
--- Page 1 ---
Preface

We must know the present need of human society. And what is that
need? Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to par-
ticular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the
Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one human
society. The ideals of spiritual communism, according to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human
society, nay, of the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by
great thinkers to make this a successful ideology. Srimad-Bhagavatam
will fill this need in human society. It begins, therefore, with the apho-
rism of Vedinta philosophy janmady asya yatah to establish the ideal of
a common cause.

Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of
oblivion. It has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts,
education and economic development throughout the entire world. But
there is a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore
there are large-scale quarrels, even over less important issues. There is
need of a clue as to how humanity can become one in peace, friendship
and prosperity with a common cause. Srimad-Bhagavatam will fill this
need, for it is a cultural presentation for the re-spiritualization of the
entire human society.

Srimad-Bhagavatam should be introduced also in the schools and col-
leges, for it is recommended by the great student-devotee Prahlada
Maharaja in order to change the demoniac face of society.

kaumdra dcaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabham manusarm janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)

Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One, from whom everything
emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything

ix


--- Page 2 ---
x Srimad-Bhagavatam

is merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source
of creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ulti-
mate source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained
rationally and authoritatively in the beautiful Bhagavatam or Srimad-
Bhagavatam.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the transcendental science not only for know-
ing the ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation
with Him and our duty towards perfection of the human society on the
basis of this perfect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the
Sanskrit language, and it is now rendered into English elaborately so that
simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well, so much so
that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend himself from the
onslaught of atheists. Over and above this, the reader will be able to con-
vert others to accepting God as a concrete principle.

Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Veddnta-siitra by the same author,
Srila Vyasadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the
highest state of God realization. The only qualification one needs to study
this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step
cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly like with an ordinary
book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter, one after another.
The reading matter is so arranged with its original Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration, synonyms, translation and purports so that one is
sure to become a God-realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine
cantos.

The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto
without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in
twelve cantos, each independent, but it is good for all to read them in
small installments one after another. |

I must admit my frailties in presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam, but still
I am hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society
on the strength of the following statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.5.11):

tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin prati-§lokam abaddhavaty api


--- Page 3 ---
Introduction

“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to His own abode, accompanied by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the
dense darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this
Purana.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43)

The timeless wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human knowledge. Originally
preserved through oral tradition, the Vedas were first put into writing
five thousand years ago by Srila Vyasadeva, the “literary incarnation of
God.” After compiling the Vedas, Vyasadeva set forth their essence in
the aphorisms known as Vedanta-sitras. Srimad-Bhagavatam is
Vyasadeva’s commentary on his own Vedanta-sitras. It was written in
the maturity of his spiritual life under the direction of Narada Muni, his
spiritual master. Referred to as “the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic
literature,” Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and authoritative
exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After compiling the Bhagavatam, Vyasa impressed the synopsis of it
upon his son, the sage Sukadeva Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami subse-
quently recited the entire Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assem-
bly of learned saints on the bank of the Ganges at Hastinapura (now
Delhi). Maharaja Pariksit was the emperor of the world and was a great
rajarsi (saintly king). Having received a warning that he would die
within a week, he renounced his entire kingdom and retired to the bank
of the Ganges to fast until death and receive spiritual enlightenment.
The Bhagavatam begins with Emperor Pariksit’s sober inquiry to
Sukadeva Gosvami: ‘‘You are the spiritual master of great saints and
devotees. I am therefore begging you to show the way of perfection for
all persons, and especially for one who is about to die. Please let me know
what a man should hear, chant, remember and worship, and also what he
should not do. Please explain all this to me.”

Sukadeva Gosvami’s answer to this question, and numerous other
questions posed by Maharaja Pariksit, concerning everything from the
nature of the self to the origin of the universe, held the assembled sages

xiii


--- Page 4 ---
xiv Srimad-Bhagavatam

in rapt attention continuously for the seven days leading to the King’s
death. The sage Sita Gosvami, who was present on the bank of the
Ganges when Sukadeva Gosvami first recited Srimad-Bhagavatam, later
repeated the Bhagavatam before a gathering of sages in the forest of
Naimisaranya. Those sages, concerned about the spiritual welfare of the
people in general, had gathered to perform a long, continuous chain of
sacrifices to counteract the degrading influence of the incipient age of
Kali. In response to the sages’ request that he speak the essence of Vedic
wisdom, Sita Gosvami repeated from memory the entire eighteen thou-
sand verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit.

The reader of Srimad-Bhagavatam hears Sita Gosvami relate the
questions of Maharaja Pariksit and the answers of Sukadeva Gosvami.
Also, Sita Gosvami sometimes responds directly to questions put by
Saunaka Rsi, the spokesman for the sages gathered at Naimisaranya. One
therefore simultaneously hears two dialogues: one between Maharaja
Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami on the bank of the Ganges, and another
at Naimisaranya between Sita Gosvami and the sages at Naimisaranya
Forest, headed by Saunaka Rsi. Furthermore, while instructing King
Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami often relates historical episodes and gives
accounts of lengthy philosophical discussions between such great souls as
the saint Maitreya and his disciple Vidura. With this understanding of
the history of the Bhagavatam, the reader will easily be able to follow its
intermingling of dialogues and events from various sources. Since philo-
sophical wisdom, not chronological order, is most important in the text,
one need only be attentive to the subject matter of Srimad-Bhagavatam
to appreciate fully its profound message.

The translator of this edition compares the Bhagavatam to sugar
candy —wherever you taste it, you will find it equally sweet and
relishable. Therefore, to taste the sweetness of the Bhagavatam, one may
begin by reading any of its volumes. After such an introductory taste,
however, the serious reader is best advised to go back to Volume One of
the First Canto and then proceed through the Bhagavatam, volume after
volume, in its natural order.

This edition of the Bhagavatam is the first complete English transla-
tion of this important text with an elaborate commentary, and it is the
first widely available to the English-speaking public. It is the product of


--- Page 5 ---
Introduction xv
the scholarly and devotional effort of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His consummate Sanskrit
scholarship and intimate familiarity with Vedic culture and thought as
well as the modern way of life combine to reveal to the West a magnifi-
cent exposition of this important classic.

Readers will find this work of value for many reasons. For those in-
terested in the classical roots of Indian civilization, it serves as a vast
reservoir of detailed information on virtually every one of its aspects.
For students of comparative philosophy and religion, the Bhagavatam
offers a penetrating view into the meaning of India’s profound spiritual
heritage. To sociologists and anthropologists, the Bhagavatam reveals the
practical workings of a peaceful and scientifically organized Vedic
culture, whose institutions were integrated on the basis of a highly
developed spiritual world view. Students of literature will discover the
Bhagavatam to be a masterpiece of majestic poetry. For students of psy-
chology, the text provides important perspectives on the nature of con-
sciousness, human behavior and the philosophical study of identity.
Finally, to those seeking spiritual insight, the Bhagavatam offers simple
and practical guidance for attainment of the highest self-knowledge and
realization of the Absolute Truth. The entire multivolume text, pre-
sented by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant
place in the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern man for a
long time to come.

—The Publishers


--- Page 6 ---
SUMMARY OF THE TENTH CANTO

A short description of each chapter of this Tenth Canto is as follows. The
First Chapter, which has sixty-nine verses, describes Maharaja Pariksit’s
eagerness to learn about the incarnation of Lord Krsna, and it also tells
how 3771588 killed the six sons of Devaki because of his fear of being
killed by her eighth child. The Second Chapter contains forty-two verses,
describing the entrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
into the womb of Devaki to fulfill His mission of killing Karhsa. When
Lord Krsna was within Devaki’s womb, all the demigods, headed by
Brahma, offered prayers to the Lord. The Third Chapter contains fifty-
three verses. This chapter describes the appearance of Lord Krsna as He
is. The Lord’s father and mother, understanding the Lord’s appearance,
offered prayers. Fearing Karnsa, the Lord’s father brought the child from
Mathura to Gokula Vrndavana. The Fourth Chapter contains forty-six
verses, which tell of a prophecy by the goddess Candika. After consulting
demoniac friends, Karisa began killing all the children born at that time,
since he thought this would be to his benefit.

The Fifth Chapter contains thirty-two verses, describing how Nanda
Maharaja performed the birth ceremony of Krsna and then went to
Mathura, where he met Vasudeva. The Sixth Chapter contains forty-four
verses. In this chapter, Nanda Maharaja, following the advice of his
friend Vasudeva, returns to Gokula and on the way sees the dead body of
the Pitana demoness and is astonished at her having been killed by
Krsna. The Seventh Chapter, which contains thirty-seven verses, de-
scribes Maharaja Pariksit’s enthusiasm to hear about the boyhood
pastimes of Lord Krsna, who killed Sakatasura and Trnavartisura and
showed within His mouth the entire cosmic manifestation. In the Eighth
Chapter there are fifty-two verses, which describe Gargamuni’s per-
forming the name-giving ceremony of Krsna and Balarama and how
Krsna and Balarama performed playful childish activities, crawling on
the ground, trying to walk with Their small legs, and stealing butter and
breaking the pots. This chapter also describes the vision of the universal
form.

The Ninth Chapter, which has twenty-three verses, describes how
Krsna disturbed His mother while she was churning butter. Because she

’ 1


--- Page 7 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam

left Krsna to see to the stove, where the milk was boiling, and did not
allow Him to suck her breast, Krsna was very angry and broke a pot of
yogurt. To chastise her naughty child, mother Yasoda wanted to bind
Him with rope, but every time she tried she failed because of a shortage
of rope when the time came to knot it. In the Tenth Chapter there are
forty-three verses. This chapter describes how Krsna, as Damodara,
caused the twin Yamalarjuna trees to fall and how the two demigods
within the trees were delivered by the mercy of Krsna. In the Eleventh
Chapter there are fifty-nine verses. This chapter describes how Nanda
Maharaja released Krsna from the ropes, how Krsna showed His mercy to
a fruit seller while exchanging grains for fruit, and how Nanda Maharaja
and others decided to leave Gokula for Vrndavana, where Krsna killed
Vatsasura and Bakasura.

Chapter Twelve contains forty-four verses, describing Krsna’s
pastimes with the cowherd boys in the forest and the killing of the
demon named Aghasura. Chapter Thirteen contains sixty-four verses,
describing how Brahma stole Krsna’s calves and His friends, the cowherd
boys. Krsna expanded His pastimes for one year, representing Himself as 5
the calves and boys in forms exactly like their own. In this way He
bewildered Brahma, who at last surrendered when his illusion was over.
The Fourteenth Chapter contains sixty-one verses. In this chapter,
Brahma offers prayers to Krsna after fully understanding Him to be the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Fifteenth Chapter contains fifty-
two verses. This chapter describes how Krsna entered Talavana Forest
with Balarama, how Balarama killed Dhenukasura, and how Krsna pro-
tected the cowherd boys and cows from the poisonous effects of Kaliya.

The Sixteenth Chapter contains sixty-seven verses. This chapter de-
scribes the chastisement of Kaliya by Krsna, and it also describes the
prayers offered by Kiliya’s wives. In the Seventeenth Chapter there are
twenty-five verses. This chapter describes why Kaliya entered the River
Yamuna after leaving his home, Nagalaya, one of the dvipas, which ac-
cording to some corresponds to the Fiji Islands. This chapter also de-
scribes how Garuda was cursed by Saubhari Rsi, how the cowherd boys,
Krsna’s friends, were enlivened when Krsna emerged from the Yamuna,
and how Krsna stopped the forest fire and saved the sleeping inhabitants
of Vraja. ’

The Eighteenth Chapter contains thirty-two verses, giving a descrip-


--- Page 8 ---
Summary of the Tenth Canto 3
tion of Krsna and Balarama, Their picnics within the forest, the climate
of Vrndavana in the summer and the spring, and Lord Balarama’s killing
of Pralambasura. Chapter Nineteen contains sixteen verses, describing
Krsna’s entering the forest known as Muiijaranya, saving the cowherd
boys and cows from the forest fire, and bringing them to Bhandiravana.
Chapter Twenty contains forty-nine verses. This chapter describes the
enjoyment of Balarama and Krsna in the forest with the cowherd boys
during the rainy season, and it gives various instructions through
analogies concerning the rainy season and autumn.

Chapter Twenty-one contains twenty verses, describing how Krsna en-
tered the forest of Vrndavana in the autumn, playing His flute, and how
He attracted the gopis, who were singing His glories. The Twenty-second
Chapter contains thirty-eight verses, describing how the gopis prayed to
the goddess Katyayani to obtain Krsna as their husband and how Krsna
later stole the garments of the gopis while the gopis were bathing in the
Yamuna. The Twenty-third Chapter contains fifty-two verses, describing
how the cowherd boys, being very hungry, followed Krsna’s directions
by begging some food for Him and themselves from brahmanas engaged
in performing yajiias. The brahmanas refused to give food to Krsna and
Balarama, although the boys begged for it, but the wives of the
brahmanas agreed, and therefore Krsna bestowed His mercy upon them.

The Twenty-fourth Chapter contains thirty-eight verses, describing
how Krsna defied King Indra, despite Indra’s position of prestige, by
stopping the indra-yajiia and instead worshiping Govardhana. The
Twenty-fifth Chapter contains thirty-three verses. As described in this
chapter, because the indra-yajia was stopped, King Indra was very
angry, and to kill the inhabitants of Vrndavana, Vraja, he flooded the en-
tire area with rain. Krsna, however, accepted King Indra’s challenge by
lifting Govardhana Hill as an umbrella to protect Vrndavana and all the
cows. The Twenty-sixth Chapter contains twenty-five verses, describing
how Nanda Maharaja, seeing the extraordinary activities of Krsna, was
struck with wonder and how he thus narrated for all the cowherd men
the whole story of Krsna’s opulence, as foretold by Gargamuni. Chapter
Twenty-seven, which contains twenty-eight verses, describes how King
Indra, upon seeing Krsna’s unlimited power, worshiped Lord Krsna, who
was fully washed with milk supplied by the surabhi and who thus be-
came known as Govinda. The Twenty-eighth Chapter contains seventeen


--- Page 9 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam

verses. In this chapter Krsna saves His father, Nanda Maharaja, from the
custody of Varuna and shows the cowherd men how Vaikunthaloka is
situated.

The Twenty-ninth Chapter contains forty-eight verses, describing
how Krsna talked to the gopis before performing the rasa-lila and how,
after the beginning of the rasa-lila, Krsna disappeared from the scene.
Chapter Thirty contains forty-four verses, describing how the gopis,
being separated from Krsna, went mad and began to wander in the forest
in search of Him. The gopis met Srimati Radharani, the daughter of King
Vrsabhanu, and they all wandered on the bank of the Yamuna searching
for Krsna. Chapter Thirty-one contains nineteen verses, describing how
the bereaved gopis waited in great anxiety to meet Krsna. Chapter
Thirty-two contains twenty-two verses. In this chapter, Krsna appears
among the gopis, who are fully satisfied in ecstatic love for Him. Chapter
Thirty-three contains thirty-nine verses. In this chapter Krsna appears
in multiforms in the midst of the gopis, with whom He dances in the rasa
dance. Then they all bathe in the River Yamuna. Also in this chapter,
Sukadeva mitigates the doubts of Pariksit concerning the performance of
the rasa-lila.

Chapter Thirty-four contains thirty-two verses. This chapter describes
how Nanda Maharaja, Krsna’s father, was swallowed by a big python,
who had been a demigod named Vidyadhara but was cursed by Angira
Rsi. Krsna rescued His father and saved this demigod simultaneously.
Chapter Thirty-five contains twenty-six verses. This chapter describes
how Krsna went to the pasturing grounds with the cows and how the
gopis sang in separation from Him.

Chapter Thirty-six contains forty verses. This chapter describes
Krsna’s killing of Aristasura. It also describes Narada’s disclosure to
Karnsa that both Rama and Krsna were sons of Vasudeva. Because of this
disclosure, Karisa arranged to kill both Rama and Krsna. He sent his
assistant 14681 to Vrndavana, and later he sent Akriira to bring Rama and
Krsna to Mathura. Chapter Thirty-seven contains thirty-three verses. In
this chapter Krsna kills the Kesi demon, Narada worships Krsna by nar-
rating His future activities, and Krsna kills the demon named
Vyomasura. Chapter Thirty-eight contains forty-three verses. This
chapter describes how Akrira went to Vrndavana and how he was
received by Rima-Krsna and Nanda Maharaja. Chapter Thirty-nine con-


--- Page 10 ---
Summary of the Tenth Canto 5
tains fifty-seven verses. This chapter describes how Rama and Krsna,
having been invited by Karnsa, started for Mathura. While They were
ready ‘on the chariot, the gopis began to cry, and Krsna sent His
messenger to pacify them. Thus He was able to travel toward Mathura.
On the way, Akriira was shown the entire Visnuloka within the water of
the Yamuna.

Chapter Forty contains thirty verses, in which the prayers of Akrira
are described. Chapter Forty-one, which contains fifty-two verses, de-
scribes the entrance of Rama and Krsna into the city of Mathura, where
the ladies were very jubilant to see these two brothers. Krsna killed a
washerman, glorified Sudama and gave Sudama His benediction. Chapter
Forty-two, which contains thirty-eight verses, describes how Krsna
delivered Kubja and how He broke Karnsa’s gigantic bow and killed its
caretakers. Thus Kamisa and Krsna met. Chapter Forty-three contains
forty verses. Outside the sporting arena of Karhsa, Krsna killed an
elephant named Kuvalayapida. Then He entered the arena and spoke
with Canira. Chapter Forty-four, which contains fifty-one verses, de-
scribes how Krsna and Balarama killed the wrestlers named Caniira and
Mustika and thereafter killed Karhsa and his eight brothers. Krsna,
however, pacified Kamsa’s wives and His own father and mother,
Vasudeva and Devaki.

Chapter Forty-five contains fifty verses. This chapter describes how
Krsna pacified His father and mother and celebrated the enthronement
of His grandfather Ugrasena. After promising the inhabitants of
Vrndavana that He would return very soon, Krsna underwent ritualistic
ceremonies as a ksatriya. He took the vow of brahmacarya and lived in
the guru-kula, where He studied regularly. By killing the demon named
Paficajana, He received a conchshell named Paficajanya. Krsna rescued
the son of His guru from the custody of Yamaraja and returned them.
After thus offering guru-daksina to repay His teacher, Lord Krsna
returned to Mathura-puri. Chapter Forty-six contains forty-nine verses.
As described in this chapter, Krsna sent Uddhava to Vrndavana to pacify
His father and mother, Nanda Maharaja and Ya$oda. Chapter Forty-
seven contains sixty-nine verses, describing how Uddhava, following
Krsna’s order, went to pacify the gopis and then returned to Mathura.
Thus Uddhava appreciated the ecstatic love felt for Krsna by the inhabi-
tants of Vrndavana.


--- Page 11 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Chapter Forty-eight contains thirty-six verses. This chapter describes
how Krsna fulfilled the desire of Kubja by going to her house and enjoy-
ing her. Krsna then went to the home of Akrira. Satisfied by Akrira’s
prayers, Krsna praised him very much and sent him to Hastinapura to
gather information about the Pandavas. Chapter Forty-nine contains
thirty-one verses. As described in this chapter, Akrira, following
Krsna’s orders, went to Hastinapura, where he met Vidura and Kunti
and heard from them about Dhrtarastra’s mistreatment of the Pandavas.
Informed of the Pandavas’ faith in Krsna, Akrira advised Dhrtarastra,
and after understanding Dhrtarastra’s mind, he returned to Mathura,
where he described everything about the situation in Hastinapura.

Chapter Fifty contains fifty-seven verses. In this chapter, Jarasandha,
having heard that his son-in-law Karhsa was killed, attacked Mathura to
kill Rama and Krsna but was defeated seventeen times. When
Jarasandha was about to attack for the eighteenth time, Kalayavana, hav-
ing been advised by Narada, also attacked Mathura. Thus the Yadava
dynasty entered a fort in the midst of the water and lived there by mystic
power. After giving full protection to the Yadava dynasty and conferring
with Lord Baladeva, Lord Krsna emerged from Dvaraka. Chapter Fifty-
one, which contains sixty-three verses, describes how Mucukunda killed
Kalayavana simply by glancing upon him.

Chapter Fifty-two contains forty-four verses. In this chapter,
Mucukunda offers prayers to Krsna, and then Krsna kills all the soldiers
of Kalayavana and returns to Dvaraka with their booty. When
Jarasandha attacked Mathura again, Rama and Krsna, as if afraid of him,
fled to the top of a mountain, to which Jarasandha then set fire. Unseen
by Jarasandha, Krsna and Balarama jumped from the mountain and en-
tered Dvaraka, which was surrounded by the sea. Jarasandha, thinking
that Krsna and Balarama had been killed, returned with his soldiers to
his own country, and Krsna continued to live in Dvaraka. Rukmini, the
daughter of Vidarbha, was very much attracted to Krsna, and she sent
Krsna a letter through a brahmana. Chapter Fifty-three contains fifty-
seven verses. Following Rukmini’s request, Krsna went to the city of
Vidarbha and kidnapped her in the presence of such enemies as
Jarasandha. Chapter Fifty-four contains sixty verses. As described in this
chapter, Krsna defeated all the opposing princes and disfigured Ruk-
mini’s brother Rukmi. Then Krsna returned with Rukmini to Dvaraka,


--- Page 12 ---
Summary of the Tenth Canto 7
where they were united in a regular marriage. Rukmi, however, re-
mained in a place known as Bhojakata, being angry at his brother-in-law,
Krsna. Chapter Fifty-five, containing forty verses, describes the birth of
Pradyumna, how Pradyumna was kidnapped by Sambarasura, and how
Pradyumna later killed Sambarasura and returned to Dvaraka with his
wife, Ratidevi.

Chapter Fifty-six contains forty-five verses. As described in this
chapter, King Satrajit, by the mercy of the sun-god, received a jewel
called Syamantaka. Later, when this jewel was stolen, Satrajit unneces-
sarily became doubtful of Krsna, but Krsna, to vindicate His position,
retrieved the jewel, along with the daughter of Jambavan. Krsna later
married Satrajit’s daughter and received a full dowry. As described in
Chapter Fifty-seven, which contains forty-two verses, both Balarama and
Krsna went to Hastinapura, having heard about the fire in the shellac
house of the Pandavas. After Satrajit was killed by Satadhanva at the in-
stigation of Akrira and Krtavarmi, Balarama and Krspa returned to
Dvaraka. Satadhanva left the Syamantaka jewel with Akrira and fled to
the forest. Thus although Krsna killed Satadhanva, He was unable to
retrieve the jewel. Finally the jewel was discovered and awarded to
Akrura. Chapter Fifty-eight contains fifty-eight verses. After the
Pandavas finished living incognito in the forest, Krsna went to In-
draprastha to see them. He then married five wives, headed by Kalindi.
After Krsna and Arjuna set fire to the Khandava Forest, Arjuna received
the Gandiva bow. The demon Maya Danava constructed an assembly
house for the Pandavas, and Duryodhana was very much aggrieved.

Chapter Fifty-nine contains forty-five verses. In this chapter, Krsna,
at the request of Indra, kills the demon Narakasura, the son of the earth
personified, along with the demon’s associates, headed by Mura. The
earth personified offers prayers to Krsna and returns to Him all the
paraphernalia that Narakasura has stolen. Krsna then bestows fearless-
ness upon the son of Narakasura and marries the sixteen thousand prin-
cesses whom the demon kidnapped. Also in this chapter, Krsna takes
away the parijata plant from the heavenly planets, and the foolishness of
Indra and others is described.

Chapter Sixty contains fifty-nine verses. In this chapter, Krsna makes
Rukmini angry with His joking words. Krsna pacifies Rukmini, and
there is a lover’s quarrel between them. Chapter Sixty-one contains forty


--- Page 13 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam

verses. This chapter contains a description of the sons and grandsons of
Krsna. At the time of Aniruddha’s marriage, Balarama kills Rukmi and
breaks the teeth of the King of Kalinga.

Chapter Sixty-two contains thirty-three verses. This chapter begins
the discourse concerning the abduction of Usa, the daughter of Banasura,
and the amorous pastimes between Usa and Aniruddha. It also describes
a fight between Aniruddha and Banasura and how Banasura seized
Aniruddha with a snake-noose. Chapter Sixty-three, which contains
fifty-three verses, describes how the strength of Lord Siva was defeated
in a battle between Banasura and the Yadavas. The Raudra-jvara, having
been defeated by the Vaisnava-jvara, offered prayers to Krsna. Krsna
severed all but four of Bina’s one thousand arms and thus showed him
mercy. Krsna then returned to Dvaraka with Usa and Aniruddha.

Chapter Sixty-four contains forty-four verses. In this chapter, Krsna
liberates King Nrga, the son of Iksvaku, from a curse and instructs all
kings by explaining the fault in misappropriating the property of a
brahmana. In connection with the deliverance of King Nrga, there are
instructions for the Yadavas, who were puffed up with pride due to
wealth, opulence, enjoyment and so on.

Chapter Sixty-five contains thirty-four verses. As described in this
chapter, Lord Baladeva, desiring to see His friends and relatives, went to
Gokula. In the months of Caitra and Vaisakha, in the groves by the
Yamuna, Lord Balarama performed the rasa-rasotsava and yamuna-
karsana lilds in the association of His gopis.

As described in Chapter Sixty-six, which contains forty-three verses,
Krsna went to [86] and then killed Paundraka, as well as his friend the
King of Kasi, Sudaksina and others. Chapter Sixty-seven, which contains
twenty-eight verses, describes how Lord Baladeva, while enjoying with
many young girls on Raivataka Mountain, vanquished the extremely
mischievous ape Dvivida, who was the brother of Mainda and a friend of
Narakasura’s.

Chapter Sixty-eight has fifty-four verses. As described in this chapter,
when Samba, the son of Jambavati, kidnapped Laksmana, the daughter
of Duryodhana, he was captured in a fight with the Kauravas. In order to
free him and establish peace, Lord Baladeva went to Hastinapura as a
well-wisher. The Kauravas, however, were uncooperative, and upon
seeing their arrogance, Lord Baladeva began pulling their city of


--- Page 14 ---
Summary of the Tenth Canto 9
Hastinapura with His plow. The Kauravas, headed by Duryodhana,
offered prayers to Lord Baladeva, who then returned to Dvaraka with
Samba and Laksmana.

Chapter Sixty-nine contains forty-five verses. As described in this
chapter, Krsna exhibited His householder life with His sixteen thousand
wives. Even the great sage Narada was astonished at how Krsna, having
expanded Himself into sixteen thousand forms, was conducting His
householder life. Thus Narada offered prayers to Lord Krsna, and Krsna
was very much pleased with him.

Chapter Seventy, which contains forty-seven verses, describes how
Krsna exhibited His daily ritualistic ceremonies and how He released the
kings arrested by Jarasandha. While Lord Krsna was receiving a
messenger sent by these kings, Narada came to see Krsna and told Him
news of the Pandavas. Narada informed Krsna that the Pandavas desired
to perform a rajasitya sacrifice, and Krsna agreed to attend it, but He
first asked for Uddhava’s decision about whether to give preference to
killing King Jarasandha or performing the rajasiya-yajiia. Chapter
Seventy-one contains forty-five verses, describing the happiness of the
Pandavas when Krsna went to Indraprastha. By the inconceivable desire
of Krsna, Jarasandha would be killed, and the rajasitya-yajiia would be
performed by Maharaja Yudhisthira.

Chapter Seventy-two contains forty-six verses. By agreeing to perform
the rajasiya-yajiia, Krsna gave Maharaja Yudhisthira great pleasure.
This chapter also describes the killing of Jarasandha, the enthroning of
his son, and the release of the kings whom Jarasandha had arrested.
Chapter Seventy-three contains thirty-five verses. After Lord Krsna
released the kings and restored their royal power, He was worshiped by
Sahadeva, the son of Jarasandha, and then He returned to Indraprastha
with Bhima and Arjuna. Chapter Seventy-four contains fifty-four verses.
Maharaja Yudhisthira offered prayers to Krsna and offered Him the first
worship in the rdjasiya-yajiia. To honor the Lord in this way is the
foremost duty of every man, but this was intolerable to Siupala, the
King of Cedi. Sisupala began to blaspheme Krsna, who thus severed the
King’s head from his body and awarded him the salvation called
sarupya-mukti. After the conclusion of the rdjasiya sacrifice, Krsna
returned to Dvaraka with His queens. Chapter Seventy-five contains
forty verses. As described in this chapter, Maharaja Yudhisthira, after


--- Page 15 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam

the rajasitya-yajiia, performed the final ritualistic bathing ceremonies.
Duryodhana was bewildered in the palace constructed by Maya Danava,
and thus he felt insulted.

Chapter Seventy-six contains thirty-three verses, describing how
Salva, one of the kings Krsna defeated when He kidnapped Rukmini,
decided to rid the entire world of the Yadavas. To defeat the Yadavas,
Salva worshiped Lord Siva, who rewarded him with an aerial car named
Saubha. When Salva fought with the Vrsnis, Pradyumna smashed the car
designed by Maya Danava, but he was attacked by Salva’s brother, whose
name was Dyuman. Beaten unconscious by Dyuman’s club, Pradyumna
was carried some distance away from the warfield by his charioteer, but
later he lamented having been removed from the battlefield. Chapter
Seventy-seven contains thirty-seven verses. In this chapter, Pradyumna
recovers from his injuries and begins fighting with Salva. When Krsna
returned to Dvaraka from Indraprastha, He immediately went to the bat-
tlefield where Salva and Pradyumna were fighting. There He killed
Salva, although Salva was powerfully equipped with illusory weapons.

Chapter Seventy-eight contains forty verses. As described in this
chapter, a friend of Salva’s named Dantavakra and Dantavakra’s
brother Vidaratha were killed by Sri Krsna. Instead of taking part in the
fighting between the Kauravas and the Pandavas, Baladeva, who had
been staying at Dvaraka-puri, went touring holy places. Because of the
misbehavior of Romaharsana, Baladeva killed him at Naimisaranya and
appointed his son Ugrasrava, Sita Gosvami, the speaker of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, to continue the discourses on the Puranas. Chapter
Seventy-nine contains thirty-four verses. This chapter describes how the
brahmanas of Naimisaranya advised Baladeva to atone for the death of
Romaharsana. After killing a demon named Balvala, Baladeva traveled
and bathed in holy places until He at last came to the Battlefield of Kuru-
ksetra, where Bhima and Duryodhana were fighting. Then He returned
to Dvaraka and went again to Naimisaranya, where He instructed the
rsis. Then He left with His wife Revati.

Chapter Eighty, which contains forty-five verses, describes how
Sudama Vipra, a friend of Krsna’s, approached Krsna for money and was
worshiped by Krsna, who reminisced with him about their boyhood at
the guru-kula. Chapter Eighty-one contains forty-one verses. This
chapter describes the friendly talks between Krsna and His friend `


--- Page 16 ---
Summary of the Tenth Canto 11
Sudama. Krsna very gladly accepted a gift of flat rice from Sudama
Vipra. When Sudama Vipra returned home, he saw that everything there
was wonderfully opulent, and he praised the friendship of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. With the gifts of the Lord, he enjoyed material
opulence, and later he was promoted back home, back to Godhead.

Chapter Eighty-two contains forty-eight verses. This chapter describes
how the Yadavas went to Kuruksetra because of a solar eclipse and how
other kings spoke to them of Krsna. At this meeting, Krsna satisfied
Nanda Maharaja and the residents of Vrndavana, who had also come
there. Chapter Eighty-three contains forty-three verses, describing how
the women assembed at Kuruksetra engaged in topics of Sri Krsna and
how Draupadi asked all Krsna’s queens about how they had married
Him. Chapter Eighty-four contains seventy-one verses. As described in
this chapter, when great sages went to see Krsna at Kuruksetra, Krsna
took this opportunity to praise them. Because Vasudeva desired to per-
form a great sacrifice on this occasion, the sages advised him regarding
worship of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After the yajiia
was performed, all who were present dispersed to their respective
abodes. Chapter Eighty-five contains fifty-nine verses. At the request of
His father and mother, Krsna, by His mercy, returned their dead sons,
all of whom were liberated. Chapter Eighty-six contains fifty-nine
verses. This chapter describes how Arjuna kidnapped Subhadra with a
great fight. It also describes how Krsna went to Mithila to favor His devo-
tee Bahulaéva and stay at the house of Srutadeva and advise them about
spiritual advancement.

Chapter Eighty-seven contains fifty verses, describing the prayers
offered to Narayana by the Vedas. Chapter Eighty-eight contains forty
verses. This chapter describes how Vaisnavas become transcendental by
worshiping Lord Visnu and then return home, back to Godhead. By wor-
ship of demigods, one may get material power, but this chapter describes
how an ordinary living being in the material world can be favored by
Lord Sri Krsna, and it establishes Lord Visnu’s supremacy above Lord
Brahmi and Lord Siva. Chapter Eighty-nine contains sixty-five verses,
disclosing who is the best among the material deities. Although Visnu is
among the three deities— Brahma, Visnu and Mahe$vara—He is tran-
scendental and supreme. In this chapter we also find a description of how
Krsna and Arjuna went to Mahakala-pura to deliver the son of a Dvaraka


--- Page 17 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam

brahmana and how Arjuna was astonished. Chapter Ninety contains fifty
verses. This chapter summarizes Krsna’s lilas and presents the logic of
madhurena samdpayet, establishing that everything ends well in
transcendental bliss.


--- Page 18 ---
CHAPTER ONE
The Advent of Lord Krsna:
Introduction
The summary of the First Chapter is as follows. This chapter describes
how Karnsa, frightened by hearing an omen about his being killed by the
eighth son of Devaki, killed Devaki’s sons one after another.

When Sukadeva Gosvami finished describing the dynasty of Yadu, as
well as the dynasties of the moon-god and sun-god, Maharaja Pariksit re-
quested him to describe Lord Krsna, who appeared with Baladeva in the
Yadu dynasty, and how Krsna performed His activities within this world.
Krsna is transcendental, the King said, and therefore to understand His
activities is the occupation of liberated persons. Hearing of krsna-lila is
the boat by which to achieve the ultimate goal of life. Except for an
animal killer or one who is following a policy of suicide, every intelligent
person must strive to understand Krsna and His activities.

Krsna was the only worshipable Deity for the Pandavas. When
Maharaja Pariksit was in the womb of his mother, Uttara, Krsna saved
him from the attack of the brahma-sastra. Now Maharaja Pariksit asked
Sukadeva Gosvami how His Lordship Baladeva, the son of Rohini, could
have appeared in the womb of Devaki. Why did Krsna transfer Himself
from Mathura to Vrndavana, King Pariksit asked, and how did He live
there with His family members? What did Krsna do in Mathura and
Vrndavana, and why did He kill His maternal uncle Kamsa? For how
many years did Krsna reside in Dvaraka, and how many queens did He
have? Maharaja Pariksit asked Sukadeva Gosvami all these questions. He
also requested Sukadeva Gosvami to describe other activities of Krsna
about which he could not inquire.

When Sukadeva Gosvami began to speak about Krsna consciousness,
Maharaja Pariksit forgot the fatigue brought about by his fasting. En-
thusiastic to describe Krsna, Sukadeva Gosvami said, “Like the waters of
the Ganges, descriptions of the activities of Krsna can purify the entire
universe. The speaker, the inquirer and the audience all become
purified.”

13


--- Page 19 ---
14 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1

Once when the entire world was overburdened by the increasing mili-
tary power of demons in the form of kings, mother earth assumed the
shape of a cow and approached Lord Brahma for relief. Sympathetic to
mother earth’s lamentation, Brahma, accompanied by Lord Siva and
other demigods, took the cow-shaped mother earth to the shore of the
milk ocean, where he offered prayers to please Lord Visnu, who lay there
on an island in transcendental ecstasy. Brahma thereafter understood the
advice of Maha-Visnu, who informed him that He would appear on the
surface of the earth to mitigate the burden created by the demons. The
demigods, along with their wives, should appear there as associates of
Lord Krsna in the family of Yadu to increase the sons and grandsons in
that dynasty. By the will of Lord Krsna, Anantadeva would appear first,
as Balarama, and Krspa’s potency, yogamdyd, would also appear.
Brahmi informed mother earth about all this, and then he returned to
his own abode.

After marrying Devaki, Vasudeva was returning home with her on a
chariot driven by Kamsa, her brother, when an ominous voice addressed
Karisa, warning him that Devaki’s eighth son would kill him. Upon
hearing this omen, Kamsa was immediately ready to kill Devaki, but
Vasudeva diplomatically began to instruct him. Vasudeva stressed that it
would not be good for Karnsa to kill his younger sister, especially at the
time of her marriage. Anyone who possesses a material body must die,
Vasudeva advised him. Every living entity lives in a body for some time
and then transmigrates to another body, but one is unfortunately misled
into accepting the body as the soul. If a person under this mistaken con-
ception wants to kill another body, he is condemned as hellish.

Because Karnsa was not satisfied by Vasudeva’s instructions, Vasudeva
devised a plan. He offered to bring Kamsa all of Devaki’s children so that
1637188 could kill them. Why then should Karsa kill Devaki now? Karsa
was satisfied by this proposal. In due course of time, when Devaki gave
birth to a child, Vasudeva brought the newborn baby to Karhsa, who,
upon seeing Vasudeva’s magnanimity, was struck with wonder. When
Vasudeva gave Kamsa the child, 1497088, showing some intelligence, said
that since he was to be killed by the eighth child, why should he kill the
first? Although Vasudeva did not trust him, Karhsa requested Vasudeva
to take the child back. Later, however, after Narada approached Karmsa
and disclosed to him that the demigods were appearing in the Yadu and


--- Page 20 ---
Text 1] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 15
Vrsni dynasties and conspiring to kill him, Karhsa decided to kill all the
children born in these families, and he also decided that any child born
from the womb of Devaki must be killed. Thus he arrested and im-
prisoned both Devaki and Vasudeva and killed six of their sons, one after
another. Narada had also informed Karhsa that in his previous birth
Kamsa was Kalanemi, a demon killed by Visnu. Consequently, Karmsa
became a great enemy to all the descendants of the yadu-varmsa, the
Yadu dynasty. He even arrested and imprisoned his own father,
Ugrasena, for Karmsa wanted to enjoy the kingdom alone.

Krsna has threefold pastimes—the Vraja-lila, Mathura-lila and
Dvaraka-lila. As already mentioned, in the Tenth Canto of Srimad-
Bhagavatam there are ninety chapters, which describe all these lilas.
The first four chapters describe Brahma’s prayers for the relief of the
earth’s burden, and they also describe the appearance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Chapters Five through Thirty-nine recount
Krsna’s pastimes in Vrndavana. The Fortieth Chapter describes how
Krsna enjoyed in the water of the Yamuna and how Akrira offered
prayers. Chapters Forty-one through Fifty-one, eleven chapters, tell of
Krsna’s pastimes in Mathura, and Chapters Fifty-two through Ninety,
thirty-nine chapters, relate Krsna’s pastimes in Dvaraka.

Chapters Twenty-nine through Thirty-three describe Krsna’s dancing
with the gopis, known as the rasa-lila. Therefore these five chapters are
known as rasa-paicadhyaya. The Forty-seventh Chapter of the Tenth
Canto is a description known as the bhramara-gita.

TEXT 1
श्रीराजोवाच
कथितो वंशविस्तारो भवता सोमदर्ययोः |
राज्ञां चोभयवंश्यानां चरितं sega । १ ॥
Sri-rajovaca
kathito vamsa-vistaro
bhavata soma-siiryayoh
लाक cobhaya-varmsyanam
caritarh paramadbhutam


--- Page 21 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1

sri-raja uvaca—King Pariksit said; kathitah—has already been de-
scribed; wvamsa-vistarah—a broad description of the dynasties;
bhavata—by Your Lordship; soma-siryayoh—of the moon-god and the
sun-god; rajiam—of the kings; ca—and; ubhaya—both; varmsya-
nam—of the members of the dynasties; caritam—the character;
parama—exalted; adbhutam—and wonderful.

TRANSLATION

King Pariksit said: My dear lord, you have elaborately described
the dynasties of both the moon-god and the sun-god, with the ex-
alted and wonderful character of their kings.

PURPORT

At the end of the Ninth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter, Sukadeva
Gosvami summarized the activities of Krsna. He spoke of how Krsna had
personally appeared to reduce the burden on the earth, how He had
manifested His pastimes as a householder, and how, soon after His birth,
He had transferred Himself to His Vrajabhaimi-lila. Pariksit Maharaja,
being naturally a devotee of Krsna, wanted to hear more about Lord
Krsna. Therefore, to encourage Sukadeva Gosvami to continue speaking
about Krsna and give further details, he thanked Sukadeva Gosvami for
having described the activities of Krsna in brief. Sukadeva Gosvami had
said:

Jato gatah pitr-grhad vrajam edhitartho
hatva ripan suta-Satdani krtorudarah
utpadya tesu purusah kratubhih samije
atmanam datma-nigamarm prathayas janesu

“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, known as lila-
purusottama, appeared as the son of Vasudeva but immediately left His
father’s home and went to Vrndavana to expand His loving relationships
with His confidential devotees. In Vrndavana the Lord killed many
demons, and afterward He returned to Dvaraka, where according to
Vedic principles He married many wives who were the best of women,
begot through them hundreds of sons, and performed sacrifices for


--- Page 22 ---
Text 1] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 17
His own worship to establish the principles of householder life.”
(Bhag. 9.24.66)

The Yadu dynasty belonged to the family descending from Soma, the
moon-god. Although the planetary systems are so arranged that the sun
comes first, before the moon, Pariksit Maharaja gave more respect to the
dynasty of the moon-god, the soma-varmsa, because in the Yadava
dynasty, descending from the moon, Krsna had appeared. There are two
different ksatriya families of the royal order, one descending from the
king of the moon planet and the other descending from the king of the
sun. Whenever the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears, He
generally appears in a ksatriya family because He comes to establish
religious principles and the life of righteousness. According to the Vedic
system, the ksatriya family is the protector of the human race. When the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as Lord Ramacandra, He ap-
peared in the sirya-varsa, the family descending from the sun-god, and
when He appeared as Lord Krsna, He did so in the Yadu dynasty, or
yadu-varmsa, whose descent was from the moon-god. In the Ninth Canto,
Twenty-fourth Chapter, of Srimad-Bhagavatam, there is a long list of
the kings of the yadu-vamsa. All the kings in both the soma-vamsa and
sirya-varm$a were great and powerful, and Maharaja Pariksit praised
them very highly (rajiam cobhaya-vamsyanam ০৫807 paramad-
bhutam). Nonetheless, he wanted to hear more about the soma-varmsa
because that was the dynasty in which Krsna had appeared.

The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is de-
scribed in Brahma-sarihita as the abode of cintamani: cintamani-pra-
kara-sadmasu kalpavrksa-laksavrtesu surabhir abhipalayantam. The
Vrndavana-dhama on this earth is a replica of that same abode. As stated
in Bhagavad-gita (8.20), in the spiritual sky there is another, eternal
nature, transcendental to manifested and unmanifested matter. The
manifested world can be seen in the form of many stars and planets such
as the sun and moon, but beyond this is the unmanifested, which is im-
perceptible to those who are embodied. And beyond this unmanifested
matter is the spiritual kingdom, which is described in Bhagavad-gita as
supreme and eternal. That kingdom is never annihilated. Although
material nature is subject to repeated creation and annihilation, that
spiritual nature remains as it is eternally. In the Tenth Canto of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, that spiritual nature, the spiritual world, is described as


--- Page 23 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
Vrndavana, Goloka Vrndavana or Vraja-dhama. The elaborate descrip-
tion of the above-mentioned [गढ from the Ninth Canto—jato gatah
pitr-grhad — will be found here, in the Tenth Canto.
TEXT 2 -
C ५
यदोश्च धमंशीलस्य नितरां gam ।
तत्रांशेनावतीणंस्य विष्णोवीर्याणि शंस नः ॥ २ ॥
yados ca dharma-stlasya
nitararm muni-sattama
tatramsenavatirnasya
visnor viryani Samsa nah
yadoh—of Yadu or the Yadu dynasty; ca—also; dharma-silasya—
who were strictly attached to religious principles; nitaram—highly
qualified; muni-sattama—O best of all munis, king of the munis
(Sukadeva Gosvami); tatra—in that dynasty; armsena—with His plenary
expansion Baladeva; avatirnasya—who appeared as an incarnation;
visnoh—of Lord Visnu; viryani—the glorious activities; $ammsa —kindly
describe; nah—unto us.
TRANSLATION
O best of munis, you have also described the descendants of
Yadu, who were very pious and strictly adherent to religious prin-
ciples. Now, if you will, kindly describe the wonderful, glorious
activities of Lord Visnu, or Krsna, who appeared in that Yadu
dynasty with Baladeva, His plenary expansion.
PURPORT
The Brahma-samhita (5.1) explains that Krsna is the origin of the
visnu-tattva.
iSsvarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam


--- Page 24 ---
Text 3] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 19
“Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin ‘of all. He has no other
origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes.”
yasyaika-nisvasita-kdalam athavalambya
Jjwanti loma-vilaja jagad-anda-nathah
visnur mahan sa iha yasya kala-viseso
govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami
“The Brahmas, the heads of the innumerable universes, live only for the
duration of one breath of Maha-Vispu. I worship Govinda, the original
Lord, of whom Maha-Visnu is but a portion of a plenary portion.”
(Bs. 5.48)

Govinda, Krsna, is the original Personality of Godhead. Krsnas tu
bhagavan svayam. Even Lord Maha-Visnu, who by His breathing creates
many millions upon millions of universes, is Lord Krsna’s kala-visesa, or
plenary portion of a plenary portion. Maha-Visnu is a plenary expansion
of Sankarsana, who is a plenary expansion of Narayana. Narayana is a
plenary expansion of the catur-vyiha, and the catur-vyitha are plenary |
expansions of Baladeva, the first manifestation of Krsna. Therefore
when Krsna appeared with Baladeva, all the visnu-tattvas appeared with
Him.

Maharaja Pariksit requested Sukadeva Gosvami to describe Krsna and
His glorious activities. Another meaning may be derived from this verse
as follows. Although Sukadeva Gosvami was the greatest muni, he could
describe Krsna only partially (arisena), for no one can describe Krsna
fully. It is said that Anantadeva has thousands of heads, but although He
tries to describe Krsna with thousands of tongues, His descriptions are
still incomplete.

TEXT 3
¢
अवतीयं यदोर्वंशे भगवान्‌ भूतभावनः |
-
कृतवान्‌ यानि विश्वात्मा तानि नो वद विस्तरात्‌ 13
avatirya yador vamse
bhagavan bhiita-bhavanah


--- Page 25 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
krtavan yani visvatma
tani no vada vistarat
avatirya—after descending; yadoh vari$e—in the dynasty of Yadu;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhita-bhavanah—
who is the cause of the cosmic manifestation; krtavan—executed;
yani—whatever (activities); visva-atma—the Supersoul of the entire
universe; tani—all of those (activities); nah—unto us; vada —kindly
say; vistarat— elaborately.
TRANSLATION
The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna,
the cause of the cosmic manifestation, appeared in the dynasty of
Yadu. Please tell me elaborately about His glorious activities and
character, from the beginning to the end of His life.
PURPORT
In this verse the words krtavan yani indicate that all the different ac-
tivities Krsna performed while present on earth are beneficial to human
society. If religionists, philosophers and people in general simply hear
the activities of Krsna, they will be liberated. We have described several
times that there are two kinds of krsna-kathd, represented by Bhagavad-
87৫, spoken personally by Krsna about Himself, and Srimad-
Bhagavatam, spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami about the glories of Krsna.
Anyone who becomes even slightly interested in krsna-katha is liberated.
Kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sanigah param vrajet (Bhag. 12.3.51).
Simply by chanting or repeating krsna-kathd, one is liberated from the
contamination of Kali-yuga. Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore advised,
yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa (Cc. Madhya 7.128). This is the
mission of Krsna consciousness: to hear about Krsna and thus be liber-
ated from material bondage.
TEXT 4
निवृत्ततर्वैरुपगीयमानाद्‌
EN রে -
मवोषधाच्छोत्रमनोऽभिरामात्‌ ।


--- Page 26 ---
Text 4] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 21
IN
क उत्तमनछाकगुणाचुवादात्‌
पुमान्‌ विरज्येत विना gga ॥ ४ ॥
nivrtta-tarsair upagiyamanad
bhavausadhac chrotra-mano-’bhiramat
ka uttamasloka-gunanuvadat
puman virajyeta vind pasughnat
nivrtta—released from; tarsaih—lust or material activities; upagiya-
manat—which is described or sung; bhava-ausadhat—which is the
right medicine for the material disease; Srotra—the process of aural
reception; manah—the subject matter of thought for the mind;
abhiramat—from the pleasing vibrations from such glorification;
kah—who; uttamasloka—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
guna-anuvadat—from describing such activities; puman—a person;
virajyeta—can keep himself aloof; vina—except; pasu-ghnat—either a
butcher or one who is killing his own personal existence.
TRANSLATION
Glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is per-
formed in the parampara system; that is, it is conveyed from spiri-
tual master to disciple. Such glorification is relished by those no
longer interested in the false, temporary glorification of this cos-
mic manifestation. Descriptions of the Lord are the right medicine
for the conditioned soul undergoing repeated birth and death.
Therefore, who will cease hearing such glorification of the Lord
except a butcher or one who is killing his own self?
PURPORT
In India it is the practice among the general populace to hear about
Krsna, either from Bhagavad-gita or from Srimad-Bhagavatam, in
order to gain relief from the disease of repeated birth and death. Al-
though India is now fallen, when there is a message that someone will
speak about Bhagavad-gita or Srimad-Bhagavatam, thousands of people
still gather to hear. This verse indicates, however, that such recitation of
Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam must be done by persons


--- Page 27 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
completely freed from material desires (nivrtta-tarsaih). Everyone
within this material world, beginning from Brahma down to the insig-
nificant ant, is full of material desires for sense enjoyment, and everyone
is busy in sense gratification, but when thus engaged one cannot fully
understand the value of krsna-kathd, either in the form of Bhagavad-
gita or in Srimad-Bhagavatam.

If we hear the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from
liberated persons, this hearing will certainly free us from the bondage of
material activities, but hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam spoken by a profes-
sional reciter cannot actually help us achieve liberation. Krsna-katha is
very simple. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that Krsna is the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. As He Himself explains, mattah 00701070778 nanyat
kificid asti dhanafijaya: “0 Arjuna, there is no truth superior to Me.”
(Bg. 7.7) Simply by understanding this fact—that Krsna is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead—one can become a liberated person. But, es-
pecially in this age, because people are interested in hearing Bhagavad-
gita from unscrupulous persons who depart from the simple presentation
of Bhagavad-gita and distort it for their personal satisfaction, they fail to
derive the real benefit. There are big scholars, politicians, philosophers
and scientists who speak on Bhagavad-gitd in their own polluted way,
and people in general hear from them, being uninterested in hearing the
glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from a devotee. A devotee
is one who has no other motive for reciting Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-
Bhagavatam than to serve the Lord. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has
therefore advised us to hear the glories of the Lord from a realized per-
son (bhagavata paro diya bhagavata sthane). Unless one is personally a
realized soul in the science of Krsna consciousness, a neophyte should not
approach him to hear about the Lord, for this is strictly forbidden by
Srila Sanatana Gosvami, who quotes from the Padma Purana:

avaisnava-mukhodgirnam
puta hari-kathamrtam
’ Sravanarh naiva kartavyar
sarpocchistarh yatha payah
One should avoid hearing from a person not situated in Vaisnava
behavior. A Vaisnava is nivrtta-trsna; that is, he has no material pur-


--- Page 28 ---
Text 4] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 23
pose, for his only purpose is to preach Krsna consciousness. So-called
scholars, philosophers and politicians exploit the importance of
Bhagavad-gita by distorting its meaning for their own purposes.
Therefore this verse warns that krsna-katha should be recited by a per-
son who is nivrtta-trsna. Sukadeva Gosvami epitomizes the proper reciter
for Srimad-Bhagavatam, and Pariksit Maharaja, who purposefully left
his kingdom and family prior to meeting death, epitomizes the person fit
to hear it. A qualified reciter of Srimad-Bhagavatam gives the right
medicine (bhavausadhi) for the conditioned souls. The Krsna conscious-
ness movement is therefore trying to train qualified preachers to recite
Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita throughout the entire world, so
that people in general in all parts of the world may take advantage of this
movement and thus be relieved of the threefold miseries of material
existence. J

The instructions of Bhagavad-gita and the descriptions of Srimad-
Bhagavatam are so pleasing that almost anyone suffering from the
threefold miseries of material existence will desire to hear the glories of
the Lord from these books and thus benefit on the path of liberation. Two
classes of men, however, will never be interested in hearing the message
of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam—those who are determined
to commit suicide and those determined to kill cows and other animals
for the satisfaction of their own tongues. Although such persons may
make a show of hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam at a Bhagavata-saptaha,
this is but another creation of the karmis, who cannot derive any benefit
from such a performance. The word pasu-ghnat is important in this con-
nection. Pasu-ghna means “butcher.” Persons fond of performing
ritualistic ceremonies for elevation to the higher planetary systems must
offer sacrifices (yajiias) by killing animals. Lord Buddhadeva therefore
rejected the authority of the Vedas because his mission was to stop
animal sacrifices, which are recommended in Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies.

nindasi yajiia-vidher ahaha sruti-jatam
sa-daya-hrdaya darsita-pasu-ghatam
kesava dhrta-buddha-$arira jaya jagadisa hare
(Gita-govinda)


--- Page 29 ---
24 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
Even though animal sacrifices are sanctioned in Vedic ceremonies, men
who kill animals for such ceremonies are considered butchers. Butchers
cannot be interested in Krsna consciousness, for they are already ma-
terially allured. Their only interest lies in developing comforts for the
temporary body.

bhogaisvarya-prasaktanar

tayapahrta-cetasam
vyavasayatmika buddhih
samadhau na vidhiyate
“In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and ma-
terial opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute
determination of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take
place.” (Bg. 2.44) Srila Narottama dasa Thakura says:
manusya-janama paiya, radha-krsna na bhajiya,

Jjaniya Suniya visa khainu
Anyone who is not Krsna conscious and who therefore does not engage in
the service of the Lord is also pasu-ghna, for he is willingly drinking
poison. Such a person cannot be interested in krsna-katha because he
still has a desire for material sense gratification; he is not nivrtta-trsna.
As it is said, traivargikas te purusa vimukha hari-medhasah. Those in-
terested in trivarga—that is, in dharma, artha and kama —are religious
for the sake of achieving a material position with which to gain better
facilities for sense gratification. Such persons are killing themselves by
willingly keeping themselves in the cycle of birth and death. They cannot
be interested in Krsna consciousness.

For krsna-katha, topics about Krsna consciousness, there must be a
speaker and a hearer, both of whom can be interested in Krsna con-
sciousness if they are no longer interested in material topics. One can ac-
tually see how this attitude automatically develops in persons who are
Krsna conscious. Although the devotees of the Krsna consciousness
movement are quite young men, they no longer read materialistic
newspapers, magazines and so on, for they are no longer interested in
such topics (nivrtta-tarsaih). They completely give up the bodily under-


--- Page 30 ---
Text 4] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 25
standing of life. For topics concerning Uttama$loka, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the spiritual master speaks, and the disciple hears
with attention. Unless both of them are free from material desires, they
cannot be interested in topics of Krsna consciousness. The spiritual
master and disciple do not need to understand anything more than Krsna
because simply by understanding Krsna and talking about Krsna, one be-
comes a perfectly learned person (yasmin vijiiate sarvam evam vijiiatam
bhavati). The Lord sits within everyone’s heart, and by the grace of the
Lord the devotee receives instructions directly from the Lord Himself,
who says in Bhagavad-gita (15.15):
sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jianam apohanam ca
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham

“I am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas, I am to be known; in-
deed, I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.”
Krsna consciousness is so exalted that one who is perfectly situated in
Krsna consciousness, under the direction of the spiritual master, is fully
satisfied by reading krsna-katha as found in Srimad-Bhagavatam,
Bhagavad-gita and similar Vedic literatures. Since merely talking about
Krsna is so pleasing, we can simply imagine how pleasing it is to render
service to Krsna.

When discourses on krsna-katha take place between a liberated spiri-
tual master and his disciple, others also sometimes take advantage of
hearing these topics and also benefit. These topics are the medicine to
stop the repetition of birth and death. The cycle of repeated birth and
death, by which one takes on different bodies again and again, is called
bhava or bhava-roga. If anyone, willingly or unwillingly, hears krsna-
katha, his bhava-roga, the disease of birth and death, will certainly stop.
Therefore krsna-katha is called bhavausadha, the remedy to stop the
repetition of birth and death. Karmis, or persons attached to material
sense enjoyment, generally cannot give up their material desires, but
krsna-katha is such a potent medicine that if one is induced to hear
krsna-kirtana, he will certainly be freed from this disease. A practical


--- Page 31 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
example is Dhruva Maharaja, who at the end of his tapasya was fully
satisfied. When the Lord wanted to give Dhruva a benediction, Dhruva
refused it. Svamin krtartho smi varam na yace. “My dear Lord,” he
said, “I am fully satisfied. I do not ask for any benediction for material
sense gratification.” We actually see that even young boys and girls in
the Krsna consciousness movement have given up their long practice of
bad habits like illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. Be-
cause Krsna consciousness is so potent that it gives them full satisfaction,
they are no longer interested in material sense gratification.
TEXTS 5-7
पितामहा मे _समरेऽमरज्ञयै-
-
देवत्रताद्यातिरथैस्तिमिङ्गिलेः ।
. EY .
दुरत्ययं कोरवसैन्यसागरं
कृत्वातरन्‌ वत्सपदं ख यत्छवाः ॥ ५॥
द्रीण्यख्रविप्ल्टमिदं Ew
सन्तानबीजं ङरुपाण्डवानाम्‌ ।
गोप IRF गत॒ आत्तचक्रो
मातु्च मे यः शरणं गतायाः ॥ ६ ॥
वीर्याणि  तस्याखिलदेहमाजा-
< 2
मन्तबेहिः पूरुषकालसरूपेः |
प्रयच्छतो मरत्युताखतं च
मायामनुष्यस्य মহল विदन्‌ ॥ ७ ॥
pitamaha me samare 'marafijayair
devavratadyatirathais timingilaih
duratyayam kaurava-sainya-sagararm
krtvataran vatsa-padam sma yat-plavah
drauny-astra-viplustam 10077 mad-arigam
santana-bijarm kuru-pandavanam
Jjugopa kuksim gata atta-cakro
matu$ ca me yah Saranam gatayah


--- Page 32 ---
Text 7] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 27
viryani tasyakhila-deha-bhajam
antar bahih purusa-kala-ripaih
prayacchato mrtyum utamrtam ca
mdyd-manusyasya vadasva vidvan

pitamahah—my grandfathers, the five Pandavas (Yudhisthira,
Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva); me—my; samare—on the Bat-
tlefield of Kuruksetra; amaram-jayaih—with fighters who could gain
victory over the demigods on the battlefield; devavrata-adya—
Bhismadeva and others; atirathaih—great commanders in chief;
timingilaih—resembling great timingila fish, which can easily eat large
sharks; duratyayam—very difficult to cross; kaurava-sainya-saga-
ram —the ocean of the assembled soldiers of the Kauravas; krtva—con-
sidering such an ocean; ataran—crossed it; vatsa-padam—exactly as
one steps over a small hoofprint of a calf; sma—in the past; yat-
plavah—the shelter of the boat of Krsna’s lotus feet; drauni—of
Asévatthama; astra—by the brahmadstra; viplustam —being attacked and
burned; idam—this; mat-arigam—my body; santana-bijam—the only
seed left, the last descendant of the family; kuru-pandavanam—of the
Kurus and the Pandavas (because no one but me lived after the Battle of
Kuruksetra); jugopa—gave protection; kuksim—within the womb;
gatah—being placed; atta-cakrah—taking in hand the disc; matuh—of
my mother; ca—also; me—my; yah—the Lord who; Saranam—the
shelter; gatayah—who had taken; viryani—the glorification of the tran-
scendental characteristics; tasya—of Him (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); akhila-deha-bhajam—of all the materially embodied living
entities; antah bahih—inside and outside; pirusa—of the Supreme
Person; kala-ripaih—in the forms of eternal time; prayacchatah—who
is the giver; mrtyum—of death; uta—it is so said; amrtam ca—and
eternal life; maya-manusyasya—of the Lord, who appeared as an ordi-
nary human being by His own potency; vadasva—kindly describe;
vidvan—O learned speaker (Sukadeva Gosvami).

TRANSLATION

Taking the boat of Krsna’s lotus feet, my grandfather Arjuna
and others crossed the ocean of the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, in
which such commanders as Bhigmadeva resembed great fish that


--- Page 33 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
could very easily have swallowed them. By the mercy of Lord
Krsna, my grandfathers crossed this ocean, which was very dif-
ficult to cross, as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of a calf.
Because my mother surrendered unto Lord Krsna’s lotus feet, the
Lord, Sudar§ana-cakra in hand, entered her womb and saved my
body, the body of the last remaining descendant of the Kurus and
the Pandavas, which was almost destroyed by the fiery weapon of
Asvatthama. Lord Sri Krsna, appearing within and outside of all
materially embodied living beings by His own potency in the
forms of eternal time —that is, as Paramatma and as virat-riipa—
gave liberation to everyone, either as cruel death or as life. Kindly
enlighten me by describing His transcendental characteristics.
PURPORT
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.58):
samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavarm
mahat-padari punya-yaso murareh
bhavambudhir vatsa-padari param [00007
padari padam yad vipadarm na tesam

“For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is
the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Murari, or the
enemy of the Mura demon, the ocean of the material world is like the
water contained in a calf’s hoofprint. His goal is param padam, or
Vaikuntha, the place where there are no material miseries, not the place
where there is danger at every step.”

One who seeks shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Krsna is immediately
protected by the Lord. As the Lord promises in Bhagavad-gita (18.66),
ahari एका? sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami ma Sucah: “I shall deliver
you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear.” By taking shelter of Lord
Krsna, one comes under the safest protection. Thus when the Pandavas
took shelter at the lotus feet of Krsna, all of them were on the safe side of
the Battlefield of Kuruksetra. Pariksit Maharaja, therefore, felt obliged
to think of Krsna in the last days of his life. This is the ideal result of
Krsna consciousness: ante narayana-smrtih. If at the time of death one


--- Page 34 ---
Text 8] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 29
can remember Krsna, one’s life is successful. Pariksit Maharaja,
therefore, because of his many obligations to Krsna, intelligently decided
to think of Krsna constantly during the last days of his life. Krsna had
saved the Pandavas, Maharaja Pariksit’s grandfathers, on the Battlefield
of Kuruksetra, and Krsna had saved Maharaja Pariksit himself when he
was attacked by the brahmastra of Asvatthama. Krsna acted as the friend
and worshipable Deity of the Pandava family. Moreover, apart from Lord
Krsna’s personal contact with the Pandavas, Krsna is the Supersoul of all
living entities, and He gives everyone liberation, even if one is not a pure
devotee. Karisa, for example, was not at all a devotee, yet Krsna, after
killing him, gave him salvation. Krsna consciousness is beneficial to
everyone, whether one is a pure devotee or a nondevotee. This is the
glory of Krsna consciousness. Considering this, who will not take shelter
at the lotus feet of Krsna. Krsna is described in this verse as maya-
manusya because He descends exactly like a human being. He is not
obliged to come here, like karmis, or ordinary living beings; rather, He
appears by His own internal energy (sambhavamy atma-mayaya) just to
show favor to the fallen conditioned souls. Krsna is always situated in His
original position as sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, and anyone who renders
service to Him is also situated in his original, spiritual identity
(svarapena vyavasthitih). This is the highest perfection of human life.
TEXT 8
=
रोदिण्यास्तनयः प्रोक्तो रामः सङ्कर्षणस्त्वया |
देवक्या गर्भसम्बन्धः ङतो देहान्तरं विना ॥ ८ ॥
rohinyas tanayah prokto
ramah sarkarsanas tvaya
devakya garbha-sambandhah
kuto dehantararm vina

rohinyah—of Rohinidevi, the mother of Baladeva; tanayah—the son;
proktah—is well known; ramah—Balarama; sarikarsanah—Balarama is
none other than Sankarsana, the first Deity in the quadruple group
(Sankarsana, Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Vasudeva); tvaya—by
you (it is so said); devakyah—of Devaki, the mother of Krsna;


--- Page 35 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
garbha-sambandhah—connected with the womb; kutah—how; deha-
antaram—transferring bodies; vina—without.
TRANSLATION
My dear Sukadeva Gosvami, you have already explained that
Sankarsana, who belongs to the second quadruple, appeared as the
son of Rohini named Balarama. If Balarama was not transferred
from one body to another, how is it possible that He was first in the
womb of Devaki and then in the womb of Rohini? Kindly explain
this to me.
PURPORT
Here is a question particularly directed at understanding Balarama,
who is Sankarsana Himself. Balarama is well known as the son of Rohini,
yet it is also known that He was the son of Devaki. Pariksit Maharaja
wanted to understand the mystery of Balarama’s being the son of both
Devaki and Rohini.
TEXT 9
कसान्युकन्दो भगवान्‌ पितर्गेदाद्‌ व्रजं गतः |
क्र IIE FART: साधं कृतवान्‌ सात्वतांपतिः ॥ ९ ॥
kasman mukundo bhagavan
pitur gehad vrajar gatah
kva ৮৫5৫7 jiiatibhih sardham
krtavan satvatam patih
kasmat—why; mukundah—Krsna, who can award liberation to
everyone; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pituh—of
His father (Vasudeva); gehat—from the house; vrajam—to Vraja-
dhama, Vrajabhiimi; gatah—went; kva— where; vasam—placed Him-
self to live; jAatibhih— His relatives; sardham —with; krtavan—did so;
satvatam patih—the master of all Vaisnava devotees.
’ TRANSLATION
Why did Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, leave the
house of His father, Vasudeva, and transfer Himself to the house


--- Page 36 ---
Text 10] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 31
of Nanda in Vrndavana? Where did the Lord, the master of the
Yadu dynasty, live with His relatives in Vrndavana?
PURPORT
These are inquiries about the itinerary of Krsna. Just after His birth
in the house of Vasudeva in Mathura, Krsna transferred Himself to
Gokula, on the other side of the Yamuna, and after some days He moved
with His father, mother and other relatives to Nanda-grama, Vrndavana.
Maharaja Pariksit was very much eager to hear about Krsna’s activities
in Vrndavana. This entire canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam is full of ac-
tivities performed in Vrndavana and Dvaraka. The first forty chapters
describe Krsna’s Vrndavana affairs, and the next fifty describe Krsna’s
activities in Dvaraka. Maharaja Pariksit, to fulfill his desire to hear about
Krsna, requested Sukadeva Gosvami to describe these activities in full
detail.
TEXT 10
AN वसन्‌ किमकरोन्मधुपुयां च केशवः ।
ক ss [3
WE चावधीत्‌ कसं मातुरद्ातदहणम्‌ ॥१०॥
vraje vasan kim akaron
madhupuryarm ca kesavah
bhrataram cavadhit kamsam
matur addhatad-arhanam
vraje—at Vrndavana; vasan—while residing; kim akarot—what did
He do; madhupuryam—in Mathura; ca—and; kesavah—XKrsna, the
killer of Keéi; bhrataram—the brother; ca—and; avadhit—killed;
kammsam—Karhsa; matuh—of His mother; addha—directly; a-tat-
arhanam—which was not at all sanctioned by the Sastras.
TRANSLATION
Lord Krsna lived both in Vrndavana and in Mathura. What did
He do there? Why did He kill Karhsa, His mother’s brother? Such
killing is not at all sanctioned in the §astras.


--- Page 37 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
PURPORT

One’s maternal uncle, the brother of one’s mother, is on the 1ével of
one’s father. When a maternal uncle has no son, his nephew legally in-
herits his property. Therefore, why did Krsna directly kill Karsa, the
brother of His mother? Maharaja Pariksit was very much inquisitive
about the facts in this regard.

TEXT 11
देहं मालुषमाधरित्य कति वर्षाणि इष्णिभिः |
यदुपुयौ सदाबात्सीत्‌ Te: कत्यमवन्‌ प्रभोः 112 2)
deharih manusam asritya
kati varsani vrsnibhih
yadu-puryarm sahavatsit
patnyah katy abhavan prabhoh

deham—body; manusam—exactly like a man; dasritya—accepting;
kati varsani—how many years; vrsnibhih—in the company of the
Vrsnis, those who were born in the Vrsni family; yadu-puryam—in
Dvaraka, in the residential quarters of the Yadus; saha—with; avatsit—
the Lord lived; patnyah—wives; kati—how many; abhavan—were
there; prabhoh—of the Lord.

TRANSLATION

Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has no material
body, yet He appears as a human being. For how many years did
He live with the descendants of Vrsni? How many wives did He
marry, and for how many years did He live in Dvaraka?

PURPORT

In many places the Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as
sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, possessing a spiritual, blissful body. His bodily
feature is narakrti, that is, exactly like that of a human being. Here the
same idea is repeated in the words manusam asritya, which indicate that
He accepts a body exactly like that of a man. Everywhere it is confirmed


--- Page 38 ---
Text 13] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 33
that Krsna is never nirakara, or formless. He has His form, exactly like
that of a human being. There is no doubt about this.
TEXT 12
एतदन्यच्च स्वं मे यने कृष्णविचेष्टितम्‌ |
TPR संज्ञ श्रदधानाय विस्तृतम्‌ ।१२॥
etad anyac ca sarvarih me
mune krsna-vicestitam
vaktum arhasi sarvajiia
Sraddadhanaya vistrtam
etat—all these details; anyat ca—and others also; sarvam—every-
thing; me—unto me; mune—O great sage; krsna-vicestitam—the ac-
tivities of Lord Krsna; vaktum—to describe; arhasi—you are able;
sarva-jia—because you know everything; sraddadhdanaya—because I
am not envious but have all faith in Him; vistrtam —in full detail.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, who know everything about Krsna, please describe
in detail all the activities of which I have inquired and also those of
which I have not, for I have full faith and am very eager to hear of
them.
TEXT 13
नैषातिदुःसहा gi त्यक्तोदमपि बाधते |
पिबन्तं त्वन्भुखाम्भोजच्युतं হব্কিযাদ্বনমূ 1230
naisatiduhsaha ksun mam
tyaktodam api badhate
08007080077 tvan-mukhambhoja-
cyutari hari-kathamrtam
na—not; esda—all this; ati-duhsaha—extremely difficult to bear;
ksut—hunger; mam —unto me; tyakta-udam—even after giving up


--- Page 39 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1

drinking water; api—also; badhate—does not hinder; pibantam—while

drinking; tvat-mukha-ambhoja-cyutam —emanating from your lotus

mouth; hari-katha-amrtam—the nectar of topics concerning Krsna. .
TRANSLATION

Because of my vow on the verge of death, I have given up even
drinking water, yet because I am drinking the nectar of topics
about Krsna, which is flowing from the lotus mouth of Your Lord-
ship, my hunger and thirst, which are extremely difficult to bear,
cannot hinder me.

PURPORT

To prepare to meet death in seven days, Maharaja Pariksit gave up all
food and drink. As a human being, he was certainly both hungry and
thirsty, and therefore Sukadeva Gosvami might have wanted to stop nar-
rating the transcendental topics of Krsna; but despite his fast, Maharaja
Pariksit was not at all fatigued. “The hunger and thirst from my fast do
not disturb me,” he said. “Once when I felt very thirsty, I went to the
asrama of Samika Muni to drink water, but the muni did not supply it. I
therefore wrapped a dead snake over his shoulder, and that is why I was
cursed by the brahmana boy. Now, however, I am quite fit. I am not at
all disturbed by my hunger and thirst.” This indicates that although on
the material platform there are disturbances from hunger and thirst, on
the spiritual platform there is no such thing as fatigue.

The entire world is suffering because of spiritual thirst. Every living
being is Brahman, or spirit soul, and needs spiritual food to satisfy his
hunger and thirst. Unfortunately, however, the world is completely
unaware of the nectar of krsna-katha. The Krsna consciousness move-
ment is therefore a boon to philosophers, religionists and people in
general. There is certainly a charming attraction in Krsna and krsna-
katha. Therefore the Absolute Truth is called Krsna, the most attractive.

The word amrta is also an important reference to the moon, and the
word ambuja means “lotus.” The pleasing moonshine and pleasing
fragrance of the lotus combined to bring pleasure to everyone hearing
krsna-katha from the mouth of Sukadeva Gosvami. As it is said:

matir na krsne paratah svato va
mitho ’bhipadyeta grha-vratanam


--- Page 40 ---
Text 14] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 35
adanta-gobhir visatarh tamisram
punah punas$ carvita-carvananam
“Because of their uncontrolled senses, persons too addicted to ma-
terialistic life make progress toward hellish conditions and repeatedly
chew that which has already been chewed. Their inclinations toward
Krsna are never aroused, either by the instructions of others, by their
own efforts, or by a combination of both.” (818. 7.5.30) At the present
moment, all of human society is engaged in the business of chewing the
chewed (punah punas carvita-carvananam). People are prepared to
undergo mrtyu-samsdara-vartmani, taking birth in one form, dying, ac-
cepting another form and dying again. To stop this repetition of birth
and death, krsna-kathad, or Krsna consciousness, is absolutely necessary.
But unless one hears krsna-katha from a realized soul like Sukadeva
Gosvami, one cannot relish the nectar of krsna-katha, which puts an end
to all material fatigue, and enjoy the blissful life of transcendental exis-
tence. In relation to the Krsna consciousness movement, we actually see
that those who have tasted the nectar of krsna-katha lose all material
desires, whereas those who cannot understand Krsna or krsna-katha
regard the Krsna conscious life as “brainwashing” and ‘“‘mind control.”
While the devotees enjoy spiritual bliss, the nondevotees are surprised
that the devotees have forgotten material hankerings.
TEXT 14
चूत उवाच
एवं निशम्य भरगुनन्दन साधुवादं
वैयासकिः स भगवानथ विष्णुरातम्‌ |
्त्यच्यं कृष्णचरितं कलिकस्मपष्नं
व्याहतुमारमत भागवतप्रधानः ॥१४॥
sta uvaca
evam nisamya bhrgu-nandana sadhu-vadam
vaiydasakih sa bhagavan atha visnu-ratam
pratyarcya krsna-caritari kali-kalmasa-ghnarm
vyahartum arabhata bhagavata-pradhanah


--- Page 41 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1

sitah uvaca—Sita Gosvami said; evam—thus; niSamya—hearing;
bhrgu-nandana—O son of the Bhrgu dynasty, Saunaka; sadhu-
vadam—pious questions; vaiydsakih—Sukadeva Gosvami, the son of
Vyasadeva; sah—he; bhagavan—the most powerful; atha—thus;
visnu-ratam—unto Pariksit Maharaja, who was always protected by
Visnu; pratyarcya—offering him respectful obeisances; krsna-
caritam—topics of Lord Krsna; kali-kalmasa-ghnam —which diminish
the troubles of this age of Kali; vydhartum—to describe; arabhata—
began; bhagavata-pradhanah —Sukadeva Gosvami, the chief among the
pure devotees.

TRANSLATION
_ Sata Gosvami said: 0 son of Bhrgu [Saunaka Rsi], after
Sukadeva Gosvami, the most respectable devotee, the son of
Vyasadeva, heard the pious questions of Maharaja Pariksit, he
thanked the King with great respect. Then he began to discourse
on topics concerning Krsna, which are the remedy for all suffer-
ings in this age of Kali.
PURPORT

In this verse the words krsna-caritari kali-kalmasa-ghnam indicate
that the activities of Lord Krsna are certainly the greatest panacea for all
miseries, especially in this age of Kali. It is said that in Kali-yuga people
have only short lives, and they have no culture of spiritual consciousness.
If anyone is at all interested in spiritual culture, he is misled by many
bogus svamis and yogis who do not refer to krsna-katha. Therefore most
people are unfortunate and disturbed by many calamities. Srila
Vyasadeva prepared Srimad-Bhagavatam at the request of Narada Muni
in order to give relief to the suffering people of this age (kali-kalmasa-
ghnam). The Krsna consciousness movement is seriously engaged in en-
lightening people through the pleasing topics of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
All over the world, the message of Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-
gita is being accepted in all spheres of life, especially in advanced, edu-
cated circles.

Srila Sukadeva Gosvami is described in this verse as bhagavata-
pradhanah, whereas Maharaja Pariksit is described as visnu-ratam. Both


--- Page 42 ---
Text 15] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 37
words bear the same meaning; that is, Maharaja Pariksit was a great
devotee of Krsna, and Sukadeva Gosvami was also a great saintly person
and a great devotee of Krsna. Combined together to present krsna-katha,
they give great relief to suffering humanity. .
anarthopasamari saksad
bhakti-yogam adhoksaje
lokasydjanato vidvams
cakre satvata-sarnhitam
“The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to
him, can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional ser-
vice. But the mass of people do not know this, and therefore the learned
Vyasadeva compiled this Vedic literature, Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is
in relation to the Supreme Truth.” (Bhag. 1.7.6) People in general are
unaware that the message of Srimad-Bhagavatam can give all of human
society relief from the pangs of Kali-yuga (kali-kalmasa-ghnam).
TEXT 15
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
सम्यरज्यवसिता बुद्धिस्तव राजर्षिसत्तम |
वासुदेवकथायां ते यजाता नैष्ठिकी रतिः ॥१५॥
sri-Suka uvaca
samyag vyavasita buddhis
tava rajarsi-sattama
vasudeva-kathayam te
yaj jata naisthiki ratih
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; samyak—completely;
vyavasita— fixed; buddhih—intelligence; tava —of Your Majesty; raja-
rsi-sattama—O best of rajarsis, saintly kings; vasudeva-kathayam—in
hearing about the topics of Vasudeva, Krsna; te —your; yat—Dbecause;
jata—developed; naisthiki—without cessation; ratih—attraction or
ecstatic devotional service.


--- Page 43 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami said: O Your Majesty, best of all saintly
kings, because you are greatly attracted to topics of Vasudeva, it is
certain that your intelligence is firmly fixed in spiritual under-
standing, which is the only true goal for humanity. Because that
attraction is unceasing, it is certainly sublime.
PURPORT
Krsna-katha is compulsory for the rajarsi, or executive head of
government. This is also mentioned in Bhagavad-gita (imam rajarsayo
viduh). Unfortunately, however, in this age the governmental power is
gradually being captured by third-class and fourth-class men who have
no spiritual understanding, and society is therefore very quickly becom-
ing degraded. Krsna-katha must be understood by the executive heads of
government, for otherwise how will people be happy and gain relief from
the pangs of materialistic life? One who has fixed his mind in Krsna con-
sciousness should be understood to have very sharp intelligence in
regard to the value of life. Maharaja Pariksit was rajarsi-sattama, the
best of all saintly kings, and Sukadeva Gosvami was muni-sattama, the
best of munis. Both of them were elevated because of their common in-
terest in krsna-katha. The exalted position of the speaker and the
audience will be explained very nicely in the next verse. Krsna-katha is
so enlivening that Maharaja Pariksit forgot everything material, even his
personal comfort in relation to food and drink. This is an example of how
the Krsna consciousness movement should spread all over the world to
bring both the speaker and the audience to the transcendental platform
and back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 16

वारदेवकथाप्रभः पुरुषांखीन्‌ पुनाति टि ।

वक्तारं प्रच्छकं श्रोतुस्तत्पादसलिलं यथा ॥१६॥

। vasudeva-katha-prasnah

purusaris trin punati hi |
vaktaram pracchakam Srotfris
tat-pada-salilarih yatha


--- Page 44 ---
Text 17] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 39
vasudeva-katha-prasnah—questions about the pastimes and charac-
teristics of Vasudeva, Krsna; purusan—persons; trin—three; punati—
purify; hi—indeed; vaktaram —the speaker, such as Sukadeva Gosvami;
pracchakam —and an inquisitive hearer like Maharaja Pariksit; srotfn—
and, between them, the listeners hearing about the topics; tat-pada-
salilam yathd—exactly as the entire world is purified by the Ganges
water emanating from the toe of Lord Visnu.
TRANSLATION
The Ganges, emanating from the toe of Lord Visnu, purifies the
three worlds, the upper, middle and lower planetary systems.
Similarly, when one asks questions about the pastimes and charac-
teristics of Lord Vasudeva, Krsna, three varieties of men are
purified: the speaker or preacher, he who inquires, and the people
in general who listen.
PURPORT
It is said, tasmad gurum prapadyeta jijidsuh Sreya uttamam
(Bhag. 11.3.21). Those interested in understanding transcendental sub-
ject matters as the goal of life must approach the bona fide spiritual
master. Tasmad gururi prapadyeta. One must surrender to such a guru,
who can give right information about Krsna. Herein, Maharaja Pariksit
has surrendered to the right personality, Sukadeva Gosvami, for en-
lightenment in vdsudeva-kathd. Vasudeva is the original Personality of
Godhead, who has unlimited spiritual activities. Srimad-Bhagavatam is a
record of such activities, and Bhagavad-gita is the record of Vasudeva
speaking personally. Therefore, since the Krsna consciousness move-
ment is full of vasudeva-katha, anyone who hears, anyone who joins the
movement and anyone who preaches will be purified.
TEXT 17
2 2
भूमिसरृपन्याजदैत्यानीकशतायुतैः ।
आक्रान्ता भूरिभारेण ब्रह्माणं शरणं ययो ॥ १५७॥
bhimir drpta-nrpa-vydja-
daityantka-satayutaih


--- Page 45 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
akranta bhuri-bharena
brahmanam Saranam yayau
bhamih—mother earth; drpta—puffed up; nrpa-vyaja—posing as
kings, or the supreme power personified in the state; daitya—of
demons; anika—of military phalanxes of soldiers; Sata-ayutaih—un-
limitedly, by many hundreds of thousands; akranta—being overbur-
dened; bhiri-bharena—by a burden of unnecessary fighting power;
brahmanam —unto Lord Brahma; Saranam—to take shelter; yayau—
went.
TRANSLATION
Once when mother earth was overburdened by hundreds of
thousands of military phalanxes of various conceited demons
dressed like kings, she approached Lord Brahma for relief.
PURPORT
When the world is overburdened by unnecessary military arrange-
ments and when various demoniac kings are the executive heads of state,
this burden causes the appearance of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita 4.7):
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanar syjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
appear Myself.” When the residents of this earth become atheistic and
godless, they descend to the status of animals like dogs and hogs, and
thus their only business is to bark among themselves. This is dharmasya
glani, deviation from the goal of life. Human life is meant for attaining
the highest perfection of Krsna consciousness, but when people are god-
less and the presidents or kings are unnecessarily puffed up with mili-
tary power, their business is to fight and increase the military strength of


--- Page 46 ---
Text 18] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 41
their different states. Nowadays, therefore, it appears that every state is
busy manufacturing atomic weapons to prepare for a third world war.
Such preparations are certainly unnecessary; they reflect the false pride
of the heads of state. The real business of a chief executive is to see to the
happiness of the mass of people by training them in Krsna consciousness
in different divisions of life. Catur-varnyam maya srstamm guna-karma-
vibhagasah (Bg. 4.13). A leader should train the people as brahmanas,
ksatriyas, vaiSyas and $idras and engage them in various occupational
duties, thus helping them progress toward Krsna consciousness. Instead,
however, rogues and thieves in the guise of protectors arrange for a vot-
ing system, and in the name of democracy they come to power by hook or
crook and exploit the citizens. Even long, long ago, asuras, persons de-
void of God consciousness, became the heads of state, and now this is
happening again. The various states of the world are preoccupied with
arranging for military strength. Sometimes they spend sixty-five percent
of the government’s revenue for this purpose. But why should people’s
hard-earned money be spent in this way? Because of the present world
situation, Krsna has descended in the form of the Krsna consciousness
movement. This is quite natural, for without the Krsna consciousness

movement the world cannot be peaceful and happy.

TEXT 18
गौमूत्वाशरु॒खी खिन्ना कन्दन्ती करुणं विभोः |
उपस्थितान्तिके तस्मे व्यसनं समवोचत ॥१८॥
gaur bhatvasru-mukhi khinna
krandanti karunar vibhoh
upasthitantike tasmai
vyasanam samavocata
gauh—the shape of a cow; bhiuitva—assuming; asru-mukhi—with
tears in the eyes; khinna—very much distressed; krandanti—weeping;
karunam—piteously; vibhoh—of Lord Brahma; upasthita—appeared;
antike—in front; tasmai—unto him (Lord Brahma); vyasanam—her
distress; samavocata—submitted.


--- Page 47 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION

Mother earth assumed the form of a cow. Very much distressed,
with tears in her eyes, she appeared before Lord Brahma and told
him about her misfortune.

TEXT 19
बरह्मा तदुपधार्याथ सह देवैस्तया सह |
जगाम सत्रिनयनस्तीरं क्षीरपयोनिधेः ॥१९॥
brahma tad-upadharyatha
R saha devais taya saha
Jjagama sa-tri-nayanas
tira ksira-payo-nidheh

brahma—Lord Brahma; tat-upadhdrya—understanding everything
rightly; atha—thereafter; saha—with; devaih—the demigods; taya
saha—with mother earth; jagama—approached; sa-tri-nayanah—with
Lord Siva, who has three eyes; tiram —the shore; ksira-payah-nidheh—
of the ocean of milk.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter, having heard of the distress of mother earth, Lord
Brahma, with mother earth, Lord Siva and all the other demigods,
approached the shore of the ocean of milk.

PURPORT

After Lord Brahma understood the precarious condition of the earth,
he first visited the demigods headed by Lord Indra, who are in charge of
the various affairs of this universe, and Lord Siva, who is responsible for
annihilation. Both maintenance and annihilation go on perpetually,
under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita. (4.8), paritranaya sadhiinam vindsaya ca duskrtam.
Those who are obedient to the laws of God are protected by different ser-
vants and demigods, whereas those who are undesirable are vanquished
by Lord Siva. Lord Brahma first met all the demigods, including Lord


--- Page 48 ---
Text 20] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 43
Siva. Then, along with mother earth, they went to the shore of the ocean
of milk, where Lord Visnu lies on a white island, Svetadvipa.
TEXT 20
तत्र॒ गत्वा जगन्नाथं देवदेवं वृषाकपिम्‌ |
पुरुषं ॒पुरुषठक्तेन उपतस्थे समाहितः ॥२०॥
tatra gatva jaganndathari
deva-devam vrsakapim
purusam purusa-siktena
upatasthe samahitah
tatra—there (on the shore of the ocean of milk); gatva—after going;
jagannatham—unto the master of the entire universe, the Supreme
Being; deva-devam—the Supreme God of all gods; vrsakapim—the
Supreme Person, Visnu, who provides for everyone and dimin-
ishes everyone’s suffering; purusam—the Supreme Person; purusa-
siktena—with the Vedic mantra known as Purusa-sikta; upatasthe —
worshiped; samahitah—with full attention.
TRANSLATION
After reaching the shore of the ocean of milk, the demigods
worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, the
master of the whole universe, the supreme God of all gods, who
provides for everyone and diminishes everyone’s suffering. With
great attention, they worshiped Lord Vignu, who lies on the ocean
of milk, by reciting the Vedic mantras known as the Purusa-siikta.
PURPORT
The demigods, such as Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, King Indra, Candra
and Sirya, are all subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Aside from the demigods, even in human society there are many influen-
tial personalities supervising various businesses or establishments.
Lord Vispu, however, is the God of gods (paramesvara). He is
parama-purusa, the Supreme Being, Paramatma. As confirmed in the


--- Page 49 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
Brahma-samhita (5.1), णात paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-
vigrahah: “Krsna, known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has
an eternal, blissful, spiritual body.” No one is equal to or greater than
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore He is described here
by many words: jagannatha, deva-deva, vrsakapi and purusa. The
supremacy of Lord Visnu is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (10.12) in
this statement by Arjuna:
param brahma param dhama
pavitrarh paramari bhavan
purusam sasvatarn divyam
adi-devam ajar vibhum
“You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and
purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the
primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-
pervading beauty.” Krsna is adi-purusa, the original Personality of God-
head (govindam adi-purusam tam 28277 bhajami). Visnu is a plenary
expansion of Lord Krsna, and all the visnu-tattvas are paramesvara,
deva-deva.
TEXT 21
. EY त्‌
गिरं समाधौ गगने समीरितां
oN
নিহাম্ম वेधाख्िदशाजुवाच ह ।
गां पौरुषीं मे श्ृण॒तामराः पुन-
EN
विंधीयतामाछ्ु तथेव मा चिरम्‌ ॥२१॥
gira samadhau gagane samiritar
nisamya vedhas tridasan uvaca ha
gam paurusim me Srnutamarah punar
vidhiyatam asu tathaiva ma ciram
giram—a vibration of werds; samadhau—in trance; gagane—in the
sky; samiritam —vibrated; niSamya —hearing; vedhah—Lord Brahma;
tridasan—unto the demigods; uvdca—said; ha—oh; gam —the order;


--- Page 50 ---
Text 21] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 45
paurusim—received from the Supreme Person; me—from me; srnuta—
just hear; amarah—O demigods; punah—again; vidhiyatam —execute;
asu—immediately; tatha eva—just so; ma—do not; ciram—delay.
TRANSLATION

While in trance, Lord Brahma heard the words of Lord Visnu
vibrating in the sky. Thus he told the demigods: O demigods, hear
from me the order of Ksirodakasayi Visnu, the Supreme Person,
and execute it attentively without delay.

PURPORT

It appears that the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
be heard in trance by competent persons. Modern science gives us
telephones, by which one can hear sound vibrations from a distant place.
Similarly, although other persons cannot hear the words of Lord Visnu,
Lord Brahma is able to hear the Lord’s words within himself. This is con-
firmed in the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.1.1): tene brahma
hrda ya adi-kavaye. Adi-kavi is Lord Brahma. In the beginning of the
creation, Lord Brahma received the instructions of Vedic knowledge
from Lord Vispu through the medium of the heart (hrda). The same
principle is confirmed herewith. While Brahma was in trance, he was
able to hear the words of Ksirodakasayi Visnu, and he carried the Lord’s
message to the demigods. Similarly, in the beginning, Brahma first
received the Vedic knowledge from the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through the core of the heart. In both instances the same process was
used in transmitting the message to Lord Brahma. In other words, al-
though Lord Visnu was invisible even to Lord Brahma, Lord Brahma
could hear Lord Visnu’s words through the heart. The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is invisible even to Lord Brahma, yet He descends on
this earth and becomes visible to people in general. This is certainly an
act of His causeless mercy, but fools and nondevotees think that Krsna is
an ordinary historical person. Because they think that the Lord is an
ordinary person like them, they are described as miidha (avajananti
mar mudhah). The causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of God-
head is neglected by such demoniac persons, who cannot understand the
instructions of Bhagavad-gita and who therefore misinterpret them.


--- Page 51 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
TEXT 22
gH पंसावष्तो धराज्वरो
मवद्धिरंशोयेदुषूपजन्यताम्‌ ।
स॒ यावदुर्व्या भरमीश्वरेश्वरः
खकालशाक्त्या क्षपयंशरेद স্তুনি 1
puraiva purisavadhrto dhara-jvaro
bhavadbhir amsair yadusipajanyatam
sa yavad urvya bharam iSvaresvarah
sva-kala-saktya ksapayarns cared bhuvi
pura—even before this; eva—indeed; purmsa—by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; avadhrtah—was certainly known; dhara-jvarah—
the distress on the earth; bhavadbhih—by your good selves; amsaih—
expanding as plenary portions; yadusu—in the family of King Yadu;
upajanyatam—take your birth and appear there; sah—He (the Supreme
Personality of Godhead); yavat—as long as; urvyah—of the earth;
bharam—the burden; iSvara-isvarah—the Lord of lords; sva-kdla-
Saktya—by His own potency the time factor; ksapayan—diminishing;
caret—should move; bhuvi—on the surface of the earth.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma informed the demigods: Before we submitted our
petition to the Lord, He was already aware of the distress on earth.
Consequently, for as long as the Lord moves on earth to diminish
its burden by His own potency in the form of time, all of you
demigods should appear through plenary portions as sons and
grandsons in the family of the Yadus.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.39):
ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan
nanavataram akarod bhuvanesu kintu


--- Page 52 ---
Text 23] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 47
krsnah svayar samabhavat paramah puman yo
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
“I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is always
situated in various incarnations such as Rima, Nrsirhha and many subin-
carnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godhead,
known as Krsna, and who incarnates personally also.”

In this verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam we find the words puraiva
pumsavadhrto dhara-jvarah. The word [0175৫ refers to Krsna, who was
already aware of how the whole world was suffering because of the in-
crease of demons. Without reference to the supreme power of the Per-
sonality of Godhead, demons assert themselves to be independent kings
and presidents, and thus they create a disturbance by increasing their
military power. When such disturbances are very prominent, Krsna ap-
pears. At present also, various demoniac states all over the world are in-
creasing their military power in many ways, and the whole situation has
become distressful. Therefore Krsna has appeared by His name, in the
Hare Krsna movement, which will certainly diminish the burden of the
world. Philosophers, religionists, and people in general must take to this
movement very seriously, for man-made plans and devices will not help
bring peace on earth. The transcendental sound Hare Krsna is not dif-
ferent from the person Krsna.

nama cintamanih krsnas
caitanya-rasa-vigrahah
purnah Suddho nitya-mukto
’bhinnatvan nama-naminoh
(Padma Purana)
There is no difference between the sound Hare Krsna and Krsna the
person.
TEXT 23
वसुदेवगृहे ANE भगवान्‌ पुरुषः परः |
जनिष्यते तत्मियाथं सम्भवन्तु gem: ॥२२॥


--- Page 53 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
vasudeva-grhe saksad
bhagavan purusah parah
Jjanisyate tat-priyarthari
sambhavantu sura-striyah

vasudeva-grhe —in the house of Vasudeva (who would be the father of
Krsna when the Lord appeared); saksat—personally; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has full potency; purusah—the
original person; parah—who is transcendental; janisyate—will appear;
tat-priya-artham —and for His satisfaction; sambhavantu—should take
birth; sura-striyah—all the wives of the demigods.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, who has full
potency, will personally appear as the son of Vasudeva. Therefore
all the wives of the demigods should also appear in order to satisfy
Him.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (4.9) the Lord says, tyaktva 06107 punar janma
naiti mam eti: after giving up the material body, the devotee of the Lord
returns home, back to Godhead. This means that the devotee is first
transferred to the particular universe where the Lord is at that time stay-
ing to exhibit His pastimes. There are innumerable universes, and the
Lord is appearing in one of these universes at every moment. Therefore
His pastimes are called nitya-lila, eternal pastimes. The Lord’s ap-
pearance as a child in the house of Devaki takes place continuously in
one universe after another. Therefore, the devotee is first transferred to
that particular universe where the pastimes of the Lord are current. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita, even if a devotee does not complete the course
of devotional service, he enjoys the happiness of the heavenly planets,
where the most pious people dwell, and then takes birth in the house of a
Suci or §riman, a pious brahmana or a wealthy vaisya (Sucinam srimatar
gehe yoga-bhrasto ’bhijayate). Thus a pure devotee, even if unable to
execute devotional service completely, is transferred to the upper plan-
etary system, where pious people reside. From there, if his devotional


--- Page 54 ---
Text 24] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 49
service is complete, such a devotee is transferred to the place where the
Lord’s pastimes are going on. Herein it is said, sambhavantu sura-
striyah. Sura-stri, the women of the heavenly planets, were thus ordered
to appear in the Yadu dynasty in Vrndavana to enrich the pastimes of
Lord Krsna. These sura-stri, when further trained to live with Krsna,
would be transferred to the original Goloka Vrndavana. During Lord
Krsna’s pastimes within this world, the sura-stri were to appear in dif-
ferent ways in different families to give pleasure to the Lord, just so that
they would be fully trained before going to the eternal Goloka
Vrndavana. With the association of Lord Krsna, either at Dvaraka-puri,
Mathura-puri or Vrndavana, they would certainly return home, back to
Godhead. Among the sura-stri, the women of the heavenly planets, there
are many devotees, such as the mother of the Upendra incarnation
of Krsna. It was such devoted women who were called for in this
connection.
TEXT 24
वासुदेवकलानन्तः सहस्रवदनः स्वराट्‌ ।
- C
अग्रतो भविता देवो हरेः प्रियचिकीषेया nen
vasudeva-kalanantah
sahasra-vadanah svarat
agrato bhavita devo
hareh priya-cikirsaya

vasudeva-kald anantah—the plenary expansion of Lord Krsna known
as Anantadeva or Sankarsana Ananta, the all-pervasive incarnation of
the Supreme Lord; sahasra-vadanah—having thousands of hoods;
svarat—fully independent; agratah—previously; bhavita—will appear;
devah—the Lord; hareh—of Lord Krsna; priya-cikirsaya—with the
desire to act for the pleasure.

TRANSLATION

The foremost manifestation of Krsna is Sankarsana, who is

known as Ananta. He is the origin of all incarnations within this


--- Page 55 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
material world. Previous to the appearance of Lord Krsna, this
original Sankarsana will appear as Baladeva, just to please the
Supreme Lord Krsna in His transcendental pastimes.
PURPORT
प Baladeva is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. He is
equal in supremacy to the Supreme Godhead, yet wherever Krsna ap-
pears, Sri Baladeva appears as His brother, sometimes elder and some-
times younger. When Krsna appears, all His plenary expansions and
other incarnations appear with Him. This is elaborately explained in
Caitanya-caritamrta. This time, Baladeva would appear before Krsna as
Krsna’s elder brother.
TEXT 25
विष्णोर्माया भगवती यया सम्मोहितं जगत्‌ ।
৬ =
आदिष्टा EAA FEY सम्भविष्यति 140)
visnor maya bhagavati
yaya sammohitari jagat
adista prabhunamsena
karyarthe sambhavisyati
visnoh maya—the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Visnu; bhagavati—as good as Bhagavan and therefore known as
Bhagavati; yaya—by whom; sammohitam—captivated; jagat—all the
worlds, both material and spiritual; adista—being ordered; prabhuna—
by the master; amsena—with her different potential factors; karya-
arthe—for executing business; sambhavisyati—would also appear.
TRANSLATION
The potency of the Lord, known as visnu-maya, who is as good
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will also appear with Lord
Krsna. This potency, acting in different capacities, captivates all
the worlds, both material and spiritual. At the request of her
master, she will appear with her different potencies in order to
execute the work of the Lord.


--- Page 56 ---
Text 25] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 51
PURPORT

Parasya saktir vividhaiva srityate (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8). In the
Vedas it is said that the potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
are called by different names, such as yogamaya and mahamaya.
Ultimately, however, the Lord’s potency is one, exactly as electric
potency is one although it can act both to cool and to heat. The Lord’s
potency acts in both the spiritual and material worlds. In the spiritual
world the Lord’s potency works as yogamdyd, and in the material world
the same potency works as mahamaya, exactly as electricity works in
both a heater and a cooler. In the material world, this potency, working
as mahamayad, acts upon the conditioned souls to deprive them more and
more of devotional service. It is said, yaya sammohito jiva atmanarh tri-
gunatmakam. In the material world the conditioned soul thinks of him-
self as a product of tri-guna, the three modes of material nature. This is
the bodily conception of life. Because of associating with the three gunas
of the material potency, everyone identifies himself with his body. Some-
one is thinking he is a brahmana, someone a ksatriya, and someone a
vaiS§ya or Sidra. Actually, however, one is neither a brahmana, a
ksatriya, a vaiSya nor a Sidra; one is part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord (mamaivamsah), but because of being covered by the material en-
ergy, mahamadya, one identifies himself in these different ways. When
the conditioned soul becomes liberated, however, he thinks himself an
eternal servant of Krsna. Jivera ‘svaripa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-dasa.’
When he comes to that position, the same potency, acting as yogamaya,
increasingly helps him become purified and devote his energy to the
service of the Lord.

In either case, whether the soul is conditioned or liberated, the Lord is
supreme. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.10), mayadhyaksena prakrtih
siiyate sa-caracaram: it is by the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead that the material energy, mahamdya, works upon the condi-
tioned soul.

prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah

ahankara-vimuadhatma
kartaham iti manyate


--- Page 57 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
“The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities which are in
actuality carried out by nature.” (Bg. 3.27) Within conditioned life, no
one has freedom, but because one is bewildered, being subject to the rule
of mahamaya, one foolishly thinks himself independent (aharikdra-
vimiadhatma kartaham iti manyate). But when the conditioned soul be-
comes liberated by executing devotional service, he is given a greater and
greater chance to relish a relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in different transcendental statuses, such as dasya-rasa,
sakhya-rasa, vatsalya-rasa and madhurya-rasa.

Thus the Lord’s potency, visnu-maya, has two features—avaranika
and unmukha. When the Lord appeared, His potency came with Him and
acted in different ways. She acted as yogamaya with Yaéoda, Devaki and
other intimate relations of the Lord, and she acted in a different way with
Karhsa, Silva and other asuras. By the order of Lord Krsna, His potency
yogamaya came with Him and exhibited different activities according to
the time and circumstances. Karyarthe sambhavisyati. Yogamaya acted
differently to execute different purposes desired by the Lord. As con-
firmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.13), mahatmanas tu mam partha daivimn
prakrtim asritah. The mahatmas, who fully surrender to the lotus feet of
the Lord, are directed by yogamaya, whereas the duratmas, those who
are devoid of devotional service, are directed by mahamaya.

TEXT 26
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्यादिश्यामरगणान्‌ प्रजापतिपतिर्विंथुः |
आश्वास्य च महीं गीर्भिः खधाम परमं ययो ॥२६॥
$ri-Suka uvaca
ity adiSyamara-ganan
prajapati-patir vibhuh
asvasya ca mahim girbhih
sva-dhama paramari yayau

Sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; adiSya—

after informing; amara-ganan—all the demigods; prajapati-patih—


--- Page 58 ---
Text 28] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 53
Lord Brahma, the master of the Prajapatis; vibhuh—all-powerful;
asvasya—after pacifying; ca—also; mahim—mother earth; girbhih—
by sweet words; sva-dhama—his own planet, known as Brahmaloka;
paramam—the best (within the universe); yayau—returned.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After thus advising the demigods
and pacifying mother earth, the very powerful Lord Brahma, who
is the master of all other Prajapatis and is therefore known as
Prajapati-pati, returned to his own abode, Brahmaloka.
TEXT 27
शूरसेनो यदुपतिर्भथुरमादसन्‌ पुरीम्‌ |
माथुराञ्छरसेनांश्च विषयान्‌ बु्जे पुरा ।২৩।
suraseno yadupatir
mathuram avasan purim
mathuran chirasenams ca
visayan bubhuje pura
surasenah—XKing Sirasena; yadu-patih—the chief of the Yadu
dynasty; mathuram—at the place known as Mathura; avasan—went to
live; purim—in that city; mathuran—at the place known as the Mathura
district; sirasenan ca—and the place known as Sarasena; visayan—
such kingdoms; bubhuje—enjoyed; pura—formerly.
TRANSLATION
Formerly, Siirasena, the chief of the Yadu dynasty, had gone to
live in the city of Mathura. There he enjoyed the places known as
Mathura and Surasena.
TEXT 28
९
राजधानी ततः साभूत्‌ सवयादबभूञजाम्‌ ।
मथुरा भगवान्‌ यत्र नित्यं संनिहितो हरिः ॥२८॥


--- Page 59 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
rajadhani tatah sabhut
sarva-yadava-bhabhujam
mathura bhagavan yatra
nityam sannihito harih
rajadhani—the capital; tatah—from that time; sa—the coun-
try and the city known as Mathura; abhiit—became; sarva-yadava-
bhiabhujam—of all the kings who appeared in the Yadu dynasty;
mathura—the place known as Mathura; bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; yatra—wherein; nityam—eternally; sannihitah—
intimately connected, living eternally; harih—the Lord, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Since that time, the city of Mathura had been the capital of all
the kings of the Yadu dynasty. The city and district of Mathura are
very intimately connected with Krsna, for Lord Krsna lives there
eternally.
PURPORT
It is understood that Mathura City is the transcendental abode of Lord
Krsna; it is not an ordinary material city, for it is eternally connected
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vrndavana is within the
jurisdiction of Mathura, and it still continues to exist. Because Mathura
and Vrndivana are intimately connected with Krsna eternally, it is said
that Lord Krsna never leaves Vrndavana (vrndavanam parityajya
padam ekari na gacchati). At present, the place known as Vrndavana, in
the district of Mathura, continues its position as a transcendental place,
and certainly anyone who goes there becomes transcendentally purified.
Navadvipa-dhama is also intimately connected with Vrajabhami. Srila
Narottama dasa Thakura therefore says:
$ri gauda-mandala-bhimi, yeba jane cintamani,
ta’ra haya vrajabhime vasa
“Vrajabhtimi” refers to Mathuri-Vrndavana, and Gauda-mandala-
bhiami includes Navadvipa. These two places are nondifferent. There-


--- Page 60 ---
Text 29] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 55
fore, anyone living in Navadvipa-dhama, knowing Krsna and Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be the same personality, lives in Vrajabhiimi,
Mathura-Vrndivana. The Lord has made it convenient for the condi-
tioned soul to live in Mathura, Vrndavana and Navadvipa and thus be
directly connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Simply by
living in these places, one can immediately come in contact with the
Lord. There are many devotees who vow never to leave Vrndavana and
Mathura. This is undoubtedly a good vow, but if one leaves Vrndavana,
Mathura or Navadvipa-dhama for the service of the Lord, he is not dis-
connected from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At any rate, we
must understand the transcendental importance of Mathura-Vrndavana
and Navadvipa-dhama. Anyone who executes devotional service in these
places certainly goes back home, back to Godhead, after giving up his
body. Thus the words mathura bhagavan yatra nityar sannihito harih
are particularly important. A devotee should fully utilize this instruction
to the best of his ability. Whenever the Supreme Lord personally ap-
pears, He appears in Mathura because of His intimate connection with
this place. Therefore although Mathura and Vrndavana are situated on
this planet earth, they are transcendental abodes of the Lord.
TEXT 29
तस्यां तु कर्दिचिच्छोरिवंसुदेवः कृतोढहः |
देवक्या FM साधं प्रयाणे रथमारुहत्‌ ।॥२९॥
tasyam tu karhicic chaurir
vasudevah krtodvahah
devakya siuryaya sardham
prayane ratham aruhat
tasyam—in that place known as Mathura; tu—indeed; karhicit—
some time ago; Saurih—the demigod, descendant of Stra; vasudevah—
who appeared as Vasudeva; krta-udvahah—after being married;
devakya—Devaki; siryaya—his newly married wife; sardham—along
with; prayane—for returning home; ratham—the chariot; aruhat—
mounted.


--- Page 61 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION
Some time ago, Vasudeva, who belonged to the demigod family
[or to the Siira dynasty], married Devaki. After the marriage, he
mounted his chariot to return home with his newly married wife.
TEXT 30
उग्रसेनसुतः कंसः खसुः भियचिकीषया |
a
रद्मीन्‌ हयानां जग्राह ER रथशतेष्रेतः ॥२०॥
ugrasena-sutah karmsah
svasuh priya-cikirsaya
rasmin hayanam jagraha
raukmai ratha-satair vrtah
ugrasena-sutah—the son of Ugrasena; kamsah—by the name Karnsa;
svasuh—of his own sister Devaki; priya-cikirsayd—to please her on the
occasion of her marriage; rasmin—the reins; hayanam—of the horses;
Jjagraha—took; raukmaih—made of gold; ratha-sataih—by hundreds of
chariots; vrtah—surrounded.
TRANSLATION
Karhsa, the son of King Ugrasena, in order to please his sister
Devaki on the occasion of her marriage, took charge of the reins of
the horses and became the chariot driver. He was surrounded by
hundreds of golden chariots.
TEXTS 31-32
चतुःशतं पारिबर्हं गजानां हेममालिनाम्‌ |
अश्वानामयुतं सार्धं रथानां च त्रिषर॒श्चतम्‌ ।२१॥
दासीनां सुकुमारीणां ढे शते समलङ्कते |
FRA देवकः प्रादाद्‌ याने दुहित्वत्सलः 11320)
(1/1... 11.11.
gajanari hema-malinam


--- Page 62 ---
Text 32] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 57
asvanam ayutarn sardham
rathanam ca tri-sat-satam
dasinam sukumarinam
dve Sate samalankrte
duhitre devakah pradad
yane duhitr-vatsalah
catuh-satam—four hundred; paribarham—dowry; gajanam—of
elephants; hema-malinam—decorated with garlands of gold; asva-
nam—of horses; ayutam—ten thousand; sardham—along with;
rathanam—of chariots; ca—and; tri-sat-iatam —three times six hun-
dred (eighteen hundred); dasinam —of maidservants; su-kumarinam—
very young and beautiful unmarried girls; dve—two; Sate—hundred;
samalarikrte—fully decorated with ornaments; duhitre—unto his
daughter; devakah—King Devaka; pradat—gave as a gift; yane—while
going away; dubhitr-vatsalah—who was very fond of his daughter
Devaki.
TRANSLATION
Devaki’s father, King Devaka, was very much affectionate to his
daughter. Therefore, while she and her husband were leaving
home, he gave her a dowry of four hundred elephants nicely deco-
rated with golden garlands. He also gave ten thousand horses,
eighteen hundred chariots, and two hundred very beautiful young
maidservants, fully decorated with ornaments.
PURPORT
The system of giving a dowry to one’s daughter has existed in Vedic
civilization for a very long time. Even today, following the same system,
a father who has money will give his daughter an opulent dowry. A
daughter would never inherit the property of her father, and therefore
an affectionate father, during the marriage of his daughter, would give
her as much as possible. A dowry, therefore, is never illegal according to
the Vedic system. Here, of course, the gift offered as a dowry by Devaka
to Devaki was not ordinary. Because Devaka was a king, he gave a dowry


--- Page 63 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
quite suitable to his royal position. Even an ordinary man, especially a
high-class brahmana, ksatriya or vai§ya, is supposed to give his
daughter a liberal dowry. Immediately after the marriage, the daughter
goes to her husband’s house, and it is also a custom for the brother of the
bride to accompany his sister and brother-in-law to exhibit affection for
her. This system was followed by Karnsa. These are all old customs in the
society of varnasrama-dharma, which is now wrongly designated as
Hindu. These long-standing customs are nicely described here.
TEXT 33
TEER नेददुन्दुमयः समम्‌ |
प्रयाणप्रक्रमे तात वरवध्वोः सुमङ्गलम्‌ ।।২২।।
$arikha-tirya-mrdarngas ca
nedur dundubhayah samam
prayana-prakrame tata
vara-vadhvoh sumarngalam
Sanikha —conchshells; tiirya—bugles; mrdarigah—drums; ca—also;
neduh—vibrated; dundubhayah—kettledrums; samam—in concert;
prayana-prakrame—at the time of departure; tata—O beloved son;
vara-vadhvoh—of the bridegroom and the bride; su-margalam—for
the purpose of their auspicious departure.
TRANSLATION
O beloved son, Maharaja Pariksit, when the bride and bride-
groom were ready to start, conchshells, bugles, drums and ket-
tledrums all vibrated in concert for their auspicious departure.
TEXT 34
पथि प्रग्रहिणं कंसमाभाष्यादाशरीरवाक् |
अस्यास्त्वामष्टमो गर्भो हन्ता यां वहसेऽबुध 11381
pathi pragrahinam karmsam
abhasyahasarira-vak


--- Page 64 ---
Text 35] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 59
asyas tvam astamo garbho
hanta yar vahase *budha

pathi—on the way; pragrahinam—who was managing the reins of the
horses; kamsam—unto 1497158; abhdsya—addressing; aha—said; a-
Sarira-vak—a voice coming from someone whose body was invisible;
asyah—of this girl (Devaki); tvdm—you; astamah—the eighth; gar-
bhah—pregnancy; hantda—killer; yam —her whom; vahase—you are
carrying; abudha—you foolish rascal.

TRANSLATION

While Kamsa, controlling the reins of the horses, was driv-
ing the chariot along the way, an unembodied voice addressed
him, “You foolish rascal, the eighth child of the woman you are
carrying will kill you!”

PURPORT

The omen spoke of astamo garbhah, referring to the eighth preg-
nancy, but did not clearly say whether the child was to be a son or a
daughter. Even if Kamsa were to see that the eighth child of Devaki was
a daughter, he should have no doubt that the eighth child was to kill him.
According to the Visva-kosa dictionary, the word garbha means
“embryo” and also arbhaka, or ‘‘child.” Karhsa was affectionate toward
his sister, and therefore he had become the chariot driver to carry her
and his brother-in-law to their home. The demigods, however, did not
want [4971589 to be affectionate toward Devaki, and therefore, from an
unseen position, they encouraged Karsa to offend her. Moreover, the six
sons of Marici had been cursed to take birth from the womb of Devaki,
and upon being killed by Kamsa they would be delivered. When Devaki
understood that [3788 would be killed by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who would appear from her womb, she felt great joy. The word
vahase is also significant because it indicates that the ominous vibration
condemned Karnsa for acting just like a beast of burden by carrying his
enemy’s mother.

TEXT 35
इत्युक्तः स खलः पापो भोजानां कटपांसनः |
भगिनीं हन्तुमारब्धं खद्धपाणिः कचेऽग्रहीत्‌ 1341


--- Page 65 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
ity uktah sa khalah papo
bhojanam kula-parsanah
bhaginim hantum arabdhari
khadga-panih kace ‘grahit
iti uktah—thus being addressed; sah—he (Kamsa); khalah—en-
vious; papah—sinful; bhojanam—of the Bhoja dynasty; kula-
pamsanah—one who can degrade the reputation of his family;
bhaginim —unto his sister; hantum arabdham—being inclined to kill;
khadga-panih—taking a sword in his hand; kace—hair; agrahit—
took up.
TRANSLATION
Karhsa was a condemned personality in the Bhoja dynasty be-
cause he was envious and sinful. Therefore, upon hearing this
omen from the sky, he caught hold of his sister’s hair with his left
hand and took up his sword with his right hand to sever her head
from her body.
PURPORT
Kamsa was driving the chariot and controlling the reins with his left
hand, but as soon as he heard the omen that his sister’s eighth child
would kill him, he gave up the reins, caught hold of his sister’s hair, and
with his right hand took up a sword to kill her. Before, he had been so
affectionate that he was acting as his sister’s chariot driver, but as soon as
he heard that his self-interest or his life was at risk, he forgot all affec-
tion for her and immediately became a great enemy. This is the nature of
demons. No one should trust a demon, despite any amount of affection.
Aside from this, a king, a politician or a woman cannot be trusted, since
they can do anything abominable for their personal interest. Cianakya
Pandita therefore says, viSvaso naiva kartavyah strisu raja-kulesu ca.
TEXT 36
तं॑जुगुष्सितकर्माणं FEE freee |
वसुदेवो महाभाग उवाच परिसान्त्वयन्‌ ॥३६॥


--- Page 66 ---
Text 37] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 61
tari jugupsita-karmanar
nrsamsar nirapatrapam
vasudevo maha-bhaga
uvdca parisantvayan
tam—unto him (Kamsa); jugupsita-karmanam—who was ready to
commit such an offensive act; nrsarmsam—very cruel; nirapatrapam—
shameless; vasudevah— Vasudeva; maha-bhagah—the greatly fortu-
nate father of Vasudeva; uvaca—said; parisantvayan—pacifying.
TRANSLATION
Wanting to pacify Karnsa, who was so cruel and envious that he
was shamelessly ready to kill his sister, the great soul Vasudeva,
who was to be the father of Krsna, spoke to him in the following
words.
PURPORT
Vasudeva, who was to be the father of Krsna, is described here as
maha-bhaga, a very upright and sober personality, because although
1427058 was ready to kill Vasudeva’s wife, Vasudeva remained sober and
unagitated. In a peaceful attitude, Vasudeva began to address Kamsa by
putting forward reasonable arguments. Vasudeva was a great personality
because he knew how to pacify a cruel person and how to forgive even
the bitterest enemy. One who is fortunate is never caught, even by tigers
or snakes.
TEXT 37
श्रीवसुदेव उवाच
ao =
छाषनीयगुणः FIAT भोजयशस्करः |
स कथं भगिनीं दन्यात्‌ स्ियञुद्वाहपवेणि ॥२७॥।
Sri-vasudeva uvaca
slaghaniya-gunah $irair
bhavan bhoja-yasaskarah
sa katham bhaginim hanyat
striyam udvaha-parvani


--- Page 67 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
Sri-vasudevah uvdaca—the great personality Vasudeva said; slagha-
niya-gunah—a person who possesses praiseworthy qualities; §iraih—by
great heroes; bhavan—your good self; bhoja-yasah-karah—a brilliant
star in the Bhoja dynasty; sah—one such as your good self; katham—
how; bhaginim—your sister; hanyat—can kill; striyam—especially a
woman; udvaha-parvani—at the time of the marriage ceremony.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva said: My dear brother-in-law Karhsa, you are the pride
of your family, the Bhoja dynasty, and great heroes praise your
qualities. How could such a qualified person as you kill a woman,
your own sister, especially on the occasion of her marriage?
PURPORT
According to Vedic principles, a brahmana, an old man, a woman, a
child or a cow cannot be killed under any circumstances. Vasudeva
stressed that Devaki was not only a woman but a member of Kamsa’s
family. Because she was now married to Vasudeva, she was para-stri,
another man’s wife, and if such a woman were killed, not only would
Karnsa be implicated in sinful activities, but his reputation as king of the
Bhoja dynasty would be damaged. Thus Vasudeva tried in many ways to
convince Karnsa in order to stop him from killing Devaki.
TEXT 38
¢ ड
शत्युजन्मवतां वीर देहेन सह॒ जायते ।
॥
अद्य ATTA वा मृत्यव प्राणिनां স্তন; ॥३८॥
mrtyur janmavatam vira
dehena saha jayate
adya vabda-satante va
mrtyur vai praninam dhruvah
mrtyuh—death; janma-vatam—of the living entities who have taken
birth; vira—O great hero; dehena saha—along with the body; jayate—
is born (one who has taken birth is sure to die); adya—today; va—


--- Page 68 ---
Text 39] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 63
either; abda-sata—of hundreds of years; ante—at the end; va—or;
mrtyuh—death; vai—indeed; praninam—for every living entity;
dhruvah—is assured.
TRANSLATION
O great hero, one who takes birth is sure to die, for death is
born with the body. One may die today or after hundreds of years,
but death is sure for every living entity.
PURPORT
Vasudeva wanted to impress upon Karsa that although Karhsa feared
dying and therefore wanted to kill even a woman, he could not avoid
death. Death is sure. Why then should Karsa do something that would
be detrimental to his reputation and that of his family? As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (2.27):
Jjatasya hi dhruvo mrtyur
dhruvarih janma mrtasya ca
tasmad apariharye ’rthe
na tvam Socitum arhasi
“For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who is
dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your
duty, you should not lament.” One should not fear death. Rather, one
should prepare oneself for the next birth. One should utilize one’s time
in this human form to end the process of birth and death. It is not that to
save oneself from death one should entangle oneself in sinful activities.
This is not good.
TEXT 39
देहे पञ्चत्वमापन्ने IH क्मालुगोऽवशषः ।
देहान्तरमनुप्राप्य प्राक्तनं त्यजते वपुः ॥३९॥
dehe paficatvam apanne
dehi karmanugo “vasah


--- Page 69 ---
64. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
dehantaram anuprapya
praktanam tyajate vapuh
dehe —when the body; paficatvam apanne—turns into five elements;
dehi—the proprietor of the body, the living being; karma-anugah—
following the reactions of his own fruitive activities; avasah—spon-
taneously, automatically; deha-antaram—another body (made of ma-
terial elements); anuprapya—receiving as a result; praktanam—the
former; tyajate—gives up; vapuh—body.
TRANSLATION
‘When the present body turns to dust and is again reduced to five
elements —earth, water, fire, air and ether —the proprietor of the
body, the living being, automatically receives another body of ma-
terial elements according to his fruitive activities. When the next
body is obtained, he gives up the present body.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, which presents the beginning of
spiritual understanding.
dehino ’smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanam jara
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati
““‘As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.” (Bg. 2.13) A per-
son or an animal is not the material body; rather, the material body is the
covering of the living being. Bhagavad-gita compares the body to a dress
and elaborately explains how one changes dresses one after another. The
same Vedic knowledge is confirmed here. The living being, the soul, is
constantly changing bodies one after another. Even in the present life,
the body changes from childhood to boyhood, from boyhood to youth,
and from youth to old age; similarly, when the body is too old to con-
tinue, the living being gives up this body and, by the laws of nature,


--- Page 70 ---
Text 40] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 65
automatically gets another body according to his fruitive activities,
desires and ambitions. The laws of nature control this sequence, and
therefore as long as the living entity is under the control of the external,
material energy, the process of bodily change takes place automatically,
according to one’s fruitive activities. Vasudeva therefore wanted to im-
press upon Karnsa that if he committed this sinful act of killing a woman,
in his next life he would certainly get a material body still more condi-
tioned to the sufferings of material existence. Thus Vasudeva advised
Karisa not to commit sinful activities.

One who commits sinful activities because of ignorance, tamo-guna,
obtains a lower body. Karanarh guna-sango sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
(Bg. 13.22). There are hundreds and thousands of different species of
life. Why are there higher and lower bodies? One receives these bodies
according to the contaminations of material nature. If in this life one is
contaminated by the mode of ignorance and sinful activities (duskrti), in
the next life, by the laws of nature, one will certainly get a body full of
suffering. The laws of nature are not subservient to the whimsical
desires of the conditioned soul. Our endeavor, therefore, should be to
associate always with sattva-guna and not indulge in rajo-guna or tamo-
guna (rajas-tamo-bhavah). Lusty desires and greed keep the living en-
tity perpetually in ignorance and prevent him from being elevated to the
platform of sattva-guna or Suddha-sattva-guna. One is advised to be
situated in Suddha-sattva-guna, devotional service, for thus one is im-
mune to the reactions of the three modes of material nature.

TEXT 40
TREY पदेकेन TARA गच्छति ।
यथा तृणजलौकैवं देही कर्मगतिं गतः।॥॥४०॥
vrajarms tisthan padaikena
yathaivaikena gacchati
yatha trna-jalaukaivari
dehi karma-gatirh gatah

vrajan—a person, while traveling on the road; tisthan —while stand-

ing; pada ekena—on one foot; yathda—as; eva—indeed; ekena—by


--- Page 71 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
another foot; gacchati—goes; yatha—as; trna-jalauka—a worm on a
vegetable; evan —in this way; dehi—the living entity; karma-gatim—
the reactions of fruitive activities; gatah—undergoes.
TRANSLATION

Just as a person traveling on the road rests one foot on the
ground and then lifts the other, or as a worm on a vegetable
transfers itself to one leaf and then gives up the previous one, the
conditioned soul takes shelter of another body and then gives up
the one he had before.

PURPORT

This is the process of the soul’s transmigration from one body to
another. At the time of death, according to his mental condition, the liv-
ing being is carried by the subtle body, consisting of mind, intelligence
and ego, to another gross body. When higher authorities have decided
what kind of gross body the living entity will have, he is forced to enter
such a body, and thus he automatically gives up his previous body. Dull-
minded persons who do not have the intelligence to understand this pro-
cess of transmigration take for granted that when the gross body is
finished, one’s life is finished forever. Such persons have no brains with
which to understand the process of transmigration. At the present
moment there is great opposition to the Hare Krsna movement, which is
being called a ‘“‘brainwashing” movement. But actually the so-called
scientists, philosophers and other leaders in the Western countries have
no brains at all. The Hare Krsna movement is trying to elevate such
foolish persons by enlightening their intelligence so that they will take
advantage of the human body. Unfortunately, because of gross ig-
norance, they regard the Hare Krsna movement as a brainwashing move-
ment. They do not know that without God consciousness one is forced to
continue transmigrating from one body to another. Because of their
devilish brains, they will next be forced to accept an abominable life and
practically never be able to liberate themselves from the conditional life
of material existence. How this transmigration of the soul takes place is
very clearly explained in this verse.


--- Page 72 ---
Text 41] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 67
TEXT 41
aR यथा परयति देहमीदृशं
मनोरथेनाभिनिविष्टवेतनः |
दष्टशचुताभ्यां मनसानुचिन्तयन्‌
प्रपद्यते तत्‌ किमपि awed nell
svapne yatha paSyati deham idrsam
manorathenabhinivista-cetanah
drsta-$rutabhyam manasanucintayan
prapadyate tat kim api hy apasmrtih
svapne—in a dream; yatha—as; paSyati—one sees; deham —the kind
of body; idrsam—similarly; manorathena—by mental speculation;
abhinivista—is fully absorbed; cetanah—he whose consciousness;
drsta—by whatever has been experienced by seeing with the eyes;
Srutabhyam —and by hearing a description of something else; manasa — ,
by the mind; anucintayan—thinking, feeling and willing; prapad-
yate—surrenders; tat—to that situation; kim api—what to speak of;
hi—indeed; apasmrtih—experiencing forgetfulness of the present body.
TRANSLATION
Having experienced a situation by seeing or hearing about it,
one contemplates and speculates about that situation, and thus one
surrenders to it, not considering his present body. Similarly, by
mental adjustments one dreams at night of living under different
circumstances, in different bodies, and forgets his actual position.
Under this same process, one gives up his present body and accepts
another [tatha dehantara-praptih].
PURPORT
Transmigration of the soul is very clearly explained in this verse. One
sometimes forgets his present body and thinks of his childhood body, a
body of the past, and of how one was playing, jumping, talking and so on.
‘When the material body is no long workable, it becomes dust: “For dust


--- Page 73 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.” But when the body again
mixes with the five material elements—earth, water, fire, air and
ether —the mind continues to work. The mind is the subtle substance in
which the body is created, as we actually experience in our dreams and
also when we are awake in contemplation. One must understand that the
process of mental speculation develops a new type of body that does not
actually exist. If one can understand the nature of the mind
(manorathena) and its thinking, feeling and willing, one can very easily
understand how from the mind different types of bodies develop.

The Krsna consciousness movement, therefore, offers a process of
transcendental activities wherein the mind is fully absorbed in affairs
pertaining to Krsna. The presence of the soul is perceived by conscious-
ness, and one must purify his consciousness from material to spiritual,
or, in other words, to Krsna consciousness. That which is spiritual is
eternal, and that which is material is temporary. Without Krsna con-
sciousness, one’s consciousness is always absorbed in temporary things.
For everyone, therefore, Krsna recommends in Bhagavad-gita (9.34),
man-mand bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru. One should
always be absorbed in thought of Krsna, one should become His devotee,
one should always engage in His service and worship Him as the supreme
great, and one should always offer Him obeisances. In the material world
one is always a servant of a greater person, and in the spiritual world our
constitutional position is to serve the Supreme, the greatest, param
brahma. This is the instruction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Jivera
‘svariipa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’ (Cc. Madhya 20.108).

To act in Krsna consciousness is the perfection of life and the highest
perfection of yoga. As Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (6.47):

yoginam api sarvesari
mad-gatenantaratmanda
sraddhavan bhajate yo mari
sa me yuktatamo matah
“Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping
Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in
yoga and is the highest of all.”
The condition of the mind, which flickers between sarnikalpa and


--- Page 74 ---
Text 41] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 69
vikalpa, accepting something and rejecting it, is very important in
transferring the soul to another material body at the time of death.
yam yar vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kaunteya

sada tad-bhava-bhavitah
“Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that
state he will attain without fail.” (Bg. 8.6) Therefore one must train the
mind in the system of bhakti-yoga, as did Maharaja Ambarisa, who
kept himself always in Krsna consciousness. Sa vai manah krsna-
padaravindayoh. One must fix the mind at the lotus feet of Krsna
twenty-four hours a day. If the mind is fixed upon Krsna’s lotus feet, the
activities of the other senses will be engaged in Krsna’s service. Hrsikena
hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktir ucyate: to serve Hrsike$a, the master of the
senses, with purified senses is called bhakti. Those who constantly engage
in devotional service are situated in a transcendental state, above the ma-
terial modes of nature. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):

mar ca yo ’vyabhicarena

bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiiyaya kalpate

“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” One must learn the secret of suc-
cess from the Vedic literatures, especially when the cream of Vedic
knowledge is presented by Bhagavad-gita as it is.

Because the mind is ultimately controlled by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Krsna, the word apasmrtih is significant. Forgetfulness of
one’s own identity is called apasmrtih. This apasmrtih can be controlled
by the Supreme Lord, for the Lord says, mattah smrtir jianam
apohanar ca: “From Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetful-
ness.” Instead of allowing one to forget one’s real position, Krsna can
revive one’s original identity at the time of one’s death, even though the


--- Page 75 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
mind may be flickering. Although the mind may work imperfectly at the
time of death, Krsna gives a devotee shelter at His lotus feet. Therefore
when a devotee gives up his body, the mind does not take him to another
material body (tyaktva dehari punar janma naiti mam eti); rather,
Krsna takes the devotee to that place where He is engaged in His
pastimes (mam eti), as we have already discussed in previous verses.
One’s consciousness, therefore, must always be absorbed in Krsna, and
then one’s life will be successful. Otherwise the mind will carry the soul
to another material body. The soul will be placed in the semen of a father
and discharged into the womb of a mother. The semen and ovum create a
particular type of body according to the form of the father and mother,
and when the body is mature, the soul emerges in that body and begins a
new life. This is the process of transmigration of the soul from one body
to another (tatha dehantara-praptih). Unfortunately, those who are less
intelligent think that when the body disappears, everything is finished.
The entire world is being misled by such fools and rascals. But as stated
in Bhagavad-gita (2.20), na hanyate hanyamane sarire. The soul does
not die when the body is destroyed. Rather, the soul takes on another
body.
TEXT 42
यतो यतो धावति दैवचोदितं
मनो विकारात्मकमाप पञ्चसु |
गुणेषु मायारचितेषु देद्यसौ
प्रपद्यमानः सह॒ तेन॒ जायते ॥४२॥
yato yato dhavati daiva-coditari
mano vikaratmakam apa paficasu
gunesu maya-racitesu dehy asau
prapadyamanah saha tena jayate

yatah yatah—from one place to another or from one position to
another; dhavati—speculates; daiva-coditam—impelled by accident or
deliberation; manah—the mind; vikara-atmakam—changing from one
type of thinking, feeling and willing to another; apa —at the end, he ob-
tains (a mentality); panicasu—at the time of death (when the material


--- Page 76 ---
Text 42] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 71

body turns totally into matter); gunesu— (the mind, not being liberated,

becomes attached) to the material qualities; maya-racitesu —where the

material energy creates a similar body; dehi—the spirit soul who accepts

such a body; asau—he; prapadyamanah —being surrendered (to such a

condition); saha—with; tena—a similar body; jayate —takes birth.
TRANSLATION

At the time of death, according to the thinking, feeling and will-
ing of the mind, which is involved in fruitive activities, one
receives a particular body. In other words, the body develops ac-
cording to the activities of the mind. Changes of body are due to
the flickering of the mind, for otherwise the soul could remain in
its original, spiritual body.

PURPORT

One can very easily understand that the mind is constantly flickering,
changing in the quality of its thinking, feeling and willing. This is
explained by Arjuna in Bhagavad-gita (6.34):

canicalam hi manah krsna
pramathi balavad drdham
tasyaham nigraham manye
vayor wa suduskaram
The mind 15 caficala, flickering, and it changes very strongly. Therefore
Arjuna admitted that controlling the mind is not at all possible; this
would be as difficult as controlling the wind. For example, if one were in
a boat moving according to the wind on a river or the sea, and the wind
were uncontrollable, the tilting boat would be very much disturbed and
extremely difficult to control. It might even capsize. Therefore, in the
bhava-samudra, the ocean of mental speculation and transmigration to
different types of bodies, one must first control the mind.

By regulative practice one can control the mind, and this is the pur-
pose of the yoga system (abhyasa-yoga-yuktena). But there is a chance
of failure with the yoga system, especially in this age of Kali, because the
yoga system uses artificial means. If the mind is engaged in bhakti-yoga,


--- Page 77 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
however, by the grace of Krsna one can very easily control it. Therefore
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has recommended, harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam. One should chant the holy name of the Lord
constantly, for the holy name of the Lord is nondifferent from Hari, the
Supreme Person.

By chanting the Hare Krsna mantra constantly, one can fix the mind
on the lotus feet of Krsna (sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh) and in
this way achieve the perfection of yoga. Otherwise, the flickering mind
will hover on the platform of mental speculation for sense enjoyment,
and one will have to transmigrate from one type of body to another be-
cause the mind is trained only in relation to the material elements, or, in
other words, to sense gratification, which is false. Maya-sukhaya
bharam udvahato vimudhan (Bhag. 7.9.43). Rascals (vimidhan), being
controlled by mental speculation, make huge arrangements by which to
enjoy life temporarily, but they must give up the body at the time of
death, when everything is taken away by Krsna’s external energy
(mrtyuh sarva-haras caham). At that time, whatever one has created in
this life is lost, and one must automatically accept a new body by the
force of material nature. In this life one may have constructed a very tall
skyscraper, but in the next life, because of one’s mentality, one may have
to accept a body like that of a cat, a dog, a tree or perhaps a demigod.
Thus the body is offered by the laws of material nature. Karanam guna-
sango ‘sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu (Bg. 13.22). The spirit soul takes
birth in higher and lower species of life only because of his association
with the three qualities of material nature.

drdhvarh gacchanti sattva-stha
madhye tisthanti rajasah
Jjaghanya-guna-vrtti-stha
adho gacchanti tamasah
“Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the
higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets;
and those in the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds.”
(Bg. 14.18)

In conclusion, the Krsna consciousness movement offers the topmost

welfare activity for human society. The saner section of human society


--- Page 78 ---
Text 43] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 73
must therefore take this movement very seriously for the benefit of all
humanity. To save oneself from the repetition of birth and death, one
must purify his consciousness. Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktari tat-paratvena
nirmalam. One must be freed from all designations— “I am American,”
“I am Indian,” “I am this,” “I am that” —and come to the platform of
understanding that Krsna is the original master and we are His eternal
servants. When the senses are purified and engaged in Krsna’s service,
one achieves the highest perfection. Hrsikena hrsikesa-sevenarih bhaktir
ucyate. The Krsna consciousness movement is a movement of bhakti-
yoga. Vairagya-vidya-nija-bhakti-yoga. By following the principles of
this movement, one becomes disassociated from material mental concoc-
tions and is established on the original platform of the eternal relation-
ship between the living entity and the Supreme Personality of Godhead
as servant and master. This, in summary, is the purpose of the Krsna
consciousness movement.
TEXT 43
ज्योतियैवोदकपा्थिवेष्वदः
समीरवेगानुगतं  विमान्यते ।
एवं खमायारचितेष्वसौ पुमान्‌
गुणेषु रागानुगतो वियुद्यति usin
Jyotir yathaivodaka-parthivesv adah
samira-veganugatarm vibhavyate
evam sva-mdaya-racitesv asau puman
gunesu raganugato vimuhyati

Jyotih—the luminaries in the sky, such as the sun, the moon and the
stars; yatha—as; eva—indeed; udaka—in water; parthivesu—or in
other liquids, like oil; adah—directly; samira-vega-anugatam—being
forced by the movements of the wind; vibhavyate —appear in different
shapes; evam—in this way; sva-maya-racitesu—in the situation created
by one’s mental concoctions; asau—the living entity; puman—person;
gunesu—in the material world, manifested by the modes of nature;
raga-anugatah—according to his attachment; vimuhyati—becomes
bewildered by identification.


--- Page 79 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION

When the luminaries in the sky, such as the moon, the sun and
the stars, are reflected in liquids like oil or water, they appear to be
of different shapes —sometimes round, sometimes long, and so
on—because of the movements of the wind. Similarly, when the
living entity, the soul, is absorbed in materialistic thoughts, he ac-
cepts various manifestations as his own identity because of ig-
norance. In other words, one is bewildered by mental concoctions
because of agitation from the material modes of nature.

PURPORT

This verse gives a very good example by which to understand the dif-
ferent positions of the eternal spiritual soul in the material world and
how the soul takes on different bodies (dehantara-praptih). The moon is
stationary and is one, but when it is reflected in water or oil, it appears to
take different shapes because of the movements of the wind. Similarly,
the soul is the eternal servant of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, but when put into the material modes of nature, it takes different
bodies, sometimes as a demigod, sometimes a man, a dog, a tree and so
on. By the influence of maya, the illusory potency of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the living entity thinks that he is this person, that
person, American, Indian, cat, dog, tree or whatever. This is called
maya. When one is freed from this bewilderment and understands that
the soul does not belong to any shape of this material world, one is situ-
ated on the spiritual platform (brahma-bhiita).

This realization is sometimes explained as nirakara, or formlessness.
This formlessness, however, does not mean that the soul has no form.
The soul has form, but the external, agitating form he has acquired be-
cause of material contamination is false. Similarly, God is also described
as nirakara, which means that God has no material form but is sac-cid-
ananda-vigraha. The living entity is part and parcel of the supreme sac-
cid-ananda-vigraha, but his material forms are temporary, or illusory.
Both the living entity and the Supreme Lord have original, spiritual
forms (sac-cid-ananda-vigraha), but the Lord, the Supreme, does not
change His form. The Lord appears as He is, whereas the living entity
appears because material nature forces him to accept different forms.


--- Page 80 ---
Text 43] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 75
When the living entity receives these different forms, he identifies with
them, and not with his original, spiritual form. As soon as the living en-
tity returns to his original, spiritual form and understanding, he im-
mediately surrenders to the supreme form, the Personality of Godhead.
This is explained in Bhagavad-gita (7.19). Bahiunari janmanam ante
JjAanavan mam prapadyate. When the living entity, after many, many
births in different forms, returns to his original form of Krsna con-
sciousness, he immediately surrenders unto the lotus feet of the supreme
form, Krsna. This is liberation. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita
(18.54):
brahma-bhiitah prasannatma
na Socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhiitesu
mad-bhaktir labhate param

“One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he at-
tains pure devotional service unto Me.” Surrender unto the supreme
form is the result of bhakti. This bhakti, or understanding of one’s own
position, is the complete liberation. As long as one is under an imper-
sonal understanding of the Absolute Truth, he is not in pure knowledge,
but must still struggle for pure knowledge. Kleso ‘dhikataras tesam
avyaktasakta-cetasam (Bg. 12.5). Although one may be spiritually ad-
vanced, if one is attached to the impersonal feature of the Absolute
Truth one must still work very hard, as indicated by the words kleso
’dhikatarah, which mean “greater suffering.” A devotee, however,
easily attains his original position as a spiritual form and understands the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His original form.

Krsna Himself explains the forms of the living entities in the Second
Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, where He clearly says to Arjuna that He,
Arjuna and all other living entities, who were previously in their original
forms, are separate individual identities. They were individuals in the
past, they are now situated in individuality, and in the future they will
all continue to maintain their individual forms. The only difference is
that the conditioned living entity appears in various material forms,


--- Page 81 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
whereas Krsna appears in His original, spiritual form. Unfortunately,
those who are not advanced in spiritual knowledge think that Krsna is
like one of them and that His form is like their material forms.
Avajananti mam midha manusim tanum asritam (Bg. 9.11). Krsna is
never puffed up by material knowledge and is therefore called acyuta,
whereas the living entities fall down and are agitated by material nature.
This is the difference between the Supreme Lord and the living entities.

In this connection it is to be noted that Vasudeva, who was situated in
a transcendental position, advised Karhsa not to commit further sinful
activities. Karnsa, a representative of the demons, was always ready to
kill Krsna, or God, whereas Vasudeva represents a transcendentally situ-
ated person to whom Krsna is born (Vasudeva is the son of Vasudeva).
Vasudeva wanted his brother-in-law Karnsa to refrain from the sinful act
of killing his sister, since the result of being agitated by material nature
would be that Kammsa would have to accept a body in which to suffer
again and again. Elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.4), Rsabhadeva
also says:

na sadhu manye yata atmano yam
asann api klesada asa dehah
As long as the living entity is entangled in the fruitive activities of so-
called happiness and distress, he will receive a particular type of body in
which to endure the three kinds of suffering due to material nature (tri-
tapa-yantrand). An intelligent person, therefore, must free himself
from the influence of the three modes of material nature and revive his
original, spiritual body by engaging in the service of the Supreme Per-
son, Krsna. As long as one is materially attached, one must accept the
process of birth, death, old age and disease. One is therefore advised that
an intelligent person, instead of being entangled in so-called good and
bad fruitive activities, should engage his life in advancing in Krsna con-
sciousness so that instead of accepting another material body (tyaktva
dehari punar janma naiti), he will return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 44
TUE कस्यचिद्‌ द्रोदमाचरेत्‌ स तथाविधः।
आत्मनः क्षेममन्विच्छन्‌ IGT परतो भयम्‌॥७४।।


--- Page 82 ---
Text 44] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 77
tasman na kasyacid droham
acaret sa tatha-vidhah
atmanah ksemam anvicchan
drogdhur vai parato bhayam
tasmat—therefore; na—not; kasyacit—of anyone; droham—envy;
acaret—one should act; sah—a person (Karnsa); tatha-vidhah—who has
been advised in such a way (by Vasudeva); atmanah—his own;
ksemam —welfare; anvicchan—if he desires; drogdhuh—of one who is
envious of others; vai—indeed; paratah—from others; bhayam—there
is a cause of fear.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, since envious, impious activities cause a body in
which one suffers in the next life, why should one act impiously?
Considering one’s welfare, one should not envy anyone, for an en-
vious person must always fear harm from his enemies, either in
this life or in the next.
PURPORT
Instead of being inimical toward other living entities, one should act
piously by engaging in the service of the Supreme Lord, thus avoiding a
fearful situation both in this life and in the next. In this regard, the
following moral instruction by the great politician Canakya Pandita is
very meaningful:
tyaja durjana-sarsargam
bhaja sadhu-samagamam
kuru punyam aho 7৫707
smara nityam anityatam
One should give up the company of devils, demons and nondevotees and
should always associate with devotees and saintly persons. One should al-
ways act piously, thinking that this life is temporary, and not be attached
to temporary happiness and distress. The Krsna consciousness movement
is teaching all of human society this principle of becoming Krsna con-
scious and thus solving the problems of life forever (tyaktva deham
punar janma naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna).


--- Page 83 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
TEXT 45
एषा तवाचुजा बाला कृपणा पुत्रिकोपमा |
हन्तुं नाहेसि कल्याणीमिमां त्वं दीनवत्सलः ॥४५॥
esa tavanuja bala
krpana putrikopama
hanturh narhasi kalyanim
imam tvam dina-vatsalah
esa—this; tava—your; anuja—younger sister; bala—innocent
woman; krpana—completely dependent on you; putrika-upama—ex-
actly like your own daughter; hantum—to kill her; na—not; arhasi—
you deserve; kalyanim—who is under your affection; imam—her;
tvam—you; dina-vatsalah—very compassionate to the poor and
innocent.
TRANSLATION
As your younger sister, this poor girl Devaki is like your own
daughter and deserves to be affectionately maintained. You are
merciful, and therefore you should not kill her. Indeed, she
deserves your affection.
TEXT 46
tas उवाच
णवं स सामभिरभदर्ोध्यमानोऽपि दारुणः |
न॒ न्यवतेत कारव्य पुरूषादाननुत्रतः ॥४६॥
§ri-Suka uvaca
evar sa samabhir bhedair
bodhyamano 7 darunah
na nyavartata kauravya
purusadan anuvratah
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—in this way;
sah—he (14977188); samabhih —by attempts to pacify him (Karhsa);
bhedaih—by moral instructions that one should not be cruel to anyone


--- Page 84 ---
Text 47] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 79
else; bodhyamanah api—even being pacified; darunah—he who was
the most fiercely cruel; na nyavartata—could not be stopped (from the
grievous act); kauravya—O Maharaja Pariksit; purusa-adan—the
Raksasas, man-eaters; anuvratah—following in their footsteps.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: O best of the Kuru dynasty,
Karhsa was fiercely cruel and was actually a follower of the
Raksasas. Therefore he could be neither pacified nor terrified by
the good instructions given by Vasudeva. He did not care about the
results of sinful activities, either in this life or in the next.

TEXT 47
निर्बन्धं तस्य तं जञात्वा विचिन्त्यानकटुन्दुभिः।
মাম कारं प्रतिन्योद्धमिदं तत्रान्वपद्यत ॥४७॥
nirbandham tasya tar jidatva
vicintyanakadundubhih
praptari kalam prativyodhum
idamh tatranvapadyata

nirbandham —determination to do something; tasya—of him
(81198); tam—that (determination); jaatva—understanding; wvicin-
tya—thinking deeply; anakadundubhih—Vasudeva; praptam—had ar-
rived; kalam —imminent danger of death; prativyodhum—to stop him
from such activities; idam—this; tatra—thereupon; anvapadyata—
thought of other ways.

TRANSLATION

When Vasudeva saw that Karhsa was determined to kill his sister
Devaki, he thought to himself very deeply. Considering the immi-
nent danger of death, he thought of another plan to stop Karnsa.

PURPORT

Although Vasudeva saw the imminent danger that his wife Devaki

would be killed, he was convinced of his welfare because at his birth the


--- Page 85 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
demigods had played drums and kettledrums. He therefore attempted
another way to save Devaki.
TEXT 48
मृत्युबुद्धिमतापोद्यो यारद्वुद्धिकलोदयम्‌ |
=
यद्यसौ न निवर्तेत नापराधोऽस्ति देदिनः sen
mrtyur buddhimatapohyo
yavad buddhi-balodayam
yady asau na nivarteta
naparadho ’sti dehinah
mrtyuh—death; buddhi-mata—by an intelligent person; apohyah—
should be avoided; yavat—as long as; buddhi-bala-udayam—intelli-
gence and bodily strength are present; yadi—if; asau—that (death); na
nivarteta—cannot be checked; na—not; aparadhah—offense; asti—
there is; dehinah—of the person in danger of death.
TRANSLATION
As long as he has intelligence and bodily strength, an intelligent
person must try to avoid death. This is the duty of every embodied
person. But if death cannot be avoided in spite of one’s endeavors,
a person facing death commits no offense.
PURPORT
It is natural for a person facing untimely death to try his best to save
himself. This is one’s duty. Although death is sure, everyone should try
to avoid it and not meet death without opposition because every living
soul is by nature eternal. Because death is a punishment imposed in the
condemned life of material existence, the Vedic culture is based on
avoiding death (tyaktva dehar punar janma naiti). Everyone should try
ˆ to.avoid death and rebirth by cultivating spiritual life and should not
submit to death without struggling to survive. One who is not trying to
stop death is not an intelligent human being. Because Devaki was face to
face with imminent death, it was Vasudeva’s duty to save her, as he was


--- Page 86 ---
Text 50] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 81
trying his best to do. He therefore considered another way to approach
Karnsa so that Devaki would be saved.
TEXTS 49-50
प्रदाय मृत्यवे पुत्रान्‌ मोचये कृपणामिमाम्‌ |
सुता मे यदि जायेरन्‌ FE न भ्रियेत चेत्‌ ॥४९॥
[NEN
विपर्ययो वा किं न स्याद्‌ गतिर्धातुदुरत्यया |
उपय्यितो निवर्तेत निवृत्तः पुनरापतेत्‌ ॥५०॥
pradaya mrtyave putran
mocaye krpanam imam
suta me yadi jayeran
mrtyur va na mriyeta cet
viparyayo va kim na syad
gatir dhatur duratyaya
upasthito nivarteta
nivrttah punar apatet
pradaya—promising to deliver; mrtyave —unto Karsa, who is death
personified for Devaki; putran—my sons; mocaye—I am releasing her
from imminent danger; krpanam—innocent; imam —Devaki; sutah—
sons; me—my; yadi—whether; jayeran—should take birth; mrtyuh—
Karisa; va—or; na—not; mriyeta—should die; cet—if; viparyayah—
just the opposite; va—or; kim—whether; na—not; syat—it may hap-
pen; gatih—the movement; dhatuh—of providence; duratyaya—very
difficult to understand; upasthitah—that which is presently obtained;
nivarteta—may stop; nivrttah—Devaki’s death being stopped; punah
apatet—in the future it may happen again (but what can I do).
, TRANSLATION
Vasudeva considered: By delivering all my sons to Karinsa, who
is death personified, I shall save the life of Devaki. Perhaps Karnsa
will die before my sons take birth, or, since he is already destined


--- Page 87 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
to die at the hands of my son, one of my sons may kill him. For the
time being, let me promise to hand over my sons so that Karhsa will
give up this immediate threat, and if in due course of time Karhsa
dies, I shall have nothing to fear.
PURPORT
Vasudeva wanted to save the life of Devaki by promising to deliver his
sons to Karhsa. “In the future,” he thought, “Karisa may die, or I may
not beget any sons. Even if a son is born and I deliver him to Karnsa,
Kamisa may die at his hands, for by providence anything could happen. It
is very difficult to understand how things are managed by providence.”
Thus Vasudeva decided that he would promise to deliver his sons to the
hands of Karsa in order to save Devaki from the imminent danger of
death.
TEXT 51
अग्नेय॑था  दारुव्रियोगयोगयो-
रदृ्टतोऽन्यन निमित्तमस्ति ।
(1 -
एवं हि जन्तोरपि दुर्विभाव्यः
शरीरसंयोगवियोगहेतुः nen
agner yatha daru-viyoga-yogayor
adrstato ‘nyan na nimittam asti
evarn hi jantor api durvibhavyah
Sarira-sarivyoga-viyoga-hetuh
agneh—of a fire in the forest; yatha—as; daru—of wood; viyoga-
yogayoh—of both the escaping and the capturing; adrstatah—than
unseen providence; anyat—some other reason or accident; na—not;
nimittam—a cause; asti—there is; evam—in this way; hi—certainly;
jantoh—of the living being; api—indeed; durvibhavyah—cannot be
found out; Sarira —of the body; sarmyoga—of the accepting; viyoga—or
of the giving up; hetuh—the cause.
TRANSLATION
When a fire, for some unseen reason, leaps over one piece of
wood and sets fire to the next, the reason is destiny. Similarly,


--- Page 88 ---
Text 52] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 83
when a living being accepts one kind of body and leaves aside
another, there is no other reason than unseen destiny.
PURPORT
When there is a fire in a village, the fire sometimes jumps over one
house and burns another. Similarly, when there is a forest fire, the fire
sometimes jumps over one tree and catches another. Why this happens,
no one can say. One may set forth some imaginary reason why the
nearest tree or house did not catch fire whereas a tree or house in a dis-
tant place did, but actually the reason is destiny. This reason also applies
to the transmigration of the soul, by which a prime minister in one life
may become a dog in the next. The work of unseen destiny cannot be
ascertained by practical experimental knowledge, and therefore one must
be satisfied by reasoning that everything is done by supreme providence.
TEXT 52
५ ^ + S
एवं নিম্বহম तं पापं यावदात्मनिदशनम्‌ |
† <
पूजयामास बै शोखिबिहमानपुरःसरम्‌ ॥५२॥
evar vimrSya tam papari
yavad-atmani-darsanam
pujayam dsa vai Saurir
bahu-mana-purahsaram
evam—in this way; wvimr§ya—after contemplating; tam—unto
Karnsa; papam—the most sinful; ydvat—as far as possible; atmani-
darsanam—with all the intelligence possible within himself; pujayam
asa—praised; vai—indeed; Saurih— Vasudeva; bahu-mana—offering
all respect; purahsaram—Dbefore him.
TRANSLATION
After thus considering the matter as far as his knowledge would
allow, Vasudeva submitted his proposal to the sinful Karhsa with
great respect.


--- Page 89 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
TEXT 53
সমম্বনবহনাম্সীলী चृशंसं निरपत्रपम्‌ |
मनसा दूयमानेन विहसनिदमत्रवीत्‌ ॥५३॥
prasanna-vadanambhojo
nriamsari nirapatrapam
manasa dityamanena
vihasann idam abravit

prasanna-vadana-ambhojah— Vasudeva, who externally presented
himself as if very happy; nrsarmsam—unto the most cruel; nirapa-
trapam—shameless Kamsa; manasa —with the mind; diyamanena—
which was full of anxiety and sorrow; vihasan—smiling externally;
idam abravit—and spoke as follows.

TRANSLATION

Vasudeva’s mind was full of anxiety because his wife was facing
danger, but in order to please the cruel, shameless and sinful
Karsa, he externally smiled and spoke to him as follows.

PURPORT

Sometimes one must act duplicitously in a dangerous position, as
Vasudeva did to save his wife. The material world is complicated, and to
execute one’s duties, one cannot avoid adopting such diplomacy.
Vasudeva did everything possible to save his wife for the sake of beget-
ting Krsna. This indicates that one may act duplicitously for the purpose
of saving Krsna and His interests. According to the arrangement already
foretold, Krsna was to appear through Vasudeva and Devaki to kill
Kamisa. Vasudeva, therefore, had to do everything to save the situation.
Although all the events were prearranged by Krsna, a devotee must try
his best to serve the purpose of Krsna. Krsna Himself is all-powerful, but
it is not that a devotee should therefore sit idly and leave everything to
Him. This instruction is also found in Bhagavad-gita. Although Krsna
was doing everything for Arjuna, Arjuna never sat down idly as a non-


--- Page 90 ---
Text 54] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 85
violent gentleman. Rather, he tried his best to fight the battle and be
victorious.
TEXT 54
MITT ऊवाच
५ ক
न द्यस्यास्ते भयं सौम्य यद्‌ वै साहाशरीर वाक्‌ |
[9
पत्रा समपेयिष्येऽस्या यतस्ते भयञुत्थितम्‌ ।॥*५४।।
Sri-vasudeva uvdca
na hy asyas te bhayam saumya
yad vai sahdsarira-vak
putran samarpayisye sya
yatas te bhayam utthitam
$ri-vasudevah uvdca—Sri Vasudeva said; na—not; hi—indeed;
asyah—from Devaki; te—of you; bhayam—fear; saumya—O most
sober; yat—which; vai—indeed; s@—that omen; aha—dictated; a-
Sarira-vak—a vibration without a body; putran—all my sons; samar-
payisye—I shall deliver to you; asyah—of her (Devaki); yatah—from
whom; te—your; bhayam—{fear; utthitam—has arisen.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva said: O best of the sober, you have nothing to fear
from your sister Devaki because of what you have heard from the
unseen omen. The cause of death will be her sons. Therefore 1
promise that when she gives birth to the sons from whom your
fear has arisen, I shall deliver them all unto your hands.
PURPORT
Kamsa feared Devaki’s existence because after her eighth pregnancy
she would give birth to a son who would kill him. Vasudeva, therefore, to
assure his brother-in-law the utmost safety, promised to bring him all
the sons. He would not wait for the eighth son, but from the very begin-
ning would deliver to the hands of Kamsa all the sons to which Devaki
would give birth. This was the most liberal proposition offered by
Vasudeva to Karsa.


--- Page 91 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
TEXT 55
श्रीशुक उवाच
< নি
WEIMRETY कंसस्तद्वाक्यसारवित्‌ ।
.
वसुदेवोऽपि तं মীন: সহাত্য MET गृहम्‌ ।*५५५॥
अ-5440 uvaca
svasur vadhan nivavrte
kamsas tad-vakya-sara-vit
vasudevo ’pi tar pritah
prasasya pravisad grham
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; svasuh—of his sister
(Devaki); vadhat—from the act of killing; nivavrte—stopped for the
time being; karisah—Karmsa; tat-vakya—the words of Vasudeva; sara-
vit—knowing to be perfectly correct; vasudevah— Vasudeva; api—also;
tam—to him (Kamsa); pritah—being satisfied; prasasya—pacifying
more; pravisat grham —entered his own house.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Karisa agreed to the logical
arguments of Vasudeva, and, having full faith in Vasudeva’s
words, he refrained from killing his sister. Vasudeva, being
pleased with Karhsa, pacified him further and entered his own
house.
PURPORT
Although Karisa was a sinful demon, he believed that Vasudeva would
never deviate from his word. The character of a pure devotee like
Vasudeva is such that even so great a demon as Karnsa firmly believed in
his words and was satisfied. Yasydsti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana sarvair
gunais tatra samasate surah (Bhag. 5.18.12). All good attributes are
present in a devotee, so much so that even Karnsa believed in Vasudeva’s
words without a doubt.
TEXT 56
अथ काल SUES देवकी qa |
पत्रान्‌ प्रसुषुवे चाष्टौ कन्यां चैवानुवत्सरम्‌ ॥५६॥


--- Page 92 ---
Text 56] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 87
atha kala upavrtte
devaki sarva-devata
putran prasusuve castau
kanyam caivanuvatsaram

atha—thereafter; kale—in due course of time; upavrtte—when it was
ripe; devaki—Devaki, the wife of Vasudeva, Krsna’s father; sarva-
devata—Devaki, to whom all the demigods and God Himself appeared;
putran—sons; prasusuve—gave birth to; ca—and; astau—eight;
kanyam ca—and one daughter named Subhadra; eva—indeed; anu-
vatsaram—year after year.

TRANSLATION ’

Each year thereafter, in due course of time, Devaki, the mother
of God and all the demigods, gave birth to a child. Thus she bore
eight sons, one after another, and a daughter named Subhadra.

PURPORT

The spiritual master is sometimes glorified as sarva-devamayo guruh
(Bhag. 11.7.27). By the grace of the guru, the spiritual master, one can
understand the different kinds of devas. The word deva refers to God,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the original source of all the
demigods, who are also called devas. In Bhagavad-gita (10.2) the Lord
says, aham adir hi devanam: “I am the source of all the devas.” The
Supreme Lord, Visnu, the Original Person, expands in different forms.
Tad aiksata bahu syam (Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.3). He alone has ex-
panded into many. Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam (Brahma-
sarithita 5.33). There are different grades of forms, known as svamsa
and vibhinnamsa. The svamsa expansions, or visnu-tattva, are the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas the vibhinnamsa are jiva-
tattva, who are part and parcel of the Lord (mamaivamso jiva-loke jia-
bhutah sanatanah). If we accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and worship Him, all the parts and expansions of the Lord
are automatically worshiped. Sarvarhanam acyutejya (Bhag. 4.31.14).
Krsna is known as Acyuta (senayor ubhayor madhye rathari sthapaya
me ‘cyuta). By worshiping Acyuta, Krsna, one automatically worships all
the demigods. There is no need of separately worshiping either the


--- Page 93 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
visnu-tattva or jiva-tattva. If one concentrates upon Krsna, one worships
everyone. Therefore, because mother Devaki gave birth to Krsna, she is
described here as sarva-devata.
TEXT 57
कीर्तिमन्तं प्रथमजं कंसायानकट्न्दुमिः |
[9 N
अपेयामास FPN सोऽनृताद ARES: ॥५५७॥
kirtimantarh prathamajam
karhsayanakadundubhih
arpayam asa krcchrena
so ’‘nrtad ativihvalah

kirtimantam —by the name Kirtiman; prathama-jam —the first-born
baby; karsaya—unto Kamsa; anakadundubhih— Vasudeva; arpayam
asa—delivered; krcchrena—with great pain; sah—he (Vasudeva);
anrtat—from the breaking of the promise, or from fear of being a liar;
ati-vihvalah—was very much disturbed, being afraid.

TRANSLATION

Vasudeva was very much disturbed by fear of becoming a liar by
breaking his promise. Thus with great pain he delivered his first-
born son, named Kirtiman, into the hands of Karhsa.

PURPORT

In the Vedic system, as soon as a child is born, especially a male child,
the father calls for learned brahmanas, and according to the description
of the child’s horoscope, the child is immediately given a name. This
ceremony is called nama-karana. There are ten different 50771512705, or
reformatory methods, adopted in the system of varnasrama-dharma,
and the name-giving ceremony is one of them. Although Vasudeva’s first
son was to be delivered into the hands of Karmhsa, the nama-karana
ceremony was performed, and thus the child was named Kirtiman. Such
names are given immediately after birth.


--- Page 94 ---
Text 58] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 89
TEXT 58
कि दुःसहं चु साधूनां विदुषां किमपेक्षितम्‌ ।
किमकायं कदर्याणां दुस्त्यजं किः धृतात्मनाम्‌ uel
क्रः duhsaham nu sadhiinam
vidusam kim apeksitam
kim akaryam kadaryanam
dustyajari kim dhrtatmanam

kim—what is; duhsaham—painful; nu—indeed; sadhianam—for
saintly persons; vidusam —of learned persons; kim apeksitam —what is
dependence; kim akaryam—what is forbidden work; kadaryanam—of
persons in the lowest grade; dustyajam —very difficult to give up; kim—
what is; dhrta-atmanam—of persons who are self-realized.

TRANSLATION

What is painful for saintly persons who strictly adhere to the
truth? How could there not be independence for pure devotees
who know the Supreme Lord as the substance? What deeds are
forbidden for persons of the lowest character? And what cannot
be given up for the sake of Lord Krsna by those who have fully
surrendered at His lotus feet?

PURPORT

Since the eighth son of Devaki was to kill Karhsa, one might ask what
the need was for Vasudeva to deliver the first-born child. The answer is
that Vasudeva had promised Karmhsa that he would deliver all the
children born of Devaki. Karhsa, being an asura, did not believe that the
eighth child would kill him; he took it for granted that he might be
killed by any of the children of Devaki. Vasudeva, therefore, to save
Devaki, promised to give Kamsa every child, whether male or female.
From another point of view, Vasudeva and Devaki were very pleased
when they understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
would come as their eighth son. Vasudeva, a pure devotee of the Lord,
was eager to see Krsna appear as his child from the eighth pregnancy of


--- Page 95 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
Devaki. Therefore he wanted to deliver all the children quickly so that
the eighth turn would come and Krsna would appear. He begot one child
every year so that Krsna’s turn to appear would come as soon as possible.
TEXT 59
दष्ट समत्वं तच्छोरेः सत्ये चैव व्यवसितिम्‌ |
कंसस्तुष्टमना राजन्‌ प्रहसनिद मन्रवीत्‌ ॥५९॥
drstva samatvari tac chaureh
satye caiva vyavasthitim
karsas tusta-mana rajan
prahasann idam abravit

drstva—by seeing; samatvam—being equipoised, undisturbed in dis-
tress or happiness; tat—that; Saureh—of Vasudeva; satye—in truthful-
ness; ca—indeed; eva—certainly; vyavasthitim—the firm situation;
karhsah—Karhsa; tusta-manah—being very satisfied (with Vasudeva’s
behavior in delivering the first child to keep his promise); rajan—
0 Maharaja Pariksit; prahasan—with a smiling face; idam—this;
abravit—said.

TRANSLATION

My dear King Pariksit, when Karhsa saw that Vasudeva, being
situated in truthfulness, was completely equipoised in giving him
the child, he was very happy. Therefore, with a smiling face, he
spoke as follows.

PURPORT

The word samatvam is very significant in this verse. Samatvam refers
to one who is always equipoised, unaffected by either happiness or dis-
tress. Vasudeva was so steadily equipoised that he did not seem in the
least agitated when delivering his first-born child into the hands of
Kamsa to be killed. In Bhagavad-gita (2.56) it is said, duhkhesv
anudvigna-manah sukhesu vigata-sprhah. In the material world, one
should not be very eager to be happy, nor should one be very much dis-
turbed by material distress. Lord Krsna advised Arjuna:


--- Page 96 ---
Text 60] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 91

matra-sparsas tu kaunteya

Sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah
agamapayino ’nityds
tams titiksasva bharata
“0 son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and dis-
tress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and
disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense per-
ception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without
being disturbed.” (Bg. 2.14) The self-realized soul is never disturbed by
so-called distress or happiness, and this is especially true of an exalted
devotee like Vasudeva, who showed this by his practical example.
Vasudeva was not at all disturbed when delivering his first child to
Karnsa to be killed.
TEXT 60
प्रतियातु कमारोऽयं न TEER मे मयम्‌ |
अष्टमाद्‌ gestae विदितः किंल ।॥६०॥
pratiyatu 1171070 ’yam
na hy asmad asti me bhayam
astamad yuvayor garbhan
mrtyur me vihitah kila
pratiyatu—my dear Vasudeva, take back your child and go home;
kumarah—newborn child; ayam —this; na—not; hi—indeed; asmat—
from him; asti—there is; me —my; bhayam—fear; astamat—from the
eighth; yuvayoh—of both you and your wife; garbhat—from the preg-
nancy; mrtyuh—death; me—my; vihitah —has been ordained; kila—
indeed. ,
TRANSLATION
O Vasudeva, you may take back your child and go home. I have

no fear of your first child. It is the eighth child of you and Devaki I
am concerned with because that is the child by whom I am destined
to be killed.


--- Page 97 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
TEXT 61
तथेति सुतमादाय ययावानकदुन्दुभिः ।
नाभ्यनन्दत तद्वाक्यमसतोऽबरिजितात्मनः ॥६१॥
tatheti sutam adaya
yayav anakadundubhih
nabhyanandata tad-vakyam
asato ’vijitatmanah
tatha—very well; iti—thus; sutam addya—taking back his child;
yayau—Ileft that place; anakadundubhih— Vasudeva; na abhya-
nandata—did not very much value; tat-vakyam—the words (of
Kamsa); asatah—who was without character; avijita-atmanah—and
without self-control.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva agreed and took his child back home, but because
Karhsa had no character and no self-control, Vasudeva knew that
he could not rely on Karhsa’s word.
TEXTS 62-63
नन्दाद्या ये व्रजे गोपा যাখামীঘা च योषितः |
इष्णयो वसुदेवाद्या देवक्याद्या यदुचियः NER
स्वे वै देवताप्राया उभयोरपि भारत |
H ^
ज्ञातयो बन्धुसुहृदो ये च कंसमनुव्रताः ॥६२॥
nandadya ye vraje gopa
yas camisam ca yositah
vrsnayo vasudevadya
| devaky-adya yadu-striyah
sarve vai devata-praya
ubhayor api bharata
JjAatayo bandhu-suhrdo
ye ca kamsam anuvratah


--- Page 98 ---
Text 63] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 93

nanda-adyah—beginning from Nanda Maharaja; ye—all of which
persons; vraje—in Vrndavana; gopah —the cowherd men; yah—which;
ca—and; amisam —of all those (inhabitants of Vrndavana); ca—as well
as; yositah—the women; vrsnayah—members of the Vrsni family;
vasudeva-adyah—headed by Vasudeva; devaki-adyah—headed by
Devaki; yadu-striyah —all the women of the Yadu dynasty; sarve—all of
them; wvai—indeed; devata-prayadh—were inhabitants of heaven;
ubhayoh—of both Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva; api—indeed;
bharata—O Maharaja Pariksit; jAatayah—the relatives; bandhu—
friends; suhrdah—well-wishers; ye—all of whom; ca—and; kamsam
anuvratah —even though apparently followers of Karnsa.

TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of Vrndavana, headed by Nanda Maharaja and
including his associate cowherd men and their wives, were none
but denizens of the heavenly planets, O Maharaja Pariksit, best of
the descendants of Bharata, and so too were the descendants of the
Vrsni dynasty, headed by Vasudeva, and Devaki and the other
women of the dynasty of Yadu. The friends, relatives and well-
wishers of both Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva and even those who
externally appeared to be followers of Karmsa were all demigods.

PURPORT

As previously discussed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu,
informed Lord Brahma that Lord Krsna would personally descend to
mitigate the suffering on the earth. The Lord ordered all the denizens of
the heavenly planets to take birth in different families of the Yadu and
Vrsni dynasties and in Vrndavana. Now this verse informs us that all the
family and friends of the Yadu dynasty, the Vrsni dynasty, Nanda
Maharaja and the gopas descended from the heavenly planets to see the
pastimes of the Lord. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.8), the Lord’s
pastimes consist of paritrandya sadhanam vinasaya ca duskrtam—sav-
ing the devotees and killing the demons. To demonstrate these activities,
the Lord called for devotees from different parts of the universe.

There are many devotees who are elevated to the higher planetary
systems.


--- Page 99 ---
94 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
prapya punya-krtam lokan
usitva $asvatih samah
Sucinari Srimatam gehe
yoga-bhrasto ’bhijayate
“The unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the
planets of the pious living entities, is born into a family of righteous
people, or into a family of rich aristocracy.” (Bg. 6.41) Some devotees,
having failed to complete the process of devotional service, are promoted
to the heavenly planets, to which the pious are elevated, and after enjoy-
ing there they may be directly promoted to the place where the Lord’s
pastimes are going on. When Lord Krsna was to appear, the denizens of
the heavenly planets were invited to see the pastimes of the Lord, and
thus it is stated here that the members of the Yadu and Vrsni dynasties
and the inhabitants of Vrndavana were demigods or almost as good as
demigods. Even those who externally helped the activities of Karnsa
belonged to the higher planetary systems. The imprisonment and release
of Vasudeva and the killing of various demons were all manifestations of
the pastimes of the Lord, and because the devotees would be pleased to
see these activities personally, they were all invited to take birth as
friends and relatives of these families. As confirmed in the prayers of
Kunti (Bhag. 1.8.19), nato natya-dharo yatha. The Lord was to play the
part of a demon-killer, and a friend, son and brother to His devotees, and
thus these devotees were all summoned.
TEXT 64
एतत्‌ कंसाय भगवाञ्छशंसाभ्येत्य नारदः |
भूमेमारायमाणानां दैत्यानां च वधोयमम्‌ ॥६४॥।
etat karsaya bhagavan
chasamsabhyetya naradah
bhiimer bharayamananarm
daityanam ca vadhodyamam
etat—all these words about the Yadu family and Vrsni family;
karsaya—unto King 97038; bhagavan—the most powerful representa-


--- Page 100 ---
Text 64] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 95
tive of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sasarisa—informed
(Karnsa, who was in doubt); abhyetya—after approaching him; nara-
dah—the great sage Narada; bhimeh—on the surface of the earth;
bharayamananam —of those who were a burden; daityanam ca—and of
the demons; vadha-udyamam —the endeavor to kill.
. TRANSLATION

Once the great saint Narada approached Karhsa and informed
him of how the demoniac persons who were a great burden on the
earth were going to be killed. Thus Karhsa was placed into great
fear and doubt.

PURPORT

It has already been discussed that mother earth implored Lord Brahma
to give her relief from the distress created by the burdensome demons
and that Lord Brahma informed her that Lord Krsna Himself was going
to appear. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (4.8):

paritrandya sadhiinari
vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge

Whenever there is a burden created by the demons and whenever the in-
nocent devotees are distressed by demoniac rulers, the Lord appears in
due course of time to kill the demons with the assistance of His real
representatives, who are technically called demigods. In the Upanisads it
is stated that the demigods are different parts of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As it is the duty of the parts of the body to serve the whole,
it is the duty of Krsna’s devotees to serve Krsna as He wants. Krsna’s
business is to kill the demons, and therefore this should be a devotee’s
business also. Because the people of Kali-yuga are fallen, however, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, out of kindness for them, did not bring any
weapon to kill them. Rather, by spreading Krsna consciousness, love of
Krsna, He wanted to kill their nefarious, demoniac activities. This is the


--- Page 101 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
purpose of the Krsna consciousness movement. Unless the demoniac ac-
tivities on the surface of the world are diminished or vanquished, no one
can be happy. The program for the conditioned soul is fully described in
Bhagavad-gita, and one simply has to follow these instructions to become
happy. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has therefore prescribed:
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
ndsty eva gatir anyatha
Let people chant the Hare Krsna mantra constantly. Then their demoniac
tendencies will be killed, and they will become first-class devotees, happy
in this life and in the next.
TEXTS 65-66
© _+
ऋषेविनिगमे कंसो यदून्‌ मत्वा सुरानिति |
देवक्या गमभंसम्भूतं विष्णुं च অন্ধ प्रति।।६५५॥
. a
देवकीं वसुदेवं च frm fear ।
जातं जातमहन्‌ पुत्रं तयोरजनशङ्कया ॥६६॥
rser vinirgame karmso
yadin matva suran iti
devakya garbha-sambhitarmn
visnurm ca sva-vadhari prati
devakir vasudevari ca
nigrhya nigadair grhe
jatam jatam ahan putram
tayor ajana-sarkayd
rseh—of the great sage Narada; vinirgame—on the departure (after
giving information); karsah—Kamsa; yadiin—all the members of the
Yadu dynasty; matva—thinking of; suran—as demigods; iti—thus;
devakyah —of Devaki; garbha-sambhiitam—the children born from the


--- Page 102 ---
Text 66] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 97
womb; vispum— (accepting) as Visnu; ca—and; sva-vadham prati—
fearing his own death from Visnu; devakim—Devaki; vasudevam ca—
and her husband, Vasudeva; nigrhya—arresting; nigadaih—by iron
shackles; grhe —confined at home; jatam jatam—each one who was
born, one after another; ahan—Kkilled; putram—the sons; tayoh—of
Vasudeva and Devaki; ajana-$arikaya—with the doubt that they would
be Visnu.
TRANSLATION

After the departure of the great saint Narada, Karnsa thought
that all the members of the Yadu dynasty were demigods and that
any of the children born from the womb of Devaki might be
Visnu. Fearing his death, Karnsa arrested Vasudeva and Devaki and
chained them with iron shackles. Suspecting each of the children
to be Visnu, Karhsa killed them one after another because of the
prophecy that Visnu would kill him.

PURPORT

Srila Jiva Gosvami, in his notes on this verse, has mentioned how
Narada Muni gave Karisa this information. This incident is described in
the Hari-vamsa. Narada Muni went to see Karmsa by providence, and
Karnsa received him very well. Narada, therefore, informed him that any
one of the sons of Devaki might be Visnu. Because Visnu was to kill him,
Karisa should not spare any of Devaki’s children, Narada Muni advised.
Narada’s intention was that Karnsa, by killing the children, would in-
crease his sinful activities so that Krsna would soon appear to kill him.
Upon receiving the instructions of Narada Muni, 1437158 killed all the
children of Devaki one after another.

The word ajana-sarikaya indicates that Lord Visnu never takes birth
(ajana) and that He therefore appeared as Krsna, taking birth just like a
human being (manusirh tanum asritam). Karnsa attempted to kill all the
babies born of Devaki and Vasudeva, although he knew that if Visnu
were born, He would not be killed. Actually it came to pass that when
Visnu appeared as Krsna, Karhsa could not kill Him; rather, as foretold,
it was He who killed Karhsa. One should know in truth how Krsna, who
takes His birth transcendentally, acts to kill the demons but is never


--- Page 103 ---
|
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
killed. When one perfectly understands Krsna in this way, through the
medium of $astra, one becomes immortal. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-
gita (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evarh yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so ’rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this
material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.”
TEXT 67
मातरं पितरं ्रातुन्‌ सर्वां सुहृदस्तथा ।
सन्ति TEIN Fo राजानः प्रायो थुवि ।६७॥
mataram pitaram bhratin
sarvams ca suhrdas tatha
ghnanti hy asutrpo lubdha
rajanah prayaso bhuvi
mdtaram—unto the mother; pitaram—unto the father; bhratin—
unto brothers; sarvan ca—and anyone else; suhrdah—friends; tatha—
as well as; ghnanti—they kill (as it is practically seen); hi—indeed; asu-
trpah—those who envy the lives of others for their personal sense grati-
fication; lubdhah—greedy; rajanah—such kings; prayasah—almost
always; bhuvi—on the earth.
TRANSLATION
Kings greedy for sense gratification on this earth almost always
kill their enemies indiscriminately. To satisfy their own whims,
they may kill anyone, even their mothers, fathers, brothers or
friends.
PURPORT
We have seen in the history of India that Aurangzeb killed his brother
and nephews and imprisoned his father to fulfill political ambitions.


--- Page 104 ---
Text 68] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 99
There have been many similar instances, and [758 was the same type
of king. Kamsa did not hesitate to kill his nephews and imprison his
sister and his father. For demons to do such things is not astonishing.
Nonetheless, although Kamsa was a demon, he was aware that Lord
Visnu cannot be killed, and thus he attained salvation. Even partial
understanding of the activities of Lord Visnu makes one eligible for
salvation. Kamsa knew a little about Krsna—that He could not be
killed —and therefore he attained salvation although he thought of
Visnu, Krsna, as an enemy. What then is to be said of one who knows
Krsna perfectly from the descriptions of sastras like Bhagavad-gita? It is
therefore the duty of everyone to read Bhagavad-gita and understand
Krsna perfectly. This will make one’s life successful.
TEXT 68
आत्मानमिह TH TT प्राग्‌ विष्णुना हतम्‌ |
महासुरं ককাতলমি यदुभिः स व्यरुध्यत ॥६८॥
(11.1.18 3.111.111
janan prag visnuna hatam
mahasuram kalanemirn
yadubhih sa vyarudhyata
atmanam —personally; iha—in this world; sarijatam—born again;
janan—understanding well; prak—previously, before this birth; vis-
nuna—by Lord Visnu; hatam—was killed; maha-asuram—a great
demon; kalanemim—Dby the name Kalanemi; yadubhih —with the mem-
bers of the Yadu dynasty; sah—he (Kamsa); vyarudhyata—acted
inimically.
TRANSLATION
In his previous birth, Karhsa had been a great demon named
Kilanemi and been killed by Visnu. Upon learning this informa-
tion from Narada, Karhsa became envious of everyone connected
with the Yadu dynasty.
PURPORT
Persons who are demons, enemies of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, are called asuras. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, the asuras, because


--- Page 105 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
of their enmity toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead, take birth
after birth in asura families and therefore glide down to the darkest
hellish regions.
TEXT 69
उग्रसेनं च पितरं यदुभोजान्धकाधिपय्‌ |
स्वयं निगद्य TIN शरसेनान्‌ WES ।।६९॥
ugrasenam ca pitaram
yadu-bhojandhakadhipam
svayamn nigrhya bubhuje
suirasenan maha-balah

ugrasenam—unto Ugrasena; ca—and; pitaram—who was his own
father; yadu—of the Yadu dynasty; bhoja—of the Bhoja dynasty;
andhaka—of the Andhaka dynasty; adhipam—the king; svayam—per-
sonally; nigrhya—subduing; bubhuje—enjoyed; Ssurasenan—all the
states known as Siirasena; maha-balah—the extremely powerful Karhsa.

TRANSLATION

Karinsa, the most powerful son of Ugrasena, even imprisoned his
own father, the King of the Yadu, Bhoja and Andhaka dynasties,
and personally ruled the states known as Surasena.

PURPORT

The state known as Mathura was also included within the states known

as Surasena.
ADDITIONAL NOTES FOR THIS CHAPTER

Regarding transmigration of the soul, Srila Madhvacarya gives the
following notes. When one is awake, whatever one sees or hears is im-
pressed upon the mind, which later works in dreams to show one dif-
ferent experiences, although in dreams one appears to accept a different


--- Page 106 ---
Notes] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 101
body. For example, when one is awake one does business and talks with
customers, and similarly in dreams one meets various customers, talks
about business and gives quotations. Madhvacarya says, therefore, that
dreams take place according to what one sees, hears and remembers.
When one reawakens, of course, one forgets the body of the dream. This
forgetfulness is called apasmrti. Thus we are changing bodies because we
are sometimes dreaming, sometimes awake and sometimes forgetful.
Forgetfulness of our previously created body is called death, and our
work in the present body is called life. After death, one cannot remember
the activities of one’s previous body, whether imaginary or factual.

The agitated mind is compared to agitated water reflecting the sun and
the moon. Actually the sun and moon reflected on the water do not exist
there; nonetheless, they are reflected according to the movements of the
water. Similarly, when our minds are agitated, we wander in different
material atmospheres and receive different types of bodies. This is de-
scribed in Bhagavad-gita as guna-sariga. Karanam guna-sarngo ‘sya.
Madhvacarya says, gunanubaddhah san. And Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
says, brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva (Cc. Madhya 19.151).
The living entity rotates up and down throughout the universe, some-
times in the upper planetary system, sometimes in the middle and lower
planetary systems, sometimes as a man, sometimes a god, a dog, a tree
and so on. This is all due to the agitation of the mind. The mind
must therefore be steadily fixed. As it is said, sa vai manah krsna-
padaravindayoh. One should fix one’s mind at the lotus feet of Krsna,
and then one will become free from agitation. This is the instruction of
the Garuda Purana, and in the Naradiya Purana the same process is de-
scribed. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, yanti deva-vrata devan. The agi-
tated mind goes to different planetary systems because it is attached to
different kinds of demigods, but one does not go to the abode of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by worshiping the demigods, for this is
not supported by any Vedic literature. Man is the architect of his own
fortune. In this human life one has the facility with which to understand
one’s real situation, and one can decide whether to wander around the
universe forever or return home, back to Godhead. This is also con-
firmed in Bhagavad-gita (aprapya mam nivartante mrtyu-sarsara-
vartmani).


--- Page 107 ---
|
|
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1 |

There is no such thing as chance. When a tree is burning in a forest
fire and although the nearest tree is spared a distant tree catches fire, this
may appear to be chance. Similarly, one may seem to get different types
of bodies by chance, but actually one receives these bodies because of the
mind. The mind flickers between accepting and rejecting, and according
to the acceptance and rejection of the mind, we receive different types of
bodies, although we superficially seem to obtain these bodies by chance.
Even if we accept the theory of chance, the immediate cause for the
change of body is the agitation of the mind.

Notes on amsa. This chapter describes that Krsna appeared arsena,
with His parts and parcels or His partial manifestation. In this connec-
tion, Sridhara Svami says that Krsna is one hundred percent Bhagavan
(krsnas tu bhagavan svayam). Because of our imperfections, however,
we cannot appreciate Krsna in fullness, and therefore whatever Krsna
exhibited when present on earth was but a partial manifestation of His
opulence. Again, Krsna appeared with His plenary expansion Baladeva.
Krsna, however, is full; there is no question of His appearing partially.
In the Vaisnava-tosani, Srila Sanatana Gosvami says that to accept that
Krsna was partially manifested would contradict the statement krsnas tu
bhagavan svayam. Srila Jiva Gosvami says that the word arisena means
that Krsna appeared with all His plenary expansions. The words armsena
visnoh do not mean that Krsna is a partial representative of Visnu.
Rather, Krsna appeared in fullness, and He manifests Himself partially
in the Vaikunthalokas. In other words, Lord Visnu is a partial represen-
tation of Krsna; Krsna is not a partial representation of Visnu. In the
Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi-lila, Chapter Four, this subject matter is ex-
plained very clearly. Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura also notes that
no one can describe Krsna in fullness. Whatever descriptions we find in
Srimad-Bhagavatam are partial explanations of Krsna. In conclusion,
therefore, the word armsena indicates that Lord Visnu is a partial repre-
sentation of Krsna, not that Krsna is a partial representation of Visnu.

Srila Sanatana Gosvami’s Vaisnava-tosani has explained the word
dharma-silasya. The exact meaning of dharma-sila is “an unadulterated
devotee.” Real dharma consists of full surrender to Krsna (sarva-
dharman parityajya mam ekari saranam vraja). One who has fully sur-
rendered to Krsna is actually religious. One such religious person was
Maharaja Pariksit. Anyone who accepts the principle of surrender to the


--- Page 108 ---
Notes] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 103
lotus feet of the Lord, giving up all other systems of religion, is actually
dharma-$ila, perfectly religious.

The word nivrtta-tarsaih refers to one who no longer has any material
desires (sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam). One may have many material desires
because of contamination in this material world, but when one is com-
pletely free from all material desires, he is called nivrtta-trsna, which in-
dicates that he no longer has any thirst for material enjoyment. Svamin
krtartho ’smi varari na yace (Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya). Materialistic per-
sons want some material profit from executing devotional service, but
this is not the purpose of service. The perfection of devotional service
lies in complete surrender unto the lotus feet of Krsna, with no material
desires. One who surrenders in this way is already liberated. Jivan-
muktah sa ucyate. One who is always busy serving Krsna, in whatever
condition he may live, is understood to be liberated even in this life. Such
a person, who is a pure devotee, does not need to change his body; in-
deed, he does not possess a material body, for his body has already been
spiritualized. An iron rod kept constantly within a fire will ultimately be-
come fire, and whatever it touches will burn. Similarly, the pure devotee
is in the fire of spiritual existence, and therefore his body is cin-maya;
that is, it is spiritual, not material, because the pure devotee has no
desire but the transcendental desire to serve the Lord. In text four the
word upagiyamanat is used: nivrtta-tarsair upagiyamanat. Who will
chant the glories of the Lord unless he is a devotee? Therefore the word
nivrtta-tarsaih indicates the devotee, and no one else. These are the
remarks of dcaryas like Viraraghava Acarya and Vijayadhvaja. To desire
anything other than devotional service will diminish one’s freedom from
material desires, but when one is free from all such desires one is called
nivrtta-tarsaih.

Vina pasu-ghnat. The word pasu means “animal.” An animal killer,
pasu-ghna, cannot enter into Krsna consciousness. In our Krsna con-
sciousness movement, therefore, animal killing is completely prohibited.

Uttamasloka-gunanuvadat. The word uttamasloka means “‘one who is
famous as the best of those who are good.” The Lord is good in all
circumstances. That is His natural reputation. His goodness is unlimited,
and He uses it unlimitedly. A devotee is also sometimes described as
uttamasloka, meaning that he is eager to glorify the Supreme Personality
of Godhead or the Lord’s devotees. Glorifying the Lord and glorifying


--- Page 109 ---
104. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
the Lord’s devotees are the same. Or, rather, glorifying the devotee is
more important than glorifying the Lord directly. Narottama dasa
Thakura explains this fact: chadiya vaisnava-seva, nistara payeche
keba. One cannot be liberated from material contamination without
sincerely serving a devotee of Krsna.

Bhavausadhat means “from the universal remedy.” Chanting the
holy name and glorifying the Supreme Lord are the universal remedy for
all the miseries of materialistic life. Persons who desire to be freed from
this material world are called mumuksu. Such persons can understand
the miseries of materialistic life, and by glorifying the activities of the
Lord they can be released from all these miseries. The transcendental
sound vibrations concerning the Lord’s name, fame, form, qualities and
paraphernalia are all nondifferent from the Lord. Therefore the very
sound vibration of the Lord’s glorification and name are pleasing to the
ears, and by understanding the absolute nature of the Lord’s name, form
and qualities the devotee becomes joyful. Even those who are not devo-
tees, however, enjoy the pleasing narrations of the Lord’s transcendental
activities. Even ordinary persons not very much advanced in Krsna con-
sciousness take pleasure in describing the narrations depicted in Srimad-
Bhagavatam. When a materialistic person is purified in this way, he
engages in hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord. Because
glorification of the Lord’s pastimes is very pleasing to the ear and heart
of the devotee, it is simultaneously his subject and object.

In this world there are three kinds of men: those who are liberated,
those trying to be liberated, and those entangled in sense enjoyment. Of
these three, those who are already liberated chant and hear the holy
name of the Lord, knowing perfectly that to glorify the Lord is the only
way to keep oneself in a transcendental position. Those who are trying to
be liberated, the second class, may regard the chanting and hearing of
the Lord’s holy name as a process of liberation, and they too will feel the
transcendental pleasure of this chanting. As for karmis and persons
engaged in sense gratification, they also may take pleasure in hearing the
pastimes of the Lord, like His fighting on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra
and His dancing in Vrndavana with the gopis.

The word uttamasloka-gunanuvada refers to the transcendental
qualities of the Supreme Lord, such as His affection for mother YaSoda
and His friends the cowherd boys and His loving attitude toward the


--- Page 110 ---
Notes] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 105
gopis. The Lord’s devotees like Maharaja Yudhisthira are also described
by the qualification uttamasloka-gunanuvada. The word anuvada refers
to describing the qualities of the Supreme Lord or His devotees. When
these qualities are described, other devotees are interested in hearing
them. The more one is interested in hearing about these transcendental
qualities, the more one transcendentally enjoys. Everyone, therefore, in-
cluding the mumuksus, the vimuktas and the karmis, should chant and
hear the glories of the Lord, and in this way everyone will benefit.

Although the sound vibration of the transcendental qualities of the
Lord is equally beneficial to all, for those who are mubktas, liberated, it is
especially pleasing. As described in Srimad-Bhagavatam, Eighth Canto,
Third Chapter, verse twenty, because pure devotees, who no longer have
any material desires, surrender fully to the lotus feet of the Lord, they
always merge in the ocean of bliss by chanting and hearing the Lord’s
holy name. According to this verse, devotees like Narada and other resi-
dents of Svetadvipa are seen always engaged in chanting the holy name
of the Lord because by such chanting they are always externally and in-
ternally blissful. The mumuksus, persons desiring to be liberated, do not
depend on the pleasures of the senses; instead, they concentrate fully on
becoming liberated by chanting the holy name of the Lord. Karmis like
to create something pleasing to their ears and hearts, and although they
sometimes like to chant or hear the glories of the Lord, they do not do it
openly. Devotees, however, always spontaneously hear, chant about and
remember the activities of the Lord, and by this process they are fully
satisfied, even though these may seem like topics of sense gratification.
Simply by hearing the transcendental narrations of the Lord’s activities,
Pariksit Maharaja was liberated. He was therefore srotramano-’bhirama;
that is, he glorified the process of hearing. This process should be
accepted by all living entities.

To distinguish persons who are bereft of these transcendental
pleasures, Pariksit Maharaja has used the words virajyeta puman. The
word puman refers to any person, whether man, woman or in-between.
Because of the bodily conception of life, we are subject to lamentation,
but one who has no such bodily conceptions can take pleasure in tran-
scendental hearing and chanting. Therefore a person fully absorbed in
the bodily concept of life is surely killing himself by not making spiritual
progress. Such a person is called pasu-ghna. Especially excluded from


--- Page 111 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
spiritual life are the animal hunters, who are not interested in hearing
and chanting the holy name of the Lord. Such hunters are always
unhappy, both in this life and in the next. It is therefore said that a
hunter should neither die nor live because for such persons both living
and dying are troublesome. Animal hunters are completely different
from ordinary karmis, and thus they have been excluded from the pro-
cess of hearing and chanting. Vina pasu-ghnat. They cannot enter into
the transcendental pleasure of chanting and hearing the holy name of the
Lord.

The word maha-ratha refers to a great hero who can fight alone
against eleven thousand other heroes, and the word atiratha, as found in
text five, refers to one who can fight against an unlimited number. This
is mentioned in the Mahabharata as follows:

ekadasa-sahasrani
yodhayed yas tu dhanvinam
astra-$astra-pravinas ca
maha-ratha iti smrtah
amitan yodhayed yas tu
samprokto tirathas tu sah
This is the description given in the Brhad-vaisnava-tosani by Srila
Sanatana Gosvami. :

Maya-manusyasya (10.1.17). Because of being covered by yogamaya
(nahariv prakasah sarvasya yogamaya-samavrtah), Krsna is sometimes
called maya-manusya, indicating that although He is the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, He appears like an ordinary person. A misunder-
standing arises because yogamaya covers the vision of the general
public. The Lord’s position is actually different from that of an ordinary
person, for although He appears to act like an ordinary man, He is always
transcendental. The word maya also indicates “mercy,” and sometimes it
also means “knowledge.” The Lord is always full of all transcendental
knowledge, and therefore although He acts like a human being, He is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, full of knowledge. In His original
identity, the Lord is the controller of maya (mayadhyaksena prakrtih
siyate sa-caracaram). Therefore the Lord may be called maya-
manusya, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead playing like an ordi-


--- Page 112 ---
Notes] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 107
nary human being, although He is the controller of both the material and
spiritual energies. The Lord is the Supreme Person, Purusottama, but
because we are deluded by yogamayda, He appears to be an ordinary per-
son. Ultimately, however, yogamdya induces even a nondevotee to
understand the Lord as the Supreme Person, Purusottama. In Bhagavad-
gita we find two statements given by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. For the devotees, the Lord says:
tesa satata-yuktanarn
bhajatarh priti-purvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tam
yena mam upayanti te

“To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.” (Bg. 10.10) Thus for
the willing devotee the Lord gives intelligence by which to understand
Him and return home, back to Godhead. For others, for nondevotees, the
Lord says, mrtyuh sarva-haras caham: “I am all-plundering, inevitable
death.” A devotee like Prahlada enjoys the activities of Lord Nrsirm-
hadeva, whereas nondevotees like Prahlada’s father, Hiranyakasipu,
meet death before Lord Nrsirhhadeva. The Lord therefore acts in two
ways, by sending some onto the path of repeated birth and death and
sending others back home, back to Godhead.

The word kala, meaning “‘black,” indicates the color of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Lord Krsna and Lord Ramacandra, who
both look blackish, give liberation and transcendental bliss to Their
devotees. Among persons possessing material bodies, sometimes someone
is able to subject death to his own will. For such a person, death is almost
impossible because no one wants to die. But although Bhismadeva
possessed this power, Bhisma, by the supreme will of the Lord, died very
easily in the Lord’s presence. There have also been many demons who
had no hope of salvation, yet Karhsa attained salvation by the supreme
will of the Lord. Not to speak of Karmisa, even Piitana attained salvation
and reached the level of the Lord’s mother. Pariksit Maharaja, therefore,
was very eager to hear about the Lord, who has inconceivable qualities by
which to give liberation to anyone. Pariksit Maharaja, at the point of his
death, was certainly interested in his liberation. When such a great and


--- Page 113 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
exalted personality as the Lord behaves like an ordinary human being al-
though possessing inconceivable qualities, His behavior is called maya.
Therefore the Lord is described as maya-manusya. This is the opinion of
Srila Jiva Gosvami. Mu refers to mukti, or salvation, and ku refers to that
which is bad or very obnoxious. Thus muku refers to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who saves one from the bad condition of material
existence. The Lord is called mukunda because He not only saves the
devotee from material existence but offers him transcendental bliss in
love and service.

As for Ke$ava, ka means Brahma, and isa means Lord Siva. The Per-
sonality of Godhead captivates both Lord Brahma and Lord Mahadeva, or
Siva, by His transcendental qualities. Therefore He is called Kesava.
This opinion is given by Sanatana Gosvami in his Vaisnava-tosani
commentary.

It is said that all the demigods, accompanied by Tri-nayana, Lord Siva,
went to the shore of the ocean of milk and offered their prayers through
the mantra known as Purusa-siikta. From this statement it is understood
that the demigods cannot directly approach Lord Visnu, who lies on the
ocean of milk, or enter His abode. This is also clearly stated in the
Mahabharata, Moksa-dharma, and the next chapter of Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has His
abode in Goloka (goloka-namni nija-dhamni tale ca tasya). From Lord
Krsna come the catur-vyitha, the quadruple expansions Sankarsana,
Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Vasudeva. There are innumerable brah-
mandas, all of which emanate from the pores of Karanodakasayi Visnu,
and in every brahmanda there is a Garbhodakasayi Visnu, who is a par-
tial expansion of Aniruddha. This Aniruddha is a partial expansion of
Pradyumna, who is partially represented as Ksirodakasayi Visnu, the
Supersoul of all living entities. These Visnu expansions are different
from Krsna, who resides in Goloka Vrndavana. When it is said that the
demigods offered prayers to the Lord by chanting the Purusa-sikta, this
indicates that they pleased the Lord by enunciating prayers of bhakti.

The word vrsakapi refers to one who satisfies His devotee in every way
and frees His devotee from all material anxieties. V'rsa refers to religious
performances like sacrifices. Even without the execution of sacrifices, the
Lord can still enjoy the supermost comforts of the heavenly planets. The
statement that Purusottama, Jagannatha, would appear in the house of


--- Page 114 ---
Notes] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 109
Vasudeva distinguishes the Supreme Personality of Godhead from ordi-
nary persons. The statement that He personally appeared indicates that
He did not send His plenary expansion. The word priyartham indicates
that the Lord appeared to please Rukmini and Radharani. Priya means
“the most beloved.”

In the commentary of Sri Viraraghava Acarya, the following extra
verse is accepted after text twenty-three:

rsayo ‘pi tad-adesat
kalpyantam pasu-rapinah
payo-dana-mukhenapi
visnum tarpayitum surah
“O demigods, even great sages, following the order of Visnu, appeared in
the forms of cows and calves to please the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by delivering milk.”

Ramanujacarya sometimes accepts Baladeva as a $aktyavesa-avatara,
but Srila Jiva Gosvami has explained that Baladeva is an expansion of
Krsna and that a part of Baladeva is Sankarsana. Although Baladeva is
identical with Sankarsana, He is the origin of Sankarsana. Therefore the
word svarat has been used to indicate that Baladeva always exists in His
own independence. The word svarat also indicates that Baladeva is
beyond the material conception of existence. Maya cannot attract Him,
but because He is fully independent, He can appear by His spiritual
potency wherever He likes. Maya is fully under the control of Visnu.
Because the material potency and yogamaya mingle in the Lord’s ap-
pearance, they are described as ekanarmsa. Sometimes ekanamsia is
interpreted to mean “without differentiation.” Sankarsana and Sesa-
naga are identical. As stated by Yamunadevi, “O Rama, O great-armed
master of the world, who have extended Yourself throughout the entire
universe by one plenary expansion, it is not possible to understand You
fully.” Therefore ekamsa refers to Sesa-naga. In other words, Baladeva,
merely by His partial expansion, sustains the entire universe.

The word karyarthe refers to one who attracted the pregnancy of
Devaki and bewildered mother 36008. These pastimes are very confi-
dential. The Supreme Personality of Godhead ordered yogamaya to
bewilder His associates in His pastimes and bewilder demons like Karsa.


--- Page 115 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
As stated previously, yogamayam samadisat. To give service to the Lord,
yogamaya appeared along with mahamaya. Mahamaya refers to yaya
sammohitari jagat, “0116 who bewilders the entire material world.” From
this statement it is to be understood that yogamaya, in her partial expan-
sion, becomes mahamaya and bewilders the conditioned souls. In other
words, the entire creation has two divisions —transcendental, or spiri-
tual, and material. Yogamdya manages the spiritual world, and by her
partial expansion as mahamdaya she manages the material world. As
stated in the Narada-paficaratra, mahamaya is a partial expansion of
yogamaya. The Narada-paficaratra clearly states that the Supreme Per-
sonality has one potency, which is sometimes described as Durga. The
Brahma-samhita says, chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga. Durga
is not different from yogamaya. When one understands Durga properly,
he is immediately liberated, for Durga is originally the spiritual potency,
hladini-sakti, by whose mercy one can understand the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead very easily. Radha krsna-pranaya-vikrtir hladini-
Saktir asmad. The mahamaya-sakti, however, is a covering of
yogamdya, and she is therefore called the covering potency. By this
covering potency, the entire material world is bewildered (yaya sam-
mohitam 79828). In conclusion, bewildering the conditioned souls and
liberating the devotees are both functions belonging to yogamaya.
Transferring the pregnancy of Devaki and keeping mother Yasoda in
deep sleep were both done by yogamdya; mahamaya cannot act upon
such devotees, for they are always liberated. But although it is not possi-
ble for mahamaya to control liberated souls or the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, she did bewilder Karhsa. The action of yogamaya in pre-
senting herself before Karmsa was the action of mahamaya, not
yogamaya. Yogamdayd cannot even see or touch such polluted persons as
Kamsa. In Candi, in the Markandeya Purana, Eleventh Chapter,
Mahamaya says, “During the twenty-eighth yuga in the period of
Vaivasvata Manu, I shall take birth as the daughter of १३६०१ and be
known as Vindhyacala-vasini.”

The distinction between the two mayas—yogamaya and maha-
maya—is described as follows. Krsna’s rasa-lila with the gopis and
the gopis’ bewilderment in respect to their husbands, fathers-in-law and
other such relatives were arrangements of yogamdya in which
mahamaya had no influence. The Bhagavatam gives sufficient evidence


--- Page 116 ---
Notes] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 111
of this when it clearly says, yogamayam updsritah. On the other hand,
there were asuras headed by Salva and ksatriyas like Duryodhana who
were bereft of devotional service in spite of seeing Krsna’s carrier
Garuda and the universal form, and who could not understand Krsna to
be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This was also bewilderment, but
this bewilderment was due to mahamaya. Therefore it is to be concluded
that the maya which drags a person from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is called jadamaya, and the maya which acts on the transcen-
dental platform is called yogamaya. When Nanda Maharaja was taken
away by Varuna, he saw Krsna’s opulence, but nonetheless he thought of
Krsna as his son. Such feelings of parental love in the spiritual world are
acts of yogamaya, not of jadamaya, or mahamaya. This is the opinion of
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura.

Surasenars ca. The son of Kartaviryarjuna was Sarasena, and the
countries he ruled were also called Sarasena. This is noted by Sanatana
Gosvami in his Vaisnava-tosani commentary.

In regard to Mathura, we find this quotation:

mathyate tu jagat ऽवा एका)
brahma-jiianena yena va
tat-sara-bhutarn yad yasyam
mathura sa nigadyate
When a self-realized soul acts in his transcendental position, his situation
is called Mathura. In other words, when one acts in the process of bhakti-
yoga, he may live anywhere, but actually he lives in Mathura,
Vrndavana. Devotion to Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja, is the essence
of all knowledge, and wherever such knowledge is manifested is called
Mathura. Also, when one establishes bhakti-yoga, excluding all other
methods, one’s situation is called Mathura. Yatra nityari sannihito harih:
the place where Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, lives eter-
nally is called Mathura. The word nitya indicates eternality. The
Supreme Lord is eternal, and His abode is also eternal. Goloka eva
nivasaty akhilatma-bhitah. Although the Lord is always stationed in His
abode, Goloka Vrndavana, He is present everywhere in fullness. This
means that when the Supreme Lord descends on the surface of the world,
His original abode is not vacant, for He can remain in His original abode


--- Page 117 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
and simultaneously descend upon Mathura, Vrndavana, Ayodhya and
other places. He does not need to descend, since He is already present
there; He simply manifests Himself.

Srila Sukadeva Gosvami has addressed Maharaja Pariksit as tata, or
“beloved son.” This is due to parental love in the heart of Sukadeva
Gosvami. Because Krsna was soon coming as the son of Vasudeva and
Devaki, out of parental affection Sukadeva Gosvami addressed Maharaja
Pariksit as tata, “my dear son.”

In the Visva-kosa dictionary, the word garbha is explained: garbho
bhrane arbhake kuksav ity adi. When Karnsa was about to kill Devaki,
Vasudeva wanted to dissuade him by the diplomacy of sama and bheda.
Sama means “‘pacifying.”” Vasudeva wanted to pacify Kamsa by indicat-
ing relations, gain, welfare, identity and glorification. Reference to these
five concerns constitutes sama, and Vasudeva’s presentation of fear in
two situations—in this life and the next—is called bheda. Thus
Vasudeva used both sama and bheda to pacify Karmsa. Praising 14715875
qualifications was glorification, and praising him as a descendant of the
bhoja-varisa appealed to sambandha, relationship. Speaking of ‘your
sister’’ was an appeal to identity. Speaking about killing a woman raises
questions about fame and welfare, and arousing fear of the sinful act of
killing one’s sister during her marriage ceremony is an aspect of bheda.
The Bhoja dynasty refers to those who were simply interested in sense
gratification and were therefore not very aristocratic. Another meaning
of bhoja is “fighting.” These were indications of defamation for Karmsa.
When Vasudeva addressed Kamsa as dina-vatsala, this was excessive
praise. Karhsa would accept calves as a form of revenue from his poor
constituents, and therefore he was called dina-vatsala. Vasudeva knew
very well that he could not by force rescue Devaki from the imminent
danger. Devaki was actually the daughter of Karhsa’s uncle, and
therefore she is described as suhrt, meaning “relative.” It is stated that
Kamsa refrained from killing his close relation Devaki because if he had
killed her, a great fight would have ensued among the other members of
the family. Kamsa refrained from provoking this great danger of a
family fight, for it would have caused many persons to lose their lives.

Formerly an asura named Kalanemi had six sons, named Harsa,
Suvikrama, Kratha, Damana, Ripurmardana and Krodhahanta. They


--- Page 118 ---
Notes] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 113
were known as the sad-garbhas, or six garbhas, and they were all equally
powerful and expert in military affairs. These sad-garbhas gave up the
association of Hiranyaka$ipu, their grandfather, and underwent great
austerities to satisfy Lord Brahma, who, upon being satisfied, agreed to
give them whatever benediction they might desire. When asked by Lord
Brahma to state what they wanted, the sad-garbhas replied, “Dear Lord
Brahma, if you want to give us a benediction, give us the blessing that we
will not be killed by any demigod, maha-roga, Yaksa, Gandharva-pati,
Siddha, Carana or human being, nor by great sages who are perfect in
their penances and austerities.”” Brahma understood their purpose and
fulfilled their desire. But when Hiranyaka$ipu came to know of these
events, he was very angry at his grandsons. “You have given up my
association and have gone to worship Lord Brahma,” he said, “and
therefore I no longer have any affection for you. You have tried to save
yourselves from the hands of the demigods, but I curse you in this way:
Your father will take birth as Karhsa and kill all of you because you will
take birth as sons of Devaki.”” Because of this curse, the grandsons of
Hiranyakasipu had to take birth from the womb of Devaki and be killed
by Kamsa, although he was previously their father. This description is
mentioned in the Hari-vamsa, Visnu-parva, Second Chapter. According
to the comments of the Vaisnava-tosant, the son of Devaki known as
Kirtiman was the third incarnation. In his first incarnation he was known
as Smara and was the son of Marici, and later he became the son of
Kalanemi. This is mentioned in the histories.

An additional verse in this chapter of Srimad-Bhagavatam is accepted
by the Madhvacarya-sampradaya, represented by Vijayadhvaja Tirtha.
The verse is as follows:

atha karisam upagamya
narado brahma-nandanah
ekantam upasarigamya
vakyam etad uvaca ha
atha—in this way; kamsam—unto Kamsa; upagamya—after going;
naradah —the great sage Narada; brahma-nandanah—who is the son of
Brahma; ekantam upasangamya—after going to a very solitary place;


--- Page 119 ---
114. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 1
vakyam —the following instruction; etat—this; uvaca —said; ha—in the
past.

Translation: “Thereafter, Narada, the mental son of Lord Brahma, ap-
proached Kamsa and, in a very solitary place, informed him of the
following news.”

The great saint Narada descended from the heavenly planets to the
forest of Mathura and sent his messenger to Karnsa. When the messenger
approached Karmsa and informed him of Narada’s arrival, Karhsa, the
leader of the asuras, was very happy and immediately came out of his
palace to receive Narada, who was as bright as the sun, as powerful as
fire, and free from all tinges of sinful activities. Karhsa accepted Narada
as his guest, offered him respectful obeisances and gave him a golden
seat, brilliant like the sun. Narada was a friend of the King of heaven,
and thus he told Karhsa, the son of Ugrasena, “My dear hero, you have
satisfied me with a proper reception, and therefore I shall tell you some-
thing secret and confidential. While I was coming here from Nanda-
kanana through the Caitraratha forest, I saw a great meeting of the
demigods, who followed me to Sumeru Parvata. We traveled through
many holy places, and finally we saw the holy Ganges. While Lord
Brahma was consulting the other demigods at the top of Sumeru Hill, I
was also present with my stringed instrument, the vind. I shall tell you
confidentially that the meeting was held just to plan to kill the
asuras, headed by you. You have a younger sister named Devaki, and it
is a fact that her eighth son will kill you.” (reference: Hari-vamsa,
Visnu-parva 1.2-16)

No one can blame Naradaji for encouraging Karnsa to kill the sons of
Devaki. The saint Narada is always a well-wisher for human society, and
he wanted the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, to descend to this
world as soon as possible so that the society of demigods would be pleased
and would see Karhsa and his friends killed by Krsna. 14977158 would also
attain salvation from his nefarious activities, and this too would very
much please the demigods and their followers. Srila Viévanatha
Cakravarti Thakura remarks in this connection that Narada Muni some-
times did things that were beneficial to the demigods and the demons
simultaneously. Sri Viraraghava Acarya, in his commentary, has in-
cluded the following half-verse in this regard: asurdh sarva evaita


--- Page 120 ---
Notes] The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction 115
lokopadrava-karinah. Asuras are always disturbing elements for human
society.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, First
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Advent of Lord
Krsna: Introduction.” ;


--- Page 121 ---
CHAPTER TWO
Prayers by the Demigods
for Lord Krsna in the Womb
As described in this chapter, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead
entered the womb of Devaki to kill Karnsa, all the demigods understood
that the Lord was living within Devaki’s womb, and therefore in venera-
tion they offered Him the Garbha-stuti prayers.

Karnsa, under the protection of his father-in-law, Jarasandha, and
with the help of his demoniac friends like Pralamba, Baka, Canira,
Trnavarta, Aghasura, Mustika, Bana and Bhaumasura, began oppressing
the members of the Yadu dynasty. Therefore, the members of the Yadu
dynasty left their homes and sought shelter in such states as Kuru,
Paficala, Kekaya, Salva and Vidarbha. Only some of them stayed with
Karhsa, as nominal friends.

After Karnsa killed the sad-garbhas, the six sons of Devaki, one after
another, Anantadeva entered Devaki’s womb and was transferred to the
womb of Rohini by the manipulation of Yogamaya, who was following
the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord Himself,
who was soon to appear as the eighth son of Devaki, ordered Yogamaya to
take birth from the womb of Yasodadevi. Because Krsna and His po-
tency, Yogamaya, appeared simultaneously as brother and sister, the
world is full of Vaisnavas and Saktas, and there is certainly some rivalry
between them. Vaisnavas worship the Supreme Lord, whereas saktas, ac-
cording to their desires, worship Yogamaya in forms like Durga,
Bhadrakili and Candika. Following the orders of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Yogamaya transferred Baladeva, Sankarsana, the
seventh child of Devaki, from the womb of Devaki to the womb of
Rohini. Because Sankarsana appears in order to increase love of Krsna,
He is known as Baladeva. One may take auspicious strength from Him to
become a devotee of the Lord, and therefore He is also known as
Balabhadra.

After Yogamaya transferred the seventh child of Devaki to the womb
of Rohini, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared within the

117


--- Page 122 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
heart of Vasudeva and transferred Himself into the heart of Devaki. Be-
cause the Lord was present in her heart, Devaki, as her pregnancy con-
tinued, appeared effulgent. Upon seeing this effulgence, Karsa was full
of anxiety, but he could not harm Devaki because of their family rela-
tionship. Thus he began indirectly thinking of Krsna and became fully
Krsna conscious.

Meanwhile, because of the Lord’s presence within the womb of
Devaki, all the demigods came to offer the Lord their prayers. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, they said, is eternally the Absolute
Truth. The spiritual soul is more important than the gross body, and the
Supersoul, Paramatma, is still more important than the soul. The
Supreme Godhead is absolutely independent, and His incarnations are
transcendental. The prayers of the demigods glorify and exalt devotees
and explain the fate of persons who superficially consider themselves
liberated from the conditions of material nature. A devotee is always
safe. When a devotee fully surrenders at the lotus feet of the Lord, he is
completely liberated from the fear of material existence. By explaining
why the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends, the prayers of the
demigods clearly confirm the Lord’s statement in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):

yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanam srjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion —at that time I
descend Myself.”
TEXTS 1-2
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
পে
प्रलम्बबकचाणूरतणायतंमहाशनैः I
अष्टिकारिषटद्धिविदपूतनाकेशिधेलुकेः ॥ १॥
2 Aan C
अन्येश्वासुरभूपाकैर्वाणममादिभियत ‡ |
यदूनां कदनं चक्रे बली मागधसंश्रयः ॥ २ ॥


--- Page 123 ---
Text 2] Prayers by the Demigods 119
sri-Suka uvaca
pralamba-baka-caniara-
trnavarta-mahdsanaih
mustikarista-dvivida-
putana-kesi-dhenukaih
anyais casura-bhapalair
bana-bhaumadibhir yutah
yadinam kadanam cakre
bali magadha-sarsrayah
éri-sukah uvdaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; pralamba—by the
asura named Pralamba; baka —Dby the asura named Baka; canira—by
the asura named Canira; trnavarta—by the asura named Trnavarta;
mahasanaih—by Aghasura; mustika—by the asura named Mustika;
arista—by the asura Arista; dvivida—by the asura named Dvivida;
putana—by Patana; kesi—by Keéi; dhenukaih—by Dhenuka; anyaih
ca—and by many others; asura-bhipalaih—by demoniac kings on the
surface of the globe; bana—by King Bana; bhauma—by Bhaumasura;
adibhih—and by others as well; yutah—Dbeing assisted; yadinam—of
the kings of the Yadu dynasty; kadanam—persecution; cakre—
regularly performed; bali—very powerful; magadha-samsrayah—
under the protection of Jarasandha, the King of Magadha.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: Under the protection of Magadharaja,
Jarasandha, the powerful Karhsa began persecuting the kings of
the Yadu dynasty. In this he had the cooperation of demons like
Pralamba, Baka, Canira, Trnavarta, Aghasura, Mustika, Arista,
Dvivida, Patana, Kesi, Dhenuka, Banasura, Narakasura and many
other demoniac kings on the surface of the earth.
PURPORT
This verse supports the following statement given by the Lord in
Bhagavad-gita (4.7-8):


--- Page 124 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
100৫7707207 srjamy aham
paritranaya sadhiinarn
vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion —at that time I
descend Myself. To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as
well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millen-
nium after millennium.”

The Lord’s purpose in maintaining this material world is to give
everyone a chance to go back home, back to Godhead, but kings and
political leaders unfortunately try to hinder the purpose of the Lord, and
therefore the Lord appears, either personally or with His plenary por-
tions, to set things right. It is therefore said:

garbham saficarya rohinyarm
devakya yogamayaya
tasyah kuksirh gatah krsno
dvitiyo vibudhaih stutah
“Krsna appeared in the womb of Devaki after transferring Baladeva to
the womb of Rohini by the power of Yogamaya.” Yadubhih sa
vyarudhyata. The kings of the Yadu dynasty were all devotees, but there
were many powerful demons, such as Salva, who began to persecute
them. At that time, Jarasandha, who was Kamsa’s father-in-law, was ex-
tremely powerful, and therefore Kamsa took advantage of his protection
and the help of the demons in persecuting the kings of the Yadu dynasty.
The demons naturally appeared more powerful than the demigods, but
ultimately, because of help received from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the demons were defeated and the demigods triumphant.


--- Page 125 ---
Text 5] Prayers by the Demigods 121
TEXT 3
ते पीडिता MART: कुरुपश्चारकेकयान्‌ ।
o ~ - a
शाल्वान्‌ दिदर्मान्‌ निषधान्‌ विदेहान्‌ कोशलानपि 13 1
te pidita niviviSuh
kuru-paficala-kekayan
$alvan vidarbhan nisadhan
videhan kosalan api
te—they (the kings of the Yadu dynasty); piditah—being persecuted;
niviviSuh—took shelter or entered (the kingdoms); kuru-paficala—the
countries occupied by the Kurus and Paficalas; kekayan—the countries
of the Kekayas; Salvan—the countries occupied by the Silvas;
vidarbhan—the countries occupied by the Vidarbhas; nisadhan—the
countries occupied by the Nisadhas; videhan—the country of Videha;
kosalan api—as well as the countries occupied by the Kosalas.
TRANSLATION
Persecuted by the demoniac kings, the Yadavas left their own
kingdom and entered various others, like those of the Kurus,
Paiicalas, Kekayas, Salvas, Vidarbhas, Nisadhas, Videhas and
Koséalas.
TEXTS 4-5
एके तमनुरुन्धाना ज्ञातयः पयुपासते |
=
TAT RF बालेषु देवक्या ओंग्रसेनिना ॥ ४॥
EN A
aga वेष्णवं धाम॒ यमनन्तं प्रचक्षते ।
= ९
বাল बभूव देवक्या हर्षशोकविवर्धनः ॥ ५ ॥
eke tam anurundhana
JjAatayah paryupdsate
hatesu satsu balesu
devakya augrasenina


--- Page 126 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
saptamo vaisnavarn dhama
yam anantari pracaksate
garbho babhiiva devakya
harsa-Soka-vivardhanah
eke—some of them; tam—unto Kamsa; anurundhanah—exactly
following his policy; jidatayah—relatives; paryupdsate—began to agree
with him; hatesu—having been killed; satsu—six; balesu—
children; devakyah—born of Devaki; augrasenina—by the son of
Ugrasena (Karmsa); saptamah—the seventh; vaispavam—of Lord
Visnu; dhama—a plenary expansion; yam —unto whom; anantam —by
the name Ananta; pracaksate—is celebrated; garbhah—embryo;
babhitva —there was; devakyah—of Devaki; harsa-Soka-vivardhanah—
simultaneously arousing pleasure and lamentation.
TRANSLATION
Some of their relatives, however, began to follow Karhsa’s prin-
ciples and act in his service. After Karsa, the son of Ugrasena,
killed the six sons of Devaki, a plenary portion of Krsna entered
her womb as her seventh child, arousing her pleasure and her lam-
entation. That plenary portion is celebrated by great sages as
Ananta, who belongs to Krsna’s second quadruple expansion.
PURPORT
, Some of the chief devotees, such as Akrira, stayed with Kamsa to
satisfy him. This they did for various purposes. They all expected the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to appear as the eighth child as soon as
Devaki’s other children were killed by Karmsa, and they were eagerly
awaiting His appearance. By remaining in Karhsa’s association, they
would be able to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead take birth and
display His childhood pastimes, and Akrira would later go to Vrndavana
to bring Krsna and Balarama to Mathura. The word paryupadsate is sig-
nificant because it indicates that some devotees wanted to stay near
17188 in order to see all these pastimes of the Lord. The six children
killed by Karnsa had formerly been sons of Marici, but because of having
been cursed by a brahmana, they were obliged to take birth as grandsons


--- Page 127 ---
Text 6] Prayers by the Demigods 123
of Hiranyakasipu. Karnsa had taken birth as Kalanemi, and now he was
obliged to kill his own sons. This was a mystery. As soon as the sons of
Devaki were killed, they would return to their original place. The devo-
tees wanted to see this also. Generally speaking, no one kills his own
nephews, but Karsa was so cruel that he did so without hesitation.
Ananta, Sankarsana, belongs to the second catur-vyitha, or quadruple
expansion. This is the opinion of experienced commentators.
TEXT 6
भगवानपि विश्वात्मा विदित्वा कंसजं भयम्‌ |
9 4 ৬. ক
यदूनां निजनाथानां योगमायां समादिशत्‌ ng
bhagavan api visvatma
viditva karisajarn bhayam
yadundar nija-nathanam
yogamdyam samadisat

bhagavan —Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—
also; visvatma—who is the Supersoul of everyone; viditva—understand-
ing the position of the Yadus and His other devotees; karisa-jam—
because of Karisa; bhayam—fear; yadinam—of the Yadus; nija-
nathanam —who had accepted Him, the Supreme Lord, as their supreme
shelter; yogamayam—unto Yogamaya, the spiritual potency of Krsna;
samadisat—ordered as follows.

TRANSLATION

To protect the Yadus, His personal devotees, from Karhsa’s at-
tack, the Personality of Godhead, Viévatma, the Supreme Soul of
everyone, ordered Yogamaya as follows.

PURPORT

The words bhagavan api visvatma viditva karisajari bhayam are com-
mented upon by Srila Sanatana Gosvami. Bhagavan svayam is Krsna
(krsnas tu bhagavan svayam). He is Viévatma, the original Supersoul of
everyone, because his plenary portion expands as the Supersoul. This is


--- Page 128 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (13.3): ksetra-jiiarii capi marn viddhi sarva-
ksetresu bharata. Lord Krsna is the ksetra-jiia, or Supersoul, of all living
entities. He is the original source of all expansions of the Personality of
Godhead. There are hundreds and thousands of plenary expansions of
Visnu, such as Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Vasudeva, but
here in this material world, the Visvatma, the Supersoul for all living en-
tities, is Ksirodakasayi Visnu. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.61),
Svarah sarva-bhitanam hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati: “The Supreme Lord is
situated in the heart of all living entities, O Arjuna.” Krsna is actually
Viévatma by His plenary expansion as visnu-tattva, yet because of His
affection for His devotees, He acts as Supersoul to give them directions
(sarvasya cahariv hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtir jianam apohanar ca).

The affairs of the Supersoul pertain to Ksirodakaéayi Visnu, but Krsna
took compassion on Devaki, His devotee, because He understood her fear
of Karhsa’s persecution. A pure devotee is always fearful of material ex-
istence. No one knows what will happen next, for one may have to
change his body at any moment (tatha dehantara-praptih). Knowing this
fact, a pure devotee acts in such a way that he will not have his life
spoiled by being obliged to accept another body and undergo the
tribulations of material existence. This is bhayam, or fear. Bhayar
dvitiyabhinivesatah syat (Bhag. 11.2.37). This fear is due to material ex-
istence. Properly speaking, everyone should always be alert and fearful
of material existence, but although everyone is prone to be affected by
the ignorance of material existence, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Krsna, is always alert to the protection of His devotees. Krsna is so
kind and affectionate toward His devotees that He helps them by giving
them the intelligence by which to exist in this material world without
forgetting Him even for a moment. The Lord says:

: tesam evanukampartham
aham ajiianajari tamah
nasayamy atma-bhavastho
Jjiana-dipena bhasvata

“Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with
the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.”
(Bg. 10.11)


--- Page 129 ---
Text 7] Prayers by the Demigods 125
The word yoga means “link.” Any system of yoga is an attempt to
reconnect our broken relationship with the Supreme Personality of God-
head. There are different types of yoga, of which bhakti-yoga is the best.
In other yoga systems, one must undergo various processes before attain-
ing perfection, but bhakti-yoga is direct. The Lord says in Bhagavad-
gita (6.47):
yoginam api sarvesariv
mad-gatenantaratmanda
sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah
“Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping
Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in
yoga and is the highest of all.” For the bhakti-yogi, a human body is
guaranteed in his next existence, as stated by Lord Krsna (Sucinam
srimatam gehe yoga-bhrasto °bhijayate). Yogamaya is the spiritual po-
tency of the Lord. Out of affection for His devotees, the Lord always stays
in spiritual touch with them, although otherwise His maya potency is so
strong that she bewilders even exalted demigods like Brahma. Therefore
the Lord’s potency is called yogamaya. Since the Lord 15 Vi§vatma, He
immediately ordered Yogamaya to give protection to Devaki.
TEXT 7
गच्छ देवि व्रजं भद्र गोपगोभिरलङ्कतम्‌ |
रोहिणी वसुदेवस्य भार्यास्ते ननवो |
अन्याश्च कंससंविभ्ना विवरेषु वसन्ति हि ॥ ७॥
gaccha devi vrajarn bhadre
gopa-gobhir alarikrtam
rohini vasudevasya
bharyaste nanda-gokule
anyas ca karisa-samvigna
vivaresu vasanti hi
gaccha—now go; devi—O you who are worshipable for the whole
world; vrajam —to the land of Vraja; bhadre —O you who are auspicious


--- Page 130 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
for all living entities; gopa-gobhih—with cowherds and cows;
alarikrtam —decorated; rohini—by the name Rohini; vasudevasya—of
Vasudeva, Krsna’s father; bharya—one of the wives; aste—is living;
nanda-gokule—in the estate of Nanda Maharaja known as Gokula,
where hundreds and thousands of cows are maintained; anyah ca—and
other wives; karsa-sarivignah—being afraid of Karmsa; vivaresu —in
secluded places; vasanti—are living; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION

The Lord ordered Yogamaya: O My potency, who are worship-
able for the entire world and whose nature is to bestow good for-
tune upon all living entities, go to Vraja, where there live many
cowherd men and their wives. In that very beautiful land, where
many cows reside, Rohini, the wife of Vasudeva, is living at the
home of Nanda Maharaja. Other wives of Vasudeva are also living
there incognito because of fear of Karhsa. Please go there.

PURPORT

Nanda-gokula, the residence of King Nanda, was itself very beautiful,
and when Yogamiaya was ordered to go there and encourage the devotees
with fearlessness, it became even more beautiful and safe. Because
Yogamiyi had the ability to create such an atmosphere, the Lord ordered
her to go to Nanda-gokula.

TEXT 8
देवक्या जठरे गभं शेषाख्यं धाम मामकम्‌ |
तत्‌ संनिकृष्य रोहिण्या उदरे संनिवेशय ॥ ८ ॥
devakya jathare garbhari
Sesakhyarhn dhama mamakam
tat sannikrsya rohinya
udare sannivesaya

devakyah—of Devaki; jathare — within the womb; garbham—the

embryo; Sesa-akhyam —known as ৩০৪৪, the plenary expansion of Krsna;


--- Page 131 ---
Text 8] Prayers by the Demigods 127
dhama—the plenary expansion; mamakam—of Me; tat—Him; san-
nikrsya—attracting; rohinyah—of Rohini; udare—within the womb;
sannivesaya—transfer without difficulty.

TRANSLATION

Within the womb of Devaki is My partial plenary expansion
known as Sankarsana or Sesa. Without difficulty, transfer Him into
the womb of Rohini.

PURPORT

The first plenary expansion of Krsna is Baladeva, also known as Sesa.
The Sesa incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead supports
the entire universe, and the eternal mother of this incarnation is mother
Rohini. “Because 1 am going into the womb of Devaki,” the Lord told
Yogamaya, “the Sesa incarnation has already gone there and made suit-
able arrangements so that I may live there. Now He should enter the
womb of Rohini, His eternal mother.”

In this connection, one may ask how the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is always situated transcendentally, could enter the womb of
Devaki, which had previously been entered by the six asuras, the sad-
garbhas. Does this mean that the sad-garbhdsuras were equal to the
transcendental body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? The
following answer is given by Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura.

The entire creation, as well as its individual parts, is an expansion of
the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, even
though the Lord enters the material world, He does not do so. This is ex-
plained by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (9.4-5):

maya tatam idam sarvari
10800 avyakta-miirtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
na caham tesv avasthitah
na ca mat-sthani bhiatani
pasya me yogam aiSvaram


--- Page 132 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
bhita-bhrn na ca bhita-stho
mamatma bhita-bhavanah
“By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them. And yet everything that is cre-
ated does not rest in Me. Behold My mystic opulence! Although I am the
maintainer of all living entities, and although I am everywhere, My Self
is the very source of creation.”” Sarvari khalv 8007 brahma. Everything
is an expansion of Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet
everything is not the Supreme Godhead, and He is not everywhere.
Everything rests upon Him and yet does not rest upon Him. This can be
explained only through the acintya-bhedabheda philosophy. Such truths
cannot be understood, however, unless one is a pure devotee, for the
Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (18.55), bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas
casmi tattvatah: “One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is
only by devotional service.”” Even though the Lord cannot be understood
by ordinary persons, this principle should be understood from the
statement of the $astras.

A pure devotee is always transcendentally situated because of execut-
ing nine different processes of bhakti-yoga (Sravanar kirtanari visnoh
smaranar pada-sevenam/ arcanari vandanari ddsyar sakhyam atma-
nivedanam). Thus situated in devotional service, a devotee, although in
the material world, is not in the material world. Yet a devotee always
fears, ‘Because I am associated with the material world, so many con-
taminations affect me.” Therefore he is always alert in fear, which
gradually diminishes his material association.

Symbolically, mother Devaki’s constant fear of Karmsa was purifying
her. A pure devotee should always fear material association, and in this
way all the asuras of material association will be killed, as the sad-
garbhasuras were killed by 9170858. It is said that from the mind, Marici
appears. In other words, Marici is an incarnation of the mind. Marici has
six sons: Kama, Krodha, Lobha, Moha, Mada and Matsarya (lust, anger,
greed, illusion, madness and envy). The Supreme Personality of God-
head appears in pure devotional service. This is confirmed in the Vedas:
bhaktir evainarh darsayati. Only bhakti can bring one in contact with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
appeared from the womb of Devaki, and therefore Devaki symbolically


--- Page 133 ---
Text 9] Prayers by the Demigods 129
represents bhakti, and Karhsa symbolically represents material fear.
When a pure devotee always fears material association, his real position
of bhakti is manifested, and he naturally becomes uninterested in ma-
terial enjoyment. When the six sons of Marici are killed by such fear and
one is freed from material contamination, within the womb of bhakti the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appears. Thus the seventh pregnancy of
Devaki signifies the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
After the six sons Kama, Krodha, Lobha, Moha, Mada and Matsarya are
killed, the Sesa incarnation creates a suitable situation for the appearance
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, when one
awakens his natural Krsna consciousness, Lord Krsna appears. This is
the explanation given by Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura.
TEXT 9
अथाहमंशभागेन देवक्याः पुत्रतां হাল |
प्राप्स्यामि तवं यज्लोदायां नन्द पटन्यां भविष्यसि Nn
athaham arsa-bhagena
devakydah putratar Subhe
prapsyami ৮৫ yasodayarn
nanda-patnyar bhavisyasi

atha—therefore; aham—I; arsa-bhagena—by My plenary ex-
pansion; devakyah—of Devaki; putratam—the son; Subhe—O all-
auspicious Yogamaya; prapsyami—I shall become; tvam—you; yaso-
dayam—in the womb of mother Yadoda; nanda-patnyam—in the wife
of Maharaja Nanda; bhavisyasi—shall also appear.

TRANSLATION

© all-auspicious Yogamaya, I shall then appear with My full six
opulences as the son of Devaki, and you will appear as the
daughter of mother Yasoda, the queen of Maharaja Nanda.

PURPORT

The word aria-bhagena is important in this verse. In Bhagavad-gita

(10.42) the Lord says:


--- Page 134 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
athava bahunaitena
kim jiatena tavarjuna
vistabhyaham idam krtsnam
ekamsena sthito jagat
“But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.”
Everything is situated as a part of the Supreme Lord’s potency. In regard
to Lord Krsna’s appearance in the womb of Devaki, Brahma played a
part also because on the bank of the milk ocean he requested the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to appear. A part was also played by
Baladeva, the first expansion of Godhead. Similarly, Yogamaya, who ap-
peared as the daughter of mother Yasoda, also played a part. Thus jiva-
tattva, visnu-tattva and Sakti-tattva are all integrated with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and when Krsna appears, He appears with all
His integrated parts. As explained in previous verses, Yogamaya was re-
quested to attract Sankarsana, Baladeva, from the womb of Devaki to the
womb of Rohini, and this was a very heavy task for her. Yogamaya
naturally could not see how it was possible for her to attract Sankarsana.
Therefore Krsna addressed her as 5८61९, auspicious, and said, “Be
blessed. Take power from Me, and you will be able to do it.” By the grace
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, anyone can do anything, for the
Lord is present in everything, all things being His parts and parcels
(arsa-bhagena) and increasing or decreasing by His supreme will.
Balarama was only fifteen days older than Krsna. By the blessings of
Krsna, Yogamaya became the daughter of mother Yasoda, but by the
supreme will she was not able to enjoy the parental love of her father and
mother. Krsna, however, although not actually born from the womb of
mother Yadoda, enjoyed the parental love of mother Yadoda and Nanda.
By the blessings of Krsna, Yogamaya was able to achieve the reputation
of being the daughter of mother Yasoda, who also became famous by the
blessings of Krsna. Yadoda means “0116 who gives fame.”
TEXT 10
अ्चिष्यन्ति मनुष्यास्त्वां सवंकामवरेश्वरीम्‌ |
धूपोपहारबलिभिः सर्वकामवरप्रदाम्‌ ।१०॥।


--- Page 135 ---
Text 10] Prayers by the Demigods 131
arcisyanti manusyas tvari
sarva-kama-varesvarim
dhiapopahdra-balibhih
| sarva-kama-vara-pradam

arcisyanti—will worship; manusydh—human society; tvam—unto
you; sarva-kama-vara-isvarim —because you are the best of the
demigods who can fulfill all material desires; dhipa—by incense;
upahara—by presentations; balibhih—by different types of worship
through sacrifice; sarva-kdma—of all material desires; vara—the
blessings; pradam—one who can bestow.

TRANSLATION

By sacrifices of animals, ordinary human beings will worship
you gorgeously, with various paraphernalia, because you are
supreme in fulfilling the material desires of everyone.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.20), kamais tais tair hrta-jianah pra-
padyante ’nya-devatah: “Those whose minds are distorted by material
desires surrender unto demigods.” Therefore the word manusya, mean-
ing “human being,” here refers to one who does not know the actual goal
of life. Such a person wants to enjoy the material world by taking birth in
a highly elevated family with the benefits of education, beauty and im-
mense wealth, which in this material world are desirable. One who has
forgotten the real aim of life may worship goddess Durga, maya-sakti,
under various names, for different purposes, and in different places. As
there are many holy places for the worship of Krsna, there are also many
holy places in India for the worship of Durgadevi, or Mayadevi, who took
birth as the daughter of YaSoda. After cheating Karhsa, Mayadevi dis-
persed herself to various places, especially in Vindhyacala, to accept
regular worship from ordinary men. A human being should actually be
interested in understanding datma-tattva, the truth of atma, the spirit
soul, and Paramitma, the supreme soul. Those who are interested in
atma-tattva worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead (yasmin
vijiidte sarvam evar vijiidtam bhavati). However, as explained in the


--- Page 136 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
next verse of this chapter, those who cannot understand atma-tattva
(apasyatam atma-tattvam) worship Yogamaya in her different features.
Therefore Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.1.2) says:
Srotavyadini rajendra
nrnam santi sahasrasah
apasyatam atma-tattvam
grhesu grha-medhinam
“Those persons who are materially engrossed, being blind to the knowl-
edge of ultimate truth, have many subject matters for hearing in human
society, O Emperor.” Those who are interested in remaining in this ma-
terial world and are not interested in spiritual salvation have many
duties, but for one who is interested in spiritual salvation, the only duty
is to surrender fully unto Krsna (sarva-dharman parityajya mam eka
Saranari vraja). Such a person is not interested in material enjoyment.
TEXTS 11-12
©
नामधेयानि इवन्ति নানি च नरा वि ।
दुर्गेति भद्रकालीति विजया वैष्णवीति च ॥११॥
खुदा चण्डिका कृष्णा माधवी कन्यकेति च |
माया नारायणीशानी शारदेत्यम्बिकेति च ॥१२॥
namadheyani kurvanti
sthanani ca nara bhuvi
durgeti bhadrakaliti
vijayd vaisnaviti ca
kumuda candika krsna
madhavi kanyaketi ca
maya narayanisani
saradety ambiketi ca
namadheyani—different names; kurvanti—will give; sthanani—in
different places; ca—also; nardh —persons interested in material enjoy-


--- Page 137 ---
Text 12] Prayers by the Demigods 133
ment; bhuvi—on the surface of the globe; durga iti—the name Durga;
bhadrakali iti—the name Bhadrakali; vijayd—the name Vijaya;
vaisnavi iti—the name Vaisnavi; ca—also; kumuda—the name
Kumudia; candikd—the name Candika; krspa—the name Krsna;
madhavi—the name Madhavi; kanyaka iti—the name Kanyaka or
Kanya-kumari; ca —also; maya —the name Maya; narayani—the name
Narayani; i@ni—the name ভা], sarada—the name Sarada; iti—thus;
ambika—the name Ambika; iti—also; ca—and.
TRANSLATION

Lord Krsna blessed Mayadevi by saying: In different places on
the surface of the earth, people will give you different names, such
as Durga, Bhadrakali, Vijaya, Vaisnavi, Kumuda, Candika, Krsna,
Madhavi, Kanyaka, Maya, Narayani, Isani, Sarada and Ambika.

PURPORT

Because Krsna and His energy appeared simultaneously, people have
generally formed two groups —the $aktas and the Vaisnavas—and some-
times there is rivalry between them. Essentially, those who are interested
in material enjoyment are Saktas, and those interested in spiritual salva-
tion and attaining the spiritual kingdom are Vaisnavas. Because people
are generally interested in material enjoyment, they are interested in
worshiping Mayadevi, the energy of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Vaisnavas, however, are Suddha-saktas, or pure bhaktas, because
the Hare Krsna maha-mantra indicates worship of the Supreme Lord’s
energy, Hara. A Vaisnava prays to the energy of the Lord for the oppor-
tunity to serve the Lord along with His spiritual energy. Thus Vaisnavas
all worship such Deities as Radha-Krsna, Sita-Rama, Laksmi-Narayana
and Rukmini-Dvarakadhisa, whereas durga-saktas worship the material
energy under different names.

The names by which Mayadevi is known in different places have been
listed by Vallabhacarya as follows. In Varanasi she is known as Durga, in
Avanti she is known as Bhadrakali, in Orissa she is known as Vijaya, and
in Kulahapura she is known as Vaisnavi or Mahalaksmi. (The represen-
tatives of Mahalaksmi and Ambika are present in Bombay.) In the coun-
try known as Kamaripa she is known as Candika, in Northern India as


--- Page 138 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
Sarada, and in Cape Comorin as Kanyaka. Thus she is distributed accord-
ing to various names in various places.

Srila Vijayadhvaja Tirthapada, in his Pada-ratnavali-tika, has ex-
plained the meanings of the different representations. Maya is known as
Durga because she is approached with great difficulty, as Bhadra because
she is auspicious, and as Kali because she is deep blue. Because she is the
most powerful energy, she is known as Vijaya; because she is one of the
different energies of Visnu, she is known as Vaignavi; and because she
enjoys in this material world and gives facilities for material enjoyment,
she is known as Kumuda. Because she is very severe to her enemies, the
asuras, she is known as Candika, and because she gives all sorts of ma-
terial facilities, she is called Krsna. In this way the material energy is dif-
ferently named and situated in different places on the surface of the
globe.

TEXT 13
[NPR . . पि
गभेसंकषणात्‌ तं वै प्राहुः संकर्षणं थुवि |
= ५
रामेति रोकरमणाद्‌ बल मद्र बरोच्छयात्‌ ॥१२॥
garbha-sarikarsanat tam vai
prahuh sarikarsanam bhuvi
rameti loka-ramanad
balabhadrari balocchrayat
garbha-sarikarsanat—because He will be taken from the womb of
Devaki to that of Rohini; tam —Him (Rohini-nandana, the son of
Rohini); vai—indeed; prahuh—people will call; sarikarsanam—by the
name Sankarsana; bhuvi—in the world; rama iti—He will also be called
Rama; loka-ramanat—because of His special mercy in enabling people
in general to become devotees; balabhadram—He will also be called
Balabhadra; bala-ucchrayat—because of extensive bodily strength.
TRANSLATION

The son of Rohini will also be celebrated as Sankarsana because

of being sent from the womb of Devaki to the womb of Rohini. He


--- Page 139 ---
Text 14] Prayers by the Demigods 135
will be called Rama because of His ability to please all the inhabi-
tants of Gokula, and He will be known as Balabhadra because of
His extensive physical strength.
PURPORT
These are some of the reasons why Balarama is known as Sankarsana,
Balarama or sometimes Rama. In the maha-mantra—Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rima, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare—people sometimes object when Rama is accepted as
Balarama. But although devotees of Lord Rama may object, they should
know that there is no difference between Balarama and Lord Rama. Here
Srimad-Bhagavatam clearly states that Balarama is also known as Rama
(rameti). Therefore, it is not artificial for us to speak of Lord Balarama as
Lord Rama. Jayadeva Gosvami also speaks of three Ramas: Parasurama,
Raghupati Rama and Balarama. All of them are Ramas.
TEXT 14
3 + -
सन्दि्टेवं भगवता तथेत्योमिति JE ।
प्रतिगृह्य परिक्रम्य गां गता तत्‌ तथाकरोत्‌ ॥ ২৩
sandistaivarn bhagavata
tathety om iti tad-vacah
pratigrhya parikramya
gar gata tat tathakarot
sandista —having been ordered; evam—thus; bhagavata—by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; tatha iti—so be it; omi—affirmation by
the mantra ori; iti—thus; tat-vacah —His words; pratigrhya—accepting
the order; parikramya—after circumambulating Him; gam —to the sur-
face of the globe; gata—she immediately went; tat—the order, as given
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tatha—just so; akarot—
executed.
TRANSLATION
Thus instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Yogamaya immediately agreed. With the Vedic mantra orn, she


--- Page 140 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
confirmed that she would do what He asked. Thus having accepted
the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, she circumam-
bulated Him and started for the place on earth known as Nanda-
gokula. There she did everything just as she had been told.
PURPORT
After receiving the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Yogamaya twice confirmed her acceptance by saying, “Yes, sir, I shall do
as You order,” and then saying ori. $rila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura
comments that 0772 signifies Vedic confirmation. Thus Yogamaya very
faithfully received the Lord’s order as a Vedic injunction. It is a fact that
whatever is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is a Vedic in-
junction that no one should neglect. In Vedic injunctions there are no
mistakes, illusions, cheating or imperfection. Unless one understands the
authority of the Vedic version, there is no purpose in quoting $astra. No
one should violate the Vedic injunctions. Rather, one should strictly exe-
cute the orders given in the Vedas. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (16.24):
tasmac chastrarh pramanar te
karyakarya-vyavasthitau
JjAdatva sastra-vidhanoktari
karma kartum iharhasi
“One should understand what is duty and what is not duty by the regula-
tions of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should
act so that one may gradually be elevated.”
TEXT 15
-~ = $
गर्भे प्रणीते देवक्या रोदिणीं योगनिद्रया |
५ EN
अहो विखंसितो गमं इति पोरा REE: ॥१५५॥
garbhe pranite devakya
rohinim yoga-nidraya
aho visrarisito garbha
iti paurd vicukrusuh


--- Page 141 ---
Text 15] Prayers by the Demigods 137
garbhe—when the embryo; pranite—was carried from the womb;
devakyah—of Devaki; rohinim—to the womb of Rohini; yoga-
nidraya—by the spiritual energy called Yogamaya; aho—alas; visram-
sitah—is lost; garbhah—the embryo; iti—thus; paurah—all the
inhabitants of the house; vicukrusuh —lamented.
TRANSLATION

‘When the child of Devaki was attracted and transferred into the
womb of Rohini by Yogamaya, Devaki seemed to have a miscar-
riage. Thus all the inhabitants of the palace loudly lamented,
‘Alas, Devaki has lost her child!”

PURPORT

“All the inhabitants of the palace” includes Karmsa. When everyone
lamented, Karnsa joined in compassion, thinking that perhaps because of
drugs or some other external means, Devaki had undergone this abor-
tion. The real story of what happened after Yogamaya attracted the child
of Devaki into the womb of Rohini in the seventh month of Rohini’s
pregnancy is described as follows in the Hari-vamsa. At midnight, while
Rohini was deeply sleeping, she experienced, as if in a dream, that she
had undergone a miscarriage. After some time, when she awoke, she saw
that this had indeed happened, and she was in great anxiety. But
Yogamaya then informed her, “O auspicious lady, your child is now
being replaced. I am attracting a child from the womb of Devaki, and
therefore your child will be known as Sankarsana.”

The word yoga-nidra is significant. When one is spiritually recon-
nected through self-realization, one regards his material life as having
been like a dream. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.69):

ya nisa sarva-bhitanam
tasyar jagarti sarnyami
yasyam jagrati bhitani
sa 7750 pasyato muneh
“What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-
controlled; and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the


--- Page 142 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
introspective sage.” The stage of self-realization is called yoga-nidra. All
material activities appear to be a dream when one is spiritually
awakened. Thus yoga-nidra may be explained to be Yogamaya.
TEXT 16
भगवानपि विश्वात्मा भक्तानापमयङ््‌रः |
आविवेशांशभागेन मन आनकदुन्दुभेः ॥१६॥
bhagavan api visvatma
bhaktanam abhayarikarah
avivesamsa-bhagena
mana anakadundubheh

bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—also; vis-
vatma—the Supersoul of all living entities; bhaktanam—of His
devotees; abhayam-karah—always killing the causes of fear; avivesa—
entered; amsa-bhagena—with all of His potential opulences
(sad-aisvarya-purna); manah—in the mind; anakadundubheh—of
Vasudeva.

TRANSLATION

Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul
of all living entities and who vanquishes all the fear of His devo-
tees, entered the mind of Vasudeva in full opulence.

PURPORT

The word visvatma refers to one who is situated in everyone’s heart
(1৮070, sarva-bhatanam hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati). Another meaning of
visvatma is “‘the only lovable object for everyone.” Because of forgetful-
ness of this object, people are suffering in this material world, but if one
fortunately revives his old consciousness of loving Krsna and connects
with Viévatma, one becomes perfect. The Lord is described in the Third
Canto (3.2.15) as follows: paravareso mahad-amsa-yukto hy ajo pi jato
bhagavan. Although unborn, the Lord, the master of everything, ap-
pears like a born child by entering the mind of a devotee. The Lord is


--- Page 143 ---
Text 17] Prayers by the Demigods 139
already there within the mind, and consequently it is not astonishing for
Him to appear as if born from a devotees body. The word avivesa sig-
nifies that the Lord appeared within the mind of Vasudeva. There was no
need for a discharge of semen. That is the opinion of Sripada Sridhara
Svami and Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura. In the Vaisnava-
tosani, Srila Sanatana Gosvami says that consciousness was awakened
within the mind of Vasudeva. Srila Viraraghava Acirya also says that
Vasudeva was one of the demigods and that within his mind the Supreme
Personality of Godhead appeared as an awakening of consciousness.
TEXT 17
स बिभ्रत्‌ dred धाम भ्राजमानो यथा रविः |
-~ ৬
दुरासदोऽतिदुधर्षो भूतानां सम्बभूव ह ॥। १७॥
sa bibhrat paurusam dhama
bhrajamano yatha ravih
durasado ’tidurdharso
bhuatanam sambabhiiva ha

sah—he (Vasudeva); bibhrat—carried; paurusam—pertaining to the
Supreme Person; dhama—the spiritual effulgence; bhrajamanah—il-
luminating; yathd—as; ravih—the sunshine; durasadah—very difficult
even to look at, difficult to understand by sensory perception; ati-
durdharsah—approachable with great difficulty; bhitanam—of all liv-
ing entities; sambabhiiva—so he became; ha —positively.

TRANSLATION

‘While carrying the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
within the core of his heart, Vasudeva bore the Lord’s transcen-
dentally illuminating effulgence, and thus he became as bright as
the sun. He was therefore very difficult to see or approach through
sensory perception. Indeed, he was unapproachable and unper-
ceivable even for such formidable men as Karnsa, and not only for
Karnsa but for all living entities.


--- Page 144 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
PURPORT

The word dhama is significant. Dhama refers to the place where the
Supreme Personality of Godhead resides. In the beginning of Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.1.1) it is said, dhamna svena sada nirasta-kuhakar
satya param dhimahi. In the abode of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, there is no influence of material energy (dhamna svena
sada nirasta-kuhakam). Any place where the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is present by His name, form, qualities or paraphernalia im-
mediately becomes a dhama. For example, we speak of Vrndavana-
dhama, Dvaraka-dhama and Mathura-dhama because in these places the
name, fame, qualities and paraphernalia of the Supreme Godhead are al-
ways present. Similarly, if one is empowered by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead to do something, the core of his heart becomes a dhama, and
thus he becomes so extraordinarily powerful that not only his enemies
but also people in general are astonished to observe his activities. Be-
cause he is unapproachable, his enemies are simply struck with wonder,
as explained here by the words durdasado ’tidurdharsah.

The words paurusari dhama have been explained by various acaryas.
Sri Viraraghava Acirya says that these words refer to the effulgence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vijayadhvaja says that they signify
visnu-tejas, and Sukadeva says bhagavat-svaripa. The Vaisnava-tosani
says that these words indicate the influence of the Supreme Lord’s
effulgence, and Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that they signify
the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 18
ततो जगन्मङ्गलमच्युतांशं
समाहितं  शरसुतेन देवी ।
` दधार सर्वात्मकमात्मभूतं
काष्ठा यथानन्द कर मनस्तः; ।॥१८॥ ^
tato jagan-marnigalam acyutamsari
samahitamn Sira-sutena devi
dadhara sarvatmakam atma-bhiitam
kastha yathananda-karam manastah


--- Page 145 ---
Text 18] Prayers by the Demigods 141

tatah—thereafter; jagat-margalam—auspiciousness for all living en-
tities in all the universes of the creation; acyuta-amsam —the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is never bereft of the six opulences, all of
which are present in all His plenary expansions; samahitam—fully
transferred; Sira-sutena—by Vasudeva, the son of Sirasena; devi—
Devaki-devi; dadhara—carried; sarva-atmakam—the Supreme Soul of
everyone; datma-bhiitam—the cause of all causes; kastha—the east;
yatha—just as; ananda-karam—the blissful (moon); manastah—being
placed within the mind.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter, accompanied by plenary expansions, the fully opu-
lent Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is all-auspicious for the
entire universe, was transferred from the mind of Vasudeva to the
mind of Devaki. Devaki, having thus been initiated by Vasudeva,
became beautiful by carrying Lord Krsna, the original conscious-
ness for everyone, the cause of all causes, within the core of her
heart, just as the east becomes beautiful by carrying the rising
moon.

PURPORT

As indicated here by the word manastah, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead was transferred from the core of Vasudeva’s mind or heart to
the core of the heart of Devaki. We should note carefully that the Lord
was transferred to Devaki not by the ordinary way for a human being,
but by diksa, initiation. Thus the importance of initiation is mentioned
here. Unless one is initiated by the right person, who always carries
within his heart the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one cannot acquire
the power to carry the Supreme Godhead within the core of one’s own
heart.

The word acyutarsam is used because the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is sad-aisvarya-pirma, full in the opulences of wealth,
strength, fame, knowledge, beauty and renunciation. The Supreme God-
head is never separated from His personal opulences. As stated in the
Brahma-samhita (5.39), ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan: the
Lord is always situated with all His plenary expansions, such as Rama,
Nrsihha and Varaha. Therefore the word acyutarsam is specifically
used here, signifying that the Lord is always present with His plenary


--- Page 146 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
expansions and opulences. There is no need to think of the Lord ar-
tificially as yogis do. Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa paSyanti yar
yoginah (Bhag.12.13.1). Yogis meditate upon the Supreme Person
within the mind. For a devotee, however, the Lord is present, and His
presence need only be awakened through initiation by a bona fide spiri-
tual master. The Lord did not need to live within the womb of Devaki,
for His presence within the core of her heart was sufficient to carry Him.
One is here forbidden to think that Krsna was begotten by Vasudeva
within the womb of Devaki and that she carried the child within her
womb.

When Vasudeva was sustaining the form of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead within his heart, he appeared just like the glowing sun,
whose shining rays are always unbearable and scorching to the common
man. The form of the Lord situated in the pure, unalloyed heart of
Vasudeva is not different from the original form of Krsna. The ap-
pearance of the form of Krsna anywhere, and specifically within the
heart, is called dhama. Dhama refers not only to Krsna’s form, but to
His name, His form, His quality and His paraphernalia. Everything be-
comes manifest simultaneously.

Thus the eternal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with
full potencies was transferred from the mind of Vasudeva to the mind of
Devaki, exactly as the setting sun’s rays are transferred to the full moon
rising in the east.

Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, entered the body of
Devaki from the body of Vasudeva. He was beyond the conditions of the
ordinary living entity. When Krsna is there, it is to be understood that all
His plenary expansions, such as Narayana, and incarnations like Lord
Nrsimmha and Varaha, are with Him, and they are not subject to the con-
ditions of material existence. In this way, Devaki became the residence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is one without a second and
the cause of all creation. Devaki became the residence of the Absolute
Truth, but because she was within the house of Karsa, she looked just
like a suppressed fire, or like misused education. When fire is covered by
the walls of a pot or is kept in a jug, the illuminating rays of the fire can-
not be very much appreciated. Similarly, misused knowledge, which does
not benefit the people in general, is not very much appreciated. So
Devaki was kept within the prison walls of Karsa’s palace, and no one


--- Page 147 ---
Text 19] Prayers by the Demigods 143
could see her transcendental beauty, which resulted from her conceiving
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. চু
Commenting upon this verse, Sri Viraraghava Aciarya writes,
vasudeva-devaki-jatharayor hrdayayor bhagavatah sambandhah. The
Supreme Lord’s entrance into the womb of Devaki from the heart of
Vasudeva was a heart-to-heart relationship.
TEXT 19
©
सा देवकी सवेजगन्निवास-
निवासभूता नितरां न रेजे।
भोजेन्द्रेेऽभिशिखेव रुद्धा
सरस्वती ज्ञानखक्ते यथा सती ॥१९॥
sa devakt sarva-jagan-nivasa-
nivasa-bhiita nitaram na reje
bhojendra-gehe ‘gni-sikheva ruddha
sarasvati jiana-khale yatha sat
sa devaki—that Devakidevi; sarva-jagat-nivasa—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the sustainer of all the universes (mat-sthani
sarva-bhitani); nivasa-bhiita —the womb of Devaki has now become the
residence; nitaram—extensively; na—not; reje—became illuminated;
bhojendra-gehe —within the limits of the house of Karsa; agni-sikha
iva—like the flames of a fire; ruddha—covered; sarasvati—knowledge;
jAdna-khale—in a person known as jiana-khala, one who possesses
knowledge but cannot distribute it; yatha—or just as; sati—so being.
TRANSLATION
Devaki then kept within herself the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the cause of all causes, the foundation of the entire cos-
mos, but because she was under arrest in the house of Karihsa, she
was like the flames of a fire covered by the walls of a pot, or like a
person who has knowledge but cannot distribute it to the world
for the benefit of human society.


--- Page 148 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
PURPORT

In this verse the word jiiagna-khala is most significant. Knowledge is
meant for distribution. Although there is already much scientific knowl-
edge, whenever scientists or philosophers awaken to a particular type of
knowledge, they try to distribute it throughout the world, for otherwise
the knowledge gradually dries up and no one benefits from it. India has
the knowledge of Bhagavad-gita, but unfortunately, for some reason or
other, this sublime knowledge of the science of God was not distributed
throughout the world, although it is meant for all of human society.
Therefore Krsna Himself appeared as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and or-
dered all Indians to take up the cause of distributing the knowledge of
Bhagavad-gita throughout the entire world.

yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa
amara ajnaya guru hana tara’ ei desa

“Instruct everyone to follow the orders of Lord Sri Krsna as they are
given in Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. In this way be-
come a spiritual master and try to liberate everyone in this land.”
(Ce. Madhya 7.128) Although India has the sublime knowledge of
Bhagavad-gita, Indians have not done their proper duty of distributing
it. Now, therefore, the Krsna consciousness movement has been set up to
distribute this knowledge as it is, without distortion. Although pre-
viously there were attempts to distribute the knowledge of Bhagavad-
gita, these attempts involved distortion and compromise with mundane
knowledge. But now the Krsna consciousness movement, without mun-
dane compromises, is distributing Bhagavad-gita as it is, and people are
deriving the benefits of awakening to Krsna consciousness and becoming
devotees of Lord Krsna. Therefore the proper distribution of knowledge
has begun by which not only will the whole world benefit, but India’s
glory will be magnified in human society. Karnsa tried to arrest Krsna
consciousness within his house (bhojendra-gehe), with the result that
Karmsa, with all his opulences, was later vanquished. Similarly, the real
knowledge of Bhagavad-gita was being choked by unscrupulous Indian
leaders, with the result that India’s culture, and knowledge of the
Supreme were being lost. Now, however, because Krsna consciousness is
spreading, the proper use of Bhagavad-gita is being attempted.


--- Page 149 ---
Text 20] Prayers by the Demigods 145
TEXT 20
at fr कंसः प्रभयाजितान्तरां
- ठ ५
विरोचयन्तीं भवनं श्चिसिताम्‌ |
¢ +
আইদ मे प्राणहरो Rue
भुवं चितो মল पुरेयमीदशी ॥२०॥
tam viksya karmmsah prabhaydajitantaram
virocayantim bhavanari Suci-smitam
ahaisa me prana-haro harir guham
dhruvari $rito yan na pureyam idrsi
tam—her (Devaki); viksya—after seeing; kariisah—her brother
Kamsa; prabhaya—with the enhancement of her beauty and influence;
ajita-antaram —because of keeping Ajita, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Visnu, within herself; virocayantim—illuminating; bhava-
nam—the whole atmosphere of the house; sSuci-smitam —smiling and
brilliant; @ha—said to himself; esah—this (Supreme Person); me—my;
prana-harah—who will kill me; harih—Lord Visnu; guham —within
the womb of Devaki; dhruvam—certainly; sritah—has taken shelter;
yat—because; na—was not; pura—formerly; iyam—Devaki; idrsi—
like this.
TRANSLATION
Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead was within her
womb, Devaki illuminated the entire atmosphere in the place
where she was confined. Seeing her jubilant, pure and smiling,
Kamsa thought, “The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu,
who is now within her, will kill me. Devaki has never before
looked so brilliant and jubilant.”
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata


--- Page 150 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanam srjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
descend Myself.” In this age, at the present moment, there are inordinate
discrepancies in the discharge of human duties. Human life is meant for
God realization, but unfortunately the materialistic civilization is stress-
ing only the senses of the body, not understanding the living force within
the body. As clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita (dehino ’smin yatha dehe),
within the body is the body’s proprietor, the living force, which is more
important. But human society has become so fallen that instead of under-
standing the living force within the body, people have become busy with
external things. This is a discrepancy in human duties. Therefore Krsna
has taken birth or taken shelter within the womb of the Krsna conscious-
ness movement. Men of Karnsa’s class, therefore, are very much afraid
and are busy trying to stop this movement, especially in the Western
countries. One politician has remarked that the Krsna consciousness
movement is spreading like an epidemic and that if not checked im-
mediately, within ten years it may capture governmental power. There
is, of course, such potency in the Krsna consciousness movement. As
stated by authorities (Cc. Adi 17.22), kali-kale nama-rupe krsna-
avatara: in this age, Krsna has appeared in the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra. The Krsna consciousness movement is spreading like wildfire all
over the world, and it will go on doing so. Men who are like Karhsa are
very much afraid of the movements progress and acceptance by the
younger generation, but as Krsna could not be killed by Karnsa, this
movement cannot be checked by men of Karisa’s class. The movement
will go on increasing more and more, provided the leaders of the move-
ment remain firmly Krsna conscious by following the regulative prin-
ciples and the primary activities of chanting the Hare Krsna mantra
regularly.
TEXT 21
किमद्य तसिन्‌ Fim मे
Tete न विहन्ति विक्रमम्‌ ।


--- Page 151 ---
Text 21] Prayers by the Demigods 147
fom: खसुणुरुमत्या वधोऽयं ।
यञ्चः भियं हन्त्यनुकालमायुः ॥२१॥
kim adya tasmin karaniyam asu me
yad artha-tantro na vihanti vikramam
striyah svasur gurumatya vadho ‘yar
yasah sriyamn hanty anukalam ayuh

kim—what; adya—now, immediately; tasmin—in this situation;
karantyam —is to be done; asu—without delay; me —my duty; yat—be-
cause; artha-tantrah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is al-
ways determined to protect the sadhus and kill the asadhus; na—does
not; vihanti—give up; vikramam—His prowess; striyah—of a woman;
svasuh—of my sister; guru-matyah—especially when she is pregnant;
vadhah ayam—the killing; yasah—fame; sriyam—opulence; hanti—
will vanquish; anukalam—forever; ayuh—and the duration of life.

TRANSLATION

Kariisa thought: What is my duty now? The Supreme Lord, who
knows His purpose [paritranaya sadhiinarh vinasaya ca duskrtam],
will not give up His prowess. Devaki is a woman, she is my sister,
and moreover she is now pregnant. If I kill her, my reputation,
opulence and duration of life will certainly be vanquished.

PURPORT

According to Vedic principles, a woman, a brahmana, an old man, a
child and a cow should never be killed. It appears that 37188, although a
great enemy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was aware of the
Vedic culture and conscious of the fact that the soul transmigrates from
one body to another and that one suffers in the next life according to the
karmas of this life. Therefore he was afraid of killing Devaki, since she
was a woman, she was his sister, and she was pregnant. A ksatriya be-
comes famous by performing heroic acts. But what would be heroic about
killing a woman who, while confined in his custody, was under his
shelter? Therefore, he did not want to act drastically by killing Devaki.
13708818 enemy was within Devaki’s womb, but killing an enemy in such


--- Page 152 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
a nescient state would not be an exhibition of prowess. According to
ksatriya rules, an enemy should be fought face to face and with proper
weapons. Then if the enemy is killed, the victor becomes famous. Karnsa
very conscientiously deliberated upon these facts and therefore refrained
from killing Devaki, although he was completely confident that his
enemy had already appeared within her womb.
TEXT 22
स॒ एष जीवन्‌ অন্ত सम्परेतो
- +
वर्तेत योऽत्यन्त्शंसितेन |
देहे ते तं wg शपन्ति
- = -
गन्ता तमोऽन्धं TFA धुवम्‌ ॥२२॥
sa esa jan khalu sampareto
varteta yo ’tyanta-nrsamsitena
dehe mrte tah manujah Sapanti
ganta tamo 'ndhar tanu-manino dhruvam
sah—he; esah—that jealous person; jivan—while living; khalu—
even; samparetah—is dead; varteta—continues to live; yah—anyone
who; atyanta—very much; nrsamsitena—by executing cruel activities;
dehe—when the body; mrte—is finished; tam—him; manujah—all
human beings; Sapanti—condemn; ganta—he will go; tamah an-
dham—to hellish life; tanu-maninah—of a person in the bodily con-
cept of life; dhruvam—without a doubt.
TRANSLATION
A person who is very cruel is regarded as dead even while living,
for while he is living or after his death, everyone condemns him.
And after the death of a person in the bodily concept of life, he is
undoubtedly transferred to the hell known as Andhatama.
PURPORT
Karisa considered that if he killed his sister, while living he would be
condemned by everyone, and after death he would go to the darkest


--- Page 153 ---
Text 22] Prayers by the Demigods 149
region of hellish life because of his cruelty. It is said that a cruel person ^
like a butcher is advised not to live and not to die. While living, a cruel
person creates a hellish condition for his next birth, and therefore he
should not live; but he is also advised not to die, because after death he
must go to the darkest region of hell. Thus in either circumstance he is
condemned. 1497188, therefore, having good sense about the science of
the soul’s transmigration, deliberately refrained from killing Devaki.

In this verse the words ganta tamo ‘ndham tanu-manino dhruvam are
very important and require extensive understanding. Srila Jiva Gosvami,
in his Vaisnava-tosani-tika, says: tatra tanu-maninah pdapina iti
dehatma-buddhyaiva papabhiniveso bhavati. One who lives in the
bodily concept, thinking, “I am this body,” involves himself, by the very
nature of this conception, in a life of sinful activities. Anyone living in
such a conception is to be considered a candidate for hell.

adanta-gobhir visatar tamisrari
punah punas carvita-carvananam
(Bhag. 7.5.30)
One who is in a bodily concept of life has no control over sense gratifica-
tion. Such a person can do anything sinful to eat, drink, be merry and
enjoy a life of sense gratification, not knowing of the soul’s transmigra-
tion from one body to another. Such a person does whatever he likes,
whatever he imagines, and therefore, being subject to the laws of nature,
he suffers miserably again and again in different material bodies.
yavat kriydas tavad idarh mano vai
karmatmakari yena Sarira-bandhah
(Bhag. 5.5.5)
In the bodily concept of life, a person is karmanubandha, or conditioned
by karma, and as long as the mind is absorbed in karma, one must accept
a material body. Sarira-bandha, bondage to the material body, is a source
of misery (klesa-da).
na sadhu manye yata atmano yam
asann api klesada asa dehah


--- Page 154 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
Although the body is temporary, it always gives one trouble in many
ways, but human civilization is now unfortunately based on tanu-mant,
the bodily concept of life, by which one thinks, “I belong to this nation,”
“I belong to this group,” “I belong to that group,” and so on. Each of us
has his own ideas, and we are becoming increasingly involved, in-
dividually, socially, communally and nationally, in the complexities of
karmanubandha, sinful activities. For the maintenance of the body, men
are killing so many other bodies and becoming implicated in kar-
manubandha. Therefore Srila Jiva Gosvami says that tanu-mani,
those in the bodily concept of life, are papi, sinful persons. For such sin-
ful persons, the ultimate destination is the darkest region of hellish life
(ganta tamo ’ndham). In particular, a person who wants to maintain his
body by killing animals is most sinful and cannot understand the value
of spiritual life. In Bhagavad-gita (16.19-20) the Lord says:
tan aham dvisatah kriran
samsaresu naradhaman
ksipamy ajasram asubhan
asurisv eva yonisu
asurim yonim apanna
madha janmani janmani
mam aprapyaiva kaunteya
tato yanty adhamari gatim
“Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among
men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various
demoniac species of life. Attaining repeated birth among the species of
demoniac life, such persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink
down to the most abominable type of existence.” A human being is
meant to understand the value of human life, which is a boon obtained
after many, many births. Therefore one must free oneself from tanu-
mani, the bodily concept of life, and realize the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 23
इति घोरतमाद्‌ भावात्‌ सनिशृतः অয সন্ত; ।
आस्ते AERA हरेर्ेरायुबन्धङ़ृत्‌ ॥२३॥


--- Page 155 ---
Text 24] Prayers by the Demigods 151
iti ghoratamad bhavat
sannivrttah svayam prabhuh
aste pratiksaris taj-janma
harer vairanubandha-krt
iti—thus (thinking in the above-mentioned way); ghora-tamat
bhavat—from the most ghastly contemplation of how to kill his sister;
sannivrttah—refrained; svayam—personally deliberating; prabhuh—
one who was in full knowledge (Karnsa); dste—remained; pratiksan—
awaiting the moment; tat-janma—until the birth of Him; hareh—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari; vaira-anubandha-krt—
determined to continue such enmity.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: Deliberating in this way, Karhsa, al-
though determined to continue in enmity toward the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, refrained from the vicious killing of his
sister. He decided to wait until the Lord was born and then do what
was needed.
TEXT 24
आसीनः संविशंस्तिष्ठन्‌ স্তুললানঃ we महीम्‌ ।
चिन्तयानो हषीकेशमपर्यत्‌ तन्मयं जगत्‌ ।॥२४॥
asinah samvisams tisthan
bhurjanah paryatan mahim
cintayano hrsikesam
apasyat tanmayam jagat
asinah—while sitting comfortably in his sitting room or on the
throne; sarvisan—or lying on his bed; tisthan—or staying anywhere;
bhunjanah—while eating; paryatan—while walking or moving;
mahim—on the ground, going hither and thither; cintayanah—always
inimically thinking of; hrsikeSam—the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the controller of everything; apasyat—observed; tat-mayam—
consisting of Him (Krsna), and nothing more; jagat—the entire world.


--- Page 156 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
TRANSLATION

While sitting on his throne or in his sitting room, while lying on
his bed, or, indeed, while situated anywhere, and while eating,
sleeping or walking, Karisa saw only his enemy, the Supreme
Lord, Hrsikesa. In other words, by thinking of his all-pervading
enemy, 1९87088 became unfavorably Krsna conscious.

PURPORT

Srila Rapa Gosvami has described the finest pattern of devotional ser-
vice as anukiilyena krsnanusilanam, or cultivating Krsna consciousness
favorably. Karhsa, of course, was also Krsna conscious, but because he
regarded Krsna as his enemy, even though he was fully absorbed in
Krsna consciousness, his Krsna consciousness was not favorable for his
existence. Krsna consciousness, favorably cultivated, makes one com-
pletely happy, so much so that a Krsna conscious person does not con-
sider kaivalya-sukham, or merging into the existence of Krsna, to be a
great gain. Kaivalyari narakayate. For a Krsna conscious person, even
merging into the existence of Krsna, or Brahman, as impersonalists
aspire to do, is uncomfortable. Kaivalyam narakayate tridasa-pir
akasa-puspayate. Karmis hanker to be promoted to the heavenly planets,
but a Krsna conscious person considers such promotion a will-o’-the-
wisp, good for nothing. Durdantendriya-kala-sarpa-patali protkhata-
damstrayate. Yogis try to control their senses and thus become happy,
but a Krsna conscious person neglects the methods of yoga. He is uncon-
cerned with the greatest of enemies, the senses, which are compared to
snakes. For a Krsna conscious person who is cultivating Krsna conscious-
ness favorably, the happiness conceived by the karmis, jiianis and yogis
is treated as less than a fig. Karhsa, however, because of cultivating
Krsna consciousness in a different way—that is, inimically—was
uncomfortable in all the affairs of his life; whether sitting, sleeping,
walking or eating, he was always in danger. This is the difference be-
tween a devotee and a nondevotee. A nondevotee or atheist also cultivates
God consciousness— by trying to avoid God in everything. For example,
so-called scientists who want to create life by a combination of chemicals
regard the external, material elements as supreme. Such scientists do not
like the idea that life is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. As clearly


--- Page 157 ---
Text 25] Prayers by the Demigods 153
stated in Bhagavad-gita (mamaivamso Jjiva-loke jiva-bhitah), the living
entities do not arise from a combination of material elements, such as
earth, water, air and fire, but are separated portions of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. If one can understand the position of the living en-
tity as a separated portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by
studying the nature of the living entity one can understand the nature of
the Supreme Godhead, since the living entity is a fragmental sample of
the Godhead. But because atheists are not interested in God conscious-
ness, they try to be happy by cultivating Krsna consciousness in various
unfavorable ways.

Although 97189 was always absorbed in thoughts of Hari, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was not happy. A devotee, however,
whether sitting on a throne or beneath a tree, is always happy. Srila Rapa
Gosvami resigned from office as a government minister to sit beneath a
tree, yet he was happy. Tyaktva tirnam asesa-mandalapati-srenim sada
tucchavat (Sad-gosvamy-astaka 4). He did not care for his comfortable
position as minister; he was happy even beneath a tree in Vrndavana,
favorably serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the dif-
ference between a devotee and a nondevotee. For a nondevotee, the
world is full of problems, whereas for a devotee the entire world is full of
happiness.

visvari purna-sukhayate vidhi-mahendradis ca kitayate
yat-karunya-kataksa-vaibhavavatdm tari gauram eva stumah
(Caitanya-candramrta 95)
This comfortable position of a devotee can be established by the mercy of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Yasmin sthito na duhkhena gurunapi
vicalyate (Bg. 6.22). Even when a devotee is superficially put into great
difficulty, he is never disturbed.
TEXT 25
ब्रह्मा भवश्च तत्रैत्य স্বনিসিনাহোহিদিঃ ।
देवैः सानुः साकं ॒गीर्िैषणमडयन्‌ ।२५॥


--- Page 158 ---
154 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
brahma bhavas ca tatraitya
munibhir naradadibhih
devaih sanucaraih sakam
girbhir vrsanam aidayan
„ brahma—the supreme four-headed demigod; bhavah ca—and Lord
Siva; tatra—there; etya—arriving; munibhih—accompanied by great
sages; narada-adibhih—by Narada and others; devaih—and by
demigods like Indra, Candra and Varuna; sa-anucaraih—with their
followers; sakam—all together; girbhih—by their transcendental
prayers; vrsanam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can
bestow blessings upon everyone; aidayan—pleased.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, accompanied by great sages like
Narada, Devala and Vyasa and by other demigods like Indra,
Candra and Varuna, invisibly approached the room of Devaki,
where they all joined in offering their respectful obeisances and
prayers to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can
bestow blessings upon everyone.
PURPORT
Dvau bhita-sargau loke ’smin daiva asura eva ca (Padma Purana).
There are two classes of men —the daivas and the asuras— and there is a
great difference between them. Kamsa, being an asura, was always plan-
ning how to kill the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His mother,
Devaki. Thus he was also Krsna conscious. But devotees are Krsna con-
scious favorably (visnu-bhaktah smrto daivah). Brahma is so powerful
that he is in charge of creating an entire universe, yet he personally came
to receive the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhava, Lord Siva, is al-
ways jubilant in chanting the holy name of the Lord. And what to speak
of Narada? Narada-muni, bajaya vina, radhika-ramana-name. Narada
Muni is always chanting the glories of the Lord, and his engagement is to
travel all over the universe and find a devotee or make someone a devo-
tee. Even a hunter was made a devotee by the grace of Narada. Srila
Sanatana Gosvami, in his Tosani, says that the word narada-adibhih


--- Page 159 ---
Text 26] Prayers by the Demigods 155
means that Narada and the demigods were accompanied by other saintly
persons, like Sanaka and Sanatana, all of whom came to congratulate or
welcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even though Karmsa was
planning to kill Devaki, he too awaited the arrival of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead (pratiksams taj-janma).
TEXT 26
सत्यत्रतं सत्यपरं त्रिसत्यं
सत्यस्य योनिं निहितं च सत्ये |
.
सत्यस्य सत्यग्रतसत्यनेतर
सत्यात्मकं त्वां शरण प्रपन्नाः {RE
satya-vratam satya-param tri-satyam
satyasya yoni nihitari ca satye
satyasya satyam rta-satya-netram
satyatmakar tvarm Saranam prapanndah
satya-vratam—the Personality of Godhead, who never deviates from
His vow;* satya-param—who is the Absolute Truth (as stated in the
beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam, satyari param dhimahi); tri-
satyam—He is always present as the Absolute Truth, before the creation
of this cosmic manifestation, during its maintenance, and even after its
annihilation; satyasya—of all relative truths, which are emanations
from the Absolute Truth, Krsna; yonim—the cause; nihitam—en-
tered;t ca—and; satye—in the factors that create this material world
(namely, the five elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether);
satyasya—of all that is accepted as the truth; satyam—the Lord is the
original truth; rta-satya-netram—He is the origin of whatever truth is
pleasing (sunetram); satya-atmakam—everything pertaining to the
Lord is truth (sac-cid-ananda: His body is truth, His knowledge is truth,
*The Lord vows: yada yada hi dharmasya glanir bhavati bharata/ abhyutthanam
adharmasya tadatmanarh srjamy aham (Bg. 7. To honor this vow, the Lord appeared.
1The Lord enters everything, even the atom: andantara-stha-paramanu-caydantara-
stham (Brahma-sarhita 5.445, Therefore He is called antaryami, the inner force.


--- Page 160 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
and His pleasure is truth); tvam —unto You, O Lord; saranam —offering
our full surrender; prapannah—we are completely under Your
protection.
TRANSLATION

The demigods prayed: O Lord, You never deviate from Your
vow, which is always perfect because whatever You decide is per-
fectly correct and cannot be stopped by anyone. Being present in
the three phases of cosmic manifestation — creation, maintenance
and annihilation — You are the Supreme Truth. Indeed, unless one
is completely truthful, one cannot achieve Your favor, which
therefore cannot be achieved by hypocrites. You are the active
principle, the real truth, in all the ingredients of creation, and
therefore you are known as antaryami, the inner force. You are
equal to everyone, and Your instructions apply for everyone, for
all time. You are the beginning of all truth. Therefore, offering
our obeisances, we surrender unto You. Kindly give us protection.

PURPORT

The demigods or devotees know perfectly well that the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is the true substance, whether within this material
world or in the spiritual world. Srimad-Bhagavatam begins, therefore,
with the words om namo bhagavate vasudevaya...satyarh param
dhimahi. Vasudeva, Krsna, is the param satyam, the Supreme Truth.
The Supreme Truth can be approached or understood by the supreme
method, as declared by the Supreme Truth: bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah (Bg. 18.55). Bhakti, devotional service, is the
only way to understand the Absolute Truth. For protection, therefore,
the demigods surrender to the Supreme Truth, not to the relative truth.
There are persons who worship various demigods, but the Supreme
Truth, Krsna, declares in Bhagavad-gita (7.23), antavat tu phalam
tesa tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam: “Men of small intelligence worship
the demigods, and their fruits are limited and temporary.” Worship of
demigods may be useful for a limited time, but the result is antavat,
perishable. This material world is impermanent, the demigods are im-
permanent, and the benedictions derived from the demigods are also im-
permanent, whereas the living entity is eternal (nityo nityanam cetanas


--- Page 161 ---
Text 26] Prayers by the Demigods 157
cetananam). Every living entity, therefore, must search for eternal hap-
piness, not temporary happiness. The words satya param dhimahi in-
dicate that one should search for the Absolute Truth, not the relative
truth.

While offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Nrsimhadeva, Prahlada Maharaja said:

balasya neha saranam pitarau nrsimha
nartasya cagadam udanvati majjato nauh
Generally it is understood that the protectors for a child are his parents,
but this is not actually the fact. The real protector is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihanjasestas
tavad vibho tanu-bhrtam tvad-upeksitanam
(Bhag. 7.9.19)

If neglected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a child, despite the
presence of his parents, will suffer, and a diseased person, despite all
medical help, will die. In this material world, where there is a struggle
for existence, men have invented many means for protection, but these
are useless if the Supreme Personality of Godhead rejects them.
Therefore the demigods purposefully say, satyatmakari tvari saranam
prapannah: “Real protection can be obtained from You, O Lord, and
therefore we surrender unto You.”

The Lord demands that one surrender unto Him (sarva-dharman
parityajya mam 61979 Saranar vraja), and He further says:

sakrd eva prapanno yas
tavasmiti ca ydacate
abhayarh sarvada tasmai
dadamy etad vratarh mama

“If one surrenders unto Me sincerely, saying, ‘My Lord, from this day I
am fully surrendered unto You,’ I always give him protection. That is My
vow.” (Ramayana, Yuddha-kanda 18.33) The demigods offered their


--- Page 162 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He had now ap-
peared in the womb of His devotee Devaki to protect all the devotees
harassed by Karhsa and his lieutenants. Thus the Lord acts as satya-
vrata. The protection given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead can-
not be compared to the protection given by the demigods. It is said that
Ravana was a great devotee of Lord Siva, but when Lord Ramacandra
went to kill him, Lord Siva could not give him protection.

Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, accompanied by great sages like Narada
and followed by many other demigods, had now invisibly appeared in the
house of Karhsa. They began to pray for the Supreme Personality of God-
head in select prayers which are very pleasing to the devotees and which
award fulfillment of devotional desires. The first words they spoke ac-
claimed that the Lord is true to His vow. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita,
Krsna descends upon this material world just to protect the pious and
destroy the impious. That is His vow. The demigods could understand
that the Lord had taken His residence within the womb of Devaki to
fulfill this vow. They were very glad that the Lord was appearing to
fulfill His mission, and they addressed Him as satyari param, or the
Supreme Absolute Truth.

Everyone is searching after the truth. That is the philosophical way of
life. The demigods give information that the Supreme Absolute Truth is
Krsna. One who becomes fully Krsna conscious can attain the Absolute
Truth. Krsna is the Absolute Truth. Relative truth is not truth in all the
three phases of eternal time. Time is divided into past, present and
future. Krsna is Truth always, past, present and future. In the material
world, everything is being controlled by supreme time, in the course of
past, present and future. But before the creation, Krsna was existing,
and when there is creation, everything is resting in Krsna, and when this
creation is finished, Krsna will remain. Therefore, He is Absolute Truth
in all circumstances. If there is any truth within this material world, it
emanates from the Supreme Truth, Krsna. If there is any opulence
within this material world, the cause of the opulence is Krsna. If there is
any reputation within this material world, the cause of the reputation is
Krsna. If there is any strength within this material world, the cause of
such strength is Krsna. If there is any wisdom and education within this
material world, the cause of such wisdom and education is Krsna.
Therefore Krsna is the source of all relative truths.


--- Page 163 ---
Text 26] Prayers by the Demigods 159

Devotees, therefore, following in the footsteps of Lord Brahma, pray,
govindam adi-purusam tam ahariv bhajami, worshiping the adi-purusa,
the supreme truth, Govinda. Everything, everywhere, is performed in
terms of three principles, jiana-bala-kriya—knowledge, strength and
activity. In every field, if there is not full knowledge, full strength and
full activity, an endeavor is never successful. Therefore, if one wants
success in everything, one must be backed by these three principles. In
the Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8) there is this statement about the
Supreme Personality of Godhead:

na tasya karyar karanam ca vidyate
na tat samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate
parasya Saktir vividhaiva Sriyate
svabhaviki jaiana-bala-kriya ca
The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not need to do anything per-
sonally, for He has such potencies that anything He wants done will be
done perfectly well through the control of material nature (svabhaviki
jiiana-bala-kriya ca). Similarly, those who are engaged in the service of
the Lord are not meant to struggle for existence. The devotees who are
fully engaged in spreading the Krsna consciousness movement, more
than ten thousand men and women all over the world, have no steady or
permanent occupation, yet we actually see that they are maintained very
opulently. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.22):
ananyds cintayanto mam
ye janah paryupasate
tesa nityabhiyuktanarm
yoga-ksemarm vahamy aham

“For those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcen-
dental form, I carry to them what they lack and preserve what they
have.” The devotees have no anxiety over what will happen next, where
they will stay or what they will eat, for everything is maintained and
supplied by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has promised,
kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati: “O son of Kunti,


--- Page 164 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.” (Bg. 9.31) From all
angles of vision, therefore, in all circumstances, if one fully surrenders
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no question of one’s
struggling for existence. In this connection, the commentary by Sri-
pada Madhvacarya, who quotes from the Tantra-bhagavata, is very
meaningful:
sac-chadba uttamar 070৫0
anandantiti vai vadet
yetijidnarn samuddistari
purnananda-drsis tatah
attrtvac ca tada danat
satyattya cocyate vibhuh

Explaining the words satyasya yonim, Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti
Thakura says that Krsna is the avatari, the origin of all incarnations. All
incarnations are the Absolute Truth, yet the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Krsna is the origin of all incarnations. Diparcir eva hi dasan-
taram abhyupetya dipayate (Brahma-sarhita 5.46). There may be
many lamps, all equal in power, yet there is a first lamp, a second lamp, a
third lamp and so on. Similarly, there are many incarnations, who are
compared to lamps, but the first lamp, the original Personality of God-
head, is Krsna. Govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami.

The demigods must offer worship in obedience to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, but one might argue that since the Supreme God-
head was within the womb of Devaki, He was also coming in a material
body. Why then should He be worshiped? Why should one make a dis-
tinction between an ordinary living entity and the Supreme Personality
of Godhead? These questions are answered in the following verses.

TEXT 27
एकायनोऽसौ द्विफटचखिमूल-
अतूरसः पञ्चविधः षडात्मा ।


--- Page 165 ---
Text 27] Prayers by the Demigods 161
सप्षत्वगष्टविरपो नवाक्षो
दशच्छदी द्विखगो द्यादिदरक्षः uel
ekayano ’sau dvi-phalas tri-milas
cati-rasah pafica-vidhah sad-atma
sapta-tvag asta-vitapo 71002450
dasa-cchadi dvi-khago hy adi-vrksah
eka-ayanah—the body of an ordinary living being is fully dependent
on the material elements; asau—that; dvi-phalah—in this body we are
subject to material happiness and distress, which result from karma; tri-
milah—having three roots, the three modes of nature (goodness, pas-
sion and ignorance), upon which the body is created; catuh-rasah—four
rasas, or tastes;* parica-vidhah—consisting of five senses for acquiring
knowledge (the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch); sat-atma—six
circumstances (lamentation, illusion, old age, death, hunger and thirst);
sapta-tvak—having seven coverings (skin, blood, muscle, fat, bone,
marrow and semen); asta-vitapah—eight branches (the five gross ele-
ments—earth, water, fire, air and ether —and also the mind, intelligence
and ego); nava-aksah—nine holes; dasa-chqdi—ten kinds of life air,
resembling the leaves of a tree; dvi-khagah—two birds (the individual
soul and the Supersoul); hi—indeed; adi-vrksah—this is the orig-
inal tree or construction of the material body, whether individual or
universal.
TRANSLATION
The body [the total body and the individual body are of the same

composition] may figuratively be called “‘the original tree.” From
this tree, which fully depends on the ground of material nature,
come two kinds of fruit—the enjoyment of happiness and the
suffering of distress. The cause of the tree, forming its three roots,
is association with the three modes of material nature — goodness,
*As the root of a tree extracts water (rasa) from the earth, the body tastes dharma,
artha, kama and moksa—religion, economic development, sense gratification and libera-
tion. These are four kinds of rasa, or taste.


--- Page 166 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
passion and ignorance. The fruits of bodily happiness have four
tastes —religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and
liberation — which are experienced through five senses for acquir-
ing knowledge in the midst of six circumstances: lamentation, il-
lusion, old age, death, hunger and thirst. The seven layers of bark
covering the tree are skin, blood, muscle, fat, bone, marrow and
semen, and the eight branches of the tree are the five gross and
three subtle elements — earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelli-
gence and false ego. The tree of the body has nine hollows—the
eyes, the ears, the nostrils, the mouth, the rectum and the
genitals —and ten leaves, the ten airs passing through the body. In
this tree of the body there are two birds: one is the individual soul,
and the other is the Supersoul.
PURPORT

This material world is composed of five principal elements—earth,
water, fire, air and ether —all of which are emanations from Krsna. Al-
though materialistic scientists may accept these five primary elements as
the cause of the material manifestation, these elements in their gross and
subtle states are produced by Krsna, whose marginal potency also pro-
duces the living entities working within this material world. The Seventh
Chapter of Bhagavad-gita clearly states that the entire cosmic manifesta-
tion is a combination of two of Krsna’s energies—the superior energy
and the inferior energy. The living entities are the superior energy, and
the inanimate material elements are His inferior energy. In the dormant
stage, everything rests in Krsna.

Material scientists cannot give such a thorough analysis of the material
structure of the body. The analysis of the material scientists concerns it-
self only with inanimate matter, but this is inadequate because the living
entity is completely separate from the material bodily structure. In
Bhagavad-gita (7.5) the Lord says:

apareyam itas tv anyam
prakrtim viddhi me param

Jjwa-bhuatarh maha-baho
yayedar dharyate jagat


--- Page 167 ---
Text 27] Prayers by the Demigods 163
“Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a
superior energy of Mine, which consists of all the living entities who are
struggling with material nature and are sustaining the universe.” Al-
though the material elements emanate from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, they are separated elements and are sustained by the
living elements.

As indicated by the word dvi-khagah, the living elements within the
body resemble two birds in a tree. Kha means “sky,” and ga means ‘“‘one
who flies.”” Thus the word dvi-khagah refers to birds. In the tree of the
body there are two birds, or two living elements, and they are always dif-
ferent. In Bhagavad-gita (13.3), the Lord says, ksetra-jfiam capi mari
viddhi sarva-ksetresu bhdrata: “0 scion of Bharata, you should under-
stand that I am also the knower in all bodies.” The ksetra-jiia, the owner
of the body, is also called the khaga, the living entity. Within the body
there are two such ksetra-jiias—the individual soul and the Supersoul.
The individual soul is the owner of his individual body, but the Super-
soul is present within the bodies of all living entities. Such a thorough
analysis and understanding of the bodily structure cannot be obtained
anywhere but in the Vedic literature.

When two birds enter a tree, one may foolishly think that the birds be-
come one or merge with the tree, but actually they do not. Rather, each
bird keeps its individual identity. Similarly, the individual soul and the
Supersoul do not become one, nor do they merge with matter. The living
entity lives close to matter, but this does not mean that he merges or
mixes with it (asango hy aya purusah), although material scientists
mistakenly see the organic and inorganic, or animate and inanimate, to
be mixed.

Vedic knowledge has been kept imprisoned or concealed, but every
human being needs to understand it in truth. The modern civilization of
ignorance is simply engaged in analyzing the body, and thus people come
to the erroneous conclusion that the living force within the body is
generated under certain material conditions. People have no information
of the soul, but this verse gives the perfect explanation that there are two
living forces (dvi-khaga): the individual soul and the Supersoul. The
Supersoul is present in every body (&varah sarva-bhitanarn hrd-dese
’rjuna tisthati), whereas the individual soul is situated only in his own
body (dehi) and is transmigrating from one body to another.


--- Page 168 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
TEXT 28
त्वमेक एवास्य सतः प्रखति-
स्त्वं सनिधानं त्वमनुग्रदथ |
त्वन्मायया संवृतचेतसस्त्वां
पर्यन्त नाना न विपथितो ये uke
tvam eka evasya satah prasiitis
tvari sannidhanam tvam anugrahas ca
tvan-mayaya samuvrta-cetasas tvam
pasyanti nana na vipascito ye
tvam—You (0 Lord); ekah—being one without a second, You are
everything; eva—indeed; asya satah—of this cosmic manifestation now
visible; prasitih—the original source; tvam—Your Lordship; san-
nidhanam—the conservation of all such energy when everything is an-
nihilated; tvam— Your Lordship; anugrahah ca—and the maintainer;
tvat-mayaya—by Your illusory, external energy; sarrta-cetasah—
those whose intelligence is covered by such illusory energy; tvam—unto
You; pasSyanti—observe; nand—many varieties; na—not; vipascitah—
learned scholars or devotees; ye—who are.
TRANSLATION
The efficient cause of this material world, manifested with its
many varieties as the original tree, is You, O Lord. You are also the
maintainer of this material world, and after annihilation You are
the one in whom everything is conserved. Those who are covered
by Your external energy cannot see You behind this manifestation,
but theirs is not the vision of learned devotees.
PURPORT
Various demigods, beginning from Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and even
Visnu, are supposed to be the creator, maintainer and annihilator of this
material world, but actually they are not. The fact is that everything is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, manifested in varieties of energy.
Ekam evadvitiyarn brahma. There is no second existence. Those who are


--- Page 169 ---
Text 28] Prayers by the Demigods 165
truly vipascit, learned, are those who have reached the platform of
understanding and observing the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
any condition of life. Premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah
sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti (Brahma-sarihita 5.38). Learned devotees
accept even conditions of distress as representing the presence of the
Supreme Lord. When a devotee is in distress, he sees that the Lord has
appeared as distress just to relieve or purify the devotee from the con-
tamination of the material world. While one is within this material
world, one is in various conditions, and therefore a devotee sees a condi-
tion of distress as but another feature of the Lord. Tat te 'nukampam
susamiksamanah (Bhag. 10.14.8). A devotee, therefore, regards distress
as a great favor of the Lord because he understands that he is being
cleansed of contamination. Tesam aham samuddharta mrtyu-samsara-
sagarat (Bg. 12.7). The appearance of distress is a negative process in-
tended to give the devotee relief from this material world, which is called
mrtyu-samsdra, or the constant repetition of birth and death. To save a
surrendered soul from repeated birth and death, the Lord purifies him of
contamination by offering him a little distress. This cannot be understood
by a nondevotee, but a devotee can see this because he is vipascit, or
learned. A nondevotee, therefore, is perturbed in distress, but a devotee
welcomes distress as another feature of the Lord. Sarvam khalv idam
brahma. A devotee can actually see that there is only the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and no second entity. Ekam evadvitiyam. There is
only the Lord, who presents Himself in different energies.

Persons who are not in real knowledge think that Brahma is the cre-
ator, Visnu the maintainer and Siva the annihilator and that the different
demigods are intended to fulfill diverse purposes. Thus they create
diverse purposes and worship various demigods to have these purposes
fulfilled (kamais tais tair hrta-jiianah prapadyante ‘nya-devatah). A
devotee, however, knows that these various demigods are but different
parts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and that these parts need
not be worshiped. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.23):

ye py anya-devata bhakta
yajante sraddhayanvitah

te ‘pi mam eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-parvakam


--- Page 170 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
“Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, 0 son of Kunti, is really
meant for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding.” There
is no need to worship the demigods, for this is avidhi, not in order.
Simply by surrendering oneself at the lotus feet of Krsna, one can com-
pletely discharge one’s duties; there is no need to worship various deities
or demigods. These various divinities are observed by the midhas, fools,
who are bewildered by the three modes of material nature (tribhir
gunamayair bhavair ebhih sarvam 1027 jagat). Such fools cannot
understand that the real source of everything is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead (mohitarn nabhijanati mam ebhyah param avyayam). Not
being disturbed by the Lord’s various features, one should concentrate
upon and worship the Supreme Lord (mam ekarh $aranam vraja). This
should be the guiding principle of one’s life.
TEXT 29
IN
बिभपिं रूपाण्यवबोध आत्मा
क्षेमाय लोकस्य चराचरस्य |
IN
सत्त्वोपपन्नानि सुखावहानि
सतामभद्राणि gg: खलानाम्‌ ॥२९॥
bibharsi ripany avabodha atma
ksemaya lokasya caracarasya
sattvopapannani sukhavahani
satam abhadrani muhuh khalanam
bibharsi—You accept; riipani—varieties of forms, such as Matsya,
Kirma, Varaha, Rama and Nrsimha; avabodhah atma—in spite of hav-
ing different incarnations, You remain the Supreme, full of knowledge;
ksemaya—for the benefit of everyone, and especially the devotees;
lokasya—of all living entities; cara-acarasya—moving and nonmoving;
sattva-upapanndni—all such incarnations are transcendental (suddha-
sattva); sukha-avahani—full of transcendental bliss; satam—of the
devotees; abhadrani—all inauspiciousness or annihilation; muhuh—
again and again; khalanam—of the nondevotees.


--- Page 171 ---
Text 30] Prayers by the Demigods 167
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are always in full knowledge, and to bring all good
fortune to all living entities, You appear in different incarnations,
all of them transcendental to the material creation. When You ap-
pear in these incarnations, You are pleasing to the pious and
religious devotees, but for nondevotees You are the annihilator.
PURPORT
This verse explains why the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears
as an incarnation again and again. The incarnations of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead all function differently, but their main purpose is
paritrandya 5৫018077278 vindsaya ca duskrtam—to protect the devotees
and annihilate the miscreants. Yet even though the duskrtis, or
miscreants, are annihilated, this is ultimately good for them.
TEXT 30
त्वय्यम्बुजाक्षाखिलसत््वधाम्नि
ES
समाधिनावेशितचेतसेके |
iN
त्वत्पादपोतेन महत्कृतेन
©,
ुवेन्ति गोवत्सपदं भवाब्धिम्‌ ॥३०॥
tvayy ambujaksakhila-sattva-dhamni
samadhinavesita-cetasaike
tvat-pada-potena mahat-krtena
kurvanti govatsa-padariv bhavabdhim
tvayi—in You; ambhuja-aksa—O lotus-eyed Lord; akhila-sattva-
dhamni—who are the original cause of all existence, from whom every-
thing emanates and in whom all potencies reside; samadhina—by
constant meditation and complete absorption (in thoughts of You, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead); avesita—fully absorbed, fully
engaged; cetasa—but by such a mentality; eke—the one process of al-
ways thinking of Your lotus feet; tvat-pada-potena—by boarding such a
boat as Your lotus feet; mahat-krtena—by that action which is


--- Page 172 ---
168 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
considered the most powerful original existence or which is executed by
mahdjanas; kurvanti—they make; govatsa-padam—like the hoofprint
of a calf; bhava-abdhim—the great ocean of nescience.
TRANSLATION

O lotus-eyed Lord, by concentrating one’s meditation on Your
lotus feet, which are the reservoir of all existence, and by accept-
ing those lotus feet as the boat by which to cross the ocean of ne-
science, one follows in the footsteps of mahijanas [great saints,
sages and devotees]. By this simple process, one can cross the
ocean of nescience as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of a
calf.

PURPORT

The true mission in life is to cross the ocean of nescience, of repeated
birth and death. Those in the darkness of ignorance, however, do not
know this mission. Instead, being carried away by the waves of material
nature (prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah), they are
undergoing the tribulations of mrtyu-samsara-vartmani, repeated birth
and death. But persons who have achieved knowledge by the association
of devotees follow the mahdjanas (mahat-krtena). Such a person always
concentrates his mind upon the lotus feet of the Lord and executes one or
more of the nine varieties of devotional service (sravanar kirtanar
visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam). Simply by this process, one can cross
the insurmountable ocean of nescience. J

Devotional service is powerful in any form. Sri-visnoh Sravane
pariksid abhavad vaiyasakih kirtane (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.265).
According to this verse, Maharaja Pariksit became liberated by fully con-
centrating his mind on hearing the Lord’s holy name, attributes and
pastimes. Similarly, Sukadeva Gosvami simply glorified the Lord, and by
speaking on the subject matters of Krsna that constitute the entire
Srimad-Bhagavatam, he too was liberated. One may also be liberated
simply by sakhya, friendly behavior with the Lord. Such is the power of
devotional service, as we learn from the examples set by the Lord’s many
pure devotees.


--- Page 173 ---
Text 30] Prayers by the Demigods 169
svayambhir naradah Sambhuh
kumarah kapilo manuh
prahlado janako bhismo
balir vaiyasakir vayam
(Bhag. 6.3.20)
We have to follow in the footsteps of such devotees, for by this one easy
process one can cross the great ocean of nescience just as one might cross
a small hole created by the hoof of a calf.

Here the Lord is described as ambujaksa, or lotus-eyed. By seeing the
eyes of the Lord, which are compared to lotus flowers, one becomes so
satisfied that one does not want to turn his eyes to anything else. Simply
by seeing the transcendental form of the Lord, a devotee is at once
fully absorbed in the Lord in his heart. This absorption is called
samadhi. Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa paSyanti yar yoginah
(Bhag. 12.13.1). A yogi is fully absorbed in thoughts of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, for he has no other business than to think of the
Lord always within the heart. It is also said:

samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavarm
mahat-padari punya-yaso murareh
bhavambudhir vatsa-padariv param padam
[00007 [00077 yad vipadam na tesam
““For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is
the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Murari, the
enemy of the demon Mura, the ocean of the material world is like the
water contained in a calf’s hoofprint. His goal is param padam, or
Vaikuntha, the place where there are no material miseries, not the place
where there is danger at every step.” (Bhag. 10.14.58) This process is
recommended here by authorities like Lord Brahma and Lord Siva
(svayambhiar naradah sambhuh), and therefore we must take to this
process in order to transcend nescience. This is very easy, but we must
follow in the footsteps of great personalities, and then success will be
possible.
In regard to the word mahat-krtena, it is also significant that the


--- Page 174 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
process shown by great devotees is not only for them but also for others.
If things are made easy, this affords facility for the person who has made
them easy and also for others who follow the same principles. The pro-
cess recommended in this verse for crossing the ocean of nescience is
easy not only for the devotee but also for common persons who follow the
devotee (mahdajano yena gatah sa panthah).
TEXT 31
. ९ ५
स्वयं सयुत्तीयं सदुस्तरं द्युमन्‌
९
भवाणैवं भीममदभ्रसौहृदाः |
=
भवत्पदाम्भोरुहनावमत्र ते
निधाय याताः सदनुग्रहो भवान्‌ ॥३१॥
svayam samuttirya sudustarari dyuman
bhavarnavar bhimam adabhra-sauhrdah
bhavat-padambhoruha-navam atra te
nidhaya yatah sad-anugraho bhavan
svayam—personally; samuttirya— perfectly crossing; su-dustaram—
which is very difficult to cross; dyuman—O Lord, who appear exactly
like the sun, illuminating the darkness of this world of ignorance;
bhava-arnavam—the ocean of nescience; bhimam —which is extremely
fierce; adabhra-sauhrdah—devotees who are incessantly friendly to the
fallen souls; bhavat-pada-ambhoruha— Your lotus feet; navam—the
षि boat for crossing; atra—in this world; te—they (the Vaisnavas);
nidhaya—leaving behind; yatah—on to the ultimate destination,
Vaikuntha; sat-anugrahah—who are always kind and merciful to the
devotees; bhavan— You.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, who resemble the shining sun, You are always ready to
fulfill the desire of Your devotee, and therefore You are known as
a desire tree [vaiicha-kalpataru]. When acaryas completely take
shelter under Your lotus feet in order to cross the fierce ocean of
nescience, they leave behind on earth the method by which they


--- Page 175 ---
Text 31] Prayers by the Demigods 171
cross, and because You are very merciful to Your other devotees,
You accept this method to help them.
PURPORT

This statement reveals how the merciful dcaryas and the merciful
Supreme Personality of Godhead together help the serious devotee who
wants to return home, back to Godhead. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in His
teachings to Ripa Gosvami, said:

brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
(Ce. Madhya 19.151)

One can achieve the seed of bhakti-lata, devotional service, by the mercy
of guru and Krsna. The duty of the guru is to find the means, according
to the time, the circumstances and the candidate, by which one can be in-
duced to render devotional service, which Krsna accepts from a candi-
date who wants to be successful in going back home, back to Godhead.
After wandering throughout the universe, a fortunate person within this
material world seeks shelter of such a guru, or acarya, who trains the
devotee in the suitable ways to render service according to the circum-
stances so that the Supreme Personality of Godhead will accept the
service. This makes it easier for the candidate to reach the ultimate
destination. The dcarya’s duty, therefore, is to find the means by which
devotees may render service according to references from $astra. Ripa
Gosvami, for example, in order to help subsequent devotees, published
such devotional books as Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. Thus it is the duty of
the dcdrya to publish books that will help future candidates take up the
method of service and become eligible to return home, back to Godhead,
by the mercy of the Lord. In our Krsna consciousness movement, this
same path is being prescribed and followed. Thus the devotees have been
advised to refrain from four sinful activities—illicit sex, intoxication,
meat-eating and gambling—and to chant sixteen rounds a day. These are
bona fide instructions. Because in the Western countries constant chant-
ing is not possible, one should not artificially imitate Haridasa Thakura,
but should follow this method. Krsna will accept a devotee who strictly


--- Page 176 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
follows the regulative principles and the method prescribed in the
various books and literatures published by the authorities. The acarya
gives the suitable method for crossing the ocean of nescience by accept-
ing the boat of the Lord’s lotus feet, and if this method is strictly
followed, the followers will ultimately reach the destination, by the grace
of the Lord. This method is called dcarya-sampraddaya. It is there-
fore said, sampradaya-vihina ye mantras te nisphala matah (Padma
Purana). The acarya-sampraddya is strictly bona fide. Therefore one
must accept the dcdrya-sampradaya; otherwise one’s endeavor will be
futile. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura therefore sings:
tandera carana sevi bhakta sane vasa
janame janame haya, ei abhilasa
One must worship the lotus feet of the acarya and live within the society
of devotees. Then one’s endeavor to cross over nescience will surely be
successful.
TEXT 32
येऽन्येऽरविन्दाक्ष वियुक्तमानिन-
स्त्वय्यस्तमावाद विशचद्बुद्धयः ।
- . .
आरुह्य FFA पर पद ततः
पतन्त्यधोऽनादतयुष्मदङ्घ्रयः ॥২২।।
ye ‘nye ’ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah
aruhya krcchrena param padari tatah
patanty adho ’nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah
ye anye—anyone, or all others; aravinda-aksa—O lotus-eyed one;
vimukta-maninah—falsely considering themselves free from the bond-
age of material contamination; tvayi—unto You; asta-bhavat—specu-
lating in various ways but not knowing or desiring more information of
Your lotus feet; avisuddha-buddhayah—whose intelligence is still not
purified and who do not know the goal of life; aruhya—even though


--- Page 177 ---
Text 32] Prayers by the Demigods 173
achieving; krcchrena—by undergoing severe austerities, penances and
hard labor; param padam—the highest position (according to their
imagination and speculation); tatah—from that position; patanti—they
fall; adhah—down into material existence again; anddrta—neglecting
devotion to; yusmat— Your; anghrayah—Ilotus feet.
TRANSLATION

[Someone may say that aside from devotees, who always seek
shelter at the Lord’s lotus feet, there are those who are not devo-
tees but who have accepted different processes for attaining salva-
tion. What happens to them? In answer to this question, Lord
Brahma and the other demigods said:] O lotus-eyed Lord, al-
though nondevotees who accept severe austerities and penances to
achieve the highest position may think themselves liberated, their
intelligence is impure. They fall down from their position of
imagined superiority because they have no regard for Your lotus
feet.

PURPORT

Aside from devotees, there are many others, nondevotees, known as
karmis, jianis or yogis, philanthropists, altruists, politicians, imper-
sonalists and voidists. There are many varieties of nondevotees who have
their respective ways of liberation, but simply because they do not know
the shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet, although they falsely think that they
have been liberated and elevated to the highest position, they fall down.
As clearly stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (9.3):

asraddadhanah purusa
dharmasydsya parantapa
aprapya mam nivartante
mrtyu-sarisara-vartmani

“Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot at-
tain Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this ma-
terial world.” It doesn’t matter whether one is a karmi, jAani, yogi,
philanthropist, politician or whatever; if one has no love for the lotus


--- Page 178 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
feet of the Lord, one falls down. That is the verdict given by Lord
Brahma in this verse.

There are persons who advocate accepting any process and who say
that whatever process one accepts will lead to the same goal, but that is
refuted in this verse, where such persons are referred to as vimukta-
maninah, signifying that although they think they have attained the
highest perfection, in fact they have not. In the present day, big, big
politicians all over the world think that by scheming they can occupy the
highest political post, that of president or prime minister, but we actually
see that even in this life such big prime ministers, presidents and other
politicians, because of being nondevotees, fall down (patanty adhah). To
become president or prime minister is not easy; one must work very hard
(aruhya krcchrena) to achieve the post. And even though one may reach
his goal, at any moment one may be kicked down by material nature. In
human society there have been many instances in which great, exalted
politicians have fallen from government and become lost in historical
oblivion. The cause of this is aviSuddha-buddhayah: their intelligence
is impure. The $astra says, na te viduh svartha-gatim hi vispum
(Bhag. 7.5.31). One achieves the perfection of life by becoming a devo-
tee of Visnu, but people do not know this. Therefore, as stated in
Bhagavad-gita (12.5), kleso ’dhikataras tesam avyaktasakta-cetasam.
Persons who do not ultimately accept the Supreme Personality of God-
head and take to devotional service, but who instead are attached to im-
personalism and voidism, must undergo great labor to achieve their
goals.

Sreyah-srtim bhaktim udasya te vibho
klisyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye
(Bhag. 10.14.4)
To achieve understanding, such persons work very hard and undergo
severe austerities, but their hard labor and austerities themselves are
their only achievement, for they do not actually achieve the real goal of
life.

Dhruva Maharaja at first wanted to achieve the greatest material
kingdom and greater material possessions than his father, but when he
was actually favored by the Lord, who appeared before him to give him


--- Page 179 ---
Text 32] Prayers by the Demigods 175
the benediction he desired, Dhruva Maharaja refused it, saying, svamin
krtartho ‘smi vara na yace: “Now I am fully satisfied. I do not want
any material benediction.” (Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 7.28) This is the
perfection of life. Yarn labdhva caparari labharh manyate nadhikari
tatah (Bg. 6.22). If one achieves the shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet, one
is fully satisfied and does not need to ask for any material benediction.
At night, no one can see a lotus, for lotuses blossom only during the
daytime. Therefore the word aravindaksa is significant. One who is not
captivated by the lotus eyes or transcendental form of the Supreme Lord
is in darkness, exactly like one who cannot see a lotus. One who has not
come to the point of seeing the lotus eyes and transcendental form of
Syamasundara is a failure. Premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena san-
tah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti. Those who are attached to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in love always see the Lord’s lotus eyes
and lotus feet, whereas others cannot see the Lord’s beauty and are
therefore classified as anadrta-yusmad-arighrayah, or neglectful of the
Lord’s personal form. Those who neglect the Lord’s form are surely
failures on every path in life, but if one develops even a little love for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is liberated without difficulty
(svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat). Therefore the
Supreme Personality of Godhead recommends in Bhagavad-gita (9.34),
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru: ‘Simply
think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer some slight
homage to Me.” Simply by this process, one is guaranteed to return
home, back to Godhead, and thus attain the highest perfection. The Lord
further affirms in Bhagavad-gita (18.54-55):
brahma-bhiitah prasannatma
na Socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhiitesu
mad-bhaktirm labhate param
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato jiiatva
visate tad-anantaram


--- Page 180 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
“One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he at-
tains pure devotional service unto Me. One can understand the Supreme
Personality as He is only by devotional service. And when one is in full
consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into
the kingdom of God.”
TEXT 33
तथान ते माधव तावकाः कचिद्‌
भ्रश्यन्ति मार्गात्वयि बदूसौहदाः |
(> [> अह
त्वयाभिगुप्ता विचरन्ति निभेया
99 kd =
विनायकानीकपमूधेसु মমা 1330
tatha na te madhava tavakah kvacid
bhrasyanti margat tvayi baddha-sauhrdah
tvayabhigupta vicaranti nirbhaya
vinayakanikapa-mirdhasu prabho
tatha—like them (the nondevotees); na—not; te—they (the devo-
tees); madhava—O Lord, husband of the goddess of fortune; tavakah—
the followers of the devotional path, the devotees; kvacit—in any
circumstances; bhrasyanti—fall down; margat—from the path of devo-
tional service; tvayi—unto You; baddha-sauhrdah—because of being
fully attached to Your lotus feet; tvaya—by You; abhiguptah—always
protected from all dangers; vicaranti—they move; nirbhayah—without
fear; vinayaka-anikapa—the enemies who maintain paraphernalia to
oppose the bhakti cult; mirdhasu—on their heads; prabho—O Lord.
TRANSLATION
O Madhava, Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord of the god-

dess of fortune, if devotees completely in love with You sometimes
fall from the path of devotion, they do not fall like nondevotees,
for You still protect them. Thus they fearlessly traverse the heads
of their opponents and continue to progress in devotional service.


--- Page 181 ---
Text 33] Prayers by the Demigods 177
PURPORT

Devotees generally do not fall down, but if circumstantially they do,
the Lord, because of their strong attachment to Him, gives them protec-
tion in all circumstances. Thus even if devotees fall down, they are still
strong enough to traverse the heads of their enemies. We have actually
seen that our Krsna consciousness movement has many opponents, such
as the ““deprogrammers,” who instituted a strong legal case against the
devotees. We thought that this case would take a long time to settle, but
because the devotees were protected by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, we unexpectedly won the case in one day. Thus a case that was ex-
pected to continue for years was settled in a day because of the protection
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has promised in Bhagavad-
gita (9.31), kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati: 0 son of
Kunti, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.” In history there
are many instances of devotees like Citraketu, Indradyumna and
Maharaja Bharata who circumstantially fell down but were still pro-
tected. Maharaja Bharata, for example, because of his attachment to a
deer, thought of the deer at the time of death, and therefore in his next
life he became a deer (yam yar vapi smaran bhavari tyajaty ante
kalevaram). Because of protection by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, however, the deer remembered his relationship with the Lord and
next took birth in a good brahminical family and performed devotional
service (Sucinam srimatarh gehe yoga-bhrasto ‘bhijayate). Similarly,
Citraketu fell down and became a demon, Vrtrasura, but he too was pro-
tected. Thus even if one falls down from the path of bhakti-yoga, one is
ultimately saved. If a devotee is strongly situated in devotional service,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead has promised to protect him (kaun-
teya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati). But even if a devotee
circumstantially falls down, he is protected by Madhava.

The word Madhava is significant. Ma, mother Laksmi, the mother of
all opulences, is always with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and if
a devotee is in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all the
opulences of the Lord are ready to help him.

yatra yogesvarah krsno
yatra partho dhanur-dharah


--- Page 182 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
tatra Srir vijayo bhutir
dhruva nitir matir mama
(Bg. 18.78)
Wherever there is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and His
devotee Arjuna, Partha, there is victory, opulence, extraordinary power
and morality. The opulences of a devotee are not a result of karma-
kanda-vicara. A devotee is always protected by all of the Supreme Lord’s
opulences, of which no one can deprive him (tesa nityabhiyuktanam
yoga-ksemarir vahamy aham). Thus a devotee cannot be defeated by any
opponents. A devotee, therefore, should not deviate knowingly from the
path of devotion. The adherent devotee is assured all protection from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 34
. . EN
सखं विशुद्धं श्रयते भवान्‌ सितो
शरीरिणां श्रेयउपायनं वपुः |
वेदक्रियायोगतपःसमाधिभि-
ति
WARN येन जनः समीहते ॥३४॥
sattvamm ০1618001807 Srayate bhavan sthitau
Saririnar $§reya-upayanarih vapuh
veda-kriya-yoga-tapah-samadhibhis
tavarhanar yena janah samihate
sattvam —existence; visuddham—transcendental, beyond the three

modes of material nature; srayate—accepts; bhavan— Your Lordship;
sthitau —during the maintenance of this material world; Saririnam —of
all living entities; sreyah—of supreme auspiciousness; upayanam—for
the benefit; vapuh—a transcendental form or body; veda-kriya—by
ritualistic ceremonies according to the directions of the Vedas; yoga—by
practice of devotion; tapah—by austerities; samadhibhih—by becoming
absorbed in transcendental existence; tava— Your; arhanam —worship;
yena—Dby such activities; janah—human society; samihate—offers (its
obligation unto You).


--- Page 183 ---
Text 34] Prayers by the Demigods 179
TRANSLATION

O Lord, during the time of maintenance You manifest several in-
carnations, all with transcendental bodies, beyond the material
modes of nature. When You appear in this way, You bestow all
good fortune upon the living entities by teaching them to perform
Vedic activities such as ritualistic ceremonies, mystic yoga,
austerities, penances, and ultimately samadhi, ecstatic absorp-
tion in thoughts of You. Thus You are worshiped by the Vedic
principles.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.3), yajiia-dana-tapah-karma na tya-
Jyam: the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies, charity, austerity and all such
prescribed duties are never to be given up. Yajiio dana tapas caiva
pavanani manisinam (18.5): even one who is very much advanced in
spiritual realization must still execute the Vedic principles. Even in the
lowest stage, the karmis are advised to work for the sake of the Lord.

yajiiarthat karmano ‘nyatra
loko yar karma-bandhanah

“Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work
binds one to this material world.” (Bg. 3.9) The words yajiiarthat kar-
manah indicate that while performing all kinds of duties, one should
remember that these duties should be performed to satisfy the Supreme
Lord (sva-karmana tam abhyarcya). According to Vedic principles,
there must be divisions of human society (catur-varnyar maya srstam).
There should be brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaiSyas and $iidras, and everyone
should learn to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead (tam
abhyarcya). This is real human society, and without this system we are
left with animal society. |

The modern activities of human society are described in Srimad-
Bhagavatam as the activities of go-khara, cows and asses (sa eva go-
kharah). Everyone is acting in a bodily concept of life involving society,
friendship and love for the improvement of economic and political condi-
tions, and thus all activities are enacted in ignorance. The Supreme


--- Page 184 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
Personality therefore comes to teach us how to act according to the Vedic
principles. In this age of Kali, the Supreme Personality of Godhead ap-
peared as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and preached that in this age the
Vedic activities cannot be systematically performed because people are so
fallen. He gave this recommendation from the sastras:
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva

ndsty eva gatir anyatha
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way.” The Krsna consciousness movement
is therefore teaching people all over the world how to chant the Hare
Krsna mantra, and this has proved very much effective in all places at all
times. The Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in order to teach us
Vedic principles intended for understanding Him (vedais ca sarvair
aham eva vedyah). We should always know that when Krsna and Lord
Caitanya appeared, They appeared in suddha-sattva bodies. One should
not mistake the body of Krsna or Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be a material
body like ours, for Krsna and Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared as needed
for the benefit of the entire human society. Out of causeless mercy, the
Lord appears in different ages in His original Suddha-sattva transcen-
dental body to elevate human society to the spiritual platform upon
which they can truly benefit. Unfortunately, modern politicians and
other leaders stress the bodily comforts of life (yasyatma-buddhih
kunape tri-dhatuke) and concentrate on the activities of this ism and that
ism, which they describe in different kinds of flowery language. Essen-
tially such activities are the activities of animals (sa eva go-kharah). We
should learn how to act from Bhagavad-gita, which explains everything
for human understanding. Thus we can become happy even in this age of
Kali.

TEXT 35
a न चेद्धातरिदं निजं भवेद्‌
विज्ञानमज्ञानमिदापमाजंनम्‌ ।


--- Page 185 ---
Text 35] Prayers by the Demigods 181
EN
गुणप्रकाशेरनुमीयते भवान्‌
प्रकाञ्चते यस्य च येन वा गुणः ॥३५॥
ও0৮৫ো8 na ced dhatar idari 71007, bhaved
vijidnam ajiiana-bhidapamarjanam
guna-prakasair anumiyate bhavan
prakasate yasya ca yena va gunah
sattvam —Suddha-sattva, transcendental; na—not; cet—if; dhatah—
O reservoir of all energies, cause of all causes; idam—this; nijam—per-
sonal, spiritual; bhavet—could have been; vijianam—transcenden-
tal knowledge; ajiana-bhida—which drives away the ignorance
of the material modes; apamarjanam—completely vanquished; guna-
prakasaih—by the awakening of such transcendental knowledge;
anumiyate —becomes manifested; bhavan— Your Lordship; prakasate —
exhibit; yasya—whose; ca—and; yena—by which; va—either; gu-
nah—quality or intelligence.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, cause of all causes, if Your transcendental body were not
beyond the modes of material nature, one could not understand
the difference between matter and transcendence. Only by Your
presence can one understand the transcendental nature of Your
Lordship, who are the controller of material nature. Your tran-
scendental nature is very difficult to understand unless one is in-
fluenced by the presence of Your transcendental form.
PURPORT
It is said, traigunya-visaya veda nistraigunyo bhavarjuna. Unless one
is situated in transcendence, one cannot understand the transcendental
nature of the Lord. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.29):
athapi te deva padambuja-dvaya-
prasada-lesanugrhita eva hi
janati tattvarh bhagavan-mahimno
na canya eko ’pi ciram vicinvan


--- Page 186 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
Only by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can one
understand Him. Those who are in the modes of material nature, al-
though speculating for thousands of years, cannot understand Him. The
Lord has innumerable forms (ramadi-miirtisu kald-niyamena tisthan),
and unless these forms, such as Lord Rimacandra, Nrsimhadeva, Krsna
and Balarama, were transcendental, how could they be worshiped by
devotees since time immemorial? Bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas
casmi tattvatah (Bg. 18.55). Devotees who awaken their transcendental
nature in the presence of the Lord and who follow the rules and regula-
tions of devotional service can understand Lord Krsna, Lord Rimacandra
and other incarnations, who are not of this material world but who come
from the spiritual world for the benefit of people in general. If one does
not take to this process, one imagines or manufactures some form of God
according to material qualities and can never awaken a real understand-
ing of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The words bhaktya mam
abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah signify that unless one worships
the Lord according to the regulative devotional principles, one cannot
awaken the transcendental nature. Deity worship, even in the absence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, awakens the transcendental nature
of the devotee, who thus becomes increasingly attached to the Lord’s
lotus feet.

The appearance of Krsna is the answer to all imaginative iconography
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone imagines the form of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to his mode of material
nature. In the Brahma-sarihita it is said that the Lord is the oldest per-
son. Therefore a section of religionists imagine that God must be very
old, and therefore they depict a form of the Lord like a very old man. But
in the same Brahma-sarihitd, that is contradicted; although He is the
oldest of all living entities, He has His eternal form as a fresh youth.
The exact words used in this connection in the Srimad-Bhagavatam
are vijidnam ajiiana-bhidapamarjanam. Vijiiana means transcendental
knowledge of the Supreme Personality; vijidna is also experienced
knowledge. Transcendental knowledge has to be accepted by the de-
scending process of disciplic succession as Brahma presents the knowl-
edge of Krsna in the Brahma-sarihita. Brahma-samhita is vijiana as
realized by Brahma’s transcendental experience, and in that way he pre-
sented the form and the pastimes of Krsna in the transcendental abode.


--- Page 187 ---
Text 35] Prayers by the Demigods 183
Ajiiana-bhida means “that which can match all kinds of speculation.” In
ignorance, people are imagining the form of the Lord; sometimes He has
no form and sometimes He has form, according to their different imagi-
nations. But the presentation of Krsna in the Brahma-samhita is
vijiagna—scientific, experienced knowledge given by Lord Brahma and
accepted by Lord Caitanya. There is no doubt about it. Sri Krsna’s form,
Sri Krsna’s flute, Krsna’s color —everything is reality. Here it is said that
this vijidnam is always defeating all kinds of speculative knowledge.
“Therefore,” the demigods prayed, “without Your appearing as Krsna,
as You are, neither ajiiana-bhida (the nescience of speculative knowl-
edge) nor vijiianam would be realized. Ajiana-bhidapamarjanam —by
Your appearance the speculative knowledge of ignorance will be van-
quished, and the real, experienced knowledge of authorities like Lord
Brahma will be established. Men influenced by the three modes of ma-
terial nature imagine their own God according to the modes of material
nature. In this way God is presented in various ways, but Your ap-
pearance will establish what the real form of God is.”

The highest blunder committed by the impersonalist is to think that
when the incarnation of God comes, He accepts a form of matter in the
mode of goodness. Actually the form of Krsna or Narayana is tran-
scendental to any material idea. Even the greatest impersonalist,
Sankaracarya, has admitted, narayanah paro ’vyaktat: the material cre-
ation is caused by the avyakta, the impersonal manifestation of matter or
the nonphenomenal total reservoir of matter, and Krsna is transcenden-
tal to that material conception. This is expressed in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam as $uddha-sattva, or transcendental. The Lord does not
belong to the material mode of goodness, for He is above the position of
material goodness. He belongs to the transcendental, eternal status of
bliss and knowledge.

“Dear Lord,” the demigods prayed, “when You appear in Your dif-
ferent incarnations, You take different names and forms according
to different situations. Lord Krsna is Your name because You are all-
attractive; You are called Syamasundara because of Your transcendental
beauty. Syama means blackish, yet they say that You are more beautiful
than thousands of cupids. Kandarpa-koti-kamaniya. Although You ap-
pear in a color which is compared to that of a blackish cloud, You are the
transcendental Absolute, and therefore Your beauty is many, many times


--- Page 188 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
more attractive than the delicate body of Cupid. Sometimes You are
called Giridhari because You lifted the hill known as Govardhana. You
are sometimes called Nanda-nandana or Vasudeva or Devaki-nandana
because You appear as the son of Maharija Nanda or Devaki or
Vasudeva. Impersonalists think that Your many names or forms are ac-
cording to a particular type of work and quality because they accept You
from the position of a material observer.

“Our dear Lord, the way of understanding is not to study Your ab-
solute nature, form and activities by mental speculation. One must
engage himself in devotional service; then one can understand Your ab-
solute nature and Your transcendental form, name and quality. Actually,
only a person who has a little taste for the service of Your lotus feet can
understand Your transcendental nature or form and quality. Others may
go on speculating for millions of years, but it is not possible for them to
understand even a single part of Your actual position.” In other words,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, cannot be understood by the
nondevotees because there is a curtain of yogamaya which covers
Krsna’s actual features. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (7.25),
naham prakasah sarvasya. The Lord says, “I am not exposed to anyone
and everyone.” When Krsna came, He was actually present on the bat-
tlefield of Kuruksetra, and everyone saw Him. But not everyone could
understand that He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Still,
everyone who died in His presence attained complete liberation from ma-
terial bondage and was transferred to the spiritual world.

Because foolish miidhas do not awaken their spiritual nature, they do
not understand Krsna or Rama (avajananti mam mudha manusir
tanum asritam). Even big academic scholars, not considering the en-
deavors of the acaryas who have recommended devotional service in
many elaborate commentaries and notes, think that Krsna is fictitious.
This is due to a lack of transcendental knowledge and a failure to awaken
Krsna consciousness. One should have the common sense to ask why, if
Krsna or Rama were fictitious, stalwart scholars like $ridhara Svami,
Ripa Gosvami, Sanatana Gosvami, Viraraghava, Vijayadhvaja, Valla-
bhacirya and many other recognized dcaryas would have spent so much
time to write about Krsna in notes and commentaries on Srimad-
Bhagavatam.


--- Page 189 ---
Text 36] Prayers by the Demigods 185
TEXT 36
न॒ नामरूपे गुणजन्मकमममि-
निरूपितव्ये तव तस्य साक्षिणः |
- ५
मनोवचोभ्यामनुमेयवत्मेनो
देव क्रियायां प्रतियन्त्यथापि हि ॥३६॥
na nama-ripe guna-janma-karmabhir
nirapitavye tava tasya saksinah
mano-vacobhyam anumeya-vartmano
deva kriyayam pratiyanty athapi hi
na—not; nama-ripe—the name and form; guna—with attributes;
Jjanma—appearance; karmabhih—activities or pastimes; nirdpitavye—
are not able to be ascertained; tava— Your; tasya—of Him; saksinah—
who is the direct observer; manah—of the mind; vacobhyam—words;
anumeya—hypothesis; vartmanah—the path; deva—O Lord; kriya-
yam —in devotional activities; pratiyanti—they realize; atha api—still;
hi—indeed (You can be realized by the devotees).
TRANSLATION
O Lord, Your transcendental name and form are not ascertained
by those who merely speculate on the path of imagination. Your
name, form and attributes can be ascertained only through
devotional service.
PURPORT
As stated in the Padma Purana:
atah $ri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah
“One cannot understand the transcendental nature of the name, form,
quality and pastimes of Sri Krsna through one’s materially contaminated


--- Page 190 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
senses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental
service to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality and
pastimes of the Lord revealed to him.” Since Krsna and His transcenden-
tal name, form and activities are all of a transcendental nature, ordinary
persons or those who are only slightly advanced cannot understand them.
Even big scholars who are nondevotees think that Krsna is fictitious. Yet
although so-called scholars and commentators do not believe that Krsna
was factually a historical person whose presence on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra is recorded in the history of Mahabharata, they feel com-
pelled to write commentaries on Bhagavad-gita and other historical
records. Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah: Krsna’s
transcendental name, form, attributes and activities can be revealed only
when one engages in His service in full consciousness. This confirms
Krsna’s own words in Bhagavad-gita (18.55):
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato jidtva
४5८४९ tad-anantaram
“One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is only
by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the
Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.”
Only by sevonmukha, by engaging oneself in the Lord’s service, can one
realize the name, form and qualities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

“O Lord,” the demigods say, “the impersonalists, who are nondevo-
tees, cannot understand that Your name is identical with Your form.”
Since the Lord is absolute, there is no difference between His name and
His actual form. In the material world there is a difference between form
and name. The mango fruit is different from the name of the mango.
One cannot taste the mango fruit simply by chanting, “Mango, mango,
mango.” But the devotee who knows that there is no difference between
the name and the form of the Lord chants Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rima, Hare Rima, Rima Rima, Hare
Hare, and realizes that he is always in Krsna’s company.

For persons who are not very advanced in absolute knowledge of the


--- Page 191 ---
Text 36] Prayers by the Demigods 187
Supreme, Lord Krsna exhibits His transcendental pastimes. They can
simply think of the pastimes of the Lord and get the full benefit. Since
there is no difference between the transcendental name and form of the
Lord, there is no difference between the transcendental pastimes and the
form of the Lord. For those who are less intelligent (like women, laborers
or the mercantile class), the great sage Vyasadeva wrote Mahabharata.
In the Mahabharata, Krsna is present in His different activities.
Mahabharata is history, and simply by studying, hearing, and memoriz-
ing the transcendental activities of Krsna, the less intelligent can also
gradually rise to the standard of pure devotees.

The pure devotees, who are always absorbed in the thought of the
transcendental lotus feet of Krsna and who are always engaged in devo-
tional service in full Krsna consciousness, are never to be considered to
be in the material world. Srila (008 Gosvami has explained that those
who are always engaged in Krsna consciousness by body, mind and ac-
tivities are to be considered liberated even within this body. This is also
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita: those who are engaged in the devo-
tional service of the Lord have already transcended the material position.

Krsna appears in order to give a chance to both the devotees and the
nondevotees for realization of the ultimate goal of life. The devotees get
the direct chance to see Him and worship Him. Those who are not on that
platform get the chance to become acquainted with His activities and
thus become elevated to the same position.

The Brahma-sarihita (5.38) says:

premaiijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yar §yamasundaram acintya-guna-svaripam
govindam adi-purusari tam aham bhajami
Although Krsna’s transcendental form is presented as black, devotees
who are in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead appreciate the
Lord as Syamasundara, having a very beautiful blackish form. The
Lord’s form is so beautiful that the Brahma-samhita (5.30) also states:
venumi kvanantam aravinda-dalayataksarn
barhavatarnsam asitdimbuda-sundarangam


--- Page 192 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-sobhamn
govindam adi-purusari tam 0110779 bhajami

“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who plays on His transcendental
flute. His eyes are like lotus flowers, He is decorated with peacock
plumes, and His bodily color resembles the color of a fresh black cloud,
although His bodily features are more beautiful than millions of
Cupids.” This beauty of the Supreme Lord can be seen by devotees who
are in love with Him, devotees whose eyes are anointed with love of God-
head (premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena).

The Lord is also known as Giridhari or Girivara-dhari. Because Krsna,
for the sake of His devotees, lifted Govardhana Hill, the devotees ap-
preciate the Lord’s inconceivable strength; but nondevotees, in spite of
directly perceiving the Lord’s inconceivable strength and power, regard
the Lord’s activities as fictitious. This is the difference between a devotee
and a nondevotee. Nondevotees cannot give any nomenclature for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet the Lord is known as Syamasun-
dara and Giridhari. Similarly, the Lord is known as Devaki-nandana and
Yasoda-nandana because He accepted the role of son for mother Devaki
and mother Yasoda, and He is known as Gopala because He enjoyed the
sport of maintaining the cows and calves. Therefore, although He has no
mundane name, He is addressed by devotees as Devaki-nandana, Yasoda-
nandana, Gopala and Syamasundara. These are all transcendental names
that only devotees can appreciate and nondevotees cannot.

The history of Krsna the person has been openly seen by everyone, yet
only those who are in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
appreciate this history, whereas nondevotees, who have not developed
their loving qualities, think that the activities, form and attributes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are fictitious. Therefore this verse ex-
plains, na nama-ripe guna-janma-karmabhir nirapitavye tava tasya
saksinah. In this connection, Srila Vi§vanatha Cakravarti Thikura has
given the example that persons suffering from jaundice cannot taste the
sweetness of sugar candy, although everyone knows that sugar candy is
sweet. Similarly, because of the material disease, nondevotees cannot
understand the transcendental name, form, attributes and activities of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although they actually see the


--- Page 193 ---
Text 37] Prayers by the Demigods 189
Lord’s activities, either through authority or through history. The
Puranas are old, authentic histories, but nondevotees cannot understand
them, especially Srimad-Bhdgavatam, which is the essence of Vedic
knowledge. Nondevotees cannot understand even the preliminary study
of transcendental knowledge, Bhagavad-gita. They simply speculate and
present commentaries with absurd distortions. In conclusion, unless one
elevates himself to the transcendental platform by practicing bhakti-
yoga, one cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His
name, form, attributes or activities. But if by chance, by the association
of devotees, one can actually understand the Lord and His features, one
immediately becomes a liberated person. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-
gita (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evar yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehari punar janma
naiti mam eti so ’rjuna

“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this ma-
terial world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.”

Srila Ripa Gosvami has therefore said that by affection and love for
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, devotees can express their mind to
Him with their words. Others, however, cannot do this, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah).

TEXT 37
शृण्वन्‌ गृणन्‌ संखसरयं श चिन्तयन्‌
नामानि বাদি च मङ्गलानि ते ।
क्रियासु यस्त्वच्रणारबिन्दयो-
राविष्टचेता न भवाय कल्यते ॥२७॥
Srnvan grnan sarismarayars ca cintayan
namani riupani ca mangalani te


--- Page 194 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
kriyasu yas tvac-carandravindayor
avista-cetd na bhavaya kalpate

Srpvan—constantly hearing about the Lord (Sravanar kirtanam
visnoh); grnan —chanting or reciting (the holy name of the Lord and His
activitios: sarismarayan —remembering (constantly thinking of the
Lord’s lotus feet and His form); ca—and; cintayan —contemplating (the
transcendental activities of the Lord); namani—His transcendental
names; ripani—His transcendental forms; ca—also; marngalani—
which are all transcendental and therefore auspicious; te—of Your Lord-
ship; kriyasu—in being engaged in the devotional service; yah—he
who; tvat-carana-aravindayoh—at Your lotus feet; avista-cetah—the
devotee who is completely absorbed (in such activities); na—not;
bhavaya—for the material platform; kalpate—is fit.

TRANSLATION

Even while engaged in various activities, devotees whose minds
are completely absorbed at Your lotus feet, and who constantly
hear, chant, contemplate and cause others to remember Your tran-
scendental names and forms, are always on the transcendental plat-
form, and thus they can understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

PURPORT

How bhakti-yoga can be practiced is explained in this verse. Srila
Ripa Gosvami has said that anyone who has dedicated his life to the ser-
vice of the Lord (tha yasya harer dasye) by his activities, his mind and
his words (karmana manasa gird) may stay in any condition of life
(nikhilasv apy avasthasu) and yet is no longer actually conditioned but is
liberated (jivan-muktah sa ucyate). Even though such a devotee is in a
material body, he has nothing to do with this body, for he is transcenden-
tally situated. Nardyana-parah sarve na kutascana bibhyati: because a
devotee is engaged in transcendental activities, he is not afraid of being
materially embodied. (Bhag. 6.17.28) Illustrating this liberated position,
$ri Caitanya Mahaprabhu prayed, mama janmani janmanisvare bhava-


--- Page 195 ---
Text 37] Prayers by the Demigods 191
tad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi: “All 1 want is Your causeless devotional
service in My life, birth after birth.” (Siksastaka 4) Even if a devotee, by
the supreme will of the Lord, takes birth in this material world, he con-
tinues his devotional service. When King Bharata made a mistake and in
his next life became a deer, his devotional service did not stop, although
some slight chastisement was given to him because of his negligence.
Narada Muni says that even if one falls from the platform of devotional
service, he is not lost, whereas nondevotees are lost entirely because they
are not engaged in service. Bhagavad-gita (9.14) therefore recommends
that one always engage at least in chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra:
satatarn kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratah
namasyantas ca mam bhaktya
nitya-yukta updasate
“Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination,
bowing down before Me, the great souls perpetually worship Me with
devotion.”

One should not give up the process of devotional service, which is per-
formed in nine different ways (§ravanari kirtanar visnoh smaranam
pada-sevanam, etc.). The most important process is hearing (sravanam)
from the guru, sadhu and S$dstra—the spiritual master, the saintly
acaryas and the Vedic literature. Sadhu-sastra-guru-vakya, cittete
kariya aikya. We should not hear the commentaries and explanations of
nondevotees, for this is strictly forbidden by Srila Sanatana Gosvami,
who quotes from the Padma Purana:

avaisnava-mukhodgirmam
pitari hari-kathamrtam
Sravanar naiva kartavyari
sarpocchistari yatha payah
We should strictly follow this injunction and never try to hear from
Mayavadis, impersonalists, voidists, politicians or so-called scholars.


--- Page 196 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
Strictly avoiding such inauspicious association, we should simply hear
from pure devotees. Srila Ripa Gosvami therefore recommends, ভা
guru-padasrayah: one must seek shelter at the lotus feet of a pure devo-
tee who can be one’s guru. Caitanya Mahaprabhu advises that a guru is
one who strictly follows the instructions of Bhagavad-gita: yare dekha,
tare kaha, ‘krsna’—upadesa (Cc. Madhya 7.128). A juggler, a magician
or one who speaks nonsense as an academic career is not a guru. Rather,
a guru is one who presents Bhagavad-gitd, Krsna’s instructions, as it is.
Sravana is very important; one must hear from the Vaisnava sadhu,
guru and कय.

The word kriydsu, meaning ‘‘by manual labor” or “by work,” is im-
portant in this verse. One should engage in practical service to the Lord.
In our Krsna consciousness movement, all our activities are concentrated
upon distributing Krsna literature. This is very important. One may ap-
proach any person and induce him to read Krsna literature so that in the
future he also may become a devotee. Such activities are recommended in
this verse. Kriydasu yas tvac-caranaravindayoh. Such activities will al-
ways remind the devotees of the Lord’s lotus feet. By fully concentrating
on distributing books for Krsna, one is fully absorbed in Krsna. This is
samadhi.

TEXT 38
दिष्टया हरेऽस्या भवतः पदो शवो
भारोऽपनीतस्तव जन्मनेरितुः |
. 2
दिषटयाङ्कितां त्वत्पदकैः सुशोमने-
Feat af च तवानुकस्पिताम्‌ ॥।३८॥
distya hare ‘sya bhavatah pado bhuvo
bharo ’panitas tava janmanesituh
distyankitam tvat-padakaih susobhanair
draksyama gar dyam ca tavanukampitam

distya—by fortune; hare—O Lord; asyah—of this (world);
bhavatah—of Your Lordship; padah—of the place; bhuvah—on this
earth; bharah—the burden created by the demons; apanitah—now


--- Page 197 ---
Text 38] Prayers by the Demigods 193
removed; tava—of Your Lordship; janmana—by appearance as an in-
carnation; iSituh—You, the controller of everything; distya—and by
fortune; arikitam —marked; tvat-padakaih—by Your lotus feet;
su-$obhanaih —which are transcendentally decorated with the marks of
conchshell, disc, lotus and club; draksyama—we shall surely observe;
gam —upon this earth; dyam ca—in heaven also; tava anukampitam—
due to Your causeless mercy upon us.
TRANSLATION

O Lord, we are fortunate because the heavy burden of the
demons upon this earth is immediately removed by Your ap-
pearance. Indeed, we are certainly fortunate, for we shall be able
to see upon this earth and in the heavenly planets the marks of
lotus, conchshell, club and disc that adorn Your lotus feet.

PURPORT

The soles of the Lord’s lotus feet are marked with sarikha-cakra-
gada-padma—conchshell, disc, club and lotus—and also by a flag and a
thunderbolt. When Krsna walks on this earth or in the heavenly planets,
these marks are visible wherever He goes. Vrndavana-dhama is a tran-
scendental place because of Krsna’s walking on this land frequently. The
inhabitants of Vrndidvana were fortunate to see these marks here and
there. When Akrira went to Vrndivana to take Krsna and Balarama
away to the festival arranged by Karisa, upon seeing the marks of the
Lord’s lotus feet on the ground of Vrndavana, he fell down and began to
groan. These marks are visible to devotees who receive the causeless
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (tavanukampitam). The
demigods were jubilant not only because the appearance of the Supreme
Lord would do away with the burdensome demons, but also because they
would be able to see upon the ground the transcendental marks from the
soles of the Lord’s lotus feet. The gopis always thought of the Lord’s lotus
feet when He was walking in the pasturing grounds, and, as described in
the previous verse, simply by thinking of the Lord’s lotus feet, the gopis
were fully absorbed in transcendence (avista-ceta na bhavaya kalpate).
Like the gopis, one who is always absorbed in thought of the Lord is


--- Page 198 ---
194 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
beyond the material platform and will not remain in this material world.
It is our duty, therefore, always to hear, chant and think about the Lord’s
lotus feet, as actually done by Vaisnavas who have decided to live in
Vrndavana always and think of the Lord’s lotus feet twenty-four hours a
day.
TEXT 39
न तेऽभवस्येश भवस्य कारणं
विना विनोदं बत तकैयामहे |
मवो निरोधः स्थितिरप्यविद्यया
कृता यतस्त्वस्यभयाश्रयात्मनि 11331
na te ’bhavasyesa bhavasya karanam
vina vinodar bata tarkayamahe *
bhavo nirodhah sthitir apy avidyaya
krta yatas tvayy abhayasrayatmani
na—not; te—of Your Lordship; abhavasya—of whom there is no
birth, death or maintenance as for an ordinary being; #$a—O Supreme
Lord; bhavasya—of Your appearance, Your birth; karanam—the cause;
vind—without; vinodam —the pastimes (despite what is said, You are
not forced to come to this world by any cause); bata—however;
tarkayamahe —we cannot argue (but must simply understand that these
are Your pastimes); bhavah—birth; nirodhah—death; sthitih—mainte-
nance; api—also; avidyayd—by the external, illusory energy; krtah—
done; yatah—because; tvayi—unto You; abhaya-asraya—O fearless
shelter of all; atmani—of the ordinary living entity.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, You are not an ordinary living entity appear-
ing in this material world as a result of fruitive activities.
Therefore Your appearance or birth in this world has no other
cause than Your pleasure potency. Similarly, the living entities,
who are part of You, have no cause for miseries like birth, death


--- Page 199 ---
Text 39] Prayers by the Demigods 195
and old age, except when these living entities are conducted by
Your external energy.
PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (15.7), mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhutah
sandtanah: the living entities are parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord,
and thus they are qualitatively one with the Lord. We can understand
that when the Supreme Lord appears or disappears as an incarnation,
there is no other cause than His pleasure potency. We cannot force the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to appear. As He says in Bhagavad-gita
4.7):

yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanarm srjamy aham

“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion —at that time I
descend Myself.” When there is a need to diminish a burden created by
the demons, the Supreme Godhead can do it in many ways because He
has multifarious energies. There is no need for Him to come as an incar-
nation, since He is not forced to do anything like ordinary living entities.
The living entities come to this material world in the spirit of enjoyment,
but because they want to enjoy without Krsna (krsna-bahirmukha haiya
bhoja-vaiicha kare), they suffer birth, death, old age and disease under
the control of the illusory energy. When the Supreme Personality of
Godhead appears, however, no such causes are involved; His descent is
an act of His pleasure potency. We should always remember this distinc-
tion between the Lord and the ordinary living entity and not uselessly
argue that the Lord cannot come. There are philosophers who do not
believe in the Lord’s incarnation and who ask, “Why should the
Supreme Lord come?’” But the answer is, “Why should He not come?
Why should He be controlled by the desire of the living entity?” The
Lord is free to do whatever He likes. Therefore this verse says, vina
vinodam bata tarkayamahe. It is only for His pleasure that He comes
although He does not need to come.


--- Page 200 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
When the living entities come to this world for material enjoyment,
they are entangled in karma and karma-phala by the Lord’s illusory en-
ergy. But if one seeks shelter at the Lord’s lotus feet, one is again situ-
ated in his original, liberated state. As stated here, krta yatas tvayy
abhayasrayatmani: one who seeks shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord is
always fearless. Because we are dependent on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, we should give up the idea that without Krsna we can enjoy
freedom in this material world. This idea is the reason we have become
entangled. Now it is our duty to seek shelter again at the Lord’s lotus
feet. This shelter is described as abhaya, or fearless. Since Krsna is not
subject to birth, death, old age or disease, and since we are part and
parcel of Krsna, we also are not subject to birth, death, old age and dis-
ease, but we have become subject to these illusory problems because of
our forgetfulness of Krsna and our position as His eternal servants
(jivera ‘svarapa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’). Therefore, if we practice
devotional service by always thinking of the Lord, always glorifying Him
and always chanting about Him, as described in text 37 (Srnvan grnan
sarismarayams$ ca cintayan), we will be reinstated in our original,
constitutional position and thus be saved. The demigods, therefore, en-
couraged Devaki not to fear Karmsa, but to think of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who was already within her womb.
TEXT 40
मलस्याश्चकच्छपनूर्सिंहवराहहंस-
राजन्यविप्रविवुधेषु कृतावतारः |
त्वं पासि AREA च यथाधुनेश
भारं शवो हर यदृत्तम वन्दनं ते ॥४०॥
7700153/25४८ ८८८0009 7757१४८7 6120-1 0ा7050 ~
rajanya-vipra-vibudhesu krtavatarah
tvarih [0058 nas tri-bhuvanari ca yathadhunesa
bharari bhuvo hara yaduttama vandanam te
matsya—the fish incarnation; asva—the horse incarnation; kac-
chapa—the tortoise incarnation; nrsimha—the Narasimha incarnation;


--- Page 201 ---
Text 41] Prayers by the Demigods 197
var@ha—the Variha incarnation; harisa—the swan incarnation; ra-
janya—incarnations as Lord Ramacandra and other ksatriyas; vipra—
incarnations as brahmanas like Vamanadeva; vibudhesu—among the
demigods; krta-avatarah—appeared as incarnations; tvam— Your Lord-
ship; pdsi—please save; nah—us; tri-bhuvanam ca—and the three
worlds; yatha—as well as; adhunda—now; 252 --0 Supreme Lord;
bharam—burden; bhuvah—of the earth; hara—please diminish; yadu-
uttama—O Lord Krsna, best of the Yadus; vandanam te —we offer our
prayers unto You.
TRANSLATION

O supreme controller, Your Lordship previously accepted incar-
nations as a fish, a horse, a tortoise, Narasithhadeva, a boar, a
swan, Lord Ramacandra, Parasurama and, among the demigods,
Vamanadeva, to protect the entire world by Your mercy. Now
please protect us again by Your mercy by diminishing the distur-
bances in this world. O Krsna, best of the Yadus, we respectfully
offer our obeisances unto You.

PURPORT

In every incarnation, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has a par-
ticular mission to execute, and this was true in His appearance as the son
of Devaki in the family of the Yadus. Thus all the demigods offered their
prayers to the Lord, bowing down before Him, and requested the Lord to
do the needful. We cannot order the Supreme Personality of Godhead to
do anything for us. We can simply offer Him our obeisances, as advised
in Bhagavad-gita (man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam
namaskuru), and pray to Him for annihilation of dangers.

TEXT 41
दिष्टयाम्ब ते স্ভবিবানঃ परः पुमा-
লহীন साक्षाद्‌ भगवान्‌ भवाय नः |
माभूद्‌ भयं भोजपतेयुमूर्षो-
गोपा यदूनां भविता तवात्मजः ॥४७१॥


--- Page 202 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
distyamba te kuksi-gatah parah puman
amsena saksad bhagavan bhavaya nah
mabhid bhayarn bhoja-pater mumiirsor
gopta yadindri bhavita tavatmajah
distya—Dby fortune; amba—O mother; te —your; kuksi-gatah—in the
womb; parah—the Supreme; puman—Personality of Godhead; ari-
sena—with all His energies, His parts and parcels; saksat—directly;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavaya—for the
auspiciousness; nah —of all of us; ma abhiit—never be; bhayam—fear-
ful; bhoja-pateh—from Kamsa, King of the Bhoja dynasty; mumir-
soh—who has decided to be killed by the Lord; gopta—the protector;
yadanam—of the Yadu dynasty; bhavita—will become; tava atmajah—
your son.
TRANSLATION
O mother Devaki, by your good fortune and ours, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself, with all His plenary portions,
such as Baladeva, is now within your womb. Therefore you need
not fear Karhsa, who has decided to be killed by the Lord. Your
eternal son, Krsna, will be the protector of the entire Yadu
dynasty.
PURPORT
The words parah puman amsena signify that Krsna is the original
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the verdict of the astra (krsnas
tu bhagavan svayam). Thus the demigods assured Devaki, ‘Your son is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He is appearing with Baladeva,
His plenary portion. He will give you all protection and kill Karhsa, who
has decided to continue his enmity toward the Lord and thus be killed by
Him.”
TEXT 42
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
इत्यमिष्ट्य पुरुषं यद्रूपमनिदं मथा ।
बर्ेशानौ पुरोधाय देवाः प्रतिययुर्दिवम्‌ ॥४२॥


--- Page 203 ---
Text 42] Prayers by the Demigods 199
sri-suka uwvaca
ity abhistiiya purusam
yad-ripam anidam yatha
brahmesanau purodhdaya
devah pratiyayur divam

$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—in this way;
abhistiya—offering prayers; purusam—unto the Supreme Person-
ality; yat-ripam—whose form; anidam—transcendental; yatha—as;
brahma—Lord Brahmi; #§@nau—and Lord Siva; purodhdya—keeping
them in front; devah—all the demigods; pratiyayuh—returned;
divam —to their heavenly homes.

TRANSLATION

After thus offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Lord Visnu, the Transcendence, all the demigods, with Lord
Brahma and Lord Siva before them, returned to their homes in the
heavenly planets.

- PURPORT
It is said:
adyapiha caitanya e saba lila kare
yari’ra bhagye thake, se dekhaye nirantare
(Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya 23.513)

The incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead appear con-
tinuously, like the waves of a river or an ocean. There is no limit to the
Lord’s incarnations, but they can be perceived only by devotees who are
fortunate. The devatdas, the demigods, fortunately understood the incar-
nation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus they offered
their prayers. Then Lord Siva and Lord Brahma led the demigods in
returning to their homes.

The word kuksi-gatah, meaning “within the womb of Devaki,” has
been discussed by Sri Jiva Gosvami in his Krama-sandarbha commen-
tary. Since it was said at first that Krsna was present within the heart of
Vasudeva and was transferred to the heart of Devaki, Sri Jiva Gosvami
writes, how is it that Krsna was now in the womb? He replies that there


--- Page 204 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 2
is no contradiction. From the heart the Lord can go to the womb, or from
the womb He can go to the heart. Indeed, He can go or stay anywhere. As
confirmed in the Brahma-samhita (5.35), andantara-stha-paramanu-
cayantara-stharm govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami. The Lord
can stay wherever He likes. Devaki, therefore, in accordance with the
desire of her former life, now had the opportunity to seek the benedic-
tion of having the Supreme Personality of Godhead as her son, Devaki-
nandana.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Second
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Prayers by the Demigods
for Lord Krsna in the Womb.”


--- Page 205 ---
CHAPTER THREE

The Birth of Lord Krsna
As described in this chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna, Hari in His original form, appeared as Visnu so that His father
and mother could understand that their son was the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Because they were afraid of Kamsa, when the Lord appeared
as an ordinary child they took Him to Gokula, the home of Nanda
Maharaja.

Mother Devaki, being fully transcendental, sac-cid-ananda, does not
belong to this material world. Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appeared with four hands, as if born from her womb. Upon seeing the
Lord in that Visnu form, Vasudeva was struck with wonder, and in tran-
scendental happiness he and Devaki mentally gave ten thousand cows in
charity to the brahmanas. Vasudeva then offered prayers to the Lord,
addressing Him as the Supreme Person, Parabrahman, the Supersoul,
who is beyond duality and who is internally and externally all-pervading.
The Lord, the cause of all causes, is beyond material existence, although
He is the creator of this material world. When He enters this world as
Paramiatma, He is all-pervading (andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-
stham), yet He is transcendentally situated. For the creation, mainte-
nance and annihilation of this material world, the Lord appears as the
guna-avataras— Brahma, Visnu and Maheévara. Thus Vasudeva offered
prayers full of meaning to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Devaki
followed her husband by offering prayers describing the transcendental
nature of the Lord. Fearing Kamsa and desiring that the Lord not be
understood by atheistic and materialistic nondevotees, she prayed that
the Lord withdraw His transcendental four-armed form and appear like
an ordinary child with two hands.

The Lord reminded Vasudeva and Devaki of two other incarnations in
which He had appeared as their son. He had appeared as Prénigarbha and
Vamanadeva, and now this was the third time He was appearing as the
son of Devaki to fulfill their desire. The Lord then decided to leave the
residence of Vasudeva and Devaki, in the prison house of Kamsa, and at

201


--- Page 206 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
this very time, Yogamaya took birth as the daughter of Yasoda. By the ar-
rangement of Yogamaya, Vasudeva was able to leave the prison house
and save the child from the hands of Karmsa. When Vasudeva brought
Krsna to the house of Nanda Maharaja, he saw that by Yogamaya’s ar-
rangement, (36008, as well as everyone else, was deeply asleep. Thus he
exchanged the babies, taking Yogamaya from १३३०१३०७ lap and placing
Krsna there instead. Then Vasudeva returned to his own place, having
taken Yogamaya as his daughter. He placed Yogamaya on Devaki’s bed
and prepared to be a prisoner as before. In Gokula, 36008 could not
understand whether she had given birth to a male or a female child.
TEXTS 1-5
श्रीद्युक उवाच
अथ सर्वगुणोपेतः कालः परमशोभनः |
ति [३
यर््ेवाजनजन्मक्षं शान्तक्षग्रहतारकम्‌ 1 १॥
IN ५ NEN =
<0: ग्रसेदुगगनं निमेलोडगणोदयम्‌ |
मही मद्धरभूयिष्टपुरग्रामत्रजाकरा || २ ॥
नद्यः प्रसन्नसलिला हदा जलरुहश्रियः |
दिजालिकुलसंनाद स्तवका वनराजयः ॥ ३ ॥
९
ववौ वायुः FEET: THERE: चिः ।
अग्नयश्च द्विजातीनां शान्तास्तत्र समिन्धत ॥ ४ ॥
मनांस्यासन्‌ प्रसन्नानि साधूनामसुरदरहाम्‌ |
जायमानेऽजने TRAY नेदुदन्दुभयः समम्‌ ॥ ५॥
sri-Suka uvaca
atha sarva-gunopetah
kalah parama-sobhanah
yarhy evajana-janmarksari
santarksa-graha-tarakam
disah prasedur gaganam
nirmalodu-ganodayam


--- Page 207 ---
Text 5] The Birth of Lord Krsna 203
mahi mangala-bhiyistha-
pura-grama-vrajakara
nadyah prasanna-salila
hrada jalaruha-sriyah
dvijali-kula-sannada-
stavaka vana-rajayah
vavau vayuh sukha-sparsah
punya-gandhavahah Sucih
agnayas$ ca dvijatinarn
santas tatra samindhata
mandmsy dsan prasanndani
sadhanam asura-druham
jayamane ‘jane tasmin
nedur dundubhayah samam
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; atha—on the occasion
of the Lord’s appearance; sarva—all around; guna-upetah—endowed
with material attributes or facilities; kdlah—a favorable time; parama-
Sobhanah—all-auspicious and very favorable from all points of view;
yarhi—when; eva—certainly; ajana-janma-rksam—the constellation of
stars known as Rohini; $dnta-rksa—none of the constellations were
fierce (all of them were peaceful); graha-tarakam—and the planets and
stars like Aévini; disah—all directions; praseduh—appeared very
auspicious and peaceful; gaganam—all of outer space or the sky;
nirmala-udu-gana-udayam—in which all the auspicious stars were visi-
ble (in the upper strata of the universe); mahi—the earth; mangala-
bhuayistha-pura-grama-vraja-akarah —whose many cities, towns, pas-
turing grounds and mines became auspicious and very neat and clean;
nadyah—the rivers; prasanna-salilih—the waters became clear;
hradah—the lakes or large reservoirs of water; jalaruha-sriyah—ap-
peared very beautiful because of blooming lotuses all around; dvija-ali-
kula-sannada-stavakah—the birds, especially the cuckoos, and swarms
of bees began to chant in sweet voices, as if praying to the Supreme


--- Page 208 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
Personality of Godhead; vana-rajayah—the green trees and plants were
also very pleasing to see; vavau—blew; vayuh—the breeze; sukha-spar-
Sah—very pleasing to the touch; punya-gandha-vahah—which was full
of fragrance; Sucih—without pollution by dust; agnayah ca—and the
fires (at the places of sacrifice); dvijatinam—of the brahmanas; san-
tah—undisturbed, steady, calm and quiet; tatra—there; samindhata—
blazed; manarisi—the minds of the brahmanas (who because of 1९277088
had always been afraid); dsan—became; prasannani—fully satisfied
and free from disturbances; s@dhiinam —of the brahmanas, who were
all Vaispava devotees; asura-druham—who had been oppressed by
Kamsa and other demons disturbing the discharge of religious rituals;
Jjayamane —because of the appearance or birth; ajane—of Lord Visnu,
who is always unborn; tasmin—in that situation; neduh—resounded;

dundubhayah—Xkettledrums; samam—simultaneously (from the upper
planets).

TRANSLATION
Thereafter, at the auspicious time for the appearance of the

Lord, the entire universe was surcharged with all the qualities of

goodness, beauty and peace. The constellation Rohini appeared, as

did stars like Aévini. The sun, the moon and the other stars and

planets were very peaceful. All directions appeared extremely

pleasing, and the beautiful stars twinkled in the cloudless sky.

Decorated with towns, villages, mines and pasturing grounds, the

earth seemed all-auspicious. The rivers flowed with clear water,

and the lakes and vast reservoirs, full of lilies and lotuses, were ex-

traordinarily beautiful. In the trees and green plants, full of

flowers and leaves, pleasing to the eyes, birds like cuckoos and

swarms of bees began chanting with sweet voices for the sake of

the demigods. A pure breeze began to blow, pleasing the sense of

touch and bearing the aroma of flowers, and when the brahmanas

engaging in ritualistic ceremonies ignited their fires according to
Vedic principles, the fires burned steadily, undisturbed by the
breeze. Thus when the birthless Lord Visnu, the Supreme Per-

sonality of Godhead, was about to appear, the saints and
brahmanas, who had always been disturbed by demons like Karnsa


--- Page 209 ---
Text 5] The Birth of Lord Krsna 205
and his men, felt peace within the core of their hearts, and ket-
tledrums simultaneously vibrated from the upper planetary
system.

PURPORT

As stated in the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord says that His appearance,
birth, and activities are all transcendental and that one who factually
understands them is immediately eligible to be transferred to the spiri-
tual world. The Lord’s appearance or birth is not like that of an ordinary
man, who is forced to accept a material body according to his past deeds.
The Lord’s appearance is explained in the previous chapter: He appears
out of His own sweet pleasure.

When the time was mature for the appearance of the Lord, the
constellations became very auspicious. The astrological influence of the
constellation known as Rohini was also predominant because this con-
stellation is considered very auspicious. Rohini is under the direct super-
vision of Brahma, who is born of Visnu, and it appears at the birth of
Lord Visnu, who in fact is birthless. According to the astrological conclu-
sion, besides the proper situation of the stars, there are auspicious and
inauspicious moments due to the different situations of the different
planetary systems. At the time of Krsna’s birth, the planetary systems
were automatically adjusted so that everything became auspicious.

At that time, in all directions, east, west, south, north, everywhere,
there was an atmosphere of peace and prosperity. Auspicious stars were
visible in the sky, and on the surface in all towns and villages or pastur-
ing grounds and within the mind of everyone there were signs of good
fortune. The rivers were flowing full of water, and the lakes were
beautifully decorated with lotus flowers. The forests were full with
beautiful birds and peacocks. All the birds within the forests began to
sing with sweet voices, and the peacocks began to dance with their con-
sorts. The wind blew very pleasantly, carrying the aroma of different
flowers, and the sensation of bodily touch was very pleasing. At home,
the brahmanas, who were accustomed to offer sacrifices in the fire,
found their homes very pleasant for offerings. Because of disturbances
created by the demoniac kings, the sacrificial fire had been almost
stopped in the houses of brahmanas, but now they could find the oppor-
tunity to start the fire peacefully. Being forbidden to offer sacrifices, the


--- Page 210 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
brahmanas were very distressed in mind, intelligence and activities. But
just on the point of Krsna’s appearance, automatically their minds be-
came full of joy because they could hear loud vibrations in the sky of
transcendental sounds proclaiming the appearance of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

On the occasion of Lord Krsna’s birth, seasonal changes took place
throughout the entire universe. Krsna was born during the month of
September, yet it appeared like springtime. The atmosphere, however,
was very cool, although not chilly, and the rivers and reservoirs appeared
just as they would in Sarat, the fall. Lotuses and lilies blossom during the
day, but although Krsna appeared at twelve o’clock midnight, the lilies
and lotuses were in bloom, and thus the wind blowing at that time was
full of fragrance. Because of Karhsa’s disturbances, the Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies had almost stopped. The brahmanas and saintly persons
could not execute the Vedic rituals with peaceful minds. But now the
brahmanas were very pleased to perform their daily ritualistic
ceremonies undisturbed. The business of the asuras is to disturb the
suras, the devotees and brahmanas, but at the time of Krsna’s ap-
pearance these devotees and brahmanas were undisturbed.

TEXT 6
जगुः किन्नरगन्धर्वास्तुष्टवुः सिद्धचारणाः ।
विधयाधर्यश्च ननृतुरप्सरोभिः समं दा ॥ ६ ॥
i Jjaguh kinnara-gandharvas 5
tustuvuh siddha-caranah
vidyadharyas$ ca nanrtur
apsarobhih samam muda

Jjaguh—recited auspicious songs; kinnara-gandharvah—the Kinnaras
and Gandharvas, inhabitants of various planets in the heavenly planetary
system; tustuvuh—offered their respective prayers; siddha-cdrandh—
the Siddhas and Caranas, other inhabitants of the heavenly planets;
vidyadharyah ca—and the Vidyadharis, another group of inhabitants of
the heavenly planets; nanrtuh—danced in transcendental bliss; apsa-


--- Page 211 ---
Text 8] The Birth of Lord Krsna 207
robhih—the Apsaras, beautiful dancers in the heavenly kingdom;
samam—along with; muda—in great jubilation.
TRANSLATION
The Kinnaras and Gandharvas began to sing auspicious songs,
the Siddhas and Caranas offered auspicious prayers, and the
Vidyadharis, along with the Apsaras, began to dance in jubilation.
TEXTS 7-8
५ ~ > च
यमुचुयुनयो देवाः सुमनांसि FETT: |
+ + ¢
मन्द मन्दं जटठधरा जगजरनुसागरम्‌ ।। ७ ॥
= = 3
निशीथे तमउद्धूते जायमाने जनादन |
N পাতে বকে S
TIFT दवरूपण्या वकष्णुः सवेगुदाशयः |
आविरासीद्‌ यथा प्राच्यां दिशीन्दुरिव पुष्कलः ।। < ॥
mumucur munayo devah
sumandrisi mudanvitah
77107100077 mandam jaladhara
Jjagarjur anusagaram
nisithe tama-udbhiite
jayamane jandardane
devakyam deva-ripinyam
visnuh sarva-guha-sayah
avirasid yatha pracyam
disindur iva puskalah
mumucuh—showered; munayah—all the great sages and saintly per-
sons; devah—and the demigods; sumanamsi—very beautiful and
fragrant flowers; muda anvitah—being joyous in their attitude;
mandam mandam—very mildly; jala-dharah—the clouds; jagarjuh—
vibrated; anusagaram—following the vibrations of the sea waves;
nisithe—late at night; tamah-udbhiite—when it was densely dark;
jayamane—on the appearance of; janardane —the Supreme Personality


--- Page 212 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
of Godhead, Visnu; devakyam—in the womb of Devaki; deva-ripi-
nyam—who was in the same category as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead (ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhih) ; visnuh — Lord
Visnu, the Supreme Lord; sarva-guha-sayah—who is situated in the
core of everyone’s heart; dvirdsit—appeared; yatha—as; pracyam
disi—in the east; induh iva—like the full moon; puskalah—complete in
every respect.
TRANSLATION

The demigods and great saintly persons showered flowers in a
joyous mood, and clouds gathered in the sky and very mildly thun-
dered, making sounds like those of the ocean’s waves. Then the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, who is situated in the
core of everyone’s heart, appeared from the heart of Devaki in the
dense darkness of night, like the full moon rising on the eastern
horizon, because Devaki was of the same category as Sri Krsna.

PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.37):
ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis
tabhir ya eva nija-ripatayd kalabhih
goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhiito
govindam adi-purusam tam ahari bhajami

This verse indicates that Krsna and His entourage are of the same spiri-
tual potency (ananda-cinmaya-rasa). Krsna’s father, His mother, His
friends the cowherd boys, and the cows are all expansions of Krsna, as
will be explained in the brahma-vimohana-lila. When Brahma took
away Krsna’s associates to test the supremacy of Lord Krsna, the Lord
expanded Himself again in the forms of the many cowherd boys and
calves, all of whom, as Brahma saw, were visnu-martis. Devaki is also an
expansion of Krsna, and therefore this verse says, devakyam deva-
rapinyam visnuh sarva-guha-sayah.

At the time for the Lord’s appearance, the great sages and the
demigods, being pleased, began to shower flowers. At the seashore, there


--- Page 213 ---
Text 8] The Birth of Lord Krsna 209
was the sound of mild waves, and above the sea there were clouds in the
sky which began to thunder very pleasingly.

When things were adjusted like this, Lord Visnu, who is residing
within the heart of every living entity, appeared in the darkness of night
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead before Devaki, who appeared as
one of the demigoddesses. The appearance of Lord Visnu at that time
could be compared to the rising of the full moon in the sky on the eastern
horizon. The objection may be raised that since Lord Krsna appeared on
the eighth day of the waning moon, there could be no rising of the full
moon. In answer to this it may be said that Lord Krsna appeared in the
dynasty which is in the hierarchy of the moon; therefore, although the
moon was incomplete on that night, because of the Lord’s appearance in
the dynasty wherein the moon is himself the original person, the moon
was in an overjoyous condition, so by the grace of Krsna he could appear
as a full moon. To welcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
waning moon became a full moon in jubilation.

Instead of deva-riipinyam, some texts of Srimad-Bhagavatam clearly
say visnu-ripinyam. In either case, the meaning is that Devaki has the
same spiritual form as the Lord. The Lord is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha,
and Devaki is also sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. Therefore no one can find
any fault in the way the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sac-cid-
ananda-vigraha, appeared from the womb of Devaki.

Those who are not in full knowledge that the appearance and disap-
pearance of the Lord are transcendental (janma karma ca me divyam)
are sometimes surprised that the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
take birth like an ordinary child. Actually, however, the Lord’s birth is
never ordinary. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is already situated
within the core of everyone’s heart as antaryami, the Supersoul. Thus
because He was present in full potency in Devaki’s heart, He was also
able to appear outside her body.

One of the twelve great personalities is Bhismadeva (svayambhar
naradah sambhuh kumarah kapilo manuh prahlado janako bhismah).
In Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.9.42), Bhisma, a great authority to be
followed by devotees, says that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
situated in the core of everyone’s heart, just as the sun may be on every-
one’s head. Yet although the sun may be on the heads of millions and
millions of people, this does not mean that the sun is variously situated.


--- Page 214 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
Similarly, because the Supreme Personality of Godhead has inconceiv-
able potencies, He can be within everyone’s heart and yet not be situated
variously. Ekatvam anupasyatah (Isopanisad 7). The Lord is one, but He
can appear in everyone's heart by His inconceivable potency. Thus al-
though the Lord was within the heart of Devaki, He appeared as her
child. According to the Visnu Purana, therefore, as quoted in the
Vaisnava-tosani, the Lord appeared like the sun (anugrahasaya). The
Brahma-samhita (5.35) confirms that the Lord is situated even within
the atom (andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham). He is situated
in Mathura, in Vaikuntha and in the core of the heart. Therefore one
should clearly understand that He did not live like an ordinary child in
the heart or the womb of Devaki. Nor did He appear like an ordinary
human child, although He seemed to do so in order to bewilder asuras
like Karmisa. The asuras wrongly think that Krsna took birth like an ordi-
nary child and passed away from this world like an ordinary man. Such
asuric conceptions are rejected by persons in knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Ajo 7 sann avyayatma bhiitanam isvaro ’pi san
(Bg. 4.6). As stated in Bhagavad-gita, the Lord is aja, unborn, and He is
the supreme controller of everything. Nonetheless, He appeared as the
child of Devaki. This verse describes the inconceivable potency of the
Lord, who appeared like the full moon. Understanding the special sig-
nificance of the appearance of the Supreme Godhead, one should never
regard Him as having taken birth like an ordinary child.
TEXTS 9-10
तमद्भुतं बालकमम्बुजेक्षणं
चतुुजं शह्वगदाद्‌युदायुधम्‌ |
श्रीवत्सलक्ष्मं गटश्ोभिकोस्तभं
. - =
पीताम्बरं सान्द्रपयोदसोभगम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
OR Cn
महाहवेदूयेकिरीरकुण्डल-
चिषा परिष्वक्तसदस्रकन्तलम्‌ |
उदामकाज्च्यङ्गद कङ्कणादिभि-
विरोचमानं वसुदेव रक्षत ॥१०॥


--- Page 215 ---
Text 10] The Birth of Lord Krsna 211
tam ৫0801150077 balakam ambujeksanam
catur-bhujamh Sankha-gadady-udayudham
Srivatsa-laksmari gala-Sobhi-kaustubhari
pitambarari sandra-payoda-saubhagam
maharha-vaidirya-kirita-kundala-
tvisa parisvakta-sahasra-kuntalam
uddama-karncy-angada-kankanadibhir
virocamanam vasudeva aiksata
tam—that; adbhutam—wonderful; balakam—child; ambuja-tksa-
nam—with eyes resembling lotuses; catuh-bhujam—with four hands;
Sarikha-gada-adi—bearing a conchshell, club, disc and lotus (in those
four hands); udayudham —different weapons; Srivatsa-laksmam—deco-
rated with a particular type of hair called Srivatsa, which is visible only
on the chest of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gala-sobhi-
kaustubham—on His neck was the Kaustubha gem, which is particularly
available in Vaikunthaloka; pita-ambaram —His garments were yellow;
sandra-payoda-saubhagam —very beautiful, being present with the hue
of blackish clouds; maha-arha-vaidirya-kirita-kundala —of His helmet
and earrings, which were studded with very valuable Vaidtrya gems;
tvisa—by the beauty; parisvakta-sahasra-kuntalam —brilliantly illumi-
nated by scattered, fully grown hair; uddama-karnci-arngada-karkana-
adibhih—with a brilliant belt on His waist, armbands on His arms,
bracelets on His wrists, etc.; virocamanam —very beautifully decorated;
vasudevah— Vasudeva, the father of Krsna; aiksata —saw.
TRANSLATION
Vasudeva then saw the newborn child, who had very wonderful
lotuslike eyes and who bore in His four hands the four weapons
Sailkha, cakra, gada and padma. On His chest was the mark of
Srivatsa and on His neck the brilliant Kaustubha gem. Dressed in
yellow, His body blackish like a dense cloud, His scattered hair
fully grown, and His helmet and earrings sparkling uncommonly
with the valuable gem Vaidirya, the child, decorated with a
brilliant belt, armlets, bangles and other ornaments, appeared very
wonderful.


--- Page 216 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
PURPORT
To support the word adbhutam, meaning “wonderful,” the decora-
tions and opulences of the newborn child are fully described. As
confirmed in the Brahma-samhita (5.30), barhavatarisam asitambuda-
sundarangam: the hue of the Lord’s beautiful form resembles the
blackish color of dense clouds (asita means ‘blackish,” and ambuda
means ‘‘cloud”). It is clear from the word catur-bhujam that Krsna first
appeared with four hands, as Lord Visnu. No ordinary child in human
society has ever been born with four hands. And when is a child born
with fully grown hair? The descent of the Lord, therefore, is completely
distinct from the birth of an ordinary child. The Vaidarya gem, which
sometimes appears bluish, sometimes yellow and sometimes red, is
available in Vaikunthaloka. The Lord’s helmet and earrings were
decorated with this particular gem.
TEXT 11
a वबिखयोत्फुछविलोचनो हरिं
सुतं विलोक्यानकदुन्दुभिस्तदा |
कृष्णारतारोत्सवसम्भ्रमोऽस्पृशन्‌
मुदा द्विजेभ्योऽयुतमाप्ठतो गवाम्‌ ११॥
sa vismayotphulla-vilocano harim
sutari vilokyanakadundubhis tada
krsnavatarotsava-sambhramo ’sprsan
muda dvijebhyo ’yutam apluto gavam
sah—he (Vasudeva, also known as Anakadundubhi); vismaya-

utphulla-vilocanah—his eyes being struck with wonder at the beautiful
appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; harim —Lord Hari,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sutam—as his son; vilokya—
observing; anakadundubhih— Vasudeva; tadd—at that time; krsna-
avatara-utsava—for a festival to be observed because of Krsna’s ap-
pearance; sambhramah—wishing to welcome the Lord with great
respect; asprSat—took advantage by distributing; muda—with great
jubilation; dvijebhyah—to the brahmanas; ayutam—ten thousand;
aplutah—overwhelmed, surcharged; gavam—cows.


--- Page 217 ---
Text 12] The Birth of Lord Krsna 213
TRANSLATION
‘When Vasudeva saw his extraordinary son, his eyes were struck
with wonder. In transcendental jubilation, he mentally collected
ten thousand cows and distributed them among the brahmanas as a
transcendental festival.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura has analyzed the wonder of
Vasudeva upon seeing his extraordinary child. Vasudeva was shivering
with wonder to see a newborn child decorated so nicely with valuable
garments and gems. He could immediately understand that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead had appeared, not as an ordinary child but in His
original, fully decorated, four-handed form. The first wonder was that
the Lord was not afraid to appear within the prison house of Karnsa,
where Vasudeva and Devaki were interned. Second, although the Lord,
the Supreme Transcendence, is all-pervading, He had appeared from the
womb of Devaki. The third point of wonder, therefore, was that a child
could take birth from the womb so nicely decorated. Fourth, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead was Vasudeva’s worshipable Deity yet
had taken birth as his son. For all these reasons, Vasudeva was transcen-
dentally jubilant, and he wanted to perform a festival, as ksatriyas do to
celebrate the birth of a child, but because of his imprisonment he was
unable to do it externally, and therefore he performed the festival within
his mind. This was just as good. If one cannot externally serve the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can serve the Lord within one’s
mind, since the activities of the mind are as good as those of the other
senses. This is called the nondual or absolute situation (advaya-jiana).
People generally perform ritualistic ceremonies for the birth of a child.
Why then should Vasudeva not have performed such a ceremony when
the Supreme Lord appeared as his son?
TEXT 12
= = 4 .
अथनमस्तादवधाय पूरुष
परं नताङ्गः कृतधीः कृताज्ञलिः |
खरोचिषा भारत afr
~ ~ .
विरोचयन्तं गतभीः प्रभाववित्‌ ॥१२॥


--- Page 218 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
athainam astaud avadhdrya purusari
param natangah krta-dhih krtanjalih
sva-rocisa bhdrata sitika-grham
virocayantari gata-bhih prabhava-vit
atha—thereafter; enam—to the child; astaut—offered prayers;
avadhdrya—understanding surely that the child was the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; pirusam—the Supreme Person; param —tran-
scendental; nata-arigah—falling down; krta-dhth—with concentrated
attention; krta-afijalih—with folded hands; sva-rocisa—by the
brilliance of His personal beauty; bhdrata—O Maharaja Pariksit, de-
^  scendant of Maharaja Bharata; siatika-grham —the place where the Lord
was born; virocayantam—illuminating all around; gata-bhih—all his
fear disappeared; prabhdva-vit—he could now understand the influence
(of the Supreme Personality of Godhead).
TRANSLATION
O Maharaja Pariksit, descendant of King Bharata, Vasudeva
could understand that this child was the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Narayana. Having concluded this without a doubt, he be-
came fearless. Bowing down with folded hands and concentrating
his attention, he began to offer prayers to the child, who illumi-
nated His birthplace by His natural influence.
PURPORT
Struck with such great wonder, Vasudeva now concentrated his atten-
tion on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Understanding the in-
fluence of the Supreme Lord, he was surely fearless, since he understood
that the Lord had appeared to give him protection (gata-bhih prabhava-
vit). Understanding that the Supreme Personality of Godhead was pres-
ent, he appropriately offered prayers as follows.
TEXT 13
श्रीवसुदेव उवाच
विदितोऽसि भवान्‌ साक्षात्‌ पुरुषः प्रकृतेः परः।
केवलानुभवानन्दसवरूपः सर्वबुद्धिटक्‌ 1230


--- Page 219 ---
Text 14] The Birth of Lord Krsna 215
Sri-vasudeva uvaca
vidito ’si bhavan saksat
purusah prakrteh parah
kevalanubhavananda-
svaripah sarva-buddhi-drk

$ri-vasudevah uvaca—Sri Vasudeva prayed; viditah asi—now I am
fully conscious of You; bhavan—Your Lordship; saksat—directly;
purusah—the Supreme Person; prakrteh—to material nature; parah—
transcendental, beyond everything material; kevala-anubhava-ananda-
svariipah—Your form is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, and whoever per-
ceives You becomes transcendentally blissful; sarva-buddhi-drk—the
supreme observer, the Supersoul, the intelligence of everyone.

TRANSLATION

Vasudeva said: My Lord, You are the Supreme Person, beyond
material existence, and You are the Supersoul. Your form can be
perceived by transcendental knowledge, by which You can be
understood as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I now under-
stand Your position perfectly.

PURPORT

Within Vasudeva’s heart, affection for his son and knowledge of the
Supreme Lord’s transcendental nature both awakened. In the beginning
Vasudeva thought, “Such a beautiful child has been born, but now
Karhsa will come and kill Him.” But when he understood that this was
not an ordinary child but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he be-
came fearless. Regarding his son as the Supreme Lord, wonderful in
everything, he began offering prayers appropriate for the Supreme Lord.
Completely free from fear of Kamsa’s atrocities, he accepted the child
simultaneously as an object of affection and as an object of worship by
prayers.

TEXT 14
स एव खयप्रकृत्येदं gg त्रिगुणात्मकम्‌ |
तदनु त्वं द्यप्रविषटः प्रविष्ट इव भाव्यसे ॥१४॥


--- Page 220 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
sa eva svaprakrtyedari
srstvagre tri-gunatmakam
tad anu tvamm hy apravistah
pravista iva bhavyase
sah—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); eva—indeed; sva-
prakrtya—by Your personal energy (mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate
sa-caracaram); idam—this material world; srstva—after creating;
agre—in the beginning; tri-guna-atmakam—made of three modes of
energy (sattva-rajas-tamo-guna); tat anu—thereafter; tvam— Your
Lordship; hi—indeed; apravistah—although You did not enter;
pravistah iva—You appear to have entered; bhavyase—are so under-
stood.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the same person who in the beginning created
this material world by His personal external energy. After the cre-
ation of this world of three gunas [sattva, rajas and tamas], You ap-
pear to have entered it, although in fact You have not.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (7.4) the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly
explains:
bhuamir apo 7৮010 vayuh
kha mano buddhir eva ca
aharikara ittyarh me
bhinna prakrtir astadha
This material world of three modes of nature —sattva-guna, rajo-guna
and tamo-guna—is a composition of earth, water, fire, air, mind, intelli-
gence and false ego, all of which are energies coming from Krsna, yet
Krsna, being always transcendental, is aloof from this material world.
Those who are not in pure knowledge think that Krsna is a product of
matter and that His body is material like ours (avajananti mar
migdhah). In fact, however, Krsna is always aloof from this material
world.


--- Page 221 ---
Text 14] The Birth of Lord Krsna 217
In the Vedic literature, we find the creation described in relationship
to Maha-Visnu. As stated in the Brahma-sarhita (5.35):
eko ‘py asau racayitur jagad-anda-kotir
yac-chaktir asti jagad-anda-caya yad-antah
andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-sthar
govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami
“I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, the original Personality of God-
head. By His partial plenary expansion as Maha-Visnu, He enters into
material nature. Then He enters every universe as Garbhodakasdayi
Visnu, and He enters all the elements, including every atom of matter, as
Ksirodakasayi Visnu. Such manifestations of cosmic creation are innum-
erable, both in the universes and in the individual atoms.” Govinda is
partially exhibited as antaryami, the Supersoul, who enters this material
world (andantara-stha) and who is also within the atom. The Brahma-
samhita (5.48) further says:
yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya
Jjwanti loma-vilaja jagad-anda-nathah
visnur mahan sa iha yasya kala-viseso
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
This verse describes Maha-Visnu as a plenary expansion of Krsna. Maha-
Visnu lies on the Causal Ocean, and when He exhales, millions of
brahmandas, or universes, come from the pores of His body. Then, when
Maha-Visnu inhales, all these brahmandas disappear. Thus the millions
of brahmandas controlled by the Brahmas and other demigods come and
go in this material world through the breathing of Maha-Visnu.
Foolish persons think that when Krsna appears as the son of
Vasudeva, He is limited like an ordinary child. But Vasudeva was aware
that although the Lord had appeared as his son, the Lord had not entered
Devaki’s womb and then come out. Rather, the Lord was always there.
The Supreme Lord is all-pervading, present within and without. Pravista
iva bhavyase: He only seemed to have entered the womb of Devaki and
to have now appeared as Vasudeva’s child. The expression of this knowl-
edge by Vasudeva indicates that Vasudeva knew how these events took


--- Page 222 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
place. Vasudeva was certainly a devotee of the Lord in full knowledge,
and we must learn from devotees like him. Bhagavad-gita (4.34)
therefore recommends:
tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya
upadeksyanti te jianam
JjAaninas tattva-darsinah
“Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized
soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.”
Vasudeva begot the Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet he was in full
knowledge of how the Supreme Lord appears and disappears. He was
therefore tattva-darsi, a seer of the truth, because he personally saw how
the Supreme Absolute Truth appeared as his son. Vasudeva was not in
ignorance, thinking that because the Supreme Godhead had appeared as
his son, the Lord had become limited. The Lord is unlimitedly existing
and all-pervading, inside and outside. Thus there is no question of His
appearance or disappearance.
TEXTS 15-17
>~ ~ 2
यथेमेऽविकृता भावास्तथा ते विकृतेः सह |
नानावीर्याः पृथग्भूता विराजं जनयन्ति হি ।॥१५॥
सनिपत्य FYE दइयन्तेऽचुगता इव |
प्रागेव विद्यमानत्वान्न तेषामिह सम्भवः ॥१६॥
एवं भवान्‌ बुद्धचनुमेयरकषणे-
cox Ox ry
ग्राद्ययुणः सनाप तद्गुणाग्रहः 1
অনান্তনল্লাহু নহিংল্লং न ते
[५
सर्वस्य सर्वात्मन आत्मवस्तुनः ॥१७।।
yatheme ’vikrta bhavas
tatha te vikrtaih saha
nand-viryah prthag-bhiita
virajar janayanti hi


--- Page 223 ---
Text 17] The Birth of Lord Krsna 219
sannipatya samutpadya ^
(1131. 11. 2,
prag eva vidyamanatvan
na tesam iha sambhavah
evar bhavan buddhy-anumeya-laksanair
grahyair gunaih sann api tad-gunagrahah
anavrtatvad bahir antaram na te
sarvasya sarvatmana atma-vastunah

yatha—as; ime—these material creations, made of material energy;
avikrtah—actually not disintegrated; bhavah—with such a conception;
tatha—similarly; te—they; vikrtaih saha—association with these dif-
ferent elements coming from the total material energy; nana-viryah—
every element is full of different energies; prthak—separated; bhitah—
becoming; virdjam—the whole cosmic manifestation; janayanti—cre-
ate; hi—indeed; sannipatya—because of association with the spiritual
energy; samutpadya—after being created; drsyante—they appear;
anugatah—entered within it; iva—as if; prak—from the very begin-
ning, before the creation of this cosmic manifestation; eva—indeed;
vidyamdnatvat—due to the existence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; na—not; tesam—of these material elements; iha—in this
matter of creation; sambhavah—entering would have been possible;
evam—in this way; bhavan—O my Lord; buddhi-anumeya-laksa-
naih—Dby real intelligence and by such symptoms; grahyaih—with the
objects of the senses; gunaih—with the modes of material nature; san
api—although in touch; tat-guna-agrahah—are not touched by the ma-
terial qualities; andvrtatvat—because of being situated everywhere;
bahih antaram—within the external and internal; na te—there is no
such thing for You; sarvasya—of everything; sarva-atmanah— You are
the root of everything; atma-vastunah—everything belongs to You, but
You are outside and inside of everything.

TRANSLATION

The mahat-tattva, the total material energy, is undivided, but
because of the material modes of nature, it appears to separate into
earth, water, fire, air and ether. Because of the living energy


--- Page 224 ---
220 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
[jiva-bhiita], these separated energies combine to make the cosmic
manifestation visible, but in fact, before the creation of the cos-
mos, the total energy is already present. Therefore, the total
material energy never actually enters the creation. Similarly, al-
though You are perceived by our senses because of Your presence,
You cannot be perceived by the senses, nor experienced by the
mind or words [avani-manasa-gocara]. With our senses we can per-
ceive some things, but not everything; for example, we can use
our eyes to see, but not to taste. Consequently, You are beyond
perception by the senses. Although in touch with the modes of ma-
terial nature, You are unaffected by them. You are the prime factor
in everything, the all-pervading, undivided Supersoul. For You,
therefore, there is no external or internal. You never entered the
womb of Devaki; rather, You existed there already.
PURPORT
This same understanding is explained by the Lord Himself in
Bhagavad-gita (9.4):
maya tatam idam sarvari
Jjagad-avyakta-miirtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
na caham tesv avasthitah
“By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.”

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the
gross material senses. It is said that Lord Sri Krsna’s name, fame,
pastimes, etc., cannot be understood by material senses. Only to one who
is engaged in pure devotional service under proper guidance is He
revealed. As stated in Brahma-samhita (5.38):

premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
One can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, always, with-
in oneself and outside oneself, if one has developed the transcenden-


--- Page 225 ---
Text 17] The Birth of Lord Krsna 221
tal loving attitude toward Him. Thus for people in general, He is not visi-
ble. In the above-mentioned verse from Bhagavad-gitd, therefore, it is
said that although He is all-pervading, everywhere present, He is not
conceivable by the material senses. But actually, although we cannot see
Him, everything is resting in Him. As discussed in the Seventh Chapter
of Bhagavad-gita, the entire material cosmic manifestation is only a
combination of His two different energies, the superior, spiritual energy
and the inferior, material energy. Just as the sunshine is spread all over
the universe, the energy of the Lord is spread all over the creation, and
everything is resting in that energy.

Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He has
lost His personal existence. To refute such arguments, the Lord says, “I
am everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof.”” For exam-
ple, a king heads a government which is but the manifestation of the
king’s energy; the different governmental departments are nothing but
the energies of the king, and each department is resting on the king’s
power. But still one cannot expect the king to be present in every depart-
ment personally. That is a crude example. Similarly, all the manifesta-
tions that we see, and everything that exists, both in this material world
and in the spiritual world, are resting on the energy of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The creation takes place by the diffusion of His dif-
ferent energies, and, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita, He is everywhere
present by His personal representation, the diffusion of His different
energies.

One may argue that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who creates
the whole cosmic manifestation simply by His glance, cannot come within
the womb of Devaki, the wife of Vasudeva. To eradicate this argument,
Vasudeva said, ‘““My dear Lord, it is not very wonderful that You ap-
peared within the womb of Devaki, for the creation was also made in that
way. You were lying in the Causal Ocean as Maha-Visnu, and by Your
breathing, innumerable universes came into existence. Then You entered
into each of the universes as Garbhodakasayi Visnu. Then again You ex-
panded Yourself as Ksirodakasayi Visnu and entered into the heart of all
living entities and entered even within the atoms. Therefore Your en-
trance into the womb of Devaki is understandable in the same way. You
appear to have entered, but You are simultaneously all-pervading. We
can understand Your entrance and nonentrance from material examples.


--- Page 226 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
The total material energy remains intact even after being divided into
sixteen elements. The material body is nothing but a combination of the
five gross elements —namely earth, water, fire, air and ether. Whenever
there is a material body, it appears that such elements are newly created,
but actually the elements are always existing outside of the body.
Similarly, although You appear as a child in the womb of Devaki, You are
also existing outside. You are always in Your abode, but still You can
simultaneously expand Yourself into millions of forms.

“One has to understand Your appearance with great intelligence be-
cause the material energy is also emanating from You. You are the
original source of the material energy, just as the sun is the source of the
sunshine. The sunshine cannot cover the sun globe, nor can the material
energy —being an emanation from You—cover You. You appear to be in
the three modes of material energy, but actually the three modes of ma-
terial energy cannot cover You. This is understood by the highly intellec-
tual philosophers. In other words, although You appear to be within the
material energy, You are never covered by it.”

We hear from the Vedic version that the Supreme Brahman exhibits
His effulgence and therefore everything is illuminated. We can under-
stand from Brahma-samhita that the brahmajyoti, or the Brahman
effulgence, emanates from the body of the Supreme Lord. And from the
Brahman effulgence, all creation takes place. It is further stated in the
Bhagavad-gita that the Lord is the support of the Brahman effulgence.
Originally He is the root cause of everything. But persons who are less
intelligent think that when the Supreme Personality of Godhead comes
within this material world, He accepts material qualities. Such conclu-
sions are not mature, but are made by the less intelligent.

TEXT 18
य आत्मनो दृश्यगुणेषु सनिति
व्यवस्यते खच्यतिरेकतोऽबुधः |
विनाचुवादं ন च तन्मनीषितं
सम्यग्‌ यतस्त्यक्तयुपाददत्‌ पुमान्‌ ।१८॥
ya atmano dr§ya-gunesu sann iti
vyavasyate sva-vyatirekato ‘budhah


--- Page 227 ---
Text 18] The Birth of Lord Krsna 223
vinanuvadar na ca tan manisitamn
samyag yatas tyaktam upadadat puman

yah—anyone who; atmanah—of his own real identity, the soul;
drSya-gunesu—among the visible objects, beginning with the body;
san—Dbeing situated in that position; iti—thus; vyavasyate—continues
to act; sva-vyatirekatah—as if the body were independent of the soul;
abudhah—a rascal; vina anuvadam—without proper analytical study;
na—not; ca—also; tat— the body and other visible objects; manisitam —
such considerations having been discussed; samyak—fully; yatah—be-
cause he is a fool; tyaktam—are rejected; upadadat—accepts this body
as reality; puman—a person.

TRANSLATION

One who considers his visible body, which is a product of the
three modes of nature, to be independent of the soul is unaware of
the basis of existence, and therefore he is a rascal. Those who are
learned have rejected his conclusion because one can understand
through full discussion that with no basis in soul, the visible body
and senses would be insubstantial. Nonetheless, although his con- = `
clusion has been rejected, a foolish person considers it a reality.

PURPORT

Without the basic principle of soul, the body cannot be produced. So-
called scientists have tried in many ways to produce a living body in their
chemical laboratories, but no one has been able to do it because unless
the spirit soul is present, a body cannot be prepared from material ele-
ments. Since scientists are now enamored of theories about the chemical
composition of the body, we have challenged many scientists to make
even a small egg. The chemicals in eggs can be found very easily. There
is a white substance and a yellow substance, covered by a shell, and
modern scientists should very easily be able to duplicate all this. But
even if they were to prepare such an egg and put it in an incubator, this
man-made chemical egg would not produce a chicken. The soul must be
added because there is no question of a chemical combination for life.
Those who think that life can exist wihout the soul have therefore been
described here as abudhah, foolish rascals.


--- Page 228 ---
224. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
Again, there are those who reject the body, regarding it as insubstan-
tial. They are of the same category of fools. One can neither reject the
body nor accept it as substantial. The substance is the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and both the body and the soul are energies of the
Supreme Godhead, as described by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita
(7.4-5):
bhamir apo 71010 vayuh
kharh mano buddhir eva ca
aharkara ittyarn me
bhinna prakrtir astadha
apareyam itas tv anyarn
prakrtirh viddhi me param
Jjiva-bhitam maha-baho
yayedari dharyate jagat
“Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all
together these eight comprise My separated material energies. But
besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior
energy of Mine, which consists of all living entities who are struggling
with material nature and are sustaining the universe.”

The body, therefore, has a relationship with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, just as the soul does. Since both of them are energies of the
Lord, neither of them is false, because they come from the reality. One
who does not know this secret of life is described as abudhah. According
to the Vedic injunctions, aitadatmyam idam sarvam, sarvar khalv 1077
brahma: everything is the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, both the body
and the soul are Brahman, since matter and spirit emanate from
Brahman.

Not knowing the conclusions of the Vedas, some people accept the ma-
terial nature as substance, and others accept the spirit soul as substance,
but actually Brahman is the substance. Brahman is the cause of all
causes. The ingredients and the immediate cause of this manifested ma-
terial world are Brahman, and we cannot make the ingredients of this
world independent of Brahman. Furthermore, since the ingredients and
the immediate cause of this material manifestation are Brahman, both of


--- Page 229 ---
Text 19] The Birth of Lord Krsna 225
them are truth, satya; there is no validity to the expression brahma
satyari jagan mithya. The world is not false.

Jaanis reject this world, and foolish persons accept this world as
reality, and in this way they are both misguided. Although the body is
not as important as the soul, we cannot say that it is false. Yet the body is
temporary, and only foolish, materialistic persons, who do not have full
knowledge of the soul, regard the temporary body as reality and engage
in decorating this body. Both of these pitfalls—rejection of the body as
false and acceptance of the body as all in all—can be avoided when one is
fully situated in Krsna consciousness. If we regard this world as false, we
fall into the category of asuras, who say that this world is unreal, with no
foundation and no God in control (asatyam apratistham te jagad ahur
anisvaram). As described in the Sixteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita,
this is the conclusion of demons.

TEXT 19
त्वत्तोऽस्य जन्मस्ितिसंयमान्‌ विभो
वदन्त्यनीहादगुणादविक्रियात्‌ ।
=
त्वयीश्वरे ब्रह्मणि नो fee
EN
त्वदाश्रयत्वादुपचयते गुणे: ॥१९॥
tvatto ‘sya janma-sthiti-sarivyaman vibho
vadanty anihad agunad avikriyat
tvayisvare brahmani no virudhyate
tvad-dsrayatvad upacaryate gunaih

tvattah—are from Your Lordship; asya—of the entire cosmic
manifestation; janma—the creation; sthiti—maintenance; saryaman—
and annihilation; vibho—O my Lord; vadanti—the learned Vedic schol-
ars conclude; anthat—who are free from endeavor; agunat—who are
unaffected by the modes of material nature; avikriyat—who are
unchanging in Your spiritual situation; tvayi—in You; iSvare—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; brahmani—who are Parabrahman,
the Supreme Brahman; no—not; virudhyate—there is a contradiction;
tvat-asrayatvat—because of being controlled by You; upacaryate—


--- Page 230 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
things are going on automatically; gunaih—by the operation of the |
material modes.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, learned Vedic scholars conclude that the creation,
maintenance and annihilation of the entire cosmic manifestation
are performed by You, who are free from endeavor, unaffected by
the modes of material nature, and changeless in Your spiritual
situation. There are no contradictions in You, who are the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Parabrahman. Because the three
modes of material nature —sattva, rajas and tamas —are under Your
control, everything takes place automatically.
PURPORT
As stated in the Vedas:
na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate
na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate
parasya Saktir vividhaiva Srizyate
svabhaviki jiana-bala-kriya ca
“The Supreme Lord has nothing to do, and no one is found to be equal to
or greater than Him, for everything is done naturally and systematically
by His multifarious energies.” (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8) Creation,
maintenance and annihilation are all conducted personally by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and this is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sa-caracaram). Yet ultimately the Lord
does not need to do anything, and therefore He is nirvikara, changeless.
Because everything is done under His direction, He is called srsti-karta,
the master of creation. Similarly, He is the master of annihilation. When
a master sits in one place while his servants work in different duties,
whatever the servants are doing is ultimately an activity of the master,
although he is doing nothing (na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate).
The Lord’s potencies are so numerous that everything is nicely done.
Therefore, He is naturally still and is not directly the doer of anything in
this material world.


--- Page 231 ---
Text 20] The Birth of Lord Krsna 227
TEXT 20
qd त्रिलोकस्थितये खमायया
. o
বিমণি TF ag बणमात्मनः |
सर्गाय रक्तं EER
‘ कृष्णं च वर्णं तमसा जनात्यये ॥२०॥
sa tvam tri-loka-sthitaye sva-mayaya
bibharsi suklam khalu varnam atmanah
sargaya raktarm rajasopabrmhitarm
krsnam ca varnam tamasa jandatyaye
sah tvam—Your Lordship, who are the same person, the Transcen-
dence; tri-loka-sthitaye—to maintain the three worlds, the upper, mid-
dle and lower planetary systems; sva-mayaya—by Your personal energy
(atma-mayaya); bibharsi—assume; suklam—the white form of Visnu
in goodness; khalu—as well as; varnam—color; atmanah—of the same
category as You (visnu-tattva); sargaya—for the creation of the entire
world; raktam—the reddish color of rajo-guna; rajasa— with the quality
of passion; upabrmhitam—being charged; krsnam ca—and the quality
of darkness; varnam—the color; tamasda—which is surrounded by ig-
norance; jana-atyaye—for the ultimate destruction of the entire
creation.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, Your form is transcendental to the three material
modes, yet for the maintenance of the three worlds, You assume
the white color of Vignu in goodness; for creation, which is sur-
rounded by the quality of passion, You appear reddish; and at the
end, when there is a need for annihilation, which is surrounded by
ignorance, You appear blackish.
PURPORT
Vasudeva prayed to the Lord, “You are called suklam. Suklam, or
‘whiteness,’ is the symbolic representation of the Absolute Truth because
it is unaffected by the material qualities. Lord Brahma is called rakta, or


--- Page 232 ---
228 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
red, because Brahma represents the qualities of passion for creation.
Darkness is entrusted to Lord Siva because he annihilates the cosmos.
The creation, annihilation and maintenance of this cosmic manifestation
are conducted by Your potencies, yet You are always unaffected by those
qualities.” As confirmed in the Vedas, harir hi nirgunah saksat: the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is always free from all material
qualities. It is also said that the qualities of passion and ignorance are
nonexistent in the person of the Supreme Lord.

In this verse, the three colors mentioned —sukla, rakta and krsna—
are not to be understood literally, in terms of what we experience with
our senses, but rather as representatives of sattva-guna, rajo-guna and
tamo-guna. After all, sometimes we see that a duck is white, although it
is in tamo-guna, the mode of ignorance. Illustrating the logic called
bakandha-nydaya, the duck is such a fool that it runs after the testicles of
a bull, thinking them to be a hanging fish that can be taken when it
drops. Thus the duck is always in darkness. Vyasadeva, however, the
compiler of the Vedic literature, is blackish, but this does not mean that
he is in tamo-guna; rather, he is in the highest position of sattva-guna,
beyond the material modes of nature. Sometimes these colors (Sukla-
raktas tatha pitah) are used to designate the brahmanas, ksatriyas,
vaiSyas and $idras. Lord Ksirodakadayi Visnu is celebrated as possessing
a blackish color, Lord Siva is whitish, and Lord Brahma is reddish, but
according to Srila Sanatana Gosvami in the Vaisnava-tosani-tika, this ex-
hibition of colors is not what is referred to here.

The real understanding of Sukla, rakta and krsna is as follows. The
Lord is always transcendental, but for the sake of creation He assumes
the color rakta as Lord Brahma. Again, sometimes the Lord becomes
angry. As He says in Bhagavad-gita (16.19):

tan aham dvisatah kriaran
samsaresu naradhaman
ksipamy ajasram asubhan
dsurisv eva yonisu
“Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among
men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various
demoniac species of life.” To destroy the demons, the Lord becomes


--- Page 233 ---
Text 21] The Birth of Lord Krsna 229
angry, and therefore He assumes the form of Lord Siva. In summary, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is always beyond the material qualities,
and we should not be misled into thinking otherwise simply because of
sense perception. One must understand the position of the Lord
through the authorities, or mahdjanas. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.3.28), ete camsa-kalah pumsah krsnas tu bhagavan svayam.
TEXT 21
त्वमस्य लोकस्य विभो रिरकिषु-
गृहेऽतीर्णोऽसि ममाखिलेश्वर |
A ए =
राजन्यसंज्ञासुरकोियूथप-
9
निव्यृद्यमाना निहनिष्यसे चमूः ॥२१॥
tvam asya lokasya vibho riraksisur
grhe ’vatirno ’si mamakhilesvara
rajanya-sarijiiasura-koti-yithapair
nirvytithyamana nihanisyase camih
tvam— Your Lordship; asya—of this world; lokasya—especially of
this martya-loka, the planet earth; vibho—O Supreme; riraksisuh—
desiring protection (from the disturbance of the asuras); grhe —in this
house; avatirnah asi—have now appeared; mama—my; akhila-
iSvara—although You are the proprietor of the entire creation; rajanya-
sarjiia-asura-koti-yitha-paih —with millions of demons and their
followers in the roles of politicians and kings; nirvyahyamanah—which
are moving here and there all over the world; nihanisyase—will kill;
camith—the armies, paraphernalia, soldiers and retinues.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, proprietor of all creation, You have now appeared in
my house, desiring to protect this world. I am sure that You will
kill all the armies that are moving all over the world under the
leadership of politicians who are dressed as ksatriya rulers but who
are factually demons. They must be killed by You for the protec-
tion of the innocent public.


--- Page 234 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
PURPORT

Krsna appears in this world for two purposes, paritranaya sadhinari
vindsaya ca duskrtdm: to protect the innocent, religious devotees of the
Lord and to annihilate all the uneducated, uncultured asuras, who un-
necessarily bark like dogs and fight among themselves for political
power. It is said, kali-kdle nama-ripe krsna avatara. The Hare Krsna
movement is also an incarnation of Krsna in the form of the holy name
(nama-ripe). Every one of us who is actually afraid of the asuric rulers
and politicians must welcome this incarnation of Krsna: Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rima, Hare Rima, Rima
Rama, Hare Hare. Then we will surely be protected from the harassment
of asuric rulers. At the present moment these rulers are so powerful that
by hook or by crook they capture the highest posts in government and
harass countless numbers of people on the plea of national security or
some emergency. Then again, one asura defeats another asura, but the
public continues to suffer. Therefore the entire world is in a precarious
condition, and the only hope is this Hare Krsna movement. Lord
Nrsimmhhadeva appeared when Prahlada was excessively harassed by his
asuric father. Because of such asuric fathers—that is, the ruling politi-
cians—it is very difficult to press forward the Hare Krsna movement,
but because Krsna has now appeared in His holy name through this
movement, we can hope that these asuric fathers will be annihilated and
the kingdom of God established all over the world. The entire world is
now full of many asuras in the guise of politicians, gurus, sadhus, yogis
and incarnations, and they are misleading the general public away from
Krsna consciousness, which can offer true benefit to human society.

TEXT 22
अयं त्वसभ्यस्तव जन्म नौ गृहे
PARA न्यवधीत्‌ सुरेश्वर |
स॒तेऽवतारं पुरुषैः समर्पितं
शत्वाधुनैदापिरत्युदायुधः ।॥२२॥
ayam tv asabhyas tava janma nau grhe
Srutvagrajams te nyavadhit suresvara


--- Page 235 ---
Text 22] The Birth of Lord Krsna 231
sa te ’vataram purusaih samarpitam
srutvadhunaivabhisaraty udayudhah

ayam—this (rascal); tu—Dbut; asabhyah—who is not civilized at all
(asura means “‘uncivilized,” and sura means civilized”); tava—of Your
Lordship; janma—the birth; nau—our; grhe —into the home; Srutva—
after hearing; agrajan te—all the brothers born before You;
nyavadhit—Xkilled; sura-isvara—O Lord of the suras, the civilized per-
sons; sah—he (that uncivilized Kamsa); te— Your; avatdram —ap-
pearance; purusaih—Dby his lieutenants; samarpitam—being informed
of; Srutva—after hearing; adhund—now; eva—indeed; abhisarati—
will come immediately; udayudhah—with raised weapons.

TRANSLATION

O my Lord, Lord of the demigods, after hearing the prophecy
that You would take birth in our home and kill him, this un-
civilized Karmsa killed so many of Your elder brothers. As soon as
he hears from his lieutenants that You have appeared, he will im-
mediately come with weapons to kill You.

PURPORT

1637083 has here been described as asabhya, meaning “uncivilized” or
““most heinous,” because he killed the many children of his sister. When
he heard the prophecy that he would be killed by her eighth son, this un-
civilized man, Karhsa, was immediately ready to kill his innocent sister
on the occasion of her marriage. An uncivilized man can do anything for
the satisfaction of his senses. He can kill children, he can kill cows, he
can kill brahmanas, he can kill old men; he has no mercy for anyone.
According to the Vedic civilization, cows, women, children, old men and
brahmanas should be excused if they are at fault. But asuras, uncivilized
men, do not care about that. At the present moment, the killing of cows
and the killing of children is going on unrestrictedly, and therefore this
civilization is not at all human, and those who are conducting this con-
demned civilization are uncivilized asuras.

Such uncivilized men are not in favor of the Krsna consciousness
movement. As public officers, they declare without hesitation that the


--- Page 236 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
chanting of the Hare Krsna movement is a nuisance, although
Bhagavad-gita clearly says, satatar kirtayanto mam yatantas ca drdha-
vratah. According to this verse, it is the duty of the mahatmas to chant
the Hare Krsna mantra and try to spread it all over the world to the best
of their ability. Unfortunately, society is in such an uncivilized state that
there are so-called mahatmas who are prepared to kill cows and children
and stop the Hare Krsna movement. Such uncivilized activities were ac-
tually demonstrated in opposition to the Hare Krsna movement’s Bombay
center, Hare Krsna Land. As Karhsa was not expected to kill the beautiful
child of Devaki and Vasudeva, the uncivilized society, although unhappy
about the advancement of the Krsna consciousness movement, cannot be
expected to stop it. Yet we must face many difficulties in many different
ways. Although Krsna cannot be killed, Vasudeva, as the father of
Krsna, was trembling because in affection he thought that Karnsa would
immediately come and kill his son. Similarly, although the Krsna con-
sciousness movement and Krsna are not different and no asuras can
check it, we are afraid that at any moment the asuras can stop this move-
ment in any part of the world.
TEXT 23
saw उवाच
अथैनमात्मनं वीक्ष्य महापुरुषलक्षणम्‌ |
देवकी IIT HATZ भीता सुबिसिता 1:30
§ri-Suka uvaca
athainam atmajam viksya
maha-purusa-laksanam
devakt tam upadhavat

karmsad bhita suvismita
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; atha—after this offer-
ing of prayers by Vasudeva; enam—this Krsna; atmajam—their son;
viksya—observing; maha-purusa-laksanam—with all the symptoms of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu; devaki—Krsna’s mother;
tam—unto Him (Krsna); upadhavat—offered prayers; kamsat—of


--- Page 237 ---
Text 24] The Birth of Lord Krsna 233
Kamsa; bhita—being afraid; su-vismita—and also being astonished by
seeing such a wonderful child.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thereafter, having seen that her
child had all the symptoms of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Devaki, who was very much afraid of Karmsa and unusually
astonished, began to offer prayers to the Lord.
PURPORT
The word suvismitd, meaning ‘‘astonished,” is significant in this
verse. Devaki and her husband, Vasudeva, were assured that their child
was the Supreme Personality of Godhead and could not be killed by
Karnsa, but because of affection, as they thought of Karhsa’s previous
atrocities, they were simultaneously afraid that Krsna would be killed.
This is why the word suvismita has been used. Similarly, we are also
astounded upon thinking of whether this movement will be killed by the
asuras or will continue to advance without fear.
TEXT 24
श्रीदेवक्युवाच
रूपं यत्‌ तत्‌ प्राहुरव्यक्तमाययं
ह्म ज्योतिनिगुणं निर्विकारम्‌ |
सत्तामात्रं निर्विशेषं निरीहं
स तवं साक्षाद्‌ विष्णुरध्यात्मदीपः ।२४॥
sri-devaky uvaca
70707 yat tat prahur avyaktam adyam
brahma jyotir nirgunam nirvikaram
satta-matram nirvisesam nirtham
sa £৮৫7 saksad visnur adhyatma-dipah
sri-devaki uvaca—Sri Devaki said; ripam—form or substance; yat
tat—because You are the same substance; prahuh— You are sometimes


--- Page 238 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
called; avyaktam—not perceivable by the material senses (atah sri-
krsna-namadi na bhaved grahyam indriyaih); adyam—You are the
original cause; brahma—You are known as Brahman; jyotih—light;
nirgunam—without material qualities; nirvikdram—without change,
the same form of Visnu perpetually; sattd-matram—the original sub-
stance, the cause of everything; nirviSesam—You are present every-
where as the Supersoul (within the heart of a human being and within
the heart of an animal, the same substance is present); nirtham —with-
out material desires; sah —that Supreme Person; tvam — Your Lordship;
saksat—directly; visnuh—Lord Visnu; adhyatma-dipah—the light for
all transcendental knowledge (knowing You, one knows everything:
‘yasmin vijiiate sarvam evar vijiiatarn bhavati).
TRANSLATION
Sri Devaki said: My dear Lord, there are different Vedas, some
of which describe You as unperceivable through words and the
mind. Yet You are the origin of the entire cosmic manifestation.
You are Brahman, the greatest of everything, full of effulgence
like the sun. You have no material cause, You are free from change
and deviation, and You have no material desires. Thus the Vedas
say that You are the substance. Therefore, my Lord, You are
directly the origin of all Vedic statements, and by understanding
You, one gradually understands everything. You are different
from the light of Brahman and Paramatma, yet You are not dif-
ferent from them. Everything emanates from You. Indeed, You are
the cause of all causes, Lord Visnu, the light of all transcendental
knowledge.
PURPORT
Visnu is the origin of everything, and there is no difference between
Lord Visnu and Lord Krsna because both of Them are visnu-tattva. From
the Rg Veda we understand, om tad visnoh paramarm padam: the
original substance is the all-pervading Lord Visnu, who is also
Paramatma and the effulgent Brahman. The living entities are also part
and parcel of Visnu, who has various energies (parasya saktir vividhaiva
$rayate svabhaviki jiana-bala-kriya ca). Visnu, or Krsna, is therefore


--- Page 239 ---
Text 24] The Birth of Lord Krsna 235
everything. Lord Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita (10.8), aham
sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvarmh pravartate: “I am the source of all
spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me.” Krsna,
therefore, is the original cause of everything (sarva-karana-karanam).
When Visnu expands in His all-pervading aspect, we should understand
Him to be the nirakdra-nirvisesa-brahmajyoti.

Although everything emanates from Krsna, He is ultimately a person.
Aham adir hi devanam: He is the origin of Brahma, Vispu and
Maheévara, and from them many other demigods are manifested. Krsna
therefore says in Bhagavad-gita (14.27), brahmano hi pratisthaham:
“Brahman rests upon Me.” The Lord also says:

ye ’py anya-devata-bhakta
yajante §raddhayanvitah
te ‘pi mam eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-parvakam
“Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunti, is really
meant for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding.”
(Bg. 9.23) There are many persons who worship different demigods,
considering all of them to be separate gods, which in fact they are not.
The fact is that every demigod, and every living entity, is part and parcel
of Krsna (mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhutah). The demigods are also in
the category of living entities; they are not separate gods. But men whose
knowledge is immature and contaminated by the modes of material
nature worship various demigods, according to their intelligence.
Therefore they are rebuked in Bhagavad-gita (kamais tais tair hrta-
jAanah prapadyante ’nya-devatah). Because they are unintelligent and
not very advanced and have not properly considered the truth, they take
to the worship of various demigods or speculate according to various phi-
losophies, such as the Mayavada philosophy.

Krsna, Vignu, is the actual origin of everything. As stated in the
Vedas, yasya bhdsa sarvam 007 vibhati. The Absolute Truth is de-
scribed later in the Srimad- Bhagavatam (10.28.15) as satyari jidnam
anantam yad brahma-jyotih ৩৫780007277, The brahmajyoti is sandtana,
eternal, yet it is dependent on Krsna (brahmano hi pratisthaham). The


--- Page 240 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
Brahma-sarihitd states that the Lord is all-pervading. Andantara-stha-
paramanu-cayantara-stham: He is within this universe, and He is
within the atom as Paramatma. Yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-
koti-kotisv aSesa-vasudhadi-vibhiti-bhinnam: Brahman is also not inde-
pendent of Him. Therefore whatever a philosopher may describe is
ultimately Krsna, or Lord Visnu (sarvari khalv 80077 brahma, param
brahma [02707 dhama pavitrarih paramam bhavan). According to dif-
ferent phases of understanding, Lord Visnu is differently described, but
in fact He is the origin of everything.

Because Devaki was an unalloyed devotee, she could understand that
the same Lord Vigsnu had appeared as her son. Therefore, after the
prayers of Vasudeva, Devaki offered her prayers. She was very
frightened because of her brother’s atrocities. Devaki said, “My dear
Lord, Your eternal forms, like Narayana, Lord Rama, Sesa, Variha,
Nrsimha, Vamana, Baladeva, and millions of similar incarnations
emanating from Visnu, are described in the Vedic literature as original.
You are original because all Your forms as incarnations are outside of this
material creation. Your form was existing before this cosmic manifesta-
tion was created. Your forms are eternal and all-pervading. They are
self-effulgent, changeless and uncontaminated by the material qualities.
Such eternal forms are evercognizant and full of bliss; they are situated
in transcendental goodness and are always engaged in different pastimes.
You are not limited to a particular form only; all such transcendental,
eternal forms are self-sufficient. I can understand that You are the
Supreme Lord Visnu.” We may conclude, therefore, that Lord Visnu is
everything, although He is also different from everything. This is the
acintya-bhedabheda-tattva philosophy.

TEXT 25
नष्टे लोके ল্তিত্যাখাবমাল
महाभूतेष्वादि मूतं गतेषु |
व्यक्तेऽव्यक्तं कालवेगेन याते
भवानेकः रिष्यतेऽदोषसंज्ञः TEA]
naste loke dvi-parardhavasane
maha-bhiitesv adi-bhiatarh gatesu


--- Page 241 ---
Text 25] The Birth of Lord Krsna 237
vyakte ’vyaktam kala-vegena yate
bhavan ekah Sisyate ’Sesa-sarijiiah

naste —after the annihilation; loke —of the cosmic manifestation; dvi-
parardha-avasane —after millions and millions of years (the life of
Brahma); maha-bhitesu—when the five primary elements (earth,
water, fire, air and ether); adi-bhitam gatesu—enter within the subtle
elements of sense perception; vyakte—when everything manifested;
avyaktam—into the unmanifested; kala-vegena—by the force of time;
yate—enters; bhavan—Your Lordship; ekah—only one; Sisyate—
remains; asesa-samjiah—the same one with different names.

TRANSLATION

After millions of years, at the time of cosmic annihilation, when
everything, manifested and unmanifested, is annihilated by the
force of time, the five gross elements enter into the subtle concep-
tion, and the manifested categories enter into the unmanifested
substance. At that time, You alone remain, and You are known as
Ananta Sega-naga.

PURPORT

At the time of annihilation, the five gross elements—earth, water,
fire, air and ether—enter into the mind, intelligence and false ego
(aharikdara), and the entire cosmic manifestation enters into the spiritual
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who alone remains as the
origin of everything. The Lord is therefore known as Sesa-naga, as Adi-
purusa and by many other names.

Devaki therefore prayed, ‘After many millions of years, when Lord
Brahmi comes to the end of his life, the annihilation of the cosmic
manifestation takes place. At that time the five elements —namely earth,
water, fire, air and ether —enter into the mahat-tattva. The mahat-tattva
again enters, by the force of time, into the nonmanifested total material
energy; the total material energy enters into the energetic pradhana, and
the pradhana enters into You. Therefore after the annihilation of the
whole cosmic manifestation, You alone remain with Your transcendental
name, form, quality and paraphernalia.


--- Page 242 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
“My Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You because You are
the director of the unmanifested total energy, and the ultimate reservoir
of the material nature. My Lord, the whole cosmic manifestation is under
the influence of time, beginning from the moment up to the duration of
the year. All act under Your direction. You are the original director of
everything and the reservoir of all potent energies.”
TEXT 26
योऽयं कालस्तस्य तेऽव्यक्तबन्धो
चेष्टामाहुशवेष्ठते মল विश्वम्‌ ।
[ नि 9
निमेषादिवेत्सरान्तो महीयां-
. ति N
W त्वेशानं क्षेमधाम प्रपये REN)
yo ’yam kdlas tasya te ४१/०८ -6८ा1व110
cestam ahus cestate yena visvam +
nimesadir vatsaranto mahiyars
tar tves@nari ksema-dhama prapadye
yah—that which; ayam—this; kalah—time (minutes, hours, sec-
onds); tasya—of Him; te—of You; avyakta-bandho—O my Lord, You
are the inaugurator of the unmanifested (the original mahat-tattva or
prakrti); cestam—attempt or pastimes; dhuh—it is said; cestate—
works; yena—by which; visvam—the entire creation; nimesa-adih—
beginning with minute parts of time; vatsara-antah—up to the limit of a
year; mahiyan—powerful; tam—unto Your Lordship; tva Sanam—
unto You, the supreme controller; ksema-dhama—the reservoir of all
auspiciousness; prapadye—I offer full surrender.
TRANSLATION
O inaugurator of the material energy, this wonderful creation
works under the control of powerful time, which is divided into
seconds, minutes, hours and years. This element of time, which
extends for many millions of years, is but another form of Lord
Visnu. For Your pastimes, You act as the controller of time, but


--- Page 243 ---
Text 26] The Birth of Lord Krsna 239
You are the reservoir of all good fortune. Let me offer my full
surrender unto Your Lordship.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.52):
yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanarm
raja samasta-sura-mirtir asesa-tejah
yasydjiiayd bhramati sarmbhrta-kala-cakro
govindam adi-purusari tam ahariv bhajami

“The sun is the king of all planetary systems and has unlimited potency
in heat and light. I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, under whose control even the sun, which is con-
sidered to be the eye of the Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal
time.” Although we see the cosmic manifestation as gigantic and wonder-
ful, it is within the limitations of kdla, the time factor. This time factor is
also controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sa-caracaram). Pra-
krti, the cosmic manifestation, is under the control of time. Indeed,
everything is under the control of time, and time is controlled by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Supreme Lord has no
fear of the onslaughts of time. Time is estimated according to the move-
ments of the sun (savitd). Every minute, every second, every day, every
night, every month and every year of time can be calculated according to
the sun’s movements. But the sun is not independent, for it is under
time’s control. Bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakrah: the sun moves within
the kala-cakra, the orbit of time. The sun is under the control of time,
and time is controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore
the Lord has no fear of time.

The Lord is addressed here as avyakta-bandhu, or the inaugurator of
the movements of the entire cosmic manifestation. Sometimes the cosmic
manifestation is compared to a potter’s wheel. When a potter’s wheel is
spinning, who has set it in motion? It is the potter, of course, although
sometimes we can see only the motion of the wheel and cannot see the


--- Page 244 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
potter himself. Therefore the Lord, who is behind the motion of the cos-
mos, is called avyakta-bandhu. Everything is within the limits of time,
but time moves under the direction of the Lord, who is therefore not
within time’s limit.
TEXT 27
मर्त्यो सरत्युव्यालमीतः पलायन्‌
= ति
लोकान्‌ सर्वानिर्भयं नाध्यगच्छत्‌ |
त्वत्पादान्जं प्राप्य यच्च्छयाच
EN
सुस्थः देते गत्युरस्मादपेति ॥।২৩॥
martyo mrtyu-vyala-bhitah palayan
lokan sarvan nirbhayari nadhyagacchat
tvat-padabjari prapya yadrcchayadya
susthah Sete mrtyur asmad apaiti

martyah—the living entities who are sure to die; mrtyu-vyala-
bhitah—afraid of the serpent of death; paldyan—running (as soon as a
serpent is seen, everyone runs away, fearing immediate death); lokan—
to the different planets; sarvan—all; nirbhayam —fearlessness; na
adhyagacchat—do not obtain; tvat-pada-abjam—of Your lotus feet;
prapya—obtaining the shelter; yadrcchaya—by chance, by the mercy of
Your Lordship and Your representative, the spiritual master (guru-krpa,
krsna-krpa); adya—presently; su-sthah—Dbeing undisturbed and men-
tally composed; Sete —are sleeping; mrtyuh—death; asmat—from those
persons; apaiti— flees.

TRANSLATION

No one in this material world has become free from the four
principles birth, death, old age and disease, even by fleeing to
various planets. But now that You have appeared, My Lord, death is
fleeing in fear of You, and the living entities, having obtained
shelter at Your lotus feet by Your mercy, are sleeping in full
mental peace.


--- Page 245 ---
Text 27] The Birth of Lord Krsna 241
PURPORT

There are different categories of living entities, but everyone is afraid
of death. The highest aim of the karmis is to be promoted to the higher,
heavenly planets, where the duration of life is very long. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (8.17), sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmano
viduh: one day of Brahma equals 1,000 yugas, and each yuga consists of
4,300,000 years. Similarly, Brahma has a night of 1,000 times 4,300,000
years. In this way, we may calculate Brahma’s month and year, but even
Brahma, who lives for millions and millions of years (dvi-parardha-
kala), also must die. According to Vedic $astra, the inhabitants of the
higher planetary systems live for 10,000 years, and just as Brahma’s day
is calculated to equal 4,300,000,000 of our years, one day in the higher
planetary systems equals six of our months. Karmis, therefore, try for
promotion to the higher planetary systems, but this cannot free them
from death. In this material world, everyone from Brahma to the insig-
nificant ant must die. Therefore this world is called martya-loka. As
Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (8.16), abrahma-bhuvanal lokah punar
avartino शुष्क; as long as one is within this material world, either on
Brahmaloka or on any other loka within this universe, one must undergo
the kala-cakra of one life after another (bhiitva bhutva praliyate). But if
one returns to the Supreme Personality of Godhead (yad gatva na
nivartante), one need not reenter the limits of time. Therefore, devotees
who have taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord can sleep
very peacefully with this assurance from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9), tyaktva deham punar
janma naiti: after giving up the present body, a devotee who has under-
stood Krsna as He is need not return to this material world.

The constitutional position for the living entity is eternity (na hanyate
hanyamane sarire, nityah sasvato ’yam). Every living entity is eternal.
But because of having fallen into this material world, one wanders
within the universe, continually changing from one body to another.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu says:

brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan ja
guru-krsna prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
(Ce. Madhya 19.151)


--- Page 246 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
Everyone is wandering up and down within this universe, but one who is
sufficiently fortunate comes in contact with Krsna consciousness, by the
mercy of the spiritual master, and takes to the path of devotional service.
Then one is assured of eternal life, with no fear of death. When Krsna
appears, everyone is freed from fear of death, yet Devaki felt, “We are
still afraid of Karhsa, although You have appeared as our son.” She was
more or less bewildered as to why this should be so, and she appealed to
the Lord to free her and Vasudeva from this fear.

In this connection, it may be noted that the moon is one of the
heavenly planets. From the Vedic literature we understand that one who
goes to the moon receives a life with a duration of ten thousand years in
which to enjoy the fruits of pious activities. If our so-called scientists are
going to the moon, why should they come back here? We must conclude
without a doubt that they have never gone to the moon. To go to the
moon, one must have the qualification of pious activities. Then one may
go there and live. If one has gone to the moon, why should he return to
this planet, where life is of a very short duration?

TEXT 28
स॒ त्वं घोरादुग्रसेनात्मजान-
fe अस्तान्‌ भरत्यवित्रासहासि |
. PRE ৬ .
सूपं RK ard ध्यानधिष्ण्यं
मा प्रत्यक्षं মাস্ততহাঁ FOE ॥२८॥
sa [एवमी ghorad ugrasendtmajan nas
trahi trastan bhrtya-vitrasa-hasi
ripari cedar paurusarn dhyana-dhisnyar
ma pratyaksarih marisa-drsarm krsisthah

sah— Your Lordship; tvam— You; ghorat—terribly fierce; ugrasena-
atmajat—from the son of Ugrasena; nah—us; trahi—kindly protect;
trastan —who are very much afraid (of him); bhrtya-vitrasa-ha asi—
You are naturally the destroyer of the fear of Your servants; ripam—in
Your Visnu form; ca—also; idam—this; paurusam—as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; dhyana-dhisnyam—who is appreciated by


--- Page 247 ---
Text 28] The Birth of Lord Krsna 243

meditation; ma—not; pratyaksam—directly visible; mamsa-drsam —to

those who see with their material eyes; krsisthah— please be.
TRANSLATION

My Lord, because You dispell all the fear of Your devotees, I re-
quest You to save us and give us protection from the terrible fear
of Karisa. Your form as Visnu, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, is appreciated by yogis in meditation. Please make this form
invisible to those who see with material eyes.

PURPORT

The word dhyana-dhisnyam is significant in this verse because the
form of Lord Visnu is meditated upon by yogis (dhydnavasthita-tad-
gatena manasa pasyanti yam yoginah). Devaki requested the Lord, who
had appeared as Visnu, to conceal that form, for she wanted to see the
Lord as an ordinary child, like a child appreciated by persons who have
material eyes. Devaki wanted to see whether the Supreme Personality of
Godhead had factually appeared or she was dreaming the Visnu form. If
Karisa were to come, she thought, upon seeing the Vignu form he would
immediately kill the child, but if he saw a human child, he might recon-
sider. Devaki was afraid of Ugrasena-atmaja; that is, she was afraid not
of Ugrasena and his men, but of the son of Ugrasena. Thus she requested
the Lord to dissipate that fear, since He is always ready to give protection
(abhayam) to His devotees. “My Lord,” she prayed, “I request You to
save me from the cruel hands of the son of Ugrasena, 1697188. I am pray-
ing to Your Lordship to please rescue me from this fearful condition be-
cause You are always ready to give protection to Your servitors.” The
Lord has confirmed this statement in the Bhagavad-gita by assuring
Arjuna, “You may declare to the world, My devotee shall never be
vanquished.”

While thus praying to the Lord for rescue, mother Devaki expressed
her motherly affection: “I understand that this transcendental form is
generally perceived in meditation by the great sages, but I am still afraid
because as soon as Karisa understands that You have appeared, he might
harm You. So I request that for the time being You become invisible to


--- Page 248 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
our material eyes.”” In other words, she requested the Lord to assume the
form of an ordinary child. “My only cause of fear from my brother
Kamsa is due to Your appearance. My Lord Madhusidana, Karhsa may
know that You are already born. Therefore I request You to conceal this
four-armed form of Your Lordship, which holds the four symbols of
Visnu —namely the conchshell, the disc, the club and the lotus flower.
My dear Lord, at the end of the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation,
You put the whole universe within Your abdomen; still, by Your
unalloyed mercy, You have appeared in my womb. I am surprised that
You imitate the activities of ordinary human beings just to please Your
devotee.”

Devaki was so afraid of Karisa that she could not believe that Karhsa
would be unable to kill Lord Visnu, who was personally present. Out of
motherly affection, therefore, she requested the Supreme Personality of
Godhead to disappear. Although because of the Lord’s disappearance
Karnsa would harass her more and more, thinking that the child born of
her was hidden somewhere, she did not want the transcendental child to
be harassed and killed. Therefore she requested Lord Visnu to disappear.
Later, when harassed, she would think of Him within her mind.

TEXT 29
(3
जन्म ते मय्यसो पापो मा विद्यान्मधुखदन |
सुदि भवद्धेतोः कंसादहमधीरधीः ie
janma te mayy asau papo
ma vidyan madhusidana
samudvije bhavad-dhetoh
kamsad aham adhira-dhih
janma—the birth; te—of Your Lordship; mayi—in my (womb);
asau—that Kamsa; papah—extremely sinful; ma vidyat—may be un-
able to understand; madhusiidana —O Madhusidana; samudvije—I am
full of anxiety; bhavat-hetoh—because of Your appearance; kamsat—
because of Karhsa, with whom I have had such bad experience; aham—
I; adhira-dhih—have become more and more anxious.


--- Page 249 ---
Text 30] The Birth of Lord Krsna 245
TRANSLATION
© Madhusiidana, because of Your appearance, I am becoming
more and more anxious in fear of Karnsa. Therefore, please ar-
range for that sinful Karnsa to be unable to understand that You
have taken birth from my womb.
PURPORT
Devaki addressed the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Madhu-
siidana. She was aware that the Lord had killed many demons like
Madhu who were hundreds and thousands of times more powerful than
1637188, yet because of affection for the transcendental child, she believed
that Karhsa could kill Him. Instead of thinking of the unlimited power of
the Lord, she thought of the Lord with affection, and therefore she re-
quested the transcendental child to disappear.
TEXT 30
४ =,
उपसंहर विश्वात्मन्नदो रूपमरोक्किम्‌ |
TETRA जुष्टं gag ॥२०॥
upasarmhara visvatmann
ado rupam alaukikam
Sarikha-cakra-gada-padma-
Sriya justarm catur-bhujam
upasarmmhara—withdraw; visvatman—O all-pervading Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; adah—that; ripam—form; alaukikam—which is
unnatural in this world; Sarikha-cakra-gada-padma—of the conchshell,
disc, club and lotus; $riya—with these opulences; justam—decorated;
catuh-bhujam —four hands.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, You are the all-pervading Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and Your transcendental four-armed form, holding
conchshell, disc, club and lotus, is unnatural for this world. Please


--- Page 250 ---
246 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
withdraw this form [and become just like a natural human child so
that I may try to hide You somewhere].
PURPORT
Devaki was thinking of hiding the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and not handing Him over to Karinsa as she had all her previous children.
Although Vasudeva had promised to hand over every child to Karnsa,
this time he wanted to break his promise and hide the child somewhere.
But because of the Lord’s appearance in this surprising four-armed
form, He would be impossible to hide.
TEXT 31
fd यदेतत्‌ खतनोौ निशान्ते
यथावकाशं पुरुष; परो भवान्‌ |
बिभर्ति सोऽयं मम गर्भ॑गोऽभू-
दहो नृलोकस्य विडम्बनं हि तत्‌ ॥२१॥
visvarh yad etat sva-tanau nisante
yathavakasar purusah paro bhavan
bibharti so ’yarh mama garbhago ‘bhid
aho nr-lokasya vidambanam hi tat
visvam—the entire cosmic manifestation; yat etat—containing all
moving and nonmoving creations; sva-tanau—within Your body;
nisd-ante—at the time of devastation; yathd-avakasam—shelter in
Your body without difficulty; purusah—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; parah—transcendental; bhavan— Your Lordship; bibharti—
keep; sah—that (Supreme Personality of Godhead); ayam—this form;
mama —my; garbha-gah—came within my womb; abhiit—it so hap-
pened; aho—alas; nr-lokasya—within this material world of living en-
tities; vidambanam—it is impossible to think of; hi—indeed; tat—that
(kind of conception).
TRANSLATION
At the time of devastation, the entire cosmos, containing all cre-
ated moving and nonmoving entities, enters Your transcendental


--- Page 251 ---
Text 31] The Birth of Lord Krsna " 247
body and is held there without difficulty. But now this transcen-
dental form has taken birth from my womb. People will not be
able to believe this, and I shall become an object of ridicule.
PURPORT

As explained in Caitanya-caritamrta, loving service to the Personality
of Godhead is of two different kinds: aisvarya-pirna, full of opulence,
and aisvarya-sithila, without opulence. Real love of Godhead begins with
aiSvarya-$ithila, simply on the basis of pure love.

premaifijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yar §yamasundaram acintya-guna-svaripari
govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami
(Brahma-samhita 5.38)

Pure devotees, whose eyes are anointed with the ointment of prema,
love, want to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Syamasundara,
Muralidhara, with a flute swaying in His two hands. This is the form
available to the inhabitants of Vrndayana, who are all in love with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as Syamasundara, not as Lord Visnu,
Narayana, who is worshiped in Vaikuntha, where the devotees admire
His opulence. Although Devaki is not on the Vrndavana platform, she is
near the Vrndavana platform. On the Vrndavana platform the mother of
Krsna is mother Yasoda, and on the Mathura and Dvaraka platform the
mother of Krsna is Devaki. In Mathura and Dviraka the love for the
Lord is mixed with appreciation of His opulence, but in Vrndavana the
opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not exhibited.

There are five stages of loving service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead — santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya and madhurya. Devaki is on
the platform of vatsalya. She wanted to deal with her eternal son, Krsna,
in that stage of love, and therefore she wanted the Supreme Personality
of Godhead to withdraw His opulent form of Vispu. Srila Viévanatha
Cakravarti Thakura illuminates this fact very clearly in his explanation
of this verse.

Bhakti, bhagavan and bhakta do not belong to the material world.
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):


--- Page 252 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
mar ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gundan samatityaitan
brahma-bhityaya kalpate
“One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed devotional ser-
vice immediately transcends the modes of material nature and is elevated
to the spiritual platform.” From the very beginning of one’s transactions
in bhakti, one is situated on the transcendental platform. Vasudeva and
Devaki, therefore, being situated in a completely pure devotional state,
are beyond this material world and are not subject to material fear. In the
transcendental world, however, because of pure devotion, there is a simi-
lar conception of fear, which is due to intense love.

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi
tattvatah) and as confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (bhaktyaham ekaya
grahyah), without bhakti one cannot understand the spiritual situation
of the Lord. Bhakti may be considered in three stages, called guni-bhiita,
pradhani-bhiita and kevala, and according to these stages there are three
divisions, which are called jiiana, jianamayi and rati, or prema—that is,
simple knowledge, love mixed with knowledge, and pure love. By simple
knowledge, one can perceive transcendental bliss without variety. This
perception is called mana-bhiiti. When one comes to the stage of
JjAdnamayi, one realizes the transcendental opulences of the Personality
of Godhead. But when one reaches pure love, one realizes the transcen-
dental form of the Lord as Lord Krsna or Lord Rima. This is what is
wanted. Especially in the madhurya-rasa, one becomes attached to the
Personality of Godhead (sri-vigraha-nistha-rapadi). Then loving trans-
actions between the Lord and the devotee begin.

The special significance of Krsna’s bearing a flute in His hands in Vra-
jabhiimi, Vrndavana, is described as madhuri. . . virgjate. The form of
the Lord with a flute in His hands is most attractive, and the one who is
most sublimely attracted is Srimati Radharani, Radhika. She enjoys
supremely blissful association with Krsna. Sometimes people cannot
understand why Radhika’s name is not mentioned in Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Actually, however, Radhika can be understood from the
word aradhana, which indicates that She enjoys the highest loving
affairs with Krsna.


--- Page 253 ---
Text 32] The Birth of Lord Krsna 249
Not wanting to be ridiculed for having given birth to Visnu, Devaki
wanted Krsna, with two hands, and therefore she requested the Lord to
change His form.
TEXT 32
श्रीभगवाठवाच
€.
त्वमेव WEIS: पृश्निः खायम्युवे सति |
तदायं सतपा नाम प्रजापतिरकल्मषः ॥२२॥
$ri-bhagavan uvdca
tvam eva piurva-sarge 01:00
prsnih svayambhuve sati
tadayam sutapa nama
prajapatir akalmasah
sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said to
Devaki; tvam—you; eva—indeed; pirva-sarge—in a previous millen-
nium; abhiith—became; prsnih —by the name Préni; svayambhuve —the
millennium of Svayambhuva Manu; sati—O supremely chaste; tada—at
that time; ayam—Vasudeva; sutapd—Sutapa; ndma—by the name;
prajapatih—a Prajapati; akalmasah—a spotlessly pious person.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied: My dear mother,
best of the chaste, in your previous birth, in the Svayambhuva
millennium, you were known as Préni, and Vasudeva, who was the
most pious Prajapati, was named Sutapa.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead made it clear that Devaki had
not become His mother only now; rather, she had been His mother pre-
viously also. Krsna is eternal, and His selection of a father and mother
from among His devotees takes place eternally. Previously also, Devaki
had been the Lord’s mother and Vasudeva the Lord’s father, and they
were named Préni and Sutapa. When the Supreme Personality of God-
head appears, He accepts His eternal father and mother, and they accept


--- Page 254 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
Krsna as their son. This pastime takes place eternally and is therefore
called nitya-lila. Thus there was no cause for surprise or ridicule. As
confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehariv punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this ma-
terial world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.” One should try to
understand the appearance and disappearance of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead from Vedic authorities, not from imagination. One
who follows his imaginations about the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is condemned.
avajananti mam midha
manusim tanum asritam
param bhavam ajananto
mama bhiita-mahesvaram
(Bg. 9.11)
The Lord appears as the son of His devotee by His param bhavam. The
word bhava refers to the stage of pure love, which has nothing to do with
material transactions.
TEXT 33
+R = ~~
युवाव जह्मणादिष्टां ग्रजासगं यदा ततः |
सननियम्येन्द्रियग्रामं तेपाथे परमं तपः ॥२३॥
yuvam vai brahmanadistau
praja-sarge yada tatah
sanniyamyendriya-gramarm
tepathe paramam tapah
yuvam—both of you (Préni and Sutapa); vai—indeed; brahmana
adistau—ordered by Lord Brahma (who is known as Pitimaha, the


--- Page 255 ---
Text 33] The Birth of Lord Krsna 251
father of the Prajapatis); praja-sarge—in the creation of progeny;
yada—when; tatah—thereafter; sanniyamya—keeping under full con-
trol; indriya-gramam—the senses; tepdthe—underwent; paramam—
very great; tapah— austerity.

TRANSLATION

‘When both of you were ordered by Lord Brahma to create prog-
eny, you first underwent severe austerities by controlling your
senses.

PURPORT

Here is an instruction about how to use one’s senses to create progeny.
According to Vedic principles, before creating progeny one must fully
control the senses. This control takes place through the garbhadhana-
sariskara. In India there is great agitation for birth control in various
mechanical ways, but birth cannot be mechanically controlled. As stated
in Bhagavad-gita (13.9), janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosanu-
darsanam: birth, death, old age and disease are certainly the primary
distresses of the material world. People are trying to control birth, but
they are not able to control death; and if one cannot control death, one
cannot control birth either. In other words, artificially controlling birth is
not any more feasible than artificially controlling death.

According to Vedic civilization, procreation should not be contrary to
religious principles, and then the birthrate will be controlled. As stated
in Bhagavad-gita (7.11), dharmaviruddho bhitesu kamo ’smi: sex not
contrary to religious principles is a representation of the Supreme Lord.
People should be educated in how to give birth to good children through
sarhskaras, beginning with the garbhddhana-sariskara; birth should not
be controlled by artificial means, for this will lead to a civilization of
animals. If one follows religious principles, he automatically practices
birth control because if one is spiritually educated he knows that the
aftereffects of sex are various types of misery (bahu-duhkha-bhdja).
One who is spiritually advanced does not indulge in uncontrolled sex.
Therefore, instead of being forced to refrain from sex or refrain from
giving birth to many children, people should be spiritually educated, and
then birth control will automatically follow.


--- Page 256 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
If one is determined to make spiritual advancement, he will not beget
a child unless able to make that child a devotee. As stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (5.5.18), pitd na sa syat: one should not become a father
unless one is able to protect his child from mrtyu, the path of birth and
death. But where is there education about this? A responsible father
never begets children like cats and dogs. Instead of being encouraged to
adopt artificial means of birth control, people should be educated in
Krsna consciousness because only then will they understand their re-
sponsibility to their children. If one can beget children who will be
devotees and be taught to turn aside from the path of birth and death
(mrtyu-samsara-vartmani), there is no need of birth control. Rather, one
should be encouraged to beget children. Artificial means of birth control
have no value. Whether one begets children or does not, a population of
men who are like cats and dogs will never make human society happy. It
is therefore necessary for people to be educated spiritually so that instead
of begetting children like cats and dogs, they will undergo austerities to
produce devotees. This will make their lives successful.
TEXTS 34-35
< 6,
वषेवातातपहिमघमकालगुणानयु |
EN hy ~ ©. =
सहमाना शधासरोधवबिनिधूतमनोमटौ | २४॥
७
शीर्णपर्णानिलाहारावुपशान्तेन चेतसा |
a
मत्तः कामानभीप्सन्तो मदाराधनमीहतुः ॥३५॥
varsa-vatatapa-hima-
gharma-kala-gunan anu
sahamanau svasa-rodha-
vinirdhita-mano-malau
Strna-parnanilaharav
upasantena cetasa
mattah kaman abhipsantau
mad-aradhanam ithatuh
varsa—the rain; vata—strong wind; dtapa—strong sunshine; hima —
severe cold; gharma—heat; kala-gunan anu—according to seasonal


--- Page 257 ---
Text 35] The Birth of Lord Krsna 253
changes; sahamanau—Dby enduring; Svdasa-rodha—by practicing yoga,
controlling the breath; vinirdhiita—the dirty things accumulated in the
mind were completely washed away; manah-malau—the mind became
clean, free from material contamination; $irna—rejected, dry; parna—
leaves from the trees; anila—and air; ahdrau—eating; upasantena—
peaceful; cetasa—with a fully controlled mind; mattah—from Me;
kaman abhipsantau—desiring to beg some benediction; mat—My;
aradhanam—worship; thatuh—you both executed.
TRANSLATION

My dear father and mother, you endured rain, wind, strong sun,
scorching heat and severe cold, suffering all sorts of inconve-
nience according to different seasons. By practicing pranayama to
control the air within the body through yoga, and by eating only
air and dry leaves fallen from the trees, you cleansed from your
minds all dirty things. In this way, desiring a benediction from Me,
you worshiped Me with peaceful minds.

PURPORT

Vasudeva and Devaki did not obtain the Supreme Personality of God-
head as their son very easily, nor does the Supreme Godhead accept
merely anyone as His father and mother. Here we can see how Vasudeva
and Devaki obtained Krsna as their eternal son. In our own lives, we are
meant to follow the principles indicated herewith for getting good
children. Of course, it is not possible for everyone to get Krsna as his son,
but at least one can get very good sons and daughters for the benefit of
human society. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that if human beings do not
follow the spiritual way of life, there will be an increase of varna-
sartkara population, population begotten like cats and dogs, and the en-
tire world will become like hell. Not practicing Krsna consciousness but
simply encouraging artificial means to check the population will be
futile; the population will increase, and it will consist of varna-sarikara,
unwanted progeny. It is better to teach people how to beget children not
like hogs and dogs, but in controlled life.

Human life is meant not for becoming a hog or dog, but for tapo
divyam, transcendental austerity. Everyone should be taught to undergo


--- Page 258 ---
254. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
austerity, tapasya. Although it may not be possible to undergo tapasya
like that of Préni and Sutapa, the $astra has given an opportunity for a
method of tapasya very easy to perform —the sarkirtana movement.
One cannot expect to undergo tapasya to get Krsna as one’s child, yet
simply by chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra (kirtanad eva
krsnasya), one can become so pure that one becomes free from all the
contamination of this material world (mukta-sangah) and goes back
home, back to Godhead (02727 vrajet). The Krsna consciousness move-
ment, therefore, is teaching people not to adopt artificial means of happi-
ness, but to take the real path of happiness as prescribed in the $astra—
the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra—and become perfect in every
aspect of material existence.
TEXT 36
ud वां तप्यतोस्तीव्रं तपः परमदुष्करम्‌ |
6. =
दिव्यवषेसहस्राणि दवादशेयुमदात्मनोः ॥३६॥
evam vam tapyatos tivram
tapah parama-duskaram
divya-varsa-sahasrani
dvadaseyur mad-atmanoh
evam—in this way; vam—for both of you; tapyatoh—executing
austerities; tivram—very severe; tapah—austerity; parama-duska-
ram—extremely difficult to execute; divya-varsa—celestial years, or
years counted according to the higher planetary system; sahasrani—
thousand; dvddasa—twelve; iyuh—passed; mat-Gtmanoh—simply
engaged in consciousness of Me.
TRANSLATION
Thus you spent twelve thousand celestial years perform-
ing difficult activities of tapasya in consciousness of Me [Krsna
consciousness].
TEXTS 37-38
तदा वां परितुष्टोऽहमञ्ना  AYIAY |
तपसा श्रद्धया नित्यं भक्त्या च हदि भावितः nse


--- Page 259 ---
Text 38] The Birth of Lord Krsna 255
प्रादुरासं AREAS युवयोः कामदित्सया |
व्रियतां वर इत्युक्तं মাহা वां वृतः सुतः ॥३८॥
tada var paritusto "ham
amuna vapusanaghe
tapasa sraddhaya nityamn
bhaktya ca hrdi bhavitah
pradurasari varada-rad
yuvayoh kama-ditsaya
vriyatam vara ity ukte
madrso vam vrtah sutah
tada—then (after the expiry of twelve thousand celestial years);
vam —with both of you; paritustah aham—I1 was very much satisfied;
amuna—Dby this; vapus@—in this form as Krsna; anaghe—O My dear
sinless mother; tapasa—by austerity; Sraddhaya—by faith; nityam—
constantly (engaged); bhaktyd—by devotional service; ca—as well as;
hrdi—within the core of the heart; bhavitah—fixed (in determination);
pradurasam —appeared before you (in the same way); vara-da-rat—the
best of all who can bestow benedictions; yuvayoh—of both of you;
kama-ditsaya—wishing to fulfill the desire; vriyatam—asked you to
open your minds; varah—for a benediction; iti ukte—when you were re-
quested in this way; madrSah—exactly like Me; vam —of both of you;
vrtah—was asked; sutah—as Your son (you wanted a son exactly like
Me).
TRANSLATION
O sinless mother Devaki, after the expiry of twelve thousand
celestial years, in which you constantly contemplated Me within
the core of your heart with great faith, devotion and austerity, I
was very much satisfied with you. Since I am the best of all
bestowers of benediction, I appeared in this same form as Krsna to
ask you to take from Me the benediction you desired. You then ex-
pressed your desire to have a son exactly like Me.
PURPORT
Twelve thousand years on the celestial planets is not a very long time
for those who live in the upper planetary system, although it may be very


--- Page 260 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
long for those who live on this planet. Sutapa was the son of Brahma, and
as we have already understood from Bhagavad-gita (8.17), one day of
Brahma equals many millions of years according to our calculation
(sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmano viduh). We should be
careful to understand that to get Krsna as one’s son, one must undergo
such great austerities. If we want to get the Supreme Personality of God-
head to become one of us in this material world, this requires great
penance, but if we want to go back to Krsna (tyaktva deham punar
janma naiti mam eti so ’rjuna), we need only understand Him and love
Him. Through love only, we can very easily go back home, back to God-
head. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore declared, prema pum-artho
mahan: love of Godhead is the highest achievement for anyone.

As we have explained, in worship of the Lord there are three stages —
jAdna, jianamayi and rati, or love. Sutapa and his wife, Préni, in-
augurated their devotional activities on the basis of full knowledge.
Gradually they developed love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and when this love was mature, the Lord appeared as Visnu, although
Devaki then requested Him to assume the form of Krsna. To love the
Supreme Personality of Godhead more, we want a form of the Lord like
Krsna or Rama. We can engage in loving transactions with Krsna
especially.

In this age, we are all fallen, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead
has appeared as Caitanya Mahaprabhu to bestow upon us love of Godhead
directly. This was appreciated by the associates of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Ripa Gosvami said:

namo maha-vadanyaya
krsna-prema-pradaya te
krsnaya krsna-caitanya-
namne gaura-tvise namah
In this verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is described as maha-vadanya,
the most munificent of charitable persons, because He gives Krsna so
easily that one can attain Krsna simply by chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra. We should therefore take advantage of the benediction
given by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and when by chanting the Hare
Krsna mantra we are cleansed of all dirty things (ceto-darpana-
marjanam), we shall be able to understand very easily that Krsna is the


--- Page 261 ---
Text 39] The Birth of Lord Krsna 257
only object of love (kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah param
vrajet).

Therefore, one need not undergo severe penances for many thousands
of years; one need only learn how to love Krsna and be always engaged in
His service (sevonmukhe hi Jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah). Then
one can very easily go back home, back to Godhead. Instead of bringing
the Lord here for some material purpose, to have a son or whatever else,
if we go back home, back to Godhead, our real relationship with the Lord
is revealed, and we eternally engage in our eternal relationship. By
chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, we gradually develop our eternal rela-
tionship with the Supreme Person and thus attain the perfection called
svaripa-siddhi. We should take advantage of this benediction and go
back home, back to Godhead. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has
therefore sung, patita-pavana-hetu tava avatara: Caitanya Mahaprabhu
appeared as an incarnation to deliver all fallen souls like us and directly
bestow upon us love of Godhead. We must take advantage of this great
benediction of the great Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 39
=
अजुषटग्राम्यविषयावनपत्यो च॒ दम्पती ।
~ ~: द, ha
न वत्राथेऽपवगं मे मोहितौ देवमायया ॥२९॥
ajusta-gramya-visayav
anapatyau ca dam-pati
na vavrathe ’pavargariv me
mohitau deva-mdyayd
ajusta-gramya-visayau—for sex life and to beget a child like Me;
anapatyau—because of possessing no son; ca—also; dam-pati—both
husband and wife; na—never; vavrathe —asked for (any other benedic-
tion); apavargam—liberation from this world; me—from Me;
mohitau—being so much attracted; deva-mayaya—by transcendental
love for Me (desiring Me as your beloved son).
TRANSLATION

Being husband and wife but always sonless, you were attracted

by sexual desires, for by the influence of devamaya, transcendental


--- Page 262 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
love, you wanted to have Me as your son. Therefore you never
desired to be liberated from this material world.
PURPORT

Vasudeva and Devaki had been dam-pati, husband and wife, since the
time of Sutapa and Préni, and they wanted to remain husband and wife
in order to have the Supreme Personality of Godhead as their son. This
attachment came about by the influence of devamaya. Loving Krsna as
one’s son is a Vedic principle. Vasudeva and Devaki never desired any-
thing but to have the Lord as their son, yet for this purpose they ap-
parently wanted to live like ordinary grhasthas for sexual indulgence.
Although this was a transaction of spiritual potency, their desire appears
like attachment for sex in conjugal life. If one wants to return home,
back to Godhead, one must give up such desires. This is possible only
when one develops intense love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said:

niskificanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya
parari param jigamisor bhava-sagarasya
(Cc. Madhya 11.8)
If one wants to go back home, back to Godhead, one must be niskificana,
free from all material desires. Therefore, instead of desiring to have the
Lord come here and become one’s son, one should desire to become free
from all material desires (anyabhilasita-sanyam) and go back home,
back to Godhead. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu teaches us in His Siksastaka:
na dhanam na jana na sundarim
kavitam va jagad-isa kamaye
mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi

“0 almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desire
beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want
Your causeless devotional service, birth after birth.” One should not ask
the Lord to fulfill any materially tainted desires.


--- Page 263 ---
Text 41] The Birth of Lord Krsna 259
TEXT 40
गते मयि युवां sear वरं मत्सदृशं सुतम्‌ |
ग्राम्यान्‌ ARTIST युवां STRAIT ॥४०॥
gate mayi yuvam labdhva
varam mat-sadrsam sutam
gramyan bhogan abhunijathar
yuvarh prapta-manorathau
gate mayi—after My departure; yuvam—both of you (husband and
wife); labdhva—after receiving; varam—the benediction of (having a
son); mat-sadrsam —exactly like Me; sutam—a son; gramyan bhogan—
engagement in sex; abhufAjatham—enjoyed; yuvam—both of you;
prapta—having been achieved; manorathau —the desired result of your
aspirations.
TRANSLATION
After you received that benediction and I disappeared, you
engaged yourselves in sex to have a son like Me, and I fulfilled
your desire.
PURPORT
According to the Sanskrit dictionary Amara-kosa, sex life is also called
gramya-dharma, material desire, but in spiritual life this gramya-
dharma, the material desire for sex, is not very much appreciated. If one
has a tinge of attachment for the material enjoyments of eating, sleeping,
mating and defending, one is not niskificana. But one really should be
niskificana. Therefore, one should be free from the desire to beget a
child like Krena by sexual enjoyment. This is indirectly hinted at in this
verse.
TEXT 41
$ > लौ ©
অছ্বান্যবম रोके शीलोदायंगुणेः समम्‌ |
अहं सुतो वाममधं IRE इति श्चुतः ।४१॥


--- Page 264 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
adrstvanyatamam loke
silaudarya-gunaih samam
ahari suto vam abhavari
prénigarbha iti Srutah
adrstva—not finding; anyatamam—anyone else; loke—in this world;
Stla-audarya-gunaih—with the transcendental ‘qualities of good char-
acter and magnanimity; samam—equal to you; aham—I; sutah—the
son; vam—of both of you; abhavam—became; prsni-garbhah—cele-
brated as born of Préni; iti—thus; §rutah—I am known.
TRANSLATION
Since I found no one else as highly elevated as you in simplicity
and other qualities of good character, I appeared in this world as
Prénigarbha, or one who is celebrated as having taken birth from
Préni.
PURPORT
In the Treta-yuga the Lord appeared as Prénigarbha. Srila Viévanatha
Cakravarti Thakura says, prsnigarbha iti so ‘yam treta-yugavataro
laksyate.
TEXT 42
तयोर्वा पुनरेवाहमदित्यामास कश्यपात्‌ |
उपेन्द्र इति विख्यातो वामनत्वाच्च वामनः ॥४७२॥
tayor vam punar evaham
adityam asa kaSyapat
upendra iti vikhyato
vamanatvdc ca vamanah
tayoh—of you two, husband and wife; vam—in both of you; punah
eva—even again; aham—I Myself; aditydm—in the womb of Aditi;
asa—appeared; kaSyapat—Dby the semen of Kasyapa Muni; upendrah—
by the name Upendra; iti—thus; vikhydtah—celebrated; vamanatvat
ca—and because of being a dwarf; vamanah—I was known as Vamana.


--- Page 265 ---
Text 43] The Birth of Lord Krsna 261
TRANSLATION
In the next millennium, I again appeared from the two of you,
who appeared as My mother, Aditi, and My father, Kasyapa. I was
known as Upendra, and because of being a dwarf, I was also known
as Vamana.
TEXT 43
৬ न,
ततीयेऽसिन्‌ भवेऽहं पै तेनैव वपुषाथ वाम्‌ |
जातो भूयस्तयोरेव सत्यं मे व्याहतं सति ॥४३॥
trtiye ’smin bhave ham vai
tenaiva vapusatha vam
jato bhityas tayor eva
satyam me vyahrtam sati
trtiye—for the third time; asmin bhave—in this appearance (as
Krsna); aham—I Myself; vai—indeed; tena—with the same per-
sonality; eva—in this way; vapusa—by the form; atha—as; vam—of
both of you; jatah—born; bhiiyah—again; tayoh—of both of you;
eva—indeed; satyam—take as truth; me—My; vyahrtam—words;
sati—O supremely chaste.
TRANSLATION
O supremely chaste mother, I, the same personality, have now
appeared of you both as your son for the third time. Take My
words as the truth.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead chooses a mother and father
from whom to take birth again and again. The Lord took birth originally
from Sutapa and Préni, then from Kadyapa and Aditi, and again from the
same father and mother, Vasudeva and Devaki. “In other appearances
also,” the Lord said, “I took the form of an ordinary child just to become
your son so that we could reciprocate eternal love.” Jiva Gosvami has ex-
plained this verse in his Krsna-sandarbha, Ninety-sixth Chapter, where
he notes that in text 37 the Lord says, amuna vapusa, meaning ‘by this
same form.” In other words, the Lord told Devaki, ‘““This time I have


--- Page 266 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
appeared in My original form as $ri Krsna.” Srila Jiva Gosvami says that
the other forms were partial expansions of the Lord’s original form, but
because of the intense love developed by Préni and Sutapa, the Lord ap-
peared from Devaki and Vasudeva in His full opulence as Sri Krsna. In
this verse the Lord confirms, “I am the same Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but I appear in full opulence as Sri Krsna.” This is the purport
of the words tenaiva vapusa. When the Lord mentioned the birth of
Prénigarbha, He did not say tenaiva vapusd, but He assured Devaki that
in the third birth the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna had ap-
peared, not His partial expansion. Prénigarbha and Vamana were partial
expansions of Krsna, but in this third birth Krsna Himself appeared.
This is the explanation given in Sri Krsna-sandarbha by Srila Jiva
Gosvami.
TEXT 44
एतद्‌ না হিল रूपं प्राग्जन्मसरणाय मे |
नान्यथा मद्भवं ज्ञानं TASHA जायते 11981)
etad vam darsitam riupam
prag-janma-smarandya me
nanyatha mad-bhavar jiianam
martya-lingena jayate

etat—this form of Visnu; vam —unto both of you; darsitam—has
been shown; ripam—My form as the Supreme Personality of God-
head with four hands; prak-janma—of My previous appearances;
smarandya—just to remind you; me—My; na—not; anyatha—other-
wise; mat-bhavam—Vignu’s appearance; jidnam—this transcendental
knowledge; martya-lingena—by taking birth like a human child;
Jjayate—does arise.

TRANSLATION

I have shown you this form of Vignu just to remind you of My
previous births. Otherwise, if I appeared like an ordinary human
child, you would not believe that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Visnu, has indeed appeared.


--- Page 267 ---
Text 45] The Birth of Lord Krsna 263
PURPORT

Devaki did not need to be reminded that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Visnu, had appeared as her son; she already accepted
this. Nonetheless, she was anxious, thinking that if her neighbors heard
that Visnu had appeared as her son, none of them would believe it.
Therefore she wanted Lord Visnu to transform Himself into a human
child. On the other hand, the Supreme Lord was also anxious, thinking
that if He appeared as an ordinary child, she would not believe that Lord
Visnu had appeared. Such are the dealings between devotees and the
Lord. The Lord deals with His devotees exactly like a human being, but
this does not mean that the Lord is one of the human beings, for this is
the conclusion of nondevotees (avajananti mam miadha manusinm tanum
asritam). Devotees know the Supreme Personality of Godhead under any
circumstances. This is the difference between a devotee and a non-
devotee. The Lord says, man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam
namaskuru: “Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My
devotee, offer obeisances and worship Me.” A nondevotee cannot believe
that simply by thinking of one person, one can achieve liberation from
this material world and go back home, back to Godhead. But this is a fact.
The Lord comes as a human being, and if one becomes attached to the
Lord on the platform of loving service, one’s promotion to the transcen-
dental world is assured.

TEXT 45
युवां मां पुत्रभावेन ब्रह्मभावेन चासकृत्‌ |
चिन्तयन्तौ कृतसखेहो यास्येथे TER पराम्‌ ।४५॥
yuvarh mam putra-bhavena
brahma-bhavena casakrt
cinta yantau krta-snehau
yasyethe mad-gatirh param

yuvam—both of you (husband and wife); mam —unto Me; putra-
bhavena—as your son; brahma-bhavena—knowing that I am the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—and; asakrt—constantly;
cintayantau—thinking like that; krta-snehau—dealing with love and


--- Page 268 ---
264 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
affection; yasyethe—shall both obtain; mat-gatim—My supreme abode;
param —which is transcendental, beyond this material world.
TRANSLATION

Both of you, husband and wife, constantly think of Me as your
son, but always know that I am the Supreme Personality of God-
head. By thus thinking of Me constantly with love and affection,
you will achieve the highest perfection: returning home, back to
Godhead.

PURPORT

This instruction by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to His father
and mother, who are eternally connected with Him, is especially in-
tended for persons eager to return home, back to Godhead. One should
never think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as an ordinary
human being, as nondevotees do. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, personally appeared and left His instructions for the benefit of
all human society, but fools and rascals unfortunately think of Him as an
ordinary human being and twist the instructions of Bhagavad-gita for
the satisfaction of their senses. Practically everyone commenting on
Bhagavad-gita interprets it for sense gratification. It has become es-
pecially fashionable for modern scholars and politicians to interpret
Bhagavad-gita as if it were something fictitious, and by their wrong in-
terpretations they are spoiling their own careers and the careers of
others. The Krsna consciousness movement, however, is fighting against
this principle of regarding Krsna as a fictitious person and of accepting
that there was no Battle of Kuruksetra, that everything is symbolic, and
that nothing in Bhagavad-gita is true. In any case, if one truly wants to
be successful, one can do so by reading the text of Bhagavad-gitd as it is.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu especially stressed the instructions of
Bhagavad-gita: yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa. If one wants to
achieve the highest success in life, one must accept Bhagavad-gita as
spoken by the Supreme Lord. By accepting Bhagavad-gita in this way,
all of human society can become perfect and happy.

It is to be noted that because Vasudeva and Devaki would be separated
from Krsna when He was carried to Gokula, the residence of Nanda


--- Page 269 ---
Text 46] The Birth of Lord Krsna 265
Maharaja, the Lord personally instructed them that they should always
think of Him as their son and as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
That would keep them in touch with Him. After eleven years, the Lord
would return to Mathura to be their son, and therefore there was no
question of separation.
TEXT 46
श्री्युक उवाच
इत्युक्त्वासीद्धरिस्तृष्णीं भगवानात्ममायया |
= - -
पित्रोः सम्पश्यतोः सदो बभूव प्राकृतः Brg: ।७६।
sri-Suka uvdaca
ity uktvasid dharis tasnim
bhagavan atma-mayaya
pitroh sampasyatoh sadyo
babhiva prakrtah sisuh
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti uktva—after in-
structing in this way; asit—remained; harih—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; tisnim—silent; bhagavan—Lord Visnu, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; atma-mayaya—by acting in His own spiritual en-
ergy; pitroh sampaSyatoh—while His father and mother were factually
seeing Him; sadyah—immediately; babhiva—He became; prakrtah—
like an ordinary human being; 525८-3 child.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: After thus instructing His father and
mother, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, remained
silent. In their presence, by His internal energy, He then trans-
formed Himself into a small human child. [In other words, He
transformed Himself into His original form: krsnas tu bhagavan
svayam.]
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.6), sambhavamy atma-mayaya: what-
ever is done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is done by His spiri-
tual energy; nothing is forced upon Him by the material energy. This is


--- Page 270 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
the difference between the Lord and an ordinary living being. The Vedas
say:
parasya Saktir vividhaiva $70% 016
svabhaviki jiiana-bala-kriya ca
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8)

It is natural for the Lord to be untinged by material qualities, and be-
cause everything is perfectly present in His spiritual energy, as soon as
He desires something, it is immediately done. The Lord is not a prakrta-
ॐ, a child of this world, but by His personal energy He appeared like
one. Ordinary people may have difficulty accepting the supreme con-
troller, God, as a human being because they forget that He can do every-
thing by spiritual energy (atma-mayaya). Nonbelievers say, “How can
the supreme controller descend as an ordinary being?’ This sort of
thinking is materialistic. Srila Jiva Gosvami says that unless we accept
the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as inconceivable,
beyond the conception of our words and mind, we cannot understand the
Supreme Lord. Those who doubt that the Supreme Personality of God-
head can come as a human being and turn Himself into a human child
are fools who think that Krsna’s body is material, that He is born and
that He therefore also dies.

In Srimad-Bhagavatam, Third Canto, Fourth Chapter, verses 28 and
29, there is a description of Krsna’s leaving His body. Maharaja Pariksit
inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami, “When all the members of the Yadu
dynasty met their end, Krsna also put an end to Himself, and the only
member of the family who remained alive was Uddhava. How was this
possible?” Sukadeva Gosvami answered that Krsna, by His own energy,
destroyed the entire family and then thought of making His own body
disappear. In this connection, Sukadeva Gosvami described how the Lord
gave up His body. But this was not the destruction of Krsna’s body;
rather, it was the disappearance of the Supreme Lord by His personal
energy.

Actually, the Lord does not give up His body, which is eternal, but as
He can change His body from the form of Visnu to that of an ordinary
human child, He can change His body to any form He likes. This does not
mean that He gives up His body. By spiritual energy, the Lord can appear


--- Page 271 ---
Text 47] The Birth of Lord Krsna 267
in a body made of wood or stone. He can change His body into anything
because everything is His energy (parasya saktir vividhaiva sriayate). As
clearly said in Bhagavad-gita (7.4), bhinna prakrtir astadha: the ma-
terial elements are separated energies of the Supreme Lord. If He
transforms Himself into the arca-mirti, the worshipable Deity, which we
see as stone or wood, He is still Krsna. Therefore the $astra warns, arcye
visnau Sila-dhir gurusu nara-matih. One who thinks that the worship-
able Deity in the temple is made of wood or stone, one who sees a
Vaisnava guru as an ordinary human being, or one who materially con-
ceives of a Vaisnava as belonging to a particular caste is ndarakt, a resi-
dent of hell. The Supreme Personality of Godhead can appear before us
in many forms, as he likes, but we must know the true facts: janma
karma ca me divyam evam yo vetti tattvatah (Bg. 4.9). By following the
instructions of sddhu, guru and $astra—the saintly persons, the spiritual
master and the authoritative scriptures—one can understand Krsna, and
then one makes his life successful by returning home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 47
ततश्च शौरिर्भगवत्परचोदितः
सुतं समादाय स खतिकायहात्‌ |
यदा बहिर्गन्तुमियेष त्यजा
या योगमायाजनि नन्दजायया ।।७७।।
tatas ca Saurir bhagavat-pracoditah
sutamm samadaya sa sutika-grhat
yada bahir gantum iyesa tarhy aja
ya yogamdydjani nanda-jayaya
tatah—thereafter; ca—indeed; Saurih— Vasudeva; bhagavat-praco-
ditah—being instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sutam—his son; samadaya—carrying very carefully; sah —he; suatika-
grhat—from the maternity room; yadda —when; bahih gantum—to go
outside; iyesa—desired; tarhi—exactly at that time; ajd—the transcen-
dental energy, who also never takes birth; ya—who; yogamaya—is
known as Yogamayi; ajani—took birth; nanda-jayaya—from the wife
of Nanda Maharaja.


--- Page 272 ---
268 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, exactly when Vasudeva, being inspired by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, was about to take the newborn
child from the delivery room, Yogamaya, the Lord’s spiritual en-
ergy, took birth as the daughter of the wife of Maharaja Nanda.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura discusses that Krsna appeared
simultaneously as the son of Devaki and as the son of Yasoda, along with
the spiritual energy Yogamaya. As the son of Devaki, He first appeared as
Visnu, and because Vasudeva was not in the position of pure affection
for Krsna, Vasudeva worshiped his son as Lord Visnu. Ya$oda, however,
pleased her son Krsna without understanding His Godhood. This is the
difference between Krsna as the son of Yasoda and as the son of Devaki.
This is explained by Viévanatha Cakravarti on the authority of Hari-
vamsa.
TEXTS 48-49
<,
तया दृतप्त्ययसवेडत्तिषु
FAY परेष्वपि शायितेष्वथ |
হ্রাংশ सर्वाः पिहिता दुरत्यया
a
बरहत्कपारायसकीलगबहठेः ॥७८॥
ताः कृष्णवाहे वसुदेव आगते
५ < -
सयं RA यथा तमो रवेः |
© & Py
ववषं oe उपां्यगर्जितः
- = ono ও
रोषाऽन्वगाद्‌ ATR THAI ROTEL RUN
taya hrta-pratyaya-sarva-vrttisu
dvah-sthesu pauresv api Sayitesv atha
dvaras ca sarvah pihita duratyaya
brhat-kapatayasa-kila-srrikhalaih
tah krsna-vahe vasudeva agate
svayar vyavaryanta yathda tamo raveh


--- Page 273 ---
Text 49] The Birth of Lord Krsna 269
vavarsa parjanya updarsu-garjitah
Seso ’nvagad vari nivarayan phanaih

taya—Dby the influence of Yogamaya; hrta-pratyaya—deprived of all
sensation; sarva-vritisu—having all their senses; dvah-sthesu—all the
doormen; pauresu api—as well as other members of the house;
Sayitesu —sleeping very deeply; atha—when Vasudeva tried to take his
transcendental son out of the confinement; dvarah ca—as well as the
doors; sarvah—all; pihitah—constructed; duratyaya—very hard and
firm; brhat-kapata—and on great doors; dayasa-kila-Srrikhalaih—
strongly constructed with iron pins and closed with iron chains; tah —all
of them; krsna-vahe—bearing Krsna; vasudeve—when Vasudeva;
agate —appeared; svayam—automatically; vyavaryanta—opened wide;
yatha—as; tamah—darkness; raveh—on the appearance of the sun;
vavarsa—showered rain; parjanyah—the clouds in the sky; upamsu-
garjitah—very mildly resounding and raining very slightly; Sesah—
Ananta-naga; anvagat—followed; vari—showers of rain; nivarayan—
stopping; phanaih—by spreading His hoods.

TRANSLATION

By the influence of Yogamaya, all the doorkeepers fell fast
asleep, their senses unable to work, and the other inhabitants of
the house also fell deeply asleep. When the sun rises, the darkness
automatically disappears; similarly, when Vasudeva appeared, the
closed doors, which were strongly pinned with iron and locked
with iron chains, opened automatically. Since the clouds in the sky
were mildly thundering and showering, Ananta-naga, an expan-
sion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, followed Vasudeva,
beginning from the door, with hoods expanded to protect
Vasudeva and the transcendental child.

PURPORT

Sesa-naga is an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
whose business is to serve the Lord with all necessary paraphernalia.
When Vasudeva was carrying the child, Sesa-naga came to serve the
Lord and protect Him from the mild showers of rain.


--- Page 274 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3
TEXT 50
N ©
मघोनि वषेत्यसकृद्‌ यमानुजा
~ SRE a
गम्भीरतोयोघजवो्िफेनिखा ।
©
भयानक वतश्ताङ्ला नदी
<Q oN
मार्गं ददौ सिन्धुरिव भियः पतेः ॥५०॥
maghoni varsaty asakrd yamanuja
gambhira-toyaugha-javormi-phenila
bhayanakavarta-satakula nadi !
margariv dadau sindhur iva Sriyah pateh
maghoni varsati—because of Lord Indra’s showering rain; asakrt—
constantly; yama-anuja—the River Yamuna, who is considered the
younger sister of Yamaraja; gambhira-toya-ogha—of the very deep
water; java—by the force; @rmi—by the waves; phenila—full of foam;
bhayanaka—fierce; avarta-sata—by the whirling waves; akulda—agi-
tated; nadi—the river; margam—way; dadau—gave; sindhuh va—
like the ocean; sriyah pateh—unto Lord Ramacandra, the husband of the
goddess Sita.
TRANSLATION
Because of constant rain sent by the demigod Indra, the River
Yamuna was filled with deep water, foaming about with fiercely
whirling waves. But as the great Indian Ocean had formerly given
way to Lord Ramacandra by allowing Him to construct a bridge,
the River Yamuna gave way to Vasudeva and allowed him to cross.
TEXT 51
नन्दव्रजं FREI तत्र तान्‌
गोपान्‌ प्रसुप्ाचुपलभ्य निद्रया |
सुतं यशोदाशयने निधाय বৃ-
त्सुताघुपादाय पुनयंहानगात्‌ (14211
nanda-vrajami Saurir upetya tatra tan
gopan prasuptan upalabhya nidraya


--- Page 275 ---
Text 52] The Birth of Lord Krsna 271
sutari yasoda-sayane nidhaya tat-
sutam updadaya punar grhan agat
nanda-vrajam—the village or the house of Nanda Maharaja; saurih—
Vasudeva; upetya—reaching; tatra—there; tan—all the members;
gopan—the cowherd men; prasuptan—were fast asleep; upala-
bhya—understanding that; nidraya—in deep sleep; sutam—the son
(Vasudeva’s son); yaSoda-sayane—on the bed where mother Yasoda was
sleeping; nidhdaya—placing; tat-sutam—her daughter; upadaya—pick-
ing up; punah—again; grhan—to his own house; agat—returned.
TRANSLATION
‘When Vasudeva reached the house of Nanda Maharaja, he saw
that all the cowherd men were fast asleep. Thus he placed his own
son on the bed of Yasoda, picked up her daughter, an expansion of
Yogamaya, and then returned to his residence, the prison house of
Karhsa.
PURPORT
Vasudeva knew very well that as soon as the daughter was in the
prison house of Kamsa, 68788 would immediately kill her; but to protect
his own child, he had to kill the child of his friend. Nanda Maharaja was
his friend, but out of deep affection and attachment for his own son, he
knowingly did this. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that one
cannot be blamed for protecting one’s own child at the sacrifice of
another’s. Furthermore, Vasudeva cannot be accused of callousness,
since his actions were impelled by the force of Yogamaya.
TEXT 52
देवक्याः TAA न्यस्य बसुदेबोऽथ दारिकाम्‌ |
प्रतिञुच्य पदोर्लोहमास्ते पूर्ववदावृतः ॥५२॥
devakyah Sayane nyasya
vasudevo tha darikam
pratimucya pador loham
aste pirvavad avrtah


--- Page 276 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 3

devakyah—of Devaki; Sayane—on the bed; nyasya—placing;
vasudevah— Vasudeva; atha—thus; darikam—the female child;
pratimucya—binding himself again; padoh loham—iron shackles on the
two legs; dste—remained; pirva-vat—like before; avrtah—bound.

TRANSLATION

Vasudeva placed the female child on the bed of Devaki, bound

his legs with the iron shackles, and thus remained there as before.
TEXT 53
WET नन्दपली च जातं परमबुध्यत |
न afew परिश्रान्ता निद्रयापगतस्मरतिः ws
yaSoda nanda-patni ca
jatar param abudhyata
na tal-lingam parisranta
nidrayapagata-smrtih

yasoda—Yaéoda, Krsna’s mother in Gokula; nanda-patni—the wife
of Nanda Maharaja; ca—also; jatam—a child was born; param—the
Supreme Person; abudhyata—could understand; na—not; tat-liri-
gam —whether the child was male or female; parisranta—because of too
much labor; nidraya—when overwhelmed with sleep; apagata-smrtih—
having lost consciousness. ति

TRANSLATION

Exhausted by the labor of childbirth, Yasoda was overwhelmed
with sleep and unable to understand what kind of child had been
born to her.

PURPORT

Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva were intimate friends, and so were
their wives, Yaéoda and Devaki. Although their names were different,
they were practically nondifferent personalities. The only difference is
that Devaki was able to understand that the Supreme Personality of God-


--- Page 277 ---
Text 53] The Birth of Lord Krsna 273
head had been born to her and had now changed into Krsna, whereas
Yasoda was not able to understand what kind of child had been born to
her. YaSoda was such an advanced devotee that she never regarded Krsna
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but simply loved Him as her
own child. Devaki, however, knew from the very beginning that al-
though Krsna was her son, He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In Vrndavana, no one regarded Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. When something very wonderful happened because of Krsna’s
activities, the inhabitants of Vrndavana—the cowherd men, the cowherd
boys, Nanda Maharaja, Yasoda and the others —were surprised, but they
never considered their son Krsna the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Sometimes they suggested that some great demigod had appeared there
as Krsna. In such an exalted status of devotional service, a devotee
forgets the position of Krsna and intensely loves the Supreme Personality
of Godhead without understanding His position. This is called kevala-
bhakti and is distinct from the stages of jiiana and jianamayi bhakti.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Third
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘The Birth of Lord Krsna.”


--- Page 278 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
The Atrocities of King Karnsa
This chapter describes how Karnsa, following the advice of his demoniac
friends, considered the persecution of small children to be very
diplomatic.

After Vasudeva bound himself with iron shackles as before, all the
doors of the prison house closed by the influence of Yogamaya, who then
began crying as a newborn child. This crying awakened the doorkeepers,
who immediately informed Karnsa that a child had been born to Devaki.
Upon hearing this news, Karhsa appeared with great force in the mater-
nity room, and in spite of Devaki’s pleas that the child be saved, the
demon forcibly snatched the child from Devaki’s hands and dashed the
child against a rock. Unfortunately for Karhsa, however, the newborn
child slipped away from his hands, rose above his head and appeared as
the eight-armed form of Durga. Durga then told Kamsa, “The enemy

व you contemplate has taken birth somewhere else. Therefore your plan to
persecute all the children will prove futile.”

According to the prophecy, the eighth child of Devaki would kill
7188, and therefore when Kamsa saw that the eighth child was a
female and heard that his so-called enemy had taken birth elsewhere, he
was struck with wonder. He decided to release Devaki and Vasudeva, and
he admitted before them the wrongness of his atrocities. Falling at the
feet of Devaki and Vasudeva, he begged their pardon and tried to con-
vince them that because the events that had taken place were destined to
happen, they should not be unhappy for his having killed so many of
their children. Devaki and Vasudeva, being naturally very pious, im-
mediately excused Karnsa for his atrocities, and Karnsa, after seeing that
his sister and brother-in-law were happy, returned to his home.

After the night passed, however, 1697088 called for his ministers and

, informed them of all that had happened. The ministers, who were all
demons, advised Karnsa that because his enemy had already taken birth
somewhere else, all the children born within the past ten days in the

275


--- Page 279 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
villages within Karmsa’s kingdom should be killed. Although the
demigods always feared Karnsa, they should not be treated leniently;
since they were enemies, Karmsa should try his best to uproot their exis-
tence. The demoniac ministers further advised that Kamsa and the
demons continue their enmity toward Visnu because Visnu is the original
person among all the demigods. The brahmanas, the cows, the Vedas,
austerity, truthfulness, control of the senses and mind, faithfulness and
mercy are among the different parts of the body of Visnu, who is the
origin of all the demigods, including Lord Brahma and Lord Siva.
Therefore, the ministers advised, the demigods, the saintly persons, the
cows and the brahmanas should be systematically persecuted. Strongly
advised in this way by his friends, the demoniac ministers, Kamsa ap-
proved of their instructions and considered it beneficial to be envious of
the brahmanas. Following Kamsa’s orders, therefore, the demons began
committing their atrocities all over Vrajabhami.
TEXT 1
fia उवाच
वहिरन्तःपुरदारः सर्वाः पूर्ववदाढ़ृताः |
ततो बालध्वनिं श्रुत्वा gaan: gga: ॥ १॥
§ri-Suka uvdca
bahir-antah-pura-dvarah
sarvah purvavad avrtah
tato bala-dhvanir Srutva
grha-palah samutthitah

sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; bahih-antah-pura-
dvarah—the doors inside and outside the house; sarvah—all; pirva-
vat—Ilike before; avrtah—closed; tatah—thereafter; bala-dhvanim—
the crying of the newborn child; srutva—hearing; grha-palah—all the
inhabitants of the house, especially the doormen; samutthitah—
awakened.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King Pariksit, the doors

inside and outside the house closed as before. Thereafter, the in-


--- Page 280 ---
Text 2] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 277

habitants of the house, especially the watchmen, heard the crying

of the newborn child and thus awakened from their beds.
PURPORT

The activities of Yogamaya are distinctly visible in this chapter, in
which Devaki and Vasudeva excuse Kamsa for his many devious,
atrocious activities and Kamsa becomes repentant and falls at their feet.
Before the awakening of the watchmen and the others in the prison
house, many other things happened. Krsna was born and transferred to
the home of Yasoda in Gokula, the strong doors opened and again closed,
and Vasudeva resumed his former condition of being shackled. The
watchmen, however, could not understand all this. They awakened only
when they heard the crying of the newborn child, Yogamaya.

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura has remarked that the watchmen
were just like dogs. At night the dogs in the street act like watchmen. If
one dog barks, many other dogs immediately follow it by barking. Al-
though the street dogs are not appointed by anyone to act as watchmen,
they think they are responsible for protecting the neighborhood, and as
soon as someone unknown enters it, they all begin to bark. Both
Yogamaya and Mahamaya act in all material activities (prakrteh
kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah), but although the energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead acts under the Supreme Lord’s direc-
tion (mayadhyaksena prakrtih sityate sa-caracaram), doglike watchmen
such as politicians and diplomats think that they are protecting their
neighborhoods from the dangers of the outside world. These are the ac-
tions of maya. But one who surrenders to Krsna is relieved of the protec-
tion afforded by the dogs and doglike guardians of this material world.

TEXT 2
©

ते तु तूण॑मुपत्रज्य देवक्या गर्भजन्म तत्‌ |
आचख्युर्भोजराजाय यदुद्विग्नः प्रतीक्षते ॥ २॥

te tu tirnam upavrajya

devakya garbha-janma tat
acakhyur bhoja-rajaya
yad udvignah pratiksate


--- Page 281 ---
278 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
te—all the watchmen; tu—indeed; tarnam—very quickly; upa-
vrajya—going before (the King); devakyah—of Devaki; garbha-
janma—the deliverance from the womb; tat—that (child); acakhyuh—
submitted; bhoja-rajadya—unto the King of the Bhojas, Karhsa; yat—of
whom; udvignah—with great anxiety; pratiksate —was waiting (for the
child’s birth).
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, all the watchmen very quickly approached King
Karhsa, the ruler of the Bhoja dynasty, and submitted the news of
the birth of Devaki’s child. Karhsa, who had awaited this news very
anxiously, immediately took action.
PURPORT
17188 was very anxiously waiting because of the prophecy that the
eighth child of Devaki would kill him. This time, naturally, he was
awake and waiting, and when the watchmen approached him, he
immediately took action to kill the child.
TEXT 3
स तस्पात्‌ तृणं त्थाय कालोऽयमिति fee: |
खतीगृदमगात्‌ qu प्रस्वलन्‌ शक्तमूधेजः ॥ २ ॥
sa talpat tirnam utthaya
kalo ’yam iti vihvalah
siuti-grham agat tiarnar
praskhalan mukta-murdhajah
sah—he (King Karisa); talpat—from the bed; turnam—very
quickly; utthaya—getting up; kalah ayam—here is my death, the
supreme time; iti—in this way; vihvalah—overwhelmed; sati-grham—
to the maternity home; agat—went; tirnam—without delay;
praskhalan —scattering; mukta—had become opened; miirdha-jah—the
hair on the head.
TRANSLATION
Karhsa immediately got up from bed, thinking, ‘Here is Kala,
the supreme time factor, which has taken birth to kill me!” Thus


--- Page 282 ---
Text 4] The Atrocities of King Karhsa 279
overwhelmed, Karisa, his hair scattered on his head, at once ap-
proached the place where the child had been born.
PURPORT

The word kalah is significant. Although the child was born to kill
(7188, Karmsa thought that this was the proper time to kill the child so
that he himself would be saved. Kala is actually another name of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead when He appears only for the purpose
of killing. When Arjuna inquired from Krsna in His universal form,
“Who are You?” the Lord presented Himself as kala, death personified
to kill. By nature’s law, when there is an unwanted increase in popula-
tion, kala appears, and by some arrangement of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, people are killed wholesale in different ways, by war,
pestilence, famine and so on. At that time, even atheistic political leaders
go to a church, mosque or temple for protection by God or gods and sub-
missively say, “God willing.” Before that, they pay no attention to God,
not caring to know God or His will, but when kala appears, they say,
“God willing.” Death is but another feature of the supreme kala, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the time of death, the atheist must
submit to this supreme kala, and then the Supreme Personality of God-
head takes away all his possessions (mrtyuh sarva-haras caham) and
forces him to accept another body (tatha dehantara-praptih). This the
atheists do not know, and if they do know, they neglect it so that they
may go on with their normal life. The Krsna consciousness movement is
trying to teach them that although for a few years one may act as a great
protector or great watchman, with the appearance of kala, death, one
must take another body by the laws of nature. Not knowing this, they
unnecessarily waste their time in their occupation as watchdogs and do
not try to get the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As it is
clearly said, aprapya mam nivartante mrtyu-samsara-vartmani: without
Krsna consciousness, one is condemned to continue wandering in birth
and death, not knowing what will happen in one’s next birth.

TEXT 4
तमाह भ्रातरं देवी कृपणा करुणं सृती ।
. + ५
स्नुषेयं तव कल्याण स्यं मा हन्तुमहसि ॥ ४ ॥


--- Page 283 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
tam aha bhratararh devi
krpana karunarm sati
snuseyam tava kalyana
ওঠা চো ma hantum arhasi
tam—unto Kamsa; aha—said; bhrataram—her brother; devi—
mother Devaki; krpana—helplessly; karunam—piteously; sati—the
chaste lady; snusa iyam tava—this child will be your daughter-in-law,
the wife of your future son; kalyana—O all-auspicious one; striyam—a
woman; ma—not; hantum—to kill; arhasi—you deserve.
TRANSLATION
Devaki helplessly, piteously appealed to Karhsa: My dear
brother, all good fortune unto you. Don’t kill this girl. She will be
your daughter-in-law. Indeed, it is unworthy of you to kill a
woman.
PURPORT
Kamsa had previously excused Devaki because he thought that a
woman should not be killed, especially when pregnant. But now, by the
influence of maya, he was prepared to kill a woman —not only a woman,
but a small, helpless newborn child. Devaki wanted to save her brother
from this terrible, sinful act. Therefore she told him, “Don’t be so
atrocious as to kill a female child. Let there be all good fortune for you.”
Demons can do anything for their personal benefit, not considering what
is pious or vicious. But Devaki, on the contrary, although safe because
she had already given birth to her own son, Krsna, was anxious to save
the daughter of someone else. This was natural for her.
TEXT 5
बहवो हिंसिता भ्रातः शिशवः पावकोपमाः ।
EN EN
त्वया देवनिसुष्टेन पुत्रिकका प्रदीयताम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥
bahavo himsita bhratah
SiSavah pavakopamah
tvayda daiva-nisrstena
putrikaika pradiyatam


--- Page 284 ---
Text 5] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 281

bahavah—many; hirsitah—killed out of envy; bhratah—my dear
brother; SiSavah—small children; pavaka-upamah—all of them equal
to fire in brightness and beauty; tvaya—by you; daiva-nisrstena—as
spoken by destiny; putrika—daughter; eka—one; pradiyatam—give me
as your gift.

TRANSLATION

My dear brother, by the influence of destiny you have already
killed many babies, each of them as bright and beautiful as fire.
But kindly spare this daughter. Give her to me as your gift.

PURPORT

Here we see that Devaki first focused Kamsa’s attention on his
atrocious activities, his killing of her many sons. Then she wanted to
compromise with him by saying that whatever he had done was not his
fault, but was ordained by destiny. Then she appealed to him to give her
the daughter as a gift. Devaki was the daughter of a ksatriya and knew
how to play the political game. In politics there are different methods of
achieving success: first repression (dama), then compromise (sama), and
then asking for a gift (dana). Devaki first adopted the policy of repres-
sion by directly attacking 63158 for having cruelly, atrociously killed
her babies. Then she compromised by saying that this was not his fault,
and then she begged for a gift. As we learn from the history of the
Mahabharata, or “Greater India,” the wives and daughters of the ruling
class, the ksatriyas, knew the political game, but we never find that a
woman was given the post of chief executive. This is in accordance with
the injunctions of Manu-sarmhita, but unfortunately Manu-sarmhita is
now being insulted, and the Aryans, the members of Vedic society, can-
not do anything. Such is the nature of Kali-yuga.

Nothing happens unless ordained by destiny.

tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovido
na labhyate yad bhramatam upary adhah
tal labhyate duhkhavad anyatah sukham
kalena sarvatra gabhira-ramhasa
(Bhag. 1.5.18)


--- Page 285 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
Devaki knew very well that because the killing of her many children had
been ordained by destiny, 97158 was not to be blamed. There was no
need to give good instructions to Karhsa. Upadeso hi murkhanam
prakopaya na santaye (Canakya Pandita). If a foolish person is given
good instructions, he becomes more and more angry. Moreover, a cruel
person is more dangerous than a snake. A snake and a cruel person are
both cruel, but a cruel person is more dangerous because although a
snake can be charmed by mantras or subdued by herbs, a cruel person
cannot be subdued by any means. Such was the nature of Karnsa.
TEXT 6
AE ते হানা दीना हतसुता प्रभो |
< ক ৬
दातुमहसि मन्दाया AKA चरमां प्रजाम्‌ ॥ ६&॥
nanv aharh te hy avaraja
dina hata-suta prabho
datum arhasi mandaya
angemam caramam prajam
nanu—however; aham—I am; te—your; hi—indeed; avaraja—
younger sister; dina—very poor; hata-suta—deprived of all children;
prabho—O my lord; datum arhasi—you deserve to give (some gift);
mandayah—to me, who am so poor; ariga—my dear brother; imam —
this; caramam —last; prajam —child.
TRANSLATION
My lord, my brother, I am very poor, being bereft of all my
children, but still I am your younger sister, and therefore it would
be worthy of you to give me this last child as a gift.
TEXT 7
श्रीञ्युक उवाच
छ भ
उपगुद्यात्मजामेवं रुदत्या दीनदीनवत्‌ ।
নি < LN
याचितस्तां विनिर्रस्यं स्तादाचिच्छिदे EE:


--- Page 286 ---
Text 8] The Atrocities of King Karhsa 283
§ri-suka uvdca
upaguhydtmajam evarh
rudatya dina-dinavat
ydcitas tar vinirbhartsya
hastad dacicchide khalah
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; upaguhya—embrac-
ing; dtmajam —her daughter; evam —in this way; rudatyd—by Devaki,
who was crying; dina-dina-vat—very piteously, like a poor woman;
yacitah—being begged; tam —her (Devaki); vinirbhartsya—chastising;
hastat—from her hands; dcicchide—separated the child by force;
khalah—XKarmsa, the most cruel.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Piteously embracing her daugh-
ter and crying, Devaki begged Karsa for the child, but he was so
cruel that he chastised her and forcibly snatched the child from
her hands.
PURPORT
Although Devaki was crying like a very poor woman, actually she was
not poor, and therefore the word used here is dinavat. She had already
given birth to Krsna. Therefore, who could have been richer than she?
Even the demigods had come to offer prayers to Devaki, but she played
the part of a poor, piteously afflicted woman because she wanted to save
the daughter of Yasoda.
TEXT 8
तां THR चरणयोर्जातमात्रां অন্তু: सुताम्‌ |
अपोथयच्छिलापृष्ठे स्ार्थोन्मूरितसौहृद ः ॥ ८ ॥
tar grhitva caranayor
jata-matrar svasuh sutam
apothayac child-prsthe
svarthonmillita-sauhrdah


--- Page 287 ---
284. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4

tam —the child; grhitva—taking by force; caranayoh—Dby the two
legs; jata-matram—the newborn child; svasuh—of his sister; sutam—
the daughter; apothayat—smashed; $ila-prsthe—on the surface of a
stone; sva-artha-unmiilita—uprooted because of intense selfishness;
sauhrdah—all friendship or family relationships.

TRANSLATION

Having uprooted all relationships with his sister because of in-
tense selfishness, Karisa, who was sitting on his knees, grasped the
newborn child by the legs and tried to dash her against the surface
of 8 stone.

TEXT 9
सा तद्धस्तात्‌ सयुत्पत्य स्यो देव्यम्बरं गता |
अदृश्यतानुजा विष्णोः सायुधाष्टमहाञ्जा । ९ ॥
sa tad-dhastat samutpatya
sadyo devy ambaram gata
adr$yatanuja visnoh
sayudhasta-mahabhuja

s@—that female child; tat-hastat—from the hand of 87058; sam-
utpatya—slipped upward; sadyah—immediately; devi—the form of a
demigoddess; ambaram—into the sky; gatd—went; adrSyata—was
seen; anuja—the younger sister; visnoh—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sa-ayudha—with weapons; asta—eight; maha-bhuja—with
mighty arms.

TRANSLATION

The child, Yogamaya-devi, the younger sister of Lord Visnu,
slipped upward from Karisa’s hands and appeared in the sky as
Devi, the goddess Durga, with eight arms, completely equipped
with weapons.

PURPORT

Karhsa tried to dash the child downward against a piece of stone, but
since she was Yogamaya, the younger sister of Lord Visnu, she slipped
upward and assumed the form of the goddess Durga. The word anuja,


--- Page 288 ---
Text 11] The Atrocities of King Karmsa 285
meaning ‘“‘the younger sister,” is significant. When Visnu, or Krsna,
took birth from Devaki, He must have simultaneously taken birth from
Yasoda also. Otherwise how could Yogamaya have been anuja, the Lord’s
younger sister?
TEXTS 10-11
दिन्यस्रगम्बरारेपरलाभरणभूषिता I
धनुःशङेषु चमासिशद्धवकगदाधरा ॥१०॥
सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वरष्सरः किन्नरोरगैः ।
उपाहृतोरुबलिभिः स्तृयमानेदमन्रवीत्‌ 12211
divya-srag-ambardlepa-
ratnabharana-bhisita
dhanuh-silesu-carmasi-
Sarikha-cakra-gada-dhara
siddha-carana-gandharvair
apsarah-kinnaroragaih
upahrtoru-balibhih
stilyamanedam abravit
divya-srak-ambara-alepa—she then assumed the form of a demigod-
dess, completely decorated with sandalwood pulp, flower garlands and a
nice dress; ratna-abharana-bhisita—decorated with ornaments of
valuable jewels; dhanuh-sila-isu-carma-asi—with bow, trident, arrows,
shield and sword; Sarikha-cakra-gada-dhara—and holding the weapons
of Visnu (conchshell, disc and club); siddha-carana-gandharvaih—by
the Siddhas, Caranas and Gandharvas; apsarah-kinnara-uragaih—and
by the Apsaras, Kinnaras and Uragas; updahrta-uru-balibhih—who
brought all kinds of presentations to her; stiyamana—being praised;
idam—these words; abravit—she said.
TRANSLATION
The goddess Durga was decorated with flower garlands, smeared
‘with sandalwood pulp and dressed with excellent garments and or-
naments made of valuable jewels. Holding in her hands a bow, a


--- Page 289 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
trident, arrows, a shield, a sword, a conchshell, a disc and a club,
and being praised by celestial beings like Apsaras, Kinnaras,
Uragas, Siddhas, Caranas and Gandharvas, who worshiped her with
all kinds of presentations, she spoke as follows.
TEXT 12
कि TN हतया मन्द जातः खलु ITH |
यत्र क्र वा पूरवश्ुमा हिंसीः कृपणान्‌ इथा ॥१२॥
kirh maya hataya manda
jatah khalu tavanta-krt
yatra kva va purva-satrur
ma hirmsth krpanan vrtha
kim —what is the use; mayd—me; hataya—in killing; manda—O
you fool; jatah—has already been born; khalu—indeed; tava anta-krt—
who will kill you; yatra kva va—somewhere else; pirva-satruh—your
former enemy; ma—do not; himsith—kill; krpanan—other poor
children; vrtha—unnecessarily.
TRANSLATION
O Karhsa, you fool, what will be the use of killing me? The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has been your enemy from
the very beginning and who will certainly kill you, has already
taken His birth somewhere else. Therefore, do not unnecessarily
kill other children.
TEXT 13
इति সমাচ্দ तं देवी माया भगवती স্তুনি।
बहुनामनिकेतेषु बहुनामा बभूव ह ॥१३॥
iti prabhdsya tam devi
mdyd bhagavati bhuvi
bahu-nama-niketesu
bahu-nama babhiiva ha


--- Page 290 ---
Text 14] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 287

iti—in this way; prabhdsya—addressing; tam—Kamsa; devi—the
goddess Durga; maya—Yogamiya; bhagavati—possessing immense
power, like that of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhuvi—on the
surface of the earth; bahu-nama—of different names; niketesu—in dif-
ferent places; bahu-nama—different names; babhiiva—became; ha—
indeed.

TRANSLATION

After speaking to Karisa in this way, the goddess Durga,
Yogamaya, appeared in different places, such as Varanasi, and be-
came celebrated by different names, such as Annapiirna, Durga,
Kali and Bhadra.

PURPORT

The goddess Durga is celebrated in Calcutta as Kali, in Bombay as
Mumbadevi, in Varanasi as Annapiirna, in Cuttack as Bhadrakali and in
Ahmedabad as Bhadra. Thus in different places she is known by dif-
ferent names. Her devotees are known as $aktas, or worshipers of the en-
ergy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas worshipers of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself are called Vaisnavas.
Vaisnavas are destined to return home, back to Godhead, in the spiritual
world, whereas the saktas are destined to live within this material world
to enjoy different types of material happiness. In the material world, the
living entity must accept different types of bodies. Bhramayan sarva-
bhatani yantraradhani mayaya (Bg. 18.61). According to the living
entity’s desire, Yogamaya, or Maya, the goddess Durga, gives him a par-
ticular type of body, which is mentioned as yantra, a machine. But the
living entities who are promoted to the spiritual world do not return to
the prison house of a material body (tyaktva deham punar janma naiti
mam eti so 'rjuna). The words janma na eti indicate that these living en-
tities remain in their original, spiritual bodies to enjoy the company of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the transcendental abodes
Vaikuntha and Vrndavana.

TEXT 14
तयाभिटितमारूण्यं कंसः परमविसितः ।
देवकीं वरुदेव च विश्य प्र्रितोऽरवीत्‌ ॥१४।।


--- Page 291 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
tayabhihitam akarnya
kamsah parama-vismitah
devakim vasudevari ca
vimucya prasrito ’bravit
tayd—by the goddess Durga; abhihitam—the words spoken;
akarnya—by hearing; karmsah—Karmsa; parama-vismitah—was struck
with wonder; devakim—unto Devaki; vasudevam ca—and Vasudeva;
vimucya—releasing immediately; prasritah—with great humility;
abravit—spoke as follows.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the words of the goddess Durga, Karhsa was
struck with wonder. Thus he approached his sister Devaki and
brother-in-law Vasudeva, released them immediately from their
shackles, and very humbly spoke as follows.
PURPORT
1471588 was astonished because the goddess Durga had become the
daughter of Devaki. Since Devaki was a human being, how could the
goddess Durga become her daughter? This was one cause of his astonish-
ment. Also, how is it that the eighth child of Devaki was a female? This
also astonished him. Asuras are generally devotees of mother Durga,
Sakti, or of demigods, especially Lord Siva. The appearance of Durga in
her original eight-armed feature, holding various weapons, immediately
changed Kamsa’s mind about Devak1’s being an ordinary human. Devaki
must have had some transcendental qualities; otherwise why would the
goddess Durga have taken birth from her womb? Under the circum-
stances, Kamisa, struck with wonder, wanted to compensate for his
atrocities against his sister Devaki.
TEXT 15
अहो भगिन्यहो भाम मया वां बत पाप्मना ।
५ -
पुरुषाद इवापत्यं बहवो हिंसिताः; सताः ॥१५॥।


--- Page 292 ---
Text 16] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 289
aho bhaginy aho bhama
maya vam bata papmana
purusada ivapatyari
bahavo himsitah sutah
aho—alas; bhagini—my dear sister; aho—alas; bhama—my dear
brother-in-law; maya—by me; vam—of you; bata—indeed; pap-
mand—because of sinful activities; purusa-adah—a Raksasa, man-
eater; iva—like; apatyam—child; bahavah—many; himsitah—have
been killed; sutah—sons.
TRANSLATION
Alas, my sister! Alas, my brother-in-law! I am indeed so sinful
that exactly like a man-eater [Raksasa] who eats his own child, I
have killed so many sons born of you.
PURPORT
Raksasas are understood to be accustomed to eating their own sons, as
snakes and many other animals sometimes do. At the present moment in
Kali-yuga, Raksasa fathers and mothers are killing their own children in
the womb, and some are even eating the fetus with great relish. Thus the
so-called civilization is gradually advancing by producing Raksasas.
TEXT 16
q त्वहं त्यक्तकारुण्यस्त्यक्तज्ञातिसुहत्‌ TS: |
- a
काञ्चोकान्‌ बे गमिष्यामि ब्रह्महेव तः श्वसन्‌ ।।१६॥
sa tv aham tyakta-karunyas
tyakta-jiiati-suhrt khalah
kan lokan vai gamisyami
brahma-heva mrtah svasan
sah—that person (Kamsa); tu—indeed; aham—I; tyakta-karun-
yah—devoid of all mercy; tyakta-jAiati-suhrt—my relatives and friends
have been rejected by me; khalah—cruel; kan lokan—which planets;


--- Page 293 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
vai—indeed; gamisyami—shall go; brahma-ha iva—like the killer of a
brahmana; mrtah svasan—either after death or while breathing.
TRANSLATION
Being merciless and cruel, I have forsaken all my relatives and
friends. Therefore, like a person who has killed a brahmana, I do
not know to which planet I shall go, either after death or while
breathing.
TEXT 17
दैवमप्यचृतं वक्ति न मर्त्या एव केवलम्‌ |
यदिन्रम्भादहं पापः खसुर्निहतवाञ्छिशान्‌ । १७७॥
daivam apy anrtam vakti
na martyda eva kevalam
yad-visrambhad ahariv papah
svasur nihatavan chisan
daivam —providence; api—also; anrtam—lies; vakti—say; na—
not; martyah—human beings; eva—certainly; kevalam—only; yat-
visrambhat —because of believing that prophecy; aham—I; papah—the
most sinful; svasuh—of my sister; nihatavan—killed; $isiin —so many
children.
TRANSLATION
Alas, not only human beings but sometimes even providence
lies. And I am so sinful that I believed the omen of providence and
killed so many of my sister’s children.
TEXT 18
मा शोचतं महाभागावात्मजान्‌ स्वकृतंश्चजः |
जान्तवो न सदैकत्र दैवाधीनास्तदासते ।१८॥
ma Socatarn maha-bhagav
atmajan sva-krtariv bhujah


--- Page 294 ---
Text 19] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 291
jantavo na sadaikatra
daivadhinas tadasate

ma Socatam—kindly do not be aggrieved (for what happened in the
past); maha-bhagau—O you who are learned and fortunate in spiritual
knowledge; atmajan—for your sons; sva-krtam—only because of their
own acts; bhujah—who are suffering; jantavah—all living entities;
na—not; sadd—always; ekatra—in one place; daiva-adhinah—who are
under the control of providence; tada—hence; dsate—live.

TRANSLATION

O great souls, your children have suffered their own misfor-
tune. Therefore, please do not lament for them. All living entities
are under the control of the Supreme, and they cannot always live
together.

PURPORT

Kamsa addressed his sister and brother-in-law as maha-bhagau be-
cause although he killed their ordinary children, the goddess Durga took
birth from them. Because Devaki bore Durgadevi in her womb, Karsa
praised both Devaki and her husband. Asuras are very devoted to the
goddess Durga, Kali and so forth. Karnsa, therefore, truly astonished, ap-
preciated the exalted position of his sister and brother-in-law. Durga is
certainly not under the laws of nature, because she herself is the con-
troller of the laws of nature. Ordinary living beings, however, are con-
trolled by these laws (prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah).
Consequently, none of us are allowed to live together for any long
period. By speaking in this way, Kamsa tried to pacify his sister and
brother-in-law.

TEXT 19
वि भौमानि भूतानि यथा यान्त्यपयान्ति = |
~ a
नायमात्मा तत विपर्येति यथेव भूः ॥१९॥
bhuvi bhaumani bhatani
yatha yanty apayanti ca


--- Page 295 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
ndyam atma tathaitesu
viparyeti yathaiva bhih

bhuvi—on the surface of the world; bhaumani—all material products
from earth, such as pots; bhitani—which are produced; yatha—as;
yanti—appear (in form); apayanti—disappear (broken or mixed with
the earth); ca—and; na—not; ayam atma—the soul or spiritual iden-
tity; tathG—similarly; etesu —among all these (products of material ele-
ments); viparyeti—is changed or broken; yatha—as; eva— certainly;
bhiih—the earth.

TRANSLATION

In this world, we can see that pots, dolls and other products of
the earth appear, break and then disappear, mixing with the earth.
Similarly, the bodies of all conditioned living entities are annihi-
lated, but the living entities, like the earth itself, are unchanging
and never annihilated [na hanyate hanyamane &arire].

PURPORT

Although Karhsa is described as a demon, he had good knowledge of
the affairs of atma-tattva, the truth of the self. Five thousand years ago,
there were kings like Karhsa, who is described as an asura, but he was
better than modern politicians and diplomats, who have no knowledge
about atma-tattva. As stated in the Vedas, asarigo hy ayam purusah: the
spirit soul has no connection with the changes of the material body. The
body undergoes six changes—birth, growth, sustenance, by-products,
dwindling and then annihilation—but the soul undergoes no such
changes. Even after the annihilation of a particular bodily form, the
original source of the bodily elements does not change. The living entity
enjoys the material body, which appears and disappears, but the five ele-
ments earth, water, fire, air and ether remain the same. The example
given here is that pots and dolls are produced from the earth, and when
broken or destroyed they mingle with their original ingredients. In any
case, the source of supply remains the same.

As already discussed, the body is made according to the desires of the
soul. The soul desires, and thus the body is formed. Krsna therefore says
in Bhagavad-gita (18.61):


--- Page 296 ---
Text 20] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 293
iSvarah sarva-bhitanam
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhitani
yantrarudhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.” Neither the Supersoul,
Paramatma, nor the individual soul changes its original, spiritual iden-
tity. The atma does not undergo birth, death or changes like the body.
Therefore a Vedic aphorism says, asarnigo hy ayam purusah: although the
soul is conditioned within this material world, he has no connections with
the changes of the material body.
TEXT 20
৬ LN
यथानेवंविदो भेदो यत॒ आत्मविपर्ययः ।
[3 <
देहयोगवियोगौ च संखृतिनं निवर्तते ।२०॥
yathanevarh-vido bhedo
yata atma-viparyayah
deha-yoga-viyogau ca
samsrtir na nivartate
yathda—as; an-evam-vidah—of a person who has no knowledge
(about atma-tattva and the steadiness of the atma in his own identity,
despite the changes of the body); bhedah—the idea of difference be-
tween body and self; yatah—because of which; atma-viparyayah—the
foolish understanding that one is the body; deha-yoga-viyogau ca—and
this causes connections and separations among different bodies;
sarisrtih—the continuation of conditioned life; na—not; nivartate—
does stop.
TRANSLATION
One who does not understand the constitutional position of the
body and the soul [atma] becomes too attached to the bodily con-
cept of life. Consequently, because of attachment to the body and
its by-products, he feels affected by union with and separation


--- Page 297 ---
294. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
from his family, society and nation. As long as this continues, one
continues his material life. [Otherwise, one is liberated.]
PURPORT
As confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.6):
sa vai purisdri paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhoksaje
ahaituky apratihata
yayatma suprasidati
The word dharma means “engagement.” One who is engaged in the ser-
vice of the Lord (yato bhaktir adhoksaje), without impediment and with-
out cessation, is understood to be situated in his original, spiritual status.
When one is promoted to this status, one is always happy in transcenden-
tal bliss. Otherwise, as long as one is in the bodily concept of life, one
must suffer material conditions. Janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-duhkha-
dosanudarsanam. The body is subject to its own principles of birth,
death, old age and disease, but one who is situated in spiritual life (yato
bhaktir adhoksaje) has no birth, no death, no old age and no disease. One
may argue that we may see a person who is spiritually engaged twenty-
four hours a day but is still suffering from disease. In fact, however, he
is neither suffering nor diseased; otherwise he could not be engaged
twenty-four hours a day in spiritual activities. The example may be
given in this connection that sometimes dirty foam or garbage is seen
floating on the water of the Ganges. This is called nira-dharma, a func-
tion of the water. But one who goes to the Ganges does not mind the foam
and dirty things floating in the water. With his hand, he pushes away
such nasty things, bathes in the Ganges and gains the beneficial results.
Therefore, one who is situated in the spiritual status of life is unaffected
by foam and garbage —or any superficial dirty things. This is confirmed
by Srila Ripa Gosvami:
tha yasya harer dasye
karmana manasa gira
nikhilasv apy avasthdsu
Jjwan-muktah sa ucyate


--- Page 298 ---
Text 21] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 295
““A person acting in the service of Krsna with his body, mind and words
is a liberated person, even within the material world.” (Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.187) Therefore, one is forbidden to regard the guru
as an ordinary human being (gurusu nara-matir. . . naraki sah). The
spiritual master, or ৫০৫70, is always situated in the spiritual status of
life. Birth, death, old age and disease do not affect him. According to the
Hari-bhakti-vilasa, therefore, after the disappearance of an dacarya, his
body is never burnt to ashes, for it is a spiritual body. The spiritual body
is always unaffected by material conditions.
TEXT 21
THI भद्र खतनयान्‌ मया व्यापादितानपि |
- +
AEN यतः सवं; सृतं विन्द तेऽवशः 12
tasmad bhadre sva-tanayan
maya vyapaditan api
manusoca yatah sarvah
sva-krtarh vindate "vasah
tasmat—therefore; bhadre—my dear sister (all auspiciousness unto
you); sva-tanayan—for your own sons; mayd—by me; vyapaditan—
unfortunately killed; api—although; ma anusoca —do not be aggrieved;
yatah—Dbecause; sarvah—everyone; sva-krtam—the fruitive results of
one’s own deeds; vindate —suffers or enjoys; avasah—under the control
of providence.
TRANSLATION
My dear sister Devaki, all good fortune unto you. Everyone
suffers and enjoys the results of his own work under the control of
providence. Therefore, although your sons have unfortunately
been killed by me, please do not lament for them.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-sarnhita (5.54):
yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-
bandhanuripa-phala-bhajanam atanoti


--- Page 299 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam

govindam adi-purusam tam ahari bhajami
Everyone, beginning from the small insect known as indra-gopa up to
Indra, the King of the heavenly planets, is obliged to undergo the results
of his fruitive activities. We may superficially see that one is suffering or
enjoying because of some external causes, but the real cause is one’s own
fruitive activities. Even when someone kills someone else, it is to be
understood that the person who was killed met the fruitive results of his
own work and that the man who killed him acted as the agent of material
nature. Thus Karsa begged Devaki’s pardon by analyzing the matter
deeply. He was not the cause of the death of Devaki’s sons. Rather, this
was their own destiny. Under the circumstances, Devaki should excuse
Kamsa and forget his past deeds without lamentation. Karisa admitted
his own fault, but whatever he had done was under the control of provi-
dence. 87158 might have been the immediate cause for the death of
Devaki’s sons, but the remote cause was their past deeds. This was an
actual fact.

TEXT 22
यावद्धतोऽसि हन्ताखीत्यात्मानं मन्यतेऽस्वदक्‌ |
तावत्तदभिमान्यज्ञो वाध्यवाथकतामियात्‌ ।॥२२॥
yavad dhato ’smi hantasmi-
ty atmanam manyate ‘sva-drk
tavat tad-abhimany ajiio
badhya-badhakatam iyat
yavat—as long as; hatah asmi—I am now being killed (by others);

hanta asmi—I am the killer (of others); iti—thus; atmanam—own self;
manyate—he considers; a-sva-drk—one who has not seen himself
(because of the darkness of the bodily conception of 1106); tavat—for that
long; tat-abhimani—regarding himself as the killed or the killer;
ajiah—a foolish person; badhya-badhakatam —the worldly transaction
of being obliged to execute some responsibility; iyat—continues.


--- Page 300 ---
Text 23] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 297
TRANSLATION
In the bodily conception of life, one remains in darkness, with-
out self-realization, thinking, ‘I am being killed” or “I have
killed my enemies.” As long as a foolish person thus considers the
self to be the killer or the killed, he continues to be responsible
for material obligations, and consequently he suffers the reactions
of happiness and distress.
PURPORT
By the grace of the Lord, Kamsa felt sincere regret for having unnec-
essarily persecuted such Vaisnavas as Devaki and Vasudeva, and thus he
came to the transcendental stage of knowledge. “Because I am situated
on the platform of knowledge,” Kamsa said, “understanding that I am
not at all the killer of your sons, I have no responsibility for their death.
As long as I thought that I would be killed by your son, I was in ig-
norance, but now I am free from this ignorance, which was due to a
bodily conception of life.” As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.17):
yasya naharikrto bhavo
buddhir yasya na lipyate
hatvapi sa imal lokan
na hanti na nibadhyate
“One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not en-
tangled, though he kills men in this world, is not the slayer. Nor is he
bound by his actions.” According to this axiomatic truth, Karmsa pleaded
that he was not responsible for having killed the sons of Devaki and
Vasudeva. “Please try to excuse me for such false, external activities,”
he said, “and be pacified with this same knowledge.”
TEXT 23
क्षमध्वं मम दौरारम्यं साधवो दीनवत्सलः |
EN -
इत्युक्त्वाश्ुमुखः पादौ TIS: खस्रोरथाग्रदीत्‌।।२२॥
ksamadhvarih mama dauratmyari
sadhavo dina-vatsalah


--- Page 301 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
ity uktvasru-mukhah padau
Syalah svasror athagrahit
ksamadhvam —kindly excuse; mama—my; dauratmyam—atrocious
activities; sddhavah—both of you are great saintly persons; dina-
vatsaldh—and are very kind to poor, cripple-minded persons; iti
uktva —saying this; asru-mukhah—his face full of tears; padau—the
feet; Syalah—his brother-in-law Kamsa; svasroh—of his sister and
brother-in-law; atha—thus; agrahit—captured.
TRANSLATION
Karisa begged, “My dear sister and brother-in-law, please be
merciful to such a poor-hearted person as me, since both of you
are saintly persons. Please excuse my atrocities.” Having said this,
Karnsa fell at the feet of Vasudeva and Devaki, his eyes full of tears
of regret.
PURPORT
Although Karnsa had spoken very nicely on the subject of real knowl-
edge, his past deeds were abominable and atrocious, and therefore he
further begged forgiveness from his sister and brother-in-law by falling
at their feet and admitting that he was a most sinful person.
TEXT 24
मोचयामास निगडाद्‌ विश्रन्धः कन्यकागिरा |
४ + &
देवकीं TERA च दश्लयन्नात्मसीहदम्‌ IRB)
mocayam 250 nigadad
visrabdhah kanyaka-gira
devakim vasudevam ca
darsayann atma-sauhrdam
mocayam asa—Kamsa released them; nigadat—from their iron
shackles; visrabdhah—with full confidence; kanyaka-gira—in the
words of the goddess Durga; devakim—toward his sister Devaki;


--- Page 302 ---
Text 25] The Atrocities of King Karhsa 299
vasudevam ca—and his brother-in-law Vasudeva; darsayan —fully ex-
hibiting; dtma-sauhrdam—his family relationship.
TRANSLATION

Fully believing in the words of the goddess Durga, Karhsa ex-
hibited his familial affection for Devaki and Vasudeva by im-
mediately releasing them from their iron shackles.

TEXT 25
भ्रातुः समनुतप्तस्य क्षान्तरोषा च देवकी |
व्यसृजद्‌ वसुदेवश्च प्रदस्य AGIA ह NIU
bhratuh samanutaptasya
ksanta-rosd ca devaki
vyasrjad vasudeva$ ca
prahasya tam 0৮৫০৫ ha

bhratuh—toward her brother Karhsa; samanutaptasya—because of
his being regretful; ksdnta-rosa—was relieved of anger; ca—also;
devaki—Krsna’s mother, Devaki; vyasrjat—gave up; vasudevah ca—
Vasudeva also; prahasya—smiling; tam —unto Karhsa; uvdca—said;
ha—in the past.

TRANSLATION

When Devaki saw her brother actually repentant while explain-
ing ordained events, she was relieved of all anger. Similarly,
Vasudeva was also free from anger. Smiling, he spoke to Karhsa as
follows.

PURPORT

Devaki and Vasudeva, both highly elevated personalities, accepted the
truth presented by Karhsa that everything is ordained by providence. Ac-
cording to the prophecy, Karhsa would be killed by the eighth child of
Devaki. Therefore, Vasudeva and Devaki saw that behind all these inci-
dents was a great plan devised by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 303 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
Because the Lord had already taken birth, just like a human child, and
was in the safe custody of Yasoda, everything was happening according to
plan, and there was no need to continue their ill feeling toward Karnsa.
Thus they accepted Karnsa’s words.
TEXT 26
एवमेतन्महाभाग यथा वदसि देहिनाम्‌ |
अज्ञानप्रभवाहंधीः खपरेति भिदा यतः ॥२६॥
evam etan maha-bhaga
yatha vadasi dehinam
ajiiana-prabhavahari-dhih
sva-pareti bhida yatah

evam—yes, this is right; etat—what you have said; maha-bhaga—O
great personality; yatha—as; vadasi—you are speaking; dehinam—
about living entities (accepting material bodies); ajiidna-prabhava—by
the influence of ignorance; aham-dhih—this is my interest (false ego);
sva-pard iti—this is another’s interest; bhida —differentiation; yatah—
because of such a conception of life.

TRANSLATION

O great personality Karnsa, only by the influence of ignorance
does one accept the material body and bodily ego. What you have
said about this philosophy is correct. Persons in the bodily concept
of life, lacking self-realization, differentiate in terms of “This is
mine’ and “This belongs to another.”

PURPORT

Everything is done automatically by the laws of nature, which work
under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is no
question of doing anything independently, for one who has put himself
in this material atmosphere is fully under the control of nature’s laws.
Our main business, therefore, should be to get out of this conditioned life
and again become situated in spiritual existence. Only due to ignorance
does a person think, “I am a demigod,” “I am a human being,” “I am a


--- Page 304 ---
Text 27] The Atrocities of King Karsa 301
dog,” “I am a cat,” or, when the ignorance is still further advanced, “I
am God.” Unless one is fully self-realized, one’s life of ignorance will
continue.
TEXT 27
=O
शोकहषेभयद्वेषलोभमोहमदान्विताः |
৬ A ©+
मिथो न्तं न पश्यन्ति भावरर्मावं पृथग्दशः ।२५७॥
Soka-harsa-bhaya-dvesa-
lobha-moha-madanvitah
mitho ghnantar na pasyanti
bhavair bhava prthag-drsah
Soka—lamentation; harsa—jubilation; bhaya—fear; dvesa—envy;
lobha —greed; moha—illusion; mada—madness; anvitah—endowed
with; mithah—one another; ghnantam—engaged in killing; na
pasyanti—do not see; bhavaih—because of such differentiation;
bhavam—the situation in relation to the Supreme Lord; prthak-drsah—
persons who see everything as separate from the control of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Persons with the vision of differentiation are imbued with the
material qualities lamentation, jubilation, fear, envy, greed, illu-
sion and madness. They are influenced by the immediate cause,
which they are busy counteracting, because they have no knowl-
edge of the remote, supreme cause, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Krsna is the cause of all causes (sarva-karana-karanam), but one who
has no connection with Krsna is disturbed by immediate causes and can-
not restrain his vision of separation or differences. When an expert
physician treats a patient, he tries to find the original cause of the disease
and is not diverted by the symptoms of that original cause. Similarly, a
devotee is never disturbed by reverses in life. Tat te ’nukampam
susamiksamanah (Bhag. 10.14.8). A devotee understands that when he
is in distress, this is due to his own past misdeeds, which are now


--- Page 305 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
accruing reactions, although by the grace of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead these are only very slight. Karmdani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-
bhajam (Brahma-samhita 5.54). When a devotee under the protection of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is to suffer because of faults in his
past deeds, he passes through only a little misery by the grace of the
Lord. Although the disease of a devotee is due to mistakes committed
sometime in the past, he agrees to suffer and tolerate such miseries, and
he depends fully on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he is
never affected by material conditions of lamentation, jubilation, fear and
so on. A devotee never sees anything to be unconnected with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Srila Madhvécarya, quoting from the
Bhavigya Purana, says:
bhagavad-darsanad yasya
virodhad darsanam prthak
prthag-drstih sa vijieyo
na tu sad-bheda-darsanah
TEXT 28
श्रीश्यकं उवाच
कंस एवं प्रसन्नाभ्यां विशयं प्रतिभाषितः ।
देवकीवसुदेवाभ्यामन्ञातोऽिशद्‌ गृहम्‌ ।२८॥
$ri-suka uvdca
karhsa evar prasannabhydm
visuddharh pratibhdsitah
devaki-vasudevabhyam
anujiidto ‘visad grham
§ri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvimi said; karmsah—King Karhsa;
evam—thus; prasanndbhydm —who were very much appeased; visud-
dham—in purity; pratibhdsitah—being answered; devaki-vasudeva-
bhyam—by Devaki and Vasudeva; anujiidtah—taking permission;
avisat—entered; grham —his own palace.


--- Page 306 ---
Text 29] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 303
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thus having been addressed in
purity by Devaki and Vasudeva, who were very much appeased,
Karisa felt pleased, and with their permission he entered his
home.
TEXT 29
तस्यां TAT व्यतीतायां कंस आहूय मन्त्रिणः |
तेभ्य आचष्ट तत्‌ सवं यदुक्तं योगनिद्रया ।।२९॥
tasyam ratryam vyatitayam
kamsa ahiya mantrinah
tebhya acasta tat sarvari
yad uktari yoga-nidraya
tasyam—that; ratryam—night; vyatitayam—having passed; kari-
sah—King Kamsa; @hitya—calling for; mantrinah—all the minis-
ters; tebhyah—them; dcasta—informed; tat—that; sarvam—all; yat
uktam—which was spoken (that [4718588 murderer was already some-
where else); yoga-nidraya—by Yogamaya, the goddess Durga.
TRANSLATION
After that night passed, Karhsa summoned his ministers and in-
formed them of all that had been spoken by Yogamaya [who had
revealed that He who was to slay (57158 had already been born
somewhere else].
PURPORT
The Vedic scripture Candi describes maya, the energy of the Supreme
Lord, as nidra: durga devi sarva-bhiitesu nidra-ripena samasthitah. The
energy of Yogamaya and Mahamaya keeps the living entities sleeping in
this material world in the great darkness of ignorance. Yogamaya, the
goddess Durga, kept Karisa in darkness about Krsna’s birth and misled
him to believe that his enemy Krsna had been born elsewhere. Krsna was
born the son of Devaki, but according to the Lord’s original plan, as


--- Page 307 ---
304. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
prophesied to Brahma, He went to Vrndavana to give pleasure to mother
Yaséoda and Nanda Maharaja and other intimate friends and devotees for
eleven years. Then He would return to kill Karhsa. Because Karnsa did
not know this, he believed Yogamaya’s statement that Krsna was born
elsewhere, not of Devaki.
TEXT 30
০০১৬ ~~
आकर्ण्य भतर्मदितं तमूचुदेवशत्रवः |
देवान्‌ भ्रति कृतामषां दैतेया नातिकोविदाः ॥।३०॥
1.1.13... 1.1.11
tam cur deva-satravah
devan prati krtamarsa
daiteya nati-kovidah
akarnya—after hearing; bhartuh—of their master; gaditam—the
words or statement; tam dcuh—replied to him; deva-satravah—all the
asuras, who were enemies of the demigods; devan—the demigods;
prati—toward; krta-amarsah—who were envious; daiteyah—the
asuras; na—not; ati-koviddh—who were very expert in executing
transactions.
TRANSLATION
After hearing their master’s statement, the envious asuras, who
were enemies of the demigods and were not very expert in their
dealings, advised Karhsa as follows.
PURPORT
There are two different types of men—the asuras and the suras.
dvau bhita-sargau loke ’smin
daiva asura eva ca
visnu-bhakta smrto daiva
asuras tad-viparyayah
(Padma Purana)


--- Page 308 ---
Text 32] The Atrocities of King Karhsa 305
Those who are devotees of Lord Visnu, Krsna, are suras, or devas,
whereas those who are opposed to the devotees are called asuras. Devo-
tees are expert in all transactions (yasydsti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surah). Therefore they are called kovida,
which means “expert.” Asuras, however, although superficially showing
expertise in passionate activities, are actually all fools. They are neither
sober nor expert. Whatever they do is imperfect. Moghasa mogha-
karmanah. According to this description of the asuras given in
Bhagavad-gita (9.12), whatever they do will ultimately be baffled. It was
such persons who advised Kamsa because they were his chief friends and
ministers.
TEXT 31
. =
एवं चेत्तर्हि „भोजेन्द्र पुरग्रामव्रजादिषु |
ক > ~}
अनिर्दशान्‌ निदंशांशच हनिष्यामोऽद्य वै Ree
evar cet tarhi bhojendra
pura-grama-vrajadisu
anirdasan nirdasams ca
hanisyamo ‘dya vai इक्या

evam—thus; cet—if it is so; tarhi—then; bhoja-indra—O King of
Bhoja; pura-grama-vraja-adisu—in all the towns, villages and pasturing
grounds; anirda$an—those who are less than ten days old; nirdasan
ca—and those who are just over ten days old; hanisyamah—we shall
kill; adya—Dbeginning from today; wvai—indeed; S$isin—all such
children.

TRANSLATION

If this is so, O King of the Bhoja dynasty, beginning today we
shall kill all the children born in all the villages, towns and pastur-
ing grounds within the past ten days or slightly more.

TEXT 32
fry: करिष्यन्ति देवाः समरभीरवः |
> =
नित्यदधि्रमनसो ড্যাঘীদীঘীন্তমংলন 1301


--- Page 309 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
kim udyamaih karisyanti
devah samara-bhiravah
nityam udvigna-manaso
Jya-ghosair dhanusas tava
kim—what; udyamaih—by their endeavors; karisyanti—will १०;
devah—all the demigods; samara-bhiravah—who are afraid of fight-
ing; nityam—always; udvigna-manasah—with agitated minds; jya-
ghosaih—Dby the sound of the string; dhanusah—of the bow; tava—
your.
TRANSLATION
The demigods always fear the sound of your bowstring. They
are constantly in anxiety, afraid of fighting. Therefore, what can
they do by their endeavors to harm you?
TEXT 33
= Ac
अस्यतस्ते शरव्रातंहेन्यमाना;ः समन्ततः |
जिजीविषव उत्सृज्य पलायनपरा ययुः 11330
asyatas te Sara-vratair
hanyamanah samantatah
Jiyisava utsrjya
palayana-para yayuh
asyatah—pierced by your discharged arrows; te—your; Sara-vra-
taih—by the multitude of arrows; hanyamanah—being killed; saman-
tatah—here and there; jijivisavah—aspiring to live; utsrjya—giving up
the battlefield; paldyana-parah—intent on escaping; yayuh—they fled
(the fighting).
TRANSLATION
‘While being pierced by your arrows, which you discharged on
all sides, some of them, who were injured by the multitude of ar-
rows but who desired to live, fled the battlefield, intent on
escaping.


--- Page 310 ---
Text 35] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 307
TEXT 34
केचित्‌ प्राज्ञलयो दीना স্যব্লহান্তা दिवौकसः |
युक्तकच्छरिखाः केचिद्‌ भीताः ख इति बादिनः।।२३४।।
kecit praijalayo dina
nyasta-Sastrd divaukasah
mukta-kaccha-sikhah kecid
bhitdh sma iti vadinah
kecit—some of them; prarjalayah—folded their hands just to please
you; dindh—very poor; nyasta-Sastrdh—being bereft of all weapons;
divaukasah—the demigods; mukta-kaccha-sikhah—their garments and
hair loosened and scattered; kecit—some of them; bhitdh —we are very
much afraid; sma—so became; iti vadinah—they spoke thus.
TRANSLATION
Defeated and bereft of all weapons, some of the demigods gave
up fighting and praised you with folded hands, and some of them,
appearing before you with loosened garments and hair, said, “0
lord, we are very much afraid of you.”
TEXT 35
न त्वं विस्मरतराल्नाच्ान्‌ विरथान्‌ भयसंवृतान्‌ |
हंस्यन्यासक्तवियुखान्‌ भत्रचापानयुध्यतः; ।३५५॥
na tvarh vismrta-Sastrastran
virathan bhaya-sarvrtan
harsy anydsakta-vimukhan
bhagna-capan ayudhyatah
na—not; tvam—Your Majesty; vismrta-Sastra-astran—those who
have forgotten how to use weapons; virathan —without chariots; bhaya-
sarwrtdn—bewildered by fear; hamsi—does kill; anya-dsakta-vimu-
khan —persons attached not to fighting but to some other subject matter;


--- Page 311 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
bhagna-capan—their bows broken; ayudhyatah—and thus not fight-
ing.
TRANSLATION
When the demigods are bereft of their chariots, when they
forget how to use weapons, when they are fearful or attached to
something other than fighting, or when their bows are broken and
they have thus lost the ability to fight, Your Majesty does not kill
them.
PURPORT
There are principles that govern even fighting. If an enemy has no
chariot, is unmindful of the fighting art because of fear, or is unwilling
to fight, he is not to be killed. Karhsa’s ministers reminded Karnsa that
despite his power, he was cognizant of the principles of fighting, and
therefore he had excused the demigods because of their incapability.
“But the present emergency,” the ministers said, “is not intended for
such mercy or military etiquette. Now you should prepare to fight under
any circumstances.” Thus they advised Karsa to give up the traditional
etiquette in fighting and chastise the enemy at any cost.
TEXT 36
aA ITN EN
किं क्षिमशरीरविुधैरसंयुगविकल्थनेः ।
रहोजुषा कि हरिणा शम्थुना वा वनौकसा |
किमिन्द्रेणार्पवीर्येण ब्रह्मणा वा तपस्यता 13501
kin ksema-sirair vibudhair
asamyuga-vikatthanaih
raho-jusa kirh harina
Sambhuna va vanaukasa
kim indrenalpa-viryena
brahmana va tapasyata
kim —what is there to fear; ksema—in a place where there is a scarcity
of the ability to fight; Siraih—by the demigods; vibudhaih—by such
powerful persons; asarmyuga-vikatthanaih—by boasting and talking


--- Page 312 ---
Text 37] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 309
uselessly, away from the fighting; rahah-jusa—who is living in a solitary
place within the core of the heart; kim harind—what is the fear from
Lord Visnu; sambhuna— (and what is the fear) from Lord Siva; va—
either; vana-okasa—who is living in the forest; kim indrena—what is
the fear from Indra; alpa-viryena—he is not at all powerful (having no
power to fight with you); brahrmiana—and what is the fear from
Brahma; va—either; tapasyatd—who is always engaged in meditation.
TRANSLATION

The demigods boast uselessly while away from the battlefield.
Only where there is no fighting can they show their prowess.
Therefore, from such demigods we have nothing to fear. As for
Lord Visnu, He is in seclusion in the core of the hearts of the
yogis. As for Lord Siva, he has gone to the forest. And as for Lord
Brahma, he is always engaged in austerities and meditation.
The other demigods, headed by Indra, are devoid of prowess.
Therefore you have nothing to fear.

PURPORT

Karhsa’s ministers told Karhsa that all the exalted demigods had fled in
fear of him. One had gone to the forest, one to the core of the heart, and
one to engage in tapasya. “Thus you can be free from all fear of the
demigods,” they said. “Just prepare to fight.”

TEXT 37
तथापि देवाः सापटन्या्नोपेक्ष्या इति मन्महे |
ततस्तन्मूलखनने नियुङक्ष्वासाननुत्रताच्‌ 13911
tathapi devah sapatnyan
nopeksya iti manmahe
tatas tan-miila-khanane
niyuriksvasman anuvratan

tatha api—still; devah —the demigods; sapatnyat—due to enmity; na
upeksyah —should not be neglected; iti manmahe —this is our opinion;
tatah—therefore; tat-miila-khanane—to uproot them completely;


--- Page 313 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
niyunksva—engage; asmdn—us; anuvratdn—who are ready to follow
you.
TRANSLATION
Nonetheless, because of their enmity, our opinion is that the
demigods should not be neglected. Therefore, to uproot them
completely, engage us in fighting with them, for we are ready to
follow you.
PURPORT
According to moral instructions, one should not neglect to extinguish
fire completely, treat diseases completely, and clear debts completely.
Otherwise they will increase and later be difficult to stop. Therefore the
minsters advised Karhsa to uproot his enemies completely.
TEXT 38
यथामयोऽङ्गे समुपेक्ितो নৃদি-
नै शक्यते रूढपदधिकित्सितुम्‌ |
यथेन्द्रियग्राम उपेक्षितस्तथा
Q -
Ryser. gaa न चाल्यते ॥३८॥
yathdmayo nge samupeksito nrbhir
na Sakyate ragha-padas cikitsitum
yathendriya-grama upeksitas tathd
ripur mahdn baddha-balo na cdlyate
yathd—as; dmayah—a disease; arige—in the body; samupeksitah—
being neglected; nrbhih—by men; na—not; Sakyate—is able; ridha-
padah—when it is acute; cikitsitum—to be treated; yathd—and as;
indriya-gramah —the senses; upeksitah—not controlled in the begin-
ning; tathd—similarly; ripuh mahdn—a great enemy; baddha-balah—
if he becomes strong; na—not; cdlyate—can be controlled.
TRANSLATION
As a disease, if initially neglected, becomes acute and impossible
to cure, or as the senses, if not controlled at first, are impossible to


--- Page 314 ---
Text 39] The Atrocities of King Karhsa 311
control later, an enemy, if neglected in the beginning, later
becomes insurmountable.
TEXT 39
५ ~ : ९
मूरं हि विष्णुर्देवानां यत्र धमेः सनातनः |
तस्य च ब्रह्म गोविप्रास्तपो यज्ञाः सदक्षिणाः ॥२३९॥
milan hi visnur devanam
yatra dharmah sanatanah
tasya ca brahma-go-vipras
tapo yajAah sa-daksinah
mitlam —the foundation; hi—indeed; visnuh—is Lord Visnu; deva-
nam—of the demigods; yatra—wherein; dharmah—religious prin-
ciples; sanatanah—traditional or eternal; tasya—of this (foundation);
ca—also; brahma—brahminical civilization; go—cow protection;
viprah— brahmanas; tapah—austerity; yajiah—performing sacrifices;
sa-daksinah —with proper remuneration.
TRANSLATION
The foundation of all the demigods is Lord Vigsnu, who lives and
is worshiped wherever there are religious principles, traditional
culture, the Vedas, cows, brahmanas, austerities, and sacrifices
with proper remuneration.
PURPORT
Here is a description of sanatana-dharma, eternal religious principles,
which must include brahminical culture, brahmanas, sacrifices and
religion. These principles establish the kingdom of Visnu. Without the
kingdom of Visnu, the kingdom of God, no one can be happy. Na te
viduh svartha-gatirn hi vispum: in this demoniac civilization, people un-
fortunately do not understand that the self-interest of human society lies
in Visnu. Durdsaya ye bahir-artha-maninah: thus they are involved in a
hopeless hope. People want to be happy without God consciousness, or
Krsna consciousness, because they are led by blind leaders who lead


--- Page 315 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
human society to chaos. The asuric adherents of Karmsa wanted to disrupt
the traditional condition of human happiness and thus defeat the
devatas, the devotees and demigods. Unless the devotees and demigods
predominate, the asuras will increase, and human society will be in a
chaotic condition.
TEXT 40
तसात्‌ सर्वात्मना राजन्‌ ब्राह्मणान्‌ ब्रह्मवादिन |
~ ५
तपखिनो यज्ञशीलान्‌ गाश्च हन्मो हविदुधाः ॥४०॥
tasmat sarvatmana rajan
brahmanan brahma-vadinah
tapasvino yajiia-silan
gas ca hanmo havir-dughah
tasmat—therefore; sarva-atmana—in every respect; rajan—O King;
brahmanan—the brahmanas; brahma-vadinah—who maintain the
brahminical culture, centered around Visnu; tapasvinah—persons who
are engaged in austerities; yajiia-Silan —persons engaged in offering
sacrifices; gah ca—cows and persons engaged in protecting cows;
hanmah—we shall kill; havih-dughah—Dbecause they supply milk, from
which clarified butter is obtained for the offering of sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
O King, we, who are your adherents in all respects, shall
therefore kill the Vedic brahmanas, the persons engaged in offer-
ing sacrifices and austerities, and the cows that supply milk, from
which clarified butter is obtained for the ingredients of sacrifice.
TEXT 41
विप्रा गाव वेदाश्च तपः सत्यं दमः शमः |
সত্রা दया तितिक्षा च क्रतवश्च हरेस्तनूः 1920
vipra gavas ca vedas ca
tapah satya damah Samah


--- Page 316 ---
Text 41] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 313
sraddha daya titiksa ca
kratava$ ca hares taniih
viprah—the brahmanas; gavah ca—and the cows; vedah ca—and the
Vedic knowledge; tapah—austerity; satyam—truthfulness; damah—
control of the senses; samah—control of the mind; $raddha—faith;
daya—mercy; titiksa—tolerance; ca—also; kratavah ca—as well as
sacrifices; hareh taniith—are the different parts of the body of Lord
Visnu.
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas, the cows, Vedic knowledge, austerity, truthful-
ness, control of the mind and senses, faith, mercy, tolerance and
sacrifice are the different parts of the body of Lord Visnu, and they
are the paraphernalia for a godly civilization.
PURPORT
When we offer our obeisances to the Personality of Godhead, we say:
namo brahmanya-devaya
go-brahmana-hitaya ca
Jjagad-dhitaya krsnaya
govindaya namo namah
When Krsna comes to establish real perfection in the social order, He
personally gives protection to the cows and the brahmanas (go-
brahmana-hitaya ca). This is His first interest because without protec-
tion of the brahmanas and the cows, there can be no human civilization
and no question of happy, peaceful life. Asuras, therefore, are always in-
terested in killing the brahmanas and cows. Especially in this age, Kali-
yuga, cows are being killed all over the world, and as soon as there is a
movement to establish brahminical civilization, people in general rebel.
Thus they regard the Krsna consciousness movement as a form of
“brainwashing.” How can such envious persons be happy in their god-
less civilization? The Supreme Personality of Godhead punishes them by
keeping them in darkness, birth after birth, and pushing them lower and


--- Page 317 ---
314. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
lower into wretched conditions of hellish life. The Krsna consciousness
movement has started a brahminical civilization, but especially when it is
introduced in the Western countries, the asuras try to impede it in many
ways. Nonetheless, we must push forward this movement tolerantly for
the benefit of human society.
TEXT 42
~€ (3 ~
स हं सवसुराध्यक्षा द्यसुरादवड्‌ गुहाशयः |
तन्मूला देवताः सर्वाः सेश्वराः सचतुगरुखाः |
PAREN = ड
अयं बे तदधोपायो यदृषीणां Affe ek
sa hi sarva-suradhyakso
hy asura-dvid guha-sayah
tan-mula devatah sarvah
sesvarah sa-catur-mukhah
ayam vai tad-vadhopayo
yad rsinar vihimsanam
sah—He (Lord Visnu); hi—indeed; sarva-sura-adhyaksah—the
leader of all the demigods; hi—indeed; asura-dvit—the enemy of the
asuras; guha-sayah—He is the Supersoul within the core of everyone’s
heart; tat-miilah—taking shelter at His lotus feet; devatah —the
demigods exist; sarvah—all of them; sa-i#Svarah—including Lord Siva;
sa-catuh-mukhah—as well as Lord Brahma, who has four faces;
ayam—this is; vai—indeed; tat-vadha-upayah—the only means of kill-
ing Him (Visnu); yat—which; rsinam—of great sages, saintly persons,
or Vaisnavas; vihirsanam—suppression with all kinds of persecution.
TRANSLATION
Lord Visnu, the Supersoul within the core of everyone’s heart,
is the ultimate enemy of the asuras and is therefore known as
asura-dvit. He is the leader of all the demigods because all the
demigods, including Lord Siva and Lord Brahma, exist under His
protection. The great saintly persons, sages and Vaisnavas also
depend upon Him. To persecute the Vaisnavas, therefore, is the
only way to kill Visnu.


--- Page 318 ---
Text 43] The Atrocities of King Karhsa 315
PURPORT
The demigods and the Vaisnavas especially are part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord, Visnu, because they are always obedient to His orders
(07 tad visnoh paramarm padam sada pasyanti sarayah). The demoniac
followers of Kamsa thought that if the Vaisnavas, saintly persons and
sages were persecuted, the original body of Visnu would naturally be
destroyed. Thus they decided to suppress Vaisnavism. The asuras per-
petually struggle to persecute the Vaignavas because they do not want
Vaisnavism to spread. Vaisnavas preach only devotional service, not en-
couraging karmis, jiianis and yogis, because if one must liberate oneself
from material, conditional life, one must ultimately become a Vaisnava.
Our Krsna consciousness movement is directed with this understanding,
and therefore the asuras always try to suppress it.
TEXT 43
श्रीदयुक उवाच
বে 5 ९
एवं दुमेन्तरिभिः कसः सह सम्मन्त्य दुमेतिः |
নি ক -
ब्रह्महिंसां हितं मेने कारपासाव्रतोऽसुरः 11830
577-5८4८ uvaca
evam durmantribhih kamsah
saha sammantrya durmatih
brahma-himmsam hitar mene
kala-pasavrto ‘surah
$ri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—in this way;
durmantribhih—his bad ministers; karmsah—King Karsa; saha—along
with; sammantrya—after considering very elaborately; durmatih—
without good intelligence; brahma-hirmsam—persecution of the
brahmanas; hitam—as the best way; mene—accepted; kala-pasa-
avrtah—being bound by the rules and regulations of Yamaraja;
asurah—because he was a demon.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thus, having considered the in-
structions of his bad ministers, Karhsa, who was bound by the laws


--- Page 319 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
of Yamaraja and devoid of good intelligence because he was a
demon, decided to persecute the saintly persons, the brahmanas,
as the only way to achieve his own good fortune.
PURPORT
Srila Locana dasa Thakura has sung, apana karama, bhuijaye
Samana, kahaye locana dasa. Instead of taking good instructions from
the sages and the Sastras, godless nondevotees act whimsically, according
to their own plans. Actually, however, no one has his own plans because
everyone is bound by the laws of nature and must act according to his
tendency in material, conditional life. Therefore one must change one’s
own decision and follow the decision of Krsna and Krsna’s devotees.
Then one is rescued from punishment by Yamaraja. Karsa was not
uneducated. It appears from his talks with Vasudeva and Devaki that he
knew all about the laws of nature. But because of his association with bad
ministers, he could not make a clear decision about his welfare.
Therefore the Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.54) says:
‘sadhu-sariga,’ ‘sadhu-sariga’— sarva-sastre kaya
lava-matra sadhu-sarige sarva-siddhi haya
If one desires his real welfare, he must associate with devotees and
saintly persons and in this way rectify the material condition of his life.
TEXT 44
सन्दिश्य साघुलोकसय कदने कदनप्रियान्‌ |
कामरूपधरान्‌ दिक्षु दानवान्‌ गृहमाविशत्‌ ॥८५०।।
sandiSya sadhu-lokasya
kadane kadana-priyan
kama-ripa-dharan diksu
danavan grham avisat
sandi§ya—after giving permission; sadhu-lokasya—of the saintly
persons; kadane—in persecution; kadana-priyan—to the demons, who


--- Page 320 ---
Text 45] The Atrocities of King Karnsa 317
were very expert at persecuting others; kama-ripa-dharan—who could
assume any form, according to their own desire; diksu—in all directions;
danavan—to the demons; grham avisat—Karnsa entered his own palace.
TRANSLATION
These demons, the followers of Karhsa, were expert at persecut-
ing others, especially the Vaisnavas, and could assume any form
they desired. After giving these demons permission to go every-
where and persecute the saintly persons, Karhsa entered his palace.
TEXT 45
ते बै रजःप्रकृतयस्तमसा भृटचेतसः |
सतां विद्रेषमाचेरुरारादागतमत्यवः Hil
te vai rajah-prakrtayas
tamasa midha-cetasah
satam vidvesam acerur
arad agata-mrtyavah
te—all the asuric ministers; vai—indeed; rajah-prakrtayah—sur-
charged with the mode of passion; tamasa—overwhelmed by the mode
of ignorance; midha-cetasah—foolish persons; satam—of saintly per-
sons; vidvesam—persecution; dceruh—executed; arat agata-mrtya-
vah—impending death having already overtaken them.
TRANSLATION
Surcharged with passion and ignorance and not knowing what
was good or bad for them, the asuras, for whom impending death
was waiting, began the persecution of the saintly persons.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.13):
dehino ’smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanam jara


--- Page 321 ---
318 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 4
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati
“As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.” Irresponsible per-
sons, surcharged with passion and ignorance, foolishly do things that are
not to be done (niznar pramattah kurute vikarma). But one should know
the results of irresponsible actions, as explained in the next verse.
TEXT 46
& ४ =
आयुः श्रियं यलो धमं लोकानाशिष एव च ।
৬ কক
हन्ति श्रेयांसि सर्वाणि গুলী महदतिक्रमः ॥४६॥
ayuh Sriyam yaso dharmari
lokan asisa eva ca
hanti §reyamsi sarvani
7477250 mahad-atikramah
ayuh—the duration of life; sriyam—beauty; yaSah—fame;
dharmam —religion; lokan—elevation to higher planets; asisah —bless-
ings; eva—indeed; ca—also; hanti—destroys; Sreyarsi—benedictions;
sarvani—all; pursah—of a person; mahat-atikramah—trespassing
against great personalities.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, when a man persecutes great souls, all his
benedictions of longevity, beauty, fame, religion, blessings and
promotion to higher planets will be destroyed.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Fourth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Atrocities of King
Karnsa.”


--- Page 322 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
The Meeting of
Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva
As described in this chapter, Nanda Maharaja very gorgeously performed
the birth ceremony for his newborn child. Then he went to Karmsa to pay
taxes due and met his intimate friend Vasudeva.

There was great jubilation all over Vrndavana due to Krsna’s birth.
Everyone was overwhelmed with joy. Therefore the King of Vraja,
Maharaja Nanda, wanted to perform the birth ceremony for his child,
and this he did. During this great festival, Nanda Maharaja gave in
charity to all present whatever they desired. After the festival, Nanda
Maharaja put the cowherd men in charge of protecting Gokula, and then
he went to Mathura to pay official taxes to Karmsa. In Mathura, Nanda
Maharaja met Vasudeva. Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva were brothers,
and Vasudeva praised Nanda Maharaja’s good fortune because he knew
that Krsna had accepted Nanda Maharaja as His father. When Vasudeva
inquired from Nanda Maharaja about the welfare of the child, Nanda
Maharaja informed him all about Vrndavana, and Vasudeva was very
much satisfied by this, although he expressed his grief because Devaki’s
many children had been killed by Karisa. Nanda Maharaja consoled
Vasudeva by saying that everything happens according to destiny and
that one who knows this is not aggrieved. Expecting many disturbances
in Gokula, Vasudeva then advised Nanda Maharaja not to wait in
Mathura, but to return to Vrndavana as soon as possible. Thus Nanda
Maharaja took leave of Vasudeva and returned to Vrndavana with the
other cowherd men on their bullock carts.

TEXTS 1-2
श्रीद्युक उवाच
नन्द स्त्वात्मज उत्पले TARR महामनाः |
आहूय विप्रान्‌ वेदज्ञान्‌ सातः Fraga: nen
319


--- Page 323 ---
320 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
वाचयित्वा खस्त्ययनं ST वे ।
कारयामास विधिवत्‌ पितदेवाचनं तथा ॥ २॥
sri-suka uvdca
nandas tv atmaja utpanne
jatahlado maha-manah
ahitya vipran veda-jian
snatah sucir alarikrtah
vdcayitva svastyayanari
Jjata-karmatmajasya vai
karayam asa vidhivat
pitr-devarcanar tatha
Sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; nandah—Maharaja
Nanda; tu—indeed; datmaje—his son; utpanne—having been born;
jata—overwhelmed; ahladah—in great jubilation; maha-manah—who
was great minded; d@hiilya—invited; vipran—the brahmanas; veda-
jiian—who were fully conversant in Vedic knowledge; snatah—taking a
full bath; Sucih—purifying himself; alarikrtah—being dressed very
nicely with ornaments and fresh garments; vacayitva—after causing to
be recited; svasti-ayanam —Vedic mantras (by the brahmanas); jata-
karma —the festival for the birth of the child; atmajasya—of his own
son; vai—indeed; kdrayam dasa—caused to be performed; vidhi-vat—
according to the Vedic regulations; pitr-deva-arcanam —the worship of
the forefathers and the demigods; tatha—as well as.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: Nanda Maharaja was naturally very mag-
nanimous, and when Lord Sri Krsna appeared as his son, he was
overwhelmed by jubilation. Therefore, after bathing and purify-
ing himself and dressing himself properly, he invited brahmanas
who knew how to recite Vedic mantras. After having these
qualified brahmanas recite auspicious Vedic hymns, he arranged to
have the Vedic birth ceremony celebrated for his newborn child
according to the rules and regulations, and he also arranged for
worship of the demigods and forefathers.


--- Page 324 ---
Text 3] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 321
PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura has discussed the significance of
the words nandas tu. The word tu, he says, is not used to fulfill the sen-
tence, because without tu the sentence is complete. Therefore the word tu
is used for a different purpose. Although Krsna appeared as the son of
Devaki, Devaki and Vasudeva did not enjoy the jata-karma, the festival
of the birth ceremony. Instead, this ceremony was enjoyed by Nanda
Maharaja, as stated here (nandas tv atmaja utpanne jatahlado maha-
manah). When Nanda Maharaja met Vasudeva, Vasudeva could not dis-
close, “Your son Krsna is actually my son. You are His father in a
different way, spiritually.” Because of fear of Karhsa, Vasudeva could
not observe the festival for Krsna’s birth. Nanda Maharaja, however,
took full advantage of this opportunity.

The jata-karma ceremony can take place when the umbilical cord,
connecting the child and the placenta, is cut. However, since Krsna was
brought by Vasudeva to the house of Nanda Maharaja, where was the
chance for this to happen? In this regard, ViSvanatha Cakravarti
Thakura desires to prove with evidence from many $astras that Krsna ac-
tually took birth as the son of Ya$oda before the birth of Yogamaya, who
is therefore described as the Lord’s younger sister. Even though there
may be doubts about the cutting of the umbilical cord, and even though
it is possible that this was not done, when the Supreme Personality of
Godhead appears, such events are regarded as factual. Krsna appeared as
Varahadeva from the nostril of Brahmi, and therefore Brahma is de-
scribed as the father of Varahadeva. Also significant are the words
karayam asa vidhivat. Being overwhelmed with jubilation over the birth
of his son, Nanda Maharaja did not see whether the cord was cut or not.
Thus he performed the ceremony very gorgeously. According to the
opinion of some authorities, Krsna was actually born as the son of
38003. In any case, without regard for material understandings, we can
accept that Nanda Maharaja’s celebration for the ceremony of Krsna’s
birth was proper. This ceremony is therefore well known everywhere as
Nandotsava.

TEXT 3
धेनलां नियुते प्रादाद्‌ fie समलङ्कृते |
तिलाद्रीन्‌ सप्र रलोषशातकौम्भाम्बरावृर्तान्‌ ॥ २ ॥


--- Page 325 ---
322 Srimad-Bhagavatam ॥ [Canto 10, Ch. 5
01678072772 niyute pradad
viprebhyah samalarikrte
tiladrin sapta ratnaugha-
satakaumbhambaravrtan
dheniinam— of milk-giving cows; niyute —two million; pradat—gave
in charity; viprebhyah—unto the brahmanas; samalarnkrte— completely
decorated; tila-adrin—hills of grain; sapta—seven; ratna-ogha-sata-
kaumbha-ambara-avrtan —covered with jewels and cloth embroidered
with gold.
TRANSLATION
Nanda Maharaja gave two million cows, completely decorated
with cloth and jewels, in charity to the brahmanas. He also gave
them seven hills of grain, covered with jewels and with cloth deco-
rated with golden embroidery. ’
TEXT 4
PSE
कालेन खानशोचाम्यां HER RESTA |
A
शुष्यन्ति दानैःसन्तष्टया द्रव्याण्यातमात्मविद्यया ॥ ४॥
kalena snana-saucabhyarn
sarmskarais tapasejyaya
Sudhyanti danaih santustya
dravyany atmatma-vidyaya
kalena—by due course of time (the land and other material things be-
come purified); snana-saucabhyam—by bathing (the body becomes
purified) and by cleansing (unclean things become purified);
sariskaraih—by purificatory processes (birth becomes purified);
tapasa—by austerity (the senses become purified); ijyaya—by worship
(the brahmanas become purified); Sudhyanti—become purified;
danaih—by charity (wealth becomes purified); santustya—by satisfac-
tion (the mind becomes purified); dravyani—all material possessions,
such as cows, land and gold; atma—the soul (becomes purified); atma-
vidyaya—by self-realization.


--- Page 326 ---
Text 5] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 323
TRANSLATION
O King, by the passing of time, land and other material posses-
sions are purified; by bathing, the body is purified; and by being
cleansed, unclean things are purified. By purificatory ceremonies,
birth is purified; by austerity, the senses are purified; and by
worship and charity offered to the brahmanas, material posses-
sions are purified. By satisfaction, the mind is purified; and by
self-realization, or Krsna consciousness, the soul is purified.
PURPORT
These are §astric injunctions concerning how one can purify every-
thing according to Vedic civilization. Unless purified, anything we use
will infect us with contamination. In India five thousand years ago, even
in the villages such as that of Nanda Maharaja, people knew how to
purify things, and thus they enjoyed even material life without
contamination.
TEXT 5
=
सौमङ्गल्यगिरो विप्राः छतमागधवन्दिनः ।
স্ব __ AS
गायकाश्च जगुर्ेदुरभर्यो दुन्दुभयो gE ॥ এ ॥
saumarngalya-giro viprah
sita-magadha-vandinah
gayakas ca jagur nedur
bheryo dundubhayo muhuh
saumarngalya-girah —whose chanting of mantras and hymns purified
the environment by their vibration; viprah—the brahmanas; siita—ex-
perts in reciting all the histories; magadha—experts in reciting the
histories of special royal families; vandinah—general professional
reciters; gayakah—singers; ca—as well as; jaguh—chanted; neduh—
vibrated; bheryah—a kind of musical instrument; dundubhayah—a
kind of musical instrument; muhuh— constantly.
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas recited auspicious Vedic hymns, which purified
the environment by their vibration. The experts in reciting old


--- Page 327 ---
324 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
histories like the Puranas, the experts in reciting the histories of
royal families, and general reciters all chanted, while singers
sang and many kinds of musical instruments, like bheris and
dundubhis, played in accompaniment.
TEXT 6
AM: सम्बरष्टसंसिक्तद्वाराजिरगृहान्तरः |
N EN EY
चित्रध्वजपताकासरकूचेखप्वतोरणेः ॥ৰ & ॥
vrajah sammrsta-sarmsikta-
dvarajira-grhantarah
citra-dhvaja-pataka-srak-
caila-pallava-toranaih
vrajah—the land occupied by Nanda Maharaja; sammrsta—very
nicely cleaned; sarsikta—very nicely washed; dvara—all the doors or
entrances; ajira—courtyards; grha-antarah—everything within the
house; citra—variegated; dhvaja—of festoons; pataka—of flags; srak—
of flower garlands; caila—of pieces of cloth; pallava—of the leaves of
mango trees; toranaih— (decorated) by gates in different places.
TRANSLATION
Vrajapura, the residence of Nanda Maharaja, was fully decorated
with varieties of festoons and flags, and in different places, gates
were made with varieties of flower garlands, pieces of cloth, and
mango leaves. The courtyards, the gates near the roads, and every-
thing within the rooms of the houses were perfectly swept and
washed with water.
TEXT 7
ho aR
বালী IAT वत्सतरा हिद्रातेलरूषिताः |
০
विचित्रधातुबहेखग्वखकाश्चनमारिनः nei
gavo vrsa vatsatara |
haridra-taila-risitah |
|


--- Page 328 ---
Text 8] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 325
vicitra-dhatu-barhasrag-
vastra-kancana-malinah

gavah—the cows; vrsah—the bulls; vatsatarah—the calves; hari-
dra—with a mixture of turmeric; taila—and oil; risitah—their entire
bodies smeared; vicitra—decorated varieties of; dhatu—colored min-
erals; barha-srak—peacock-feather garlands; vastra—cloths; = पला
cana—golden ornaments; malinah—being decorated with garlands.

TRANSLATION

The cows, the bulls and the calves were thoroughly smeared
with a mixture of turmeric and oil, mixed with varieties of
minerals. Their heads were bedecked with peacock feathers,
and they were garlanded and covered with cloth and golden
ornaments.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has instructed in Bhagavad-
gita (18.44), krsi-go-raksya-vanijyarn vaiSya-karma-svabhavajam:
“Farming, cow protection and trade are the qualities of work for the
vaiSyas.” Nanda Maharaja belonged to the wvaiSya community, the
agriculturalist community. How to protect the cows and how rich this
community was are explained in these verses. We can hardly imagine
that cows, bulls and calves could be cared for so nicely and decorated so
well with cloths and valuable golden ornaments. How happy they were.
As described elsewhere in the Bhagavatam, during Maharaja
Yudhisthira’s time the cows were so happy that they used to muddy the
pasturing ground with milk. This is Indian civilization. Yet in the same
place, India, Bharatavarsa, how much people are suffering by giving up
the Vedic way of life and not understanding the teachings of Bhagavad-
gita.

TEXT 8
< - o र
महाहंवखाभरणकञ्चुकोष्णीषभूषिताः ।
गापाः समाययू राजन्‌ नानापायनपाणयः | ८ ॥


--- Page 329 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
maharha-vastrabharana-
kanicukosnisa-bhusitah
gopah samayayiu rajan
, nanopdyana-panayah
mahd-arha—extremely valuable; vastra-abharana—with garments
and ornaments; kaficuka—by a particular type of garment used in
Vrndavana; usnisa—with turbans; bhisitah—being nicely dressed;
gopah—all the cowherd men; samdyayuh—came there; rajan—O
King (Maharaja Pariksit); nand—various; updyana—presentations;
panayah—holding in their hands.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, the cowherd men dressed very opulently with
valuable ornaments and garments such as coats and turbans. Deco-
rated in this way and carrying various presentations in their hands,
they approached the house of Nanda Maharaja.
PURPORT
When we consider the past condition of the agriculturalist in the
village, we can see how opulent he was, simply because of agricultural
produce and protection of cows. At the present, however, agriculture
having been neglected and cow protection given up, the agriculturalist is
suffering pitiably and is dressed in a niggardly torn cloth. This is the dis-
tinction between the India of history and the India of the present day. By
the atrocious activities of ugra-karma, how we are killing the oppor-
tunity of human civilization!
TEXT 9
- = -
गोप्यशाकण्यं gfe यश्ादायाः सुतांद्धवम्‌ |
५ ९
आत्मानं भूषयाशचकरवेखाकर्पाञ्ननादिमिः ॥ ९ ॥
gopyas cakarnya mudita
yasodayah sutodbhavam
atmanari bhasayam cakrur
vastrakalpanjanadibhih


--- Page 330 ---
Text 10] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 327
gopyah—the feminine community, the wives of the cowherd men;
ca—also; akarnya—after hearing; muditah—became very glad;
yasodayah—of mother Yadoda; suta-udbhavam—the birth of a male
child; atmanam—personally; bhisayam cakruh—dressed very nicely to
attend the festival; vastra-akalpa-afijana-adibhih—with proper dress,
ornaments, black ointment, and so on.
TRANSLATION
The gopi wives of the cowherd men were very pleased to hear
that mother Yasoda had given birth to a son, and they began to
decorate themselves very nicely with proper dresses, ornaments,
black ointment for the eyes, and so on.
TEXT 10
नबङ्ङ्कमकिञ्रल्कमुरपङ्जभूतयः ।
^ (~ oe AN
अलिभिस्त्वारेत SY पथुश्राण्यथटलत्कुचाः 11 oll
nava-kurikuma-kinjalka-
mukha-parnikaja-bhitayah
balibhis tvaritarih jagmuh
prthu-sronyas calat-kucah
nava-kunkuma-kifjalka—with saffron and newly grown kurikuma
flower; mukha-parnkaja-bhiitayah—exhibiting an extraordinary beauty
in their lotuslike faces; balibhih—with presentations in their hands;
tvaritam—very quickly; jagmuh—went (to the house of mother
Yasoda); prthu-sronyah—bearing full hips, fulfilling womanly beauty;
calat-kucah—their developed breasts were moving.
TRANSLATION
Their lotuslike faces extraordinarily beautiful, being decorated
with saffron and newly grown kunkuma, the wives of the cowherd
men hurried to the house of mother Yasoda with presentations in
their hands. Because of natural beauty, the wives had full hips and
full breasts, which moved as they hurried along.


--- Page 331 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
PURPORT
The cowherd men and women in the villages lived a very natural life,
and the women developed a natural feminine beauty, with full hips and
breasts. Because women in modern civilization do not live naturally,
their hips and breasts do not develop this natural fullness. Because of ar-
tificial living, women have lost their natural beauty, although they claim
to be independent and advanced in material civilization. This description
of the village women gives a clear example of the contrast between
natural life and the artificial life of a condemned society, such as that of
the Western countries, where topless, bottomless beauty may be easily
purchased in clubs and shops and for public advertisements. The word
balibhih indicates that the women were carrying gold coins, jeweled
necklaces, nice cloths, newly grown grass, sandalwood pulp, flower gar-
lands and similar offerings on plates made of gold. Such offerings are
called bali. The words tvaritari jagmuh indicate how happy the village
women were to understand that mother Yasoda had given birth to a won-
derful child known as Krsna.
TEXT 11
गोप्यः सु््टमणिङ्ण्डलनिष्ककण्ठ्य-
शित्राम्बराः पथि शिखाच्युतमास्यवर्षाः।
. नन्दालयं सवलया व्रजतीर्विरेज-
व्यालोलङ्ण्डलपयोधरहारशोभाः ॥११॥
gopyah sumrsta-mani-kundala-niska-kanthyas
citrambarah pathi sikha-cyuta-malya-varsah
nandalayam sa-valaya vrajatir virejur
vyalola-kundala-payodhara-hara-sobhah
gopyah—the gopis; su-mrsta—very dazzling; mani—made of jewels;

kundala—wearing earrings; niska-kanthyah—and having little keys
and lockets hanging from their necks; citra-ambarah—dressed with
varieties of colored embroidery; pathi—on their way to YaSodamayi’s
house; $ikha-cyuta—fell from their hair; malya-varsah—a shower of


--- Page 332 ---
Text 11] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 329
flower garlands; nanda-dlayam—to the house of Maharaja Nanda; sa-
valayah—with bangles on their hands; vrajatih—while going (in that
costume); virejuh—they looked very, very beautiful; vydlola—moving;
kundala—with earrings; payodhara—with breasts; hara—with flower
garlands; Sobhah—who appeared so beautiful.
TRANSLATION
In the ears of the gopis were brilliantly polished jeweled ear-
rings, and from their necks hung metal lockets. Their hands were
decorated with bangles, their dresses were of varied colors, and
from their hair, flowers fell onto the street like showers. Thus
while going to the house of Maharaja Nanda, the gopis, their ear-
rings, breasts and garlands moving, were brilliantly beautiful.
PURPORT
The description of the gopis, who were going to the house of Maharaja
Nanda to welcome Krsna, is especially significant. The gopis were not
ordinary women, but expansions of Krsna’s pleasure potency, as de-
scribed in the Brahma-sarhita:
ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis
tabhir ya eva nija-rupataya kalabhih
goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhiito
govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami
(5.37)
cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa-
laksavrtesu surabhir abhipalayantam
laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam
govindam adi-purusarh tam aha bhajami
(5.29)
Krsna is always worshiped by the gopis wherever He goes. Therefore
Krsna is so vividly described in Srimad-Bhagavatam. Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu has also described Krsna in this way: ramya kacid updsana


--- Page 333 ---
330 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
vrajavadhii-vargena ya kalpita. All these gopis were going to offer Krsna
their presentations because the gopis are eternal associates of the Lord.
Now the gopis were more jubilant because of the news of Krsna’s ap-
pearance in Vrndavana.
TEXT 12
ता आशिषः प्रयुञ्ञानाधिरं पादीति बारके |
[9
Rade: सिज्चन्त्योऽजनयुज्गुः ॥१२॥
ta asisah prayunjanas
- চাচা pahiti balake
haridra-cirna-tailadbhih
sificantyo ’janam ujjaguh
tah—all the women, the wives and daughters of the cowherd men;
asisah—Dblessings; prayunjanah—offering; ciram—for a long time;
pahi—may You become the King of Vraja and maintain all its inhabi-
tants; iti—thus; bdlake—unto the newborn child; haridra-cirna—
powder of turmeric; taila-adbhih—mixed with oil; siicantyah—sprin-
kling; ajanam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is unborn;
ujjaguh— offered prayers.
TRANSLATION
Offering blessings to the newborn child, Krsna, the wives and
daughters of the cowherd men said, ‘““May You become the King of
Vraja and long maintain all its inhabitants.” They sprinkled a mix-
ture of turmeric powder, oil and water upon the birthless Supreme
Lord and offered their prayers.
TEXT 13
sre विचित्राणि वादित्राणि महोत्सवे |
कृष्णे विशवश्वरेऽनन्ते नन्दस्य व्रजमागते ॥१३॥
avadyanta vicitrani
vaditrani mahotsave


--- Page 334 ---
Text 14] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 331
krsne visvesvare ‘nante
nandasya vrajam agate
avadyanta—vibrated in celebration of Vasudeva’s son; wvicitrani—
various; vaditrani—musical instruments; mahd-utsave—in the great
festival; krsne—when Lord Krsna; visva-isvare —the master of the en-
tire cosmic manifestation; anante—unlimitedly; nandasya—of Maha-
raja Nanda; vrajam—at the pasturing place; dgate—had so arrived.
TRANSLATION
Now that the all-pervading, unlimited Lord Krsna, the master of
the cosmic manifestation, had arrived within the estate of Maharaja
Nanda, various types of musical instruments resounded to cele-
brate the great festival.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanar srjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
descend Myself.” Whenever Krsna comes, once in a day of Brahma, He
comes to the house of Nanda Maharaja in Vrndavana. Krsna is the master
of all creation (sarva-loka-mahesvaram). Therefore, not only in the
neighborhood of Nanda Maharija’s estate, but all over the universe—
and in all the other universes — musical sounds celebrated the auspicious
arrival of the Lord.
TEXT 14
- ৬
गोपाः परस्परं हृष्टा दधिक्षीरघताम्बुभिः |
AN AY
आसिश्वन्तो विलिम्पन्तो नवनीतेश्च चिक्षिपुः ॥१४॥


--- Page 335 ---
332 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10. Ch. 5
gopah parasparam hrsta
dadhi-ksira-ghrtambubhih
asificanto vilimpanto
navanitais ca ciksipuh
gopah—the cowherd men; parasparam—on one another; hrstah—
being so pleased; dadhi—with curd; ksira —with condensed milk; ghrta-
ambubhih—with water mixed with butter; dsificantah—sprinkling;
vilimpantah—smearing; navanitaih ca—and with butter; ciksipuh—
they threw on one another.
TRANSLATION
In gladness, the cowherd men enjoyed the great festival by
splashing one another’s bodies with a mixture of curd, condensed
milk, butter and water. They threw butter on one another and
smeared it on one another’s bodies.
PURPORT
From this statement we can understand that five thousand years ago
not only was there enough milk, butter and curd to eat, drink and cook
with, but when there was a festival it would be thrown about without
restriction. There was no limit to how extensively milk, butter, curd and
other such products were used in human society. Everyone had an ample
stock of milk, and by using it in many varied milk preparations, people
would keep good health in natural ways and thus enjoy life in Krsna
consciousness.
TEXTS 15-16
नन्दो FETTER वासोऽलङ्कारगोधनम्‌ |
=
छतमागधवन्दिभ्यो येऽन्ये विद्योपजीविनः ॥१५॥
EN EN
तैस्तैः कामेरदीनात्मा यथोचितमपूजयत्‌ |
विष्णोराराधनार्थाय सखपुत्रस्योदयाय च ॥१६॥
nando mahda-manas tebhyo
vaso ’lankara-go-dhanam


--- Page 336 ---
Text 16] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 333
stita-magadha-vandibhyo
ye ’nye vidyopajivinah
tais taih kamair adinatma
yathocitam apijayat
visnor aradhandrthaya
sva-putrasyodaydya ca
nandah—Maharaja Nanda; mahd-manah—who among the cowherd
men was the greatest of all upright persons; tebhyah—unto the cowherd
men; vasah—clothing; alarikdra—ornaments; go-dhanam—and cows;
suta-magadha-vandibhyah —unto the sitas (the professional reciters of
the old histories), the magadhas (the professional reciters of the histories
of royal dynasties) and the vandis (general singers of prayers); ye
anye—as well as others; vidyd-upajivinah—who were continuing their
livelihood on the basis of educational qualifications; taih taih—with
whatever; kamaih—improvements of desire; adina-atma—Maharaja
Nanda, who was so magnanimous; yathd-ucitam—as was suitable;
apijayat—worshiped them or satisfied them; visnoh daradhana-
arthaya—for the purpose of satisfying Lord Visnu; sva-putrasya—of
his own child; udayaya—for the improvement in all respects; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The great-minded Maharaja Nanda gave clothing, ornaments and
cows in charity to the cowherd men in order to please Lord Visnu,
and thus he improved the condition of his own son in all respects.
He distributed charity to the sitas, the magadhas, the vandis, and
men of all other professions, according to their educational
qualifications, and satisfied everyone’s desires.
PURPORT
Although it has become fashionable to speak of daridra-narayana, the
words visnor aradhandarthaya do not mean that all the people satisfied by
Nanda Maharaja in this great ceremony were Visnus. They were not
daridra, nor were they Narayana. Rather, they were devotees of
Narayana, and by their educational qualifications they would satisfy


--- Page 337 ---
334 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
Narayana. Therefore, satisfying them was an indirect way of satisfying
Lord Visnu. Mad-bhakta-pijabhyadhika (Bhag. 11.19.21). The Lord
says, “Worshiping My devotees is better than worshiping Me directly.”
The varndsrama system is entirely meant for visnu-aradhana, worship
of Lord Visnu. Varndsramdcdravata purusena parah puman/ visnur
aradhyate (Visnu Purana 3.8.9). The ultimate goal of life is to please
Lord Visnu, the Supreme Lord. The uncivilized man or materialistic per-
son, however, does not know this aim of life. Na te viduh svartha-gatim
hi visnum (Bhag. 7.5.31). One’s real self-interest lies in satisfying Lord
Visnu. Not satisfying Lord Visnu but instead attempting to become
happy through material adjustments (bahir-artha-maninah) is the
wrong way for happiness. Because Visnu is the root of everything, if
Visnu is pleased, everyone is pleased; in particular, one’s children and
family members become happy in all respects. Nanda Maharaja wanted to
see his newborn child happy. That was his purpose. Therefore he wanted
to satisfy Lord Visnu, and to satisfy Lord Visnu it was necessary to
satisfy His devotees, such as the learned brahmanas, magadhas and
৩8805. Thus, in a roundabout way, ultimately it was Lord Visnu who was
to be satisfied.
TEXT 17
रोहिणी च महाभागा नन्दगोपामिनन्दिता |
व्यचरद्‌ दिन्यवासछकण्टषभरणभरूषिता ॥ १५७॥
rohini ca maha-bhaga
nanda-gopabhinandita
vyacarad divya-vasa-srak-
kanthabharana-bhisita

rohini—Rohini, the mother of Baladeva; ca—also; maha-bhaga—the
most fortunate mother of Baladeva (greatly fortunate because of having
the opportunity to raise Krsna and Balarama together); nanda-gopa-
abhinandita—being honored by Maharaja Nanda and mother १०5०;
vyacarat—was busy wandering here and there; divya—beautiful;
vasa—with a dress; srak—with a garland; kantha-abharana—and with
an ornament covering the neck; bhisita—decorated.


--- Page 338 ---
Text 18] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 335
TRANSLATION
The most fortunate Rohini, the mother of Baladeva, was
honored by Nanda Maharaja and Yaéoda, and thus she also dressed
gorgeously and decorated herself with a necklace, a garland and
other ornaments. She was busy wandering here and there to
receive the women who were guests at the festival.
PURPORT
Rohini, another wife of Vasudeva’s, was also kept under the care of
Nanda Maharaja with her son Baladeva. Because her husband was im-
prisoned by Karhsa, she was not very happy, but on the occasion of
Krsna-janmastami, Nandotsava, when Nanda Maharaja gave dresses and
ornaments to others, he also gave gorgeous garments and ornaments to
Rohini so that she could take part in the festival. Thus she also was busy
receiving the women who were guests. Because of her good fortune in
being able to raise Krsna and Balarama together, she is described as
maha-bhaga, greatly fortunate.
TEXT 18
০
तत॒ आरभ्य नन्दस्य वजः মনযম্বত্তিমানু |
हरेर्निवासात्मगुणे रमाक्रीडममू मुप ॥१८॥
tata arabhya nandasya
vrajah sarva-samrddhiman
harer nivasatma-gunai
ramakrigdam abhin nrpa
tatah arabhya—beginning from that time; nandasya—of Maharaja
Nanda; vrajah— Vrajabhimi, the land for protecting and breeding cows;
sarva-samrddhiman—became opulent with all kinds of riches; hareh
nivasa—of the residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atma-
gunaih—by the transcendental qualities; rama-akridam—the place of
pastimes for the goddess of fortune; abhiit—became; nrpa—O King
(Maharaja Pariksit).


--- Page 339 ---
336 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
O Maharaja Pariksit, the home of Nanda Maharaja is eternally
the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His tran-
scendental qualities and is therefore always naturally endowed
with the opulence of all wealth. Yet beginning from Lord Krsna’s
appearance there, it became the place for the pastimes of the god-
dess of fortune.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.29), laksmi-sahasra-sata-sam-
bhrama-sevyamanam govindam adi-purusarn tam aha bhajami.
The abode of Krsna is always served by hundreds and thousands of god-
desses of fortune. Wherever Krsna goes, the goddess of fortune naturally
resides with Him. The chief of the goddesses of fortune is Srimati
Radharani. Therefore, Krsna’s appearance in the land of Vraja indicated
that the chief goddess of fortune, Radharani, would also appear there
very soon. Nanda Maharaja’s abode was already opulent, and since Krsna
had appeared, it would be opulent in all respects.
TEXT 19
- $ 3
गापान्‌ गोकुलरक्षायां निरूप्य मथुरा गतः |
नन्दः कंसस्य Tie करं दातुं FEE ।१९॥
gopan gokula-raksayam
niriapya mathuram gatah
nandah kamsasya varsikyari
karar datum kuridvaha
gopan—the cowherd men; gokula-raksayam—in giving protection
to the state of Gokula; nirdpya—after appointing; mathuram—to
Mathura; gatah—went; nandah—Nanda Maharaja; karsasya—of
Karmsa; varsikyam—yearly taxes; karam—the share of profit; datum —
to pay; kuru-udvaha—O Maharaja Pariksit, best protector of the Kuru
dynasty.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thereafter, my dear King
Pariksit, O best protector of the Kuru dynasty, Nanda Maharaja ap-


--- Page 340 ---
Text 20] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 337
pointed the local cowherd men to protect Gokula and then went to
Mathura to pay the yearly taxes to King Karhsa.
PURPORT
Because the killing of babies was going on and had already become
known, Nanda Maharaja was very much afraid for his newborn child.
Thus he appointed the local cowherd men to protect his home and child.
He wanted to go immediately to Mathura to pay the taxes due and also to
offer some presentation for the sake of his newborn son. For the protec-
tion of the child, he had worshiped various demigods and forefathers and
given charity to everyones satisfaction. Similarly, Nanda Maharaja
wanted not only to pay Karisa the yearly taxes but also to offer some pre-
sentation so that Kammsa too would be satisfied. His only concern was how
to protect his transcendental child, Krsna.
TEXT 20
वसुदेव उपश्रुत्य आतरं नन्दमागतम्‌ |
ज्ञात्वा दत्तकरं राज्ञे ययो तदवमोचनम्‌ ॥ Rell
vasudeva upasrutya
bhrataram nandam agatam
JjAatva datta-karam rajiie
yayau tad-avamocanam
vasudevah— Vasudeva; upasrutya—when he heard; bhrataram—that
his dear friend and brother; nandam —Nanda Maharaja; agatam —had
come to Mathura; jiatva—when he learned; datta-karam—and had
already paid the taxes; rdjie—unto the King; yayau—he went; tat-
avamocanam—to the residential quarters of Nanda Maharaja.
TRANSLATION
When Vasudeva heard that Nanda Maharaja, his very dear friend
and brother, had come to Mathura and already paid the taxes to
Karhsa, he went to Nanda Maharaja’s residence.


--- Page 341 ---
338 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
PURPORT
Vasudeva and Nanda Maharaja were so intimately connected that they
lived like brothers. Furthermore, it is learned from the notes of Sripada
Madhvacarya that Vasudeva and Nanda Maharaja were stepbrothers.
Vasudeva’s father, Sirasena, married a vaisya girl, and from her Nanda
Maharaja was born. Later, Nanda Maharaja himself married a vaiSya
girl, ३६०१. Therefore his family is celebrated as a vai§ya family, and
Krsna, identifying Himself as their son, took charge of vaisya activities
(krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam). Balarama represents plowing the land for
agriculture and therefore always carries in His hand a plow, whereas
Krsna tends cows and therefore carries a flute in His hand. Thus the two
brothers represent krsi-raksya and go-raksya.
TEXT 21
तं TZ सहसोत्थाय देहः प्राणमिवागतम्‌ |
9 _ ९. সই ০
sta: Brad Zw सखजे प्रेमविह्टलः 1201
tan drstva sahasotthaya
dehah pranam ivagatam
pritah priyatamari dorbhyarn
sasvaje prema-vihvalah
tam—him (Vasudeva); drstva—seeing; sahasa—suddenly; uttha-
ya—getting up; dehah—the same body; pranam—life; iva—as if;
agatam—had returned; pritah—so pleased; priya-tamam—his dear
friend and brother; dorbhyam—by his two arms; sasvaje—embraced;
prema-vihvalah—overwhelmed with love and affection.
TRANSLATION
When Nanda Maharaja heard that Vasudeva had come, he was
overwhelmed with love and affection, being as pleased as if his
body had regained its life. Seeing Vasudeva suddenly present, he
got up and embraced him with both arms.
PURPORT
Nanda Maharaja was older than Vasudeva. Therefore Nanda Maharaja
embraced him, and Vasudeva offered him namaskara.


--- Page 342 ---
Text 23] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 339
TEXT 22
पूजितः सुखमासीनः पृष्ानामयमादतः |
भ्रसक्तधीः खात्मजयोरिदमाह विशाम्पते ॥२२॥
pujitah sukham dasinah
prstvanamayam adrtah
prasakta-dhih svatmajayor
idam aha visampate
pujitah—Vasudeva having been so dearly welcomed; sukham
astinah —having been given a place to sit comfortably; prstva—asking;
anamayam—all-auspicious inquiries; ddrtah—being honored and re-
spectfully received; prasakta-dhth—because of his being very much at-
tached; sva-atmajayoh—to his own two sons, Krsna and Balarama;
idam —the following; aha —inquired; visam-pate—O Maharaja Pariksit.
TRANSLATION
O Maharaja Pariksit, having thus been received and welcomed
by Nanda Maharaja with honor, Vasudeva sat down very peacefully
and inquired about his own two sons because of intense love for
them.
TEXT 23
दिष्टया भ्रातः प्रवयस इदानीमप्रजस्य ते।
प्रजाशाया [INR प्रजा यत्‌ समपद्यत ॥২২।
distya bhratah pravayasa
idanim aprajasya te
prajasaya nivrttasya
praja yat samapadyata
distya—it is by great fortune; bhratah—O my dear brother;
pravayasah—of you whose age is now quite advanced; idanim—at the
present moment; aprajasya—of one who did not have a son before; te—
of you; praja-asayah nivrttasya—of one who was almost hopeless of get-
ting a son at this age; praja—a son; yat—whatever; samapadyata—has
been gotten by chance.


--- Page 343 ---
340 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
My dear brother Nanda Maharaja, at an advanced age you had no
son at all and were hopeless of having one. Therefore, that you
now have a son is a sign of great fortune.
PURPORT
At an advanced age one generally cannot beget a male child. If by
chance one does beget a child at this age, the child is generally female.
Thus Vasudeva indirectly asked Nanda Maharaja whether he had ac-
tually begotten a male child or a female child. Vasudeva knew that
Yasoda had given birth to a female child, whom he had stolen and
replaced with a male child. This was a great mystery, and Vasudeva
wanted to determine whether this mystery was already known to Nanda
Maharaja. On inquiring, however, he was confident that the mystery of
Krsna’s birth and His being placed in the care of Yasoda was still hidden.
There was no danger, since Karnsa at least could not learn what had
already happened.
TEXT 24
+ a ७
दिष्टया संसारचक्रेऽखिन्‌ वतमानः पुनर्भवः 1
९ 3
उपलब्धो भवानद्य दुलेभं PEER ॥२४॥
distya samsdara-cakre "णा,
vartamanah punar-bhavah
upalabdho bhavan adya
durlabhari priya-darsanam
distya—it is also by great fortune; sarisara-cakre asmin—in this
world of birth and death; vartamanah—although I was existing; punah-
bhavah—my meeting with you is just like another birth; upalabdhah—
being obtained by me; bhavan—you; adya—today; durlabham—al-
though it was never to happen; priya-darSanam—to see you again, my
very dear friend and brother.
TRANSLATION
It is also by good fortune that I am seeing you. Having obtained
this opportunity, I feel as if I have taken birth again. Even though


--- Page 344 ---
Text 25] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 341
one is present in this world, to meet with intimate friends and dear
relatives in this material world is extremely difficult.
PURPORT
Vasudeva had been imprisoned by Kamsa, and therefore, although
present in Mathura, he was unable to see Nanda Maharaja for many
years. Therefore when they met again, Vasudeva considered this meeting
to be another birth.
TEXT 25
५ + o
नैकत्र प्रियसंवासः सुहृदां चित्रकमेणाम्‌ |
ओषेन व्युद्यमानानां वानां स्रोतसो यथा ॥२५॥
naikatra priya-sarivasah
suhrdam citra-karmanam
oghena vyiahyamananarm
plavanam srotaso yatha
na—not; ekatra—in one place; priya-sarwasah—living together with
dear friends and relatives; suhrdam—of friends; citra-karmanam —of
all of us who have had varieties of reactions to our past karma; oghena—
by the force; vyahyamananam—carried away; plavanam—of sticks and
other objects floating in the water; srotasah—of the waves; yatha—as.
TRANSLATION
Many planks and sticks, unable to stay together, are carried away
by the force of a river’s waves. Similarly, although we are in-
timately related with friends and family members, we are unable to
stay together because of our varied past deeds and the waves of
time.
PURPORT
Vasudeva was lamenting because he and Nanda Maharaja could not
live together. Yet how could they live together? Vasudeva warns that all
of us, even if intimately related, are carried away by the waves of time
according to the results of past karma.


--- Page 345 ---
342 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
TEXT 26
+ + „6
कचित्‌ पशव्यं निरुजं भूयम्बुतणवीरुधम्‌ |
FLEA तदधुना यत्रास्से त्वं सुहृद्वृतः ।२६॥
(1.118.111 1.1.111
bhiry-ambu-trna-virudham
brhad vanam tad adhuna
yatrasse एव, suhrd-vrtah
kaccit— whether; pasavyam—protection of the cows; nirujam —with-
out difficulties or disease; bhari—sufficient; ambu—water; trna—grass;
virudham —plants; brhat vanam—the great forest; tat—all these ar-
rangements are there; adhund—now; yatra—where; asse—are living;
tvam—you; suhrt-vrtah—surrounded by friends.
TRANSLATION
My dear friend Nanda Maharaja, in the place where you are liv-
ing with your friends, is the forest favorable for the animals, the
cows? I hope there is no disease or inconvenience. The place must
be full of water, grass and other plants.
PURPORT
For human happiness, one must care for the animals, especially the
cows. Vasudeva therefore inquired whether there was a good arrange-
ment for the animals where Nanda Maharaja lived. For the proper pur-
suit of human happiness, there must be arrangements for the protection
of cows. This means that there must be forests and adequate pasturing
grounds full of grass and water. If the animals are happy, there will be
an ample supply of milk, from which human beings will benefit by
deriving many milk products with which to live happily. As enjoined
in Bhagavad-gita (18.44), krsi-go-raksya-vanijyari vaisya-karma-sva-
bhavajam. Without giving proper facilities to the animals, how can
human society be happy? That people are raising cattle to send to the
slaughterhouse is a great sin. By this demoniac enterprise, people are
ruining their chance for a truly human life. Because they are not giving


--- Page 346 ---
Text 28] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 343
any importance to the instructions of Krsna, the advancement of their so-
called civilization resembles the crazy efforts of men in a lunatic asylum.
TEXT 27
¢ . o
श्रातमम सुतः कचिन्मात्रा सह भवद्रजे |
तातं भवन्तं मन्वानो भवद्भ्या्रपलाकितः ॥२९७॥
bhratar mama sutah kaccin
matra saha bhavad-vraje
tatarn bhavantarh manvano
bhavadbhyam upalalitah
bhratah—my dear brother; mama—my; sutah—son (Baladeva, born
of Rohini); kaccit—whether; matra saha—with His mother, Rohini;
bhavat-vraje—in your house; tatam—as father; bhavantam —unto you;
manvanah—thinking; bhavadbhyam—by you and your wife, १०5०१;
upalalitah— properly being raised.
TRANSLATION
My son Baladeva, being raised by you and your wife, YaSodadevi,
considers you His father and mother. Is he living very peacefully
in your home with His real mother, Rohini?
TEXT 28
gafgant विहितः gg द्ययुभावितः |
न तेषु fey त्रिवर्गोऽर्थाय कल्पते ।।२८॥
77715व5 tri-vargo vihitah
suhrdo hy anubhavitah
na tesu klisyamanesu
tri-vargo rthaya kalpate
purisah—of a person; tri-vargah—the three aims of life (religion,
economic development and sense gratification); vihitah—enjoined ac-
cording to Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; suhrdah—toward relatives and


--- Page 347 ---
344 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
friends; hi—indeed; anubhdvitah—when they are properly in line;
na—not; tesu—in them; kliSyamanesu—if they are actually in any dif-
ficulty; tri-vargah—these three aims of life; arthaya—for any purpose;
kalpate —does become so.
TRANSLATION
When one’s friends and relatives are properly situated, one’s
religion, economic development and sense gratification, as de-
scribed in the Vedic literatures, are beneficial. Otherwise, if one’s
friends and relatives are in distress, these three cannot offer any
happiness.
PURPORT
Vasudeva regretfully informed Nanda Maharaja that although he had
his wife and children, he could not properly discharge his duty of main-
taining them and was therefore unhappy.
TEXT 29
श्रीनन्द उवाच
अहो ते देवकीपुत्राः कंसेन बहवो हताः |
एकातवशिष्टावरजा कन्या सापि दिवं गता ।।২৭।।
ॐ? -71071व0 ५९८०
aho te devaki-putrah
10071856780, bahavo hatah
ekavasistavaraja
kanya sapi diva gata
sri-nandah uvaca—Nanda Maharaja said; aho—alas; te—your;
devaki-putrah —all the sons of your wife Devaki; karisena—by King
Kamsa; bahavah—many; hatah—have been killed; eka—one;
avaSistd—remaining child; avaraja—the youngest of all; kanya—a
daughter also; sa api—she also; divam gatda—gone to the heavenly
planets.


--- Page 348 ---
Text 30] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 345
TRANSLATION
Nanda Maharaja said: Alas, King Karhsa killed so many of your
children, born of Devaki. And your one daughter, the youngest
child of all, entered the heavenly planets.
PURPORT
When Vasudeva understood from Nanda Maharaja that the mystery of
Krsna’s birth and His having been exchanged with Yasoda’s daughter
was yet undisclosed, he was happy that things were going on nicely. By
saying that Vasudeva’s daughter, his youngest child, had gone to the
heavenly planets, Nanda Maharaja indicated that he did not know that
this daughter was born of Yasoda and that Vasudeva had exchanged her
with Krsna. Thus the doubts of Vasudeva were dispelled.
TEXT 30
नूलं द्यदृ्टनिष्टोऽयमदृ्टपरमो जनः ।
PERN
अदृष्टमात्मनस्तचं यो वेद न स FA ॥२३०॥
nanam hy adrsta-nistho yam
adrsta-paramo janah
adrstam atmanas tattvam
yo veda na sa muhyati
nianam—certainly; hi—indeed; adrsta—unseen; nisthah ayam—
something ends there; adrsta—the unseen destiny; paramah—ultimate;
janah—every living entity within this material world; adrstam—that
destiny; atmanah—of oneself; tattvam—ultimate truth; yah—anyone
who; veda—knows; na—not; sah—he; muhyati—becomes bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Every man is certainly controlled by destiny, which determines
the results of one’s fruitive activities. In other words, one has a son
or daughter because of unseen destiny, and when the son or


--- Page 349 ---
346 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 10, Ch. 5
daughter is no longer present, this also is due to unseen destiny.
Destiny is the ultimate controller of everyone. One who knows this
is never bewildered.
PURPORT

Nanda Maharaja consoled his younger brother Vasudeva by saying
that destiny is ultimately responsible for everything. Vasudeva should
not be unhappy that his many children had been killed by Karnsa or that
the last child, the daughter, had gone to the heavenly planets.

TEXT 31
श्रीवसुदेव उवाच
करो वै वार्षिको दत्तो रज्ञे Tm वयं च वः।
नेद स्थेयं बहुतिथं सन्त्युत्पाताश्च Wwe 132
Sri-vasudeva uvdca
karo vai varsiko datto
rajiie drsta vayam ca vah
neha stheyari bahu-tithari
santy utpatas ca gokule

sri-vasudevah uvaca—Sri Vasudeva replied; karah—the taxes; vai—
indeed; varsikah—yearly; dattah—have already been paid by you;
rajie—to the King; drstah—have been seen; vayam ca—both of us;
vah—of you; na—not; iha—in this place; stheyam —should be staying;
bahu-titham —for many days; santi—may be; utpatah ca—many distur-
bances; gokule—in your home, Gokula.

TRANSLATION

Vasudeva said to Nanda Maharaja: Now, my dear brother, since
you have paid the annual taxes to Karhsa and have also seen me, do
not stay in this place for many days. It is better to return to
Gokula, since I know that there may be some disturbances there.


--- Page 350 ---
Text 32] The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva 347
TEXT 32
श्रीजुक उवाच
इति नन्दादयो गोपा; प्रोक्तास्ते ROT ययुः |
= 2 -
अनोभिरनड्द्युक्तेस्तमयुज्ञाप्य IEE ।२२॥
sri-Suka uvaca
iti nandadayo gopah
proktas te saurind yayuh
anobhir anadud-yuktais
tam anujiidpya gokulam

sri-Sukah uvaca—S8ri Sukadeva Gosvimi said; iti—thus; nanda-
adayah—Nanda Maharija and his companions; gopah—the cowherd
men; proktah—being advised; te—they; Saurind—by Vasudeva;
yayuh—started from that place; anobhih—by the bullock carts; anadut-
yuktaih—yoked with oxen; tam anujiidpya—taking permission from
Vasudeva; gokulam—for Gokula.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: After Vasudeva advised Nanda Maharaja
in this way, Nanda Maharaja and his associates, the cowherd men,
took permission from Vasudeva, yoked their bulls to the bullock
carts, and started riding for Gokula.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Tenth Canto, Fifth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Meeting of Nanda
Maharaja and Vasudeva.”


--- Page 351 ---
Appendixes


--- Page 352 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent devotional scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutes), liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila Prabhu-
pada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gitd, assisted the Gaudiya
Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance, started an English
fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and checked the
galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and strug-
gled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never
stopped; it is now being continued by his disciples in the West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion,
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
“Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life, and four years later he adopted the
vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his studies and writ-
ing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana, where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and
writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At
Radha-Damodara, Srila Prabhupada began work on his life’s master-
piece: a multivolume translation and commentary on the eighteen thou-
sand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote
Easy Journey to Other Planets. i

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time, His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes
of authoritative translations, commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

351


--- Page 353 ---
352 Srimad-Bhagavatam

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
grown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of almost one
hundred asramas, schools, temples, institutes and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana, an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana, now a thriving farm community of more than one thou-
sand acres, his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. The school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the
beginning of 1975 the enrollment had grown to 150.

rila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large inter-
national center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India, which is also
the site for a planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the
magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guest House in
Vrndavana, India. These are centers where Westerners can live to gain
firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their authori-
tativeness, depth and clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in
numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into eleven
languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, established in 1972 ex-
clusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus become the
world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and phi-
losophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most
recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —com-
pleted by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. र,

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature and culture.


--- Page 354 ---
References
The purports of Srimad-Bhagavatam are all confirmed by standard

Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are specifically

cited in this volume:

Bhagavad-gita, 17, 22, 24, 25, 28, 38, 40, 41, 42, 44, 48, 51-52, 63, 64,
65, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 75, 76, 87, 90, 91, 93, 94, 95, 98, 101, 107,
118, 119-120, 124, 125, 127-128, 129-130, 131, 136, 137-138,
145-146, 150, 153, 156, 159-160, 162-163, 165-166, 173, 174,
175-176, 177-178, 179, 182, 184, 186, 189, 195, 197, 210, 216,
218, 220, 224, 225, 226, 228, 232, 235, 239, 241, 247-248, 250,
251, 256, 265, 267, 287, 292-293, 297, 305, 317-318, 325, 331,
342

Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, 168, 294-295

Brahma-samhita, 17, 18-19, 44, 46-47, 87, 110, 141, 155n, 160, 165,
187-188, 200, 208, 210, 212, 217, 220, 239, 295-296, 302, 329,
336

Caitanya-bhagavata, 199

Caitanya-candramrta, 153

Caitanya-caritamrta, 20, 68, 101, 144, 146, 171, 192, 241, 258, 316

Candi, 110, 303

Chandogya Upanisad, 87

Gita-Govinda, 23

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya, 103, 175

353


--- Page 355 ---
354 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Hari-vamsa, 97, 113, 114, 137

Hitopadesa, 282

Isopanisad, 210

Krsna-sandarbha, 261-262

Mahabharata, 106

Markandeya Purana, 110

Padma Purana, 22, 47, 154, 172, 185-186, 191, 304

Ramayana, 157

Sad-gosvamy-astaka, 153

Siksastaka, 190-191, 258

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 16-17, 20, 28, 34-35, 37, 39, 45, 72, 76, 86, 87,
94, 105, 124, 132, 138, 140, 142, 149, 165, 169, 174, 181, 190,
209, 229, 235, 248, 252, 266, 281, 294, 301, 334

Svetasvatara Upanisad, 51, 159, 226, 266

Tantra-bhagavata, 160

Vaisnava-tosani, 102, 149

Visva-kosa, 112


--- Page 356 ---
Clossary
A
Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by example.
Arati—a ceremony for greeting the Lord with offerings of food, lamps,
fans, flowers and incense.
Arcana—the devotional process of Deity worship.
Artha—economic development.
Asérama—the four spiritual orders of life: celibate student, householder,
retired life and renounced life.
Asuras —atheistic demons.
Avatira—a descent of the Supreme Lord.
B
Bhagavad-gita—the basic directions for spiritual life spoken by the
Lord Himself.
Bhagavan — one who unlimitedly possesses all opulences; a term of ad-
dress for the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Bhagavata-saptiaha—a seven-day discourse on Srimad-Bhagavatam.
Bhagavat-svariipa— the personal form of the Lord.
Bhakta—a devotee.
Bhakti-yoga—linking with the Supreme Lord by devotional service.
Brahmacarya—celibate student life; the first order of Vedic spiritual
life.
Brahman —the Absolute Truth; especially the impersonal aspect of the
Absolute.
Brahmana—one wise in the Vedas who can guide society; the first Vedic
social order.
Brahmandas —the universes.
Brahmastra—a nuclear weapon produced by chanting mantras.
C
Catur-vyiiha—the Lord’s plenary expansions Vasudeva, Sankarsana,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha
355


--- Page 357 ---
356 Srimad-Bhagavatam
D

Daivas—the demigods or godly persons.

Daridra-narayana— “poor Narayana,” an offensive term used by
Mayavadis to equate poor men with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

Dasya-rasa—the servitorship relationship with the Lord.

Dharma— eternal occupational duty; religious principles.

E

Ekadasi—a special fast day for increased remembrance of Krsna, which

comes on the eleventh day of both the waxing and waning moon.
G

Garbhadhana-samskara— Vedic purificatory ritual for obtaining good
progeny; performed by husband and wife before child’s concep-
tion.

Goloka (Krsnaloka) —the highest spiritual planet, containing Krsna’s
personal abodes, Dvaraka, Mathura and Vrndavana.

Gopis—Krsna’s cowherd girl friends, His most confidential servitors.

Grhastha—regulated householder life; the second order of Vedic
spiritual life.

Guni-bhiita—the first stage of bhakti.

Guru—a spiritual master.

H
Hare Krsna mantra— See: Maha-mantra
Hladini-sakti— the Lord’s pleasure potency.
J
Jiva-tattva—the living entities, atomic parts of the Lord.
Jiiani— one who cultivates knowledge by empirical speculation.
K

Kala-cakra—the wheel of time.

Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) —the present age, characterized by quarrel; it
is last in the cycle of four and began five thousand years ago.


--- Page 358 ---
Glossary 357
Kama —lust.
Karatalas—hand cymbals used in kirtana.
Karma —fruitive action, for which there is always reaction, good or bad.
Karma-kanda-vicara— the rituals for material prosperity prescribed in
the Vedas.
Karmi—a person satisfied with working hard for flickering sense
gratification.
Kevala—the third and highest stage of bhakti.
Kirtana— chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord.
Krsnaloka— See: Goloka
Ksatriyas —a warrior or administrator; the second Vedic social order.
L
Loka—a planet.
M
Madhurya-rasa— conjugal love relationship with the Lord.
Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare
Hare Rima, Hare Rima, Rima Rima, Hare Hare.
Maha-roga—a severe illness.
Mahat-tattva—the total material energy, from which the material world
is manifested.
Mantra—a sound vibration that can deliver the mind from illusion.
Mathura—Lord Krsna’s abode, surrounding Vrndavana, where He took
birth and later returned to after performing His Vrndavana
pastimes.
Maya —illusion; forgetfulness of one’s relationship with Krsna.
Mayavadis— impersonal philosophers who say that the Lord cannot have
a transcendental body.
Mrdanga—a clay drum used for congregational chanting.
Miadha—a fool.
Muni—a sage.
N
Namaskara—a polite greeting or address.


--- Page 359 ---
358 Srimad-Bhagavatam
P
Pararh brahma—the Supreme Absolute Truth, Personality of Godhead.
Parampara—the chain of spiritual masters in disciplic succession.
Pradhana— the total material energy in its unmanifest state.
Pradhani-bhiita—the second and intermediate stage of bhakti.
Prajapatis — the populators of the universe.
Pranayama— control of the breathing process; performed in astdnga-
yoga.
Prasada—food spiritualized by being offered to the Lord.
R
Rakgasas — man-eating demons.
S
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the Lord’s transcendental form, which is
eternal, full of knowledge and bliss.
Sadhu —a saintly person.
Sakhya-rasa—friend relationship with the Lord.
Saktydvesa-avatira—an empowered incarnation of the Supreme Lord.
Sankirtana— public chanting of the names of God, the approved yoga
process for this age.
Sannyasa—renounced life; the fourth order of Vedic spiritual life.
Santa-rasa— neutral relationship with the Supreme Lord.
Sastras —revealed scriptures.
Sravanarh kirtanarh visnoh— the devotional processes of hearing and
chanting about Lord Visnu.
Sudariana-cakra—the disc weapon of the Supreme Lord.
Suddha-sattva—the state of pure, transcendental goodness (not to be
_ confused with material goodness).
Stidra—a laborer; the fourth of the Vedic social orders.
Svami—one who controls his mind and senses; title of one in the
renounced order of life.
Svariipa-siddhi—the perfection of attaining one’s original, spiritual
form.
T
Tapasya—austerity; accepting some voluntary inconvenience for a
higher purpose.


--- Page 360 ---
Glossary 359
Tilaka— auspicious clay marks that sanctify a devotee’s body as a temple i
of the Lord.
ए ,
Ugra-karma—evil activities.
Vv
Vaikuntha—the spiritual world.
Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Visnu, Krsna.
Vaidyas— farmers and merchants; the third Vedic social order.
Vanaprastha—one who has retired from family life; the third order of
Vedic spiritual life.
Varna— the four occupational divisions of society: the intellectual class,
the administrative class, the mercantile class, and the laborer class.
Varnasrama— the Vedic social system of four social and four spiritual
orders.
Vatsalya-rasa— parental relationship with the Lord.
Vedas—the original revealed scriptures, first spoken by the Lord
Himself.
Vimuktas — persons liberated from the material world.
Visnu, Lord —Krsna’s expansion for the creation and maintenance of
the material universes.
Visnu-mirtis—the various forms of the Lord.
Visnu-tattva—the original Personality of Godhead’s primary expan-
sions, each of whom is equally God.
Vrndavana—Krsna’s personal abode, where He fully manifests His
quality of sweetness.
Vyasadeva—Krsna’s incarnation, at the end of Dvapara-yuga, for com-
piling the Vedas.
Y
Yajfia—an activity performed to satisfy either Lord Visnu or the
demigods.
Yogi—a transcendentalist who, in one way or another, is striving for
union with the Supreme.
Yugas—ages in the life of a universe, occurring in a repeated cycle of
four.


--- Page 361 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide
Vowels
अ,आ इ; ই: Ju Fao Wr ऋः
लृ! Te देओ ओ
2 फ (anusvara) $b (visarga)
Consonants
Gutturals: ka kha Iga घटश द्धः 29
Palatals: चच cha ज): द्य jha अ
Cerebrals: eta ठक tha ड da G dha ण
Dentals: dita tha @ da YJ dha Hq na
Labials: प? फ ब  Whha ma
Semivowels: य+ Ira ola q va
Sibilants: श sa q sa स sa
Aspirate: Qha S › (avagraha) - the apostrophe
The numerals are: 0-0 ¢-1 २-2 3-3 8-4 ৭5 §-6 9-7 £-8 ९-9
The vowels above should be pronounced as follows:
a — like the ain organ or the u in but.
a — like the ain far but held twice as long as short a.
1 — like the iin pin.
i — like the i in pique but held twice as long as short i.
361


--- Page 362 ---
362 Srimad-Bhagavatam
u — like the win push.
पे — like the win rule but held twice as long as short wu.
r — like the riin rim.
ह — like ree in reed.
1 — like I followed by r (Ir).
€ — like the ein they.
ai — like the aiin aisle.
০ — like the oin go.
au — like the ow in how.
m (anusvdra) — aresonant nasal like the nin the French word bon. = `
h (visarga) — a final h-sound: ah is pronounced like aha; ih like ihi.
The vowels are written as follows after a consonant:
<A
Ta fi Ys Wu Qi er gf =e Nai Yo Tau
ध ~
For example: कृ 1 कृत [कृत की । काः । कू ka
pa QA 2
कृष्व Fle Fhe कषम Fil ko कों kau
The vowel ““a” is implied after a consonant with no vowel symbol.
The symbol virama (১) indicates that there is no final vowel: क
The consonants are pronounced as follows:
k — asin kite jh — as in hedgehog
kh— as in Eckhart ii — asin canyon
g — asin give t — asin tub
gh— asin dig-hard th — as in light- heart
7 — asin sing d — asin dove
০ — asin chair dha- as in red-hot
ch — as in staunch-heart n — asrna (prepare to say
j — asin joy the r and say na).
Cerebrals are pronounced with tongue to roof of mouth, but the
following dentals are pronounced with tongue against teeth:
t — asin tub but with tongue against teeth.
th — as in light-heart but with tongue against teeth.


--- Page 363 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide 363
१ — asin dove but with tongue against teeth.
dh— as in red-hot but with tongue against teeth.
n — as in nut but with tongue between teeth.
0 — asin pine 1 — asin light
ph— as in uphill (not f) v — asin vine
b — asin bird ৪ (palatal) — as in the sin the German
bh— as in rub-hard word sprechen
m — as in mother s (cerebral) — as the sh in shine
y — asin yes 8 — asin sun
r — asinrun h — asin home
Generally two or more consonants in conjunction are written
together in a special form, as for example: gq ksa चर tra
There is no strong accentuation of syllables in Sanskrit, or pausing
between words in a line, only a flowing of short and long (twice as
long as the short) syllables. A long syllable is one whose vowel is
long (a, i, पे, €, ai, 0, au), or whose short vowel is followed by more
than one consonant (including anusvara and visarga). Aspirated
consonants (such as kha and gha) count as only single consonants.


--- Page 364 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each of the
Sanskrit poetry verses of this volume of Srimad-Bhagavatam, arranged in English
alphabetical order. The first column gives the Sanskrit transliteration, and the second and
third columns, respectively, list the chapter-verse reference and page number for each
verse.
A astamad yuvayor garbhan 1.60 91
dste pratiksarhs taj-janma 2.23 151
dcakhyur bhoja-rajaya 4.2 277  as$vanam ayutarh sardhar 1.31 57
adista prabhunarisena 1.25 50  asvdsya ca mahi girbhih 1.26 52
adrstam dtmanas tattvar 5.30 345  asyds tvam astamo garbho 1.34 59
adrstvanyatamarh loke 3.41 260
adriyatanuja visnoh 4.9 284  asyatas te Sara-vratair 4.33 306
athaham arisa-bhagena 29 129
adya vabda-satante va 1.38 62 athainam astaud avadhdrya parusari 3.12 214
agnayas ca dvijatinani 34 203  athainam atmajar viksya 3.23 232
agner yatha daru-viyoga-yogayor 1.51 82  atha kala updvrtte 1.56 87
agrato bhavita devo 1.24 49
dhaisa me prana-haro harir guham 2.20 145  atha sarva-gunopetah 3.1 202
atmanah ksemam anvicchan 1.44 না
ahari suto vam abhavar 3.41 260  atmanam bhasayar cakrur 5.9 326
aho bhaginy aho bhama 4.15 289  armanam iha safjatarn 1.68 99
aho te devaki-putrah 5.29 344  avadyanta vicitrani 5.13 330
aho visrarisito garbha 2.15 136
ahitya vipran veda-jian 5.1 320  avatirya yador varie 1.3 19
avirdsid yatha pracyar 3.8 207
ajAdna-prabhavahar-dhih 4.26 300 avivesarsa-bhagena 216 138
ajusta-gramya-visayav 3.39 257 ayamtvasabhyas tava janma nau grhe = 3.22 230
akarnya bhartur gaditarh 430 304 ayarh vai tad-vadhopayo 442 314
akranta bhari-bharena 1.17 40  ayuh sriyar yaso dharmari 4.46 318
anavrtatvad bahir antarari na te 3.17 219 B
anirdasan nirdasams ca 4.31 305  bahavo hirisitd bhratah 4.5 280
anobhir anadud-yuktais 5.32 347  bahir-antah-pura-dvarah 4.1 276
anyais casura-bhipalair 2.2 119  bahu-nama-niketesu 4.13 286
anyas ca karisa-sarmvigna 2.7 125  balibhis tvaritarh jagmuh 5.10 327
apothayac child-prsthe 48 283  bhagavan api visvatma 26 123
arcisyanti manusyds tvarn 2.10 131  bhagavan api visvatma 216 138
arpayam ৫5৫ krcchrena 1.57 88  bhaginim hantum ৫70৫80011৫7 1.35 60
aruhya krechrena param pada tatah 2.32 172  bhavat-paddmbhoruha-navam atra te 2.31 170
1 2.25 151  bhavo nirodhah sthitir apy avidyaya 2.39 194
[1.1 5.14 332  bhaydnakavarta-satakuld nadi 3.50 270
365


--- Page 365 ---
366 Srimad-Bhagavatam
bhojendra-gehe gni-ikheva ruddha 2.19 143  devakyd saryaya sardharh 1.29 55
bhratararh cavadhit karhsarh 1.10 31 = devan prati krtamarsa 4.30 304
bhratar mama sutah kaccin 5.27 343  dhanuh-sulesu-carmadsi- 4.10 285
bhratuh samanutaptasya 4.25 299  dhenanarh niyute pradad 5.3 322
bhamer bharayamananarh 1.64 94  dhapopahdra-balibhih 2.10 131
bhamir drpta-nrpa-vydja- 117 39  disahprasedur gaganarh 3.2 202
bhuvi bhaumani bhatani 4.19 291  distya bhratah pravayasa 5.23 339
bibharsi rapany avabodha atma 2.29 166  distya hare 'sya bhavatah pado bhuvo 2.38 192
bibharti so "yarh mama garbhago "bhad = 3.31 = 246  distydmba te kuksi-gatah parah puman 2.41 = 198
brahma bhavas ca tatraitya 2.25 154  distyankitarh tvat-padakaih susobhanair 2.38 192
brahma-hirhsarh hitarh mene 4.43 315  distyd sarhsara-cakre 'smin 5.24 340
brahma tad-upadharyatha 1.19 42  divya-srag-ambaralepa- 4.10 285
brahmesanau purodhdya 2.42 199  drauny-astra-viplustam idarh mad- 1.6 26
brhad vanarh tad adhuna 5.26 342  drsta-srutabhyarh manasanucintayan 1.41 67
Cc drstvd samatvarh tac chaureh 1.59 90
duhitre devakah pradad 1.32 57
catub-iatarh paribarharh 131 56 वदा 2.17 139
cintaydno hrstkeiam 224 151 duratyayarh kaurava-sainya-sdgararn ~~ 1.5 26
cintayantau krta-snehau 345 263 er ba-sainya-sag :
५ | urgeti bhadrakaliti 2.11 132
citra-dhvaja-pasaka-srak- 56 324. 0৮৫64 ca sarvah pikita duratyaya 348 268
D dvijali-kula-sanndda- 3.3 203
dadhara sarvatmakam atma-bhatarh 2.18 140 E
daivam apy anrtarh vakti 4.17 290  ekavasistavaraja 5.29 34
dasinarh sukumarinarh 1.32 57  ekayano sau dvi-phala tri-malas 2.27 161
datum arhasi mandaya 4.6 282 eke tam anurundhana 24 121
deharh manusam dsritya 1.11 32 esd tavanuja bala 1.45 78
etad anyac ca sarvarh me 1.12 33
dehantaram anuprapya 1.39 64
deha-yoga-viyogau ca 4.20 293  etad varhdarsitarh raparh 3.44 262
dehe mrte tarh manujah sapanti 2.22 148 = शन karhsdya bhagavan 1.64 94
dehe paficatvam apanne 1.39 63 evarh bhavan buddhy-anumeya- 3.17 219
devaih sanucaraih sakarh 2.25 154  evarh cet tarhi bhojendra 4.31 305
evarh durmantribhih karhsah 443 315
devakirh vasudevarh ca 1.66 96
devakirh vasudevarh ca 4.14 288 evam etan maha-bhaga 4.26 300
devakirh vasudevarh ca 4.24 298  evarh hi jantor api durvibhavyah 1.51 82
devakt tam upadhavat 3.23 232 evarhnisSamya bhrgu-nandana sadhu- 1.14 35
devaki-vasudevabhyam 4.28 302  evarh sa samabhir bhedair 146 78
evarh sva-mayd-racitesv asau puman 1.43 73
devakya garbha-sambandhah 1.8 29  evarh vimrya tarh pdparh 1.52 83
devakya garbha-sambhiatarh 1.65 96 G
devakyah sayane nyasya 3.52 271
devakya jathare garbharh 2.8 126  gaccha devi vrajarh bhadre 2.7 125
devakyarh deva-ripinydrm 3.8 207  garh paurusim me §ruutamardh punar 1.21 44


--- Page 366 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 367
garbha-sankarsanat tam vai 2.13 134  jato bhiiyas tayor eva 3.43 261
garbhe pranite devakyd 2.15 136 jayamane ‘jane tasmin 3.5 203
garbho babhuva devakya 2.5 122 jijivisava utsrjya 4.33 306
Jjidtayo bandhu-suhrdo 1.63 92
gate mayi yuvar labdhva 3.40 259
gaur bhitvasru-mukhi khinna 1.18 41  jAatva datta-karam rajiie 5.20 337
8৫০০ णठ vatsatara 5.7 324 jugopa kuksim gata atta-cakro 1.6 26
gayakas ca jagur nedur 5.5 323  jyotir yathaivodaka-pdrthivesv adah 1.43 73
ghnanti hy asutrpo lubdha 1.67 98 K
iran itd 1.21 44
ian samddhan gogane samiritarm kaccit pasavyar nirujari 5.26 342
gopah parasparar hrstd 5.14 332 |
TE kalena snana-saucabhyam 5.4 322
gopdh samayaya rajan 5.8 326 A 5 व
५ kan lokan vai gamisyami 4.16 289
gopan gokula-raksayar 5.19 336
gopyah sumptsa-mani-kundala- 511 328 Kame-ripa-dharan diksu नि 16
॥ or : त karhsa evari prasannabhyam 4.28 302
gopyas cakarnya mudita 5.9 326 |
gramyan bhogan abhuiijatharh 340 259 karhsas tusta-mand rajan 1.59 90
guna-prakasair anumiyate bhavan 235 181 = ॐ ०, व গা वि 30
nesu mayd-racitesu dehy asau 142 70 karovaivdrsiko ৫০৪০ 5.31 346
Lis ॥ kasman mukundo bhagavan 19 30
H kathito varisa-vistaro 11 15
hamsy anyasakta-vimukhan 4.35 307 7৫ uttamasloka-gunanuvadat 1.4 21
hanti Sreyarnsi sarvani 4.46 318 = kecit pranjalayo dina 4.34 307
hanturh narhasi kalyanim 145 = 78  kepalanubhavananda- 3.13 215
harer nivasatma-gunai 5.18 335 Jim adya tasmin karaniyam asu me 221 147
haridra-carna-tailadbhih 5.12 330 kim akaryarh kadaryanam 1.58 89
hatesu satsu balesu 24 121
I kim duhsahari nu sadhindni 1.58 89
im indrendlpa-viryena 4.3 308
kim indrenal) 6
iti ghoratamad bhavat 2.23 151 न ksema-sarair vibudhair 4.36 308
iti nandadayo gopah 5.32 347 kin maya hataya manda 4.12 286
iti prabhasya tar devi 4.13 286 kim udyamaih karisyanti 4.32 306
ity abhistilya purusam 2.42 199 . ' রা
ity ৫০16%/৫77070-80037. 1.26 52 kirtimantarn prathamajari . 1.57 88
kriyasu yas tvac-carandravindayor 2.37 190
ity uktah sa khalah papo 1.35 60 krsnavatarotsava-sambhramo ’sprian 3.11 212
ity uktvasid dharis tasnim 3.46 265 দিয়েও visvesvare ‘nante 5.13 331
ity uktvasru-mukhah padau 423 298 krtavan yanivisvatma 13 20
J ksamadhvarh mama dauratmyari 4.23 297
व kumuda candika krsna 2.12 132
Jjagama sa-tri-nayanas 1.19 42 Gar ध
jaguh kinnara-gandharvas 36 206 kva vasarh jiiatibhih sardhar 19 30
Janisyate tat-priyarthar 1.23 48 M
Jjanma te mayy asau papo 3.29 244
Jjantavo na sadaikatra 4.18 291  mabhad bhayar bhoja- pater mumarsor 2.41 198
jatar jatam ahan putrami 1.66 96  maghoni varsaty asakrd yamanuja 3.50 270


--- Page 367 ---
368 Srimad-Bhagavatam
mahdrha-vaidirya-kirita-kundala- 3.10 211  nanyatha mad-bhavamjidnar 3.44 262
mahdrha-vastrabharana- 5.8 326 na nyavartata kauravya 1.46 78
mahasurar kalanemin 1.68 99  nagte loke dvi-parardhavasane 3.25 236

na tal-lingarh parisranta 3.53 272
mahi mangala-bhiiyistha- 3.2 203 na te 'bhavasyesa bhavasya kdranam 2.39 194
mandrisy dsan prasanndni 3.5 203
manasa dityamanena 1.53 84 na tesu klisyamanesu 5.28 343
mandari mandan jaladhara 3.7 207 na tvarh vismrta-Sastrastran 4.35 307
mano-vacobhyam anumeya-vartmano == 2.36 = 185  nava-kunkuma-kinjalka- 5.10 327

na vavrathe ‘pavargam me 3.39 257
manusoca yatah sarvah 421 295  nayam atma tathaitesu 4.19 292
martyo mrtyu-vyala-bhitah palayan 3.27 240
ma Socatarih maha-bhagav 4.18 290 neha stheyari bahu-tithar 5.31 346
matararh pitarari bhratfn 1.67 98  nimesadir vatsaranto mahiyams 3.26 238
mathurd bhagavdn yatra 1.28 54 nirbandhan tasya tarh jAdtvd 1.47 79

nisithe tama-udbhite 3.8 207
mathurai chirasenars ca 1.27 53 = nityam udvigna-manaso 4.32 306
matsydsva-kacchapa-nysimha-varaha- 2.40 = 196  nivrtta-tarsair upagiyamanad 14 21
mattah kaman abhipsantau 3.35 252 nanam hy adrsta-nistho yam 5.30 345
maya ndrayanisani 2.12 132 ০
mitho ghnantari na pasyanti 4.27 301

oghena vyahyamananar 5.25 341
mocaydam asa nigadad 4.24 298
mrtyur buddhimatapohyo 1.48 80 |
mytyur janmavatan vira 1.38 62 728 pragrahinarh karhsam 1.34 58
॥ नन 4.34 = 307 == कषमा tvan-mukhambhoja- 1.13 33
malari hi vispur devandrn 4.39 = 311 == [00037710188 me samare ‘'marafijayair 1.5 26
॥ munayo devih 3.7 207 = pitrohsampasyatoh sadyo 3.46 265
mustikarista-dvivida- 2.1 119. pradaya mrtyave putran 1.49 81

N pradurdsarh varada-rad 3.38 255

nabhyanandata tad-vakyam 1.61 92  prag eva vidyamdnatvin 3.16 219
nadyah prasanna-salila 3.3 203 prajasaya nivrttasya 5.23 339
na hy asyas te bhayari saumya 1.54 85  pralamba-baka-canira- 2.1 119
naikatra priya-sarhvdsah 5.25 341 prapsyami ৮৫7 yasodayar 2.9 129
naisatiduhsaha ksun mam 1.13 33

praptar kdlarh prativyodhum 1.47 79
namadheyani kurvanti 2.11 132. prasakta-dhih svatmajayor 5.22 339
na ndma-riipe guna-janma-karmabhir = 2.36 = 185  prasanna-vadanambhojo 1.53 84
nana-viryah prthag-bhiita 3.15 218  pratigrhya parikramya 2.14 135
nandadya ye vraje gopa 1.62 92  pratimucya pador loham 3.52 271
nandah karhsasya varsikyari 5.19 336

1. 11.1.11, 1.60 91
nandalayam sa-valaya vrajatir virejur == 5.11 328  pratyarcya krsna-caritarih kali-kalmasa- 1.14 35
nandas tv Gtmaja utpanne 5.1 320  prayacchato mrtyum utamrtari ca 1.7 27
nanda-vrajarh Saurir upetya tatra tan 3.51 270  praydna-prakrame tata 1.33 58
nando maha-mands tebhyo 5.15 332  pritah priyatamari dorbhyam 5.21 338
nanv aha te hy avaraja 4.6 282  pijayam dsa vai Saurir 1.52 83


--- Page 368 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 369

pijitah sukham asinah 5.22 339  sarve vai devata-praya 1.63 92
purnsas tri-vargo vihitah 5.28 343 sa tad-dhastat samutpatya 49 284
puraiva purasavadhrto dhara-jvaro 1.22 46. ও৫ talpat imam utthdya 43 278
purusada ivapatyam 4.15 289 sata vidvesam acerur 4.45 317

sa te 'vatdram purusaih samarpitar 3.22 231
purusari purusa-siktena 1.20 43  satta-matram nirvisesari nirtharn 3.24 233
putran prasusuve castau 1.56 87
putrdn samarpayisye syd 1.54 85  sattvam na ced dhatar ida nijar 235 181

R sattvar visuddham Srayate bhavan 2.34 178

sattvopapanndni sukhavahdani 2.29 166
raho-jusa kin harina 4.36 308 sa tvaham tyakta-karunyas 416 289
rajadhani tatah sabhit 1.28 54 sa tvamh ghorad ugrasendtmajan nas 3.28 242
rajanya-sarmjidsura-koti-yathapair 3.21 229
rajidm cobhaya-vamsyandm 1.1 15 sa tvam tri-loka-sthitaye sva-mayayd 3.20 227
rameti loka-ramanad 2.13 134  satyasya satyam rta-satya-netram 226 155

satya-vratari satya-parari tri-satyari 2.26 155
rasmin hayandm jagraha 1.30 56  saumangalya-giro viprah 5.5 323
rohini ca maha-bhaga 5.17 334 sa vismayotphulla-vilocano harir 3.11 212
rohini vasudevasya 2.7 125
rohinyds tanayah prokto 1.8 29 sa yavad urvya bharam tsvaresvarah 1.22 46

siddha-carana-gandharvair 4.11 285
rser vinirgame kamso 1.65 96  sirna-parndnilaharav 3.35 252
ripari cedar paurusari dhyana- 3.28 242 slaghaniya-gunah sirair 1.37 61
raparh yat tat prahur avyaktam ddyam = 3.24 = 233 == snuseyam tava kalyana 4.4 280

ও Soka-harsa-bhaya-dvesa- 427 301

sa bibhrat paurusarih dhdma 2.17 139  s$raddha daya titiksa ca 441 313
sa devaki sarva-jagan-nivdsa- 2.19 143  srivatsa-laksmarh gala-Sobhi-kaustubharn 3.9 211
sa esa jivan khalu sampareto 222 148  $mvangrnan sarasmarayaris ca cintayan 2.37 190
sa eva svaprakrtyedari 3.14 216  striyah svasur gurumatyd vadho yam 221 147
sahamanau $vasa-rodha- 3.34 252

(1.111.111 1 5.4 322
sa hi sarva-suradhyakso 4.42 314 saraseno yadupatir 1.27 53
sa katharh bhaginim hanyat 1.37 61  sita-magadha-vandibhyo 5.15 333
salvan vidarbhan nisadhan 23 121  sutd me yadi jayeran 1.49 81
samudvije bhavad-dhetoh 3.29 244  sutar yaSoda-sayane nidhdya tat- 3.51 271
samyag vyavasita buddhis 1.15 37

siti-grham agat tirnam 4.3 278
sandistaivarh bhagavatd 2.14 135  svapne yathd pasyati deham idrsar 1.41 67
sandisya sadhu-lokasya 4.44 316  sva-rocisa bharata sitika-grhari 3.12 214
Sarka-cakra-gada-padma- 3.30 245  svasur vadhan nivavrte 1.55 86
Sankha-tirya-mrdangas ca 1.33 58  svayam nigrhya bubhuje 1.69 100
sannipatya samutpddya 3.16 219 svayar samuttirya sudustararh dyuman 2.31 170
sanniyamyendriya-gramari 3.33 250 T
saptamo vaisnavar dhama 2.5 122
sapta-tvag asta-vitapo navakso 2.27 161 1৫ asisah prayunjanas 5.12 330
sargaya raktari rajasopabrmhitari 3.20 227 1৫0 anu tvam hy apravistah 3.14 216


--- Page 369 ---
370 Srimad-Bhagavatam
tada vam paritusto "ham 3.37 255 1,11.1... "ham vai 3.43 261
taddyari sutapd nama 3.32 249 tvam asya lokasya vibho riraksisur 3.21 229
tah krsna-vahe vasudeva agate 3.49 268 tvam eka evdsya satah prasitis 2.28 164
tais taih kamair adinatma 5.16 333  tvam eva pirva-sarge "bhith 3.32 249
tam adbhutarh balakam ambujeksanarn 3.9 211 ण्यो) pdsi nas tri-bhuvanar ca 240 196
tam aha bhratararh devi 44 280  tan-mayaydsarivrta-cetasas twin 228 164
tari drstva sahasotthaya 5.21 388 tvat-padabjari prapya yadrcchayadya = 3.27 240
tari grhitva caranayor 4.8 283 tvat-pada-potena mahat-krtena 2.30 167
tari jugupsita-karmanari 1.36 61 tvatto sya janma-sthiti-sariyaman vibho 3.19 225
tari viksya karisah prabhaydjiténtararn 2.20 145 tvayabhigupta vicaranti nirbhaya 2.33 176
tan-mila devatah sarvah 442 314 tvaya daiva-nisrstena 4.5 280
tapasa sraddhaya nityarn 3.37 255 tvayiSvare brahmani no virudhyate 3.19 225
tapasvino yajiia-silan 4.40 312 tvayy ambujaksakhila-sattva-dhamni 2.30 167
tasmad bhadre sva-tanayan 421 295 U
tasman na kasyacid droham 1.44 77 नि ति व
tasydrh ratryan vyatitaydrh 429 303 uddhama-karicy-angada-kartkanadibhir 3.10 211
॥ ५ ^ ugrasenarh ca pitarari 1.69 100
tasyari tu karhicic chaurir 1.29 55 N
tasmat sarvatmana rajan 440 31g  Ugrasena-sutahkarhsah 1.30 56
upaguhyatmajam evar 4.7 283
tasya ca brahma-go-vipras 4.39 311 updhrtoru-balibhik 4.11 285
tata arabhya nandasya 5.18 335
stam bhasaniuh monstino 521 343  upalabdho bhavan adya 224 349
tatas ca saurir bhagavat-pracoditah 347 267  UPasamharavisvatmann 3.30 24
tatas tan-mila-khanane 437 309 upesthitantike tasmai 118 ५1
upasthito nivarteta 1.50 81
tathd na te madhava tavakah kvacid = 2.33 176 = “pendraiti vikhyato 3.42 260
tathapi devah sapatnyan 4.37 309 v
tato bala-dhvanir Srutva 4.1 276
tato jagan-mangalam acyutarmsarn 2.18 140  vdcayitvd svastyayanari 5.2 320
tatra gatva jaganndthari 1.20 43 = vaktarari pracchakar $rotfris 1.16 38
vaktum arhasi sarvajiia 1.12 33
tatramsendvatirmasya 1.2 18  varsa-vatatapa-hima- 3.34 252
tat sannikrsya rohinyd 2.8 126 vasudeva-grhe saksad 1.23 48
tatheti sutam adaya 1.61 92
tavat tad-abhimany ajiio 4.22 296  vasudeva-kalanantah 1.24 49
1/1... 4.14 288  vasudeva-katha-prasnah 1.16 38
vasudeva-kathaydarh te 1.15 37
taya hrta-pratyaya-sarva-vrttisu 3.48 268  vasudeva upasrutya 5.20 337
tayor vam punar evaham 3.42 260  vasudevo maha-bhaga 1.36 61
tebhya dcasta tat sarvarn 4.29 303
te pidita nivivisuh 23 121  vasudevo pi tar pritah 1.55 86
te tu tirnam upavrajya 4.2 277 = vavarsa parjanya upamsu-garjitah 3.49 269
vavau vayuh sukha-sparsah 3.4 203
te vai rajah -prakrtyas 4.45 317 veda-kriya-yoga-tapah-samadhibhis 2.34 178
tiladrin sapta ratnaugha- 5.3 322  vicitra-dhatu-barhasrag- 57 325


--- Page 370 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 371
vidito 51 bhavan saksat 3.13 215 2৫006 ca dharma-tlasya 1.2 18
vidyadharyas ca nangtur 3.6 206 yadiunar kadanarh cakre 2.2 119
vindnuvddarh na ca tan manisitarh 3.18 223
viparyayo va kirh na syad 1.50 81 yadandrh nija-nathanarh 2.6 123
vipra 8৫০০৪ ca vedds ca 44] 313 yadu-puryarh sahavatsit 1.11 32
>प्व-णङावा१९१वव्‌ aharh papah 4.17 290
viryani tasyakhila-deha-bhajam 1.7 27  yady asau na nivarteta 1.48 80
visnor dradhanarthaya 5.16 333  yarhy evdjana-janmarksarh 3.1 202
visnor maya bhagavatt 1.25 50
visvarh yad etat sva-tanau nisante 3.31 246 yasoda nanda-patnica 3.53 272
vrajah sammysta-sarhsikta- 5.6 324  yathamayo 'nge samupeksito nrbhir 4.38 310
yathanevarh-vido bhedo 4.20 293
vrajarhs tisthan padaikena 1.40 65  yatha trna-jalaukaivam 1.40 65
vraje vasan kim akaron 1.10 31  yatheme 'vikrta bhavas 315 218
vriyatarh vara ity ukte 3.38 255
vrsnayo vasudevddyd 1.62 92  yathendriya-grama upeksitas tatha 4.38 310
vyacarad divya-vdsa-srak- 5.17 334  yato yato dhdvati daiva-coditarh 1.42 70
vyakte 'vyaktarh kala-vegena yate 3.25 237 yatra kva vd parva-datrur 4.12 286
vyasrjad vasudevas ca 425 299  yavad dhato ‘smi hantasmi- 4.22 296
Y ye ‘nye ‘ravindaksa vimukta-maninas 2.32 172
ya dtmano driya-gunesu sann iti 3.18 222 yo 'yarh kalas tasya te "vyakta-bandho = 3.26 238
ydcitas tarh vinirbhartsya 4.7 283 yuvarh marh putra-bhavena 3.45 263
yada bahir gantum iyesa tarhy aja 347 267 yuvam vai brahmanadistau 3.33 250


--- Page 371 ---
General Index
Numerals in boldface type indicate references to translations of the verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
A Administrators. See: Kings; Ksatriyas;
Leaders, government; Politicians
Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam
Abhaya defined, 196 quoted, 87
Abhayar sarvada tasmai Adyapiha caitanya e saba lila kare
verse quoted, 157 verse quoted, 199
Abhyasa-yoga-yuktena Agamapayino ’nityas
quoted, 71 verse quoted, 91
Abhyutthanam adharmasya Age of Kali. See: Kali-yuga
verse quoted, 40, 118, 120, 145-146, Aghasura, 119
155n, 195, 331 Agriculturalists. See: Vaisyas
Abrahma-bhuvanal lokah Ahaituky apratihata
quoted, 241 verse quoted, 294
Absolute Truth Aham adir hi devanam
devotional service reveals, 156 quoted, 87, 235
Lord Krsna as, 34, 156, 158, 160 Ahan sarvasya prabhavo
personal & impersonal realization of, 75 quoted, 235
See also: Krsna, Lord; Supreme Lord Ahan tvarh sarva-papebhyo
Abudhah defined, 223 quoted, 28
Acaryas (saintly authorities) Aharnkara (false ego). See: Bodily concept
duty of, 171 Abharikara itiyarih me
Lord as reached via, 170-171, 172 verse quoted, 216, 224
scholars ignore, 184 Ahankara vimidhatma
See also: Spiritual master; names of specific quoted, 52
dcdaryas verse quoted, 51-52
Acintya-bhedabheda (oneness-and- Aitadatmyam 1027 sarvam
difference) philosophy, 128, 236 quoted, 224
Activities Ajo ‘pi sann avyaydtma
of God. See: Krsna, Lord, pastimes of; quoted, 210
Supreme Lord, activities of Akriira, 122,193
of irresponsible persons, 318 Amara djiiaya guru hand tara’ ei desa
in Krsna consciousness movement, 192 verse quoted, 144
See also: Endeavor; Fruitive activities; Amara-kosa, cited on sex life, 259
Karma; Sinful activities Ambarisa Maharaja, 69
Adanta-gobhir visatar tamisrari Ambuja defined, 34
quoted, 149 Amitan yodhayed yas tu
verse quoted, 34-35 verse quoted, 106
Aditi, Devaki was, 261 Arena defined, 102
373


--- Page 372 ---
374 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Anadir adir govindah Anarthopasamarh saksad
verse quoted, 18-19 verse quoted, 37
Analogies Andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-sthari
birds in tree & soul-Supersoul in body, quoted, 155n, 200, 201, 210, 236
162, 163 verse quoted, 217
boat & Lord’s lotus feet, 168, 169, 172 Anger
boat & mind, 71 of fool at good instructions, 282
dreaming & transmigration, 67, 100-101 of Lord at demons, 228-229
dress & body, 64 of Vasudeva & Devaki at Karsa relieved,
earth element & living entity, 292 299-300
electricity & Lord’s potency, 51 Animals
fiery rod & spiritualized body, 103 atheists compared to, 40
fire (covered) & Devaki (imprisoned), 142, care for, 342
143 killing of. See: Animal slaughter
fire leaping & soul transmigrating, 82-83, modern men compared to, 179, 180
102 See also: Cows; names of other specific
Ganges River & spiritual master, 294-295 animals
jaundice patients & nondevotees, 188 Animal slaughter
king's government & Lord’s creation, 221 Buddha stopped, 23
knowledge (misused) & Devaki Krsna consciousness prohibits, 103
(imprisoned), 142, 143 as sinful, 150, 342
Krsna’s advent & awakening Krsna con- in Vedic sacrifices, 23-24
sciousness, 128-129 See also: Cows, killing of ; Hunters, animal
luminary’s reflection & soul’s covering, 74 Aniruddha, 108
moonrise & Lord’s advent, 141, 142, 208, Antaryami defined, 155n, 156
210 Antavat tu phalarh tesari
ocean & material world, 168, 169, quoted, 156
170-171, 172 Ante narayana-smrtih
original lamp & Krsna, 160 quoted, 28
potter’s wheel & cosmos, 239-240 Anukalyena krsnanu-
sun & Lord, 209-210 quoted, 152
sunshine & Lord’s energy, 222 Anuvdda defined, 105
tree & body, 161-162, 163 Anxiety. See: Suffering
watchdogs & politicians, 277, 279 Anyabhilasita-sainyam
Ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis quoted, 258
verse quoted, 208, 329 Apana karama, bhuiijaye Samana,
Ananta [ quoted, 316
as Baladeva, 127 Apareyamitas tv anydr
Krsna indescribable by, 19 verse quoted, 162-163, 224
protected Vasudeva & child, 269 Apasmrtih defined, 69, 101
as Rohini’s son, 127 Apasyatam dtma-tattvarh
Sankarsana as, 49, 109 verse quoted, 132
in second quadruple expansion, 122, 123 Appearance of the Lord. See: Krsna, Lord,
universe supported by, 127 “birth” of ; Supreme Lord, advent of
Ananyas cintayanto marh Aprdpya mar nivartante
verse quoted, 159 quoted, 101, 279


--- Page 373 ---
General Index 375
Aprapya mar nivartante Attachment
verse quoted, 173 See also: Bodily concept; Desire; Desire,
Apsaras, 207, 285-286 material
Aradhana defined, 248 Attrtvac ca tada danat
Arca-mirti. See: Deity form verse quoted, 160
Arcanarh vandanarh dasyari Aurangzeb, King, 98
verse quoted, 128 Austerities
Arista, 119 human life for, 253-254
Arjuna by Vasudeva (Sutapa) & Devaki (Préni),
fought for Krsna, 27, 84-85 251, 253-255, 256
Krsna’s universal form bewildered, 279 Authorities. See: Acaryas; Mahajanas; Spiri-
quoted on flickering mind, 71 tual master
_ quoted on Supreme Brahman, 44 Avaisnava-mukhodgirnam
Aryans, Vedic, 281 verse quoted, 22, 191-192
Asango hy ayarh purusah Avajananti mar midhah
quoted, 163, 292, 293 quoted, 45, 76, 184, 216, 263
Asraddadhanah purusa verse quoted, 250
verse quoted, 173 Avan-manasa-gocara
Astra-Sastra-pravinas ca quoted, 220
verse quoted, 106 Avatara. See: Incarnation
Astrology of Krsna’s advent, 204, 205 Avatari defined, 160
Asurdah sarva evaita Avyakta defined, 183
quoted, 115 Ayodhya, 112
Asuras. See: Demons
Asuririh yonim dpanna B
verse quoted, 150
Aévatthama, 28, 29
Atah sri-krsna-namadi Bahanarh janmanam ante
verse quoted, 185-186 quoted, 75
Atha karhsam upagamya Baka, 119
verse quoted, 113 Bakandha-nyaya logic, 228
Athapi te deva padambuja-dvaya- Balarama (Baladeva), Lord
verse quoted, 181 in Devaki’s womb, 127, 129
Athava bahunaitena as independent, 109
verse quoted, 130 as Krsna’s brother, 50, 130, 338
Atheists as Krsna’s expansion, 18, 19, 102,127,
compared to animals, 40 198
God avoided by, 152-153, 279 mother of, 30, 335, 343
See also: Demons; Impersonalists other names of, 134-135
Atiratha defined, 106 plow carried by, 338
Atma. See: Soul as Sankarsana, 127, 130, 134, 137
Atma-tattva defined, 131, 292 sustains universe, 109
Atom, Lord within, 155n, 236 Yogamaya transferred, from Devaki to
Attachment Rohini, 137
to bodily concept, 293-294 Balasya neha saranam pitarau nrsirnha
to material enjoyment, 259 quoted, 157


--- Page 374 ---
376 Srimad -Bhagavatam
Banasura, 119 Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
Barhavatarhsam asitambuda-sundararigam on devotional service & transcendence, 69,
quoted, 212 175-176, 247-248
Beings, living. See: Living entities on devotional service as highest yoga, 68
Benediction on duty, 136, 179
of Brahmi on Kilanemi’s sons, 113 on embodied soul, 64, 146, 317-318
of Caitanya in Hare Krsna mantra, 256, on equanimity, 90
257 on faithless persons falling to birth &
of Krsna on Vasudeva (Sutapa) & Devaki death, 173
(Préni), 255, 257-259 on fool imagining about Lord’s advent, 250
Bhagavad-darsanad yasya on fool’s bafflement, 305
verse quoted, 302 on God & demigods, 87
Bhagavad-gita on impersonalist’s labor, 75, 174
See also: Bhagavad-gita, cited; Bhagavad- on killing in knowledge as not killing, 297
88৫, quotations from on knowing Lord’s advent & activities, 98,
duty to read, 99 189, 241, 250
guru follows, 192 on Krsna as Brahmans basis, 235
for humans, 180 on Krsna consciousness, 68
knowledge in, distribution of, 144 on Krsna’s form as misunderstood, 76
Lord spoke, 264 on Krsna’s supremacy, 22
modernists misinterpret, 264 on living entities as Lord’s parts & parcels,
nondevotees misunderstand, 189 153,195
recitation 01, bogus & bona fide, 21-23, 25 on Lord as birthless, 210
as Vedas’ essence, 69 on Lord as death to nondevotees, 107
Bhagavad-gita, cited on Lord as knower in all bodies, 163
on demon’s destiny, 99-100 on Lord as source of all, 235
on devotional service & transcendence, 187 on Lord as within & without, 127-128, 220
on fighting for Krsna, 84-85 on Lord directing cosmic manifestation,
on Lord’s advent, 205 226, 239
on spiritual sky, 17 on Lord directing living entity’s wander-
on varna-sarikara population, 253 ings, 292-293
Bhagavad-gita, quotations from on Lord directing material energy, 51
on bewildered soul, 51-52 on Lord enlightening devotees, 107, 124
on birth-death cycle, 63, 101, 251 on Lord in heart, 25, 124
on bodies by material association, 65, 72, on Lord known by devotional service, 128,
101 182, 186
on body as desire machine, 287 on Lord maintaining devotees, 159
on Brahma’s day, 241, 256 on Lord pervading universe, 129-130
on chanting Hare Krsna, 191, 232 on Lord protecting devotees, 177, 243
on demigod worshipers, 101, 131, 156, on Lord’s advent & mission, 40, 95,
165-166, 235 119-120, 145-146, 195, 267, 331
on devotee as best yogi, 125 on Lord saving devotee from birth & death,
on devotee going back to Godhead, 48 165
on devotee never perishing, 159-160 on Lord’s inferior & superior energies,
on devotee undisturbed by difficulty, 153 162-163, 224


--- Page 375 ---
General Index 377
Bhagavad-gita, quotations from Bhaktir evainarh darsayati
on Lord’s material energies, 216, 267 quoted, 128
on Lord’s protection, 28 Bhakti-yoga. See: Devotional service; Krsna
on Lord’s spiritual energy, 265 consciousness
on loving the Lord, 175 Bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah
on mahdatmads, 52 quoted, 248
on materialists, 24 Bhaktya mam abhijanati
on material world, 241 quoted, 128, 156, 182, 189, 248
on mind as flickering, 71 verse quoted, 175-176, 186
on modes of nature determining destiny, Bharata Maharaja, 177, 191
72 Bharatavarsa. See: Earth planet; India
on obeisances to the Lord, 197 Bhava defined, 250
on opulence of Krsna & Arjuna, 177-178 Bhavambudhir vatsa-padari parari padari
on perfection of life, 175 verse quoted, 28, 169
on pious birth, 48, 94 Bhava-roga defined, 25
on remembrance, death & destiny, 69 Bhava-samudra defined, 71
on sacrifice for Visnu, 179 Bhavausadha defined, 25, 104
on sex according to religious principles, Bhavisya Purana, quoted on devotee seeing
251 Lord’s will everywhere, 302
on sinful people cast into demoniac species, Bhayarh dvitiyabhinivesatah syat
150, 228 quoted, 124
on social orders, 41 Bheda defined, 112
on soul surviving body, 70 Bhinna prakrtir astadha
on spiritual awakening vs. material quoted, 267
dream, 137-138 Bhismadeva
on spiritual master, 218 cited on Lord in heart, 209
on Supersoul, 124 died by Lord’s will, 107
on Supreme Brahman, 44 in Kuruksetra war, 27-28
on surrender to the Supreme, 75 Bhogaisvarya-prasaktandarh
on tolerance amid happiness & distress, verse quoted, 24
91 Bhoja dynasty, 62, 112
on vaisyas (agriculturalists), 325 Bhramayan sarva-bhitani
Bhagavan. See: Krsna, Lord; Supreme Lord quoted, 287
Bhagavatam. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam verse quoted, 293
Bhagavata paro diya bhagavata sthane Bhamir apo 70010 vayuh
quoted, 22 , verse quoted, 216, 224
Bhagavata Purana. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam Bhita-bhrn na ca bhita-stho
Bhaktas: See: Devotees verse quoted, 127-128
Bhakti defined, 69 Bhatva bhatva praliyate
See also: Devotional service; Krsna con- quoted, 241
sciousness Birds at Krsna’s advent, 204, 205
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu Birds in tree & soul-Supersoul in body,
quoted on liberated soul, 294-295 analogy of, 162, 163
quoted on Pariksit & Sukadeva, 168 Birth
by Ripa Gosvami, 171 death followed by, 63


--- Page 376 ---
378 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Birth (continued) Body, material
of devotee in pious family, 48, 94 soul contrasted to, 292, 293
of Krsna. See: Krsna, “birth” of suffering due to, 65, 76, 77, 149-150
of living entity vs. Lord’s advent, Supersoul in, 163
194-195, 196, 205, 210, 212 true but temporary, 224, 225
modes of nature determine, 72 See also: Birth; Bodily concept; Senses;
name-giving ceremony after, 88 Subtle body; Transmigration
process of, 70 Body, spiritual
Birth and death, repeated of pure devotee, 103
education for avoiding, 252 of spiritual master, 295
faithless persons return to, 173 Body of the Lord. See: Krsna, Lord, body of;
Krsna consciousness stops, 76, 279 Supreme Lord, body of
krsna-katha stops, 21, 25, 35 Bombay
Lord saves devotee from, 165 Durga worship in, 287
purification stops, 73 Hare Krsna center in, 232
See also: Birth; Death; Transmigration Bondage. See: Life, material; Maya; Modes of
Birth control, artificial vs. spiritual, 251-253 material nature; Suffering
Bliss, transcendental, by chanting Lord’s Brahma, Lord
names, 105. as adi-kavi, 45
See also: Happiness as authority, 169
Boat & Lord’s lotus feet, analogy of, 168, 169, Brahma-sarihita by, 182, 183
172 as creator, 227-228
Boat and mind, analogy of, 71 day of, 241, 256, 331
Bodily concept of life demigods advised by, about Lord’s advent,
attachment to, 293-294 45, 46, 48-50
as ignorance, 179, 297, 300-301 earth approached, for relief, 40, 42
via modes of nature, 51, 74 Kalanemi’s sons blessed by, 113
sinful activities via, 149, 150 Krsna tested by, 208
suffering due to, 294, 297 lifetime of, 19, 241
See also: Attachment; Desire, material Lord above, 154, 164, 165
Body, material at Lord’s advent, 154, 158
changes of, 292 quoted on nondevotees, 173
compared to dress, 64 in trance hearing the Lord, 45
compared to tree, 161-162, 163 as Varahadeva’s father, 321
desire determines, 287, 292 Brahma-bhiitah prasannatma
elements in, 64, 162, 222, 292 verse quoted, 75, 175-176
formation of, 70 Brahmajyoti (Brahman effulgence), 222,
happiness from, 161-162 235
living force in, 146, 162-163 Brahman (impersonal Absolute), 235, 236
as materialist’s reality, 223, 225 Brahman, Supreme
mind develops, 68-70, 71, 72, 101, 102 as cause of all causes, 224
nature awards, 64-65, 72, 279 Lord as, 44
soul as basis of, 223 See also: Supreme Lord
soul changes, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68-70, 71, Brahmanas (saintly intellectuals)
72,74,75,76,317-218 Karnsa’s ministers plotted against, 312


--- Page 377 ---
General Index 379
Brahmanas (saintly intellectuals) “Brainwashing,” Krsna consciousness move-
at Krgna’s “birth” ceremony, 320, 322, ment branded as, 35, 66, 313
323 Buddha, Lord, stopped animal sacrifices, 23
Lord protects, 313 Bulls at Krgna’s “birth” festival, 325
Lord’s advent gladdened, 204-205, 206
Nanda’s charity to, 322
Brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva C
quoted, 101
verse quoted, 171, 241 Caitanya-bhagavata, quoted on devotees per-
Brahman effulgence (brahmajyoti), 222, ceiving Lord’s incarnations, 199
235-236 Caitanya-candramrta, quoted on devotee’s
Brahmano hi pratisthaham happy-world view, 153
quoted, 235 Caitanya-caritamrta, cited
Brahma-samhita on devotional service in opulence or love,
by Brahma, 182, 183 247
cited on Brahman effulgence, 222 on Krsna & Vignu, 102
cited on Lord as old & young, 182 on Krsna’s advent, 50
Brahma-sarihita, quotations from Caitanya-caritamrta, quotations from
on devotees loving Lord as Syamasundara, on associating with devotees, 316
187 on devotional service via guru & Krsna,
on devotees perceiving Lord’s presence, 171,241
165 on guru distributing Krgna’s instructions,
on devotee’s protection from karmic reac- 144,192
tions, 302 on hearing about Krgna, 20
on Durga, 110 on Krsna as Hare Krsna mantra, 146
on fruitive activities controlling everyone, on living entity wandering in universe, 101
295-296 on renouncing material desires, 258
on Krsna & gopi goddesses, 329, 336 on serving the Supreme, 68
on Krsna & His entourage, 208 Caitanya Mahaprabhu
on Krsna as origin of incarnations, 46-47, body of, transcendental, 180
160 Brahma-sarnhita accepted by, 183
on Krsna’s supremacy, 18-19, 44 devotee helped by, 153
on Lord as all-pervading, 236 as Kali-yuga’s savior, 95-96, 180
on Lord’s abode, 17 as Krsna, 55, 144
on Lord’s advent, 45, 46, 48-50 love of God given by, 256, 257
on Lord’s beauty, 187-188, 212 Caitanya Mahaprabhu, quotations from
on Lord’s expansions, 87, 141 on chanting the Lord’s holy name, 72, 96,
on Lord’s presence everywhere, 155n, 200, 180
210 on desiring devotional service, 190-191,
on Maha-Visnu, 217 258
on seeing the Supreme Lord, 220 on devotional service via guru & Krsna,
on sun, time & the Lord, 239 171, 241
Brahma satyari jagan mithya on guru distributing Krsna’s instructions,
quoted, 225 144, 192
Brahmins. See: Brahmanas on hearing about Krsna, 20, 22


--- Page 378 ---
380 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, quotations from (cont.) Charity, Nanda distributed, at Krsna’s “birth”
on Krsna, 329-330 festival, 322, 333
on living entity wandering in universe, 101 Chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga
on love of God, 256 quoted, 110
on renouncing material desires, 258 Chemicals, life not from, 223
on serving the Supreme, 68 Children
Canakya Pandita of Devaki, 87, 97, 113
quoted on king, woman & politician, 60 female, begotten in old age, 340
quoted on piety in association & action, 77 killing of, 231, 232
(00780010718 hi manah krsna name-giving ceremony for, 88
verse quoted, 71 parents not ultimate protectors of, 157
Candi, quoted on maya, 303 procreation of, 251-253
Candra, 43 Cin-maya defined, 103
Canara, 119 Cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpavrksa-
Caranas, 207, 285-286 quoted, 17
Castes, social. See: Brahmanas; Ksatriyas; verse quoted, 329
Society, human, occupational divisions Citraketu, 177
of; Vaisyas Civilization, modern
Catur-varnyari maya srstarn in bodily concept, 150
quoted, 41, 179 chaotic & demoniac, 311-312
Catur-vyiiha. See: Quadruple expansions of condemned, 231, 232, 326
Godhead crazy, 342-343
Causal Ocean, Maha-Visnu lies on, 217, 221 in ignorance, 163
Cause, ultimate materialistic, 146
Brahman as, 224 producing Riksasas (man-eaters),
destiny as, 82-83 289
Krsna as, 18-19, 235, 301 See also: Society, human
Ceremonies. See: Ritualistic ceremonies; Colors, Lord assumes, for cosmic functions,
Sacrifices 227-228
Ceto-darpana-marjanam Comparisons. See: Analogies
quoted, 256 Conditioned soul. See: Soul, conditioned
Chadiya vaisnava-seva, nistara payeche keba Consciousness, material vs. spiritual, 68
quoted, 104 See also: Krsna consciousness
Chaitanya. See: Caitanya Mahaprabhu Cosmic manifestation. See: Creation, the; Ma-
Chance, body not obtained by, 102 terial world; Nature, material; Universe
Chandogya Upanisad, quoted on Lord’s ex- Cow(s)
pansions, 87 earth in form of, 42
Chanting “mango, mango, mango,” 186 happy in Vedic times, 325
Chanting the Supreme Lord’s holy names Kariisa’s ministers plotted against, 312
blissful, 105 killing of, 231, 232, 313
Caitanya recommends, 72 at Krsna’s “birth” festival, 322, 325
for Kali-yuga, 180 protection of, 313, 325, 326, 342
misery cured by, 104 Vasudeva mentally distributed, 213
by Siva, 154 Cowherd men of Vrndavana
in Western countries, 171 descended from heavenly planets, 93
See also: Hare Krsna mantra at Krgna’s “birth” festival, 326, 332


--- Page 379 ---
General Index 381
Cowherd men of Vrndavana Demigods
Nanda appointed, to protect home in his demons advised Karnsa about, 306-311,
absence, 336-337 314
Cowherd women. See: Gopis demons vs., 120
Creation, the, material & spiritual divisions of, Devaki encouraged by, 196, 198
110 as devotees, 95
See also: Earth planet; Heavenly planets; Karhsa-Devaki clash incited by, 59
Material world; Nature, material; Karnsa’s associates as, 93, 94
Spiritual world; Universe(s) in Krsna’s pastimes, 93, 94
Cruelty condemned, 148, 149, 282 Lord above, 43, 87, 164-166, 235
Cupid, Lord Krsna excels, 183-184, 188 Lord’s advent greeted by, 154, 155, 207,
Curse of Hiranyakasipu on grandsons, 113 208
Cycle of birth and death. See: Birth and death, at milk ocean, 42, 43, 108
repeated; Transmigration prayers for Krsna by. See: Prayers, by
demigods for Krsna
Visnu chief among, 311, 314, 315
D Vrndavana’s residents as, 93, 94
Vrsnis & Yadus as, 93, 94
Dadami buddhi-yogar tari worship toward, 87-88, 101, 156-157, 235
verse quoted, 107 See also: names of specific demigods
Dam-pati defined, 258 Democracy, corruption in, 41
Daridra-narayana, 333 Demons (asuras)
Death demigods vs., 120
control over, 107, 251 devoted to Durga, 288, 291
devotee remembers Krsna at, 28-29, devotees contrasted to, 305
69-70 earth burdened by, 40, 41, 47
duty to avoid, 80 as fools, 305
fear ০1, Lord dispels, 240, 241, 242 government ruined by, 40-41
Lord as personification of, 107, 279 hellish destiny of, 99-100
Pariksit fasted before, 34 Karhsa advised by, 304-316
as sure & certain, 63, 241 Krsna consciousness movement opposed
takes everything away, 72 by, 313-315
See also: Transmigration Lord kills, 95, 228, 229, 230, 245
Decorations at Krsna’s “birth” festival, Lord’s advent derided by, 45
324-329 persecuted saintly persons, 317
Deer, Bharata became, 177, 191 selfish nature of, 60, 231, 280
Dehino ’smin yatha dehe Vaignavas vs., 315
quoted, 146 world ruined by, 230
verse quoted, 64, 317-318 Yadus persecuted by, 119, 120, 121
Deity form of the Supreme Lord See also: Atheists; 16977188; Materialists;
as Lord Himself, 267 Nondevotees; Riksasas; names of
Vaignavas (devotees) worship, 133, 182 other specific demons
See also: Worship “‘Deprogrammers”’ court case, 177
Demigods Desire
Brahma advised, about Lord’s advent, 45, of Caitanya for devotional service, 191, 258
46, 48-50 of devotee, Lord fulfills, 170-171


--- Page 380 ---
382 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Desire, material Devaki
body according to, 287, 292 Krsna within, 130, 141, 142, 143, 145,
conditioned soul bound by, 65 158, 198, 220, 221, 222
freedom from, 103, 258 “miscarriage” 01, Karhsa & co. lamented,
Krsna consciousness dispels, 25-26, 35 137
love of God dispels, 258 pleaded with Karnsa on baby daughter’s
See also: Attachment; Bodily concept; behalf, 280-283
Sense gratification; Sex life as politician, 281
Destiny prayers for Krsna by. See: Prayers, by
as controller, 345-346 Devaki for Krsna
Karhsa’s killings ordained by, 281, 282, as Préni in pastlife, 249, 251, 253-255,
295, 296, 299-300 256, 257-260, 261, 262
modes of nature determine, 72 symbolizes bhakti, 128-129
88 unseen cause, 82-83 as transcendental, 209, 248, 288
See also: Karma; Transmigration Vasudeva dissuaded Karhsa from killing,
Deva (3), defined, 87 78, 79, 80, 81-86, 88, 89, 112
See also: Demigods Vasudeva married, 56-58
Devaka, King, dowry to Devaki from, 57-58 Yaéoda contrasted to, 272-273
Devaki Yogamaya transferred Balarama from, to
as Aditi in past life, 261 Rohini, 137
Baladeva (Sesa) in womb of, 30, 127, 129 Devamaya defined, 257-258
children of, 87 Devatas defined, 199
compared to covered fire & misused knowl- Devotees of the Supreme Lord (Vaisnavas)
edge, 142, 143 association with, 168, 189, 316
. demigods encouraged, 196, 198 born in pious family, 48, 94
dowry from Devaka to, 57-58 Caitanya’s mercy on, 153
feared Karhsa would kill Krsna, 233, 236, chant Hare Krsna, 186
242, 243-244, 245-246 defeat enemies, 177, 178
Karhsa attacked, 60 as demigods, 95
Karnsa deliberated on, pregnant with demons contrasted to, 305
Krsna, 147, 148, 149, 151 demons vs., 315
Karnsa forgiven by, 299-300 devotional service continued by, 191
Karhsa frightened, 128-129 difficulty doesn’t disturb, 153
Karhsa imprisoned, 97 distress of, as Lord’s mercy, 165, 301-
Kamsa killed sons of, 97, 113, 122, 123 302
Karnsa repented atrocities to, 288-299 Durga’s devotees contrasted to, 287
as Karnsa’s sister, 56, 62, 147, 148 duty of, 84, 95, 194
Krsna “born” of, 88-90, 128, 208, 209, enjoy hearing about Lord, 105
210, 213, 283 eternal life for, 241
Krsna instructed, at His advent, 264-265 as expert, 305
Krsna protected, 124, 125 falldown of, 176-177
as Krgna’s mother, 184, 188, 200, 236, following in footsteps of, 168, 169, 170
247, 249, 253, 258, 261-264, 268, as good, 86
272-273 as happy, 153
Krsna’s Visnu form dismayed, in Karhsa’s hearing about Krsna from, 22-23
prison, 243, 244, 245-247 impersonalist contrasted to, 75


--- Page 381 ---
General Index 383
Devotees Devotional service
with Karhsa awaiting Lord’s advent, 122, hearing process in, 191-192
123 liberation by, 168, 263, 295, 315
karmis contrasted to, 105 Lord known by, 128, 176, 182, 184, 185,
in Krsna consciousness movement, 24, 26, 186, 189, 220, 248
35,171 in Lord’s abodes, 55
as learned, 164-165 by mind, 213
as liberated souls, 110, 190, 191 modes of nature transcended by, 65, 69,
Lord as son of, 138-139, 249, 250 187, 248
Lord enlightens, 107, 124 in opulence or love, 247
Lord fulfills desire of, 170-171 power of, 168
Lord known to, 190, 263 pure, 75, 273, 294
Lord maintains, 159-160 stages of, 247, 248, 256
Lord present with, 142 surrender as perfection of, 103
Lord protects, 123, 124, 167,176-177, as yoga’s perfection, 125
178, 230, 243, 301-302 See also: Krsna consciousness
Lord purifies, 165 Dhama defined, 140, 142
Lord’s form enchants, 169, 175 Dhamna svena sada nirasta-kuhakari satyarn
Lord’s incarnations understood by, 199 pararir dhimahi
Lord’s mercy on, 165,170-171, 187, 193 quoted, 140
Lord’s opulences available to, 177-178 Dharma defined, 294
Lord’s pastimes please, 104 See also: Religion
love the Lord, 187-189 Dharma-samsthapanarthaya
materialists contrasted to, 133 verse quoted, 95, 120
Narada Muni makes, 154 Dharma-sila defined, 102-103
nondevotee contrasted to, 152-153, 165, Dharmasya glani defined, 40
176,188, 191, 263 Dharmaviruddho bhiitesu
promoted to Lord’s pastimes, 48-49, 70, 94 quoted, 251
remember Lord at death, 69-70 Dhenuka, 119
see Lord’s will everywhere, 165, 302 Dhruva Maharaja, quoted on his spiritual
as transcendental, 190 satisfaction, 26, 275
vow of, in Lord’s abodes, 55 Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa pasyanti
worship the Lord, 159, 182 yarh yoginah
worshiptoward, 103-104, 333-334 quoted, 142, 169, 243
yogis excelled by, 125, 142 Diksa defined, 141
See also: Disciple; Pure devotees; names of Diparcir eva hi dasantaram abhyupetya
specific devotees quoted, 160
Devotional service to the Supreme Lord Diplomacy, 84
(bhakti-yoga) See also: Politicians
Absolute Truth known by, 156 Disciple, krsna-katha heard by, 25
dcdaryas recommend, 184 See also: Devotees
benefit 01, 196 Disciplic succession, knowledge via, 182
desire for, 191, 258 See also: Acaryas; Disciple; Spiritual
devotee continues, 48-49, 191 master
devotee’s duty in, 84, 95, 194 Distress. See: Suffering
via guru & Krsna, 171,172 Downfall. See: Falldown


--- Page 382 ---
384 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Dream E

material life compared to, 137-138

transmigration compared to, 67, 100-101 Earth element & living entity, analogy of, 292
Duck, foolish, 228 Earth planet
Duhkhesv anudvigna-manah approached Brahma for relief, 40, 42

quoted, 90 demons disturbing, 40, 41, 47, 230
Durdasaya ye bahir-artha-maninah Hare Krsna movement as hope of , 230

quoted, 311 at Lord’s advent, 204, 205, 206
Duratmas defined, 52 Lord’s footprints on, 193
Durdantendriya-kala-sarpa-patali protkhata- Ecstasy. See: Bliss, transcendental; Happiness

darhstrayate Education, birth-control, 251-253

quoted, 152 Egg, scientists can’t make, 223
Durga (Mayadevi), goddess Ego, false. See: Bodily concept

as Lord’s potency, 110 Ekadasa-sahasrani

nature’s laws under, 291 verse quoted, 106

other names of, 133-134, 287 Ekantam upasarigamya

quoted on her advent, 110 verse quoted, 113

worshipers of, 131, 133, 287, 288, 291 Ekatvam anupasyatah

Yogamaya advented as, 284, 285, 287, quoted, 210

288 Eko ’py asau racayiturih jagad-anda-kotiri

Durga devi sarva-bhiitesu verse quoted, 217

quoted, 303 Electricity and Lord’s potency, analogy of, 51
Duryodhana, 111 Elements, material
Duskrtis defined, 167 at annihilation of cosmos, 237
Duty in body, 64, 162, 222, 292

before death, 80 life not from, 152-153

Bhagavad-gita study as, 99 Krsna emanates, 162, 163

of devotees, 95, 194 in world, 162, 216, 219

of government leaders, 41 See also: Nature, material; names of

humans neglecting, 146 specific elements

for Lord’s satisfaction, 179 Emergencies, three listed, 310

of mahatmas, 232 Endeavor, three principles of, 159

material vs. spiritual, 132 Enemies

surrender to Lord as, 166 devotee defeats, 177,178

of vaisyas (agriculturalists), 325 etiquette in fighting, 308

Vedas prescribe, 136 Energy, material. See: Durga; Elements, ma-
Dviraka terial; Maya; Nature, material

as Lord’s abode, 140 Energy of the Lord. See: Supreme Lord, en-

love for Lord in, 247 ergy of
Dwau bhita-sargau loke ’smin Enjoyment, material

quoted, 154 attachment to, 259

verse quoted, 304 living entities seeking, 195, 196
Dvi-khagah defined, 163 Mayadevi worship for, 133, 134
Dvivida, 119 transmigration for, 72
Dynasties. See: Sun, ksatriya family from; See also: Bliss, transcendental; Happiness

Yadu dynasty Entities, individual. See: Living entities


--- Page 383 ---
General Index 385
Envy, fearful result of, 77 Fire, sacrificial, Lord’s advent restored, 204,
See also: Anger 205-206
Ete carhsa-kalah purasah Fire leaping & soul transmigrating, analogy of,
quoted, 229 82-83, 102
Eternality Flowers at Lord’s advent, 204, 205 206, 208
by knowing Lord’s advent & activities, 98, Form of the Lord. See: Deity form; Supreme
250 Lord, form of
by Krsna consciousness, 242 Freedom from material desires, 103, 258
of Lord & His abode, 111 See also: Liberation
Expansions of the Lord. See: Krsna, Lord, ex- Fruitive activities
pansions of; Quadruple expansions; body according to, 64-65
Supreme Lord, expansions of destiny controls, 345-346
everyone controlled by, 296
freedom from, 76
F See also: Karma; Sense gratification; Sin-
ful activities
Fruitive workers. See: Karmis; Materialists
Falldown
of devotees, 176-177
of nondevotees, 173, 174 G
of politicians, 174
False ego. See: Bodily concept Gandharvas, 207, 285-286
Farmers. See: Vaisyas Ganges River
Fasting by Pariksit before death, 34 purifying power of, 39
Father, responsibility of, 252 spiritual master compared to, 294-295
See also: Marriage; Parents Garbha defined, 59
Fear Garbhari saficarya rohinyari
in author for Krgna consciousness move- verse quoted, 120
ment’s life, 232, 233 Garbhodakasayi-Visnu, 108, 217, 221
of death, 63, 240, 241, 242 Gauda-mandala-bhimi, 54
in demigods, {4971888 ministers quoted on, ০88৫. See: Bhagavad-gita
306-309 Gita-Govinda, quoted on Buddha’s mission, 23
in Devaki for Krgna’s life, 233, 236, 242, Glorification of the Lord. See: Supreme Lord,
243-244, 245-246 glorification of
of Krsna consciousness movement by Go-brahmana-hitaya ca
malicious men, 146 quoted, 313
of material existence, 124, 128, 129 God. See: Krsna, Lord; Supreme Lord; Vignu,
transcendental, 248 Lord
in Vasudeva for Krsna’s life, 231, 232, God consciousness
233 atheists avoid, 152-153
Vasudeva freed of, at Lord’s advent, 214, life without, 66
215 people neglect, 311-312
Festivals, Vedic. See: Ritualistic ceremonies See also: Krsna consciousness
Fiery rod & spiritualized body, analogy of, 103 = Goddess (es) of fortune
Fighting, principles for, 308 Laksmi as, 176, 177
Fire, disease & debt, 310 Radharani chief among, 336


--- Page 384 ---
386 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Godhead, returning to Happiness
by loving Krsna, 256, 257 in Kali-yuga, 180
by renouncing material desires, 258 by Krsna consciousness, 152, 254
by thinking of the Lord, 263 material vs. spiritual, 334
See also: Krsna, Lord; Spiritual world; of Ripa Gosvami, 153
Supreme Lord; Vrndavana See also: Bliss, transcendental; Enjoyment,
“Gods.” See: Demigods material
Gokula, Krsna’s transfer to, 31, 264-265 Hara, 133
Goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhitah Hare Krsna mantra
quoted, 111 Caitanya recommends, 96
verse quoted, 208, 329 chanting of, 72, 146, 186, 191, 232, 254,
Goloka-namni nija-dhamni tale ca tasya 256-257
quoted, 108 Hariin, 133
Goloka Vrndavana, 49, 108, 111 Krsna consciousness movement propagates,
See also: Spiritual world; Vrndavana 180
Goodness, mode of (sattva-guna) Krsna in, 146
for cosmic maintenance, 227 quoted, 135, 186, 230
higher planets via, 72 Rama in, 135
Gopas. See: Cowherd men of Vrndavana See also: Chanting the Supreme Lord’s
Gopis (cowherd women) holy names
at Krsna’s “birth” festival, 327, 329, 330 Hare Krgna movement. See: Krsna conscious-
Lord’s lotus feet enchanted, 193 ness movement
Gosvamis, the. See: Jiva Gosvami; Ripa Harer nama harer nama
Gosvami; Sanitana Gosvami quoted, 72
Govardhana Hill, Krsna lifted, 188 verse quoted, 96, 180
Government, demoniac leaders ruin, 40-41 Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya, quoted on freedom
See also: Civilization, modern; Kings; from material desires, 103, 175
Ksatriyas; Politicians; Society, Hari-bhakti-vilasa, cited on dcarya’s body,
human 295
Govindam adi-purusari tam aha bhajami Haridasa Thakura, don’t imitate, 171
quoted, 44, 159, 160 Harir hi nirgunah saksat
Gramya-dharma defined, 259 quoted, 228
Gunas. See: Modes of material nature Hari-varisa, as cited or quoted
Guru. See: Acaryas; Spiritual Master on {4377088 & Devaki’s sons, 113
Guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija on Krsna as son of Devaki & Yasodi, 268
verse quoted, 171, 241 on Narada & 1687188, 97, 114
on Rohini’s miscarriage & Balarama’s ad-
vent, 137
H Hatvapi sa imal lokan
verse quoted, 297
Happiness Hearing about the Lord. See: Supreme Lord,
from body, 161-162 hearing about
by cow protection, 342 Heavenly planets
of cows in Vedic times, 325 devotees promoted to, 48, 93-94
demoniac leaders disrupt, 311-312 karmis seek, 241
of devotee, 153 Krsna’s footprints mark, 193


--- Page 385 ---
General Index 387
Heavenly planets Ignorance
moon among, 242 civilization in, 163
residents of. See: Demigods irresponsible persons in, 318
time on, 241, 255-256 Lord’s form as imagined in, 183
women of, in Krgna’s pastimes, 49 Western leaders in, 66
See also: Creation, the; Spiritual world; Ignorance, mode of (tamo-guna)
Universe(s) bad body from, 65
Hell for cosmic annihilation, 227-228
via bodily concept, 149 hell via, 72
materialist as resident of, 267 Tha yasya harer dasye
via sinful activities, 150 quoted, 190
“Hindu” as false designation, 58 verse quoted, 294-295
Hiranyakasipu Illusion. See: Dream; Ignorance; Maya
Kalanemi’s sons cursed by, 113 Imagination, Lord not known by, 182, 183,
Nrsithhadeva killed, 107 185, 250
Hitopadesa, quoted on fool angered by good Imarh rajarsayo viduh
instructions, 282 quoted, 38
Holy men. See: Acaryas; Devotees; Maha- Immortality. See: Eternality
Jjanas; Pure devotees; Sages; Saintly Impersonal Brahman, 235, 236
persons; Spiritual master Impersonalists
Holy names of God. See: Chanting the devotee contrasted to, 75
Supreme Lord’s holy names; Hare hearing from, forbidden, 191
Krsna mantra; Krsna, Lord, name of; labor of, 75, 174
Supreme Lord, names of Lord’s form misunderstood by, 183, 184,
Holy places. See: काय; Dvaraka; Mathura; 186
Navadvipa; Vrndavana merging with Brahman desired by, 152
Hrsikena hrsikesa- See also: Jianis; Philosophers
quoted, 69, 73 Incarnation (s) of the Supreme Lord
Human being(s) devotees understand, 199
Bhagavad-gita for, 180 Hare Krsna movement as, 230
cow protection for, 342 Krsna as origin of, 46-47, 160
duty neglected by, 146 Krsna’s name as, 230
Krsna in role of, 29, 32-33, 106-108, 263, limitless, 199
265, 266 Lord’s names according to, 183-184
types of, 104, 154 via Lord’s pleasure potency, 195
Vedic knowledge for, 163 philosophers disbelieve in, 195
See also: Life, human; Living entities; protect world, 197
Society, human; Soul, conditioned urpose of, 167
Hunters, animal, 105-106 Son as, 127,129
as transcendental, 179, 182, 183
See also: Krsna, Lord, “birth” of ; Supreme
1 Lord, advent of; names of specific
incarnations
. Independence. See: Freedom; Liberation
Ignorance India
bodily concept as, 179, 297, 300-301 Aurangzeb in, 98


--- Page 386 ---
388 Srimad-Bhagavatam
India (continued) Jatasya hi dhruvo mretyur
birth-control agitation in, 251 verse quoted, 63
Durga (Mayadevi) worship in, 131, Jato gatah pitr-grhad vrajam edhitartho
133-134, 287 verse quoted, 16-17
five thousand years ago, 323 Jaundice patients & nondevotees, analogy of,
hearing about Krsna in, 21 188
knowledge of Bhagavad-gita in, 144 Jayadeva Gosvami, cited on three Ramas, 135
Vedic vs. modern, 325, 326 Jiva-bhiita defined, 219-220
Indian Ocean gave way to Lord Rima, 270 Jiva-bhatarih maha-baho
Indra, King, 42, 43, 270, 296 verse quoted, 162-163, 224
Indra-gopa insect, 296 Jiva Gosvami, cited
Initiation, spiritual, invokes Lord’s presence, on Baladeva, 109
141, 142 on bodily concept, 149, 150
International Society for Krishna Conscious- on Krsna adventing for Vasudeva &
ness (ISKCON). See: Krsna conscious- Devaki, 261-262
ness movement on Krsna adventing with His expansions,
Irreligion, Lord’s advent caused by, 40, 41, 102
146, 195, 331 on Krsna within Devaki, 199-200
See also: Atheists; Demons on Lord as maya-manusya, 107-108
Fopanisad, quoted on Lord’s potency, 210 on Narada & Karsa, 97
Fvarah paramah krsnah Jivan-muktah sa ucyate
quoted, 44 quoted, 103, 190
verse quoted, 18-19 Jiwa-tattva. See: Living entities; Soul; Soul,
Isvarah sarva-bhatanar conditioned
quoted, 124, 138, 163 Jivera ‘svaripa’ haya— krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’
verse quoted, 293 quoted, 51, 68, 196
Jiiana-bala-kriya defined, 159
Jianamayidefined, 248
J Jiiana defined, 248
Jiianis reject world, 225
Jagad-dhitaya krsnaya See also: Impersonalists; Philosophers
verse quoted, 313 Jiatva sastra-vidhanoktar
Jaghanya-guna-vrtti-stha verse quoted, 136
verse quoted, 72
Janame janame haya, ei abhilasa K
verse quoted, 172
Janati tattvarih bhagavan-mahimno Kaivalyam narakayate tridasa-par akasa-
verse quoted, 181 puspayate
Janma karma ca me divyam quoted, 152
quoted, 209, 267 Kala defined, 107, 239, 278-279
verse quoted, 98, 189, 250 Kailanemi
Janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi Karhsa was, 99, 112, 113, 123
quoted, 251, 294 sons of, 112-113
Jarasandha, 119, 120 Kalau nasty eva nasty eva
Jata-karma defined, 321 verse quoted, 96, 180


--- Page 387 ---
General Index 389
Kalda-visesa defined, 19 Kamsa
Kali-kale nama-ripe krsna-avatara omen of doom for, 59, 60
quoted, 146, 230 politicians as baser than, 292
Kali-yuga (age of Kali) quoted on bodily concept of life, 293-294,
Aryans powerless in, 281 297
Caitanya’s program for, 95, 96, 180 quoted on embodied living entities, 292
krsna-katha counteracts, 20, 36, 37 quoted on living entities under Supreme
Rakgasas (man-eaters) in, 289 control, 291, 295
Kamais tais tair hrta-jianah repented atrocities to Vasudeva & Devaki,
quoted, 131, 235 288-299
Karhsa soul’s transmigration known to, 147, 149
Akrira with, 122 symbolizes fear, 129
associates 01, as demigods, 93, 94 as Ugrasena’s son, 100, 243
as Bhoja king, 62 Vasudeva dissuaded, from killing Devaki,
as charioteer for Vasudeva & Devaki, 56, 78, 79, 80, 81-86, 88, 89, 112
59, 60 Vasudeva feared, on Krsna’s account, 231,
cruel, 282, 283 232,233
deliberated on Devaki pregnant with Vasudeva imprisoned by, 97
Krsna, 147, 148, 149, 151 Vasudeva’s advice to, about life & death,
as demon (asura), 76, 79, 86, 89, 99, 154, 62-64, 65,66, 67, 71, 74,76, 77
231, 292, 315-316 Vasudeva’s equanimity pleased, 90, 91
demoniac ministers advised, 304-316 watchmen of, slept due to Yogamaya, 269,
destiny ordained killings by, 281, 282, 277
295, 296, 299-300 Yadus persecuted by, 119, 120
Devaki as sister of, 56, 62, 147, 148 Yogamaya outwitted, 284-286, 303-304
Devaki attacked by, 60 Kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-sobhari
Devaki feared, on Krsna’s account, verse quoted, 187-188
128-129, 233, 236, 242, 243-244, Karanarm guna-sango ‘sya
245-246 quoted, 65, 72, 101
Devaki imprisoned by, 97 Karanodakasayi Visnu (Maha-Visnu), 19, 108,
Devaki pleaded with, on baby daughter’s 217, 221
behalf, 280-283 Karmana manasa gira
Devaki’s sons killed by, 97, 113, 122, 123 quoted, 190
forgiven by Vasudeva & Devaki, 299-300 Karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam
as Kalanemi in past birth, 99, 112, 113, quoted, 302
123 verse quoted, 295-296
in knowledge of self, 292, 297 Karmanubandha defined, 149, 150
as Krsna conscious unfavorably, 152, 153, Karma separates everyone in time, 341
154 See also: Destiny; Fruitive activities; Sin-
Krsna killed, 31, 32, 97 ful activities; Transmigration
Krsna saved, 29, 99, 107 Karmis (fruitive workers)
lamented Devaki’s ‘miscarriage,’ 137 higher planets sought by, 241
maya influenced, 110, 280 Krsna conscious devotees contrasted to,
Nanda paid taxes to, 336-337 105, 152
Narada’s death-warning to, 95, 97, 114 sacrifice essential for, 179


--- Page 388 ---
390 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Karmis (continued) Krama-sandarbha, cited on Krgna within
See also: Materialists; Nondevotees; Soul, Devaki, 199-200
conditioned Krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam
Kartaviryarjuna, 111 quoted, 325, 338, 342
Kasyapa, Vasudeva was, 261 = , Krena, Lord
Kaunteya pratijanihi See also: Krsna, Lord, quotations from
quoted, 159, 177 abode of. See: Dhama; Dviaraka; Mathura;
Kaustubha gem, 211 Nanda Maharéja, residence of ;
Kekayas, 121 Navadvipa; Vrndavana
Kesava dhrta-buddha-sarira jaya jagadisa as Absolute Truth, 34, 156, 158, 160
hare academic scholars misunderstand, 184, 186
verse quoted, 23 dcdryas accept, 184
Kesi, 119 activities of. See: Krsna, pastimes of
Kevala-bhakti defined, 273 as Acyuta, 87
Killing. See: Animal slaughter; Children, kill- as adi-purusa, 44
ing of; Vedic injunction, on killing Arjuna and, 27, 84-85, 279
Kingdom of God. See: Spiritual world; Balarama as expansion of, 18, 19, 102,
Vrndavana 127,198
Kings, greedy, 98-99 as Balarama’s brother, 50, 130, 338
See also: Ksatriyas; Leaders, government; beyond description, 19
Politicians; names of specific kings beyond material world, 216
King’s government & Lord’s creation, analogy “birth” of
of, 221 auspicious signs at, 204-205, 206,
Kinnaras, 207, 285-286 208-209
Kirtana. See: Chanting the Supreme Lord’s ceremony celebrating, 320-335
holy names; Hare Krsna mantra; demigods attending, 207, 208
Preaching of Krsna consciousness; from Devaki, 88-90, 128, 208, 209,
Supreme Lord, glorification of 210, 213, 283
Kirtanad eva krsnasya from Devaki & Yaéoda simultaneously,
quoted, 20, 254, 257 268, 285
Kirtiman, 88, 113 from devotee, 138-139
Kleso ‘dhikataras tesam Krsna’s transfer after, 31
quoted, 75, 174 mystery of, Nanda unaware of, 345
Knowledge, speculative, Lord’s advent defeats, in past milleniums, 260, 261
182-184 as perpetual pastime, 48
# See also: Impersonalists; Jianis; Philoso- time of , 204, 205, 206
phers; Speculation, mental transcendental, 97-98
Knowledge, transcendental transformation at, 265, 266-267
in Bhagavad-gita for distribution, 144 Vasudeva beheld, 211, 213, 214
in Brahma-sarihita, 182, 183 in Vignu form, 208, 209, 211, 212
via disciplic succession, 182 wonderful, 211, 212,213
Kamsa in, 292, 297 See also: Incarnations; Supreme Lord,
Lord imparts, 25 advent of
See also: Absolute Truth body of
Koéalas, 121 color 01, 107


--- Page 389 ---
General Index 391
Krsna, Lord Krsna, Lord
body of Karnsa saved by, 29, 99, 107
transcendental, 180 in Krsna consciousness movement, 41, 47,
See also: Supreme Lord, body of 146
as brahmajyoti’s basis, 235 on Kuruksetra battlefield, 184, 186
Brahma tested, 208 love for. See: Supreme Lord, love for
Caitanya as, 55, 144 name of
demigods’ prayers for. See: Prayers, by as Krgna Himself, 47
demigods for Krsna as Krgna’s incarnation, 230
demigods under, 235 meaning of, 34, 183
in Devaki, 130, 141, 142, 143, 145, 158, See also: Chanting the Supreme Lord’s
198, 220, 221, 222 holy names; Hare Krsna mantra;
Devaki dismayed by Vignu form of, in Supreme Lord, names of
6371888 prison, 243, 244, Nanda protected, 337
245-247 Nanda’s “birth” festival for, 320-335
Devaki protected by, 124, 125 as origin of all, 19, 44, 47, 235
Devaki’s prayers for. See: Prayers, by Pandavas saved by, 27-28, 29
Devaki for Krsna Pariksit saved by, 28, 29
as Devaki’s son, 184, 188, 200, 236, 247, pastimes of
249, 253, 258, 261-264, 268, Baladeva in, 50
272-273 demigods in, 93, 94
devotees of. See: Devotees; Pure devotees; devotee promoted to, 48-49, 70, 94
names of specific devotees elevate the less intelligent, 186-187
disappearance of, 266 as eternal, 48
as eternal, 249 Sukadeva summarized, 16
expansions of women of heaven in, 49
accompanied His advent, 102 See also: Supreme Lord, activities of
spiritual, 208 Radharani and, 109, 248, 336
Visnu, 108, 217 relationship with. See: Rasa
See also: Quadruple expansions; as sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, 29, 32
Supreme Lord, expansions of ; as Supreme Lord, 22, 44, 87, 182-184,
names of specific expansions 198, 261-262, 331
flute carried by, 248, 338 in Vasudeva, 138, 139
as Giridhari, 184, 188 Vasudeva exchanged, for Yogamaya,
goddesses of fortune serve, 336 268-272, 273
as Gopala, 188 Vasudeva’s prayers for. See: Prayers, by
gopis always thought of, 193 Vasudeva for Krgna
gopis at “birth” festival of, 327, 329, 330 as Vasudeva’s son, 213, 215,217, 218,
as Govinda, 19 249, 253, 258, 261-262, 264-265,
in Hare Krsna mantra, 146 268
in human role, 29, 32-33, 106-108 as Visnu, 234-236
incarnations of. See: Incarnations as Visnu’s origin, 44, 102
instructed Vasudeva & Devaki at His ad- in Vrndavana. See: Vrndavana
vent, 264-265 Yadus destroyed by, 266
37188 killed by, 31, 32,97 as Yaéoda’s son, 188, 247, 268, 273, 321


--- Page 390 ---
392 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Krsna, Lord (continued) Krsna consciousness movement
Yogamaya blessed by, 130 Bhagavad-gita as distributed by, 144
as Yogamadya’s brother, 284-285, 321 “brainwashing” charges against, 35, 66,
Yogamaya’s orders from, 126, 127, 129, 313
130, 131, 133, 135-136 devotees in, 24, 26, 35
See also: Supreme Lord fights for Krsna & His Gita, 264
Krsna, Lord, quotations from happiness via, 254
on Brahman’s basis, 235 Hare Krsna mantra propagated by, 180
on devotional service, 69 Krsna conscious process in, 68
on Krsna consciousness, 68 krsna-katha promoted by, 34, 36, 39
on Lord directing living entity’s wander- as Krsna’s incarnation, 41, 47, 146, 230
ings, 292-293 leaders in, advice to, 146
on material world as place of death, 241 literature distribution by, 192
on source of all, 235 Lord maintains devotees in, 159
Krsna-bahirmukha haiya bhoja-varicha kare opponents of, 35, 66, 146, 177, 230-232,
quoted, 195 313-315
Krsna color, 228 preaching by, 23
Krsna consciousness problems solved by, 77
academic scholars lack, 184 purpose of, 73, 95-96
animal killers lack, 103 regulative principles of, 171-172
awakening of, compared to Lord’s advent, spreading everywhere, 146
128-129 as world’s hope, 230
benefits everyone, 29 Krsnah svayarh samabhavat paramah
birth-death cycle stopped by, 76, 279 puman yo
demoniac nature killed by, 95-96 verse quoted, 46-47
eternal life by, 241-242 Krsna-janmastami (Krgna’s “birth” festival),
favorable & unfavorable, 152, 153 320-335
happiness in, 152 Krsna-katha (topics of Krgna)
Kariisa in, unfavorably, 152, 153, 154 government leaders need, 38
life meant for, 40, 41 liberation by hearing, 20, 22, 23, 25
materialists uninterested in, 24 materialists uninterested in, 22-24
milk products used in, 332 as nectarous, 34, 35
mind in, 68-72, 101 purifying power of, 39
mission of, 20 relieves suffering, 36, 37, 38
nondevotees misunderstand, 35 two types of, 20
parent education in, 252 See also: Krsna, Lord; Supreme Lord
perfection by, 138 Krsna-sandarbha, cited on Krsna adventing
purification by, 68, 73 for Vasudeva & Devaki, 261-262
as yoga's perfection, 68, 72 Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam
See also: Devotional service; God con- quoted, 19, 102, 123, 198, 265
sciousness; Krsna-katha Krsnaya krsna-caitanya-
Krsna consciousness movement verse quoted, 256
animal killing forbidden in, 103 Ksatriyas (soldiers & statesmen)
atheist’s lesson from, 279 descend from sun & moon, 17
author afraid for life of, 232, 233 fame for, 147, 148


--- Page 391 ---
General Index 393
Ksatriyas Liberation
Lord advents in family of, 17 of Pariksit & Sukadeva, 168
See also: Kings; Leaders, government; surrender to Krsna as, 75, 103
Politicians Life
Ksetra-jiia defined, 163 of Brahma, 19, 241
Ksetra-jiiari capi mar viddhi goal of. See: Perfection; Success
quoted, 124, 163 on higher planets, 241
Ksipamy ajasram asubhan human
verse quoted, 150, 228 for austerity, 253-254
Ksirodakasayi Visnu, 217, 221, 228 value of, 150
See also: Supersoul; Visnu, Lord See also: Human beings
Kunti, quoted on Lord’s pastimes, 94 for Krsna consciousness, 40, 41
Kuruksetra, Battlefield of, 27-28, 29, 184, material vs. spiritual, 34, 35
186, 264 mission of, 168
Kuru punyam aho ratram on moon, 242
verse quoted, 77 natural vs. artificial, 328
Kurus, 121 perfection of, 29, 68, 174-175
scientists misunderstand, 152-153, 223
Life, material
L bodily concept perpetuates, 293-294
compared to dream, 137-138
Lakgmi, mother, 177 devotee as beyond, 302
Laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama- pure devotee fears, 124, 128, 129
sevyamdnari spiritual life vs., 34, 35
quoted, 336 See also: Material world
verse quoted, 329 Life force in body, 146, 162-163
Lava-matra sadhu-sarige sarva-siddhi haya See also: Soul
verse quoted, 316 Living entities
Leaders, government compared to earth element, 292
as blind, 311-312 as eternal, 156-157, 241
demoniac, endanger world, 40-41, 47, 230 fear death, 241
duty of, 41 form of, 74-76
Hare Krsna movement opposed by, Lord contrasted to, 74-76, 194-195, 196,
230-232 205, 210, 212, 265-266
krsna-katha essential for, 38 as Lord’s parts & parcels, 152-153,
See also: Kings; Ksatriyas; Politicians 194-195, 196
Liberation as Lord’s servants, 73-75
of conditioned soul, 51, 52 Lord supervises, 293
by devotional service, 168, 263, 295, 315 in material world, 287
by hearing Krgna’s activities, 20-23, 25, in maya, 74, 303
105 nature controls, 291, 300
by knowing the Lord, 189 suffering of, 194-195, 196
Krsna gives, 29, 107-108, 184 wander the universe, 101
by loving the Lord, 175 See also: Animals; Human beings; Soul;
nondevotees fall short of, 173 Soul, conditioned


--- Page 392 ---
394 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Locana dasa Thakura, quoted on punishment Maha-vadanya defined, 256
by providence, 316 Maha-Visnu (Karanodakasayi Visnu), 19, 108,
Lokasyajanato vidvars 217, 221
verse quoted, 37 Mamaivarmso jiva-loke
Lotus feet of the Lord. See: Supreme Lord, quoted, 87, 153, 195, 235
lotus feet of Mama janmani janmanisvare
Love of God. See: Rasa (relationship with quoted, 190-191
Krsna); Supreme Lord, love for verse quoted, 258
Lust. See: Desire, material; Sense gratifica- Mam aprapyaiva kaunteya
tion; Sex life verse quoted, 150
Mari ca yo "vyabhicarena
M verse quoted, 69, 248
Mam ekarn saranar vraja
quoted, 166
Mad-bhakta-pijabhyadhika Mana-bhati defined, 248
quoted, 334 Man-eaters (Raksasas), present society pro-
Madhu demon, 245 ducing, 289
Madhvacarya, Srila, as cited or quoted “Mango, mango, mango” chanting, 186
on devotee seeing Lord’s will everywhere, Mankind. See: Human beings; Society, human
302 Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
on transmigration of soul, 100-101 quoted, 68, 175, 197, 263
on Vasudeva & Nanda Maharaja, 338 Mantra. See: Hare Krsna mantra; Ori; Sound,
Madhvacarya-sampradaya, extra Bhagavatam transcendental
verse accepted by, 113-114 Manu-sarihita, cited on woman in politics,
Maha-bhaga defined, 61 281
Mahabharata Manusim tanum asritam
cited on demigods & Visnu, 108 quoted, 97
cited on ksatriya’s wives & daughters, 281 Manusya defined, 131
Krsna’s history in, 186, 187 Manusya-janama paiya, radha-krsnana
quoted on maha-ratha & atiratha soldiers, bhajiya
106 quoted, 24
Mahajanas defined, 168, 229 Marici, sons of, 59, 122-123, 128, 129
Mahajano yena gatah sa panthah Markandeya Purana, quoted on Yasoda’s
quoted, 170 daughter, 110
Maha-mantra. See: Hare Krsna mantra Marriage
Mahamaya. See: Maya of Vasudeva & Devaki, 56-58
Maharaja Nanda. See: Nanda Maharaja in Vedic culture, 57, 58
Maharaja Pariksit. See: Pariksit Maharaja Material body. See: Body, material
Maha-ratha defined, 106 Material enjoyment. See: Enjoyment, material
Mahatmanas tu mam partha Materialists
quoted, 52 body as reality to, 223, 225
Mahatmas (great souls) as hell’s residents, 267
duty of, 232 krsna-katha disinterests, 22-24
surrender to the Lord, 52 life’s goal unknown to, 334
Mahat-tattva defined, 219 surrendered souls contrasted to, 132


--- Page 393 ---
General Index 395
Materialists Maya (mahamaya)
Vaignavas contrasted to, 133 conditioned soul in, 74,110
worship Mayadevi, 131, 133 Kamsa in, 110, 280
See also: Atheists; Demons; Karmis; Non- living entities in, 303
devotees; Soul, conditioned Lord controls, 106-107
Material nature. See: Nature, material material function of, 51, 52, 110-111
Material world politicians in, 277
compared to ocean, 168, 169, 170-171, yogamdyd vs., 110-111
172 See also: Material world; Modes of material
death sure in, 241 nature; Nature, material;
diplomacy unavoidable in, 84 Yogamaya potency
elements in, 162, 216, 219 Mayadevi, goddess. See: Durga
living entity in 287 Mayadhyaksena prakrtih
Lord as beyond, 216 quoted, 51, 106, 226, 239, 277
Lord controls, 164 Maya-sukhdya bharam udvahato vimidhan
Lord saves devotee from, 165 quoted, 72
Lord within & without, 127-128 Maya tatam idarh sarvarh
mahamayd in, 51,110 verse quoted, 127-128, 220
politicians “protect,” 277, 279 2/1 9 ५३१78. See: Impersonalists, all entries
pure devotees as beyond, 187, 247-248 Meditation on the Lord, 168, 169, 243
purpose of, 120 See also: Krgna consciousness; Samadhi;
spiritual world vs., 17, 287 Yoga
suffering in, 34, 251 Mental speculation, 182-184, 185
time controls, 158, 237, 238, 239, 240 See also: Impersonalists; Jiidnis; Philoso-
true but temporary, 224-225 phers
See also: Creation, the; Earth planet; Mercy of the Lord. See: Supreme Lord,
Heavenly planets; Life, material; mercy of
Nature, material; Universe(s) Merging with the Supreme, impersonalists
Mathura aspire to, 152
as Lord’s abode, 54, 55, 111 Military power, world overburdened by,
Lord to return to, 265 40-41,47
love for Lord in, 247 Milk ocean, demigods prayed to Vignu at, 43,
in Strasena states, 100 108
Vasudeva-Nanda meeting in, 337~ Milk products
347 five thousand years ago, 332
Mathyate tu jagat sarvar for happiness, 342
verse quoted, 111 Mind
Matir na krsne paratah svato va body developed by, 68-70, 71, 72, 101,
verse quoted, 34-35 102
Matra sparsas tu kaunteya compared to boat, 71
verse quoted, 91 as flickering, 68-70, 71, 72, 102
Mat-sthani sarva-bhutani in Krsna consciousness, 68-72, 101
verse quoted, 127-128, 220 serving the Lord by, 213
Mattah smrtir jiidnam apohanari ca See also: Meditation; Subtle body
quoted, 69


--- Page 394 ---
396 Srimad-Bhagavatam
“‘Mind control,” nondevotees brand Krsna N
consciousness as, 35
Misery. See: Suffering Na ca mat-sthani bhiutani
Modes of material nature verse quoted, 127-128
birth according to, 72 Na dhanari na janari na sundarim
bodily concept via, 51, 74 verse quoted, 258
colors according to, 227, 228 Nahar prakasah sarvasya
devotional service transcends, 65, 69, 248 quoted, 106, 184
fools bewildered by, 166 Na hanyate hanyamane sarire
Lord beyond, 181, 182-184, 216, 220, quoted, 70, 241, 292
222, 226, 227, 228, 229 Nama cintamanih krsnas
See also: Maya; Nature, material; names of verse quoted, 47
specific modes (goodness, passion, Nama-karana ceremony, 88
ignorance) Namasyantas ca mari bhaktya
Moghasa mogha-karmanah verse quoted, 191
quoted, 305 Names of the Lord. See: Chanting the
Mohitar nabhijanati Supreme Lord’s holy names; Hare
quoted, 166 Krsna mantra; Krsna, Lord, name of ;
Moksa. See: Liberation Supreme Lord, names of
Moksa-dharma, cited on demigods & Visnu, Namo brahmanya-devaya
108 verse quoted, 313
Monists. See: Impersonalists; Jiianis Namo maha-vadanyaya
Moon verse quoted, 256
dynasty from, 17, 209 Nanda-grama, 31
at Krsna’s advent, 209 Nanda Maharaja
scientists haven’t gone to, 242 descended from heavenly planets, 93
Moonrise & Lord’s advent, analogy of, 141, Krsna’s “birth” festival performed by,
142, 208, 210 320-335
Moon’s reflection & soul’s covering, analogy mystery of Krsna’s “birth” unknown to,
of, 74 345
Mrtyu defined, 252 in parental love of Krsna, 111
Mrtyuh sarva-haras caham protected Krsna, 337
quoted, 72, 107, 279 residence of , 126, 264-265, 324, 336
Mrtyu-sarisara defined, 165 taxes to 1697088 paid by, 336-337
Mrtyu-sarisara-vartmani as vaiSya, 338
quoted, 35, 168, 252 Vasudeva advised, to return to Gokula,
Maghas defined, 166 346, 347 .
Mukti. See: Liberation Vasudeva cheated, for Krsna’s sake,
Mumuksu defined, 104, 105 271
Music at Krgna’s “birth” festival, 323-324, as Vasudeva’s ‘“‘brother,” 337, 338
331 as Vasudeva’s friend, 271, 272
Mustika, 119 Vasudeva’s Mathura meeting with,
Mysticism. See: Krsna consciousness; 337-347
Yoga Nandotsava (Nanda Maharaja’s “birth”
Mystics. See: Devotees; Yogis festival for Krsna), 320-335


--- Page 395 ---
General Index 397
Narada Muni, 36 Nature, material
chants Lord’s name, 105 See also: Body, material; Elements, ma-
cited on devotees & nondevotees, 191 terial; Maya; Modes of material
devotees made by, 154 nature
Kamsa’s death-warning from, 95, 97, Navadvipa-dhama, 54-55
114 Nikhilasv apy avasthasu
at Lord’s advent, 154, 158 quoted, 190
Narada-muni, bajaya ving, radhika-ramana- verse quoted, 294-295
name Nindasi yajiia-vidher ahaha sruti-jatari
quoted, 154 verse quoted, 23
Narada-paiicaratra, cited on Lord’s potency, Nirakara defined, 33, 74
110 Nirvana. See: Liberation
Narakisura, 119 Nigadhas, 121
Naraki defined, 267 Niskificanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya
Narakrti defined, 32 quoted, 258
Narayana, Lord, 19, 333-334 Nitya-lila defined, 48
See also: Supreme Lord; Visnu, Lord Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam
Narayanah paro "vyaktat quoted, 156-157
quoted, 183 Nivrtta-tarsaih defined, 103
Narayana-parah sarve Nivrtta-trsna defined, 22-23, 103
quoted, 190 Nondevotees
Narottama dasa Thakura, quotations from devotee contrasted to, 152-153, 165, 176,
on Caitanya delivering fallen souls, 257 188,191, 263
on sense enjoyment as poison, 24 falldown of, 173, 174
on serving Lord’s devotees, 104, 172 hearing from, forbidden, 191-192
on Vrajabhiimi & Gauda-mandala-bhimi, as jaundiced, 188
54 Krsna consciousness misunderstood by, 35
Na sadhu manye yata atmano yam Krsna’s advent benefits, 187
quoted, 76, 149 liberation not achieved by, 173
Nasayamy atma-bhavastho Lord as death to, 107
verse quoted, 124 Lord not known by, 184, 186, 188, 189,
Na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate 263, 264
quoted, 226 nature’s laws control, 316
verse quoted, 159, 226 See also: Atheists; Demons; Imper-
Na te viduh svartha-gatiri hi visnum sonalists; Karmis; Materialists
quoted, 174, 311, 334 Nrsimhadeva, Lord, 107, 157, 230
Nato natya-dharo yatha Ninari pramattah kurute vikarma
quoted, 94 quoted, 318
Nature, material
body awarded by, 64-65, 72, 279
Durga controls, 291 0
living entities under, 291, 300
Lord controls, 181, 238-240 Ocean
nondevotees under, 316 of birth & death. See: Birth and death, re-
population curbed by, 279 peated


--- Page 396 ---
398 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Ocean (continued) Pararh bhavam ajananto
Causal, Mahi-Vignu lies on, 217, 221 verse quoted, 250
Indian, gave way to Lord Rama, 270 Parari brahma parari dhdma
of milk, demigods prayed to Visnu at, 43, quoted, 236
108 verse quoted, 44
Ocean and material world, analogy of, 168, Paramesvara defined, 43
169,170-171, 172 Pararih padam defined, 28
Old age, female children begotten in, 340 Parampara defined, 21
Ori as Vedic confirmation, 136 Parasya saktir vividhaiva Sriyate
Omen of Karmsa’s doom, 59, 60 quoted, 51, 234, 266, 267
Orih namo bhagavate vasudevdya verse quoted, 159, 226
quoted, 156 Paravareso mahad-arisa-yukto
Orir tad visnoh paramari padam quoted, 138
quoted, 234, 315 Parents, child not ultimately protected by, 157
Oneness & difference of Lord & creation (acin- See also: Father; Marriage
tya-bhedabheda philosophy), 128, 236 Pariksit Maharaja
Opulence(s) fasted before death, 34
of agriculturalist in past, 326 greatness of, 36-38
of devotee, 178 Krsna saved, 28, 29
of Lord, 141, 177-178 liberation of, 105, 107, 168
love for Lord in, 247 quoted on disappearance of Krsna & Yadu
of Nanda’s residence, 336 dynasty, 266
Orders, social. See: Brahmanas; Ksatriyas; Paritranaya sadhinari
Society, human, occupational divisions quoted, 42, 93, 147, 167, 230
in; Vaisyas verse quoted, 95, 120
Oversoul. See: Supersoul Passion, mode of (rajo-guna)
for creation of cosmos, 227-228
destiny in, 72
P irresponsible persons in, 318
Pastimes of Krsna. See: Krsna, Lord, pastimes
Pada-ratnavali-tika, cited on Mayadevi’s of
names, 134 Pasu-ghna defined, 23, 24, 103, 105-106
Padma Purana, quotations from Patita-pavana-hetu tava avatara
on dcdrya-sampraddya, 172 quoted, 257
on hearing from nondevotees as forbidden, Paurusari dhama defined, 140
22,191 Payo-dana-mukhendapi
on Krsna and His name, 47 verse quoted, 109
on Lord known by devotional service, Perfection
185-186 by chanting Hare Krsna, 257
on suras & asuras, 304 by devotional service, 29, 174
Pain. See: Suffering by Krsna consciousness, 68, 138
Paiicilas, 121 See also: Success
Pandavas, Krgna saved, 27-28, 29 Persons. See: Animals; Human beings; Living
Parama-purusa defined, 43 entities; Soul, conditioned; Supreme
Paramatma. See: Supersoul Lord


--- Page 397 ---
General Index 399
Philosophers, Lord’s incarnation denied by, Prajapatis, 53
195 Prakrta-$isu defined, 266
See also: Impersonalists; Janis Prakrteh kriyamanani
Philosophy, acintya-bhedabheda (oneness- quoted, 168, 277, 291
and-difference), 128, 236 verse quoted, 51-52
See also: Absolute Truth; Knowledge, Prakrti defined, 239
transcendental See also: Nature, material
Planets. See: Astrology; Earth planet; Pralamba, 119
Heavenly planets; Universe (6) Prapya punya-krtar lokan
Pleasure. See: Bliss, transcendental; Enjoy- verse quoted, 94
ment, material; Happiness Prayers
Politician (৪) by demigods for Krsna, 154-197
animalistic, 180 on body, 161-162
Bhagavad-gita misinterpreted by, 264 on devotees, 176, 190
cited on Krsna consciousness movement, on Lord & living entities, 194-195
146 on Lord as cause of cosmos, 164
compared to watchdogs, 277, 279 on Lord as Supreme Truth, 156
as demoniac rulers, 230 on Lord’s incarnations, 167, 179, 197
Devaki as, 281 ॥ on Lord’s lotus feet as transcendental
falldown of, 174 shelter, 168, 170-171, 193
hearing from, forbidden, 191 on Lord’s transcendental nature, 181,
Karnsa better than, 292 185
in maya, 277 on nondevotees, 173
methods of, three listed, 281 by Devaki for Krsna, 233-247
“‘protect” world, 277, 279 on Lord as cause of all causes, 234
woman as, 281 on Lord as death’s dispeller, 240
See also: Kings; Ksatriyas; Leaders, on Lord as time’s controller, 238-239
government on Lord at cosmic annihilation, 237
Population on Lord’s transcendental form, 243,
““cats-and-dogs,” 252, 253 245-247
nature curbs, 279 by Vasudeva for Krsna, 214-231
Potency of the Lord. See: Supreme Lord, on body & soul, 223
potency of on 1497082, 231
Potter’s wheel and cosmos, analogy of, on Lord & the creation, 216, 219-220,
239-240 226
Power on Lord as protector, 229
of devotional service, 168 on Lord as Supreme Person, 215
from the Lord, 140 on Lord’s forms, 227
Pradyumna, 108 See also: Worship
Prahlada Maharaja Preaching of Krsna consciousness
Nrsimmhadeva and, 107, 230 direction for, 315
quoted on protection & Lord’s sanction, by devotees, 22-23
157 See also: Krsna consciousness movement,
Prahlado janako bhismo literature distribution by; Supreme
verse quoted, 169 Lord, glorification of


--- Page 398 ---
400 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Prema defined, 247, 248 Purusarh sasvatari divyam
Premaiijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena verse quoted, 44
quoted, 165, 175, 188, 220 Purusa-sikta mantra, 43, 108
verse quoted, 187, 247 Piitana, 107,119
Priests, Vedic. See: Brahmanas
Priya defined, 109
Promise of Vasudeva to Karmsa, 82, 85, 88, Q
89
Protection 313, 325, 326, 342 च ৷ of Godhead (catur-
of father for child, 252 वि as Baladeva’s expansions, 19
by Lord. See: Supreme Lord, protection by as Krsna’s expansions, 108
by Nanda for Krsna, 337 second, Sainkarsana (Ananta) among, 30,
by politicians useless, 277, 279 122, 123
by Sesa-naga for Vasudeva & Krsna, 269 Qualities, material. See: Modes of material
by Vasudeva for Krsna, 271 व
Providence. See: Destiny; Karma
Préni, Devaki was, 249, 251, 253-253, 256,
257-260, 261, 262 R
Prthag-drstih sa vijiieyo
verse quoted, 302 Radha krsna-pranaya-vikrtir hladini-saktir
Puman defined, 105 quoted, 110
Punah punas carvita-carvananam Radharani and Krsna, 109, 248, 336
quoted, 35 Rain at Krgna’s advent, 269, 270
Puranas, nondevotees misunderstand, 189 Rajarsi defined, 38
Pure devotee(s) of the Supreme Lord Rajo-guna. See: Passion, mode of
body of, spiritualized, 103 Raksasas (man-eaters), present society pro-
chant Lord’s holy name, 105 ducing, 289
duality doesn’t disturb, 91 See also: Demons
hearing from, 191-192 Rakta color, 227-228
love the Lord, 247, 273 Riamacandra, Lord
material existence frightens, 124, 128, 129 Balarama nondifferent from, 135
as transcendental, 128, 187 color of, 107
truth known to, 128 Indian Ocean gave way to, 270
See also: Acaryas; Devotees; Mahajanas; Ravana killed by, 158
Spiritual master; names of specific in sun dynasty, 17
pure devotees Ramadi-martisu kala-niyamena tisthan
Purification quoted, 141, 182
by chanting Hare Krsna, 254, 256-257 verse quoted, 46-47
of devotee by Lord, 165 Ramanujacarya, cited on Baladeva, 109
by Ganges, 39 Ramayana, quoted on surrender to the Lord,
by Krsna consciousness, 68, 73 157
by krsna-katha, 39 Ramya kacid upasana
Vedic processes for, 323 quoted, 329-330
Purnah suddho nitya-mukto Rasa (relationship with Krsna)
verse quoted, 47 chanting Hare Krsna evokes, 257


--- Page 399 ---
General Index 401
Rasa (relationship with Krsna) Rukmini, Lord advented for, 109
madhurya- (conjugal), 248 Ripa Gosvami
stages of, 52, 247 cited on devotees, 187, 189
See also: Supreme Lord, love for as devotee-author, 171
Rasa (taste), 161n happiness of, 153
Rati defined, 248 quoted on Caitanya Mahaprabhu, 256
Ravana, Rimacandra killed, 158 quoted on devotional service, 152
Reaction. See: Karma; Sinful activities quoted on liberated soul, 190, 294-295
Reality, Lord as, 224 quoted on seeking shelter of spiritual
See also: Absolute Truth; Spiritual world master, 192
Regulative principles
of Krsna consciousness movement,
171-172 S
transcendence via, 182
See also: Religious principles Sac-chadba uttamari briyad
Reincarnation. See: Birth and death, repeated; verse quoted, 160
Transmigration Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha defined, 32
Religion Sacrifices
Lord upholds, 331 brahmanas & cows required for, 312
as surrender to the Lord, 102-103 for Lord’s sake, 179
See also: Devotional service See also: Ritualistic ceremonies; Worship
Religious principles Sad-garbhas. See: Kalanemi, sons of ; Marici,
for God-centered society, 311 sons of
procreation according to, 251-253 Sad-gosvamy-astaka, quoted on the Gosvamis’
See also: Regulative principles; Vedic in- renunciation, 153
junction Sadhus. See: Acaryas; Devotees; Pure devo-
Rg Veda, quoted on Visnu, 234 tees; Sages; Saintly persons; Spiritual
Ritualistic ceremonies master
animal killing in, 23-24 ‘Sadhu-sanga,’ ‘sadhu-sanga’——sarva-sdstre
at Krsna’s “birth,” 320-335 kaya
Lord’s advent restored, 204, 205-206 verse quoted, 316
name-giving, 88 Sadhu-sastra, guru-vakya
Vasudeva mentally performed, at Lord’s quoted, 191
“birth,” 213 Sages
See also: Sacrifices came as cows to please Lord, 109
Rivers at Krgna’s advent, 204, 205, 206 See also: Acaryas; Brahmanas; Devotees;
Rohini Pure devotees; Spiritual master
as Balarama’s mother, 30, 127, 335, 343 Sa gundn samatityaitan
at Krsna’s “birth” festival, 335 verse quoted, 69, 248
as Vasudeva’s wife, 335 Sahasra-yuga-paryantam
Yogamaya transferred Balarama from quoted, 241, 256
Devaki to, 137 Saintly persons, Karhsa’s demons persecuted,
Rohini star, 204, 205 317
Rsabhadeva, quoted on body and suffering, 76 See also: Acaryas; Brahmanas; Devotees;
Rsayo ’pi tad-adesat Pure devotees; Spiritual master
verse quoted, 109 Sakhya defined, 168


--- Page 400 ---
402 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Sakrd eva prapanno yas Sarkha-cakra-gada-padma
_ versequoted, 157 quoted, 193
Saktas defined, 133, 287 Sarikirtana. See: Chanting the Supreme Lord’s
Salva, 111,120 holy names; Hare Krsna mantra;
Salvas, 121 Preaching of Krsna consciousness;
Salvation. See: Liberation , Supreme Lord, glorification of
Sama defined, 112 Sarat season, 206
Samadhi (trance) Sarira-bandha defined, 149
of Brahma hearing the Lord, 45 Sarva-devamayo guruh
of devotee seeing Lord in heart, 169 quoted, 87
distributing Krsna literature as, 192 Sarva-dharman parityajya
Lord teaches, 179 quoted, 102, 132, 157
Samah sarvesu bhitesu Sarva-karana-karanam
verse quoted, 75, 175-176 quoted, 235, 301
Samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavar Sarva-loka-mahesvaram
verse quoted, 28, 169 quoted, 331
Samatvam defined, 90 Sarvari khalv ida brahma
Sambhavamy atma-mayaya quoted, 128, 165, 224, 236
quoted, 29, 265 Sarvasya cahari hrdi sannivisto
Samika Muni and Pariksit Maharaja, 34 quoted, 124
Sampradaya-vihina ye verse quoted, 25
quoted, 172 Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktarn
Sarnsara. See: Birth and death, repeated; i quoted, 73,103
Transmigration Sastras (Vedic scriptures). See: Vedas; Vedic
Sariskaras defined, 88 knowledge; names of specific Vedic
Sanatana-dharma defined, 311 literatures
Sanatana Gosvami, as cited or quoted Satatari kirtayanto mar
on dharma-silasya, 102 quoted, 232
on hearing from nondevotees as forbidden, verse quoted, 191
22,191 Sattva-guna. See: Goodness, mode of
on Krsna’s advent, 102 Satyarh jianam anantam yad
on Lord as Kesava, 108 quoted, 235
on Lord assuming colors, 228 Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh
on maha-ratha & atiratha soldiers, 106 quoted, 69, 72,101
on Narada & co. at Lord’s advent, 154-155 Sa vai purisari paro dharmo
on Sarasena, 111 verse quoted, 294
on Vasudeva’s consciousness at Lord’s ad- Scholars, academic
vent, 139 dcaryas ignored by, 184
Sarikalpa & vikalpa defined, 68-69 Bhagavad-gita misinterpreted by, 264
| quoted on Narayana (Krsna) as hearing from, forbidden, 191
beyond manifested cosmos, 183 Krsna misunderstood by, 184, 186
Sankarsana, Lord See: Janis; Philosophers; Scientists, ma-
as Ananta (Sesa), 123,127 terial
as Balarama (Baladeva), 30, 50, 109, 130, Scientists, material
134,137 life misunderstood by, 152-153, 223
as Narayana’s expansion, 19 material analysis by, 162, 163


--- Page 401 ---
General Index 403
Scientists, material Sinful activities
moon not visited by, 242 bad body by, 65, 77
Self. See: Soul . bodily concept causes, 149, 150
Self-realization condemned, 63
bodily concept from lack of, 297, 300 four listed, 171
as spiritual awakening, 137-138 Krsna consciousness stops, 95-96
See also: Devotional service; God con- Vasudeva warned [97188 about, 62, 65, 76,
sciousness; Krsna consciousness; 77
Meditation; Yoga Siva, Lord
Self-realized souls. See: yp Pure devo- as annihilator, 42, 228, 229
tees; Spiritual master as authority, 169
Senayor ubhayor madhye chants Lord’s holy name, 154
quoted, 87 color of, 228
Sense control for producing progeny, 251 Lord above, 164, 165
See also: Meditation; Samadhi; Yoga at Lord’s advent, 154, 158
Sense gratification Snake, cruel person worse than, 282
Bhagavad-gita misused for, 264 Society, human
demon can kill for, 231, 280 animalistic, 179, 180
hellish result of, 149 in chaos, 311-312
krsna-katha precluded by, 22, 24, 25 fallen condition of, 146
See also: Attachment; Bodily concept; godly vs. godless, 313-314
Desire, material; Enjoyment, ma- occupational divisions of, 41, 179
terial; Sex life in Western countries, 328
Sense perception, Lord as beyond, 220, 221, See also: Civilization, modern; Vedic
228, 229 culture
Senses in Krgna’s service, 69, 73 Soma-varsa. See: Yadu dynasty
See also: Body, material; Mind Soul
Servants of God. See: Devotees body based on, 223
Service body contrasted to, 292, 293
to devotees, 103-104 changes bodies, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68-70,
material vs. spiritual, 68 71, 72, 74, 75, 76, 317-318
See also: Devotional service consciousness symptomizes, 68
Sesa-naga. See: Ananta as Lord’s energy, 224
Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau Supersoul contrasted to, 163
quoted, 185-186, 257 See also: Life force; Living entities; Soul,
verse quoted, 185-186 conditioned; Transmigration
Sex life Soul, conditioned
material desire for, 259 compared to reflected luminary, 74
spiritual principles for, 251-252 desires bind, 65
See also: Desire, material; Sense gratifica- liberation of, 51, 52
tion Lord’s abodes benefit, 55
Siddhas, 207, 285-286 Lord’s favor to, 29
Siksdstaka, quoted on desiring devotional ser- mahamadya bewilders, 51, 110
vice, 190-191, 258 See also: Animals; Human beings; Living
Sinful activities entities; Soul
animal slaughter among, 150, 342 Soul, liberated, devotee as, 110, 190, 191, 295


--- Page 402 ---
404. Srimad-Bhagavatam
Soul, liberated (continued) Sravanam naiva kartavyam
See also: Acaryas; Pure devotees; Spiritual _ verse quoted, 22, 191-192
master Sreyah-srtirh bhaktim udasya te vibho
Sound, transcendental quoted, 174
to Brahma from Visnu, 45 Sridhara Svami, cited
glorifying the Lord as, 104 on Bhagavan Krsna, 102
Hare Krsna as, 47 „ on Lord’s appearance within Vasudeva, 139
See also: Hare Krsna mantra; Krsna, Lord, Sri gauda-mandala-bhami, 2680৫ jane cin-
name of; Supreme Lord, names of tamani
Speculation, mental, Lord not known by, „ quoted, 54
182-184, 185 Srimad-Bhagavatam
See also: Mind; Philosophers; Scholars, See also: Srimad-Bhagavatam, cited;
academic Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations
Spirit. See: Body, spiritual; Brahman (imper- from
sonal Absolute); Life force; Soul; Spiri- additional verses in, 109, 113-115
tual world; Supreme Lord nondevotees misunderstand, 189
Spiritual life recitation of, bogus & bona fide, 21-23, 25
animal hunters ineligible for, 105-106 relieves suffering, 36, 37
sex desire unwanted in, 259 Tenth Canto of, summarized, 1-12, 15, 31
suffering absent in, 294 Vyasa compiled, 36, 37
See also: Devotional service; God con- Srimad-Bhagavatam, cited
sciousness; Krsna consciousness; on cows during Yudhisthira’s reign, 325
Self-realization; Yoga on Krsna’s disappearance, 266
Spiritual master on Lord in heart, 209
body of, spiritual, 295 on modern society, 179
bogus vs. bona fide, 192 _ on pure devotee’s pleasure, 105
compared to Ganges, 294-295 Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from
God & demigods explained by, 87 on Absolute Truth, 235
hearing from, 191-192 on Bhagavan Krsna, 229
initiation via, 142 on bodily concept, 149
krsna-katha spoken by, 25 on body and suffering, 76
as necessary, 39 on Brahmi and the Lord, 45
truth via, 218 on destiny, 281
See also: Acaryas; Pure devotees on devotee as transcendental, 190
Spiritual world (Vaikuntha) on devotee’s distress as Lord’s mercy, 165,
fear in, 248 301
Lord’s opulence admired in, 247 on devotee’s goodness, 86
material world vs. 17, 287 on dharma of devotional service, 294
‘yogamdayd manages, 110, 111 on father’s responsibility, 252
চন See also: Vrndiavana on fear, 124
Sraddhavan bhajate yo mam on following great devotees, 169
verse quoted, 68, 125 on impersonalist’s labor, 174
Sravanarih kirtanam visnoh on Krsna as Supreme Truth, 156
quoted, 168, 191 on Krgna’s pastimes, 16-17, 94
verse quoted, 128 on liberation by krsna-katha, 20


--- Page 403 ---
General Index 405
Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from Suffering
on Lord as shelter, 28 Lord diminishes, 46, 47
on Lord known by His mercy, 181 in material world, 34, 251
on Lord’s abode, 140 of public under demoniac politicians, 230
on Lord’s “birth,” 138 sins cause, 65, 77
on Lord’s lotus feet as boat across material in spiritual life absent, 294
ocean, 169 of Vasudeva, 344
on materialists, 34-35, 72, 132, 334 Sukadeva Gosvami
on perfection of life, 174 cited on paurusam dhama, 140
on sense gratification as hellish, 149 greatness of , 36-38
on spiritual master, 39, 87 liberation of , 168
on Srimad-Bhagavatam, 37 Sukadeva Gosvami, quotations from
on worshiping devotees, 334 on 13788, 79, 119, 315-316
on yogis meditating on Lord, 142, 169 on Krsna, Vasudeva & Devaki, 265
Srivatsa mark, 211 on Krsna’s activities, 16-17
Sri-visnoh sravane pariksid abhavad on Nanda Maharaja, 336-337
vaiyasakih kirtane Sukla color, 227, 228
quoted, 168 Sukle raktas tatha pitah
Srotavyadini rajendra quoted, 228
verse quoted, 132 Sun
Stars at Krgna’s advent, 204, 205 ksatriya family from, 17
See also: Heavenly planets; Universe(s) Lord compared to, 209-210
Subhadra, 87 time controls, 239
Subtle body, transmigration via, 66 Sunshine & Lord’s energy, analogy of, 222
See also: Bodily concept; Mind Supersoul (Paramatma)
Success in all bodies, 163
via Bhagavad-gita as it is, 264 changeless, 293
political methods for, 281 Lord as, 28, 29, 123, 124, 209, 220
three principles for, 159 soul contrasted to, 163
_ See also: Perfection Supreme Brahman. See: Brahman, Supreme;
Sucinari srimatar gehe Supreme Lord
quoted, 48, 125, 177 Supreme Lord
„ verse quoted, 94 See also: Supreme Lord, quotations from
Suddha-sattva (pure goodness) abode of. See: Dhama; Dvaraka; Nanda
devotional service as, 65 Maharaja, residence of ; Navadvipa;
Lord as, 183 Vrndavana
Suffering as Absolute Truth, 156
bodily concept causes, 294, 297 activities of
body causes, 76, 77, 149-150 liberation by hearing, 20-23, 25
chanting Lord’s names cures, 104 pleasing & purifying, 104
of devotee as Lord’s mercy, 165, 301-302 See also: Krsna, Lord, pastimes of
impersonal realization as, 75 as acyuta, 76
in India, 325, 326 advent of
krsna-katha relieves, 36, 37, 38 Brahma advised demigods about, 45,
of living entities, 194-195, 196 46, 48-50


--- Page 404 ---
406 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Supreme Lord (continued) Supreme Lord
advent of body of
in Brahma’s day, 331 beauty of, 183-184, 187-188
compared to awakening Krsna con- color of, 187-188, 211, 212, 227, 228
sciousness, 128-129 eternal, 266
demigods greeted, 154, 155, 158, 207, eyes of, 169, 175
208 transcendental, 181
demons deride, 45 wonderful, 211, 212,213
for devotee’s deliverance & demon’s See also: Krsna, Lord, body of
demise, 93, 95, 193, 158, 230 Brahma excelled by, 154, 164, 165, 208
devotees with Karisa awaited, 122, 123 Brahma heard, in trance, 45
as eternal, 249-250 brahmanas protected by, 313
eternal life by knowing, 250 as Brahman’s basis, 222, 235, 236
His integrated parts accompany, 130 as cause of all causes, 234, 301
in human form, 266 changeless, 226
by internal energy, 29 compared to sun, 209-210
as ksatriya, 17 cows protected by, 313
living entity’s birth vs., 194-195, 196, as creator, maintainer, annihilator, 164,
205, 210, 212 226, 227, 228
Lord’s form established by, 182-184 as death personified, 107, 279
in Mathura, 55 demigods under, 43, 87, 164-166
Narada eager for, 114 demons killed by, 95, 228, 229, 230, 245
purpose of, 16, 17, 120, 187, 230 devotees of. See: Devotees
for Radharani & Rukmini, 109 devotional service reveals, 128, 176, 182,
for religions revival & irreligion’s 184, 185, 186, 189, 220, 248
removal, 40, 41, 146, 195, 331 Dhruva blessed by, 174-175
as transcendental, 180, 205, 209, 210, energy of
250 inconceivable, 266
in Yadu dynasty, 17 material & spiritual, 133, 221, 222,
See also: Incarnations; Krsna, Lord, 265-267
“birth” of superior & inferior, 162-163, 221, 224
all-good, 103 worshipers of, 287
all-pervading, 217, 218, 220, 221, 222, See also: Supreme Lord, potency of
235, 236 as eternal, 111
anger of, 228-229 expansions of
at annihilation of cosmos, 237, 244, accompany Him, 141
246-247 Sega-naga, 269
atheists ignore, 279 two types of, 87
as beyond See also: Krsna, Lord, expansions of;
imagination, 182, 183, 185 Quadruple expansions
manifested cosmos, 183 fear of death dispelled by, 240, 241, 242
modes of nature, 181, 182-184, 216, form(s) of
220, 222, 226, 227, 228, 229 for creation, maintenance & annihila-
sense perception, 220, 221, 228, 229 tion, 227, 228-229
Bhagavad-gita spoken by, 264 devotee enchanted by, 169, 175
birthless, 205, 210 devotional service reveals, 184


--- Page 405 ---
General Index 407
Supreme Lord Supreme Lord
form(s) of living entities supervised by, 293
as eternal, 236 lotus feet of
four-armed, 244, 245, 246 compared to boat, 168, 169, 172
impersonalists misunderstand, 183, marks on, 193
184, 186 as sole shelter, 168, 169, 196
living entity’s form vs., 74-76 love for
as transcendental, 181, 182-184, 185, Caitanya bestows, 256, 257
186-189, 227, 236 in devotees, 187-189, 273
universal, 279 in Dvaraka & Mathura, 247
See also: Deity form; Incarnations; in Krsna form, 256
Krsna, Lord, body of; Supreme liberation by, 175
Lord, body of Lord seen by, 220-221
glorification of material desires dispelled by, 258
benefits everyone, 105 stages of, 247, 248
misery cured by, 104 in Vasudeva & Devaki, 257-258
by Narada Muni, 154 in Vrndavana, 247, 248
by serving His devotees, 103-104 See also: Rasa (relationship with
See also: Chanting the Supreme Lord’s Krsna)
holy names; Preaching of Krsna as Madhava, 176, 177
consciousness as Madhusiidana, 245
as greater than all, 44 material elements from, 162, 163
happiness by pleasing, 334 maya controlled by, 51, 106-107
hearing about as maya-manusya, 106-108
bogus & bona fide, 22-25 meditation on, 168, 169, 243
devotees relish, 105 mercy of
liberation by, 20-23, 25, 105 demons neglect, 45
pleases everyone, 104 on devotee, 165, 170-171, 193
from pure devotees, 191-192 Lord known by, 182
See also: Krsna-katha as mukunda, 108
in heart of all, 25, 124, 209, 210 names of
in human role, 263, 265, 266 Lord’s activities determine, 183-184,
incarnations of. See: Incarnations 188
independent, 195, 197 as transcendental, 185, 186-189
as kala, 279 See also: Chanting the Supreme Lord’s
as Kesava, 108 holy names; Hare Krsna mantra;
knowledge from, 25 Krsna, Lord, name of
Krsna as, 22, 44, 87, 182-184, 198, as Nanda-nandana, 184
261-262, 331 nature controlled by, 181, 238-240
liberation given by, 29, 107-108, 184, 189 nondevotees can’t understand, 184, 186,
living entities as parts & parcels of, 188, 189, 263, 264
152-153, 194-195, 196 as oldest & youngest, 182
living entities as servants of, 73-75 as one without second, 164, 165
living entities contrasted to, 74-76, opulences of, 141, 177-178
194-195, 196, 205, 210, 212, potency of
265-266 as inconceivable, 210


--- Page 406 ---
408 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Supreme Lord (continued) Supreme Lord
potency of as Upendra, 261
Lord acts via, 159, 226 as Vamana, 261, 262
material & spiritual aspects of, 50-52, as Vasudeva, 39, 184
106-107, 109-111 as Vidvatma, 123, 124, 125, 138
pleasure, 194, 195, 329 vow of, on His advent, 155n, 156, 158
See also: Maya; Supreme Lord, energy as vrsakapi, 108
of; Yogamaya potency weapons of, 211
power from, 140 as within & without, 127-128, 217, 218,
present everywhere, 111-112, 130, 155n, 220, 221, 222
200, 209, 210, 217, 218, 220, 221, Yogamaya’s orders from, 126, 127, 129,
222 130, 131, 133, 135-136
protection by See also: Absolute Truth; Krsna, Lord;
for cows & brahmanas, 313 Supersoul; Visnu, Lord
via demigods, 42 Supreme Lord, quotations from
for devotees, 123, 124, 167,176-177, on demigod worship, 165-166, 235
178, 243, 301-302 on devotee never perishing, 159-160
via incarnations, 197 on devotional service as highest yoga, 68,
as safest shelter, 28, 157, 158 125
for surrendered souls, 157, 159-160, on faithless persons falling to birth &
277 death, 173
for world public, 229, 230 on God & demigods, 87
as Prénigarbha, 260, 262 on Godhead, returning to, 48
punishes the envious, 313-314 on knowing Lord’s advent & activities, 98,
qualities of, 104-105 189, 250
relationship with. See: Rasa (relationship on Lord as death personified, 107
with Krsna) on Lord as knower in all bodies, 163
remembrance of, at death, 29 on Lord as within & without, 127-128, 220
as sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, 74, 209 on Lord delivering devotees & destroying
sacrifice for satisfying, 179 demons, 42, 93, 95
as seen by love, 220-221 on Lord enlightening devotees, 107, 124
as Sesa-naga, 237 on Lord hiding from nondevotee’s vision,
Siva under, 164, 165 184
as substantial reality, 224 on Lord in heart, 25
suffering diminished by, 46, 47 on Lord known by devotional service, 128,
as Supersoul, 28, 29, 123, 124, 209, 220 186
surrender to on Lord maintaining devotees, 159
as duty, 166 on Lord pervading universe, 129-130
as liberation, 75, 103 on Lord protecting devotees, 177, 243
material enjoyment vs., 132 on Lord reviving religion & removing ir-
as protection, 157, 159-160, 277 religion, 40, 145-146, 195, 331
as real religion, 102-103 on Lord’s inferior & superior energies,
as Syamasundara, 183, 187, 188, 247 162-163, 224
time controlled by, 238, 239, 240 on Lord’s material energies, 216
universe pervaded by, 130 on Lord’s protection, 28


--- Page 407 ---
General Index 409
Supreme Lord, quotations from T
on loving the Lord, 175 Tad aiksata bahu syam
on previous births of Vasudeva, Devaki & quoted, 87
the Lord, 249-262 Tad viddhi pranipatena
on remembrance, knowledge & forgetful- verse quoted, 218
ness, 69 Tal labhyate duhkhavad anyatah sukhari
on sinful people cast into demoniac species, verse quoted, 281
150, 228 Tamo-guna. See: Ignorance, mode of
on surrendering to Him, 75, 157 Tari tam evaiti kaunteya
on thinking of Him always, 263 verse quoted, 69
on tolerance amid happiness & distress, Tan aharh dvisatah kriran
90-91 verse quoted, 150, 228
on transcendence & devotional service, Tarndera carana sevi bhakta sane vasa
175-176 verse quoted, 172
on vaisyas (agriculturalists), 325 Tanu-mani defined, 150
on worshiping devotees, 334 Tapasya defined, 254
Supreme Personality of Godhead. See: Krsna, See also: Austerities
Lord; Supreme Lord; Vignu, Lord Taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihdiijasestas
Suras defined, 206 quoted, 157
Sirasena, father of Vasudeva, 53, 338 Tasmac chastrarih pramanari te
Strasena, son of Kartaviryarjuna, 111 verse quoted, 136
Sirasena states, 53, 100, 111 Tasmad apariharye 706
Sura-stri defined, 49 verse quoted, 63
Surrender. See: Supreme Lord, surrender to Tasmad gururh prapadyeta
Sirya, 43 quoted, 39
Sarya-vamsa, 17 Tasyaharh nigraharh manye
Sutapa, Vasudeva was, 249, 251, 253, 254, verse quoted, 71
256, 257-259, 261, 262 Tasyah kuksim gatah krsno
Svabhaviki jiana-bala-kriya ca verse quoted, 120
quoted, 159 Tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovido
Sva-karmana tam abhyarcya verse quoted, 281
quoted, 179 Tatha dehdantara-praptih
Svalpam apy asya dharmasya quoted, 67, 70, 124, 279
quoted, 175 verse quoted, 64, 317-318
Svamin krtartho smi varam na yace Tato mar tattvato jiiatva
quoted, 26, 103, 175 verse quoted, 175-176, 186
Svamsa expansions, 87 Tatra $rir vijayo bhitir
Svaripena vyavasthitih verse quoted, 177-178
quoted, 29 Tat-sara-bhitarh yad yasyan
Svayambhir naradah sambhuh verse quoted, 111
quoted, 169, 209 Tat te 'nukamparh susamiksamanah
verse quoted, 169 quoted, 165, 301
$vetadvipa, 43 Tattva-darsi defined, 218
Svetasvatara Upanisad, quoted on Lord’s Teachers, spiritual. See: Acdryas;
potencies, 51, 159, 226, 266 Brahmanas; Spiritual master


--- Page 408 ---
410 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Temple worship. See: Deity form; Worship Tyaktva dehari punar janma
Tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye quoted, 48, 70, 76, 77, 80, 241, 256, 287
quoted, 45 verse quoted, 98, 189, 250
Te ’pi mam eva kaunteya Tyaktva tirnam asesa-mandalapati-srenimn
verse quoted, 165-166, 235 sada tucchavat
Tesam evanukampartham quoted, 153
verse quoted, 124
Tesarih nityabhiyuktanarm
quoted, 178 চা
verse quoted, 159
Tesari satata-yuktanarm Uddhava, 266
he quoted, 107 । King, 56, 100, 243
Universe(s,
on Brahmaloka, 241, 256 annihilation of, 237, 244, 246-247
পপ trolled by, 158, 237, 238, 239, Baladeva (Sesa) sustains, 109, 127
: ~ ০ at Krsna’s advent, 204, 205, 206, 331
on higher planets, 241, 255-256 living entity wanders, 101, 241-242
of Krsna’s “birth,” 204, 205, 206 Lord’s pastimes in, 48
SEI TOURS kal Lord within & without, 127-128, 130
separates everyone, 341 Maha-Visnu breathes, 19, 217, 221
sun controlled by, 239 See also: Creation, the; Heavenly planets;
Traigunya-visayd veda Material world; Spiritual world
नध quoted, ae _ Upadeksyanti te jiianam
Traivargikas x purusa verse quoted, 218
uoted, শা न
Trance. See: Samadhi Upadeso hi murkhanarh
Py রন __ quoted, 282
Transcendentalists. See: Devotees; Janis; Upendra incarnation, 49
Vogts Uragas, 285-286
Transmigration of the soul Urdhvam gacchanti sattva-stha
compared to dreaming, 67, 100-101 verse quoted, 72
compared to fire, 82-83, 102 Utpadya tesu purusah kratubhih samije
Kamsa aware of, 147, 149 verse quoted, 16-17
process of, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68-70, 71, 72, Uttamasloka deBned, 103
74,75,76 "
See also: Birth and death, repeated; Bodily
concept; Body, material Vv
Tree, body compared to, 161-162, 163
Treta-yuga, Lord as Prénigarbha in, 260
Tribhir gunamayair bhavair Vaidirya gem, 211, 212
quoted, 166 Vaikuntha. See: Spiritual world
Tri-guna defined, 51 Vairagya-vidya nija-bhakti-yoga
Trivarga defined, 24 quoted, 73
Trnavarta, 119 Vaignavas. See: Devotees
Truth. See: Absolute Truth Vaisnava-tosani, as cited or quoted
Tyaja durjana-sarisargari on bodily concept of life, 149
verse quoted, 77 on dharma-silasya, 102


--- Page 409 ---
General Index 411
Vaisnava-tosani, as cited or quoted Vasudeva
on Kirtiman, 113 married Devaki, 56-58
on Krsna’s advent, 102, 210 mentally celebrated Lord’s advent, 213
on Lord as Keéava, 108 Nanda advised by, to return to Gokula,
on Lord assuming colors, 228 346, 347
on mahd-ratha & atiratha soldiers, 106 Nanda cheated by, for Krsna’s sake, 271
on Narada & co. at Krgna’s advent, as Nanda’s “brother,” 337, 338
154-155 as Nanda’s friend, 271, 272
on paurusarih dhama, 140 Nanda’s Mathura meeting with, 337-347
on Strasena, 111 prayers for Krgna by. See: Prayers, by
on Vasudeva’s consciousness at Krsna’s ad- Vasudeva for Krsna
vent, 139 as pure devotee, 86, 89-91
Vaisyas (agriculturalists) quoted on bodily concept of life, 300, 301
duties of, 325 quoted on body, death & transmigration,
Nanda among, 338 63, 64, 66,67, 71, 74,77
past & present, 326 as Rohini’s husband, 335
Vallabhacarya, cited on Mayadevi’s names, as Sutapi in past life, 249, 251, 253, 254,
133-134 256, 257-259, 261, 262
Vancha-kalpataru defined, 170 as transcendental, 76, 248
Varahadeva, Lord, 321 unhappiness of, 344
Vara-sarikara defined, 253 Yamuna River gave passage to, 270
Vamasramadcaravata Vasudeva, Lord, 108
quoted, 334 Vasudeva-katha. See: Krsna-katha
Vamasrama-dharma. See: Society, human, Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah
occupational divisions of ; Vedic culture quoted, 180
Vasudeva verse quoted, 25
exchanged Krsna for Yogamaya, 268-272, Vedas, duty to follow, 136
273 See also: Vedic knowledge; names of
feared 9788 would kill Krsna, 231, 232, specific Vedic literatures
233 Vedic culture
fearless from Lord’s advent, 214, 215 duty before death in, 80
greatness of, 61 impunity in, 231
Karhsa advised by, about life & death, marriage in, 57, 58
62-64, 65, 66, 67, 71, 74, 76, 77 name-giving ceremony in, 88
Karnsa dissuaded by, from killing Devaki, procreation in, 251
78, 79, 80, 81-86, 88, 89,112 purification processes in, 323
Karhsa forgiven by, 299-300 Vedic injunction
Karnsa imprisoned, 97 on killing, 62, 147
Karhsa pleased by equanimity of, 90, 91 as Lord’s order, 136
1317083 repented atrocities to, 288-299 on producing progeny, 251
as Kadyapa in past life, 261 on Supreme Brahman, 224
Krsna instructed, at His advent, 264-265 Vedic knowledge
Krsna’s advent beheld by, 211, 213, 214 Bhagavad-gita as essence ०, 69
Lord as son of, 213, 215, 217, 218, 249, Brahma received, in heart, 45
253, 258, 261-262, 264-265, 268 humans need, 163
Lord within, 138, 139 See also: Knowledge, transcendental


--- Page 410 ---
412 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Venurih kvanantam aravinda-dalayataksari Visnu-tattva. See: Supreme Lord; Visnu,
verse quoted, 187-188 Lord; names of specific expansions &
Vibhinnarsa expansions, 87 incarnations
Vidarbhas, 121 Vistabhyaham idari krtsnam
Videhas, 121 verse quoted, 130
Vidyadharis, 207 Visva-kosa dictionary, quoted on garbha, 59,
Vijayadhvaja Tirtha 112
cited on Mayadevi’s names, 134 Visvarh parna-sukhayate vidhi-mahendradis
cited on nivrtta-tarsaih, 103 ca kitayate
cited on paurusarh dhama, 140 quoted, 153
in Madhvacarya-sampradaya, 113 Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, as cited or
Vijiana defined, 182, 183 quoted
Vikalpa & sarikalpa defined, 68-69 on Devaki & Krsna, 247
Vindhyacala, 131 on Karhsa’s watchmen, 277
Viraraghava Acarya, as cited or quoted on Krsna as origin of incarnations, 160
on asuras, 114-115 on Krsna as son of Devaki & Yaéoda, 268
on Lord’s advent via Vasudeva & Devaki, on Krsna as Yasoda’s son, 321
143 on Krsna’s advent & awakening Krsna con-
on nivrtta-tarsaih, 103 sciousness, 128-129
on paurusari dhama, 140 on Krsna’s appearance within Vasudeva,
on sages coming as cows to please Lord, 109 139
on Vasudeva’s consciousness at Lord’s ad- on Krsna’s fullness, 102
vent, 139 on Narada Muni, 114
Visnu, Lord on nondevotees as jaundiced, 188
Brahma heard message of, 45 on om, 136
as demigods’ chief, 43, 311, 314, 315 on paurusari dhama, 140
demigods worshiped, 43, 108 on Prénigarbha in Treta-yuga, 260
expansions of, 124 on Vasudeva protecting child Krsna, 271
Krsna advented as, 208, 209, 211, 212 on Vasudeva’s wonder at Krgna’s advent,
Krsna nondifferent from, 234-236 213
as Krgna’s expansion, 44, 102 on yogamdya & mahamaya, 111
maintains cosmos, 227 Visvaso naiva kartavyah
on milk ocean, 43, 108 quoted, 60
symbols held by, 244 Vow
yogis meditate on, 243 of devotees in Lord’s abodes, 55
See also: Garbhodakasayi Visnu; of Lord Krsna on His advent, 155n, 156,
Ksirodakasayi Visnu; Narayana, 158
Lord; Supersoul; Supreme Lord Vraja. See: Vrndavana
Visnu-aradhana defined, 334 Vrndiavana
Visnu-bhaktah smrto daivah demigods descended to, 93, 94
quoted, 154 Goloka, 49,108,111
verse quoted, 304 Krsna descends to, 331
Visnu-maya. See: Supreme Lord, potency of Krsna’s footprints in, 193
Visnu Purana, cited on Lord’s advent, 210 as Krsna’s transcendental abode, 17, 54, 55
Visnur mahan sa tha yasya kala-viseso Krsna’s transfer to, 31
verse quoted, 19, 217 love for Krsna in, 247, 248, 273


--- Page 411 ---
General Index 413
Vrndavana Worship of the Supreme Lord
Ripa Gosvami in, 153 Durga (Mayadevi) worship vs., 131, 133,
See also: Spiritual world 287
Vrndavanari parityajya in Vedic society, 179
quoted, 54 See also: Deity form; Devotional service;
Vrsni dynasty, 93, 94 Ritualistic ceremonies; Sacrifices
Vrtrasura, 177
Vyasadeva Y
Mahabharata by, 187
Srimad-Bhagavatam by, 36, 37 Yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam
as transcendental, 228 verse quoted, 239
Vyavasayatmika buddhih Yada yada hi dharmasya
verse quoted, 24 verse quoted, 40, 118, 120, 145-146,
155n, 195, 331
Yad gatva na nivartante
w ॥ quoted, 241
Yadubhih sa vyarudhyata
quoted, 120
War, world preparing for, 41 Yadu dynasty (soma-varisa)
See also: Fighting, principles for; Kuru- demigods appeared in, 93, 94
ksetra, Battlefield of 13771888 demons persecuted, 119, 120,
Watchdogs & politicians, analogy of, 277, 279 121
Wealth. See: Opulence Krsna appeared in, 17
Weapons of the Lord, 211 Krsna destroyed, 266
Western countries Mathura capital of, 54
condemned society in, 328 from moon-god, 17
constant chanting impossible in, 171 Siirasena chief of, 53
opponents of Krsna consciousness move- Yajna. See: Ritualistic ceremonies; Sacrifices
ment in, 66, 146, 313-314 Yajia-dana-tapah-karma
‘Women quoted, 179
of heaven in Krsna’s pastimes, 49 Yajnarthat karmano ‘nyatra
killing 0£, condemned, 62, 147 quoted, 179
in politics, 281 Yajiio dana tapas caiva
village vs. modern, 328 quoted, 179
See also: Gopis Yamaraja as punisher, 316
Work. See: Duty; Fruitive activities; Karma; Yarn labdhva caparam labharn
Sacrifices quoted, 175
World. See: Creation, the; Earth planet; Yar syamasundaram acintya-guna-
Heavenly planets; Material world; Uni- svariipari
verse(s) verse quoted, 187, 247
Worship of the Supreme Lord Yamuna River
by demigods at milk ocean, 43, 108 quoted on Rama (Balarama), 109
demigod worship vs., 87-88, 101, Vasudeva given passage by, 270
156-158, 165-166, 235 Yarh yar vapi smaran bhava
by devotees, 159, 182 quoted, 177
devotee worship vs., 333-334 verse quoted, 69


--- Page 412 ---
414 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Ya nisa sarva-bhutanar Yaya sammohito jiva
verse quoted, 137-138 quoted, 51
Yanti deva-vrata devan Ye ‘py anya-devata bhakta
quoted, 101 verse quoted, 165-166, 235
Ya’ra bhagye thake se dekhaye nirantare Yetijiagnari samuddistari
verse quoted, 199 verse quoted, 160
Yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa Yoga
quoted, 20, 192, 264 of bhakti best, 125
verse quoted, 144 defined, 125
Yasmin sthito na duhkhena in Krsna consciousness, 68, 72
quoted, 153 Vasudeva & Devaki practiced, in past life,
Yasmin vijiiate sarvam evar vijiiatarh bhavati 253
quoted, 25, 131 See also: Devotional service; Krsna con-
Yasoda, mother sciousness; Meditation; Samadhi
Devaki contrasted to, 272-273 Yogamaya
as Krgna’s mother, 247, 268, 273, 321 Balarama transferred by, from Devaki to
name of, meaning of, 130 Rohini, 137
as Yogamadya’'s mother, 268, 271 in Durga form, 284, 285, 287, 288
Yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva- 1911088 outwitted by, 284-286, 303-304
karma Karnsa’s watchmen slept due to, 269, 277
verse quoted, 295-296 Krsna blessed, 130
Yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya Krsna’s orders to, 126, 127, 129, 130,
verse quoted, 19, 217 131,133,135-136
Yasydjiiaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakro as Krgna’s sister, 284-285, 321
verse quoted, 239 Vasudeva exchanged Krsna for, 268-272,
Yasyar jagrati bhutani 273
verse quoted, 137-138 as Yadoda’s daughter, 268, 271
Yasya naharikrto bhavo Yogamayam samadisat
verse quoted, 297 quoted, 110
Yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti- Yogamayam updsritah
quoted, 236 quoted, 111
Yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akiiicana Yogamaya potency
quoted, 86, 305 mahamaya vs., 110-111
Yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke nondevotees and, 106-107, 184
quoted, 180 spiritual function of, 51, 52, 110-111, 125
Yato bhaktir adhoksaje Yoga-nidra defined, 138
quoted, 294 Yogi(s)
Yatra nityarh sannihito harih highest, 68, 125
quoted, 111 Krsna’s devotees contrasted to, 142
Yatra yogesvarah krsno meditate on the Lord, 142, 169, 243
verse quoted, 177-178 See also: Devotees
Yavat kriyas tavad idarih mano vai Yoginam api sarvesar
quoted, 149 verse quoted, 68, 125
Yaya sammobhitari jagat Yudhisthira Maharaja, 325
quoted, 110 Yuga, duration of, 241


--- Page 413 ---
. BE ১০ pot £
॥ न"
A নে ol
ष AW XN
५, x ड ২
4 _ ০5
es; < र ` ५
EF 0 2 “x = ,

1১১৮১৬৯৯২৬4 4. (9 ~ SN 1 ह, 0
५, ९५ ¶ (ha ০০৯১ পা ১৬২ RY
६. EQ ৬২, १८ | [५ TR ~
5 Wl op €, (५८ ४4 ২, / [= AN -
BR SS ज [४ ১৬৩৩ ^ +. (A ) AT
ऋ 1 , ^ (@ २ :৬/:& INS 11. তত >>
& gt y Same ২৯৩২ INE dg + \N

/ po 7 EN) ANSE ए AEE

# (+ / ५ #^ ES \ + \

( I ( PJ Had ६ न 2 5. <

< 7 রূহ N १.४
२३) NS rp =

“৯” SN # =

রক ~> ৮১ क Ea টস wR “4
4 ~ ५.
„~ न 4 शि ~ B/S = pe । 5 py x
2 ¢: < श ८ कै = 2 To
~ अक "श a


--- Page 414 ---
What the reviewers say about the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti- `
vedanta Swami Prabhupada:

““It has been my great pleasure recently to have

: read the Srimad-Bhagavatam in the superb edition
authorized by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhu-
pada. I am sure this monumental work will go far to
bring the sublime message of the Bhagavatam to
numerous Westerners who otherwise would miss this
opportunity.’

Dr. Alex Wayman
Professor of Sanskrit
Columbia University

“‘Srimad-Bhagavatam is a valuable source ma-
terial for several categories of readers. With its ex-
haustive plan of providing the original Sanskrit text,
its Roman transliteration, English synonyms,
English translation and elaborate commentary by a
scholar and practitioner of philosophy, it cannot but
be attractive to serious students and scholars of
religion and philosophy. I recommend this series to
anyone as an important and useful reference work.’

Professor C. P. Agrawal
Department of Humanities
University of Michigan

““The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust editions of
famous religious classics of India with new transla-
tions and commentaries are an important addition to
our expanding knowledge of spiritual India. The new
edition of the Srimad-Bhagavatam is particularly
welcome.””

Dr. John L. Mish
Chief, Oriental Division
New York Public Library
^ _ =
:
1
দূরে

