
--- Page 1 ---
CHAPTER SEVEN
Scheduled incarnations
with Specific Functions
TEXT 1
agar
= ~~ =
यत्रो यतः क्षितितलोद्धरणाय विच्रत्‌
न Ne 4
क्रौडीं বস্তু सकरयज्ञमयीमनन्तः |
त ~ => +
अन्तर्महार्णव उषपागतमाददत्य
तं दष्याद्रिमिव वज्रधरो ददार ॥ १॥
brah movaca
yatrodyatah ksiti-taloddharanaya bibhrat
kraudim tanum sakala-yajiia-mayim anantah
antar-maharnava upagatam adi-daityam
tam damstrayadrim iva vajra-dharo dadara
brahma uvaca—Lord Brahma said; yatra—at that time (when); udyatah—
attempted; ksiti-tala—the earthly planet; uddharapaya—for the matter of
lifting; bibhrat—assumed; kraudim— pastimes; tanum—form; sakala— total;
yajita-mayim—all-inclusive sacrifices; anantah—the Unlimited; antar—within
the universe; mahda-arnave—the great Garbha Ocean; upagatam—having
arrived at; adi—the first; daityam—demon; tam—him; daristraya—by the
tusk; adrim—the flying mountains; iva—like; vajra-dharah—the controller
of the thunderbolts; dadara— pierced.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: At the time when the unlimitedly powerful Lord
assumed the form of a boar as a pastime, just to lift up the earthly
planet, which was drowned in the great ocean of the universe called the
Garbhodaka, the first demon [Hiranydksa] appeared, and the Lord
pierced him with His tusk.
337


--- Page 2 ---
338 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
PURPORT

Since the beginning of ereation, the demons and the demigods or the
Vaisnavas are always the two classes of living beings to dominate the
planets of the universes. So Lord Brahma is the first demigod, and
Hiranyaksa is the first demon in this universe. Only under certain con-
ditions do the planets float as weightless balls in the air, and as soon as these
conditions are disturbed, the planets may fall down in the Garbhodaka
Ocean which covers half the universe. The other half is the spherical dome
within which the innumerable planetary systems exist. The floating of the
planets in the weightless air is due to the inner constitution of the globes,
and the modernized drilling of the earth to exploit oil from within is a sort
of disturbance by the modern demons resulting in a greatly harmful
reaction of the floating condition of the earth. A similar disturbance was
created formerly by the demons headed by Hiranyaksa (the great exploiter
of the gold rush), and the earth was detached from its weightless condition
and fell down into the Garbhodaka Ocean. The Lord, as the maintainer of
the whole creation of the material world, therefore assumed the gigantic
form of a boar with a proportionate snout and picked up the earthly
planet from within the water of Garbhodaka. Sri Jayadeva Gosvami, the
great Vaisnava poet, sang as follows:

vasati dasana-sikhare dharani tava lagna
Saini kalanka-kaleva nimagna
kesava dhrta-sitkara-ripa
jaya jagadisa hare.
“O Kesava! O Supreme Lord who has assumed the form of a boar! 0
Lord! The earthly planet rested on Your tusks, and it appeared like the
moon engraved with spots.”

Such is the symptom of an incarnation of the Lord. The incarnation of
the Lord is not the concocted idea of a fanciful class of men who create
an incarnation out of imagination. The incarnation of the Lord appears
under certain extraordinary circumstances like the above-mentioned occa-
sion, and the incarnation performs a task which is not even imaginable by
the tiny brain of mankind. The modern creators of the many cheap incar-
nations may take note of the factual incarnation of God as the gigantic
boar with a suitable snout to carry the earthly planet.

When the Lord appeared to pick up the earthly planet, the demon of
the name Hiranyidksa tried to create a disturbance in the methodical
functions of the Lord, and therefore he was killed by being pierced by the
Lord’s tusk. According to Srila Jiva Gosvami, the demon Hiranyaksa was
killed by the hand of the Lord. Therefore his version is that after being


--- Page 3 ---
Text 2] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 339
Killed by the hand of the Lord, the demon was pierced by the tusk, and
Srila Viévanitha Cakravarti Thakur confirms this version.
TEXT 2
जातो EI सुयमान्‌ सुयज्ञ
आङ्कतिष् नुरमरानय दक्षिणायाम्‌ |
रोकत्रयस्य महतीमहरद्‌ यदार्तिं
सरायम्थुवेन मनुना हरिरित्यनृक्तः॥। २॥
jato rucer ajanayat suyaman suyajna
akuati-sinur amaran atha daksinayam
loka-trayasya mahatim aharad yadartim
svayambhuvena manuna harir ity anitktah
jatah—was born; ruceh—of the wife of Prajapati; ajanayat—gave birth;
suyaman—headed by Suyama; suyajiiah—Suyajiia; @kiti-sinur—of the son
of Akuti;amaran—the demigods; atha—thus; daksinayam—unto the wife of
the name Daksina; loka—the planetary systems; trayasya— of the three;
mahatim—very great; aharat— diminished; yat—all those; artim—distresses;
svayambhuvena—by the Manu named Svayambhuva; manuna—by the
father of mankind; harih—Hari; iti—thus; anitktah—named.
TRANSLATION
The Prajapati first begot Suyajiia, in the womb of his wife Akiiti, and
then Suyajiia begot demigods, headed by Suyama, in the womb of his wife
Daksina. Suyajia, as the Indradeva, diminished very great miseries in the
three planetary systems (upper, lower and intermediate), and because he so
diminished the miseries of the universe, he was later called Hari by the
great father of mankind, namely Svayambhuva Manu.
PURPORT
In order to guard against the invention of unauthorized incarnations of
God by the fanciful less intelligent persons, the name of the father of the
bona fide incarnations is also mentioned in the authorized revealed scrip-
tures. No one, therefore, can be accepted as an incarnation of the Lord if
his father’s name, as well as the name of the village or place in which he
appears, 15 not mentioned by the authorized scriptures. In the Bhagavata-
Purina the name of the Kalki incarnation, which is to take place in almost


--- Page 4 ---
340 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
400,000 years, is mentioned along with the name of His father and the
name of the village in which He will appear. A sane man, therefore, does
not accept any cheap edition of incarnation without reference to the
authorized scriptures.
TEXT 3
[] ~ os
जज्ञे च कदमगृहे द्विज देवहूत्यां
৬ -
स्रीभिः समं नवभिरात्मगतिं aan |
TH ययात्मशमरं गुणसङ्गपङ्क-
मसिन्‌ विधूय कपिलस्य afd 0 ३ ॥
jajiie ca kardama-grhe dvija devahityam
stribhih samam navabhir atmagatim sva-matre
८८९ yayatma-samalam guna-sanga-pankam
asmin vidhiiya kapilasya gatim prapede
jajie—took birth; ca—also; kardama—the Prajapati-named Kardama;
grhe—in the house of; dvija—O brahmana; devahiityam—in the womb of
Devahiti; stribhih—by women; samam—accompanied by; navabhih—by
nine; atma-gatim—spiritual realization; sva-matre—unto His own mother;
ice—ultered; yaya—by which; atma-samalam—coverings of the spirit soul;
guna-sanga—associated with the modes of nature; pankam—mud; asmin—
this very life;vidhitya—being washed off; kapilasya— of Lord Kapila; gatim—
liberation; prapede—achieved.
TRANSLATION
The Lord then appeared as the Kapila incarnation, being the son of the
prajapati brahmana Kardama and his wife Devahuti, along with nine other
women [sisters]. He spoke to His mother about self-realization, by which,
in that very lifetime, she became fully cleansed of the mud of the material
modes and thereby achieved liberation, the path of Kapila.
PURPORT
The instructions of Lord Kapila to His mother Devahiiti are fully
described in the Third Canto (Chapters 25-30) of the Srimad-Bhagavatam,


--- Page 5 ---
Text 3] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 341
and anyone who follows the instructions can achieve the same liberation
obtained by Devahuti. The Lord spoke Bhagavad-gita, and thercby Arjuna
achieved self-realization, and even today anyone who follows the path of
Arjuna can also attain the same benefit as Sri Arjuna. The scriptures are
meant for this purpose. Foolish unintelligent persons make their own
interpretations by imagination and thus mislead their followers, causing
them to remain in the dungeon of material existence. However, simply by
following the instructions imparted by Lord Krsna or Lord Kapila, one can
obtain the highest benefit, even today.

The word dtma-gatim is significant in the sense of perfect knowledge of
the Supreme. One should not be satisfied simply by knowing the qualitative
equality of the Lord and the living being. One should know the Lord as
much as can be known by our limited knowledge. It is impossible for the
Lord to be known perfectly as He is, even by such liberated persons as Siva
or Brahma, so what to speak of other demigods or men in this world. Still,
by following the principles of the great devotees and the instructions
available in the scriptures, one can know to a considerable extent the
features of the Lord. His Lordship Kapila, the incarnation of the Lord,
instructed His mother fully about the personal form of the Lord, and
thereby she realized the personal form of the Lord and was able to achieve
a place in the Vaikunthaloka where Lord Kapila predominates. Every
incarnation of the Lord has His own abode in the spiritual sky. Therefore
Lord Kapila also has His separate Vaikuntha planet. The spiritual sky is not
void. There are innumerable Vaikuntha planets, and in each of them the
Lord, by His innumerable expansions, predominates, and the pure devotees
who are there also live in the same style as the Lord and His eternal
associates.

When the Lord descends personally or by His personal plenary expan-
sions, such incarnations are called 0778৫, kala, guna, yuga, and manvantara
incarnations, and when the Lord’s associates descend by the order of the
Lord, such incarnations are called saktyavesa incarnations. But in all cases
all the incarnations are supported by the invulnerable statements of the
authorized scriptures, and not by any imagination of some self-interested
propagandist. Such incarnations of the Lord, in either of the above
categories, always declare the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be the
ultimate truth. The impersonal conception of the supreme truth is just a
process of negation of the form of the Lord from the mundane conception
of the supreme truth.

The living entities, by their very constitution, are spiritually as good as
the Lord, and the only difference between them is that the Lord is always


--- Page 6 ---
342 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
supreme and pure, without contamination by the modes of material
nature, whereas the living entities are apt to be contaminated by associa-
tion with the material modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. This
contamination by the material modes can be washed off completely by
knowledge, renunciation and devotional service. Devotional service to the
Lord is the ultimate issue, and therefore those who are directly engaged in
the devotional service of the Lord do not only acquire the necessary
knowledge in spiritual science, but also attain detachment from material
connection and are thus promoted to the kingdom of God by complete
liberation, as is stated in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 14.26):

mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena

bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityai "tan
brahma-bhayaya kalpate
Even in the nonliberated stage, a living enlity can be directly engaged in
the transcendental loving service of the Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna
or His plenary expansions Rama, Narasimha, etc. Thus, with the pro-
portionate improvement of such transcendental devotional service, the
devotee makes definite progress in the matter of brahma-gati, or atma-gati,
and ultimately attains kapilasya gati, or the abode of the Lord, without
difficulty. The antiseptic potency of devotional service to the Lord is so
great that it can neutralize the material infection even in the present life
of a devotee. A devotee does not need to wait for his next birth for
complete liberation.
TEXT 4
अत्रेरपत्यमभिकाष्वत॒ आह तष्टो
दन्तो मयाहमिति यद्‌ भगवान्‌ age: |
यत्पाद पङ्कजपरागपवित्रदेहा
योगद्विमापुरुमयीं यदुदेदयादाः | ४ ॥
atrer apatyam abhikanksata aha tusto
datto mayaham iti yad bhagavan sa dattah
yat-pada-pankaja-paraga-pavitra-deha
yogarddhim apur ubhayim yadu-haihayadyah


--- Page 7 ---
Text 4] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 343
atreh—of the sage Atri; apatyam—issue; abhikanksatah—having prayed
for; aha—said it; tustah—being satisfied; dattah—given over; maya—by me;
aham—myself; iti—thus; yat—because; bhagavan—the Personality of God-
head; sah—He; dattah—Dattatreya; yat-pada—one whose feet; pankaja—
lotus; paraga— dust; pavitra—purified; dehah—-body ; yoga—mystic; rddhim—
opulence; apuh—got; ubhayim—for both the worlds; yadu—the father of
the Yadu dynasty; haihaya-adyah—and others, like King Haihaya.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Atri prayed for offspring, and the Lord, being satisfied
with him, promised to incarnate as Atri’s son, Dattatreya [ Datta, the son
of Atri]. And by the grace of the lotus feet of the Lord, many Yadus,
Haihayas, etc., became so purified that they obtained both material and
spiritual blessings.
PURPORT
Transcendental relations between the Personality of Godhead and the
living entities are eternally established in five different affectionate humors,
which are known as santa, dasya, sakhya, viatsalya and madhurya. The
sage Atri was related with the Lord in the affectionate vatsalya humor,
and therefore, as a result of his devotional perfection, he was inclined to
have the Personality of Godhead as his son. The Lord accepted his prayer,
and He gave Himself as the son of Atreya. Such a relation of sonhood
between the Lord and His pure devotees can be cited in many instances.
And because the Lord is unlimited, He has an unlimited number of father-
devotees. Factually the Lord is the father of all living entities, bul out of
transcendental affection and love between the Lord and His devotees, the
Lord takes more pleasure in becoming the son of a devotee than in be-
coming one’s father. The father actually serves the son, whereas the son
only demands all sorts of services from the father; therefore a pure devotee
who is always inclined to serve the Lord wants Him as the son, and not as
the father. The Lord also accepts such service from the devotee, and thus
the devotee becomes more than the Lord. The impersonalists desire to
become one with the Supreme, but the devolee becomes more than the
Lord, surpassing the desire of the greatest monist. Parents and other
relatives of the Lord achieve all mystic opulences automatically because
ot their intimate relationship with the Lord. Such opulences include all


--- Page 8 ---
344 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
details of material enjoyment, salvation and mystic powers. Therefore, Lhe
devotee of the Lord does not scck them separately, wasting his valuable
time in life. The valuable time of one’s life must therefore be fully engaged
in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Then other desirable
achievements are automatically gained. But even afler obtaining such
achievements one should be on guard against the pitfall of offenses at the
feet of the devotees. The vivid example is Haihaya, who achieved all such
perfection of devotional service but, because of his offense at the feet of a
devotee, was Killed by Lord Parasurama. The Lord became the son of
the great sage Atri and became known as Dattatreya.
TEXT 5
तप्तं तपो रिविधलोकसिठृखया मे
आदौ सनात्‌ WATE: स चतुःसनोऽभूत्‌ |
प्राकल्पसम्पुवविनष्टमिदात्मतच्चं
सम्यग्‌ जगाद सुनयो यद चक्षतात्मन्‌ ।।५॥।
taptam tapo vividha-loka-sisrksaya me
adau sanat sva-tapasah sa catuh-sano 01:08
prak-kalpa-samplava-vinastam ihatma-tattvam
samyag jagada munayo yad acaksatatman
taptam—having undergone austerities; tapah—penance; vividha-loka—
different planetary systems; sisrksaya—desiring to create; me—of mine;
adau—at first; sanat—from the Personality of Godhead; sva-tapasah—by
dint of my own penances; sah—He, the Lord; catuh-sanah—the four bache-
lors named Sanat-kumiara, Sanaka, Sanandana and 58118118 ; abhiit—
appeared; prak—previous; kalpa—creation; samplava—in the inundation;
vinastam—devastated; tha—in this material world; atma—the spirit; tattvam
—truth; samyak—in complete; jagada—became manifested ; munayah— sages;
yat—that which; acaksata—saw clearly ; atman—the spirit.
TRANSLATION
In order to create different planetary systems I had to undergo
austerities and penance, and the Lord, thus being pleased with me, in-


--- Page 9 ---
Text 6] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 345
carnated in four sanas [Sanaka, Sanatkumara, Sanandana and Sanatana].
In the previous creation the spiritual truth was devastated, but the four
sanas explained it so nicely that the truth at once became clearly per-
ceived by the sages.

PURPORT

In the Visnu-sahasra-nama prayers there is a mention of the Lords
name as sanat and sandtanatama. The Lord and the living entities are both
qualitatively sandtanam, or eternal, but the Lord is sanatanatama or the
eternal in the superlative degree. The living entities are positively
sandtanam, but not superlatively because the living entities are apt to fall
to the atmosphere of noneternity also. Therefore, the living entities are
quantitatively different from the superlative sandatana, the Lord.

The word san 15 also used in the sense of charity; therefore when every-
thing is given up in charity unto the Lord, the Lord reciprocates by giving
Himself unto the devotee. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita also
(Bg. 4.11): ye yatha mar prapadyante. Brahmaji wanted to create the
whole cosmic situation as it was in the previous millennium, and
because, in the last devastation, knowledge of the Absolute Truth was
altogether erased from the universe, he desired that the same know-
ledge again be renovated; otherwise there would be no meaning in
the creation. Because there is prime necessity for transcendental knowledge,
the ever-conditioned souls are given a chance for liberation in every
millennium of creation. This mission of Brahmaji was fulfilled by the
grace of the Lord when the four sanas, namely Sanaka, Sanatkumara,
Sanandana, and Sanatana, appeared as his four sons. These four sanas
were incarnations of the knowledge of the Supreme Lord, and as such
they explained transcendental knowledge so explicitly that all the sages
could at once assimilate this knowledge without the least difficulty. By
following in the footsteps of the four Kumaras, one can at once see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead within oneself.

TEXT 6
WE द्षदुहित्य॑जनिष्ट॒मूर्या
नारायणो नर इति खतपःप्रभावः |
ृष्टात्मनों भगवतो नियमावरोपं
TIARA ARG न शेकुः ।। ६ ॥


--- Page 10 ---
346 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
dharmasya daksa-duhitary-ajanista martyam
ndrayano nara iti sva-tapah prabhavah
drstvatmano bhagavato niyamavalopam
devyas tv ananga-prtana ghatitum na $ekuh
dharmasya—of Dharma (the controller of religious principles); daksa—
Daksa, one of the Prajapatis; duhitari—unto the daughter; ajanista—took
birth; mirtyam—of the name Murti; narayanah—Narayana; narah— Nara;
iti—thus; sva-tapah- personal penances; prabhavah—strength; drstva—by
seeing; atmanah—of His own; bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead;
niyama-avalopam—breaking the vow; devyah—celestial beauties; tu—but;
ananga-prtanah—companion of Cupid; ghatitum—to happen; na—never;
Sekuh—made possible.
TRANSLATION
In order to exhibit His personal way of austerity and penance, He
appeared in twin forms as Narayana and Nara in the womb of Mirti,
the wife of Dharma and the daughter of Daksa. Celestial beauties, the
companions of Cupid, went to try to break His vows, but they were
unsuccessful, for they saw that many beauties like them were emanating
from Him, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The Lord, being the source of everything that be, is the origin of all
austerities and penances also. Great vows of austerity are undertaken by
sages to achieve success in self-realization. Human life is meant for such
tapasya, with the great vow of celibacy or brahmacarya. In the rigid life
of tapasya, there is no place for the association of woman. And because
human life is meant for tapasya, for self-realization, factual human civili-
zation, as conceived by the system of sanatana-dharma or the school of
four castes and four orders of life, prescribes rigid dissociation from
woman in three stages of life. In the order of gradual cultural development,
one’s life may be divided in four divisions: celibacy, household life,
retirement, and renunciation. During the first stage of life, up to twenty-
five years of age, 8 man may be trained as a brahmacari under the guidance
of a bona fide spiritual master just to understand that woman is the real
binding force in the material existence. If anyone wants to get freedom
from the material bondage of conditional life, he must get free from the


--- Page 11 ---
Text 6] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 347
attraction for the form of woman. Woman, or the fair sex, is the enchanting
principle for the living entities, and the male form, especially of the human
being, is meant for self-realization. The whole world is moving under the
spell of womanly attraction, and as soon as a man becomes united with a
woman, he at once becomes a victim of material bondage under a tight
knot. The desires for lording it over the material world, under the intoxi-
cation of a false sense of lordship, specifically begin just after the man’s
unification with a woman. The desires for acquiring a house, possessing
land, having children and becoming prominent in society, the affection for
community and the place of birth, and the hankering for wealth, which
are all like the phantasmagoria or illusory dreams of life, encumber a
human being, and he is thus impeded in his progress toward self-realization,
the real aim of life. The brahmacart, or a boy from the age of five years,
especially from the higher castes, namely from the scholarly parents (the
brahmanas), the administrative parents (the ksatriyas), or the mercantile
or productive parents (the vaisyas), is trained until twenty-five years of age
under the care of a bona fide guru or teacher, and under strict observance
of discipline he comes to understand the values of life along with taking
specific training for livelihood. The brahmacari is then allowed to go home
and enter householder life and get married to a suitable woman. But there
are many brahmacaris who do not go home to become householders but
continue the life of naisthika-brahmacaris, without any connection with
women. They accept the order of sannyasa, or the renounced order of
life, knowing well that combination with women is an unnecessary burden
that checks self-realization. Since sex desire is very strong at a certain stage
of life, the guru may allow the brahmacari to marry; this license is given
to a brahmacari who is unable to continue the way of naisthika-
brahmacarya, and such discriminations are possible for the bona fide guru.
A program of so-called family planning is needed. The householder who
associates with woman under scriptural restrictions, after a thorough
training of brahmacarya, cannot be a householder like cats and dogs. Such
a householder, after fifty years of age, would retire from the association
of woman as a vanaprastha to be trained up to live alone without the
association of woman. When the practice is complete, the same retired
householder becomes a sannyadast, strictly separate from woman, even from
his married wife. Studying the whole scheme of disassociation from women,
it appears that a woman is a stumbling block for self-realization, and the
Lord appeared as Narayana to teach the principle of womanly disassocia-
tion with a vow in life. The demigods, being envious of the austere life of
the rigid brahmacaris, would try to cause them to break their vows by dis-


--- Page 12 ---
348 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
patching soldiers of Cupid. But in the case of the Lord, it became an
unsuccessful attempt when the celestial beauties saw that the Lord can
produce innumerable such beauties by His mystic internal potency, so
there was no need to be attracted by others externally. There is a common
proverb that a confectioner is never attracted by sweetmeats. The con-
fectioner, who is always manufacturing sweetmeats, has very little desire
to eat them; similarly, the Lord, by His pleasure potential powers, can
produce innumerable spiritual beauties and not be the least attracted by
the false beauties of material creation. One who does not know, foolishly
alleges that Lord Krsna enjoyed women in His rase-lila in Vrndavana, or
with His sixteen thousand married wives at Dvaraka.
TEXT 7
कामं दहन्ति कृतिनो Ag रोषदृष्टया
रोषं दहन्तमुत ते न दहन्त्यसह्यम्‌ |
सोऽयं यदन्तरमलं प्रविशन्‌ बिभेति
कामः कथं लु पुनरस्य मनः श्रयेत । ७ ॥
kamam dahanti krtino nanu rosa-drstya
rosari dahantam uta te na dahanty asahyam
so yam yad antaram alam pravisan bibheti
kamah katham nu punar asya manah $rayeta
kamam—lust; dahanti—chastises; krtinah—great stalwarts; nanu—but;
rosa-drstya—by wrathful glance; rosam—wrath; dahantam—being over-
whelmed; uta—although; te—they; na—cannot; dahanti—subjugate; asah-
yam—inlolerable; sah—that; ayam-—Him; yat—because; antaram— within;
alam—however; pravisan—entering; bibheti—is afraid of; kamah—lust; ka-
tham—how ;nu—as a matter of fact; punah—again; asya—llis; manah—mind;
Srayeta—take shelter of.
TRANSLATION
Great stalwarts like Lord Siva can, by their wrathful glance, overcome
lust and vanquish him, yet they cannot be free from the overwhelming
effects of their own wrath. Such wrath can never enter into the heart of


--- Page 13 ---
Text 8] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 349
Him [the Lord], who is above all this. So how can lust take shelter in
His mind?
PURPORT
When Lord Siva was engaged in severely austere meditation, Cupid,
the demigod of lust, threw his arrow of sex desire, and Lord Siva, thus
being angry at him, glanced at Cupid in great wrath, and at once the body
of Cupid was annihilated. Although Lord Siva was so powerful, he was
unable to get free from the effects of such wrath. But in the behavior of
Lord Visnu there is no incidence of such wrath at any time. On the con-
trary, Bhrgu Muni tested the tolerance of the Lord by purposely kicking
His chest, but instead of being angry at Bhrgu Muni the Lord begged his
pardon, saying that Bhrgu Muni’s leg might have been badly hurt due to
His chest being too hard. The Lord has the sign of the foot of Bhrgu-pada
as the mark of tolerance. The Lord, therefore, is never affected by any
kind of wrath, so how can there be any place for lust, which is less strong
than wrath? When lust or desire is not fulfilled, there is the appearance of
wrath, but in the absence of wrath how can there by any place for lust?
The Lord is known as apta-kamah, or one who can fulfill His desires by
Himself. He does not require anyone’s help to satisfy His desires. The Lord
is unlimited, and therefore His desires are alse unlimited. All living
entities but the Lord are limited in every respect; how then can the
limited satisfy the desires of the unlimited? The conclusion is that the
Absolute Personality of Godhead has neither lust nor anger, and even if
there is sometimes a show of lust and anger by the Absolute, it should be
considered an absolute benediction.
TEXT 8
विद्धः सपल्न्युदि तपत्रिभिरन्ति राज्ञो
बालोऽपि सन्ुपगतस्तपसे वनानि |
तसा अदाद्‌ ध्रुवगतिं गृणते प्रसन्नो
भ
दिव्याः स्तुवन्ति मुनयो यडुपयधस्तात्‌।। ८ ॥
viddhah sapatny-udita-patribhir anti rajio
balo 08 sann upagatas tapase vanani
tasma adad dhruva-gatim grate prasanno
divyah stuvanti munayo yad upary-adhastat


--- Page 14 ---
350 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
viddhah— pinched by; sapatni—a co-wife; udita—uttered by; patribhih—
by sharp words; anti—just before; rajiah—of the king; balah—a boy; api—
although; san—being so; upagatah—took to; tapase--severe penances; vana-
ni—in a great forest; tasmai—therefore; adat—gave as a reward; dhruva-
gatim—a path to the Dhruva planet; grmate—on being prayed for; prasannah
—being satisfied; divyah—denizens of higher planets; stuvanti—do pray;
munayah—great sages; yat—thereupon; upari-—up; adhastat—down.
TRANSLATION
Being insulted by sharp words spoken by the co-wife of the king, even
in his presence, Prince Dhruva, though only a boy, took to severe penances
in the forest. And the Lord, being satisfied by his prayer, awarded him the
Dhruva planet, which is worshiped by great sages, both upward and down-
ward.
PURPORT

When he was only five years old, Prince Dhruva, a great devotee and the
son of Maharaja Uttanapada, was sitting on the lap of his father. His step-
mother did not like the King’s patting her stepson, so she dragged him out,
saying that he could not claim to sit on the lap of the King because he was
not born out of her womb. The little boy felt insulted by this act of his
stepmother. Nor did his father make any protest, for he was too attached
to his second wife. After this incidence, Prince Dhruva went to his own
mother and complained. His real mother also could not take any step
against this insulting behavior, so she wept. The boy inquired from his
mother how he could sit on the royal throne of his father, and the poor
queen replied that only the Lord could help him. The boy inquired where
the Lord could be seen, and the queen replied that it is said that the Lord
is sometimes seen by great sages in the dense forest. The child prince
decided to go into the forest to perform severe penances in order to
achieve his objective.

Prince Dhruva performed a stringent type of penance under the in-
struction of his spiritual master, Sri Narada Muni, who was specifically
deputed for this purpose by the Personality of Godhead. Prince Dhruva
was initiated by Narada to chant the hymn composed of eighteen letters,
namely om namo bhagavate vasudevaya, and Lord Vasudeva incarnated
Himself as Prénigarbha, the Personality of Godhead with four hands, and


--- Page 15 ---
Text 9] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 351
awarded the Prince a specific planet above the seven stars. Prince Dhruva,
after achieving success in his undertakings, saw the Lord face to face, and
he was satisfied that all his needs were fulfilled.

The planet awarded to Prince Dhruva Maharaja is a fixed Vaikuntha
planet, installed in the material atmosphere by the will of the Supreme
Lord Vasudeva. This planet, although within the material world, will not
be annihilated at the time of devastation, but will remain fixed in its
place. And, because it is a Vaikuntha planet never to be annihilated, it is
worshiped even by the denizens of the seven stars situated below the
Dhruva planet, as well as the planets which are even above the Dhruva
planet. Maharsi Bhrgu’s planet is situated above the Dhruva planet.

So the Lord incarnated Himself as Prsnigarbha just to satisfy a pure
devotee of the Lord. And this perfection was achieved by Prince Dhruva
simply by chanting the hymn mentioned above, after being initiated by
another pure devotee, Narada. A serious personality can thus achieve the
highest perfection of meeting the Lord and attain his objective simply by
being guided by a pure devotee, who automatically approaches by dint of
one’s serious determination to meet the Lord by all means.

The description of Prince Dhruva’s activities can be read in detail in the
Fourth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

TEXT 9
यद्वेनघुत्पथगतं दहिजवाक्यवज्र-
निष्प्लुष्टपौरुषभगं निरये पतन्तम्‌ |
त्रात्वार्थितो जगति पुत्रपदं च लेभे
दुग्धा वञ्नि वसधा सकलानि येन ॥ ९ ॥

yad venam utpatha-gatari dvija-vakya-vajra

nisplusta-paurusa-bhagar niraye patantam
tratvarthito jagati putra-padam ca lebhe

dugdha vasini vasudha sakalani yena

yat—when; venam—unto King Vena; utpatha-gatam—going astray from
the righteous path; dvija—of the brahmanas; vakya—words of cursing;
vajra— thunderbolt; nisplusta—being burnt by; paurusa—great deeds; bha-
gam—opulence; niraye—into hell; patantam—going down; tratva—by de-


--- Page 16 ---
352 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
livering; arthitah—so being prayed for; jagati—on the world; putra-padam—
the position of the son; ca—as well as; lebhe—achieved ; dugdha—exploited;
vasitni— produce; vasudhd—the earth; sakalani—all kinds of ;yena—by whom.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Vena went astray from the path of righteousness, and the
brahmanas chastised him by the thunderbolt curse. By this King Vena was
burnt with his good deeds and opulence and was en route to hell. The
Lord, by His causeless mercy, descended as his son, by the name of Prthu,
delivered the condemned King Vena from hell, and exploited the earth by
drawing all kinds of crops as produce.
PURPORT
According to the system of varnasrama-dharma, the pious and learned
brahmanas were the natural guardians of society. The brahmanas, by their
learned labor of love, would instruct the administrator kings how to rule
the country in complete righteousness, and thus the process would go on
as a perfect welfare state. The kings or the ksatriya administrators would
always consult the council of learned brahmanas. They were never auto-
cratic monarchs. The scriptures like Manu-sarthita and other authorized
books of the great sages were guiding principles for ruling the subjects,
and there was no need for less intelligent persons to manufacture a code
of law in the name of democracy. The less intelligent mass of people have
very little knowledge of their own welfare, as the child has very little
knowledge of its future well-being. The experienced father guides the
innocent child towards the path of progress, and the childlike mass of
people need similar guidance. The standard welfare codes are already there
in the Manu-samhita and other Vedic literatures. The learned brahmanas
would advise the king in terms of those standard books of knowledge and
with reference to the particular situation of time and place. Such
brahmanas were not paid servants of the king, and therefore they had the
strength to dictate to the king on the principles of scriptures. This system
continued even up to the time of Maharaja Candragupta, and the
brahmana Canakya was his unpaid prime minister.
Maharaja Vena did not adhere to this principle of ruling, and he dis-
obeyed the learned brahmanas. The broad-minded brahmanas were not
self-interested, but looked to the interest of complete welfare for all the


--- Page 17 ---
Text 10] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 353
subjects. They wanted to chastise King Vena for his misconduct and so
prayed to the Almighty Lord as well as cursed the king.

Long life, obedience, good reputation, righteousness, prospects of being
promoted to higher planets, and blessings of great personalities are all
vanquished simply by disobeying a great soul. One should strictly try to
follow in the footsteps of great souls. Maharaja Vena became a king,
undoubtedly due to his past deeds of righteousness, but because he will-
fully neglected the great souls, he was punished by the loss of all the above-
mentioned acquisitions. In the Vamana Purana, the history of Maharaja
Vena and his degradation are fully described. When Maharaja Prthu heard
about the hellish condition of His father, Vena, who was suffering from
leprosy in the family of a mleccha, he at once brought the former king to
Kuruksetra for his purification and relieved him from all sufferings.

Maharaja Prthu, the incarnation of God, descended by the prayer of the
brahmanas to restore the disorders on earth. He produced all kinds of
crops. But, at the same time, He performed the duty of a son who delivers
the father from hellish conditions. The word putra means one who delivers
from hell, called put. That is a worthy son.

TEXT 10
नाभेरसात्रषभ आस सुदेविषठनु-
यो वै चचार समदृग्‌ जडयोगचर्याम्‌ |
TURES: पदमामनन्ति
स्वस्थः FAFA: परिथुक्तसङ्गः।।१०॥।
nabher ०56४ rsabha asa sudevi-sanur
Yo vai cacara sama-drg jada-yoga-caryam
yat paramaharmsyam rsayah padam amananti
svasthah prasanta-karapah parimukta-sangah
nabheh—by Maharaja Nabhi; asau—the Personality of Godhead; rsabhah—
Rsabha; asa—became; sudevi—Sudevi; sanuh—the son of; yah— who; vai—
certainly; cacara—performed;sama-drk—equibalanced; jada—material; yoga-
caryam—performance of yoga; yat—which; paramaharisyam— the highest
stage of perfection; rsayah—the learned sages; padam—situation; amananti—
do accept; svasthah—self-reposed; prasanta—suspended; karanah— the mate-
rial senses; parimukta—perfectly liberated; saitgah—material contamination.


--- Page 18 ---
354 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
TRANSLATION
The Lord appeared as the son of Sudevi, the wife of King Nabhi, and
was known as Rsabhadeva. He performed materialistic yoga to equibalance
the mind. This stage is also accepted as the highest perfectional situation of
liberation, wherein one is situated in one’s self and is completely satisfied.
PURPORT

Out of many types of mystic performances for self-realization, the
process of jada-yoga is also one accepted by authorities. This jada-yoga
involves practicing becoming like a dumb stone without being affected by
material reactions. Just as a stone is indifferent to all kinds of attacks and
reattacks of external situations, similarly one practices jada-yoga by
tolerating voluntary infliction of pain upon the material body. Such yogis,
out of many self-infliction methods, practice plucking out the hairs on
their head, without shaving and without any instrumental help. But the
real purpose of such jada-yoga practice is to get free from all material
affection and to be completely situated in the self. At the last stage of his
life, Emperor Rsabhadeva wandered like a dumb madman without being
affected by all kinds of bodily mistreatment. Seeing him like a madman,
wandering naked with long hair and a long beard, less intelligent children
and men in the street used to spit on him and urinate on his body. He used
to lie in his own stool and never move. But the stool of his body was
flavored like the smell of fragrant flowers, and a saintly person would
recognize him as a paramahamsa, one in the highest state of human
perfection. One who is not able to make his stool fragrant should not,
however, imitate Emperor Rsabhadeva. The practice of jada-yoga was
possible by Rsabhadeva and others on the same level of perfection, but
such an uncommon practice is impossible for an ordinary man.

The real purpose of jada-yoga, as mentioned here in this verse, is
prasanta-karanah, or subduing the senses. The whole process of yoga,
under whatever heading it may be, is to control the unbridled material
senses and thus prepare oneself for self-realization. In this age specifically,
this jada-yoga cannot be of any practical value, but on the other hand the
practice of bhakti-yoga is feasible because it is just suitable for this age. The
simple method of hearing from the rightful source of Srimad-Bhagavatam
will lead one to the highest perfectional stage of yoga. Rsabhadeva was the
son of King Nabhi and the grandson of King Agnidhra, and he was the


--- Page 19 ---
Text 11] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 355
father of King Bharata, after whose name this planet earth was called
Bharatavarsa. Rsabhadeva’s mother was also known as Merudevi, although
her name is mentioned here as Sudevi. It is sometimes proposed that
Sudevi was another wife of King Agnidhra, but since King Rsabhadeva is
mentioned elsewhere as the son of Merudevi, it is clear that Merudevi and
১৮৫০৬! are the same person under different names.
TEXT 11
सत्र ममास भगवान्‌ हयशीरषाथो
6
साक्षात्‌ स यज्ञपुरूप्तपनीयबणं: |
छन्दोमयो मखमयोऽखिलदेवतात्मा
वाचो बभूवुरुदातीः ्सतोऽस्य नस्तः।।११॥
satre 71071650 bhagavan haya-sirasatho
saksat sa yajita-purusas tapaniya-varnah
chandomayo makhamayo’khila-devatatma
৮৫০০ babhitvur usatih svasato’sya nastah
satre—in the sacrificial ceremony; mama— of mine; asa—appeared; bhaga-
van—the Personality of Godhead; haya-sirasa—with His horselike head;
atha— thus; saksat— directly; sah— He; yajiia-purusah—the person who is
pleased by performances of sacrifice; tapaniya—golden; varnah—hue;
chandomayah—personified Vedic hymns; makhamayah—personified
sacrifices; akhila—all that be; devata-atma—soul of the demigods; vacah—
sounds; babhivah—become audible; usatih—very pleasing to hear; $vasa-
tah—while breathing; asya— His; nastah—through the nostrils.
TRANSLATION
The Lord appeared as the Hayagriva incarnation in the sacrifice
performed by Brahma. He was the personified sacrifices, and the hue of
His body was golden. He is the personified Vedas as well, and the Supersoul
of atl demigods. When He breathed, all the sweet sounds of the Vedic
hymns came out of His nostrils.


--- Page 20 ---
356 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
PURPORT
The Vedic hymns are generally meant for sacrifices to be performed by
the fruitive workers who also want to satisfy the demigods to achieve their
fruitive result. But the Lord is the personified sacrifices and personified
Vedic hymns. Therefore one who is directly a devotee of the Lord is a
person who has automatically both served the purposes of sacrifices and
pleased the demigods. The devotees of the Lord may not perform any
sacrifice or may not please the demigods as per Vedic injunctions, and still
the devotee is on a higher level than the fruitive workers or the worshipers
of different demigods.
TEXT 12
मत्स्यो युगान्तसमये मनुनापलच्धः
क्षोणीमयो निखिलजोवनिकायकेतः।
विष॑सितानुरुभये सलिले gawd
¢
आदाय तत्र विजहार ह वेदमागान्‌ ॥१२॥
matsyo yuganta-samaye manunopalabdhah
ksonimayo nikhila-jiva-nikaya-ketah
visramsitan uru-bhaye salile mukhan me
adaya tatra vijahara ha veda-margan
matsyah—incarnation of the fish; yuga-anta—at the end of the millen-
nium; samaye—at the time of; manuna—the would-be Vaivasvata Manu;
upalabdhah—seen; ksonimayah—up to the earthly planets; nikhila—all;
Jjiva—living entities; nikaya-ketah—shelter for; visrarhsitan—emanating from;
uru—great; bhaye—out of fear; salile—in the water; mukhat—from the
mouth; me--mine; adaya—having taken to; tatra—there; vijahara—enjoyed;
ha—certainly ; veda-margan—all the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the millennium, the would-be Vaivasvata Manu, of the
name Satyavrata, would see that the Lord in the fish incarnation is the
shelter of all kinds of living entities, up to those in the earthly planet. Out


--- Page 21 ---
Text 13] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 357
of fear of the vast water, at the end of the millennium, the Vedas come
out of my [Brahma’s] mouth, and the Lord enjoys those vast waters
and protects the Vedas.
PURPORT
During one day of Brahma, there are fourteen Manus, and at the end of
each Manu, there is devastation up to the earthly planets, and the vast
water is fearful even to the personality of Brahma. So in the beginning of
the would-be Vaivasvata Manu, such devastation would be seen by him.
There would be many other incidences also, such as the killing of the
famous Sankhasura, etc. This foretelling is by past experience of Brahmaji,
who knew that in that fearful devastating scene, the Vedas would come
out of his mouth, but the Lord in His fish incarnation not only would
save all living entities, namely the demigods, animals, man and the great
sages, but would also save the Vedas.
TEXT 13
क्षीरोदधावमरदानवगूथपाना-
य॒न्मश्रतामण्रतलन्धय आदिदेवः |
पृष्टेन कच्छपवपुरिदधार गोत्रं
- ¢
निद्राक्षणोऽद्विपरिवितकषाणकण्ड्‌: 1231
ksirodadhav amara-danava-yithapanam
unmathnatam amyrta-labdhaya adi-devah
prsthena kacchapa-vapur vidadhara gotram
nidraksano’dri-parivarta-kasana-kandith
ksira—milk;udadhau—in the ocean of ;amara—the demigods; danava—the
demons; yiitha-panam— of the leaders of both hosts; unmathnatam— while
churning; amrta—nectar; labdhaya—for gaining; adi-devah—the primeval
Lord; prsthena—by the backbone; kacchapa—tortoise; vapuh—body; vida-
dhara—assumed; gotram—the Mandara Hill; nidralsanah—while partly
sleeping; adri-parivarta—rolling the hill; kasdna—scratching; kandiah—
itching.


--- Page 22 ---
358 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
TRANSLATION

The primeval Lord then assumed the tortoise incarnation in order to
serve as a resting place [pivot] for the Mandara Mountain, which
was acting as a churning rod. The demigods and demons were churning
the ocean of milk with the Mandara Mountain in order to extract
nectar. The mountain moved back and forth, scratching the back of
Lord Tortoise, who, while partly sleeping, was experiencing an itching
sensation.

PURPORT

Although it is not in our experience, there is a milk ocean within this
universe. It is accepted even by the modern scientist that there are
hundreds and hundreds of thousands of planets hovering over our heads,
and each of them has different kinds of climatic conditions. Srimad-
Bhagavatam gives much information which may not tally with our present
experience. But as far as Indian sages are concerned, knowledge is received
from the Vedic literatures, and the authorities accept without any hesita-
tion that we should look through the pages of authentic books of
knowledge ($astra-caksusvat). So we cannot deny the existence of the
ocean of milk as stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam unless and until we
have experimentally seen all the planets hovering in space. Since such an
experiment is not possible, naturally we have to accept the statement of
Srimad-Bhagavatam as it is because it is so accepted by spiritual leaders
like Sridhara Svami, Jiva Gosvami, Viévanatha Cakravarti and others. The
Vedic process is to follow in the footsteps of great authorities, and that is
the only process for knowing that which is beyond our imagination.

The primeval Lord, being all-powerful, can do whatever He likes, and
therefore His assuming the incarnation of a tortoise or a fish for serving a
particular purpose is not at all astonishing. Therefore we should not have
any hesitation whatsoever in accepting the statements of the authentic
scriptures like Srimad-Bhagavatam.

The gigantic work of churning the milk ocean by combined effort of
the demigods and the demons required a gigantic resting ground or pivot
for the gigantic Mandara Hill. Thus to help the attempt of the demigods
the primeval Lord assumed the incarnation of a gigantic tortoise, swim-
ming in the ocean of milk. At the same time, the mountain scratched
His backbone as He was partly sleeping and thus relieved His itching
sensation.


--- Page 23 ---
Text 14] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 359
TEXT 14
a [8 9
्रेपिष्टपोरुभयहा स frat
कृत्वा भ्रमद्भ्रुकृटिदप्रकराटवक्तरम्‌ |
ES
देत्येन्द्रमाश्च गदयाभिपतन्तमारा
= =
दूरा निपात्य विददार नसः स्फुरन्तम्‌।। १४८।।
trai-pistaporu-bhaya-ha sa nrsirmha-riparn
krtva bhramad-bhrukuti-darstra-karala-vaktram
daityendram asu gadayabhipatantam
07৫01007018 nipatya vidadara nakhaih sphurantam
trai-pistapa—the demigods; wru-bhaya-ha—one who vanquishes great
fears; sah—He, the Personality of Godhead; nrsirha-riipam-— assuming the
incarnation Nrsimha; krtva—doing so; bhramat—by rolling; bhru-kuti—
eyebrows; damstra—teeth; karala—greatly fearful; vakiram- mouth; daitya-
indram—the king of the demons; asu—immediately; gadaya—with club in
hand; abhipatantam—while falling down; arat—nearby ; arau—on the thighs;
nipatya—placing on;vidadara— pierced; nakhaih—by the nails; sphurantam—
while challenging.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead assumed the incarnation of Narasirnhadeva
in order to vanquish the great fears of the demigods. He killed the king
of the demons [Hiranyakasipu], who challenged the Lord with a club
in his hand, by placing the demon on His thighs and piercing him with His
nails, rolling His eyebrows in anger and showing His fearful teeth and
mouth.
PURPORT
The history of Hiranyakasipu and his great devotee son Prahlada Maha-
raja is narrated in the Seventh Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Hiranyakasipu
became very powerful by material achievements and thought himself to
be immortal by the grace of Brahmaji. Brahmaji declined to award him
the benediction of immortality because he himself is nol an
immortal being. But Hiranyakasipu derived Brahmaji’s benediction in a
roundabout way, almost equal to becoming an immortal being. Hiranya-
kasipu was sure that he would not be killed by any man or demigod or by


--- Page 24 ---
360 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 2, Ch. 7
any kind of known weapon, nor would he die in day or night. The Lord,
however, assumed the incarnation of half-man and half-lion, which was
beyond the imagination of a materialistic demon like Hiranyakasipu, and
thus, keeping pace with the benediction of Brahmaji, the Lord killed
him. He killed him on His lap, so that he was killed neither on the land
nor on the water nor in the sky. lle was pierced by Narasimha’s nails,
which were beyond the human weapons imaginable by Hiranyakasipu.
The literal meaning of Hiranyakasipu is one who is after gold and soft
bedding, the ultimate aim of all materialistic men. Such demonic men,
who have no relationship with God, gradually become puffed up by
material acquisitions and begin to challenge the authority of the Supreme
Lord and torture those who are devotees of the Lord. Prahlada Maharaja
happened to be the son of Hiranyakasipu, and because he was a great
devotee, his father tortured him to the best of his ability. In this extreme
situation, the Lord assumed the incarnation of Narasimhadeva, and just
to finish the enemy of the demigods, the Lord Killed lliranyakasipu in a
manner which was beyond the demon’s imagination. Materialistic plans
of godless demons are always frustrated by the all-powerful Lord.
TEXT 15
अन्तःसरस्युरुबलेन पदे गृहीतो
o I
ग्राहेण यूथपतिरम्बुजहस्त आतंः |
आहेदमादिपुरुषाखिललोकनाथ
[५ =
तीथेश्रवः श्रवणमङ्गलनामधेय ॥१५॥
antah-sarasy uru-balena pade grhito
grahena yiitha-patir ambuja-hasta artah
ahedam adi-purusakhila-loka-natha
tirtha-sravah sravana-maengala-namadheya
antah-sarasi— within the river; uru-balena—by superior strength; pade—

leg; grhitah—being taken up; grahena—by the crocodile; yitha-patih—of
the leader of the elephants; ambuja-hastah—with 8 lotus flower in the hand;
artah—greally aggrieved; aha—addressed; idam—like this; adi-purusa—the
original enjoyer; akhila-loka-natha—the Lord of the universe; tirtha-sravah—


--- Page 25 ---
Text 15] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 361
as famous as a place of pilgrimage; sravapa-mangala—all good simply by
hearing the name; nama-dheya—whose holy name is worth chanting.
TRANSLATION

The leader of the elephants, whose leg was attacked in the river by a
crocodile of superior strength, was much aggrieved. Taking a lotus flower
in his trunk, he addressed the Lord, saying, ‘O original enjoyer, Lord of the
universe! O deliverer, as famous as the place of pilgrimage! All are purified
simply by hearing Your holy name, which is worthy to be chanted.’

PURPORT

The history of delivering the leader of the elephants, whose leg was
attacked in the river by the superior strength of a crocodile, is described in
the Eighth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatan (Bhag. 8.2.4). Since the Lord is
absolute knowledge, there is no difference between His holy name and the
Personality of Godhead. The leader of the elephants was much distressed
when he was attacked by the crocodile. Although the elephant is always
stronger than the crocodile, the latter is stronger than the elephant when
itisin the water. And because the elephant was a great devotee of the Lord
in his previous birth, he was able to chant the holy name of the Lord by
dint of his past good deeds. Every living entity is always distressed in this
material world because this place is such that in every step one has to meet
with some kind of distress. But one who is supported by his past good
deeds engages himself in the devotional service of the Lord, as is confirmed
in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.19). Those who are supported by impious acts
cannot be engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, even though they
are distressed. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.15). The
Personality of Godhead Hari appeared at once on the back of His eternal
bearer Garuda and delivered the elephant.

The elephant was conscious of his relation with the Supreme Lord. He
addressed the Lord as adi-purusa, or the original enjoyer. Both the Lord
and the living beings are conscious and are therefore enjoyers, but the
Lord is the original enjoyer because He is the creator of everything. In a
family, both the father and his sons are undoubtedly enjoyers, but the
father is the original enjoyer, and the sons are subsequent enjoyers. A pure
devotee knows well that everything in the universe is the property of the
Lord, and a living entity can enjoy a thing as ordained by the Lord. A


--- Page 26 ---
362 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
living being cannot even touch a thing which is not alloted to him. This
idea of the original enjoyer is explained very nicely in the ISopanisad.
One who knows this difference between the Lord and himself never accepts
anything without first offering it to the Lord.

The elephant addressed the Lord as akhila-loka-natha, or the Lord of the
universe, and as such He is the Lord of the elephant also. The elephant,
being a pure devotee of the Lord, specifically deserved to be saved from
the attack of the crocodile, and because it is a promise of the Lord that
His devotee will never be vanquished, it was quite befitting that the
elephant called upon the Lord to protect him, and the merciful Lord also
at once responded. The Lord is the protector of everyone, but He is the
first protector of one who acknowledges the superiority of the Lord
without being so falsely proud as to deny the superiority of the Lord or to
claim to be equal to Him. He is ever superior. A pure devotee of the Lord
knows this difference between the Lord and himself. Therefore a pure
devotee is given first preference because of his full dependence, whereas
the person who denies the existence of the Lord and declares himself the
Lord is called asura, and as such he is given protection by the strength of
limited power subject to the sanction of the Lord. Since the Lord is
superior to everyone, His perfection is also superior. No one can imagine
it.

The elephant addressed the Lord as tirtha-sravah, or “famous as the place
of pilgrimage.” People go to places of pilgrimage in order to be delivered
from the reactions of unknown sinful acts. But one can be freed from all
sinful reactions simply by remembering His holy name. The Lord is there-
fore as good as the holy places of pilgrimage. One can be free from all
sinful reactions after reaching a place of pilgrimage, but one can have the
same benefit at home or at any place simply by chanting the holy name of
the Lord. For a pure devotee, there is no need to go to the holy place of
pilgrimage. He can be delivered from all sinful acts simply by remembering
the Lord in earnestness. A pure devotee of the Lord never commits any
sinful acts, but because the whole world is full of the sinful atmosphere,
even a pure devotee may commit a sin unconsciously, as a matter of
course. One who commits sinful acts consciously cannot be worthy of
becoming a devotee of the Lord, but a pure devotee who unconsciously
does something sinful is certainly delivered by the Lord because a pure
devotee remembers the Lord always.

The Lord’s holy name is called sravana-mangala. This means that every-
thing pip is received simply by hearing the holy name. In another
place in Srimad-Bhagavatam, His holy name is described as punya-sravana-


--- Page 27 ---
Text 16] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 363
kirtana. lt is a pious act simply to chant and hear all about the Lord. The
Lord descends on this earth and acts like others in connection with the
activities of the world just to create subject matter for hearing about Him;
otherwise the Lord has nothing to do in this world, nor has He any
obligation to do anything. He comes out of His own causcless mercy and
acts as He desires, and the Vedas and Puranas are full of descriptions of [115
different activities so that people in general may naturally be eager to hear
and read something about His activities. Generally, however, the modern
fictions and novels of the world occupy a greater part of people’s valuable
time. Such literatures cannot do good to anyone; on the contrary, they
agitate the young mind unnecessarily and increase the modes of passion
and ignorance, leading to increasing bondage to the material conditions.
The same aplitude for hearing and reading is better utilized in hearing and
reading of the l.ord’s activities. This will give one all around benefit.

It is concluded, therefore, that the holy name of the Lord and things in
relation with Him are always worth hearing, and therefore He is called here
in this verse nama-dheya, or one whose holy name is worth chanting.

TEXT 16
ne =
श्रुत्वा हरिस्तमरणार्थिनमप्रमेय-
शक्रायुधः पतगराजयुजाधिरूटः |
चक्रेण नक्रवदनं Afar तसा
द्धस्ते प्रगृह्य भगवान्‌ कपयाजहार 11] ६॥
Srutva haris tam aranarthinam aprameyas
cakrayudhah patagardja-bhujadhiridhah
cakrene nakra-vadanam vinipatya tasmadd
haste pragrhya bhagavan krpayojjahara

Srutva—by hearing; harih—the Personality of Godhead; tam—him; arana-
arthinam—one who is in need of help; aprameyah—the unlimitedly power-
ful Lord; cakra—wheel; @yudhah—equipped with 1115 weapon; pataga-raja—
the king of the birds (Garuda); bhuja-adhiradhah—being seated on the
wings of; cakrena—by the wheel; nakra-vadanam—the mouth of the croco-
0116; vinipatya—cutting in two; tasmat—trom the mouth of the crocodile;
haste—in the hands; pragrhya—taking hold of the trunk; bhagavan—the


--- Page 28 ---
364 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
Personality of Godhead; krpayd—out of causeless mercy; ujjahara—de-
livered him.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, after hearing the elephant’s plea, felt that
he needed His immediate help, for he was in great distress. Thus at once
the Lord appeared there on the wings of the king of birds, Garuda, fully
equipped with His weapon, the wheel [cakra]. And with the wheel He
cut to pieces the mouth of the crocodile to save the elephant, and He
delivered the elephant by lifting him by his trunk.
PURPORT
The Lord resides in His Vaikuntha planet. No one can estimate how far
away this planet is situated. It is said, however, that anyone trying to
reach that planet by airships or by mindships, traveling for millions of
years, will find it still unknown. Modern scientists have invented airships
which are material, and a still finer material attempt is made by the yogis
to travel by mindships. The yogis can reach any distant place very quickly
with the help of mindships. But neither the airship nor the mindship has
access into the kingdom of God in the Vaikunthaloka, situated far beyond
the material sky. Since this is the situation, how was it possible for the
prayers of the elephant to be heard from such an unlimitedly distant place,
and how could the Lord at once appear on the spot? These things cannot
be calculated by human imagination. All this was possible by the unlimited
power of the Lord, and therefore the Lord is described here as aprameya,
for not even the best human brain can estimate His powers and potencies
by mathematical calculation. The Lord can hear from such a distant place,
He can eat from there, and He can appear simultaneously in all places at a
moment’s notice. Such is the omnipotency of the Lord.
TEXT 17
= - ~~ >
ज्यायान्‌ युणररजेाऽप्यादतः सुताना
लोकान्‌ विचक्रम इमान्‌ यदथाधियज्ञः
मां वामनेन जगे त्रिपदच्छलेन
fs clan =
याच्ञामृते पथि चरन्‌ प्रभुमिनं ALT 011


--- Page 29 ---
Text 17] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 365
Jydyan gunair avarajo’py aditeh sutanam
lokan vicakrama iman yad athadhiyajiiah
ksmar vamanena jagrhe tripadacchalena
ydciiam rte pathi caran prabhubhir na calyah
jydyan—the greatest; gunaih—by qualities; avarajah—transcendental;
api—although He is so: aditeh—of Aditi; sutanam—of all the sons known as
Adityas: lokan—all the planets; vicakrame—surpassed; iman—in this uni-
verse; yat—one who; atha—therefore; adhiyajiiah—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; ksmam—all the lands; vamanena—in the incarnation of
Vamana; jagrhe— accepted; tri-pada—three steps; chalena—by pretention;
yaciiam—begging; rte—without; pathi caran—passing over the right path;
prabhubhih—by authorities; na—never to be; calyah—to be bereft of.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, although transcendental to all material modes, still surpassed
all qualities of the sons of Aditi, known as the Adityas. The Lord appeared
as the youngest son of Aditi. And because He surpassed all the planets of
the universe, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. On the pretense
of asking for a measurement of three footsteps of land, He took away all
the lands of Bali Maharaja. He asked simply because without begging, no
authority can take one’s rightful possession.
PURPORT
The history of Bali Maharaja and his charity to Vamanadeva is described
in the Eighth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Bali Maharaja conquered all the
planets of the universe by rightful possession. A king can conquer other
kings by strength, and such possession is considered to be rightful. So
Bali Maharaja possessed all the lands of the universe, and he happened to
be charitably disposed toward the brahmanas. The Lord therefore pre-
tended to be a beggar brahmana, and He asked for a measurement of three
footsteps of land from Bali Maharaja. The Lord, as the proprietor of
everything, could take from him all the lands that Bali Maharaja possessed,
but He did not do so because Bali Maharaja possessed all those lands by
king’s rights. While Bali Maharaja was asked by Lord Vamana for such
small charity, the spiritual master of Bali Maharaja, namely Sukracarya,
objected to this proposal because he knew that Vamanadeva was Visnu


--- Page 30 ---
366 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
Himself, pretending to be a beggar. Bali Maharaja did not agree to abide
by the order of his spiritual master when he understood that the beggar
was Visnu Himself, and he at once agreed to give Him in charity the land
requested. By this agreement Lord Vamana covered all the lands of the
universe with His first two steps and then asked Bali Maharaja where to
place the third step. Bali Maharaja was very glad to receive the Lord’s
remaining step upon his head, and thus Bali Maharaja, instead of losing
everything that he possessed, was blessed by the Lord’s becoming his
constant companion and doorman. So, by giving everything to the cause of
the Lord, one does not lose anything, but he gains everything that he
could never otherwise expect.
TEXT 18
EY
नार्थो बलेरयमुरुक्रमपाद शोच-
मापः शिखा gard विबुधाधियत्यम्‌।
সই EE o CRAY
यो वें प्रतिश्रुतमरते न चिकीषेदन्य-
Noa
दाट्मानमङ्ग मनसा हरयेऽभिमेने ॥१८॥
nartho baler ayam urukrama-pada-saucam
apah sikha-dhrtavato vibudhadhipatyam
yo vai pratisrutam rte na cikirsad anyad
atmanam anga manasa haraye’ bhimene
na—never; arthah—of any value in comparison with; baleh—of strength;
ayam—this; urukrama-pada-saucam—the water washed from the feet of the
Personality of Godhead; apah—water; sikha-dhrtavatah—of one who has
kept it on his head; vibudha-adhipatyam—supremacy over the kingdom
of the demigods; yah—one who; vai—certainly; pratisrutam— what was duly
promised; rte na—besides that; cikirsat—tried for; anyat—anything else;
atmanam—even his personal body; anga—O Narada; manasi—within his
mind; haraye—unto the Supreme Lord; abhimene—dedicated.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja, who put on his head the water washed from the lotus
feet of the Lord, did not think of anything else besides his promise, in


--- Page 31 ---
Text 18] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 367
spite of being forbidden by his spiritual master. The king dedicated his own
personal body to fulfill the measurement of the Lord’s third step. For such
a personality, even the kingdom of heaven, which he conquered by his
strength, was of no value.

PURPORT

Bali Maharija, by gaining the transcendental favor of the Lord in
exchange for his great material sacrifice, was able to have a place in the
Vaikunthaloka with equal or greater facilities of eternal enjoyment; there-
fore he was not at all the loser by sacrificing the kingdom of heaven,
which he possessed by his material strength. In other words, when the
Lord snatches away one’s hard-earned material possessions and favors one
with His personal transcendental service for eternal life, bliss and know-
ledge, such taking away by the Lord should be considered a special favor
upon such a pure devotee.

Material possessions, however alluring they may be, cannot be permanent
possessions. Therefore one has to voluntarily give up such possessions, or
one has to leave such possessions at the time of quitting this material body.
The sane man knows that all material possessions are temporary, and the
best use of such possessions is to engage them in the service of the Lord so
that the Lord may be pleased with him and award him a permanent place
in His param dhama.

In the Bhagavad-gita, the param dhama of the Lord is described as
follows:

nirmana-moha jita-sanga-dosa
adhyatma-nitya vinivrtta-kamah
dvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-samjiair
gacchanty amudhah padam avyayam tat
na tad bhasayate siryo
na sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante
tad dhama paramarm mama (Bg. 15.56)
One who possesses more in this material world, in the shape of houscs,
land, children, society, friendship and wealth, possesses these things only
for the time being. One cannot possess all this illusory paraphernalia, cre-


--- Page 32 ---
368 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
ated by maya, permanently. Such a possessor is more illusioned in the mat-
ter of his self-realization; therefore one should possess less or nothing, so
that he may be free from artificial prestige. We are contaminated in the
material world by association with the three modes of material nature.
Therefore, the more one is spiritually advanced by devotional service to
the Lord, in exchange for his temporary possessions, the more one is freed
from the attachment of material illusion. And to achieve this stage of life
one must be firmly convinced about spiritual existence and its permanent
effects. To know exactly the permanency of spiritual existence, one must
voluntarily practice to possess less or the minimum only to maintain the
material existence without any difficulty. One should not create artificial
needs. That will help one to be satisfied with the minimum. Artificial
needs of life are activities of the senses. The modern advancement of
civilization is based on these activities of the senses, or, in other words, it
is the civilization of sense gratification. Perfect civilization is the civilization
of atma, or the soul proper. The civilized man of sense gratification is on
an equal level with animals because animals cannot go beyond the activities
of the senses. Above the senses there is the mind. The civilization of mental
speculation is also not the perfect stage of life because above the mind
there is the intelligence, and the Bhagavad-gita gives us information of the
intellectual civilization. The Vedic literatures give different directions for
the human civilization, including the civilization of the senses, of the mind,
of intelligence, and the civilization of the soul proper. The Bhagavad-gita
primarily deals with the intelligence of man, leading one to the progressive
path of the civilization of the spirit soul. And Srimad-Bhagavatam is the
complete human civilization dealing with the subject matter of the soul
proper. As soon as a man is raised to the status of the civilization of the
soul, he is fit to be promoted to the kingdom of God, and the kingdom
of God is described in the Bhagavad-gita as per the above verses.

The primary information of the kingdom of God informs us that there
is no need of sun nor moon nor of electricity, which are all necessary in
this material world of darkness. And the secondary information of the
kingdom of God explains that anyone able to reach that kingdom by
adoption of the civilization of the soul proper, or, in other words, by
the method of bhakti-yoga, attains the highest perfection of life. One is
then situated in the permanent existence of the soul, with full knowledge
of transcendental loving service for the Lord. Bali Maharaja accepted this
civilization of the soul in exchange for his great material possession and
thus became fit for promotion to the kingdom of God. The kingdom of
heaven, which he achieved by dint of his material power, was considered
mosl insignificant in comparison with the kingdom of God.


--- Page 33 ---
Text 19] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 369
Those who have attained the comforts of material civilization, made for
sense gratification, should try to attain the kingdom of God by following
in the footsteps of Bali Maharaja, who exchanged his acquired material
strength, adopting the process of bhakti-yoga as recommended in the
Bhagavad-gita and further explained in the Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 19
तुम्यं च नारद भृशं भगान्‌ विवृद्र-
भवेन साधुपरितुष्ट उवाच योगम्‌ |
ज्ञानं च भागवतमात्मसतच्दीषं
> os =
यदूवासुदवश्शरणा विटुरञ्ञसव nan
tubhyam ca narada bhrsar bhagavan vivrddha-
bhavena sadhu paritusta uvaca yogam
Jianar ca bhagavatam atma-satattva-dipam
yad vasudeva-sarana vidur afijasaiva
tubhyam—unto you; ca—also; narada—O Narada; bhrsam—very nicely;
bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; vivrddha—developed; bhavena—by
transcendental love; sadhu—your goodness; paritustah—being satisfied;
uvaca—described; yogam—service; jianam—knowledge; ca—also; bhagava-
tam—the science of God and His devotional service; atma—the self; sa-
tattva—with all details; dipam—just like the light in the darkness; yat—that
which; vasudeva-$aranah—those who are souls surrendered unto Lord
Vasudeva; viduh—know them ;afijasa— perfectly well; eva—as it is.
TRANSLATION
O Narada, you were taught about the science of God and His transcen-
dental loving service by the Personality of Godhead in His incarnation of
Hamsavatara. He was very much pleased with you, due to your intense
proportion of devotional service. He also explained unto you, lucidly, the
full science of devotional service, which is especially understandable by
persons who are souls surrendered unto Lord Vasudeva, the Personality of
Godhead.


--- Page 34 ---
370 Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 2, Ch. 7]
PURPORT

The devotee and devotional service are two correlative terms. Unless one
is inclined to be a devotee of the Lord, he cannot enter into the intracacies
of devotional service. Lord Sri Krsna wanted to explain the Bhagavad-gita,
which is the science of devotional service, unto Sri Arjuna because Arjuna
was not only a friend of Lord Krsna, but was a great devotee as well. The
whole process is that all living entities, being constitutionally parts and
parcels of the supreme living being, the Absolute Personality of Godhead,
have proportionately minute independence of action also. So the prelimi-
nary qualification for entering into the devotional service of the Lord is
that one become a willing cooperator, and as such one should voluntarily
cooperate with persons who are already engaged in the transcendental
devotional service of the Lord. By cooperating with such persons, the
prospective candidate will gradually learn the techniques of devotional
service, and with the progress of such learning one becomes proportionately
free from the contamination of material association. Such a purificatory
process will establish the prospective candidate in firm faith and gradually
elevate him to the stage of transcendental taste for such devotional service.
Thus he acquires a genuine attachment for the devotional service of the
Lord, and his conviction carries him on to the point of ecstasy, just prior
to the stage of transcendental love.

Such knowledge of devotional service may be divided into two sections,
namely preliminary knowledge of the nature of devotional service and the
secondary knowledge of execution. Bhdgavatam is in relation with the
Personality of Godhead, His beauty, fame, opulence, dignity, attraction
and transcendental qualities which attract one towards Him for exchange
of love and affection. There is a natural affinity of the living entity for the
loving service of the Lord. This affinity becomes artificially covered by
the influence of material association, and Srimad-Bhagavatam helps one
very genuinely remove that artificial covering. Therefore it is particularly
mentioned herein that Srimad-Bhagavatam acts like the lamp of transcen-
dental knowledge. These two sections of transcendental knowledge in
devotional service become revealed to a person who is a soul surrendered
unto Vasudeva; as it is said in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.19), such a great
soul, fully surrendered unto the lotus feet of Vasudeva, is very, very rare.


--- Page 35 ---
Text 20] = Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 371
TEXT 20
५4 - [a 4 at च
चक्रं च दिक्ष्य विहतं दशसु स्वतेजो
मन्वन्तरेषु मनुवंशधरो बिभति |
- .
दुष्टेषु राजसु दमं व्यदधात्‌ खकीर्षि
a (> oon
सव्ये fgg उशतीं प्रथयंधरित्रेः ॥२०॥
cakram ca diksv avihatam dasasu sva-tejo
manvantaresu manu-vamsa-dharo bibharti
dustesu rajasu damam vyadadhat sva-kirtim
satye tri-prstha usatim prathayams caritrath
cakram—the Sudaréana wheel of the Lord; ca—as well as; diksu—in all
directions; avihatam—without being deterred; dasasu—ten sides; sva-tejah—
personal strength; manvantaresu—in different incarnations of Manu; manu-
vamsa-dharah—as the descendant of the Manu dynasty; bibharti—rules
over; dustesu—unto the miscreants; rajasu—upon the kings of that type;
damam—subjection; vyadadhat— performed; sva-kirtim—personal glories;
satye—in the Satyaloka planet; tri-prsthe—the three planetary systems;
usatim—glorious; prathayan—established; caritrath— characteristics.
TRANSLATION
As the incarnation of Manu, the Lord became the descendant of the
Manu dynasty and ruled over the miscreant kingly order, subjecting them
by His powerful wheel weapon. Undeterred in all circumstances, His rule
was characterized by His glorious fame, which spread over the three lokas,
and above them up to the planetary system of the Satyaloka, the topmost
in the universe.
PURPORT
We have already discussed the incarnations of Manu in the First Canto.
In one day of Brahma there are fourteen Manus, changing one after
another. In that way there are 420 Manus in a month of Brahma and
5,040 Manus in one year of Brahma. Brahma lives for one hundred years
in his calculation, and as such there are 504,000 Manus in the jurisdiction
of one Brahma. And there are innumerable Brahmas, and all of them live
only during one breathing period of Maha-Visnu. So we can just imagine


--- Page 36 ---
372 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
how the incarnations of the Supreme Lord work all over the material
worlds, which comprehend only one-fourth of the total energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The Manvantara incarnation chastises all the miscreant rulers of different
planets with as much power as that of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who punishes the miscreants with His wheel weapon. The Manvantara
incarnations disseminate the transcendental glories of the Lord.

TEXT 21
__ (>.
धन्वन्तरिश्च भगवान्‌ खयमेव कीति-
नाम्ना नृणां पुरुरुजां रुज आलु हन्ति।
य॒ज्ञे च भागमसरतायुरवावरुन्ध
आयुष्यवेदमयु्ास्त्यवतीर्य सोके 112211
dhanvantari$ ca bhagavan svayam eva kirtir
namna nypam puru-rujam ruja asu hanti
yajiie ca bhagam amrtayur-avavarundha
ayusya-vedam anusasty avatirya loke
dhanvantarih—the incarnation of God named Dhanvantari; ca—and;
bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; svayam eva—personally Himself;
kirtih—fame personified; namna—by the name; nrnam puru-rujam—of the
diseased living entities; rujah—diseases; asu—very soon; hanti—cures; yajie
—in the sacrifice; ca—also; bhagam—share; amrta—nectar; dyuh—duration
of life; ava—from; avarundhe—obtains; ayusya—of duration of life; vedam
—knowledge; anusasti—directs; avatirya—incarnating; loke—in the universe.
TRANSLATION
The Lord in His incarnation of Dhanvantari very quickly cures the
diseases of the ever diseased living entities simply by His fame personified,
and due to Him only the demigods achieve long duration of life. Thus
the Personality of Godhead becomes ever glorified. He also exacted a
share from the sacrifices, and it is He only who inaugurated the medical
science or the knowledge of medicine in the universe.


--- Page 37 ---
Text 22] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 373
PURPORT
As stated in the beginning of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, everything ema-
nates from the ultimate source of the Personality of Godhead; it is there-
fore understood in this verse that medical science or knowledge in medicine
was also inaugurated by the Personality of Godhead in His incarnation
Dhanvantari, and thus the knowledge is recorded in the Vedas. The Vedas
are the source of all knowledge, and thus knowledge in medical science is
also there for the perfect cure of the diseases of the living entity. The
embodied living entity is diseased by the very construction of his body.
The body is the symbol of diseases. The disease may differ from one
variety to another, but disease must be there just as there is birth and death
for everyone. So, by the grace of the Personality of Godhead, not only
diseases of the body and mind are cured, but also the soul is relieved of the
constant repetition of birth and death. The name of the Lord is also called
bhavausadhi, or the source of curing the disease of material existence.
TEXT 22
क्षत्रं क्षयाय विधिनोपभृतं महात्मा
FATT नरकार्तिलिप्सु |
&
उद्धन्त्यसाववनिकण्टकमु्रवीये-
्िःससङृत्व उरुधारपरश्वधेन ।२२॥
ksatram ksayaya vidhinopabhrtarih mahatma
brahma-dhrug ujjhita-patham narakarti-lipsu
uddhanty asav avanikantakam ugra-viryas
trih-sapta-kriva urudhdra-parasvadhena
ksatram—the royal order; ksayaya—for the matter of diminishing;

vidhina—by destination; upabhrtam—increased in proportion; mahatma—
the Lord in the form of the great sage Parasurama; brahma-dhruk—the
ultimate truth in Brahman; ujjhita-patham—those who have given up the
path of Absolute Truth; naraka-arti-lipsu—desirous to suffer pain in hell;
uddhanti—exacts; asau—all those; avanikantakam—thorns of the world;
ugra-viryah—awfully powerful; trih-sapta—thrice seven times; krtvah—per-
formed; urudhara—very sharp; parasvadhena—by the great chopper.


--- Page 38 ---
374 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
TRANSLATION
When the ruling administrators, who are known as the ksatriyas, turned
astray from the path of Absolute Truth, being desirous to suffer in hell,
the Lord, in His incarnation as the sage Parasurama, uprooted those
unwanted Kings, who appeared as the thorns of the earth. Thus He thrice
seven times uprooted the ksatriyas with His keenly sharpened chopper.
PURPORT
The ksatriyas, or the ruling administrators of any part of the universe,
either on this planet or on other planets, are factually the representatives of
the Almighty Personality of Godhead, and they are meant to lead the
subjects towards the path of God realization. Every state and its adminis-
trators, regardless of the nature of the administration—monarchy or
democracy, oligarchy or dictatorship or autocracy—have the prime re-
sponsibility to lead the citizens toward God realization. This is essential
for all human beings, and it is the duty of the father, spiritual master,
and ultimately the state to take up the responsibility to lead the citizens
towards this end. The whole creation of material existence is made for
this purpose, just to give a chance to the fallen souls who rebelled against
the will of the Supreme Father and thus became conditioned by material
nature. The force of material nature gradually leads one to a hellish con-
dition of perpetual pains and miseries. Those going against the prescribed
rules and regulations of conditional life are called brahmojjhita-pathas, or
persons going against the path of the Absolute Truth, and they are liable
to be punished. Lord Parasurama, the incarnation of the Personality of
Godhead, appeared in such a state of worldly affairs and killed all the
miscreant Kings twenty-one times. Many ksatriya kings fled away at that
time from India to other parts of the world, and according to the authority
of the Mahabharata, the kings of Egypt originally migrated from India
because of Parasurama’s program of chastisement. The kings or admin-
istrators are similarly chastised in all circumstances whenever they become
godless and plan a godless civilization, and that is the order of the
Almighty.
TEXT 23
असःप्रसाद सुमुखः कखया FST
TAH अवतीय JURA |


--- Page 39 ---
Text 23] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 375
নিষ্ঠন্‌ वनं सदयितानुज आविवेश
~ ©
यसिन्‌ विरुध्य दशकन्धर आर्तिमाच्छत्‌।।२३॥
asmat-prasada-sumukhah kalaya kalesa
tksvaku-varmsa avatirya guror nidese
tisthan vanam sa-dayitanuja avivesa
yasmin virudhya dasa-kandhara artim arcchat
asmat—unto us, beginning from Brahma down to the insignificant ant;
prasada— causeless mercy; sumukhah—so inclined; kalaya— with His plenary
extensions; kalesah—the Lord of all potencies; iksvaku—Maharaja lksvaku,
in the dynasty of the sun; vamse—family; avatirya—by descending in;
guroh—of the father or spiritual master; nidese—under the order ০1; tisthan
—being situated in; vanam—in the forest; sa-dayitd-anujah—along with His
wife and younger brother; avivesa—entered in; yasmin—unto whom;
virudhyya—being rebellious; dasa-kandharah—Riavana, who had ten heads;
artim—great distress; arcchat—achieved.
TRANSLATION
Due to His causeless mercy upon all living entities within the universe,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, along with His plenary extensions,
appeared in the family of Maharaja Iksvaku as the Lord of His internal
potency, Sita. Under the order of His father, Maharaja Dasaratha, He
entered the forest and lived there for considerable years with His wife and
younger brother. Ravana, who was very materially powerful, with ten
heads on His shoulders, committed a great offense against Him and was
thus ultimately vanquished.
PURPORT
Lord Rama is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His brothers,
namely Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna, are His plenary expansions. All
four brothers were Vispu-tattva and were never ordinary human beings.
There are many unscrupulous and ignorant commentators on Srimad
Ramayana who present the younger brothers of Lord Ramacandra as
ordinary living entities. But here in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the most


--- Page 40 ---
376 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch.7
authentic scripture on the science of Godhead, it is clearly stated that His
brothers were His plenary expansions. Originally Lord Ramacandra is the
incarnation of Vasudeva, Laksmana is the incarnation of Sankarsana,
Bharata is the incarnation of Pradyumna, and Satrughna is the incarnation
of Aniruddha, expansions of the Personality of Godhead. Laksmijt Sita is
the internal potency of the Lord and is neither an ordinary woman nor
the external potency incarnation of Durga. Durga is the external potency
of the Lord, and she is associated with Lord Siva.

As stated in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 4.7), the Lord appears when there
is discrepancy in the discharge of factual religiousness, and Lord Rama-
candra also appeared under the same circumstances, accompanied by His
brothers, who are expansions of the Lord’s internal potency, and by
Laksmiji Sitadevi.

Lord Ramacandra was ordered by His father, Maharaja Dasaratha, to
leave home for the forest under awkward circumstances, and the Lord, as
the ideal son of His father, carried out the order, even on the occasion of
His being declared the King of Ayodhya. One of His younger brothers,
Laksmanaji, desired to go with Him, and so also His eternal wife, Sitaji,
desired to go with Him. The Lord agreed to both of them, and all together
they entered the Dandakaranya Forest, to live there for fourteen years.
During their stay in the forest, there was some quarrel between Ramacandra
and Ravana, and the latter kidnapped the Lord’s wife, Sita. The quarrel
ended in the vanquishing of the greatly powerful Ravana, along with all
his kingdom and family.

Sita is Laksmijt, or the goddess of fortune, but she is never to be enjoyed
by any living being. She is meant for being worshiped by the living being
along with her husband, Sri Ramacandra. A materialistic man like Ravana
does not understand this great truth, but on the contrary he wants to
snatch Sitadevi from the custody of Rama and thus incurs great miseries.
The materialists, who are after opulence and material prosperity, may take
lessons from the Ramayana that the policy of exploiting the nature of the
Lord without acknowledging the supremacy of the Supreme Lord is the
policy of Ravana. Ravana was very advanced materially, so much so that
he turned his kingdom, Lanka, into pure gold, or full material wealth.
But because he did not recognize the supremacy of Lord Ramacandra and
defied Him by stealing His wife Sita, Ravana was killed and all his opulence
and power destroyed.

Lord Ramacandra is a full incarnation with six opulences in full, and He
is therefore mentioned in this verse as kalesah, or master of all opulence.


--- Page 41 ---
Text 24] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 377
TEXT 24
TW अदादुदधिरूटभयाङ्गवेषो
* oe ^
मागं सपद्यरिपुरं TEE दिधक्षोः |
द्रे खहन्मथितरोषसुशोणद््टया
तातप्यमानमकरारगनक्रचक्रः TESA
yasma adad udadhi ridha-bhayanga-vepo
margam sapady ari-puram haravad didhaksoh
dire suhm-mathita-rosa-susona-drstya
tatapyamana-makaroraga-nakra-cakrah
yasmai—unto whom; adat—gave; udadhih—the great Indian Ocean;
riidha-bhaya—affected by fear; anga-vepah—bodily trembling; margam—
way; sapadi—quickly; ari-puram—the city of the enemy; haravat—like
that of Hara (Mahadeva); didhaksoh—desiring to burn into ashes; dire—
at a long distance; su-hrt—intimate friend; mathita—being aggrieved by;
rosa—in anger; su-$ona—red-hot; drstya—by such a glance; tatapyamana—
burning in heat; makara— sharks;uraga— snakes;nakra— crocodiles;cakrah—
circle.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead Ramacandra, being aggrieved for His
distant intimate friend [Sita], glanced over the city of the enemy Ravana
with red-hot eyes like those of Hara [who wanted to burn the kingdom of
heaven]. The great ocean, trembling in fear, gave Him His way because its
family members, the aquatics like the sharks, snakes and crocodiles, were
being burnt by the heat of the angry red-hot eyes of the Lord.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead has every sentiment of a sentient being,
like all other living beings, because He is the chief and original living entity,
the supreme source of all other living beings. He is the nitya, or the chief
eternal amongst all other eternals. He is the chief one, and all others are
the dependent many. The many eternals are supported by the one eternal,
and thus both the eternals are qualitatively one. Due to such oneness, both
the eternals have constitutionally a complete range of sentiments, but the
difference is that the sentiments of the chief eternal are different in


--- Page 42 ---
378 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 2, Ch. 7
quantity from the sentiments of the dependent eternals. When Ramacandra
was angry and showed His red-hot eyes, the whole ocean became heated
with that energy, so much so that the acquatics within the great ocean felt
the heat, and the personified ocean trembled in fear and offered the Lord
an easy path for reaching the enemy’s city. The impersonalists will see
havoc in this red-hot sentiment of the Lord because they want to see
negation in perfection. Because the Lord is absolute, the impersonalists
imagine that in the absolute the sentiment of anger, which resembles
mundane sentiments, must be conspicuous by absence. Due to a poor fund
of knowledge, they do not realize that the sentiment of the Absolute Per-
son is transcendental to all mundane concepts of quality and quantity. Had
Lord Ramacandra’s sentiment been of mundane origin, how could it
disturb the whole ocean and its inhabitants? Can any mundane red-hot eye
generate heat in the great ocean? These are factors to be distinguished in
terms of the personal and impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth.
As it is said in the beginning of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Absolute
Truth is the source of everything, so the Absolute Person cannot be devoid
of the sentiments that are reflected in the temporary mundane world.
Rather, the different sentiments found in the Absolute, either in anger or
in mercy, have the same qualitative influence, or, in other words, there is
no mundane difference of value because these sentiments are all on the
absolute plane. Such sentiments are definitely not absent in the Absolute,
as the impersonalists think, making their mundane estimation of the
transcendental world.
TEXT 25
° =
वक्षःस्थटस्पदेरु्नमदेन्द्रवाद-
दन्तविंडम्बितककुव्जुष ऊटहासम्‌ |
सद्योऽसुभिः सह्‌ विनेष्यति दारहतै-
विंस्पूरजिते्ेलप उचरतोऽधिसेन्ये ॥२५॥
vaksah-sthala-sparsa-rugna-mahendra-vaha-
dantair vidambita-kakubjusa ddha-hasam
sadyo’subhih saha vinesyati dara-hartur
visphirjitair dhanusa uccarato’dhisainye


--- Page 43 ---
Text 26] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 379
vaksah-sthala—chest; sparsa—touched by; rugna—broken; maha-indra—
the King of heaven; vaha—the conveyor; dantaih—by the trunk; vidambita—
illuminated; kakubjusah—all directions thus being served; adha-hasam—
overtaken by laughter; sadyah—within no time; asubhih—by the life;
saha—along with; vinesyati—was killed; dara-hartuh—of the one who
kidnapped the wife; visphitrjitath—by the tingling of the bow; dhanusah—
bow; uccaratah—strolling fast; adhisainye—in the midst of the fighting
soldiers of both sides.
TRANSLATION
When Ravana was engaged in the battle, the trunk of the elephant
which carried the King of heaven, Indra, broke in pieces, having collided
with the chest of Ravana, and the scattered broken parts illuminated all
directions. Ravana therefore felt proud of his prowess and began to loiter
in the midst of the fighting soldiers, thinking himself the conqueror of all
directions. But his laughter, overtaken by joy, along with his very air of
life, suddenly ceased with the tingling sound of the bow of Ramacandra,
the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
However powerful a living being may be, when he is condemned by God
no one can save him, and, similarly, however weak one may be, if he is
protected by the Lord no one can annihilate him.
TEXT 26
भूमेः सुरेतरषरूथविमर्दितायाः
BITE कलया सितङरष्णकेशः।
जातः करिष्यति जनानुपठक्त्यमागंः
कर्मणि चात्ममदिमोपरिवन्धनानि।।२६।।
bhumeh suretara-variitha-vimarditayah
klesa-vyayaya kalaya sita-krsna-kesah
jatah karisyati jananupalaksya-margah
karmani catma-mahimopanibandhanani


--- Page 44 ---
380 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
bhameh—of the entire world; sura-itara—other than godly persons;
variitha—soldiers; vimarditayah— distressed by the burden; klesa—miseries;
vyayaya—for the matter of diminishing; kalaya—along with His plenary
expansion; sita-krsna—not only beautiful but also black; kesah— with such
hairs; jatah—having appeared; kansyati—would act; jana—people in general;
anupalaksya—rarely to be seen; margah—path; karmanpi—activities; ০৫:
also; atma-mahima—glories of the Lord Himself; upanibandhanani—in
relation to.
TRANSLATION
When the world is overburdened by the fighting strength of kings who
have no faith in God, the Lord, just to diminish the distressed condition of
the world, descends with His plenary portion. The Lord comes in His
original form, with beautiful black hair. And just to expand His transcen-
dental glories, He acts extraordinarily. No one can properly estimate how
great He is.
PURPORT
This verse is especially describing the appearance of Lord Krsna and His
immediate expansion, Lord Baladeva. Both Lord Krsna and Lord Baladeva
are one Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is omnipotent, and He
expands Himself in innumerable forms and energies, and the whole unit is
known as the one Supreme Brahman. Such extensions of the Lord are
divided into two divisions, namely personal and differential. Personal
expansions are called the Visnu-tattvas, and the differential expansions are
called the jiva-tattvas. And in such expansional activity, Lord Baladeva is
the first personal expansion of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In the Visnu Purana, as well as in the Mahabharata, both Krsna and
Baladeva are mentioned as having beautiful black hair, even in Their
advanced age. The Lord is called anupalaksya-margah or, in-still more
technical Vedic terms, avan-manasa-gocara: one who is never to be seen
or realized by the limited sense perception of the people in general. In the
Bhagavad-gita it is said by the Lord, naharn prakasah sarvasya yogamaya
samavrtah (Bg. 7.25). In other words, He reserves the right of not being
exposed to anyone and everyone. Only the bona fide devotees can know
Him by His specific symptoms, and out of such many, many symptoms,
onc symptom is mentioned here in this verse, that the Lord is sita-krsna-
kesah, or one who is observed always with beautiful black hair. Both Lord


--- Page 45 ---
Text 26] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 381
Krsna and Lord Baladeva have such hair on Their heads, and thus even in
advanced age They appeared like young boys sixteen years old. That is the
particular symptom of the Personality of Godhead. In the Brahma-sarhita
it is stated that although He is the oldest personality among all the living
entities, still He always looks like a new, youthful boy. That is the charac-
teristic of a spiritual body. The material body is symptomized by birth,
death, old age and diseases, but the spiritual body is conspicuous by the
absence of those symptoms. Living entities who reside in the Vaikuntha-
lokas in eternal life and bliss have the same type of spiritual body, without
being affected by any signs of old age. It is described in the Bhagavatam
(Canto Six) that the party of Visnudutas who came to deliver Ajamils
from the clutches of the party of Yamaraja appeared like youthful boys,
corroborating the description in this verse. It is ascertained thus that the
spiritual bodies in the Vaikunthalokas, either of the Lord or of the other
inhabitants, are completely distinct from the material bodies of this world.
Therefore, when the Lord descends from that world to this world, He
descends in His spiritual body of Atma-maya or internal potency, without
any touch of the bahiranga-maya or external material energy. The allega-
tion that the impersonal Brahman appears in this material world by
accepting a material body is quite absurd. Therefore the Lord, when He
comes here, has not a material body, but a spiritual body. The impersonal
brahmajyoti is only the glaring effulgence of the body of the Lord, and
there is no difference in quality between the body of the Lord and the
impersonal ray of the Lord, called brahmajyoti.

Now the question is why the Lord, who is omnipotent, comes here to
diminish the burden of the world, created by the unscrupulous kingly
order. Certainly the Lord does not need to come here personally for such
purposes, but He actually descends to exhibit His transcendental activities
in order to encourage His pure devotees, who want to enjoy life by chanting
the glories of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gita it is stated (Bg. 9.13-14) that
the mahatmas, great devotees of the Lord, take pleasure in chanting of the
activities of the Lord. All Vedic literatures are meant for turning one’s
attention towards the Lord and His transcendental activities. Thus the
activities of the Lord, in His dealings with worldly people, create a subject
matter for discussion by His pure devotees.

TEXT 27
तोकेन जीवहरणं यदु ट्किकाया-
खैमासिकस्य च पदा शकटोऽपदृत्तः।


--- Page 46 ---
382 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
यद्‌ रिङ्गतान्तरगतेन free
५ 3
उन्मूखनं तितरथाञंनयोनं भाव्यम्‌ २७॥
tokena jiva-haranam yad uluki-kayas
trai-masikasya ca pada sakato’pavrttah
yad ringatantaragatena divi-sprsor va
unmalanam tv itaratharjunayor na bhavyam
tokena—by a child; jiva-haranam—Kkilling a living being; yat—one which;
uliki-kayah—assumed the giant body of a demon; trai-masikasya—of one
who is only three months old; ca—also; pada—by the leg; Sakatah upavrt-
tah—turned over the cart; yat—one who; ringata—while crawling; antara-
gatena—being overtaken;divi—high in the sky; spréoh— touching; va—either;
unmitlanam—uprooting; tu—but; itaratha—anyone else than; arjunayoh—
of the two arjuna trees; na bhavyam—was not possible.
TRANSLATION
There is no doubt about Lord Krsna’s being the Supreme Lord, other-
wise how was it possible for Him to kill a giant demon like Patana when
He was just on the lap of His mother, to overturn a cart with His leg when
He was only three months old, to uproot a pair of arjuna trees, so high
that they touched the sky, when He was only crawling. All these activities
are not possible for anyone other than the Lord Himself.
PURPORT
One cannot manufacture a God by one’s mental speculation or by
numerical votes, as has become a practice for the less intelligent class of
men. God is God eternally, and an ordinary living entity is eternally a part
and parcel of God. God is one without a second, and the ordinary living
entities are many without number. All such living entities are maintained
by God Himself, and that is the verdict of the Vedic literatures. When Krsna
was on the lap of His mother, the demon Piitana appeared before His
mother and prayed to nurture the child in her lap. Mother # ३६०१३ agreed,
and the child was transferred onto the lap of Patana, who was in the garb


--- Page 47 ---
Text 27] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 383
of a respectable lady. Piitana wanted to kill the child by smearing poison
on the nipple of her breast. But when everything was complete, the Lord
sucked her breast along with her very air of life, and the demon’s gigantic
body, said to be as long as six miles, fell down. But Lord Krsna did not
need to expand Himself to the length of the she-demon Piitana, although
He was quite competent to extend Himself more than six miles long. In His
Vamana incarnation He posed Himself as a dwarf brahmana, but when He
took possession of His land, promised by Bali Maharaja, He expanded His
footstep to the top end of the universe, extending over thousands and
millions of miles. So it was not very difficult for Krsna to perform a
miracle by extending His bodily feature, but He had no desire to do it
because of His deep filial love for His mother, Ya$oda. If Yasoda would
have seen Krsna in her lap extending six miles to cope with the she-demon
Piitana, then the natural filial love of Yasoda would have been hurt because
in that way Yasoda would come to know that her so-called son, Krsna, was
God Himself. And with the knowledge of the Godhead of Krsna, Yasoda
may1 would have lost the temper of her love for Krsna as a natural mother.
But as far as Lord Krsna is concerned, He is God always, either as a child
on the lap of His mother, or as the coverer of the universe, Vamanadeva.
He does not require to become God by undergoing severe penances,
although some men think of becoming God in that way. By undergoing
severe austerities and penances, one cannot become one or equal with God,
but one can attain most of the godly qualities. A living being can attain
godly qualities to a large extent, but he cannot become God; whereas
Krsna, without undergoing any type of penance, is God always, either in
the lap of His mother or growing up or at any stage of growth.

So at the age of only three months He killed the Sakatasura who
remained hidden behind a cart in the house of Yasodamayi. And when He
was crawling and was disturbing His mother from doing household affairs,
the mother tied Him with a grinding pestle, but the naughty child dragged
the pestle up to a pair of very high arjuna trees in the yard of Yasodamayi,
and when the pestel was stuck in between the pair of trees, they fell down
with a horrible sound. When Ya$odamayi came to see the happenings, she
thought that her child was saved from the falling trees by the mercy of the
Lord, without knowing that the Lord Himself, crawling in her yard, had
wreaked the havoc. So that is the way of reciprocation of love affairs be-
tween the Lord and His devotees. Yasodamayi wanted to have the Lord as
her child, and the Lord played exactly likea child in her lap,butat the same


--- Page 48 ---
384 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
time played the part of the Almighty Lord whenever it was so required.
The beauty of such pastimes was that the Lord fulfilled everyone’s desire.
In the case of felling the gigantic arjuna tree, the Lord’s mission was to
deliver the two sons of Kuvera, who were condemned to become trees by
the curse of Narada, as well as to play like a crawling child in the yard of
Y asoda, who took transcendental pleasure in seeing such activities of the
Lord in the very yard of her home.
The Lord in any condition is Lord of the universe, and He can act as
such in any form, gigantic or small, as He likes.
TEXT 28
bY = AN
यद्‌ ৭ লজ व्रजपशून्‌ विषतोयपीतान्‌
पालांस्त्वजीवयद्‌ ग्रह दष्िबष्टया |
तच्छद्धयेऽतिविषवीर्यविलोलजिह्ध-
+ a
युचाटयिप्यदुरगं विहरन्‌ हदिन्याम्‌।।२८॥
yad vai vraje vraja-pasin visatoya-pitan
palams tv ajivayad anugraha-drsti-vrstya
tac-chuddhaye’ti-visa-virya-vilola-jihvam
uccatayigyad uragam viharan hradinyam
yat—one who; vai—certainly; vraje—at Vrndavana; vraja-pasin—the
animals thereof; visa-toya—poisoned water; pitan—those who drank;
palan—the cowherd men; tu—also; ajivayat—brought to life; anugraha-drsti
—merciful glance; vrstya—by the showers of; tat—that; suddhaye—for
purification; ati—exceedingly ; visa-virya—highly potent poison; vilola—lurk-
ing; jihvam—one who has such a tongue; uccatayisyat—severely punished;
uragam—unto the snake; viharan—taking it as a pleasure; hradinyam—in
the river.
TRANSLATION
Then also when the cowherd boys and their animals drank the poisoned
water of the River Yamuna, and after the Lord [in His childhood] revived
them by His merciful glance, just to purify the water of the River Yamuna
He jumped into it as if playing and chastised the venomous Kaliya snake,


--- Page 49 ---
Text 29] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 385
which was lurking there, its tongue emitting waves of poison. Who can
perform such Herculean tasks but the Supreme Lord?
TEXT 29
[ .
तत्‌ कमं दिव्यमिव यन्निशि निःशयानं
হানাস্লিনা श्चिवने परिदद्यमाने |
उन्नेष्यति व्रजमतोऽवसितान्तकालं
-
नेत्रे पिधाप्य सबलोऽनधिगम्यवीरयः।।२९॥
tat karma divyam iva yan nisi nihsayanarm
davagnina suci-vane paridahyamane
unnegyati vrajam ०८० vasitanta-kalam
netre pidhapya sabalo’nadhigamya-viryah
tat—that; karma—activity; divyam—superhuman; iva—like; yat—which;
nisi—at night; nihsayanam—sleeping carefreely; dava-agnina—by the flare
of the forest fire; $uci-vane—in the dry forest; paridahyamane— being set
ablaze; unnesyati—would deliver; vrajam—all the inhabitants of Vraja;
atah—hence; avasita—surely; ante-kalam—last moments of life; netre—on
the eyes; pidhapya—simply by closing; sabalah—along with Baladeva;
anadhigamya—unfathomable; viryah—prowess.
TRANSLATION
On the very night of the day of the chastisement of the Kailiya snake,
when the inhabitants of Vrajabhiimi were sleeping carefreely, there was a
forest fire ablaze due to dry leaves, and it appeared that all the inhabitants
were sure to meet their death. But the Lord, along with Balarama, saved
them simply by closing His eyes. Such are the superhuman activities of the
Lord. ’
PURPORT
Although in this verse the Lord’s activity has been described as super-
human, it should be noted that the Lord’s activities are always superhuman,
and that distinguishes Him from the ordinary living being. Uprooting a
gigantic banyan or arjuna tree and extinguishing a blazing forest fire simply


--- Page 50 ---
386 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
by closing one’s eyes are certainly impossible by any kind of human en-
deavor. But not only are these activities amazing to hear, but in fact all
other activities of the Lord, whatever He may do, are all superhuman, as
is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 4.9). And whoever knows the
superhuman activities of the Lord, due to their very transcendental nature,
becomes eligible to enter the kingdom of Krsna, and as such, after quitting
this present material body, the knower of the transcendental activities
of the Lord goes back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 30
गृह्णीत यद्‌ यदुपबन्धममुष्य माता
खर्वं सुतस्य न तु तत्‌ IGT माति।
= - -
यञ्जुम्भतोऽस्य वदने भवनानि गोपी
संवीक्ष्य शङ्कितमनाः प्रतिबोधित।सीत्‌।।३०॥
grhnita yad yad upabandham amusya mata
Sulban sutasya na tu tat tad amugya mati
yaj jrmbhato’sya vadane bhuvanani gopi
sarmviksya $anikita-manah pratibodhitasit
grhnita—by taking up; yat yat—whatsoever; upabandham—ropes for
tying; amusya—His; mata—mother; sulbam—ropes; sutasya—of her son;
na—not; tu—however; tat tat—by and by; amusya—His; mati—was suffi-
cient; yat—that which; jrmbhatah—opening the mouth; asye—of Him;
vadane—in the mouth; bhuvanani—the worlds; gopi—the cowherd woman;
samuviksya—so seeing it; sankita-manah—doubtful in mind; pratibodhita—
convinced in a different way; asit—was so done.
TRANSLATION
When the cowherd woman [Krsna’s foster mother, Yasoda] was trying
to tie the hands of her son with ropes, she found the rope to be always
insufficient in length, and when she finally gave up, Lord Krsna, by and by,
opened His mouth, wherein the mother found all the universes situated.
Seeing this, she was doubtful in her mind, but she was convinced in a
different manner of the mystic nature of her son.


--- Page 51 ---
Text 31] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 387
PURPORT
One day Lord Krsna as the naughty child disturbed His mother Yasoda,
and she began to tie up the child with ropes just to punish Him. But no
matter how much rope she used, she found it always insufficient. Thus
she became fatigued, but in the meantime the Lord opened His mouth, and
the affectionate mother saw within the mouth of her son all the universes
situated together. The mother was astonished, but out of her deep affection
for Krsna she thought that the Almighty Godhead Narayana had kindly
looked after her son just to protect Him from all the continuous calamities
happening to Him. Because of her deep affection for Krsna, she could
never think that her very son was Narayana, the Personality of Godhead
Himself. That is the action of yogamaya, the internal potency of the
Supreme Lord, which acts to perfect all the pastimes of the Lord with
His different types of devotees. Who could play such wonders without
being God?
TEXT 31
नन्दं च मोक्ष्यति भयाद्‌ वरुणस्य ণাহাহু
ओ ~ oon
गोपान्‌ विेषु पिहितान्‌ मयघ्रूनुना च।
अहचाृरतं निशि शयानमतिश्रमेण
लोकं विकुण्टमुपनेष्यति MEd स ।३१॥
nandam ca moksyati bhayad varunasya pasad
gopan bilesu pihitan maya-sinuna ca
ahny aprtam nisi sayanam atisramena
lokam vikuntham upanesyati gokulam sma
nandam—unto Nanda (the father of Krsna); ca—also; moksyati—saves;

bhayat—from the fear of; varunasya—of Varuna, the demigod of water;
pasat—from the clutches of; gopan—the cowherd men; bilesu—in the caves
of the mountain; pihitan—placed; maya-sinuna—by the son of Maya;
ca—also; ahni aprtam—being very engaged during the daytime; nisi—at
night; sayanam—lying down; atisramena—because of hard labor; lokam—
planet; vikuntham—the spiritual sky; upanesyati—He awarded; gokulam—
the highest planet; sma—certainly.


--- Page 52 ---
388 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
TRANSLATION
Lord Krsna saved His foster father Nanda Maharaja from the fear of the
demigod Varuna and released the cowherd boys from the caves of the
mountain, for they were placed there by the son of Maya. Also, to the
inhabitants of Vrndavana, who were busy working during daytime and
sleeping soundly at night because of their hard labor in day, Lord Krsna
awarded promotion to the highest planet in the spiritual sky. All these
acts are transcendental and certainly prove without any doubt His
Godhood.
PURPORT
Nanda Maharaja, the foster father of Lord Krsna, went to take his bath
in the River Yamuna in the dead of night, mistakenly thinking that the
night was already over; thus the demigod Varuna took him to the Varuna
planet just to have a look at the Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna, who
appeared there to release the father. Actually there was no arrest of Nanda
Maharaja by Varuna because the inhabitants of Vrndavana were always
engaged in thinking of Krsna, in constant meditation on the Personality
of Godhead in a particular form of samadhi, or trance of bhakti-yoga.
They had no fear of the miseries of material existence. In the Bhagavad-
gita it is confirmed that to be in association with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead by full surrender in transcendental love frees one from the
miseries inflicted by the laws of material nature. Here it is clearly
mentioned that the inhabitants of Vrndavana were extensively busy in the
hard labor of their day’s work, and due to the day’s hard labor they were
engaged in sound sleep at night. So practically they had very little time
to devote to meditation or to the other paraphernalia of spiritual activities.
But factually they were engaged in the highest spiritual activities only.
Everything done by them was spiritualized because everything was dove-
tailed in their relationship with Lord Sri Krsna. The central point of
activities was Krsna, and as such the so-called activities in the material
world were saturated with spiritual potency, and that is the advantage of
the way of bhakti-yoga. One should discharge one’s duty on Lord Krsna’s
behalf, and all one’s actions will be saturated with Krsna thought, the
highest pattern of trance in spiritual realization.
TEXT 32
गोपैर्मखे प्रतिहते व्रजविष्ठवाय
देवेऽभिवर्षति mm कृपया रिरक्षुः |


--- Page 53 ---
Text 32] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 389
धर्ताच्छिलीन्ध्रमिव सप्त दिनानि सप्त
=
वर्षो महीध्रमनघेककरे सलीलम्‌ 113210
gopair makhe pratihate vraja-viplavaya
deve ’bhivarsati pasun krpaya riraksuh
dhartocchilindhram iva sapta-dinani sapta-
varso mahidhram anaghaikakare salilam
gopaih—by the cowherd men; makhe—in offering a sacrifice to the King
of heaven; pratihate—being hampered; vraja-viplavaya—for devastating the
whole existence of Vrajabhtimi, the land of Krsna’s pastimes; deve—by
the King of heaven; abhivarsati—having poured down heavy rain; pasin—
the animals; krpaya—by causeless mercy upon them; riraksuh— desired to
protect them; dharta—held up; ucchilindhram—uprooted as an umbrella;
iva—exactly like that; sapta-dinani—continuously for seven days; sapta-
varsah—although He was only seven years old; mahidhram—the Govardhana
Hill; anagha—without being tired; ekakare—in one hand only; salilam—
playfully.
TRANSLATION
When the cowherd men of Vrndavana stopped offering sacrifice to the
heavenly King, Indra, under instruction of Krsna, the whole tract of land
known as Vraja was threatened to be washed away by constant heavy
rains for seven days. Lord Krsna, out of His causeless mercy upon the
inhabitants of Vraja, held up the hill known as Govardhana with one
hand only, although He was only seven years old. He did this to protect
the animals from the onslaught of water.
PURPORT
Children play with an umbrella generally known as a frog’s umbrella,
and Lord Krsna, when He was seven years old only, could snatch the
great hill known as the Govardhana Parvata at Vrndavana and hold it for
seven days continually with one hand, just to protect the animals and the
inhabitants of Vrndavana from the wrath of Indra, the heavenly King, who
was denied sacrificial offering by the inhabitants of Vrajabhiimi.


--- Page 54 ---
390 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
Factually there is no need of offering sacrifices to the demigods for
their services if one is engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord.
Sacrifices recommended in the Vedic literature for satisfaction of the
demigods are a sort of inducement to the sacrificers just to realize the
existence of higher authorities. The demigods are engaged by the Lord as
controlling deities of the material affairs, and according to the Bhagavad-
8:8৫, when a demigod is worshiped the process is accepted as the indirect
method for worshiping the Supreme Lord. But when the Supreme Lord is
worshiped directly there is no need of worshiping the demigods or offer-
ing them sacrifices as is recommended in particular circumstances. Lord
Krsna therefore advised the inhabitants of the Vrajabhtimi not to offer
any sacrifices to the heavenly King Indra. But Indra, not knowing
Lord Krsna in Vrajabhiimi, was angry at the inhabitants of Vrajabhtimi
and tried to avenge the offense. But, competent as the Lord was, He saved
the inhabitants and animals of Vrajabhtimi by His personal energy and
proved definitely that anyone who is directly engaged as a devotee of the
Supreme Lord need not satisfy any other demigods, however great, even to
the level of Brahma or Siva. Thus thisincidence definitely proved without a
doubt that Lord Krsna is the Personality of Godhead and He was so in all
circumstances, as a child on the lap of His mother, as a boy seven years
old, and as an old man of 125 years of age. In either case He was never on
the level of the ordinary man, and even in His advanced age He appeared a
young boy sixteen years old. These are the particular features of the
transcendental body of the Lord.
TEXT 33
क्रीडन्‌ নল निशि निश्चाकररस्मिगौयौ
रासोन्मुखः करुपदायतमूच्छितेन |
उदीपितसररुजां वजभृद्रधूनां
हरिष्यति शिरो धनदानुगस्य 1330
kridan vane nisi nisakara-rasmi-gauryam
rasonmukhah kala-padayata-murcchitena
uddipita-smara-rujam vraja-bhrd-vadhinam
hartur harisyati siro dhanadanugasya


--- Page 55 ---
Text 33] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 391

kridan—while engaged in His pastimes; vane—in the forest of Vrndavana;
nisi—nocturnal; nisakara—the moon; rasmi-gauryam—white moonshine;
rasa-unmukhah—desiring to dance with; kala-padayata—accompanied by
sweet songs; miircchitena—and melodious music; uddipita—awakened;
smara-rujam—sex desires; vraja-bhyt—the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi; vadhii-
nam—of the wives; hartuh—of the kidnappers; harigyati—will vanquish;
sirah—the head; dhanada-anugasya—of the follower of the rich Kuvera.

PURPORT

When the Lord was engaged in His pastimes of the rasa dance in the
forest of Vrndavana, enlivening the sexual desires of the wives of the
inhabitants of Vrndavana by sweet and melodious songs, a demon of the
name Sarnikkhactida, a rich follower of the treasurer of heaven [Kuvera],
kidnapped the damsels, and the Lord severed his head from his trunk.

TRANSLATION

We should carefully note that the statements described herein are the
statements of Brahmaji to Narada, and He was speaking to Narada of
events that would happen in future during the advent of Lord Krsna. The
pastimes of the Lord are known to the experts who are able to see past,
present and future, and Brahmaji, being one of them, foretold what
would happen in the future. The killing of Sankhaciida by the Lord is a
more recent incident, after rdsa-lili, and not exactly a simultaneous
affair. In the previous verses we have seen also that the Lord’s engagement
in the forest fire affairs was described along with His pastimes of punishing
the Kaliya snake, and similarly the pastimes of the rasa dance and the
killing of Sankhaciida are also described herein. Fhe adjustment is that all
these incidences would take place in the future, after the time when it was
being foretold by Brahmaji to Narada. The demon Sankhaciida was killed
by the Lord during His pastimes at Horika in the month of Phalguni, and
the same ceremony is still observed in India by the burning of the effigy
of Sankhaciida one day prior to the Lord’s pastimes at Horika generally
known as Holi.

Generally the future appearance and the activities of the Lord or His
incarnations are foretold in the scriptures, and thus the pseudo-incarnations
are unable to cheat persons who are in the knowledge of the events as they
are described in the authoritative scriptures.


--- Page 56 ---
2) Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 2, Ch. 7
TEXTS 34-35
£ ~
ये च प्रम्बखरददुरकेश्यरिष्ट-
By ক [+ अ
महछमकसयवनाः क[पपाण्ड्‌ काद्याः |
अन्ये च शचाल्वङ्ुजवल्वलदन्तवक्र-
सपरोक्षशम्बरवरिदुरथरुकिममुख्याः 11331)
ये gy समितिश्चालिन आत्तचापाः
- <
FATA AHATET TARTRATE |
ए &
याखन्त्यदश्ेनमञं बलपाथेभीम्‌-
व्याजाह्ययेन हरिणा निलयं तदीयम्‌।।३५॥
ye ca pralamba-khara-dardural:esy-arista-
mallebha-kamsa-yavanah lapi-paundrakadyah
anye ca Salva-kuja-balvala-dantavakra-
saploksa-Sambara-vidaratha-rukmi-mukh yah
ye va mrdhe sumili-salina attacapah
kamboja-malsya-kuru-sriijaya-kaikayadyah
yasyanly adarsanam alum bala-parthe-bhima-
vydjahvayena harina nilayam tadiyam
ye—all those; ca—totally; praelamba—the demon named Pralamba; khara
sardhavasura; dardure—Bakasura; kesi—the 1৫68] demon; arista—the
mon Aristasura; malle—a wrestler in the court of Karmsa; ibha-
wvalayapida; kemse—the King of Mathura and the maternal uncle of
sna; yavanah—the kings of Persia and other adjoining places; kapi—
ivida; paundrake-adyah—Paundraka and others; anye—others; ca—as
ach 85; $alva—King Salva; kuja—Narakasura; balvala—King Balvala;
ntavakra—the brother of Si$upala, a dead rival of Krsna’s; saptokse—
ng Saptoksa; Sambara—King Sambara; viditratha—King Vidaratha; rukmi-
tkhyah—the brother of Rukmini, the first Queen of Krsna at Dvaraka.
—all those; va—either; mpdhe—in the battlefield; samiti-Salinah—all
ry powerful; datta-capah—well equipped with bows and arrows; kamboje—
1 King of Kamboja; matsya—the King of Dvarbhanga; kuru—the sons of
irtaragtra; sritjaya— King Srijaya; kaikaya-adyah—the King of Kekaya and
hers; yasyanti—would attain; adearsanam—impcrsonal merging within the
uhmajyoti; alam—what to speak of; bala—Baladeva, the elder brother of


--- Page 57 ---
Texts 34-35] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 393
Krsna; partha— Arjuna; bhima—the second Pandava; vydja-ahvayena—by the
false names; harina—by Lord Hari; nilayam—the abode; tadiyam— of Him.
TRANSLATION
All demonic personalities like Pralamba, Dhenuka, Baka, 1৫০81, Arista,
Canuira, Mustika, Kuvalayapida elephant, Kamsa, Yavana, Narakasura, and
Paundraka, and great marshals like Salva, Dvivida monkey, and Balvala,
Dantavakra, the seven bulls, Sambara, Vidaratha and Rukmi, as also great
warriors like Kamboja, Matsya, Kuru, Srijaya and Kekaya, would all
fight vigorously, either with the Lord Hari directly or with Him under His
names of Baladeva, Arjuna, Bhima, etc. And the demons, thus being killed,
would attain either the impersonal brahmajyoti or His personal abode in
the Vaikuntha planets.
PURPORT
All manifestations, both in the material and spiritual worlds, are
demonstrations of the different potencies of Lord Krsna. The Personality
of Godhead Baladeva is llis immediate personal expansion, and Bhima,
Arjuna, etc., are His personal associates. The Lord would appear (and He
does so whenever He appears) with all His associates and potencies.
Therefore the rebellious souls, like the demons and demoniae men, men-
tioned by names like Pralamba, ete, would be Killed either by the Lord
Himself or by His associates. All these affairs will be clearly explained in
the Tenth Canto. But we should know well that all the above-mentioned
living entities Killed would attain salvation cither by being merged in the
brahmajyoti of the Lord or being allowed to enter into the abodes of the
Lord called Vaikunpthas. This is already explained by Bhismadeva (First
Canto). All persons who participated in the Battlefield of Kuruksetra or
otherwise with the Lord or with Baladeva, etc., would be benefitted by
attaining spiritual existence according to the situation of the mind at the
time of death. Those who recognized the Lord would enter Vaikuntha,
and those who estimated the Lord as a powerful being only would attain
salvation by merging into the spiritual existence of the impersonal bralma-
Jyoti of the Lord. Bul every one of them would get release from material
existence. Since such is the benefit of those who played with the Lord
inimically, one can imagine what would be the position of those who
devoutly served the Lord in transcendental relationship with Him.


--- Page 58 ---
394 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
TEXT 36
कालेन मीलितधियामवग्रश्य नृणां
स्तोकायुषां खनिगमो बत दूरपारः |
आविर्हितस्त्वनुयुगं स हि सत्यवत्यां
৬ ५ -
Jagd विटपशो विभजिष्यति स ॥३६॥
kalena milita-dhiyam avamrsya ninam
stokayusam sva-nigamo bala dira-parah
avirhitas tv anuyugari sa hi satyavatyar
veda-drumarm vita-paso vibhajisyati sma
kalena—in course of time; milita-dhiyam—of the less intelligent persons;
avamyrs$ya—considering the difficulties; nipdm—of humanity at large;
stoka-ayusam—of the short-living persons; sva-nigamah—the Vedic litera-
tures compiled by him; bata—exactly; dire-parah—greatly difficult;
avirhitah—having appeared as; tu—but; anuyugam—in terms of the age;
sah—He, the Lord; hi—certainly; satyavatyam—in the womb of Satyavati;
veda-drumam—the desire tree of the Vedas; vita-pasah—by division of
branches; vibhajisyati—would divide; sma—as it were.
TRANSLATION
The Lord Himself in His incarnation as the son of Satyavati [Vyasa-
deva] would consider His compilation of the Vedic literature to be very
difficult for the less intelligent persons with short life, and thus He would
divide the tree of Vedic knowledge into different branches, according to
the circumstances of the particular age.
PURPORT
Herein Brahma mentions the future compilation of Srimad-Bhagavatam
for the short-lived persons of the Kali age. As explained in the First Canto,
the less intelligent persons of the age of Kali would be not only short-lived,
but also perplexed with so many problems of life due to the awkward
situation of the godless human society. Advancement of material com-


--- Page 59 ---
Text 37] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 395
forts of the body is activity in the mode of ignorance according to the laws
of material nature. Real advancement of knowledge means progress of
knowledge in self-realization. But in the age of Kali the less intelligent
men mistakenly consider the short lifetime of one hundred
years (now factually reduced to about forty or sixty years)
to be all in all. They are less intelligent because they have no
information of the eternity of life, and they identify with the
temporary material body existing for forty years and consider it the
only basic principle of life. Such persons are described as equal to the asses
and bulls. But the Lord, as the compassionate father of all living beings,
imparts unto them the vast Vedic knowledge in short treatises like the
Bhagavad-gita and, for the graduates, the Srimad-Bhagavatam. The Puranas
and the Mahabharata are also similarly madeby Vyasadevafor the different
types of men in the modes of material nature. But none of them are
independent of the Vedic principles.
TEXT 37
> Ce on 0
देवद्विषां नगमवतमान লাদঘবালা
पूर्भिर्मयेन विहिताभिरदश्यतूभिः |
लोकान्‌ মনা मतिविमोहमतिप्रलोभं
वेषं विधाय बहु भाष्यत ओपधम्पंम्‌।। ३७॥
deva-dvisarn nigama-vartmani nisthitanarm
purbhir mayena vihitabhir adrsya-tarbhih
lokan ghnatam mati-vimoham atipralobham
vesam vidhaya bahu bhasyata aupadharmyam
deva-dvisam—of those who were envious of the devotees of the lord;
nigama—the Vedas; vartmani—on the path of; nisthitanam—of the well
situated; piarbhih—by rockets; mayena— made by the great scientist Maya;
vihitabhih—made by ; adrsya-tirbhih—unseen in the sky; lokan—the differ-
ent planets; ghnatam—of the killers; mati-vimoham—bewilderment of the
mind; atipralobham— very attractive; vesam—dress; vidhaya— having done
so; bahu bhasyate—would talk very much; aupadharmyam— subreligious
principles.


--- Page 60 ---
396 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
TRANSLATION
When the atheists, after being well versed in the Vedic scientific
knowledge, would annihilate inhabitants of different planets, flying unseen
in the sky on well-built rockets prepared by the great scientist Maya, the
Lord would bewilder their minds by dressing Himself attractively as
Buddha and would preach on subreligious principles.
PURPORT
This incarnation of Lord Buddha is not exactly the same Buddha incar-
nation as we have in the present history of mankind. According to Srila
Jiva Gosvami, the Buddha incarnation mentioned in this verse appeared in
a different Kali age. In the duration of life of one Manu there are more
than seventy-two Kali-yugas, and in one of them the particular type of
Buddha mentioned here would appear. Lord Buddha incarnates at a time
when the people are most materialistic and preaches common-sense reli-
gious principles. Such ahimsa is not a religious principle itself, but it is an
important quality for persons who are actually religious. It is a common-
sense religion because one is advised to do no harm to any other animal or
living being because such harmful actions are equally harmful to him who
does the harm. But before learning these principles of nonviolence one has
to learn two other principles, namely to be humble and to be prideless.
Unless one is humble and prideless, one cannot be harmless and non-
violent. And after being nonviolent onc has to learn tolerance and sim-
plicity of living. One must offer respects to the great religious preachers
and spiritual leaders and also train the senses for controlled action, learning
to be unattached to family and home, and enacting devotional service to
the ford, ete. At the ultimate stage onc has to accept the Lord and become
1115 devotee; otherwise there is no religion. In religious principles there
must be God in the center; otherwise simple moral instructions are simply
subreligious principles, generally known as upadharma, or nearness to
religious principles.
TEXT 38
यद्यालयेपष्वपि सतां न हरेः कथाः स्युः
पानण्डिनो द्विजजना व्रषला TZ |


--- Page 61 ---
Text 38] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 397
an ~ =
स्वाहा स्वधा वषाडतिसख [REA I
~ ~ हि
शास्ता भविष्यति कठेभं ग्वान्‌ युगान्ते IEA]!
yarhy alayesv api satan na hareh kathah syuh
pasandino dvija-jana vrsala nrdevah
svaha svadha vesad iti sma giro na yatra
sasta bhavisyati kaler bhagavan yugante
yarhi—when it would so happen;alayesu—in the residence of’; api—even;
satam—civilized gentlemen; na—noj; hareh—of the Personality of Godhead;
kathah—topics; syuh—would take place; pasandinah—atheists; dvija-janah—
persons declaring themselves to be the higher three classes (brahmanas,
ksatriyas and vaisyas); vrsalah—the lower class $itdras; nr-devah—ministers
of the government; svaha—hymns to perform sacrifices; svadha—the ingre-
dients to perform sacrifices; vasaf—the altar of sacrifice; iti—all these;
sma—shall; girah—words; na—never; yatra—anywhere; sasta—the chastiser;
bhavisyati—would appear; kaleh—of the Kali age; bhagavan—the Personality
of Godhead; yuga-ante—at the end of.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, at the end of Kali-yuga, when there would exist no topics
on the subject of God, even at the residences of so-called saints and re-
spectable gentlemen of the three higher castes, and when the power of
government would be transferred to the hands of ministers elected from
the lowborn ৪0013 class or those less than them, and when there would be
nothing known of the techniques of sacrifice, even by word, at that time
the Lord would appear as the supreme chastiser.
PURPORT
The symptoms of the worst conditions of the material world, at the last
stage of this age, called Kali-yuga, are stated herein. The sum and substance
of such conditions is godlessness. Even the so-called saints and higher
castes of the social orders, generally known as the dvija-janas or the twice-
born, will become atheists. As such, all of them will practically forget even
the holy name of the Lord, and what to speak of His activities. The higher
castes of society, namely the intelligent class of men guiding the destinies


--- Page 62 ---
398 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
of the social orders, the administrative class of men guiding the law and
order of the society, and the productive class of men guiding the economic
development of the society, must all be properly well versed in knowledge
of the Supreme Lord, knowing factually His name, quality, pastimes, en-
tourage, paraphernalia and personalities. The saints and the higher castes or
orders of the society are judged by their proportion of knowledge in the
science of God, or tattva-jiiana, and not by any kind of birthright or bodily
designations. Such designations, without any knowledge of the science of
God and practical knowledge of devotional service, are considered to be but
decorations of dead bodies. And when there is too much inflation of these
decorated dead bodies in society, there develop so many anomalies in the
progressive, peaceful life of the human being. Because of the lack of
training or culture in the upper section of the social orders, they are no
more to be designated as the dvija-janas, or the twice-born. The significance
of being twice-born has been explained in many places in these great
literatures, and again one is being reminded herewith that birth, executed
by the sex life of the father and the mother, is called animal birth. But
such animal birth and progress of life on the animal principles of eating,
sleeping, fearing and mating (without any scientific culture of spiritual
life) is called the ৪807৫ life, or, to be more explicit, the uncultured life of
the lower class of men. It is stated herein that the governmental power of
the society in the Kali-yuga would be passed over to the uncultured, god-
less laborer classes of men, and thus the nrdevas (or the ministers of the
government) would be the wvrsalas, or the uncultured lower-class men of
society. No one can expect any peace and prosperity in a human society
full of uncultured lower classes of men. The symptoms of such uncultured
social animals are already in vogue, and it is the duty of the leaders of men
to take note of it and try to reform the social order by introducing the
principles of twice-born men trained in the science of God consciousness.
This can be done by expanding the culture of Srimad-Bhdgavatam all over
the world. In the degraded condition of the human society, the Lord in-
carnates as the Kalki avatara and kills all the demonic without mercy.
TEXT 39
~ - -
सर्गे तपोऽहमृषयो नव ये प्रजेशाः
स्थानेऽथ धमेमखमन्वमरावनीक्ञाः |


--- Page 63 ---
Text 39] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 399
अन्ते त्वधमेहरमन्पुवशाषुरा्या
मायाविभूतय इमाः पुरुशक्तिभाजः 11311
sarge tapo’ham rsayo nava ye prajesah
sthane’tha dharma-makha-manv-amaravanisah
ante tv adharma-hara-manyuvasasuradya
maya-vibhiitaya imah puru-sakti-bhajah
sarge—in the beginning of the creation; tapah—penance; aham—myself;
rsayah—sages; nava—nine; ye prajesth—those who would generate; sthane—
in the middle while maintaining the creation; atha— certainly; dharma
religion; makha—Lord Visnu; manu—the father of mankind; amara—the
demigods deputed to control the affairs of maintenance;avanisah—and the
kings of different planets; ante—at the end; tu—but; adharma—irreligion:
hara—Lord Siva; manyu-vasa—subjected to anger; asura-ddyah—atheists,
the enemies of the devotees; maya—energy; vibhiatayah—powerful repre-
sentatives; imah—all of them; puru-sakti-bhajah— of the Supreme Powerful
Lord.
TRANSLATION
At the beginning of creation there is penance, myself | Brahmi], the
Prajapatis, and great sages who generate; then, during the maintenance of
the creation, there is Lord Visnu, the demigods with controlling powers,
and the kings of different planets. But at the end there is irreligion, and
then Lord Siva and the atheists full of anger, etc. All of them are different
representative manifestations of the energy of the supreme power, the
Lord.
PURPORT
The material world is created by the energy of the Lord, which is
manifested in the beginning of the creation by the penance of Brahmaji.
the first living being in the creation, and then there are the nine Prajapatis.
known as great sages. In the stage when the creation is maintained,
there are devotional service to Lord Visnu, or factual religion, the dif-
ferent demigods, and the kings of different planets who maintain the
world. At last, when the creation is preparing to wind up, there is first
the principle of irreligion, then Lord Siva along with the atheists, full


--- Page 64 ---
400 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
of anger. But all of them are but different manifestations of the Supreme
Lord. Therefore Brahma, Visnu and Mahadeva (Siva) are different incarna-
tions of the different modes of material nature. Visnu is the Lord of the
mode of goodness. Brahma is the lord of the mode of passion, and Siva
is the lord of the mode of ignorance. Ultimately, the material creation is
but a temporary manifestation meant to give the chance of liberation to
the conditioned souls who are entrapped in the material world, and one
who develops the mode of goodness under the protection of Lord Vispu
has the greatest chance of being liberated by following the Vaisnava
principles and thus being promoted to the kingdom of God, no more to
return to this miserable material world.
TEXT 40
=© © र = ©
विन्णोनु बीयेगणनां कतमोऽदंतीद
यः पार्थिवान्यपि कविर्विममे रजांसि।
चस्कम्भ यः सखरहसास्खलता fg
यस्मात्‌ त्रिस म्यप्षदनादुरु कम्पयानम्‌।। ४ |
visnor nu virya-gananam katamo’rhatiha
yah parthivany api kavir vimame rajarisi
caskambha yah sva-rahasaskhalata tri-prstham
yasmat tri-samya-sadanad uru-kampayanam
visnoh—of Lord Visnu; nu—but;virya—prowess; gananam—in the matter
of accounting; katamah—who else; arhati—is able to do it; iha—in this
world; yah—one who; parthivani—the atoms; api—also; kavih—great scien-
tist; vimame—might have counted; rajamsi— particles; caskambha—could
catch; yah—one who; sva-rahasa—by His own leg; askhalata—without being
hampered; tri-prstham—the topmost planetary space; yasmat—by which;
tri-samya—the neutral state of the three modes; sadanat--up to that place;
uru-kampayanam—moving very greatly.
TRANSLATION
Who can describe completely the prowess of Visnu? Even the scientist,
who might have counted the particles of the atoms of the universe, cannot


--- Page 65 ---
Text 41] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 401
do so. Because it is He only who, in His form of Trivikrama, moved His leg
effortlessly beyond the topmost planet, Satyaloka, up to the neutral
state of the three modes of material nature. And all were moved.
PURPORT
The highest scientific advancement of the material scientist is atomic
energy. But the material scientist is not able to have an estimation of the
particles of atoms contained in the whole of the universe. But even if one
is able to count such atomic particles or is able to roll up the sky, like
one’s bedding, even then one is unable to estimate the extent of the
prowess and energy of the Supreme Lord. He is known as Trivikrama
because once, in His incarnation of Vamana, He expanded His leg beyond
the highest planetary system of Satyaloka and reached the neutral state of
the modes of nature called the covering of the material world. There are
seven layers of material coverings over the material sky, and the Lord
could penetrate even those coverings. And with His toe He made a hole
through which the water of the Causal Ocean filters into the material sky,
and the current is known as the sacred Ganges, which purifies the planets
of the three worlds. In other words, no one is equal to the transcendentally
powerful Visnu. He is omnipotent, and no one is equal to or greater
than Him.
TEXT 41
नान्तं षिदाम्यहमपी मुनयोऽग्रजास्ते
=
APES पुरुषस्य कुतोऽवरा ये |
गायन्‌ गुणान्‌ হযাহানালল आदिदेवः
शेषोऽधुनापि समवस्यति नास्य पारम्‌॥।४१॥
nantam vidaimy aham ami munayo’gra-jas te
maya-balasya purusasya kuto vara ye
gayan gunan dasa-satanana adi-devah
$eso’dhunapi samavasyati nasya param
na—never; antam—end; vidimi—de 1 know; aham—myself; ami—and all

those; munayah—great sages; agra-jah—born prior to yourself; te—you;
maya-balasya—of the omnipotent; purusasya—of the Personality of God-


--- Page 66 ---
402 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
head; kutah—what to speak of others; avarah—born after us; ye—those
gayan—Dby singing; gunan—the qualities; dasa-Sata-ananah—one who has ten
hundred faces; adi-devah—the first incarnation of the Lord; sesah—known
as Sesa; adhund—up to date; api—even; samavasyati—can achieve; na—not:
asya—of Him; param— limit.
TRANSLATION
Neither myself nor all the sages who were born before you know fully
the omnipotent Personality of Godhead. So what can others, who are
born after us, know about Him? Even the first incarnation of the Lord.
namely Sesa, has not been able to reach the limit of such knowledge.
although He is describing the qualities of the Lord with ten hundred
faces.
PURPORT
The omnipotent Personality of Godhead has primarily three potential
manifestations, namely internal, external, and marginal potencies, with
unlimited expansions of these three energies. As such, the potential ex-
pansions can never be calculated by anyone because even the Personality
of God Himself, as the incarnation of Sesa, could not estimate the
potencies, although He has been describing them continually with His one
thousand faces.
TEXT 42
येषां स एष॒ भगवान्‌ दययेदनन्तः
सर्वारमनाधितपदो यदि निव्य॑लीकम्‌।
ते दुस्तरामतितरन्ति च देवमायां
= 1
नेषां ममाहमिति धीः ATE ।।४२॥
yesar sa esa bhagavan dayayed anantah
sarvatmanasrita-pado yadi nirvyalikam
te dustaram atitaranti ca deva-mayam
naisam mamaham iti dhih sva-srgala-bhaksye


--- Page 67 ---
Text 42] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 403

yesam—unto those only; sah—the Lord; esah—the; bhagavan—the Person-
ality of Godhead; dayayet—does bestow His mercy; anantah—the unlimi-
ted potential; sarva-atmana—by all means withoul reservation; asrita-padah
—surrendered soul; yadi—il such surrender; nirvyalikam—without preten-
tion; te—Lhose only; dustaram—insurmountable; atitaranti—can overcome;
ca—and the paraphernalia; deva-mayam—diverse energies of the Lord; na—
not;esam—ol them; mama—mine;aham—myself; iti— thus; dhih— conscious;
$va—dogs; §rgala—jackals; bhaksye—in the matter of eating.

TRANSLATION
But anyone who is specifically favored by the Supreme Lord, the
Personality of Godhead, due to unalloyed surrender unto the service of
the Lord, can overcome the insurmountable ocean of illusion and can
understand the Lord also. But those who are attached to this body, which
is meant to be eaten up at the end by dogs and jackals, cannot do so.
PURPORT

The unalloyed devotees of the Lord know the glories of the Lord in the
sense that they can understand how great the Lord is and how great is His
expansion of diverse energy. Those who are attached to the perishable
body can hardly enter into the realm of the science of Godhead. The whole
materialistic world, based on the conception of the material body as the
self, is ignorant of the science of God. The materialist is always busy work-
ing for the welfare of the material body, not only of his own but also that
of his children, kinsmen, communitymen, countrymen, cte. They have
many branches of philanthropic and altruistic activities from a political,
national, and international angle of vision, but none of the field work can
go beyond the jurisdiction of the misconception of identifying the
material body with the spirit soul. Unless, therefore, one is saved from the
wrong conception of the body and the soul, there is no knowledge of
Godhead, and unless there is knowledge of God, all advancement of mate-
rial civilization, however dazzling, should be considered to be a failure.


--- Page 68 ---
404 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto Z, Ch. ८
TEXTS 43-45
वेदाहमङ्ग परमस्य हि योगमायां
+ = (५
यूय AY भगवानथ दत्यवयंः |
पल्ली मनोः स च मनु तदात्मना
त
Sri उत भुव ॥४३॥
HIST विदेहगाधि-
रघ्वूम्बरीपसगरा गयनादुषाद्याः |
क
मान्धात्रलकंशतधन्वलुरन्तिदेवा
देवव्रतो बछिरमूर्तरयो Ra: ॥४४।।
सौमयुतङ्कशिबिदेवरपिप्पलाद्‌-
सारसखतोद्धवपराशरभूरिषेणाः ।
येऽन्ये विभीषणहन्‌सदुपेन्द्रदत्त-
©
पाथ।्िषेणविदुरश्रुतदेववर्याः ॥४५॥
vedaham anga paramasya hi yoga-mayam
yaya bhavas ca bhagavan atha daitya-varyah
patni manoh sa ca manus ca tad-atmajas ca
pracinabarhir rbhur ariga uta dhruvas ca
tksvakur aila-mucukunda-videha-gadhi-
raghv-ambarisa-sagara gaya-nahusadyah
mandhatralarka-satadhanvanu-rantideva
devavrato balir amirttarayo dilipah
saubharyutanka-sibi-devala-pippalada-
sarasvatoddhava-parasara-bhurisenah
ye’nye vibhisana-haniimad-upendradatia-
partharstisena-vidura-srutadeva-varyah
veda—know it; aham—myself; anga—O Narada; paramasya—of the Su-
preme; hi—certainly; yoga-mayam—potency; yayam—yourself; bhavah—
Siva; ca—and; bhagavan—the great demigod; atha—as also; daitya-varyah—
Prahlada Maharaja, the great devotee of the Lord born in the family of
the atheist; patni—Satarupa; manoh—of Manu; sah—he; ca—also; manuh—


--- Page 69 ---
Texts 43-45] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 405
Svayambhuva; ca—and; tat-atmajah ca—and his children like Priyavrata, Ut-
tanapada, Devahiti, etc.
TRANSLATION
O Narada, although the potencies of the Lord are unknowable and
immeasurable, still, because we are all surrendered souls, we know how He
acts through yogamiaya potencies. And, similarly, the all-powerful Siva,
the great king of the atheist family, namely Prahlada Maharaja, Svayam-
bhuva Manu, his wife Sataripa, his sons and daughters like Priyavrata,
Uttanapada, Akuti, Devahuti, Prasuti, etc., Pracinabarhi, Rbhu, Anga
the father of Vena, Maharaja Dhruva, Iksvaku, Aila, Mucukunda, Maha-
raja Janaka, Gadhi, Raghu, Ambarisa, Sagara, Gaya, Nahusa, Mandhata,
Alarka, Satadhanu, Anu, Rantideva, Bhisma, Bali, Amurtaraya, Dilipa,
Saubhari, Utarika, Sibi, Devala, Pippalada, Sarasvata, Uddhava, Parasara,
Bhirrisena, Vibhisana, Hanuman, Sukadeva Gosvami, Arjuna, Arstisena,
Vidura, Srutadeva, etc., all also know the potencies of the Lord.
PURPORT
All the great devotees of the Lord, as mentioned above, who flourished
in the past or present, and all devotees of the Lord who will come in the
future, are aware of the different potencies of the Lord along with the
potency of His name, quality, pastimes, entourage, personality, etc. And
how do they know? Certainly it is not by mental speculation, nor by any
attempt by dint of limited instruments of knowledge. By the limited
instruments of knowledge (either senses or the material instruments like
microscopes and telescopes) one cannot even fully know the Lord’s mate-
rial potencies, which are manifested before our eyes. For example there
are many millions and billions of planets far, far beyond the scientist’s
calculation. But these are only the manifestations of the Lord’s material
energy. What can the scientist hope to know of the spiritual potency of
the Lord by such material efforts? Mental speculations, by adding some
dozens of ““if’s” and “maybe’s,” cannot aid the advancement of knowledge
—on the contrary, such mental speculation will only end in despair by
dismissing the case abruptly and declaring the nonexistence of God. The
sane person, therefore, ceases to speculate on subjects beyond the
jurisdiction of his tiny brain, and as a matter of course he tries to learn to
surrender unto the Supreme Lord, who alone can lead one to the platform


--- Page 70 ---
406 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
of real knowledge. In the Upanisads it is clearly said that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead can never be known simply by working very hard
and taxing the good brain, nor can He be known simply by mental specula-
tion and jugglery of words. The Lord is knowable only by one who is a
surrendered soul. Herein Brahmaji, the greatest of all material living beings,
acknowledges this truth. Therefore, the fruitless spoiling of energy by
pursuing the path of experimental knowledge mustbe given up. One should
gain knowledge by surrendering unto the Lord and by acknowledging the
authority of the persons mentioned herein. The Lord is unlimited and,
by the grace of the yogamaya, helps the surrendered soul to know Him
proportionately with the advance of one’s surrendering process.
TEXT 46
ते वै विदन्त्यतितरन्ति च देवमायां
स्रीशद्रहूणशवरा अपि पापजीवाः |
यदयद्यतकम्‌परायणशीलशिकषा-
स्तियग्जना अपि किमु श्चुतथारणा ये ॥४६॥
te vai vidanty atitaranti ca deva-mayari
stri-Sidra-hitna-sabara api papa-jivah
yady adbhuta-krama-parayana-sila-$ik sas
tiryag-jana api kim u $ruta-dharana ye
te—such persons; vai—undoubtedly; vidanti—do know; atitaranti—sur-
pass; ca—also; deva-mayam—the covering energy of the Lord; stri—such as
women; sidra—the laborer class of men; hiina—the mountaineers; sabarah—
the Siberians, or those lower than the siadras; api—although; papa-jivah—
sinful living beings; yadi—provided; adbhuta-krama—one whose acts are so
wonderful; parayapa—those who are devotees; $ila—behavior; siksah—
trained up by, tiryak-janah—even those who are not human beings; api—
also; kim—what; u—to speak of; sruta-dharanah—those who have taken
to the idea of the Lord by hearing about Him; ye—those.
TRANSLATION
Surrendered souls, even from the groups leading sinful lives, such as
the woman, the laborer class, the mountaineers, the Siberians, etc., or


--- Page 71 ---
Text 47] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 407
even the birds and beasts, can also know about the science of Godhead
and become liberated from the clutches of the illusory energy by surrender-
ing unto the pure devotees of the Lord and by following in their footsteps
in devotional service.

PURPORT

Sometimes there are inquiries as to how one can surrender unto the
Supreme Lord. In the Bhagavad-gité (Bg. 18.66) the Lord asked Arjuna
to surrender unto Him, and therefore persons unwilling to do so question
as to where God is and to whom they should surrender. The answer to
such questions or inquiries is given herein very properly. The Personality
of Godhead may not be present before one’s eyes, but if one is sincere in
wanting such guidance the Lord will send a bona fide person who can
guide one properly back to home, back to Godhead. There is no need of
material qualifications for making progress in the path of spiritual realiza-
tion. In the material world, when one accepts some particular type of
service, he is required to possess some particular type of qualification
also. Without this one is unfit for such service. But in the devotional
service of the Lord the only qualification required is surrender. Surrender-
ing oneself is in one’s own hand. If one likes, he can surrender immediately
without any delay, and that begins his spiritual life. The bona fide repre-
sentative of God is as good as God Himself. Or, in other words, the loving
representative of the Lord is more kind and more easy to approach. A sin-
ful soul cannot approach the Lord directly, but such a sinful man
can very easily approach a pure devotee of the Lord. And if one agrees
to put himself under the guidance of such a devotee of the Lord, he
can also understand the science of God and can also become like the
transcendental pure devotee of the Lord and thus get his liberation back
to Godhead, back home for eternal happiness.

Sorealization of the science of Godhead and relief from the unnecessary,
useless struggle for existence are not at all difficult for the willing candidate.
But they are very difficult for persons who are not surrendered souls but
only simple, profitless speculators.

TEXT 47
शश्वत्‌ प्रशान्तमभयं प्रतिबोधमात्रं
TE समं सदसतः परमात्मतत्त्वम्‌ ।
शब्दो न यत्र पुरुकारकवान्‌ क्रियार्थो
माया परत्यभिघुखे च बिलजमाना


--- Page 72 ---
408 Srimad-Bhagavalam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
तद्‌ ন पदं भगवतः परमस्य पुंसो
bh mn ৬ = B_
সন্তানি यद्‌ वदुरजस्सुख वशकम्‌ ॥४७॥
Sasvat presantam ৫018090৫111 pratibodha-matram
suddham samam sad-asatah paramatma-tallvam
sabdo na yatra puru-karekavan kriyartho
maya paraity abhimukhe ca vilajjamana
tad vai padam bhagavatah paramasya [२८17250
brahmeti yad vidur ajasra-sukham visokam
sasvat—eternal; prasantam—without disturbance;abhayam—without fear
pratibodha-matram—a consciousness opposed to the material counterpart
suddham—uncontaminated;samam— without distinction; sat-asatah— of the
cause and effect; paramatma-tattvam—the principle of primeval cause
Sabdah—speculative sound; na—not; yatra—where there is; puru-karakavar
—resulting in fruitive action; kriya@-arthah—for the matter of sacrifice; may:
—illusion; paraiti—flies away; abhimukhe— in front of; ca—also; vilajjamanc
—being ashamed of; tat—that; vai—is certainly; padam—ultimate phase
bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead; paramasya—of the Supreme
pumsah—of the person; brahma—the Absolute; iti—thus: yat—which: णव
known as; ajasra—unlimited; sukham—happiness; visokam— without grief
TRANSLATION
What is realized as the Absolute Brahman is full of unlimited 115
without grief. That is certainly the ultimate phase of the supreme enjoyer
the Personality of Godhead. He is eternally void of all disturbances, with
out any fear, complete consciousness as opposed to matter, uncontam
inated, without any distinction, the principle primeval cause of all cause:
and effects, in whom there is no sacrifice for पार्ट activities, and ir
whom the illusory energy does nol stand.
PURPORT
The supreme enjoyer, Personality of Godhead, is the Supreme Brahman
or the summum bonum because of His being the supreme cause of all
causes. The conception of impersonal Brahman realization is the first step.
due to lis distinction from the illusory conception of material existence.
In other words, impersonal Brahman is a feature of the Absolute distinet


--- Page 73 ---
Text 47] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 409
from the material variegatedness, just as light is a conception distinct from
its counterpart, darkness. But the light has its variegatedness, which is seen
by those who further advance in the light, and thus the ultimate realization
of Brahman is the source of the Brahman light, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the summum bonum or the ultimate source of everything.
Therefore, meeting the Personality of Godhead includes the realization of
the impersonal Brahman as realized at first in contrast with material
incbricty. The Personality of Godhead is the third step of Brahman reali-
zation. As explained in the First Canto, one must understand all three
features of the Absolute—Brahman, Paramatma, and Bhagavan.

Pratibodha-matram is just the opposite conception of material existence.
In matter there are material miseries, and thus in the first realization of
Brahman there is the negation of such material inebrieties and a fecling of
cternal existence distinct from the pangs of birth and death, discase and
old age. That is the primary conception of impersonal Brahman.

The Supreme Lord is the Supreme Soul of everything, and therefore in
the supreme conception affection is realized. The conception of affection
is due to the relationship of soul to soul. A father is affectionate to his
son because there is some relationship of nearness between the son and the
father. But that sort of affection in the material world is full of inebricty.
When the Personality of Godhead is met, the fullness of affection becomes
manifested because of the reality of the affectionate relationship. He is not
the object of affection by material tinges of body and mind, but He is the
full, naked uncontaminated object of affection for all living entities be-
cause He is the Supersoul or Paramdtma within everyones heart. In
the liberated state of affairs, the full-fledged affection for the Lord is
awakened.

As such, there is an unlimited flow of happiness, everlasting, without
any fear of being broken as we have experienced here in the material
world. The relationship with the Lord is never broken; thus there is no
grief and no fear. Such happiness is inexplicable by words, and there can
be no attempt to generate such happiness by fruitive activities by arrange-
ment and sacrifices. But we must know also that happiness, unbroken
happiness, exchanged with the Supreme Person, the Personality of Godhead
as described in this verse, transcends the impersonal conception of the
Upanisads. In the Upanisads the description is more or less negation of the
material conception of things, but this is not denial of the transcendental
senses of the Supreme Lord. Herein also the same is affirmed in the state-
ments about the material elements; they are all transcendental, free from
all contamination of material identification. And also the liberated souls


--- Page 74 ---
410 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 2, Ch. 7
are not devoid of senses; otherwise there cannot be any reciprocation of
unhampered spiritual happiness exchanged between them in spontaneous
unbroken joy. All the senses, both of the Lord and of the devotees, arc
without any material contamination. They are so because they are beyond
the material cause and effects, as it is clearly mentioned herein (sad-asatah
param). The illusory material energy cannot work there, being ashamed
before the Lord and His transcendental devotees. In the material world the
sense activities are not without grief, but here it is clearly said that the
senses of the Lord and the devotees are without any grief. There is a
distinct difference between the material and spiritual senses. And it
should be understood without denying the spiritual senses because of a
material conception.
The senses in the material world are surcharged with material ignorance.
In every way the authorities have recommended purification of the senses
from the material conception. In the material world the senses are manipu-
lated for individual and personal satisfaction, whereas in the spiritual world
the senses are properly used for the purpose for which they were originally
meant, namely the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. Such sensual activi-
tics are natural, and therefore sense gratification there is uninterrupted
and unbroken by material contamination because the senses are spiritually
purified. And such satisfaction of the senses is equally shared by the
transcendental reciprocators. Since the activities are unlimited and con-
stantly increasing, there is no scope for material attempts or artificial
arrangements. Such happiness of transcendental quality is called brehma-
saukhyam, which will be clearly described in the Fifth Canto.
TEXT 48
सभ्यङ नियम्य यतयो यमकर्ततिं
অন্ধ; सखराडिव निपानखनित्रमिन्द्रः Neel
sadhryan niyamya yatayo yama-karta-hetim
Jjahyuh svarad iva nipana-khanitram indrah
sadhryan—artificial mental speculation or meditation; niyamya—control-
ling; yatayah—the mystics; yama-karta-hetim—the process of spiritual cul-
ture; jahyuh—are given up; svarat—fully independent; iva—as; nipana—well;
khanitram—trouble for digging; indrah—the controlling demigod supplying
rains.


--- Page 75 ---
Text 49] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 411
TRANSLATION
In such a transcendental state there is no need of artificial control of
the mind, mental speculation or meditation, as performed by the jaanis
and yogis. Such processes are given up, as the heavenly King, Indra, does
not take Lhe trouble to dig a well.
PURPORT
A poor man in want of water digs a well and undertakes the trouble of
digging. Similarly, {11086 who are poor in transcendental realization specu-
late on the mind or meditate by controlling the senses. But they do not
know that such control of the senses and achievement of spiritual per-
fection are simultaneously made possible as soon as one is factually
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Supreme Person, the
Personality of Godhead. It is for this reason that the great liberated souls
also desire to be associated in hearing and chanting the activities of the
Lord. The example of Indra is very appropriate in this connection. King
Indra of heaven is the controlling deity or demigod for arranging clouds
and supplying rains in the universe, and as such he does not have to take
the trouble to dig a well for his personal water supply. For him, digging
a well for a water supply is simply ludicrous. Similarly, those who are
factually engaged in the loving service of the Lord have attained the
ultimate goal of life, and for them there is no need of mental speculation
to find out the true nature of God or His activities. Nor do such devotees
have to meditate upon the imaginary or real identity of the Lord. Because
they are factually engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,
the Lord’s pure devotees have already achieved the results of mental
speculation and meditation. The real perfection of life is therefore to be
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
TEXT 49
- ~ S -
स श्रेयसामपि विथुभेगवान्‌ यतोऽस्य
[WY
भावस्वमावविहितस्य सतः प्रसिद्धिः |
o (5
देहे खधातुविगमेऽजुविश्ीयमाणे
- - ४५३ _
ज्योमेव तत्र पुरुषो न विशीयेतेऽजः 118


--- Page 76 ---
412 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
sa sreyasam api vibhur bhagevan yato’sya
bhave-svabhave-vihitasya satah prasiddhih
dehe sva-dhatu-vigame nuvisiryamane
vyomeva tatra puruso na visiryate jah

sah—He; sreyasam—all auspiciousness; api—also; vibhuh—the master;
bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; yatah--because; asya-of the living
entity; bhava—natural modes: sva-bhava—own constitution; vihitasya—per-
formances; satah—all good work; prasiddhih— ultimate success; dehe- of
the body; sva-dhatu— forming elements; vigame—being vanquished; anu—
after; visiryamane—having given up; vyoma— sky; iva—like: tatra—there-
upon; puruseh—the living entity; na—never; visiryate—becomes vanquished ;
ejah—due to being unborn.

TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead is the supreme master of everything
auspicious because the results of whatever actions are performed by the
living being, either in the material or spiritual existence, are awarded by the
Lord. As such, He is the ultimate benefactor. Every individual living entity
is unborn, and therefore even after the annihilation of the material
elementary body, the living entity exists, exactly like the air within the
body.
PURPORT

The living entity is unborn and eternal, and as it is confirmed in the
Bhaegavad-gita (Bg. 2.30), the living entity is not exhausted even though
the material elementary body is vanquished. As long as the living entity is
in the material existence, actions performed by him are rewarded in the
next life, or even in the present life. Similarly, in his spiritual life also
actions arc rewarded by the Lord by the five Kinds of liberation. Even the
impersonalist cannot achieve the desired merging into the existence of the
Supreme without being favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita also (Bg. 4.11) that the Lord awards
similar results, as one desires, in one’s present life. The living entities are
given freedom to make their choice, and the Lord awards them according-
ly.

It is the duty of everyone, therefore, to worship devoutly only the
Personality of Godhead to achieve his desired goal. The impersonalist,


--- Page 77 ---
Text 49] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 413
instead of speculating or meditating, can directly execute the routine
devotional service of the Lord and thus casily obtain the desired goal.

The devotees, however, are naturally inclined to become associates of
the Lord without being merged in the spiritual existence, as conceived by
the impersonalist. The devotees, therefore, following their constitutional
instincts, achieve the desired goal of becoming servitors, friends, fathers,
mothers or conjugal lovers of the Lord. The devolional service of the Lord
involves nine transcendental processes of hearing and chanting, etc., and
by performing such easy and natural devotional services the devolees
achieve the highest perfectional results, far, far superior to merging into
the existence of the Brahman. The devotees are, therefore, never advised
to indulge in speculating upon the nature of the Supreme, or artificially
meditating on the void.

One should not, however, misunderstand that after the annihilation of
this present body there is no body by which one can associate with the
Lord face to face. The living entity is unborn. It is not that he is manifest
with the creation of the material body. On the other hand, it is true that
the material body develops only by the desire of the living entity. The
evolution of the material body is due to such desires of the living being.
According Lo the desires of the living being, the material body develops.
So from the spirit soul the material body comes into existence, generated
from the living force. As the living being is eternal, so he exists just like the
air within the body. Air is within and without the body. Therefore when
the external covering, the material body, is vanquished, the living spark,
like the air within the body, continues to exist. And by the direction of
the Lord, because He is the ultimate benefactor, the living entity is al once
awarded the necessary spiritual body befitting his association with the
Lord in the manner of saripya (equal bodily feature), salokya (equal
facility to live in the same planet with the Lord), sarsti (equal possession
of opulence like the Lord), and samipya (equal association with the Lord).

The Lord is so kind that even if a devotee of the Lord cannot fulfill the
complete course of devotional service unalloyed and uncontaminated by
malerial association, he is given another chance in the next life by being
awarded a birth in the family of a devotee or rich man so that without
being engaged in the struggle for material existence, the devotee can finish
the remaining purification of his existence and thus immediately, after
relinquishing the present body, go back home, back to Godhead. This is
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita.

In this connection detailed information is available in the Bhagavat-
sandarbha of Srila Jiva Gosvami Prabhupada. Once achieving the spiritual


--- Page 78 ---
414 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 2, Ch. 7
existence, the devotee is eternally situated there, as already discussed in
the previous verse.
TEXT 50
- ^ ১ o
सोऽयं तेऽभिहितस्तात भगवान्‌ विश्वभावनः |
समासेन हरेनान्यदन्यसात्‌ सदसच यत्‌ ॥५०॥
so’yari (९ 01111105 tata
bhagavan visva-bhavanah
samasena harer nanyad
anyasmat sad-asac ca yat
sah—thal; ayam—the same; te—unto you; abhihitah—cxplained by me;
tata—my dear son; bhagavan— the Personality of Godhead; visva-bhavanah
—the creator of the manifested worlds; samasena—in brief; hareh—without
Hari, the Lord; na—never;anyat— anything else; anyasmat— being the cause
of ; sat—manifested or phenomenal; asat—noumenal ; ca—and; yat— whatever
there may be.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, I have now explained in brief the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is creator of the manifested worlds. Without Him, Hari, the
Lord, there are no other causes of the phenomenal and noumenal
existences.
PURPORT
As we have generally the experience of the temporary, material world
and conditioned souls trying to lord it over the material worlds, so
Brahmaji explained to Naradadeva that this temporary world is the work
of the external potency of the Lord, and the conditioned souls struggling
here for existence are the marginal potency of the Supreme Lord Person-
ality of Godhead, and but for Him, Hari, the Supreme Lord, there is no
other cause for all these phenomenal activities. He is the primeval cause
of all causes. This does not mean, however, that the Lord Himself is
distributed impersonally. He is aloof from all these interactions of the
external and marginal potencies. In the Bhagavad-gita, it is confirmed


--- Page 79 ---
Text 51] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 415
(Bg. 9.4) that by His potencies alone He is present everywhere and
anywhere, and everything that is manifested rests on His potency only, but
He, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always aloof from them.
The potency and the potent are simultaneously one and different from one
another.

One should not deprecate the Supreme Lord for the creation of this
miserable world, just as one should not blame the king for creating a
prisonhouse in the government. The prisonhouse is a necessary institution
of the establishment of the government for those who are disobedient to
the laws of the government. Similarly, this material world, full of miseries,
is a temporary creation of the Lord for those who have forgotten Him and
are trying to lord it over the false manifestation. He, however, is always
anxious to get the fallen souls back home, back to Godhead, and for this
He has given so many chances to the conditioned souls via the authoritative
scriptures, His representatives, and personal incarnations also. Since He
has no direct attachment to this material world, He is not to be blamed
for its creation.

TEXT 51
त ৬ a
इदं भागवतं নাম यन्मे भगवतोदितम्‌ |
. . = a
संग्रहोऽयं विभूतीनां त्वमेतद्‌ विपुरीङुरु 142
एव, bhagavatar nama
yan me bhagavatoditam
sangraho’yar vibhatinam
tvam etad vipulikuru

idam~—this; bhagavatam—the science of Godhead; n@ma—of the name;
yat—that which; me--unto me; bhagavata—by the Personality of Godhead;
uditam—enlightened; sangrahah—is the accumulation of; ayam— His;
vibhatinam—of the diverse potencies;-tvam—your good self; etat—this
science of Godhead; vipuli—expand; kuru—do it.

TRANSLATION
0 Narada, this science of God, Srimad-Bhagavatam, was spoken to me
in a nutshell by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and it was spoken in


--- Page 80 ---
416 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
a nutshell as the accumulation of His diverse potencies. Please expand this
science yourself.
PURPORT

The Bhagavatam in a nutshell, spoken in about half a dozen verses by the
Personality of Godhead, as it will appear ahead, is the science of God, and
it is the potential representation of the Personality of Godhead. He, being
absolute, is nondifferent from the science of God, Srimad-Bhagavatam.
Brahmaji received this science of Godhead from the Lord directly, and he
handed over the same to Narada, who in his turn ordered Srila Vyasadeva
to expand it. So the transcendental knowledge of the Supreme Lord is not
mental speculation by the mundane wranglers, but is uncontaminated,
eternal, perfect knowledge beyond the jurisdiction of material modes.
The Bhagavata Purana is therefore the direct incarnation of the Lord in the
form of transcendental sound, and one should receive this transcendental
knowledge from the bona fide representative of the Lord in the chain of
disciplic succession from the Lord to Brahmaji, from Brahmaji to Narada,
from Narada to Vyasa, from Vyasadeva to Sukadeva Gosvami, from
Sukadeva Gosvami to Siita Gosvami, as the ripened fruit of the Vedic tree
drops from one hand to another without being broken by falling suddenly
from the high branch down to the earth. Therefore unless one hears the sci-
ence of Godhead from the bona fide representative of the disciplic succes-
sion, as above mentioned, it will be a difficult job for one to understand the
theme of the science of Godhead. It should never be heard from the
professional Bhagavatam reciters who earn their livelihood by gratifying
the senses of the audience.

TEXT 52
यथा हरौ भगवति JO भक्तिभविष्यति |
सर्वारिमन्ययिलाधारे इति सङ्करप्य वणय ।५२॥
yatha harau bhagavati
nrnarm bhaktir bhavisyati
sarvatmany akhiladhare
iti sannkalpya varnaya


--- Page 81 ---
Text 52] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 417
yatha—as much as; harau—unto the Personality of Godhead; bhagavati—
unto the Lord; nmam—for human beings; bhaktih—devotional service;
bhavisyati—become enlightened; sarva-agtmani—the Absolute Whole; ak hila-
adhare—unto the summum bonum; iti—thus; sankalpya—by determination;
varnaya—describe.
TRANSLATION
Please describe the science of Godhead with determination and in a
manner by which it will be quite possible for the human being to develop
transcendental devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead Hari,
the Supersoul of every living being and the summum bonum source of all
energies.
PURPORT

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the philosophy of devotional service and the
scientific presentation of man’s relationship with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Prior to the age of Kali there was no need for such a book of
knowledge to know the Lord and His potential energies, but with the
beginning of the age of Kali the human society became gradually influenced
by four sinful principles, namely illegitimate connection with women,
intoxication, gambling and unnecessary killing of animals. Because of these
basic sinful acts, gradually man became forgetful of his eternal relation
with God. Therefore man became blind, so to speak, to his ultimate goal
of life. The ultimate goal of life is not to pass a life of irresponsibility like
the animals and indulge in a polished way in the four animal principles,
namely eating, sleeping, fearing and mating. For such a blind human
society in the darkness of ignorance, Srimad-Bhagavatam is the torchlight
to see things in proper perspective. Therefore it was necessary to describe
the science of God from the very beginning, or from the very birth of the
phenomenal world.

As we have already explained previously, Srimad-Bhagavatam is so
scientifically presented that any sincere student of this great science will
be able to understand the science of God simply by readingit with attention
or simply by regularly hearing it from the bona fide speaker. Everyone is
hankering after happiness in life, but in this age, blind as they are, the
members of human society have no proper vision that the Personality of
Godhead is the reservoir of all happiness because He is the ultimate source
of everything: janmadasya yatah. Happiness in complete perfection without


--- Page 82 ---
418 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
hindrance can be achieved only by our devotional relationship with Him.
And it is only by His association that we can get rid of the distressful
material existence. Even those who are after the enjoyment of this material
world can also take shelter of the great science of 3 nad Bhagavatam, and
they will be successful at the end. Narada is therefore requested or ordered
by his spiritual master to present this science with determination and in
good plan. Narada was never advised to preach the principles of Bhagavatam
to earn a livelihood, but he was ordered by his spiritual master to take the
matter very seriously in a missionary spirit.
TEXT 53
: £
मायां व्णेयतोऽगुप्य ईखवरस्यानुमोदतः |
oo (4
शृण्वतः श्रद्धया नित्यं माययात्मा न अुद्यति।।५३॥
mayarm varnayato’musya
iSvarasyanumodatah
$rnvatah sraddhaya 7১009 0778
mayayatma na muhyati
mayam—affairs of the external energy; varnayatah—while describing;
amusya— of the Lord; iSvarasya— of the Personality of Godhead; anumodatah
—thus appreciating; srnvatah—thus hearing; sraddhaya—with devotion;
nityam— regularly; mayaya— by the illusory energy; atma—the living entity;
na—never; muhyati—becomes illusioned.
TRANSLATION
Activities of the Lord, in association with His different energies, should
be described, appreciated and heard in accordance with the teachings of the
Supreme Lord. If this is done regularly with devotion and respect, one is
sure to get out of the illusory energy of the Lord.”
PURPORT
The science of learning a subject matter seriously is different from the
sentiments of the fanatics. The fanatics or the fools may consider the


--- Page 83 ---
Text 53] Scheduled Incarnations with Specific Functions 419
Lord’s activities in relation with external energy useless for them, and they
may falsely claim to be higher participants in the internal energy of the
Lord, but factually the Lord’s activities, either in relation with the external
energy or with the internal energy, are equally good. On the other hand,
those who are not completely free from the clutches of the external energy
of the Lord should devoutly hear regularly about the activities of the Lord
in relation with the external energy. They should not foolishly jump up to
the activities of the internal energy, falsely attracted by the Lord’s internal
potential activities like His rasa-lila. The cheap reciters of the Bhagavatam
are very much enthusiastic about the Lord’s internal potential activities,
and the pseudo-devotees, absorbed in material sense enjoyment, falsely
jump to the stage of liberated souls and thus fall down deeply into the
clutches of external energy.

Some of them think that to hear about the pastimes of the Lord means
to hear about His activities with the gopis or about His pastimes like
uplifting the Govardhana Hill, etc., and they have nothing to do with the
Lord’s plenary expansions as the purusavataras and Their pastimes of
creation, maintenance, or annihilation of the material worlds. But a pure
devotee knows that there is no difference between the pastimes of the
Lord, either in rasa-lila or in creation, maintenance or destruction of the
material world. Rather, the description of such activities of the Lord as
purusavataras are specifically meant for persons who are in the clutches of
the external energy. Rasa-lila, etc., are meant for the liberated souls and
not for the conditioned souls. The conditioned souls, therefore, must hear
the Lord’s pastimes in relationship with the external energy with appre-
ciation and devotion, and such acts are as good as the hearing of rasa-lila in
the liberated stage. A conditioned soul should not imitate the activities of
liberated souls. Lord Sr Caitanya never indulged in hearing the rasa-lila
with ordinary men.

In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the science of God, the first nine cantos
prepare the ground for hearing the Tenth Canto. This will be further ex-
plained in the last chapter of this canto. In the Third Canto it will be more
explicit. A pure devotee of the Lord, therefore, must begin reading or
hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam from the very beginning, and not from the
Tenth Canto. We have several times been requested by some so-called
devotees to take up the Tenth Canto immediately, but we have refrained
from such an action because we wish to present Srimad-Bhdgavatam as
the science of Godhead and not as a sensuous understanding for the
conditioned souls. This is forbidden by such authorities as Sr1 Brahmaj.
By reading and hearing Srimad-Bhdgavatam as a scientific presentation,


--- Page 84 ---
420 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 7
the conditioned souls will gradually be promoted to the higher status of
transcendental knowledge after being freed from the illusory energy based
on sense enjoy ment.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Seventh
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Scheduled Incarnations with
Specific Functions.”


--- Page 85 ---
CHAPTER EIGHT
Questions by King Pariksit
TEXT 1
राजोवाच
=
जह्मणा चोदितो ब्रह्मन्‌ गुणाख्यानेऽगुणस्य च।
©
यस्मै यस्मे यथा प्राह नारदो देवदर्शनः ॥ १ ॥
rajovaca
brahmana codito brahman
gunakhyane’gunasya ca
yasmai yasmai yatha praha
narado deva-darsanah
raja—the King; uvaca—inquired; brahmana—by Lord Brahma; coditah—
being instructed; brahman—O learned brahmana (Sukadeva Gosvimi);
guna-akhyane—in narrating the transcendental qualities; agunasya—of the
Lord, who is without material qualities; ca—and; yasmai yasmai—and
whom; yatha—as much as; prdha—explained; naradah—Narada Muni; deva-
darsanah—one whose audience is as good as that of any demigod.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami: How did Narada
Muni, whose hearers are as fortunate as those instructed by Lord Brahma,
explain the transcendental qualities of the Lord, who is without material
qualities, and before whom did he speak?
PURPORT
Devarsi Narada was directly instructed by Brahmdji, who was also
directly instructed by the Supreme Lord; therefore the instructions im-
parted by Narada to his various disciples are as good as those of the
Supreme Lord. That is the way of understanding Vedic knowledge. It
comes down from the Lord by disciplic succession, and this transcen-
dental knowledge is distributed to the world by this descending process.
421


--- Page 86 ---
422 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
There is no chance, however, to receive the Vedic knowledge from mental
speculators. Therefore, wherever Narada Muni goes, he represents himself
as authorized by the Lord, and his appearance is as good as that of the
Supreme Lord. Similarly, the disciplic succession which strictly follows
the transcendental instruction is the bona fide chain of disciplic succession,
and the test for such bona fide spiritual masters is that there should be no
difference between the instruction of the Lord originally imparted to His
devotee and that which is imparted by the authority in the line of disciplic
succession. How Narada Muni distributed the transcendental knowledge of
the Lord will be explained in later cantos.

It will appear also that the Lord existed prior to the material creation,
and therefore His transcendental name, quality, etc., do not represent any
material quality. Whenever, therefore, the Lord is described as aguna, or
without any quality, it does not mean that He has no quality, but that He
has no material quality, such as the modes of goodness, passion, or
ignorance, as the conditioned souls have. He is transcendental to all
material conceptions, and thus He is described as aguna.

TEXT 2
एतद्‌ নতিত্তুমি্্যামি বন্দ तच्चविदां वर ।
-
हरेरद्तवीर्यस्य कथा लोकसुमङ्गलाः ॥ २॥
etad veditum icchami
tattvam tattva-vidar vara
harer adbhuta-viryasya
katha loka-sumangalah

etal—all these; veditum—just understand; icchami—do | wish; tattvam—
the truth; tattva-vidam—of those who are well versed in the matter of
Absolute Truth; vare—the great; hareh—of the Lord; adbhuta-viryasya—of
the one who possesses wonderful potencies; kathah—narrations; loka— for
all planets; su-mangaldh— auspicious.

TRANSLATION

The King said: I wish to know. Narrations concerning the Lord, who
possesses wonderful potencies, are certainly auspicious for living beings
in all planets.

PURPORT

Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is full of narration of the activities of the

Supreme Lord, is auspicious for all living beings residing in every planet.


--- Page 87 ---
Text 31 Questions by King Pariksit 423
One who takes it as belonging to a particular sect is certainly mistaken.
Srimad-Bhagavatam is certainly a very dear scripture for the devotees of
the Lord. but it is auspicious even for the nondevotees also because it
explains that even the nondevotees hovering under the spell of material
energy can be delivered from such clutches if they hear with devotion and
attention the narration of the Srimad-Bhagavatam from the right source
representing the Lord by disciplie succession.
TEXT 3
कययख महाभाग यथाहमखिलात्मनि |
कृष्णे fade निःसङ्गं मनस्त्यक्ष्ये कठेवरम्‌ ॥ ২ ॥
kathayasva mahabhaga
॥ yathaham akhilatmani
krsne nivesya nihsarngar
manas tyaksye kalevaram
kathayasva—please continue speaking; mahabhaga—Q greatly fortunate
one; yatha—as much as; aham—1; akhila-atmani—unto the Supreme Soul;
krsne—unto Lord Sri Krsna; nivesya—having placed;nihsaigam —being 17600
from material qualities; manah—mind; tyaksye—may relinquish; kalevaram
—body.
TRANSLATION
O greatly fortunate Sukadeva Gosvami, please continue narrating
Srimad-Bhagavatam so that I can place my mind upon the Supreme Soul,
Lord Krsna, and, being completely freed from material qualities, thus
relinquish this body.
PURPORT
To be fully engaged in hearing the transcendental narration described in
the text of Srimad-Bhagavatam means to be constantly associated with the
Supreme Soul Sri Krsna. And to be constantly associated with the Supreme
Lord Krsna means to be liberated from the qualities of matter. Lord Krsna
is like the sun, and the material contamination is like the darkness. As
darkness is dissipated in the presence of the sun, so to be constantly


--- Page 88 ---
424. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
engaged in the association of the Lord Sri Krsna means to be uncontami-
nated by the material qualities. Contamination by material qualities is the
cause of repeated birth and death, and liberation from material qualities is
transcendence. Maharaja Pariksit is now a realized soul by this secret of
liberation through the grace of Sukadeva Gosvami, for the latter informed
the King that the highest perfection of life is to be in remembrance of
Narayana at the end of life. Maharaja Pariksit was destined to give up his
body at the end of seven days, and thus he decided to continue the
remembrance of the Lord by His association with the topic of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, and thus to quit his body in full consciousness of the
presence of the Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme Soul.

The hearing of Srimad-Bhagavatam performed by the professional men
is different from the transcendental hearing of Maharaja Pariksit. Maharaja
Pariksit was a soul realized in the Absolute Truth, Sri Krsna, the Personality
of Godhead. The fruitive materialist is not a realized soul; he wants to de-
rive some material benefit from hisso-called hearing of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
Undoubtedly such an audience, hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam from the
professional men, can derive some material benefit as desired by them,
but that does not mean that such a pretense of hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam
for a week is as good as that of Maharaja Pariksit.

It is the duty of the sane to hear Srimad-Bhagavatam from a self-realized
soul without being duped by professional men, and one should continue
such hearing till the end of one’s life so that one can actually have the
transcendental association of the Lord and thus be liberated simply by
hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam.

Maharaja Pariksit had already given up all his connections with his
kingdom and family, the most attractive features of materialism, but still
he was conscious of his material body. He wanted to be free of such
bondage also by the constant association of the Lord.

TEXT 4
श्रृण्वतः श्रद्धया नित्यं गृणतश्च खचेष्टितम्‌ |
RISA नातिदीर्घेण भगवान्‌ विश्चते हृदि ॥ ও ।।
srnvatah sraddhaya nityarm
grnatas ca sva-cestitam
kalena natidirghena
bhagavan visate hrdi


--- Page 89 ---
Text 5] Questions by King Pariksit 425
Srpvatah—ol those who hear; sraddhaya--in earnestness; nityam—regu-
larly, always; grnatah—taking the matter: ca—also; sva-cestitam—seriously
by one’s own endeavor; kalena—duration: na—not; atidirghena—very pro-
longed time; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna; visate—
becomes manifest; hrdi—within one’s heart.
TRANSLATION
Persons who hear Srimad-Bhagavatam regularly and are always taking
the matter very seriously will have the Personality of Godhead da Krsna
manifested in their hearts within a short time.
PURPORT
Cheap devotees or the material devotees of the Lord are very much
desirous to see the Lord personally without making any requisite qualifica-
tion. Such third-grade devotees should know well that material attachment
and seeing the Lord eye to eye cannot go together. It is not such a
mechanical process that the professional Bhagavatam reciters can do the
job on behalf of the third-grade materialist pseudo-devotee. The professional
men are useless in this connection because they are neither self-realized
nor interested in the liberation of the audience. They are simply interested
in maintaining the material establishment of family attachment and earning
some material benefits out of the profession. Maharaja Pariksit had no
more than seven days to live, but for others Maharaja Pariksit personally
recommends that one should hear Srimad-Bhagavatam regularly, nityam,
always by one’s own effort and with serious devotion also. That will help
one to see the Lord Sri Krsna manifested in one’s heart within no time.
The pseudo-devotee, however, is very anxious to see the Lord by his
whims, not making any serious effort to hear Srimad-Bhagavatam
regularly and without detachment from material benefit. That is not the
way recommended by an authority like Maharaja Pariksit, who heard and
benefitted by hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 5
PN পু + =
TEAL: कणेरन्ध्रण स्वानां भावसरारुहम्‌ |
धुनोति शमलं कृष्णः सलिल यथा श्रत्‌ ॥ ५॥


--- Page 90 ---
426 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
pravistah karpa-randhrena
svanam bhava-saroruham
dhunoti ৪৫771701077, Ersnah
salilasya yatha Sarat

pravistah—thus being entered; karpa-randhrepa—through the holes of
the ears; svanam—according to one’s liberated position; bhava—constitu-
tional relationship; sarah-ruham—the lotus flower; dhunoti—cleanses;
samalam— material qualities like lust, anger, avarice, hankering, etc.; krsnah
—Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; salilasya—of the reser-
voir of waters; yatha—as it were; $arat—the autumn season.

TRANSLATION
The sound incarnation of Lord Krsna, the Supreme Soul [i.e. Srimad-
Bhagavatam |, entering into the heart of a self-realized devotee, sits on the
lotus flower of his loving relationship and thus cleanses the dust of material
association, such as lust, anger, hankerings, etc., and acts like the autumnal
rains upon the pools of muddy water.
PURPORT

It is said that a single pure devotee of the Lord can deliver all the fallen
souls of the world, and thus one who is actually in the confidence of a pure
devotee like Narada or Sukadeva Gosvami and thus empowered by one’s
spiritual master, as Narada was by Brahmaji, can not only deliver himself
from the clutches of maya, or illusion, but can deliver the whole world by
his pure and empowered devotional strength. The comparison to the
autumnal rain which falls on the muddy reservoirs of water is very
appropriate. During the rainy season, all waters of the rivers become
muddy, but in the month of July-August, the autumn season, when there
is aslight rainfall, the muddy waters of the rivers all over the world become
at once clear. By addition of some chemical, a small reservoir of water
like that of the metropolitan waterworks tanks, etc., can be cleared, but
by such a tiny effort it is not possible to clear up all the reservoirs of
water like the rivers, etc. Similarly, a powerful pure devotee of the Lord
can deliver not only his personal self but also many others in his associa-
tion.

In other words, the cleansing of the polluted heart by other methods
(1110 culture of empiric knowledge or mystic gymnastics) can simply


--- Page 91 ---
Text 6] Questions by King Pariksit 427
cleanse one’s own heart, but devotional service to the Lord is so powerful
that it can cleanse the hearts of the people in general, by the devotional
service of the pure empowered devotee. A true representative of the Lord
like Narada, Sukadeva Gosvami, Lord Caitanya, the six Gosvamis and
later Srila Bhaktivinode Thakur or Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakur, etc., can deliver all people by their empowered devotional service.

By sincere efforts to hear Srimad-Bhagavatam one realizes his constitu-
tional relationship with the Lord in the transcendental humor of servitude,
friendship, paternal affection or conjugal love, and by such self-realization
one becomes situated at once in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord. All such pure devotees like Narada were not only self-realized souls,
but they were engaged in preaching work automatically by spiritual
impetus, and thus they delivered many poor souls entangled in the
material modes. They became so powerful hecause they sincerely followed
the Bhagavatam principles by regular hearing and worshiping. By such
actions the accumulated material lusts, etc., become cieansed by the
personal endeavor of the Lord within the heart. The Lord is always within
the heart of the living being, but He becomes manifested by one’s
devotional service.

Purification of the heart by culture of knowledge or mystic yoga may
be all right for the time being for an individual person, but it is like
cleansing the stagnant water in small quantity by chemical processes.
Such clarification of water may stand for the time being and the sediments
settle down, but by a slight agitation everything becomes muddy. The
idea is that devotional service to the Lord is the only method of cleansing
the heart for good. Whereas other methods may be superficially good for
the time being, there is a risk of becoming muddy again due to agitation
of the mind. Devotional service to the Lord, with specific attention for
hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam regularly and always, is the best recommended
method for liberation from the clutches of illusion.

TEXT 6
धौतात्मा पुरुपः TOTEGE न gH |
मुक्त ARE: पान्थः | यथा ।॥ ৭1
dhautatma purusah krsna-
pada-milari na municati
mukta-sarva-pariklesah
panthah sva-saranari yatha


--- Page 92 ---
428 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
dhauta-atma—a person whose heart has been cleansed; purusah—the
living being; krsna—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pada-milam—
the shelter of the lotus feet; na—never; mufnicati—gives up; mukta—liber-
ated; sarva—all; pariklesah—of all miseries of life; panthah—the traveler;
sva-$aranam—in his own abode; yatha—as it were.
TRANSLATION
A pure devotee of the Lord, whose heart is once cleansed by the
process of devotional service, never relinquishes the lotus feet of Lord
Krsna because they fully satisfy him, as the traveler is satisfied at home
after a troubled journey.
PURPORT
One who is not a pure devotee of the Supreme Lord Krsna is not
completely cleansed in the heart. But a perfectly cleansed person never
quits the devotional service of the Lord. In discharging such devotional
service, as it was ordered by Brahmaji to Narada in the preaching of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, sometimes the representative of the Lord engaged in
preaching work meets various so-called difficulties of life. This was
exhibited by Lord Nityananda when He delivered the two fallen souls Jagai
and Madhai, and similarly Lord Jesus Christ was crucified by the
nonbelievers. But such difficulties are suffered by the devotees in
preaching work very gladly because in such activities, although apparently
very severe, the devotees of the Lord feel transcendental pleasure because
the Lord is satisfied. Prahlada Maharaja suffered greatly, but still he never
forgot the lotus feet of the Lord. This is because a pure devotee of the Lord
is so purified in the heart that he cannot leave the shelter of Lord Krsna in
any circumstances. There is no self-interest in such service. The progress of
culturing knowledge by the jiianis or the bodily gymnastics by the yogis
are ultimately given up by the respective performers, but a devotee of the
Lord cannot give up the service of the Lord, for he is ordered by his
spiritual master. Pure devotees like Narada or Nityananda Prabhu take up
the order of the spiritual master as the sustenance of life. They do not
mind what becomes of the future of their lives. They take the matter very
seriously as the order comes from the higher authority, from the repre-
sentative of the Lord, or from the Lord Himself.
The example set herein is very appropriate. A traveler leaves home to
search for wealth in far distant places, sometimes in the forest and


--- Page 93 ---
Text 7] Questions by King Pariksit 429
sometimes on the ocean and sometimes on hilltops. Certainly there are
many troubles for the traveler when he is in such unknown places. But all
such troubles are at once mitigated as soon as the sense of his family
affection is remembered, and as soon as he returns home he forgets all
such troubles on the way.

A pure devotee of the Lord is exactly in a family tie with the Lord, and
therefore he is undeterred in discharging his duty in full affectionate tie
with the Lord.

TEXT 7
यदधातुमता ब्रह्मन्‌ देदारम्भाऽस्य धातुभिः |
यचच्छया हेतुना वा भवन्तो जानते यथा ॥ ७ ॥
yad adhatu-mato brahman
deharambho’sya dhatubhih
yadrcchaya hetuna va
bhavanto janate yatha

yat—as it is; adhdtu-matah—without being materially constituted;
brahman—O learned brahmana; deha—the material body; arambhah— the
beginning of; asya—of the living being; dhatubhih—by matter; yadrcchaya—
without cause, accidental; hetuna—due to some cause; va—either; bhavantah
—your good self; janate—as you may know it; yatha—so you inform me.

TRANSLATION
O learned brahmana, the transcendental spirit soul is different from
the material body. Does he acquire the body accidentally or by some
cause? Will you kindly explain this, for it is known to you.
PURPORT

Maharaja Pariksit, being a typical devotee, is not only satisfied by
confirming the importance of hearing the Srimad-Bhagavatam from the
representative of Brahmaji by disciplic succession, but he is still more
anxious to establish the philosophical basis of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Srimad-
Bhagavatam is the science of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as


--- Page 94 ---
430 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
such all questions that may arise in the mind of a serious student must be
cleared by the statements of the authority. A person on the path of
devotional service may inquire from his spiritual master all about the
spiritual position of God and the living beings. From the Bhagavad-gita,
as well as from the Srimad-Bhagavatam, it is known that qualitatively the
Lord and the living beings are one. The living being in the conditioned
state of material existence is subjected to many transmigrations by
continuously changing the material body. But what are the causes of such
material embodiment of the part and parcel of the Lord? Maharaja Pariksit
inquires about this very important matter for the benefit of all classes of
candidates on the path of self-realization and devotional service to the
Lord.

Indirectly it is confirmed that the Supreme Being, the Lord, makes no
such material changes of body. He is spiritually whole, with no difference
between His body and His soul, unlike the conditioned soul. The liberated
living beings, who associate with the Lord in person, are also exactly like
the Lord. Only the conditioned souls awaiting liberation are subjected to
change of bodies. How was the process first begun?

In the process of devotional service, the first step is to take shelter of the
spiritual master and then inquire from the spiritual master all about the
process. This inquiry is essential in order to be made immune to all kinds
of offenses in the path of devotional service. Even if one is fixed in
devotional service like Maharaja Pariksit, he must still inquire from the
realized spiritual master all about this. In other words, the spiritual master
must also be well versed and learned so that he may be able to answer all
these inquiries from the devotees. Thus one who is not well versed in
the authorized scriptures and not able to answer all such relevant inquiries
should not pose as a spiritual master for the matter of material gain. It is
illegal to become a spiritual master if one is unable to deliver the disciple.

TEXT 8
आसीद्‌ यदुदरात्‌ पञ्मं लाकसंस्ानलक्षणम्‌ |
यावानयं वे पुरुप इयत्तावयवैः प्रथक्‌ |
तावानसाविति प्रोक्तः संस्थावयववानिव ॥ ८ ॥
asid yad-udarat padmar
loka-samsthana-laksanam


--- Page 95 ---
Text 8] Questions by King Pariksit 431
yavan ayam vai purusa
lyattavayavaih prthak
tavan asav iti proktah
samsthavayavavan iva

asit—as it grew; yat-udarat—from whose abdomen; padmam—lotus
flower; loka— world; sari sthana—situation; laksanam— possessed of ; yavan—
as it were; ayam~— this;vai— certainly; purusah— the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; iyatta—measurement; avayavaih—by embodiment; prthak—dif-
ferent; tavan—so; asau—that; iti proktah—it is so said; samstha—situation;
avayavavin—embodiment; iva—like.

TRANSLATION
If the Supreme Personality of Godhead, from whose abdomen the
lotus stem sprouted, is possessed of a gigantic body according to His own
caliber and measurement, then what is the specific difference between
the body of the Lord and those of other common living entities?
PURPORT

One should note how Maharaja Pariksit intelligently put the questions
before his spiritual master for scientific understanding of the transcendental
body of the Lord. It has been described in many places before this that
the Lord assumed a very gigantic body, like KaranodakadayT Visnu, from
whose hair pores innumerable universes have generated. The body of the
Garbhodakasiyl Visnu is described as sprouting the lotus stem within
which all the planets of the universe remain, and at the top of the stem
there is the lotus flower on which Lord Brahma is born. In the creation of
the material world He undoubtedly assumes the gigantic body, and living
entities also get bodies, big or small, according to the respective necessity.
For example, an elephant gets a gigantic body according to its needs, and
so also an ant gets its body according to its needs. Similarly, if the
Personality of Godhead assumes a gigantic body to accomodate the uni-
verses or the planets of a particular universe, there is no difference in the
principle of assuming or accepting a particular type of body in terms of
necessity. A living being and the Lord cannot be distinguished simply by
the difference of the magnitude of the body. So the answer depends on the
specific significance of the body of the Lord, as distinguished from the
body of thc common living being.


--- Page 96 ---
432 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
TEXT 9
अजः सृजति भूतानि भूतात्मा यदनुग्रहात्‌ |
TY येन तद्रूपं नाभिपद्मसमुद्भवः ॥ ९॥
ajah srjati bhatani
bhatatma yad-anugrahat
dadrse yena tad-riipari
nabhi-padma-samudbhavah
ajah—one who is born without a material source; srjati— creates;
bhiitani—all those materially born; bhitta-atma—having a body of matter;
yat—whose; anugrahat—by the mercy of; dadrse—could see; yena—by
whom; tat-ripam—His form of body; nabhi— navel; padma— lotus flower;
samudbhavah—being born of.
TRANSLATION
Brahma, who was not born of a material source but of the lotus flower
coming out of the navel abdomen of the Lord, is the creator of all those
who are materially born. Of course, by the grace of the Lord, Brahma was
able to see the form of the Lord.
PURPORT
The first living creature, Brahma, is called gjah because he did not take
his birth from the womb of a mother materially born. He was directly
born from the bodily expansion of the lotus flower of the Lord. Thus it is
not readily understandable whether the body of the Lord and that of
Brahma are of the same quality or different. This must also be clearly
understood. One thing is, however, certain: Brahma was completely
dependent on the mercy of the Lord because after his birth he could
create living beings by the Lord’s grace only, and he could see the form of
the Lord. Whether the form seen by Brahma is of the same quality as that
of Brahma is a bewildering question, and Maharaja Pariksit wanted to get
clear answers from Srila Sukadeva Gosvami.


--- Page 97 ---
Text 11] Questions by King Pariksit 433
TEXT 10
स चापि यत्र पुरुषो विख्वस्थित्युद्धवाप्ययः |
मुक्त्वात्ममायां मायेशः হাল सर्वगुहाशयः ॥।१०॥
sa capi yatra puruso
viSva-sthity-udbhavipyayah
muktvatma-mayari mayesah
Sete sarva-guha-sayah
sah—He; ca—also; api—as He is; yatra— where; purusah—the Personality
of Godhead; visva—the material worlds; sthiti—maintenance; udbhava—
creation; apyayah—annihilation; muktva—without being touched: atma-
mayam—own energy; mayesah—the Lord of all energies; sete—does lie on;
sarva-guhd-sayah—one who lies in everyone’s heart.
TRANSLATION
Please also explain the Personality of Godhead, who lies in every heart
as the Supersoul and as the Lord of all energies, but is untouched by His
external energy.
PURPORT
Undoubtedly the form of the Lord who was seen by Brahma must be
transcendental, otherwise how could He simply look upon the creative
energy without being touched? It is understood also that the same purusa
lies in the heart of every living entity. This also requires proper explanation.
TEXT 11
= 6
पुरुषावयवेर्लीकाः सपालाः पूञ्रकल्पिताः |
- न ean
लोकरमुप्यावयवाः सपारुरिति शुश्रुम ॥११॥
purusavayavair lokah
sa-palah purva-kalpitah
lokair amusyavayavah
sa-palair iti Susruma


--- Page 98 ---
434 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8

purusa—universal form of the Lord (virata purusah); avayavaih—by
different parts of the body: lokah—the planetary system; sa-palah—with
respective governors; piarva—formerly; kalpitah—discussed; lokaih—by the
different planetary systems; amusya—llis; avayavah—different parts of the
body; sa-palaih—with the governors; iti—thus; susruma- | heard.

TRANSLATION
O learned brahmana, it was formerly explained that all the planets of
the universe with their respective governors are situated in the different
parts of the gigantic body of the virata purusa. I have also heard that the
different planetary systems are supposed to be in the gigantic body of the
virata purusa. But what is their actual position? Will you please explain
that?
TEXT 12
यावान्‌ कल्पोविकरस्यो वा यथा कागोऽनुमीयते।
L. a C _.
भूतभव्यभवच्छन्द्‌ ATIAM च यत्‌ सतः TRE
yavan kalpo vikalpo va
yatha kalo’numiyate
bhita-bhavya-bhavac-chabda
ayur-manam ca yat satah

yavan—as il is; kalpah—the duration of lime between creation and
annihilation; vikalpah—subsidiary creation and annihilation; va—either;
yatha—as also; kalah—the lime; anumiyate—is measured; bhuta—past;
bhavya—future; bhavat—present; sabdah—sound; dayuh—duration of life;
manam— measurement; ca—also; yat—which; satah—of all living beings in
all planets.

TRANSLATION
Also please explain the duration of time between creation and annihi-

lation, and that of other subsidiary creations, as well as the nature of time,
indicated by the sound of past, present and future. Also, please explain
the duration and measurement of life of the different living beings known
as the demigods, the human beings, etc., in different planets of the universe.


--- Page 99 ---
Text 14] Questions by King Pariksit 435
PURPORT
Past, present and future are different features of time to indicate the
duration of life for the universe and all its paraphernalia, including the
different living beings in different planets.
TEXT 13
कारस्यानुगतिय। तु लक्ष्यतेऽण्वी बृहत्यपि |
यावत्यः क्रमगतयोा यादृश्ीदविंजसत्तम 11231)
kalasyanugatir ya tu
laksyate’nvi brhaty api
yavatyah karma-gatayo
yadrsir dvija-sattama
kalasya— of the cternal time; anugatih—-beginning; ya tu—as they are;
laksyate—experienced; apvi—small; brhati—great; api—even; yavatyah—as
long as; karma-gatayah—in terms of the work performed; yadrsth—as it
may; dvija-sattama—Q purest of all brah manas.
TRANSLATION
O purest of the brahmanas, please also explain the cause of the differ-
ent durations of time, both short and long, as well as the beginning of
time, following the course of action.
TEXT 14
~ QS = = ~ =
JM करमसमावाया यथा মনাঘযনান।
गुणानां गुणिनां चव परिणाममभीप्सताम्‌ ॥१४॥
yasmin karma-samavayo
yatha yenopagrhyate
gunanar guninam caiva
parinamam abhipsatam


--- Page 100 ---
436 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
yasmin—in which; karma—actions; samavayah—accumulation; yatha—as
far as; yena—by which; upagrhyate—takes over; gunanam—of the different
modes of material nature; gupinam—of the living beings; ca—also; eva—
certainly; parinamam—resultant; abhipsatam—of the desires.
TRANSLATION
Then again, kindly describe how the proportionate accumulation of
the resultant actions of the different modes of material nature act upon
the desiring living being, promoting or degrading him among the different
species of life, beginning from the demigods down to the most insignificant
creatures.
PURPORT

The actions and reactions of all works in the material modes of nature,
either in the minute form or in the gigantic form, are accumulated, and thus
the result of such accumulated actions and reactions of karma, or work,
become manifested in the same proportion. How such actions and reactions
take place, what are the different procedures, and in what proportion they
act are all the subject matter of Maharaja Pariksit’s inquiries from the
great brahmana, Sukadeva Gosvami.

Life in the higher planets, known as the abode of the denizens of heaven,
is obtained not by the strength of spacecraft (as is now being contemplated
by the inexperienced scientists), but by works done in the mode of
goodness.

There is even restriction on the very planet where we are now living for
entrance of foreigners to a country where the citizens are more prosperous.
For example, the American government has many restrictions for entrance
of foreigners from less prosperous countries. The reason is that the Ameri-
cans do not wish to share their prosperity with any foreigner who has not
qualified himself as a citizen of America. Similarly, the same mentality is
prevailing in every other planet also where there are more and more intelli-
gent living beings residing. The higher planetary living conditions are all in
the mode of goodness, and anyone desiring te enter the higher planets
like the moon, sun, Venus, etc., must qualify thoroughly by activity in
complete goodness.

Maharaja Pariksit’s inquiries are on the basis of proportionate actions
of goodness which qualify one in this planet to be promoted to the highest
regions of the universe.


--- Page 101 ---
Text 15] Questions by King Parksit 437

Even on this planet of our present residence, no one can achieve a good
position within the social order without being qualified with proportionate
good work. No one can forcibly sit on the chair of a high court judge
without being qualified for the post. Similarly, no one can enter into the
higher regions of the planetary system without being qualified by good
works in this life. Persons addicted to the habits of passion and ignorance
have no chance of entering the higher planetary system simply by an
electronic mechanism.

According to the statement of the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.25), persons
trying to qualify themselves for promotion to the higher regions of
heavenly planets can go there; similarly, persons trying for the Pitrlokas
can go there; similarly, persons trying to improve the conditions on this
earth can also do that, and persons who are engaged in going back home,
back to Godhead, can also achieve the result. These various actions and
reactions of work in the mode of goodness are generally known as pious
work with devotional service, culture of knowledge with devotional
service, mystic powers with devotional service and (at last) devotional
service unmixed with any other varieties of goodness. This unmixed
devotional service is transcendental and is called the para bhakti, which
alone can promote a person to the transcendental kingdom of God. Such
a transcendental kingdom is not a myth, but is as factual as the moon
planet. It requires the transcendental qualities to understand the kingdom
of God and God Himself.

TEXT 15
भूपातालककुज्व्योमग्रहनक्षत्रभूमृताम्‌ |
सरित्समुदरद्ीपानां सम्भवश्चेतदोकसाम्‌ ||)
bhii-patala-kakub-vyoma-
graha-naksatra-bhubhrtam
sarit-samudra-dvipanari
sambhavas caitad-okasam
bhith-patala—underneath the land; kakub—four sides of the heavens;
vyoma—the sky; graha—the planets; naksatra—the stars; bhibhrtam
—of the hills; sarit—the river; samudra—the sea; dvipanam—of the islands:
sambhavah—appearance; ca—also; etat—their; okasam—of the inhabitants.


--- Page 102 ---
438 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
TRANSLATION
O best of the brahmanas, please also describe how the creation of the
globes throughout the universe, the four directions of the heavens, the
sky, the planets, the stars, the mountains, the rivers, the seas and the
islands, as well as their different kinds of inhabitants, takes place.
PURPORT
The inhabitants of different varieties of land, etc., are differently
situated, and not all of them are equal in all respects. The inhabitants of
the land are different from the inhabitants of the water or the sky, and
similarly the inhabitants of the different planets and stars in the sky are
also different from one another. No place is vacant by the laws of the
Lord, but the creatures of one particular place are different from others.
Even in the human society the inhabitants of the jungles or those of the
desert are different from those of the cities and villages. They are so made
according to different qualities of the modes of nature. Such adjustment
of the laws of nature is not blind. There is a great plan behind the arrange-
ment. Maharaja Pariksit requests the great sage Sukadeva Gosvami to
explain all these authoritatively, in accordance with proper understanding.
TEXT 16
प्रमाणमण्डकेशस्य बा्याम्यन्तरमेदतः |
महतां चानुचरितं वर्णाश्रमविनिश्वयः ॥१६।
pramanam anda-kosasya
bahyabhyantara-bhedatah
mahatam canucantam
varpasrama-viniscayah
pramanam—extent and measurement; anda-kosasya—of the universe;
bahya—outer space; abhyantara—inner space; bhedatah —by division of;
mahatam—of the great souls; ca—also; anucaritam—character and activities;
varpa—castes; asrama—orders of life; viniscayah—specifically describe.


--- Page 103 ---
Text 16] Questions by King Pariksit 439
TRANSLATION
Also, please describe the inner and outer space of the universe by
specific divisions, as well as the character and activities of the great souls,
and also the characteristics of the different classifications of the castes and
orders of social life.
PURPORT

Maharaja Pariksit is a typical devotee of Lord Krsna, and as such he is
anxious to know the complete significance of the creation of the Lord. He
wants to know the inner and outer space of the universal form. It is quite
fitting for the real searcher of knowledge to know all about this. Those who
are of the opinion that the devotees of the Lord are satisfied with some
sentiments only can find good lessons in the inquiries of Maharaja Pariksit
as to how much a pure devotee is inquisitive to know things in their
true perfection. The modern scientist is unable to know about the inner
space of the universal horizon, and what to speak of the space which
covers the universes.

Maharaja Pariksit is not simply satisfied with material knowledge only.
He is inquisitive about the characters and activities of the great souls or
devotees of the Lord. The glories of the Lord and the glories of His devo-
tees, combined together, comprise the complete knowledge of Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Lord Krsna showed His mother the complete universal crea-
tion within His mouth, while she, completely charmed by her son, wanted
to see the inner mouth of the Lord just to see how much earth the child
had eaten. By the grace of the Lord the devotees are able to see everything
in the universe within the mouth of the Lord.

The very idea of the scientific divisions of four classes of human society
and four orders of life is also inquired about herewith on the basis of indi-
vidual personal quality. The four divisions are exactly like the four divisions
of one’s personal body. The parts and parcels of the body are nondifferent
from the body, but by themselves they are only parts and parcels of the
body. That is the significance of the whole scientific system of four
orders of castes and social orders. The value of such scientific divisions
of human society can only be ascertained in terms of the proportionate
development of devotional service to the Lord. Any person employed in
the government service is a part and parcel of the entire government,
including the president. Everyone is a government servant, but no one is
the government himself. That is the position of all living entities in the


--- Page 104 ---
440 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
government of the Supreme Lord. No one can artificially claim to the
supreme position of the Lord, but everyone is meant to serve the purpose
of the supreme whole.
TEXT 17
. sc व -
युगानि युगमानं च 947 यश्च युगे युगे।
i 60 =
अवतारानुचरितं यद्‌ाश्चप्रेतम हरेः ॥१७॥
yugani yuga-manarm ca
dharmo 7৫৪ ca yuge yuge
avataranucaritari
yad ascaryatamar hareh
yugani—the different ages; yuga-manam—the duration of each age; ca—
as well as; dharmah—the particular occupational duty; yah ca—and which;
yuge yuge—in each and every yuga or particular age; avatara—the incarna-
tion; anucaritam—and the activities of the incarnation; yat—which;
ascaryatamam—the most wonderful activities; hareh—of the Supreme
Lord.
TRANSLATION
Please explain all the different ages in the duration of the creation, and
also the duration of such ages. Also tell me about the different activities
of the different incarnations of the Lord in different ages.
PURPORT
Lord Krsna is the original Personality of Godhead, and all the incarna-
tions of the Supreme Lord, although nondifferent from Him, are emana-
tions from the Supreme. Maharaja Pariksit inquires from the great learned
sage Sukadeva Gosvami about the different activities of such incarna-
tions so that the incarnation of the Lord may be confirmed by His
activities in the authoritative scriptures. Maharaja Pariksit is not to be
carried away by the sentiments of the common man to accept an incarna-
tion of the Lord very cheaply. Instead he wished to accept the incarnation
of the Lord by symptoms mentioned in the Vedic literatures and confirmed
by an ৫০৫7৫ like Bikndova Gosvami. The Lord descends by His internal


--- Page 105 ---
Text 18] Questions by King Pariksit 441
energy without any obligation to the laws of material nature, and thus His
activities are also uncommon. The specific activities of the Lord are
mentioned, and one should know that the activities of the Lord and the
Lord are identical due to being on the absolute plane. Thus to hear the
activities of the Lord means to associate with the Lord directly, and
association of the Lord directly means purification from material con-
tamination. We have already discussed this point in the First Volume.
TEXT 18
+ < ९ _~ ~
नृणां साधारणा धमः লালহাদশ यादेशः |
~ A 0 © = _ৰ
श्रेणीनां ARTO च धमः न्दरेषु जीघताम्‌ ॥१८॥
nrnam sadharano dharmah
savisesas ca yadrsah
Srepindm rajarsinam ca
dharmah krcchresu jivatam
nmam—of human society; sadharanah—general; dharmah —religious
affiliation; sa-visesah—specific; ca—also; yadrsah—as they are: sreninam—of
the particular three classes; rajarsinam—of the saintly royal order; ca—also;
dharmah—occupational duty; krcchresu—in the matter of distressed
conditions; jivatam—of the living beings.
TRANSLATION
Please also explain what may generally be the common religious
affiliations of human society, as well as their specific occupational duties
in religion, the classification of the social orders as well as the admin-
istrative royal orders, and the religious principles for one who may be in
the distressed condition of life.
PURPORT
The common religion of all classes of human beings, regardless of who-
soever and whatsoever one may be, is devotional service. Even the animals
may be included in devotional service to the Lord, and the best example


--- Page 106 ---
442 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
is set by Sri Bajrangaji or Hanuman, the great devotee of Lord Sri Rama.
As we have already discussed, even the aborigines and cannibals can also
be engaged in the devotional service of the Lord if they happen to be
under the guidance of a genuine devotee of the Lord. In the Skanda
Purana there is a narration that a hunter in the jungle became the most
enlightened devotee of the Lord by the guidance of इत Narada Muni.
Therefore devotional service to the Lord can be equally shared by every
living being.

Religious affiliation in terms of different countries and cultural circum-
stances is obviously not the common religion of the human being, but the
basic principle is devotional service. Even if a particular type of religious
principle does not recognize the supremacy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the followers still have to obey the disciplinary principles
laid down by a particular leader. Such a leader of a religious sect is never
the supreme leader because such a circumstantial leader comes to the
position of leadership after undergoing some penance. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead does not, however, require to be under disciplinary
action to become leader, as we see in the activities of Lord Krsna.

The occupational duties of the castes and the orders of society, follow-
ing the principles of livelihood, also depend on the principle of de-
votional service. In the Bhagavad-gita it is stated that a person can achieve
the highest perfection of life simply by awarding the results of one’s
occupational duty unto the devotional service of the Lord. People follow-
ing the principles of devotional service of the Lord can never be put into
difficulty, and thus there cannot be any question of apad-dharma, or
religion in distress. As will be explained in this book by the greatest
authority, Srila Sukadeva Gosvami, there is no religion save and except
the devotional service of the Lord, though this may be presented in
different forms.

TEXT 19
तच्चानां परिसंख्यानं लक्षणं ठेतुरक्षणम्‌ |
पुरूषाराधनविधिर्योग्याध्यारिपिकद्य च ॥१९॥
tattvanam parisankhyanam
laksanarn hetu-laksanam
purusaradhana-vidhir
yogasyadhyatmikasya ca


--- Page 107 ---
Text 20] Questions by King Pariksit 443
tattvanam— of the elements that constitute the creation; parisankhyanam
—of the number of such elements; laksanam—symptoms; hetu-laksanam—
the symptoms of the causes; purusa—complete; dradhana—devotional
service; vidhih—rules and regulations; yogasya—cultivation of the yoga
system; adhyatmikasya—spiritual methods leading to devotional service;
ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Kindly explain all about the elementary principles of creation, the
number of such elementary principles, their causes, and their development,
and also the process of devotional service and the method of mystic
powers.
TEXT 20
- 2 fa = (~
योगेश्वरेशर्यगतिि्गभङ्गस्त॒ योगिनाम्‌ |
- 5 ¢ ~
वेदोपवेदधमोणामितिहासपुराणयोः ॥२०॥
yogesvaraisvarya-gatir
linga-bhanigas tu yoginam
vedopaveda-dharmanam
itihasa-puranayoh
yogesvara—the master of the mystic powers; aisvarya—opulence;gatih—
advancement; linga—astral body; bhangah—detachment; tu—but; yoginam
—-of the mystics; veda—transcendental knowledge; upaveda—knowledge in
pursuance of the Veda indirectly; dharmanam—of the religiosities; itihasa—
history; puranayoh—of the Puranas.
TRANSLATION
What are the opulences of the great mystics, and what is their ultimate
realization? How does the perfect mystic become detached from the subtle
astral body? What is the basic knowledge of the Vedic literatures, including
the branches of history and the supplementary Puranas?
PURPORT
The yogesvara, or the master of mystic powers, can exhibit eight kinds of
wonders of perfection by becoming smaller than the atom or lighter than


--- Page 108 ---
444 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
a feather, getting anything and everything he desires, going anywhere and
everywhere he likes, creating even a planet in the sky, etc. There are many
yogesvaras having different proficiencies in these wonderful powers, and
the topmost of all of them is Lord Siva. Lord Siva is the greatest yogi, and
he can perform such wonderful things, far beyond the ordinary living
beings. The devotees of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, do
not directly practice the process of mystic powers, but, by the grace of the
Lord, His devotee can defeat even a great yogesvara like Durvasa Muni,
who picked up a quarrel with Maharaja Ambarisa and wanted to show the
wonderful achievements of his mystic powers. Maharaja Ambarisa was a
pure devotee of the Lord, and thus without any effort on his part the
Lord saved him from the wrath of Yoge$vara Durvasa Muni,and the latter
was obliged to beg pardon from the King. Similarly, at the time of
Draupadi’s precarious position, when she was attacked by the Kurus who
wanted to see her naked in the open assembly of the royal order, the Lord
saved her from being stripped by supplying an unlimited length of sari to
cover her. And Draupadi knew nothing of mystic powers. Therefore the
devotees are also yogesvara by the unlimited power of the Lord, just as a
child is powerful by the strength of the parents. They do not try to protect
themselves by any artificial means, but are saved by the mercy of the
parents.

Maharaja Pariksit inquired from the learned brahmana Sukadeva
Gosvami about the ultimate destination of such great mystics or how they
attain such extraordinary powers by their own efforts or by the grace of
the Lord. He inquired also about their detachment from the subtle and
gross material bodies. He inquired also about the purports of the Vedic
knowledge, and, as is stated in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 15.15), the whole
purport of all the Vedas is to know the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and thus become a transcendental loving servant of the Lord.

TEXT 21
WEY: सध॑भूतानां विक्रमः प्रतिसंक्रमः |
इष्टापूतैस्य काम्यानां त्रिवगंस्य च यो विधिः ॥२१॥
samplavah sarva-bhitanarn
vik ramah pratisaitkramah
istapurtasya kamyanar
tri-vargasya ca yo vidhih


--- Page 109 ---
Text 21] Questions by King Pariksit 445

samplavah—the perfect means or complete devastation; sarva-bhiitanam
—of all living beings; vikramah—specific power or situation; pratisankramah
—ultimate destruction; ista—performance of Vedic rituals; pitrtasya—pious
acts in terms of religion; kdmyanadm—rituals for economic development;
tri-vargasya—the three means of religion, economic development and
sense satisfaction; ca—also; yah— whatsoever; vidhih—procedures.

TRANSLATION
Please explain unto me how the living beings are generated, how they
are maintained, and how they are annihilated. Tell me also of the advan-
tages and disadvantages of discharging devotional service unto the Lord.
What are the Vedic rituals and injunctions of the supplementary Vedic
rites, and what are the procedures of religion, economic development
and sense satisfaction?
PURPORT

Samplavah, in the sense of “perfect means,” is employed to denote the
discharging of devotional service, and pratisamplavah means just the oppo-
site, or that which destroys the progress of devotional service. ®ne who is
firmly situated in devotional service of the Lord can very easily execute the
function of conditional life. Living the conditional life is just like plying a
boat in the middle of the ocean. ®ne is completely at the mercy of the
ocean, and at every moment there is every chance of being drowned in the
ocean by slight agitation. If the atmosphere is all right, the boat can ply
very easily, undoubtedly, but if there is some storm, fog, wind, or cloud,
there is every possibility of being drowned in the ocean. No one can control
the whims of the ocean, however one may be materially well equipped.
One who has crossed the oceans by ship may have sufficient experience of
such dependence upon the mercy of the ocean. But one can ply over the
ocean of material existence by the grace of the Lord very easily, without
any fear of storm or fog. It all depends on the will of the Lord; no one can
help if there is some unfortunate danger in the state of conditional life.
The devotees of the Lord, however, cross the ocean of material existence
without anxiety because a pure devotee is always protected by the Lord
(Bg. 9.13). The Lord gives special attention to His devotees in their activi-
ties within material, conditional life. (Bg. 9.29) Therefore everyone should
take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord and be a pure devotee of the Lord
by all means.


--- Page 110 ---
446 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8

One should know, therefore, from the expert spiritual master the advan-
tages and disadvantages of discharging devotional service, just as Maharaja
Pariksit asked his spiritual master Srila Sukadeva Gosvami. According to
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, the science of devotional service, one should not
eat more than what he requires to maintain body and soul together.
Vegetable diets and milk are sufficient for maintenance ef the human
body, and therefore one has no need to eat anything more to satisfy the
palate. One should also not accumulate money to become puffed up in the
material world. One should earn his livelihood easily and honestly, for it is
better to become a coolie for honest livelihood than to become a great
man in the society by hook and crook. There is no harm if one becomes
the richest man in the world by honest dealings, but one should not sacri-
fice the honest means of livelihood simply to accumulate wealth. Such an
endeavor is harmful to devotional service. One should not talk nonsense.
A devotee’s business is to earn the favor of the Lord. Therefore a devotee
should always glorify the Lord in His wonderful creations. A devotee
should not decry the creation of the Lord, defying Him by saying that He
has created a false world. The world is not false. Factually we have to take
so many things from the world for our maintenance, so how we can say
that the world is false? Similarly, how can one think of the Lord as being
without form? How can one become formless and at the same time have
all intelligence and consciousness, direct and indirect? So there are many
things for a pure devotee to learn, and he should learn them perfectly from
a bona fide personality like Sukadeva Gosvami. 3

The favorable conditions for discharging devotional service are that one
should be very enthusiastic in serving the Lord. The Lord in His form of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted the cult of devotional service to the Lord
to be preached all over the world, in every nook and corner, and therefore
a pure devotee’s duty is to discharge this order as far as possible. Every
devotee should be very enthusiastic, not only in performing his daily rituals
of devotional service,but in trying to preach the cult peacefully by follow-
ing in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya. If he is not superficially successful
in such an attempt, he should not be deterred from the discharge of his
duty. Success or failure has no meaning for a pure devotee because he is a
soldier in the field. Preaching the cult of devotional service is something
like declaring war against materialistic life. There are different kinds of
materialists, such as the fruitive workers, the mental speculators, the mystic
jugglers, and so many others. All of them are against the existence of
Godhead. They would declare that they are themselves God, although in
every step and in every action they are dependent on the mercy of the


--- Page 111 ---
Text 22] Questions by King Pariksit 447
Lord. Therefore a pure devotee may not associate with such gangs of
atheists. A strong devotee of the Lord will not be misled by such atheistic
propaganda of the nondevotees, but a neophyte devotee should be very
cautious about them. A devotee should see to the right discharge of devo-
tional service under the guidance of abona fide spiritual master and should
not stick only to the formalities. Under the direction of the bona fide
spiritual master one should see how much service is being executed, and
not simply in the matter of rituals. A devotee should not hanker after
anything, but he should be satisfied with things that may automatically
come to him by the will of the Lord. That should be the principle of a
devotional life. And all these principles are easily learned under the gui-
dance of ‘a spiritual master like Sukadeva Gosvami. Maharaja Pariksit
inquired from Sukadeva correctly, and one should follow his example.

Maharaja Pariksit inquired about the process of creation, maintenance
and destruction of the material world, the process of Vedic rituals and the
method of executing pious activities in terms of the supplementary Vedas
like the Puranas, Mahabharata, etc. As explained before, the Mahabharata
is the history of ancient India, and so also the Puranas. Pious acts are
prescribed in the supplementary Vedas (smrtis), and they are specifically
mentioned in the matter of digging tanks and wells for water supply of the
people in general. To implant trees on the public roads, to construct public
temples and places of worship of God, to establish places of charity where
the poor destitutes can be provided with foodstuff, and similar activities,
are called pirta.

Similarly, the process of fulfilling the natural desires for sense gratifica-
tion was also inquired about by the King for the benefit of all concerned.

TEXT 22
LC
यो GACT सगः पाषण्डस्य च सम्भवः |
आत्मनो TFA च व्यवस्थानं FET: RR
yo vanusayinam sargah
pasandasya ca sambhavah
atmano bandha-moksau ca
vyavasthanam sva-ripatah


--- Page 112 ---
448 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
yah—all those; vi—either; anusayinam—merged into the body of the
Lord; sargah— creation; pasandasya—of the infidels; ca—and; sambhavah—
appearance; atmanah—of the living beings; bandha—conditioned; moksau—
being liberated; ca—also; vyavasthanam—being situated; sva-riipatah—in an
unconditioned state.
TRANSLATION

Please also explain how, merged in the body of the Lord, living beings
are created, and how the infidels appear in the world. Also please explain

how the unconditioned living entities exist.

PURPORT
The progressive devotee of the Lord must inquire from the bona fide
spiritual master how living entities merged in the body of the Lord again
come back at the time of creation. There are two kinds of living entities.
There are the ever liberated unconditioned living beings as well as the ever
conditioned living beings. Of the ever conditioned living beings, there are
two divisions. They are the faithful and the infidels. Of the faithful there
are again two divisions, namely the devotees and the mental speculators.
The mental speculators desire to merge into the existence of the Lord, or
to become one with the Lord, whereas the devotees of the Lord desire to
keep separate identities and constantly engage in the service of the Lord.
The devotees who are not fully purified, as well as the empiric philoso-
phers, become conditioned again during the next creation for further
purification. Such conditioned souls become liberated by further progress
of devotional service to the Lord. Maharaja Pariksit asked all these ques-
tions from the bona fide spiritual master in order to become fully equipped

in the science of God.
TEXT 23
यथात्मतन्त्रो भगवान्‌ विक्रीडत्यात्ममायया।
विसृज्य चायथामायामदाम्त साक्षिवद्‌ विथुः|।२३२॥
yathatma-tantro bhagavan
vikridaty atma-mayaya


--- Page 113 ---
Text 24] Questions by King Pariksit 449
visrjya va yatha mayam
udaste sakgivad vibhuh
yathd—as; datma-tantrah—independent; bhagavan—the Personality of
Godhead; vikridati—enjoys His pastimes; atma-mayaya—by His internal
potency; visrjya—giving up; vd—as also; yatha—as He desires; mayam—the
external potency; uddste—remains; saksivat—just as the witness; vibhuh—
the almighty.
TRANSLATION
The independent Personality of Godhead enjoys His pastimes by His
internal potency and at the time of annihilation gives them up to the
external potency, and He remains a witness to it all.
PURPORT
Lord Sri Krsna, being the Supreme Personality of Godhead and foun-
tainhead of all other incarnations, is the only independent person. He
enjoys His pastimes by creation as He desires and gives them up to the
external energy at the time of annihilation. By His internal potency only
He kills the demon Puitana, even though enjoying His pastimes in the lap of
His mother Yasoda. And when He desired to leave this world He created
the pastimes of killing His own family members (Yadu-kula) and remained
unaffected by such annihilation. He is the witness of everything that is
happening, and yet He has nothing to do with anything. He is indepen-
dent in every respect. Maharaja Panksit desired to know more perfectly,
for a pure devotee ought to know well.
TEXT 24
¢ ४७
सर्वमेतच भगवन्‌ पृच्छतो मेऽनुपूर्वशः |
6
तच्वतोऽदस्युदाहतं प्रपन्नाय महामुने ॥२४।।
sarvam ९४०८ ca bhagavan
prcchato me’nupiirvasah
tattvato’rhasy udaharturi
prapannaya maha-mune


--- Page 114 ---
450 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
sarvam—all these; etat—inquiries; ca—also that I have not been able to
ask; bhagavan—Q great sage; prcchatah—of the inquisitive; me—myself;
anupirvasah—from the beginning; tattvatah—just in accordance with the
truth; arhasi—may kindly be explained; udahartum—as you will let know;
prapanndaya—one who is surrounded; mahd-mune—Q great sage.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, representative of the Lord, kindly satisfy my inquisitive-
ness in all that I have inquired from you and all that I may not have
inquired from you from the very beginning of my questionings. Since I
am a surrendered soul unto you, please impart full knowledge in this
connection.
PURPORT
The spiritual master is always prepared to impart knowledge to the
disciple and specifically when the disciple is very inquisitive. Inquisitive-
ness on the part of a disciple is greatly necessary for the progressive
disciple. Maharaja Pariksit is a typical disciple because he is perfectly
inquisitive. If one is not very inquisitive about self-realization, one need
not approach a spiritual master simply to make a show of discipleship.
Maharaja Pariksit is inquisitive, not only for all that he has inquired, but
he is also anxious to know what he has not been able to inquire. Factually
it is not possible for a man to inquire about everything from the spiritual
master, but the bona fide spiritual master is able to enlighten the disciple
in every way for the disciple’s benefit.
TEXT 25
अत्र प्रमाणं हि भवान्‌ परमेष्टी यथात्मभूः |
+ "6.
अपरे चानुतिष्ठन्ति पूर्वेषां पूजे: कतम्‌ URN
atra preamanar hi bhavan
paramesthi yathatma-bhah
apare canutisthanti
[90706806118 parva-juih krtam


--- Page 115 ---
Text 25] Questions by King Pariksit 451
atra—in this matter; pramanam—evidential facts; hi—certainly; bhavan—
yourself; paramesthi—Brahma, the creator of the universe; yatha—as;
atma-bhah—born directly from the .Lord; apare—others; ca—only; anu-
tisthanti—just to follow; piirvesim—as a matter of custom; pirva-jaih—
knowledge suggested by a previous philosopher; krtam—having been done.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, you are as good as Brahma, the original living being.
Others follow custom only, as followed by the previous philosophical
speculators.
PURPORT

It may be argued that Sukadeva Gosvam is not the only authority of
perfect knowledge in transcendence because there are many other sages
and their followers. Contemporary to Vyasadeva or even prior to him
there were many other great sages, such as Gautama, Kanada, Jaimini,
Kapila and Astavakra, and all of them have presented a philosophical path
by themselves. Patafjali is also one of them, and all these six great rsis
have their own way of thinking, exactly like the modern philosophers
and mental speculators. The difference between the six philosophical
paths put forward by the renowned sages above mentioned and that of
Sukadeva Gosvami, as presented in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, is that all the
six sages mentioned above speak the facts according to their own thinking,
but Sukadeva Gosvami presents the knowledge which comes down directly
from Brahmaji, who is known as atma-bhith, or born of and educated by
the Almighty Personality of Godhead.

Vedic transcendental knowledge descends directly from the Personality
of Godhead. By His mercy, Brahma, the first living being in the universe,
was enlightened, and from Brahmaji, Narada was enlightened, and from
Narada, Vyasa was enlightened. Sukadeva Gosvami received such transcen-
dental knowledge directly from his father, Vyasadeva. Thus the knowledge,
being received from the chain of disciplic succession, is perfect. One cannot
be a spiritual master in perfection unless and until one has reccived the
same by disciplic succession. Thal is the secret of receiving transcendental
knowledge. The six greal sages mentioned above may be great thinkers,
but their knowledge by mental speculation is not perfect. However perfect
an empiric philosopher may be in presenting a philosophical thesis, such


--- Page 116 ---
452 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
knowledge is never perfect because it is produced by an imperfect mind.
Such great sages also have their disciplic succession, but they are not
authorized because such knowledge does not come directly from the
independent Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana. No one can be
independent except Narayana; therefore no one’s knowledge can be
perfect due to being dependent on the flickering mind. Mind is material,
and thus knowledge presented by material speculators is never transcen-
dental and can never become perfect. Mundane philosophers, being im-
perfect in themselves, disagree with other philosophers because a mundane
philosopher is not a philosopher at all unless he presents his own theory.
Intelligent persons like Maharaja Pariksit do not recognize such mental
speculators, however great they may be, but hear from the authorities like
$ikadeva Gosvami, who is nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by the parampara system, as is specially stressed in the Bhagavad-
gita.
TEXT 26
=
न मेऽसवः परायन्ति बह्मननशनादमी |
पिबतोऽच्युतपीयूषम्‌ तद्‌ वाक्याश्िविनिः सृतम्‌ REN
na me ’savah pardayanti
brahmann anasanadami
pibato ’cyuta-piyusam
tad vakyabdhi-vinihsrtam
na—never; me—mine; asavah—life; pardyanti—becomes exhausted;
brahman—O learned brahmana; anasanat ami—because of fasting;
pibatah—because of my drinking; acyuta—the infallible; ptyisam—nectar;
tat—your; vakyabdhi—ocean of speech; vinihsrtam—flowing down from.
TRANSLATION
O learned brahmana, because of my drinking the nectar of the message
of the infallible Personality of Godhead, which is flowing down from the
ocean of your speeches, I do not feel any sort of exhaustion due to my
fasting.”


--- Page 117 ---
Text 27] Questions by King Pariksit 453
PURPORT

The disciplic succession from Brahma, Narada, Vyasa and Sukadeva
Gosvami is particularly different from others. The disciplic succession
from other sages is simply a waste of time, being devoid of Acyuta-katha,
or the message of the infallible Lord. The mental speculators can present
their theories very nicely by reason and arguments, but such reasons and
arguments are not infallible because they arc defeated by better mental
speculators. Maharaja Parlksit was not interested in the dry speculation of
the flickering mind, but he was interested in the topics of the Lord because
factually he felt that by hearing such a nectarean message from the mouth
of Sukadeva Gosvami he was not feeling any exhaustion, even though he
was fasting because of his imminent death.

One can indulge in hearing the mental speculators, but such hearing can-
not be prolonged for any length of time. One will be exhausted very soon
by hearing such hackneyed ways of thinking, and no one in the world can
be satisfied simply by hearing such useless speculations. The message of
the Lord, especially from a personality like Sukadeva Gosvami, can never
be tiring, even though one may be exhausted from other causes.

In some editions of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the text of the last
line of this verse reads anyatra kupitad dvijat, which means the King
might be overwhelmed by the thought of his imminent death by
snakebite. The snake is also twice-born, and its anger is compared with the
cursing brahmana boy who was without good intelligence. Maharaja
Pariksit was not at all afraid of death because of being fully encouraged by
the message of the Lord. One who is fully absorbed in Acyuta-katha can
never be afraid of anything in this world.

TEXT 27
खूत उवाच
स उपामन्त्रितो राज्ञा कथायामिति सत्पतेः |
ज्रह्रातो भृशं प्रीतो विष्णुरातेन संसदि ॥२७॥
stita uvaca
sa upamantrito rajia
kathayam iti sat-pateh
brahmarato bhrsam prito
vispuratena samsadi


--- Page 118 ---
454 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
ई sittah uwvaca—Srila Sita Gosvami said; sah—he (Sukadeva Gosvami);
upamantritah—thus being inquired; ragjia—by the King; kathayam—in the
topics of; iti—thus; sat-pateh—of the highest truth; brahmaratah—
Sukadeva Gosvami; bhrsam—very much; pritah—pleased; vispuratena—by
Maharaja Pariksit; sarmsadi—in the meeting.
TRANSLATION

Suita Gosvami said: Thus Sukadeva Gosvami, being invited by Maharaja
Pariksit to speak on topics of the Lord Sri Krsna with the devotees, was
very much pleased.

PURPORT

Srimad-Bhagavatam can only be legitimately discussed among the devo-
tees of the Lord. As the Bhagavad-gita was authoritatively discussed be-
tween Lord Krsna and Arjuna (the Lord and the devotee respectively),
similarly Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is the postgraduate study of the
Bhagavad-gita, can also be discussed between the scholars and devotees
like Sukadeva Gosvami and Mahardja Pariksit. Otherwise the real taste of
the nectar cannot be relished. dikadeva Gosvami was pleased with
Maharaja Pariksit because he was not at all tired of hearing the topics of
the Lord, and he was more and more anxious to hear them on and on with
interest. Foolish interpreters unnecessarily tackle the Bhagavad-gita and
Srimad-B3hagavatam when they have no access to the subject matter. There
is no use in nondevotees’ meddling with the two topmost Vedic literatures,
and therefore Sankaracirya did not touch Srimad-Bhagavatam for commen-
tation. In his commentation on the Bhagavad-gita, &ripada Sankaracirya
accepted Lord Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but later on.
he commented from the impersonalist’s view. But, being conscious of his
position, he did not comment on the Srimad-Bhagavatam.

Srila Sukadeva Gosvami was protected by Lord Krsna (vide Brahma-
vaivarta Purana), and therefore he is known as Brahmarata, and Sriman
Pariksit Maharaja was protected by Visnu, and thus he is known as the
Visnurata. As devotees of the Lord, they are always protected by the
lord. Tt is clear also in this connection that a Visnurata should hear
Srimad-Bhagavatam from Brahmarata and no one else because others
misrepresent the transcendental knowledge and thus spoil one’s valuable
time.


--- Page 119 ---
Text 28] Questions by King Pariksit 455
TEXT 28
प्राह भागवतं नाम पुराणं जद्यसम्मितम्‌ |
FEU भगवत्प्रोक्तं ब्रह्मकल्प उपागते ॥२८।।
praha bhagavatari nama
[01476120712 brahma-sammitam
brahmane bhagavat-proktarm
brahma-kalpa upagate

praha—he said; bhagavatam—the science of the Personality of Godhead;
nama—of the name; puranam—the supplement of the Vedas; brahna-
sammitam—just in pursuance of the Vedas; brahmane—unto Lord Brahma;
bhagavat-proktam—was spoken by the Personality of Godhead; brahma-
kalpe—the millennium in which Brahma was first generated; upagate—
just in the beginning.

TRANSLATION
He just began to reply to the inquiries of Maharaja Pariksit by saying
that the science of the Personality of Godhead was spoken first by the
Lord Himself to Brahma when he was first born. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the
supplementary Vedic literature, and it is just in pursuance of the Vedas.
PURPORT

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the science of the Personality of Godhead. The
impersonalist always tries to misrepresent the personal feature of the Lord
without knowing the science of this great knowledge, and Srimad-
Bhagavatam is in pursuance of the Vedas and scientific knowledge of the
Personality of Godhead. To learn this science one should take shelter of
the representative of Sri Sukadeva and follow in the footsteps of Maharaja
Pariksit without foolishly attempting to interpret, thereby committing a
great offense at the feet of the Lord. The dangerous ways of interpreta-
tions by the nondevotee class of men have played havoc in understanding
the Srimad-Bhagavad-gita and the Srimad-Bhagavatam, and the carcful
student should be always alert in this matter if he at all wants to learn the
science of Godhead.


--- Page 120 ---
456 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 8
TEXT 29
यद्‌ यत्‌ परीक्षिदषभः पाण्डूनामयुपएच्छति |
hy 2
आनुपूर्व्येण तत्सर्वमाख्यातुुपचक्रमर 1221]
yad yat pariksid rsabhah
pandianam anuprcchati
anupurvyena tal sarvam
akhyatum upacakrame
yat yat—whatsoever; pariksit—the King; rsabhah—the best; pandinam—
in the dynasty of Pandu; anuprcchati—goes on inquiring; anupirvyena—
the beginning to the end; tat—all those; sarvam—{ully; akhyatum—to
describe; upacakrame—he just prepared himself.
TRANSLATION
He also prepared himself to reply to all that King Pariksit inquired
from him. Maharaja Pariksit was the best in the dynasty of the Pandus,
and thus he was able to ask the right questions from the right person.”
PURPORT
Maharaja Pariksit asked many questions, some of them very curiously,
to know things as they are, but it is not necessary for the master to answer
them in the order of the disciple’s inquiries, one after the other. But
Sukadeva Gosvami, experienced teacher that he was, answered all the
questions in a systemalic way as they were received from the chain of
disciplic succession. And he answered all of them without exception.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Eighth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Questions By King Pariksit.”


--- Page 121 ---
CHAPTER NINE
Answers by Citing
J -
the Lords Version
TEXT 1
সীহ্যুক্ক IT
आत्ममायागरते राजन्‌ परस्यायुभवात्मनः |
न घटेतार्थसम्बन्धः खमद्रषुरिवाञ्जसा । १॥
sri suka ९८९४८८०
atma-mayam rte rajan
parasyanubhavatmanah
na ghatetartha-sambandhah
svapna-drastur ivanjasa
sri sukah uviaca—Sn Sukadeva Gosvami said; atma—the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead; mayam—energy; rte—without; rajan—O King; parasya—
of the pure soul; anubhava-atmanah—of the purely conscious; na—never;
ghateta—it can so happen; artha— meaning; sambandhah—relation with the
material body; svapna—dream; drastuh—of the seer; iva—like it; aijasa—
completely.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: 0 King, unless one is influenced by the
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no meaning to the
relationship of the pure soul in pure consciousness with the material body.
It is just like the dreamer seeing his own body working.
PURPORT
The question of Maharaja Pariksit is perfectly answered as to how a
living entity began his material life, although he is apart from the material
body and mind. The spirit soul is distinct from the material conception of
his life, but he is absorbed in such a material conception because of being
influenced by the external energy of the Lord, called atmae-maya. This is
already explained in the First Canto in connection with Vyasadeva’s
457


--- Page 122 ---
458 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
realization of the Supreme Lord and His external energy. The external
energy is controlled by the Lord, and the living entities are controlled by
the external energy—by the will of the Lord: Therefore, although the living
entity is purely conscious in his pure state, he is subordinate to the will of
the Lord in being influenced by the external energy of the Lord. In the
Bhagavad-gita also the same thing is confirmed (Bg. 15.15), that the Lord
is present within the heart of every living entity, and all consciousness and
forgetfulness of the living entity are influenced by the Lord.

Now the next question will automatically be made as to why the Lord
influences the living entity to such consciousness and forgetfulness. The
answer is that the Lord clearly wishes that cvery living entity be in his
pure consciousness as the part and parcel of the Lord and thus be engaged
in the loving service of the Lord as he is constitutionally made; but because
the living entity is partially independent also, he may not be willing to
serve the Lord, but may try to become as independent as the Lord is.
The whole nondevotee class of living entities are all desirous of becoming
cqually as powerful as the Lord, although they are not fit to become so.
The living entities are illusioned by the will of the Lord because they
wanted to become like Him. As a person thinks of becoming a king without
possessing the necessary qualification, similarly when the living entity
desires to become the Lord Himself, he is put in a condition of dreaming
that he is a king. Therefore the first sinful will of the living entity is to
become the Lord, and the consequent will of the Lord is that the living
entity forgets his factual life and thus dreams of the land of utopia where
he may become one like the Lord. The child cries to have the moon from
the mother, and the mother gives the child a mirror to satisfy the crying
and disturbing child with the shadow of the moon. Similarly, the crying
child of the Lord is given over to the shadow of the material world to lord
it over as karmi and to give this up in frustration to become one with the
Lord. Both these stages are dreaming illusions only. There is no necessity
of tracing out the history when the living entity desired this. But the fact
is that as soon as he desired such, he was put under the control of atma-
maya by the direction of the Lord. Therefore the living entity in his
material condition is dreaming falsely that this is “mine” and this is “1.”
The dream is that the conditioned soul thinks of his material body as “I”
or falsely thinks that he is the Lord and that everythingin connection with
that material body is “mine.” Thus in dream only the misconception of “I”
and “mine” persists life after life. This continues life after life, as long as
the living entity is not purely conscious of his identity as the subordinate
part and parcel of the Lord.


--- Page 123 ---
Text 2] Answers by Citing the Lord's Version 459

In his pure consciousness, however, there is no such misconceived
drcam, and in that pure conscious state the living entity does not forget
that he is never the Lord, but that he is cternally the servitor of the Lord
in transcendental love.

TEXT 2
बहुरूप इवाभाति मायया बहुरूपया |
- -
रममाणो गुणेप्वस्या ममाहमिति मन्यते ॥ २॥
bahu-ripa ivabhati
mayayd bahu-ripaya
ramamano gunesv asya
mamaham iti manyate

bahu-ripah—multiforms; iva—as it were; abhati—manifested; mayaya—
by the influence of the exterior energy; bahu-ripaya—in multifarious
forms; ramamanah— enjoying as it were; gunesu—in the modes of different
qualities; asyah—of the external energy; mama—mine; aham—1; iti—thus;
manyate—thinks.

TRANSLATION

The illusioned living entity appears in so many forms which are
offered by the external energy of the Lord, and the encaged living entity,
while enjoying in the modes of material nature, misconceives, thinking in
terms of "न?" and “mine.”

PURPORT

The different forms of the living entities are different dresses offered
by the illusory external energy of the Lord according to the modes of
nature desired to be enjoyed by the living being. The external material
energy is represented by her three modes, namely goodness, passion and
ignorance. So even in the material nature there is a chance of an indepen-
dent choice by the living entity, and according to his choice the material
energy offers him different varieties of material bodies. There are
900,000 varieties of material bodies in the water, two million vegetable
bodies, 1,100,000 worms and reptiles, one million forms of birds,
three million different bodies of beasts, and 400,000 human forms.
Altogether there are 8,400,000 varieties of bodies in different planets of
the universe, and the living entity is traveling by so many transmigrations
according to different modes of enjoying spirit within himself. Even in
one particular body the living entity changes from childhood to boyhood,


--- Page 124 ---
460 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
from boyhood to youth, from youth to old age and from old age to an-
other body created by his own action. The living entity creates his own
body by his personal desires, and the external energy of the Lord supplies
him the exact form by which he can enjoy his desires to the fullest extent.
The tiger wanted to enjoy the blood of another animal, and therefore, by
the grace of the Lord, the material energy supplies him the body of the
tiger with facilities for enjoying blood from another animal. Similarly,
a living entity desiring to get the body of a demigod in the higher
planet can also get it by the grace of the Lord. And if he is intelligent
enough, he can desire to get a spiritual body to enjoy the company of the
Lord, and he will get it. So the minute freedom of the living entity can be
fully utilized, and the Lord is so kind that he will award him the same
type of body that he desires. It is like dreaming of a golden mountain. A
person knows what a mountain is, and he knows also what gold is. Out
of his desire only he dreams of a golden mountain, and when the dream is
over he sees something 0156 in his presence. He finds in his awakened state
that there is neither gold nor a mountain, and what to speak of a golden
mountain.

The different positions of the living entities in the material world under
multifarious manifestations of bodies arc due to the misconception of
“mine” and 1.” The karmi thinks of this world as “mine,” and the ]7 078
thinks “I am” everything. The whole material conception of politics,
sociology, philanthropy, altruism, etc., conceived by the conditioned souls
is on the basis of this misconceived “I” and “mine,” and this I and mine
are products of a strong desire to enjoy material life. 1dentification of the
body and the place where the body is obtained under different con-
ceptions of socialism, nationalism, family affection, and so on and so forth
is all due to forgetfulness of the real nature of the living entity, and the
whole misconception of the bewildered living entity can be removed by
the association of Sukadeva GosvamT and Mahirdja Pariksit, as all this is
explained in the Srimad-Bhagavatam.

TEXT 3
यर्हि वाव महिनि स्वे परसिन्‌ कालमाययोः ।
- -
रमेत गतसम्मोदस्त्यक्त्वोदास्ते तदोभयम्‌ ॥ २॥
yarhi vava mahimni sve
parasmin kala-mayayoh


--- Page 125 ---
Text 3] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 461
rameta gata-sammohas
tyaktvodaste tadobhayam

yarhi—at any time; vava—certainly; mahimni—in the glory; sve—of him-
self; parasmin—in the Supreme; kala—time; mayayoh—also the material
energy; rameta—enjoys; gata-sammohah—being freed from misconception;
tyaktva—giving up; udaste—in fullness; tada—that; ubhayam—both.

TRANSLATION
As soon as the living entity becomes situated in his constitutional
glory and begins to enjoy the transcendence beyond time and material
energy, he at once gives up the two misconceptions of life [mine and 1]
and thus becomes fully manifested as the pure self.
PURPORT

The two misconceptions of life, namely “I” and “mine,” are verily
manifested in two classes of men. In the lower state the conception of
“mine” is very prominent, and in the higher state the misconception of
“1” is prominent. In the animal state of life the misconception of “mince”
is perceivable even in the category of cats and dogs, and they fight with
one another with the same misconception of “mine.” In the lower stage
of human life the same misconception is also prominent in the shape of
“It is my body,” “It is my house,” “It is my family,” “It is my caste,”
“It is my nation,” “It is my country,” and so on. And in the higher stage
of speculative knowledge, the same misconception of “mine” is trans-
formed into “I am,” or “It is all I am,” or “I,” etc. There are many classes
of men comprehending the same misconception of “I” and “mine” in 011
ferent color. But the real significance of such “1” can only be realized when
one is situated in the consciousness of “I am the eternal servitor of the
Lord.” This is pure consciousness, and the whole Vedic literatures teach us
this conception of life.

The misconception of “I am the Lord,” 011 am the Supreme,” is more
dangerous than the misconception of “mine.” Although there are some-
times directions in the Vedic literatures to think oneself one with the
Lord, that does not mean that one becomes identified in every respect
with the Lord. Undoubtedly there is oneness of the living entity with the
Lord in many respects, but ultimately the living entity is subordinate to


--- Page 126 ---
462 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
the Lord, and he is constitutionally meant for satisfying the senses of the
Lord. The Lord therefore asks the conditioned souls to surrender unto
Him. Had the living entities not been subordinate to the supreme will, why
would the living entity be asked to surrender? Had the living being been
equal in all respects, then why was he put under the influence of maya?
We have already discussed many times that the material energy is
controlled by the Lord. The Bhagavad-gita confirms this controlling power
of the Lord over the material nature (Bg. 9.10). Can a living entity who
claims to be as good as the Supreme Being control the material nature?
The foolish “I” would reply that he would do so in the future. Even
accepting that in the future one would be as good a controller of the
material nature as the Supreme Being, ther why is he now under the con-
trol of the material nature? The Bhagavad-gita says that one can be freed
from the control of the material nature by surrendering unto the Supreme
Lord, but if there is no surrender, then the living entity will never be able
to control the material nature. So this misconception of “I” must also be
given up by practicing the way of devotional service or firmly being situ-
ated in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. A poor man without
any employment or without any occupation may undergo so many
troubles in life, but if by chance the same man gets a good service under
the government, he at once becomes happy. There is no profit in denying
the supremacy of the Lord, who is the controller of all energies, but one
should be constitutionally situated in one’s own glory, namely to be
situated in the pure consciousness of being the eternal servitor of the Lord.
In his conditional life the living entity is servant of the illusory maya, and
in his liberated state he is the pure unqualified servant of the Lord. To
become untinged by the modes of material nature is the qualification for
entering into the service of the Lord. As long as one is a servant of mental
concoctions, one cannot be completely free from the disease ০11” and
“mine.”

The Supreme Truth is without any contamination of the illusory
energy because He is the controller of that energy. The relative truths are
apt to be engrossed with illusory energy. The best purpose is, however,
served when one is directly facing the supreme truth, as when one faces
the sun. The sun overhead in the sky is full of light, but when the sun is
not in the visible sky, all is in darkness. Similarly, when one is face to
face with the Supreme Lord, he is freed from all illusions, and one who
is not so is in the darkness of illusory maya. The Bhagavad-gita confirms
this as follows:


--- Page 127 ---
Text 4] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 463
mari ca yo ‘vyabhicarena bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhayaya kalpate
(Bg. 14.26)

So the science of bhakti-yoga, of worshiping the Lord, glorifying the
Lord, hearing the Srimad-Bhagavatam from the right sources (not from
the professional man but from a person who is Bhagavatam in life) and
being always in the association of pure devotees, should be adopted in
earnestness without being misled by misconceptions of “I” and “mine.”
The karmis are fond of the conception of “mine,” and the jianis are fond
of the conception of “1,” and both of them are unqualified to be free from
the bondage of the illusory energy. Srimad-Bhagavatam, and primarily the
Bhagavad-gita, are both meant for delivering a person from the misconcep-
tion of “I” and “mine,” and Srila Vyasadeva transcribed them for the
deliverance of the fallen souls. The living entity has to be situated in the
transcendental position where there is no more influence of time nor of the
material energy. In conditioned life the living entity is subjected to the
influence of time in the dream of past, present and future. The mental
speculator tries to conquer the influence of time by future speculation of
becoming Vasudeva or the Supreme Lord himself by means of culture of
knowledge and conquering over ego. But the process is not perfect. The
perfect process is to accept Lord Vasudeva as the Supreme in everything,
and the best perfection of culturing knowledge is to surrender unto Him
because He is the source of everything. In that conception only can one
gt rid of the misconception of I and mine. Both Bhagavad-gita and the

rimad-Bhagavatam confirm it. Srila Vyasadeva hasspecifically contributed
to the illusioned living entities the science of God and the process of
bhakti-yoga in his great literature Srimad-Bhagavatam, and the conditioned
soul should fully take advantage of this great science.
TEXT 4
आत्यतत्वदिश्द्धयर्थं यदाह EE ।
ब्रह्मणे दीयन्‌ रूपमल्यलीकवतादतः || ও ||
atma-tattva-visuddhy-artharm
yad aha bhagavan rtam
brahmane darsayan ripam
avyalikg-vratadrtah


--- Page 128 ---
464 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9

atma-tattvam—the science of God or that of the living entity; visuddhi—
purification; artham—goal; yat—that which; @aha—said; bhagavan—the Per-
sonality of Godhead; rtam—in reality; brahmanpe—unto Lord Brahma;
dar$ayan—by showing; riipam—eternal form; avyalika— without any decep-
tive motive; vrata—vow; ddrtah— worshiped.

TRANSLATION
0 King, the Personality of Godhead, being very much pleased with Lord
Brahma because of his nondeceptive penance in bhakti-yoga, presented
His eternal and transcendental form before Brahma. And that is the
objective goal for purifying the conditioned soul.
PURPORT

Atma-tattvam is the science of both God and the living entity. Both the
Supreme Lord and the living entity are known as ৫8772. The Supreme Lord
is called Paramatma or Parambrahma, and the living entity is called the
dtma or the brahma or the jiva. Both the Paramatma and the jivatma, being
transcendental to the material energy, are called ama. So Sukadeva
Gosvami explains this verse with the aim of purifying the truth of both
the Paramatma and the jivatma. Generally people have many wrong con-
ceptions about both of them. The wrong conception of the jivatma is to
identify the material body with the pure soul, and the wrong conception
of Paramatma is to think Him on an equal level with the living entity. But
both misconceptions can be removed by one stroke of bhakti-yoga, just as
in the sunlight both the sun and the world and everything within the sun-
light are properly seen. In the darkness no one can see the sun, nor himself,
nor the world. But in the sunlight one can see the sun, himself and the
world around him. Srila Sukadeva Gosvami therefore says that for purifi-
cation of both wrong conceptions, the Lord presented His eternal form
before Brahmaji, being fully satisfied by Brahma’s nondeceptive vow of
discharging bhakti-yoga. Except for bhakti-yoga, any method for realization
of atma-tattva, or the science of atma, will prove deceptive in the long run.

In the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord says that only by bhakti-yoga can one
know Him perfectly, and then one can enter into the science of God.
Brahmaji undertook great penance in performing bhakti-yoga, and thus he
was able to see the transcendental form of the Lord. His transcendental
form is one hundred percent spiritual, and one can see Him only by


--- Page 129 ---
Text 5] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 465
spiritualized vision after proper discharge of tapasya or penance in pure
bhakti-yoga. The form of the Lord which was manifested before Brahma
is not one of the forms with which we have experience in the material
world. Brahmaji did not perform such severe types of penance just to see
a form of material production. Therefore the question by Maharaja Pariksit
about the form of the Lord is answered. The form of the Lord is sac-cid-
ananda, or eternal, full of knowledge and full of bliss. But the material
form of the living being is neither eternal, nor full of knowledge, nor
blissful. That is the distinction between the form of the Lord and that of
the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul, however, can regain his form
of eternal knowledge and bliss simply by seeing the Lord by means of
bhakti-yoga.

The summary is that due to ignorance the conditioned soul is encaged
in the temporary varieties of material forms. But the Supreme Lord has no
such temporary form like the conditioned souls. He is always possessed of
an eternal form of knowledge and bliss, and that is the difference between
the Lord and the living entity. One can understand this difference by the
process of bhakti-yoga. Brahma was then told by the Lord the gist of
Srimad-Bhagavatam in four original verses. Thus Srimad-Bhagavatam is not
a creation of the mental speculators. The sound of Srimad-Bhagavatam is
transcendental, and the resonance of Srimad-Bhagavatam is as good as that
of the Vedas. Thus the topic of the Srimad-Bhagavatam is the science of
both the Lord and the living entity. Regular reading or hearing of Srimad-
Bhagavatam is also performance of bhakti-yoga, and one can attain the
highest perfection simply by the association of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Both
Sukadeva Gosvami and Maharaja Pariksit attained perfection through the
medium of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

TEXT 5
स आदिदेवो जगतां परो गुरुः
खधिष्ण्यमास्थाय सिसृक्षयैक्षत |
तां नान्यगच्छ्‌ दृशमत्र सम्मतां
प्रपश्चनिर्माणविपिर्यया भवेत्‌ ॥ ५॥
sa adi-devo jagatari paro guruh
svadhispyam asthaya sisrksayaiksata
tar nadhyagacchad drsam atra sammatam
prapaiica-nirmana-vidhir yaya bhavet


--- Page 130 ---
466 Srimad Bhagavatam | Canto 2, Ch. 9
sah—he; adi-devah—the first demigod; jagatam—of the universe; parah—
supreme; guruh—spiritual master; svadhisnyam—his lotus seal ; asthaya—to
find out the source of it; sisrksaya—for the matter of creating the universal
affairs; aiksata—began to think; tam—in that matter; na—could not; adhya-
gacchat—understand; drsam—the direction; atra—therein; sammatam—just
the proper way; prapaiica—material; nirmana—construction; vidhih—
process; yayd—as much as; bhavet—should be.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, the first spiritual master, supreme in the universe, could
not trace out the source of his lotus seat, and while thinking of creating
the material world, he could not understand the proper direction for such
creative work, nor could he find out the process for such creation.
PURPORT

This verse is the prelude for explaining the transcendental nature of the
form and the abode of the Lord. In the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam
it is already said that the Supreme Absolute Truth exists in His own abode
without any touch of the deluding energy. Therefore the kingdom of God
isnot a myth but factually a different and transcendental sphere of planets
known as the Vaikunthas. This will also be explained in this chapter.

Such knowledge of the spiritual sky far above this material sky and its
paraphernalia can be known only by dint of devotional service or bhekti-
yoga. The power of creation by Lord Brahma was also achieved by bhakti-
yoga. Brahmaji was bewildered in the matter of creation, and he could not
even trace oul the source of his own existence. But all this knowledge was
fully achieved by him through the medium of bhakti-yoga. By bhakti-yoga
one can know the Lord, and by knowing the Lord as the Supreme, one is
able to know everything ০156৫. One who knows the Supreme knows
everything clse. That is the version of all Vedas. Even the first spiritual
master of the universe was enlightened by the grace of the Lord, so who
else can attain perfect knowledge of everything without the mercy of the
Lord? If anyone desires to scek perfect knowledge of everything, he must
scek the mercy of the Lord, and there is no other means. To seek know-
ledge on the strength of one’s personal attempt is a sheer waste of time.


--- Page 131 ---
Text 6] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 467
TEXT 6
os i" ৮.)
स॒ चन्तयन्‌ दयक्षरमकदाभ्म-
= ~~ C : ~+ ~
स्युपाशरृणोद्‌ हिगदितं वचो वियः |
=e - +
स्पर्शेषु यत्पोडश्चमेकिंशं
निषप्किञ्वनानां चुप यद्‌ धनं विदुः ॥ £ ॥
sa cintayan dvyaksaramekadambhasy
upasrnod dvir-gaditam vaco vibhuh
sparsesu yat sodasam ekavirnsam
niskificananam nrpa yad dhanam viduh
sah—he; cintayan— while thus thinking; dvi- two; aksaram—syllables;
ekadda—once upon a time;ambhasi—in the water; upasmot—heard it nearby;
dvih—twice; gaditam—uttered; vacah— words; vibhuh—the great; sparsesu—
of the sparsa letters; yat— which; sodasam—the sixteenth; ekavimsam—and
the twenty-first; nigkificananam—of the renounced order of life; nrpa—0
King; yat—what is; dhanam— wealth; viduh—as it is known.
TRANSLATION
While thus engaged in thinking, in the water, Brahmaji heard twice
from nearby two syllables joined together. One of the syllables was taken
from the sixteenth and the other from the twenty-first of the sparsa
alphabets, and both joined to become the wealth of the renounced order
of life.
PURPORT
In Sanskrit language, the consonant alphabets are divided into two
divisions, namely the sparsa-varpas and the talavya-varnas. From ka to ma
the letters are known as the sparsa-varpas, and the sixteenth of the group
is called ta, whereas the twenty-first letter is called pa. So when they are
joined together, the word tapa, or penance, is constructed. This penance is
the beauty and wealth of the brahmanas and the renounced order of life.
According to Bhagavata philosophy, every human being is meant simply
for this tapa and for no other business, because by penance only can one
realize his sclf; and sclf-realization, and not sense gratification, is the


--- Page 132 ---
468 Srimad Bhagavatam |Canto 2, Ch. 9
business of human life. This tapa, or penance, was begun from the very
beginning of the creation, and it was first adopted by the supreme spiritual
master, Lord Brahma. By tapasya only can one get the profit of human life,
and not by a polished civilization of animal life. The animal does not know
anything except sense gratification in the jurisdiction of eat, drink, be
merry and enjoy. But the human being is made to undergo tapasya for
going bark to Godhead, back to home.

When Lord Brahma was perplexed about how to construct the material
manifestations in the universe and went down within the water to find out
the means and the source of his lotus seat, he heard the word tapa vibrated
twice. To take the path of tapa is the second birth of the desiring disciple.
The word upasrnot is very significant. It is similar to upanayana, or bringing
the disciple nearer to the spiritual master for the path of tapa. So Brahmaji
was thus initiated by Lord Krsna, and this fact is corroborated by Brahmaji
himself in his book the Brahma-sarmhita. In the Brahma-samhita Lord
Brahma has sung in every verse govindam adi-purusam tam ahari bhajami.
Thus Brahma was initiated by the Krsna mantra, by Lord Krsna Himself,
and thus he became a Vaisnava, or a devotee of the Lord, before he was
able to construct the huge universe. It is stated in the Brahma-samhita that
Lord Brahma was initiated into the eighteen-letter Krsna mantra, which is
generally accepted by all the devotees of Lord Krsna. We follow the same
principle because we belong to the Brahma sampradaya, directly in the
disciplic chain from Brahma to Narada, from Narada to Vyasa, from
Vyasa to Madhva Muni, from Madhva Muni to Madhavendra Puri, from
Madhavendra Purl to Ivara Purl, from Iévara Puri to Lord Caitanya and
gradually to His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, our divine master.

One who is thus initiated in the disciplic succession is able to achieve the
same result or power of creation. Chanting of this holy mantra is the only
shelter of the desireless pure devotee of the Lord. Simply by such tapasya,
or penance, the devotee of the Lord achieves all perfections like Lord
Brahma.

TEXT 7
निशम्य तद्वक्दि दक्षया दिशो
N
विरोक्य तत्रान्यदपरयमानः |
खधिष्ण्यमास्याय বিদ্বহম तद्धितं
तपस्युपादिष्ट इवादधे मनः ॥ ७॥


--- Page 133 ---
Text 7] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 469
nisamya tad-vaktr-didrksaya diso
vilokya tatranyad apasyamanah
svadhisnyam asthaya vimrsya taddhitam
tapasy upadista ivadadhe manah

nisamya—after hearing; tat—that; vaktr—the speaker; didrksaya—just
to find out who spoke; disah—all sides; vilokya—by seeing; tatra—there;
anyat—any other; apasyamanah—not to be found; svadhisnyam—on his
lotus seat; asthaya—sit down; vimr§ya—thin king; tat—it; hitam—welfare:
tapasi—in penance; upadistah—as he was instructed; iva—in pursuance ০1:
adadhe—gave; manah— attention.

TRANSLATION
When he heard the sound, he tried to find out the speaker, searching
on all sides. But when he was unable to find anyone besides himself, he
thought it wise to sit down on his lotus seat firmly and give his attention
to the execution of penance, as he was instructed.
PURPORT

To achieve success in life, one should follow the example of Lord
Brahma, the first living creature in the beginning of creation. After being
initiated by the Supreme Lord to execute tapasya, he was fixed in his
determination to do it and although he could not find anyone besides
himself, he could rightly understand that the sound was transmitted by the
Lord Himself. Brahma was the only living being at that time because there
was no other creation, and none could be found there except himself. In
the beginning of the First Canto, First Chapter, first verse of the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, it is already mentioned that Brahma was initiated by the Lord
from within. The Lord is within every living entity as the Supersoul, and
He initiated Brahma because Brahma was willing to receive the initiation.
The Lord can similarly initiate everyone who is inclined to have it.

As already stated, Brahma is the original spiritual master for the universe,
and since he was initiated by the Lord Himself, the message of Srimad-
Bhagavatam is coming down by disciplic succession, and in order to receive
the real message of दु 8158৫561273 one should approach the current
link, or spiritual master in the chain of disciplic succession. After being
initiated by the proper spiritual master in that chain of succession, one
should engage himself in the discharge of tapasya in the execution of


--- Page 134 ---
470 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
devotional service. One should not, however, think himself on the level
of Brahma to be initiated directly by the Lord from inside because in the
present age no one can be accepted to be as pure as Brahma. The post
of Brahma to officiate in the creation in the universe is offered to the most
pure living being, and unless one is so qualified one cannot expect to be
treated like Brahmaji directly. But one can have the same facility through
unalloyed devotees of the Lord, and scriptural instructions (as revealed
in the Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam especially), and also the
bona fide spiritual master available to the sincere soul. The Lord Himself
appears as the spiritual master to a person who is sincere in heart to serve
the Lord. Therefore the bona fide spiritual master who happens to meet
the sincere devotee should be accepted as the most confidential and
beloved representative of the Lord. 11 a person is posted under the guidance
of such a hona fide spiritual master, it may be accepted without any
doubt that the desiring person has achieved the grace of the Lord.
TEXT 8
(~ + - <~
द्य्य खटस्बाह्दममाषद्‌ शना
~ NY = S.\ =
जितानिलात्मा विजितोभयेन्द्रियः।
अतप्यत साखिललोकतापनं
तपस्तपीयांस्तपतां समाहितः ॥ ८ ॥
divyam sahasrabdam amogha-darsano
Jjitanilatma vijitobhayendriyah
atapyata smakhila-loka-tapanarn
tapas tapiyams tapatar samahitah
divyam—pertaining to the demigods in the higher planets; sahasra—one
thousand; abdam—years; amogha—spotless, without a tinge of impurity;
darsanah—one who has such a vision of life; jita—controlled; anila—life;
atma—mind; vijita—controlled over; ubhaya—both; indriyah—one who has
such senses; atapyata—executed penance; sma—in the past; akhila—all;
loka— planet; tapanam—enlightening; tapah—penance; tapiyan—extremely
hard penance; tapatam—of all the executors of penances; samahitah— thus
situated.


--- Page 135 ---
Text 8] Answers by Citing the Lord's Version 471
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma underwent penances for one thousand years by the
calculations of the demigods. He heard this transcendental vibration from
the sky, and he accepted it as divine. Thus he controlled his mind and
senses, and the penances which he executed were a great lesson for the
living entities. Thus he is known as the greatest of all ascetics.
PURPORT

Lord Brahma heard the occult sound tapa, but he did not see the person
who vibrated the sound. And still he accepted the instruction as beneficial
for him, and therefore he engaged himself in meditation for one thousand
celestial years. One celestial year is equal to 6 x 30 x 12 x 1000 of
our years. His acceptance of the sound was due to his pure vision of the
absolute nature of the Lord. And due to his correct vision, he made no
distinction between the Lord and the Lord’s instruction. There is no
difference between the Lord and sound vibration coming from Him, even
though He is not personally present. The best way of understanding is to
accept such divine instruction, and Brahma, the prime spiritual master of
everyone, is the living example of this process of receiving transcendental
knowledge. The potency of transcendental sound is never minimized
because the vibrator is apparently absent. Therefore Srimad-Bhagavatam
or the Bhagavad-gita or any revealed scripture in the world is never to be
accepted as an ordinary mundane sound without transcendental potency.

One has to receive the transcendental sound from the right source and
accept it as a reality and prosecute the direction without any hesitation.
The secret of success is to receive the sound from the right source of a
bona fide spiritual master. Mundane manufactured sound has no potency,
and as such, seemingly transcendental sound received from an unauthorized
person also has no potency. One should be qualified enough to discern
such transcendental potency, and either by discriminating or by fortunate
chance if one is able to receive the transcendental sound from the bona
fide spiritual master, his path of liberation is guaranteed. The disciple,
however, must be ready to execute the order of the bona fide spiritual
master as Lord Brahma executed the instruction of his spiritual master, the
Lord Himself. Following the order of the bona fide spiritual master is the
only duty of the disciple, and this completely faithful execution of the
order of the bona fide spiritual master is the secret of success.


--- Page 136 ---
472 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
Lord Brahma controlled his two grades of senses by means of sense
perception and sense organs because he had to engage such senses in the
execution of the order of the Lord. Therefore controlling the senses means
to engage them in the transcendental service of the Lord. The Lord’s order
descends in disciplic succession through the bona fide spiritual master, and
thus exceution of the order of the bona fide spiritual master is factual
control of the senses. Such execution of penance in full faith and sincerity
made Brahmaji so powerful that he became the creator of the universe.
And because he was able to attain such power, he is called the best amongst
all the tapasvis.
TEXT 9
a = _
तस्मे स्वलोकं भगवान्‌ सभाजितः
सन्दशंयामास परं न यत्परम्‌ |
FR PN 4
व्यपेतसंजधेशविमोहसाध्वसं
pith
स्वदृष्टवद्धिपुरुषेरमिष्टूतम्‌ ॥ ९॥
tasmai 5৮৫-/০/০৫/8 bhagavan sabhajitah
sandarsayamdsa param na yat-param
vyapeta-saitklesa-vimoha-sadhvasari
sva-drstavadbhir purusair abhistutam
tasmai—unto him; sva-lokam—His own planet or abode; bhagavan—the
Personality of Godhead; sabhdjitah—bceing pleased by the penance of
Brahma; sandarsayamasa—manifested; param—the supreme; na—not; yat—
of which; param—further supreme; vyapeta—completely given up; sanklesa
—five kinds of material afflictions; vimoha—without illusion ; sadhvasam—
fearfulness of material existence; sva-drstavadbhih—by those who have
perfectly realized the self; purusaih—by persons; abhistutam— worshiped
by.
ह TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, being thus very much satisfied with the
penance of Lord Brahma, was pleased to manifest His personal abode,
Vaikuntha, the supreme planet above all others. This transcendental abode
of the Lord is adored by all self-realized persons freed from all kinds of
miseries and fearfulness of illusory existence.


--- Page 137 ---
Text 9] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 473
PURPORT

The troubles of penance accepted by Lord Brahma were certainly in the
line of devotional service (bhakti). Otherwise there was no chance of
Vaikuntha or svalokam, the Lord’s personal abodes, becoming visible to
Brahmiji. The personal abodes of the Lord, known as Vaikunthas, are
neither myth nor material, as conceived by the impersonalists. But such
realization of the transcendental abodes of the Lord is possible only
through devotional service, and thus the devotees enter into such abodes.
There is undoubtedly trouble in executing penance, but the trouble
accepled in executing bhakti-yoga is transcendental happiness from the
very beginning, whereas the trouble of penance in other processes of self-
realization (namely jianayoga, dhyanavoga. etc.) without any Vaikuntha
realization ends in trouble only and nothing more. There is no profit in
biting husks without grains. Similarly, there is no profit in executing
troublesome penances other than bhakti-yoga for self-realization.

Execution of bhakti-yoga is exactly like sitting on the lotus sprouted
out of the abdomen of the transcendental Personality of Godhead, for
Lord Brahma was seated there. Brahmaji was able to please the Lord, and
the Lord was also pleased to show Brahmaji His personal abode. Srila Jiva
Gosvami narrates, in the comments of his Krama-sandarbha annotation
of Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from the Garga Upanisad, Vedic evi-
dence. It is said that Yajfiavalkya described this transcendental abode of
the Lord to Gargl, and it is said there that the abode of the Lord is
situated above the highest planet of the universe, namely Brahmaloka.
This abode of the Lord, although described in the revealed scriptures like
the Bhagavad-gita and the Srimad-Bhagavatam, remains only a myth for
the less intelligent class of men with a poor fund of knowledge. Herein
the word svadrstavadbhi is very significant. One who has actually realized
his self realizes the transcendental form of one’s self. Impersonal realization
of self and the Supreme is not complete, because it is just an opposite
conception of material personalities. The Personality of Godhead and the
personalities of devotees of the Lord are all transcendental; they do not
have material bodies. The material body is overcast with five kinds of
miserable conditions, namely ignorance, material conception, attachment,
hatred and absorption. As long as one is overwhelmed with these five
kinds of material miseries, there is no question of entering into the
Vaikunthalokas. Impersonal conception of one’s self is just the negation of
material personality, far from the positive existence of personal form. These
personal forms of the transcendental abode will be explained in the follow-


--- Page 138 ---
474 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
ing verses. Brahmajl also described this highest planet of the Vaikunthaloka
as Goloka Vrndavana, where the Lord resides as a cowherd boy keeping
transcendental surabhi cows and surrounded by hundreds and thousands
of goddesses of fortune.
cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpavrksa-
laksavrtesu surabhir abhipalayantam
laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam
govindam adi-purusarii tam 0110777 bhajami (Bs. 5.29)
The statement of the Bhagavad-gita, yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama
paramari mama, is also confirmed herewith. Param means transcendental
Brahma. Therefore, the abode of the l.ord is also Brahma, nondifferent
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is known as
Vaikuntha, and His abode is also known as Vaikuntha. And such Vaikuntha
realization and worship can be made possible by transcendental form and
sense.
TEXT 10
र्त -
भ्रवतेते यत्र॒ रजस्तमस्तयोः
सत्वं च मिश्रं न च कालविक्रमः |
न यत्र माया किमुतापरे हरे-
रनुत्रता यत्र॒ सुरासुरार्चिताः ॥१०॥।
pravartate yatra rajas tamas tayoh
sattvarn ca misram na ca kala-vikramah
na yatra maya kim utapare harer
anuvratd yatra surasurarcitah
pravartate—prevail; yatra—wherein; rajah tamah—the modes of igno-
rance and passion; tayoh—both of them; sattvam—the mode of goodness;
ca—and; misram—mixture; na—never; ca—and; kala—time; vikramah—
influence; na—neither; yatra—therein; maya—illusory external energy;
kim—what; uta—there is; apare—others; hareh—of the Personality of
Godhead; anuvratah—devotees; yatra—wherein; sura—the demigods; ৫57৫
—the demons; arcitah—worshiped.


--- Page 139 ---
Text 10] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 475
TRANSLATION
In that personal abode of the Lord, the material modes of ignorance
and passion do not prevail, nor is there any of their influence in the matter
of goodness. There is no predominance of the influence of time, so what
to speak of the illusory external energy thal cannot enter in that region.
Without discrimination, both the demigods and the demons worship the
Lord as devolees.
PURPORT
The kingdom of God, or the atmosphere of Vaikuntha nature, which is
called the trip@d-vibhiiti, is three Limes bigger than the material universes
and is described here, as also in the Bhagavad-gita, in a nutshell. This
universe, containing billions of stars and planets, is one of the billions of
such universes clustered together within the compass of mahat-tattva.
And all these millions and billions of universes combined together consti-
tute only one fourth of the magnitude of the whole creation of the Lord.
There is the spiritual sky also: beyond this sky the spiritual planets are
there under the names of Vaikuntha, and all of them constitute three
fourths of the entire creation of the Lord. God’s creations arc always
innumerable. Even the leaves of a tree cannot be counted by a man, nor
the hairs on his head. However, foolish men are puffed up with the idea of
becoming God Himself, though unable to create a hair of their own bodies.
Man may discover so many wonderful vehicles of journey, but even if he
reaches the moon by his much advertised spacecraft, he cannot remain
there. The sane man, therefore, without being puffed up, as if he were the
God of the universe, abides by the instructions of the Vedic literature, the
easiest way to acquire knowledge in transcendence. So let us know through
the authority of Srimad-Bhagavatam of the nature and constitution of
the transcendental world beyond the material sky. In that sky the material
qualities, especially the modes of ignorance and passion, are completely
absent. The mode of ignorance influences a living entity to the habit of
lust and hankering, and this means that in the Vaikunthalokas the living
entities are free from these two things. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita,
in the brahma-bhiita stage of life one becomes free from hankering and
lamentation. Therefore the conclusion is that the inhabitants of the
Vaikuntha planets are all brahma-bhiita living enlitics, as distinguished
from the mundane creatures who are all compact in hankering and lamen-
lation. When one is nol in the modes of ignorance and passion, one is


--- Page 140 ---
476 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness in the material world.
Goodness in the material world also al times becomes contaminated with
touches of the modes of passion and ignorance. In the Vaikunthaloka, it is
unalloyed goodness only.

The whole situation there is one of freedom from the illusory manifes-
tation of the external energy. Although illusory energy is also part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, still illusory energy is differentiated from the
Lord. The illusory energy is not, however, false, as claimed by the monist
philosophers. The rope accepted as a snake may be an illusion to a particu-
lar person, but the rope is a fact, and the snake is also a fact. The illu-
sion of water on the hot desert may be illusion for the ignorant animal
searching out water in the desert, but the desert and walter are actual facts.
Therefore the material creation of the Lord may be an illusion to the non-
devotee class of men, bul to a devotee even the material creation of the
Lord is a fact, as the manifestation of His external energy. But this energy
of the Lord is not all. The Lord has His internal energy also, which has
another creation known to be the Vaikunthalokas, where there is no
ignorance, no passion, no illusion and no past and present. With a poor
fund of knowledge one may be unable to understand the existence of such
things as the Vaikuntha atmosphere, but that does not nullify its existence.
That spacecraft cannot 10301) these plancts does not mean that there are
no such planets, for they are described in the revealed scriptures.

As quoted by Srila Jiva Gosvami, we can know from the Narada-
paiicaratra that the transcendental world or Vaikuntha atmosphere is
enriched with transcendental qualities. These transcendental qualities, as
revealed through the devotional service of the Lord, are distinct from the
mundane qualities of ignorance, passion and goodness. Such qualities are
nonattainable by the nondevotee class of men. In the Padma Purana,
Uttara-l:handa, it is stated that beyond the one-fourth part of God’s
creation, there is the three-fourths part manifestation. The marginal line
between the material manifestation and the spiritual manifestation is the
Viraja River, and beyond the Viraja, which is a transcendental current
flowing from the perspiration of the body of the Lord, there is the three-
fourths part manifestation of God’s creation. This part is eternal, ever-
lasting, without any deterioration, and unlimited, and contains the highest
perfectional stage of living conditions. In the Sankhya-kaumudi it is
stated that unalloyed goodness or transcendence is just opposite to the
material modes. All living entities are eternally associated without any
break, and the Lord is the chief and prime entity there. In the Agama
Puranas also, the transcendental abode is described as follows: The asso-


--- Page 141 ---
Text 11] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 477
ciated members there are free to go everywhere within the creation of the
Lord, and there is no limit to such creation, particularly in the region of
the three-fourths magnitude. Since the nature of that region is unlimited,
there is no history of such association, nor is there end of it.

The conclusion may be drawn that because of the complete absence of
the mundane qualities of ignorance and passion, there is no question of
creation nor of annihilation. In the material world everything is created
and everything is annihilated, and the duration of life between the creation
and annihilation is temporary. In the transcendental realm there is no
creation and no destruction, and thus the duration of life is eternal un-
limitedly. In other words, everything in the transcendental world is cver-
lasting, full of knowledge and bliss without any deterioration. Since there
is no deterioration, there is no past, present and future in the estimation of
time. It is clearly stated in this verse that the influence of time is con-
spicuous by its absence. The whole material existence is manifested by
actions and reactions of elements which make the influence of time
prominent in the matter of past, present and future. There are no such
actions and reactions of cause and effects there, so the cycle of birth,
growth, existence, transformations, deterioration and annihilation, or the
six material changes, are not existent there. It is the unalloyed manifesta-
tion of the energy of the Lord without any illusion as experienced here in
the material world. The whole Vaikuntha existence proclaims that everyone
there is a follower of the Lord. The Lord is the chief leader there without
any competition of leadership, and the people in general are all followers
of the Lord. It is confirmed in the Vedas, therefore, that the lord is the
chief leader, and all other living entities are subordinate to Him, as only
the Lord satisfies all the needs of all other living entities.

TEXT 11
स्यामावदाताः शतपत्रलोचनाः
पिशङ्गचखराः सुरुचः सुपेशसः |
स्वे चतुर्बाहव उन्मिषन्मणि-
प्रवेकनिष्काभरणाः सुवच॑सः॥११॥
Syamavadatah sata-patra-locanah
pisanga-vastrah su-rucah su-pesasah
sarve catur-bahava unmisan-mani-
praveka-niskabharanah su-varcasah


--- Page 142 ---
478 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
Syama—sky-bluish;avadatah—glowing;sata-patra—lotus flower; locanah—
eyes; pisanga—yellowish; vastrah—clothing; su-rucah—greatly attractive;
su-pesasah—growing youthful; sarve—all of them; catuh—four; bahavah—
hands; unmisan—rising luster; mapi—pearls; praveka—superior quality;
nigka-ibharanah—ornamental medallion; su-varcasah—effulgent.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of the Vaikuntha planets are described as having a
glowing sky-bluish complexion. Their eyes resemble the lotus flower, their
dress is of yellowish color and their bodily features very attractive. They
are just the age of growing youths, they all have four hands, they are all
nicely decorated with pearl necklaces with ornamental medallions, and
they all appear to be effulgent.
PURPORT
The inhabitants in Vaikunthaloka are all personalities with spiritual
bodily features not to be found in the material world. We can find the
descriptions in the revealed scriptures like Srimad-Bhagavatam. Impersonal
descriptions of transcendence in the scriptures indicate that the bodily
features in Vaikunthaloka are never to be seen in any part of the universe,
As there are different bodily features in different places of a particular
planet, or as there are different bodily features between bodies in different
planets, similarly the bodily features of the inhabitants in the Vaikuntha-
lokas are completely different from those in the material universe. For
example, the four hands are distinct from two hands in this world.
TEXT 12
९
RARE:
परिस्फुरस्कुण्डलमोलिमालिनः ॥१२॥
pravala-vaidiarya-mrnala-varcasah
parisphurat-kundala-mauli-malinah
pravala—coral; vaidiarya—a special diamond; mrpala—celestial lotus;
varcasah—rays; parisphurat—blooming; kundala—earring; mauli—heads; ma-
linah—with garlands.


--- Page 143 ---
Text 13] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 479
TRANSLATION
Some of them are effulgent like the coral and diamond in complexion
and have garlands on their heads, blooming like the lotus flowers, and some
wear earrings.
PURPORT
There are some inhabitants who have attained the liberation of saritpya,
or possessing bodily features like that of the Personality of Godhead. The
vaidiirya diamond is especially meant for the Personality of Godhead, but
one who achieves the liberation of bodily equality with the Lord is
especially favored with such diamonds on the body.
TEXT 13
-
भ्राजिष्णुभियंः परितो विराजते
সি
FAFA HERAT |
त
विद्योतमानः प्रमदोत्तमाद्युभिः
>
सविदयुदश्रावकिभिर्यथा नमः॥१३॥
bhrajisnubhir yah parito virajate
lasad-vimanavalibhir mahatmanam
vidyotamanah pramadottamadyubhih
sa-vidyud abhravalibhir yatha nabhah
bhrajisnubhih—by the glowing; yah—the Vaikuntha-lokas; paritah—
surrounded by; virdjate—thus situated; lasat—brilliant; vimana—airplanes;
avalibhih—assemblage; maha-atmanam—of the great devotees of the Lord;
vidyotamanah—beautiful like the lightning; pramada—Iladies; uttama—
celestial; adyubhih—by complexion; sa-vidyut—with electric lightning;
abhravalibhih—with clouds in the sky; yatha—as it were; nabhah— the sky.
TRANSLATION
The Vaikuntha planets are also surrounded by various airplanes, all
glowing and brilliantly situated, belonging to the great mahatmas or devo-
tees of the Lord. The ladies also are as beautiful as lightning because of


--- Page 144 ---
480 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
their celestial complexions, and all these combined together appear just
like the sky decorated with both clouds and lightning.
PURPORT
It appears that in the Vaikuntha planets there are airplanes also bril-
liantly glowing, and they are occupied by the great devotees of the
Lord with ladies of celestial beauty as brilliant as lightning. As there are
airplanes, so there must be different types of carriages also like the air-
planes, but they may not be driven machines, as we have experience in
this world. Because everything is of the same nature of eternity, bliss and
knowledge, the airplanes and carriages are of the same quality as Brahman.
As there is nothing except Brahman, so it should not be misconceived that
there is only void and no variegatedness. To think like that is due to a
poor fund of knowledge, otherwise no one would have such a misconcep-
tion of voidness in the Brahman. As there are airplanes, ladies, and gentle-
men, so there must be cities and houses and everything else just suitable
to the particular planets. One should not carry the ideas of imperfection
from this world to the transcendental world without taking into considera-
tion the nature of the atmosphere, as completely free from the influence
of time, etc., as described previously.
TEXT 14
-
श्रीर्यत्र रूपिष्युरुगायपादयोः
.
करोति मानं बहुधा विभूतिभिः।
a । =
ag भरिता = इसुमाक्राचुग-
Ly
विंगीयमाना प्रियकमं गायती ॥१४॥
द्य yatra ripiny urugaya-padayoh
karoti manarih bahudha vibhitibhih
prenkham srita ya kusumakaranugair
vigiyamand priya-karma gayati
srih—the goddess of fortune; yatra—in the Vaikuntha planets; riipipi—in
her transcendental form; urugaya—the Lord, who is sung of by the great
devotees; pidayoh—under the lotus feet of the Lord; karoti—does; manam


--- Page 145 ---
Text 15] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 481
—respectful services; bahudha—in diverse paraphernalia; vibhatibhih—
accompanied by her personal associates; preiitkham—movement of enjoy-
ment; §ritdi—taken shelter of; ya—who; kusumakara—spring; anugaih—by
the black bees; vigiyamana—being followed by the songs; priya-karma—
activities of the dearmost; gayati-singing.
TRANSLATION
The goddess of fortune in her transcendental form is engaged in the
loving service of the Lord’s lotus feet, and being moved by the black bees,
followers of spring, she is not only engaged in variegated pleasure—service
to the Lord, along with her constant companions—but also she is engaged
in singing the glories of the Lord’s activities.
TEXT 15
ददशचं॑तत्राखिरसात्वतां पतिं
श्रियः पतिं यज्ञपतिं जगत्पतिम्‌ |
स॒नन्दनन्दप्रबलारंणादिभिः
9 ५
TYE: परिसेवितं विभुम्‌ ॥१५॥
dadarsa tatrakhila-satvatarn patim
sriyah patim yajiia-patim jagat-patim
sunanda-nanda-prabalarhanadibhih
sva-parsadagraih parisevitar vibhum
dadarsa—Brahma saw; tatra—there in the Vaikunthaloka; akhila— entire;
satvataim—of the great devotees; patim—the Lord; sriyah—of the goddess
of fortune; patim—the Lord; yajiia—sacrifice; patim—the Lord; jagat—the
universe; patim—the Lord; sunande—Sunanda; nanda—Nanda; prabala—
Prabala; arhana—Arhana; adibhih—by them; sva-parsada—own associates;
agraih—by the foremost; parisevitam—being served in transcendental love;
vibhum—the Great Almighty.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma saw in the Vaikuntha planet the Personality of Godhead,
who is the Lord of the entire devotee community, the Lord of the goddess
of fortune, the Lord of all sacrifices, and the Lord of the universe, and who


--- Page 146 ---
482 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
is served by the foremost servitors like Nanda, Sunanda, Prabala, and
Arhana, His immediate associates.
PURPORT
When we speak of the king it is naturally understood that the King is
accompanied by his confidential associates, like his secretary, private
secretary, aide-de-camp, ministers, advisers, etc. So also when we see the
Lord we see Him with His different energies, associates and confidential
servitors, etc. So the Supreme Lord, who is the leader of all living entities,
the Lord of all devotee sects, the Lord of all opulences, the Lord of
sacrifices and the cnjoyer of everything in His entire creation, is not only
the Supreme Person, but also He is always surrounded by His immediate
associates, all engaged in their loving transcendental service to Him.
TEXT 16
भृत्यग्रसादाभिञ्चखं Wad
-
प्रसनहासारुणलाचनाननम्‌ |
५ . © +
किरीटिनं স্তণতত্তিন चतुुजं
पीतां शुकं वक्षसि लक्षितं भरिया ॥१६॥
bhrtya-prasadabhimukhari drg-asavam
prasanna-hasaruna-locanananam
kiritinam kundalinam catur-bhujam
pitam-sukam vaksasi laksitamn sriya
bhrtya—the servitor; prasada—affection ; abhimukham—favorably facing;
drk—the very sight; dsavam—an intoxication; prasanna—very much pleased;
hasa—smile; aruna—reddish; locana—eyes; @nanam—face; kiritinam— with
helmet; kundalinam—with earrings; catuh-bhujam—with four hands; pitam
—yellow; Sukam—dress; vaksasi—on the chest; laksitam—marked with;
sriya—the goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, seen leaning favorably towards His
loving servitors, His very sight intoxicating and attractive, appeared to be


--- Page 147 ---
Text 17] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 483
very much satisfied. He had a smiling face decorated with an enchanting
reddish hue. He wasdressed in yellow robes and wore earrings and a helmet
on his head. He had four hands, and His chest was marked with the
lines of the goddess of fortune.
PURPORT
In the Padma Purana, Uttara-khanda, there is a full description of the
yoga-pitha or the particular place where the Lord is in audience to His
eternal devotees. In that yoga-pitha, the personifications of religiousness,
knowledge, opulence, and renunciation are all seated at the lotus feet
of the Lord. The four Vedas, namely Rk, Sama, Yajus, and Atharva, are
present there personally to advise the Lord. The sixteen energies headed by
Canda are all present there. Canda and Kiimuda are the two first door-
keepers, and at the middle door there are the doorkeepers named Bhadra
and Subhadra, and at the last door there are Jaya and Vijaya. There are
other doorkeepers also, named Kiimuda, Kumudaksa, Pundarika, Vamana,
Sankukarna, Sarvanetra, Sumukha, etc. The palace is well decorated and
protected by the above-mentioned doorkeepers.
TEXT 17
[७ छ .
अध्यदहणीयासनमास्यितं परं
. ~ ~
बृतं चतुःपोडश्चपश्चशक्तिभिः |
५ > EN
युक्तं मगै; स्वरितरत्र TIE
स्व एव धापरन्‌ रममाणमीश्वरम्‌ ॥१७॥
adhyarhaniyasanam asthitam [00707
vrtam catuh-sodasa-paiica-saktibhih
yuktar bhagaih svair itaratra cadhruvaih
sva eva dhaman ramamanam isvaram
adhyarhaniya—greatly worshipable;asanam—throne;asthitam—scated on
it; param—the Supreme; vrtam—surrounded by; catuh—four, namely
prakrti, purusa, mahat and ego; sodasa—the sixteen; paiica—the live; Sakti-
bhih—by the energies; yuktam—empowered with; bhagaith—lis opulences;
svaih— personal ; itaratra—other minor prowesses; ca—also; adhruvaih—tem-


--- Page 148 ---
484 ऽपात्‌ Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
porary; sva—own; eva—certainly; dhaman—abode; ramamanam- enjoying;
isvaram—the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION

The Lord was seated on His throne and was surrounded by different
energies like the four, the sixteen, the five, and the six natural opulences,
along with other insignificant energies of the temporary character. But He
was the factual Supreme Lord, enjoying His own abode.

PURPORT

The Lord is naturally endowed with His six opulences, namely He
is the richest in wealth, He is the most powerful, He is the most famous,
He is the most beautiful, He is the greatest in knowledge, and He is the
greatest renouncer as well. And for His material creative energies, He is
served by four, namely the principles of prakrti, purusa, mahat-tattva and
ego. He is also served by the sixteen, namely the five elements, earth,
water, air, fire and sky, the five perceptive sense organs, namely the eye,
ear, nose, tongue and skin, and the five working sense organs, namely the
hand, the leg, the stomach, the evacuation outlet and the genitals. Together
with the mind, they are sixteen in all. And the five includes the sense
objects, namely form, taste, smell, sound and touch. All these twenty-five
items serve the Lord in the material creation, and all of them are personally
present to serve the Lord. The insignificant opulences numbering eight
(the asta-siddhis, attained by yogis for temporary overlordship) are also
under His control, but He is naturally full with all such powers without
any effort, and therefore He is the Supreme Lord.

The living being, by severe penance and performances of bodily exer-
cises, can temporarily attain some wonderful power, but that does not
make him the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord by His own potency is
unlimitedly more powerful than any yogi, He is unlimitedly more learned
than any jiani, He is unlimitedly richer than any wealthy person, He is
unlimitedly more beautiful than any beautiful living being, and He is
unlimitedly more charitable than any philanthropist. He is above all, and
no one is equal to or greater than Him. Nor can anyone reach His level of
perfection in all the above powers by any amount of performance of
penance or yogic demonstration. The yogis are dependent on His mercy.
Out of His immensely charitable disposition He can award some temporary


--- Page 149 ---
Text 18] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 485
powers to the yogis because of the yogis” hankering after them, but to His
unalloyed devotees, who do not want anything from the Lord save and
except His transcendental service, the Lord is so pleased that He gives
Himself in exchange for unalloyed service.
TEXT 18
५
तद शंनाह्ादपरिष्छतान्तरो
हृष्यत्तनुः प्रेमभराश्चुलोचनः |
ननाम पादाम्बुजमस्य faa
यत्‌ पारमर्हस्येन पथाधिगम्यते ॥१८॥
tad-darsanahlada-pariplutdantaro
hrsyat-tanuh prema-bharasru-locanah
nanama padambujam asya visva-srg
yat paramahamsyena pathadhigamyate
tat—by that audience of the Lord; daersane—audience; dahlada—joy;
panpluta—overwhelmed; antarah— within the heart; hrsyat—full in ecstasy;
tanuh—body; prema-bhara—in full transcendental love; asru—tears; locanah
—in the eyes; nanama—bowed down; padambujam—under the lotus feet;
asya—of the Lord; visva-srg—the creator of the universe; yat—which;
paramaharisyena—by the great liberated soul; patha—the path ;adhigamyate
—is followed.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, thus seeing the Personality of Godhead in His fullness,
became overwhelmed with joy within his heart, and thus in full transcen-
dental love and ecstasy, his eyes became full with tears of love. He thus
bowed down before the Lord. That is the way of highest perfection for
the living being [ paramahamsa].
PURPORT
In the beginning of the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that this great
literature is meant for the paramahamsas. Param nirmatsaranam satam,


--- Page 150 ---
486 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
i.e. the Srimad-Bhagavatam is meant for such persons who are completely
free from malice. In the conditioned life the malicious life begins from the
top, namely bearing malice against the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The Personality of Godhead is an established fact in all the revealed
scriptures, and in the Bhagavad-gita the personal feature of the Supreme
Lord is especially mentioned, so much so that in the last portion of the
great literature it has been emphatically stressed that one should surrender
unto the Personality of Godhead to be saved from the miseries of life.
Unfortunately, persons with impious backgrounds do not believe in the
Personality of Godhead, and everyone wants to become God himself with-
out any qualification. This malicious nature in the conditioned soul con-
tinues even up to the stage when a person wants to be one with the Lord,
and thus even the greatest of the empiric philosophers speculating on
becoming one with the Supreme Lord cannot become a paramaharmsa
because the malicious mind is there. Therefore the paramahariisa stage of
life can only be attained by those who are fixed in the practice of bhakti-
yoga. This bhakti-yoga begins if a person has the firm conviction that
simply discharging devotional service to the Lord in full transcendental
love can elevate him to the highest perfectional stage of life. Brahmajt
believed in this art of bhakti-yoga; he believed in the words of the Lord to
execute tapa, and he discharged the function with great penance and thus
achieved the great success of seeing the Vaikunthalokas and the Lord also
by personal experience. No one can reach the abode of the Supreme Lord
by any mechanical means of the mind or machine, but one can reach the
abode of the Vaikunthalokas simply by following the process of bhakti-
yoga because the Lord can be realized only through the bhakti-yoga
process. Lord Brahmaji was actually sitting on his lotus seat, and from
there, by executing the process of bhakti-yoga in great seriousness, he
could see the Vaikunthalokas with all variegatedness as well as the Lord in
person and His associates.

Following in the footsteps of Lord Brahma, any person, even up to this
day, can attain the same perfection by following the path of the parama-
11017150 as recommended herein. Lord Caitanya also approved of this method
of self-realization for men in this age. One should first, with all conviction,
believe in the Personality of Godhead Si Krsna, and without making
efforts to realize Him by speculative philosophy, one should prefer to
hear about Him from the Srimad-Bhagavad-gita and later on from the text
of the Srimad-Bhagavatam. He should hear such discourses from a person
Bhagavatam and not from the professional man, nor from the karmi, jiani
or yogi. That is the secret of learning the science. One does not need to be


--- Page 151 ---
Text 19] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 487
in the renounced order of life; he can remain in his present condition of
life, but he must search out the association of a bona fide devotee of the
Lord and hear from him the transcendental message of the Lord with faith
and conviction. That is the path of the paramaharisa recommended herein.
Amongst various holy names of the Lord, He is called also gjita, or one
who can never be conquered by anyone else. Yet He can be conquered by
the paramaharisa path, as is practically realized and shown by the great
spiritual master Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma has personally recommended
this paramahariisa-pantha in his own words as follows:
jiiane prayasam udapasya namanta eva
Jjivanti sanmukharitam bhavadiyavartam
sthane sthitah sruti-gatam tanuvanmanobhir
ye prayaso jita-jito’pyasi tais trilokyam
Lord Brahma said, ““O my Lord Krsna, a devotee who abandons the path
of empiric philosophical speculation aimed at becoming merged in the
existence of the Supreme and engages himself in hearing Your glories and
activities from a bona fide sadhu, or saint, and who lives an honest life in
the occupational engagement of his social life, can conquer Your sympathy
and mercy even though You are gjita, or unconquerable by anyone.”
(Bhag. 10.14.3) That is the path of the paramaharisas, which was person-
ally followed by Lord Brahma and later on recommended by him for
attaining perfect success in life.
TEXT 19
तं प्रीयमाणं समुपस्थितं कविं
प्रजाविसर्गे fer |
बभाष ईषरिस्मतशोचिषा fa
प्रियः ्रियं प्रीतमनाः करे स्पृशन्‌ ॥१९॥
tari priyamanarm samupasthitarm kavim
praja-visarge nija-sasanarhapam
babhasa isat-smita-socisa gira
priyah priyarm prita-manah kare sprian
tam—unto Lord Brahma; priyamanam—worthy of being dear; samu-
pasthitam—present before; kavim—the great scholar; praja—living entities;


--- Page 152 ---
488 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
visarge—in the matter >f creation; nija—His own; sa@sana—control; arhanam
—just suitable; babhase—addressed; isat—mild; smita—smiling; socisa—
enlightening; gira—words; priyah—the beloved; priyam—the counterpart of
love; prita-manah—being very much pleased; kaure—by the hand; sprsan—
shaking.
TRANSLATION

And seeing Brahma present before Him, the Lord accepted him as
worthy to create living beings, to be controlled as He desired, and thus
being much satisfied with him, the Lord shook hands with Brahma and,
slightly smiling, addressed him thus.

PURPORT

The creation of the material world is not blind nor accidental. The living
entities who are ever conditioned, or nitya-bandha, are thus given a
chance for liberation under the guidance of His own representative like
Brahma. The Lord instructs Brahma in Vedic knowledge in order to diffuse
this knowledge to the conditioned souls. The conditioned souls are forget-
ful souls in their relationship with the Lord, and thus a period of creation
and the process of dissemination of Vedic knowledge are necessary activi-
ties of the Lord. l.ord Brahma has great responsibility to deliver the con-
ditioned souls, and therefore he is very dear to the Lord.

Brahma also does his duty very perfectly, not only by generating the
living entities but also by spreading his party for reclaiming the fallen
souls. The party is called the Brahma-sampradaya, and any member of this
party to date is naturally engaged in reclaiming the fallen souls back to
Godhead, back to home. The Lord is very much anxious to get back His
parts and parcels, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita. No one is more dear than
the one who takes the task of reclaiming the fallen souls back to Godhead.

There are many renegades from the Brahma-sampradaya whose only
business is to make men more forgetful of the Lord and thus entangle
them more and more in material existence. Such persons are never dear to
the Lord, and the Lord sends them deeper into the darkest region of
matter so that such envious demons may not be able to know the Supreme
Lord.

Anyone, however, preaching the mission of the Lord in the line of
Brahma-sampraddya is always dear to the Lord, and the Lord, being
satisfied with such a preacher of the authorized bhakti cult, shakes hands
with him in great satisfaction.


--- Page 153 ---
Text 20] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 489
TEXT 20
श्रीभगवाचुवाच
„~ ©
त्वयाहं तोषितः सम्यग्‌ वेदगभे सिसृक्षया |
% -
चिरं श्रतेन तपसा दुस्तोषः कूटयोगिनाम्‌ Roll
577 bhagavan uvaca
tvayaham tositah samyag
veda-garbha sisrksaya
ciram bhrtena tapasa
dustosah kiita-yoginam—
srt bhagavan uvdaca—the all-beautiful Personality of Godhead said; tvaya
—by you; aham—1 am; tositah—pleased; samyak-— complete; veda-garbha—
impregnated with the Vedas; sisrksaya—for creating; ciram—for a long
time; bhrtena—accumulated; tapasa—by penance; dustosah—very hard to
please; kiita-yoginam—for the pseudo mystics.
TRANSLATION
The beautiful Personality of Godhead addressed Lord Brahma: O
Brahma, impregnated with the Vedas, I am very much pleased with your
long accumulated penance with the desire for creation. Hardly am I
pleased with the pseudo mystics.
PURPORT
There are two kinds of penance: one for sense gratification and the
other for self-realization. There are many pseudo mystics who undergo
severe penances for their own satisfaction, and there are others who under-
go severe penances for the satisfaction of the senses of the Lord. For
example, the penances undertaken to discover nuclear weapons will
never satisfy the Lord because such a penance is never satisfactory. By
nature’s own way, everyone has to meet death, and if such a process of
death is accelerated by anyone’s penances, there is no satisfaction of the
Lord. The Lord wants every one of His parts and parcels to attain eternal
life and bliss by coming home to Godhead, and the whole material creation
is meant for that objective. Brahma underwent severe penances for that
purpose, namely to regulate the process of creation so that the Lord might


--- Page 154 ---
490 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
be satisfied, and therefore the Lord was very much pleased with him, and
for this Brahma was impregnated with Vedic knowledge. The ultimate
purpose of Vedic knowledge is to know the Lord and not to misuse the
knowledge for any other purposes. Those who do not utilize Vedic know-
ledge for that purpose are known as kiita-yogis, or pseudo transcenden-

talists who spoil their lives with ulterior motives.

TEXT 21
वरं वरय भद्रं ते वरेशं माभिवाञ्छितम्‌ |
- न) (५
जह्मञ्छरेयःपरिश्रामः पुंसां मदशेनावधिः (120)
varam varaya bhadram te
varesarm mabhivaichitam
(07012771075 chreyah-parisramah
pumsdm mad-darsanavadhih

varam—benediction; varaya—just ask from; bhadram—auspicious; te—
unto you; varesam—the giver of all benediction; ma (mam)—from Me;
abhivanchitam—wishing; brahman—0O Brahma; sreyah—the ultimate suc-
cess; pari-Sramah—for all penances; pumsam—for everyone; mat—My;

darsana—realization; avadhih—up to the limit of.

TRANSLATION
1 wish you good luck. O Brahma, you can ask from Me, the giver of
all benediction, all that you may desire. You may know that the ultimate
benediction, as the result of all penances, is to see Me by realization.
PURPORT

The ultimate realization of the Supreme Truth is to know and see eye
to eye the Personality of Godhead. Realization of the impersonal Brahman
and localized Paramatma features of the Personality of Godhead is not
ultimate realization. When one realizes the Supreme Lord, one does not
struggle hard to perform such penances. The next stage of life is to dis-
charge devotional service to the Lord just to satisfy Him. In other words,


--- Page 155 ---
Text 22] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 491
one who has realized and seen the Supreme Lord has attained all perfection
because everything is included there in that highest perfectional stage. The
impersonalists and the pseudo mystics, however, cannot reach this state.
TEXT 22
o > - ~
मनीषितानुमावोऽयं মম लकरवलाकनम्‌ |
यदुपश्रुत्य रहसि चकर्थ परमं तपः ।२२॥
manisitanubhavo yar
mama lokavalokanam
yad upasrutya rahasi
cakartha [00170778078 tapah
manisita—ingenuily; anubhavah—perceplion; ayam—this; mama—My;
loka—abode; avalokanam—seeing by actual experience; yat—because;
upasrutya—hearing; rahasi—in great penance; cakartha—having performed;
paramam—highest ; tapah— penance.
TRANSLATION
The highest perfectional ingenuity is the personal perception of My
abodes, and this has been possible because of your submissive attitude in
the performance of severe penance on My order.
PURPORT
The highest perfectional stage of life is to know the Lord by actual
perception, by the grace of the Lord. This can be attained by everyone
who is willing to discharge the act of devotional service to the Lord as
cnjoined in the revealed scriptures that are standard and accepted by the
bona fide dcdryas, spiritual masters. For example, the Bhagavad-gila is the
approved Vedic literature accepted by all the great dcaryas, such as
Sankara, Ramanuja, Madhva, Caitanya, Visvanitha, Baladeva, Siddhanta
Sarasvall and many others. In that Bhagavad-gita the Personality of God-
head, इन Krsna, asks that one should always be mindful of Him, one should
always be His devotee, one should always worship Him only, and one
should always bow down before the Lord. And by doing so one is sure to


--- Page 156 ---
492 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
go back home, back to Godhead, without any doubt. In other places also
the same order is there, that one should give up all other engagements and
fully surrender unto the Lord without any hesitation. And the Lord will
give such a devotee all protection. And these are the secrets of attaining the
highest perfectional stage. Lord Brahmi exactly followed these principles
without any superiority complex, and thus he attained the highest per-
fectional stage of experiencing the abode of the Lord and the Lord Himself
with all [115 paraphernalia. Impersonal realization of the effulgence of the
body of the Lord is not the highest perfectional stage, nor is the stage of
Paramatmai realization. The word manisita is significant. Everyone is
falsely or factually proud of his so-called learning. But the Lord says that
the highest perfectional stage of learning is to know Him and His abode,
devoid of all illusion.
TEXT 23
+ ५
प्रत्यादिष्टं मया तत्र त्वयि कमेविमोहिते |
५ . -
तपो मे हदयं साक्षादात्माहं तपसोऽनघ ॥२३२॥
pratyadistam maya tatra
tvayi karma-vimohite
tapo me hrdayam saksad-
atmaham tapaso’nagha
pratyadistam—ordered by; maya—by Me; tatra—because of; tvayi—unto
you; karma—duty; vimohite—being perplexed; tapah—penance; me—Mine;
hrdayam—heart; saksat—directly; atma-life and soul; aham—Myself;
tapasah—of one who is engaged in penance; anagha—O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
O Brahma, the sinless, you may know from Me that it was I who
ordered you to undergo penance at first on your being perplexed in your
duty, because such penance is My heart and soul, and because of that,
penance and I are nondifferent.
PURPORT
The penance by which one can see the Personality of Godhead eye to
eye is to be understood as devotional service to the Lord and nothing else


--- Page 157 ---
Text 23] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 493
because only by discharging devotional service in transcendental love can
one approach the Lord. Such penance is the internal potency of the Lord
and is nondifferent from Him. Such acts of internal potency are exhibited
by nonattachment for material enjoyment. The living entities are encaged
in the conditions of material bondage because of their propensity for
overlordship. But by engagement in the devotional service of the Lord one
becomes detached from such enjoying spirit. The devotees automatically
become detached from worldly enjoyment, and this detachment is the
result of perfect knowledge. Therefore the penance of devotional service
includes knowledge and detachment, and that is the manifestation of the
transcendental potency.

One cannot enjoy material illusory prosperity if he desires to return
home, back to Godhead. One who has no information of the transcenden-
tal bliss in the association of the Lord foolishly desires to enjoy this tem-
porary material happiness. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that if
someone sincerely wants to see the Lord and at the same time wants (0
enjoy this material world, he is considered to be a fool only. One who
wants to remain here in the material world for material enjoyment has no
business entering into the eternal kingdom of God. Such a foolish devotee
is favored by the Lord by His snatching all that he may possess in the
material world. If such a foolish devotee of the Lord again tries to recoup
his position, then the merciful Lord again snatches away all that he may
have possessed. By such repeated failures in material prosperity he becomes
very unpopular with his family members and friends. In the material world
the family members and the friends honor persons who may be very
successful in accumulating wealth by any means. The foolish devotee of
the Lord is thus put into forcible penance by the grace of the Lord, and at
the end the devotee becomes perfectly happy, being engaged in the service
of the Lord. Therefore penance in devotional service of the Lord, either by
voluntary submission or being forced by the Lord, is necessary for attaining
perfection, and thus such penance is the internal potency of the Lord.

One cannot, however, be engaged in the penance of devotional service
without being completely free from all sins. As is stated in the Bhagavad-
gita, only a person who is completely free from all reactions of sins can
engage himself in the worship of the Lord. Brahmaji was sinless, and
therefore he faithfully discharged the advice of the Lord, “tapa tapa,” and
the Lord, being satisfied with him, awarded him the desired result. There-
fore love and penance combined can only please the Lord, and thus one is
able to attain His complete mercy. He directs the sinless, and the sinless
devotee attains the highest perfection of life.


--- Page 158 ---
494 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
TEXT 24
1 [ny
सृजामि तपसैवेदं ग्रसामि तपसा पुनः |
ह ae 5
বিমমি तपसा विश्वं वीयं मे दुश्वरं तपः 1:30
srjami tapasaivedarn
grasami tapasa punah
bibharmi tapasa visvarn
viryam me duscarari tapah
srjami—I create; tapasa—by the same energy of penance; eva—certain-
ly; idam—this; grasami tapasa—I do withdraw also by the same energy:
punah—again; bibharmi—do maintain: tapasi—by penance; visvam— the
cosmos; viryam— potency ; me—Mine; duscaram—severe: tapah—penance.
TRANSLATION
I create this cosmos by such penance, I maintain it by the same energy,
and I withdraw it all by the same energy. Therefore the potential power is
penance only.
PURPORT
In executing penance, one must be determined to return home, back to
Godhead, and must decide to undergo all types of tribulations for that end.
Even for material prosperity, name and fame, one has to undergo severe
types of penance, otherwise no one can become an important figure in this
material world. Why, then, are there severe types of penance for perfection
of devotional service? An easygoing life and attainment of perfection in
transcendental realization cannot go together. The Lord is more clever than
any living entity; therefore He wants {0 see how painstaking the devotee is
in devotional service. The order is received from the Lord, either directly
or through the bona fide spiritual master, and to execute that order, how-
ever painstaking, is the severe type of penance. One who follows the
principle rigidly is sure Lo achieve success in attaining the Lord’s mercy.


--- Page 159 ---
Text 25] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 495
TEXT 25
ब्रह्मोवाच
9 - =
भगवन्‌ सवेभूतानामध्यक्षोऽवस्थितो गुहाम्‌ ।
-
वेद ॒द्यप्रतिरुद्धेन प्रज्ञानेन चिकीषिंतम्‌ ॥२४॥
$ri 67011720 ४९८०
(11.1.11
adhyak 50 vasthito guham
veda hy apratiruddhena
prajiianena cikirsitam
$ri brahma uvaca— Lord Brahma said; bhagavan—O my Lord; sarva—all;
bhatanam—of all living entities; adhyaksah—director; avasthitah—situated;
guham— within the heart; veda—know ; hi—certainly ; apratiruddhena— with-
out hindrance; prajianena—by superintelligence; cikirsitam—endeavors.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: O Personality of Godhead, You are situated in
every living entity’s heart as the supreme director, and therefore You are
aware of all endeavors by Your superior intelligence, without any hin-
drance whatsoever.
PURPORT
The Bhagavad-gita confirms that the Lord is situated in everyones
heart as the witness, and as such He is the supreme director of sanction.
The director is not the enjoyer of the fruits of action, but without His
sanction no one can enjoy. For example, in a prohibited area a habituated
drunkard puts forward his application to the director of drinking, and the
director, considering his case, sanctions only a certain amount of liquor for
drinking. Similarly, the whole material world is full of many drunkards, in
the sense that each and every one of the living entitics has something in
his mind to enjoy, and everyone desires the fulfillment of his desires very
strongly. The almighty Lord, very kind to the living entity, as the father
is kind to the son, fulfills the living entity's desire for his childish satisfac-
tion. With such desires in mind, the living entity does not actually enjoy,


--- Page 160 ---
496 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
but he serves the bodily whims unnecessarily, without profit. The drunkard
does not derive any profit oul of drinking, but because he has become a
servant of the drinking habit and does not wish to get out of it, the merci-
ful Lord gives him all facilities to fulfill such desires.

The impersonalists recommend that one should become desireless, and
others recommend banishing desires altogether. That is impossible; no one
can banish desires altogether because desiring is the living symptom. With-
oul having desires aliving entity would be dead, which he is not. Therefore,
living conditions and desire go together. Perfection of desires may be
achieved when one desires to serve the Lord, and the Lord also desires
that every living entity should banish all personal desires and cooperate
with the desires of the Lord. That is the last instruction of the Bhagavad-
gita. Brahmaji agreed to this proposal, and therefore he is given the
responsible post of creating generations in the vacant universe. Oneness
with the Lord is therefore to dovetail one’s desires with the desires of the
Supreme Lord. That makes for the perfection of all desires.

The Lord, as the Supersoul in the heart of every living being, knows
what 15 there in the mind of each living entity, and no one can do anything
without the knowledge of the Lord within. By His superior intelligence,
the Lord gives everyone the chance to fulfill his desires to the fullest extent,
and the resultant reaction is also awarded by the Lord.

TEXT 26
तथापि नाथमानस्य नाय नाथय नाथितम्‌ |
पराप्ररे यथा रूपे जानीयां ते त्वरूपिणः ।।२६॥
tathapi natha-manasya
natha nathaya nathitam
paravare yatha riipe
janiyam te tv ariipinah

tatha api—in spite of that; natha-manasya—of the one who is asking for;
natha—of the Lord; nathaya—please award; nathitam—as it is desired;
paravare—in the matter of mundane and transcendental; yatha—as it is;
riape—in the form; janiyam—may it be known; te—Your; tu—but; aripinah
—one who is formless.


--- Page 161 ---
Text 27] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 497
TRANSLATION
In spite of that, my Lord, I am praying to You, kindly to fulfill my
desire. May I please be informed how, in spite of Your transcendental
form, You assume the mundane form, although You have no such form at
all.
TEXT 27
यथाऽऽत्ममायायोगेन ARTIF Ray |
विलुम्पन्‌ विसृजन्‌ गृह्णन्‌ बिन्रदात्मानमारमना Rell
yathatma-maya-yogena
nand-sakty-upabrmhitam
vilumpan visrjan grhnan
bibhrad atmanam atmana

yatha—as much as;atma—own;maya—potency;yogena—by combination;
ndanda— various; Sakti—energy ; upabrmhitam—by combination and permuta-
tion; vilumpan—in the matter of annihilation; visrjen—in the matter of
generation; grhnan—in the matter of acceptance; bibhrat—in the matter of
maintenance; atmanam—own self; atmana—by the self.

TRANSLATION
And how You, by Your own Self, manifest different energies for
annihilation, generation, acceptance and maintenance by combination and
permutation.
PURPORT

The whole manifestation is the Lord Himself by diffusion of His differ-
ent energies only, namely the internal, external and marginal, just as the
sunlight is the manifestation of the energy of the sun planet. Such energy
is simultaneously one and different from the Lord, just as the sunshine is
simultaneously one and different from the sun planet. The energies are
acting by combination and permutation by the indication of the Lord, and
the acting agents, like Brahma, Visnu and Siva, are also different incarna-


--- Page 162 ---
498 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
tions of the Lord. In other words, there is nothing but the Lord, and still
the Lord is different from all such manifestive activities. How it is so will
be explained later on.
TEXT 28
o
कीडस्यमोषसङ्कल्प रर्णनाभिर्यथोर्णैते |
तथा तद्विषयां धेहि मनीषां मयि माधव ।॥२८॥
kridasy amogha-saiikalpa
arnandbhir yathornute
tatha tad-visayarn dhehi
manisarm mayi madhava

kridasi—as You do play; amogha—infallible; sankalpa—determination;
arpabhih—the spider; yatha—as much as; arpute—covers; tatha—so and 50;
tat-visayam—in the subject of all those; dhehi—do let me know; manisam—
philosophically ; mayi—unto me; madhava—O master of all energies.

TRANSLATION
O master of all energies, please tell me philosophically all about them.
You play like the spider who covers itself by its own energy, and Your
determination is infallible.
PURPORT

By the inconceivable energy of the Lord, every creative clement has its
own potencies, known as the potency of the clement, potency of know-
ledge and potency of different actions and reactions. By a combination of
such potential energies of the Lord there is the manifestation of creation,
maintenance and annihilation in due course of time and by different
agents like Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara. Brahma creates, Visnu main-
tains, and Lord Siva destroys. But all such agents and creative energies are
emanations from the Lord, and as such there is nothing except the Lord,
or the one supreme source of different diversities. The exact example is the
spider and spider’s web. The web is created by the spider, and it is main-
tained by the spider, and as soon as it likes, the whole thing is wound up


--- Page 163 ---
Text 29] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 499
within the spider. The spider is covered within the web. If an insignificant
spider is so powerful as to act according to its will, why can’t the Supreme
Being act by His supreme will in the creation, maintenance and destruction
of the cosmic manifestations? By the grace of the Lord, a devotee like
Brahma, or one in his chain of disciplic succession, can understand the
almighty Personality of Godhead eternally engaged in His transcendental
pastimes in the region of different energies.
TEXT 29
भगवच्छिक्षितमहं करवाणि gata: |
नेदमानः प्रजासगं बध्येयं यद्‌ नुग्रदात्‌ ॥२९॥
bhagavac-chiksitam ৫1:07
karavani hy atandritah
nehamanah praja-sargam
badhyeyar yad-anugrahat
bhagavat—by the Personality of Godhead; siksitam—taught by; aham—
myself; karavapni—be acting; hi—certainly; atandritah—instrumental; na--
never; thamanah—although acting; praja-sargam—generation of the living
entities; badhyeyam—be conditioned; yat—as a matter of fact; anugrahat—
by the mercy of.
TRANSLATION
Please tell me so that I may be taught in the matter by the instruction
of the Personality of Godhead, and thus I may act instrumentally to
generate living entities, without being conditioned by such activities.
PURPORT
Brahmaji does not want to become a speculator dependent on the
strength of his personal knowledge and conditioned to material bondage.
Everyone should know in clear consciousness that one is, in the execution
of all activities, an instrument. A conditioned soul is instrumental in the
hands of the external energy, gupamayi maya, or the illusory energy of the
Lord, and in the liberated stage the living entity is instrumental to the will


--- Page 164 ---
500 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
of the Personality of Godhead directly. To be instrumental to the direct
will of the Lord is the natural constitutional position of the living entity,
whereas to be an instrument in the hands of the illusory energy of the Lord
is material bondage for the living entity. In that conditioned state, the
living entity speculates on the Absolute Truth and His different activities.
But in the unconditional stage, the living entity directly receives knowledge
from the Lord, and such a liberated soul acts flawlessly, without any
speculative habit. The Bhagavad-gita confirms emphatically (Bg. 10.10-11)
that the pure devotees, who are constantly engaged in the loving transcen-
dental service of the Lord, are directly advised by the 1,010, so much so
that the devotee unwaveringly makes progress on the path home, back to
Godhead. Pure devotees of the Lord are therefore not proud of their
definite progress, whereas the nondevotee speculator is in the darkness of
illusory energy and is very much proud of his misleading knowledge based
on speculation without any definite path. Lord Brahmawanted to be saved
from that pitfall of pride, although he was posted in the most exalted
position within the universe.
TEXT 30
यावत्‌ सखा सख्युरिवेश ते कृतः
प्रजाविसर्गे विभजामि भो जनम्‌ |
after परिकर्मणि स्थितो
मा मे सयुनद्धमदोऽजमानिनः ।३०॥
yavat sakha sakhyur ivesa te krtah
praja-visarge vibhajami bho janam
aviklavas te parikarmani sthito
ma me samunnaddha-mado ja-maninah
yavat—as it is; sakha—friend; sakhyuh—unto the friend; iva—like that;

Sa—O Lord; te—Yoau; krtah—have accepted; praja—the living entities;
visarge—in the matter of creation; vibhajami—as 1 shall do it differently;
bhoh—O my Lord; janam—those who are born; aviklavah—without being
perturbed; te— Your; parikarmapi—in the matter of service; sthitah—thus
situated; ma—neverit may be; me—unto me; samunnaddha—resulting arise;
madah—madness; aja—O unborn one; maninah—thus being thought of.


--- Page 165 ---
Text 30] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 501
TRANSLATION
0 my Lord, the unbom, You have shaken hands with me just like भ
friend does with a friend [as if equal in position]. 1 shall be engaged in the
creation of different types of living entities, and 1 shall be occupied in
Your service. 1 shall have no perturbation, but 1 pray that all this may not
give rise to pride, as if 1 were the Supreme.
PURPORT
Lord Brahma is definitely situated in the humor of friendship with the
Lord. Every living being is eternally related with the Personality of God-
head in one of five different transcendental humors, namely santa, dasya,
sakhya, vatsalya and madhurya. We have already discussed these five kinds
of humors in relationship with the Personality of Godhead. It is clearly
exhibited herein that Lord Brahma is related to the Personality of Godhead
in the transcendental humor of friendship. A pure devotee may be related
with the Lord in any one of the transcendental humors, even in the humor
of parenthood, but the devotee of the Lord is always a transcendental
servitor. No one is equal to or greater than the Lord. That is the version of
the Bhagavad-gita. Brahmaji, although eternally related with the Lord
in the transcendental humor of friendship, and although entrusted with
the most exalted post of creating different grades of living entities, still is
conscious of his position, that he is neither the Supreme Lord nor is
supremely powerful. It is possible that some personality, within or without
the universe, even though extremely powerful, sometimes shows more
power than the Lord Himself. Still the pure devotee knows that this power
is a vibhati delegated by the Lord, and such a delegated powerful living en-
tity is never independent. Sri Hanumanji crossed the Indian Ocean by jump-
ing over the sea, and Lord Sri Ramacandra engaged Himself in marching
over the bridge, but this does not mean that Hanumanji was more powerful
than the Lord. Sometimes the Lord gives extraordinary powers to His
devotee, but the devotee knows always that the power belongs to the
Personality of Godhead and that the devotee is only an instrument. The
pure devotee is never puffed up like the nondevotee class of men who
falsely think that they are God. It is astonishing to see how a person who
is being kicked by the laws of the Lord’s illusory energy in every step can
falsely think of becoming one with the Lord. Such thinking is the last
snare of the illusory energy offered to the conditioned soul. The first


--- Page 166 ---
502 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
illusion is that he wants to become Lord of the material world by
accumulating wealth and power, but when he is frustrated in that attempt
he wants to be one with the Lord. So both becoming the most powerful
man in the material world or desiring to become one with the Lord are
different illusory snares. And because the pure devotees of the Lord are
surrendered souls, they are above the illusory snares of maya. Because he
is a pure devotee, Lord Brahmi, even though the first dominating deity
in the material world, and therefore able to do many wonderful things,
would never, like the nondevotee with a poor fund of knowledge, have
the audacity to think of becoming one with the Lord. People with a poor
fund of knowledge should take lessons from Brahma when they are puffed
up with the false notion of becoming God.

Factually Lord Brahma does not create the living entities. In the
beginning of the creation he is empowered to give different bodily shapes
to the living entities according to their work during the last millennium.
Brahm3)i’s duty is just to wake the living entities from their slumber and
to engage them in their proper duty. The different grades of living entities
are not created by Brahmajt by his capricious whims, but he is entrusted
with the task of giving the living entities different grades of body so that
they can work accordingly. And still he is conscious that he is only
instrumental, so that he may not think of himself as the Supreme Powerful
Lord.

Devotees of the Lord are engaged in the specific duty offered by the
Lord, and such dulics arc successfully carried out without hindrance
because they are ordained by the Lord. The credit of success does not go
to the doer but to the Lord. But persons with a poor fund of knowledge
take the credit of success into their own accounts and give nothing to the
credit of the Lord. That is the symptom of the nondevotee class of men.

TEXT 31
श्रीभगवाचुवाच
ज्ञानं परमगुह्यं मे यद्‌ विज्ञानसमन्वितम्‌ |
सरहस्यं तदङ्गं च गृहाण गदितं मया ॥३१॥
sri bhagavan uvaca
jianam parama-guhyari me
+न vijidna-samanvitam


--- Page 167 ---
Text 31] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 503
sa-rahasyari tad-angam ca
grhana gaditam maya

आ bhagavan uvaca—the Personality of Godhead said; jianam—knowledge
acquired; parama—extremely; guhyam—confidential; me—of Mine; yat—
which is; vijidna—realization; samanvitam—coordinated; sa-rahasyam—with
devotional service; tat—of that; angam ca— necessary paraphernalia; grhana
—just try to take up; gaditam—explained; maya—by Me.

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead said: Knowledge about Me as described in
the scriptures is very confidential, and 11 has to be realized in conjunction
with devotional service. The necessary paraphernalia for thal process is
being explained by Me. You may take 11 up carefully.

PURPORT

Lord Brahmi is the topmost devotee of the Lord within the universe,
and therefore the Personality of Godhead replied to his four principal
inquiries in four important statements, which are known as the original
Bhagavatam in four verses. These were Brahma’s questions: 1. What are
the forms of the Lord both in matter and transcendence? 2. How are the
different energies of the Lord working? 3. How does the Lord play with
His different energies? 4. How may Brahma be instructed to discharge the
duty entrusted with Him? The prelude to the answers is this verse under
discussion, wherein the Lord informs Brahma that knowledge of Him, the
Supreme Absolute Truth, as it is stated in the revealed scriptures, is very
subtle and cannot be understood unless one is self-realized by the grace of
the Lord. The Lord says that Brahma may take the answers as He
explains them. This means that transcendental knowledge of the absolute
Supreme Being can be known if it is made known by the Lord Himself.
By the mental speculation of the greatest mundane thinkers, the Absolute
Truth cannot be understood. The mental speculators can reach up to the
standard of impersonal Brahman realization, but factually, complete
knowledge of transcendence is beyond the knowledge of impersonal
Brahman. Thus it is called the supreme confidential wisdom. Out of many
liberated souls, someone may be qualified to know the Personality of
Godhead. In the Bhagavad-gita il is also said by the Lord Himself that out


--- Page 168 ---
504 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
of many hundreds of thousands of people, one may try for perfection in the
human life, and out of many liberated souls one may know Him as He is.
Therefore, the knowledge of the Personality of Godhead may be attained
by devotional service only. Rahasyem means devotional service. Lord
Krsna instructed Arjuna in the Bhagavad-gita because le found Arjuna to
be a devotee and friend. Without such qualifications. no one can enter into
the mystery of the Bhagavad-gita. Therefore, one cannot understand the
Personality of Godhead unless one becomes a devotee and discharges
devotional service. This mystery is love of Godhead. Therein lies the main
qualification for knowing the mystery of the Personality of Godhead. And
to attain the stage of transcendental love of Godhead regulativé principles
of devotional service must be followed. The regulative principles are called
vidhi-bhakti, or devotional service of the Lord, and they can be practiced
by aneophyte with his present senses. Such regulative principles are mainly
based on hearing and chanting of the glories of the Lord. And such hearing
and chanting of the glories of the Lord can be made possible in the asso-
ciation of devotees only. Lord Caitanya therefore recommended five main
principles for attaining perfection in the devotional service of the Lord.
The first is association of devotees (hearing): second is chanting the glories
of the Lord; third, hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam from the pure devotee:
fourth, residing in a holy place connected with the Lord; and fifth, wor-
shiping the Deity of the Lord with devotion. Such rules and regulations
are parts of devotional service. So, as requested by Lord Brahma, the
Personality of Godhead will explain all about the four questions put
forward by Brahma, and others also which are parts and parcels of the
same questions.
TEXT 32
. -
यावानहं यथामाबो यदूपगुणकर्मकः |
तथैव तच्चविज्ञानमस्तु ते मदनुग्रहात्‌ ॥३२॥
yavan ahari yatha-bhavo
yad-riipa-guna-karmakah

tathaiva tattva-vijianam

astu te mad-anugrahat
yavan—as I am in eternal form; aham—Myself; yatha—as much as; bhavah
—transcendental existence; yat—those; riipa—various forms and colors;


--- Page 169 ---
Text 32] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 505
gupa—qualities; karmakah—activities; tatha—so and so: eva—certainly:
tattva-vijianam— factual realization; astu—let it be unto you; te—unto you:
mat—Mine; anugrahat—by causeless mercy.
TRANSLATION
All of Me, namely My actual eternal form, My transcendental existence,
color, qualities and activities—let all be awakened within you by factual
realization, out of My causeless mercy.
PURPORT

The secret of success in understanding the intricacies of knowledge of
the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, is the causeless mercy of
the Lord. Even in the material world, the father of many sons discloses the
secret of his position to the pet sons. The father discloses the confidence
unto the son whom he thinks worthy. An important man in the social
order can be known by his mercy only. Similarly, one must be very dear to
the Lord in order to know the Lord. The Lord is unlimited: no one can
know Him completely, but one’s advancement in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord can make one eligible to know the Lord. Here we can
see that the Lord is sufficiently pleased with Brahmaji, and therefore He
offers His causeless mercy to him so that Brahmaji may have the factual
realization of the Lord by His mercy only.

In the Vedas also it is said that a person cannot know the Absolute
Truth Personality of Godhead simply by dint of mundane education or
intellectual gymnastics. One can know the Supreme Truth if one has
unflinching faith in the bona fide spiritual master as well as in the Lord.
Such a faithful person, even though illiterate in the mundane sense, can
know the Lord automatically by the mercy of the Lord. In the Bhagarvad-
gita also, it is said that the Lord reserves the right of not being exposed to
everyone, and He keeps Himself concealed from the faithless by His
yoga-maya potency.

To the faithful the Lord reveals Himself in His form, quality and
pastimes. The Lord is not formless, as it is wrongly conceived by the
impersonalist, but His form is not like one that we have experienced. The
Lord discloses His form, even to the extent of measurement, to His pure
devotees, and that is the meaning of yavan, as is explained by Srila [iva
Gosvami, the greatest scholar of Srimad-Bhagavatam.


--- Page 170 ---
506 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9

The Lord discloses His transcendental nature of existence. The mundane
wranglers make mundane conceptions of the form of the Lord. It is said
in the revealed scriptures that the Lord has no mundane form; therefore
persons with a poor fund of knowledge conclude that He must be
formless. They cannot distinguish between the mundane form and the
spiritual form. According to them, without a mundane form one must be
formless. This conclusion is also mundane because formlessness is the
opposite conception of form. Negation of the mundane conception does
not establish a transcendental fact. In the Brahma-sanithita it is said that
the Lord has a transcendental form and that He can utilize any one of His
senses for any purpose. For example, He can eat with His eyes, and He can
see with His leg. In the mundane conception of form, no one can eat with
one’s eyes nor see with his leg. That is the difference between the mundane
body and the spiritual body of sac-cid-ananda. Spiritual body does not
mean formless, but a different type of body which we cannot conceive with
our present mundane senses. IFormless therefore means devoid of mundane
form, or possessing a spiritual body of which the nondevotee can have no
conception by the speculative method.

The Lord discloses to the devotee His unlimited varieties of transcen-
dental bodies, all identical with one another with different kinds of bodily
features. Some of the transcendental bodies of the Lord are blackish, and
some of them are whitish. Some of them are reddish, and some of them
are yellowish. Some of them are four-handed, and some of them are
two-handed. Some of them are like the fish, and some of them are like
the lion. All these different transcendental bodies of the Lord, without
any differential category, are disclosed to the devotees of the Lord by the
mercy of the Lord, and thus the impersonalists’ false arguments claiming
the formlessness of the Supreme Truth do not appeal to a devotee of the
Lord, even though such a devotee may not be very advanced in devotional
service.

The Lord has unlimited numbers of transcendental qualities, and one of
them is His affection for His unalloyed devotee. In the history of the
mundane world we can appreciate His transcendental qualities. The Lord
incarnates Himself for the protection of His devotees and for the annihila-
tion of the faithless. His activities are in relationship with His devotees,
and the Srimad-Bhagavatam is full of such activities of the Lord in
relationship with His devotees, and the nondevotees have no knowledge of
such pastimes. The Lord lifted the Govardhana Hill when He was only seven
years old and protected His pure devotees at Vrndavana from the wrath
of Indra, who was overflooding the place with rain. Now this lifting of the


--- Page 171 ---
Text 33] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 507
Govardhana Hill by a seven-year-old boy may be unbelievable for the
faithless, but for the devotees it is absolutely believable. The devotee
believes in the almighty potency of the Lord, while the faithless say that
the Lord is almighty but do not believe it. Such men with a poor fund of
knowledge do not know that the Lord is the Lord eternally, and that one
cannot become the Lord by meditation for millions of years nor by mental
speculation for billions of years.

The impersonal interpretation of the mundane wranglers is completely
refuted in this verse because it is clearly stated here that the Supreme
Lord has His qualities, form, pastimes, and everything that a person has.
All these descriptions of the transcendental nature of the Personality of
Godhead are factual realizations by the devotee of the Lord, and by the
causeless mercy of the Lord they become revealed to His pure devotee,
and to no one else.

TEXT 33
अहमेवासमेवाग्रे नान्यद्‌ यत्‌ सदसत्‌ परम्‌ |
पश्चादहं यदेतच्च योऽवशिष्येत सोऽस्म्यहम्‌ ॥३३॥
aham evasam evagre
nanyad yat sad-asat param
pascad ৫1১07 yad etac ca
yo’vasisyeta so’smy aham

aham—1, the Personality of Godhead; eva—certainly;asam—existed; eva—
only; agre—before the creation; na—never; anyat—anything else; yat—all
those; sat—the effect; asat—the cause; param—the supreme; pascat—at the
end; aham—1, the Personality of Godhead; yat—all these; etat—creation;
ca—also; yeh—everything; avasisyeta—remains; sah—that ; asmi—1 am; aham
—I, the Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION
Brahma, it is I, the Personality of Godhead, who was existing before
the creation when there was nothing but Myself. Nor was there the
material nature, the cause of this creation. That which you see now is
also I, the Personality of Godhead, and after annihilation what remains
will also be I, the Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 172 ---
508 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
PURPORT

We should note very carefully that the Personality of Godhead is
addressing Lord Brahma and specifying with great emphasis Himself,
pointing out that it is He, the Personality of Godhead, who existed before
the creation, it is He only who maintains the creation, and it is He only
who remains after the annihilation of the creation. Brahma is also a
creation of the Supreme Lord. The impersonalist puts forth the theory
of oneness in the sense that Brahma, also being the same principle of “I”
because he is an emanation from the I, the Absolute Truth, is identical
with the Lord, the principle of I, and thus there is nothing more than
the principle of I, as explained in this verse. Accepting the argument of
the impersonalist, it is to be admitted that the Lord is the creator I, and
the Brahma is the created I. Therefore there is a difference between the
two “I's,” namely the predominator I and the predominated I. Therefore
there are still two I's, even accepting the argument of the impersonalist.
But we must note carefully that these two I's are accepted in the Vedic
literature (Kathopanisad) in the sense of quality. The Kathopanisad says,

nityo nityandrh cetana$ cetananam eko bahinarh yo vidadhati kaman
(Katha 2.2.13)
The creator “I” and the created “I” are both accepted in the Vedas as quali-
tatively one because both of them are nityas and cetanas. But the singular
“I” is the creator “I,” and the created ““I’s’ are of plural number because
there are many “I's” like Brahma and those generated by Brahma. It is the
simple truth. The father creates or begets a son, and the son also creates
many other sons, and all of them may be one as human beings, but at the
same time from the father, the son and the grandsons are all different. The
son cannot take the place of the father, nor can the grandsons. Simultane-
ously the father, the son and the grandson are one and different also. As
human beings they are one, but as relativities they are different. Therefore
the relativities of the creator and the created or the predominator and the
predominated have been differentiated in the Vedas by saying that the
predominator “I” is the feeder of the predominated “I's,” and thus there is a
vast difference between the two principles of “I.”

In another feature of this verse, no one can deny the personalities of
both the Lord and Brahma. Therefore in the ultimate issue both the
predominator and predominated are persons. This conclusion refutes the
conclusion of the impersonalist that in the ultimate issue everything is
impersonal. This impersonal feature stressed by the less intelligent imper-


--- Page 173 ---
Text 33] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 509
sonalist school is refuted by pointing out that the predominator “I” is the
Absolute Truth, and He 15 a person. The predominated “1,” Brahma, is also
a person, but he is not the Absolute. For realization of one’s self in spiritual
psychology it may be convenient to assume oneself as the same principle
as the Absolute Truth, but there is always the difference of the predomi-
nated and the predominator, as is clearly pointed out here in this verse,
which is grossly misused by the impersonalists. Brahma is factually seeing
eye to eye his predominator Lord who, in His transcendental eternal form,
exists even after the annihilation of the material creation. The form of the
Lord, as seen by Brahma, existed before the creation of Brahma, and the
material manifestation with all ingredients and agents of material creation
are also energetic expansions of the Lord, and after closing the exhibited
energy of the Lord, what remains is the same Personality of Godhead.
Therefore the form of the Lord exists in all circumstances of the creation,
maintenance and annihilation. The Vedic hymns confirm this fact in the
statement, “vasudevo va idam agra asin na brahma na ca $ankarah eko vai
ndrdyana dstnna brahma na iano, etc.” Before the creation there was none
except Vasudeva. There was neither Brahma nor Sankara. Only Narayana
was there and no one else, neither Brahma nor 18313. Sripada Sankaracarya
also confirms in his comments on the Bhagavad-gita that Narayana, or the
Personality of Godhead, is transcendental to all creation, but the whole
creation is the product of avyakta. Therefore the difference between the
created and the creator is always there, although both the creator and
created are of the same quality.

The other feature of the statement is that the supreme truth is Bhagavan,
or the Personality of Godhead. The Personality of Godhead and His
kingdom have already been explained. The kingdom of Godhead is not
void as conceived by the impersonalists. The Vaikuntha planets are full of
transcendental variegatedness, including the four-handed residents of those
planets, and with great opulence of wealth and presperity, and there are
even airplanes and other amenities required for high-grade personalities.
Therefore the Personality of Godhead exists before the creation, and He
exists with all transcendental variegatedness in the Vaikunthalokas. The
Vaikunthalokas, also accepted in the Bhagavad-gita asbeing of the sanatana
nature, are not annihilated even after the annihilation of the manifested
cosmos. Those transcendental planets are of a different nature altogether,
and that nature is not subjected to the rules and regulations of material
creation, maintenance or annihilation. The existence of the Personality of
Godhead implies the existence of the Vaikunthalokas, as the existence of a
king implies the existence of a kingdom.

In various places of Srimad-Bhagavatam and in other revealed scriptures


--- Page 174 ---
510 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
the existence of the Personality of Godhead is mentioned. For example,
Maharaja Pariksit asks, “Sa capi yatra puruso visva-sthity-udbhavapyayah
muktvatma-mayam mdyesah Sete sarva-guhdsayah?”” How does the Per-
sonality of Godhead, the cause of creation, maintenance and annihilation,
who is always freed from the influence of the illusory energy and is the
controller of the same, lie in everyone’s heart? Similar also is a question of
Vidura’s: “Tattvanarh bhagavaris tesam katidhd pratisankramah tatremar
ka upasiran ka usvid anuserata.”” Sridhara Svami explains this in his notes:
“During the annihilation of the creation, who serves the Lord lying on the
Sesa, etc.” This means that the transcendental Lord with all His name,
fame, quality and paraphernalia exists eternally. The same confirma-
tion is also in the Kasi-Khanda in connection with Dhruva-carita. It is
said there, “Na cyavante’pi yad-bhakta mahatyar pralayapadi ato ’cyuto-
khile loke sa ekah sarvago vyayah.” Even the devotees of the Personality
of Godhead are not annihilated during the period of the entire annihilation
of the material world, not to speak of the Lord Himself. The Lord is ever-
existent in all three stages of material change.

The impersonalist adduces no activity in the Supreme, but in this dis-
cussion between Brahma and the Supreme Personality of Godhead the
Lord is said to have activities also, as He has His form and quality. The
activities of Brahma and other demigods during the time and maintenance
of the creation are to be understood as the activities of the Lord. The king,
or the head executive of a state, may not be seen in the government offices,
for he may be engaged in royal comforts. Yet it should be understood that
everything is being done under his direction, and everything is at his com-
mand. The Personality of Godhead is never formless. He may not be
visible in His personal form in the material world to the less intelligent
class of men, and therefore He may be sometimes called formless. But
actually He is always in His eternal form in His Vaikuntha planets as well
as in other planets of the universes as different incarnations. The example
of the sun is very appropriate in this connection. The sun in the night may
not be visible to the eyes of men in the darkness, but the sun is visible
wherever it has risen. Because the sun is not visible to the eyes of the in-
habitants of a particular part of the earth does not mean that the sun has
no form.

In the Aitareye Upanisad there is the hymn “@tmaivedam agra asit
purusa-vidhah.” This mantra indicates the Supreme Personality of God-
head (Krsna) even before the appearance of the purusa incarnation. In the
Bhagavad-gita it is said (Bg. 15.18) that Lord Krsna is Purusottama because
He is the Supreme Purusa, transcendental even to the purusa aksara and the


--- Page 175 ---
Text 33] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 511
purusa ksara. The aksara purusa, or the Maha-Visnu, throws His glance over
prakrti, or material nature, but the existence of the Purusottama was
there even before that. The Aitareya Upanisad therefore confirms the
statement of the Bhagavad-gita that Lord Krsna is the Supreme Person
(Purusottama).

In some of the Vedas it is also said that in the beginning only the imper-
sonal Brahman was there. But according to this verse, the impersonal
Brahman, which is the glowing effulgence of the body of the Supreme
Lord, may be called the immediate cause, but the cause of all causes orthe
remote cause is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord’s imper-
sonal feature is existent in the material world because by material senses
or material eyes the Lord cannot be seen or perceived. One has to spiritual-
ize the senses before one can expect to see or perceive the Supreme Lord.
But He is always engaged in His personal capacity, and He is eternally
visible to the inhabitants of Vaikunthaloka, eye to eye. Therefore He is
materially impersonal, just as the executive head of the state may be
impersonal in the government offices, although he is not impersonal in
the government house. Similarly, the Lord is not impersonal in His abode,
which is always nirasta-kuhakam, as is stated in the very beginning of the
Bhagavatam. Therefore both the impersonal and personal features of the
Lord are acceptable, as mentioned in the revealed scriptures. This Person-
ality of Godhead is very emphatically explained in the Bhagavad-gita in
connection with the verse, “brahmano hi pratisthaham™ (Bg. 14.27).
Therefore in all ways the confidential part of spiritual knowledge is
realization of the Personality of Godhead, and not His impersonal Brahman
feature. One should therefore have his ultimate aim of realization not in
the impersonal feature but in the personal feature of the Absolute Truth.
The example of sky within the pot and the sky without the pot may be
helpful to the student for his realization of the all-pervading quality of the
cosmic consciousness of the Absolute Truth. But that does not mean that
the individual part and parcel of the Lord becomes the Supreme by a false
claim. It means only that the conditioned soul is a victim of the illusory
energy in her last snare. To claim to become one with the cosmic con-
sciousness of the Lord is the last trap set by the illusory energy or daivi
maya. Even in the impersonal existence of the Lord, as it is in the material
creation, one should be after the personal realization of the Lord, and that
is the meaning of “pascad 01807 yad etac ca yo “vasisyeta so ’smy aham.”

Brahmajt also accepted the same truth when he was instructing Narada.
He said, ‘“So’yam te ‘bhihitas tata bhagavan visva-bhayanah.”
(Bhag. 2.7.50). There is no other cause of all causes than the


--- Page 176 ---
512 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, and therefore this verse aham eva
never indicates anything other than the Supreme Lord, and one should
therefore follow the path of Brahma-sampradaya, or the path of Brahmaj
to Narada, to Vyasadeva, etc., and make it a point in life to realize the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, or Lord Krsna. This very confiden-
tial instruction to the pure devotees of the Lord was also given to Arjuna
and to Brahma in the beginning of the creation. The demigods like Brahma,
Visnu, Mahesvara, Indra, Candra, Varuna are undoubtedly different forms
of the Lord for execution of different functions; the different elemental
ingredients of material creation, as well as the multifarious energies, also
may be of the same Personality of Godhead, but the root of all of them is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, and one should be attached
to the root of everything rather than bewildered by the branches and
leaves. That in the instruction given in this verse.
TEXT 34
ऋतेऽथं यत्‌ प्रतीयेत न प्रतीयेत चात्मनि |
तद्विद्यादात्मनो मायां ययाऽऽभासो यथा तमः।३४॥
16670180718 yat pratiyeta
na pratiyeta catmani
tad vidyad atmano mayan
yathabhasc yatha tamah
rte—without; artham—value; yat—which; pratiyeta—appears to be; na—
does not; pratiyeta—appears to be; ca—certainly; @tmani—in My relation;
tat—that; vidyat—must you know; atmanah—Mine; mayam—illusory ener-
gy; yatha—as much as; abhasah—in reflection; yatha—as it is; tamah—
darkness.
TRANSLATION
O Brahma, whatever appears to be of any value, if it is without relation
to Me, has no reality. Know it as My illusory energy, that reflection which
appears to be in darkness.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it has already been concluded that in any stage of
the cosmic manifestation—namely its appearance, its sustenance, its growth,


--- Page 177 ---
Text 34] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 513
its interactions of different cnergies, its deterioration and its disappear-
ance—all has its basic relation with the existence of the Personality of
Godhead. And as such, whenever there is forgetfulness of this prime re-
lation with the Lord, and things are accepted as real without being related
with the Lord, that conception is called the product of the illusory energy
of the Lord. Because nothing can exist without the Lord, it should be
known that the illusory energy is also an energy of the Lord. The right
conclusion of dovetailing everything in relationship with the Lord is
called yoga-maya, or the energy of union, and the wrong conception of
detaching a thing from its relationship with the Lord is called daivi maya,
or mahd& maya, of the Lord. Both the mayas also have connection with the
Lord because nothing can exist without being related with Him. As such,
the wrong conception of detaching relationships from the Lord is not
false but illusory.

Misconceiving one thing for another thing is called illusion. The example
of accepting the rope as a snake is illusion, but it is not false. The rope, as
it exists in the front of the illusioned person, is not at all false, but the
acceptance is illusory. Therefore the wrong conception of accepting this
material manifestation as being divorced from the energy of the Lord is
illusion, but it is not false. And this illusory conception is called the re-
flection of the reality in the darkness of ignorance. Anything that appears
as apparently not being “produced out of My energy” is called maya. The
conception that the living entity is formless or that the Supreme Lord is
formless is also illusion. In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 2.12) it is said by the
Lord in the midst of the battlefield that the warriors who were standing
in front of Arjuna, Arjuna himself, and even the Lord were all existing
before, they were existing on the battlefield of Kuruksetra, and they
would all continue to be individual personalities in the future also, even
after the annihilation of the present body and even after being liberated
from the bondage of material existence. In all circumstances, the Lord and
the living entities are individual personalities, and the personal features of
both the Lord and living beings are never abolished; only the influence of
the illusory energy, the reflection of light in the darkness, can, by the
mercy of the Lord, be removed. In the material world, the light of the
sun is also not independent, nor is that of the moon. The real source of
light is the brahmajyoti, which diffuses light from the transcendental body
of the Lord, and the same light is reflected in varieties of light: the light
of the sun, the light of the moon, the light of the fire, or the light of
electricity. So the identity of self as being unconnected with the Supreme
Self, the Lord, is also illusion, and the false claim that “1 am the Supreme”


--- Page 178 ---
514. Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
is also the last illusory snare of the same maya, or the external energy of
the Lord.

The Vedanta-siitra in the very beginning affirms that everything is born
from the Supreme, and thus, as explained in the previous verse, all
individual living entities are born from the energy of the supreme living
being, the Personality of Godhead, as Brahma himself was born from the
cnergy of the Lord, and all other living entities are born from the energy
of the Lord through the agency of Brahma, and none of them has any
existence without being dovetailed with the Supreme Lord.

Theindependence of the individual living entity is not real independence,
but is just the reflection of the real independence existing in the Supreme
Being, the Lord. The false claim of supreme independence by the con-
ditioned souls is illusion, and this conclusion is admitted in this verse.

Persons with a poor fund of knowledge become illusioned, and therefore
the so-called scientists, physiologists, empiric philosophers, etc., become
dazzled by the glaring reflection of the sun, moon, electricity, etc., and
deny the existence of the Supreme Lord, putting forward theories and
different speculations about creation, maintenance and annihilation of
everything material. The medical practitioner may deny the existence of
the soul in the physiological bodily construction of an individual person,
but he cannot give life to the dead body, even though all the mechanisms
of the body exist even after death. The psychologist makes a serious
study of the physiological conditions of the brain, as if the construction
of the cerebral lump is the machine of the functioning mind, but in the
dead body the psychologist cannot bring back the function of the mind.
These scientific studies of the cosmic manifestation or that of the bodily
construction independent of the Supreme Lord are different reflective
intellectual gymnastics only, but at the end they are allillusion and nothing
more. All such advancement of science and knowledge in the present con-
text of material civilization is the action of the covering influence of the
illusory energy. The illusory energy has two phases of existence, namely
the covering influence and the throwing influence. By the throwing influ-
ence the living entities are thrown into the darkness of ignorance, and by
the covering influence she covers the eyes of men with a poor fund of
knowledge about the existence of the Supreme Person who enlightened
the supreme individual living being, Brahma. The identity of Brahma with
the Supreme Lord is never claimed herein, and therefore such a foolish
claim by the man with a poor fund of knowledge is another display of
the illusory energy of the Lord. The Lord says in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 16.18-20) that demoniac persons who deny the existence of the Lord


--- Page 179 ---
Text 34] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 515
arc thrown more and more into the darkness of ignorance, and thus such
demoniac persons transmigrate life after life without any knowledge of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The sane man, however, is enlightened in the disciplic succession from
Brahmaji, who was personally instructed by the Lord, or in the disciplic
succession from Arjuna, who was personally instructed by the Lord in the
Bhagavad-gita. He accepts the statement of the Lord, aham sarvasya
prabhavo mattah sarvarm pravartate/ iti matva bhajante mam budha bhava-
samanvitah” (Bg.10.8). The Lord is the original source of all emanations,
and everything that is crcated, maintained and annihilated exists by the
energy of the Lord. The 58110 man who knows this is actually learned, and
therefore he becomes a pure devotee of the Lord, engaged in the transcen-
dental loving service of the Lord.

Although the reflectory energy of the Lord displays various illusions to
the eyes of persons with a poor fund of knowledge, the sane person knows
clearly that the Lord can act, even from far, far beyond our vision, by His
different energies, just as the fire can diffuse heat and light from a distant
place. In the medical science of the ancient sages, known as the Ayur-veda,
there is definite acceptance of the Lord’s supremacy in the following
words: “‘jagad-yonir anicchasya cid-anandaika-riipinah puso ’sti prakrtir
nitya praticchayeva bhasvatah acetanapi caitanya-yogena paramatmanah
akarod visvam akhilam anityam nataka-krtim.” There is one Supreme
Person who is the progenitor of this cosmic manifestation, whose energy
acts as prakrti, or the material nature, dazzling like the reflection. By such
illusory action of the prakrti, even the dead matter is caused to move by
the cooperation of living energy of the Lord, and the material world
appears like a dramatic performance to the ignorant eyes. The ignorant
person, therefore, may even be a scientist or physiologist in the drama of
prakrti, while the sane person knows the prakrti as the illusory energy of
the Lord. By such a conclusion, and as is confirmed by the Bhagavad-gita,
it is clear that the living entities are also a display of the superior energy
(para prakrtih) of the Lord, just as the material world is a display of the
inferior energy (৫007৫ prakrtih) of the Lord. The superior energy of the
Lord cannot be as good as the Lord, although there is very little difference
between the energy and the possessor of the energy, or the fire and the
heat. Fire is possessed of heat, but heat is not fire. This simple thing is not
understood by the man with a poor fund of knowledge who falsely claims
that the fire and hcat are the same. This cnergy of the fire (namely heat) is
explained here as a reflection, and not directly fire. Therefore the living
energy represented by the living entities is the reflection of the Lord, and


--- Page 180 ---
516 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
never the Lord Himself. And as the reflection of the Lord, the existence of
the living entity is dependent on the Supreme Lord, who is the original
light. This material energy may be compared with darkness, as actually it
is darkness, and the activities of the living entities in the darkness are re-
flections of the original light. The Lord should be understood by the con-
text of this verse. Nondependence of both the energies of the Lord is
explained as maya, or illusion. No one can make a solution of the darkness
of ignorance simply by the reflection of light. Similarly, no one can come
out of the material existence simply by the reflected light of the common
man, but one has to receive the light from the original light itself. The
reflection of sunlight in the darkness is unable to drive out the darkness,
but the sunlight which is outside the reflection can drive out the darkness
completely. In darkness no one can sce the things in a room. Therefore a
person in the dark is afraid of snakes and scorpions, although there may
not be such things. But in the light the things in the room can be clearly
seen, and the fear of snakes and scorpions is at once removed. Therefore
one has to take shelter of the light of the Lord, as in the Bhagavad-gita or
the Srimad-Bhagavatam, and not the reflective personalities who have no
touch with the Lord. No one should hear Bhagavad-gita or Srimad-
Bhagavatam from a person who is a nonbeliever in the existence of the
Lord. Such a person is already doomed, and any association with such a
doomed person makes the associater also doomed.

According to the Padma Purana, within the material compass there are
innumerable material universes, and all of them are full of darkness. Any
living being, beginning from Brahmas (there are innumerable Brahmas also
in innumerable universes) to the insignificant ant, are all born in darkness,
and they require factual light from the Lord to see Him directly, just as
the sun can be seen only by the direct light of the sun. No lamp or man-
made torchlight, however powerful it may be, can help one to see the sun.
The sun reveals itself. Therefore the action of different energies of the
Lord or the Personality of Godhead Himself can be realized by the light
manifested by the causeless mercy of the Lord. The impersonalists say that
God cannot be seen. God can be seen by the light of God and not by man-
made speculations. Here it is specifically mentioned as vidyat, which is an
order by the Lord to Brahma. This direct order of the Lord is a manifes-
tation of His internal energy, and this particular energy is the means of
seeing the Lord eye to eye. Not only Brahma but anyone who may be
graced by the Lord to see such merciful direct internal energy can also
realize the Personality of Godhead without any mental speculation.


--- Page 181 ---
Text 35] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 517
TEXT 35
3
यथा महान्ति भूतानि भूतेषूचायचेष्वंनु ।
प्रविषटान्यप्रविष्टानि तथा तेषु न तेष्वहम्‌ ।।३५॥
yatha mahanti bhitani
bhatesiiccavacesv anu
pravistany apravistani
tatha tesu na tesv aham
yatha—as it is: mahdanti—the universal: bhatani—elements: bhitesu ucca-
avacesu—in the minute and gigantic: anu—after: pravistani—entered:
apravistani—not entered: tathd—so much 80; tesu—in them: na—not: tesu—
in them: aham— Myself.
TRANSLATION
O Brahma, please know that the universal elements enter into the
cosmos and at the same time do not enter into the cosmos; similarly, I
Myself also exist within everything created, and at the same time I am
outside of everything.
PURPORT
The great elements of material creation, namely earth, water, fire, air
and ether. etc., all enter into the body of all manifested entities, namely
the seas, mountains, aquatics, plants, reptiles, birds, beasts, human beings,
demigods and everyone materially manifested, and at the same time such
elements are differently situated. In the developed stage of consciousness,
the human being can study both physiological and physical science. but
the basic principles of such sciences are nothing but the material elements
and nothing more. The body of the human being and the body of the
mountain, as also the body of the demigods, including Brahma, are all of
the same ingredients, namely earth, water, etc., and at the same time the
elements are beyond the body. The elements were created first, and there-
fore they entered into the bodily construction later on. but in both cir-
cumstances they entered the cosmos as well as not entered. Similarly, the
Supreme Lord, by His different energies, namely the internal and external,
is within everything in the manifested cosmos, and at the same time He is


--- Page 182 ---
518 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
outside of everything, situated in the kingdom of God (Vaikunthaloka) as
described before. This is very nicely stated in the Brahma-sarmhita as
follows:
ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratlibhavitabhis
tabhir ya eva nijarapataya kalabhih
goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhito
govindam adi-purusarin tam aham bhajami (Bs. 5.37)
“I worship the Personality of Godhead Govinda, who, by expansion of His
internal potency of transcendental existence, knowledge and bliss, enjoys
in His own and expanded forms. Simultaneously He enters into every atom
of the creation.”

This expansion of His plenary parts is also more definitely explained in

the same Brahma-sarihita as follows:
eko ’py asau racayitur jagad-anda-kotirn
yac-chaktir asti jagad-anda-caya yad-antah
apdantarastha-paramanu-cayantarastham
govindam adi-purusari tam aham bhajami (Bs. 5.35)
“l worship the Personality of Godhead Govinda, who, by one of His
plenary portions, enters into the existence of every universe and every
particle of the atoms and thus manifests His infinite energy all over the
material creation unlimitedly.”

The impersonalists can imagine or even perceive that the Supreme
Brahman is thus all-pervading, and therefore they conclude that there is no
possibility of His personal form. Herein lies the mystery of His transcen-
dental knowledge. This mystery is the transcendental love of Godhead,
and one who is surcharged with such transcendental love of Godhead can
see the Personality of Godhead in every atom and every movable or
immovable object without any difficulty. And at the same time he can see
the Personality of Godhead in His abode of Goloka, enjoying eternal
pastimes with His cternal associates, who are also expansions of His
transcendental cxistence. This vision is the real mystery of spiritual know-
ledge, as is stated by the Lord in the beginning, “sa-rahasyari tad-ahgarh ca.”
This mystery is the most confidential part of the knowledge of the
Supreme, and it is impossible to be discovered by the mental speculators
by dint of intellectual gymnastics. The mystery can be revealed through
the process recommended by Brahmaji in his Brahma-samhita as follows:


--- Page 183 ---
Text 35] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 519
premaiijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yarn §yamasundaram acintya-guna-svarii par
govindam adi-purusari tam 0710777 bhajami. (Bs. 5.38)
“I worship the original Personality of Godhead, Govinda, whom the pure
devotees whose eyes are smeared with the ointment of love of Godhead
always observe within their hearts. This Govinda, the original Personality
of Godhead, is Syamasundara with all transcendental qualities.”
Therefore, although He is present in every atom, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead may not be visible to the dry speculators: still the
mystery is unfolded before the eyes of the pure devotees because their
eyes are anointed with love of Godhead. And this love of Godhead can be
attained only by the practice of transcendental loving service of the Lord,
and nothing else. The vision of the devotees is not ordinary: it is purified
by the process of devotional service. In other words, as the universal
elements are both within and without, similarly the Lord’s name, form,
quality, pastimes, entourage, etc., as they are described in the revealed
scriptures or as they are being performed in the Vaikunthalokas, far, far
beyond the material cosmic manifestation, are factually being televised in
the heart of the devotee. The man with a poor fund of knowledge cannot
understand, although by material science one can see things far away by
means of television. Factually, the spiritually developed person is able to
have the television of the kingdom of God always reflected within his
heart. That is the mystery of knowledge of the Personality of Godhead.
The Lord can award anyone and everyone liberation (mukti) from the
bondage of material existence, yet He rarely awards the privilege of love of
Godhead, as is confirmed by Narada, “mukti dadhati karhicit sma na
bhakti-yogam.” This transcendental devotional service of the Lord is so
wonderful that the occupation keeps the deserving devotee always rapt in
psychological activities, without any deviation from the absolute touch.
Thus love of Godhead, developed in the heart of the devotee, is a great
mystery. It was previously told by Brahmaji to Narada that the desires of
Brahmaji are never unfulfilled because he is always absorbed in the tran-
scendental loving service of the Lord; nor has he any desire in his heart
save and except the transcendental service of the Lord. That is the beauty
and mystery of the process of bhakti-yoga. As the Lord’s desire is in-
fallible, as He is acyuta, similarly the desires of the devotees in the tran-
scendental service of the Lord are also acyuta, infallible. It is very difficult,
however, for the layman to understand without knowledge of the mystery


--- Page 184 ---
520 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
of devotional service, as it is very difficult to know the potency of touch-
stone. As touchstone is rarely found, a pure devolee of the Lord is also
rarely to be seen, even amongst the millions of liberated souls (katsv api
mahamune). Out of all Kinds of perfections attained by the process of
Knowledge, yoga perfection in devotional service is the highest of all and
the most mysterious also, even more mysterious than the eight kinds of
mystic perfection attained by the process of yogic performances. In the
Bhagavad-gita the lord therefore advised Arjuna about this bhakti-yoga:

sarva-guhyatamari bhityah

$rnu me paramam vacah
“Just hear from Me again about the most confidential part of instructions
in the Bhagavad-gita.” (Bg. 18.64) The same was confirmed by Brahmaji
to Narada in the following words: “10077 bhagavatarm nama yan me bhaga-
vatoditam/ sangraho "वा vibhatinam tvam etad vipulikuru. Yatha harau
bhagavati 71107 bhaktir bhavisyati.” Brahmaji said to Narada. “Whatever
I have spoken to you about the Bhagavatam was explained to me by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and [ am advising you to expand
these topics nicely so that people may easily understand the mysterious
bhakti-yoga by transcendental loving service to the Lord.” It is to be noted
here that the mystery of bhakti-yoga was disclosed to Brahmaji by the Lord
Himself, and the same was explained by Brahmajt to Narada, and Narada
explained the same to Vyasa and from Vyasa to Sukadeva Gosvami, and
that same knowledge is coming down, in the unalloyed chain of disciplic
succession. If one is fortunate enough to have received the knowledge in
the transcendental disciplic succession, surely he may have the chance of
understanding the mystery of the Lord and that of the Srimad-Bhagavatam,
the sound incarnation of the Lord.
TEXT 36
AT जिज्ञास्यं तत््रजिज्ञासुनाऽऽत्मनः |
अन्ययव्यतिरेकाभ्यां यत्‌ स्यात्‌ सर्वत्र सर्वदा 1138)
etdvad eva jijiidsyarn
tattva-jijiasunatmanah
anvaya-vyatirekabhyam
yat syat sarvatra sarvada


--- Page 185 ---
Text 36] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 521
etavat—up to this: eva—certainly; jijidsyam—is to be required; tattva—
Absolute Truth; jijigsuna—the student; atmanah—of the Self; anvaya—
directly; vyatirekabhyam—indirectly; yat—whatever; syat—it may be:
sarvatra—in all space and time; sarvada—in all circumstances.
TRANSLATION
A person who is searching after the Supreme Absolute Truth, the
Personality of Godhead, has to search it out up to this, certainly in all
circumstances, and in all space and time, and both directly and indirectly.
PURPORT
To unfold the mystery of bhakti-voga, as it is explained in the previous
verse. is the ultimate stage of all inquiries or the highest objective for the
inquisitive. Everyone is searching after self-realization in different ways,
namely by karma-yoga, by jidna-yoga, by dhyana-yoga, by rdja-voga, or
by bhakti-yoga, etc. To engage in self-realization is the responsibility of
every living entity developed in consciousness. One who is developed in
consciousness certainly makes enquiries into the mystery of the self, of the
cosmic situation and of the problems of life, in all spheres and fields,
namely social, political, economic, cultural, religious, moral, etc., and in
their different branches. But here is explained the goal of all such inquiries.
The Vedanta-siitra philosophy begins with this inquiry of life and the
Bhagavatam answers such inquiries up to this point. or the mystery of all
inquiries. Lord Brahma wanted to be perfectly educated by the Personality
of Godhead, and here is the answer by the Lord finished in four nutshell
verses, namely beginning from aham eva to this verse, etavad eva. This is
the end of all self-realization processes. भृटा do not know that the ultimate
goal of life is Visnu or the Supreme Personality of Godhead due to being
bewildered by the glaring reflection in the darkness, and as such everyone
is entering into the darkest region of material existence, driven by the
uncontrolled senses. The whole material existence has sprung up by sense
gratification, desires based principally on the sex desire, and the result is
that in spite of all advancement of knowledge, the final goal of all activities
of the living entities is sense gratification. But here is the real goal of life,
and everyone should know it by inquiries put before a bona fide spiritual
master expert in the science of bhak ti-yoga, or from a living personality of
Bhagavatam life. Everyone is engaged in various kinds of scriptural in-


--- Page 186 ---
522 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
quiries, but the Srimad-Bhagavatam gives answers 10 all of the various
students of self-realization: this ultimate objective of life is not to be
searched out without any great labor or perseverance. One who is imbucd
with such sincere inquiries must ask the bona fide spiritual master in the
disciplic succession from Brahmaji, and that is the direction given here.
Because the mystery was disclosed before Brahmajt by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the mystery of all such inquiries regarding self-
realization must be put before such a spiritual master who is directly the
representative of the Lord, acknowledged in that disciplic succession. Such
a bona fide spiritual master is able to clear up the whole thingby evidences
from the revealed scriptures, both directly and indirectly. Although every-
one is free to consult the revealed scriptures in this connection, still one
requires the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, and that is the direc-
tion in this verse. The bona fide spiritual master is the most confidential
representative of the Lord, and one must receive direction from the
spiritual master in the same spirit as Brahmaji received them from the
Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna. The bona fide spiritual master in
that bona fide chain of disciplic succession never claims to be the Lord
Himself, although such a spiritual master is greater than the Lord in the
sense that he can deliver the Lord by his personally realized experience.
The Lord is not to be found simply by education orby a good fertile brain,
but surely He can be found by the sincere student through the transparent
medium of the bona fide spiritual master.

The revealed scriptures give direction directly to this end, but because
the bewildered living entities are blinded by the glaring reflection in the
darkness, they are unable to find out the truth of the revealed scriptures.
For example, in the Bhagavad-gita the whole direction is targetted toward
the Personality of Godhead Lord Sri Krsna, but for want of a bona fide
spiritual master in the line of Brahmaji or the direct hearer, Arjuna, there
are different distortions of the revealed knowledge by many unauthorized
persons who just want to satisfy their own whims. Undoubtedly the
Bhagavad-gita is accepted as one of the most brilliant stars in the horizon
of the spiritual sky, yet the interpretations of the great book of knowledge
have so grossly been distorted that every student of the Bhagavad-gita is
still in the same darkness of glaring material reflection, and such students
are hardly enlightened by the Bhagavad-gita. In the Gita practically the
same instruction is imparted as in the four prime verses of the Bhagavatam,
but due to wrong and fashionable interpretations by unauthorized persons,
one cannot reach the ultimate conclusion. In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.61)
it is clearly said,


--- Page 187 ---
Text 36] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 523
iSvarah sarva-bhittanarm hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhiitani yantraridhani mayaya
The Lord is situated in the heart of all living beings (as Paramatma), and
He is controlling all of them in the material world under the agency of His
external energy. Therefore it is clearly mentioned that the Lord is the
supreine controller and that the living entities are controlled by the Lord.
In the same Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.65) the Lord directs as follows:
manmana bhava mad-bhakto
madyaji mam namaskuru
mam evaisyasi satyan te
pratijane priyo 58 me
It is clear in this verse of the Bhagavad-gita that the direction of the Lord
is that one should be Godminded, a devotee of the Lord, a worshiper of the
Lord, and must offer all obeisances unto Lord Krsna, and by so doing, the
devotee will undoubtedly go back to Godhead, back to home.

Indirectly it is said that the whole Vedic social construction of human
society is so made that everyone acts as the part and parcel of the complete
body of the Lord. The intelligent class of men, or the brahmanas, are
situated on the face of the Lord; the administrative class of men, or the
ksatriyas, are situated on the arms of the Lord; the productive class of
men, or the vaisyas, are situated on the belt of the Lord; and the laborer
class of men, or the siidras, are situated on the legs of the Lord. Therefore
the complete social construction is the body of the Lord, and each and
every part of the body, namely the brahmanas, the ksatriyas, the vaiSyas
and the sudras, is meant {0 serve the Lord’s whole body conjointly; other-
wise it becomes unfit to be coordinated with the supreme consciousness of
oneness. Universal consciousness is factually achieved by coordinated ser-
vice of all concerned to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and that
alone can insure total perfection.

Therefore even the great scientists, the great philosophers, the great
mental speculators, the great politicians, the great industrialists and the
great social reformers, etc., cannot give any relief to the restless society of
the material world because they do not know the secret of success as
mentioned in this verse of the Bhagavatam, namely that one must know
the mystery of bhakti-yoga. In the Bhagavad-gita also it is said,


--- Page 188 ---
524 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
na marh duskrtino 77100011018 prapadyante naradhamah
mdyaya ’pahrta-jiana asurarh bhavam asritah (Bg. 7.15)
The so-called great leaders of human society, because they are ignorant
of this great knowledge of bhakti-yoga and are always cngaged in the
ignoble acts of sensc gratification, bewildered by the external energy of
the Lord, are stubborn rebels against the supremacy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and they never agree to surrender unto Him
because they are fools, miscreants and the lowest type of human beings.
Such faithless nonbelievers may be highly educated in the material sensc
of the term, but factually they are the greatest fools of the world because
by the influence of the external material nature all their so-called acquisi-
tion of knowledge has been made null and void. Therefore all advancement
of knowledge in the present context of things is being misused in terms of
the cats and dogs fighting with one another for sense gratification, and all
acquisition of knowledge in science, philosophy, fine arts, nationality,
economic development, religiousness and great activities are being spoiled
by being used as dresses for dead men. There is no utility in the dresses
used for covering a coffin of the dead body save getting a false applause
from the ignorant public. The Srimad-Bhagavatam therefore says again
and again that without attainment of the status of bhakti-yoga, all activi-
ties of the human society are to be considered as absolute failures only.
It is said:
parabhavas tavad abodha-jato
Yyavan na jijiidsata atma-tattvam
yavat kriyas tavad 1007) mano vai
karmatmakarh yena sarira-bandhah == (0128. 5.5.5)
As long as one is blind to inquiring after self-realization, all material
activities, however great they may be, are all different kinds of defeat
because the aim of human life is not fulfilled by such unwanted and
profitless activities. The function of the human body is to attain freedom
from the material bondage, but as long as one is fully absorbed in material
activities, his mind will be overwhelmed in the whirlpool of matter, and
thus he will continue to be encaged in the material bodies life after life.
evan manah karma-vasam prayunkte
avidyayatmany upadhiyamane
pritir na yavan mayi vasudeve
na mucyate deha-yogena tavat  (Bhag. 5.5.6)


--- Page 189 ---
Text 36] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 525

It is one’s mind that generates different Kinds of bodies for suffering
different Kinds of material pangs. Therefore as long as the mind is absorbed
in fruitive activities, it is to be understood that the mind is absorbed in
nescience, and thus one is sure to again and again be subjected to material
bondage in different bodies until one develops a transcendental love of
Godhead, Vasudeva, the Supreme Person. To become absorbed in the
transcendental name, quality, form and activities of the Supreme Person,
Vasudeva, means to change the temper of the mind from matter to absolute
knowledge, which leads one to the path of absolute realization and thus
frees one from the bondage of material contact and encagements in
different material bodies.

Srila [५१ Gosvami Prabhupada therefore comments on the words
sarvatra sarvada in the sense that the principles of bhakti-yoga, or
devotional service to the Lord, are apt in all circumstances, i.e., it is
recommended in all the revealed scriptures, it is performed by all
authorities, it is important in all places, it is useful in all causes and
effects, etc. As far as all the revealed scriptures are concerned, he quotes
from the Skanda Purana on the topics of Brahma and Narada as follows:

sarisdre ’smin maha-ghore janma-mrtyu-samakule
pujanarh vasudevasya tarekarn vadibhih smrtam.

In the material world, which is full of darkness and dangers, combined
with birth and death and full with different anxieties, the only way to get
out of the great entanglement is to accept loving transcendental devotional
service of the Lord Vasudeva. This isaccepted by all classes of philosophers.

Srila Jiva Gosvami also quotes another common passage which is found
in three Puranas, namely the Padma Purana, the Skanda Purana and Linga
Purana. It runs as follows:

alodya sarva-§astrani vicarya ca punah punah
idam ekam sunispannar dhyeyo narayanah sada.

“By scrutinizingly reviewing all the revealed scriptures and judging them
again and again, it is now concluded that Lord Narayana is the Supreme
Absolute Truth, and thus He alone should be worshiped.”

The same truth is also indirectly described as follows:


--- Page 190 ---
526 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
parari gato pi vedanari sarva-sastrartha-vedyapi
yo na sarvesvare bhaktas tari vidyat purusadhamam.

“Even though one may have gone to the other side of all the Vedas, and
even though one is well versed in all the revealed scriptures, if one is not a
devotee of the Supreme Lord, he must be considered to be the lowest of
mankind.” Similarly, it is also stated indirectly as follows:

yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surah

harav abhaktesu kuto mahat-guna-
mano-rathenasato dhavato yahi.

One who has unflinching devotion unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead must have all the good qualities of the demigods, and contrarily
one who is not a devotee of the Lord must be hovering in the darkness of
mental speculation and thus must be engaged in the material imperma-
nence.

It is also said in the Eleventh Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam:

$0000 brahmani nisnato na nisnayat pare yadi
Sravas tasya srama-phalo hy adhenum iva raksatah

“One may be well versed in all the transcendental literature of the
Vedas, but if he fails to be acquainted with the Supreme, then it must be
concluded that all of his education is like the burden of the beast or as
one’s keeping a cow without milking capacity.”

Similarly, the liberty of discharging loving transcendental service to the
Lord is invested in everyone, even the women, the sidras, the forest
tribes, or any other living beings who are born in sinful conditions.

te vai vidanty atitaranti ca deva-mayari
stri-siidra-hiina-sabara api papa-jivah
yady adbhiita-krama-parayana-silasiksas
tiryag-jana api kimu $ruta-dharana ye
(Bhag. 2.7.46)

The lowest of human beings can be elevated to the highest stage of
devotional life if they are trained up by the bona fide spiritual master
well versed in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. If the


--- Page 191 ---
Text 36] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 527
lowest can be so elevated, then what to speak of the highest who are well
versed in the Vedic knowledge? The conclusion is that devotional service
of the Lord is open for all, regardless of who they are. That is the
confirmation of its application for all kinds of performers of the service.

Therefore devotional service of the Lord with perfect knowledge
through the training of a bona fide spiritual master is advised for everyone,
even if they happen not to be human beings. This is confirmed in the
Garuda Purana as follows:

kita-paksi-mrganari ca harau sannyasta-karmanam
irdhvam eva gatirh manye kirh punar jRanindrh nrnam

“Even the worms, birds and beasts are assured of elevation to the
highest perfectional life if they are completely surrendered to the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, so what to speak of those
philosophers amongst the human beings?”

Therefore there is no need to seek properly qualified candidates for
discharging devotional service of the Lord. Let them be either well behaved
or ill trained, let them be either learned or fools, let them be either grossly
attached or in the renounced order of life, let them be liberated souls
or desirous of salvation, let them be inexpert in the discharge of devotional
service or expert in the same, all of them can be elevated to the supreme
position by discharge of devotional service under the proper guidance.
This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita as follows:

api cet sudurdcaro bhajate mam ananya-bhak
sadhur eva sa mantavyah samyag vyavasito hi sah
mari hi partha vyapasritya ye ’pi syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaisyas tatha $ काऽ te "ए yanti pararn gatim
(Bg. 9.30,32)

Even if a person is fully addicted to all sorts of sinful acts, if he happens
to be engaged in the loving transcendental service of the Lord under proper
guidance, he is to be considered the most perfect holy man without a
doubt. And thus any person, whatsoever and whosoever he or she may be—
even the fallen woman, the less intelligent laborer class or the dull mercan-
tile type of men, or even men lower than all these—can attain the highest
perfection of life by going back home, back to Godhead, provided he or
she takes shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord in all earnestness. This sin-
cere earnestness is the only qualification that can lead one to the highest


--- Page 192 ---
528 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
perfectional stage of life, and unless and until such real earnestness is
aroused, there is a difference between cleanliness or uncleanliness, learning
or nonlearning in the material estimation. The fire is always fire, and thus
if someone touches the fire, knowingly or unknowingly, the fire will act
in its own way without any discrimination. The principle is: harir harati
papani dusta-cittair api smyrtah. The all-powerful Lord can purify the
devotee of all sinful reactions, just as the sun can sterilize all sorts of
infections by its powerful rays. ^^ Attraction of material enjoyment cannot
act upon a pure devotee of the Lord.” There are hundreds and thousands
of aphorisms in the revealed scriptures. Atmaramas ca munayah. Even the
sclf-realized souls are also attracted by the transcendental loving service
of the Lord. Kecit kevalaya bhaktya vasudeva-parayana: “Simply by hear-
ing and chanting, one becomes a great devotee of Lord Vasudeva.” Na
calati bhagavat-padaravindal lavanimisardham api sa vaispavagryah: “A per-
son who does not move from the lotus feet of the Lord even for a moment
or a second is to be considered the greatest of all Vaisnavas.” Bhagavat-
parsadatari prapte mat-sevaya pratitam te: “The pure devotees are con-
vinced of attaining the association of the Personality of Godhead, and
thus they are always engaged in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord.” Therefore in all continents, in all planets, in all universes, there is
currency of devotional service of the Lord, or bhakti-yoga, and that is the
statement of the Srimad-Bhagavatam and allied scriptures. Everywhere
means in every part of the creation of the Lord. The Lord can be served
by all the senses, or even simply by the mind. The South Indian brahmana
who served the Lord simply on the strength of his mind also factually
realized the Lord. Success is guaranteed for a devotee who fully
engages any one of his senses in the mode of devotional service. The Lord
can be served by any ingredient, even the most common commodities—a
flower, a leaf, a fruit or a little water, which are available in any part of the
universe and without any cost—and thus the Lord is served universally by
the universal entities. He can be served simply by hearing, He can be served
simply by chanting or reading about His activities, He can be served simply
by adoring Him and accepting Him.

In the Bhagavad-gita it is stated that one can serve the Lord by offering
the result of one’s own work; it does not matter what one does. Generally
men may say that whatever they are doing is inspired by God, but that
is not all. One should actually work on behalf of God as a servant of God.
The Lord says in the Bhagavad-gita: (Bg. 9.27)

yat karosi yad asnasi yaj juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kurusva mad-arpanam


--- Page 193 ---
Text 36] .Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 529

Do whatever you like or whatever may be easier for you to do, eat
whatever you may eat, sacrifice whatever you can sacrifice, give whatever
you may give in charity, and do whatever you may undertake in penance,
but everything must be done for Him only. If you do business or if you
accept some employment, do so on behalf of the Lord. Whatever you may
eat, you may offer the same to the Lord and be assured that He will return
the food after eating it Himself. He is the complete whole, and therefore
whatever He may eat as offered by the devotee is accepted because of the
devotee’s love, but again it is returned as prasadam for the devotee so
that he can be happy by eating. In other words, be a servant of God and
live peacefully in that consciousness, ultimately returning home, back to
Godhead.

It is said, yasya smrtya ca namoktya tapo-yajna-kriyadisu nitnarm sam-
pirnpatameti sadyo vandetam acyutam. 1 offer my obeisances unto Him,
the infallible, because simply by either remembering Him or vibrating His
holy name one can attain the perfection of all penances, sacrifices or
fruitive activities, and this process can be universally followed. It is en-
joined, akamah sarva-kamo va moksa-kama udaradhih tibrena bhakti-
yogena yajeta purusam param: “A person, though he may be full of de-
sires or may have no desires, may follow this path of infallible bhakti-
yoga for complete perfection.” One need not be anxious to propitiate
each and every demigod and goddess because the root of all of them is the
Personality of Godhead. As by pouring water on the root of the tree all
the branches and leaves are served and enlivened, so by rendering service
unto the Supreme Lord every god and goddess becomes automatically
served without extraneous effort. The Lord is all-pervading, and therefore
service unto Him is also all-pervading. This fact is corroborated in the
Skanda Purapa as follows: “arcite deva-devese sankha-cakra-gadadhare.
arcitah sarva-devah syur yatah sarva-gato harih.” When the Supreme Lord,
the Personality of Godhead, who carries in His hands a conchshell, wheel,
club, and lotus flower, is worshiped, certainly all other demigods are
worshiped automatically because Hari the Personality of Godhead is all-
pervading. Therefore, in all cases, namely nominative, objective, causative,
dative, ablative, possessive and supportive, everyone is benefitted by such
transcendental loving service of the Lord. The man who worships the Lord,
the Lord Himself who is worshiped, the cause for which the Lord is
worshiped, the source of supply, the place where such worship is done,
etc.—everything is benefitted by such an action.

Even during the annihilation of the material world, the process of
bhakti-yoga can be applied. Kalena nasta pralaye vantyam: the Lord is
worshiped in devastation because He protects the Vedas from being


--- Page 194 ---
530 Srimad Bhagavatam « [Canto 2, Ch. 9
annihilated. He is worshiped in every millennium or yuga, as it is said,
krte yad dhyayato visnurh tretayar yajato makhaih
dvapare paricarydyam kalau taddhari-kirtanat

In the Vispu Purana it is written: (0 hanis tan-mahacchidram sa mohah
sa ca vibhramah yan-muhurtarh ksanarh vapi vasudevar na cintayet.” If even
for a moment remembrance of Vasudeva, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, is missed, that is the greatest loss, that is the greatest illusion, and that
is the greatest anomaly. The Lord can be worshiped in all stages of life.
For instance, even in the womb of their mothers Maharaja Prahlada and
Maharaja Pariksit worshiped the Lord: even in his very childhood, at the
age of only five years, Dhruva Maharaja worshiped the Lord; even in full
youth, Maharaja Ambarisa worshiped the Lord; and even at the last stage
of his frustration and old age Maharaja Dhrtarastra worshiped the Lord.
Ajamila worshiped the Lord even at the point of death, and the Lord was
worshiped by Citraketu even in heaven and in hell. In the Narasirhha
Purana it is said that as the hellish inhabitants began to chant the holy
name of the Lord they began to be elevated from hell towards heaven.
Durvasa Muni has also supported this view: “mucyeta yan-namny udite
narako 07 Simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord the inhabitants
of hell became released from their hellish persecution. So the conclusion’
of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as given by Sukadeva Gosvami to Maharaja Pariksit,
is: etad nirvidya mananam icchatam akuto-bhayam yoginanam api nirnitam
harer namanukirtanam: “® King, it is finally decided that everyone,
namely those in the renounced order of life, the mystics, and the enjoyers
of fruitive work, should chant the holy name of the Lord fearlessly to
achieve the desired success in their pursuits.”

Similarly, it is indicated indirectly in various places of revealed scrip-
tures:

1. Even though one is well versed in all the Vedas and scriptures, if one
is not a devotee of the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, he is
considered to be the lowest of mankind.

2. In the Garuda Purana, Brhad-Naradiya Purina and Padma Purana, the
same isrepeated: What is the use of Vedic knowledge and penances for one
who is devoid of devotional service of the Lord?

3. What is the comparison of thousands of Prajapatis with one devotee
of the Lord?

4. Sukadeva Gosvami said (01085. 2.4.17) that neither the ascetic, nor
one who is greatly munificent, nor one who is famous, nor the great


--- Page 195 ---
Text 36] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 531
philosopher, nor the great occultist, nor anyone else can achieve the
desired result without being engaged in the service of the Lord.

5. Even if a place is more glorious than heaven, if there is no glorifica-
tion of the Lord of Vaikuntha nor His pure devotee, it should be at once
quitted.

6. The pure devotee refuses to accept all the five different types of
liberation in order to be engaged in the service of the Lord.

The final conclusion, therefore, is that the glories of the Lord must be
always and everywhere proclaimed, one should hear about His glories, one
should chant about His glories, and one should always remember His
glories because that is the highest perfectional stage of life. As far as
fruitive work is concerned, it is limited to an enjoyable body; as far as
yoga is concerned, it is limited to the acquirement of mystic power; as far
as empiric philosophy is concerned, it is limited to the attainment of
transcendental knowledge; and as far as transcendental knowledge is
concerned, it is limited to attainment of salvation. Even if they are
adopted, there is every chance of discrepencies in discharging the particular
type of functions. But adoptation of the transcendental devotional service
of the Lord has no limit, nor is there fear of falling down. The process
reaches automatically to the final stage by the grace of the Lord. In the
preliminary stage of devotional service there is an apparent requisition of
knowledge, but in the higher stage there is no necessity of such knowledge.
The best and guaranteed path of progress is therefore engagement in
bhakti-yoga, pure devotional service.

The cream of Srimad-Bhagavatam in the foregoing four slokas is some-
times squeezed out by the impersonalist for different interpretations in
their favor, but it should be carefully noted that the four slokas were first
described by the Personality of Godhead Himself, and thus the imperson-
alist has no scope to enter into them because he has no conception of
the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, the impersonalist may squeeze out
any interpretations from them, but such interpretations will never be
accepted by those who are taught in the disciplic succession from Brahma,
as will be cleared up in the following verses. Besides that, the Sruti con-
firms that the Supreme Truth Absolute Personality of Godhead never
reveals Himself to anyone who is falsely proud of his academic knowledge.
The ৩7808 mantra clearly says:

ndyam atma pravacanena labhyo na medhaya na bahudha $rutena
yam evaisa vrnute tena labhyas tasyaisa atma vivrnute tanurm svam


--- Page 196 ---
532 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
The whole matter is explained by the Lord Himself, and one who has no
approach to the Lord in His personal feature can rarely understand the
purport of Srimad-Bhagavatam without being taught by the bhagavatas in
the disciplic succession.
TEXT 37
एतन्मतं समातिष्ठ॒ परमेण समाधिना |
~
भवान्‌ कल्पविकल्पेषु न Fats कर्िचित्‌ 13
etan matam samatistha
[00107716120 samadhina
bhavan kalpa-vikalpesu
na vimuhyati karhicit
etat—this is: matam—the conclusion; samatistha—remain fixed up;
paramena—by the Supreme: samadhina-- concentration of the mind; bhavan
—vourself: kalpa—intermediate devastation; vikalpesu—in the final devas-
tation; na vimuhyati—will never bewilder: karhicit—anything like com-
placence.
TRANSLATION
© Brahma, just follow this conclusion by fixed concentration of mind,
and no pride will disturb you, neither in the partial nor final devastations.”
PURPORT
As in the Bhagavad-gita, Tenth Chapter, the Personality of Godhead,
Lord Krsna, has summarized the whole text in four verses, namely,
“ahari sarvasya prabhavah,” etc., so also the complete Srimad-Bhagavatam
also has been summarized in four verses, as aham evasam evagre, etc., and the
secret purpose of the most important Bhagavatite conclusion is explained
by the original speaker of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, who was also the
original speaker of the Bhagavad-gita, the Personality of Godhead, Lord
Sri Krsna. There are many grammarians and nondevotee material wranglers
who have tried to present false interpretations of these four verses of the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, but the Lord Himself advised Brahmajl not to be


--- Page 197 ---
Text 37] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 533
deviated from the fixed conclusion the Lord taught him. The Lord was
the teacher of the nucleus four verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, and Brahma
was the receiver of the knowledge. Misinterpretation of the word aham
by the word jugglery of the impersonalist should not disturb the mind of
the strict followers of the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the
text of the Personality of Godhead and His unalloyed devotees, who are
also known as the Bhagavatas, and any outsider should have no access to
this confidential literature of devotional service. But unfortunately the
impersonalist, who has no relation with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, sometime tries to interpret Srimad-Bhagavatam by his poor fund
of knowledge in grammar and dry speculation. Therefore, the Lord warns
Brahma (and, through Brahma, all future devotees of the Lord in the
disciplic succession of Brahma) that one should never be misled by the
conclusion of the so-called grammarians or by other men with a poor fund
of knowledge, but must always fix the mind properly, via the parampara
system. No oneshould try to give a new interpretation by dint of mundane
knowledge. And the first thing, therefore, in pursuance of the system of
knowledge received by Brahma is to approach a bona fide guru who is the
representative of the Lord following the parampara system. No one should
try to squeeze out his own meaning by imperfect mundane knowledge. The
guru, or the bona fide spiritual master, is competent to teach the disciple
in the right path with reference to the context of all authentic Vedic
literature. He does not attempt to juggle words to bewilder the student.
The bona fide spiritual master, by his personal activities, teaches the
disciple the principles of devotional service. Without personal service, like
the impersonalist and dry speculators, one would go on speculating life
after life and would be unable to reach the final conclusion. By following
the instructions of the bona fide spiritual master in conjunction with the
principles of revealed scriptures, the student will rise to the plane of com-
plete knowledge. which will be exhibited by development of detachment
from the world of sense gratification. The mundane wranglers are surprised
as to how one can detach himself from the world of sense gratification,
and thus any attempt to be fixed in God realization appears to them to be
mysticism. This detachment from the sensory world is called the brahma-
bhiita stage of realization, the preliminary stage of transcendental devotion-
al life (para bhaktih). The brahma-bhiita stage of life is also known as the
atmadarama stage, in which one is fully self-satisfied and does not hanker for
the world of sense enjoyment. This stage of full satisfaction is the proper
situation for understanding the transcendental knowledge of the Person-
ality of Godhead. The Srimad-Bhagavatam affirms this:


--- Page 198 ---
534 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
evar prasanna-manaso bhagavat-bhakti-yogatah
bhagavat-tattva-vijianam mukta-sangasya jayate.(Bhag. 1.2.20)

Thus in the completely satisfied stage of life, exhibited by full detachment

from the world of sense enjoyment as the result of performing devotional

service, one can understand the science of God in the liberated stage.

In this stage of full satisfaction and detachment from the sensory world,
one can know the mystery of the science of God with all its confidential
intricacies, and not by grammar or academic speculation. And because
Brahma qualified himself for such reception, the Lord was pleased to
disclose the purpose of Srimad-Bhagavatam. This direct instruction by the
Lord to any devotee who is detached from the world of sense gratification
is possible, as is stated in the Bhagavad-gita:

tesam satata-yuktanarm bhajatam priti-parvakam
dadami buddhi-yogarm tam yena mam upayanti te. (Bg. 10.10)

Unto the devotees who are constantly engaged in the transcendental
loving service (priti-piarvakam) of the Lord, the Lord out of His causeless
mercy upon the devotee gives direct instructions so that the devotee may
make accurate progress on the path of returning home, back to Godhead.
One should not, therefore, try to understand these four verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam by mental speculation. Rather, by direct perception of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is able to know all about His abode,
Vaikuntha, as was seen and experienced by Brahmaji. Such Vaikuntha
realization is possible by any devotee of the Lord situated in the transcen-
dental position as a result of devotional service.

In the Gopala-tapani Upanisad (Sruti) it is said that the Lord appeared
before Brahmaji as “gopa-vesome purastad avirbhiivah’’: the Lord appeared
before Brahma as a cowboy, that is, as the original Personality of Godhead,
Lord Sri Krsna, Govinda, who is later described by Brahmajt in his Brahma-
sarmhita:

cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpavrksa-
laksavrtesu surabhir abhipalayantam
lak smi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami. (Bs. 5.29)

Brahmaji desires to worship the original Personality of Godhead, Lord

Sri Krsna, who resides in the topmost Vaikuntha planet, known as Goloka


--- Page 199 ---
Text 38] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 535
Vrndavana, and where He is in the habit of keeping surabhi cows as a
cowboy, and where He is served by hundreds and thousands of goddesses
of fortune (the gopis) with love and respect.

Therefore Lord Sri Krsna is the original form of the Supreme Lord
(krsnas tu bhagavan svayam). This is also clear in this instruction. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is Lord Krsna, and not directly Narayana
or purusa-avataras bécause such manifestations are subsequent. Therefore
Srimad-Bhdgavatam means consciousness of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Lord Sri Krsna, and Srimad-Bhdgavatam is the sound representa-
tion of the Lord as much as the Bhagavad-gita is. Thus the conclusion is
that Srimad-Bhdgavatam is the science of the Lord in which the Lord and
His abode are perfectly realized.

TEXT 38
igs उवाच
सम्प्रदिस्यैवमजनो जनानां परमेष्ठिनम्‌ ।
पर्यतस्तस्य तद्‌ रूपमारमनो न्यरुणद्धरिः ॥३८॥
$rt suka ८४०८०
sampradi§yaivam gjano
jananam paramesthinam
pasyatas tasya tad-ritpam
atmano nyarunaddharih

sri $ukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; sampradisya—thus fully
instructing Brahmaji; evam— thus; ajanah—the Supreme Lord; jananam—of
the living entities; paramesthinam—unto the supreme leader, Brahma;
pasyatah—while he was seeing; tasya—His; tat-ripam—that transcendental
form; dtmanah—of the Absolute; nyarunat—disappeared; harih—the Lord,
the Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, after being seen in His
transcendental form, instructing Brahmaji, the leader of the living entities,
disappeared,” said Sukadeva Gosvami to Maharaja Pariksit.


--- Page 200 ---
536 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly mentioned that the Lord is ajanah, or the Su-
preme Person, and He was showing His transcendental form (atmano
ritpam) to Brahmdji while He was instructing him in the summarization of
Srimad-Bhagavatam in four verses. He isajanal, or the Supreme Person
amongst jananam, or all persons. All living entities are individual persons,
and amongst all such persons Lord Hari is Supreme, as it is confirmed in the
Sruti mantra, nityo nityanarm cetanas cetananam. So there is no place for
impersonal features in the transcendental world as there are impersonal
features in the material world. Whenever there is cetana, or knowledge,
the personal feature comes in. In the spiritual world everything is full
of knowledge, and therefore everything in the transcendental world
is personal; nothing is impersonal there. In the transcendental world, the
land, the water, the tree, the mountain, the river, the man, the animal, the
bird and everything are all of the same quality, namely cetana, and there-
fore everything there is individual and personal. Srimad-Bhagavatam gives
us Lhis information as the supreme Vedic literature, and it was personally
instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to Brahmaji so that the
leader of the living entities might broadcast the message to all in the uni-
verse in order to teach the supreme knowledge of bhakti-yoga. Brahmaji in
his turn instructed Narada, his beloved son, the same message of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, and Narada, in his turn, taught the same to Vyasadeva, who
again taught it to Sukadeva Gosvami, and through Sukadeva Gosvami’s
grace and by the mercy of Maharaja Pariksit we are all given Srimad-
Bhagavatam perpetually to learn the science of the Absolute Personality of
Godhead, Lord Krsna.

TEXT 39
अन्तर्हितेन्दरियार्थीय হয়ে বিচ্িবাস্মত্তিঃ |
सर्मभूतमयो fd ससर्जेदं स पूर्वत्‌ ।२९॥
antarhitendriyarthaya
haraye vihitanjalih
sarva-bhiitamayo visvarn
sasarjedamn sa pirvavat

antarhita—on disappearance; indriya-arthaya—unto the Personality of

Godhead, the objective of all senses; haraye—unto the Lord; vihita-aijalih—


--- Page 201 ---
Text 39) Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 537
in folded hands; sarva-bhiita—all living entities; mayah—full of; visvam—
the universe; sasarja—created; idam—this; sah—he, Brahmaji; pirvavat—
exactly like before.
TRANSLATION

On the disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari,
who is the object of transcendental enjoyment for the senses of devotees,
Brahma, with folded hands, began to recreate the universe full with living
entities, as it was previously.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is the object for fulfilling
the senses of all living entities. Hlusioned by the glaring reflection of the
external energy, the living entities worship the senses instead of engaging
them properly in fulfilling the desires of the Supreme.

In the Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya there is the following verse:

aksinoh phalarh tvadrsarh 00140110718 hi
tanoh phalarh tvadrsa-gatra-sangah
Jjihva-phalarh tvadrsa-kirtanarn hi
sudurlabha-bhagavatarn hi loke.
“0 devotee of the Lord, the purpose of the visual sense is fulfilled simply
by secing you, and to touch your body is the fulfillment of this bodily
touch. The tongue is meant for glorifying your qualifies because in this
world it is very difficult to find a pure devotee of the Lord.”

Originally tke senses of the living entity were awarded for this purpose,
namely to engage them in the transcendental loving service of the Lord or
that of His devotees, but the conditioned souls, illusioned by the material
energy, became captivated by sense enjoyment. Therefore the whole pro-
cess of God consciousness is meant to rectify the conditional activities of
the senses and to re-engage them in the direct service of the Lord. Lord
Brahma thus engaged his senses in the Lord by recreating the conditioned
living entities to act in the recreated universe. This material universe is thus
created and annihilated by the will of the Lord. It is created to give a
chance to the conditioned soul to act to return home, back to Godhead,
and servants like Brahmaji, Naradaji, Vyasaji and their company become
busy with the same purpose of the Lord: to reclaim the conditioned souls
from the लात्‌ of sense gratification and return them to the normal stage of


--- Page 202 ---
538 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
engaging the senses in service of the Lord. Instead of doing so, i.e. con-
verting the actions of the senses, the impersonalists began to make the
conditioned souls sense-less, and the Lord also sense-less. That is improper
treatment for the conditioned souls. The diseased condition of the senses
may be treated by curing the defect, but not uprooting it altogether. When
there is some disease in the eyes, the eyes may be cured to see properly.
Plucking out the eyes is no treatment. Similarly, the whole material
disease is based on the process of sense gratification, and liberation from
the diseased condition is to re-engage the senses to see the beauty of the
Lord, hear His glories, and act on His account. Thus Brahmaji recreated
the universal activities again.
TEXT 40
[9
प्रजापतिर्धभेपतिरेकदा नियमान्‌ यमान्‌ ।
भद्र प्रजानामन्ििच्छन्नातिष्ठत्‌ स्वाथकाम्यया ॥ २९॥
prajapatir dharmapatir
ekada niyaman yaman
bhadram prajanam anvicchann
atisthat svartha-kamyaya

praja-patih—the forefather of all living entities; dharma-patih—the father
of religious life; ekada—once upon a time; niyaman—rules and regulations;
yaman—principles of control; bhadram— welfare; prajanam—of the living
beings; anvicchan—desiring; atisthat—situated; sva-artha—own interest;
kamyaya—so desiring.

TRANSLATION
Thus once upon a time the forefather of living entities and the father
of religiousness, Lord Brahma, situated himself in the acts of regulative
principles, desiring self-interest for the welfare of all living entities.
PURPORT

No one can be situated in an exalted position without having undertaken
a regulative life of rules and regulations. An unrestricted life of sense
gratification is animal life, and Lord Brahma, in order to teach all con-
cerned within the jurisdiction of his generations, taught the same principles


--- Page 203 ---
Text 42] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 539
of sense control for executing higher duties. He desired the welfare of
everyone as servants of God, and anyone desiring the welfare of the
members of his family and generations must conduct a moral, religious
life. The highest life of moral principles is to become a devotee of the Lord
because one who is a pure devotee of the Lord has all the good qualities
of the Lord. On the other hand, one who is not a devotee of the Lord,
however qualified he may be in the mundane sense of the term, cannot be
qualified with any good quality worthy of the name. The pure devotees of
the Lord, like Brahma and persons in the chain of disciplic succession, do
not do anything to instruct their subordinates without acting accordingly
themselves.
TEXT 41
. =
q नारदः प्रियतमो रिक्यादानामनुत्रतः |
TEA: शीलेन प्रश्रयेण दभेन च ॥४०॥
tam naradah priyatamo
rikthadanam anuvratah
Susrisamanah silena
prasrayena damena ca
team—unto him; naradah—the great sage Narada; priyatamah—very dear;
rikthadanam—of the inheritor sons; anuvratah—very obedient; Susriisa-
mapah—always ready to serve; silena—by good behavior; prasrayena—by
meekness; damena—by sense control; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Narada, the most dear of the inheritor sons of Brahma, always ready
to serve his father, strictly follows the instructions of his father by his
mannerly behavior, meekness and sense control.
TEXT 42
मायां विविदिषन्‌ विष्णोर्मायेशस्य महामुनिः |
महामागग्रतो राजन्‌ पितरं॑पयेतोषयत्‌ ॥४१॥


--- Page 204 ---
540 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
7710) 0112 vividisan visnor
mayesasya maha-munih
mahda-bhagavato rdajan
pitaram paryatosayat

mayam—energies; vividisan—desiring to know: visnoh—of the Personality
of Godhead: maya-isasya—of the master of all energies; maha-munih— the
great sage; mahda-bhagavatah—the first-class devotee of the Lord; rajan—
O King; pitaram—unto his father; paryatosayat—very much pleased.

TRANSLATION
Narada very much pleased his father and desired to know all about the
energies of Visnu, the master of all energies, for he [Narada] was the
greatest of all sages and greatest of all devotees, O King.
PURPORT

Lord Brahma, being the creator of all living beings in the universe, is
originally the father of several well-known sons, like Daksa, the Sanakas,
and Narada. In three departments of human knowledge, namely fruitive
work (karma-kanda), transcendental knowledge (jiana-kanda), and devo-
tional service (upasand-kanda), disseminated by the Vedas, Devarsi Narada
inherited from his father Brahma devotional service, whereas the Daksas
inherited from their father fruitive work, and Sanaka, Sanitana, etc.,
inherited from their father information about jiana-kanda, or transcen-
dental knowledge. But out of them all, Narada is described here as the
most beloved son of Brahma because of good behavior, obedience, meek-
ness and readiness to render service unto the father. And Narada is famous
as the greatest of all sages because of his being the greatest of all devotees.
Narada is the spiritual master of many famous devotees of the Lord. He is
spiritual master of Prahlada, Dhruva and Vyasa, down to the forest animal
hunter Kirata. His only business is to turn everyone to the transcendental
loving service of the Lord. Therefore all these features of Narada make
him the dearmost son of his father, and all this is due to Narada’s being a
first-class devotee of the Lord. The devotees are always anxious to know
more and more about the Supreme Lord, the master of all energies. As
is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita:


--- Page 205 ---
Text 43] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 541
mac-citta mad-gata-prina bodhayantah parasparam
kathayantas ca mam nityarn tusyanti ca ramanti ca

(Bg. 10.9)
The Supreme Lord is unlimited, and His energies are also unlimited. No
one can know them completely. Brahmaji, being the greatest living entity
within this universe and being directly instructed by the Lord, must know
more than anyone within this universe, although such knowledge may not
be complete, and thus it is the duty of everyone to ask about the un-
limited Lord from the spiritual master in the disciplic succession of Brahma,
which descends from Narada to Vyasa, from Vyasa to Sukadeva and so on.
TEXT 43
. PE
तटं निशाम्य पितरं लोकानां प्रपितामहम्‌ |
देवर्षिः परिपप्रच्छ भवान्‌ यन्मानुषृच्छति ।४३।
11.11.11, 1.711.911...
10100710772 prapitamaham
devarsih paripapraccha
bhavan yan manuprcchati
tustam—satisfied; nisamya—after seeing; pitaram—the father; lokanam—
of the whole universe; prapitamaham—the great-grandfather: devarsth—the
great sage Narada; paripapraccha—inquired; bhavan—yourself; yat—as it is;
ma—from me; anuprechati—inquiring.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Narada also inquired in detail from his father Brahma,
the great-grand father of all the universe, after seeing him well satisfied.
PURPORT
The process of understanding spiritual or transcendental knowledge
from the realized person is not exactly like asking an ordinary question
from the schoolmaster. The schoolmasters in the modern days are paid


--- Page 206 ---
542 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
agents for giving some information, but the spiritual master is not a paid
agent. Nor can he impart instruction without being authorized. In the
Bhagavad-gita, the process of understanding transcendental knowledge is
directed as follows:

tad viddhi pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya

upadel:syanti te jidnarn jidninas tattva-darsinah
Arjuna was advised to receive transcendental knowledge from the realized
person by surrender, questions and service. Receiving transcendental know-
ledge is not like exchanging dollars; such knowledge has to be received by
service to the spiritual master. As Brahmaji received the knowledge directly
from the Lord by satisfying Him fully, similarly one has to receive the
transcendental knowledge from the spiritual master by satisfying him. The
spiritual master’s satisfaction is the means of assimilating transcendental
knowledge. One cannot understand transcendental knowledge simply by
becoming a grammarian. The Vedas declared:

yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau

tasyaite kathita hy arthah prakasante mahatmanah
“Only unto one who has unflinching devotion to the Lord and to the
spiritual master does transcendental knowledge become automatically
revealed.” Such a relationship between the disciple and the spiritual master
is eternal. One who is now the disciple is the next spiritual master. And one
cannot be a bona fide and authorized spiritual master unless one has been
strictly obedient to his spiritual master. Brahmaji, as disciple of the
Supreme Lord, received the real knowledge and imparted it to his dear
disciple Narada, and similarly Narada, as spiritual master, handed over this
knowledge to Vyasa and so on. Therefore the so-called formal spiritual mas-
ter and disciple are not facsimiles of Brahma and Narada or Narada or
Vyasa. The relationship between Brahma and Narada is reality, while the
so-called formality is the relation between the cheater and cheated. It is
clearly mentioned herewith that Narada is not only well behaved, meek
and obedient, but is also self-controlled. One who is not self-controlled,
specifically in sex life, can neither become a disciple nor a spiritual master.
One must have disciplinary training in controlling speaking, anger, tongue,
mind, belly and the genitals. One who has controlled the particular senses
mentioned above is called a gosvami. Without becoming a gosvami one
can neither become a disciple nor a spiritual master. The so-called spiritual


--- Page 207 ---
Text 44] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 543
master without sense control is certainly the cheater, and the disciple of
such a so-called spiritual master is the cheated.

One should not think of Brahmaji as a dead great-grandfather, as we
have experience in this planet. He is the oldest great-grandfather, and he
is still living, and Narada is also living. The age of the inhabitants of the
Brahmaloka planet is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gita. The inhabitants of
this small planet earth can hardly calculate even the duration of one day
of Brahma.

TEXT 44
तसा इदं भागवतं पुराणं दशलक्षणम्‌ |
Mh भगवता प्राह प्रीतः पुत्राय भूतकृत्‌ ॥४४॥
tasma idam bhagavatam
puranam dasa-laksanam
proktam bhagavata praha
pritah putraya bhitta-krt

tasmai—thereupon; idam—this; bhagavatam—the glories of the Lord or
the science of the Lord; puranam— Vedic supplementary; dasa-laksapam—
ten characteristics; proktam—described; bhagavata—by the Personality of
Godhead; praha—said; pritah—in satisfaction; putraya—unto the son;
bhita-krt—the creator of the universe.

TRANSLATION
Thereupon the supplementary Vedic literature, Srimad-Bhagavatam,
which was described by the Personality of Godhead and contains ten
characteristics, was told by the father [ Brahma] to his son Narada with
satisfaction.
PURPORT

Although the Srimad-Bhagavatam was spoken in four verses, it had ten
characteristics which will be explained in the next chapter. In the four
verses it is first said that the Lord existed before the creation, and thus the
beginning of the Srimad-Bhagavatam includes the Vedanta aphorism,


--- Page 208 ---
544 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 9
janmadyasya. Janmadyasya is the beginning, yet the four verses in which
it is said that the Lord is the root of everything that be, beginning
from the creation up to the supreme abode of the Lord, naturally
explain the ten characteristics. One should not misunderstand by
wrong interpretations that the Lord spoke only four verses, and therefore
all the rest of the 17,994 verses are all useless. The ten characteristics, as
will be explained in the next chapter, require so many verses just to ex-
plain them properly. Brahmaji also advised Narada previously that he
should expand the idea that he had heard from Brahmaji. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu instructed this to Srila Riipa Gosvami in a nutshell, but the
disciple Riipa Gosvami expanded this very elaborately, and the same
subject was further expanded by Jiva Gosvami and even further by Sri
Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakur. We are just trying to follow in the foot-
steps of all these authorities. So Srimad-Bhagavatam is not like ordinary
fiction or mundane literature. It is unlimited in strength, and however one
may expand it to one’s own capacity, Bhagavatam still cannot be finished
by such expansion. Srimad-Bhagavatam, being the sound representation
of the Lord, is simultaneously explained in four verses, as well as in four
billions of verses all the same, inasmuch as the Lord is smaller than the
atom and bigger than the unlimited sky. Such is the potency of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
TEXT 45
नारद; प्राह अनये सरखत्यास्ते नष ।
ध्यायते ब्रह्म परमं न्यासायामिततेजसे 134
naradah praha munaye
sarasvatyas tate nrpa
dhyayate brahma [00707720171
vyasayamita-tejase

ndradah—the great sage Narada; praha—instructed; munaye—unto the
great sage; sarasvatyah—of the River Sarasvati; tate—on the bank; nrpa—
O King; dhyayate—unto the meditative; brahma— Absolute Truth; paramam
—the Supreme; vydsadya—unto Srila Vyasadeva; amita—unlimited; tejase—
unto the powerful.


--- Page 209 ---
Text 45] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 545
TRANSLATION
In succession, O King, the great sage, Narada, instructed Srimad-
Bhagavatam unto the unlimitedly powerful Vyasadeva, who meditated in
devotional service upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute
Truth, on the bank of the River Sarasvati.
PURPORT
In the Fifth Chapter of the First Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, Narada
instructed the great sage Vyasadeva as follows:
atho maha-bhaga bhavan amogha-drk
Suci-sravah satya-rato dhrta-vratah
urukramas yakhila-bandha-muktaye
samadhinanusmara tad vicestitam
“0 greatly fortunate, pious philosopher, your name and fame are universal,
and you are fixed in the Absolute Truth with spotless character and in-
fallible vision. | ask you to meditate upon the activities of the Personality
of Godhead, whose activities are unparalleled.”

So in the disciplic succession of the Brahma-sampradaya, the practice
of yoga meditation is not neglected. But because the devotees are bhakti-
yogis, they do not undertake the trouble to meditate upon the impersonal
Brahman, but, as is indicated here, on Brahma Paramam or the Supreme
Brahman. Brahman realization begins from the impersonal effulgence, but
by further progress of such meditation, manifestation of the Supreme Soul,
Paramatma realization, takes place. And progressing further, realization of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is fixed. Sri Narada Muni, as the
spiritual master of Vyasadeva, knew very well the position of Vyasadeva,
and thus he certified the qualities of Srila Vyasadeva as fixed in the Abso-
lute Truth with great vow, etc. He advised meditation upon the transcen-
dental activities of the Lord. Impersonal Brahman has no activities, but the
Personality of Godhead has many activities, and all such activities are
transcendental without any tinge of material quality. If the activities of
the Supreme Brahman would have been material activities, then Narada
would not have advised Vyasadeva to meditate upon them. And the
Param Brahman is Lord Sri Krsna, as is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita.
In the Tenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, when Arjuna realized the


--- Page 210 ---
546 Srimad Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch.9
factual position of Lord Krsna, he addressed Lord Krsna in the following
words:
parariv brahma param dhama pavitrari paramar bhavan
purusam sasvatam divyam adi-devam ajar vibhum
ahus tvam rsayah sarve devarsir naradas tatha
asito devalo vyasah svayam caiva bravigi me (Bg. 10.12-13)
Arjuna summarized the purpose of the Bhagavad-gita by his realization of
Lord Sri Krsna and thus said, “My dear Personality of Godhead, You are
the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Original Person in the eternal form of
bliss and knowledge, and this is confirmed by Narada, Asita, Devala and
Vyasadeva, and, above all, Your personal self has also confirmed it.”

When Vyasadeva fixed his mind in meditation, he did it in bhakti-yoga
trance and actually saw the Supreme Person with maya, the illusory energy,
in contraposition. As we have discussed before, the Lord’s maya or
illusion is also a representation because maya has no existence without the
Lord. Darkness is not independent of light. Without light, no one can
experience the contraposition of darkness. But this maya or illusion can-
not overcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but stands apart from
Him (apasrayam).

Therefore, perfection of meditation is to realize the Personality of God-
head along with His transcendental activities. Meditation on the impersonal
Brahman is a troublesome business for the meditator, as is confirmed in
the Bhagavad-gita:

kleso ’dhikataras tesam avyaktasakta-cetasam
(Bg. 12.5)
TEXT 46
यदुताहं त्वया पृष्टो वैराजात्‌ पुरूषादिदम्‌ ।
यथाऽऽसी तदुपाख््यास्ते प्रश्ानन्यां ध FEET: 1951)
yad ८271077 tvaya prsto
vairgjat purusad idam
yathasit tad upakhyaste
prasnan anyars ca krtsnasah


--- Page 211 ---
Text 46] Answers by Citing the Lord’s Version 547

yat—what;uta—is, however; aham—1; tvaya—by you; prstah—1 am asked;
vairajat—from the universal form; purusat—from the Personality of God-
head; idam—this world; yatha—as it; asit—was; tat—that; upakhyaste—
I shall explain; prasnan—all the questions; anyan—others; ca—as well as;
krtsnasah—in great detail.

TRANSLATION

0 King, your questions as to how the universe became manifested
from the gigantic form of the Personality of Godhead, as well as other
questions, I shall answer in detail by the explanation of the four verses
already mentioned.

PURPORT

As stated in the beginning of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, this great tran-
scendental literature is the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic knowledge,
and therefore all questions that can be humanly possible regarding the
universal affairs, beginning from its creation, are all answered in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. It depends only on the qualification of the person
who explains. The ten divisions of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as explained by
the great speaker Srila Sukadeva Gosvami, are the limitation of all ques-
tions, and intelligent persons will derive all intellectual benefits from
them by proper utilization.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Ninth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Answers by Citing the
Lord’s Version.”


--- Page 212 ---
CHAPTER TEN
Bhagavatamis the Answer
to All Questions
TEXT 1
श्रीडुक Iam
अत्र सर्गो विसग॑श्च स्थानं पोषणमूतयः |
मन्वन्तरेशानुकथा निरोधो gimme: ॥ १॥
§ri suka uvaca
atra sargo visargas ca
sthanam posanam iitayah
manvantaresanukatha
nirodho muktir asrayah
sri Sukah uvdca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; atra—in this Srimad-
Bhagavatam; sargah—statement of the creation of the universe; visargah—
statement of subcreation; ca—also; sthanam—the planetary system;
posanam—protection; itayah—creative impetus; manvantara—changes of
Manus; iSa-anukathah—science of God; nirodhah—going back home, back
to Godhead 3 muktih—liberation; asrayah—the summum bonum.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: “In the Srimad-Bhagavatam there are ten divi-
sions of statements regarding the following: creation of the universe,
subcreation, planetary systems, protection by the Lord, creative impetus,
change of Manus, science of God, return to home, back to Godhead,
liberation, and the summum bonum.
TEXT 2
दश्चमस्य विशुद्धयथं नवानामिह लक्षणम्‌ |
वकि
वणंयन्ति মহাংমানঃ श्रुतेनार्थेन चाञ्जसा ॥ २ ॥
549


--- Page 213 ---
550 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
dasamasya visuddhy-arthar
navanam tha laksanam
varpayanti mahatmanah
Srutendrthena canjasa
dasamasya—of the summum bonum; visuddhi—isolation; artham—pur-
pose; navanam—of the other nine; iha—in this Srimad-Bhagavatam;
laksapam—symptoms; varnayanti—they describe; maha-atmanah— the great
sages; Srutena—by Vedic evidences; arthena—by direct explanation; ca—or;
afijasa—summarily.
TRANSLATION
In order to eliminate transcendence of the summum bonum, the
symptoms of the rest are described sometimes by Vedic inference, some-
times by direct explanation, and sometimes by summary explanation given
by the great sages.
TEXT 3
भूतमात्रन्द्रियधियां जन्म सगं उदाहतः |
ह्मणो TONITE: पौरुषः स्यतः ॥ ३॥
bhita-matrendriya-dhiyam
janma sarga uddahrtah
brahmano guna-vaisamyad
visargah paurusah smrtah
bhiuta— the five gross elements like the sky, etc.; matra—objects perceived
by the senses; indriya—the senses; dhiyam—of the mind; janma—creation;
sargah—manifestation; udahrtah—is called the creation; brahmanah—of
Brahma, the first purusa; guna-vaisamyat—by interaction of the three
modes of nature; visargah—recreation; paurusah—resultant activities:
smrtah— it is so known.
TRANSLATION
The elementary creation of sixteen items of matter—namely the five
elements [ fire, water, land, air and sky], sound, form, taste, smell, touch,
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin and mind—is known as sarga, whereas sub-
sequent resultant interaction of the modes of material nature is called
visarga.
PURPORT
In order to explain the ten divisional symptoms of the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, there are seven continuous verses. The first of these under


--- Page 214 ---
Text 4] Bhagavatam is the Answer 551
reference pertains to the sixteen elementary manifestations of earth,
water, etc., with material ego composed of material intelligence and
mind, and the subsequent creation is a result of the reactions of the above-
mentioned sixteen energies of the first purusa, the Maha-Visnu incarnation
of Govinda, as is later on explained by Brahma in his treatise the Brahma-
sarihita as follows:
yah karaparpava-jale bhajati sma yoga-
nidram ananta-jagadanda-saromakipah
adhara-saktim avalambya [0৫707 sva-mirtim
govindam adi-purusari tamahari bhajami (8.5. 5.47)

The first purusa incarnation of Govinda, Lord Krsna, known as the
Maha-Visnu, goes into a yogae-nidra mystic sleep, and the innumerable
universes are situated in potency in each and every hair hole of His tran-
scendental body.

As is mentioned in the previous verse, srutena (or with reference to the
Vedic conclusions), the creation is made possible from the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead directly by manifestation of His particular energies.
Without such a Vedic reference, the creation appears to be a product of
material nature, and this conclusion comes from a poor fund of knowledge.
From Vedic reference it is concluded that the origin of all energies (namely
internal, external, and marginal) is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
And as has been explained hereinbefore, the illusory conclusion is that
creation is made by the inert material nature. The Vedic conclusion is
transcendental light, whereas the non-Vedic conclusion is material dark-
ness. The internal potency of the Supreme Lord is identical with the
Supreme Lord, and the external potency is enlivened in contact with the
internal potency. The parts and parcels of the internal potency which react
in contact with the external potency are called the marginal potency, or
the living entities.

Thus the original creation is directly from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, or Param Brahman, and the secondary creation, as reactionary
resultant of the original ingredients, is made by Brahma, and the activities
of the whole universe are thus started.

TEXT 4
खितिर्दङष्टविजयः पोषणं तदनुग्रहः |
मन्वन्तराणि सद्धर्म ऊतयः कमेवासनाः || ४ ॥


--- Page 215 ---
552 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
sthitir vaikuntha-vijayah
posanari tad-enugrahah
manvantarani sad-dharma
itayah karma-vasanah

sthitth—right situation; vaikuntha-vijayah—victory of the Lord of Vai-
kuntha; posanam—maintenance; tat-anugrahah—His causeless mercy; man-
vantarani—reign of the Manus; sat-dharmah—perfect occupational duty;
iitayah—impetus to work; karma-vasanah— desire for fruitive work.

TRANSLATION
The right situation for the living entities is to obey the laws of the Lord
and thus be in perfect peace of mind under the protection of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The Manus and their laws are meant to give right
direction in life. The impetus of activity is the desire for fruitive work.
PURPORT

This material world is created, maintained for some time, and again
annihilated by the will of the Lord. The ingredients for creation and the
subordinate creator, Brahma, are first created by Lord Visnu in His first
and second incarnations. The first Purusa incarnation is Maha-Visnu, and
the second Purusa incarnation is the Garbhodakasayl Visnu, from whom
Brahma is created. The third Purusa avatara is the Ksirodakasayl Visnu,
who lives as the Supersoul of everything in the universe and maintains the
creation generated by Brahma. Siva is one of the many sons of Brahma,
and he annihilates the creation. Therefore the original creator of the
universe is Visnu, and He is also maintainer of the created beings by His
causeless mercy. As such, it is the duty of all conditioned souls to ac-
knowledge the victory of the Lord and thus become pure devotees and
live peacefully in this world where miseries and dangers of life are always
in existence. The conditioned souls who take this material creation as the
place for satisfaction of the senses, and thus are illusioned by the external
energy of Visnu, remain again to be subjected to laws of material nature,
creation and destruction.

In the Bhagavad-gita it is said that beginning from the topmost planet
of this universe down to the lowest planet, the Patalaloka, all are de-
structible, and the conditioned souls may travel in space either by good or
bad work or by the modern spacecraft, but they are sure to die everywhere,


--- Page 216 ---
Text 5] Bhagavatam is the Answer 553
although the duration of life in different planets is different. The only
means to attain eternal life is to go back home, back to Godhead, where
there is no more rebirth as in the material planets. The conditioned souls,
being uhaware of this very simple fact by forgetting the relationship with
the Lord of Vaikuntha, try to plan out a permanent life in this material
world, being illusioned by the external energy, and thus become engaged
in various types of economic and religious development of life, forgetting
that they are meant for going back home, back to Godhead. This forgetful-
ness is so strong due to the influence of maya that the conditioned souls
do not at all want to go back to Godhead. By sense enjoyment they
become victims of birth and death repeatedly and thus spoil human lives
which are chances for going back to Visnu. The directive scriptures made
by the Manus at different ages and millenniums are called sad-dharma,
good guidance for the human beings, who should take up the advantage of
all the revealed scriptures on their own interest to make life’s successful
termination. The creation is not false, but it is a temporary manifestation
just to give a chance for the conditioned souls to go back to Godhead. And
the desire to go back to Godhead and functions performed in that direction
are the right path of work. When such a regulative path is accepted, the
Lord gives all protection to His devotees by His causeless mercy, while the
nondevotees risk their own activities to bind themselves up in the chain of
fruitive reactions. The word sad-dharma is significant in this connection.
Sad-dharma, or duty performed for going back to Godhead and thus
becoming His unalloyed devotee, is the only pious activity; all others may
be pretendingly pious, but actually they are not so. It is for this reason
only that the Lord advises in the Bhagavad-gita to give up all so-called
religious activities and be completely engaged in the devotional service of
the Lord in order to become free from all anxieties due to the dangerous
life of material existence. To work situated in the sad-dharma is the right
direction of life. One’s aim of life should be to go back home, back to
Godhead, and not be subjected to repeated births and deaths in the ma-
terial world by getting good or bad bodies for temporary existence.
Herein lies the intelligence of human life, and one should desire the activi-
ties of life in that way.
TEXT 5
अवतारानुचरितं. हरेशवस्यानुवतिनाम्‌ |
पुंसामीशकथाः प्रोक्ता नानाख्यानोप कंहिताः ॥ ५॥


--- Page 217 ---
554 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
avataranucaritam
hares casyanuvartinam
pumsam iSa-kathah prokta
nanakhyanopabrinhitah
avatara—incarnation of Godhead; anucaritam—activities; hareh—of the
Personality of Godhead; ca—also; asya—of His; anuvartinam—followers;
pumsam—of the persons; isa-kathah—science of God; proktah—is said;
nana—various; akhyyana—narrations; upabrmhitah— described.
TRANSLATION
The science of God describes the incarnations of the Personality of
Godhead and His different activities together with the activities of His
great devotees.
PURPORT
During the course of existence of the cosmic manifestation, the chro-
nology of history is created, recording the activities of the living entities.
People in general have a tendency to learn history and narrations of
different men and times, but due to lack of knowledge in the science of
Godhead, they are not apt to study the history of the incarnations of the
Personality of Godhead. It should always be remembered that the material
creation is created for the salvation of the conditioned souls. The merciful
Lord, out of His causeless mercy, descends in the material world to various
planets and acts for the salvation of the conditioned souls. That makes the
history and narrations worth reading. Srimad-Bhagavatam offers such
transcendental topics of the Lord in relationship with great devotees.
Therefore the topics of the devotees and the Lord are to be given respect-
ful aural reception.
TEXT 6
निरोधोऽस्यानुश्षयनमात्मनः सह शक्तिभिः |
ক
धुक्तिरदित्वान्यथारूपं खरूपेण व्यवस्थितिः ॥ ६ ॥
nirodho ’syanusayanam
atmanah saha $aktibhih
muktir hitvanyatha riipam
sva-riipena vyavasthitih


--- Page 218 ---
Text 6] Bhagavatam is the Answer 555
nirodhah—winding up of the cosmic manifestation; asya—of His;
anusayanam—lying down of the Purusa incarnation Maha-Visnu in mystic
slumber; atmanah—of the living entities; saha—along with; saktibhih— with
the energies; muktih—liberation; hitva—giving up; anyatha—otherwise;
ripam— form; sva-riipepa—in constitutional form; vyavasthitih—permanent
situation.
TRANSLATION
When the living entity, along with his conditional living tendency,
merges with the mystic lying down of the Maha-Visnu, it is called the
winding up of the cosmic manifestation. Liberation is the permanent
situation of the form of the living entity after giving up the changeable
material gross and subtle bodies.
PURPORT
As we have discussed several times, there are two types of living entities.
Most of them are ever liberated, or nitya-muktas, while some of them are
ever conditioned. The ever conditioned souls are apt to develop a mentality
of lording over the material nature, and therefore the material cosmic
creation is manifested to give the ever conditioned souls two kinds of
facilities. One facility is that the conditioned soul can act according to his
tendency to lord it over the cosmic manifestation, and the other facility
is to give a chance to the conditioned soul to come back to Godhead. So
after the winding up of the cosmic manifestation, most of the conditioned
souls merge into the existence of the Maha-Vignu Personality of Godhead,
lying in His mystic slumber, to be recreated again when there will be the
next creation. But some of the conditioned souls, who follow the tran-
scendental sound in the form of Vedic literatures and are thus able to go
back to Godhead, attain spiritual and original bodies after quitting the
material conditional gross and subtle bodies. The material conditional
bodies develop out of the living entities’ forgetfulness of the relationship
with Godhead, and during the course of the cosmic manifestation, the
conditioned souls are given a chance to revive their original status of life
by the help of revealed scriptures, so mercifully compiled by the Lord in
His different incarnations. Reading or hearing of such transcendental
literatures helps one to become liberated even in the conditional state of
material existence. The whole Vedic literatures aim at devotional service
of the Personality of Godhead, and as soon as one is fixed to this point, he
at once becomes liberated from the conditional life. The material gross


--- Page 219 ---
556 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
and subtle forms are simply due to ignorance of the conditioned soul, and
as soon as he is fixed in the devotional service of the Lord, he becomes
eligible to be freed from the conditioned state. This devotional service is
transcendental attraction for the Supreme on account of the latter’s being
the source of all pleasing humors. Everyone is after some pleasure of humor
for enjoyment, but does not know the supreme source of all attraction
(raso vai sa 70507 hy evayar labdhvanandi bhavati). The Vedic hymns
inform everyone about the supreme source of all pleasure; the unlimited
fountainhead of all pleasure is the Personality of Godhead, and one who is
fortunate enough to get this information through the transcendental
literatures like Srimad-Bhagavatam becomes permanently liberated to
occupy one’s proper place in the kingdom of God.
TEXT 7
आभासश्च निरोधश्च यनो 5 स्त्यध्यवसीयते ।
स आश्रयः परं त्रह्म परमात्मेति शन्यते ॥ ७॥
2616505 ca nirodhas ca
yato ’sty adhyavasiyate
sa asrayah param brahma
paramatmeti Sabdyate

abhasah—the cosmic manifestation; ca—and; nirodhah—and its winding
up; ca—also; yatah—from the source; asti—is; adhyavasiyate—become
manifested; sah—He; asrayah—reservoir; param—the Supreme; brahma—
Being; paramatma—the Supersoul; iti—thus; sabdyate—called.

TRANSLATION
The supreme one who is celebrated as the Supreme Being or the
Supreme Soul is the supreme source of the cosmic manifestation as well as
its reservoir and winding up. Thus He is the Supreme Fountainhead
Absolute Truth.
PURPORT

Synonyms of the supreme source of all energies, as explained in the very

beginning of the Srimad-Bhagatavam, are janmadyasya yatah, vadanti tat


--- Page 220 ---
Text 7] Bhagavatam is the Answer 557
tattvavidas tattvam yaj 10720771 advayam, brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan
iti Sabdyate, called Param Brahma, Paramatma or Bhagavan. The word iti
used here in the verse completes the synonyms and thus indicates Bhagavan.
This will be further explained in the later verses, but this Bhagavan means
ultimately Lord Krsna because the Srimad-Bhagavatam has already accepted
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Krsna. Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam.
The original source of all energies or the summum bonum is the Absolute
Truth which is called Param Brahma, etc., and Bhagavan is the last word of
the Absolute Truth. But even with the synonyms of Bhagavan, such as
Narayana, Visnu, Purusa, etc., the last word is Krsna, as confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita: ৫1807 sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvari pravartate, etc.
Besides that, the Srimad-Bhagavatam is the representation of Lord Krsna
as sound incarnation of the Lord. Krspe sva-dhamopagate dharma-
jAaanadibhih saha/ kalau nasta-drsam esah puranarko’dhunoditah. Thus by
general conclusion Lord Krsna isthe ultimate source of all energies, and the
word Krsna means that. And to explain Krsna or the science of Krsna, the
Srimad-Bhagavatam has been prepared. In the First Canto of $rimad-
Bhagavatam this truth is indicated in the questions and answers by Suta
Gosvami and great sages like Saunaka, etc., and in the First and Second
Chapters of the canto this is explained. In the Third Chapter this subject
is more explicit, and in the Fourth Chapter even more explicit. In the
Second Canto the Absolute Truth as the Personality of Godhead is further
emphasized, and the indication is the Supreme Lord Krsna. The summary
of Srimad-Bhagavatam in four verses, as we have already discussed, is
succinct. This Supreme Personality of Godhead in the ultimate issue is
confirmed by Brahma in his Brahma-sarihita as i§varah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-inanda-vigrahah. So it is concluded in the Third Canto of the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. The complete subject matter is elaborately explained
in the Tenth and Eleventh Cantos of the Srimad-Bhagavatam. In the matter
of changes of the Manus of manvantaras, such as the Svayambhuva manvan-
tara and Caksusa manvantara, as they are discussed in the Third, Fourth,
Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Cantos of Srimad-Bhagavatam, Lord Krsna is
indicated. In the Eighth Canto Vaivasvata manvantara explains the same
subject indirectly, and in the Ninth Canto the same purport is there. In the
Twelfth Canto the same is further explained, specifically regarding the
different incarnations of the Lord. Thus it is concluded by studying the
complete Srimad-Bhagavatam that Lord Sri Krsna is the ultimate summum
bonum, or the ultimate source of all energy. And according to the grades
of worshipers, the indications of the nomenclature may be differently
explained as Narayana, Brahma, Paramatma, etc.


--- Page 221 ---
558 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
TEXT 8
योऽध्यात्मिकोऽयं पुरुषः सोऽसावेवाधिदेविकः।
यस्तत्रोभयदिच्छेदः पुरुषो द्याधिमोतिकः || ८ ॥
yo ‘dhyatmiko ‘yam purusah
so sav evadhidawikah
yas tatrobhayavicchedah
puruso hyadhibhautikah
yah—one who; adhyatmikah—is possessed of the sense organs; ayam—
this; purusah—personality; sah—he: asau—that; eva—also; adhidaivikah—
controlling deity ; yah—that which; tatra—there;ubhaya—of both: vicchedah
—separation; purusah—person; hi—for; adhibhautikah—the visible body or
the embodied living entity.
TRANSLATION
The individual person possessing different instruments of senses is
called the adhyatmic person, and the individual controlling deity of the
senses is called adhidaivic. And the embodiment which is seen on the eye-
balls is called the adhibhautic person.
PURPORT
The supreme controlling summum bonum is the Personality of Godhead
in His plenary portion of Paramatma or the Supersoul manifestation. In
the Bhagavad-gita it is said:
athavd bahunaitena kim jidtena tavarjuna
vistabhyaham idam krtsnam 61৫71886110 sthito jagat
“All the controlling deities like Visnu, Brahma and Siva are different
manifestations of the Paramatma feature of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Sri Krsna, and He exhibits himself in such manners by entering
into each and every universe generated from Him.” (Bg. 10.42) But still
apparently there are divisions of the controller and controlled. For
example, in the food-controlling department the controller of food is a
person made of the same ingredients as the person who is controlled.
Similarly, cach and every individual in the material world is controlled by


--- Page 222 ---
Text 9] Bhagavatam is the Answer 559
the higher demigods. For example, we have our senses, but the senses are
controlled by superior controlling deities. We cannot see without light,
and the supreme controller of light is the sun. The sun-god is in the sun
planet, and we, the individual human beings or any other being on this
earth, are all controlled by the sun-god as far as our eyes are concerned.
Similarly, all the senses that we have are controlled by the superior demi-
gods, who are also as much living entities as we are, but one is empowered
while the other is controlled. The controlled living entity is called the
adhyatmic person, and the controller is called the adhidaivic person. All
these positions in the material world are due to different fruitive activities.
Any individual living being can become the sun-god or even Brahma or any
other god in the upper planetary system by a higher grade of pious work,
and similarly one becomes controlled by the higher demigods by lower
grades of fruitive activities. So every individual living entity is subject to
the supreme control of the Paramatma, who puts everyone in different
positions of the controller and the controlled.

That which distinguishes the controller and controlled, i.e. the material
body, is called the adhibhautic purusa. The body is sometimes called
purusa, as is confirmed in the Vedas in the following hymn: “sa va esa
puruso ’‘nna-rasamaya.” This body is called anna-rasa embodiment. This
body depends on food. The living entity which is embodied does not eat
anything, however, because the owner is spirit in essence. The material
body requires replacement of matters for the wearing and tearing of the
mechanical body. Therefore the distinction between the individual living
entity and controlling planetary deities 18 in the anna-rasamaya body. The
sun may have a gigantic body, and the man may have a smaller body, but
all these visible bodies are made of matter;nonetheless, the sun-god and the
individual person related as the controller and the controlled are the same
spiritual parts and parcels of the Supreme Being, and it is the Supreme
Being who places different parts and parcels in different positions. And
thus the conclusion is that the Supreme Person is the shelter of all.

TEXT 9
एरूमेकतरामावे यदा नोपलभामहे ।
त्रितयं तत्र यो वेद्‌ स आत्मा खाश्रयाभ्रयः ॥ ९ ॥
ekam ekatarabhave
yada nopalabhamahe


--- Page 223 ---
560 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
tritayam tatra yo veda
sa atma svasrayasrayah
ekam—one; ekatara—another; abhave—:a the absence of; yada—because;
na—does not; upalabhamahe—perceptible; tritayam—in three stages; tatra—
there; yah—the one; veda—who knows; sah atma—the Supersoul; sva—own;
asraya—shelter; asrayah—of the shelter.
TRANSLATION
All the above-mentioned three stages of different living entities are
interdependent. In the absence of one, the other is not understood. And
the Supreme Being who is seeing every one of them as the shelter of the
shelter is independent of all, and therefore He is the supreme shelter.
PURPORT
So there are innumerable living entities, one dependent on the other in
the relationship of the controlled and the controller. But without the
medium of perception, no one can know or understand who is the con-
trolled and who is the controller. For example, the sun controls the
power of our vision, and we can see the sun because the sun has its body,
and the sunlight is useful only because we have eyes. Without our having
eyes, the sunlight is useless, and without sunlight the eyes are useless.
Thus they are interdependent, and neither of them is independent. There-
fore the natural question arises concerning who made them interdepen-
dent, and one who has made such a relationship of interdependence must
be ultimately completely independent. As it is stated in the beginning of
the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the ultimate source of all interdependent objec-
tives is the complete independent subject. This ultimate source of all inter-
dependence is the Supreme Truth or Paramatma, the Supersoul, who is not
dependent on anything else. He is svasrayasrayah. He is only dependent
on His self, and thus He is the supreme shelter of everything. Although
Paramatma or Brahman are subordinate to Bhagavan, because Bhagavan
is Purusottama or the Superperson, He is the source of the Supersoul also.
In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 15.18) Lord Krsna says that He is the Purusottama
and the source of everything, and thus it is concluded that इ Krsna is the
ultimate source and shelter of all entities including the Supersoul or
Supreme Brahman. Even accepting that there is no difference between the


--- Page 224 ---
Text 10] Bhagavatam is the Answer 561
Supersoul and the individual soul, the individual soul is dependent on the
Supersoul for being liberated from the illusion of material energy. The
individual is under the clutches of illusory energy, and therefore although
qualitatively one with the Supersoul, he is under the illusion of identifying
himself with matter. And to get out of this illusory conception of factual
life, the individual soul has to depend on the Supersoul to be recognized as
one with Him. In that sense also the Supersoul is the supreme shelter. And
there is no doubt about it.

The individual living entity or the jiva is always dependent on the
Supersoul Paramatma because the individual soul forgets his spiritual
identity whereas the Supersoul Paramatma does not forget His transcen-
dental position. In the Bhagavad-gita these separate positions of the jiva-
atma and the paramatma are specifically mentioned. In the Fourth Chapter,
Arjuna, the jiva soul, is represented as forgetful of his many, many pre-
vious births, but the Lord, the Supersoul, is not forgetful. The Lord even
remembers when He taught the Bhagavad-gita to the sun-god some billions
of years before. The Lord can remember such millions and billions of
years, as is stated in the Bhagavad-gita as follows:

vedahari samatitani vartamanani carjuna
bhavisyani ca bhittani mar tu veda na kascana
The Lord in His eternal blissful body of knowledge is fully aware of all
that happened in the past, and that which is going on at the present as
well as what will happen in the future. And in spite of His becoming the
shelter of both the Paramatma and Brahman, persons with a poor fund
of knowledge are unable to understand Him as He is.

The propaganda of the identity of cosmic consciousness with the con-
sciousness of the individual living entities is completely misleading because
even a person or individual soul like Arjuna could not remember his past
deeds, although he is always with the Lord. And what can the tiny
ordinary man know about his past, present and future, falsely claiming to
be one with the cosmic consciousness.

TEXT 10
पुरुषोऽण्डं बिनिभिय यदासौ स बिनिर्ग॑तः ।
आत्मनोऽयनमन्विच्छनपोऽसरा्ीच्छुचिः शुचीः १०


--- Page 225 ---
562 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
puruso 11007 vinirbhidya
yadasau sa vinirgatah
atmano ’yanam anvicchann
apo ’sraksicchucih sucih
purusah—the Supreme Person, Paramatma; andam—the universes; vini-
rbhidya—making them each separately situated; yada—when; asau—the
same; sah—He (the Lord); vinirgatah—came out; atmanah—of Himself;
ayanam—lying in place; anvicchan—desiring; apah—water; asraksit—created;
Sucih—the most pure; $ucth—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
The gigantic universal form of the Lord [Maha-Visnu], which came
out of the causal ocean, the place of appearance of the first purusa-
avatara, after separating the different universes, entered into each of the
separate universes, desiring to lie on the created transcendental water
[Garbhodaka].
PURPORT
After analysis of the living entities and the Supreme Lord Paramatma,
the independent source of all other living beings, Srila Sukadeva Gosvami
is now presenting the prime necessity for devotional service of the Lord,
which is the only occupational business of all living entities. The Supreme
Lord Sri Krsna and all His plenary portions and extensions of plenary
portions are nondifferent from one another, and thus the supreme inde-
pendence is there in each and every one of them. In order to prove this,
Sukadeva Gosvami (as promised to King Pariksit) describes herein the
independence of the Purusa-Avatara Personality of Godhead, even in the
sphere of the material creation. Such activities of the Lord are also
transcendental, and therefore they are also lila, or pastimes, of the absolute
Lord. Such pastimes of the Lord are very conducive to the hearers for
self-realization in the field of devotional service. Some may argue, why not
then relish the transcendental lila of the Lord as exhibited in the land of
Mathura and Vrndavana, which are sweeter than anything in the world?
Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakur replies that the pastimes of the Lord
in Vrndavana are meant to be relished by advanced devotees of the Lord.
Neophyte devotees will misunderstand such supreme transcendental activi-
ties of the Lord, and therefore for the neophyte the Lord’s pastimes in


--- Page 226 ---
Text 10] Bhagavatam is the Answer 563
the material sphere related to creation, maintenance and destruction are
verily relishabde by the prakrta, or mundane devotees of the Lord. As the
yoga system mainly based on bodily exercises is meant for the person who
is too much attached to the bodily conception of existence, similarly the
pastimes of the Lord related to creation and destruction of the material
world are for those who are too much materially attached. For such
mundane creatures the functions of the body as well as the functions of
the cosmic world by physical laws in relationship with the Lord are also
therefore included in understanding the lawmaker, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The scientists explain the material functions by so many
technological terms of material law, but such blind scientists forget the
lawmaker. The Srimad-Bhagavatam points out the lawmaker. One should
not be amazed by the mechanical arrangement of the complicated engine
or dynamo, but one should be praising the engineer who creates such a
wonderful working machine. That is the difference between the devotee
and nondevotee. Devotees are always full with praising the Lord who
directs the physical laws. In the Bhagavad-gita the direction of the Lord
upon the material nature is described as follows:
mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sacaracaram
hetunanena kaunteya jagad viparivartate.

“The material nature full of physical laws is one of My different energies;
therefore it is neither independent nor blind. Because | am transcendentally
all-powerful, simply by My glancing over the material nature, the physical
laws of nature work so wonderfully. The actions and reactions of the
physicallaws work on that account, and thus the material world is created,
maintained and annihilated again and again.”

Men with poor fund of knowledge, however, become astonished by
studying the physical laws both within the construction of the individual
body as well as the cosmic manifestation and foolishly decry the existence
of God, taking it for granted that the physical laws are independent without
any metaphysical control. The Bhagavad-gita replies to this foolishness in
the following words:

avajananti mam midha manusim tanum asritam
param bhavam ajananto mama bhiita-mahesvaram.
“The foolish men [miadhah] do not know the Personality of Godhead in
His eternal form of bliss and knowledge.” The foolish man thinks of the


--- Page 227 ---
564 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Cante 2, Ch. 10
transcendental body of the Lord as something like his own, and therefore
he cannot think of the Lord’s unlimited power of control, even though [६
is not visible in the acting of the physical laws. The Lord is, however,
visible to the naked eyes of the people in general when lle descends
Himself by 1115 own personal potency. Lord Krsna incarnated Himself as
He is and played very wonderful parts as the Lord Himself, and the
Bhagavad-gita concerns such wonderful actions and knowledge, and yet
foolish men will not accept Lord Krsna as the Supreme Lord. Generally
they consider the infinitesimal and infinite features of the Lord because
they themselves are unable to become either the infinitesimal or the
infinite, but one should know that the infinite and infinitesimal sizes of
the Lord are not His highest glories. The most wonderful manifestation of
the Lord’s power is exhibited when the infinite Lord becomes visible to
our eyes as one of us. Yet 1115 activities are different from those of the
finite beings. To lift a mountain at the age of six years or to marry
sixteen thousand wives in 1115 prime of youth are some of the examples of
His infinite energy, but the miidhas, after seeing them or hearing about
them, decry them as legendary and take the Lord as one of them. They
cannot understand that the Lord Sri Krsna, although in the form of a
human being by His own potency, is still the Supreme Lord with full
potency as supreme controller.

When, however, the madhas give submissive aural reception to the
messages of the Lord as in the mad. Bhagavad gita or in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam through the channel of disciplic succession, such midhas also
becorhe devotees of the Lord by the grace of His pure devotees. And for
this reason only, either in the Bhagavad-gita or in the Srimad-Bhagavatam,
the pastimes of the Lord in the material world are delineated for the
benefit of those men with a poor fund of knowledge.

TEXT 11
IAI खयुष्टार ARRAS |
तेन नारायणो नाम यदापः पुरुषोद्भवाः 1220
tasv avatsit sva-srstasu
sahasram parivatsaran
tena narayano nama
yad apah purusodbhavah


--- Page 228 ---
Text 12] Bhagavatam is the Answer 565
tasu—in that; avatsit—resided; sva—own; srstasu—in the matter of crea-
tion; sahasram—one thousand; parivatsaran—years of His measurement;
tena—for that reason; narayanah—the Personality of Godhead named
Narayana; nadma—name; yat—because; apah—water; purusa-udbhavah—
emanated from the Supreme Person.
TRANSLATION
That Supreme Person is not impersonal and therefore is distinctively a
nara, or person. Therefore the transcendental water created from the
Supreme Nara is known as nira. And because He lies down on that water,
He is known as Narayana.
TEXT 12
्रन्यं कर्म च कालश्च खभायो जीव एव च |
यदनुग्रहतः सन्ति न सन्ति यदुपेक्षया ॥१२॥
dravyam karma ca 645 ca
sva-bhavo jiva eva ca
yad-anugrahatah santi
na santi yad-upeksaya
dravyam—physical elements; karma—action; ca—and; kalah—time; ca—
also; sva-bhavah jivah—the living entities; eva—certainly; ca—also: yat—
whose; anugrahatah—by the mercy of; santi—exist; na—does not; santi—
exist; yat-upeksaya—by negligence.
TRANSLATION
One should know definitely that all material ingredients, activities,
time, modes, and the living entities who are meant to enjoy them all,
exist by His mercy only, and as soon as He does not care for them, every-
thing becomes nonexistent.
PURPORT
The living entities are the enjoyers of the material ingredients, time,
modes, etc., because they want to lord it over the material nature. The


--- Page 229 ---
566 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
Lord is the supreme enjoyer, and the living entitics are meant to assist the
Lord in His enjoyment and thus participate in the transcendental enjoy-
ment of everyone. The enjoyer and the enjoyed both participate in enjoy-
ment, but, deluded by the illusory energy, the living entities want to
become the enjoyer like the Lord, although they are not meant for such
enjoyment. The jivas or the living entities are mentioned in the Bhagavad-
gita as the superior nature or para prekrti of the Lord, and so also it is
mentioned in the Visnu Purana. Therefore the living entities are never the
purusas, or the factual enjoyers. As such, the spirit of enjoyment by the
living entity in the material world is false. In the spiritual world the living
entities are pure in nature, and therefore they are associates in the enjoy-
ment of the Supreme Lord. In the material world the spirit of enjoyment
by the living entities by dint of their own actions (karma) becomes
gradually faded by the laws of nature, and thus the illusory energy dictates
in the ear of the conditioned souls to become one with the Lord. This is
the last snare of the illusory energy. When the last illusion is also cleared
off by the mercy of the Lord, the living entity again becomes reinstated in
his original position and thus becomes actually liberated. And for this
attainment of liberation from the material clutches, the Lord creates the
material world, maintains it for some time (one thousand years of His
measurement, as is stated in the previous verse), and then again annihilates
it by His will. The living entities are therefore completely dependent on
the mercy of the Lord, and all their so-called enjoyments by scientific
improvement are crushed into dust when the Lord desires.
TEXT 13
एको नानात्वमन्िच्छन्‌ योगतल्पात्‌ सयुत्थितः।
वीयं हिरण्मयं देवो मायया व्यसृजत्‌ त्रिधा ॥१३॥
eko nanatvam anvicchan
yoga-talpat samutthitah
viryari hiranmayarm devo
mdyaya vyasrjat tridha
ekah—Ile¢, one alone; nanatvam—varieties; anvicchan—so desiring; yoga-
talpat—from the bedstead of mystic slumber; samutthitah— thus generated;
viryam—the semina;hirapmayam—golden hue; devah— the demigod; mayaya
—by the external energy; vyasrjat—perfectly created; tridha—in three fea-
tures.


--- Page 230 ---
Text 13] Bhagavatam is the Answer 567
TRANSLATION
The Lord, while lying on His bed of mystic slumber, generated the
seminal symbol, golden in hue, through external energy out of His desire
to manifest varieties of living entities from Himself alone.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gita the creation and annihilation of the material world
are stated as follows:
sarva-bhittani kaunteya [01010188778 yanti mamikam
kalpaksaye punas tani kalpadau visrjamy aham
prakrtim svam avastabhya visrjami punah punah
bhita-gramam imam krtsnam avasarn prakrter vasat.
(Bg. 9.7-8)

“At the end of each millennium the creative forces, namely the material
nature as well as the living entities who struggle in the material nature, all
merge together into the transcendental body of the Lord, and again when
the Lord desires to manifest them, all of them are again displayed by the
1,010.

“Therefore the material nature is working under the control of the Lord.
All of them, under the agency of material nature and under the control of
the Lord, are thus repeatedly created and annihilated by the will of the
Lord.”

As such, before the creation or manifestation of the material cosmic
world, the Lord exists as total energy (mahasamasti), and thus desiring
Himself to be diffused to many, He expands Himself further into multi-
total energy (samasti), and from the multi-total energy He further expands
Himself into individuals in three dimensions, namely adhyatmic, adhidaivic
and adhibhautic, as explained before (vyasti). As such, the whole creation
and the creative energies are nondifferent and different simultaneously.
Because everything is an emanation from Him (the Maha-Visnu or
Mahasamasti), nothing of the cosmic energies is different from Him; but
all such expanded energies have specific functions and display as designed
by the Lord, and therefore they are simultaneously different from the
Lord. The living entities are also similar energy (marginal potency) of the
Lord, and thus they are simultaneously one and different from Him.

At the stage of nonmanifestation, the living energies remain potent in
the Lord, and when they are let loose in the cosmic manifestation they are
exhibited differently in terms of different desires under the modes of


--- Page 231 ---
568 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
nature. Such differential manifestations of the living energies are con-
ditional states of the living entities. The liberated living entities, however,
in the sandtana or eternal manifestation, are unconditionally surrendered
souls, and therefore they are not subject to the conditions of creation and
annihilation. So this creation takes place by the glance of the Lord from
His bedstead of mystic slumber. And thus all the universes and the lord of
the universe, Brahma, are again and again manifested and annihilated.
TEXT 14
अधिदवमथाध्यात्ममधिभूतमिति wg: |
अथैकं पौरुषं वीयं त्रिधाभियत বস্তুত ॥१४॥
adhidaivam athadhyatmam
adhibhitam iti prabhuh
athaikari paurusari viryari
tridhabhidyata tac chrpu
adhidaivam—the controlling entities; atha—now; adhyatmam—the con-
trolled entities; adhibhiitam—the material bodies; iti—thus; prabhuh—the
Lord; atha—in this way; ekam—one only; paurusam—of His Lordship;
viryam—potency; tridha—in three; abhidyata—divided; tat—that; srnu—
just hear from me.
TRANSLATION
Just hear from me how the potency of His Lordship divides one into
three, called by the names controlling entities, controlled entities and the
material bodies, in the manner mentioned above.
TEXT 15
अन्तः शरीर आकाशात्‌ पुरुषस्य विचेष्टतः ।
ओजः सदो बलं जज्ञे ततः प्राणो महानसुः ॥१५॥
antah $arira akasat
purusasya vicestatah
ojah saho ९०1०7 [गट
tatah prano mahan asuh


--- Page 232 ---
Text 16] Bhagavatam is the Answer 569

antah $artre—within the body; akasat—from the sky; purusasya—of
Maha-Visnu; vicestatah—while so trying, or willing; ojah—energy of the
senses; sahah—mental force; balam—bodily strength; jajiie—generated;
tatah—thereafter; pranah—living force; mahan asuh—the fountainhead of
everyone's life.

TRANSLATION
From the sky situated within the transcendental body of the mani-
festing Maha-Visnu, sense energy, mental force and bodily strength are all
generated, as well as the sum total of the fountainhead of the total living
force.
TEXT 16
अनुप्राणन्ति यं प्राणाः प्राणन्तं सर्वजन्तुषु ।
अपानन्तमपानन्ति नरदेवमिवानुगाः ॥१६॥
anu prananti yam pranah
pranantam sarva-jantusu
apanantam apananti
nara-devam ivanugah

anu prapanti—follow the living symptoms; yam— whom; pranah—senses;
pranantam—endeavoring; sarva-jantusu—in all living entities; apanantam—
stop endeavoring; apananti—all others stop; nara-devam—the king; iva—
like; anugah—the followers.

TRANSLATION
As the followers of the king follow their lord, similarly when the total
energy is in motion, all other living entities move, and when the total
energy stops endeavoring, all other living entities stop sense activities.
PURPORT

The individual living entities are completely dependent on the total
energy of the supreme purusa. No one has independent existence, just as
no electric lamp has independent effulgence. Each and every electrical
instrument depends fully on the total powerhouse; the total powerhouse


--- Page 233 ---
570 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
depends on the electric generating water reservation; water depends on the
cloud: the cloud depends on the sun; the sun depends on creation, and the
creation depends on the movement of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes.
TEXT 17
- +~,
श्राणेनाकषिपता क्षुत्‌ JS जायते विभोः |
पिपासतो जक्षतश्च प्राङ्मुखं निरभियत ॥ १७॥
pranenaksipata ksut-trd
antara jayate vibhoh
pipasato jaksatas ca
pran mukhari nirabhidyata
pranena—by the living force; akgipata—being agitated; ksut—hunger;
trt—thirst;antara—from within; jayate—generates; vibhoh—of the Supreme;
pipasatah—being desirous to quench the thirst; jaksatah—being desirous to
eat; ca—and; prak—at first; mukham—mouth; nirabhidyata— was opened.
TRANSLATION
The living force, being agitated by the virata purusa, generated hunger
and thirst, and when He desired to drink and eat, the mouth opened.
PURPORT
The process functioning for all living beings in the womb of the mother
to develop the sense organs and sense perceptions appears to follow the
same principles in the case of णठ (व purusa, the sum total of all living
entities. Therefore the supreme cause of all generation is not impersonal
or without desire. The desires for all kinds of sense perception and sense
organs are there in the Supreme, and they take place in the individual
persons. And this desire is the nature of the supreme living being, the
Absolute Truth. Because He has the sum total of all mouths, the individual
living entities have mouths. Similarly with all other senses and sense organs.
Here the mouth is the symbolic representation of all sense organs, and the
same principle is applicable in others also.


--- Page 234 ---
Text 19] Bhagavatam is the Answer 571
TEXT 18
gare निर्भिन्नं जिह्वा तत्रोपजायते ।
ततो नानारसो जज्ञे जिह्वया योऽधिगम्यते ॥१८॥
mukhatas talu nirbhinnam
Jihva tatropajayate
tato nana-raso jajie
jihvaya yo ’dhigamyate
mukhatah—from the mouth; talu—the palate; nirbhinnam—being gener-
ated; jihva—the tongue; tatra—thereupon; upajayate—becomes manifested;
tatah—thereupon; nana-rasah—various tastes; jajie—became manifested;
jihvaya—by the tongue; yah—which; adhigamyate—become relished.
TRANSLATION
From the mouth the palate became manifested, and thereupon the
tongue was also generated. After this all the different tastes came into
existence so that the tongue can relish them.
PURPORT
This gradual process of evolution suggests the explanation of the con-
trolling deities (adhidaiva) because Varuna is the controlling deity for all
relishable juices. Therefore the mouth becomes the resting place for the
tongue, which tastes all the different juices of which the controlling deity
is the Varuna. It suggests, therefore, that Varuna was also generated along
with the development of the tongue. The tongue and the palate, being instru-
mental, are adhibhiitam, or the forms of matter, but the functioning deity
who is a living entity is adhidaiva, whereas the person undergoing the
function is adhyatmic, and thus the three categories are also explained as
to their birth after the opening of the mouth of the virata purusa. The
four principles mentioned here in this verse serve to explain the three main
principles, namely the adhyatma, adhidaiva and adhibhiitam, as explained
before.
TEXT 19
दिविधोश्खतो qt वहिर्वाग्‌ व्याहृतं तयोः |
जले '्वौ বন্য सुचिरं निरोधः समजायत ॥१९॥


--- Page 235 ---
572 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
vivaksor mukhato ® 77720
vahnir vag vyahrtarii tayoh
jale caitasya suciram
nirodhah samajayata
vivaksoh—when there was a need to speak; mukhatah—from the mouth;
bhiimnah—of the Supreme; vahnih—the fire or the controlling deity of
fire; vak—vibration; vyahrtam—speeches; tayoh—by both; jale—in the
water; ca—however; etasya—of all these; suciram—very, very long time;
nirodhah—suspension; samajayata—did continue.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme desired to speak, there was vibration of speeches
from the mouth. Then the controlling deity Fire generated from the
mouth. But when He was lying in the water, all these functions remained
suspended.
PURPORT
The peculiarity of the gradual development of the different senses is
simultaneously being supported by their controlling deities. It is to be
understood, therefore, that the activities of the sense organs are controlled
by the will of the Supreme. The senses are, so to speak, offering a license
for the conditioned souls, and they are to use them properly under the
control of the controlling deity deputed by the Supreme Lord. One who
violates such controlling regulations has to be punished by degradation to
the lower status of life. Take, for example, the tongue and its controlling
deity Varuna. The tongue is meant for eating, and men, animals and birds
each have their different tastes because of different licenses. The taste of
the human beings and that of the swine are not on the same level. The
controlling deity, however, awards or certifies a particular type of body
when the particular living entity develops a taste in terms of different
modes of nature. If the human being develops taste without discrimination,
as does the swine, then the controlling deity is certainly certified for the
next term to award him the body of a swine. The swine accepts any kind
of foodstuff, including stools, and a human being who has developed such
indiscriminate taste must be prepared for a degraded life in the next life.
Such life is also God’s grace because the conditioned soul desired a body
like that for perfectly tasting a particular type of foodstuff, and if a man


--- Page 236 ---
Text 20] Bhagavatam is the Answer 573
gets the body of a swine it must be considered the grace of the Lord be-
cause He awards the facility. After death the body is offered by superior
control, and not blindly. A human being, therefore, must be on his guard
as to what sort of body he is going to have in the next life. Irresponsible
life of indiscrimination is risky, and that is the declaration of all scriptures.
TEXT 20
a _ 9 =
नासिके निरभियेतां दोधूयति नभखति ।
तत्र बायुगेन्धवहो घ्राणो नसि faa: ॥२०॥
nasike nirabhidyetam
dodhiiyati nabhasvati
tatra vayur gandha-vaho
ghrano nasi jighrksatah

nastke—in the nostrils; nirabhidyetam—being developed; dodhityate—
rapidly blowing; nabhasvati—air respiration; tatra—thereupon; vayuh—air;
gandha-vahah—smelling odor; ghranah—sense of smell; nasi—in the nose;
jighrksatah—desiring to smell odors.

TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when the supreme purusa desired to smell odors, the
nostrils and respiration generated, the nasal instrument and odors came
into existence, and the controlling deity of air, carrying smell, also became
manifested.
PURPORT

The nasal instrument, odor, and the controlling deity air, smelling, ctc.,
all became manifested simultaneously when the Lord desired to smell. The
Vedic mantras confirm this statement in the Upanisads’ statement that
everything is first desired by the Supreme, and then the subordinate living
entity can act upon it. The living entity can see only when the Lord sees,
the living entity can smell when the Lord smells, and so on. The idea is
that the living entity cannot do anything independently. He can simply
think of doing something independently, but he cannot act independently.
This independence of thinking is there by the grace of the Lord, but the


--- Page 237 ---
574 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
thinking can be given shape by the grace of the Lord, and therefore the
common saying is that man proposes and God disposes. The whole explana-
tion is on the subject of absolute dependence of the living entities and
absolute independence of the Supreme Lord. Less intelligent persons,
claiming to be on an equal level with God, first of all must prove them-
sclves to be absolute and independent, and then they must substantiate
their claim as one with God.
TEXT 21
- .
यदाऽऽत्मनि निरालोकमात्मानं च ea: |
-
निभिन्ने ह्यकषिणी तस्य ज्योतिश्वकु्गुणग्रदः 12201
yadatmani niralokam
atmanarn ca didrksatah
nirbhinne aksini tasya
Jyotis caksur guna-grahah
yada—while; atmani—unto Himself; niralokam—without any light;
atmanam—His own transcendental body; ca—also other bodily forms;
didrksatah—desired to look upon; nirbhinne—due to being sprouted;
aksini—of the eyes; tasya— of Him; jyotih—the sun; caksuh— the eyes; guna-
grahah—the power of seeing.
TRANSLATION
Thus when everything existed in darkness, the Lord desired to see
Himself and all that was created. Then the eyes, the illuminating god Sun,
the power of vision and the object of sight all became manifested.
PURPORT
The universe is by nature dense darkness, and therefore the total crea-
tion is called tamas or darkness. The night is the real feature of the uni-
verse, for then no one can see anything, including oneself. The Lord, out
of His causeless mercy, first desired to sce Himself and all the creation as
well, and thus the sun became manifested, the power of vision of all living
entities became possible, and the objects of vision were also manifested.
This means the whole phenomenal world became visible after the creation
of the sun.


--- Page 238 ---
Text 23] Bhagavatam is the Answer 575
TEXT 22
बोध्यमानस्य gira: |
कर्णो च निरभियेतां दिशः ie गुणग्रहः ॥२२॥
bodhyamanasya rsibhir
atmanas taj jighrksatah
karpau ca nirabhidyetarn
disah Srotram guna-grahah
bodhyamanasya—desiring to understand; rsibhih by the authorities;
atmanah—of the Supreme Being; tat—that; jighrksatah— when he desired
to take up; karnau—the ears; ca—also; nirabhidyetam—became manifested;
disah—the direction or the god of air; srotram—the power of hearing; guna-
grahah—and the objects of hearing.
TRANSLATION
By development of the desire of the great sages to know, the ears, the
power of hearing, the controlling deity of hearing, and the objects of
hearing became manifested. The great sages desired to hear about the Self.
PURPORT
As is stated in the Bhagavad-gita, one should try to know by advance-
ment of knowledge about the Supreme Lord, the summum bonum of
everything. Knowledge does not mean to know the laws of nature or of
physical knowledge that are working by the direction of the Lord. The
scientists are eager to hear about the physical laws that are working in the
material nature. They are eager to hear through the medium of radio and
television about the things which are taking place far away from them in
other planets, but they should know that the power of hearing and the
instruments for hearing were given to them by the Lord for hearing about
the Self, or about the Lord. Unfortunately the power of hearing is mis-
used in hearing the vibrations of mundane affairs. The great sages were
interested to hear about the Lord through Vedic knowledge and nothing
more. And that is the beginning of aural reception of knowledge.
TEXT 23
वस्तुनो FHS ASTRO |
9
जिषृक्षतस्त्वङ्‌ निर्भिन्ना त्यां रोममहीरुदाः |
तत्र चान्त्॑टिदतस्त्क्वा रन्धगुणो इतः ।२३॥


--- Page 239 ---
576 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
vastuno mrdu-kathinya-
laghu-gurvosnpa-sitatam
jighrksatas tvan nirbhinna
[05707 roma-mahiruhah
tatra cantar bahir vatas
tvaca labdha-guno vrtah
vastunah—of all matters; mrdu—softness; kathinya—hardness; laghu—
lightness; guru—heaviness; ospa—warmness; sitatam— coldness; jighrksatah
—desiring to perceive; tvak—touch sensation; nirbhinna—distributed; tasyam
—in the skin; roma—hairs on the body; mahi-ruhah—as well as the trees,
the controlling deities; tatra— there; ca—also; antah— within; bahih— outside;
vatah tvaca—sense of touch or the skin; labdha—having been perceived;
gunah—objects of sense perception; vrtah—generated.
TRANSLATION
When there was a desire to perceive the physical characteristics of
matter, as softness, hardness, warmth, cold, lightness, heaviness, etc., the
background of sensation, skin, the skin pores, the hairs on the body and
their controlling deities (the trees) were generated. Within and without the
skin there is an air covering through which sense perception became
prominent.
PURPORT
The physical characteristics of matter, as softness, etc., are subject of
the sense perception, and thus physical knowledge is the subject matter of
the touch sensation. One can measure the temperature of matter by
touching with the hand, and one can measure the weight of a matter by
lifting with the hand and thus estimate its heaviness or lightness. The
skin, the skin pores and the hairs on the body are all interdependent with
touch sensation. The air blowing within and without the skin is also an
object of sense perception. This sense perception is also the source of
knowledge, and therefore it is suggested here that physical or physiological
knowledge are subordinate to the knowledge of the Self, as above men-
tioned. Knowledge of Self can expand to the knowledge of phenomena,
but physical knowledge cannot lead to the knowledge of Self.
There is, however, intimate relation between the hairs on the body and
the vegetation on the body of the earth. The vegetables are nourishment


--- Page 240 ---
Text 24] Bhagavatam is the Answer হব
for the skin both as food and medicine, as is stated in the Third Canto:
“tvacam asya vinirblinnam vivisur dhispyam osadhih.”
TEXT 24
८९.
हस्तौ रुरुदतुस्तस्य नानाकर्मचिकीर्षया |
- ~
तयास्तु बरवानन्द्र॒ आदानयुभयान्नरयम्‌ nell
hastau ruruhatus tasya
nand-karma-cikirsaya
tayos tu balavan indra
adanam ubhayasrayam
hastau—the hands; ruruhatuh—manifested; tasya—His; nana— various;
karma—work; cikirsayd—being so desirous; tayoh—of them; tu—however;
balavan—to give strength; indrah—the demigod in heaven; adanam—
activities of the hand; ubhaya-asrayam—dependent on both the demigod
and the hand.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter when the Supreme Person desired to perform varieties of
work, the two hands and their controlling strength, and Indra, the demigod
in heaven, became manifested, as also the acts dependent on both the
hands and the demigod.
PURPORT
In every item we can note with profit that the sense organs of the living
entity are never independent in any stage. The Lord is known as the Lord
of the senses (Hrsikesa), and thus the sense organs of the living entities
become manifested by the will of the Lord, and each organ is controlled
by a certain type of demigod. No one, therefore, can claim any proprietor-
ship of the senses. The living entity is controlled by the senses, the senses
are controlled by the demigods, and the demigods are the servants of the
Supreme Lord. That is the arrangement in the system of creation. The
whole thing is controlled ultimately by the Supreme Lord, and there is no
independence either of the material nature or of the living entity. The
illusioned living entity who claims to be the lord of his senses is under the


--- Page 241 ---
578 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
clutches of the external energy of the Lord, and as long as a living entity
continues to be puffed up by his tiny existence, he is to be understood to
be under the stringent control of the external energy of the Lord, and there
is no question of liberation from the clutches of illusion (maya), however
much one may declare himself a liberated soul.
TEXT 25
गतिं जिगीषतः पादौ रुरदातेऽभिकामिकाम्‌ |
पद्यां यज्ञः खयं हव्यं कमभिः क्रियते चृभिः॥२५॥
8067 jigisatah padau
ruruhate “bhikamikam
padbhyarh yajiiah svayam havyarn
karmabhih kriyate nrbhih
gatim—movement; jigisatah—so desiring; padau—the legs; ruruhate—
being manifested; abhikamikam—purposeful; padbhyam—from the legs;
yajiiah—a certain demigod of the name Visnu; svayam— personally Himself;
havyam—the duties; karmabhih—by one’s occupational duty; kriyate—
caused to be done; nrbhih—by different human beings.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon, by so desiring to control movement, His legs became
manifested, and from the legs the controlling deity named Visnu generated.
By His personal supervision of this act, all varieties of human being are
busily engaged in dutiful occupational sacrifice.
PURPORT
Every human being is engaged in his particular occupational duty, and
such activities are visible as men go hither and thither. This is very promi-
nently visible in big cities of the world: people are going all over the
cities with great concern, from one place to another. This movement is
not only limited within the cities but is also visible outside the cities from
one place to another, or from one city to another, by different means of
vehicles. They are moving by cars and rails on the roads, by subways within
the carth and by planes in the sky for the purpose of business success. But


--- Page 242 ---
Text 25] Bhagavatam is the Answer 579
in all these movements the real purpose is to earn wealth for comfortable
life. And for this comfortable life the scientist is engaged, the artist is
engaged, the engineer is engaged, the technician is engaged, all in different
branches of human activity. But they do not know how to make the
activities purposeful to fulfill the mission of human life. Without knowing
this secret, all their activities are targetted towards the goal of sense
gratification without any control, and therefore by all this business they
are unknowingly entering into the deep regions of darkness.

Because they have been captivated by the external energy of the Su-
preme Lord, they have completely forgotten the Supreme Lord Visnu, and
thus they have taken it for granted that this life, as presently manifested
under the conditions of material nature, is all in all for enjoying the high-
est amount of sense gratification. But such a wrong conception of life
cannot give anyone the desired peace of mind, and thus in spite of all
advancement of knowledge by using the resources of nature, no one is
happy in this material civilization. The secret is that in every step they
should try to execute sacrifices towards the path of world peace. The
Bhagavad-gita also advises the same secret in the following verses.

sve sve karmany abhiratah samsiddhim labhate narah
sva-karmanir atah siddhir yatha vindati tac chrnu

yatah pravrttir bhiitanar yena sarvam 1007 tatam
sva-karmana tam abhyarcya siddhir vindati manavah

The Lord said to Arjuna, “Just hear from Me how one can attain the
highest perfection in life simply by discharging his specified occupational
duty.

“Man can attain the highest perfection of life by worshiping the Su-
preme Lord and by performing sacrifice for the sake of the Supreme Lord
Visnu, who is all-pervading, and by whose control every living being ac-
quires his desired facilities, according to his personal propensity.”

There is no harm in having different propensities in life because every
human being is proportionately independent to chalk out the plan of his
life by different occupations, but he should make it a point in his life to
know perfectly well that he is not independent absolutely. He is certainly
under the control of the Supreme Lord and under different agencies. And
knowing this, he should make it a point that by his work and the result of
his labor he serves the Supreme Lord as it is prescribed by the authorities
expert in the transcendental loving service of the Supreme Lord Visnu.
And for performing such occupational duties of life the leg is the most


--- Page 243 ---
580 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 2, Ch. 10
important instrument of the body because without the help of the legs no
one can move from one place to another, and therefore the Lord has
special control over the legs of all human beings, which are meant for
performing yajiias.
TEXT 26
o bY ~>
निरभियत शिश्नो वे sama: |
Iq आसीत्‌ कामानां प्रियं तदुभयाश्रयम्‌ ॥२६॥
nirabhidyata sisno vai
prajanandamrtarthinah
upastha asit kamanari
priyam tad-ubhaya&rayam
nirabhidyata—came out; sisnah—the genitals; vai— certainly; praja-ananda
—sex pleasure; amrta-arthinah— aspiring to taste the nectar; upasthah— the
male or female organ; asit—came into existence; kamanam—of the lustful;
priyam—very dear; tat—that; ubhaya-asrayam—shelter for both.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon, for sex pleasure, begetting offspring and tasting heavenly
nectar, the Lord developed the genitals, and thus there is the genital organ
and its controlling deity, the Prajapati. The object of sex pleasure and the
controlling deity are under the control of the genitals of the Lord.
PURPORT
The heavenly pleasure for the conditioned soul is sex pleasure, and this
pleasure is tasted by the genitals. The woman is the object of sex pleasure,
and both the sense perception of sex pleasure and the woman are con-
trolled by the Prajapati, who is under the control of the Lord’s genitals.
The impersonalist must know from this verse that the Lord is not imper-
sonal because he has His genitals on which all the pleasurable objects of
sex depend. No one would have taken the trouble to maintain children if
there were no taste of the heavenly nectar by means of sexual intercourse.
This material world is created to give a chance to the conditioned souls for
rejuvenation for going back home, back to Godhead, and therefore gen-


--- Page 244 ---
Text 27] Bhagavatam is the Answer 581
eralion of the living being is necessary for upkeep of the purpose of
creation. The sex pleasure is an impetus for such action, and as such one
can even serve the Lord in the act of such sex pleasure. The service is
counted when the children born out of such sex pleasure are properly
trained in God consciousness. The whole idea of material creation is to
revive the dormant God consciousness of the living entity. In other forms
of life, besides the human form, the sex pleasure is prominent only with-
out any motive of service for the mission of the Lord. But in the human
form of life the conditioned soul can render service to the Lord by creating
progeny suitable for the attainment of salvation. One can beget hundreds
of children and enjoy the celestial pleasure of sexual intercourse provided
he is able to train up the children in God consciousness. Otherwise be-
getting children is on the level of the swine. Rather, the swine is more
expert that the human being because the swine can beget a dozen piglets
at a time, whereas the human being can give birth to one only at a time.
So one should always remember that the genitals, sex pleasure, the woman,
and the offspring are all related in the service of the Lord, and one who
forgets this relationship in the service of the Supreme Lord becomes
subjected to the threefold miseries of material existence by the laws of
nature. Perception of sex pleasure is there even in the body of the dog,
but there is no sense of God consciousness. The human form of life is
distinct from that of the dog by the perception of God consciousness.
TEXT 27
उत्सिखशोर्धातुमलं निरभिद्यत वै गुदम्‌ ।
ततः पायुस्ततो मित्र उत्सर्ग उभयाश्रयः ॥ २७]
utsisrksor dhatu-malari
nirabhidyata vai gudam
tatah payus tato mitra
utsarga ubhayasrayah

utsisrksoh—desiring to evacuate; dhatu-malam—refuse of eatables;
nirabhidyata—became open; vai—certainly; gudam—the evacuating hole:
tatah—thereafler; payuh—the evacuating sense organ; tatah—thereafter:
mitrah—the controlling demigod; utsargah—the substance evacuated;
ubhaya—both; asrayah—shelter.


--- Page 245 ---
582 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, desiring to evacuate the refuse of eatables, the evacuating
hole, anus, and the sensory organ thereof developed along with the con-
trolling deity Mitra. The sensory organ and the evacuating substance are
both under the shelter of the controlling deity.
PURPORT
Even in the matter of evacuating stool, the refuse is controlled, so how
can the living entity claim to be independent?
TEXT 28
आसिसृप्सोः पुरः पुर्या नाभिद्वारमपानतः |
-
तत्रापानस्तता म्रत्युः TIFIGAATAIY ॥२८॥
asisrpsoh purah purya
nabhi-dvaram apanatah
tatrapanas tato mrtyuh
prthaktvam ubhayasrayam
asisrpsoh—desiring to go everywhere; purah—in different bodies; puryah—
from one body; nabhi-dvaram—the navel or abdominal hole; apanatah—
was manifested; tatra—thereupon; apanah—stopping of the vital force;
tatah— thereafter; mrtyuh—death; prthaktvam—separately; ubhaya—both;
asrayam—shelter.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, desiring to move from one body to another, the navel and
the air of departure and death were combinedly created. The navel is the
shelter for both, namely death and the separating force.
PURPORT
The prapa-vayu continues the life, and the apana-vayu stops the living
force. And both the vibrations are generated from the abdominal hole,
navel. This navel is the joint from one body to the other. Lord Brahma


--- Page 246 ---
Text 29] Bhagavatam is the Answer 583
was born out of the abdominal hole of Garbhodakasayi Visnu as a separate
body, and the same principle is followed even in the birth of any ordinary
body. The body of the child develops from the body of the mother, and
when the child is separated from the body of the mother, it is separated
by cutting the navel joint. And that is the way the Supreme Lord mani-
fested Himself as separated many. The living entities are therefore
separated parts, and thus they have no independence.
TEXT 29
आदित्सोरननपानानामासन्‌ ङष्षयन्त्रनाडयः |
-
नद्यः AGHA तयोस्तुष्टिः पुष्टिस्तदाश्रये ॥२९॥
aditsor anna-pananam
asan kuksy-antra-nadayah
nadyah samudras ca tayos
tustih pustis tad-asraye

aditsoh—desiring to have; anna-pananam—of food and drink; asan—there
became; kuksi—abdomen; antra—intestines; nadayah—and the artery;
nadyah—the rivers; samudrah—seas; ca—also; tayoh—of them; tustih—
sustenance; pustih—metabolism; tat—of them; asraye—the source.

TRANSLATION
When there was desire to have food and drink, the abdomen and the
intestines and also the arteries became manifested. The rivers and the seas
are the source of their sustenance and metabolism.
PURPORT

The controlling deities of the intestines are rivers, and those of the
arteries, the seas. Fulfillment of the belly with food and drink is the
cause of sustenance, and the metabolism of the food and drink replaces
the waste of the bodily energies. Therefore, the body’s health is dependent
on healthy actions of the intestines and the arteries. The rivers and the seas,
being the controlling deities of the two, keep the intestines and the arteries
in healthy order.


--- Page 247 ---
584 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
TEXT 30
निदिष्यासोरात्ममायां हृदयं Ff ।
ततो ARIE इति सङ्कर्पः काम एव च ॥३०॥
nididhyasor atma-mayarm
hrdayam nirabhidyata
tato manas candra iti
saitkalpah kama eva ca
nididhyasoh—being desirious to know;atma-mayam—own energy; hrda-
yam—the location of the mind; nirabhidyata—was manifested; tatah—
thereafter; manah—the mind; candrah—the controlling deity of the mind,
the moon; iti—thus; sankalpah—determination; kamah—desire; eva—as
much as; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
When there was a desire to think about the activities of His own
energy, then the heart, the seat of the mind, the mind, the moon,
determination and all desire became manifested.
PURPORT
The heart of every living entity is the seat of the Supersoul Paramatma,
a plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Without His
presence the living entity cannot get into the working energy according to
his past deeds. The living entities who are conditioned in the material
world are manifested in the creation in terms of respective inclinations
inherent in them, and the requisite material body is offered to each and
every one of them by the material energy under the direction of the
Supersoul. This is explained in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.10). When, there-
fore, the Supersoul is situated in the heart of the conditioned soul, the
requisite mind is manifested in the conditioned soul, and he becomes
conscious of his occupation as one is conscious of his duty after waking
up from slumber. Therefore the material mind of the living entity develops
when the Supersoul sits on his heart, after which the mind, the con-
trolling deity, moon, and then the activities of the mind (namely thinking,
feeling, and willing) all take place. The activities of the mind cannot begin
without the manifestation of the heart, and the heart becomes manifested
when the l.ord wants to see the activities of the material creation.


--- Page 248 ---
Text 32] Bhagavatam is the Answer 585
TEXT 31
৬ -
त्वक्चमणंसरूधिरपेदोषजासथिधातदः |
- o =
भूम्यप्तेजोमयाः सप्त प्राणो व्योमाम्बुवायुभिः 132101
tvak-carma-mamsa-rudhira-
medo-majjasthi-dhatavah
bhimy-ap-tejomayah sapta
prano vyomambu-vayubhih
tvak—the thin layer on the skin; carma—skin; mamsa—flesh; rudhira—
blood; medah— fat; majja—marrow ; asthi—bone; dhatavah—elements; bhami
—earth;ap—water; tejah—fire; mayah—predominating; sapta—seven; pranah
—breathing air; vyoma—sky ; ambu—water; vayubhih—by the air.
TRANSLATION
The seven elements of the body, namely the thin layer on the skin,
the skin, the flesh, the blood, fat, the marrow and the bone, are all made of
earth, water and fire, whereas the life breathing air is produced by the
sky, water and air.
PURPORT
Construction of the whole material world is prominently made by
three elements, namely earth, water and fire. But the living force is pro-
duced by sky, air, and water. So water is the common element both in the
gross and subtle forms of all material creation, and it should be noted
herewith that due to necessity, water, being most prominent in the mate-
rial creation, is the principal element of all the five. This material body is
thus an embodiment of the five elements, and the gross manifestation is
perceived because of three, namely, earth, water, and fire. Sensation of
touch is perceived due to the thin layer on the skin, and bone is as good
as hard stone. Since the breathing air of life is produced of sky, air and
water, open air, regular bath and ample space to live in are favorable for
healthy vitality. Fresh produce of the earth like grains and vegetables,
fresh water and heat are good for the upkeep of the gross body.
TEXT 32
गुणात्पकानीन्द्रियाणि भूतादिग्रभवा गुणाः |
मनः; स्विकारात्मा बद्िरचिज्ञानरूपिणी ॥२२॥


--- Page 249 ---
586 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
gunatmakanindriyani
bhitadi-prabhava gunah
manah sarva-vikaratma
buddhir vijiiana-riupini
gupa-atmakani—attached to the qualities; indriyani—senses; bhiutadi—
material ego; prabhavah—influenced by; gunah—modes of material nature;
manah—the mind; sarva—all; vikara—affection (happiness and distress);
atma—form;buddhih— intelligence ;vijiana—deliberation; riipini—featuring.
TRANSLATION
The sense organs are attached to the modes of material nature, and the
modes of material nature are products of the false ego. Mind is subjected
to all kinds of material experiences (happiness and distress), and the
intelligence is the feature of mind’s deliberation.
PURPORT
11145101160 by the material nature, the living entity identifies with false
ego. More clearly, when the living entity is entrapped by the material
body he at once identifies with the bodily relationships, forgetting his own
identity as spirit soul. This false ego associates with different modes of
material nature, and thus the senses become attached to the modes of
material nature. Mind is the instrument for feeling different material ex-
periences, bul intelligence is deliberative and can change everything for
the better. The intelligent person, therefore, can attain salvation from the
illusion of material existence by proper use of intelligence. An intelligent
person can detect the awkward position of material existence and thus
begin to inquire as to what he is, why he is subjected to different kinds of
miscries, how to get rid of all miseries, and thus, by good association, an
advanced intelligent person can turn towards the better life of self-
realization. It is advised, therefore, that an intelligent person associate with
great sages and saints who are on the path of salvation. By such association,
one can receive instructions which are able to slacken the conditioned
soul’s attachment for matter, and thus gradually the intelligent man gets rid
of the illusion of matter and false ego and is promoted to the real life of
eternity, knowledge and blissfulness.


--- Page 250 ---
Text 33] Bhagavatam is the Answer 587
TEXT 33
एतद्भगवतो सूपं स्थलं ते व्याहृतं मया |
a
मह्यादिमिशवाषरणेरष्टमिर्हिरावृतम्‌ ॥२३॥
etad bhagavato ripam
sthitlam te vyahrtarih maya
mahy-adibhis cavaranair
astabhir bahir avrtam
etat—all these; bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead; ripam—form;
sthitlam—gross; te—unto you; vyahrtam—explained; maya—by me; mahi—
the planets; adibhih—et cctera; ca—unlimitedly; avaranaih—by coverings:
astabhih—by eight; bahih—external; @vrtam— covered.
TRANSLATION
Thus by all this, the external feature of the Personality of Godhead is
covered by gross forms of planets, et cetera, which were explained to you
by me.
PURPORT
As explained in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.4) the separated material
energy of the Personality of Godhead is covered by eight kinds of mate-
rial coverings: namely earth, water, fire, air, sky, mind, intelligence and
false ego. All these are emanations from the Personality of Godhead as
His external energy. These coverings are just like the covering of clouds
for the sun. The cloud is a creation of the sun, yet it actually covers the
eyes so that one cannot see the sun. The sun cannot be covered by the
clouds. The cloud can at utmost extend a few hundreds of miles in the
sky, but the sun is far greater than millions of miles. So a hundred-mile
covering is not competent to cover millions of miles. Therefore, one of
the various energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot, of
course, cover the Lord. But these coverings are created by Him to cover
the eyes of the conditioned souls who want to lord it over the material
nature. Actually the conditioned souls are covered by the illusory creative
cloud of matter, and the Lord reserves the right of not being c¢xposed to


--- Page 251 ---
588 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
the eyes of the conditioned souls. And because they have no eyes of
transcendental vision and because they cannot see the Personality of God-
head, they therefore deny the existence of the Lord as well as the transcen-
dental form of the Lord. The covering of the gigantic material feature is
accepted by such men with poor fund of knowledge, and how it becomes
so is explained in the following verse.
TEXT 34
. = ५ (९
अतः परं खष्मतममन्यक्तं॒निर्विरोषणम्‌ |
. ক
अनादिमध्यनिधनं নি Tema परम्‌ ।२३४॥
atah param siksmatamam
avyaktam nirvisesanam
anadi-madhya-nidhanarn
nityari vai-manasah param
atah—therefore; param—transcendental; sicksmatamam—finer than the
finest; avyaktam—unmanifested; nirviSesapam—without material features;
anddi—without beginning; madhya—without an intermediate stage; nid-
hanam—without end; nityam—eternal; एदा -- words; manasah—of the mind;
param— transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Therefore beyond this [gross manifestation] there is a transcendental
manifestation finer than the finest form, which has no beginning, no inter-
mediate stage and no end; therefore it is beyond the limits of expression or
mental speculation and is distinct from the material conception.
PURPORT
The gross external body of the Supreme is manifested at certain inter-
vals, and thus the external feature or form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is not the eternal form of the Lord, which has no beginning, no
intermediate stage and no end. Anything which has beginning, interim and
end is called material. The material world is begun from the Lord, and thus
the form of the Lord, before the beginning of the material world, is cer-
tainly transcendental to the finest or the finer material conception. The
ether in the material world is considered to be the finest. Finer than the


--- Page 252 ---
Text 35] Bhagavatam is the Answer 589
ether is mind, intelligence, and false ego. But all the eight outward cover-
ings are explained as outer coverings of the Absolute Truth. The Absolute
Truth is therefore beyond the expression and speculation of the material
conception, He is certainly transcendental to all material conceptions.
This is called nirviSesanam. One should not, however, misunderstand
nirvisesanam as being without any transcendental qualifications. Visesanam
means qualities. Therefore nir added with it means that He has no mate-
rial qualities or variegatedness. This nullifying expression is described in
four transcendental qualifications, namely unmanifested, transcendental,
eternal and beyond the conception of mind or word. Beyond the limits of
words means negation of the material conception, and unless one is
transcendentally situated, it is not possible to know the transcendental
form of the Lord.
TEXT 35
IgA भगवद्रूपे मया ते aI |
उभे अपि न गृहन्ति मायासृष्टे विपश्चितः ।३५॥
amuni bhagavad-riipe
maya te hy anuvarpite
ubhe api na grhnanti
maya-srste vipas-citah
amuni—all these; bhagavat—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
ripe—in the forms; maya—by me; te—unto you; hi—certainly ; anuvarpite—
described respectively; ubhe—both; api—also; na—never; grhnanti—accepts;
maya—external; srste—being so manifested; vipas-citah—the learned one
who knows.
TRANSLATION
Both the above forms of the Lord, as just described unto you from the
material angle of vision, are not accepted by the pure devotees of the Lord
who know Him well.
PURPORT
The impersonalists think of the Absolute Personality of Godhead in two
different ways, as above mentioned. On the one hand they worship the


--- Page 253 ---
590 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
Lord in His viSva-riipa or all-pervading universal form, and on the other
they think of the Lord’s unmanifested, indescribable, subtle form. The
theories of pantheism and monism are respectively applicable to these two
conceptions of the Supreme as gross and subtle, but both of them are re-
jected by the learned pure devotees of the Lord because they are aware
of the factual position. This is very clearly mentioned in the Eleventh
Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, Arjuna’s experience of the viSva-riipa of the
Supreme Lord Sri Krsna.
adrsta-pirvam hrsito smi drstva
bhayena ca pravyathitarih mano me
tad eva me darsaya deva ripam
prasida devesa jagannivasa (Bg. 11.45)

Arjuna, as a pure devotee of the Lord, never previously saw the contem-
plated universal form of the Lord (viSva-riipa), but when he did see, his
curiosities became satisfied. But he was not happy to see such a form of
the Lord because of his attachment as a pure devotee. He was therefore
afraid to see the gigantic form of the Lord. He therefore prayed to the
Lord to assume His fourhanded Narayana or Krsna form, which alone
could please him (Arjuna). Undoubtedly the Lord has the supreme potency
to exhibit Himself in multifarious forms, but the pure devotees of the
Lord are interested in His forms as are eternally exhibited in the abode of
the Lord, known as the tripad-vibhiti or kingdom of God. The Lord in
the tripad-vibhiiti abode exhibits Himself in two forms, either with four
hands or with two hands. The visva-ripa exhibited in the material mani-
festation has unlimited hands and unlimited dimensions with everything
unlimited. The pure devotees of the Lord worship Him in His Vaikuntha
forms as Narayana or Krsna. Sometimes the same Vaikuntha forms of the
Lord are in the material world also by His grace as Sr1 Rama, Sri Krsna,
Sri Narasirhhadeva, etc., and thus the pure devotees also worship them.
Usually the features shown in the material world have no existence in the
Vaikuntha planets, and thus they are not accepted by the pure devotees.
What the pure devotees worship from the very beginning are eternal forms
of the Lord existing in the Vaikuntha planets. The nondevotee imperson-
alists imagine the material forms of the Lord, and ultimately they merge in
the impersonal brahmajyoti of the Lord, whereas the pure devotees of the
Lord are worshipers of the Lord both in the beginning and also in the
perfect stage of salvation, eternally. The worship of the pure devotee
never stops, whereas the worship of the impersonalist stops after his


--- Page 254 ---
Text 36] Bhagavatam is the Answer 591
allainment of salvation, being merged in the impersonal form of the Lord
known as brahmajyoti. Therefore the pure devotees of the Lord are de-
scribed here as vipascita, or the learned who are in the knowledge of the
Lord perfectly.
TEXT 36
स वाच्यवाचकतया भगवान्‌ AAS |
(9
नामरूपक्रिया धत्ते सकर्माकमंकः परः ॥२६॥
sa vacya-vacakataya
bhagavan brahma-ripa-dhrk
nama-rupa-kriya dhatte
sa-karmakarmakah parah
sah—He; vacya—by His forms and activities; vacakataya—by His transcen-
dental qualities and entourage; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead;
brahma—absolute; riapa-dhrk—by accepting visible forms; nama—name;
riipa— form; kriya—pastimes; dhatte—accepts; sa-karma—engaged in work;
akarmakah—without being affected; parah— transcendence.
TRANSLATION
He, the Personality of Godhead, manifests Himself in a transcendental
form, being the subject of His transcendental name, quality, pastimes,
entourage and transcendental variegatedness. Although He is unaffected
by all such activities, He appears to be so engaged.
PURPORT
Whenever there is need of material creation, the transcendental Person-
ality of Godhead accepts forms in the material world for creation, main-
tenance and destruction, and one should be intelligent enough to know
His activities in truth without being biased to conclude that He descends
in the material world by accepting a form created by material nature.
Any form accepted from the material nature has its affection to everything
done in the material world. A conditioned soul who accepts the material
form for undergoing a certain term of material activities is subjected to
the laws of matter. But here in this verse it is clearly stated that the 11115
and activities of the Lord, although they appear to be the same as those of


--- Page 255 ---
592 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
another conditioned soul, are supernatural and impossible for the condi-
tioned soul. He, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always unaffected
by such activities. In the Bhagavad-gita the Lord says:
na mam karmani limpanti na me karma-phale sprha
iti mam yo’bhijanati karmabhir na sa baddhyati
(Bg. 4.14)

The Lord is never affected by the activities which He apparently
performs by His differentincarnations and personalities, nor does He have
any desire to achieve success by fruitive activities. The Lord is full by His
different potencies of wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and
renunciation, and thus He has no reason for physical exertion like the
conditioned soul. Therefore an intelligent person who can distinguish
between the transcendental activities of the Lord and those of the condi-
tioned souls also is not bound by the reactions of activities. The Lord as
Visnu, Brahma and Siva conducts the three modes of material nature.
From Visnu is born Brahma, and from Brahma is born Siva. Sometimes
Brahma is a separated part of Visnu, and sometimes Brahma is Visnu
Himself. Thus Brahma creates the different species of life all over the
universe, which means that the Lord creates the whole manifestation
either Himself or through the agency of His authorized deputies.

TEXTS 37-40
प्रजापतीन्मनून्‌ देवानृषीन्‌ पिवृगणान्‌ प्रथक्‌ |
सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वान्‌ बिद्याध्रासुरणुद्यकान्‌ ॥२७॥
किनराग्सरसो नागान्‌ सर्पान्‌ किम्पुरुषान्नरान्‌ |
मातृ रक्षःपिशाचां थ प्रेतभूतदिनायकान्‌ ॥२८॥
कूष्माण्डोन्मादवेतालान्‌ यातुधानान्‌ ग्रहानपि।
खगान्म्रगान्‌ पशन्‌ इक्षान्‌ गिरीन्येप सरीसृपान्‌॥। ३९॥
न
FREER येऽन्ये जठस्यलनभोौकसः |
FASTIN मिश्राः कर्मणां गतयस्त्विमाः ॥४०॥
praja-patin manén devan
rsin pitr-ganan prthak
siddha-carana-gandharvan
vidyadhrasura-guhyakan


--- Page 256 ---
Texts 37-40] Bhagavatam is the Answer 593
kinnarapsaraso nagan
sarpan kimpurusan naran
mati raksah pisacams ca
preta-bhiita-vinayakan
kitsmandonmada-vetalan
yatudhdnan grehan api
khagan mrgan pasan vrksan
girin nrpa sarisrpan
dvi-vidhas$ catur-vidha ye’nye
jala-sthala-nabhaukasah
kusalakusala misrah
10771101207 gatayas tv imah
praja-patin—Brahma and his sons like Daksa and o thers; maniin—the peri-
odical heads like Vaivasvata Manu, etc.; devan—like Indra, Candra, Varuna,
etc.; rsin—like Bhrgu, Vasistha, etc.; pitrganan—the inhabitants of the
Pita planets; prthak—separately; siddha—the inhabitants of the Siddha
planet; carapa—inhabitants of the Carana planet; gandharvan—inhabitants
of the Gandharva planets; vidyadhra—inhabitants of the same planet;
asura—the atheists; guhyakan—the inhabitants of the Yaksa planet;
kinnara—the inhabitants of the Kinnara planet; apsarasah—the beautiful
angels of the Apsara planet; nagan—the inhabitants of the Nagaloka
(serpentine); sarpan—inhabitants of the Sarpaloka (snakes); kimpurusan—
monkey-shaped inhabitants of the Kimpurusa planet; naran—inhabitants
of the earth; matf—inhabitants of the Matrloka; raksah—inhabitants of the
demoniac planet; pisacan—inhabitants of the Pisacaloka; ca—also; preta—
inhabitants of Pretaloka; bhiita—the evil spirits; vindyakan—the goblins;
kasmapda—will ০” the wisp; unmada—lunatics; vetalan—the jinn; yatu-
dhanan—a particular type of evil spirit; grahan—the good and evil stars;
api—also; khagan—the birds; mrgan—the forest animals; pasin—the house-
hold animals; vrksan—the ghosts; girin—the mountains; nrpa—O King;
sarisypan—reptiles; dvi-vidhah—the moving and the standing living entities;
catur-vidhah—living entities born in the embryo, in eggs, in perspiration
and in seeds; ye—others; anye—all; jala— water; sthala—land; nabhaukasah—
birds; kusala—in happiness; akusaldh—in distress; misrah—in mixed happi-
ness and distress; karmapam—according to one’s own past deeds; gatayah—
as result of; tu—but; imah—all of them.
TRANSLATION
O King, know from me that Brahma and his sons, like Daksa, and
the periodical heads like Vaivasvata Manu, etc., demigods like


--- Page 257 ---
594 Srimad-Bhagavatam [0311০ 2, Ch. 10
Indra, Candra, Varuna, etc., great sages like Bhrgu, Vyasa, Vasistha, etc.,
the inhabitants of the Pitrloka, the inhabitants of the Siddhaloka, the
Caranas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, Asuras, Yaksas, Kinnaras, Angels, the
serpentines, the monkey-shaped Kimpurusas, the human beings, the in-
habitants of Matrloka, the demons, Pisacas, ghosts, spirits, lunatics, evil
spirits, good and evil stars, the goblins, the animals in the forest, the birds,
the household animals, the reptiles, the mountains, the moving and
standing living entities, the living entities who are born in embryos, in
eggs, in perspiration and in seeds, and all others who may be in the water,
land and sky, who may be in happiness or in distress or in mixed
happiness and distress, according to past deeds, are all created by the
Supreme Lord.
PURPORT

The varieties of living entities are mentioned in this list, and, with no
exception from the highest topmost planet down to the lowest planet of
the universe, all of them in different species of life arc created by the
Almighty Father Visnu, and therefore no one is independent of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Bhagavad-gita the Lord therefore
claims all living entities as His offsprings in the following verse:

sarva-yonisu kaunteya miirtayah sambhavanti yah
[৫5৫71 brahma mahad yonir aha bija-pradah pita
(Bg. 14.4)

The material nature is compared to the mother. Although every living
being is seen to be coming out of the mother’s body, still it is a fact that
the mother is not the ultimate cause of such a birth. The father is the
ultimate cause of birth. Without the father’s seed, no mother can give
birth to a child. Therefore the living beings that are within the innu-
merable universes in different varieties of forms and position are all
born out of the seeds of the Almighty Father, Personality of Godhead,
and only to the man with a poor fund of knowledge does it appear
that they are born out of the material nature. Being under the material
energy of the Supreme Lord, all living entities beginning from Brahma
down to the insignificant ant arc manifested in different bodies according
to their past deeds.

The material nature is one of the energies of the Lord (Bg. 7.4). The
material nature is inferior in comparison to the living entities, the superior
nature. The superior nature and inferior nature of the Lord combined
together to manifest the whole universal affairs.


--- Page 258 ---
Text 41] Bhagavatam is the Answer 595
Some of the living entities are relatively happy and in better conditions
of life, whereas others are in distressed conditions of life. But factually
none of them are actually happy in the material conditional life. No one
can be happy in prison life, although one is a first-class prisoner and the
other is a third-class prisoner. The intelligent person should not try to be
promoted from third-class prison life to first-class prison life, but should
try to be released from the prison altogether. One may be promoted to
first-class prisoner, but the same first-class prisoner is again degraded to a
third-class prisoner in the next term. One should try to be free from
prison life and go back to home, back to Godhead. That is the real goal for
all types of living entities.
TEXT 41
a रजस्तम इति तिखः सुरयनारकाः |
TRF राजन्‌ भियन्ते বানযন্ধিঘা |
RQ = 9,
यदैकेकतरोऽन्याभ्यां सखभाव उपहन्यते ।॥४१।।
sattvari rajas tama iti
tisrah suranmarakah
tatrapy ekaikaso rajan
bhidyante gatayas tridha
yadaikaikataro’nyabhyam
sva-bhava upahanyate
sattvam—the mode of goodness; rajah—the mode of passion; tamah—the
mode of darkness; iti—thus; tisrah—trio; sura—demigod; nr—human being;
narakah—one who is suffering hellish conditions; tatra api—even there;
ekaikasah—another; rajan—O King; bhidyante—divide into; gatayah—
movements; tridha—three; yada—at that time; ekaikatarah—one in relation
with another; anyabhyam—from the other; sva-bhavah—habit; upahanyate
—develops.
TRANSLATION
According to the different modes of material nature—the mode of
goodness, the mode of passion and the mode of darkness—there are
different living creatures, who are known as demigods, human beings
and hellish living entities. O King, even a particular mode of nature, being
mixed with the other two, is divided into three, and thus each kind of
living creature is influenced by the other modes and acquires its habits also.


--- Page 259 ---
596 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
PURPORT

The living entities individually are being conducted by a particular mode
of nature, but at the same time there is every chance of being influenced
by the other two. Generally, all conditioned souls in the material encage-
ment are influenced by the mode of passion because every one of them is
trying to lord it over the material nature to fulfill individual desire. But in
spite of the individual mode of passion, there is always the chance of being
influenced by other modes of nature by association. If one is in good
association he can develop the modes of goodness, and if he is in bad
association he may develop the modes of darkness or ignorance. Nothing
is stereotyped. One can change his habit by good or bad association, and
one has to become intelligent enough to discriminate between good and
bad. The best association is the service of the devotees of the Lord, and
by that association one can become the highest qualified man by the
grace of pure devotees of the Lord. As we have already seen in the life of
Srila Narada Muni, he became the topmost devotee of the Lord simply
by the association of pure devotees of the Lord. By birth he was the son
of a maidservant and had no knowledge of his father and no academic
education, even of the lowest status. But simply by associating with the
devotees and by eating the remnants of their foodstuff, he gradually
developed the transcendental qualities of the devotees. By such association,
his taste for chanting and hearing the transcendental glories of the Lord
became prominent, and because the glories of the Lord are nondifferent
from the Lord, he got direct association with the Lord by means of sound
representation. Similarly, there is the life of Ajamila (Sixth Canto), who
was the son of a brahmana and was educated and trained properly in the
discharge of the duties of a brahmana but in spite of all this, because
he contacted the bad association of a prostitute, was put into the path of
the lowest quality of candala, or the last position of human beings. There-
fore the Bhagavatam recommends always the association of the mahat, or
the great soul, for opening the gate of salvation. And to associate with
persons engaged in lording it over the material world means to enter into
the darkest region of hell. One should try to raise himself by the association
of the great soul, and that is the way of perfection of life.

TEXT 42
स एवेदं जगद्धाता भगवान्‌ धर्मरूपक्‌ |
पुष्णाति स्थापयन्‌ विश्व तिर्यङनरसुरादिभिः।।४२॥


--- Page 260 ---
Text 42] Bhagavatam is the Answer 597
sa evedar jagad-dhata
bhagavan dharma-ripa-dhrk
pusnati sthapayan visvam
tiryan-nara-suradibhih
sah—He; eva—certainly; idam—this; jagat-dhata—the maintainer of the
entire universe; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; dharma-ripa-dhrk
—assuming the form of religious principles; pusnati—maintains; sthapayan
—after establishing; visvam—the universes; tiryak— living entities lower
than the human beings; nara—the human beings; sura-adibhih—by the
demigodly incarnations.
TRANSLATION
He, the Personality of Godhead, as maintainer of all in the universe,
appears in different incarnations after establishing the creation, and thus
He reclaims all kinds of conditioned souls amongst the humans, nonhumans
and the demigods.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead Visnu incarnates Himself in
different societies of living entities to reclaim them from the clutches of
illusion, and such activities of the Lord are not limited only to the human
society. He incarnates Himself even as a fish, hog, tree and many other
forms, but less intelligent persons who have no knowledge of Him deride
Him even if He is in the human society as a human being. The Lord there-
fore says in the Bhagavad-gita:
avajananti mam miidhd manusim tanum asritam
param bhavam ajanante mama bhiita-mahesvaram. (Bg. 9.11)
As we have already discussed in the previous verses, it is concluded that
the Lord is never a product of the material creation. His transcendental
position is always unchanged. He is the eternal form of knowledge and
bliss, and He executes His almighty will by His different energies. As such
He is never the subject of reaction for all His acts. He is transcendental to
all such conceptions of action and reactions. Even if He is visible in the
material world, the exhibition is only of His internal energy, for He is
above the good and bad conceptions of this material world. In the material
world the fish or the hog may be considered lower than the man, but


--- Page 261 ---
598 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
when the Lord appears as a fish or hog, He is neither of them in the
material conception. It is His causeless mercy that He appears in every
society or species of life, but He is never to be considered one of them.
Conceptions of the material world such as good and bad, lower and upper,
important and insignificant are estimations of the material energy, and
the Supreme Lord is transcendental to all such conceptions. The word
para bhavam, or transcendental nature, can never be compared with the
material conception. We should not forget that the potencies of the Al-
mighty Lord are always the same and do not decrease because the Lord
assumes the form of a lower animal. There is no difference between Lord
Sri Rama, Lord Sri Krsna or His incarnations of fish and hogs. He is all-
pervading and simultaneously localized at any and every place. But the
foolish person with a poor fund of knowledge, for want of that para
bhavam of the Lord, cannot understand how the Supreme Lord can take
the form of a man or a fish. Everything is compared to its own standard of
knowledge, as the frog in the well considers the sca to be one like the well.
The frog in the well cannot even think of the sea, and when such a frog 15
informed of the greatness of the sea it takes the conception of the sea as a
little greater than the well. As such, one who is foolish in the transcenden-
tal science of the Lord will find it difficult to understand how Lord Visnu
can equally manifest Himself in every society of living entities.
TEXT 43
ततः कालाग्निरुद्रात्मा यत्सृष्टमिदमात्मनः |
संनियच्छति तत्‌ काले षनानीकपिवानिठः ।४२॥
tatah kalagni-rudritma
yat srstam idam atmanah
sanniyacchati tat kale
ghananikam ivanilah

tatah— thereafter at the end; kala—destruction; agni—fire; rudra-atma—
in the form of Rudra; yat—whatever; srstam—created; idam—all these;
atmanah—of lis own; sam—completely; niyacchati—annihilates; tat kale—
at the end of the millennium; ghana-anikam—bunches of clouds; iva—like
that of; anilah—air.


--- Page 262 ---
Text 43] Bhagavatam is the Answer 599
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, at the end of the millennium, the Lord Himself in the form
of Rudra, the destroyer, will annihilate the complete creation as the wind
displaces the clouds.
PURPORT
This creation is very appropriately compared to the clouds. The clouds
are created or situated in the sky, and when they are displaced they remain
in the same sky without manifestation. Similarly, the whole creation is
made by the Supreme Personality of God in His form of Brahma, it is
maintained by Him in the form of Visnu, and it is destroyed by Him in the
form of Rudra or Siva, all in-due course. This creation, maintenance and
destruction are nicely explained in the Bhagavad-gita as follows:
bhiita-gramah sa evayarn bhiitva bhiitva praliyate
ratryagame ’'vasah partha prabhavaty aharagame
paras tasmat tu bhavo ‘nyo 'vyakto vyaktat sanatanah
yah sa sarvesu bhiitesu nasyatsu na vinasyati (Bg. 8.19-20)
The nature of the material world is that it is first created very nicely,
develops very nicely, stays for a great number of years (even beyond the
calculation of the greatest mathematician), but after that it is again
destroyed during the night of Brahma without any resistance, and again at
the end of the night of Brahma the same is again manifested as creation to
follow the same principles of maintenance and destruction. The foolish
conditioned soul who has taken this temporary world as a permanent
settlement has to learn intelligently why such creation and destruction
take place. The fruitive actors in the material world are very enthusiastic
in the creation of big enterprises, big houses, big empires, big industries and
so many big, big things out of the energy and ingredients supplied by the
material agent of the Supreme Lord. With such resources, and at the cost
of valuable energy, the conditioned soul creates, satisfies his whims, but
unwillingly has to depart from all his creations and enter into another phase
of life to create again and again. And to give hope to such foolish con-
ditioned souls who waste their encrgy in this temporary material world,
the Lord gives information that there is another nature which is eternally


--- Page 263 ---
600 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
existent without being occasionally created or destroyed, and the con-
ditioned soul can understand what he should do and how his valuable
energy may be utilized. Instead of wasting his energy in matter, which is
sure to be destroyed in due course by the supreme will, he (the conditioned
soul) should utilize his energy in devotional service of the Lord so that he
can be transferred to the other, eternal nature where there is no birth, no
death, no creation, no destruction, but permanent life instead, full of
knowledge and unlimited bliss. This temporary creation is thus exhibited
and destroyed just to give information to the conditioned soul who is
attached to temporary things. It is meant also to give him a chance for self-
realization, and not for sense gratification, which is the prime aim of all
fruitive actors.
TEXT 44
IRA कथितो भगवान्‌ भगवत्तमः ।
नेत्थंभावेन हि परं दरष्टमहन्ति सरः ॥४४॥
itthambhavena kathito
bhagavan bhagavattamah
netthambhavena hi param
dragtum arhanti sitrayah

ittham—in these features; bhavena—matter of creation and destruction;
kathitah—described; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; bhagavattamah
—by the great transcendentalists; na—not; ittham—in this; bhavena—
features; hi—only; param—most glorious; drastum—to see; arhanti—deserve;
siirayah—great devotees.

TRANSLATION
The great transcendentalists thus describe the activities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but the pure devotees deserve to see more glorious
things in transcendence, beyond these features.
PURPORT

The Lord is not only creator and destroyer of the material manifesta-

tions of His different energies. He is more than simple creator and de-


--- Page 264 ---
Text 45] Bhagavatam is the Answer 601
stroyer, for there is His feature of @nanda, or His pleasure feature. This
pleasure feature of the Lord is understood by the pure devotees only, and
not by others. The impersonalist is satisfied simply by understanding the
all-pervasive influence of the Lord, called Brahman realization. Greater than
the impersonalist is the mystic who sees the Lord situated in his heart as
Paramatma, the partial representation of the Lord. But there are pure
devotees who take part in the direct pleasure (a@nanda) potency of the
Lord by factual reciprocation of loving service. The Lord in His abode
called the Vaikuntha planets, which are eternal manifestations, always
remains with His associates and enjoys transcendental loving services by
His puredevotees in different transcendental humors. The pure devotees of
the Lord thus undergo a practice of that devotional service of the Lord
during the manifestation of the creation and take full advantage of the
manifestation by qualifying themselves to enter into the kingdom of God.
The Bhagavad-gita confirms this:

bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah

tato mam tattvato [72/४2 visate tad anantaram. (Bg. 18.55)

By development of pure devotional service one can know factually the
Lord as He is and thus become trained in the bona fide service of the
Lord and be allowed to enter into the direct association of the Lord in so
many capacities. And the highest glorious association with the Lord is
made possible in the planet of Goloka Vrndavana, where Lord Krsna
enjoys Himself with the gopis and His favorite animals, the surabhi cows.
Description of this transcendental land of Krsna is given in the Brahma-
sarhita, considered by Lord Sri Caitanya to be the most authentic litera-
ture in this connection.

TEXT 45
नास्य कर्मणि जन्मादौ परस्याजुविधोयते |
कतंत्वप्रतिषेधा्थं माययारोपितं हि तत्‌ ॥४५॥
nasya 10077710108 janmadau
parasyanuvidhiyate
kartrtva-pratisedharthar
mayayaropitam hi tat


--- Page 265 ---
602 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
na—never; asya— of the creation; karmani—in the matter of; janma-adau—
creation and destruction; parasya—of the Supreme: anuvidhiyate—it is so
described; kartrtva—engineering: pratisedha-artham—counteract; mayaya—
by the external energy; aropitam—is manifested; hi—for; tat—the creator.
TRANSLATION
There is no direct engineering by the Lord for the creation and de-
struction of the material world. What is described in the Vedas about His
direct interference is simply to counteract the idea that material nature is
the creator.
PURPORT

The Vedic direction for creation, maintenance and destruction of the
material world is this: “yato va imani bhiitani jayante yena jatani jivanti
yat prayanty abhisarmvisanti,” i.e. everything is created by Brahman, and
after creation everything is maintained by Brahman, and after annihilation
everything is conserved in Brahman. Gross materialists without any know-
ledge of Brahman, Paramatma or Bhagavan conclude material nature to be
the ultimate cause of the material manifestation, and the modern scientist
also shares this view that material nature is the ultimate cause of all
manifestations of the material world. This view is refuted by all Vedic
literature. The Vedanta philosophy mentions that Brahman is the foun-
tainhead of all creation, maintenance and destruction, and Srimad-
Bhagavatam, the natural commentation on the Vedanta philosophy, says,
“janmady asya yato ’nvayad itaratas carthesv abhijiiah svarat,” etc.

Inert matter is potential energy undoubtedly by interactions, but it has
no initiative of its own. Srimad-Bhagavatam therefore comments on the
aphorism of janmadyasya as abhijiiah and svarat, i.e. the Supreme Brahman
is not inert matter, but He is supreme consciousness and is independent.
Therefore inert matter cannot be the ultimate cause of the creation,
maintenance and destruction of the material world. Superficially it appears
that the material nature is the cause of creation, maintenance and de-
struction, but material nature is set into motion for creation by the su-
preme conscious being, the Personality of Godhead. He is the background
of all creation, maintenance and destruction, and this is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita:

maydadhyakgsena prakrtih siiyate sacaracaram
hetunanena kaunteya jagad viparivartate . (Bg. 9.10)


--- Page 266 ---
Text 45) Bhagavatam is the Answer 603

The material nature is one of the energies of the Lord, and she can work
under the direction of the lord (adhyaksena). When the Lord throws His
transcendental glance over the material nature, then only can the material
nature act, as the father contacts the mother, and then the mother is able
to conceive a child. The material nature therefore produces the moving and
standing manifestations of the material world after being contacted by the
supreme father, and not independently. Therefore although it appears, to
the layman, that the mother gives birth to the child, the experienced man
knows that the father gives birth to the child. To consider material nature
as the cause of creation, maintenance, etc., is called the “logic of nipples
on the neck of the goat.” The Caitanya-caritdmrta by Srila Krsnadasa
Kavirdja Gosvami describes this logic of ajagalastana as follows (as ex-
plained by His Divine Grace Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami
Maharaja): “The material nature, as the material cause, is known as
pradhana, and as efficient cause is known as maya. But being inert matter,
it is not the remote cause of creation.” Kaviraja Gosvam states as follows:

ataeva krspa mul, {०९८८ karan
prakrti karan jaichhe ajagalastan (C-c-, Adi 5.61)
Because the Karaparpava$ayl Visnu is a plenary expansion of Krsna, it is
He who electrifies the matter to be in motion. The example of electrifica-
tion is quite appropriate. A piece of iron is certainly not fire, hut when
the iron is made red-hot, certainly it has the quality of fire through its
burning capacity. Matter is compared with the piece of iron, and it is
electrified or made red-hot by the glance or manipulation of the supreme
consciousness of Visnu. By such electrification only does the energy of
matter become displayed by various actions and reactions. Therefore the
inert matter is neither efficient nor is it the material cause of the cosmic
manifestation. Sri Kapiladeva has said:
yatholmukad visphulingad dhimad vapi svasambhavat
apy atma-tvenabhimatad yathagnih prthag ulmukat
(Bhag. 3.28.40)

The original fire, its flame, its sparks, and its smoke are all one, as fire is
still fire yet is different from the flame, flame is different from sparks, and
sparks are different from the smoke. In every one of them, namely in the
flames, in the sparks and in the smoke, the integrity of fire is present, and
still all of them and each and every one of them are differently situated
with different positions. The cosmid manifestation is compared to the


--- Page 267 ---
604 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
smoke (when the smoke passes over the sky so many forms appear re-
sembling many known and unknown manifestations), the sparks are com-
pared to living entities, and the flames are compared to material nature,
pradhdna. One must know that cach and every one of them is effective
simply by being empowered by the quality of fire (original). Therefore
every one of them, namely the material nature, the cosmic manifestation
and the living entities, are all but different energies of the Lord (fire).
Therefore those who accept the material nature as the original cause
(prakrti, the cause of creation according to Sarikhya philosophy) of cosmic
manifestation are not correct in their conclusion. The material nature has
no separate existence without the Lord. Therefore, setting aside the Su-
preme Lord as the cause of all causes is the logic of gjagalastan, or trying
to milk the nipples on the neck of the goat. The nipples on the neck of a
goat may seem like sources of milk, but it will be foolish to try to get milk
from such nipples.
TEXT 46
अयं तु ब्रह्मणः कल्पः ARF उदाहतः |
বে
विधिः साधारणो यत्र सर्गाः प्राकृतवैकृताः ॥४६॥
ayari tu brahmanah kalpah
sa-vikalpa udahrtah
vidhih sadhdarano yatra
sargah prakrta-vaikrtah

ayam—this process of creation and annihilation; tu—but; brahmanah—of
Brahma; kalpah—his one day; sa-vikalpah—along with the duration of the
universes; udahrtah—exemplified; vidhih—regulative principles; sadharanah
—in summary ; yatra— wherein; sargah—creation; prakrta—in the matter of
material nature; vaikrtah—disbursement.

TRANSLATION
This process of creation and annihilation described herein is in summary
the regulative principle during the duration of Brahma’s one day, as well
as the creation of mahat in which the material nature is dispersed.
PURPORT

There are three different types of creation, called mahakalpa, vikalpa

and kalpa. In the mahakalpa the Lord assumes the first incarnation of


--- Page 268 ---
Text 46) Bhagavatam is the Answer 605
Purusa as Karanodakadayi Visnu with all the potencies of mahat-tattva and
the sixteen principles of creative matter and instruments. The creative
instruments are eleven, and the ingredients are five, and all of them are
products of mahat or materialistic ego, and these creations by the Lord in
His feature of KaranodakasayiVisnu are called mahakalpa. Creation of
Brahma and dispersion of the material ingredients are called vikalpa, and
creation by Brahma in each day of his life is called kalpa. Therefore each
day of Brahma is called a kalpa, and there are thirty kalpas in terms of
Brahma’s days, which is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita as follows:
sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad breahmano viduh
ratrim yuga-sahasrantarm te ’horatravido janah (Bg. 8.17)
In the upper planetary system the duration of one complete day and night
is equal to one complete year of this earth. This is accepted even by the
modern scientist and testified by the astronauts. Similarly, in the region of
still higher planetary systems, the duration of day and night is still greater
than in the heavenly planets. The four yugas are calculated in terms of the
heavenly calendars and accordingly are twelve thousand years in terms of
the heavenly planets. This is called divye-yuga, and one thousand divya-
yugas make one day of Brahma. Creation during the day of Brahma is
called kalpa, and creation of Brahma is called vikalpa, and when vikalpas
are made possible by the breathing of Maha-Visnu they are called maha-
kalpa. There are regular and systematic cycles of these mahakalpas,
vikalpas and kalpas, and in answer to Maharaja Pariksit’s question about
them, Sukadeva Gosvami answered in the Prabhasa-khanda of the Skanda
Purana, and they are as follows:
prathamah $vetakalpas tu dvitiyo nilalohitah
vamadevas trtiyas tu tato gathantaroparah
rauravah paiicamah proktah sasthah prana iti smrtah
saptamo ‘tha brhatkalpah kandarpo ’stamah ucyate
savyotha navamah prokta 26710 dasamah smrtah
dhyana ekadasah proktas tatha sarasvato [00701
trayodasa udanas tu garudo ’tha caturdasah
kaurmah [00180000080 jiieyah paurnamasi prajapateh
sodaso narasirnhas tu samadhis tu tato 00701
agneyo visnujah saurah somakalpas tato’parah
dvavimso bhavanah proktah supuman iti caparah
vaikunthas carcisas tadvat vallikalpas tato’parah


--- Page 269 ---
606 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10

saptavirso’tha vairajo gaurikalpas tathaparal

mahesvaras tatha proktas tripuro yatra ghatitah

pitrkalpas tatha cante yah kuhur brahmanah smrtah
Therefore the thirty kalpas of Brahma are: 1. Svetakalpa, 2. Nilalohita,
3. Vamadeva, 4. Gathantara, 5. Raurava, 6. Prana, 7. Brhatkalpa, 8. Kan-
darpa, 9. Savyotha, 10. I$ana, 11. Dhyana, 12. Sarasvata, 13. Udana,
14. Garuda, 15. Kaurma, 16. Narasimha, 17. Samadhi, 18. Agneya,
19. Visnuja, 20. Saura, 21. Somakalpa, 22. Bhavana, 23. Supuma, 24. Vai-
kuntha, 25. Arcisa, 26. Vallikalpa, 27. Vairdja, 28. Gaurikalpa, 29. Mahe-
évara, 30. Paitrkalpa.

These are Brahma’s days only, and he has to live months and years up
to one hundred, so we can just imagine how many creations there are in
kalpas only. Then again there are vikalpas which are generated by the
breathing of Maha-Visnu, as is stated in the Brahma-sarihita (yasyaika-
nisvasita-kalam athavalambya jivanti lomavilaja jagadanda-nathah). The
Brahmas live only during the breathing period of Maha-Visnu. So the ex-
haling and inhaling of Visnu are mahakalpas, and all these are due to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, for no one else is the master of all
creations.

TEXT 47
परिमाणं ` च कारस्य FREI |
৪ -
यथा पुरस्ताद्याख्यास्ये QR कल्पमयथा शृणु ।॥४७॥
parimanam ca kalasya
kalpa-laksana-vigraham
yatha purastad vyakhyasye
padman kalpam atho srnu
parimanam—measurement; ca—also; kalasya—of time; kalpa—day of
Brahma; laksana—symptoms; vigraham—form; yatha—as much as; purastat
—hereafter; vyakhyasye—shall be explained; padmam—by the name Padma;
kalpam— duration of day; atho—thus; §rpu—just hear.
TRANSLATION
O King, I shall in due course explain the measurement of time in its
gross and subtle features with specific symptoms of each of them, but for
the present let me explain unto you the Padma-kalpa.


--- Page 270 ---
Text 48] Bhagavatam is the Answer 607
PURPORT
The present duration of a kalpa of Brahma is called Varaha-kalpa or
Svetavariha-kalpa because the incarnation of the Lord as Variha took
place during the creation of Brahma, who was born on the lotus coming
out of the abdomen of Visnu. Therefore this Varaha-kalpa is also called
Padma-kalpa, and this is testified by acaryas like Jiva Gosvami as well as
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakur in pursuance of the first commentator,
Svami Sridhara. So there is no contradiction between the Variha and the
Padma-kalpa of Brahma.
TEXT 48
शौनक ITT
oN
यदाह नो भवान्‌ छत क्षत्ता भागवतोत्तमः ।
चचार तीर्थानि थवस्त्यक्त्वा बन्धून्‌ सुदुस्त्यजान्‌ ४८
Saunaka uvaca
yadaha no bhavan siita
ksatta bhagavatottamah
cacdra tirthani bhuvas
tyaktva bandhiin su-dustyajan
$aunakah uvaca—Sri Saunaka Muni said; yat—as; aha—you said; nah—
unto us; bhavan—your good self; siita—O Sita; ksatta—Vidura; bhagavata-
uttamah—one of the topmost devotees of the Lord; cacara—practiced;
tirthani—places of pilgrimage; bhuvah—on the earth; tyaktva leaving aside;
bandhiin—all relatives; su-dustyajan—very difficult to give up.
TRANSLATION
Saunaka Rsi, after hearing all about the creation, inquired from Sata
Gosvami about Vidura, as Siita Gosvami previously informed him how
Vidura left home, leaving aside all relatives who were very difficult to
leave.
PURPORT
The Rsis headed by Saunaka were more anxious to know about Vidura,
who met Maitreya Rsi while traveling in the pilgrimage sites of the world.


--- Page 271 ---
608 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
TEXTS 49-50
५ .
क्नुः FARA संबादोऽध्यात्मसं परितः |
५ _
यद्रा स भगवास्तस्म पृरष्टस्तत्वमुवाच ह ॥४९॥
~ 9 न्रे কা ~
Aft नस्तदिदं सोम्य विदुरस्य विचेष्टितम्‌ ।
. E)
बन्धुत्यागनिमित्तं च यथवागतवान्‌ पुनः ॥५०॥
ksattuh kausaraves tasya
5471४८० ‘dhyatma-samsritah
yad va sa bhagavars tasmai
prstas tattvam 0৮৫০৫ ha
briahi nas tad 10101 saumya
vidurasya vicestitam
bandhu-tyaga-nimittam ca
yathaivagatavan punah
ksattuh—of Vidura; kausaraveh—as that of Maitreya; tasya—their;
sarnvadah—news; adhyatma—in the matter of transcendental knowledge;
samsritah—full of; yat—which; va—anything else; sah—he; bhagavan—his
grace; tasmai—unto him; prstah—inquired; tattvam—the truth; uvaca—
answered; ha—in the past; brithi—please tell; nah—unto us; tat— those
matters; idam—here; saumya—@ gentle one; vidurasya—of Vidura; vice-
stitam—activities; bandhu-tyaga—renouncing the friends; nimittam— cause
of; ca—also; yatha—as; eva—also; dgatavan—came back; punah— again
(at home).
TRANSLATION
Saunaka Rsi said: Let us know, please, what topics were discussed be-
tween Vidura and Maitreya, who talked on transcendental subjects, and
what was inquired by Vidura and replied by Maitreya. Also please let us
know what was the reason for Vidura’s giving up the connection of family
members, and why he again came home, and please also let us know the
activities of Vidura while he was in the places of pilgrimage.
PURPORT
Sri Siita Gosvami was narrating the topics of creation and destruction of
the material world, but it appears that the rsis headed by Saunaka were
more inclined to hear of transcendental subjects which are on a higher


--- Page 272 ---
Text 51] Bhagavatam is the Answer 609
level than the physical. There are two classes of men, namely those too
much addicted to the gross body and the material world, and the others,
on the higher level, who are interested more in transcendental knowledge.
Srimad-Bhagavatam gives facility to everyone, both to the materialist and
the transcendentalist. And by hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam, in the matter of
the Lord’s glorious activities both in the material world and in the tran-
scendental world, men can derive equal benefit. The materialists are more
interested in the physical laws, how they are acting, and they see wonders
in those physical glamours. Sometimes, due to physical glamours, they for-
get the glories of the Lord. They should know definitely that physical
activities and their wonders are all initiated by the Lord. The rose flower
in the garden gradually takes its shape and color to become beautiful and
sweet not by a blind physical law, although it appears like that. Behind
that physical law there is the direction of the complete consciousness of
the Supreme Lord, otherwise things cannot take shape so systematically.
The artist draws a picture of a rose very nicely with all attention and
artistic sense, and yet it does not become as perfect as the real rose. If
that is the real fact, how can we say that the real rose has taken its shape
without intelligence behind the beauty? This sort of conclusion is due to a
poor fund of knowledge. One must know from the above description of
creation and annihilation that the supreme consciousness is so omnipresent
that it can take care of everything with perfect attention. That is the fact
of the omnipresence of the Supreme Lord. There are persons, however,
still more foolish than the gross materialists, who claim to be transcenden-
talists, and they claim to have such supreme all-pervading consciousness,
but offer no proof. Such foolish persons cannot know what is going on
behind the next wall, yet they are falsely proud of possessing the cosmic
all-pervading consciousness of the Supreme Person. For them also, hearing
of Srimad-Bhagavatam is a great help to open their eyes that by simply
claiming supreme consciousness one does not become so, but actually one
has to prove in the physical world that he has such supreme consciousness.
The rsis of Naimisaranya, however, were above the gross materialists and
the false transcendentalists, and thus they are always anxious to know the
real truth in transcendental matters, as they are discussed by authorities.
TEXT 51
qa उवाच
राज्ञा परीक्षिता पृष्टो यदवोचन्महामुनिः |
तद्वोऽभिधास्ये STI राज्ञः प्रश्नानुसारतः ॥५१॥


--- Page 273 ---
610 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 10
ऽव uvaca
rajna pariksita prsto
yad avocan maha-munih
tad vo ’bhidhasye 5770४44
rajnah prasnanusaratah

5 siitah uvaca—Sri Suta Gosvami replied; rajiia—by the King; pariksita—
by Pariksit; prstah—as asked; yat—what; avocat—spoke; maha-munih— the
great sage; tat—that very thing; vah—unto you; abhidhasye—1 shall explain;
Srputa—please hear; rajiah—by the King; prasna—question; anusaratah in
accordance with.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sata Gosvami explained: 1 shall now explain to you the very
subjects which were explained by the great sage in answer to King
Pariksit’s inquiries. Please hear them attentively.

PURPORT

Any question that is put forward may be answered by quoting the
authority, and that satisfies the saner section. That is the system even in
the law court. The best lawyer gives evidence from the past judgement of
the court without taking much trouble to establish his case. This is called
the parampara system, and learned authorities follow it without manufac-
turing rubbish interpretations.

iSvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karapam

Let us all obey the Supreme Lord whose hand is in everything, without
exception.

Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Tenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Bhagavatam is the Answer.”

END OF THE SECOND CANTO

