
--- Page 1 ---
CHAPTER ONE
The First Step in God Realization
INVOCATION
<= 5 = =
ॐ नंमो भगवते वासुदेवाय |
om namo bhagavate vasudevaya

om—0 my Lord; namah—my respectful obeisances unto You; bhagavate
—-unto the Personality of Godhead ; vasudevaye—unto Lord Krsna, the son
of Vasudeva.

TRANSLATION

O my Lord, the all-pervading Personality of Godhead, I offer my

respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT

Vasudevaya means to Krsna, the son of Vasudeva. As by chanting the
name of Krsna, Vasudeva, one can achieve all the good results of charity,
austerity and penances, so by the chanting of this mantra, om namo
bhagavate vasudevdya, it is to be understood that the author or the
speaker, or anyone of the readers of Srimad-Bhagavatam, is offering
respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord Krsna, the reservoir of
all pleasure. In the First Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, the principles
of creation are described, and as such, the First Canto can be called
“Creation.”

Similarly, in the Second Canto, the post-creation cosmic manifestation is
described. The different planetary systems are described in the Second
Canto as different parts of the universal body of the Lord. For this reason,
the Second Canto can be called “The Cosmic Manifestation.” There are ten
chapters in the Second Canto, and in these ten chapters the purpose of
Srimad-Bhagavatam and the different symptoms of this purpose are nar-
rated. In the First Chapter, the glories of chanting are described, and the
process of meditation on the universal form of the Lord by the neophyte

1


--- Page 2 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
devotees is hinted. In the first verse, Sukadeva Gosvami replies to the
questions of Maharaja Pariksit, who asked him about one’s duties at the
point of his death. Maharaja Pariksit was glad to receive Sukadeva Go-
svami, and he was proud of being a descendant of Arjuna, the intimate
friend of Krsna. Personally, he was very humble and meek, but he ex-
pressed his gladness that Lord Krsna was very kind to the sons of Pandu,
or his grandfathers, especially his own grandfather, Arjuna. And because
Lord Krsna is always pleased with his family, therefore, at the verge of
Maharaja Pariksit’s death, Sukadeva Gosvami was sent to help him in the
process of self-realization. Maharaja Pariksit was a devotee of Lord Krsna
from his childhood, so he had natural affection for Krsna, and Sukadeva
Gosvami could understand his devotion to Lord Krsna. Therefore, he
welcomed the questions about his duty. Because the King hinted that
worship of Lord Krsna is the ultimate function of every living entity,
Sukadeva Gosvami welcomed the suggestion and said, “Because you have
raised questions about Krsna, your question is most glorious.” The trans-
lation of the first verse is as follows.
TEXT 1
श्रीडयक उवाच
वरीयानेष ते प्रश्नः कृतो लोकहितं IT ।
आत्मवित्सम्मतः पुंसां श्रोतव्यादिषु यः परः।। 2 ॥
7 suka ८४९८०
variyan esa te prasnah
krto loka-hitam nrpa
atmavit-sammatah pursam
srotavyadisu yah parah
इदं suka ४०८०-5 Sukadeva Gosvami said: variyan—glorious; esa—all

these; te—your; prasnah—questions; krtah—made by you; loka-hitam—
beneficial for all men; nrpa—the king; atmavit—transcendentalist; sam-
matah—approved; pumsam—of all men; srotavyadisu—in the matter of all
kinds of hearing; yah—what is; parah—the supreme.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, your question is glorious

because it is very beneficial to all kinds of people. To hear the answer to
this question is the prime subject matter of hearing, and it is approved by
all transcendentalists.


--- Page 3 ---
Text 2] The First Step in God Realization 3
PURPORT
Even the very question is so nice that it is the best subject matter for
hearing. Simply by such questioning and hearing, one can achieve the
highest perfectional stage of life. Because Lord Krsna is the original
Supreme Person, any question about Him is original and perfect. Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said that the highest perfection of life is to achieve
transcendental loving service of Krsna. Because questions and answers
about Krsna elevate one to that transcendental position, the questions of
Maharaja Pariksit about Krsna philosophy are greatly glorified. Maharaja
Pariksit wanted to absorb his mind completely in Krsna, and such ab-
sorption can be effected simply by hearing about the uncommon activities
of Krsna. For instance, in the Bhagavad-gita it is stated that simply by
understanding the transcendental nature of Lord Krsna’s appearance,
disappearance, and activities, one can immediately return back to home,
back to Godhead, and never come back to this miserable condition of
material existence. It is very auspicious, therefore, to hear always about
Krsna. So Maharaja Pariksit requested Sukadeva Gosvami to narrate the
activities of Krsna so that he could engage his mind in Krsna. The activities
of Krsna are nondifferent from Himself. As long as one is engaged in
hearing such transcendental activities of Krsna, he remains aloof from the
conditional life of material existence. The topics of Lord Krsna are so
auspicious that they purify the speaker, the hearer, and the inquirer. They
are compared to the Ganges waters, which flow from the toe of Lord
Krsna. Wherever the Ganges waters go, they purify the land and the person
who bathes in them. Similarly, Krsne-katha or the topics of Krsna are so
pure that wherever they are spoken, the place, the hearer, the inquirer, the
speaker and all concerned become purified.
TEXT 2
श्रोतव्यादीनि राजेन्द्र चृणां सन्ति सदखज्ञः |
अपरस्यतामात्मतच्वं गृहेषु गृहमेधिनाम्‌ ।। २॥
srotavyadini rajendra

nrnarn santi sahasrasah

apasyatam atma-tattvam

grhesu grha-medhinam
Srotavyadini—subject matter for hearing; rajendra—O Emperor; nrpam—
of the human society; santi—there are; sahasrasah—hundreds and thou-


--- Page 4 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
sands; apasyatam—of the blind; atma-tattvam—knowledge of self, the
ultimate truth; grhesu—at home; grha-medhinam— of persons too materially
engrossed.
TRANSLATION

Those persons who are materially engrossed, being blind to the know-
ledge of ultimate truth, have many things as subject matter for hearing in
the human society, O Emperor.

PURPORT

In the revealed scriptures there are two nomenclatures for the house-
holder’s life. One is grhastha, and the other is grhamedhi. The grhasthas
are those who live together with wife and children, but live transcen-
dentally for realizing the ultimate truth. The grhamedhis, however, are
those who live only for the benefit of the family members, extended or
centralized, and thus are envious of others. The word medhi indicates
jealousy of others. The grhamedhis, being interested in family affairs
only, are certainly envious of others. Therefore, one grhamedhi is not on
good terms with another grhamedhi, and in the extended form, one
community, society or nation is not on good terms with another counter-
part of selfish interest. In the age of Kali, all the householders are jealous
of one another because they are blind to the knowledge of ultimate truth.
They have many subject matters for hearing, namely political, scientific,
social, economic and so on, but due to a poor fund of knowledge, they set
aside the question of the ultimate miseries of life, namely miseries of
birth, death, old age and disease. Factually, the human life is meant for
making an ultimate solution to birth, death, old age and disease, but the
grhamedhis, being illusioned by the material nature, forget everything
about self-realization. The ultimate solution of the problems of life is to
go back to home, back to Godhead, and thus, as stated in the Bhagavad-
gita, the miseries of material existence—birth, death, old age and disease—
are removed. (Bg. 8.16)

The process of going back to home, back to Godhead, is to hear about
the Supreme Lord, His name, form, attributes, pastimes, paraphernalia and
variegatedness. Foolish people do not know this. They want to hear some-
thing about the name, form, etc., of everything temporary, but they do
not know how to utilize this propensity of hearing for the ultimate good.
Misguided as they are, they also create some false literatures about the


--- Page 5 ---
Text 3] The First Step in God Realization 5
name, form, attributes, etc., of the ultimate truth. One should not, there-
fore, become a grhamedhi simply to exist for envying others, but one
should become a real householder in terms of the scriptural injunctions.
TEXT 3
निद्रय। हियते नक्तं व्यवायेन च वा बयः |
दिवा चार्थेहया राजन्‌ कुटुम्बभरणेन वा ॥ ३ ॥
11/11. 1111. 11
vyavayena ca va vayah
diva carthehaya rajan
kutumba-bharanena va

nidraya—by sleeping; hriyate—wastes; naktam—night; vyavdyena—sex
indulgence; ca—also; va—either; vayah—duration of life; diva—days; ca—
and; artha—economic; ihayd—development; rgjan—O King; kutumba—
familv members; bharanena—maintaining; va—either.

TRANSLATION
The lifetime of such envious householders is passed at night either in
sleeping or in sex indulgence, and in the daytime either in making money
or maintaining family members.
PURPORT

The present human civilization is primarily based on the principles of
sleeping and sex indulgence at night and earning money in the day and
spending the same for family maintenance. Such form of human civiliza-
tion is condemned by the Bhagavata school.

Because human life is a combination of matter and spirit soul, the whole
process of Vedic knowledge is directed at liberating the spirit soul from
the contamination of matter. The knowledge concerning this is called
atma-tattva. Those men who are too materialistic are unaware of this
knowledge and are more inclined to economic development for material
enjoyment. Such materialistic men are called karmis or fruitive laborers,


--- Page 6 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
and they are allowed regulated economic development or association of
woman for sex indulgence. Those who are above the karmis, that is, the
jianis, yogis and devotees, are strictly prohibited from sex indulgence.
The karmis are more or less devoid of atma-tattva knowledge, and as such,
their life is spent without spiritual profit. The human life is not meant for
hard labor for economic development, nor is it meant for sex indulgence
like the dogs and hogs. It is specially meant for making a solution to the
problems of material life and the miseries thereof. So the karmis waste
their valuable human life by sleeping and sex indulgence at night, and by
laboring hard in the daytime to accumulate wealth, and after doing so,
they try to improve the standard of materialistic life. The materialistic way
of life is described herein in a nutshell, and how foolishly men waste the
boon of human life is described as follows.
TEXT 4
देहापत्यकलत्रादिष्वात्मसैन्येष्वसस्खपि ।
9, - 9, - le
तेषां प्रमत्ता निधनं पंस्यन्नपि न पश्यति || ४॥
dehapatya-kalatradisv
atma-sainyesv asatsv api
tesam pramatto nidhanam
pasyann api na pasyati

deha—body; apatya—children; kalatra—wife; adisu—and in everything in
relation to them; @atma—own; sainyesu—fighting soldiers; asatsu—fallible;
api—in spite of; tesam—of all of them; pramattah—too attached; nidhanam
—destruction; pasyan—having been experienced; api—although; na—does
not; pasyati—see it.

TRANSLATION
Persons devoid of atma-tattva do not inquire into the problems of life,

being too attached to the fallible soldiers like the body, children, wife,
etc. Although sufficiently experienced, still they do not see their inevitable
destruction.


--- Page 7 ---
Text 4] The First Step in God Realization 7
PURPORT

This material world is called the world of death. Every living being,
beginning from Brahma, whose duration of life is some thousands of
millions of years, down to the microbial germs who live for a few seconds
only, is struggling for existence. Therefore, this life is a sort of fight with
material nature, which imposes death upon all. In the human form of life,
a living being is competent enough to come to an understanding of this
great struggle for existence, but being too attached to family members,
society, country, etc., he wants to win over the invincible material nature
by the aid of bodily strength, children, wife, relatives, etc. Although he is
sufficiently experienced in the matter by dint of past experience and
previous examples of the deceased predecessors, he does not see that the
so-called fighting soldiers like the children, relatives, socicty members and
countrymen are all fallible in the great struggle. One should examine the
fact that his father or his father’s father has already died, and therefore he
himself is also sure to die, and similarly, his children, who are the would-
be fathers of their children, will also die in due course. No one will
survive in this struggle with material nature. The history of human society
definitely proves it, yet the foolish people still suggest that in the future
they will be able to live perpetually, with the help of material science.
This poor fund of knowledge exhibited by human society is certainly
misleading, and it is all due to ignoring the matter of the constitution of
the living soul. This material world exists only as a dream, due to our
attachment to it. Otherwise, the living soul is always different from the
material nature. The great ocean of material nature is tossing with the
waves of time, and the so-called living conditions are something like
foaming bubbles, which appear before us as bodily self, wife, children,
society, countrymen, etc. Due to a lack of the knowledge of self, we
become victimized by the force of ignorance and thus spoil the valuable
energy of human life in a vain search after permanent living conditions,
which are impossible in this material world.

Our friends, relatives and so-called wives and children are not only
fallible, but also bewildered by the outward glamor of material existence.
As such, they cannot save us. Still we think that we are safe within the
orbit of the family, society or country.

The whole materialistic advancement of human civilization is like the
decoration of a dead body. Everyone is a dead body flapping only for a
few days, and yet all the energy of human life is being wasted in the
decoration of this dead body. Sukadeva Gosvami is pointing out the duty


--- Page 8 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
of the human being after showing the actual position of bewildered human
activities. Persons who are devoid of the knowledge of atma-tattva are
misguided, but those who are devotees of the Lord and have perfect
realization of transcendental knowledge are not bewildered.
TEXT 5
तस्ाद्भारत सर्वात्मा भगवानीश्वरो हरिः ।
श्रोतव्यः কীবিনন্যখ सतेव्यश्वेचछतामयम्‌।। ५ ॥
tasmad bharata sarvatma
bhagavan iSvaro harih
Srotavyah kirtitavyas ca
smartavyas cecchatabhayam
tasmat—for this reason; bharata—O descendant of Bharata; sarvatma—
the Supersoul; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; #varah—the con-
troller; harth—the Lord who vanquishes all miseries; srotavyah—is to be
heard; kirtitavyah—to be glorified; ca—also; smartavyah—to be remem-
bered; ca—and; icchata—of one who desires; abhayam—freedom.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of King Bharata, one who desires to be free from all
miseries must hear, glorify and also remember the Personality of Godhead,
who is the Supersoul, the controller and the savior from all miseries.
PURPORT
In the previous verse, Sri Sukadeva Gosvami has described how the
foolish materially-attached men are wasting their valuable time in the
improvement of the material conditions of life by sleeping, indulging in
sex life, developing economic conditions and maintaining a band of rela-
tives who are to be vanquished in the air of oblivion. Being engaged in all
these materialistic activities, the living soul entangles himself in the cycle
of the law of fruitive actions. This entails the chain of birth and death in
the 8,400,000 species of life: the aquatics, the vegetables, the reptiles, the
birds, the beasts, the uncivilized man, and then again the human form,


--- Page 9 ---
Text 6] The First Step in God Realization 9
which is the chance of getting out of the cycle of fruitive action. There-
fore, if one desires freedom from this vicious circle, then one must cease
to act as a karmi or enjoyer of the results of one’s own work, good or bad.
One should not do anything, either good or bad, on his own account, but
must execute everything on behalf of the Supreme Lord, the ultimate
proprietor of everything that be. This process of doing work is recom-
mended in the Bhagavad-gita also (Bg. 9.27), where instruction is given for
working on the Lord’s account. Therefore, one should first of all hear
about the Lord. When one has perfectly and scrutinizingly heard, one must
glorify His acts and deeds, and thus it will become possible to remember
constantly the transcendental nature of the Lord. Hearing and glorifying
the Lord are identical with the transcendental nature of the Lord, and by
so doing, one will be always in the association of the Lord. This brings
freedom from all sorts of fearfulness. The Lord is the Supersoul (Param-
atma) present in the hearts of all living beings, and thus by the above
hearing and glorifying process, the Lord invites the association of all in His
creation. This process of hearing and glorifying the Lord is applicable for
everyone, whoever he may be, and it will lead one to the ultimate success
in everything in which one may be engaged by providence. There are
many classes of human beings: the fruitive workers, the empiric philoso-
phers, the mystic yogis, and ultimately, the unalloyed devotees. For all of
them, one and the same process is applicable for achieving the desired
success. Everyone wants to be free from all kinds of fearfulness, and every-
one wants the fullest extent of happiness in life. The perfect process for
achieving this, here and now, is recommended in the Srimad-Bhagavatam,
which is uttered by a great authority like Srila Sukadeva Gosvami. By
hearing and glorifying the Lord, all a person’s activities become molded
into spiritual activities, and thus all conception of material miseries
becomes completely vanquished.
TEXT 6
एतावान्‌ सांख्ययोगाभ्यां खधर्म॑परिनिष्टया |
जन्मलाभः परः पुंसामन्ते नारायणस्मृतिः ॥ & ॥
etavan sankhya-yogabhyam
sva-dharma-parinisthaya
janma-labhah parah purisam
ante narayana-smrtih


--- Page 10 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1

etavan—all these; sankhya—complete knowledge of matter and spirit;
yogabhyam—knowledge of mystic power; sva-dharma— particular occupa-
tional duty; parinisthaya—by full perception; janma—birth; labhah—gain;
parah—the supreme; pumsam—of a person; ante—at the end; narayana—
Personality of Godhead; smrtih—remembrance.

TRANSLATION
The highest perfection of human life, achieved either by complete
knowledge of matter and spirit, by practice of mystic powers, or by per-
fect discharge of occupational duty, is to remember the Personality of
Godhead at the end of life.
PURPORT

Narayana is the transcendental Personality of Godhead beyond the
material creation. Everything that is created, sustained, and at the end,
annihilated, is within the compass of mahat-tattva (material principle) and
is known as the material world. The existence of Narayana, or the
Personality of Godhead, is not within the jurisdiction of this mahat-tattva,
and as such, the name, form, attributes, etc., of Narayana are beyond the
jurisdiction of the material world. By speculation of empiric philosophy,
which discerns matter from spirit, or by cultivation of mystic powers,
which ultimately helps the performer to reach any planet of the universe
or beyond the universe, or by discharge of religious duties, one can achieve
the highest perfection, provided one is able to reach the stage of Narayana-
smrti, or constant remembrance of the Personality of Godhead. This is
only possible by the association of a pure devotee, who can give a finishing
touch to the transcendental activities of all jiianis, yogis, or karmis, in
terms of the prescribed duties defined in the scriptures. There are many
historical instances of the achievement of spiritual perfection, such as that
of the Sanakadi Rsis or the nine celebrated Yogendras, who attained per-
fection only after being situated in the devotional service of the Lord.
None of the devotees of the Lord ever deviated from the path of devo-
tional service by taking to other methods as adopted by the jianis or
yogis. Everyone is anxious to achieve the highest perfection of his par-
ticular activity, and it is indicated herein that such perfection is Narayana-
smrti, for which everyone must endeavor his best. In other words, life
should be molded in such a manner that one is able to progressively
remember the Personality of Godhead in every step of life.


--- Page 11 ---
Text 7] The First Step in God Realization 11
TEXT 7
~ ~ ~ PN
प्रायेण ম্বল্যা गजलनिषत्ता विधिषेधतः |
नै्गण्यग्या मन्ते মা गुणानुकयने हरेः ॥ ७॥
prayena munayo rajan
nivrtta vidhi-sedhatah
nairgunya-stha ramante sma
gunanukathane hareh
prayena—mainly; munayah—all sages; rajan—O King; nivrttah—above
the; vidhi—regulative principles; sedhatah—from restrictions; nairgunya-
sthah—transcendentally situated ;ramante—take pleasure in; sma—distinctly;
gunanukathane—describing the glories; hareh—of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, mainly the topmost transcendentalists, who are above
the regulative principles and restrictions, take pleasure in describing the
glories of the Lord.
PURPORT
The topmost transcendentalist is a liberated soul and, therefore, is not
within the purview of the regulative principles. A neophyte, who is
intended to be promoted to the spiritual plane, is guided by the spiritual
master under regulative principles. He may be compared to a patient who
is treated by various restrictions under medical jurisdiction. Generally,
such liberated souls also take pleasure in describing the transcendental
activities. As mentioned above, since Narayana, Hari, the Personality of
Godhead, is beyond the material creation, His form and attributes are not
material. The topmost transcendentalists or the liberated souls realize Him
by advanced experience of transcendental knowledge, and therefore they
take pleasure in the discussion of the transcendental qualities of the Lord’s
pastimes. In the Bhagavad-gita, the Personality of Godhead declares that
His appearance and activities are all divyam, or transcendental. (Bg. 4.9)
The common man, who is under the spell of material energy, takes it for
granted that the Lord is like one of us, and therefore he refuses to accept
the transcendental nature of the Lord’s form, name, etc. The topmost
transcendentalist is not interested in anything material, and his taking


--- Page 12 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
interest in the matter of the Lord’s activities is definite proof that the Lord
is not like one of us in the material world. In the Vedic literatures also, it
is confirmed that the Supreme Lord is one, but that He is engaged in His
transcendental pastimes in the company of His unalloyed devotees and
that simultaneously He is present as the Supersoul, an expansion of
Baladeva, in the heart of all living entities. Therefore, the highest per-
fection of transcendental realization is to take pleasure in hearing and
describing the transcendental qualities of the Lord and not in merging into
His impersonal Brahman existence, as the impersonalist monist aspires.
Real transcendental pleasure is realized in the glorification of the tran-
scendental Lord, and not in the feeling of being situated in His impersonal
feature. But there are also others who are not the topmost transcen-
dentalists, but are in the lower status, and who do not take pleasure in
describing the transcendental activities of the Lord. Rather, they discuss
such activities of the Lord formally with the aim of merging into His
existence.
TEXT 8
इदं भागवतं नाम पुराणं ब्रह्मसम्मितम्‌ |
-~ KY
अधीतवाव. द्वापरादौ पितुर्देपायनादहम्‌ । ८ ॥
idam bhagavatam nama
puranam brahma-sammitam
adhitavan 00৫1007৫001
pitur dvaipayanad aham

idam—this; bhagavatam—Srimad-Bhagavatam; nama—ef the name;
puranam—Vedic supplimentary; brahma-sammitam—approved as the es-
sence of the Vedas; adhitavan—studied; dvaparadau—at the end of the
Dvapara-yuga; pituh—from my father; dvaipayanat—Dvaipayana Vyasadeva
aham—myself.

TRANSLATION

At the end of the Dvapara-yuga, I studied this great supplement of
Vedic literature of the name Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is equal to all the
Vedas, from my father, Srila Dvaipayana Vyasadeva.


--- Page 13 ---
Text 8] The First Step in God Realization 13
PURPORT

The statement made by Srila Sukadeva Gosvami that the topmost
transcendentalist, who is beyond the jurisdiction of regulations and re-
strictions, mainly takes to the task of hearing about and glorifying the
Personality of Godhead, is verified by his personal example. Sukadeva
Gosvami, being a recognized liberated soul and the topmost transcen-
dentalist, was accepted by all of the topmost sages present in the meeting
during the last seven days of Maharaja Pariksit. He cites from the example
of his life that he himself was attracted by the transcendental activities of
the Lord, and he studied Srimad-Bhagavatam from his great father, 11
Dvaipayana Vyasadeva. Srimad-Bhagavatam, or, for that matter, any other
scientific literature, cannot be studied at home by one’s own intellectual
capacity. Medical books of anatomy or physiology are available in the
market, but no one can become a qualified medical practicioner simply by
reading such books at home. One has to be admitted to the medical
college and study the books under the guidance of learned professors.
Similarly, Srimad-Bhagavatam, the postgraduate study of the science of
Godhead, can only be learned by studying it at the feet of a realized soul
like Srila Vyasadeva. Although Sukadeva Gosvami was a liberated soul
from the very day of his birth, he still had to take lessons of Srimad-
Bhagavatam from his great father, Vyasadeva, who compiled the Srimad-
Bhagavatam under the instruction of another great soul, Sri Narada Muni.
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed a learned brahmana to study
Srimad-Bhagavatam from a personal bhagavatam. Srimad-Bhagavatam is
based on the transcendental name, form, attributes, pastimes, entourage
and variegatedness of the Supreme Person, and it is spoken by the
incarnation of the Personality of Godhead, Srila Vyasadeva. Pastimes of
the Lord are executed in cooperation with His pure devotees, and con-
sequently historical incidences are mentioned in this great literature
because they are related to Krsna. It is called brahma-sammitam because
it is the sound representative of Lord Krsna—like the Bhagavad-gita.
Bhagavad-gita is the sound incarnation of the Lord because it is spoken by
the Supreme Lord, and Srimad-Bhagavatam is the sound representative of
the Lord because it was spoken by the incarnation of the Lord about the
activities of the Lord. As stated in the beginning of this book, it is the
essence of the Vedic desire-tree and the natural commentation on the
Brahma-siitras, the topmost philosophical thesis on the subject matter of
Brahman. Vyasadeva appeared at the end of Dvapara-yuga as the son
of Satyavatl, and therefore the word Dvapara-adau, or ‘beginning of


--- Page 14 ---
14 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
Dvapara-yuga,” in this context means just prior to the beginning of the
Kali-yuga. The logic of this statement is, according to Srila Jiva Gosvami,
comparable to calling the upper portion of the tree the beginning. The
root of the tree is the beginning of the tree, but in common knowledge,
the upper portion of the tree is first seen. In that way the end of the tree
is accepted as its beginning.
TEXT 9
= a ¢ -
परिनिष्ठितोऽपि Ager उत्तमश्छाकठीठया |
=p ४
गृहीतचेता राजे आख्यानं यदधीतवान्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
parinisthito’pi nairgunya
uttama-sloka-lilaya
grhita-ceta rajarse
akhyanam yad adhitavan
parinisthitah—fully realized; api—in spite of; nair-gunye—in transcen-
dence; uttama—enlightened; sloka—verse; lilaya—by the pastimes; grhita—
being attracted; cet@dh—attention; rajarse—O saintly King; akhyanam—de-
lineation; yat— that; adhitavan—I have studied.
TRANSLATION
O saintly King, I was certainly situated perfectly in transcendence,
yet I was still attracted by the delineation of the pastimes of the Lord,
who is described by enlightened verses.
PURPORT
The Absolute Truth is realized as the impersonal Brahman at the first
instance by philosophical speculation and later on as the Supersoul by
further progress of transcendental knowledge. But, if, by the grace of the
Lord, an impersonalist is enlightened by the superior statements of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, he is also converted into a transcendental devotee of the
Personality of Godhead. With a poor fund of knowledge, we cannot
adjust to the idea of the personality of the Absolute Truth, and the


--- Page 15 ---
Text 10] The First Step in God Realization 15
personal activities of the Lord are deplored by the less intelligent im-
personalists; but reasons and arguments together with the transcendental
process of approaching the Absolute Truth help even the staunch im-
personalist to become attracted by the personal activities of the Lord. A
person like Sukadeva Gosvami cannot be attracted by any mundane
activities, but when such a devotee is convinced by superior method, he is
certainly attracted by the transcendental activities of the Lord. The Lord
is transcendental, as are His activities. He is neitherinactive nor impersonal.
TEXT 10
5 छ = =
तदहं तेऽभिधास्यामि महापोरुषिकति भवान्‌ |
~ [*
यस श्रदधतामाड्ु खान्युकुन्द मनिः सती ॥१०॥
tad aham te’bhidhasyami
mahapaurusiko bhavan
yasya sraddadhatam asu
syan mukunde matih sati
tat—that; aham—I; te—unto you; abhidhasyami—shall recite; maha-
paurusikah—the most sincere devotee of Lord Krsna; bhavan—your good
self; yasya—of which; sraddadhatam—of one who gives full respect and
attention; asu—very soon; syat—it so becomes; mukunde—unto the Lord
who awards salvation; matih—faith; sati—unflinching.
TRANSLATION
That very Srimad-Bhagavatam 1 shall recite before you because you are
the most sincere devotee of Lord Krsna. One who gives full attention and
respect to hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam achieves unflinching faith in the
Supreme Lord, the giver of salvation.
PURPORT
Srimad-Bhagavatam is recognized Vedic wisdom, and the system of
receiving Vedic knowledge is called avaroha-pantha, or the process of
receiving transcendental knowledge through bona fide disciplic succession.


--- Page 16 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
For advancement of material knowledge there is the need for personal
capacity and researching aptitude, but in the case of spiritual knowledge,
all progress depends more or less on the mercy of the spiritual master.
The spiritual master must be satisfied with the disciple; only then is
knowledge automatically manifest before the student of spiritual science.
It should not, however, be misunderstood to be something like magical
feats whereby the spiritual master acts like a magician and injects spiritual
knowledge into his disciple, as if surcharging him with an electrical current.
The bona fide spiritual master reasonably explains everything to the
disciple on the authorities of Vedic wisdom. The disciple can receive such
teachings not exactly intellectually, but by submissive inquiries and a
service attitude. The idea is that both the spiritual master and the disciple
must be bona fide. In this case, the spiritual master, Sukadeva Gosvam, is
ready to recite exactly what he has learned from his great father Srila
Vyasadeva, and the disciple, Maharaja Pariksit, is a great devotee of Lord
Krsna. A devotee of Lord Krsna is he who believes sincerely that by
becoming a devotee of the Lord one becomes fully equipped with every-
thing spiritual. This teaching is imparted by the Lord Himself in the pages
of the Bhagavad-gita, in which it is clearly described that the Lord
(प Krsna) is everything, and to surrender unto Him solely and wholly
makes one the most perfectly pious man. This unflinching faith in Lord
Krsna prepares one to become a student of Srimad-Bhagavatam, and one
who hears Srimad-Bhdgavatam from a devotee like Sukadeva Gosvami is
sure to attain salvation at the end, as Maharaja Pariksit did. The profession-
al reciter of Srimad-Bhdgavatam and the pseudo-devotees whose faith
is based on one week's hearing are different from the duo of Sukadeva
Gosvami and Maharaja Pariksit. Srila Vyasadeva explained Srimad-
Bhagavatam unto Sukadeva Gosvami from the very beginning of the
“janmadyasya” verse, and so Sukadeva Gosvami also explained it to
the King. Lord Krsna is described as the Mahapurusa in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam (Canto 11) in His devotional feature as Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Lord Krsna Himself in His
devotional attitude, descended on earth to bestow special favors upon the
fallen souls of this age of Kali. There are two verses particularly suitable
to offer as prayers to this Mahapurusa feature of Lord Krsna.
dhyeyarh 50৫00 paribhava-ghnam abhista-dohari
tirthaspadar $iva-virifici-nutam Sarapyam


--- Page 17 ---
Text 10] The First Step in God Realization 17
bhrtyarti-hari pranata-pala bhavabdhi-potam
vande mahapurusa te caranaravindam.
(Bhag. 11.3.33)
tyaktva su-dus-tyaja-surepsita-rajya-laksmim
dharmistha arya-vacasa yad agad-aranyam
maya-mygam dayitayepsitam anvadhavad
vande mahapurusa te caraparavindam.
(Bhag. 11.5.34)

In other words, purusa means the enjoyer, and mahapurusa means the
supreme enjoyer, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna. One
who deserves to approach the Supreme Lord Sri Krsna is called the
mahapaurusika. Anyone who hears Srimad-Bhdgavatam attentively from
its bona fide reciter is sure to become a sincere devotee of the Lord, who
is able to award liberation. There was none so attentive as Maharaja
Pariksit in the matter of hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam, and there was none
80 qualified as Sukadeva Gosvami to recite the text of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
Therefore, anyone who follows the footsteps of either the ideal reciter or
the ideal hearer, Sukadeva Gosvami and Maharaja Pariksit respectively,
will undoubtedly attain salvation like them. Maharaja Pariksit attained
salvation by hearing only, and Sukadeva Gosvami attained salvation by
reciting only. Recitation and hearing are two processes out of nine devo-
tional activities, and by strenuously following the principles, either in all
or by parts, one can attain the absolute plane. So the complete text of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, beginning with the “janmadyasya™ verse up to the
last one in the twelfth canto, was spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami for the
attainment of salvation by Maharaja Pariksit. In the Padma Purana, it
is mentioned that Gautama Muni advised Maharaja Ambarisa to hear
regularly Srimad-Bhdgavatam as it was recited by Sukadeva Gosvami, and
herein it is confirmed that Mahardja Ambarisa heard Srimad-Bhagavatam
from the very beginning to the end, as it was spoken by Sukadeva
Gosvimi. One who is, therefore, actually interested in the Bhagavatam
must not play with it by reading or hearing a portion from here and a
portion from there, but one must follow the footsteps of great kings like
Maharaja Ambarisa or Maharaja Partksit and hear it from a bona fide
representative of Sukadeva Gosvami.


--- Page 18 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
TEXT 11
एतनिर्वियमानानामिच्छतामङुताभयम्‌ ।
- : ~ + = Ps
योगिनां नृप निर्णीतं हदरेनामानुकीतेनम्‌ 1720
etan nirvidyamananam
icchatam akuto-bhayam
yoginar nrpa nimitari
harer-namanukirtanam
etat—it is; nirvidyamananam—of those who are completely free from all
material desires; icchatam—of those who are desirous of all sorts of
material enjoyment;akuto-bhayam—free from all doubts and fear; yoginam
—of all who are self-satisfied; nrpa—O King; nirpitam—decided truth;
hareh—of the Lord, Sri Krsna; nama—holy name; anu—after someone,
always; kirtanam—chanting.
TRANSLATION
0 King, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord after the ways
of the great authorities is the doubtless and fearless way of success for
all, including those who are free from all material desires, and also those
who are desirous of all material enjoyment, as well as those who are self-
satisfied by dint of transcendental knowledge.
PURPORT
In the previous verse, the great necessity for attaining attachment to
Mukunda has been accredited. There are different types of persons who
desire to attain success in different varieties of pursuits. Generally the
persons are materialists who desire to enjoy the fullest extent of material
gratification. Next to them are the transcendentalists, who have attained
perfect knowledge about the nature of material enjoyment and thus are
aloof from such an illusory way of life. More or less, they are satisfied in
themselves by self-realization. Above them are the devotees of the Lord,
who neither aspire to enjoy the material world nor desire to get out of it.
They are after the satisfaction of the Lord Sri Krsna. In other words, the
devotees of the Lord do not want anything on their personal account. If


--- Page 19 ---
Text 11] The First Step in God Realization 19
the Lord desires, the devotees can accept all sorts of material facilities, and
if the Lord does not desire, the devotees can leave aside all sorts of
facilities, even up to the limit of salvation. Nor are they self-satisfied,
because they want the satisfaction of the Lord only. In this verse, Sri
Sukadeva Gosvami recommends the transcendental chanting of the holy
name of the Lord. By offenseless chanting and hearing of the holy name
of the Lord, one becomes acquainted with the transcendental form of the
Lord, and then with the attributes of the Lord, and then with the tran-
scendental nature of His pastimes, etc. Here it is mentioned that one
should constantly chant the holy name of the Lord after hearing it from
authorities. This means hearing from the authorities is the first essential.
Hearing of the holy name gradually promotes one to the stage of hearing
about His form and so on about His attributes, His pastimes, etc., and
thus the necessity of the chanting of His glories develops successively.
This process is recommended not only for the successful execution of
devotional service, but also even for those who are materially attached.
According to Sri Sukadeva Gosvami, this way of attaining success is an
established fact, concluded not only by him, but also by all other previous
acaryas. Therefore, there is no need of further evidence. The process is
recommended not only for the progressive students in different depart-
ments of ideological success, but also for those who are already successful
in their achievement as fruitive workers, as philosophers or as devotees of
the Lord.

Srila Jiva Gosvami instructs that chanting of the holy name of the Lord
should be loudly done, and it should be performed offenselessly as well,
as is recommended in the Padma Purana. One can deliver himself from the
effects of all sins by surrendering himself unto the Lord. One can deliver
himself from all offenses at the feet of the Lord by taking shelter of His
holy name. But one cannot protect himself if one commits an offense at
the feet of the holy name of the Lord. Such offenses are mentioned in the
Padma Purina as being ten in number. The first offense is to vilify the
great devotees who have preached about the glories of the Lord. The
second offense is to see the holy names of the Lord in terms of worldly
distinction. The Lord is the proprietor of all the universes, and therefore
He may be known in different places by different names, but that does
not in any way qualify the fullness of the Lord. Any nomenclature which
is meant for the Supreme Lord is as holy as the others because they are
all meant for the Lord. Such holy names are as powerful as the Lord, and
there is no bar for anyone in any part of the creation to chant and glorify
the Lord by the particular name of the Lord as it is locally understood.


--- Page 20 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
They are all auspicious, and one should not distinguish such names of the
Lord as material commodities. The third offense is to neglect the orders of
the authorized acdaryas or the spiritual masters. The fourth offense is to
vilify scriptures or Vedic knowledge. The fifth offense is to define the holy
name of the Lord in terms of one’s mundane calculation. The holy name
of the Lord is identical with the Lord Himself, and one should understand
the holy name of the Lord to be nondifferent from Him. The sixth offense
is to interpret the holy name. The Lord is not imaginary, nor is His holy
name. There are persons with a poor fund of knowledge who think the
Lord to be an imagination of the worshiper and therefore think His holy
name to be imaginary. Such a chanter of the name of the Lord cannot
achieve the desired success in the matter of chanting the holy name. The
seventh offense is to commit sins intentionally on the strength of the holy
name. In the scriptures it is said that one can be liberated from the effects
of all sinful actions simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord; one
who takes advantage of this transcendental method and continues to
commit sins on the expectation of neutralizing the effects of sins by
chanting the holy name of the Lord is the greatest offender at the feet of
the holy name. Such an offender cannot purify himself by any recom-
mended method of purification. In other words, one may be a sinful man
before chanting the holy name of the Lord, but after taking shelter in the
holy name of the Lord and becoming immune, one should strictly restrain
oneself from committing sinful acts with a hope that his method of
chanting the holy name will give him protection. The eighth offense is to
consider the holy name of the Lord and His chanting method to be equal
to some material auspicious activity. There are various kinds of good
works for material benefits, but the holy name and His chanting are no
mere auspicious holy services. Undoubtedly the holy name is holy service,
but He should never be utilized for such purposes. Since the holy name
and the Lord are of one and the same identity, one should not try to
bring the holy name into the service of mankind. The idea is that the
Supreme Lord is the supreme enjoyer. He is no one’s servant or order
supplier. Similarly, since the holy name of the Lord is identical with the
Lord, one should not try to utilize the holy name for one’s personal
service.

The ninth offense is to instruct those who are not interested in chanting
the holy name of the Lord about the transcendental nature of the holy
name. If such instruction is imparted to an unwilling audience, the act is
considered to be an offense at the feet of the holy name. The tenth
offense is to become disinterested in the holy name of the Lord even after


--- Page 21 ---
Text 12] The First Step in God Realization 21
hearing of the transcendental nature of the holy name. The effect of
chanting the holy name of the Lord is perceived by the chanter as libera-
tion from the conception of false egoism. False egoism is exhibited by
thinking oneself to be the enjoyer of the world and thinking everything in
the world to be meant for the enjoyment of one’s self only. The whole
materialistic world is moving under such false egoism of “I” and “mine,”
but the factual effect of chanting the holy name is to become free from
such misconception.
TEXT 12
[ज ~~ ^ Aan
किं प्रमत्तस्य FHT पराक्षहायनेरिह |
वरं मुहूतं विदितं घटते श्रयसे यतः ॥१२॥
kim pramattasya bahubhih
paroksair hayanair iha
varam muhurtam viditarm
ghalate Sreyase yatah

kim—what is; pramattasya—of the bewildered; bahubhih—by many;
paroksaih—unexperienced; hayanaih—years; itha—in this world; varam—
better; muhirtam—a moment; viditam—conscious; ghalate—one can try
for; Sreyase—in the matter of the supreme interest; yatah—by that.

TRANSLATION

What is the value of a prolonged life which is wasted, inexperienced by
years in this world? Better a moment of full consciousness, because that
gives one a start in searching after his supreme interest.

PURPORT

Srila Sukadeva Gosvami instructed Maharaja Pariksit about the impor-
tance of chanting the holy name of the Lord by every progressive gentle-
man. In order to encourage the King, who had only seven remaining days
of life, Srila Sukadeva Gosvami asserted that there is no use in living
hundreds of years without any knowledge of the problems of life—better
to live for a moment with full consciousness of the supreme interest to be


--- Page 22 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
fulfilled. The supreme interest of life is eternal, with full knowledge and
bliss. Those who are bewildered by the external features of the material
world and are engaged in the matter of the animal propensities of the eat-
drink-and-be-merry type of life are simply wasting their lives by the
unseen passing away of valuable years. We should know in perfect con-
sciousness that human life is bestowed upon the conditioned soul to
achieve spiritual success, and the easiest possible procedure to attain this
end is to chant the holy name of the Lord. In the previous verse, we have
discussed this point to a certain extent, and we may further be en-
lightened on the different types of offenses committed unto the feet of
the holy name. Srila Jiva Gosvami Prabhu has quoted many passages from
authentic scriptures and has ably supported the statements in the matter
of offenses at the feet of the holy name. From Vispu-jamala Tantra, Srila
Jiva Gosvami has proven that one can be liberated from the effects of all
sins simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord. Quoting from the
Markandeya Purana, Sri Gosvamiji says that one should neither blaspheme
the devotee of the Lord nor indulge in hearing others who are engaged in
belittling a devotee of the Lord. A devotee should try to restrict the
vilifier by cutting out his tongue, and being unable to do so, one should
commit suicide rather than hear the blaspheming of the devotee of the
Lord. The conclusion is that one should neither hear nor allow vilifica-
tion of a devotee of the Lord. As far as distinguishing the Lord’s holy
name from the names of the demigods, the revealed scriptures disclose
(Bg. 10.41) that all extraordinarily powerful beings are but parts and
parcels of the supreme energetic, Lord Krsna. Except the Lord Himself,
everyone is subordinate; no one is independent of the Lord. Since no one
is more powerful than or equal to the energy of the Supreme Lord, no
one’s name can be as powerful as that of the Lord. By chanting the Lord’s
holy name, one can derive all the stipulated energy synchronized from all
sources. Therefore, one should not equalize the supreme holy name of the
Lord with any other name. Brahma, Siva or any other powerful god can
never be equal to the Supreme Lord Visnu. The powerful holy name of
the Lord can certainly deliver one from sinful effects, but one who
desires to utilize this transcendental potency of the holy name of the
Lord in one’s sinister activities is the most degraded person in the world.
Such persons are never excused by the Lord or by any agent of the Lord.
One should, therefore, utilize one’s life in glorifying the Lord by all
means, without any offense. Such activity of life, even for a moment, is
never to be compared with a prolonged life of ignorance, like the lives of
the tree and other living entities who may live for thousands of years
without prosecuting spiritual advancement.


--- Page 23 ---
Text 13] The First Step in God Realization 23
TEXT 13
অন্নাল্লা नाम राजपिज्ञान्वयत्तामिहायुषः ।
^ वी
भहूतान्सवमृत्सृज्य गतवानभयं हरिम्‌ IEE
khatvango nama rajarsir
jiatveyattam ihayusah
muhiirtat sarvam utsrjya
gatavan abhayari harim
khatvangah—King Khatvanga; nama—name; rajarsih—saintly king; jiatva
—by knowing; iyattam—duration; tha—in this world; ayusah—of one’s life;
muhiirtat—within only a moment; sarvam—everything; utsrjya—leaving
aside; gatavan—had undergone; abhayam—fully safe; harim—the Personality
of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The saintly King, Maharaja Khatvanga, after being informed that the
duration of his life would be only a moment more, at once got himself
freed from all material activities and took shelter of the supreme safety,
the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
A fully responsible man should always be conscious of the prime duty
of the present human form of life. The activities of life to meet the
immediate necessities of material life are not everything. One should always
be alert in his duty for attainment of the best situation in the next life.
Human life is meant for preparing ourselves for that prime duty. Maharaja
Khatvanga is mentioned herein as the saintly King because even within the
responsibility of the state management, he was not at all forgetful of the
prime duty of life. Such was the case with other rajarsis (saintly kings),
like Maharaja Yudhisthira and Maharaja Pariksit. They were all exemplary
personalities on account of their being alert in discharging their prime duty.
Maharaja Khatvanga was invited by the demigods in the higher planets to
fight demons, and as a king, he fought the battles to the full satisfaction
of the demigods. The demigods, being fully satisfied with him, wanted to
give him some benediction for material enjoyment, but Maharaja
4


--- Page 24 ---
24 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
Khatvanga, being very much alert to his prime duty, inquired from the
demigods about his remaining duration of life. This means that he was not
as anxious to accumulate some material benediction from the demigods as
he was to prepare himself for the next life. He was, however, informed by
the demigods that his life would last only a moment longer. The King at
once left the heavenly kingdom, which is always full of material enjoyment
of the highest standard, and coming down on this earth, took ultimate
shelter of the all-safe Personality of Godhead. He was successful in his
great attempt and got liberation. This attempt, even for a moment, by the
saintly King, was successful because he was always alert to his prime duty.
Maharaja Parlksit was thus encouraged by the great Sukadeva Gosvami,
even though he had only seven days left in his life to execute the prime
duty of hearing the glories of the Lord in the form of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
By the will of the Lord, Maharaja Pariksit instantly met the ot legions
Gosvami, and the great treasure of spiritual success left by him is nicely
mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 14
=, ढः nes oo,
तवाप्येतर्हि कोरव्य ANE जोविनावधिः |
© ~
उपकर्पय तत्सवं ताबद्यन्साम्परायकम्‌ nel
tavapy etarhi kauravya
saptahari jivitavadhih
upakalpaya tat sarvam
tavad yat samparayikam
tava—your; api—also; etarhi—therefore; kauravya—born in the family of
Kuru; saptaham—seven days; jivita—duration of life; avadhih—up to the
limit of; upakalpaya—get them performed; tat—those; sarvam—all; tavat—
so long; yat—which are; samparayikam—rituals for the next life.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit, now your duration of life is limited to seven more
days, so during this time you can perform all those rituals which are
needed for the best purpose of your next life.


--- Page 25 ---
Text 15] The First Step in God Realization 25
PURPORT
Sukadeva Gosvami, after citing the example of Maharaja Khatvanga,
who prepared himself for the next life within a very short time, encouraged
Maharaja Pariksit that he had still seven days at his disposal and that he
could easily take advantage of the time to prepare himself for the next
life. Indirectly, the Gosvami told Maharaja Pariksit that he should take
shelter of the sound representation of the Lord for the seven days still
remaining in the duration of his life and thus get himself liberated. In
other words, everyone can best prepare himself for the next life simply
by hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam, as it was recited by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit. The rituals are not formal, but there are also some
favorable conditions, which are required to be carried out, as instructed
hereafter.
TEXT 15
IHRE तु पुरुप आगतं TARTAR: |
चिन्यादसद्गशखेण स्पृहां देदेऽनु ये च तम्‌ ॥१५॥
anta-kale tu purusa
agate gata-sadhvasah
chindyad asanga-sastrena
sprhari dehe’nu ye ca tam
anta-kale—at the last stage of life; tu—but; purusah—a person; agate—
having arrived; gata-sadhvasah—without any fear of death; chindyat—must
cut off; asanga—nonattachment; sastrena—by the weapon of; sprham—all
desires; dehe—in the matter of the material tabernacle; anu—pertaining;
ye—all that; ca—also; tam—them.
TRANSLATION
At the last stage of one’s life, one should be bold enough not to become
afraid of death. But he must cut off all attachment to the material body
and everything pertaining to it and all desires thereof.


--- Page 26 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
PURPORT

The foolishness of gross materialism is that people think of making a
permanent settlement in this world, although it is a settled fact that one
has to give up everything here that has been created by valuable human
energy. Great statesmen, scientists, philosophers, etc., who are foolish,
without any information of the spirit soul, think that this life of a few
years only is all in all and that there is nothing more after death. This poor
fund of knowledge, even in the so-called learned circles of the world, is
killing the vitality of human energy, and the awful result is being keenly
felt. And vet the foolish materialistic men do not care for what is going to
happen in the next life. The preliminary instruction in the Bhagavad-gita
is that one should know that the identity of the individual living entity is
not lost even after the end of this present body, which is nothing but
outward dress only. As one changes an old garment, so the individual
living being also changes his body, and this change of body is called death.
Death is. therefore, a process of changing the body at the end of the
duration of the present life. An intelligent person must be prepared for
this and must try to have the best type of body in the next life. The best
type of body is a spiritual body, which is obtained by those who go back
to the kingdom of God or enter the realm of Brahman. In the second
chapter of this canto, this matter will be broadly discussed, but in as far as
the change of body is concerned, one must prepare now for the next life.
Foolish people attach more importance to the present temporary life, and
thus the foolish leaders make appeals to the body and the bodily relations.
The bodily relations not only extend to this body but also to the family
members, wife, children, society, country and so many other things which
end at the end of life. After death one forgets everything about the present
bodily relations: we have a little experience of this at night when we go to
sleep. While sleeping, we forget everything about this body and bodily
relations, although this forgetfulness is a temporary situation for only a
few hours. Death is nothing but sleeping for a few months in order to
develop another term of bodily encagement, which we are awarded by the
law of nature according to our aspiration. Therefore, one has only to
change the aspiration during the course of this present body, and for this,
there is need of training in the current duration of human life. This training
can be begun at any stage of life, or even a few seconds before death, but
the usual procedure is for one to get the training from very early life,
from the stage of brahmacarya, and gradually progress to the grhastha,
vanaprastha and sannydsa orders of life. The institution which gives such


--- Page 27 ---
Text 16] The First Step in God Realization 27
training is called varnasrama-dharma, or the system of sanatana-dharma,
the best procedure for making the human life perfect. One is, therefore,
required to give up the attachment to family or social or political life just
at the age of fifty years, if not earlier, and the training in the vanaprastha
and sannyasa asramas is given for preparation of the next life. Foolish
materialists, in the garb of leaders of the people in general, stick to family
affairs without attempting to cut off relations with them, and thus they be-
come victims of nature's law and get gross bodies again, according to their
work. Such foolish leaders may have some respect from the people at the
end of life, but that does not mean that such leaders will be immune from
the natural laws under which everyone is tightly bound by the hands and
feet. The best thing is, therefore, that everyone voluntarily give up family
relations by transferring the attachment from family, society, country and
everything thereof to the devotional service of the Lord. It is stated herein
that one should give up all desires of family attachment. One must have a
chance for better desires; otherwise there is no chance of giving up such
morbid desires. Desire is the concomitant factor of the living entity. The
living entity is eternal, and therefore his desires, which are natural for a
living being, are also eternal. One cannot, therefore, stop desiring, but the
subject matter for desires can be changed. So one must develop the desires
for returning home, back to Godhead, and automatically the desires for
material gain, material honor and material popularity will diminish in
proportion to the development of devotional service. A living being is
meant for service activities, and his desires are centered around such a
service attitude. Beginning from the top executive head of the state, down
to the insignificant pauper in the street, all are rendering some sort of
service to others. The perfection of such a service attitude is only attained
simply by transferring the desire of service from matter to spirit, or from
Satan to God.
TEXT 16
TER प्रवजितो धीरः पण्यतीर्थजलाप्ठुतः | |
शुचौ विविक्त आसीनो विधिवल्कल्पितासने ne ৪।।
grhat pravrajito dhirah
punya-tirtha-jalaplutah
Sucau vivikta asino
vidhivat kalpitasane


--- Page 28 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
grhat—from one’s home; pravrajitah—having gone out; dhirah—self-
controlled; punya—pious; tirtha—sacred place; jalapliutah—fully washed;
Sucau—cleansed; vivikte—solitary; asinah—seated; vidhivat—according to
regulations; kalpita—being done; asane—on a sitting place.
TRANSLATION
One should leave home and practice self-control. In a sacred place he
should bathe regularly and sit down in a lonely place duly sanctified.
PURPORT
To prepare oneself for the better next life, one must get out of one’s so-
called home. The system of varnasrama-dharma or sanatana-dharma pre-
scribes retirement from family encumbrances as early as possible after one
has passed fifty years of age. Modern civilization is based on family com-
forts, the highest standard of amenities, and therefore, everyone expects to
live a very comfortable life after retirement in a well furnished home
decorated with fine ladies and children, without any desire to get out of
such a comfortable home. High government officers and ministers stick to
their prize posts until death, and they neither dream nor desire to get out
of homely comforts. Bound by such hallucinations, materialistic men
prepare various plans for a still more comfortable life, but suddenly cruel
death comes without mercy and takes away the great planmaker against
his desire, forcing him to give up the present body for another body. Such
a planmaker is thus forced to accept another body in one of the 8,400,000
species of life according to the fruits of the work which he might have
performed. In the next life, generally, persons who are too much attached
to family comforts are awarded lower species of life on account of sinful
acts performed during a long duration of sinful life, and thus all the
energy of the human life is spoiled. In order to be saved from the danger
of spoiling the human form of life and being attached to unreal things, one
must take warning of death at the age of fifty, if not earlier. The principle
is that one should take it for granted that the death warning is already
there, even prior to the attainment of fifty years of age, and thus at any
stage of life one should prepare himself for a better next life. The system
of the sanatana-dharma institution is so made that the follower is trained
for the better next life without any chance of the human life being
spoiled. The holy places all over the world are meant for the residential
purposes of retired persons getting ready for the better next life. Intelligent


--- Page 29 ---
Text 17] The First Step in God Realization 29
persons must go there at the end of life, and for that matter, after fifty
years of age, to live a life of spiritual regeneration for the sake of being
freed from family attachment, which is considered to be the shackle of
material life. One is recommended to quit home just to get rid of material
attachment, because one who sticks to family life until death cannot get
rid of material attachment, and as long as one is materially attached, one
cannot understand spiritual freedom. One should not, however, become
self-complacent simply by leaving home or by creating another home at
the holy place either lawfully or unlawfully. Many persons leave home and
go to such holy places, but due to bad association, again ৯০০০0 family
men by illicit connection with the opposite sex. The illusory energy of
matter is so strong that one is apt to be under such illusion at every stage
of life, even after quitting one’s happy home. Therefore, it is essential that
one should practice self-control by celibacy without the least desire for
sex indulgence. Sex indulgence, for a man desiring to improve the con-
dition of his existence, is considered to be suicidal, or even worse. There-
fore, to live apart from family life means to become self-controlled from
all sense desires, especially sex desires. The method is that one should have
a sitting place duly sanctified, made of straw, skin of the deer and carpet,
and thus sitting on it one should chant the holy name of the Lord without
offense, as prescribed above. The whole process is to drag the mind from
material engagements and fix it on the lotus feet of the Lord. This simple
process alone will help one advance to the highest stage of spiritual success.
TEXT 17
अभ्यसेन्मनसा शखद्धं॑त्रिच्रद्माक्षरं परम्‌ ।
मनो यच्छेजितश्वासो ब्रह्मबीजमविसरन्‌ 112911
abhyasen manasa suddhari
trivrd-brahmaksarari param
mano yacchej jita-svaso
brahma-bijam avismaran वि

abhyaset—just get it into practice; manasa—by the mind; suddham—
sacred; trivrt—composed of the three; brahmaksaram—transcendental let-
ters; param—the supreme; manah—mind; yacchet—get under control; jita-
svasah—by regulating the breathing air; brahma—absolute; bijam—seed;
avismaram—without being forgotten.


--- Page 30 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION
After sitting in the above manner, make the mind remember the three
transcendental letters [ A.U.M.], and by regulating the breathing process,
control the mind so as not to forget the transcendental seed.
PURPORT
Omkara or the pranava is the seed of transcendental realization, and it is
composed of three transcendental letters A.U.M. By its chanting by the
mind, in conjunction with the breathing process, which is a transcendental
but mechanical way of getting into trance, as devised by the experience of
great mystics, one is able to bring the mind, which is materially absorbed,
under control. This is a way of changing the habit of the mind. The mind
is not to be killed. Mind or desire cannot be stopped, but to develop a
desire to function for spiritual realization, the quality of engagement by
the mind has to be changed. The mind is the pivot of the active sense
organs, and as such if the quality of thinking, feeling and willing is changed,
naturally the quality of actionsby the instrumental senses will also change.
Omkara is the seed of all transcendental sound, and it is the transcendental
sound only which can bring about the desired change of the mind and the
senses. Even a mentally deranged man can be cured by treatment of
transcendental sound. In the Bhagavad-gita, the prapava or omkara has
been accepted as the direct literal representation of the Supreme Absolute
Truth. One who is not able to chant directly the holy name of the Lord,
as recommended above, can easily chant the pranava or omkara. This
omkara is a note of address, such as, “O my Lord,” just as “om hari om”
means “O my Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” As we have
explained before, the Lord’s holy name is identical with the Lord Himself.
So also is omkara. But persons who are unable to realize the transcendental
personal form or name of the Lord on account of their imperfect senses
(in other words, the neophytes) are trained to the practice of self-
realization by this mechanical process of regulating the breathing function
and simultaneously repeating the pranava omkara within the mind. As we
have several times expressed, since the transcendental name, form, attri-
butes, pastimes, etc., of the Personality of Godhead are impossible to be
understood by the present material senses, it is necessary that through the
mind, the center of sensual activities, such transcendental realization be
set into motion. The devotees, however, directly fix their minds on the


--- Page 31 ---
Text 18] The First Step in God Realization 31
Person of the Absolute Truth. But one who is unable to accommodate such
personal features of the Absolute is disciplined in that impersonality to
train the mind to make further progress.
TEXT 18
नियच्छेद्धिषयेभ्योऽकषान्मनसा बुद्धिसारथिः |
मनः कर्मभिराक्षिप्तं शमार्थे धारयेद्धिया ॥१८॥
niyacched visayebhyo’ksan
manasa buddhi-sarathih
manah karmabhir 01050010178
subharthe dharayed dhiya
niyacchet—withdraw; visayebhyah—from sense engagements; aksan—
the senses; manasa—by dint of the mind; buddhi—intelligence; sarathih—
driver; manah—the mind; karmabhih—by the fruitive work; aksiptam—
being absorbed in; subharthe—fer the sake of the Lord; dharayet—hold
up; dhiya—in full consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Gradually, as the mind becomes progressively spiritualized, withdraw
it from sense activities, and by intelligence the senses will be controlled.
The mind, being too much absorbed in material activities, can be engaged
in the service of the Personality of Godhead and become fixed in full
transcendental consciousness.
PURPORT
The first process of spiritualizing the mind by mechanical chanting of
the prapava omkara and controlling the breathing system is technically
called the mystic or yogic process of pranayama, or fully controlling the
breathing air. The ultimate state of this pranayama system is to become
fixed up in trance, technically called the stage of samadhi. But experience
has proven that even the samadhi stage also fails to control the materially-
absorbed mind. For example, the great mystic Vivamitra Muni, even in
the stage of samadhi, became a victim of the senses and cohabited with


--- Page 32 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
Menaka. History has already recorded it. The mind, although ceasing to
think of sensual activities at present, remembers past sensual activities
from the subconscious status and thus disturbs one from cent per cent
engagement in self-realization. Therefore, Sukadeva Gosvami recommends
the next step of assured policy, namely to fix one’s mind in the service of
the Personality of Godhead. Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, also recommends this direct process in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 6.47). Thus, the mind being spiritually cleansed, one should at once
engage himself in the transcendental loving service of the Lord by the
different devotional activities of hearing, chanting, etc. That is the surest
path of progress even for the disturbed mind, if performed under proper
guidance.
TEXT 19
तत्रैकावयवं॑ध्यायेदव्युच्छिनेन वेतसा |
मनो निर्विषयं युक्त्वा ततः किश्चन न सरेत्‌।
पदं तत्रमं विष्णोर्मनो यत्र प्रसीदति ॥१९॥
tatraikavayavari dhyayed
avyucchinnena cetasa
mano nirvisayar yuktva
tatah kificana na smaret
pada tat paramari vispor
mano yatra prasidati
tatra—thereafter; eka—one after one; avayavam—limbs of the body;
dhyayet—should be concentrated upon; avyucchinnena—without being
deviated from the complete form; cetasai—by the mind; manah—mind;
nirvisayam—without being contaminated by sense objects; yuktva—being
dovetailed; tatah—after that; kificana—anything; na—do not; smaret—think
of; padam—personality; tat—that; paramam—Supreme; vispoh—of Visnu;
manah—the mind; yatra—whereupon; prasidati—becomes reconciled.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, you should meditate upon the limbs of Visnu, one after
another, without being deviated from the conception of the complete


--- Page 33 ---
Text 19] The First Step in God Realization 33
body, and thus the mind becomes free from all sense objects. There should
be no other thing to be thought upon. Because the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Visnu, is the Ultimate Truth, the mind becomes completely
reconciled in Him only.
PURPORT

Foolish persons, bewildered by the external energy of Visnu, do not
know that the ultimate goal of the progressive search after happiness is to
get into touch directly with Lord Visnu, the Personality of Godhead.
Vispu-tattva is an unlimited expansion of different transcendental forms
of the Personality of Godhead, and the supreme or original form of Visnu-
tattva is Govinda or Lord Krsna, the supreme cause of all causes. Therefore,
thinking of Visnu or meditation upon the transcendental form of Visnu,
specifically upon Lord Krsna, is the last word on the subject of meditation.
This meditation may be begun from the lotus feet of the Lord. One should
not, however, forget or be misled from the complete form of the Lord;
thus one should practice thinking of the different parts of His transcenden-
tal body, one after another. Here in this verse, it is definitely assured that
the Supreme Lord is not impersonal. He is a person, but His body
is different from those of conditioned persons like us. Otherwise,
meditation beginning from the pranava omkara up to the limbs of
the personal body of Visnu would not have been recommended by
Sukadeva Gosvami for the attainment of complete spiritual perfection.
The Visnu forms of worship in great temples of India are not, therefore,
arrangements of idol worship, as it is wrongly interpreted by a class of men
with a poor fund of knowledge, but they are different spiritual centers of
meditation on the transcendental limbs of the body of Visnu. The wor-
shipable deity in the temple of Visnu is identical with Lord Visnu by the
inconceivable potency of the Lord. Therefore, a neophyte’s concentration
or meditation upon the limbs of Visnu in the temple, as contemplated in
the revealed scriptures, is an easy opportunity for meditation for persons
who are unable to sit down tightly at one place and then concentrate upon
pranava omkara or the limbs of the body of Visnu, as recommended herein
by Sukadeva Gosvami, the great authority. The common man can benefit
more by meditating on the form of Visnu in the temple than on the
omkara, the spiritual combination of A.U.M. as explained before. There is
no difference between omkara and the forms of Visnu, but persons who
are unacquainted with the science of Absolute Truth try to create
dissension by differentiating between the forms of Visnu and that of


--- Page 34 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
omkara. Here it is indicated that the Visnu form is the ultimate goal of
meditation, and as such it is better to concentrate upon the forms of Visnu
than on impersonal omkara, as the latter process is more difficult than the
former.
TEXT 20
रजस्तमोम्यामाकिप्ं fd मन आत्मनः |
यच्छेद्धारणया धीरो हन्ति या तत्कतं मलम्‌ ॥२०॥
rajas-tamobhyam aksiptam
07700120112 mana atmanah
yacched dharanaya dhiro
hanti ya tat-krtar malam

rajah—passionate modes of nature; tamobhyam—as well as by the
ignorant modes of material nature; aksiptam—agitated ; vimiidham—bewil-
dered; manah—the mind;atmanah—of one’s own; yacchet—get it rectified;
dharanaya—by conception (of Visnu); dhirah—the pacified; hanti— destroys;
ya—all those; tat-krtam—done by them; malam—dirty things.

TRANSLATION
One’s mind is always agitated by the passionate modes of material
nature and bewildered by the ignorant modes of nature. But one can
rectify such conceptions by the relation of Visnu and thus become paci-
fied by cleansing the dirty things created by them.
PURPORT

Persons generally conducted by the modes of passion and the modes of
ignorance cannot be bona fide candidates for being situated in the tran-
scendental stage of God realization. Only the persons conducted under the
modes of goodness can have the knowledge of the Supreme Truth. Effects
of the modes of passion and ignorance are manifested by too much
hankering after wealth and women. And those who are too much after
wealth and women can only rectify their leanings by constant remem-
brance of Visnu in His potential impersonal feature. Generally the imper-
sonalists or monists are influenced by the modes of passion and ignorance.


--- Page 35 ---
Text 21] The First Step in God Realization 35
Such impersonalists think of themselves as liberated souls, but they have
noknowledge of the transcendental personal feature of the Absolute Truth.
Actually they are impure in heart on account of being devoid of knowledge
of the personal feature of the Absolute. In the Bhagavad-gita, it is said that
after many hundreds of births, the impersonalist philosopher surrenders
unto the Personality of Godhead. To acquire such a qualification of God
realization in the personal feature, the neophyte impersonalist is given a
chance to realize the relation of the Lord in everything by the philosophy
of pantheism.

Pantheism in its higher status does not permit the student to form an
impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth, but the conception of the
Absolute Truth is extended in the field of the so-called material energy.
Everything created by the material energy can be dovetailed with the
Absolute by service attitude, which is the essential part of living energy.
The pure devotee of the Lord knows the art of converting everything into
its spiritual existence by this service attitude, and in that devotional way
only can the theory of pantheism be perfected.

TEXT 21
यस्यां सन्धार्यमाणायां योगिनो भक्तिलक्षणः |
Arg सम्पद्यते योग आश्रयं भद्रमीक्षतः ।२१॥
yasyam sandharyamanayar
yogino bhakti-laksanah
asu sampadyate yoga
asrayam bhadram iksatah

yasyam—by such systematic remembrance; sandharyamapayam—and
thus being fixed in the habit of; yoginah—the mystics; bhakti-laksanah—
being practiced to the devotional system; asu—very soon; sampadyate—
attains success; yogah— connection by devotional service; asrayam—under
the shelter of; bhadram—the all-good; ik satah—which seeing that.

TRANSLATION
O King, by this system of remembrance and by being fixed in the
habit of seeing the all-good personal conception of the Lord, one can very
soon attain devotional service of the Lord under His direct shelter.


--- Page 36 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
PURPORT
Success of mystic performances is achieved only by the help of the
devotional attitude. Pantheism, or the system of feeling the presence of
the Almighty everywhere, is a sort of training of the mind to become
accustomed to the devotional conception, and it is this devotional attitude
of the mystic that makes possible the successful termination of such mystic
attempts. One is not, however, elevated to such a successful status without
the tinge of mixture in devotional service. The devotional atmosphere
created by such pantheistic vision develops into devotional service in later
days, and that is the only benefit for the impersonalist. It is confirmed in
the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 12.5) that the impersonal way of self-realization is
more troublesome because it reaches the goal in an indirect way, although
the impersonalist also becomes obsessed with the personal feature of the
Lord after a long time.
TEXT 22
राजोवाच
यथा सन्धायंते ब्रह्मन्‌ धारणा यत्र सम्मता |
Tet वा RET पुरुषस्य मनोमलम्‌ ॥२२॥
7०४८
yatha sandharyate brahman
dharana yatra sammata
yadrsi va hared asu
purusasya mano-malam
ভা raja wvdca—the lucky King said; yathd—as it is; sandharyate—the
conception is made; brahman—O brahmana; dharana—conception; yatra—
where and how; sammata—in a summary; yadrsi—the way by which; va—
either or; haret—extricated; asu—without delay; purusasya—of a person;
manah—of the mind; malam—dirty things
TRANSLATION
The lucky King Pariksit, inquiring further, said, O brahmana, please


--- Page 37 ---
Text 22] The First Step in God Realization 37
describe in full detail the process as to how and where the mind has to be
applied and how the conception can be fixed so that the dirty things in a
person’s mind can be removed.
PURPORT

The dirty things in the heart of a conditioned soul are the root cause of
all troubles for him. A conditioned soul is surrounded with the manifold
miseries of material existence, but on account of his gross ignorance he is
unable to remove the troubles due to dirty things in the heart, accumulated
during the long prison life in the material world. He is actually meant to
serve the will of the Supreme Lord, but on account of the dirty things in
the heart, he likes to serve his concocted desires. These desires, instead of
giving him any peace of mind, create new problems of life and thus bind
him to the cycle of repeated birth and death. These dirty things of fruitive
work and empiric philosophy can be removed only by his association with
the Supreme Lord. The Lord, being omnipotent, can offer His association
by His inconceivable potencies. Thus persons who are unable to pin their
faith on the personal feature of the Absolute are given a chance to associate
with His virdta ripa, or the cosmic impersonal feature of the Lord. The
cosmic impersonal feature of the Lord is a feature of His unlimited poten-
cies. Since the potent and potencies are identical, even the conception of
His impersonal cosmic feature helps the conditioned soul to associate with
the Lord indirectly and thus gradually rise to the stage of personal contact.

Maharaja Pariksit was already directly connected with the personal
feature of the Lord Sri Krsna, and as such he had no business to inquire
from Sukadeva Gosvami about where and how to apply the mind in the
impersonal virdfa ripa of the Lord. But he inquired after a detailed de-
scription of the matter for the benefit of others, who are unable to
conceive of the transcendental personal feature of the Lord as the form of
eternity, knowledge and bliss. The nondevotee class of men cannot think
of the personal feature of the Lord. Because of their poor fund of know-
ledge, the personal form of the Lord, like Rama or Krsna, is completely
revolting to them. They have a poor estimation of the potency of the Lord.
In the Bhagavad-gita, it is explained by the Lord Himself (Bg. 9.11) that
people with a poor fund of knowledge deride the Supreme Personality of
the Lord, taking Him to be a common man. Such men are ignorant of the
inconceivable potency of the Lord. By the inconceivable potency of the
Lord, He can move in the human society or any other society of living
beings and yet remain the same omnipotent Lord without deviating in the


--- Page 38 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
slightest from His transcendental position. So, for the benefit of men who
are unable to accept the Lord in His personal eternal form, Maharaja
Pariksit inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami how to fix the mind on Him in
the beginning, and the Gosvami replied in detail as follows.
TEXT 23
YF उवाच
जितासनो जितश्वासो जितसङ्गो जितेन्द्रियः |
TS भगवतो रूपे मनः सन्धारयेद्धिया 130
$ri Suka ८४९८०
jitasano jita-svaso
jita-sango jitendriyah
sthitle bhagavato ripe
manah sandharayed dhiya
ধা suka uvdca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; jitasanah—controlled sitting
posture; jita-Svasah—controlled breathing process; jita-saiigah— controlled
association; jitendriyah—controlled senses; sthiile—in the gross matter;
bhagavatah—unto the Personality of Godhead; riipe—in the feature of;
manah—the mind; sandharayet—must apply; dhiya—by intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami answered, One should control the sitting posture,
and regulate the breathing process by the yogic pranayama and thus control
the mind and the senses, and with intelligence apply the mind to the gross
potencies of the Lord [called the virata rapa].
PURPORT
The materially-absorbed mind of the conditioned soul does not allow
him to transcend the limit of the bodily conception of self, and thus the
yoga system for meditation (fixing the mind upon the Supreme, control-
ling the sitting posture and breathing process) is prescribed in order to
mold the character of the gross materialist. Unless such materialists are


--- Page 39 ---
Text 24] The First Step in God Realization 39
able to cleanse the materially absorbed mind, it is impossible for them to
concentrate upon thoughts of transcendence. And to do so one may fix
one’s mind on the gross material or external feature of the Lord. The
different parts of the gigantic form of the Lord are described in the fol-
lowing verses. The materialistic men are very anxious to have some mystic
powers as a result of such controlling process, but the real purpose of
yogic regulations is to eradicate the accumulated dirty things like lust,
anger, avarice and all such material contaminations. If the mystic yogt is
diverted by the accompanying feats of mystic control, then his mission of
yogic success is a failure, because the ultimate aim is God realization. He is
therefore recommended to fix his gross materialistic mind by a different
conception and thus realize the potency of the Lord. As soon as the
potencies are understood to be instrumental manifestations of the tran-
scendence, the next step is automatically advanced, and gradually the stage
of full realization becomes possible for him.
TEXT 24
Ava देहोऽयं स्थविष्ठश्च स्थवीयसाप्‌ |
4 (3
यत्रेदं व्यज्यते विश्व॑ भूतं भ्यं www सत्‌ ॥२४॥
visesas tasya deho’yam
sthavisthas ca sthaviyasam
yatredam vyajyate visvam
bhiitarih bhavyarn bhavac ca sat
visesah—personal; tasya—his; dehah—body; ayam—this; sthavisthah—
grossly material; ca—and; sthaviyasam—of all matter; yatra—wherein; idam
—all these phenomenal; vyajyate—is experienced; visvam—universe; bhitam
—past; bhavyam—future; bhavat—present; ca—and ; sat—resultant.
TRANSLATION
This gigantic manifestation of the phenomenal material world as a
whole is the personal body of the Absolute Truth, wherein the universal
resultant past, present and future of material time is experienced.


--- Page 40 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
PURPORT

Anything either material or spiritual is but the expansion of the energy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as stated in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 13.13), the omnipotent Lord has His transcendental eyes, heads and
other bodily parts distributed everywhere. He can see, hear, touch or
manifest Himself from anywhere and everywhere, for He is present every-
where as the Supersoul of all infinitesimal souls, although He has His
particular abode in the absolute world. This relative world is also His
phenomenal representation because it is nothing but the expansion of
His transcendental energy. Although He is in His abode, still His energy is
distributed everywhere, just as the sun is localized as well as expanded
everywhere and the rays of the sun, being nondifferent from the sun, are
accepted as expansions of the sun disc. In the Visnu Purana (V.P. 1.22.52)
it is said that as fire expands its rays and heat from one place, similarly the
Supreme Spirit, the Personality of Godhead, expands Himself by His mani-
fold energy everywhere and anywhere. The phenomenal manifestation of
the gigantic universe is only a part of His virata body. The less intelligent
class of men cannot conceive of the transcendental all-spiritual form of
the Lord, but they are astounded by His different energies just as the
aborigines are struck with wonder by the manifestation of lightning, a
gigantic mountain or a hugely expanded banyan tree. The aborigines praise
the strength of the tiger and the elephant because of their superior energy
and strength. The asuras also cannot recognize the existence of the Lord,
although there are vivid descriptions of the Lord in the revealed scriptures,
although the Lord incarnates and exhibits His uncommon strength and
energy, and although He is accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
by learned scholars and saints like Vyasadeva, Narada, Asita and Bevala in
the past and by Arjuna in the Bhagavad-gita, as also by the acaryas like
Sankara, Ramanuja, Madhva and Lord Sri Caitanya in the modern age. The
asuras do not accept any evidential proof from the revealed scriptures, nor
do they recognize the authority of the great acaryas. They want to see eye
to eye at once. Therefore they can see the gigantic body of the Lord as
virata, which will answer their challenge, and as they are accustomed to pay
homage to superior material strength like that of the tiger, elephant,
lightning, etc., they can offer respect to the virata rapa. Lord Krsna, by the
request of Arjuna, exhibited His virdta ripa for the asuras. A pure devotee
of the Lord, being unaccustomed to look into such mundane gigantic form
০1 the Lord, requires special vision for the purpose. The Lord, therefore,
favored Arjuna with special vision for looking into His wvirata ripa,


--- Page 41 ---
Text 25] The First Step in God Realization 41
described in the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita. This virata ripa
of the Lord was especially manifested, not for the benefit of Arjuna, but
for that unintelligent class of men who accept anyone and everyone as the
incarnation of the Lord and so mislead the general mass of people. For
them, the indication is that one should ask the cheap incarnation to exhibit
his virata ripa and thus be established as an incarnation. The virata ripa
manifestation of the Lord is simultaneously a challenge to the atheist and
a favor for the asuras who can think of the Lord as virata and thus
gradually cleanse the dirty things in their hearts in order to become
qualified to actually see the transcendental form of the Lord in the near
future. This is a favor of the all-merciful Lord to the atheists and the gross
malerialists.
TEXT 25
- +
अण्डकोशे शरीरेऽसिन्‌ सप्तायस्णसंयुते |
bY - =
वराजः पुरूषो याऽसा मगवान्‌ धारणाश्रयः Ru]
anda-kose $arire’smin
saptavarana-sarnyute
vairajah puruso yo’sau
bhagavan dharanasrayah
anda-kose—within the universal shell: sarire—in the body of:asmin— this:
sapta—sevenfold; avarana— coverings; samyute—being so done: vairajah—
the gigantic universal; purusah—form of the Lord: yah—that; asau—He:
bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead: dharana—conception; asrayah—
object of.
TRANSLATION
The gigantic universal form of the Personality of Godhead, within
the body of the universal shell, which is covered by sevenfold material
elements, is the subject for virata conception.
PURPORT
Simultancously, the Lord has multifarious other forms, and all of them
are identical with the original fountainhead form of the Lord $i Krsna.


--- Page 42 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
In the Bhagavad-gita, it has been proven that the original transcendental
eternal form of the Lord is Sr Krsna, the Absolute Personality of Godhead,
but by His inconceivable internal potency, atma-maya, He can expand
Himself by multifarious forms and incarnations simultaneously, without
being diminished in His full potency. He is complete, and although innu-
merable complete forms are being emanated from Him, He is still complete
without any loss. That is His spiritual or internal potency. In the Eleventh
Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, the Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna,
manifested His virdta ripa just Lo convince the less intelligent class of men,
who cannot conceive of the Lord as appearing just like a human being, that
He factually has the potency of His claim to be the Supreme Absolute
Person without any rival or superior. Materialistic men can think, although
very imperfectly, of the huge universal space, comprehending an innu-
merable number of planets as big as the sun. They can see only the circular
sky overhead, without any information that this universe, as well as many
other hundreds of thousands of universes, are each covered by sevenfold
material coverings of water, fire, air, sky, ego, noumenon and material
nature, just like a huge football, pumped and covered, floating on the
water of the Causal Ocean, wherein the Lord is lying as Maha-Visnu. All the
universes in seed are emanating from the breathing of the Maha-Visnu, who
is but part of a partial expansion of the Lord, and all the universes
presided over by the Brahmas vanish when the Maha-Visnu withdraws His
great breathing. In this way, the material worlds are being created and
vanished by the supreme will of the Lord. The poor foolish materialist can
just imagine how ignorantly he puts forward an insignificant creature to
become His rival incarnation, simply on the allegations of a dying man.
The virata riipa was particularly exhibited by the Lord just to give lessons
to such foolish men, so that one can accept a person as the incarnation of
Godhead only if such a person is able to exhibit such virdta ripa as Lord
Krsna did. The materialistic person may concentrate his mind upon the
virata or gigantic form of the Lord in his own interest and as recommended
by Sukadeva Gosvami, but he must be on his guard not to become misled
by pretenders who claim to be the identical person with Lord Krsna but
are not able to act like Him or exhibit the ৬17৫৫ ripa, comprehending the
whole of the universe.
TEXT 26
पातालमेतस्य दहि. पादमूलं
पठन्ति पाष्णिप्रपद्‌ रसातलम्‌ ।


--- Page 43 ---
Text 26] The First Step in God Realization 43
3 - ~~
महातडं विश्वसृजोऽथ गुर्फा
तलातलं ঈ पुरुषस्य जङ्घे ।॥२६॥
patalam etasya hi pada-milam
pathanti parspi-prapade rasatalam
mahatalari visva-srjo tha gulphau
talatalam vai purusasya janghe
patalam—the planet in the bottom of the universe; etasya—of his; hi—
exactly; pada-mitlam—soles of the fect; pathanti—they study it; parspi—of
the ankles; prapade—under the foot; rasatalam—the planets named
Rasatala; mahatalam—the planet named Mahatala; visva-srjah—of the
creator of the universe; atha—thus; gulphau—the calves; tala—the planet
named Tala; atala—the planet named Atala; vai—as they are; purusasya—of
the gigantic person; jannghe—on the knees.
TRANSLATION
Persons who have realized it have studied that the planets known as
Patiala constitute the bottom of the feet of the Universal Lord, and the
ankles and the soles are the Rasatala planets. The calves are Mahatala
planets, and His knees constitute the Tala and Atala planets.
PURPORT
Outside the bodily existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the manifested cosmic existence has no reality. Everything and anything
of the manifested world rests on Him, as confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 9.4), but that does not imply that everything and anything in the
vision of a materialist is the Supreme Personality. The conception of the
universal form of the Lord gives a chance to the materialist to think of the
Supreme Lord, but the materialist must know for certain that his visualiza-
tion of the world in a spirit of lording over it is not God realization. The
materialistic view of exploitation of the material resources is occasioned by
the illusion of the external energy of the Lord, and as such, if anyone wants
to realize the Supreme Truth by conceiving of the universal form of the
Lord, one must cultivate the service attitude. Unless the service attitude is
revived, the conception of virata realization will have very little effect on


--- Page 44 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
the seer. The transcendental Lord, in any conception of His form, is never
a part of the material creation. He keeps His identity as Supreme Spirit in
all circumstances and is never affected by the three material qualities, for
everything material is contaminated. The Lord always exists by His internal
energy.

The universe is divided into fourteen planetary systems. Seven planetary
systems, called Bhar, Bhuvar, Svar, Mahar, Jana, Tapas, and Satya, are
upward planetary systems, one above the other. There are also seven
planetary systems downward, known as Tala, Atala, Vitala, Rasatala,
Talatala, Mahatala and Patala, gradually, one below the other. In this verse,
the description begins from the bottom because it is in the line of devotion
that the Lord’s bodily description should be begun from His feet. Sukadeva
Gosvami is a recognized devotee of the Lord, and he 15 exactly correct in
the description.

TEXT 27
= . Ry
ढे जानुनी सुतलं विश्वमूर्ते
रूरुढयं वितलं चातलं च |
महीतलं तज्ञघनं महीपते
नभस्तल नाभिसरो गृणन्ति Rel
dve januni 5८८०1०7} visva-miirter
arudvayam vitalam catalarm ca
mabhitalari taj-jaghanari mahipate
nabhastalam: nabhisaro grnanti

dve—two; januni—leg joints; sutalam—the planetary system named
Sutala; visva-mirteh—of the universal form; irudvayam—two thighs;
vitalam—the planetary system named Vitala; ca—also; atalam—the planets
named Atala; ca—and; mahitalam—the planetary system named Mabhitala;
tat—of their; jaghanam—lower portion of the thighs; mahipate—king;
nabhastalam—outer space; nabhisarah—depression of the navel; grpanti—
they take it so.

TRANSLATION
The joints of the legs of the universal form are the planetary system of
the name Sutala, and the lower portions of the thighs are the Vitala and


--- Page 45 ---
Text 28] The First Step in God Realization 45
Atala planetary systems. The upper portion of the thighs are Mahitala, and
outer space is the depression of His navel.
TEXT 28
নে -
उरःम्लं ज्योतिरनीकमस्य
ग्रीवा _ महवेदनं ল जनोऽस्य |
तपो वराटीं विदुरादिपुंसः
রা ~
सत्यं तु शीर्षाणि gga: ॥२८॥
urah-sthalar jyotir-anikam asya
griva mahar vadanam vai jano’sya
tapo varatim vidur adi-pumsah
satyarn tu $irsani sahasra-sirsnah
urah—high; sthalam—place (the chest); jyotir-anikam—the luminary
planets; asya—of Him; griva—the neck; mahah—the planetary system above
the luminaries; vadanam—mouth; vai—exactly; janah—the planetary system
above Jano; asya—of Him; tapah—the planetary system above the Mahah;
varatim— forehead; viduh—is known; adi—the original; purisah— personality ;
satyam—the topmost planetary system; tu—but; sirsani—the head; sahasra
—one thousand; sirsnah—one with heads.
TRANSLATION
The chest of the Original Personality of the gigantic form is the
luminary planetary system, His neck is the Mahar planets, His mouth is the
Jana planets, and His forehead is the Tapas planetary system. The topmost
planetary system, known as the Satyaloka, is the head of Him who has one
thousand heads.
PURPORT
The effulgent luminary planets like the sun and the moon are situated
almost in the midplace of the universe, and as such they are to be known
as the chest of the original gigantic form of the Lord. And above the
luminary planets, called also the heavenly places of the universal directorate


--- Page 46 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
demigods, there are the Mahar, Jana, Tapas planetary systems, and,
above all, the Satyaloka planetary system, where the chief directors of the
modes of material nature reside, namely Visnu, Brahma, and Siva. This
Visnu is known as the Ksirodakasayi Visnu, and He acts as the Supersoul
in every living being. There are innumerable universes floating on the causal
ocean, and in each of them the representation of the virata form of the
Lord is there along with innumerable suns, moons, heavenly demigods,
Brahmas, Visnus and Sivas, and all of them are situated in one part of the
inconceivable potency of Lord Krsna, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 10.42).
TEXT 29
इन्द्रादया নাহল आहुरुस्राः
=^ (~ =
कणो হাঃ श्रोत्रममुष्य शब्दः |
नासत्यदस्रौ परमस्य नासे
- uD 2০
সাথী SA गन्धो স্তলমসগিবিতঃ ॥२९॥
indradayo bahava ahur usrah
karnau disah $rotram amusya sabdah
nasatya-dasrau paramasya nase
ghrano’sya gandho mukham agnir iddhah
indradayah—demigods headed by the heavenly king, Indra; bahavah—
arms; ahuh—are called; usrah—the demigods; karnau—the ears; disah—the
four directions; srotram—sense of hearing; amusya—of the Lord; sabdah—
sound; nasatya-dasrau—the demigods known as Advinikumaras; paramasya
—of the Supreme; nase—nostrils; ghranah —sense of smelling; asya—of Him;
gandhah—flavor; mukham—mouth;agnih—fire; iddhah—blazing.
TRANSLATION
His arms are the demigodsheaded by Indra, the ten directional sides are
His ears, and physical sound is the sense of His hearing. His nostrils are the
two Aévinikumaras, and the material flavor is the sense of His smelling. His
mouth is the blazing fire.


--- Page 47 ---
Text 30] The First Step in God Realization 47
PURPORT
The description of the gigantic form of the Personality of Godhead made
in the eleventh chapter of the Bhagavad-gita is further explained here in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. The description in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 11.30) runs
as follows: “O Visnu, I see You devouring all people in Your blazing
mouths and covering all the universe by Your immeasurable rays. Scorching
the worlds, You are manifest.” In that way, Srimad-Bhagavatam is the
postgraduate study for the student of the Bhagavad-gita. Both of them are
the science of Krsna, the Absolute Truth, and so they are interdependent.
The conception of the virata-purusa or the gigantic form of the Supreme
Lord is said to include all the dominating demigods as well as the domi-
nated living beings. Even the minutest part of a living being is controlled by
the empowered agency of the Lord. Since the demigods are included in the
gigantic form of the Lord, worship of the Lord whether in His gigantic
material conception or in His eternal transcendental form as Lord Sri
Krsna also appeases the demigods and all the other parts and parcels, as
much as watering the root of the tree distributes energy to all other parts.
Therefore, for a materialist also, worship of the universal gigantic form of
the Lord leads one to the right path. One need not risk being misled by
approaching many demigods for fulfillment of different desires. The real
entity is the Lord Himself, and all others are imaginary, for everything is
included in Him only.
TEXT 30
चरौरक्षिणी चक्षुरभूत्पतङ्गः
पक्ष्माणि विष्णोरहनी उभे च।
तद्भ्रूविजृम्भः परमेष्टिधिष्ण्य-
ANSE ताद्‌ रस एव जिया ॥३०॥
dyaur aksini caksur abhiit patangah
paksmani vispor ahani ubhe ca
tad-bhri-vijrmbhah paramesthi-dhisnyam
apo’sya tala rasa eva jihva


--- Page 48 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
dyauh—sphere of outer space; aksini—the eyeballs; caksuh—of eyes
(senses); abhét—it so became; patangah—the sun; paksmani—eyelids;
visnoh—of the Personality of Godhead, Sri Visnu; ahani—day and night;
ubhe—both; ca—and; tat—His; bhri—eyebrows; vijrmbhah—movements;
paramesthi—the supreme entity (Brahma); dhisnyam— post; apah— Varuna,
the director of water; asya—His; tali—palate; rasah—juice; eva— certainly ;
Jjihva—the tongue.
TRANSLATION
The sphere of outer space constitutes His eyepits, and the eyeball is
the sun as the power of seeing; His eyelids are both the day and night, and
in the movements of His eyebrows, the Brahma and similar supreme
personalities reside. His palate is the director of water, Varuna, and the
juice or essence of everything is His tongue.
PURPORT
To common sense the description in this verse appears to be somewhat
contradictory because sometimes the sun has been described as the eyeball
and sometimes as the outer space sphere. But there is no room for
common sense in the injunctions of the $astras. We must accept the
description of the $astras and concentrate more on the form of the
virdta ripa than on common sense. Common sense is always imperfect,
whereas description in the sastras is always perfect and complete. If there
is any incongruity, it is due to our imperfection and not the sastras’. That
is the method of approaching Vedic wisdom.
TEXT 31
छन्दांस्यनन्तस्य शिरो गृणन्ति
1 ~
ZN यमः स्नेदकला द्विजानि ।
हासो जनोन्मादकरी च माया
दुरन्तसर्गो यदपाङ्गमोक्षः ॥३१॥
chandarisy anantasya Siro grnanti
darmstra yamah sneha-kala dvijani
haso janonmadakari ca maya
duranta-sargo yad-apanga-moksah


--- Page 49 ---
Text 32] The First Step in God Realization 49
chandamsi—the Vedic hymns; anantasya—of the Supreme; s$irah— cerebral
passage; grnenti—they say; damstrah—jaws of teeth; yamah—Yamaraja, the
director of sinners; sneha-kalah—the art of affection; dvijani—the set of
teeth; hasah—smile; janonmadakari—the most alluring; ca—also; maya—
illusory energy; duranta—unsurpassable: sargah—the material creation;
yad-apanga—whose glance; moksah— casting over.
TRANSLATION
They say that the Vedic hymns are the cerebral passage of the Lord,
and the jaws of the teeth are Yama, god of death, who punishes the
sinners. The art of affection is his set of teeth, and the most alluring
illusory material energy is His smile. This great ocean of material creation
is but the casting of His glance over us.
PURPORT
According to Vedic assertion, this material creation is the result of the
Lord’s casting a glance over the material energy, which is described herein
as the most alluring illusory energy. The conditioned souls who are
allured by such materialism should know that the material temporary
creation is simply an imitation of the reality and that those who are
captivated by such alluring glances of the Lord are put under the direction
of the controller of sinners called Yamaraja. The Lord smiles affectionately,
displaying His teeth. The intelligent person who can grasp these truths
about the Lord becomes a fully surrendered soul unto Him.
TEXT 32
- -
वरीडोत्तरो्ठोऽधर एव _ लोभो
मः मेप
घम; स्तनोऽधमेपथोऽस्य पृष्टम्‌ |
= ७
कस्तस्य Az aot च मित्रौ
. 0.
कुक्षिः aga गिरयोऽस्थिसङ्घाः 13:1
vridottaraustho’dhara eva lobho
dharmah stano’dharma-patho’sya prstham
kas tasya medhram vrsapau ca mitrau
kuksih samudra girayo’sthi-sarighah


--- Page 50 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
vrida—modesty; uttara—upper; ostha—lip; adharah—chin; eva— certainly;
lobhah—hankering; dharmah—religiousness; stanah—breast; adharma—irreli-
giousness; pathah—way;asya—His; prstham—back; kah—Brahma; tasya— His;
medhram—genitals; vrsanau—testicles; ca—also; mitrau—the Mitravarunas;
kuksih—waist; samudrah—the oceans; girayah—the hills; asthi—bones;
sanghah—stack.
TRANSLATION
Modesty is the upper portion of His lips, hankering is His chin,
religiousness is the breast of the Lord, and irreligion is His back. Brahmaji,
who generates all living beings in the material world is His genitals, and the
Mitravarunas are His two testicles. The ocean is His waist, and the hills
and mountains are the stacks of His bones.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is not impersonal, as misconceived by less intelligent
thinkers. Rather, He is the Supreme Person, as confirmed in all authentic
Vedic literatures. But His personality is different from what we can
conceive. It is stated here that Brahmaji acts as His genitals and the
Mitravarunas are His two testicles. This means that, as person, He is com-
plete with all organs of the body, but they are of different types with
different potencies. When the Lord is, therefore, described as impersonal,
it should be understood that His personality is not exactly of the type of
personality found within our imperfect speculation. One can, however,
worship the Lord even by seeing the hills and mountains or the ocean and
the sky as different parts and parcels of the gigantic body of the Lord, the
virata purusa. The virata ripa, as exhibited by Lord Krsna to Arjuna, isa
challenge to the unbelievers.
TEXT 33
नद्योऽख AHS तनरूहाणि,
=
महीरुहा विश्वतनोचेपेनद्र |
৪ os
अनन्तवीयैः श्वसितं , मातस्थिा
गतिर्वयः कर्म॑ गुणप्रवाहः ।।২২3।।


--- Page 51 ---
Text 33] The First Step in God Realization 51

nadyo’sya nadyo’tha tanii-ruhani

mahiruha visva-tanor nrpendra

ananta-viryah Svasitar matarisva

gatir vayah karma guna-pravahah
nadyah—the rivers; asya—of Him; nadyah—veins; atha—and thereafter;
tanii-ruhani—hairs on the body;mahiruhah—the plants and trees; visva-tanoh
—of the universal form; nrpendra—O King; ananta-viryah—of the omni-
potent; Svasitam—breathing; matarisva—air; gatth—movement; vayah—pass-
ing ages; karma—activity ; guna-pravahah—reaction of the modes of nature.
TRANSLATION
0 King, the rivers are the veins of the gigantic body, the trees are hairs
of His body, and the omnipotent air is His breathing. The passing ages are
His movements, and His activities are the reactions of the three modes of
material nature.
PURPORT

The Personality of Godhead is not a dead stone, nor is He inactive, as is
poorly thought by some schools. He moves with the progress of time, and,
therefore, He knows all about the past and future, along with His present
activities. There is nothing unknown to Him. The conditioned souls are
driven by the reactions of the modes of material nature, which are the
activities of the Lord. As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.12), the
modes of nature act under His direction only, and as such no natural
functions are blind or automatic. The power behind the activities is the
supervision of the Lord, and as such, the Lord is never inactive as is
wrongly conceived. The Vedas say that the Supreme Lord has nothing to do
personally, as is always the case with superiors, but everything 15 done by
His direction. As it is said, not a blade of grass moves without His sanction.
In the Brahma-sanmhita (verse 48), it is said that all the universes and the
heads of them (the Brahmas) exist only for the duration of His breathing
period. The same is confirmed here. The air on which the universes and the
planets within the universes exist is nothing but a bit of breathing
of the unchallengeable virata purusa. So even by studying the rivers,
trees, air and the passing ages, one can conceive of the Personality
of Godhead without being misled by the formless conception of the
Lord. In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 12.5) it is stated that those who are


--- Page 52 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
much inclined to the formless conception of the Supreme Truth are more
troubled than those who can intelligently conceive of the personal form.
TEXT 34
ईशस्य केशान्‌ विदुरम्बुवाहान्‌
वासस्तु सन्ध्यां कुर्वं भूम्नः |
त
अव्यक्तमाहुहेदयं मनश्च
Co -
A चन्द्रमाः स्वेविकारकाशः 113911
iSasya kesan vidur ambuvahan
vasas tu sandhyari kuru-varya 01077271012
avyaktam ahur hrdayarh manas ca
sa candramah sarva-vikara-kosah
Sasya—of the supreme controller; kesan—hairs on the head; viduh—you
may know it from me; ambuvahan—the clouds which carry water; ৮৫5৫5 tu
—the dress; sandhyam— termination of day and night; kuru-varya—O best of
the Kurus; bhiimnah—of the Almighty; avyaktam—the prime cause of
material creation; @ahuh—it is said; hrdayam—intelligence; manas ca—and
the mind; sah—He; candramah—the moon; sarva-vikara-ko$ah—reservoir
of all changes.
TRANSLATION
O best amongst the Kurus, the clouds which carry water are the hairs
on His head, the termination of days or nights are His dress, and the
supreme cause of material creation is His intelligence. His mind is the
moon, the reservoir of all changes.
TEXT 35
विज्ञानशक्तिं महिमामनन्ति
सर्वात्मनोऽन्तःकरणं गिर्त्रिम्‌ |
[3 ~
अश्वाश्चतयुष्रगजा नरान
5 ৮ ইচ্ছে
स्वे मगाः पशवः সীতা । ३५॥


--- Page 53 ---
Text 36] The First Step in God Realization 53
vijiiana-sak tin mahim amananti
sarvatmano ntah-karanam giritram
asvasvatary-ustra-gaja nakhani
sarve mrgah pasavah Sroni-dese
vijiiana-sak tim— consciousness; mahim—principle of matter; amananti—
they call it so; sarvatmanah—of the omnipresent; antah-karanam—ego;
giritram—Rudra (Siva); asva—horse; asvatari—mule; ustra—camel; gajah—
elephant; nakhani—nails; sarve—all other; mrgah—stags; pasavah—quadru-
peds; sroni-dese—on the region of the belt.
TRANSLATION
The principle of matter [mahat-tattva] is the consciousness of the
omnipresent Lord, as asserted by the experts, and Rudradeva is His ego.
Horse, mule, camel and elephant are His nails, and wild animals and all
quadrupeds are situated in the belt zone of the Lord.
TEXT 36
वयांसि तदूव्याकरणं विचित्र
- (~
मनुमेनीपा मनुजो निवासः |
__ ৫
AP विद्याधरचारणाप्सरः
©
EEA: 1381)
vayamsi tad vydkaranar vicitram
manur manisa manujo nivasah
gandharva-vidyadhara-caranapsarah
svara-smprtir asuranika-viryah
vayamsi—varieties of birds; tad vyakaranam—vocables; vicitram— artistic;
manuh—the father of mankind; manisa— thoughts; manujaeh— mankind (the
sons of Manu); nivasah—residence; gandharva—the human beings named
Gandharvas; vidyadhara—the Vidyadharas; carana—the Caranas; apsarah—
the angels; svara—musical rhythm; smrtih—remembrance; asuranika—the
demoniac soldiers; viryah— prowess.


--- Page 54 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION

Varieties of birds are indications of His masterful artistic sense. Manu,
the father of mankind, is the emblem of His standard intelligence, and
humanity is His residence. The celestial species of human beings, like the
Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, Caranas, and angels, all represent His musical
rhythm, and the demoniac soldiers are representations of His wonderful
prowess.

PURPORT

The aesthetic sense of the Lord is manifested in the artistic, color-
ful creation of varieties of birds like the peacock, parrot, cuckoo
and others. The celestial species of human beings, like the Gandharvas
and Vidyadharas, can sing wonderfully and can entice even the minds
of the heavenly demigods. Their musical rhythm represents the mu-
sical sense of the Lord. How then can He be impersonal? His mu-
sical taste, artistic sense and standard intelligence, which is never fal-
lible, are different signs of His Supreme Personality. The Manu-samhita
is the standard law book for humanity, and every human being is
advised to follow this great book of social knowledge. The human
society is the residential quarters for the Lord—this means the human
being is meant for God realization and association with God. This
life is a chance for the conditioned soul to regain his eternal God
consciousness and thus fulfill the mission of life. Maharaja Prahlada
is the right type of the Lord’s representative in the family of asuras.
None of the living beings is away from the Lord’s gigantic body. Each
and every one has a particular duty in relation to the supreme body.
Disruption in the matter of discharging the specific duty assigned
to each and every living being is the cause of disintegration between
one living being and another, but when the relation is reestablished
in relation with the Supreme Lord, there is complete unity between
all living beings, even up to the limit of the wild animals and human
society. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu displayed this living unity in
the jungle of Madhya Pradesh, where even the tigers, elephants and
many other ferocious animals perfectly cooperated in glorifying
the Supreme Lord. That is the way to peace and amity all over the
world.


--- Page 55 ---
Text 37] The First Step in God Realization 55
TEXT 37
. -
ब्रक्मानन JAYST महात्मा
> €
विद्रुरक्किभ्रितक्रष्णवणे; |
oa क
नानाभिधाभीज्यगणोपपननो
= [
द्रव्यात्मकः कमं वितानयोगः 13001
brahmananar ksatra-bhujo mahatma
vid @rur anghrisrita-krsna-varneh
nanabhidhabhijyaganopapanno
dravyatmakah karma vitana-yogah
brahma—the brahmanas; ananam—face; ksatra— the ksatriyas; bhujah—the
arms; mahatma—the virata purusa; vit—the vaisyas; aruh—thighs; anghrisrita
—under the protection of his fect; krsna-varnah— the sidras; nana—various;
abhidha—by names; abhijyagana—the demigods; upapannah—hcing over-
taken; dravyatmakah—with feasible goods; karma—activitics; vitana-yogah
—performances of sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
The virata purusa’s face is the brahmanas, His arms are the ksatriyas,
His thighs are the vaiSyas, and the sudras are under the protection of His
feet. All the demigods who are worshipable are also overtaken by Him,
and it is the duty of everyone to perform sacrifices with feasible goods to
appease the Lord.
PURPORT
Monotheism is practically suggested here. Offering sacrifices to many
demigods under different names is mentioned in the Vedic literatures, but
the suggestion made in this verse is that all those varieties of demigods are
included in the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; they are only
the parts and parcels of the original whole. Similarly, the divisions of the
orders of the human society, namely the brahmanas or the intelligent class,
the ksatriyas or the administrators, the vaiSyas or the mercantile com-
munity and the sidras or the laborer class, are all included in the body of
the Supreme. As such, sacrifice by every one of them in terms of pleasing


--- Page 56 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
the Supreme by feasible goods is recommended. Generally, the sacrifice is
offered with clarified butter and grains, but with the progress of time,
human society has produced varieties of goods by transforming materials
supplied by God’s material nature. Human society, therefore, must learn
to offer sacrifices not only with clarified butter, but also with other
manufactured goods in the propagation of the Lord’s glory, and that will
bring about perfection in human society. The intelligent class of men, or
brahmanas, may give direction for such sacrifices in consultation with the
previous acaryas; the administrators may give all facilities to perform such
sacrifices; the vai§ya class or mercantile community, who produce such
goods, may offer them for sacrifice, and the Sidra class may offer their
manual labor for the successful termination of such sacrifice; Thus by the
cooperation of all classes of human beings, the sacrifice recommended in
this age, namely the sacrifice of congregational chanting of the holy name
of the Lord, may be executed for the common welfare for all the people
of the world.
TEXT 38
इयानसावीश्वरवि ग्रह
यः सन्निवेशः कथितौ मया ते |
सन्धायंतेऽसिन्‌ वपुपि स्थविष्ठे
मनः JIT न यतोऽस्ति किञित्‌॥।२८॥
iyan asav iSvara-vigrahasya
yah sannivesah kathito maya te
sandharyate’smin vapusi sthavisthe
manah svabuddhya na yato’sti kificit
iyan—all these; asau—that; i§vara—Supreme Lord; vigrahasya—of the
form; yah—whatsoever; sannivesah—as they are located; kathitah—ex-
plained; maya—by me; te—unto you; sandharyate—one may concentrate;
asmin—in this; vapusi—form of virata; sthavisthe—in the gross; manah—
mind; svabuddhya—by one’s intelligence; na—not; yatah—beyond Him;
asti—there is; kificit— anything else.


--- Page 57 ---
Text 38] The First Step in God Realization 50
TRANSLATION

I have thus explained to you the gross material gigantic conception
of the Personality of Godhead. One who seriously desires liberation
concentrates his mind on this form of the Lord, because there is nothing
more than this in the material world.

PURPORT

In the Bhagavad-gitd, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has verily
explained that the material nature is only an order-carrying agent of His
(Bg. 9.10). She is one of the different potencies of the Lord, and she acts
under His direction only. As the Supreme transcendental Lord, He simply
casts a glance over the material principle, and thus agitation of the matter
begins, and the resultant actions are manifested one after another by six
kinds of gradual differentiations. All material creation is moving in that
way, and as such, it so appears and disappears in due course.

Less intelligent persons with a poor fund of knowledge cannot accommo-
date the thought of this inconceivable potency of the Lord Sri Krsna, by
which He appears just like a human being (Bg. 9.11). His appearance in the
material world as one of usis also His causeless mercy upon the fallen souls.
Although He is transcendental to all material conceptions, still by His
unbounded mercy upon His pure devotees, He comes down and manifests
Himself as the Personality of Godhead. Materialistic philosophers and
scientists are too much engrossed with atomic energy and the gigantic
situation of the universal form, and they offer respect more seriously to
the external phenomenal feature of material manifestations than to the
noumenal principle of spiritual existence. The transcendental form of the
Lord is beyond the jurisdiction of such materialistic activities, and it is
very difficult to conceive that the Lord can be simultaneously localized
and all-pervasive, because the materialistic philosophers and scientists think
of everything in terms of their own experience. Because they are unable to
accept the personal feature of the Supreme Lord, the Lord is kind enough
to demonstrate the virata feature of His transcendental form, and herein
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami has vividly described this form of the Lord. He
concludes there is nothing beyond this gigantic feature of the Lord. None
of the materialistic thoughtful men can go beyond this conception of the
gigantic form. The minds of the materialistic men are flickering and con-


--- Page 58 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
stantly changing from one aspect to the other. Therefore, one is advised to
think of the Lord by thinking of any part of His gigantic body and by
one’s intelligence only. One can think of Him in any manifestation of the
material world—the forest, the hill, the ocean, the man, the animal, the
demigod, the bird, the beast or anything else. Each and every item of the
material manifestation entails a part of the body of the gigantic form, and
thus the flickering mind can be fixed in the Lord only and nothing else.
This process of concentrating on the different bodily parts of the Lord
will gradually diminish the demoniac challenge of godlessness and bring
about gradual development of devotional service of the Lord. Everything
being the part and parcel of the Complete Whole, the neophyte student
will gradually realize the hymns of Isopanisad which state that the Supreme
Lord is everywhere, and thus he will learn the art of not committing any
offense on the body of the Lord. This sense of God-mindedness will
diminish one’s pride of challenging the existence of God. Thus one can
learn to show respect to everything, for all things are the parts and parcels
of the supreme body.
TEXT 39
स सर्वधीदृत्ययुभूतसर्व
आत्मा यथा सखभ्रजनेितैकः |
त॑ सत्यमानन्दनिधिं भजेत
नान्यत्र मज्जेद्‌ যন आत्मपातः ।३९॥
sa sarva-dhi-vrtty-anubhiita-sarva
atma yatha svapnajaneksitaikah
tam satyam ananda-nidhir bhajeta
nanyatra sajjed yata atma-patah
sah—He, the Supreme Person; sarva-dhi-vrtti—the process of realization
by all sorts of intelligence; anubhiita— cognizant; sarve—everyone; atma—
Supersoul; yath@a—as much as; svapnajana—a person dreaming; ik sita—seen
by; ekah—one and the same; tam—unto Him; satyam—Supreme Truth;
ananda-nidhim—the ocean of bliss; bhajeta—must one worship; na—never;
anyatra—anything else; sajjet—be attached; yatah—whereby; atma-patah—
degradation of oneself.


--- Page 59 ---
Text 39] The First Step in God Realization 59
TRANSLATION

One should concentrate his mind upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who alone is distributed in so many manifestations, as much as
ordinary persons create thousands of manifestations in dream. One must
concentrate the mind on Him who is the only all-blissful Absolute Truth.
Otherwise one will be misled and will cause his own degradation.

PURPORT

In this verse, the process of devotional service is indicated by the great
Gosvami, Srila Sukadeva. He tries to impress upon us that instead of
diverting our attention to several branches of self-realization, we should
concentrate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the supreme
object of realization, worship and devotion. Self-realization is, as it were,
offering a fight for eternal life against the material struggle for existence,
and therefore by the illusory grace of the external energy, the yogi or the
devotee is faced with many allurements which can entangle a great fighter
again in the bondage of material existence. A yogi can attain miraculous
successes in the matter of material achievements, and they are called anima,
laghima, etc., by which one can become more minute than the minutest or
lighter than the lightest, or in the ordinary sense, may achieve material
benedictions in the shape of wealth and women. But he is warned against
such allurements because to become again entangled in such illusory
pleasure means degradation of the self and further imprisonment in the
material world. By this warning, one should follow one’s vigilant intelli-
gence only.

The Supreme Lord is one, and His expansions are various. He is,
therefore, the Supersoul of everything. When a man sees anything, he must
know that his seeing is secondary and the Lord’s seeing is primary. One
cannot see anything without the Lord’s having first seen it. That is the
instruction of the Vedas and the Upanisads. So whatever we see or do, the
Supersoul of all acts of seeing or doing is the Lord. This theory of
simultaneous oneness and difference between the individual soul and
the Supersoul is propounded by Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu as the
philosophy of acintya-bhedabheda-tattva. The virdta 7070, or the gigantic
feature of the Supreme Lord, includes everything materially manifested,
and therefore the virdta or gigantic feature of the Lord is the Supersoul of
all living and nonliving entities. But the virdta riipa is also the manifestation
of Narayana or Visnu, and going further on and on one will eventually see


--- Page 60 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 1
that Lord Krsna is the ultimate Supersoul of everything that be. The
conclusion is that one should unhesitatingly become a worshiper of Lord
Krsna, or, for that matter, His plenary expansion, Narayana, and none
else. In the Vedic hymns, it is clearly said that first of all Narayana cast
a glance over matter and thus there was creation. Before creation, there
was neither Brahma nor Siva, and what to speak of others. Sripad
Sarikaracarya has definitely accepted this, that Narayana is beyond the
material creation and all others are within the material creation. The whole
material creation is, therefore, one and different from Narayana, simulta-
neously, and this supports the philosophy of acintya-bhedabheda-tattva of
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Being an emanation from the glancing
potency of Narayana, the whole material creation is nondifferent from
Him. But because it is the effect of His external energy (bahiranga-maya)
and is aloof from the internal potency (atma-maya), the whole material
creation is different from Him at the same time. The example given in this
verse very nicely is that of the dreaming man. The dreaming man creates
many things in the dream, and thus he himself becomes the entangled seer
of the dream and is also affected by the consequences. This material
creation is also exactly a dream-like creation of the Lord, but He, being
the transcendental Supersoul, is neither entangled nor affected by the
reactions of such a dream-like creation. He is always in His transcendental
position, but essentially He is everything, and nothing is apart from Him.
One should therefore concentrate on Him only as His part and parcel
without deviation, otherwise one is sure to be overcome by the potencies
of the material creation, one after another. It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-
gita as follows:
sarva-bhitani kaunteya prakrtim yanti mamikam
kalpaksaye punas tani kalpadau visrjamy aham

“0 son of Kunti, at the end of the millennium every material manifesta-
tion entersinto My nature, and at the beginning of another millennium, by
My potency I again create.” (Bg. 9.7)

The human life is, however, an opportunity to get out of this repetition
of creation and annihilation. It is a means whereby one may escape the
Lord’s external potency and enter into His internal potency.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, First
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The First Step in God
Realization.”


--- Page 61 ---
CHAPTER TWO
The Lord in the Heart
TEXT 1
figs उवाच
एवं T धारणयाऽऽत्मयोनि-
सतिं प्रत्यवरुध्य तुष्टात्‌ |
तथा ससर्जेद ममोषदृटि-
्यथाप्ययात्‌ प्राग्‌ न्यवसायबुद्धिः ॥। १ ॥
§ri suka uvaca
evam pura dharanayatma-yonir
nastam smrtim pratyavarudhya tustat
tatha sasarjedam amogha-drstir
yathapyayat prag vyavasaya-buddhih
$ri Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—just in the same way;
purd—prior to the manifestation of the cosmos;dharanaya—by such concep-
tion; atma-yonih—of Brahmaji; nast@m—lost; smrtim—remembrance; prat-
yavarudhya—by regaining consciousness; tustat—because of appeasing the
Lord; tatha—thereafter; sasarjedam—created this material world; amogha-
drstih—one who has attained clear vision; yathd—as; apyayat—created;
prak—as formerly ; vyavasaya—ascertained ; buddhih—intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Formerly, prior to the manifestation of the
cosmos, Lord Brahma, by meditating on the virata riipa, regained his lost
consciousness by appeasing the Lord. Thus he was again able to rebuild the
creation as it was before.
PURPORT
The example cited herein of Sri Brahmiji is one of forgetfulness.
Brahmaji is the incarnation of one of the mundane attributes of the Lord.
61


--- Page 62 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
Being the incarnation of the passion-mode of material nature, he is em-
powered by the Lord to generate the beautiful material manifestation. Yet,
due to his becoming one of the numerous living entities, he is apt
to forget the art of his creative energy. This forgetfulness of the living
being—beginning from Brahma down to the lowest insignificant ant—is a
tendency which can be counteracted by meditation on the virata ripa of
the Lord. This chance is available in the human form of life, and if a
human being follows the instruction of Srimad-Bhagavatam and begins to
meditate upon the virata riipa, then revival of his pure consciousness and
counteraction to the tendency of his forgetfulness of his eternal relation-
ship with the Lord can follow simultaneously. And as soon as this
forgetfulness is removed, at once the vyavasdya-buddhi, as it is stated
here and in the Bhagavad-gita (2.41), follows at once. This ascertained
knowledge of the living being leads to loving service of the Lord, which the
living being requires. The kingdom of God is unlimited; therefore the
number of the assisting hands of the Lord is also unlimited. The
Bhagavad-gita asserts that the Lord has His hands, legs, eyes and mouths in
every nook and corner of His creation (Bg. 13.13). This means that the
expansions of differentiated parts and parcels, called jivas or the living
entities, are assisting hands of the Lord, and all of them are meant for
rendering a particular pattern of service to the Lord. The conditioned
soul, even in the position of a Brahma, forgets this by the influence of
illusory material energy generated out of false egoism. Such false egoism
can be counteracted by invoking God consciousness. Liberation means
getting out of the slumber of forgetfulness and becoming situated in the
real loving service of the Lord, as it is exemplified in the case of Brahma.
The service of Brahma is the sample of service in liberation distinguished
from the so-called altruistic services full of mistakes and forgetfulness.
Liberation is never inaction, but service without human mistakes.
TEXT 2
शाब्दस्य दि ब्रह्मण पष पन्था
यन्नामभिर्ध्यायति সমীঘোষীঃ ।
Wade न ॒विन्दतेऽयान्‌
मायामये वासनया शयानः || २ ॥
sabdasya hi brahmana esa pantha
yan namabhir dhydyati dhir aparthaih
paribhramaris tatra na vindate’rthan
mayamaye vasanaya sayanah


--- Page 63 ---
Text 2] The Lord in the Heart 63
$abdasya—of the Vedic sound; hi—certainly; brahmanah—of the Vedas;
esah—these; panthd—the way; yat—what is; namabhih—by different names;
dhyayati—ponders over, dhih—intelligence; aparthaih—by meaningless ideas;
paribhraman—wandering; tatra—there; na—never; vindate—enjoys; arthan—
realities; mayamaye—in illusory things; vasanaya—by different desires;
Sayanah—as if dreaming in sleep.
TRANSLATION
The way of presentation of the Vedic sounds is so bewildering that the
intelligence of the people is directed to meaningless things, like the
heavenly kingdoms, etc. The conditioned souls hover in a dream of such
heavenly illusory pleasures, but actually they do not relish any tangible
happiness in such places.
PURPORT
The conditioned soul is always engaged in laying out plans for happiness
within the material world, even up to the end of the universal limit. He is
not even satisfied with available amenities within this planet earth, where
he has exploited the resources of nature tc the best of his capacity. He
wants to go to the moon or the planet Venus to exploit resources there.
But the Lord has warned us in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.16) about the
worthlessness of all the innumerable planets of this universe, as well as
those planets within other systems. There are innumerable universes and
also innumerable planets in each of them. But none of them is immune to
the chief miseries of material existence, namely the pangs of birth, the
pangs of death, the pangs of old age and the pangs of disease. The Lord
says that even the topmost planet known as the Brahmaloka or Satyaloka
(and what to speak of other planets, like the heavenly planets, etc.) is not
a happy land for residential purposes due to the presence of material pangs,
as above mentioned. Conditioned souls are strictly under the laws of
fruitive activities, and as such they go up to Brahmaloka sometimes and
again come down to the Patalaloka, as if they were unintelligent children on
a merry-go-round. The real happiness is in the kingdom of God, where no
one has to undergo the pangs of material existence. Therefore, the Vedic
ways of fruitive activities by the living entities are misleading. One thinks
of a superior way of life in this country or that, or in this planet or
another, but nowhere in the material world can he fulfill his real desire of


--- Page 64 ---
64 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
life, namely eternal life, full intelligence and complete bliss. Indirectly Srila
Sukadeva Gosvami affirms that Maharaja Pariksit, in the last stage of life,
should not desire to transfer himself to the so-called heavenly planets, but
should prepare himself for going back home, back to Godhead. None of
the material planets, nor the amenities available there for living conditions,
is everlasting; therefore one must have a factual reluctance to enjoy such
temporary happiness as they afford.
TEXT 3
अतः कमिर्नामसु AE:
स्यादप्रमत्तो च्यवसायबुद्धिः |
सिद्धेऽन्यथार्थे न यतेत तत्र
परिश्रम লগ समीक्षमाणः ।।३॥
atah kavir namasu yavad arthah
syad apramatto vyavasaya-buddhih
siddhe’nyatharthe na yateta tatra
parisramam tatra samiksamanah
atah—for this reason; kavih—the enlightened person; namasu—in the
matter of names only; ya@vat—minimum; arthah—necessity; sydt—must be;
apramattah—without being mad after them; vyavasaya-buddhih—intelli-
gently fixed; siddhe—for success; anyatha—otherwise; arthe—in the interest
of;na—should never; yate ta—endeavor for; tatra—there; parisramam—labor-
ing hard; tatra—there; samiksamanah—one who sees practically.
TRANSLATION
For this reason the enlightened person should endeavor only for the
minimum necessities of life while in the world of names. He should be
intelligently fixed and never endeavor for unwanted things, being compe-
tent to perceive practically that all such endeavors are merely laboring hard
for nothing.


--- Page 65 ---
Text 3] The Lord in the Heart 65
PURPORT

The Bhagavata-dharma or the cult of Srimad-Bhégavatam is perfectly
distinct from the way of fruitive activities, which are considered by the
devotees to be merely a waste of time. The whole universe, or for that
matter all material existence, is moving on as jagat, simply for planning
business to make one’s position very comfortable or secure, although
everyone sees that this existence is neither comfortable nor secure, nor can
it ever become comfortable or secure at any stage of development. Those
who are captivated by the illusory advancement of material civilization
(following the way of phantasmagoria) are certainly madmen. The whole
material creation is a jugglery of names only; in fact, it is nothing but a
bewildering creation of matters like earth, water and fire. The buildings,
furniture, cars, bungalows, mills, factories, industries, peace, war or even
the highest perfection of material science, namely the atomic energy and
electronics, are all simply bewildering names of material elements with their
concomitant reactions of the three modes. Since the devotee of the Lord
knows them perfectly well, he is not interested in creating unwanted things
for a situation which is not at all reality, but simply names of no more
significance than the babble of sea waves. The great kings, leaders and
soldiers fight with one another in order to perpetuate their names in
history. They are forgotten in due course of time, and they make place for
another era in history. But the devotee realizes how much history and
historical persons are useless products of flickering time. The fruitive
worker aspires after a big fortune in the matter of wealth, woman and
worldly adoration, but those who are fixed in perfect reality are not at all
interested in such false things. For them it is all a waste of time. Since
every second of human life is important, an enlightened man should be
very careful to utilize time very cautiously. One second of human life
wasted in the vain research of planning happiness in the material world can
never be replaced, even by spending millions of coins of gold. Therefore,
the transcendentalist desiring freedom from the clutches of maya, or the
illusory activities of life, is warned herewith not to be captivated by the
external features of fruitive actors. Human life is never meant for sense
gratification, but for self-realization. Srimad-Bhagavatam instructs us solely
on this subject from the very beginning to the end. Human life is simply
meant for self-realization. The civilization which aims at this utmost
perfection never indulges in creating unwanted things, and such a perfec-
tional civilization prepares men only to accept the bare necessities of life


--- Page 66 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
or to follow the principle of the best use of a bad bargain. Our material
bodies and our lives in that connection are bad bargains because the living
entity is actually spirit, and spiritual advancement of the living entity is
absolutely necessary. Human life is intended for the realization of this
important factor, and one should act accordingly, accepting only the bare
necessities of life and depending more on God’s gift without diversion
of human energy for any other purpose, such as being mad for material
enjoyment. Such materialistic advancement of civilization is called “the
civilization of the demons,” which ultimately ends in wars and scarcity.
The transcendentalist is specifically warned herewith to be fixed in mind,
so that even if there is difficulty in plain living and high thinking he will not
budge even an inch from his stark determination. For a transcendentalist,
it is a suicidal policy to be intimately in touch with the sense-gratifiers of
the world, because such a policy will frustrate the ultimate gain of life.
Sukadeva Gosvami met Maharaja Pariksit when the latter felt a necessity for
such a meeting. It is the duty of a transcendentalist to help persons who
desire real salvation and to support the cause of salvation. One might note
that Sukadeva Gosvami never met Maharaja Pariksit while he was ruling as a
great king. For a transcendentalist, the mode of activities is explained in
the next sloka.
TEXT 4
सत्यां क्षितौ कि फरिपोः प्रयासै-
बाहौ स्वसिद्धे awe: किम्‌ ।
EC]
सत्यञ्जलौ কি पुरुषान्नपाच्या
दिग्बस्कलादौ सति कि दुकूलैः ॥ ४॥
satyam ksitau kimi kasipoh prayasair
bahau svasiddhe hy upabarhanaih kim
saty afijalau kim purudhanna-patrya
dig-valkaladau sati kim dukiilaih
satyam—being in possession; ksitau—earthly flats; kim—where is the
necessity; kasipoh—of bed and cots; prayasaih—endeavoring for; bahau—
the arms; svasiddhe—being self-sufficient; hi—certainly ;upabarhanaih—bed
and bedstead; kim—what is the use; sati—being present; aiijalau— the palms


--- Page 67 ---
Text 4] The Lord in the Heart 67
of the hands; kim—what is the use; purudha—varieties of; anna—eatables;
patrya—by the utensils; dik—open space; valkala-ddau—skins of trees; sati—
being existent; kim—what is the use of; dukitlaih—clothes.
TRANSLATION
When there are ample earthly flats to lie on, then what is the necessity
of cots and beds? When one can use his own arms, what is the necessity of
a pillow? When one can use the palms of his hands, then what is the
necessity of varieties of utensils? When there is ample covering, or the
skins of trees, then what is the necessity of clothing?
PURPORT
The necessities of life for the protection of the body, etc., must not be
unnecessarily increased. Human energy is spoiled in a vain search after
such illusory happiness. If one is able to lie down on the floor, then why
should one endeavor to get a good bedstead or soft cushion to lie on? If
one can rest without any pillow and make use of the soft arms endowed
by nature, there is no necessity of searching after a pillow. If we make a
study of the general life of the animals, we can see that they have no
intelligence to build big houses, furniture, aad other household parapher-
nalia, and yet they maintain a healthy life by lying down on the open land.
They do not know how to cook or prepare foodstuff, yet they still live
healthy lives more easily than the human being. This does not mean that
human civilization should revert to animal life nor that the human being
should live naked in the jungles without any culture, education, and
sense of morality. An intelligent human cannot live the life of an
animal; rather, man should try to utilize his intelligence in arts and
science, poetry and philosophy. In such a way he can further the
progressive march of human civilization. But here the idea given by
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami is that the reserve energy of human life, far
superior to that of animals, should simply be utilized for self-realization.
Advancement of human civilization must be towards the goal of establish-
ing our lost relationship with God, which is not possible in any form of
life other than the human. One must realize the nullity of the material
phenomenon, considering it a passing phantasmagoria, and must endeavor
to make a solution to the miseries of life. Self-complacence with a polished
type of animal civilization geared to sense gratification is delusion, and


--- Page 68 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
such a “civilization” is not worthy of the name. In pursuit of such false
activities, a human being is in the clutches of maya, or illusion. Great sages
and saints in the days of yore were not living in palatial buildings
furnished with good furniture and so-called amenities of life. They used
to live in huts and groves and sit on the flat ground, and yet they have left
immense treasures of high knowledge with all perfection. Srila Ripa
Gosvami and Srila Sanitana Gosvami were high-ranking ministers of state,
but they were able to leave behind them immense writings on transcen-
dental knowledge, while residing only for one night underneath one tree.
They did not live even two nights under the same tree, and what to speak
of well-furnished rooms with modern amenities. And still they were able
to give us most important literatures of self-realization. So-called comforts
of life are not actually helpful for progressive civilization; rather, they are
detrimental to such progressive life. In the system of sanatana-dharma of
four divisions of social life and four orders of progressive realization, there
are ample opportunities and sufficient directions for a happy termination
of the progressive life, and the sincere followers are advised there to accept
a voluntary life of renunciation in order to achieve the desired goal of life.
If one is not accustomed to abide by the life of renunciation and self-
abnegation from the beginning, one should try to get into the habit at a
later stage of life as recommended by Srila Sukadeva Gosvami, and that
will help one to achieve the desired success.
TEXT 5
चीराणि किं पथि न सन्ति Rafe भिक्षां
नैवाक्ध्िपाः परगरृतः सरितोऽप्यञय्यन्‌ |
शुद्धा गुहाः किमजितोऽवति नोपसनान्‌
काद्‌ भजन्ति कवयो धनदुर्मदान्धान्‌ || ५॥
cirani kim pathi na santi disanti bhiksar
naivanghripah parabhrtah sarito ‘py asusyan
ruddha guhah kim ajito’vati nopasannan
kasmad bhajanti kavayo dhana-durmadandhan
cirani—torn clothes; kim—whether; pathi—on the road; na—not; santi—
there is; disanti—give in charity; bhiksam—alms; na—not; eva—also; anghri-


--- Page 69 ---
Text 5] The Lord in the Heart 69
pah—the trees; parabhrtah—one who maintains others; saritah—the rivers;
api—also; asusyan—have dried up; ruddhah—closed; guhah—caves; kim—
whether; gjitah—the Almighty Lord; avati—give protection; na—not; upa-
sannan—the surrendered soul; kasmat—what for then; bhajanti—flatters:
kavayah—the learned; dhana—wealth; dur-mada-andhan—too intoxicated
by.
TRANSLATION
Are there no torn clothes lying on the common road? Do the trees,
which exist for maintaining others, no longer give alms in charity? Do the
rivers, being dried up, no longer supply water to the thirsty? Are the caves
of the mountains now closed, or, above all, does the Almighty Lord not
protect the fully surrendered souls? Why then do the learned sages go to
flatter those who are intoxicated by hard-earned wealth?
PURPORT
The renounced order of life is never meant for begging nor living al the
cost of others as a parasite. According to the dictionary, a parasite is a
sycophant who lives at the cost of society without making any contribution
to that society. The renounced order is meant for contributing something
substantial to the society and not depending on the earnings of the
householders. On the contrary, acceptance of alms from the householders
by the bona fide mendicant is an opportunity afforded by the saint for
tangible benefit of the donor. In the sanatana-dharma institution, alms-
giving to the mendicant is part of a householder’s duty, and it is advised
in the scriptures that the householders should treat the mendicants as
their family children and should provide them with food, clothing, etc.,
without being asked. Pseudo-mendicants, therefore, should not take ad-
vantage of the charitable disposition of the faithful householders. The first
duty of a person in the renounced order of life is to contribute some
literary work for the benefit of the human being in order to give him
realized direction toward self-realization. Amongst the other duties in the
renounced order of life of Srila Sanatana, Srila Rapa and the other
Gosvamis of Vrndavana, the foremost duty discharged by them was to
hold learned discourses amongst themselves at Sevakufja Vrndavana (the
spot where Sri Radha-Damodara Temple was established by Srila Jiva
Gosvami and where the actual samadhi tombs of Srila Riipa Gosvami and
Srila Jiva Gosvami are laid). For the benefit of all in human society, they


--- Page 70 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
left behind them immense literatures of transcendental importance.
Similarly, all the acaryas who voluntarily accepted the renounced order of
life aimed at benefiting the human society and not at living a comfortable
or irresponsible life at the cost of others. However, those who cannot
give any contribution should not go to the householders for food, for such
mendicants asking bread from the householders are an insult to the highest
order. Sukadeva Gosvami gave this warning especially for those mendicants
who adopt this line of profession to solve their economic problems.
Such mendicants are in abundance in the age of Kali. When a man becomes
a mendicant willfully or by circumstances, he must be of firm faith and
conviction that the Supreme Lord is the maintainer of all living beings
everywhere in the universe. Why, then, would He neglect the maintenance
of a surrendered soul who is cent percent engaged in the service of the
Lord? A common master looks to the necessities of his servant, so how
much more would the all-powerful, all-opulent Supreme Lord look after
the necessities of life for a fully surrendered soul. The general rule is that
a mendicant devotee will accept a simple small loincloth without asking
anyone to give it in charity. He simply salvages it from the rejected torn
cloth thrown in the street. When he is hungry he may go to a magnanimous
tree which drops fruits, and when he is thirsty he may drink water from
the flowing river. He does not require to live in a comfortable house, but
should find out a cave in the hills and may not be afraid of jungle animals,
keeping faith in God, who lives in everyone’s heart. The Lord may
dictate to tigers and other jungle animals not to disturb His devotee.
Haridas Thakur, a great devotee of Lord Sri Caitanya, used to live in such
a cave, and by chance a great venomous snake also was a copartner of
the cave. Some admirer of Thakur Haridas, who had to visit the Thakur
every day, feared the snake and gave a suggestion to the Thakur to leave
that place. Because his devotees were afraid of the snake and they were
regularly visiting the cave, Thakur Haridas agreed to the proposal on their
account. But as soon as this was settled, the snake actually crawled out of
its hole in the cave and left the cave for good before everyone present. By
the dictation of the Lord, who lives also within the heart of the snake, the
snake gave preference to Haridas and decided to leave the place and not
disturb him. So this is a tangible example of how the Lord gives protection
to a bona fide devotee like Thakur Haridas. According to the regulations
of the sanatana-dharma institution, one is trained from the beginning to
depend fully on the protection of the Lord in all circumstances. The path
of renunciation is recommended for acceptance by one who is fully
accomplished and fully purified in one’s existence. This stage is described


--- Page 71 ---
Text 6] The Lord in the Heart 71
also in the Bhagavad-gita as daivi sampad (Bg. 16.5). A human being is re-
quired to accumulate daivi sampad, or spiritual assets; otherwise, the next
alternative, asuri sampad, or material assets, will overcome him dispropor-
tionately, and thus one will be forced into the entanglement of different
miseries of the material world. A sannyasi should always live alone without
company, and he must be fearless. He should never be afraid of living
alone, although he is never alone. The Lord is residing in everyone’s
heart, and unless one is purified by the prescribed process, one will feel
that he is alone. But a man in the renounced order of life must be
purified by the process; thus he will feel the presence of the Lord every-
where and will have nothing to fear (such as being without any company).
Everyone can become a fearless and honest person if his very existence is
purified by discharging the prescribed duty for each and every order of
life. One can become fixed in one’s prescribed duty by faithful aural re-
ception of Vedic instructions and assimilation of the essence of Vedic
knowledge by devotional service of the Lord.
TEXT 6
एवं स्वचित्ते खत एव सिद्ध
आत्मा प्रियो ऽर्थो भगवाननन्तः ।
4 লিষ্নী नियताथों मजेत
संसारहेतूपरमथ यत्र ॥ ६॥
evar svacitte svata eva siddha
atma priyo’rtho bhagavan anantah
tar nirvrto niyatartho bhajeta
samsara-hetiiparamas ca yatra
evam—thus; svacitte—in one’s own heart; svatah—by His omnipotency;

eva—certainly; siddhah—fully represented; atma—the Supersoul; priyah—
very dear; arthah—substance; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; anantah—the eternal unlimited; tam—unto Him; nirvrtah—being
detached from the world; niyata—permanent; arthah—the supreme gain;
bhajeta—one must worship; sarisara-hetu—the cause of the conditioned
state of existence; uparamah—cessation; ca—certainly; yatra—in which.


--- Page 72 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
TRANSLATION
Thus being fixed, one must render service unto the Supersoul situated
in one’s own heart by His omnipotency. Because He is the Almighty
Personality of Godhead, eternal and unlimited, He is the ultimate goal of
life, and by worshiping Him one can end the cause of the conditioned
state of existence.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, as it is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.61), is the all-pervading omnipresent Supersoul.
Therefore one who is a yogi can only worship Him because He is the
substance and not illusion. Every living creature is engaging in the
service of something else. A living being’s constitutional position is to
render service, but in the atmosphere of maya, or illusion, or the con-
ditional state of existence, the conditioned soul seeks the service of
illusion. A conditioned soul works in the service of his temporary body,
bodily relatives like the wife and children, and the necessary paraphernalia
for maintaining the body and bodily relations, namely the house, land,
wealth, society, country, etc., but he does not know that all such
renderings of service are totally illusory. As we have discussed many times
before, this material world is itself an illusion, like the mirage in the
desert. In the desert there is an illusion of water, and the foolish animals
become entrapped by such illusion and run after water in the desert,
although there is no water at all. But because there is no water in the
desert, one does not conclude that there is no water at all. The intelligent
person knows well that there is certainly water, water in the seas and
oceans, but such vast reservoirs of water are far, far away from the desert.
One should therefore search for water in the vicinity of seas and oceans
and not in the desert. Every one of us is searching after real happiness in
life, namely eternal life, eternal or unlimited knowledge and unending
blissful life. But foolish people who have no knowledge of the substance
search after the reality of life in the illusion. This material body does not
endure eternally, and everything in relation with this temporary body,
namely the wife, children, society, country, etc., also changes along with
the change of body. This is called sarisara or repetition of birth, death,
old age and disease. We would like to find a solution for all these problems
oflife, but we do not know the way. Herein it is suggested that anyone who


--- Page 73 ---
Text 6] The Lord in the Heart 73
wants to make an end of these miseries of life, namely repetition of birth,
death, disease, and old age, must take to this process of worshiping the
Supreme Lord and not others, as it is also ultimately suggested in the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.65). If we at all want to end the cause of our con-
ditioned life, we must take to the worship of Lord Sri Krsna, who is
present in everyone’s heart by His natural affection for all living beings,
who are actually the parts and parcels of the Lord (Bg. 18.61). The baby
in the lap of his mother is naturally attached to the mother, and the
mother is attached to the child. But when the child grows up and becomes
overwhelmed by circumstances, he gradually becomes detached from
the mother, but the mother always expects some sort of service from the
grown-up child, and she is equally affectionate for her child, even though
the child is forgetful. Similarly, because we are all part and parcel of the
Lord, the Lord is always affectionate to us, and He always tries to get us
back home and back to Godhead. But we, the conditioned souls, do not
care for Him and run instead after the illusory bodily connections. We must
therefore extricate ourselves from all illusory connections of the world
and seek reunion with the Lord, trying to render service unto Him because
He is the ultimate truth. Actually we are hankering after Him as the child
seeks the mother. And to search out the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
we need not go anywhere else, because the Lord is within our hearts. This
does not, however, suggest that we should not go to the places of worship,
namely the temples, churches and mosques. Such holy places of worship
are also occupied by the Lord because the Lord is omnipresent. For the
common man these holy places are centers of learning about the science of
God. When the temples are devoid of activities, the people in general
become disinterested in such places, and consequently the mass of people
gradually become godless, and a godless civilization is the result. Such a
hellish civilization increases artificially the conditions of life, and existence
becomes intolerable for everyone. The foolish leaders of a godless civiliza-
tion try to devise various plans to bring about peace and prosperity in
the godless world under a patent trademark of materialism, and because
such attempts are illusory only, the people elect incompetent, blind
leaders one after another who are incapable of offering solutions. If we
want at all to end this anomaly of a godless civilization, we must follow
the principles of revealed scriptures like the Srimad-Bhagavatam and follow
the instruction of a person like Sri Sukadeva Gosvami who has no attrac-
tion for material gain.


--- Page 74 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
TEXT 7
कर्तां त्वनादत्य पराजुचिन्ता-
= বন ९
सृते पञ्चूलसतीं नाम FAR ।
५ = त
ved , पतितं Awa
खकमेजान्‌ परितापाज्ुपाणम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥
kas tam tv anadrtya paranucintam
rte pasiin asatirn nama kuryat
pasyai janam patitari vaitaranpyar
sva-karma-jan paritapan jusanam
kah—who else; tam—that; tu—out; anadrtya—by neglecting; paranu-
cintam—transcendental thoughts; rte—without; pasin—the materialists;
asatim—in the nonpermanent; nama—name; kuryat—will adopt; pasyan—
seeing definitely; janam—the general mass of people; patitam—fallen;
vaitarapyam—in Vaitarani, the river of suffering; sva-karma-jan—produced
from one’s own work; paritapan—suffering; jusanam—being overtaken by.
TRANSLATION
Who else but the gross materialists will neglect such transcendental
thought and take to the nonpermanent names only, seeing the mass of
people fallen in the river of suffering as the consequence of accruing the
result of their own work?
PURPORT
In the Vedas it is said that persons who are attached to demigods to the
exclusion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are like the animals who
follow the herdsman even though they are taken to the slaughterhouse.
The materialists, like animals, also do not know how they are being mis-
directed by neglecting the transcendental thought of the Supreme Person.
No one can remain vacant of thought. It is said that an idle brain is a devil’s
workshop because a person who cannot think in the right way must think
of something which may bring about disaster. The -materialists are always
worshiping some minor demigods, although this is condemned in the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.20). As long as a person is illusioned by material


--- Page 75 ---
Text 8] The Lord in the Heart 75
gains, he petitions the respective demigods to draw some particular benefit
which is, after all, illusory and nonpermanent. The enlightened transcen-
dentalist is not captivated by such illusory things; therefore he is always
absorbed in the transcendental thought of the Supreme in different stages
of realization, namely Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. In the previous
verse it is suggested that one should think of the Supersoul, which is one
step higher than the impersonal thought of Brahman, as it was suggested in
the case of contemplating the virata ripa of the Personality of Godhead.
Intelligent persons who can see properly may look into the general
conditions of the living entities who are wandering in the cycle of the
8,400,000 species of life, as well as in different classes of human beings.
It is said that there is an everlasting belt of water called the River Vaitarant
at the entrance of the plutonic planet of Yamaraja, who punishes sinners
in different manners. After being subjected to such sufferings, a sinner is
awarded a particular species of life according to his deeds in the past. Such
living entities as are punished by the Yamaraja are seen in different varieties
of conditioned life. Some of them are in heaven, and some of them are in
hell. Some of them are brahmanas, and some of them are misers. But no
one is happy in this material world, and all of them are either class A., B.
or C. prisoners suffering because of their own deeds. The Lord is im-
partial to all circumstances of sufferings of the living entities, but to one
who takes shelter at His lotus feet, the Lord gives proper protection, and
He takes such a living entity again back home, back to Himself.
TEXT 8
केचित्‌ स्वदेहान्तहंदयावकारो
प्रादेशमात्रं पुरूपं वसन्तम्‌ ।
aga FRAHIE-
गदाधरं धारणया सरन्ति ॥ ८ ॥
kecit sva-dehantar-hrdayavakase
pradesa-matram purusari vasantam
catur-bhujam kafija-rathanga-sarikha-
gadadharam dharanaya smaranti
kecit—others; sva-deha-antar—within the body; hrdaya-avakase—in the

region of the heart; pradesa-matram—only measured by eight inches;


--- Page 76 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
purusam—the Personality of Godhead; vasantam—residing; catuh-bhujam—
with four hands; kaitja—lotus; ratha-ariiga—the wheel of a chariot; sankha—
conchshell; gada-dharam—and with a club in the hand; dharapaya—con-
ceiving in that way; smaranti—do meditate upon Him.
TRANSLATION
Others conceive of the Personality of Godhead residing within the body
in the region of the heart and measured only by eight inches, with four
hands carrying a lotus, a wheel of a chariot, a conchshell and a club
respectively.
PURPORT

The all-pervading Personality of Godhead resides as Paramatma in the
heart of each and every living entity. The measurement of the localized
Personality of Godhead is estimated to expand from the ring finger to the
end of the thumb, more or less eight inches. The form of the Lord described
in this verse with distribution of different symbols—beginning from the
lower right hand up and down to the lower left hand with lotus, wheel of
a chariot, conchshell and club respectively—is called Janirdana, or the
plenary portion of the Lord that controls over the general mass. There are
many other forms of the Lord with varied situations of the symbols of
lotus, conchshell, etc., and they are differently known as Purusottama,
Acyuta, Narasimha, Trivikrama, Hrsikesa, Kesava, Madhava, Aniruddha,
Pradyumna, Sarikarsana, Sridhara, Vasudeva, Damodara, Janardana,
Narayana, Hari, Padmanabha, Vamana, Madhusiidana, Govinda, Krsna,
Visnumarti, Adhoksaja and Upendra. Such twenty-four forms of the lo-
calized Personality of Godhead are worshiped in different parts of the
planetary system, and in each of them there is an incarnation of the Lord
having a different Vaikuntha planet in the spiritual sky, which is called the
Paravyoma. There are many other hundreds and scores of different forms
of the Lord, and each and every one of them has a particular planet in the
spiritual sky, of which this material sky is only a fragmental offshoot. The
Lord exists as purusa, or the male enjoyer, although there is no comparing
Him to any male form in the material world. But all such forms, advaita,
are nondifferent from one another, and each of them is eternally young.
The young Lord with four hands is nicely decorated, as described below.


--- Page 77 ---
Text 10] The Lord in the Heart wT
TEXT 9
সমল नलिनायतेक्षणं
कदम्बकिञ्ल्कपिशङ्गवासम्‌ |
~ 2
कसन्मटारलाहरण्मयाङ्गद
स्फुरन्महारतरकिरीरङण्डलम्‌ || ९॥
prasanna-vaktram nalinayateksanarm
kadamba-kinjalka-pisanga-vasasam
lasan maharatna-hirapmayangadari
sphuran mahdratna-kirita-kundalam
prasanna—expresses happiness; vaktram—mouth; nalina-ayata—spread
like the petals of a lotus; iksapam—eyes; kadamba—kadamba flower;
kifijalka—saffron; pisaiga—yellow: vdsasam— garments; lasan— hanging;
maharatna—valuable jewels; hirapmaya—made of gold; arigadam—orna-
ment; sphuran—glowing; mahdratna—valuable jewels; kirifa—headdress;
kunpdalam—earrings.
TRANSLATION
His mouth expresses His happiness. His eyes are spread like the petals
of a lotus, and His garments are yellowish like the saffron of a kadamba
flower and bedecked with valuable jewels. His ornaments are all made of
gold, set with jewels, and He wears a glowing headdress and earrings.
TEXT 10
उनिद्रहत्पङ्कजकणिकारये
योगेश्वराख्यापितपाद पहछ्वम्‌ |
৬ ৬,
श्रीलक्षणं कोस्तुभरलकन्धर-
मम्लानलक्ष्म्या वनमार्याऽऽचितम्‌ 12 ||


--- Page 78 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
unnidra-hrt-pankaja-karpikalaye
yogesvarasthapita-pada-pallavam
sri-laksanpam kaustubha-ratna-kandharam
amlana-laksmya vana-malayacitam
unnidra—blooming; hrt—heart; pankaja—lotus flower; karnika-alaye—on
the surface of the whorl; yogesvara—the great mystics; asthapita—placed;
pada-pallavam—lotus feet; $ri—goddess of fortune, or a beautiful calf;
laksanam—marked in that way; kaustubha—Kaustubha jewel; ratna—other
jewels; kandharam— on the shoulder; amlana— quite fresh; laksmya—beauty;
vana-malaya—by a flower garland; acitam—spread over.
TRANSLATION
His lotus feet are placed over the whorl of the lotus-like hearts of great
mystics. On His chest there is the Kaustubha jewel engraved with a beautiful
calf, and there are other jewels on His shoulders, and the complete torso is
garlanded with fresh flowers.
PURPORT
The ornaments, flowers, clothings and all other decorations on the
transcendental body of the Personality of Godhead are identical with the
body of the Lord. None of them are made of material ingredients, otherwise
there is no chance of their decorating the body of the Lord. As such, in the
Paravyoma, spiritual varieties are also distinguished from the material
variegatedness.
TEXT 11
. EN
विभूषितं मेखलयाङ्कलीयके-
Cac
मेहाधनेने पुरकङ्णादिभिः ।
a EY
सिग्धापलाङ्गखितनीलङुन्तले-
विंरेचमानाननदासपेशलम्‌ ॥११॥
vibhitsitarn mekhalayanguliyakair
mahadhanair niipura-karikanadibhih
snigdhamala-kunicita-nila-kuntalair
virocamananana-hasa-pesalam


--- Page 79 ---
Text 12] The Lord in the Heart 79
vibhiasitam—well decorated; mekhalaya—with an ornamental wreath
about the waist; anguliyakaih—by finger rings; mahadhanaih—all highly
valuable; nipura—ringing leglet; karikana-adibhih—also by bangles; snigdha
—greasy; amald—spotless; kuficita—curling; nila—bluish; kuntalaih—hair;
virocamana—very pleasing; anana—face; hasa—smile; pesalam—beautiful.
TRANSLATION
He is well decorated with an ornamental wreath about His waist and
rings on His fingers studded with valuable jewels. His leglet, bangles, oiled
hair curling with bluish tint, and His beautiful smiling face are all very
pleasing.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the most beautiful person
amongst all others, and Srila Sukadeva Gosvami describes every part of His
transcendental beauty, one after another, in order to teach the imperson-
alist that the Personality of Godhead is not an imagination by the devotee
for facility of worship, but that He is the Supreme Person in fact and figure.
The impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth is but His radiation, as the
sun rays are but radiations from the sun.
TEXT 12
=
अदीनरीलाहसितेक्षणोसद्‌-
भ्ूभङ्गसंखचितभूरय॑नग्रहम्‌ |
ईक्षेत चिन्तामयमेनमीश्वरं
या्रन्मनो धारणयावतिष्टते ॥१२॥
adina-lila-hasiteksanollasad
bhri-bhanga-sarisicita-bhiry-anugraham
ikseta cintamayam enam isvarar
yavan mano dharanayavatisthate
adina—very magnanimous; lild—pastimes; hasita—smiling; iksana—by
glancing over; ullasat—glowing; bhri-bhaiiga—signals of the eyebrow;
samsiicita—indicated; bhiri—extensive; anugraham—benediction; ikseta—


--- Page 80 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
one must concentrate on; cintamayam—transcendental; enam— this par-
ticular; iSvaram—the Supreme Lord; yavat—as long as; manah—the mind;
dharanaya—by meditation; avatisthate—can be fixed on.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s magnanimous pastimes and the glowing glancing of His
smiling face are all indications of His extensive benedictions. One must
therefore concentrate on this transcendental form of the Lord, as long as
the mind can be fixed on Him by meditation.
PURPORT

In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 12.5) it is said that the impersonalist undergoes
a series of difficult programs on account of his impersonal meditation. But
the devotee, due to the Lord’s personal service, gets through very easily.
Impersonal meditation is therefore a source of suffering for the imperson-
alist. Here, the devotee has an advantage over the impersonalist philosopher.
The impersonalist is doubtful about the personal feature of the Lord, and
therefore he always tries to meditate upon something which is not
objective. For thisreason there is an authentic statement in the Bhagavatam
regarding the positive concentration of the mind on the factual form of the
Lord.

The process of meditation recommended herein is bhakti-yoga, or the
process of devotional service after being liberated from the material
conditions. Jii@na-yoga is the process of liberation from the material
conditions. After one is liberated from the conditions of material existence,
i.e., when one is nivrtta, as previously stated herein, or when one is freed
from all material necessities, one becomes qualified to discharge the process
of bhakti-yoga. Therefore bhakti-yoga includes jiana-yoga, or, in other
words, the process of pure devotional service simultaneously serves the
purpose of jiidna-yoga; liberation from material conditions is automatically
achieved by the gradual development of pure devotional service. These
effects of bhakti-yoga are called anartha-nivrtti. Things which are artifi-
cially acquired gradually disappear along with the progress of bhakti-yoga.
Meditation on the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, the first
processional step, must show its effect by anartha-nivrtti. The grossest type
of anartha which binds the conditioned soul in the material existence is sex
desire, and this sex desire gradually develops in the union of the male and


--- Page 81 ---
Text 12] The Lord in the Heart 81
female. When the male and female become united, the sex desire is further
aggravated by the accumulation of buildings, children, friends, relatives,
and wealth. When all these are acquired, the conditioned soul becomes
overwhelmed with such entanglements, and the false sense of egoism, or
the sense of myself and mine, becomes prominent, and the sex desire
expands to various political, social, altruistic, philanthropical, and many
other unwanted engagements, which are all like the foam of the sea waves
which becomes very prominent at one time and the next moment vanishes
as quickly as a cloud in the sky. The conditioned soul is encircled by such
products, as well as products of sex desire, and therefore bhakti-yoga
leads to gradual evaporation of the sex desire, which is summarized in
three headings, namely profit, adoration, and distinction. All conditioned
souls are mad after these different forms of sex desires, and one shall see
himself how much he has been freed from such material hankerings based
primarily on the sex desire. As a person feels his hunger satisfied after
eating each morsel of foodstuff, he must similarly be able to see the degree
to which he has been freed from sex desire. The sex desire is diminished
along with its various forms by the process of bhakti-yoga because
bhakti-yoga automatically, by the grace of the Lord, effectively results in
knowledge and renunciation, even if the devotee is not materially very well
educated. Knowledge means to know things as they are, and if by dclibera-
tion it is found that there are things which are at all unnecessary, naturally
the person who has acquired knowledge leaves aside such unwanted things.
When the conditioned soul finds by culture of knowledge that material
necessities are unwanted things, he becomes detached from such unwanted
things. This stage of knowledge is called wairagya, or detachment from
unwanted things. We have previously discussed that the transcendentalist
is required to be self-sufficient and should not beg from the rich blind
persons to fulfill the bare necessities of life. Sukadeva Gosvami has
suggested some alternatives for the bare necessities of life, namely the
problem of eating, sleeping and sheltering, but he has not suggested any
alternative for sex satisfaction. One who has the sex desire still with him
should not at all try to accept the renounced order of life. For one who has
not attained to this stage, there is no question of a renounced order of life.
So by gradual process of devotional service under the guidance of a proper
spiritual master, and following the principles of the Bhégavatam, one must
be able at least to control the gross sex desire before one accepts the
renounced order of life factually.

So purification means getting free gradually from sex desire, and this is
attained by meditation on the person of the Lord as described herein,


--- Page 82 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
beginning from the feet. One should not try to go upwards artificially
without seeing for himself how much he has been released from the sex
desire. The smiling face of the Lord is the Tenth Canto of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, and there are many upstarts who at once try to begin with
the Tenth Canto and especially with the five chapters which delineate the
rasa-lila of the Lord. This is certainly improper. By such improper study
or hearing of Bhagavatam, the material opportunists have played havoc by
indulgence of sex life in the name of Bhagavatam. This vilification of
Bhagavatam isrendered by the acts of the so-called devotees; one should be
free from all kinds of sex desire before he tries to make a show of recital
of Bhagavatam. Sri Vivanatha Cakravarti Thakur clearly defines the import
of purification as cessation from sex indulgence. He says “yatha yatha
dhi$ ca sudhyati visaya-lampatyarm tyajati tatha tatha dharayed iti citta-
$uddha-taratamyenaiva dhyana-taratamyam.” And as one gets free from
the intoxication of sex indulgence by purification of intelligence, one
should step forward for the next meditation, or in other words, the progress
of meditation on the different limbs of the transcendental body of the
Lord should be enhanced in proportion to the progress of purification of
the heart. The conclusion is that those who are still entrapped by sex
indulgence should never progress to meditation above the feet of the Lord;
therefore recital of Srimad-Bhagavatam by them should be restricted within
the First and Second Cantos of the great literature. The purificatory
process must be completed by assimilating the contents of the first nine
cantos. Then one should be admitted into the realm of the Tenth Canto of
Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 13
EFS भियानुभाषयेत्‌
पादादि यद्द्धसितं गदाथ्रतः ।
जितं जितं स्थानमपोह्य धारयेत्‌
परं परं श॒द्ध्यति धीर्यथा यथा ।१२॥
ekaikaso ‘ngani dhiyanubhavayet
padadi yavadd hasitarh gada-bhrtah
jitarh jitarh sthanam apohya dharayet
parari param Suddhyati dhir yatha yatha


--- Page 83 ---
Text 13] The Lord in the Heart 83

ekaikasah—one to one, or one after another; angani—limbs; dhiya—by
attention; anubhavayet—meditate upon; pada-adi—legs, etc.; yavat—until;
hasitam—smiling; gada-bhrtah—the Personality of Godhead; [पमः jitam—
gradually controlling the mind; sthanam— place; apohya—leaving;dharayet—
meditate upon; [00707 param—higher and higher; suddhyati— purified;
dhih—intelligence; yatha yatha—as much as.

TRANSLATION

The process of meditation should begin from the lotus feet of the Lord
and progress to His smiling face. The meditation should be concentrated
upon the lotus feet, then the calves, then the thighs, and in this way higher
and higher. The more the mind becomes fixed upon the different parts of
the limbs, one after another, the more the intelligence becomes purified.

PURPORT

The process of meditation recommended in the Srimad-Bhagavatam is
not to fix one’s attention on something impersonal or void. The medita-
tion should concentrate on the Person of the Supreme Godhead, either in
His virata ripa, the gigantic universal form, or in His sac-cid-ananda-
vigraha, as described in the scriptures. There are authorized descriptions
of Visnu forms, and there are authorized representations of Deities in the
temples. Thus one can practice meditating upon the Deity, concentrating
his mind on the lotus feet of the Lord and gradually rising higher and
higher, up to His smiling face.

According to the Bhagavata school, the Lord’s rasa dancing is the
smiling face of the Lord. Since it is recommended in this verse that one
should gradually progress from the lotus feet up to the smiling face, we
shall not jump at once to understand the Lord’s pastimes in the rasa dance.
Itisbetter to practice to concentrate our attention by offering flowers and
tulasi to the lotus feet of the Lord. In this way, we gradually become
purified by the arcana process. We dress the Lord, bathe Him, etc., and
all these transcendental activities help us purify our existence. When we
reach the higher standard of purification, if we see the smiling face of the
Lord or hear the rasa dance pastimes of the Lord, then we can relish His
activities. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, therefore, the rasa dance pastimes
are delineated in the Tenth Canto (Chapters 29-34).


--- Page 84 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2

The more one concentrates on the transcendental form of the Lord,
either on the lotus feet, the calves, the thighs or the chest, the more one
becomes purified. In this verse it is clearly stated, “the more the intelligence
becomes purified,” which means the more one becomes detached from
sense gralification. @ur intelligence in the present conditioned state of life
is impure due to being engaged in sense gratification. The result of medi-
tation on the transcendental form of the Lord will be manifested by one’s
detachment from sense gratification. Therefore, the ultimate purpose of
meditation is purification of one’s intelligence.

Those who are too engrossed in sense gratification cannot be allowed to
participate in arcana or to touch the transcendental form of the Radha-
Krsna or Visnu Deities. For them it is better to meditate upon the gigantic
virata rapa of the Lord, as is recommended in the next verse. The imper-
sonalists and the voidests are therefore recommended to meditate upon
the universal form of the Lord, whereas the devotees are recommended to
meditate on the Deity worship in the temple. Because the impersonalists
and the voidists are not sufficiently purified in their spiritual activities,
arcana is not meant for them.

TEXT 14
यावन्न जायेत परावरेऽसिन्‌
विश्वेश्वरे द्रष्टरि भक्तियोगः।
तावत्‌ स्थवीयः पुरुषस्य रूपं
क्रियावसाने प्रयतः सरेत ॥१४॥
yavan na jayeta paravare 2577771
visvesvare drastari bhakti-yogah
tavat sthaviyah purusasya riipam
kriyavasane prayatah smareta

yavat—as long as; na—does not; jayeta—develop; para—transcendental;
avare—mundane; asmin—in this form of; visvesvare—the Lord of all worlds;
drastari—unto the seer; bhakti-yogah—devotional service; tavat—so long;
sthaviyah—the gross materialist; purusasya—of the virata purusa; ripam—
universal form; kriyd-avasane—at the end of one’s prescribed duties;
prayatah— with proper attention; smareta—one should remember.


--- Page 85 ---
Text 14] The Lord in the Heart 85
TRANSLATION
Unless the gross materialist develops a sense of loving service unto the
Supreme Lord, the seer of both the transcendental and material worlds, he
should remember or meditate upon the universal form of the Lord at the
end of his prescribed duties.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is the seer of all worlds, both material and transcen-
dental. In other words, the Supreme Lord is the ultimate beneficiary and
enjoyer of all worlds, as it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 5.29).
The spiritual world is the manifestation of His internal potency, and the
material world is the manifestation of His external potency. The living
entities are also [5 marginal potency and they can, by their own choice,
live in either the transcendental or material worlds. The material world is
not a fit place for living entities because they are spiritually one with the
Lord, and in the material world the living entities become conditioned
by the laws of the material world. The Lord wants all living entities, who
are His parts and parcels, to live with Him in the transcendental world, and
for enlightening conditioned souls in the material world, all the 16005 and
the revealed scriptures are there—expressly to recall the conditioned souls
back home, back to Godhead. Unfortunately, the conditioned living enti-
ties, although suffering continually the threefold miseries of conditioned
life, are not very serious about going back to Godhead. It is due to their
misguided way of living, complicated by sins and virtues. Some of them
who are virtuous by deeds begin to reestablish the lost relation with the
Lord, but they are unable to understand the personal feature of the Lord.
The real purpose of life is to make contact with the Lord and be engaged
in His service. That is the natural position of living entities. But those who
are impersonalists and are unable to render any loving service to the Lord
have been advised to meditate upon His impersonal feature, the virata or
universal form. But some way or other, one must try to reestablish one’s
forgotten relation with the Lord if one at all desires real happiness in life,
to reclaim his natural unfettered condition. For the less intelligent begin-
ners, meditation on the impersonal feature, the virata or universal form of
the Lord, will gradually qualify one to rise up to the personal contact. One
is advised herewith to meditate upon the virata ripa specified in the
previous chapters in order to understand how the different planets, seas,
mountains, rivers, birds, beasts, human beings, demigods and all that we
can conceive are but different parts and limbs of the Lord’s virata form.


--- Page 86 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
This sort of thinking is also a type of meditation on the Absolute Truth,
and as soon as such meditation begins, one develops one’s godly qualities,
and the whole world appears to be a happy and peaceful residence for all
the people of the world. Without such meditation on God, either personal
or impersonal, all good qualities of the human being become covered with
misconceptions regarding his constitutional position, and without such
advanced knowledge, the whole world becomes a hell for the human being.
TEXT 15
fat सुखं चासनमास्थितो यति-
य॑दा जिहासुरिममङ्ग रोकम्‌ |
काले च देदो च मनो न AFA
प्राणान्‌ नियच्छेन्मनसा जितासुः ॥१५॥
ও8]87071১ 51810180118 ০৫5071077) ৫5৪8880 ১৫৮৮7
yada jihasur imam anga lokam
kale ca dese ca mano na sajjayet
pranan niyacchen manasa jitasuh
sthiram—without being disturbed; sukham—comfortable; ca—also;
asanam—sitting accommodation; asthitah—being situated; yatih—the sage;
yada—whenever; jihasuh—desires to give up; imam—this; anga—0O King;
lokam—this body; kale—in time; ca—and; dese—in proper place; ca—also;
manah—mind; na—not; sagjjayet—may not be perplexed; pranan—the
senses; niyacchet—must control; manasa—by the mind; jitasuh—conquering
the life air.
TRANSLATION
O King, whenever the yogi desires to leave this planet of human beings,
he should not be perplexed about the proper time or place, but should
comfortably sit without being disturbed and, regulating the life air, should
control the senses by the mind.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.14) it is clearly stated that a person who is
totally engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, and who


--- Page 87 ---
Text 16] The Lord in the Heart 87
constantly remembers Him in every step, easily obtains the mercy of the
Lord by entering into His personal contact. Such devotees do not need
to seek an opportune moment to leave the present body. Rather, those who
are mixed devotees, alloyed with fruitive action or empirical philosophic
speculation, require an opportune moment for quitting this body. For
them the opportune moments are stated in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.23-26).
But these opportune moments are not as important as one’s being a
successful yogi who is able to quit this body as he likes. However, such a
yogi must be competent to control his senses by the mind. Mind is easily
conquered simply by engaging it at the lotus feet of the Lord. Gradually,
by such service, all the senses become automatically engaged in the service
of the Lord. That is the way of merging into the Supreme Absolute.
TEXT 16
मनः खबुद्ध्यामर्या नियम्य
क्षेत्रज्ञ एतां निनयेत्‌ तमात्मनि |
आत्मानमात्मन्यवरुष्य धीरो
=
लन्धोपञ्चान्तिर्विरमेत कृत्यात्‌ ॥१६॥
manah svabuddhyamalaya niyamya
ksetra-jiia etam nilayet tam atmani
atmanam atmany avarudhya dhiro
labdhopasantir virameta krtyat
manah—the mind; sva-buddhya—by his own intelligence; amalaya—
unalleyed—niyamya— by regulating;ksetra-jie—unto the living entity; etam
—all of them; nilayet—merge; tam—that; atmani— the self; atmanam— the
self; atmani—in the Superself; avarudhya—being locked up; dhirah—the
fully satisfied; labdha-upasantih—one who has attained full bliss; virameta
—ceases from; krtyat—all other activities.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the yogi should merge his mind, by his unalloyed
intelligence, into the living entity, and then merge the living entity into
the Superself. And by doing this, the fully satisfied living entity becomes


--- Page 88 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 2, Ch. 2
situated in the supreme stage of satisfaction, so that he ceases from all
other activities.
PURPORT

The functions of the mind are thinking, feeling, and willing. When the
mind is materialistic, or absorbed in material contact, it acts for material
advancement of knowledge, destructively ending in discovery of nuclear
weapons. But when the mind acts under spiritual urge, it acts wonderfully
for going back home and back to Godhead for life in complete bliss and
eternity. Therefore mind has to be manipulated by good and unalloyed
intelligence. Perfect intelligence is to render service unto the Lord. One
should be intelligent enough to understand that the living being is, in all
circumstances, a servant of the circumstances. Every living being is serving
the dictates of desire, anger, lust, illusion, insanity, and enviousness—all
materially affected. But even executing such dictations of different
temperaments, he is perpetually unhappy. When one actually feels this and
turns his intelligence to inquire about it from the right sources, he gets
information of the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Instead of
serving materially for the above-mentioned different humors of the body,
the living entity’s intelligence then becomes freed from the unhappy
illusion of materialistic temperament, and thus, by unalloyed intelligence,
the mind is brought into the service of the Lord. The Lord and His
service are identical, being on the absolute plane. Therefore the unalloyed
intelligence and the mind are merged into the Lord, and thus the living
entity does not remain a seer himself but becomes seen by the Lord
transcendentally. When the living entity is directly seen by the Lord, and
the Lord dictates to him to act according to His desire, and the living
entity follows Him perfectly, the living entity ceases to discharge any other
duty for his illusory satisfaction. In his pure unalloyed state, the living
being attains the stage of labdhopasanti and ceases all material hankerings.

TEXT 17
न यत्र कालोऽनिमिषां परः प्रथुः
ङतो जु देवा जगतां थ ईशिरे ।
न॒ यत्र सत्वं न रजस्तमश्च
न वै विकारो ল महान्‌ प्रधानम्‌ ॥ १७॥


--- Page 89 ---
Text 17] The Lord in the Heart 89
na yatra kalo ’nimisam parah prabhuh
kuto nu deva jagatar ya 876
na yatra sattvarm na rajas tamas ca
na vai vikaro na mahan pradhanam
na—not; yatra—wherein; kalah—destructive time; animisam—of the
heavenly demigods; parah—superior; prabhuh—controller; kutah—where is
there; nu—certainly; devah—the demigods; jagatam—the mundane crea-
tures; ye—those; iSire—rules; na—no; yatra—therein; sattvam—mundane
goodness; na—nor; rajah—mundane passion; tamah—mundane ignorance;
ca—also;na—nor;vai— certainly ; vikarah— transformation; na—nor; mahan—
the material causal ocean; pradhanam—material nature.
TRANSLATION
In that transcendental state of labdhopasanti there is no supremacy of
devastating time, which controls even the celestial demigods (and what to
speak of the demigods themselves?) who are empowered to rule over
mundane creatures. Nor is there the mode of material goodness, nor
passion, nor ignorance, nor even the false ego, nor the material Causal
Ocean, nor the material nature.
PURPORT
Devastating time, which controls even the celestial demigods by its
manifestations of past, present and future, does not act on the transcen-
dental plane. The influence of time is exhibited by the symptoms of birth,
death, old age and disease, and these four principles of material conditions
are present everywhere in any part of the material cosmos up to the
planet Brahmaloka, where the duration of life of the inhabitants appears to
us to be fabulous. Insurmountable time even brings about the death of
Brahma, so what to speak of other demigods like Indra, Candra, Siirya,
Vayu, Varuna, etc.? The astronomical influence directed by the different
demigods over mundane creatures is also conspicuous by its absence. In the
material existence, the living entities are afraid of Satanic influence, but
for a devotee on the transcendental plane there is no such fear at all. The
living entities change their material bodies in different shapes and forms
under the influence of the different modes of material nature, but in the
transcendental state the devotee is gunatita, or above the material modes
of goodness, passion or ignorance, and as such the false ego of “I am the


--- Page 90 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
Lord of all I survey” does not arise there. In the material world the false
ego of the living being trying to lord it over the material nature is some-
thing like the moth’s falling in the blazing fire. The moth is captivated
by the glaring beauty of the fire, and when he comes to enjoy it, the
blazing fire consumes him. In the transcendental state the living being is
pure in his consciousness, and as such he has no false ego to lord it over
the material nature, but his pure consciousness dictates him to surrender
unto the Supreme Lord, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita (7.19): “ vasudevah
sarvam iti sa mahdtmad sudurlabhah.” All this indicates that on the
transcendental state there is neither material creation nor the Causal Ocean
for material nature.

The above-mentioned state of affairs is factual on the transcendental
plane, but is factually revealed in a transcendentalist’s knowledge of the
advanced state of pure consciousness. Such transcendentalists are of two
types, namely the impersonalists and the devotees. For the impersonalist
the ultimate goal or destination is the brahmajyoti of the spiritual sky, but
for the devotees the ultimate goal is the Vaikuntha planets. The devotees,
however, experience the above-mentioned state of affairs by attainment
of spiritual forms for activity in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord. But the impersonalist, because of his neglecting the association
of the Lord, does not develop a spiritual body for spiritual activity, but
remains a spiritual spark only, merged in the effulgent spiritual rays of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is the full-fledged form of
cternity, bliss and knowledge, but the formless brahmajyoti is simply
cternity and knowledge. The Vaikuntha planets are also forms of
eternity, blissand knowledge, and therefore the devotees of the Lord, who
areadmittedin the abode of the Lord, also get a body of eternity, bliss and
knowledge. As such thereis no difference between one another. The Lord’s
abode, name, fame, entourage, etc., are of the same transcendental quality,
and how this transcendental quality differs from the material world is
explained herewith in this verse. In the Bhagavad-gita, three principal
subjects have been explained by Lord Sri Krsna, namely karma-yoga,
jRana-yoga and bhakti-yoga, but one can reach the Vaikuntha planets by
the practice of bhakti-yoga only. The other two are incompetent in
helping one to reach the Vaikunthalokas, although they can, however,
conveniently take one to the effulgent brahmajyoti, as described above.


--- Page 91 ---
Text 18] The Lord in the Heart 91
TEXT 18
^ + =
परं पदं वेष्णवमामनन्ति तव्‌
LN
यमेति नेतीत्यतदुत्सिसुक्षवः |
१ a
विज्य दौरात्म्यमनन्यसौहृदा
© ^
हृदोपगुघयाैपदं पदे पदे ॥१८॥
param padari vaisnavam amananti tad
yan neti netity atad utsisrksavah
visrjya dauratmyam ananya-sauhrda
hrdopaguhyarha-padar pade pade
param—the supreme; padam—situation; vaispavam—in relation with the
Personality of Godhead; amananti—do they know; tat—that; yat—which;
neti—not this; neti—not this; iti—thus; atat—godless; utsisrksavah—those
who desire to avoid; visrjya—giving it up completely; dauratmyam—
perplexities; ananya—absolutely; sauhrda—in good will; hrda upaguhya—
taking them into his heart; arha—that which is only worshipable; padam—
lotus feet; pade pade—every moment.
TRANSLATION
The transcendentalists desire to avoid everything which is godless,
knowing that supreme situation in which everything is in relation with
the Supreme Lord Visnu. Therefore a pure devotee who is in absolute
harmony with the Lord does not create perplexities, but worships the
lotus feet of the Lord at every moment, taking them into his heart.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gita, “mad-dhama” (“My abode’) is mentioned several
times, and according to the version of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna there exists the unlimited spiritual sky wherein the planets are
called Vaikunthas, or the abode of the Personality of Godhead. In that
sky, which is far, far beyond the material sky and its sevenfold coverings,
there is no need of the sun or the moon, nor is there necessity of electricity
for illumination because the planets are self-illuminating and more brilliant
than the material suns. Pure devotees of the Lord are absolutely in


--- Page 92 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
harmony with the Personality of Godhead, or in other words, they always
think of the Lord as their only dependable friend and well-wisher. They do
not care for any mundane creature up to the status of Brahma, the lord of
the universe. They only can definitely have a clear vision of the Vaikuntha
planets. Such pure devotees, being perfectly directed by the Supreme
Lord, do not create any artificial perplexity in the matter of tran-
scendental understanding by wasting time in discussing what is Brahman
or what is not Brahman or maya, nor do they falsely think of them-
selves as one with the Lord, or argue that there is no existence of the
Lord separately, or that there is no God at all, or that living beings are
themselves God, or when God incarnates Himself He assumes a material
body. Nor do they concern themselves with many obscure speculative
theories, which are in actuality so many stumbling blocks on the path of
transcendental understanding. Apart from the class of impersonalists or
nondevotees, there are other classes also who pose themselves as devotees
of the Lord but at heart maintain the idea of salvation by becoming one
with the impersonal Brahman. They manufacture their own way of devo-
tional service wrongly by open debauchery and mislead others who are
simpletons or debauchees like themselves. All these nondevotees and
debauchees are, according to Visvanatha Cakravarti, durdtmdas, or the
crooked souls in the dress of mahatmas, or the great souls. Such non-
devotees and debauchees are completely excluded from the list of tran-
scendentalists by presentation of this particular verse by Sukadeva Go-
svami.

So the Vaikuntha planets are factually the supreme residential places
called the param padam. The impersonal brahmajyoti is also called the
param padam due to its being the rays of the Vaikuntha planets, as the
sun rays are the rays of the sun. In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 14.27) it is
clearly said that the impersonal brahmajyoti rests on the person of the
Lord, and because everything rests on the brahmajyoti directly and
indirectly, everything is generated from the Lord, everything rests on
Him, and after annihilation, everything is merged in Him only. Therefore,
nothing is independent from Him. A pure devotee of the Lord no longer
wastes valuable time in discriminating the Brahman from non-Brahman
because he knows perfectly well that the Lord Param Brahman, by His
Brahman energy, is interwoven in everything, and thus everything is
looked upon by a devotee as the property of the Lord. The devotee tries
to engage everything in His service and does not create perplexities by
falsely lording it over the creation of the Lord. He is so faithful that he
engages himself, as well as everything else, in the transcendental loving


--- Page 93 ---
Text 19] The Lord in the Heart 93
service of the Lord. In everything, the devotee sees the Lord, and he sees
everything in the Lord. The specific disturbance created by a duratma, or
crooked soul, is due to his maintaining that the transcendental form of
the Lord is something material.
TEXT 19
इत्थं श्रुनिस्तूपरमेद्‌ व्यवस्थितो
¢
विन्ञानटग्बीयंसुरन्धिताशलयः ।
स्वपाण्णिं नापीड्य गुदं ततोऽनिलं
स्थानेषु षरखननमयेजितङ्कमः 124
वः munis tiparamed vyavasthito
vijiiana-drg-virya-surandhitasayah
sva-parsninapidya 88007 tato 71107
sthanesu satsinnamayej jita-klariah
ittham—thus, by Brahman realization; munih—the philosopher; tu—but;
uparamet—should retire; vyavasthitah—well situated; vijiiana-drk—by scien-
tific knowledge; virya—strength; su-randhita—well regulated; asayah—aim
of life; sva-parsnina—with the heel of one’s foot; apidya—by blocking;
gudam—air hole; tatah—thereafter; anilam—life air; sthanesu—in the
places; satsu—six primary; unnamayet—must be lifted; jita-klamah—by
extinguishing material desires.
TRANSLATION
By the strength of scientific knowledge, one should be well situated in
absolute realization and thus be able to extinguish all material desires and
then give up the material body by blocking the air hole [through which
stool is evacuated] with the heel of one’s foot and lifting the life air from
one place to the other in the six primary places.
PURPORT
There are many duratmas who claim to have realized themselves as
Brahman and yet are unable to conquer material desires. In the Bhagavad-


--- Page 94 ---
94 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
gita it is clearly explained (Bg. 18.54) that an absolute self-realized soul
becomes completely aloof from all material desires. Material desires are
based on the false ego of the living being and are exhibited by his childish
and useless activities to conquer the laws of material nature and by his
desire to lord it over the resources of the five elements. With such men-
tality, one is led to believe in the strength of material science up to the
discovery of atomic energy and space travel by mechanical vehicles, and
by such tiny advancements of material science the false egoist tries to
challenge even the strength of the Supreme Lord, who can finish all man’s
tiny endeavors in less than a second. The well-situated self, or Brahman-
realized soul, perfectly understands that the Supreme Brahman or the
Personality of Godhead is the all-powerful Vasudeva and that he (the self-
realized living being) is a part and parcel of the supreme whole. As such,
his constitutional position is to cooperate with Him in all respects in the
transcendental relation of the served and the servitor. Such a self-realized
soul ceases to exhibit his useless activities by attempting to lord it over
material nature and fully engages himself in faithful devotion to the Lord,
scientifically well informed.

The expert yogi who has thoroughly practiced the control of the life air
by the prescribed method of the yoga system is advised to quit the body as
follows. He should plug up the evacuating hole by the heel of the foot and
then progressively move the life air on and on to six places: navel, abdo-
men, heart, chest, palate, the eyebrows and the cerebral pit. Controlling
the life air by the prescribed yogic process is mechanical, and the practice
is more or less a physical endeavor for spiritual perfection. In olden days
such practice was very common for the transcendentalist, for the mode of
life and character in those days were favorable. But in modern days, when
the influence of Kali Age is so disturbing, practically everyone is untrained
in this art of bodily exercise. Concentration of the mind is more easily
attained in these days by the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. The
results are more effective than those derived from the inner exercise of the
life air.

TEXT 20
नाभ्यां धितं हयधिरोष्य तसा-
दुदानगत्योरसि तं नयेन्धुनिः ।
ततोऽलुसन्धाय धिया wel
खताठमूं शनकैर्नयेत Rell


--- Page 95 ---
Text 21] The Lord in the Heart 95
nabhyarm 50818100718 hrdy-adhiropya tasmad
udana-gatyorasi tam nayen munih
tato ‘nusandhaya dhiya manasvi
sva-talu-milam $anakair nayeta
nabhyam—on the navel ;sthitam—situated ; hrdi—in the heart; adhiropya—
by placing; tasmat—from there; udana—soaring; gatya—force; urasi—on the
chest; tam—thereafter; nayet—should draw; munih—meditative devotee;
tatah—them; anusandhdya—just to search out; dhiya—by intelligence,
manasvi—the meditative; sva-talu-millam—at the root of the palate;
sanakaih—slowly; nayeta—may be brought in.
TRANSLATION
The meditative devotee should push up the life air from the navel to
the heart, from there to the chest and from there to the root of the palate,
slowly, and search out the proper places with intelligence.
PURPORT
There are six circles of the movement of the life air, and the intelligent
bhakti-yogi should search out the places with intelligence and in a
meditative mood. Among these, mentioned above is the svadhisthana-
cakra, or the powerhouse of the life air, and above this, just below the
abdomen navel, there is the manipiiraka-cakra. When upper space is further
searched out in the heart, it is called the andhata-cakra, and further up,
when it is placed at the root of the palate, it is called the visuddhi-cakra.
TEXT 21
तस्माद श्ुबोरन्तरु येत
निरुद्रसप्ायतनोऽनपेक्षः ।
स्त्वा gratings
निभि मूर्धन्‌ विसृजेत्परं ma: 12201


--- Page 96 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
tasmad bhruvor antaram unnayeta
niruddha-saptayatano ‘napeksah
sthitva muhartardham akuntha-drstir
nirbhidya miirdhan visrjet parari gatah
tasmat—from there; bhruvoh—of the eyebrows; antaram—in between,
unnayeta—should be brought in; niruddha—by blocking up; sapta—seven
ayatanah—outlets of the life air; anapeksah—independent of all material
enjoyment; sthitva—by keeping; muhirta—moment; ardham—half of a;
akuntha—back home, back to Godhead; drstih—one whose aim is targetted
like that; nirbhidya—punching; mirdhan—the cerebral hole; visrjet—should
give up this body; param—the Supreme; gatah—having gone to.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the bhakti-yogi should push up the life air in between the
eyebrows, and then, blocking up the seven outlets of the life air, he should
maintain his aim for going back home, back to Godhead. If he is com-
pletely free from all desires for material enjoyment, he should then reach
the cerebral hole and give up this material connection, having gone to the
Supreme.
PURPORT
The process of giving up all material connection and returning home,
back to Godhead, the Supreme, is recommended herein. The condition is
that one should be completely freed from desire for material enjoyment.
There are different grades of material enjoyments in respect to duration of
life and sensual gratification. The highest plane of sensual enjoyment for
the longest period of life is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.20). All
are but material enjoyments, and one should be thoroughly convinced
that he has no need of such long duration of life, even in the Brahmaloka
planet. He must return home, back to Godhead, and must not be attracted
by any amount of material facilities. In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 2.59) it is
said that this sort of material detachment is possible to attain when one is
acquainted with the supreme association of life. Param drstva nivartate.
One cannot be freed from material attraction unless he has complete
understanding of the nature of spiritual life. The propaganda by a certain
class of impersonalists that spiritual life is void of all varieties is dangerous
propaganda to mislead the living beings into becoming more and more


--- Page 97 ---
Text 22] The Lord in the Heart 97
attracted by material enjoyments. As such, persons with a poor fund of
knowledge cannot have any conception of the param; they try to stick
to the varieties of material enjoyments, although they may flatter them-
selves to be Brahman-realized souls. Such less intelligent persons cannot
have any conception of the param, as mentioned in this verse, and there-
fore they cannot reach the Supreme. The devotees have full knowledge of
the spiritual world, the Personality of Godhead and His transcendental
association in unlimited spiritual planets called Vaikunthalokas. Herein
akuptha-drstih is mentioned. Akuntha and vaikuptha convey the same
import, and only one who has his aim fixed upon that spiritual world and
personal association with the Godhead can give up this material connection
even while living in the material world. This param and the param dhama
mentioned in several places of the Bhagavad-gita are one and the same
thing. One who goes to the param dhama does not return again to this
material world. This is not possible even by reaching the topmost loka of
the material world.

The life air passes through seven openings, namely two eyes, two
nostrils, two ears and one mouth. Generally it passes through the mouth
at the time of an ordinary man’s death. But the yogi, as above mentioned,
who controls the life air in his own way, generally releases the life air by
puncturing the cerebral hole in the head. The yogi therefore blocks up all
the above-mentioned seven openings, so that naturally the life air will
burst forth through the cerebral hole, which is the sure sign of leaving the
material connection by the great devotees.

TEXT 22
यदि प्रयास्यन्‌ चष पारमेष्ठयं
वेदायसानापुत्र यद्‌ FER |
अष्टाधिपत्यं गुणसनिवापे
सदैव गच्छेन्मनसेन्द्रियैश्च ।।२२॥
yadi prayasyan nrpa paramesthyan
vaihayasanam uta yad viharam
astadhipatyam guna-sannivaye
sahaiva gacchen manasendriyais ca


--- Page 98 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
yadi—however; prayasyean—maintaining a desire; nyrpa—O King; parame-
sthyam—the governing planet of the material world; vaithayasanam—of the
beings known as the Vaihayasas; uta—it is said; yat—what is; viharam—
place of enjoyment; asta-ddhipatyam—lording over with eightfold achieve-
ments; guna-sannivaye—in the world of three modes of nature; saha—along
with; eva—certainly; gacchet—should go; manasa—accompanied by mind;
indriyaih—and the senses; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
0 King, if however, a yogi maintains a desire for improved material
enjoyments, like transference to the topmost planet of Brahmaloka, or the
achievement of the eightfold perfections and traveling in outer space along
with the Vaihayasas, or a situation in one of the millions of planets, then
he has to take away with him the mind and the senses materially moulded.
PURPORT
In the upper status of the planetary systems there are thousands and
thousands of times greater facilities for material enjoyments than in the
lower planetary systems. The topmost planetary systems are comprised of
planets like Brahmaloka, Dhruvaloka (the pole star), etc., and all of them
are situated beyond the Maharloka. The inhabitants of those planets are
empowered with eightfold achievements of mystic perfections. They do
not have to learn and practice the mystic processes of yoga perfection and
achieve the power of becoming small, particle-like (anima-siddhi), or
lighter than a soft feather (laghima-siddhi). They do not have to get any-
thing and everything from anywhere and everywhere (prapti-siddhi), to
become heavier than the heaviest (mahima-siddhi), to act freely even to
create something wonderful or to annihilate anything at will (isita-siddhi),
to control over all material elements (vasita-siddhi), to possess such power
as will never bring about frustration in any desire (prakamya-siddhi), or
to assume any shape or form as one may desire even whimsically
(kamavasayitasiddhi). All these expediencies are as common as natural
gifts for the inhabitants of those higher planets. They do not require any
mechanical help to travel in outer space, and they can move and travel
at will from one planet to any other planet within no time. The inhabitants
of the earth cannot move even to the nearest planet except by mechanical
vehicles like spacecraft, but the highly talented inhabitants of such higher
planets can do everything very easily.


--- Page 99 ---
Text 23] The Lord in the Heart 99
Since a materialist is generally inquisitive to experience what is actually
in such planetary systems, he wants to see everything personally. As
inquisitive persons tour all over the world to gain direct local experience,
similarly the less intelligent transcendentalist also desires to have some
experience of those planets about which he has heard so many wonderful
things. The yogi can, however, easily fulfill his desire by going there with
the present materialistic mind and senses. The prime factor of the mate-
rialistic mind is to lord it over the material world, and all the siddhis
mentioned above are features of domination over the world. The devotees
of the Lord are not ambitious to dominate a false and temporary
phenomenon. On the other hand, a devotee wants to be dominated by the
supreme predominator, the Lord. A desire to serve the Lord, the supreme
predominator, is spiritual or transcendental, and one has to attain this
purification of the mind and the senses to get an admission into the
spiritual kingdom. With the materialistic mind one can reach the best
planet in the universe, but no one can enter into the kingdom of God.
Senses are called spiritually purified when they are not involved in sense
gratification. Senses require engagements, and when the senses are engaged
totally in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, they have no
chance to become contaminated by material infections.
TEXT 23
योगेञ्वराणां गतिमाहुरन्त-
्दिखिलोक्याः पवनान्तरात्मनाम्‌ |
न कर्मभित्तां गतिमाप्नुवन्ति
विद्यातपोयोगसमाधिभाञम्‌ ॥२३॥
yogesvaranari gatim 2117" antar-
bahis-tri-lokyah pavanantar-atmanam
na karmabhis tam gatim apnuvanti
vidya-tapo-yoga-samadhi-bhajam
yogesvaranam—of the great saints and devotees; gatim—destinations;
ahuh—it is said; antar—within; bahih—without; tri-tokyah—of the three
planetary systems; pavana-antar—within the air; @tmanam—of the subtle
body; na—never; karmabhih—by fruitive activities; tam—that; gatim—


--- Page 100 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
speed; @pnuvanti—achieve; vidya—devotional service; tapah—austerities;
yoga—mystic power; samadhi—knowledge;bhajam—of those who entertain.
TRANSLATION
The transcendentalists are concerned with the spiritual body. As such,
by the strength of their devotional service, austerities, mystic power and
transcendental knowledge, their movements are unrestricted within and
without the material worlds. The fruitive workers, or the gross material-
ists, can never move in such an unrestricted manner.
PURPORT
The material scientist’s endeavor to reach other planets by mechanical
vehicles is only a futile attempt. One can, however, reach heavenly planets
by virtuous activities, but one can never expect to go beyond Svarga or
Janaloka by such mechanical or materialistic activities, either gross or
subtle. The transcendentalists who have nothing to do with the gross
material body can move anywhere within or without the material worlds.
Within the material worlds they move in the planetary system of the
Mahar, Jana, Tapas, and Satyalokas, and beyond the material worlds they
can move in the Vaikunthas as unrestricted spacemen. Narada Muni is one
of the examples of such spacemen, and Durvasa Muni is one of such
mystics. By the strength of devotional service, austerities, mystic powers
and transcendental knowledge, everyone can move like Narada Muni or
Durvasa Muni. It is said that Durvasa Muni traveled over the complete
material space and part of spiritual space within one year only. The speed
of the transcendentalists can never be attained by the gross or subtle
materialists.
TEXT 24
a oi
নহ্বান याति विहायसा गतः
सुषुम्णया ब्रञ्मपयेन शोचिषा |
=
विधूतकस्कोऽथ REE
प्रयाति चक्रं नुप ITER ॥२४॥


--- Page 101 ---
Text 25] The Lord in the Heart 101
vaisvanaram yati vihayasa gatah
susumnaya brahma-pathena socisa
vidhiita-kalko’tha harer udastat
prayati cakrari nrpa saisumaram
vaisvanaram—the controlling deity of fire; yati—goes; vihayasa—by the
path in the sky (the Milky Way); gatah—by passing over; susumnaya—by
the Susumna; brahma—Brahmaloka; pathena—on the way to; Socisa—
illuminating; vidhiita—being washed off; kalkah—dirt; atha—thereafter;
hareh—of Lord Hari; udastat—upwards; prayati—does reach; cakram—
circle; nrpa—O King; $aisumaram—named Sisumara.
TRANSLATION
0 King, such a mystic, when he passes over the Milky Way by the il-
luminating Susumna to reach the highest planet, Brahmaloka, goes first to
Vaigvanara, the planet of the deity of fire, wherein he becomes completely
cleansed of all contaminations, and thereafter he still goes higher, to the
circle of Sisumara, to relate with Lord Hari, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The polar star of the universe and the circle thereof is called the
Sisumara circle wherein the local residential planet of the Personality of
Godhead (Ksirodakasayl Visnu) is situated. Before reaching there, the
mystic passes over the Milky Way to reach the Brahmaloka, and while
going there he reaches first the Vai$vanaraloka, where the demigod con-
trols the fire. In this planet the yogi becomes completely cleansed of all
dirty sins acquired while in contact with the material world. The Milky
Way in the sky is indicated herein as the way leading to the Brahmaloka,
the highest planet of the universe.
TEXT 25
ag fats त्वतिवत्यं वि"णो-
रणीयसा विरजेनात्मनैकः |
a
नमस्कृतं बहमविदायुपेति
- ~
FATIH यद्‌ विबुधा रमन्ते ॥२५॥


--- Page 102 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 2, Ch. 2
tad visva-nabhiri tv ativartya vispor
aniyasa virajenatmanaikah
namaskrtarh brahma-vidam upaiti
kalpayuso yad vibudha ramante
tat—that; visva-nabhim—navel of the universal Personality of Godhead;
tu—but; ativartya— crossing over; visnoh—of Lord Visnu, the Personality of
Godhead; aniyasai—due to mystic perfection; viragjena—by the purified;
atmana—by the living entity; ekah—alone; namaskrtam—worshipable;
brahma-vidam—by those who are transcendentally situated ; upaiti—reaches;
kalpa-ayusah—a period of 4,300,000,000 solar years; yat—the place;
vibudhah—self-realized souls; ramante—do enjoy.
TRANSLATION
This Sisumara is the pivot for the turning of the complete uni-
verse, and it is called the navel of Visnu [Garbhodakasayi Visnu]. The
yogi alone goes beyond this circle of Sisumara and attains the planet
[Maharloka] where the purified saints like Bhrgu enjoy a duration of life
of 4,300,000,000 solar years. This planet is worshipable even by the
saints who are transcendentally situated.
TEXT 26
अथो अनन्तस्य गुखानठेन
दन्दद्यमानं स निरीक्ष्य frm ।
निर्याति सिद्धेश्वरयुष्टधिष्ण्य
2
यद्‌ ETT तदु पारमेष्ठचम्‌ ॥२६॥
atho anantasya mukhanalena
dandahyamanam sa niriksya visvam
niryati siddhesvara-yusta-dhisnyari
yadd vai parardhyari tad u paramesthyam
athah—thereupon; anantasya—of Ananta, the resting incarnation of
Godhead; mukha-analena—by the fire emanating from His mouth; dandah-


--- Page 103 ---
Text 26] The Lord in the Heart 103
yamanam—burning into ashes; sah—he; niriksya—be seeing this; visvam—
the universe; niryati—goes out; siddhesvare-yusta-dhisnyam—airplanes used
by the great purified souls; yat—the place; vai—wherein; parardhyam—
15,480,000,000,000 solar years; tat—that; u—the exalted; paramesthyam
—Satyaloka, where Brahma resides.
TRANSLATION
At the time of final devastation of the complete universe [ the end of
the duration of the life of Brahma], a flame of fire emanates from the
mouth of Ananta [from the bottom]. He sees all the planets of the
universe burning into ashes, and thus he leaves for the Satyaloka by air-
planes used by the great purified souls. The duration of life in Satyaloka
is calculated to 15,400,000,000,000 years.
PURPORT
It is indicated herein that the residents of Maharloka, where the purified
living entities or demigods possess a duration of life that is calculated to
be 4,300,000,000 solar years, have airships by which they reach the
Satyaloka, the topmost planet of the universe. In other words, the Srimad-
Bhagavatam gives us many clues about other planets far, far away from us
which modern planes and spacecraft cannot reach, even by imaginary
speeds. The statements of Srimad-Bhagavatam are accepted by great
acaryas like Sridhara Svami, Ramanujacarya, Vallabhacarya, etc. Lord
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu specifically accepts Srimad-Bhagavatam as the
spotless Vedic authority, and as such no sane man can ignore the state-
ments of Srimad-Bhagavatam when it is spoken by the self-realized soul
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami, who follows the footsteps of his great father Srila
Vyasadeva, the compiler of all Vedic literatures. In the creation of the
Lord there are many wonderful things which we can see with our own eyes
every day and night, but we are unable to reach them equipped by modern
materialistic science. We should not, therefore, depend on the fragmentary
authority of materialistic science for knowing things beyond the range of
scientific purview. For a common man, both modern science and Vedic
wisdom are simply to be accepted only because none of the statements,
either of modern science or of Vedic literature, can be verified by him. The
alternative for a common man is to believe either of them or both of them.
The Vedic way of understanding is, however, more authentic because it


--- Page 104 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
has been accepted by the dcdryas who are not only faithful and learned
men. but are also liberated souls without any of the flaws of conditioned
souls. The modern scientists are, however, conditioned souls liable to so
many errors and mistakes: therefore the safe side is to accept the authentic
version of Vedic literatures. like Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is accepted
unanimously by the great dacéryas.
TEXT 27
৮ ১ क
न यत्र JERI A जरान मत्यु-
8 as
नौर्तिनं चोद्वेग ऋते कुतधित्‌ |
- o
यचित्ततोऽदः कृपयानिदंविदां
दुरन्तदुःखप्रभवावुदशचैनात्‌ ॥२७॥
na yatra soko na jara na mrtyur
nartir na codvega rte kutascit
yac cit tato "वर krpayanidam vidam
duranta-duhkha-prabhavanudarsanat
na—never: vatra—there are; sokah—bereavement; na—nor; jara—old age;
na—nor: mrtyuh—death; na—nor:artih—pains;na—nor; ca—also; udvegah—
anxieties; rte—save and except; kutascit—sometimes; yat—because of; cit—
consciousness; tatah— therefore ;adah—compassion;krpaya—out of heartfelt
svmpathy; anidarm vidam—of those who are ignorant of the process of
devotional service; duranta—unsurpassable; duhkha—misery; prabhava—
aggrandizement: anudarsanat—by successive experience.
TRANSLATION
In that planet of Satyaloka, there is neither bereavement, nor old age
nor death. There is no pain of any kind and therefore no anxieties, save
that sometimes, due to consciousness, there is a feeling of compassion for
those who, unaware of the process of devotional service, become subjected
to the aggrandizement of unsurpassable miseries in the material world.


--- Page 105 ---
Text 27] The Lord in the Heart 105
PURPORT

Foolish men of materialistic temperament do not take advantage of
successive authorized knowledge. The Vedic knowledge is authorized and
is acquired not by experiment but by authentic statements of the Vedic
literatures explained by bona fide authorities. Simply by becoming an
academic scholar one cannot understand the Vedic statements, but one has
to approach the real authority who has received the Vedic knowledge by
disciplic succession, as it is clearly explained in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 4.2).
Lord Krsna affirmed that the system of knowledge as explained in the
Bhagavad-gita was explained to the sun-god, and the knowledge descended
by disciplic succession from the sun-god to his son Manu. and from Manu
to King Iksviku (the forefather of Lord Ramacandra), and thus the system
of knowledge was explained down the line of great sages one after another.
But in due course of time the authorized succession was broken, and
therefore, just to reestablish the true spirit of the knowledge, the Lord
again explained the same to Arjuna because he was a bona fide candidate
for understanding due to his becoming a pure devotee of the Lord.
Bhagavad-gita, as it was understood by Arjuna, is also explained (Bg. 10.
12-13), but there are many foolish men who do not follow the footsteps
of Arjuna in understanding the spirit of Bhagavad-gita. They create instead
their own interpretations. which are as foolish as themselves. and thereby
only help to put a stumbling block on the path of real understanding,
misdirecting the innocent followers who are less intelligent, or the sadras.
It is said that one should become a brahmana before one can understand
the Vedic statements, and this stricture is as important as the stricture that
no one shall become a lawyer who has not qualified himself as a graduate.
Such a stricture is not an impediment in the path of progress for anyone
and evervone. but it is necessary for an unqualified understanding of a
particular science. Vedic knowledge is misinterpreted by those who are
not qualified brahmanas. A qualified brahmana is one who has undergone
strict training under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master.

The Vedic wisdom guides us to understand our relation with the
Supreme Lord Sri Krsna and to act accordingly in order to achieve the
desired result of returning home, back to Godhead. But materialistic men
do not understand this. They want to make a plan to become happy in a
place where there is no happiness. For false happiness they try to reach
other planets, either by Vedic rituals or by spacecraft, but they should
know for certain that any amount of materialistic adjustment for becoming


--- Page 106 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
happy in a place which is meant for distress cannot benefit the misguided
man because, after all, the whole universe with all its paraphernalia will
come to an end after a certain period. Then all plans of materialistic
happiness will automatically come to an end. The intelligent person there-
fore makes a plan to return home, back to Godhead. Such an intelli-
gent person surpasses all the pangs of material existence, like birth, death,
disease and old age. Actually he is happy because he has no anxieties of
material existence, but as a compassionate sympathizer he feels unhappi-
ness for the suffering materialistic men, and thus he comes occasionally
before the materialistic men to teach them the necessity of going back to
Godhead. All the bona fide dcaryas preach this truth of returning home,
back to Godhead, and warn men not to make a false plan for happiness in
a place where happiness is only a myth.
TEXT 28
ततो विरोषं प्रतिपद्य निर्भय-
स्तेनात्मनापोऽनठमूर्तिरत्वरन्‌ |
- - LY
ज्योतिर्मयो IPT काले
वाय्वात्मना खं बृहदात्मलिङ्गम्‌ २८॥
tato visesarh pratipadya nirbhayas
tenatmandpo’nala-miirtir atvaran
Jyotirmayo vayum upetya kale
vayv-atmand khari brhad-atma-lingam
tatah—thereafter; visesam—particularly; pratipadya—by obtaining; nir-
bhayah—without any doubt; tena—by that;atmana—pure self; apah—water;
anala—fire; martih—forms; atvaran—by surpassing; jyotirmayah—effulgent;
vayum—atmosphere; upetya—having reached there; kale—in due course of
time; vayu—air; atmand—by the self; kham—ethereal; brhat—great; atma-
lingam—real form of the self.
TRANSLATION
After reaching Satyaloka, the devotee is specifically able to be incor-
porated fearlessly by the subtle body in an identification similar to that of


--- Page 107 ---
Text 28] The Lord in the Heart 107
the gross body, and one after another he gradually attains stages of exis-
tence from earthly to watery, fiery, glowing, and airy until he reaches the
ethereal stage.

PURPORT

Anyone who can reach the Brahmaloka or Satyaloka by dint of spiritual
perfection and practice is qualified to attain three different types of per-
fection. One who has attained a specific planet by dint of pious activities
attains places in terms of comparative pious activities. One who has
attained the place by dint of virata or Hiranyagarbha worship is liberated
along with the liberation of Brahma. But one who attains the place by dint
of devotional service is specifically mentioned here, in relation to how he
can penetrate into the different coverings of the universe and thus ulti-
mately disclose his spiritual identity in the absolute atmosphere of supreme
existence. .

According to Srila Jiva Gosvami, all the universes are clustered together
up and down, and each and every one of them is separately sevenfold-
covered. The watery portion is beyond the sevenfold coverings, and each
covering is ten times more expansive than the previous covering. The
Personality of Godhead who creates all such universes by His breathing
period lies above the cluster of the universes. The water of the Causal
Ocean is differently situated than the covering water of the universe. The
water that serves as covering for the universe is material, whereas the
water of the Causal Ocean is spiritual. As such, the watery covering men-
tioned herein is considered to be the false egoistic covering of all living
entities, and the gradual process of liberation from the material coverings
one after another, as mentioned herein, is the gradual process of being
liberated from false egoistic conceptions of the material gross body, and
then being absorbed in the identification of the subtle body till the attain-
ment of the pure spiritual body in the absolute realm of the kingdom of
God.

Srila Sridhara Svami confirms that a part of the material nature, after
being initiated by the Lord, is known as the mahat-tattva. A fractional
portion of the mahat-tattva is called the false ego. A portion of the ego is
the vibration of sound, and a portion of sound is atmospheric air. A
portion of the airy atmosphere is turned into forms, and the forms con-
stitute power of electricity or heat. Heat produces smell of flavor of the
earth, and the gross earth is produced by such flavor. And all these com-
bined together constitute the cosmic phenomenon. Extension of the cosmic


--- Page 108 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
phenomenon is calculated to be diametrically (both ways) 4,500,000,000
miles. Then the coverings of the universe begin. The first stratum of the
covering is calculated to extend eight million miles, and the subsequent
coverings of the universe are respectively of fire, effulgence, air and ether,
one after another, each extending ten times further than the previous. The
fearless devotee of the Lord penetrates each one of them and ultimately
reaches the absolute atmosphere where everything is of one and the same
spiritual identity. Then the devotee enters one of the Vaikuntha planets
where he assumes the exact form of the Lord and engages in the loving
transcendental service of the Lord. That is the highest perfection of
devotional life. Beyond this there is nothing to be desired or achieved by
the perfect yogi.
TEXT 29
a
घ्राणेन गन्धं रसनेन ৭ रसं
ক ४
रूपं तु दृष्टया खसनं त्वचैव |
=~ ক
श्त्रेण चोपेत्य नभोगुणत्वं
ES IN
प्राणेन चाङ्कतिखुयेति योगी ॥२९॥
ghranena gandham rasanena vai rasam
ripam ca drstyd svasanam tvacaiva
srotrena copetya nabho-gunatvam
pranena cakatim upaiti yogi
ghranena—by smelling: gandham—flavor:rasanena—by taste; vai—exactly;
rasam—palate; ripam—forms; ca—also; drstya—by vision; svasanam—con-
tact: tvaca—touch; eva—as it were; srotrena—by vibration of the ear; ca—
also: upetva—by achieving: nabhas-gunatvam —identification of ether; pra-
nena—by sense organs; ca—also: akiztim—material activities; upaiti— attains;
yogi—the devotee.
TRANSLATION
The devotee thus surpasses the subtle objects of different senses like
the flavor by smelling, the palate by tasting, the vision by seeing forms,
the touch by contacting, the vibration of the ear by ethereal identification,
and the sense organs by material activities.


--- Page 109 ---
Text 30] The Lord in the Heart 109
PURPORT
Beyond the sky there are subtle coverings, as in the case of the
elementary coverings of the universes. The gross coverings are a develop-
ment of partial ingredients of the subtle causes. So the yogi or devotee,
along with liquidation of the gross elements, relinquishes the subtle causes
like the flavor by smelling, etc. The pure spiritual spark, the living entity,
thus becomes completely cleansed of all material contamination to become
eligible for entrance into the kingdom of God.
TEXT 30
स॒ भूतवहमेन्द्रियसंनिकरष
ক [>
मनोमयं देवमयं विकार्यम्‌ |
+
संसाय गत्या सह तेन याति
. .
विज्ञानतच्वं॑गुणसंनिरोधम्‌ zo
sa bhitta-siksmendriya-sannikarsam
manomayam devamayari vikaryam
samsadya gatya saha tena yati
vijidna-tattvar guna-sannirodham
sah—he (the devotee); bhitta—the gross; siksma—and the subtle: indriya
—senses; sannikarsam—the point of neutralization; manomayam—mental
plane: devamayam—in the mode of goodness; vikaryam—egoism; sarsadya
—surpassing; gatyd—by the progress; saha—along with; tena—them; yati—
goes; vijidna—perfect knowledge; tattvam—truth; gune—material modes;
sannirodham—completely suspended.
TRANSLATION
The devotee, thus surpassing the gross and the subtle forms of cov-
erings, enters the plane of egoism. And in that status he merges the material
modes of nature [ignorance and passion] in this point of neutralization
and thus reaches egoism of goodness. After this, all egoism is merged in
the mahat-tattva, and he comes to the point of pure self-realization.


--- Page 110 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
PURPORT

Pure self-realization, as we have several times discussed, is the pure
consciousness of admitting oneself as the eternal servitor of the Lord.
Thus one is reinstated in his original position of transcendental loving
service of the Lord, as it will be clearly explained in the following
verse. This stage of rendering transcendental loving service to the Lord
without any hopes of emolument from the Lord, or any other way,
can be attained when the material senses are purified and the original
pure state of the senses revived. It is suggested herein that the pro-
cess of purifying the senses is by the yogic way, namely the gross
senses are merged in the modes of ignorance, and the subtle senses are
merged in the mode of passion. The mind belongs to the mode of goodness
and therefore is called devamaya, or godly. Perfect purification of the
mind is made possible when one is fixed in the conviction of being the
eternal servitor of the Lord. Therefore simple attainment of goodness is
also a material mode; one has to surpass this stage of material goodness and
reach the point of purified goodness, or vasudeva-sattva. This vasudeva-
sattva helps one to enter into the kingdom of God.

We may also remember in this connection that the process of gradu-
al emancipation by the devotees in the manner mentioned above,
although authoritative, is not viable at the present age because of people’s
becoming primarily unaware of the yoga practice. The so-called yoga
practice by the professional protagonists may be physiologically beneficial,
but such small successes cannot help one in the attainment of spiritual
emancipation as mentioned herein. Five thousand years ago, when the
social status of human society was in perfect Vedic order, the yoga process
mentioned herein was a common affair for everyone because everyone,
specifically the brahmanas and ksatriyas, was trained in the transcendental
art in the custody of the spiritual master far away from home, in the status
of brahmacarya. Modern man, therefore, is incompetent to understand it
perfectly.

Lord इत Caitanya, therefore, made it easier for the prospective devotee
of the present age in the following specific manner. Ultimately there is no
difference in the result. The first and foremost point is that one must
understand the prime importance of bhakti-yoga. The living beings in
different species of life are undergoing different terms of encagement
according to their fruitive actions and reactions. But in the execution of
different activities, one who secures some resources of bhakti-yoga can
understand the importance of service to the Lord through the causeless
mercy of the Lord, as well as of the spiritual master. A sincere soul is


--- Page 111 ---
Text 30] The Lord in the Heart 111
helped by the Lord by meeting a bona fide spiritual master, the representa-
tive of the Lord. By the instruction of such a spiritual master, one gets the
seed of bhakti-yoga. Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu recommends the
devotee to sow the seed of bhakti-yoga in his heart and nurture it by the
watering of hearing and chanting the holy name, fame, etc., of the Lord.
The simple process of offenseless chanting and hearing the holy name of
the Lord will gradually promote one very soon to the stage of emancipa-
tion. There are three stages of chanting the holy name of the Lord. The
first stage is the offensive chanting of the holy name, and the second is the
reflective stage of chanting the holy name. The third stage is the offense-
less chanting of the holy name of the Lord. In the second stage only, the
stage of reflection via media between the offensive and offenseless stages,
the stage of emancipation is automatically attained. And in the offenseless
stage, one actually enters into the kingdom of God, although physically he
may be apparently within the material world. To attain the offenseless
stage, one must be on guard in the following manner.

When we speak of hearing and chanting, it means one should not only
chant and hear of the holy name of the Lord as Rama, Krsna, (or systema-
tically the sixteen names of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rima, Rama Rama, Hare Hare), but one should
also read and hear the Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam in the asso-
ciation of devotees. The primary practice of bhakti-yoga will cause the
seed already sowed in heart to sprout, and by a regular watering process, as
mentioned above, the bhakti-yoga creeper will begin to grow. By system-
atic nurturing, the creeper will grow to such an extent that it will penetrate
the coverings of the universe, as we have heard in the previous verses, reach
the effulgent sky, the brahmajyoti, and go farther and farther and reach
the spiritual sky where there are innumerable spiritual planets called
Vaikunthalokas. Above all of them there is Krsnaloka or Goloka
Vrndavana, wherein the growing creeper enters and takes repose at the
lotus feet of Lord Sri Krsna, the original Personality of Godhead. When
one reaches the lotus feet of Lord Krsna at Goloka Vrndavana, the
watering process of hearing and reading, as also chanting of the holy name
in the pure devotional stage, fructifies, and the fruits grown there in the
form of love of God are tangibly tasted by the devotee, even though he is
here in this material world. The ripen fruits of love of God are relished
only by the devotees constantly engaged in the watering process as
described above. But the working devotee must always be mindful that
the creeper which has so grown may not be cut off. Therefore he should
be mindful of the following considerations:

1) Offense by one at the feet of a pure devotee may be likened to


--- Page 112 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
the mad elephant who devastates a very good garden if it enters.

2) One must be very careful to guard himself against such offenses
at the feet of pure devotees, as much as a creeper is protected by all
round fencing.

3) It so happens that by the watering process some weeds are also
grown, and unless such weeds are uprooted, the nurturing of the
main creeper, or the creeper of bhakti-yoga, may be hampered.

4) Actually these weeds are material enjoyment, merging the self
in the Absolute without separate individuality, and many other
desires in the field of religion, economic development, sense enjoy-
ment and emancipation.

5) There are many other weeds, like disobedience of the tenets of
the revered scriptures, unnecessary engagements, killing animals and
hankering after material gain, prestige and adorations.

6) If sufficient care is not taken, then the watering process may
only help to breed the weeds, stunting the healthy growth of the
main creeper and resulting in no fructification of the ultimate re-
quirement: love of God.

7) The devotee must therefore be very careful to uproot the
different weeds in the very beginning. Only then the healthy growth
of the main creeper will not be stunted.

8) And by so doing, the devotee is able to relish the fruit of love
of God and thus live practically with Lord Krsna, even in this life, and
be able to see the Lord in every step.

The highest perfection of life is to enjoy life constantly in the associa-
tion of the Lord, and one who can relish this does not aspire after any
temporary enjoyment of the material world via other media.

TEXT 31
तेनारमनात्मानणुयैति शान्त-
मानन्दमानन्दमयोऽवसाने ।
एतां गमिं मागवतीं गतो यः
स वै पुनर्नेह विषजतेऽङ्ग 12
tenatmandatmanam upaiti $antam
anandam anandamayo ‘vasane


--- Page 113 ---
Text 31] The Lord in the Heart 113
etarn gatirh bhagavatim gato yah
sa vai punar neha visajjate nga

tena—by that purified; atmana—by the self; atmanam—the Supersoul;
upaiti—attains; $antam—rest ;anandam— satisfaction; anandamayah—natural-
ly so being; avasane—being freed from all material contamination; etam—
such; gatim—destination; bhagavatim—devotional; gatah—attained by; yah
—the person; sah—he; vai—certainly ; punah—again; na—never; tha—in this
material world; visajjate—becomes attracted; aiga—O Maharaja Pariksit.

TRANSLATION
Only the purified soul can attain the perfection of associating with the
Personality of Godhead in complete bliss and satisfaction in his constitu-
tional state, and whoever is able to renovate such devotional perfection is
never again attracted by this material world, and he never returns.
PURPORT

We should specially note in this verse the description of bhagavatim
gati. To become merged in the rays of the Param Brahman, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as it is desired by the brahmavadi impersonalist,
is not bhagavati perfection. The Bhagavatas never accept merging in the
impersonal rays of the Lord, but always aspire after personal association
with the Supreme Lord in one of the Vaikuntha spiritual planets in the
spiritual sky. The whole of the spiritual sky, of which the total number of
the material skies is an insignificant part only, is full of unlimited numbers
of Vaikuntha planets, and the destination of the devotee (the Bhagavata)
is to enter into one of the Vaikuntha planets in each of which the
Personality of Godhead, in His unlimited personal expansions, enjoys
Himself in the association of unlimited numbers of pure devotee associates.
The conditioned souls in the material world, after gaining emancipation by
devotional service, get promoted in these planets. But the number of ever-
liberated souls is far, far greater than the conditioned souls in the material
world, and the ever-liberated souls in the Vaikuntha planets never care to
visit this miserable material world.

The impersonalists who aspire to merge in the impersonal brahmajyoti
effulgence of the Supreme Lord, but have no conception of loving devo-
tional service to Him in His personal form in the spiritual manifestation,


--- Page 114 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
may be compared to certain species of fish, who, being born in the rivers
and rivulets, migrate to the great ocean. They cannot stay in the ocean
indefinitely, for their urge for sense gratification brings them back to the
rivers and streams to spawn. Similarly, when the materialist becomes
frustrated in his attempts to enjoy himself in the limited material world,
he may seek impersonalliberation by merging either with the Causal Ocean
or with the impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence. However, as neither the
Causal Ocean nor the impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence afford any su-
perior substitute for association and engagement of the senses, the imper-
sonalist will fall again into the limited material world to become entangled
once more in the wheel of births and deaths, drawn on by the inextin-
guishable desire for sense engagement. But any devotee who enters the
kingdom of God by transcendental engagement of senses in devotional
service, and associates with the liberated souls and the Personality of
Godhead there, will never be attracted to the limited surroundings of the
material world.

In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.15) also the same is confirmed, as the Lord
says, “The great mahatmads, or the bhakti-yogis, after attaining My associa-
tion, never come back to this material world, which is full of miseries and
is nonpermanent.” The highest perfection of life is therefore to attain His
association, and nothing else. The bhakti-yogi, being completely engaged
in the Lord’s service, has no attraction for any other process of liberation
like jiana or yoga. A pure devotee is a one hundred percent devotee of the
Lord and nothing more.

We should further note in this verse the two words santam and anandam,
which denote that devotional service of the Lord can really bestow upon
the devotee two important benedictions, namely peace and satisfaction.
The impersonalist is desirous of becoming one with the Supreme, or in
other words, he wants to become the Supreme, which is a myth only; and
the mystic yogis become encumbered by various mystic powers and so
have neither peace nor satisfaction. So neither the impersonalist nor the
yogi can have real peace and satisfaction, but the devotee can become fully
peaceful and satisfied because of his association with the complete
whole. Thercfore merging in the Absolute or attaining some mystic powers
have no attraction for the devotee.

Attainment of love of Godhead means complete freedom from any
other attraction. The conditioned soul has many attractions, such as be-
coming a religious man, or a rich man, or a first-class enjoyer or becoming
God himself, or becoming powerful like the mystics and acting wonderfully
by getting anything or doing anything, but all these aspirations should be


--- Page 115 ---
Text 32] The Lord in the Heart 115
rejected by the prospective devotee who actually wants to revive his
dormant love of God. The impure devotee aspires after all of the above-
mentioned material things by perfection of devotion. But a pure devotee
has none of the tinges of the above contaminations influenced by material
desires, impersonal speculations and attainment of mystic powers. One
can attain the stage of love of God by pure devotional service, or by
“learned labor of love,” for the sake of the devotee’s lovable object, the
Personality of Godhead.

To be more clear, if anyone wants to attain the stage of love of Godhead,
he must give up all desires for material enjoyment, he should refrain from
worshiping any of the demigods and should devote himself only to the
worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He must give up the
foolish idea of becoming one with the Lord and the desire to have some
wonderful powers just to get the ephemeral adoration of the world. The
pure devotee is only favorably engaged in the service of the Lord without
any hope of emolument. This will bring about love of Godhead, or the
stage of santam and anandam, as stated in this verse.

TEXT 32
एते सृती ते नृप वेदगीते
त्वयाभिपृष्टे च सनातने च |
ये वै पुरा ब्रह्मण आह तुष्ट
आराधितो भगवान्‌ वासुदेवः ॥२२॥
ete srti te nrpa veda-gite
tvayabhiprste ca sanatane ca
ye vai pura brahmana aha tusta
aradhito bhagavan vasudevah

ete—all that is described; srti—way; te—unto you; nrpa—0O Maharaja
Pariksit; veda-gite—according to the version of the Vedas; tvaya—by Your
Majesty; abhiprste—being properly inquired; ca—also; sandtane—in the
matter of eternal truth; ca—verily; ye—which; vai—certainly ; pura—before;
brahmane—unto Lord Brahma; aha—said; tustah—being satisfied; aradhitah
—being worshiped; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; vasudevah—
Lord Krsna.


--- Page 116 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
TRANSLATION

“Your Majesty Maharaja Pariksit, know that all that I have described in
reply to vour proper inquiry is just according to the version of the Vedas,
and it is eternal truth. This was described personally by Lord Krsna unto
Brahma, with whom the Lord was satisfied upon being properly worshiped.

PURPORT

The two different ways of reaching the spiritual sky and thereby getting
emancipation from all material bondage, namely either by the direct
process of reaching the kingdom of God or by gradual process through the
other higher planets of the universe, are set forth exactly according to the
version of the Vedas. The Vedic versions in this connection are, yada sarve
pramucyante kama ye’sya hrdi sthitah/ atha martyo’mrto bhavanty atra
brahma samasnute and te’rcir abhisambhavanti: “Those who are free from
all material desires, which are diseases of the heart, are able to conquer
death and enter the kingdom of God through the Arci planets.” These Vedic
versions corroborate the version of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, and the latter
is further confirmed by Sukadeva Gosvami, who affirms that the truth was
disclosed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Sri Krsna, Vasudeva,
to Brahma, the first authority of the Vedas. The disciplic succession holds
that the Vedas were uttered by Lord Krsna to Brahma, from Brahma to
Narada, and from Narada to Vyasadeva, and then from Vyasadeva to
Sukadeva Gosvami and so on. So there is no difference between the version
of all the authorities. Nor do they differ from one another. The truth is
eternal, and as such there cannot be any new opinion about the truth. That
is the way of knowing the knowledge contained in the Vedas. It is not a
thing to be understood by one’s erudite scholarship or by the fashionable
interpretations of mundane scholars. There is nothing to be added and
nothing to be subtracted, because the truth is the truth. One has to accept,
after all, some authority. The modern scientists are also authorities for the
common man for some scientific truths. The common man follows the
version of the scientist. This means that the common man follows the
authority. The Vedic knowledge is also received in that way. The common
man cannot argue what is beyond the sky or beyond the universe, but he
must accept the versions of the Vedas as they are understood by the
authorized disciplic succession. In the Bhagavad-gita also the same process
of understanding the Gita is stated in the Fourth Chapter. If one does not


--- Page 117 ---
Text 33] The Lord in the Heart 117
follow the authoritative version of the acaryas, he will vainly search after
the truth mentioned in the Vedas.
TEXT 33
न दयतोऽन्यः शिवः पन्था নিহানঃ संखृताविह |
o
वासुदेवे मगदति भक्तियोगो यतो भवेत्‌ ॥२३॥
na hy ato’nyah Sivah pantha
visatah samsrtav iha
vasudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogo yato bhavet
na—never; hi—certainly; atah—beyond this; anyah—any other; Sivah—
auspicious; panthah—means; visatah—wandering; samsrtau—in the material
world; tha—in this life; vasudeve—unto Lord Vasudeva, Krsna; bhagavati—
the Personality of Godhead; bhakti-yogah—directly devotional service:
yatah—wherein; bhavet—may result in.
TRANSLATION
“For those who are wandering in the material universe, there is no more
auspicious means of deliverance than what is aimed at in the direct
devotional service of Lord Krsna.
PURPORT
As will be clarified in the next verse, devotional service, or direct bhak ti-
yoga, is the only absolute and auspicious means of deliverance from the
grip of material existence. There are many indirect methods for deliverance
from the clutches of material existence, but none of them are as easy and
auspicious as bhakti-yoga. The means of jiana and yoga and other allied
disciplines are not independent to deliver a performer. Such activities help
one to reach the stage of bhakti-yoga after many, many years. In the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 12.5) it is said that those who are attached to the
impersonal feature of the Absolute are liable to many troubles in the
pursuit of their desired goal, and the empiricist philosophers, searching


--- Page 118 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
after the Absolute Truth (Bg. 7.19) realize the importance of Vasudeva
realization as all in all after many, many births. As far as yoga systems are
concerned, it is also said in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 6.47) that amongst the
mystics who are after the Absolute Truth, the one who is always engaged
in the service of the Lord is the greatest of all. And the last instruc-
tion in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.66) advises fully surrendering unto
the Lord, leaving aside all other engagements or different processes for
self-realization and liberation from material bondage. And the purport of
all Vedic literatures is to induce one to accept the transcendental loving
service of the Lord by all means.

As it is already explained in the texts of Srimad-Bhagavatam (First
Canto), either direct bhakti-yoga or the means which ultimately culminate
in bhakti-yoga, without any tinge of fruitive activity, constitute the highest
form of religion. Everything else is simply a waste of time for the perform-
er.

Srila Sridhara Svami and all other acaryas, like Jiva Gosvami, etc., agree
that bhakti-yoga is not only easy, simple, natural and free from trouble,
but that it is the only source of happiness for the human being.

TEXT 34
मगवान्‌ ब्रह्म कार्स्न्येन त्रिरन्वीक्ष्य मनीषया |
तदध्यवस्यत्‌ कूटस्थो रतिरात्मन्‌ यतो मवेत्‌ ।३४॥

bhagavan brahma kartsnyena
trir anviksya manisaya

tad adhyavasyat kiitastho
ratir atman yato bhavet

bhagavan—the great personality Brahma; brahma—the Vedas; kartsnyena
—by summarization; trih—three times; anviksya—scrutinizingly examined;
manisaya—with scholarly attention; tat—that; adhyavasyat—ascertained it;
kitasthah—with concentration of the mind; ratih—attraction; atman
(a@tmani)—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna; yatah—
by which; bhavet—it so happens.


--- Page 119 ---
Text 35] The Lord in the Heart 119
TRANSLATION
The great personality Brahma, with great attention and concentration
of the mind, studied the Vedas three times and, after scrutinizingly exam-
ining them, ascertained that attraction for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Sri Krsna is the highest perfection of religion.
PURPORT
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami is referring to the highest Vedic authority, Lord
Brahma, who is the qualitative incarnation of Godhead. The Vedas were
taught to Brahmaji in the beginning of the material creation. Although
Brahmaji was to hear Vedic instructions directly from the Personality of
Godhead, in order to satisfy the inquisitiveness of all prospective students
of the Vedas, Brahmaji, just like a scholar, studied the Vedas three times,
as is generally done by all scholars. He studied with great attention, con-
centrating on the purpose of the Vedas, and after scrutinizingly examining
the whole process, he ascertained that becoming a pure unalloyed devotee
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna is the topmost perfection
of all religious principles. And this is the last instruction of the Bhagavad-
gita directly presented by the Personality of Godhead. The Vedic con-
clusion is thus accepted by all acaryas, and those who are against this
conclusion are only veda-vada-ratas, as explained in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 2.42).
TEXT 35
मगवान्‌ सरव॑भूतेषु sfdw: खात्मना हरिः |
ETRY लक्षणैरलुमापकैः ॥२५॥
bhagavan sarva-bhittesu
laksitah svatmana harih
drsyair buddhyadibhir drasta
laksanair anumapak ath
bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; sarva—all; bhittesu—in the living
entities; laksitah—is visible; sva-atmana—along with the self; harih—the


--- Page 120 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
Lord; drsyaih—by what is seen; buddhi-adibhih—by intelligence; drasta—
one who sees; laksanath—by different signs; anumapakath—by hypothesis.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead Lord SriKrsna is there in every living being
along with the individual soul. And this fact is perceived and hypothesized
in our acts of seeing and taking help of the intelligence.
PURPORT
The general argument of the common man is that since the Lord is not
visible to our eyes, how can one either surrender unto Ilim or render
transcendental loving service unto Him? To such a common man, here is
a practical suggestion given by Srila Sukadeva Gosvami as to how one can
perceive the Supreme Lord by reason and perception. Actually the Lord is
not perceivable by our present materialized senses, but when one is
convinced of the presence of the Lord by practical service attitude, there
is a revelation by the Lord’s mercy, and such a pure devotee of the Lord
can perceive the Lord’s presence always and everywhere. lle can, however,
perceive that intelligence is the form-direction of the Paramatma plenary
portion of the Personality of Godhead. Presence of Paramatma in every-
one’s company is not very difficult to realize, even for the common man.
The procedure is as follows. One can perceive one’s self-identification and
feel positively that he exists. Ile may not feel it very abruptly, but by using
alittle intelligence, he can feel that he is not the body. He can feel that the
hand, the leg, the head, the hair, and the limbs are all his bodily parts and
parcels, but as such the hand, the leg, the head, etc., cannot be identified
with his self. Therefore just by using intelligence he can distinguish and
separate his self from other things that he sees. So the natural conclusion
is that the living being, either man or beast, is the seer, and he sees besides
himself all other things. So there is a difference between the seer and the
seen. Now, by a little use of intelligence we can also readily agree that the
living being who sees the things beyond himself, by ordinary vision, has no
power to see or to move independently. All our ordinary actions and
perceptions depend on various forms of energy supplied to us by nature in
various combinations. Our senses of perception and of action, that is to
say, our five perceptive senses of 1) hearing, 2) touch, 3) sight, 4) taste,
and 5) smell, as well as our five senses of action, namely 1) hands, 2) legs,


--- Page 121 ---
Text 35] The Lord in the Heart 121
3) speech, 4) evacuation organs and 5) reproductive organs, and also our
three subtle senses, namely 1) mind, 2) intelligence, and 3) ego, (thirteen
senses in all), are supplied to us by various arrangements of gross or subtle
forms of natural energy. And it is equally evident that our objects of
perception are nothing but the products of the inexhaustible permutations
and combinations of the forms taken by natural energy. As this conclu-
sively proves that the ordinary living being has no independent power of
perception or of motion, and as we undoubtedly feel our existence being
conditioned by nature’s energy, we conclude that he who sees is spirit, and
the senses as well as the objects of perception are material. The spiritual
quality of the seer is manifest in our dissatisfaction with the limited state
of materially conditioned existence. That is the difference between spirit
and matter. There are some less intelligent arguments that matter develops
the power of seeing and moving as a certain organic development, but such
an argument cannot be accepted because there is no experimental evidence
that matter has produced anywhere a living entity. Trust no future,
however pleasant. Idle talks regarding future development of matter into
spirit are actually foolish because no matter has ever developed the power
of seeing or moving in any part of the world. Therefore it is definite that
matter and spirit are two different identities, and this conclusion is arrived
at by the use of intelligence. Now we come to the point that the things
which are seen by a little use of intelligence cannot be automatic unless we
accept someone as the user of or director of the intelligence. Intelligence
gives one direction like some higher authority, and the living being cannot
see or move or eat or do anything without the use of intelligence. When
one fails to take advantage of intelligence he becomes a deranged man, so
a living being is dependent on intelligence or the direction of a superior
being. Such intelligence is all-pervading. Every living being has his intelli-
gence, and this intelligence, being the direction of some higher authority,
isjust like the father’s giving direction to his son. The higher authority, who
is present and residing within every individual living being, is the Superself.

At this point in our investigation, we may consider the following
question: on the one hand we realize that all our perceptions and activities
are conditioned by arrangements of material nature, yet we also ordinarily
feel and say, “I am perceiving” or “I am doing.” Therefore we can say that
our material senses of perception and action are moving because we are
identifying the self with the material body, and that the superior principle
of Superself is guiding and supplying us according to our desire. By taking
advantage of the guidance of Superself in the form of intelligence, we can
either continue to study and to put into practice our conclusion that “I am


--- Page 122 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
not this body,” or we can choose to remain in the false material identifi-
cation, fancying ourselves to be the possessors and doers. Our freedom
consists in orienting our desire either toward the ignorant material miscon-
ception or the true spiritual conception. We can easily attain to the true
spiritual conception by recognizing the Superself (Paramatma) to be our
friend and guide and by dovetailing our intelligence with the superior
intelligence of Paramatma. The Superself and the individual self are both
spirit, and therefore the Superself and the individual self are both qualita-
tively one and distinguished from matter. But the Superself and the
individual self cannot be on an equal level because the Superself gives
direction or supplies intelligence and the individual self follows the
direction, and thus actions are performed properly. The individual is
completely dependent on the direction of the Superself because in every
step the individual self follows the direction of the Superself in the matter
of seeing, hearing, thinking, feeling, willing, etc.

So far as common sense is concerned, we come to the conclusion that
there are three identities, namely matter, spirit and Superspirit. Now if
we go to the Bhagavad-gita, or the Vedic intelligence, we can further
understand that all the three identities, namely matter, individual spirit,
and the Superspirit, are all dependent on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The Superself is a partial representation or plenary portion of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Bhagavad-gita affirms that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead dominates all over the material world by
His partial representation only. God is great, and He cannot be simply an
order supplier of the individual selves; therefore the Superself cannot be a
full representation of the Supreme Self, Purusottama, the Absolute Per-
sonality of Godhead. Realization of the Superself by the individual self is
the beginning of self-realization, and by the progress of such self-realization
one is able to realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead by intelligence,
by the help of authorized scriptures, and principally, by the grace of the
Lord. The Bhagavad-gita is the preliminary conception of the Personality
of Godhead Sri Krsna, and Srimad-Bhagavatam is the further explanation
of thescience of Godhead. So if we stick to our determination and pray for
the mercy of the director of intelligence sitting within the same bodily tree,
like two birds (as explained in the Upanisads), certainly the purport of the
revealed informations in the 16005 becomes clear to our vision and there
15110 difficulty in realizing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva.
The intelligent man therefore, after many births of such use of intelligence,
surrenders himself at the lotus feet of Vasudeva, as confirmed by the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.19).


--- Page 123 ---
Text 36] The Lord in the Heart 123
TEXT 36
तसात्‌ सर्वात्मना राजन्‌ हरिः सर्वत्र सर्वदा ।
श्रोतव्यः कीर्तितन्यश्च सरतन्यो भगवान्द्णाम्‌।। ३६॥
tasmat sarvatmana rajan
harih sarvatra sarvada
srotavyah kirtitavyas ca
smartavyo bhagavan nrmam
tasmat—therefore; sarva—all; atmana—soul; rajan—O King; harih—the
Lord; sarvatra—everywhere; sarvada—always; srotavyah—must be heard;
kirtitavyah—glorified; ca—also; smartavyah—be remembered; bhagavan—
the Personality of Godhead; nrpam—by the human being.
TRANSLATION
O King, it is therefore essential that every human being hear, glorify
and remember the Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead always and
everywhere.
PURPORT
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami begins this verse with the word tasmat, or
“therefore,” because in the previous verse he has already explained that
there is no auspicious means for salvation other than the sublime process
of bhakti-yoga. The bhakti-yoga process is practiced by the devotees in
different methods like hearing, chanting, remembering, serving the lotus
feet of the Lord, worshiping, praying, rendering service of love, becoming
friendly, and offering all that one may possess. All nine methods are
bona fide methods, and either all of them, some of them or even one of
them can bring about the desired result for the sincere devotee. But out of
all the nine different methods, the first one, namely hearing, is the most
important function in the process of bhakti-yoga. Without hearing suffi-
ciently and properly, no one can make any progress by any of the
practicing methods. And for hearing only, all the Vedic literatures are
there, compiled by authorized persons like Vyasadeva, who is the powerful
incarnation of Godhead. And as it is ascertained that the Lord is the


--- Page 124 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
Supersoul of everything, He should therefore be heard and glorified every-
where and always. That is the special duty of the human being. And
the human being, when he gives up the process of hearing about the
all-pervading Personality of Godhead, becomes victim to hearing rubbish
transmitted by man-made machines. Machinery is not bad because through
the machine one can take advantage of hearingabout the Lord, but because
machinery is used for ulterior purposes, it is creating rapid degradation in
the standard of human civilization. It is said here that it is incumbent upon
the human beings to hear because the scriptures like Bhagavad-gita, Srimad-
Bhagavatam, etc., are made for that purpose. Living beings other than
human beings have no capacity to hear such Vedic literatures. If the
human society gives itself to the process of hearing the Vedic literature, it
will not become victim to the impious sounds vibrated by impious men
who degrade the standards of the total society. Hearing is solidified by the
process of chanting. One who has perfectly heard from the perfect source
becomes convinced about the all-pervading Personality of Godhead and
thus becomes enthusiastic in the matter of glorifying the Lord. All the
great dcaryas, like Ramanuja, Madhva, Caitanya, Sarasvati Thakur or even,
in other countries, Mohammed, Christ and others, have all extensively
glorified the Lord by chanting always and in every place. Because the Lord
is all-pervading, it is essential to glorify Him always and everywhere. In the
process of glorifying the Lord there should be no restriction of time and
space. This is called sanatana-dharma or bhagavata-dharma. Sanatana means
eternal, always and everywhere. Bhagavata means pertaining to Bhagavan,
the Lord. The Lord is the master of all time and all space, and therefore
the Lord’s holy name must be heard, glorified and remembered everywhere
in the world, and that will bring about the desired peace and prosperity so
eagerly awaited by the people of the world. The word ca includes all the
remaining processes or methods of bhakti-yoga, as mentioned above.
TEXT 37
पिबन्ति ये भगवत आत्मनः सतां
FFI श्रवणपुटेषु सम्भृतम्‌ |
पुनन्ति ते विषयविदूषिताशयं
व्रजन्ति तच्रणसरोरुदान्तिकपू्‌ ॥२५७॥


--- Page 125 ---
Text 37] The Lord in the Heart 125
pibanti ye bhagavata atmanah satam
kathamrtam $ravana-putesu sambhrtam
punanti te visaya-vidiisitasayam
vrajanti tac-carana-saroruhantikam
pibanti—who drink; ye—those; bhagavatah—of the Personality of God-
head; atmanah—of the most dear; satam—of devotees; katha-amrtam—the
nectar of the messages; sravanpa-putesu—within the earholes; sambhrtam—
fully filled; punanti—purify; te—their; visaya— material enjoyment; vidasi-
tasayam—polluted aim of life; vrajanti—do go back; tat—the Lord’s; carana
—feet; saroruha-antikam—near the lotus.
TRANSLATION
Those who drink through aural reception, fully filled with the nectarean
message of Lord Krsna, the beloved of the devotees, purify the polluted
aim of life known as material enjoyment and thus go back to Godhead, to
the lotus feet of Him [the Personality of Godhead].
PURPORT
The sufferings of human society are due to a polluted aim of life, namely
lording it over the material resources. The more the human society is
engaged in the exploitation of undeveloped material resources for sense
gratification, the more it will be entrapped by the illusory material energy
of the Lord, and thus the distress of the world will be intensified instead
of diminished. The human necessities of life are fully supplied by the Lord
in the shape of foodgrains, milk, fruit, wood, stone, sugar, silk, jewels,
cotton, salt, water, vegetables, etc., in sufficient quantity to feed the
human race of the world as well as those on each and every planet within
the universe. The supply source is complete, and only a little energy by the
human being is required to get them into the proper channel. There is no
need of machines and tools or huge steel plants for artificially creating
comforts of life. Life is never made comfortable by creating artificial necds,
but by plain living and high thinking. The highest perfectional thinking for
human society is suggested here by Sukadeva Gosvami, namely, hearing
sufficiently Srimad-Bhagavatam. For men in this age of Kali, when they
have lost the perfect vision of life, this Srimad-Bhagavatam is the torch-


--- Page 126 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 2
light by which to see the real path. Srila Jiva Gosvami Prabhupada has
commented on the kathamrtam mentioned in this verse and has indicated
Srimad-Bhagavatam to be the nectarean message of the Personality of
Godhead. By sufficiently hearing the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the polluted
aim of life, namely lording it over matter, will subside, and the people in
general in all parts of the world will be able to live a peaceful life of
knowledge and bliss.

For a pure devotee of the Lord, any topics in relation with His name,
fame, quality, entourage, etc., are all pleasing, and because such topics
have been approved by great devotees like Narada, Hanuman, Nanda
Maharaja and other inhabitants of Vrndavana, certainly such messages are
transcendental and pleasing to the heart and soul.

And by the constant hearing of the messages of the Bhagavad-gita, and
later of Srimad-Bhdgavatam, one is assured herein by Srila Sukadeva
Gosvami that he will reach the Personality of Godhead and render Him
transcendental loving service in the spiritual planet of the name Goloka
Vrndavana, which resembles a huge lotus flower.

Thus by the process of bhakti-yoga, directly accepted as suggested in
this verse by hearing sufficiently the transcendental message of the Lord,
the material contamination is directly eliminated without one’s attempting
to contemplate the impersonal virata conception of the Lord. And by
practicing bhakti-yoga, if the performer is not purified from the material
contamination, he must be a pseudo-devotee. For such an imposter there
is no remedy for being freed from the material entanglement.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Second
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Lord in the Heart.”


--- Page 127 ---
CHAPTER THREE
Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart
TEXT 1
श्रीडाक उवाच
नृणां यन्स्रियमाणानां मचुष्येषु मनीषिणाप्‌ 1 १॥
एवमेतन्निगदितं पृष्टवान्‌ यदुभवान्‌ मम |
ভা Suka २८०४९८०
evam etan nigaditarh
prstavan yad bhavan mama
nrnam yan mriyamananam
manusyesu manisinam
Sri Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—so; etat—all these;
nigaditarh—answered; prstavan—as you inquired; yat—what; bhavan—your
good self; mama—unto me; nrpam—of the human being; yat—one; mriya-
mananam—on the threshold of death; manusgyesu—amongst the human
beings; manisinam—of the intelligent men.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Maharaja Pariksit, as you have inquired
from me as to the duty of the intelligent man who is on the threshold of
death, so I have answered you.
PURPORT
In the human society all over the world there are millions and billions
of men and women, and almost all of them are less intelligent because
they have very little knowledge of spirit soul. Almost all of them have a
wrong conception of life, for they identify themselves with the gross and
subtle material bodies, which they are not, in fact. They may be situated
in different high and low positions in the estimation of human society, but
one should know definitely that unless one inquires about his own self
127


--- Page 128 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
beyond the body and the mind, all his activities in human life are total
failures. Therefore out of thousands and thousands of men, one may
inquire about his spirit self and thus consult the revealed scriptures like
Vedanta-sitras, Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. But in spite of
reading and hearing such scriptures, unless one is in touch with a realized
spiritual master, he cannot actually realize the real nature of self, etc.
And out of thousands and hundreds of thousands of men, someone may
know what Lord Krsna is in fact. In the Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya
20/122-123) it is said that Lord Krsna, out of His causeless mercy, pre-
pared the Vedic literatures in the incarnation of Vyasadeva for reading
by the intelligent class of men in a human society which is almost totally
forgetful of the genuine relation with Krsna. Even such an intelligent
class of men may be forgetful in their relation with the Lord. The whole
bhakti-yoga process is therefore a revival of the lost relation. This revival
is possible in the human form of life, which is obtained only out of the
evolutionary cycle of 8,400,000 species of life. The intelligent class of
human being must take a serious note of this opportunity. All human
beings are not intelligent, so the importance of human life is not always
understood. Therefore manisinam, meaning thoughtful, is particularly used
here. Such a manisinam person, like Maharaja Pariksit, must therefore
take to the lotus feet of Lord Krsna and fully engage himself in devotional
service, hearing, chanting, etc., of the holy name and pastimes of the Lord
which are all hari-kathamrta. This action is especially recommended when
one is preparing for death.
TEXTS 2-7

ब्रहवचैसकापस्तु यजेत॒ সন্ধ্যাঃ पतिम्‌ |

हन्द्रमिन्द्रियकामस्तु प्रजाकामः प्रापतीन्‌ 1 २॥

देवीं मायां तु श्रीकामस्तेजस्कामो विभावसुम्‌ |

वसुकामो चन्‌ रुद्रान्‌ वीर्यकामोऽथ THE 131)

अन्ना्यकामस्त्वदिति ख्गकामोऽदितेः सुदान्‌।

४ -

विखान्देवान्‌ राज्यकामः साष्यान्संसाधरो বিহাদ ४

आयुष्कामोऽञिि नौ देवौ पुशटिकाप्र इलां यजेत्‌।

प्रतिष्ठाकामः पुरुषो रोदसी लोकमातरौ ॥ ५॥

रूपाभिकामो गन्धर्वान्‌ सख्रीकामोऽप्सरङरच॑शीम्‌।

॥ i} ~~

आधिपत्यकामः सर्वेषां यजेत परमेष्ठिनम्‌ ॥ £ ॥


--- Page 129 ---
Text 2-7] "Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 129
जे {को
यज्ञं यजेद्‌ TIEN: कोशकामः प्रचेतसम्‌ |
व्रिदयाक्ामस्तु गिरिशं दाम्पत्यार्थ उमां सतीम्‌॥ ७॥
brahma-varcasa-kamas tu
yajeta brahmanah patim
indram indriya-kamas tu
praja-kamah praja-patin
devim mayam tu $ri-kamas
tejas-kamo vibhavasum
vasu-kamo vasan rudran
virya-kamo’tha viryavan
annadya-kamas tv aditim
svarga-kamo’diteh sutan
visvan devan rajya-kamah
sadhyan samsadhako visam
ayus-kamo’svinau devau
pusti-kama ilam yajet
pratistha-kamah puruso
rodasi loka-matarau
riipabhikamo gandharvan
stri-kamo’psara urvasim
adhipatya-kamah sarvesam
yajeta paramesthinam
yajiiam yajed yasas-kamah
kosa-kamah pracetasam
vidya-kamas tu girisam
dampatyartha umarn satim
brahma—the absolute; varcasa—effulgence; kamas tu—but one who
desires in that way; yajeta—do worship; 6 ahmanah—of the Vedas; patim—
master; indram—the King of heaven; indriya-kamas tu—but one who
desires strong sense organs; praja-kamah—one who desires many offspring;
praja-patin—the Prajapatis; devim—the goddess; mayam —unto the mistress
of the material world; tu—but;sri-kamah— one who desires beauty ; tejah—
power; kamah—one who so desires; vibhavasum— the fire-god; vasu-kamah—
one who wants wealth; vasin—the Vasu demigods; rudran—the Rudra
expansion of Lord Siva; virya-kamah—one who wants to be very strongly


--- Page 130 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
built; atha—therefore; viryavan—the most powerful; anna-adya—grains;
kamah—one who so desires; tu—but; aditim— Aditi, mother of the demi-
gods; svarga—heaven; kamah—so desiring; aditeh sutan—the sons of Aditi;
visvan— Visvadeva; devan—demigods; rajya-kamah—those who hanker for
kingdoms; sadhyan—the Sadhya demigods; samsadhakah—what fulfills the
wishes; visam—of the mercantile community; @yus-kamah—desirious of long
life; asvinau—the two demigods known as the Asvini brothers; devau— the
two demigods; pusti-kamah—one who desires a strongly built body; ilam—
the earth; yajet—must worship; pratistha-kamah—one who desires good
fame, or stability in a post; purusah—such men; rodasi—the horizon;
loka-matarau—and the earth; riippa—beauty; abhikamah— positively aspiring
for; gandharvan—the residents of the Gandharva planet, who are very
beautiful and are expert in singing; stri-kdmah—one who desires a good
wife; apsarah urvasim—the society girls of the heavenly kingdom; adhipatya-
kamah—one who desires to dominate others; sarvesam—everyone; yajeta—
must worship; paramesthinam— Brahma, the head of the universe; yajiam—
the Personality of Godhead; yajet—must worship; yasas-kamah—one who
desires to be famous; kosa-kamah—one who desires a good bank balance;
pracetasam—the treasurer of heaven, known as Kuvera; vidya-kamas tu—
but one who desires education; girisam—the Lord of the Himalayas, Lord
Siva; dampatya-arthah—and for conjugal love; umam satim—the chaste
wife of Lord Siva, known as Uma.
TRANSLATION

One who desires to be absorbed in the impersonal brahmajyoti
effulgence should worship the master of the Vedas (Lord Brahma or
Brhaspati, the learned priest), one who desires powerful sex should
worship the heavenly King, Indra, and one who desires good progeny
should worship the great progenitors called the Prajapatis. One who desires
good fortune should worship Durgadevi, or the superintendant of the
material world. One desiring to be very powerful should worship fire, and
one who aspires after money only should worship the Vasus. One should
worship the Rudra incarnation of Lord Siva if he wants to be a great
hero. One who wants a large stock of grains should worship Aditi. One
who desires a worldly kingdom should worship Visvadeva, and one who
wants to be popular with the general mass of population should worship
the Sadhya demigod. One who desires a long span of life should worship
the demigods known as Aévinikumaras, and a person desiring a strongly


--- Page 131 ---
Text 2-7] = Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 131
built body should worship the earth. One who desires stabilization in his
post should worship the horizon and the earth combined. One who desires
to be beautiful should worship the beautiful residents of the Gandharva
planet, and one who desires a good wife should worship the Apsaras and
the Urvasi society girls of the heavenly kingdom. One who desires tangible
fame should worship the Personality of Godhead, and one who desires a
good bank balance should worship the demigod Varuna. If one desires to
be a greatly learned man he should worship Lord Siva, and if one desires a
good marital relation he should worship the chaste goddess, Uma, wife of
Lord Siva.
PURPORT

There are different modes of worship for different persons desiring
success in particular subjects. The conditioned soul living within the
purview of the material world cannot be an expert in every type of
materially enjoyable asset, but one can have considerable influence over a
particular matter by worshiping a particular demigod, as mentioned above.
Ravana was made a very powerful man by worshiping Lord Siva, and he
used to offer severed heads to please Lord Siva. He became so powerful
by the grace of Lord Siva that all the demigods were afraid of him, until
he at last challenged the Personality of Godhead Sri Ramacandra and thus
ruined himself. In other words, all such persons who aspire after gaining
some or all of the material objects of enjoyment, or the gross materialistic
persons, are on the whole less intelligent, as it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-
gita (Bg. 7.20). It is said there that those who are bereft of all good sense,
or those whose intelligence is withdrawn by the deluding energy of maya,
aspire after all sorts of material enjoyment in life by pleasing the respective
demigods, or by advancing the material civilization under the heading of
scientific progress. The real problem of life in the material world is to
solve the question of birth, death, old age and disease. No one wants to
change his birthright, no one wants to meet death, no one wants to be
old or invalid, and no one wants diseases. But these problems are solved
neither by the grace of any demigod nor by the so-called advancement of
material science. In the Bhagavad-gita, as well as in the Srimad-Bhagavatam,
such less intelligent persons have been described as devoid of all good
sense. Sukadeva Gosvami said that out of the 8,400,000 species of living
entities, the human form of life is rare and valuable, and out of those rare
human beings those who are conscious of the material problems are rarer


--- Page 132 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
still, and the still more rare persons are those who are conscious of the
value of the Srimad-Bhagavatam because it contains the messages of the
Lord and His pure devotees. Death is inevitable for everyone, intelligent
and foolish. But Pariksit Maharaja has been addressed by the Gosvami as
the manisi, or the man of highly developed mind, because at the time of
death he left all material enjoyment and completely surrendered unto the
lotus feet of the Lord by hearing His messages from the right person,
like Sukadeva Gosvami. But aspiration for material enjoyment by endeav-
oring persons is condemned. Such aspirations are something like the
intoxication of the degraded human society. Intelligent persons should
try to avoid it and seek instead the permanent life by returning home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 8
धर्मार्थं उत्तमश्छोकं तन्तुः तन्वन्‌ पितुन्‌ यजेत्‌ ।
रकषाङगामः पण्यजनानोजस्कामो FEZ ॥ ८ ॥
dharmadrtha uttama-slokam
tantuh tanvan pitin yajet
raksa-kamah punya-janan
ojas-kamo marud-ganan

dharma-arthah—for spiritual advancement; uttama-slokam—the Supreme
Lord or persons attached to the Supreme Lord; tantuh—for offspring;
tanvan—and for their protection; pitin—the residents of the Pitrloka;
yajet—must worship; raksa-kamah—one who desires protection; punya-
janan—pious persons; ojas-kamah—one who desires strength should wor-
ship; marud-ganan—the demigods.

TRANSLATION
One should worship Lord Visnu or His devotee for spiritual advance-
ment of knowledge, and for protection of heredity and advancement of
the dynasty one should worship the different demigods.
PURPORT

The path of religion entails making progress on the path of spiritual

advancement, ultimately reviving the eternal relation with Lord Visnu in


--- Page 133 ---
Text 9] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 133
His impersonal effulgence, localized Paramatma feature, and ultimately in
His personal feature by spiritual advancement of knowledge. And one who
wants to establish a good dynasty and be happy in the progress of tem-
porary bodily relations should take shelter of the pitas and the demigods
in other pious planets. Such different classes of worshipers of different
demigods may ultimately reach the respective planets within the universe,
but he who reaches the spiritual planets in the brahmajyoti achieves the
highest perfection.
TEXT 9
राज्यकामो मनूल्‌ देवान्‌ निऋतिं त्वभिचरन्‌ यजेत्‌ ।
कामकामो यजेत्‌ सोममकामः पुरुषं परम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
rajya-kamo manin devan
nirrtim tv abhicaran yajet
kama-kamo yajet somam
akamah purusam param

r@jya-kamah— anyone desiring an empire orkingdom; maniétn—the Manus,
semi-incarnations of God; devan—demigods; nirrtim—demons; tu—but;
abhicaran—desiring victory over the enemy; yajet—should worship; kama-
kamah—one who desires sense gratification; yajet—should worship; somam
—the demigod named Candra; akamah—one who has no material desires to
be fulfilled; purusam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param— the
Supreme.

TRANSLATION
One who desires domination over a kingdom or an empire should
worship the Manus. One who desires victory over an enemy should wor-
ship the demons, and one who desires sense gratification should worship
the moon. But one who desires nothing of material enjoyment should
worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT

For a liberated person, all the enjoyments listed above are considered to
be absolutely useless. Only those who are conditioned by the material
modes of external energy are captivated by different types of material


--- Page 134 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
enjoyment. In other words, the transcendentalists have no material desires
to be fulfilled, whereas the materialist has all types of desires to be fulfilled.
The Lord has proclaimed that the materialists, who desire material enjoy-
ment and thus scek the favor of different demigods, as above mentioned,
are not in control of their senses and so give themselves to nonsense. One
should therefore not desire any sort of material enjoyment, being sensible
enough to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The leaders of
nonsensical persons are still more nonsensical because they preach openly
and foolishly that one can worship any form of the demigods and get the
same result. This sort of preaching is not only against the teachings of
the Bhagavad-gita, or those of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, but it is also
foolish, just as it is foolish to claim that with the purchase of any travel
ticket one may reach the same destination. No one can reach Bombay
from Delhi by purchasing a ticket for Baroda. It is clearly defined herein
that persons impregnated with different desires have different modes of
worship, but one who has no desire for material enjoyment should wor-
ship the Supreme Lord Sri Krsna, the Personality of Godhead. And this
worshiping process is called devotional service. Pure devotional service
means service of the Lord without any tinge of material desires, including
desire for fruitive activity and empiric speculation. For fulfillment of
material desires one may worship the Supreme Lord, but the result of
such worship is different, as it will be explained in the next verse. Generally
the Lord does not fulfill anyone’s material desires for sense enjoyment,
but He awards such benediction to worshipers of the Lord, for they ulti-
mately come to the point of not desiring material enjoyment. The conclu-
sion is that one must minimize the desires for material enjoyment, and for
this one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is de-
scribed here as param, or beyond anything material. Sripada Sanikaracarya
has also stated, narayanah parovyaktat: the Supreme Lord is beyond the
material encirclement.
TEXT 10
अकामः सर्वेकामो वा मे्षकाम उदारधीः |
तीत्रेण मक्तियोगेन यजेत पुरुषं परम्‌ ॥१०॥
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
+न] व purusam param


--- Page 135 ---
Text 10] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 135
akamah—one who has transcended all material desires; sarva-kamah—one
who has the sum total of material desires; va—either; moksa-kamah—one¢
who desires liberation ;udara-dhih—with broader intelligence; tivrena— with
great force; bhakti-yogena—by devotional service of the Lord; yajeta—
should worship; purusam—the Lord; param—supreme whole.
TRANSLATION
A person who has broader intelligence, who may be full of all material
desire or may be without any material desire, and who also desires libera-
tion, by all means must worship the Supreme Whole Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Sri Krsna is described in the
Bhagavad-gita as the Purusottama, or the Supreme Personality. It is He
only who can award liberation to the impersonalists by absorbing such
aspirants in the brahmajyoti, the bodily rays of the Lord. The brahmajyoti
is not separate from the Lord, as the glowing sun ray is not independent of
the sun disc. Therefore one who desires to merge into the supreme imper-
sonal brahmajyoti must also worship the Lord by bhakti-yoga, as it is
recommended here in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Bhakti-yoga is especially
stressed here as the means of all perfection. In the previous chapters it has
been stated that bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal of both karma-yoga and
jiiana-yoga, and in the same way in this chapter it is emphatically declared
that bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal of the different varieties of worship
of the different demigods. Bhakti-yoga, thus being the supreme means of
self-realization, is recommended here. Everyone must therefore seriously
take up the methods of bhakti-yoga, even though one aspires for material
enjoyment or liberation from material bondage.

Akamah is one who has no material desire. A living being, naturally
being the part and parcel of the supreme whole purusam parpam, has as
his natural function to serve the Supreme Being, just as the parts and
parcels of the body, or the limbs of the body, are naturally meant to serve
the complete body. Desireless means, therefore, not to be inert like the
stone but to be conscious of one’s actual position and thus desire satisfac-
tion only from the Supreme Lord. Srila Jiva Gosvami has explained this
desirelessness as bhajaniya-parama-purusa-sukha-matra svasukhatvam in his
Sandharbha. This means that one should only feel happy by experiencing


--- Page 136 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
the happiness of the Supreme Lord. This intuition of the living being is
sometimes manifested even during the conditioned stage of a living being
in the material world, and such intuition is expressed in the manner of
altruism, philanthropism, socialism, communism, etc., by the undeveloped
minds of less intelligent persons. In the mundane field such an outlook of
doing good to othersin the form of society, community, family, country or
humanity is a partial manifestation of the same original feeling in which a
pure living entity feels happiness by the happiness of the Supreme Lord.
Such superb feelings were exhibited by the damsels of Vrajabhiimi for the
happiness of the Lord. The gopis loved the Lord without any return, and
this is the perfect exhibition of the akamah spirit. Kama spirit, or the desire
for one’s own satisfaction, is fully exhibited in the material world, whereas
the spirit of akamah is fully exhibited in the spiritual world.

Thoughts of becoming one with the Lord, or being merged in the
brahmajyoti, can also be exhibitions of kama spirit if they are desires for
one’s own satisfaction to be free from the material miseries. A pure devotee
does not want liberation so that he may be relieved from the miseries of
life. Even without so-called liberation, a pure devotee is aspirant for the
satisfaction of the Lord. Influenced by the kama spirit, Arjuna declined to
fight in the Kuruksetra battlefield because he wanted to save his relatives
for his own satisfaction. But being a pure devotee, he agreed to fight on
the instruction of the Lord because he came to his senses that satisfaction
of the Lord at the cost of his own satisfaction was his prime duty. Thus he
became akamah. Thal is the perfect stage of a perfect living being.

Udara-dhih means one who has broader outlook. People with desires for
material enjoyment worship small demigods, and such intelligence is con-
demned in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.20) as hrta-jiidna, the intelligence of
one who has lost his senses. No one can obtain any result from demigods
without getting sanction from the Supreme Lord. Therefore a person with
a broader outlook can see that the ultimate authority is the Lord, even
for material benefits. Under the circumstances, one with a broader outlook,
even with the desire for material enjoyment or for liberation, should
take to the worship of the Lord directly. And everyone, either an
akamah or a sakama or moksa-kama, should worship the Lord with
great expedience. This implies that bhakti-yoga may be perfectly
administered without any mixture of karma and jaana. As the unmixed
sun ray is very forceful and is therefore called tivra, similarly unmixed
bhakti-yoga of hearing, chanting, etc., may be performed by one and all
regardless of inner motive.


--- Page 137 ---
Text 11] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 137
TEXT 11
o -
एतानेव यजतामिह निःश्रेयसोदयः |
मगयत्यचजे मामो यड्‌ भागपतपंगरः ।॥११॥
etavan eva yajatam
iha nihsreyasodayah
bhagavaty acalo bhavo
yad bhagavata-sangatah
etavan—all these different kinds of worshipers; eva—certainly; yajatam—
while worshiping; iha—in this life; nihsreyasa—highest benediction; udayah
—development; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
acalah—unflinching: bhavah—spontaneous attraction: yat—which; bhagavata
—pure devotee of the Lord; sangatah—association.
TRANSLATION
All the different kinds of worshipers of multi-demigods can attain the
highest perfectional benediction, which is spontaneous attraction un-
flinchingly fixed upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by the
association of the pure devotee of the Lord.
PURPORT
All living entities within the material creation, beginning from the first
demigod Brahma down to the small ant in different statuses of life, are
conditioned under the law of material nature or the external energy of the
Supreme Lord. The living entity in his pure state is conscious of the fact
that he is a part and parcel of the Lord, but when he is thrown into the
material world on account of his desire to lord it over material energy. he
becomes conditioned by the three modes of material nature and thus
struggles for existence for the highest benefit. This struggle for existence
is something like following the will-o’-the-wisp under the spell of material
enjoyment. All plans of material enjoyment, either by worship of different
demigods as described in the previous verses of this chapter or by modern-
ized advancement of scientific knowledge without the help of God or
demigod, are illusory only because, despite all such plans for happiness, the
conditioned living being within the compass of material creation can never


--- Page 138 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
solve the problems of life, namely birth, death, old age and disease. The
history of the universe is full of such planmakers, and many kings and
emperors come and go, leaving a planmaking story only. But the prime
problems of life remained unsolved despite all endeavors by such plan-
makers.

Actually human life is meant for making a solution to the problems of
life. Such problems can never be solved by satisfying the different demi-
gods, by different modes of worship, or by so-called scientific advancement
of knowledge without the help of God or the demigods. Apart from the
gross materialists, who care very little either for God or for the demigods,
the Vedas recommend worship of different demigods for different benefits,
so they are neither false nor imaginary. The demigods are as factual as we
are, but they are much more powerful due to their being engaged in the
direct service of the Lord by managing different departments in the
universal government. The Bhagavad-gita affirms this, and the different
planets of the demigods are mentioned there, including the one of the
supreme demigod Lord Brahma. The gross materialists believe neither in
the existence of God nor the demigods. Nor do they believe that different
planets are dominated by different demigods. They are creating a great
commotion about reaching the closest celestial body, the Candraloka or
the moon, but even after much mechanical research, they have only very
scanty information of this moon, and in spite of much false advertisement
for selling land on the moon, the puffed up scientists or gross materialists
cannot live there, and what to speak of reaching other innumerable planets
which they are unable even to count. However, the followers of the Vedas
have a different method of acquiring knowledge. They accept the state-
ments of the Vedic literatures as authority in toto, as we have already
discussed in Canto One, and therefore they have full and reasonable
knowledge of God and demigods and of their different residential planets
situated within the compass of the material world and beyond the limit of
the material sky. The most authentic Vedic literature accepted by the
great Indian dcaryas like Sankara, Ramanuja, Madhva, Visnusvami,
Nimbarka, Caitanya, etc., and studied by all important personalities of
the world, is the Bhagavad-gita, in which the worship of the demigods and
their respective residential planets are mentioned. The Bhagavad-gita
affirms:

ydanti deva-vrata devan pitfn yanti pitr-vratiah
bhatani yanti bhiitejya yanti mad-ydajino ‘pi mam


--- Page 139 ---
Text 12] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 139
“The worshipers of demigods reach the respective planets of the demi-
gods,and the worshipers of forefathers reach the planets of the forefathers.
The gross materialist remains in the different material planets, but the
devotees of the Lord reach the kingdom of God.” (Bg. 9.25)

We also have information from the Bhagavad-gita that all the planets
within the material world, including the Brahmaloka, are but temporarily
situated, and after a fixed period they are all annihilated. Therefore the
demigods and their followers are all annihilated at the period of devasta-
tion, but one who reaches the kingdom of God gets a permanent share in
eternal life. That is the verdict of Vedic literature. The worshipers of the
demigods have one facility more than the unbelievers due to their con-
viction of the Vedic version by which they can get information of the
benefit of worshiping the Supreme Lord in the association of the devotees
of the Lord. The gross materialist, however, without any faith in the Vedic
version, remains eternally in darkness, driven by a false conviction on the
basis of imperfect experimental knowledge, or the so-called material
science, which can never reach into the realm of transcendental knowledge.

Therefore unless they come in contact with a transcendentalist like the
pure devotee of the Lord, the attempts of the gross materialists or the
worshipers of the temporary demigods are simply a waste of energy. Only
by the grace of the divine personalities, the pure devotees of the Lord, can
one achieve pure devotion, which is the highest perfection of human life.
Only a pure devotee of the Lord can show one the right way of progressive
life. Otherwise both the materialistic way of life, without any information
of God or the demigods, and the life engaged in the worship of demigods
in pursuit of temporary material enjoyments, are all different phases of
phantasmagoria. They are nicely explained in the Bhagavad-gita also, but
the Bhagavad-gita can be understood in the association of pure devotees
only, and not by the interpretations of politicians or dry philosophical
speculators.

TEXT 12
ज्ञानं यदा प्रतिनिदृ्तगुणोर्मिचक्र-
मात्मग्रसाद्‌ उत यत्र गुणेष्वसङ्गः |
केवल्यसम्मतपथस्त्वथ मक्तियोगः
को निरतो रिकयासु रतिं न र्यात्‌ 11230


--- Page 140 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
Jjianar yad apratinivrtta-gunormi-cakram
atma-prasada uta yatra gunesv asaiigah
kaivalya-sammala-pathas tv atha bhakti-yogah
ko nirvrto hari-kathasu ratim na kuryat
jiianam—knowledge; yat—that which; é&—up to the limit of; pratini-
vrita—completely withdrawn; guna-iirmi—the waves of the material modes;
cakram—whirlpool;atma-prasadah—self-satisfaction; uta—moreover; yatra—
where there is; gunesu—in the modes of nature; asarigagh—no attachment;
kaivalya—transcendental; sammata—approved; pathah—path; tu—but; atha
—therefore; bhakti-yogah—devotional service; kah—who; nirvrtah—ab-
sorbed in; hari-kathdsu—in the transcendental topic of the Lord; ratim—
attraction; na—shall not; kuryat—do.
TRANSLATION
Transcendental knowledge in relation with the Supreme Lord Hari is
knowledge resulting in the complete suspension of the waves and whirl-
pools of the material modes. Such knowledge is self-satisfying due to its
being free from material attachment, and being transcendental it is
approved by authorities. Who could fail to be attracted?
PURPORT
According to Bhagavad-gita the characteristics of pure devotees are
wonderful (Bg. 10.9). The complete functional activities of a pure devotee
are always engaged in the service of the Lord, and thus they exchange
feelings of ecstasy between themselves and relish transcendental bliss. This
transcendental bliss is experienced even in the stage of devotional practice
(sadhana-avastha), if properly undertaken under the guidance of a bona
fide spiritual master. And in the mature stage the developed transcendental
feeling culminates in realization of the particular relationship with the
Lord by which a living entity is originally constituted (up to the relation-
ship of conjugal love with the Lord, estimated as highest transcendental
bliss). Thus bhakti-yoga, being the only means of God realization is called
kaivalya. Srila Jiva Gosvami quotes the Vedic version (eko narayano devah
paravaranari parama aste kaivalya-sangitah) in this connection and estab-
lishes that Narayana, the Personality of Godhead, is known as kaivalya,
and the means which enables one to approach the Lord is called the


--- Page 141 ---
Text 13] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 141
kaivalya-pantha, or the only means of attainment of Godhead. This kaivalya-
pantha begins from sravapa, or hearing those topics that relate to the
Personality of Godhead, and the natural consequence of hearing such
hari-katha is attainment of transcendental knowledge, which causes a
detachment from all mundane topics, for which a devotee has no taste at
all. For a devotee, all mundane activities, social and political, become un-
attractive, and in the mature state such a ५१८५०८८ becomes disinterested
even in his own body, and what to speak of bodily relatives. In such a
state of affairs one is not agitated by the waves of the material modes.
There are different modes of material nature, and all mundane functions
in which a common man is very much interested or takes part become
unattractive for the devotee. This state of affairs is described herein as
pratinivrtta-gunormi, and it is possible by atma-prasada, or complete self-
satisfaction without any material connection. The first-class devotee of the
Lord attains this stage by devotional service, but despite his loftiness, still,
for the matter of the Lord’s satisfaction, he may play the voluntary part of
a preacher of the Lord’s glory and dovetail all into devotional service, even
mundane interest, just to give a chance to the neophytes to transform
mundane interest into transcendental bliss. Srila Ripa Gosvami has de-
scribed this action of a pure devotee as “nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktam vairagyam ucyate.”” Even mundane activities dovetailed with service
of the Lord are also calculated to be transcendental or approved kaivalya
affairs.
TEXT 13
शौनक उवाच
©
hems যসা লিহযল্য भरतषमः |
किमन्यत्पष्टवान्‌ भूयो वैयासकिम्पिं कविम्‌ ॥१३॥
saunaka uvaca
ity abhivyahrtarh raja
nisamya bharatarsabhah
kim anyat prstavan bhityo
vaiyasakim rsir kavim

iti—thus; abhivyahrtarh—all that was spoken; rgja—the king; nisamya—

by hearing; bharata-rsabhah—Maharaja Pariksit; kim—what; anyat—more;


--- Page 142 ---
142 Srimad -Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3

prstavan—did he inquire from him; bhityah—again; vaiyasakim—unto the

son of Vyasadeva;rsim—one who is well versed; kavim—poetic.
TRANSLATION

Saunaka said, The son of Vyasadeva, Srila Sukadeva Gosvami, was a
highly learned sage and was able to describe things in a poetic manner.
What did Maharaja Pariksit again inquire from him after hearing all that
he said?

PURPORT

A pure devotee of the Lord automatically develops all godly qualities,
and some of the prominent features of those qualities are as follows:

He is kind, peaceful, truthful, equable, faultless, magnanimous, mild,
clean, nonpossessive, a well-wisher to all, satisfied, surrendered to Krsna,
without hankering, simple, fixed, self-controlled, a balanced eater, sane,
mannerly, prideless, grave, sympathetic, fricndly, poetic, expert, and silent.
Out of these twenty-six prominent features of a devotee, as described by
Krsnadasa Kavirdja in his Caitanya-caritamrta, the qualification of being
poetic is especially mentioned herein in relation to Sukadeva Gosvami.
The presentation of Srimad-Bhagavatam by his recitation is the highest
poetic contribution. He was a self-realized learned sage. In other words, he
was a poet amongst the sages.

TEXT 14
एतच्छुश्रूषतां विद्वन्‌ त Ase भाषितुम्‌ |
कथा हरिकयोदक); सतां स्युः सद सि धुवम्‌ ॥१४॥
11111101
siita no 7771457 bhasitum
katha hari-kathodarkah
satam syuh sadasi dhruvam

etat—this; susrisatam—of those eager to hear; vidvan—O learned: sita—

Sita Gosvami; nah—unto us; arhasi—may you do it; bhasitum—just to


--- Page 143 ---
Text 14] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 143
explain it; kathah—topics; hari-kath&-udarkah—result in the topics of the
Lord; satam—of the devotees; syuh—may be; sadasi—in the assembly of;
dhruvam—certainly.
TRANSLATION

O learned Suita Gosvami! Please continue to explain such topics to us
because we are all eager to hear. Besides that, topics which result in the
discussion of the Lord Hari should certainly be discussed in the assembly
of devotees.

PURPORT

As we have already quoted above from the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu of
Ripa Gosvami, even mundane things, if dovetailed in the service of the
Lord Sri Krsna, are accepted as transcendental. For example, the epics or
the histories of Ramayana and Mahabharata, which are specifically recom-
mended for the less intelligent classes of men (women, sizdras and unworthy
sons of the higher castes), are also accepted as Vedic literature because
they are compiled in connection with the activities of the Lord. Maha-
bharata is accepted as the fifth division of the Vedas after its first four
divisions, namely Sama, Yajus, Rk and Atharva. The less intelligent class
of men do not accept Mahabharata as part of the Vedas, but great sages
and authorities accept it as the fifth division of the Vedas. Bhagavad-gita
is also part of the Mahabharata, and it is full of the Lord’s instruction for
the less intelligent class of men. Some less intelligent men say that
Bhagavad-gita is not meant for the householders, but such foolish men
forget that Bhagavad-gita was explained to a grhastha like Arjuna and
spoken by the Lord in His role as a grhastha (family man). So Bhagavad-
gita, although containing the high philosophy of the Vedic wisdom, is for
the beginners in the transcendental science, and Srimad-Bhagavatam is for
graduates and postgraduates in the transcendental science. Therefore
literatures like Mahabharata, the Purapas, and similar other literatures
which are full of the pastimes of the Lord, are all transcendental litera-
tures, and they should be discussed with full confidence in the society of
great devotees.

The difficulty is that such literatures, when discussed by professional
men, appear to be mundane literature like histories or epics because there
are so many historical facts and figures. It is said here, therefore, that such
literatures should be discussed in the assembly of the devotees. Unless they


--- Page 144 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
are discussed by devotees, such literatures cannot be relished by the
higher class of men. So the conclusion is that the Lord is not impersonal
in the ultimate issue. He is the Supreme Person, and He has His different
activities. He is the leader of all living entities, and He descends at His will
and by His personal energy to reclaim the fallen souls, playing exactly like
the social, political or religious leaders. Because such roles ultimately
culminate in the discussion of topics of the Lord, all such preliminary
topics are also transcendental. That is the way of spiritualizing the civic
activities of human society. Men have inclinations for studying history
and many other mundane literatures, stories, fiction, dramas, magazines,
newspapers, etc., so let them be dovetailed with the transcendental service
of the Lord, and all of them will turn to the topics relished by all devotees.
The propaganda that the Lord is impersonal, that He has no activity, and
that He is a dumb stone without any name and form has encouraged
people to become godless, faithless demons, and the more they deviate
from the transcendental activities of the Lord, the more they become
accustomed to mundane activities that only clear their path to hell instead
of return them home, back to Godhead.* Srimad-Bhagavatam begins from
the history of the Pandavas (with necessary politics and social activities),
and yet Srimad-Bhagavatam is said to be the Paramhamsa-samhita, or the
Vedic literature meant for the topmost transcendentalist, and in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, paramjii@na, highest transcendental knowledge, is
described. Pure devotees of the Lord are all paramahamsas, and they are
like the swans, who know the art of sucking milk out of a mixture of milk
and water.
TEXT 15
स वै মাযববী राजा पाण्डवेयो महारथः |
शारकीडनकैः FIST कृष्णक्रीडां य आददे ॥ १५॥

*Even fifty years ago, the social structure of all Indians was so arranged that they
would not read any literature which was not connected with the activities of the Lord.
They would not play any drama which was not connected with the Lord. They would
not organize a fair or ceremony which was not connected with the Lord. Nor would
they visit a place which was not holy and sanctified by the pastimes of the Lord. There-
fore even the common man in the village would talk about Ramayana and Mahabharata,
Gita and Bhagavatam, even from his very childhood. But by the influence of the age of
Kali, they have been dragged to the civilization of the dogs and hogs, laboring for bread
without any sense of transcendental knowledge.


--- Page 145 ---
Text 15] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 145
sa vai bhagavato raja
pandaveyo maha-rathah
bala-kridanakaih kridan
krsna-kridam ya adade
sah—he; vai—certainly; bhagavatah—great devotee of the Lord; raja—
Maharaja Pariksit; pandaveyah—grandson of the Pandavas; maha-rathah—a
great fighter; bala—while a child; kridanakaih—with play dolls; kridan—
playing; krsna—Lord Krsna; kridam—activities; yah—whe;adade—accepted.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit, the grandson of the Pandavas, was from his very
childhood a great devotee of the Lord. Even while playing with dolls, he
used to worship Lord Krsna by imitating the worship of the family Deity.
PURPORT

In the Bhagavad-gita it is stated (Bg. 6.41) that even a person who has
failed in the proper discharge of the yoga practice is given a chance to
take birth in the house of devout brahmanas or in the houses of rich men
like the ksatriya kings or rich merchants. But Maharaja Pariksit was more
than that because he was a great devotee of the Lord since his previous birth,
and as such he took his birth in an imperial family of the Kurus, and
especially that of the Pandavas. So from the very beginning of his child-
hood he had the chance of knowing intimately the devotional service of
Lord Krsna in his own family. The Pandavas, all being devotees of the
Lord, certainly venerated family Deities in the royal palace for worship.
Children who appear in such families fortunately generally imitate such
worship of the Deities, even in the way of childhood play. By the grace of
Lord i Krsna, we had the chance of being born in a Vaisnava family, and
in our childhood we imitated the worship of Lord Krsna by imitating our
father, and our father encouraged us in all respects to observe all functions
such as the Ratha-yatra and Dola-yatra ceremonies, and he used to spend
money liberally for distributing prasadam to us children and our friends.
Our spiritual master, who also took his birth in a Vaisnava family, got all
inspirations from his great Vaisnava father Thakur Bhaktivinode. That is
the way of all lucky Vaisnava families. The celebrated Mirabai was a

staunch devotee of Lord Krsna as the great lifter of Govardhana Hill.


--- Page 146 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3

The life history of many such devotees is almost the same because
there is always symmetry between the early lives of all great devolees of
the Lord. According to Jiva Gosvami, Maharaja Pariksit must have heard
about the childhood pastimes of Lord Krsna at Vrndavana, for he used to
imitate the pastimes with his young playmates. According to Sridhara
Svami, Maharaja Pariksit used to imitate the worship of the family Deity
by elderly members. Srila Vivanatha Cakravarti also confirms the view-
point of Jiva Gosvami. So accepting either of them, Maharaja Pariksit was
naturally inclined to Lord Krsna from his very childhood, and he might
have imitated either of the above-mentioned procedures, and all of them
establish his great devotion from his very childhood, a symptom of a
mahabhagavata. Such mahabhagavatas are called nitya-siddhas, or souls
liberated from birth. But there are also others who may not be liberated
from birth but who develop a tendency for devotional service by associa-
tion, and they are called sadhana-siddhas. There is no difference between
the two in the ultimate issue, and so the conclusion is that everyone can
become a sadhana-siddha, a devotee of the Lord, simply by association
with the pure devotees. The concrete example is our great spiritual master
Sri Narada Muni. In his previous life he was simply a boy of a maidservant,
but through association with great devotees he became a devotee of the
Lord of his own standard, unique in the history of devotional service.

TEXT 16
वैयासकिश्च भगवान्‌ वासुदेवपरायणः |
उस्गायगुणोदाराः सतां स्युहिं समागमे ॥१६॥
vatyasakis ca bhagavan
vasudeva-parayanah
urugaya-gunodarah
satan syur hi samagame

vaiyasakih—the son of Vyasadeva; ca—also; bhagavan—full in transcen-
dental knowledge; vasudeva—Lord Krsna; parayanah—attached to; urugaya
—of the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, who is glorified by great phi-
losophers;guna-udarah—great qualities; satam—of the devotees; syuh—must
have been; hi—as a matter of fact; samagame—by the presence of.


--- Page 147 ---
Text 16] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 147
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami, the son of Vyasadeva, is also full in transcendental
knowledge and a great devotee of Lord Krsna, son of Vasudeva. So there
must have been discussion of Lord Krsna, who is glorified by great phi-
losophers and in the company of great devotees.
PURPORT
The word satam is very important in this verse. Satam means the pure
devotees who have no other desire than to serve the Lord. In the associa-
tion of such devotees, only the transcendental glories of Lord Krsna are
properly discussed. It is said by the Lord that His topics are all full of
spiritual significance, and once one properly hears about Him in the
association of the satam, certainly one senses the great potency and so
automatically attains to the devotional stage of life. As already described,
Maharaja Pariksit was a great devotee of the Lord from his very birth and
so was Sukadeva Gosvami. Both of them were on the same level, although
it appeared that Maharaja Pariksit was a great King accustomed to royal
facilities whereas Sukadeva Gosvami was a typical renouncer of the world,
so much so that he did not even put a cloth on his body. Superficially,
Maharaja Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami might seem to be opposites, but
basically they were both unalloyed pure devotees of the Lord. When such
devotees are assembled together, there can be no topics save discussions of
the glories of the Lord, or bhakti-yoga. In the Bhagavad-gita also, when
there were talks between the Lord and his devotee Arjuna, there could not
be any other topic except bhakti-yoga, however the mundane scholars may
speculate on it in their own ways. The use of the word ca after vaiyasakih
suggests, according to Srila Jiva Gosvami, that both Sukadeva Gosvami
and Maharaja Pariksit were of the same category, settled long before, al-
though one was playing the part of the master and the other the disciple.
Since Lord Krsna is the center of the topics, the word vasudeva-parayanah,
or devotee of Vasudeva, suggests devotee of Lord Krsna, the common aim.
Although there were many others who assembled at the place where
Maharaja Pariksit was fasting, the natural conclusion is that there was no
other topic except the glorification of Lord Krsna, because the principal
speaker was Sukadeva Gosvami, and the chief audience was Maharaja
Pariksit. So Srimad-Bhdgavatam, as it was spoken and heard by two princi-
pal devotees of the Lord, is only for the glorification of the Supreme Lord
Personality of Godhead, इत Krsna.


--- Page 148 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
TEXT 17
आयुर्हरति वै पुंसाधुयनस्तं च यन्नसौ ।
=
त्ते यरक्षणो नीत STEFAN ॥ १७
ayur 07067 vai [00017850772
udyann astam ca yann ०5५८
tasyarte yat-ksano nita
uttama-sloka-vartaya
ayuh—duration of life; harati—decreases; vai—certainly ; punisam—of the
people; udyan—rising; astam—setting; ca—also; yan—moving;asau—the sun;
tasya—of one who glorifies the Lord; rte—except; yat—by whom;ksanah—
time; nitah—utilized; uttama-§loka—the all-good Personality of Godhead;
vartaya—in the topics of.
TRANSLATION
Both by rising and setting, the sun decreases the duration of life of
everyone, except one who utilizes the time by discussing topics of the all-
good Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
This verse indirectly confirms the greater importance of utilizing the
human form of life to realize our lost relationship with the Supreme Lord
by acceleration of devotional service. Time and tide wait for no man. So
the time indicated by the sunrise and the sunset will be uselessly wasted if
such time is not properly utilized for realizing identification of spiritual
values. Even a fraction of the duration of life wasted cannot be compen-
sated by any amount of gold. Human life is simply awarded to a living
entity (jiva) so he can realize his spiritual identity and his permanent source
of happiness. A living being, especially the human being, is seeking happi-
ness, because happiness is the natural situation of the living entity. But he
is vainly seeking happiness in the material atmosphere. A living being is
constitutionally a spiritual spark of the complete whole, and his happiness
can be perfectly perceived in spiritual activities. The Lord is the complete
spirit whole, and His name, form, quality, pastimes, entourage and per-
sonality are all identical with Him. Once a person comes into contact with
any one of the above-mentioned energies of the Lord through the proper


--- Page 149 ---
Text 17] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 149
channel of devotional service, the door of perfection is immediately
opencd. In the Bhagavad-gita the Lord has explained such contact in the
following words: “Endeavors in devotional service are never baffled. Nor
is there failure. A slight beginning of such activities is sufficient even to
deliver a person from the great ocean of material fears.” (Bg. 2.40) As a
highly potent drug injected intravenously acts at once on the whole body,
similarly the transcendental topics of the Lord injected through the car of
the pure devotee of the Lord can act very efficiently. Aural realization of
the transcendental messages implies total realization, just as fructification
of one part of a tree implies fructification of all other parts. This realization
for a moment in the association of pure devotees like Sukadeva Gosvami
prepares one’s complete life for eternity. And as such, the sun fails to rob
the pure devotee of his duration of life inasmuch as he is constantly busy
in the devotional service of the Lord, purifying his existence. Death is a
symptom of the material infection of the eternal living being, and due to
material infection only the eternal living entity is subjected to the law of
birth, death, old age and disease.

The materialistic way of pious activities, like charity, etc., is recom-
mended in the smrti s$astras as quoted by Srila Viévanitha Cakravarti
Thakur. Money given in charity to a suitable person is guaranteed bank
balance in the next life. Such charity is recommended to be given to a
brahmana. If the money is given in charity to a nen-brahmana (without
brahmanical qualification) the money is returned in the next life in the
same proportion. If it is given in charity to a half-educated brahmana, even
then the money is returned double. If the money is given in charity to a
learned and fully qualified brahmana, the moncy is returned a hundred and
thousand times, and if the money is given to a veda-paraga (one who has
factually realized the path of the Vedas), it is returned by unlimited
multiplication. The ultimate end of Vedic knowledge is to realize the
Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gita
(vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah). There is a guarantee of money being
returned if given in charity, regardless of the proportion. Similarly, a
moment passed in the association of a pure devotee by hearing and chanting
the transcendental messages of the Lord is a perfect guarantee for eternal
life, for returning home, back to Godhead. Mad-dhama gatva punar janma
na vidyate. In other words, a devotee of the Lord is guaranteed eternal life.
A devotee’s old age or disease in the present life is but an impetus to such
guaranteed eternal life.


--- Page 150 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch 3
TEXT 18
a: fh न जीवन्ति wan: वः न श्वसन्त्युत ।
न खादन्ति न मेहन्ति क ग्रामे पशवोऽपरे ॥१८॥
taravah kim na jivanti
bhastrah kim na $vasanty uta
na khadanti na mehanti
kim grame pasavo ‘pare

taravah—the trees; kim—whether; na—do not; jivanti—live; bhastrah—
bellows; kim—whether;na—do not; $vasanti—breathe;uta—also;na—do not;
khadanti—eat; na—do not; mehanti—discharge semen; kim—whether;grame
—in the locality ; pasavah—beastly living being; apare—others.

TRANSLATION
Do the trees not live? Do the bellows of the blacksmith not breathe?
All around us, do the beasts not eat and discharge semen?
PURPORT

The materialistic man of the modern age will argue that life, or part of
it, is never meant for discussion of theosophical or theological arguments.
Life is meant for the maximum duration of existence for eating, drinking,
sexual intercourse, making merry and enjoying life. The modern man wants
to live forever by the advancement of material science, and there are many
foolish theories for prolonging life to the maximum duration. But the
Srimad-Bhagavatam affirms that life is not meant for so-called economic
development or advancement of materialistic science for the hedonistic
philosophy of eating, mating, drinking and merrymaking. Life is solely
meant for tapasya, for purifying existence so that one may enter into
eternal life just after the end of the human form of life.

The materialists want to prolong life as much as possible because they
have no information of the next life. Therefore they want to get the
maximum comforts of life only in this present life, thinking conclusively
that there is no life after death. This ignorance about the eternity of the
living being and the change of covering in the material world has played


--- Page 151 ---
Text 19] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 151
havoc in the structure of the modern human society. Consequently there
are many problems multiplied by various plans of modernized man. The
plans for solving the problems of society have only aggravated the troubles.
Even if it is possible to prolong life more than one hundred years, advance-
ment of human civilization does not necessarily follow. The Bhagavatam
says that certain trees live for hundreds and thousands of years. At
Vrndavana there is a tamarind tree (the place is known as Imlitala) which
is said to be existing since the time of Lord Krsna. In the Calcutta
Botanical Garden there is a banyan tree said to be older than five hundred
years, and there are many such trees all over the world. Svamt Sankaracarya
lived only thirty-two years, and Lord Caitanya lived forty-eight years.
Does it mean that the prolonged lives of the above-mentioned trees are
moreimportant than Sankara or Caitanya? Prolonged life without spiritual
value is not very important. One may doubt that trees have life because
they do not breathe. But modern scientists like Bose have already proved
that there is life in plants, so breathing is no sign of actual life. The
Bhagavatam says that the bellows of the blacksmith breathes very soundly,
but that does not mean that the bellows has life. The materialist will argue
that life in the tree and life in the man cannot be compared because the
tree cannot enjoy life by eating palatable dishes or by enjoying sexual
intercourse. In reply to this, the Bhagavatam asks whether other animals
like the dogs and hogs, living in the same village with human beings, do not
eat and enjoy sexual life. The specific utterance of Srimad-Bhagavatam in
this connection regarding “other animals” means that persons who are
simply engaged in the matter of planning a better type of animal life
consisting of eating, breathing, and mating are also animals in the shape
of human beings. A society of such polished animals cannot benefit
suffering humanity, for an animal can easily harm another animal but
rarely do good.
TEXT 19
স্মবিত্য়যাহীদুত্তংঃ संस्तुतः पुरुषः 9g: |
न कत्क्णंपथोपेतो SIT नाम गदाप्रनः ॥ १९॥ .
11111111
samstutah purusah pasuh
na yat-karpa-pathopeto
jatu nama gadagrajah


--- Page 152 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
$va—a dog; vid-varaha— the village hog who eats stool; usira—the camel;
kharath—-and by the asses; samstutah—perfectly praised; purusah—a person;
pasuh—animal; na—never; yat—of him; karpa—ear; patha—path; upetah—
reached; jatu—at any time; nama—the holy name; gada-agrajeh— Lord Krsna,
the deliverer from all evils.
TRANSLATION
Men who are like dogs, hogs, camels and 9০০০১ ra those men who
never listen to the transcendental pastimes of Lord Sri Krsna, the deliverer
from evils.
PURPORT

The general mass of people, unless they are trained systematically for a
higher standard of life in spiritual values, arc no better than the animals,
and in this verse they have been particularly put on the level of the dogs,
hogs, camels and asses. Modern university education practically prepares
one to acquire a doggish mentality to accept the service of a greater
master. Like the dogs, after finishing a so-called education, the so-called
educated persons move from door to door with applications for some
service, and mostly they are driven away, informed of no vacancy. As the
dogs are negligible animals and serve the master faithfully for bits of
bread, similarly one serves a master without sufficient rewards.

Persons who have no discrimination in the matter of foodstuff and who
eat all sorts of rubbish are compared with the hogs. Hogs are very much
attached to ealing stools. So the stool is a kind of foodstuff for a
particular type of animal. And even the stones are eatable by a particular
type of animal or bird. But the human being is not meant for eating
everything and anything, save grains, vegetables, fruits, milk, sugar, etc.
Animal food is not meant for the human being. For chewing solid food,
the human being has a particular type of teeth meant for cutting fruits and
vegetables. The human being is endowed with two canine teeth as a
concession for such persons who will eat animal food at any cost. It is
known to everyone that one man’s food is another man’s poison. Human
beings are expected to accept the remnants of food offered to Lord Sri
Krsna, and the Lord accepts foodstuff from the categories of leaves,
flowers, fruits, etc. (Bg. 9.26) No animal food is offered to the Lord, as
prescribed by Vedic scriptures. Therefore, a human being is meant to eat
a particular type of food. He should not imitate the animals to derive so-


--- Page 153 ---
Text 19] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 153
called vitamin values. Therefore, a person who has no discrimination in
regard to eating is compared with the hogs.

The camel is a kind of animal which takes pleasure in cating thorns.
Similarly, a person who wants to enjoy family life or the worldly life of
so-called enjoyment is compared with the camel. Materialistic life is full
of thorns, so one should live only by the prescribed method of Vedic
regulations just to make the best use of a bad bargain. Life in the material
world is maintained by sucking one’s own blood. The central point of
attraction for material enjoyment is sex life. To enjoy sex life is to suck
one’s own blood, and there is not much more (0 be explained in this
connection. The camel also sucks its own blood while chewing the thorny
twigs. The thorns that the camel eats cut the tongue of the camel, and so
blood begins to flow within the camel’s mouth. The thorns, mixed with
fresh blood, create a taste for the foolish camel, and so he enjoys the
thorn-eating business with false pleasure. Similarly, the great business
magnates, industrialists who work very hard to carn money by different
ways and questionable means, eal the thorny result of their action mixed
up with their own blood. Therefore the Bhagavatam has situated these
diseased fellows along with the camels.

The ass is another animal who is celebrated as the greatest fool, even
amongst the animals. The ass works very hard and carries burdens of the
maximum weight without making profit for itself.* The ass is generally
engaged by the washerman, whose social position is not very respectable.
And the special qualification of the ass is that it is very much accustomed
to being kicked by the opposite sex. The ass, when he begs for sexual
intercourse, is kicked by the fair sex, yet he still follows the female
for such sexual pleasure. A henpecked man is compared, therefore,
with the ass. The general mass of people work very hard, especially in the
age of Kali. In this age the human being is actually engaged in the work of
an ass, carrying heavy burdens and driving thela and rickshaws. The so-called
advancement of human civilization has engaged a human being in the work
of an ass. The laborers in great factories and workshops are also engaged in
such burdensome work, and after working hard during the day, the poor
laborer has to be again kicked by the fair sex, not only for sex enjoyment
but also for so many household affairs.

#Human life is meant for carning values. This life is called arthadam. or that which
can deliver values. And what is the greatest value of life? It is returning home, back to
Godhead, as indicated in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.15). One’s selfishness must be aimed


--- Page 154 ---
154 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
So Srimad-Bhagavatam’s categorization of the common man without

any spiritual enlightenment into the society of the dogs, hogs, camels and
asses is not at all an exaggeration. The leaders of such ignorant masses of
people may feel very proud of being adored by such a number of dogs and
hogs, but that is not very flattering. The Bhagavatam openly declares that
a person, although a great leader of such dogs and hogs disguised as men,
may have no taste for being enlightened in the science of Krsna. Such a
leader is also an animal and nothing more. He may be designated as a
powerful, strong animal, or a big animal, but in the estimation of Srimad-
Bhagavatam he is never given a place in the category of man on account of
his atheistic temperament. Or, in other words, such godless leaders of dogs
and hog-like men are bigger animals with animal qualities in greater
proportion.
at the point of going back to Godhead. The ass does not know his self-interest, and it
works very hard for others only. Similarly, a person who works very hard for others
only, forgetting his personal interest available in the human form of life, is compared to
the ass. In the Brehma-vaivarta Purana it is said:

asitim caturas caiva 10256725 tan jiva-jatisu

bhramadbhih purusaih 10701030118 manusyarm janma-paryayat

tad apy abhalatam jatah tesam atmabhimaninam

varakanam anasritya govinda-carana-dvayam
The human life is so important that even the demigods in the higher planets sometimes
aspire after a human body on this earth because in the human body only can one easily
go back to Godhead. And in spite of having obtained such an important body, if one
does not reestablish his lost eternal relation with Govinda, Lord Krsna, he is certainly a
fool who has forgotten his self-interest. This human form of material body is obtained
by a gradual process of evolution of one body after another in the cycle of 8,400,000
varicties of life. And the poor man, forgetting this importance for his own interest,
involves himself in so many illusory engagements for uplifting the position of others as
leader of political emancipation and economic development. There is no harm in trying
for political emancipation or economic development, but one should not forget the
real aim of life: all such philanthropic activities must be dovetailed to returning to
Godhead. @ne who does not know this is compared to the ass who works only for
others without their or his own welfare in mind.


--- Page 155 ---
Text 20] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 155
TEXT 20
a
fi? षतोरुकमविक्रमान्‌ ये
न श्रष्तः SNR नरसख |
जिह्वासती दार्दुरिकेव घत
नं चोपगायत्युरुगायगाथाः ॥२०॥
bile batorukrama-vikraman ye
na Srpvatah karna-pute narasya
jihvasati dardurikeva siita
na copagayaty urugdaya-gathah
bile—snake holes; bata—like; urukrama—the Lord, who acts marvelously;
vikraman—prowess; ye—all these; na—never; srnvatah—heard ; karna-pute—
the earholes; narasya—of the man, jihva—tongue; asati—useless; dardurika
—of the frogs; eva—exactly like that; sita—O 30108 Gosvami; na—never; ca—
also; upagayati—chants loudly; urugaya—worth singing; gathah—songs.
TRANSLATION
One who has not listened to the messages about the prowess and
marvelous acts of the Personality of Godhead and has not sung or chanted
loudly the worthy songs about the Lord is to be considered to possess
earholes like that of the snakes and a tongue like that of the frogs.
PURPORT
Devotional service of the Lord is rendered by all limbs or parts of the
body. It is the transcendental dynamic force of the spirit soul; therefore a
devotee is engaged one hundred percent in the service of the Lord. One
can engage in devotional service when the senses of the body are purified
in relation with the Lord, and onc can render service to the Lord with the
help of all senses. As such, the senses and the action of the senses are to be
considered as impure or materialistic as long as they are employed in sense
gratification only. The purified senses are engaged not in sense gratification
but in the service of the Lord in toto. The Lord is the Supreme with all
senses, and the servitor who is part and parcel of the Lord also has the


--- Page 156 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
same senses. Service of the Lord is the completely purified use of the
senses, as il is described in the Bhagavad-gita. The Lord imparted in-
structions with full senses, and Arjuna received them with full senses, and
thus there was a perfect exchange of sensible and logical understanding
between the master and the disciple. Spiritual understanding is nothing
like an electrical charge from the master to the disciple, as it is foolishly
claimed by some propaganda-mongers. Everything is full of sense and
logic, and the exchange of views between the master and disciple is possible
when the reception is submissive and real only. In the Caitanya-caritamrta
it is said that one should receive the teaching of Lord Caitanya with
intellect and full senses so that one can logically understand the great
mission.

In the impure state of a living being, the respective senses are fully
engaged in mundane affairs. If the car is nol engaged in the service of the
Lord by hearing about Him in the Bhagavad-gita or in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, certainly the holes of the car will be filled up with some
rubbish. Therefore the messages of the Bhagavad-gita and the Srimad-
Bhagavatam should be preached all over the world very loudly. That is the
duty of a pure devotee who has actually heard about them from the
perfect sources. Many want to speak something to others, bul because
they are not trained up to speak on the subject matter of Vedic wisdom
they are all speaking nonsense, and the people are receiving them with no
sense. There are hundreds and thousands of sources for distributing
mundane news of the world, and people of the world arc also receiving
them. Similarly, the people of the world should be taught to hear the
transcendental topics of the Lord, and the devotee of the Lord must
speak loudly so that they can hear. The frogs loudly croak, with the
result that they invite the snakes to eat them. The human tongue is
especially given for chanting the Vedic hymns and not for croaking like
the frogs. The word asati used in this verse is also significant. Asati means
a woman who has become a prostitute. A prostitute has no reputation for
good womanly qualities. Similarly, the tongue, which is given to the
human being for chanting the Vedic hymns, will be considered a prostitute
when it is engaged in the matter of chanting some mundane nonsense.

TEXT 21
मारः परं पडकिरीरजुष्ट-
मप्युत्तमाङ्गं न नमेन्मुकुन्दम्‌ |


--- Page 157 ---
Text 21] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 157
=~
शावौ करौ नो Fed Am
(क
हरेलंस्काश्चनकङ्णौ वा ॥२१॥
bharah param patta-kirite-justam
apy uttamangam ne namen mukundam
Savau karau no kurute saparyar
harer lasat-kanicana-karikanau va
bharah—a great burden; param—heavy; patta—silk ; kirita—turban; justan
—dressed with; api—even: uttama—upper; aiigam—parts of the body; ne—
never; namet—bow down; mukundam—Lord Krsna, the deliverer; savau—
dead bodies; karau—hands; ne—do not; kurute—do; saparyam—worshiping;
hareh—of the Personality of Godhead; lasat—glittering; kaiicana—made of
gold; karnkanau—bangles; vi—even though.
TRANSLATION
The upper portion of the body, though crowned with a silk turban, if
not bowed down before the Personality of Godhead who can award
mukli [freedom], is a heavy burden only. And the hands, though deco-
rated with glittering bangles, if nol engaged in the service of the Per-
sonality of Godhead Hari, are like those of a dead man.
PURPORT
As stated hereinbefore, there are three kinds of devotees of the Lord.
The first-class devotee does not sce at all anyone who is not in the service
of the Lord, but the sccond-class devotee makes distinctions between
devotees and nondevotees. The second-class devotees are therefore meant
for preaching work, and as referred to in the above verse, they must
loudly preach the glories of the Lord. The second-class devotee accepts
disciples from the section of third-class devotees, or nondevotees. Some-
times the first-class devotees also come down to the category of the
second-class devotee for preaching work. But the common man who is
expected to become at least a third-class devotee is advised herein to visit
the temple of the Lord and bow down before the Deity, even though he
may be a very rich man or even a king with a silk turban or crown. The
Lord is the Lord of everyone, including the great kings and emperors, and


--- Page 158 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
as such, rich men in the estimation of mundane people must therefore
make a point to visit the temple of Lord Sri Krsna and regularly bow down
before the Deity. The Lord in the temple in the worshipable form is never
to be considered to be made of stone or wood because the Lord in Hisarca
incarnation as the Deity in the temple shows immense favor to the fallen
souls by His auspicious presence. By the hearing process, as mentioned
hereinbefore, this realization of the presence of the Lord in the temple is
made possible. As such, the first process of hearing in the routine work of
devotional service is the essential point. Hearing by all classes of devotees
from the authentic sources like Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam is
essential. The common man who is puffed up with his material position
and does not bow down before the Deity of the Lord in the temple, or
who defies temple worship without any knowledge of the science, must
know that his so-called turban or crown will only succeed in further
drowning him in the water of the ocean of material existence. A drowning
man with a heavy weight on his head is sure to go down more swiftly than
others who have no heavy weight. A foolish, puffed up man defies the
science of God and says God has no meaning for him, but when he is in
the grip of God’s law and is caught up by some disease like cerebral throm-
bosis, that godless man sinks into the ocean of nescience by the weight of
his material acquisition. Advancement of material science without God
consciousness is a heavy load on the head of human society, so one must
take heed of this great warning.

The common man, if he has no time to worship the Lord, may at lcast
engage his hands for a few seconds washing or sweeping the Lord’s temple.
Maharaja Prataparudra, the greatly powerful king of Orissa, was always
very busy with heavy state responsibilities, yet he made it a point to sweep
the temple of Lord Jagannatha at Purl once a year during the festival of
the Lord. The idea is that, however important a man one may be, he must
accept the supremacy of the Supreme Lord. This God consciousness will
help a man even in his material prosperity. Maharaja Prataparudra’s subor-
dination before the Lord Jagannitha made him a powerful king, so much
so that even the great Pathan in his time could not enter into Orissa on
account of the powerful Maharaja Prataparudra. And at last Maharaja
Prataparudra was graced by Lord इन Caitanya on the very grounds of his
acceptance of subordination to the Lord of the universe. So even though a
rich man’s wife has glittering bangles made of gold on her hands, she must
engage herself in rendering service to the Lord.


--- Page 159 ---
Text 22] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 159
TEXT 22
बहौयिते ते नयने नराणां
IN
रिङ्गानि विष्णोनं निरीक्षतो ये ।
पादी चृणां तौ दमजन्ममाजौ
त्राणि नानुव्रजतो हरेर्यौ IRR
barhayite te nayane naranam
lingani visnor na niriksato ye
padau nrpam tau druma-janma-bhajau
ksetrani nanuvrajato harer yau
barhayite—like plumes of a peacock; te—those; nayane—eyes; naranam—
of men; lingani—forms; visnoh—of the Personality of Godhead; na—does
not; niriksatah—look on; ye—all such; padau—legs; nrpam—of men; tau—
those; druma-janma—being born of the tree; bhajau—Ilike that, ksetrani—
holy places; na—never; anuvrajatah—goes after; hareh—of the Lord; yau—
which.
TRANSLATION
The eyes which do not look at the symbolic representations of the
Personality of Godhead Visnu [His forms, name, quality, etc.] are like
those printed on the plumes of the peacock, and the legs which do not
move to the holy places | where the Lord is remembered | are considered
to be like tree trunks.
PURPORT
Especially for the householder-devotees, the path of Deity worship is
strongly recommended. As far as possible, every householder, by the
direction of the spiritual master, must install the Deity of Visnu, forms
like Radha-Krsna, Laksmi-Narayana or Sita-Rama especially, or any other
form of the Lord, like Nrsimha, Varaha, Gaura-Nitai, Matsya, Kiirma,
$alagrama-sila and many other forms of Visnu, like Trivikrama, Keéava,
Acyuta, Vasudeva, Narayana, Damodara, etc., as they are recommended
in the Vaisnava Tantras or Puranas, and one’s family should worship strictly
following the directions and regulations of arcana-vidhi. Any member


--- Page 160 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
of the family who is above twelve years of age should be initiated by a
bona fide spiritual master, and all the members of the household should be
engaged in the daily service of the Lord, beginning from morning (4 a.m.)
till night (10 p.m.) by performing mangala-aratrika, niraiijana. arcana, pija,
kirtana, $rngara, bhoga vaikali, sandhya-aratrika, patha, bhoga (at night),
Sayana-aratrika, etc. Engagement in such worship of the Deity, under
the direction of a bona fide spiritual master, will greatly help the
householders to purify their very existence and make rapid progress in
spiritual knowledge. Simple theoretical book knowledge is not sufficient
for a neophyte devotee. Book knowledge is theoretical, whereas the
arcand process is practical. Spiritual knowledge must be developed by a
combination of theoretical and practical knowledge, and that is the
guaranteed way for attainment of spiritual perfection. The training of
devotional service by a neophyte devotee completely depends on the
expertspiritual master who knows how to lead his disciple to make gradual
progress towards the path back home, back to Godhead. One should not
become a pseudo-spiritual master as a matter of husiness to meet one’s
family expenditure, but one must be an expert spiritual master to deliver
the disciple from the clutches of impending death. Srila Visvanatha
Cakravartl Thakur has defined the bona fide qualities of a spiritual master,
and one of the verses in that description reads:
§ricvigraharadhana-nitya-nana-
srngara-tan-mandira-marjanadau
yuktasya bhaktams ca niyuijato’pi

vande guroh sri-caranaravindam.
Sricvigraha is the arca or suitable worshipable form of the Lord, and the
disciple should be engaged in worshiping the Deity regularly by sragara,
by proper decoration and dressing, as also mandira-marjanadau, the matter
of cleansing the temple. The spiritual master teaches the neophyte devotee
all these kindly and personally to help him gradually in the realization of
the transcendental name, quality, form, etc., of the Lord.

Attention engaged in the service of the Lord, especially in dressing and
decorating the temple, accompanied by musical kirtana and spiritual in-
structions from scriptures, can only save the common man from the
hellish cinema attraction and rubbish sex-songs broadcast everywhere by
radios. If one is unable to maintain a temple at home, he should go to
another’s temple where all the above performances are regularly executed.
Visiting the temple of a devotee and looking at the profusely decorated


--- Page 161 ---
Text 23] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 161
forms of the Lord well dressed in a well decorated sanctified temple
naturally infuse the mundane mind with spiritual inspiration. People
should visit holy places like Vrndavana where such temples and worship
of the Deity are specifically maintained. Formerly all rich men like kings
and rich merchants constructed such temples under the direction of expert
devotees of the Lord, like the six Gosvamis, and it is the duly of the
common man to take advantage of these temples and festivals observed in
the holy pilgrimages by following the footprints of great devolees (anu-
vraja). One should not visit all these sanctified pilgrimages and temples
with sightseeing in mind, but one must go to such temples and sanctified
places immortalized by the transcendental pastimes of the Lord and
guided by proper men who know the science. This is called anuwovraja. Anu
means to follow. It is therefore best to follow the instruction of the bona
fide spiritual master, even in visiting temples and the holy places of pil-
grimage. One who does not move in that way is as good as a slanding
tree condemned by the Lord not to move. The moving tendency of the
human being is misused by visiting places for sightsecing. The best pur-
pose of such traveling tendencies could be fulfilled by visiting the holy
places established by great dcaryas and thereby not being misled by the
atheistic propaganda of moneymaking men who have no knowledge of
spiritual matters.
TEXT 23
जीवञ्छवो भागवताडधिरेणु
न जातु मर्त्योऽभिलभेत यस्तु |
श्रीरिष्णुपदा मयुजस्तुरस्याः
श्वसञ्छवो यस्तु न वेद गन्धम्‌ ॥२३।।
[2.111.111 1
na jatu martyo’bhilabheta yas tu
Sri-visnu-padya manu-jas tulasyah
Svasaii chavo yas tu na veda gandham

Jivan—while living; savah—a dead body ; bhagavata-anghri-renum—dust of
the feet of a pure devotee; na—never; j@tu—at any time; martyah—mortal;
abhilabheta— particularly received; yah—a person; tu—but; sri—with opu-
lence; visnu-padyah—of the lotus feet of Visnu; manu-jah—a descendant of


--- Page 162 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
Manu (a man); tulasyah—leaves of the 00182] tree; svasan—while breathing;
Savah—still a dead body; yah—who; tu—but; na veda—never experienced;
gandham—the flavor.
TRANSLATION

The person who has not at any time received the dust of the feet of a
pure devotee of the Lord upon his head certainly is a dead body. And the
person who has never experienced the flavor of the tulasi leaves from the
lotus feet of the Lord is also a dead body, although breathing.

PURPORT

According to Srila Vidvanatha Cakravarti Thakur, the breathing dead
body is a ghost. When a man dies, he is called dead, but when he again
appears in a subtle form not visible to the present vision and yet acts, such
a dead body is called a ghost. Ghosts are always very bad elements, always
creating a fearful situation for others. Similarly, the ghost-like nondevotees
who have no respect for the pure devotees, nor for the Visnu Deity in the
temples, create a fearful situation for the devotees at all times. The Lord
never accepts any offering by such impure ghosts. There is a common
saying that one should first love the dog of the beloved before one shows
any loving sentiments for the beloved. The stage of a pure devotee is
attained by sincerely serving a pure devotee of the Lord. The first con-
dition of devotional service of the Lord is therefore to be a servant of a
pure devotee, and this condition is fulfilled by the statement “reception
of the dust of the lotus feet of a pure devotee who also served another
pure devotee.” That is the way of pure disciplic succession, or devotional
parampara.

Maharaja Rahiigana inquired from the great saint Jadbharata as to how
he attained such a liberated stage of a paramaharisa, and in answer the
great saint replied as follows:

rahitganaitat tapasa na yati na
cejyayd nirvapanad grhad va
na cchandasa naiva jalagni-siryair
vind mahat-pada-rajo 01115610712
“O King Rahiigana, the perfectional stage of devotional service or the
paramaharsa stage of life cannot be attained without being blessed by the


--- Page 163 ---
Text 24] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 163
dust of the feet of great devotees. It is never attained by tapasya (austerity),
the Vedic worshiping process, acceptance of renounced order of life, the
discharge of the duties of houschold life, the chanting of the Vedic hymns,
or the performance of penances in the hot sun, within cold water or be-
fore the blazing fire.”

In other words, Lord SrT Krsna is the property of His pure unconditional
devotees, and as such only the devotees can deliver Krsna to another
devotee; Krsna is never obtainable directly. Lord Caitanya therefore
designated Himself as the “gopi-bhartur dasa-dasa-dasanudasa,” or “‘the
most obedient servant of the servants of the Lord who maintains the gopi
damsels at Vrndavana.” A pure devotee therefore never approaches the
Lord directly, but tries to please the Lord’s servant of servants, and thus
the Lord becomes pleased, and the devotee then only can relish the taste
of the tulasi leaves stuck to His lotus feet. In the Brahma-samhita it is said
that the Lord is never to be found by becoming a great scholar of the
Vedic literatures, but He is very casily approachable through His pure
devotee. In Vrndavana all the pure devotees pray for the mercy of
Srimati Radharani, the pleasure potency of Lord Krsna. Srimati Radharant
is a tender-hearted feminine counterpart of the supreme whole, resembling
the perfectional stage of the worldly feminine nature. Therefore, the
mercy of Radharani is available very readily by the sincere devotees, and
once She recommends such a devotee to Lord Krsna, the Lord at once
accepts the devotee’s admittance in His association. The conclusion is,
therefore, that one should be more serious about seeking the mercy of
the devotee than that of the Lord directly, and by doing so (by the good
will of the devotee) the natural attraction for the service of the Lord will
be revived.

TEXT 24
तदस्मसारं हृदयं দত
यद्‌ गृद्यमागेहैरिनामधेयैः ।
न विक्रियेताथ यदा विकारो
नेत्रे जलं गात्ररुहेषु हर्षः URW
tad a$masarariv hrdayari batedar
yad grhyamanair hari-nama-dheyaih
na vikriyetatha yada vikaro
netre jalam gatra-ruhesu harsah


--- Page 164 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
tat— that;asmasaram—is steel framed; hrdayam—heart; batedam— certain-
ly that; yat—which; grhyamanaih—in spite of chanting; hari-nama—the
holy name of the Lord; dheyaih—by concentration of the mind; na—does
not; vikriyeta—change; atha—thus; yadai—when; vikarah—reaction; netre—
in the eyes; jalam—tears; gatra-ruhesu—at the pores; harsah—eruptions of
ecstasy.
TRANSLATION
Certainly that heart is steel-framed which, in spite of chanting the
holy name of the Lord with concentration, does nol change when ecstasy
takes place and tears fill the eyes and hairs stand on end.
PURPORT

We should note with profit that in the first three chapters of the
Second Canto, a gradual process of development of devotional service
is being presented. In the First Chapter the first step in devotional
service for God consciousness by the process of hearing and chanting has
been stressed, and a gross conception of the Personality of Godhead in His
universal form for the beginners is recommended. By such a gross concep-
tion of God through the material manifestations of His energy, one is
enabled to spiritualize the mind and the senses and gradually concentrate
the mind upon Lord Visnu, the Supreme, who is present as the Supersoul
in every heart and everywhere, in every atom of the material universe. The
system of pafica-updasana, recommending five mental attitudes for the
common man, is also enacted for this purpose, namely gradual develop-
ment, worship of the superior that may be in the form of fire, electricity,
the sun, the mass of living being, Lord Siva and at last, the impersonal
Supersoul, the partial representation of Lord Visnu. They are all nicely
described in the Second Chapter, but in the Third Chapter further develop-
ment is prescribed after one has actually reached the stage of Visnu wor-
ship, or pure devotional service, and the mature stage of Visnu worship is
suggested herein in relation to the change of heart.

The whole process of spiritual culture is aimed at changing the heart of
the living being in the matter of his eternal relation with the Supreme Lord
as subordinate servant, his eternal constitutional position. So with the
progress of devotional service, the reaction of change in the heart is
exhibited by gradual detachment from the sense of material enjoyment by
a false sense of lording it over the world and an increase in the attitude of


--- Page 165 ---
Text 24] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 165
rendering loving service to the Lord. I'idhi-bhak ti, or regulated devotional
service by the limbs of the body (namely the eyes, the ears, the nose,
the hands, the legs, as already explained hereinbefore), is now stressed
herein in relation to the mind, which is the impetus of all activities of the
limbs of the body. It is expected by all means that by discharging regulated
devotional service one must manifest the change of heart. If there is no
such change, the heart must be considered as steel-framed, for it is not
melted even when there is chanting of the holy name of the Lord. We must
always remember that hearing and chanting are the basic principles of
discharging devotional duties, and if they are properly performed there
will follow the reactional ecstasy with signs of Lears in the eyes and
standing of the hairs on the body. These are natural consequences and are
the preliminary symptoms of bhava stage, which occurs before one
reaches the perfectional stage of prema, love of Godhead.

If the reaction does nol take place, even after continuous hearing and
chanting of the holy name of the Lord, it may be considered to be due to
offenses only. That is the opinion of the Sandharbha. In the beginning of
chanting of the holy name of the Lord, if the devotee has not been very
careful about evading the ten kinds of offenses at the feet of the holy
name, certainly the reaction of feelings of separation will not be visible by
tears in the eyes and standing of the hair on end.

The bhava stage is manifested by eight transcendental symptoms, namely
stuntedncss, perspiration, standing of hairs on लात्‌, failing in voice,
trembling, palcness of the body, tears in the eyes and finally trance. The
Nectar of Devotion, a summary study of Srila Rapa Gosvam1’s Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu, explains those symptoms and vividly describes other
transcendental developments, both in steady and accelerating manifesta-
tions.

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakur has very critically discussed all these
bhava displays in connection with some unscrupulous neophyte’s imitating
the above symptoms for cheap appreciation. Not only Visvanatha
Cakravarti but also Srila Ripa Gosvami treated them very critically.
Sometimes all the above eight symptoms of ecstasy are imitated by the
mundane devotees (prakrta sahajiyas), but the pseudo symptoms are at
once detected when one sees the pseudo devotee addicted to so many
forbidden things. A person addicted to smoking, drinking or illegitimate
sex with women, even though decorated with the signs of a devotee, cannot
have all the above-mentioned ecstatic symptoms. But it is seen that some-
times they are willfully imitated, and for this reason Srila Viévanatha
CakravartT accuses the imitators of being stone-hearted men. They are even


--- Page 166 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 3
affected sometimes by the reflection of such transcendental symptoms,
yet if they still do not give up the forbidden habits, then they are hopeless
cases for transcendental realization.

When Lord Caitanya met Srila Ramananda Raya of Kavaur on the bank
of Godavari, the Lord developed all these symptoms, but because of the
presence of some nondevotee brahmanas who were attendants of the Raya,
the Lord surpressed these symptoms. So sometimes they are not visible
even in the body of the first-class devotee for certain circumstantial
reasons. Therefore real steady bhava is definitely displayed in the matter
of cessation of material desires (ksanti), utilization of every moment in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord (avyartha-kalatvam), eager-
ness for glorifying the Lord constantly (nama-gane sada ruci), attraction
for living in the land of the Lord (pritis tad-vasati sthale), complete de-
tachment from material happiness (virakti), and pridelessness (manasin-
yata). One who has developed all these transcendental qualities is really
possessed of the bhava stage, as distinguished from the stone-hearted
imitator or mundane devotee.

The whole process can be summarized as follows: the advanced devotee
who chants the holy name of the Lord in a perfectly offenscless manner
and is friendly to everyone can actually relish the transcendental taste of
glorifying the Lord. And the result of such realization is reflected in the
cessation of all material desires, ctc., as mentioned above. The neophytes,
due to their being in the lower stage of devotional service, are invariably
envious, so much so that they invent their own ways and means of devo-
tional regulations without following the dcaryas. As such, even if they
make a show of constantly chanting the holy name of the Lord, they
cannot relish the transcendental taste of the holy name. Therefore, the
show of tears in the eyes, trembling, perspiration or unconsciousness, etc.,
are all condemned. They can, however, get into touch with a pure devotee
of the Lord and rectify their bad habits; otherwise they shall continue to
be stone-hearted and unfit for any treatment. A complete progressive
march on the return path home, back to Godhead, will depend on the
instructions of the revealed scriptures directed by a realized devotee.

TEXT 25
ATE मनोऽचुकरलं
प्रमाषसे भागवतप्रधानः |


--- Page 167 ---
Text 25] Pure Devotional Service: The Change in Heart 167
2 pn
WR  वेयासकिरात्मविद्या-
fam चृपतिं साधु पृष्टः ॥२५॥
athabhidhehy anga mano nukalari
prabhasase bhagavata-pradhanah
yad aha vaiyasakir atma-vidya-
visarado nrpatim sadhu prstah

atha—therefore; abhidhehi—please explain; ariga—O Sita Gosvami;
manah—mind; anukilam—favorable to our mentality; prabhasase—you do
speak; bhagavata—the great devotee; pradhanah—the chief; yad aha—what
he spoke ;vaiydsakih—Sukadeva Gosvami;atma-vidya—transcendentalknow-
ledge; visaradah—expert; nrpatim—unto the king; sadhu—very good;
prstah—being asked.

TRANSLATION
O Sita Gosvami, your words are pleasing to our minds. Please therefore
explain this to us as it was spoken by the great devotee Sukadeva Gosvami,
who is very expert in transcendental knowledge, and who spoke to
Maharaja Pariksit upon being asked.
PURPORT

Knowledge explained by the previous dcarya like Sukadeva Gosvami
and followed by the next like Sita Gosvami is always powerful transcen-
dental knowledge, and it is therefore penetrating and useful to all
submissive students.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Third
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘Pure Devotional Service:
The Change in Heart.”


--- Page 168 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
The Process of Creation
TEXT 1
सूत उवाच
वैयासकेरिति वचस्तच्चनिश्चयमात्मनः |
उपधाय मतिं कृष्णे ओत्तरेयः सतीं व्यधात्‌ ॥ १ ॥
৬00৫ uvaca
vaiyasaker iti vacas
tattva-niscayam atmanah
upadharya matirm krsne
auttareyah satim vyadhat
sutah uvaca—Suta Gosvami said; vaiyasakeh—of Sukadeva Gosvami; iti—
thus; vacah—speeches; tattva-niscayam—that which verifies the truth;
atmanah—in the self; upadharya—just having realized; matim—concentra-
tion of the mind; krspe—unto Lord Krsna; auttareyah—the son of Uttara;
satim—chaste; vyadhat—applied.
TRANSLATION
Sita Gosvami said: Maharaja Pariksit, the son of Uttara, after hearing
the speeches of Sukadeva Gosvami, which were all about the truth of the
self, applied his concentration faithfully upon Lord Krsna.
PURPORT
The word satim is very significant. This means existing and chaste. And
both imports are perfectly applicable in the case of Maharaja Pariksit. The
whole Vedic adventure is to draw one’s attention entirely unto the lotus
feet of Lord Krsna without any diversion, as it is instructed in the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 15.15). Fortunately Maharaja Pariksit had already been
attracted to the Lord from the very beginning of his body, in the womb
of his mother. In the womb of his mother, he was struck by the brahmastra
169


--- Page 169 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
atomic bomb released by Asvatthama, but by the grace of the Lord he was
saved from being burnt by the fiery weapon, and since then the King
continually concentrated his mind upon Lord Krsna, which made him
perfectly chaste in devotional service. So by natural sequence he was a
chaste devotee of the Lord, and when he further heard from Srila Sukadeva
Gosvami that one should worship the Lord only and no one else, even
though full of all desires or desireless, his natural affection for Krsna was
strengthened. We have already discussed these topics in this connection.

To become a pure devotee of Lord Krsna, two things are very much
essential, namely having a chance of being born in the family of a devotee
and having the blessings of a bona fide spiritual master. By the grace
of Lord Krsna, Pariksit Maharaja had both opportunities. He was born
in a family of devotees like the Pandavas, and just to continue the
dynasty of the Pandavas, Maharaja Pariksit was specifically saved by the
Lord just to show special favor to the Pandavas, and later on, by the
arrangement of the Lord, Maharaja Pariksit was cursed by the boy of a
brahmana and was able to get the association of a spiritual master like
Sukadeva Gosvami. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that a fortunate
person, by the mercy of the spiritual master and Lord Krsna, achieves the
path of devotional service. This was perfectly applicable in the case of
Maharaja Pariksit. By way of being born in the family of devotees, he
automatically came in touch with Krsna, and after being so contacted he
constantly remembered Him. Consequently Lord Krsna gave the King a
further chance of development in devotional service by introducing him
to Sukadeva Gosvami, a stalwart devotee of the Lord with perfect know-
ledge in self-realization. And by hearing from a bona fide spiritual master,
he was perfectly able to concentrate his chaste mind further upon Lord
Krsna, as a matter of course.

TEXT 2
आत्पजायाुतागारपदशुद्रविणवन्पुषु |
राज्ये चाविकले नित्यं Rat ममतां जहौ || २॥
atma-jaya-sutagara-
pasu-dravina-bandhusu
rajye cavikale nityarm
viridharm mamatam jahau

atma—body; jaya—wife; suta—son; agara—palace; pasu—horses and ele-

phants; dravipa—treasury house; bandhusu—unto friends and relatives;


--- Page 170 ---
Text 2] The Process of Creation 151
rajye—in the kingdom; ca—also; avikale—without being disturbed; nityam—
constant; viridham— deep-rooted ; mamatam— affinity; jahau—gave up.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit, as a result of his wholehearted attraction for Lord
Krsna, was able to give up all deep-rooted affection for his personal body,
wife, children, palace, animals, horses and elephants, treasury house,
friends and relatives, and his undisputed kingdom.
PURPORT

To become liberated means to become free from dehatma-buddhi,
the illusory attachment for personal bodily coverings and everything
connected with the body, namely the wife, children and all other entangle-
ments. One selects a wife for bodily comforts, and the result is children.
For wife and children one requires a dwelling place, and as such the
residential house is also necessary. The animals like horses, clephants,
cows, dogs, etc., are all household animals, and a householder has to keep
them as household paraphernalia. In the modern civilization the horses
and elephants have been replaced by cars and conveyances with con-
siderable horsepower. To maintain all the household affairs, one has to
increase the bank balance and be careful about the treasury house, and in
order to display the opulence of material assets, one has to keep good
relations with friends and relatives, as well as become very careful about
maintaining the status quo. This is called material civilization of material
attachment. Devotion for Lord Krsna means negation of all material
attachments as detailed above. By the grace of Lord Krsna, Maharaja
Pariksit was awarded all material amenities and an indisputed kingdom to
enjoy the undisturbed position of king, but by the grace of the Lord he
was able to give up all connection with material attachment. That is the
position of a pure devotee. Maharaja Pariksit, due to his natural affection
for Lord Krsna as a devotee of the Lord, was always executing his royal
duties on behalf of the Lord, and as a responsible king of the world he was
always careful to see that the influence of Kali would not enter his king-
dom. A devotee of the Lord never thinks of his household paraphernalia as
his own, but surrenders everything for the service of the Lord. Thereby
living entities under a devotee’s care get the opportunity for God realiza-
tion by the management of a devotee master.

Attachment for household paraphernalia and for Lord Krsna go poorly
together. One attachment is the path of darkness, and the other attach-
ment is the path of light. Where there is light, there is no darkness, and


--- Page 171 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
where there is darkness, there is no light. But an expert devotee can turn
everything to the path of light by service attitude of the Lord, and the best
example here is the Pandavas. Maharaja Yudhisthira and householders
like him can turn everything into light by dovetailing the so-called material
assets in the service of the Lord, but one who is not trained up or is unable
to turn everything to the service of the Lord (nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe)
must give up all material connection before he can be fit to hear and chant
the glories of the Lord, or in other words, one who has seriously heard
Srimad-Bhagavatam for one day even, like Mahardja Pariksit, from a fit
personality like Sukadeva Gosvami, may be able to lose all affinity for
material things. There is no utility simply in imitating Maharaja Pariksit
and hearing Bhagavatam from professional men, even for seven hundred
years. To lake Srimad-Bhagavatam as a means of maintaining family
expenditure is the grossest type of namaparadha offense at the feet of the
Lord (sarva-subha-kriya-simyam api pramadah).
TEXTS 3-4
पप्रच्छ चेममेवाथं यन्मां पच्छथ सत्तमाः ।
कृष्णानुमावश्रवणे श्रदधानो महामनाः ॥ ३ ॥
+ ~ . A .
dat विज्ञाय संन्यस्य कर्म त्रैवशिकं च यत्‌ ।
TEE भगवनि आत्मभावं ददं गनः ॥ ४ ॥
papraccha cemam evarthar
yan mar prcchatha sattamah
krsnanubhava-sravane
sraddadhano maha-manah
saristham vijiiaya sannyasya
karma trai-vargikam ca yat
vasudeve bhagavati
atma-bhavam drdhar gatah
papraccha—asked; ca—also; imam—this; eva—exactly like; artham—
purpose; yat—that; mam—unto me; prcchatha—you are asking; sattamah—
O great sages; krsna-anubhava—rapt in the thought of Krsna; sravane—in
hearing; sraddadhanah—full of faith; maha-manah—great soul; samstham—


--- Page 172 ---
Texts 3-4] The Process of Creation 173
death; vijiiaya—being informed; sannyasya—renouncing; karma—fruitive
activities;  trai-vargikam—three principles of religion, ০০০01011110
development and sense gratification; ca—also; yat—what it may be;
vasudeve—unto Lord Krsna; bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead;
atma-bhavam—attraction of love; drdham—firmly fixed; gatah—achieved.
TRANSLATION
O great sages, the great soul Maharaja Pariksit, constantly rapt in the
thought of Lord Krsna, knowing well of his imminent death, renounced
all sorts of fruitive activities, namely acts of religion, economic
development and sense gratification, and thus fixed himself firmly in his
natural love for Krsna and asked exactly all these questions, as you are
asking me.
PURPORT
The three activities of religion, economic development and sense
gratification are generally attractive for conditioned souls struggling for
existence in the material world. Such regulated activities prescribed in the
Vedas are called the karma-kandiya conception of life, and householders
are generally recommended to follow the rules just to enjoy material
prosperity both in this life and in the next. Most people are attracted by
such activities. Even in the activities of their modern godless civilization,
people are more concerned with economic development and sense gratifi-
cation without any religious sentiments. As a great emperor of the world,
Maharaja Parlksit had to observe such regulations of the Vedic karma-
kandiya section, but by the slight association with Sukadeva Gosvami he
could perfectly understand that Lord Krsna, the Absolute Personality of
Godhead (Vasudeva), for whom he had a natural love since his birth, is
everything, and thus he fixed his mind firmly upon Him, renouncing all
modes of Vedic karma-kandiya activities. This perfectional stage is attained
by ajiiani after many, many births. The jiianis, or the empiric philosophers
endeavoring for liberation, are thousands of times better than the fruitive
workers, and out of hundreds of thousands of such janis one is liberated
factually. And out of hundreds of thousands of such liberated persons,
even one person is rarely found who can firmly fix his mind unto the lotus
feet of Lord Sri Krsna, as it is declared by the Lord Himself in the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.19). Maharaja Pariksit is specially qualified with the


--- Page 173 ---
174 Srimad-Bhiagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
word mahamanah, which puts him on an equal level with the mahatmas
described in the Bhagavad-gita. In the later age also there were many
mahatmas of this type, and they also gave up all karma-kandiya concep-
tions of life, solely and wholly depending on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Krsna. Lord Caitanya, who is Lord Krsna Himself, taught us in
His Siksastakam:

aslisya va pada-ratarh pinagtu mam ৫0018011071 marma-hatam karotu va

yatha tathd va vidadhdatu lampato mat-prane-nathas tu sa eva naparah.
“Lord Krsna, who is the lover of many devotees (women), may embrace
this fully surrendered maidservant or may trample me with His feet, or He
may render me brokenhearted by not being present before me for a long
duration of time, still He is nothing less than the Absolute Lord of my
heart.”

Srila Ripa Gosvami spoke thus:

viracaya mayi dandam dina-bandho dayar va
gatir tha na bhavattah kacid anya mamasti

nipatatu $ata-koti nirbharam va navambhah
tad api kila payodah stiuyate catakena.

“O Lord of the poor, do what you like with me, give me either mercy or
punishment, but in this world I have none to look after except Your Lord-
ship. The cataka bird always prays for the cloud, regardless of whether it
showers. rains. or throws a thunderbolt.”

Srila Madhavendra Puri, the grand-spiritual master of Lord Caitanya,
took leave of all karma-kandiya obligations in the following words:

sandhyad-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoh snana tubhyarih namo
bho devah pitaras ca tarpapa-vidhau naham ksamah ksamyatam
yatra kvapi nisadya yadava-kulottamasya kamsa-dvisah
smdrari smaram aghari harami tad alam manye kim anyena me.
“O my evening prayer, all good unto you. O my morning bath, 1 bid
you good-bye. 0 demigods and forefathers, please excuse me. I am unable
to perform any more offering for your pleasures. Now I have decided to
free myself from all reactions of sins simply by remembering anywhere
and everywhere the great descendant of Yadu and the great enemy of
Kamsa [Lord Krsna]. think this is sufficient for me. So what is the use of
further endeavors?”


--- Page 174 ---
Texts 3-4] The Process of Creation 175

Srila Madhavendra Puri said further:

mugdharih mam nigadantu niti-nipuna bhrantarm muhur vaidikah
77101100112 bandhava-saiicaya jada-dhiyarh muktadarah sodarah
unmattarn dhanino viveka-caturah kamam maha-dambhikam
moktum na ksamate mandg api mano govinda-pada-sprham.
“Let the sharp moralist accuse me of being illusioned; I do nol mind 11.
Experts in Vedic activities may slander me as being misled, friends and
relatives may call me frustrated, my brothers may call me a fool, the
wealthy mammoniles may point me out as mad, and the learned philoso-
phers may assert that I am much too proud; still my mind does not budge
an inch from the determination of serving the lotus feel of Govinda,
though I be unable to do it.”
And also Prahlada Maharaja said:
dharmartha-kama iti yo’bhihitas trivarga
iksa trayi naya-damau vividha ca varta.
manye tad etad akhilarh nigamasya satyam
svatmarpanarm svasuhrdah paramasya pumsah.
“Religion, economic development and sense gratification are celebrated
as three means of attaining the path of salvation. Of these, iksa trayi
especially, i.e., knowledge of the self, knowledge of fruitive acts and
logic and also politics and economics, are different means of livelihood. All
these are different subjects of Vedic education, and therefore 1 consider
them temporary engagements. On the other hand, surrendering unto the
Supreme Lord Visnu is a factual gain in life, and I consider it the ultimate
truth.”

The whole matter is concluded in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 2.41) as
vyavasayatmika buddhih, or the absolute path of perfection. Sri Baladeva
Vidyabhiisana, a great Vaisnava scholar, defines this as bhagavad-arcana-
rapaika-niskama-karmabhir visuddha-cittah, accepting transcendentalloving
service of the Lord as the prime duty, free from fruitive reaction.

So Maharaja Pariksit was perfectly right when he accepted firmly the
lotus feet of Lord Krsna, renouncing all karma-kandiya conceptions of
life.


--- Page 175 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
TEXT 5
राजोवाच
+ - 6
समीचीनं वचो ब्रह्न सवज्ञसख तवानघ |
तमो विज्चीयेते मद्यं हरेः कथयतः कथाम्‌ ॥ ५॥
111.
samicinam vaco brahman
sarva-jiiasya tavanagha
tamo visiryate mahyam
hareh kathayatah katham
raja uvace—the King said; samicinam—perfectly right; vacah—speeches;
brahman—O learned brahmane; sarva-jiiasya—one who knows all; tava—
your; anagha—without any contamination; tamah—darkness of ignorance;
visiryate—gradually disappearing; mahyam—unto me; hareh—of the Lord;
kathayatah—as you are speaking; katham—topics.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit said: O learned brahmana, you know everything
because you are without material contamination. Therefore whatever you
have spoken to me appears to be perfectly right. Your speeches are
gradually destroying the darkness of my ignorance, for you are narrating
the topics of the Lord.
PURPORT
The practical experience of Maharaja Pariksit is disclosed herein, re-
vealing that transcendental topics of the Lord act like injections when they
are received by the sincere devotee from a person who is perfectly uncon-
taminated by material tinges. In other words, reception of the messages of
Srimad-Bhagavatam from professional men, heard by a karma-kandiya
audience, never acts miraculously as it is stated here. Devotional hearing
of the messages of the Lord is not like hearing ordinary topics; therefore
the action will be felt by the sincere hearer by experience of the gradual
disappearance of ignorance.
yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau.
tasyaite kathita hy arthah prakasante mahatmanah
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.23)


--- Page 176 ---
Text 6] The Process of Creation 177
When a hungry man is given food to eat, he feels satiation of hunger and
the pleasure of dining simultaneously. Thus he does not have to ask
whether he has actually been fed or not. The crucial test of hearing Srimad-
Bhagavatam is that one should get positive enlightenment by such an act.
TEXT 6
भूय एव विवित्सामि भगवानात्ममायया |
यथेदं सृजते विष्वं दुरविभाव्यमधीश्वरैः ।। ६ ॥
bhitya eva vivitsami
bhagavan atma-mayaya
yathedan srjate visvam
durvibhavyam adhisvaraih
bhiiyah—again; eva—also; vivitsami—I wish to learn; bhagavan—the Per-
sonality of Godhead; atma—personal; mayaya—by the energies; yatha—as;
idam—this phenomenal world; srjate—does create; visSvam—universe; durvi-
bhavyam—inconceivable; adhisvaraih—by the great demigods.
TRANSLATION
I beg to know from you how the Personality of Godhead, by His
personal energies, creates these phenomenal universes as they are, which
are inconceivable even by the great demigods.
PURPORT
In every inquisitive mind the important question of the creation of the
phenomenal world arises, and therefore for a personality like Maharaja
Pariksit, who was to know all activities of the Lord from his spiritual
master, such inquiry is not uncommon. For every unknown thing, we have
to learn and inquire from a learned personality. The question of creation
is also one of such inquiries to be made from the right person. The
spiritual master, therefore, must be one who is sarva-jfia, as stated herein-
before in connection with Sukadeva Gosvami. Thus all inquiries on God
which are unknown to the disciple may be made from the qualified


--- Page 177 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
spiritual master, and here the practical example is set by Maharaja
Pariksit. It was, however, already known to Maharaja Pariksit that every-
thing that we sec is born out of the energy of the Lord, as we have all
learnt in the very beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam (janmady asya yatah).
So Maharaja Pariksit wanted to know the process of creation. The origin of
creation was known to him; otherwise he would not have inquired how the
Personality of Godhead, by His different energies, creates this phenomenal
world. The common man also knows that the creation is made by some
creator and is not created automatically. We have no experience in the
practical world that a thing is created automatically. Foolish people say
that the creative energy is independent and acts automatically, as electrical
energy works. But the intelligent man knows that even the electrical energy
is generated by an expert engineer in the localized powerhouse, and thus
the energy is distributed everywhere under the resident engineer’s super-
vision. The Lord’s supervision in connection with creation is mentioned
even in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.10), and it is clearly said there that
material energy is a manifestation of one of many such energies of the
Supreme (parasya saktir vividhaiva sricyate). An inexperienced boy may
be struck with wonder by secing the impersonal actions of electronics or
many other wonderful things conducted by electrical energy, but an
experienced man knows that there is a living man behind the action, who
creates such energy. Similarly the so-called scholars and philosophers of the
world may, by mental speculation, present so many Utopian theories
about the impersonal creation of the universe, but an intelligent devotee
of the Lord, by studying the Bhagavad-gita, can know that behind the
creation is the hand of the Supreme Lord, just as in the generating elec-
trical powerhouse there is the resident engineer. The research scholar finds
out the cause and the effect of everything, and the research scholars as
great as Brahma, Siva, Indra and many other demigods are sometimes
bewildered by seeing the wonderful creative energy of the Lord, so what
to speak of the tiny mundane scholars dealing in petty things. As there
are differences in the living conditions of different planets of the universe,
and as one planet is superior to others, similarly the brains of the living
entities in those respective planets are also of different categorical values.
As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gitd, one can compare the long duration of
life of the inhabitants of Brahma’s planet, which is inconceivable to the
inhabitants of this planet earth, to the categorical value of the brain of
Brahmaji, also inconceivable by any great scientist of this planet. And with
such high brain power, even Brahmaji has described in his great Samhita
(Brahma-sariihita) as follows:


--- Page 178 ---
Text 6] The Process of Creation 179
iSvarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
(Bs. 5.1)

Brahmaji admits Lord Krsna to be the supreme cause of all causes. But
persons with tiny brains within this petty planet earth think of the Lord
as one of them. Thus when the Lord says in the Bhagavad-gita that He
(Lord Krsna) is all in all, the speculative philosophers and the mundane
wranglers deride Him, and the Lord regretfully says:

avajananti mam madha
77101110507) tanum asritam
param bhavam ajananto
mama bhiita-mahesvaram.
(Bg. 9.11)
Brahma and Siva (and what to speak of other demigods) are bhiitas or
created powerful demigods that manage universal affairs, much like min-
isters who are appointed by the king. The ministers may be iSvaras or
controllers, but the Supreme Lord is mahesvara or the creator of the
controllers. Persons with a poor fund of knowledge do not know this, and
therefore they have the audacity to deride Him because He comes before
us by His causeless mercy occasionally as a human being. The Lord is not
like the human being. He is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, or the Absolute
Personality of Godhead, and there is no difference between His body and
His soul. He is both the power and the powerful.

Maharaja Pariksit did not ask his spiritual master, Sukadeva Gosvami,
to narrate Lord Krsna’s pastimes in Vrndavana, but he wanted to hear first
about the creation of the Lord. Sukadeva Gosvami did not say that the
King should hear about the direct transcendental pastimes of the Lord.
The time was very short, and naturally Sukadeva Gosvami could have gone
directly to the Tenth Canto to make a shortcut of the whole thing, as it is
generally done by the professional reciters. But neither the King nor the
great speaker of Srimad-Bhagavatam jumped up like the organizers of
Bhagavatam, but both of them proceeded systematically, so that both
future readers and hearers may take lessons from the example of the
procedure of reciting Srimad-Bhagavatam. Those who are in control of the
external energy of the Lord, or in other words those who are in the material


--- Page 179 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
world, must first of all know how the external energy of the Lord is
working under the direction of the Supreme Personality, and afterwards
one may ry to enter into the activities of His internal energy. The
mundaners are mostly worshipers of Durga Devi, the external energy of
Krsna, but they do not know that Durga Devi is but the shadow energy
of the Lord. Behind her astonishing display of material workings, the
direction of the Lord is there, as it is confirmed in the Gita (Bg. 9.10).
The Brahma-sarmhita affirms that Durga-Sakti is working by the direction
of Govinda, and without His sanction the powerful Durga-sakti cannot
move even a blade of grass. Therefore the neophyte devotee, instead of
jumping at once on the platform of transcendental pastimes presented by
the internal energy of the Lord, may know how great the Supreme Lord is
by inquiring about the process of His creative energy. In the Caitanya-
caritamrta also, descriptions of the creative energy and the Lord’s hand
in it are explained, and the author of Caitanya-caritamrta has warned the
neophyte devotees to be seriously on guard against the pitfall of neglecting
the knowledge about Krsna as to how great Ie is. Only when one knows
Lord Krsna’s greatness can one firmly put one’s unflinching faithin Him;
otherwise, like the common man, Lord Krsna will be mistaken as one of
the many demigods, or a historical personality, or a myth only, even by
the great leaders of men. The transcendental pastimes of the Lord in
Vrndavana, or even at Dvaraka, are relishable by persons who have already
qualified themselves in advanced spiritual techniques, and the common
man may be able to attain to such a plane by the gradual process of service
and inquiries, as we shall see in the behavior of Maharaja Pariksit.
TEXT 7

यथा गोपायति farm संयच्छते पुनः ।

यां यां शक्तिमुपाभित्य पुरुशक्तिः परः पुमान्‌ |

आत्मानं कीडयन्‌ क्रीडन्‌ करोति विकरोति TN ७॥

yatha gopayati vibhur
yatha sariyacchate punah
yar yam Saktim upasritya
puru-saktih parah puman


--- Page 180 ---
Text 7] The Process of Creation 181
atmanarn kridayan kridan
karoti vikaroti ca

yathd—as; gopdyati—maintains; vibhuh—the great; yatha—as; sarmya-
cchate—winds up; punah—again; yam yam—as; saktim—energies;upasritya—
by employing; puru-$aktih—the all-powerful; parah—the Supreme; puman—
Personality of Godhead; atmanam—plenary expansion; kridayan—having
engaged them; kridan—as also personally being engaged; karoti—do them;
vikaroti—and causes to be done; ca—and.

TRANSLATION
Kindly describe how the Supreme Lord, who is all-powerful, engages
His different energies and different expansions in maintaining and again
winding up the phenomenal world in the sporting spirit of a player.
PURPORT

In the Kathopanisad the Supreme Lord is described as the chief eternal
being amongst all other eternal individual beings (nityo nityanarm cetanas
cetananam) and the one Supreme Lord who maintains innumerable other
individual living beings (eko bahinarm yo vidadhdati kaman). So all living
entities, both in conditioned state and in liberated state, are maintained by
the Almighty Supreme Lord. Such maintenances arc effected by the Lord
through His different expansions of Self and three principal energies,
namely the internal, external and marginal energies. The living entities are
His marginal energies, and some of them, in the confidence of the Lord,
are entrusted with the work of creation also, as are Brahma, Marici, etc.,
and the acts of creation are inspired by the Lord unto them (tene brahma
hrda). The external energy (maya) is also impregnated with the jivas or
conditioned souls. The unconditioned marginal potency acts in the spiritual
kingdom, and the Lord, by His different plenary expansions, maintains
them in different transcendental relations displayed in the spiritual sky.
So the one Supreme Personality of Godhead manifests Himself in many
(bahu Syama), and thus all diversities are in Him and He is in all diversities,
although He is nevertheless different from all of them. That is the incon-
ceivable mystic power of the Lord, and as such everything is simultaneously
one and different from Him by His inconceivable potencies (acintya-
bhedabheda-tattva).


--- Page 181 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
TEXT 8
नूनं भगवतो ब्रह्मन्‌ हरेरद्रतकर्मणः ।
दुर्विभाव्यमिवामाति कविभिश्चापि चेष्टितम्‌ ।॥ ८ ॥
nitnari bhagavato brahman
harer adbhuta-karmanah
durvibhavyam ivabhati
kavibhis capi cestitam
ninam—still insufficient; bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead;
brahman—O learned brahmana; hareh—of the Lord; adbhuta—wonderful;
karmanah—one who acts; durvibhavyam—inconceivable; iva—like that;
abhati—appears; kavibhih—even by the highly learned; ca—also; api—in
spite of; cestitam—being endeavored for.
TRANSLATION
O learned brahmana, the transcendental activities of the Lord are
all wonderful, and they appear to be inconceivable because even great
endeavors by many learned scholars have still proved to be insufficient.
PURPORT
The acts of the Supreme Lord, in the creation of just this one universe,
appear to be inconceivably wonderful. And there are innumerable universes,
and all of them aggregated together are known as the created material
world. And this part of His creation is only a fractional portion of the
complete creation. The material world stands as a part only (ekamsena
sthito jagat). Supposing that the material world is a display of one part of
His energy, the remaining three parts consist of the Vaikuntha-jagat or
spiritual world described in the Bhagavad-gita as mad-dhama or sanatana-
dhama, or the eternal world. We have marked in the previous verse that He
creates and again winds up the creation. This action is applicable in the
material world only because the other greater part of His creation, namely
the Vaikuntha world, is neither created nor annihilated; otherwise the
Vaikuntha-dhama would not have been called eternal. The Lord exists
with dhama; His eternal name, quality, pastimes, entourage and personality
are all a display of His different energies and expansions. The Lord is


--- Page 182 ---
Text 8] The Process of Creation 183
called anadi, or having no creator, and adi, or the origin of all. We think
in our own imperfect way that the Lord is also created, but the Vedanta
informs us that He is not created. Rather, everything else is created by
Him (narayanah paro’vyaktat). Therefore for the common man these are
all very wonderful matters for consideration. Even for the great scholars
they are inconceivable, and thus such scholars present theories contra-
dictory to one another. Even for the insignificant part of His creation, this
particular universe, they have no complete information as to how far this
limited space is extended, or how many stars and planets are there, or the
different conditions of those innumerable planets. Modern scientists have
insufficient knowledge of all this. Some of them assert that there are
100,000,000 planets scattered all over space. In a news release from
Moscow dated 21/2/60, the following piece of knowledge was relayed:

“Russia’s well-known professor of astronomy Boris Vorontsov-Velianino
said that there must be an infinite number of planets in the universe
inhabited by beings endowed with reason.

“It could be that life similar to that on carth flourishes on such planets.

“Doctor of Chemistry Nikolat Zhirov, covering the problem of atmos-
phere on other planets, pointed out that the organism of a Martian, for
instance, could very well adapt itself (0 normal existence with a low body
temperature.

“He said that he felt that the gaseous composition of Martian atmosphere
was quite suitable to sustain life of beings which have become adapted to
it.”

This adaptibility of an organism to different varieties of planets is
described in the Brahma-samhita as vibhati-bhinnam, i.e., each and every
one of the innumerable planets within the universe is endowed with a
particular type of atmosphere, and the living beings there are more perfectly
advanced in science and psycholegy because of a better atmosphere.
Vibhiti means specific powers, and bhinnam means variegated. Scientists
who are attempting to explore outer space and are trying to reach other
planets by mechanical arrangements must know for certain that organisms
adapted to the atmosphere of earth cannot exist in the atmospheres of
other planets (Easy Journey to Other Planets). One has to prepare himself,
therefore, to be transferred to a different planet after being relieved of the
present body, as it is said in the Bhagavad-gita, yanti deva-vrata devan pitin
yanti pitr-vratah bhiitani yanti bhitejya yanti mad-yajino 01 mam: “Those
who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who
worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings, and those
who worship Me will live with Me.” (Bg. 9.25)


--- Page 183 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
Maharaja Pariksit’s statement regarding the working of the creative
energy of the Lord discloses that he knew everything of the process of
creation. Why then did he ask Sukadeva Gosvami for such information?
Maharaja Pariksit, being a great emperor, a descendant of the Pandavas and
a great devotee of Lord Krsna, was quite able to know considerably about
the creation of the world, but that much knowledge was not sufficient. He
said therefore that even greatly learned scholars fail to know about that,
even after great effort. The Lord is unlimited, and His activities are also
unfathomed. Any living being, up to the standard of Brahmaji, the highest
perfect living being within the universe, with a limited source of knowledge
and with imperfect senses can never imagine knowing about the unlimited.
We can know something of the unlimited when it is explained by the
unlimited, as it has been done by the Lord Himself in the unique statements
of the Bhagavad-gita, and it can also be known to some extent from
realized souls like Sukadeva Gosvami, who learned it from Vyasadeva, a
disciple of Narada, and thus the perfect knowledge can descend by the
chain of disciplic succession only, and not by any form of experimental
knowledge, old or modern.
TEXT 9
यथा गुणांस्तु प्रकृतेयुगपत्‌ क्रमोऽपि वा ।
बिभि भूरिशस्त्वेकः कुर्वन्‌ कमणि जन्मभिः। ९॥
yatha gunams tu prakrter
yugapat kramaso’pi va
bibharti bhurisas tv ekah
kurvan karmani janmabhih
yatha—as they are; gunan—the modes of; tu—but; prakrteh—of the
material energy; yugapat—simultaneously; kramasah—gradually; api—also;
va—either; bibharti—maintains; bharisah—many forms; tu—but; ekah—the
supreme one; kurvan—acting; karmani—activities; janmabhih—Dby incarna-
tions.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one, whether He alone acts
with the modes of material nature, or simultaneously expands in many
forms, or expands consecutively to direct the modes of nature.


--- Page 184 ---
Text 10] The Process of Creation 185
TEXT 10
ny
िभिकित्सितमेतन्मे seg भगवान्‌ यथा |
शाब्द ब्रह्मणि निष्णातः परस्मिंश्च मयान्खट्‌ ॥१०॥
vicikitsitam etan me
bravitu bhagavan yatha
৪৫006 brahmani nispatah
parasmims ca bhavan khalu
vicikitsitam—doubtful inquiry; etat—this; me—of me; bravitu—just clear
up; bhagavan—powerful like the Lord; yatha—as much as; sabde—sound
transcendental; brahmani— Vedic literature; nispatah— fully realized; par-
asmin—in transcendence; ca—also; bhavan—your good self; khalu—as a
matter of fact.
TRANSLATION
Kindly clear up all these doubtful inquiries, because you are not only
vastly learned in the Vedic literatures and self-realized in transcendence,
but you are also a great devotee of the Lord, and therefore you are as good
as the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT

In the Brahma-samhita it is said that the Supreme Absolute Truth,
Govinda, the Personality of Godhead, although one without a second, is
infallibly expanded by innumerable forms nondifferent from one another,
and although He is the original person, He is still ever young with perma-
nent youthful energy. He is very difficult to be known simply by learning
the transcendental science of the 16005, but He is very easily realized by
His pure devotees.

The expansion of different forms of the Lord, as from Krsna to Baladeva
to Sankarsana, from Sankarsana to Vasudeva, from Vasudeva to Aniruddha,
from Aniruddha to Pradyumna and then again to second Sankarsana and
from Him to the Narayana-Purusavataras, and innumerable other forms,
which are compared to the constant flowing of the uncountable waves of
ariver, are all one and the same. They are like lamps of equal power which
kindle from one lamp to another. That is the transcendental potency of the


--- Page 185 ---
186 Srimad-Bhiagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
Lord. The Vedas say that He is so complete that even though the whole
complete identity is emanated from Him, He still remains the same
complete whole (pirnasya piarmam adaya pirnam evavasisyate). As such,
there is no validity in a material conception of the Lord by the mental
speculators. Thus He remains always a mystery for the mundane scholar,
even if he is vastly learned in the Vedic literatures (vedesu durlabham
adurlabham atma-bhaktau). Therefore, the Lord isbeyond the limit of con-
ception for mundane learned scholars, philosophers or scientists. He is
easily understandable by the pure devotee because the Lord declares in the
Bhagavad-gita that after surpassing the stage of knowledge, when one is
able to be engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, then only can one
know the true nature of the Lord (Bg. 18.54). No one can have any clear
conception of the Lord or His holy name, form, attributes, pastimes, etc.,
unless one is engaged in His transcendental loving service. The statement of
the Bhagavad-gita that one must first of all surrender unto the Lord, being
freed from all other engagements, means that one must become a pure
unconditional devotee of the Lord. Only then can one know Him by the
strength of devotional service.

Maharaja Pariksit admitted in the previous verse that the Lord is incon-
ceivable even for the greatest learned scholars. Why then should he again
request Sukadeva Gosvami to clarify his insufficient knowledge about the
Lord? The reason is clear. Sukadeva Gosvami was not only vastly learned
in the Vedic literatures, but he was also a great self-realized soul and a
powerful devotee of the Lord. A powerful devotee of the Lord is, by the

race of the Lord, more than the Lord Himself. The Personality of Godhead
ड्म Ramacandra attempted to bridge the Indian Ocean to reach the island
of Lanka, but Sri Hanumanji, the unalloyed devotee of the Personality of
Godhead, could cross the ocean simply by jumping over it. The Lord is so
merciful upon His pure devotee that He presents His beloved devotee as
more powerful than Himself. The Lord expressed Himself to be unable to
save Durvasa Muni, although the Muni was so powerful that he could reach
the Lord directly in these material conditions. But Durvasa Muni was saved
by Mahardja Ambarisa, a devotee of the Lord. Therefore, a devotee of the
Lord is not only more powerful than the Lord, but also worship of the
devotee is considered more effective than direct worship of the Lord
(mad-bhakta pijabhyadhika).

The conclusion is, therefore, that a serious devotee must first approach
a spiritual master who is not only well versed in the Vedic literatures but is
also a great devotee with factual realization of the Lord and His different
energies. Without the help of such a devotee spiritual master, no one can


--- Page 186 ---
Text 11] The Process of Creation 187
make progress in the transcendental scicnce of the Lord. And a bona fide
spiritual master like Sukadeva Gosvami does not speak about the Lord
only in the matter of His internal potencies, but also explains how He
associates with His external potencies.

The Lord’s pastimes, in the internal potency, are displayed in His activi-
ties in Vrndavana, but His external potential works are directed in His
features of Karanarnavasayl Visnu, Garbhodakasayl Visnu, and Ksiro-
dakasayl Visnu. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti offers his good counsel to the
interested Vaisnavas when he says that they should not only be interested
to hear about the Lord’s activities (like rasa-lila, etc.), but that they must
be keenly interested in His pastimes in His features of the Purusavataras in
connection with srsti-tattva, creational functions, following the examples
of Maharaja Pariksit, the ideal disciple, and Sukadeva Gosvami, the ideal
spiritual master.

TEXT 11
सूत उवाच
इत्युपामन्त्रितो राज्ञा गुणानुकथने दरः ।
phe प्रतियत्तः प्रचक्रमे 1220
sitta uvaca
ity upamantrito rajina
gunanukathane hareh
hrsikesam anusmrtya
prativak tur pracakrame

sitta uvaca—Siita Gosvami said ;iti—thus; upamantritah—being requested;
rajia—by the King; guna-anukathane—in describing the transcendental
attributes of the Lord; hareh—of the Personality of Godhead; hrsikesam—
the master of the senses; anusmrtya—properly remembering; prativaktum—
just to reply; pracakrame—executed the preliminaries.

TRANSLATION

Siita Gosvami said, When Sukadeva Gosvami was thus requested by the
King to describe the creative energy of the Personality of Godhead, the
former then systematically remembered the master of the senses [Sri
Krsna], and to reply properly he spoke thus.


--- Page 187 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord, while delivering some speeches and describing
the transcendental attributes of the Lord, do not think that they can do
anything independently. They think that they can speak only what they
are induced to speak by the Supreme Lord, the master of the senses. The
senses of the individual being are not his own, and the devotee knows that
such senses belong to the Supreme Lord and that they can be properly
used when they are employed for the service of the Lord. The senses are
instruments, and elements are ingredients, all endowed by the Lord; there-
fore whatever an individua! can do, speak, see, etc., is under the direction
of the Lord only. The Bhagavad-gita confirms this (Bg. 15.15): sarvasya
cahariv hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtir jianam apohanari ca. No one is free
to act freely and independently, and as such, one should always seek the
permission of the Lord to do or eat or speak, and by the blessing of the
Lord everything done by a devotee is beyond the principles of four defects
typical of the conditioned soul.
TEXT 12
श्रीशुक उवच
नमः परस्मै पुरूषाय भूयसे
~ =>
सदुद्धवस्यान निरोधलीर्या |
गृदीतशचक्तित्रितयाय देहिना-
मन्तर्भवायाठुपठक्ष्यवत्मने ॥१२॥
77 suka uvaca
namah parasmai purusaya bhiiyase
sad-udbhava-sthana-nirodha-lilaya
grhita-sakti-tritayaya dehinam
antarbhavayanupalaksya-vartmane
namah—offering obeisances; parasmai—the Supreme; purusaya—Person-
ality of Godhead; bhityase—unto the complete whole; sad-udbhava—
creation of the material world; sthana—its maintenance; nirodha—and its
winding up; lilaya—by the pastime of; grhita—having accepted; Sakti—
power; tritayaya—three modes; dehinam—of all who possess material


--- Page 188 ---
Text 13] The Process of Creation 189
bodies; antarbhavaya—unto Him who resides within; anupalaksya—incon-
ceivable; vartmane—one who has such ways.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead who, for the creation of the material
world, accepts the three modes of nature. He is the complete whole residing
within the body of everyone, and His ways are inconceivable.
PURPORT
This material world is a manifestation of the three modes of goodness,
passion and ignorance, and the Supreme Lord, for the creation, mainte-
nance and destruction of the material world, accepts three predominating
forms of Brahma, Visnu and Sankara (Siva). As Visnu He enters into every
body materially created. As Garbhodakadayl Visnu He enters into every
universe, and as KsirodakasayT Visnu He enters in the body of every living
being. Lord Sri Krsna, being the origin of all Vispu-tattvas, is addressed
here as parah puman, or Purusottama, as described in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 15.18), or the complete whole. The purusavataras are therefore His
plenary expansions. Bhakti-yoga is the only process by which one can
become competent to know Him. Because the empiric philosophers and
mystic yogis cannot conceive of the Personality of Godhead, He is called
anupalaksya-vartmane, the Lord of the inconceivable way, or bhakti-yoga.
TEXT 13
भूयो नमः सद्कृजि्नाछिदेऽसता-
मसम्मवापाखिरसचमूर्तये
पुंसां पुनः पारमस्य आश्रमे
ख्यचखितानापनुखम्यदाशचुषे ॥१२॥
bhiiyo namah sad-vrjina-cchide’satam
asambhavayakhila-sattva-mirtaye
[01877852778 punah paramaharisya asrame
vyavasthitanam anumrgya-dasuse


--- Page 189 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4

bhiiyah—again; namah—my obeisances; sat—of the devotees or of the
pious; vrjina—distresses; chide—the liberator; asat@m—of the atheist, non-
devotee demons; asambhavaya—cessation of further unhappiness; akhila—
complete; sattva—goodness; mitrtaye—unto the Personality; purmsam—of
the transcendentalists; punah—again; paramahamsye—highest stage of
spiritual perfection; @rame—in the status; vyavasthitanam—particularly
situated; anumrgya— destination; dasuse—one who delivers.

TRANSLATION

I again offer my respectful obeisances unto the form of complete
existence and transcendence, who is the liberator from all distresses of the
pious devotees and the destroyer of the further advances in atheistic
temperament of the nondevotee demons. For the transcendentalists, who
are situated in the topmost spiritual perfection, He grants their specific
destinations.

PURPORT

Lord Sri Krsna is the complete form of all existence, both material and
spiritual. Akhila means complete, or that which is not khila, inferior. As
stated in the Bhagavad-gita, there are two kinds of nature (prakrti), namely
the material nature and the spiritual nature, or the external and internal
potencies of the Lord. The material nature is called anarva, or inferior, and
the spiritual nature is called superior or transcendental. Therefore the form
of the Lord is not of the inferior material nature. He is complete transcen-
dence. And He is marti, or having transcendental form. The less intelligent
men, who are unaware of His transcendental form, describe Him as imper-
sonal Brahman. But Brahman is simply the rays of His transcendental body
(yasya prabhad). The devotees, who are aware of His transcendental form,
render Him service; therefore the Lord also reciprocates by His causeless
mercy and thus delivers His devotees from all distresses. The pious men
who follow the rulings of the Vedas are also dear to Him, and therefore
the pious men of this world are also protected by Him. The impious and
the nondevotees are against the principles of the Vedas, so such persons
are always hampered from making advances in their nefarious activities.
Some of them, who are specially favored by the Lord, are killed by Him
personally, as in the cases of Ravana, Hiranyakasipu, Kamsa, etc., and thus
such demons get salvation and are thereby checked from further progress
in their demoniac activities. Just like a kind father, either in His favor upon


--- Page 190 ---
Text 14] The Process of Creation 191
the devotees or His punishment of the demons, He is ever kind to everyone
because He is complete existence for all individual existence.

The paramaharisa stage of existence is the highest perfectional stage of
spiritual values. According to Srimati Kuntidevi, the Lord is factually
understood by the paramahamsas only. As there is gradual realization of
the transcendence from impersonal Brahman to localized Paramatma to
the Personality of Godhead, Purusottama Lord Krsna, similarly there is
gradual promotion of one’s situation in the spiritual life of sannyasa.
Kuticaka, bahiidaka, parivrajakdacarya and paramaharisa are gradual pro-
gressive stages in the renounced order of life, sannyasa, and Queen Kunti-
devi, the mother of the Pandavas, has spoken about them in her prayers
for Lord Krsna (Canto One, Chapter Eight). The paramahansas are general-
pi found both among the impersonalists and the devotees, but according to

rimad-Bhagavatam (as it is clearly stated by Kuntidevt), pure bhakti-yoga
is understood by the paramahamsas, and she has especially mentioned
that the Lord descends (paritranaya sadhiinam) especially to award bhakti-
yoga to the paramaharmsas. So ultimately the paramahamsas, in the true
sense of the term, are unalloyed devotees of the Lord. Srila Jiva Gosvami
has directly accepted that the highest destination is bhakti-yoga, by which
one accepts the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Those who
accept the path of bhakti-yoga are the factual paramaharmsas.

Since the Lord is very kind to everyone, the impersonalists, who accept
bhakti as the means of being merged in the existence of the Lord in His
impersonal brahmajyoti, are also awarded their desired destination. He has
assured everyone in the Bhagavad-gita: ye yatha mam prapadyante. Accord-
ing to Srila Visvanitha Cakravarti, there are two classes of paramaharisas,
namely the brahmanandis (impersonalists) and the premanandis (devotees),
and both are awarded their desired destinations, although the premanandis
are more fortunate than the brahmanandis. But both the brahmanandis
and the premanandis are transcendentalists, and they have nothing to do
with the inferior material nature full of the existential miseries of life.

TEXT 14
ननो नमस्तेऽस्त़ृषभाय सात्वतां
विदूरकाषटाय मदः कयोगिनाप्‌ ।
निरप्तसाम्यातिदायेन _ राधसा
खधामनि ब्रह्मणि रंस्यते नमः ॥१४॥


--- Page 191 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
namo namas te’stv rsabhaya satvatam
viditra-kasthaya muhuh ku-yoginam
nirasta-samyatisayena radhasa
sva-dhamani brahmani rarisyate namah
, namah namas te—let me offer my obeisances unto You; astu—are;
rsabhaya—unto the great associate; satvatam—of the members of the Yadu
dynasty; vidiira-kasthaya—one who is far from mundane wranglers; muhuh
—always; ku-yoginam—of the nondevotees; nirasta—vanquished; samya—
equal status; atisayena—by greatness; radhasa—by opulence; sva-dhamani—
in His own abode; brahmani—in the spiritual sky; rarmsyate—enjoys; namah
—I do bow down.
TRANSLATION

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Him who is the associate
of the members of the Yadu dynasty and who is always a problem for the
nondevotees. He is the supreme enjoyer of both the material and spiritual
worlds, yet He enjoys His own abode in the spiritual sky. There is no one

equal to Him because His transcendental opulence is immeasurable.

PURPORT

There are two sides of the transcendental manifestations of the Supreme
Lord, Sri Krsna. For the pure devotees He is the constant companion, as
in the case of His becoming one of the family members of the Yadu
dynasty, or His becoming the friend of Arjuna, or His becoming the
associate neighbor of the inhabitants of Vrndavana, as the son of Nanda-
Yasoda, the friend of Sudama, Sridama and Madhumangala, or the lover of
the damsels of Vrajabhiimi, etc. That is part of His personal features. And
by His impersonal feature He expands the rays of the brahmajyoti, which
is limitless and all-pervasive. Part of this all-pervasive brahmajyoti, which
is compared with the sun rays, is covered by the darkness of mahat-tattva,
and this insignificant part is known as the material world. In this material
world there are innumerable universes like the one we can experience, and
in each of them there are hundreds of thousands of planets like the one
we are inhabiting. The mundaners are more or less captivated by the
unlimited expansion of the rays of the Lord, but the devotees are con-
cerned more with His personal form, from which everything is emanating
(janmady asya yatah). As the sun rays are concentrated in the sun disc, so


--- Page 192 ---
Text 14] The Process of Creation 193
the brahmajyoti 15 concentrated in Goloka Vrndavana, the topmost spiritual
planet in the spiritual sky. The immeasurable spiritual sky is full of spiritual
planets, named Vaikunthas, far beyond the material sky. The mundaners
have no sufficient information of even the mundane sky, so what can they
think of the spiritual sky? Therefore the mundaners are always far, far
away from Him. Even if they are able to manufacture some machine, in
the future, whose speed may be accelerated to the velocity of the air or
mind, the mundaners will still be unable to imagine reaching the planets
in the spiritual sky. So the Lord and His residential abode will always
remain a myth or a mysterious problem, but for the devotees the Lord
will always be available as an associate.

In the spiritual sky His opulence is immeasurable. The Lord resides in all
the spiritual planets, or innumerable Vaikuntha planets, by expanding
His plenary portions along with His liberated devotee associates, but the
impersonalists who want to merge in the existence of the Lord are allowed
to merge as one of the spiritual sparks of brahmajyoti. They have no
qualifications for becoming one of the associates of the Lord either in the
Vaikuntha planets or in the supreme planet Goloka Vrndavana, described
in the Bhagavad-gita as the mad-dhama, and here in this verse as the
sva-dhama of the Lord.

This mad-dhama or sva-dhama is described in the Bhagavad-gita as
follows:

na tad bhasayate 50170 na $asanko na pavkah
yad gatva na nivartante tad-dhama [70170172077 mama.
(Bg. 15.6)

The Lord’s sva-dhama does not require any sunlight or moonlight or
electricity for illumination. That dhama, or place, is supreme, and whoever
goes there never comes back to this material world.

The Vaikuntha planets and the Goloka Vrndavana planet are all self-
illuminating, and the rays are scattered by those sva-dhama of the Lord
which constitute the existence of the brahmajyoti. It is further confirmed
in the Vedas like the Mundaka, Katha and Svetdsvatara Upanisads:

na tatra siiryo bhati na candratarakam
nema vidyuto bhanti kuto ayam agnih
tam eva bhantam anubhati sarvam
tasya bhasa sarvam 0017 vibhati.


--- Page 193 ---
194. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4

In the sva-dhama of the Lord there is no need of sun, moon, or stars for
illumination. Nor is there need of electricity, so what to speak of ignited
lamps? On the other hand, it is because of those planets being self-
illuminating that all effulgence has become possible, and whatever there is
that is dazzling is due to the reflection of that sva-dhama.

One who is dazzled by the effulgence of the impersonal brahmajyoti
cannot know the personal transcendence; therefore in the 140100785৫0 it is
prayed that the Lord shift His dazzling effulgence so that the devotee can
sec the real reality. [1 is spoken thus:

hiranmayena patrena satyasyapihitarn mukham
tat tvam piisann apavrnpu satya-dharmaya drstaye.

“O Lord, You are the maintainer of everything both material and
spiritual, and everything flourishes by Your mercy. Your devotional service,
or bhakti-yoga, is the actual principle of religion, satya-dharma, and I am
engaged in that service. So kindly protect me by showing Your real face.
Please, therefore, remove the veil of Your brahmajyoti rays so that I can see
Your form of eternal bliss and knowledge.”

TEXT 15
THRE gee यदीक्षणं.
यद्वन्दनं =A ARI |
we सद्यो विधुनोति कन्मषं
तस्मै सुमद्रभ्वसे नमो नमः ॥ १५
yat-kirtanam yat-smaranam yad-iksanarm
yad-vandanari yac-chravanam yad-arhanam
lokasya sadyo vidhunoti kalmasari
tasmai subhadra-sravase namo namah

yat—whose; kirtanam—glorification; yat—whose; smaranam—remem-
brances; yat—whose; iksanam—audience; yat—whose; vandanam—prayers;
yat—whose; $ravapam—hearing about; yat—whose; arhanam—worshiping;
lokasya—of all people; sadyah—forthwith; vidhunoti—specifically cleanses;
kalmasam—effects of sins; tasmai—unto Him; subhadra—all-auspicious;
Sravase—one who is heard; namah—by due obeisances; namah—again and
again.


--- Page 194 ---
Text 15] The Process of Creation 195
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-auspicious Lord
Sri Krsna, about whom glorification, remembrances, audience, prayers,
hearing and worship can at once cleanse the effects of all sins of the
performer.
PURPORT

The sublime form of religious performances to free oneself from all
reactions of sins is suggested herein by the greatest authority, Sri Sukadeva
Gosvami. Kirtanam, or glorifying the Lord, can be performed by very many
ways, such as remembering, visiting temples to see the Deity, offering
prayers in front of the Lord, and hearing recitations of glorification of the
Lord as they are mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam or in the Bhagavad-
gita. Kirtana can be performed both by singing the glories of the Lord in
accompaniment with melodious music and by recitation of scriptures like
Srimad-Bhagavatam or Bhagavad-gita.

The devotees may not be disappointed in the absence of the Lord
physically, though they may think of not being associated with Him. The
devotional process of chanting, hearing, remembering, etc., (either all or
some of them, or even one of them) can give us the desired result of being
associated with the Lord by discharging the transcendental loving service
of the Lord in the above manner. Even the very sound of the holy name of
Lord Krsna or Rama can at once surcharge the atmosphere spiritually, and
we must know definitely that the Lord is present wherever such pure
transcendental service is performed, and thus the performer of offenseless
kirtana has positive association with the Lord. Similarly, remembrance and
prayers also can give us the desired result if they are properly done under
expert guidance. One should not concoct forms of devotional service.
One may worship the form of the Lord in a temple, or one may imperson-
ally offer the Lord devotional prayers in a mosque or a church. One is sure
to get free from the reactions of sins, provided one is very careful about
not committing sins willingly in expectation of getting free from the
reactions of sins by worshiping in the temple or by offering prayers in the
church. This mentality of committing sins willfully on the strength of
devotional service is called namno balat papa-buddhih, the greatest offense
in the discharge of devotional service. Hearing is, therefore, essential in
order to keep oneself strictly on guard against such pitfalls of sins. And in
order to give special stress to the hearing process, the Gosvami invokes
all auspicious fortune in this matter.


--- Page 195 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
TEXT 16
विचक्षणा यचरणोपसादनात्‌
५ = ~
सङ्ग व्युद स्याभयतोऽन्तरात्मनः।
विदन्ति हि ब्रह्मगतिं Ewe
स्तस्मै सुभद्रश्रवसे नमो नमः ॥१६॥
vicaksana yac-caranopasadanat
sangam vyudasyobhayato ‘ntar-atmanah
vindanti hi brahma-gatim gata-klamas
tasmai subhadra-$ravase namo namah
vicaksanah—highly intellectual; yat—whose; carana-upasadanat—simply
dedicating oneself unto the lotus feet; sarigam—attachment; vyudasya—
giving up completely; ubhayatah—for present and future existence ;antar-
atmanah—of the heart and soul; vindanti—moves progressively ; hi—certain-
ly; brahma-gatim—towards spiritual existence; gata-klamah—without dif-
ficulty ; tasmai—unto Him; subhadra—all-auspicious; Sravase—unto one who
is heard; namah—my due obeisances; namah—again and again.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances again and again unto the all-
auspicious Lord Sri Krsna. The highly intellectual, simply by surrendering
unto His lotus feet, are relieved of all attachments to present and future
existences and without difficulty progress towards spiritual existence.
PURPORT
Lord Sri Krsna has repeatedly instructed Arjuna, or for that matter
everyone concerned with becoming His unalloyed devotee. In the last
phase of His instruction in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.64-66) He instructed
most confidentially as follows:
sarva-guhyatamarin bhiiyah srnu me paramari vacah
isto’si me drdham iti tato vaksyami te hitam
manmand bhava mad-bhakto madyaji mam namaskuru
mam evaisyasi satyari te pratijane priyo’si me


--- Page 196 ---
The Process of Creation 197
sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja
ahari tvam sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami ma sucah
“My dear Arjuna, you are very dear to Me, and therefore only for your
good 1 will disclose the most secret part of My instructions. It is simply
this: become a pure devotee of Mine and give yourself unto Me only, and
I promise you full spiritual existence, by which you may gain the eternal
right of transcendental loving service unto Me. Just give up all other ways
of religiosity and exclusively surrender unto Me and believe that I will
protect you from your sinful acts, and 1 shall deliver you. Do nol worry
any more.”

Persons who are intelligent take serious notice of this last instruction of
the Lord. Knowledge of the self is the first step in spiritual realization,
which is called confidential knowledge, and a step further is God
realization, which is called more confidential knowledge. The culmination
of the knowledge of Bhagavad-gita is God realization, and when one attains
this stage of God realization, he naturally, voluntarily becomes a devotee
of the Lord to render Him loving transcendental service. This devotional
service of the Lord is always based on love of God and is distinguished
from the nature of routine service as prescribed in karma-yoga, jiana-yoga
or dhyana-yoga. In the Bhagavad-gita there are different instructions for
such men of different categories, and there are various descriptions for
varnasrama-dharma, sannyasa-dharma, yati-dharma, the renounced order
of life, controlling the senses, meditation, perfection of mystic powers,
etc., but one who fully surrenders unto the Lord to render service unto
Him, out of spontaneous love for Him, factually assimilates the essence of
all knowledge described in the Vedas. One who adopts this method very
skillfully attains perfection of life at once. And this perfection of human
life is called brahma-gati, or the progressive march in spiritual existence.
As enunciated by Srila Jiva Gosvami on the basis of Vedic assurances,
brahma-gati means to attain a spiritual form as good as that of the Lord,
and in that form the liberated living being eternally lives on one of the
spiritual planets situated in the spiritual sky. Attainment of this perfection
of life is easily available to a pure devotee of the Lord without undergoing
any difficult method of perfection. Such a devotional life is full of kirtana,
smarana, iksana, etc., as mentioned in a previous verse. One must therefore
adopt this simple way of devotional life in order to attain the highest
perfection available in any category of the human form of life in any part
of the world. Lord Brahma, when he met Lord Krsna as a playful child at
Vrndavana, offered his prayer in which he said:


--- Page 197 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
sreyah 5741777 bhaktim udasya te vibho
klisyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye
tesam asau klesala eva sisyate
nanyad yatha sthila-tusavaghatinam.
(Bhag. 10.14.4)
Bhakti-yoga is the highest quality of perfection to be achieved by the in-
telligent person in lieu of performing alarge quantity of spiritual activities.
The example cited here is very appropriate. A handful of real paddy is
more valuable than heaps of paddy skins without any substance within.
Similarly, one should not be attracted by the jugglery of karma-kanda or
jidna-kanda or even the gymnastic performances of yoga, but skillfully
should take to the simple performances of kirtanam, smarapam, ctc.,
under a bona fide spiritual master and without any difficulty attain the
highest perfection.
TEXT 17
तपसिनो दानपरा यशखिनो
মনজিনী मन्त्रविदः सुमङ्गराः |
कषमं न विन्दन्ति विना यदृणं
तस्मै GHEY नमो नमः ॥१७॥
tapasvino dana-pard yasasvino
manasvino mantra-vidah su-marigaldh
ksemam na vindanti vind yad-arpanam
tasmai subhadra-$ravase namo namah
tapasvinah—the great learned sages; dana-parah—the great performer of
charity; yasasvinah—the great worker of distinction; manasvinah—the
great philosophers or mystics; mantra-vidah—the great chanter of the
Vedic hymns; su-margalah—strict followers of Vedic principles; ksemam—
fruitful result; na—never; vindanti—attain; vina—without; yad-arpanam—
dedication; tasmai—unto Him; subhadra—auspicious; sravase— hearing about
Him; namah—my obeisances; namah—again and again.


--- Page 198 ---
Text 17] The Process of Creation 199
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-auspicious Lord Sri
Krsna again and again because the great learned sages, the great per-
formers of charities, the great workers of distinction, the great philosophers
and mystics, the great chanters of the Vedic hymns and the great fol-
lowers of Vedic principles cannot achieve any fruitful result without
dedication of such great qualities to the service of the Lord.
PURPORT
Advancement of learning, charitable disposition of mind, taking part in
political, social or religious leadership of human society, philosophical
speculations or the practice of the yoga system, becoming expert in the
Vedic rituals, and all similar high qualities in man serve one in the altain-
ment of perfection only when they are employed in the service of the
Lord. Without such dovetailing, all such qualities become sources of
trouble for people in general. Everything can either be utilized for one’s
own sense gratification or in the service of one other than oneself. There
are two kinds of self-interest also, namely personal selfishness and ex-
tended selfishness. But there is no qualitative difference between personal
and extended selfishness. Theft for personal interest or for the family
interest is of the same quality—namely, criminal. A thief pleading not
guilty because of committing theft not for personal interest but for the
interest of society or country has never been excused by the established
law of any country. People in general have no knowledge that the self-
interest of a living being attains perfection only when such an interest
coincides with the interest of the Lord. For example, what is the interest
of maintaining body and soul together? One earns money for maintenance
of the body (personal or social), but unless there is God consciousness,
unless the body is being properly maintained to realize one’s relation with
God, all good efforts to maintain body and soul together are similar to the
attempts of the animals to maintain the body and soul together. The
purpose of maintaining the human body is different from that of the
animals. Similarly advancement of learning, economic development, philo-
sophical research, study in the Vedic literature or even the execution of
pious activities (like charity, opening of hospitals, the distribution of food
grains, etc.) should be done in relation with the Lord. The aim of all such
acts and endeavors must be for the pleasure of the Lord and not for the


--- Page 199 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
satisfaction of any other identity, individual or collective (samsiddhir
hari-tosanam). In the Bhagavad-gita also the same principle is confirmed
(Bg. 9.27), and it is said there that whatever we may give in charity and
whatever we may observe in austerity must be given over to the Lord or be
done on His account only. The expert leaders of a godless human civili-
zation cannot bring about a fruitful result in all their different attempts at
educational advancement or economic development unless they are God
conscious. And to become God conscious one has to hear about the all-
auspicious Lord, as He is described in literature like the Bhagavad-gita and
Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 18
किरातदहूणान्ध्पुलिन्द पुल्कशा
आभीरशुम्भा यवनाः खसादयः |
येऽन्ये च पापा यद्पाश्रयाच्रयाः
यै $
शध्यन्ति तस्मे प्रभविष्णवे नमः॥ १८॥
kirata-hunandhra-pulinda-pulkasa
abhira-sumbha yavanah khasadayah
ye’nye ca papa yad-apasrayasrayah
Sudhyanti tasmai prabhavisnave namah
kirata—a province of old Bharata; hitpa—part of Germany and Russia;
@ndhra—a province of Southern India; pulinda—the Greeks; pulkasah—
another province; @abhira—part of old Sindh; sSumbhah—another province;
yavanah—the Turks; khasa-ddayah—the Mongolian Province; ye—even
those; anye—others; ca—also; papah—addicted to sinful acts; yat—whose;
apasraya-asrayah—having taken shelter of the devotees of the Lord;
sudhyanti—at once purified; tasmai—unto Him; prabhavisnave—unto the
powerful Visnu; namah—my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Kirata, Hina, Andhra, Pulinda, Pulkasa, Abhira, Sumbha, Yavana and
the Khasa races and even others who are addicted to sinful acts can be
purified by taking shelter of the devotees of the Lord due to His being the
supreme power. [ beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.


--- Page 200 ---
Text 18] The Process of Creation 201
PURPORT

Kirata: A province of old Bharatavarsa mentioned in the Bhisma Parva
of Mahabharata. Generally the Kiratas are known as the aboriginal tribes
of India, and in modern days the Santal Parganas in Bihar and Chota
Nagpur might comprise the old province named Kirata.

Hiina: The area of East Germany and part of Russia is known as the
province of the Hiinas. Accordingly, sometimes a kind of hill tribe is
known as the Hinas.

Andhra: A province in Southern India mentioned in the Bhisma Parva
Mahabharata. It is still extant under the same name.

Pulinda: 1t is mentioned in the Mahabharata, (Adi 174.38) viz..the in-
habitants of the province of the name Pulinda. This country was con-
quered by Bhimasena and Sahadeva. The Greeks are known as Pulindas,
and it is mentioned in the Vana Parva of Mahabharata that the non-Vedic
race of this part of the world would rule over the world. This Pulinda
Province was also one of the provinces of Bharata, and the inhabitants
were classified amongst the ksatriya Kings. But later on, due to their giving
up the brahminical culture, they were mentioned as mlecchas (just as
those who are not followers of the Islamic culture are called kafirs, and
those who are not followers of the Christian culture are called heathens).

Abhira: This name also appears in the Mahabharata, both in the Sabha
Parva and Bhisma Parva. It is mentioned that this province was situated
on the River Sarasvati in Sind. The modern Sind Province formerly ex-
tended on the other side of the Arabian Sea, and all the inhabitants of that
province were known as the Abhiras. They were under the domination of
Maharaja Yudhisthira, and, according to the statements of Markandeya,
the mlecchas of this part of the world would also rule over Bharata. Later
on this proved to be true, as it was proved in the case of the Pulindas. On
behalf of the Pulindas, Alexander the Great conquered India, and on be-
half of the Abhiras, Mohammed Ghori conquered India. These Abhiras
were also formerly ksatriyas within the brahminical culture, but they gave
up the connection. But the ksatriyas, who were afraid of Parasurama and
had hidden themselves in the Caucasian hilly regions, later on became
known as the Abhiras, and the place they inhabited was known as Abhira-
desa.

Sumbha or the Kaitkas: the inhabitants of the Katka province of old
Bharata, mentioned in the Mahabharata.

Yavanas: Yavana was the name of one of the sons of Maharaja Yayati
who was given the part of the world known as Turkey to rule over. There-
fore the Turks are Yavanas due to being descendants of Maharaja Yavana.


--- Page 201 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
The Yavanas were therefore ksatriyas, and later on, by giving up the
brahminical culture, they became mleccha yavanas. Descriptions of the
Yavanas arc in the Mahabharata (Adi 85.34). Another prince of Tuvasu was
also known as Yavana, and his country was conquered by Sahadeva, onc of
the Pandavas. The western Yavana joined with Duryodhana in the Battle
of Kuruksetra under the pressure of Karna. It is also foretold that these
Yavanas also would conquer India, and it proved Lo be true.

Khasddaya: The inhabitants of the Khasadesa are mentioned in the
Mahabharata (Drona Parva). Those who have a stunted growth of hair on
the upper lip are generally called Khasas. As such, the Khasadayas are the
Mongolians and the Chinese and others who are so designated.

The above-mentioned historical names are different nations of the
world. Even those who are constantly engaged in sinful acts are all corri-
gible to the standard of perfect human beings if they take shelter of the
devotees of the Lord. Jesus Christ and Hajratl Mohammed, two powerful
devotees of the Lord, have done tremendous service on behalf of the
Lord on the surface of the globe. And from the version of Srila Sukadeva
Gosvami it appears that instead of running a godless civilization in the
present context of the world situation, if the leadership of world affairs
is entrusted to the devotees of the Lord, for which a worldwide organi-
zation under the name and style of The International Society for Krishna
Consciousness has already been started, then by the grace of the Almighty
Lord there can be a thorough change of heart in human beings all over the
world because the devotees of the Lord are able authorities Lo effect such
a change by purifying the dust-worn minds of the people in general. The
politicians of the world may remain in their respective positions because
the pure devotees of the Lord are not interested in political leadership or
diplomatic implications. The devotees are interested only in secing that
the people in general are not misguided by political propaganda and in
seeing that the valuable life of a human being is not spoiled in following a
type of civilization which is ultimately doomed. If the politicians would,
therefore, be guided by the good counsel of the devolees, then certainly
there would be a great change in the world situation by the Sp
propaganda of the devolees, as shown by Lord Caitanya. As Sukadeva
Gosvami began his prayer by discussing the word yat-kirtanam, so also
Lord Caitanya recommended that simply by glorifying the Lord’s holy
name, a tremendous change of heart can take place by which the com-
plete misunderstanding between the human nations, created by politicians,
can at once be extinguished. And after the extinction of the fire of mis-
understanding, other profits will follow. The destination is to go back


--- Page 202 ---
Text 18] The Process of Creation 203
home, back to Godhead, as we have several times discussed in these
pages.

According to the cult of devotion, generally known as the Vaisnava
cult, there is no bar for anyone to advance in the matter of God realiza-
tion. A Vaisnava is powerful enough to turn into a Vaisnava even the
Kirata, etc., as above mentioned. In the Bhagavad-gita also it is said by the
Lord (Bg. 9.32) that there is no bar to becoming a devotee of the Lord
(even for those who are low-born, or women, Sitdras or vaisyas), and by
becoming a devotee everyone is eligible to return home, back to Godhead.
The only qualification is that one take shelter of a pure devotee of the
Lord who has thorough knowledge in the transcendental science of Krsna
(Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhdgavatam). Anyone from any part of the
world who becomes well conversant in the science of Krsna becomes a
pure devotee and a spiritual master for the general mass of people and may
reclaim them by purification of heart. A person, though he be even the
most sinful man, can at once be purified by systematic contact with a pure
Vaignava. A Vaisnava, therefore, can accept a bona fide disciple from any
part of the world without any consideration of caste and creed and
promote him by regulative principles to the status of a pure Vaisnava
who is transcendental to brahminical culture. The system of caste, or
varndsrama-dharma, is no longer regular even amongst the so-called fol-
lowers of the system. Nor is it now possible to reestablish the institutional
function in the present context of social, political and economic revolu-
tion. Without any reference to the particular custom of a country, one can
be accepted to the Vaisnava cult spiritually, and there is no hindrance in
the transcendental process. So by the order of Lord Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu, the cult of Srimad-Bhagavatam or the Bhagavad-gita can be
preached all over the world, reclaiming all persons willing to accept the
transcendental cult. Such cultural propaganda by the devotees will cer-
tainly be accepted by all persons who are reasonable and inquisitive,
without any particular bias for the custom of the country. The Vaisnava
never accepts another Vaisnava on the basis of birthright, just as he never
thinks of the Deity of the Lord in a temple as idol worship. And to remove
all doubts in this connection, Srila Sukadeva Gosvami has invoked the
blessings of the Lord, who is all-powerful (prabhavisnave namah). As the
all-powerful Lord accepts the humble service of His devotee in devotional
activities of the arcana, His form as the worshipable Deity in the temple,
similarly the body of a pure Vaisnava changes transcendentally at once by
giving himself up to the service of the Lord and training by a qualified
Vaigsnava. The injunction of Vaisnava regulation in this connection runs


--- Page 203 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
as follows: (arcye vispau Silidhir gurusu nara-matir vaispave jati-buddhih
sri-visnor namni $abda-samanya-buddhih, etc.) “One should not consider the
Deity of the Lord as worshiped in the temple to be an idol, nor should
one consider the authorized spiritual master as an ordinary man. Nor
should one consider a pure Vaisnava to belong to a particular caste, etc.”
The conclusion is that the Lord, being all-powerful, can, under any and
every circumstance, accept anyone from any part of the world, either
personally or through His bona fide manifestation as the spiritual master.
Lord Caitanya accepted many devotees from communities other than the
varpasramites, and He Himself declared, to teach us, that He does not
belong to any caste or social order of life, but that He is the eternal servant
of the servant of the Lord who maintains the damsels of Vrndavana (Lord
Krsna). That is the way of self-realization.
TEXT 19
स एष आत्मारमवतामधीश्वर-
लूयीमयो धर्ममयस्तपोमयः |
रतच्यरीक्रेजशङ्करादिभि-
~ =
वितक््यलिङ्को मगवान्‌ प्रसीद ताम्‌ 12.)
sa esa atmatmavatam adhisvaras
trayimayo dharmamayas tapomayah
gata-vyalikair aja-sankaradibhir
vitarkya-lingo bhagavan prasidatam
sah—He; esah—it is; atma—Supersoul; atmavatam—of the self-realized
souls; adhi$varah—the Supreme Lord; trayimayah—personified Vedas;
dharmamayah— personified religious scripture; tapomayah— personified aus-
terity ; gata-vyalikaih—by those who are above all pretensions; aja—Brah-
maji; $ankara-adibhih—by Lord Siva and others; vitarkya-lingah—one who
is observed with awe and veneration; bhagavan—the Personality of God-
head ; prasidatam—be kind toward me.
TRANSLATION
He is the Supersoul and the Supreme Lord of all self-realized souls. He
is the personification of the Vedas, religious scriptures and austerities. He


--- Page 204 ---
Text 19] The Process of Creation 205
is worshiped by Lord Brahma and Siva and all those who are transcen-
dental to all pretensions. Being so revered with awe and veneration, may
that Supreme Absolute be pleased with me.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, although the Lord of
all followers of different paths of self-realization, is knowable only by
those who are above all pretensions. Everyone is searching for eternal
peace or eternal life, and with an aim to this destination everyone is either
studying Vedic scriptures or other religious scriptures or undergoing severe
austerity as empiric philosophers, as mystics yogis or as unalloyed devo-
tees, etc. But the Supreme Lord is perfectly realized by the devotees only
because they are above all pretensions. Those who are on the path of self-
realization are generally classified as karmis, jaanis, yogis, or devotees of
the Lord. The karmis, who are much attracted by the fruitive activities of
the Vedic rituals, are called bhukti-kami, or those who desire liberation
from material existence. The mystic yogis, who practice different types of
austerities for attainment of eight kinds of material perfections and who
ultimately meet the Supersoul Paramatma in trance, are called siddhi-
kami, or those who desire the perfection of becoming finer than the
finest, heavier than the heaviest, and who desire to get everything desired,
to have control over everyone, to create everything liked, etc. All these
are capacities of a powerful yogi. But the devotees of the Lord do not
want anything like that for self-satisfaction. They want only to serve the
Lord because the Lord is great, and as living entities they are eternally
subordinate parts and parcels of the Lord. This perfect realization of the
self by the devotee helps him to become desireless, to desire nothing for
his personal self, and thus the devotees are called niskami, without any
desire. A living entity, by his constitutional position, cannot be void of
all desires (the bhukti-kami, mukti-kami and siddhi-kami all desire some-
thing for personal satisfaction). but the niskami devotees of the Lord
desire everything for the satisfaction of the Lord. They are completely
dependent on the orders of the Lord and are always ready to discharge
their duty for the satisfaction of the Lord.

In the beginning Arjuna placed himself as one of those who desire self-
satisfaction, for he desired not to fight in the Battle of Kuruksetra, but to
make him desireless the Lord preached the Bhagavad-gita, in which the
ways of karma-yoga, jiana-yoga, hatha-yoga, and also bhakti-yoga were
explained. Because Arjuna was without any pretension, he changed his


--- Page 205 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
decision and satisfied the Lord by agreeing to fight (karisye vacanam tava),
and thus he became desireless.

The examples of Brahma and Lord Siva are specifically cited here be-
cause Brahmaji, Lord Siva, Srimatt Laksmiji and the four Kumaras, Sanaka,
Sanatana, etc., are leaders of the four desireless Vaisnava sampradayas.
They are all freed from all pretensions. Srila Jiva Gosvami interprets the
word gata-vyalikaih as projjhita-kaitavaih, or those who are freed from all
pretensions (the unalloyed devotees only). In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is
said: bhukti-mukti siddhi-kami, sakali ‘asanta,’ krsna-bhakta—niskama, ata
eva ‘$anta.” Those who are after fruitive results for their pious activities,
those who desire salvation and identity with the Supreme, and those who
desire material perfections of mystic powers are all restless because they
want something for themselves, but the devotee is completely peaceful be-
cause he has no demand for himself and is always ready to serve the desire of
the Lord. The conclusion is, therefore, that the Lord is for everyone be-
cause no one can achieve the result of his respective desires without being
sanctioned by Him, but as stated by the Lord in Bhagavad-gita (Bg.
8.9), all such results are awarded by Him only, for the Lord is adhisvara
(the original controller) of everyone, namely the Vedantists, the great
karma-kandiyas, the great religious leaders, the great performers of aus-
terity and all who are striving for spiritual advancement. But ultimately He
is realized by the pretensionless devotees only. Therefore special stress is
given to the devotional service of the Lord by Srila Sukadeva Gosvami.

TEXT 20
श्रियः पतिर्यज्ञपतिः प्रजापति-
_ धियां पतिलोकपतिर्धरापतिः |
प्रतिगेति्ान्धकब्रृष्णिसात्वतां
प्रसीदतां मे भगवान्‌ सतां पतिः ॥२०॥
sriyah patir yajiia-patih praja-patir
dhiyam patir loka-patir dhara-patih
patir gatis candhaka-vrsni-satvatam
prasidatam me bhagavan satam patih

sriyah—all opulence; patih—owner; yajiia—of sacrifice; patih—director;

praja-patih—leader of all living entities; dhiyam—of intelligence; patih—


--- Page 206 ---
Text 20] The Process of Creation 207
master; loka-patih—proprietor of all planets; dhara—earth; patih—the
supreme; patih—head; gatih—destination; ca—also; andhaka—one of the
kings of the Yadu dynasty; vrsni—the first king of the Yadu dynasty;
satvatam—the Yadus; prasidatam--be merciful; me—upon me; bhagavan—
Lord Sri Krsna; sat@m—of all devotees; patih—Lord.
TRANSLATION

May Lord Sri Krsna, who is the worshipable Lord of all devotees, the
protector and glory of all the kings like Andhaka and Vrsni of the Yadu
dynasty, the husband of all goddesses of fortune, the director of all sacri-
fices and therefore the leader of all living entities, the controller of all
intelligence, the proprietor of all planets, spiritual and material, and the
supreme incarnation on the earth (the supreme all in all), be merciful
upon me.

PURPORT

Since Sukadeva Gosvami is one of the prominent gata-vyalikam, who
are freed from all misconceptions, he therefore expresses his own realized
perception of Lord Si Krsna as His being the sum total of all perfection,
the Personality of Godhead. Everyone is seeking the favor of the goddess
of fortune, but they do not know that Lord Sit Krsna is the beloved
husband of all goddesses of fortune. In the Brahma-sarihita it is said that
the Lord, in His transcendental abode of Goloka Vrndavana, is accustomed
to herding the surabhi cows and is served there by hundreds of thousands
of goddesses of fortune. All these goddesses of fortune are manifestations
of His transcendental pleasure potency (hladini-sakti) in His internal energy,
and when the Lord manifested Himself on this earth He partially displayed
the activities of His pleasure potency in His rasa-lila just to attract the
conditioned souls who are all after the phantasmagoria pleasure potency
in degraded sex enjoyment. The pure devotees of the Lord like Sukadeva
Gosvami, who is completely detached from the abominable sex life of the
material world, discussed this act of the Lord’s pleasure potency certainly
not in relation to sex, but to relish a transcendental taste inconceivable by
the mundaners who are after sex life. Sex life in the mundane world is the
root-cause of being conditioned by the shackles of illusion, and certainly
Sukadeva Gosvami was never interested in the sex life of the mundane
world. Nor does the manifestation of the Lord’s pleasure potency have
any connection with such degraded things. Lord Caitanya was a strict
sannydast, so much so that He did not allow any woman to come near Him,


--- Page 207 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
not even to bow down and offer respects. He never even heard the prayers
of the devadasis offered in the temple of Jagannatha because a sannyast is
forbidden to hear songs sung by the fair sex. Yet even in the rigid position
of a sannyasi He recommended the mode of worship preferred by the
gopis of Vrndavana as the topmost loving service possible to be rendered
to the Lord. And Srimati Radharani is the principal head of all such
goddesses of fortune, and therefore She is the pleasure counterpart of the
Lord and is nondifferent from Krsna.

In the Vedic rituals there are recommendations for performing
different types of sacrifice in order to achieve the greatest benefit of
life. Such benedictions as the result of performing great sacrifices are,
after all, some favors given by the goddess of fortune, and the Lord, being
the husband or lover of the goddess of fortune, factually is the Lord of
all sacrifices also. And He is the final enjoyer of all kinds of yajiia; there-
fore Yajiiapati is another name of Lord Visnu. It is recommended in the
Bhagavad-gita that everything should be done for the Yajiiapati (yajiiarthe
kuru karmani), otherwise acts will be the cause of conditioning by the
law of material nature. Those who are not freed from all misconceptions
(vyalikam) perform sacrifices to please the minor demigods, but the
devotees of the Lord know very well that Lord Sri Krsna is the supreme
enjoyer of all performances of sacrifices; therefore they perform the
santkirtana-yajita (870৫0071077 kirtanam visnoh), especially recommended in
this age of Kali. In Kali-yuga, performance of other types of sacrifice is not
feasible due to insufficient arrangement and inexpert priesthood.

We have information from the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 3.9-10) that Lord
Brahma, after giving rebirth to the conditioned souls within the universe,
instructed them to perform sacrifices and to lead a prosperous life. By
such sacrificial performances the conditioned souls will never be in diffi-
culty to keep body and soul together. Ultimately they can purify their
existence. They will find natural promotion into spiritual existence, the
real identity of the living being. A conditioned soul should never give up
the practice of sacrifice, charity and austerity, in any circumstances. The
aim of all such sacrifices is to please the Yajhapati, the Personality of
Godhead; therefore the Lord is also Prajapati. According to the Katho-
panisad, the one Lord is the leader of the innumerable living entities. The
living entities are maintained by the Lord (eko bahiinarn yo vidadhati
kaman). The Lord is called, therefore, the supreme bhiita-bhrt, or main-
tainer of all living beings.

Living beings are endowed with intelligence proportionately in terms
of their previous activities. All living beings are not equally endowed with


--- Page 208 ---
Text 20] The Process of Creation 209
the same quality of intelligence because behind such development of
intelligence the control of the Lord is there, as is declared in the Bhagavad-
gita (Bg. 15.15). As Paramatma, Supersoul, the Lord is living in everyone’s
heart, and from Him only one’s power of remembrance, knowledge and
forgetfulness follows (mattah smrtir jianam apohanan ca). One person can
sharply remember past activities by the grace of the Lord while others
cannot. One is highly intelligent by the grace of the Lord, and one is a fool
by the same control. Therefore the Lord is dhiyam patih, or the Lord of
intelligence.

The conditioned souls strive to become lords of the material world.
Everyone is trying to lord it over the material nature by applying his
highest degree of intelligence. This misuse of intelligence by the conditioned
soul is called madness. One’s full intelligence should be applied to get free
from the material clutches. But the conditioned soul, due to madness only,
engages his full energy and intelligence in sense gratification, and to achieve
this end of life he willfully commits all sorts of misdeeds, and the result is
that instead of attaining unconditional life of full freedom, the mad
conditioned soul is entangled again and again in different types of bondage
in material bodies. Everything that we see in the material manifestation is
but the creation of the Lord. Therefore He is the real proprietor of
everything in the universes. The conditioned soul can enjoy a fragment
of this material creation under the control of the Lord but not self-
sufficiently. That is the instruction in the I$opanisad. One should be
satisfied with things which are awarded by the Lord of the universe. It is
out of madness only that one tries to encroach upon another’s share of
material possession.

The Lord of the universe, out of His causeless mercy upon the condi-
tioned souls, descends by His own energy (a@tma-mayad) to reestablish the
eternal relation of the conditioned souls with the Lord. He instructs all to
surrender unto Him instead of falsely claiming to be enjoyers for a certain
limit under His control. When He so descends He proves how much greater
is His ability to enjoy, and He exhibits His power of enjoyment by (for
instance) marrying 16,000 wives at once. The conditioned soul is very
proud of becoming the husband of even one wife, but the Lord laughs, and
so the intelligent man can just know who is the real husband. Factually,
the Lord is the husband of all women in the creation of the Lord, but a
conditioned soul under the control of the Lord feels proud to become the
husband of one or two wives.

All these qualifications as the different types of pati mentioned in this
verse are meant for Lord Sri Krsna, and Sukadeva Gosvami has therefore


--- Page 209 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
specially mentioned the pati and gati of the Yadu dynasty. The members
of the Yadu dynasty knew that Lord Sri Krsna is everything, and all of
them intended to return to Lord Krsna after He had finished His transcen-
dental pastimes on the earth. The Yadu dynasty was annihilated by the
will of the Lord because the members had to return home with the Lord.
The annihilation of the Yadu dynasty was a material show created by the
Supreme Lord; otherwise the Lord and the members of the Yadu dynasty
are all eternal associates. The Lord is therefore the guide of all devotees,
and as such, Sukadeva Gosvami offered Him due respects with love-laden
feelings.
TEXT 21
यदङ्घ्यभिष्यानसमाधिधौतया
पियानुपश्यन्ति हि तच्वमात्मनः ।
2 .
वदन्ति चैतत्‌ FTA यथारुचं
LY
स मे IT) भगवान्‌ प्रसीदताम्‌ ॥२१॥
yad-anghry-abhidhyana-samadhi-dhautaya
dhiyanupasyanti hi tattvam atmanah
vadanti caitat kavayo yatha-rucam
sa me mukundo bhagavan prasidatam
yad-anghri—whose lotus feet; abhidhyana—thinking of every second;
samadhi— trance; dhautaya—being washed off; dhiya—by such clean in-
telligence; anupasyanti—does see by following authorities; hi—certainly;
tattvam—the Absolute Truth; atmanah—of the Supreme Lord and of one-
self; vadanti—they say; ca—also; etat—this; kavayah—philosophers or
learned scholars; yatha-rucam—as he thinks; sah—He; me—mine; mukundah
—Lord Krsna (who gives liberation); bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead;
prasidatam—be pleased with me.
TRANSLATION
It is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna who gives liberation. By
thinking of His lotus feet every second, the devotee in trance can see the
Absolute Truth by following in the footsteps of authorities, whereas the


--- Page 210 ---
Text 21] The Process of Creation 211
learned mental speculators think of Him according to their whims. May
the Lord be pleased with me.

PURPORT

The mystic yogis, after a strenuous effort to control the senses, may be
situated in a trance of yoga just to have a vision of the Supersoul within
everyone, but the pure devotee, simply by remembering the Lord’s lotus
feet at every second, at once becomes posted in real trance because by such
realization his mind and intelligence become completely cleansed of the
diseases of material enjoyment. The pure devotee thinks himself fallen into
the ocean of birth and death and incessantly prays to the Lord to lift him
up. He only aspires to become a speck of transcendental dust at the lotus
feet of the Lord. The pure devotee, by the grace of the Lord, absolutely
loses all attraction for material enjoyment, and to keep free from contami-
nation he always thinks of the lotus feet of the Lord. King Kuladekhara, a
great devotee of the Lord, prayed:

krsna tvadiya-pada-pankaja-pafijarantam
adyaiva visatu me manasa-raja-hamsah
prana-prayana-samaye kapha-vata-pittaih
kanthavarodhanavidhau smaranari kutas te.
“My Lord Krsna, 1 pray that the swan of my mind may immediately sink
down to the stems of the lotus feet of Your Lordship and be locked up in
the network; otherwise at the time of my final breath, when my throat is
choked up with cough, how will it be possible to think of You?”

There is an intimate relationship between the swan and the lotus stem.
So the comparison is very appropriate: without becoming a swan or
paramaharisa, one cannot enter into the network of the lotus feet of the
Lord. The mental speculators, as it is stated in the Brahma-sarnhita, even
by dint of learned scholarship, cannot even dream of the Absolute Truth
by speculating over it for eternity. The Lord reserves the right of not being
exposed to such mental speculators. And because they cannot enter into
the network stem of the lotus feet of the Lord, all mental speculators differ
in conclusions, and at the end they make a useless compromise by saying
“as many conclusions, as many ways,” according to one’s own inclination
(yatha-rucam). But the Lord is not like a shopkeeper trying to please all
sorts of customers in the mental speculator exchange. The Lord is what
He is, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, and He demands absolute


--- Page 211 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
surrender unto Him only. The pure devotee, however, by following the
ways of previous acaryas or authorities, can see the Supreme Lord through
the transparent medium of a bona fide spiritual master (anupasyanti). The
pure devotee never tries to see the Lord by mental speculation, but by
following the footsteps of the dcaryas (mahdjano yena gatah sa pantha).
Therefore there is no difference of conclusions amongst the Vaisnava
acaryas regarding the Lord and the devotees. Lord Caitanya asserts that the
living entity (jiva) is eternally the servitor of the Lord and that he is
simultaneously one and different from the Lord. This tattva of Lord
Caitanya is shared by all the four sampradayas of the Vaisnava school
(all accepting eternal servitude of the Lord even after salvation), and there
is no authorized Vaisnava acarya who may think of the Lord and himself
as one.

This humbleness of the pure devotee who is one hundred percent
engaged in His service puts the devotee of the Lord in a trance to realize
everything, because to the sincere devotee of the Lord, the Lord reveals
Himself, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 10.10). The Lord, being the
Lord of intelligence in everyone (even in the nondevotee), favors His
devotee with proper intelligence so that automatically the pure devotee is
enlightened with the factual truth about the Lord and His different
energies. The Lord is revealed not by one’s speculative power or by one’s
verbal jugglery over the Absolute Truth. Rather, He reveals Himself to a
devotee when He is fully satisfied by his service attitude. Sukadeva Gosvami
is not a mental speculator or compromiser of the theory of “‘as many ways,
as many conclusions,” but He prays to the Lord only, invoking His tran-
scendental pleasure. That is the way of knowing the Lord.

TEXT 22
प्रचोदिता येन पुरा aT
बितन्वताजस्य सतीं स्मरति हदि |
स्वलक्षणा प्रादुरभूत्‌ किंटासखतः
स मे ऋषीगाप्रषमः प्रसीदताम्‌ ॥२२॥
pracodita yena pura sarasvati
vitanvatdajasya satin smrtim hrdi
sva-laksana pradurabhiit kilasyatah
sa me rsinam rsabhah prasidatam


--- Page 212 ---
Text 22] The Process of Creation 213
pracodit@a—inspired; yena—by whom; purd—in the beginning of creation;
sarasvati—the goddess of learning; vitanvat@—amplified ; ajasya—of Brahma,
the first created living being; satim smrtim—potent memory; hrdi—in the
heart; sva—in his own; laksana—aiming at; pradurabhiit—became generated;
kila—as if: asyatah—from the mouth; sah—he; me—unto me; rsinam—of the
teachers; rsabhah—the chief; prasidat@m—be pleased.
TRANSLATION
May the Lord, who in the beginning of the creation amplified the
potent knowledge of Brahma from within his heart and inspired him with
full knowledge of creation and of His own Self, and who appeared (0 be
generated from the mouth of Brahma, be pleased upon me.
PURPORT
As we have already discussed hereinbefore, the Lord, as the Supersoul of
all living beings from Brahma to the insignificant ant, endows all with the
required knowledge potent in every living being. A living being is suffi-
ciently potent to possess knowledge from the Lord in the proportion of
50/64, or 78% of the full knowledge acquirable. The living being, being
constitutionally part and parcel of the Lord, is unable to assimilate all the
knowledge that the Lord possesses Himself. In the conditioned state, the
living being is subject to forget everything after a change of body known
as death. This potent knowledge is again inspired by the Lord from within
the heart of every living being, and it is known as the awakening of know-
ledge, for it is comparable to awakening from sleep or unconsciousness.
This awakening of knowledge is under full control of the Lord, and
therefore we find in the practical world different grades of knowledge in
different persons. This awakening of knowledge is neither an automatic nor
a malerial interaction. The supply source is the Lord Himself (dhiyam
patik), for even Brahma is also subjected to this regulation of the supreme
creator. In the beginning of the creation, Brahma is born first without any
father and mother because before Brahma there were no other living
beings. Brahma is born from the lotus which grows from the abdomen of
the GarbhodakasayT Visnu. and therefore he is known as Aja. This Brahma
or Aja is also a living being, part and parcel of the Lord, but being the most
pious devotee of the Lord, Brahma is inspired by the Lord to create,
subsequent to the main creation by the Lord, through the agency of
malerial nature. Therefore neither the material nature nor Brahma is


--- Page 213 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
independent of the Lord. The material scientists can merely observe the
reactions of the material nature without understanding the direction behind
such activities, as the child can see the action of electricity without any
knowledge of the powerhouse engineer. This imperfect knowledge of the
material scientist is due to a poor fund of knowledge. The Vedic knowledge
was therefore first impregnated within Brahma, and it appears that Brahma
distributed the Vedic knowledge. Brahma is undoubtedly the speaker of
the Vedic knowledge, but actually he was inspired by the Lord to receive
such transcendental knowledge, as it directly descends from the Lord. The
Vedas are therefore called apauruseya, or not imparted by any created
being. Before the creation the Lord was there (narayanah paro’vyaktat),
and therefore the words spoken by the Lord are vibrations of transcen-
dental sound. There is a gulf of difference between the two qualities of
sound, namely prakrta and aprakrta. The physicist can only deal with the
prakrta sound or sounds vibrated in the material sky, and therefore we
must know that the Vedic sounds recorded in symbolic expressions cannot
be understood by anyone within the universe unless and until one is
inspired by the vibration of supernatural (aprakrta) sound, which descends
in the chain of disciplic succession from the Lord to Brahma, from Brahma
to Narada, from Narada to Vyasa and so on. No mundane scholar can
translate or reveal the true import of the Vedic mantras (hymns). They
cannot be understood unless one is inspired or initiated by the authorized
spiritual master. The original spiritual master is the Lord Himself, and the
succession comes down through the sources of parampara, as is clearly
stated in the Fourth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita. So unless one receives
the transcendental knowledge from the authorized parampara, one should
be considered useless (viphala-matah), even though one may be greatly
qualified in the mundane advancements of arts or science.

Sukadeva Gosvami is praying from the Lord by dint of being inspired
from within by the Lord so that he could rightly explain the facts and
figures of creation as inquired by Maharaja Pariksit. A spiritual master is
not a theoretical speculator, like the mundane scholar, but is srotriyarn
brahmanistham.

TEXT 23
भूतै्मदद्धियं इमाः पुरो Ag
निर्माय शेते यदमूषु पूरुषः ।
IS गुणान्‌ षोडश षोडशात्मकः
सोऽलङ्कृषीष्ट WEE वचांसि मे 131


--- Page 214 ---
Text 23] The Process of Creation 215
bhiitair mahadbhir ya imah puro vibhur
nirmdya sete yadamisu parusah
bhunkte gunan sodasa sodasatmakah
so’lankrsista bhagavan vacamsi me
bhiitaih—by the elements; mahadbhih—of material creation; yah—He
who; imah—all these; purah—bodies; vibhuh—of the Lord; nirmaya—for
being set up; sete—lie down; yadamiisu—one who incarnated; pirusah—
Lord Visnu; bhuiikte—causes to be subjected; gunan—the three modes of
nature; sodasa—in sixteen divisions; sodasatmakah—kbeing the generator of
these sixteen; sah—He; alanikrsista—may decorate; bhagavan—the Person-
ality of Godhead; vacarisi—statements; me—mine.
TRANSLATION
May the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enlivens the materially
created bodies of the elements by lying down within the universe, and who
in His purusa incarnation causes the living being to be subjected to the
sixteen divisions of material modes which are his generator, be pleased to
decorate my statements.
PURPORT
Sukadeva Gosvami (unlike a mundane man who is proud of his own
capability) as a fully dependent devotee invokes the pleasure of the
Personality of Godhead so that his statements might be successful and so
that they might be appreciated by the hearers. The devotee always thinks
of himself as instrumental for anything successfully carried out, and he
declines to take credit for anything done by himself. The godless atheist
wants to take all credit for activities, without knowing that even a blade
of grass cannot move without the sanction of the Supreme Spirit, the
Personality of Godhead. Sukadeva Gosvami therefore wants to move by
the direction of the Supreme Lord, who inspired Brahma to speak the
Vedic wisdom. The truths described. in the Vedic literatures are neither
theories of mundane imagination nor are they ficticious, as the less intelli-
gent class of men sometimes think. The Vedic truths are all perfect
descriptions of the factual truth without any mistake or illusion, and
Sukadeva Gosvami wants to present the truths of creation not as a meta-
physical theory of philosophical speculation, but as the actual facts and
figures of the subject, since he would be dictated to by the Lord exactly in


--- Page 215 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
the same manner as Brahmaji was inspired. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 15.15), the Lord is Himself the father of the Vedanta knowledge, and
itis He only who knows the factual purport of the Vedanta philosophy. So
there is no greater truth than the principles of religion mentioned in the
Vedas. Such Vedic knowledge or religion is disseminated by authorities
like Sukadeva Gosvami because he is a humble devotional servitor of the
Lord who has no desire to become a self-appointed interpreter without
authority. That is the way of explaining the Vedic knowledge, technically
known as the parampara system, or descending process.

The intelligent man can see without mistake that any material creation
(either one’s own body or a fruit or flower) cannot beautifully grow up
without the spiritual touch. The greatest intelligent man of the world or
the greatest man of science can present everything very beautifully only
insofar as the spirit life is there or insomuch as the spiritual touch is there.
Therefore the source of all truths is the Supreme Spirit, and not gross
matter as it is ill-conceived by the gross materialist. We get information
from the Vedic literature that the Lord Himself first of all entered the
vacuum of the material universe, and thus everything gradually developed
one after another. Similarly, the Lord is situated as localized Paramatma
in every individual being; hence everything is done by Him very beautifully.
The sixteen principal creative elements, namely earth, water, fire, air, sky,
and the eleven sense organs, first developed from the Lord Himself and
were therebyshared by the living entities. Thus the material elements were
created for the enjoyment of the living entities. The beautiful arrangement
behind all material manifestations is therefore made possible by the energy
of the Lord, and the individual living entity can pray to the Lord only for
its proper understanding. Since the Lord is the supreme entity, different
from & site Gosvami, the prayer can be offered to Him. The Lord
helps the living entity to enjoy material creation, but He is aloof from
such false enjoyment. Sukadeva prays for the mercy of the Lord, not
only for being helped personally in presenting the truth, but also for help-
ing others to whom he would like to speak. .

TEXT 24
नमस्तस्मै WEA वामुदेषाय वेधसे |
पपुज्ञानमयं सोम्या यय्यु्वाम्बुरुटासम्‌ RSI


--- Page 216 ---
Text 241] The Process of Creation 2117

namas tasmai bhagavate

vasudevaya vedhase
papur jiianam ৫) 0৫71) saumya
yan-mukhamburuhdsavam

namah—my obeisances; tasmai—unto him; bhagavate—unto the Person-
ality of Godhead; vasudevaya—unto Vasudeva or His incarnations; vedhase—
the compiler of the Vedic literatures; papuh—drunk; jianam—knowledge;
ayam—this Vedic knowledge; saumydh—the devotees, especially the
consorts of Lord Krsna; yai—from whose; mukha-amburuha—the lotus-

like mouth; @savam—nectar from this mouth.

TRANSLATION
1 offer my respectful obeisances unto the incarnation of Vasudeva,
Srila Vyasadeva, who compiled the Vedic scriptures. The pure devotees
drink up the nectarean transcendental knowledge dropping from the

lotus-like mouth of the Lord.
PURPORT

In pursuance of the specific utterance vedhase, or the compiler of the
system of transcendental knowledge, Srila Sridhara Svami has commented
that the respectful obeisances are offered to Srila Vyasadeva, who is the
incarnation of Vasudeva. Srila Jiva Gosvami has agreed to this, but Srila
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakur has made a further advance, namely that
the nectar from the mouth of Lord Krsna is transferred to His different
consorts, and thus they learn the finer arts of music, dance, dressing,
decorations and all such things which are relished by the Lord. Such music,
dance and decorations enjoyed by the Lord are certainly not anything
mundane, because the Lord is addressed in the very beginning as para, or
transcendental. This transcendental knowledge is unknown to the forgotten
conditioned souls. Srila Vyasadeva, who is the incarnation of the Lord,
thus compiled the Vedic literatures to revive the lost memory of the
conditioned souls about their eternal relation with the Lord. One should
therefore try to understand the Vedic scriptures from the lotus-like mouth
of Vyasadeva, or Sukadeva, the nectar transferred by the Lord to His
consorts in the conjugal humor. By gradual development of transcendental
knowledge, one can rise to the stage of the transcendental arts of music


--- Page 217 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 4
and dance displayed by the Lord in His rase-lila. But without having the
Vedic knowledge one can hardly understand the transcendental nature
of the Lord’s rasa dance and music. The pure devotees of the Lord,
however, can equally relish the nectar both in the form of the profound
philosophical discourses or in the form of kissing by the Lord in the rasa
dance, as there is no mundane distinction between the two.
TEXT 25
एतदेवात्मभू राजन्‌ नारदाय विपृच्छते |
वेद गर्भोऽभ्यधात्‌ साक्षाद्‌ यदाह हरिरात्मनः RM
etad evatma-bhit rajan
naradaya viprcchate
veda-garbho’bhyadhat saksad
yad aha harir atmanah
etat—on this matter; eva—exactly; atma-bhish—the first-born (Brahmajt);
rajan—my dear King; nareddya—unto Narada Muni; viprcchate—having in-
quired about it from; veda-garbhah—one who is impregnated with Vedic
knowledge from birth; abhyadhdt—apprised; saksat—directly; yad aha—
what he spoke; harih—the Lord; atmanah—unto His own (Brahma).
TRANSLATION
My dear King, Brahma, the first-born, on being questioned by Narada,
exactly apprised him on this subject, as it was directly spoken by the
Lord to His own son, who is impregnated with Vedic knowledge from his
very birth.
PURPORT
As soon as Brahma was born out of the abdomenal lotus petals of
Visnu, he was impregnated with Vedic knowledge, and therefore he is
known as veda-garbha, or a Vedantist from the embryo. Without Vedic
knowledge, or perfect infallible knowledge, no one can create anything.
All scientific knowledge and perfect knowledge are Vedic. One can get


--- Page 218 ---
Text 25] The Process of Creation 219
all types of information from the Vedas, and as such, Brahma was
impregnated with all-perfect knowledge so that it was possible for him to
create. Thus Brahma knew the perfect description of creation, as it was
exactly apprised to him by the Supreme Lord Hari. Brahma, on being
questioned by Narada, told Narada exactly what he had heard directly
from the Lord. Narada again exactly told the same thing to Vyasa, and
Vyasa also told Sukadeva exactly what he heard from Narada. And
Sukadeva was going to repeat the same statements as he heard them from
Vyasa. That is the way of Vedic understanding. The language of the Vedas
can be revealed only by the above-mentioned disciplic succession, and not
otherwise.

There is no use in theories. Knowledge must be factual. There are many
things that are complicated, and no one can understand them unless they
are explained by one who knows. The Vedic knowledge is also very
difficult to know and must be learned by the above-mentioned system,
otherwise it is not at all understood.

Sukadeva Gosvami, therefore, prayed for the mercy of the Lord so that
he might be able to repeat the very same message that was spoken directly
by the Lord to Brahma, or what was directly spoken by Brahma to Narada.
Therefore the statements of creation, which were explained by Sukadeva
Gosvami, are not at all, as the mundaners suggest, theoretical, but they
are perfectly correct. One who hears these messages and tries to assimilate
them gets perfect information of the material creation.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Fourth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Process of Creation.”


--- Page 219 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
The Cause of All Causes
TEXT 1
नारद उवाच न
देवदेव नमस्तेऽस्तु भूतभावन पूवज |
तद्‌ विजानीहि यज्ज्ञानमात्मत्वनिद्चनम्‌ ।॥ १ ॥
narada uvaca
deva-deva namas te ‘stu
bhiita-bhavana parva-ja
tad vijanihi yaj jianam
atma-tattva-nidarsanam
ट naradah uvaca— Sri Narada said; deva— of all demigods; deva— the demi-
god; namah—obeisances; te—unto you as; astu—are; bhiita-bhdvana—the
generator of all living beings; parva-ja—the first-born; tad vijanihi— please
explain that knowledge; yaj jignam—which knowledge; atma-tattva—tran-
scendental; nidarsanam—specifically directs.
TRANSLATION
Sri Narada Muni asked Brahmaji: 0 chief amongst the demigods, 0
first-born living entity, I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto you.
Please tell me that transcendental knowledge which specifically directs one
to the truth of the individual soul and the Supersoul.
PURPORT
The perfection of the parampara system, or the path of disciplic
succession, is further confirmed. In the previous chapter it has been
established that Brahmaji, the first-born living entity, received know-
ledge directly from the Supreme Lord, and the same knowledge is im-
parted to Narada, the next disciple. Narada asked to receive the know-
ledge, and Brahmaji imparted it upon being asked. Therefore asking for
transcendental knowledge from the right person and receiving it properly
221


--- Page 220 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
is the regulation of the disciplic succession. This process is recommended
in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 4.2). The inquisitive student must approach a
qualified spiritual master to receive transcendental knowledge by surrender,
submissive inquiries and service. Knowledge received by submissive in-
quiries and service is more effective than knowledge received in exchange
for money. A spiritual master in the line of disciplic succession from
Brahma and Narada has no demand for dollars and cents. A bona fide
student has to satisfy him by sincere service to obtain knowledge of the
relation and nature of the individual soul and the Supersoul.
TEXT 2
५ ~ নে त . -
यद्रूपं यदधिष्टानं यतः get प्रमो ।
यत्संस्थं यत्परं यच्च तत्‌ तत्वं वद्‌ तत्वतः ॥ २॥
yad कनकः yad adhisthanam
yatah srstam 1007 prabho
yat samsthari yat param yac ca
tat tattvam vada tattvatah
yat—what; ripam—the symptoms of manifestation; yat—what; adhistha-
nam—background; yatah—from where; srstam—created; idam—this world;
prabho—O my father; yat—in which; samstham—conserved; yat—what;
param—under control; yat—what are; ca—and; tat—all these; tvam—yourself;
vada—please describe; tattvatah—factually.
TRANSLATION
My dear father, please describe factually the symptoms of this mani-
fest world. What is its background? How is it created? How is it conserved?
And under whose control is all this being done?
PURPORT
The inquiries by Narada Muni appear to be very reasonable on the basis
of factual cause and effect. The atheists, however, put forward many self-
made theories without any touch of cause and effect. The manifested
world, as well as the spirit soul, is still unexplained by the godless atheists
through the medium of experimental knowledge, although they have put
forward many theories manufactured by their fertile brains. Contrary
to such mental speculative theories of creation, however, Narada Muni
wanted to know all the facts of creation in truth, and not by theories.


--- Page 221 ---
Text 3] The Cause of All Causes 223

Transcendental knowledge regarding the soul and the Supersoul includes
knowledge of the phenomenal world and the basis of its creation. In the
phenomenal world three things are factually observed by any intelligent
man: the living beings, the manifest world, and the ultimate control over
them. The intelligent man can see that neither the living entity nor the
phenomenal world are creations of chance. The symmetry of creation and
its regulative actions and reactions suggests the plan of an intelligent brain
behind them, and, by genuine inquiry, one may find out the ultimate
cause with the help of one who knows them factually.

TEXT 3
<
सवं द्येतद्‌ भवान्‌ वेद॒ ATER: |
करामलकवद्‌ विश्॑विज्ञाना्सितं तव ॥ ३॥
sarvam hy etad bhavan veda
bhita-bhavya-bhavat-prabhuh
karamalaka-vad visvam
vijiianavasitam tava

sarvam—all and everything; hi—certainly; etat—this; bhavan—your good
self; veda—know; bhiita—all that is created or born; bhavya—all that will
be created or born; bhavat—all that is being created; prabhuh—you, the
master of everything; kara-amalaka-vat—just like a walnut within your
grip; visvam—the universe; vijiiana-avasitam—within your knowledge scien-
tifically; tava—your.

TRANSLATION
My dear father, all this is known to you scientifically because whatever
was created in the past, whatever will be created in the future, or whatever
is being created at present, as well as everything within the universe, is
within your grip, just like a walnut.
PURPORT

Brahma is the direct creator of the manifested universe and everything
within the universe. He therefore knows what happened in the past, what
will happen in the future, and what is happening at present. Three principal


--- Page 222 ---
224. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
items, namely the living being, the phenomenal world and the controller,
are all in continuous action—past, present, and future—and the direct
manager is supposed to know everything of such actions and reactions, as
one knows about a walnut within the grip of one’s palm. The direct
manufacturer of a particular thing is supposed to know how he learned the
art of manufacturing, where he got the ingredients, how he set it up and
how the products in the manufacturing process are being turned out.
Because Brahma is the first-born living being, naturally he is supposed to
know everything about creative functions.
TEXT 4
यद्विज्ञानो यदाधारो यत्परस्त्वं यदारमकः |
EY
oF: छृजसि भूतानि भूतैरेवात्ममायया ॥ ४॥
yad vijiiano yad-adharo
yat-paras (20472. yad-atmakah
ekah srjasi bhictani
bhiitair evatma-mayaya
yad vijidgnah—the source of knowledge; yad-ddharah—under whose
protection; yad-parah—under whose subordination; tvam—you; yad-
atmakah—in what capacity; ekah—alone; srjasi—you are creating; bhitani—
the living entities; bhiitaih—with the help of material elements; eva—
certainly; atma—self; mayaya—by potency.
TRANSLATION
My dear father, what is the source of your knowledge? Under whose
protection are you standing? And under whom are you working? What is
your real position? Do you alone create all entities with material elements
by your personal energy?
PURPORT
It was known to Sri Narada Muni that Lord Brahma attained creative
energy by undergoing severe austerities. As such, he could understand that
there was someone else superior to Brahmaji who invested Brahma with


--- Page 223 ---
Text 5] The Cause of All Causes 225
the power of creation. Therefore he asked all the above questions. Dis-
coveries of progressive scientific achievements are therefore not indepen-
dent. The scientist has to attain the knowledge of a thing already existing
by means of the wonderful brain made by someone else. A scientist can
work with the help of such an awarded brain, but it is not possible for the
scientist to create his own or a similar brain. Therefore no one is indepen-
dent in the matter of any creation, nor is such creation automatic.
TEXT 5
आत्मन्‌ मारयसे तानि न पराभावयन्‌ खयम्‌ |
आत्मशक्तिमवषटम्य ऊर्गनामिखिाङ्गमः ॥ ५॥
atman bhavayase tani
na parabhavayan svayam
atma-$aktim avastabhya
arnanabhir ivaklamah

atman (atmani)—by self; bhavayase—manifest; tani—all those; na—not;
parabhavayan—being defeated; svayam—yourself; atma-saktim—self-
sufficient power; avastabhya—being employed; @rpanabhih—the spider;
iva—like; aklamah— without help.

TRANSLATION
As the spider very easily creates the network of its cobweb and mani-
fests its power of creation without being defeated by others, so also
you yourself, by employment of your self-sufficient energy, create without
any other’s help.
PURPORT

The best example of self-sufficiency is the sun. The sun does not
require to be illuminated by any other body. Rather, it is the sun which
helps all other illuminating agents, for in the presence of the sun no other
illuminating agent becomes prominent. Narada compared the position of
Brahma with the self-sufficiency of the spider, who creates its own field of
activities without any other’s help by employment of its own energetic
creation of saliva.


--- Page 224 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
TEXT 6
नाहं वेद परं ्यसिन्नापरं न समं विमो ।
नामरूपगुणेमाव्यं सदसत्‌ किञचिदन्यतः ।॥ ६ ॥
naharm veda param hy asmin
naparari na samari vibho
nama-ripa-gunair bhavyar
sadasat kificid anyatah
na—do not;aham—myself; veda—know ; param—superior; hi—for; asmin—
in this world; na—neither; aparam—inferior; na—nor; samam—equal; vibho—
O great one; ndma—name; riipa— characteristics; gupath—by qualification;
bhavyam—all that is created; sat—eternal; asat—temporary; kificit—or any-
thing like that; anyatah—from any other source.
TRANSLATION
Whatever we can understand by nomenclature, characteristics and
features of a particular thing, superior, inferior or equal, eternal or
temporary, is not created from any source other than that of your lord-
ship, thou so great.
PURPORT
The manifested world is full of varieties of created beings in 8,400,000
species of life, and some of them are superior and inferior to others. In
human society the human being is considered to be the superior living
being, and amongst the human beings there are also different varieties:
good, bad, equal, ete. But Narada Muni took for granted that none of
them has any source of generation besides his father Brahmiji. Therefore he
wanted to know all about them from Lord Brahma.
TEXT 7
स भवानचरद्‌ धोरं यत्‌ तपः gaa: |
तेन खेदयसे नस्त्वं पराशङ्कां च यच्छसि || ७॥


--- Page 225 ---
Text 7] The Cause of All Causes 227
sa bhavan acarad ghoram
yat tapah su-samahitah
tena khedayase nas (एक)
para Sankam ca yacchasi
sah—he; bhavan— your good self; acarat— undertook; ghoram— severe;
yat tapah—meditation; su-samahitah—in perfect discipline; tena—for that
reason; khedayase—gives pain; nah— ourselves; tvam—your good self; para—
the ultimate truth; $ankam—doubts; ca—and; yacchasi—giving us a chance.
TRANSLATION
Yet we are moved to wonder about the existence of someone more
powerful than you when we think of your great austerities in perfect
discipline, although your good self is so powerful in the matter of creation.
PURPORT
Following in the footsteps of Sri Narada Muni, one should not blindly
accept his spiritual master as God Himself. A spiritual master is duly
respected on a par with God, but a spiritual master claiming to be God
Himself should at once be rejected. Narada Muni accepted Brahma as the
Supreme due to Lord Brahma’s wonderful acts in creation, but doubts
arose in him when he saw that Lord Brahma also worshiped some superior
authority. The Supreme is supreme, and He has no worshipable superior.
The ahangrahopasand, or the one who worships himself with the idea of
becoming God Himself, is misleading, but the intelligent disciple can at
once detect that the Supreme God does not need to worship anyone,
including Himself, in order to become God. Ahangrahopdsana may be one
of the processes for transcendental realization, but the ahangrahopasana
can never be God Himself. No one becomes God by undergoing a process of
transcendental realization. Narada Muni thought of Brahmaji as the Su-
preme Person, but when he saw Brahmaji engaged in the process of
transcendental realization, doubts arose in him. So he wanted to be clearly
informed.


--- Page 226 ---
228 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
TEXT 8
एतन्मे पृच्छतः सर्वं सवज्ञ GEO |
विजानीहि यथैवेदमहं बुष्येऽवुजशासितः ॥ ८ ॥
etan me prcchatah sarvam
sarva-jiia sakalesvara
vijanihi yathaivedam
ahariv budhye ’nusasitah
etat—all those; me—unto me; prcchatah—inquisitive; sarvam—all that is
inquired; sarva-jia—one who knows everything; sakala—over all; इष्वा
the controller; vijanihi—kindly explain; yathd—as; eva—they are; idam—
this; aham—myself; budhye—can understand; anusasitah—just learning from
you.
TRANSLATION
My dear father, you know everything, and you are the controller of
all. Therefore may all that I have inquired from you kindly be instructed
to me so that I may be able to understand them as your student.
PURPORT
The inquiries made by Narada Muni are very important for everyone
concerned, and as such Narada requested Brahmaji to deem them suitable
so that all others who may come in the line of disciplic succession of the
Brahma-sampradaya may also know them properly without any difficulty.
TEXT 9
जल्मोवाच
सम्यक्‌ कारुणिकस्येदं वत्स ते विचिकित्सितम्‌ |
यदहं चोदितः सौम्य भगवद्वीय॑दरशंने ॥ ९ ॥
brahmovaca
samyak karunikasyedam


--- Page 227 ---
Text 10] The Cause of All Causes 229
vatsa te vicikitsitam
yad aha coditah saumya
bhagavad-virya-darsane
अद brahma uvaca— Lord Brahma said; samyak— perfectly; karunpikasya—
of you, who are very kind; idam—this; vatsa—my dear boy; te—your;
vicikitsitam—inquisitiveness; yat—by which; aham—myself; coditah—in-
spired; saumya—O gentle one; bhagavat—of the Personality of Godhead;
virya—prowess; darsane—in the matter of.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said, My dear boy Narada, being merciful upon all
(including myself) you have asked all these questions because I have been
inspired to see into the prowess of the Almighty Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Brahmaji, being so questioned by Naradaji, congratulated him, for it is
usual for the devotees to become very enthusiastic whenever they are
questioned concerning the Almighty Personality of Godhead. That is the
sign of a pure devotee of the Lord. Such discourses on the transcendental
activities of the Lord purify the atmosphere in which such discussions are
held, and the devotees thus become enlivened while answering such ques-
tions. It is purifying both for the questioners and for one who answers the
questions. The pure devotees are not only satisfied by knowing every thing
about the Lord, but they are also eager to broadcast the information to
others, for they want to see that the glories of the Lord are known to
everyone. Thus the devotee feels satisfied when such an opportunity is
offered to him. This is the basic principle of missionary activities.
TEXT 10
AFA तव तच्चापि यथा मां प्रत्रवीषि মীঃ ।
अविज्ञाय परं मत्त एतावत्त्वं यतो हि मे ॥१०॥


--- Page 228 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
nanrtar tava taccapi
yatha mari prabravisi bhoh
avijiidya param matta
etavat tvari yato hi me

na—not; anrtam—false; tava—of yours; tat—that; ca—also; api—as you
have stated; yatha—in the matter of; mam—of myself; prabravisi—as you
describe; bhoh—O my son; avijiaya—without knowing; param—the Su-
preme; mattah—beyond myself; etavat—all that you have spoken; tvam—
yourself; yatah—for the reason of; hi—certainly; me—about me.

TRANSLATION
Whatever you have spoken about me is not false because unless and
until one is aware of the Personality of Godhead, who is the ultimate truth
beyond me, one is sure to be illusioned by observing my powerful activities.
PURPORT

“The frog in the well” logic illustrates that a frog residing in the atmos-
phere and boundary of a well cannot imagine the length and breadth of
the gigantic ocean. Such a frog, when it is informed of the gigantic length
and breadth of the ocean, first of all does not believe that there is such an
ocean, and if someone assures him that factually there is such a thing, the
frog then begins to measure it by imagination by means of pumping its
belly as far as possible, with the result that the tiny abdomen of the frog
bursts and the poor frog dies without any experience of the actual ocean.
Similarly, the material scientists also want to challenge the inconceivable
potency of the Lord by measuring Him with their frog-like brains and their
scientific achievements, but at the end they simply die unsuccessfully,
like the frog.

Sometimes a materially powerful man is accepted as God or the incar-
nation of God without any knowledge of the factual God. Such a material
assessment may be gradually proceeded on, and the attempt may reach to
the highest limit of Brahmaji, who is the topmost living being within the
universe and has a duration of life unimaginable by the material scientist.
As we get information from the most authentic book of knowledge, the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.17), Brahmaji’s one day and night is calculated to be
some hundreds of thousands of years on our planet. This long duration of
life may not be believed by “the frog in the well,” but persons who have a


--- Page 229 ---
Text 10] The Cause of All Causes 231
realization of the truths mentioned in the Bhagavad-gita accept the exis-
tence of a great personality who creates the variegatedness of the complete
universe. It is understood from the revealed scriptures that the Brahmijt
of this universe is younger than all the other Brahmas in charge of the
many, many universes beyond this, but none of them can be equal to the
Personality of Godhead.

Naradaji is one of the liberated souls, and after his liberation he was
known as Narada; otherwise, before His liberation, he was simply a son of
a maidservant. The questions may be asked why Naradaji was not aware of
the Supreme Lord and why he misconceived Brahmaiji as the Supreme
Lord, although factually he was not so. A liberated soul is never bewildered
by such a mistaken idea, so why did Naradaji ask all those questions just
like an ordinary man with a poor fund of knowledge? There was such
bewilderment in Arjuna also, although he is eternally the associate of the
Lord. Such bewilderment in Arjuna or in Narada takes place by the will of
the Lord so that other nonliberated persons may realize the real truth and
knowledge of the Lord. The doubt arising in the mind of Narada about
Brahmaji’s becoming all-powerful is a lesson for the frogs in the well, that
they may not be bewildered in misconceiving the identity of the Person-
ality of Godhead (even by comparison with a personality like Brahma, so
what to speak of ordinary men who falsely pose themselves as God or an
incarnation of God). The Supreme Lord is always the Supreme, and as we
have tried to establish many times in these purports, no living being, even
up to the standard of Brahma, can claim to be one with the Lord. One
should not be misled when people worship a great man as God after his
death as a matter of hero worship. There were many kings like Lord
Ramacandra, the King of Ayodhya, but none of them are mentioned as
God in the revealed scriptures. To become a good king is not necessarily
the qualification of becoming Lord Rama, but to be a great personality
like Krsna is the qualification of becoming the Personality of Godhead. If
we scrutinize the characters who took part in the Battle of Kuruksetra, we
may find that Maharaja Yudhisthira was no less a pious king than Lord
Ramacandra, and by character study Maharaja Yudhisthira was a better
moralist than Lord Krsna. Lord Krsna asked Maharaja Yudhisthira to lie,
but Maharaja Yudhisthira protested. But that does not mean that Maharaja
Yudhisthira could be equal to Lord Ramacandra or Lord Krsna. The great
authorities have estimated Maharaja Yudhisthira to be a pious man, but
they have accepted Lord Rama or Krsna as the Personality of Godhead.
The Lord is therefore a different identity in all circumstances, and no idea
of anthropomorphism can be applied there. The Lord is always the Lord,
and a common living being can never be equal to Him.


--- Page 230 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
’ TEXT 11
. .
येन खरोचिषा विश्वं रोचितं रोचयाम्यहम्‌ ।
यथार्कोऽगरर्यथा सोमो यथरग्रहतारकाः 1220
yena sva-rocisa visvari
rocitarii rocayamy aham
yatharko ’gnir yatha somo
yatharksa-graha-tarakah
yena—by whom; sva-rocisa—by His own effulgence; visvam—all the
world; rocitam—already created potentially; rocayami—do manifest; aham—
I; yatha—as much: arkah—the sun; agnih—fire; yatha—as; somah—the moon;
yatha—as ६150; rksa—firmament; graha—influential planets; tarakah—stars.
TRANSLATION
I create after the Lord’s creation by His personal effulgence [known
as the brahmajyoti], just as when the sun manifests its fire, the moon,
the firmament, the influential planets and the twinkling slars are also
manifest.
PURPORT
Lord Brahmaji said to Narada that his impression that Brahma was
not the supreme authority in the creation was correct. Sometimes
less intelligent men have the foolish impression that Brahma is the
cause of all causes. But Narada wanted to clear the matter by the
statements of Brahmaji, the supreme authority in the universe. As the
decision of the supreme court of a state is final, similarly the judgement of
Brahmaji, the supreme authority in the universe, is final in the Vedic
process of acquiring knowledge. As we have already affirmed in the
previous verse, Naradaji was a liberated soul; therefore, he was not one of
the less intelligent men who accept a false god or gods in their own ways.
He represented himself as less intelligent and yet intelligently presented a
doubt to be cleared by the supreme authority so that the uninformed
might take note of it and be rightly informed about the intricacies of the
creation and the Creator.
In this verse Brahmaji clears up the wrong impression held by the less
intelligent and affirms that he creates the universal variegatedness after


--- Page 231 ---
Text 11] The Cause of All Causes 233
the potential creation by the glaring effulgence of Lord Sri Krsna.
Brahmaji has separately also given this statement in the sarmhita known as
the Brahma-sarhita, and he says there:
yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti-
kotisv asesa-vasudhadi asesa-bhistam
tad-brahma niskalam anantam asesa bhiitam
govindam adi purusam tam ahari bhajami
“I serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead Govinda, the primeval Lord
whose effulgence of His transcendental body, known as the brahmajyoti,
unlimited, unfathomed and all-pervasive, is the cause of the creation of
unlimited numbers of planets, etc., with varicties of climates and specific
conditions of life.”

The same statement is in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 14.27). Lord Krsna is
the background of the brahmajyoti (brahmane hi pratisthaham). In the
Nirukti, or Vedic dictionary, the import of pratistha is mentioned as that
which establishes. So the brahmajyoti 15 not independent or sclf-sufficient.
Lord Sri Krsna is ultimately the creator of the brahmajyoti, mentioned in
this verse as sva-rocisa, or the effulgence of the transcendental body of the
Lord. This brahmajyoti is all-pervading, and all creation is made possible
by its potential power; therefore the Vedic hymns declare that everything
that exists is being sustained by the brahmajyoti (sarvar khalv idam
brahma). Therefore the potential seed of all creation is the brahmajyoti,
and the same brahmajyoti, unlimited and unfathomed, is established by
the Lord. Therefore the Lord (Sri Krsna) is ultimately the supreme cause
of all creation (aham sarvasya prabhavah).

One should not expect the Lord to create like the blacksmith with a ham-
mer and other instruments. The Lord creates by His potencies. He has His
multifarious potencies (parasya $aktir vividhaiva srayate). Just as the small
seed of abanyan fruit has the potency to create a big banyan tree, similarly
the Lord disseminates all varieties of sceds by His potential brahmajyoti
(sva-rocisa), and the seeds are made to develop by the watering process of
persons like Brahma. Brahma cannot create the seeds, but he can manifest
the seed into a tree, just as a gardener helps the plants and orchards to
grow by the watering process. The example cited here of the sun is very
appropriate. In the material world the sun is the cause of all illumination:
fire, electricity, the rays of the moon, etc. All luminaries in the sky are
creations of the sun, the sun is the creation of the brahmajyoti, and the
brahmajyoti is the effulgence of the Lord. Thus the ultimate cause of
creation is the Lord.


--- Page 232 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
TEXT 12
तस्मै नमो भगवते रासुदेवाय धीमदि ।
यन्मायया दुयया मां वदन्ति जगद्गुरुम्‌ ॥१२॥
{4577107 namo bhagavate
vasudevaya dhimahi
yan-mayaya durjayaya
mam vadanti jagad-gurum
tasmai—unto Him; namah—offer my obeisances; bhagavate—unto the
Personality of Godhead; vasudevaya—unto Lord Krsna; dhimahi—do
meditate upon Him; yat—by whose; mayaya—potencies; durjayaya—invin-
cible; mam—unto me; vadanti—they say; jagat—world; gurum—the master.
TRANSLATION
1 offer my obeisances and meditate upon Lord Krsna [ Vasudeva], the
Personality of Godhead, whose invincible potency influences them [the
less intelligent class of men] to call me the supreme controller.
PURPORT
As will be more clearly explained in the next verse, the illusory potency
of the Lord bewilders the less intelligent to accept Brahmaji, or for that
matter any other person, as the Supreme Lord. Brahmaji, however, refuses
to be called this, and he directly offers his respectful obeisances unto Lord
Vasudeva, or Sri Krsna the Personality of Godhead, as he has already
offered the same respects to Him in the Brahma-samhita:
$varah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam.
“The Supreme Lord is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, the primeval
Lord in His transcendental body, and the ultimate cause of all causes. I
worship that primeval Lord Govinda.”
Brahmaji is conscious of his actual position, and he knows how less
intelligent persons are bewildered by the illusory energy of the Lord and


--- Page 233 ---
Text 13] The Cause of All Causes 235
whimsically accept anyone and everyone as God. A responsible personality
like Brahmaji refuses to be addressed as the Supreme Lord by his disciples
or subordinates, but foolish persons praised by men of the nature of dogs,
hogs, camels, and asses feel flattered to be addressed as the Supreme Lord.
Why such persons take pleasure in being addressed as God, or why such
persons are addressed as God by foolish admirers, is explained in the
following verse.
TEXT 13
विलज्जमानया यद ॒स्थातुमीक्षापयेऽपमुया |
विमोहिता षिकत्थन्ते ममाहमिति दुर्धियः ॥१३॥
vilajjamanaya yasya
sth&tum-iksa-pathe "muya
vimohita vikatthante
mamdaham iti durdhiyah

vilajjamanaya—by one who is ashamed of; yasya—whose; sthatum—te
stay; iksa-pathe—in the front; amuya—by the bewildering energy; vimo-
hitah—those who are bewildered; vikatthante—talks nonsense; mama—it
is mine; aham—1 am everything; iti—thus vituperating; durdhiyah—thus
ill conceived.

TRANSLATION
The illusory energy of the Lord cannot take precedence, being ashamed
of her position, but those who are bewildered by her always talk nonsense,
being absorbed in the thought 01, ‘It is I, and it is mine.’
PURPORT

The invincible powerful deluding energy of the Personality of God, or
the third energy, representing nescience, can bewilder the entire world of
animation, but still she is not strong enough to be able to stand in front
of the Supreme Lord. Nescience is behind the Personality of Godhead
where she is powerful enough to mislead the living beings, and the primary
symptom of such bewildered persons is that they talk nonsense. Non-
sensical talks are not supported by the principles of Vedic literatures, and


--- Page 234 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
first-grade nonsense talk is, “It is I, it is mine.” A godless civilizalion is
exclusively conducted by such false ideas, and such persons, without any
factual realization of God, accept a false God or falsely declare themselves
to be God to mislead persons who are already bewildered by the deluding
energy. Those who are, however, before the Lord, and who surrender unto
Him, cannol be influenced by the deluding energy; therefore they are free
from the misconception of “It is I, it is mine,” and therefore they do not
accept a false God or pose themselves as equal to the Supreme Lord.
Identification of the bewildered person is distinctly given in this verse.
TEXT 14
०.९ = _
द्रव्य कम च क्र মানা জার एव च।
न ১. ~
वासुदेवात्परो হাল चान्योऽर्थोऽप्ि TTT १४।॥
dravyam karma ca 16105 ca
sva-bhavo jiva eva ca
vasudevat paro brahman
na canyo ’rtho sti tattvatah
dravyam—the ingredients (earth, water, fire, air and sky); karma—the
interaction; ca—and; kalah—cternal time; ca—also; sva-bhavah—intuition
or nature; jivah—the living being; eva—certainly; ca—and; vasudevat—from
Vasudeva; parah—differentiated parts; brahman—O brahmana; na—never;
ca—also; anyah—separate; arthah—value; asti—there is; tat tvatah—in truth.
TRANSLATION
The five elementary ingredients of creation, the interaction thereof set
up by eternal time, and the intuition or nature of the individual living
beings are all differentiated parts and parcels of the Personality of Godhead,
Vasudeva, and in truth there is no other value in them.
PURPORT
This phenomenal world is impersonally the representation of Vasudeva
because the ingredients of its creation, their interaction and the enjoyer of


--- Page 235 ---
Text 15] The Cause of All Causes 237
the resultant action, the living being, are all produced by the external and
internal energies of Lord Krsna. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 7.4-5). The ingredients, namely earth, water, fire, air, sky, as well as
the conception of material identity, intelligence, and the mind, are pro-
duced of the external energy of the Lord. The living entity who enjoys the
interaction of the above gross and subtle ingredients, as set up by the
eternal lime, is the offshoot of internal potency, with freedom either to
remain in the material world or in the spiritual world. In the material world
the living entity is enticed by deluding nescience, but in the spiritual world
he is in the normal condition of spiritual existence without any delusion.
The living entity is known as the marginal potency of the Lord. But in all
circumstances, neither the material ingredients nor the spiritual parts and
parcels are independent from the Personality of Godhead Vasudeva because
all things, either products of the external, internal, or marginal potencies
of the Lord, are simply displays of the same cffulgence of the Lord, just
as light, heat and smoke are displays of fire. None of them are separate
from the fire—all of them combine together to be called fire; similarly, all
phenomenal manifestations, as well as the effulgence of the body of
Vasudeva, are His impersonal features, whereas He eternally exists in His
transcendental form called sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah, distinct from all con-
ceptions of the material ingredients mentioned above.
TEXT 15
ARMA वेदा देवा नारायणाङ्गजाः ।
नारायणपरा रोका नारायणपरा मखाः ॥१५॥
nardayana-pard veda
deva narayananga-jah
narayana-para loka
narayana-para makhah
narayana—the Supreme Lord; pardh—is the cause and is meant for;
vedah—knowledge; devah—the demigods; narayana—the Supreme Lord:
anga-jah—assisting hands; narayana—the Personality of Godhead; parah—
for the sake of; lokah—the planets; narayana—the Supreme Lord; parah—
just please Him; makhah—all sacrifices.


--- Page 236 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
The Vedic literatures are made by and are meant for the Supreme
Lord, the demigods are also meant for serving the Lord as parts of the
body, the different planets are also meant for the sake of the Lord, and
different sacrifices are performed just to please Him.
PURPORT
According to the Vedanta-sitras ($astra-yonitvat), the Supreme Lord is
the author of all revealed scriptures, and all revealed scriptures are for
knowing the Supreme Lord. 16005 means knowledge that leads to the
Lord. The Fedas are made just to revive the forgotten consciousness of the
conditioned souls, and any literature which is not meant for reviving God
consciousness is rejected al once by the Narayapa-para devotees. Such
deluding books of knowledge, not having Narayana as their aim, are not at
all knowledge but are the playgrounds for crows who are interested in the
rejected refuse of the world. Any book of knowledge (science or art) must
lead to the knowledge of Narayana; otherwise it must be rejected. That is
the way of advancement of knowledge. The Supreme worshipable Deity is
Narayana. The demigods are recommended secondarily for worship in
relation to Narayana because the demigods are assisting hands in the
management of the universal affairs. As the officers of a kingdom are
respected due to their relation to the king, similarly the demigods are
worshiped due to their relation to the Lord. Without the Lord’s relation,
worship of the demigods is unauthorized (avidhi-piarvakam), just as it is
improper to water the leaves and branches of a tree without watering its
root. Therefore the demigods are also dependent on Narayana. The lokas,
or different planets, are attractive because there are different varieties of
life and bliss partially representing the sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. Everyone
wants the eternal life of bliss and knowledge. In the material world such
eternal life of bliss and knowledge is progressively realized in the upper
planets, but after reaching there one is inclined to achieve further progress
along the path back to Godhead. Duration of life, with a proportionate
quantity of bliss and knowledge, may be increased from one planet to
another. One can increase the duration of life to thousands and hundreds
of thousands of years in different planets, but nowhere is there eternal life.
But one who can reach the highest planet of Brahma can aspire to reach
the planets in the spiritual sky where life is eternal. Therefore, the progres-


--- Page 237 ---
Text 16] The Cause of All Causes 239
sive journey from one planet to another is culminated by reaching the
supreme planet of the Lord (mad-dhama) where life is eternal and full of
bliss and knowledge. All different kinds of sacrifices are performed just to
satisfy Lord Narayana with a view to reach Him, and the best sacrifice
recommended in this age of Kali is sankirtana-yajiia, the mainstay of
devotional service of a Narayana-para devotee.
TEXT 16
a >
नारायणपरो योगो नाराप्रणपरं तपः।
ক ४
नारायणपरं ज्ञानं नारा्णपरा गतिः ॥१६॥
narayana-paro yogo
narayana-parari tapah
narayana-pararn jiianari
narayana-para gatih
narayana-parah—just to know Narayana; yogah— concentration of mind;
narayana-param—just with an aim to achieve Narayana; tapah—austerity;
narayana-param—just to realize a glimpse of Narayana; jianam— culture of
transcendental knowledge; narayana-para—the path of salvation ends by
entering the kingdom of Narayana; gatih— progressive path.
TRANSLATION
All different types of meditation or mysticism are means for realizing
Narayana. All austerities are aimed at achieving Narayana. Culture of
transcendental knowledge is for getting a glimpse of Narayana, and ulti-
mately salvation is entering the kingdom of Narayana.
PURPORT
In meditation, there are two systems of yoga, namely astanga-yoga and
sankhya-yoga. Astanga-yoga is practice in concentrating the mind, releasing
oneself from all engagements by the regulative processes of meditation,
concentration, sitting posture, blocking the movements of the internal
circulation of air, etc. Sankhya-yoga is meant for elucidating the truth
from ephemerals. But ultimately both the systems are meant for realizing


--- Page 238 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
the impersonal Brahman, which is but a partial representation of Narayana,
the Personality of Godhead. As we have explained before, the impersonal
Brahman effulgence is only a part of the Personality of Godhead. Imper-
sonal Brahman is situated on the person of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and as such, Brahman is the glorification of the Personality of
the Godhead. This is confirmed both in the Bhagavad-gita and in the
Matsya Purana. Gali means ultimate destination, or the last word in
liberation. To be one with the impersonal brahmajyoti is not ultimate
liberation, but superior to that is the sublime association of the Personality
of Godhead in one of the innumerable spiritual planets in the Vaikuntha
sky. Therefore the conclusion is that Narayana, or the Personality of
Godhead, is the ultimate destination for all kinds of yoga systems as well
as all kinds of liberation.
TEXT 17
तस्यापि FTA इटस्यस्याखिटात्मनः |
- Ey -
सज्यं यजामि सृषटोऽहमीक्षयवाभि चोदितः ॥१७॥
tasyapi drastur iSasya
kitta-sthasyakhilatmanah
srjyariv s;jami srsto "ham
iksayaivabhicoditah
tasya—His; api—certainly; drastuh—of the seer; iSasya—of the controller;
kita-sthasya—of the one who is over everyone’s intelligence; akhila-
atmanah—of the Supersoul; srjyam—that which is already created; srjami—
do I discover; srstah—created; aham—my self; iksaya—by glance over; eva—
exactly; abhicoditah—being inspired by Him.
TRANSLATION
Inspired by Him only, I discover what is already created by Him
[Narayana] under His vision as the all-pervading Supersoul, and I am also
created by Him only.
PURPORT
Even Brahma, the creator of the universe, admits that he is not the
actual creator but is simply inspired by the Lord Narayana and therefore


--- Page 239 ---
Text 17] The Cause of All Causes 241
creates under His superintendence those things which are already created
by Him, the Supersoul of all living entities. Two identities of soul, the
Supersoul and the individual soul, are admitted to be in the living entity,
even by the greatest authority of the universe. The Supersoul is the Su-
preme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, whereas the individual soul is the
eternal servitor of the Lord. The Lord inspires the individual soul to create
what is already created by the Lord, and by the good will of the Lord a
discoverer of something in the world is accredited as the discoverer. It is
said that Columbus discovered the Western hemisphere, but actually the
tract of land was not created by Columbus. The vast tract of land was
already there by the omnipotency of the Supreme Lord, and Columbus, by
dint of his past service unto the Lord, was blessed with the credit of dis-
covering America. Similarly, no one can create anything without the sanc-
tion of the Lord, since everyone sees according to his ability. This ability is
also awarded by the Lord according to one’s willingness to render service
unto the Lord. One must therefore be voluntarily willing to render service
unto the Lord, and thus the Lord will empower the doer in proportion to
his surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord. Lord Brahma is a great
devotee of the Lord; therefore he has been empowered or inspired by the
Lord to create a universe like the one manifested before us. The Lord also

inspired Arjuna to fight in the field of Kuruksetra as follows:

tasmat tvam uttistha yaso labhasva
jitva satran bhunksva rajyam samrddham
mayaivaite nihatah parvam eva
nimitta-matram bhava savyasacin

(Bg. 11.33)

The Battle of Kuruksetra, or any other battle at any place or at any time,
is made by the will of the Lord, for no one can arrange such mass annihila-
tion without the sanction of the Lord. The party of Duryodhana insulted
Draupadi, a great devotee of Krsna, and she appealed to the Lord as well
as to all persons who were silent observers of this unwarranted insult.
Arjuna was then advised by the Lord to fight and take credit; otherwise
the party of Duryodhana would be killed anyway by the will of the Lord.
So Arjuna was advised just to become the agent and take the credit for
killing great generals like Bhisma, Karna, etc.

In the 16005 such as the Katha Upanisad, the Lord is described as the
sarva-bhitta-antaratma, or the Personality of Godhead who resides in
everyone’s body and who directs everything for one who is a surrendered
soul unto Him. Those who are not surrendered souls are put under the


--- Page 240 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
care of the material nature (bhramayan sarva-bhaitani yantraradhani
mayaya); therefore, they are allowed to do things on their own account
and suffer the consequences themselves. Devotees like Brahma and Arjuna
do not do anything on their own account, but as fully surrendered souls
they always await indications from the Lord; therefore they attempt to
do something which appears to be very wonderful to the ordinary vision.
One of the Lord’s names is Urukrama, or one whose actions are very won-
derful and are beyond the imagination of the living being, so the actions of
His devotees sometimes appear to be very wonderful due to the direction
of the Lord. Beginning from Brahma, the topmost intelligent living entity
within the universe, down to the smallest ant, every living entity’s intelli-
gence is overseen by the Lord in His transcendental position as the witness
of all actions. The subtle presence of the Lord is felt by the intelligent
man who can study the psychic effects of thinking, feeling, and willing.
TEXT 18
ক
a रजस्तम इति fue ome: ।
Cn =
स्थितिसगेनिरोधेषु गृदीता मायया विमोः ॥१८॥
sattvar rajas tama iti
nirgunasya gunas trayah
sthiti-sarga-nirodhegsu
grhita mayaya vibhoh
sattvam—mode of goodness; rajah—mode of passion; tamah—mode of ig-
norance; iti—all these; nirgunasya—of the transcendence; gunas trayah—are
three qualities; sthiti—maintenance; sarga— creation; nirodhesu—in destruc-
tion; grhitdh—accepted; mayaya—by the external energy; vibhoh—of the
Supreme.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord is pure spiritual form, transcendental to all material
qualities, yet for the sake of the creation of the material world and its
maintenance and annihilation, He accepts through His external energy,
the material modes of nature called goodness, passion and ignorance.


--- Page 241 ---
Text 19] The Cause of All Causes 243
PURPORT

The Supreme Lord is the master of the external energy manifested by
the three material modes, namely goodness, passion and ignorance, and as
master of this energy He is ever nonaffected by the influence of such
bewildering encrgy. The living entities or the jivas are, however, affected by
or are susceptible to being influenced by such modes of material nature—
that is the difference between the Lord and the living entities. The living
entities are subjected by those qualities, alihough originally the living
entities are qualitatively one with the Lord. In other words, the material
modes of nature, being products of the energy of the Lord, are certainly
connected with the Lord, but the connection is just like that between the
master and the controller, whereas the living entities, who are entangled in
the material world, are neither masters nor controllers of that energy.
Rather, they become subordinate to or controlled by such energy. Fac-
tually the Lord is eternally manifested by His internal potency or spiritual
energy just like the sun and its rays in the clear sky, but al times He creates
the material energy, as the sun creates a cloud in the clear sky. As the sun
is ever increasingly unaffected by a spot of cloud, so also the unlimited
Lord is unaffected by the spot of material energy manifested at times in
the unlimited span of the Lord’s rays of brahmajyoti.

TEXT 19
TIRE द्रव्यज्ञानकरियाश्रयाः |
बधन्ति नित्यदा शुक्तं मायिनं पुरूपं गुणाः ॥१९॥
karya-karapa-kartrtve
dravya-jiana-kriyasrayah
badhnanti nityada muk tam
mayinar purusari gunah

karya—effect; karana—cause; kartrtve—in activities; dravya—material;
jaana—knowledge; kriya-asrayah—manifested by such symptoms; badh-
nanti—conditions; nityada—eternally; muktam—transcendental; mayinam
—affected by material energy; purusam—the living entity; gunah—the
material modes.


--- Page 242 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
These three modes of material nature, being further manifested as
matter, knowledge and activities, put the eternally transcendental living
entity under conditions of cause and effect and make him responsible for
such activities.
PURPORT

Because they arc between the internal and external potencies, the
eternally transcendental living entities are called the marginal potency of
the Lord. Factually, the living entities arc not meant to be so conditioned
by material energy, but duc to their being affected by the false sense of
lording over the material cnergy they come under the influence of such
potency and thus become conditioned by the three modes of material
nature. This external energy of the Lord covers up pure knowledge of the
living entity’s eternally existing with Him, but the covering 18 so constant
that it appears that the conditioned soul is eternally ignorant. Such is the
wonderful action of maya, or external energy manifested as if materially
produced. By the covering power of the material energy, the material
scientist cannot look beyond the material causes, but factually, behind
the material manifestations, there are adhibhitta, adhyatma and adhidaiva
actions, which the conditioned soul in the mode of ignorance cannot see.
The adhibhiita manifestation entails repetitions of births and deaths with
old age and diseases, the adhydtma manifestation conditions the spirit
soul, and the adhidaiva manifestation is the controlling system. These are
the material manifestations of cause and effect and the sense of responsi-
bility of the conditioned actors. They are, after all, manifestations of the
conditioned state, and freedom from such a conditioned state by the

human being is the highest perfectional attainment.

TEXT 20
स॒ एप भगर्वोिङ्गंलिभिरेतैरधोक्षजः |
खलक्षितगतिङरह्यन्‌ सर्वेपां মম चेश्वरः ॥२०॥
sa esa bhagavl lingais
tribhir etair adhoksajah
svalaksita-gatir brahman
sarvesarin mama cesvarah


--- Page 243 ---
Text 21] The Cause of All Causes 245

sah—He; esah—this; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; lingaih—by
the symptoms; tribhih—by the three; etath—by all these; adhoksajah—the
Superseer Transcendence; su-alaksita—veritably unseen; gatih—movement;
brahman—O Narada; sarvesam—of everyone; mama—mine; ca—as also;
iSvarah—the controller.

TRANSLATION
O Brahmana Narada, the Superseer, the transcendent Lord, is beyond
the perception of the material senses of the living entities because of the
above-mentioned three modes of nature. But He is the controller of
everyone, including myself.
PURPORT

In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.24-25) the Lord has declared very clearly
that the impersonalist, who gives more importance to the transcendental
rays of the Lord as brahmajyoti and who concludes that the Absolute
Truth is ultimately impersonal and only manifests a form at a time of
necessity, is less intelligent than the personalist, however much he may be
engaged in the matter of studying the Vedanta. The fact is that such im-
personalists are covered by the above-mentioned three modes of material
nature; therefore, they are unable to approach the transcendental Person-
ality of the Lord. The Lord is not approachable by everyone because He is
curtained by His yogamaya potency. But one should not wrongly conclude
that the Lord was formerly unmanifested and has now manifested Himself
in the human form. This misconception of the formlessness of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is due to the yogamaya curtain of the Lord and
can be removed only by the Supreme Will, as soon as the conditioned soul
surrenders unto Him. The devotees of the Lord who are transcendental to
the above-mentioned three modes of material nature can see the all-
blissful transcendental form of the Lord with their vision of love in the
attitude of pure devotional service.

TEXT 21
. . [३
CAG) कर्ष स्वमाष च মাহী मायया खया ।
आत्मन्‌ TBM प्राप्तं॑पिवुमपुरुपाददे ॥२१॥


--- Page 244 ---
246 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
kalari karma sva-bhavari ca
madyeso mayaya svaya
atman yadrcchaya praptari
vibubhisur upadade
kalam—eternal time; karma—fate of the living entity; sva-bhavam—na-
ture; ca—also; maya—potency;isah—the controller; mayaya—by the energy;
svaya—of His own; atman (atmani)—unto His Self; yadrcchaya—in-
dependently ;preptam—being merged in; vibubhiisuh—appearing differently;
upadade—accepted for being created again.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, who is the controller of all energies, thus creates, by His
own potency, eternal time, the fate of all living entities, and their par-
ticular nature, for which they were created, and He again merges them
independently.
PURPORT
The creation of the material world, wherein the conditioned souls are
allowed to act subordinately by the Supreme Lord, takes place again and
again after being repeatedly annihilated. The material creation is some-
thing like a cloud in the unlimited sky. The real sky is the spiritual sky,
eternally filled with the rays of the brahmajyoti, and a portion of this
unlimited sky is covered by the mahat-tattva cloud of the material creation
in which the conditioned souls, who want to lord it against the will of the
Lord, are put into play as they desire under the control of the Lord by
the agency of His external energy. As the rainy season appears and dis-
appears regularly, similarly the creation takes place and is again annihilated
under the control of the Lord, as is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 8.19). So the creation and annihilation of the material worlds is a
regular action of the Lord just to allow the conditioned souls to play as they
like and thereby create their own fate of being differently created again in
terms of their independent desires at the time of annihilation. The creation,
therefore, takes place at a historical date (as we are accustomed to think
of everything which has a beginning in our tiny experience). The process
of creation and annihilation is called anadi, or without reference to
date regarding the time the creation first took place, because the duration
of a partial creation even is 86,400,000 years. The law of creation is,


--- Page 245 ---
Text 22] The Cause of All Causes 247
however, as mentioned in the Vedic literatures, that it is created at certain
intervals and is again annihilated by the will of the Lord. The whole
material or even the spiritual creation is a manifestation of the energy of
the Lord, just as the light and heat of a fire are different manifestations
of the fire’s energy. The Lord therefore exists in His impersonal form by
such expansion of energy, and the complete creation rests on His im-
personal feature. Nonetheless He keeps Himself distinct from such crea-
tion as the pa@rmam (or complete), so no one should wrongly think that
His personal feature is not existent due to His impersonal unlimited ex-
pansions. The impersonal expansion is a manifestation of His energy, and
He is always in His personal feature despite His innumerable unlimited
expansions of impersonal encrgies (Bg. 9.5-7). For human intelligence it
is very difficult to conceive how the whole creation rests on His expansion
of energy, but the Lord has given a very good example in the Bhagavad-
gita. It is said that although the air and the atoms rest within the huge
expansion of the sky, like the resting reservoir of everything materially
created, still the sky remains separately without being affected. Similarly
the Supreme Lord, although He maintains everything created by His
expansion of energy, always remains separate, which is accepted even by
Sarkaracarya, the great advocate of the impersonal form of the Absolute.
He says narayanah paro ‘vyaktat, or Narayana exists separately, apart
from the impersonal creative energy. The whole creation thus merges
within the body of transcendental Narayana at the time of annihilation,
and the creation emanates from His body again with the same unchanging
categories of fate and individual nature. The individual living entities,
being parts and parcels of the Lord, are sometimes described as atma,
qualitatively one in spiritual constitution. But because such living entities
are apt to be attracted to the material creation, actively and subjectively,
they are therefore different from the Lord.
TEXT 22
कालादू गुणव्यतिकरः परिणामः खमावतः |
कर्मणो जन्म महतः पुरूपाधिष्टिताद्‌ भूत्‌ RR
kalad guna-vyatikarah
parinamah sva-bhavatah
karmano janma mahatah
purusadhisthitad abhat


--- Page 246 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5

kalat—from the eternal time; guna-vyatikarah—transformation of the
modes by reaction; parinamah—transformation; sva-bhavatah—from the
nature; karmanah—of activities; janma—creation; mahatah—of the mahat-
tattva; purusa-adhisthitat—because of the purusa incarnation of the Lord;
abhit—it took place.

TRANSLATION
After the incarnation of the first purusa (Karanarnavasayi Visnu), the
mahat-lativa, or the principles of material creation, take place, and then
time is manifested, and in course of time the three qualities appear. Nature
means the three qualitative appearances. They transform into activities.
PURPORT

By the omnipotency of the Supreme Lord, the whole material creation
evolves by the process of transformation and reactions one after another,
and by the same omnipotency, they are wound up again one after another
and conserved in the body of the Supreme. Kala, or time, is the synonym
of nature and is the transformed manifestation of the principles of ma-
terial creation. As such, kala may be taken as the first cause of all creation,
and by transformation of nature different activities of the material world
become visible. These activities may be taken up as the natural instinct of
cach and every living being, or even of the inert objects, and after the
manifestation of activities there are varicties of products and by-products
of the same nature, and originally these are all due to the Supreme Lord.
The Vedanta-siitras and the Bhagavatam thus begin with the Absolute
Truth as the beginning of all creations (janmady asya yatal).

TEXT 23
-
महतस्तु वि्र्बाणाद्रजःसच्चोपदंहितात्‌ ।
तमःप्रधानस्त्वमवद्‌ द्रन्यज्ञानक्रियात्मकः ।२३॥
mahatas tu vikurvanad
rajah-sattvopabrmbhitat
tamah-pradhanas tv abhavad
dravya-jiana-kriyatmakah


--- Page 247 ---
Text 23] The Cause of All Causes 249
mahatah—of the mahat-tattva; tu—but; vikurvapnat—being transformed;
rajah— material mode of passion; sattva—mode of goodness; upab rrhitat—
because of being increased; tamah—the mode of darkness; pradhanah—
being prominent; tu—but; abhavat—took place; dravya—matter; jiana—
material knowledge; kriya-atmakah —predominantly material activities.
TRANSLATION
The cause of malerial activities is due Lo mahat-latlva being agitated.
/ first there is transformation of the modes of goodness and passion, and
later on, due to the mode of ignorance, matter, its knowledge, and differ-
enl aclivilies of malerial knowledge come into play.
PURPORT
Material creations of every description are more or less due to the devel
opment of the mode of passion (tamas). The mahat-tattva is the principle
of material creation, and when itis agitated by the will of the Supreme at
first the modes of passion and goodness are prominent, and afterwards the
mode of passion, being generated in due course by material activities of
different varieties, becomes prominent, and the living entities are thus
involved more and more in ignorance. Brahma is the representation of the
mode of passion, and Vignu is the representation of the mode of goodness,
while the mode of ignorance is represented by Lord Siva, the father of
material activities. Material nature is called the mother, and the initiator for
materialistic life is the father, Lord Siva. All material creation by the
living entities is therefore initiated by the mode of passion. With the
advancement of the duration of life in a particular millennium, the differ-
ent modes act by gradual development, and in the age of Kali (when the
mode of passion is most prominent) material activities of different
varieties, in the name of advancement of human civilization, take place,
and the living entities become more and more involved in forgetting their
real identity —the spiritual nature. By a slight cultivation of the mode of
goodness, a glimpse of spiritual nature is perceived, but due to the promi-
nence of the mode of passion, the mode of goodness becomes adulterated.
Therefore one cannot transcend the limits of the material modes, and
therefore realization of the Lord, who is always transcendental to the
modes of material nature, becomes very difficult for the living entities,
even though prominently situated in the mode of goodness through culti-


--- Page 248 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
vation of the various methods. In other words, the gross matters are
adhibhittam, their maintenance is adhidaivam, and the initiator of material
activities is called adhyatmam, and in the material world these three prin-
ciples act as prominent features, namely as raw material, its regular
supplies, and its use in different varieties of material creations for sense
enjoyment by the bewildered entities.
TEXT 24
सोऽदङ्कार হবি प्रोक्तो विद्रवन्‌ समभूतत्रिधा |
द्रव्यशक्तिः क्रियाशक्तज्ञानशक्तिरिति प्रमो ॥२४॥
so ’hankara iti prokto
vikurvan samabhiit tridha
vaikarikas taijasas ca
tamasas ceti yad-bhida
dravya-$aktih kriya-saktir
jiiana-aktir iti prabho
sah—the very same thing; ahankarah—ego; iti—thus; proktah—said;
vikurvan—being transformed; samabhiit—became manifested; tridha—in
three features; vaikarikah—in the mode of goodness; taijasah—in the mode
of passion; ca—and; tamasah—in the mode of ignorance; ca—also; iti—thus;
yat—what is; bhida—divided; dravya-saktih—powers that evolve matter;
kriya-saktih—initiation that creates; jiana-saktih—intelligence that guides;
iti—thus; prabho—the master.
TRANSLATION
The self-centered materialistic ego, thus being transformed into three
features, becomes known as the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance
in three divisions, namely the powers that evolve matter, knowledge of
material creations, and the intelligence that guides such materialistic
activities. Narada, you are quite competent to understand this.


--- Page 249 ---
Text 24] The Cause of All Causes 251
PURPORT

Materialistic ego, or the sense of identification with matter, is grossly
self-centered, devoid of clear knowledge of the existence of God. And this
self-centered egoism of the materialistic living entities is the cause of their
being conditioned by the other paraphernalia and continuing their bondage
of material existence. In the Bhagavad-gita this self-centered egoism is very
nicely explained in the Seventh Chapter (verses 24-27). The self-centered
impersonalist, without clear conception of the Personality of Godhead,
concludes in his own way that the Personality of Godhead takes a material
shape from His original impersonal spiritual existence for a particular
mission. And this misleading conception of the Supreme Lord by the self-
centered impersonalist continues, even though he is seen to be very inter-
ested in the Vedic literatures such as the Brahma-sittras and other highly
intellectual sources of knowledge. This ignorance of the personal feature
of the Lord is due simply to ignorance of the mixture of different modes.
The impersonalist thus cannot conceive of the Lord’s eternal spiritual
form of eternal knowledge, bliss and existence. The reason is that the
Lord reserves the right of not exposing Himself to the nondevotee who,
even after a thorough study of literature like the Bhagavad-gita, remains
an impersonalist simply by obstinacy. This obstinacy is due to the action
of yogamayda, a personal energy of the Lord that acts like an aide-de-camp
by covering the vision of the obstinate impersonalist. Such a bewildered
human being is described as mitdha, or grossly ignorant, because he is
unable to understand the transcendental form of the Lord as being unborn
and unchangeable. If the Lord takes a form or material shape from His
original impersonal feature, then it means that He is born and changeable
from impersonal to personal. But He is not changeable. Nor does He ever
take a new birth like a conditioned soul. The conditioned soul may take a
form birth after birth due to his conditional existence in matter, but the
self-centered impersonalists also, by their gross ignorance, accept the Lord
as one of them because of self-centered egoism, even after so-called ad-
vancement of knowledge in the Vedanta. The Lord, being situated in the
heart of every individual living entity, knows very well the tendency of
such conditioned souls in terms of past, present and future, but the be-
wildered conditioned soul hardly can know Him in His eternal form. By
the will of the Lord, therefore, the impersonalist, even after knowing the
Brahman and Paramatma features of the Lord, remains ignorant of His
eternal personal feature as ever-existent Narayana, transcendental to all
material creation.


--- Page 250 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
The cause of such gross ignorance is conslant engagement by the
malcrialislic man in the matter of artificially increasing material demands
of life. To realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one has to purify
the materialistic senses by devotional service. The mode of goodness, or
the brahminical culture recommended in the Vedic literatures, is helpful
10 such spiritual realization, and thus the jiiana-sakti stage of the con-
ditioned soul is comparatively better than the other two stages, namely
dravya-$akti and kriya-sakti. The whole material civilization is manifested
by a huge accumulation of materials, or, in other words, raw materials for
industrial purposes, and the industrial enterprises (kriya-sakti) are all due
10 gross ignorance of spiritual life. In order to rectify this great anomaly
of malerialistic civilization, based on the principles of dravya-$akti and
keriya-sakti, one has to adopt the process of devotional service of the Lord
by adoption of the principles of karma-yoga, mentioned in the Bhagavad-
gilda as follows:
yat karosi yad asnasi yaj juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyast kaunteya tat kurusva mad arpanam.
(Bg. 9.27)
TEXT 25
तापसादपि भूतादिर्षिङ््बाणादून्रमः |
= १
तख मात्रा युणः सन्दा fos यदू TET IES]
tamasad api bhitader
vikurvanad abhiin nabhah
tasya matra gunah sabdo
lingam yad dras¢r-dr§yayoh
tamasat—from the darkness of false ego; api—certainly; bhiita-addeh—of
the material elements; vikurvanpat—because of transformation; abhiit—gen-
erated; nabhah—the sky; tasya—its; matra—subtle form: gunah—quality;
$abdah—sound; lingam— characteristics; yat—as its; drastr—the seer; drsya-
yoh—of what is seen.
TRANSLATION
From the darkness of false ego, the first of the five elements, namely


--- Page 251 ---
Text 25] The Cause of All Causes 253
the sky, is generated. Its subtle form is the quality of sound, exactly as
the seer is in relationship with the seen.

PURPORT

The five elements, namely sky, air, fire, water, and earth, are all but
different qualities of the darkness of false ego. This means that the false
ego in the sum total form of mahat-tattva is generated from the marginal
potency of the Lord, and due to this false ego of lording it over the mate-
rial creation, ingredients are generated for the false enjoyment of the
living being. The living being is practically the dominating factor over the
material clements as the enjoyer, though the background is the Supreme
Lord. Factually, save and except the Lord, no one can be called the
enjoyer, but the living entity falsely desires to become the enjoyer, which
is the origin of false ego. When the bewildered living being desires this, the
shadow elements are generated by the will of the Lord, and the living
entities are allowed to run after them as after phantasmagoria.

It is said that first the tanmatra sound is created and then the sky, and
in this verse it is confirmed that actually it is so, but sound is the subtle
form of the sky, and the distinction is like that between the seer and the
seen. The sound is the representation of the actual object, as the sound
produced speaking of the object gives an idea of the description of the
object. Therefore sound is the subtle characteristic of the object. Similarly,
sound representation of the Lord, in terms of [[5 characteristics, is the
complete form of the Lord, as was seen by Vasudeva and Maharaja
Dasaratha, the fathers of Lord Krsna and Lord Rima. The sound repre-
sentation of the Lord is nondifferent from the Lord Himself because the
Lord and 11158 representation in sound are absolute knowledge. Lord
Caitanya has instructed us that in the holy name of the Lord, as sound
representation of the Lord, all the potencies of the Lord are invested, and
thus one can immediately enjoy the association of the Lord by the pure
vibration of the sound representation of His holy name, and the concept
of the Lord is immediately manifested before the pure devotee. A pure
devotee, therefore, is not aloof from the Lord even for a moment. The
holy name of the Lord, as it is reccommended in the $astras,

Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare,
may therefore be constantly chanted by the aspiring devotee in order to be


--- Page 252 ---
254 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
constantly in touch with the Supreme Lord. One who is thus able to
associate with the Lord is sure to be delivered from the darkness of the
created world, a product of false ego (tamaso ma jyotir gamaya).
TEXTS 26-29
नमसोऽथ व्िङक्बाणाद भूत्‌ स्पशंगुणोऽनिलः |
परान्ययाच्छन्दवां श्च प्राण ओजः स॒हो बलम्‌ ॥२६॥
= ¢
वायोरपि िदुर्बाणात्‌ कालकरम॑सखमावतः |
उदपद्यत तेजो वै रूपप्रत আ্হীহান্ললন ॥२७॥
तेजसस्तु विकुर्मणादासीदम्भो रसात्मकम्‌ |
रूपवत्‌ स्पदशेपचाम्भो NET परान्ययात्‌ ॥२८॥
fg विर्वाणादम्भसो गन्धवानमूव्‌ ।
WA रषरस्पशंशब्दरूपगुणान्वितः ॥२९॥
nabhaso ‘tha vikurvanad
abhiit sparsa-guno ’‘nilah
paranvayac chabdavars ca
prana ojah saho balam
vayor api vikurvanat
kala-karma-svabhavatah
udapadyata tejo vai
ripavat sparsa-$abdavat
tejasas tu vikurvanad
asid ambho rasatmakam
riipavat spar$avac cambho
ghosavac ca paranvayat
visesas tu vikurvanad
ambhaso gandhavan abhiit
paranvayad rasa-sparsa-
Sabda-ripa-gunanvitah


--- Page 253 ---
Texts 26-29] The Cause of All Causes 255
nabhasah—of the sky; atha—thus; vikurvanat—being transformed; abhit—
generated; sparsa—touch; gunah—quality; anilah—air; para—previous;
anvayat—by succession; sabdavan—full of sound; ca—also; pranah—life;
ojah—sense perception; sahah—fat; balam—strength; vayoh—of the air;
api—also; vikurvanat—by transformation; kala—time; karma—reaction of
the past; sva-bhdvatah—on the basis of nature; udapadyata—generated;
tejah—fire; vai—duly; ripavat—with form; sparsa—touch; sabdavat—with
sound also; tejasah—of the fire; vikurvanat—on being transformed; asit—
it so happened; ambhah—water; rasa-dtmakam—composed of juice; ripavat
—with form; sparsavat—with touch; ca—and; ambhah—water; ghosavat—
with sound; ca—and; para—previous; anvayat—by succession; visesah—
variegatedness; tu—but; vikurvanat—by transformation; ambhasah—of
water; gandhavan—odorous; abhiit—became; para—previous; anvaydat—
by succession; rasa—juice; sparsa— touch; sabda—sound; ripa-guna-anvitah—
qualitative.
TRANSLATION
Because the sky is transformed, the air is generated with the quality of
touch, and by previous succession the air is also full of sound and the basic
principles of duration of life: sense perception, mental power and bodily
strength. When the air is transformed in course of time and nature’s course,
fire is generated, taking shape with the sense of touch and sound. Since
fire is also transformed, there is a manifestation of water, full of juice as
previously. It also has form and touch and is also full of sound. And
water, being transformed from all variegatedness on earth, appears odorous
and, as previously, becomes qualitatively full of juice, touch, sound and
form respectively.
PURPORT
The whole process of creation is an act of gradual evolution and
development from one element to another, reaching up to the variegated-
ness of the earth as so many trees, plants, mountains, rivers, reptiles, birds,
animals and varieties of human beings. The quality of sense perception is
also evolutionary, namely generated from sound, then touch, and from
touch to form. Taste and odor are also generated along with the gradual
development of sky, air, fire, water and earth. They are all mutually the
cause and effect of one another, but the original cause is the Lord Himself
in plenary portion, as Maha-Visnu lying in the causal water of the mahat-


--- Page 254 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
tattva. As such, Lord Krsna is described in the Brahma-samhita as the cause
of all causes, and this is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita as follows:

01807 sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate

iti matva bhajante mam budha bhava-samanvitah.

(Bg. 10.8)
The qualities of sense perception are fully represented in the earth, and
they are manifested in other elements to a lesser extent. In the sky there is
sound only, whereas in the air there is sound and touch. In the fire there is
sound, touch and shape, and in the water there is taste also along with the
other perceptions, namely sound, touch, shape, etc. In the earth, however,
there are all the above-mentioned qualities with an extra development of
odor also. Therefore on the earth there is a full display of variegatedness
of life, which is originally started with the basic principle of air. Diseases
of the body take place due to derangement of air within the earthly body
of the living beings. Mental diseases result from special derangement of the
air within the body, and as such the yogic exercise is specially beneficial
to keep the air in order so that diseases of the body become almost nil by
such exercises, and when properly done the duration of life also increases,
and one can have control over death also by such practices. A perfect yogi
can have command over death and quit the body at the right moment,
when he is competent to transfer himself to a suitable planet. The bhakti-
yogi, however, surpasses all the yogis because, by dint of his devotional
service, he is promoted to the region beyond the material sky, and he is
placed in one of the planets in the spiritual sky by the supreme will of the
Lord, the controller of everything.
TEXT 30
वैकारिकान्मनो जज्ञे देवा वैकारिका दज ।
दिगबाताकंप्रयेतोऽधिवदीन््रोपनदरमित्रकाः ॥२०॥
vaikarikan mano jajiie
062৫ vaikarika dasa
dig-vatarka-praceto “svi-
vahnindropendra-mitra-kah


--- Page 255 ---
Text 30] The Cause of All Causes 257
vaikarikat—from the mode of goodness; manah—the mind; jajiie—gen-
erated; devah—demigods; vaikaritkah—in the mode of goodness; dasa—ten
in number; dik—the controller of direction; vata—the controller of air;
arka—the sun; pracetah— Varuna; asvi—the Aévinikumaras; vahni— the fire-
god; indra—the King of heaven; upendra—the deity in heaven; mitra—one
of the twelve Adityas; kah—Prajapati Brahma.
TRANSLATION
From the mode of goodness the mind was generated and became mani-
fest, as also the ten demigods controlling the bodily movements. Such
demigods are known as the controller of directions, the controller of air,
the sun-god, the father of Daksa Prajapati, the Asvinikumaras, the fire-god,
the King of heaven, the worshipable deity in the heaven, the chief of the
Adityas, and Brahmaji the Prajapati. All came into existence.
PURPORT
Vaikarika is the neutral stage of creation, and tejas is the initiative of
creation, while tamas is the full display of material creation under the spell
of the darkness of ignorance. Manufacture of the “necessities of life” in
factories and workshops, excessively prominent in the age of Kali or in the
age of the machine, is the summit stage of the quality of darkness. Such
manufacturing enterprises by the human society are in the mode of darkness
because factually there is no necessity for the commodities manufactured.
The human socicly primarily requires food for subsistance, shelter for
sleeping, defense for protection and commodities for satisfaction of the
senses. The senses are the practical signs of life, as will be explained in the
next verse. Human civilization is meant for purifying the senscs, and
objects of sense satisfaction should be supplied as much as absolutely
required, but not for aggravating artificial sensory necds. Food, shelter,
defense and sense gratification are all needs of material existence. Other-
wise, in his pure uncontaminated state of original life, the living entity has
no such needs. The nceds are, therefore, artificial, and in the pure state of
life there are no such needs. As such, increasing the artificial necds, as is
the standard of material civilization, or advancing the economic develop-
ment of human society, is a sort of engagement in the darkness of know-
ledge. By such engagement, human energy is spoiled, because human energy
is primarily meant for purifying the senses in order to be ¢ngaged in satis-


--- Page 256 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
fying the senses of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord, being the
supreme possessor of spiritual senses, is the master of the senses, Hrsikesa.
Hrsika means the senses, and 14৫ means the master. The Lord is not the
servant of the senses, or, in other words, He is not directed by the dictation
of the senses, but the conditioned souls or the individual living entities are
servants of the senses. They are conducted by the direction or dictation of
the senses, and therefore material civilization is a kind of engagement in
sense gratification only. The standard of human civilization should be to
cure the discase of sense gratification, and this can be done simply by
becoming an agent for satisfying the spiritual senses of the Lord. The
senses are never to be stopped in their engagements, but they should be
purified by engaging them in the pure service of sense gratification of the
master of the senses. This is the instruction of the whole Bhagavad-gita.
Arjuna wanted first of all to satisfy his own senses by his decision not to
fight with his kinsmen, etc., but Lord Sti Krsna taught him the Bhagavad-
gita just to purify Arjuna’s decision for sense gratification. Therefore
Arjuna agreed to satisfy the senses of the Lord, and thus he fought the
Battle of Kuruksetra, as the Lord desired.

The Vedas instruct us to get out of the existence of darkness and go
forward on the path of light (tamaso ma jyotir gamaya). The path of light
is therefore to satisfy the senses of the Lord. Misguided men, or less intelli-
gent men, follow the path of self-rcalization without any attempt to
satisfy the transcendental senses of the Lord by following the path shown
by Arjuna and other devotees of the Lord. On the contrary, they artificially
try to stop the activities of the senses (yoga system), or they deny the
transcendental senses of the Lord (jiiana system). The devotees are, how-
ever, above the yogis and the janis because pure devotees do not deny
the senses of the Lord; they want to satisfy the senses of the Lord. Only
because of the darkness of ignorance do the yogis and janis deny the
senses of the Lord and thus artificially try to control the activities of the
diseased senses. In the discased condition of the senses there is too much
engagement of the senses in increasing material needs. When one comes to
see the disadvantage of aggravating the sense activities, one is called a
jAant, and when one tries (0 stop the activities of the senses by the practice
of yogic principles, he is called a yogt, but when one is fully aware of the
transcendental senses of the Lord and tries to satisfy His senses, one is
called a devotee of the Lord. The devotees of the Lord neither try to deny
the senses of the Lord nor do they artificially stop the actions of the
senses. Bul they do voluntarily engage the purified senses in the service of
the master of the senses, as was done by Arjuna, thereby easily attaining
the perfection of satisfying the Lord, the ultimate goal of all perfection.


--- Page 257 ---
Text 31] The Cause of All Causes 259
TEXT 31
aN
तैजसात्‌ तु विकुर्बाणादिन्द्रियाणि amma |
(> = © त Aa
raf: क्रियाशक्तिडुद्धिः प्राणश्च तैजसौ |
=+ ~ -
श्रोत्रं त्वग्वाणटग्जिह्या बाग्दारमेदाड्धिपायतः।। ३१॥
taijasat tu vikurvanad
indrayani dasabhavan
jiana-saktih kriya-sak tir
buddhih pranas ca taijasau
Srotram tvag-ghrana-drg-jihva
vag-dor-medhranghri-payavah
taijasat—by the passionate egoism; tu—but; vikurvanat— transformation
of; indrayani—the senses; dasa—ten in number; abhavan—generated; jiiana-
Saktih—the five senses for acquiring knowledge; kriya-saktih—the five
senses of activities; buddhih—intelligence; pranah—the living energy: ca—
also; taijasau—all products of the mode of passion: srotram—the sense for
hearing; tvak—the sense for touching; ghrana—the sense for smelling; drk—
the sense for seeing; jihva— the sense for tasting; vak—the sense for speak-
ing; doh—the sense for handling: medhra—the genitals; anghri—the legs;
payavah—the sense for evacuating.
TRANSLATION
By further transformation of the mode of passion, the sense organs
like the ear, skin, nose, eyes, tongue, mouth, hands, genitals, legs, and the
outlet for evacuating, together with intelligence and living energy, are all
generated.
PURPORT
The living condition in the material existence depends more or less on
one’s intelligence and powerful living energy. Intelligence to counteract the
hard struggle for existence is assisted by the senses for acquiring knowledge,
and the living energy is maintained by manipulating the active organs, like
hands and legs, etc. But on the whole, the struggle for existence is an
exertion of the mode of passion. Therefore all the sense organs, headed


--- Page 258 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
by intelligence and the living energy, prana, are different products and by-
products of the second mode of nature, called passion. This mode of
passion is, however, the product of the air element, as described before.
TEXT 32
> न o~ =
यदतेऽसङ्गता AT मूतेन्द्रियमनोगुणाः |
यदायतननिर्माणे न gE 1330
yadaite ‘sangata bhava
bhitendriya-mano-gunah
yadayatana-nirmane
na $ekur brahma-vit-tama

yada—as long as; ete—all these; asangatah—without being assembled;
bhavah—remained so situated; bhita—elements; indriya—senses; manah—
mind; gunah—modes of nature; yada—so long; ayatana—body; nirmane—in
the matter of being formed; na sekuh—was not possible; brahma-vit-tama—
O Narada, the best knower of transcendental knowledge.

TRANSLATION
0 Narada, best of the transcendentalists, the forms of the body could
not take place as long as these created parts, namely the elements, senses,
mind and the modes of nature, were assembled.
PURPORT

The different types of bodily construction of the living entities are
exactly like different types of motor cars manufactured by assembling the
allied motor parts. When the car is made ready, the driver sits in the car
and moves it as he desires. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 18.61): the living entity is as if seated on the machine of the body,
and the car of the body is moving by the control of material nature, just as
the railway trains are moving under the direction of the controller. The
living entities are, however, not the bodies; they are separate from
the cars of the body. But the less intelligent material scientist cannot


--- Page 259 ---
Text 33] The Cause of All Causes 261
understand the process of assembling the parts of the body, namely the
senses, the mind and the qualities of the material modes. Every living
entity is a spiritual spark, part and parcel of the Supreme Being, and by the
kindness of the Lord, for the Father is kind to His sons, the individual
living beings are given a little freedom to act according to their will to
lord it over the material nature. Just as the father gives some playthings to
the crying child to satisfy him, similarly the whole material creation is
made possible by the will of the Lord to allow the bewildered living
entities to lord it over things as they desire, although under the control of
the agent of the Lord. The living entities are exactly like small children
playing the material field under the control of the maidservant of the
Lord (nature). They accept the aya, or the maidservant, as all in all and
thus wrongly conceive the Supreme Truth to be feminine (Goddess Durga,
etc.). The foolish, childlike materialists cannot reach beyond the concep-
tion of the maidservant, material nature, but the intelligent grown-up sons
of the Lord know well that all the acts of material nature are controlled
by the Lord, just as a maidservant is under the control of the master, the
father of the undeveloped children.

The parts of the body, namely the senses, ctc., are the creation of the
mahal-tattva, and when they are assembled by the will of the Lord, the
material body comes into existence, and the living entity is allowed to use
it for further activities. It is explained as follows.

TEXT 33
तदा संहत्य चान्योन्यं भगवच्छक्तिचोदिताः |
मदसच्वश्पादाय चोभयं ससूजुद्ीदः 133
tada samhatya canyonyari
bhagavac-chakti-coditah
sad-asattvam upadaya
cobhayari sasrjur hy adah

tada—all those; sarmhatya—being assembled; ca—also; anya—one;anyam
—other; bhagavat—by the Personality of Godhead; sakti—energy; coditah—
being applied; sad-asattvam— primarily and secondarily; upadaya—accepting;
ca—also; ubhayam—both; sasrjuh—came into existence; hi—certainly; adah
—this universe.


--- Page 260 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
Thus when all these became assembled by force of the energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, this universe certainly came into being
by accepting both the primary and secondary causes of creation.
PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly mentioned that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead exerts His different energies in the creation; it is not that He
Himself is transformed into material creations. He expands Himself by His
different energies, as well as by His plenary portions. In a corner of the
spiritual sky of brahmajyoti a spiritual cloud sometimes appears, and the
covered portion is called the mahat-tattva. The Lord then, by His plenary
portion as Maha-Visnu, lies down within the water of the mahat-tattva, and
the water is called the Causal Ocean (Karapa-jala). While Maha-Visnu sleeps
within the Causal Ocean, innumerable universes are generated along with
His breathing. These universes are floating, and they are scattered all over
the Causal Ocean. They stay only during the breathing period of Maha-
Visnu. In each and every universal globe, the same Maha-Visnu enters again
as Garbhodakasay1 Visnu and lies there on the serpentlike Sesa incarnation,
and from His navel a lotus stem is sprouted, and on the lotus, Brahma the
lord of the universe is born. Brahma creates all forms of living beings of
different shapes in terms of different desires within the universe. He
creates also the sun, moon and other demigods.

Therefore the chief engineer of the material creation is the Lord Him-
self, as it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.10). It is He only who
directs the material nature to produce all sorts of moving and nonmoving
creations.

There are two modes of material creation: the creation of the collective
universes, as stated above, done by the Maha-Visnu, and the creation of the
single universe. Both are done by the Lord, and thus the universal shape,
as we can see, takes place.

TEXT 34
वर्षप्गसटघान्ते तदण्डषदकैशायम्‌ |
कारकम खभावम्यो जीयोऽजीवपजीवयत्‌ 113811


--- Page 261 ---
Text 34] The Cause of All Causes 263
varsa-piga-sahasrante
tad andam udake sayam
kala-karma-svabhava-stho
1० ’jivam ajivayat
varsa-piiga—many years; sahasra-ante—of thousands of years; tat—that;
andam—the universal globe; udake—in the causal water; $ayam—being
drowned; kala—eternal time; karma—action; svabhdva-sthah—according to
the modes of nature; jivah—the Lord of the living beings; ajivam—non-
animated; ajivayat—caused to be animated.
TRANSLATION
Thus all the universes remained thousands of eons within the water
[Causal Ocean], and the Lord of living beings, entering in each of them,
caused them to be fully animated.
PURPORT
The Lord is described here as the jiva because He is the leader of all
other jivas (living entities). In the Vedas He is described as the nitya, the
leader of all other nityas. The Lord’s relation with the living entities is like
that of the father with the sons. The sons and the father are qualitatively
equal, but the father is never the son, nor is the son ever the father who
begets. So, as described above, the Lord as Garbhodakadayi Visnu or
Hiranyagarbha Supersoul enters into each and every universe and causesit
to be animated by begetting the living entities within the womb of the
material nature, as is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (14.3). After each
annihilation of the material creation, all the living entities arc merged
within the body of the Lord, and after creation they are again impregnated
within the material energy. In the material existence, therefore, the
material energy is seemingly the mother of the living entities, and the
Lord is the father. When, however, the animation takes place, the living
entities revive their own natural activities under the spell of time and
energy, and thus the varieties of living beings are manifested. The Lord is,
therefore, ultimately the cause of all animation over the material world.


--- Page 262 ---
264 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
TEXT 35
মন গুন पुरुषस्तसादण्डं निभिद्य निर्गतः |
TERA: सटस्राननशोषेवान्‌ ॥२५॥
sa eva [८८१1८55 tasmad
andam nirbhidya nirgatah
sahasrorv-anghri-bahv-aksah
sahasranana-sirsavan
sah—He, the Lord; eva—Himself; purusah—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tasmat—from within the universe; andam-—Hiranyagarbha;
nirbhidya—dividing; nirgatah—came out; sahasra—thousands; @#ru— thighs;
anghri—legs; bahu—arms; aksah—eyes; sahasra—thousands of; anana—
mouths; sirsavan—with heads also.
TRANSLATION
The Lord [Maha-Visnu], although lying in the Causal Ocean, came out
of it, and dividing Himself as Hiranyagarbha, He entered into each universe
and assumed the virata riipa, with thousands of legs, arms, mouths, and
heads, etc.
PURPORT
The expansions of the planetary systems within each and every universe
are situated in the different part of the virata rizpa (universal form) of the
Lord, and they are described as follows:
TEXT 36
a
यस्येदा्रयवेर्लोकान्‌ कट्पयन्ति मनीषिणः |
कट्यादिभिरधः নম TA जघनादिभिः 1381
yasyehavayavair lokan
kalpayanti manisinah
katyadibhir adhah sapta
saptordhvari jaghanadibhih


--- Page 263 ---
Text 37] The Cause of All Causes 265

yasya—whose;itha—in the universe; avayavaih—by the limbs of the body;
lokan—all the planets; kalpayanti—imagine; manisinah—greal philosophers;
kati-adibhih—down from the waist; adhah—downwards; sapta—seven sys-
tems; sapta-irdham—and seven systems upwards; Jjaghana-adibhih—front
portion.

TRANSLATION
Great philosophers imagine that the complete planetary systems in the
universe are displays of the different limbs of the universal body of the
Lord, downwards and upwards.
PURPORT

The word kalpayanti, or “imagine,” is significant. The vir@ta universal
form of the Absolute is an imagination of the speculative philosophers who
arc unable to adjust to the eternal two-handed form of Lord Sri Krsna.
Although the universal form, as imagined by the great philosophers, is one
of the features of the Lord, it is more or less imaginary. It is said that seven
upper planetary systems are situated above the waist of the universal
form, whereas the lower planetary systems are situated down from His
waist. The idea impressed herein is that the Supreme Lord is conscious of
every part of Iis body, and nowhere in the creation is there anything
beyond 1115 control.

TEXT 37
पुरुषस्य मुखं af क्षत्रमेतस्य बाहवः |
Xe
SAT TT भगवतः पद्भ्यां श्रो व्यजायत 11390)
purusasya mukhari brahma
ksatram etasya bahavah
arvor vai§yo bhagavatah
padbhyam ৪807০ vyajayata

purusasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mukham—mouth;
brahma—is the brahmanas; ksatram—the royal order; etasya—of Him;
bahavah—the arms; @rvoh—the thighs; vaisyah—are the mercantile men;
bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead; padbhyam—from 1115 legs;
sudrah—the laborer class; vyajayata—became manifested.


--- Page 264 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas represent His mouth, the ksatriyas His arms, the
vai$yas His thighs, and the siidras are born of His legs.
PURPORT
All living beings are stated to be the parts and parcels of the Supreme
Lord, and how they are so is explained in this verse. The four divisions of
human society, namely the intelligent class or the brahmanas, the admin-
istrative class or the ksalriyas, the mercantile class or the vaisyas, and the
0070৫ class or the laborers, are all in different parts of the body of the
Lord. As such, no one 15 different from the Lord. The mouth of the body
and the lcgs of the body are nondifferent constitutionally, but the mouth
or the head of the body is qualitatively more important than the legs. At
the same time, the mouth, the legs, the arms and the thighs are all
component parts of the body. These limbs of the body of the Lord are
meant to serve the complete whole. The mouth is meant for speaking and
cating, the arms are mcant for the protection of the body, the legs are
meant for carrying the body, and the waist of the body is meant for
maintaining the body. The intelligent class in society, therefore, must
speak on behalf of the body, as well as accept foodstuff to satisfy the
hunger of the body. The hunger of the Lord is to accept the fruits of
sacrifice. The brahmanas or the intelligent class must be very expert in
performing such sacrifices, and the subordinate class must join in such
sacrifices. To speak for the Supreme Lord means to glorify the Lord by
means of propagating the knowledge of the Lord as it is, broadcasting the
factual nature of the Lord and the factual position of all other parts of
the whole body. The brahmanas, thercfore, are required to know the
Vedas or the ultimate source of knowledge. Veda means knowledge, and
anta means the end of it. According to Bhagavad-gita, the Lord 15 the source
of everything (aharh sarvasya prabhavah), and thus the end of all know-
ledge (Vedanta) is to know the Lord, to know our relationship with Him
and 10 act according to that relationship only. The parts of the body are
related to the bodys; similarly, the living being must know his relationship
with the Lord. The human life is especially meant for this purpose, namely
to know the factual relationship of every living being with the Supreme
Lord. Without knowing this relationship, the human life is spoiled. The
intelligent class of men, the brahmanas, are therefore especially responsible


--- Page 265 ---
Text 38] The Cause of All Causes 267
for broadcasting this knowledge of our relationship with the Lord and
leading the general mass of people to the right path. The administrative
class is meant for protecting the living beings so that they can serve this
purpose; the mercantile class is meant for producing food grains and
distributing them to the complete human society so that the whole popu-
lation is given a chance to live comfortably and discharge the duties of
human life. The mercantile class is also required to give protection to the
cows in order to get sufficient milk and milk products, which alone can
give the proper health and intelligence to maintain a civilization perfectly
meant for knowledge of the ultimate truth. And the laborer class, who
are neither intelligent nor powerful, can help by physical services to the
other higher classes and thus be benefitted by their cooperation. There-
fore the universe is a complete unit in relationship with the Lord, and
without this relationship with the Lord the whole human society is
disturbed and is without any peace and prosperity. This is confirmed in the

Vedas: brahmano ’sya mukham ৫510, baht rajanyah krtah.

TEXT 38
TONER: कल्पितः पद्भ्यां JIA RISE नाभितः |
हृदा TIT उरसा महर्लोको महात्मनः ॥३८॥
bharlokah kalpitah padbhyar
bhuvarloko ’sya nabhitah
hrda svarloka urasa
maharloko mahdatmanah
bhith—the lower planetary systems up to the stratum of the earth; lokah
—the planets; kalpitah—it is so imagined or said; padbhyam—out of the legs;
bhuvah—the upper; lokah—the planetary system; asya—of Him (the Lord’s);
nabhitah—from the navel abdomen; hrda—by the heart; svarlokah—the
planetary systems occupied by the demigods; urasa—by the chest; mahar-
lokah—the planetary system occupied by great sages and saints; maha-
datmanah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION

The lower planetary systems, up to the limit of the earthly stratum,


--- Page 266 ---
268 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
are said to be situated in His legs. The middle planetary systems, be-
ginning from the Bhuvarloka, are situated in His navel. And the still higher
planetary systems, occupied by the demigods and highly cultured sages
and saints, are situated in the chest of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
There are fourteen spheres of planetary systems within this universe.
The lower systems are called the Bhiirloka, the middle systems are called
Bhuvarloka, and the higher planctary systems, up to Brahmaloka, the
highest planctary system of the universe, are called the Svarloka. And all
of them are situated on the body of the Lord. In other words, no one
within this universe is without a relationship with the Lord.
TEXT 39
ग्रीवायां STARE तपोलोकः स्तनद्वया३्‌ |
५ =
Tf: सत्यलोकस्तु ब्रह्मलोकः सनातनः 1133)
grivayam janaloko “sya
tapolokah stana-dvayat
mirdhabhih satyalokas tu
brahmalokah sanatanah
grivayam—up to the neck; janalokah—the Janaloka planetary system;
asya—of Him; tapolokah—the Tapoloka planetary system; stana-dvayat—
beginning from the breast; mirdhabhih—by the head; satyalokah—the
Satyaloka planetary system; tu—but; brahmalokah—the spiritual planets;
sandtanah—eternal.
TRANSLATION
From the forefront of the chest up to the neck of the universal form
of the Lord are situated the planetary systems named Janaloka and
Tapoloka, whereas Satyaloka, the topmost planetary system, is situated
on the head of the form. The spiritual planets, however, are eternal.


--- Page 267 ---
Text 39] The Cause of All Causes 269
PURPORT

Many times in these pages we have discussed the spiritual planets
situated beyond the material sky, and the description is corroborated in
this verse. The word sanatana is significant. This very idea of eternity is
expressed in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.20), where it is said that beyond the
material creation there is the spiritual sky, where everything is eternal.
Sometimes Salyaloka, the planet in which Brahma resides, is also called
Brahmaloka. But the Brahmaloka mentioned here is not the same as the
Satyaloka planetary system. This Brahmaloka is eternal, whereas the
Satyaloka planetary system is not eternal. And to distinguish between the
two, the adjective sanatana has been used in this case. According to Srila
Jiva Gosvami, this Brahmaloka is the loka or abode of Brahma, or the
Supreme Lord. In the spiritual sky all the planets are as good as the Lord
Himself. The Lord is all spirit, and 1115 name, fame, glories, qualities,
pastimes, etc., are all nondifferent from Him because He is absolute. As
such, the planets in the kingdom of God are also nondifferent from Him.
In those planets there is no difference between the body and the soul, nor
is there any influence of time as we experience it in the material world.
And in addition to there being no influence of time, the planets in the
Brahmaloka, due to their being spiritual, are never annihilated. All varie-
gatedness in the spiritual planets is also one with the Lord, and therefore
the Vedic aphorism ekam evadvitiyam is fully realized in that sanatana
atmosphere of spiritual variegatedness. This material world is only a shadow
phantasmagoria of the spiritual kingdom of the Lord, and because it is a
shadow it is never eternal; the variegatedness in the material world of
duality (spirit and matter) cannot be compared with that of the spiritual
world. Because of a poor fund of knowledge, less intelligent persons
sometimes mistake the conditions of the shadow world to be equivalent to
those of the spiritual world, and thus the Lord and His pastimes in the
material world are mistaken as one with the conditioned souls and their
activities. The Lord condemns such less intelligent persons in the Bhagavad-
gita (9.11):

avajananti mar midha manusir tanum asritam
parari bhavam ajananto mama bhiita-mahesvaram

Whenever the Lord incarnates, He does so in His full internal potency
(atma-maya), and less intelligent persons mistake Him to be one of the
material creations. Srila Sridhara Svami, therefore, rightly commenting on


--- Page 268 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
this verse, says that the Brahmaloka mentioned here is Vaikuntha, the
kingdom of God, which is sanatana or eternal and is therefore not exactly
like the material creations described above. The virata universal form of
the Lord is an imagination for the material world. It has nothing to do
with the spiritual world, or the kingdom of God.
TEXTS 40-41
तत्कव्यां AAS FIFE वितरं विभोः |
জান্তব্যা GIS TE जङ्घाभ्यां तु तलातलम्‌ ॥४०॥
मातरं तु गुल्फाभ्यां प्रपदाम्यां रसातलम्‌ |
पातालं पादतलत इति लोकमयः पुमान्‌ ।॥४१॥
tat-katyar catalari klptam
arubhyam vitalar vibhoh
janubhyari sutalar suddham
janghabhyam tu talatalam
mahatalam tu gulphabhyarh
prapadabhyarn rasatalam
patalarh pada-talata
iti lokamayah puman
tat—in His; katyam—waist; ca— also; atalam—the first planetary system
below the earth; klptam—situated; @rubhyam—on the thighs; vitalam—the
second planetary system below; vibhoh—O Narada; janubhyam— on the
ankles; sutalam—the third planetary system below; suddham—purified;
jaiighabhyam—on the joints; tu—but; taldtalam—the fourth planetary
system below; mahatalam—the fifth planetary system below: tu—but;
gulphabhyam—situated on the calves; prapadabhyam—on the upper or front
portion of the feet; rasatalam—the sixth planetary system below; patalam—
the seventh planetary system below; pada-talatah— on the bottom or soles
of the feet; iti—thus; lokamayah—full of planetary systems; puman— the
Lord.
TRANSLATION
My dear son Narada, know from me that there are seven lower plane-
tary systems out of the total fourteen: the first planetary system, known as


--- Page 269 ---
Texts 40-41] The Cause of All Causes 271

the Atala, is situated on the waist; the second, Vitala, is situated on the

thighs; the third, Sutala, on the ankles; the fourth, Talatala, on the joints;

the fifth, Mahatala, on the calves; the sixth, Rasatala, on the upper portion

of the feet; and the seventh, Patala, is situated on the soles of the feet.

Thus the virata form of the Lord is full of all planetary systems.
PURPORT

Modern enterprisers (the astronauts who travel in space) may take infor-
mation from Srimad-Bhagavatam that in space there are fourteen divisions
of planetary systems. The situation is calculated from the earthly planetary
system, which is called Bhiirloka. Above Bhiirloka there is Bhuvarloka, and
the topmost planetary system is called Satyaloka. These are the upper
seven lokas, or planetary systems. And similarly, there are seven lower
planetary systems, known as Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala,
Rasatala and Patiala lokas. All these planetary systems are scattered over
the complete universe, which occupies an area of 2,000,000,000 x
2,000,000,000 square miles. The modern astronauts can travel only a few
thousand miles away from the earth, and therefore their attempt to travel
in the sky is something like childs play on the shore of an expansive
ocean. The moon is situated in the third status of the upper planetary
system, and in the Fifth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam we shall be able to
know the distant situation of the various planets scattered over the vast
material sky. There are innumerable universes beyond the one in which we
are put, and all these material universes cover only an insignificant portion
of the spiritual sky, which is described above as sanatana-brahmaloka. The
Supreme Lord very kindly invites the intelligent human beings to return
back home, back to Godhead, in the following verse of the Bhagavad-
ita:
^ abrahma-bhuvanal [010৫] punar Gvartino’rjuna

man apetya tu kaunteya punar janma na vidyate.
(Bg. 8.16)

Beginning from Satyaloka, the topmost planet of the universe situated
just below the eternal Brahmaloka, as described above, all the planets are
material. And one’s situation in any of the many material planets is still
subjected to the laws of material nature, namely birth, death, old age and
disease. But one can get complete liberation from all the above-mentioned
material pangs when one enters into the eternal Brahmaloka sandtana
atmosphere, the kingdom of God. Therefore liberation, as contemplated


--- Page 270 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 5
by the speculative philosophers and the mystics, is possible only when one
becomes a devotee of the Lord. Anyone who is not a devotee cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. Only by attainment of service attitude in the
transcendental position can one enter into the kingdom of Godhead.
Therefore the speculative philosophers, as well as the mystics, must first of
all be attracted to the devotional cult before they can factually attain
liberation.
TEXT 42
AiR: कट्पितः पद्भ्यां युवर्लोकोऽस्य नाभितः ।
=
स्वर्लोकः कटिपतो FATT वा FFF ॥४२॥
bharlokah kalpitah padbhyam
bhuvarloko ’sya nabhitah
svarlokah kalpito mardhna
iti va loka-kalpana
bhiirlokah—the entire planetary system beginning from Patala to the
earthly planetary system; kalpitah—imagined; padbhyam—situated on the
legs; bhuvarlokah—the Bhuvarloka planetary system; asya—of the universal
form of the Lord; nabhitah—out of the navel abdomen; svarlokah— the
higher planetary system beginning with the heavenly planets—kalpitah—
imagined; mirdhna—beginning from the chest to the head; iti—thus; va—
either; loka—the planetary systems; kalpana—imagination.
TRANSLATION
Others may divide the whole planetary system into three divisions,
namely the lower planetary systems on the legs up to the earth, the middle
planetary systems on the navel, and the upper planetary systems of
Svarloka from the chest to the head of the Supreme Personality.
PURPORT
The three divisions of the complete planetary systems are here men-
tioned; fourteen are imagined by others, and that is also explained.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Fifth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Cause of All Causes.”


--- Page 271 ---
CHAPTER SIX
Purusa-sukta Confirmed
TEXT 1
जह्मोवान
वाचां बहेषुंखं कषत्रं छन्दसां सप्त धातवः |
हन्यकल्याएतान्नानां সিদ্ধা सर्वैरसस्य च ।। १॥
brahmovaca
৮৫০৫7 vahner mukhar ksetram
০1807100501 sapta dhatavah
havya-kavyamrtannanar
jthva sarva-rasasya ca

brahma uvaca—ILord Brahma said; vacam—of the voice; vahneh—of fire;
mukham—the mouth; ksetram—generating center; chandasam—of the Vedic
hymns, such as Gayatri; sapta—seven; dhatavah—skin and six other layers;
havya-kavya—offerings for the demigods and the forefathers; amrta—food
for human beings; annanam—of all sorts of foodstuffs; jihva—the tongue;
sarva—all; rasasya—of all delicacies; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma said: The mouth of the virata purusa [the universal form
of the Lord] is the generating center of the voice, and the controlling deity
is Fire. His skin and six other layers are the generating centers of the Vedic
hymns, and His tongue is the productive center of different foodstuffs
and delicacies for offering to the demigods, the forefathers and the general
mass of people.

PURPORT

The opulences of the universal form of the Lord are described herein,
and it is said that His mouth is the generating center of all kinds of voices,
and its controlling deity is the fire demigod. And His skin and other six

273


--- Page 272 ---
274. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
layers of the bodily constructions are the representative generating centers
of the seven kinds of Vedic hymns, like the Gayatri, etc. Gayatri is the
beginning of all Vedic mantras, and it is explained in the first volume of
Srimad-Bhagavatam. Since the generating centers are the different parts of
the universal form of the Lord, and since the form of the Lord is transcen-
dental to the material creation, it is to be understood that the voice, the
tongue, the skin, etc., suggest that the Lord in His transcendental form is
not without them. The material voice, or the energy of intaking foodstuff,
is generated originally from the Lord; such actions are but perverted
reflections of the original reservoirs—the transcendental situation is not
without spiritual variegatedness. In the spiritual world, all the perverted
forms of material variegatedness are fully represented in their original
spiritual identity. The only difference is that material activities are con-
taminated by the three modes of material nature, whereas the potencies in
the spiritual world are all purified because they are engaged in the un-
alloyed transcendental loving service of the Lord. In the spiritual world,
the Lord is the sublime enjoyer of everything, and the living entities there
are all engaged in His transcendental loving service without any contamina-
tion of the modes of material nature. The activities in the spiritual world
are without any of the inebrieties of the material world, but there is no
question of impersonal voidness on the spiritual platform, as suggested by
the impersonalists. Devotional service is defined in the Narada-paiicaratra
as follows:
sarvopadhi-vinirmuk tam tatparatvena nirmalam
hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanarn bhak tir ucyate.

Originally, since all the senses are being produced out of the Lord’s reser-
voir of senses, the sensual activities of the material world are to be purified
by the process of devotional service, and thus the perfection of life can be
attained simply by purifying the present position of our material activities.
And the purifying process begins from the stage of being liberated from
the conception of different designations. Every living entity is engaged in
some sort of service, either for the self, or for the family, or for the society,
country, etc., but, unfortunately, all such services are rendered due to
material attachment. The attachments of the material affinity may be
simply changed to the service of the Lord, and thus the treatment of being
freed from material attachment begins automatically. The process of
liberation is therefore easier through devotional service than by any other
methods, for in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 12.5) it is said that one is subjected
to various kinds of tribulations if one is impersonally attached: kleso
’dhikataras tesam avyaktasakta-cetasam.


--- Page 273 ---
Text 3] Purusa-sitkta Confirmed 275
TEXT 2
सर्वाषठलां च वायोश्च तनासे परमायेण ।
अश्िनोरोषधीनां च प्राणो मोदप्रमोदयोः ॥ २॥
sarvasiinam ca vayos ca
tan-ndase paramayane
asvinor osadhinam ca
ghrano moda-pramodayoh
sarva—all; asiinam—different kinds of life air; ca—and; vayoh—of the air;
ca—also; tat—His; nase—in the nose; parama-ayane—in the transcendental
generating center; asvinoh—of the Advinikkumara demigods; osadhinam—of
all medicinal herbs; ca—also; ghranah—His smelling power; moda—pleasure;
pramodayoh— specific sport.
TRANSLATION
His two nostrils are the generating centers of our breathing and of all
other airs, His smelling powers generate the Asvinikumara demigods and
all kinds of medicinal herbs, and His breathing energies produce different
kinds of fragrance.
TEXT 3
. . ध ©
रूपाणां तेजसां चक्षुर्दिवः SE चाक्षिणी |
करणो दिशां च तीर्थानां शरोत्रमाकाशशन्दयोः ॥ ३ ॥
rapanarm tejasarn caksur
divah siryasya caksint
karpau 01807 ca tirthanam
570८7077. akasa-sabdayoh
ripanam—for all kinds of forms; tejasam—of all that is illuminating;
caksuh—the eyes; divah—that which glitters; siryasya—of the sun; ca—also;
aksini—the eyeballs; karnau—the ears; disam—of all directions; ca—and;
tirthanam—of all the Vedas; srotram—the sense of hearing; akasa—the sky;
$abdayoh—of all sounds.
TRANSLATION
His eyes are the generating centers of all kinds of forms, and they
glitter and illuminate. His eyeballs are like the sun and the heavenly planets.
His ears hear from all sides and are receptacles for all the Vedas, and His


--- Page 274 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
sense of hearing is the generating center of the sky and of all kinds of
sound.
PURPORT
The word tirthanam is sometimes interpreted to mean the places of
pilgrimage, but Srila Jiva Gosvami says that it means the reception of the
Vedic transcendental knowledge. The propounders of the Vedic knowledge
are also known as the tirthas.
TEXT 4
TE वस्तुसाराणां सौभगस च भाजनम्‌ ।
त वायोश्च सर्वमेधस्य चैव हि
त्वगसय RTH RAI च्व ॥ ४ ॥
tad-gatram vastusaranpari
saubhagasya ca bhajanam
tvag asya sparsa-vayos ca
sarva-medhasya caiva hi
tat—His; gatram—bodily surface; vastusaranam—of the active principles
of all articles; saubhagasya—of all auspicious opportunities; ca—and;
bhajanam—ficld of production; tvak—skin; asya—llis; sparsa—touch; vayoh
—of the moving airs; ca—also; sarva—all kinds of; medhasya—of sacrifices;
ca—also; eva—certainly ; hi—exactly.
TRANSLATION
His bodily surface is the breeding ground for the active principles of
everything and for all kinds of auspicious opportunities. His skin, like the
moving air, is the generating center for all kinds of senses of touch and is
the place for performing all kinds of sacrifices.
PURPORT
The air is the moving agent of all the planets, and as such the generating
centers for promotion to the deserving planets, the sacrifices, are His
bodily surface and are naturally the origin of all auspicious opportunities.


--- Page 275 ---
Text 6] Purusa-sitkta Confirmed 277
TEXT 5
_ EY
रोमाण्युद्धिजजातीनां यैवा यज्ञस्तु सम्भृतः |
FAFA शिटालोदात्रविद्युता्‌ ॥ ५॥
romany udbhijja-jatinarm
yair va yajiias tu sambhrtah
kesa-smasru-nakhany asya
sila-lohabbhra-vidyutam
romani—hairs on the body; udbhijja—vegetables; jatinam—of the king-
00115: yath—by which; va—either; yajiiah—sacrifices; tu—but; sambhrtah—
particularly served; kesa—hairs; $masru—facial; nakhani—nails; asya—of
Him; sila—stones; loha—iron ores; abbhra—mica; vidyutam—electricity.
TRANSLATION
The hairs on His body are the cause of all vegetation, particularly of
those trees which are required as ingredients for sacrifice. The hairs on
His head are reservoirs for the clouds, and His face is the breeding ground
of electricity and mica. His nails are of stones and iron ores.
PURPORT
The polished nails of the Lord generate electricity, and the clouds rest
on the hairs of His head, and from His face mica is produced. One can
therefore collect all sorts of necessities of life from the person of the
Lord, and therefore the Vedas affirm that everything that is produced
is caused by the Lord. The Lord is the supreme cause of all causes.
TEXT 6
Q
बाहवो लोकपालानां प्रायशः ATER ॥ & ॥
bahavo loka-palanam
prayasah ksema-karmanam


--- Page 276 ---
278 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6

bahavah—arms: loka-palanam—of the governing deities of planets,
the demigods; prayasah—almost always; ksema-karmanam—of those who
are leaders and protectors of the general mass.

TRANSLATION
The Lord’s arms are the productive fields for the great demigods and
other leaders of the living entities who protect the general mass.
PURPORT

This important verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam is corroborated and nicely

explained in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 10.41-42) as follows:
yad yad vibhatimat sattvam srimad irjitam eva va
tat tad evavagaccha tvam mama tejo ‘rsa-sambhavam
athava bahunaitena kim jiiatena tavarjuna
vistabhyaham idam krtsnam ekamsena sthito jagat

There are many powerful kings, leaders, learned scholars, scientists,
artists, engineers, inventors, excavators, archeologists, industrialists, poli-
ticians, economists, business magnates, and many more powerful deities
or demigods like Brahma, Siva, Indra, Candra, Siirya, Varuna, Marut, etc.,
who are all protecting the interest of the universal affairs of maintenance,
in different positions, and all of them are different powerful parts and
parcels of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord Sri Krsna is the father
of all living entities. They are placed in different high and low positions
according to their desires or aspirations. Some of them, as particularly
mentioned above, are specifically endowed with powers by the will of
the Lord. A sane person must know for certain that a living being,
however powerful he may be, is neither absolute nor independent. All
living beings must accept the origin of their specific power as mentioned
in this verse. And if they act accordingly, then simply by discharging their
respective occupational duties, they can achieve the highest perfection of
life, namely eternal life, complete knowledge and inexhaustible blessings.
As long as the powerful men of the world do not accept the origin of their
respective powers, namely the Personality of Godhead, the actions of maya
or illusion will continue to act. The actions of maya and illusion are such
that a powerful person, misled by the illusory material energy, wrongly


--- Page 277 ---
Text 7] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 279
accepts himself as all in all, and does not develop God consciousness. As
such, the false sense of egoism (namely myself and mine) has become
overly prominent in the world, and there is a hard struggle for existence in
the human society. The intelligent class of men, therefore, must admit the
Lord as the ultimate source of all energies and thus pay tribute to the Lord
for His good blessings. Simply by accepting the Lord as the supreme pro-
prietor of everything, as He is actually so, one can achieve the highest
perfection of life. Whatever a person may be in the estimation of the
social order of things, if a person tries to reciprocate a feeling of love
towards the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is satisfied with the
blessings of the Lord, he will at once feel the highest peace of mind for
which he is hankering life after life. Peace of mind, or in other words the
healthy state of mind, can only be achieved when the mind is situated in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord. The parts and parcels of the
Lord are endowed with specific powers for rendering service unto the
Lord, just as a big business magnate’s sons are empowered with specific
powers of administration. The obedient son of the father never goes
against the will of the father and therefore passes life very peacefully in
concurrence with the head of the family, the father. Similarly, the Lord
being the father, all living beings should fully and satisfactorily discharge
the duty and will of the father, as faithful sons. This very mentality will at
once bring peace and prosperity to the human society.
TEXT 7
विक्रमो भूरथैवः অথ क्षेमख Fo च |
FIRE हरेषरण आस्पदम्‌ ॥ ७॥
vikramo bhir bhuvah svas ca
ksemasya Saranasya ca
sarva-kama-varasyapi
hares carana aspadam

vikramah—forward steps; bhith bhuvah—of the lower and upper planets;
svah—as well as of heaven; ca—also; ksemasya—of protection of all that we
have; saranasya—of fearlessness; ca—also; sarva-kama—all that we need;
varasya—of all benediction; api—exactly; hareh—of the Lord; carapah—
lotus feet; aspadam—shelter.


--- Page 278 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Thus the forward steps of the Lord are the shelter of the three upper,
lower, and heavenly planets, as well as for all that we need. They serve as
protection from all kinds of fear.
PURPORT

For absolute protection from all sorts of fear, as well as for all our needs
of life, we must take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, not only in this
planet but also in all the upper, lower, and heavenly planets. This absolute
dependence on the lotus feet of the Lord is called pure devotional service,
and it is directly hinted within this passage. No one should have any kind
of doubt in this matter, nor should one be inclined to seek the help of any
other demigods, because all of them are dependent on Him only. Everyone,
except the Lord Himself, is dependent on the mercy of the Lord; even
the all-pervading Supersoul is also dependent on the supreme aspect of
Bhagavin, the Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 8
अपां वीर्यस्य सर्गस्य पर्जन्यस्य प्रजापतेः ।
पुंसः शिश्न उपखस्तु प्रजात्यानन्दनि्तेः ॥ ८ ॥
वद्या viryasya sargasya
parjanyasya praja-pateh
purisah $isna upasthas tu
prajaty-ananda-nirvrtih

apam—of water; viryasya—of the semen; sargasya—of the generative;
parjanyasya—of rains; praja-pateh—of the creator; pumsah—of the Lord;
$isnah—the genitals; upasthah tu—the place where the genitals are situated;
prajati—due to begetting; ananda—pleasure; nirvrtih—cause.

TRANSLATION
From the Lord’s genitals originate water, semen, generatives, rains, and

the procreators. His genitals are the cause of a pleasure that counteracts
the distress of begetting.


--- Page 279 ---
Text 9] Purusa-sikta Confirmed 281
PURPORT

The genitals and the pleasure of begetting counteract the distresses of
family encumbrances. One would cease to generate altogether if, by the
grace of the Lord, there were not a coating, a pleasure-giving substance, on
the surface of the generative organs. This substance gives a pleasure so
intense that it counteracts fully the distress of family encumbrances. A
person is so captivated by this pleasure-giving substance that he is not
satisfied by giving birth to a single child, but he increases the number of
children, with great risk of maintaining them, simply for this pleasure-
giving substance. This pleasure-giving substance is not false, however,
because it originates from the transcendental body of the Lord. In other
words, the pleasure-giving substance is a reality, but it has taken up an
assumption of pervertedness on account of material contamination. In the
material world, sex life is the cause of many distresses on account of
material contact. Therefore, the sex life in the material world should not
be encouraged beyond the necessity. There is a necessity for generating
progeny even in the material world, but such generation of children must
be carried out with full responsibility for spiritual values. The spiritual
values of life can be realized in the human form of material existence, and
the human being must adopt family planning with reference to the context
of spiritual values, and not otherwise. The degraded form of family
restriction by use of contraceptives, etc., is the grossest type of material
contamination. Materialists who use these devices want to fully utilize the
pleasure potency of the coating on the genitals by artificial means, without
knowing the spiritual importance. And without knowledge of spiritual
values, the less intelligent man tries to utilize only the material sense
pleasure of the genitals.

TEXT 9
Tra मित्रस्य परिमोक्षस्य नारद ।
हिंसाया Fr Fanfare गुदं स्मृतः ॥ ९॥
payur yamasya mitrasya
parimoksasya narada
himsdyd nirrter mrtyor
nirayasya gudam smrtam


--- Page 280 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
payuh—the evacuating outlet; yamasya—the controlling deity of death;
mitrasya—of Mitra; parimoksasya—of the evacuating hole; narada—@
Narada; hirisayah—of envy; nirrteh—of misfortune; mrtyoh—of death;
nirayasya—of hell; gudam—the rectum; smrtam—is understood.
TRANSLATION
O Narada, the evacuating outlet of the universal form of the Lord is the
abode of the controlling deity of death, Mitra, and the evacuating hole
and the rectum of the Lord is the place of envy, misfortune, death,
hell, etc.
TEXT 10
©. ~
पराभूतेरधमेसख तमसथापि দশিদঃ।
नाञ्यो नदनदीनां च गोत्राणामस्िसंहतिः 112 011
parabhiiter adharmasya
tamasas capi pascimah
nadyo nada-nadinari ca
gotranam asthi-sarmhatih
parabhiiteh—of frustration; adharmasya—of immortality; tamasah—of
ignorance; ca—and; api—as also; pascimah—back; nadyah—of the intestines;
nada—of the great rivers; nadinam—of the rivulets; ca—also; gotranam—of
the mountains; asthi—bones; sarhatih—accumulation.
TRANSLATION
The back side of the Lord is the place for all kinds of frustrations and
ignorance, as well as for immorality; from His veins flow the great rivers
and rivulets, and on His bones are stacked the great mountains.
PURPORT
In order to defy the impersonal conception of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, a systematic analysis of the physiological and anatomical


--- Page 281 ---
Text 11] Purusa-sitkta Confirmed 283
constitution of His transcendental body is given here. It is clear from the
available description of the body of the Lord (His universal form) that the
form of the Lord is distinct from the forms of ordinary mundane concep-
tion. In any case, He is never a formless void. Ignorance is the back side of
the Lord, and therefore the ignorance of the less intelligent class of men
is also not separate from His bodily conception. Since His body is the
complete whole of everything that be, one cannot assert that He is imper-
sonal only. On the contrary, the perfect description of the Lord holds that
He is both impersonal and personal simultaneously. The Personality of
Godhead is the original feature of the Lord, and His impersonal emanation
is but the reflection of His transcendental body. Those who are fortunate
enough to have a view of the Lord from the front can realize His personal
feature, whereas those who are frustrated and are thus kept on the
ignorance side of the Lord, or, in other words, those who have the view of
the Lord from the back side, realize Him in His impersonal feature.
TEXT 11
अन्यक्तरससिन्धूनां भूतानां निधनस च ।
उदरं शिदितं पुंसो हदयं मनसः पदम्‌ ॥११॥
avyakta-rasa-sindhiinarn
bhitanari nidhanasya ca
udarari viditarh pumso
hrdayari manasah padam

avyakta—impersonal feature; rasa-sindhitnam—of the seas and oceans of
water; bhiitanam—of those who take birth in the material world; nidhanasya
—of the annihilation; ca—also; udaram—His belly ; viditam—isknown by the
intelligent class of men; purisah—of the great personality; hrdayam—the
heart; manasah—of the subtle body; padam—place.

TRANSLATION
The impersonal feature of the Lord is the abode of great oceans, and

the resting place for the materially annihilated living entities is the belly of
the Lord. His heart is the abode of the subtle material bodies of living
beings. Thus it is known by the intelligent class of men.


--- Page 282 ---
284 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
PURPORT

In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 8.17-18) it is stated that according to human
calculations one day of Brahma is equal to one thousand ages of four
millenniums (4,300,000 years) each, and the same period is calculated to
be his night also. A Brahma lives for one hundred such years and then dies.
A Brahma, who is generally a great devotee of the Lord, attains liberation
after such a downfall. The universe (called the brahmanda, or the round
football-like domain controlled by a Brahma) thus becomes annihilated,
and thus the inhabitants of a particular planet, or of the whole universe,
are also annihilated. Avyakta, mentioned here in this verse, means the night
period of Brahma, when partial annihilation takes place and the living enti-
ties of that particular brahmanda, up to the planets of Brahmaloka, along
with the big oceans, etc., are all reposed in the belly of the virata purusa. At
the end of a Brahma’s night, the creation again takes place, and the living
entities, reserved within the belly of the Lord, are let loose to play their
respective parts as if being awakened from a deep slumber. Since the living
entities are never destroyed, the annihilation of the material world does not
annihilate the existence of theliving entities, but until liberation is attained
one has to accept one material body after another, again and again,
repeatedly. The human life is meant for making a solution to this repeated
change of bodies and thereby attaining a place in the spiritual sky where
everything is eternal, blissful, and full of knowledge. In other words, the
subtle forms of the living entities take place in the heart of the Supreme
Being, and such forms take tangible shape at the time of creation.

TEXT 12
धर्मस्य मम तुम्यं च कुमाराणां भवस्य च ।
विज्ञानस्य च स्त्वस्य परस्यात्मा परायणम्‌ ॥१२॥
dharmasya mama tubhyari ca
kumaranar bhavasya ca
vijiianasya ca sattvasya
parasyatma parayanam

dharmasya—of religious principles, or of Yamaraja; mama—mine;

tubhyam—of yours; ca—and; kumaranam—of the four Kumaras; bhavasya


--- Page 283 ---
Texts 13-16] Purusa-sakta Confirmed 285
—Lord Siva; ca—and also; vijianasya—of transcendental knowledge; ca—
३150; sattvasya—of truth; parasya—of the great personality ;:atma—conscious-
ness; parayanam— dependent.
TRANSLATION
Also the consciousness of that great personality is the abode of
religious principles, mine, yours, and that of the four bachelors, Sanaka,
Sanatana, Sanatkumiara and Sanandana. That consciousness is also the
abode of truth and transcendental knowledge.
TEXTS 13-16
अहं भवान्‌ FEAT त হট GASH ।
सुरासुरनरा नागाः खगा मृगसरीसृपाः ngs
गन्धर्वाप्सरसो यक्षा रक्षोभूतगणोरगाः |
पशवः पितरः सिद्धा विद्याध्राश्चारणा दरुमाः ॥१४॥
अन्य च विविधा আনা जलखलनमौकसः |
ह्केतवस्तारा्तडितः स्तनयिलवः |
स्व॑ पुरुष एवेदं भूतं भव्यं भवच्च यत्‌ ।
तेनेदमाृतं विश्व॑ লিললিদপিনিদ্রনি ॥१६॥
01৫18 bhavan bhavas caiva
ta ime munayo ‘grajah
surasura-nara nagah
khaga mrga-sarisrpah
gandarvapsaraso yaksa
rakso-bhiita-ganoragah
pasavah pitarah siddha
vidyadhras$ carana drumah
anye ca vividha jiva
jala-sthala-nabhau kasah
graharksa-ketavas taras
taditastanayitnavah


--- Page 284 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
sarvari purusa evedam
bhittarn bhavyam bhavac ca yat
tenedam avrtarn visvarn
vitastim adhi tisthati

aham—myself; bhavan—yourself; bhavah— Lord Siva; ca—also; eva—cer-
tainly: te—they; ime—all; munayah-—the great sages; agrajah—born before
you; sura—the demigods; asura—the demons; narah—the human beings:
nagah—the inhabitants of the Naga planet; khagah—birds; mrga—beasts;
sarisrpah—repliles; gandharva-apsarasah, yaksah, raksah-bhita-gana-uragah,
pasavah, pitarah, siddhah, vidyadhrah, caranah—all inhabitants of different
planets; drumah—the vegetable kingdom; anye—many others; ca—also;
vividhah—of different varieties; jivah—living entities; jala—water; sthala—
land; nabhaukasah—the inhabitants of the sky, or the birds; graha—the
asteroids; rksa—the influential stars; ketavah—the comets; tarah—the lu-
minaries; taditah—the lightning; stanayitnavah—the sound of the clouds;
sarvam—everything; purusah—the Personality of Godhead; eva idam—cer-
tainly all these; bhiitam—whatever is created; bhavyam—whatever will be
crealed; bhavat—and whatever was created in the past; ca—also; yat—what-
ever; tena idam—it is all by Him; avrtam—covered; viSvam—universally
comprehending; vitastim—half cubit;adhi tisthati—situated.

TRANSLATION

Beginning from me [Brahmi] down to you and Bhava [Siva], all the
great sages who were born before you, the demigods, the demons, the
Nagas, the human beings, the birds, the beasts, as well as the reptiles, etc.,
and all phenomenal manifestations of the universes, namely the planets,
stars, asteroids, luminaries, lightning, thunder, and the inhabitants of the
different planetary systems, namely the Gandharvas, Apsaras, Yaksas,
Raksasas, Bhataganas, Uragas, Pasavas, Pitaras, Siddhas, Vidyadharas,
Caranas, and all other different varieties of living entities, including the
birds, beasts, trees and everything that be, are all covered by the universal
form of the Lord at all times, namely past, present and future, although
He is transcendental to all of them, eternally existing in a form not ex-
ceeding nine inches.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead by His partial representation,

measuring not more than nine inches as Supersoul, expands by His poten-


--- Page 285 ---
Text 17] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 287
tial energy in the shape of the universal form, which includes everything
manifested in different varieties of organic and inorganic materials.
Manifested varieties of the universe are therefore not different from the
Lord, just as golden ornaments of different shapes and forms are non-
different from the original stock reserve of gold. In other words, the Lord
is the Supreme Person who controls everything that is within the creation,
and still le remains the supreme separate identity, distinct from all
manifested material creation. In the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.4-5) lle is
therefore said to be Yogesvara. Everything rests on the potency of Lord
Sri Krsna, and still the Lord is different from and transcendental to all
such identities. In the Vedic Purusa-sikta of the Rk-mantra, this is also
confirmed. This philosophical truth of simultaneous oneness and difference
was propounded by Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and it is known as
acintya-bhedabheda-tattva. Brahma, Narada and all others are simul-
taneously one with the Lord and different from the Supreme Lord. We are
all one with Him, just as the gold ornaments are one in quality with the
stock gold, but the individual gold ornament is never equal in quantity
with the stock gold. The stock gold is never exhausted even if there are
innumerable ornaments emanating from the stock because the stock is
parnam, complete, and even if piarpam is deducted from the piarnam, still
the supreme piirnem remains the same piarnam. This fact is inconceivable
to our present imperfect senses. Lord Caitanya therefore defined 1115
theory of philosophy as acintya (inconceivable), and as confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita as well as in the Bhdagavatam, Lord Caitanya’s theory of
acintya-bhedabheda-tattva is the perfect philosophy of the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 17
स्वधिष्ण्यं प्रतपन्‌ प्राणो बहिश्च प्रतपत्यसौ |
एवं विराजं प्रतपंस्तपत्यन्तवंहिः पुमान्‌ ।1ং৩।॥
svadhispyam pratapan prano
bahis ca pratapaty asau
evar vir@jari pratapams
tapaty antar bahih puman

svadhispyam—radiation; pratapan—by expansion; pranah—living energy;

bahih—external; ca—also; pratapati—illuminated; asau—the sun; evam—in


--- Page 286 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
the same way; vir@gjam—the universal form: pratapan—by expansion of;
tapati—enlivens; antah—internally ; bahih—externally: puman—the Supreme
Personality.
TRANSLATION
As the sun is illuminated both internally and externally by expanding
its radiation, similarly the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by expanding
His universal form, maintains everything in the creation both internally
and externally.
PURPORT

The universal form of the Lord, or the impersonal feature of the Lord
known as brahmajyoti, is clearly explained here, compared to the radiation
of the sun. The sunshine may expand all over the universe, but the source
of the sunshine, namely the sun planet or the deity known as the
Stryanardyana, is the basis of such radiation. Similarly, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna is the basis of the impersonal brahma-
Jyoti radiation, or the impersonal feature of the Lord. This is confirmed
in the Bhagavad-gita (14.27). So the universal form of the Lord is the
secondary imagination of the impersonal form of the Lord, but the primary
form of the Lord is Syamasundara, with two hands, playing on His eternal
flute. Seventy-five percent of the expansive radiation of the Lord is mani-
fested in the spiritual sky (tripad-vibhati), and twenty-five percent of His
personal radiation comprehends the entire expansion of the material
universes. This is also explained and stated in the Bhagavad-gita (10.42).
Thus the seventy-five percent expansion of His radiation is called His
internal energy, whereas the twenty-five percent expansion is called the
external energy of the Lord. The living entities, who are residents of the
spiritual as well as the material expansions, are His marginal energy
(tatastha-sakti), and they are at liberty to live in either of the energies,
external or internal. Those who live within the spiritual expansion of the
1,010 are called liberated souls, whereas the residents of the external
expansion are called the conditioned souls. We can just make an estimate
of the number of the residents of the internal expansions in comparison
with the number of residents in the external energy and may easily con-
clude that the liberated souls are far more numerous than the conditioned
souls.


--- Page 287 ---
Text 18] Purusa-sukta Confirmed 289
TEXT 18
सोऽख्तस्याभयस्येश्ो मत्यंमन्नं यदत्यगात्‌ |
मदिमेष ततो ब्रह्मन्‌ OTE दुरत्ययः ।॥१८॥
so ‘mrtasyabhayasyeso
martyam annam yad atyagat
mahimaisa'tato brahman
purusasya duratyayah
sah—He (the Lord); amrtasya—of deathlessness; abhayasya—of fearless-
ness; isah—the controller; martyam—dying; annam—fruitive action; yat—
one who has; atyagat—has transcended; mahima—glories; esah—of Him;
tatah—therefore; brahman—O brahmana Narada; purusasya— of the Supreme
Personality; duratyayah—immeasurable.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the controller of immortality
and fearlessness, and He is transcendental to death and the fruitive actions
of the material world. 0 Narada, 0 brahmana, it is therefore difficult to
measure the glories of the Supreme Person.
PURPORT
The glories of the Lord, in the transcendental seventy-five percent
portion of the Lord’s internal potency, are stated in the Padma Purana
(Uttara-khanda). It is said there that those planets in the spiritual sky,
which comprises the seventy-five percent expansion of the internal potency
of the Lord, are far, far greater than those planets in the total universes
composed of the external potency of the Lord. In the Caitanya-caritamrta,
the total universes in the external potency of the Lord are compared to
a bucketful of mustard seeds. One mustard seed is calculated to be a uni-
verse itself. In one of the universes, in which we are now living, the number
of planets cannot be counted by human energy, so how can we think of
the sum total in all the universes, which are compared to a bucketful of
mustard seeds? And the planets in the spiritual sky are at least three times
the number of those in the material sky. Such planets, being spiritual, are
in fact transcendental to the material modes; therefore they are constituted


--- Page 288 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
in the mode of unalloyed goodness only. The conception of spiritual bliss
(brahmananda) is fully present in those planets. Each of them is eternal,
indestructible and free from all kinds of inebrieties experienced in the
material world. Each of them is self-illuminating and more powerfully
dazzling than (if we can imagine) the total sunshine of millions of mundane
suns. The inhabitants of those planets are liberated from birth, death, old
age and diseases and have full knowledge of everything; they are all godly
and free from all sorts of material hankerings. They have nothing to do
there except to render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Narayana, who is the predominating Deity of such Vaikuntha planets.
Thoseliberated souls are engaged incessantly in singing songs mentioned in
the Sama-veda (vedaih sanga-pada-kramopanisadair gayanti yam samagah).
All of them are personifications of the five Upanisads. Tripad-vibhiiti, or the
seventy-five percent portion known as the internal potency of the Lord, is
to be understood as the kingdom of God far beyond the material sky; and
when we speak of pada-vibhiiti, or the twenty-five percent portion com-
prising His external energy, we should understand that this refers to the
sphere of the material world. It is also said in the Padma Purana that the
kingdom of tripad-vibhiiti is transcendental, whereas the pada-vibhiti is
mundane. Tripad-oibhiti is eternal, whereas the pada-vibhiti is transient.
The Lord and His eternal servitors in the transcendental kingdom all have
eternal forms which are auspicious, infallible, spiritual and eternally youth-
ful. In other words, there is no birth, death, old age and disease. That
eternal land is full of transcendental enjoyment and full of beauty and
bliss. This very factis also corroborated in this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
and the transcendental nature is described as amrta; and as it is described
in the Vedas: utamrtatvasyesanah. The Supreme Lord is the Lord of
immortality, or in other words, the Lord is immortal, and because He is
the Lord of immortality He can award immortality to His devotees. In the
Bhagavad-gita also (88. 8.16) the Lord assures that whoever may go to
His abode of immortality shall never return to this mortal land of three-
fold miseries. The Lord is not like the mundane lord. The mundane master
or lord never enjoys equally along with his subordinates, nor is a mundane
lord immortal, nor can he award immortality to his subordinate. The
Supreme Lord, who is the leader of all living entities, can award all the
qualities of His personality unto His devotees, including immortality and
spiritual bliss. In the material world there is always anxiety or fearfulness
in the heart of all living entities, but the Lord, being Himself the supreme
fearless, also awards the same quality of fearlessness to His pure devotees.
Mundane existence is itself a kind of fearfulness because in all mundane


--- Page 289 ---
Text 19] Purusa-sikta Confirmed 291
bodies the effects of birth, death, old age and disease always keep a living
being compact in fearfulness. In the mundane world, there is always the
influence of time, which changes things from one stage to another, and
the living entity, originally being avikara or nonchangeable, suffers a great
deal on account of changes due to the influence of time. The changing
effects of the eternal time are conspicuously absent in the immortal king-
dom of God; it is therefore to be understood that there is no influence of
time and therefore no fear whatsoever. In the material world, so-
called happiness is the result of one’s own work. One can become a rich
man by dint of one’s own hard labor, and there are always fear and doubts
as to the duration of such acquired happiness. But in the kingdom of God,
no one has to endeavor to attain a standard of happiness. Happiness is the
nature of the spirit, as it is stated in the Vedanta-sitras: anandamayo
’bhyasat—it is by nature full of happiness. Happiness in spiritual nature
always increases in volume with a new phase of appreciation; there is no
question of decreasing the bliss. Such unalloyed spiritual bliss is nowhere
to be found within the orbit of the material universe, including the Jana-
loka planets, or, for that matter, the Maharloka or Satyaloka planets, be-
cause even Lord Brahma is subjected to the laws of fruitive actions and
the law of birth and death. It is, therefore, stated here: duratyayah, or,
in other words, spiritual happiness in the eternal kingdom of God cannot
be imagined even by the great brahmacaris or sannydsis who are eligible to
be promoted to the planets beyond the region of heaven. Or, the greatness
of the Supreme Lord is so great that it cannot be imagined even by the
great brahmacaris or sannyasis, but such happiness is factually attained by
the unalloyed devotees of the Lord, by His divine grace.
TEXT 19
पादेषु सवैभूतानि पुंसः स्थितिपदा बिदुः ।
अमृतं क्षेममभयं त्रमूर्भोऽधायि मूर्धसु ॥१९॥
padesu sarva-bhiatani
pumsah sthiti-pado viduh
amrtar ksemam abhayari
tri-mirdhno 01809 8 mirdhasu


--- Page 290 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam |Canto 2, Ch. 6
padesu—in the one-fourth part; sarva—all; bhitani—living entities;
puriisah—of the Supreme Person; sthiti-padah—the reservoir of all material
opulence; viduh—you should know; amrtam—deathlessness; ksemam—all
happiness, free from the anxiety of old age, diseases, etc.; abhayam—fear-
lessness; tri-miirdhnah—beyond the three higher planetary systems; adhayi
—exist; miirdhasu—beyond the material coverings.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is to be known as the supreme
reservoir of all material opulences by the one-fourth part of His energy in
which all the living entities exist. Deathlessness, fearlessness, and freedom
from the anxieties of old age and disease, exist in the kingdom of God,
which is beyond the three higher planetary systems and beyond the
material coverings.
PURPORT

Out of the total manifestations of the sandhini energy of the Lord, one-
fourth is displayed in the material world, and three-fourths is displayed in
the spiritual world. The Lord’s energy is divided into three component
parts, namely sandhini, 50188 and hladini, or, in other words, He is the
full manifestation of existence, knowledge and bliss. In the material world
such a sense of existence, knowledge and pleasure are meagerly exhibited,
and all living entities, who are minute parts and parcels of the Lord, are
eligible to relish such consciousness of existence, knowledge and bliss very
minutely in the liberated stage, whereas in the conditioned stage of material
existence they can hardly appreciate what is the factual, existential,
cognizable and pure happiness of life. The liberated souls who exist in far
greater numerical strength than those souls in the material world can
factually experience the potency of the above-mentioned sandhini, 5৫77
and hladini energies of the Lord in the matter of deathlessness, fearless-
ness and freedom from old age and disease.

In the material world, the planetary systems are arranged in three
spheres, called triloka or Svarga, Martya, Patala, and all of them constitute
only one-fourth of the total sandhini energy. Beyond that there is the
spiritual sky where the Vaikuntha planets exist beyond the coverings of
seven material strata. In none of the triloka planetary systems can one
experience the status of immortality, full knowledge and full bliss. The


--- Page 291 ---
Text 20] Purusa-siikkta Confirmed 293
upper three planetary systems are called sattvika planets because they pro-
vide facilities for a long duration of life and relative freedom from disease
and old age, as well as a sense of fearlessness. The great sages and saints are
promoted beyond the heavenly planets to the Maharloka, but that also is
not the place of complete fearlessness because at the end of one kalpa the
Maharloka is annihilated and the inhabitants have to transport themselves
to still higher planets. Yet even on these planets no one is immune from
death. There may be a comparative extension of life, expansion of know-
ledge and sense of full bliss, but factual deathlessness, fearlessness and
freedom from old age, diseases, etc., are only possible beyond the material
spheres of the coverings of the material sky. Such things are situated on
the head (adhayi mirdhasu).
TEXT 20
TREAT चदिञ्चासनग्रजानां य आश्रमाः |
अन्तिरोक्यास्त्वपरो TEASER: ॥२०॥
padas trayo bahis casann
aprajanar ya asramah
antas tri-lokyas tv aparo
grha-medho ‘brhad-vratah
padah trayah—the cosmos of three-fourths of the Lord’s energy; bahih—
thus situated beyond; ca—and for all; asan—were; aprajanam—of those
who are not meant for rebirth; ye—those; asramah- status of life; antah—
within; tri-lokyah—of the three worlds; tu—but; aparah—others; grha-
medhah—attached to family life; abrhat-vratah— without strictly following
a vow of celibacy.
TRANSLATION
The spiritual world, which consists of three-fourths of the Lord’s
energy, is situated beyond this material world, and it is especially meant
for those who will never be reborn. Others, who are attached to family
life and who do not strictly follow celibacy vows, must live within the
three material worlds.


--- Page 292 ---
294. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
PURPORT

The climax of the system of varnasrama-dharma or sanatana-dharma is
clearly expressed here in this particular verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam. The
highest benefit that can be awarded to a human being is to train him to be
detached from sex life, particularly because due to sex indulgence only
the conditioned life of material existence continues birth after birth.
Human civilization in which there is no control of sex life is a fourth-class
civilization because in such an atmosphere there is no liberation of the
soul encaged in the material body. Birth, death, old age and disease are
related to the material body, and they have nothing to do with the spirit
soul. But as long as the bodily attachment for sensual enjoyment is en-
couraged, the individual spirit soul is forced to continue the repetition of
birth and death on account of the material body, which is compared to
garments subjected to the law of deterioration.

In order to award the highest benefit of human life, the varnasrama
system trains the follower to adopt the vow of celibacy beginning from
the order of brahmacari. The brahmacart life is for students who are
educated to follow strictly the vow of celibacy. Youngsters who have had
no taste of sex life can easily follow the vow of celibacy, and once fixed in
the principle of such a life, one can very easily continue to the highest
perfectional stage, attaining the kingdom of the three-fourths energy of
the Lord. It is already explained that in the cosmos of three-fourths energy
of the Lord, there is neither death nor fear, and one is full of the blissful
life of happiness and knowledge. A householder attached to family life
can easily give up such a life of sex indulgence if he has been trained in the
principles of the life of brahmacari. A householder is recommended to quit
home at the end of fifty years (paiicasordham vanam vrajet) and live a life
in the forest; then, being fully detached from family affection, he may
accept the order of renunciation as a sannyasi fully engaged in the service
of the Lord. Any form of religious principles in which the followers are
trained to pursue the vow of celibacy is good for the human being because
only those who are trained in that way can end the miserable life of ma-
terial existence. The principles of nirvana, as recommended by Lord
Buddha, are also meant for ending the miserable life of material existence.
And this process, in the highest degree, is recommended here in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, with clear perception of ideal perfection, although basically
there is no difference between the process of Buddhists, Sankarites and
Vaisnavites. For promotion to the highest status of perfection, namely
freedom from birth and death, anxiety and fearfulness, not one of these
processes allows the follower to break the vow of celibacy.


--- Page 293 ---
Text 21] Purusa-sikkta Confirmed 295

The householders and persons who have broken the vow of celibacy
deliberately cannot enter into the kingdom of deathlessness. The pious
householders or the fallen yogis or the fallen transcendentalists can be
promoted to the higher planets within the material world (one-fourth of
the energy of the Lord), but they will fail to enter into the kingdom of
deathlessness. Abrhad-vratas are those who have broken the vow of celi-
bacy. The vanaprasthas, or those retired from family life, and the sannyasis,
or the renounced persons, cannot break the vow of celibacy if they want
success in the process. The brahmacaris, vanaprasthas and the sannyasis
do not intend to take rebirth (apraja), nor are they meant for secretly
indulging in sex life. Such a falldown by the spiritualist may be compen-
sated by another chance of human life in good families of learned
brahmanas or of rich merchants for another term of elevation, but the best
thing is to attain the highest perfection of deathlessness as soon as the
human form of life is attained; otherwise the whole policy of human life
will prove to be a total failure. Lord Caitanya was very strict in advising
His followers in this matter of celibacy. One of His personal attendants,
Chota Haridasa, was severely punished by Lord Caitanya because of his
failure to observe the vow of celibacy. For a transcendentalist, therefore,
who at all wants to be promoted to the kingdom beyond material miseries,
it is worse than suicide to deliberately indulge in sex life, especially in the
renounced order of life. Sex life in the renounced order of life is the most
perverted form of religious life, and such a misguided person can only be
saved if, by chance, he meets a pure devotee.

TEXT 21
खती विचक्रमे fag साशनानशने उमे ।
यदविद्या च विदा च पुरूषस्तूमयाश्रयः ॥२१॥
srti vicakrame visvarn
sasananasane ubhe
yad avidya ca vidya ca
purusas tibhayasrayah

srti—destination of the living entities; vicekrame—exists comprehensive-
ly; visvam—the all-pervading Personality of Godhead; sasana—activities of
lording it over; anasane—activities in the matter of devotional service;
ubhe—both; yat—what is; avidya—nescience; ca—as well as; vidya—factual


--- Page 294 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
knowledge; ca—and; purusah—the Supreme Person; tu—but; ubhaya—for
both of them; asrayah— master.
TRANSLATION

By His energies, the all-pervading Personality of Godhead is thus com-
prehensively the master in the activities of controlling and in devotional
service. He is the ultimate master of both nescience and factual knowledge
of all situations.

PURPORT

The word visvam is significant in this verse. One who travels perfectly in
every field of activity is called the purusah or ksetrajiia. These two terms,
ksetrajiia and purusa, are equally applicable to both the individual self and
the Supreme Self, the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gita the matter is explained
as follows:

ksetrajiiari capi mam viddhi sarva-ksetresu bharata

ksetra-ksetrajiiayor jiianari yat taj jianam 77101077 mama

(Bg. 13.3)

Ksetra means the place, and one who knows the place is called the
ksetrajiia. The individual self knows about his limited field of activities,
but the Supreme Self, the Lord, knows about the unlimited field of activi-
ties. The individual soul knows about his own thinking, feeling and willing
activities, but the Supersoul or the Paramatma, the supreme controller,
being present everywhere, knows everyone’s thinking, feeling and willing
activities, and as such the individual living entity is the minute master of
his personal affairs, whereas the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
master of everyone's affairs, past, present, and future (vedaham samatitani,
etc.). Only the ignorant person does not know this difference between the
Lord and the living entities. The living entities, as distinguished from the
incognizant matter, may be qualitatively equal to the Lord in the matter of
cognizance, but the living entity can never be equal to the Lord in full
knowledge of past, present and future.

And because the living entity is partially cognizant, he is therefore
sometimes forgetful of his own identity. This forgetfulness is specifically
manifested in the field of the ekapad-vibhiiti of the Lord, or in the material
world, but in the tripad-vibhiiti field of actions, or in the spiritual world,


--- Page 295 ---
Text 22] Purusa-sikta Confirmed 297
there is no forgetfulness by the living entities, who are free from all kinds of
contaminations resulting from the forgetful state of existence. The material
body is the symbol of the gross and subtle form of forgetfulness; therefore
the whole atmosphere of the material world is called avidyd, or nescience,
and similarly the whole atmosphere of the spiritual world is called vidya,
or full of knowledge. There are different stages of avidyd, and they are
called dharma, artha, and moksa. The idea of moksa, or liberation, held by
the monist in the matter of oneness of the living entity and the Lord by
ultimate merging in one, is also the last stage of materialism or forgetful-
ness. To acquire the knowledge of qualitative oneness of the self and
Superself is partial knowledge and ignorance also because there is no
knowledge in the matter of quantitative difference, as explained above.
The individual self can never be equal to the Lord in cognizance, otherwise
he could not be placed in the state of forgetfulness. So, because there is a
stage of forgetfulness of the individual selves, or the living entities, there is
always a gulf of difference between the Lord and the living entity, as
between the part and the whole. The part is never equal to the whole. So
the conception of one hundred percent equality of the living being with
the Lord is also nescience.

In the field of nescience, activities are directed toward lording it over
the creation. In the material world, therefore, everyone is engaged in
acquiring material opulence to lord it over the material world. Therefore
there is always clash and frustration, which are the symptoms of nescience.
But in the field of knowledge, there is devotional service of the Lord
(bhakti). Therefore there is no chance of being contaminated by the
influence of nescience or forgetfulness (avidya) in the liberated stage of
devotional activities. The Lord is thus the proprietor both of the fields of
nescience and of cognition, and it remains the choice of the living entity
to exist in either of the above regions.

TEXT 22
यसादण्डं विराड्‌ जज्ञे भूतेन्द्रियगुणात्मकः |
तद्‌ द्रव्यमत्यगाद्‌ विश्वं गोभिः खयं इवातपन्‌ ॥॥२२॥
yasmad गवः virad jajiie
bhittendriya-gunatmakah
tad dravyam atyagad visvar
gobhih sirya ivatapan


--- Page 296 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6

yasmat—from whom; apdam—universal globes; virat—and the gigantic
universal form; jajiie—appeared; bhiita—elements; indriya—senses; guna-
atmakah— qualitative; tat dravyam—the universes and the universal form,
etc.; atyagat—surpassed; visvam—all the universes; gobhih—by the rays;
sitryah—the sun; iva—like; atapan—distributed rays and heat.

TRANSLATION
From that Personality of Godhead, all the universal globes and the
universal form with all material elements, qualities, and senses are gener-
ated. Yet He is aloof from such material manifestations, like the sun, which
is separate from its rays and heat.
PURPORT

The supreme truth has been ascertained in the previous verse as purusa
or the purusottama, the Supreme Person. The Absolute Person is the कष्ण
or the supreme controller by His different energies. The ekapad-vibhiiti
manifestation of the material energy of the Lord is just like one of the
many mistresses of the Lord, by whom the Lord is not so much attracted,
as indicated in the language of the Gita (bhinna prakrtih). But the region
of the tripad-vibhiiti, being a pure spiritual manifestation of the energy of
the Lord, is, so to speak, more attractive to Him. The Lord, therefore,
generates the material manifestations by impregnating the material energy,
and then, within the manifestation, He expands Himself as the gigantic
form of the visva-riipa. The visva-ripa, as it was shown to Arjuna, is not
the original form of the Lord. The original form of the Lord is the tran-
scendental form of Purusottama, or Krsna Himself. It is very nicely ex-
plained herein that He expands Himself just like the sun. The sun expands
itself by its terrible heat and rays, yet the sun is always aloof from such
rays and heat. The impersonalist takes into consideration the rays of the
Lord without any information of the tangible, transcendental, eternal
form of the Lord, known as Krsna. Therefore Krsna, in His supreme
personal form, with two hands and flute, is bewildering for the imperson-
alists who can accommodate only the gigantic visva-rizpa of the Lord. They
should know that the rays of the sun are secondary to the sun, and simi-
larly the impersonal gigantic form of the Lord is also secondary to the
personal form as Purusottama. The Brahma-sarihita confirms this state-
ment as follows:


--- Page 297 ---
Text 23] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 299
ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis
tabhir ya eva nijariupataya kalabhih
goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhitto
govindam adi-purusam tam aha bhajami
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, the one who enlivens
the senses of everyone by His personal bodily rays, resides in His transcen-
dental abode, called Goloka. Yet He is present in every nook and corner of
His creation by expansion of happy spiritual rays, equal in power to His
personal potency of bliss.” He is therefore simultaneously personal and
impersonal by His inconceivable potency, or He is the one without a
second, displaying complete unity in diversity of material and spiritual
manifestations. He is separated from everything, and still nothing is dif-
ferent from Him.
TEXT 23
TEE नामभ्यानलिनादहमासं महात्मनः |
नाविदं यज्ञसम्भारान्‌ पुरुपावयवानरृते 130
yadasya nabhyan nalinad
aham ৫5071 mahatmanah
navidarn yajiia-sambharan
purusavayavan rte
yada—at the time of; asya—His; nabhyat—from the abdomen; nalinat—
from the lotus flower; aham—myself;asam—took my birth; maha-atmanah—
of the great person; na avidam—did not know; yajiia—sacrificial; sam-
bharan—ingredients; purusa—of the Lord; avayavat— personal bodily limbs;
rte—except.
TRANSLATION
When I was born from the abdominal lotus flower of the Lord
[Maha-Visnu], the great person, I had no other ingredients for sacrificial
performances except the bodily limbs of the great Personality of
Godhead.


--- Page 298 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
PURPORT

Lord Brahma, the creator of the cosmic manifestation, is known as
Svayambhuva, or one who is born without father and mother. The general
process is that a living creature is born out of the sex combination of the
male father and the female mother. But Brahma, the first-born living
being, is born out of the abdominal lotus flower of the Maha-Visnu
plenary expansion of Lord Krsna. The abdominal lotus flower is part of
the Lord’s bodily limbs, and Brahma is born out of the lotus flower.
Therefore Lord Brahma is also a part of the Lord’s body. Brahma, after
his appearence in the gigantic hollow of the universe, saw darkness and
nothing else. He felt perplexity, and from his heart he was inspired by
the Lord to undergo austerity, thereby acquiring the ingredients for
sacrificial performances. But there was nothing besides the two of them,
namely the Personality of Maha-Visnu and Brahma himself, born of the
bodily part of the Lord. For sacrificial performances many ingredients
were in need, especially animals. The animal sacrifice is never meant for
killing the animal, but for achieving the successful result of the sacrifice.
The animal offered in the sacrificial fire is, so to speak, destroyed, but
the next moment it is given a new life again by dint of the Vedic hymns
chanted by the expert priest. When such an expert priest is not available,
the animal sacrifice in the fire of the sacrificial altar is forbidden. Thus
Brahma created even the sacrificial ingredients out of the bodily limbs of
the Garbhodakasayi Visnu, which means that the cosmic order was
created by Brahma himself. Also, nothing is created out of nothing, but
everything is created from the person of the Lord. The Lord says in the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 10.8), aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravar-
tate. “Everything is made from My bodily limbs, and I am therefore the
original source of all creations.”

The impersonalists argue that there is no use in worshiping the Lord
when everything 15 nothing but the Lord Himself. The personalist, however,
worships the Lord out of a great sense of gratitude, utilizing the ingredients
born out of the bodily limbs of the Lord. The fruits and flowers are avail-
able from the body of the earth, and yet mother earth is worshiped by the
sensible devotee with ingredients born from the earth. Similarly, mother
Ganges is worshiped by the water of the Ganges, and yet the worshiper
enjoys the result of such worship. Worship of the Lord is also performed
by the ingredients born from the bodily limbs of the Lord, and yet the
worshiper, who is himself a part of the Lord, achieves the result of devo-
tional service of the Lord. While the impersonalist wrongly concludes that


--- Page 299 ---
Text 25] Purusa-sikkta Confirmed 301
he is the Lord himself, the personalist, out of a great gratitude, worships
the Lord in devotional service, knowing perfectly well that nothing is
different from the Lord. The devotee therefore endeavors to apply every-
thing in the service of the Lord because he knows that everything is the
property of the Lord and that no one can claim anything as one’s own.
This perfect conception of oneness helps the worshiper in being engaged
in His loving service, whereas the impersonalist, being falsely puffed up,
remains a nondevotee forever, without being recognized by the Lord.
TEXT 24
तेषु यज्ञस्य पशवः सवनस्पतयः कुशाः ।
इदं च देवयजनं काटथोरुगुणानििितः ॥२४॥
tesu yajiiasya pasavah
sa-vanaspatayah kusah
idarh ca deva-yajanarn
kalas corugunanvitah
tesu—in such sacrifices; yajiiasya—of the sacrificial performance; pasavah
—the animals or the sacrificial ingredients; sa-vanaspatayah—along with
flowers and leaves; kusah—the straw; idam—all these; ca—as also; deva-
yajanam—the sacrificial altar; kalah—suitable time; ca—as also; wru—
great; guna-anvitah—qualified.
TRANSLATION
For performing sacrificial ceremonies, sacrificial ingredients, such as
flowers, leaves and straw, along with the sacrificial altar and a suitable
time [Spring] are all required.
TEXT 25
वस्तून्योषधयः स्नेहा रसलोहमरदो जलम्‌ |
ऋचो यजूंषि सामानि चातुर्होत्रं च सत्तम ॥२५॥


--- Page 300 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
vastinyosadhayah sneha
rasa-loha-mrdo jalam
7८० yajirnsi samani
catur-hotram ca sattama
vastitni—utensils; osadhayah— grains; snehah—clarified butter; rasa-loha-
mrdah—honey, gold and earth; jalam—water; rcah—the Rg-veda; yajirnsi—
the Yajur-veda; samani—the Sama-veda; catur-hotram—four persons con-
ducting the performance; ca—all these; sattama—O most pious one.
TRANSLATION
Other requirements are utensils, grains, clarified butter, honey, gold,
earth, water, Rg-veda, Yajur-veda, Sama-veda and four priests to perform
the sacrifice.
PURPORT
To perform a sacrifice successfully, at least four expert priests are
needed: one who can offer (hota), one who can chant (udgata), one who
can kindle the sacrificial fire (brahma) without the aid of separate fire, and
one who can chant the hymns. Such sacrifices were conducted from
the birth of Brahma, the first living creature, and were carried on till the
reign of Maharaja Yudhisthira. But such expert brahmana priests are very
rare in this age of corruption and quarrel, and therefore in the present age
only the yagjiia of chanting the holy name of the Lord is recommended. The
scriptures enjoin:
harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha.
TEXT 26
नामधेयानि FATT दक्षिणाश्च व्रतानि A |
ইলনান্তন্কমঃ कल्पः सङ्कल्पस्तन्त्रमेव च ।॥२६॥


--- Page 301 ---
Text 26] Purusa-sikta Confirmed 303
nama-dheyani mantras ca
daksinds ca vratani ca
devatanukramah kalpah
sankalpas tantram eva ca
nama-dheyani—invoking the names of the demigods; mantrah—specific
hymns to offer to a particular demigod; ca—also; daksinah—reward; ca—
and; vratani—vows; ca—and; devatd-anukramah—one demigod after another;
kalpah—the specific scripture; sankalpah—the specific purpose; tantram—
a particular process; eva—as they are; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Other necessities include invoking the different names of the demigods
by specific hymns and vows of recompense, in accordance with the
particular scripture, for specific purposes by specific processes.
PURPORT
The whole process of offering sacrifice is under the category of fruitive
action, and such activities are extremely scientific. They mainly depend
on the process of vibrating sounds with a particular accent. It is a great
science, and due to being out of proper use for more than four thousand
years, for want of qualified brahmanas, such performances of sacrifice are
no longer effective. Nor are they recommended in this fallen age. Any such
sacrifice undertaken in this age as a matter of show may simply be a
cheating process by the clever priestly order. But such a show of sacrifices
cannot be effective at any stage. Fruitive action is being carried on by the
help of material science and to a little extent by gross material help, but
the materialists await a still more subtle advancement in the process of
vibrating sounds on which the Vedic hymns are established. Gross material
science cannot direct the real purpose of human life. They can only
increase the artificial needs of life without any solution to the problems
of life; therefore the way of materialistic life leads to the wrong type of
human civilization. Since the ultimate aim of life is spiritual realization,
the direct way of invoking the holy name of the Lord, as mentioned above,
is precisely recommended by Lord Caitanya, and people of the modern
age can easily take advantage of this simple process which is tenable to the
condition of the complicated social structure.


--- Page 302 ---
304 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
TEXT 27
= 2 Pn र
गतया সলমন TRH समपणम्‌ |
১২২১
पुरूपावयव॑रेते सम्भाराः सम्भृता मया ॥२७॥
gatayo matayas caiva
prayas-cittari samarpanam
purusavayavair ete
sambharah sambhrta maya
gatayah—progress to the ultimate goal (Visnu); matayah—worshiping the
demigods; ca—as also; eva—certainly ; prayas-cittam—compensation; samar-
panam—ultimate offering; purusa—the Personality of Godhead; avayavaih—
from the parts of the body of the Personality of Godhead; ete—these;
sambharah—the ingredients; sambhrtah—were arranged; maya—by me.
TRANSLATION
Thus I had to arrange all these necessary ingredients and paraphernalia
of the sacrifice from the personal bodily parts of the Personality of
Godhead. By invocation of the demigods’ names, the ultimate goal, Visnu,
was gradually attained, and thus compensation and ultimate offering was
complete.
PURPORT
In this verse special stress is given to the person of the Supreme Lord,
and not to His impersonal brehmajyoti, as being the source of all supplies.
Narayana, the Supreme Lord, is the goal of sacrificial results, and therefore
the Vedic hymns are ultimately meant for attaining this goal. Human life
is thus made successful by pleasing Narayana and getting entrance into the
direct association of Narayana in the spiritual kingdom of Vaikuntha.
TEXT 28
= =
इति सम्भृतसम्भारः CO RR ECE ।
५ = =
तमेव पुरुष यज्ञं तेनेवायजमीश्वरम्‌ ।।২৫।।


--- Page 303 ---
Text 28] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 305
iti sambhrta-sambharah
purusavayavair aham
tam eva purusari yajiiar
tenaivayajam iSvaram

iti—thus;sambhrta—executed; sambharah— equipped myself well; purusa
—the Personality of Godhead; avayavaih—by the parts and parcels; aham—
I; tam eva—unto Him; purusam—the Personality of Godhead; yajiam—the
enjoyer of all sacrifices; tena eva—by all those; ayajam—worshiped;
Svaram— the supreme controller.

TRANSLATION
Thus I created the ingredients and paraphernalia for offering sacrifice
out of the parts and parcels of the body of the Supreme Lord, the
enjoyer of the sacrifice, and I performed the sacrifice to satisfy the Lord.
PURPORT

People in general are always anxious to have peace of mind or peace in
the world, but they do not know how to achieve such a standard of
peace in the world. Such peace in the world is obtainable by performances
of sacrifice and by practicing austerity. In the Bhagavad-gita the following
prescription is recommended:

bhoktarar yajna-tapasan sarva-loka-mahesvaram
su-hrdarn sarva-bhitanam jnatva mar santim rcchati
(Bg. 5.29)

“The karma-yogis know that the Supreme Lord is the factual enjoyer and
maintainer of all sacrifices and of the austere life. They also know that the
Lord is the ultimate proprietor of all the planets, and He is the factual
friend of all living entities. Such knowledge gradually converts the karma-
yogis into pure devotees of the Lord through the association of unalloyed
devotees, and thus they are able to be liberated from the material bondage.”

Brahma, the original living being within the material world, taught us
the way of sacrifice. The word sacrifice suggests dedication of one’sown
interests for satisfaction of a second person. That is the way of all
activities. Every man is engaged in sacrificing his interests for others, either


--- Page 304 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
in the form of family, society, community, country or the entire human
society. But perfection of such sacrifices is attained when they are
performed for the sake of the Supreme Person, the Lord. Because the Lord
is the proprietor of everything, because the Lord is the friend of all living
creatures, and because He is the maintainer of the performer of sacrifice,
as well as the supplier of the ingredients of sacrifices, it is He only and
no one else who should be satisfied by all sacrifices.

The whole world is engaged in sacrificing energy for advancement of
learning, social upliftment, economic development and plans for total
improvement of the human condition, but no one is interested in sacrificing
for the sake of the Lord, as it is advised in the Bhagavad-gita. Therefore,
there is no peace in the world. If men at all want peace in the world, they
must practice sacrifice in the interest of the supreme proprietor and friend
of all.

TEXT 29
. [न
ततस्ते भ्रातर इमे प्रजानां पतयो नव ।
अयजन्‌ व्यक्तमव्यक्तं पुरुषं सुसमादिताः ।।२९॥
tatas te bhratara ime
prajanam patayo nava
ayajan vyaktam avyaktari
purusam su-samahitah

tatah—thereafter; te—your; bhratarah -brothers; ime— these; prajanam--
of the living creatures; patayah—masters; nava—nine in number; ayajan—
performed; vyaktam—manifested; avyaktam—nonmanifested; purusam—
personalities; su-samahitah—with proper rituals.

TRANSLATION
My dear son, thereafter your nine brothers, who are the masters of
living creatures, performed the sacrifice with proper rituals to satisfy both
the manifested and nonmanifested personalities.
PURPORT

The manifested personalities are the demigods like the ruler of the

heavenly kingdom, Indra, and his associates; and the nonmanifested


--- Page 305 ---
Text 30] Purusa-sitkta Confirmed 307
personality is the Lord Himself. The manifested personalities are mundane
controllers of the material affairs, whereas the nonmanifested Personality
of Godhead is transcendental, beyond the range of the material atmosphere.
In this age of Kali the manifested demigods are also not to be seen due to
space travel being completely stopped. So both powerful demigods and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are nonmanifested to the covered eyes
of the modern man. Modern men want to see everything with their
eyes, although they are not sufficiently qualified. Consequently, they
disbelieve in the existence of the demigods or of the Supreme God. They
should see through the pages of authentic scriptures and should not
simply believe their unqualified eyes. Even in these days, God can also be
seen by qualified eyes tinged with the ointment of love of God.
TEXT 30
ततश मनवः काले ईजिरे ऋषयोऽपरे |
= EN ee
पितरो विवुधा दत्या मनुष्याः क्रतुमिर्विुम्‌ ॥२०।।
tatas ca manavah kale
ijire rsayo’pare
pitaro vibudha daitya
manusyah kratubhir vibhum
tatah— thereafter; ca—also; manavah—the Manus or the fathers of man-
kind; kale—in due course of time; gjire—worshiped; rsayah—great sages;
apare—others; pitarah—the forefathers; vibudhah—the learned scholars;
daityah—great devotees of the demigods; manusyah—mankind; kratubhih
vibhum—by performance of sacrifices in order to please the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, by performance of sacrifice meant to please the Supreme
Lord, Manu, the father of mankind, worshiped great sages, learned scholars
and forefathers.
PURPORT
The daityas are devotees of the demigods because they want to derive
the greatest possible material facilities from them. The devotees of the Lord


--- Page 306 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
are eka-nistha, or absolutely attached to the devotional service of the Lord.
Therefore they have practically no time to see the benefits of material
facilities. Because of their realization of their spiritual identity, they are
more concerned with spiritual emancipation than with material comforts.
TEXT 31
~ ~, ~ IN
नारायणे AEA तादद विश्वमाहतम्‌ |
o
गृहीतमायोरुगुणः सगादावगुणः सखतः 13210
narayane bhagavati
tad idam visvam ahitam
grhita-mayoru-gunah
sargadav agunah svatah
narayane--unto Narayana; bhagavati—the Personality of Godhead; tat
idam—all these material manifestations: viSvam—all the universes; @hitam—
situated; grhita—having accepted; maya—material energies; wru-gunah—
greatly powerful; sarga-adau—in the matter of creation, maintenance and
destruction; agunah—without affinity for the material modes; svatah—
self-sufficiently.
TRANSLATION
All the material manifestations of the universes are therefore situated
in His powerful material energies, which He accepts self-sufficiently,
although He is eternally without affinity for the material modes.
PURPORT
The question put by Narada before Brahma concerning the sustenance
of the material creation is thus answered. Material actions and reactions,
as the material scientist can superficially observe, are not basically ultimate
truth in regards to creation, maintenance, and destruction. But the material
energy is a potency of the Lord which is displayed in time, accepting the
three qualities of goodness, passion and ignorance in the forms of Visnu,
Brahma and Siva. The material energy thus works under the supreme spell
of His Lordship, although He is always transcendental to all such material


--- Page 307 ---
Text 32] Purusa-sukta Confirmed 309
activities. A rich man constructs a big house by spending his energy
in the shape of resources, and similarly he destroys a big house by
his resources, but the maintenance is always under his personal care.
The Lord is the richest of the rich because He is always fully complete in
six opulences. Therefore He is not required to do anything personally, but
everything in the material world is carried out by His wishes and direction;
therefore, the entire material manifestation is situated in Narayana, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Impersonal conception of the supreme
truth is due to lack of knowledge only, and this fact is clearly explained by
Brahmaji, who is supposed to be the creator of the universal affairs.
Brahmaji is the highest authority of Vedic wisdom, and his assertion in
this connection is therefore the supreme information.
TEXT 32
सृजामि तन्नियुक्तोऽं हरो हरति aga: |
विश्वं पुरुषरूपेण परिपाति त्रिशक्तिधृक्‌ ।२२॥
srjami tan-niyukto’ham
haro harati tad-vasah
visvarh purusa-riipena
paripati tri-Sakti-dhrk
srjami—do create; tat—by His; niyuktah—appointment; aham—1: harah—
Lord Siva; harati—destroys; tat-vasah—under His subordination: visvam—
the whole universe; purusa— Personality of Godhead: ripenpa—by His
eternal form; paripati—maintains; tri-Sakti-dhrk—the controller of three
energies.
TRANSLATION
By His will, 1 create, Lord Siva destroys, and He Himself, in His
eternal form as the Personality of Godhead, maintains everything. He is
the powerful controller of these three energies.
PURPORT
The conception of one without a second is clearly confirmed here.


--- Page 308 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
The one is Lord Vasudeva, and by His different energies and expansions
only, different manifestations, both in the material and in the spiritual
worlds, are maintained. In the material world also, Lord Vasudeva is
everything, as is stated in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.19): vasudevah sarvam
iti, everything is Vasudeva only. In the Vedic hymns also the same
Vasudeva is held to be supreme. It is said in the Vedas, vasudevat paro
brahman na canyo’rtho’ti tattvata: in fact there is no greater truth than
Vasudeva. And Lord Krsna affirms the same truth in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 7.7), mattah [007৫0070৫70 nanyati: there is nothing above Me (Lord
Krsna). So the conception of oneness, as is overly stressed by the im-
personalist, is also accepted by the personalist devotee of the Lord. The
difference is that the impersonalist denies personality in the ultimate issue,
whereas the devotee gives more importance to the Personality of Godhead.
Srimad-Bhagavatam explains this truth in the verse under discussion: Lord
Vasudeva is one without a second, but because He is all-powerful, He can
expand Himself as well as display His omnipotencies. The Lord is described
here as omnipotent by three energies (tri-sakti-dhrk). So primarily His
three energies are internal, marginal, and external. This external energy is
also displayed in the three modes of goodness, passion and ignorance.
Similarly, the internal potency is also displayed in three spiritual modes,
ऽवा, sandhini, and hladini. The marginal potency or the living entities
are also spiritual (prakrtim viddhi me param), but they are never equal with
the Lord. The Lord is nirasta samya atisaya; in other words, no one is
greater than or equal to the Supreme Lord. So the living entities, including
even such great personalities as Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, are all
subordinate to the Lord. In the material world also, in His eternal form of
Visnu, He maintains and controls all the affairs of the demigods, including
Brahma and Siva.
TEXT 33
हति तेऽभिहितं तात यथेद मनुप्रच्छसि |
नान्यद्भगवतः किविद्धान्यं सदसदात्मकम्‌ 1331
iti te’bhihitamn tata
yathedam anuprcchasi
nanyad bhagavatah kinicid
bhavyam sad-asad-atmakam


--- Page 309 ---
Text 33) Purusa-siikkta Confirmed 311
iti—thus; te—unto you; abhihitam—explained; tata—my dear son; yatha—
as; idam—all these; anuprcchasi—as you have inquired; na—never; anyat—
anything else; bhagavatah—beyond the Personality of Godhead; kificit—
nothing; bhavyam—to be thought ever; sat—cause; asat—effect; atmakam—
in the matter of.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, whatever you inquired from me, I have thus explained
unto you, and you must know for certain that whatever there is (either as
cause or as effect, both in the material and spiritual worlds) is dependent
on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The complete cosmic situation, both in the material and in the spiritual
manifestations of the energies of the Lord, is working and moving first as
the cause and then as the effect. But the original cause is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Effects of the original cause become the cause of
other effects, and thus everything, either permanent or temporary, is
working as cause and effect. And because the Lord is the primeval cause of
all persons and all energies, He is called the cause of all causes, as it is
confirmed in the Brahma-sarihita as well as in the Bhagavad-gita. The
Brahma-sarmhita affirms:
iSvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam.
(Bs. 5.1)
And in the Bhagavad-gita it is said:
aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate
iti matva bhajante mam budha bhava samanvitah.
(Bg. 10.8)
So the original primeval cause is vigraha, the personal, and the impersonal
spiritual effulgence, brahmajyoti, is also the effect of the Supreme Brahman
(brahmano hi pratisthaham), Lord Krsna.


--- Page 310 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
TEXT 34
न भारती मेऽङ्ग सरपोपलक्ष्यते
= ~
न वे HEAR मनसो सषा गतिः ।
न मे हषीकाणि पतन्त्यसत्पथे
EY -
यन्मे हृदौत्कण्ठ्यवता धतो हरि; ॥२४॥
na bharati me’nga mrsopalaksyate
na vai kvacin me manaso mrsa gatih
na me hrsikani patanty asat-pathe
yan me hrdautkanthyavata dhrto harih
na—never; bhdrati—statements; me—mine; anga—O Narada; mrsa—un-
truth; upalaksyate—prove to be; na—never; vai—certainly; kvacit—at any
time; me—mine; manasah—of the mind; mrsa—untruth; gatih—progress;
na—nor; me—mine; hrsikani—senses; patanti—degrades; asat-pathe—in the
temporary matter; yat—because; me—mine; hrda—heart; autkanthyavata—
by great earnestness: dhrtah—caught hold of; harih—the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
O Narada, because I have caught hold of the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari, with great zeal, whatever I say has never
proved to have been false. Nor is the progress of my mind ever deterred.
Nor are my senses ever degraded by temporary attachment to matter.
PURPORT
Lord Brahma is the original speaker of Vedic wisdom to Narada, and
Narada is the distributor of transcendental knowledge all over the world
through his various disciples, like Vyasadeva and others. The followers of
Vedic wisdom accept the statements of Brahmaji as gospel truth, and
transcendental knowledge is thus being distributed all over the world by
the process of disciplic succession from time immemorial, since the
beginning of the creation. Lord Brahma is the perfect liberated living being
within the material world, and any sincere student of transcendental
knowledge must accept the words and statements of Brahmajt as infallible.
The Vedic knowledge is infallible because it comes down directly from the


--- Page 311 ---
Text 34] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 313
Supreme Lord unto the heart of Brahma, and since he is the most perfect
living being, Brahmaji is always correct to the letter. And this is because
Lord Brahma is a great devotee of the Lord who has earnestly accepted the
lotus feet of the Lord as the supreme truth. In the Brahma-sarihita, which
is compiled by Brahmaji, he repeats the aphorism, govindam adi-purusam
tam aha bhajami: “I am a worshiper of the original Personality of
Godhead, Govinda, the primeval Lord.” So whatever he says, whatever he
thinks, and whatever he does normally in his mood are to be accepted as
truth because of his direct and very intimate connection with Govinda,
the primeval Lord. Sri Govinda, who pleasingly accepts the loving tran-
scendental service of His devotees, gives all protection to the words and
actions of His devotees. The Lord declares in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.31),
kaunteya pratijanihi: “0 son of Kunti, please declare it.” The Lord asks
Arjuna to declare, and why? Because sometimes the declaration of Govinda
Himself may seem to be contradictory to mundane creatures, but the
mundaner will never find any contradiction in the words of the Lord’s
devotees. The devotees are especially protected by the Lord so that they
may remain infallible. Therefore the process of devotional service always
begins in the service of the devotee who appears in disciplic succession.
The devotees are always liberated, but that does not mean that they are
impersonal. The Lord is a person eternally, and the devotee of the Lord is
also a person eternally. Because the devotee has his sense organs even at
the liberated stage, he is therefore a person always. And because the
devotee’s service is accepted by the Lord in full reciprocation, the Lord is
also a person in His complete spiritual embodiment. The devotee’s senses,
being engaged in the service of the Lord, never go astray under the attrac-
tion of false material enjoyment. The plannings of the devotee never go in
vain, and all these things are due to the faithful attachment of the devotee
for the service of the Lord. This is the standard of perfection and liberation.
Anyone, beginning from Brahmaji down to the human being, is at once put
on the path of liberation simply by his attachment in great earnestness for
the Supreme Lord, Sr Krsna, the primeval Lord. The Lord affirms this in
the Bhagavad-gita:
mar ca yo vyabhicarena bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan brahmabhityaya kalpate.
(Bg. 14.26)

Anyone, therefore, who is earnestly serious in heart and soul about

being in intimate touch with the Personality of Godhead in the relation-


--- Page 312 ---
314 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
ship of transcendental loving service will always be infallible in words and
action. The reason is that the Supreme Lord is Absolute Truth, and any-
thing earnestly dovetailed with the Absolute Truth attains the same tran-
scendental quality. On the other hand, any amount of mental speculation
on the strength of material science and knowledge without any bona fide
touch with the Absolute Truth is sure to be a mundane untruth and failure,
simply due to not being in touch with the Absolute Truth. Such godless,
unfaithful words and actions, however materially enriched, are never to be
trusted. That is the purport of this important verse. A grain of devotion is
more valuable than tons of faithlessness.
TEXT 35
साह समाञ्नायमयस्तपामयः
प्रजापतीनामभिबन्दितिः पतिः।
आस्थाय योगं निपुणं समाहित-
स्तं नाध्यगच्छं यत आत्मसम्भवः ॥ ३५॥
50 077 samamndyamayas tapomayah
praja-patinam abhivanditah patih
asthaya yogarii nipupari samahitas
tar nadhyagacchari yata atma-sambhavah
sali aham—myself (the great Brahma); samamnayamayah—in the chain
of disciplic succession of Vedic wisdom; tapomayah—successfully under-
gone all austerities; praja-patinam—of all the forefathers of living entities;
abhivanditah—worshipable; patih—master; asthaya—successfully practiced;
yogam—mystic powers; nipupam—very expert; samahitah—self-realized;
tam—the Supreme Lord; na—did not;adhyagaccham—properly understood;
yatah—from whom; atma—self; sambhavah—generated.
TRANSLATION
Although I am known as the great Brahma, perfect in the disciplic
succession of Vedic wisdom, and although I have undergone all austerities
and am an expert in mystic powers and self-realization, and although I am


--- Page 313 ---
Text 35] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 315
recognized as such by the great forefathers of the living entities, who offer
me respectful obeisances, still I cannot understand Him, the Lord, the very
source of my birth.
PURPORT

Brahma, the greatest of all living creatures within the universe, is ad-
mitting his failure to know the Supreme Lord in spite of his vast learning
in the Vedic wisdom, austerity, penance, mystic powers and self-realization,
and despite being worshiped by the great Prajipatis, the forefathers
of the living entities. So these qualifications are not sufficient to know the
Supreme Lord. Brahmaji could understand the Lord to a little extent only
when he was trying to serve Him by the eagerness of his heart (hrdaut-
kanthya), which is the devotional service mood. Therefore, the Lord can
be known only by the sincere mood of eagerness for service, and not by
any amount of material qualification as scientist or speculative philosopher
or by attainment of mystic powers. This fact is clearly corroborated in the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.54-55):

brahma-bhitah prasannatma na socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhiitesu mad-bhaktim labhate param.
bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato jiiatva visate tad anantaram.

Self-realization only, by attainment of the above high qualifications of
Vedic wisdom, austerity, etc., can help one on the path of devotional
service. But failing in devotional service, one remains still imperfect be-
cause even in that position of self-realization, one cannot factually know
the Supreme Lord. By self-realization, one is qualified to become a devotee,
and the devotee, by service mood (bhaktya) only, can gradually know the
Personality of Godhead. ®ne should not, however, misunderstand the
import of visate (enters into) as being merged into the existence of the
Supreme. Even in the material existence, one is merged in the existence
of the Lord. No materialist can disentangle self from matter due to the
self’s being merged in the external energy of the Lord. As no layman can
separate butter from milk, similarly no one can extricate the merged self
from matter by acquiring some material qualification. This visate by
devotion (bhakti) means to be able to participate in the association of the
Lord in person. Bhakti, or devotional service of the Lord, means to become
free from the material entanglement and then to enter into the kingdom


--- Page 314 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
of God, becoming one like Him. Losing one’s individuality is not the aim
of bhakti-yoga or of the devotees of the Lord. There are five types of
liberations, one of which is called sayujya-mukti, or being merged into the
existence or body of the Lord. The other forms of liberation maintain the
individuality of the particle soul and involve always being engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. The word visate, used in the
verses of the Bhagavad-gita, is thus meant for the devotees who are not at
all anxious for any kind of liberation. The devotees are satisfied simply in
being engaged in the service of the Lord, regardless of the situation.

Lord Brahma is the first living being, who learnt directly the Vedic wis-
dom from the Lord (tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye). Therefore, who can
be a more learned Vedantist than Lord Brahma? He admits that in spite of
his perfect knowledge in the Vedas, he was unable to know the glories of
the l.ord. Since no one can be more than Lord Brahma, how can a so-called
Vedantist be perfectly cognizant of the Absolute Truth? The so-called
Vedantist, therefore, cannot enter into the existence of the Lord without
being trained in the matter of Bhakti-vedanta, or Vedanta plus bhakti.
Vedanta means self-realization, and bhakti means realization of the
Personality of Godhead, to some extent. No one can know the Personality
of Godhead in full, but at least to a certain extent, one can know the
Absolute Truth, Personality of Godhead, by self-surrender and devotional
attitude, and by nothing else. In the Brahma-sarithita also, it is said, vedesu
durlabham, or simply by study of Vedanta one can hardly find out the
existence of the Personality of Godhead, but the Lord is adurlabham atma-
bhaktau, very easily available to His devotee. Srila Vyasadeva, therefore,
was not satisfied simply with compiling the I'edanta-sittras, but over and
above this, by the advice of his spiritual master, Narada, he compiled the
Srimad-Bhagavatam in order to understand the real import of Vedanta.
Srimad-Bhagavatam is, therefore, the absolute medium to understand the
Absolute Truth.

TEXT 36
नतोऽस्म्यहं JO समीयुषां
भवच्छिदं खस्त्ययनं सुमङ्गलम्‌ |
यो ह्यात्ममायाविभवं ख पर्यगाद्‌
यथा नमः खान्तमथापरे कृतः IRE


--- Page 315 ---
Text 36] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 317
nato’smy aham tac-caranam samiyusam
bhavacchidam svasty-ayanam su-mangalam
yo hy atma-maya-vibhavarm sma parvagad
yatha nabhah svantam athapare kutah
natah—let me offer my obeisances; asmi—am; aham—1; tat—the Lord’s;
caranam—feet; samiyusam—of the surrendered soul; bhavacchidam—that
which stops repetition of birth and death; svasty-ayanari—perception of all
happiness; su-mangalam—all-auspicious; yah—one who; hi—exactly; atma-
maya —personal energies; vibhavam—potency; sma—certainly ; paryagat—can-
not estimate; yatha—as much as; nabhah—the sky;svantam—its own limit;
atha—therefore: apare—others; kutah—how.
TRANSLATION
Therefore it is best for me to surrender unto His feet, which alone can
deliver one from the miseries of repeated birth and death. Such surrender
is all-auspicious and allows one to perceive all happiness. Even the sky
cannot estimate the limits of its own expansion. So what can others do
when the Lord Himself is unable to estimate His own limits?
PURPORT
Lord Brahma, the greatest of all learned living beings, the greatest
sacrificer, the greatest observer of the austere life, and the greatest self-
realized mystic, advises us, as the supreme spiritual master of all living
beings, that one should simply surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord
in order to achieve all success, even up to the limit of being liberated from
the miseries of material life and being endowed with all-auspicious
spiritual existence. Lord Brahma is known as the pitamaha, or the father’s
father. A young man consults his experienced father about discharging
his duties. So the father is naturally a good advisor. But Lord Brahma is the
father of all fathers. He is the father of the father of Manu, who is the
father of mankind all over the universal planets. Therefore the mankind
of thisinsignificant planet should kindly accept the instruction of Brahmajt
and would do well to surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord rather
than try to estimate the length and breadth of the Lord’s potencies. His
potencies are immeasurable, as is confirmed in the Vedas. Pardasya Saktir
vividhaiva Sriiyate svabhaviki jiana-bala-kriya ca. He is greatest of all, and


--- Page 316 ---
318 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
all others, even the greatest of all living beings, namely, Brahmaji, admits
that the best thing for us is to surrender unto Him. Therefore only those
persons with a very poor fund of knowledge claim that they themselves
are lords of all that they survey. And what can they survey? They cannot
survey even the length and breadth of a small sky in one small universe.
The so-called material scientist says that he would need to live forty
thousand years to reach the highest planet of the universe, being carried by
a sputnik. This is also utopian because no one can be expected to live
forty thousand years. Besides, when the space pilot returns from his travel,
none of his friends would be present to receive him back as the greatest
astronaut, as has become fashionable for modern bewildered scientific men.
One scientific man, who had no belief in God, was very much enthusiastic
in making plans for his material existence and therefore opened a hospital
to save the living. But after opening the hospital, he himself died within
six months. So one should not spoil his human life, which is obtained after
many, many changes of bodies in 8,400,000 species of life, simply for the
concocted material happiness of life by increasing artificial needs in the
name of advancement of economic development and scientific knowledge,
but one should simply surrender unto the feet of the Lord to make a
solution of all miseries of life. That is the instruction of Lord Krsna
directly in the Bhagavad-gita, and that is the instruction of Srimad-
Bhagavatam by Brahmaji, the supreme father of all living beings.

Anyone denying this surrendering process as recommended both in the
Bhagavad-gita and in the Srimad-Bhagavatam and, for that matter, in all
authorized scriptures, will be forced to surrender unto the laws of material
nature. The living entity, by his constitutional position, is not independent.
He must surrender, either unto the Lord or unto material nature. Material
nature is also not independent of the Lord, since the Lord Himself has
claimed material nature as mama maya, or “My energy” (Bg. 7.14), and as
me bhinna prakrtir astadha, or “My separated energy in eight divisions.”
(Bg. 7.4) Therefore material nature is also controlled by the Lord, as He
has claimed in Bhagavad-gita: mayadhyaksena prakrtih 50086 sacaracaram,
“Under My direction only is material nature working, and thus are all
things moving.” (Bg. 9.10) And the living entities, being superior energy to
matter, have choice and discrimination either to surrender unto the Lord
or to surrender unto material nature. By surrendering unto the Lord, one
is happy and liberated, but by surrendering unto material nature the living
entity suffers. So the end of all suffering means surrendering unto the Lord
because the surrendering process itself is bhavacchidam or liberation from
all material miseries, svastyayanam or perception of all happiness, and
sumangalam or the source of everything auspicious.


--- Page 317 ---
Text 37] Purusa-sakta Confirmed 319

Therefore liberty, happiness and all good fortune can be attained only
by surrendering unto the Lord because He is full liberty, full happiness and
full auspiciousness. Such liberation and happiness are also unlimited, and
they have been compared to the sky, although such liberation and
happiness are infinitely greater than the sky. In our present position we
can simply understand the magnitude of greatness when it is compared
with the sky. We fail to make a measurement of the sky, but the happiness
and liberty obtained in association with the Lord are far greater than the
sky. That spiritual happiness is so great that it cannot be measured, even
by the Lord Himself, not to speak of others.

It is said in the scriptures, brahma sukharm hy anantam, spiritual happi-
ness is unlimited. Here it is said that even the Lord cannot measure such
happiness. This does not mean that the Lord cannot measure it and is
therefore imperfect in that sense. The actual position is that the Lord can
measure it, but the happiness in the Lord is also identical with the Lord on
account of absolute knowledge. So the happiness derived from the Lord
may be measured by the Lord, but the happiness increases again, and the
Lord measures it again, and then again the happiness increases more and
more, and the Lord measures it more and more, and as such there is
eternally a competition between increment and measurement, so much so
that the competition is never stopped, but goes on unlimitedly ad in-
finitum. Spiritual happiness is anandambudhi-vardhanam, or the ocean of
happiness which increases. The material ocean is stagnant, but the spiritual
ocean is dynamic. In the Caitanya-caritamrta, (4th Chapter, Adi-lila)
Kaviraja Gosvami has very nicely described this dynamic increment of the
ocean of spiritual happiness in the transcendental person of Srimati
Radharani, the pleasure potency of Lord Krsna.

TEXT 37
नाहं न यूयं TEA गतिं विदु-
५
नं वामदेवः किदुतापरे सुराः |
तन्मायया योहितवुद्ध यस्त्विदं
विनिर्मितं चात्मसमं विचक्ष्महे ॥२७॥
nahar na ১% 83078 yad-rtam gatim vidur
na vamadevah kim utapare surah
tan-mayaya mohita-buddhayas tv idam
vinirmitarh catma-samari vicaksmahe


--- Page 318 ---
320 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
na—neither; aham—1; yiyam—all you sons; yat—whose; rtam—factual;
gatim—movements; viduh—do know; na—nor; vamadevah--Lord Siva;
kim—what; uta—else; apare—others; surah—demigods; tat—by His;
mdyaya—by the illusory energy; mohita—bewildered; buddhayah—
with such intelligence; tu—but; idam—this; vinirmitam—what is created;
ca—also; atma-samam—by dint of one’s personal capacity; vicaksmahe—
observe.
TRANSLATION
Since neither Lord Siva nor you nor I could ascertain the limits of
spiritual happiness, how can other demigods know it? And because all of
us are bewildered by the illusory external energy of the Supreme Lord, we
can see only this manifested cosmos according to our individual capacity.
PURPORT
We have many times mentioned the names of twelve selected authorities
(dvadasa-mahdajana), of which Brahma, Narada and Lord Siva head the list
as the first, second and third in order of merit of those who know some-
thing of the Supreme lord. Other demigods, semi-demigods, Gandharvas,
Caranas, Vidyadharas, human beings, or asuras cannot possibly know fully
about the potencies of the Absolute Lord, Sri Krsna. The demigods, semi-
demigods, Gandharvas, etc., are all highly intelligent persons in the upper
planets. The human beings are inhabitants of the intermediate planets, and
the asuras are inhabitants of the lower planets. All of them have their
respective conceptions and estimations of the Absolute Truth, as does the
scientist or the empiric philosopher in the human society. All such living
entities are creatures of the material nature, and consequently they are
bewildered by the wonderful display of the three modes of material nature.
Such bewilderment is mentioned in the Gita (Bg. 7.13): tribhir gunamayair
bhavair ebhih sarvam idam jagat, every entity, beginning from Brahma
down to the ant, is individually bewildered by the three modes of material
nature, namely goodness, passion and ignorance. Everyone thinks, in
terms of individual capacity, that this universe, which is manifested before
us, is all in all. And so the scientist in the human society of the twentieth
century calculates the beginning and end of the universe in his own way.
But what can the scientists know? Even Brahma himself was once bewil-
dered, thinking himself the only one Brahma favored by the Lord, but
later on, by the grace of the Lord, he came to know that there are innu-


--- Page 319 ---
Text 38] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 321
merable more powerful Brahmas as well in far bigger universes beyond this
universe, and all of these universes combined together form ekapad-vibhitti
or one-fourth of the manifestation of the Lord’s creative energy. The other
three-fourths of His energy are displayed in the spiritual world, so what
can the tiny scientist with a tiny brain know of the Absolute Personality
of Godhead, Lord Krsna? The Lord says, therefore, mohitam nabhijanati
mam ebhyah param avyayam: bewildered by such modes of material
nature, they cannot understand that there is a Supreme Person beyond
these manifestations who is the absolute controller of everything. Brahma,
Narada and Lord Siva know about the Lord to a considerable extent, and
therefore one should follow the instructions of these great personalities
instead of being satisfied with a tiny brain and its playful discoveries such
as spacecraft and similar products of science. As the mother is the only
authority to identify the father of a child, so the mother Vedas, presented
by the recognized authority such as Brahma, Narada or Siva, etc., is the
only authority to inform us about the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 38
{vl ~
यस्यावतारकम।णि गाय।न्त दयसदादयः।
न यं विदन्ति तच्वेन तस्मे भगवते नमः ॥२८॥
yasyavatara-karmani
gayanti hy asmad-adayah
na yar vidanti tattvena
tasmai bhagavate namah
yasya—whose; avatdra—incarnation; karmani—activities; gayanti—chant
in glorification; hi—indeed; asmat-adayah—persons like us; na—do not;
yam—whom; vidanti—know; tattvena—cent percent as He is; tasmai—unto
Him; bhagavate—unto the Personality of Godhead <न Krsna; namah—re-
spectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto that Supreme Personality
of Godhead whose incarnations and activities are chanted by us for
glorification, though He can hardly be fully known as He is.


--- Page 320 ---
322 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
PURPORT
It is said that the transcendental name, form, quality, pastimes, para-
phernalia, personality, etc., cannot possibly be perceived by the gross
materialistic senses. But when the senses are purified by the process of
hearing, chanting, remembering, and worshiping the lotus feet of the holy
Deity, etc., the Lord reveals Himself proportionately to the advancement
of the quality of devotional service (ye yatha mam prapadyante). One
should not expect the Lord to be an order-supplying agent who must be
present before us as soon as we desire to see Him. We must be ready to
undergo the prescribed devotional duties, following the path shown by the
predecessors in the disciplic succession from Brahma, Narada and similar
authorities. As the senses are progressively purified by bona fide devotional
service, the Lord reveals His identity according to the spiritual advancement
of the devotee. But one who is not in the line of devotional service can
hardly perceive Him simply by calculations and philosophical speculations.
Such a hard worker can present a jugglery of words before the audience,
but can never know the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His personal
feature. The Lord has clearly stated in the Bhagavad-gita that one can know
Him only by devotional service. No one can know the Lord by any puffed
up material process of challenge, but the humble devotee can please the
Lord by his earnest devotional activities. Thus the Lord reveals Himself
proportionately before the devotee. Lord Brahma therefore offers his
respectful obeisances as a bona fide spiritual master and advises us to
follow the process of sravana and kirtana. Simply by this process, or simply
by hearing and chanting the glories of the activities of the Lord’s incar-
nation, one can certainly see within himself the identity of the Lord. We
have already discussed this subject in Volume One of Srimad-Bhagatavam,
in connection with the verse:
tac chraddadhana munayo jiana-vairigya-yuktaya
pasyanty atmani catmanam bhaktya sruta-grhitaya.
(Bhag. 1.2.12)
The conclusion is that no one can know the Supreme Personality of
Godhead fully by any method, but He can be seen and felt partially by the
devotional service process of hearing, chanting, etc.


--- Page 321 ---
Text 39] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 323
TEXT 39
स एष आदयः पुरुषः कल्पे कल्पे सृजत्यजः |
आत्मात्मन्यात्मनात्मानं स संयच्छति पाति च ॥३९॥
sa esa adyah purusah
kalpe kalpe srjaty ajah
atmatmany atmanatmanam
sa sarmyacchati pati ca
sah—He; esah—the very; adyah—the original Personality of Godhead;
purusah—the Maha-Visnu incarnation, a plenary portion of Govinda, Lord
Krsna; kalpe kalpe—in each and every millennium; srjati— creates; ajah—
the unborn; atma—self; atmani—upon the self; atmana—by His own self;
atmanam—own self; sah—He; samyacchati—absorbs; pati—maintains; ca—
also.
TRANSLATION
“That Supreme original Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna, ex-
panding His plenary portion as Maha-Vignu, the first incarnation, creates
this manifested cosmos, but He is unborn. The creation, however, takes
place in Him, and the material substance, as well as the manifestations,
are all Himself, which He maintains for some time and again absorbs into
Himself again.
PURPORT
The creation is nondifferent from the Lord, and still He is not in the
creation. This is explained in the Bhagavad-gita as follows:
maya tatam idam sarvan jagad avyakte-mirtind
mat-sthani sarva-bhiitani na caham tesv avasthitah
(Bg. 9.4)
The impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth is also a form of the
Lord called avyakta-miirti. Mirti means form, but because His impersonal
feature is inexplicable by our limited senses, He is the avyakta-mirti form,
and in that inexplicable form of the Lord the whole creation is resting, or,
in other words, the whole creation is the Lord Himself, and the creation is


--- Page 322 ---
324 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
also nondifferent from Him, but simultaneously He, as the original Per-
sonality of Godhead Sri Krsna, is aloof from the created manifestation.
The impersonalist gives stress to the impersonal form or feature of the
Lord and does not believe in the original personality of the Lord, but the
Vaisnavas accept the original form of the Lord, of whom the impersonal
form is merely one of the features. The impersonal and personal concep-
tions of the Lord are existing simultaneously, and this fact is clearly
described both in the Bhagavad-gita and the Srimad-Bhagavatam, and also
in other Vedic scriptures. Inconceivable by human intelligence, the idea
must simply be accepted on the authority of the scriptures, and it can only
be practically realized by the progress of devotional service unto the Lord,
and never by mental speculation or inductive logic. The impersonalists
depend more or less on inductive logic, and therefore they always remain
in darkness about the original Personality of Godhead Sti Krsna. Their
conception of Krsna is not clear, although everything is clearly mentioned
in all the Vedic scriptures. A poor fund of knowledge cannot comprehend
the existence of an original personal form of the Lord when He is expanded
in everything. This imperfectness is due, more or less, to the material
conception that a substance which is distributed widely in parts can no
longer exist in the original form.

The original personality of Godhead (adyal) Govinda expands Himself
as the Maha-Visnu incarnation and rests in the Causal Ocean which He
Himself creates. The Brahma-sarmhita confirms this as follows:

yah karanarnava-jale bhajati sma yoga-
nidram ananta-jagad-anda-sa-romakiipah
adhare-saktim avalambya param sva-mirtim
govindam adi-purusarn tam aham bhajami
Lord Brahmaji says in his Brahma-sarmhita, “1 worship the primeval Lord
Govinda, who lies down in the Causal Ocean in His plenary portion as
Maha-Visnu, with all the universes generating from the pores of hair on
His transcendental body, and who accepts the mystic slumber of eternity.”

So this Maha-Visnu is the first incarnation in the creation, and from
Him all the universes generate and all material manifestations are produced,
one after another. The Causal Ocean is created by the Lord as the mahat-
tattva, as a cloud in the spiritual sky, and is a part of His different
manifestations only. The spiritual sky is an expansion of His personal rays,
and He is the mahat-tattva cloud also. He lies down and generates the
universes by His breathing, and again, by entering into each universe as


--- Page 323 ---
Texts 40-41] Purusa-sikta Confirmed 325
Garbhodakasayl Visnu, He creates Brahma, Siva and many other demigods
for maintenance of the universe and again absorbs the whole thing into His
person, as is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita:

sarva-bhutani kaunteya prakrtim vanti mamikam

kalpaksaye punas tani kalpadau visrjamy aham.

(Bg. 9.7)

“0 son of Kuntl, when the kalpa or the duration of the life of Brahma is
ended, then all the created manifestations enter into My prakrti, or energy,
and again, when I desire, the same creation takes place by My personal
energy.”

The conclusion is that these are all displays of the Lord’s inconceivable
personal cnergies only, of which no one can have any full information, and
this point we have already discussed.

TEXTS 40-41
কতা ৷
নিহত केवलं ज्ञानं प्रत्यक्‌ सम्यगवस्थितम्‌ ।
वी + 6 > 2
सत्य पूणमनाद्न्त निगुणं नित्यमदहयम्‌ ॥४०॥
= ~ >
ऋषे विदन्ति मुनयः प्रशान्तातमेन्द्रियाश्याः।
- Jen = as
यदा तदेवासत्तरकैस्िरोधीयेत विष्ठुतम्‌ 18
एडप्वका को) kevalarh jAianarn
pratyak 5071)/वह्ु avasthitam
satyam piarnam anady-antam
nirgunari nityam advayam
rse vidanti munayah
prasantatmendriyasayah
yada tad evasat-tarkais
tiro-dhiyeta viplutam

visuddham—without any material tinge; kevalam—pure and perfect:
jaanam—knowledge: pratyak—all-pervading;sariyak—in fullness; avasthitam
—situated; satyam— truth: parpam—absolute; anadi— without any beginning;
antam—and so also without any end; nirgupam—devoid of material modes;


--- Page 324 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
nityam—eternal; advayam—without any rival; rse—O Narada, O great
sage; vidanti—they can understand only; munayah—the great thinkers;
prasanta—pacified; atma—self; indriya—senses; asayah—sheltered; yada—
while; tat—that; eva—certainly; asat—untenable; terkaih—arguments; tiro-
dhiyeta—disappears; viplutam—distorted.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead is pure, being free from all contaminations
of material tinges. He is the Absolute Truth and the embodiment of full and
perfect knowledge. He is all-pervading, without beginning or end, and
without rival. O Narada, O great sage, the great thinkers can know Him
when completely freed from all material hankerings and when sheltered
under undisturbed conditions of the senses. Otherwise, by untenable
arguments, all is distorted, and the Lord disappears from our sight.
PURPORT
Here is an estimation of the Lord apart from His transcendental activities
in the temporary material creations. Mayavada philosophy tries to desig-
nate the Lord as contaminated by a material body when He accepts forms
of incarnation. This sort of interpolation is completely denied herein by
explaining the position of the Lord as pure and unalloyed in all circum-
stances. According to Mayavada philosophy, the spirit soul, when covered
by nescience, is designated as jiva, but when he is freed from such ignorance
of nescience he is merged in the impersonal existence of the Absolute
Truth. But here it is said that the Lord is eternally the symbol of full and
perfect knowledge. This is His speciality: perpetual freedom from all
material contaminations. This distinguishes the Lord from the individual,
common living entities who have the aptitude of being subordinated by
nescience and thus becoming materially designated. In the Vedas it is said
that the Lord is vijianam ৫7207200772, full of bliss and knowledge. The condi-
tioned souls are never to be compared to Him because such individual
souls have the tendency of becoming contaminated. Although after libera-
tion the living entity can become one with the same quality of existence
as the Lord, his very tendency to become contaminated, which the Lord
never has, makes the individual living entity different from the Lord.
In the Vedas it is said, ayam atma apahata papna itit: the individual
atma becomes polluted by sin, but the Lord is never contaminated by


--- Page 325 ---
Texts 40-41] Purusa-sikta Confirmed 327
sins. The Lord is compared to the powerful sun. The sun is never
contaminated by anything infectious because it is so powerful. On the
contrary, infected things are sterilized by the rays of the sun. Similarly,
the Lord is never contaminated by sins; on the contrary, the sinful living
entities become sterilized by contact with the Lord. This means that the
Lord is also all-pervading like the sun, and as such the word pratyak is
used in this verse. Nothing is excluded from the existence of the Lord’s
potential expansions. The Lord is within everything, and He is all-covering
also, without being disturbed by the activities of the individual souls.
He is therefore infinite, and the living entities are infinitesimal. In the
Vedas it is said that only the Lord alone exists, and all others’ existences
depend on Him. He is the generating reservoir for everyone’s existential
capacity; He is the Supreme Truth of all other categorical truths. He is the
source of everyone’s opulence, and therefore no one can equal Him in
opulence. Being full of all opulences, namely wealth, fame, strength,
beauty, knowledge and renunciation, certainly He is the Supreme Person.
And because He is a person, He has many personal qualities, although He
is transcendental to the material modes. We have already discussed the
statement ilthambhita-gino harth. (Bhag. 1.7.10) His transcendental quali-
ties are so attractive that even the liberated souls (@atmaramas) are also
attracted by them. Although possessed of all personal qualities, He is,
nevertheless, omnipotent. Therefore, personally He has nothing to do, for
everything is being carried out by His omnipotent energies. This is con-
firmed by the Vedic mantras: parasya $aktir vividhaiva Sriyate svabhavikt
jiana-bala-kriya ca. This suggests His specific spiritual form, which can
never be experienced by the material senses. He can be seen only when the
senses are purified by devotional service, yam evaisa vrnute (07807 svam.
As such, there are basic differences between the Lord and the living
entities, in so many respects. No one can be compared to the Lord, as the
Vedas declare, ০1077 evadvitiyamn brahma dvaitat vai bhayarm bhavati
The Lord has no competitor, and He has nothing to fear from any other
being, nor can anyone be equal to Him. Although He is the root of all
other beings, there are basic differences between Him and other beings.
Otherwise there was no necessity of the statement in the previous verse
that no one can know Him one hundred percent as He is, na yar vidanti
tattvena. That no one can fully understand Him is explained also in this
verse, but the qualification for understanding to some degree is mentioned
here. Only the prasantas, or the unalloyed devotees of the Lord, can know
Him to a greater extent. The reason is that the devotees have no demands
in their lives but to be obedient servants of the Lord, while all others,


--- Page 326 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
namely the emperic philosophers, the mystics, and the fruitive workers,
all basically have some demand, and as such they cannot be pacified. The
fruitive worker wants reward for his work, the mystic wants some perfec-
tion of life, and the empiric philosopher wants to merge in the existence
of the Lord. Somehow or other, as long as there is a demand for sense
satisfaction, there is no chance for pacification; on the contrary, by
unnecessary dry speculative arguments, the whole matter becomes dis-
torted, and thus the Lord moves still further away from our understanding.
The dry speculators, however, because of their following the principles of
austerity and penance, can have knowledge of the impersonal features of
the Lord to some extent, but there is no chance of their understanding
His ultimate form as Govinda because only the amaldtmanas, or the
completely sinless persons, can accept pure devotional service of the Lord,
as is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.28):
yesam tv antagatarn papam jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta bhajante mam drdha-vratah
TEXT 42
आग्रोऽवतारः पुरूषः परस्य
काटः सवभावः सद्सन्मनश् |
द्रव्यं विकारो गुण इन्द्रियाणि
विराट्‌ सखराट्‌ =| चरिष्णु gE: ॥४२॥
adyo vatarah purusah parasya
kalah svabhavah sad-asan-manas ca
dravyari vikdaro guna indriyani
virat svarat sthasnu carisnu-bhtmnah
adyah—first; avatarah—incarnation; purusah—Karanarnavadayl Visnu;
parasya—of the Lord; kalah—time; svabhavah—space; sat—resultant ; asat—
cause; manah—mind; ca—also; dravyam—elements; vikarah—material ego;
gunah—modes of nature; indriyani—senses; virat—the complete whole
body; svarat—Garbhodakasayl Visnu; sthasnu—immovable; carisnu—mov-
able; bhiimnah—of the Supreme Lord.


--- Page 327 ---
Text 42] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 329
TRANSLATION
Karanarnavasayl Visnu is the first incarnation of the Supreme Lord,
and He is the master of eternal time, space, cause and effects, mind,
elements, material ego, modes of nature, senses, the universal form of the
Lord, Garbhodaksayi Visnu, and the sum total of all living beings, both
moving and nonmoving.
PURPORT
That the material creation is not permanent has been discussed many
times hereinbefore. The material creation is but a temporary exhibition of
the material energy of the Almighty God. This material manifestation is
necessary to give a chance to the conditioned souls who are unwilling to
associate with the Lord in the relationship of loving transcendental service.
Such unwilling conditioned souls are not allowed to enter into the liberated
life of spiritual existence because at heart they are not willing to serve.
Instead, they want to enjoy themselves as imitation Gods. The living
entities are constitutionally eternal servitors of the Lord, but some of
them, because of misusing their independence, do not wish to serve;
therefore they are allowed to enjoy the material nature, which is called
maya, or illusion. It is called illusion because the living beings under the
clutches of maya are not factually enjoyers, although they think that they
are, being illusioned by maya. Such illusioned living entities are given a
chance at intervals to rectify their perverted mentality of becoming false
masters of the material nature, and they are imparted lessons from the
Vedas about their eternal relationship with the Supreme Lord Krsna
(vedai$ ca sarvair aham eva vedyah). So the temporary creation of the
material manifestation is an exhibition of the material energy of the Lord,
and to manage the whole show the Supreme Lord incarnates Himself as the
Karanarnavasayr Visnu just as a magistrate is deputed by the government
to manage affairs temporarily. This Karanodakasayl Visnu causes the
manifestation of material creation by looking over His material energy (sa
aiksatah). In the first volume of this book we have already discussed to
some extent the explanation of the verse jagrhe [00247880778 ripari. The
duration of the illusory play of material creation is called a kalpa, and we
have already discussed the creation’s taking place in kalpa after kalpa. By
His incarnation and potential activities, the complete ingredients of crea-
tion, namely time, space, cause, result, mind, the gross and subtle elements
and their interactional modes of nature—goodness, passion and ignorance—


--- Page 328 ---
330 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
and then the senses and their reservoir source, the gigantic universal
form as the second incarnation Garbhodaka$ayl Visnu, and all living
beings, both moving and standing, which come out of the second incarna-
tion, all became manifested. Ultimately, all these creative elements and
the creation itself are but potential manifestations of the Supreme Lord;
nothing is independent of the control of the Supreme Being. This first
incarnation in the material creation, namely Karanarnavasayi Visnu, is the
plenary part of the original Personality of Godhead, Sr Krsna, described
in the Brahma-sarihita as follows:
yasyaikanisvasitakalam athavalambya
Jjivanti loma-vilaja jagad-anda-nathah
visnur mahan sa tha yasya kala-viseso
govindam adi-purusam tam ahari bhajami
All the innumerable universes are maintained only during the breathing
period of Maha-Visnu or Karanarnavasayl Visnu, who is only a plenary
part of Govinda, the original Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna.
TEXTS 43-45
1: = =~ RX
अह মনা यज्ञ॒ इमं प्रजा
=
दक्षादयो ये भवदादयच।
खर्लाकपाला;ः खगलोकपाला
चलाकपालास्तललोकपालाः nL
~ -
गन्यच्रक्दाधरचारणल्ला
ये यक्षरक्लोरगनागनाथा; |
= .
ये वा ऋषीणामृषभाः पितणां
=
देत्येन्द्रसिद्ेश्वरदानवेन्द्रीः ।
अन्ये च ये प्रेतपिशाचभूत
कूष्माण्डयादोगरगपन््यधीन्ञाः ॥४५।॥
यर्किच॒ लोके भगवन्महस्व-
दाजःसदस्वद्‌ ववत्‌ क्षमावत्‌ |
श्रीहीविभूत्यात्मवदद्धुताणं
तत्तव॑ परं रूप्वद खरूपम्‌ ।४५॥


--- Page 329 ---
Texts 43-45] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 331
01107 bhavo yajiia ime prajesa
daksadayo ye bhavad-adayas ca
svarloka-palah khagaloka-pala
nrloka-palas talaloka-palah
gandharva-vidyadhara-caranesa
ye yaksa-raksoraga-naganathah
ye va rsinam rsabhah pitfnam
daityendra-siddhesvara-danavendrah
anye ca ye preta-pisaca-bhiita-
kasmanda-yado-mrga-paksyadhisah
yat kifica loke bhagavan mahasvad
ojah-sahasvad balavat ksamavat
$ri-hri-vibhity-atmavad adbhutarnarm
tattvarh param riipavad ৫5৮01010077
aham—myself (Brahmaji); bhavah—Lord Siva; yajiiah—Lord Vispu; ime
—all these; prajesah—the father of the living beings; daksa-adayah—Daksa;
Marici, Manu, etc.; ye—those; bhavat—yourself;adayah ca—and the bachelors
(Sanat-kumara and his brothers); svarloka-palah— the leaders of the heavenly
planets; khagaloka-palah—the leaders of space travellers; nrloka-palah—
the leaders of mankind; talaloka-palah—the leaders of the lower planets;
gandharva—the residents of Gandharvaloka; vidyadhara—the residents of
the Vidyadhara planet; carana-isah—the leaders of the Caranas; ye—as also
others; yaksa—the leaders of the Yaksas; raksa—demons; uraga—snakes;
naga-nathah—leaders of the Nagaloka (below the earth); ye—others; va—
also; rsinam—of the sages; rsabhah—the chief; pitrnam—of the forefathers;
daitya-indra—leaders of the atheists; siddha-iSvaras—leaders of the Siddha-
loka planets (spacemen); danava-indrah—leaders of the non-Aryans; anye—
besides them; ca—also; ye—those; preta—dead bodies; pisaca—evil spirit;
bhita—jinn; kiismanda—a special type of evil spirit; yadah—aquatics; mrga
—animals; paksi-adhi$ah—giant eagles; yat—anything; kim ca—and every-
thing; loke—in the world; bhagavat—possessed of bhaga, or extraordinary
power; mahasvat—of a special degree; ojah-sahasvat—specific mental and
sense dexterity; balavat—possessed of strength; ksamavat—possessed of
forgiveness; sri—beauty; hri—ashamed of impious acts; vibhiti—riches;
atmavat—possessed of intelligence; adbhuta—wonderful; arnam—race; tatt-
vam—specific truth; param—transcendental; ‘riipavat—as if the form of;
asvariipam—not the form of the Lord.


--- Page 330 ---
332 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION
Myself [ Brahma], Lord Siva, Lord Visnu, great generators of living
beings like Daksa and Prajapati, yourselves [Narada and the Kumaras],
heavenly demigods like Indra, Candra, etc., the leaders of the Bharloka
planets, the leaders of the earthly planets, the leaders of the lower planets,
the leaders of the Gandharva planets, the leaders of the Vidyadhara planets,
11161930০15 of the Caranaloka planets, the leaders of the Yaksas, Raksas and
Uragas, the great sages, the great demons, the great atheists and the great
spacemen, as well as the dead bodies, evil spirits, satans, jinn, kiismandas,
great aquatics, great beasts and great birds, etc.—in other words, anything
and everything which is exceptionally possessed of power, opulence,
mental and perceptual dexterity, strength, forgiveness, beauty, modesty,
opulence, and breeding, which is either in form or is formless—may appear
to be the specific truth and the form of the Lord, but actually are not so.
They are only a fragment of the transcendental potency of the Lord.
PURPORT
Those in the list given above, beginning from the name of Brahmaji, the
first living creature within the universe, down to Lord Siva, Lord Visnu,
Narada and other powerful demigods, men, supermen, sages, rsis, and
other lower creatures of extraordinary strength and opulence, including
the dead bodies, satans, evil spirits, jinn, aquatics, birds and beasts, etc.,
may appear to be the Supreme Lord, but factually none of them is the
Supreme Lord; every one of them possesses only a fragment of the great
potencies of the Supreme Lord. The less intelligent class of men is sur-
prised to see the wonderful actions of material phenomena, as the abo-
rigines are fearful of a great thunderbolt, a great and gigantic banyan tree,
or a great lofty mountain in the jungle. For such undeveloped human
beings, merely the slight display of the Lord’s potency is captivating. A
still more advanced person is captivated by the powers of the demigods and
goddesses. Therefore, those who are simply astonished by the powers of
anything in the creation of the Lord, without any factual information of
the Lord Himself, are known as Saktas, or worshipers of the great powers.
The modern scientist is also captivated by the wonderful actions and reac-
tions of natural phenomena and therefore is also Sakta. These lower grade
persons gradually rise to states of becoming Sauriyas, or worshipers of the
sun-god, Ganpapatyas, or worshipers of the mass of people as janata-


--- Page 331 ---
Text 46] Purusa-sukta Confirmed 333
janardana or daridrya-narayana, etc.,in the form of Ganapati, and then
rise to the platform of worshiping Lord Siva in search for the ever-existing
soul, and then to the stage of worshiping Lord Visnu, the Supersoul, etc.,
without any information of Govinda or Lord Krsna, who is the original
Lord Visnu. In other ways some are worshipers of race, nationality, birds,
beasts, evil spirits, satans, etc. The general worship of Sanideva, the lord
of distressful condition, and Sitaladevi, the goddess of smallpox, is also
common to the mass of people, and there are many foolish men who
worship the mass of people or the poor class of men. So different persons,
societies and communities, ctc., worship some of the potential manifesta-
tions of the Lord, wrongly accepting the powerful object as God. But in
this verse it is advised by Brahmaji that none of them is the Supreme Lord,
but they are only borrowed plumes from the original Almighty Lord Sri
Krsna. When the Lord advises in Bhagavad-gita to worship Him alone, it is
to be understood that worshiping Lord Krsna includes worshiping all that
is mentioned, because He, Lord Krsna, includes everyone.

When the Lord is described as formless in the Vedic literatures, it is to
be understood that all these forms mentioned above, within the experience
of universal knowledge, are different exhibitions of the Lord’s transcen-
dental potencies only, and none of them factually represent the transcen-
dental form of the Lord. But at the same time, when the Lord actually
descends on the earth or anywhere within the universe, the less intelligent
class of men also mistake Him to be one of them, and thus they imagine the
Transcendence to be formless or impersonal. Factually, the Lord is not
formless, nor does He belong to any of the multiforms experienced within
the universal forms. One should try to know the truth about the Lord by
following the instruction of Brahmaji.

TEXT 46
प्राधान्यतो यानृष आमनन्ति
लीलावतारान्‌ „ पुरुषस्य भूम्नः ।
आपीयतां कणकषायशशोषा-
AGHAST त इमान्‌ सुपेशान्‌ ॥४६॥
pradhanyato yan rsa amananti
lilavataran purusasya bhimnah
apiyatarm karna-kasaya-sosan
anukramisye ta iman supesan


--- Page 332 ---
334 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 2, Ch. 6
pradhanyatah—chiefly; yan—all those; rse—O Narada; dmananti— worship;
lila—pastimes; avatdran—incarnations; purusasya—of the Personality of
Godhead; bhiimnah—the Supreme; apiyatam—in order to be relished by
you; karna—ears; kasaya—foul matter; Sosan—that which evaporates;
anukramisye—shall state one after another; te—they; iman—as they are in
my heart; supesan—all pleasing to hear.
TRANSLATION
0 Narada, now I shall state, one after another, the transcendental
incarnations of the Lord, known as lila avataras. Hearing of their activities
counteracts all foul matters accumulated in the ear. These pastimes are
pleasing to hear and are to be relished. Therefore they are in my heart.”
PURPORT
As it was said in the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhag. 1.5.8), one
cannot be fully satisfied by hearing unless and until one is given a chance
to hear of the transcendental activities of the Lord. So Brahmaji is also
trying, in this verse, to stress the importance of narrating the transcenden-
tal pastimes of the Lord as He comes and manifests Himself here on the
surface of the material planets. Every living entity has a tendency to hear
pleasing messages, and as such almost every one of us is inclined to hear
news and talks broadcast by the radio stations. But the difficulty is that
no one is satisfied at heart by hearing all those messages. The cause of such
dissatisfaction is the incompatibility of the message with the innermost
stratum of the living soul. This transcendental literature is especially pre-
pared by Srila Vyasadeva to give the utmost satisfaction to the people in
general by narration of the activities of the Lord, as instructed by Sra
Narada Muni to Srila Vyasadeva. Such activities of the Lord are principally
of two varieties. One concerns the mundane manifestation of the material
creative force, and the other deals with His pastimes in the form of dif-
ferent incarnations in terms of the time and place. There are innumerable
incarnations of the Lord, like the waves of the river flowing constantly in
and out. Less intelligent persons take more interest in the creative forces of
the Lord in the material world, and, being disconnected from their rela-
tionship with the Lord, they put forward many theories of the creation in
the name of scientific research. The devotees of the Lord, however, know
well how the creative forces work concurrently by the action and reaction


--- Page 333 ---
Text 46] Purusa-siikta Confirmed 335
of the material energy of the Lord. Therefore they take more interest in
the transcendental activities of the Lord as He incarnates Himself on the
surface of the material world. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the history of such
activities of the Lord, and people who take interest in hearing Srimad-
Bhagavatam clear their hearts of accumulated mundane filth. There are a
thousand and one rash literatures on the market, but one who has taken
interest in the Srimad-Bhagavatam loses all interest in such filthy litera-
tures. Sri Brahmajt is thus attempting to narrate the principal incarnations
of the Lord so that they may be drunk by Narada as transcendental
nectar.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Second Canto, Sixth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Purusa-siikta Confirmed.”

