
--- Page 1 ---
CHAPTER NINE
Brahma'’s Prayers for Creative Energy
TEXT 1
ब्रह्मोवाच
ज्ञातोऽसि मेऽद्य सुचिराजनु देहभाजां
न ज्ञायते भगवतो गतिरित्यवद्यम्‌
नान्यत्त्वदस्ति भगवन्नपि तन्न gE
सायागुणच्यतिरूरादयदरुरिपाति ॥ १॥
brahmovaca
jiato ’si me 00 suciran nanu deha-bhajarn
na jiiayate bhagavato gatir ity avadyam
nanyat tvad asti bhagavann api tan na suddhari
maya-guna-vyatikarad yad urur vibhasi

27011776 uvdca— Lord Brahma said; jiiatah—known; asi— You are; me—
by me; adya—today; sucirat—after a long time; nanu—but; deha-bhajam—
of one who has a material body; na—not; jiiadyate—is known; bhagavatah—
of the Personality of Godhead; gatih—course; iti—so it is; avadyam—great
offense; na anyat—none beyond; tvat—Y ou; asti—there is; bhagavan—O my
Lord; api—even though there is; tat—anything that may be; na—never;
suddham—absolute; maya—material energy; guna-vyatikarat— because of
the mixture of the modes of; yat—to which; uruh—transcendental; vibhasi—
You are.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma said: O my Lord, today, after many, many years of
penance, 1 have come to know about You. Oh, how unfortunate the
embodiedliving entities are that they are unable to know Your personality!
My Lord, You are the only knowable object because there is nothing
supreme beyond Yourself. If there is anything supposedly superior to

331


--- Page 2 ---
332 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
You, it is not the Absolute. You exist as the Supreme by exhibiting the
creative energy of matter.

PURPORT

The highest peak of the ignorance of the living entities who are
conditioned by material bodies is that they are unaware of the supreme
cause of the cosmic manifestation. Different people have different theories
regarding the supreme cause, but none of them are genuine. The only
supreme cause is Vignu, and the intervening impediment is the illusory
energy of the Lord. The Lord has employed His wonderful material energy
in manifesting many, many wonderful distractions in the material world,
and the conditioned souls, illusioned by the same energy, are thus unable
to know the supreme cause. The most stalwart scientists and philosophers
cannot, therefore, be accepted as wonderful. They only appear to be
wonderful because they are instruments in the hands of the illusory energy
of the Lord. Under illusion, the general mass of people denies the existence
of the Supreme Lord and accepts the foolish products of illusory energy as
supreme.

One can know the supreme cause, the Personality of Godhead, by the
causeless mercy of the Lord, which is bestowed upon the Lord’s pure
devotees like Brahma and those in his disciplic succession. By acts of
penance only was Lord Brahma able to see the Garbhodakasayi Visnu, and
by realization only could he understand the Lord as He is. Brahma was
extremely satisfied upon observing the magnificent beauty and opulence
of the Lord, and he admitted that nothing can be comparable to Him. Only
by penance can one appreciate the beauty and opulence of the Lord, and
when one is acquainted with that beauty and opulence, he is no longer
attracted by any other. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (2.59):
param drstva nivartate.

Foolish human beings who do not endeavor to investigate the supreme
beauty and opulence of the Lord are here condemned by Brahma. It is
imperative that every human being try for such knowledge, and if anyone
does not do so, his life is spoiled. Anything that is beautiful and opulent
in the material sense is enjoyed by those living entities who are like crows.
Crows always engage in picking at rejected garbage, whereas the white
ducks do not mix with the crows. Rather, they take pleasure in trans.
parent lakes with lotus flowers, surrounded by beautiful orchards. Both
crows and ducks are undoubtedly birds by birth, but they are not of the
same feather.


--- Page 3 ---
Text 2] Brahma'’s Prayers for Creative Energy 333
TEXT 2
रूपं यदेतद्बबोधरसोदयेच
श्चखन्िकृ्तमसः सदनुग्रहाय |
2 +
आदौ गृदीतमवतारशचतेकबीजं
यन्नाभिपद्रभवनादहमाविरासम्‌ 11 २॥
70001 yad etad avabodha-rasodayena
Sasvan-nivrtta-tamasah sad-anugrahaya
adau grhitam avatara-sataika-bijarn
yan nabhi-padma-bhavanad aham avir asam
ripam—form; yat—which; etat—that; avabodha-rasa—of Your internal
potency; udayena—with the manifestation; sasvat— forever; nivrtta—freed
from; tamasah— material contamination; sat-anugrahaya— for the sake of the
devotees; ddau—original in the creative energy of matter; grhitam—
accepted; aval@ra—of incarnations; $ata-eka-bijam—the root cause of
hundreds; yat—that which; nabhi-padma—the navel lotus flower;
bhavanat—from the home; aham—myself; avih asam—generated.
TRANSLATION
The form which I see is eternally freed from material contamination and
has advented to show mercy to the devotees as a manifestation of internal
potency. This incarnation is the origin of many other incarnations, and I
am born from the lotus flower grown from Your navel home.
PURPORT
The three deities, Brahma, Vignu, and Mahesvara (Siva), the executive
heads of the three modes of material nature (passion, goodness and igno-
rance), are all generated from Garbhodakasayi Visnu, who is described here-
in by Brahma. From the Ksirodakasayi Visnu, many Visnu incarnations
expand at different ages in the duration of the cosmic manifestation.
They are expanded only for the transcendental happiness of the pure
devotees. The incarnations of Vigsnu, who appear at different ages and
times, are never to be compared to the conditioned souls. The Visnu-
tattvas are not to be compared to, nor are they on the same level as,
deities like Brahma and Siva. Anyone who compares them is called a
pasandi, or infidel. Tamasah, mentioned herein, is the material nature,
and the spiritual nature has a completely separate existence from tamah.


--- Page 4 ---
334 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
Therefore, spiritual nature is called avabodha-rasa, or avarodha-rasa.
Avarodha means that which completely nullifies. In the Transcendence
there is no chance of material contact by any means. Brahma is the
first living being, and therefore he mentions his birth from the lotus
flower generated from the abdomen of Garbhodakasay1 Visnu.
TEXT 3
नातः परं परम THEI: खरूप-
मानन्दमात्रमविकस्पमविद्धवचैः |
पश्यामि विश्वसृजमेकमविश्वमात्मन्‌
भूतेन्द्रियात्मकमद स्त उपाभितोऽसि।।३॥
natah [00701 parama yad bhavatah svarupam
ananda-matram avikalpam aviddha-varcah
pasyami visva-srjam ekam avisvam atman
bhitendriyatmaka-madas ta upasrito ‘smi
na—do not; atah param—hereafter; parama—O Supreme; yat—that which;
bhavatah—of Your Lordship; sveriipam—eternal form; ananda-matram—
impersonal Brahman effulgence; avikalpam—without changes; aviddha-
varcah— without deterioration of potency; pasyami—do I see; visva-srjam—
creator of the cosmic manifestation; ekam—one without a second; avisvam
—and yet not of matter; atman—O Supreme Cause; bhiita—body; indriya—
senses; dtmaka—on such identification; madah—pride; te—unto You;
upasritah—surrendered; asmi—I am.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, I do not see a form superior to Your present form of
eternal bliss and knowledge. In Your impersonal Brahman effulgence in
the spiritual sky, there is no occasional change and no deterioration of
internal potency. I surrender unto You because, whereas I am proud of my
material body and senses, Your Lordship is the cause of the cosmic
manifestation and yet You are untouched by matter.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.55), bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan
yas casmi tattvatah: the Supreme Personality of Godhead can only be
partially known, and only by the process of devotional service to the


--- Page 5 ---
Text 4] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 335
Lord. Lord Brahma became aware that the Supreme Lord Krgna has many,
many eternal, blissful forms of knowledge. He has described such expan-
sions of the Supreme Lord, Govinda, in his Brahma-sarihita (Bs. 5.33), as
follows:
advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam
adyar purapa-puritsam nava-yauvanarm ca
vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau
govindam adi-purutsarn tam 0110170 bhajami.
“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is nondual and infallible. He
is the original cause of all causes, even though He expands in many, many
forms. Although He is the oldest personality, He is ever youthful, un-
affected by old age. The Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be
known by the academic wisdom of the Vedas; one has to approach the
devotee of the Lord to understand Him.”

The only way to understand the Lord as He is, is by devotional service
to the Lord, or by approaching the devotee of the Lord who always has
the Lord in his heart. By devotional perfection one can understand that
the impersonal brahmajyoti is only a partial representation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, and that the three purusa expansions
in the material creation are His plenary portions. In the spiritual sky of the
brahmajyoti there is no change of various kalpas or millenniums, and there
are no creative activities in the Vaikuntha worlds. The influence of time
is conspicuous by its absence. The rays of the transcendental body of
the Lord, the unlimited brahmajyoti, are undeterred by the influence of
material energy. In the material world also, the initial creator is the Lord
Himself. He brings about the creation of Brahma, who becomes the sub-
sequent creator, empowered by the Lord.

TEXT 4

तद्रा इदं WARS मङ्गलाय |

ध्याने ख नो ZS त उपासकानाम्‌।
तस नमो मगवतेऽनुविधेम तुभ्यं

(९

योऽनादतो चरकबाग्पिरसत्परसङ्गः ।। ४॥।

tad va 80072 bhuvana-mangala mangalaya
dhyane sma no 00781880118 ta upasakanam


--- Page 6 ---
336 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
tasmai namo bhagavate ‘nuvidhema tubhyarm
yo ’nadrto naraka-bhagbhir asat-prasangaih
tat—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna; va—or; idam—
this present form; bhuvana-mangala—they are all auspicious for all the
universes; mangaldya—for the sake of all prosperity; dhyane—in meditation;
sma—as it were; nah—unto us; dar§itam— manifested; te—Your;
upasakanam—of the devotees; tasmai—unto Him; namah—my respectful
obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Personality of Godhead; anuvidhema—
I perform; tubhyam—unto You;yah—which;anadrtah-is neglected;naraka-
bhagbhih—by persons who are destined for hell; asat-prasanigaih—by
material topics.
TRANSLATION
This present form, or any transcendental form expanded by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, is equally auspicious for all
the universes. Since You have manifested this eternal personal form upon
whom Your devotees meditate, I therefore offer my respectful obeisances
unto You. Those who are destined to be dispatched to the path of hell
neglect Your personal form because of speculating on material topics.
PURPORT
Regarding the personal and impersonal features of the Supreme Abso-
lute Truth, the personal forms exhibited by the Lord in His different
plenary expansions are all for the benediction of all the universes. The
personal form of the Lord is also worshiped in meditation as Supersoul,
Paramatma, but the impersonal brahmajyoti is not worshiped. Persons who
are addicted to the impersonal feature of the Lord, whether in meditation
or otherwise, are all pilgrims to hell because, as stated in Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 12.5), impersonalists simply waste their time in mundane mental
speculation because they are addicted more to false arguments than to
reality. Therefore, the association of the impersonalists is condemned
herewith by Brahma.
All the plenary expansions of the Personality of Godhead are equally
potent, as confirmed in the Brahma-sarihita (5.46):
diparcir eva hi dasantaram abhyupetya
dipayate vivrta-hetu-samana-dharma
yas tadrg eva hi ca visnutaya vibhati
govindam adi-purusarn tam 0110771 bhajami


--- Page 7 ---
Text 5] Brahma's Prayers for Creative Energy 337
The Lord expands Himself as the flames of a fire expand one after another.
Although the original flame, or Sri Krsna, is accepted as Govinda, the
Supreme Person, all other expansions, such as Rama, Nrsimha and Varaha,
are as potent as the original Lord. All such expanded forms are transcen-
dental. In the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam it is made clear that the
Supreme Truth is eternally uncontaminated by material touch. There is no
jugglery of words and activities in the transcendental kingdom of the
Lord. All the Lord’s forms are transcendental, and such manifestations
are ever identical. The particular form of the Lord exhibited to a devotee
is not mundane, even though the devotee may retain material desire, nor
is it manifest under the influence of material energy, as is foolishly
considered by the impersonalists. Impersonalists who consider the transcen-
dental forms of the Lord to be products of the material world are surely
destined for hell.
‘TEXT 5
येतु त्वदीयचरणाम्बुजकोशगन्धं
जिघन्ति कणंविवरःशवुतिवातनीतम्‌।
भक्तया गृहीतचरणः परया च तेषां
नापैषि नाथ हदयाम्बुरुदात्खपुंसाय्‌॥।५॥
ye tu tvadiya-caranambuja-kosa-gandharm
Jjighranti karna-vivaraih Srutivatanitam
bhaktya grhita-caranah paraya ca tesarn
napaisi natha hrdayambu-ruhat sva-pumsam
ye—those who; tu—but; tvadiya—Y our; carana-ambuja—lotus feet; kosa—
inside; gandham—flavor; jighranti—smells; karpa-vivaraih—through the
channel of the ears; sruti-vatanitam—carried by the air of Vedic sound;
bhaktya—by devotional service; grhita-caranah—accepting the lotus feet;
paraya— transcendental; ca—also; tesam—for them; na—never; apaigi—
separate; natha—O my Lord; hydaya—heart; ambu-ruhat—from the lotus of;
sva-purisam—of Your own devotees.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, persons who smell the aroma of Your lotus feet, carried by
the air of Vedic sound through the holes of the ears, accept Your
devotional service. For them You are never separated from the lotus of
their hearts.


--- Page 8 ---
338 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
PURPORT
For the pure devotee of the Lord there is nothing beyond the lotus feet
of the Lord, and the Lord knows that such devotees do not wish anything
more than that. The word tu specifically establishes this fact. The Lord
also does not wish to be separated from the lotus hearts of those pure
devotees. That is the transcendental relationship between the pure devo-
tees and the Personality of Godhead. Because the Lord does not wish
to separate Himself from the hearts of such pure devotees, it is therefore
understood that they are specifically dearer than the impersonalists. The
relationship of the pure devotees with the Lord develops because of
devotional service to the Lord on the authentic basis of Vedic authority.
Such pure devotees are not mundane sentimentalists, but are factually
realists because their activities are supported by the Vedic authorities who
have given aural reception to the facts mentioned in the Vedic literatures.
The word paraya is very significant. Para-bhakti, or spontaneous love of
God, is the basis of an intimate relationship with the Lord. This highest
stage of relationship with the Lord can be attained simply by hearing about
Him (His name, form, quality, etc.) from authentic sources like Bhagavad-
gita, Srimad-Bhagavatam, etc., recited by pure unalloyed devotees of the
Lord.
TEXT 6
ताबद्धयं॑द्रविणदेदसुदभिभितं
शोकः स्पृहा परिभवो विपुलश्च Im: |
तावन्ममेत्यसदवग्रह आर्तिमूलं
यावन्न तेऽङ्घ्रिमभयं प्रबृणीत लोकः ।६॥
tavad bhayam dravina-deha-suhrn-nimittam
$okah sprha paribhavo vipulas$ ca lobhah
tavan mamety asad-avagraha artimularn
yavan na te ’nghrim abhayar pravrnita lokah
tavat—until then; bhayeam—fear; dravina—wealth; deha—body; suhrt—
relatives; nimittam—for the matter of; §okah—lamentation; sprha— desire;
paribhavah—paraphernalia; vipulah—very great; ca—also; lobhah—avarice;
tavat—up to that time; mama—mine; iti—thus; asat— perishable; avagrahah—
undertaking; artimiilam—full of anxieties; yavat—as long as; na—do not;
te—Your; anghrim abhayam—safe lotus feet; pravrpita—take shelter;
lokah—the people of the world.


--- Page 9 ---
Text 7] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 339
TRANSLATION

O my Lord, the people of the world are embarrassed by all material
anxieties—they are always afraid. They always try to protect wealth, body,
and friends, they are filled with lamentation and unlawful desires and
paraphernalia, and they avariciously base their undertakings on the
perishable conceptions of “my” and “mine.” As long as they do not take
shelter of Your safe lotus feet, they are full of such anxieties.

PURPORT

One may question how one can always think of the Lord in regard to
His name, fame, quality, etc., if one is embarrassed by thoughts of family
affairs. Everyone in the material world is full of thoughts about how to
maintain his family, how to protect his wealth, how to keep pace with
friends and relatives, etc. Thus he is always in fear and lamentation,
trying to keep up with the status quo. In answer to this question, this
verse spoken by Brahma is very appropriate.

A pure devotee of the Lord never thinks of himself as the proprietor of
his home. He surrenders everything unto the supreme control of the Lord,
and thus he has no fear for maintaining his family or for protecting the
interests of his family. Because of this surrender, he no longer has any
attraction for wealth. Even if there is attraction for wealth, it is not for
sense enjoyment, but for the service of the Lord. A pure devotee may be
attracted to accumulating wealth just like an ordinary man, but the dif-
ference is that a devotee acquires money for the service of the Lord,
whereas the ordinary man acquires money for his sense enjoyment. Thus
the acquisition of wealth by a devotee is not a source of anxieties, as is the
case for a worldly man. And because a pure devotee accepts everything in
the sense of serving the Lord, the poisonous teeth of accumulation of
wealth are extracted. If a snake has his poison removed and bites a man,
there is no fatal effect. Similarly, wealth accumulated in the cause of the
Lord has no poisonous teeth, and the effect is not fatal. A pure devotee is
never entangled in material worldly affairs even though he may remain in
the world like an ordinary man.

TEXT 7
दैवेन ते हतधियो भवतः Ew
तसर्बा्ुयोपशययादियुखेन्द्रिया ये।
कुर्वन्ति कामसुखठेशखवाय दीना
लोमामिभूतमनसोऽकुशलानि शश्वत्‌ Holl


--- Page 10 ---
340 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
daivena te hata-dhiyo bhavatah prasangat
sarvasubhopasamanad vimukhendriya ye
kurvanti kama-sukha-lesa-lavaya dina
lobhabhibhitta-manaso ’kusalani sasvat
daivena—by fate of misfortune; te—they; hata-dhiyah— bereft of
memory; bhavatah—of You; prasangat—from the topics; sarva—all; asubha—
inauspiciousness; upasamanat—curbing down; vimukha—turned against;
indriyah—senses; ye—those; kurvanti—act; kama—sense gratification;
sukha—happiness; leSa—brief; lavaya—for a moment only; dinah—poor
fellows; lobha-abhibhiita—overwhelmed by greed; manasah—of one whose
mind; akusal@ni—inauspicious activities; sasvat—always.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, persons who are bereft of the all-auspicious performance of
chanting and hearing about Your transcendental activities are certainly
unfortunate and are also bereft of good sense. They engage in inaus-
picious activities, enjoying sense gratification for a very little while.
PURPORT
The next question is why people are against such auspicious activities as
chanting and hearing the glories and pastimes of the Lord, which can bring
total freedom from the cares and anxieties of material existence. The only
answer to this question is that they are unfortunate because of supernatural
control due to their offensive activities performed simply for the sake of
sense gratification. The Lord’s pure devotees, however, take compassion
upon such unfortunate persons and, in a missionary spirit, try to persuade
them into the line of devotional service. Only by the grace of pure devotees
can such unfortunate men be elevated to the position of transcendental
service.
TEXT 8
छतुरत्रिधात॒भिरिमा gga:
शीतोष्णवातवरेवेरितरेतराब ।
कामाप्निनाच्युत रुषा च सुदुभरेण
सम्पश्यतो मन उरुक्रम सीदते मे ॥ ८ ॥
ksut-trt-tridhatubhir ima muhur ardyamanah
sitosna-vata-varasair itaretarac ca


--- Page 11 ---
Text 9] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 341
kamagninacyuta-rusa ca sudurbharena
sampasyato mana urukrama sidate me
ksut—hunger; trs— thirst; tri-dhatubhih— three secretions, namely mucus,
bile and wind; imah—all of them; muhuh—always; ardyamanah—
perplexed; Sita—winter; ugna—summer; vata—wind; varasaih—by rains;
itara-itarat—and many other disturbances; ca—also; kama-agnina— by strong
sex urges; acyuta-rusa—indefatigable anger; ca—also; sudurbharena—most
unbearable; sampadyatah—so observing; manah—mind; urukrama—O great
actor; sidate—becomes despondent; me—my.
TRANSLATION
O great actor, my Lord, all these poor creatures are constantly perplexed
by hunger, thirst, severe cold, secretion and bile, attacked by coughing
winter, blasting summer, rains and many other disturbing elements, and
overwhelmed by strong sex urges and indefatigable anger. I take pity on
them, and I am very much aggrieved for them.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord like Brahma and persons in his disciplic
succession are always unhappy to see the perplexities of the conditioned
souls, who are suffering the onslaughts of the threefold miseries which
pertain to the body and mind, to the disturbances of material nature and
many other such material disadvantages. Not knowing adequate measures
for relieving such difficulties, suffering persons sometimes pose themselves
as leaders of the people, and the unfortunate followers are put into further
disadvantages under such so-called leadership. This is like a blind man’s
leading another blind man to fall into a ditch. Therefore, unless the
devotees of the Lord take pity on them and teach them the right path,
their lives are hopeless failures. The devotees of the Lord who voluntarily
take the responsibility of raising the foolish materialistic sense enjoyers are
as confidential to the Lord as Lord Brahma.
TEXT 9
आत्फ़थक््वमिद मात्मन इन्द्रियां
मायाबलं भगवतो जन ईश पद्येत्‌ |
ताव्न संसृतिरसौ प्रतिसंक्रमेत
व्यर्थापि दुःखनिवहं वहती ক্ষিয়াযা।।৭।।
yavat prthaktvam idam atmana indriyartha-
maya-balari bhagavato jana (80৫ pasyet


--- Page 12 ---
342 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
tavan na sarisrtir asau pratisankrameta
vyarthapi duhkha-nivahar vahati kriyartha
ydvat—as long as; prthaktvam—separatism; idam—this; atmanah—of the
body; indriya-artha—for sense gratification; maya-balam—influence of
external energy; bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead; janah—a
person; isa—O my Lord; pasyet—sees; tavat—so long; na—not; sarmsrtih—
the influence of material existence; asau—that man; pratisankrameta—
can overcome; vyartha api—although without meaning; duhkha-nivaham—
multiple miseries; vahati— bringing; kriya-artha—for fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, the material miseries are without factual existence for the
soul. Yet as long as the conditioned soul sees the body as meant for sense
enjoyment, he cannot get out of the entanglement of material miseries,
being influenced by Your external energy.
PURPORT
The whole trouble of the living entity in material existence is that he has
an independent conception of life. He is always dependent on the rules of
the Supreme Lord, both in the conditioned and liberated states, but by the
influence of external energy the conditioned soul thinks himself indepen-
dent of the supremacy of the Personality of Godhead. His constitutional
position is to dovetail himself with the desire of the supreme will, but as
long as he does not do so, he is sure to drag on in the shackles of material
bondage. He has to give up all sorts of plans manufactured by mental
concoction, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 2.55: prajahati yada kaman
sarvan partha mano-gatan), and has to dovetail himself with the supreme
will. That will help him to get out of the entanglement of material existence.
TEXT 10
अह्वथापृतातंकरणा निशि निःशयाना
नानामनोरथधिया क्षणभग्ननिद्राः |
दैवाहतार्थरचना ऋषयोऽपि देव
युष्मत्प्रसद्धवि प्रवा इह संसरन्ति eel
ahny aprtarta-karana nisi nihsayana
nana-mano-ratha-dhiya ksana-bhagna-nidrah
daivahatartha-racana rsayo ए deva
yusmat prasanga-vimukha iha sarmsaranti


--- Page 13 ---
Text 10] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 343

ahni—during the daytime; aprta—engaged;drta— distressing engagement;
karanah—senses; nisi—at night; nihfayanah—insomnia; nana—various;
manah-ratha—mental speculations; dhiya—by intelligence; ksana—con-
stantly; bhagna—broken; nidrah—sleep; daiva—superhuman; ahata-artha—
frustrated; racanah—plans; rsayah—great sages; api—also; deva—O my Lord;
yusmat— Your Lordship’s; prasannga— topic; vimukhah— turned against; iha—
in this (material world); sarisaranti—do rotate.

TRANSLATION

Such nondevotees engage their senses in very troublesome and extensive
work, and they suffer insomnia at night because their intelligence con-
stantly breaks their sleep with various mental speculations. They are
frustrated in all their various plans by supernatural power. Even great
sages, if they are against Your transcendental topics, must rotate in this
material world.

PURPORT

As described in the previous verse, people who have no taste for the
devotional service of the Lord are occupied in material engagements. Most
of them engage during the daytime in hard physical labor; their senses are
engaged very extensively in troublesome duties in the gigantic plants of
heavy industrial enterprise. The owners of such factories are engaged in
finding a market for their industrial products, and the laborers are engaged
in extensive production involving huge mechanical arrangements. Factory
is another name for hell. At night, hellishly engaged persons take advan-
tage of wine and women to satisfy their tired senses, but they are not even
able to have sound sleep because their various mental speculative plans
constantly interrupt their sleep. Sometimes they feel sleepy in the morning
for want of sufficient sleep at night because they suffer from insomnia. By
the arrangement of supernatural power, even the great scientists and
thinkers of the world suffer frustration of their various plans and thus rot
in the material world birth after birth. A great scientist might make dis-
coveries in atomic energy for the quick destruction of the world and might
be awarded the best prize in recognition of his service (or disservice), but
he also has to undergo the reactions of his work by rotating in the cycle of
repeated births and deaths under the superhuman law of material nature.
All these people who are against the principle of devotional service are
destined to rotate in this material world without fail.

This verse particularly mentions that even sages who are averse to the
principles of devotional service to the Lord are also condemned to undergo
the terms of material existence. Not only in this age, but formerly also,


--- Page 14 ---
344 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
there were many sages who tried to invent their own systems of religion
without reference to devotional service to the Supreme Lord, but there
cannot be any religious principle without devotional service to the Lord.
The Supreme Lord is the leader of the entire range of living entities, and
no one can be equal to or greater than Him. Even the Lord’s impersonal
feature and all-pervading localized feature cannot be on an equal level with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, there cannot be any
religion or system of genuine philosophy for the advancement of the
living entities without the principle of devotional service.

The impersonalists, who take much trouble in penance and austerity for
self-liberation, may approach the impersonal brahmajyoti, but ultimately,
because of not being situated in devotional service, they glide down again
to the material world to undergo another term of material existence. This
is confirmed as follows:

ye ‘nye ’ ravindaksa vimuktamaninas
tvayy astabhavad avisuddha-buddhayah
aruhya krcchrepa param padam tatah
patanty adho ‘nadrta-yusmad-arighrayah
“Persons who are falsely under the impression of being liberated, without
devotional service to the Lord, may reach the goal of the brahmajyoti, but
because of their impure consciousness and for want of shelter in the
Vaikunthalokas, such so-called liberated persons again fall down into
material existence.” (Bhag.10.2.32)

Therefore, no one can manufacture any system of religion without the
principle of devotional service to the Lord. As we find in the Sixth Canto
of Srimad-Bhagavatam, the initiator of religious principles is the Lord
Himself. In Bhagavad-gita also we find that the 1.010 condemns all forms of
religion other than that which entails the process of surrendering unto the
Supreme. Any system which leads one to the devotional service of the
Lord, and nothing else, is actually religion or philosophy. In the Sixth
Canto we find the following statements of Yamaraja, the controller of all
unfaithful living entities:

dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-prapitanm
na vai vidur rsayo napi devah

na siddha-mukhya asura manusyah
kutas ca vidyadhara-caranadayah


--- Page 15 ---
Text 10] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 345
svayambhur naradah sambhuh
kumarah kapilo manuh
prahlado janako 61177110
balir vaiyasakir vayam
dvadasaite vijanimo
dharmam bhagavatari bhatah
guhyam visuddham 01700018072
yam jiatvamrtam asnute (Bhag. 6.3.19-21)
“The principles of religion are initiated by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and no one else, including the sages and demigods, can manu-
facture any such principles. Since even great sages and demigods are un-
authorized to inaugurate such principles of religion, what to speak
of others—the so-called mystics, demons, human beings, Vidyadharas
and Caranas living in the lower planets? Twelve personalities—Brahma,
Narada, Lord Siva, Kumara, Kapila, Manu, Prahlada Maharaja, Janaka
Maharaja, Bhisma, Bali, Sukadeva Gosvami and Yamaraja—are
agents of the Lord authorized to speak and propagate the principles of
religion.”

The principles of religion are not open to any ordinary living entity.
They are just to bring the human being onto the platform of morality.
Nonviolence, etc., are necessary for misguided persons because unless one
is moral and nonviolent one cannot understand the principles of religion.
It is very difficult to understand what is actually religion even if one is
situated in the principles of morality and nonviolence. It is very confiden-
tial because as soon as one is conversant with the real principles of religion,
he is at once liberated to the eternal life of bliss and knowledge. Therefore,
one who is not situated in the principles of devotional service to the Lord
should not pose himself as a religious leader of the innocent public. The
Tsopanisad emphatically forbids this nonsense in the following mantra:

andham tamah pravisanti ye ’sambhutim upasate

tato bhiya iva te tamo ya u sambhutyam ratah

(14০100115৫0 12)

“A person in ignorance of the principles of religion who therefore does
nothing in the matter of religion is far better than a person who misguides
others in the name of religion without reference to the factual religious
principles of devotional service.” Such so-called leaders of religion are sure
to be condemned by Brahma and other great authorities.


--- Page 16 ---
346 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
TEXT 11
स्वं मक्तियोगपरिमावितहत्रोज
आस्से श्रुतेक्षितपथो ननु नाथ पुंसाम्‌ |
यद्यद्धिया त उरुगाय विभावयन्ति
तत्तद्वपुः प्रणयसे सदनुग्रहाय ॥११॥
(४0771, bhak ti-yoga-paribhavita-hrt-saroja
asse sruteksita-patho nanu natha pumsam
yad yad dhiya ta urugaya vibhavayanti
tat-tad-vapuh pranayase sad-anugrahaya
tvam—unto You; bhakti-yoga—in devotional service; paribhavita—being
one hundred percent engaged; hrt—of the heart; saroje—on the lotus; asse—
You reside; sruta-iksita—seen through the ear; pathah—the path; nanu—now;
natha—0O my Lord; pumsam—of the devotees; yat yat—whichever; dhiya—
by meditating; te—Your; urugaya—O Multi-glorious; vibhavayanti—
they specifically think of; tat-tat—the very same; vapuh—transcendental
form; pranayase—do You manifest; sat-anugrahaya—to show Your cause-
less mercy.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Your devotees can see You through the ears by the process
of bona fide hearing, and thus their hearts become cleansed, and You take
Your seat there. You are so merciful to Your devotees that You manifest
Yourself in the particular eternal form of transcendence in which they
always think of You.
PURPORT
The statement here that the Lord manifests Himself before the devotee
in the form in which the devotee likes to worship Him indicates that the
Lord becomes subordinate to the desire of the devotee—so much so that
He manifests His particular form as the devotee demands. This demand of
the devotee is satisfied by the Lord because He is pliable in terms of the
transcendental loving service of the devotee. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 4.11): ye yatha mam prapadyante tams tathaiva
bhajamy aham. We should note, however, that the Lord is never the order
supplier of the devotee. Here in this verse it is particularly mentioned: (धव
bhakti-yoga-paribhavita. This indicates the efficiency achieved through
execution of matured devotional service, or prema, love of Godhead. This
state of prema is achieved by the gradual process of development from


--- Page 17 ---
Text 12] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 347
faith to love. On faith one associates with bona fide devotees, and by such
association one can become engaged in the bona fide devotional service,
which includes proper initiation and the execution of the primary devo-
tional duties prescribed in the revealed scriptures. This is clearly indicated
herein by the word $ruteksita. The Sruteksita path is to hear from bona
fide devotees who are conversant with Vedic wisdom, free from mundane
sentiment. By this bona fide hearing process, the neophyte devotee
becomes cleansed of all material rubbish, and thus he becomes attached to
one of the many transcendental forms of the Lord, as described in the
Vedas.

This attachment of the devotee to a particular form of the Lord is due to
natural inclination. Each and every living entity is originally attached to a
particular type of transcendental service because he is eternally the servitor
of the Lord. Lord Caitanya says that the living entity is eternally a servitor
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Therefore, every living
entity has a particular type of service relationship with the Lord, eternally.
This particular attachment is invoked by practice of regulative devotional
service to the Lord, and thus the devotee becomes attached to the eternal
form of the Lord, exactly like one who is already eternally attached. This
attachment for a particular form of the Lord is called svarupa-siddhi. The
Lord sits on the lotus heart of the devotee in the eternal form the pure
devotee desires, and thus the Lord does not part from the devotee, as
confirmed in the previous verse. The Lord, however, does not disclose
Himself to a casual or inauthentic worshiper to be exploited. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.25): nahar prakasahsarvasya yoge-maya-
samavrtah. Rather, by yoga-maya, the Lord remains concealed to the non-
devotees or casual devotees who are serving their sense gratification. The
Lord is never visible to the pseudo-devotees who worship the demigods in
charge of universal affairs. The conclusion is that the Lord cannot become
the order supplier of a pseudo-devotee, but He is always prepared to re-
spond to the desires of a pure unconditional devotee who is free from all
tinges of material infection.

TEXT 12
नातिप्रसीदति तथोपचितोपचारं -
राराधितः सुरगणैदैदि बद्धकामः ।
-
यत्सवभूतद ययासद लमभ्ययैको
नानाजनेष्ववहितः सुदृदन्तरात्भा ॥ १२॥


--- Page 18 ---
348 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
nati-prasidati tathopacitopacarair
aradhitah sura-ganair hrdi-baddha-kamaih
yat sarva-bhiita-dayayasad-alabhyayaiko
nana-janesv avahitah suhrd antar-atma

na—never; ati—very much; prasidati—become satisfied; tatha—as much
as; upacita—by pompous arrangement; upacaraih— with much worshipable
paraphernalia; aradhitah—being worshiped; sura-ganaih—by the celestial
demigods; hrdi-baddha-kamaih—with hearts full of all sorts of material
desires; yat—that which; sarva—all; bhiita—living entities; dayaya—to show
them causeless mercy; asat—nondevotee; alabhyaya—not being achieved;
ekah—one without a second; nana—various; janesu—in living entities;
avahitah—perceived; suhrt—well-wishing friend; antah—within; atma—
Supersoul.

TRANSLATION

My Lord, You are not very much satisfied by the worship of the
demigods who arrange for Your worship very pompously, with various
paraphernalia, but who are full of material hankerings. You are situated in
everyone's heart as the Supersoul just to show Your causeless mercy, and
You are the eternal well-wisher, but You are unavailable for the non-
devotee.

PURPORT

The demigods in the celestial heavenly planets, who are appointed
administrators of the material affairs, are also devotees of the Lord. But, at
the same time, they have desire for material opulence and sense grati-
fication. The Lord is so kind that He awards them all sorts of material
happiness, more than they can desire, but He is not satisfied with them
because they are not pure devotees. The Lord does not want any one of
His innumerable sons (the living entities) to remain in the material world
of threefold miseries to perpetually suffer the material pangs of birth,
death, old age and disease. The demigods in the heavenly planets, and
many devotees on this planet also, want to remain in the material world as
devotees of the Lord and take advantage of material happiness. They do
so at a risk of falling down to the lower status of existence, and this makes
the Lord dissatisfied with them.

Pure devotees are not desirous of any material enjoyment, nor are they
averse to it. They completely dovetail their desires with the desires of the
Lord and perform nothing on their personal account. Arjuna is a good


--- Page 19 ---
Text 12] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 349
example. On his own sentiment, due to family affection, Arjuna did not
want to fight, but finally, after hearing Srimad-Bhagavad-gita, he agreed to
fight in the interests of the Lord. Therefore, the Lord is very much satis-
fied with pure devotees because they do not act for sense gratification but
only in terms of the Lord’s desire. As Paramidtma or Supersoul, He is
situated in everyone’s heart, always giving everyone the chance of good
counsel. Thus everyone should take the opportunity and render transcen-
dental loving service to Him wholly and solely.

The nondevotees, however, are neither like the demigods nor the pure
devotees, but are averse to the transcendental relationship with the Lord.
They have revolted against the Lord and must perpetually undergo the
reactions of their own activities.

Bhagavad-gita (Bg.4.11) states: ye yatha mar prapadyante tams tathaiva
bhajamy aham. ‘Although the Lord is equally kind to every living being,
the living beings, for their own part, are able to please the Lord either to a
greater or lesser extent.” The demigods are called sakama devotees, or
devotees with material desires in mind, while the pure devotees are called
niskama devotees because they have no desires in their personal interests.
The sakama devotees are self-interested because they do not think of
others, and therefore they are not able to satisfy the Lord perfectly,
whereas the pure devotees take the missionary responsibility of turning
nondevotees into devotees, and they are therefore able to satisfy the Lord
more than the demigods. The Lord is unmindful of the nondevotees,
although He is sitting within everyone’s heart as well-wisher and Supersoul.
However, He also gives them the chance to receive His mercy through His
pure devotees who are engaged in missionary activities. Sometimes the
Lord Himself descends for missionary activities, as He did in the form of
Lord Caitanya, but mostly He sends His bona fide representatives, and
thus He shows His causeless mercy towards the nondevotees. The Lord is
so satisfied with His pure devotees that He wants to give them the credit
of missionary success, although He could do the work personally. This is
the sign of His satisfaction with His pure niskama devotees, compared to
the sakama devotees. By such transcendental activities the Lord simul-
taneously becomes free from the charge of partiality and exhibits His
pleasure with the devotees.

Now a question arises: If the Lord is sitting in the hearts of non-
devotees, why are they not moved to become devotees? It may be
answered that the stubborn nondevotees are like the barren land or
alkaline field, where no agricultural activities can be successful. As part
and parcel of the Lord, every individual living entity has a minute


--- Page 20 ---
350 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
quantity of independence, and by misuse of this minute independence,
the nondevotees commit offense after offense, to both the Lord and His
pure devotees engaged in missionary work. As a result of such acts, they
become as barren as an alkaline field, where there is no strength to
produce.
TEXT 13
पुंसामतो विविधरूपमिरष्वरायै-
दानिन चोग्रतपसा परिचर्यया च ।
आराधनं भगवतस्तव सत्कियार्यो
धर्मोऽपितः कर्हिचिदुप्रियते न यत्र nan
purisam ato vividha-karmabhir adhvaradyair
danena cogra-tapasa paricaryaya ca .
aradhanarh bhagavatas tava sat-kriyartho
dharmo’rpitah karhicid mriyate na yatra

purisam—of the people; atah—therefore; vividha-karmabhih—by various
fruitive activities; adhvara-ddyaii—by performance of Vedic rituals;
danena—by charities; ca—and; ugra—very hard; tapasa—austerity; pari-
caryaya—by transcendental service; ca—also; aradhanam—worship; bhaga-
vatah—of the Personality of Godhead; tava—Your; sat-kriya-arthah—
simply for pleasing Your Lordship; dharmah—religion; arpitah—so offered;
karhicit—at any time; mriyate—vanquishes; na—never; yatra—there.

TRANSLATION

But the pious activities of the people, such as performance of Vedic
rituals, charity, austere penances, and transcendental service, performed
with a view to worship You and satisfy You by offering You the fruitive
results, are also beneficial. Such acts of religion never go in vain.

PURPORT

Absolute devotional service, conducted in nine different spiritual
activities—hearing, chanting, remembering, worshiping, praying, etc.—
does not always appeal to people with a pompous nature; they are more
attracted by the Vedic superficial rituals and other costly performances
of social religious shows. But the process according to the Vedic
injunctions is that the fruits of all pious activities should be offered to the
Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gita, (Bg. 9.27), the Lord demands that


--- Page 21 ---
Text 14] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 351
whatever one may do in one’s daily activities, such as worship, sacrifice,
and offer charity, all the results should be offered to Him only. This
offering of the result of pious acts unto the Supreme Lord is a sign of
devotional service to the Lord and is of permanent value, whereas enjoying
the same results for oneself is only temporary. Anything done on account
of the Lord is a permanent asset and accumulates in the form of unseen
piety for gradual promotion to the unalloyed devotional service of the
Lord. These undetected pious activities will one day result in full-fledged
devotional service by the grace of the Supreme Lord. Therefore, any
pious act done on account of the Supreme Lord is also recommended
here for those who are not pure devotees.
TEXT 14
श्त्खरूपमहसेव निपीतमेद-
मोहाय बोधधिषणाय नमः परस्मै |
विशवोद्धवसियितिरयेषु निमि्तलीला-
रासाय ते नम हदं चकृमेश्वराय ॥१४।
Sasvat svariipa-mahasaiva niptta-bheda
mohaya bodha-dhisandaya namah parasmai
visvodbhava-sthiti-layesu nimitta-lila
rasaya te nama idam cakrmesvaraya
Sasvat—eternally; svarupa—transcendental form; mahasa—by the glories;
eva— certainly; nipita— distinguished; bheda— differentiation; mohaya—unto
the illusory conception; bodha—self-knowledge; dhisanaya—intelligence;
namah—obeisances; parasmai—unto the Transcendence; visva-udbhava—
creation of the cosmic manifestation; sthiti—maintenance; layesu—also
destruction; nimitta—for the matter of; lila—by such pastimes; rasaya—
for enjoyment; te—unto You; namah—obeisances; idam—this; cakrma—do
I perform; iSvaraya—unto the Supreme. \
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my obeisances unto the Supreme Transcendence who is

eternally distinguished by His internal potency. His indistinguishable
impersonal feature is realized by intelligence for self-realization. I offer
my obeisances unto Him who, by His pastimes, enjoys the creation,
maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifestation.


--- Page 22 ---
352 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is eternally distinguished from the living entities by
His internal potency, although He is also understood in His impersonal
feature by self-realized intelligence. Devotees of the Lord, therefore,
offer all respectful obeisances unto the impersonal feature of the Lord.
The word rasa is significant herein. The 7৫53৫ dance is performed by
Lord Krsna in the company of the cowherd damsels at Vrndavana, and
the Personality of Godhead Garbhodakasayi Visnu is also engaged in rasa
enjoyment with His external potency, by which He creates, maintains and
dissolves the entire material manifestation. Indirectly, Lord Brahma offers
his respectful obeisances unto Lord Sri Krsna, who is factually ever
engaged in 7৫50৫ enjoyment with the gopis, as confirmed in the Vedas in
the following words: parardhante so ’budhyata gopa-veso me purastad
avirbabhitva. The distinction between the Lord and the living entity is
definitely experienced when there is sufficient intelligence to understand
His internal potency, as distinguished from the external potency by which
He makes possible the material manifestation.
TEXT 15
খন্যাবৰবায়্য্যোকযবিক্ধম্ববাবি
नामानि येऽसुविगमे विवज्ञा गृणन्ति |
तेऽनैकजन्मशमलं सहसैव हित्वा
संयान्त्यपाइृतगरतं तमजं प्रपद्ये ॥१५॥
yasyavatara-guna-karma-vidambanani
namani ye’suvigame vivasa grnanti
te ’naika-janma-samalarh sahasaiva hitva
saryanty apavrtamrtarm tam ajam prapadye
yasya—whose; avatdra—incarnations; guna—transcendental qualities;
karma—activities; vidambanani—all mysterious; namani— transcendental
names; ye—those; asuvigame—while quitting this life; vivasah—automati-
cally; grnanti—invoke; te—they; anaika—many; janma—births; samalam—
accumulated sins; sahasa—immediately; eva—certainly; hitva—giving up;
saryanti—obtain; apavrt—open; amrtam—immorlality; tam—Him; ajam—
the unborn; prapadye—1 take shelter.
TRANSLATION
Let me take shelter of the lotus feet of Him whose incarnations,
qualities and activities are mysterious imitations of worldly affairs.


--- Page 23 ---
Text 16] Brahma'’s Prayers for Creative Energy 353
One who invokes His transcendental names, even unconsciously, at the
time he quits this life, certainly is immediately washed of the sins of
many, many biiths and attains Him without fail.
PURPORT
The activities of the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead are a kind of imitation of the activities going on in the material
world. He is just like an actor on a stage. An actor imitates the activities of
a king on stage, although actually he is not the king. Similarly, when the
Lord incarnates, He imitates parts with which He has nothing to do. In
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 4.14), it is said that the Lord has nothing to do with
the activities in which He is supposedly engaged: na mam karmani
limpanti na me karma-phale sprha. The Lord is omnipotent; simply by His
will He can perform anything and everything. When the Lord appeared as
Lord Krsna, He played the part of the son of Yasoda and Nanda, and He
lifted the Govardhana Hill, although lifting a hill is not His concern. He
can lift millions of Govardhana Hills by His simple desire; He does not
need to lift it with His hand. But He imitates the ordinary living entity by
this lifting, and at the same time He exhibits His supernatural power. Thus
His name is chanted as the lifter of Govardhana Hill, or Sri Govardhana-
0311. Therefore, His acts in His incarnations and His partiality to the
devotees are all imitations only, just like the stage makeup of an expert
dramatical player. His acts in that capacity, however, are all omnipotent,
and the remembrance of such activities of the incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is as powerful as the l.ord Himself.
Ajamila remembered the holy name of the Lord, Narayana, by merely
calling the name of his son Narayapa, and that gave him a complete
opportunity to achieve the highest perfection of life.
TEXT 16
यो वा अहं च fife fp खयं च
स्थिर्युद्धवप्रलयदेतव आत्ममूरम्‌ |
fire त्रिपादवृध एक उरुप्ररोह-
स्तस्मै नमो भगवते TERE ।।१६॥
yo va 0710777 ca girisas ca vibhuh svayarn ca
sthity-udbhava-pralaya-hetava atma-mulam
bhittva tripad vavrdha eka uru-prarohas
tasmai namo bhagavate bhuvane-drumaya


--- Page 24 ---
354 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9

yah—one who; vai—certainly; aham ca—also I; girisah ca—also Siva;
vibhuh—the Almighty; svayam—personality (as Visnu); ca—and; sthiti—
maintenance; udbhava—creation; pralaya—dissolution; hetavah— the causes;
dtma-milam—self-rooted; bhittvai—having penetrated; tripat—three trunks;
vavrdhe—grew; ekah—one without a second; uru—many; prarohah—
branches; tasmai—unto Him; namah—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Per-
sonality of Godhead; bhuvana-drumaya—unto the tree of the planetary
Be ০৯ TRANSLATION

Your Lordship is the prime root of the tree of the planetary systems.
This tree has grown by first penetrating the material nature in three
trunks—as myself, Siva and Yourself, the Almighty—for creation,
maintenance and dissolution, and we three have grown with many
branches. Therefore I offer my obeisances unto You, the tree of the
cosmic manifestation.

PURPORT

The cosmic manifestation is grossly divided into three worlds, the
upper, lower and middle planetary systems, and then it broadens into the
cosmos of fourteen planetary systems with the manifestation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as the supreme root. Material nature,
which appears to be the cause of the cosmic manifestation, is only the
agency or energy of the Lord. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.10):
mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram. ‘Only under the super-
intendence of the Supreme lord does material nature appear to be the
cause of all creation, maintenance and dissolution.” The Lord expands
Himself into three, Visnu, Brahma and Siva, for maintenance, creation and
destruction respectively. Of the three principal agents controlling the three
modes of material nature, Visnu is the Almighty; even though He is
within material nature for the purpose of maintenance, He is not con-
trolled by the laws of material nature. The other two, Brahma and Siva,
although almost as greatly powerful as Visnu, are within the control of
the material energy of the Supreme Lord. The conception of many gods
controlling the many departments of material nature is ill conceived by
the foolish pantheist. God is one without a second, and He is the primal
cause of all causes. As there are many departmental heads of governmental
affairs, so there are many heads of management of the universal affairs.

Due to a poor fund of knowledge, the impersonalist does not believe
in the personal management of things as they are. But in this verse it is
clearly explained that everything is personal and nothing is impersonal.


--- Page 25 ---
Text 17] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 355
We have already discussed this point in the Introduction, and it is
confirmed here in this verse. The tree of the material manifestation is
described in the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita as an asvattha tree
whose root is upward. We have actual experience of such a tree when we
see the shadow of a tree on the bank of a reservoir of water. The reflection
of the tree on the water appears to hang down from its upward roots.
The tree of creation which is described here is only a shadow of the reality
which is Parabrahman, Visnu. In the internal potential manifestation of the
Vaikunthalokas, the actual tree exists, and the tree reflected in the
material nature is only the shadow of this actual tree. The impersonalists’
theory that Brahman is void of all variegatedness is false because the
shadow tree described in Bhagavad-gita cannot exist without being the
reflection of areal tree. The real tree is situated in the eternal existence of
spiritual nature, full of transcendental varieties, and Lord Visnu is the
root of that tree also. The root is the same—the Lord—both for the real
tree and the false, but the false tree is only the perverted reflection of the
real tree. The Lord, being the real tree, is here offered obeisances by
Brahma on his own behalf and also on behalf of Lord Siva.
TEXT 17
लोको विकर्मनिरतः कुले प्रमत्तः
कर्मण्ययं त्वदुदिते भवदच॑ने स्वे |
यस्तावदस्य बलवानिह जीविताशां
सद्यद्छिनत्यनिमिषाय नमोऽस्तु तस्मै।।१७॥
loko vikarma-niratah kusale pramattah
karmany ayarh tvad udite bhavad-arcane sve
yas tavad asya balavan iha jivitasam
sadyas chinatty animisaya namo’ stu tasmai
lokah—people in general; vikarma—work without sense; niratah—engaged

in; kusale—in beneficial activity; pramattah—negligent; karmani—in activity;
ayam~—this; tvat—by You; udite—enunciated; bhavat—of You; arcane—in
worship; sve—their own; yah—who; taval—as long as; asya—of the
people in general; balavan—very strong; iha—this; jivitasam—struggle
for existence; sadyah— directly; chinatti—is cut to pieces; animisaya—by the
eternal time; namah—my obeisances; astu—let there be; tasmai—unto Him.


--- Page 26 ---
356 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
TRANSLATION
People in general all engage in foolish acts, not in the really beneficial
activities which are enunciated directly by You for their guidance. As long
as their tendency for foolish work remains powerful, all their plans in the
struggle for existence will be cut to pieces. 1 therefore offer my obeisances
unto Him who acts as eternal time.
PURPORT
People in general are all engaged in senscless work. They are system-
atically unmindful of the real beneficial work, which is the devotional
service of the Lord, technically called the arcana regulations. The arcana
regulations are directly instructed by the Lord in the Narada-paiicaratra
and are strictly followed by the intelligent men who know well that the
highest perfectional goal of life is to reach Lord Visnu, who is the root of
the tree called the cosmic manifestation. Also, in the Bhagavatam and in
Bhagavad-gita such regulative activities are clearly mentioned. Foolish
people do not know that their self-interest is in realization of Visnu. The
Bhagavatam (7.5.30-32) says:
matir na krsne paratah svato va
mitho *bhipadyeta grha-vratanam
adanta-gobhir visatarh tamisram
punah punas carvita-carvananam
na te viduh svartha-gatirh hi visnurn
durasaya ye bahir artha-maninah
andha yathandhair upaniyamana
vacisatantyam urudamni baddhah
naisarn matis tavad urukramanghrirm
spréaty anarthapagamo yad arthali
mahiyasar pada-rajo’bhisekarn
niskificananarh na vita yavat
“Persons who are determined to totally rot in false material happiness
cannot become Krsna-minded either by instructions from teachers, by
self-realization or by parliamentary discussions. They are dragged by the
unbridled senses into the darkest region of ignorance, and thus they
madly engage in what is called ‘chewing the chewed.’
“Because of their foolish activities, they are unaware that the ultimate
goal of human life is to achieve Vignu, the Lord of the cosmic manifesta-
tion, and so their struggle for existence is in the wrong direction of


--- Page 27 ---
Text 18] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 357
material civilization, which is under the external energy. They are led by
similar foolish persons, just as one blind man is led by another blind man
and both fall in the ditch.

“Such foolish men cannot be attracted towards the activities of the
Supreme Powerful, who is actually the neutralizing measure for their
foolish activities, unless and until they have the good sense to be guided
by the great souls who are completely freed from material attachment.”

In Bhagavad-gita the Lord asks everyone to give up all other occupa-
tional duties and absolutely engage in arcana activities, or in pleasing the
Lord. But almost no one is attracted to such arcana activity. Everyone is
more or less attracted by activities which are conditions of rebellion
against the Supreme Lord. The systems of jiana and yoga are also
indirectly rebellious acts against the Lord. There is no auspicious activity
except arcana of the Lord. Jitana and yoga are sometimes accepted
within the purview of arcana when the ultimate aim is Vignu, and not
otherwise. The conclusion is that only the devotees of the Lord are bona
fide human beings eligible for salvation. Others are vainly struggling for
existence without any actual benefit.

TEXT 18
यखादियेम्यहमपि द्विपराधषिष्ण्य-
मध्यासितः सकललोकनमस्कृतं यत्‌।
तेपे तपो TEEN ऽवरुरुूत्समान-
स्तस्मै नमो भगवतेऽधिमखाय तुभ्यम्‌॥॥१८॥
yasmad bibhemy aham api dviparardha-dhispyam
adhyasitah sakala-loka-namaskrtarh yat
tepe tapo bahusavo ‘varurutsamanas
tasmai namo bhagavate ‘dhimakhaya tubhyam
yasmat—from whom; bibhemi—fear; aham—1; api—also; dvi-para-ardha—
up to the limit of 4,300,000,000 x 2 x 30 x 12 x 100 solar years;
dhisnyam— place; adhyasitah—situated in; sakala-loka—all other planets;
namaskrtam—honored by; yat—that; tepe—underwent; tapah—penances;
bahusavah— many, many years; avarurutsamanah—desiring to obtain You;
tasmai—unto Him; namah—1 do offer my obeisances; bhagavate—unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhimakhaya—unto Him who is the
enjoyer of all sacrifices; tubhyam—unto Your Lordship.


--- Page 28 ---
358 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
TRANSLATION
Your Lordship, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You who are
indefatigable time and the enjoyer of all sacrifices. Although I am
situated in an abode which will continue to exist for a time duration of
two parardhas, although I am the leader of all other planets in the
universe, and although I have undergone many, many years of penance
for self-realization, still I offer my respects unto You.
PURPORT
Brahma is the greatest personality in the universe because he has the
longest duration of life. He is the most respectable personality because of
his penance, influence, prestige, etc., and still he has to offer his respectful
obeisances unto the Lord. Therefore, it is incumbent upon all others, who
are far, far below the standard of Brahmi, to do as he did and offer
respects as a matter of duty.
TEXT 19
तिरय्नुष्यविदुधादि षु जीवयोनि-
ष्वातमेच्छयाऽऽःयकृतसेतुपरीष्सया यः |
रेमे निरस्तविषयोऽप्यबरुद्देह-
N
स्तस्मै नमो भगवते पुरुषोत्तमाय ।।१९॥
tiryan-manusya-vibudhadisu jiva-yonisv
atmecchayatma-krta-setu-paripsaya yah
reme nirasta-visayo ’py avaruddha-dehas
tasmai namo bhagavate purusottamaya
tiryaiic— animals lower than human beings; manusya—human beings, etc.;
vibudha-adisu—amongst the demigods; jiva-yonisu—in different species of
life; atma—self; icchaya—by the will; atma-krta—self-created; setu—obliga-
tions; paripsayd—desiring to preserve; yah—who; reme—performing tran-
scendental pastimes; nirasta—not being affected; visayah— material contami-
nation; api— certainly; avaruddha— manifested; dehah—transcendental body;
tasmai—unto Him; namah—my obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Personali-
ty of Godhead; purusottamaya—the primeval Lord.
TRANSLATION
0 my Lord, by Your own will You appear in the various species of
living entities, among animals lower than human beings as well as among


--- Page 29 ---
Text 20] Brahma's Prayers for Creative Energy 359
the demigods, to perform Your transcendental pastimes. You are not
affected by material contamination. You come just to fulfill the
obligations of Your own principles of religion, and therefore, O Supreme
Personality, I offer my obeisances unto You for manifesting such different
forms.
PURPORT
The Lord’s incarnations in different species of life are all transcendental.
He appears as a human being in His incarnations of Krsna, Rama, etc.,
but He is not a human being. Anyone who mistakes Him for an ordinary
human being is certainly not very intelligent, as confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita (Bg. 9.11): avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam. The
same principle is applicable when He appears as the hog or fish incarna-
tions. They are transcendental forms of the Lord and are manifested
under certain necessities of His own pleasure and pastimes. Such
manifestations of the transcendental forms of the Lord are accepted by
Him mostly to enliven His devotees. All His incarnations are manifested
whenever there is a need to deliver His devotees and maintain His own
principles.
TEXT 20
योऽविदययानुपहतोऽपि दास्या
fe जटरीकृतलोकयात्रः |
अन्तज॑लेऽदिकशिपुस्पर्शानुकलां
भीमोभिमालिनि जनस्य सुखं विद्ृण्वन्‌।।२०॥
yo ’vidyayanupahato ‘pi dasardha-vrttya
nidram uvaha jathari-krta-loka-yatrah
antar-jale *hikasipu sparsanukularm
bhimormi-malini janasya 51810180118 vivrnvan
yah—one;avidyaya—influenced by nescience; anupahatah—without being

affected; api—in spite of; dasardha—five; vrttya—interaction; nidram—
sleep; uvaha—accepted; jathari—within the abdomen; krta—doing so; loka-
yatrah—maintenance of the different entities; antah-jale—within the water
of devastation; ahi-kasipu—on the snake bed; sparsa-anukilam—happy for
the touch; bhima-iarmi—violent waves; malini—chain of; janasya—of the
intelligent person; sukham—happiness; vivrnvan—showing.


--- Page 30 ---
360 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You accept the pleasure of sleeping in the water of devasta-
tion, where there are violent waves, and You enjoy pleasure on the bed of
snakes, showing the happiness of Your sleep to intelligent persons. At that
time, all the universal planets are stationed within Your abdomen.
PURPORT
Persons who cannot think of anything beyond the limit of their own
power are like frogs in a well who cannot imagine the length and breadth
of the great Pacific Ocean. Such people take it as legendary when they
hear that the Supreme Lord is lying on His bed within the great ocean of
the universe. They are surprised that one can lie down within the water
and sleep very happily. But a little intelligence can mitigate this foolish
astonishment. There are many living entities within the bed of the ocean
who also enjoy the material bodily activities of eating, sleeping, defending
and mating. If such insignificant living entities can enjoy life within the
water, why can’t the Supreme Lord, who is all-powerful, sleep on the
cool body of a serpent and enjoy in the turmoil of violent ocean waves?
The distinction of the Lord is that His activities are all transcendental, and
He is able to do anything and everything without being deterred by
limitations of time and space. He can enjoy His transcendental happiness
regardless of material considerations.
TEXT 21
अख्याणिपदथवगबाददयासयोट्य
= -
लोकत्रयोपकरणो यद ुग्रहेण |
तस्मै नमस्त उदरस्थमवाय योग-
निद्रावसानविकसन्नलिनेश्षणाय 12201
yan-nabhi-padma-bhavanad aham asam idya
loka-trayopakarano yad-anugrahena
tasmai namasta udarastha-bhavaya yoga-
nidravasana-vikasan-nalineksanaya
yat—whose; nabhi- navel; padma—lotus; bhavanat—from the house of;
aham—1; asam—became manifested; idya—O worshipable one; loka-traya—
three worlds; upakaranah—helping in the creation of; yat— whose; anugra-
hepa—by the mercy; tasmai—unto Him; namah—my obeisances; te—unto


--- Page 31 ---
Text 21] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 361

You; udarastha—situated within the abdomen; bhavaya—having the universe;

yoga-nidra-avasana—after the end of that transcendental sleep; vikasat—

blossoming; nalina-iksanaya—unto Him whose opening eyes are like lotuses.
TRANSLATION

O object of my worship, I am born from the house of Your lotus
navel for the purpose of creating the universe by Your mercy. All these
planets of the universe were stationed within Your transcendental
abdomen while You were enjoying sleep. Now, Your sleep having ended,
Your eyes are opened like a blossoming lotus in the morning.

PURPORT

Brahma is teaching us the beginning of arcana regulations from morning
(four o’clock) to night (ten o’clock). Early in the morning, the devotee
has to rise from his bed and pray to the Lord, and there are other
regulative principles for offering mangalaratrika early in the morning.
Foolish nondevotees, not understanding the importance of arcana,
criticize the regulative principles, but they have no eyes to see that the
Lord also sleeps, by His own will. The impersonal conception of the
Supreme is so detrimental to the path of devotional service that it is very
difficult to associate with the stubborn nondevotees, who always think in
terms of material conceptions.

Impersonalists always think backwards. They think that because there
is form in matter, therefore spirit should be formless; because in matter
there is sleep, therefore in spirit there cannot be sleep; and because the
sleeping of the Deity is accepted in arcana worship, therefore the arcana
is maya. All these thoughts are basically material. To think either positively
or negatively is still thinking materially. Knowledge accepted from the
superior source of the Vedas is standard. Here in these verses of the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, we find that arcana is recommended. Before Brahma
took up the task of creation, he found the Lord sleeping on the serpent
bed in the waves of the water of devastation. Therefore, sleeping exists in
the internal potency of the Lord, and this is not denied by pure devotees
of the Lord like Brahma and his disciplic succession. It is clearly said here
that the Lord slept very happily within the violent waves of the water,
manifesting thereby that He is able to do anything and everything by His
transcendental will and not be hampered by any circumstances. The
Mayavadi cannot think beyond this material experience, and thus he
denies the Lord’s ability to sleep within the water. His mistake is that he
compares the Lord to himself-and that comparison is also a material


--- Page 32 ---
362 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
thought. The whole philosophy of the Mayavada school, based on “not
this, not that” (neti, neti), is basically material. Such thought cannot give
one the chance to know the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is.
TEXT 22
सोऽयं समस्तजगतां सुहृदेक आत्मा
सत्वेन यन्मृडयते भगवान्‌ भगेन |
तेनैव मे टशमनुस्पशतायथाहं
wef पूव॑वदिदं प्रणतप्रियोऽसौ ॥२२॥
so “yar samasta-jagatar suhrd eka atma
sattvena yan mrdayate bhagavan bhagena
tenaiva me drsam anusprsatad yathaham
sraksyami purvavad ida pranata-priyo ‘sau
sah—He; ayam—the Lord; samasta-jagatam—of all the universes; suhrt
ekah—the one friend and philosopher; atma—the Supersoul; sattvena—by
the mode of goodness; yat—one who; mrdayate—causes happiness; bhaga-
van—the Personality of Godhead; bhagena—with six opulences; tena—by
Him; eva—certainly ; me—to me;drsam—power of introspection; anusprsatat
—let Him give; yatha—as; aham—1; sraksyami—will be able to create; piirva-
vat—as before; idam—this universe; pranata—surrendered; priyah—dear;
asau—He (the Lord).
TRANSLATION
Let the Supreme Lord be merciful towards me. He is the one friend and
soul of all living entities in the world, and He maintains all, for their
ultimate happiness, by His six transcendental opulences. May He be
merciful towards me so that I can, as before, be empowered with the
introspection to create, for I am also one of the surrendered souls who are
dear to the Lord.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, Purugottama or Sri Krsna, is the maintainer of
all, both in the transcendental and material worlds. He is the life and
friend of all because there is eternally natural affection and love between
the living entities and the Lord. He is the one friend and well-wisher for
all, and He is one without a second. The Lord maintains all the living
entities everywhere by His six transcendental opulences, for which He is


--- Page 33 ---
Text 231] Brahma's Prayers for Creative Energy 363
known as Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Brahma
prayed for His mercy so that he might be able to create the universal
affairs as he did before; only by the Lord’s causeless mercy could he create
both material and spiritual personalities like Marici and Narada respec-
tively. Brahma prayed to the Lord because He is very much dear to the
surrendered soul. The surrendered soul knows nothing but the Lord, and
therefore the Lord is very affectionate towards him.
TEXT 23
एष प्रपन्नवरदो रमयाऽऽत्मशचक्तया
यद्यत्करिष्यति गृहीतगुणावतारः |
afer खदिक्रमभिदं खजतोऽपि चेतो
युञ्जीत कमेशमलं च यथा विजद्याम्‌ 11:31
esa prapanna-varado ramaya’’tma-$aktya
yad yat karisyati grhita-gunavatarah
tasmin sva-vikramam idam srjato ‘pi ceto
yuiijita karma-$samalari ca yatha vijahyam
esah—this; prapanna—one who is surrendered; varadah—benefactor;
ramaya—enjoying always with the goddess of fortune (Laksmi); atma-
Saktya—with His internal potency; yat yat—whatever; karisyati— He may
act; grhita—accepting;sguna-avatarah—incarnation of the mode of good-
ness; tasmin—unto Him; sva-vikramam—with omnipotency; idam—this
cosmic manifestation; srjatah—creating; api—in spite of; cetah—heart;
yuiijita—be engaged; karma—work; samalam—material affection; ca—also;
yatha—as much as; vijahyam—1 can give up.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is always the benefactor
of the surrendered souls. His activities are always enacted through His
internal potency, Rama, or the goddess of fortune. I pray only to engage
in His service in the creation of the material world, and I pray that I not
be materially affected by my works, for thus I may be able to give up the
false prestige of being the creator.
PURPORT
In the matter of material creation, maintenance and destruction, there
are three incarnations of the material modes of nature—Brahma, Vignu and


--- Page 34 ---
364 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 3, Ch. 9
Mahesdvara. But the Lord’s incarnation as Visnu, in His internal potency, is
the supreme energy for the total activities. Brahma, who is only an
assistant in the modes of creation, wanted to remain in his actual position
as an instrument of the Lord instead of becoming puffed up by the false
prestige of thinking himself the creator. That is the way of becoming dear
to the Supreme Lord and receiving His benediction. Foolish men want to
take credit for all creations made by them, but intelligent persons know
very well that not a blade of grass can move without the will of the Lord;
thus all the credit for wonderful creations must go to Him. By spiritual
consciousness only can one be free from the contamination of material
affection and receive the benedictions offered by the Lord.
TEXT 24
LN 9.
नाभिहदादिह सतोऽम्भसि यस्य पुंसो
विज्ञानरक्तिरहमासमनन्तशक्तेः ।
-
रूपं विचित्रमिदमस्य fra मे
मा रीरिषीष्ट निगमस्य गिरां विसर्गः ॥२४॥
nabhi-hradad iha sato’mbhasi yasya pumso
vijitana-saktir aham asam ananta-sakteh
ruparh vicitram idam asya vivrnvato me
md ririsista nigamasya girarn visargah
nabhi-hradat—from the navel lake; iha—in this millennium; satah—lying;
ambhasi—in the walter; yasya—one whose; purisah—of the Personality
of Godhead; vijiigna—of the total universe; $aktih—energy; aham—
I; asam—was born; ananta—unlimited; sakteh—of the powerful;
rupam—form; vicitram—variegated; idam—this; asya—His; vivrpvatah—
manifesting; me—unto me; ma—may not; ririsista—vanish; nigamasya—of
the Vedas; giram—of the sounds; visargah—vibration.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s potencies are innumerable. As He lies down in the water of
devastation, I am born as the total universal energy from the navel lake in
which the lotus sprouts. I am now engaged in manifesting His diverse
energies in the form of the cosmic manifestation. I therefore pray that in
the course of my material activities I may not be deviated from the
vibration of the Vedic hymns.


--- Page 35 ---
Text 25] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 365
PURPORT
Every person engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord in
this material world is prone to so many material activities, and if one is
not strong enough to protect himself against the onslaught of material
affection, he may be diverted from the spiritual energy. In the material
creation Brahma has to create all kinds of living entities with bodies
suitable to their material conditions. Brahma wants to be protected by the
Lord because he has to contact many, many vicious living entities. An
ordinary brahmana can fall from the brahma-tejas, or the power of
brahminical excellence, due to his association with many fallen condi-
tioned souls. Brahma, as the supermost brahmana, is afraid of such a
falldown, and therefore he prays to the Lord for protection. This is a
warning for one and all in the spiritual advancement of life. Unless one is
sufficiently protected by the Lord, he may fall down from his spiritual
position; therefore one has to pray constantly to the Lord for protection
and the blessing to carry out one’s duty. Lord Caitanya also entrusted His
missionary work to His devotees and assured them of His protection
against the onslaught of material affection. The path of spiritual life is
stated in the Vedas to be like the edge of a sharpened razor. A little
inattentiveness may at once create havoc and bloodshed, but one who is a
completely surrendered soul, always seeking protection from the Lord in
the discharge of his entrusted duties, has no fear of falling into material
contamination.
TEXT 25
सोऽसावदभ्रकरुणो भगवान्‌ বিষ্বত্ত-
परमसितेन नयनाम्बुरुहं विज्‌म्मन्‌ |
उत्थाय विश्वविजयाय च नो विषादं
माध्न्या गिरापनयतारंपुरुषः पुराणः २५॥
so ‘sav adabhra-karuno bhagavan vivrddha-
prema-smitena nayanamburuham vijrmbhan
utthaya visvavijayaya ca no visadam
madhvya girapanayatat purusah puranah
sah—He (the Lord); eseu—that; adabhra—unlimited; karunah— merciful;

bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; vivrddha—excessive; prema—love;
smitena—by smiling; nayana-amburuham—the lotus eyes; vijrmbhan—by


--- Page 36 ---
366 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
opening; utthaya—for flourishing; visva-vijayaya—for glorifying the cosmic
creation; ca—as also; nah—our; visadam —dejection; madhvya— by sweet;
giri—words; apanayatat—let Him kindly remove; purusah—the Supreme;
puranah—oldest.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, who is supreme and is the oldest of all, is unlimitedly

merciful. 1 wish that He may smilingly bestow His benediction upon me
by opening His lotus eyes. He can uplift the entire cosmic creation and
remove our dejection by kindly speaking His directions.

PURPORT

The Lord is ever increasingly merciful upon the fallen souls of this

material world. The whole cosmic manifestation is a chance for all to
improve themselves in devotional service to the lord, and everyone is
meant for that purpose. The Lord expands Himself into many personalities
who are either Self-expansions or separated expansions. The personalities
of the individual souls are His separated expansions, whereas the Self-
expansions are the Lord Himself. The Self-expansions are predominators,
and the separated expansions are predominated for reciprocation of
transcendental bliss with the supreme form of bliss and knowledge. The
liberated souls can join in this blissful reciprocation of predominator and
predominated without materially concocted ideas. The typical example of
such a transcendental exchange between the predominator and the
predominated is the Lord’s rase-lila with the gopis. The gopis are
predominated expansions of internal potency, and therefore the Lord's
participation in the rasa-lila dance is never to be considered like the
mundane relationship of man and woman. It is, rather, the highest
perfectional stage of the exchange of feelings between the Lord and the
living entities. The Lord gives the fallen souls the chance for this highest
perfection of life. Lord Brahma is entrusted with the management of the
complete cosmic show, and therefore he prays that the Lord bestow His
blessings upon him so that he may execute its purpose.

TEXT 26

मैत्रेय उवाच

सखसम्मवं निशाम्यैवं तपोदियासमाविषिः |
यादन्पनोदचः स्तुत्वा विरराम स खिन्नवत्‌ ।।২৪।।


--- Page 37 ---
Texts 27-28] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 367
maitreya uvaca
sva-sambhavarn nisamyaivam
tapo-vidya-samadhibhih
yavan mano-vacah stutva
virarama sa khinnavat
maitreyah uvdca—the great sage Maitreya said; sva-sambhavam—the source
of his appearance; nis@mya—by seeing; evam—thus; tapah— penance;
vidya—knowledge; samadhibhih—as also by concentration of the mind;
yavat—as far as possible; manah—mind; vacah—words; stutva—by prayers;
virarama— became silent; sah—he (Brahma); khinnavat—as if tired.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya said: O Vidura, after observing the source of his
appearance, namely the Personality of Godhead, Brahma prayed for His
mercy as far as his mind and words would permit him. Thus praying, he
became silent, as if tired from his activities of penance, knowledge and
mental concentration.
PURPORT
Brahma’s enlightenment in knowledge was due to the Lord sitting
within his heart. After being created, Brahma could not ascertain the
source of his appearance, but after penance and mental concentration he
could see the source of his birth, and thus he became enlightened through
his heart. The spiritual master outside and the spiritual master within are
both representations of the Lord. Unless he has contact with such bona
fide representations, one cannot claim to be a spiritual master. Lord
Brahma had no opportunity to take the help of a spiritual master from
outside because at that time Brahma himself was the only creature in the
universe. Therefore, on becoming satisfied by the prayers of Brahma, the
Lord enlightened him about everything from within.
TEXTS 27-28
TRATED ब्रह्मणो AEE: |
दिषण्णवेतसं तेन॒ कत्यव्यतिङराग्पसा ॥२७॥
लोकसंस्यानविज्ञान आत्मनः परिखिदययतः |
। तमाहागाधया वाचा कर्मं शमयभिव ॥२८॥
athabhipretam anviksya
brahmano madhusiadanah


--- Page 38 ---
368 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 9
visanna-cetasarn tena
kalpa-vyatikarambhasa
loka-sammsthana-vijiiana
atmanah parikhidyatah
tam ahagadhaya vaca
kasmalam $amayann iva
atha— thereupon; abhipretam—intention; anviksya—observing; brah-
manah—of Brahma; madhusiidanah—the killer of the Madhu demon;
visapna—depressed; cetasam—of the heart; tena—by him; kalpa—millennium;
vyatikara-ambhasa—devastaling water; loka-sarsthana—situation of the
planetary system; vijiiane—science; atmanah—of himself; parikhidyatah—
sufficiently anxious; tam—unto him;aha—said; agadhaya—deeply thought-
ful; vaca—by words; kasmalam—impurities; samayan—removing; iva—like
that.
TRANSLATION
The Lord saw that Brahma was very anxious about the planning and
construction of the different planetary systems and was depressed upon
seeing the devastating water. He could understand the intention of Brahma,
and thus He spoke in deep thoughtful words, removing all the illusion that
had arisen.
PURPORT
The devastating water was so fearful that even Brahma was perturbed at
its appearance and became very anxious about how to situate the different
planetary systems in outer space to accommodate the different kinds of
living entities, such as the human beings, those lower than the human
beings, and the superhuman beings. All the planets in the universe are
situated according to the different grades of living entities under the
influence of the modes of material nature. There are three modes of
material nature, and when they are mixed with one another they become
nine. When the nine are mixed they become eighty-one, and the eighty-one
also become mixed, and thus ultimately we do not know how the delusion
increases and increases. Lord Brahma had to accommodate different places
and situations for the requisite bodies of the conditioned souls. The task
was only meant for Brahma, and no one in the universe can even understand
how difficult it was. But, by the grace of the Lord, Brahma was able to
execute the tremendous task so perfectly that everyone is amazed to see
the workmanship of the vidhata, or the regulator.


--- Page 39 ---
Text 29] Brahma'’s Prayers for Creative Energy 369
TEXT 29
श्रीभगवानुवाच
मा वेदगमे ae सगं उद्यममावह |
तन्मयाऽऽपादितं ग्र यन्मां সাধ্য मवान्‌ ॥२९॥
द bhagavan uvaca
ma veda-garbha gas tandrim
sarga udyamam avaha
tan maya’paditari hy agre
yan mam prarthayate bhavan
৪70 bhagavan uvaca—the Lord, the Personality of Godhead, said; ma—
don’t; veda-garbha—one who has the depth of all Vedic wisdom; gah
tandrim—become dejected; sarge—for creation; udyamam—enterprises;
avaha—you just undertake; tat—that (which you want); maya—by Me;
apaditam—executed; hi—certainly; agre—previously; yat—which; mam—
from Me; prarthayate—begging; bhavan—yourself.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead then said: O Brahma, O depth of
Vedic wisdom, be neither depressed nor anxious about the execution of
creation. What you are begging from Me has already been granted before.
PURPORT
Any person who is authorized either by the Lord or by His bona fide
representative is already blessed, as is the work entrusted to him. Of
course, the person who is entrusted with such a responsibility should
always be aware of his incapability and must always look for the mercy of
the Lord for the successful execution of his duty. One should not be
puffed up because he is entrusted with certain executive work. Fortunate
is he who is so entrusted, and if he is always fixed in the sense of being
subordinate to the will of the Supreme, he is sure to come out successful
in the discharge of his work. Arjuna was entrusted with the work of
fighting on the Battlefield of Kurukgetra, and before he was so entrusted,
the Lord had already arranged for his victory. But Arjuna was always
conscious of his position as subordinate to the Lord, and thus he accepted
Him as the supreme guide in his responsibility. Anyone who takes the
pride of doing responsible work and does not give credit to the Supreme
Lord is certainly falsely proud and cannot execute anything nicely. Brahma


--- Page 40 ---
370 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
and persons in the line of his disciplic succession who follow in his
footsteps are always successful in the discharge of loving transcendental
service to the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 30
भूयस्त्वं तप आतिष्ठ विदां चैव मदाश्रयाम्‌ |
त्राम्यामन्तहंदि ब्रह्मन्‌ लोकान्दरष्त्यस्यपाड़तान्‌ ॥२०॥
bhuyas 8৮৫7 tapa atistha
vidyarh caiva mad-asrayam
tabhyam antar-hrdi brahman
lokan draksyasy apavrtan
bhiiyah—again; tvam—yourself; tapahi—penance; datistha—be situated;
vidyam—in the knowledge; ca—also; eva—certainly; mat—My; asrayam—
under the protection; tabhyam—by those qualifications; antah—within;
hrdi—in the heart; brahman—O brahmana; lokan—all the worlds; draksyasi
—you can see; apavrtan—all disclosed.
TRANSLATION
O Brahma, situate yourself in penance and meditation and follow the
principles of knowledge to receive My favor. By these actions you will be
able to understand everything from within your heart.
PURPORT
The mercy the Lord bestows upon a particular person engaged in
executing the responsible work entrusted unto him is beyond imagination.
But His mercy is received due to our penance and perseverance in
executing devotional service. Brahma was entrusted with the work of
creating the planetary systems. The Lord instructed him that when he
meditated he would very easily know where and how the planetary
systems must be arranged. The directions were to come from within, and
there was no necessity for anxiety in that task. Such instructions of
buddhi-yoga are directly imparted by the Lord from within, as confirmed
in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 10.10).
TEXT 31
तत आत्मनि लोके च भक्तियुक्तः समादितः।
द्रष्टासि मां ततं ब्रह्मन्मयि लोकांस्त्वमात्मनः 12200


--- Page 41 ---
Text 32] Brahma'’s Prayers for Creative Energy 371
tata atmani loke ca
bhakti-yuktah samahitah
drastasi mam tatarn brahman
mayi (01८21725 tvam atmanah
tatah—thereafter; atmani—in yourself; loke—in the universe; ca—also;
bhakti-yuktah—being situated in devotional service; samahitah—being
completely absorbed; drastasi—you shall see; mam—Me; tatam—spread
throughout; brahman—Brahma; mayi—in Me; lokan—all the universe;
tvam—you; atmanah— the living entities.
TRANSLATION
0 Brahma, when you are absorbed in devotional service, in the course of
your creative activities, you will see Me in you and throughout the universe,
and you will see that you yourself, the universe and the living entities are
all in Me.
PURPORT
It is cited herein by the Lord that during his daytime Brahma would see
Him as Lord Sri Krsna. He would appreciate how the Lord expanded
Himself into all the calves during His childhood at Vyndavana, he would
know how Yasodamayi saw all the universes and planetary systems within
the mouth of Krsna during His playful childhood pastimes, and he would
also see that there are many millions of Brahmas during the appearance of
Lord Krsna in Brahma’s daytime. But all these manifestations of the Lord,
appearing everywhere in His eternal transcendental forms, cannot be under-
stood by anyone but the pure devotees, who are always engaged in
devotional service to the Lord and are fully absorbed in the Lord. The high
qualifications of Brahma are also indicated herein.
TEXT 32
यदा त॒ सवभूतेषु दारुष्वभ्निमिव स्थितम्‌ ।
प्रतिचक्षीत मां लोको FEET कस्मलम्‌ ॥३२॥
yada tu sarva-bhutesu
darusv agnim iva sthitam
praticaksita mam loko
jahyat tarhy eva kasmalam


--- Page 42 ---
372 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
yadd—when; tu—but; sarva—all; bhittesu—in the living entities; darusu—
in the wood; agnim—fire; iva—like; sthitam—situated; praticaksita—you
shall see; mam —Me; lokah—and the universe; jahyyat—can give up; tarhi—then
at once; eva—certainly; kasmalam—illusion.
TRANSLATION
You will see Me in all living entities as well as all over the universe, just
as fire is situated in wood. Only in that state of transcendental vision will
you be able to be free from all kinds of illusion.
PURPORT
Brahma prayed that he might not forget his eternal relationship with the
Lord during the course of his material activities. In answer to that prayer,
the Lord said that he should not think of existing without a relationship
with His omnipotency. The example is given of the fire in wood. The fire
kindled in wood is always the same, although the wood may be of different
types. Similarly the bodies within material creation may be specifically
different according to shape and quality, but the spirit souls within them
are not different from one another. The quality of fire, warmth, is the same
everywhere, and the spiritual spark, or part and parcel of the Supreme
Spirit, is the same in every living being; thus the potency of the Lord is
distributed all over His creation. This transcendental knowledge alone can
save one from the contamination of material illusion. Since the Lord’s
potency is distributed everywhere, a pure soul or devotee of the Lord
can see everything in relationship with the Lord, and therefore he has no
affection for the outer coverings. That pure spiritual conception makes
him immune to all contamination of material association. The pure devotee
never forgets the touch of the 1,010 in all circumstances.
TEXT 33
यदा रदितमात्मानं afer: ।
खरूपेण ATR TET खाराज्यृच्छति 1331
yada rahitam atmanarm
bhutendriya-gunasayaih
svariipena mayopetam
pasyan svarajyam rcchati


--- Page 43 ---
Text 33] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 373

yada—when; rahitam—freed from; atmanam—self; bhuta—material ele-
ments; indriya— material senses; guna-asayaih—under the influence of the
material modes of nature; svarupena—in pure existence; maya—by Me;
upetam—approaching; pasyan—by seeing; svarajyam—spiritual kingdom;
rcchati—enjoy.

TRANSLATION

When you are free from the conception of gross and subtle bodies and
when your senses are free from all influences of the modes of material
nature, you will realize your pure form in My association. At that time
you will be situated in pure consciousness.

PURPORT

In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is said that a person whose only desire
is to render transcendental loving service to the Lord is a free person in
any condition of material existence. That service attitude is the svarupa or
real form of the living entity. Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in the
Caitanya-caritamrta, also confirms this statement by declaring that the
real spiritual form of the living entity is eternal servitorship to the Supreme
Lord. The Mayavadi school shudders at the thought of a service attitude in
the living entity, not knowing that in the transcendental world the service
of the Lord is based on transcendental love. Transcendental loving service
is never to be compared to the forced service of the material world. In the
material world, even if one is under the conception that he is no one’s
servant, he is still the servant of his senses, under the dictation of the
material modes. Factually no one is master here in the material world, and
therefore the servants of the senses have a very bad experience of servitude.
They shudder at the thought of service because they have no knowledge of
the transcendental position. In transcendental loving service, the servitor
is as free as the Lord. The Lord is svarat, or fully independent, and the
servant is also fully independent or svarat in the spiritual atmosphere
because there is no forced service. There the transcendental loving service
is due to spontaneous love. A reflected glimpse of such service is expe-
rienced in the service of the mother unto the son, the friend’s service unto
the friend, or the wife’s service unto the husband. These reflections of
service by friends, parents or wives are not forced, but are due only to love.
Here in this material world, however, the loving service is only a reflection.
The real service, or service in svarupa, is present in the transcendental
world, in association with the Lord. The very same service in transcendental
love can be practiced here in devotion.


--- Page 44 ---
374 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9

This verse is also applicable to the jiiant school. The enlightened jiiani,
when free from all material contaminations, namely the gross and subtle
bodies together with the senses of the material modes of nature, is placed
in the Supreme and is thus liberated from material bondage. The jiants
and the devotees are actually in agreement up to the point of liberation
from material contamination. But whereas the jiianis remain pacified on
the platform of simple understanding, the devotees develop further spiri-
tual advancement in loving service. The devotees develop a spiritual
individuality in their spontaneous service attitude, which is enhanced on
and on, up to the point of madhurya-rasa, or transcendental loving service
reciprocated between the lover and the beloved.

TEXT 34
-
नानाकर्मवितानेन प्रजा बह्वीः सिसुक्षतः ।
नात्यारसीदत्यसिपिस्ते वर्पायान्मदजुरदः 13211
nana-karma-vitanena
praja bahvih sisrksatah
natmavasidaty asmirs te
varstyan mad-anugrahah

nana-karma—varieties of service; vitanena—by expansion of; prajah—
population; bahvih—innumerable; sisrksatah—desiring to increase; na—
never; atma—self; avasidati—will be bereaved; asmin—in the matter; te—of
you; varsiyan—always increasing; mat—My; anugrahah—causeless mercy.

TRANSLATION

Since you have desired to increase the population innumerably and
expand your varieties of service, you shall never be deprived in this matter
because My causeless mercy upon you will always increase for all time.

PURPORT

A pure devotee of the Lord, being cognizant of the facts of the particular
time, object and circumstances, always desires to expand the number of
devotees of the Lord in various ways. Such expansions of transcendental
service may appear to be material to the materialist, but factually they are
expansions of the causeless mercy of the Lord towards the devotee. Plans
for such activities may appear to be material activities, but they are dif-
ferent in potency, being engaged in the satisfaction of the transcendental
senses of the Supreme.


--- Page 45 ---
Text 36] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 375
TEXT 35
चऋषिमायं न बधाति पापीयांस्त्वां रजोगुणः।
= Lr ५. -
यन्मनो मयि निषेद्धं प्रजाः संसृजतोऽपि ते ॥२५५॥
rsim adyarh na badhnati
papiyams tvam rajo-gunah
yan mano mayi nirbaddhar
prajah samsrjato ‘pi te
rsim—unto the great sage; adyam—the first of the kind; na—never;
badhnati—encroaches; pdapiyan—vicious; tvam—you; rajah-gunah—the
material mode of passion; yat—because; manah—mind; mayi—in Me;
nirbaddham—compact in; prajah—progeny; samsrjatah—generating; api—
in spite of; te—your.
TRANSLATION
You are the original si, and because your mind is always fixed on Me,
even though you will be engaged in generating various progeny, the vicious
mode of passion will never encroach upon you.
PURPORT
The same assurance is given to Brahma in the Second Canto, Chapter
Nine, verse 36. Being so favored by the Lord, Brahma’s schemes and plans
are all infallible. If sometimes Brahma is seen to be bewildered, as, in the
Tenth Canto, he is bewildered by seeing the action of the internal potency,
that is also for his further advancement in transcendental service. Arjuna is
found to be similarly bewildered. All such bewilderment of the pure
devotees of the Lord is specifically meant for their further advancement in
knowledge of the Lord.
TEXT 36
ज्ञातोऽदं मवता त्वद्य दुर्विज्ञेयोऽपि देहिनाम्‌ |
यन्मां त्वं मन्यसेऽयुक्तं भूतेन्द्रियगुणात्ममिः॥२३६॥
172८० hari bhavata tv adya
dur-vijiieyo pi dehinam
yan mar tvarh manyase ’yuktarm
bhutendriya-gunatmabhih


--- Page 46 ---
376 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9

jaatah—known; aham —Myself; bhavata—by you; tu—but; adya—today;
duh— difficult; vijieyah—to be known; api—in spite of; dehinam—for the
conditioned soul; yat—because; mam—Me; tvam—you; manyase—under-
stand; ayuktam—without being made of; bhiita—material elements; indriya
—material senses; guna—material modes; atmabhih—and false ego like the

iti 1.

conditioned soul TRANSLATION

Although I am not easily knowable by the conditioned soul, you have
known Me today because you know that My personality is not constituted
of anything material, and specifically not of the five gross and three subtle
elements.

PURPORT

Knowledge of the Supreme Absolute Truth does not necessitate negation
of the material manifestation but understanding of spiritual existence as it
is. To think that because material existence is realized in forms spiritual
existence must therefore be formless is only a negative material concep-
tion of spirit. The real spiritual conception is that spiritual form is not
material form. Brahma appreciated the eternal form of the Lord in that
way, and the Personality of Godhead approved of Brahma’s spiritual
conception. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord condemned the material conception
of Krsna’s body which arises because He is apparently present like a man.
The Lord may appear in any of His many, many spiritual forms, but He is
neither materially composed nor has He any difference between body and
self. That is the way of conceiving the spiritual form of the Lord.

TEXT 37
[१ - Se
a मद्िनिकित्सायामात्मा मे दरिीतोऽवदहिः।
AR सिके मूलं पुष्करस्य विचिन्वतः ।२५॥
tubhyarih mad-vicikitsayam
atma me darsito ’bahih
nalena salile mulam
puskarasya vicinvatah

tubhyam—unto you; mat—Me; vicikitsadyam—on your trying to know;
atma—self; me—of Myself; darsitah—exhibited; abahih—from within; nalena
—through the stem; salile—in the water; milam—root; puskarasya—of the
lotus, the primeval source; vicinvatah —contemplating.


--- Page 47 ---
Text 38] Brahmas Prayers for Creative Energy 377
TRANSLATION

When you were contemplating whether there was a source to the stem
of the lotus of your birth and you even entered into that stem, you could
not trace out anything. But at that time I manifested My form from within.

PURPORT

The Personality of Godhead can be experienced only by His causeless
mercy, not by mental speculation nor with the help of the material senses.
Material senses cannot approach the transcendental understanding of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He can be appreciated only by submissive
devotional service when He reveals Himself before the devotee. Only by
love of Godhead can one know God, and not otherwise. The Personality of
Godhead cannot be seen with the material eyes, but He can be seen from
within by spiritual eyes opened by the ointment of love of Godhead. As
long as one’s spiritual eyes are closed due to the dirty covering of matter,
one cannot see the Lord. But when the dirt is removed by the process of
devotional service, one can see the Lord without a doubt. Brahma’s per-
sonal endeavor to see the root of the lotus pipe failed, but when the Lord
was satisfied by his penance and devotion, He revealed Himself from
within with no external endeavor.

TEXT 38
Noe
यच्चकर्थाङ्ग AA मत्कथाभ्युदयाङ्कितम्‌।
यद्वा तपसि ते निष्टा स एष मदनुग्रहः ॥३८॥
yac cakarthanga mat-stotrarn
mat-kathabhyudayankitam
yad va tapasi te nistha
sa esa mad-anugrahah

yat—that which; cakartha— performed; anga—O Brahma; mat-stotram—
prayers for Me; mat-katha—words regarding My activities; abhyudaya-
ankitam—enumerating My transcendental glories; yat—or that; va—either;
tapasi—in penance; te— your; nistha—faith; sah—that; esah—all these; mat—
My; anugrahah—causeless mercy.

TRANSLATION ;

O Brahma, the prayers that you have chanted praising the glories of My

transcendental activities, the penances you have undertaken to understand


--- Page 48 ---
378 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
Me, and your firm faith in Me—all these are to be considered My causeless
mercy.
PURPORT
When a living entity desires to serve the Lord in transcendental loving
service, the Lord helps the devotee in so many ways as the caitye-guru, or
the spiritual master within, and thus the devotee can perform many won-
derful activities beyond material estimation. By the mercy of the Lord
even a layman can compose prayers of the highest spiritual perfection.
Such spiritual perfection is not limited by material qualifications but is
developed by dint of one’s sincere endeavor to render transcendental
service. Voluntary endeavor is the only qualification for spiritual perfec-
tion. Material acquisitions of wealth or education are not considered.
TEXT 39
प्रीतोऽहमस्तु मद्रं ते लोकानां विजयेच्छया ।
> রী [I
यदस्तोषीगुंणमयं fas मायुबणेयन्‌ ॥३९॥
prito "ham astu bhadrarm te
lokanam vijayecchaya
yad astausir gunamayari
nirgunam manuvarnayan
pritah—pleased; aham—Myself; astu—let it be so; bhadram—all benedic-
tion;te—untoyou;lokanam—of the planets; vijaya—for glorification; icchaya
—by your desire; yat—that which; astausih—you prayed for; gunamayam—
describing all transcendental qualities; nirgupam—although I am free from
all material qualities; ma—Me; anuvarnayan—nicely describing.
TRANSLATION
I am very much pleased by your description of Me in terms of My
transcendental qualities, which appear mundane to the mundaners. I grant
you all benedictions in your desire to glorify all the planets by your
activities.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord like Brahma and those in his line of disciplic
succession always desire that the Lord be known all over the universe by
each and every one of the living entities. That desire of the devotee is
always blessed by the Lord. The impersonalist sometimes prays for the


--- Page 49 ---
Text 41] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 379
mercy of the Personality of Godhead Narayana as the embodiment of
material goodness, but such prayers do not satisfy the Lord because He is
not thereby glorified in terms of His actual transcendental qualities. The
pure devotees of the Lord are always most dear to Him, although He is
always kind and merciful to all living entities. Here the word gunamayam
is significant because it indicates the Lord’s possessing transcendental
qualities. |
TEXT 40
पि ry = ¥ 4
य एतेन पुमान्नित्यं स्तुत्वा स्तोत्रेण मां भजेत्‌ |
. ९ ¥
तस्याञ्च सम्प्रसीदेयं सवकामवरेश्वरः ॥४०॥
ya etena puman nityam
stutva stotrena mar bhajet
tasyasu samprasideyarn
sarva-kama-varesvarah
yah—anyone who; etena—by this; puman—human being; nityam—regu-
larly; stutvdi—praying; stotrena—by the verses; mam—Me; bhajet—may
worship; tasya—his; asu—very soon; samprasideyam—1 shall fulfill; sarva—
all; kama—desires; vara-isvarah— the Lord of all benediction.
TRANSLATION
Any human being who prays like Brahma, and who thus worships Me,
shall very soon be benedicted with the fulfillment of all his desires, for I am
the Lord of all benediction.
PURPORT
The prayers offered by Brahma cannot be chanted by anyone who
desires to fulfill his own sense gratification. Such prayérs can be selected
only by a person who wants to satisfy the Lord in His service. The Lord
certainly fulfills all desires in regards to transcendental loving service, but
He cannot, however, fulfill the whims of nondevotees, even when such
casual devetees offer Him the best prayers.
TEXT 41
पूर्तेन तपसा यज्ैदर्निर्योगसमाधिना |
राद्धं निःश्रेयसं पुंसां मटप्रीतिस्तत्वविन्मतम्‌ ॥४१॥


--- Page 50 ---
380 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
purtena tapasa yajiair
danair yoga-samadhina
raddham nihsreyasarn [01817852113
mat-pritis tattvavin-matam
purtena—by traditional good work; tapasa—by penances; yajiiaih—by
sacrifices; danaih—by charities; yoga —by mysticism; samadhina—by
trance; raddham—success; nih$reyasam—ultimately beneficial; purmsam— of
the human being; mat—of Me; pritih—satisfaction; tattvavit—expert
transcendentalist; matam— opinion.
TRANSLATION
It is the opinion of expert transcendentalists that the ultimate goal of
performing all traditional good works, penances, sacrifices, charities,
mystic activities, trances, etc., is to invoke My satisfaction.
PURPORT
There are many traditionally pious activities in human society, such as
altruism, philanthropy, nationalism, internationalism, charity, sacrifice,
penance, and even meditation in trance, and all of them can be fully bene-
ficial only when they lead to the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The perfection of any activity—social, political, religious or
philanthropic—is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. This secret of success is
known to the devotee of the Lord, as exemplified by Arjuna on the
Battlefield of Kuruksetra. As a good nonviolent man, Arjuna did not want
to fight with his kinsmen, but when he understood that Krsna wanted the
fight and had arranged it at Kurukgetra, he gave up his own satisfaction
and fought for the satisfaction of the Lord. That is the right decision for
all intelligent men. One’s only concern should be to satisfy the Lord by
one’s activities. If the Lord is satisfied by an action, whatever it may be,
then it is successful. Otherwise, it is simply a waste of time. That is the
standard of all sacrifice, penance, austerity, mystic trance and other good
and pious work.
TEXT 42
अहमात्माऽऽत्मनां धातः रेष्ठ सन्‌ ITAA |
১
अतो मथि रतिं Faas प्रियः ॥४२॥


--- Page 51 ---
Text 42] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 381
aham atma’’tmanam dhatah
presthah san preyasam api
ato mayi ratim kuryad
dehadir yat-krte priyah

aham—1 am; atma—Supersoul; atmanam—of all other souls; dhatah—
director; presthah—the dearest; san—being; preyasam—of all dear things;
api—certainly ;atah— therefore; mayi—unto Me;ratim—attachment; kuryat—
one should do; deha-adih—the body and mind; yat-krte—on whose account;
priyah—very dear.

TRANSLATION

1 am the Supersoul of every individual, the supreme director and the
dearest. People are wrongly attached to the gross and subtle bodies, but
they should be attached to Me only.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is the dearest both in
the conditioned and liberated states. When a person does not know that
the Lord only is the dearmost object, then he is in the conditioned state of
life, and when one knows perfectly well that the Lord only is the dearmost
object, he is considered to be liberated. There are degrees of knowing one’s
relationship with the Lord, depending on the degree of realization as to
why the Supreme Lord is the dearmost object of every living being. The
real reason is clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 15.7). Mamaivariso jiva-
loke jiva-bhutah sanatanah: the living entities are eternally parts and par-
cels of the Supreme Lord. The living entity is called the atmd, and the Lord
is called the Paramatma. The living entity is called Brahman, and the Lord
is called the Parabrahman or the Paramesvara. Isvarah paramah krsnah.
The conditioned souls who do not have self-realization accept the material
body as the dearmost. The idea of the dearmost is then spread all over the
body, both concentrated and extended. The attachment for one’s own body
and its extensions like children and relatives is actually developed on the
basis of the real living entity. As soon as the real living entity is out of the
body, even the body of the most dear son is no longer attractive. Therefore
the living spark or eternal part of the Supreme is the real basis of affection,
and not the body. Because the living entities are also parts of the whole
living entity, therefore that supreme living entity is the factual basis of
affection for all. One who has forgotten the basic principle of his love for
everything has only flickering love because he is in maya. The more one is


--- Page 52 ---
382 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
affected by the principle of maya, the more he is detached from the basic
principle of love. One cannot factually love anything unless he is fully
developed in the loving service of the Lord.

In the present verse, stress is given to focusing love upon the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The word kuryat is significant here. This means
“one must have it.” It 15 just to stress that we must have more and more
attachment to the principle of love. The influence of maya is experienced
by the part and parcel spiritual entity, but it cannot influence the Super-
soul or the Paramatma. The Mayavadi philosophers, accepting the influence
of maya on the living entity, want to become one with the Paramatma.
But because they have no actual love for Paramatma, they remain ever
entrapped by the influence of maya and are unable to approach the
vicinity of Paramatma. This inability is due to their lack of affection for the
Paramatma. A rich miser does not know how to utilize his wealth, and
therefore, in spite of his being very rich, his miserly behavior keeps him
everlastingly a poor man. On the other hand, a person who knows how to
utilize wealth can quickly become a rich man, even with a small credit
balance.

The eyes and the sun are very intimately related because without sun-
light the eyes are unable to see. But the other parts of the body, being
attached to the sun as a source of warmth, take more advantage of the sun
than do the eyes. Without possessing affection for the sun, the eyes cannot
bear the rays of the sun; or, in other words, such eyes have no capacity to
understand the utility of the sun’s rays. Similarly, the empiric philosophers,
despite their theoretical knowledge of Brahman, cannot utilize the mercy
of the Supreme Brahman only for want of affection. So many impersonal
philosophers remain everlastingly under the influence of maya because,
although they indulge in theoretical knowledge of Brahman, they neither
develop affection for Brahman nor do they have any scope for development
of affection because of their defective method. A devotee of the sun-god,
even though devoid of eyesight, can see the sun-god as he is even from this
planet, whereas one who is not a devotee of the sun cannot even bear the .
glaring sunlight. Similarly, by devotional service, even though one is not on
the level of a jiani, he can see the Personality of Godhead within himself
due to his development of pure love. In all circumstances one should try to
develop love of Godhead, and that will solve all contending problems.

TEXT 43
सर्ववेदमयेनेदमात्मनाऽऽत्माऽऽत्मयोनिना |
प्रनाः सृज TAME याश्च मय्यजुशोरते ॥৬২॥


--- Page 53 ---
Text 44] Brahma’s Prayers for Creative Energy 383
sarva-veda-mayenedam
atmana’’tma’’tma-yonina
prajah srja yatha-purvam
yas ca mayy anuserate
sarva—all; veda-mayena—under complete Vedic wisdom; idam— this;
atmana—by the body ;atma— you;atma-yonina— directly born of the Lord;
prajah—living entities; srja—generate; yatha-piurvam— as it was hereinbefore;
yah—which; ca—also; mayi—in Me; anuserate—lie.
TRANSLATION
By following My instructions you can now generate the living entities as
before, by dint of your complete Vedic wisdom and the body that you
have directly received from Me, the supreme cause of everything.
TEXT 44
AN
HAG उवाच
तखा एवं REE प्रधानपुरुषेश्वरः |
=
व्यज्येदं स्वेन रूपेण कञ्नामस्तिरोदघे ।७४॥
maitreya uvaca
tasma evar jagat-srastre
pradhana-purusesvarah
vyajyedam svena rupena
kaiija-nabhas tirodadhe
maitreyah uvaca—the sage Maitreya said; tasmai—unto him; evam—thus;
Jagat-srastre—unto the creator of the universe; pradhana-purusae-isvarah—
the primeval Lord, the Personality of Godhead; vyajya idam—after in-
structing this; svena—in His person; ripena—by the form; kaiija-nabhah—
the Personality of Godhead Narayana; tirodadhe—disappeared.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya said: After instructing Brahma, the creator of the
universe, to expand, the primeval Lord, the Personality of Godhead in His
personal form as Narayana, disappeared.
PURPORT
Before his activity in creating the universe, Brahma saw the Lord. That
is the explanation of the Catuh-sloki Bhagavatam. When the creation


--- Page 54 ---
384 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 9
awaited Brahma’s activity, Brahma saw the Lord, and therefore the Lord
existed in His personal form before the creation. His eternal form is not
created by the attempt of Brahma, as imagined by less intelligent men.
The Personality of Godhead appeared as lle is before Brahma, and He
disappeared from him in the same form, which is not materially tinged.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Ninth Chapter,
of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘Brahma’ Prayers for Creative Energy.”


--- Page 55 ---
CHAPTER TEN
Divisions of the Creation
TEXT 1
विदुर उवाच
अन्तर्हिते भृगवति ब्रह्मा लोकपितामहः |
भ्रनाः ससजं कतिधा RMA: ॥ १ ॥
vidura uvaca
antarhite bhagavati
brahma loka-pita-mahah
prajah sasarja katidha
daihikir manasir vibhuh
< vidurah uvaca—Sri Vidura said; antarhite—after the disappearance;
bhagavati— of the Personality of Godhead; brahma— the first created living
being: loka-pita-mahah—the grandfather of all planetary inhabitants:
prajah—generations; sasarja— created; katidhah—how many; daihikih—from
his body; manasth— from his mind; vibhuh—the great.
TRANSLATION
Sri Vidura said: 0 great sage, please let me know how Brahma, the
grandfather of the planetary inhabitants, created the bodies of the living
entities from his own body and mind after the disappearance of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 2
ये च मे भगवन्‌ पृष्टस्त्वय्यर्था hi
১০ J ৬
तान्‌ बदसखाुपू््यं ण छिन्धि नः सवेसंशयान्‌ IRN
385


--- Page 56 ---
386 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 10
ye ca me bhagavan prstas
tvayy artha bahuvittama
tan vadasvanupiirvyena
chindhi nah sarva-samsayan
ye—all those; ca—also; me—by me; bhagavan—O powerful one; prstah—
inquired; tvayi—unto you;arthah— purpose; bahuvittama— O greatly learned
one; tan—all of them;vadasva—kindly describe; anupiirvyena—from begin-
ning to end; chindhi—kindly eradicate; nah—my; sarva—all; sarmsayan—
doubts.
TRANSLATION
0 greatly learned one, kindly eradicate all my doubts and let me know
of all that I have inquired from you from the beginning to the end.
PURPORT
Vidura asked all relevant questions of Maitreya because he knew well
that Maitreya was the right person to reply to all the points of his
inquiries. One must be confident about the qualifications of his teacher;
one should not approach a layman for replies to specific spiritual inquiries.
Such inquiries, when replied to with imaginative answers by the teacher,
are a program for wasting time.
TEXT 3
सूत उवाच
५ =
एवं सश्वोदितस्तेन gen कौषारविधैनिः |
न= (
प्रीतः प्रत्याह तान्‌ FA] हृदि खानथ भागव ॥२॥
5000 uvaca
evam saiicoditas tena
ksattra kausaravir munih
pritah pratyaha tan prasnan
hrdi-sthan atha bhargava
नं 5001) uvaca—Sri Sita Gosvami said; evam— thus; saiicodilaft—being
enlivened; tena—by him; ksattra—by Vidura; kausaravih—the son of
Kausara; munih—great sage; pritah—being pleased; pratyaha—replied;
tan—those; prasnan—questions; /irdi-sthan—from the core of his heart:
atha— thus; bhargava— the son of Bhrgu.


--- Page 57 ---
Text 4] Divisions of the Creation 387
TRANSLATION
Suta Gosvami said: O son of Bhrgu, the great sage Maitreya Muni, thus
hearing from Vidura, felt very much enlivened. Everything was in his
heart, and thus he began to reply to the questions one after another.
PURPORT
The phrase sitah uvaca (“Sita Gosvami said”) appears to indicate a
break in the discourse between Maharaja Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami.
While Sukadeva Gosvami was speaking to Maharaja Pariksit, Sita Gosvami
was only one member of a large audience. But Sita Gosvami was speaking
to the sages of Naimisaranya, headed by the sage Saunaka, a descendant
of Sukadeva Gosvami. This does not, however, make any substantial
difference in the topics under discussion.
TEXT 4
As
मज्रय उवाच
- - . 9 >
विरिश्वोऽपि तथा चक्रे दिव्यं वर्षशतं तपः ।
आत्मन्यात्मानमावेस्य यथाह भगवानजः | ४ ॥
mailreya uvaca
virifico ‘pi tatha cakre
divyvam varsa-satari tapah
atmany atmanam avesya
yathaha bhagavan ajah
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya said: virificali— Brahma; api—
also; tatha—in that manner; cakre—performed; divyam—celestial; varsa-
Salam—one¢ hundred years; lapah— penances; dalmani—unto the Lord;
atmanam—his own self; avesya—engaging; yatha aha—as it was spoken;
bhagavan— the Personality of Godhead; ajah—the unborn.
TRANSLATION
The greatly learned sage Maitreya said: O Vidura, Brahma thus engaged
himself in penances for one hundred celestial years, as advised by the
Personality of Godhead, and applied himself in devotional service to the
Lord.
PURPORT
That Brahma engaged himself for the Personality of Godhead, Narayana,
means that he engaged himself in the service of the Lord; that is the


--- Page 58 ---
388 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 3, Ch. 10
highest penance which one can perform for any number of years. There is
no retirement from such service, which is eternal and ever encouraging.
TEXT 5
९
तद्विलोक्यान्नसम्भूतो वायुना यदधिष्ठितः |
= -~
पद्ममम्भश्च तत्कालकृतवीर्येण कम्पितम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥
tad vilok yabjasambhiito
vayuna yad-adhisthitah
padmam ambhas ca tat-kala-
krta-viryena kampitam
tat vilokya—looking into that;abja-sambhiitah—whose source of birth was
a lotus; vayuna—by the air; yat—that;adhisthitah—on which he was situated;
padmam—lotus;ambhah—water; ca—also; tat-kala-krta—which was effected
by eternal time; viryena—by its inherent force; kampitam—trembling.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter Brahma saw that both the lotus on which he was situated
and the water on which the lotus was growing were trembling due to a
strong, violent wind.
PURPORT
The material world is called illusory because itis a place of forgetfulness
of the transcendental service of the Lord. Thus one engaged in the Lord’s
devotional service in the material world may sometimes be very much
disturbed by awkward circumstances. There is a declaration of war between
the two parties, the illusory energy and the devotee, and sometimes the
weak devotees fall victim to the onslaught of the powerful illusory energy.
Lord Brahma, however, was sufficiently strong, by the causeless mercy of
the Lord, and he could not be victimized by the material energy, although
it gave him cause for anxiety when it managed to totter the existence of
his position.
TEXT 6
=
तपसा ह्येधमानेन विद्या चात्मसंस्थया |
विच्रद्धविज्ञानबलो न्यपाद्‌ वायुं सहाम्भसा ॥ & ॥


--- Page 59 ---
Text 7] Divisions of the Creation 389
tapasa hy edhamanena
vidyaya catma-samsthaya
vivrddha-vijiana-balo
nyapad vayum sahambhasa
tapasa—by penance; hi—certainly; edhamanena—increasing; vidyaya—
by transcendental Knowledge; ca—also; atma—self; sarmsthaya—situated in
the self; vivrddha— matured; vijiana—practical knowledge; bala)i—power;
nyapat— drank; vayum—the wind; sasha ambhasa—along with the water.
TRANSLATION
Long penance and transcendental knowledge of self-realization matured
Brahma in practical knowledge, and thus he drank the wind completely,
along with the water.
PURPORT
Lord Brahma’s struggle for existence is a personal example of the
continued fight between the living entities in the material world and the
illusory energy called maya. Beginning from Brahma down to this age,
the living entitics are struggling with the forces of material nature. By
advanced knowledge in science and transcendental realization, one can try
to control the material energy, which works against our endeavors, and in
the modern age advanced material scientific knowledge and penance have
played very wonderful roles in controlling the powers of the material
energy. Such control of the material energy, however, can be most
successfully carried out if one is a soul surrendered unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and carries out His order in the spirit of loving
transcendental service.
TEXT 7
- +
तद्विलोक्य वियदल्यापि पुष्करं यदधिष्ठितम्‌ |
=
अनेन लोकान्‌ प्राग्लीनान्‌ कल्पितासीत्यचिन्तयत्‌ 119 ॥
tad vilokya viyadvyapi
puskararh yad-adhisthitam
anena lokan praglinan
kalpitasmity acintayat
tat vilokya—looking into that; viyadvyapi—extensively widespread;
puskaram—the lotus; yat—that which;adhisthitam—he was situated;anena—


--- Page 60 ---
390 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 10
by this; lokan—all the planets; praiic-linan—previously merged in dissolution;
kalpitasmi—1 shall create; iti— thus; acintayat—thought like that.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter he saw that the lotus on which he was situated was spread
throughout the universe, and he contemplated how to create all the
planets, which were previously merged in that very same lotus.
PURPORT
The seeds of all the planets in the universe were impregnated in the lotus
on which Brahma was situated. All the planets were already generated by
the Lord, and all the living entities were also born in Brahma. The material
world and the living entities were all already generated in seedling forms
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Brahma was to disseminate
the same seedlings all over the universe. The real creation is therefore
called sarga, and, later on, the manifestation by Brahma is called visarga.
TEXT 8
. [3
पद्मकोशं तदाऽऽविश्य भगवत्कमंचोदितः |
एकं न्यभाट्ीदुरुधा त्रिधा माव्यं द्विसप्तधा ॥ ८ ॥
padma-kosarh tadavisya
bhagavat-karma-coditah
ekarn vyabhanksid urudha
tridha bhavyarh dvi-saptadha
padma-kosam—the whorl of the lotus; tada—then; avi§ya—entering into;
bhagavat—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; karma—in activities;
coditah—being encouraged by; ekam—one; vyabhaiksit—divided into;
urudha—great division; tridhd—three divisions; bhavyam— capable of further
creation; dvi-sap tadha—fourtcen divisions.
TRANSLATION
Thus engaged in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Lord Brahma entered into the whorl of the lotus, and as it spread all over
the universe he divided it into three divisions of worlds and later into
fourteen divisions.


--- Page 61 ---
Text 9] Divisions of the Creation 391
TEXT 9
एतावा्रीकलोकस्य संस्ाभेदः समाहृतः |
धर्मस ह्यनिमित्तस्य विपाकः परमेष्ठयसौ ॥ ९॥
etavan jiva-lokasya
sarnstha-bhedah samahrtah
dharmasyd’hy animittasya
vipakah paramesthy asau

etavan—up to this; jiva-lokasya— of the planets inhabited by the living en-
tities; samstha-bhedah—different situations of habitation; samahrtah—per-
formed completely; dharmasya—of religion; hi—certainly; animittasya— of
causelessness; vipakah—mature stage; paramegthi—the highest personality
in the universe; asau—that.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma is the most exalted personality in the universe because of
his causeless devotional service unto the Lord in mature transcendental
knowledge. He therefore created all the fourteen planetary divisions for
inhabitation by the different types of living entities.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord is the reservoir of all the qualities of the living
entities. The conditioned souls in the material world reflect only part of
those qualities, and therefore they are sometimes called pratibimbas.
These pratibimba living entities, as parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord,
have inherited different proportions of His original qualities, and in terms
of their inheritance of these qualities, they appear as different species of
life and are accommodated in different planets according to the plan of
Brahma. Brahma is the creator of the three worlds, namely the lower
planets, called the Patalalokas, the middle planets, called the Bhirlokas,
and the upper planets, called the Svarlokas. Still higher planets, such as
Maharloka, Tapoloka, Satyaloka and Brahmaloka, do not dissolve in the
devastating water because of the causeless devotional service rendered unto
the Lord by their inhabitants, whose existence continues up to the end of
dvi-pardrdha time, when they are generally liberated from the chain of
birth and death in the material world.


--- Page 62 ---
392 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 10
TEXT 10
विदुर उवाच
यथात्थ बहुरूपस्य हरेरद्भुतकर्मणः |
कालाख्यं रक्षणं AGL यथा वर्णय नः प्रभो ॥१०॥
vidura uvaca
yathattha bahu-rupasya
harer adbhuta-karmanah
kalakhyarm [01050 [10178 brahman
yatha varnaya nah prabho
vidurah uvdca— Vidura said; yatha—as; attha—you have said; bahu-
riapasya—having varieties of forms; hareh—of the Lord; adbhute—wonder-
ful; karmanah—of the actor; kala—time; akhyam—of the name; laksanam—
symptoms; brahman—O learned brahmana; yatha—as it is; varnaya— please
describe; nah—unto us; prabho—O lord.
TRANSLATION
Vidura inquired from Maitreya: O my lord, O greatly learned sage,
kindly describe eternal time, which is another form of the Supreme Lord,
the wonderful actor. What are the symptoms of that eternal time? Please
describe them to us in detail.
PURPORT
The complete universe is a manifestation of varieties of entities, begin-
ning from the atoms up to the gigantic universe itself, and all is under
the control of the Supreme Lord in His form of kdla, or eternal time. The
controlling time has different dimensions in relation to particular physical
embodiments. There is a time for atomic dissolution and a time for the
universal dissolution. There is a time for the annihilation of the body of
the human being, and there is a time for the annihilation of the universal
body. Also, growth, development and resultant actions all depend on the
time factor. Vidura wanted to know in detail the different physical
manifestations and their times of annihilation.
TEXT 11
SN
HAI ITF
गुणव्यतिकराकारो निर्वञेषोऽप्रतिष्ठितः ।
पुरुषस्तदुपादानमारमानं लीख्याखजत्‌ ॥११॥


--- Page 63 ---
Text 11] Divisions of the Creation 393
maitreya uvaca
guna-vyatikarakaro
nirviseso 'pratisthitah
purusas tad-upadanam
atmanam lilayasrjat

maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya said; guna-vyatikara—of the interactions of
the modes of material nature; akarah— source; nirvisesah— without diversity;
apratisthitah—unlimited; purusah—of the Supreme Person; tat—that;
upadanam—instrument; @atmanam—the material creation; lilaya—by pas-
times; aspjat—created.

TRANSLATION

Maitreya said: Eternal time is the primeval source of the interactions of
the three modes of material nature. It is unchangeable and limitless, and it
works as the instrument of the Supreme Personality of Godhead for His
pastimes in the material creation.

PURPORT

The impersonal time factor is the background of the material manifes-
tation as the instrument of the Supreme Lord. It is the ingredient of
assistance offered to material nature. No one knows where time began
and where it ends, and it is time only which can keep a record of the
creation, maintenance and destruction of the material manifestation. This
time factor is the material cause of creation and is therefore a Self-
expansion of the Personality of Godhead. Time is considered the
impersonal feature of the Lord.

The time factor is also explained by modern men in various ways. Some
accepl it almost as it is explained in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. For example,
in Hebrew literature time is accepted, in the same spirit, as a representation
of God. It is stated therein: “God, who at sundry times and in divers
manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets. . .”
Metaphysically, time is distinguished as absolute and real. Absolute time is
continuous and is unaffected by the speed or slowness of material things.
Time is astronomically and mathematically calculated in relation to the
speed, change and life of a particular object. Factually, however, time has
nothing to do with the relativities of things, but rather every thingis shaped
and calculated in terms of the facility offered by time. Time is the basic
measurement of the activity of our senses, by which we calculate past,
present and future; but in factual calculation, time has no beginning and
no end. Pandit Canakya says that even a slight fraction of time cannot be


--- Page 64 ---
394 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 10
purchased with millions of dollars, and therefore even a moment of time
lost without profit must be calculated as the greatest loss in life. Time is
not subject to any form of psychology, nor are the moments objective
realities in themselves, but they are dependent on particular experiences.

Therefore, Srila Jiva Gosvami concludes that the time factor is inter-
mixed with the activities—actions and reactions—of the external energy of
the Lord. The external energy or material nature works under the superin-
tendence of the time factor as the Lord Himself, and that is why material
nature appears to have produced so many wonderful things in the cosmic
manifestation. Bhagavad-gita confirms this conclusion as follows (Bg. 9.10):
mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram hetunanena kaunteya jagad
viparivartate.

TEXT 12
बिं वै ह्मतन्मात्रं संस्थितं विष्णुमायया ।
ईश्वरेण परिच्छिन्नं काठेनाव्यक्तमूतिना ॥१२॥
visvam vai brahma-tan-matram
samsthitam vispu-mayaya
14000176180 paricchinnam
kalenavyakta-mirtina

visvtam—the material phenomenon; vai—certainly ; brahma—the Supreme;
lat-matram—the same as; samsthitam—situated; visnu-mayaya—by the
energy of Visnu; iSvarena—by the Personality of Godhead; paricchinnam—
separated; kalena—by the eternal time; avyakta—unmanifested; murtina—
by such a feature.

TRANSLATION

This cosmic manifestation is separated from the Supreme Jord as
material energy by means of kala, which is the unmanifested impersonal
feature of the Lord. It is situated as the objective manifestation of the
Lord under the influence of the same material energy of Visnu.

PURPORT

Asstated previously by Narada before Vyasadeva (Bhag. 1.5.20), idam hi
visvarn bhagavan ivetarah: this unmanifested world is the selfsame Person-
ality of Godhead, but it appears to be something else beyond or besides
the Lord. It appears so because of its being separated from the Lord by
means of kala. [1 is something like the tape recorded voice of a person who


--- Page 65 ---
Text 14] Divisions of the Creation 395
is now separated from the voice. As the tape recording is situated on the
tape, so the whole cosmic manifestation is situated on the material energy
and appears separate by means of kala. The material manifestation is
therefore the objective manifestation of the Supreme Lord and exhibits
His impersonal feature so much adored by impersonalist philosophers.
TEXT 13
-
यथेदानीं तथाग्रे च पश्वादप्येतदीदशम्‌ ॥१३॥
yathedanim tathagre ca
pascad apy etad tdrsam
yatha—as it is; idanim—at present; tatha—so it was; agre—in the begin-
ning; ca—and; pascat—at the end; api—also; etat idrsam—it continues to be
the same.
TRANSLATION
This cosmic manifestation is as it is now, it was the same in the past, and
it will continue in the same way in the future.
PURPORT
There is a systematic schedule for the perpetual manifestation, mainte-
nance and annihilation of the material world, as stated in Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 9.8): bhuta-gramam imam krtsnam avasari prakrter vasat. As il is
created now and as it will be destroyed later on, so also it existed in the
past and again will be created, maintained and destroyed in due course of
time. Therefore, the systematic activities of the time factor are perpetual
and eternal and cannot be stated to be false. The manifestation is
temporary and occasional, but it is not false as claimed by the Mayavadi
philosophers.
TEXT 14
[এ = A
सर्गो नवविधस्तस्य प्राकृतो asa यः।
-_ os Cl
कालद्रन्यगुणेरस्य त्रिविधः प्रतिसंक्रमः ॥१४॥
sargo navavidhas tasya
prakrto vaikrtas tu yah


--- Page 66 ---
396 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 10
kala-dravya-gunair asya
trividhah pratisankramah
sargah—creation; navavidhah—of nine different kinds; tasya—its;
prakrtah—material; vaikrtah—by the modes of material nature; tu—but;
yah—that which; kala—eternal time; dravya—matter; gupath— qualities;
asya—its; trividhah —three kinds; pratisankramah—annihilation.
TRANSLATION
There are nine different kinds of creations besides the one which
naturally occurs due to the interactions of the modes. There are three
kinds of annihilations due to eternal time, the material elements and the
quality of one’s work.
PURPORT
The scheduled creations and annihilations take place in terms of the
supreme will. There are other creations due to interactions of material
elements which take place by the intelligence of Brahma. Later these will
be more explicitly explained. AL present, only preliminary information is
given. The three kinds of annihilations are: (1) due to the scheduled time of
annihilation of the entire universe, (2) due to a fire which emanates from
the mouth of Ananta, and (3) due to one’s qualitative actions and reactions.
TEXT 15
EN
आद्यस्तु महतः सर्गो गुणवंषम्यमात्मनः |
= = -
दहितीयस्त्वहमो यत्र द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियोदयः॥ ५५॥
adyas tu mahatah sargo
guna-vaisamyam atmanah
dvitiyas tv ahamo yatra
dravya-jiiana-kriy odayah
adyah—the first; tu—but; mahatah—of the total emanation from the
Lord; sargah— creation; guna-vaisamyam—interaction of the material modes;
atmanah—of the Supreme; dvitiyah—the second; tu—but; ahamah—false
ego; yatra—wherein; dravya—malterial ingredients; jiana —material knowl-
edge; kriyd-udayah—awakening of activities (work).
TRANSLATION
Of the nine creations, the first one is the creation of the mahat-tattva,
or the sum total of the material ingredients, wherein the modes interact


--- Page 67 ---
Text 17] Divisions of the Creation 397
due to the presence of the Supreme Lord. In the second, the false ego is
generated in which the material ingredients, material knowledge and
material activities arise.
PURPORT
The first emanation from the Supreme Lord for material creation is
called mahat-tattva. The interaction of the material modes is the cause of
false identification or the sense that a living being is made of material
elements. This false ego is the cause of identifying the body and mind with
the soul proper. Material resources and the capacity and knowledge to work
are all generated in the second term of creation, after the mahat-tattva.
Jitana indicates the senses which are sources of knowledge, and their con-
trolling deities. Work entails the working organs and their controlling
deities. All these are generated in the second creation.
TEXT 16
i মী
भूतसगेस्तृतीयस्तु तन्मात्रो द्रव्यशक्तिमान्‌ |
~ IN
चतुर्थ रेन्दरियः सर्गो यस्तु ज्ञानक्रियात्मकः ॥१६॥
bhiita-sargas triiyas tu
tanmatro dravya-saktiman
caturtha aindriyah sargo
yas tu jiana-kriyatmakah
bhuta-sargah—creation of matter; trtiyah—is the third; tu—but;
tat-matrah—sense pereeplion;dravya—of the elements; $aktiman—generator;
caturthah—the fourth; aindriyah—in the matter of the senses; sargah—
creation; yah—that which; tu—but; jiana—knowledge acquiring; kriya
—working; @atmakah — basically.
TRANSLATION
The sense perceptions are created in the third creation, and from these
the elements are generated. The fourth creation is the creation of knowl-
edge and of working capacity.
TEXT 17
A - ¢ - 9
वैकारिको देवसगे; पञ्चमो यन्मयं मनः।
षष्ठस्तु तमसः सर्गो यस्त्वबुद्धिकृतः TREN


--- Page 68 ---
398 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 10
vaikariko deva-sargah
paiicamo yan-mayarit manah
sasthas tu tamasah sargo
yas tvabuddhikrtah prabhoh
vaikarikah—interaction of the mode of goodness; deva—the demigods or
controlling deities; sargah—creation; paiicamah—fifth; yat—that which;
mayam—sum total; manah—mind; sasthah—sixth; tu—but; taemasah—of
darkness; sargah—creation; yah—that which; tu—expletive; abuddhikrtah—
made to be foolish; prabhoh—of the master.
TRANSLATION

The fifth creation is that of the controlling deities by the interaction of
the mode of goodness, of which the mind is the sum total. The sixth crea-
tion is the ignorant darkness of the living entity by which the master acts
as a fool.

PURPORT

The demigods in the higher planets are called devas because they are all
devotees of Lord Visnu. Visnu-bhaktah bhavet devah asuras tad viparya-
yah: All the devotees of Lord Visnu are devas or demigods, whereas all
others are asuras. That is the division of the devas and the asuras. Devas are
situated in the mode of goodness of material nature, whereas the asuras
are situated in the modes of passion or ignorance. The demigods or
controlling deities are entrusted with departmental management of all the
different functions of the material world. For example, one of our sense
organs, the eye, is controlled by light, light is distributed by the sun rays,
and their controlling deity is the sun. Similarly, mind is controlled by the
moon. All other senses, both for working or for acquiring knowledge, are
controlled by the different demigods. The demigods are assistants of the
Lord in the management of material affairs.

After the creation of the demigods, all entities are covered by the dark-
ness of ignorance. Each and every living being in the material world is
conditioned by his mentality of lording over the resources of material
nature. Although a living entity is the master of the material world, he is
conditioned by ignorance, by the false impression of being the proprietor
of material things.

The energy of the Lord called avidya is the bewildering factor of the
conditioned souls. The material nature is called avidya or ignorance,
but to the devotees of the Lord engaged in pure devotional service, this
energy becomes vidya or pure knowledge. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-


--- Page 69 ---
Text 19] Divisions of the Creation 399
gita. The energy of the Lord transforms from maha-maya to yoga-maya
and appears to pure devotees in her real feature. The material nature
therefore appears to function in three phases: as the creative principle
of the material world, as ignorance and as knowledge. As disclosed in the
previous verse, in the third creation the power of knowledge is also
created. The conditioned souls are not originally fools, but by the
influence of the avidya function of material nature they are made fools,
and thus they are unable to utilize knowledge in the proper channel.

By the influence of darkness, the conditioned soul forgets his relation-
ship with the Supreme Lord and is overwhelmed by attachment, hatred,
pride, ignorance and false identification, the five kinds of illusion that
cause material bondage.

TEXT 18
a
षडिमे gan: सगा वैकृतानपि मे 79 |
रजोमाजो भगवतो लीलेयं हरिमेधसः ॥१८॥
sad ime prakrtah sarga
vaikrtan api me Srnu
rajobhajo bhagavato
lileyarn hari-medhasah

sat—six; ime—all these; prakrtah—of the material energy; sargah—crea-
tions; vaikrtan—secondary creations by Brahma; api—also; me—from me;
srnu—just hear; rajah-bhdjah—of the incarnation of the mode of passion
(Brahma); bhagavatah—of the greatly powerful; lila— pastime; iyam— this;
hari—the Supreme Personality of Godhcad; medhasah—of one who has
such a brain.

TRANSLATION

All the above are natural creations by the external energy of the Lord.
Now hear from me about the creations by Brahma, who is an incarnation
of the mode of passion and who, in the matter of creation, has a brain
like the Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 19
= ¢ .
सप्तमो FETE षड़विधस्तस्थुषां च यः ।
दबस्प्त्येषपिठतात्वङ्सारा वीरुषो दमाः ॥१९॥


--- Page 70 ---
400 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 10
saptamo mukhya-sargas tu
sad-vidhas tasthugam ca yah
vanaspaty-osadhi-lata-
tvaksara virudho drumah
saptamah—the seventh; mukhya—principle; sargah—creation; tu—exple-
tive; sa-vidhah—six kinds of’; tasthusam—of those who do not move; ca—
also; yah—those; vanaspati—fruit trees without flowers; osadhi—trees and
plants existing until the fruit is ripe; lata—creepers; tvaksarah—pipe plants;
virudhah— creepers without support; drumah— trees with flowers and fruits.
TRANSLATION
The seventh creation is that of the immovable entities, which are of
six kinds: the fruit trees without flowers, trees and plants which exist
until the fruit is ripe, creepers, pipe plants, creepers which have no
support and trees with flowers and fruits.
TEXT 20
SERRE: ST अन्तः स्पर्शा विशेषिणः ॥२०॥
utsrotasas tamah-praya
antah-sparsa visesinah
utsrotasah—they seek their subsistence upwards; tamah-prayah—almost
unconscious; antah-sparsah—slightly feeling within; visesinah—with varieties
of manifestation.
TRANSLATION
All the immovable trees and plants seek their subsistence upwards.
They are almost unconscious but have feelings of pain within. They are
manifested in variegatedness.
TEXT 21
तिरश्चामष्टमः सर्गः सोऽष्टाविंशद्विधो मतः |
अविदो भूरितमसो घ्राणज्ञा हयवेदिनः ॥२१॥
tirascam astamah sargah
so ‘stavimsad vidho matah


--- Page 71 ---
Text 22] Divisions of the Creation 401
avido bhuri-tamaso
ghrana-jia hrdy-avedinah
tirascam—species of lower animals; astamah— the eighth; sargah— creation;
sah—they are; astavimsat—twenty-eight; vidhah—varieties; matah—con-
sidered; avidah—without knowledge of tomorrow; bhiri—extensively;
tamasah— ignorant; ghrana-jiah—can know desirables by smell; hrdi-
avedinahi—can remember very little in the heart.
TRANSLATION
The eighth creation is that of the lower species of life, and they are of
different varieties, numbering twenty-eight. They are all extensively fool-
ish and ignorant. They know their desirables by smell, but are unable to
remember anything within the heart.
PURPORT
In the Vedas the symptoms of the lower animals are described as follows;
athetaresarn pasinam asanapipase evabhivijiianani na vijidtan vadanti na
vijiiatam pasyanti na viduh $vastanarn na lokalokaviti; yadva, bhiiri-tamaso
bahurusah ghrapenaiva jananti hrdyam prati svapriyar vastveva vindanti
bhojana-sayanady-artharin grhnanti. Lower animals have knowledge only of
their hunger and thirst. They have no acquired knowledge, no vision.
Their behavior exhibits no dependence on formalities. Extensively igno-
rant, they can know their desirables only by smell, and by such intelligence
only can they understand what is favorable and unfavorable. Their
knowledge is concerned only with eating and sleeping. Therefore, even the
most ferocious lower animals, such as tigers, can be tamed simply by
regularly supplying meals and accommodations for sleeping. Only snakes
cannot be tamed by such an arrangement.
TEXT 22
= -
गीरजो महिषः Foor: GE गवयो रुरुः ।
-
foam: पशवश्चेमे अविरुषट् सत्तम ॥२२॥
gaur ajo mahisah krsnah
sukaro gavayo ruruh
dvisaphah pasavas ceme
avir ustras ca sattama


--- Page 72 ---
402 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 10
gauh—the cow; ajah—the goat; mahisah—the buffalo; krspah—a kind of
stag; sukarah—hog; gavayah—a species of animal; ruruh—deer; dvisaphah—
having two hoofs; pasavah—animals; ca—also; ime—all these; avih—lamb;
ustrah— camel; ca—and;sattama—O purest.
TRANSLATION
O purest Vidura, of the lower animals the cow, goat, buffalo, krsna-
stag, hog, gavaya animal, deer, lamb and camel all have two hoofs.
TEXT 23
- - LN
खरोऽश्वोऽश्वतरो गोरः JAH तथा |
.
एते चैकशफाः क्षत्तः श्रृणु पञ्चनखान्‌ पशन्‌ : ॥२३॥
kharo ’$vo ’svataro gaurah
৪070 01104 camari tatha
ete caika-saphah ksattah
srnu paiica-nakhan pasin
kharah—ass; asvah—horse; asvatarah—mule; gaurah—white deer;
Sarabhah—bison; camari—wild cow; tatha—thus; ete—all these; ca—and;
eka—only one; saphah—hoof; ksattah—O Vidura; §rnu—just hear now;
paitca—five; nakhan—nails; pasin—animals.
TRANSLATION
The horse, mule, ass, gaura, darabha bison and wild cow all have only
one hoof. Now you may hear from me about the animals who have five
nails.
TEXT 24
श्वा सृगालो TH व्याघ्रो मार्जारः शशशलको ।
सिंहः कपिगंजः करमो गोधा च मकरादयः ॥२४॥
sva srgalo vrko vyaghro
marjarah sasa-sallakau
sirihah kapir gajah kirmo
godha ca makaradayah
sva—dog; srgalah—jackal; vrkah—fox; vyaghrah—tiger; marjarah—cat;
$asa—rabbit; sallakau—sajaru (with thorns on the body); simhah—lion;


--- Page 73 ---
Text 26] Divisions of ‘the Creation 403
kapih— monkey; gajah—elephant; kurmah—tortoise; godha—gosapa (snake
with four legs); ca— also; makara-adayah—the alligator and others.

TRANSLATION
The dog, jackal, tiger, fox, cat, rabbit, sajaru, lion, monkey, elephant,
tortoise, alligator, etc., all have five nails in their claws. They are known
as paiica-nakhas, or animals having five nails.
TEXT 25
FETATHRTAEAGHRARM: |
दंससारसचक्राह्यकाकोल्कादयः खगाः ॥२५५॥
kanka-grdhra-baka-syena-
bhasa-bhalluka-barhinah
harnsa-sarasa-cakrahva-
kakolukadayah khagah
kanka—heron; grdhra—vulture; baka—crane; syena—hawk; bhasa—the
bhasa; bhalliika— the bhalliika; barhinah—the peacock 50141754 -- ६४५३1) ; sarasa—
the sarasa; cakrahva— the cakravaka; kaka—crow; alika—owl;adayah—and
others; khagah—the birds.
TRANSLATION
The heron, vulture, crane, hawk, 11893, bhallika, peacock, swan,
sarasa, cakravaka, crow, owl and others are the birds.
TEXT 26
अर्वाक्सोतस्तु नवमः क्षत्तरेकविधो चृणाम्‌ ।
रजोऽधिकाः कर्मपरा दुःखे च सुखमानिनः ॥२६॥
arvak-srotas tu navamah
ksattar eka-vidho nrnam
rajo ‘dhikah karma-para
duhkhe ca sukha-maninah


--- Page 74 ---
404 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 10
arvak— downwards; srotah— passage of food; tu—but; navamah—the
ninth; ksattah—O Vidura; eka-vidhah—one species; nrnam—of human
beings; rajah—the mode of passion; adhik&ah—very prominent; karma-
parah—interested in working; duhkhe—in misery; ca—but; sukha—happi-
ness; maninah— thinking.
TRANSLATION
The creation of the human beings, who are of one species only and who
stock their eatables in the belly, is the ninth in the rotation. In the human
race, the mode of passion is very prominent. Humans are always busy in
the midst of miserable life, but they think themselves happy in all
respects.
PURPORT
The human being is more passionate than the animals, and thus the sex
life of the human being is more irregular. The animals have their due time
for sexual intercourse, but the human being has no regular time for such
activities. The human being is endowed with a higher, advanced stage of
consciousness for getting relief from the existence of material miseries, but
due to his ignorance he thinks that his higher consciousness is meant for
advancing in the material comforts of life. Thus his intelligence is misused
in the animal propensities—eating, sleeping, defending and mating—instead
of spiritual realization. By advancing in material comforts the human
being puts himself into a more miserable condition, but, illusioned by the
material energy, he always thinks himself happy, even while in the midst of
misery. Such misery of human life is distinct from the natural comfortable
life enjoyed even by the animals.
TEXT 27
EY Q
वङृताख्य एवैते देवसगंश्च॒ सत्तम ।
Ey
वैकारिकस्तु यः प्रोक्तः कौमारस्त्‌भयात्मकः ॥२७॥
vaikrtas traya ९४०८९
deva-sargas ca sattama
, vatkarikas tu yah proktah
kaumaras tubhayatmakah
vaikrtah—creations of Brahma; trayah— three kinds; eva—certainly; ete—
all these; deva-sargah—appearance of the demigods; ca—also; sattama—0O


--- Page 75 ---
Texts 28-29] Divisions of the Creation 405
good Vidura; vaikarikah—creation of demigods by nature; tu—but; yah—
which; proktah—described before; kaumarah—the four Kumaras; tu—but;
ubhaya-atmakah—beth ways (namely vaikrta and prakrta).
TRANSLATION
0 good Vidura, these last three creations and the creation of demigods
(the tenth creation) are vaikrta creations which are different from the
previously described prakrta (natural) creations. The appearance of the
Kumaras is both.
TEXTS 28-29
देवसर्गश्वा्टविधो विवुधाः पितरोऽसुराः |
गन्धर्वाप्सरसः सिद्धा यक्षरक्षांसि चारणाः ॥२८॥!
भूतग्रेतपिशाचाश्च विद्याध्राः किनरादयः |
Aw 9 i र
दशते विदुराख्याताः सगास्ते विश्वसृक्कृताः ॥२९॥
deva-sargas casta-vidho
vibudhah pitaro ‘surah
gandharvapsarasah siddha
yaksa-raksamsi caranah
bhiita-preta-pisacas ca
vidyadhrah kinnaradayah
dasaite vidurak hyyatah
sargas te visva-srk-krtah
deva-sargah—creation of the demigods; ca—also; asta-vidhah— eight
kinds; vibudhah—the demigods; pitarah—the forefathers; asurah—the de-
mons; gandharva—the expert artisans in the higher planets; apsarasah—the
angels; siddhah—persons who are perfect in mystic powers; yaksa—the
super protectors; raksamsi—giants; caranah—the celestial singers; bhizta—
jinn; preta—evil spirits; pisacah—attendant spirits; ca—also; vidyadhrah—
the celestial denizens named Vidyadharas; kinnara—superhuman beings;
adayah—and others; dasa ete—all these ten (creations); vidura—O Vidura;
dkhyatah— described; sargah—creations; le—unto you; visva-srk—the creator
of the universe (Brahma); krtah—done by him.


--- Page 76 ---
406 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 10
TRANSLATION
The creation of the demigods is of eight varieties: (1) the demigods,
(2) the forefathers, (3) the asuras or demons, (4) the Gandharvas and
Apsaras, or angels, (5) the Yaksas and Rakgasas, (6) the Siddhas, Caranas
and Vidyadharas, (7) the Bhiutas, Pretas and Pisacas, and (8) the
superhuman beings, celestial singers, etc. All are created by Brahma, the
creator of the universe.
PURPORT
As explained in the Second Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Siddhas
are inhabitants of Siddhaloka, where the residents travel in space without
vehicles. At their mere will they can pass from one planet to another
without difficulty. Therefore, in the upper planets the inhabitants are far
superior to the inhabitants of this planet in all matters of art, culture and
science, since they possess brains superior to those of human beings. The
spirits and jinn mentioned in this connection are also counted among the
demigods because they are able to perform uncommon functions that are
not possible for men.
TEXT 30
अतः परं प्रवक्ष्यामि वंशान्मन्वन्तराणि च |
एवं WGA: FE कर्पादिष्वात्मभूहरिः |
सृजत्यमोषसङ्कर्प आत्मैवात्मानमात्मना ॥३०॥
atah param pravaksyami
vamsan manvantarani ca
evam rajah-plutah srasta®
kalpadisv atmabhur harih
srjaty amogha-sankalpa
atmaivatmanam atmana
atah—here: param— after; pravaksyami—1 shall explain; vamsan—descen-
dants; manvantarani—different advents of Manus; ca—and; evam—thus;
rajah-plutah—infused with the mode of passion; sras{@—the creator:
kalpa-adisu—in different millenniums; atmabhith—self-advent; harih—the
Personality of Godhead; srjati— creates; amogha—unfailing; saiikalpah—de-
termination; @tma eva— lle Himself; atmanam—Himself; atmana—by His
own energy.


--- Page 77 ---
Text 30] Divisions of the Creation 407
TRANSLATION

Now Ishall describe the descendants of the Manus. The creator, Brahma,
as the incarnation of the passion mode of the Personality of Godhead,
creates the universal affairs with unfailing desires in every millennium by
the force of the Lord’s energy.

PURPORT

The cosmic manifestation is an expansion of one of the many energies
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; the creator and the created are
both emanations of the same Supreme Truth, as stated in the beginning of
the Bhagavatam: janmady asya yatah.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Tenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Divisions of the Creation.”


--- Page 78 ---
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Calculation of Time, from the Atom
TEXT 1
a
मेश्रेय उवाच
चरमः सद्िशेषाणामनेकोऽसंयुतः सदा ।
परमाणुः स विज्ञेयो चृणामैक्यभ्रमो यतः ॥ १ ॥
maitreya ८४८८०
caramah sad-visesanam
aneko’samyutah sada
paramanuh sa vijiieyo
nrnam atkya-bhramo yatah
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya said; caramah—ultimate; sat—effect; visesa-
nam—symptoms;anekah—innumerable;asarmyutah—unmixed;sada—always;
parama-anuh—atoms; sah—that; vijieyah—should be understood; nrpam—
of men; aikya—oneness; bhramah— mistaken; yatah—from which.
TRANSLATION
The ultimate particle of the material manifestation, which is indivisible
and not formed into a body, is called the atom. It exists always as an
invisible identity, even after the dissolution of all forms. The material
body is but a combination of such atoms, but it is misunderstood by the
common man.
PURPORT
The atomic description of the Srimad-Bhagavatam is almost the same as
the modern science of atomism, and this is further described in the
Paramanu-vada of Kanada. In modern science also, the atom is accepted as
the ultimate indivisible particle of which the universe is composed. Srimad-
409


--- Page 79 ---
410 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
Bhagavatam is the full text of all descriptions of knowledge, including the
theory of atomism. The atom is the minute subtle form of eternal time.
TEXT 2
सत एव WHE खरूपावस्यितस्य यत्‌ ।
कवस्यं परममहानविरेषो निरन्तरः ॥ २॥
sata eva padarthasya
svaripavasthitasya yat
kaivalyarn parama-mahan
aviseso nirantarah
satah—of the effective manifestation; eva—certainly; pada-arthasya—
of physical bodies; svarupa-avasthitasya—staying in the same form even to
the time of dissolution; yat—that which; kaivalyam—oneness; parama—the
supreme; mahan—unlimited; avisesash—forms; nirantarah—eternally.
TRANSLATION
Atoms are the ultimate state of the manifest universe. When they stay in
their own forms without forming different bodies, they are called the
unlimited oneness. There are certainly different bodies in physical forms,
but the atoms themselves form the complete manifestation.
TEXT 3
एवं कारोऽप्यचुमितः de) स्थौल्ये च सत्तम।
संस्थानशक्त्या मगवानव्यक्तो SRT 20
evam kalo’py anumitah
sauksmye sthaulye ca sattama
sarmsthana-bhuktya bhagavan
avyakto vyakta-bhug vibhuh
evam~—thus; kalah—time; api—also; anumitah— measured; sauksmye—in
the subtle; sthaulye—in the gross forms; ca—also; sattama—O best;
saristhdna—combinations of the atoms; bhuktya—by the motion;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; avyaktah—unmani-
fested; vyakta-bhuk—controlling all physical movement; vibhuh—the
great potential.


--- Page 80 ---
Text 4] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 411
TRANSLATION

One can estimate time by measuring the movement of the atomic
combination of bodies. Time is the potency of the almighty Personality of
Godhead, Hari, who controls all physical movement although He is not
visible in the physical world.

TEXT 4
स कालः परमाणु यो द्धे परमाणुताम्‌ |
सतोऽविशेषञचग्यस्तु स कालः परमो महान्‌ ॥ ४॥
sa kalah paramanpur vai
yo bhuiikte paramanutam
sato ’visesa-bhug yas tu
sa kalah paramo mahan

sah—that; kalah—eternal time; parama-anuh—atomic; vai—certainly;
yah—which; bhunkte— passes through; parama-anutam—the space of an
atom; satah—of the entire aggregate; avisesa-bhuk—passing through the
nondual exhibition; yah tu—which; sah—that; kalah—time; paramah—the
supreme; mahan—the great.

TRANSLATION

Atomic time is measured according to its covering a particular atomic
space. That time which covers the unmanifest aggregate of atoms is called
the great time.

PURPORT

Time and space are two correlative terms. Time is measured in terms of
its covering a certain space of atoms. Standard time is calculated in terms
of the movement of the sun. The time covered by the sun in passing over
an atom is calculated as atomic time. The greatest time of all covers the
entire existence of the nondual manifestation. All the planets rotate and
cover space, and space is calculated in terms of atoms. Each planet has its
particular orbit for rotating, in which it moves without deviation, and
similarly the sun has its orbit. The complete calculation of the time of
creation, maintenance and dissolution, measured in terms of the circulation
of the total planetary systems until the end of creation, is known as the
supreme kala.


--- Page 81 ---
412 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
TEXT 5
अणु परमाणु स्थास्रसरेणखयः स्तः ।
जालाकेरदम्यवगतः खमेवानुपतन्नगात्‌ (| ५ ॥
anur dvau paramanu syat
trasarenus trayah smrtah
Jjalarkarasmy-avagatah
kham evanupatann agat
apuh—double atom; dvau—two; parama-anii—atoms; syat—become;
trasarenuh—hexatom; trayah—three; smrtah— considered; jala-arka— of sun-
shine through the holes of a window screen; rasmi—by the rays; avagatah—
can be known; kham eva—towards the sky; anupatan agat—going up.
TRANSLATION
The division of gross time is calculated as follows: two atoms make one
double atom, and three double atoms make one hexatom. This hexatom is
visible in the sunshine which enters through the holes of a window screen.
One can clearly see that the hexatom goes up towards the sky.
PURPORT
The atom is described as an invisible particle, but when six such atoms
combine together, they are called a trasarenu, and this is visible in the
sunshine pouring through the holes of a window screen.
TEXT 6
त्रसरेणुत्रिकं GSH यः कालः स I(T: v3:
FART वेधः सयाततेखिभिस्तु लवः स्मृतः । ६ ॥
trasarenu-trikam bhunkte
yah kalal sa trutih smrtal
Sata-bhagas tu vedhah syat
tais tribhis tu lavah smrtah
trasarenu-trikam—combination of three hexatoms; bhunkte—as they
take time to integrate; yah—that which; kalah— duration of time; sah—
that; trutih—by the name truti; smrtah—is called; sata-bhagah—one hun-
dred trutis; tu—but; vedhah—called a vedha; syat—it so happens: taih—by
them; tribhih—three times; tu—but; lavah—lava; smrtah—so called.


--- Page 82 ---
Text 7] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 413
TRANSLATION
The time duration needed for the integration of three trasarenus is
called a truti, and one hundred trutis make one vedha. Three vedhas make
one lava.
PURPORT
It is calculated that if a second is divided into 1687.5 parts, each part is
the duration of a truti, which is the time occupied in the integration of
eighteen atomic particles. Such a combination of atoms into different
bodies creates the calculation of material time. The sun is the central
point for calculating all different durations.
TEXT 7
লিমঘজ্তিতলী বীম आन्नातस्ते त्रयः বাঃ ।
क्षणान्‌ पश्च विदुः काष्टां लघु ता द्च पञ्च च ॥ ७॥
nimesas tri-lavo [7९१०
amnatas te trayah ksanah
ksapan paiica viduh kastham
laghu ta dasa pajiica ca
nimesah—duration of time called a nimesa; tri-lavah— duration of three
lavas; jiieyah—is to be known; amnatah—it is so called; te—they; trayah—
three; ksanah—duration of time called a ksana; ksanan—such ksanas;
paiica— five; viduh—one should understand; kastham—duration of time
called a kdastha; laghu—duration of time called a laghu; tah— those; dasa
pafica—fifteen; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The duration of time of three lavas is equal to one nimesa, the
combination of three nimesas makes one ksana, five ksanas combined
together make one kastha, and fifteen kasthas make one laghu.
PURPORT
By calculation it is found that one laghu is equal to two minutes. The
atomic calculation of time in terms of Vedic wisdom may be converted
into present time with this understanding.


--- Page 83 ---
414 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
TEXT 8
लघूनि वै समान्नाता दश्च पश्च च नाडिका |
ते दे अहतैः प्रहरः षढ्यामः सस्र वा चृणाम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
laghuni vai samamnata
dasa paiica ca nadika
te कण्ट muhurtah praharah
sad yamah sapta va nrpam
laghiini—such laghus (each of two minutes); vai—exacltly; samamnata—
is called; dasa pafica—fifteen; ca—also; nadika—a nadika; te—of them; dve—
two; muhiirtah—a moment; praharah—three hours; sat—six; yamah—one
fourth of a day or night; sapta—seven; va—or; nrpam—of human cal-
culation.
TRANSLATION
Fifteen laghus make one nadika, which is also called a danda. Two
dandas make one mubhiirta, and six or seven dandas make one fourth of a
day or night, according to human calculation.
TEXT 9
९ : a
TRINH चतुर्भिषतुरङ्गलेः |
MN: FASE यावर्धस्यजलष्युतम्‌ ।। ९ ॥
dvadasardha-palonmanarin
caturbhis catur-angulaih
svarna-masaih krta-cchidram
yavat prastha-jala-plutam
dvadasa-ardha—six; pala—of the scale of weight; unmanam—measuring
pot;caturbhih—by weight of four; catuh-angulaih—four fingers by measure;
svarpa—of gold; masaih—of the weight; krta-chidram—making a hole; yavat
—as long as; prastha—measuring one prastha; jala-plutam—filled by water.
TRANSLATION
The measuring pot for one nadika or danda can be prepared with a six
pala weight [14 ounce] pot of copper, in which a hole is bored with a gold


--- Page 84 ---
Text 11] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 415
probe weighing four masa and measuring four fingers long. When the pot
is placed on water, the time before the water overflows in the pot is called
one danda.
PURPORT
It is advised herein that the bore in the copper measuring pot must be
made with a probe weighing not more than four masa and measuring not
longer than four fingers. This regulates the diameter of the hole. The pot
is submerged in water, and the overflooding time is called a danda. This is
another way of measuring the duration of a danda, just as time is measured
by sand in a glass. It appears that in the days of Vedic civilization there
was no dearth of knowledge in physics, chemistry or higher mathematics.
Measurements were calculated in different ways, as simply as could be
done.
TEXT 10
यामात्वार्त्वारो मत्यानामहनी उभे |
पकः पञ्चदशाहानि TH: FOF मानद्‌ ॥१०॥
yamas catvaras catvaro
martyanam ahant ubhe
paksah paiica-dasahani
Suklah krsnas ca manada
yamah—three hours; catvarah—four; catvarah—and four; martyanam—
of the human beings; ahani— duration of day; ubhe—both day and night;
pak sah—fortnight; paiica-dasa—fifteen;ahani— days; suklah— white; krsnah—
black; ca—also; manada— measured.
TRANSLATION
It is calculated that there are four praharas, which are also called yamas,
in the day and four in the night of the human being. Similarly, fifteen
days and nights are a fortnight, and there are two fortnights, white and
black, in a month.
TEXT 11
तयोः age मासः पितृणां तदहर्निशम्‌ |
Rang: षडयनं दकिणं चोत्तरं दिषि ॥११॥


--- Page 85 ---
416 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
tayoh samuccayo masah
pitrnam tad aharnisam
dvau tav rtuh sad ayanam
daksinarn cottaram divi
tayoh—of them; samuccayah— aggregate; masah—month; pitrnam—of the
Pita planets; tat—that (month); ahah-nisam—day and night; dvau—two;
tau—months; rtuh—a season; saf—six; ayanam—movement of the sun
in six months; daksinam—southern; ca—also; uttaram—northern; divi—in
the heavens.
TRANSLATION
The aggregate of two fortnights is one month, and that period is one
complete day and night for the Pita planets. Two of such months comprise
one season, and six months comprise one complete movement of the sun
from south to north.
TEXT 12
अयने चाहनी ATARAX द्वादश स्मतः |
संक्त्सरशतं नृणां प्रमायुर्निरूपितम्‌ ॥१२॥
ayane cahani prahur
vatsaro dvadasa smrtah
sariwatsara-satari njpam :
paramayur niripitam
ayane—in the solar movement (of six months); ca—and; ahani—a day of
the demigods; prahuh—it is said; vatsarah—one calendar year; dvadasa—
twelve months; smrtah—is so called; samvatsara-Satam—one hundred years;
nfpam—of human beings; parama-ayuh—duration of life; nirdapitam—is
estimated.
TRANSLATION
Two solar movements make one day and night of the demigods, and
that combination of day and night is one complete calendar year for the
human being. The human being has a duration of life of one hundred
years.


--- Page 86 ---
Text 14] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 417
TEXT 13
TEARS: परमाण्वादिना जगत्‌ |
=.
संवत्सरावसानेन पर्येत्यनिमिषो विथः ॥१३॥
graha-rksa-tara-cakra-sthah
paramanvadina jagat
samvatsaravasanena
paryety animiso vibhuh
graha—influencing planets like the moon; rksa—luminaries like Asvini;
tara—stars; cakra-sthah—in the orbit; parama-anu-adina—along with the
atoms; jagal—the entire universe; sarmvatsara-avasanena—by the end of one
year; paryeti—completes its orbit; animisah—the eternal time; vibhuh—the
Almighty.
TRANSLATION
Influential stars, planets, luminaries and atoms all over the universe are
rotating in their respective orbits under the direction of the Supreme,
represented by eternal kala.
PURPORT
In the Brah ma-samhita it is stated that the sun is the eye of the Supreme
and it rotates in its particular orbit of time. Similarly, beginning from the
sun down to the atom, all bodies are under the influence of the kala-cakra,
or the orbit of eternal time, and each of them has a scheduled orbital time
of one samvatsara.
TEXT 14
संवत्सरः परिवत्सर इडावत्सर एव च ।
अनुवत्सरो वतसर विदुरैवं भ्रमाष्यते ॥१४॥
3017201507041 parivatsara
idavatsara eva ca
anuvatsaro vatsaras ca
viduraivam prabhasyate
sarhvatsarah— orbit of the sun; parivatsarah—circumambulation of Brhas-
pati; idavatsarah—orbit of the stars; eva—as they are; ca—also; anuvat-
sarah—orbit of the moon; vatsarah—one calendar year; ca—also; vidura—
0 Vidura; evam—thus; prabhasyate—they are so told.


--- Page 87 ---
418 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
TRANSLATION
There are five different names for the orbits of the sun, moon, stars and
luminaries in the firmament, and they each have their own ৪3113318313.
PURPORT
The subject matters of physics, chemistry, mathematics, astronomy,
time and space dealt with in the above verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam are
certainly very interesting to students of the particular subject, but as far
as we are concerned, we cannot explain them very thoroughly in terms of
technical knowledge. The subject is summarized by the statement that
above all the different branches of knowledge is the supreme control of
kala, the plenary representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Nothing exists without Him, and therefore everything, however wonderful
it may appear to our meager knowledge, is but the work of the magical
wand of the Supreme Lord. As far as time is concerned, we beg to subjoin
herewith a table of timings in terms of the modern clock.
One truti - 8/13,500 second One laghu - 2 minules
One vedha - 8/135 second One danda - 30 minutes
One lava - 8/45 second One prahara ~ 3 hours
One nimesa - 8/15 second One day - 12 hours
One ksana  - 8/5 second One night - 12 hours
One kastha - 8 seconds One paksa ~ 15 ५३९
Two paksas comprise one month, and twelve months comprise one
calendar year, or one full orbit of the sun. A human being is expected to
live up to one hundred years. That is the way of the controlling measure
of eternal time.
The Brahma-sarmhita affirms this control in this way:
yac caksur esa savita sakala-grahapam
raja samasta-sura-murtir asesa-tejah
yasyajiiaya bhramati saribhrta-kala-cakro
govindam adi-purusari tam 0110771 bhajami
“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, under whose control even the sun, which is considered to be
the eye of the Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time. The
sun is the king of all planetary systems and has unlimited potency in
heat and light.” (Bs. 5.52)


--- Page 88 ---
Text 16] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 419
TEXT 15
यः सृज्यशक्तिघरुधोच्क्रसयन्‌ खशक्त्या
पुंसोऽभ्रमाय दिवि धावति भूतमेदः |
कालाख्यया गुणमयं क्रतुभिर्वितन्वं-
स्तस्मै बलिं हरत वत्सरपश्चकाय ॥ १५॥
yah srjya-saktim urudhocchvasayan svasaktya
puriiso’bhramaya divi dhavati bhitta-bhedah
kalakh yaya gunamayarm kratubhir vitanvars
tasmai balim harata vatsara-paiicakaya
yah—one who; srjya—of creation; saktim—the seeds; urudha—in
various ways; ucchvasayan—invigorating; svasaktya—by his own energy;
purisah—of the living entity ;abhramaya—to dissipate darkness; divi— during
the daytime; dhavali—moves; bhuta-bhedah—distinct from all other mate-
rial form; kala-akhyaya—by the name of eternal time; guna-mayam—the
material results; kratubhih—by offerings; vilanvan—enlarging; lasmai—unto
him; balim—ingredients of offerings; harata—one should offer; vatsara-
paitcakaya—offerings every five years.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, the sun enlivens all living entities with his unlimited heat and
light. He diminishes the duration of life of all living entities in order to
release them from their illusion of material attachment, and he enlarges
the path of elevation to the heavenly kingdom. He thus moves in the
firmament with great velocity, and therefore everyone should offer him
respects once every five years with all ingredients of worship.
TEXT 16
विदुर उवाच
पितदेवमनुप्याणामायुः परमिदं स्मृतम्‌ |
परेषां गतिमाचक्ष्व ये स्युःकट्पाद्‌ बहिविंदः॥ १६॥
vidura uvaca
pitr-deva-manusyanam
ayul param 10017) smrtam
10017680118 gatim acaksva
ye syuh kalpad bahir vidah


--- Page 89 ---
420 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
vidurah uvdca— Vidura said; pitr—the Pita planets; deva—the heavenly
planets; manusyanam—and that of the human beings; ayuh—duration of
life; param—final; idam—in their own measurement; smrtam—calculated;
paresam—of the superior living entities; gatim—duration of life; dcaksva—
kindly calculate; ye—all those who; syuh—are; kalpat—from the millennium;
bahih—outside; vidah—greatly learned.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: I now understand the life durations of the residents of
the Pita planets and heavenly planets as well as that of the human beings.
Now kindly inform me of the durations of life of those greatly learned
living entities who are beyond the range of a kalpa.
PURPORT
The partial dissolution of the universe that takes place at the end of
Brahma’s day does not affect all the planetary systems. The planets of
highly learned living entities like the sages Sanaka, Bhrgu, elc., are not
affected by the dissolutions of the millenniums. All the planets are of
different types, and each is controlled by a different kala-cakra or
schedule of eternal time. The time of the earth planet is not applicable to
other, more elevated planets. Therefore, Vidura herein inquires about the
duration of life on other planets.
TEXT 17
मगवान्‌ वेद कालस्य गतिं भगवतो नु |
विश्वं विचक्षते धीरा योगराद्धेन चक्षुषा ॥ १५७॥
bhagavan veda kalasya
gatim bhagavato nanu
৮1007 vicaksate dhira
yoga-raddhena caksusa
bhagavan—O spiritually powerful one; veda—you know; kalasya—of the
eternal time; gatim—movements; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; nanu—as a matter of course; visvam—the whole universe;
vicaksate—see; dhirah—those who are self-realized; yoga-raiddhena—by dint
of mystic vision; caksusd—by the eyes.


--- Page 90 ---
Text 18] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 421
TRANSLATION
O spiritually powerful one, you can understand the movements of
eternal time, which is the controlling form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Because you are a self-realized person, you can see everything
by the power of mystic vision.
PURPORT
Those who have reached the highest perfectional stage of mystic
power and can see everything in the past, present and future are called
tri-kala-jiias. Similarly, the devotees of the Lord can see clearly everything
that is in the revealed scriptures. The devotees of Lord Sri Krsna can very
easily understand the science of Krsna, as well as the situation of the
material and spiritual creations, without difficulty. Devotees do not have
to endeavor for any yogae-siddhi, or perfection in mystic powers. They
are competent to understand everything by the grace of the Lord, who is
sitting in everyone’s heart.
TEXT 18
#37 उवाच
+ ५ ~ ¢
छृतं त्रेता द्वापरं च करिति चतुयुगम्‌ |
दिन्यरादशभिरवरवैः सावधानं निरूपितम्‌ | १८॥
maitreya ५८४९८
krtam treta dvaparam ca
kalis ceti catur-yugam
divyair dvadasabhir varsaih
savadhanarm nirapitam
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya said; krtam—the age of Satya; treta—
the age of Treta;dvapararn—the age of Dvapara; ca—also; kalih—the age of
Kali; ca—and; iti—thus; catuh-yugam—four millenniums; divyaih—of the
demigods; dvadasabhih— twelve; varsaih—thousands of years; savadhanam—
approximately; niriipitam—ascertained.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: O Vidura, the four millenniums are called the Satya,
Treta, Dvapara and Kali yugas. The aggregate number of years of all of
these combined is equal to twelve thousand years of the demigods.


--- Page 91 ---
422 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
PURPORT
The years of the demigods are equal to 360 years of humankind. As will
be clarified in the subsequent verses, 12,000 of the demigods’ years,
including the transitional periods which are called yuga-sandhyas, comprise
the total of the aforementioned four millenniums. Thus the aggregate of
the above-mentioned four millenniums is 4,320,000 years.
TEXT 19
= ^
चत्वारि त्रीणि दे चैकं कृतादिषु यथाकमम्‌ |
संख्यातानि सहस्राणि द्विगुणानि श्चतानि च ॥१९॥
catvart trini dve caikam
krtadisu yathakramam
sankhyatani sahasrani
dvigupani satani ca
catvari—four; trini—three; dve—two; ca—also; ekam—one; krta-adisu—in
the Satya-yuga millennium; yatha-kramam—and subsequently others;
sankhydtani—numbering; sahasrani—thousands; dvigunani—twice; Satani—
hundreds; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The duration of the Satya-yuga millennium equals 4,800 years of the
demigods; the duration of the Treta-yuga millennium equals 3,600 years
of the demigods; the duration of the Dvipara-yuga millennium equals
2,400 years; and that of the Kali-yuga millennium is 1,200 years of the `
demigods.
PURPORT
As aforementioned, one year of the demigods is equal to 360 years of
the human beings. The duration of the Satya-yuga is therefore 4,800 x 360
or 1,728,000 years. The duration of the Treta-yuga millennium is 3,600 x
360 or 1,296,000 years. The duration of the Dvapara-yuga millennium is
2,400x 360 or 864,000 years. And the last, the Kali millennium, is 1,200
x 360 or 432,000 years.


--- Page 92 ---
Text 21] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 423
TEXT 20
1 ক. ৬ ४९५ 4 1 4
संघ्यासंध्यांशयोरन्तयः कारः शतसंख्ययोः |
০৬
तमेबाहूयुगं तज्ज्ञा यत्र धर्मो विधीयते ॥२०॥
sandhyd-sandhyamsayor antar
yah kalah sata-sannkhyayoh
tam evahur yugam taj-jia
yatra dharmo vidhiyate
sandhya—transitional period before; sandhya-amsayoh—and transitional
period after; antah—within; yah—that which; kalah— duration of time; sata-
sankhyayoh—hundreds of years; tam eva—that period; ahuh—they call;
yugam—millennium; tat-jiah—the expert astronomers; yatra—wherein;
dharmah—religion; vidhiyate—is performed.
TRANSLATION
The transitional periods before and after every millennium, which are a
few hundred years as aforementioned, are known as yuga-sandhyas, or the
conjunctions of two millenniums, according to the expert astronomers.
In those periods all kinds of religious activities are performed.
TEXT 21
धमेशतुष्यान्मनुजान्‌ ते समनुवर्तते |
ष hel
स एवान्येष्वधर्मेण व्येति पादेन ad ॥२१॥
dharmas catuspan manujan
krte samanuvartate
sa evanyesv adharmena
vyeti padena vardhata
dharmah—religion; catuspat—complete four dimensions; manujan—man-
kind; krte—in the Satya-yuga millennium; samanuvartate—properly main-
tained; sah—that; eva—certainly; anyesu—in other; adharmena—by the in-
fluence of irreligion; vyeti—declined; padena—by one part; vardhata—
gradually increasing proportionately.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, in the Satya-yuga millennium mankind properly and


--- Page 93 ---
424 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
completely maintained the principles of religion, but in other millenniums
religion gradually decreased by one part as irreligion was proportionately
admitted.
PURPORT
In the Satya-yuga millennium, complete execution of religious principles
prevailed. Gradually, the principles of religion decreased by one part in
each of the subsequent millenniums. In other words, at present there is one
part religion and three parts irreligion. Therefore people in this age are not
very happy.
TEXT 22
त्रिलोक्या grad बदिराब्रह्मणो दिनम्‌ ।
तावत्येव निचला तात यनिमीरति विश्वसृक्‌ ॥२२॥
trilokya yuga-sahasram
bahir abrahmano dinam
tavaty eva nisa tata
yan nimilati visvasrk
trilokyah—of the three worlds; yuga—the four yugas; s@hasram—one
thousand; behih—outside of; abrahmapah—up to Brahmaloka; dinam—is a
day; tavati—a similar (period); eva—certainly; nisa—is night; tata—QO dear
one; yat—because; nimilati—goes to sleep; visvasrk— Brahma.
TRANSLATION
Outside of the three planetary systems [ Svarga, Martya and Patala], the
four yugas multiplied by 1,000 comprise one day on the planet of Brahma.
A similar period comprises a night of Brahma, in which the creator of the
universe goes to sleep.
PURPORT
When Brahma goes to sleep in his nighttime, the three planetary systems
below Brahmaloka are all submerged in the water of devastation. In his
sleeping condition, Brahma dreams about the Garbhodakasayi Vispu and
takes instruction from the L.ord for the rehabilitation of the devastated area
of space.


--- Page 94 ---
Text 24] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 425
TEXT 23
निश्चावसान आरन्धो रोककल्पोऽयुवर्वते |
যাবছিন मगवतो मनून्‌ अ॒ज्ज॑तुद श ।।२२॥
nisavasana arabdho
loka-kalpo’nuvartate
yavad dinam bhagavato
manun 01170175 caturdasa
nisa—night; avasane—termination; arabdhah—beginning from; loka-kal-
pah—further creation of the three worlds; anuvartate—follows; y@vat—until;
dinam—the daytime; bhagavatah—of the lord (Brahma); manan-the Manus;
bhufijan—existing through; caturdasa—fourteen.
TRANSLATION
After the end of Brahma’s night, the creation of the three worlds begins
again in the daytime of Brahma, and they continue to exist through the
life durations of fourteen consecutive Manus, or fathers of mankind.
PURPORT
At the end of the life of each Manu there are shorter dissolutions also.
TEXT 24
Shh থৈ
स्वं स्वं कालं ATER साधिकां शेकसप्ततिम्‌ |
৬৮৫11) svam kalarn manur bhunkte
sadhikam hy eka-saptatim
svam—own; svam—accordingly; kalam—duration of life; manuh—Manu;
bhunkte—enjoys; sadhikam—a little more than; hi—certainly; eka-saptatim
—sevently-one.
TRANSLATION
Each and every Manu enjoys a life of a little more than seventy-one sets
of four millenniums.


--- Page 95 ---
426 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
PURPORT
The duration of life of a Manu comprises seventy-one sets of four mil-
lenniums, as described in the Vispu Purana. The duration of life of one
Manu is about 852,000 years in the calculation of the demigods, or, in the
calculation of human beings, 306,720,000 years.
TEXT 25
मन्वन्तरेषु मनवस्तदंश्या ऋषयः सुराः |
बन्ति चैव युगपत्सुरेशषाश्वानु ये च तान्‌ ॥२५॥
' manv-antaresu manavas
tad-vamsya rsayah surah
bhavanti caiva yugapat
suresas canu ye ca tan
manu-antaresu—after the dissolution of each and every Manu; manavah—
other Manus; tat-varmsyah—and their descendants; rsayah—the seven famous
sages; surahi—devotees of the Lord; bhavanti—{lourish; ca eva—also all of
them; yugapad—simultaneously; sura-i§ah—demigods like Indra; ca—and;
anu—followers; ye—all; ca—also; tan—them.
TRANSLATION
After the dissolution of each and every Manu, the next Manu comes in
order, along with his descendants, who rule over the different planets; but
the seven famous sages and demigods like Indra and their followers, such
as the Gandharvas, all appear simultaneously with Manu.
PURPORT
There are fourteen Manus in one day of Brahma, and each of them has
different descendants.
TEXT 26
एव दनन्दिनः सर्गो ब्राहमङलोक्यवतनः |
ति्डनपिकदेवानां सम्मवो यत्र कम॑मिः ॥२६॥
esa dainandinah sargo
brahmas trailokya-vartanah


--- Page 96 ---
Text 28] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 427
tiryan-nr-pitr-devanam
sambhavo yatra karmabhih
esah—all these creations; dainandinah—daily; sargah—creation; brahmah—
in terms of the days of Brahma; trailokya-vartanah—revolution of the three
worlds; tiryaiic—animals lower than the human beings; nr—human beings;
pitr—of the Pita planets; devanam—of the demigods; sambhavah—appear-
ance; yatra—wherein; karmabhih—in the cycle of fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
In the creation, during Brahma’s day, the three planetary systems—
Svarga, Martya and Patala—revolve, and the inhabitants, including the
lower animals, human beings, demigods and Pitas, appear and disappear in
terms of their fruitive activities.
TEXT 27
मन्वन्तरेषु मगवान्‌ fae खमूर्तिभिः |
मन्वादिभिरिदं बिश्वमवत्युदितपौरुषः ॥२७॥
manvantaresu bhagavan
bibhrat sattvarn svamartibhih
manvadibhir idam visvam
avaty udita-paurusah
manu-antaresu—in each change of Manu; bhagavin—the Person-
ality of Godhead; bibhrat—manifesting; sattvam—His internal potency;
svamirtibhih—by His different incarnations; manu-adibhih—as Manus;
idam—this; viSvam—the universe; avati—maintains; udita—discovering;
paurusah—divine potencies.
TRANSLATION
In each and every change of Manu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appears by manifesting His internal potency in different incarnations, as
Manu and others. Thus He maintains the universe by discovered power.
TEXT 28
तमोमात्रायुपादाय प्रतिसंरुदधविकरमः |
कूलेनानुगताशेष आस्ते तुष्णीं दिनात्यये ।२८॥


--- Page 97 ---
428 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
tamo matram upadaya
pratisariruddha-vikramah
kalenanugatasesa
aste tusnim dinatyaye
tamah—mode of ignorance, or the darkness of night; matram—an in-
significant portion only; upadaya—accepting; pratisamruddha-vikramah
—suspending all power of manifestation; kalena—by means of the
eternal kala; anugata—merged in; asesah—innumerable living entities; aste—
remains; tizsnim—silent; dina-atyaye—at the end of the day.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the day, under the insignificant portion of the mode of
darkness, the powerful manifestation of the universe merges in the
darkness of night. By the influence of eternal time, the innumerable
living entities remain merged in that dissolution, and everything is silent.
PURPORT
This verse is an explanation of the night of Brahma, which is the effect
of the influence of time in touch with an insignificant portion of the modes
of material nature in darkness. The dissolution of the three worlds is
effected by the incarnation of darkness, Rudra, represented by the fire
of eternal time which blazes over the three worlds. These three worlds are
known as Bhiir, Bhuvar and Svar (Svarga, Martya and Patala). The innumer-
able living entities merge into that dissolution, which appears to be the
dropping of the curtain of the scene of the Supreme Lord’s energy, and so
everything becomes silent.
TEXT 29
तमेवान्यपिधीयन्ते रोका भूरादयस्रयः |
farmer नि्क्तशाशिभास्करम्‌ ॥२९॥
tam evanv apidhiyante
loka bhur-adayas trayah
nisayam anuvrttayar
nirmukta-sasi-bhaskaram
tam—that; eva—certainly; anu—after; apidhiyante—are out of sight;
lokah—the planets; bhiah-ddayah—the three worlds, 01101, Bhuvar and


--- Page 98 ---
Text 30] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 429
Svar; trayah—three; niSdyam—in the night; anuvrttayam—ordinary;
nirmuk ta— without glare; $asi—the moon; bhaskaram—the sun.
TRANSLATION
When the night of Brahma ensues, all the three worlds are out of sight,
and the sun and the moon are without glare, just as in the due course of an
ordinary night.
PURPORT
It is understood that the glare of the sun and moon disappear from the
sphere of the three worlds, but the sun and the moon themselves do not
vanish. They appear in the remaining portion of the universe, which is
beyond the sphere of the three worlds. The portion in dissolution remains
without sunrays or moonglow. It all remains dark and full of water, and
there are indefatigable winds, as will be explained in the following verses.
TEXT 30
few प
t दह्यमानायां शक्तया सङ्षणाम्मिना।
यान्त्यूष्मणा মহতীকাজন भृग्बादयोऽ्दिता; ॥३०॥
trilokyarn dahyamanayam
Saktya sankarsanagnina
yanty usmana maharlokaj
janam bhrgv-adayo ‘rditah
trilokyam—when the spheres of the three worlds; dahyamanayam—
being set ablaze; saktya—by the potency; sankarsana—from the mouth of
Sankargana; agnina—by the fire; yanti—they go; uasmane—heated by the
warmth; mahah-lokat—from Maharloka; janam—to Janaloka; bhrgu—
the sage Bhrgu; ddayah— and others; arditah— being so distressed.
TRANSLATION
The devastation takes place due to the fire emanating from the mouth
of Sankarsana, and thus great sages like Bhrgu and other inhabitants of
Maharloka transport themselves to Janaloka, being distressed by the
warmth of the blazing fire which rages through the three worlds below.


--- Page 99 ---
430 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
TEXT 31
EN
fag सद्यः कल्पान्तेधितसिन्धवः |
श्ावयन्त्युत्कटाटोपचण्डवातेरितोर्मयः ॥२१॥
tavat tribhuvanarmn sadyah
kalpantaidhita-sindhavah
plavayanty utkatatopa-
canda-vateritormayah.
tavat—then; tribhuvanam—all the three worlds; sadyah—immediately
after; kalpa-anta—in the beginning of devastation; edhita—inflated; sindhavah
—all the oceans; plavayanti—inundate; utkata—violent; atopa—agitation;
capda—hurricane; vata—by winds; irita—blown; urmayah— waves.
TRANSLATION
At the beginning of the devastation all the seas overflow, and hurricane
winds blow very violently. Thus the waves of the seas become ferocious,
and in no time at all the three worlds are full of water.
PURPORT
It is said that the blazing fire from the mouth of Sankargana rages for
one hundred years of the demigods, or 36,000 human years. Then for
another 36,000 years there are torrents of rain, accompanied by violent
winds and waves, and the seas and oceans overflow. These reactions of
72,000 years are the beginning of the partial devastation of the three
worlds. People forget all these devastations of the worlds and think them-
selves happy in the material progress of civilization. This is called maya, or
that which is not.
TEXT 32
अन्तः स तसिन्‌ सलिरु आस्तेऽनन्तासनो हरिः।
nN
योगनिद्रानिमीलाकषः स्तूयमानो जनालयैः ।॥३२॥
antah sa tasmin salila
aste’nantasano harih
yoga-nidra-nimilak sah
stuyamano janalayath.


--- Page 100 ---
Text 33] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 431

antah—within; sah—that; tasmin—in that; salile—water; aste—there is;
ananta—Ananta; asanah—on the seat of; harih—the Lord; yoga—mystic;
nidra—sleep; nimila-aksah—eyes closed; stiyamanah—being glorified;
jana-dlayaih—by the inhabitants of the Janaloka planets.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, lies down in the water
on the seat of Ananta, with His eyes closed, and the inhabitants of the
Janaloka planets offer their glorious prayers unto the Lord with folded
hands.

PURPORT

We should not understand the sleeping condition of the Lord to be the
same as our sleep. Here the word yoga-nidra is specifically mentioned,
which indicates that the Lord’ssleeping condition is also a manifestation of
His internal potency. Whenever the word yoga is used it should be under-
stood to refer to that which is transcendental. In the transcendental stage
all activities are always present, and they are glorified by prayers of great
sages like Bhrgu.

TEXT 33
एवंविधैरदोरात्रेः Sree: |
अपश्षितमिवास्यापि परमायुवेयःशतम्‌ ।३३।॥
evarm-vidhair aho-ratrath
kala-gatyopalaksitaih
apaksitam ivasyapi
paramayur vayah-satam.

evam—thus; vidhaith—by the process of; ahah—days; ratraih—by nights;
kala-gatya—advancement of time; upalaksitath—by such symptoms;
apaksitam—declined; iva—just like; asya—his; api—although; paramayuh—
duration of life; vayah—years; satam—one hundred.

TRANSLATION

Thus the process of the exhaustion of the duration of life exists for
every one of the living beings, including Lord Brahma. 01618 life endures
for only one hundred years, in terms of the times in the different planets.


--- Page 101 ---
432 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
PURPORT
Every living being lives for one hundred years in terms of the times in
different planets for different entities. These one hundred years of life are
not equal in every case. The longest duration of one hundred years belongs
to Brahma, but although the life of Brahma is very long, it expires in the
course of time. Brahma is also afraid of his death, and thus he performs
devotional service to the Lord, just to release himself from the clutches
of illusory energy. Animals, of course, have no sense of responsibility, but
even humans, who have developed a sense of responsibility, while away
their valuable time without engaging in devotional service to the Lord;
they live merrily, unafraid of impending death. This is the madness of
human society. The madman has no responsibility in life. Similarly, a
human being who does not develop a sense of responsibility before he dies
is no better than the madman who tries to enjoy material life very happily
without concern for the future. It is necessary that every human being be
responsible in preparing himself for the next life, even if he has a duration
of life like that of Brahma, the greatest of all living creatures within the
universe.
TEXT 34
यदु्थमायुषस्तसख परार्धमभिधीयते ।
ও €:
पूवं; परार्घोऽपक्रान्तो ह्यपरोऽद्य সললল ॥২৬।।
yad ardham ayusas tasya
parardham abhidhiyate
parvah parardho’pakranto
hy aparo’dya pravartate
yat—that which; ardham—half; ayusah—of the duration of life; tasya—
his; parardham—a parardha; abhidhiyate—is called; piarvah—the former;
parardhah—half of the duration of life; apakrantah—having passed; hi—
certainly; aparah—the latter; adya—in this millennium; pravartate—shall
begin.
TRANSLATION
The one hundred years of Brahma'’s life are divided into two parts, the
first half and the second half. The first half of the duration of Brahma’s
life is already over, and the second half is now current.


--- Page 102 ---
Text 35] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 433
PURPORT
The duration of one hundred years in the life of Brahma has already
been discussed in many places in this work, and it is described in Bhagavad-
gita also (Bg. 8.17). Fifty years of the life of Brahma are already over, and
fifty years are yet to be completed; then, for Brahma also, death is
inevitable.
TEXT 35
पूर्वादौ dE AE নাম मदानमूत्‌ ।
कल्पो TATE शबन्दकषोति यं विदुः ॥२५॥
purvasyadau parardhasya
brahmo nama mahan abhut
kalpo yatrabhavad brahma
sabda-brahmeti yam viduh
purvasya—of the first half;adau—in the beginning; para-ardhasya—of the
superior half; brahmah—Brahma-kalpa; nama—of the name; mahan—very
great; abhit—was manifest; kalpah—millennium; yatra—whereupon;
abhavat—appeared; brahma— Lord Brahma; sabda-brahma iti—the sounds
of the Vedas; yam—which; viduh—they know.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of the first half of Brahma’s life, there was a millennium
called Brahma-kalpa wherein Lord Brahma appeared. The birth of the
Vedas was simultaneous with Brahma’s birth.
PURPORT
According to Padma Purana (Prabhasa-kapda), in thirty days of Brahma
many kalpas take place, such as Varaha-kalpa, Pitr-kalpa, etc. Thirty days
make one month of Brahma, beginning from the full moon to the disap-
pearance of the moon. Twelve such months complete one year, and fifty
years complete one parardha, or one half the duration of the life of
Brahma. The Sveta-Variha appearance of the Lord is the first birthday of
Brahma. The birth date of Brahma is in the month of March, according to
Hindu astronomical calculation. This statement is reproduced from the
explanation of Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakur.


--- Page 103 ---
434 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
TEXT 36
तस्यैव चान्ते कल्पोऽभूद्‌ यं पा्मभिचधृते |
-
যত্রনাসিময়ে आसील्लोकसरोरुहम्‌ 1138)
tasyaiva cante kalpo’bhud
yam padmam abhicaksate
yad dharer nabhi-sarasa
asl loka-saro-ruham
tasya— of the Brahma-kalpa; eva— certainly; ca—also; ante—at the end of;
kalpah—millennium; abhit—came into existence; yam—which; padmam—
Padma; abhicaksate—is called; yat—in which; hareh—of the Personality of
Godhead; nabhi—in the navel; sarasah—from the reservoir of water; dsit—
there was; loka—of the universe; saras-ruham —lotus.
TRANSLATION
The millennium which followed the first Brahma millennium is known
as the Padma-kalpa because in that millennium the universal lotus flower
grew out of the navel reservoir of water of the Personality of Godhead
Hari.
PURPORT
The millennium following the Brahma-kalpa is known as the Padma-
kalpa because the universal lotus grows in that millennium. The Padma-
kalpa is also called the Pitr-kalpa in certain Puranas.
TEXT 37
अयं तु कथितः कल्पो द्वितीयस्यापि भारत ।
वाराह इति विरू्यातो यत्रासीच्छरकरो दरिः ॥३७॥
ayar tu kathitah kalpo
dvitiyasyapi bharata
varaha iti vikhyato
yatrasic chukaro harih
ayam—this; tu—but; kathitah—known as; kalpah— the current millenni-
um; dvitiyasya—of the second half; api—certainly; bharata—O descendent


--- Page 104 ---
Text 38] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 435
of Bharata; varahah—Varaha; iti—thus; vikhyatah—is celebrated; yatra—
in which; asit—appeared; sakarah—hog shape; harih—the Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
0 descendant of Bharata, the first millennium in the second half of the
life of Brahma is also known as the Varaha millennium because the
Personality of Godhead appeared in that millennium as the hog incarnation.
PURPORT
The different millenniums known as the Brahma, Padma and Varaha
kalpas appear to be a little puzzling for the layman. There are some
scholars who think these kalpas to be one and the same. According to Srila
Viévanatha Cakravarti, the Brahma-kalpa in the beginning of the first half
appears to be the Padma-kalpa. We can, however, simply abide by the text
and understand that the present millennium is in the second half of the
duration of the life of Brahma.
TEXT 38
कालोऽयं द्विपरार्धाख्यो निमेष उपचर्यते |
अव्याकृतस्पानन्तस्य द्यनादेजैगदात्मनः ॥३८॥
kalo’yam dviparardhakhyo
nimesa upacaryate
avyakrlasyanantasya
hy anader jagad-atmanah
kalah—eternal time; ayam—this (as measured by Brahma’s duration of
life); dvi-para-ardha-akhyah—measured by the two halves of Brahma’s life;
nimesah—less than a second; upacaryate—is so measured; avyakrtasya—of
one who is unchanged; anantasya—of the unlimited; hi—certainly 3 anadeh—
of the beginningless; jagat-atmanah—of the soul of the universe.
TRANSLATION
The duration of the two parts of Brahma’s life, as above mentioned, is
calculated to be equal to one nimesa [less than a second] for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is unchanging and unlimited and is the cause
of all causes of the universe.


--- Page 105 ---
436 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
PURPORT

The great sage Maitreya has given a considerable description of the time
of different dimensions, beginning from the atom up to the duration of the
life of Brahma. Now he attempts to give some idea of the time of the
unlimited Personality of Godhead. He just gives a hint of His unlimited
time by the standard of the life of Brahma. The entire duration of the life
of Brahma is calculated to be less than a second of the Lord’s time, and it
is explained in the Brahma-sammhita as follows:

yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athdvalambya
jivanti loma-vilaja jagadanda-nathah
visnur mahan sa tha yasya kala-viseso
govindam adi-purusarn tam aham bhajami (Bs. 5.48)

“I worship Govinda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all
causes, whose plenary portion is Maha-Visnu. All the heads of the innumer-
able universes [the Brahmas] live only by taking shelter of the time occu-
pied by one of His breaths.” The impersonalists do not believe in the
form of the Lord, and thus they would hardly believe in the Lord’s
sleeping. Their idea is obtained by a poor fund of knowledge; they cal-
culate everything in terms of man’s capacity. They think that the exis-
tence of the Supreme is just the opposite of active human existence; be-
cause the human being has senses, therefore the Supreme must be without
sense perception; because the human being has a form, therefore the
Supreme must be formless; and because the human being sleeps, therefore
the Supreme must not sleep. Srimad-Bhagavatam, however, does not agree
with such impersonalists. It is clearly stated herein that the Supreme Lord
rests in yoga-nidra, as previously discussed. And because He sleeps,
naturally He must breathe, and the Brahma-sarmhita confirms that within
His breathing period innumerable Brahmas take birth and die.

There is complete agreement between Srimad-Bhagavatam and the
Brahma-samhita. Eternal time is never lost along with the life of Brahma.
It continues, but it has no capacity to control the Supreme Personality of
Godhead because the Lord is the controller of time. In the spiritual world
there is undoubtedly time, but it has no control over activities. Time is
unlimited, and the spiritual world is also unlimited, since everything there
exists on the absolute plane.

TEXT 39
कालोऽयं परमाण्वादिर्दिपराधान्त ईश्वरः ।
नैवेशितुं प्रर्भूञ्न ईश्वरो धाममानिनाम्‌ (13201


--- Page 106 ---
Text 40] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 437
kalo ‘yam paramanv-adir
dviparardhanta tsvarah
naivesiturn prabhur bhumna
$varo dhama-maninam
kalah—the eternal time; ayam—this; parama-anu—atom; adih— beginning
from; dvi-para-ardha—two superdurations of time; antah—to the end;
$varah— controller; na—never;eva—certainly; isitum—to control; prabhuh—
capable; bhumnah—of the Supreme; isvarah—controller; dhama-maninam—
of those who are body conscious.
TRANSLATION
Eternal time is certainly the controller of different dimensions, from
that of the atom up to the superdivisions of the duration of Brahma’s
life; but, nevertheless, it is controlled by the Supreme. Time can control
only those who are body conscious, even up to the Satyaloka or the other
higher planets of the universe.
TEXT 40
विकारः सदितो युक्तैर्िशेषादिभिराषतः ।
आण्डकोशो बहिरयं पओचाशत्कोरि विस्तृतः ।४०॥
vikaraih sahito yuktair
visesadibhir avrtah
andakoso bahir ayam
paiicasat-koti-vistrtah
vikaraih—by the transformation of the elements; sahitah—along with;
yuktaith—being so amalgamated; visesa—manifestations;adibhih—by them;
avrtah —covered; anda-kosah—the universe; bahih—outside; ayam—this;
paiicasat—fifty; koti—ten million; vistrtah— widespread.
TRANSLATION
This phenomenal material world is expanded to a diameter of four bil-
lion miles, as a combination of eight material elements transformed into
sixteen further categories, within and without, as follows:
PURPORT
As explained before, the entire material world is a display of sixteen di-
versities and eight material elements. The analytical studies of the material


--- Page 107 ---
438 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 11
world are the subject matter of saikhya philosophy. The first sixteen diver-
sities are the eleven senses and five sense objects, and the eight elements are
the gross and subtle matter, namely earth, water, fire, air, sky, mind, intelli-
gence and ego. All these combined together are distributed throughout the
entire universe, which extends diametrically to four billion miles. Besides
this universe of our experience, there are innumerable other universes.
Some of them are bigger than the present one, and all of them are clustered
together under similar material elements as described below.
TEXT 41
दञ्ो्तराधिकर्यत्र॒ प्रविष्टः परमाणुवत्‌ |
TEAS कोटिशो हण्डराशयः 192)
dasottaradhikair yatra
pravistah paramanuvat
laksyate’ntar-gatas canye
kotiso hy anda-rasayah
dasa-uttara-adhikaih— with ten times greater thickness; yatra—in which;
pravistah—entered; parama-anuvat—like atoms; laksyate—it (mass of uni-
verses) appears; antah-gatafi—come together; ca—and; anye—in the other;
kotisah— clustered; hi—for; anda-rasayah—huge combination of universes.
TRANSLATION
The layers of elements covering the universes are each ten times thicker
than the one before, and all the universes clustered together appear like
atoms in a huge combination.
PURPORT
The coverings of the universes are also constituted of the elements earth,
water, fire, air and ether, and each is ten times thicker than the one before.
The first covering of the universe is earth, and it is ten times thicker than
the universe itself. If the universe is four billion miles in size, then the size
of the earthly covering of the universe is four billion times ten. The cov-
ering of water is ten times greater than the earthly covering, the covering
of fire is ten times greater than the watery covering, the covering of air is
ten times greater than that of the fire, the covering of ether is ten times
greater still than that of air, and so on. The universe within the coverings
of matter appears to be like an atom in comparison to the coverings, and
the number of universes is unknown even to those who can estimate the
coverings of the universes.


--- Page 108 ---
Text 42] Calculation of Time, from the Atom 439
TEXT 42
तदाहुरक्षरं बह्म सर्वकारणकारणम्‌ |
विष्णोपाम परं साक्षात्पुरुषस्य महामनः ॥।४२॥
tad ahur ৫1050170118 brahma
sarva-karana-karanam
visnor dhama param saksat
purusasya mahatmanah

tat—that; ahuh—is said; aksaram—infallible; brahma—the supreme;
sarva-karana—all causes; karanam—the supreme cause; visnoh dhama—thce
spiritual abode of Visnu; param—the supreme; saksat—without doubt;
purusasya—of the purusaincarnation; mahatmanah—of the Maha-Visnu.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, is therefore said to be
the original cause of all causes. Thus the spiritual abode of Visnu is eternal
without a doubt, and it is also the abode of Maha-Visnu, the origin of all
manifestation.

PURPORT

Lord Maha-Vignu, who is resting in yoga-nidra on the Causal Ocean and
creating innumerable universes by His breathing process, only temporarily
appears in the mahat-tattva for the temporary manifestation of the
material worlds. He is a plenary portion of Lord Sri Krsna, and thus
although He is nondifferent from Lord Krsna, His formal appearance in the
material world as an incarnation is temporary. The original form of the
Personality of Godhead is actually the svarupa or real form, and He
eternally resides in the Vaikuptha world (Visnuloka). The word mahat-
manah is used here to indicate Maha-Visnu, and His real manifestation is
Lord Krsna, who is called parama, as confirmed in the Brahma-sarhita:

iSvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam

“The Supreme Lord is Krsna, the original Personality of Godhead known
as Govinda. His form is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge, and He is the
original cause of all causes.”

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports of the Third Canto, Eleventh
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Calculation of Time, from
the Atom.”


--- Page 109 ---
CHAPTER TWELVE
Creation of the Kumaras and Others
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय sare
इति ते वणितः क्षत्तः कालाख्यः परमात्मनः |
মহিমা वेदगर्भोऽथ यथास्राक्षीभिबोध मे ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvdca
iti te varnitah ksattah
kalakhyah paramatmanah
mahima veda-garbho’tha
yathasraksin nibodha me
maitreyah uwvaca—Sri Maitreya said; iti—thus; te—unto you; varpitah—
described; ksattah—O Vidura; kala-akhyah—by the name of eternal time;
paramatmanah—of the Supersoul; mahima—glories; veda-garbhah— lord
Brahma, the reservoir of the Vedas; atha—hereafter; yatha—as it is; asraksit—
did create; nibodha—just try to understand; me—from me.
TRANSLATION
Sri Maitreya said: O learned Vidura, so far I have explained to you the
glories of the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His feature
of kala. Now you can hear from me about the creation of Brahma, the
reservoir of all Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 2
ससजाग्रऽन्धताभिखमथ বামিম্বমান্তক্ক্‌ |
- 9
महामोहं च मोहं च तमधाज्ञानवृतयः ॥ २ ॥
441


--- Page 110 ---
442 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
sasarjagre’ndha-tamisram
atha tamisram adikrt
mahamohari ca mohar ca
tamas cajiiana-vrttayah
sasarja—created; agre—at first; andha-tamisram—sense of death; atha—
then; tamisram—anger upon frustration; adikrt— all these; maha-moham—
ownership of enjoyable objects; ca—also; meham—illusory conception;
ca—also; tamah—darkness in self-knowledge; ca—as well as; ajiana—
nescience; vrttayah—engagements.
TRANSLATION

Brahma first created the nescient engagements like self-deception, the
sense of death, anger after frustration, the sense of false ownership, and
the illusory bodily conception, or forgetfulness of one’s real identity.

PURPORT

Before the factual creation of the living entities in different varieties of
species, the conditions under which a living being in the material world
has to live were created by Brahma. Unless a living entity forgets his real
identity, it is impossible for him to live in the material conditions of life.
Therefore the first condition of material existence is forgetfulness of one’s
real identity. And by forgetting one’s real identity, one is sure to be
afraid of death, although a pure living soul is deathless and birthless. This
false identification with material nature is the cause of false ownership of
things which are offered by the arrangement of superior control. All
material resources are offered to the living entity for his peaceful living
and for the discharge of the duties of self-realization in conditioned life.
But due to false identification, the conditioned soul becomes entrapped by
the sense of false ownership of the property of the Supreme Lord. It is
evident from this verse that Brahma himself is a creation of the Supreme
Lord, and the five kinds of nescience which condition the living entities
in material existence are creations of Brahma. It is simply ludicrous to
think the living entity to be equal with the Supreme Being when one can
understand that the conditioned souls are under the influence of Brahma’s
magic wand. Patanjali also accepts that there are five kinds of nescience,
as mentioned herein.


--- Page 111 ---
Text 3] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 443
TEXT 3
₹ছা पापीयसीं सृष्टं नात्मानं बहमन्यत |
खगदद्धयानप्तेन मनसान्यां ततोऽसृजत्‌ ॥ ३ ॥
^, 4.1.11 11.111
natmanarn bahv amanyata
bhagavad-dhyana-piitena
manasanyarm tato’srjat
drstva—by seeing; papiyasim—sinful; srstim—creation; na—did not;
atmanam—unto himself; bahu—much pleasure; amanyata—felt; bhagavat—
on the Personality of Godhead; dhyana—meditation; piitena—purified by
that; manasa—by such a mentality; anyam—another; tatah—thereafter;
asrjat—created.
TRANSLATION
Seeing such a misleading creation as a sinful task, Brahma did not feel
much pleasure in his activity, and therefore he purified himself by
meditation on the Personality of Godhead. Then he began another term
of creation.
PURPORT
Although he created the different influences of nescience, Lord Brahma
was not satisfied in performing such a thankless task, but he had to do it
because most of the conditioned souls wanted it to be so. Lord Krsna
says in Bhagavad-gita (15.15) that He is present in everyone’s heart and is
helping everyone to either remember or forget. The question may be raised
why the Lord, who is all-merciful, helps one to remember and another to
forget. Actually, His mercy is not exhibited in partiality towards one and
enmily towards another. The living entity, as part and parcel of the Lord,
is partially independent because he partially possesses all the qualities of
the Lord. Anyone who has some independence may sometimes misuse it
due to ignorance. When the living entity prefers to misuse his independence
and glide down towards nescience, the all-merciful Lord first of all tries to
protect him from the trap, but when the living entity persists on gliding
down 10 hell, the Lord helps him to forget his real position. The
Lord helps the falling living entity 10 glide down to the lowest point,
just to give him the chance to see if he is happy by misusing his
independence.


--- Page 112 ---
444 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12

Almost all the conditioned souls who are rotting in the material world
are misusing their independence, and therefore five kinds of nescience are
imposed upon them. As an obedient servitor of the Lord, Brahma creates
all these as a matter of necessity, but he is not happy in doing so because
a devotee of the Lord naturally does not like to see anyone falling down
from his real position. Persons who do not care for the path of realization
get full facilities from the Lord for executing their proclivities to the
fullest extent, and Brahma helps in that procedure without fail.

TEXT 4
सनकं च सनन्दं च सनातनमथात्मभूः |
सनत्कुमारं च घनीभिष्कियानूष्वैरेतसः ॥ ४ ॥
11111192 11119
sandatanam athatmabhah
sanat-kumarari ca munin
niskriyan érdhva-retasah

sanakam—Sanaka; ca—also; sanandam—Sananda; ca—and; sanatanam—
Sanatana; atha— thereafter; atmabhuh— Brahma, who is self-born; sanat-
kumaram—Sanat-kumara; ca—also; munin—the great sages; niskriyan—
free from all fruitive action; urdhva-retasah—those whose semina flows
upwards.

TRANSLATION

In the beginning, Brahma created four great sages named Sanaka,
Sananda, Sanatana and Sanat-kumara. All of them were unwilling to adopt
materialistic activities because they were highly elevated due to their
semina’s flowing upwards.

PURPORT

Although Brahma created the principles of nescience as a matter of
necessity for those living entities who were destined to ignorance by the
will of the Lord, he was not satisfied in performing such a thankless task.
He therefore created four principles of knowledge: sankhya, or empirical
philosophy for the analytical study of material conditions; yoga, or mysti-
cism for liberation of the pure soul from material bondage; vairagya, the
acceptance of complete detachment from material enjoyment in life to


--- Page 113 ---
Text 5] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 445
elevate oneself to the highest spiritual understanding; and tapas, or the
various kinds of voluntary austerities performed for spiritual perfection.
Brahma created the four great sages Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and Sanat
to entrust them with these four principles of spiritual advancement, and
they inaugurated their own spiritual party, or sampradaya, known as the
Kumara-sampradaya, or later on as the Nimbarka-sampradaya, for the
advancement of bhakti. All of these great sages became great devotees, for
without devotional service to the Personality of Godhead one cannot
achieve success in any activity of spiritual value.
TEXT 5
तान्‌ बमावे ERY: पत्रान्‌ प्रजाः सुजत THE: |
तेन्छन्योक्षधर्पाणो वासुदेवपरायणाः ॥ ५॥
tan babhdse svabhith putran
prajah srjata putrakah
tan naicchan moksa-dharmano
vasudeva-parayanah

tan—unto the Kumairas, as above-mentioned; babhase—addressed;
svabhuh—Brahma; putran—unto the sons; prajah—generations; srjata—do
create; putrakdh—O my sons; tat—that; na—not; aicchan—desired; moksa-
dharmanah—pledged to the principles of liberation; vasudeva—the Person-
ality of Godhead; parayapah—who are so devoted.

TRANSLATION

Brahma spoke to his sons after generating them. “My dear sons,” he said,
“now generate progeny.” But due to their being attached to Vasudeva,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they aimed at liberation, and
therefore they expressed their unwillingness.

PURPORT

The four sons of Brahma, the Kumaras, declined to become family men
even on the request of their great father, Brahma. Those who are serious
about gaining release from material bondage should not be entangled in
the false relationship of family bondage. People may ask how the Kumaras
could refuse the orders of Brahma, who was their father and above all the
creator of the universe. The reply is that one who is vasudeva-parayanah,
or seriously engaged in the devotional service of the Personality of


--- Page 114 ---
446 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
Godhead, Vasudeva, need not care for any other obligation. It is enjoined
in the Bhagavatam:
devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam pitrparn
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajan
sarvatmana yah saranam saranyam
gato mukundari parihrtya kartam
“Anyone who has completely given up all worldly relationships and has
taken absolute shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, who gives us salvation
and who alone is fit to be taken shelter of, is no longer a debtor or servant
of anyone, including the demigods, forefathers, sages, other living entities,
relatives and members of human society.” (Bhag. 11.5.41) Thus there was
nothing wrong in the acts of the Kumaras when they refused their great
father’s request that they become family men.
TEXT 6
. a
सोऽवघ्यातः सुतेरेवं रत्यार्यानाुशासनेः |
IN . .
क्रोधं হুবিঘ্ जातं नियन्तपुपचकये ॥ ६ ॥
so’vadhyatah sutair evarn
pratyakhyatanusasanaih
10700100712 durvisaharm jatar
niyantum upacakrame
sah—he (Brahma); avadhyatah—thus being disrespected; sutaih—by the
sons; evam—thus; pratyakhyata—refusing to obey; anusasanaih—the order
of their father; krodham—anger; durvisasham—too much to be tolerated;
jatam—thus generated; niyantum—to control; upacakrame—tried his
best.
TRANSLATION
On the refusal of the sons to obey the order of their father, there was
much anger generated in the mind of Brahma, which he tried to control
and not express.
PURPORT
Brahma is the director in charge of the modes of passion of material
nature. Therefore it was natural for him 10 become angry on the refusal of
his sons to obey his order. Although the Kumaras were right in such acts of
refusal, Brahma, being absorbed in the mode of passion, could not check


--- Page 115 ---
Text 8] Creation of the Kumiras and Others 447
his passionate anger. He did not express it, however, because he knew that
his sons were far enlightened in spiritual advancement and thus he should
not express his anger before them.
TEXT 7
विया निगृ्माणोऽपि श्रुवोरमष्याटपजापतेः |
सद्योऽजायत तन्मन्युः कुमारो AFA: ॥ ७॥
dhiya nigrh yamano’pi
bhruvor-madhyat prajapateh
sadyo’jayata tan-manyuh
kumaro nila-lohitah
dhiya—by intelligence; nigrhyamanah—being controlled; api—in spite of;
bhruvoh—of the eyebrows; madhyat—from between; prajapateh—of
Brahma; sadyah—at once: ajayata—generated; tal—his; manyuh—anger;
kumdrah—a child; nila-lohitah— mixture of blue and red.
TRANSLATION
Although he tried to curb his anger, it came out from between his
eyebrows, and a child of mixed blue and red was immediately generated.
PURPORT
The face of anger is the same whether exhibited due to ignorance or
knowledge. Although Brahma tried to curb his anger, he could not do so,
even though he is the supreme being. Such anger in its true color came
from between the eyebrows of Brahma as Rudra, in a mixed color of blue
(ignorance) and red (passion), because anger is the product of passion and
ignorance.
TEXT 8
সখ ४
स ঈ रुरोद देवानां पूजो मगवान्‌ मवः ।
नामानि रु मे धातः स्थानानि च TEER ॥ ८ ॥
sa vai ruroda devanam
४7४० bhagavan bhavah
namani kuru me dhatah
sthanani ca jagad-guro


--- Page 116 ---
448 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
sah—he; vai—certanly; ruroda—cried loudly; devanam parvajah—the
eldest of all demigods; bhagavan—the most powerful; bhavah—Lord
Siva; namani—different names; kuru—designate; me—my; dhatah—O
destiny maker; sthanani—places; ca—also; jagat-guro—O teacher of the
universe.
TRANSLATION
After his birth he began to cry: O destiny maker, teacher of the
universe, kindly designate my name and place.
TEXT 9
इति तस्य वचः पाग्मो भगवान्‌ Rue |
-
अम्यघाद्द्रया वाचा मा रोदीस्तत्करोमि ते॥ ९॥
iti tasya vacah padmo
bhagavan paripalayan
abhyadhad bhadraya vaca
ma rodis tat karomi te
iti—thus; tasya—his; vacah—request; padmah—one who is born from the
lotus flower; bhagavan—the powerful; paripalayan—accepting the request;
abhyadhat—pacified; bhadraya—by gentle; vaca—words; ma—do not;
rodih—cry; tat—that; karomi—1 shall do it; te—as desired by you.
TRANSLATION
The all-powerful Brahma, who was born from the lotus flower, pacified
the boy with gentle words, accepting his request, and said: Do not cry.
I shall certainly do as you desire.
TEXT 10
यदरोदीः FAG सोदरेण इव॒ NEw: |
ततस्त्वायमिधास्यन्ति ATH रुद्र इति प्रजाः ॥१०॥
yad arodih sura-Srestha
sodvega iva balakah
tatas tvam abhidhasyanti
namna rudra iti prajah


--- Page 117 ---
Text 11] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 449
yat—as much as; arodih—cried loudly; sura-srestha—O chief of the demi-
gods; sodvegah— with great anxiety; iva—like; balakah —a boy; tatah—there-
fore; tvam—you; abhidhasyanti—will call; n@amna—by the name; rudra—
Rudra; iti—thus; prajah—people.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter Brahma said: O chief of the demigods, you shall be called by
the name Rudra by all people because you have so anxiously cried.
TEXT 11
इदिन्द्रियाण्यसुर्व्योम fied मदी |
WERT स्थानान्यग्रे कृतानि ते ॥११॥
hrd indriyany asur vyoma
vayur agnir jalarn mahi
suryas candras tapas caiva
sthanany agre krtani te
hrt—the heart; indriyani—the senses; asuh—life air; vyoma—the sky;
vayuh—the air; agnih—fire; jalam—water; mahi—the earth; suryah—the sun;
candrah—the moon; tapah—austerity; ca—as well as; eva—certainly;
sthanani—all these places; agre—hereinbefore; krtani—already made; te—
for your.
TRANSLATION
My dear boy, I have already selected the following places for your
residence: the heart, the senses, the air of life, the sky, the air, the fire, the
water, the earth, the sun, the moon and austerity.
PURPORT
The creation of Rudra from between the eyebrows of Brahma as the
result of his anger, generated from the mode of passion partly touched by
ignorance, is very significant. In Bhagavad-gita the principle of Rudra is
described (Bg. 3.37). Krodha (anger) is the product of kama (lust), which
is the result of the mode of passion. When lust and hankering are unsatis-
fied, the element of krodha appears, which is the formidable enemy of the
conditioned soul. This most sinful and inimical passion is represented as
ahankara, or the false egocentric attitude of thinking oneself to be all in
all. Such an egocentric attitude on the part of the conditioned soul, who


--- Page 118 ---
450 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
is completely under the control of material nature, is described in
Bhagavad-gita as foolish. The egocentric attitude is a manifestation of the
Rudra principle in the heart, wherein krodha (anger) is generated. This
anger develops in the heart and is further manifested through various
senses, like the eyes, hands and legs. When a man is angry he expresses such
anger with red-hot eyes and sometimes makes a display of clenching his
fists or kicking his legs. This exhibition of the Rudra principle is the proof
of Rudra’s presence in such places. When a man is angry he breathes very
rapidly, and thus Rudra is represented in the air of life or in the activities
of breathing. When the sky is overcast with dense clouds and roars in anger,
and when the wind blows very fiercely, the Rudra principle is manifested,
and so also when the sea water is infuriated by the wind it appears in a
gloomy feature of Rudra which is very fearful to the common man. When
fire is ablaze we can also experience the presence of Rudra, and when there
is an inundation over the earth we can understand that this is also the
representation of Rudra.

There are many earthly creatures who constantly represent the Rudra
element. The snake, tiger and lion are always representations of Rudra.
Sometimes because of the extreme heat of the sun there are cases of heat
stroke, and due to the extreme coldness created by the moon there are
cases of collapse. There are many sages empowered with the influence of
austerity and many yogis, philosophers and renouncers who sometimes
exhibit their acquired power under the influence of the Rudra principles
of anger and passion. The great yogi Durvasi, under the influence of this
Rudra principle, picked a quarrel with Maharaja Ambarisa, and a brahmana
boy exhibited the Rudra principle by cursing the great King Maharaja
Parikgit. When the Rudra principle is exhibited by persons who are not
engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the angry person falls down from the peak of his improved position. This
is confirmed as follows:

ye ‘nye ’ravindaksa vimuktamaninas
tvayy astabhavad avisuddha-buddhayah
aruhya krcchrena param [00001 tatah
४ patanty adho ’nadrta-yusmad anghrayah
(Bhag. 10.2.32)
The most lamentable falldown of the impersonalist is due to his false and
unreasonable claim of being one with the Supreme.


--- Page 119 ---
Text 14] Creation of the Kumiras and Others 451
TEXT 12
मन्यर्मनुर्महिनसो महाञ्छिव ऋतभ्वजः |
-
उग्ररेता भवः कारो वामदेवो धतव्रतः ।१२॥
manyur manur mahinaso
mahan chiva rtadhvajah
ugrareta bhavah kalo
vamadevo dhrtavratah
manyuh, manuh, mahinasah, mahan, $ivah, rtadhvajah, ugraretah,
bhavah, kalah, vamadevah, dhrtavratah—all names of Rudra.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: My dear boy Rudra, you have eleven other names:
Manyu, Manu, Mahinasa, Mahan, Siva, Rtadhvaja, Ugrareta, Bhava, Kala,
Vamadeva and Dhrtavrata.
TEXT 13
धीधैतिरसलोमा च नियुत्सर्पिरिसाम्बिका |
इरावती खथा दीक्षा रुद्राण्यो रुद्र ते लियः ॥१३॥
dhir dhrti-rasaloma ca
niyut sarpir ilambika
iravati svadha diksa
rudranyo rudra te striyah
dhih, dhrti, rasala, uma, niyut, sarpih, ila, ambikd, iravati, svadha,
diksa, rudranyah—the eleven Rudranis; rudra—O Rudra; te—unto you;
striyah—wives.
TRANSLATION
O Rudra, you also have eleven wives, called the Rudranis, and they are
as follows: Dhi, Dhrti, Rasala, Uma, Niyut, Sarpi, lla, Ambika, Iravati,
Svadha and Diksa.
TEXT 14
गृहाणेतानि नामानि स्थानानि च सयोषणः ।
एभिः सज प्रजा बहीः प्रनानामसि यत्पतिः ॥ १४॥


--- Page 120 ---
452 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
grhanaitani namani
sthanani ca sayosanah
ebhih srja praja bahvih
prajanam asi yat patih
grhana—just accept;etani—all these; namani— different names; sthanani—
as well as places; ca—also; sa-yosanah—along with wives; ebhih—with them;
srja—just generate; prajah—progeny; bahvih—on a large scale; prajanam—
of the living entities; asi—you are; yat—since; patih—the master.
TRANSLATION
My dear boy, you can now accept all the names and places designated
for you and your different wives, and since you are now one of the masters
of the living entities, you may increase the population on a large scale.
PURPORT
Brahma, as the father of Rudra, selected the wives of his son, his living
places, and his names as well. It is natural that one should accept the wife
selected by one’s father, just as a son accepts the name given by the father
or as he accepts the property offered by the father. That is the general
ceurse in increasing the population of the world. ®n the other hand, the
Kumaras did not accept the offering of their father because they were
elevated far beyond the business of generating a great number of sons. As
the son can refuse the order of the father for higher purposes, so the
father can refuse to maintain his sons in increasing population because of
higher purposes.
TEXT 15
=
इत्यादिष्टः स्वगुरुणा भगवान्नीरलं हितः |
सत्त्वाटृतिखमभावेने ससर्जात्मसमाः प्रजाः; Null
ity adistah svaguruna
bhagavan nila-lohitah
sattvakrti-svabhavena
sasarjatmasamah prajah
iti—thus; adistah—being ordered; svaguruna—by his own spiritual
master; bhagavan—the most powerful; nila-lohitah—Rudra, whose color is
mixed blue and red; sattva—power; akrti—bodily features; svabhavena—and


--- Page 121 ---
Text 16] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 453
with a very furious mode of nature; sasarja—created; atma-samah-—
like his own prototype; prajah—generations.
TRANSLATION
The most powerful Rudra, whose bodily color was blue mixed with
red, created many offspring exactly resembling him in features, strength
and furious nature.
TEXT 16
रुद्राणां रुद्रसृष्टानां समन्ताद्‌ ग्रसतां जगत्‌ |
निक्लाम्यासंख्यशो युथान्‌ प्रजापतिरशङ्कत ॥१६॥
rudranam rudra-srstanam
samantad grasatam jagat
nisamyasankhyaso yuthan
prajapatir asankata
rudranam—of the sons of Rudra; rudra-srstanam—who were generated
by Rudra;samantat—being assembled together; grasatam—while devouring;
Jjagat—the universe; nisamya—by observing their activities; asantkhyasah—
unlimited; yiathan—assembly; praja-patih—the father of the living entities;
asankata—became afraid of.
TRANSLATION
The sons and grandsons generated by Rudra were unlimited in number,
and when they assembled together they attempted to devour the entire
universe. When Brahma, the father of the living entities, saw this, he
became afraid of the situation.
PURPORT
The generations of Rudra, the incarnation of anger, were so dangerous
to the maintenance of universal affairs that even Brahma, the father of the
living entities, became afraid of them. The so-called devotees or followers
of Rudra are also a menace. They are sometimes dangerous even to Rudra
himself. Descendants of Rudra sometimes make plans to kill Rudra—by
the grace of Rudra. That is the nature of his devotees.


--- Page 122 ---
454 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
TEXT 17
अलं प्रजामिः सृष्टाभिरीटशीभिः सुरोत्तम |
ro x
मया মহ ददन्तीभिर्दिंशश्वक्षभिरूरबणः 1g ell
alam prajabhih srstabhir
idrsibhih surottama
maya 5018৫ dahantibhir
disas caksurbhir ulbanaih
alam—unnecessary ; prajabhih—by such living entities; srstabhih—
generated; idrsibhih—of this type; surottama—O best among the demi-
gods; maya—me; saha—along with; dahantibhih—who are burning; disah—
all sides; caksurbhih—by the eyes; ulbanaih—fiery flames.
TRANSLATION
Brahma told Rudra: O best among the demigods, there is no need for
you to generate living entities of this nature. They have begun to devastate
everything on all sides with the fiery flames from their eyes, and they have
even attacked me.
TEXT 18
तप॒ आतिष्ठ भद्रं ते सर्वभूतसुखाबहम्‌ |
तपसैव यथापूव ভা विश्वमिदं भवान्‌ ।१८।।
tapa atistha bhadrarn te
sarva-bhuta-sukhavaham
tapasaiva yatha purvam
srasta visvam idam bhavan
tapah—penance;atistha—be situated; bhadram— auspicious; te—unto you;
sarva—all; bhiita—living entities; sukha-avaham—bringing happiness; tapasa—
by penance; eva—only; yathd—as much as; parvam—before; srasta—will
create; visSvam—the universe; idam—this; bhavan—y ourself.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, you had better situate yourself in penance, which is
auspicious for all living entities and which will bring all benediction upon


--- Page 123 ---
Text 19] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 455
you. By penance only shall you be able to create the universe as it was
before.
PURPORT
In the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifesta-
tion, the three deities Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara, or Siva, are respec-
tively in charge. Rudra was advised not to destroy while the period of
creation and maintenance was going on, but to situate himself in penance
and wait for the time of dissolution, when his services would be called for.
TEXT 19
तपसैव परं उयोतिर्भगवन्तमधोक्षजम्‌ |
सर्व॑भूतगुहावासमञ्जसा विन्दते पुमान्‌ ॥१९॥
tapasaiva [५0771 jyotir
bhagavantam adhoksajam
sarva-bhuta-guhavasam
aiijasa vindate puman
tapasa—by penance; eva—only; param—the supreme; jyotih—light;
bhagavantam—unto the Personality of Godhead; adhoksajam—He who is
beyond the approach of the senses; sarva-bhita-guha-vasam—residing in
the heart of all living entities; aijasa—complete; vindate—can know;
puman—a person.
TRANSLATION
By penance only can one even approach the Personality of Godhead,
who is within the heart of every living entity and at the same time beyond
the reach of all senses.
PURPORT
Rudra was advised by Brahma to perform penance as an example to his
sons and followers that penance is necessary for the attainment of the
favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita it is said
that the common mass of people follow the path shown by an authority.
Thus Brahma, disgusted with the Rudra generations and afraid of being
devoured by the increase of population, asked Rudra to stop producing
such an unwanted generation and take to penance for attaining the favor


--- Page 124 ---
456 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
of the Supreme Lord. We find, therefore, in pictures, that Rudra is always
sitting in meditation for the attainment of the favor of the Lord. Indirectly,
the sons and followers of Rudra are advised to stop the business of annihi-
lation following the Rudra principle while the peaceful creation of Brahma
is going on.
TEXT 20
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवमात्मयथुतराऽऽदिष्टः परिक्रम्य गिरां पतिम्‌ |
बाढमित्यञ्चुमामन्तरय বিলহা तपसे बनम्‌ Rel
maitreya uvaca
evam atmabhuva “distah
parikramya giram patim
badham ity amum amantrya
vivesa tapase vanam
maitreyah wvica—Sit Maitreya said; evam—thus; datma-bhuva—by
Brahma; ddistah—being so requested; parikramya—by circumambulating;
giram—of the Vedas; patim—unto the master; badham—that is right; iti— thus;
amum—unto Brahma; amantrya—thus addressing; vivesa—entered. into;
tapase—for the matter of penance; vanam—into the forest.
TRANSLATION
Sri Maitreya said: Thus Rudra, being ordered by Brahma,
circumambulated his father, the master of the Vedas. Addressing him
with words of assent, he entered the forest to perform austere penances.
TEXT 21
अथाभिष्यायतः सगे दश्च पुत्राः प्रजज्ञिरे ।
भगवच्छक्तियुक्तस्य लोकसन्तानहेतवः ॥२१॥
(11111111 /1 71.1.98...
dasa putrah prajajitire
bhagavac-chakti-yuktasya
loka-santana-hetavah


--- Page 125 ---
Text 22] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 457
atha—thus; abhidhyayatah—while thinking of; sargam—creation; dasa—
ten; putrah—sons; prajajiiire—were begotten; bhagavat—regarding the Per-
sonality of Godhead; $akti—potency; yuktasya—empowered with; loka—the
world; sant@na—generation; hetavah—the causes.
TRANSLATION
Brahma, who was empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
thought of generatingliving entities and begot ten sons for the extension of
the generations.
TEXT 22
मरीविरश्यञ्जिरसौ परस्त्य पुलहः करतुः |
FRAG दक्षश्च হহাদলগ नारदः IRR)
maricir atry-angirasau
pulastyah pulahah kratuh
bhrgur vasistho daksas ca
dasamas tatra naradah
maricih, atri, angirasau, pulastyah, pulahah, kratuh, bhrguh, vasisthah,
daksah—names of sons of Brahma; dasamah—the tenth; tatra—there;
naradah—Narada.
TRANSLATION
Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhrgu, Vasistha, Daksa,
and the tenth son, Narada, were thus born.
PURPORT
The whole process of the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the
cosmic manifestation is meant to give the conditioned souls a chance to go
back home, back to Godhead. Brahma created Rudra to help him in his
creative endeavor, but from the very beginning Rudra began to devour the
whole creation, and thus he had to be stopped from such devastating
activities. Brahma therefore created another set of good children who were
mostly in favor of worldly fruitive activities. He knew very well, however,
that without devotional service to the Lord there is hardly any benefit for
the conditioned souls, and therefore he at last created his worthy son
Narada, who is the supreme spiritual master of all transcendentalists. With-


--- Page 126 ---
458 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
out devotional service to the Lord one cannot make progress in any depart-
ment of activity, although the path of devotional service is always
independent of anything material. It is only the transcendental loving
service of the Lord which can deliver the real goal of life, and thus the
service rendered by Sriman Narada Muni is the highest among all the sons
of Brahma.
TEXT 23
उत्सङ्गाभारदो जज्ञे EIST: |
प्राणादसिष्ठः AFT FERN करात्कतुः ॥२३॥
utsangan narado jajiie
dakso ngusthat svayam-bhuvah
pranad vasisthah saijato
bhrgus tvaci karat kratuh
utsangat—by transcendental deliberation; naradah—Mahamuni Narada;
jajie—generated; daksah—Daksa; angusthat—from the thumb; svayam-
bhuvah—of Brahma; pranat—from the life air or breathing; vasisthah—
Vasistha; saiijatah—was born; bhrguh—the sage Bhrgu; tvaci—from the
touch; karat—from the hand; kratuh—the sage Kratu.
TRANSLATION
Narada was born from the deliberation of Brahma, which is the best
part of his body. Vasistha was born from his breathing, Daksa from a
thumb, Bhrgu from his touch, and Kratu from his hand.
PURPORT
Narada was born from the best deliberation of Brahma because Narada
was able to deliver the Supreme Lord to anyone he liked. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead cannot be realized by any amount of Vedic knowl-
edge nor by any number of penances. But a pure devotee of the Lord like
Narada can deliver the Supreme Lord by his good will. The very name
Narada suggests that he can deliver the Supreme Lord. Nara means the
Supreme Lord, and da means one who can deliver. That he can deliver the
Supreme Lord does not mean that the Lord is like a commodity that can
be delivered to any person. But Narada can deliver to anyone the tran-
scendental loving service of the Lord as a servitor, friend, parent or lover,


--- Page 127 ---
Text 25] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 459
as one may desire out of one’s own transcendental love for the Lord. In
other words, it is Narada only who can deliver the path of bhakti-yoga, the
highest mystic means for attainment of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 24
6
पुलहो नाभितो जज्ञ पुलस्त्यः कणेयोच्छंषिः |
अङ्गिरा घुखतोऽश्ष्णोऽत्रि्मरीविर्मनसोऽभवत्‌।।२४॥
pulaho nabhito jajie
pulastyah karnayor rsih
angira mukhato ’ksno ’trir
maricir manaso ’bhavat
pulahah—the sage Pulaha; nabhitah—from the navel; jajiie—generated;
pulastyah—the sage Pulastya; karpayoh—from the ears; rsih—the great
sage; angirah—the sage Angira; mukhatah—from the mouth; akspah—
from the eyes; atrih—the sage Atri; maricih—the sage Marici; manasah—
from the mind; abhavat—appeared.
TRANSLATION
Pulastya was generated from the ears, Angira from the mouth, Atri
from the eyes, Marici from the mind and Pulaha from the navel of Brahma.
TEXT 25
घर्मः FARR यत्र नारायणः खयम्‌ |
a: पृष्ठतो TETRA: ২4
dharmah stanad daksinato
yatra narayanah svayam
adharmah prsthato yasman
mrtyur loka-bhayan-karah
dharmah—religion; stanat—from the breast; daksinatah—on the right
side; yatra—wherein; narayanah—the Supreme Lord; svayam—personally;
adharmah—irreligion; prsthatah—from the back; yasmat—from which;
mrtyuh—death;loka—to the living entity; bhayam-karah—horrible.


--- Page 128 ---
460 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
TRANSLATION
Religion was manifested from the breast of Brahma, wherein is seated the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Narayana, and irreligion appeared from
his back, where horrible death takes place for the living entity.
PURPORT
That religion was manifested from the place where the Personality of
Godhead is personally situated is very significant because religion means
devotional service to the Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita as well as the Bhagavatam. In Bhagavad-gita the last
instruction is to give up all other engagements in the name of religion and
take shelter of the Personality of Godhead. Srimad-Bhagavatam also
confirms that the highest perfection of religion is that which leads to the
devotional service of the Lord, unmotivated and unhampered by material
impediments. Religion in its perfect form is the devotional service of the
Lord, and irreligion is just the opposite. The heart is the most important
part of the body, whereas the back is the most neglected part. When one
is attacked by an enemy one is apt to endure attacks from the back and
protect himself carefully from all attacks on the chest. All types of
irreligion spring from the back of Brahma, whereas real religion, the
devotional service of the lord, is generated from the chest, the seat of
Narayana. Anything which does not lead to the devotional service of the
Lord is irreligion, and anything which leads to the devotional service of
the Lord is called religion.
TEXT 26
इदि कामो श्रुवः क्रोधो रोभश्वाधरदच्छदात्‌ !
आसाद्वाक्सिन्धवो मेदानिच्छतिः पायोरघाश्रयः 1151)
hrdi kamo bhruvah krodho
lobhas cadharadacchadat
asyad vak sindhavo medhran
nirrtih payor aghasrayah
hrdi—from the heart; kamah-—lust; bhruvah—from the eyebrows;
krodhah—anger; lobhah—greed; ca—also; adhara-dacchadat—from between
the lips; dsydat—from the mouth; wak—speaking; sindhavah—the seas;
medhrat—from the penis; nirrtih—low activities; payoh—from the anus;
agha-asrayah—reservoir of all vices.


--- Page 129 ---
Text 27] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 461
TRANSLATION
Lust and desire became manifested from the heart of Brahma, anger
from between his eyebrows, greed from between his lips, the power of
speaking from his mouth, the ocean from his penis, and low and
abominable activities from his anus, the source of all sins.
PURPORT
A conditioned soul is under the influence of mental speculation. How-
ever great one may be in the estimation of mundane education and learning,
he cannot be free from the influence of psychic activities. Therefore it is
very difficult to give up lust and the desires for low activities until one is in
the line of devotional service to the Lord. When one is frustrated in lust
and low desires, anger is generated from the mind and is expressed from
between the eyebrows. Ordinary men are therefore advised to concentrate
the mind by focusing on the place in between the eyebrows, whereas the
devotees of the l.ord are already practiced to place the Supreme Personality
of Godhead on the seat of their minds. The theory of becoming desireless
is untenable because the mind cannot be made desireless. When it is recom-
mended that one should be desireless, it is understood that one should not
desire things which are destructive to spiritual values. A devotee of the
Lord always has the Lord in his mind, and thus he does not need to be
desireless because all his desires are in relationship with the service of the
Lord. The power of speaking is called Sarasvati, or the goddess of learning,
and the birthplace of the goddess of learningis the mouth of Brahma. Even
if a man is endowed with the favor of the goddess of learning, it is quite
possible for his heart to be full of lust and material desire and his eyebrows
to display symptoms of anger. One may be very learned in the mundane
estimation, but that does not mean that he is free from all low activities of
lust and anger. Good qualifications can only be expected from a pure
devotee who is always engaged in the thought of the Lord, or in samadhi,
with faith.
TEXT 27
छायायाः FAM AF ZTE: पतिः प्रथः |
मनसो देहतशरेदं जज्ञे विश्वकृतो जगत्‌ ॥२७॥
chayayah kardamo jajiie
devahutyah patih prabhuh
manaso dehatas cedam
Jajiie visva-krto jagat


--- Page 130 ---
462 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
chayayah—by the shadow; kardamah—Kardama Muni; jajiie—became
manifested; devahutyah—of Devahuti;  patih—husband; prabhuh—the
master; manasah—from the mind; dehatah—from the body; ca—also;
idam—this; jajiie—developed; visva—the universe; krtah—of the creator;
Jjagat—cosmic manifestation.
TRANSLATION
Sage Kardama, husband of the great Devahiiti, was manifested from
the shadow of Brahma. Thus all became manifested either from the body
or the mind of Brahma.
PURPORT
Although one of the three modes of material nature is always prominent,
they are never represented unalloyed by one another. Even in the most
prominent existence of the two lower qualities, the modes of passion and
ignorance, there is sometimes a tinge of the mode of goodness. Therefore
all the sons generated from the body or the mind of Brahma were in the
modes of passion and ignorance, but some of them, like Kardama, were
born in the mode of goodness. Narada was born in the transcendental
state of Brahma.
TEXT 28
gh तन्वीं স্বযচ্দুই্বা मनः ।
अकारं चकम श्षत्ः सकाम इति नः श्चुतम्‌ NR)
(19/11/1111
svayam-bhur haratim manah
akamari cakame ksattah
sakama iti nah 57९८८472
vacam—Vak; duhitaram—unto the daughter; tanvim—born of his body;
svayam-bhith—Brahma; haratim—attracting; manah—his mind; akamam—
without being sexually inclined; cakame—desired; ksattah—O Vidura;
sa-kamah—being sexually inclined; iti—thus; nah—we; srutam—have heard.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, we have heard that Brahma had a daughter named Vak who


--- Page 131 ---
Text 29] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 463
was born from his body and who attracted his mind toward sex, although
she was not sexually inclined towards him.

PURPORT

Balavan indriya-gramo vidvamsam api karsati. It is said that the senses
are so mad and strong that they can bewilder even the most sensible and
learned man. Therefore it is advised that one should not indulge in living
alone even with one’s mother, sister or daughter. Vidvarmsam api karsati
means that even the most learned also become victims of the sensuous urge.
Maitreya hesitated to state this anomaly on the part of Brahma, who was
sexually inclined to his own daughter, but still he mentioned it because
sometimes it so happens, and the living example is Brahma himself, al-
though he is the primeval living being and the most learned within the
whole universe. If Brahma could be a victim of the sexual urge, then what
of others, who are prone to so many mundane frailties? This extraordinary
immorality on the part of Brahma was heard to have occurred in some
particular kalpa, but it could not have happened in the kalpa in which
Brahma heard directly from the Lord the four essential verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam because the Lord benedicted Brahma, after giving him lessons
on the Bhagavatam, that he would never be bewildered in any kalpa
whatsoever. This indicates that before the hearing of Srimad-Bhagavatam
he might have fallen a victim to such sensuality, but after hearing Srimad-
Bhagavatam directly from the Lord, there was no possibility of such
failures.

One should, however, take serious note of this incident. The human
being is a social animal, and his unrestrictedly mixing with the fair sex leads
to downfall. Such social freedom of man and woman, especially among
the younger section, is certainly a great stumbling block on the path of
spiritual progress. Material bondage is due only to sexual bondage, and
therefore unrestricted association of man and woman is surely a great
impediment. Maitreya cited this example on the part of Brahma just to
bring to our notice this great danger.

TEXT 29
we कृतमतिं विलोक्य पितरं सुताः ।
मरीकिभुरू्या ध्वनयो विश्वस्पात्फत्ययोधयन्‌ ॥२९।।
tam adharme krta-matim
vilokya [2८070772 sutah


--- Page 132 ---
464 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
marici-mukhya munayo
visrambhat pratyabodhayan
tam—unto him; adharme—in the matter of immorality; krta-matim—the
mind being so given; vilokya—seeing thus; pitaram—unto the father;
sutah—sons; marici-mukhyah—headed by Marici; munayah—sages;
visrambhat—with due respect; pratyabodhayan—submitted as follows.
TRANSLATION
Thus, finding their father so deluded in an act of immorality, the sages
headed by Marici, all sons of Brahma, spoke as follows with great respect.
PURPORT
The sages like Marici were not in the wrong in submitting their protests
against the acts of their great father. They knew very well that even though
their father committed a mistake, there must have been some great pur-
pose behind the show, otherwise such a great personality could not have
committed such a mistake. It might be that Brahma wanted to warn his
subordinates about human frailties in their dealings with women. This is
always very dangerous for persons who are on the path of self-realization.
Therefore, great personalities like Brahma, even when in the wrong, should
not be neglected, nor could the great sages headed by Marici show any
disrespect because of his extraordinary behavior.
TEXT 30
Fred: कृतं অল न करिष्यन्ति चापरे ।
यस्त्वं दुहितरं गच्छेरनिगपाङ्गजं प्रथः Rel
naitat purvaih krtam tvad ye
na karisyanti capare
yas (४०77 duhitaram gaccher
anigrhyangajam prabhuh
na—never; etat—such a thing; purvaih—by any other Brahma, or your-
self in any previous kalpa; krtam—performed; tvat—by you; ye—that
which; na—nor; karisyanti—will do; ca—also; apare—anyone else; yah—
that which; tvam—you; duhitaran—unto the daughter; gaccheh—would
go; anigrhya— without controlling; angajam—sex desire; prabhuh—O father.


--- Page 133 ---
Text 31] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 465
TRANSLATION
O father, this performance in which you are endeavoring to complicate
yourself was never attempted by any other Brahma, nor by anyone else,
nor by yourself in previous kalpas, nor will anyone dare to attempt it in
the future. You are the supreme being in the universe, so how is it that
you want to have sex with your daughter and cannot control your desire?
PURPORT
The post of Brahma is the supermost post in the universe, and it appears
that there are many Brahmas and many universes besides the one in which
we are situated. One who fills this post must be ideal in behavior, for
Brahma sets the example for all living entities. Brahma, the living entity
who is the most pious and spiritually elevated, is entrusted with a post next
to that of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 31
तेजीयसामपि शेत gee जगद्गुरो ।
Train वै रोकः शेमाय कल्पते ॥२१॥
tejiyasam api hy etan
na suslokyam jagadguro
yad-vrttam anutisthan vai
lokah ksemaya kalpate
tejiyasam—of the most powerful; api—also; hi—certainly; etat—such an
act; na—not suitable; suslokyam—good behavior; jagat-guro—O spiritual
master of the universe; yat—whose; vrttam—character; anutisthan— follow-
ing; vai—certainly; lokah—the world; ksemaya—for prosperity; kalpate—
becomes eligible.
TRANSLATION
Even though you are the most powerful being, this act does not suit
you because your character is followed for spiritual improvement by people
in general.
PURPORT
It is said that a supremely powerful living entity can do anything and
everything he likes and such acts da not affect him in any way. For


--- Page 134 ---
466 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
example, the sun, the most powerful fiery planet in the universe, can
evaporate water from anywhere and still remain as powerful. The sun
evaporates water from filthy places and yet is notinfected with the quality
of the filth. Similarly, Brahma remains unimpeachable in all conditions.
But still, since he is the spiritual master of all living entities, his behavior
and character should be so ideal that people will follow such sublime
behavior and derive the highest spiritual benefit. Therefore, he should not
have acted as he did.
TEXT 32
तस्मै नमो भगवते य शं स्वेन रोचिषा ।
आत्मस्थं व्यञ्जयामास स धर्मे ধান্তুমইবি ॥२२॥
(0577101 namo bhagavate
ya 8007 svena rocisa
atmastham vyaiijayamasa
sa dharmar patum arhati
tasmai—unto Him; namah—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Personality
of Godhead; yah—who; idam— this; svena—by His own; rocisa—effulgence;
atma-stham—situated in Himself; vyaiijayamasa—has manifested; sah—He;
dharmam—religion; patum— for protection; arhati—may kindly do so.
TRANSLATION
Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead,
who, by His own effulgence, while situated in Himself, has manifested this
cosmos. May He also protect religion for all goodness.
PURPORT
Lust for sexual intercourse is so strong that it appears herein that
Brahmi could not be dissuaded from his determination in spite of the
appeal by his great sons like Marici. Therefore, the great sons began to
pray to the Supreme Lord for the good sense of Brahma. It is only by the
grace of the Supreme Lord that one can be protected from the allurement
of lusty material desires. The Lord gives protection to devotees who are
always engaged in His transcendental loving service, and by His causeless
mercy He forgives the accidental fall of a devotee. Therefore, sages like
Marici prayed for the mercy of the Lord, and their prayer was fruitful.


--- Page 135 ---
Text 33] Creation of the Kumiras and Others 467
TEXT 33
स इत्थं गृणतः पुत्रान्‌ पुरो TH प्रजापतीन्‌ ।
प्रजापतिपतिस्तन्वं तत्याज व्रीडितस्तदा ।
तां Rf जगृहर्पोरां नीहारं यद्विदुस्तमः 1220
sa 01707 grpatah putran
puro drstva praja-patin
prajapati-patis tanvariu
tatyaja vriditas tada
tar 0180 jagrhur ghorar
niharam yad vidus tamah

sah—he (Brahma);  ittham—thus; grnatah—speaking; putran—sons;
purah—before; drstva—seeing; praja-patin—all the progenitors of living
entities; prajapati-patih—the father of all of them (Brahma); tanvam—
body ;tatyaja—quit; vriditah— ashamed; tada—at that time; tam— that body;
disah—all directions; jagrhuh—accepted; ghoram—blamable; niharam—fog;
yat—which; viduh—they know as; tamah—darkness.

TRANSLATION

The father of all Prajapatis, Brahma, thus seeing all his Prajapati sons
speaking in that way, became very much ashamed and at once gave up the
body which he had accepted. Later that body appeared in all directions as
the dangerous fog in darkness.

PURPORT

The best way 10 compensate for one’s sinful acts is to give up one’s
body at once, and Brahma, the leader of the living entities, showed this
by his personal example. Brahma has a fabulous duration of life, but he
was obliged to give up his body due to his grievous sin, even though he had
merely contemplated it in his mind without having actually done it.

This is a lesson for the living entities how sinful an act it is to indulge in
unrestricted sex life. Even to think of abominable sex life is sinful, and to
compensate for such sinful acts, one has to give up his body. In other
words, one’s duration of life, blessings, opulence, etc., are decreased by
sinful acts, and the most dangerous type of sinful act is unrestricted sex.

Ignorance is the cause of sinful life, or sinful life is the cause of gross
ignorance. The feature of ignorance is darkness or fog. Darkness or fog


--- Page 136 ---
468 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
still covers the whole universe, and the sun is the only counteracting
principle. One who takes shelter of the Lord, the perpetual light, has no
fear of being annihilated in the darkness of fog or ignorance.
TEXT 34
hs ও
कदाचिद्‌ ध्यायतः অবলা ARATE |
कथं खत्याम्यदं लोकान्‌ समवेतान्‌ यथा पुरा॥ २४॥
kadacid dhyayatah srastur
veda 2501771 catur-mukhat
katham sraksyamy aham lokan
samavetan yatha pura
kada-cit—once upon a time; dhydyatah—while contemplating;
srastuh—of Brahma; vedah—the Vedic literature; asan—became mani-
fested;catur-mukhat—from the four mouths; katham sraksyami—how shall
I create; aham—myself; lokan—all these worlds; samavetan—assembled;
yatha—as they were; pura—in the past.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, when Brahma was thinking of how to create the
worlds asin the past millennium, the four Vedas, which contain all varieties
of knowledge, became manifested from his four mouths.
PURPORT
As a fire can consume anything and everything without being contami-
nated, so, by the grace of the Lord, the fire of Brahma’s greatness con-
sumed his desire for the sinful act of sex with his daughter. The Vedas are
the source of all knowledge, and they were first revealed to Brahma by the
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead while Brahma was thinking
of recreating the matetial world. Brahma is powerful by dint of his
devotional service unto the Lord, and the Lord is always ready to forgive
His devotee if by chance he falls down from the noble path of devotional
service. The Srimad-Bhagavatam confirms this as follows (Bhag. 11.5.42):
sva-pada-miilam bhajatah priyasya
tyaktanya-bhavasya harih paresah


--- Page 137 ---
Text 35] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 469
vikarma yac ০০/০৫/8007 katham-cid
dhunoti sarvam hrdi sannivistah
“Any person who is engaged one hundred percent in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord, at His lotus feet, is very dear to the Personality
of Godhead Hari, and the Lord, being situated in the heart of the devotee,
excuses all kinds of sins committed by chance.” It was never expected that
a greal personality like Brahma would ever think of sex indulgence with
his daughter. The example shown by Brahma only suggests that the power
of material nature is so strong that it can act upon everyone, even Brahma.
Brahma was saved by the mercy of the Lord with alittle punishment, but
by the grace of the Lord he did not lose his prestige as the great Brahma.
TEXT 35
चातुर्होत्रं करमतन्त्रष्ुपवेदनयैः सह ।
धर्मस्य पादाअत्वारस्तयेदाशरयश्तयः 134)
catur-hotram karma-tantram
upaveda-nayaih saha
dharmasya padas catvaras
tathaivasrama-vrttayah
catuh—four; hotram—paraphernalia for sacrifice; karma—action; tan-
tram—expansions of such activities; upaveda—supplementary to the Vedas;
nayaih—by logical conclusions; saha—along with; dharmasya—of religios-
ity; padah—principles; catvarafi—four; tatha eva—in the same way ; asrama—
social orders; vrttayah —occupations.
TRANSLATION
The four kinds of paraphernalia for conducting the fire sacrifice became
manifest: the performer [the chanter], the offerer, the fire, and the action
performed in terms of the supplementary Vedas. Also the four principles of
religiosity [truth, austerity, mercy and cleanliness] and the duties in the
four social orders, all became manifest.
PURPORT
Eating, sleeping, defending and mating are the four principles of
material bodily demands which are common to both the animals and
human society. To distinguish human society from the animals there is the


--- Page 138 ---
470 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 12
performance of religious activities in terms of the social statuses and orders
of life. They are all clearly mentioned in the Vedic literatures and were
manifested by Brahma when the four Vedas were generated from his four
mouths. Thus the duties of humankind in terms of the statuses and social
orders were established to be observed by the civilized man. Those who
traditionally follow these principles are called Aryans, or progressive
human beings.

TEXT 36

विद्र उवाच

स वै विश्वसजामीश्लो वेदादीन्‌ घुखतोऽखृजत्‌।
यद्‌ यद्‌ येनासृजद्‌ देवस्तन्मे बरूहि तपोधन ॥२६॥
vidura uvaca
sa vai visva-srjam [80
vedadin mukhato’srjat
yad yad yenasrjad devas
tan me bruhi tapodhana
vidurah uvaca—Vidura said; sah—he (Brahma); vai—certainly; visva
—the universe; srjam—of those who created; isah—the controller; veda-
adin—the Vedas, etc.; mukhatah—from the mouth; asrjat—established;
yat—that; yat— which; yena—by which;asrjat—created: devah—the god; tat--
that; me—unto me; brihi—please explain;tapah-dhana— O sage whose only
wealth is penance.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O great sage whose only wealth is penance, kindly explain

to me how and with whose help Brahma established the Vedic knowledge
which emanated from his mouth.

TEXT 37

मभ्य उवाच
EAGAN वेदान्‌ GEA: |
श्ाज्रमिज्यां स्तुतिस्तोमं प्रायधित्तं व्यधात्कमात्‌ ।। ३५७


--- Page 139 ---
Text 38] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 471
maitreya uvaca
rg-yajuh-samatharvakhyan
vedan purvadibhir mukhaih
sastram ijyam stuti-stomam
prayas-cittam vyadhat kramat
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya said; rk-yajuh-saima-atharva—the four
Vedas; akhyan—of the name; vedan—Vedic literatures; purva-adibhih—
beginning with the front; mukhaih—by the mouths; sastram— Vedic hymns
not pronounced before; ijyam— priestly rituals; stuti-stomam—the subject
matter of the recilers; prayah-cittam— transcendental activities; vyadhat—
established; kramat—one after another.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: Beginning from the front face of Brahma, gradually the
four Vedas—RKk, Yajuh, Sama and Atharva—became manifest. Thereafter,
Vedic hymns which had not been pronounced before, priestly rituals, the
subject matters of the recitation, and transcendental activities were all
established, one after another.
TEXT 38
आयुर्वेदं wgdd বাল্যন वेदमात्मनः ।
स्थापत्यं EWE वेदं FREER: ॥२८॥
ayur-vedarih dhanur-vedarn
gandharvam vedam atmanah
sthapatyarm casrjad vedarn
kramat purvadibhir mukhaih
ayuh-vedam— medical science; dhanuh-vedam— military science; gandhar-
vam—musical art; vedam—they are all Vedic knowledge; atmanah—of his
own; sthapatyam—architectural; ca—also; asrjat—created; vedam—knowl-
edge; kramat—respectively; purva-adibhili—beginning from the front face;
mukhaih—mouth.
TRANSLATION
He also created the medical science, military art, musical art, and
architectural science, all from the Vedas. They all emanated one after
another, beginning from the front face.


--- Page 140 ---
472 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
PURPORT
The Vedas contain perfect knowledge, which includes all kinds of knowl-
edge necessary for human society, not only on this particular planet but on
other planets as well. It is understood that military art is also necessary
knowledge for the upkeep of social order, as is the art of music. All these
groups of knowledge are called the Upapurana, or supplements of the
Vedas. Spiritual knowledge is the main topic of the Vedas, but to help the
human being’s spiritual pursuit of knowledge, the other information, as
above mentioned, forms necessary branches of the Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 39
इतिहासपुराणानि पञ्चमं वेदमीश्वरः ।
सर्वेभ्य एव IRE: ससृजे सवेदर्शनः।॥३९॥
itthasa-puranani
paiicaman vedam ष्वा
sarvebhya eva vaktrebhyah
sasrje sarva-darsanah
itthdsa—histories; puranani—the Puranas (supplementary Vedas);
paiicamam—the fifth; vedam—the Vedic literature; i§varah—the Lord;
sarvebhyah—all together; eva—certainly; vaktrebhyah—from his mouths;
sasrje—created; sarva—all around; darsanah—one who can see all time.
TRANSLATION
Then he created the fifth Veda—the Puranas and the histories—from all
his mouths, since he could see all the past, present and future.
PURPORT
There are histories of particular countries and nations and of the world,
but the Puranas are the histories of the universe, not only in one millen-
nium, but in many kalpas. Brahma has knowledge of those historical facts,
and therefore all the Purapas are histories. As originally composed by
Brahma, they are part of the Vedas and are called the fifth Veda.


--- Page 141 ---
Text 41] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 473
TEXT 40
पोडड्युक्थौ पूर्ववक्त्रात्पुरीष्यभरिष्टतावथ |
आतोर्यामातिरात्रौ च वाजपेयं सगोसवम्‌ ।॥४०॥
sodasy-ukthau piirva-vaktrat
purisy-agnistutav atha
aptoryamatiratrau ca
vajapeyarit sagosavam
sodasi-ukthau—types of sacrifices; pitrva-vaktrat—from the eastern
mouth; purisi-agnistutau—types of sacrifices; atha—then; aptoryama-
atiratrau—types of sacrifices; ca—and; vajapeyam—type of sacrifice;
sagosavam—type of sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
All the different varieties of fire sacrifices [sodasi, uktha, purisi,
agnistoma, aptoryama, atiratra, vajapeya and gosava] became manifested
from the eastern mouth of Brahma.
TEXT 41
विद्या दानं तपः सरयं धर्मस्येति पदानि च ।
आश्रमां यथासंख्यमसृजत्सह एत्तिमिः ॥४१॥
vidya danam tapah satyari
dharmasyeti padani ca
asramams ca yatha-sankhyam
asrjat saha vrttibhih
vidya—education; danam— charity; tapah—penance; satyam—truth;
dharmasya—of religion; iti—thus; padani—four legs; ca—also; asraman—
orders of life; ca—also; yatha—as they are; sankhyam—in number;
asrjat—created; saha— along with; vrttibhih—by vocations.
TRANSLATION
Education, charity, penance and truth are said to be the four legs of
religion and to learn this there are four orders of life with different
classifications of castes according to vocation. Brahma created all these in
systematic order.


--- Page 142 ---
474 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 3, Ch. 12
PURPORT
The nucleus of the four social orders—brahmacarya or student life,
grhastha or household family life, vanaprastha or retired life for practicing
penance, and sannyasa or renounced life for preaching the truth—is the
four legs of religion. The vocational divisions are the brahmanas or the
intelligent class, the ksatriyas or administrative class, the vaisyas or mercan-
tile productive class, and the siudras or general laborer class who have no
specific qualifications. All were systematically planned and created by
Brahma for the regular promotion of self-realization. Student life is meant
for acquiring the best education; household family life is meant for grati-
fying the senses, provided it is performed with a charitable disposition of
mind. Retirement from household life is meant for penance, for advance-
ment of spiritual life, and renounced life is meant for preaching the
Absolute Truth to the people in general. The combined actions of all
members of society make the whole situation favorable for the upliftment
of the mission of human life. The beginning of this social institution is
based on education meant for purifying the animal propensities of the
human being. The highest purificatory process is knowledge of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the purest of the pure.
TEXT 42
सावित्रं प्राजापत्यं च बराच चाथ शृहत्तथा ।
वार्तासञ्चयशाठीवशिरोञ्छ इति वै गृहे ॥४२॥
savicrar prajapatyar ca
brahmari catha brhat tatha
varta saiicaya-salina-
Siloiicha iti vai grhe
savitram—the thread ceremony of the twice-born; prajapatyam—to
execute the vow for one year; ca— and; brahmam—acceptance of the Vedas;
ca—and; atha—also; brhat—complete abstinence from sex life; tatha—then;
varta—vocation in terms of Vedic sanction; saiicaya— professional duty;
Salina—livelihood without asking anyone for cooperation; Siloiicha—
picking up rejected grains; iti—thus; vai—even though; grhe—in household
life.


--- Page 143 ---
Text 43] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 475
TRANSLATION
Then the thread ceremony for the twice-born was inaugurated, as were
the rules to be followed for at least one year after acceptance of the Vedas,
rules for observing complete abstinence from sex life, vocations in terms of
Vedic injunctions, various professional duties in household life, and the
method of maintaining a livelihood without anyone’s cooperation by
picking up rejected grains.
PURPORT
During student life the brahmacaris were given full instructions about
the importance of the human form of life. Thus the basic education was
designed to encourage the student in becoming free from family encum-
brances. Only students who were unable to accept such a vow in life were
allowed to go home and marry a suitable wife. Otherwise, the student
would remain a permanent brahmacari, observing complete abstinence
from sex life for his whole life. It all depended on the quality of the
student’s training. We had the opportunity to meet an avowed brahmacart
in the personality of our spiritual master, Om Visnupada Sri- Srimad
Bhaktisiddhanta Gosvam1 Maharaja. Such a great soul is called a naisthika-
brahmacari.
TEXT 43
वैखानसा वालखिल्यौदुम्बराः फेनपा वने |
- ৬
न्यासे इटीचकः पूवं बह्योदो दंसनिष्कियौ ne
vaikhanasa valakhilyau-
dumbarah phenapa vane
nyase kuti-cakah purvarn
bahvodo harisa-niskriyau
vaikhanasah—the section of men who retire from active life and live on
half-boiled meals; valakhilya—one who quits his former stock of grains
on receipt of more; audumbarah—one who lives on what he gets from the
direction towards which he starts after rising from bed; phenapah—one
who lives on the fruits which automatically fall from the tree; vane—in the
forest; nyase—in the order of renunciation; kuti-cakah—life in the family
without attachment; purvam—in the beginning; bahvodah—giving up all
material activities and engaging fully in transcendental service; hariisah—


--- Page 144 ---
476 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
fully engaged in transcendental knowledge; niskriyau—stopping all kinds
of activities.
TRANSLATION
The four divisions of retired life are the vaikhanasas, valakhilyas,
audumbaras and phenapas. The four divisions of the renounced order of
life are the kuti-cakas, bahvodas, hanisas and nigkriyas. All these were
manifested from Brahma.
PURPORT
The varpasrama-dharma, or the institution of the four divisions and
orders of social and spiritual life, is not a new invention of the modern age,
as proposed by the less intelligent. It is an institution established by
Brahma from the beginning of the creation. This is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gitd, in the Fourth Chapter: catur-varnyam mayasrstam (Bg.4.13).
TEXT 44
AR त्रयी বাবা दण्डनीतिस्तथैव च ।
एवं व्याहृतयश्चासन्‌ प्रणवो यस्य दहतः ॥४४॥
anviksiki tray varta
danda-nitis tathaiva ca
evar vyahrtayas casan
pranavo hyasya dahratah
anviksiki—logic; trayi—the three goals, namely religion, economy
and salvation; wdrtd—sense gratification; dapda—law and order;
nitih— moral codes; tatha—as also; eva ca—respectively; evam— thus;
vyahrtayah—the celebrated hymns bhah, bhuvah, and svah;ca—also;
asan—came into existence; prapavah—the orikara; hi—certainly; asya—of
him (Brahma); dahratah—from the heart.
TRANSLATION
The science of logical argument, the Vedic goals of life, law and order,
moral codes, and the celebrated hymns bhiih, bhuvah and svah all became
manifested from the mouths of Brahma, and the pranava omkara was
manifested from his heart.


--- Page 145 ---
Text 46] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 477
TEXT 45
- - -
तस्योष्णिगासीछ्छोमभ्यो गायत्री च त्वचो विमोः।
्रिष्टुम्मांसारस्नुतोऽनुषटुन्जगत्यस्थः प्रजापतेः ४५
tasyosnig astl lomabhyo
gayatri ca tvaco vibhoh
tristum mamsat snuto’nustub
jagaty asthnah prajapateh
tasya—his; usnik—one of the Vedic melers; asit—generated; lomabhyah—
from the hairs on the body; gayatri—the principal Vedic hymn; ca—also;
tvacah—from the skin; vibhoh—of the lord; tristubh—a particular type of
poetic meter; mamsat—from the flesh; snutafi—from the sinews; anugtabh—
another type of poetic meter; jagati—another type of poetic meter; asthnah
—from the bones; prajapateh—of the father of the living entities.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the art of literary expression, usnik, was generated from the
hairs on the body of the almighty Prajapati. The principal Vedic hymn,
gayatri, was generated from the skin, tristup from the flesh, anustup from
the veins, and jagati from the bones of the lord of the living entities.
TEXT 46
मउजायाः FETT बृहती प्राणतोऽभवत्‌ : ।७६॥
majjayah panktir utpanna
brhati pranato *bhavat
majjayah—from the bone marrow; panktih— the particular type of verse;
utpanna—became manifested; brhati—another type of verse; pranatah—
out of the life breathing; abhavat— generated.


--- Page 146 ---
478 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
TRANSLATION
The art of writing verse, pankti, became manifested from the bone
marrow, and that of brhati, another type of verse, was generated from the
life-breath of the lord of the living entities.
TEXT 47
EEE: स्वरा दह IEA |
उ्माणमिन्द्रियाण्याहुरन्तःस्था बलमात्मनः |
खराः सप्त विहारेण मवन्ति ख प्रजापतेः ॥४७॥
sparsas tasyabhavaj jivah
svaro deha udahrta
usmanam indriyany ahur
antahstha balam atmanah
svarah sapta viharena
bhavanti sma prajapateh
sparsah —the set of letters from ka to ma; tasya—his; abhavat—became;
jivah—the soul; svarah—vowels; dehah—his body; udahrtah—are expressed;
usmanam—the letters $a, sa, sa and ha; indriyani—the senses; ahuh—are
called; antahsthah—the set of letters so known (ya, ra, la and va); balam—
energy; atmanah—of his self; svarah— music; sapta—seven; viharena—by the
sensual activities; bhavanti sma—became manifested; prajapateh—of the
lord of the living entities.
TRANSLATION
Brahmai'’s soul manifested as the touch alphabets, his body as the vowels,
his senses as the sibilant alphabets, his strength as the intermediate alpha-
bets and his sensual activities as the seven notes of music.
PURPORT
In Sanskrit there are thirteen vowels and thirty-five consonants. The
vowels are a, a, i, i, u, च, 7, ह, |, e, ai, 0, au, and the consonants are ka,
kha, ga, gha, etc. Amongst the consonants, the first twenty-five letters are
called the sparsas. There are also four antahsthas. Of the 05705
there are three s’s, called talavya, miirdhanya and danta. The musical notes
are sa, 7, ga, ma, pa, dha, and ni. All these sound vibrations are originally
called sabda-brahma, or spiritual sound. It is said, therefore, that Brahma


--- Page 147 ---
Text 48] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 479
was created in the Maha-kalpa as the incarnation of spiritual sound. The
Vedas are spiritual sound, and therefore there is no need of material
interpretation for the sound vibration of the Vedic literature. The Vedas
should be vibrated as they are, although they are symbolically represented
with letters which are known to us materially. At the ultimate issue there
is nothing material because everything has its origin in the spiritual world.
The material manifestation is therefore called illusion in the proper sense
of the term. For those who are realized souls there is nothing but spirit.
TEXT 48
शब्द ब्रह्मात्मनस्तस्य व्यक्ताव्यक्तात्मनः परः |
- ৬
ज्मावमाति विततो नानाशक्त्युपब्ंदितः ive
sabda-brahmatmanas tasya
vyaktavyaktatmanah parah
brahmavabhati vitato
nana-sakty-upabrmhitah

sabda-brahma— transcendental sound; atmanah—of the Supreme Lord;
tasya—His; vyakta—manifested; avyakta-atmanah—of the unmanifested;
parah— transcendental; brahma— the Absolute; avabhati—completely mani-
fested; vitatah— distributing; nana— multifarious; sakti—energies; upabrr-
hitah—invested with.

TRANSLATION

Brahma is the personal representation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as the source of transcendental sound and is therefore above the
conception of manifested and unmanifested. Brahma is the complete form
of the Absolute Truth and is invested with multifarious energies.

PURPORT

The post of Brahma is the highest responsible post within the universe,
and it is offered to the most perfect personality of the universe. Sometimes
the Supreme Personality of Godhead has to become Brahma when there
is no suitable living being to occupy the post. In the material world, Brahma
is the complete representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and transcendental sound, prapava, comes from him. He is therefore
invested with multifarious energies, from which all the demigods like Indra,


--- Page 148 ---
480 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
Candra and Varuna are manifested. His transcendental value is not to be
minimized, even though he exhibited a tendency to enjoy his own daughter.
There is a purpose for the exhibition of such a tendency by Brahma, and
he is not to be condemned like an ordinary living entity.
TEXT 49
ततोऽपराषठपादाय स सर्गाय मनो दधे 120
tato’ param upadaya
sa sargaya mano dadhe
tatah—thereafter; aparam—another; upadaya—having accepted; sah—he;
sargdya—in the matter of creation; maneh—mind; dadhe—gave attention.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter Brahma accepted another body in which sex life was not
forbidden, and thus he engaged himself in the matter of further creation.
PURPORT
In his former body, which was transcendental, affection for sex life was
forbidden, and Brahma therefore had to accept another body to allow
himself to be connected with sex. He thus engaged himself in the matter of
creation. His former body transformed into fog, as previously described.
TEXT 50
wf भूरिरीर्याणामपि सग॑मविस्ठ्तम्‌ ।
ज्ञात्वा तद्धृदये भूयश्चिन्तयामास कौरव ॥५०॥
rsinar bhuriviryanam
api sargam avistrtam
721४6 tad dhyrdaye bhiyas
cintayamasa kaurava
rsinam—of the great sages; bhiiri-viryapam—with great potential power; api
—in spite of; sargam—the creation; avistrtam—not extended; jigtva—know-


--- Page 149 ---
Text 52] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 481
ing; tat—that; hrdaye—in his heart; bhiiyah— again; cintayamasa—he began
to consider; kaurava—O son of the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
0 son of the Kurus, when Brahma saw that in spite of the presence of
sages of great potency there was no sufficient increase in population, he
began to seriously consider how the population could be increased.
TEXT 51
अहो अद्भुतमेतन्मे व्यापरतस्यापि नित्यदा ।
न ধীণন্দ प्रजा ननं दैवमत्र विघातकम्‌ ॥५१॥
aho adbhutam etan me
vyaprtasyapi nityada
na hy edhante praja ninariu
daivam atra vighatakam
aho—alas; adbhutam—it is wonderful; etat—this; me—for me; vydprtasya
—being busy; api—although; nityada—always; na—does not; hi—certainly;
edhante—generate; prajah—living entities; nitnam—however; daivam—des-
tiny; atra—herein; vighatakam—against.
TRANSLATION
Brahma thought to himself: Alas, it is wonderful that in spite of my
being scattered all over, there is still insufficient population throughout
the universe. There is no other cause for this misfortune save and except
destiny.
TEXT 52
EN
एवं युक्तकृतस्तस्य दंव ावेक्षतस्तदा |
कस्य ETRE देषा यत्कायमभिचक्षते WRI
evam yukta-krtas tasya
daivait caveksatas tada
kasya riipam abhud dvedha
yat kayam abhicaksate


--- Page 150 ---
482 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
evam—thus; yukta—contemplating; krtah—while doing so; tasya—his;
daivam—supernatural power; ca—also; aveksatah— observing; tada—at that
time; kasya—of Brahma; rapam—form; abhit—became manifested;
dvedha—twofold; yat—which is; kayam—his body; abhicaksate—is said to
be.
TRANSLATION
While he was thus absorbed in contemplation and was observing the
supernatural power, two other forms were generated from his body. They
are still celebrated as the body of Brahma.
PURPORT
Two bodies came out from the body of Brahma. One had a moustache,
and the other had swollen breasts. No one can explain the source of their
manifestation, and therefore up until today they are known as the kayam,
or the body of Brahma, with no indication of their relationship as his son
or daughter.
TEXT 53
ताभ्यां रूपविमागाम्यां मिथुनं समपद्यत ॥५३॥
tabhyarh rupa-vibhagabhyarn
mithunam samapadyata
tabhyam—of them; rupa—form; vibhagabhyam—thus being divided;
mithunam—sex relation; samapadyata—perfectly executed.
TRANSLATION
The two newly separated bodies united together in a sexual relationship.
TEXT 54
यस्तु तत्र JA सोऽभून्भयुः SEER: स्वराट्‌ |
खी याऽऽसीच्छतरूपाख्या महिष्यस्य महात्मनः 114311
yas tu (0८70 puman so’bhiin
manuh svayambhuvah svarat


--- Page 151 ---
Text 56] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 483
str yasic chataripakhya
mahisy asya mahatmanah
yah—one who; tu—but; tatra—there; puman—the male; sah—he; abhut—
became; manuh—the father of mankind; svayambhuvah—of the name
Svayambhuvaj; svarat—fully independent; stri—the woman; ya—one who;
asit—there was; sataripa—of the name Satarfipa; akhya—known as;
mahisi—the queen;asya—of him; mahatmanah—the great soul.
TRANSLATION
Out of them, the one who had the male form became known as the Manu
named Svayambhuva, and the woman became known as Satariipa, the
queen of the great soul Manu.
TEXT 55
तदा मिथुनधर्मेण प्रजा द्येधाम्बभूविरे ॥५५॥
tada mithuna-dharmena
praja hy edham babhuvire
tada—at that time; mithuna—sex life; dharmena—according to regula-
tive principles; prajah—generations; hi—certainly; edham—increased;
babhitvire—took place.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, by sex indulgence, they gradually increased generations of
population one after another.
TEXT 56
स चापि श्षतरूपायां पञ्चापत्यान्यजीजनत्‌ |
ने,
प्रियव्रतो्तानपादौ fa: कन्याश्च भारत ।
आङतिर्दबहूतिश्च प्र्तिरिति सत्तम ॥५६॥
sa capi Satarupayam
paiicapatyany ajijanat
priyavratottanapadau


--- Page 152 ---
484 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 12
tisrah kanyas ca bharata
akutir devahutis ca
† prasutir iti sattama
sah—he (Manu); ca—also; api—in due course; Satarupayam—unto
Satariipa; paiica—five; apatyani—children; ajijanat—begot; priyavrata—
Priyavrata; uttanapadau—Uttanapada; tisrah—three in number; kanyah—
daughters; ca—also; bharata—O son of Bharata; akitih—Akati; devahitih—
Devahiiti; ca—and; prasittih—Prasuti; iti—thus;sattama—O best of all.
TRANSLATION
0 son of Bharata, in due course of time he [Manu] begot in Satariipa
five children—two sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada, and three daughters,
Akiti, Devahuti and Prasati.
TEXT 57
AER रुचये प्रदात्कद॑माय तु मध्यमाम्‌ |
दृश्वायदातप्र्तिं च यत आपूरितं जगत्‌ ॥५७॥
akutim rucaye pradat
kardamaya tu madhyamam
daksayadat [01705001778 ca
yata apuritarh jagat
akutim—the daughter named Akiiti;rucaye—unto the sage Ruci;pradat—
handed over; kardamaya—unto the sage Kardama; tu—but; madhyamam—
the middle one (Devahiti); daksaya—unto Daksa; adat—handed over;
prasutim—the youngest daughter; ca—also; yatah—wherefrom; apuritam—
is fulfilled; jagat— the whole world.
TRANSLATION
The father, Manu, handed over his first daughter, Akiiti, to the sage
Ruci, the middle daughter, Devahiiti, to the sage Kardama, and the
youngest, Prasiiti, to Daksa. From them, all the world filled with
population.


--- Page 153 ---
Text 57] Creation of the Kumaras and Others 485
i PURPORT
The history of the creation of the population of the universe is given
herewith. Brahma is the original living creature in the universe, from whom
were generated the Manu Svayambhuva and his wife Satarapa. From Manu,
two sons and three daughters were born, and from them all the population
in different planets has sprung up until now. Therefore, Brahma is known
as the grandfather of everyone, and the Personality of Godhead, being the
father of Brahma, is known as the great-grandfather of all living beings.
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita as follows (Bg. 11.39):
vayur yamo ‘gnir varunah sasankah
prajapatis (४५72 prapitamahas ca
namo namas te ‘stu sahasra-krtvah
punas$ ca bhuyo ’pi namo namas te
“You are the Lord of air, the supreme justice Yama, the fire, and the Lord
of rains. You are the moon, and You are the great-grandfather. Therefore
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and again.”
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Twelfth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Creation of the Kumaras
and Others.”


--- Page 154 ---
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Appearance of Lord vVaraha
TEXT 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
निरम्य वाच॑ वदतो नेः पुण्यतमां चष ।
भूयः पप्रच्छ कौरव्यो वासुदेवकथाद्तः ॥ १ ॥
$ri Suka uvaca
nisamya vacam vadato
muneh punyatamam nrpa
bhuyah papraccha kauravyo
vasudeva-kathadrtah
द $ukah uvaca—Sr1 Sukadeva Gosvami said; nisamya—after hearing;
vacam—talks; vadatah—while speaking; muneh—of Maitreya Muni;
punyatamam—the most virtuous; nrpa—O King; bhiiyah—then again;
papraccha—inquired; kauravyah—the best amongst the Kurus (Vidura);
vasudeva-katha—topics on the subject of the Personality of Godhead,
Vasudeva; adrtah—one who so adores.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: 0 King, after hearing all these most virtuous
topics from the sage Maitreya, Vidura inquired further on the topics of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, which he adored to hear.
PURPORT
The word adrtah is significant because it indicates that Vidura had a
natural inclination for hearing the transcendental message of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and he was never fully satisfied though continuing
to hear those topics. He wanted to hear more and more so that he could be
more and more blessed by the transcendental message.
487


--- Page 155 ---
488 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
TEXT 2
विदुर उवाच
स वै खायभ्थवः सम्राट्‌ प्रियः पुत्रः खयम्शुवः।
प्रतिलम्य प्रियां off किं चकार ततो शुने ॥ २ ॥
vidura uvaca
sa vai svayambhuvah samrat
priyah putrah svayambhuvah
pratilabhya priya patnirn
kim cakara tato mune
vidurah uvdca—Vidura ৪3৪10] sah—he; vai—easily; svayambhuvah—
Svayambhuva Manu; samrat—the king of all kings; priyah—dear; putrah—
son; svayambhuvah—of Brahma; pratilabhya— after obtaining; priyam—most
loving; patnim—wife; kim—what; cakara—did; tatah—thereafter; mune—O
great sage.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O great sage, what did Svayambhuva, the dear son of
Brahma, do after obtaining his very loving wife?
TEXT 3
ष्वरित॑॑तस्य॒रार्ज्वेरादिराजस्य ससम ।
নহি मे अदधानाय विष्वक्सेनाश्रयो gat ॥ ३ ॥
caritarn tasya rajarser
adirajasya sattama
brihi me sraddadhanaya
visvaksenasrayo hy asau
caritam—character; tasya—his; rajarseh—of the saintly king; adi-
rajasya—of the original king; sattama—O most pious one; brihi—kindly
speak ; me—unto me; §raddadhanaya—unto one eager to receive; visvaksena—
of the Personality of Godhead; asrayah—one who has taken shelter; hi—
certainly; asau— that king.
TRANSLATION
O best of the virtuous, the original king of kings [Manu] was a great
devotee of the Personality of Godhead Hari, and thus it is worth hearing
of his sublime character and activities. Please describe them. I am very
eager to hear.


--- Page 156 ---
Text 4] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 489
PURPORT
Srimad-Bhagavatam is full of the transcendental topics of the Person-
ality of Godhead and His pure devotees. In the absolute world there is no
difference in quality between the Supreme Lord and His pure devotee.
Therefore, hearing the topics of the Lord and hearing of the character and
activities of the pure devotee have the same result, namely, the develop-
ment of devotional service.
TEXT 4
चैतस्य पुंसां सुचिरश्रमस्य
नन्वञ्जसा घरिभिरीडितोऽ्थः |
तसद्गुणानुश्रवणं মন্তব্য
पादारविन्दं इृदयेषु येषाम्‌ lg
Srutasya purisam sucira-Sramasya
nanv aitjasa suribhir idito’rthah
tat-tad-gunanusravanarn mukunda-
padaravindari hrdayesu yesam
Srutasya—of persons who are in the process of hearing; purmsam—of
such persons; sucira—for a long time: sramasya—laboring very hard; nanu—
certainly; aiijasa— elaborately ;siiribhih—by pure devotees; iditah—explained
by; arthah—statements; tat—that; tat—that; guna—transcendental qualities;
anusravanam—thinking; mukunda—the Personality of Godhead, who awards
liberation; pada-aravindam—the lotus feet; hrdayesu—within the heart;
yesam— of them.
TRANSLATION
Persons who engage in hearing from a spiritual master with great labor
and for a long time must hear from the mouths of pure devotees about
the character and activities of pure devotees. Pure devotees always think
within their hearts of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, who
awards liberation to His devotees.
PURPORT
Transcendental students are those who undergo great penance in being
trained by hearing the Vedas from a bona fide spiritual master. Not only
must they hear about the activities of the Lord, but they must also hear
about the transcendental qualities of the devotees who are constantly


--- Page 157 ---
490 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
thinking of the lotus feet of the Lord within their hearts. A pure devotee
of the Lord cannot be separated from the lotus feet of the Lord for even
a moment. Undoubtedly the Lord is always within the hearts of all living
creatures, but they hardly know about it because they are deluded by the
illusory material energy. The devotees, however, realize the presence of
the Lord, and therefore they can always see the lotus feet of the Lord
within their hearts. Such pure devotees of the Lord are as glorious as the
Lord; they are, in fact, recommended by the Lord as more worshipable
than He Himself. Worship of the devotee is more potent than worship of
the Lord. It is therefore the duty of the transcendental students to hear
of pure devotees, as explained by similar devotees of the Lord, because
one cannot explain about the Lord or His devotee unless he happens to be
a pure devotee himself.
TEXT 5
figs उवाच
इति वाणं विदुरं विनीतं
FEE रणोपघानम्‌ |
प्रहृष्टरोमा मगवत्कथायां
भ्रणीयमानो ghar ॥ ५॥
ॐ suka ८४८८०
iti bruvanam viduram vinitam
sahasra-Sirsnas caranopadhanam
prahrsta-roma bhagavat-kathayam
prantyamano munir abhyacasta
ऽ Sukah uvaca— Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; bruvanam—
speaking; viduram—unto Vidura; vinitam—very gentle; sahasra-Sirsnah—the
Personality of Godhead Krsna; carana—lotus feet; upadhanam— pillow;
prahrsta-roma—hairs standing in ecstasy; bhagavat—in relationship with
the Personality of Godhead; kathayam—im the words; praniyamanah—
being influenced by such spirit; munih—the sage; abhyacasta—attempted
to speak.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: The Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna was
pleased to place His lotus feet on the lap of Vidura because Vidura was
very meek and gentle. The sage Maitreya was very pleased with Vidura’s
words, and, being influenced by his spirit, he attempted to speak.


--- Page 158 ---
Text 7] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 491
PURPORT
The word sahasra-sirsnah is very significant. One who has diverse energies
and activities and a wonderful brain is known as the sahasra-§irsnah. This
qualification is applicable only to the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna
and no one else. The Personality of Godhead was pleased to dine some-
times with Vidura at his home, and while resting He placed His lotus feet
on the lap of Vidura. Maitreya was inspired by the thought of Vidura’s
wonderful fortune. The hairs of his body stood on end, and he was pleased
to narrate the topics of the Personality of Godhead with great delight.
TEXT 6
मैत्रेय उवाच
यदा EAT साधै जातः SEER मजुः |
भ्राञ्लकिः সাব वेदगभममाप्त ॥ ६ ॥
maitreya uvaca
yada sva-bharyaya sardhar
jatah svayambhuvo manuh
praiijalih prapatas cedar
veda-garbham abhasata
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya said; yedi—when; sva-bharyaya—along
with his wife; sardham—accompanied by; jatah—appeared; svayambhuvah—
Svayambhuva Manu; manuh— the father of mankind; praiijalih—with folded
hands; prapatah—in obeisances; ca—also; idam—this; veda-garbham—unto
the reservoir of Vedic wisdom;abhasata—addressed.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya said to Vidura: After his appearance, Manu, the
father of mankind, along with his wife, thus addressed the reservoir of
Vedic wisdom, Brahma, with obeisances and folded hands.
TEXT 7
त्वभेकः सवभूतानां जन्मङृद्‌ इतिदः पिता ।
तथापि नः प्रजानां ते शुश्रूषा केन वा मवेत्‌ ॥ ७ ॥
tvam ekah sarva-bhutanarm
janma-krd vrttideh pita
tathapi nah prajanam te
$usrusa kena va bhavet


--- Page 159 ---
492 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
tvam—you; ekah—one; sarva—all; bhutanam—living entities; janma-krt—
progenitor; vrttidah—source of subsistence; pita—the father; tathapi—yet;
nah— ourselves; prajanam— of all who are born; te—of you; susrusa—service;
kena—how; va—either; bhavet—may be possible.
TRANSLATION
You are the father of all living entities and the source of their
subsistence because they are all born of you. Please order us how we may
be able to render service unto you.
PURPORT
A son’s duty is not only to make the father the source of supply for all
his needs, but also, when he is grown up, to render service unto him. That
is the law of creation beginning from the time of Brahma. A father’s duty
is to bring up the son until he is grown, and when the son is grown up, it is
his duty to render service unto the father.
TEXT 8
€.
तद्विधेदि नमस्तुभ्यं कमेखीब्यारेमशक्तिषु |
यत्ृत्वेह यशो বিষ্ান্তুন च भवेद्धतिः ॥ ८ ॥
tad vidhehi 7147105 tubhyarm
karmasv idyatma-saktisu
yat krtveha yaso visvag
amutra ca bhaved gatih
tat—that; vidhehi—give direction; namah—my obeisances; tubhyam—
unto you; karmasu—in duties; idya—Q worshipful one; atma-saktisu—
within our working capacity; yat—which; krtva—doing; iha—in this world;
yasah—fame; visvak—everywhere; amutra—in the next world; ca—and;
bhavet—it should be; gatih—progress.
TRANSLATION
O worshipful one, please give us your direction for the execution of
duty within our working capacity so that we can follow it for fame in this
life and progress in the next.
PURPORT
Brahma is the direct recipient of Vedic knowledge from the Personality
of Godhead, and anyone discharging his entrusted duties in disciplic


--- Page 160 ---
Text 9] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 493
succession from Brahma is sure to gain fame in this life and salvation in the
next. The disciplic succession from Brahma is called the Brahma-
sampradaya, and it descends as follows: Brahma, Narada, Vyasa, Madhva
Muni (Puarnaprajfia), Padmanabha, Nrhari, Madhava, Aksobhya, Jayatirtha,
Jaanasindhu, Dayanidhi, Vidyanidhi, Rajendra, Jayadharma, Purugottama,
Brahmanyatirtha, Vyasatirtha, Laksmipati, Madhavendra Puri, I§vara Puri,
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Svariipa Damodara and Sri Riipa Gosvami and
others, ऽन Raghunatha-dasa Gosvami, Krgna-dasa Gosvami, Narottama-
dasa Thakura, Visvanatha Cakravarti, Jagannatha-dasa Babaji, Bhaktivinoda
Thakura, Gaurakisora-dasa Babajf, Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami.

This line of disciplic succession from Brahma is spiritual, whereas the
genealogical succession from Manu is material, but both are on the pro-
gressive march towards the same goal of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 9
নহাবান্দ
श्ीतस्तुभ्यमहं तात অলি स्ताद्वां क्षितीश्वर ।
RRA हदा aT मेत्यारमनापितम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
brahmovaca
pritas tubhyam 0710772 tata
svasti stad vam ksitisvara
yan nirvyalikena hrda
$adhi mety atmanarpitam

brahma uvdca—Brahma said; pritah—pleased; tubhyam—unto you;
aham—1; tata—my dear son; svasti—all blessings; stat—let there be; vam—un-
to you both; ksiti-tsvara—@® lord of the world; yat—because; nirvyalikena—
without reservation; hrda—by the heart; sadhi—give instruction; ma—unto
me; iti—thus; atmana—by self ; arpitam—surrendered.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma said: My dear son, 0 lord of the world, I am very pleased
with you, and I desire all blessings for both you and your wife. You have
without reservation surrendered yourself unto me with your heart for my
instructions.

PURPORT

The relationship between the father and the son is always sublime. The

father is naturally disposed with good will towards the son, and he is


--- Page 161 ---
494 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
always ready to help the son in his progress in life. But in spite of the
father’s good will, the son is sometimes misguided because of his misuse
of personal independence. Every living entity, however small or big he may
be, has the choice of independence. If the son is unreservedly willing to be
guided by the father, the father is ten times more eager to instruct and
guide him by all means. The father and son relationship as exhibited herein
in the dealings of Brahma and Manu is excellent. Both the father and the
son are well qualified, and their example should be followed by all human-
kind. Manu, the son, unreservedly asked the father, Brahma, to instruct
him, and the father, who was full of Vedic wisdom, was very glad to
instruct. The example of the father of mankind may be rigidly followed
by mankind, and that will advance the cause of the relationship of fathers
and sons.
TEXT 10
a
एतावत्यास्मजै वीर॒ कार्या ध्पविति्गुरी |
' शक्त्याप्रमतग्ेत सादरं गतमत्सरैः ॥१०॥
etavaty atmajair vira
karya hy apacitir gurau
Saktyapramattair grhyeta
sadarar gata-matsaraih
etavati—just exactly like this; atmajaih—by the offspring; vira—O hero;
karya—should be performed; hi—certainly; apacitih—worship; gurau—
unto the superior; saktya—with full capacity; apramattaih—by the sane;
grhyeta—should be accepted; sadaram—with great delight; gata-matsaraih—
by those who are beyond the limit of envy.
TRANSLATION
O hero, your example is quite befitting a son in relationship with his
father. This sort of adoration for the superior is required. One who is
beyond the limit of envy and who is sane accepts the order of his father
with great delight and executes it to his full capacity.
PURPORT
When the four previous sons of Brahma, the sages Sanaka, Sanatana,
Sanandana and Sanat-Kumara, refused to obey their father, Brahma was
mortified, and his anger was manifested in the shape of Rudra. That inci-
dent was not forgotten by Brahma, and therefore the obedience of Manu


--- Page 162 ---
Text 11] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 495
Svayambhuva was very encouraging. From the material point of view, the
four sages’ disobedience to the order of their father was certainly abomin-
able. but because such disobedience was for a higher purpose, they were
free from the reaction of disobedience. Those who disobey their fathers
on material grounds, however, are surely subjected to disciplinary reaction
for such disobedience. Manu’s obedience to his father on material grounds
was certainly free from envy, and in the material world it is imperative for
ordinary men to follow the example of Manu.
TEXT 11
स त्वमस्यामपत्यानि सदशान्यार्मनो गुणैः |
उत्पाद्य चास धर्मेण गां यज्ञैः पुरुषं यज ॥११॥
sa tvam asyam apatyani
sadrsany atmano gunaih
utpadya asa dharmena
gam yajiaih purusam yaja

sah—therefore that obedient son; tvam—as you are; asyam—in her;
apatyani—children; sadréani—equally qualified; atmanah—of yourself;
gunaih—with the characteristics; utpadya—having begotten; sdsa—rule;
dharmena—on the principles of devotional service; gim—the world; yajitaih—
by sacrifices; purusam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaja—worship.

TRANSLATION

Since you are my very obedient son, I ask you to beget children qualified
like yourself in the womb of your wife. Rule the world in pursuance of
the principles of devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and thus worship the Lord by performances of कु.

PURPORT

The purpose of the material creation by Brahma is clearly described
herein. Every human being should beget nice children in the womb of his
wife, as a sacrifice for the purpose of worshiping the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in devotional service. In the Visnu Purana it is stated:

varpasramdcdra-vatd purusena parah puman
visnur aradhyate pantha nanyat tat-tose-karapam

“One can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vignu, by proper
discharge of the principles of varna and asrama. There is no alternative to


--- Page 163 ---
496 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
pacifying the Lord by execution of the principles of the varpasrama
system.” (Visnu Purana 3.8.9)

Vignu worship is the ultimate aim of human life. Those who take the
license of married life for sense enjoyment must also take the responsibili-
ty to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, and the first
steppingstone is the varnasrama-dharma system. Varnasrama-dharma is the
systematic institution for advancing in worship of Vignu. However, if one
directly engages in the process of devotional service to the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, it may not be necessary to undergo the disciplinary
system of varpasrama-dharma. The other sons of Brahma, the Kumaras,
directly engaged in devotional service, and thus they had no need to
execute the principles of varpasrama-dharma.

TEXT 12
परं शुश्रूषणं मद्यं॑स्यात्प्जारक्षया चप ।
. ९
भगवांस्ते प्रजामतैटेषीकेशोऽयुतुष्यति ॥१२॥
00707 susrusanarn 77018190718
syat praja-raksaya nrpa
bhagavaris te prajabhartur
hrsikeso 'nutusyati

param—the greatest; susrusanam—devotional service; mahyam—unto me;
syat—should be; praja—the living entities who are born in the material
world; raksaya—by saving them from being spoiled; nrpa—O King;
bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; te— with you; praja-bhartuh—with
the protector of the living beings; hrsikesah—the Lord of the senses;
anutusyati—is satisfied.

TRANSLATION

0 King, if you can give proper protection to the living beings in the
material world, that will be the best service for me. When the Supreme
Lord sees you to be a good protector of the conditioned souls, certainly
the master of the senses will be very pleased with you.

PURPORT

The whole administrative system is arranged for the purpose of going
back home, back to Godhead. Brahma is the representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and Manu is the representative of Brahma.
Similarly, all other kings on different planets of the universe are represen-


--- Page 164 ---
Text 13] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 497
tatives of Manu. The lawbook for the entire human society is the Manu-
samhita, which directs all activities towards the transcendental service of
the Lord. Every king, therefore, must know that his responsibility in
administration is not merely to exact taxes from the citizens but to see
personally that the citizens under him are being trained in Visnu worship.
Everyone must be educated in Vignu worship and engaged in the devotion-
al service of Hrgikesa, the owner of the senses. The conditioned souls are
meant not to satisfy their material senses but to satisfy the senses of
Hrgikesa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the purpose of the
complete administrative system. One who knows this secret, as disclosed
here in the version of Brahma, is the perfect administrative head. One who
does not know this is a show-bottle administrator. By training the citizens
in the devotional service of the Lord, the head of a state can be free in his
responsibility, otherwise he will fail in the onerous duty entrusted to him
and thus be punishable by the supreme authority. There is no other
alternative in the discharge of administrative duty.
TEXT 13
येषां न तुष्टो मगवान्‌ यज्ञलिङ्गो जनार्दनः |
तेषां श्रमो ह्यपार्थाय यदात्मा नादतः खयम्‌ ॥१३॥
yesarn na tusto bhagavan
yajia-lingo janardanah
tesarn 5८710 hy aparthaya
yad atma nadrtah svayam

yesgm—of those with whom; na—never; tustah—satisfied; bhagavan—the
Personality of Godhead; yajiia-lingah—the form of sacrifice; janardanah—
Lord Krsna or the Visnu-tattva; tesam—of them;sramah—labor;hi—certain-
ly; aparthaya— without profit; yat—because; atma—the Supreme Soul; na—
not; adrtah—respected; svayam—his own self.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Janardana [ Lord Krsna], is the
form to accept all the results of sacrifice. If He is not satisfied, then one’s
labor for advancement is futile. He is the ultimate Self, and therefore one
who does not satisfy Him certainly neglects his own interests.

PURPORT

Brahma is deputed as the supreme head of universal affairs, and he in

his turn deputes Manu and others as chargés d’affaires of the material


--- Page 165 ---
498 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
manifestation, but the whole show is for the satisfaction of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Brahma knows how to satisfy the Lord, and
similarly persons engaged in the line of Brahma’s plan of activities also
know how to satisfy the Lord. The Lord is satisfied by the process of
devotional service, consisting of the ninefold process of hearing, chanting,
etc. It is in one’s own self-interest to execute prescribed devotional
service, and anyone who neglects this process neglects his own self-interest.
Everyone wants to satisfy his senses, but above the senses is the mind,
above the mind is the intelligence, above the intelligence is the individual
self, and above the individual self there is the Superself. Above even the
Superself there is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu-tattva. The
primeval Lord and the cause of all causes is Sri Krsna. The complete pro-
cess of perfectional service is to render service for the satisfaction of the
transcendental senses of Lord Krsna, who is known as Janardana.
TEXT 14
मनुत्वाच
IRAE मगवतो वर्तेयामीवददन |
स्यानं त्विहानुजानीहि प्रजानां मम च प्रमो ॥ १४॥
manur uvaca
adese’ham bhagavato
varteyamiva-sudana
sthanam tv thanujanihi
prajanar mama ca prabho
manuh uvdca—Sri Manu said; ddese—under the order; aham—I;
bhagavatah—of your powerful self; varteya—shall stay; amiva-sudana—O
killer of all sins; sthanam—the place; tu—but; iha—in this world; anujanthi—
please let me know; prajanam—of the living entities born from me; mama—
my; ca—also; prabho—O Lord.
TRANSLATION
Sri Manu said: O all-powerful lord, O killer of all sins, I shall abide by
your order. Now please let me know my place and that of the living
entities born of me.
TEXT 15
यदोकः सर्वमतानां मही म्रा महाम्भसि ।
अस्या उद्धरणे यज्ञो देव देन्या विधीयताम्‌ ॥१५॥


--- Page 166 ---
Text 16] The Appearance of Lord Variha 499
yad okah sarva-bhutanam
mahi magna mahambhasi
asya uddharane yatno
deva devya vidhiyatam
yat—because; okah— the dwelling place; sarva—for all; bhutanam—living
entities; mahi—the earth; magna—merged; mah@-ambhasi—in the great
walter; asydh—of this; uddharape—in the lifting; yatnah—attempt; deva—
O master of the demigods; devyah—of this earth; vidhiyatam—Ilet it be
done.
TRANSLATION
O master of the demigods, please attempt to lift the earth, which is
merged in the great water, because it is the dwelling place for all the living
entities. It can be done by your endeavor and by the mercy of the Lord.
PURPORT
The great water mentioned in this connection is the Garbhodaka Ocean,
which fills half of the universe.
TEXT 16
मैत्रेय उवाच
परमेष्ठी त्वपां मध्ये तथा TAWA गाम्‌ |
कथमेनां समुन्नेष्य इति दध्यौ धिया चिरम्‌ ॥१६॥
maitreya ८४८८०
paramestht tv apam madhye
tatha sannam aveksya gam
katham 61101) samunnesya
iti dadhyau dhiya ciram
maitreyah uvaca—Sri Maitreya Muni said; paramesthi—Brahma; tu—
also; apam—the water; madhye—within; tatha—thus; sannam—situated;
aveksya—seeing; gim—the earth; katham—how; enam—this; samunnesye—1
will lift; iti—thus; dadhyau—gave attention; dhiya—by intelligence; ciram—
for a long time.
TRANSLATION
Sri Maitreya said: Thus, seeing the earth merged in the water, Brahma
gave his attention for a long time to how it could be lifted.


--- Page 167 ---
500 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
PURPORT
According to Jiva Gosvami, the topics delineated here are of different
millenniums. The present topics are of the Sveta-vardha millennium, and
topics regarding the Caksusa millennium will also be discussed in this
chapter.
TEXT 17
go मे कितिर्वाभिः शरान्यमाना रसां गता ।
= ~ =,
अथात्र किमयुषठेयमसामि; सगंयोजितेः |
यस्याहं TARE स॒ ইহা विदधातु मे ॥१५७॥
srjato me ksitir varbhih
plavyamana 70507 gata
athatra kim anustheyam
asmabhih sarga-yojitaih
yasyahari hrdayad ৫5৫77
sa 180 vidadhatu me
srjatah—while engaged in creation; me—of me; kgitih—the earth;
varbhih—by the water; pldvyamdand—being inundated; rasim—depth of
water; gata—gone down; atha—therefore; atra—in this matter; kim—what;
anustheyam—is right to be attempted; asmabhih—by us; sarga—creation;
yojitaih—engaged in; yasya—the one from whose; aham—1;hrdayat—{rom
the heart; asam—born; sah—He; sah—the Lord; vidadhatu—may direct;
me—unto me.
TRANSLATION
Brahma thought: While 1 have been engaged in the process of creation,
the earth has been inundated by a deluge and has gone down into the
depths of the ocean. What can we do who are engaged in this matter of
creation? It is best to let the Almighty Lord direct us.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Lord, who are all confidential servitors, are some-
times perplexed in the discharge of their respective duties, but they are
never discouraged. They have full faith in the Lord, and He paves the way
for the smooth progress of the devotee’s duty.


--- Page 168 ---
Text 19] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 501
TEXT 18
इत्यमिष्यायतो नासाविवरात्सदसानघ |
वराहतोको निरगाद ङ्गष्टपरिमाणकः ॥१८॥
ity abhidhyayato nasa-
vivarat sahasanagha
varahatoko niragad
angustha-parimanakah
iti—thus; abhidhydyatah—while thinking; nasd-vivarat—from the nostrils;
sahasa—all of a sudden; anagha—O sinless one; varahatokah—a minute form
of Varaha (a boar); niragat—came out; angustha—upper portion of the
thumb; parimanakah—of the measurement.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Vidura, all of a sudden, while Brahma was engaged in think-
ing, a small form of a boar came out of his nostril, and the measurement
of the creature was not more than the upper portion of a thumb.
TEXT 19
तस्याभिपश्यतः खस्थः क्षणेन किर भारत |
गजमात्रः प्रववृधे तदद्ञुतमभून्महत्‌ 11241
tasyabhipasyatah khasthah
ksanena kila bharata
gajamatrah pravavrdhe
tad adbhutam abhian mahat
tasya—his;abhipa$yatah—while thus observing; khasthah—situated in the
sky; ksanena—suddenly; kila—verily; bharata—O descendant of Bharata;
gajamatrah—just like an elephant; pravavrdhe—thoroughly expanded; tat—
that; adbhutam—extraordinary; abhitt— transformed; mahat—into a gigan-
tic body.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata, while Brahma was observing Him, that boar
became situated in the sky in a wonderful manifestation as gigantic as a
great elephant.


--- Page 169 ---
502 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
TEXT 20
मरीविप्र्ले्दिभेः इमारेमनुना सह ।
दृषा तत्सौकरं रूपं तर्कयामास चित्रधा Rel
marici-pramukhair vipraih
kumarair manuna 50120
drstva tat saukaram rupam
tarkayamasa citradha
marici—the great sage Marici; pramukhaih—headed by; vipraih—all
brahmanas; kumaraih— with the four Kumaras;manuna—and with Manu;
saha—with; drstva— seeing; tat— that; saukaram—appearance like a boar;
riupam—form; tarkayamasa—argued among themselves; citradha—in various
ways.
TRANSLATION
Struck with wonder at observing the wonderful boarlike form in the
sky, Brahma, with great brahmanas like Marici, as well as the Kumiras and
Manu, began to argue in various ways.
TEXT 21
किमेतत्सकरव्याजं avd दिन्यमव सितम्‌ ।
©, °
अहो बतायमिदं नासाया मे विनिःसृतम्‌ nen
kim etat sukara-vyajarm
sattvarn divyam avasthitam
aho batascaryam idam
nasaya me vinihsrtam
kim—what; etat—this; sitkara—boar; vydjam—pretention; sattvam—en-
tity; divyam—extraordinary; avasthitam—situated; aho bata—oh, it is;
ascaryam—very wonderful; idam—this; nasayah—from the nose; me—my;
vinthsrtam— came out.
TRANSLATION
Is this some extraordinary entity come in the pretense of a boar? It is
very wonderful that He has come from my nose.
TEXT 22
दृष्टोऽङ्कष्ठशिरोमात्रः क्षणादण्डशिलासमः |
अपि खिद्धगवानेष यज्ञो मे खेदयन्मनः ॥२२॥


--- Page 170 ---
Text 23] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 503
drsto’ngustha-siro-matrah
ksanad ganda-silasamah
api svid bhagavan esa
yajiio me khedayan manah
drstah—just seen; angustha—thumb; sirah—tip; matrah—only; ksanat—
immediately; ganda-§ila—large stone; samah—like; api svit—whether;
bhagavan— the Personality of Godhead; esah—this; yajiiah—Visnu; me—my;
khedayan—perturbing; manah—mind.
TRANSLATION
First of all this boar was seen no bigger than the tip of a thumb, and
within a moment He was as large as a stone. My mind is perturbed. Is He
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu?
PURPORT
Since Brahma is the supermost person in the universe and he had never
before experienced such a form, he could guess that the wonderful appear-
ance of the boar was an incarnation of Visnu. The uncommon features
symptomatic of the incarnation of Godhead bewilder even the mind of
Brahma.
TEXT 23
इति मीमांसतस्तस्य ब्रह्मणः सह gat: |
भगवान्‌ यज्ञपुरुषो जगजगिन्द्रसन्निमः ॥२२॥
iti mimamsatas tasya
brahmanah saha sunubhih
bhagavan yajia-puruso
Jjagarjagendra-sannibhah
iti—thus; mimamsatah—while deliberating; tasya—his; brahmanah— of
Brahma; saha—along with; sunubhih— his sons; bhagavan— the Personality
of Godhead; yajiia—Lord Vignu; purusah—the Supreme Person; jagarja—
resounded; agendra—great mountain; sannibhah—like.
TRANSLATION
While Brahma was deliberating with his sons, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Vignu, roared tumultuously like a great mountain.


--- Page 171 ---
504 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
PURPORT
It appears that great hills and mountains also have their roaring power
because they are also living entities. The volume of the sound vibrated is in
proportion to the size of the material body. While Brahma was guessing
about the appearance of the Lord’s incarnation as a boar, the Lord con-
firmed Brahma’s contemplation by roaring with His gorgeous voice.
TEXT 24
wei दषेयामास हरिस्तांथ द्विजोत्तमान्‌ |
खगजितेन বন্ধন? प्रतिखनयता विथः ॥२४॥
brahmanam harsayamasa
haris tams ca dvijottaman
sva-garjitena kakubhah
pratisvanayata vibhuh
brahmanam—unto Brahma; harsayamasa—enlivened; harih—the Person-
ality of Godhead; tan—all of them; ca—also; dvija-uttaman— highly elevated
brahmanas; sva-garjitena—by His uncommon voice; kakubhah—all direc-
tions; pratisvanayata— which echoed; vibhuh— the omnipotent.
TRANSLATION
The omnipotent Supreme Personality of Godhead thus enlivened
Brahma and the other highly elevated brahmanas by again roaring with
His uncommon voice, which echoed in all directions.
PURPORT
Brahma and other enlightened brahmanas who know the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are enlivened by the appearance of the Lord in any
of His multi-incarnations. The appearance of the wonderful and gigantic
incarnation of Vignu as the mountainlike boar did not fill them with any
kind of fear, although the Lord’s resounding voice was tumultuous and
echoed horribly in all directions as an open threat to all demons who might
challenge His omnipotency.
TEXT 25
fen ते wifd सखखेद-
क्षयिष्णु मायामयघ््करस्य |


--- Page 172 ---
Text 25] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 505
जनस्तपःसत्यनिवासिनस्ते
तरिभिः पवित्रयुनयोऽगृणन्‌ स ॥२५॥
niSamya te ghargharitar sva-kheda-
ksayisnu mayamaya-sukarasya
Janas-tapah-satya-nivasinas te
tribhih pavitrair munayo’grnan sma
nisamya—just after hearing; te—those; ghargharitam—the tumultuous
sound;sva-kheda— personal lamentation; ksayisnu—destroying; mayamaya—
all-merciful; sizkarasya—of Lord Boar; janah—the )Janaloka planet; tapah—
the Tapoloka planet; satya—the Satyaloka planet; nivasinah— residents;
te—all of them; tribhih—from the three Vedas; pavitraih—by the all-
auspicious mantras; munayah—great thinkers and sages; agrnan sma—
chanted.
TRANSLATION
When the great sages and thinkers who are residents of Janaloka,
Tapoloka and Satyaloka heard the tumultuous voice of Lord Boar, which
is the all-auspicious sound of the all-merciful Lord, they chanted auspicious
chants from the three Vedas.
PURPORT
The word mayamaya is very significant in this verse. 1৫৫ means
mercy, specific knowledge and also illusion. Therefore Lord Boar is
everything; He is merciful, He is all knowledge, and He is illusion also.
The sound which He vibrated as the boar incarnation was answered by the
Vedic hymns of the great sages in the planets of Janaloka, Tapoloka and
Satyaloka. The highest intellectual and pious living entities live in those
planets, and when they heard the extraordinary voice of the boar, they
could understand that the specific sound was vibrated by the Lord and no
one else. Therefore they replied by praying to the Lord with Vedic hymns.
The earth planet was submerged in the mire, but on hearing the sound of
the Lord, the inhabitants of the higher planets were all jubilant because they
knew that the Lord was there to deliver the earth. Therefore Brahma and
all the sages, such as Bhrgu and Brahma’s other sons, and other learned
brahmanas, were enlivened, and they concertedly joined in praising the
Lord with the transcendental vibrations of the Vedic hymns. The most
important is the Brhan-naradiya Purana verse Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.


--- Page 173 ---
506 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
TEXT 26
तेषां सतां वेदवितानमूतिं-
बैद्मादधारयात्पगुणायुबादम्‌ ।
विनद्य भूयो विचुधोदयाय
गजेन्द्रलीलो जलमाविवेश ॥२६॥
tesam satam veda-vitana-murtir
brahmavadharyatma-gunanuvadam
vinadya bhuyo vibudhodayaya
gajendra-lilo jalam avivesa
tesam—of them; satam—of the great devotees; veda—all knowledge;
vitana-murtih—the form of expansion; brahma—Vedic sound;avadharya—
knowing it well; atma—of Himself; gupanuvadam—transcendental glorifica-
tion; vinadya—resounding; bhityah—again; vibudha—of the transcendentally
learned; udayaya—for the elevation or benefit; gajendra-lilah— playing like
an elephant; jalam—the water; avivesa—entered.
TRANSLATION
Playing like an elephant, He entered into the water after roaring again in
reply to the Vedic prayers by the great devotees. The Lord is the object of
the Vedic prayers, and thus He understood that the devotees’ prayers were
meant for Him.
PURPORT
The form of the Lord in any shape is always transcendental and full of
knowledge and mercy. The Lord is the destroyer of all material contamina-
tion because His form is personified Vedic knowledge. All the Vedas wor-
ship the transcendental form of the Lord. In the Vedic mantras the
devotees request the Lord to remove the glaring effulgence because it
covers His real face. That is the version of the Isopanisad. The Lord has no
material form, but His form is always understood in terms of the Vedas.
The Vedas are said to be the breath of the Lord, and that breath was in-
haled by Brahma, the original student of the Vedas. The breathing from
the nostril of Brahma caused the appearance of Lord Boar, and therefore
the boar incarnation of the Lord is the personified Vedas. The glorifica-
tion of the incarnation by the sages on the higher planets consisted of
factual Vedic hymns. Whenever there is glorification of the Lord, it is to be
understood that Vedic mantras are being rightly vibrated. The Lord was


--- Page 174 ---
Text 27] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 507
therefore pleased when such Vedic mantras were chanted, and to encour-
age His pure devotees, He roared once more and entered the water to
rescue the submerged earth.
TEXT 27
fame: खचरः कटोरः
सटा विधुन्वन्‌ ames |
खुराहताभ्रः सितदं्र ইরা
-
ज्योतिर्बभासे भगवान्महीधः ॥२७॥
utksipta-valah khacarah kathorah
sata vidhunvan khara-romasa-tvak
khurahatabhrah sita-damstra iksa-
jyotir babhdse bhagavan mahidhrah
utksipta-valah— slashing with the tail; khacarah—in the sky; kathorah—
very hard; satah—hairs on the shoulder; vidhunvan—quivering; khara—
sharp; romasa-tvak—skin full of hairs; khura-ahata—struck by the hoofs;
abhrah—the clouds; sita-damstrah—white tusks; Tksa—glance; jyotih—
luminous; babhase—began to emit an effulgence; bhagavan—the Personality
of Godhead; mahidhrah—the supporter of the world.
TRANSLATION
Before entering the water to rescue the earth, Lord Boar flew in the
sky, slashing His tail, His hard hairs quivering. His very glance was
luminous, and He scattered the clouds in the sky with His hoofs and His
glittering white tusks.
PURPORT
When the Lord is offered prayers by His devotees, His transcendental
activities are described. Here are some of the transcendental features of
Lord Boar. As the residents of the upper three planetary systems offered
their prayers to the Lord, it isunderstood that His body expanded through-
out the sky, beginning from the topmost planet, Brahmaloka, or Satyaloka.
It is stated in the Brahma-sarnhita that His eyes are the sun and the moon;
therefore His very glance over the sky was as illuminating as the sun or the
moon. The Lord is described herein as mahidhrah, which means either a
big mountain or the sustainer of the earth. In other words, the Lord’s body
was as big and hard as the Himalayan Mountains, otherwise how was it


--- Page 175 ---
508 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
possible that He kept the entire earth on the support of His white tusks?
The poet Jayadeva, a great devotee of the Lord, has sung of the incident
in his prayers for the incarnations:
vasati dasana-sikhare dharani tava lagna
Sasini kalanka-kaleva nimagna
kesava dhrta-$ukara-ripa
Jaya jagadisa hare
“All glories to Lord Kesava [Krsna], who appeared as the boar. The earth
was held between His tusks, which appeared like the scars on the moon.”
TEXT 28
घ्राणेन पृ्न्याः पदवीं विजिघन्‌
कऋोडापदेशः सखयमष्वराङ्गः |
करालदं्रोऽप्यकरालद्म्या-
gare विप्रान्‌ गृणतोऽविशत्कम्‌ 1a
ghranena prthvyah padavim vijighran
krodapadesah svayam adhvarangah
karala-darstro’py akarala-drgbhyam-
udviksya vipran grpato’visat kam
ghranena—by smelling; prthvyah—of the earth; padavim—situation;
vijighran—searching after the earth; kroda-apadesah— assuming the body of
a hog; svayam— personally ; adhvara—transcendental; angah—body ; karala—
fearful; damgstrah—teeth (tusks); api—in spite of; akarala—not fearful;
drgbhyam—by His glance; udviksya—glancing over;vipran—all the brahmana
devotees; grnatah—who were engaged in prayers; avisat— entered; kam—the
water.
TRANSLATION
He was personally the Supreme Lord Vignu and was therefore
transcendental, yet because He had the body of a hog, He searched after
the earth by smell. His tusks were fearful, and He glanced over the devotee
brahmanas engaged in offering prayers. Thus He entered the water.
PURPORT
We should always remember that although the body of a hog is material,
the hog form of the Lord was not materially contaminated. It is not pos-
sible for an earthly hog to assume a gigantic form spreading throughout
the sky, beginning from the Satyaloka. His body is always transcendental


--- Page 176 ---
Text 29] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 509
in all circumstances; therefore, the assumption of the form of a boar is only
His pastime. His body is all Vedas or transcendental. But since He assumed
the form of a boar, He began to search out the earth by smelling, just like
a hog. The Lord can perfectly play the part of any living entity. The gigan-
tic feature of the boar was certainly very fearful for all nondevotees, but to
the pure devotees of the Lord He was not at all fearful; on the contrary,
He was so pleasingly glancing upon His devotees that all of them felt
transcendental happiness.
TEXT 29
q कज्रदूटाङ्गनिपातवेग-
विद्मीणंङुक्षिः स्तनयन्लुदन्वान्‌ |
उत्सुष्टदीर्घोमिजेरिवार्त-
श्चुक्रोश AE TR मेति ॥२९॥
sa vajra-kutanga-nipata-vega-
visirna-kuksih stanayann udanvan
utsrsta-dirghormi-bhujair ivartas
cukrosa yajiiesvara pahi meti

sah—that; vajra-kiita-anga—body like a great mountain; nipata-vega—
the force of diving; visirna—bifurcating; kuksih—the middle portion;
stanayan—resounding like; udanvan—the ocean; utsrsta—creating; dirgha—
high; @rmi—waves; bhujaih—by the arms; iva artah—like a distressed per-
son; cukrosa—prayed loudly; yajfia-tsvara—O master of all sacrifices; pahi—
please protect; ma—unto me; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

Diving into the water like a giant mountain, Lord Boar divided the
middle of the ocean, and two high waves appeared as the arms of the
ocean, which cried loudly as if praying to the Lord, "0 Lord of all sacri-
fices, please do not cut me in two! Kindly give me protection!”

PURPORT

Even the great ocean was perturbed by the falling of the mountainlike
body of the transcendental boar, and it appeared to be frightened, as if
death were imminent.


--- Page 177 ---
510 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
TEXT 30
ইঁ EN
सुरः क्चरम्रदरयस्तदाप
उत्पारपारं त्रिपरू रसायाम्‌ ।
০ হস
ददश মা লন सुषुप्सुरग्रे
यां जीवधानीं खयमम्यघत्त ॥२०॥
khuraih ksuraprair darayams tad apa
utpara-parar tri-paric rasayam
dadarsa garn tatra susupsur agre
yam jiva-dhanim svayam abhyadhatta
khuraih—by the hoofs; ksurapraih—compared to a sharp weapon;
darayan—penetrating; tat—that; apah—water; utpara-param—found the
limitation of the unlimited; tri-parah—the master of all sacrifices;
rasayam—within the water; dadarsa—found; gam—the earth; tatra— there;
susupsuh—lying; agre—in the beginning; yam—whom; Jjiva-dhanim— the
resting place for all living entities; svayam—personally; abhyadhatta—
uplifted.
TRANSLATION
Lord Boar penetrated the water with His hoofs, which were like
sharpened arrows, and He found out the limits of the ocean although it
was unlimited. He saw the earth, the resting place for all living beings, lying
as it was in the beginning of creation, and He personally lifted it.
PURPORT
The word rasayam is sometimes interpreted to mean Rasatala, the
lowest planetary system, but that is not applicable in this connection,
according to Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura. The earth is seven times
superior to the other planetary systems, namely Tala, Atala, Talatala,
Vitala, Rasatala, Patiala, etc. Therefore the earth cannot be situated in the
Rasatala planetary system. It is described in the Vispu-dharma:
patala-miilesvara-bhoga-sarmhatau
vinyasya padau prthivim ca bibhratah
yasyopamanar na babhiiva so cyuto
mamastu mangalya-vivrddhaye harih
Therefore the Lord found the earth on the bottom of the Garbhodaka
Ocean, where the planets rest during the devastation at the end of Brahma’s
day.


--- Page 178 ---
Text 32) The Appearance of Lord Vardha 511
TEXT 31
mer महीं निमम्नां
स उत्थितः संरुरुचे रसायाः |
तत्रापि दैत्यं गदयाऽऽपतन्तं
सनामसन्दीपिततीव्रमन्युः ॥२१॥
sva-damstrayoddhrtya mahim nimagnam
sa utthitah sarmruruce rasayah
tatrapi daityam gadaya ’’patantarn
sunabha-sandipita-tivra-manyuh
sva-damstraya—by His own tusks; uddhrtya—raising; mahim—the earth;
nimagnam—submerged; sah—He; utthitah—getting up; sarmruruce— appeared
very splendid; rasayah—from the water; tatra—there; api— also; daityam—
unto the demon; gaday@— with the club; apatantam—rushing towards Him;
sunabha—the wheel of Krsna; sandipita—glowing; tivra—fierce; manyuh—
anger.
TRANSLATION
Lord Boar very easily took the earth on His tusks and got it out of the
water. Thus He appeared very splendid. Then, His anger glowing like the
Sudaréana wheel, He immediately killed the demon [Hiranyaksa], although
he tried to fight with the Lord.
PURPORT
According to Srila Jiva Gosvami, the Vedic literatures describe the
incarnation of Lord Varaha (Boar) in two different devastations, namely
the Cakgsusa devastation and the Svayambhuva devastation. This particular
appearance of the boar incarnation actually took place in the Svayambhuva
devastation, when all planets other than the higher ones—Jana, Mahar and
Satya—merged in the water of devastation. This particular incarnation of
the boar was seen by the inhabitants of the planets mentioned above.
Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti suggests that the sage Maitreya amalgamated
both the boar incarnations in different devastations and summarized them
in his description to Vidura.
TEXT 32
जघान रन्धानमसद्यविक्रमं
स लीलये्म॑रृगरादिविाम्भसि |


--- Page 179 ---
512 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
तद्रक्तपङ्काङ्कितगण्डतष्टो
यथा गजेन्द्रो जगतीं विभिन्दन्‌ ।॥३२॥
jaghana rundhanam asahya-vikramarm
sa lilayebhar mrgarad ivambhasi
tadrakta-pankankita-ganda-tundo
yatha gajendro jagatirn vibhindan
Jjaghana—Kkilled;rundhanam—the obstructive enemy ;asahya—unbearable;
vikramam—prowess; sah—lHe; lilaya—easily ; ibham—the elephant; mrgarat—
the lion; iva—like; ambhasi—in the water; tat-rakta—of his blood; panka-
ankita—smeared by the pool; ganda—cheeks; tundah—tongue; yatha—as if;
gajendrah—the elephant; jagatim—earth;vibhindan—digging.
TRANSLATION
Thereupon Lord Boar killed the demon within the water, just as a lion
kills an elephant. The cheeks and tongue of the Lord became smeared with
the blood of the demon, just as an elephant becomes reddish from digging
in the purple earth.
TEXT 33
तमालनीलं सितदन्तकोय्या
Ry गजलीलयाङ्ग ।
WH  बद्धाञ्ञरयोऽलुवाकै
विरिञ्जियुर्या उपतस्थुरीञ्चम्‌ 133
tamala-nilarn sita-danta-kotya
ksmam utksipantarm gaja-lilayanga
prajiiaya baddhaiijalayo 'nuvakair
viriiici-mukhya upatasthur iam
tamala—a blue tree named the tamala ; nilam—bluish;sita— white; danta—
tusks; kotya—with the curved edge; kgmam—the earth; utksipantam— while
suspending; gaja-lilayd—playing like an elephant; ariga—O Vidura; prajiigya—
after knowing it well; baddha—folded; afijalayah—hands; anuvakaih—by
Vedic hymns; virifici— Brahma; mukhydh—headed by; upatasthuh—offered
prayers; iSem—unto the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
Then the Lord, playing like an elephant, suspended the earth on the
edge of His curved white tusks. He assumed a bluish complexion like that


--- Page 180 ---
Text 34) The Appearance of Lord Variaha 513
of a tamala tree, and thus the sages, headed by Brahma, could understand
Him to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offered respectful
obeisances unto the Lord.
TEXT 34
ऋषय ऊचुः
जितं जितं तेऽजित यज्ञमावन
त्रयीं ad खां परिधुन्वते नमः |
यद्रोमगर्तेषु निरिल्युरद्य-
स्तस्मै नमः HEE ते ॥।३४॥।
rsaya ucuh
jitarh jitarh te’jita yajiia-bhavana
trayim tanum svam paridhunvate namah
yad-roma-gartesu nililyur addhayas
tasmai namah karana-sukaraya te
rsayah @icuh—the glorified sages uttered; jitam—all glories; jitam—all
victories; te—unto You; ajita—O unconquerable one; yajiia-bhavana—one
who is understood by performances of sacrifice; trayim—personified Vedas;
tanum—such a body; svam—own; paridhunvate—shaking; namah—all obei-
sances; yat— whose; roma—hairs; gartesu—in the holes; nililyuh-submerged;
addhayah—the oceans; tasmai—unto त; namah—offering obeisances;
karana-sitkaraya—unto the hog form assumed for reasons; te—unto You.
TRANSLATION
All the sages uttered with great respect: O unconquerable enjoyer of all
sacrifices, all glories and all victories unto You! You are moving in Your
form of the personified Vedas, and in the hair holes of Your body the
oceans are submerged. For certain reasons [to uplift the earth] You have
now assumed the form of a boar.
PURPORT
The Lord can assume any form He likes, and in all circumstances He is
the cause of all causes. Since His form is transcendental, He is always the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, as He is in the Causal Ocean in the form
of Maha- Visnu. Innumerable universes generate from the holes of His bodily
hairs, and thus His transcendental body is the Vedas personified. He is the
enjoyer of all sacrifices, and He is the unconquerable Supreme Personality
of Godhead. He is never to be misunderstood to be other than the Supreme


--- Page 181 ---
514 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
Lord because of His assuming the form of a boar in order to lift the earth.
That is the clear understanding of sages and great personalities like Brahma
and other residents of the higher planetary systems.
TEXT 35
रूप॑तवैतम्ननु दुष्कृतात्मनां
6
[RA देव॒ यदष्वरात्मकम्‌ |
छन्दांसि यस त्वचि बर्हिरोम-
खाज्यं दशि त्वङ्धिषु TEE ॥ ३५॥
rupari tavaitan nanu duskrtatmanam
durdarsanarm deva yad adhvaratmakam
chandamsi yasya tvaci barhi-romasv
ajyam drsi tv anghrisu catur-hotram
rupam—form; tava—Your; etat—this; nanu—but; duskrta-atmanam— of
souls who are simply miscreants;durdarsanam—very difficult to see; deva—
O Lord; yat—that; adhvara-atmakam—worshipable by performances of
sacrifice; chandamsi—the Gayatri mantra and others; yasya— whose; tvaci—
touch of the skin; barhih—sacred grass called kusa; romasu—hairs on the
body; @jyam—clarified butter; drsi—in the eyes; tu—also;anghrisu—on the
four legs; catuh-hotram—four kinds of fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, Your form is worshipable by performances of sacrifice, but
souls who are simply miscreants are unable to see it. All the Vedic hymns,
Gayatri and others, are there in the touch of Your skin. In Your bodily
hairs is the kusa grass, in Your eyes is the clarified butter, and in Your four
legs are the four kinds of fruitive activities.
PURPORT
There is a class of miscreants who are known in the words of Bhagavad-
gita as Veda-vadi, or so-called strict followers of the Vedas. They do not
believe in the incarnation of the Lord, what to speak of the Lord’s incarna-
tion as the worshipable hog. They describe worship of the different forms
or incarnations of the Lord as anthropomorphism. In the estimation of
Srimad-Bhagavatam these men are miscreants, and in Bhagavad-gita (7.15)
they are called not only miscreants but also fools and the lowest of man-
kind, and it is said that their knowledge has been plundered by illusion due


--- Page 182 ---
Text 36] The Appearance of Lord Variaha 515
to their atheistic temperament. For such condemned persons, the Lord's
incarnation as the gigantic hog is invisible. These strict followers of the
Vedas who despise the eternal forms of the Lord may know from Srimad-
Bhagavatam that such incarnations are personified forms of the Vedas.
Lord Boar’s skin, His eyes and His bodily hair holes are all described here
as different parts of the Vedas. He is therefore the personified form of the
Vedic hymns, specifically the Gayatri mantra.
TEXT 36
HIS ARG ইহা नासयो-
>
रिडोद्रे चमसाः wee |
भ्रारित्रमास्ये ग्रसने ग्रहास्तु ते
TEU ते REET REN
srak tunda asit sruva a nasayor
idodare camasah karna-randhre
prasitram asye grasane grahas tu te
yac carvanarn te bhagavann agni-hotram
srak—the plate for sacrifice; tunde—on the tongue; asit—there is;
sruvah—another plate for sacrifice; a—O Lord; ndsayoh—of the nos-
trils; ida—the plate for eating; udare—in the belly; camasah—another plate
for sacrifices; karna-randhre—in the holes of the ears; prasitram— the plate
which is called the Brahma plate; asye—in the mouth; grasane—in the
throat; grahah—the plates known as soma plates; tu—but; te— Your; yat—
that which; carvanam—chewing; te—Your; bhagavan—O my Lord; agni-
hotram—is Your eating through Your sacrificial fire.
TRANSLATION
0 Lord, Your tongue is the plate of sacrifice, Your nostril is another
plate of sacrifice, in Your belly is the eating plate of sacrifice, and another
plate of sacrifice is the holes of Your ears. In Your mouth is the Brahma
plate of sacrifice, Your throat is the plate of sacrifice known as soma, and
whatever You chew is known as agni-hotra.
PURPORT
The Vedavadis say that there is nothing more than the Vedas and the
performances of sacrifice mentioned in the Vedas. They have recently made
a rule in their group to formally observe daily sacrifice; they simply ignite


--- Page 183 ---
516 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
asmall fire and offer something whimsically, but they do not strictly follow
the sacrificial rules and regulations mentioned in the Vedas. It 15 under-
stood that by regulation there are different plates of sacrifice required, such
as srak, sruvd, barhih, caturhotra, idd, camasa, prasitra, graha and
agni-hotra. One cannot achieve the results of sacrifice unless one observes
the strict regulations. In this age there is practically no facility for perform-
ing sacrifices in strict discipline. Therefore, in this age of Kali there is a
stricture regarding such sacrifices: It is explicitly directed that one should
perform sankirtana-yajiia and nothing more. The incarnation of the Su-
preme Lord is Yajfiesvara, and unless one has respect for the incarnation of
the Lord, he cannot perfectly perform sacrifice. In other words, taking
shelter of the Lord and rendering service unto Him is the factual perform-
ance of all sacrifices, as explained herein. Different plates of sacrifice
correspond to the different parts of the body of the Lord’s incarnation.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, Eleventh Canto, it is explicitly directed that
one should perform sankirtana-yajiia to please the Lord’s incarnation as
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This should be rigidly followed in order to
achieve the result of yajiia performance.
TEXT 37
दीक्षालजन्मोपसदः शिरोधरं
d श्रायणीयोद्यनोयद्ः ।
fr प्रवभ्यस्तव शीर्षकं क्रतोः
सर्यावसथ्यं चितयोऽसयो हि ते nen
diksanujanmopasadah sirodharam
tvam prayaniyodayaniya-damstrah
jihva pravargyas tava ৪8750৫1007১ kratoh
satyavasathyam citayo 50৫0০ hi te

diksa—initiation; anujanma—spiritual birth, or repeated incarnations;
upasadah— three kinds of desires (relationship, activities and ultimate goal);
Sirah-dharam—the neck; tvam—Y ou; prayapiya—after the result of initiation;
udayaniya—the last rites of desires; daristrah—the tusks; jihva—the tongue;
pravargyah—prior activities; tava— Your; sirsakam—head; kratoh—of the
sacrifice; satya—fire without sacrifice; @vasathyam—fire of worship;
citayah—aggregate of all desires; asavah—life breath; hi—certainly; te—unto
Your.


--- Page 184 ---
Text 38] The Appearance of Lord Variha 517
TRANSLATION
Moreover, O Lord, the repetition of Your appearance is the desire for
all kinds of initiation. Your neck is the place for three desires, and Your
tusks are the result of initiation and the end of all desires. Your tongue is
the prior activities of initiation, Your head is the fire without sacrifice as
well as the fire of worship, and Your living forces are the aggregate of all
desires.
TEXT 38
सोमस्तु रेतः सदनान्यबसयितिः
संस्थाविभेदास्तव देव॒ धातवः |
सत्राणि सर्वाणि _ शरीरसन्धि-
ফলন सर्वयज्ञक्रतुरििबन्धनः ।२८॥
somas tu retah savanany avasthitih
sarnstha-vibhedas tava deva dhatavah
satrani sarvani sarira-sandhis
tvarh sarva-yajita-kratur isti-bandhanah
somah tu retah—Your semina is the sacrifice called soma; savanani—
ritualistic performances of the morning; avasthitih—different statuses of
bodily growth; samstha-vibhedah—seven varieties of sacrifices; tava— Your;
deva—0 Lord; dhatavah—ingredients of the body such as skin, flesh, etc;
satrani—sacrifices performed over twelve days; sarvapi—all of them;sarira—
the bodily; sandhili—joints; tvam—Y our Lordship; sarva—all; yajia—asoma
sacrifices; kratuh—soma sacrifices; isti—the ultimate desire; bandhanah—
attachment.
TRANSLATION
0 Lord, Your semina is the sacrifice called soma-yajiia. Your growth is
the ritualistic performances of the morning. Your skin and touch sensa-
tions are the seven elements of the agnistoma sacrifice. Your bodily joints
are symbols of various other sacrifices performed in twelve days. Therefore
You are the object of all sacrifices called soma and asoma, and You are
bound by yajiias only.
PURPORT
There are seven kinds of routine yajiias performed by all followers of the
Vedic rituals, and they are called agnistoma, atyagnistoma, uktha, sodasi,


--- Page 185 ---
518 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
vdjapeya, atiratra and aptoryama. Anyone performing such yajiias regular-
ly is supposed to be situated with the Lord. But anyone who is in contact
with the Supreme Lord by discharging devotional service is understood to
have performed all different varieties of yajiias.
TEXT 39
नमो नमस्तेऽखिलमन्त्रदेवता-
FAW सर्वक्रतवे क्रियात्मने ।
EY
वेराग्यथ्यात्पजयानुमादिति-
ज्ञानाय विदागुरवे नमो नमः ॥२९॥
namo 71077145 te’khila-mantra-devata-
dravyaya sarva-kratave kriyatmane
vairagya-bhaktyatmajayanubhavita-
jhanaya vidyagurave namo namah
namah namah—obeisances unto You; te—unto You, who are worshipable;
akhila—all-inclusive; mantra—hymns;devata—the Supreme Lord; dravyaya—
unto all ingredients for performing sacrifices; sarva-kratave—unto all kinds
of sacrifices; kriya-atmane—unto You, the supreme form of all sacrifices;
vairagya—renunciation; bhaktya—by devotional service; atma-jaya-anu-
bhavita—perceivable by conquering the mind; jianaya—such knowledge;
vidya-gurave—the supreme spiritual master of all knowledge; namah
namah—again I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead and are
worshipable by universal prayers, Vedic hymns and sacrificial ingredients.
We offer our obeisances unto You. You can be realized by the pure mind
freed from all visible and invisible material contamination. We offer our
respectful obeisances to You as the supreme spiritual master of knowledge
in devotional service.
PURPORT
The qualification of bhakti, or devotional service to the Lord, is that the
devotee should be free from all material contaminations and desires. This
freedom is called vairagya, or renouncement of material desires. One who
engages in devotional service to the Lord according to regulative principles
is automatically freed from material desires, and in that pure state of mind
one can realize the Personality of Godhead. The Personality of Godhead,


--- Page 186 ---
Text 40] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 519
being situated in everyone’s heart, instructs the devotee regarding pure
devotional service so that he may ultimately achieve the association of the
Lord. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita as follows:

tesarn satata-yuktanam bhajatarn priti-purvakam

dadami buddhi-yogarh tam yena mam upayanti te
“To one who constantly engages in the devotional service of the Lord
with faith and love, the Lord certainly gives the intelligence to achieve
Him at the ultimate end.” (Bg.10.10)

One has to conquer the mind, and one may do it by following the
Vedic rituals and by performing different types of sacrifice. The ultimate
end of all those performances is to attain bhakti, or the devotional service
of the Lord. Without bhakti one cannot understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The original Personality of Godhead or His
innumerable expansions of Vigsnu are the only objects of worship by all
the Vedic rituals and sacrificial performances.

TEXT 40
द्॑राग्रकोव्या भगवंस्त्वया धृता
विराजते भूधर मूः सभूधरा ।
यथा वनान्निःसरतो दता धृता
मतङ्गजेन्द्रसख सपत्रपथिनी ।४०॥
damstragra-kotya bhagavams tvaya dhrta
virajate bhu-dhara bhuh sa-bhiudhara
yatha vanan nihsarato data dhrta
matangajendrasya sa-patra-padmini

damgstra-agra—the tips of the tusks; kofya—by the edges; bhagavan—
O Personality of Godhead; tvaya—by You; dhrta—sustained; virajate—
is so beautifully situated: bhii-dhara—O lifter of the earth; bhuh—the
earth; sa-bhudhara—with mountains; yatha—as much as; vanat—from the
water; nihsaratah—coming out; data—by the tusk; dhrta—captured; matan-
gajendrasya—infuriated elephant; sa-patra—with leaves; pad mini—the lotus
flower.

TRANSLATION

O lifter of the earth, the earth with its mountains, which You have
lifted with Your tusks, is situated as beautifully as a lotus flower with
leaves sustained by an infuriated elephant just coming out of the water.


--- Page 187 ---
520 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
PURPORT
The fortune of the earth planet is praised because of its being specifi-
cally sustained by the Lord; its beauty is appreciated and compared to
that of a lotus flower situated on the trunk of an elephant. As a lotus
flower with leaves is very beautifully situated, so the world, with its many
beautiful mountains, appeared on the tusks of the Lord Boar.
TEXT 41
त्रयीमयं रूपमिदं च सोकरं
भूमण्डलेनाथ दता धृतेन ते।
चकास्ति THETA भूयसा
र
ङलाचलेन्द्रस्य यथेव विश्रमः ॥४१॥
trayimayarm rupam idam ca saukaram
bhu-mandalenatha data dhrtena te
cakasti srngodha-ghanena bhuyasa
kulacalendrasya yathaiva vibhramah
trayimayam— Vedas personified; ripam—form; idam—this; ca—also;
saukaram—the boar; bhii-mandalena—by the earth planet; atha—now; data—
by the tusk; dhrtena—sustained by; te—Your; cakasti—is glowing; srigodha—
sustained by the peaks; ghanena—by the clouds; bhityasa—more glorified;
kula-acalendrasya—of the great mountains; yetha—as much as; eva—
certainly; vibhramah— decoration.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, as the peaks of great mountains become beautiful when
decorated with clouds, Your transcendental body has become beautiful
because of Your lifting the earth on the edge of Your tusks.
PURPORT
The word vibhramah is significant. Vibhramah means illusion as well as
beauty. When a cloud rests on the peak of a great mountain, it appears to
be sustained by the mountain, and at the same time it looks very beautiful.
Similarly, the Lord has no need to sustain the earth on His tusks, but when
He does so the world becomes beautiful, just as the Lord becomes more
beautiful because of His pure devotees on the earth. Although the Lord is
the transcendental personification of the Vedic hymns, He has become
more beautiful because of His appearance to sustain the earth.


--- Page 188 ---
Text 42] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 521
TEXT 42
संस्थापयैनां जगतां सतस्थुषां
लोकाय पलीमसि मातरं पिता ।
विधेम चास्यै नमसा सह त्वया
यखां सखतेजोऽश्रिमिवारणा्रधाः ॥७२॥
3077561101002/07110771 jagatam satasthusam
lokaya patnim asi mataram pita
vidhema casyai namasa saha tvaya
yasyar svatejo ‘gnim ivaranav adhah
sarsthapaya enam—raise up this earth; jagatam—both the moving and;
satasthusam—nonmoving; lokaya—for their residence; patnim wife; asi—
You are; mataram—the mother; pita—the father; vidhema—do we offer; ca
—also; asyai—unto the mother; namasa—with all obeisances; saha—along
with; tvaya—with You; yasyam—in whom; sva-tejah—by Your own poten-
cy: agnim—fire; iva—likened; arapau—in the arani wood; adhah—invested.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, for the residential purposes of all inhabitants, both moving and
nonmoving, this earth is Your wife, and You are the supreme father. We
offer our respectful obeisances unto You, along with mother earth, in
whom You have invested Your own potency, just as an expert sacrificer
puts fire in the arani wood.
PURPORT
The so-called law of gravitation which sustains the planets is described
herein as the potency of the Lord. This potency is invested by the Lord in
the way that an expert sacrificial brahmana puts fire in the arani wood by
the potency of Vedic mantras. By this arrangement the world becomes
habitable for both the moving and nonmoving creatures. The conditioned
souls who are residents of the material world are put in the womb of
mother earth in the same way as the seed of a child is put by the father in
the womb of the mother. This conception of the Lord and the earth as
father and mother is explained in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 14.4). Condi-
tioned souls are devoted to the motherland in which they take their
birth, but they do not know their father. The mother is not independent
in producing children. Similarly, material nature cannot produce living
creatures unless in contact with the supreme father, the Supreme


--- Page 189 ---
522 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
Personality of Godhead. S$rimad-Bhagavatam teaches us to offer obeisances
unto the mother along with the Father, the Supreme Lord, because it is
the Father only who impregnates the mother with all energies for the
sustenance and maintenance of all living beings, both moving and
nonmoving.
TEXT 43
कः श्रदधीतान्यतमस्तव प्रभो
रसां गताया भुव उद्विवरणम्‌ |
न विसयोऽसौ त्वयि विश्वविखये
यो माययेदं सखजेऽतिदिखयम्‌ nL
kah sraddadhitanyatamas tava prabho
rasam gataya bhuva udvibarhanam
na vismayo ‘sau tvayi visva-vismaye
yo mayayedarn sasrje 'tivismayam

kah—who else; sraddadhita—can endeavor; anyatamah—anyone besides
Yourself; tava— Your; prabho—O Lord; rasam—in the water; gatayah—
while lying in; bhuvah—of the earth; udvibarhanam—deliverance; na—never;
vismayah— wonderful; asau—such an act; tvayi—unto You; visva—universal;
vismaye—full of wonders;yah— one who;mayaya— by potencies; idam—
this; sasrje— created; ativismayam—surpassing all wonders.

TRANSLATION

Who else but Yourself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, could
deliver the earth from within the water? It is not very wonderful for You,
however, because You acted most wonderfully in the creation of the
universe. By Your energy You have created this wonderful cosmic

* manifestation.
PURPORT

When a scientist discovers something impressive to the ignorant mass of
people, the common man, without inquiry, accepts such a discovery as
wonderful. But the intelligent man is not struck with wonder by such
discoveries. He gives all credit to the person who created the wonderful
brain of the scientist. A common man is also struck with wonder by the
wonderful action of material nature, and he gives all credit to the cosmic
manifestation. The learned Krsna conscious person, however, knows well
that behind the cosmic manifestation there is the brain of Krsna, as


--- Page 190 ---
Text 44] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 523
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.10): mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate
sacaracaram. Since Krsna can direct the wonderful cosmic manifestation,
it is not at all wonderful for Him to assume the gigantic form of a boar and
thus deliver the earth from the mire of the water. A devotee is therefore
not astonished to see the wonderful boar because he knows that the Lord
is able to act far more wonderfully by His potencies, which are incon-
ceivable to the brain of even the most erudite scientist.
TEXT 44
Aga वेदमयं निजं वपु-
जैनस्तपःसत्यनिवासिनो वयम्‌ |
सटाशिखोदूतिवाम्बुबिन्दुभिः
নিদ্বত্যমানা শ্বহামীহা पाविताः ॥४४।
vidhunvata vedamayarn nijarm vapur
Janas-tapah-satya-nivasino vayam
sata-$ikhoddhuta-sivambu-bindubhir
vimrjyamana bhrsam 18৫ pavitah
vidhunvati—while shaking; vedamayam—personified Vedas; nijam—own;
vapuh—body; janah—the Janaloka planetary system; tapakh—the Tapoloka
planetary system; satya—the Satyaloka planetary system; nivasinah—the
inhabitants; vayam—we; sata—hairs on the shoulder; $ikha-uddhiita—
sustained by the tip of the hair; fiva—auspicious;ambu—water; bindubhih—
by the particles; vimpjyamanah—we are thus sprinkled by; bhrsam— highly;
#a—Supreme Lord; pavitah—purified.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, undoubtedly we are inhabitants of the most pious
planets—the Jana, Tapas and Satya lokas—but still we have been purified
by the drops of water sprinkled from Your shoulder hairs by the shaking
of Your body.
PURPORT
Ordinarily the body of a hog is considered impure, but one should not
consider that the hog incarnation assumed by the Lord is also impure. That
form of the Lord is the personified Vedas and is transcendental. The
inhabitants of the Jana, Tapas and Satya lokas are the most pious persons
in the material world, but because those planets are situated in the material
world, there are so many material impurities there also. Therefore, when


--- Page 191 ---
524 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
the drops of water from the tips of the Lord’s shoulder hairs were
sprinkled upon the bodies of the inhabitants of the higher planets, they
felt purified. The Ganges water is pure because of its emanating from the
toe of the Lord, and there is no difference between the water emanating
from the toe and that from the tips of the hair on the shoulder of Lord
Boar. They are both absolute and transcendental.
TEXT 45
a ~
स॒वे बत श्रष्टमतिस्तवेष ते
यः कर्मणां पारमपारकर्मणः |
- ৬
यद्योगमायागुणयोगमोहितं
विश्वं समस्तं मगवन्‌ विधेहि शम्‌ wan
sa vai bata bhrastamatis tavaisate
yah karmanar param apara-karmanah
yad-yoga-maya-guna-yoga-mohitar
visvarih samastam bhagavan vidhehi sam
sah—he; vai—certainly; bata—alas; bhragstamatih—nonsense; tava— Your;
esate—desires; yah—one who; karmanam—of activities; param—limit;
apara-karmanah—of one who has unlimited activities; yat—by whom; yoga—
mystic power; maya—potency; gupa—modes of material nature; yoga—
mystic power; mohitam—bewildered; visvam—the universe; samastam—in
total; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality; vidhehi—just be pleased to bestow;
sam—good fortune.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, there is no limit to Your wonderful activities. Anyone who
desires to know the limit of Your activities is certainly nonsensical.
Everyone in this world is conditioned by the powerful mystic potencies.
Please bestow Your causeless mercy upon these conditioned souls.
PURPORT
Mental speculators who want to understand the limit of the Unlimited
are certainly nonsensical. Every one of them is captivated by the external
potencies of the Lord. The best thing for them is to surrender unto Him,
knowing Him to be inconceivable, for thus they can receive His causeless
mercy. This prayer was offered by the inhabitants of the higher planetary
systems, namely the Jana, Tapas and Satya lokas, who are far more
intelligent and powerful than humans.


--- Page 192 ---
Text 46] The Appearance of Lord Varzha 525
Visvarh samastam is very significant here. There are the material world
and the spiritual world. The sages pray: “Both worlds are bewildered by
Your different energies. Those who are in the spiritual world are absorbed
in Your loving service, forgetting themselves and You also, and those who
are in the material world are absorbed in material sense gratification and
therefore also forget You. No one can know You because You are
unlimited. It is best not to try to know You by unnecessary mental
speculation. Rather, kindly bless us so that we can worship You with
causeless devotional service.”
TEXT 46
मैत्रेय उवाच
°c
इत्युपस्थीयमानोऽसौ सुनिभित्रकषवादिभिः ।
सकले aE उपाधत्तावितावनिम्‌ ॥४६॥
maitreya uvaca
ity upasthiyamano ’sau
munibhir brahma-vadibhih
salile sva-khurakranta
upadhattavitavanim
maitreyah uvdca—the sage Maitreya said; iti—thus; upasthiyamanah—
being praised by; asau— Lord Boar; munibhih—by the great sages; brahma-
vadibhih—by the transcendentalists; salile—on the water; sva-khura-
akrante—touched by His own hoofs; upadhatta—placed; avita—the main-
tainer; avanim—the earth.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya said: The Lord, being thus worshiped by all the great
sages and transcendentalists, touched the earth with His hoofs and placed
it on the water.
PURPORT
The earth was placed on the water by His inconceivable potency. The
Lord is all-powerful, and therefore He can sustain the huge planets either
on the water or in the air, as He likes. The tiny human brain cannot
conceive how these potencies of the Lord can act. Man can give some vague
explanation of the laws by which such phenomena are made possible, but
actually the tiny human brain is unable to conceive of the activities of the
Lord, which are therefore called inconceivable. Yet the frog philosophers
still try to give some imaginary explanation.


--- Page 193 ---
526 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
TEXT 47
स हत्थं मगवानुवीं विष्वक्सेनः प्रजापतिः ।
रसाया लीलयोन्नीतामप्सु न्यस्य ययो हरिः gol
sa 2171077 bhagavan urvim
visvak-senah praja-patih
rasaya lilayonnitam
apsu nyasya yayau harih
sah—He; ittham—in this manner; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead;
urvim—the earth; visvak-senah—another name of Visnu; praja-patih—
the Lord of the living entities; rasayah—from within the water; llaya—
very easily; unnitam—raised; epsu—on the water; nyasya— placing; yayau—
returned to His own abode; harith—the Personality of Godhead.
५ TRANSLATION
In this manner the Personality of Godhead Lord Visnu, the maintainer
of all living entities, raised the earth from within the water, and, placing it
afloat on the water, He returned to His own abode.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead Lord Visnu descends by His will to the
material planets in His innumerable incarnations for particular purposes,
and again He goes back to His own abode. When He descends He is called
an avatara because avatara means one who descends. Neither the Lord
Himself nor His specific devotees who come to this earth are ordinary
living entities like us.
TEXT 48
य एवमेतां हरिमेधसो हरेः
कथां सुमद्रां कथनीयमायिनः ।
शृण्वीत भक्तया श्रवयेत वोशतीं
जनादं नोऽ स्याश्च हदि प्रसीदति ॥४८॥
ya evam etam hari-medhaso hareh
katham subhadram kathaniya-mayinah
srnvita bhaktya Sravayeta vosatim
Janardano ’syasu hrdi prasidati


--- Page 194 ---
Text 49] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 527
yah—one who; evam—thus; etam—this; hari-medhasah—who destroys
the material existence of the devotee; har¢h—of the Personality
of Godhead; katham—narration;subhadram—auspicious; kathaniya—worthy
to narrate; mayinah—of the merciful by His internal potency; §rnvita—
hears; bhaktya—in devotion; Sravayeta—also allows others to hear; va—
either; usatim—very pleasing; janardanah—the Lord; asya—his; asu—very
soon; hrdi—within the heart; prasidati—becomes very pleased.
TRANSLATION
If anyone hears and describes in a devotional service attitude this
auspicious narration of Lord Boar, which is worthy of description, the
Lord; who is within the heart of everyone, is very pleased.
PURPORT
In His various incarnations, the Lord appears, acts and leaves behind
Him a narrative history which is as transcendental as He Himself. Every
one of us is fond of hearing some wonderful narration, but most stories
are neither auspicious nor worth hearing because they are of the inferior
quality of material nature. Every living entity is of superior quality, spirit
soul, and nothing material can be auspicious for him. Intelligent persons
should therefore hear personally and cause others to hear the descriptive
narrations of the Lord’s activities, for that will destroy the pangs of
material existence. Out of His causeless mercy only, the Lord comes to
this earth and leaves behind His merciful activities so that the devotees
may derive transcendental benefit.
TEXT 49
तखिन्‌ प्रसन्ने सकराशिषां प्रमो
th gd ताभिरलं लवात्मभिः |
अनन्यदटया मजतां गुहाशयः
खयं विधत्ते खगर्तिं परः पराम्‌ neal
tasmin prasanne sakalasisarn prabhau
kim 01710010078 tabhir 01078 lavatmabhih
ananya-drstya bhajatarn guhasayah
svayam vidhatte sva-gatirn parah param
tasmin—unto Him; prasanne—being pleased; sakala-asisam—of all bene-
diction; prabhau—unto the Lord; kim—what is that; durlabham—very


--- Page 195 ---
528 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 13
difficult to obtain; tabhih—with them; alam—away; lava-itmabhih—with
insignificant gains; ananyae-drstya—by nothing but devotional service;
bhajatam—of those who are engaged in devotional service; guhd-asayah—
residing within the heart; svayam— personally; vidhatte— executes; sva-
gatim—in His own abode; parah—the supreme; param—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Nothing remains unachieved when the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is pleased with someone. By transcendental achievement one understands
everything else to be insignificant. One who engages in transcendental
loving service is elevated to the highest perfectional stage by the Lord
Himself, who is seated in everyone’s heart.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 10.10), the Lord gives intelligence to
the pure devotees so that they may be elevated to the highest perfectional
stage. It is confirmed herein that a pure devotee who constantly engages in
the loving service of the Lord is awarded all knowledge necessary to reach
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For such a devotee there is nothing
valuable to be achieved but the Lord’s service. If one serves faithfully,
there is no possibility of frustration because the Lord Himself takes
charge of the devotee’s advancement. The Lord is seated in everyone's
heart, and He knows the devotee’s motive and arranges everything
achievable. In other words, the pseudo-devotee who is anxious to achieve
material gains cannot attain the highest perfectional stage because the
Lord is in knowledge of his motive. One merely has to become sincere in
his purpose, and then the Lord is there to help in every way.
TEXT 50
को नाम लोके पुरूषा्॑सारवित्‌
पुराकथानां IERIE |
आपीय कणाञ्लिभिर्भवापहा-
महो विरभ्येत विना नरेतरम्‌ ॥५०॥
ko nama [0166 purusartha-saravit
pura-kathanam bhagavat-kathasudham
apiya karnanjalibhir bhavapaham
aho virajyeta vina naretaram


--- Page 196 ---
Text 50] The Appearance of Lord Varaha 529

kah—who; nama—indeed; loke—in the world; purusa-artha—goal of life;
saravit—one who knows the essence of; pura-kathanam—of all past
histories; bhagavat—regarding the Personality of Godhead; katha-sudham—
the nectar of the narrations about the Personality of Godhead; apiya—by
drinking; karpa-aiijalibhih—by aural reception; bhava-apaham—that which
kills all material pangs; aho—alas; virajyeta—could refuse; vina—without;
naretaram—other than the human being.

TRANSLATION

Who, other than one who is not a human being, can exist in this world
and not be interested in the ultimate goal of life? Who can refuse the
nectar of narrations about the Personality of Godhead’s activities,
which by itself can deliver one from all material pangs?

PURPORT

The narration of the activities of the Personality of Godhead is like a
constant flow of nectar. No one can refuse to drink such nectar except
one who is not a human being. Devotional service to the- Lord is the
highest goal of life for every human being, and such devotional service
begins by hearing about the transcendental activities of the Personality of
Godhead. Only an animal, or a man who is almost an animal in behavior,
can refuse to take an interest in hearing the transcendental message of the
Lord. There are many books of stories and histories in the world, but
except for the histories or narrations on the topics of the Personality of
Godhead, none are capable of diminishing the burden of material pangs.
Therefore one who is serious about eliminating material existence must
chant and hear of the transcendental activities of the Personality of
Godhead. Otherwise one must be compared to the nonhumans.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports of the Third Canto, Thirteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Appearance of Lord
Varaha.”


--- Page 197 ---
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening
TEXT 1
farm उवाच
निशम्य कोषारविणोपवर्णितां
हरेः कथां कारणदकरात्मनः।
पुनः स प्रच्छ तयुदयताञ्जकि-
नै चातितृ्ो विदुरो धृतव्रतः ॥ १॥
$ri Suka uvaca
nisamya kaugsara-vinopavarpitam
hareh katham karapa-sukaratmanah
punah sa papraccha tam udyatanjalir
na catitrpto viduro dhrta-vratah
$ri sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; nisamya—after hearing;
kausaravina—by the sage Maitreya; upavarpitim—described; harch—of the
Personality of Godhead; katham—narrations; kdrapa—for the reason of
lifting the earth; sitkara-atmanah—of the boar incarnation; punah—again;
sah—he; papraccha—inquired; tam—from him (Maitreya); udyata-aiijalih—
with folded hands; na—never; ca—also; atitrptah—very much satisfied;
vidurah— Vidura; dhrta-vratah—taken to a vow.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: After hearing from the great sage Maitreya
about the Lord’s incarnation as Variha, Vidura, who had taken a vow,
begged him with folded hands to please narrate further transcendental
activities of the Lord, since he [ Vidura] did not yet feel satisfied.
531


--- Page 198 ---
532 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
TEXT 2
विदुर उवाच
=
तेनैव तु gh हरिणा यज्ञमूर्तिना |
आदिदैत्यो दिरण्याक्षो हत इत्यनुश्ुम ॥। २ ॥
vidura uvaca
tenaiva tu muni-Srestha
harina yajiia-murtina
adi-daityo hiranyakso
hata ity anususruma
vidurah uvdca—Sri Vidura said; tena—by Him; eva—certainly; tu—but;
muni-srestha—Q chief amongst the sages; harina—by the Personality of God-
head; yajiia-mitrtina—the form of sacrifices; adi— original; daityah— demon;
hiranyaksah—by the name Hiranyiksa; hatah—slain; iti—thus;anususruma—
heard in succession.
TRANSLATION
Sri Vidura said: O chief amongst the great sages, I have heard by
disciplic succession that Hiranyaksa, the original demon, was slain by the
same form of sacrifices, the Personality of Godhead [ Lord Boar].
PURPORT
As referred lo previously, the boar incarnation was manifested in two
millenniums—namely Svayambhuva and Caksuga. In both millenniums there
was a boar incarnation of the Lord, but in the Svayambhuva millennium
He lifted the earth from within the water of the universe, whereas in the
Cakguga millennium He killed the first demon, Hiranpyaksa. In the
Svayambhuva millennium He assumed the color white, and in the Caksuga
millennium He assumed the color red. Vidura has already heard about
one of them, and he proposed to hear about the other. The two different
boar incarnations described are the one Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 3
तस्य चोद्धरतः क्षोणीं खद्ात्रेण Se |
-
दैत्यराजस्य च ब्रह्मन्‌ FRAN: ॥ ২ ॥
tasya coddharatah ksaunim
sva-damstragrena (11৫) ৫


--- Page 199 ---
Text 4] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 533
daitya-rajasya ca brahman
kasmad dhetor abhiin mrdhah
tasya—Ilis; ca—also; uddharatah— while lifting; ksaupim—the earth planet;
sva-darigtra-agrena—by the edge of Ilis tusks; lilaya—in [115 pastimes;
daitya-rajasya—of the king of demons; ca—and; brahman—O brahmana;
kasmat—from what; hetoh—reason; abhiit—there was; mrdhah—fight.
TRANSLATION
What was the reason, O brahmana, for the fight between the demon
king and the Lord Boar while the Lord was lifting the earth as His pastime?
TEXT 4
श्रदरधानाय भक्ताय नहि तजन्मविस्तरम्‌ |
5 5 £
ऋषे न ठप्यति मनः परं शोतूहलं हि मे ॥ ४॥
sraddadhanaya bhaktaya
bruhi taj-janma-vistaram
Ise na trpyati manah
parariv kautithalariv hi me
$raddadhanaya—unto a faithful person; bhaktaya—unto a devotee;
bruhi—please narrate; tat—Ilis; janma—appearance; vistaram—in detail;
rse—Q) great sage; na—not; trpyati—become satisfied; manah—mind; param —
very much; kautithalam—inquisitive; hi—certainly ; me—my.
TRANSLATION
My mind has become very inquisitive, and therefore I am not satisfied
with hearing the narration of the Lord’s appearance. Please, therefore,
speak more and more to a devotee who is faithful.
PURPORT
One who is actually faithful and inquisitive is qualified to hear the
transcendental pastimes of the appearance and disappearance of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vidura was a suitable candidate to
receive such transcendental messages.


--- Page 200 ---
534 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 3, Ch. 14
TEXT 5
मैत्रेय उवाच
साधु वीर त्वया पृष्टमवतारकथां हरेः |
यच्च पृच्छसि मर्त्यानां मृत्युपाजविज्ञातनीम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥
maitreya uvaca
sadhu vira tvaya prstam
avatara-katham hareh
yat tvam prcchasi martyanam
mrtyupasa-visatanim
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya said; sadhu—devotee; vira—OQ warrior;
tvaya—by you; prstam—inquired; avatara-katham—topics on the incarna-
tion of the Lord; hareh—of the Personality of Godhead; yat—that which;
tvam—your good self; prechasi—asking me; martyanam—of those who are
destined to death; mrtyupasa—the chain of birth and death; visatanim—
source of liberation.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya said: O warrior, the inquiry made by you is just
befitting a devotee because it concerns the incarnation of the Personality
of Godhead. He is the source of liberation from the chain of birth and
death for all those who are otherwise destined to die.
PURPORT
The great sage Maitreya addressed Vidura as a warrior not only because
Vidura belonged to the Kuru family but because he was anxious to hear
about the chivalrous activities of the Lord in His incarnations of Varaha
and Nrsimha. Because the inquiries concerned the Lord, they were perfectly
befitting a devotee. A devotee has no taste for hearing anything mundane.
There are many topics of mundane warfare, but a devotee is not inclined
to hear them. The topics of the warfare in which the Lord engages do not
concern the war of death but the war against the chain of maya which
obliges one to accept repeated birth and death. In other words, one who
takes delight in hearing the war topics of the Lord is relieved from the
chains of birth and death. Foolish people are suspicious of Krgna’s taking
part in the Battle of Kurukgetra, not knowing that His taking part insured
liberation for all who were present on the battlefield. It is said by
Bhigmadeva that all who were present on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra
attained their original spiritual existences after death. Therefore, hearing
the war topics of the Lord is as good as any other devotional service.


--- Page 201 ---
Text 7] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 535
TEXT 6
ययोत्तानपद्‌ः पुत्रो निना गीतयार्भकः |
मृत्योः कृत्वैव मूष्न्यंङ्धिमारुरोह हरेः TE & ॥
yayottanapadah putro
munina gitayarbhakah
mrtyoh krtvaiva murdhny anghrim
aruroha hareh padam
yaya—by which; uttanapadah—of King Uttanapada; putrah—son; mu-
ninda—by the sage; gitaya—being sung; arbhakah—a child; mrtyoh—of death;
krtva—placing; eva—-certainly; mirdhni—on the head; anghrim—feet;
aruroha—ascended; hareh—of the Personality of Godhead; padam—to the
abode.
TRANSLATION
By hearing these topics from the sage [Narada], the son of King
Uttanapada [Dhruva] was enlightened regarding the Personality of
Godhead, and he ascended to the abode of the Lord, placing his feet over
the head of death.
PURPORT
While quitting his body, Maharaja Dhruva, the son of King Uttanapada,
was attended by personalities like Sunanda and others, who received him
in the kingdom of God. He left this world at an early age, as a young boy,
although he had attained the throne of his father and had several children
of his own. Because he was due to quit this world, death was waiting for
him. He did not care for death, however, and even with his present body
he boarded a spiritual airplane and went directly to the planet of Vispu
because of his association with the great sage, Narada, who spoke to him
the narration of the pastimes of the Lord.
TEXT 7
अथात्रापीतिहासोऽ्यं श्रुतो मे वर्णितः पुरा ।
जह्मणा देवदेवेन देवानामनुषएच्छताम्‌ ॥ ७ ॥
athatrapttihaso yam
$ruto me varnitah pura
brahmana deva-devena
devanam anuprcchatam


--- Page 202 ---
536 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
atha—now; atra—in this matter; api—also; itihasah—history ; ayam—this;
srutah—heard; me—by me; varnitah—described; pura—years ago; brahmana
—by Brahma; deva-devena—the foremost of the demigods; devanam—by
the demigods;anuprcchatam—asking.
TRANSLATION
This history of the fight between the Lord as a boar and the demon
Hiranyaksa was heard by me in a year long ago as it was described by the
foremost of the demigods, Brahma, when he was questioned by the other
demigods.
TEXT 8
Pw, . .
दितिर्दाक्षायणी श्षत्र्मारीचं कर्यपं पतिम्‌ ।
अपत्यकामा चकमे सन्ध्यायां हृच्छयार्दिता nell
ditir daksayant ksattar
maricam kasyapam patim
apatya-kama cakame
sandhyayarm hre-chayardita
ditth—Diti; daksayani—the daughter of Daksa; ksattah—O Vidura;
maricam—the son of Marici; kaSyapam—Kasyapa; patim—her hus-
band; apatya-kama—desirous of having a child; cakame—longed for;
sandhyayam— in the evening; hrt-Saya—by sex desires; ardita— distressed.
TRANSLATION
Diti, daughter of Daksa, being afflicted with sex desire, begged her
husband, Kadyapa, the son of Marici, to have intercourse with her in the
evening in order to beget a child.
TEXT 9
fe पयसा पुरुषं यजुषां पतिम्‌ ।
५
निम्लोचत्यक्‌ आसीनमग्न्यगारे समाहितम्‌ ।। ९ ॥
istvagni-jihvari payasa
purusam yajusari patim
nimlocaty arka astnam
agnyagare samahitam
istva—after worshiping; agni—fire ; jihvam—tongue; payasa-by oblation;
purusam—unto the Supreme Person; yajusam—of all sacrifices; patim—


--- Page 203 ---
Text 10] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 537
master; nimlocati—while setting;arke—the sun; asinam—sitting; agni-agare—
in the sacrificial hall; samahitam—completely in trance.
TRANSLATION
The sun was setting, and the sage was sitting in trance after offering
oblations to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, whose tongue
is the sacrificial fire.
PURPORT
Fire is considered to be the tongue of the Personality of Godhead 1510,
and oblations of grains and clarified butter offered to the fire are thus
accepted by Him. That is the principle of all sacrifices, of which Lord Visnu
is the master. In other words, the satisfaction of Lord Vispu includes the
satisfaction of all demigods and other living beings.
TEXT 10
रितिरूवाच
एष मां त्वत्कृते विद्वन्‌ काम आत्तशरासनः |
दुनोति दीनां विक्रम्य रम्भामिव मतङ्गजः ॥१०॥
ditir uvaca
esa mar tvatkrte vidvan
kama atta-sarasanah
dunoti dinar vikramya
rambham iva matangajah
ditih uvdaca—beautiful Diti said; esah—all these; mam—unto me; tvatkrte
—for you;vidvan—0 learned one; kamah—Cupid; atta-$arasanah—taking his
arrows; dunoti—distresses; dinam—poor me;vikramya—attacking; rambham
—banana tree; iva—like; matangajah—mad elephant.
TRANSLATION
In that place the beautiful Diti expressed her desire: O learned one,
Cupid is taking his arrows and distressing me forcibly, as a mad elephant
troubles a banana tree.
PURPORT
Beautiful Diti, seeing her husband absorbed in trance, began to speak
loudly, not attempting to attract him by bodily expressions. She frankly
said that her whole body was distressed by sex desire because of her
husband’s presence, just as a banana tree is troubled by a mad elephant.


--- Page 204 ---
538 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
It was not natural for her to agitate her husband when he was in trance, but
she could not control her strong sex appetite. Her sex desire was like a mad
elephant, and therefore it was the prime duty of her husband to give her
all protection by fulfilling her sex desire.
TEXT 11
तद्धवान्दष्यमानायां सपलीनां सम॒द्धिभिः |
प्रजावतीनां भ्रं ते मय्यायुङ क्तामनुग्रहम्‌ ।११॥
tad bhavan dahyamanayam
sa-patninam samrddhibhih
prajavatinarm bhadrar te
mayy ayunktam anugraham

tat—therefore; bhavan—your good self; dahyamanayam—being dis-
tressed; sa-patninam—of the co-wives; samrddhibhih—by the prosperity;
prajavatinam—of those who have children; bhadram—all prosperity; te—
unto you; mayi—unto me; ayunktam—do unto me, in all respects;
anugraham—favor.

TRANSLATION

Therefore you should be kind towards me by showing me complete
mercy. I desire to have sons, and 1 am much distressed by seeing the
opulence of my co-wives. By performing this act, you will become happy.

PURPORT ॥

In Bhagavad-gita sexual intercourse for begetting children is accepted as
righteous. A person sexually inclined for simple sense gratification,
however, is unrighteous. In Diti’s appeal to her husband for sex, it was not
exactly that she was afflicted by sex desires, but she desired sons. Since she
had no sons, she felt poorer than her co-wives. Therefore Kasyapa was
supposed to satisfy his bona fide wife.

TEXT 12
मरतर्यापोरुमानानां लोकानाविशते यशः |
पतिर्भवद्विधो यासां प्रजया नयु जायते ॥१२॥
bhartary aptorumananarm
lokan avisate yasah


--- Page 205 ---
Text 13] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 539
patir bhavadvidho yasam
prajaya nanu jayate
bhartari—by the husband; dpta-urumananam—of those who are beloved;
lokan—in the world; avisate—spreads; yasah— fame; patih- husband; bhavat-
vidhah—like your good self; yasam—of those whose; prajaya—by children;
nanu—certainly; jdyate—expands.
TRANSLATION
A woman is honored in the world by the benediction of her husband,
and a husband like you will become famous by having children because
you are meant for the expansion of living entities.
PURPORT
According to Rsabhadeva, one should not become a father or mother
unless one is confident that he can beget children whom he can deliver
from the clutches of birth and death. Human life is the only opportunity
to get out of the material scene, which is full of the miseries of birth,
death, old age and diseases. Every human being should be given the oppor-
tunity to take advantage of his human form of life, and a father like
Kagyapa is supposed to beget good children for the purpose of liberation.
TEXT 13
पुरा पिता नो भगवान्दक्षो दुदिठवत्ससः ।
कं वृणीत वरं वत्सा EIB नः 99% 112300
pura pita no bhagavan
dakso duhitr-vatsalah
kar vrnita varam vatsa
ity aprcchata nah prthak
pura—in days long ago; pita—father; nah—our; bhagavan—the most
opulent; daksah—Daksa; duhitr-vatsalah —affectionate to his daughters;
kam—unto whom; vrpita—you want to accept; varam—your husband;
vatsah—O my children; iti—thus; aprcchata—inquired; nah—us; prthak—
separately.
TRANSLATION
In days long ago, our father, the most opulent Daksa, who was
affectionate to his daughters, asked each of us separately whom we would
prefer to select as our husband.


--- Page 206 ---
540 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 14
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that free selection of a husband was allowed
by the father, but not by free association. The daughters were asked
separately to submit their selection of a husband who was famous for his
acts and personality. The ultimate sclection depended on the choice of the
father.
TEXT 14
स विदित्वाऽऽत्मजानां नो মান सन्तानभाक्नः।
श्रयोदज्चाददात्तासां यास्ते शीलमनुव्रताः ॥१४॥
sa viditva’t ma-janari no
bhavarn santana-bhavanah
trayodasadadat tasam
vas te slam anuvratah
sah—Daksa; viditva—understanding; atma-janam—of the daughters; nah—
our; bhavam—indication; santana— children; bhavanah—well-wisher; trayo-
dasa—thirteen; adadat—handed over; tasam—of all of them; yah— those
who are; te—your; §ilam—behavior; anuvratah—all faithful.
TRANSLATION
Our well-wishing father, Daksa, after knowing our intentions, handed
over thirteen of his daughters unto you, and since then we have all been
faithful.
PURPORT
Generally the daughters were too shy to express their opinions before
their father, but the father would accept the daughters’ intentions through
someone else, such as through a grandmother to whom the grandchildren
had free access. King Daksa collected the opinions of his daughters and
thus handed over thirteen to Kasyapa. Every one of Diti’s sisters was a
mother of children. Therefore, since she was equally faithful to the same
husband, why should she remain without children?
TEXT 15
अथ मे TT FAW কাম कमललोचन |
आर्तोपसपेणं भूमलमोषं हि महीयसि ॥१५॥


--- Page 207 ---
Text 16] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 541
atha me kuru kalyanam
kamam kamala-locana
artopasarpanam bhitmann
amogharm hi mahtyasi
atha—therefore; me—unto me; kuru—Kindly do; kalydnam—benediction;
kamam—desire; kamala-locana—0O lotus-eyed one; arta—of the distressed;
upasarpapam—the approaching; bhiiman—Q great one; amogham—without
failure; hi—certainly; mahiyasi—to a great person.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed one, kindly bless me by fulfilling my desire. When someone
in distress approaches a great person, his pleas should never go in vain.
PURPORT
Ditiknew well that her request might be rejected because of the untimely
situation, but she pleaded that when there is an emergency or a distressful
condition, there is no consideration of time or situation.
TEXT 16
इति तां वीर मारीचः owt चहुमाषिणीम्‌ |
प्रत्याहानुनयन्‌ वाचा RFF ॥ १६॥
iti tam vira maricah
krpanarn bahu-bhasinim
pratyahanunayan vaca
pravrddhananga-kasmalam
iti—thus; tam—unto her; vira—O hero; maricah— the son of Marci (Kas-
yapa); krpanam—unto the poor; bahu-bhasinim—too talkative; pratyaha—
replied; anunayan—pacifying; vaca—by words; pravrddha—highly agitated;
ananga—lust; kasmalam—contaminated.
TRANSLATION
O hero [ Vidura], Diti, being thus afflicted by the contamination of lust,
and therefore poor and talkative, was pacified by the son of Marici in
suitable words.
PURPORT
When a man or woman is afflicted by the lust of sex desire, it is to be
understood as sinful contamination. Kasyapa was engaged in his spiritual


--- Page 208 ---
542 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
activities, but he did not have sufficient strength to refuse his wife, who
was thus afflicted. He could have refused her with strong words expressing
impossibility, but he was not as spiritually strong as Vidura. Vidura is
addressed here as a hero because no one is stronger in self-control than a
devotee of the Lord. It appears that Kasyapa was already inclined to have
sex enjoyment with his wife, and because he was not a strong man he tried
to dissuade her only with pacifying words.
TEXT 17
एष तेऽद्ं दिधास्यामि प्रियं भीरु यदिच्छसि |
तस्याः कामं न कः छर्यात्सिद्धिस्यैरमिकी यतः ।। १७॥
esa te ham vidhasyami
priyam bhiru yad icchasi
tasyah kamam na kal kuryat
siddhis traivargiki yatah
esah—this; te—your request; aham—1I; vidhasyami—shall execute; pri-
yam—very dear; bhiru—O0 afflicted one; yat—what; icchasi—you are desiring;
tasyah—her; kamam—desires; na—not; kah—who; kuryat—would perform;
siddhih—perfection of liberation; traivargiki—three; yatah—from whom.
TRANSLATION
O afflicted one, I shall forthwith gratify whatever desire is dear to you,
for who else but you is the source of the three perfections of liberation?
PURPORT
The three perfections of liberation are religiosity, economic development
and sense gratification. For a conditioned soul, the wife is considered to be
the source of liberation because she offers her service to the husband for
his ultimate liberation. Conditional material existence is based on sense
gratification, and if someone has the good fortune to get a good wife, he
is helped by the wife in all respects. If one is disturbed in his conditional
life, he becomes more and more entangled in material contamination. A
faithful wife is supposed to cooperate with her husband in fulfilling all
material desires so he can then become comfortable and execule spiritual
activities for the perfection of life. If, however, the husband is progressive
in spiritual advancement, the wife undoubtedly shares in his activities, and
thus both the wife and the husband profit in spiritual perfection. It is
essential, therefore, that girls as well as boys be trained to discharge spiri-


--- Page 209 ---
Text 18] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 543
tual duties so that at the time of cooperation both will be benefited. The
training of the boy is brahmacarya, and the training of the girl is chastity.
A faithful wife and spiritually trained brahmacari is a good combination
for advancement of the human mission.
TEXT 18
TGA खाभ्रमेण ङलत्रवान्‌ ।
व्यसनाणबयत्येति जलयानं IE ॥१८॥
sarvasraman upadaya
svasramena kalatravan
vyasanarnavam atyeti
Jala-yanair yatharnavam
sarva—all; dsramdan—social orders; upadaya—completing; sva—own;
asramena—by the social orders; kalatravan—a person living with a
wife; vyasana-arnavam—the dangerous ocean of material existence; atyeti—
one can cross over; jala-ydnaih—seagoing vessel; yatha—as; arnavam—the
ocean.
TRANSLATION
As one can cross over the ocean with seagoing vessels, similarly one can
cross over the dangerous situation of the material ocean by living with a
wife.
PURPORT
There are four social orders for cooperation in the endeavor for
liberation from material existence. The orders of brahmacarya or pious
student life, household life with a wife, retired life and renounced life all
depend for successful advancement on the householder who lives with
a wife. This cooperation is essential for the proper functioning of the
institution of the four social orders and the four spiritual orders of life.
This Vedic varpasrama system is generally known as the caste system. The
man who lives with a wife has a great responsibility in maintaining the
members of the other social orders—the brahmacaris, vanaprasthas and
sannyasts. Except for the grhasthas or the householders, everyone is sup-
posed to engage in the spiritual advancement of life, and therefore the
brahmacari, the vanaprastha and the sannyasi have very little time to earn
a livelihood. They therefore collect alms from the grhasthas, and thus they
secure the bare necessities of life and cultivate spiritual understanding. By


--- Page 210 ---
544 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
helping the other three sections of society cultivate spiritual values, the
householder also makes advancement in spiritual life. Ultimately every
member of society automatically becomes spiritually advanced and easily
crosses the ocean of nescience.
TEXT 19
यामाहुरात्पनो qd श्रेयस्कामस्य मानिनि ।
यस्यां aged पुमांश्चरति विज्वरः nan
yam ahur atmano hy ardham
Sreyas-kamasya manini
yasyam sva-dhuram adhyasya
pumams carati vijvarah

yam— the wife who; ahuh—is said; atmanah—of the body; hi— thus; ard-
ham—half; sreyah— welfare; kamasya—of all desires; manini—O respectful
one; yasyam—in whom; sva-dhuram— all responsibilities; adhyasya—entrust-
ing; puman—a man; carati— moves; vijvarah— without anxiety.

TRANSLATION

O respectful one, a wife is so helpful that she is called the better half of
a man’s body because of her sharing in all auspicious activities. A man can
move without anxiety entrusting all responsibilities to his wife.

PURPORT

By the Vedic injunction, the wife is accepted as the better half of a
man’s body because she is supposed to be responsible for discharging half
of the duties of the husband. A family man has a responsibility to perform
five kinds of sacrifices, called paiica-yajfia, in order to get relief from all
kinds of unavoidable sinful reaction incurred in the course of his affairs.
When the man becomes qualitatively like the cats and dogs, he forgets
his duties in cultivating spiritual values, and thus he accepts his wife
as a sense gralificatory agency. When the wife is accepted as a sense
gratificatory agency, personal beauty is the main consideration, and as soon
as there is a break in personal sense gratification, there is disruption or
divorce. But when husband and wife aim at spiritual advancement by
mutual cooperation, there is no consideration of personal beauty or the
disruption of so-called love. In the material world there is no question of
love. Marriage is actually a duty performed in mutual cooperation as direct-
ed in the authoritative scriptures for spiritual advancement. Therefore
marriage is essential in order to avoid the life of cats and dogs, who are not
meant for spiritual enlightenment.


--- Page 211 ---
Text 20] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 545
TEXT 20
यामाधित्येन्दरियारातीन्दुजेयानितराश्मैः |
बयं जयेम हेलाभिदंस्युन्दुगंपतिर्यथा ॥२०॥
yam asrityendriyaratin
durjayan itarasramaih
vayarn jayema helabhir
dasyun durga-patir yatha

yam— whom; asritya—taking shelter of; indriya—senses; aratin—enemics;
durjayan—difficult to conquer; itara—other than the householders; asra-
maih—by orders of society; vayam—we; jayema—can conquer; helabhih—
easily; dasyin—invading plunderers; durga-patih—a fort commander;
yatha—as.

TRANSLATION

As a fort commander very easily conquers invading plunderers, by taking
shelter of a wife, one can conquer the senses, which are unconquerable in
the other social orders.

PURPORT

Of the four orders of human society—the student or brahmacart order,
the householder or grhastha order, the retired or vd@naprastha order, and
the renounced or sannydasi order—the householder is on the safe side. The
bodily senses are considered plunderers of the fort of the body. The wife
is supposed to be the commander of the fort, and therefore whenever there
is an attack on the body by the senses, it is the wife who protects the body
from being smashed. The sex demand is inevitable for everyone, but one
who has a fixed wife is saved from the onslaught of the sense enemies. A
man who possesses a good wife does not create disturbance in society by
corrupting virgin girls. Without a fixed wife a man becomes a debauchee of
the first order and is a nuisance in society—unless he is a trained brahma-
cart, vanaprastha or sannydsi. Unless there is rigid and systematic training
of the brahmacdr? by the expert spiritual master and unless the student is
obedient, it is sure that the so-called brahmacari will fall prey to the
attack of sex. There are so many instances of falldown, even for great
yogis like Visvamitra. A grhastha is saved, however, because of his faithful
wife. Sex life is the cause of material bondage, and therefore it is prohibited
in three aframas and is allowed only in the grhastha-asrama. The grhastha
is responsible for producing first-quality brahmacaris, vanaprasthas and
sannyasis.


--- Page 212 ---
546 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
TEXT 21
न वयं TEE त्वामनुकतं गृहेश्वरि ।
अप्यायुषा वा कार्स्न्येन ये चान्ये TORT: ॥२१॥
na vayam prabhavas tam
tvam anukartum grhesvari
apy ayusa va kartsnyena
ye canye guna-grdhnavah

na—never; vayam—we; prabhavah—are able; tam—that; tvam—unto you;
anukartum—do the same; grha-isvari—@® queen of the home; api—in spite
of; ayusa—by duration of life; va—or (in the next life); kartsnyena—entire;
ye—who; ca—also; anye—others; gunae-grdhnavah—those who are able to
appreciate qualities.

TRANSLATION

0 queen of the home, we are not able to act like you, nor could we
repay you for what you have done, even if we worked for our entire life or
even after death. To repay you is not possible, even for those who are
admirers of personal qualities.

PURPORT

So much glorification of a woman by her husband indicates that he is
henpecked or is talking lightly in joke. Kasyapa meant that householders
living with wives enjoy the heavenly blessings of sense enjoyment and at
the same time have no fear of going down to hell. The man in the
renounced order of life has no wife and may be driven by sex desire to
seek another woman or another’s wife and thus go to hell. In other words,
the so-called man of the renounced order, who has left his house and wife,
goes to hell if he again desires sexual pleasure, knowingly or unknowingly.
In that way the householders are on the side of safety. Therefore husbands
as a class cannot repay their debt to women either in this life or the next.
Even if they engage themselves in repaying the women throughout their
whole lives, it is still not possible. Not all husbands are as able to appreciate
the good qualities of their wives, but even though one is able to appreciate
these qualities, it is still not possible to repay the debt to the wife. Such
extraordinary praises by a husband for his wife are certainly in the mode
of joking.


--- Page 213 ---
Text 23] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 547
TEXT 22
अथापि काममेतं ते प्रजात्यै करवाण्यलम्‌ ।
यथा मां नातिरोचन्ति ged प्रतिपालय ।२२॥
athapi kamam eta te
prajatyai karavany alam
yatha mam natirocanti
muhurtam pratipalaya
athapi—even though (it is not possible); kamam—this sex desire; etam—as
it is; te—your; prajatyai—for the sake of children; karavani—let me do;
alam—without delay; yatha—as; mam—unto me; na—may not; atirocanti—
reproach; muhiirtam—a few seconds; pratipalaya—wait for.
TRANSLATION
Even though it is not possible to repay you, I shall satisfy your sex
desire immediately for the sake of begetting children. But you must wait
for only a few seconds so that others may not reproach me.
PURPORT
The henpecked husband may not be able to repay his wife for all the
benefits that he derives from her, but as for begetting children by fulfilling
sex desire, it is not at all difficult for any husband unless he is thoroughly
impotent. This is a very easy task for a husband under normal conditions.
In spite of Kasyapa’s being very eager, he requested her to wait for a few
seconds so that others might not reproach him. He explains his position as
follows.
TEXT 23
©.
एषा घोरतमा वेला घोराणां धोरदशेना |
चरन्ति यस्यां भूतानि भूतेशानुचराणि ह ।२३॥
esa ghoratama vela
ghoranarm ghora-darsana
caranti yasyarm bhutani
bhutesanucarani ha
esa—this time; ghoratama—most horrible; vela—pcriod; ghorapam—of
the horrible; ghora-darsana—horrible looking; caranti—move; yasyam—in
which; bhutani—ghosts; bhutesa—the lord of the ghosts; anucarani—
constant companions; ha—indeed.


--- Page 214 ---
548 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 3, Ch. 14
TRANSLATION
This particular time is most inauspicious because at this time the horrible
looking ghosts and constant companions of the lord of the ghosts are
visible.
PURPORT
Kasgyapahas already informed his wife, Diti, to wait for a while, and now
he warns her that failure to consider the particular time will result in
punishment from the ghosts and evil spirits who move during this time,
along with their master, Lord Rudra.
TEXT 24
एतस्यां साध्वि सन्ध्यायां भगवान्‌ भूतभावनः |
परीतो भूतपषद्धिद्ेषेणाटति भूतराट्‌ RI)
etasyam sadhvi sandhyayam
bhagavan bhita-bhavanah
parito bhuta-parsadbhir
vrsenatati bhutarat
etasyam—in this period; sadhvi—O chaste one; sandhyayam—at the
junction of day and night (evening); bhagavan—the Personality of God;
bhuta-bhavanah—the well-wisher of the ghostly characters; paritah—
surrounded by; bhiita-parsadbhih—by ghostly companions; vrsena—on the
back of the bull carrier; atati—travels; bhutarat—the king of the ghosts.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva, the King of the ghosts, sitting on the back of his bull carrier,
travels at this time, accompanied by ghosts who follow him for their
welfare.
PURPORT
Lord Siva, or Rudra, is the King of the ghosts. Ghostly characters
worship Lord Siva to be gradually guided toward a path of self-realization.
Mayavadi philosophers are mostly worshipers of Lord Siva, and Sripada
Sankaracarya is considered to be the incarnation of Lord Siva for preaching
godlessness to the Mayavadi philosophers. Ghosts are bereft of a physical
body because of their grievously sinful acts, such as suicide. The last resort
of the ghostly characters in human society is to take shelter of suicide,
either material or spiritual. Material suicide causes loss of the physical body,


--- Page 215 ---
Text 25] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 549
and spiritual suicide causes loss of the individual identity. Mayavadi phi-
losophers desire to lose their individuality and merge into the impersonal
spiritual brahmajyoti existence. Lord Siva, being very kind to the ghosts,
sees that, although they are condemned, they get physical bodies. He
places them into the wombs of women who indulge in sexual intercourse
regardless of the restrictions on time and circumstance. K asyapa wanted to
impress this fact upon Diti so that she might wait for a while.
TEXT 25
इपशानयकानिलधूलिधूम्र-
Cr न
[REIL बि्योतजटाकलापः |
भखावगुण्टामटसुक्मदेदो
[Rf पश्यति देवरस्ते uu
$masana-cakranila-dhuli-dhumra-
vikirpa-vidyota-jata-kalapah
bhasmavagunthamala-rukma-deho
devas tribhih pasyati devaras te
§masana—burning crematorium; cakra-anila—whirlwind; dhuli—dust;
dhiumra—smoky; vikirna-vidyota—thus smeared over beauty; jata-kalapah—
bunches of matted hair; bhasma— ashes; avaguntha—covered by; amala—
stainless; rukma—reddish; dehah—body; devah—the demigod; tribhih—
with three eyes; pasyati—sees; devarah—younger brother of the husband;
te—your.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sivas body is reddish, and he is unstained, but he is covered with
ashes. His hair is dusty from the whirlwind dust of the burning
crematorium. He is the younger brother of your husband, and he sees with
his three eyes.
PURPORT
Lord Siva is not an ordinary living entity, nor is he in the category of
Visnu, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is far more powerful
than any living entity up to the standard of Brahma, yet he is not on an
equal level with Visnu. Since he is almost like Lord Visnu, Siva can see
past, present and future. One of his eyes is like the sun, another is like the
moon, and his third eye, which is between his eyebrows, is like fire. He
can generate fire from his middle eye, and he is able to vanquish any


--- Page 216 ---
550 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
powerful living entity, including Brahma, yet he does not live pompously
in a nice house, etc., nor does he possess any material properties, although
he is master of the material world. He lives mostly in the crematorium
where dead bodies are burnt, and the whirlwind dust of the crematorium
is his bodily dress. He is unstained by material contamination. Kasyapa
took him as his younger brother because the youngest sister of Diti
(Kasyapa’s wife) was married to Lord Siva. The husband of one’s sister is
considered one’s brother. By that social relation, Lord Siva happened to be
the younger brother of Kasyapa. Kasyapa warned his wife that because
Lord Siva would see their sex indulgence, the time was not appropriate.
Diti might argue that they would enjoy sex life in a private place, but
Kasyapa reminded her that Lord Siva has three eyes, called the sun, moon
and fire, and one cannot escape his vigilance any more than he can escape
Vispu. Although seen by the police, a criminal is sometimes not immedi-
ately punished; the police wait for the proper time to apprehend him. The
forbidden time for sexual intercourse would be noted by Lord Siva, and
Diti would meet with proper punishment by giving birth to a child of
ghostly character or a godless impersonalist. Kadyapa foresaw this, and
thus he warned his wife Diti.
TEXT 26
न यस्य रोके खजनः परो वा
= - noo <
नात्यादता नात RIFE: |
¢ ~
वर्यं वतैयंचरणापविद्धा-
माञ्चासदेऽजां बत GRA ॥ २६॥
na yasya loke sva-janah paro va
natyadrto nota kascid vigarhyah
vayarn vratair yac-carapapaviddham
asasmahe jam bata bhukta-bhogam
na—never; yasya—of whom; loke—in the world; sva-janah—kinsman;
parah—unconnected; vd—nor; na—neither; ati—greater; adrtah—favor-
able; na—nol; uta—or; kascit—anyone; vigarhyah—criminal; vayam—we;
vrataih—by vows; yat—whose; carapa—feet; apaviddham—rejected; asas-
mahe—respectfully worship; ajam—maha-prasadam; bata—certainly ; bhukte
bhogam—remnants of foodstuff.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva regards no one as his relative, yet there is no one who is not
connected with him; he does not regard anyone as very favorable or


--- Page 217 ---
Text 27] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 551
abominable. We respectfully worship the remnants of his foodstuff, and
we vow to accept what is rejected by him.
PURPORT
Kasyapa informed his wife that just because Lord Siva happened to be
his brother-in-law, that should not encourage her in her offense towards
him. Kasyapa warned her that actually Lord Siva is not connected with
anyone, nor is anyone his enemy. Since he is one of the three controllers
of the universal affairs, he is equal to everyone. His greatness is incom-
parable because he is a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is said that among all the devotees of the Personality of
Godhead, Lord Siva is the greatest. Thus the remnants of foodstuff left by
him are accepted by other devotees as mahd-prasadam, or great spiritual
foodstuff. The remnants of foodstuff offered to l.ord Krsna are called
prasadam, but when the same prasadam is eaten by a great devotee like
Lord Siva, it is called maha-prasadam. Lord Siva is so great that he does
not care for the material prosperity for which every one of us is so eager.
Parvati, who is the powerful material nature personified, is under his full
control as his wife, yet he does not use her even to build a residential
house. He prefers to remain without shelter, and his great wife also agrees
to live with him humbly. People in general worship goddess Durga, the
wife of Lord Siva, for material prosperity, but Lord Siva engages her in his
service without material desire. He simply advises his great wife that of all
kinds of worship, the worship of Visnu is the highest; and greater than that
is the worship of a great devotee or anything in relation with Visnu.
TEXT 27
TEATERG मनीषिणो
गृणन्त्यविद्यापटलं Rifas: |
- .
निरस्तसाम्यातिशयोऽपि यत्खयं
पिजाचचयामचरद्वतिः सताम्‌ ॥२७॥
yasyanavadya-caritarn manisino
grnanty avidya-patalam bibhitsavah
nirasta-samyatisayo ’pi yal svayarn
pisaca-caryam acarad gatih satam
yasya—whose;anavadya—unimpeachable; caritam —character; manisinah—
great sages; grnanti—follow;avidya—nescience;patalam—mass; bibhitsavah—
desiring to dismantle; nirasta—nullified; samya—equality; atisayah—great-
ness; api—in spite of; yat—as; svayam—pecrsonally ; pisaca—devil; caryam—


--- Page 218 ---
552 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
activities; acarat— performed; gatih— destination; satam—of the devotees of
the lord.
TRANSLATION
Although no one in the material world is equal to or greater than Lord
Siva, and although his unimpeachable character is followed by great souls
to dismantle the mass of nescience, he nevertheless remains as if a devil in
order to give salvation to all devotees of the Lord.
PURPORT
Lord Siva’s uncivilized devilish characteristics are never abominable
because he teaches the sincere devotees of the Lord how to practice
detachment from material enjoyment. He is called Mahadeva, or the
greatest of all demigods, and no one is equal to or greater than him in the
material world. He is almost equal with Lord Visnu. Although he always
associates with Maya, Durga, he is above the reactionary stage of the three
modes of material nature, and although he is in charge of devilish
characters in the mode of ignorance, he is not affected by such association.
TEXT 28
५ ¢
हसन्ति यस्याचरितं हि gam
खात्मन्‌ रतस्याविदुषः समीहितम्‌ |
४५ =
यैवखरमाल्यामरणानुलेपनेः
घभोजनं खार्मतयोपलालितम्‌ ॥२८॥
hasanti yasyacaritarn hi durbhagal
svatman ratasyavidusah samihitam
yair vastra-malyabharapanulepanaih
$va-bhojanam svatmatayopalalitam
hasanti—laugh at; yasya—whose; acaritam—activity; hi—certainly; dur
bhagah—the unfortunate; sva-atman—in the self; ratasya—of one engaged;
avidusah—not knowing; samihitam—his purpose; yaih—by whom; vastra—
clothing; madlya—garlands; abharapa—ornaments; anu—such luxurious;
lepanaih—with ointments; sva-bhojanam—eatable by the dogs; sva-
atmataya—as if the self; upalalitam—fondled.
TRANSLATION
Unfortunate, foolish persons, not knowing that he is engaged in his own
self, laugh at him. Such foolish persons engage in maintaining the body—
which is eatable by dogs—with dresses, ornaments, garlands and ointments.


--- Page 219 ---
Text 29] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 553
PURPORT
Lord Siva never accepts any luxurious dress, garland, ornament or oint-
ment. But those who are addicted to the decoration of the body which is
finally eatable by dogs—very luxuriously maintain it as the self. Such per-
sons do not understand Lord Siva, but they approach him for luxurious
material comforts. There are two kinds of devotees of Lord Siva. One
class is the gross materialist seeking only bodily comforts from Lord Siva,
and the other class desires to become one with him. They are mostly
impersonalists and prefer to chant ‘“Sivo ’ham,” “I am Siva,” or “After
liberation I shall become one with Lord Siva.” In other words, the karmis
and jianis are generally devotees of L.ord Siva, but they do not properly
understand his real purpose in life. Sometimes so-called devotees of Lord
Siva imitate him in using poisonous intoxicants. Lord Siva once swallowed
an ocean of poison, and thus his throat became blue. The imitation Sivas
try to follow him by indulging in poisons, and thus they are ruined. The
real purpose of Lord Siva is to serve the Soul of the soul, Lord Krsna. He
desires that all luxurious articles, such as nice garments, garlands, orna-
ments, and cosmetics, be given to Lord Krsna only, because Krsna is the
real enjoyer. He refuses to accept such luxurious items himself because
they are only meant for Krsna. However, since they do not know this pur-
pose of Lord Siva, foolish persons either laugh at him or profitlessly try to
imitate him.
TEXT 29
ब्रह्मादयो यत्कृतसेतपाठा
यत्कारणं विश्वमिदं च माया ।
[च
आज्ञाकरी यस्य॒ पिश्चाचचय।
अहो विभूञ्नश्चरितं विडम्बनम्‌ ॥२९॥
brahmadayo yal-krta-setu-pala
yat-karanam visvam ida ca maya
ajiiakari yasya pisaca-carya
aho vibhumnas caritam vidambanam
brahma-adayah—demigods like Brahma; yat—whose; krta—activities;
setu—religious rites; palah—observers; yat—one who is; karanam—the origin
of; visvam—the universe; idam—this; ca—also; mayd—material energy;
djiiakari—order carrier; yasya—whose; pisaca—devilish; caryd—activity;
aho—O my lord; vibhamnah—of the great; caritam—character;
vidambanam—simply imitation.


--- Page 220 ---
554 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
TRANSLATION
Demigods like Brahma also follow the religious rites observed by him.
He is the controller of the material energy, which causes the creation of
the material world. He is great, and therefore his devilish characteristics
are simply imitation.
PURPORT
Lord Siva is the husband of Durga, the controller of the material energy.
Durga is personified material energy, and Lord Siva, being her husband, is
the controller of the material energy. He is also the incarnation of the
mode of ignorance and one of the three deities representing the Supreme
Lord. As His representative, Lord Siva is identical with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He is very great, and his renunciation of all
material enjoyment is an ideal example of how one should be materially
unattached. One should therefore follow in his footsteps and be unattached
to matter, not imitate his uncommon acts like drinking poison.
TEXT 30
मैत्रेय उवाच
सैवं संविदिते मत्रा मन्मथोन्मथितेन्द्रिया ।
- C
जग्राह वासो अह्यर्षेवरृषलीव गतत्रपा ॥२०।।
maitreya uvaca
507४०77 5৫118080186 bhartra
manmathonmathitendriya
jagraha vaso brahmarser
vrsaltva gata-trapa
maitreyah uvdca—Maitreya said; sa—she; evam—thus; samvidite—in
spite of being informed; bhartra—by her husband; manmatha—by Cupid;
unmathita—being pressed; indriya—senses; jagraha—caught hold of; vasah—
clothing; brahmarseh— of the great brahmana sage; vrsali—public prostitute;
iva—like; gata-trapa— without shame.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: Diti was thus informed by her husband, but she was
pressed by Cupid for sex satisfaction. She caught hold of the clothing of
the great brahmana sage, just like a shameless public prostitute.
PURPORT
The difference between a married wife and a public prostitute is that
one is restrained in sex life by the rules and regulations of the scriptures,


--- Page 221 ---
Text 31] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 555
whereas the other is unrestricted in sex life and is conducted solely by the
strong sex urge. Although very enlightened, Kasyapa, the great sage, be-
came a victim of his prostitute wife. Such is the strong force of material
energy.
TEXT 31
ক "সী (5
स विदित्वाथ भार्यायास्तं fae विकर्मणि |
नत्वा दिष्टाय रहसि तयाथोपविवेश दि nan
sa viditvatha bharyayas
tar nirbandham vikarmani
natva distaya rahasi
tayathopavivesa hi
sah—he; viditva—understanding; atha—thereupon; bharyayah—of the
wife; tam—that; nirbandham—obstinacy; vikarmani—in the forbidden act;
natva—offering obeisances; dist@dya—unto worshipable fate; rahasi—in a
secluded place; taya—with her; atha— thus; upavivesa—sat on; hi— certainly.
TRANSLATION
Understanding his wife’s purpose, he was obliged to perform the
forbidden act, and thus offering his obeisances unto worshipable fate, he
lay with her in a secluded place.
PURPORT
It appears from the talks of Kasyapa with his wife that he was a wor-
shiper of Lord Siva, and although he knew that Lord Siva would not be
pleased with him for such a forbidden act, he was obliged to act by his
wife’s desire, and thus he offered his obeisances unto fate. He knew that
- the child born of such untimely sexual intercourse would certainly not be
a good child, but could not protect himself because he was too obligated
to his wife. In a similar case,however, when Thakura Haridasa was tempted
by a public prostitute at the dead of night, he avoided the allurement be-
cause of his perfection in Krsna consciousness. That is the difference
between a Krgna conscious person and others. Kasyapa Muni was greatly
learned and enlightened, and he knew all the rules and regulations of
systematic life, yet he failed to protect himself from the attack of sex
desire. Thakura Haridasa was not born of a brahmana family, nor was he
himself brahmana, yet he could protect himself from such an attack due to
his being Krsna conscious. Thakura Haridasa used to chant the holy name
of the Lord 300,000 times daily.


--- Page 222 ---
556 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
TEXT 32
Tver सलिलं प्राणानायम्य वाग्यतः |
ध्यायञ्जजाप विरजं बरह्म ज्योतिः सनातनम्‌ ॥३२॥
athopasprsya 50111071
pranan ayamyavagyatah
dhyayaii jajapa virajam
brahma jyotih sanatanam

atha—thereafter; upasprsya—touching or taking bath in water; salilam—
water; pranan  @yamya—practicing trance; wvak-yatah—controlling
speech; dhyayan—meditating; jajapa—chanted within the mouth;
virajam—pure; brahma—Gayatri hymns; jyotih—effulgence; sanatanam—
eternal.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter the brahmana took his bath in the water and controlled
his speech by practicing trance, meditating on the eternal effulgence and
chanting the holy Gayatri hymns within his mouth.

PURPORT

As one has to take bath after using the toilet, so one has to wash him-
self with water after sexual intercourse, especially at a forbidden time.
Kagyapa Muni meditated on the impersonal brahmajyoti by chanting the
Gayatri mantra within his mouth. When a Vedic mantra is chanted within
the mouth so that only the chanter can hear, it is called japa. But when
such mantras are chanted loudly, it is called kirtana. The Vedic hymn
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare can be chanted both softly to oneself or loudly;
therefore it is called the maha-mantra or the great hymn.

Kadyapa Muni appears to be an impersonalist. Comparing his character
with that of Thakura Haridasa as referred to above, it is clear that the
personalist is stronger in sense control than the impersonalist. This is
explained in Bhagavad-gita as parari drstva nivartate; i.e., one ceases lo
accept lower grade things when one is situated in a superior condition. One
is supposed to be purified alter taking bath and chanting Gayatri, but the
maha-mantra is so powerful that one can chant loudly or softly, in any
condition, and he is protected from all the evils of material existence.


--- Page 223 ---
Text 34] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 557
TEXT 33
दितिस्तु व्रीडिता तेन saa" भारत |
उपसङ्गम्य वि्र्षियधोभुख्यम्यमाषत 1230
ditis tu vridita tena
karmavadyena bharata
upasangamya viprarsim
adhomukhy abhyabhasata
ditth—Diti, the wife of Kasyapa; tu—but; vriditi—ashamed; tena—
by that; karma—act; avadyena—faulty; bharata—O son of the Bharata
family; upasangamya—going nearer to; viprarsim—the brahmana sage;
adhomukhi—with her face lowered; abhyabhasata— politely said.
TRANSLATION
O son of the Bharata family, Diti, after this, went nearer to her
husband, her face lowered because of her faulty action. She spoke as
follows:
PURPORT
When one is ashamed of an abominable action, one naturally becomes
down-faced. Diti came to her senses after the abominable sexual
intercourse with her husband. Such sexual intercourse is condemned as
prostitution. In other words, sex life with one’s wife is equal to prostitu-
tion if the regulations are not properly followed.
TEXT 34
दि तिरुवाच
न भे गर्भमिमं ब्रह्मन्‌ भूतानारषभोऽवधीत्‌ |
रुद्रः पतिर्हि भूतानां sem Ie
ditir uvaca
na me garbham imam brahman
bhutanam rsabho 'vadhit
rudral patir hi bhutanarn
yasyakaravam ৫1111105072
ditih uvdca—the beautiful Diti said; na—not; me—my; garbham—preg-
nancy; imam—this; brahman—O brahmapa; bhiitanam—of all living en-
tities; rsabhah—the noblest of all living entities; avadhit—let him kill;


--- Page 224 ---
558 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
rudrah— Lord Siva; patih—master; hi—certainly; bhitanam—of all living
entities; yasya— whose; akaravam—1 have done; anmhasam— offense.
TRANSLATION
The beautiful Diti said: My dear brahmana, kindly see that my embryo
is not killed by Lord Siva, the lord of all living entities, because of the
great offense which I have committed against him.
PURPORT
Diti was conscious of her offense and was anxious to be excused by
Lord Siva. Lord Siva has two popular names, Rudra and Asutosa. He is
very prone to anger as well as quickly pacified. Diti knew that because of
his being quickly angered he might spoil the pregnancy she had so unlaw-
fully achieved. But because he was also Asdutosa, she implored her
brahmana husband to help her in pacifying Lord Siva, for her husband
was a great devotee of Lord Siva. In other words, Lord Siva might have
been angry with Diti because she obliged her husband to transgress the
law, but he would not refuse her husband’s prayer. Therefore the
application for excuse was submitted through her husband. She prayed to
Lord Siva as follows.
TEXT 35
नमो रुद्राय महते देवायोग्राय मीदुषे ।
থিৰায न्यस्तदण्डाय धृतदण्डाय मन्यवे ॥ ३५॥
namo rudraya mahate
devayograya midhuse
sivaya nyasta-dandaya
dhrta-dandaya manyave
namah—all obeisances unto; rudraya—unto the angry Lord Siva; mahate—
unto the great; devaiya—unto the demigod; ugraya—unto the ferocious;
midhuse—unto the fulfiller of all material desires; sivaya—unto the all-
auspicious; nyasta-dandaya—unto the forgiving; dhrta-dapdaya—unto the
immediate chastiser; manyave—unto the angry.
TRANSLATION
Let me offer my obeisances unto the angry Lord Siva, who is
simultaneously the very ferocious great demigod and the fulfiller of all
material desires. He is all-auspicious and forgiving, but his anger can
immediately move him to chastise.


--- Page 225 ---
Text 36] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 559
PURPORT
Diti prayed for the mercy of Lord Siva very cleverly. She prayed:
“The lord can cause me to cry, but if he likes he can also stop my crying
because he is Asutosa. He is so great that if he likes he can immediately
destroy my pregnancy, but by his mercy he can also fulfill my desire that
my pregnancy not be spoiled. Because he is all-auspicious, it is not
difficult for him to excuse me from being punished, although he is now
ready to punish me because ] have moved his great anger. He appears
like a man, but he is the lord of all men.”
TEXT 36
स नः प्रसीदतां मामो भगवालुर्वनुमहः ।
व्याधस्याप्यलुकम्प्यानां खीणां देवः सतीपतिः ॥२६॥
sa nah 10705100077, bhamo
bhagavan urv-anugrahah
vyadhasyapy anukampyanar
strinam devah satipatih
sah—he; nah—with us; prasidatam— be pleased; bhamah—brother-in-law;
bhagavan—the personality of all opulences; uru—very great; anugrahah—
merciful; vyadhasya—of the hunter; api—also; anukampyanam—of the ob-
jects of mercy; strinam—of the women; devah—the worshipable lord; sati-
patih—husband of Sati (the chaste).
TRANSLATION
Let him be pleased with us, since he is my brother-in-law, the husband
of my sister Sati. He is also the worshipable lord of all women. He is the
personality of all opulences and can show mercy towards women, who are
excused even by the uncivilized hunters.
PURPORT
Lord Siva is the husband of Sati, one of the sisters of Diti. Diti invoked
the pleasure of her sister Sati so that she would request her husband to
excuse her; besides that, Lord Siva is the worshipable lord of all women.
He is naturally very kind towards women, on whom even the uncivilized
hunters also show their mercy. Since Lord Siva is himself associated with
women, he knows very well their defective nature, and he might not take
very seriously Diti’s unavoidable offense, which occurred due to her faulty
nature. Every virgin girl is supposed to be a devotee of Lord Siva. Diti
remembered her childhood worship of Lord Siva and begged his mercy.


--- Page 226 ---
560 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
TEXT 37 4
मैत्रेय उवा
स्वसगंस्थारिषं तोक्यामासासाचां प्रवेपतीम्‌ |
नि्तसन्ध्यानियमो भार्यामाह प्रजापतिः ।२७॥
maitreya uvaca
sva-sargasyasisam lokyam
asasanar pravepatim
nivrtta-sandhya-niyamo
bharyam aha prajapatih
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya said; sva-sargasya—of her own
children; dsisam—welfare; lokyam—in the world; dsasanam—desiring;
pravepatim—while trembling; nivrtta—averted from; sandhya-niyamah—
the rules and regulations of evening; bharyam—unto the wife; aha—said;
prajapatih—the progenitor.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Kasyapa thus addressed his wife, who was trembling
because of fear that her husband was offended. She understood that he
had been dissuaded from his daily duties of offering evening prayers, yet
she desired the welfare of her children in the world.
TEXT 38
F499 ITH
अप्रायत्यादात्यनस्ते হাীঘাল্মীর্ুবিকাহুন |
मखिदेशातिचारेण देवानां चातिहेलनात्‌ 113
kasyapa ४४८८०
aprayatyad atmanas te
dosan mauhurtikad uta
man-nidesaticarena
devanarm catihelanat
kasyapah uvaca—the learned brahmana Kasyapa said; aprayatyat—
because of the pollution; atmanah—of the mind; te—your; dosat—
because of defilement; mauhirtikat—in terms of the moment; uta—
also; mat—my;nidesa— direction; aticarena—being too neglectful; devanam—
of the demigods; ca—also; atihelanat—being too apathetic.


--- Page 227 ---
Text 39] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 561
TRANSLATION

The learned Kasyapa said: Because of your mind’s being polluted,
because of defilement of the particular time, because of your negligence
of my directions, and because of your being apathetic to the demigods,
everything was inauspicious.

PURPORT

The conditions for having good progeny in society are that the husband
should be disciplined in religious and regulative principles and the wife
should be faithful to the husband. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that sexual
intercourse according to religious principles is a representation of Krsna
consciousness (Bg. 7.11). Before engaging in sexual intercourse, both the
husband and the wife must consider their mental condition, the particular
time, the husband’s direction, and obedience to the demigods. According
to Vedic society, there is a suitable auspicious time for sex life, which is
called the time for garbhadhana. Diti neglected all the principles of
scriptural injunction, and therefore, although she was very anxious for
auspicious children, she was informed that her children would not be
worthy to be the sons of a brahmana. There is a clear indication herein
that a brahmana’s son is not always a brahmana. Personalities like Ravana
and Hiranyakasipu were actually born of brahmanas, but they were not
accepted as brahmanas because their fathers did not follow the regulative
principles for their birth. Such children are called demons or raksasas.
There were only one or two raksasas in the previous ages due to negligence
of the disciplinary methods, but during the age of Kali there is no
discipline in sex life. How, then, can one expect good children? Certainly
unwanted children cannot be a source of happiness in society, but through
the Krsna consciousness movement they can be raised to the human
standard by chanting the holy name of God. That is the unique contribu-
tion of Lord Caitanya to human society.

TEXT 39
ARITA at |
लोकान्‌ सपाला ण्ड युहुराकन्दपिष्यतः 132)
bhavisyatas tavabhadrav
abhadre jatharadhamau
lokan 50170127785 trims candi
muhur akrandayisyatah


--- Page 228 ---
562 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14

bhavisyatah—will take birth; tava—your; abhadrau—two contemptuous
sons; abhadre—O unlucky one; jathara-adhamau—born of a condemned
womb; lokan—all planets; sa-paldn—with their rulers; trin—three; candi—
haughty one; muhuh—constantly; akrandayisyatah—will cause lamentation.

TRANSLATION

0 haughty one, you will have two contemptuous sons born of your
condemned womb. Unlucky woman, they will cause constant lamentation
to all the three worlds!

PURPORT

Contemptuous sons are born of the condemned womb of their mother.
In Bhagavad-gita it is said, “When there is deliberate negligence of the
regulative principles of religious life, the women as a class become polluted,
and as a result there are unwanted children.” (Bg. 1.40) This is especially
true for boys; if the mother is not good, there cannot be good sons. The
learned Kasyapa could foresee the character of the sons who would be
born of the condemned womb of Diti. The womb was condemned because
of the mother’s being too sexually inclined and thus transgressing all the
laws and injunctions of the scriptures. In a society where such women are
predominant, one should not expect good children.

TEXT 40
प्राणिनां हन्यमानानां दीनानामकृतागसाम्‌ |
sori निगृ्माणानां कोपितेषु মহাংমন্ত ।४०।।
praninam hanyamananam
dinanam akrtagasam
stripam nigrhyamananam
kopitesu mahatmasu

praningm—when the living entities; hanyamdnanam—being killed;
dinanam—of the poor; akrta-agasim—of the faultless; strinam—of the
women; nigrhyamdananam—being tortured; kopitesu—being enraged;
mahdtmasu—when the great souls.

TRANSLATION

They will kill poor faultless living entities, torture women and enrage

the great souls.


--- Page 229 ---
Text 41] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 563
PURPORT
Demoniac activities are predominant when innocent, faultless living
entities are killed, women are tortured, and the great souls engaged in
Krsna consciousness are enraged. In a demoniac society, innocent animals
are killed to satisfy the tongue, and women are tortured by unnecessary
sexual indulgence. Where there are women and meat, there must be
liquor and sex indulgence. When these are prominent in society, by God’s
grace one can expect a change in the social order by the Lord Himself or
by His bona fide representative.
TEXT 41
AY 2
तदा विश्वेश्वरः স্ত্রী मगर्वोष्छोकभावनः |
2 (२
इनिष्यत्यवतीर्यासौ यथाद्रीन्‌ शतपवशक्‌ ॥४१।।
tada visvesvarah kruddho
bhagaval loka-bhavanah
hanisyaty avatiryasan
yathadrin Sataparvadhrk
tada—at that time; visvesvarah—the Lord of the universe; kruddhah—in
great anger; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; loka-
bhavanah—desiring the welfare of the people in general; hanisyati—will
kill; avatirya—descending Himself; asau—He; yatha—as if; adrin—the moun-
tains; sataparva-dhrk—the controller of the thunderbolt (Indra).
TRANSLATION
At that time the Lord of the universe, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the well-wisher of all living entities, will descend and
kill them, just as Indra smashes the mountains with his thunderbolts.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 4.8), the Lord descends as an incarna-
tion to deliver the devolees and kill the miscreants. The Lord of the
universe and of everything would appear to kill the sons of Diti because of
their offending the devotees of the Lord. There are many agents of the
Lord, such as Indra, Candra, Varuna, goddess Durga, and Kali, who can
chastise any formidable miscreants in the world. The example of
mountains being smashed by a thunderbolt is very appropriate. The
mountain is considered to be the most strongly built body within the


--- Page 230 ---
564 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
universe, yet it can be easily smashed by the arrangement of the Supreme
Lord. The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not need to descend in
order to kill any strongly built body; He comes down just for the sake of
His devotees. Everyone is subject to the miseries offered by material na-
ture, bul because the activities of miscreants, such as killing innocent
people and animals or torturing women, are harmful to everyone and are
therefore a source of pain for the devotees, the Lord comes down. He
descends only to give relief to His ardent devotees. The killing of the
miscreant by the Lord is also the mercy of the Lord towards the mis-
creant, although apparently the Lord takes the part of the devotee.
Since the Lord is absolute, there is no difference between His activities of
killing the miscreants and favoring the devotees.
TEXT 42
বিনিতবান্ব
बधं WEA पाश्शात्सुनाभोदरजद्ना |
आशासे पुत्रयोर्मह्यं মা FETE ॥७२॥
ditir uvaca
vadhar bhagavata saksat
sunabhodarabahuna
asase putrayor mahyam
ma kruddhad brahmanad prabho
ditih uvaca—Diti said; vadham—the killing; bhagavata—by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; sdksat—directly; sunabha—with His Sudarsana
weapon; uddra—very magnanimous; bahuna—by the arms; asase—I desire;
putrayoh—of the sons; mahyam—of mine; ma—never be it so; kruddhat—
by the rage; brahmanat—of the brahmanas; prabho—0O my husband.
TRANSIATION
Diti said: It is very good that my sons will be magnanimously killed by
the arms of the Personality of Godhead with His Sudaréana weapon. 0 my
husband, may they never be killed by the wrath of the brahmana devotees.
PURPORT
When Diti heard from her husband that the great souls would be
angered by the activities of her sons, she was very anxious. She thought
that her sons might be killed by the wrath of the brahmanas. The Lord
does not appear when the brahmanas become angry at someone because
the wrath of a brahmana is sufficient in itself. He certainly appears,


--- Page 231 ---
Texts 44-45] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 565
however, when His devotee simply becomes sorry. A devotee of the Lord
never prays to the Lord to appear for the sake of the troubles the
miscreants cause for him, and he never bothers Him by asking for
protection. Rather, the Lord is anxious to give protection to the devotees.
Diti knew well that the killing of her sons by the Lord would also be His
mercy, and therefore she says that the wheel and arms of the Lord are
magnanimous. If someone is killed by the wheel of the Lord and is thus
fortunate enough to see the arms of the Lord, that is sufficient for his
liberation. Such good fortune is not achieved even by the great sages.
TEXT 43
न॒ ऋ्यदण्डद्‌ग्धस्य न भूतभयदस्य च।
AFAR यां যা योनिमसौ गतः ॥४३॥
na brahma-danda-dagdhasya
na bhuta-bhayadasya ca
narakas canugrhnanti
yarn yarn yonim asau gatah
na—never; brahma-dapda—punishment by a brahmana; dagdhasya—of
one who is so punished; na—neither; bhitta-bhayadasya—of one who is
always fearful to the living entities; ca—also; narakah—those condemned
to hell; ca—also;anugrhnanti— do any favor; yam yam— whichever; yonim—
species of life; asau—the offender; gatah—goes.
TRANSLATION
A person who is condemned by a brahmana or is always fearful to other
living entities is not favored either by those who are already in hell or by
those in the species in which he is born.
PURPORT
A practical example of a condemned species of life is the dog. Dogs are
so condemned that they never show any sympathy to their contemporaries.
TEXTS 44-45
कल्यत उवाच
कृतञोकाठुतापेन सद्यः प्रत्यवमशंनात्‌ |
मगवत्युरुमानाच भवे मय्यपि चादरात्‌ ॥४४॥
4 EY €
पुत्रस्यैव च पुत्राणां मधितैकः सतां मतः ।
गास्यन्ति यद्यशः शुद्धं भगवदयशसा समम्‌ ॥४५॥


--- Page 232 ---
566 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 14
kasyapa uvaca
krta-sokanutapena
sadyah pratyavamarsanat
bhagavaty urumanac ca
bhave mayy api cadarat
putrasyaiva ca putranam
bhavitaikah 5৫ (৫17 matah
gasyanti yad-yasah suddharn
bhagavad-yasasa samam
kasyapah uvaca—the learned Kasyapa said; krta-soka—having lament-
ed; anutapena—by penitence; sadyah—immediately; pratyavamarsanat—
by proper deliberation; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of God-
head; uru—great; mandt—adoration; ca—and; bhave—unto Lord Siva;
mayi api—unto me also; ca—and; adarat—by respect; putrasya—of the son;
eva—certainly; ca—and; putranam—of the sons; bhawvita—shall be born;
ekah—one; satam—of the devotees; matah—approved; gasyanti—will broad-
cast; yat—of whom; yasah—recognition; suddham—transcendental; bhaga-
vat—of the Personality of Godhead; yasasa—with recognition; samam—
equally.
TRANSLATION
The learned Kasyapa said: Because of your lamentation, penitence and
proper deliberation, and also because of your unflinching faith in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and your adoration for Lord Siva and
myself, one of the sons [Prahlada] of your son |Hiranyakasipu] will be
an approved devotee of the Lord, and his fame will be broadcast equally
with that of the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 46
योगैर्हेमेव दुर्वणं भादयिष्यन्ति साधवः ।
निर्वेरादिभिरात्मानं यच्छीलमनुदर्तितुम्‌ ।४६॥
yogair hemeva durvarnarn
bhavayisyanti sadhavah
nirvairadibhir atmanarm
yac-chilam anuvartitum
yogaih—by the rectifying processes; hema—gold; iva—like; durvarnam—
inferior quality; bhdavayisyanti—will purify; sadhavah—saintly persons;
nirvaira-adibhih—by practice of freedom from animosity, etc.; atmanam—
the self; yat—whose; silam—character; anuvartitum—to follow in the foot-
steps.


--- Page 233 ---
Text 47] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 567
TRANSLATION
In order to follow in his footsteps, saintly persons will try to emulate
his character by practicing freedom from animosity, just as the purifying
processes rectify gold of inferior quality.
PURPORT
Yoga practice, the process of purifying one’s existential identity, is
based mainly on self-control. Without self-control one cannot practice
freedom from animosity. In the conditional state, every living being is
envious of another living being, but in the liberated state there is an
absence of animosity. Prahlada Maharaja was tortured by his father in so
many ways, yet after the death of his father he prayed for his liberation
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He did not ask any benediction
that he might have asked, but he prayed that his atheistic father might be
liberated. He never cursed any of the persons who engaged in torturing
him on the instigation of his father.
; TEXT 47
यत्प्रसादादिदं विश्व प्रसीदति यदात्मकम्‌ |
स WOE यस्य तोष्यतेऽनन्यया दशा ॥४७॥
yat-prasadad idam एष्व
prasidati yad-atmakam
sa sva-drg bhagavan yasya
tosyate’nanyaya drsa
yat—by whose; prasadat—mercy of; idam—this; visvam—universe;
prasidati—becomes happy; yat—whose; atmakam—because of His omnipo-
tency; sah— He; sva-drk— taking special care for His devotees; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; yasya—whose; tosyate—becomes pleased;
ananyaya— without deviation; drsa—by intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Everyone will be pleased with him because the Personality of Godhead,
the supreme controller of the universe, is always satisfied with a devotee
who does not wish for anything beyond Him.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated everywhere as the
Supersoul, and He can dictate to anyone and everyone as He likes. The
would-be grandson of Diti, who is predicted to be a great devotee, would


--- Page 234 ---
568 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14.
be liked by everyone, even by the enemies of his father, because he would
have no other vision besides the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A pure
devotee of the Lord sees the presence of his worshipable Lord every where.
The Lord also reciprocates in such a way that all living entities in whom
the Lord is dwelling as the Supersoul also like a pure devotee because the
Lord is present in their hearts and can dictate to them to be friendly to
His devotee. There are many instances in history wherein even the most
ferocious animal became friendly to a pure devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 48
a वै मदामागवतो महात्मा
महानुमाओो महतां मदिष्ठ |
भ्रबृद्धमक्त्या द्यनुभाविताशये
EN .
निवेश्य वेकुण्ठमिमं शिदहासखति ॥४८॥
sa vai maha-bhagavato mahatma
mahanubhavo 77101100118 mahisthah
pravrddha-bhaktya hy anubhavitasaye
nivesya vaikuntham imam vihasyati
sah—he; vai—certainly; maha-bhdgavatah— the topmost devotee; mahat-
ma—expanded intelligence; maha-anubhavah—expanded influence; maha-
tam—of the great souls; mahisthah—the greatest; pravrddha—well
matured; bhaktya—by devotional service; hi—certainly ; anubhavita—being
situated in the anubhava stage of ecstasy; asaye—in the mind; nivesya—
entering; vaikuptham—in the spiritual sky; imam—this (material world);
vihasyati— will quit.
TRANSLATION
That topmost devotee of the Lord will have expanded intelligence and
expanded influence and will be the greatest of the great souls. Due to
matured devotional service, he will certainly be situated in transcendental
ecstasy and will enter the spiritual sky after quitting this material world.
PURPORT
There are three stages of transcendental development in devotional
service, which are technically called sthayibhava, anubhava and
mahabhava. Continual perfect love of Godhead is called sthayibhava, and
when it is performed in a particular type of transcendental relationship it
is called anubhava. But the stage of mahabhava is visible amongst the


--- Page 235 ---
Text 49] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 569
personal pleasure potential energies of the Lord. It is understood that the
grandson of Diti, namely Prahlada Maharaja, would constantly meditate
on the Lord and reiterate His activities. Because he would constantly
remain in meditation, he would easily transfer himself to the spiritual
world after quitting his material body. Such meditation is still more
conveniently performed by chanting and hearing the holy name of the
Lord, which is especially recommended in this age of Kali.
TEXT 49
-
अलम्पटः शीलधरो गुणाकरो
हृष्टः परद्र्था व्यथितो दुःखितेषु ।
६.५ ©
अभूतशतुजंगतः शोकहता
नैदाधिकं ales: ॥४९॥
alampatah siladharo gunakaro
hrstah pararddhyd vyathito dulikhitesu
abhitasatrur jagatah soka-harta
naidaghikam tapam ivodurajah
alampatah—virtuous; $ila-dharoh—qualified; guna-akarah—reservoir of
all good qualities; hrstah—jolly; para-rddhyd—by others’ happiness;
vyathitah—distressed; duhkhitesu—in others’ unhappiness; abhitta-satruh—
without encmies; jagatah—of all the universe; soka-harta—destroyer of
lamentation; naidaghikam—due to the summer sun; tapam— distress; iva—
likened; udurajah—the moon.
TRANSLATION
He will be a virtuously qualified reservoir of all good qualities; he will
be jolly and happy in others’ happiness, distressed in others’ distress, and
will have no enemies. He will be a destroyer of the lamentation of all the
universes, like the pleasant moon after the summer sun.
PURPORT
Prahlada Maharaja, the exemplary devotee of the Lord, had all the
good qualities humanly possible. Although he was the emperor of this
world, he was not profligate. Beginning from his childhood he was the
reservoir of all good qualities. Without enumerating those qualities, it is
said here summarily that he was endowed with all good qualities. That is
the sign of a pure devotee. The most important characteristic of a pure
devolee is that he is not lampata, or licentious, and another quality is that


--- Page 236 ---
570 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
he is always eager to mitigate the miseries of suffering humanity. The
most obnoxious misery of a living entity is his forgetfulness of Krsna. A
pure devotee, therefore, always tries to evoke everyone’s Krsna conscious-
ness. This is the panacea for all miseries.
TEXT 50
< Py
अन्तबेहिश्वामरमन्जनेतर
खपूरुषच्छानुगटीतरूपम्‌ ।
पौत्रस्तव श्रीठलनाललामं
द्रष्टा स्फुरतङरण्डलमण्डिताननम्‌ ॥५०॥
antar bahis camalam abja-netram
sva-purusecchanugrhita-rupam
pautras tava $ri-lalana-lalamam
drasta sphurat-kundala-manditananam
antah— within; bahih — without; ca—also; amalam—spotless; abja-netram—
lotus eyes; sva-piirusa—own devotee; icchd-anugrhita-ritpam—accepting form
according to desire; pautrah—grandchild; tava—your; $ri-lalana— beautiful
goddess of fortune; lalamam—decorated; drasta—will see; sphurat-kundala—
with brilliant earrings; mandita—decorated; ananam—face.
TRANSLATION
Your grandson will be able to see, inside and outside, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose wife is the beautiful goddess of fortune.
He can assume the form desired by the devotee, and His face is always
beautifully decorated with earrings.
PURPORT
It is predicted herewith that the grandson of Diti, Prahlada Maharaja,
would not only see the Personality of Godhead within himself by
meditation but would also be able to see Him personally with his eyes.
This direct vision is possible only for one who is highly elevated in Krsna
consciousness, for it is not possible to see the Lord with these material
eyes. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has multifarious eternal forms
such as Krsna, Baladeva, Sankarsana, Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Vasudeva,
Narayana, Rama, Nrsimha, Varaha and Vamana, and the devotee of the
Lord knows all those Vispu forms. A pure devotee becomes attached to
one of the eternal forms of the Lord, and the Lord is pleased to appear
before him in the form desired. A devotee does not imagine something


--- Page 237 ---
Text 51] Pregnancy of Diti in the Evening 571
whimsical about the form of the Lord, nor does he ever think that the
Lord is impersonal and can assume a form desired by the nondevotee.
The nondevotee has no idea of the form of the Lord, and thus he cannot
think of any one of the above-mentioned forms. But whenever a devotee
sees the Lord, he sees Him in a most beautifully decorated form,
accompanied by His constant companion, the goddess of fortune, who is
eternally beautiful.
TEXT 51
मैत्रेय उकाचे
त्वा भागवतं पौत्रममोदत दितिम्‌ ।
प्रयो वध ृष्णादिदित्याऽऽसीन्पदामनाः ॥५१॥
maitreya uvica
Srutva bhagavatam pautram
amodata ditir bhrsam
putrayos ca vadhar krsnad
viditvasin maha-mandh
maitreyah  uvdca—the sage Maitreya said; srutvd—by hearing;
bhagavatam—to be a great devotee of the Lord;pautram—grandson;
amodata—took pleasure; ditth—Diti; bhrsam—very greatly; putrayoh—
of two sons; ca—also; vadham—the killing; krsnat—by Krsna; viditva—-know-
ing this; asit— became; maha-manah—highly pleased in mind.
TRANSLATION
Sage Maitreya said: Hearing that her grandson would be a great devotee
and that her sons would be killed by Krsna, Diti was highly pleased in
mind.
PURPORT
Diti was very aggrieved to learn that because of her untimely pregnancy
her sons would be demons and would fight with the Lord. But when she
heard that her grandson would be a great devotee and that her two sons
would be killed by the Lord, she was very satisfied. As the wife of a
great sage and the daughter of a great prajapati, Daksa, she knew that
being killed by the Personality of Godhead is a great fortune. Since the
Lord is absolute, His acts of violence and nonviolence are both on the
absolute platform. There is no difference in such acts of the Lord.
Mundane violence and nonviolence have nothing to do with the Lord’s
acts. A demon killed by Him attains the same result as one who attains


--- Page 238 ---
572 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 14
liberation after many, many births of penance and austerity. The word
bhrsam is significant herein because it indicates that Diti was pleased
beyond her expectation.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Fourteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Pregnancy of Diti in the
Evening.”


--- Page 239 ---
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Description of the Kingdom of God
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय অনান্য
प्राजापत्यं तु तत्तेजः परतेजोहनं दितिः ।
दधार वर्षाणि शतं शङ्कमाना सुरादंनात्‌ ॥ १ ॥
mailreya uvaca
prajapatyarm tu lat tejah
paratejohanam ditih
dadhara varsani satam
santkamana surardanat
maitreyah uvdca—the sage Maitreya said; prajapatyam—of the great
Prajapati; tu—but; tat tejah—his powerful semina; para-tejah—others’
prowess; hanam—troubling; ditih—Diti (Kasyapa’s wife); dadhara—bore;
varsapi—years; satam—hundred; sannkamana—being doubtful; sura-ardanat—
disturbing to the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Sri Maitreya said: My dear Vidura, Diti, the wife of Sage Kasyapa, could
understand that the sons within her womb would be a cause of disturbance
to the demigods. As such, she continually bore the powerful semina of
Kasyapa Muni, which was meant to give trouble to others, for one hundred
years.
PURPORT
The great sage Sri Maitreya was explaining to Vidura about the activities
of the demigods, including l.ord Brahma. When Diti heard from her hus-
band that the sons she bore within her abdomen would be causes of distur-
bances to the demigods, she was not very happy. There are two classes of
men - १९५०1८८5 and nondevotees. Nondevotees are called demons, and
573


--- Page 240 ---
574 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 15
devotees are called demigods. No sane man or woman can tolerate the
nondevotees’ giving trouble to devotees. Diti, therefore, was reluctant to
give birth to her babies; she waited for one hundred years so that al least
she could save the demigods from the disturbance for that period.
TEXT 2
रोके तेनाहतालोके लोकपाला हतौजसः ।
न्यवेदयन्‌ विश्वसृजे ध्वान्तव्यतिकरं दिशाम्‌ | २ ॥
loke tenahataloke
loka-pala hataujasah
nyavedayan visva-srje
dhvanta-vyatikaram disam

loke—within this universe; tena—by the force of the pregnancy of
Diti; ahata—being devoid of; aloke—light; loka-palah—the demigods
of various planets; hata-ojasah— whose prowess was diminished; nyaveda-
yan—asked; visva-sgje— Brahma; dhvanta-vyatikaram—expansion of dark-
ness; disam—in all directions.

TRANSLATION

By the force of the pregnancy of Diti, the light of the sun and moon
was impaired in all the planets, and the demigods of various planets,
being so disturbed by that force, asked the creator of the universe,
Brahma, “What is this expansion of darkness in all directions?”

PURPORT

It appears from this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam that the sun is the
source of light in all the planets in the universe. The modern scientific
theory which states that there are many suns in cach universe is not
supported by this verse. It is understood that there is only one sun in
each universe which supplies light to all the planets. In Bhagavad-gita
the moon is also stated to be one of the stars. There are many stars, and
when we see them glittering at night we can understand that they are
reflectors of light; just as moonlight is the reflection of sunlight,
similarly other planets also reflect sunlight, and there are many other
planets which cannot be seen by our naked eyes. The demoniac influence
of the sons in the womb of Dili expanded darkness throughout the
universe.


--- Page 241 ---
Text 4] Description of the Kingdom of God 575
TEXT 3
देवा उचुः
तम एतद्विभो वेत्थ संविग्ना यद्वयं भृशम्‌ ।
न व्यक्तं मगवतः कालेनास्पथ्वत्यंनः ॥ ३॥
deva ucuh
tama etad vibho vettha
50118018710 yad vayar bhrsam
na hy avyaktar bhagavatah
kalenasprsta-vartmanah
devah ucuh—the demigods said; tamah— darkness; etat— this; vibho—O
great one; vettha—you know; samvignah—very anxious; yat—because;
vayam—we; bhrsam—very much; na—not; hi—because; avyaktam—un-
manifest; bhagavatah—of You (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
kalena—by time; asprsta—untouched; vartmanah —whose way.
TRANSLATION
The fortunate demigods said: 0 great one, just see this darkness, which
you know very well and which is causing us anxieties. Because the
influence of time cannot touch you, there is nothing unmanifest before
you.
PURPORT
Brahma is addressed herein as Vibhu and as the Personality of Godhead.
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s incarnation of the mode of
passion in the material world. He is nondifferent, in the representative
sense, from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore the
influence of time cannot affect him. The influence of time, which
manifests as past, present and future, cannot touch higher personalities
like Brahma and other demigods. Sometimes demigods and great sages
who have attained such perfection are called tri-kala-jia.
TEXT 4
देवदेव जगद्धातलोकबाथशिखामणे |
परेषामपरेषां त्वं भूतानामसि भाववित्‌ ॥ ४॥
deva-deva jagad-dhatar
lokanatha-§ikhamane


--- Page 242 ---
576 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 3, Ch. 15
paresam aparesarm (४०१४
bhutanam asi bhava-vit
deva-deva—O god of the demigods; jagat-dhatah—O sustainer of the
universe; lokanatha-sikhamane—O head jewel of all the demigods in other
planets; paresam—of the spiritual world; eparesam—of the material world;
tvam—you; bhitanam—of all living entities; asi—are; bhava-vit— knowing
the intentions.
TRANSLATION
O god of the demigods, sustainer of the universe, head jewel of all the
demigods in other planets, you know the intentions of all living entities,
both in the spiritual and material worlds.
PURPORT
Because Brahma is almost on an equal footing with the Personality of
Godhead, he is addressed here as the god of the demigods, and because he
is addressed here as the god of the demigods, and because he is the
secondary creator of this universe, he is addressed as the sustainer of
the universe. He is the head of all the demigods, and therefore he is addressed
here as the head jewel of the demigods. It is not difficult for him to
understand everything which is happening both in the spiritual and
material worlds. He knows everyone’s heart and everyone's intentions,
and therefore he was requested to explain this incidence. Why was the
pregnancy of Diti causing such anxieties all over the universe?
TEXT 5
नमो विज्ञानवीर्याय माययेद्पेयुषे ।
यृहीतगुणमेदाय FARSI ॥ ५ ॥
namo vijiiana-viryaya
mayayedam upeyuse
grhita-guna-bhedaya
namas te ‘vyakta-yonaye
namah—respectful obeisances; vijiiana-viryaya—O original source of
strength and scientific knowledge; mayaya—by the external energy;
idam—this body of Brahma; upeyuse—having obtained; grhita—accepting;
guna-bhediya— differentiated mode of passion; namah te—offering obei-
sances unto you; avyakta—unmanifested; yonaye—source.


--- Page 243 ---
Text 7] Description of the Kingdom of God 577
TRANSLATION
O original source of strength and scientific knowledge, all obeisances
unto you! You have accepted the differentiated mode of passion from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. With the help of external energy you
are born of the unmanifested source. All obeisances unto you!
PURPORT
The Vedas are the original scientific knowledge for all departments of
understanding, and this knowledge of the Vedas was first impregnated in
the heart of Brahma by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore
Brahma is the original source of all scientific knowledge. He is born
directly from the transcendental body of Garbhodakasayi Visnu, who is
never seen by any creature of this material universe and therefore always
remains unmanifested. Brahma is stated here to be born of the unmani-
fested. He is the incarnation of the mode of passion in material nature,
which is the separated external energy of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 6
ये त्वानन्येन भावेन भाषयन्त्यात्ययावयम्‌ |
आस्मनि प्रोतवनं परं सदसदात्यकम्‌ A ६ ॥
ye tvananyena bhavena
bhavayanty atma-bhavanam
atmani prota-bhuvanam
param sad-asad-atmakam
ye—those who; tva—on you; ananyena—without deviation; bhavena—
with devotion; bhavayanti—meditate; atma-bhavanam—who generates all
living entities; atmani— within yourself; prota—linked; bhuvanam—all the
planets; param—the supreme; sat—effect; asat—cause;atmakam—generator.
TRANSLATION
O lord, all these planets exist within yourself, and all the living entities
are generated from you. Therefore you are the cause of this universe, and
anyone who meditates upon you without deviation attains devotional
service.
TEXT 7
तेषां सुपक्योगानां जितश्रासेन्द्रियात्पनाप्‌ |
लन्धयुप्मत्परसादानां न कुतश्चित्पराभवः ।। ७ ॥


--- Page 244 ---
578 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
८९52007 su-pakva-yoganar
Jjita-$vasendriyatmanam
labdha-yusmat-prasadanar
na kutascit parabhavah
tesam—of them; su-pakva-yoganam—who are mature mystics; jita—con-
trolled; svasa—breath; indriya—the senses; atmanam—the mind; labdha—
attained; yusmat—your; prasadanam—mercy; na—not; kutascit—any where;
parabhavah— defeat.
TRANSLATION
There is no defeat in this material world for persons who control the
mind and senses by controlling the breathing process and who are therefore
experienced, mature mystics. This is because by such perfection in yoga
they have attained your mercy.
PURPORT
The purpose of yogic performances is explained here. It is said that one
who is an experienced mystic attains full control of the senses and the
mind by controlling the breathing process. Therefore, controlling the
breathing processis not the ultimate aim of yoga. The real purpose of yogic
performances is to control the mind and the senses. Anyone who has such
control is to be understood to be an experienced, mature mystic yogi. 11 is
indicated herein that a yogi who has control over the mind and senses has
the actual benediction of the Lord, and he has no fear. In other words,
one cannot attain the mercy and benediction of the Supreme Lord until
one is able to control the mind and the senses. This is actually possible
when one fully engages in Krsna consciousness. A person whose senses and
mind are always engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord has no
possibility to engage in material activities. The devotees of the Lord are
not defeated anywhere in the universe. It is stated, narayana-para-
sadbhih: Anyone who is narayana-para, or a devotee of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is not afraid anywhere, whether he is sent to hell
or promoted to heaven.
TEXT 8
यस्य वाचा प्रजाः सर्वा गावस्तन्त्येव यन्त्िताः।
हरन्ति बकिपायतास्तस्मे मुख्याय ते नमः || ८ ॥
yasya vaca prajah sarva
gavas tantyeva yantritah


--- Page 245 ---
Text 9] Description of the Kingdom of God 579
haranti balim ayattas
tasmai mukhyaya te namah
yasya—of whom; vaca—by the Vedic directions; prajah—living entities;
sarvah—all; gavah— bulls; tantya—by a rope; iva—as; yantritah—are directed;
haranti—offer, take away; balim—presentation, ingredients for worship;
ayattah—under control; tasmai—unto him; mukhyaya—unto the chief
person; te—unto you; namah—respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
All the living entities within the universe are conducted by the Vedic
directions, as a bull is directed by the rope attached to its nose. No one
can violate the rules laid down in the Vedic literatures. To the chief
person, who has contributed the Vedas, we offer our respect!
PURPORT
The Vedic literatures are the laws of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One cannot violate the injunctions given in the Vedic literatures,
any more than one can violate the state laws. Any living creature who
wants real benefit in life must act according to the direction of the Vedic
literature. The conditioned souls who have come to this material world for
material sense gratification are regulated by the injunctions of the Vedic
literature. Sense gratification is just like salt. One cannot take too much or
too little, but one must take some salt in order to make one’s foodstuff
palatable. Those conditioned souls who have come to this material world
should utilize their senses according to the direction of the Vedic litera-
ture, otherwise they will be put into a more miserable condition of life. No
human being or demigod can enact laws like those of the Vedic literature
because the Vedic regulations are prescribed by the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 9
८1 de
स त्वं विधत्ख হা भूमंस्तमसा Fm |
अदभ्रदयया दृष्टया आप्नानरंसीक्ितम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
sa tvam vidhatsva sam bhimams
tamasa lupta-karmanpam
adabhra-dayaya drstya
apannan arhastksitum
sah—he; tvam—you; vidhatsva—perform; sam—good fortune; bhuman—
O great lord; tamasa—by the darkness; lupta—have been suspended; karma-
pam—of prescribed duties; adabhra—magnanimous, without reservation;


--- Page 246 ---
580 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 3, Ch. 15
dayaya—mercy; drstya—by your glance; apannan—us, the surrendered;
arhasi—are able; Tksitum—to see.
TRANSLATION
The demigods prayed to Brahma: Please look upon us mercifully, for
we have fallen into a miserable condition; because of the darkness, all our
work has been suspended.
PURPORT
Because of complete darkness throughout the universe, the regular
activities and engagements of all the different planets were suspended. As
in the North and South Poles of this planet there are sometimes no
divisions of day and night, similarly, when the sunlight does not approach
the different planets within the universe, there is no distinction between
day and night.
TEXT 10
एष देव दितेर्गभं ओजः कारयपमर्पितम्‌ |
(8 =,
दिश्ञस्तिमिरयन्‌ स्वां वर्धते ऽप्निरिवधसि ॥१०॥
esa ५९४० diter garbha
ojah kasyapam arpitam
disas timirayan sarva
vardhate ‘gnir ivaidhasi
esah—this; deva—O lord; diteh—of Diti; garbhah—womb; ojah—semina;
kasyapam—of Kadyapa; arpitam— deposited; disah—directions; timirayan—
causing complete darkness; sarvah—all; vardhate—overloads; agnih—fire;
iva—as; edhasi— fuel.
TRANSLATION
As fuel overloads a fire, so the embryo created by the semina of
Kasyapa in the womb of Diti has caused complete darkness throughout
the universe.
PURPORT
The darkness throughout the universe is explained herewith as being
caused by the embryo created in the womb of Diti by the semina of
Kasyapa.


--- Page 247 ---
Text 12] Description of the Kingdom of God 581
TEXT 11
मैत्रेय उवाच
(4
स प्रहस्य মহানাহী भगवान्‌ शम्दगोचरः |
=
प्रत्याच्टार्मभू्देवान्‌ प्रीणन्‌ रुचिरया गिरा ॥११॥
maitreya uvaca
sa prahasya maha-baho
bhagavan sabda-gocarah
pratyacastatma-bhur devan
(07111001 ruciraya gira
maitreyah uvaca— Maitreya said; sah—he; prahasya—smiling; maha-baho—
O mighty-armed (Vidura); bhagavan—the possessor of all opulences; sabda-
gocarah—who is understood by transcendental sound vibration; pratya-
casta—replicd; atma-bhuh—Lord Brahma; devan—the demigods; prinan—
satisfying; ruciraya— with sweet; gira— words.
TRANSLATION
Sri Maitreya said: Thus Lord Brahma, who is understood by
transcendental vibration, tried to satisfy the demigods, being pleased with
their words of prayer.
PURPORT
Brahma could understand the misdeeds of Diti, and therefore he smiled
at the whole situation. He replied to the demigods present there in words
they could understand.
TEXT 12
ब्रह्मोवाच
©.
मानसा मे सुता युष्मत्पूषेजाः सनकादयः |
তে kN
चेरु्विंहायसा लोकोल्लोकेषु विगतस्पृहाः ॥१२॥
brahmovaca
manasa me sula yusmat-
purvajah sanakadayah
cerur vihayasa lokal
lokesu vigata-sprhah
brahma uvaca— Lord Brahma said; manasah—born from the mind; me—
my; sutah—sons; yusmat—than you; purve-jah—born previous; sanako-


--- Page 248 ---
582 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
adayah—headed by Sanaka;ceruh—traveled;vihayasa—by traveling in outer
space or flying in the sky; lokan—to the material and spiritual worlds;
lokesu—among the people; vigata-sprhah— without any desire.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: My four sons Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana and Sanat-
kumara, who were born from my mind, are your predecessors. Sometimes
they travel throughout the material and spiritual skies without any
definite desire.
PURPORT
When we speak of desire we refer to desire for material sense gratifica-
tion. Saintly persons like Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumara
have no material desire, but sometimes they travel all over the universe out
of their own accord to preach devotional service.
TEXT 13
EY
त॒ UFZ भगवतो बेङुण्टस्यामसात्मनः |
. ও
যনুনক্হানিতম  सवंलोकनमस्कृतम्‌ 1230
ta ekada bhagavato
vaikunthasyamalatmanah
yayur vaikupntha-nilayam
sarva-loka-namaskrtam
te—they; ekada—once upon a time; bhagavatah— of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead; vaikunthasya—of Lord Visnu; amala-atmanah—being
freed from all material contamination;yayuh—entered;vaikuntha-nilayam—
the abode named Vaikuntha; sarva-loka—by the residents of all the material
planets; namaskrtam— worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Thus traveling all over the universes, they also entered into the spiritual
sky, for they were freed from all material contamination. In the spiritual
sky there are spiritual planets known as Vaikunthas, which are the
residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His pure devotees
and are worshiped by the residents of all the material planets.
PURPORT
The material world is full of cares and anxieties. In any one of the
planets, beginning from the highest down to the lowest, Patala, every


--- Page 249 ---
Text 14] Description of the Kingdom of God 583
living creature must be full of cares and anxieties because in the material
planets one cannot live eternally. The living entities, however, are actually
eternal. They want an eternal home, an eternal residence, but because of
accepting a temporal abode in the material world, they are naturally full
of anxiety. In the spiritual sky the planets are called Vaikuntha because
the residents of these planets are free from all anxieties. For them there is
no question of birth, death, old age and diseases, and therefore they are
not anxious. @n the other hand, the residents of the material planets are
always afraid of birth, death, disease and old age, and therefore they are
full of anxieties.
TEXT 14
वसन्ति यत्र पुरुषाः মন वैकुण्ठमूतेयः |
येऽनिमितनिमित्तेन धर्मेणाराधयन्‌ हरिम्‌ ॥१४॥
vasanti yatra purusah
sarve vaikuntha-murtayah
ye ’‘nimitta-nimittena
dharmenaradhayan harim

vasanti—they live; yatra—where; purusah—persons; sarve—all; vaikuntha-
murtayah—having a four-handed form similar to that of the Supreme Lord,
Visnu; ye—those Vaikuntha persons; animitta—without desire for sense
gratification; nimittena—caused by; dharmena—by devotional service;
aradhayan—continuously worshiping; harim—unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. ।

TRANSLATION

In the Vaikuntha planets all the residents are similar in form to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. They all engage in devotional service to
the Lord without desires for sense gratification.

PURPORT

The residents and the form of living in Vaikuntha are described in this
verse. The residents are all like the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Narayana. In the Vaikuntha planets Krsna’s plenary feature as four-
handed Narayana is the predominating Deity, and the residents of
Vaikunthaloka are also four-handed, just contrary to our conception here
in the material world. Nowhere in the material world do we find a human
being with four hands. In Vaikunthaloka there is no occupation but the
service of the Lord, and this service is not rendered with a purpose.
Although every service has a particular result, the devotees never aspire


--- Page 250 ---
584 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
for the fulfillment of their own desires; their desires are fulfilled by render-
ing transcendental loving service to the Lord.
TEXT 15
यत्र चाद्यः JARS मगवान्‌ शब्दगोचरः |
सत्त्वं वष्टम्य विरजं खानां नो यन्‌ वृषः nga
yatra cadyah puman 25८९
bhagavan $abda-gocarah
sattvam vistabhya virajari
svanam no mrdayan vrsah
yatra—in the Vaikuntha planets; ca—and; adyeh—original; puman—
person; aste—is there; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
$abda-gocarah—understood through the Vedic literature; sattvam—the
mode of goodness; vistabhya— accepting; virajam—uncontaminated; sva-
nam—of His own associates; nah—us; mrdayan—increasing happiness;
vrsah—the personification of religious principles.
TRANSLATION
In the Vaikuntha planets is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
the original person and who can be understood through the Vedic
literature. He is full of the uncontaminated mode of goodness, with no
place for passion or ignorance. He contributes religious progress for the
devotees.
PURPORT
The kingdom of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the spiritual
sky cannot be understood by any process other than hearing from the de-
scription of the Vedas. No one can go and see it. In this material world
also, one who is unable to pay to go to a far distant place by motorized
conveyances can only understand about that place from authentic books.
Similarly, the Vaikuntha planets in the spiritual sky are beyond this mate-
rial sky. The modern scientists who are trying to travel in space are having
difficulty going even to the nearest planet, the moon, to say nothing of the
highest planets within the universe. There is no possibility that they can
go beyond the malerial sky, enter the spiritual sky and see for themselves
the spiritual planets, Vaikuntha. Therefore, the kingdom of God in the
spiritual sky can be understood only through the authentic descriptions of
the Vedas and Puranas.


--- Page 251 ---
Text 16] Description of the Kingdom of God 585
In the material world there are three modes of material qualities—good-
ness, passion and ignorance, but in the spiritual world there is no trace of
the modes of passion and ignorance; there is only the mode of goodness,
which is uncontaminated by any tinge of ignorance or passion.In the mate-
rial world, even if a person is completely in goodness, he is sometimes sub-
ject to be polluted by the tinges of the modes of ignorance and passion.
But in the Vaikuntha world, the spiritual sky, only the mode of goodness
in its pure form exists. The Lord and His devotees reside in the Vaikuntha
planets, and they are of the same transcendental quality, namely, suddha-
sattva, the mode of pure goodness. The Vaikuntha planets are very dear to
the Vaignavas, and for the progressive march of the Vaisnavas toward the
kingdom of God, the Lord Himself helps His devotees.
TEXT 16
४ র্‌
यत्र नैश्रेयसं লাম নল कामदुषैदंमैः |
a
सरवतुश्रोभििश्राजेत्कैवल्यमिव मूतिंमत्‌ 11251
yatra naihsreyasarm nama
vanam kama-dughair drumaih
sarva-rtu-Sribhir vibhrajat
kaivalyam iva murtimat
yatra—in the Vaikuntha planets; naihsreyasam—auspicious;nama—named;
vanam—forcsts; kima-dughaih—yielding desire; drumaih—with trees; sarva—
all; rtu—scasons; $ribhih—with flowers and fruits; vibhrajat—splendid;
kaivalyam—spiritual; iva—as; mirtimat—personal.
TRANSLATION
In those Vaikuntha planets there are many forests which are very
auspicious. In those forests the trees are desire trees, and in all seasons
they are filled with flowers and fruits because everything in the Vaikuntha
planets is spiritual and personal.
PURPORT
In the Vaikuntha planets the land, the trees, the fruits and flowers and
the cows—everything—is completely spiritual and personal. Trees are desire
trees. On this material planet the trees can produce fruits and flowers
according to the order of material energy, but in the Vaikuntha planets
the trees, the land, the residents and the animals are all spiritual. There is


--- Page 252 ---
586 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
no difference between the tree and the animal or the animal and the man.
Here the word murtimat indicates that everything has a spiritual form.
Formlessness, as conceived by the impersonalists, is refuted in this verse;
in the Vaikuntha planets, although everything is spiritual, everything has
a particular form. The trees and the men have form, and because all of
them, although differently formed, are spiritual, there is no difference
between them.
TEXT 17
वैमानिकाः सललनाश्चरितानि शश्वत
गायन्ति यत्र शमलक्षपणानि Ad: |
©. ক
अन्तजलेऽनुविकसन्मघुमाधवीनां
गन्धेन खण्डितधियोऽप्यनिलं क्षिपन्तः ॥ १७
vaimanikah salalanas caritani sasvat
gayanti yatra samala-ksapanani bhartuh
antarjale ‘nuvikasan-madhu-madhavinam
gandhena khandita-dhiyo ‘py 0114072 ksipantah
vaimanikah—flying in their airplanes; sa-lalanah-along with their wives;
caritani—activities; sasvat—eternally; gayanti—sing; yatra—in those
Vaikuntha planets; samala—all inauspicious qualities; ksapanani—devoid
of; bhartuh—of the Supreme Lord; antarjale—in the midst of the water;
anuvikasat—blossoming; madhu—fragrant,laden with honey; madhavinam—
of the madhavt flowers; gandhena—by the fragrance; khandita—disturbed;
dhiyah— minds; api—even though; anilam—breeze; ksipantah—deriding.
TRANSLATION
In the Vaikuntha planets the inhabitants fly in their airplanes,
accompanied by their wives and conserts, and eternally sing of the character
and activities of the Lord, which are always devoid of all inauspicious
qualities. While singing the glories of the Lord, they deride even the
presence of the blossoming madhavi flowers, which are fragrant and laden
with honey.
PURPORT
It appears from this verse that the Vaikuntha planets are full of all
opulences. There are airplanes in which the inhabitants travel in the spiri-


--- Page 253 ---
Text 18] Description of the Kingdom of God 587
tual sky with their sweethearts. There is a breeze carrying the fragrance of
blossoming flowers, and this breeze is so nice thal it also carries the honey
of the flowers. The inhabitants of Vaikuntha, however, are so interested in
glorifying the Lord that they do not like the disturbance of such a nice
breeze while they are chanting the Lord’s glories. In other words, they are
pure devotees. They consider glorification of the Lord more important
than their own sense gratification. In the Vaikuntha planets there is no
question of sense gratification. To smell the fragrance of a blossoming
flower is certainly very nice, but it is simply for sense gratification. The
inhabitants of Vaikuntha give first preference to the service of the Lord,
not their own sense gratification. Serving the Lord in transcendental love
yields such transcendental pleasure that, in comparison, sense gratification
is counted as insignificant.
TEXT 18
पाराषतान्यभ्रतसारसचक्रवाक-
regia सः |
कोलाहलो विरमतेऽचिरमात्रषठै-
भङ्गाधिपे हरिकथामिव गायमाने ॥१८॥
paravatanyabhrta-sarasa-cakravaka-
datyuha-harmsa-suka-tittiri-barhinam yah
kolahalo viramate 'cira-matram uccair
bhragadhipe hari-katham iva gayamane
paravata— pigeons; anyabhrta—cuckoo; sarasa—crane; cakravaka—cakra-
vaka; datyuha—a gallinule; hamsa—swan; suka—parrot; tittiri—partridge;
barhinam— of the peacock; yah —which; kolahalah— tumult; viramate—stops;
acira-matram—temporarily; uccath--loudly; bhriga-adhipe—king of the
bumblebees; hari-katham—the glories of the lord; iva—as; gayamane—
while singing.
TRANSLATION
When the king of bees hums in a high pitch, singing the glories of the

Lord, there is a temporary lull in the noise of the pigeon, the cuckoo, the
crane, the cakravaka, the swan, the parrot, the partridge and the peacock.
Such transcendental birds stop their own singing simply to hear the glories
of the Lord.


--- Page 254 ---
588 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
PURPORT
This verse reveals the absolute nature of Vaikuntha. There is no
difference between the birds there and the human residents. The situation
in the spiritual sky is that everything is spiritual and variegated. Spiritual
variegatedness means that everything 18 animate. There is nothing inanimate.
Even the trees, the ground, the plants, the flowers, the birds and the beasts
are all on the level of Krsna consciousness. The special feature of Vaikuntha-
loka is that there is no question of sense gratification. In the material world
even an ass enjoys his sound vibration, but in the Vaikunthas such nice
birds as the peacock, the cakravaka and the cuckoo prefer to hear the
vibration of the glories of the Lord from the bees. The principles of devo-
tional service, beginning with hearing and chanting, are very prominent in
the Vaikuntha world.
TEXT 19
न्दारङ़न्दङ्रवोरपलचम्पकाणे-
पुच्ागनागबङलाम्बुजपारिजाताः |
गन्धे sR तुठसिकामरणेन तस्या
यसिस्तपः सुमनसो बहु मानयन्ति ॥१९॥
mandara-kunda-kurabotpala-campakarna-
punnaga-naga-bakulambuja-parijatah
gandhe ’rcite tulasikabharanena tasya
yasmims tapah su-manaso bahu manayanti
mandara—mandara; kunda—kunda; kuraba—kuraba; utpala—utpala;
campaka—campaka; arpa—arpa flower; punnaga—punnaga; naga—naga-
kesara; bakula—bakula; ambuja—lily; parijatah—parijata; gandhe—fragrance;
arcite—being worshiped; tulasika—tulast; abharanena—with a garland;
tasyah—of her; yasmin—in which Vaikuntha; tapah—austerity; su-manasah—
good-minded, Vaikuntha-minded; bahu—very much; manayanti—glorify.
TRANSLATION
Although flowering plants like the mandara, kunda, kurabaka, utpala,
campaka, arpa, punnaga, nagakesara, bakula, lily and parijata are full of
transcendental fragrance, they are still conscious of the austerities
performed by tulasi because tulasi is given special preference by the Lord,
who garlands Himself with tulasi leaves.


--- Page 255 ---
Text 20] Description of the Kingdom of God 589
PURPORT

The importance of tulasi leaves is very clearly mentioned here. Tulasi
plants and their leaves are very important in devotional service. Devotees
are recommended to water the tulasi tree every day and collect the leaves
to worship the Lord. One time an atheist svami remarked, “What is the use
of watering the tulasi plant? It is better to water eggplant. By watering the
eggplant one can get some fruits, but what is the use of watering the
tulast?” These foolish creatures, unacquainted with devotional service,
sometimes play havoc with the education of people in general.

The most important thing about the spiritual world is that there is no
envy among the devotees there. This is true even among the flowers, which
are all conscious of the greatness of tulasi. In the Vaikuntha world entered
by the four Kumaras,even the birds and flowers are conscious of service to
the Lord.

TEXT 20
. 2
यत्संङ्लं हरिपदानतिमात्र्टे-
Ly (|
वैटूय॑मारकतदेममयेर्धिमानेः |
येषां बृहत्कटितटाः सितशोभिष्ठुख्यः
(१
कृष्णात्मनां न रज आदधुरुरसयाद्य;। २०॥
yat sankulam hari-padanati-matra-drstair
vairdurya-marakata-hema-mayair vimanaih
১6804 brhat-kati-tatah smita-Sobhi-mukhyah
krsnatmanam na raja adadhur utsmayadyaih

yat—that Vaikuntha abode; sankulam—is pervaded; hari-pada—at the two
lotus feet of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anati—by obei-
sances; matra—simply; drstaih—are obtained; vaidurya—Ilapis lazuli; mara-
kata—emeralds; hema—gold; mayaih—made of; vimanaih— with airplanes;
yesam—of those passengers; brhat—large; kati-tatah—hips; smita—smiling;
$obhi—beautiful;mukhyah —faces; krspa—in Krsna; atmanam—whose minds
are absorbed; na—not; rajah—sex desire; adadhuh—stimulate; utsmaya-
adyaih—by intimate friendly dealings, laughing and joking.

TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of Vaikuntha travel in their airplanes made of lapis

lazuli, emerald and gold. Although crowded by their consorts, who have


--- Page 256 ---
590 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
large hips and beautiful smiling faces, they cannot be stimulated to passion
by their mirth and beautiful charms.
PURPORT
In the material world, opulences are achieved by materialistic persons by
dint of their labor. One cannot enjoy material prosperity unless he works
very hard to achieve it. But the devotees of the Lord who are residents of
Vaikuntha have the opportunity to enjoy a transcendental situation of
jewels and emeralds. Ornaments made of gold bedecked with jewels are
achieved not by working hard but by the benediction of the Lord. In
other words, devotees in the Vaikuntha world, or even in this material
world, cannot be poverty-stricken, as is sometimes supposed. They have
ample opulences for enjoyment, but they need not labor to achieve them.
It is also stated that in the Vaikuntha world the consorts of the residents
are many, many times more beautiful than we can find in this material
world, even in the higher planets. It is specifically mentioned here that a
woman’s large hips are very attractive and they stimulate man’s passion,
but the wonderful feature of Vaikuntha is that although the women have
large hips and beautiful faces and are decorated with ornaments of
emeralds and jewels, the men are so absorbed in Krsna consciousness that
the beautiful bodies of the women cannot attract them. In other words,
there is enjoyment of the association of the opposite sex, but there is no
sex relationship. The residents of Vaikuptha have a better standard of
pleasure, so there is no need of sex pleasure.
TEXT 21
श्री रूपिणी कणयती चरणारविन्दं
-
रीराम्बुजेन हरिस्मनि ुक्तदोषा |
संरक्त्यते स्फटिकढुल्य उपेतहेम्नि
6. -
सम्माजेतीव यदनुग्रहणेऽन्ययलः 11221
ङा rupint kvanayati caraparavindam
lilambujena hari-sadmani mukta-desa
sarmlaksyate sphatika-kudya upeta-hemni
sammarjativa yad-anugrahane ’nya-yatnah
$ri—Laksmi, the goddess of fortune; rupini—assuming a beautiful form;
kvapayati—tinkling; carapa-aravindam—lotus feet; lila-ambujena—playing
with a lotus flower; hari-sadmani—the house of the Supreme Personality;
mukta-dosa—freed from all fault; samlaksyate—becomes visible; sphatika-


--- Page 257 ---
Text 21] Description of the Kingdom of God 591
crystal; kudye—walls; upeta—mixed; hemni—gold; sammarjati iva—appear-
ing like a sweeper; yat-anugrahane—to receive her favor; anya—others’;
yatnah—very much careful.

TRANSLATION

The ladies in the Vaikuntha planets are as beautiful as the goddess of
fortune herself. Such transcendentally beautiful ladies, their hands playing
with lotuses and their leg bangles tinkling, are sometimes seen sweeping
the marble walls, which are bedecked at intervals with golden borders, in
order to receive the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

In the Brahma-sarhhita it is stated that the Supreme Lord, Govinda, is
always served in His abode by many, many millions of goddesses of fortune.
Laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam. These millions and trillions
of goddesses of fortune who reside in the Vaikuntha planets are not
exactly consorts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but are the
wives of the devotees of the Lord and also engaged in the service of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is stated here that in the Vaikuntha
planets the houses are made of marble. Similarly, in the Brahma-sarihita it
is stated that the ground on the Vaikuntha planets is made of touchstone.
Thus there is no need to sweep the stone in Vaikuntha, for there is hardly
any dust on it, but still, in order to satisfy the Lord, the ladies there always
engage in dusting the marble walls. Why? The reason is that they are eager
to achieve the grace of the Lord by doing so.

It is also stated here that in the Vaikuntha planets the goddesses of
fortune are faultless. Generally the goddess of fortune does not remain
steadily in one place. Her name is Caricala, which means one who is not
steady. We find, therefore, that a man who is very rich may become the
poorest of the poor. Another example is Ravapa. Ravana took away
Laksmi, Sitaji, to his kingdom, and instead of being happy by the grace of
Laksmi, his family and his kingdom were vanquished. Thus Laksmi in the
house of Ravana is Caricala, or unsteady. Men of Ravana’s class want Laksmi
only, without her husband, Narayana; therefore they become unsteady due
to Laksmiji. Materialistic persons find fault on the part of Laksmi, but in
Vaikuntha Laksmiji is fixed in the service of the Lord. In spite of her being
the goddess of fortune, she cannot be happy without the grace of the Lord.
Even the goddess of fortune needs the Lord’s grace in order to be happy,
yet in the material world even Brahma, the highest created being, seeks the
favor of Laksmi for happiness.


--- Page 258 ---
592 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
TEXT 22
वापीषु विद्धुमतटाखमलामरताप्सु
्भ्यान्विता निजवने तुलसीभिरीश्चम्‌।
अम्यचैती SETA वकत्र-
च्छेषितं भगवतेत्यमताङ्ग यच्छ्रीः URN
vapisu vidruma-tatasv amalamrtapsu
presyanvita nija-vane tulastbhir isam
abhyarcati sv-alakam unnasam tksya vaktram
ucchegsitarn bhagavatety amatanga yac chrih
vapisu—in the ponds; vidruma—made of coral; tatasu—banks;
amala—transparent; amrta—nectarean; apsu—water; presya-anvita—sur-
rounded by maidservants; nija-vane—in her own garden; tulastbhih—
with  tulast; tam—the Supreme Lord; abhyarcati— worship; su-
alakam—with her face decorated with tilaka; unnasam—raised nose;
Tksya—by seeing; vaktram—face; ucchesitam—being kissed; bhagavata—
by the Supreme Lord; iti—thus; amata—thought; ariga—O demigods; yat
srih—whose beauty.
TRANSLATION
The goddesses of fortune worship the Lord in their own gardens by
offering tulasi leaves on the coral-paved banks of transcendental reservoirs
of water. While offering worship to the Lord they can see on the water the
reflection of their beautiful faces with raised noses, and it appears that they
have become more beautiful because of the Lord's kissing their faces.
PURPORT
Generally, when a woman is kissed by her husband, her face becomes
more beautiful. In Vaikuntha also, although the goddess of fortune is
naturally as beautiful as can be imagined, she nevertheless awaits the
kissing of the Lord to make her face more beautiful. The beautiful face of
the goddess of fortune appeared in ponds of transcendental crystal water
when she worshiped the Lord with tulasi leaves in her garden.
TEXT 23
IN व्रजन्त्यघभिदो रचनादुवादा-
| च््ृण्वन्ति येऽन्यविषयाः कथा मतिघ्नीः |


--- Page 259 ---
Text 23] Bescription of the Kingdom of God 593
७
यास्तु श्रुता हतमगेनभिरा्सारा-
wi fray तमःसु हन्त ॥२२॥
yan na vrajanly agha-bhido racananuvadac
chrpvanti ye ‘nya-visayah ku-katha mati-ghnth
yas tu ruta hata-bhagair nrbhir atta-saras
tams tan ksipanty asaranesu tamahsu hanta
yat—Vaikuntha; na—never; vrajanti—approach; agha-bhidah—of the van-
quisher of all kinds of sins; racana—of the creation; anuvadat—than narra-
tions; srpvanti—hear; ye—those who; anya—other; visayah—subject matter;
ku-kathah—bad words; mati-ghnip—killing intelligence; yah—which; tu—
but; srutah—are heard; hata-bhagaih—unfortunate; nybhih—by men; atta—
taken away; sarah—values of life; tan tan—such persons; ksipanti—are
thrown; asaranesu—devoid of all shelter; tamahsu—in the darkest part of
material existence; hanta—alas.
TRANSLATION
It is very much regrettable that unfortunate people do not discuss the
description of the Vaikuntha planets but engage in topics which are
unworthy to hear and which bewilder one’s intelligence. Those who give up
the topics of Vaikuntha and take to talk of the material world are thrown
into the darkest region of ignorance.
PURPORT
The most unfortunate persons are the impersonalists, who cannot
understand the transcendental variegatedness of the spiritual world. They
are afraid to talk about the beauty of the Vaikuntha planets because they
think that variegatedness must be material. Such impersonalists think that
the spiritual world is completely void, or, in other words, that there is no
variegatedness. This mentality is described here as ku-katha mati-ghnih,
intelligence bewildered by unworthy words. The philosophies of voidness
and of the impersonal situation of the spiritual world are condemned here
because they bewilder one’s intelligence. How can the impersonalist and
the void philosopher think of this material world, which is full of variegat-
edness, and then say that there is no variegatedness in the spiritual world?
It is said that this material world is the perverted reflection of the spiritual
world, so unless there is variegatedness in the spiritual world, how can
there be temporary variegatedness in the material world? That one can


--- Page 260 ---
594 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
transcend this material world does not imply that there is no transcen-
dental variegatedness.

Here in the Bhagavatam, in this verse particularly, it is stressed that
people who try to discuss and understand the real spiritual nature of the
spiritual sky and the Vaikunthas are fortunate. The variegatedness of the
Vaikuntha planets is described in relation to the transcendental pastimes
of the Lord. But instead of trying to understand the spiritual abode and
the spiritual activities of the Lord, people are more interested in politics
and economic developments. They hold many conventions, meetings and
discussions to solve the problems of this worldly situation, where they can
remain for only a few years, but they are not interested in understanding
the spiritual situation of the Vaikuntha world. If they are at all fortunate,
they become interested in going back home, back to Godhead, but unless
they understand the spiritual world, they rot in this material darkness
continually.

TEXT 24
येऽम्यर्थितामपि च नो TS प्रपला
जञानं च तस्वविषयं सहधर्मं यत्र |
नाराधनं मगवतो Rags
सम्मोहिता विततया बत मायया nen
ye ’bhyarthitam api ca no nr-gatim prapanna
jiidnam ca tattva-visayarn saha-dharmarh yatra
naradhanam bhagavato vitaranty amugya
sammohitd vitatayd bata mayaya te

ye—those persons; abhyarthitam— desired; api— certainly; ca—and; nah—
by us (Brahma and the other demigods); nr-gatim— the human form of life;
prapannah—have attained; jianam—knowledge; ca—and; tattva-visayam—
subject matter about the Absolute Truth; saha-dharmam—along with re-
ligious principles; yatra—where; na—not; aradhanam— worship; bhagavatah—
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vitaranti—perform; amusya— of
the Supreme Lord; sammohitah—being bewildered; vitataya—all pervading;
bata—alas; mayaya—by the influence of the illusory energy; te—they.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma said: My dear demigods, the human form of life is of such
importance that we alsodesire to have such life, for in the human form one
can attain perfect religious truth and knowledge. If one in this human form


--- Page 261 ---
Text 25] Description of the Kingdom of God 595
of life does not understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His
abode, it is to be understood that he is very much affected by the influence
of external nature.
PURPORT
Brahmaji condemns very vehemently the condition of the human being
who does not take interest in the Personality of Godhead and His transcen-
dental abode, Vaikuptha. The human form of life is desired even by
Brahmaji. Brahma and other demigods have much better material bodies
than human beings, yet the demigods, including Brahma, nevertheless
desire to attain the human form of life because it is specifically meant for
the living entity who can attain transcendental knowledge and religious
perfection. It is not possible to go back to Godhead in one life, but in the
human form one should at least understand the goal of life and begin Krsna
consciousness. It is said that the human form is a great boon because it is
the most suitable boat for crossing over the nescience ocean. The spiritual
master is considered to be the most able captain in that boat, and the infor-
mation from the scriptures is the favorable wind for floating over the ocean
of nescience. The human being who does not take advantage of all these
facilities in this life is committing suicide. Therefore one who does not
begin Krsna consciousness in the human form of life loses his life to the
influence of the illusory energy. Brahma regrets the situation of such a
human being.
TEXT 25
यच ॒व्रजन्त्यनिमिषाख्षमायुवृत्या
„ _द्रेयमा gat नः agit: |
Aafia: सुयशसः कथनानुराग-
वैङ्कव्य्राप्पकर्या पुलकीताङ्गाः ।।२५॥
yac ca vrajanty animisdm rsabhanuvrttya
direyamd hy upari nah sprhaniya-silah
bhartur mithah su-yasasah kathananuraga-
vaiklavya-baspakalaya pulakikrtangah
yat— Vaikuntha; ce—and; vrajanti—go; animisam—of the demigods;
rsabha—chief; anuvrttya—following in the footsteps; dure—keeping at a
distance; yamah—regulative principles; hi—certainly; upari—above;
nah—us; sprhaniya—to be desired; silah—good qualities; bhartuh—of the
Supreme Lord; mithafi—for one another; su-yasasah—glories; kathana—by


--- Page 262 ---
596 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 15
discussions, discourses; anuraga—attraction; vaiklavya—ecstasy; baspakalaya
—tears in the eyes; pulakikrta—shivering; angah—bodies.
TRANSLATION

Persons whose bodily features change in ecstasy and who breathe heavily
and perspire due to hearing the glories of the Lord are promoted to the
kingdom of God, even though they do not care for meditation and other
austerities. The kingdom of God is above the material universes, and it is
desired by Brahma and other demigods.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated herein that the kingdom of God is above these
material universes. Just as there are many hundreds of thousands of higher
planets above this earth, so there are many millions and billions of spiritual
planets belonging to the spiritual sky. Brahmaji states herein that the
spiritual kingdom is above the kingdom of the demigods. One can enter the
kingdom of the Supreme Lord only when one is highly developed in
desirable qualities. All good qualities develop in the person of a devotee.
It is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, Fifth Canto, 18th Chapter, 13th verse
that anyone who is Krsna conscious is endowed with all the good qualities
of the demigods. In the material world the qualitics of the demigods are
highly appreciated, just as, even in our experience, the qualities of a gentle-
man are more highly appreciated than the qualities of a man in ignorance
or in a lower condition of life. The qualities of the demigods in the higher
planets are far superior to the qualities of the inhabitants of this earth.

Brahmaji confirms herewith that only persons who have developed the
desirable qualities can enter into the kingdom of God. In the Caitanya-
caritamrta, the devotee’s desirable qualities are described to be twenty-six
in number. They are stated as follows: He is very kind; he does not quarrel
with anyone; he accepts Krsna consciousness as the highest goal of life; he
is equal to everyone; no one can find fault in his character; he is magnani-
mous, mild and always clean, internally and externally; he does not profess
to possess anything in this material world; he is a benefactor to all living
entities; he is peaceful and is a soul completely surrendered to Krsna; he has
no material desire to fulfill; he is meek and humble, always steady, and has
conquered the sensual activities; he does not eat more than required to
maintain body and soul together; he is never mad after material identity;
he is respectful to all others and does not demand respect for himself; he
is very grave, very compassionate and very friendly; he is poetic; he is
expert in all activities, and he is silent in nonsense. Similarly, in Srimad-
Bhagavatam, Third Canto, 25th Chapter, 20th verse, the qualifications of


--- Page 263 ---
Text 25] Description of the Kingdom of God 597
a saintly person are mentioned. It is said there that a saintly person eligible
to enter into the kingdom of God is very tolerant and very kind to all
living entities. He is not partial; he is kind to both human beings and to
animals. He is not such a fool that he will kill a goat Narayana to feed a
human Narayana or daridra-ndarayana. He is very kind to all living
entities; therefore he has no enemy. He is very peaceful. These are the
qualities of persons who are eligible to enter into the kingdom of God. That
such a person gradually becomes liberated and enters the kingdom of God
is confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam, Fifth Canto, 5th Chapter, 2nd verse.
The Srimad-Bhagavatam, Second Canto, 3rd Chapter, 24th verse, also states
that if a person does not cry or exhibit bodily changes after chanting the
holy name of God without offense, it is to be understood that he is hard-
hearted and that therefore his heart does not change even after he chants
the holy name of God, Hare Krsna. These bodily changes can take place
due to ecstasy when we offenselessly chant the holy names of God, Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare.

It may be noted that there are ten offenses that we should avoid. The
first offense is to decry persons who try in their lives to broadcast the
glories of the Lord. People must be educated in understanding the glories
of the Supreme; therefore the devotees who engage in preaching the glories
of the Lord are never to be decried. It is the greatest offense. Furthermore,
the holy name of 19100 is the most auspicious name, and His pastimes are
also nondifferent from the holy name of the Lord. There are many foolish
persons who say that one can chant Hare Krsna or chant the name of Kali
or Durga or Siva because they are all the same. If one thinks that the holy
name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the names and activities
of the demigods are on the same level, or if one accepts the holy name of
Visnu to be a material sound vibration, that is also an offense. The third
offense is to think of the spiritual master who spreads the glories of the
Lord as an ordinary human being. The fourth offense is to consider the
Vedic literatures, such as the Puranas or other transcendentally revealed
scriptures, to be ordinary books of knowledge. The fifth offense is to think
that devotees have given artificial importance to the holy name of God.
The actual fact is that the Lord is nondifferent from His name. The highest
realization of spiritual value is to chant the holy name of God, as pre-
scribed for the age—llare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. The sixth offense is to give some
interpretation on the holy name of God. The seventh offense is to act sinfully
on the strength of chanting the holy name of God. It is understood that one
can be freed from all sinful reaction simply by chanting the holy name of


--- Page 264 ---
598 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
God, but if one thinks that he is therefore at liberty to commit all kinds of
sinful acts, that is a symptom of offense. The eighth offense is to equalize
the chanting of Hare Krsna with other spiritual aclivities, such as medita-
lion, austerity, penance or sacrifice. They cannot be equalized al any level.
The ninth offense is to specifically glorify the importance of the holy name
before persons who have no interest. The tenth offense is to be attached to
to the misconception of possessing something, or to accept the body as
one’s self, while executing the process of spiritual cultivation.

When one 15 free from all ten of these offensesin chanting the holy name
of God, he develops the ecstatic bodily features which are called pulakasru.
Pulaka means symptoms of happiness, and asru means tears in the eyes.
The symptoms of happiness and tears in the eyes must appear in a person
who has chanted the holy name offenselessly. Here in this verse it is stated
that those who have actually developed the symptoms of happiness and
tears in the eyes by chanting the glories of the Lord are eligible to enter the
kingdom of God. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that if one does not
develop these symptoms while chanting Hare Krsna, it is to be understood
that he is still offensive. Caitanya-caritamrta suggests a nice remedy in
this connection. There it is said, in verse 31, Chapter Eight, of Adi-lila,
that if anyone takes shelter of L.ord Caitanya and just chants the holy name
of the Lord, Hare Krsna, he becomes freed from all offenses.

TEXT 26
तद्विश्वगुवधिकृतं शवनैकवन्ं
दिव्यं विचित्रविबुधाग्न्यविमानशोचिः।
आपुः परां FARIS योग-
मायाबलेन नयस्तदथो विकुण्ठम्‌ ।२६॥
tad visva-gurv-adhikrtam bhuvanaika-vandyariv
divyam vicitra-vibudhagrya-vimana-$ocih
apuh param mudam apiirvam upetya yoga-
mayd-balena munayas tad atho vikuptham

tat—then; visva-guru—by the teacher of the universe, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; adhikrtam—predominated; bhuvana—of the pla-
nets; eka—alone; vandyam—worthy to be worshiped; divyem—spiritual;
vicitra—highly decorated; vibudha-agrya—of the devotees (who are the
best of the learned); vimana—of the airplanes; socih—illuminated; apuh—
attained; param— the highest; mudam—happiness; apurvam—unprecedented;
upetya—having attained; yoga-maya—by spiritual potency; balena—by the


--- Page 265 ---
Text 26] Description of the Kingdom of God 599
influence; munayah—the sages; tat—Vaikuntha; atho—that; vikuntham—
Vispu.
TRANSLATION

Thus the great sages, Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumara,
upon reaching the above-mentioned Vaikuntha in the spiritual world by
dint of their mystic yoga performance, perceived unprecedented happi-
ness. They found that the spiritual sky was illuminated by highly decorated
airplanes piloted by the best devotees of Vaikuntha and was predominated
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one without a second. He is
above everyone. No one is equal to Him, nor is anyone greater than Him.
Therefore He is described here as visva-guru. He is the prime living entity of
the entire material and spiritual creation and is bhuvanaika-vandyam, the
only worshipable Personality in the three worlds. The airplanes in the
spiritual sky are self-illuminated and are piloted by great devotees of the
Lord. In other words, in the Vaikuntha planets there is no scarcity of the
things which are available in the material world; they are available, but
they are more valuable because they are spiritual and therefore eternal and
blissful. The sages felt an unprecedented happiness because Vaikuntha
was not predominated by an ordinary man. The Vaikuntha planets are
predominated by expansions of Krsna, who are differently named as
Madhustdana, Madhava, Narayana, Pradyumna, etc. These transcendental
planets are worshipable because the Personality of Godhead personally
rules them. It is said here that the sages reached the transcendental spiritual
sky by dint of their mystic power. That is the perfection of the yoga
system. The breathing excercise and disciplines to keep health in proper
order are not the ultimate goals of yoga perfection. The yoga system as
generally understood is astanga-yoga, or siddhi, eightfold perfection in
yoga. By dint of perfection in yoga one can become lighter than the light-
est and heavier than the heaviest; one can go wherever he likes and can
achieve opulences as he likes. There are eight such perfections. The rsis,
the four Kumaras, reached Vaikuntha by becoming lighter than the light-
est and thus passing over the space of the material world. Modern mechan-
ical space vehicles are unsuccessful because they cannot go to the highest
region of this material creation, and they certainly cannot enter the
spiritual sky. But by perfection of the yoga system one can not only
travel through material space, but can surpass material space and enter the
spiritual sky. We learn this fact also from an incident concerning Durvasa
Muni and Maharaja Ambarisa. It is understood that in one year Durvasa


--- Page 266 ---
600 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
Muni traveled everywhere and went into the spiritual sky to meet the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayapa. By present standards,
scientists calculate that if one could travel at the speed of light, it would
take 40,000 years to reach the highest planet of this material world. But
the yoga system can carry one without limitation or difficulty. The word
yoga-maya is used in this verse. Yoga-maya-balena vikuntham. The
transcendental happiness exhibited in the spiritual world and all other
spiritual manifestations there are made possible by the influence of yoga-
maya, the internal potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 27
तसिजतीर्य ga: पडसजमानाः
कक्षाः समानवयसावथ सप्तमायाम्‌ |
देवावचक्षत गृहीतगदौ परार््य-
केयूरङ्ण्डलकिरीटविटङ्कवेषौ ।॥२७॥
tasminn atitya munayah sad asajjamanah
kaksah samana-vayasav atha saptamayam
devav acaksata grhita-gadau parardhya-
keyura-kundala-kirita-vitanka-vesau
tasmin—in that Vaikuntha; atitya—after passing through; munayah—
the great sages; sat—six; asajjamanah—without being much attracted;
kaksah— walls; samana—equal; vayasau—age; atha—thereafter; saptam-
ayam—at the seventh gate; devau—two Vaikuntha doormen; acaksata—
saw; grhita—carrying; gadau—maces; para-ardhya—most valuable; keyiara—
bracelets; kundala—earrings; kirita—helmets; vitaika—beautiful; vesau—
garments.
TRANSLATION
After passing through the six entrances of Vaikuntha Puri, the Lord’s
residence, without feeling astonishment at all the decorations, they saw
at the seventh gate two shining beings of the same age, armed with maces
and adorned with most valuable jewelry, earrings, diamonds, etc.
PURPORT
The sages were so eager to see the Lord within Vaikuntha Puri that they
did not care to see the transcendental decorations of the six gates which
they passed by one after another. But at the seventh door they found two
doormen of the same age. The significance of the doormen’s being of the
same age is that in the Vaikunthaplanets there is no old age, so one cannot


--- Page 267 ---
Text 29] Description of the Kingdom of God 601
distinguish who is older than whom. The inhabitants of Vaikuntha are
decorated like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana, with sankha,
cakra, gada and padma (conch, wheel, club and lotus).
TEXT 28
मत्तद्विरेफवनमाकिकया निवीतौ
विन्यस्तयासितचतुष्टयवादुमध्ये |
वक्त्रं भुवा glee स्फुटनिरेयाम्यां
रक्तेक्षणेन च मनाग्रमसं दधानो ॥২৫॥
matta-dvirepha-vanamalikaya nivitau
vinyastayasita-catustaya-bahu-madhye
vaktram bhruva kutilaya sphuta-nirgamabhyam
rakteksanena ca manag rabhasar dadhanau
matta—intoxicated; dvi-repha—bees; vana-malikaya—with a garland of
fresh flowers; nivitau—hanging on the neck; vinyastaya—placed around;
asita—blue; catustaya—four; bahu—hands; madhye—between; vaktram—
face; bhruva—with their eyebrows; kufilaya—arched; sphuta—snorting;
nirgamabhyam— breathing; rakta—reddish; iksanena—with eyes; ca—and;
manak—somewhal; rabhasam— agitated; dadhanau—glanced over.
TRANSLATION
The two doormen were garlanded with fresh flowers which attracted
intoxicated bees and which were placed around their necks and between
their four blue hands. From their arched eyebrows, discontented nostrils
and reddish eyes, they appeared somewhat agitated.
PURPORT
Their garlands attracted swarms of bees because they were garlands of
fresh flowers. In the Vaikuntha world everything is fresh, new and transcen-
dental. The inhabitants of Vaikuntha have bodies of bluish color and four
hands like Narayana.
TEXT 29
©
दर्ये तयोर्निवि विद्युमिंषतोरपष्ठा
„ पूवा यथा पुरटक्जकपाटिका याः |
सवत्र तेऽविषमया gv खट्टा
ये सञ्चरन्त्यविहता विगतामिशङ्काः॥।२९॥


--- Page 268 ---
602 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
dvary etayor nivivisur misator aprstva
purva yatha purata-vajra-kapatika yah
sarvatra te 'visamaya munayah sva-drstya
ye saficaranty avihata vigatabhisankah

dvari—in the door; etayoh—both doorkeepers; nivivisuh—entered;
misatoh—while seeing; aprstva—without asking; purvah—as before; yatha—
as; purata—made of gold; vajra—and diamond; kapatikah—the doors; yah—
which; sarvatra—everywhere; te—they; avisamaya—without any sense of
discrimination; munayah—the great sages; sva-drstya—out of their own will;
ye—who; saficaranti—move; avihatah—without being checked; vigata—
without; abhisannkah— doubt.

TRANSLATION

The great sages, headed by Sanaka, had opened doors everywhere. They
had no idea of ours and theirs. With open minds, they entered the seventh
door out of their own will, just as they had passed through the six other
doors, which were made of gold and diamonds.

PURPORT

The great sages—namely, Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana, and Sanat-
kumara—although very old in years, maintained themselves eternally as
small children. They were not at all duplicitous, and they entered the doors
exactly as little children enter places without any idea of what it is to
trespass. That is a child’s nature. A child can enter any place, and no one
checks him. Indeed, a child is generally welcome in his attempts to go
places, but if it so happens that a child is checked from entering a door, he
naturally becomes very sorry and angry. That is the nature of a child. In
this case, the same thing happened. The childlike saintly personalities
entered all the six doors of the palace, and no one checked them; therefore
when they attempted to enter the seventh door and were forbidden by the
doormen, who checked them with their sticks, they naturally became very
angry and sorrowful. An ordinary child would cry, but because these were
not ordinary children, they immediately made preparations to punish the
doormen, for the doormen had committed a great offense. Even to this
day a saintly person is never checked from entering anyone’s door in India.

TEXT 30
तान्‌ वीक्ष्य बातरशनां थतुरः कुमारान्‌
बद्धान्दश्ारधवयसो विदितात्मतच्तान्‌ |


--- Page 269 ---
Text 31] Description of the Kingdom of God 603
वेत्रेण चाप्वव्लयतापतद देणास्तौ
तेजो विहस्य যমবন্দ্রবি্ধৃততহাকী।।২০॥
tan viksya vata-rasanarns caturah kumaran
vrddhan dasardha-vayaso viditatma-tattvan
vetrena caskhalayatam atad-arhanams tau
tejo vihasya bhagavat-pratikiila-silau
tan—them; viksya—after seeing; vdta-rasanan—naked; caturah—four;
kumaran—boys; vrddhan—aged; dasa-ardha—five years; vayasah—appear-
ing as of the age; vidita—had realized; atma-tattvan—the truth of the self;
vetrena— with their staffs; ca—also; askhalayatam—forbade; a-tat-arhanan—
not deserving such from them; tau—those two porters; tejah—glories;
vihasya— disregarding the etiquette; bhagavat-pratikula-§ilau—having a nature
displeasing to the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The four boy sages, who had nothing to cover their bodies but the
atmosphere, looked only five years old, even though they were the oldest
of all living creatures and had realized the truth of the self. But when the
porters, who happened to possess a disposition which was quite unpalat-
able to the Lord, saw the sages, they blocked their way with their staffs,
despising their glories, although the sages did not deserve such treatment
at their hands.
PURPORT
The four sages were the first-born sons of Brahma. Therefore all other
living entities, including Lord Siva, are born later and are therefore younger
than the four Kumaras. Although they looked like five-year-old boys and
traveled naked, the Kumaras were older than all other living creatures and
had realized the truth of the self. Such saints were not to be forbidden to
enter the kingdom of Vaikuntha, but by chance the doormen objected to
their entrance. This was not fitting. The Lord is always anxious to serve
sages like the Kumaras, but in spite of knowing this fact, the doormen,
astonishingly and outrageously, prohibited them from entering.
TEXT 31
ताभ्यां मिषत्खनिमिषेषु निषिष्यमानाः
खेमा ঘাণি हरेः धतिदारणाम्याम्‌।
उचुः सुदृतमदिटक्षितमङ्ग i
त्कामानुजेन सदसा त उपप्ठताक्षाः 11321


--- Page 270 ---
604 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
tabhyarih misatsv animisesu nisidhyamanah
sv-arhattama hy api hareh pratihara-pabhyam
wcuh suhrttama-didrksita-bhanga tsat-
kamanujena sahasa ta upaplutaksah

tabhyam—by those two porters; misatsu—while looking on; animisesu—
demigods living in Vaikuntha; nisidhyeamanah—being forbidden; su-
arhattamah—by far the fittest persons; hi api—although; hareh—of Hari, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratihara-pabhyam—by the two door-
keepers; cuh—said; suhrttama—most beloved; didrksita—cagerness to
sec; bhange—hindrance; Tsat—slight; kama-anujena—by the younger brother
of lust (anger); sahasa—suddenly; te—those great sages; upapluta—agitated;
aksah—eyes.

TRANSLATION

Although they were by far the fittest persons, when the Kumaras were
thus forbidden entrance by the two chief doorkeepers of Sri Hari while
other divinities looked on, their eyes suddenly turned red because of anger
due to their great eagerness to see their most beloved master, Sri Hari, the
Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

According to the Vedic system, a sannyasi, a person in the renounced
order of life, is dressed in saffron colored garments. This saffron dress is
practically a passport for the mendicant and sannyasi to go anywhere.
The sannyast’s duty is to enlighten people in Krsna consciousness. Those in
the renounced order of life have no other business but preaching the
glories and supremacy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore
the Vedic sociological conception is that a sannyasi should not be
restricted; he is allowed to go anywhere and everywhere he wants, and he
is not refused any gift he might demand from a householder. The four
Kumaras came to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead Narayana. The
word suhrttama, “best of all friends,” is important. As Lord Krsna states in
the Bhagavad-gita, He is the best friend of all living entities. Suhrdam
sarva-bhiitanam. No one can be a greater well-wishing friend to any living
enlity than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. lle is so kindly disposed
towards everyone that in spite of our completely forgetting our relation-
ship with the Supreme Lord, He comes Himself—sometimes personally, as
Lord Krsna appeared on this earth, and sometimes as His devotee, as did
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu—and sometimes He sends His bona fide devo-
tees to reclaim all the fallen souls. Therefore, He is the greatest well-wishing
friend of everyone, and the Kumaras wanted to see Him. The doorkeepers


--- Page 271 ---
Text 32] Description of the Kingdom of God 605
should have known that the four sages had no other business, and therefore
to restrict them from entering the palace was not apt.

In this verse it is figuratively stated that the younger brother of desire
suddenly appeared in person when the sages were forbidden to see their
most beloved Personality of Godhead. The younger brother of desire is
anger. If one’s desire is not fulfilled, the younger brother, anger, follows.
Here we can mark that even great saintly persons like the Kumaras were al-
so angry, but they were not angry for their personal interests. They were
angry because they were forbidden to enter the palace to see the Personality
of Godhead. Therefore the theory that in the perfectional stage one should
not have anger is not supported in this verse. Anger will continue even in
the liberated stage. These four mendicant brothers, the Kumaras, were con-
sidered liberated persons, but still they were angry because they were re-
stricted in their service to the l.ord. The difference between the anger of an
ordinary person and that of a liberated person is that an ordinary person be-
comes angry because of his sense desires not being fulfilled, whereas a
liberated person like the Kumaras becomes angry when restricted in the
discharge of duties for serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

In the previous verse it has been clearly mentioned that the Kumaras
were liberated persons. Viditatma-tattva means one who understands the
truth of self-realization. One who does not understand the truth of self-
realization is called ignorant, but one who understands the sclf, the Super-
self, their interrelation, and activities in self-realization is called viditatma-
tattva. Although the Kumaras were already liberated persons, they never-
theless became angry. This point is very important. Becoming liberated
does not necessitate losing one’s sensual activities. Sense activities continue
even in the liberated stage. The difference is, however, that sense activities
in liberation are accepted only in connection with Krsna consciousness,
whereas sense activities in the conditioned stage are enacted for personal
sense gratification.

TEXT 32
मनय जचुः
को বামিইহ্য मगवत्परिचर्ययोच्चै-
प्तद्र्भिणां निवसतां विषमः खभावः |
तसिन्‌ प्रशान्तपुरुषे गतविग्रहे at
को वाऽऽत्मवत्कुदकयोः परिशङ्कनीयः ॥॥३२॥
munaya ९५८८४
ko vam thailya bhagavat-paricaryayoccais
tad-dharminam nivasatam visamah sva-bhavah


--- Page 272 ---
606 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
tasmin prasanta-puruse gata-vigrahe vam
ko vatmavat kuhakayoh parisankaniyah

munayah—the great sages; acuh—said; kah—who; vam—you two; iha—in
Vaikuntha; etya— having attained; bhagavat— of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; paricaryaya—by the service; uccaih—having been developed by
past pious actions; tat-dharmipam—of the devotees; nivasatam—dwelling in
Vaikuntha; visamah— discordant; sva-bhavah—mentality; tasmin—in the
Supreme Lord; prasanta-puruse— without anxieties; gata-vigrahe—without
any enemy; vam—of you two; kah—who; va—or; atmavat—like yourselves;
kuhakayoh—maintaining duplicity; parésaitkantyah—not becoming trust-
worthy.

TRANSLATION

The sages said: Who are these two persons who have developed such a
discordant mentality even though they are posted in the service of the Lord
in the highest position and are expected to have developed the same
qualities as the Lord? How are these two persons living in Vaikuntha?
Where is the possibility of an enemy's coming into this kingdom of God?
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no enemy. Who could be envious
of Him? Probably these two persons are imposters; therefore they suspect
others to be like themselves.

PURPORT

The difference between the inhabitants of a Vaikuntha planet and those
of a material planet is that in Vaikuntha all the residents engage in the
service of the Lord Himself and are equipped with all His good qualities. It
has been analyzed by great personalities that when a conditioned soul is
liberated and becomes a devotee, about seventy-nine percent of all the
good qualities of the l.ord develop in his person. Therefore in the
Vaikuntha world there is no question of enmity between the Lord and
the residents. Here in this material world the citizens may be inimical to
the chief executives or heads of state, but in Vaikuntha there is no such
mentality. One is not allowed to enter Vaikuntha unless he has completely
developed the good qualities. The basic principle of goodness is to accept
subordination to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The sages, therefore,
were surprised to see that the two doormen who checked them from
entering the palace were not exactly like the residents of Vaikunthaloka.
It may be said that a doorman’s duty is to determine who should be
allowed to enter the palace and who should not. But that is not relevant in
this matter because no oneis allowed to enter the Vaikuntha planets unless
he has developed one hundred percent his mentality of devotional service
to the Supreme Lord. No enemy of the Lord can enter Vaikunthaloka.


--- Page 273 ---
Text 33] Description of the Kingdom of God 607
The Kumaras concluded that the only reason for the doormen’s checking
them was that the doormen themselves were imposters.
TEXT 33
न न्तरं मगवतीह Seed
वात्भानमास्मनि नमो नभसीव धीराः।
पर्यन्ति यत्र युवयोः सुरलिङ्गिनोः कि
व्युत्पादितं हयदरभेदि भयं यतोऽस्य 122
na hy antararn bhagavatiha samasta-kuksav
atmanam atmani nabho nabhasiva dhirah
pasyanti yatra yuvayoh sura-linginoh kim
vyutpaditari hy udara-bhedi bhayarn yato’sya
na—not; hi—because; antaram—distinction; bhagavati—in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; iha—here; samasta-kuksau—everything is within
the abdomen; atmanam—the living entity; atmani—in the Supersoul;
nabhah—the small quantity of air; nabhasi—within the whole air; iva—as;
dhirah— the learned; pasyanti—see; yatra—in whom; yuvayoh—of you two;
sura-linginoh—dressed like inhabitants of Vaikuntha; kim—how; vyutpadi-
tam—awakened, developed;hi—certainly ; udara-bhedi— distinction between
the body and the soul; bhayam—fearfulness; yatah—wherefrom; asya—of
the Supreme Lord.
TRANSLATION
In the Vaikuntha world there is complete harmony between the residents
and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as there is complete har-
mony within space between the big and the small skies. Why then is there
a seed of fear in this field of harmony? These two persons are dressed like
inhabitants of Vaikuntha, but wherefrom can their disharmony come into
existence?
PURPORT
Just as there are different departments in each state in this material
world, the civil department and the criminal department, so, in God’s
creation, there are two departments of existence. As in the material
world we find that the criminal department is far, far smaller than the
civil department, so this material world, which is considered the criminal
department, is one-fourth of the entire creation of the Lord. All living
entities who are residents of the material universes are considered to be
more or less criminals because they do not wish to abide by the order of
the Lord or they are against the harmonious activities of God’s will. The


--- Page 274 ---
608 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
principle of creation is that the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead,
is by nature joyful, and He becomes many in order to enhance His
transcendental joy. The living entities like ourselves, being part and parcel
of the Supreme Lord, are meant to satisfy the senses of the Lord. Thus,
whenever there is a discrepancy in that harmony, immediately the living
entity is entrapped by maya, or illusion.

The external energy of the Lord is called the material world, and the
kingdom of the internal energy of the Lord is called Vaikuntha, or the
kingdom of God. In the Vaikuntha world there is no disharmony between
the Lord and the residents. Therefore God’s creation in the Vaikuntha
world is perfect. There is no cause of fear. The entire kingdom of God is
such a completely harmonious unit that there is no possibility of enmity.
Everything there is absolute. Just as there are so many physiological
constructions within the body yet they work in one order for the satisfac-
tion of the stomach, and just as in a machine there are hundreds and
thousands of parts yet they run in harmony to fulfill the function of the
machine, in the Vaikuntha planets the Lord is perfect, and the inhabitants
also perfectly engage in the service of the Lord.

The Mayavadi philosophers, the impersonalists, interpret this verse of
Srimad-Bhagavatam to mean that the small sky and the big sky are one,
but this idea cannot stand. The example of the big sky and the small skies
is also applicable within a person’s body. The big sky is the body itself,
and the intestines and other parts of the body occupy the small sky. Each
and every part of the body has individuality, even though occupying a
small part of the total body. Similarly, the whole creation is the body of
the Supreme Lord, and we created beings, or anything that is created, are
but a small part of that body. The parts of the body are never equal to the
whole. This is never possible. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that the living
entities, who are parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are eternally parts
and parcels. According to the Mayavadi philosophers, the living entity in
illusion considers himself part and parcel although he is actually one and
the same as the supreme whole. This theory is not valid. The oneness of the
whole and the part is in their quality. The qualitative oneness of the small
and large portion of the sky does not imply that the small sky becomes the
big sky.

There is no cause for the politics of divide and rule in the Vaikuntha
planets; there is no fear because of the united interests of the Lord and the
residents. Maya means disharmony between the living entities and the
Supreme Lord, and Vaikuntha means harmony between them. Actually all
living entities are provided for and maintained by the Lord because He is
the supreme living entity. But foolish creatures, although actually under


--- Page 275 ---
Text 34] Description of the Kingdom of God 609
the control of the supreme living entity, defy His existence, and that state
is called maya. Sometimes they deny that there is such a being as God.
They say, “Everything is void.” And sometimes they deny Him in a differ-
ent way: “There may be a God, but He has no form.” Both these concep-
tions arise from the rebellious condition of the living entity. As long as
this rebellious condition prevails, the material world will continue in
disharmony.

Harmony or disharmony is realized because of the law and order of a
particular place. Religion is the law and order of the Supreme Lord. In the
Srimad-Bhagavad-gita we find that religion means devotional service, or
Krsna consciousness. Krsna says, “Give up all other religious principles and
simply become a soul surrendered unto Me.” This is religion. When one is
fully conscious that Krsna is the supreme enjoyer and Supreme Lord and
acts accordingly, that is real religion. Anything which goes against this
principle is not religion. Krsna therefore says: ‘Just give up all other
religious principles.” In the spiritual world this religious principle of Krsna
consciousness is maintained in harmony, and therefore that world is called
Vaikuntha. If the same principles can be adopted here, wholly or partially,
then itis also Vaikuntha. So it is with any society, such as the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness: If the members of the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness, putting faith in Krsna as the center,
live in harmony according to the order and principles of Bhagavad-gita,
then they are living in Vaikuntha, not in this material world.

TEXT 34
[अ
WE परमस्य विङ्कण्टमतुः
कतुं प्रकृष्टमिह धीमहि मन्दघीभ्याम्‌।
लोकानितो वरजतमन्तरभावदष्टया
पापीयसश्लय इमे रिपवोऽस्य यत्र ॥३४॥
tad vam amugsya paramasya vikuptha-bhartuh
kartum prakrstam iha dhimahi manda-dhibhyam
lokan ito vrajatam antara-bhava-drstya
papiyasas traya ime ripavo’sya yatra

tat—therefore; vam—unto these two; amusya—of Him; paramasya— the
Supreme; vikuntha-bhartuh—the Lord of Vaikuntha; kartum—to bestow;
prakrstam—benefit; iha—in the matter of this offense; dhimahi—let us
consider; manda-dhibhyam—those whose intelligence is not very nice;
lokan—1to the material world; itah—{rom this place (Vaikuntha); vrajatam—


--- Page 276 ---
610 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
go; antara-bhavah—duality; drstyd—on account of seeing; papiyasah—
sinful; trayah— three; ime— these; ripavah—enemies; asya—of a living entity;
yatra—where.
TRANSLATION

Therefore let us consider how these two contaminated persons should
be punished. The punishment should be apt, for thus benefit can eventual-
ly be bestowed upon them. Since they find duality in the existence of
Vaikuntha life, they are contaminated and should be removed from this
place to the material world, where the living entities have three kinds of
enemies.

PURPORT

The reason for pure souls’ coming into the existential circumstances of
the material world, which is considered to be the criminal department of
the Supreme Lord, is stated in Bhagavad-gita, Seventh Chapter, 27th
verse. It is stated that as long as a living entity is pure, he is in complete
harmony with the desires of the Supreme Lord, but as soon as he becomes
impure he is in disharmony with the desires of the Lord. By contamination
he is forced to transfer to this material world, where the living entities have
three enemies, namely desire, anger and lust. These three enemies force the
living entities to continue material existence, and when one is free from
them he is eligible to enter the kingdom of God. One should not, therefore,
be angry in the absence of an opportunity for sense gratification, and one
should not be lusty to acquire more than is necessary. In this verse it is
clearly stated that the two doormen should be sent into the material
world where criminals are allowed to reside. Since the basic principles of
criminality are sense gratification, anger and unnecessary lust, persons
who are conducted by these three enemies of the living entity are never
promoted to Vaikunthaloka. People should learn Bhagavad-gita and accept
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, as the Lord of everything;
they should practice satisfying the senses of the Supreme Lord instead of
trying to satisfy their own senses. Training in Krsna consciousness will
help one be promoted to Vaikuntha.

TEXT 35
तेषामितीरितसुभाववधायं घोरं
तं ब्रहमदण्डमनिवारणमसपूगेः |
सद्यो हरेरयुचरावुरु बिभ्यतस्तत्‌
पादग्रदावपततामतिकातरेण ।३५॥


--- Page 277 ---
Text 36] Description of the Kingdom of God 611
tesam itiritam ubhav avadharya ghoram
tam brahma-dandam anivaranam astra-pugaih
sadyo harer anucarav uru bibhyatas tat-
pada-grahav apatatam atikatarena
tesam—of the four Kumaras; iti—thus; tritam—uttered; ubhau—both
doorkeepers; avadharya— understanding; ghoram—terrible; tam—that;
brahma-dandam—curse of a brahmana; anivaranam—not able to be counter-
acted; astra-pugaih—by any kind of weapon; sadyah—at once; hareh—of
the Supreme Lord; anucarau—devotees; uru—very much; bibhyatah—be-
came fearful; tat-pada-grahau— grasping their feet; apatatam—fell down;
atikatarena—in great anxiety.
TRANSLATION
When the doormen of Vaikunthaloka, who were certainly devotees of
the Lord, found that they were going to be cursed by the brihmanas,
they at once became very much afraid and fell down at their feet in great
anxiety, for a brahmana’s curse cannot be counteracted by any kind of
weapon. ह
PURPORT
Although, by chance, the doormen committed a mistake by checking
the brahmanas from entering the gate of Vaikuntha, they were at once
aware of the gravity of the curse. There are many kinds of offenses, but
the greatest offense is to offend a devotee of the Lord. Because the door-
men were also devotees of the Lord, they were able to understand their
mistake and were terrified when the four Kumaras were ready to curse
them.
TEXT 36
ৰৈ
भूयादघोनि भगवद्भिरकारि दण्डो
यो नौ हरेत सुरहेलनमप्यशेषम्‌ |
[९
मा वोऽनुतापकरया RRC ARN
मोहो भवेदिह तु नौ व्रजतोरधोऽधः ॥२६॥
bhityad aghoni bhagavadbhir akari dando
yo nau hareta sura-helanam apy asesam
ma vo’nutapa-kalaya bhagavat-smrti-ghno
moho bhaved iha tu nau vrajator adho’dhah
bhuyat—let it be; aghoni—for the sinful; bhagavadbhih—by you; akari—
was done; dandah—punishment; yah— that which; nau—in relation to us;


--- Page 278 ---
612 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 3, Ch. 15
hareta—should destroy; sura-helanam—disobeying great demigods; api—
certainly; asesam—unlimited; ma—not; vah—of you; anutapa—repentance;
kalaya—by a little; bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
smyrti-ghnah—destroying the memory of; mohah—illusion; bhavet—should
be; iha—in the foolish species of life; tu—but; nau—of us; vrajatoh—who
are going; adhah adhah—down to the material world.
TRANSLATION
After being cursed by the sages, the doormen said: It is quite apt that
you have punished us for neglecting to respect sages like you. But we
pray that due to your compassion at our repentance, the illusion of for-
getting the Supreme Personality of Godhead will not come upon us as we
go progressively downward.
PURPORT
To a devotee, any heavy punishment is tolerable but the one which
effects forgetfulness of the Supreme Lord. The doormen, who were also
devotees, could understand the punishment meted out to them because
they were conscious of the great offense they had committed by not allow-
ing the sages to enter Vaikunthaloka. In the lowest species of life, includ-
ing the animal species, forgetfulness of the Lord is very prominent. The
doormen were aware that they were going to the criminal department of
the material world, and they expected that they might go to the lowest
species and forget the Supreme Lord. They prayed, therefore, that this
might not happen in the lives which they were going to accept because of
the curse. In Bhagavad-gita, Sixteenth Chapter, verses 19 and 20, it is said
that those who are envious of the Lord and His devotees are thrown into
the species of abominable life; life after life such fools are unable to re-
member the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore they continue
going down and down.
TEXT 37
. ५
gd W|I भगवानरविन्दनामः
+ ७
खानां विबुध्य सद तिक्रममायंहयः |
af ययौ परमह॑समहाुनीना-
EY
मन्वेषणीयचरणौ चलयन्‌ सहश्रीः ॥ २७॥
evarn tadaiva bhagavan aravinda-nabhah
svanam vibudhya sad-atikramam arya-hrdyah
tasmin yayau paramaharsa-maha-muninam
anveganiya-carapau calayan saha-srth


--- Page 279 ---
Text 38] Description of the Kingdom of God 613
evam—thus; tada eva—at that very moment; bhagavan—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; aravinda-nabhah—with a lotus growing from
His navel; svanam—of His own servants; vibudhya—learned about; sat—to
the great sages; atikramam—the insult; arya—of the righteous; hrdyah—
the delight; tasmin—there; yayau—went; paramaharmsa—recluses; maha-
muninam—by the great sages; anvesapiya—which are worthy to be sought
after; caranau—the two lotus feet; calayan—walking; saha-$rth—with the
goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
At that very moment, the Lord, who is called Padmanabha because of
the lotus grown from His navel and who is the delight of the righteous,
learned about the insult offered by His own servants to the saints.
Accompanied by His spouse, the goddess of fortune, He went to the spot
on those very feet that are sought for by recluses and great sages.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita the Lord declares that His devotees cannot be
vanquished at any time. The Lord could understand that the quarrel
between the doormen and the sages was taking a different turn, and there-
fore He instantly came out of His place and went to the spot to stop
further aggravation so that His devotees, the doormen, might not be
vanquished for good.
ग TEXT 38
तं त्वागतं प्रतिदतोपयिकं खपुम्मि-
स्तेऽचक्षताक्षविषयं खसमाधिमाग्यम्‌ |
~ ¢ -
हंसभ्रियोन्येजनयोः शिववायुलोल-
च्छुभ्रातपत्रशशिरेसरशोकराम्बुम्‌ ॥२८॥
tam tv 6०८4 pratihrtaupayikar sva-pumbhis
te ’caksataksa-visayar sva-samadhi-bhagyam
hamsa-sriyor vyajanayoh siva-vayu-lolac-
chubhratapatra-sasi-kesara-sikarambum
tam—Him; tu—bul; agatam—coming forward; pratihrta—carried; aupayi-
kam—the paraphernalia; sve-pumbhih—by His own associates; te—
the great sages (Kumaras); acaksala—saw; aksa-visayam—now subject
matter for seeing; sva-samadhi-bhagyam—visible simply by ecstatic trance;
hamsa-sriyoh—as beautiful as white swans; vyajanayoh—the camaras
(bunches of white hair); siva-vayu—favorable winds; lolat— moving; subhra-


--- Page 280 ---
614 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
atapatra—the white umbrella; sesi—the moon; kesara—pearls; sikara—
drops; embum—water.
TRANSLATION

The sages, headed by Sanaka Rsi, saw that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Visnu, who was formerly only visible within their hearts in
ecstatic trance, had now actually become visible to their eyes. As He came
forward, accompanied by His own associates, bearing all paraphernalia,
such as an umbrella and a camara fan, the white bunches of hair moved
very gently, like two swans, and due to their favorable breeze the pearls
garlanding the umbrella also moved, like drops of nectar falling from the
white full moon or ice melting due to a gust of wind.

PURPORT

In this verse we find the word acaksataksa-visayam. The Supreme Lord
cannot be seen by ordinary eyes, but He now became visible to the eyesight
of the Kumaras. Another significant word is samadhi-bhagyam. Medita-
tors who are very fortunate can see the Visnu form of the Lord within
their hearts by following the yogic process. But to see Him eye to eye is a
different matter. This is only possible for pure devotees. The Kumaras,
therefore, upon seeing the Lord coming forward with His associates, who
were holding an umbrella and a camara fan, were struck with wonder that
they were seeing the Lord face to face. It is said in the Brahima-samhita that
devotees, being elevated in love of God, always see Syamasundara, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, within their hearts. But when they are
mature, the same God is visible before them face to face. For ordinary
persons the Lord is not visible; however, when one can understand the
significance of His holy name and one engages himself in the devotional
service of the Lord, beginning with the tongue, by chanting and tasting
prasadam, then gradually the Lord reveals Himself. Thus the devotee con-
stantly sees the Lord within his heart, and, in a more mature stage, one can
see the same Lord directly, as we see everything else.

TEXT 39
कत्लप्रषादसुञचखं स्पृहणीयधाम
स्नेहावलोककलया हदि संस्पृशन्तम्‌ |
श्यामे एथावुरसि शोभितया भरिया स्व-
FIRM सुभगयन्तमिवात्मधिष्यम्‌ ॥२९॥


--- Page 281 ---
Text 39] Description of the Kingdom of God 615
krtsna-prasada-sumukham sprhaniya-dhama
snehavaloka-kalaya hrdi sarisprsantam
sSyame prthav urasi Sobhitaya sriya svas-
cudamanim subhagayantam ivatma-dhisnyam

krtsna-prasada—Dblessing everyone;  sumukham—auspicious face;
sprhaniya—desirable; dhama—shelter; sneha—affection; avaloka—looking
upon; kalaya—by expansion; hrdi—within the heart; samspréantam—touch-
ing; syame—unto the Lord with blackish color; prthau—broad; urasi—
chest; sobhitaya—being decorated; sriya—goddess of fortune; svah-heaven-
ly planets; cidamanim—summit; subhagayantam—spreading good fortune;
iva—like; atma—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhisnyam—abode.

TRANSLATION

The Lord is the reservoir of all pleasure. His auspicious presence is meant
for everyone’s benediction, and His affectionate smiling and glancing touch
the core of the heart. The Lord’s beautiful bodily color is blackish, and His
broad chest is the resting place of the goddess of fortune, who glorifies the
entire spiritual world, which is the summit of all heavenly planets. Thus it
appeared that the Lord was personally spreading the beauty and good
fortune of the spiritual world.

PURPORT

When the Lord came, He was pleased with everyone; therefore it is
stated here, krtsna-prasada-sumukham. The Lord knew that even the offen-
sive doormen were His pure devotees, although by chance they committed
an offense at the feet of other devotees. To commit an offense against a
devotee is very dangerous in devotional service. Lord Caitanya therefore
said that an offense to a devotee is just like a mad elephant runloose; when
a mad elephant enters a garden, he tramples all the plants. Similarly, an
offense unto the feet of a pure devotee murders one’s position in devotion-
al service. On the part of the Lord there was no offended mood because He
does not accept any offense created by His sincere devotee. But a devotee
should be very cautious of committing offenses at the feet of another
devotee. The Lord, being equal to all, and being especially inclined to His
devotee, looked as mercifully at the offenders as at the offended. This
attitude of the Lord was due to His unlimited quantity of transcendental
qualities. His cheerful attitude towards the devotees was so pleasing and
heart-touching that His very smiling was attractive for them. That attrac-
tion was glorious not only for all the higher planets of this material world,
but beyond, for the spiritual world also. Generally a human being has no


--- Page 282 ---
616 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
idea of what the constitutional position is in the higher material planets,
which are far better constituted in regard to all paraphernalia, yet the
Vaikuptha planet is so pleasing and so celestial that it is compared to the
middle jewel or locket in a necklace of jewels.

In this verse the words sprhaniya-dhama indicate that the Lord is the
reservoir of all pleasure because He has all the transcendental qualities.
Although only some of these are aspired for by persons who hanker
after the pleasure of merging in the impersonal Brahman, there are other
aspirants who want to associate with the Lord personally as His servants.
The Lord is so kind that He gives shelter to everyone-both impersonalists
and devotees. He gives shelter to the impersonalists in His impersonal
Brahman effulgence, whereas He gives shelter to the devotees in His per-
sonal abodes known as the Vaikunthalokas. He is especially inclined to
His devotee; He touches the core of the heart of the devotee simply by
smiling and glancing over him. The Lord is always served in the Vaikuntha-
loka by many hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune, as stated
by the Brahma-samhita (laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam). In
this material world, one is glorified if he is favored even a pinch by the
goddess of fortune, so we can simply imagine how glorified is the kingdom
of God in the spiritual world, where many hundreds and thousands of
goddesses of fortune engage in the direct service of the Lord. Another
feature of this verse is that it openly declares where the Vaikunthalokas
are situated. They are situated as the summit of all the heavenly planets,
which are above the sun globe, at the upper limit of the universe, and are
known as Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka. The spiritual world is situated beyond
the universe. Therefore it is stated here that the spiritual world, V aikuntha-
loka, is the summit of all planetary systems.

TEXT 40
पीतांशके पृथुनितम्बिनि विस्फुरन्त्या
काज्ज्यालिमिर्विरुतया वनमालया |
वल्युप्रोष्ठवलयं विनतासुतांसे
विन्यस्तदस्तमितरेण घुनानमन्जम्‌ | Zell
pitamsuke prthu-nitambini visphurantya
kaiicyalibhir virutaya vana-malaya ca
valgu-prakogstha-valayam vinata-sutanmse
vinyasta-hastam itarena dhunanam abjam
pita-arisuke—covered with a yellow cloth; prthu-nitambini—on His
large hips; visphurantya—shining brightly; kaiicya— with a girdle; alibhih—


--- Page 283 ---
Text 41] Description of the Kingdom of God 617
by the bees; virutaya—humming; vana-malaya—with a garland of fresh
flowers; ca—and; valgu—lovely; prakostha—wrists; valayam—bracelets;
vinata-suta— of Garuda, the son of Vinata; amse—on the shoulder;vinyasta—
rested; hastam—one hand; itarepa—with another hand; dhunanam—being
twirled; abjam—a lotus flower.
TRANSLATION

He was adorned with a girdle that shone brightly on the yellow cloth
covering His large hips, and He wore a garland of fresh flowers which was
distinguished by humming bees. His lovely wrists were graced with bracelets,
and He rested one of His hands on the shoulder of Garuda, His carrier, and
twirled a lotus with another hand.

PURPORT

Here is a full description of the Personality of Godhead as personally
experienced by the sages. The Lord’s personal body was covered with
yellow colored robes, and His waist was thin. In Vaikuntha, whenever there
is a flower garland on the chest of the Personality of Godhead or any one
of His associates, it is described that the humming bees are there. All these
features were very beautiful and attractive for the devotees. One of the
Lord’s hands rested on His carrier, Garuda, and in another hand He twirled
a lotus flower. These are personal characteristics of the Personality of God-
head, Narayana.

TEXT 41
विद्युरिक्षपन्मकरङ्ण्डमण्डनाहै-
गण्डस्थलोननसथ्चुखं मणिमत्किरीटम्‌
दोदण्डषण्डविवरे हरता पराण्य॑-
हारेण कन्धरगतेन च कौस्तुभेन ॥४१॥
vidyut-ksipan-makara-kundala-mandanarha-
ganda-sthalonnasa-mukham manimat-kiritam
dor-danda-sanda-vivare harata parardhya-
harena kandhara-gatena ca kaustubhena

vidyut—lightning; ksipat—outshining; makara—alligator-shaped; kundala—
earrings; mandana—decoration; arha—as it fits; ganda-sthala—cheeks;
unnasa—prominent nose; mukham—countenance; mapimat—gem-studded;
kirttam—crown; doh-dapda—of His four stout arms; sanda—group; vivare—
between; haratd—charming; para-ardhya—by the most precious; harena—


--- Page 284 ---
618 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
necklace; kandhara-gatena—adorning His neck; ca—and; kaustubhena—by
the Kaustubha jewel.
TRANSLATION

His countenance was distinguished by cheeks that enhanced the beauty
of His alligator-shaped pendants, which outshone lightning. His nose was
prominent, and His head was covered with a gem-studded crown. A
charming necklace hung between His stout arms, and His neck was
adorned with the gem known by the name Kaustubha.

TEXT 42
अत्रोपसुष्टमिति चोत्सितमिन्दिरायाः
स्वानां धिया विरचितं बहुसोष्ठबाद्यम्‌ |
मं मवस्य मवतां च मजन्तमङ्खं
ने्ठनिरीष्य नविठसटछो दा कैः॥४२॥
atropasrstam iti cotsmitam indirayah
svanarm dhiya viracitam bahu-sausthavadhyam
77101801718 bhavasya bhavatam ca bhajantam angam
nemur nirtksya na vitrpta-drso muda kaih

atra—here, in the matter of the beauty; upasrstam—curbed down; iti—
thus; ca—and;utsmitam—the pride of her beauty ;indirayah—of the goddess
of fortune; svanam—of His own devotees; dhiya—by intelligence;
viracitam—meditated on; bahu-sausthava-adhyam—very beautifully deco-
rated; mahyam—of me; bhavasya—of Lord Siva; bhavatam—of all of you;
ca—and; bhajantam—worshiped; angam—the figure; nemuh—bowed down;
nirtksya—after seeing; na—not; vitrpta—satiated; drsah—eyes; muda—
joyously; kaih—by their heads.

TRANSLATION

The exquisite beauty of Narayana, being many times magnified by the
intelligence of His devotees, was so attractive that it defeated the pride of
the goddess of fortune in being the most beautiful. My dear demigods, the
Lord who thus manifested Himself is worshipable by me, by Lord Siva and
by all of you. The sages regarded Him with unsated eyes and joyously
bowed their heads at His lotus feet.

PURPORT

The beauty of the Lord was so enchanting that it could not be

sufficiently described. The goddess of fortune is supposed to be the most


--- Page 285 ---
Text 43] Description of the Kingdom of God 619
beautiful sight within the spiritual and material creations of the Lord; she
has a sense of being the most beautiful, yet her beauty was defeated when
the Lord appeared. In other words, the beauty of the goddess of fortune is
secondary in the presence of the Lord. In the words of Vaignava poets, it is
said that the Lord’s beauty is so enchanting that it defeats hundreds of
thousands of Cupids. He is therefore called Madanamohana. It is also des-
cribed that the Lord sometimes becomes mad after the beauty of
Radharani. Poets describe that, under those circumstances, although
Lord Krsna is Madanamohana, He becomes Madanadaha, or enchanted by
the beauty of Radharani. Actually the Lord’s beauty is superexcellent,
surpassing even the beauty of Laksmt in Vaikuntha. The devotees of the
Lord in the Vaikuntha planets want to see the Lord as the most beautiful,
but the devotees in Gokula or Krsnaloka want to see Radharani as more
beautiful than Krsna. The adjustment is that the Lord, being bhakta-
vatsala, or one who wants to please His devotees, assumes such features so
that devotees like Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and other demigods may be
pleased. Here also, for the devotee-sages, the Kumaras, the Lord appeared
in His most beautiful feature, and they continued to see Him without
satiation and wanted to continue seeing Him more and more.
TEXT 43
सस्यारपिन्दनयनस्य पदारविन्द
क्छ्त्रल्कमिश्रतुटसोमर्रन्दवायुः |
अन्तगैतः खविवरेण चकार तेषां
सषेभमश्चरलषामपि चित्ततन्वोः sR
tasyaravinda-nayanasya padaravinda-
kinijalka-misra-tulasi-makaranda-vayuh
antargatah sva-vivarena cakara tesa
sanksobham aksara-jusam api citta-tanvoh

tasya—of Him; aravinda-nayanasya—of the lotus-eyed Lord; pada-aravin-
da—of the lotus feet; kifijalka—with the toes; misra—mixed; tulasi— the tulasi
leaves; makaranda— fragrance; vayuh—breeze; antargatah—entered within;
sva-vivarena— through their nostrils; cakara— made; tesam—of the Kumaras;
sanksobham—agitation for change; aksara-jusam—attached to impersonal
Brahman realization; api—even though; citta-tanvoh—in both mind and
body.


--- Page 286 ---
620 Srimad-Bhagavatam Canto 3, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION

When the breeze carrying the aroma of tulasi leaves from the toes of the
lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead entered the nostrils of those sages,
they experienced a change both in body and mind, even though they were
attached to the impersonal Brahman understanding.

PURPORT

It appears from this verse that the four Kumaras were impersonalists or
protagonists of the philosophy of monism, becoming one with the Lord.
But as soon as they saw the Lord’s features, their minds changed. In other
words, the impersonalist who feels transcendental pleasure in striving to
become one with the Lord is defeated when he sees the beautiful tran-
scendental features of the Lord. Because of the fragrance of His lotus feet,
carried by the air and mixed with the aroma of tulast, their minds
changed; instead of becoming one with the Supreme Lord, they thought
it wise to be devotees. Becoming a servitor of the lotus feet of the
Lord is better than becoming one with the Lord.

TEXT 44
ते वा AGA वदनासितपद्मकोशच-
gE सुन्दरतराधरङन्दहासम |
कन्धाशिषः पुनरवेक्ष्य বনীমসত্দি-
इन्द्रं नखारुणमणिश्रयणं निदध्युः 1193)
te va amugya vadanasita-padma-kosam
udviksya sundarataradhara-kunda-hasam
labdhasisah punar aveksya tadtyam anghri-
00011000172 nakharuna-mani-srayanari nidadhyuh

te—those sages; vai—certainly; amusya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; vadana—face;asita—blue; padma—lotus; kosam—inside; udviksya—
after looking up; sundaratara—more beautiful; adhara—lips; kunda—jasmine
flower; hasam—smiling;labdha—achieved;asisah—aims of life; punah—again;
aveksya—looking down; tadtyam—His; anghri-dvandvam—pair of lotus feet;
nakha—nails; aruna—red; mani—rubies; srayanam—shelter; nidadhyuh—
meditated.

TRANSLATION

The Lord’s beautiful face appeared to them like the inside of a blue

lotus, and the smiling of the Lord appeared to be a blossoming jasmine


--- Page 287 ---
Text 45] Description of the Kingdom of God 621
flower. After seeing the face of the Lord, the sages were fully satisfied,
and when they wanted to see Him further, they looked upon the nails of
His lotus feet, which resembled rubies. Thus they viewed the Lord’s
transcendental body again and again, and so they finally achieved
meditation on the Lord’s personal feature.
TEXT 45
पुंसां गतिं सृगयतामिह योगमार्गे
ध्यानास्पद्‌ बहु मतं नयनाभिरामम्‌।
त EY
diet वपुदंश्चयानमनन्यसिदधै-
nN
रौत्पत्तिकेः समगृणन्‌ युतमष्टमोगे; ॥४५॥
purisariv gatim mrgayatam iha yoga-margair
dhyanaspadam bahu-matam nayanabhiramam
[00111511018 vapur darsayanam ananya-siddhair
autpattikaih samagrnan yutam asta-bhogaih
pumsam—of those persons; gatim—liberation; mrgayatam—who are
searching after; tha—here in this world; yoga-margaih—by the process of
astanga-yoga; dhyana-aspadam—object of meditation; bahu—by the great
yogis; matam—approved ; nayana—eyes; abhiramam—pleasing; paurisnam—
human; vapuh—form; darsayanam—displaying; ananya—not by others;
siddhaih— perfected; autpattikaih—eternally present; samagrnan— praised;
yutam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is endowed; asta-
bhogailh— with eight kinds of achievement.
TRANSLATION
This is the form of the Lord which is meditated upon by the followers
of the yoga process, and it is pleasing to the yogis in meditation. It is not
imaginary, but is factual, as proved by great yogis. The Lord is full in eight
kinds of achievement, but for others these achievements are not possible in
full perfection.
PURPORT
The success of the yoga process is very nicely described here. It is
specifically mentioned that the form of the Lord as four-handed Narayana
is the object of meditation for the followers of yoga-marga. In the modern
age there are so many so-called yogis who do not target their meditation on
the four-handed Narayana form. Some of them try to meditate on some-
thing impersonal or void, but that is not approved by the great yogis who


--- Page 288 ---
622 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
follow the standard method. The real yoga-marga process 18 to control the
senses, sit in a solitary and sanctified place and meditate on the four-handed
form of Narayana, decorated as described in this chapter as He appeared
before the four sages. This Narayana form is Krsna’s expansion; therefore
the Krsna consciousness movement which is now spreading is the real,
topmost process of yoga practice.

Krsna consciousness is the highest yoga performance by trained devo-
tional yogis. Despite all the allurement of yoga practice, the eight kinds of
yogic perfections are hardly achievable by the common man. But here it is
described that the Lord, who appeared before the four sages, is Himself
full of all eight of those perfections. The highest yoga-marga process is to
concentrate the mind twenty-four hours a day on Krsna. This is called
Krsna consciousness. The yoga system, as described in Srimad-Bhagavatam
and Bhagavad-gita or as recommended in the Patafjali yoga process, is
different from the nowadays practiced hatha-yoga as it is generally under-
stood in the Western countries. Real yoga practice is to control the senses
and, after such control is established, to concentrate the mind on the
Narayana form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Lord
Krsna is the original Personality of Godhead, and all thc other Visnu
forms— with four hands decorated with conch, lotus, club and wheel —are
plenary expansions of Krsna. In Bhagavad-gita it is recommended that one
should meditate upon the form of the Lord. To practice concentration of
the mind, one has to sit with the head and the back in a straight line, and
one must practice in a secluded place, sanctified by a sacred atmosphere.
The yogi should observe the rules and regulations of brahmacarya—to
strictly live a life of self-restraintand celibacy. One cannot practice yoga in
a congested city, living a life of extravagancy, including unrestricted sex
indulgence and adultery of the tongue. Yoga practice necessitates control-
ling the senses, and the beginning of sense control is to control the tongue.
One who can control the tongue can also have control over the other senses.
One cannot allow the tongue to take all kinds of forbidden food and drink
and at the same time advance in the practice of yoga. It is a very regrettable
fact that many unauthorized so-called yogis come to the Western countries
and exploit people’s inclination towards yoga practice. Such unauthorized
yogis even dare to say publicly that one can indulge in the habit of drinking
and at the same time practice meditation.

Five thousand years ago Lord Krsna recommended yoga practice to
Arjuna, but Arjuna frankly expressed his inability to follow the stringent
rules and regulations of the yoga system. One should be very practical in
every field of activities and should not waste his valuable time in practicing
useless gymnastic feats in the name of yoga. Real yoga is to search out the


--- Page 289 ---
Text 45] Description of the Kingdom of God 623
four-handed Supersoul within one’s heart and see Him perpetually in
meditation. Such continued meditation is called samadhi, and the object
of this meditation is the four-handed Narayana, with bodily decorations as
described in this chapter of Srimad-Bhagavatam. If, however, one wants to
meditate upon something void or impersonal, it will take a very long time
before he achieves success in yoga practice. We cannot concentrate our
mind on something which is void or impersonal. Real yoga is to fix the
mind on the form of the Lord, the four-handed Narayana who is sitting in
everyone's heart.

By meditation one can understand that God is seated within one’s
heart. Even if one does not know it, God is seated within the heart of
everyone. He is not only seated in the heart of the human being, but He is
also within the hearts of cats and dogs. Bhagavad-gita certifies this fact by
the declaration of the Lord, iSvarah sarva-bhutanari hrd-dese. The vara,
the supreme controller of the world, is seated in the heart of everyone. He
is not only in everyone’s heart, but He is also present within the atom. No
place is vacant or devoid of the presence of the Lord. That is the statement
of ISopanisad. God is present everywhere, and His right of proprietorship
applies to everything. The feature of the Lord by which He is present
everywhere is called Paramatma. Atma means the individual soul, and
Paramatma means the individual Supersoul; both atma and Paramatma are
individual persons. The difference between atma and Paramatma is that the
atma or the soul is present only in a particular body, whereas the
Paramatma is present everywhere. In this connection, the example of the
sun is very nice. An individual person may be situated in one place, but
the sun, even though a similar individual entity, is present on the head of
every individual person. In Bhagavad-gita this is explained. Therefore even
though the qualities of all entities, including the Lord, are equal, the
Supersoul is different from the individual soul by quantitative power of
expansion. The Lord or the Supersoul can expand Himself into millions of
different forms, whereas the individual soul cannot do so.

The Supersoul, being seated in everyone’s heart, can witness everyone’s
aclivities—past, present and future. In the Upanisads the Supersoul is de-
scribed as being seated with the individual soul as friend and witness. As a
friend, the Lord is always anxious to get back His friend, the individual soul,
and bring him back home, back to Godhead. As a witness He is the bestower
of all benedictions, and He endows each individual with the result of his ac-
tions. The Supersoul gives the individual soul all facilities to achieve what-
ever he desires to enjoy in this material world. Suffering is a reaction to the
living entity’s propensity to try to lord it over the material world. But the
Lord instructs His friend, the individual soul,how is also His son, to give up


--- Page 290 ---
624 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
all other engagements and simply surrender unto Him for perpetual bliss
and an eternal life full of knowledge. This is the last instruction of Bhagavad-
gitd, the most authorized and widely read book on all varieties of yoga. Thus
the last word of Bhagavad-gitd is the last word in the perfection of yoga.

It is stated in Bhagavad-gita that a person who is always absorbed in
Krsna consciousness is the topmost yogi. What is Krsna consciousness? As
the individual soul is present by his consciousness throughout his entire
body, so the Supersoul or Paramatma is present throughout the whole
creation by superconsciousness. This superconscious energy is imitated by
the individual soul, who has limited consciousness. I can understand what
is going on within my limited body, but I cannot feel what is going on in
another’s body. I am present throughout my body by my consciousness,
but my consciousness is not present in another’s body. The Supersoul or
Paramatma, however, being present everywhere and within everyone, is
also conscious of everyone’s existence. The theory that the soul and the
Supersoul are one is not acceptable because it is not confirmed by authori-
tative Vedic literature. The individual soul’s consciousness cannot act in
superconsciousness. This superconsciousness can be achieved, however, by
dovetailing individual consciousness with the consciousness of the Supreme.
This dovetailing process is called surrender, or Krsna consciousness. From
the teachings of Bhagavad-gita we learn very clearly that Arjuna, in the
beginning, did not want to fight with his brothers and relatives, but after
understanding Bhagavad-gita he dovetailed his consciousness with the
superconsciousness of Krsna. Ile was then in Krsna consciousness.

A person in full Krsna consciousness acts by the dictation of Krsna. In
the beginning of Krsna consciousness, dictation is received through the
transparent medium of the spiritual master. When one is sufficiently trained
and acts in submissive faith and love for Krsna under the direction of the
bona fide spiritual master, the dovetailing process becomes more firm and
accurate. This stage of devotional service by the devotee in Krsna conscious-
ness is the most perfect stage of the yoga system. At this stage, Krsna, or
the Supersoul, dictates from within, while from without the devotee is
helped by the spiritual master, who is the bona fide representative of
Krsna. From within He helps the devotee as caitya, for Ile is seated within
the heart of everyone. Understanding that God is seated within everyone’s
heart is not, however, sufficient. One has to be acquainted with God both
from within and without, and one must take dictation from within and
without to act in Krsna consciousness. This is the highest perfectional
stage of the human form of life and the topmost perfection of all yoga.

For a perfect yogi, there are eight kinds of super-achievements: One can
become lighter than air, one can become smaller than the atom, one can


--- Page 291 ---
Text 45] Description of the Kingdom of God 625
become bigger than a mountain, one can achieve whatever he desires, one
can control like the Lord, and so on. But when one rises to the perfectional
stage of receiving dictation from the Lord, that is greater than the stage of
material achievements above mentioned. The breathing exercise of the
yoga system which is generally practiced is just the beginning. Meditation
on the Supersoul is just another step forward. But to obtain direct contact
with the Supersoul and take dictation from Him is the highest perfectional
stage. The breathing exercises of meditation practice were very difficult
even 5000 years ago, otherwise Arjuna would not have rejected the pro-
posal of Krsna that he adopt this system. This age of Kali is called the
fallen age. In this age, people in general are short-living and very slow to
understand self-realization or spiritual life; they are mostly unfortunate,
and therefore if someone is a little bit interested in self-realization he is
likely to be misguided by so many frauds. The only way to realize the per-
fect stage of yoga is to follow the principles of Bhagavad-gita as practiced
by Lord Caitanya. This is the simplest and highest perfection of yoga
practice. Lord Caitanya demonstrated this Krsna consciousness yoga system
in a practical manner simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna, as pre-
scribed in the Vedanta, Srimad-Bhagavatam, Bhagavad-gita, and many
important Puranas.

The largest number of Indians follow this yoga process, and in the United
States it is gradually spreading in many cities. It is very easy and practical
for this age, especially for those who are serious about success in yoga. No
other process of yoga can be successful in this age. The meditation process
was possible in the golden age of Satya-yuga because people in that age
used to live for hundreds of thousands of years. If one wants success in prac-
tical yoga practice, it is advised that he take to the chanting of Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare, and he will actually feel himself making progress. In Bhagavad-
gita this practice of Krsna consciousness is prescribed as raja-vidya, or the
king of all erudition.

Those who have taken to this most sublime bhakti-yoga system, who
practice devotional service in transcendental love of Krsna, can testify to
its happy and easy execution. The four sages Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana
and Sanat-kumara also became attracted by the features of the Lord and
the transcendental aroma of the dust of His lotus feet, as already described
in verse 43.

Yoga necessitates controlling the senses, and bhakti-yoga, or Krsna
consciousness, is the process of purifying the senses. When the senses are
purified, they are automatically controlled. One cannot stop the activities
of the senses by artificial means, but if one purifies the senses by engaging


--- Page 292 ---
626 Srimad-Bhigavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
in the service of the Lord, the senses can not only be controlled from
rubbish engagement, but they can be engaged in the Lord’s transcendental
service, as aspired to by the four sages Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana and
Sanat-kumara. Krsna consciousness is not, therefore, a manufactured
concoction of the speculative mind. It is the process enjoined in Bhagavad-
gita: man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yajt mam namaskuru. (Bg. 9.34)
TEXT 46
कुमारा ऊचुः
S me?
योऽन्तर्हितो हदि गतोऽपि दुरात्मनां त्वं
A
SGT नो नयनमूलमनन्त राद्ध; |
যন कर्णविवरेण गुहां गतो नः
ित्रालुदणितरहा भवदुद्धवेन BEI
kumara acuh
yo’ntarhito hrdi gato’pi duratmanarm tvarn
so’dyaiva no nayana-mualam ananta raddhah
yarhy eva karna-vivarena guhari gato nah
pitranuvarpita-raha bhavad-udbhavena
kumarah ६८५१ -111€ Kumaras said; yah—lle who; antarhitah—not mani-
fested; hrdi—in the heart;gatah—is seated; api—even though; duratmanam—
to the rascals; tvam—You; sah—He;adya—today; eva—certainly ;nah—of us;
nayana-mulam—face to face; ananta—O unlimited one; raddhah —attained;
yarhi—when; eva—certainly; karpa-vivarena—through the ears; guham—
intelligence; gatah—have attained; nah —our; pitra—by our father; anuvar-
nita—described; rahah— mysteries; bhavat-udbhavena—by Your appearance.
TRANSLATION
The Kumaras said: Our dear Lord, You are not manifested to rascals,
even though You are seated within the heart of everyone. But as far as we
are concerned, we see You face to face, although You are unlimited. The
statements we have heard about You from our father, Brahma, through
the ears have now been actually realized by Your kind appearance.
PURPORT
The so-called yogis who concentrate their mind or meditate upon the
impersonal or void are described here. This verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam
describes persons who are expected to be very expert yogis engaged in
meditation but who do not find the Supreme Personality of Godhead who


--- Page 293 ---
Text 47] Description of the Kingdom of God 627
is seated within the heart. These persons are described here as duratma,
which means a person who has a very crooked heart, or a less intelligent
person, just opposite to a mehatma, which means one who has a broad
heart. Those so-called yogis who, although engaged in meditation, are not
broad-hearted cannot find the four-handed Narayana form, even though
He is seated within their hearts. Although the first realization of the Su-
preme Absolute Truth is impersonal Brahman, one should not remain
satisfied with experiencing the impersonal effulgence of the Supreme Lord.
In the ISopanisad also, the devotee prays that the glaring effulgence of
Brahman may be removed from his eyes so that he can see the real person-
al feature of the Lord and thus satisfy himself fully. Similarly, although
the Lord is not visible in the beginning because of His glaring bodily
effulgence, if a devotee sincerely wants to see Him, the Lord is revealed to
him. It is said in Bhagavad-gita that the Lord cannot be seen by our imper-
fect eyes, He cannot be heard by our imperfect ears, and He cannot be
experienced by our imperfect senses; but if one engages in devotional
service with faith and devotion, then God reveals Himself.

Here the four sages Sanat-kumara, Sanatana, Sanandana, and Sanaka
are described as actually sincere devotees. Although they had heard from
their father, Brahma, about the personal feature of the Lord, only the im-
personal feature—Brahman—was revealed to them. But because they were
sincerely searching for the Lord, they finally saw His personal feature di-
rectly, which corresponded with the description given by their father. They
thus became fully satisfied. Here they express their gratitude that although
they were foolish impersonalists in the beginning, by the grace of the Lord
they could now have the good fortune to see His personal feature. Another
significant aspect of this verse is that the sages describe their experience of
hearing from their father, Brahma, who was born of the Lord directly. In
other words, the disciplic succession from the Lord to Brahma and from
Brahma to Narada and from Narada to Vyasa, and so on, is accepted here.
Because the Kumaras were sons of Brahma, they had the opportunity to
learn Vedic knowledge from the disciplic succession of Brahma, and
therefore, in spite of their impersonalist beginnings, they became, in the
end, direct seers of the personal feature of the Lord.

TEXT 47
.
dai विदाम भगवन्‌ परमात्मतच्वं
सस्वेन Fey रतिं रचयन्तमेषाम्‌ ।
-
तत्तेऽनुतापविदितद्ढमक्तियोगे-
रुदरन्थयो हदि fgg विरागा॥७७॥


--- Page 294 ---
628 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
tam tvari vidama bhagavan param atma-tattvam
sattvena samprati ratim racayantam esam
yat te’nutapa-viditair drdha-bhakti-yogair
udgranthayo hrdi vidur munayo viragah

tam— Him; tvam— You; vidama—we know; bhagavan—O Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead; param—the Supreme; atma-tattvam— Absolute Truth;
sattvena—by Your form of pure goodness; samprati—now; ratim—love of
God; racayantam—creating; esam—of all of them; yat— which; te— Your;
anutapa—mercy; viditaih —understood; drdha—unflinching; bhakti-yogaih—
through devotional service; udgranthayah—without attachment, free from
material bondage; hrdi—in the heart; viduhi—understood; munayah—great
sages; viragali—not interested in material life.

TRANSLATION

We know that You are the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of
Godhead, who manifests His transcendental form in the uncontaminated
mode of pure goodness. This transcendental eternal form of Your
personality can be understood only by Your mercy, through unflinching
devotional service, by great sages whose hearts have been purified in the
devotional way.

PURPORT

The Absolute Truth can be understood in three features—impersonal
Brahman, localized Paramatma, and Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Here it is admitted that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the last word in understanding the Absolute Truth. Even though the four
Kumaras were instructed by their great learned father, Brahma, they
could not actually understand the Absolute Truth. They could only under-
stand the Supreme Absolute Truth when they personally saw the
Personality of Godhead with their own eyes. In other words, if one sees or
understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the other two features
of the Absolute Truth—namely impersonal Brahman and localized Param-
atma—are also automatically understood. Therefore the Kumaras confirm:
“You are the ultimate Absolute Truth.” The impersonalist may argue that
since the Supreme Personality of Godhead was so nicely decorated, He is
therefore not the Absolute Truth. But here it is confirmed that all the
variegatedness of the absolute platform is constituted of suddha-sattva,
pure goodness. In the material world, any quality—goodness, passion or
ignorance—is contaminated. Even the quality of goodness here in the
material world is not free from tinges of passion and ignorance. But in the
transcendental world, only pure goodness, without any tinge of passion or


--- Page 295 ---
Text 48] Description of the Kingdom of God 629
ignorance, exists; therefore the form of the Supreme Personality of God-
head and His variegated pastimes and paraphernalia are all pure sattva-
guna. Such variegatedness in pure goodness is exhibited eternally by the
Lord for the satisfaction of the devotee. The devotee does not want to
see the Supreme Personality of Absolute Truth in voidness or impersonal-
ism. In one sense, absolute transcendental variegatedness is meant only for
the devotees, not for others, because this distinct feature of transcendental
variegatedness can be understood only by the mercy of the Supreme Lord
and not by mental speculation or the ascending process. It is said that one
can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead when he is even
slightly favored by Him; otherwise, without His mercy, a man may specu-
late for thousands of years and not understand what is actually the Abso-
lute Truth. This mercy can be perceived by the devotee when he is com-
pletely freed from contamination. It is stated, therefore, that only when all
contamination is rooted out and the devotee is completely detached from
material attractions can he receive this mercy of the Lord.
TEXT 48
নি ९
नात्यन्तिकं विगणयन्त्यपि ते प्रसादं
. Ey
किम्बन्यदपितभयं Frew |
येऽङ्ग त्वद्ङधधिश्षरणा भवतः कथायाः
¢. रै,
कीतन्यतीथ यशसः कुशला रसज्ञाः ॥४८॥
natyantikari viganayanty api te prasadam
kimv anyad arpita-bhayanm bhruva unnayais te
ye ‘nga tvad-anghri-sarapa bhavatah kathayah
kirtanya-tirtha-yasasah kusala rasa-jiiah

na—nolt; atyantikam—liberation; vigapayanti—care for; api—even;
te—those; prasadam—benedictions; kimu—what to speak; anyat—other
material happinesses; arpita—given; bhayam—fearfulness; bhruvah— of the
eyebrows; unnayaili—by the raising; te— Your; ye—those devotees; anga—
O Supreme Personality of Godhead; tvat— Your; anghri—lotus feet;
sarapah—who have taken shelter; bhavatah— Your; kathayah—narrations;
kirtanya— worth chanting; tirtha—pure; yasasah—glories; kusalah —very ex-

pert; rasa-jiiah —knowers of the mellows or humors.

TRANSLATION

Persons who are very expert and most intelligent in understanding things
as they are engage in hearing narrations of the auspicious activities and


--- Page 296 ---
630 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
pastimes of the Lord, which are worth chanting and worth hearing. Such
persons do not care even for the highest material benediction, namely
liberation, to say nothing of other less important benedictions like the
material happiness of the heavenly kingdom.
PURPORT

The transcendental bliss enjoyed by devotees of the Lord is completely
different from the material happiness enjoyed by less intelligent persons.
The less intelligent persons in the material world are engaged by the four
principles of benediction called dharma, artha, kama and moksa. Generally
they prefer to take to religious life to achieve some material benedictien,
the purpose of which is to satisfy the senses. When, by that process, they
become confused or frustrated in fulfilling the maximum amount of sense
enjoyment, they try to become one with the Supreme, which is, according
to their conception, mukti, or liberation. There are five kinds of liberation,
the least important of which is called sayujya, to become one with the
Supreme. Devotees don’t care for such liberation because they are actually
intelligent. Nor are they inclined to accept any of the other four kinds of
liberation, namely to live on the same planet as the Lord, to live with Him
side by side as an associate, to have the same opulence, and to attain the
same bodily features. They are concerned only with glorifying the Supreme
Lord and His auspicious activities. Pure devotional service is sravapam
kirtanam. Pure devotees, who take transcendental pleasure in hearing and
chanting the glories of the Lord, do not care for any kind of liberation;
even if they are offered the five liberations, they refuse to accept them, as
stated in the Bhagavatam in the Third Canto. Materialistic persons aspire
for the sense enjoyment of heavenly pleasure in the heavenly kingdom, but
devotees reject such material pleasure at once. The devotee does not even
care for the post of Indra. A devotee knows that any pleasurable material
position is subject to be annihilated at a certain point. Even if one reaches
the post of Indra, Candra, or any other demigod, he must be dissolved at
a certain stage. A devotee is never interested in such temporary pleasure.
From Vedic scriptures it is understood that sometimes even Brahma and
Indra fall down, but a devotee in the transcendental abode of the Lord
never falls. This transcendental stage of life, in which one feels transcen-
dental pleasure in hearing the Lord’s pastimes, is also recommended by
Lord Caitanya. When Lord Caitanya was talking with Ramananda Raya,
there were varieties of suggestions offered by Ramananda regarding
spiritual realization, but Lord Caitanya rejected all but one—that one
should hear the glories of the Lord in association with pure devotees. That


--- Page 297 ---
Text 49] Description of the Kingdom of God 631
is acceptable for everyone, especially in this age. One should engage him-
self in hearing from pure devotees about the activities of the Lord. That is
considered the supreme benediction for mankind.
TEXT 49
न
कामं भवः खट़जिनेर्निरयेषु नः स्ता-
चेतोऽलिवद्यदि चु ते पद्यो रमेव ।
वाक नस्तलसिवयदि dss fir
पूर्येत ते गुणगणेयदि कणरन्धः ॥४९॥
प्राव! bhavah sva-vjinair nirayesu nah stac
ceto ’livad yadi nu te padayo rameta
vacas ca nas tulasivad yadi te ’righri-Sobhah
puryeta te guna-ganair yadi karna-randhrah

kamam—as much as deserved; bhavah—birth; sva-vrjinaih—by our own
sinful activities; nirayesu—in low births; nah—our; stat—let it be; cetah—
minds; alivat—like bees; yadi—if; nu—may be; te—Y our; padayoh—at Your
lotus feet; rameta—are engaged; vacah—words; ca—and; nah—our; tulasivat—
like the tulast leaves; yadi—if; te—Your; anghri—at Your lotus feet; Sobhah—
beautified; puryeta—are filled; te—Y our; guna-ganaih—by transcendental
qualities; yadi—if; karpa-randhrah—the holes of the ears.

TRANSLATION

O Lord, we pray that You let us be born in any hellish condition of life,
just as long as our hearts and minds are always engaged in the service of
Your lotus feet, our words are made beautiful [by speaking of Your
activities] just as tulasi leaves are beautified when offered unto Your lotus
feet, and as long as our ears are always filled with the chanting of Your
transcendental qualities.

PURPORT

The four sages now offer their humility to the Personality of Godhead
because of their having been haughty in cursing two other devotees of the
Lord. Jaya and Vijaya, the two doorkeepers who checked them from enter-
ing the Vaikuntha planet, were certainly offenders, but, as Vaisnavas, the
four sages should not have cursed them in anger. After the incident, they
become conscious that they had done wrong by cursing the devotees of
the Lord, and they prayed to the Lord that even in the hellish condition of


--- Page 298 ---
632 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 15
life their minds might not be distracted from the engagement of service to
the lotus feet of Lord Narayana. Those who are devotees of the Lord are
not afraid of any condition of life, provided there is constant engagement
in the service of the Lord. It is said of the narayana-para, or those who are
devotees of Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, na kuto na
bibhyati. They are not afraid of entering a hellish condition, for since they
are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, heaven or hell
is the same for them. In material life both heaven and hell are one and the
same because they are material; in either place there is no engagement in
the Lord’s service. Therefore those who are engaged in the service of the
Lord see no distinction between heaven and hell; it is only the materialists
who prefer one to the other.

These four devotees prayed to the Lord that although they might go to
hell because they had cursed devotees, they might not forget the service of
the Lord. The transcendental loving service of the Lord is performed in
three ways—with the body, with the mind and with words. Here the sages
pray that their words may always be engaged in glorifying the Supreme
Lord. One may speak very nicely with ornamental language or one may be
expert at controlled grammatical presentation, but if one’s words are not
engaged in the service of the Lord, they have no flavor and no actual use.
The example is given here of tulast leaves. The tulast leaf is very useful even
from the medicinal or antiseptic point of view. It is considered sacred and
is offered to the lotus feet of the Lord. The tulasi leaf has numerous good
qualities, but if it were not offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, tulast
could not be of much value or importance. Similarly, one may speak very
nicely from the rhetorical or grammatical point of view, which may be very
much appreciated by a materialistic audience, but if one’s words are not
offered to the service of the Lord, they are useless. The holes of the ears
are very small and can be filled with any insignificant sound, so how can
they receive as great a vibration as the glorification of the Lord? The
answer is that the holes of the ears are like the sky. As the sky can never
be filled up, the quality of the ear is such that one may go on pouring in
vibrations of various kinds, yet it is capable of receiving more and more
vibration. A devotee is not afraid of going to hell if he has the opportunity
to hear the glories of the Lord constantly. This is the advantage of chanting
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, [lare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare. One may be put in any condition, but God gives
him the prerogative to chant Hare Krsna. In any condition of life, if one
goes on chanting he will never be unhappy.


--- Page 299 ---
Text 50] Description of the Kingdom of God 633
TEXT 50
प्रादुथकथे यदिदं qe सूपं
+
तेनेश निडेतिमवापुरलं दशो |
तस्मा इदं मगवते नम इदिषेम
योऽनारमनां दुरुदयो WEAF प्रतीतः॥॥५०॥
praduscakartha yad idari puruhuta ruparm
tenesa nirvrtim avapur alariv drso nah
tasma 10011) bhagavate nama id vidhema
yo’natmanan durudayo bhagavan pratitah
praduscakartha—Y ou have manifested; yat—which; idam—this; puru-
huta—greally worshiped; rupam—eternal form; tena—by that form;ise—0O
Lord; nirvrtim—satisfaction; avapuh—obtained; alam—so much; dréah—
vision; nah—our; tasmai—unto Him; idam—this; bhagavate—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead;namah—obeisances;it—only ; vidhema—
let us offer; yah—Who; anatmanam—of those who are less intelligent;
durudayah—cannot be seen; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; pratitah —has been seen by us.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, we therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto Your eternal
form as the Personality of Godhead which You have so kindly manifested
before us. Your supreme eternal form cannot be seen by unfortunate, less
intelligent persons, but we are so much satisfied in our mind and vision to
see it.
PURPORT
The four sages were impersonalists in the beginning of their spiritual life,
but afterwards, by the grace of their father and spiritual master, Brahma,
they understood the eternal spiritual form of the Lord and felt completely
satisfied. In other words, the transcendentalists who aspire to the imper-
sonal Brahman or localized Paramatma are not fully satisfied and still
hanker for more. Even if they are satisfied in their minds, still, transcen-
dentally, their eyes are not satisfied. But as soon as such persons come to
realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are satisfied in all
respects. In other words, they become devotees and want to see the form
of the Lord continually. It is confirmed in the Brahma-sarihita that one who
has developed transcendental love of Krsna by smearing his eyes with the


--- Page 300 ---
634 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 3, Ch. 15
ointment of love sees constantly the eternal form of the Lord. The partic-
ular word used in this connection, anatmanam, signifies those who have
no control over the mind and senses and who therefore speculate and want
to become one with the Lord. Such persons cannot have the pleasure of
seeing the eternal form of the Lord. For the impersonalists and the so-called
yogis, the Lord is always hidden by the curtain of yoge-maya. Bhagavad-
gita says that even when Lord Krsna was seen by everyone while He was
present on the surface of the earth, the impersonalist and the so-called
yogis could not see Him because they were devoid of devotional eyesight.
The theory of the impersonalists and so-called yogis is that the Supreme
Lord assumes a particular form when He comes in touch with maya,
although actually He has no form. This very conception of the imperson-
alists and so-called yogis checks them from seeing the Supreme Personality
of Godhead as He is. The Lord, therefore, is always beyond the sight of
such nondevotees. The four sages felt so much obliged to the Lord that
they offered their respectful obeisances unto Him again and again.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Fifteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Description of the Kingdom
of God.”


--- Page 301 ---
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
The Two Doorkeepers of
Vaikuntha, Jaya and Vijaya,
Cursed by the Sages
TEXT 1
बह्मोवाच
इति तद्‌ णतां तेषां श्नीनां योगधर्मिणाम्‌ ।
भ्रतिनन्य जगादेदं बिङ्कण्डनिलयो विश्च; ॥ १॥
brahmovaca
iti tad grpatam tesarn
muninam yoga-dharminam
pratinandya jagadedari
vikuntha-nilayo vibhuh
brahma uvaca—Lord Brahma said; iti—thus; tat—speech; grpatam—prais-
ing; tesam—of them; munin@m—those four sages; yoga-dharminam-engaged
in linking with the Supreme; pratinandya—after congratulating; jagada—
said; idam—these words; vikuntha-nilayah—whose abode is bereft of
anxiety; vibhuh—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose
abode is in the kingdom of God, after congratulating the sages for their
nice words, spoke as follows:
TEXT 2
श्रीभगवाछवात्
एतौ तौ पार्षदौ মহা जयो विजय व च ।
कदर्थीहत्य मां यद्रो बह्टकातामतिक्रमम्‌ NR |
635


--- Page 302 ---
636 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
sri bhagavan wvaca
etau tau parsadau mahyam
Jayo vijaya eva ca
kadarthikrtya mam yad vo
bahv akratam atikramam

sri bhagavan uviaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; etau—these
two; tau—they; parsadan—attendants; mahyam—of Mine; jayah—named
Jaya; vijayah—named Vijaya: eva—certainly; ca—and; kadarthikrtya—by
ignoring; mam—Me; yat—which; vah—against you; bahu—great; akratam—
have committed; atikramam—offense.

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead said: These attendants of Mine, Jaya and
Vijaya by name, have committed a great offense against you because of
ignoring Me.

PURPORT

To commit an offense at the feet of a devotee of the Lord is a great
wrong. Even when a living entity is promoted to Vaikuntha, there is still
the chance that he may commit offenses, but the difference is that when
one is in a Vaikuntha planet, even if by chance one commits an offense,
he is protected by the Lord. This is the remarkable fact in the dealings of
the Lord and the servitor, as seen in the present incident concerning
Jaya and Vijaya. The word atikramam used herein indicates that in
offending a devotee one neglects the Supreme Lord Ilimself.

By mistake the doormen held the sages from entering Vaikunthaloka,
but because they were engaged in the transcendental service of the Lord,
their annihilation was not expected by advanced devotees. The Lord’s
presence on the spot was very pleasing to the hearts of the devotees. The
Lord understood that the trouble was due to His lotus feet not being
seen by the sages, and therefore 116 wanted to please them by personally
going there. The Lord is so merciful that even if there is some impediment
for the devotee, He Ilimself manages matters in such a way that the
devotee is not bereft of having audience at His lotus feet. There is a very
good example in the life of Ilaridasa Thakura. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu
was residing at Jagannatha Puri, Haridasa Thakura, who happened to be
Mohammedan by birth, was with Him. In Hindu temples, especially
in those days, no one but a Hindu was allowed to enter. Although
11914258 Thakura was the greatest of all Hindus in his behavior, he


--- Page 303 ---
Text 4] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 637
considered himself a Mohammedan and did not enter the temple. Lord
Caitanya could understand his humility, and since he did not go to see the
temple, Lord Caitanya Himself, who is nondifferent from Jagannatha,
used to come and sit with Haridasa Thakura daily. Here in Srimad-
Bhagavatam we also find this same behavior of the Lord. His devotees
were prevented from seeing His lotus feet, but the Lord Himself came
to see them on the same lotus feet for which they aspired. It is also
significant that He was accompanied by the goddess of fortune. The
goddess of fortune is not to be seen by ordinary persons, but the Lord
was so kind that although the devotees did not aspire for such an honor,
He appeared before them with the goddess of fortune.
TEXT 3
यस्त्वेतयोर्धैतो दण्डो भवद्धिर्मामयुवतैः।
=
स॒रवानुमठोऽसाभिग॑नयो देवहेटनात्‌ ॥ ३ ॥
yas tv etayor dhrto dando
bhavadbhir mam anuvrataih
sa evanumato ’smabhir
munayo deva-helanat
yah—which; tu—bul; etayoh—regarding both Jaya and Vijaya; dhrtah—
has been given; dandah—punishment; bhavadbhih—by you; mam—Me;
anuvratath—devoted to; sah—that; eva—certainly; anumatah—is approved;
asmabhih—by Me; munayah—O great sages; deva—against you; helanat—be-
cause of an offense.
0 great sages, 1 approve of the punishment that you who are devoted to
Me have meted out to them.
TEXT 4
तद्वः प्रषादयाम्यद्य TW दैवं परं दि A |
तद्धीत्यारमहृतं मन्ये यत्खपुम्भिरसर्कृताः ॥ ४ ॥
tad vah prasadayamy adya
brahma daivam param hi me
tad dhity atma-krtam manye
yat sva-pumbhir asatkrtah


--- Page 304 ---
638 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16

tat—therefore; vah--you sages; prasadayami—1 am seeking your forgive-
ness; adya—just now; brahma—the brahmanas; daivam—most beloved
personalities; param—highest; hi—because; me—My; tat—that offense; hi—
because; iti—thus; atma-krtam—done by Me; manye—!1 consider; yat—
which; sva-pumbhih—by My own attendants; asatkrtah—having been dis-
respected.

TRANSLATION

To Me, the brahmana is the highest and most beloved personality. The
disrespect shown by My attendants has actually been displayed by Me
because the doormen are My servitors. [ take this to be an offense by
Myself; therefore I seek your forgiveness for the incident that has arisen.

PURPORT

The Lord is always in favor of the brahmanas and the cows, and there-
fore it is said, go-brahmana-hitaya ca. Lord Krsna or Visnu, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is also the worshipable Deity of the brahmanas.
In the Vedic literature, in the Rg-mantra hymns of the Rg Veda, it is
stated that those who are actually brahmanas always look to the lotus feet
of Visnu: om tad visnoh paramarm padari sada pasyanti surayah. Those
who are qualified brahmanas worship only the Visnu form of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, which means Krsna, Rama and all Visnu expan-
sions. A so-called brahmana, who is born in the family of brahmanas but
performs activities aimed against the Vaisnavas, cannot be accepted as
a brahmana because brahmana means Vaispava, and Vaisnava means
brahmana. One who has become a devotee of the Lord is also a brahmana.
The formula is brahma janatiti brahmaneh. A brahmana is one who has
understood Brahman, and a Vaisnava is one who has understood the
Personality of Godhead. Brahman realization is the beginning of realization
of the Personality of Godhead. One who understands the Personality of
Godhead also knows the impersonal feature of the Supreme, which is
Brahman. Therefore one who becomes a Vaisnava is already a brahmana.
It should be noted that the glories of the brahmana described in this
chapter by the Lord Himself refer to His devotee brahmana, or the
Vaisnava. It should never be misunderstood that the so-called brahmanas
who are born in brahmana familics but have no brahminical qualifications
are referred to in this connection.

TEXT 5
FEE च गृह्णाति लोको भृत्ये छृतागसि ।
सोऽसाधुवादस्तत्कीर्विं हन्ति त्वचमिवामयः ॥ ৭ ॥


--- Page 305 ---
Text 6] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 639
yan-namani ca grhnati
loko bhrtye krtagasi
so ’sadhu-vadas tat-kirtim
hanti tvacam ivamayah
yat—of whom; namani—the names; ca—and; grhpati—take; lokah—
people in general; bhrtye—when a servant; krtagasi—has committed some-
thing wrong; sah—that; asadhu-vadah—blame; tat—of that person; kirtim—
the reputation; hanti—destroys; tvacam— the skin; iva—as; amayah—leprosy.
TRANSLATION
A wrong act committed by a servant leads people in general to blame
his master, just as a spot of white leprosy on any part of the body pollutes
all of the skin.
PURPORT
A Vaisnava, therefore, should be fully qualified. As stated in the
Bhagavatam, anyone who has become a Vaisnava has developed all the
good qualities of the demigods. There are twenty-six qualifications men-
tioned in the Caitanya-caritamrta. A devotee should always see that his
Vaignava qualities increase with the advancement of his Krsna conscious-
ness. A devotee should be blameless because any offense by the devotee
is a scar on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The devotee’s duty is to
be always conscious in his dealings with others, especially with another
devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 6
यख्ाड्तामलयञ्चःन्नरबणावगाहः
सद्यः पुनाति जगद्‌ खपचाद्िङ्ण्ठः |
सोऽहं मवद्धय उपठव्धसुतीर्थकीति-
श्छिन्यां खबाहुमपि वः प्रतिद्रलघचिम्‌।। ६ ॥
yasyamyrlamala-yasah-sravanavagahah
sadyah punati jagad a svapacad vikunthah
so "ham bhavadbhya upalabdha-sulirtha-kirtis
chindyar sva-bahum api vah pratikula-vritim
yasya—of whom: amrta—nectar; amala—uncontaminated; yasah—glories;
$ravapa—hearing; avagahah—cntering into; sadyah—immediately; punati—
purifies; jagat—the universe; a svapacat—including even the dog-eaters;
vikunthah—without anxiety ; sah —that person; aham—1 am; bhavadbhyah—


--- Page 306 ---
640 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
from you; upalabdha—obtained; sutirtha—the best place of pilgrimage;
kirtih—the fame; chindydm—would cut off; sva-bahum—My own arm; api—
even; vah—towards you; pratikula-vrttim—acting inimically.
TRANSLATION

Anyone in the entire world, even down to the candala who lives by
cooking and eating the tlesh of the dog, is immediately purified if he
takes bath in hearing through the ear the glorification of My name, fame,
etc. Now you have realized Me without doubt; therefore I will not
hesitate to lop off My own arm if its conduct is found hostile to you.

PURPORT

Real purification can take place in human society if its members take
to Krsna consciousness. This is clearly stated in all Vedic literature. Any-
one who takes to Krsna consciousness in all sincerity, even if he is not very
advanced in good behavior, is purified. A devotee can be recruited from
any section of human society, although it is not expected that everyone in
all segments of society is well behaved. As stated in this verse and in many
places in Bhagavad-gita, even if one is not born in a brahmapna family, or
even if he is born in a family of candalas, if he simply takes to Krsna
consciousness he is immediately purified. In Bhagavad-gita, Ninth Chapter,
verses 30-32, it is clearly stated that even though a man is not well
behaved, if he simply takes to Krsna consciousness he is understood to be
a saintly person. As long as a person is in this material world he has two
different relationships in his dealings with others—one relationship pertains
to the body, and another relationship pertains to the spirit. As far as
bodily affairs or social activities are concerned, although a person is
purified on the spiritual platform, it is sometimes seen that he acts in
terms of his bodily relationships. If a devotee born in the family of a
candala (the lowest caste) is sometimes found engaged in his habitual
activities, he is not to be considered a candala. In other words, a Vaisnava
should not be evaluated in terms of his body. In the §astra it states that no
one should think the Deity in the temple to be made of wood or stone,
and no one should think that a person coming from a lower caste family
who has taken to Krsna consciousness is still of the same low caste. These
attitudes are forbidden because anyone who takes to Krsna consciousness
is understood to be fully purified. He is at least engaged in the process of
purification, and if he sticks to the principle of Krsna consciousness he
will very soon be fully purified. The conclusion is that if one takes to


--- Page 307 ---
Text 7] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 641
Krsna consciousness with all seriousness, he is to be understood as already
purified, and Krsna is ready to give him protection by all means. The Lord
assures herein that He is ready to give protection to His devotee even if
there is need to cut off part of His own body.
TEXT 7
यत्सेवया चरणपद्यपविद्रेणुं
सद्यःश्वताखिलमलं Stes |
न श्रीर्विरक्तमपि मां विजहाति यसाः
Trea इतरे नियमान्‌ वहन्ति ॥ ७॥
yat-sevaya carapa-padma-pavitra-refum
sadyah ksatakhila-malam pratilabdha-silam
na $rir viraktam api mam vijahati yasyah
preksa-lavartha itare niyaman vahanti
yat—of whom; sevaya—by the service; carana—feet; padma—Ilotus;
pavitra—sacred; renum—the dust; sedyah—immediately; ksata—wiped out;
akhila—all; malam—sins; pratilabdha— acquired; silam— disposition; na—not;
srii—the goddess of fortune; viraktam—have no attachment; api—even
though; mam—Me; vijahati—leave; yasyah—of the goddess of fortune;
preksa-lava-arthah—for obtaining a slight favor; itare—others, like Lord
Brahma; niyaman—sacred vows; vahanti—observe.
TRANSLATION
The Lord continued: Because I am the servitor of My devotees, My
lotus feet have become so sacred that they immediately wipe out all sin,
and I have acquired such a disposition that the goddess of fortune does
not leave Me, even though I have no attachment for her and others praise
her beauty and observe sacred vows to secure from her even a slight favor.
PURPORT
The relationship between the Lord and His devotee is transcendentally
beautiful. As the devotee thinks that it is due to his being a devotee of the
Lord that he is elevated in all good qualities, so the Lord also thinks that
it is because of His devotion to the servitor that all His transcendental
glories have increased. In other words, as the devotee is always anxious to


--- Page 308 ---
642 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
render service to the Lord, so the Lord is ever anxious to render service to
the devotee. The Lord admits herein that although He certainly has the
quality that anyone who receives a slight particle of the dust of His lotus
feet becomes at once a great personality, this greatness is due to His
affection for His devotee. It is because of this affection that the goddess
of fortune does not leave Him and that not only one but many thousands
of goddesses of fortune engage in His service. In the material world, simply
to get a little favor from the goddess of fortune, people observe so many
rigid regulations of austerity and penance. The Lord cannot tolerate any
inconvenience on the part of the devotee. He is therefore famous as
Bhaktavatsala.
TEXT 8
नाहं तथाग्रि যজমানহবিবিবাল
च्योतदुधृतप्डतयदन्‌ FAITE |
यद्राक्मणस्य ्रखतथरतोऽनुषासं
तटस्य मय्यवहितैर्निजकर्मपाके; || ८ ॥
naham tathadmi yajamana-havir vitane
scyotad-ghrta-plutam adan huta-bhun-mukhena
yad brahmanasya mukhatas carato ‘nughasam
tustasya mayy avahitair nija-karma-pakaih

na—not; aham—1I; tatha—on the other hand; admi—1 eat; yajamana—by
the sacrificer; havih—the oblations; vitane—in the sacrificial fire; scyotat—
pouring; ghrta—ghee; plutam—mixed; adan—eating; huta-bhuk—the sacri-
ficial fire; mukhena—by the mouth; yat—as;brahmanasya— of the brahmana;
mukhatah—from the mouth; caratah— acting; anughasam— morsels; tustas-
ya—satisfied; mayi—to Me; avahitaih— offered; nija—own; karma—activities;
pakaih—by the results.

TRANSLATION

I do not enjoy the oblations offered by the sacrificers in the sacrificial
fire, which is one of My own mouths, with the same relish as I do the
delicacies overflowing with ghee which are offered to the mouths of the
brahmanas who have dedicated to Me the results of their activities and
who are ever satisfied with My prasada.


--- Page 309 ---
Text 9) The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 643
PURPORT
The devotee of the Lord, or the Vaishnava, does not take anything
without offering it to the Lord. Since a # ३1518५३ dedicates all the results
of his activities to the Lord, he does not taste anything eatable which is
not first offered to Him. The Lord also relishes giving to the Vaisnava’s
mouth all eatables offered to Him. It is clear from this verse that the Lord
eats through the sacrificial fire and the brahmana’s mouth. So many
articles—grains, ghee, etc.—are offered in sacrifice for the satisfaction of
the Lord. The Lord accepts sacrificial offerings from the brahmanas
~and devotees, and elsewhere it is stated that whatever is given for the
brahmanas and Vaignavas to eat is also accepted by the Lord. But here it is
said that He accepts offerings to the mouths of brahmanas and Vaisnavas
with even greater relish. The best example of this is found in the life of
AdvaitaPrabhuin his dealings with HaridasaThakura. Even though Haridasa
was born of a Mohammedan family, Advaita Prabhu offered him the first
dish of prasada after the performance of a sacred fire ceremony.
Haridasa Thakura informed him that he was born of a Mohammedan
family and asked why Advaita Prabhu was offering the first dish to a
Mohammedan instead of an elevated brahmana. Out of his humbleness,
Haridasa condemned himself a Mohammedan, but Advaita Prabhu, being
an experienced devotee, accepted him as a real brahmana. Advaita Prabhu
asserted that by offering the first dish to 11381108358 Thakura, he was getting
the result of feeding 100,000 brah mapas. The conclusion is that if one can
feed a brahmana or Vaignava, it is better than performing hundreds of
thousands of sacrifices. In this age, therefore, it is recommended that
harer nama—chanting the holy name of God-and pleasing the Vaisnava,
are the only means to elevate oneself to spiritual life.
TEXT 9
येषां बिमम्य॑दमखण्डविङ्ण्ठयोग-
मायाविभूतिरमलाङ्प्रिरजः fa: |
विप्रास्तु को न विषहेत यदरेणाम्मः
सथः पुनाति सदचन्द्रलठापठोरान्‌ NR
yesam bibharmy aham akhanda-vikunthae-yoga-
maya-vibhutir amalanghri-rajah kirttaih


--- Page 310 ---
644 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3. Ch. 16
viprams tu ko na visaheta yad-arhanambhah
sadyah punati saha-candra-lalama-lokan

yesam—of the brahmanas; bibharmi—1 bear; aham—1; akhanda—un-
broken; vikuntha—unobstructed; yoga-maya—internal energy; vibhutih—
opulence; amala— pure; anghri—of the feet; rajah—the dust; kiritaith— on My
helmet; vipran—the brahmanas; tu—then; kah—who; na—not; visaheta—
carry; yat—of the Supreme Lord; arhapa-ambhah— water which has washed
the feet; sadyah—at once; punati—sanclifies; saha—along with; candra-
lalama— Lord Siva; lokan—the three worlds.

TRANSLATION

I am the master of My unobstructed internal energy, and the water of
the Ganges is the remnant left after My feet are washed. That water
sanctifies the three worlds, along with Lord Siva, who bears it on his head.
If T can take the dust of the feet of the Vaisnava on My head, who will
refuse to do the same?

PURPORT

The difference between the internal and external energies of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is that in the internal energy or in the
spiritual world, all the opulences are undisturbed, whereas in the external
or material energy, all the opulences are temporary manifestations. The
Lord’s supremacy is equal in both the spiritual and material worlds, but
the spiritual world is called the kingdom of God, and the material world is
called the kingdom of maya. Maya refers to that which is not actually fact.
The opulence of the material world is a reflection. It is stated in Bhagavad-
gita that this material world is just like a tree whose rools are up and
branches down. This means that the material world is the shadow of the
spiritual world. Real opulence is in the spiritual world. In the spiritual
world the predominating Deity is the Lord Himself, whereas in the material
world there are many lords. That is the difference between the internal
and external energies. The Lord says that although He is the predominating
factor of the internal energy and although the material world is sanctified
just by the water that has washed His feet, He has the greatest respect for
the brahmana and the Vaisnava. When the Lord Himself offers so much
respect to the Vaisnava and the brahmana, how can one deny respect to
such personalities?


--- Page 311 ---
Text 10] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 645
TEXT 10
यै मे तन्दिजवरान्दुहतीमदीया
भूतान्य्टन्धशरणानि च मेदबुदधया |
द्रष्यन्त्यष्तदशो ्हिमन्यवस्तान्‌
गधा रुषा मम FETA: ॥१०॥
ye me tanur dvija-varan duhatir madiya
bhutany alabdha-saranani ca bheda-buddhya
draksyanty agha-ksata-drso hy ahi-manyavas tan
grdhra rusa mama kugsanty adhidanda-netuh
ye—which persons; me—My; tanuh—body; dvija-varan—the best of the
brahmanas; duhatih—cows; madiyah—relating to Me; bhiitani—living enti-
ties; alabdha-saranani—defenseless; ca—and; bheda-buddhya—considering
as different; draksyanti—see; agha—by sin; ksata—is impaired; drsah—whose
faculty of judgement; hi—because; ahi—like a snake; manyavah—angry;
tan—those same persons; grdhrah—the vulturelike messengers; rusa—angrily;
mama—My; kusanti—tear; adhidanda-netuh—of the superintendent of
punishment, Yamaraja.
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas, the cows and the defenseless creatures are My own
body. Those whose faculty of judgment has been impaired by their own
sin look upon these as distinct from Me. They are just like furious serpents,
and they are angrily torn apart by the bills of the vulturelike messengers
of Yamarija, the superintendent of sinful persons.
PURPORT
The defenseless creatures, according to Brahma-sarmhita, are the cows,
brahmanas, women, children and old men. Of these five, the brahmanas
and cows are especially mentioned in this verse because the Lord is always
anxious about the benefit of the brahmanas and cows and is prayed to in
this way. The Lord especially instructs, therefore, that no one should be
envious of these five, especially the cows and brahmapas. In some of the
Bhagavatam readings, the word duhitrh is used instead of duhatih. Butin
either case, the meaning is the same. Duhatih means cow, and duhitfh can
also be used to mean cow because the cow is supposed to be the daughter


--- Page 312 ---
646 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
of the sun-god. Just as children are taken care of by the parents, women as
a class should be taken care of by the father, husband or grown-up son.
Those who are helpless must be taken care of by their respective guardians,
otherwise the guardians will be subjected to the punishment of Yamaraja,
who is appointed by the Lord to supervise the activities of sinful living
creatures. The assistants or messengers of Yamaraja are likened here to
vultures, and those who do not execute their respective duties in protecting
their wards are compared to serpents. Vultures deal very seriously with
serpents, and similarly the messengers will deal very seriously with neglect-
ful guardians.
TEXT 11
ये ब्राह्मणान्मयि धिया किपतोऽच॑यन्त-
qr: सितसुधोधितपद्मवक्त्राः।
बाप्यानुरागस्छयाऽऽत्मजवद्‌ गृणन्तः
सम्बोषयन्त्यहमिवारघुपाहृतस्तैः 112211
ye brahmanan mayi dhiya ksipato ’rcayantas
tusyad-dhrdah smita-sudhoksita-padma-vaktrah
vapyanuraga-kalayatmajavad grpantah
sambodhayanty aham ivaham updhrtas taih

ye—which persons; brahmanan—the brahmanas; mayi—in Me; dhiya—
with intelligence; ksipatah—uttering harsh words; arcayantah—respecting;
tusyat—gladdened; hrdah—hearts; smita—smiling; sudha—nectar; uksita—
wet; padma—Ilotuslike;vaktrah—faces;vanya— with words; anuraga-kalaya—
loving; atmajavat—like a son; grnantah— praising; sambodhayanti— pacify;
aham—1; iva—as; aham—1; upahrtah—being controlled; tath—by them.

TRANSLATION

On the other hand, they captivate My heart who are gladdened in
heart and who, their lotus faces enlightened by nectarean smiles, respect
the brahmanas, even though they utter harsh words. They look upon the
brahmanas as My own Self and pacify them by praising them in loving
words, even as a son would appease an angry father or as I am pacifying
you.


--- Page 313 ---
Text 12] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 647
PURPORT
It has been observed in many instances in the Vedic scriptures that
when the brahmanas or Vaisnavas curse someone in an angry mood, the
person who is cursed does not take it upon himself to treat the brah manas
or Vaignavas in the same way. There are many examples of this. For
instance, the sons of Kuvera, when they were cursed by the great sage
Narada, did not seek revenge in the same harsh way, but submitted. Here
also, when Jaya and Vijaya were cursed by the four Kumaras, they did not
become harsh towards them; rather, they submitted. That should be the
way of treating brahmanas and Vaisnavas. One may sometimes be faced
with a grievous situation created by a brahmana, but instead of meeting
him with a similar mood, one should try to pacify him with a smiling
face and mild treatment. Brahmanas and Vaisnavas should be accepted as
earthly representatives of Narayana. Nowadays some foolish persons have
manufactured the term “daridra-narayana,” indicating that the poor man
should be accepted as the representative of Narayana. But in Vedic
literature we do not find that poor men should be treated as representa-
tives of Narayana. Of course, “those who are unprotected’ are mentioned
here, but the definition of this phrase is clear from the sastras. The poor
man should not be unprotected, but the brahmana should especially be
treated as the representative of Narayana and should be worshiped like
Him. It is specifically said that to pacify the brahmanas, one’s face should
be lotuslike. A lotuslike face is exhibited when one is adorned with love
and affection. In this respect, the example of the father’s being angry at
the son and the son’s trying to pacify the father with smiling and sweet
words is very appropriate.
TEXT 12
तन्मे खभतरसायमलक्षमाणौ
युष्पद्च्यतिकमगति प्रतिपद सयः |
भूयो ममान्तिकमितां तदनुग्रहो मे
यत्कर्पतामविरतो aE: 1 १२॥
tan me sva-bhartur avasayam alaksamanau
yusmad-vyatikrama-gatim pratipadya sadyah
01810 mamantikam itam tad anugraho me
yat kalpatam acirato bhrtayor vivasah


--- Page 314 ---
648 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 16

tat—therefore; me—My; sva-bhartuh—of their master; avasayam—the
intention; alaksamanau—not knowing; yusmat—against you; vyatikrama—
offense; gatim—result; pratipadya—reaping;sadyah—immediately; bhuyah—
again; mama antikam—near Me; itam—obtain; tat—that; anugrahah—a
favor; me—to Me; yat—which; kalpatam—let it be arranged; aciratah—
not long; bhrtayoh—of these two servants; vivasah—exile.

TRANSLATION

These servants of Mine have transgressed against you, not knowing the
mind of their master. I shall therefore deem it a favor done to Me if you
order that, although reaping the fruit of their transgression, they may
return to My presence soon and the time of their exile from My abode
may expire before long.

PURPORT

From this statement we can understand how anxious the Lord is to get
his servitor back into Vaikuntha. This incident, therefore, proves that
those who have once entered a Vaikuntha planet can never fall down. The
case of Jaya and Vijaya is not a falldown; it is just an accident. The 1,010
is always anxious to get such devotees back again to the Vaikuntha
planets as soon as possible. It is to be assumed that there is no possibility
of a misunderstanding between the Lord and the devotees but when there
are discrepancies or disruptions between one devotee and another, one has
to suffer the consequences, although that suffering is temporary. The Lord
is so kind to His devotees that He took all the responsibility for the
doormen’s offense and requested the sages to give them facilities to return
10 Vaikuntha as soon as possible.

TEXT 13
- TEA
अथ तस्योशतीं JERE सरखतीम्‌ ।
नाखादय मन्युदष्टानां ARATE ॥१२॥
brahmovaca
atha tasyosatim devim
rsi-kulyarh sarasvatim
nasvadya manyu-dastanar
tesam atmapy atrpyata


--- Page 315 ---
Text 14] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 649
brahma— Lord Brahma; uvaca—said; atha—now; tasya—of the Supreme
Lord; usatim—lovely; devim—shining; rsi-kulyam—like a series of Vedic
hymns; sarasvatim—speech; na—not;asvadya—hearing; manyu—anger; das-
tanam—bitten; tesam—of those sages; atma—the mind; api—even though;
atrpyata—satiated.
TRANSLATION
Brahma continued: Even though the sages had been bitten by the
serpent of anger, their souls were not satiated with hearing the Lord’s
lovely and illuminating speech, which was like a series of Vedic hymns.
TEXT 14
सतीं व्यादाय श््वन्तो Fei गुवर्थगह्राम्‌ |
दिगाद्यागाधगम्यीरां न पिदुस्तशिकीरषितम्‌ ॥१४॥
satim vyadaya srnvanto
laghvim gurv-artha-gahvaram
vigahyagadha-gambhirarm
na vidus tac-ciktrsitam
sattim—excellent; vyadaya—with attentive aural reception; srpvantah—
hearing; laghvim—properly composed; guru—momentous; artha—import;
gahvaram— difficult to understand; vigahya—pondering; agadha—deep;
gambhiram—grave; na—not; viduh—understand; tat—of the Supreme Lord;
cikirsitam—the intention.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s excellent speech was difficult to comprehend because of its
momentous import and its most profound significance. The sages heard
it with wide open ears and pondered it as well. But although hearing, they
could not understand what He intended to do.
PURPORT
It should be understood that no one can surpass the Supreme Personality
of Godhead’s speaking. There is no difference between the Supreme Person
and His speeches, for He stands on the absolute platform. The sages tried
with wide open ears to understand the words from the lips of the Supreme
Lord, but although His speech was very concise and meaningful, the sages


--- Page 316 ---
650 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
could not completely comprehend what He was saying. They could not
even comprehend the purport of the speech or what the Supreme Lord
wanted to do. Nor could they understand whether the Lord was angry or
pleased with them.
TEXT 15
ते योगणायथाञऽरन्यपारयेष्ठथपहोदयम्‌ |
प्रोचुः AHSAN विप्राः प्रहृष्टाः क्षुमितत्यचः।॥१५॥
te yoga-mayayarabdha-
paramesthya-mahodayam
procuh praiijalayo viprah
prahrstah ksubhita-tvacah

te—those; yoga-mayaya—through His internal potency; arabdha—had
been revealed; paramesthya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
mahd-udayam—multi-glories; procuh—spoke; prafijalayah—with folded
hands; viprah—the four brahmanas; prahrstah—extremely delighted;
ksubhita-tvacah—hair standing on end.

TRANSLATION

The four brahmana sages were nevertheless extremely delighted to
behold Him, and they experienced a thrill throughout their bodies. They
then spoke as follows to the Lord, who had revealed the multi-glories of
the Supreme Personality through His internal potency, yogamaya.

PURPORT

The sages were almost too puzzled to speak before the Supreme
Personality of Godhead for the first time, and the hairs of their bodies
stood erect due to their extreme joy. The highest opulence in the material
world is called paramesthya, the opulence of Brahma. But that material
opulence of Brahma, who lives on the topmost planet within this
material world, cannot compare to the opulence of the Supreme Lord
because the transcendental opulence in the spiritual world is caused
by yogamaya, whereas the opulence in the material world is caused by
mahamaya.


--- Page 317 ---
The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 651
TEXT 16
क्षय FI?
न बयं भगवन्‌ दिग्मस्तव देव चिकीर्षितम्‌ ।
कृतो मेऽनुग्रहश्चेति यदध्यक्षः प्रभाषसे ॥१६॥
rsaya ucuh
na vaya bhagavan vidmas
tava deva cikirsitam
krto me ’nugrahas ceti
yad adhyaksah prabhasase
rsayah—the sages; iucuh—said;na—not;vayam—we; bhagavan—O Supreme
Personality of Godhead; vidmah—did know; tava—Y our; deva—O Lord;
cikirsitam—wish for us to do; krtah—has been done; me—unto Me; anu-
grahah—favor; ca—and; iti—thus; yat—which; adhyaksah—the supreme
ruler; prabhasase—Y ou say.
TRANSLATION
The sages said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, we are unable to
know what You intend for us to do, for even though You are the supreme
ruler of all, You speak in our favor as if we have done something good for
You.
PURPORT
The sages could understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is above everyone, was speaking as if He were in the wrong; therefore
it was difficult for them to understand the words of the Lord. They could
understand, however, that the Lord was speaking in such a humble way
just to show them His all-merciful favor.
TEXT 17
जह्मण्यस्य परं दैवं ब्राह्मणाः किठ ते प्रमो ।
दिप्राणां देवदेवानां मगानात्पदेदतय्‌ 12S |
brahmanyasya 407 व07४0772
brahmanah kila te prabho
৮170172৫027 deva-devanam
bhagavan atma-daivatam


--- Page 318 ---
652 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16

brahmanyasya—of the Supreme director of the brahminical culture;
param—the highest; daivam—position; brahmanah—the brahmanas; kila—
for the teaching of others; te—Your; prabho—O Lord; viprapam—of the
brahmanas; deva-devanam—to be worshiped by the demigods; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atma—the self; daivatam—worship-
able Deity.

TRANSLATION

0 Lord, You are the supreme director of the brahminical culture. Your
considering the brahmanas to be in the highest position is Your example
for teaching others. Actually You are the supreme worshipable Deity, not
only for the gods but for the brahmanas also.

PURPORT

In the Brahma-sarhita it is clearly stated that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is the cause of all causes. There are undoubtedly many
demigods, the chiefs of whom are Brahma and Siva. Lord Visnu is the
Lord of Brahma and Siva, not to speak of the brahmanas who are in this
material world. As mentioned in Bhagavad-gita, the Supreme Lord is very
favorable towards all activities performed according to brahminical culture,
or the qualities of control of the senses and mind, cleanliness, forbearance,
faith in scripture, and practical and theoretical knowledge. The 1,010 is the
Supersoul of everyone. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that the Lord is the
source of all emanations; thus He is also the source of Brahma and Siva.

TEXT 18
त्वत्तः सनातनो धर्मो रक्ष्यते age ।
धस्य परमो गुदो निर्विकारो भवान्मतः ॥१८॥
tvattah sanatano dharmo
raksyate tanubhis tava
dharmasya paramo guhyo
nirvikaro bhavan matah

tvattah—from You; sanatanah—eternal; dharmah—occupation; raksyate—
is protected; tanubhih—by multi-manifestations; tava—Y our; dharmasya—
of religious principles; paramah—the supreme; guhyah—objective; nirvi-
karah—unchangeable; bhavan—Y ou; matah—in our opinion.


--- Page 319 ---
Text 19] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 653
TRANSLATION

You are the source of the eternal occupation of all living entities, and
by Your multi-manifestations of Personalities of Godhead, You have
always protected religion. You are the supreme objective of religious
principles, and in our opinion You are inexhaustible and unchangeable
eternally.

PURPORT

The statement in this verse dharmasya paramo guhyo refers to the most
confidential part of all religious principles. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita. The conclusion of Lord Krsna in His advice to Arjuna is: “Give up all
other religious engagement and just surrender unto Me.” This is the most
confidential knowledge in executing religious principles. In the Bhagavatam
also it is stated that if one does not become Krsna conscious after very
rigidly executing one’s specified religious duties, all his labor in following
so-called religious principles is simply a waste of time. Here also the sages
confirm the statement that the Supreme Lord, not the demigods, is the
ultimate goal of all religious principles. There are many foolish propa-
gandists who say that worship of the demigods is also a way to reach the
supreme goal, but in the authorized statements of Srimad-Bhagavatam and
Bhagavad-gita this is not accepted. Bhagavad-gita says that one who
worships a particular demigod can reach the demigod’s planet, but one who
worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead can enter into Vaikuntha.
Some propagandists say that regardless of what one does he will ultimately
reach the supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, but this is not
valid. The Lord is eternal, the L.ord’s servitor is eternal, and the Lord’s
abode is also eternal. They are all described here as sanatana, or eternal.
The result of devotional service, therefore, is not temporary, as is the
achievement of heavenly planets by worshiping the demigods. The sages
wanted to stress that although the Lord, out of His causeless mercy, says
that He worships the brahmanas and Vaisnavas, actually the Lord is
worshipable not only by the brahmanas and Vaisnavas but also by the
demigods.

TEXT 19
तरन्ति शञ्जसा मृत्युं fr यदनुग्रहात्‌ ।
योगिनः स भवान्‌ किखिद्ुगुदयेत यत्परैः ne


--- Page 320 ---
654 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
taranti hy afijasa mrtyum
nivrtta yad-anugrahat
yoginah sa bhavan kim svid
anugrhyeta yat paraih
taranti—cross over; hi—because; afijasa—easily; mrtyum—Dbirth and death;
nivrttah—ceasing all material desires; yat—Your; anugrahat—by mercy;
yoginah—transcendentalists; sah—the Supreme Lord; bhavan—You; kim
svit—never possible; anugrhyeta—may be favored; yat—which; paraih—by
others.
TRANSLATION
Mystics and transcendentalists, by the mercy of the Lord, cross beyond
nescience by ceasing all material desires. It is not possible, therefore, that
the Supreme Lord can be favored by others.
PURPORT
Unless one is favored by the Supreme Lord, one cannot cross over the
ocean of the nescience of repeated birth and death. Here it is stated that
yogis or mystics cross beyond nescience by the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. There are many kinds of mystics, such as the
karma-yogi, jiana-yogi, dhyana-yogi and bhakti-yogi. The karmis particu-
larly search after the favor of the demigods, the jiianis want to become
one with the Supreme Absolute Truth, and the yogis are satisfied simply
by partial vision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramatma, and
ultimately by oneness with Him. But the bhaktas, the devotees, want to
associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead eternally and serve
Him. It has already been admitted that the Lord is eternal, and those who
want the favor of the Supreme Lord perpetually are also eternal. Therefore
“yogis” here means devotees. By the mercy of the Lord, devotees can
easily pass beyond the nescience of birth and death and attain the eternal
abode of the Lord. The Lord is therefore not in need of another’s favor
because no one is equal to or greater than Him. Actually, everyone needs
the favor of the Lord for successful understanding of his human mission.
TEXT 20
यं वै बिभूतिरुपयात्यदुवेरमन्यै-
रथथिमिः অহিত্তা game: |


--- Page 321 ---
Text 21] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages ` 655
FANE RISA
रोक मधुव्रतपतेरिव कामयाना ॥२०॥
yar vai vibhutir upayaty anuvelam anyair
artharthibhih sva-sirasa dhrta-pada-repuh
dhanyarpitanghri-tulasi-nava-dama-dhamno व
1010077 madhu-vrata-pater iva kamayana

yam—whom; vai—certainly; vibhiitih—Laksmi, the Goddess of Fortune;
upaydti—waits upon; anuvelam—occasionally; anyaih—by others; artha—
material facility; arthibhih—by those who desire; sva-sirasi—on their own
heads; dhrta—accepting; pada—of the feet; renuh—the dust; dhanya—by the
devotees; arpita—offered; anghri—at Your feet; tulasi—of tulasi leaves;
nava—fresh; dama—on the garland; dhamnah—having a place; lokam—the
place; madhu-vrata-pateh—of the king of the bees; iva—like; kamayana—is
anxious to secure.

TRANSLATION

The goddess of fortune, Laksmi, the dust of whose feet is worn on the
head by others, waits upon You, as appointed, for she is anxious to
secure a place in the abode of the king of bees, who hovers on the fresh
wreath of tulasi leaves offered at Your feet by some blessed devotee.

PURPORT :

As previously described, tulast has attained all superior qualities due to
being placed at the lotus feet of the Lord. The comparison made here is
very nice. As the king of bees hovers over the tulast leaves offered to the
lotus feet of the Lord, so Laksmi, the goddess who is sought after by the
demigods, brahmanas, Vaispavas and everyone else, always engages in
rendering service to the lotus feet of the Lord. The conclusion is that no
one can be the benefactor of the Lord; everyone is actually the servant of
the servant of the Lord.

TEXT 21
यस्तां विरिक्तवरितेरनुवर्वयां
नात्याद्रियत्परममागकतप्रसङ्गः ।
स त्वं द्विजायुपथपुण्यरजः पुनीतः
श्रीवत्सलक्ष्म किमगा भगभाजनस्त्वम्‌।।२१॥


--- Page 322 ---
656 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
yas tam vivikta-caritair anuvartamanar
natyadriyat parama-bhagavata-prasangah
sa tvam dvijanupatha-punya-rajah punitah
srivatsa-laksma kim aga bhaga-bhajanas tvam

yah—who; tam—Laksmi; vivikta— completely pure; caritaih— devotional
services; anuvartamanam—serving; na—not;atyadriyat—attached; parama—
the highest; bhagavata— devotees; prasaingah—attached; sah—the Supreme
Lord; tvam—You; dvija— of the brahmanas; anupatha—on the path; punya—
sanctified; rajah—dust; punitah— purified; srivatsa— of Srivatsa; laksma—the
mark; kim—what; agah— You obtained; bhaga—all opulences or all good
qualities; bhajanah—the reservoir; tvam—You.

TRANSLATION

0 Lord, You are exceedingly attached to the activities of Your pure
devotees, yet You are never attached to the goddesses of fortune who
constantly engage in Your transcendental loving service. How can You be
purified, therefore, by the dust of the path traversed by the brahmanas,
and how can You be glorified or made fortunate by the marks of Srivatsa
on Your chest?

PURPORT

It is said in the Brahma-samhita that the Lord is always served by many
hundreds of thousands of goddesses of fortune in His Vaikuntha planet,
yet because of His attitude of renunciation of all opulences, He is not
attached to any one of them. The Lord has six opulences—unlimited
wealth, unlimited fame, unlimited strength, unlimited beauty, unlimited
knowledge and unlimited renunciation. All the demigods and other living
entities worship Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, just to get her favor, yet
the Lord is never attached to her because He can create an unlimited
number of such goddesses for His transcendental service. The goddess of
fortune, Laksmi, is sometimes envious of the tulast leaves which are placed
at the lotus feet of the Lord because they remain fixed there and do not
move, whereas Laksmiji, although stationed by the chest of the Lord,
sometimes has to please other devotees who pray for her favor. Laksmiji
sometimes has to go to satisfy her numerous devotees, but tulasi leaves
never forsake their position, and the Lord therefore appreciates the service
of the tulast more than the service of Laksmi. When the Lord says,
therefore, that it is due to the causeless mercy of the brahmanas that
Laksmiji does not leave Him, we can understand that Laksmiji is attracted


--- Page 323 ---
Text 22] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 657
by the opulence of the Lord, not by the brahmanas’ benedictions upon
Him. The Lord is not dependent on anyone’s mercy for His opulence; He
is always self-sufficient. The Lord’s statement that His opulence is due to
the benediction of the brahmanas and Vaignavas is only to teach others
that they should offer respect to the brahmanas and Vaisnavas, the
devotees of the Lord.
TEXT 22
६.
धर्मख ते मगवतचखियुग त्रिभिः स्वैः
पद्विश्वराचरमिदं द्विजदेवतार्थम्‌ |
লূ सृतं तद्मिघाति रजस्तमथ
सर्वेन नो নৃত্য तुवा निरस्य ॥२२॥
dharmasya te bhagavatas tri-yuga tribhih svaih
padbhis caracaram 10018 dvija-devatartham
nunam bhrtar tad-abhighati rajas tamas ca
sattvena no vara-daya tanuva nirasya
dharmasya— of the personification of all religion; te—of You;bhagavatah—
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tri-yuga—You who are manifest in
all three millenniums; tribhih—by three; svath—Your own; padbhih—
feet; cara-acaram—animate and inanimate; idam—this universe; dvija—
the twice-born; devata—the demigods; artham—for the sake of; nunam—
however; bhrtam—protected; tat—those feet; abhighati—destroying;
rajah—the mode of passion; tamah—the mode of ignorance; ca—and;
sattvena—of pure goodness: nah—unto us; vare-daya—bestowing all bless-
ings; tanuva—by Your transcendental form; nirasya—driving away.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are the personification of all religion. Therefore You
manifest Yourself in three millenniums, and thus You protect this
universe, which consists of animate and inanimate beings. By Your grace,
which is of pure goodness and is the bestower of all blessing, kindly
drive away the elements of rajas and tamas for the sake of the demigods
and twice-born.
PURPORT
The Lord is addressed in this verse as tri-yuga, or one who appears in
three millenniums—namely the Satya, Dvapara and Treta yugas. He is not


--- Page 324 ---
658 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
mentioned as appearing in the fourth millennium, or Kali-yuga. It is
described in Vedic literature that in Kali-yuga He comes as channa-
avatara, or an incarnation, but He does not appear as a manifest incar-
nation. In the other yugas, however, the Lord is a manifest incarnation,
and therefore He is addressed as tri-yuga, or the Lord who appears in
three yugas.

Sridhara Svami describes triyuga as follows: yuga means couple, and
tri means three. The Lord is manifested as three couples by His six
opulences or three couples of opulences. In that way He can be addressed
as triyuga. The Lord is the personality of religious principles. In three
millenniums religious principles are protected by three kinds of spiritual
culture, namely austerity, cleanliness and mercy. The Lord is called
triyuga in that way also. In the age of Kali these three requisites to
spiritual culture are almost absent, but the Lord is so kind that in spite
of Kali-yuga’s being devoid of these three spiritual qualities, He comes and
protects the people of this age in His covered incarnation as Lord
Caitanya. Lord Caitanya is called covered because although He is Krsna
Himself, He presents Himself as a devotee of Krsna, not directly. The
devotees pray to Lord Caitanya, therefore, to eliminate their stock of
passion and ignorance, the most conspicuous assets of this yuga. In the
Krsna consciousness movement one cleanses himself of the modes of
passion and ignorance by chanting the holy name of the Lord, Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, as introduced by Lord Caitanya.

The four Kumaras were cognizant of their situation in the modes of
passion and ignorance because, although in Vaikuntha, they wanted to
curse devotees of the Lord. Since they were conscious of their own weak-
ness, they prayed to the Lord to remove their still existing passion and
ignorance. The three transcendental qualifications, cleanliness, austerity
and mercy, are the qualifications of the twice-born and the demigods.
Those who are not situated in the quality of goodness cannot accept
these three principles of spiritual culture. For the Krsna consciousness
movement, therefore, there are three sinful activities which are prohibited—
namely illicit sex, intoxication, and eating food other than the prasada
offered to Krsna. These three prohibitions are based on the principles of
austerity, cleanliness and mercy. Devotees are merciful because they spare
the poor animals, and they are clean because they are free of contamina-
tion from unwanted foodstuff and unwanted habits. Austerity is
represented by restricted sex life. These principles, indicated by the
prayers of the four Kumaras, should be followed by the devotees who
are engaged in Krsna consciousness.


--- Page 325 ---
Text 23] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 659
TEXT 23
न त्वं दविजो्तमङकलं यदिदात्मगोपं
-
गोपा दषः खर्हणेन EFA |
तरेव नङक्ष्यति शिवस्तव देव पन्था
लोकोऽग्रहीष्यदषभस्य हि तत्प्माणम्‌।।२३॥
na tvam dvijottama-kulam yadi hatma-gopam
gopta vrsah svarhapena sa-siinrtena
tarhy eva nanksyati sivas tava deva pantha
loko ’grahisyad rsabhasya hi tat pramanam
na—not; tvam—You; dvija—of the twice-born;uttama-kulam—the highest
class; yadi—if; ha—indeed; atma-gopam—worthy to be protected by You;
gopta—the protector; vrsah—the best; svarhanena—by worship; sa-siinrtena
—along with mild words; tarhi—then; eva—certainly; nanksyati—
will be lost; §ivali— auspicious; tava— Y our; deva—O Lord; panthah—the path;
lokah—the people in general; agrahisyat—would accept; rsabhasya—of the
best; hi—because; tat—that; pramanam—authority.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, You are the protector of the highest of the twice-born, and if
You do not protect them by offering worship and mild words, then
certainly the auspicious path of worship will be rejected by people in
general, who act on the strength and authority of Your Lordship.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita it is stated by the Lord Himself that the acts and
character of great authorities are followed by people in general. Leaders
of ideal character are therefore needed in society. Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, appeared in this material world just to show the
example of perfect authority, and people have to follow His path. The
Vedic injunction is that one cannot understand the Absolute Truth
simply by mental speculation or logical argument. One has to follow the
authorities. Mahdjano yena gatah sa panthah. Great authorities should be
followed; otherwise, if we simply depend on the scriptures, we are some-
times misled by rascals, or else we cannot understand or follow the
different spiritual injunctions. The best path is to follow the authorities.


--- Page 326 ---
660 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
The four brahmana sages stated that Krsna is naturally the protector of
the cows and brahmanas: go-brahmana-hitaya ca. When Krsna was on
this planet, He set a practical example. He was a cowherd boy, and He
was very respectful to the brahmanas and devotees.

It is also affirmed herein that the brahmanas are the best of the twice-
born. Brahmanas, ksatriyas and vaisyas are all twice-born, but the
brahmanas are the best. When there is a fight between two persons, each
of them protects the upper part of his body—the head, the arms and the
belly. Similarly, for the actual advancement of human civilization, the
best part of the social body, namely the brahmanas, the ksatriyas and
vaisyas (the intelligent class of men, the military class and the mercantile
men) should be given special protection. Protection of the laborers should
not be neglected, but special protection should be given to the upper
orders. Of all classes of men, the brahmanas and the Vaisnavas should be
given special protection. They should be worshiped. When their protection
is performed, it is just like worshiping God. That is not exactly protection;
it is a duty. One should worship the bralimanas and Vaisnavas by offering
them all kinds of endowments and sweet words, and if one has no means
to offer anything, he must at least use sweet words to pacify them. The
Lord personally exhibited this behavior towards the Kumaras.

If this system is not introduced by the leaders, then human civilization
will be lost. When there is no protection and special treatment for persons
who are devotees of the Lord, who are highly intelligent in spiritual life,
then the whole society is lost. The word nanksyati indicates that such a
civilization becomes spoiled and is annihilated. The kind of civilization
recommended is called deva-pathin; which means the royal road of the
demigods. Demigods are supposed to be fully fixed in devotional service
or Krsna consciousness; that is the auspicious path that should be
protected. If the authorities or the leaders of society do not give special
respect to the brahmanas and Vaisnavas and do not offer them not only
sweet words but all facilities, then the path of progress will be lost to
human civilization. The Lord personally wanted to teach this, and there-
fore He offered so much praise to the Kumaras.

TEXT 24
तत्तेऽनभीष्टमिव सखनिधेविंधित्सोः
क्षेमं जनाय निजशक्तिभिरुद्तारेः |
नैतावता त्यधिपतेर्त विश्वमत-
स्तेजः क्षतं त्ववनतस्य स ते विनोद्‌ ॥२४॥


--- Page 327 ---
Text 24] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 661
tat te ‘nabhistam iva sattva-nidher vidhitsoh
ksemar janaya nija-saktibhir uddhrtareh
naitavata tryadhipater bata visva-bhartus
tejah ksatam tv avanatasya sa te vinodah
tat—that destruction of the path of auspiciousness; te—by You;
anabhistam—is not liked; iva—as; sattva-nidhehi—the reservoir of all good-
ness; vidhitsoh—desiring to do; ksemam—good; janaya—for the people in
general; nija-saktibhih—by Your own potencies; uddhrta—destroyed;
areh—Lhe opposite element; na—not; etavata—by this; tryadhipateh— of
the proprietor of the three kinds of creations; bata—O Lord; visva-bhartuh—
the maintainer of the universe; tejah—potency; ksatam—reduced; tu—but;
avanatasya—submissive; sah—that; te—Y our; vinodah—pleasure.
TRANSLATION
Dear Lord, You never want the auspicious path to be destroyed because
You are the reservoir of all goodness. Just to benefit people in general,
You destroy the evil element by Your mighty potency. You are the
proprietor of the three creations and the maintainer of the entire
universe. Therefore Your potency is not reduced by Your submissive
behavior. Rather, by submission You exhibit Your transcendental
pastimes.
PURPORT
Lord Krsna was never reduced in His position by becoming a cowherd
boy or by offering respect to Sudama Brahmauna or to His other devotees
like Nanda Maharaja, Vasudeva, Maharaja Yudhisthira and the Pandavas’
mother, Kunti. Everyone knew that He was the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, yet His behavior was exemplary. The Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha; His form is completely
spiritual, full of bliss and knowledge, and it is eternal. Because the living
entities are His parts and parcels, originally they also belong to the same
quality of eternal form as the Lord, but when they come in contact with
maya, the material potency, due to their forgetfulness their existential
constitution is covered. We should try to understand the appearance of
Lord Krsna in this spirit, as the Kumaras pray to Him. He is eternally a
cowherd boy at Vrndavana, 116 is eternally the leader of the Battle of
Kuruksetra, and He is eternally the opulent prince of Dvaraka and the
lover of the damsels of Vrndavana; all His appearances are meaningful
because they show His real characteristics to the conditioned souls
who have forgotten their relationship with the Supreme Lord. He does


--- Page 328 ---
662 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
everything for their benefit. The force exhibited in the Battle of
Kuruksetra by the desire of Krsna and through the agency of Arjuna
was also necessary because when people become too irreligious, force is
required. Nonviolence in this respect is rascaldom.
TEXT 25
यं वानयोर्दममधीश भवान्‌ fas
धरसि जुवा तदनुमन्महि निर्व्यलीकम्‌ ।
srg वा य उचितो धियतां स दण्डो
येऽनागसौ वयमयुङक्महि किरिविषेण iu
yam vanayor damam adhisa bhavan vidhatte
vrttirh nu va tad anumanmahi nirvyalikam
asmasu va ya ucito dhriyatam sa dando
ye ’nagasau vayam ayunksmahi kilbisena
yam—which; va—or; anayoh—of both of them; damam—punishment;
adhisa—O Lord; bhavan— Your Lordship; vidhatte—awards; vrttim—better
existence; nu—certainly; va—or; tat—that; anumanmahi—we accept;
nirvyalikam—without duplicity; asmasu—to us; va—or; yeh— whichever;
ucitah—is proper; dhriyatam—may be awarded; sah—that; dandah—punish-
ment; ye—who; anagasau—sinless; vayam—we; ayunksmahi—allotted;
kilbisena— with a curse.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, whatever punishment You wish to award to these two
innocent persons or also to us we shall accept without duplicity. We
understand that we have cursed two faultless persons.
PURPORT
The sages, the four Kumaras, now reject their cursing of the two door-
keepers, Jaya and Vijaya, because they are now conscious that persons
who engage in the service of the Lord cannot be at fault at any stage. It is
said that anyone who has implicit faith in the service of the Lord, or who
actually engages in transcendental loving service, has all the good qualities
of the demigods. Therefore, a devotee cannot be at fault. If sometimes it
is found that he is in error by accident or by some temporary arrangement,
that should not be taken very seriously. The cursing of Jaya and Vijaya is


--- Page 329 ---
Text 26] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 663
here repented. Now the Kumaras are thinking in terms of their position in
the modes of passion and ignorance, and they are prepared to accept any
kind of punishment from the Lord. In general, when dealing with devotees,
we should not try to find faults. In Bhagavad-gita also it is confirmed that
the devotee who faithfully serves the Supreme Lord, even if found to
commit a gross mistake, should be considered a sadhu or saintly person.
Due to former habits he may commit some wrong, but because he is
engaged in the service of the Lord, that wrong should not be taken very
seriously.
TEXT 26
श्रीमरायानुवाच
एतौ सुरेतरगतिं प्रतिपद्य सथः
संरम्मसम्भूतसमाण्युवद्धयोगो |
भूयः सकाशघ्चुपयास्यव AY यो वः
হ্যাদী मयैव निमितस्तदमेत विप्राः ।॥२६॥
ও 01108200018 88৫০৫
etau suretara-gatirh pratipadya sadyah
sarmrambha-sambhrta-samadhy-anubaddha-yogau
bhuyah sakasam upayasyata asu yo vah
sapo mayaiva nimitas tad aveta viprah
द bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead replied; etau—
these two doorkeepers; sura-itara—demoniac; gatim—the womb; prati-
padya— obtaining; sadyah—quickly; samrambha—by anger; sambhrta—
intensified; samadhi—concentration of mind; anubaddha—firmly; yogau—
united with Me; bhizyah—again; sakasam—to My presence; upayasyatah—
shall return; asu—shortly; yah— which; vah—of you; sapah— curse; maya—
by Me; eva—alone; nimitah—ordained; tat—that; aveta—know; viprah— O
brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
The Lord replied: O brahmanas, know that the punishment you inflicted

on them was originally ordained by Me, and therefore they will fall to a
birth in a demoniac family. But they will be firmly united with Me in
thought through mental concentration intensified by anger, and they will
return to My presence shortly.


--- Page 330 ---
664 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
PURPORT

The Lord stated that the punishment inflicted by the sages upon the
doorkeepers Jaya and Vijaya was conceived by the Lord Himself. Without
the Lord’s sanction, nothing can happen. It is to be understood that there
was a plan in the cursing of the Lord’s devotees in Vaikuntha, and His plan
is explained by many stalwart authorities. The Lord sometimes desires to
fight. The fighting spirit also exists in the Supreme Lord, otherwise how
could fighting be manifested at all? Because the Lord is the source of
everything, anger and fighting are also inherent in His personality. When
He desires to fight with someone, He has to find an enemy, but in the
Vaikuntha world there is no enemy because everyone is engaged fully in
His service. Therefore He sometimes comes to the material world as an
incarnation in order to manifest His fighting spirit.

In Bhagavad-gita also it is said that the Lord appears just to give
protection to the devotees and to annihilate the nondevotees (Bg. 4.8).
The nondevotees are found in the material world, not in the spiritual
world; therefore, when the Lord wants to fight, He has to come to this
world. But who will fight with the Supreme Lord? No one is able to fight
with Him! Therefore, because the Lord’s pastimes in the material world
are always performed with His associates, not with others, He has to find
some devotee who will play the part of an enemy. In Bhagavad-gita the
Lord says to Arjuna, “My dear Arjuna, both you and I appeared many,
many times in this material world, but you have forgotten, whereas I
remember.” Thus Jaya and Vijaya were selected by the Lord to fight with
Him in the material world, and that was the reason the sages came to see
Him and accidentally the doorkeepers were cursed. It was the Lord’s desire
to send them to the material world, not perpetually; but for some time.
Therefore, just as, on a theatrical stage, someone takes the part of enemy
to the proprietor of the stage although the play is for a short time and
there is no permanent enmity between the servant and the proprietor,
similarly the sura-janas (devotees) were cursed by the sages to go to the
asura-jana or atheistic families. That a devotee should come into an
atheistic family is surprising, but it is simply a show. After finishing their
mock fighting, both the devotee and the Lord are. again associated in the
spiritual planets. That is very explicitly explained here. The conclusion is
that no one falls from the spiritual world or Vaikuntha planet, for it is the
eternal abode. But sometimes, as the Lord desires, devotees come into
this material world as preachers or as atheists. In each case we must under-
stand that there is a plan of the Lord. Lord Buddha, for example, is an


--- Page 331 ---
Text 27] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 665
incarnation, yet he preached atheism: “There is no God.” But actually
there was a plan behind this, as explained in the Bhagavatam.
TEXT 27
Tg
अथ ते GAM EP नयनानन्दभाजनम्‌ |
a ए . .
বন্ধ तदधिष्ठानं विद्कण्टं च खयंप्रमम्‌ 11)
brahmovaca
atha te munayo drstva
nayanananda-bhajanam
vaikuptharh tad-adhisthanam
vikuntham ca svayam-prabham
brahma uvaca—Lord Brahma said; atha—now; te—those; munayah—
sages; drstva—after seeing; nayana—of the eyes; ananda—pleasure; bhaja-
nam—producing;vaikuptham—the Vaikuntha planet; tat-of Him; adhistha-
nam—the abode; vikuntham—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—
and; svayam-prabham—self-illuminating.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: After seeing the Lord of Vaikuntha, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, in the self-illuminated Vaikuntha planet, the
sages left that transcendental abode.
PURPORT
The transcendental abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as
stated in Bhagavad-gita and confirmed in this verse, is self-illuminated. In
Bhagavad-gita it is said that in the spiritual world there is no need of sun,
moon or electricity. This indicates that all the planets there are self-
illuminated, self-sufficient and independent; everything there is complete.
Lord Krsna says that once one goes to that Vaikuntha planet, he never
returns. The inhabitants of Vaikuntha never return to the material world,
but the incident of Jaya and Vijaya was a different case. They came to
the material world for some time, and then again they returned to
Vaikuntha.


--- Page 332 ---
666 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
TEXT 28
भगवन्तं परिक्रम्य प्रणिपत्यानुमान्य च ।
प्रतिजग्छुःप्रयुदिता; शंसन्तो वैष्णवीं frag ie
bhagavantam parikramya
pranipatyanumanya ca
pratijagmuh pramuditah
Samsanto vaisnavim sriyam
bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;parikramya—after
circumambulating; pranipatya—after offering obeisances; anumanya—after
learning; ca—and; pratijagmuh—returned ; pramuditah—extremely delighted;
Samsantah—glorifying; vaispavim—of the Vaignavas; sriyam—opulence.
TRANSLATION
The sages circumambulated the Supreme Lord, offered their obeisances
and returned, extremely delighted at learning of the divine opulences of
the Vaisnava.
PURPORT
It is still a respectful practice to circumambulate the Lord in Hindu
temples. Especially in Vaisnava temples there is an arrangement for
people to offer respects to the Deity and circumambulate the temple at
least three times.
TEXT 29
भगवाननुगावाह यातं মা भैष्टमस्तु शम्‌ |
ब्रह्मतेजः समर्थोऽपि हन्तुं नेच्छे मतं त॒ मे ॥२९॥
bhagavan anugav aha
yatarm ma bhaistam astu sam
brahma-tejah samartho ‘pi
10011777 necche matam tu me
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anugau—to His two
attendants; aha—said; yatam—depart from this place; ma—let there not be;
bhaistam—fear;astu—let there be;sam—happiness; brahma— of a brahmana;
tejah—the curse; samarthah—being able; api—even; hantum—to nullify; na
icche—do not desire; matam—approved; tu—on the contrary; me—by Me.


--- Page 333 ---
Text 30] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 667
TRANSLATION
The Lord then said to His attendants, Jaya and Vijaya: Depart this
place, but fear not. All glories unto you. Though I am capable of
nullifying the brahmanas’ curse, I would not do so. On the contrary, it has
My approval.
PURPORT
As explained in connection with Text 26, all the incidents that took
place had the approval of the Lord. Ordinarily, there is no possibility that
the four sages could be so angry with the doorkeepers, nor could the
Supreme Lord neglect His two doorkeepers, nor can one come back from
Vaikuntha after once taking birth there. All these incidents, therefore,
were designed by the Lord Himself for the sake of His pastimes in the
material world. Thus He plainly says that it was done with His approval.
Otherwise, it would have been impossible for inhabitants of Vaikuntha to
come back to this material world simply because of a brahminical curse.
The Lord especially blesses the so-called culprits: ‘All glories unto you.”
A devotee, once accepted by the Lord, can never fall down. That is the
conclusion of this incident.
TEXT 30
১ (~ ~ +
एतत्पुरव निर्दि रमया क्रुद्धया यदा|
पुरापवारिता द्वारि विशन्ती मय्युपारते ॥२०॥
९८८८ puraiva nirdistarn
ramayd kruddhaya yada
purapavdrita dvari
visanti mayy uparate
etat—this departure; pura—formerly; eva— certainly; nirdistam—foretold;
ramayd—by Laksmi; kruddhayd—furious; yada—when; purd—previously;
apavariti—prevented; dvdri—at the gate; visanti—entering; mayi—as I;
uparate—was resting.
TRANSLATION
This departure from Vaikuntha was foretold by Laksmi, the goddess of
fortune. She was very angry because when she left My abode and then re-
turned, you stopped her at the gate while I was sleeping.


--- Page 334 ---
668 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 16
TEXT 31
ह ~= [9 व
मयि संरम्भयोगेन निस्तीयं त्रह्महेलनम्‌ |
प्रत्येष्यतं निकादयं मे कालेनाल्पीयसा पुनः ॥३१॥
mayi 507८771 6110-+/06९120
nistirya brahma-helanam
pratyesyatarii nikasam me
kalenalptyasa punah

mayi—unto Me;sarmrambha-yogena—by practice of mystic yoga in anger;
nistirya—being liberated from; brahma-helanam—the result of disobedience
to the brahmanas; pratyesyatam—will come back; nikdsam—near; me—Me;
kalena—in due course of time; alpiyasa—very short; punah—again.

TRANSLATION

The Lord assured the two Vaikuntha inhabitants, Jaya and Vijaya: By
practicing the mystic yoga system in anger, you will be cleansed of the sin
of disobeying the brahmanas and within a very short time return to Me.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead advised the two doorkeepers, Jaya
and Vijaya, that by dint of bhakti-yoga in anger they would be delivered
from the curses of the brahmanas. Srila Madhva Muni remarks in this con-
nection that by practicing bhakti-yoga one can become free from all sinful
reactions. Even a brahma-éapa, or curse by a brahmana, which cannot be
overcome by any other means, can be overcome by bhakti-yoga.

One can practice bhakti-yoga in many rasas. There are twelve rasas, five
primary and seven secondary. The five primary rasas constitute direct
bhakti-yoga, but although the seven secondary rasas are indirect, they are
also counted within bhakti-yoga if they are used in the service of the Lord.
In other words, bhakti-yoga is all-inclusive. If one somehow or other be-
comes attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes en-
gaged in bhakti-yoga, as described in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.29.15):
kamam krodham bhayam. The gopis were attracted to Krsna by bhakti-
yoga in arelationship of lusty desire (kama). Similarly, Kamsa was attached
to bhakti-yoga by dint of fear of his death. Thus bhakti-yoga is so powerful
that even becoming an enemy of the Lord and always thinking of Him can
deliver one very quickly. It is said, vispu-bhakto bhaved daiva asuras tad-


--- Page 335 ---
Text 32] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 669
viparaydt: “Devotees of Lord Visnu are called demigods, whereas nondevo-
tees are called asuras.” But bhakti-yoga is so powerful that both demigods
and asuras can derive its benefits if they always think of the Personality of
Godhead. The basic principle of bhakti-yoga is to think of the Supreme
Lord always. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gitd, man-mand bhava mad-bhaktah:
“Always think of Me.” (Bg. 18.65) It doesn’t matter in which way one
thinks; the very thought of the Personality of Godhead is the basic principle
of bhakti-yoga.

In the material planets there are different grades of sinful activities, of
which disrespecting a brahmanpa or a Vaisnava is the most sinful. Here it is
clearly stated that one can overcome even that grave sin simply by thinking
of Visnu, not even favorably but in anger. Thus even if those who are not
devotees always think of Visnu, they become free from all sinful activities.
Krsna consciousness is the highest form of thought. Lord Visnu is thought
of in this age by chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. From the statements of
the Bhagavatam it appears that if one thinks of Krsna, even as an enemy,
that particular qualification—thinking of Visnu or Krsna —cleanses one of
all sins.

TEXT 32
=
द्वाःस्थावादिश्य भगवान्‌ षिमानघ्रेणिमूषणम्‌।
सर्वातिश्वयया लक्ष्म्या जुष्टं सवं धिष्ण्यमाधिश्चत्‌।२२॥
dvahsthav adisya bhagavan
vimana-sreni-bhiisanam
sarvatisayaya laksmya
Justa 5৮৫7 dhispyam avisat

dvdh-sthau—to the doorkeepers; ddisya—just directing them; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vimdna-srepi-bhiisanam— always
decorated with first-class airplanes; sarva-atiSayaya—in every respect ex-
tensively opulent; laksmya—opulences; justam—bedecked with; svam—llis
own; dhisnyam—abode; avisat—went back.

TRANSLATION

After thus speaking at the door of Vaikuntha, the Lord returned to His
abode, where there are many celestial airplanes and all-surpassing wealth
and splendor.


--- Page 336 ---
670 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
PURPORT

It is clear from this verse that all the incidents took place at the entrance
of Vaikunthaloka. In other words, the sages were not actually within
Vaikunthaloka, but were at the gate. It could be asked, “How could they
return to the material world again if they entered Vaikunthaloka?” But
factually they did not enter, and therefore they returned. There are many
similar incidents where great yogis and brahmapas, by dint of their yoga
practice, have gone from this material world to Vaikunthaloka—but they
were not meant to stay there. They came back again. It is also confirmed
here that the Lord was surrounded by many Vaikuntha airplanes.
Vaikunthaloka is described here as having splendid opulence, far surpassing
the splendor of this material world.

All other living creatures, including the demigods, are born of Brahma,
and Brahma is born of Lord Visnpu. Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita, in the
Tenth Chapter, aha sarvasya prabhavah: Lord Visnu is the origin of all
manifestations in the material world. Those who know that Lord Visnu is
the origin of everything, who are conversant with the process of creation
and who understand that Visnu or Krsna is the most worshipable object of
all living entities, engage themselves in Visnu worship as Vaignavas. The
Vedic hymns also confirm this: 07 tad visnoh paramam padam. The goal
of life is to understand Visnu. The Bhagavatam also confirms this elsewhere.
Foolish people,not knowing that Visnu is the supreme worshipable object,
create so many worshipable objects in this material world, and therefore
they fall down.

TEXT 33
तौ त॒ गीर्वाणऋषभौ दुस्तराद्धरिलोकतः |
हतश्रियौ ब्रह्मशापादभूतां विगतसयौ 1330
tau tu girvana-rsabhau
dustarad dhari-lokatah
hata-$riyau brahma-sapad
abhiitarm vigata-smayau

tau—those two gatekeepers; tu—but; girvana-rsabhau—the best of the
demigods; dustardt—unable to be avoided; hari-lokatah—from Vaikuntha,
the abode of Lord Hari; hate-$riyau—diminished in beauty and luster;
brahma-sapat—from the curse of a brahmana; abhiitari—became; vigata-
smayau—morose.


--- Page 337 ---
Text 35] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 671
TRANSLATION
But those two gatekeepers, the best of the demigods, their beauty and
luster diminished by the curse of the brahmanas, became morose and fell
from Vaikuntha, the abode of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 34
तदा विकुण्डधिपणात्तयोनिंपतमानयोः |
हाहाकारो महानासीद्धिमानाग्रयेषु पुत्रकाः ॥३४॥
tada vikuntha-dhisanat
tayor nipatamanayoh
haha-karo mahan asid
vimanagryesu putrakah
tada—then; vikuntha—of the Supreme Lord; dhisanat—from the abode;
tayoh—as both of them; nipatamanayoh—were falling; hahd-karah—roaring
in disappointment; mahdn—great; asit—occurred; vimdna-agryesu—in the
best of airplanes; putrakah—O demigods.
TRANSLATION
Then, as Jaya and Vijaya fell from the Lord’s abode, a great roar of
disappointment arose from all the demigods, who were sitting in their
splendid airplanes.
TEXT 35
= ©
तावेव AF प्राप्तौ पाषदश्रवरी हरेः ।
दितेजैठरनिर्विष्टं काश्यपं तेज उल्बणम्‌ ॥२५॥
{2४ eva hy adhuna praptau
pdrsada-pravarau hareh
diter jathara-nirvistam
kasyapar teja 10100020773
tau—those two doorkeepers; eva—certainly; hi—addressed; adhund—now;
praptau—having gotten; parsada-pravarau—important associates; hareh—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; diteh—of Diti; jathara—womb;
nirvistam —entering; kasyapam—of Kasyapa Muni; tejah—semina;ulbanam—
very strong.


--- Page 338 ---
672 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma continued: Those two principal doorkeepers of the Person-
ality of Godhead have now entered the womb of Diti, the powerful semina
of Kasyapa Muni having covered them.
PURPORT
Here is clear proof of how a living entity coming originally from
Vaikunthaloka is encaged in material elements. The living entity takes
shelter within the semina of a father, which is injected within the womb of
a mother, and with the help of the mother’s emulsified ovum the living
entity grows a particular type of body. In this connection it is to be re-
membered that the mind of Kasyapa Muni was not in order when he con-
ceived the two sons, Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu. Therefore the semina
he discharged was simultaneously extremely powerful and mixed with the
quality of anger. It is to be concluded that while conceiving a child one’s
mind must be very sober and devotional. For this purpose the Garbhadhana-
samskadra is recommended in the Vedic scriptures. If the mind of the father
is not sober, the semina discharged will not be very good. Thus the living
entity, wrapped in the matter produced from the father and mother, will
be demoniac like Hiranyaksa and Hiranyaka8ipu. The conditions of con-
ception are to be carefully studied. This is a very great science.
TEXT 36
तयोरसुरयोरद्य तेजसा यमयोर्हि वः ।
आक्षिप्तं तेज एतरहिं भगवांसतद्विधित्सति ॥३६॥
tayor asurayor adya
tejasa yamayor hi vah
aksiptam teja etarhi
011080৮৫775 tad vidhitsati
tayoh—of them; asurayoh—of the two asuras; adya—today; tejasai—by
the prowess; yamayoh—of the twins; hi—certainly; vah—of all you demi-
gods; aksiptam— agitated; tejah—power; etarhi—thus certainly; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat—that; vidhitsati-~ desires to do.
TRANSLATION
It is the prowess of these twin asuras [demons] that has disturbed you,
for it has minimized your power. There is no remedy within my power,
however, for it is the Lord Himself who desires to do all this.


--- Page 339 ---
Text 37] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 673
PURPORT

Although Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa, formerly Jaya and Vijaya, be-
came asuras, the demigods of this material world could not control them,
and therefore Lord Brahma said that neither he nor all the demigods could
counteract the disturbance they created. They came within the material
world by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He alone
could counteract such disturbances. In other words, although Jaya and
Vijaya assumed the bodies of asuras, they remained more powerful than
anyone, thus proving that the Supreme Personality of Godhead desired to
fight because the fighting spirit is also within Him. He is the original in
everything, but when He desires to fight He must fight with a devotee.
Therefore by His desire only were Jaya and Vijaya cursed by the Kumaras.
The Lord ordered the gatekeepers to go down to the material world to be-
come His enemies so that He could fight with them and His fighting desires
would be satisfied by the service of His personal devotees.

Brahma showed the demigods that the situation created by the darkness,
for which they were disturbed, was the desire of the Supreme Lord. He
wanted to show that even though these two attendants were coming in the
forms of demons, they were very powerful,greater than the demigods, who
could not control them. No one can surpass the acts of the Supreme Lord.
The demigods were also advised not to try to counteract this incident be-
cause it was ordered by the Lord. Similarly, anyone who is ordered by the
Lord to perform some action in this material world, especially preaching
His glories, cannot be counteracted by anyone; the will of the Lord is
executed under all circumstances.

TEXT 37
विश्वस्य यः स्ितिलयोद्धवहेतुराद्यो
£ 2
योगेश्वरेरपि दुरत्यययागमायः |
„+ ~ EN र
क्षेमं विधास्यति स नो मगवांसू्यधीश्च-
o Cc
TATE ta कियानिहाथंः।॥३७॥
visvasya yah sthiti-layodbhava-hetur adyo
yogesvarair api duratyaya-yogamayah
{25९72072 vidhasyati sa no bhagavams tryadhisas
tatrasmadtya-vimrsena kiyan iharthah

visvasya—of the universe; yah—who; sthiti—maintenance; laya— destruc-

tion; udbhava—creation; hetuh—the cause; adyah—most ancient person;


--- Page 340 ---
674 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 16
yoga-isvarath—by the masters of yoga ;api—even; duratyaya—cannot be
easily understood; yoga-mayah—His yoga-maya potency; ksemam—good;
vidhasyati—will do; sah—He; nah— of us; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; tri-adhisah—the controller of the three modes of material
nature; tatra—there;asmadiya—by our;vimrsena— deliberation; kiyan— what;
tha—on this subject; arthah—purpose.

TRANSLATION

My dear sons, the Lord is the controller of the three modes of nature
and is responsible for the creation, preservation and dissolution of the
universe. His wonderful creative power, yoga-maya, cannot be easily
understood even by the masters of yoga, and that most ancient person, the
Personality of Godhead, will alone come to our rescue. What purpose can
we serve on His behalf by deliberating on the subject?

PURPORT

When something is arranged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
one should not be disturbed by it, even if it appears to be a reverse
according to his calculation. For example, sometimes we see that a
powerful preacher is killed, or sometimes he is put into difficulty, just as
Haridasa Thakura was. He was a great devotee who came into this material
world to execute the will of the Lord by preaching the Lord’s glories. But
Haridasa was punished at the hands of the Kazi by being beaten in twenty-
two marketplaces. Similarly, Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, and Prahlada
Maharaja was put through so many tribulations. The Pandavas, who were
direct friends of Krsna, lost their kingdom; their wife was insulted, and
they had to undergo many severe tribulations. Seeing all these reverses
affect devotees, one should not be disturbed; one should simply understand
that in these matters there must be some plan of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The Bhagavatam’s conclusion is that a devotee is never
disturbed by such reverses. Ile accepts even reverse conditions as the grace
of the Lord. One who continues to serve the Lord even in reverse
conditions is assured that he will go back to Godhead, back to the
Vaikuntha planets. Lord Brahma assured the demigods that there was no
use in talking about how the disturbing situation of darkness was taking
place, since the actual fact was that it was ordered by the Supreme Lord.
Brahma knew this because he was a great devotee; it was possible for him
to understand the plan of the Lord.


--- Page 341 ---
Text 37] The Doorkeepers Cursed by the Sages 675

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Sixteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Two Doorkeepers of
Vaikuntha, Jaya and Vijaya, Cursed by the Sages.”

