
--- Page 1 ---
CHAPTER ONE
Questions by Vidura
TEXT 1
श्रीडएक उवाच
EY
एवमेतत्पुरा पृष्टो {AA भगवान्‌ किरः ।
क्षत्त्रा वनं प्रविष्टेन त्यक्त्वा स्वगृहग्द्धिमत्‌ ॥ १॥
$ri suka uvaca
evam-etat pura prsto
maitreyo bhagavan kila
ksattra vanam pravistena
tyaktva sva-grham rddhimat
ऽ Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—thus; etat— this;
pura—formerly; prstah—being asked; maitreyah—the great sage Maitreya;
bhagavan—His Grace; kila—certainly; ksattra—by Vidura; vanam—forest;
pravistena—entering; tyaktva—renouncing; sva-grham—own house; rddhi-
mat— prosperous.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: After renouncing his prosperous home and
entering the forest, King Vidura, the great devotee, asked this question of
His Grace Maitreya Rsi:
TEXT 2
यद्वा अयं मन्त्रकृदढो भगवानखिलेश्वरः |
f= हित्वा प्रविवेशात्मसात्कतम्‌ । २ ॥
yadva ayam mantra-krd vo
bhagavan akhilesvarah
pauravendra-grhar hitva
pravivesat masat krtam
1


--- Page 2 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
yat—the house; vai—what else is there to say; ayam—Sri Krsna; mantra-
krt—minister; vah—you people; bhagavan- the Personality of Godhead;
akhila-tsvarah—the Lord of everything; pauravendra—Duryodhana;grham—
house; hitva—giving up; pravivesa—entered; atmasat—identify with oneself;
krtam—so accepted.
TRANSLATION
What else is there to say about the residential house of the Pandavas?
Sri Krsna, the Lord of everything, acted as your minister. He used to enter
that house as if it were His own, and He did not take any care of
Duryodhana’s house.
PURPORT
According to the Gaudiya acintye-bhedabheda-tattva 6 any-
thing which satisfies the senses of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, is also
Sri Krsna. For example, Sri Vrndavana-dhama is nondifferent from Sri
Krsna (tad-dhama-vrndavanam) because at Vrndavana the Lord enjoys the
transcendental bliss of His internal potency. Similarly, the house of the
Pandavas was also the source of transcendental bliss for the Lord. It is
mentioned here that the Lord identified the house with His own Self. Thus
the house of the Pandavas was as good as Vyndavana, and Vidura should
not have given up that place of transcendental bliss. Therefore the reason
for his quitting the house was not exactly family misunderstanding;
rather, Vidura took the opportunity to meet Rsi Maitreya and discuss
transcendental knowledge. For a saintly person like Vidura, any dis-
turbance due to worldly affairs is insignificant. Such disturbances,
however, are sometimes favorable for higher realization, and therefore
Vidura took advantage of a family misunderstanding in order to meet
Maitreya Rsi.
TEXT 3
राजोवाच
a
ङत्र॒शषतुभगवता মঈযীঘায় सङ्गमः ।
कदा वा सह संवाद CIE नः प्रमो ॥ २॥
rajovaca
kutra ksattur bhagavata
maitreyenasa saingamah
kada va saha samvada
etad varpaya nah prabho


--- Page 3 ---
Text 4] Questions by Vidura 3
raja uvaca—the King said; kutra—wherein; ksattuh—with Vidura;
bhagavata—and with His Grace; maitreyepa—with Maitreya; asa—there
was; sangamah—meeting; kada—when; va—also; saha—with; sarhvadah—
discussion; etat—this; varnaya—describe; nah—unto me; prabho—0O my
lord.
TRANSLATION
The King asked Sukadeva Gosvami: Where and when did the meeting
and discussion take place between Saint Vidura and His Grace Maitreya
Muni? Kindly oblige, my lord, and describe this to us.
PURPORT
Exactly as Saunaka Rsi inquired of Suta Gosvami and Suita Gosvami
replied, so Srila Sukadeva Gosvami replied to King Pariksit’s inquiries.
The King was very anxious to understand the meaningful discussion that
took place between the two great souls.
TEXT 4
न दयल्पार्थोदयस्तस्य विदुरस्यामलाटमनः |
तखिन्‌ वरीयसि प्र्नः साधुवादोपृंहितः ॥ ४ ॥
na hy alparthodayas tasya
vidurasyamalatmanah
tasmin variyasi prasnah
sadhu-vadopabrimhitah
na—never; hi—certainly; alpa-artha—small (unimportant) purpose;
udayah—raised; tasya—his; vidurasya—of Vidura; amala-atmanah—of the
saintly man; tasmin—in that; variyasi—highly purposeful; prasnah—ques-
tion; sadhu-vada—things approved by saints and sages; upabrmhitah—full
with.
TRANSLATION
Saint Vidura was a great and pure devotee of the Lord, and therefore
his questions to His Grace Rsi Maitreya must have been very purposeful,
on the highest level, and approved by learned circles.
PURPORT
Questions and answers among different classes of men have different
value. Inquiries by mercantile men in a business exchange cannot be


--- Page 4 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
expected to be highly purposeful in spiritual values. Questions and
answers by different classes of men can be guessed by the caliber of the
persons concerned. In Bhagavad-gita, the discussion was between Lord Sri
Krsna and Arjuna, the Supreme Person and the supreme devotee
respectively. The Lord admitted Arjuna to be His devotee and friend
(Bg. 4.3), and therefore any sane man can guess that the discussion was on
the topic of the bhakti-yoga system. Actually the whole Bhagavad-gita is
based on the principle of bhakti-yoga. There is a difference between
karma and karma-yoga. Karma is regulated action for the enjoyment of
the fruit by the performer, but karma-yoga is action performed by the
devotee for the satisfaction of the Lord. Karma-yoga is based on bhakti,
or pleasing the Lord, whereas karma is based on pleasing the senses of the
performer himself. According to Srimad-Bhagavatam, one is advised to
approach a bona fide spiritual master when one is actually inclined to
question from an elevated level of spiritual understanding. A common
man who has no interest in spiritual values has no need to approach a
spiritual master just as a matter of following fashion.

As a student, Maharaja Pariksit was serious about learning the science of
God, and Sukadeva Gosvami was a bona fide spiritual master in the
transcendental science. Both of them knew that the topics discussed by
Vidura and Rsi Maitreya were elevated, and thus Maharaja Pariksit was
very interested to learn from the bona fide spiritual master.

TEXT 5 ॥
सूत उवाच
स॒ एवद्धषिवर्योऽयं पृष्टो राज्ञा परीधिता ।
प्रत्याह तं सुबहुवित््रीतात्मा श्रूयतामिति ॥ ५॥
suta uvaca
sa evam rsi-varyo ‘yam
prsto raja pariksita
pratyaha tam su-bahuvit
pritatma Sruyatam iti

$ri sutah uvaca—S$ri Siita Gosvami said; sah— he; evam—thus; rsi-varyah—
the great rsi; ayam—Sukadeva Gosvami; prstah—being questioned; rajiia—
by the King; pariksita—Maharaja Pariksit; prati aha—replied; tam—unto
the King; su-bahuvit—highly experienced; prita-atma—fully satisfied;
sruyatam—please hear me; iti—thus.


--- Page 5 ---
Text 6] Questions by Vidura 5
TRANSLATION
Sri 3018 Gosvami said: The great sage Sukadeva Gosvami was highly
experienced and was pleased with the King. Thus being questioned by the
King, he said to him, Please hear the topics attentively.
TEXT 6
श्रीश्चुक उवाच
यदा त राजा स्वसुतानसाधून्‌
युष्णनधर्मेण विनष्टिः |
भरातुयैबि्ठस्य सुतान्‌ विवन्धून्‌
प्रवेश्य लाक्षाभवने ददाह ॥ & ॥
$ Suka uvaca
yada tu raja sva-sutan asadhun
pusnan na dharmena vinasta-drstih
bhratur yavisthasya sutan vibandhun
pravesya laksa-bhavane dadaha
$ Sukah uvaca— प्र Sukadeva Gosvami said; yada— when; tu—but; raja—
King Dhrtarastra; sva-sutan—his own sons; asadhun— dishonest; puspan—
nourished; na—never; dharmena—on the right path; vinasta-drstih—one who
has lost his insight; bhratuh—of his brother; yavisthasya—younger; sutan—
sons; vibandhun—having no guardian (father); pravesya—made to enter;
laksa— lacquer; bhavane—in the house; dadaha—set on fire.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: King Dhrtarastra became blind under the
influence of impious desires to nourish his dishonest sons, and thus he set
fire to the lacquer house to burn his fatherless nephews, the Pandavas.
PURPORT
Dhrtarastra was blind from birth, but his blindness in committing
impious activities to support his dishonest sons was a greater blindness
than his physical lack of eyesight. The physical lack of sight does not bar
one from spiritual progress. But when one is blind spiritually, even though
physically fit, that blindness is dangerously detrimental to the progressive
path of human life.


--- Page 6 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
TEXT 7
यदा सभायां इरुदेवदेन्याः
केशाभिमशं স্তবন্ষদ गर्धम्‌ ।
न्‌ वारयामास चपः FEE
स्वासैहैरन्त्याः TIGA ॥ ७॥
yada sabhayam kuru-deva-devyah
kesabhimarsarn suta-karma garhyam
na varayamasa nrpah snusayah
svastrair harantyah kuca-kunkumani
yada—when; sabhayam—the assembly; kuru-deva-devyah—of Draupadi,
the wife of godly Yudhisthira; kesa-abhimarsam—insult by grabbing her
hair; suta-karma— action taken by his son; garhyam—which was abominable;
na—did not; varayamasa—forbidden; nrpah—the King; snusayah—of his
daughter-in-law; svastraih—by her tears; harantyah—of she who was
washing; kuca-kunkumani—red dust on her breast.
TRANSLATION
The King did not forbid his son Duhsasana’s abominable action of
grabbing the hair of Draupadi, the wife of the godly King Yudhisthira,
even though her tears washed the red dust on her breast.
TEXT 8
=<
धूते त्वधर्मेण भितख साधोः
सत्याग्ठम्बस्य वनम्‌ गतस्य |
न॒ याचतोऽदात्समयेन दायं
तमो जुषाणो यदजातशत्रोः ॥ ८ ॥
dyute tv adharmena jitasya sadhoh
satyavalambasya vanam gatasya
na yacato ‘dat samayena 02% 017
tamo-jusano yad ajata-satroh
dyule—by means of gambling; tu—but; adharmena—by unfair tricks;
Jjitasya—of the vanquished; sadhoh—a saintly person; satya-avalambasya—
one who embraced truth as shelter; vanam—forest; gatasya—of the goer;
na—never; yacatah—when asked for; adat—delivered; samayena—in due


--- Page 7 ---
Text 9] Questions by Vidura 7
course; dayarn—right share; tamah-jusanah—overwhelmed by illusion; yat—
as much as; ajata-satroh—of one who had no enemy.

TRANSLATION

Yudhisthira, who was born without any enemy, was unfairly defeated
in gambling. But because he had taken the vow of truthfulness, he went
off to the forest. When he came back in due course and begged the return
of his rightful share of the kingdom, he was refused by Dhrtarastra, who
was overwhelmed by illusion.

PURPORT

Maharaja Yudhisthira was the rightful heir to his father’s kingdom.
But just to favor his own sons, headed by Duryodhana, Dhrtarastra,
Maharaja Yudhisthira’s uncle, adopted various unfair means to cheat his
nephews of their rightful share of the kingdom. At last the Pandavas
demanded only five villages, one for each of the five brothers, but that
was also refused by the usurpers. This incidence led to the War of
Kurukgétra. The Battle of Kuruksetra, therefore, was induced by the
Kurus, and not the Pandavas.

As ksatriyas, the proper livelihood of the Pandavas was only to rule,
and not to accept any other occupation. A brahmana, ksatriya or vaisya
will not accept employment for his livelihood under any circumstances.

TEXT 9
यदा च पार्थप्रहितः सभायां
¢
जगद्गुरुय।नि जगाद Fo: |
A तानि पुंसाममृतायननि
-
राजोरु मेने FAIS: || ९॥
yada ca partha-prahitah sabhayarn
Jagad-gurur yani jagada krsnpah
na tani [01077850771 amrtayanani
rajoru mene ksata-punya-lesah

yada—when; ca—also; partha-prahitah—being advised by Arjuna;
sabhayam—in the assembly; jagat-guruh—of the teacher of the world;
yani—those; jagada—went; krsnah—Lord Krsna; na—never; tani—such
words; purnsam—of all men of sense; amrta-ayanani—as good as nectar;


--- Page 8 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
raja—the King (Dhrtaragtra or Duryodhana); uru—very important; mene—
did consider; ksata— dwindling; punya-lesah—fragment of pious acts.
TRANSLATION
Lord Krsna was sent by Arjuna into the assembly as the spiritual master
of the whole world, and although His words were heard by some [like
Bhisma, etc.] as pure nectar, it was not so for the others, who were
completely bereft of the last farthing of past pious works. The King
[Dhrtarastra or Duryodhana] did not take the words of Lord Krsna very
seriously.
PURPORT
Lord Krsna, who is the spiritual master of the entire universe, accepted
the duty of a messenger, and, deputed by Arjuna, went to the assembly of
King Dhrtaragtra on a peace mission. Krsna is everyone’s Lord, yet
because He was the transcendental friend of Arjuna, He gladly accepted
the role of messenger, exactly like an ordinary friend. That is the beauty
of the Lord’s behavior with His pure devotees. He reached the assembly
and spoke about peace, and the message was relished by Bhisma and
other great leaders because it was spoken by the Lord Himself. But due to
the exhaustion of the pious results of their past deeds, Duryodhana, or his
father, Dhrtarastra, did not take the message very seriously. That is the
way of persons who have no credit of pious deeds. By past pious deeds,
one may become the king of a country, but because the results of the
pious acts of Duryodhana and company were dwindling, it became
evident from their actions that they were sure to lose the kingdom to the
Pandavas. The message of Godhead is always like nectar to the devotees,
but it is just the opposite to the nondevotees. Sugar candy is always sweet
to a healthy man, but it tastes very bitter to persons suffering from
jaundice.
TEXT 10
यदोपहूतो भवनं gfe
¢.
मन्त्राय पृष्टः किल पूर्वजेन ।
अथाह JET वरीयान्‌
EY ति
यन्मन्त्रिणो वैदुरिकं वदन्ति ॥१०॥
yadopahuto bhavanari pravisto
mantraya prstah kila purvajena


--- Page 9 ---
Text 11] Questions by Vidura 9
athaha tan mantra-dr$am variyan
yan mantripo vaidurikam vadanti
yada— when; upahutah—was called by; bhavanam—the palace; pravistah—
entered; mantraya—for consultation; prstah—asked by; kila—of course;
purvajena—by the elder brother; atha—thus; aha—said; tat—that; mantra—
advice; drsam—just suitable; variyan—excellent; yat—that which;
mantrinah—the ministers of state, or expert politicians; vaidurikam—
instructions by Vidura; vadanti—do they say.
TRANSLATION
When Vidura was invited by his elder brother [Dhrtarastra] for
consultation, he entered the house and gave instructions which were
exactly to the point. His advice is well-known, and instructions by Vidura
are approved by expert ministers of state.
PURPORT
Political suggestions by Vidura are known as expert, just as, in modern
times, Pandit Canakya is considered the authority in good counsel both in
political and moral instructions.
TEXT 11
Ne ” ৬
अजातशत्रोः प्रतियच्छ दायं
तितिक्षतो दुर्विषहं तवागः।
~
सहाचुजो यत्र॒ RAR
श्वसन्‌ रुषा यत्वमलं विभेषि ॥११॥
ajata-$atroh pratiyaccha dayam
titiksato durvisaham tavagah
sahanujo yatra vrkodarahih
$vasan ruga yat tvam alam bibhesi
ajata-satroh—of Yudhisthira, who has no enemy; pratiyaccha—return;
dayam—Ilegitimate share; titiksatah—of him who is so forebearing;
durviggham—unbearable; tava—your; agah—offense; saha—along with;
anujah— younger brothers; yatra— wherein; vrkodara—Bhima; ahih—reveng-
ing snake; svasan—breathing heavily; rusa—in anger; yat—whom; tvam—
you; alam—verily; bibhesi—do fear.


--- Page 10 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION
[ Vidura said: ] You must now return the legitimate share to Yudhisthira,
who has no enemies and who has been forebearing through untold
sufferings due to your offenses. He is waiting with his younger brothers,
among whom is the revengeful Bhima, breathing heavily like a snake.
Surely you are afraid of him.
TEXT 12
पार्थास्तु ইনী ম্যাবান্যন্তল্তী
गृहीतवान्‌ सक्षितिदेवदेवः ।
आस्ते WIA यदुदेवदेवो
विनिर्जितारोषचृदेवदेवः ॥१२॥
27171 @का725 tu devo bhagavan mukundo
grhitavan sa-ksiti-deva-devah
aste sva-puryari yadu-deva-devo
vinirjitasesa-nrdeva-devah
parthan—the sons of Prtha (Kunti); tu—but; devah—Lord; bhagavan—
the Personality of Godhead; mukundah—Sri Krsna, who awards liberation;
grhitavan—has taken up; sa— with; ksiti-deva-devah—the brahmanas and the
demigods; aste—is present; sva-puryam—along with His family; yadu-deva-
devah— worshiped by the royal order of the Yadu dynasty; vinirjita—
conquered by; asesa— unlimited; nrdeva—kings; devah— Lord.
TRANSLATION
Lord Krsna, the Personality of Godhead, has accepted the sons of Prtha
as His kinsmen, and all the kings of the world are with Lord Sri Krsna. He
is present in His home with all His family members, the kings and princes
of the Yadu dynasty, who have conquered an unlimited number of rulers,
and He is their Lord.
PURPORT
Vidura gave Dhrtarastra very good counsel regarding political alliance
with the sons of Prtha, the Pandavas. The first thing he said was that Lord
Krsna was intimately related with them as their cousin. Because Lord
Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is worshipable by all


--- Page 11 ---
Text 13] Questions by Vidura 11
brahmanas and demigods, who are the controllers of the universal affairs.
Besides that, Lord Krsna and His family members, the royal order of the
Yadu dynasty, were the conquerers of all kings of the world.

The ksatriyas used to fight the kings of various dominions and kidnap
their beautiful princess-daughters, after conquering their relatives. This
system was laudable because the ksatriyas and the princesses would be
married only on the basis of the chivalry of the conquering ksatriya. All
the young princes of the Yadu dynasty married the daughters of other
kings in this way, by chivalrous force, and thus they were conquerors of
all the kings of the world. Vidura wanted to impress upon his elder brother
that fighting with the Pandavas was fraught with many dangers because
they were supported by Lord Krsna, who had conquered, even in His
childhood, demons like Kamsa and Jarasandha and demigods like Brahma
and Indra. Therefore all universal power was behind the Pandavas.

TEXT 13
स॒ एष दोषः पुरुषदधिडास्ते
गृहान्‌ प्रविष्टो यमपत्यमत्या |
पुष्णासि ङष्णाद्विखो गतश्री-
= +
स्त्यजाश्वरोवं gone ॥१३॥
sa esa dosah purusa-dvid 25८९
grhan pravisto yam apatya-matya
pusnasi krsnad vimukho gata-sris
tyajasvasaivamn kula-kausalaya

sah—he; esah—this; dosah—offense personified; purusa-dvit—envious of
Lord Krsna; aste—exists; grhan—household; pravistah—entered; yam—
whom; apatya-matya—thinking to be your son; pusnasi—maintaining;
krsnat—from Krsna; vimukhah—in opposition; gata-srih—devoid of every-
thing auspicious; tyeja—give up; asu—as soon as possible; asaivam—
inauspicious; kula—family; kausalaya—for the sake of.

TRANSLATION

You are maintaining offense personified, Duryodhana, as your infal-
lible son, but he is envious of Lord Krsna. And because you are thus main-
taining a nondevotee of Krsna, you are devoid of all auspicious qualities.
Relieve yourself of this ill fortune as soon as possible and do good to the
whole family!


--- Page 12 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
PURPORT

A good son is called apatya, one who does not allow his father to fall
down. The son can protect the father’s soul when the father is dead by
offering sacrifices to please the Supreme Lord, Visnu. This system is still
prevalent in India. After the death of his father, a son goes to offer sacri-
fices at the lotus feet of Visnu at Gaya and thus delivers the father’s soul
if the father is fallen. But if the son is already an enemy of Visnu, how, in
such an inimical mood, can he offer sacrifice unto Lord Visnu’s lotus feet?
Lord Krsna is directly the Personality of Godhead, Visnu, and Duryodhana
was inimical to Him. He would therefore be unable to protect his father,
Dhrtarastra, after his death. He himself was to fall down because of his
faithlessness towards Visnu. How, then, could he protect his father?
Vidura advised Dhrtarastra to get rid of such an unworthy son as
Duryodhana as soon as possible if he was at all anxious to see to the good
of his family.

According to the moral instructions of Canakya Pandit, “What is the
use of a son who is neither a learned man nor a devotee of the Lord?” If
a son is not a devotee of the Supreme Lord, he is just like blind eyes—a
source of trouble. A physician may sometimes advise the extrication of
such useless eyes from their sockets so that one can be relieved of the
constant trouble. Duryodhana was exactly like blind, troubling eyes; he
would be a source of great trouble to the family of Dhrtarastra, as fore-
seen by Vidura. Vidura therefore rightly advised his eldest brother to get
rid of this source of trouble. Dhrtarastra was wrongly maintaining such
personified offense under the mistaken impression that Duryodhana was a
good son, able to liberate his father.

TEXT 14
इत्यूचिवांस्तत्र सयोधनेन
्रशृद्कोपस्फुरिताधरेण ।
असत्कृतः सरसएदणीययीलः
कता सकर्णानुजसौबलेन ॥१४॥
ityicivams tatra suyodhanena
pravrddha-kopa-sphuritadharena
asatkrtah sat-spthaniya-silah
ksatta sa-karnanuja-saubalena


--- Page 13 ---
Text 15] Questions by Vidura 13
iti—thus; ucivan—while speaking; tatra—there; suyodhanena—by
Duryodhana; pravrddha—swollen with; kopa—anger; sphurita—flapping;
adharena—lips; asatkrtah—insulted; sat—respectable; sprhaniya-silah—de-
sirable qualities; ksatta—Vidura; sa—with; karna—Karna; anuja—younger
brothers; saubalena— with Sakuni.
TRANSLATION
While speaking thus, Vidura, whose personal character was esteemed by
respectable persons, was insulted by Duryodhana, who was swollen with
anger and whose lips were trembling. Duryodhana was in company with
Karna, his younger brothers and his maternal uncle Sakuni.
PURPORT
It is said that giving good counsel to a foolish person causes the fool to
become angry, just as feeding milk to a snake only increases its venomous
poison. Saint Vidura was so honorable that his character was looked up to
by all respectable persons. But Duryodhana was so foolish that he dared
to insult Vidura. This was due to his bad association with Sakuni, his
maternal uncle, as well as with his friend Karna, who always encouraged
Duryodhana in his nefarious acts.
TEXT 15
कं एनमत्रोपजुदाब्र সি
दास्याः স্তন মজতিলল पुष्टः ।
तसिन्‌ प्रतीपः परत्य आस्ते
निर्बासतापमा्च॒पराच्छ्रसानः ॥१५॥
ka enam atropajuhava jihmam
dasyah sutam yad-balinaiva pustah
tasmin pratipah parakrtya aste
nirvasyatam asu purac chvasanah
kah—who; enam—this; atra—here; upajuhava—called for; jihmam—
crooked; dasyah—of a kept mistress; sutam—son; yat—whose; balinaiva—
by whose subsistence; pustah—grown up; tasmin—unto him; pratipah—
enmity; parekrtya—enemy’s interest; aste—situated; nirvasyatam—get him
out; asu—immediately; purat—from the palace; svasanah—let him breathe
only.


--- Page 14 ---
14 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION
Who asked him to come here, this son of a kept mistress? He is so
crooked that he spies in the interest of the enemy against those on whose
support he has grown up. Toss him out of the palace immediately and
leave him with only his breath.
PURPORT
When getting married, the ksatriya kings would take on several other
youthful girls along with the married princess. These girl attendants of the
king were known as ddsis, or attendant mistresses. By intimate association
with the king, the dasis would get sons. Such sons were called dast-putras.
They had no claim to a royal position, but they would get maintenance
and other facilities just like princes. Vidura was the son of such a 0৫5 and
he was thus not counted amongst the ksatriyas. King Dhrtarastra was very
affectionate toward his younger dasi-putra brother, Vidura, and Vidura
was a great friend and philosophical advisor to Dhrtarastra. Duryodhana
knew very well that Vidura was a great soul and well-wisher, but un-
fortunately he used strong words to hurt his innocent uncle. Duryodhana
not only attacked Vidura’s birth, but he also called him an infidel because
he seemed to support the cause of Yudhisthira, whom Duryodhana consid-
ered his enemy. He desired that Vidura be immediately put out of the
palace and deprived of all his possessions. If possible, he would have liked
him caned until he was left with nothing but his breath. He charged that
Vidura was a spy of the Pandavas because he advised King Dhrtarastra in
their favor. Such is the situation of palace life and the intricacies of
diplomacy that even a faultless person like Vidura could be charged with
something abominable and punished. Vidura was struck with wonder at
such unexpected behavior from his nephew Duryodhana, and before any-
thing actually happened, he decided to leave the palace for good.
TEXT 16
©
खयं धनुद्धारि निधाय मायां
९
श्रतु; पुरो TER ताडितोऽपि |
स इत्यमतधुल्वणकर्णवाणै-
गतवन्यथोऽयादुरु मानयानः ॥१६॥
svayarit dhanur dvari nidhaya mayam
bhratuh puro marmasu tadito’pi
sa ittham aty ulbana-karna-banair
gata-vyatho’yad uru manayanah


--- Page 15 ---
Text 16] Questions by Vidura 15

svayam—he himself; dhanuh dvari—bow on the door; nidhaya—keeping;
mayam—the external nature; bhratuh—brother’s; purah—from the palace;
marmasu—in the core of the heart; taditah—being afflicted; api—in spite of;
sah—he (Vidura); ittham—like this; ati ulbana—severely; karna—ear;
banaih—by the arrows; gata-vyathah— without being sorry; aydt—excited;
uru—great; manayanah—so thinking.

TRANSLATION

Thus being pierced by arrows through his ears and afflicted to the core
of his heart, Vidura placed his bow on the door and quit his brother’s
palace. He was not sorry, for he considered the acts of the external
energy to be supreme.

PURPORT

A pure devotee of the Lord is never perturbed by an awkward position

created by the external energy of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gita it is stated:
prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah
ahankara-vimidhatma kartaham iti manyate.
(Bg. 3.27)

A conditioned soul is absorbed in material existence under the influence
of different modes of external energy. Absorbed in the false ego, he
thinks that he is doing everything by himself. The external energy of the
Lord, the material nature, is fully under the control of the Supreme Lord,
and the conditioned soul is fully under the grip of the external energy.
Therefore, the conditioned soul is fully under the control of the law of
the Lord. But, due to illusion only, he thinks himself independent in his
activities. Duryodhana was acting under such influence of the external
nature, by which he would be vanquished at the ultimate end. He could
not accept the sound advice of Vidura, but on the contrary he insulted
that great soul, who was the well-wisher of his whole family. Vidura could
understand this because he was a pure devotee of the Lord. In spite of
being very strongly insulted by Duryodhana’s words, Vidura could see that
Duryodhana, under the influence of mdyd, the external energy, was
making progress on the path toward his own ruination. He therefore
considered the acts of the external energy to be supreme, yet he also saw
how the internal energy of the Lord helped him in that particular situation.
A devotee is always in a renounced temperament because the worldly
attractions can never satisfy him. Vidura was never attracted by the royal
palace of his brother. He was always ready to leave the place and devote
himself completely to the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Now


--- Page 16 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
he got the opportunity by the grace of Duryodhana, and instead of being
sorry at the strong words of insult, he thanked him from within because it
gave him the chance to live alone in a holy place and fully engage in the
devotional service of the Lord. The word gata-vyathah (without being
sorry) is significant here because Vidura was relieved from the tribulations
which trouble every man entangled in material activities. He therefore
thought that there was no need to defend his brother with his bow because
his brother was meant for ruination. Thus he left the palace before
Duryodhana could act. Maya, the supreme energy of the Lord, acted here
both internally and externally.
TEXT 17
a निर्गतः Sage
गजाहयाीर्थपदः पदानि ।
अन्वाक्रमतपुण्यविकतीर्पयोन्यौ
अधिष्ठितो यानि सदसरमूतिः nen
sa nirgatah kaurava-punya-labdho
gajahvayat tirtha-padah padani
anvakramat punya-cikirsayorvyar
adhisthito yani sahasra-murtih
sah—he (Vidura); nirgatah—after having quit; kaurava—the Kuru dynas-
ty; punya—piety; labdhah—so achieved; gaja-ahvayat—from Hastinapura;
tirtha-padah— of the Supreme Lord; padani—pilgrimages; anvakramat—took
shelter; punya—piety; cikirsaya—desiring so; urvyam—of high grade;
adhisthitah—situated; yani—all those; sahasra—thousands; murtih—forms.
TRANSLATION
By his piety, Vidura achieved the advantages of the pious Kauravas.
After leaving Hastinapura, he took shelter of many places of pilgrimages,
which are the Lord’s lotus feet. With a desire to gain a high order of pious
life, he traveled to holy places where thousands of transcendental forms
of the Lord are situated.
PURPORT
Vidura was undoubtedly a highly elevated and pious soul, otherwise he
would not have taken his birth in the Kaurava family. To have high parent-
age, to possess wealth, to be highly learned and to have great personal
beauty are all due to past pious acts. But such pious possessions are not


--- Page 17 ---
Text 17] Questions by Vidura 17
sufficient for obtaining the grace of the Lord and being engaged in His
transcendental loving service. Vidura considered himself less pious, and
therefore he decided to travel to all the great places of pilgrimage in the
world in order to achieve greater piety and advance nearer to the Lord. At
that time, Lord Krsna was personally present in the world, and Vidura
could at once approach Him directly, but he did not do so because he
was not sufficiently freed from sin. One cannot be one hundred percent
devoted to the Lord unless and until he is completely free from all effects
of sin. Vidura was conscious that by the association of the diplomatic
Dhrtaragtra and Duryodhana he had lost his piety and was therefore not fit
to associate at once with the Lord. In Bhagavad-gita this is confirmed in
the following verse:

yesam tvanta-gatarn papam jananarn punya-karmapam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta bhajante mar drdha-vratah (Bg.7.28)

Persons who are sinful asuras like Kamsa and Jarasandha cannot think of
Lord Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth.
Only those who are pure devotees, those who follow the regulative princi-
ples of religious life as prescribed in the scriptures, are able to engage them-
selves in karma-yoga and then jiana-yoga and thereafter, by pure medita-
tion, can understand pure consciousness. When God consciousness is
developed, one can take advantage of the association of pure devotees.
Syan mahat-sevaya viprah punya-tirtha: one is able to associate with the
Lord even during the existence of this life.

Places of pilgrimages are meant for eradicating the sins of the pilgrims,
and they are distributed all over the universe just to give facility to all con-
cerned for attaining pure existence and God realization. One should not
be satisfied, however, merely by visiting the places of pilgrimage and per-
forming one’s prescribed duties; he should be eager to meet the great souls
who are already there, engaged in the service of the Lord. In each and
every place of pilgrimage, the Lord is present in His various transcendental
forms.

These forms are called arca-murtis, or forms of the Lord which can be
easily appreciated by the common man. The Lord is transcendental to
our mundane senses. He cannot be seen with our present eyes, nor can
He be heard with our present ears. To the degree that we have entered
into the service of the Lord or to the proportion to which our lives are
freed from sins, we can perceive the Lord. But even though we are not
free from sins, the Lord is kind enough to allow us the facility of seeing
Him in His arca-murtis in the temple. The Lord is all powerful, and there-


--- Page 18 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
fore He is able to accept our service by presentation of His arca form. No
one, therefore, should foolishly think the arca in the temple to be an idol.
Such an arca-maurti is not an idol but the Lord Himself, and to the propor-
tion to which one is free from sins, he is able to know the significance of
the arca-murti. The guidance of a pure devotee is therefore always
required.

In the land of Bharatavarga there are many hundreds and thousands of
places of pilgrimage distributed all over the country, and by traditional
practice the common man visits such holy places during all seasons of the
year. Some of the arca representations of the Lord situated in different
places of pilgrimage are mentioned herewith. The Lord is present at
Mathura (the birthplace of Lord Krsna) as Adi-Kesava; the Lord is present
at Puri (Orissa) as Lord Jagannatha (also known as Purusottama); He is
present at Allahabad (Prayag) as Bindu-Madhava; at Mandara Hill he is
present as Madhusiidana. In the Anandaranya, He is known as
Vasudeva, Padmanabha and Janardana; at Visnukanci, He is known as
Visnu; and at Mayaura, He is known as Hari. There are millions and bil-
lions of such arca forms of the Lord distributed all over the universe. All
these arca-murtis are summarized in the Caitanya-caritamrta in the follow-
ing words:

sarvatra prakasa tanhara bhakte sukhodite
jagatera adharma nasi dharma sthapite
“The Lord has so distributed Himself all over the universe just to give
pleasure to the devotees, to give the common man facility to eradicate his
sins, and to establish religious principles in the world.”
TEXT 18
रेष पुण्योपवनाद्रिजे-
ष्वपङ्कतोयेषु सरित्सरःसु |
अनन्तलिङ्गैः ASFA
0
चचार  तीथ.यतनेप्वनन्यः ॥१८॥
puresu puny opavanadri-kuiijesv
apanka-toyesu sarit-sarahsu
ananta-lingaih samalankrtesu
cacara tirthayatanesv ananyah


--- Page 19 ---
Text 19] Questions by Vidura 19
puresu—holy places like Ayodhya, Dvaraka, Mathura, etc.; pupya—
piety; upavana—the air; adri—hill; kufijesu—in the orchards; apanka—with-
out sin; toyesu—in the water; sarit—river; sarahsu—lakes; ananta-lingaih—
the forms of the unlimited; samalanikrtesu—being so decorated; cacara—
executed; tirtha—places of pilgrimage; ayatanesu—holy land; ananyah—
alone or seeing Krsna alone.
TRANSLATION
He began to travel along, thinking only of Krsna, through various holy
places like Ayodhya, Dvaraka and Mathura. He traveled where the air, hill,
orchard, river and lake are all pure and sinless and where the forms of the
Unlimited decorate the temples. Thus he performed the pilgrim’s progress.
PURPORT
These arca forms of the Lord may be considered idols by the atheists,
but that does not matter for persons like Vidura or His many other
servants. The forms of the Lord are mentioned here are ananta-lingam.
Such forms of the Lord have unlimited potency, the same as that of the
Lord Himself. There is no difference between the potencies of the arca and
those of the personal forms of the Lord. The example of the postbox and
post office may be applied here. The little postboxes distributed all over
the city have the same potency as the postal system in general. The duty
of the post office is to carry letters from one place to another. If one puts
letters in postboxes authorized by the general post office, the function of
carrying letters is performed without a doubt. Similarly, the arca-murti
can also deliver the same unlimited potency of the Lord as when He is per-
sonally present. Vidura, therefore, could see nothing but Krsna in the
different arca forms,and ultimately he was able to realize Krsna alone and
nothing else.
TEXT 19
गां पर्यटन्मेष्यविविक्ताृत्तिः
- -
सदाऽऽप्ठतोऽधःशयनोऽवधूतः |
FY
अलितः CEE
व्रतानि चेरे हरितोषणानि ॥१९॥


--- Page 20 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
gar paryatan medhya-vivikta-vrttih
sada “pluto 01018 $ayano ‘vadhutah
alaksitah svair avadhuta-veso
vratani cere hari-tosanani
gim—earth; paryatan—traversing; medhya— pure; vivikta-vrttih—indepen-
dent occupation for living; sada—always; aplutah—sanctified; adhah—on
the earth; sayanah—lying; avadhutah— without dressing (of the hair, etc.);
alaksitah— without being seen; svath—alone; avadhiita-vesah—dressed like a
mendicant; vratani—vows; cere— performed; hari-tosanani—that pleases the
Lord.
TRANSLATION
While so traversing the earth, he simply performed duties to please the
Supreme Lord Hari. His occupation was pure and independent. He was
constantly sanctified by taking his bath in holy places, although he was
in the dress of a mendicant and had no hair dressing nor a bed on which to
lie. Thus he was always unseen by his various relatives.
PURPORT
The first and foremost duty of a pilgrim is to satisfy the Supreme Lord
Hari. While traveling as a pilgrim, one should not be worried about pleas-
ing society. There is no need to depend on social formalities or occupation
or dress. ®ne should remain always absorbed in the function of pleasing
the Lord. Thus sanctified by thought and action, one is able to realize the
Supreme Lord by the process of a pilgrim’s journey.
TEXT 20
इत्थं वजन्‌ भारतमेव वपं
कालेन यावद्वतवान्‌ प्रमासम्‌ |
ताबच्छशास कषितिमेकचका-
भेकातपत्रामजितेन पार्थः ॥२०॥
ittham vrajan bharatam eva varsam
kalena yavad gatavan prabhasam
tavac chasasa ksitim eka-cakram
ekatapatram ajitena parthah
ittham—like this; vrajan—while traveling; bharatam—India; eva—only;
varsam—the tract of land; kalena—in due course of time; yavat— when;
gatavan— visited; prabhasam—Prabhasa pilgrimage site; tavat—at that time;


--- Page 21 ---
Text 21] Questions by Vidura 21
sasasa—rules; ksitim—the world; eka-cakram—by one military force; eka—
one; atapatram—flag; ajitena—by the mercy of the unconquerable Krsna;
parthah—Maharaja Yudhisthira.
TRANSLATION
Thus, when he was in the land of Bharatavarsa traveling to all the places
of pilgrimage, he visited Prabhasasetra. At that time Maharaja Yudhisthira
was the emperor and held the world under one military strength and one
flag.
PURPORT
More than five thousand years ago, while Saint Vidura was traveling the
earth as a pilgrim, India was known as Bharatavarsa, as it is known even
today. The history of the world cannot give any systematic account for
more than three thousand years into the past, but before that the whole
world was under the flag and military strength of Maharaja Yudisthira,
who was the emperor of the world. At present there are hundreds and
thousands of flags flapping in the United Nations, but during the time of
Vidura there was, by the grace of Ajita, Lord Krsna, only one flag. The
nations of the world are very eager to again have one state under one flag,
but for this they must seek the favor of Lord Krsna, who alone can help
us to become one worldwide nation.
TEXT 21
तत्राथ হ্যগান सुदृद्विनष्टिं
वनं यथा वेणुजवद्धिसं्रयप्‌ |
~
संस्पर्धया दरधययानुशोचन्‌
सरस्वतीं प्रत्यगियाय तूष्णीम्‌ ॥२१॥
tatratha susrava suhrd-vinastim
vanam yatha venu-javahni-sarmsrayam
samspardhaya dagdham athanusocan
sarasvalim pratyag iyaya tuspim
tatra— there; atha—thereafter; Susrava—heard;suhrt—kinsmen; vinastim—
all dead; vanam—forest; yatha—as much as; venpu-javahni—fire due to the
bamboos; sarmsrayam—{friction with one another; sarmspardhaya—by vio-
lent passion; dagdham— burnt; atha—thus; anusocan—thinking; sarasvatim—
the River Sarasvati; pratyak — westward; iyaya— went; tusnim—silently.


--- Page 22 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION
At the place of pilgrimage at Prabhasa, it came to his knowledge that all
his relatives had died due to violent passion, just as an entire forest burns
due to fire produced by the friction of bamboos. After this he proceeded
west, where the River Sarasvati flows.
PURPORT
Both the Kauravas and the Yadavas were relatives of Vidura, and Vidura
heard of their extinction due to fratricidal war. The comparison of the
friction of forest bamboos to that of passionate human societies is appro-
priate. The whole world is compared to a forest. At any moment there
may be a flare up of fire in the forest due to friction. No one goes to the
forest to set it on fire, but due only to friction between bamboos, fire
takes place and burns an entire forest. Similarly, in the greater forest of
worldly transaction, the fire of war takes place because of the violent
passion of the conditioned souls illusioned by the external energy. Such a
worldly fire can be extinguished only by the water of the mercy cloud of
saints, just as a forest fire can be extinguished only by rains falling from a
cloud.
TEXT 22
तस्यां त्रितस्योशनसो মনামব
- AA
पृथोरथाप्रेरसितख वायोः ।
तीथं सुदाससख गवां गुह
यच्छराद्रदेवस्य स आसिषेवे ॥२२॥
tasyam tritasyo$anaso manos ca
prthor athagner asitasya vayoh
tirtharh sudasasya gavarm guhasya
yac chraddha-devasya sa asiseve
tasyam—on the bank of the River Sarasvati; tritasya— the pilgrimage site
named Trita; usanasah—the pilgrimage site named Us$ana; manoh ca—as
also of the pilgrimage site named Manu; prthoh—that of Prthu; atha—
thereafter; agneh—that of Agni; asitasya—that of Asita; vayoh—that of
Vayu; tirtham—places of pilgrimages; sudasasya—of the name Sudasa;
gavam—that of Go; guhasya—that of Guha; yat—thereupon; sraddha-
devasya—of the name Sraddhadeva; sah— Vidura; asiseve—duly visited and
performed the rituals.


--- Page 23 ---
Text 23) Questions by Vidura 23
TRANSLATION
On the bank of the River Sarasvati there were eleven places of
pilgrimage, namely, (1) Trita, (2) Usana, (3) Manu, (4) Prthu, (5) Agni,
(6) Asita, (7) Vayu, (8) Sudisa, (9) Go, (10) Guha and (11) Sraddhadeva.
Vidura visited all of them and duly performed rituals.
TEXT 23
<
अन्यानि |W EIR
3 -
कृतानि _ नानायतनानि विष्णोः ।
त्यङ्गमुख्याङ्कितमन्दिराणि
यदश्ंबात्ृष्णमनुखरन्ति ॥२३॥
anyani ceha dvija-deva-devaih
krtani nanayatanani vispoh
pratyanga-mukhyankita-mandirani
yad-darsanat krsnam anusmaranti
anyani—others; ca—also; iha—here; dvija-deva—great sages; devaih—by
demigods; krtani—established by; nana—various; ayatanani—various forms;
visnoh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prati—each and every;
anga—part; mukhya—the chief; anikita— marked; mandirani— temples; yat—
which; daréanat—by seeing from a distance; krsnam—the original Person-
ality of Godhead; anusmaranti—constantly remembers.
TRANSLATION
There were also many other temples of various forms of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Visnu, established by great sages and demigods.
These temples were marked with the chief emblems of the Lord, and they
reminded one always of the original Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna.
PURPORT
Human society is divided into four social orders of life and four divi-
sions, applying to each and every individual person. This system is called
varnasrama-dharma and has already been discussed in many places in this
great literature. The sages, or persons who completely devoted themselves
to the spiritual upliftment of the entire human society, were known as
dvija-deva, the best amongst the twice-born. The denizens of superior
planets, from the moon planet and upwards, were known as devas. Both


--- Page 24 ---
24 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
the dvije-devas and the devas always establish temples of Lord Visnu in His
various forms, such as Govinda, Madhusudana, Nrsimha, Madhava, Keéava,
Narayana, Padmanabha, Parthasarathi and many others. The Lord expands
Himself in innumerable forms, but all of them are nondifferent from one
another. Lord Visnu has four hands, and each hand holds a particular
item—either a conchshell, wheel, club or lotus flower. Of these four
emblems, the cakra, or wheel, is the chief. Lord Krsna, being the original
Visnu form, has only one emblem, namely the wheel, and therefore He is
sometimes called the Cakri. The Lord’s cakra is the symbol of the power
by which the Lord controls the whole manifestation. The tops of Visnu
temples are marked with the symbol of the wheel so that people may have
the chance to see the symbol from a very long distance and at once
remember Lord Krsna. The purpose of building very high temples is to
give people a chance to see them from a distant place. This system is
carried on in India whenever a new temple is constructed, and it appears
that it is coming down from a time before recorded history. The foolish
propaganda by atheists that temples were only constructed in later days is
refuted here because Vidura visited these temples at least 5,000 years ago,
and the temples of Visnu were in existence long, long before Vidura visited
them. The great sages and demigods never established statues of men or
demigods, but they established temples of Vispu for the benefit of
common men, to raise them to the platform of God consciousness.
TEXT 24
ततस्त्वतिव्रज्य सुराट्‌ृदध
सौवीरमत्स्यान्‌ इरुजाङ्गसां थच |
कालेन तापरद्यञ्ुनापुपेत्य
तत्रोद्धवं भागवतं ददं IRB
tatas tv ativrajya surastram rddham
sauvire-matsyan kurujangalams ca
kalena tavad yamunam upetya
tatroddhavarh bhagavatarn dadarse

tatah—from there; tu—but; ativrajya—by passing over; surastram—the
kingdom of Surat;rddham—very wealthy; sauvira—the kingdom of Sauvira;
matsyan—the kingdom of Matsya; kurujangalin—the kingdom of western
India up to the Delhi province; ca—also; kalena—in course of time;
tdvat—as soon as; yamundm—bank of the River Yamuna; upetya—reaching;


--- Page 25 ---
Text 24] Questions by Vidura 25
tatra—there; uddhavam—Uddhava, one of the prominent Yadus;
bhagavatam—the great devotee of Lord Krsna; dadarsa—happened to see.
TRANSLATION

Thereafter he passed through very wealthy provinces like Surat, Sauvira
and Matsya and through western India, known as Kurujarigala. At last he
reached the bank of the Yamuna, where he happened to meet Uddhava,
the great devotee of Lord Krsna.

PURPORT

The tract of land comprising about one hundred square miles from
modern Delhi to the Mathura district in Uttar Pradesh, including a portion
of the Gurgaon district in Punjab (Fast India), is considered to be the
topmost place of pilgrimage in all of India. This land is sacred because
Lord Krsna traveled through it many times. From the very beginning of
His appearance, He was at Mathura in the house of His maternal uncle
Kamsa, and He was reared by His foster father Maharaja Nanda at
Vrndavana. There are still many devotees of the Lord lingering there in
ecstasy in search of Krsna and His childhood associates, the gopis. It is not
that such devotees meet Krsna eye to eye in that tract of land, but a
devotee’s eagerly searching after Krsna is as good as his seeing Him per-
sonally. How this is so cannot be explained, but it is factually realized by
those who are pure devotees of the Lord. Philosophically, one can under-
stand that Lord Krsna and His remembrance are on the absolute plane and
that the very idea of searching for Him at Vrndavana in pure God
consciousness gives more pleasure to the devotee than seeing Him eye to
eye. Such devotees of the Lord see Him eye to eye at every moment, as is
confirmed in the Brahma-samhita:

premaiijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti.
yam Syamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupam
govindam adi-purusarm tam aham bhajami (Bs. 5.38)

“Those who are in ecstasy of love with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Syamasundara [Krsna], see Him always in their hearts due
to love and devotional service rendered to the Lord.” Both Vidura and
Uddhava were such elevated devotees, and therefore they both came to
the bank of the Yamuna and met each other.


--- Page 26 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
TEXT 25
स॒ वातदेवातुचरं NA
[ER प्रा तनयं प्रतीतम्‌ |
आलिङ्गय गादं प्रणयेन मद्र
खानाप्च्छद्धगवस्प्रजानाम्‌ HRI
sa vasudevanucararn prasantarn
brhaspateh prak-tanayarh pratitam
alingya gadharh pranayena bhadram
svanam aprcchad bhagavat-prajanam
sah— Vidura; vasudeva—Lord Krsna; anucaram—constant companion;
prasantam—very sober and gentle; brhaspateh—of Brhaspati, the learned
spiritual master of the demigods; prak—formerly; tanayam—son or disciple;
pratitam—acknowledged; alingya—embracing; gadham—very feelingly;
pranayena—in love; bhadram—auspicious; svanam—his own; aprcchat—
asked; bhagavat—of the Personality of Godhead; prajanam—family.
TRANSLATION
Then, due to his great love and feeling, Vidura embraced him
[ Uddhava] who was a constant companion of Lord Krsna and formerly a
great student of Brhaspati. Vidura then asked him for news of the family
of Lord Krsna, the Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Vidura was older than Uddhava, like a father, and therefore when the
two met, Uddhava bowed down before Vidura, and Vidura embraced him
because Uddhava was younger, like a son. Vidura’s brother Pandu was
Lord Kysna’s uncle, and Uddhava was a cousin to Lord Krsna. According
to social custom, therefore, Vidura was to be respected by Uddhava on the
level of his father. Uddhava was a great scholar in logic, and he was known
to be a son or disciple of Brhaspati, the greatly learned priest and spiritual
master of the demigods. Vidura asked Uddhava about the welfare of his
relatives, although he already knew that they were no longer in the world.
This inquiry appears to be very queer, but Srila Jiva Gosvami states that
the news was shocking to Vidura, who therefore inquired again due to
great curiosity. Thus his inquiry was psychological and not practical.


--- Page 27 ---
Text 26] Questions by Vidura 27
TEXT 26
FRE पुरुषो खनाम्य-
पा्मानुष्प्येह किटा्रीणो |
आसात उच्य; TIS विधाय
कृतक्षणो शलं TOW NRE
kaccit puranau purusau svanabhya-
padmanuvrttyeha kilavatirnau
asata urvyah kusalam vidhaya
krtaksanau kusalam Sura-gehe
kaccit—whether; puranau—the original; purusau—Personalities of God-
head (Krsna and Balarama); svanabhya—Brahma; padma-anuvrttyeha—by
the request of the one who is born from the lotus; kile—certainly;
avatirnau—incarnated; asate—are; urvyah—in the world; kusalam—well-
being; vidhaya—for doing so; krtaksanau—the elevators of everyone's
prosperity; kusalam—all well; Sura-gehe—in the house of Surasena.
TRANSLATION
[Please tell me] whether the original Personalities of Godhead, who
incarnated Themselves at the request of Brahma [who is born out of the
lotus flower from the Lord] and who have increased the prosperity of
the world by elevating everyone, are doing well in the house of Sarasena.
PURPORT
Lord Krsna and Balarama are not two different Personalities of God-
head. God is one without a second, but He expands Himself in many
forms without their being separate from one another. They are all plenary
expansions. The immediate expansion of Lord Krsna is Baladeva, and
Brahma, born from the lotus flower from Garbhodakasayi Visnu, is an
expansion of Baladeva. This indicates that Krsna and Baladeva are not
subjected to the regulations of the universe; on the contrary, the whole
universe is under Their subjugation. They appeared at the request of
Brahma to liberate the burden of the world, and They relieved the world
by many superhuman activities so that everyone became happy and pros-
perous. Without the grace of the Lord, no one can become happy and
prosperous. Because the happiness of the family of devotees of the Lord


--- Page 28 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
depends on the happiness of the Lord, Vidura first of all inquired about
the well-being of the Lord.
TEXT 27
कच्चित्कुरूणां परमः सहनो
भाषः स आस्ते [ERE शौरिः |
यो वै mgm पित्व्रददाति
. प॑
वरान्‌ वदान्यो वरतपेणेन ॥२७॥
kaccit kurunpam paramah suhrn no
bhamah sa aste sukham anga saurih
yo vai svasrnam pitrvad dadati
varan vadanyo vara tarpanena
kaccit— whether; kurinam—of the Kurus; paramah—greatest; suhrt—well-
wisher; nah—our; bhamah—brother-in-law; sah—he; aste—is; sukham—
happy; aniga— 0 Uddhava; saurih— Vasudeva; yah—one who;vai— certainly;
svasinam—of the sisters; pitrvat—like father; dadati— gives; varan—every-
thing desirable; vadanyoli—munificent; vara— wife; tarpanena—by pleasing.
TRANSLATION
[Please tell me] whether the best friend of the Kurus, our brother-in-
law Vasudeva, is doing well. He is very munificent. He is like a father to his
sister, and he is always pleasing to his wives.
PURPORT
Lord Krsna’s father, Vasudeva, had sixteen wives, and one of them,
named Pauravi or Rohini, the mother of Baladeva, was the sister of Vidura.
Vasudeva, therefore, is the husband of Vidura’s sister, and thus they were
brothers-in-law. Vasudeva’s sister Kunti was the wife of Pandu, Vidura’s
elder brother, and in that sense also, Vasudeva was brother-in-law to
Vidura. Kunti was younger than Vasudeva, and it was the duty of the
elder brother to treat younger sisters as daughters. Whenever anything was
needed by Kunti, it was munificently delivered by Vasudeva, due to his
great love for his younger sister. Vasudeva never dissatisfied his wives, and
at the same time he supplied the objects desired by his sister. He had
special attention for Kunti because she became a widow at an early age.
While inquiring about Vasudeva’s welfare, Vidura remembered all about
him and the family relationship.


--- Page 29 ---
Text 29] Questions by Vidura 29
TEXT 28
~ ₹
कचचिद्ररूथाधिपतियंदूनां
्र्युश्न आस्ते सुखमङ्ग॒वीरः |
यं रुकिभिणी भगवतोऽभिलेभे
~ ~
sme fm swe ॥२८॥
kaccid varuthadhipatir yadunam
pradyumna aste sukham anga viral
yam rukmini bhagavato’bhilebhe
aradhya vipran smaram adisarge
kaccit—whether; varutha—military; adhipatih—commander-in-chief;
yadunam—of the Yadus; pradyumnah—the son of Krsna named
Pradyumna; aste—is; sukham—happy; anga—O Vidura; virah—the great
warrior; yam—whom; rukmini—the wife of Krsna named Rukmint;
bhagavatah—from the Personality of Godhead; abhilebhe—got as a prize;
aradhya—pleasing; vipran—brahmanas; smaram--Cupid (Kamadeva); ৫৫৮
sarge—in his previous life.
TRANSLATION
0 Uddhava, please tell me how is Pradyumna, the commander-in-chief
of the Yadus, who was Cupid in a former life? Rukmini bore him as her
son from Lord Krsna, by the grace of brahmanas whom she pleased.
PURPORT
According to Srila Jiva Gosvami, Smara (Cupid, or Kamadeva) is one of
the eternal associates of Lord Krsna. Jiva Gosvami has explained this very
elaborately in his treatise Krsna-sandarbha.
TEXT 29
कचित्सखं सात्वतवृष्णिमोज-
दारा्हकाणामधिपः स॒ आस्ते |
-
यमम्यवि्वच्छतपत्रनेत्रो
नृपाषनाश्ां परिहृत्य UT ॥२९॥


--- Page 30 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
kaccit sukham satvata-vrsni-bhoja-
dasarha-kanam-adhipah sa aste
yam abhyasificac chata-patranetro
nrpasanasam parihrtya durat
kaccit—whether; sukham—all well; satvata—the Satvata race; vrsni—the
Vrsni dynasty; bhoja—the Bhoja dynasty; dasarha-kanam—the Dasarha
race; adhipah —King Ugrasena; sah—he; aste—do exist; yam—whom;
abhyagificat—installed; sata-patra-netrah—Lord Sri Krsna; nrpasanasam—
hope of the royal throne; parihrtya—giving up; dierat—at a distant place.
TRANSLATION
O my friend, [tell me] whether Ugrasena, the King of the Satvatas,
Vrsnis, Bhojas and Dasarhas, is now doing well. He went far away from His
kingdom, leaving aside all hopes of his royal throne, but Lord Krsna again
reinstalled him.
TEXT 30
slag: सौम्य स॒तः মহ্য
आस्तेऽग्रणी Wat साधु साम्बः |
असूत थं उाम्बव्रती Fas
৬ -
देवं गुं योम्बिकया धृतोऽग्र ॥३०॥
kaccid dhareh saumya sutah sadrksa
aste ‘grant rathinam sadhu sambah
astita yam jambavati vratadhya
devam 81407 yo ‘mbikaya dhrto ‘gre
kaccit—whether; dhareh—of the Personality of Godhead; saumya—O
grave one; sutah—son; sadrksa—similar; aste—fare well; agranih—forward;
rathinam—of the warriors; sadhu—well behaved; sambah—Samba; asuta—
gave birth; yam—whom; jambavati—Jambavati, a queen of Lord Krsna’s;
vratadhya—enriched by vows; devam—the demigod; guham—of the name
Karttikeya; yah— whom; ambikaya— unto the wife of Siva; dhrtah—born;
agre—in the previous birth.
TRANSLATION
O gentle one, does Samba fare well? He exactly resembles the son of the
Personality of Godhead. In a previous birth he was born as Karttikeya in


--- Page 31 ---
Text 31] Questions by Vidura 31
the womb of the wife of Lord Siva, and now he has been born in the womb
of Jambavati, the most enriched wife of Krsna.
PURPORT
Lord Siva, one of the three qualitative incarnations of the Personality of
Godhead, is the plenary expansion of the Lord. Karttikeya, born of him, is
on the level of Pradyumna, another son of Lord Krsna. When Lord Sri
Krsna descends into the material world, all His plenary portions also
appear with Him to exhibit different functions of the Lord. But for the
pastimes at Vrndavana, all functions are performed by the Lord’s dif-
ferent plenary expansions. Vasudeva is a plenary expansion of Narayana.
When the Lord appeared as Vasudeva before Devaki and Vasudeva, He
appeared in His capacity as Narayana. Similarly, all the demigods of the
heavenly kingdom appeared as associates of the Lord in the forms of
Pradyumna, Samba, Uddhava, etc. It is learned here that Kamadeva
appeared as Pradyumna, Karttikeya as Samba, and one of the Vasus as
Uddhava. All of them served in their different capacities in order to enrich
the pastimes of Krsna.
TEXT 31
५.4
क्षेम॑ स॒ कच्चिद्युयुधान आस्ते
यः FEATS: |
FASTETNEATIT
गवि तदीयां यतिभिदुंरापाप्‌ ॥३१॥
ksemar sa kaccid yuyudhana 25८९
yah phalgunal labdha-dhanu-rahasyah
lebhe ‘iijasadhoksaja-sevayaiva
gatir tadiyari yatibhir durapam
ksemam—all good; sah—he; kaccit—whether; yuyudhanah—Satyaki;aste—
is there; yah—one who; phalgunat—from Arjuna; labdha— achieved; dhanu-
rahasyah—one who understands the intricacies of military art; lebhe—
also achieved; afijasa—summarily; adhoksaja—transcendence; sevaya—by
service; eva—certainly; gatim—destination; tadiyam—transcendental; yati-
bhih—by great renouncers; durapam—very difficult to achieve.


--- Page 32 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION

0 Uddhava, does Yuyudhana fare well? He learned the intricacies of the
military art from Arjuna and attained the transcendental destination which
is very difficult to reach even for great renouncers.

PURPORT

The destination of transcendence is to become the personal associate of
the Personality of Godhead, who is known as adhoksaja, He who is beyond
the reach of the senses. The renouncers of the world, the sannyasis, give up
all worldly connections, namely, family, wife, children, friends, home,
wealth—everything—to attain the transcendental bliss of Brahman happi-
ness. But adhoksaja happiness is beyond Brahman happiness. The empiric
philosophers enjoy a transcendental quality of bliss by philosophical
speculation on the Supreme Truth, but beyond that pleasure there is the
pleasure which is enjoyed by Brahman in His eternal form of the
Personality of Godhead. Brahman bliss is enjoyed by living entities after
liberation from material bondage. But Param Brahman, the Personality of
Godhead, enjoys eternally a bliss of His own potency, which is called the
ahladini potency. The empiric philosopher who studies Brahman by nega-
tion of the external features has not yet learned the quality of the ahladint
potency of Brahman. Out of many potencies of the Omnipotent, there are
three features of His internal potency—namely sarmvit, sandhini and
ahladini. And in spite of their strict adherence to the principles of yama,
niyama, asana, dhyana, dharana and pranayama, the great yogis and jianis
are unable to enter into the internal potency of the Lord. This internal
potency is, however, easily realized by the devotees of the Lord by dint of
devotional service. Yuyudhana achieved this stage of life, just as he
achieved expert knowledge in military science from Arjuna. Thus his life
was successful to the fullest extent from both the material and spiritual
angles of vision. That is the way of devotional service to the Lord.

TEXT 32
FAT बुधः खस्त्यनभीव आप्ते
ARRAN मगवसेप्रपन्नः |
यः कृष्णपादङ्कितमागंपास-
seq ्रेमिमिन्नधै्यः ॥२२॥


--- Page 33 ---
Text 33] Questions by Vidura 33
kaccid budhah svastyanamiva aste
Svaphalka-putro bhagavat-prapannah
yah krsna-padankita-marga-parsusv-
acestata prema-vibhinna-dhairyah
kaccit—whether; budhah—very learned; svasti—well;anamivah —faultless;
aste—do exist; svaphalka-putrah—the son of Svaphalka, Akrura; bhagavat—
regarding the Personality of Godhead; prapannah—surrendered; yah—one
who; krsna—the Lord; pada-ankita—marked with footprints; marga—path;
pamsusu—dust; acestata—exhibited; prema-vibhinna—lost in transcenden-
tal love; dhairyah—mental equilibrium.
TRANSLATION
Please tell me whether Akrura, the son of Svaphalka, is doing well. He is
a faultless soul surrendered unto the Personality of Godhead. He once lost
his mental equilibrium due to his ecstasy of transcendental love and fell
down on the dust of a road which was marked with the footprints of Lord
Krsna.
PURPORT
When Akriara came to Vrndavana in search of Krsna, he saw the foot-
prints of the Lord on the dust of Nanda-grama and at once fell on them in
ecstasy of transcendental love. This ecstasy is possible for a devotee who is
fully absorbed in incessant thoughts of Krsna. Such a pure devotee of the
Lord is naturally faultless because he is always associated with the su-
premely pure Personality of Godhead. Constant thought of the Lord is the
antiseptic method for keeping oneself free from the infectious contamina-
tion of the material qualities. The pure devotee of the Lord is always in
company with the Lord by thinking of Him. Yet, in the particular context
of time and place, the transcendental emotions take a different turn, and
this breaks the mental equilibrium of the devotee. Lord Caitanya was the
typical example of the transcendental ecstasy, as we can understand from
the life of this incarnation of God.
TEXT 33
sfafted देवकमोजयपुत्या
विष्णुप्रजाया হন देवमातुः ।
या वै amin दधार ইন
त्रयी यथा यज्ञमितानमर्थम्‌ 1330


--- Page 34 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
kaccic chivarn devaka-bhoja-putrya
vispu-prajaya iva deva-matuh
ya vai sva-garbhent dadhara 06007
trayi yatha yajia-vitanam artham
kaccit—whether; sivam—everything well; devaka-bhoja-putryah—of the
daughter of King Devaka-bhoja; visnu-prajayah—of she who gave birth to
the Personality of Godhead; iva—like that of; deva-matuh—of the mother
of the demigods (Aditi); ya—one who; vai—indeed; sva-garbhena—by her
own womb; dadhara—conceived; devam—the Supreme Lord; trayi—the
Vedas; yatha—as much as; yajiia-vitanam—spreading the sacrificial; artham—
purpose.
TRANSLATION
As the Vedas are the reservoir of sacrificial purposes, so the daughter of
King Devaka-bhoja conceived the Supreme Personality of Godhead in her
womb, as did the mother of the demigods. Is she [ Devaki] doing well?
PURPORT
The Vedas are full of transcendental knowledge and spiritual values, and
thus Devaki, the mother of Lord Krsna, conceived the Lord in her womb
as the personified meaning of the Vedas. There is no difference between
the Vedas and the Lord. The Vedas aim at the understanding of the Lord,
and the Lord is the Vedas personified. Devaki is compared to the meaning-
ful Vedas and the Lerd to their purpose personified.
TEXT 34
अपिखिदास्ते भगवान्‌ सुखं না
यः মানেনা कापदुघोऽनिरुदधः |
यमाप्रनन्ति सख दि शब्दयोनिं
-
मनोमयं सच्चतुरीयतच्वम्‌ ॥।२३४॥
api-svid aste bhagavan sukhar vo
yah satvatarn kama-dugho ’niruddhah
yam amananti sma hi sabda-yonim
mano-mayam sattva-turtya-tattvam
api—as also; svit—whether; aste—does He; bhagavan—the Personality of
Godhead; sukham—all happiness; vah—of you; yah—one who; satvatam—
of the devotees; kama-dughah—source of all desires; aniruddhah—the


--- Page 35 ---
Text 35] Questions by Vidura 35
plenary expansion Aniruddha; yam—whom; amananti—accept; sma—from
yore;hi—certainly;sabda-yonim—the cause of the Rg-veda;manah-mayam—
creator of the mind; sattva—transcendental; turiya—the fourth expansion;
tattvam—principle.
TRANSLATION
May I inquire whether Aniruddha is doing well? He is the fulfiller of all
the desires of the pure devotees and has been considered from yore to be
the cause of the Rg-veda, the creator of the mind and the fourth plenary
expansion of Visnu.
PURPORT
Adi-caturbuja, the original expansions from Baladeva, are Vasudeva,
Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. All of Them are Visnu-tattvas or
nondifferent Personalities of Godhead. In the incarnation of Sri Rama, all
these different expansions appeared for particular pastimes. Lord Rama
is the original Vasudeva, and His brothers were Sankarsana, Pradyumna
and Aniruddha. Aniruddha is also the cause of Maha-Visnu, from whose
breathing the Rg-veda appeared. All this is nicely explained in the
Markandeya Purana. In the incarnation of Lord Krsna, Aniruddha
appeared as the son of the Lord. Lord Krsna in Dvaraka is the Vasudeva
expansion of the original group. The original Lord Krsna never leaves
Goloka Vrndavana. All the plenary expansions are one and the same
Visnu-tattva, and there is no difference in their potency.
TEXT 35
RA
अपिस्विदन्ये च निजामदेव-
मनन्यवृत्या समनुव्रता ये।
हृदीकसस्यात्मजचाष्देष्ण-
गदादयः aft चरन्ति सौम्य nga
api-svid anye ca nijatma daivam
ananya-vrttya samanuvrata ye
hrdika-satyatmaja-carudesna
gadadayah svasti caranti saumya
api—as also; svit—whether; anye—others; ca—and; nija-atma—of one’s
own self; daivam—Sri Krsna; ananya—absolutely; vrttya—faith; samanu-
vratah—followers; ye—all those; hrdika—llrdika; satye-atmaja—born of


--- Page 36 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
Satyabhama; carudesna—Carudesna; gada—Gada; adayah—and others; sva-
sti—all well; caranti— pass time; saumya—O sober one.
TRANSLATION
0 sober one, others, such as Hrdika, Carudesna, the son of Satyabhama,
and Gada, who accept Lord Sri Krsna as the soul of the self and thus
follow His path without deviation—are they well?
TEXT 36
अपि खदोमभ्यां विजियाच्युताभ्यां
~~
धर्मेण ঘমঃ परिपाति सेतुम्‌ ।
- ৬
दुर्योधनोऽतप्यत यत्सभायां
साप्राज्यलष््म्या রিজযান্তব্বব্যা ॥२३६॥
api sva-dorbhyam vijayacyutabhyarn
dharmena dharmah paripati setum
duryodhano’tapyata yat-sabhayam
samrajya-laksmya-vijayanuvrttya
api—as also; sva-dorbhyam—own arms; vijaya— Arjuna; acyutabhyam—
along with Sri Krsna; dharmena—on religious principles; dharmah—King
Yudhisthira; paripati—maintains; setum—the respect of religion; duryo-
dhanah—Duryodhana; atapyata—envied; yat—whose; sabhayam—royal
assembly; samrajya—imperial; laksmya—opulence; vijaya-anuvrttya—by the
service of Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
Also let me inquire whether Maharaja Yudhisthira is now maintaining
the kingdom according to religious principles and with respect for the path
of religion. Formerly Duryodhana was burning with envy because
Yudhisthira was being protected by the arms of Krsna and Arjuna as if
they were his own arms.
PURPORT
Maharaja Yudhisthira was the emblem of religion. When he was ruling
his kingdom with the help of Lord Krsna and Arjuna, the opulence of his
kingdom surpassed all imaginations of the opulence of the kingdom of
heaven. His actual arms were Lord Krsna and Arjuna, and thus he surpassed
everyone's opulence. Duryodhana, being envious of this opulence, planned


--- Page 37 ---
Text 37] Questions by Vidura 37
so many schemes to put Yudhisthira into difficulty, and at last the Battle
of Kuruksetra was brought about. After the Battle of Kuruksetra, Maharaja
Yudhisthira was again able to rule his legitimate kingdom, and he rein-
stated the principles of honor and respect for religion. That is the beauty
of a kingdom ruled by a pious king like Maharaja Yudhisthira.
TEXT 37
किं वा कृताषेष्वघमत्यमषीं
मीभोऽदिवदीषैतमं sage |
य्ाङ्खिपातं रणभूनं सेहे
ant गदायाश्चरतो विचित्रम्‌ ।३५॥
kin va krtaghesv aghamaty amarsi
bhimo hivad dirghatamarh vyamuiicat
yasyanghri-patam rana-bhur na sehe
margar gadayas carato vicitram
kim—whether; va—either; krta—performed; aghesu—unto the sinners;
aghamati—angry; amarsi—unconquerable; bhimah— Bhima; ahivat—like the
cobra; dirghatamam—long-cherished; vyamuiicat—has released; yasya—
whose; anghri-patam— putting on the steps; rana-bhuh—the field of battle;
na—could not; sehe—tolerate; margam—the path; gadayah—by the clubs;
caratah— playing; vicitram— wonderful.
TRANSLATION
[Please tell me] whether the unconquerable Bhima, who is like a cobra,
has released his long-cherished anger upon the sinners? The field of battle
could not tolerate even the wonderful playing of his club when he stepped
on the path.
PURPORT
Vidura knew the strength of Bhima. Whenever Bhima was on the battle-
field, his steps on the path and the wonderful playing of his club were
unbearable for the enemy. Powerful Bhima did not take steps against the
sons of Dhrtaragtra for a long time. Vidura’s inquiry was whether he had
yet released his anger, which was like that of a suffering cobra. When a
cobra releases its venom after long-cherished anger, its victim cannot
survive.


--- Page 38 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
TEXT 38
कथिदयश्लोधा रथयूथपानां
गाण्डी्रन्नोपरतारिरास्ते |
अरधितो यच्छरकूटगूढो
मायाकिरातो गिरिशस्तुतोष ॥३८॥
kaccid yasodha ratha-yuthapanam
gandiva-dhanvoparatarir aste
alaksito yac-chara-kuta-gudho
maya-kirato girisas tutosa
kaccit—whcther; yasodha— famous; ratha-yuthapanam—amongst the great
chariot warriors; gandiva—Gandiva; dhanva—bow; uparatarih—one who
has vanquished the enemies; aste—doing well; alaksitah— without being
identified; yat— whose; sara-kiita-gudhah—being covered by arrows; maya-
kiratah—false hunter; giriSah— Lord Siva; tutosa—was satisfied.
TRANSLATION
[Please tell me] whether Arjuna, whose bow bears the name Gandiva
and who is always famous amongst the chariot warriors for vanquishing
his enemies, is doing well. He once satisfied Lord Siva by covering him
with arrows when Siva came as an unidentified false hunter.
PURPORT
Lord Siva tested Arjuna’s strength by picking a quarrel with him over a
hunted boar. He confronted Arjuna in the false dress of a hunter, and
Arjuna covered him with arrows until Lord Siva was satisfied with
Arjuna’s fighting. He offered Arjuna the Pasupati weapon and blessed him.
Here Vidura inquired about the great warrior’s well-being.
TEXT 39
यमान्रुतस्वि्तनयौ पृथायाः
पार्ैैतौ पक्ष्मभिरक्षिणीव ।
रेमात उदाय . দুদ स्वरिक्थं
परात्सुपर्णाविव afer ॥२९॥


--- Page 39 ---
Text 39] Questions by Vidura 39
yamav utasvit tanayau prthayah
parthair vrtau paksmabhir aksiniva
remata uddaya mrdhe sva-riktham
parat suparnav iva vajri-vaktrat

yamau—twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) utasvit—whether; tanayau—sons;
prthayah—of Prtha; parthaih—by the sons of Prtha; vrtau—protected;
paksmabhih—by shields; aksini—of the eyes; iva—like; remate—playing
carelessly; uddaya—snatching; mrdhe—in the fight; sva-riktham—own
property; parat—from the enemy Duryodhana; suparpau—Garuda, the
carrier of Lord Visnu; iva—like;vajri-vaktrat—from the mouth of Indra.

TRANSLATION

Are the twin brothers who are protected by their brothers doing well?
Just as the eye is always protected by the eyelid, they are protected by
the sons of Prtha, who snatched back their rightful kingdom from the
hands of their enemy Duryodhana, just as Garuda snatched nectar from
the mouth of Indra, the thunderbolt carrier. ॥

PURPORT

Indra, the King of heaven, carries a thunderbolt in his hand and is very
strong, yet Garuda, the carrier of Lord Visnu, was able to snatch nectar
from his mouth. Similarly, Duryodhana was as stong as the King of
heaven, and still the sons of Prtha, the Pandavas, were able to snatch away
their kingdom from Duryodhana. Both Garuda and the Parthas are pet
devotees of the Lord, and thus it was possible for them to face such
strong enemies.

Vidura’s inquiry was about the youngest brothers of the Pandavas,
namely Nakula and Sahadeva. These twin brothers were sons of Madri,
the stepmother of the other Pandavas. But although they were step-
brothers, because Kunti took charge of them after the departure of
Madri with her husband Maharaja Pandu, Nakula and Sahadeva were as
goad as the other three Pandavas, Yudhisthira, Bhima and Arjuna. The
five brothers are known in the world as regular brothers. The three elder
Pandavas took care of the younger brothers, just as the eyelid takes care
of the eye. Vidura was anxious to know whether, after winning back their
own kingdom from the hands of Duryodhana, the younger brothers were
still living happily under the care of the elder brothers.


--- Page 40 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
TEXT 40
अदो wR Asked
राजपिंवर्येण AAR तेन।
TEXAN ऽधिरथो Af
घनुरितीयः FART: ॥७०॥
aho prthapi dhriyate’rbhakarthe
rajarsi-varyena vinapi tena
yas tv eka-viro ’dhiratho vijigye
dhanur dvitiyah kakubhas catasrah

aho—O my lord; prtha—Kunti; api—also; dhriyate—bears her life;
arbhaka-arthe—for the sake of fatherless children; rajarsi—King Pandu;
varyena—the best; vinapi— without him; tena—him; yah—one who; tu—but;
eka—alone; virah—the warrior; adhirathah—commander; vijigye— could
conquer; dhanuh—the bow; dvitiyah— the second; kukubhah— directions;
catasrah—four.

TRANSLATION

O my lord, is Prtha still living? She lived only for the sake of her
fatherless children; otherwise it was impossible for her to live without
King Pandu, who was the greatest commander and who alone conquered
the four directions simply with the help of a second bow.

PURPORT

A faithful wife cannot live without her lord, the husband, and therefore
all widows used to voluntarily embrace the burning fire which consumed
the dead husband. This system was very common in India because all the
wives were chaste and faithful to their husbands. Later on, with the
advent of the age of Kali, the wives gradually began to be less adherent to
their husbands, and the voluntary embrace of the fire by the widows
became a thing of the past. Very recently the system was abolished, since
the voluntary system had become a forcible social custom.

When Maharaja Pandu died, both his wives, namely Kunti and Madri,
were prepared to embrace the fire, but Madri requested Kunti to live for
the sake of the younger children, the five Pandavas. This was agreed upon
by Kunti at the added request of Vyasadeva. In spite of her great
bereavement, Kunti decided to live, not to enjoy life in the absence of her
husband, but only to give protection to the children. This incidence is
referred to here by Vidura because he knew all the facts about his sister-


--- Page 41 ---
Text 41] Questions by Vidura 41
in-law, Kuntidevi. It is understood that Maharaja Pandu was a great
warrior and that he alone, with the help of bow and arrow, could conquer
the world’s four directions. In the absence of such a husband, it was
almost impossible for Kunti to live on even as a widow, but she had to do
it for the sake of the five children.
TEXT 41
सोम्यानुशोे तमधःपतन्तं
"a परेताय fgg মঃ।
निर्यापितो येन॒ aE
अहं स्वपुत्रान्‌ समनुत्रतेन ॥४१॥
saumyanusoce tam adhah-patantam
bhratre paretaya vidudruhe yah
niryapito yena suhrt sva-purya
aham sva-putran samanuvratena
saumya—O gentle one; anusoce—just lamenting; tam—him; adhah-
patantam— gliding down; bhratre—on his brother’s; paretaya— death; vidud-
ruhe—revolted against; yah—one who; niryapitah—driven out; yena—by
whom; suhrt—well-wisher; sva-puryah—from his own house; aham— myself;
sva-putran—with his own sons; samanuvratena—accepting the same line of
action.
TRANSLATION
0 gentle one, I simply lament for him [Dhrtarastra] who rebelled
against his brother after death. By him I was driven out of my own house,
although I am his sincere well-wisher. He did this by accepting the line of
action adopted by his own sons.
PURPORT
Vidura did not ask about the welfare of his elder brother because there
was no chance of his well-being, only news of his gliding down to hell.
Vidura was a sincere well-wisher for Dhrtarastra, and he had a thought
about him in the corner of his heart. He lamented that Dhrtarastra could
rebel against the sons of his dead brother Pandu and that he could drive
him (Vidura) out of his own house on the dictation of his crooked sons.
In spite of these actions, Vidura never became an enemy of Dhrtarastra
but continued to be his well-wisher, and at the last stage of Dhrtarastra’s


--- Page 42 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
life, it was he only who proved to be his real friend. Such is the behavior
of a Vaigpava like Vidura: he desires all good, even for his enemies.
TEXT 42
सोऽहं  दरेमैत्यैबिडम्बनेन
यो नृणां चालयतो विधातुः ।
नान्योपठक््यः पदवीं प्रसादा-
शरामि पर्यन्‌ गतपिस्मयोऽत्र ॥४२॥
so "ham harer martya-vidambanena
0180 nrnam calayato vidhatuh
nanyopalaksyah padavim prasadac
carami pasyan gata-vismayo ’tra
sah aham—therefore,I; hareh—of the Personality of Godhead; martya—
in this mortal world; vidambanena—without being recognized; drsah—on
sight; nrnam—of the people in general; calayatah —bewildering; vidhatuh—
in order to do it; na—not; anya—other; upalaksyah—seen by others;
padavim—glories; prasadat—by the grace of; carami—do travel; pasyan—by
seeing; gata-vismayah—without doubt; atra—in this matter.
TRANSLATION
I am not astonished at this, having traveled over the world without
being seen by others. The activities of the Personality of Godhead, which
are like those of a man in this mortal world, are bewildering to others, but
I know of His greatness by His grace, and thus I am happy in all respects.
PURPORT
Although he was the brother of Dhrtaragtra, Vidura was completely
different. By the grace of Lord Krsna, he was not as foolish as his
brother, and thus his brother’s association could not influence him.
Dhrtaragtra and his materialistic sons wanted to falsely lord it over the
world by dint of their own strength. The Lord encouraged them in
this, and thus they became more and more bewildered. But Vidura
wanted to achieve sincere devotional service of the Lord and therefore
became a soul absolutely surrendered to the Absolute Personality of God-
head. He could realize this in the progress of his pilgrim’s journey, and
thus he was freed from all doubts. He was not at all sorry to be bereft of
his hearth and home because he now had experience that dependence


--- Page 43 ---
Text 43] Questions by Vidura 43
on the mercy of the Lord is a greater freedom than so-called freedom at
home. A person should not be in the renounced order of life unless he is
firmly convinced of being protected by the Lord. This stage of life is
explained in Bhagavad-gita as abhayam sattva-sarmsuddhih: every living
entity is factually completely dependent on the mercy of the Lord, but
unless one is in the pure state of existence, he cannot be established in this
position. This stage of dependence is called sattva-samsuddhih, or purifica-
tion of one’s existence. The result of such purification is exhibited in
fearlessness. A devotee of the Lord, who is called narayapa-para, is never
afraid of anything because he is always aware of the fact that the Lord
protects him in all circumstances. With this conviction, Vidura traveled
alone, and he was not seen or recognized by any friend or foe. Thus he
enjoyed freedom of life without obligation to the many duties of the
world.

When Lord Sri Krsna was personally present in the mortal world in His
eternal blissful form of Syamasundara, those who were not pure devotees
of the Lord could not recognize Him or know His glories. Avajananti mari
midha manugim tanum asritam (Bg. 9.11): He is always bewildering to the
nondevotees, but He is always seen by the devotees by dint of their pure
devotional service to Him.

TEXT 43
w qt त्रिमदोत्पथानां
महीं एुश्वार्यतां चमूभिः ।
वधात्यपव्यापिलिरी्पयेशे-
ऽप्युवैक्षताघं मगवान्‌ FEY ॥४७२॥
nunar nrpanarn tri-madotpathanam
mahim-muhus$ calayatam camubhih
vadhat prapannarti-jihirsayeso
’py upaiksataghar bhagavan kurunam

ninam—of course; nrpanam— of the kings; tri—three; mada-utpathanam—
going astray out of false pride; mahim—earth; muhuh—censtantly;
calayatam—agitating; camubhih—by movement of soldiers; vadhat—from
the act of killing; prapanna—surrendered; arti-jihirsaya—willing to relieve
the distress of the sufferers; iSah—the Lord; api—in spite of; upaiksata—
waited; agham—offenses; bhagavan—the Supreme Lord; kurupam—of the
Kurus.


--- Page 44 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION

Despite His being the Lord and being always willing to relieve the
distress of sufferers, He [Krsna] refrained from killing the Kurus, although
they committed all sorts of sins and although He saw other kings constantly
agitating the earth by their strong military movements carried out under
the dictation of three kinds of false pride.

PURPORT

As declared in Bhagavad-gita, the Lord appears in the mortal world to
execute His much-needed mission of killing the miscreants and giving
protection to the suffering faithful. In spite of that mission, Lord Krsna
tolerated the insult to Draupadi by the Kurus and the injustices perpetrated
against the Pandavas, as well as insults to Himself. The question may be
raised, “Why did He tolerate such injustices and insults in His presence?
Why did He not chastise the Kurus immediately?” When Draupadi was
insulted in the assembly by the Kurus by their attempt to see her naked
in the presence of all, the Lord protected Draupadi by supplying an
unlimited length of clothing. But He did not chastise the insulting party
immediately. This silence of the Lord did not mean, however, that He
excused the offenses of the Kurus. There were many other kings on earth
who had become very proud of three kinds of possessions—wealth, educa-
tion and followers—and they were constantly agitating the earth by move-
ments of military strength. The Lord was just waiting to get them together
on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra and kill them all at one time, just to make
a short-cut in His killing mission. Godless kings or heads of state, when
puffed up by advancement of material wealth, education and increase of
population, always make a show of military strength and give trouble to
the innocent. When Lord Krsna was personally present, there were many
such kings all over the world, and He thus arranged for the Battle of
Kuruksetra. In His manifestation of visve-ripa, the Lord expressed His
mission of killing as follows: “I have willingly descended on the earth in
My capacity of inexorable Time in order to decrease the unwanted popu-
lation. I shall finish all those who have assembled here except you, the
Pandavas. This killing does not wait for you to take part in it. It is already
arranged: all will be killed by Me. If you want to become famous as the
hero of the battlefield and thus enjoy the booty of war, then, O
Savyasacin, just become the immediate cause of this killing and thus take
the credit. I have already killed all the great warriors, Bhisma, Drona,
Jayadratha, Karna and many other great generals. Do not worry. Fight the
battle and be famous as a great hero.” (Bg. 11.32-34)


--- Page 45 ---
Text 44] Questions by Vidura 45
The Lord always wants to see His devotee as the hero of some episode
which He Himself performs. He wanted to see His devotee and friend
Arjuna as the hero of the Battle of Kuruksetra, and thus 116 waited for all
the miscreants of the world to assemble. That, and nothing else, is the
explanation of His waiting.
TEXT 44
अजस जन्मोत्पथनाशनाय
कममाण्यकरत्रदणाय पुंतापू ।
- -
नन्वन्यथा फोऽदति देहयोगं
परो गुणानाष्ुत॒ कम॑तन्त्रम्‌ ॥४४॥
ajasya janmotpatha-nasanaya
karmany akartur grahanaya purisam
nanv anyatha ko 110৫8 deha-yogarn
paro gupanam uta karma-tantram
ajasya—of the unborn; janma—appearance; utpatha-nasanaya—for the
sake of annihilating the upstarts; karmani—works; akartuh—of one who
has nothing to do; grahanaya—to take up; puriisam—of all persons; nanu
anyatha—otherwise; kah—who; arhati—may deserve; deha-yogam— contact
of the body; parah—transcendental; gunpanam—of the three modes of
nature; uta—what to speak of; karma-tantram—the law of action and
reaction.
TRANSLATION
The appearance of the Lord is manifested for the annihilation of the
upstarts. His activities are transcendental and are enacted for the
understanding of all persons. Otherwise, since the Lord is transcendental
to all material modes, what purpose could He serve by coming to earth?
PURPORT
Isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah (Brahma-sambhita, 5.1):
the form of the Lord is eternal, blissful and all-knowing. His so-called
birth is therefore an appearance only, like the birth of the sun on the
horizon. His birth does not, like that of the living entities, take place
under the influence of material nature and the bondage of the reactions
of past deeds. His works and activities are independent pastimes and are


--- Page 46 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
not subject to the reactions of material nature. In Bhagavad-gita it is
said:
na mam karmani limpanti na me karma-phale sprha
iti mam yo ’bhijanati karmabhir na sa baddhyate (Bg. 4.14)

The law of karma enacted by the Supreme Lord for the living entities
cannot be applicable to Him, nor has the Lord any desire to improve Him-
self by activities like those of ordinary living beings. Ordinary living beings
work for the improvement of their conditional lives. But the Lord is al-
ready full of all opulence, all strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge
and all renunciation. Why should He desire improvement? No one can
excel Him in any opulence, and therefore the desire for improvement is
absolutely useless for Him. One should always discriminate between the
activities of the Lord and those of ordinary living beings. Thus one may
come to the right conclusion regarding the Lord’s transcendental position.
One who can come to the conclusion of the Lord’s transcendence can be-
come a devotee of the Lord and can at once be free from all reactions of
past deeds. It is said, karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam: The
Lord minimizes or nullifies the reactionary influence of the devotees’ past
deeds. (B.s. 5:54)

The activities of the Lord are to be accepted and relished by all living
entities. His activities are to attract the ordinary man towards the Lord.
The Lord always aets in favor of the devotees, and therefore ordinary
men who are fruitive actors or seekers of salvation may be
attracted to the Lord when He acts as protector of the devotees. The
fruitive actors can attain their goals by devotional service, and the
salvationists can also attain their goal in life by devotional service to the
Lord. The devotees neither want the fruitive results of their work nor do
they want any kind of salvation. They relish the glorious superhuman
activities of the Lord, such as His lifting Govardhana Hill, His killing the
demon Putana in infancy, etc. His activities are enacted to attract all kinds
of men—karmis, jianis and bhaktas. Because He is transcendental to all
laws of karma, there is no possibility of His accepting a form of maya as
is forced on the ordinary living entities who are bound by the actions and
reactions of their own deeds.

The secondary purpose of His appearance is to annihilate the upstart
asuras and to stop the nonsense of atheistic propaganda by less intelligent
persons. By the Lord’s causeless mercy, the asuras who are killed
personally by the Personality of Godhead get salvation. The meaningful


--- Page 47 ---
Text 45] Questions by Vidura 47
appearance of the Lord is always distinct from ordinary birth. Even the
pure devotees have no connection with the material body, and certainly
the Lord, who appears as He is, in His sac-cid-ananda form, is not limited
by a material form.
TEXT 45
तस्य॒ भरप्ासिललोखूपाना-
सवसितानामनुञ्चासने स्वे ।
अर्थाय जातस्य यदुष्वजस्य
बातो सखे dw तीर्थकीर्तेः ।४५॥
tasya prapannakhila-loka-panam
avasthitanam anusasane sve
arthaya jatasya yadusv ajasya
vartam sakhe kirtaya tirtha-kirteh
tasya—His; prapanna—surrendered; akhila-loka-panam—all rulers of the
entire universe; avasthitanam—situated in; anusasane—under the control
of; sve—own self; arthaya—for the interest of; jatasya—of the born;
yadusu—in the family of the Yadus; ajasya—of the unborn; vartam—
topics; sakhe—O my friend; kirtaya—please narrate; tirtha-kirteh—of the
Lord, whose glories are chanted in the places of pilgrimage.
TRANSLATION
O my friend, please, therefore, chant the glories of the Lord, who is
meant to be glorified in the places of pilgrimage. He is unborn, and yet He
appears by His causeless mercy upon the surrendered rulers of all parts of
the universe. Only for their interest did He appear in the family of His
unalloyed devotees, the Yadus.
PURPORT
There are innumerable rulers all over the universe in different varieties
of planets: the sun-god in the sun planet, the moon-god in the moon
planet, Indra in the heavenly planet, Vayu, Varuna, and those in the
Brahmaloka planet where Lord Brahma is living. All are obedient
servants of the Lord. Whenever there is any trouble in the administration
of the innumerable planets in different universes, the rulers pray for an


--- Page 48 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 1
appearance, and the Lord appears. The Bhagavatam has already confirmed
this in the following verse:

ete camsa-kalah pumsah krsnas tu bhagavan svayam

indrari-vyakulam lokam mrdayanti yuge yuge (Bhag. 1.3.28)
In every millennium, whenever there is any trouble for the obedient
rulers, the Lord appears. He also appears for the sake of His pure
unalloyed devotees. The surrendered rulers and the pure devotees are
always strictly under the control of the Lord, and they are never
disobedient to the desires of the Lord. The Lord is therefore always
attentive to them.

The purpose of pilgrimages is to remember the Lord constantly, and
therefore the Lord is known as tirtha-kirti. The purpose of going to a
place of pilgrimage is to get the chance to glorify the Lord. Even today,
although times have changed, there are still pilgrimage sites in India. For
example, in Mathura and Vrndavana, where we had a chance to stay,
people are awake from early in the morning at 4 A.M. up until nighttime
and are constantly engaged, some way or other, in chanting the holy
glories of the Lord. The beauty of such a pilgrimage site is that auto-
matically one remembers the holy glories of the Lord. His name, fame,
quality, form, pastimes and entourage are all identical to the Lord, and
therefore chanting the glories of the Lord invokes the personal presence of
the Lord. Anytime or anywhere pure devotees meet and chant the glories
of the Lord, the Lord is present without any doubt. It is said by the Lord
Himself that He always stays where His pure devotees chant His glories.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, First
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Questions by Vidura.”


--- Page 49 ---
CHAPTER TWO
Remembrance of Lord Krsna
TEXT 1
श्रीड्युक उवाच
इति मागतः पृष्टः gen वात प्रियाश्रयापू ।
प्रतिवक्तुं न चोत्सेह ओत्कष्डयात्सारितेश्रः ॥ १ ॥
§ri Suka uvaca
iti bhagavatah prstah
ksattra vartam priyasrayam
prativaktur na cotseha
autkanthyat smaritesvarah

$ri ई uvdca—Sri Sukadeva said; iti—thus; bhagavatah—the great
devotee; prstah—being asked; ksattra—by Vidura; vartam—message; priya-
asrayam—regarding the dearest; prativaktum—to reply; na—not; ca—also;
utsehe—became eager; autkanthyat—by excessive anxiety; smarita—
remembrance; isvarah—the Lord.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: When the great devotee Uddhava was asked
by Vidura to speak on the messages of the dearest [ Lord Krsna], Uddhava
was unable to answer immediately due to excessive anxiety at the
remembrance of the Lord.

TEXT 2 ।
यः पदायनो मात्रा प्रातराखछाय याचितः ।
तसनच्छद्रचयन्‌ यस्य सपयौ बाललीलया ॥ २॥
49


--- Page 50 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
yah paiica-hayano matra
pratarasaya yacitah
tan naicchad racayan yasya
saparyam bala-lilaya
yah—one who; paiica—five; hayanah—years old; matra—by his mother;
pratarasaya—for breakfast; yacitah— called for; tat— that; na—not; aicchat—
liked; racayan—playing; yasya—whose; saparyam—service; bala-lilaya—
childhood.
TRANSLATION
He was one who even in his childhood, at the age of five years, was so
absorbed in the service of Lord Krsna that when he was called by his
mother for morning breakfast, he did not wish to have it.
PURPORT
From his very birth, Uddhava was a natural devotee of Lord Krsna, or
a nitya-siddha, a liberated soul. From natural instinct he used to serve
Lord Krsna, even in his childhood. He used to play with dolls in the form
of Krsna, he would serve the dolls by dressing, feeding and worshiping them,
and thus he was constantly absorbed in the play of transcendental
realization. These are the signs of an eternally liberated soul. An eternally
liberated soul is a devotee of the Lord who never forgets Him. Human
life is meant for reviving one’s eternal relation with the Lord, and all
religious injunctions are meant for awakening this dormant instinct of the
living entity. The sooner this awakening is brought about, the quicker the
mission of human life is fulfilled. In a good family of devotees, the child
gets the opportunity to serve the Lord in many ways. A soul who is
already advanced in devotional service has the opportunity to take birth
in such an enlightened family. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita
(6.41). Sucinam srimatar gehe yoga-bhrasto ’bhi jayate: even the fallen
devotee gets the opportunity to take his birth in the family of a well
situated brahmana or in a rich, well-to-do mercantile family. In both these
families there is a good opportunity to revive one’s sense of God
consciousness automatically because particularly in these families the
worship of Lord Krsna is regularly performed and the child gets the
opportunity to imitate the process of worship called arcana.
The panicaratriki formula for training persons in devotional service is
temple worship, whereby the neophytes get the opportunity to learn
devotional service to the lord. Maharaja Pariksit also used to play with


--- Page 51 ---
Text 3] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 51
Krsna dolls in his childhood. In India the children in good families are
still given dolls of the Lord like Rama and Krsna, or sometimes the
demigods, so that they may develop the aptitude of service to the Lord.
By the grace of the Lord we were given the same opportunity by our
parents, and the beginning of our life was based on this principle.
TEXT 3
स ক্ষ सेवया तस्य कालेन जरसं गतः ।
पृष्टो वातो ARETE: TREE ॥ ২ ॥
sa katham sevaya tasya
kalena jarasarh gatah
prsto vartam pratibriyad
bhartuh padav anusmaran

sah—Uddhava; katham—how; sevayd—by such service; tasya—his;
kalena—in course of time; jarasam— invalidity; gatah—undergone; prstah—
asked for; vartam—message; pratibriyat—just to reply; bhartuh—of the
Lord; padau— His lotus feet; anusmaran—remembering.

TRANSLATION

Uddhava thus served the Lord continually from childhood, and in his
old age that attitude of service never slackened. As soon as he was asked
about the message of the Lord, he at once remembered all about Him.

PURPORT

Transcendental service to the Lord is not mundane. The service attitude
of the devotee gradually increases and never becomes slackened. Generally,
in old age a person is allowed retirement from mundane service. But in the
transcendental service of the Lord there is no retirement at all; on the
contrary, the service attitude increases more and more with the progress
of age. In the transcendental service there is no satiation, and therefore
there is no retirement. Materially, when a man becomes tired by rendering
service in his physical body, he is allowed retirement, but in the transcen-
dental service there is no feeling of fatigue because it is spiritual service
and is not on the bodily plane. Service on the bodily plane dwindles as the
body grows older, but the spirit is never old, and therefore on the spiritual
plane the service is never tiresome.

Uddhava undoubtedly became old, but that does not mean that his
spirit became old. [5 service attitude matured on the transcendental


--- Page 52 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
plane, and therefore as soon as he was questioned by Vidura about Lord
Krsna, he at once remembered his Lord by reference to the context and
forgot himself on the physical plane. That is the sign of pure devotional
service to the Lord, as will be explained later on (laksanari bhakti-
yogasya, etc.) in Lord Kapila’s instruction to His mother Devahiiti.

TEXT 4
स gral ङृष्णाङ्धिसुघया II |
तीव्रेण মক্কিযীমীন निमप्रः साधु fd ॥ ४ ॥
sa muhiirtam abhitt taspirm
krsnanghri sudhaya 67750771
tivrena bhak ti-yogena
nimagnah sadhu nirvrtah

sah—Uddhava; muhiirtam—for a moment; abhiit—became; tiasnim—
dead silent; krsna-anghri—lotus feet of the Lord; sudhaya—by the nectar;
bhrsam—well matured; tivrena—by very strong; bhakti-yogena—devotional
service; nimagnah—absorbed in; saidhu—good; nirvrtah—fully in love.

TRANSLATION

For a moment he remained dead silent, and his body did not move. He
became absorbed in the nectar of remembering the Lord’s lotus feet in
devotional ecstasy, and he appeared to be going increasingly deeper into
that ecstasy.

PURPORT

On the inquiry by Vidura about Krsna, Uddhava appeared to be
awakened from slumber. He appeared to regret that he had forgotten the
lotus feet of the Lord. Thus he again remembered the lotus feet of the
Lord and remembered all his transcendental loving service unto Him, and
by so doing he felt the same ecstasy that he used to feel in the presence of
the Lord. Because the Lord is absolute, there is no difference between His
remembrance and His personal presence. Thus Uddhaya remained com-
pletely silent for a moment, but then he appeared to be going deeper and
deeper into ecstasy. Feelings of ecstasy are displayed by highly advanced
devotees of the Lord. There are eight kinds of transcendental changes in
the body—tears, shivering of the body, perspiration, restlessness,
throbbing, choking of the throat, etc.—and all were manifested by
Uddhava in the presence of Vidura.


--- Page 53 ---
Text 5] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 53
TEXT 5
«
पुलकोद्धिनसर्वाङ्गो अुखन्मीटदूटशा शचः |
- ৬
তামা रक्षितस्तेन सेदप्सरसंप्ठुतः ॥ ५॥
pulakodblinna-sarodango
१116419 ८11 milad-drsa sucah
९ parnartho laksitas tena
sneha-prasara-samplutal

pulaka-udbhinna—hodily changes of transcendental ecstasy ; sarvangah—
every part of the body: muiican— smearing: milal—opening; drsa—by the
eyes; Sucah—lears of griel: parpa-arthah— complete achievement; laksitah—
thus observed: tena—by Vidura: sneha-prasara—extensive love; samplutah—
thoroughly assimilated.

TRANSLATION

It was so observed by Vidura that Uddhava had all the transcendental
bodily changes due to total ecstasy, and he was trying to wipe away tears
of separation from his eyes. Thus Vidura could understand that Uddhava
had completely assimilated extensive love for the Lord.

PURPORT

The symptoms of the highest order of devotional life were observed by
Vidura, an experienced devotee of the Lord, and he confirmed Uddhava’s
perfectional stage of love of Godhead. Ecstatic bodily changes are
manifested from the spiritual plane and are not artificial expressions
developed by practice. There are three different stages of development in
devotional service. The first stage is that of following the regulative
principles prescribed in the codes of devotional service, the second stage is
that of assimilation and realization of the steady condition of devotional
service, and the last stage is that of ecstasy symptomized by transcendental
bodily expression. The nine different modes of devotional service, such as
hearing, chanting, and remembering, are the beginning of the process. By
regular hearing of the glories and pastimes of the Lord, the impurities
in the student’s heart begin to be washed off. The more one is cleansed of
impurities, the more one becomes fixed in devotional service. Gradually
the activities take the forms of steadiness, firm faith, taste, realization and
assimilation, one after another. These different stages of gradual develop-
ment increase love of God to the highest stage, and in the highest stage


--- Page 54 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
there are still more symptoms, such as affection, anger and attachment,
gradually rising in exceptional cases to the maha-bhava stage, which is
generally not possible for the living entities. All these were manifested by
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the personification of love of God.

In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu by Srila Ripa Gosvami, the chief disciple
of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, these transcendental symptoms
displayed by pure devotees like Uddhava are systematically described. We
have written a summary study of Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu entitled The
Nectar of Devotion, and one may consult this book for more detailed
information on the science of devotional service.

TEXT 6
oo» LN
FANS HASH पुनरागतः |
विमृज्य नेत्रे विदुरं प्रत्यादोद्धव उत्सयन्‌ ॥ & ॥
Sanakair bhagaval-lokan
71710100118 punar agatah
vimrjya netre vidurariu
pratyahoddhava utsmayan

Sanakaih—a little after; bhagavat—the Lord; lokat—from the abode;
nrlokam—the planet of the human beings; punal agatah—coming again;
vimrjya— wiping; netre—eyes; viduram—unto Vidura; pratya—in affection;
aha—said; uddhavah—Uddhava; utsmayan—by all those remembrances.

TRANSLATION

The great devotee Uddhava soon came back from the abode of the Lord
to the human plane, and wiping his eyes, he awakened his reminiscence of
the past and spoke to Vidura in a pleasing mood.

PURPORT

When Uddhava was fully absorbed in the transcendental ecstasy of love
of God, he actually forgot all about the external world. The pure devotee
lives constantly in the abode of the Supreme Lord, even in the present
body, which apparently belongs to this world. The pure devotee is not
exactly on the bodily plane, since he is absorbed in the transcendental
thought of the Supreme. When Uddhava wanted to speak to Vidura, he
came down from the abode of the Lord, Dvaraka, to the material plane of
human beings. Even though a pure devotee is present on this mortal
planet, he is here in relation to the Lord for engagement in transcendental


--- Page 55 ---
Text 7] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 55
loving service, and not for any material cause. A living entity can live
either on the material plane or in the transcendental abode of the Lord,
in accordance with his existential condition. The conditional changes of
the living entity are explained in the Caitanya-caritamrta in the instruc-
tions given to Srila Ripa Gosvami by Lord Sri Caitanya: “The living
entities all over the universes are enjoying the effects of the respective
fruitive results of their own work, life after life. Out of all of them, some
may be influenced by the association of pure devotees and thus get the
chance to execute devotional service by attainment of taste. This taste is
the seed of devotional service, and one who is fortunate enough to have
received such a seed is advised to sow it in the core of his heart. As one
cultivates a seed by pouring water to fructify it, similarly the seed of
devotional service sown in the heart of the devotee may be cultured by
pouring water in the form of hearing and chanting of the holy name
and pastimes of the Lord. The creeper of devotional service, so nourished,
gradually grows, and the devotee, acting as a gardener, goes on pouring
the water of constant hearing and chanting. The creeper of devotional
service gradually grows so high that it passes through the entire material
universe and enters into the spiritual sky, growing still higher and higher
until it reaches the planet of Goloka Vrndavana. The devotee gardener is
in touch with the abode of the Lord even from the material plane by dint
of performing devotional service to the Lord simply by hearing and
chanting. As a creeper takes shelter of another, stronger tree, similarly the
creeper of devotional service, nourished by the devotee, takes shelter of
the lotus feet of the Lord and thus becomes fixed. When the creeper is
fixed, then the fruit of the creeper comes into existence, and the gardener
who nourished it is able to enjoy this fruit of love, and his life becomes
successful.” That Uddhava attained this stage is evident from his dealings.
He could simultaneously reach the supreme planet and still appear in this
world.
TEXT 7
ITH उवाच
-
छष्णघुपणिनिम्ठोे गीर्णेष्वजगरेण ह ।
ক্কিন্তনঃ 793 बयां गतश्रीषु गृहेष्वहम्‌ ॥ ও ॥
uddhava uvdaca
krsna-dyumapi-nimloce
girnesv ajagarena ha
ki nu nah 10180801071 07073
gata-srisu grhesv aham


--- Page 56 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2

ऊर 18000110801) uvaca—Sri Uddhava said; krspa-dyumapi—the Krsna sun;

nimloce—having set; girnesu—being swallowed; ajagarena—by the great

snake; ha—in the past; kim—what; nu—else; nah—our; kusalam—welfare:

briicyam—may | say; gata—gone away; srisu-grhesu—in the house; aham—1.
TRANSLATION

Sri Uddhava said: My dear Vidura, the sun of the world, Lord Krsna,
has set, and our house has now been swallowed by the great snake of time.
What can I say to you about our welfare?

PURPORT

The disappearance of the Krsna sun may be explained as follows,
according to the commentary of Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakur.
Vidura was struck with great sorrow when he got the hint of the
annihilation of the great Yadu dynasty as well as his own family, the
Kuru dynasty. Uddhava could understand the grief of Vidura, and
therefore he first of all wanted to sympathize with him by saying that
after the sunset everyone is in darkness. Since the entire world was
merged in the darkness of grief, neither Vidura nor Uddhava nor anyone
else could be happy. Uddhava was as much aggrieved as Vidura, and there
was nothing further to be said about their welfare.

The comparison of Krsna to the sun is very appropriate. As soon as the
sun sets, darkness automatically appears. But the darkness experienced by
the common man does not affect the sun itself either at the time of
sunrise or of sunset. Lord Krsna’s appearance and disappearance are
exactly like that of the sun. He appears and disappears in innumerable
universes, and as long as He is present in a particular universe there is all
transcendental light in that universe, but the universe from which He
passes away is put into darkness. His pastimes, however, are everlasting.
The Lord is always present in some universe, just as the sun is present
either in the eastern or the western hemisphere. The sun is always present
either in India or in America, but when the sun is present in India, the
American land is in darkness, and when the sun is present in America, the
Indian hemisphere is in darkness.

As the sun appears in the morning and gradually rises up to the
meridian and then again sets in one hemisphere while simultaneously
rising in the other, so Lord Krgna’s disappearance in one universe and the
beginning of His different pastimes in another take place simultaneously.
As soon as one pastime is finished here, it is manifested in another
universe. And thus His nitya-lila or eternal pastimes are going on without


--- Page 57 ---
Text 8] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 57
ending. As the sunrise takes place once in twenty-four hours, similarly the
pastimes of Lord Krsna take place in a universe once in a daytime of
Brahma, the account of which is given in the Bhagavad-gita as
4,300,000,000 solar years. Bul wherever the Lord is present, all His
different pastimes as described in the revealed scriptures take place at
regular intervals.

As at sunset the snakes become powerful, thieves are encouraged,
ghosts become active, the lotus becomes disfigured and the cakravaki
laments, so with the disappearance of Lord Krsna, the atheists feel
enlivened, and the devotees become sorry.

TEXT 8
दुर्भगो बत लोकोऽयं यदवो नितरामपि |
ये संवसन्तो न RRA मीना इवोडपम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
durbhago bata loko "yarn
yadavo nitaram api
ye sarrvasanto na vidur
harirh mind ivodupam
durbhagah—unfortunate; bata—certainly; lokah—universe; ayam—this;
yadavah—the Yadu dynasty; nitaram—more specifically; api—also; ye—
those; sarvasantah—living together; na—did not; viduh—understand;
harim—the Personality of Godhead; minah—the fishes; iva udupam—like
the moon.
TRANSLATION

This universe with all its planets is most unfortunate. And even more
unfortunate are the members of the Yadu dynasty because they could not
identify Lord Hari as the Personality of Godhead, any more than the fish
could identify the moon.

PURPORT

Uddhava lamented for the unfortunate persons of the world who could
not recognize Lord Sri Krsna in spite of seeing all His transcendental godly
qualities. From the very beginning of His appearance within the prison
bars of King Kamsa up to His mausala-lila, although He exhibited His
potencies as the Personality of Godhead in the six opulences of wealth,
strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation, the foolish persons
of the world could not understand that He was the Supreme Lord. Foolish
persons might have thought Him an extraordinary historical figure because


--- Page 58 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
they had no intimate touch with the Lord, but more unfortunate were the
family members of the Lord, the members of the Yadu dynasty, who were
always in company with the Lord but were unable to recognize Him as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Uddhava lamented his own fortune also
because although he knew Krsna to be the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he could not properly use the opportunity to render devotional
service to the Lord. He regretted everyone’s misfortune, including his own.
The pure devotee of the Lord thinks himself most unfortunate. That is due
to excessive love for the Lord and is one of the transcendental perceptions
of viraha, the suffering of separation.

It is learned from the revealed scriptures that the moon was born from
the milk ocean. There is a milk ocean in the upper planets, and there Lord
Visnu, who controls the heart of every living being as Paramatma (the
Supersoul), resides as the Ksirodakasayi Visnu. Those who do not believe
in the existence of the ocean of milk because they have experience only of
the salty water in the ocean should know that the world is also called the
Go, which means the cow. The urine of a cow is salty, and according to
Ayurvedic medicine, the cow’s urine is very effective in treating patients
suffering from liver trouble. Such patients may not have any experience of
the cow’s milk because milk is never given to liver patients. But the liver
patient may. know that the cow has milk also, although he has never
tasted it. Similarly, men who have experience only of this tiny planet
where the salt-water ocean exists may take information from the re-
vealed scriptures that there is also an ocean of milk, although we have
never seen it. From this ocean of milk the moon was born, but the fish in
the milk ocean could not recognize that the moon was not another fish
and was different from them. The fish took the moon to be one of them
or maybe something illuminating, but nothing more. The unfortunate
persons who do not recognize Lord Krsna are like such fish. They take Him
to be one of them, although a little extraordinary in opulence, strength,
etc. The Bhagavad-gita confirms such foolish persons to be most unfor-
tunate: avajananti marnh miadhda manugsirh tanum asritam. (Bg. 9.11)

TEXT 9
इङ्गितज्ञाः goiter एकारामाश्च सात्वदाः |
सात्वताणषभं सर्वे मूतावासममंसत ॥ ९ ॥
ingita-jiiah puru-praudha
ekaramas ca satvatah
satvatam 75087077 sarve
bhitavasam ৫772075080৫


--- Page 59 ---
Text 10] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 59

ingita-jiiah—expert in psychic study; puru-praudhah—highly experienced;
eka—one; aramah—relaxation; ca—also; satvatah—devotees, or own men;
satvatam rsabham—head of the family; sarve— all; bhuta-avasam—all-
pervading; amamsata—could think.

TRANSLATION

The Yadus were all experienced devotees, learned and expert in psychic
study. Over and above this, they were always with the Lord in all kinds of
relaxations, and still they were able to know Him as the one Supreme who
dwells everywhere.

PURPORT

In the Vedas it is said that the Supreme Lord or the Paramatma cannot
be understood simply by the strength of one’s erudition or power of
mental speculation: nayam atma pravacanena labhyo/ na medhaya na
bahuna srutena. He can be known only by one who has the mercy of the
Lord. The Yadavas were all exceptionally learned and experienced, but in
spite of their knowing the Lord as the one who lives in everyone’s heart,
they could not understand that He is the original Personality of Godhead.
This lack of knowledge was not due to their insufficient erudition, but it
was due to their misfortune. In Vrndavana, however, the Lord was not even
known as the Paramatma because the residents of Vrndavana were pure
unconventional devotees of the Lord and could only think of Him as
their object of love. They did not know that He is the Personality of
Godhead. The Yadus or the residents of Dvaraka, however, could know
Lord Krsna as Vasudeva or the Supersoul living everywhere, but not as the
Supreme Lord. As scholars of the Vedas, they verified the Vedic hymns:
“eko devah. . .” ‘“‘sarva-bhutadhivasah. ..” “antaryami...”’ and ‘“‘vrspinam
para-devata. . .”” The Yadus, therefore, accepted Lord Krsna as the Super-
soul incarnated in their family, and not more than that.

TEXT 10
देवस्य मायया WHY चान्यदसदाश्रिताः ।
आम्यते धीन तद्दाञ्यैरारमन्युास्मनो हरौ ॥१०॥
devasya mayaya sprsta
ye canyad asad asritah
bhramyate dhir na tad vakyair
atmany uptatmano harau


--- Page 60 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
devasya—of the Personality of Godhead; mayaya—by the influence of
external energy; sprstah—infected; ye—all those; ca—and; anyat— others;
asat—illusory; asritah—being taken to; bhramyate —bewilder; dhih—
intelligence; na—not; tat—that; vakyaih—by those words; atmani—in the
Supreme Self; uptatmanah—surrendered souls; harau—unto the Lord.
TRANSLATION

Under no circumstances can the words of persons who are bewildered
by the illusory energy of the Lord deviate the intelligence of those who are
completely surrendered souls.

PURPORT

Lord Sri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to all
the evidences of the Vedas. He is accepted by all acaryas, including Sripada
Sankaracarya. But when He was present in the world, different classes of
men accepted Him differently, and therefore their calculations of the Lord
were also different. Generally, persons who had faith in the revealed
scriptures accepted the Lord as He is, and all of them merged into great
bereavement when the Lord disappeared from the world. In the First
Canto we have already discussed the lamentation of Arjuna and
Yudhisthira, to whom the disappearance of Lord Krsna was almost
intolerable up to the end of their lives.

The Yadavas were only partially cognizant of the Lord, but they are
also glorious because they had the opportunity to associate with the Lord,
who acted as the head of their family, and they also rendered the Lord
intimate service. The Yadavas and other devotees of the Lord are different
from those who wrongly calculated Him to be an ordinary human
personality. Such persons are certainly bewildered by the illusory energy.
They are hellish and are envious of the Supreme Lord. The illusory encrgy
acts very powerfully on them because in spite of their elevated mundane
education, such persons are faithless and are infected by the mentality of
atheism. They are always very eager to cstablish that Lord Krsna was an
ordinary man who was killed by a hunter due to His many impious acts in
plotting to kill the sons of Dhrtarastra and Jarasandha, the demonic kings
of the earth. Such persons have no faith in the statement of the Bhagavad-
gita that the Lord is unaffected by the reactions of work: na mar
tani dharmani limpanti. According to the atheistic point of view, Lord
Krsna’s family, the Yadu dynasty, was vanquished due to being cursed by
the brahmanas for the sins committed by Krsna in Killing the sons of
Dhrtarastra, etc. All these blasphemies do not touch the heart of the


--- Page 61 ---
Text 11] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 61
devotees of the Lord because they know perfectly well what is what.
Their intelligence regarding the Lord is never disturbed. But those who are
disturbed by the statements of the asuras are also condemned. That is what
Uddhava meant in this verse.
TEXT 11
प्रदर्यातसतपसामवितसच्छां चृणाप्‌ ।
आदायान्तरधायस्तु Wie ठोकरोचनम्‌ ॥११॥
pradarsyatapta-tapasam
avitrpta-drsam nrpam
adayantar adhad yas tu
sva-bimbam loka-locanam
pradar§ya—by exhibiting; atapta—without undergoing; tapasam—
penances;avitrpta-drsam—without fulfillment of vision; nrpam—of persons;
adaya—taking;antah—disappearance;adhat—performed; yah— who; tu—but;
sva-bimbam— His own form; loka-locanam—public vision.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Krsna, who manifested His eternal form before the vision of all
on the earth, performed His disappearance by removing His form from the
sight of those who were unable to see Him [as He is] due to not executing
required penance.
PURPORT
In this verse the word avitrpta-drsam is most significant. The conditioned
souls in the material world are all trying to satisfy their senses in various
ways, but they have failed to do so because it is impossible to be satisfied
by such efforts. The example of the fish on land is very appropriate. If one
takes a fish from the water and puts it on the land, it cannot be made
happy by any amount of offered pleasure. The spirit soul can be happy
only in the association of the supreme living being, the Personality of
Godhead, and nowhere else. The Lord, by His unlimited causeless mercy,
has innumerable Vaikuntha planets in the brahmajyoti sphere of the
spiritual world, and in that transcendental world there is an unlimited
arrangement for the unlimited pleasure of the living entities.
The Lord Himself comes to display His transcendental pastimes,
typically represented at Vrndavana, Mathura and Dvaraka. He appears
just to attract the conditioned souls back to Godhead, back home to the


--- Page 62 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
eternal world. But for want of sufficient piety, the onlookers are not
attracted by such pastimes of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that only
those who have completely surpassed the way of sinful reaction can engage
themselves in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. The entire
Vedic way of ritualistic performances is to put every conditioned soul on
the path of piety. By strict adherence to the prescribed principles for all
orders of social life, one can attain the qualities of truthfulness, control of
the mind, control of the senses, forbearance, etc., and can be elevated to
the plane of rendering pure devotional service to the Lord. Only by such a
transcendental vision are one’s material hankerings fully satisfied.

When the Lord was present, persons who were able to satisfy their
material hankerings by seeing Him in true perspective were thus able to go
back with Him to His kingdom. But those persons who were unable to see
the Lord as He is remained attached to material hankerings and were not
able to go back home, back to Godhead. When the Lord passed beyond
the vision of all, He did so in His original eternal form, as stated in this
verse. The Lord left in His own body; He did not leave His body as is
generally misunderstood by the conditioned souls. This statement defeats
the false propaganda of the faithless nondevotees that the Lord passed
away like an ordinary conditioned soul. The Lord appeared in order to
release the world from the undue burden of the nonbelieving asuras, and
after doing this, He disappeared from the world’s eyes.

TEXT 12
यन्मत्यैलीलौपयिक  स्वयोग-
मायाबलं दञ्च॑यता ada |
बिखापनं स्वस च বীনা:
परं पदं भूषणभूषणाङ्गम्‌ ॥१२॥
yan martya lilau-payikari sva-yoga-
maya-balam darsayata grhitam
vismapanari svasya ca saubhgarddheh
parari padari bhusanae-bhusanangam

yat—His eternal form; martya—mortal world; lilau-payikam—just suitable
for the pastimes; sva-yoga-maya-balam—potency of the internal energy;
darsayata—for manifestation; grhitam— discovered; vismapanam—wonder-
ful; svasya—of His own; ca—and; saubhagarddheh—of the opulent; param—


--- Page 63 ---
Text 12] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 63
supreme; padam—ultimate stand; bhusana—ornament; bhusanangam—of
the ornaments.

TRANSLATION

The Lord appeared in the mortal world by His internal potency,
yoga-maya. He came in His eternal form, which is just suitable for His
pastimes. These pastimes were wonderful for everyone, even for those
proud of their own opulence, including the Lord Himself in His form as
the Lord of Vaikuntha. Thus His [Sri Krsna’s] transcendental body is the
ornament of all ornaments.

PURPORT

In conformity with the Vedic hymns (nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam),
the Personality of Godhead is ‘more excellent than all other living
beings within all the universes in the material world. He is the chief of
all living entities; no one can surpass Him or be equal to Him in wealth,
strength, fame, beauty, knowledge or renunciation. When Lord Krsna was
within this universe, He seemed to be a human being because He appeared
in a manner just suitable for His pastimes in the mortal world. He did not
appear in human society in His Vaikuntha feature with four hands because
that would not have been suitable for His pastimes. But in spite of His
appearing as a human being, no one was or is equal to Him in any respect
in any of the six different opulences. Everyone is more or less proud of his
opulence in this world, but when Lord Krsna was in human society, He
excelled all His contemporaries within the universe.

When the Lord’s pastimes are visible to the human eye, they are called
prakata, and when they are not visible they are called aprakata. In fact, the
Lord’s pastimes never stop, just as the sun never leaves the sky. The sun is
always in its right orbit in the sky, but it is sometimes visible and
sometimes invisible to our limited vision. Similarly, the pastimes of the
Lord are always current in one universe or another, and when Lord Krsna
disappeared from the transcendental abode of Dvaraka, it was simply a
disappearance from the eyes of the people there. It should not be
misunderstood that His transcendental body, which is just suitable for the
pastimes in the mortal world, is in any way inferior to His different

"expansions in the Vaikunthalokas. His body manifested in the material
world is transcendental par excellence in the sense that His pastimes in the
mortal world excel His mercy displayed in the Vaikunthalokas. In the
Vaikunthalokas the Lord is merciful toward the liberated or nitye-mukta
living entities, but in His pastimes in the mortal world He is merciful even


--- Page 64 ---
64 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
to the fallen souls who are nitya-baddha or conditioned forever. The six
excellent opulences which He displayed in the mortal world by the agency
of His internal potency, yoga-maya, are rare even in the Vaikunthalokas.
All His pastimes were manifested not by the material energy but by His
spiritual energy. The excellence of His rasa-lila at Vrndavana and His
householder life with 16,000 wives is wonderful even for Narayana in
Vaikuntha and is certainly so for other living entities within this mortal
world. His pastimes are wonderful even for other incarnations of the Lord,
such as Sri Rama, Nrsimha and Varaha. His opulence was so superexcellent
that His pastimes were adored even by the Lord of Vaikuntha, who is not
different from Lord Krsna Himself.
TEXT 13
-
Tada বাসন্তী
.
निरीक्ष्य क्खस्त्ययनं fete ।
.
का्स्येन चायेह गतं विधातु-
स्वाक्सितौ कोदारमिस्यमन्यत ॥१३॥
yad-dharma-sunor bata rajasitye
niriksya drk-svastyayanam tri-lokah
kartsnyena cadyeha gatam vidhatur
arvak-srtau kausalam ity amartyata
yat—which; dharma-sitnoh —of Maharaja Yudhisthira; bata—certainly;
rajasieye—in the arena of the Rajasliya sacrifice; nirtksya—by observing;
drk—sight; svastyayanam—pleasing; tri-lokah—the three worlds; kartsnye-
na—in sum total; ca—thus; adya—today; iha—within the universe; gatam—
surpassed; vidhatuh—of the creator (Brahma); arvak—recent mankind;
srtau—in the material world; kausalam—dexterity; iti—thus; amanyata—
contemplated.
TRANSLATION
All the demigods from the upper, lower and middle universal planetary

systems assembled at the altar of the Rajasiiya sacrifice performed by
Maharaja Yudhisthira. After seeing the beautiful bodily features of Lord
Krsna, they all contemplated that He was the ultimate dexterous creation
of Brahma, the creator of human beings.


--- Page 65 ---
Text 14] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 65
PURPORT
There was nothing comparable to the bodily features of Lord Krsna
when 116 was present in this world. The most beautiful object in the
material world may be compared to the blue lotus flower or the full moon
in the sky, but even the lotus flower and the moon were defeated by the
beauty of the bodily features of Lord Krsna, and this was certified by the
demigods, the most beautiful living creatures in the universe. The demigods
thought that Lord Krsna, like themselves, was also created by lord
Brahma, but in fact Brahma was created by Lord Krsna. It was not within
the power of Brahma to create the transcendental beauty of the Supreme
Lord. No one is the creator of Krsna; rather, He is the creator of everyone.
As lle says in Bhagavad-gita, aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam
pravartate. (Bg. 10.8)
TEXT 14
यलावुरागष्तदहासरास-
-
लीलावलोकप्रतिलन्धमानाः ।
बजल्ियो दम्भिरनुगप्रबृत्त-
धियोऽवतस्थुः किर कृत्यशेषाः ॥१४॥
yasyanuraga-pluta-hasa-rasa-
lilavaloka-pratilabdha-manah
vraja-striyo drgbhir anupravrtta-
dhiyo “vatasthuh kila krtya-sesah
yasya—whose; anuraga—attachment; pluta—enhanced by; hasa—laugh-
ter; rasa—humors; lila—pastimes; avaloka—glancing; pratilabdha— obtained
thereof; manah— anguished; vraja-striyah—damsels of Vraja; drgbhih—with.
the eyes; anupravrtta—following; dhiyah—by intelligence; avatasthuh—sat
silently; kila—indeed; krtya-sesah— without finishing household duties.
| TRANSLATION
The damsels of Vraja, after pastimes of laughter, humor and exchanges
of glances, were anguished when Krgna left them. They used to follow Him
with their eyes, and thus they sat down with stunned intelligence and
could not finish their household duties.


--- Page 66 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
PURPORT
In His boyhood at Vrndavana, Lord Krsna was notorious as a teasing
friend in transcendental love to all the girls His age. His love for them was
so intense that there is no comparison to that ecstasy, and the damsels of
Vraja were so much attached to Him that their affection excelled that of
the great demigods like Brahma and Siva. Lord Krsna finally admitted His
defeat before the transcendental affection of the gopis and declared that
He was unable to repay them for their unalloyed affection. Although the
gopis were seemingly anguished by the Lord’s teasing behavior, when
Krsna would leave them they could not tolerate the separation and used to
follow Him with their eyes and minds. They were so stunned by the
situation that they could not finish their household duties. No one could
excel Him even in the dealing of love exchanged between boys and girls. It
is said in the revealed scriptures that Lord Krsna personally never goes
beyond the boundary of Vrndavana. He remains there eternally because of
the transcendental love of the inhabitants. Thus even though 116 is not
visible at present, He is not away from Vyndavana for a moment.
TEXT 15
स्वणान्तरूपेष्वितरैः wet
रम्यर्यमानेष्वनुकम्पितास्मा ।
परावरेशो महदंशयुक्तो
ह्यजोऽपि जातो मगवान्‌ यथा्निः ॥१५॥
sva-$anta-rupesv itarath sva-rupair
abh yardyamanesv anukampitatma
[00708017680 mahad-ar$a-yukto
hy ajo ‘pi jato bhagavan yathagnih
sva-Santa-ripesu—unto the peaceful devotees of the Lord; itaraih—others,

nondevotees; sva-rupaih—according to their own modes of nature;
abhyardyamanesu—being harrassed by; anukampita-atma—the all-compas-
sionate Lord; paravara—spiritual and material; isah—controller; mahat-
amsa-yuktah—accompanied by the plenary portion of mahat-tattva; hi—
certainly; ajah—the unborn; api—although; jatah—be born; bhagavan—
the Personality of Godhead; yatha—as if; agnih—the fire.


--- Page 67 ---
Text 15] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 67
TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead, the all-compassionate controller of both
the spiritual and material creations, is unborn, but when there is friction
between His peaceful devotees and persons who are in the material modes
of nature, He takes birth just like fire, accompanied by the mahat-tattva.

PURPORT

The devotees of the Lord are by nature peaceful because they have no
material hankering. A liberated soul has no hankering, and therefore he has
no lamentation. One who wants to possess also laments when he loses his
possession. Devotees have no hankerings for material possessions and no
hankerings for spiritual salvation. They are situated in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord as a matter of duty, and they do not mind where
they are or how they have to act. Karmis, jiianis and yogis all hanker to
possess some material or spiritual assets. Karmis want material possessions,
jianis and yogis want spiritual possessions, but devotees do not want any
material or spiritual assets. They want only to serve the Lord anywhere in
the material or spiritual worlds that the Lord desires, and the Lord is
always specifically compassionate towards such devotees.

The karmis, jianis and yogis have their particular mentalities in the
modes of nature, and therefore they are called itara or nondevotees. These
itaras, including even the yogis, sometimes harass the devotees of the Lord.
Durvasa Muni, a great yogi, harassed Maharaja Ambarisa because the
latter was a great devotee of the Lord. And the great karmi and jiani
Hiranyakadipu even harassed his own Vaisnava son, Prahlada Maharaja.
There are many instances of such harassment of the peaceful devotees of
the Lord by the itaras. When such friction takes place, the Lord, out of
His great compassion towards His pure devotees, appears in person,
accompanied by His plenary portions controlling the mahat-tattva.

The Lord is everywhere, both in the material and spiritual domains, and
He appears for the sake of His devotees when there is friction between His
devotee and the nondevotee. As electricity is generated by friction of
matter anywhere and everywhere, similarly, the Lord, being all-pervading,
appears because of the friction of devotees and nondevotees. When Lord
Krsna appears on a mission, all His plenary portions accompany Him.
When He appeared as the son of Vasudeva, there were differences of
opinions about His incarnation. Some said, “He is the Supreme


--- Page 68 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
Personality of Godhead.” Some said, “11615 an incarnation of Narayana,”
and others said, “He is the incarnation of Ksirodakasayi Vispu.” But
actually He is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead—Krsnas tu
bhagavan svayam—and Narayana, the purusas and all other incarnations
accompany Him to function as different parts of His pastimes. Mahat-
aiisa-yuktah indicates that He is accompanied by the purusas, who create
the mahat-tattva. It is confirmed in the Vedic hymns, mahantarm vibhum
atmanam.

Lord Krsna appeared, just like electricity, when there was friction
between Karsa and Vasudeva and Ugrasena. Vasudeva and Ugrasena were
the Lord’s devotees, and Karnsa, a representative of the karmis and janis,
was a nondevotee. Krsna, as He is, is compared to the sun. He first appeared
from the ocean of the womb of Devaki, and gradually He satisfied the
inhabitants of the places surrounding Mathura, just as the sun enlivens the
lotus flower in the morning. Gradually rising up to the meridian of
Dvaraka, the Lord set like the sun, placing everything in darkness, as
described by Uddhava.

TEXT 16
मां खेदयत्येतदजस्य जन्म-
विडम्बनं यदसदेषगेहे |
-
a च वासोऽरिभयादिव खयं
पुराद्‌ व्यवात्सीयदनन्तवीरयैः ॥१६॥
mam khedayaty etad ajasya janma-
vidambanam yad-vasudeva-gehe
vraje ca vaso ’ri-bhayad iva svayam
purad vyavatsid yad-ananta-viryah

mam—to me; khedayati—gives me distress; etat—this; ajasya—of the
unborn; janma— birth; vidambanam— bewildering; yat—that; vasudeva-gehe—
in the home of Vasudeva; vraje—in Vyndavana; ca—also; vasah—inhabita-
tion; ari—enemy; bhayat—because of fear; iva—as if; svayam—Himself;
purat—from Mathura Puri; vyavatsit—fled; yat—one who is; ananta-
viryah—unlimitedly powerful.

TRANSLATION

When I think of Lord Krgna—how He was born in the prison house of
Vasudeva although He is unborn, how He went away from His father’s
protection to Vraja and lived there incognito out of fear of the enemy,


--- Page 69 ---
Text 17] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 69
and how, although He is unlimitedly powerful, He fled from Mathura in
fear—all these bewildering incidences give me distress.
PURPORT
Because Lord Sri Krsna is the original person from whom everything
and everyone has emanated—ahari sarvasya prabhavah (Bg. 10.8),
janmady asya yatah (Vs. 1.12)—nothing can be equal to or greater than
Him. The Lord is supremely perfect, and whenever He enacts His tran-
scendental pastimes as a son, a rival or an object of enmity, He plays the
part so perfectly that even pure devotees like Uddhava are bewildered.
For example, Uddhava knew perfectly well that Lord Sri Krsna is
eternally existent and can neither die nor disappear for good, yet he
lamented for Lord Krsna. All these events are perfect arrangements to
give perfection to His supreme glories. It is for enjoyment’s sake. When a
father plays with his little son and the father lays down on the floor as if
defeated by the son, it is just to give the little son pleasure, and nothing
more. Because the Lord is all-powerful, it is possible for Him to adjust
opposites such as birth and no birth, power and defeat, fear and fearless-
ness, etc. A pure devotee knows very well how it is possible for the Lord
to adjust opposite things, but he laments for the nondevotees who, not
knowing the supreme glories of the Lord, think of Him as imaginary simply
because there are so many apparently contradictory statements in the
scriptures. Factually there is nothing contradictory, but everything is
possible when we understand the Lord as the Lord and not as one of us,
with all our imperfection.
TEXT 17
=
दुनोति चेतः सरतो ममैतद्‌
यदाह RENT पित्रोः।
ताताम्ब कंसादुरुशङ्कितानां
प्रसीदतं नोऽकृतनिष्कृतीनाम्‌ ॥१७॥
dunoti cetah 57107010 mamaitad
yad aha padav abhivandya pitroh
tatamba kamsad uru-$ankitanam
prasidatam no ’krta-niskrtinam
dunoti—it gives me pain; cetah—heart; smaratah—while thinking of;
mama—my; etat— this; yat—as much as; aha—said; padau— feet; abhivandya—


--- Page 70 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
worshiping; pitroh—of the parents; tata— my dear father;amba—my dear
mother; kamsat—out of Kamsa’s; uru—great; sankitanam—of those who
are afraid; prasidatam—be pleased with; nah—our; akrta—not executed;
niskrtinam— duties to serve you.

TRANSLATION

Lord Krsna begged pardon from His parents for Their [Krsna’s and
Balarama’s] inability to serve their feet, due to being away from home
because of great fear of Kamsa. He said, (0 mother, 0 father, please
excuse Us for this inability.” All this behavior of the Lord gives me pain at
heart.

PURPORT

It appears that Lord Krsna and Baladeva were both very greatly afraid
of Kamsa, and therefore They had to hide Themselves. But if Lord Krsna
and Baladeva are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, how was it possible
that They were afraid of Kamsa? Is there any.contradiction in such state-
ments? Vasudeva, due to his great appreciation for Krsna, wanted to give
Him protection. He never thought that Krsna was the Supreme Lord and
could protect Himself; he thought of Krsna as his son. Because Vasudeva
was a great devotee of the Lord, he did not like to think that Krsna might
be killed like his other children. Morally, Vasudeva was bound to deliver
Krsna to the hands of Kamsa because he had promised to turn over all his
children. But out of his great love for Krsna he broke his promise, and the
Lord was very pleased with Vasudeva for his transcendental mentality. He
did not want to disturb the intense affection of Vasudeva, and thus He
agreed to be carried by His father to the house of Nanda and Yasoda. And
just to test the intense love of Vasudeva, Lord Krsna fell down in the
waters of the Yamuna while his father was crossing the river. Vasudeva
became mad after his child as he tried to recover Him in the midst of the
rising river.

These are all glorified pastimes of the Lord, and there is no contradic-
tion in such manifestations. Since Krsna is the Supreme Lord, He was
never afraid of Kamsa, but to please His father He agreed to be so. And the
most brilliant part of His supreme character was that He begged pardon
from His parents for being unable to serve their feet while absent from
home because of fear of Kamsa. The Lord, whose lotus feet are worshiped
by demigods like Brahma and Siva, wanted to worship the feet of Vasudeva.
Such instruction by the Lord to the world is quite appropriate. Even if
one is the Supreme Lord, one must serve his parents. A son is indebted to


--- Page 71 ---
Text 19] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 71
his parents in so many ways, and it is the duty of the son to serve his
parents, however great the son may be. Indirectly, Krsna wanted to teach
the atheists who do not accept the supreme fatherhood of God, and they
may learn from this action how much the Supreme Father has to be
respected. Uddhava was simply struck with wonder by such glorious
behavior of the Lord, and he was very sorry that he was unable to go with
Him.
TEXT 18
को वा अघठुष्याङधिसरोजरेणुं
विस्तमीशीत पुमान्‌ वरिजिघन्‌ ।
यो बिस्फुरद्भूविटपेन भूमे-
भारं कृतान्तेन तिरश्चकार ॥१८॥
ko va amusyanghri-saroja-requri
vismartum Sita puman vijighran
yo visphurad-bhru-vitapena bhumer
bhararn krtantena tirascakara
kah—who else; va—either; amusya—the Lord’s; anghri—feet; saroja-
renum—dust of the lotus; vismartum—forgetting; Sita—may be able;
puman—person; vijighran—smelling; yah—one who; visphurat—expanding;
bhru-vitapena—by the leaves of the eyebrows; bhumeh—of the earth;
bharam—burden; krta-antena—by death blows; tirascakara—executed.
TRANSLATION
Who, after smelling the dust of His lotus feet even once, could ever
forget it? Simply by expanding the leaves of His eyebrows [Krsna] has
given the death blow to those who were burdening the earth.
PURPORT
Lord Krsna cannot be accepted as one of the human beings, even though
He played the role of an obedient son. His actions were so extraordinary
that by the simple raising of His eyebrows He could deliver death blows to
those who were burdening the earth.
TEXT 19
दृष्टा भवद्भिर्ननु राजख्य
Ser छृष्णं द्विषतोऽपि सिद्धिः ।


--- Page 72 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
यां योगिनः संस््रहयन्ति सम्यग्‌
योगेन कस्तद्रिरहं सहेत ॥१९॥
drsta bhavadbhir nanu rajaswye
caidyasya krsnam dvisato ’pi siddhih
yam yoginah samsprhayanti samyag
yogena kas tad viraham saheta

drsta—it has been seen; bhavadbhih—by your good self; nanu—of course;
rajasuye—in the assembly of the Rajasiiya sacrifice performed by
Maharaja Yudhisthira; caidyasya—of the King of Cedi (Sisupala); krspam—
unto Krsna; dvisatah—envying; api—in spite of; siddhih—success; yam—
which; yoginah—the yogis; sarsprhayanti—verily desire; samyak—fully;
yogena—by performance of yoga; kah—who; tat —His; virecham—separation;
saheta—can tolerate.

TRANSLATION

You have personally seen how the King of Cedi [Sisupala] achieved
success in yoga practice, although he hated Lord Krsna. Even the actual
yogis aspire after such success with great interest by performance of their
various practices.

PURPORT

Lord Krgna’s causeless mercy was exhibited in the great assembly of
Maharaja Yudisthira. He was merciful even to His enemy, the King of
Cedi, who always tried to be an envious rival of the Lord. Because it is not
possible to be a bona fide rival of the Lord, the King of Cedi was extremely
malicious toward Lord Krsna. In this he was like many other asuras, such
as Kamsa and Jarasandha. In the open assembly of the Rajasiaya sacrifice
performed by Maharaja Yudhisthira, Sisupala insulted Lord Krsna, and he
was finally killed by the Lord. But it was seen by everyone in the
assembly that a light flashed out of the body of the King of Cedi and
merged into the body of Lord Krsna. This means that Cediraja achieved
the salvation of attaining oneness with the Supreme, which is a perfection
most desired by the jianis and yogis and for which they execute their
different types of transcendental activities.

It is a fact that persons who are trying to understand the Supreme Truth
by their personal endeavors of mental speculation or mystic powers of yoga
achieve the same goal as others who are personally killed by the Lord.
Both achieve the salvation of merging in the brahmajyoti rays of the


--- Page 73 ---
Text 20] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 73
transcendental body of the lord. The Lord was merciful even to His
enemy, and the success of the King of Cedi was observed by everyone who
was present in the assembly. Vidura was also present there, and therefore
Uddhava referred the incident to his memory.
TEXT 20
तथैव चान्ये नरलोकवीरा
य॒ आहवे कृष्णमुखाररिन्दम्‌ |
नेत्रैः पिबन्तो नयनाभिरामं
पार्थाखरपूतः पदमापुरस्य ॥२०॥
tathaiva canye nara-loka-vira
ya ahave krsna-mukharevindam
netraih pibanto nayanabhiramarm
parthastra-piutah padam apur asya
tatha—as also; eva ca—and certainly; anye—others; nara-loka—human
society ;virah— fighter; ye— those; ahave—on the battlefield (of Kuruksetra);
krsna—Lord Krsya’s; mukha-aravindam—face like a lotus flower; netraih—
with the eyes; pibantah— while seeing; nayana-abhiranian—very pleasing to
the eyes; partha— Arjuna; astra-putah—purified; padam—abode; apuh—
achieved; asya—of Him.
TRANSLATION
Certainly others who were fighters on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra
were purified by the onslaught of Arjuna’s arrows, and while seeing the
lotuslike face of Krsna, so pleasing to the eyes, they achieved the abode
of the Lord.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna, appears in this
world for two missionary purposes: to deliver the faithful, and to
annihilate the miscreants. But because the Lord is absolute, His two
different kinds of actions, although apparently different, are ultimately
one and the same. His annihilation of a person like SiSupala is as
auspicious as His actions for the protection of the faithful. All the
warriors who fought against Arjuna but who were able to see the lotus-
like face of the Lord on the battlefront achieved the abode of the l.ord,
exactly as the devotees of the Lord do. The words *‘pleasing to the eyes
of the seer” are very significant. When the warriors from the other side of


--- Page 74 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
the battlefield saw Lord Krsna at the front, they appreciated His beauty,
and their dormant instinct of love of God was awakened. Sisupala saw
the Lord also, but he saw Him as his enemy, and his love was not
awakened. Therefore Siupala achieved oneness with the Lord by
merging in the impersonal glare of His body, called the brahmajyoti.
Others, who were in the marginal position, being neither friends nor
enemies but slightly in love of Godhead by appreciating the beauty of
His face, were at once promoted to the spiritual planets, the Vaikunthas.
The Lord’s personal abode is called Goloka Vrndavana, and the abodes
where His plenary expansions reside are called the Vaikunthas, where the
Lord is present as Narayana. Love of Godhead is dormant in every living
entity, and the entire process of devotional service unto the Lord is meant
for awakening this dormant, eternal love of Godhead. But there are degrees
of such transcendental awakening. Those whose love of God is awakened
to the fullest extent go back to Goloka Vrndavana planet in the spiritual
sky, whereas persons who have just awakened to love of Godhead by
accident or association are transferred to the Vaikuntha planets. Essen-
tially there is no material difference between Goloka and Vaikuntha, but
in the Vaikunthas the Lord is served in unlimited opulence, whereas in
Goloka the Lord is served in natural affection.

This love of God is awakened by the association of pure devotees of the
Lord. Here the word parthastra-putah is significant. Those who saw the
beautiful face of the Lord on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra were purified
first by Arjuna when he made his onslaught with arrows. The Lord
appeared for the mission of diminishing the burden of the world, and
Arjuna was assisting the Lord by fighting on His behalf. Arjuna personally
declined to fight, and the whole instruction of the Bhagavad-gita was
given to Arjuna to engage him in the fight. As a pure devotee of the Lord,
Arjuna agreed to fight in preference to his own decision, and thus Arjuna
fought to assist the Lord in His mission of diminishing the burden of the
world. All the activities of a pure devotee are executed on behalf of the
Lord because a pure devotee of the Lord has nothing to do for his person-
al interest. Arjuna’s killing was as good as killing by the Lord Himself. As
soon as Arjuna shot an arrow at an enemy, that enemy became purified of
all material contaminations and became eligible to be transferred to the
spiritual sky. Those warriors who appreciated the lotus feet of the Lord
and saw His face at the front had their dormant love of God awakened, and
thus they were transferred at once to Vaikunthaloka, not to the impersonal
state of brahmajyoti as was Sigupala. Sigupila died without appreciating
the Lord, while others died with appreciation of the Lord. Both were


--- Page 75 ---
Text 21] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 75
transferred to the spiritual sky, but those who awakened to love of God
were transferred to the planets of the transcendental sky.

Uddhava seemingly lamented that his own position was less than that of
the warriors on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra because they had attained
to Vaikuntha, whereas he remained to lament the disappearance of the
Lord.

TEXT 21
खयं त्वसाम्यातिकियस्त्यधीशः
स्वाराज्यरक्ष्म्याप्रसमस्तकामः |
=
মতি हरद्धिभिरलोकपालैः
रिरोटसोरथेडितपदपीटः ॥२१॥
svayar tv asamyatisayas tryadhisah
svarajya-laksmyapta-samastakamah
balirh haradbhis cira-loka-palaih
kirita-koty editapadapithah

svayam— Himself; tu—but; asamya—unique; atisayah—greater; tri-
adhiSah—Lord of the three; svarajya—independent supremacy; laksmi—
fortune; apta—achieved; samastakamah—all desires; balim—worshiping
paraphernalia; haradbhih—offered by; cira-loka-palaih—by the eternal
maintainers of the order of creation; kirita-koti— millions of helmets;
edita-pada-pithah—feet honored by prayers.

TRANSLATION

Lord Sri Krsna is the Lord of all kinds of threes and is independently
supreme by achievement of all kinds of fortune. He is worshiped by the
eternal maintainers of the creation, who offer Him the paraphernalia of
worship by touching their millions of helmets to His feet.

PURPORT

Lord Sri Krsna is so mild and merciful, as described in the above verses,
and yet He is the Lord of all kinds of threes. He is the Supreme Lord of the
three worlds, the three qualities of material nature and the three purusas
(Karanodakasayi, Garbhodakasayi and Ksirodakasayi Visnu). There are
innumerable universes, and in each and every universe there are different
manifestations of Brahma, Visnu and Rudra. Besides that, there is the
Sesa-miirti who bears all the universes on His hoods. And Lord Krsna is the
Lord of all of them. As the incarnation of Manu, He is the original source


--- Page 76 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
of all Manus in innumerable universes. Each universe has manifestations
of 540,000 Manus. He is the Lord of the three principal potencies,
namely cit-$akti, maya-sakti and tatastha-sakti, and He is the complete
master of six kinds of fortune— wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge
and renunciation. There is none who can excel Him in any matter of
enjoyment, and certainly there is no onc greater than Him. No one is equal
to or greater than Him. It is the duty of everyone, whoever and wherever
one may be, to surrender completely unto Him. It is not wonderful,
therefore, that all the transcendental controllers surrender to Him and
make all offerings of worship.
TEXT 22
तत्तस्य केडूर्यमलं gam
विग्छापयत्यङ्ग यदुग्रसेनम्‌ ।
किष्ठजिषण्णं परमेष्िधिष्ण्य
न्यबोधयद्देब निधारयेति ॥२२॥
tat tasya kainkaryam alam bhrtanno
viglapayaty anga yad ugrasenam
tisthan nisannam paramesthi-dhisnye
nyabodhayad deva nidharayeti
tat—therefore;tasya— His; kainkaryam—service;alam— of course; bhrtan—
the servitors; nah—us; viglapayati—gives pain; aiiga—O Vidura; yat—as
much as;ugrasenam—unto King Ugrasena; tisthan—being seated; nisannam—
waiting upon Him; paramesthi-dhisnye—on the royal throne; nyabodhayat—
submitted; deva—addressing my Lord; nidharaya—please know it; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Vidura, does it not pain us, His servitors, when we
remember that He [ Lord Krsna] used to stand before King Ugrasena, who
was sitting on the royal throne, and used to submit explanations before
him, saying, “0 My lord, please let it be known to you?
PURPORT
Lord Krsna’s gentle behavior before His so-called superiors such as His
father, grandfather and elder brother, His amiable behavior with His so-
called wives, friends and contemporaries, His behavior as a child before His


--- Page 77 ---
Text 23] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 77
mother Yadoda, and His naughty dealings with His young girl friends
cannot bewilder a pure devotee like Uddhava. Others, who are not devo-
tees, are bewildered by such behavior of the Lord, who acted just like a
human being. This bewilderment is explained by the Lord Himself in the
Bhagavad-gita as follows:
avajananti mam mudha
manusim tanum asritam
parariv bhavam ajananti
mama bhuta-mahesvaram (Bg. 9.11)

Persons with a poor fund of knowledge belittle the Personality of God-
head, Lord Krsna, not knowing His exalted position as the Lord of every-
thing. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord has explained His position clearly, but
the demoniac atheistic student squeezes out an interpretation to
suit his own purpose and misleads unfortunate followers into the same
mentality. Such unfortunate persons merely pick up some slogans from
the great book of knowledge, but are unable to estimate the Lord as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Pure devotees like Uddhava, however,
are never misled by such atheistic opportunists.

TEXT 23
अहो बकी यं स्तनकारद्रं
जि्ांसयापाययदप्यसाध्वी ।
FY गतिं धात्युचितां ततोऽन्यं
कं बा दयां शरणं व्रजे ॥२२॥
aho baki yarn stanae-kala-ku tam
jighamsayapayayad apy asadhvi
lebhe gatirh dhatryucitam tato nyam
kar va dayalum saranam vrajema

aho—alas; baki—the she-demon (Putana); yam—whom; stana—breast;
kala— dead; kutam— poison; jigharisaya— out of envy; apayayat— nourished;
api—although; asadhvi—unfaithful; lebhe—achieved; gatim—destination;
dhatryucitam—just suitable for the nurse; tatah—beyond whom; anyam—
other; kam—who else; va— certainly; dayalum—merciful; saranam—shelter;
vrajema—shall I take.


--- Page 78 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
TRANSLATION

Alas, how shall I take shelter of one more merciful than Him who
granted the position of mother to a she-demon [Putana] although she was
unfaithful and she prepared deadly poison to be sucked from her breast?

PURPORT

Here is an example of the extreme mercy of the Lord, even to His
enemy. It is said that a noble man accepts the good qualities of a person
of doubtful character, just as one accepts nectar from a stock of poison.
In His babyhood, He was administered deadly poison by Pitana, a she-
demon who tried to kill the wonderful baby. And because she was a
demon, it was impossible for her to know that the Supreme Lord, even
though playing the part of a baby, was no one less than the same Supreme
Personality of Godhead. His value as the Supreme Lord did not diminish
upon His becoming a baby to please His devotee Yasoda. The Lord may
assume the form of a baby or a shape other than that of a human being,
but it doesn’t make the slightest difference; He is always the same Supreme.
A living creature, however powerful he may become by dint of severe
penance, can never become equal to the Supreme Lord.

Lord Krsna accepted the motherhood of Puitana because she pretended
to be an affectionate mother, allowing Krsna to suck her breast. The Lord
accepts the least qualification of the living entity and awards him the
highest reward. That is the standard of His character. Therefore, who but
the Lord can be the ultimate shelter?

TEXT 24
मन्येऽसुरान्‌ मागवतांरू्यधी शे
संरम्यमागोभिनिदिष्टचित्तान्‌ ।
ये संयुगेऽचक्षत ag
म॑से छनामायुधमापतन्तम्‌ ॥२४॥
manye ’suran bhagavatams try-adhise
samrambha-margabhinivista-cittan
ye sariyuge ’caksata tarksya-putram
amse sunabhayudham apatantam

manye—I think; esuran—the demons; bhagavatan—great devotees;
tri-adhiSe—unto the Lord of the threes; sarirambha—enmity; marga—by
the way of; abhinivista-cittan—absorbed in thought; ye—those; sarmyuge—


--- Page 79 ---
Text 25] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 79
in the fight; acaksata—could see; tarksya-putram—Garuda, the carrier of
the Lord; amse—on the shoulder; sunabha—the wheel; ayudham—one who
carries the weapon; apatantam— coming forward.
TRANSLATION

I consider the demons, who are inimical toward the Lord, to be more
than the devotees because while fighting with the Lord, absorbed in
thoughts of enmity, they are able to see the Lord carried on the shoulder
of Garuda, the son of Tarksya [Kasdyapa], and carrying the wheel weapon
in His hand.

PURPORT

The asuras who fought against the Lord face to face got salvation due to
their being killed by the Lord. This salvation of the demons is not due to
their being devotees of the Lord; it is because of the Lord’s causeless
mercy. Anyone who is slightly in touch with the Lord, somehow or other,
is greatly benefited, even to the point of salvation, due to the excellence
of the Lord. He is so kind that He awards salvation even to His enemies
because they come into contact with Him and are indirectly absorbed in
Him by their inimical thoughts. Actually, the demons can never be equal
to the pure devotees, but Uddhava was thinking in that way because of his
feelings of separation. He was thinking that at the last stage of his life he
might not be able to see the Lord face to face as did the demons. The fact
is that the devotees who are always engaged in the devotional service of the
Lord in transcendental love are rewarded many hundreds and thousands
of times more than the demons by being elevated to the spiritual planets,
where they remain with the Lord in eternal, blissful existence. The demons
and impersonalists are awarded the facility of merging in the brahmajyoti
effulgence of the Lord, whereas the devotees are admitted into the spiritual
planets. For comparison, one can just imagine the difference between
floating in space and residing in one of the planets in the sky. The pleasure
of the living entities on the planets is greater than that of those who have
no body and who merge with the molecules of the sun’s rays. The
impersonalists, therefore, are no more favored than the enemies of the
Lord; rather, they are both on the same level of spiritual salvation.

TEXT 25
वसुदेवस्य देषक्यां जातो भोजेन्द्रबन्धने ।
चिकीषुर्भगवानस्थाः शमजेनाभियाचितः ॥२५॥


--- Page 80 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
vasudevasya devakyarm
jato bhojendra-bandhane
cikirsur bhagavan asyah
Sam ajenabhiyacitah
vasudevasya—of the wife of Vasudeva; devakyam—in the womb of
Devaki; jatah—born of; bhoja-indra—the King of the Bhojas; bandhane—in
the prison house; cikirsuh— for doing; bhagavan— the Personality of God-
head; asyah—of the earth; sam—welfare; ajena—by Brahma; abhiyacitah—
being prayed for.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna, being prayed to by Brahma
to bring welfare to the earth, was begotten by Vasudeva in the womb of
his wife Devaki in the prison of the King of Bhoja.
PURPORT
Although there is no difference between the Lord’s pastimes of
appearance and disappearance, the devotees of the Lord do not generally
discuss the subject matter of His disappearance. Vidura inquired indirectly
from Uddhava about the incidence of His disappearance, since he asked
him to relate Krsna-katha, or topics on the history of Lord Krsna. Thus
Uddhava began the topics from the very beginning of His appearance as the
son of Vasudeva and Devaki in the prison of Kamsa, the King of the
Bhojas, at Mathura; The Lord has no business in this world, but when He
is so requested by devotees like Brahma, He descends on the earth for the
welfare of the entire universe. This is stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.8):
paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca dugkrtam dharma-samsthapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge.
TEXT 26
ततो नन्दव्रजमितः पित्रा कंसादिषिभ्यता |
THEY समास्तत्र गूढार्चिः सबलोऽवसत्‌ ॥२६॥
tato nanda-vrajam itah
pitra kamsad vibibhyata
ekadasa samas tatra
gudharcih sabalo ’vasat


--- Page 81 ---
Text 27] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 81

tatah—thereafter; nanda-vrajam—cow pastures of Nanda Maharaja; itah—
being brought up; pitra—by His father; kamsat—from Kamsa;
vibibhyata—being afraid of; ekadasa—eleven; samah—years; tatra—therein;
gudha-arcih—covered fire; sabalah—with Baladeva; avasat—resided.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter, His father, being afraid of Kamsa, brought Him to the cow
pastures of Maharaja Nanda, and there He lived for eleven years like a
covered flame with His elder brother Baladeva.

PURPORT

There was no necessity of the Lord’s being dispatched to the house of
Nanda Maharaja out of fear of Kamsa’s determination to kill Him as soon as
He appeared. It is the business of the asuras to try to kill the Supreme
Personality of Godhead or to prove by all means that there is no God or
that Krsna is an ordinary human being and not God. Lord Krsna is not
affected by such determination of men of Kamsa’s class, but in order to
play the role of a child He agreed to be carried by His father to the cow
pastures of Nanda Maharaja because Vasudeva was afraid of Kamsa. Nanda
Maharaja was due to receive [11111 as his child, and Yasodamayi was also to
enjoy the childhood pastimes of the Lord, and therefore to fulfill every-
one’s desire, He was carried from Mathura to Vrndavana just after His
appearance in the prison house of Karsa. He lived there for eleven years
and completed all His fascinating pastimes of childhood, boyhood and
adolescence with His elder brother, Lord Baladeva, His first expansion.
Vasudeva’s thought of protecting Krsna from the wrath of Kamsa is part
of a transcendental relationship. The Lord enjoys more when someone
takes Him as his subordinate son who needs the protection of a father
than He does when someone accepts Him as the Supreme Lord. He is the
father of everyone, and He protects everyone, but when His devotee takes
it for granted that the Lord is to be protected by the devotee’s care, it is a
transcendental joy for the Lord. Thus when Vasudeva, out of fear of
Kamsa, carried Him to Vrndavana, the Lord enjoyed it; otherwise, He had
no fear from Kamsa or anyone else.

TEXT 27
परीतो वत्सपैव॑त्सांश्ारयन्‌ ल्यदरदवि्ः |
यघ्ुनोपवने कूजदद्विजसंङुलिताङ्घ्निपे ॥२७॥


--- Page 82 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
parito vatsapair vatsams
carayan vyaharad vibhuh
yamunopavane kujad-
dvija-sankulitanghripe

paritah—surrounded by; vatsapaih—cowherd boys; vatsan—calves;
carayan—herding, tending; vyaharat—enjoyed by traveling; vibhuh—the
Almighty; yamuna—the Yamuna River; upavane—gardens on the shore;
kijat—vibrated by the voice; dvija—the twice-born birds; senkulita—
densely situated; anghripe—trees.

TRANSLATION

In His childhood, the Almighty Lord was surrounded by cowherd boys
and calves, and thus He traveled on the shore of the Yamuna River,
through gardens densely covered with trees and filled with vibrations of
chirping birds.

PURPORT

Nanda Maharaja was a landholder for King Kamsa, but because by caste
he was a vaiSya, a member of the mercantile and agricultural community,
he maintained thousands of cows. It is the duty of the vaiSyas to give
protection to the cows, just as the ksatriyas are to give protection to the
human beings. Because the Lord was a child, He was put in charge of the
calves with His other cowherd boy friends. These cowherd boys were great
rsis and yogis in their previous births, and after many such pious births,
they gained the association of the Lord and could play with Him on equal
terms. Such cowherd boys never cared to know who Krsna was, but they
played with Him as a most intimate and lovable friend. They were so fond
of the Lord that at night they would only think of the next morning when
they would be able to meet the Lord and go together to the forests for
cowherding.

The forests on the shore of the Yamuna are all beautiful gardens full of
trees of mango, jackfruit, apples, guava, oranges, grapes, berries, palmfruit
and so many other plants and fragrant flowers. And because the forest was
on the bank of the Yamuna, naturally there were ducks, cranes and
peacocks on the branches of the trees. All these trees and birds and beasts
were pious living entities born in the transcendental abode of Vrndavana
just to give pleasure to the Lord and His eternal associates, the cowherd
boys.


--- Page 83 ---
Text 28] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 83

While playing like a small child with His associates, the Lord killed
many demons, including Aghasura, Bakasura, Pralambasura and
Gardabhasura. Although He appeared at Vrndavana just as a boy, He was
actually like the covered flames of a fire. As a small particle of fire can
kindle a great fire with fuel, so the Lord killed all these great demons,
beginning from His babyhood in the house of Nanda Maharaja. The land
of Vrndavana, the Lord’s childhood playground, still remains today, and
anyone who visits these places enjoys the same transcendental bliss,
although the Lord is not physically visible to our imperfect eyes. Lord
Caitanya recommended this land of the Lord as identical with the Lord
and therefore worshipable by the devotees. This instruction is taken up
especially by the followers of Lord Caitanya known as the Gaudiya
Vaignavas. And because the land is identical with the Lord, devotees like
Uddhava and Vidura therefore visited these places five thousand years
ago in order to have direct contact with the Lord, visible or not visible.
Thousands of devotees of the Lord are still wandering in these sacred
places of Vrndavana, and all of them are preparing themselves to go back
home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 28
कौमारीं FARE प्रेक्षणीयां वजीकसाम्‌ |
रुदभिव हसन्धुग्धवाररसिंदाबलोनः ॥२८॥
kaumarim 00780901118 cestam
preksaniyam vrajaukasam
rudann iva hasan mugdha-
bala-simhavalokanah

kaumarim—just suitable to childhood; darsayan—used to show; cestam—
activities; preksaniyam—worthy to be seen; vraja-okasam—by the inhabi-
tants of the land of Vrndavana; rudan—crying; iva—just like; hasan—
laughing; mugdha—struck with wonder; bala-siritha—lion cub; avalokanah—
looking like that.

TRANSLATION

When the Lord displayed His activities just suitable for childhood, He
was only visible to the residents of Vrndavana. Sometimes He would cry
and sometimes laugh, just like a child, and while so doing He would
appear like a lion cub.


--- Page 84 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
PURPORT
If anyone wants to enjoy the childhood pastimes of the lord, then he
has to follow in the footsteps of the residents of Vrajavasi like Nanda,
Upananda and other parental inhabitants. A child may insist on having
something and cry like anything to get it, disturbing the whole neighbor-
hood, and then immediately after achieving the desired thing, he laughs.
Such crying and laughing is enjoyable to the parents and elderly members
of the family, so the Lord would simultaneously cry and laugh in this way
and merge His devotee parents in the humor of transcendental pleasure.
These incidents are enjoyable only by the residents of Vraja like Nanda
Maharaja, and not by the impersonalist worshipers of Brahman or
Paramatma. Sometimes when He was attacked in the forest by demons,
Krsna would appear struck with wonder, but He looked on them like the
cub of a lion and killed them. His childhood companions would also be
struck with wonder, and when they came back home they would narrate
the story to their parents, and everyone would appreciate the qualities of
their Krsna. Child Krsna did not belong only to His parents, Nanda and
Yadoda, but He was the son of all the elderly inhabitants of Vrndavana
and the friend of all contemporary boys and girls. Everyone loved Krsna;
He was the life and soul of everyone, including the animals, the cows and
the calves.
TEXT 29
स एव गोधनं लक्ष्म्या निकेतं सितगोगृषम्‌ |
चारयल्नुगान्‌ गोपान्‌ रणदेणुररीरमत्‌ ॥२९॥
sa eva go-dhanam laksmya
niketar sita-go-vrsam
carayann anugan gopan
ranad-venur ariramat
sah—He (Lord Krsna); eva—certainly; go-dhanam—the treasure of cows;
laksmyah—by opulence; niketam—reservoir; sita-go-vrsam—beautiful cows
and bulls; carayan—herding; anugan—the followers; gopan—cowherd boys;
rapat—blowing; venuh—flute; ariramat—cnlivened.
TRANSLATION
While herding the very beautiful bulls, the Lord, who was the reservoir
of all opulence and fortune, used to blow His flute, and thus He enlivened
His faithful followers, the cowherd boys.


--- Page 85 ---
Text 29] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 85
PURPORT

As He grew to six and seven years old, the Lord was given charge of
looking after the cows and bulls in the grazing grounds. He was the son of
a well-to-do landholder who owned hundreds and thousands of cows, and
according to Vedic economics, one is considered to be a rich man by the
strength of his store of grains and cows. With only these two things, cows
and grain, humanity can solve its eating problem. Human society needs
only sufficient grain and sufficient cows to solve its economic problems.
All other things but these two are artificial necessities created by man to
kill his valuable life at the human level and waste his time in things which
are not needed. Lord Krsna, as the teacher of human society, personally
showed by His acts that the mercantile community or the vaisyas should
herd cows and bulls and thus give protection to the valuable animals.
According to smrti regulation, the cow is the mother and the bull the
father of the human being. The cow is the mother because just as one
sucks the breast of one’s mother, human society takes cow’s milk.
Similarly, the bull is the father of human society because the father earns
for the children just as the bull tills the ground to produce food grains.
Human society will kill its spirit of life by killing the father and the
mother. It is mentioned herein that the beautiful cows and bulls were of
various checkered colors—red, black, green, yellow, ash, etc. And because
of their colors and healthy smiling features, the atmosphere was enlivening.

Over and above all, the Lord used to play His celebrated flute. The
sound vibrated by His flute would give His friends such transcendental
pleasure that they would forget all the talks of the brahmananda which is
so praised by the impersonalists. These cowherd boys, as will be explained
by Sukadeva Gosvami, were living entities who had accumulated heaps of
pious acts and thus were enjoying with the Lord in person and were
hearing His transcendental flute. The Brahma-sarhita confirms the Lord’s
blowing His transcendental flute.

venum kvanantam aravinda-dalayataksarn
barhavatariisam asitambuda-sundarangam
kandarpa-koti-kaniiniya-visesa-sobham
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami (Bs. 5.30)

Brahmaji said, “I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who plays on His
transcendental flute. His eyes are like lotus flowers, He is decorated with
peacock plumes, and His bodily color resembles a fresh black cloud
although His bodily features are more beautiful than millions of cupids.”
These are the special features of the Lord.


--- Page 86 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
TEXT 30
प्रयुक्तान्‌ माजरायेन मायिनः कामरूपिणः |
लीलया व्यनुदत्तांस्तान्‌ बालः कीडन रानिव 11301
prayuktan bhoja-rajena
mayinah kama-rupinah
lilaya vyanudat-tams tan
balah kridanakan iva

prayuktan—engaged; bhoja-rajena—by King Kamsa; mayinah—great
wizards; kama-rupinah— who could assume any form they liked; lilaya—in
the course of the pastimes; vyanudat—killed; tan— them; tan—as they came
there; balah—the child; kridanakan— dolls; iva—like that.

TRANSLATION

The great wizards who were able to assume any form were engaged by
the King of Bhoja, Kamsa, to kill Krsna, but in the course of His pastimes
the Lord killed them as easily as a child breaks dolls.

PURPORT

The atheist Kammsa wanted to kill Krsna just after His birth. He failed to
do so, but later on he got information that Krsna was living in Vrndavana
at the house of Nanda Maharaja. He therefore engaged many wizards who
could perform wonderful acts and assume any form they liked. All of
them appeared before the child Lord in various forms, like Agha, Baka,
Putana, Sakata, Trnavarta, Dhenuka and Gardabha, and they tried to kill
the Lord at every opportunity. But one after another, all of them were
killed by the Lord as if He were only playing with dolls. Children piay
with toy lions, elephants, boars and many similar dolls, which are broken
by the children in the course of their playing with them. Before the
Almighty Lord, any powerful living being is just like a toy lion in the
hands of a playing child. No one can excel God in any capacity, and there-
fore no one can be equal to or greater than Him, nor can anyone attain
the stage of equality with God by any kind of endeavor. Jiiana, yoga and
bhakti are three recognized processes of spiritual realization. The
perfection of such processes can lead one to the desired goal of life in
spiritual value, but that does not mean that one can attain a perfection equal
to the Lord’s by such endeavors. The Lord is the Lord at every stage.
When He was playing just like a child on the lap of His mother Yasoda-
ठ or just like a cowherd boy with His transcendental friends, He


--- Page 87 ---
Text 32] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 87
continued to remain God, without the slightest diminution of His six
opulences. Thus He is always unrivaled.
TEXT 31
विपनान्‌ विषपानेन निगृह्य ्ुजगाधिपम्‌ ।
उल्थाप्यापाययद्वावस्तत्तोयं प्रकृतिस्थितम्‌ 1320
vipannan visa-panena
nigrhyya bhujagadhipam
utthapyapayayad-gavas
tat toyam prakrti-sthitam
vipannan—perplexed in great difficulties; visa-panena—by drinking
poison; nigrhya—subduing; bhujaga-adhipam—the chief of the reptiles;
utthapya—after coming out; apayayat—caused to drink; gavah—the cows;
tat—that; toyam— water; prakrti—natural; sthitam—situated.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Vyndavana were perplexed by great difficulties
because a certain portion of the Yamuna was poisoned by the chief of the
reptiles [Kaliya]. The Lord chastised the snake king within the water and
drove him away, and after coming out of the river, He caused the cows to
drink the water and proved that the water was again in its natural state.
TEXT 32
FACILE गोपराजं द्विजोत्तमैः |
वित्तस्य चोरुभारस्य चिकीर्षन्‌ aa विशः ।॥२२॥
ayajayad go-savena
gopa-rajam dvijottamaih
vittasya coru-bharasya
cikirsan sadvyayar vibhuh
ayajayat—made to perform; go-savena—by worship of the cows; gopa-
rajam—the king of the cowherds; dvije-uttamaih—by the learned
brahmanas; vittasya—of the wealth; ca—also; uru-bharasya—great opulence;
cikirsan—desiring to act; sadvyayam—proper utilization; vibhuh—the
great.


--- Page 88 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord, Krsna, desired to utilize the opulent financial
strength of Maharaja Nanda for worship of the cows, and also He wanted
to give a lesson to Indra, the King of heaven. Thus He advised His father
to perform worship of go, or the pasturing land and the cows, with the
help of learned brahmanas.

PURPORT

Since He is the teacher of everyone, the Lord also taught His father,
Nanda Maharaja. Nanda Maharaja was a well-to-do landholder and owner
of many cows, and, as was the custom, he used to perform yearly
worship of Indra, the King of heaven, with great opulence. This worship
of demigods by the general populace is also advised in the Vedic literature
just so people can accept the superior power of the Lord. The demigods are
servants of the Lord deputed to look after the management of various
activities of universal affaris. Therefore it is advised in the Vedic scriptures
that one should perform yajiias to appease the demigods. But one who is
devoted to the Supreme lord has no need to appease the demigods.
Worship of the demigods by common people is an arrangement for
acknowledging the supremacy of the Supreme Lord, but it is not
necessary. Such appeasement is generally recommended for material gains
only. As we have already discussed in the Second Canto of this literature,
one who admits the supremacy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
does not need to worship the secondary demigods. Sometimes, being
worshiped and adored by less intelligent living beings, the demigods
become puffed up with power and forget the supremacy of the Lord.
This happened when Lord Krsna was present in the universe, and thus the
Lord wanted to give a lesson to the King of heaven, Indra. He therefore
asked Maharaja Nanda to stop the sacrifice offered to Indra and to use the
money properly by performing a ceremony worshiping the cows and the
pasturing ground on the hill of Govardhana. By this act Lord Krsna
taught human society, as He has instructed in the Bhagavad-gita also,
that one should worship the Supreme Lord by all acts and by all their
results. That will bring about the desired success. The wvaisyas are
specifically advised to give protection to the cows and their pasturing
ground or agricultural land instead of squandering their hard-earned
money. That will satisfy the Lord. The perfection of one’s occupational
duty, whether in the sphere of duty to oneself, one’s community or one’s
nation, is judged by the degree to which the Lord is satisfied.


--- Page 89 ---
Text 34] Remembrance of Lord Krsna 89
TEXT 33
वर्षतीन्द्रे व्रजः कोपाद्धञनमानेऽतिबिद्वलः |
- - = +
गोत्रलीलातपत्रेण त्रातो मद्रानुगृहता 12310)
varsatindre vrajah kopad
bhagnamane ’ti-vihvalah
go-tra-lila-tapatrepa
trato bhadranugrhnata
varsati—in pouring water; indre—by the King of heaven, Indra; vrajah—
the land of cows (Vrndavana); kopat bhagnamane—having been in anger on
being insulted; ati—highly; vihvalah—perturbed; go-tra—the hill for the
cows; lila-tapatrena—by the pastime umbrella; tratah—were protected;
bhadra—O sober one; anugrhnata—by the merciful Lord.
TRANSLATION
0 sober Vidura, King Indra, his honor having been insulted, poured
water incessantly on Vrndavana, and thus the inhabitants of Vraja, the
land of cows, were greatly distressed. But the compassionate Lord Krsna
saved them from danger with His pastime umbrella, the Govardhana Hill.
TEXT 34
[TY
शरच्छशिकरेशरष्टं मानयन्‌ रजनीथुखम्‌ |
गायन्‌ FUE रेमे स्रीणां मण्डलमण्डनः 1132
Sarac-chasi-karair mrstam
manayan rajani-mukham
gayan kala-padarh reme
strinam mandala-mandanah
Sarat—autumn; sasi-moon; karaih—by the shine; mrstam—brightened;
manayan— thinking so; rajani-mukham—the face of the night; gayan—
singing; kala-padam—pleasing songs; reme—enjoyed; strinam—of the wo-
men; mandala-mandanah—as the central beauty of the assembly of women.
TRANSLATION
In the third season of the year, the Lord enjoyed the central beauty of
the assembly of women by attracting them with His pleasing songs in an
autumn night brightened by moonshine.


--- Page 90 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 2
PURPORT

Before leaving the land of cows, Vrndavana, the Lord pleased His young
girl friends, the transcendental gopis, in His rase-lila pastimes. Here
Uddhava stopped his description of the Lord’s activities.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Second
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Remembrance of Lord
Krsna.”


--- Page 91 ---
CHAPTER THREE
The Lords Pastimes
out of
Vrndavana
TEXT 1
उद्धव उवाच
ततः स आगत्य पुरं खपित्रा-
िकीर्षया शं बरुदेवसंयुतः ।
निपात्य तङ्गाद्विपुयुथनाथं
¢ =
हतं व्यकर्षद्‌ व्यसुमोजसोर्व्याम्‌ | १॥
uddhava uvaca
tatah sa agatya puram sva-pitros
cikirsaya sam baladeva-samyutah
nipatya tungad ripu-yutha-natham
110८0771 vyakarsad vyasum ojasorvyam
$ri uddhavah uvaca—Sri Uddhava said; tatah— thereafter; sah— the Lord;
agatya—coming; puram—the city of Mathura; sva-pitroh—own parents;
cikirsaya— wishing well; sam—well-being; baladeva-sarhyutah—with Lord
Baladeva; nipatya—dragging down; tungat—from the throne; ripu-yutha-
natham—leader of public enemies; hatam—Kkilled; vyakarsat—pulled;
vyasum—on the ground; ojasa—by strength; urvyam—very great.
TRANSLATION
Sri Uddhava said: Thereafter Lord Krsna went to Mathura City with
Sri Baladeva, and to please Their parents They dragged Kamsa, the
leader of public enemies, down from his throne and killed him, pulling
him along the ground with great strength.
PURPORT
King Kamsa’s death is only briefly described here because such pastimes
are vividly and elaborately described in the Tenth Canto. The Lord proved
91


--- Page 92 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
to be a worthy son of His parents even at the age of sixteen years. Both
brothers, Lord Krsna and Lord Baladeva, went to Mathura from Vyndavana
and killed Their maternal uncle, who had given so much trouble to Their
parents, Vasudeva and Devaki. Kamsa was a great giant, and Vasudeva and
Devaki never thought that Krsna and Balarama (Baladeva) would be able
to kill such a great and strong enemy. When the two brothers attacked
Kamsa on the throne, Their parents feared that now Kamsa would finally
get the opportunity to kill their sons, whom they had hidden for so long
in the house of Nanda Maharaja. The parents of the Lord, due to parental
affection, felt extreme danger, and they almost fainted. Just to convince
them that They had actually killed Karhsa, Krsna and Baladeva pulled
Kamsa’s dead body along the ground to encourage them.
TEXT 2
सान्दीपनेः HATH ब्रह्माधीत्य सविस्तरम्‌ |
तस्मे प्रादादरं पुत्र ग्रत पञ्चजनोदरात्‌ nn
sandipaneh sakrt proktam
brahmadhitya savistaram
tasmai pradad varam putram
77110771. paiica-janodarat

sandipaneh—of Sandipani Muni; sakrt—once only; proktam—instructed;
brahma—all the Vedas with their different branches of knowledge;
adhitya—after studying; savistaram—in all details; tasmai—unto him;
pradat—rewarded; varam—benediction; putram—son; mrtam—who was
already dead; paiica-jana—the region of the departed souls; udarat—from
within.

TRANSLATION

The Lord learned all the Vedas with their different branches simply by
hearing them once from His teacher, Sandipani Muni, whom he rewarded
by bringing back his dead son from the region of Yamaloka.

PURPORT

No one but the Supreme Lord can become well-versed in all the
branches of Vedic wisdom simply by hearing once from his teacher. Nor
can anyone bring a dead body back to life after the soul has already gone
to the region of Yamaraja. But Lord Krsna ventured to the planet of
Yamaloka and found the dead son of His teacher and brought him back to
his father as a reward for the instructions received. The Lord is con-


--- Page 93 ---
Text 3] The Lord's Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 93
stitutionally well-versed in all the Vedas, and yet to teach by example
that everyone must go to learn the Vedas from an authorized teacher and
must satisfy the teacher by service and reward, He Himself adopted this
system. The Lord offered His services to His teacher, Sandipani Muni, and
the muni, knowing the power of the Lord, asked something which was
impossible to be done by anyone else. The teacher asked that his beloved
son, who had died, be brought back to him, and the Lord fulfilled the
request. The Lord is not, therefore, an ingrate to anyone who renders Him
some sort of service. The devotees of the Lord who always engage in His
loving service are never to be disappointed in the progressive march of
devotional service.
TEXT 3
समाहता भीष्मककन्यया ये
=
रियः सवर्णेन बुभूषयेषाम्‌ |
गान्धर्व्या मिषतां खभागं
WF पदं मूर्धि दधत्सुपर्णः ২ ॥
samahuta bhismaka-kanyaya ye
Sriyah savarnena bubhusayaisam
gandharva-vrttya misatam sva-bhagam
Jahre pada murdhni dadhat suparnah
samahutah—invited; bhismaka—of King Bhigmaka; kanyaya—by the
daughter; ye—all those;sriyah—fortune; savarnena—by a similar sequence;
bubhusdya—expecting to be so; esam—of them; gandharva—in marrying;
vrttya—by such a custom; misatam—carrying so; sva-bhagam—own share;
jahre—took away; padam—let; murdhni—on the head; dadhat—placed;
suparpah—Garuda.
TRANSLATION
Attracted by the beauty and fortune of Rukmini, the daughter of
King Bhigsmaka, many great princes and kings assembled to marry her.
But Lord Krgna, stepping over the other hopeful candidates, carried her
away as His own share, as Garuda carried away nectar.
PURPORT
Princess Rukmini, the daughter of King Bhismaka, was actually as
attractive as fortune itself because she was as valuable as gold both in
color and value. Since the goddess of fortune, Laksmi, is the property of


--- Page 94 ---
94 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
the Supreme Lord, Rukmini was actually meant for Lord Krsna. But
Sisupala was selected as her bridegroom by Rukmini’s elder brother,
although King Bhismaka wanted his daughter to be married to Krsna.
Rukmini invited Krsna to take her away from the clutches of Sigupala,
so when the bridegroom, Sisupila, came there with his party with the
desire to marry Rukmipi, Krsna all of a sudden swept her from the
scene, stepping over the heads of all the princes there, just as Garuda
carried away nectar from the hands of the demons. This incident will
be clearly explained in the Tenth Canto.
TEXT 4
कङुभ्निनोऽविद्धनसो হলিলা
सखयंबरे नाम्नजितीञुबाह |
=
TEAMED गृष्यतोऽन्ञा-
घ्प्रेऽक्षतः शखभतः खश; । ४ ॥
kakudmino ‘viddhanaso damitva
svayarnvare nagnajitim uvaha
tad-bhagnamanan api grdhyato jiian
jaghne ’ksatah $astra-bhrtah sva-Sastraih
kakudminah—bulls whose noses were not pierced; aviddhanasah—
pierced by the nose; damitva—subduing; svayarivare—in the open compe-
tition to select the bridegroom; nagnijiti—Princess Nagnijiti; uvaha—
married; tat-bhagnamanah—in that way all who were disappointed; api—
even though; grdhyaytah— wanted; ajian—fools; jaghne— killed and
wounded; aksatah— without being wounded; sastra-bhrtah—equipped with
all weapons; sva-satraih—by His own weapons.
TRANSLATION
By subduing seven bulls whose noses were not pierced, the Lord
achieved the hand of Princess Nagnajiti in the open competition to
select her bridegroom. Although the Lord was victorious, His competitors
asked the hand of the Princess, and thus there was a fight. Well-equipped
with weapons, the Lord killed or wounded all of them, but He was not
hurt Himself.


--- Page 95 ---
Text 5] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 95
TEXT 5
प्रियं সম্ভমাল্স इव प्रियाया
विधित्सुराच्छंद्‌ স্তন यदर्थे |
५ 4
वज्रयाद्रवत्तं सगणो रुषान्धः
क्रीडार्गो नूनमयं वधूनाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥
priya prabhur gramya iva priyaya
vidhitsur arcchad dyutarum yad-arthe
vajry adravat tar sagano rugandhah
krida-mrgo nunam 09078 vadhunam
priyam—of the dear wife; prabhuh—the Lord; gramyah—ordinary living
being; iva—in the manner of; priyayah—just to please; vidhitsuh—wishing;
arcchat—brought about; dyutarum—the parijata flower tree; yat— for which;
arthe—in the matter of; vajri—Indra, the King of heaven; adravat tam—
went forward to fight with Him; se-ganah—with full strength; rusa—in
anger; andhah—blind; krida-mrgah—henpecked; nunam—of course; ayam—
this; vadhunam—of the wives.
TRANSLATION
Just to please His dear wife, the Lord brought back the parijata tree
from heaven, just as an ordinary husband would do. But Indra, the King
of heaven, induced by his wives (henpecked as he was), ran after the Lord
with full force to fight Him.
PURPORT
The Lord once went to the heavenly planet to present an earring to
Aditi, the mother of the demigods, and His wife Satyabhama also went
with Him. There is a special flowering tree called the parijata which grows
only in the heavenly planets, and Satyabhama wanted this tree. Just to
please His wife, like an ordinary husband, the Lord brought back the tree,
and this enraged Vajri, or the controller of the thunderbolt. Indra’s wives
inspired him to run after the Lord to fight, and Indra, because he was a
henpecked husband and also a fool, listened to them and dared to fight
with Krsna. He was a fool on this occasion because he forgot that
everything belongs to the Lord.


--- Page 96 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
There was no fault on the part of the Lord, even though He took away
the tree from the heavenly kingdom, but because he was henpecked,
dominated by his beautiful wives like Sadi, Indra became a fool, just as all
persons who are dominated by their wives are generally foolish. Indra
thought that Krsna was a henpecked husband who only by the will of His
wife Satyabhama took away the property of heaven, and therefore he
thought that Krsna could be punished. He forgot that the Lord is the
proprietor of everything and cannot be henpecked. The Lord is fully
independent, and by His will only He can have hundreds and thousands of
wives like Satyabhama. He was not, therefore, attached to Satyabhama
because she was a beautiful wife, but He was pleased with her devotional
service and thus wanted to .reciprocate the unalloyed devotion of His
devotee.
TEXT 6
सतं धे `खं॑वपुषा ग्रसन्तं
হদ্বা सुनाभोन्मथितं धरित्या ।
आमनच्तरितस्ततनयाय शेषं
दत्वा तदन्तःपुरमाविवेश ॥ & ॥
sutam mrdhe kham vapusa grasantam
drstva sunabhon mathitarm dharitrya
amantritas tattanayaya sesarn
dattva tad-antah-puram avivesa
sutam—son; mrdhe—in the fight; kham—the sky; vapusa—by his body;
grasantam—while devouring; drstva—seeing; sunabhot—by the sudarsana
wheel; mathitam—killed; dharitrya—by the earth; amantritah—being prayed
for; tat-tanayaya—to the son of Narakasura; §esam—that which was taken
from; dattva—returning; it; tat—his; aentah-puram—inside the house;
avivesa—entered.
TRANSLATION
Narakasura, the son of Dharitri, the earth, tried to grasp the whole sky,
and for this he was killed by the Lord in a fight. His mother then prayed
to the Lord, which led to the return of the kingdom to the son of
Narakisura, and thus the Lord entered the house of the demon.


--- Page 97 ---
Text 7] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 97
PURPORT
It is said in other Puranas that Narakasura was the son of Dharitri, the
earth, by the Lord Himself. But he became a demon due to the bad
association of Bapa, another demon. An atheist is called a demon, and it is
a fact that even a person born of good parents can turn into a demon by
bad association. Birth is not always the criterion of goodness; unless and
until one is trained in the culture of good association, one cannot become
good.
TEXT 7
বলাহলালা। नरदेवकन्याः
=~
कृजेन दृष्ट्रा इरिमातेबन्धुम्‌ |
उत्थाय सद्यो जगृहुः प्रहष-
& .
ATER RAR: ॥ ७॥
tatrahrtas ta nara-deva-kanyah
kujena drstva harim arta-bandhum
utthaya sadyo jagrhuh praharsa-
vridanuraga-prahitavalokaih
tatra—inside the house of Narakasura;ahrtah—kidnapped; tah—all those;
nara-deva-kanyah— daughters of many kings; kujena—by the demon;
drstva—by seeing; harim—the Lord; arta-bandhum—the friend of the
distressed; utthaya—at once got up; sadyah—then and there; jagrhuh—
accepted; praharsa—joyfully; vrida—shyness; anuraga— attachment; prahita-
avalokaih—by eager glancing.
TRANSLATION
There in the house of the demon, all the princesses kidnapped by
Narakasura at once became alert upon seeing the Lord, the friend of the
distressed. They looked upon Him with eagerness, joy and shyness and
offered to be His wives.
PURPORT
Narakasura kidnapped many daughters of great kings and kept them
imprisoned in his palace. But when he was killed by the Lord and the Lord


--- Page 98 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
entered the house of the demon, all the princesses were enlivened with
joy and offered to become His wives because the Lord is the only friend of
the distressed. Unless the Lord accepted them, there would be no chance
of their being married because the demon kidnapped them from their
fathers’ custody and therefore no one would agree to marry them.
According to Vedic society, girls are transferred from the custody of the
father to the custody of the husband. Since these princesses had already
been taken away from the custody of their fathers, it would have been
difficult for them to have any husband other than the Lord Himself.
TEXT 8
आसां घत एकसिन्नानागारेषु योषिताम्‌ |
सविधं जगृह पाणीनयुरूपः खमायया । < ॥
0৫527) 77100101760 ৩1008771011
nanagaresu yositam
savidham jagrhe panin
anurupah sva-mayaya
asam—all those; muhurta—at one time; ekasmin—simultaneously; nana-
garesu—in different compartments; yositam—of the women; sa-vidham—in
perfect rituals; jagrhe—accepted; panin—hands; enuripah—exactly to
match; sva-mayaya—by His internal potency.
TRANSLATION
All those princesses were lodged in different apartments, and the Lord
simultaneously assumed different bodily expansionsexactly matching each
and every princess, and He accepted their hands in perfect rituals by His
internal potency.
PURPORT
In the Brahmg-sarmhita the Lord is described as follows in regard to His
innumerable plenary expansions:
advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam
adyam purana-purisam navayauvanam ca
vedesu durllabham adurllabham atma-bhaktau
govindam adi-purusarn tam 0110772 bhajami (Bs. 5.33)
“The Lord, Govinda, whom 1 worship, is the original Personality of
Godhead. He is nondifferent from His innumerable plenary expansions,


--- Page 99 ---
Text 10] The Lord's Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 99
who are all infallible, original and unlimited and who have eternal forms.
Although He is primeval, the oldest personality, He is always fresh and
young.” By His internal potency the Lord can expand Himself into various
personalities of svayam-prakasa and again into prabhava and vaibhava
forms, and all of them are nondifferent from one another. The forms into
which the Lord expanded to marry the princesses in different apartments
were all slightly different just to match each and every one of them. They
are called vaibhava-vilasa forms of the Lord and are effected by His
internal potency, yoga-maya.
TEXT 9
[3 ९
तास्वपत्यान्यजनयदात्मतुल्यान মণনঃ।
एकैकस्यां TW दश ॒प्रकृतेविंबुभूषया ।। ९॥।
(05४ apatyany ajanayad
atma-tulyani sarvatah
ekaikasyam dasa dasa
prakrter vibubhusaya
tasu—unto them; apatyani—offspring; ajanayat—begot; atma-tulyani—
all like Himself; sarvatah—in all respects; eka-ekasyam—in each and every
one of them; dasa—ten; dasa—ten; prakrteh—for expanding Himself;
vibubhusaya—so desiring.
TRANSLATION
Just to expand Himself according to His transcendental features, the
Lord begot in each and every one of them ten offspring with exactly His
own qualities.
TEXT 10
FRNA AA रुन्धतः पुरम्‌ |
अजीषनरस्वयं दिव्यं खपुंसां तेज आदिशत्‌ 112 oll
kala-magadha-salvadin
anikai rundhatah puram
ajighanat svayam divyam
sva-purisari teja adisat
kala—Kalayavana; magadha—the King of Magadha (Jarasandha); salva—
King Salva; adin—and others; anikath—by the soldiers; rundhatah—being
encircled; puram—the city of Mathura; ajighanat—killed; svayam—person-


--- Page 100 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
ally; divyam—transcendental; sva-purnsam—of His own men; tejah—prow-
ess; adisat—exhibited.
TRANSLATION

Kalayavana, the King of Magadha and Salva attacked the city of
Mathura, but when the city was encircled by their soldiers, the Lord
refrained from killing them personally, just to show the power of His
own men.

PURPORT

After the death of Karhsa, when Mathura was encircled by the soldiers
of Kalayavana, Jarasandha and Silva, the Lord seemingly fled from the
city, and thus He is known as Ranchor, or one who fled from fighting.
Actually, the fact was that the Lord wanted to kill them through the
agency of His own men, devotees like Mucukunda, Bhima, etc. Kilayavana
and the King of Magadha were killed by Mucukunda and Bhima respec-
tively, who acted as agents of the Lord. By such acts the Lord wanted to
exhibit the prowess of His devotees, as if He were personally unable to
fight but His devotees could kill them. The relationship of the Lord with
His devotees is a very happy one. Actually, the Lord descended at the
request of Brahma in order to kill all the undesirables of the world, but to
divide the share of glory He sometimes engaged His devotees to take the
credit. The Battle of Kuruksetra was designed by the Lord Himself, but
just to give credit to His devotee Arjuna (nimitla-matrarm bhava savyasacin),
He played the part of the charioteer, while Arjuna was given the chance to
play the fighter and thus become the hero of the Battle of Kuruksetra.
What He wants to do Himself by His transcendental plans, He executes
through His confidential devotees. That is the way of the Lord’s mercy
towards His pure unalloyed devotees.

TEXT 11
शम्बरं द्विविदं बाणं gi बल्वलमेव च ।
अन्यांश्च दन्तवक्त्ादीवधीत्कांश् घातयत्‌ 12211
sambaram dvividarh 00007
muram balvalam eva ca
anyams$ ca dantavaktradin
avadhit kams ca ghatayat


--- Page 101 ---
Text 13] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 101
sambaram—Sambara; dvividam—Dvivida; banam—Bana; muram—Mura;
balvalam—Balvala; eva ca—as also; anyan—others; ca—also; dantavakra-
adin—like Dantavakra and others; avadhit—killed; kan ca—and many
others; ghatayat—caused to be killed.
TRANSLATION
Of kings like Sambara, Dvivida, Bana, Mura, Balvala and many other
demons, such as Dantavakra, some He killed Himself, and some He caused
to be killed by others [Sri Baladeva, etc].
TEXT 12
अथ ते ATA पक्षयोः पतितान्दरृपान्‌ ।
चचार भूः FEAT येषामापततां बरैः ॥१२॥
atha te bhratr-putranarn
paksayoh patitan nrpan
cacala bhuh kuruksetram
yesam apatatarm balaih
atha—thereafter;te—your; bhratr-putranam—of the nephews; paksayoh—
sides; patitan—killed; nrpan—kings; cacala—shook; bhuh—the earth;
kuruksetram—Battle of Kuruksetra; yesam—of whom; apatatam—travers-
ing; balaih—by strength.
TRANSLATION
Then, O Vidura, the Lord caused all the kings, both the enemies and
those on the side of your fighting nephews, to be killed in the Battle of
Kuruksgetra. All those kings were so great and strong that the earth seemed
to shake as they traversed the warfield.
TEXT 13
Aw AEE
कुमन्त्रपाकेन हतश्ियायुषम्‌ |
सुयोधनं सानुचरं शयानं
TAL न ननन्द॒पर्यन्‌ ।॥१३॥


--- Page 102 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
sa karna-duhsasana-saubalanam
kumantrapakena hata-sriyayusam
suyodhanam sanucaram sayanam
bhagnorum urvyarm na nananda pasyan
sah—He (the Lord); karna—Karna; duhsasana—Duhs$asana; saubalanam—
Saubala; kumantra-pakena—by the intricacy of ill advice; hata-sriya—
bereft of fortune; ayusam—duration of life; suyodhanam—Duryodhana;
sa-anucaram—with followers; sayanam—lying down; bhagna—broken;
urum— thighs; urvyam—very powerful; na—did not; nananda—take pleasure;
pasyan—seeing like that.
TRANSLATION
Duryodhana was bereft of his fortune and duration of life because of
the intricacy of ill advice given by Karna, Duhéasana and Saubala. When he
lay on the ground with his followers, his thighs broken although he was
powerful, the Lord was not happy to see the scene.
PURPORT
The fall of Duryodhana, the leading son of Dhrtaragtra, was not pleasing
to the Lord, although Ile was on the side of Arjuna and it was 116 who
advised Bhima how to break the thighs of Duryodhana while the fight was
going on. The Lord is constrained to award punishment upon the
wrongdoer, but He is not happy to award such punishments because the
living entities are originally His parts and parcels. He is harder than the
thunderbolt for the wrongdoer and softer than the rose for the faithful.
The wrongdoer is misled by bad associates and by ill advice which is
against the established principles of the Lord’s order, and thus he becomes
subject to punishment. The surest path to happiness is to live by the
principles laid down by the Lord and not to disobey His established laws,
which are enacted in the Vedas and the Puranas for the forgetful living
entities.
TEXT 14
कियान्‌ वोऽयं क्षपितोरुभारो
यद्रोणमीष्मार्जनमीममूलेः |
ERIE add
रास्ते बलं gfe यदूनाम्‌ nee
kiyan bhuvo yam ksapitoru-bharo
yad drona-bhismarjuna-bhima-mulaih


--- Page 103 ---
Text 14] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 103
astadasaksauhini ko madarii$air
aste bala durvisaham yadunam

kiyan—what is this; bhuvah—of the earth; ayam—this; ksapita—abated;
uru—very great; bharah—burden; yat—which; dropa—Drona; bhisma—
Bhisma; arjuna— Arjuna; bhima—Bhima; mulaih—on the background;
astadasa—eighteen; aksauhini—phalanxes of military strength (vide Bhag.
1.16.34); kah—who; madamsaih—with My descendants; aste—are still
there; balam—great strength; durvisasham—unbearable; yadunam—of the
Yadu dynasty.

TRANSLATION

[After the end of the Battle of Kuruksetra, the Lord said:] The
abatement of the great burden of the earth has now been effected with the
help of Drona, Bhigma, Arjuna and Bhima. But what is this? There is still
the great strength of the Yadu dynasty, born of Myself, which may be a
more unbearable burden.

PURPORT

It is a wrong theory that due to an increase in population the world
becomes overburdened and therefore there are wars and other annihilating
processes. The earth is never overburdened. The heaviest mountains and
oceans on the face of the earth hold more living entities than there are
human beings, and they are not overburdened. If a census were taken of
all the living beings on the surface of the earth, certainly it would be found
that the number of humans is not even five percent of the total number of
living beings. If the birth rate of human beings is increasing, then the birth
rate of other living beings is increasing proportionately. The birth rate of
lower animals—beasts, aquatics, birds, etc.—is far greater than that of
human beings. There is an adequate arrangement for food for all the living
beings all over the earth by the order of the Supreme Lord, and He can
arrange more and more if there is actually a disproportionate increase of
living beings.

Therefore, there is no question of an increase in population causing a
burden. The earth became overburdened due to dharma-glani, or irregular
discharge of the Lord’s desire. The Lord appeared on the earth to curb the
increase in miscreants, and not the increase in population, as is wrongly
put forward by the mundane economist. When Lord Krsna appeared,
there had been a sufficient increase in miscreants who had violated the
desire of the Lord. The material creation is meant for fulfilling the desire
of the Lord, and His desire is that the conditioned souls who are unfit to
enter into the kingdom of God have a chance to improve their conditions
for entering. The entire process of cosmic arrangement is intended just to


--- Page 104 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
give a chance to the conditioned souls to enter the kingdom of God, and
there is an adequate arrangement for their maintenance by the nature of
the Lord.

Therefore, although there may be a great increase in population on the
surface of the earth, if the people are exactly in line with God conscious
ness and are not miscreants, such a burden on the earth is a source of
pleasure for her. There are two kinds of burdens. There is the burden of
the beast and the burden of love. The burden of the beast is unbearable,
but the burden of love is a source of pleasure. Sri Viévanatha Cakravarti
describes the burden of love very practically. He says that the burden of
the husband on the young wife, the burden of the child on the lap of the
mother, and the burden of wealth on the businessman, although actually
burdens from the viewpoint of heaviness, are sources of pleasure, and in
the absence of such burdensome objects, one may feel the burden of sepa-
ration, which is heavier to bear than the actual burden of love. When Lord
Krsna referred to the burden of the Yadu dynasty on the earth, He referred
to something different than the burden of the beast. The large numbers of
family members born of Lord Krsna counted to some millions and were cer-
tainly a great increase in the population of the earth, but because all of
them were expansions of the Lord Himself by His transcendental plenary
expansions, they were a source of great pleasure for the earth. When the
Lord referred to them in connection with the burden on the earth, He had
in mind their imminent disappearance from the earth. All the members of
the family of Lord Krsna were incarnations of different demigods, and
they were to disappear from the surface of the earth along with the Lord.
When He referred to the unbearable heaviness on the earth in connectior
with the Yadu dynasty, He was referring to the burden of their separation
Srila Jiva Gosvami confirms this inference.

TEXT 15
मिथो यदैषां मविता विवादो
मध्ामदाताग्रविलोचनानाम्‌ |
नैषां वधोपाय दयानतोऽन्यो
मगयुद्यतेऽन्तदधते खयं स ।१५॥
mitho yadaisarm bhavita vivado
madhv-amadatamra-vilocananam
naisam vadhopaya iyan ato ‘nyo
mayy udyate ‘ntardadhate svayam sma


--- Page 105 ---
Text 16] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 105

mithah—one another; yada— when; esam— of them; bhavita— will take
place; vivadah— quarrel; madhu-amada—intoxication by drinking; tamnra-
vilocananam—of their eyes being copper-red; na—not; esam—of them;
vadhopayah—means of disappearance; iyan—like this; atah—besides this;
anyah—alternative; mayi—on My; udyate—disappearance; antardadhate—
will disappear; svayam—themselves; sma— certainly.

TRANSLATION

When they quarrel among themselves, influenced by intoxication, with
their eyes red like copper because of drinking [madhu], then only will they
disappear; otherwise, it will not be possible. On My disappearance, this
incident will take place.

PURPORT

The Lord and His associates appear and disappear by the will of the
Lord. They are not subjected to the laws of material nature. No one was
able to kill the family of the Lord, nor was there any possibility of their
natural death by the laws of nature. The only means, therefore, for their
disappearance was the makeshow of a fight amongst themselves, as if
brawling in intoxication due to drinking. That so-called fighting would
also take place by the will of the Lord, otherwise there would be no cause
for their fighting. Just as Arjuna was made to be illusioned by family
affection and thus the Bhagavad-gita was spoken, so the Yadu dynasty was
made to be intoxicated by the will of the Lord, and nothing more. The
devotees and associates of the Lord are completely surrendered souls.
Thus they are transcendental instruments in the hands of the Lord and can
be used in any way the Lord desires. The pure devotees also enjoy such
pastimes of the Lord because they want to sec Him happy. Devotees of
the Lord never assert independent individuality; on the contrary, they
utilize their individuality in pursuit of the desires of the Lord, and this
cooperation of the devotees with the Lord makes a perfect scene of the
Lord’s pastimes.

TEXT 16
णवं सञिन्त्य भगवान्‌ स्वराज्ये আত্ম धर्मजम्‌ ।
नन्दयामास सुहृदः साधूनां ब्म दर्शयन्‌ ।१६॥
evam sancintya bhagavan
sva-rajye sthapya dharmajam


--- Page 106 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
nanda-yamasa suhrdah
sadhunari vertma darsayan
evam—thus; saiicintya—thinking within Himself; bhagavan— the Person-
ality of Godhead; sva-rgjye—in his own kingdom; sthapya—installing;
dharmajam—Maharaja Yudhisthira; nanda-yamasa—gladdened; suhrdah—
friend of all; sadhunam—of the saints; vartma—path; darsayan—by indica-
tion.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sri Krsna, thus thinking to Himself, established Maharaja
Yudhisthira in the position of supreme control of the world in order to
show the ideal of administration on the path of piety.
TEXT 17
उत्तरायां घतः WEA: साध्वभिमन्युना |
Ey
स वै द्रौण्य्रसंशचष्टः पुनर्मगवता ga: nee
uttarayam dhrtah puror
vamsah sadhv abhimanyuna
sa vai drauny-astra-samplustah-
punar bhagavata dhrtah
uttarayam—unto Uttara; dhrtah—conceived; puroh—of Puru; vamsah—
descendant; sadhu abhimanyuna—by the hero Abhimanyu; sah—he; vai—
certainly; drauni-astra—by the weapon of Drauni, the son of Drona;
samplustah—being burnt; punah—again for the second time; bhagavata—by
the Personality of Godhead; dhrtah—protected.
TRANSLATION
The embryo of the descendant of एता, who was begotten by the great
hero Abhimanyu in the womb of Uttara, his wife, was burnt by the
weapon of the son of Drona, but later on he was again protected by the
Lord.
PURPORT
The embryonic body of Parikgit which was in formation after Uttara’s
pregnancy by Abhimanyu, the great hero, was burned by the brahmastra
of Advatthama, but a second body was given by the Lord within the womb,
and thus the descendant of Puru was saved. This incident is the direct
proof that the body and the living entity, the spiritual spark, are different.
When the living entity takes shelter in the womb of a woman through the
injection of the semina of a man, there is an emulsification of the man’s


--- Page 107 ---
Text 18] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 107
and woman’s discharges, and thus a body is formed the size of a pea,
gradually developing into a complete body. But if the developing embryo
is destroyed in some way or other, the living entity has to take shelter in
another body or in the womb of another woman. The particular living
entity who was selected to be the descendant of Maharaja Piiru, or the
Pandavas, was not an ordinary living entity, and by the superior will of the
Lord he was destined to be the successor to Maharaja Yudhisthira. There-
fore, when Agvatthama destroyed the embryo of Maharaja Pariksit, the
Lord, by His own internal potency, entered into the womb of Uttara by
His plenary portion just to give audience to the would-be Maharaja
Pariksit, who was in great danger. By His appearance within the womb, the
Lord encouraged the child and gave him complete protection in a new
body by His omnipotency. By His power of omnipresence He was present
both inside and outside of Uttara and other members of the Pandava
family.
TEXT 18
अयाजयद्र्मसतमश्वमेषैखिभिरविंथः |
सोऽपि क्ष्मामनुजै रक्षन्‌ रेमे दृष्णमनुत्रतः 1240
ayajayad dharma-sutam
asva-medhais tribhir vibhuh
so "ए ksmam anujai raksan
reme krsnam-anuvratah

ayajayat—made to perform; dharma-sutam—by the son of Dharma
(Maharaja Yudhisthira); asva-medhaih—by horse sacrifices; tribhih—three;
vibhuh—the Supreme Lord; sah—Maharaja Yudhisthira; api—also; ksmam—
the earth; anujaih—assisted by his younger brothers; raksan—protecting;
reme—enjoyed; krsnam—Krsna, the Personality of Godhead; anuvratah—
constant follower.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord induced the son of Dharma to perform three horse
sacrifices, and Maharaja Yudhisthira, constantly following Krsna, the
Personality of Godhead, protected and enjoyed the earth, assisted by his
younger brothers.

PURPORT

Maharaja Yudhisthira was the ideal monarchical representative on the
earth because he was a constant follower of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna.
As stated in the Vedas (ISopanisad), the Lord is the proprietor of the
entire manifested cosmic creation, which presents a chance for the condi-


--- Page 108 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
tioned souls to revive their eternal relationship with the Lord and thus go
back to Godhead, back home. The whole system of the material world
is arranged with that program and plan. Anyone who violates the plan is
punished by the law of nature, which is acting by the direction of the
Supreme Lord. Maharaja Yudhisthira was installed on the throne of the
earth as a representative of the Lord. The king is always expected to be
the representative of the Lord. Perfect monarchy necessitates representa-
tion of the supreme will of the Lord, and Maharaja Yudhisthira was the
ideal monarch on this supreme principle. Both the King and the subjects
were happy in the discharge of worldly duties, and thus protection of the
citizens and enjoyment of natural life, with full cooperation of material
nature, followed in the reign of Maharaja Yudhisthira and his worthy
descendants like Maharaja Pariksit.
TEXT 19
भगवानपि विश्वात्मा जोक्देदपरथानुगः |
कामान्‌ सिषेवे द्वावेत्यामसक्त ः सांख्यमाग्थितः ।१९।
bhagavan api visvatma
loka-veda-pathanugah
kaman siseve dvarvatyam
asaktah sankhyam asthitah

bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; api— also; visva-atma— the Super-
soul of the universe; loka—custom; veda—the Vedic principles; patha-
anugah—follower of the path; kaman—the necessities of life; siseve—
enjoyed; dvarvatyam—in the city of Dvaraka; asaktah—without being
attached; sankhyam—knowledge in Sankhya philosophy; asthitah—being
situated.

TRANSLATION

Simultaneously, the Personality of Godhead enjoyed life in the city of
Dvaraka, strictly in conformity with the Vedic customs of society. He was
situated in detachment and knowledge, as enunciated by the Sainikhya
system of philosophy.

PURPORT

While Maharaja Yudhisthira was the Emperor of the earth, Lord Sri
Krsna was the King of Dvaraka and was known as Dvarakadhida. Like
other subordinate kings, He was under the regime of Maharaja Yudhisthira.


--- Page 109 ---
Text 20] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 109
Although Lord $i Krsna is the supreme emperor of the entire creation,
while He was on this earth He never violated the principles of the Vedic
injunctions because they are the guide for human life. Regulated human
life according to the Vedic principles, which are based on the system of
knowledge called Sarnikhya philosophy, is the real way of enjoyment of the
necessities of life. Without such knowledge, detachment and custom, the
so-called human civilization is no more than an animal society of eat,
drink, be merry and enjoy. The Lord was acting freely, as He willed, yet
by His practical example He taught not to lead a life which goes against
the principles of detachment and knowledge. Attainment of knowledge
and detachment, as very elaborately discussed in Saitkhya philosophy, is
the real perfection of life. Knowledge means to know that the mission of
the human form of life is to end all the miseries of material existence and
that in spite of having to fulfill the bodily necessities in a regulated way,
one must be detached from such animal life. Fulfilling the demands of the
body is animal life, and fulfilling the mission of spirit soul is the human
mission.
TEXT 20
ffm वाचा पीयूषकल्पया |
खरिकरेणानवदेन श्रीनिकेतेन चात्मना ॥२०॥
snigdha-smitavalokena
vaca piyisa-kalpaya
caritrenanavadyena
$ri-niketena catmana
snigdha— gentle; smita-avalokena—by a glance with sweet smile; vaca— by
words; piyusa-kalpaya—compared to nectar; caritrena—by character;
anavadyena— without flaw; §ri—fortune; niketena—residence; ca—and;
atmana—by His transcendental body.
TRANSLATION
He was there in His transcendental body, the residence of the goddess of
fortune, with His usual gentle and sweetly smiling face, His nectarean
words and His flawless character.
PURPORT
In the previous verse it is described that Lord Krsna, being situatedin the
truths of Sankhya philosophy, is detached from all kinds of matter. In
the present verse it is described that He is the residence of the goddess of


--- Page 110 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
fortune. These two things are not at all contradictory. Lord Krsna is
detached from the variegatedness of the inferior nature, but Ile 15 ]1।
eternal, blissful enjoyment of the spiritual nature, or His internal potency.
One who has a poor fund of knowledge cannot understand this distinction
between the external and internal potencies. In Bhagavad-gita, the internal
potency is described as the para prakrti. In the Vispu Purana also, the
internal potency of Visnu is described as para sakti. The Lord is never
detached from the association of para sakti. This para sakti and her
manifestations are described in the Brahma-sarhita as ananda-cinmaya-
rasa-pratibhavitabhih. (Bs. 5.37) The Lord is eternally joyful and cognizant
in the taste derived from such transcendental bliss. Negation of the
variegatedness of the inferior energy does not necessitate negation of the
positive transcendental bliss of the spiritual world. Therefore the Lord’s
gentleness, His smile, His character and everything related to [im are all
transcendental. Such manifestations of the internal potency are the reality,
of which the material shadow is only a temporary representation from
which everyone with proper knowledge must be detached.
TEXT 21
इमं Sag সী रमयन्‌ सुतरां यदून्‌ |
W क्षणदया दत््षणसीक्षणसोहदः 112211
imam lokam amum caiva
ramayan sutaram yadun
reme ksanadaya datta-
ksana-stri-ksana-sauhrdah

imam—this; lokam —earth; amum—and the other worlds; ca—also; eva—
certainly; ramayan—pleasing; sutaram—specifically; yadun—the Yadus;
reme—enjoyed; ksanadaya—by night; datta—given by; ksana—leisure; stri—
women; ksana— conjugal love; sauhydah—friendship.

TRANSLATION

The Lord enjoyed His pastimes, both in this world and in other worlds
[higher planets], specifically in the association of the Yadu dynasty. At
leisure hours offered by night, He enjoyed the friendship of conjugal love
with women.

PURPORT

The Lord enjoyed in this world with His pure devotees. Although He is

the Personality of Godhead and is transcendental to all material attach-


--- Page 111 ---
Text 22] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 111
ment, He nevertheless exhibited much attachment for His pure devotees
on the earth, as well as for the demigods who engage in His service in the
heavenly planets as powerful delegated directors in the management of all
material activities. He displayed special attachment for His family members,
the Yadus, as well as for His sixteen thousand wives, who had the
opportunity to meet Him in the leisure hours of night. All these attach-
ments of the Lord are manifestations of His internal potency, of which the
external potency is only a shadow representation. In the Skanda Purana,
Prabhasa khanda Chapter, in the topics between Lord Siva and Gauri,
there is confirmation of His internal potential manifestations. There is
mention of the Lord’s meeting with sixteen thousand cowherd damsels
although He is the Hamsa (transcendental) Supersoul and maintainer of all
living entities. The sixteen thousand cowherd damsels are a display of
sixteen varieties of internal potencies. This will be more elaborately
explained in the Tenth Canto. It is said there that Lord Krsna 18 just like
the moon and the internal potential damsels are like the stars around the
moon.
TEXT 22
Td रममाणस्य संवत्सरगणान्‌ बहन्‌ |
गृहमेधेषु योगेषु॒विरागः समजायत ॥२२॥
tasyaivar ramamanasya
sarhvatsara-ganan bahun
grhamedhesu yogesu
viragah samajayata
tasya—His; evam—thus; ramamanasya—enjoying; sarvatsara—many
years; gapan—number; bahin—great many; grhamedhesu—in household
life; yogesu—in sex life; viragah— detachment; samajayata— awakened.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was thus engaged in household life for many, many years, but
at last His detachment from ephemeral sex life was fully manifested.
PURPORT
Even though the Lord is never attached to any kind of material sex
life, as the universal teacher He remained a householder for many, many
years, just to teach others how one should live in householder life. Srila
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakur explains that the word samajayata means
“fully exhibited.” In all His activities while present on the earth, the


--- Page 112 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
Lord exhibited detachment. This was fully displayed when He wanted
to teach by example that one should not remain attached to household
life for all the days of one’s life. One should naturally develop detach-
ment as a matter of course. The l.ord’s detachment from household life
does not indicate detachment from His eternal associates, the transcen-
dental cowherd damsels. But the Lord desired to end His so-called
attachment to the three modes of material nature. He can never be
detached from the service of His transcendental associates like Rukmini
and other goddesses of fortune, as described in the Brahma-sarmhita:
laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam. (Bs. 5.37)
TEXT 23
दैवाधीनेषु कामेषु दैवाधीनः खयं पुमान्‌ ।
को विखम्भेत योगेन योगेश्वरमनुव्रतः ।२३॥
daivadhinesu kamesu
daivadhinah svayam puman
ko visrambheta yogena
yogesvaram anuvratah

daiva—supernatural; adhinesu—being controlled; kamesu—in sense enjoy-
ment; daiva-adhinah— controlled by supernatural force; svayam—himself;
puman—living entity; kah— whoever; visrambheta—can have faith in;
yogena—by devotional service; yogesvaram—the Supreme Lord; anuvra-
tah—serving.

TRANSLATION

Every living entity is controlled by a supernatural force, and thus his
sense enjoyment is also under the control of that supernatural force. No
one, therefore, can put his faith in Lord Krsna's transcendental sense
activities but one who has become a devotee of the Lord by rendering
devotional service.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita, no one can understand the transcendental
birth and activities of the Lord. The same fact is herein corroborated: no
one but one who is enlightened by the devotional service of the Lord can
understand the difference between the Lord’s activities and those of
others, who are controlled by the supernatural force. The sense enjoyment
of all animals, men and demigods within the purview of the material


--- Page 113 ---
Text 24] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 113
universe is controlled by the supernatural force called the prakrti, or
daivimaya. No one is independent in obtaining sense enjoyment, and
everyone in this material world is after sense enjoyment. Persons who are
themselves under the control of supernatural power cannot believe that
Lord Krsna is not under any control beyond Himself in the matter of
sense enjoyment. They cannot understand that His senses are transcen-
dental. In the Brahma-sarhita the Lord’s senses are described as omni-
potent; i.e., with any sense He can perform the activities of the other
senses. One who has limited senses cannot believe that the Lord can eat by
His transcendental power of hearing and can perform the act of sex life
simply by seeing. The controlled living entity cannot even dream of such
sense activities in his conditional life. But simply by the activities of
bhakti-yoga, he can understand that the Lord and His activities are always
transcendental. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.55), bhaktya
mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah: one cannot know even a
fraction of the activities of the Lord if he is not a pure devotee of the
Lord.
TEXT 24
EY
TW कदाचि्करीडङ्कियंदुमोजङमारकेः |
5 iN ~
कोपिता FAT: A पुभेगवन्मतकोविदाः HRI
puryar kadacit kridadbhir
yadu-bhoja-kumarakaih
kopita munayah sepur
bhagavan-mata-kovidah
puryam—in the city of Dvaraka; kadacit—once upon a time; kridadbhih—
by sporting activities; yadu—the descendants of Yadu; bhoja—the descen-
dants of Bhoja; kumarakail—princes; kopitah—became angry; munayah—
the great sages; Sepuh—cursed; bhagavat— Personality of Godhead; mata—
desire; kovidah— cognizant.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, great sages were made angry by the sporting activities
of the princely descendants of the Yadu and Bhoja dynasties, and thus, as
desired by the Lord, the sages cursed them.
PURPORT
The associates of the Lord who were playing the part of princes of
descendants of the Yadu and Bhoja dynasties were not ordinary living


--- Page 114 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
entities. It is not possible that they could offend any saintly man or sage,
nor could the sages, who were all pure devotees of the Lord, be influenced
to anger by any of the sporting activities of the princes born in the holy
dynasty of Yadu or Bhoja wherein the Lord Himself appeared as a
descendant. The cursing of the princes by the sages is another transcen-
dental pastime of the Lord to make a show of anger. The princes were
cursed in order that one may know that even the descendants of the Lord,
who could never be vanquished by any act of material nature, were
subjected to the reactions of anger by great devotees of the Lord. One
should, therefore, take great care and attention not to commit an offense
at the feet of a devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 25
a
ततः HAASE ER: |
वि = ~
यथुः प्रभासं संहृष्टा रथेदेवविमोहिताः ॥२५॥
tatah katipayair masair
vrsni-bhojandhakadayah
yayuh prabhasam samhrsta
rathair deva-vimohitah
tatah—thereafter; katipayaih—a few; masaih—months passing; vrspi—the
descendants of Vrsni; bhoja—the descendants of Bhoja; andhaka-adayah—
and others, like the sons of Andhaka;yayuh— went;prabhasam—the place
of pilgrimage named Prabhasa; sarihrstah —with great pleasure; rathaih—on
their chariots; deva—by Krsna; vimohitah—bewildered.
TRANSLATION
A few months passed, and then, bewildered by Krsna, all the
descendants of Vrsni, Bhoja and Andhaka who were incarnations of
demigods went to Prabhasa, while those who were eternal devotees of the
Lord did not leave but remained in Dvaraka.
TEXT 26
EN
বঙ্গ खात्वा पितृन्देवानूषीर्चैव तदम्भसा |
तर्पयित्वाथ विप्रेभ्यो गावो बहुगुणा ददु; URE
tatra snatva pitrn devan
rsims$ caiva tad-ambhasa
tarpayitvatha viprebhyo
gavo bahu-guna daduh


--- Page 115 ---
Text 26] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 115

tatra—there; snatva—by taking bath; pitrn—forefathers; devan—demi-
gods; rsin—great sages; ca—also; eva—certainly; tat—of that; ambhasa—by
the water; tarpayitva—by pleasing; atha—thereupon;viprebhyah—unto the
brahmanas; gavah—cows; bahu-gunah—greatly useful; daduh—gave in
charity.

TRANSLATION

After arriving there, all of them took bath, and with the water of this
place of pilgrimage they offered their respects to the forefathers, demigods
and great sages and thus satisfied them. They gave cows to the brahmanas
in royal charity.

PURPORT

Amongst the devotees of the Lord there are several divisions, mainly
nitya-siddhas and sadhana-siddhas. The nitya-siddha devotees never fall
down to the region of the material atmosphere, even though they
sometimes come onto the material plane to execute the mission of the
Lord. The sadhana-siddha devotees are chosen from the conditioned souls.
Out of the sadhana devotees, there are mixed and pure devotees. The
mixed devotees are sometimes enthusiastic about fruitive activities and are
habituated to philosophical speculation. The pure devotees are free from
all these mixtures and are completely absorbed in the service of the Lord,
regardless of how and where they are situated. Pure devotees of the Lord
are not enthusiastic to put aside their service to the Lord in order to go
visit holy places of pilgrimage. A great devotee of the Lord in modern
times, Sr1 Narottamadasa Thakur, has sung like this: “To visit holy places
of pilgrimage is another bewilderment of the mind because devotional
service to the Lord at any place is the last word in spiritual perfection.”

For pure devotees of the Lord who are completely satisfied with the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, there is hardly any necessity to
visit the various places of pilgrimage. But those who are not so advanced
have the prescribed duties of visiting pilgrimage sites and regularly
performing the rituals. The part of the princely order of the Yadu dynasty
who went to Prabhasa performed all duties to be done in a place of
pilgrimage and offered their pious actions to their forefathers and others.

As a rule, every human being is indebted to God, the demigods, great
sages, other living entities, people in general, forefathers, etc., for various
contributions received from them. Thus everyone is obliged to repay the
debt of gratitude. The Yadus who went to the Prabhasa pilgrimage site
performed their duties by distributing land, gold, and well-nourished cows
in royal charity, as described in the following verse.


--- Page 116 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
TEXT 27
ford रजतं शय्यां वासांस्यजिनकम्बलान |
यानं रथानिभान्‌ कन्या धरां इत्तिकरीमपि ॥२७॥
hiranyarh 7001077 Sayyarm
vasarsy ajina-kambalan
yanam rathan ibhan kanya
dharam-vrtti-karim api
hiranyam—gold; rajatam— gold coins; Sayyam— bedding; vasarisi—cloth-
ing; ajina—animal skin for seats; kambalan—blankets; yanam—horses;
rathan—chariots; ibhan—elephants; kanyah—girls; dharam—land; vrtti-
karin—to provide livelihood; api—also.
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas were not only given well-fed cows in charity, but also
gold, gold coins, bedding, clothing, animal skin seats, blankets, horses,
elephants, girls and sufficient land for maintenance.
PURPORT
All these charities were meant for the brahmanas whose lives were
devoted entirely to the welfare of society, both spiritually and materially.
The brahmanas were not giving their services as paid servants, but the
society provided them with all necessities. It was arranged for some of the
brahmanpas, who were in difficulty for marriage, to be given girls. The
brahmanas, therefore, had no economic problems. The ksatriya kings and
rich mercantile men would provide them with all that they needed, and in
exchange the brahmanas were completely devoted to the elevation of
society. That was the way of social cooperation between the different
castes. When the brahmana class or caste gradually became easygoing,
being fed by the society although they had no brahminical qualifications,
they degraded themselves into brahma-bandhus, or disqualified brahmapas,
and thus other members of society also gradually fell down from the
social standard of progressive life. As described in Bhagavad-gita, the
caste system is the creation of the Lord and is arranged according to the
quality of work rendered to society and not in terms of birthright, as
falsely claimed in the present degraded society.
TEXT 28
am EE तेभ्यो दत्वा भगवदर्पणम्‌ |
गोविप्रार्थासवः शराः SOE मूधेमिः ॥२८॥


--- Page 117 ---
Text 28] The Lord’s Pastimes Out of Vrndavana 117
annarh coru-rasarmn tebhyo
dattva bhagavad-arpanam
go-viprarthasavah Surah
pranemur bhuvi miurdhabhih

annam—foodstuff; ca—also; uru-rasam— highly delicious; tebhyah—unto
the brahmanas; dattva—after supplying; bhagavat-arpanam— which was first
offered to the Personality of Godhead;go— cow ;vipra—brahmanas; artha—
purpose; asavah—purpose of living; surah—all the valiant kgatriyas;
pranemuh—offered obeisances; bhuvi—touching the ground; murdhabhih—
with their heads.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter they offered the brahmanas highly delicious foodstuffs
which were first offered to the Personality of Godhead, and they
offered their respectful obeisances by touching their heads to the ground.
They lived perfectly by protecting the cows and the brahmanas.

PURPORT

The behavior exhibited by the descendants of Yadu in the pilgrimage
site of Prabhasa was highly cultured and exactly to the point of human
perfection. The perfection of human life is attained by following three
principles of civilization: protecting the cows, maintaining the brahminical
culture and, above all, becoming a pure devotee of the Lord. Without
becoming a devotee of the Lord, one cannot perfect one’s human life.
The perfection of human life is to be elevated to the spiritual world,
where there is no birth, no death, no diseases and no old age. That is the
highest perfectional aim of human life. Without this aim, any amount of
material advancement in so-called comforts can only bring the defeat of
the human form of life.

Brahmanas and Vaisnavas do not accept any foodstuff which is not first
offered to the Personality of Godhead. Foodstuff offered to the Lord is
accepted by the devotees as the mercy of the Lord. After all, the Lord
supplies all kinds of foodstuff, both to the human being and to other
animals. A human being must be conscious of the fact that all foodstuffs,
namely grains, vegetables, milk, water, etc.—the prime necessities of life—
are supplied by the Lord for mankind, and such foodstuffs cannot be
manufactured by any scientist or materialist in a laboratory or factory
established by human effort. The intelligent class of men are called
brahmanas, and those who have realized the Absolute Truth in His supreme
personal feature are called Vaignavas. But both of them accept foodstuffs
which are the remnants of sacrifice. Sacrifice is ultimately meant to satisfy


--- Page 118 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 3
the yajiia-purusa, Visnu. In Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 3.13) it is said that one who
accepts foodstuffs as the remnants of sacrifice is freed from all sinful
reactions, and one who cooks foodstuffs for maintenance of his body
takes in all kinds of sins, which lead only to suffering. The foodstuffs
prepared by the Yadus at the Prabhasa pilgrimage site to offer to the bona
fide brahmanas there were all offered to the Personality of Godhead,
Visnu. They offered their sincere obeisances by touching their heads to
the ground. The Yadus or any enlightened family in Vedic culture are
trained for attainment of human perfection by total cooperation of service
between the different divisions of social orders.

The word uru-rasam is also significant here. Hundreds of delicacies can
be prepared simply by the combination of grains, vegetables and milk.
All such preparations are in the mode of goodness and therefore can be
offered to the Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 9.26), the Lord accepts only foodstuffs which are within the range of
fruits, flowers, leaves and liquids, provided they are offered in complete
devotional service. Devotional service is the only criterion for a bona fide
offering to the Lord. The Lord assures that He positively eats such food-
stuffs offered by the devotees. So, judging from all sides, the Yadus were
perfectly trained civilized persons, and their being cursed by the brahmana
sages was only by the desire of the Lord; the whole incident was a warning
to all concerned that no one should behave lightly with brahmanas and
Vaisnavas.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Chapter, Third
Canto, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Lord’s Pastimes Out of
Vrndavana.”


--- Page 119 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
Vidura Approaches Maitreya
TEXT 1
उद्धव उवाच
अथ ते तदनुज्ञाता युक्त्वा पीत्वा च वारणीम्‌ |
. EY
तया विभ्रंशितज्ञाना दुरुक्तंमम पस्श्ः ॥ १ ॥
uddhava ४८०४९८०
atha te tad-anujiata
bhuktva pitva ca varunim
taya vibhramsite-jiana
duruktair marma pasprsuh
uddhavah uvaca—Uddhava said;atha—thereafter; te—they (the Yadavas);
tat—by the brahmanas; anujiiatah—being permitted; bhuktva— partaking;
pitva—drinking; ca—and; varupim—liquor; taya—by that; vibhramsita-
Jiaanah—being bereft of knowledge; duruktaih— with harsh words; marma—
the core of the heart; pasprsuh—touched.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, all of them [the descendants of Vrsni and Bhoja], being
permitted by the brahmanas, partook of the remnants of prasadam and
also drank liquor made of rice. By drinking they all became delirious, and,
bereft of knowledge, they touched the cores of each other's hearts with
harsh words.
PURPORT
In ceremonies when brahmanas and Vaispavas are sumptuously fed, the
host partakes of the remnants of foodstuff after the guest has given per-
mission. So the descendants of Vrsni and Bhoja formally took permission
from the brahmanpaes and ate the prepared foodstuff. Ksatriyas are
119


--- Page 120 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
permitted to drink at certain occasions, so they all drank a kind of light
liquor made of rice. By such drinking they became delirious and bereft of
sense, so much so that they forgot their relationship with one another and
used harsh words which touched the cores of each other’s hearts. Drinking
is so harmful that even such a highly cultured family becomes affected by
intoxication and can forget themselves in a drunken state. The descendants
of Vrsni and Bhoja were not expected to forget themselves in this way, but
by the will of the Supreme it happened, and thus they became harsh
towards one another.
TEXT 2
„+ ॐ
तेषां मेरेयदोषेण विषमीकृतचेतसाम्‌ |
-
निम्लोचति रवादासीद्ेणूनापिव মহুনমূ। २॥
tesa maireyadosena
visamikrtacetasam
nimlocati ravavasid
venéinamiva mardanam
tesam—of them; maireya—of intoxication; dosena—by the faults;
visamikrta—became unbalanced; cetasam—of those of whom the minds;
nimlocati— sets; ravau—the sun; asit—takes place; venpanam—of the bam-
boos; iva—as; mardanam—destruction.
TRANSLATION
As by the friction of bamboos destruction takes place, so also, at sunset,
by the interaction of the faults of intoxication, all their minds became
unbalanced, and destruction took place.
PURPORT
When there is need of fire in the forest, by the will of the Supreme it
takes place due to friction among the bamboos. Similarly, the descendants
of Yadu were all destroyed by the will of the Lord by the process of self-
destruction. Just as there is no possibility of a fire’s occurring deep in a
forest due to human effort, so also there was no power in the universe
which could vanquish the descendants of the Yadus, who were protected
by the Lord. The Lord wanted them to be so destroyed, and thus they
obeyed His order, as indicated by the word tad-anujiiata.


--- Page 121 ---
Text 3] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 121

TEXT 3

मगवान्‌ खात्ममायाया गति तामवलोक्य सः।
WERT वकषमूलुपादिशत्‌ ॥ 2 ॥
bhagavan svatmamayaya
gatim tam avalokya sah
sarasvatim upasprsya
vrksa-mitlam upavisat

bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; sva-atma-mayaya—by His internal
potency ;gatim—the end; tam—that; avalok ya—foresecing; sah—He (Krsna);
sarasvatim— the River Sarasvati; upasprsya— after sipping water; vrksa-milam

—at the foot of a tree; upavisat—sat down.

TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna, after foreseeing the end
[of His family] by His internal potency, went to the bank of the River
Sarasvati and sat down there underneath a tree.

PURPORT
All the above-mentioned activities of the Yadus and Bhojas were
executed by the internal potency of the Lord because He wanted them to
be dispatched to their respective abodes after He had finished His mission
of descent. They were all His sons and grandsons and were given complete
protection by the paternal affection of the Lord. How they could be
vanquished in the presence of the Lord is answered in this verse: everything
was done by the Lord Himself (svatma maya yah). The Lord’s family
members were either incarnations of His plenary expansions or demigods
from the heavenly planets, and thus before His departure He separated
them by His internal potency. Before being dispatched to their respective
abodes, they were sent to the holy place of Prabhasa, where they
performed pious activities and took food and drink to their heart’s con-
tent. It was then arranged for them to be sent back to their abodes so that
others could see that the powerful Yadu dynasty was no longer in the
world. In the previous verse, the word anujiiata, indicating that the whole
sequence of events was arranged by the Lord, is significant. These
particular pastimes of the Lord are not a manifestation of His external
energy or material nature. Such an exhibition of His internal potency is


--- Page 122 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
eternal, and therefore one should not conclude that the Yadus and Bhojas
died in a drunken state in an ordinary fratricidal war. Sri Jiva Gosvami
comments on these incidences as magical performances.
TEXT 4
अहं चोक्तो भगवता प्रपन्नार्तिहरेण ह ।
बदरीं त्रं प्रयाहीति apd संजिहीषरंणा || ও ॥
0107 cokto bhagavata
prapannartiharepa ha
badarim tvarh prayahiti
sva-kulam safijihirsuna
aham—1I; ca—and; uktah—was told; bhagavata—by the Supreme Lord;
prapanna—of the surrendered; arti-harena—by He who is the vanquisher
of the distresses; ha—indeed; badarim—to Badari; tvam—you; prayahi—
should go; iti—thus; sva-kulam—His own family; safjihirsuna—by desiring
to destroy.
TRANSLATION
The Lord is the vanquisher of the distresses of one who is surrendered
unto Him. Thus He who desired to destroy His family told me previously
to go to Badarikasrama.
PURPORT
While at Dvaraka, Uddhava was warned to avoid the distresses which
were to follow the disappearance of the Lord and the destruction of the
Yadu dynasty. He was advised to proceed to Badarikasrama because
there he could associate with the devotees of Nara-Narayana, and in their
association of devotional service he could increase his eagerness for chant-
ing, hearing, knowledge and detachment.
TEXT 5
अथापि तदभिप्रेतं जानस्रहमरिन्दम |
पृष्ठतोऽन्वगमं भतः पाद्विस्छेषणाक्षमः ॥ ५ ॥
tathapi tad-abhipretarin
janan naham arindama
prsthato’nvagamari bhartuh
pada-vislesanaksamah


--- Page 123 ---
Text 6] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 123
tathapi—yet, in spite of; tat-abhipretam—His desire; janan—knowing; na—
not; aham—1I; arindama— O subduer of the enemy (Vidura); prsthatah—be-
hind; anvagamam—followed; bhartuli—of the master; pada-vislesana—sepa-
ration from His lotus feet; aksamah—not being able.
TRANSLATION
Yet in spite of my knowing His desire [to destroy the dynasty], O
Arindama [Vidura], I followed Him because it was impossible for me to
bear separation from the lotus feet of the master.
TEXT 6
अद्राक्षमेकभासीनं विचिन्वन्‌ दयितं पतिम्‌ ।
श्रीनिकेतं सरखलत्यां तकेतमकेतनम्‌ ।। ६ ॥
adraksam ekam dasinari
vicinvan dayitam patim
$ri-niketam sarasvatyam
krta-ketam aketanam
adraksam—1 saw; ekam—alone; asinam—sitting; vicinvan—deeply
thinking; dayitam— patron; patim—master; sri-niketam—the shelter of the
goddess of fortune; sarasvatyam—on the bank of the Sarasvati;krta-ketam—
taking shelter;aketanam—being situated without a shelter.
TRANSLATION
Thus following, I saw my patron and master [ Lord Sri Krsna) sitting
alone and deeply thinking, taking shelter on the bank of the River
Sarasvati although He is the shelter of the goddess of fortune.
PURPORT
Those who are in the renounced order of life often take shelter under-
neath a tree. The Lord was found by Uddhava in that condition of taking
shelter as do persons who have no shelter. Because He is the proprietor of
everything, everywhere is His shelter, and everywhere is under His shelter.
The entire material and spiritual cosmic manifestation is sustained by Him,
and therefore He is the shelter of everything. So there was nothing
astonishing in His taking shelter in the way of the unsheltered who are in
the renounced order of life.


--- Page 124 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
TEXT 7
श्यामावदातं विरजं प्रशान्तारुणलोचनम्‌ |
५ =
दोरभिश्वतभिर्विदितं पीतकाशाम्बरेण च ॥ ७॥
Syamavadatam virajam
prasantaruna-locanam
dorbhis caturbhir viditarm
pita-kausambarena ca
§yama-avadatam—beautiful with black color; virajam—formed of pure
goodness; prasanta—peaceful; aruna—reddish; locanah—eyes; dorbhih—by
the arms; caturbhih—four; viditam—being recognized; pita—yellow; kausa—
silken; ambarena— with garments; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s body is blackish, but is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge,
and very, very beautiful. His eyes are always peaceful, and they are
reddish like the rising morning sun. I could immediately recognize Him as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by His four hands, different
symbolic representations, and yellow colored silk garments.
TEXT 8
वाम ऊरावधिश्रित्य दक्षिणाङ्परिसरोरुहम्‌ ।
अपाभिताभकाश्वत्थमकृशं त्यक्तपिप्पलम्‌ ॥ ८ ||
vama urav adhisritya
daksinanghri-saroruham
apasritarbhakasvattham
akrsam tyakta-pippalam
vame—on the left; irau—thigh; adhisritya—placed on; daksina-anghri-
saroruham—the right lotus foot; apasrita—taking rest against; arbhaka—
young; asvattham—banyan tree; akrsam—cheerful; tyakta—having left;
pippalam—household comforts.
TRANSLATION
The Lord was sitting, taking rest against a young banyan tree, with His
right lotus foot on His left thigh, and although He had left all household
comforts, He looked quite cheerful in that posture.


--- Page 125 ---
Text 9] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 125
PURPORT
According to Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakur, the Lord’s sitting
posture—keeping His back against the newly grown banyan tree—is also
meaningful. Asvattha, the banyan tree, is so called because the tree does
not die very quickly; it continues to live for many, many years. His legs
and their energies are the material ingredients, which are five in all: earth,
water, fire, air and sky. The material energies represented by the banyan
tree are all products of His external potency and are thercfore kept to
His back. And because this particular universe is the smallest of all, the
banyan tree is therefore designated as small, or as a child. Tyakta-
pippalam indicates that He had now finished His pastimes in this particular
small universe, but since the Lord is absolute and eternally blissful, there
is no difference between His leaving or accepting something. The Lord
was now prepared to leave this particular universe and go into another, just
as the sun rises on one particular planet and sets in another simultaneously
but does not change its own situation.
TEXT 9
= - a
तसिन्महाभागवतो देपायनसुहत्सखा |
लोकाननुचरन्‌ fg आससाद यदच्छा ॥ ९॥
tasmin maha-bhagavato
dvaipayana-suhrt-sakha
lokananucaran siddha
asasada yadrcchaya
tasmin—then; maha-bhagavatah—a great devotee of the Lord;
dvaipayana—of Krsna-dvaipayana Vyasa; suhrt—a well-wisher; sakha—a
friend;lokan—the three worlds; anucaran— traveling; siddhe—in that asrama;
asasada— arrived; yadrcchaya— by his own perfect accord.
TRANSLATION
At that time, after traveling in many parts of the world, Maitreya, a
great devotee of the Lord and a friend and well-wisher of the great sage
Krsna-dvaipayana Vyasa, reached that spot out of his own perfect accord.
PURPORT
Maitreya was one of the disciples of Maharsi Parasara, the father of
Vyasadeva. Thus Vyasadeva and Maitreya were friends and mutual well-


--- Page 126 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
wishers. By some fortunate accident, Maitreya reached the place where
Lord Sri Krsna was resting. To meet the Lord is not an ordinary incident.
Maitreya was a great sage and a learned scholar-philosopher but not a pure
devotee of the Lord, and therefore his meeting with the Lord at that time
may have been due to gjiiata-sukrti, or some unknown devotional service.
Pure devotees always engage in pure devotional activities, and therefore
their meeting with the Lord is natural. But when those who are not up to
that standard meet the Lord, it is due to the unforeseen fortune of
accidental devotional service.
TEXT 10
-
EEE gage
प्रमोदभावानलकन्धरस्य |
-
आन्रण्वता मामनुरागदास-
समीक्षया विश्रमयन्नुवाच ॥१०॥
tasyanuraktasya muner mukundah
pramoda-bhavanata-kandharasya
asrpvato mam anuraga-hasa-
samiksaya visramayann uvaca
tasya—his (Maitreya’s); anuraktasya—although attached; muneh—of the
sage; mukundah—the Lord who awards salvation; pramoda-bhava—in a
pleasing attitude; dnata—lowered; kandharasya— of the shoulder; asrnvatah—
while thus hearing; mam—unto me; anuraga-hasa—with kind smiling;
samiksayd—particularly seeing me; visramayan—allowing me complete
rest; uvdca—said.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya Muni was greatly attached to Him [the Lord], and he was
listening in a pleasing attitude, with his shoulder lowered. With a smile
and a particular glance upon me, having allowed me to rest, the Lord spoke
as follows:
PURPORT
Although both Uddhava and Maitreya were great souls, the Lord’s
attention was more on Uddhava because he was a spotlessly pure devotee.
A jhana-bhakta, or one whose devotion is mixed with the monistic view-
point, is not a pure devotee. Although Maitreya was a devotee, his devotion


--- Page 127 ---
Text 11] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 127
was mixed. The Lord reciprocates with His devotees on the basis of
transcendental love and not on the basis of philosophical knowledge or
fruitive activities. In the transcendental loving service of the Lord, there
is no place for monistic knowledge or fruitive activities. The gopis in
Vrndavana were neither highly learned scholars nor mystic yogis. They
had spontaneous love for the Lord, and thus He became their heart and
soul, and the gopis also became the heart and soul of the Lord. Lord
Caitanya approved the relationship of the gopis with the Lord as supreme.
Herein the Lord’s attitude towards Uddhava was more intimate than with
Maitreya Muni.
TEXT 11
श्वीभगवायुबान्
वेदाटपन्त्नसीष्सितं ते
ददामि यत्तद्‌ दुरबापमन्येः |
सत्र पुरा বিম্বম্বলী वलां
मत्सिद्धिकामेन वसो त्वयेष्टः ||
$ bhagavan uvaca
vedaham antar manasipsitam te
dadami yat tad duravapam anyaih
satre pura visva-srjar vasunarm
mat-siddhi-kamena vaso tvayestal
आद bhagavan uvaca—the Personality of Godhead said; veda—known;
aham—1; antah— within; manasi—the mind; ipsitam—what you desired;
te—your; dadami—I1 give you; yat—which is; tat—that; duravapam—very
difficult to achieve; anyaih—by others; satre—in the sacrifice; pura—in the
days of yore; visva-srjam—of those who expanded this creation; vasiinam—
of the Vasus; mat-siddhi-kamena— with a desire to achieve My association;
vaso—O Vasu; tvaya—by you; istah—ultimate goal of life.
TRANSLATION
0 Vasu, I know from within your mind what you desired in the days of
yore when the Vasus and other demigods who are responsible for expand-
ing the universal affairs performed sacrifices. You particularly desired to
achieve My association. This is very difficult to obtain for others, but I
award it unto you.


--- Page 128 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
PURPORT

Uddhava is one of the eternal associates of the Lord, and a plenary
portion of Uddhava was one of the eight Vasus in the days of yore. The
eight Vasus and the demigods in the upper planetary system, who are
responsible for the management of the universal affairs, performed a
sacrifice in the days of yore, desiring to fulfill their respective ultimate
goals in life. At that time an expansion of Uddhava, acting as one of the
Vasus, desired to become an associate of the Lord. The Lord knew this
because He is present in the heart of every living entity as Paramatma, the
Superconsciousness. In everyone’s heart there is the representation of the
Superconsciousness, who gives memory to the partial consciousness of
every living entity. The living entity, as partial consciousness, forgets
incidences of his past life, but the Superconsciousness reminds him how to
act in terms of his past cultivation of knowledge. Bhagavad-gita confirms
this fact in various ways: ye yatha mam prapadyante tams tathaiva
bhajamy aham (Bg. 4.11), sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtir
jianam apahanar ca (Bg. 15.15).

Everyone is at liberty to desire as he likes, but the desire is fulfilled by
the Supreme Lord. Everyone is independent to think or desire, but the
fulfillment of one’s desire depends on the supreme will. This law is
expressed as “‘Man proposes, God disposes.” In the days of yore, when the
demigods and Vasus performed sacrifice, Uddhava, as one of the Vasus,
desired to enter into the association of the Lord, which is very difficult
for those busy in empiric philosophical speculation or fruitive activities.
Such persons have practically no information of the facts about becoming
an associate of the Lord. Only the pure devotees can know, by the mercy
of the Lord, that the personal association of the Lord is the highest perfec-
tion of life. The Lord assured Uddhava that He would fulfill his desire. It
appears that when the Lord informed him by His indication to Uddhava,
the great sage Maitreya finally became aware of the importance of entering
into the association of the Lord.

TEXT 12
q of साधो चरमो भवाना-
मासादितस्ते. मदनुग्रहो यत्‌ |
यन्मां चृलोकान्‌ रह उत्सृजन्तं
छ दिष्टया Team. विशदानुष्स्या ॥१२॥


--- Page 129 ---
Text 13] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 129
sa esa sadho caramo bhavanam
asaditas te mad-anugraho yat
yan mam nrlokan raha utsrjantarn
distya dadrsvan visadanuvrttya
sah— that; esah— of those; sadho—O honest one; caramah— the ultimate;
bhavanam— of all your incarnations (as Vasu); asaditah—now achieved; te—
unto you; mat—My; anugrahah—mercy; yat—as it is; yat—because; mam—
Me; nrlokan—the planets of the conditioned souls; rahah—in seclusion;
utsrjantam—while quitting; digfya—by seeing; dadrsvan— what you have
seen; visada-anuvrttya—by unflinching devotion.
TRANSLATION
O honest one, your present life is the last and the supermost because in
this term of life you have been awarded My ultimate favor. Now you can
go to My transcendental abode, Vaikuntha, by leaving this universe of
conditioned living entities. Your visit to Me in this lonely place because of
your pure and unflinching devotional service is a great boon for you.
PURPORT
When a person is fully conversant with knowledge of the Lord as far as
can be known by a perfect living enlity in the liberated state, he is allowed
to enter into the spiritual sky, where the Vaikuntha planets exist. The Lord
was sitting in a lonely place just aboul to disappear from the vision of the
inhabitants of this universe, and Uddhava was fortunate to see Him even
at that time and thus receive the Lord’s permission to enter Vaikuntha.
The Lord is everywhere at all times, and His appearance and disappearance
are mercly the experience of the inhabitants of a particular universe. He is
just like the sun. The sun docs not appear or disappear in the sky, but it is
only in the experience of men that in the morning the sun rises and in the
evening the sun sets. The Lord is simultaneously both in Vaikuntha and
everywhere within and without Vaikuntha.
TEXT 13
पुरा मया प्रोक्तमजाय नाभ्यि
पञ्चे निषण्णाय ममादिसर्गे |
जञानं परं मन्महिमावभासं
यत्छरयो भागवतं वदन्ति ||? ২


--- Page 130 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
pura maya proktam ajaya nabhye
padme nisapnaya mamadi-sarge
jhanam param man-mahimavabhasarn.
yat surayo bhagavatarn vadanti
pura—in the days of yore; maya—by Me; proktam—was said; aj@éye—unto
Brahma; nabhye—out of the navel; padme—on the lotus; nisapnaye—unto
the one situated on; mama—My; adi-sarge—in the beginning of creation;
jianam—knowledge; param—sublime; mat-mahima—My transcendental
glories; avabhasam—that which clarifies; yat—which; siirayah—the great
learned sages; bhagavatam—Srimad-Bhagavatam; vadanti—do say.
TRANSLATION
0 Uddhava, in the lotus millennium in the days of yore, at the beginning
of the creation, I spoke unto Brahma, who is situated on the lotus which
grows out of My navel, about My transcendental glories, which the great
sages describe as Srimad-Bhagavatam.
PURPORT
The explanation of the Supreme Self, as given to Brahma and already
explained in the Second Canto of this great literature, is further clarified
herein. The Lord said that the concise form of Srimad-Bhagavatam as
০:-:-:৭11160 to Brahma was meant to elucidate His personality. The imper-
sonal explanation of those four verses in the Second Canto is nullified
herewith. Sridhara Svami also explains in this connection that the same
concise form of the Bhagavatam concerned the pastimes of Lord Krsna
and was never meant for impersonal indulgence.
TEXT 14
इत्यारतोक्तः परमस्य पुंसः
ग्रति्षणानुगदभाजनोऽहम्‌ |
खेहोत्यरोमा स्खलिताक्षरस्तं
मुजञ्छचः MFR ।।१४॥
ity adrtoktah paramasya ८८771504
pratiksananugraha-bhajano ham
snehottha-roma skhalitaksaras tam
muricaii chucah pranijalir ababhase


--- Page 131 ---
Text 15] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 131
iti—thus; adrta—being favored; uktah—addressed; paramasya—of the
Supreme; pumsah—Personality of Godhead; pratiksapa—every moment;
anugraha-bhdjandh—object of favor; aham—myself; sneha—affection;
uttha—eruption; roma—hairs on the body; skhalita—slackened; aksarah—
of the eyes; tam—that; muifican—smearing; sucah—tears; praiijalih— with
folded hands; ababhase—said.
TRANSLATION
Uddhava said: O Vidura, when I was thus favored at every moment
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead and addressed by Him with great
affection, my words failed in tears, and the hairs on my body erupted.
After smearing my tears, I, with folded hands, spoke like this:
TEXT 15
को न्वीश ते पादसरोजभाजां
सदुलमोऽरथेषु चतु्प्वपीद |
तथापि नाहं प्रबरणोमि भुमन्‌
भवन्पदाम्भोज निषेवणोत्सुकः ।*५॥
ko nvisa te pada-saroja-bhajam
sudurlabho’rthesu catursv aptha
tathapi nahar pravrpomi bhuman
bhavat-padam-bhoja-nisevanotsukah
kah nu isa—® my Lord; te—Y our; pada-saroja-bhajam—of the devotees
engaged in the transcendental loving service of Your lotus feet; sudurla-
bhah—very difficult to obtain; arthesu—in the matter of; catursu—in the
four objectives; api—in spite of; iha—in this world; tathapi—yet; na—do not;
aham—1; pravrpomi—prefer; bhuman—O great one; bhavat—Y our; padam-
bhoja—lotus feet; nisevana-utsukah—anxious to serve.
TRANSLATION
0 my Lord, devotees who engage in the transcendental loving service
of Your lotus feet have no difficulty in achieving anything within the
realm of the four principles of religiosity, economic development, sense
gratification and liberation. But, O great one, as far as I am concerned, I
have preferred only to engage in the loving service of Your lotus feet.


--- Page 132 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
PURPORT
Those who are associated with the Lord in the Vaikuntha planets achieve
all the bodily features of the Lord and appear to be the same as Lord
Visnu. Such liberation is called sarupya-mukti, which is one of the five
kinds of liberation. The devotees engaged in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord never accept the sayujya-mukti, or merging in the
rays of the Lord called the brahmajyoti. The devotees can achieve not
only liberation but any success in the realm of religiosity, economic
development or sense gratification up to the standard of the demigods in
the heavenly planets. But such a pure devotee as Uddhava refuses to
accept all such facilities. A pure devotee wants simply to engage in the
service of the Lord and does not consider his own personal benefit.
TEXT 16
कर्माण्यनोहस्य भवोऽभवस्य ते
दुर्गाश्रयोऽथारिभयात्यलायनम्‌ ।
काटात्मनां यत्प्रमदायुताश्रमः
खात्मन्रतेः ff धीकरिदामिह neal
karmany anthasya bhavo’bhavasya te
durgasrayo’thari-bhayat palayanam
kalatmano yat pramada-yutasrayah
svatman-rateh khidyati dhir vidam iha
karmapi—activities; anihasya—of one who has no desire; bhavah—birth;
abhavasya—of onc who is never born; te—your; durge-asrayah—taking
shelter of the fort; atha—thereafter; ari-bhayat—out of fear of the enemies;
palayanam—flee; kala-atmanah—of He who is the controller of eternal
time; yat—thal; pramada-yuta—in the association of women; asramah—
houschold life; sva-atman—by Your own Self; rateh—one who enjoys;
khidyati— disturbs; dhth—intelligence; vidam—of the learned; iha—in this
world.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, even the learned sages become disturbed in their intelligence
when they see that Your Greatness engages in fruitive work although You
are free from all desires, that You take birth although You are unborn,
that You flee out of fear of the enemy and take shelter in a fort although
You are the controller of invincible time, and that You enjoy householder
life surrounded by many women although You enjoy in Your Self.


--- Page 133 ---
Text 16] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 133
PURPORT

Pure devolees of the lord are nol very much concerned with philosophi-
cal speculation in regard lo transcendental knowledge of the Lord. Nor is
it possible to acquire complete knowledge of the Lord. Whatever little
knowledge they have about the Lord is sufficient for them because devotees
are simply satisfied in hearing and chanting about the transcendental
pastimes of the Lord. This gives them all transcendental bliss. But some
of the pastimes of the Lord appear contradictory, even to such pure
devotees, and thus Uddhava asked the Lord about some of the contra-
dictory incidences in His pastimes. The Lord is described as having nothing
to do personally, and it is actually so because even in the creation and
sustenance of the material world, the Lord has nothing to do. It seems
contradictory, then, to hear that the Lord personally lifts the Govardhana
Hill for the protection of His unalloyed devotees. The Lord is the Supreme
Brahman, the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead appearing like
a man, but Uddhava had doubts whether He could have so many
transcendental activities.

There is no difference between the Personality of Godhead and the
impersonal Brahman. How then can the Lord have so many things to do,
whereas the impersonal Brahman is stated to have nothing to do either
materially or spiritually? If the Lord is ever unborn, how then is He born
as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki? He is fearful even to kale, the supreme
fear, and yet the Lord is afraid of fighting Jarasandha and takes shelter in a
fort. How can one who is full in Himself take pleasure in the association of
many women? How can He take wives and, just like a houscholder, take
pleasure in the association of family members, children, relatives and
parents? All these apparently contradictory happenings bewilder even the
greatest learned scholars, who, thus bewildered, cannot understand whether
inactivity is a fact or whether His activities are only imitations.

The solution is that the Lord has nothing to do with anything mundane.
All His activities are transcendental. This cannot be understood by the
mundane speculators. For the mundane speculators there is certainly a kind
of bewilderment, but for the transcendental devotees there is nothing
astonishing in this. The Brahman conception of the Absolute Truth is
certainly the negation of all mundane activities, but the Param Brahman
conception is full with transcendental activities. One who knows the
distinctions between the conception of Brahman and the conception of
Supreme Brahman is certainly the real transcendentalist. There is no
bewilderment for such transcendentalists. The Lord Himself also declares
in Bhagavad-gita, “Even the great sages and demigods can know hardly


--- Page 134 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
anything about My activities and transcendental potencies.” (Bg. 10.2)
The right explanation of the Lord’s activities is given by Grandfather
Bhismadeva (Bhag. 1.9.16) as follows:
na hy asya karhicid rajan puman veda vidhitsitam
yad-vijijiasaya yukta muhyanti kavayo pi hi
TEXT 17
मन्त्रेषु मां वा उपहूय यत्व-
मकुण्ठिताखण्डसदात्मबोधः ।
पृल्छेः प्रभो अगध इवाप्रमत्त-
বন্দী मनो मोहयतीव देव ॥१७॥
mantresu mari va upahuya yat tvam
akunthitakhanda-sadatma-bodhah
precheh prabho mugdha ivapramattas
tan no mano mohayativa deva
mantresu—in consultations; mam—unto me;vai—as either; upahiiya—by
calling; yat—as much as; tvam—Y our Lordship; akunthita— without hesila-
tion; akhanda—without being separated; sada—etcrnally; atma—sclf;
bodhah—intelligent; prccheh—asked; prabho—O my Lord; mugdhah—
bewildered; iva—as if it were so; apramattah—although never bewildered;
tat—that; nah—us; manah—mind; mohayati—bewilders; iva—as it is so;
deva—O my Lord.
TRANSLATION
0 my Lord, Your eternal Self is never divided by the influence of time,
and there is no limitation to Your perfect knowledge. Thus You were
sufficiently able to consult with Yourself, yet You called upon me for
consultation, as if bewildered, although You are never bewildered. And
this act of Yours bewilders me.
PURPORT
Uddhava was never actually bewildered, but he says that all these
contradictions appear to be bewildering. The whole discussion between
Krsna and Uddhava was meant for the benefit of Maitreya, who was
sitting ncarby. The Lord used to call Uddhava for consultation when the
cily was attacked by Jarisandha and others and when He executed great
sacrifices as part of His routine royal work as Lord of Dvaraka. The Lord


--- Page 135 ---
Text 18] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 135
has no past, present and future because He is unhampered by the influence
of eternal time and thus nothing is hidden from Him. He is eternally
self-intelligent. Therefore His calling for Uddhava to give Him enlighten-
ment is certainly astonishing. All these actions of the Lord appear to be
contradictory, although there is no contradiction in the routine activities
of the Lord. Therefore it is better to see them as they are and not attempt
to explain them.
TEXT 18
ज्ञानं परं खात्मरहःप्रकारं
-
प्रोवाच FR भगवान्‌ समग्रम्‌ |
अपि क्षमं नो ग्रहणाय मतं-
6.
षेदाञ्जसा यद्‌ वृजिनं तरेम ॥१८॥
| 72714772 param svatma-rahah-prakasam
provaca kasmai bhagavan samagram
api ksamarh no grahapaya bhartar
vadaiijasa yad vrjinam tarema
jiianam—knowledge; param—supreme; sva-atma—own self; rahah—
mystery; prakasam—enlightening; provaca—said; kasmai—unto Ka
(Brahmaji); bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; samagram—in sum
total; api—if so; ksamam-—able; nah—unto me; grahanaya—acceptable;
bhartah—my Lord; vada—say; aiijasa—in detail; yat—that which; vrjinam—
miseries; tarema—can cross over.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, kindly explain to us, if You think us competent to receive
it, that transcendental knowledge which gives enlightenment about Your-
self and which You explained before to Brahmaji.
PURPORT
A pure devotee like Uddhava has no material afflictions because he
engages constantly in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. A
devotee feels afflicted without the association of the Lord. Constant
remembrance of the Lord’s activities keeps the devotee alive, and there-
fore Uddhava requested that the Lord please enlighten him with the
knowledge of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as was previously instructed to
Brahmji.


--- Page 136 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
TEXT 19
ARTERY मद्यं स भगवान्‌ परः |
आदिदेजारकिन्दासष आत्मनः परमां स्थितिम्‌ ॥१९॥
ityavedita-hardaya
mahyarh sa bhagavan parah
adidesaravindaksa
atmanah paramarn sthitim
iti-avedita—thus being prayed to by me; hardaya—from the core of my
heart; mahyam—unto me; sah— He; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead;
parah— Supreme; adidesa—instructed; aravinda-aksah—the lotus-eyed; atma-
nah— of Himself; paramam—transcendental; sthitim—situation.
TRANSLATION
When I thus expressed my heartfelt desires unto the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, the lotus-eyed Lord instructed me about His transcenden-
tal situation.
PURPORT
The words paramari sthitim are significant in this verse. The Lord’s
transcendental situation was not even spoken of to Brahma when the four
verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam were explained (Bhag. 2.9.30-33). This
transcendental situation comprises His dealings with devotees engaged
in transcendental loving service, as exhibited at Dvaraka and Vrndavana.
When the Lord explained about lis specific transcendental situation, it
was meant for Uddhava only, and therefore Uddhava particularly said
“mahyam” (01000 me”), although the great sage Maitreya was also sitting
there. Such a transcendental situation is hardly understood by those whose
devotion is mixed with speculative knowledge or fruitive activities. The
Lord’s activities in confidential love are very rarely disclosed to the
general devotees who are attracted by devotion mixed with knowledge
and mysticism. Such activities are the inconceivable pastimes of the Lord.
TEXT 20
म एवमाराधितपादतीर्था-
दघीततत््वात्पविबोघमार्ग; |
प्रणम्य पादौ परिषत्य॒देब-
मिदागतोऽहं षिरदातुरत्मा ॥२०॥


--- Page 137 ---
Text 20] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 137
sa evam aradhita-pada-tirthad-
adhita-tattvatma-vibodha-margah
pranamya padau parivrtya devam
thagato "har virahaturatma

sah—so myself; evam—thus; aradhita— worshiped; pada-tirthat—the Per-
sonality of Godhead; adhita—studied; , tattva-atma—self-knowledge;
vibodha—understanding; margah—path; pranamya—after saluting; padau—
at His lotus feet; parivrtya—after circumambulating;devam—the Lord; iha—
at this place; agatah—reached; aham—1I; viraha—separation; ature-atma—
aggrieved in self.

TRANSLATION

I have studied the path of understanding self-knowledge from my
spiritual master, the Personality of Godhead, and thus after circum-
ambulating Him I have come to this place, very much aggrieved due to
separation.

PURPORT

Sri Uddhava’s actual life is the direct symbol of the “Catuhsloki
Bhagavatam™ enunciated first to Brahmaji by the Personality of Godhead.
These four very great and important verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam are
particularly taken out by the Mayavadi speculators, who construe a
different purport to suit their impersonal view of monism. Here is the
proper answer to such unauthorized speculators. The verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam are purely theistic science understandable by the postgraduate
students of Bhagavad-gita. The unauthorized dry speculators are offenders
at the lotus feet of the Lord Sri Krsna because they distort the purports
of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam to misl€ad the public and prepare
a direct path to the hell known as andha-tamisra. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 16.20) such envious speculators are without knowledge
and are surely condemned life after life. They unnecessarily take shelter
of Sripada Sankaracarya, but he was not so drastic as to commit an
offense at the lotus feet of Lord Krsna. According to Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, Sripada Saiikaracarya preached the Mayavadi philosophy for
a particular purpose. Such a philosophy was necessary to defeat the
Buddhist philosophy of the nonexistence of the spirit soul, but it was never
meant for perpetual acceptance. It was an emergency. Thus Lord Krsna
was accepted by Sarikaracarya as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
his commentation on Bhagavad-gita. Since he was a great devotee of Lord
Krsna, he did not dare write any commentary on Srimad-Bhagavatam
because that would have been a direct offense at the lotus feet of the


--- Page 138 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
Lord. But later speculators, in the name of Mayavadi philosophy,
unnecessarily make their commentary on the Catuhsloki Bhagavatam
without any bona fide intent.

The monistic dry speculators have no business in the Srimad-Bhagavatam
because this particular Vedic literature is forbidden for them by the
great author himself. Srila Vyisadeva has definitely forbidden persons
engaged in religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and
finally, salvation, from trying to understand Srimad-Bhagavatam , which is
not meant for them (Bhag. 1.1.2). Sripada Sridhara Svami, the great
commentator on Srimad-Bhagavatam, has definitely forbidden the salva-
tionists or monists to deal in Srimad-Bhagavatam. It is not for them. Yet
such unauthorized persons perversely try to understand Srimad-
Bhagavatam, and thus they commit offense at the feet of the Lord, which
even Sripada Sankaracarya dared not do. Thus they prepare for their
continuation of miserable life. It should be particularly noted herein that
Uddhava studied the Catuhsloki Bhagavatam directly from the Lord, who
spoke them first to Brahmaji, and this time the Lord explained more con-
fidentially the self-knowledge mentioned as the paramar sthitim. Upon
learning such self-knowledge of love, Uddhava felt very much aggrieved by
feelings of separation from the Lord. Unless one is awakened to the stage
of Uddhava—everlastingly feeling the separation of the Lord in transcen-
dental love, as was exhibited by Lord Caitanya also—one cannot under-
stand the real import of the four essential verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
One should not indulge in the unauthorized act of twisting the meaning
and thereby putting himself on the dangerous path of offense.

TEXT 21
dst तदसनाह्वाददियोगा्ियुतः प्रभो ।
गमिष्ये दयितं॑तस्य बदंरयाश्रममण्डलम्‌ IRE)
so 1107 tad-darsandhlada
viyogartiyutah prabho
gamisye dayitam tasya
badaryasrama-mandalam

sah aham—thus myself; tat—llis; darsana—audience; ahlada— pleasure;
viyoga—without that; artiyutah—afflicted by distress; prabho—my dear sir;
gamisye—shall go; dayitam—so instructed; tasya—His; badaryasrama—
Badarikasrama, in the Himalayas; manpdalam— association.


--- Page 139 ---
Text 22] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 139
TRANSLATION
My dear Vidura, now I am mad for want of the pleasure of seeing Him,
and just to mitigate this I am now proceeding to Badarikasrama in the
Himalayas for association, as I have been instructed by Him.
PURPORT
A pure devotee of the Lord of the standard of Uddhava constantly
associates with the Lord in the double perception of simultaneous
separation and meeting. The pure devotee is not for a moment unen-
gaged in the transcendental service of the Lord. Execution of the Lord’s
service is the main occupation of the pure devotee. Uddhava’s separation
from the Lord was unbearable, and therefore he started to Badarikasrama
in obedience to the Lord’s order because the order of the Lord and the
Lord Himself are identical. As long as one is engaged in the execution of
the order of the Lord, there is no factual separation from Him.
TEXT 22
यत्न नारायणो देवो লব্য WHE: |
(1 = च By =
gz did तपो दीष तेपाते लोकभावनौ ।२२॥
yatra narayapo devo
naras ca bhagavan rsih
myrdu tivram tapo dirghari
tepate loka-bhavanau
yatra—where; narayapah—the Personality of Godhead; devah—by incar-
nation; narah—human being; ca—also; bhagavan—the Lord;rsih—great sage;
mrdu—amiable to everyone; tivram—severe; tapah—penance; dirgham—very
long; tepate— performing; loka-bhavanau— welfare of all living entities.
TRANSLATION
There in Badarikasrama the Personality of Godhead, in His incarnation
as the sages Nara and Narayana, has been undergoing great penance since
time immemorial for the welfare of all amiable living entities.
PURPORT
Badarikasrama on the Himalayas, the abode of the Nara-Narayana sages,
is a great place of pilgrimage for the Hindus. Even up to the present,


--- Page 140 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
hundreds and thousands of pious Hindus go to pay respects to the incarna-
tion of Godhead Nara-Narayana. It appears that even five thousand years
ago this holy place was being visited by such a holy being as Uddhava, and
even at that time the place was known to be very, very old. This particular
pilgrimage site is very difficult to visit for ordinary men because of its
difficult situation in the Himalayas in a place which is covered by ice
almost all year. A few months during the summer season people can visit
this place at great personal inconvenience. There are four dhamas, or
kingdoms of God, which represent the planets of the spiritual sky, which
consists of the brahma-jyoti and the Vaikunthas. These are Badarikasrama,
Ramesvaram, Jagannatha Purl and Dvaraka. Faithful Hindus still visit all
these holy places for perfection of spiritual realization, following in the
footsteps of devotees like Uddhava.
TEXT 23
श्रीहयुक उवाच
IERIE सुहृदां दुःसहं वधम्‌ ।
श्ानेनाशमयरधत्ता शोकमुत्पतितं बुधः ।।२३॥
$rt suka uvaca
ity uddhavad upakarnya
suhrdam duhsahari vadham
jianenasamayat ksatta
Sokam utpatitam budhah

इ Sukah uwvaca—Sri Suka Gosvami said; iti—thus; uddhavat—from
Uddhava; upakarpya—hearing; suhrdam—of friends and relatives; duhsa-
ham—unbearable; vadham—annihilation; jianena—by transcendental
knowledge; asamayat—pacified himself; ksatta— Vidura; sokam—bereave-
ment; utpatitam—arisen; budhah—the learned.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: After hearing from Uddhava all about the
annihilation of his friends and relatives, the learned Vidura pacified his
overwhelming bereavement by dint of his transcendental knowledge.

PURPORT

Vidura was informed that the result of the Battle of Kuruksetra was the

annihilation of his friends and relatives as well as the destruction of the


--- Page 141 ---
Text 24] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 141
Yadu dynasty and also the passing away of the Lord. All these hurled him
into bereavement for the time being, but because he was highly advanced
in transcendental knowledge, he was quite competent to pacify himself by
enlightenment. As 11 15 stated in Bhagavad-gita, due to our long association
with bodily relationships, bereavement on account of the annihilation of
friends and relatives is not at all astonishing, but one has to learn the art of
subduing such bereavement with higher transcendental knowledge. The
talks between Uddhava and Vidura on the topic of Krsna began at sunset,
and Vidura was now further advanced in knowledge due to his association
with Uddhava.
TEXT 24
५ + ५ i
सत महामागवत व्रजन्तं DEATH: |
ha J ৬
विश्रम्भादभ्यधत्तेदं मुख्य कृष्णपरिग्रहे ॥॥२४॥
sa (0718 maha-bhagavatam
vrajantar kauravarsabhah
visrambhad abhyadhattedarn
mukhyari krsna-parigrahe
sah— Vidura; tam—unto Uddhava; maha-bhagavatam— the great devotee
of the Lord; vrajantam—while going; kaurava-rsabha—the best amongst
the Kauravas; visrambhat—out of confidence; abhyadhatta—submitted;
idam—this; mukyam—unto the chief; krsna— Lord Krsna; parigrahe—in
devotional service to the Lord.
TRANSLATION
While Uddhava, the chief and most confidential amongst the devotees
of the Lord, was going away, Vidura, in affection and confidence,
questioned him.
PURPORT
Vidura was much older than Uddhava. By family relationship Uddhava
was a contemporary brother of Krsna’s, while Vidura was as elderly as
Krsna’s father Vasudeva. But although junior by age, Uddhava was much
advanced in the devotional service of the Lord, and therefore he is de-
scribed herein as the chief amongst the devotees of the Lord. Vidura was
confident about this, and thus he addressed Uddhava in that higher
category. Thal is the way of courteous dealings between two devotees.


--- Page 142 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
TEXT 25
विदुर उवाच
ज्ञानं परं स्वात्मरहःप्रकाशं
यदाद योगेश्वर ईश्वरस्ते ।
- © ~ ~
वक्तु भवान्नाऽहेति यदि विष्णो-
®
शस्या; FFF ।॥२५॥
vidura (८४८८०
jhanarm param svatma-rahah-prakasarm
yad aha yogesvara 4४८05 te
vak turn bhavan no 11441 yadd hi vispor
bhrtyah sva-bhrtyartha-krtas caranti
vidurah uvaca— Vidura said;jianam—knowledge; param—transcendental;
sva-atma—regarding the self;rahah—myslery; prakasam—enlightening; yat—
that which; aha—said; yoga-isvarah—the master of all mystics; ©varah —the
Lord; te—unto you; vaktum—to narrate; bhavan—your good self; nah—unto
me; arhati—deserve; yat—for; hi—reason of; visnoh—of Lord Visnu;
bhrtyah—servants; sva-bhrtyartha-krtah—for the interest of their servants;
caranti—do wonder.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O Uddhava, because the servants of Visnu, the Lord,
wander in the interest of serving others, it is quite fit that you kindly
describe the self-knowledge with which you have been enlightened by the
Lord Himself.
PURPORT
The servants of the Lord are actually the servants of society. They have
no interest in human society other than to enlighten it in transcendental
knowledge; they are interested in imparting knowledge of the relationship
of the living being with the Supreme Lord, the activities in that transcen-
dental relationship, and the ultimate goal of human life. That is the real
knowledge which can help society achieve the real aim of human welfare.
Knowledge in the matter of the bodily necessities of eating, sleeping, mat-
ing and fearing, transformed into various branches of advancement of
knowledge, is all temporary. A living being is not the material body but an
eternal part and parcel of the Supreme Being, and thus revival of his self-


--- Page 143 ---
Text 26] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 143
knowledge is very essential. Without this knowledge, the human life is
baffled. The servants of the Lord, Visnu, are entrusted with this respon-
sible work, and so they wander over the earth and to all other planets in
the universe. Thus the knowledge which was received by Uddhava directly
from the Lord deserves to be distributed in human society, especially to
persons like Vidura who are highly advanced in the devotional service of
the Lord.

Real transcendental knowledge descends in the disciplic succession from
the Lord to Uddhava, from Uddhava to Vidura and so on. Such supreme
transcendental knowledge is not possible to achieve by the process of im-
perfect speculation as performed by the so-called learned mundane
wranglers. Vidura was anxious to know from Uddhava that confidential
knowledge known as paramarm sthitim, in which the Lord is known by His
transcendental pastimes. Although Vidura was older than Uddhava, he was
anxious to become a servant of Uddhava in the transcendental relationship.
This formula of transcendental disciplic succession is taught by Lord
Caitanya also. Lord Caitanya advises that one receive transcendental knowl-
edge from anyone—whether a brahmana or a siidra, a householder or a
sannyasi—provided that person is factually conversant with the science of
Krsna. A person who knows the science of Krsna is factually a bona fide
spiritual master.

TEXT 26
:. उक उवाच
नच ते THO ऋषिः कोषारबोऽन्तिके |
o
साक्षाद्रगवताऽऽदिष्टो मत्येलोकं जिहासता ।२६॥
uddhava uvaca
nanu te tattva-samradhya
rsih kaugaravo ’‘ntike
saksad bhagavata “disto
martya-lokam jihasata

$ uddhavah uvaca—Sri Uddhava said; nanu—however; te—yourself;
tattva-samradhyah—one who is worshipable for reception of transcendental
knowledge; rsih—learned scholar; kausaravah—unto the son of Kusaru
(Maitreya); antike—staying nearby; saksat—directly; bhagavata—by the
Personality of Godhead; adistah—instructed;martya-lokam—mortal world;
Jjihasata— while quitting.


--- Page 144 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION

Sri Uddhava said: You may take lessons from the great learned sage
Maitreya, who is nearby and who is worshipable for reception of transcen-
dental knowledge. He was directly instructed by the Personality of
Godhead while He was about to quit this mortal world.

PURPORT

Although one may be well versed in the transcendental science, one
should be careful about the offense of marya-davyati-krama, or imperti-
nently surpassing a greater personality. According to scriptural injunction
one should be very careful of transgressing the law of marya-davyati-
krama because by so doing one loses his duration of life, his opulence,
fame, piety and the blessings of all the world. To be well versed in the
transcendental science necessitates awareness of the techniques of spiritual
science.

Uddhava, being well aware of all these technicalities of transcendental
science, advised Vidura to approach Maitreya Rsi to receive transcendental
knowledge. Vidura wanted to accept Uddhava as his spiritual master,
but Uddhava did not accept the post because Vidura was as old as
Uddhava’s father and therefore Uddhava could not accept him as his
disciple, especially when Maitreya was present nearby. The rule is that in
the presence of a higher personality one should not be very eager to im-
part instructions, even if one is competent and well-versed. So Uddhava
decided to send an elderly person like Vidura to Maitreya, another elderly
person, but he was well versed also because he was directly instructed by
the Lord while He was about to quit thismortal world. Since both Uddhava
and Maitreya were directly instructed by the Lord, both had the authority
to become the spiritual master of Vidura or anyone else, but Maitreya,
being elderly, had the first claim to becoming the spiritual master, es-
pecially for Vidura, who was much older than Uddhava. One should not
be eager to become a spiritual master cheaply for the sake of profit and
fame, but should become a spiritual master only for the service of the
Lord. The Lord never tolerates the impertinence of marya-davyati-krama.
One should never pass over the honor due to an elderly spiritual master
in the interests of one’s own personal gain and fame. Impertinence on the
part of the psuedo-spiritual master is very risky to progressive spiritual
realization.


--- Page 145 ---
Text 27] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 145
TEXT 27
shaw उवाख
इति सह विदुरेण विश्वमूर्ते
Jove सुधया इावितोरुतापः |
= ৬
क्षणमिव पुलिने यमखमुततां
सञ्चुषित ओपगविनिंशां ततोऽगात्‌ ॥२५७॥
$ suka uvaca
iti saha vidurena visva-murter
guna-kathaya sudhaya plavitorutapah
ksanam iva puline yamasvasus tam
samugita aupagavir nisar 1010 gat
ने $ukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; saha—along with;
vidurena-- Vidura; visva-marteh—of the Universal Person; guna-kathaya—
in the discourse of transcendental qualities; sudhaya—nectarean; plavita-
urutapah—overwhelmed by great affliction; ksanam—moment; iva—like
that; puline—on the bank of; yamasvasuh tam— River Yamuna;samusitah—
passed on; aupagavih —the son of Aupagava (Uddhava); nisam—the night;
tatah—thereafter; agat— went away.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, thus discussing the transcendental
name, fame, qualities, etc., on the bank of the Yamuna, Vidura became
overwhelmed with great affliction. He passed the night as if it were a
moment, and thereafter he went away.
PURPORT
The word used here for Krsna is visva-murti. Both Uddhava and Vidura
were in great affliction because of Lord Krsna’s departure, and the more
they discussed the transcendental name, fame and qualities of the Lord,
the more the picture of the Lord became visible to them everywhere. Such
visualization of the transcendental form of the Lord is neither false nor
imaginary but is factual Absolute Truth. When the Lord is perceived as
visva-murti, it is not that He loses His personality or transcendental eternal
form, but He becomes visible in the same form everywhere.


--- Page 146 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
TEXT 28
राजोवाच
~ =>
निधनधुपगतेषु च्रृष्णिमोजे-
ष्वधिरथयूथपयूथपेषु युख्यः |
-
सतु कथमवशिष्ट उद्धवो agi
रपि तत्यज आक्रति त्यधीशः ॥२८॥
rajovaca
nidhanam upagatesu vrsni-bhojesv
adhiratha-yuthapa-yuthapesu mukhyah
sa tu katham avasista uddhavo yadd harir
api tatyaja akrtirm tryadhisah
क rdja uvaca—the King inquired; nidhanam—destruction; upagatesu—
having overtaken; vrspi—of the Vrsni dynasty; bhojesu—the Bhoja dynasty;
adhiratha—great commander; yuthapa—commander-in-chief; yithapesu—
amongst them; mukhyah—prominent; sah—he; tu—only; katham—how;
avasistah—remained; uddhavah—Uddhava; yat—whereas; harth—the Person-
ality of Godhead; api—also; tatyaje—finished; akrtim—complete pastimes;
tri-adhisah—the Lord of the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
The King inquired: At the end of the pastimes of the Lord of the three
worlds, Sri Krsna, and after the disappearance of the members of the
Vrsni and Bhoja dynasties, who were the best of the great commanders,
why did Uddhava alone remain?
PURPORT
According to Sri Jiva Gosvami, nidhanam means the transcendental
abode of the Lord. Ni means the highest, and dhanam means opulence.
And because the abode of the Lord is the highest manifestation of
transcendental opulence, His abode can therefore be called nidhanam.
Apart from the grammatical elucidation, the real purpose of the word
nidhanam is to indicate that all the members of the Vrsni and Bhoja
dynasties were direct associates of the Lord, and after the end of His
pastimes, all the associates were dispatched to their respective positions in
the transcendental abode.
Srila Vidvanatha Cakravarti Thakur elucidates the meaning of akrtim as
pastimes. 4 means complete, and krtim means transcendental pastimes.


--- Page 147 ---
Text 29] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 147
Since the Lord is identical with His transcendental body, there is no
question of His changing or quitting His body. To act in accordance with
the rules and customs of the material world, the Lord seems to take His
birth or leave His body, but the pure devotees of the Lord know well the
actual fact. It is necessary, therefore, for the serious students of Srimad-
Bhagavatam to follow the notes and comments of the great acaryas like
Jiva Gosvami and Visvanatha Cakravarti. To others, who are not devotees
of the Lord, the comments and explanations of such acaryas may appear to
be grammatical jugglery, but to the students who are in the line of
disciplic succession, the explanations of the great acaryas are quite fit.

The word upagatesu is also significant. All the members of Vrsni and
Bhoja directly reached the abode of the Lord. Other devotees do not reach
the abode of the Lord directly, but the pure associates of the Lord have no
attraction for the opulence of any planets of the material world. Some-
times, due to inquisitiveness, devotees who are to be promoted to the
abode of the Lord have some attraction for the opulence of the higher
material planets above the earth, and thus they desire to see them while
going up to the perfection. But the Vrsnis and Bhojas were directly dis-
patched because they had no attraction for material planets. Srila
Vigvanatha Cakravarti Thakur also suggests that according to the Amara-
kosa dictionary, akrti also means signal. Lord Krsna ordered Uddhava by
signal to go to Badarikasrama after His departure, and Uddhava, as a pure
devotee of Lhe Lord, carried out the order more faithfully than going back
to Godhead or the abode of the Lord. That was the cause of his remaining
alone even after the departure of the Lord from the face of the earth.

TEXT 29
fas उवाच
= = ~
ब्रह्मशापापदेशेन कालेनामोघवाञ्छितः |
संहत्य |S Wd त्यश््यन्देहमचिन्तयत्‌ ।।२९॥
$ri suka ५२८८०
brahma-sapapadesena
kalenamogha-vaiicchitah
sanhrtya sva-kularh 50011010113
tyaksyan deham acinta-yat

इ 4000৫) uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; brahma-sapa—cursing by the
brahmanas ;apadesena—on the plea, by such a show; kalena—by the eternal
time; amogha—unfailing; vancchitah—one who so desires; sarfthrtya—


--- Page 148 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
closing; sva-kulam—own family; sphitam—excessively numerous;
tyaksyan—for disappearing; deham—the universal form ;acinta-yat—thought
to Himself.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami replied: My dear King, the cursing of the brahmanas
was only a plea, but the actual fact is the supreme desire of the Lord. He
wanted to disappear from the face of the earth after dispatching His
excessively numerous family members. He thought to Himself as follows:

PURPORT

In this verse the word tyaksyan is very significant in relation to Lord
Sri Krsna’s leaving His body. Since He is the eternal form of existence,
knowledge and bliss, His body and His Self are identical. Therefore how is
it possible that He would leave His body and then disappear from the vision
of the world? There is a great controversy amongst the nondevotees or
Mayavadis about the mysterious disappearance of the Lord, and the doubts
of those men with a poor fund of knowledge have been very elaborately
cleared by Srila Jiva Gosvami in his Krsna-sandarbha.

According to Brahma-samhita, the Lord has many forms. It is stated
therein that the lord has innumerable forms, and when He appears within
the vision of the living entities, as Lord Krsna actually appeared, all such
forms amalgamate with Him. Besides all these infallible forms, He has His
universal form, as manifested before Arjuna on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra. Here in this verse the word sphitam is also used, which
indicates that He left His gigantic universal form called the virata-rupa, not
His primeval, eternal form, because there is hardly any possibility of His
changing His form of sac-cid-ananda. This simple understanding is at once
realized by the devotees of the Lord, but those who are nondevotees, who
perform hardly any devotional service to the Lord, either do not under-
stand this simple fact or purposely raise a controversy to defeat the eternity
of the transcendental body of the Lord. This is due to the defect called the
cheating propensity of the imperfect living entities.

By practical experience also, it is seen, up to the present day, that the
Lord’s transcendental form is worshiped by devotees in different temples,
and all the devotees of the Lord factually realize that the form of the
Deity in the temple is nondifferent from the form of the Lord. This incon-
ceivable performance of the internal potency of the Lord is described in
Bhagavad-gita: naham prakasah sarvasya yogamaya-samavrtah. (Bg. 7.25)
The Lord reserves the right of not being exposed to everyone. In the


--- Page 149 ---
Text 30] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 149
Padma Purana it is said, atah Sri-krsna-namadi na bhaved grahyam
indriyaih. The name and form of the Lord cannot be perceived by the
material senses, but when He appears within the vision of the mundane
people He assumes the form of the virata-riupa. This is an additional ma-
terial exhibition of form and is supported by the logic of a subject and
its adjectives. In grammar, when an adjective is taken away from the
subject, the subject it modifies does not change. Similarly, when the Lord
quits His virata-ripa, His eternal form does not change, although there is no
material difference between Himself and any one of His innumerable forms.
In the Fifth Canto it will be seen how the Lord is worshiped in different
planets in His different forms, even now, and how He is worshiped in
different temples of this earth also.

Srila Jiva Gosvami and Srila Vigvanatha Cakravarti Thakur have very
elaborately explained this incidence of the Lord’s disappearance in their
commentaries, quoting various authentic versions of Vedic literatures. We
purposely do not include them all here to avoid an increase in the volume
of this book. The entire matter is explained in Bhagavad-gita, as quoted
above: the Lord reserves the right of not being exposed to everyone. He
always keeps Himself out of the vision of the nondevotees, who are devoid
of love and devotion, and thus He puts them still further away from the
Lord. The Lord appeared on the invitation of Brahma, who prayed before
the Ksirodakasayi Visnu, and therefore when the Lord appeared, all the
forms of Visnu amalgamated with Him, and when the mission was fulfilled,
all of them disintegrated from Him in the usual course.

TEXT 30
अस्पाष्ठोकादुपरते मयि ज्ञानं मदाश्रयम्‌ |
अहत्युद्धव॒एवाद्वा सम्प्रत्यात्मवतां वरः ॥३०॥
asmal lokad uparate
mayi 76710071 mad-asrayam
arhaty uddhava evaddha
sampraly atmavatam varah

asmat—(from this (universe); lokat—carth; uparate—having disappeared;
mayi—of Myself; jianam—knowledge; mat-asrayam— concerning Myself;
arhati—deserves; uddhavah—Uddhava; eva—certainly; addha—directly;
samprati—at the present moment; atmavatam—of the devotees; varah—
foremost.


--- Page 150 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION
Now [ shall leave the vision of this mundane world, and I see that
Uddhava, the foremost of My devotees, is the only one who can be directly
entrusted with knowledge about Me.
PURPORT
Jitanar mad-asrayam is significant in this verse. Transcendental knowl-
edge has three departmental divisions, namely knowledge of impersonal
Brahman, knowledge of the all-pervading Supersoul and knowledge of the
Personality of Godhead. Out of the three, transcendental knowledge of the
Personality of Godhead has special significance and is known as bhagaval-
tattva-vijiiam, specific knowledge of the Personality of Godhead. This
specific knowledge is realized by pure devotional service and no other
means. Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.55) confirms this: bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan ya$ ca smi tattvatah. “Only persons engaged in devotional service
can factually know the transcendental position of the Lord.” Uddhava
was considered Lo be the best amongst all devotees of that time, and there-
fore he was directly instructed by the Lord’s grace, so that people might
take advantage of Uddhava’s knowledge after the disappearance of the
Lord from the vision of the world. This is one of the reasons why Uddhava
was advised to go to Badarikasrama, where the Lord is personally repre-
sented by the Nara-Narayana Deity. One who is transcendentally advanced
can gain direct inspiration from the temple Deity, and thus a devotee of the
Lord always takes shelter of a recognized temple of the Lord in order to
make tangible advancement in transcendental knowledge by the grace of
the Lord.
TEXT 31
- - ৬২ ल
नाद्धनाऽण्व पि मनन्यूना यद्गुणे नादितः qq: |
= त ও ~ [>
अता {EIA लोकं ग्राहयानह ततु nse
noddhavo ‘nv api man-nyano
yad gunair narditah prabhuh
ato mad-vayunam lokam
grahayann iha (८६ (५८४८
na—not; wddhavah—Uddhava; anu—slightly; api—also; mal—Myself;
nyunah—inferior; yal—because; gunaih—by the modes of material nature;
na—nor; ardilah— affected; prabhuh—master; atah— therefore; mat-vayu-


--- Page 151 ---
Text 31] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 151
nam—knowledge of Me (the Personality of Godhead); lokam —the world;
grahayan—just to disseminate; iha—in this world; tisthatu—may remain.
TRANSLATION

Uddhava is not inferior to Me in any way because he is never affected
by the modes of material nature. Therefore he may remain in this world in
order to disseminate specific knowledge of the Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

The specific qualification for becoming the representative of the Lord is
to be unaffected by the material modes of nature. The highest qualifica-
tion of a person in the material world is to be a brahmana. But since a
brahmana is in the mode of goodness, to be a brahmana is not sufficient
for becoming a representative of the Lord. One has to transcend the mode
of goodness also and be situated in unalloyed goodness, unaffected by any
of the qualities of material nature. This stage of transcendental qualifica-
tion is called suddha-sattva, or vasudeva, and in this stage the science of
God can be realized. As the Lord is not affected by the modes of material
nature, so a pure devotee of the Lord is also not affected by the modes of
nature. That is the primary qualification for being one with the Lord. A
person who is able to attain this transcendental qualification is called
Jjivanmukta, or liberated, even though he is apparently in material condi-
tions. This liberation is achieved by one who constantly engages in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. In Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is
stated:

tha yasya harer dasye karmana manasa gira
nikhilasv apy avasthasu jivanmuktah sa ucyate.

“Anyone who, by his actions, mind and words, lives only for the transcen-
dental loving service of the Lord, is certainly a liberated soul, even though
he may appear to be in a condition of material existence.” Uddhava was
in such a transcendental position, and thus he was selected to be the
factual representative of the Lord in His bodily absence from the vision of
the world. Such a devotee of the Lord is never affected by material strength,
intelligence or even renunciation. Such a devotee of the Lord can with-
stand all onslaughts of material nature, and therefore he is known as
gosvami. Only such gosvamis can penetrate the mysteries of the Lord’s
transcendental loving relationships.


--- Page 152 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
TEXT 32
एवं त्रिलोकगुरुणा सन्दिष्टः शब्दयोनिना |
बदर्याश्रममासाद् हरिमीजे समाधिना 1320
evari tri-loka-guruna
sandistah $abda-yonina
badaryasramam asadya
harim ije samadhina

evam—thus; tri-loka—three worlds; guruna—by the spiritual master;
sandistah—being perfectly taught; sabda-yonina—by one who is the source
of all Vedic knowledge; badarya-asramam—in the pilgrimage site of
Badarikasrama; asadya—reaching; harim—unto the Lord; Zje—satisfied;
samadhina—by trance.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami informed the King that Uddhava, being thus in-
structed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the source of all
Vedic knowledge and the spiritual master of the three worlds, reached the
pilgrimage site of Badarikasrama and engaged himself there in trance to
satisfy the Lord.

PURPORT

Lord Sri Krsna is factually the spiritual master of the three worlds, and
He is the original source of all Vedic knowledge. It is very difficult, how-
ever, to understand the personal feature of the Absolute Truth, even from
the Vedas. His personal instructions are needed in order to understand the
Personality of Godhead as the Supreme Absolute Truth. Bhagavad-gita is
the evidence of such transcendental knowledge in gist. One cannot know
the Supreme Lord unless one is graced by the Lord Himself. Lord Krsna
exhibited this specific mercy towards Arjuna and Uddhava while He was in
the material world.

Undoubtedly. Bhagavad-gita was spoken by the Lord on the Battlefield
of Kuruksetra just to encourage Arjuna to fight, and yet to complete the
transcendental knowledge of Bhagavad-gita, the Lord instructed Uddhava.
The Lord wanted Uddhava to fulfill His mission and disseminate knowl-
edge which He had not even spoken in Bhagavad-gita. Persons who are
attached to the words of the Vedas may also know from this verse that
the Lord is the source of all Vedic knowledge. One who is unable to


--- Page 153 ---
Text 32] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 153
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by going through the
pages of the Vedas may take shelter of one of the l.ord’s devotees, such as
Uddhava, in order to advance further in knowledge of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. The Brahma-samhita says that it is very difficult to
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead from the Vedas, but He
is easily understood from a pure devotee like Uddhava. Taking mercy on
the great sages who lived at Badarikasrama, the Lord authorized Uddhava
to speak on His behalf. Unless one has such authorization, one cannot
understand or preach the devotional service of the lord.

While present on this earth, the Lord executed many uncommon
activities, even traveling in space to bring down the parijata from heaven
and recovering the son of His teacher (Sandipani Muni) from the regions of
death. Uddhava was certainly informed of the conditions of life on other
planets, and all the sages were anxious to know of them, just as we are
anxious to know about the planets in space. liddhava was particularly
deputed to carry a message to Badarikasrama, not only to the sages of
that place of pilgrimage but also to the Nara-Narayana Deities. Such a
message must have been more confidential than the knowledge described
in the pages of the Vedas.

The Lord is undoubtedly the source of all knowledge, and the messages
dispatched through Uddhava to Nara-Narayana and other sages were also
part of the Vedic knowledge, but they were more confidential and could
be sent or understood only through such a pure devotee as Uddhava. Since
such confidential knowledge was known only to the Lord and Uddhava, it
is said that Uddhava is as good as the Lord Himself. Every living entity
can, like Uddhava, also become a confidential messenger on the same level
as the Lord, provided he becomes confidential himself by dint of loving
devotional service. Such confidential knowledge is entrusted, as confirmed
in Bhagavad-gita, only to pure devotees like Uddhava and Arjuna, and one
has to learn the mystery through them, and not otherwise. One cannot
understand Bhagavad-gita or Srimad-Bhagavatam without the help of such
confidential devotees of the Lord. According to Srila Vidvanatha
Cakravarti Thakur, that confidential message must have concerned the
mystery of His departure and the annihilation of His dynasty after the
end of His appearance in the mundane world for one hundred years.
Everyone must have been very anxious to know about the mystery of the
annihilation of the Yadu dynasty, and that message must have been
explained by the Lord to Uddhava and dispatched to Badarikasrama for
the information of Nara-Narayana and other pure devotees of the Lord.


--- Page 154 ---
154 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
TEXT 33
a
fag रोऽप्युद्धवाच्छरुत्वा कृष्णस परमात्मनः |
क्रीडयोपात्तदेहस्य कर्माणि श्छापितानि च 1330
viduro ’py uddhavac chrutva
krsnasya paramatmanah
kridayopatta-dehasya
karmani slaghitani ca

vidurah— Vidura; api—also; uddhavat—from the source of Uddhava;
srutva—having heard; krspasya—of Lord Krsna; paramatmanah—of the
Supersoul; kridaya—for the sake of pastimes in the mortal world; upatta—
extraordinarily accepted; dehasya—of the body; karmani—transcendental
activities; slaghitani— most glorious; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

Vidura also heard from Uddhava about the appearance and disappear-
ance of Lord Krsna, the Supersoul, in the mortal world, which is a subject
matter sought after with great perseverance by the great sages.

PURPORT

The subject matter of the appearance and disappearance of the Super-
soul, Lord Sri Krsna, is a mystery even for the great sages. The word
paramatmanah is significant in this verse. An ordinary living being is
generally called the atmanah, but Lord Krsna is never an ordinary living
being because He is paramatmanah, the Supersoul. Yet His appearance
as one of the human beings and His disappearance again from the mortal
world are subject matters for the research workers who execute research
work with great perseverance. Such subject matters are certainly of increas-
ing interest because the researchers have to search out the transcendental
abode of the Lord, which He enters after finishing His pastimes in the
mortal world. But even the great sages have no information that beyond
the material sky there is the spiritual sky where Sri Krsna eternally resides
with His associates, although at the same time He exhibits His pastimes in
the mortal world in all the universes one after another. This fact is con-
firmed in Brahma-sarmhita (Bs. 5.37): goloka eva nivasaty akhilatmabhutah.
“The Lord, by His inconceivable potency, resides in His eternal abode,
Goloka, yet at the same time, as the Supersoul, He is present everywhere —
both in the spiritual and material skies—by His multivarieties of manifes-
tation.” Therefore His appearance and disappearance are simultaneously


--- Page 155 ---
Text 34] Vidura Approaches Maitreya 155
going on, and no one can say definitely which of them is the beginning and
which is the end. His eternal pastimes have no beginning or end, and one
has to learn of them from the pure devotee only and not waste valuable
time in so-called research work.
TEXT 34
+ ५ a0 0
देहन्यासं च तस्यैवं धीराणां पै्यवधनम्‌ |
अन्येषां दुष्करतरं पशनां विङ्कवात्मनाम्‌ 130
deha-nyasam ca tasyatvarn
dhiranam dhairya-vardhanam
anyesam duskarataram
[00880110118 viklavatmanam

deha-nyasam—entering the body; ca—also; tasya—His; evam—also;
dhiranam—of great sages; dhairya— perseverance; vardhanam—increasing;
anyesam—for others; duskarataram—very difficult to ascertain; pasunam—
of the beasts; viklava—disturbed; atmanam-— of such a mind.

TRANSLATION

The Lord’s glorious acts and His acceptance of various transcendental
forms for the performance of extraordinary pastimes in the mortal world
are very difficult for anyone other than His devotees to understand, and
for the beasts they are simply a mental disturbance.

PURPORT

The transcendental forms and pastimes of the Lord, as described in
Bhagavad-gita, are difficult subject matters for those who are not devotees
to understand. The Lord never reveals Himself to persons like the jiants
and yogis. And there are others who, because of their envying the lord
from the bottom of their hearts, are classified amongst the beasts, and for
such envious beasts the subject matter of the Lord’s appearance and
disappearance is simply a mental disturbance. As confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita (Bg. 7.15), the miscreants who are simply concerned with material
enjoyment, who work very hard like beasts of burden, can hardly know
the Personality of Godhead at any stage due to asurika-bhava, or a spirit of
revolt against the Supreme Lord.

The transcendental bodily expansions manifested by the Lord for His
pastimes in the mortal world, and the appearance and disappearance of
such transcendental expansions, are difficult subject matters, and those


--- Page 156 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 4
who are not devotees are advised not to discuss the l.ord’s appearance and
disappearance, lest they commit further offenses at the lotus feet of the
Lord. The more they discuss the transcendental appearance and disappear-
ance of the Lord in the asuric spirit, the more they enter into the darkest
region of hell, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 16.20). Anyone who is
against the transcendental loving service of the Lord is more or less a
beastly creature, as confirmed in this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 35
. . ~ LY
आत्मानं च FAG FONA मनसेक्षितम्‌ |
a LN Ly = = _ (~
ध्यायन्‌ गते भागवते रुराद प्रमविह्यलः ॥२५॥
atmanari ca kuru-srestha
krsnena manaseksitam
dhyayam gate bhagavate
ruroda prema-vihvalah
atmanam— himself; ca—alsos kuru-srestha—0O best amongst the Kurus;
krsnena—by Krsna; manasa—by the 1111; iksitam—remembered;
dhyayan—thus thinking of; gate—having gone; bhagavate—of the devolee;
ruroda— cried loudly; prema-vihvalah—overwhelhined by the cestasy of love.
TRANSLATION
Understanding that he was remembered by Lord Krsna [ while quitting
this world], Vidura began to cry loudly, overwhelmed by the ecstasy of
love.
PURPORT
Vidura was overwhelmed by the ecstasy of love when he understood that
Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thought of him at the
last moment. Although he thought of himself as insignificant, he was re-
membered by the Lord, by His causeless mercy. Vidura accepted this as a
great favor, and thus he cried. This crying is the last word in the progressive
path of devotional service. One who can cry for the Lord in love is
certainly successful in the line of devotional service.
TEXT 36
कारिन्याः कतिभिः सिद्ध अहोमिभैरतषभः |
प्राप्यत खःसरितं यत्र मित्रासुतो स॒निः ॥३६॥


--- Page 157 ---
Text 36 Vidura Approaches Maitreya 157
kalindyah kalibhih siddha
ahobhir bharatarsabhah
prapadyata svah-saritam
: (५८70 mitra-suto munih
kalindyah—on the bank of the Yamuna; katibhih—a few: siddhe—bheing
so passed; ahobhih— days: bharata-rsabhah—O best of the Bharata dynasty;
prapadyata—reached; svah-saritam—the celestial water of the Ganges;
yatra— where; mitra-sutlah—the son of Mitra; munih—sage.
TRANSLATION
After passing a few days on the bank of the River Yamuna, Vidura, the
self-realized soul, reached the bank of the Ganges, where the great sage
Maitreya was situated.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Chapter, Third
Canto, of Stimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Vidura Approaches Maitreya.”


--- Page 158 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
2 ie =
Vidura's Talks with Maitreya
TEXT 1
श्रीट्युक उवाच
द्वारि दगया ऋषभः ङरूणां
मासीनमगाधबोधम्‌ |
क्षत्तोपसृत्याच्युतमावसिद्धः
पप्रच्छ सौशील्यगुणामिवप्तः ॥ १ ॥
$ri 81800 uvaca
dvari dyunadya rsabhah kurinam
maitreyam asinam agadha-bodham
ksattopasrtyacyuta-bhava-siddhah
papraccha sausilya-gunabhitrptah
Sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; dvdri—on the mouth of; dyunad-
yah—the celestial River Ganges; rsabhah—the best of the Kurus; kuriinam—
of the Kurus; maitreyam—unto Maitreya; asinam—sitting; agadha-bodham—
of unfathomed knowledge; ksatta— Vidura; upasrtya—having approached
nearer; acyuta—the infallible Lord; bhava—character; siddhah—perfect;
papraccha—inquired; sau$ilya—gentleness; guna-abhitrptah—satisfied in
transcendental qualities.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: Vidura, the best amongst the Kuru dynasty,
who was perfect in devotional service to the Lord, thus reached the mouth
of the celestial Ganges River [ Hardwar], where Maitreya, the great fathom-
less learned sage of the world, was seated. Vidura, who was perfect in
gentleness and satisfied in transcendence, inquired from him.
159


--- Page 159 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
PURPORT
Vidura was already perfect due to his unalloyed devotion to the
infallible Lord. The Lord and the living entities are all qualitatively the
same by nature, but the Lord is quantitatively much greater than any
individual living entity. He is ever infallible, whereas the living entities are
prone to fall under the illusory energy. Vidura had already surpassed the
fallible nature of the living entity in conditional life due to his being
acyuta-bhava, or legitimately absorbed in the devotional service of the
Lord. This stage of life is called acyuta-bhava-siddha, or perfection by
dint of devotional service. Anyone, therefore, who is absorbed in the
devotional service of the lord is a liberated soul and has all admirable
qualities. The learned sage Maitreya was sitting in a solitary place on the
bank of the Ganges at Hardwar, and Vidura, who was a perfect devotee of
the Lord and possessed all good transcendental qualities, approached him
for inquiry.
TEXT 2
विदुर उवाच
कर्माणि करे
सुखाय णि करोति लोको
न तैः gd वान्यदुपारमं वा।
विन्देत भूयस्तत एव दुःखं
TA युक्त भगवान्‌ वदेन्न; ॥ २॥
vidura uvaca
sukhaya karmanpi karoti loko
na taih sukham vanyad-uparamarm va
vindeta bhuyas tata eva duhicham
yad atra yuktam bhagavan vaden nah
vidurah uvaca—Sri Vidura said; sukhaya—for attaining happiness;
karmani—{fruitive activities; karoti—everyone does so; lokah—in this world;
na—never; taih—by those activities; sukham—any happiness; va—or; anyat—
differently; upadramam—satiation; va—either; vindeta—achieve; bhityah—on
the contrary; tatah—by such activities; eva—certainly ; duhkham— miseries;
yat—that which; atra—under the circumstances; yuktam—right course;
bhagavan—O great one; vadet—may kindly enlighten; nah—us.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O great sage, in this world everyone engages in fruitive
activities to attain happiness, but they find neither satiation nor the


--- Page 160 ---
Text 3] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 161
mitigation of distress. On the contrary, they are only aggravated by such
activities, Please, therefore, give us directions on how one should live for
real happiness.
PURPORT
Vidura asked Maitreya some common questions, which was not original-
ly his intention. Uddhava asked Vidura to approach Maitreya Muni and
inquire into all the truths concerning the Lord, His name, fame, quality,
form, pastimes, entourage, etc., and thus when Vidura approached
Maitreya, he should have asked only about the Lord. But out of natural
humility he did not immediately ask about the Lord, but inquired into a
subject which would be of great importance to the common man. A
common man cannot understand the Lord. He must first know the real
position of his life under the influence of the illusory energy. In illusion
one thinks that he can be happy only by fruitive activities, but what
actually happens is that one becomes more and more entangled in the
network of action and reaction and does not find any solution to the
problem of life. There is a nice song in this connection: ‘Because of a
great desire to have all happiness in life, I built this house. But unfortu-
nately the whole scheme has turned to ashes because the house was
unexpectedly set on fire.” The law of nature is like that. Everyone tries
to become happy by planning in the material world, but the law of nature
is so cruel that it sets fire to one’s schemes; the fruitive worker is not
happy in his schemes, nor is there any satiation of his continuous
hankering for happiness.
TEXT 3
a
जनस कृष्णाद्विुखस्थ देवा-
EE सुदुःखितस्य |
अनुग्रहायेह चरन्ति qd
भूतानि मन्यानि जनादंनस्य ॥ ३॥
Jjanasya krsnad-vimukhasya daivad
adharma-§ilasya suduhkhitasya
anugrahayeha caranti nunam
bhitani bhavyani janardanasya
janasya—of the common man; krsnat—from the Supreme Lord Krsna;
vimukhasya—of the one who has turned his face against the Lord; daivat—
by the influence of external energy; adharma-silusya— of one who is engaged


--- Page 161 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
in irreligion; sudulikhitasya—of one who is always unhappy; anugrahaya—
due to being compassionate towards them; iha—in this world; caranti—
wander; niinam—certainly; bhiitani—persons; bhavyani—great philanthrop-
ic souls; janardanasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
0 my lord, great philanthropic souls travel on the earth on behalf of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to show compassion to the fallen souls
who are adverse to the sense of subordination to the Lord.
PURPORT
To be obedient to the wishes of the Supreme Lord is the natural position
of every living entity. But due only to past misdeeds, a living being be-
comes adverse to the sense of subordination to the Lord and suffers all the
miseries of material existence. No one has anything to do but render
devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna. Therefore any activity
other than transcendental loving service to the Lord is more or less a
rebellious action against the supreme will. All fruitive activity, empirical
philosophy and mysticism are more or less against the sense of subordina-
tion to the Lord, and any living entity engaged in such rebellious activity
is more or less condemned by the laws of material nature, which work un-
der the subordination of the Lord. Great unalloyed devotees of the Lord
are compassionate towards the fallen, and therefore they travel all over the
world with the mission of bringing souls back to Godhead, back to home.
Such pure devotees of the Lord carry the message of Godhead in order
to deliver the fallen souls, and therefore the common man who is bewil-
dered by the influence of the external energy of the Lord should avail
himself of their association.
TEXT 4
FEAR वत्मं হা नः
संराधितो भगवान्‌ येन पुंसाम्‌ |
=
हृदि खितो यच्छति भक्तिपूते
ज्ञानं सतन्वाधिगमं पुराणम्‌ ॥ ४॥
tat sadhuvaryadisa vartma sam nah
sarradhito bhagavan yena pumsam
hrdi sthito yacchati bhaktipute
jianam sa tattvadhigamam puranam


--- Page 162 ---
Text 4] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 163
। tat—therefore; sadhuvarya—O great one amongst the saints; adisa—please
instruct: vartma—the path; $am—auspicious; nah—for us; sariradhitah—
being perfectly served; bhagavan— the Personality of Godhead; yena—
by which; purisam—of the living entity; hrdi sthitah—residing in the heart;
yacchati—awards; bhaktipiate—unto the unalloyed devotee; jidnam—knowl-
edge; sa—that; tattva—truth; adhigamam—by which one learns; puranam—
authorized, old. ’
TRANSLATION

Therefore, 0 great sage, please give me instruction on the transcendental
devotional service of the Lord, so that He who is situated in the heart of
everyone can be pleased to impart, from within, knowledge of the Absolute
Truth in terms of the ancient Vedic principles delivered only to those who
are purified by the process of devotional service.

PURPORT

As already explained in the First Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, the
Absolute Truth is realized in three different phases—although they are
one and the same—in terms of the knower’s capacity to understand. The
most capable transcendentalist is the pure devotee of the Lord who is
without any tinge of fruitive actions or philosophical speculation. By
devotional service only does one’s heart become completely purified from
all material coverings like karma, jiiana and yoga. Only in such a purified
stage does the Lord, who is seated in everyone’s heart with the individual
soul, give instruction so that the devotee can reach the ultimate destination
of going back home, back to Godhead. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita (Bg. 10.10): tesa satata-yuktanam bhajatam. Only when the Lord is
satisfied ‘with the devotional service of the devotee does He impart
knowledge, as He did for Arjuna and Uddhava.

The janis, yogis and karmis cannot expect this direct cooperation of
the Lord. They are not able to satisfy the lord by transcendental loving
service, nor do they believe in such service to the Lord. The bhakti process,
as performed under the regulative principles of vaidhi-bhakti, or devotion-
al service following the prescribed rules and regulations, is defined by the
revealed scriptures and confirmed by great acaryas. This practice can help
the neophyte devotee to rise to the stage of raga-bhakti, in which the Lord
responds from within as the caitta-guru or the spiritual master as Super-
consciousness. All transcendentalists other than devotees do not make any
distinction between the individual soul and the Supersoul because they
miscalculate the Superconsciousness and individual consciousness to he


--- Page 163 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
one and the same. Such miscalculation by the nondevotees makes them
unfit to receive any direction from within, and therefore they are bereft
of the direct cooperation of the Lord. After many, many births, when
such a nondualist comes to sense that the Lord is worshipable and that the
devotee is simultaneously one and different from the Lord, then only can
he surrender unto the Lord, Vasudeva. Pure devotional service begins from
that point. The process of understanding the Absolute Truth adopted by
the misguided nondualist is very difficult, whereas the devotee’s way of
understanding the Absolute Truth comes directly from the Lord, who is
pleased by devotional service. On behalf of many neophyte devotees,
Vidura, at the very first instance, inquired from Maitreya about the path
of devotional service, by which the Lord, who is seated within the heart,
can be pleased.
TEXT 5
=
करोति कर्माणि कृतावतारो
यान्यात्मतन्त्रो FESTA: |
यथा ससर्जाग्र इदं निरीहः
संस्थाप्य इतिं जगतो विधत्ते || ५॥
karoti karmani krtavataro
yany atma-tantro bhagavams tryadhisah
yatha sasarjagra 10011 nirthah
50111501801) ৫ ৮1001 jagato vidhatte
karoti—does them; karmani— transcendental activities: krta—by accept-
ing; avatarah—incarnations; yani—all those; atma-tantraji—Self-independent;
bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; tryadhisah—the Lord of the three
worlds; yatha—as much as; sasarja—created; agre—at first; idam—this cos-
mic manifestation; nirthah—although desireless; sariisthapya—by establish-
ing; vrttim—means of livelihood; jagatah—of the universes; vidhatte—as He
regulates.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, kindly narrate how the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is the independent desireless Lord of the three worlds and the con-
troller of all energies, accepts incarnations and creales the cosmic mani-
festation with perfectly arranged regulative principles for its maintenance.


--- Page 164 ---
Text 6) Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 165
PURPORT

Lord Krsna is the original Personality of Godhead from whom the
three creative incarnations, namely the purusa-avataras—Karanarnavasayi
Visnu, Garbhodakasayl Visnu and Ksirodakasayi Visnu—expand. The
whole material creation is conducted by the three purusas in successive
stages under the external cnergy of the Lord, and thus material nature is
controlled by Him. Thinking material nature to be independent is like
seeking milk from the nipplelike bags on the neck of a goat. The Lord is
independent and desireless. He does not create the material world for His
own satisfaction as we create our household affairs to fulfill our material
desires. Actually the material world is created for the illusory enjoyment
of the conditioned souls, who have been against the transcendental
service of the Lord since time immemorial. But the material universes are
full in themselves. There is no scarcity for maintenance in the material
world. Because of their poor fund of knowledge, the materialists are
disturbed when there is an apparent increase of population on the earth.
Whenever there is a living being on the earth, however, his subsistence is
immediately arranged by the Lord. The other species of living entities,
who far outnumber human society, are never disturbed for maintenance;
they are never seen dying of starvation. It is only human society that is
disturbed about the food situation and, to cover up the real fact of
administrative mismanagement, takes shelter in the plea that the popula-
tion is excessively increasing. If there is any scarcity in the world, it is the
scarcity of God consciousness, otherwise, by the grace of the Lord, there
is no scarcity of anything.

TEXT 6
यथा पुनः स्वे ख इदं निवेश्य
शेते गुहायां स॒निदृत्ृत्तिः |
योगेश्वराधीश्वर एक एत-
दनुप्रविष्टो बहुधा यथाऽऽसीत्‌ ॥ & ॥
yatha punah sve kha ida nivesya
Sete guhayam sa nivrtla-vrttih
yogesvaradhisvara eka etad
anupravisto bahudha yatha sit


--- Page 165 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
yatha—as much as; punah—again; sve—in His; khe—form of space (virata-
ritpa); idam— this; nivesya—entering into; sete—lies down; guhayam—within
the universe; sah—He (the Personality of Godhead); nivrtta—without
endeavor; vrttih—means of livelihood; yoga-isvara—the master of all mys-
tic powers; adhisvarah—proprietor of everything; ekali—one without a
second; etat—this; anupravistah—entering afterwards; bahudha—by innu-
merable; yathd—as much as; dsit—exists.
TRANSLATION
He lies down on His own heart spread in the form of the sky, and thus
placing the whole creation in that space, He expands Himself into many
living entities, which are manifested as different species of life. He does
not have to endeavor for His maintenance because He is the master of all
mystic powers and the proprietor of everything. Thus He is distinct from
the living entities.
PURPORT
The questions regarding creation, maintenance and destruction, which
are mentioned in many parts of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, are in relation
to different millenniums (kalpas), and therefore they are differently
described by different authorities when questioned by different students.
There is no difference regarding the creative principles and the Lord’s
control over them, yet there are some differences in the minute details
because of different kalpas. The gigantic sky is the material body of the
Lord, called the virata-rapa, and all material creations are resting on the
sky or the heart of the Lord. Therefore, beginning from the sky, the first
material manifestation to the gross vision, down to the earth, everything is
called Brahman. Sarva khalv ida brahma: “There is nothing but the
Lord, and He is one without a second.” The living entities are the superior
energies, whereas matter is the inferior energy, and the combination of
these energies brings about the manifestation of this material world, which
is in the heart of the Lord.
TEXT 7
~ त
क्रीडन्‌ विधत्ते द्विजगोसुराणां
क्षेमाय कर्माण्यवतारमेदैः |
मनो न तष्यत्यपि gaat नः
FEES ARITA ॥ ७ ॥


--- Page 166 ---
Text 7] Vidura's Talks with Maitreya 167
kridan vidhatte dvija-go-surapam
ksemaya karmany avatara-bhedaih
mano na trpyaly api 411100৫0078 nah
susloka-maules caritamrtani

kridan—manifesting pastimes; vidhatte—perform; dvija—twice-born; go—
cow; suranam—of the demigods; ksemaya— welfare; karmapi—transcenden-
tal activities; avatdra—incarnations; bhedaih—differently; manah—mind;
na—never; trpyati—satisfies; api—in spite of; §rpvatam—continuously hear-
ing; nah—our; susloka—auspicious; mauleh—of the Lord; carita—character-
istics; amrtani—undying.

TRANSLATION

You may narrate also about the auspicious characteristics of the Lord
in His different incarnations for the welfare of the twice-born, the cows
and the demigods. Our minds are never satisfied completely although we
continuously hear of His transcendental activities.

PURPORT

The Lord appears in this universe in different incarnations like Matsya,
Karma, Varaha and Nrsimha, and He manifests His different transcenden-
tal activities for the welfare of the twice-born, the cows and the demigods.
The Lord is directly concerned with the twice-born or civilized men. A
civilized man is one who has taken his birth twice. A living entity takes
birth in this mundane world due to the union of male and female. A
human being is born due to union of the father and mother, but a
civilized human being has another birth by contact with a spiritual
master, who becomes the actual father. The father and mother of the
material body are so only in one birth, and in the next birth the father
and mother may be a different couple. But the bona fide spiritual master,
as the representative of the Lord, is the eternal father because the spiritual
master has the responsibility to lead the disciple to spiritual salvation or
the ultimate goal of life. Therefore, a civilized man must be twice-born,
otherwise he is no more than the lower animals.

The cow is the most important animal for developing the human body
to perfection. The body can be maintained by any kind of foodstuff, but
cow’s milk is particularly essential for developing the finer tissues of the
human brain so that one can understand the intricacies of transcendental
knowledge. A civilized man is expected to live on foodstuffs comprising
fruits, vegetables, grains, sugar and milk. The bull helps in the agricultural


--- Page 167 ---
168 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
process of producing grain, etc., and thus in one sense the bull is the
father of humankind, whereas the cow is the mother, for she supplies
milk to human society. A civilized man is therefore expected to give all
protection to the bulls and cows.

The demigods, or the living entities who live in the higher planets, are
far superior to human beings. Since they have better arrangements for
living conditions, they live far more luxuriously than human beings, yet
they are all devotees of the Lord. The Lord incarnates in different forms,
such as those of a fish, a tortoise, a hog, a combined lion and man, etc.,
just to give protection to civilized man, the cow and the demigods, who
are directly responsible for the regulative life of progressive self-realization.
The whole system of the material creation is planned so that the con-
ditioned souls may have the opportunity for self-realization. One who
takes advantage of such an arrangement is called a demigod or civilized
man. The cow is meant to help maintain such a high standard of living.

The Lord’s pastimes for the protection of the twice-born civilized men,
the cows and the demigods are all transcendental. A human being is
inclined to hear good narrations and stories, and therefore there are so
many books, magazines and newspapers on the market to satisfy the
interests of the developed soul. But the pleasure in such literature, after it
is read once, becomes stale, and people do not take any interest in reading
such literature repeatedly. In fact, newspapers are read for less than an
hour and then thrown in the dustbins as rubbish. The case is similar with
all other mundane literatures. But the beauty of transcendental literatures
like Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam is that they never become old.
They have been read in the world by civilized man for the last five
thousand years, and they have never become old. They are ever fresh to
the learned scholars and devotees, and even by daily repetition of the
verses of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, there is no satiation for
devotees like Vidura. Vidura might have heard the pastimes of the Lord
many, many times before he met Maitreya, but still he wanted the same
narrations to be repeated because he was never satiated by hearing them.
That is the transcendental nature of the Lord’s glorious pastimes.

TEXT 8
यैस्त्वभेदेरधिलोकनाथो
लोकानठोकान्‌ सह लोकपालान्‌ |
अचीक्ट्पयत्र॒ दि सर्व॑सच्च-
निकायभेदोऽधिकृतः प्रतीतः ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 168 ---
Text 8] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 169
vais laltva-bhedair adhi-loka-natho
lokan alokan saha loka-palan
acthipad vatra hi sarva-sallva
nikaya-bhedo “dhikrtal pratitah

yaih—by whom: tattva—truth: bhedaih—by differentiation: adhi-loka-
nathah—the King of the Kings: lokan—planets: alokan—planets of the
lower region; saha—along with: loka-palan—respective Kings: acth{pat—
planned; yatra— wherein; hi—certainly ६ sarva— all: sat tva—existence ; nikaya—
living entities; bhedah—difference: adhikrtah—occupied: pratitah—it so
appears.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme King of all kings has created different planets and places
of habitation where living entities are situated in terms of the modes of
nature and work, and He has created their different kings and rulers.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna is the chief King of all kings, and He has created different
planets for all kinds of living entities. Even on this planet there are
different places for inhabitation by different types of men. There are
places like deserts, icelands and valleys in mountainous countries, and in
each of them there are different kinds of men born of different modes of
nature according to their past deeds. There are people in the Arabian
deserts and in the valleys of the Himalayan Mountains, and the inhabitants
of these two places differ from one another, just as the inhabitants of the
icelands also differ from them. Similarly, there are also different planets.
The planets below the earth down to the Patala planet are full of various
kinds of living beings; no planet is vacant, as is wrongly imagined by the
modern so-called scientist. In Bhagavad-gita we find it said by the lord
that the living entities are sarva-gala, or present in every sphere of life. So
there is no doubt that on other planets there are also inhabitants like us,
sometimes with greater intelligence and greater opulence. The living
conditions for those of greater intelligence are more luxurious than on this
earth. There are also planets where no sunlight reaches, and there are
living entities who must live there due to their past deeds. All such plans
for living conditions are made by the Supreme Lord, and Vidura requested
Maitreya to describe this for the sake of further enlightenment.


--- Page 169 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
TEXT 9
येन॒ সজআালান্ল आत्मकमे-
रूपाभिधानां च भिदां न्यधत्त ।
नारायणो विश्वयृगात्मयोनि-
We नो ww বিসবয ॥ ९॥
yena prajanam uta atma-karma
rupabhidhanari ca bhidam vyadhatta
narayano visvasrg atma-yonir
etac ca no varpaya vipra-varya
yena—by which; prajanam—of those who are born; uta—as also; atma-
karma—destined engagement; ripa—form and feature; abhidhanam—
endeavors; ca—also; bhidam—differentiation; vyaedhatta—dispersed; naraya-
nah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; visvasrk—the creator of the
universe; atma-yonih—self-sufficient; etat—all these; ca—also; nah—unto
us; varnaya—describe; vipra-varya—O chief amongst the brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
O chief amongst the brahmanas, please also describe how Narayana, the
creator of the universe and the self-sufficient Lord, has differently created
the natures, activities, forms, features and names of the different living
creatures.
PURPORT
Every living being is under the plan of his natural inclinations in terms
of the modes of material nature. His work is manifested in terms of the
nature of the three modes, his form and bodily features are designed
according to his work, and his name is designated according to his bodily
features. For example, the higher classes of men are white (Sukla), and the
lower classes of men are black. This division of white and black is in
terms of one’s white and black duties of life. Pious acts lead one to take
birth in a good and highly placed family, to become rich, to become
learned, and to acquire beautiful bodily features. Impious acts lead one to
become poor by parentage, to be always in want, to become a fool or
illiterate and to acquire ugly bodily features. Vidura requested Maitreya
to explain these differences between all the living creatures made by
Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 170 ---
Text 10] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 171
TEXT 10
परावरेषां भगवन्‌ व्रतानि
श्रुतानि मे व्यासमुतवादीर्णम्‌ |
ATI श्ठसस्गाबहानां
तेषामृते कृष्णकथामृतौघात्‌ ॥१०॥
paravaresarn bhagavan vralani
srutani me vyasa-mukhad abhiksnam
atrpnuma ksulla-sukhavahanam
tesamrte krsna-kathamrtaughat
para—higher; avara—lower; esam—of all these; bhagavan—O my lord, O
great one; vratani— occupations; srutani—heard; me—by me; vyasa— Vyasa;
mukhat—from the mouth; abhiksnam—repeatedly; atrpnuma—1 am satis-
fied; ksulla—little; sukha-Gvahanam—that which causes happiness; tesam—
out of that; amrta—reality; krspa-kathd—talks about the Personality of
Godhead, Lord Krsna; amrta-oghat—from the nectar.
TRANSLATION
0 my lord, I have repeatedly heard about these higher and lower
statuses of human society from the mouth of Vyasadeva, and ] am quite
satiated with all these lesser subject matters and their happiness. They
have not satisfied me with the nectar of topics about Krsna.
PURPORT
Because people are very much interested in hearing social and historical
presentations, Srila Vyasadeva has compiled many books such as the
Puranas and Mahabharata. These books are reading matter for the mass of
people, and they were compiled with a view to reviving their God
consciousness, now forgotten in the conditional life of material existence.
The real purpose of such literatures is not so much to present topics of
historical references, but to revive the people’s sense of God consciousness.
For example, Mahabharata is the history of the Battle of Kuruksetra, and
common people read it because it is full of topics regarding the social,
political and economic problems of human society. But factually the most
important part of Mahabharata is Bhagavad-gita, which is automatically
taught to readers along with the historical narrations of the Battle of
Kuruksetra.


--- Page 171 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
Vidura explained to Maitreya his position of being fully satiated with
the knowledge of mundane social and political topics and having no more
interest in them. He was anxious to hear transcendental topics regarding
Lord Sri Krsna. Because. there were insufficient topics directly concerning
Krsna in the Puranas, Mahabharata, etc., he was not satisfied and wanted
to know more about Krsna. Krsna-katha, or topics regarding Krsna, are
transcendental, and there is no satiation in hearing such topics. Bhagavad-
gita is important on account of its being Krsna-katha, or speeches delivered
by Lord Krsna. The story of the Battle of Kuruksetra may be interesting
for the mass of people, but to a person like Vidura who is highly
advanced in devotional service, only Krsna-katha and that which is
dovetailed with Krsna-katha is interesting. Vidura wanted to hear of
everything from Maitreya, and so he inquired from him, but he desired
that all the topics be in relationship with Krsna. As fire is never satisfied
in its consumption of firewood, so a pure devotee of the Lord never hears
enough about Krsna. Historical events and other narrations concerning
social and political incidents all become transcendental as soon as they
are in relationship with Krsna. That is the way to transform mundane
things into spiritual identity. The whole world can be transformed into
Vaikuntha if all worldly activities are dovetailed with Krsna-katha.

There are two important Krsna-kathas current in the world—Bhagavad-
gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. Bhagavad-gita is Krsna-katha because it is
spoken by Krsna, whereas Srimad-Bhagavatam is Krsna-katha because it
narrates about Krsna. Lord Caitanya advised all His disciples to preach
Krsna-katha all over the world without discrimination because the
transcendental value of Krsna-katha can purify one and all from material
contamination.

TEXT 11
कस्तप्नुयात्तीपदोऽभिधानात्‌
सत्रेषु वः प्ररिभिरीख्यपानात्‌ |
यः कणनाडीं पुरुषस्य यातो
भवप्रदां শহরে छिनत्ति ॥११॥
kas trpnuyat tirtha-pado *bhidhanat
satresu vah 50017800117 idyamanat
yah karna-nadim purusasya yato
bhava-pradar geha-ratim chinatti

kah—who is that man; trpnuyat—that can be satisfied; tirtha-padah—

whose lotus feet are all the places of pilgrimage; abhidhanat—from the


--- Page 172 ---
Text 11] Vidura's Talks with Maitreya 173
talks of; satresu—in human society; vah—one who 15; saribhih—by great
devotees; idyamanat—one who is so worshiped; yah—who; karna-nadim—
in the holes of the ears; purusasya—of a man; yatah—entering; bhava-
pradam—that which awards births and deaths; geha-ratim—family affection;
chinatti—is cut off.
TRANSLATION

Who in human society can be satisfied without hearing sufficient talk
of the Lord, whose lotus feet are the sum total of all places of pilgrimage
and who is worshiped by great sages and devotees? Such topics can cut
off one’s bondage to family affection simply by entering the holes of
one’s ears.

PURPORT

Krsna-katha is so powerful that simply by entering into a person’s ear it
can at once give deliverance from the bondage of family affection. Family
affection is an illusory manifestation of the external energy, and it is the
only impetus for all mundane activities. As long as there is mundane
activity and the mind is absorbed in such engagement, one has to undergo
the repetition of birth and death in the current material nescience. People
are most influenced by the mode of ignorance, and some are influenced
by the passionate mode of material nature, and under the spell of these
two modes a living being is actuated by the material conception of life.
The mundane qualities do not allow a living enlity to understand his real
position. The qualities of both ignorance and passion strongly bind one to
the illusory bodily conception of the self. The best among the fools who
are thus deluded are those who engage in altruistic activities under the
spell of the material mode of passion. Bhagavad-gita, which is direct
Krsna-katha, gives humanity the elementary lesson that the body is
perishable and that the consciousness which is spread throughout the body
is imperishable. The conscious being, the imperishable self, is eternally
existent and cannot be killed under any circumstances, even after the
dissolution of the body. Anyone who misunderstands this perishable body
to be the self and who works for it in the name of sociology, politics,
philanthropy, altruism, nationalism or internationalism, under the false
plea of the bodily conception of life, is certainly a fool and does not know
the implications of reality and unreality. Some of them are above the
modes of ignorance and passion and are situated in the mode of goodness,
but mundane goodness is always contaminated by tinges of ignorance and
passion. Mundane goodness can enlighten one that the body and the self
are different, and one in goodness is concerned with the self and not the


--- Page 173 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
body. But due to being contaminated, those in mundane goodness cannot
understand the real nature of the self as a person. Their impersonal
conception of the self as distinct from the body keeps them in the mode
of goodness within material nature, and unless they are attracted by
Krsna-katha, they will never be liberated from the bondage of material
existence. Krsna-katha is the only remedy for all people of the world
because it can situate one in pure consciousness of the self and liberate
one from material bondage. To preach Krsna-katha all over the world, as
recommended by Lord Caitanya, is the greatest missionary activity, and
all sensible men and women of the world may join in this great movement
started by Lord Caitanya.
TEXT 12
धनिरविवश्ुभगवद्गुणानां
सखापि ते भारतमाह. कृष्णः |
यसिन्दरणां ग्राम्यसुखानुवादे-
Aha लु हरेः कथायाम्‌ ॥१२॥
munir vivaksur bhagavad-gunanam
sakhapi te bharatam aha krsnah
yasmin 71707 gramya-sukhanuvadair
matir grhita nu hareh kathayam
munih—the sage; vivaksuh—described; bhagavat—of the Personality of
Godhead; gunanam— transcendental qualities; sakha— friend; api— also; te—
your; bharatam—the Mahabharata; dha—has described; krsnpah—Krsna-
dvaipayana Vyasa; yesmin—in which; nrpam—of the people; gramya—
worldly; sukha-anuvadaih—pleasure derived from mundane topics; matih—
attention ;grhita nu—just to draw towards; hareh—of the Lord; kathayam—
speeches of (Bhagavad-gita).
TRANSLATION
Your friend the great sage Krsna-dvaipayana Vyasa has already
described the transcendental qualities of the Lord in his great work, the
Mahabharata. But the whole idea is to draw the attention of the mass of
people to Krsna-katha [Bhagavad-gita] through their strong affinity for
hearing mundane topics.


--- Page 174 ---
Text 13] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 175
PURPORT

The great sage Krena-dvaipayana Vyasa is the author of all Vedic
literature, of which his works Vedanta-sutra, Srimad-Bhagavatam and
Mahabharata are very popular readings. As stated in Bhagavatam (1.4.25),
Srila Vyasadeva compiled the Mahabharata for the less intelligent class of
men who take more interest in mundane topics than in the philosephy of
life. The Vedanta-sitra was compiled for persons already above the mun-
dane topics, who might already have tasted the bitterness of the so-called
happiness of mundane affairs. The first aphorism of Vedanta-sitra is
athato brahma-jijiiasa, i.e., only when one has finished the business of
mundane inquiries in the marketplace of sense gratification can one make
relevant inquiries regarding Brahman, the Transcendence. Those persons
who are busy with the mundane inquiries which fill the newspapers and
other such literatures are classified as stri-siidra-dvijabandhus, or women,
the laborer class and unworthy sons of the higher classes (brahmana,
ksatriya and wvaisya). Such less intelligent men cannot understand the
purpose of Vedanta-siutra, although they may make a show of studying
the sitras in a perverted way. The real purpose of Vedanta-sitra is
explained by the author himself in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, and any-
one trying to understand Vedanta-sitra without reference to Srimad-
Bhagavatam is certainly misguided. Such misguided persons, who are
interested in the mundane affairs of philanthropic and altruistic work
under the misconception of the body as the self, could better take
advantage of the Mahabharata, which was specifically compiled by Srila
Vyasadeva for their benefit. The great author has compiled the Maha-
bharata in such a way that the less intelligent class of men, who are more
interested in mundane topics, may read the Mahabharata with great relish
and in the course of such mundane happiness can also take advantage of
Bhagavad-gita, the preliminary study of Srimad-Bhagavatam or the
Vedanta-sitra. Srila Vyasadeva had no interest in writing a history of
mundane activities other than to give less intelligent persons a chance for
transcendental realization through Bhagavad-gita. Vidura’s reference to
the Mahabharata indicates that he had heard of the Mahabharata from
Vyasadeva, his real father, while he was away from home and was touring
the places of pilgrimage.

TEXT 13
सा श्रदधानसख विवर्धमाना
विरक्तिमन्यत्र करोति पुंसः ।


--- Page 175 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 5
हरेः पदानुस्मृतिनिर्गृतस्य
समस्तदु ःखाप्ययमाड् धत्ते ॥१३॥
sa $raddadhanasya vivardhamana
viraktim anyatra karoti purmsah
hareh padanusmrti-nirvrlasya
samasta-dubkhapyayam asu dhatte
sa—those topics of Krsna, or Krspa-katha; sraddadhanasya—of one who
is anxious to hear; vivardhamana—gradually increasing; viraktim—indiffer-
ence; anyatra—in other things (than such topics); karoti—does; pumsah—of
one who is so engaged; hareh— of the Lord; pada-anusmrli— constant
remembrance of the lotus feet of the Lord; nirvrtasya—one who has
achieved such transcendental bliss: samasta-dub kha—all miserics;apyayam—
vanquished; asu— without delay ; dhatte-—cexecules.
TRANSLATION
For one who is anxious to engage constantly in hearing such topics,
Krsna-katha gradually increases his indifference towards all other things.
Such constant remembrance of the lotus feet of Lord Krsna by the
devotee who has achieved transcendental bliss vanquishes all his miseries
without delay.
PURPORT
We must certainly know that on the absolute plane Krsna-katha and
Krsna are one and the same. The Lord is the Absolute Truth, and there-
fore 113 name, form, quality, etc., which are all understood to be Krsna-
katha, are nondifferent from Him. Bhagavad-gita, being spoken by the
Lord, is as good as the Lord Himself. When a sincere devotee reads
Bhagavad-gita, this is as good as his seeing the Lord eye to eye in his
personal presence, but this is not so for the mundane wrangler. All the
potencies of the Lord are there when one reads Bhagavad-gita, provided
it is read in the way recommended in the Gita by the Lord Himself. One
cannot foolishly manufacture an interpretation of Bhagavad-gita and still
bring about transcendental benefit. Anyone who tries to squeeze some
artificial meaning or interpretation from Bhagavad-gita for an ulterior
molive is not sraddadhana-pumsa (one engaged anxiously in bona fide
hearing of Krsna-katha). Such a person cannot derive any benefit from
reading Bhagavad-gita, however great a scholar he may be in the estimation
of a layman. The sraddadhana, or faithful devotee, can actually derive all


--- Page 176 ---
Text 14] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 177
the benefits of Bhagavad-gita because by the omnipotency of the Lord he
achieves the transcendental bliss which vanquishes attachment and nullifies
all concomitant material miseries. ®nly the devotee, by his factual ex-
perience, can understand the import of this verse spoken by Vidura. The
pure devotee of the Lord enjoys life by constantly remembering the lotus
feet of the lord by hearing Krsna-katha. For such a devotee there is
no such thing as material existence, and the much advertised bliss of
brahmananda is like a fig for the devotee who is in the midst of the
transcendental ocean of bliss.
TEXT 14
ताञ्छोच्यश्लोच्यानविदोऽनु्ोचे
हरेः कथायां विथचुखानषेन |
क्षिणोति देवोऽनिमिषस्तु येषा-
यायुदेथादाद गतिस्पतीनाय्‌ ॥१४॥
taiic chocya-$ocyan avido ८६०८९
hareh kathayanm vimukhan aghena
ksinoti devo ‘nimisas tu yesam
ayur vrtha-vada-gati-smrtinam
tan—all those; socya—pitiable; socyan—of the pitiable; avidah—ignorant;
anusoce—| pity; hareh—of the Lord; kathayam—to the topics of; vimu-
khan—adverse; aghena—because of sinful activities; ksinoti—decaying;
devah—O sage; animisah—eternal time; tu—but; yesam—of whom; ayuh—
duration of life; vytha—uselessly; vada—philosophical speculations; gati—
ultimate goal; smrtinam—of {11086 following different rituals.
TRANSLATION
O sage, persons who, because of their sinful activities, are adverse to the
topics of Transcendence and thus are ignorant of the purpose of the
Mahabharata [Bhagavad-gita] are pitied by the pitiable. 1 also pity them
because 1 see how their duration of life is spoiled by eternal time while
they involve themselves in presentations of philosophical speculation,
theoretical ultimate goals of life, and different modes of ritual.
PURPORT
According to the modes of material nature, there are three kinds of
relationships between human beings and the Supreme Personality of


--- Page 177 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
Godhead. Those who are in the modes of ignorance and passion are
adverse to the existence of God, or else they formally accept the existence
of God in the capacity of an order supplier. Above them are those who are
in the mode of goodness. This second class of men believe the Supreme
Brahman to be impersonal. They accept the cult of bhakti, in which
hearing of Krsna-katha is the first item, as a means and not the end. Above
them are those who are pure devotees. They are situated in the transcen-
dental stage above the mode of material goodness. Such persons are
decidedly convinced that the name, form, fame, qualities, etc., of the
Personality of Godhead are nondifferent from one another on the absolute
plane. For them, hearing of the topics of Krsna is equal to meeting with
Him eye to eye. According to this class of men, who are situated in
pure devotional service to the Lord, the highest goal of human life is
purusartha, devotional service to the Lord, the real mission of life. The
impersonalists, because they engage in mental speculation and have no
faith in the Personality of Godhead, have no business hearing the topics
of Krsna. Such persons are pitiable for the first-class pure devotees of the
Lord. The pitiable impersonalists pity those who are influenced by the
modes of ignorance and passion, but the pure devotees of the Lord take
pity on them both because both waste their most valuable time in the
human form of life in false pursuits, sense enjoyment and mental specula-

tive presentations of different theories and goals of life.

TEXT 15
तदस्य कौषारव शर्मदातु-
रेः कथामेव कथासु सारम्‌ |
SIA पुष्पेभ्य इवातबन्धो
शिवाय नः कीर्तय ती्थकीतेः ॥ এ ।
tad asya kausarava $arma-datur
hareh katham-eva kathasu saram
uddhrtya puspebhya ivarta-bandho
$ivaya nah kirtaya tirtha-kirteh

tat—thercfore; asya—His; kausarava—(O) Maitreya; sarma-datuh—of
one who awards good fortune; hareh—of the Lord; katham— topics; eva—
only; kathasu—of all topics; saram—the essence; uddhrtya—by quoting;
puspebhyah—from the flowers; iva—like that; arta-bandho—of the friend


--- Page 178 ---
Text 16] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 179
of the distressed; sivaya—for welfare; nah—of us; kirtaya—Kkindly describe;
tirtha— pilgrimage; kirteh—of glorious.
TRANSLATION
0 Maitreya, O friend of the distressed, the glories of the Supreme Lord
can alone do good for people all over the world. Therefore, just as bees
collect honey from flowers, kindly describe the essence of all topics—the
topics of the Lord.
PURPORT
There are many topics for different persons in different modes of
material nature, but the essential topics are those in relationship with the
Supreme Lord. Unfortunately, materially affected conditioned souls are
all more or less adverse to topics of the Supreme Lord because some of
them do not believe in the existence of God and some of them believe
only in the impersonal feature of the Lord. In both cases there is nothing
for them to say of God. Both the nonbelievers and the impersonalists
deny the essence of all topics; therefore, they engage in topics of rela-
tivity in various ways, either in sense gratification or mental speculation.
For the pure devotees like Vidura, the topics of both the mundaners and
the mental speculators are useless in all respects. Thus Vidura requested
Maitreya to talk of the essence only, the talks of Krsna, and nothing else.
TEXT 16
. ~~
स॒ विश्वजन्मसितिसंयमारथे
छरतावरतारः प्रगृहीतशक्तिः |
चकार कर्माण्यतिपूरुपषाणि
यानीश्वरः कीतेय तानि मह्यम्‌ ।॥१६॥
sa visva-janma-sthiti-saiyamarthe
krtavatarah pragrhita-saktih
cakara karmany atipurusani
yanisvarah kirtaya tani mahyam
sah—the Personality of Godhead; visva—universe; janma—creation;
sthiti—maintenance; sariyama-arthe—with a view to perfect control; krta—
accepted; avatarah—incarnation; pragrhita—accomplished with; Saktih—
potency; cakara—performed; karmapi—transcendental activities; atipéru-
sani—superhuman; yani—all those; iSvarah—the Lord; kirtaya—please chant;
tani—all those; mahyam—unto me.


--- Page 179 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
Kindly chant all those superhuman transcendental activities of the
supreme controller, the Personality of Godhead, who accepted incarna-
tions fully equipped with all potency for the full manifestation and
maintenance of the cosmic creation.
PURPORT
Vidura was undoubtedly very eager to hear about Lord Krsna in
particular, but he was overwhelmed because Lord Krsna had just passed
away from the visible world. He therefore wanted to hear about Him in
His purusa incarnations, which He manifests with full potencies for the
creation and maintenance of the cosmic world. The activities of the purusa
incarnations are but an extension of the activities of the Lord. This hint
was given by Vidura to Maitreya because Maitreya could not decide which
part of the activities of Lord Krsna should be chanted.
TEXT 17
श्रीडुक उवाच
स एवं भगवान्‌ पृष्टः क्षत्रा कौषारवो शनिः |
ক ৬ ण्व
पुंसां निःश्रेयसार्थेन तमाह बहु मानयन्‌ ॥१७॥
क Suka 8000৫
sa evan bhagavan prstah
ksattra kausaravo munih
pumsam nihsreyasarthena
tam aha bahu-manayan
$ $ukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; sah—he; evam—this; bha-
gavan—the great sage; prstah—being requested; ksattra—by Vidura; kauga-
ravah— Maitreya; munih—the great sage; purnsam—{for all people; nihsre-
yasa—for the greatest welfare; arthena—for that; tam—unto him; aha—
narrated; bahu— greatly; manayan—honored.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: The great sage Maitreya Muni, after honoring
Vidura very greatly, began to speak, at Vidura’s request, for the greatest
welfare of all people.


--- Page 180 ---
Text 18] Vidura's Talks with Maitreya 181
PURPORT
The great sage Maitreya Muni is described here as bhagavan because he
surpassed all ordinary human beings in learning and experience. Thus his
selection of the greatest welfare service for the world is considered
authoritative. The all-inclusive welfare service for the entire human society
is devotional service to the Lord, and, as requested by Vidura, the sage
described the same very appropriately.
TEXT 18
as
मन्नय उवाच
৬ - =
साधु TE त्वया साधा কাক্কানু ATTRA |
(~ = ३ Te
कीर्ति वितन्वता लोके आत्मनोऽधोक्षजात्मनः।। १८॥
mailreya ५०7८५
sadhu prstam vaya sadho
lokan sadhv anugrhpata
kirtim vilanvala loke
atmano ‘dhoksajatmanah
maitreyah uvdca—Sri Maitreya said; sadhu—all good; prstam—1 am
asked; tvaya—by you; sadho—QO good one; lokan—all the people; sadhu
anugrhnpata—showing mercy in goodness; kirtim—glories; vitanvata—broad-
casting; loke—in the world; atmanah—of the self; adhoksaja—the Tran-
scendence; @tmanah—mind.
TRANSLATION
Sri Maitreya said: O Vidura, all glory unto you. You have inquired
from me of the greatest of all goodness, and thus you have shown your
mercy both to the world and to me because your mind is always absorbed
in thoughts of the Transcendence.
PURPORT
Maitreya Muni, who was experienced in the science of Transcendence,
could understand that Vidura’s mind was fully absorbed in Transcendence.
Adhoksaja means that which transcends the limits of sense perception or
sensuous experience. The Lord is transcendental to our sense experience,
but He reveals Himself to the sincere devotee. Because Vidura was always
absorbed in thought of the Lord, Maitreya could estimate Vidura’s tran-


--- Page 181 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
scendental value. He appreciated the valuable inquiries of Vidura and thus
thanked him with great honor.
TEXT 19
2 + [J ¢.
नेतचित्रं त्वयि क्षत्तर्वादरायणवीयजे |
= o
गृहीतोऽनन्यभावेन বযন্লযা हरिरीश्वरः ।॥१९॥
nailac citram tvayi ksattar
badarayanaviryaje
grhito ’nanya-bhavena
val tvaya harir t$varah
na—never; elal—such inquiries; citram—very wonderful; tvayi—in you;
ksattah—O Vidura; badarayapa—of Vyasadeva; viryaje—born from the
seminas grhitai—aceepted; ananya-bhavena—without deviation from the
thought; yat—because; tvaya—by yous harih—the Personality of Godhead;
wvarah—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, it is not at all wonderful that you have so accepted the Lord
without deviation of thought, for you are born from the semina of
Vyasadeva.
PURPORT
The value of great parentage and noble birth is evaluated here in
connection with the birth of Vidura. The culture of a human being begins
when the father invests his semina in the womb of the mother. According
to his status of work, a living entity is placed in a particular father’s
semina, and because Vidura was not an ordinary living entity, he was given
the chance to be born from the semina of Vyasa. The birth of a human
being is a great science, and therefore reformation of the act of impregna-
tion according to the Vedic ritual called Garbhadhana-samskara is very
important for generating good population. The problem is not to check
the growth of the population, but to generate good population on the
level of Vidura, Vyasa and Maitreya. There is no need to check the growth
of population if the children are born as human beings with all precautions
regarding their birth. So-called birth control is not only vicious but also
useless.


--- Page 182 ---
Text 20] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 183
TEXT 20
ক -
माण्डन्यज्ञापाद्धगवाच्‌ प्रजासयमना यमः |
रातु कषत्रे ्जिप्यायां जातः सत्यवतीसुतात्‌ २०॥
mandavyasapad bhagavan
praja-sariiyamano yamah
bhratuh ksetre bhujisyayam
jatah satyavali-sutat
mandavya—the great rsi Mandavya Muni; §apat—by his curse; bhagavan—
the greatly powerful; praja—one who is born; sarhyamanah— controller of
death; yamah—known as Yamaraja; bhratuh—of the brother; ksetre—in the
wife; bhujisyayam—kept; jatah—born; satyavati—Satyavati (the mother of
both Vicitravirya and Vyasadeva); sutat—by the son (Vyasadeva).
TRANSLATION
1 know that you are now Vidura due to the cursing of Mandavya Muni
and that formerly you were King Yamaraja, the great controller of living
entities after their death. You were begotten by the son of Satyavati,
Vyasadeva, in the kept wife of his brother.
PURPORT
Mandavya Muni was a great sage (Cf. Bhag. 1.13.1), and Vidura was
formerly the controller Yamaraja, who takes charge of the living entities
after death. Birth, maintenance and death are three conditional states of
the living entities who are within the material world. As the appointed
controller after death, Yamaraja once tried Mandavya Muni for his child-
hood profligacy and ordered him to be picreced with a lance. Mandavya,
being angry at Yamaraja for awarding him undue punishment, cursed him
to become a sudra (member of the less intelligent laborer class). Thus
Yamaraja took birth in the womb of the kept wife of Vicitravirya from
the semina of Vicitravirya’s brother, Vyasadeva. Vyasadeva is the son of
Satyavati by the great King Santanu, the father of Bhismadeva. This
mysterious history of Vidura was known to Maitreya Muni because he
happened to be a contemporary friend of Vyasadeva’s. In spite of Vidura’s
birth in the womb of a kept wife, because he had otherwise high parentage
and great connection, he inherited the highest talent of becoming a great
devotee of the Lord. To take birth in such a great family is understood to


--- Page 183 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 5
be an advantage for attaining devotional life. Vidura was given this chance
due to his previous greatness.
TEXT 21
- .
मवान्‌ भगवतो नित्यं सम्मतः सानुगस्य ह ।
=
यख ज्ञानोपदेशाय ASSRAFTIR ART N12
bhavan bhagavato nityam
sammalah sanugasya ha
yasya jianopadesaya
madisad bhagavan vrajan
bhavan—your good self; bhagavatafi—of the Personality of Godhead;
nityam—eternal; sammatal— recognized; sanugasya— one of the associates;
ha—have been; yasya—of whom; jiana—knowledge; upadesaya—for in-
structing; md—unto me; adisat—so ordered; bhagavan—the Personality of
Godhead; vrajan—while returning to His abode.
TRANSLATION
Your good self is one of the eternal associates of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead for whose sake the Lord, while going back to His
abode, left instructions with me.
PURPORT
Yamaraja, the great controller of life after death, decides the living
entities’ destinies in their next lives. He is surely among the most con-
fidential representatives of the Lord. Such confidential posts are offered
to great devotees of the Lord who are as good as His eternal associates in
the spiritual sky. And because Vidura happened to be among them, the
Lord, while returning to Vaikuntha, left instructions for Vidura with
Maitreya Muni. Generally the eternal associates of the Lord in the spiritual
sky do not come to the material world. Sometimes they come, however,
by the order of the Lord—not to hold any administrative post, but to
associate with the Lord in person or to propagate the message of God in
human society. Such empowered representatives are called saktyavesa
avataras, or incarnations invested with transcendental power of attorney.
TEXT 22
- 0
अथ ते भगवह्टीला TARGET RA |
विश्वस्थित्युद्धवान्ता्या वणयाम्यनुपू्वशः IRR


--- Page 184 ---
Text 23] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 185
atha te bhagaval-lila
yogamayoru-brrhitah
visva-sthity-udbhavantartha
varpayamy anupirvasah
atha—therefore; te—unto you; bhagavat—pertaining to the Personality
of Godhead; lildh—pastimes; yoga-maya—energy of the Lord; uru—greatly;
brrmhatah—extended by; visva—of the cosmic world; sthiti— maintenance;
udbhava— creation; anta—dissolution; arthah—purpose; varnayami—1 shall
describe; anupirvasah—systematically.
TRANSLATION
I shall therefore describe to you the pastimes by which the Personality
of Godhead extends His transcendental potency for the creation, main-
tenance and dissolution of the cosmic world as they occur one after
another.
PURPORT
The omnipotent Lord, by His different energies, can perform anything
and everything He likes. The creation of the cosmic world is done by His
yoga-maya energy.
TEXT 23
WEAF आसेदमग्र आत्माऽऽत्मनां विथु; |
आमेच्छाचुगतावात्मा नानामत्युपलक्षणः ॥२२॥
bhagavan eka asedam
agra atmatmanar vibhuh
atmecchanugatav atma
nanamaty-upalaksanah
bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; ekah—one without a second;
asa—was there; idam—this creation; agre—prior lo the creation; @ma—in
His own form; atmanam—of the living entities; vibhuph—master; atma—
Self; iccha—desire; anugatau—being merged in; atma—Self; nanamati—
different vision; upalaksapah—sy mptoms.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead, who is the master of all living entities,
existed prior to the creation as one without a second. It is by His will only


--- Page 185 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
that creation is made possible and again everything merges in Him. This
Supreme Self is symptomized by different names.

PURPORT

The great sage here begins to explain the purpose of the four original
verses of the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Although they have no access to the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, the followers of the Mayavadi (impersonalist) school
sometimes screw out an imaginary explanation of the original four verses,
but we must accept the actual explanation given herein by Maitreya Muni
because he, along with Uddhava, personally heard it directly from the
Lord. The first line of the original four verses runs, aham evasam evagre.
The word aham is misinterpreted by the Mayavadi school into meanings
which no one but the interpreter can understand. Here aham is explained
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not the individual living entities.
Before the creation, there was only the Personality of Godhead; there
were no puruga incarnations and certainly no living entities, nor was there
the material energy, by which the manifested creation is effected. The
purusa incarnations and all the different energies of the Supreme Lord
were merged in Him only.

The Personality of Godhead is described herein as the master of all
other living entities. He is like the sun disc, and the living entities are like
the molecules of the sun’s rays. This existence of the Lord before the
creation is confirmed by the srutis: vasudevo va idam agra asit na brahma
na ca Sankarah eko vai nardyapa asit na brahma na sano. Because every-
thing that be is an emanation from the Personality of Godhead, He
therefore always exists alone without a second. He can so exist because He
is all-perfect and omnipotent. Everything other than Him, including His
plenary expansions the Visnu-tattvas, is lis part and parcel. Before the
creation there were no Karanarnavadayi or Garbhodakasayi or Ksirodaka-
dayi Visnus, nor was there Brahma nor Sankara. The Visnu plenary
expansion and the living entities beginning from Brahma are separated
parts and parcels. Although the spiritual existence was there with the
Lord, the material existence was dormant in Him. By His will only is the
material manifestation done and undone. The diversity of the Vaikuntha-
loka is one with the Lord, just as the diversity of soldiers is one with and
the same as the king. As explained in Bhagavad-gita (9.7), the material
creation takes place at intervals by the will of the Lord, and in the periods
between dissolution and creation, the living entities and the material
energy remain dormant in Him.


--- Page 186 ---
Text 24] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 187
TEXT 24
स वा एष तदा FL नापश्यद्‌ THAW, |
(1 os
मेनेऽसन्तमिवात्मानं सु्रशक्तिरसुप्रदक्‌ ।२४॥
sa va esa lada drasta
napasyad drsyam ekaral
mene ’santam ivatmanam
supta-saktir asupta-drk
sah—the Personality of Godhead; va—either; esah—all these; tada—at
that time; drasta—the seer; na—did not; apasyat—see; dr§yam—the cosmic
creation; ekarat—undisputed proprietor; mene—thought like this; asan-
tam—nonexistent; iva—like that; atmanam—plenary manifestations; supta—
unmanifested; $aktih—material energy; asupta—manifested; drk—internal
potency.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, the undisputed proprietor of everything, was the only seer.
The cosmic manifestation was not present at that time, and thus He
felt imperfect without His plenary and separated parts and parcels.
The material energy was dormant, whereas the internal potency was
manifested.
PURPORT
The Lord is the supreme seer because only by His glance did the
material energy become active for cosmic manifestation. At that time the
seer was there, but the external energy, over which the glance of the Lord
is cast, was not present. He felt somewhat insufficient, like a husband
feeling lonely in the absence of his wife. This is a poetic simile. The Lord
wanted to create the cosmic manifestation to give another chance to the
conditioned souls who were dormant in forgetfulness. The cosmic mani-
festation gives the conditioned souls a chance to go back home, back to
Godhead, and that is its main purpose. The Lord is so kind that in the
absence of such a manifestation He feels something wanting, and thus the
creation takes place. Although tlie creation of the internal potency was
manifested, the other potency appeared to be sleeping, and the Lord
wanted to awaken her to activity, just as a husband wants to awaken his
wife from the sleeping state for enjoyment. It is the compassion of the
Lord for the sleeping energy that He wants to see her awaken for enjoy-


--- Page 187 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
ment like the other wives who are awake. The whole process is to enliven
the sleeping conditioned souls to the real life of spiritual consciousness so
that they may thus become as perfect as the ever-liberated souls in the
Vaikunthalokas. Since the Lord is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, He likes every
part and parcel of His different potencies to take part in the blissful rasa
because participation with the Lord in His eternal rasa-lila is the highest
living condition, perfect in spiritual bliss and eternal knowledge.
TEXT 25
.
सावाएतस्य संद्रष्टुः शक्तिः सदसदात्मिका |
माया नाम महामाग ययेदं निर्ममे বিস্তঃ Ru
sa va elasya samdrastuh
Sak tilt sad-asad-atmika
maya nama mahabhaga
yayedariv nirmame vibhuh
sd—that external energy; va—is either; etasya—of the Lord; sardras-
tuh—of the perfect seer; §aktih—energy: sal-asat-atmika—both as the
cause and the effect: maya nama—called by the name Maya; mahabhaga—
O fortunate one: yaya—by which; idam—this material world; nirmame—
constructed; vibhuh—the Almighty.
TRANSLATION
The Lord is the seer, and the external energy, which is seen, works both
as cause and effect in the cosmic manifestation. 0 greatly fortunate
Vidura, this external energy is known as maya or illusion, and through her
agency only is the entire material manifestation made possible.
PURPORT
The material nature, known as maya, is both the material and efficient
cause of the cosmos, but in the background the Lord is the consciousness
for all activities. As in the individual body the consciousness is the source
of all energies of the body, so the supreme consciousness of the Lord is
the source of all energies in material nature. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita (9.10) as follows:
mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sacaracaram
helunanena kaunteya jagad viparivartate


--- Page 188 ---
Text 26] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 189
“Throughout all the energies of material nature there is the hand of the
Supreme Lord as the final superintendent. Due to this supreme cause
only, the activities of material nature appear planned and systematic, and
all things regularly evolve.”
TEXT 26
TET तु मायायां गुणमय्यापघोश्षजः |
पुरुषेणात्ममूतेन fifa वीयेवान्‌ ॥२६॥
kala-vrttya tu mayayam
guna-mayyam adhoksajah
purusenatma-bhiitena
viryam adhatta viryavan

kala—the eternal time; vrttya—by the influence 01; tu—but; mayayam—
in the external energy; guna-mayyam—in the qualitative modes of nature;
adhoksajah—the Transcendence; purusepa—by the purusa incarnation;
atma-bhiitena—who is the plenary expansion of the Lord; viryam—the
seeds of the living entities; adhatla—impregnated; viryavan—the Supreme
Living Being.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Living Being in His feature as the transcendental purusa
incarnation, who is the Lord’s plenary expansion, impregnates the material
nature of three modes, and thus by the influence of eternal time the
living entities appear.

PURPORT

The offspring of any living being is born after the father impregnates
the mother with semina and the living entity floating in the semina of the
father takes the shape of the mother’s form. Similarly, mother material
nature cannot produce any living entity from her material elements unless
and until she is impregnated with living entities by the Lord Himself. That
is the mystery of the generation of the living entities. This impregnating
process is performed by the first purusa incarnation, Karanarpavasayi
Visnu. Simply by His glance over material nature, the whole matter is
accomplished.

We should not understand the process of impregnation hy the Per-
sonality of Godhead in terms of our conception of sex. The omnipotent
Lord can impregnate just by His eyes, and therefore He is called all-


--- Page 189 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
potent. Each and every part of His transcendental body can perform each
and every function of the other parts. This is confirmed in the Brahma-
sarihita (Bs. 5.32) : angani yasya sakalendriya-vrttimanti. In Bhagavad-gita
also (14.3), the same principle is confirmed: mama yonir mahad brahma
tasmin garbharn dadhamy aham. When the cosmic creation is manifested,
the living entities are directly supplied from the Lord; they are never
products of material nature. Thus, no scientific advancement of material
science can ever produce a living being. That is the whole mystery of the
malerial creation. The living entities are foreign to matter, and thus they
cannot be happy unless they are situated in the same spiritual life as the
Lord. The mistaken living being, out of forgetfulness of this original
condition of life, unnecessarily wastes time trying to become happy in the
material world. The whole Vedic process is to remind one of this essential
feature of life. The Lord offers the conditioned soul a material body for
his so-called enjoyment, but if one does not come to his senses and enter
into spiritual consciousness, the Lord again puts him in the unmanifested
condition as it existed in the beginning of the creation. The Lord is
described here as wviryavan, or the greatest potent being, because He
impregnates material nature with innumerable living entities who are
conditioned from time immemorial.
TEXT 27
ततोऽमवन्‌ पदक्त्वपव्यक्तात्सरयोरितात्‌ |
विज्ञानात्माऽऽत्मदेदस्थं विशव sagas:
tato “bhavan mahat-tattvam
avyak tal kala-coditat
vijianatma “tma-deha-stham
visvarh vyaijarts tamonudah

tatah— thereafter: abhaval—came into existence; mahat—supreme; tatt-
vam—sum tolal; avyaktal—from the unmanifested; kala-coditat—by the
interaction of time; vijidnatma—unalloyed goodness; atma-deha-stham—
situated on the bodily self; visvam—complete universes; vyarijan—mani-
10300; tamonudah—the supreme light.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter, influenced by the interactions of eternal time, the supreme
sum total of matter called the mahat-tattva became manifested, and in
this mahat-tattva the unalloyed goodness, the Supreme Lord, sowed the
seeds of universal manifestation out of His own body.


--- Page 190 ---
Text 28] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 191
PURPORT
In due course of time, the impregnated material energy was manifested
first as the total material ingredients. Every thing takes its own time to fruc-
tify, and therefore the word kala-coditat, influenced by time, 15 used herein.
The mahat-tattva is the total consciousness because a portion of it is
represented in everyone as the intellect. The mahat-tattva is directly
connected with the supreme consciousness of the Supreme Being, but
still it appears as matter. The mahat-tattva or shadow of pure conscious-
ness is the germinating place of all creation. It is pure goodness with the
slight addition of the material mode of passion, and therefore activity
is generated from this point.
TEXT 28
सोऽप्य॑शचगुणकालात्मा RETRAIN: |
আন্মান व्यकरोदात्मा विश्वस्यास्य মিত্তবযা।।২৫।
so'py amsa-guna-kalatma
bhagavad-drsti-gocarah
(11160177 vvakarod atma
visvasvasva sisrksava
sah —mahat-tattva; api—also: arisa—purusa plenary expansion: gune—
chiefly the quality of ignorance: kala—the duration of time: atma— full
consciousness; bhagavat —the Personality of Godhead; drsti-gocarah—range
of sight; atmanam—many different forms: vvakarot— differentiated: atma—
reservoir: visvasya—the would-be entities: asya— of this; sisrksaya— generates
the false ego.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the mahat-tattva differentiated itself into many different
forms as the reservoir of the would-be entities. The mahat-tattva is chiefly
in the mode of ignorance, and it generates the false ego. It is a plenary
expansion of the Personality of Godhead with full consciousness of
creative principles and time for fructification.
PURPORT
The mahat-tattva is the via medium between pure spirit and material
existence. It is the junction of matter and spirit wherefrom the false ego
of the living entity is generated. All living entities are differentiated parts
and parcels of the Personality of Godhead. Under the pressure of false ego,
the conditioned souls, although parts and parcels of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, claim to be the enjoyers of material nature. This
false ego is the binding force of material existence. The Lord again and


--- Page 191 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 5
again gives a chance to the bewildered conditioned souls to get free from
this false ego, and that is why the material creation takes place at intervals.
He gives the conditioned souls all facilities for rectifying the activities of
the false ego, but He does not interfere with their small independence as
parts and parcels of the Lord.
TEXT 29
ক
महतत्वादिङर्बाणादर्हकत्वं व्यजायत |
का्यकारणकर्त्ात्मा भूतेन्द्रियमनोमयः |
वैकारिकस्तैजसश्च तामसश्चेत्यहं त्रिधा ।२९॥
mahat-tattvad vikurvanad
ahani-tatlvam vyajayata
karya-karana-kartratma
bhitendriya-mano-mayah
vatkartkas taijasas ca
tamasas cely aham tridha
mahat—the great; tattvat—causal truth; vikurvapat—being transformed;
aham—{false ego; tattvam—material truth; vyajayata—became manifested;
karya—effects: kdrapa—cause; kartr—doer; atma—soul or source; bhiita—
material ingredients; indriya—scenses; manah-mayah—hovering on the men-
tal plane; vaikarikah— mode of goodness; taijasai—mode of passion; tama-
sahi—mode of ignorance; ca—and; iti—thus; aham—false ego; tridha—three
kinds.
TRANSLATION
Mabhat-tattva, or the great causal truth, transforms into false ego, which
is manifested in three phases—cause, effect and the doer. All such activities
are on the mental plane and are based on the material elements, gross
senses and mental speculation. The false ego is represented in three
different modes—goodness, passion and ignorance.
PURPORT
A pure living enlity in his original spiritual existence is fully conscious
of his constitutional position as an eternal servitor of the Lord. All souls
who are situated in such pure consciousness are liberated, and therefore
they eternally live in bliss and knowledge in the various Vaikuntha
planets in the spiritual sky. When the material creation is manifested, it is
not meant for them. The eternally liberated souls are called nitye-muktas,


--- Page 192 ---
Text 30] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 193
and they have nothing to do with the material creation. The material
creation is meant for rebellious souls who are not prepared to accept
subordination under the Supreme Lord. This spirit of false lordship is
called false ego. It is manifested in three modes of material nature, and it
exists in mental speculation only. Those who are in the mode of goodness
think that each and every person is God, and thus they laugh at the pure
devotees who try to engage in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord. Those who are puffed up by the mode of passion try to lord it over
material nature in various ways. Some of them engage in altruistic
activities as if they were agents appointed to do good to others by their
mental speculative plans. Such men accept the standard ways of mundane
altruism, but their plans are made on the basis of false ego. This false ego
extends to the limit of becoming one with the Lord. The last class of
egoistic conditioned souls— those in the mode of ignorance are misguided
by identification of the gross body with the self. Thus, all their activities
are centered around the body only. All these persons are given the chance
to play with false cgoistic ideas, but at the same time the Lord is kind
enough to give them a chance to take help from scriptures like Bhagavad-
gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam so that they may understand the science of
Krsna and thus make their lives successful. The entire material creation,
therefore, is meant for the falsely egoistic living entities hovering on the
mental plane under different illusions in the modes of material nature.
TEXT 30
अदंतत्वादिङु्वाणान्मनो वैकारिकादभूत्‌ |
वैकारिकाश्च ये देवा अर्थाभिव्यज्ननं यतः ॥२०॥
aham-tattvad vikurvanan
mano vatkarikad abhut
vaikarikas ca ye deva
arthabhivyaiijanam yatah
aham-tattvat—from the principle of false ego; vikurvanat—by trans-
-formation; manah—the mind; vaikarikat—by interaction with the mode of
goodness; abhiit—generated; vaikarikah—by interaction with goodness; ca—
also; ye—all these; devah—demigods; artha—the phenomenon; abhivyai-
janam—physical knowledge; yatah—the source.
TRANSLATION
The false ego is transformed into mind by interaction with the mode of
goodness. All the demigods who control the phenomenal world are also


--- Page 193 ---
194 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
products of the same principle, namely the interaction of false ego and
the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

False ego interacting with the different modes of material nature is the

source of all materials in the phenomenal world.
TEXT 31
तैजसानीन्द्ियाण्येव ज्ञानकर्ममयानि च 1320
taijasanindriyany eva
Jiana-karma-mayani ca

taijasani—the mode of passion; indriyani—the senses; eva—certainly;
jiaana—knowledge, philosophical speculations; karma—fruitive activities;
mayani—predominating; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

The senses are certainly products of the mode of passion in false ego,
and therefore philosophical speculative knowledge and fruitive activities
are predominantly products of the mode of passion.

PURPORT

The chief function of the false ego is godlessness. When a person forgets
his constitutional position as an eternally subordinate part and parcel of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and wants to be happy indepen-
dently, he functions mainly in two ways. He first attempts to act
fruitively for personal gain or sense gratification, and after attempting such
fruitive activities for a considerable time, when he is frustrated, he
becomes a philosophical speculator and thinks himself to be on the same
level as God. This false idea of becoming one with the Lord is the last
snare of the illusory energy, which traps a living entity into the bondage
of forgetfulness under the spell of false ego.

The best means of liberation from the clutches of false ego is to give up
the habit of philosophical speculation regarding the Absolute Truth. One
should know definitely that the Absolute Truth is never realized by the
philosophical speculations of the imperfect egoistic person. The Absolute
Truth or the Supreme Personality of Godhead is realized by hear-


--- Page 194 ---
Text 33] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 195
ing about him in all submission and love from a bona fide authority
who is a representative of the twelve great authorities mentioned in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. By such an attempt only can one conquer the illusory
energy of the Lord, although for others she is unsurpassable, as confirmed
in Bhagavad-gita (7.14).
TEXT 32
तामसो raed: खं लिङ्गमात्मनः 133)
tamaso bhuta-suksmadir
yatah kha lingam atmanah
tamasah—from the mode of passion; bhiite-siksmadih—subtle sense
objects; yatah—from which; kham—the sky; lingam—symbolic representa-
tion; atmanah—of the Supreme Soul.
TRANSLATION
The sky is a product of sound, and sound is the transformation of
egoistic passion. In other words, the sky is the symbolic representation of
the Supreme Soul.
PURPORT
In the Vedic hymns it is said, etasmad atmanah akasah sambhiitah. The
sky is the symbolic representation of the Supreme Soul. Those who are
egoistic in passion and ignorance cannot conceive of the Personality of
Godhead. For them the sky is the symbolic representation of the
Supreme Soul.
TEXT 33
N
कारमायांशयोगेन WERE नमः।
नमसोऽलुसृतं অহাঁ विकृ्विरममेऽनिलम्‌ ॥३३॥
kala-mayamsa-yogena
bhagavad-viksitamn nabhah
nabhaso’ nusrtam sparsam
vikurvan nirmame 11110071
kala—time; maya—external energy: arisa-yogena—partly mixed; bhaga-
vat—the Personality of Godhead; viksitam—glanced over; nabhah—the sky;
nabhasah—from the sky; anusrtam—being so contacted; spar§am—touch;
vikurvat—heing transformed; nirmame—was created; anilam— the air.


--- Page 195 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
Thercalter the Personality of Godhead glanced over the sky, partly
mixed with eternal time and external energy, and thus developed the
touch sensation, from which the air in the sky was produced.
PURPORT
All material creations take place from subtle to gross. The entire
universe has developed in that manner. From the sky developed the touch
sensation, which is a ‘mixture of eternal time, the external energy and the
glance of the Personality of Godhead. The touch sensation developed into
the air in the sky. Similarly, all other gross matter also developed from
subtle to gross: sound developed into sky, touch developed into air, form
developed into fire, taste developed into water, and smell developed into
earth.
TEXT 34
अनिखोऽपि Agata नभसोरुबलान्वितः |
i =
aad रूपतन्मात्रं ज्योतिर्लोकस्य रोचनम्‌ ॥३४॥
anilo pi vikurvano
nabhasoru-balanvitah
sasarja riupa-lan-matramm
jyotir lokasya locanam
anilah—air; api—also; vikurvanah—being transformed; nabhasa—sky;
uru-bala-anvitah—extremely powerful; sasarja—created; rizpa—form; tat-
mdtram—sense perception; jyolii—electricity; lokasya—of the world;
locanam—light to see.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the extremely powerful air, interacting with the sky,
generated the form of sense perception, and the perception of form
transformed into electricity, the light to see the world.
TEXT 35
-
अनिेनान्वितं ज्योतिविकुबेत्परवीितम्‌ |
आधतताम्मो रसमयं कालमायांशयोगतः ॥२५॥
anilenanvitarn jyotir
vikurval paraviksitam


--- Page 196 ---
Text 36 | Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 197
adhattambho rasa-mayam
kala-mayamsa-yogatah
anilena—by the air; anvitam—interacted; jyotih—clectricity ; vikurvat—
being transformed;  paraviksitam—being glanced over by the Supreme;
adhatta—created; ambhah rasa-mayam—water with taste; kala—eternal
time; mayarmsa—external energy; yogatah—by a mixture.
TRANSLATION
When electricity was surcharged in the air and was glanced over by the
Supreme, at that time, by a mixture of eternal time and external energy,
there occurred the creation of water and taste.
TEXT 36
ज्योतिषाम्मोऽजुसंस्टं॒षिदुर्वद्रखदीधितम्‌ |
महीं गन्धगुणापाघात्काठमशयांशयोगतः॥। ३६॥
Jyotisambho’nusarmsrstam
vikurvad brahma-viksitam
mahim gandha-gunam adhat
kala-mayamsa-yogatah
Jyotisa—elecltricity; ambhah—waler; anusarisrstlam—thus created;
vikurvat—due to transformation; brahma—the Supreme; viksitam—so glanced
over; mahim—the earth; gandha—smell; gunam—qualification: adhat—was
created; kala—cternal time; maya—external energy; amsa— partially; yoga-
tah— by intermixture.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the water produced from electricity was glanced over by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and mixed with eternal time and
external energy. Thus it was transformed into the earth, which is
qualified primarily by smell.
PURPORT
From the descriptions of the physical elements in the above verses it is
clear that in all stages the glance of the Supreme is needed with the other
additions and alterations. In every transformation, the last finishing touch
is the glance of the Lord, who acts as a painter does when he mixes
different colors to transform them into a particular color. When one
element mixes with another, the number of its qualities increases. For


--- Page 197 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
example, the sky is the cause of air. The sky has only one quality,
namely sound, but by the interaction of the sky with the glance of the
Lord, mixed with eternal time and external nature, the air is produced,
which has two qualities—sound and touch. Similarly after the air is
created, interaction of sky and air, touched by time and the external
energy of the Lord, produces electricity. And after the interaction of
electricity with air and sky, mixed with time, external energy and the
Lord’s glance over them, the water is produced. In the final stage of sky
there is one quality, namely sound; in the air two qualities, sound and
touch; in the electricity three qualities, namely sound, touch and form;
in the water four qualities, sound, touch, form and taste; and in the last
stage of physical development the result is earth, which has all five
qualities—sound, touch, form, taste and smell. Although they are
different mixtures of different materials, such mixtures do not take place
automatically, just as a mixture of colors does not take place automatically
without the touch of the living painter. The automatic system is factually
activated by the glancing touch of the Lord. Living consciousness is the
final word in all physical changes. This fact is mentioned in Bhagavad-gita
as follows:
mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sacaracaram
hetunanena kaunteya jagad viparivartate (Bg. 9.10)

The conclusion is that the physical elements may work very wonderfully
to the laymen’s eyes, but their workings actually take place under the
supervision of the Lord. Those who can mark only the changes of the
physical elements and cannot perceive the hidden hands of the Lord
behind them are certainly less intelligent persons, although they may be
advertised as great material scientists.

TEXT 37
भूतानां नम आदीनां यद्यद्धन्यावरावरम्‌ |
तेषां परानुसंसर्गा्ययासंख्यं गुणान्‌ विदुः ২৩
bhutanarm nabha adinam
yad yad bhavyavara-varam
tesa paranusarmsargad-
yatha 5०111011 3071 gunan viduh

bhutanam—of all the physical elements; nabhah—the sky; adinam—

beginning from; yat—as; yat—and as; bhavya—O gentle one; avara—inferior;


--- Page 198 ---
Text 38] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 199
varam—superior; tesam—all of them; para—the Supreme; anusarisargat—
last touch; yatha—as many: sank hyam—number; gunan—qualities; viduh—
vou may understand.
TRANSLATION
O gentle one, of all the physical elements, beginning from the sky
down to the earth, all the inferior and superior qualities are due only to
the final touch of the glance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 38
एते देवाः कला विष्णोः कालमा्यांशलिद्धिनः |
नानात्वात्खकियारीडाः प्रोचुः ASN विधम्‌ ॥३८॥
ete devah kala visnoh
kala-mayarisa-linginah
nanatvat svakriyanisah
(१०८५१ praitjalayo vibhum
ete—of all these physical clements; devah—the controlling demigods;
kalah— parts and parcels; visnoh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
kala—time; mayd—external cnergy; armsa—part and parcel; linginah—so
embodied; nanatvat— because of various; svakriya—personal duties; anisah—
not being able to perform; procuh—uttered; pranjalayah— fascinating;
vibhum—unto the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The controlling deities of all the above-mentioned physical elements are
empowered expansions of Lord Vigsnu. They are embodied by eternal
time under the external energy, and they are His parts and parcels.
Because they were entrusted with different functions of universal duties
and were unable to perform them, they offered fascinating prayers to the
Lord as follows:
PURPORT
The conception of various controlling demigods who inhabit the higher
planetary systems for the management of universal affairs is not imaginary,
as proposed by persons with a poor fund of knowledge. The demigods
are expanded parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord Visnu, and they are
embodied by time, external energy and partial consciousness of the
Supreme. Human beings, animals, birds, etc., are also parts and parcels of


--- Page 199 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
the Lord and have different material bodies, but they are not the control-
ling deities of material affairs. They are, rather, controlled by such
demigods. Such control is not superfluous; it is as necessary as the
controlling departments in the affairs of a modern state. The demigods
should not be despised by the controlled living beings. They are all
great devotees of the Lord entrusted to execute certain functions of
universal affairs. One may be angry with Yamaraja for his thankless task
of punishing sinful souls, but Yamaraja is one of the authorized devotees
of the Lord, and so are all the other demigods. A devotee of the Lord is
never controlled by such deputed demigods, who function as assistants of
the Lord, but he shows them all respects on account of the responsible
positions to which they have been appointed by the Lord. At the same
time, a devotee of the Lord does not foolishly mistake them to be the
Supreme Lord. Only foolish persons accept the demigods as being on the
same level as Visnu; actually they are all appointed as servants of Visnu.

Anyone who places the Lord and the demigods on the same level is
called a pasandi, or atheist. The demigods are worshiped by persons who
are more or less adherents to the processes of jiana, yoga and karma, i.e.,
the impersonalists, meditators and fruitive workers. The devotees,
however, worship only the Supreme Lord Visnu. This worship is not for
any material benefit, as desired by all the materialists, even up to the
salvationists, mystics and fruitive workers. Devotees worship the Supreme
Lord to attain unalloyed devotion to the Lord. The Lord, however, is not
worshiped by others who have no program for attaining love of God,
which is the essential aim of human life. Persons who are adverse to a
loving relationship with God are more or less condemned by their own
actions.

The Lord is equal to every living entity, just like the flowing Ganges.
The Ganges water is meant for the purification of everyone, yet the trees
on the banks of the Ganges have different values. A mango tree on the
bank of the Ganges drinks the water,and the nim tree also drinks the same
water. But the fruits of both trees are different. One is celestially sweet,
and the other is hellishly bitter. The condemned bitterness of the nim is
due to its own past work, just as the sweetness of the mango is also due to
its own karma. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita:

tan aham dvisatah kruran sarmsaresu naradhaman

ksipamy ajasram asubhan asurisv eva yonisu
“The envious, the mischievous, the lowest of mankind, these do | ever
put back into the ocean of material existence, into various demonic
species of life.” (Bg. 16.19). Demigods like Yamaraja and other controllers


--- Page 200 ---
Text 39] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 201
are there for the unwanted conditioned souls who always engage in
threatening the tranquility of the kingdom of God. Since all the demigods
are confidential devotee-servitors of the Lord, they are never to be
condemned.
TEXT 39
देवा FT:
नमाम ते देव पदारविन्दं
HATTA |
यन्मूलकेता यतयोऽञ्जसोरु
ति ५
संसारदुःखं बदिरुरिक्षपन्ति ॥३९॥
deva ucuh
namama te deva padaravindarm
prapanna-ltapopasamatapatram
yan-miula-ketla yalayo ’fijasoru
sarnsara-dubkhar bahir utksipanti
devah ucuh—the demigods said; namama—we offer our respectful
obeisances;te—Y our; deva—0O- Lord; pada-aravindam—lotus feet; prapanna --
surrendered; tapa— distress; upasama— suppresses; atapalram—um brella; yat-
mula-ketah—shelter of the lotus feet; yatayah —greal sages; arnjasa—totally;
uru—greal; samsara-dubikham—miseries of material existence; bahih—out;
utksipanti—forcibly throw.
TRANSLATION
The demigods said: O Lord, Your lotus feet are like an umbrella for
the surrendered souls, protecting them from all the miseries of material
existence. All the sages under that shelter throw off all material miseries.
We therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
There are many sages and saints who engage in trying to conquer
rebirth and all other material miseries. But of all of them, those who take
shelter under the lotus feet of the Lord can completely throw off all such
miseries without difficulty. Others, who are engaged in transcendental
activities in different ways, cannot do so. For them it is very difficult.
They may artificially think of becoming liberated without accepting the
shelter of the lotus feel of the Lord, but that is not possible. One is sure
to fall again to the material existence from such false liberation, even


--- Page 201 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
though one may have undergone severe penances and austerities. This is
the opinion of the demigods, who are not only well versed in Vedic knowl-
edge but who are also seers of the past, present and future. The opinions
of the demigods are valuable because they are authorized to hold positions
in the affairs of universal management. They are appointed by the Lord as
His confidential servants.
TEXT 40
धातयंदसिन्‌ भव ई जीवा-
सतापत्रयेणामिहता न॒ शमं ।
आर्तरह्वमन्ते भगवंस्तवार्धि-
च्छायां सकामत आश्रयेम ॥४०॥
dhatar yad asmin bhava Ta jivas
tapa-trayenabhihata na Sarma
atmal labhante bhagavars tavanghri-
cchayam savidyam ata asrayema
dhatah—O father; yat—because; asmin—in this; bhave—material world;
$a—O Lord;jivah—the living entities; tapa—miseries; trayena—by the three;
abhihatah—always embarrassed; na—never; sarma—in happiness; atman—
self; labhante—do gain; bhagavan—Personality of Godhead; tava— Your;
anghri-chayam—shade of Your feet; savidyam—full of knowledge; atah—
obtain; asrayema—shelter.
TRANSLATION
O Father, O Lord, O Personality of Godhead, the living entities in the
material world can never have any happiness because they are overwhelmed
by the three kinds of miseries. Therefore they take shelter of the shade of
Your lotus feet, which are full of knowledge, and we also thus take shelter
of them.
PURPORT
The way of devotional service is neither sentimental nor mundane. It is
the path of reality by which the living entity can attain the transcendental
happiness of being freed from the three kinds of material miseries—miseries
arising from the body and mind, from other living entities and from
natural disturbances. Everyone who is conditioned by material existence—
whether he be a man or beast or demigod or bird—must suffer from


--- Page 202 ---
Text 41] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 203
adhyatmic (bodily or mental) pains, adhibautic pains (those offered by
living creatures), and adhidaivic pains (those due to supernatural distur-
bances). lis happiness is nothing but a hard struggle to get free from the
miseries of conditional life. But there is only one way he can be rescued,
and that is by accepting the shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

The argument that unless one has proper knowledge one cannot be
freed from material miseries is undoubtedly true. But because the lotus
feet of the Lord are full of transcendental knowledge, acceptance of His
lotus feet completes that necessity. We have already discussed this point
in the First Canto (1.2.7):

vasudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogah prayojitah
Janayaty 28 vairagyar jiianar ca yad ahaitukam
There is no want of knowledge in the devotional service of Vasudeva, the
Personality of Godhead. 116, the Lord, personally takes charge of dissi-
pating the darkness of ignorance from the heart of a devotee. He confirms
this in Bhagavad-gita (10.10):
tesam satata-yukatanam bhajatam priti- purvakam
dadami buddhi-yogarm tam yena mam upayanti te
Empiric philosophical speculation cannot give one relief from the threefold
miseries of material existence. Simply to endeavor for knowledge without
devoting oneself to the Lord is a waste of valuable time.
TEXT 41
मार्गन्ति यते मुतपश्ननीडै-
-
इछन्द्‌ःसपर्णे ऋषयो विविक्ते ।
यस्याघमर्षोदसरिदरायाः
पदं पदं तीर्थपदः प्रपाः ॥४१॥
marganti yat te mukha-padma-nidais
chandah-suparnair rsayo vivikte
yasyaghamarsoda-sarid-varayah
padari padam tirtha-padah prapannah
marganti—searching after; yat—as; te—Your; mukha-padma—Ilotuslike
face; nidaih—by those who have taken shelter of such a lotus flower;
chandah— Vedic hymns; suparnaih—by the wings; rsayah—the sages; vivi-


--- Page 203 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
kte—in clear mind; yasya—whose;agha-marsoda—that which offers freedom
from all reactions to sin; sarit—rivers; varayah—in the best; padam padam—
in every step; tirtha-padah—one whose lotus feet are as good as a place of
pilgrimage; prapannah—taking shelter.

TRANSLATION

The lotus feet of the Lord are by themselves the shelter of all places of
pilgrimage. The great clear-minded sages, carried by the wings of the Vedas,
always search after the nest of Your lotuslike face. Some of them
surrender to Your lotus feet at every step by taking shelter of the best of
rivers | the Ganges], which can deliver one from all sinful reactions.

PURPORT

The paramahariisas are compared to royal swans who make their nests
on the petals of the lotus flower. The Lord’s transcendental bodily parts
are always compared to the lotus flower because in the material world the
lotus flower is the last word in beauty. The most beautiful thing in the
world is the Vedas, or Bhagavad-gita, because therein knowledge is imparted
by the Personality of Godhead Himself. The paramaharisa makes his nest
in the lotuslike face of the Lord and always sccks shelter at His lotus feet,
which are reached by the wings of Vedic wisdom. Since the Lord is the
original source of all emanations, intelligent persons, enlightened by Vedic
knowledge, seek the shelter of the Lord, just as birds who leave the nest
again search out the nest to take complete rest. All Vedic knowledge is
meant for understanding the Supreme Lord, as stated by the Lord in
Bhagavad-gita: vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyal (Bg. 15.15). Intelligent
persons, who are like swans, take shelter of the Lord by all means and do
not hover on the mental plane by fruitlessly speculating on different
philosophies.

The Lord is so kind that He has spread the River Ganges throughout the
universe so that by taking bath in that holy river everyone can get release
from the reactions of sins, which occur at every step. There are many rivers
in the world which are able to evoke one’s sense of God consciousness
simply by one’s bathing in them, and the River Ganges is chief amongst
them. In India there are five sacred rivers, but the Ganges is the most
sacred. The River Ganges and Bhagavad-gita are chief sources of transcen-
dental happiness for mankind, and intelligent persons can take shelter of
them to go back home, back to Godhead. Even Sripada Saiikaracarya
recommends that a little knowledge in Bhagavad-gita and the drinking of


--- Page 204 ---
Text 42] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 205
a little quantity of Ganges water can save one from the punishment of
Yamaraja.
TEXT 42
यच्छद्धया श्चुतवत्या च भक्त्या
संग्रज्यमाने हृदयेऽवधाय ।
जञानेन वैराग्यवलेन धीरा
-
व्रजेम तत्तेऽङधिसरोजपीठम्‌ ॥४२॥
yac chraddhaya $ruta-vatya ca bhaktya
sammprjyamane hrdaye ‘vadhaya
Jhanena vairagya-balena dhira
vrajema tat te ‘nghri-sarojapitham
yat—that which; sraddhaya—by eagerness; sruta-vatya—simply by hear-
ing; ca—also; bhaktya—in devotion; sammrjyamane—being cleansed;
hrdaye—in the heart; avadhaya—meditation; jaanena—by knowledge;
vairagya—detachment; balena—by the strength of; dhirah—pacified; vra-
Jjema—must go to; tat—that; te— Your; anghri—feet; sarah-japitham—lotus
sanctuary.
TRANSLATION
Simply by hearing about Your lotus feet with eagerness and devotion
and by meditating upon them within the heart, one at once becomes
enlightened with knowledge, and on the strength of detachment one
becomes pacified. We must therefore take shelter of the sanctuary of Your
lotus feet.
PURPORT
The miracles of meditating on the lotus feet of the Lord with eagerness
and devotion are so great that no other process can compare to it. The
minds of materialistic persons are so disturbed that it is almost impossible
for them to search after the Supreme Truth by personal regulative
endeavors. But even such materialistic men, with a little eagerness for
hearing about the transcendental name, fame, qualities, etc., can surpass
all other methods of attaining knowledge and detachment. The conditioned
soul is attached to the bodily conception of the self, and therefore he is in
ignorance. Culture of self-knowledge can bring about detachment from
material affection, and without such detachment there is no meaning to
knowledge. The most stubborn attachment for material enjoyment is sex


--- Page 205 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
life. One who is attached to sex life is to be understood as devoid of knowl-
edge. Knowledge must be followed by detachment. That is the way of self-
realization. These two essentials for self-realization, knowledge and
detachment, become manifest very quickly if one performs devotional
service to the lotus feet of the Lord. The word dhira is very significant in
this connection. A person who is not disturbed even in the presence of
cause of disturbance is called dhira. Sri Yamunacarya says, “Since my
heart has been overwhelmed by the devotional service of Lord Krsna, I
cannot even think of sex life, and if thoughts of sex come upon me I at
once feel disgust.” A devotee of the Lord becomes an elevated dhira by
the simple process of meditating in eagerness on the lotus feet of the Lord.
Devotional service entails being initiated by a bona fide spiritual master
and following his instruction in regard to hearing about the Lord. Such a
bona fide spiritual master is accepted by regularly hearing from him about
the Lord. The improvement in knowledge and detachment can be perceived
by devotees as an actual experience. Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
strongly recommended this process of hearing from a bona fide devotee,
and by following this process one can achieve the highest result, conquer-
ing all other methods.
TEXT 43
fram जन्मखितिसंयमार्थ
कृतावतारस्य पदाम्बुजं ते ।
व्रजेम सवे शरणं यदीश
wd प्रयच्छत्यभयं aga ॥४३॥
viSvasya ]৫117710-508108-5৫71 0771৫101816
krtavatarasya padambujarn te
vrajema sarve $aranarm yad isa
3717८072 prayacchaty abhayarh svapurisam
visvasya—of the cosmic universe; janma—creation; sthiti— maintenance;

sarmyamarthe—for the dissolution also; krta—accepted or assumed; avata-
rasya—of the incarnations; pada-ambujam—lotus feet; te—Y our; vrajema—
let us take shelter of; sarve—all of us; saranam—shelter; yat—that which;
०-0 Lord; smrtam—remembrance; prayacchati—awarding; abhayam—
courage; svapurnsam—of the devotees.


--- Page 206 ---
Text 44] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 207
TRANSLATION
0 Lord, You assume incarnations for the creation, maintenance and
dissolution of the cosmic manifestation, and therefore we all take shelter
of Your lotus feet because they always award remembrance and courage to
Your devotees.
PURPORT
For the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifes-
tations there are three incarnations: Brahma, Visnu and Mahegvara
(Lord Siva). They are the controllers or masters of the three modes of
material nature, which cause the phenomenal manifestation. Visnu is the
master of the mode of goodness, Brahma is the master of the mode of
passion, and Mahesvara is the master of the mode of ignorance. There are
different kinds of devotees according to the modes of nature. Persons in
the mode of goodness worship Lord Visnu, those in the mode of passion
worship Lord Brahma, and those in the mode of ignorance worship Lord
Siva. All three of these deities are incarnations of the Supreme Lord Krsna
because He is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead. The demigods
directly refer to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord and not to the
different incarnations. The incarnation of Visnu in the material world
is, however, directly worshiped by the demigods. It is learned from various
scriptures that the demigods approach Lord Visnu in the ocean of milk
and submit their grievances whenever there is some difficulty in the admin-
istration of universal affairs. Although they are incarnations of the Lord,
Lord Brahma and Lord Siva worship Lord Visnu, and thus they are also
counted amongst the demigods and not as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Persons who worship Lord Visnu are called demigods, and
persons who do not do so are called asuras, or demons. Visnu always
takes the part of the demigods, but Brahma and Siva sometimes take the
side of the demons; it is not that they become one in interest with them,
but sometimes they do something in order to gain control over the demons.
TEXT 44

यत्साठुबन्धेऽसति देदगेहे

ममादमित्यटदु राग्रदाणाप्‌ ।

सां स्रं वसतोऽपि धं

मजेम तसे WET पदान्जम्‌ ॥४४॥


--- Page 207 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
yat sanubandhe ’sati deha-gehe
mamahamity-udha-duragrahanam
pumsam suduram vasato ’pi puryam
bhajema tat te bhagavan padabjam
yat— because; sanubandhe—due to becoming entangled; asati—thus being;
deha—the gross material body; gehe—in the home; mama—mine; aham—1I;
iti—thus; adha—great, deep; duragrahanam—undesirable eagerness; pur-
sam—of persons; suduram—far away; vasatah—dwelling; api—although; pur-
yam— within the body; bhajema—let us worship; tat—therefore; te— Your;
bhagavan—O Lord; padabjam—lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, persons who are entangled by undesirable eagerness for the
temporary body and kinsmen, and who are bound by thoughts of ‘mine’
and “I,” are unable to see Your lotus feet, although they are situated
within their own bodies. But let us take shelter of Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
The whole Vedic philosophy of life is that one should get rid of the
material encagement of gross and subtle bodies, which only cause one to
continue in a condemned life of miseries. This material body continues as
long as one is not detached from the false conception of lording it over
material nature. The impetus for lording over material nature is the sense
of “mine” and “1.” “I am the lord of all that I survey. So many things I
possess, and I shall possess more and more. Who can be richer than I in
wealth and education? [ am the master, and ] am God. Who else is there
but me?” All these ideas reflect the philosophy of ahani-mama, the
conception that “I am everything”. Persons conducted by such a con-
ception of life can never get liberation from material bondage. But even a
person perpetually condemned to the miseries of material existence can
get relief from bondage if he simply agrees to hear only Krsna-katha. In
this age of Kali, the process of hearing Krsna-katha is the most effective
means to gain release from unwanted family affection and thus find
permanent freedom in life. The age of Kali is full of sinful reactions,
and people are more and more addicted to the qualities of this age, but
simply by hearing and chanting of Krsna-katha one is sure to go back to
Godhead. Therefore, people should be trained to hear only Krsna-katha—
by all means—in order to get relief from all miseries.


--- Page 208 ---
Text 45] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 209
TEXT 45
तान्‌ बै धसषुशरसिभिरक्विमिये
पराहृतान्तमनसः परेश्च ।
अथो न पत्यन्तयुरुगाय नूलं
ये ते पदन्या्रिलाषलस्याः ॥४५॥
tan vai hy asad-vrttibhir aksibhir ye
parahrtantar-manasah paresa
atho na pasyanty urugaya ninam
ye te padanyasa-vilasa-laksyah

tan—the lotus feet of the Lord; vai—certainly; hi—for;asat— materialistic ;
vrttibhih—by those who are influenced by external energy; aksibhih—by
the senses; ye—those; parahrta— missing at a distance; antah-manasah— of the
internal mind; paresa—O Supreme; atho—therefore; na—never; pasyanti—
can see;urugaya—O great;niunam—but;ye—those; te—who are; padanyasa—
activities; vilasa—transcendental enjoyment; laksyah—those who see.

TRANSLATION

O great Supreme Lord, offensive persons whose internal vision has been
too affected by external materialistic activities cannot see Your lotus feet,
but they are seen by Your pure devotees, whose one and only aim is to
transcendentally enjoy Your activities.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.61), the Lord is situated in everyone's
heart. It is natural that one should be able to see the Lord at least within
himself. But that is not possible for those whose internal vision has been
covered by external activities. The pure soul, which is symptomized by
consciousness, can be easily perceived even by a common man because
consciousness is spread all over the body. The yoga system asrecommended
in Bhagavad-gita is to concentrate the mental activities internally and thus
see the lotus feet of the Lord within oneself. But there are many so-called
yogts who have no concern with the Lord but are only concerned with
consciousness, which they accept as the final realization. Such realization
of consciousness is taught by Bhagavad-gita within only a few minutes,
whereas the so-called yogis take continuous years to realize it because of
their offenses at the lotus feet of the Lord. The greatest offense is to deny


--- Page 209 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
the existence of the Lord as separate from the individual souls or to accept
the Lord and the individual soul as one and the same. The impersonalists
misinterpret the theory of reflection, and thus they wrongly accept the
individual consciousness as the supreme consciousness.

The theory of the reflection of the Supreme can be clearly understood
without difficulty by any sincere common man. When there is a reflection
of the sky on the water, both the sky and the stars are seen within the
water, but it is understood that the sky and the stars are not to be accepted
on the same level. The stars are parts of the sky, and therefore they cannot
be equal to the whole. The sky is the whole, and the stars are parts. They
cannot be one and the same. Transcendentalists who do not accept the
supreme consciousness as separate from the individual consciousness are
as offensive as the materialists who deny even the existence of the Lord.

Such offenders cannot actually see the lotus feet of the Lord within
themselves, nor are they even able to see the devotees of the Lord. The
devotees of the Lord are so kind that they roam to all places to enlighten
people in God consciousness. The offenders, however, lose the chance to
receive the Lord’s devotees, although the offenseless common man is at
once influenced by the devotees’ presence. In this connection there is an
interesting story of a hunter and Devarsi Narada. A hunter in the forest,
although a great sinner, was not an intentional offender. He was at once
influenced by the presence of Narada, and he agreed to take the path of
devotion, leaving aside his hearth and home. But the offenders Nalakavara
and Manigriva, even though living amongst the demigods, had to undergo
the punishment of becoming trees in their next lives, although by the grace
of a devotee they were later delivered by the Lord. Offenders have to
wait until they receive the mercy of devotees, and then they can become
eligible to see the lotus feet of the Lord within themselves. But due to
their offenses and their extreme materialism, they cannot see even the
devotees of the Lord. Engaged in external activities, they kill the internal
vision. The Lord’s devotees, however, do not mind the offenses of the
foolish in their many gross and subtle bodily endeavors. The Lord’s
devotees continue to bestow the blessings of devotion upon all such
offenders without hesitation. That is the nature of devotees.

TEXT 46
पानेन ते देव कथासुधायाः
्रवद्धमक्त्या विशदाशया ये ।


--- Page 210 ---
Text 46] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 211
वैराग्यसारं प्रतिलभ्य बोधं
यथाञ्जसान्वीुरडण्ठधिष्ण्यम्‌ ॥४६॥
panena te deva katha-sudhayah
pravrddha-bhaktya visaddsaya ye
vairagya-saram pratilabhya bodham
yathaiijasanviyur akuptha-dhisnyam

panena—by drinking; te—of You; 4९४८-0 Lord; katha—topics;
sudhayah—of the nectar; pravrddha—highly enlightened; bhaktya—by
devotional service; visada-asaya—with a greatly serious attitude; ye—
those; vairagya-saram—the entire purport of renunciation; pratilabhya—
achieving; bodham—intelligence; yatha—as much as; afjesa—quickly;
anviyuh—achieve; akuptha-dhispyam—Vaikunthaloka in the spiritual sky.

TRANSLATION

O Lord, persons who, because of their serious attitude, attain the stage
of enlightened devotional service achieve the complete meaning of
renunciation and knowledge and attain the Vaikunthaloka in the spiritual
sky simply by drinking the nectar of Your topics.

PURPORT

The difference between the impersonalistic mental speculators and the
pure devotees of the Lord is that the former pass through a miserable
understanding of the Absolute Truth at every stage, whereas the devotees
enter into the kingdom of all pleasures even from the beginning of their
attempt. The devotee has only to hear about devotional activities, which
are as simple as anything in ordinary life, and he also acts very simply,
whereas the mental speculator has to pass through a jugglery of words,
which are partially facts and partially a make-show for the maintenance of
an artificial impersonal status. In spite of his strenuous efforts to attain
perfect knowledge, the impersonalist attains merging into the impersonal
onencss of the brahmajyoti of the Lord, which is also attained by the
enemies of the Lord simply because of their being killed by Him. The
devotees, however, attain to the highest stage of knowledge and renuncia-
tion and achieve the Vaikunthalokas, the planets in the spiritual sky. The
impersonalist attains only the sky, and does not achieve any tangible
transcendental bliss, whereas the devotee attains to the planets where real
spiritual life prevails. With a serious attitude, the devotee throws away all


--- Page 211 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
achievements like so much dust, and he accepts only devotional service,
the transcendental culmination.
TEXT 47
तथापरे चाट्मसमाधियोग-
बलेन जित्वा प्रकृतिं वरिष्ठाम्‌ ।
त्वामेव धीराः पुरुषं विशन्ति
तेषां श्रमः खान्न तु सेवया ते well
tathapare catma-samdadhi-yoga-
balena jitva prakrtirm balistham
tvam eva dhirdh purusam visanti
tesa sramah sydn na tu sevayd te
tatha—as far as; apare—others; ca—also; atma-samadhi—transcendental
self-realization; yoga—means; balena—by the strength of; jitva— conquering;
prakrtim—acquired nature or modes of nature; balistham— very powerful;
tvam—You; eva—only; dhirah—pacified; purusam—person; visanti—enters
into; tesam—for them; sramah—much labor; syat—has to be taken; na—
never; tu—but; sevayd—by serving; te—of You.
TRANSLATION
Others, who are pacified by means of transcendental self-realization and
have conquered over the modes of nature by dint of strong power and
knowledge, also enter into You, but for them there is much pain, whereas
the devotee simply discharges devotional service and thus feels no such
pain.
PURPORT
In terms of a labor of love and its returns, the bhaktas, or devotees of
the Lord, always have priority over persons who are addicted to the
association of jianis, or impersonalists, and yogis, or mystics. The word
apare (others) is very significant in this connection. “Others” refer to the
Jjiianis and the yogis, whose only hope is to merge into the existence of the
impersonal brahmajyoti. Although their destination is not so important
in comparison to the destination of the devotees, the labor of the non-
devotees is far greater than that of the bhaktas. One may suggest that
there is sufficient labor for the devotees also in the matter of discharging
devotional service. But that labor is compensated by the enhancement of


--- Page 212 ---
Text 48] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 213
transcendental pleasure. The devotees derive more transcendental pleasure
while engaged continuously in the service of the Lord than when they
have no such engagement. In the family combination of a man and a
woman there is much labor and responsibility for both of them, yet when
they are single they feel more trouble for want of their untied activities.
The union of the impersonalists and the union of the devotees are not
on a par. The impersonalists try to fully stop their individuality by
attaining sayujya-mukti, or unification by merging into oneness, whereas
the devotees keep their individuality to exchange feelings in relationship
with the Supreme Individual Lord. Such reciprocation of feelings takes
place in the transcendental Vaikuntha planets, and therefore the liberation
sought by theimpersonalistsis already achieved in devotional service. The
devotees attain mukti automatically while continuing the transcendental
pleasure of maintaining individuality. As explained in the previous verse,
the destination of the devotees is Vaikuntha, or akuntha-dhisnya, the
place where anxieties are completely eradicated. One should not mistake
the destination of the devotees and that of the impersonalists to be one
and the same. The destinations are distinctly different, and the transcen-
dental pleasure derived by the devotee is also distinct from cinmatra, or
spiritual feelings alone.
TEXT 48
-
तत्ते बयं लोकसिसृक्षया
त्वयानुसृष्टासिभिरात्ममिः सख |
सर्वे वियुक्ताः सखविहारतन्तर
न॒ शक्रुमस्तत्प्रतिदतेवे ते ॥४८॥
tat te vayam loka-sisrksayadya
tvayanusrstas tribhir atmabhih sma
sarve viyuktah svavihdra-tantram
na $aknumas tat pratihartave te
tat—therefore; te— Your; vayam—all of us; loka—world; sisrksaya—for

the sake of creation; adya—the original; tvaya—by You; enusrstah—being
created one after another; tribhih—by the three modes of nature; dtma-
bhih—by one’s own; sma—in the past; sarve—all; viyuktah—separated;
svavihara-tantram—the network of activities for one’s own pleasure; na—not;
Saknumah—could do it; tat—that; pratihartave—to award; te—unto Your.


--- Page 213 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION
0 Original Person, we are therefore but Yours only. Although we are
Your creatures, we are born one after another under the influence of the
three modes of nature, and for this reason we are separated in action.
Therefore, after the creation we could not act concertedly for Your
transcendental pleasure.
PURPORT
The cosmic creation is working under the influence of the three modes
of the external potency of the Lord. Different creatures are also under the
same influence, and therefore they cannot act concertedly in satisfying
the Lord. Because of this diverse activity, there cannot be any harmony in
the material world. The best policy, therefore, is to act for the sake of
the Lord. That will bring about the desired harmony.
TEXT 49
TES तेऽज हराम काले
यथा वय चान्नमदाम यत्र ।
-
यथोभयेषां त इमे হি रोका
=
AE हरन्तोऽनमदन्त्यनहाः ॥५९॥
yavad 0৫/077 te “ja harama kale
yatha vaya cannam adama yatra
yathobhayesam la ime hi loka
balim haranto ’nnam adanly anhah
yavat—as it may be; balim—offerings; te— Your; aja—O unborn one;
harama—shall offer; kdale—at the right time; yatha—as much as; vayam—we;
ca—also; annam—food grains; adama—shall partake; yatra—whereupon;
yatha—as much as; ubhayesam—both for You and us; ta—all; ime—these
living entities; hi—certainly; lokah—in the world; balim— offerings; haran-
tah—while offering; annam—grains; adanti—eat; anihah—without distur-
bance.
TRANSLATION
O unborn one, please enlighten us regarding the ways and means by
which we can offer You all enjoyable grains and commodities so that both
we and all other living entities in this world can maintain ourselves without
disturbance and can easily accumulate the necessities of life both for You
and ourselves.


--- Page 214 ---
Text 49] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 215
PURPORT

Developed consciousness begins from the human form of life and
further increases in the form of the demigods living in higher planets.
The earth is situated almost in the middle of the universe, and the human
form of life is the via medium between the life of the demigods and that
of the demons. The planetary systems above the earth are especially
meant for the higher intellectuals, called demigods. They are called
demigods because although their standard of life is far more advanced in
culture, enjoyment, luxury, beauty, education and duration of life, they
are always fully God conscious. Such demigods are always ready to
render service to the Supreme Lord because they are perfectly aware of
the fact that every living entity is constitutionally an eternal subordinate
servitor of the Lord. They also know that it is the Lord only who can
maintain all living entities with all the necessities of life. The Vedic hymns,
“eko bahunam vidadhati kaman,” ‘ta enam abruvan ayatanarh nah
prajanihi yasmin pratisthita annam adame,” etc., confirm this truth. In
Bhagavad-gita also, the Lord is mentioned as bhata-bhrt, or the main-
tainer of all living creatures.

The modern theory that starvation is due to an increase in population is
not accepted by the demigods or the devotees of the Lord. The devotees
or demigods are fully aware that the Lord can maintain any number of
living entities provided they are conscious of how to eat. If they want to
eat like ordinary animals, who have no God consciousness, then they
must live in starvation, poverty and want, like the jungle animals in the
forest. The jungle animals are also maintained by the Lord with their
respective foodstuffs, but they are not advanced in God consciousness.
Similarly, human beings are provided with food grains, vegetables, fruits
and milk by the grace of the Lord, but it is the duty of human beings to
acknowledge the mercy of the Lord. As a matter of gratitude, they should
feel obliged to the Lord for their supply of foodstuff, and they must first
offer Him food in sacrifice and then partake of the remnants.

In Bhagavad-gita it is confirmed (3.13) that one who takes foodstuff
after a performance of sacrifice eats real food for proper maintenance of
the body and soul, but one who cooks for himself and does not perform
any sacrifice eats'only lumps of sin in the shape of foodstuffs. Such sinful
eating can never make one happy or free from scarcity. Famine is not due
to an increase in population, as less intelligent economists think. When
human society is grateful to the Lord for all His gifts for the maintenance
of the living entities, then there is certainly no scarcity or want in society.
But when men are unaware of the intrinsic value of such gifts from the


--- Page 215 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 5
Lord, surely they are in want. A person who has no God consciousness
may live in opulence for the time being due to his past virtuous acts, but
if one. forgets his relationship with the Lord, certainly he must await the
stage of starvation by the law of the powerful material nature. One cannot
escape the vigilance of the powerful material nature unless he leads a God
conscious or devotional life.
TEXT 50
त्वं नः सुराणामसि सान्वयानां
कूटस्य आद्यः पुरुषः पुराणः |
[1 ও C=
त्वं देब হাত্বযাঁ गुणकमेयोनौ
रेतस्त्वजायां कविमादधेऽजः kell
tvari nah suranam asi sanvayanari
kitta-stha adyah purusah puranah
tvarn deva $aktyam guna-karma-yonau
retas tvajayar kavim adadhe jah
tvam—Your Lordship; nah—of us; suranam—of the demigods; asi—You
are; sanvayanam—with different gradations; kiite-sthah—one who 15
unchanged; adyah—without any superior; purusah—the founder person;
puranah— the oldest, who has no other founder; tvam—Y ou; deva—O Lord;
$aktyam—unto the energy; guna-karma-yonau—unto the cause of the
material modes and activities; retah—semina of birth; tvajadyam—f{or beget-
ting; kavim—the total living entities; adadhe—initiated; ajah—one who is
unborn.
TRANSLATION
You are the original personal founder of all the demigods and the orders
of different gradations, yet You are the oldest and are unchanged. O Lord,
You have no source or superior. You have impregnated the external
energy with the semina of the total living entities, yet You are unborn.
PURPORT
The Lord, the Original Person, is the father of all other living entities,
beginning from Brahma, the personality from whom all other living
entities in different gradations of species are generated. Yet the supreme
father has no other father. Every one of the living entities of all grades,
up to Brahma, the original creature of the universe, is begotten by one


--- Page 216 ---
Text 51] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 217
father, but He, the Lord, has no father. When He descends on the material
plane, out of His causeless mercy He accepts one of His great devotees as
His father to keep pace with the rules of the material world. But since He
is the Lord, He is always independent in choosing who will become His
father. For example, the Lord came out of a pillar in His incarnation as
Nrsimhadeva, and by the Lord’s causeless mercy, Ahalya came out of a
stone by the touch of the lotus feet of His incarnation as Lord Sri Rama.
He is also the companion of every living entity as the Supersoul, but He is
unchanged. The living entity changes his body in the material world, but
even when the Lord is in the material world, He is ever unchanged. That
is His prerogative.

As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, the Lord impregnates the external or
material energy (Bg. 14.3), and thus the total living entities later come out
in different gradations, beginning from Brahma, the first demigod, down
to the insignificant ant. All gradations of living entities are manifested by
Brahma and the external energy, but the Lord is the original father of
everyone. The relationship of every living being with the Supreme Lord is
certainly one of son and father and not one of equality. Sometimes in love
the son is more than the father, but the relationship of father and son is
one of the superior and the subordinate. Every living entity, however great
he may be, even up to demigods like Brahma, Indra, etc., is an eternally
subordinate servitor of the supreme father. The mahat-tattva principle is
the generating source of all the modes of material nature, and the living
entities take birth in the material world in bodies supplied by the mother,
material nature, in terms of their previous work. The body is a gift of
material nature, but the soul is originally part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord.

TEXT 51
ततो वयं women यदर्थे
चभूविमात्मन्‌ करवाम किं ते।
त्वं नः खचक्षुः परिदेहि शक्त्या
देव क्रियार्थे यदनुग्रहाणाम्‌
tato ৮৫৫78 mat-pramukha yad-arthe
babhavimatman karavama kim te
(077 nah svacaksuh paridehi saktya
deva kriyarthe yad-anugrahanam


--- Page 217 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam {Canto 3, Ch. 5

tatah—therefore; vayam—all of us; mat-pramukhah—coming from the
total cosmos, the mahat-tattva; yat-arthe—for the purpose of which;
babhuvima—created; atman—the self; karavama—shall do; kim— what; te—
Your service; tvam—Yourself; nah—to us; svacaksuh—personal plan;
paridehi—specifically grant us; sektya—with potency to work; deva—O
Lord; kriyarthe—for acting; yat—that which; enugrehanam—of those who
are specifically favored.

TRANSLATION

O Supreme Self, please give us, who are created in the beginning from
the mahat-tattva, the total cosmic energy, Your kind directions on how
we shall act. Kindly award us Your perfect knowledge and potency so
that we can render You service in the different departments of subsequent
creation.

PURPORT

The Lord creates this material world and impregnates the material energy
with the living entities who will act in the material world. All these actions
have a divine plan behind them. The plan is to give the conditioned souls
who so desire a chance to enjoy sense gratification. But there is another
plan behind the creation: to help the living entities realize that they are
created for the transcendental sense gratification of the Lord and not for
their individual sense gratification. This is the constitutional position of
the living entities. The Lord is one without a second, and He expands
Himself into many for His transcendental pleasure. All the expansions—
the Vispu-tattvas, the jiva-tattvas and the sakti-tattvas (the Personalities of
Godhead, the living entities and the different potential energies)—are
different offshoots from the same one Supreme Lord. The jiva-tattvas
are separated expansions of the Visnu-tattvas, and although there are
potential differences between them, they are all meant for the transcen-
dental sense gratification of the Supreme Lord. Some of the jivas,
however, wanted to lord it over material nature in imitation of the
lordship of the Personality of Godhead. Regarding when and why such
propensities overcame the pure living entities, it can only be explained
that the jiva-tattvas have infinitesimal independence and that due to
misuse of this independence some of the living entities have become
implicated in the conditions of cosmic creation and are therefore called
nitya-bandhanas, or eternally conditioned souls.

The expansions of Vedic wisdom also give the nitya-bandhanas, the
conditioned living entities, a chance to improve, and those who take


--- Page 218 ---
Text 51] Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya 219
advantage of such transcendental knowledge gradually regain their lost
consciousness of rendering transcendental loving service to the Lord. The
demigods are amongst the conditioned souls who have developed this pure
consciousness of service to the Lord, but at the same time they continue
to desire to lord it over the material energy. Such mixed consciousness
puts a conditioned soul in the position of managing the affairs of this
creation. The demigods are entrusted leaders of the conditioned souls.
As some of the old prisoners in government jails are entrusted with some
responsible work of prison management, so the demigods are improved
conditioned souls acting as representatives of the Lord in the material
creation. Such demigods are devotees of the Lord in the material world
and are completely free from all material desire to lord it over the material
energy. They have become pure devotees and have no desire but to serve the
Lord. Any living entity who desires a position in the material world may
desire so in the service of the Lord and may seek power and intelligence from
the Lord, as exemplified by the demigods in this particular verse. One
cannot do anything unless he is enlightened and empowered by the Lord.
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (15.15), mattah smrtir jianam apohanam
ca. All recollections, knowledge, etc., as well as all forgetfulness, are
engineered by the Lord, who is sitting within the heart of everyone. The
intelligent man seeks the help of the Lord, and the Lord helps the sincere
devotees engaged in His multifarious services.

The demigods are entrusted by the Lord to create different species of
living entities according to their past deeds. They are herein asking the
favor of the Lord for the intelligence and power to carry out their task.
Similarly, any conditioned soul may also engage in the service of the Lord
under the guidance of an expert spiritual master and thus gradually
become freed from the entanglement of material existence. The spiritual
master is the manifested representative of the Lord, and anyone who puts
himself under the guidance of a spiritual master and acts accordingly is said
to be acting in terms of buddhi-yoga, as explained in Bhagavad-gita:

vyavasayatmika buddhir ekena kuru-nandana
bahu-$akha hy anantas ca buddhayo "vyavasayinam
(Bg. 2.41)

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Fifth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘‘Vidura’s Talks with
Maitreya.”


--- Page 219 ---
CHAPTER SIX
Creation of the Universal Form
TEXT 1
ऋषिरुवाच
इति तासां सखशक्तीनां सतीनामसमेत्य सः |
प्रसुप्लोकतन्त्राणां निज्ाम्य गतिमीश्वरः ॥ १ ॥
r$ir uvaca
iti tasam sva-saktinam
satinam asametya sah
prasupta loka-tantranam
nisamya gatim isvarah
ॐ rsih uvaca—the Rsi Maitreya said; iti—thus; tasam—their; sva-
Saktinam—own potency; satinam—so situated; asametya—without com-
bination; sah—He (the Lord); prasupta-suspended;loka-tantranam—in the
universal creations; nisamya—hearing; gatim—progress; iSvarah—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Rsi Maitreya said: The Lord thus heard about the suspension of the
progressive creative functions of the universe due to the noncombination
of His potencies, such as the mahat-tattva.
PURPORT
There is nothing wanting in the creation of the Lord; all the potencies
are there in a dormant state. But unless they are combined by the will of
the Lord, nothing can progress. The suspended progressive work of
creation can only be revived by the direction of the Lord.
TEXT 2
कालसंज्ञां तदा देवीं बि्रच्छक्तिमुरुकमः |
त्रयोषंश्चतितच्ानां गणं युगपदादिशत्‌ ॥ २ ॥
221


--- Page 220 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
kala-sarhjiar tada 06017
bibhrac-chaktim urukramah
trayovimsati tattvanam
ganarh yugapad avisat
kala-samjiam—known as Kali; tada—at that time; devim—the goddess;
bibhrat—destructive; saktim—potency ; urukramah— the supreme powerful;
trayovimsati—twenty-three; tattvanam—of the elements; ganam—all of
them; yugapat—simultaneously; avisat—entered.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Powerful Lord then simultaneously entered into the
twenty-three elements with the goddess Kali, His external energy, who
alone amalgamates all the different elements.
PURPORT
The ingredients of matter are counted as twenty-three: the total ma-
terial energy, false ego, sound, touch, form, taste, smell, earth, water,
fire, air, sky, eye, ear, nose, tongue, skin, hand, leg, evacuating organ,
genitals, speech and mind. All are combined together by the influence of
time and are again dissolved in the course of time. Time, therefore, is
the energy of the Lord and acts in her own way by the direction of the
Lord. This energy is called Kali and is represented by the dark destructive
goddess generally worshiped by persons influenced by the mode of dark-
ness or ignorance in material existence. In the Vedic hymn this process is
described as mala-prakrtir avikrtir mahadadyah prakrti-vikrtayam sapta-
sorasakas tu vikaro na prakrtir na vikrtih purusah. The energy which
acts as material nature in a combination of twenty-three ingredients is not
the final source of creation. The Lord enters into the elements and applies
His energy, called Kali. In all other Vedic scriptures the same principle is
accepted. In Brahma-sarnhita it 15 stated:
eko ‘py asau racayiturh jagadanda-kotim
yac-chak tir asti jagadanda-caya yad-antah
andantarastha-paramanu-cayantara-stharn
govindam adi-purusarm tam aham bhajami (Bs. 5.35)
“I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is the original Personality of
Godhead. By His partial plenary expansion [Maha-Visnu], He enters into
material nature, and then into each and every universe [as Garbhodakasay1


--- Page 221 ---
Text 3] Creation of the Universal Form 223
Visnu], and then [as Ksirodakasayi Visnu] into all the elements, including
every atom of matter. Such manifestations of cosmic creation are innumer-
able, both in the universes and in the individual atoms.”
Similarly, this is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 10.42):
athava bahunaitena kim jiatena tavarjuna
vistabhyaham idan krtsnam ekamsena sthito jagat.
“Q Arjuna, there is no necessity of your knowing about My innumerable
energies, which act in various ways. 1 enter into the material creation by
My partial plenary expansion [Paramatma, or the Supersoul] in all the
universes and in all the elements thereof, and thus the work of creation
goes on.” The wonderful activities of material nature are due to Lord
Krsna, and thus He is the final cause or the ultimate cause of all causes.
TEXT 3
सोऽचुप्रिषटो भगवां शेशरूपेण तं गणम्‌ |
সিল संयोजयामास gd कर्म प्रबोधयन्‌ ॥ २॥
so’nupravisto bhagavarns
cestarupena (07 ganam
bhinnam saryojayamasa
suptarn karma prabodhayan
sah—that; anupravistah— thus entering later on; bhagavan—the Personality
of Godhead; cestaripena—by His representation of attempt, Kali; tam—
them; gapam—all the living entities, including the demigods; bhinnam—
separately; sarmyojayamasa—engaged them to work; suptam—sleeping;
karma—work; prabodhayan—enlightenment.
TRANSLATION
Thus when the Personality of Godhead enters into the elements by His
.energy, all the living entities are enlivened into different activities, just as
one engages in his work after awakening from sleep.
PURPORT
Every individual soul remains unconscious after the dissolution of the
creation and thus enters into the Lord with His material energy. These
individual living entities are conditioned souls everlastingly, but in each and
every material creation they are given a chance to liberate themselves and


--- Page 222 ---
224 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
become free souls. They are all given a chance to take advantage of the
Vedic wisdom and find out what is their relationship with the Supreme
Lord, how they can be liberated, and what the ultimate profit is in such
liberation. By properly studying the Vedas one becomes conscious of his
position and thus takes to the transcendental devotional service of the
Lord and is gradually promoted to the spiritual sky. The individual souls
in the material world engage in different activities according to their past
unfinished desires. After the dissolution of a particular body, the individu-
al soul forgets everything, but the all-merciful Lord, who is situated in
everyone’s heart as the witness, the Supersoul, awakens him and reminds
him of his past desires, and thus he begins to act accordingly in his next
life. This unseen guidance is described as fate, and a sensible man can
understand that this continues his material bondage in the three modes of
nature.

The unconscious sleeping stage of the living entity just after the partial
or total dissolution of the creation is wrongly accepted as the final stage of
life by some less intelligent philosophers. After the dissolution of the
partial material body, a living entity remains unconscious for only a few
months, and after the total dissolution of the material creation, he remains
unconscious for many millions of years. But when the creation is again
revived, he is awakened to his work by the Lord. The living entity is
eternal, and the wakeful state of his consciousness, manifested by activities,
is his natural condition of life. He cannot stop acting while awake, and
thus he acts according to his diverse desires. When his desires are trained
in the transcendental service of the Lord, his life becomes perfect, and he
is promoted to the spiritual sky to enjoy eternal awakened life.

TEXT 4
प्रबुद्धकर्म दैवेन उयोषिंशतिको गणः |
्ररितोऽजनयत्खाभिर्माप्ाभिरधिषूरुषम्‌ ॥ ४॥
prabuddha-karma daivena
trayovimsatiko ganah
prerito’ janayat svabhir
matrabhir adhipurusam

prabuddha—awakened; karma—activities; daivena—by the will of the
Supreme; trayovimsatikah—by the twenty-three principal ingredients;
ganah— combination; prerituh—induced by ;ajanayat—manifested; svabhih—
by 1115 personal; matrabhih—by plenary expansion; adhipirusam—the
gigantic universal form (visva-ripa).


--- Page 223 ---
Text 5] Creation of the Universal Form 225
TRANSLATION

When the twenty-three principal elements were set in action by the will
of the Supreme, the gigantic universal form, or the vi§va-riipa body of the
Lord, came into existence.

PURPORT

The virata-riipa or visva-ripa, the gigantic universal form of the Lord,
which is very much appreciated by the impersonalist, is not an eternal
form of the Lord. It is manifested by the supreme will of the Lord after
the ingredients of material creation. Lord Krsna exhibited this virata or
viSva-riipa to Arjuna just to convince the impersonalists that He is the
original Personality of Godhead. Krsna exhibited the virata-ripa; it is not
that Krsna was exhibited by the virata-ripa. The virata-rupa is not,
therefore, an eternal form of the Lord exhibited in the spiritual sky; itis a
material manifestation of the Lord. The arca-vigraha, or the worshipable
Deity in the temple, is a similar manifestation of the Lord for the
neophytes. But in spite of their material touch, such forms of the Lord as
the virata and arca are all nondifferent from His eternal form as Lord
Krsna.

TEXT 5
परेण विशता खसिन्मात्रया Rags: ।
चुक्षोभान्योन्यमासाद यस्मिष्ठोकाश्वराचराः ।। ५ ॥
parena visata svasmin
matraya visva-srg-ganah
cuksobhanyonyam asadya
yasmil lokas caracarah

parena—by the Lord; visata—thus entering; svasmin—by His own self;
matraya—by a plenary portion; visva-srk—the elements of universal
creation; ganah—all; cuksobha—transformed; anyonyam—one another;
asadya—having obtained; yasmin—in which; lokah—the planets; cara-
acardh—movable and immovable.

TRANSLATION

As the Lord, in His plenary portion, entered into the elements of the
universal creation, they transformed into the gigantic form in which all the
planetary systems and all movable and immovable creations rest.


--- Page 224 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
PURPORT

The elements of cosmic creation are all matter and have no potency to
increase in volume unless entered into by the Lord in His plenary portion.
This means that matter does not increase or decrease unless it is spiritually
touched. Matter is a product of spirit and increases only by the touch of
spirit. The entire cosmic manifestation has not assumed its gigantic form
by itself, as wrongly calculated by less intelligent persons. As long as spirit
is within matter, matter can increase as needed; but without the spirit,
matter stops increasing. For example, as long as there is spiritual conscious-
ness within the material body of a living entity, the body increases to the
required size, but a dead material body, which has no spiritual conscious-
ness, stops increasing. In Bhagavad-gita (Chapter Two) importance is
given to the spiritual consciousness, not the body. The entire cosmic body
increased by the same process that we experience in our small bodies. One
should not, however, foolishly think that the individual infinitesimal soul
is the cause of the gigantic manifestation of the universal form. The
universal form is called the virate-ripa because the Supreme Lord is
within it in His plenary portion.

TEXT 6
दिरण्मयः स पुरुषः सदखपरिरत्सरान्‌ ।
.
आण्डकोश उवासाप्सु सव॑सत्वोपकंहितः ॥ ६ ॥
hirapmayah sa purusah
sahasra parivatsaran
anda-kosa uvasapsu
sarva-sattvopabrmhitah

hiranmayah—the Garbhodakasayi Visnu, who also assumes the virafa-
70100) sah—He; purusah—incarnation of Godhead; sahasra—one thousand;
parivatsaran— celestial years; anda-kosa—within the global universe; uvasa—
resided; apsu—on the water; sarva-sattva—all living entities lying with Him;
upabrmhitah—so spread.

TRANSLATION

The gigantic virata-purusa known as Hiranmaya lived for one thousand
celestial years on the water of the universe, and all the living entities lay
with Him.

PURPORT

After the Lord entered each and every universe as the Garbhodakasay1

Visnu, half of the universe was filled with water. The cosmic manifestation


--- Page 225 ---
Text 7] Creation of the Universal Form 227
of the planetary systems, outer space, etc., which are visible to us, 15 only
one half of the complete universe. Before the manifestation takes place
and after the entrance of Visnu within the universe, there is a period of one
thousand celestial years. All the living entities injected within the womb
of the mahat-tattva are divided in all universes with the incarnation of
Garbhodakasayl Vispu, and all of them lie down with the Lord until
Brahma is born. Brahma is the first living being within the universe, and
from him all other demigods and living creatures are born. Manu is the
original father of mankind, and therefore, in Sanskrit, mankind is called
manusya. Humanity in different bodily qualities is distributed throughout
the various planetary systems.
TEXT 7
स वै विश्वसृजां गर्भो दोवकर्मात्पशक्तियान्‌ |
विवमाजात्मनाऽऽत्मानमेकषा হুহাঘা সিঘা ।। ७॥
sa vai visva-srjari garbho
deva-karmatma-sak timan
vibabhajatmana tmanam
ekadha dasadha tridha

sah—that; vai—certainly; visva-srjam—of the gigantic virata form; gar-
bhah—total energy; deva—living energy; karma—activity of life; atma—
self; saktiman—full with potencies; vibabhdja— divided; atmama—by Him-
self; atmanam—Himself; ekadhd—in oneness; dasadha—in ten; tridha—and
in three.

TRANSLATION

The total energy of the mahat-tattva, in the form of the gigantic virata-
riipa, divided Himself by Himself into the consciousness of the living
entities, the life of activity, and self-identification, which are subdivided
into one, ten and three respectively.

PURPORT

Consciousness is the sign of the living entity or the soul. The existence
of the soul is manifest in the form of consciousness, called jiiana-sakti.
The total consciousness is that of the gigantic virate-rupa, and the same
consciousness is exhibited in individual persons. The activity of conscious-
ness is performed through the air of life which is of ten divisions. The airs
of life are called prapa, apana, udana, vyana and semana and are also
differently qualified as naga, kurma, krkara, devadatta and dhanaiijaya.


--- Page 226 ---
228 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
The consciousness of the soul becomes polluted by the material atmos-
phere, and thus various activities are exhibited in the false ego of bodily
identification. These various activities are described in Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 2.41) as bahu-sakha hy anantas ca buddhayo ‘vyavasayinam. The
conditioned soul is bewildered into various activities for want of pure
consciousness. In pure consciousness the activity is one. The consciousness
of the individual soul becomes one with the supreme consciousness when
there is complete synthesis between the two.

The monist believes that there is only one consciousness, whereas the
satvatas, or the devotees, believe that although there is undoubtedly one
consciousness, they are one because there is agreement. The individual
consciousness is advised to dovetail with the supreme consciousness, as
instructed by the Lord in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.66): sarva-dharman
parityajya mam eka sarapari vraja. The individual consciousness (Arjuna)
is advised to dovetail with the supreme consciousness and thus maintain
his conscious purity. It is foolish to try to stop the activities of conscious-
ness, but they can be purified when they are dovetailed with the Supreme.
This consciousness is divided into three modes of self-identification ac-
cording to the proportion of purity: adhyatmic or self-identification
with the body and mind, adhibhautic or self-identification with the
material products, and adhidaivic or self-identification as a servant of the
Lord. Of the three, adhidaivic self-identification is the beginning of purity
of consciousness in pursuance of the desire of the Lord.

TEXT 8
एष द्यशेषरत्वानामात्मांशः परमात्मनः ।
आयोऽतारो यत्रासौ भूतग्रामो विभान्यते ।॥ ८ ॥
esa hy asesa-sattvanam
৫6771011180) paramatmanah
adyo’vataro yatrasau
bhuta-gramo vibhavyate

esah—this; hi—certainly; asesa—unlimited; sattvanam-—living entities;
atma—Self; arms$ah— part; paramatmanah—of the Supersoul; adyah— the
first; avatarah—incarnation; yatra—whereupon; aseu—all those; bhiita-
gramah—the aggregate creations; vibhavyate—flourish.

TRANSLATION

The gigantic universal form of the Supreme Lord is the first incarnation

and plenary portion of the Supersoul. He is the Self of an unlimited


--- Page 227 ---
Text 9] Creation of the Universal Form 229
number of living entities, and in Him rests the aggregate creation, which
thus flourishes.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord expands Himself in two ways, by personal plenary
expansions and separated minute expansions. The personal plenary expan-
sions are Vispu-tattvas, and the separated expansions are living entities.
Since the living entities are very small, they are sometimes described as the
marginal energy of the Lord. But the mystic yogis consider the living
entities and the Supersoul, Paramatma, to be one and the same. It is,
however, a minor point of controversy; after all, everything created rests
on the gigantic virate or universal form of the Lord.
TEXT 9
साध्यात्मः साधिदैवश्च साधिभूत इति त्रिधा ।
frag, प्राणो दशविध एकधा हृदयेन च ॥ ९॥
sadhyatmah sadhidaivas ca
sadhibhuta iti tridha
virat prano dase-vidha
ekadha hrdayena ca
sa-adhyatmah—the body and mind with all the senses; sa-adhidaivah—
and the controlling demigods of the senses; sa-adhibhiitah—the present
objectives; iti— thus; tridha—three; virat— gigantic; pranah— moving force;
dasa-vidhah—ten kinds; ekadha—one only; hrdayena—living energy; ca—
also.
TRANSLATION
The gigantic universal form is represented by three, ten and one in the
sense that He is the body and the mind and senses, He is the dynamic force
for all movements by ten kinds of life energy, and He is the one heart
where life energy is generated.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (7.4-5) it is stated that the eight elements carth, water,
fire, air, sky, mind, intelligence and false ০86০ are all products of the Lord’s
inferior cnergy, whereas the living entities, who are seen to utilize the
inferior energy, originally belong to the superior energy, the internal


--- Page 228 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
potency of the Lord. The eight inferior energies work grossly and subtly,
whereas the superior energy works as the central generating force. This is
experienced in the human body. The gross elements, namely, carth, etc.,
form the external gross body and are like a coat, whereas the subtle mind
and false ego act like the inner clothing of the body.

The movements of the body are first generated from the heart, and all
the activities of the body are made possible by the senses, powered by the
ten kinds of air within the body. The ten kinds of air are described as
follows: The main air passing through the nose in breathing is called prana.
The air which passes through the rectum as evacuated bodily air is called
apana. The air which adjusts the foodstuff within the stomach and which
sometimes sounds as belching is called samana. The air which passes
through the throat and the stoppage of which constitutes suffocation is
called the udana air. And the total air which circulates throughout the
entire body is called the vyana air. Subtler than these five airs, there are
others also. That which facilitates the opening of the eyes, mouth, etc., is
called naga air. The air which increases appetite is called krkara air. The air
which helps contraction is called kizrma air. The air which helps relaxation
by opening the mouth wide (in yawning) is called devadatta air, and the air
which helps sustenance is called dhanaiijaya air.

All these airs are generated from the center of the heart, which is one
only. This central energy is superior energy of the Lord, who is seated
within the heart with the soul of the body, who acts under the guidance of
the Lord. This is explained in Bhagavad-gita as follows:

sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jianam apohanam ca
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham (Bg. 15.15)
The complete central force is generated from the heart by the Lord, who
is seated there and who helps the conditioned soul in remembering and
forgetting. The conditioned state is due to the soul’s forgetfulness of his
relationship of subordination to the Lord. One who wants to continue to
forget the Lord is helped by the Lord to forget Him birth after birth, but
one who remembers Him, by dint of association with a devotee of the
Lord, is helped to remember Him more and more. Thus the conditioned
soul can ultimately go back home, back to Godhead.

This process of transcendental help by the Lord is described in Bhagavad-

gita (10.10) as follows:


--- Page 229 ---
Text 10] Creation of the Universal Form 231
tesa satata-yuktanam bhajatam priti-purvakam
dadami buddhi-yogarh tam yena mam upayanti te
The buddhi-yoga process of self-realization with intelligence transcen-
dental to the mind (devotional service) can alone elevate one from the
conditioned state of material entanglement in the cosmic construction.
The conditioned state of the living entity is like that of a person who is
within the depths of a huge mechanical arrangement. The mental
speculators can reach the point of buddhi-yoga after many, many life-
times of speculation, but the intelligent person who begins from the plat-
form of intelligence above the mind makes rapid progress in self-realization.
Because the buddhi-yoga process entails no fear of deterioration or
retrogression at any time, it is the guaranteed path to self-realization, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (2.40). The mental speculators cannot-under-
stand that the two birds (Sve. Up.) sitting in one tree are the soul and the
Supersoul. The individual soul eats the fruit of the tree, while the other
bird does not eat the fruit but only observes the activities of the eating
bird. The witness bird helps the bird which eats the fruit to perform
fruitful activities without attachment. One who cannot understand this
difference between the soul and the Supersoul, or God and the living
entities, is certainly still in the entanglement of the cosmic machinery
and thus must still await the time when he will be free from bondage.
TEXT 10
स्मरन्‌ ति खसृजापीञ्ो विज्ञापितमघोश्चजः |
विरायमतपरस्वेन तेजसैषां Aged ॥१०॥
smaran visva-srjam so
vijiiapitam adhoksajah
virajam atapat svena
tejasaisarn vivrttaye
smaran—remembering; visva-srjam—of the demigods entrusted with the
task of cosmic construction; iSah—the Supreme Lord; vijiiapitam—as He
was prayed for; adhoksajah—the Transcendence; virgjam—the gigantic
universal form; atapat—considered thus; svena—by His own; tejasa—energy;
esam—for them; vivrttaye—understanding.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord is the Supersoul of all the demigods who are
entrusted with the task of constructing the cosmic manifestation. Being


--- Page 230 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
thus prayed to [by the demigods], He thought to Himself and thus
manifested the gigantic form for their understanding.

PURPORT

The impersonalists are captivated by the gigantic universal form of the
Supreme. They think that the control behind this gigantic manifesta-
tion is imagination. Intelligent persons, however, can estimate the value
of the cause by observing the wonders of the effects. For example, the
individual human body does not develop from the womb of the mother
independently but because the living entity, the soul, is within the body.
Without the living entity, a material body cannot automatically take shape
or develop. When any material object displays development, it must be
understood that there is a spiritual soul within the manifestation. The
gigantic universe has developed gradually, just as the body of a child
develops. The conception that the Transcendence enters within the
universe is, therefore, logical. As the materialists cannot find the soul and
the Supersoul within the heart, similarly, for want of sufficient knowledge,
they cannot see that the Supreme Soul is the cause of the universe. The
Lord is therefore described in the Vedic language as avdi-manasa-gocarah,
beyond the conception of words and minds.

Due to a poor fund of knowledge, the mental speculators try to bring
the Supreme within the purview of words and minds, but the Lord refuses
to be so intelligible; the speculator has no adequate words or mind to
gauge the infinity of the Lord. The Lord is called adhoksaja, or the person
who is beyond perception by the blunt, limited potency of our senses.
One cannot perceive the transcendental name or form of the Lord by
mental speculation. The mundane Ph.D.’s are completely unable to
speculate on the Supreme with their limited senses. Such attempts by the
puffed up Ph.D.’s are compared to the philosophy of the frog in the well.
A frog in a well was informed of the gigantic Pacific Ocean, and he began
to puff himself up in order to understand or measure the length and
breadth of the Pacific Ocean. Ultimately the frog burst and died. The
title Ph.D. can also be interpreted as Plough Department, a title meant
for the tillers in the paddy field. The attempt of the tillers in the paddy
field to understand the cosmic manifestation and the cause behind such
wonderful work can be compared to the endeavor of the frog in the well
to calculate the measurement of the Pacific Ocean.

The Lord can reveal Himself only to a person who is submissive and
who engages in His transcendental loving service. The demigods controlling
the elements and ingredients of universal affairs prayed to the Lord for


--- Page 231 ---
Text 12] Creation of the Universal Form 233
guidance, and thus He manifested His gigantic form, as He did at the
request of Arjuna.
TEXT 11
अथ तस्याभितप्तस्य कतिधायतनानि ह ।
निरभिद्यन्त देवानां तानि मे गदतः शृणु ॥११॥
atha tasyabhitaptasya
katidhayatanani ha
nirabhidyanta devanarm
tani me gadatah srnu
atha—therefore; tasya— His;abhitaptasya— in terms of His contemplation;
katidha—how many; dyatanani—embodiments; ha—there were; nirabhi-
dyanta—by separated parts; devanam—of the demigods; tani—all those; me
gadatah— described by me; $rpu—just hear.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya said: You may now hear from me how the Supreme Lord
separated Himself into the diverse forms of the demigods after the
manifestation of the gigantic universal form.
PURPORT
The demigods are separated parts and parcels of the Supreme lord, as
are all other living entities. The only difference between the demigods and
the ordinary living entities is that when the living entities are rich in
pious acts of devotional service to the l.ord, and when their desire to lord
it over material energy has vanished, they are promoted to the posts of
demigods, who are entrusted by the Lord to execute the management of
the universal affairs.
TEXT 12
FERN
Fenfurret निर्भिनं लोकपालोऽविज्ञस्पदम्‌ |
वाचा [RAT वक्तव्यं ययासौ प्रतिपद्यते ॥१२॥
tasyagnir asyarn nirbhinnari
loka-palo visat padam
vaca svamsena vaktavyarn
yayasau pratipadyate
tasya—His; agnih—fire; asyam—mouth; nirbhinnam—thus separated;
loka-palah—the directors of material affairs; avisat—entered; padam—re-


--- Page 232 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
spective positions; vaca—by words; sve-arnisena—by one’s own part;
vaktavyam—speeches; yaya—by which; asau— they; pratipadyate— express.
TRANSLATION
Agni or heat separated from His mouth, and all the directors of
material affairs entered into it in their respective positions. By that energy
the living entity expresses himself in words.
PURPORT
The mouth of the gigantic universal form of the Lord is the source of
the speaking power. The director of the fire element is the controlling
deity or the adhidaiva. The speeches delivered are adhyatma, or bodily
functions, and the subject matter of the speeches is material productions,
or the adhibhuta principle.
TEXT 13
নিমিষ্গ ag वरुणो रोकपालोऽविश्चद्रेः ।
জিদ্ধযাহীন च रसं ययासो प्रतिपद्यते ॥१३॥
nirbhinnam talu varuno
loka-palo visadd hareh
Jjihvayamsena ca rasan
yayasau pratipadyate
nirbhinnam—separated; talu—palate; varunah—the deity controlling air;
loka-palah—director of the planets; avisat—entered; hareh—of the Lord;
Jihvaya armsena—with the part of the tongue; ca—also; rasam— tastes; yaya—
by which; asau—the living entity; pratipadyate—expresses.
TRANSLATION
When the palate of the gigantic form was separately manifested,
Varuna, the director of air in the planetary systems, entered therein,
and thus the living entity has the facility to taste everything with his
tongue.
TEXT 14
নির্মিষ্ী अधिनौ नासे विष्णोराविशतां पदम्‌ ।
घ्राणेनांशेन गन्धस्य प्रतिपत्तिय॑तो भवेत्‌ ॥१४॥


--- Page 233 ---
Text 16] Creation of the Universal Form 235
nirbhinne asvinau nase
vispor avisatam padam
ghranenarmsena gandhasya
pratipattir yato bhavet
nirbhinne—thus being separated; asvinau—the dual Asvinis; nase—of the
two nostrils; visnoh—of the Lord; avisatam—entering; padam-—post;
ghranena amsena—by partially smelling; gandhasya—aroma; pratipattih—
experience; yatah—whereupon; bhavet—becomes.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord’s two nostrils separately manifested, the dual
Asvinikumaras entered them in their proper positions, and because of this
the living entities can smell the aromas of everything.
TEXT 15
निरभिमे अक्षिणी त्वष्टा लोकपालोऽविशदिमोः।
चक्षुषांशेन रूपाणां प्रतिपत्तिर्यतो भवेत्‌ |
nirbhinne aksini tvasta
loka-palo’ visad vibhoh
caksusamsena rupanarn
pratipattir yato bhavet
nirbhinne—thus being separated; aksini—the eyes; tvasta—the sun;
loka-palah— director of light; avisat—entered; vibholh—of the great; caksusa
arhsena—by the part of the eyesight; ripanam—of the forms; pratipattih—
experience; yatah—by which; bhavet—becomes.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the two eyes of the gigantic form of the Lord separately
manifested. The sun, the director of light, entered them with the partial
representation of eyesight, and thus the living entities can have vision
of forms.
TEXT 16
निरभिमनान्यस्य चर्माणि लोकपालोऽनिलोऽवि्चत्‌ |
प्राणेनांशेन संस्पशं येनासो प्रतिपद्यते ngs


--- Page 234 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
nirbhinnany asya carmani
loka-palo’ nilo’ visat
pranenarnsena sarsparsarn
yenasau pratipadyate
nirbhinnani—being separated;asya— of the gigantic form ;carmani— skin;
loka-palah—the director; anilah— air; avisat—entered; prapena armsena—
the part of the breathing; sarmsparsam—touch; yena—by which; asau— the
living entity ; pratipadyate—can experience.
TRANSLATION
When there was a manifestation of skin separated from the gigantic
form, Anila, the deity directing the mind, entered with partial touch, and
thus the living entities can realize tactile knowledge.
TEXT 17
कर्णावस्य विनिर्भिभौ धिष्ण्य स्वं বিবিহ্যত্তিহাঃ |
श्रोत्रेणांशेन शब्दस्य सिद्ध येन प्रपद्यते ॥१७॥
karnavasya vinirbhinnau
dhisnyam svarh vivisur
disah srotrenamsena sabdasya
siddhim yena prapadyate
karpau—the ears; asya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnau—being thus
separated; dhisnyam—the controlling deity; svam—own; vivisuh—entered;
disah—of the directions; srotrepa armsena—with the hearing principles;
$abdasya—of the sound;siddhim—perfection;yena—by which; prapadyate—
is experienced.
TRANSLATION
When the ears of the gigantic form became manifested, all the
controlling deities of the directions entered into them with the hearing
principles, by which all the living entities hear and take advantage of
sound.
PURPORT
The ear is the most important instrument in the body of the living
entity. Sound is the most important medium for carrying the message
of distant and unknown things. The perfection of all sound or knowledge
enters through the ear and makes one’s life perfect. The entire Vedic


--- Page 235 ---
Text 19] Creation of the Universal Form 237
system of knowledge is received by aural reception only, and thus sound
is the most important source of knowledge.
TEXT 18
त्वचमस्य विनिर्भिजां FRE: |
. EY
अंशेन रोमभिः wf FE प्रतिपद्यते ॥१८॥
tvacam asya vinirbhinnarn
vivisur dhispyam osadhih
amsena romabhih kandum
yair asau pratipadyate
tvacam—skin;asya—of the gigantic form;vinirbhinnam—heing separately
manifested; vivisuh—entered; dhisnyam—the controlling deity; osadhih—
sensations; ars$ena—with parts; romabhih—through the hairs on the body;
kandiim—itching; yaith—by which; asau—the living entity; pratipadyate—
experiences.
TRANSLATION
When there was a separate manifestation of skin, the controlling
deities of sensations and its different parts entered into it, and thus the
living entities feel itching and happiness due to touch.
PURPORT
For sense perception there are two principal items, touch and itching,
and both of them are controlled by the skin and hairs on the body.
According to Sri Viévanatha Cakravarti, the controlling deity of touch is
the air passing within the body, and the controlling deity of the hairs
on the body is Ogadhya. For the skin the object of perception is touch,
and for the hairs on the body the object of perception is itching.
TEXT 19
मेदू तस्य विनिर्भिन्नं खधिष्ण्यं क उपाविशत्‌ |
रेतसांशेन येनासावानन्दं प्रतिपद्यते ॥१९॥
medhram tasya vinirbhinnam
sva-dhispyam ka
upavisat retasarmsena yendasav
৫1107100118 pratipadyate


--- Page 236 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
medhram—genitals; tasya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnam—being
separated; sva-dhispyam—own position; kah— Brahma, the original living
creature; upavisat—entered; retasa armsena—with the part of the semina;
yena—by which; asau—the living entity; anandam—sex pleasure; pratipad-
yate—experiences.
TRANSLATION
When the genitals of the gigantic form separately became manifest, then
Prajapati, the original living creature, entered into them with his partial
semina, and thus the living entities can enjoy sex pleasure.
TEXT 20
-
गुदं पुंसो विनिर्भिन्नं मित्रो लोकेख জবাবিহার্‌ ।
पायुनांसेन येनासौ fed fied ॥२०॥
gudam puso vinirbhinnam
mitro lokesa avisat
payunarisena yenasau
visargarn pratipadyate
gudam—evacuating outlet; pumsah—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnam—
being separately manifested; mitrah—the sun-god; lokesah—the director
named Mitra; avisat—entered; payuna amsena—with the partial evacuation
process; yena—by which; asau—the living entity; visargam—evacuation;
pratipadyate— performs.
TRANSLATION
The evacuating channel separately became manifest, and the director
named Mitra entered into it with partial organs of evacuation. Thus the
living entities are able to pass stool and urine.
TEXT 21
हस्तावस्य RARER: श्व्पतिराविव्‌ |
बाठेयांशेन पुरुषो यया IR प्रपद्यते ॥२१॥
hastav asya vinirbhinnav
indrah svar-patir avisat
vartayamsena puruso
yaya vrttim prapadyate
hastau—hands;asya— of the gigantic form;vinirbhinnau—being separately
manifested; indrah—the King of heaven; svah-patih—the ruler of heavenly


--- Page 237 ---
Text 23] Creation of the Universal Form 239
planets; avisat—entered into it; vdrtaya amsena—with partial mercantile
principles; purusah— the living entity; yaya—by which; vrttim—business of
livelihood; prapadyate—transacts.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when the hands of the gigantic form separately became
manifested, Indra, the ruler of the heavenly planets, entered into them,
and thus the living entity is able to transact business for his livelihood.
TEXT 22
-
पादावस्य विनिर्भिन्नो रोकेशो विष्णुराविशत्‌ |
गत्या खांशेन पुरुषो यया प्राप्यं प्रपद्यते ॥२२॥
padav asya vinirbhinnau
lokeso visnur avisat
gatya svarisena puruso
yaya prapyar prapadyate
padau—the legs; asya—of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnau—being mani-
fested separately; lokesah visnuh—the demigod Visnu (not the Personality
of Godhead);avisat— entered; gatya— by the power of movement; sva-
armsena—with his own parts; purusah—living entity; yaya—by which;
prapyam—destination; prapadyate—reaches.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the legs of the gigantic form separately became manifest, and
the demigod named Visnu [not the Personality of Godhead] entered with
partial movement. This helps the living entity to move to his destination.
TEXT 23
gf चास्य विनिभिनां वागीशो धिष्ण्यमाविदचत्‌ |
बोधेनांशेन बोद्धव्यम्‌ प्रतिपत्ति्य॑तो भेत्‌ ॥২২।॥
buddhim casya vinirbhinnam
vagtso dhignyam avisat
bodhenarmsena boddhavyam
pratipattir yato bhavet
buddhim—intelligence ; ca— also;asya—of the gigantic form;vinirbhinnam
—being separately manifested; vagiSah—Brahma, lord of the Vedas;
dhispyam—the controlling power; avisat—entered in; bodhena aritSena—


--- Page 238 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
with his part of intelligence; boddhavyam—the matter of understanding;
pratipattih—understood; yatah—by which; bhavet—so becomes.
TRANSLATION
When the intelligence of the gigantic form separately became manifest,
Brahma, the lord of the Vedas, entered into it with the partial power of
understanding, and thus an object of understanding is experienced by the
living entities.
TEXT 24
हृदयं चाख निर्भिन्नं चन्द्रमा धिष्ण्यमाविशत्‌ ।
मनसांशेन येनासौ विक्रियां प्रतिपद्यते ।॥२४॥
11700 0718 casya nirbhinnam
candrama dhisnyam avisat
manasamsena yenasau
vikriyarn pratipadyate
hrdayam—heart; ca—also; asya—of the gigantic form; nirbhinnam—being
manifested separately; candrama—the moon demigod; dhisnyam—with
controlling power ;avisat—entered into; manasa armsena— partly with mental
activity; yena—by which; asau—the living entity; vikriyam—resolution;
pratipadyate—transacts.
TRANSLATION
After that, the heart of the gigantic form separately manifested itself,
and into it entered the moon demigod with partial mental activity. Thus
the living entity can conduct his mental speculations.
TEXT 25
आत्मानं चास्य निभिजममिमानोऽविशत्पदम्‌ |
कर्मणांशेन येनासौ Fd प्रतिपद्यते UR
atmanam casya nirbhinnam
abhimano 018৫6 padam
karmanarmsena yenasau
kartavyarn pratipadyate
atmanam—false ego; ca—also; asya—of the gigantic form; nirbhinnam—
being separately manifested; abhimanah—false identification; avisat—en-
tered; padam—in position; karmapa—activities;amsena—by the part; yena—


--- Page 239 ---
Text 26] Creation of the Universal Form 241
by which; asau—the living entity; kartavyam—objective activities; prati-
padyate—takes in.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter the materialistic ego of the gigantic form separately mani-
fested itself, and into it entered Rudra, the controller of false ego, with his
own partial activities, by which the living entity transacts his objective
actions.
PURPORT
The false ego of materialistic identity is controlled by the demigod
Rudra, an incarnation of Lord Siva. Rudra is the incarnation of the
Supreme Lord who controls the mode of ignorance within material
nature. The activities of the false ego are based on the objective of the
body and mind. Most persons conducted by the false ego are controlled
by Lord Siva. When one reaches a finer version of ignorance, he falsely
thinks of himself as the Supreme Lord. That egoistic conviction of the
conditioned soul is the last snare of the illusory energy which controls
the entire material world.
TEXT 26
सत्वं am विनिर्भिनं महान्धिष्म्युपािशत्‌ |
चित्तेनांशेन येनासौ विज्ञानं प्रतिपद्यते ।॥२६॥
50८{ए४व 777 casya vinirbhinnam
mahan dhisnyam-upavisat
cittenamsena yenasau
vijiianarm pratipadyate
sattvam—consciousness; ca—also; asya—of the gigantic form; vinir-
bhinnam—being separately manifested; mahan—the total energy, mahat-
tattva; disnyam—with control; upavisat—entered into; cittena armsena—
along with his part of consciousness; yena—by which; asau—the living
entity; vijianam—specific knowledge; pratipadyate—cultivates.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, when His consciousness separately manifested itself, the
total energy, mahat-tattva, entered with His conscious part. Thus the living
entity is able to conceive specific knowledge.


--- Page 240 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
TEXT 27
aise चौरधरा पद्भयां खं नाभेरुदषयत |
गुणानां त्यो येषु प्रतीयन्ते सुरादयः ॥२७॥
sirsno sya dyaur dhara padbhyam
kharh nabher udapadyata
gunanarm vrttayo yesu
pratiyante suradayah
Sirsnah—head; asya—of the gigantic form; dyauh—the heavenly planets;
dhara—earthly planets; padbhyam—on His legs; kham—the sky; nabheh—
from the abdomen; udapadyata—became manifested; gupanam—of the
three modes of nature; vrttayah—reactions; yesu—in which; pratiyante—
manifest; sura- adayah—the demigods and others.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, from the head of the gigantic form, the heavenly planets
were manifested, and from His legs the earthly planets and from His
abdomen the sky separately manifested themselves. Within them the demi-
gods and others also were manifested in terms of the modes of material
nature.
TEXT 28
आत्यन्तिकेन सत्वेन दिवं देवाः प्रपेदिरे ।
धरां TENET पणयो ये च तानयु ॥२८॥
atyantikena sattvena
diva devah prapedire
dharam rajah sva-bhavena
panayo ye ca tan anu
atyantikena—excessive; sattvena—by the mode of goodness; divam—in
the higher planets; devah—the demigods; prapedire—have been situated;
dharam—on the earth; rajah—mode of passion; sva-bhavena—by nature;
panayah—the human being; ye—all those; ca—also; tdan—their; anu—
subordinate.
TRANSLATION
The demigods are situated in the heavenly planets qualified by the
superexcellent quality of the mode of goodness, whereas the human


--- Page 241 ---
Text 29] Creation of the Universal Form 243
beings, because of their nature in the mode of passion, live on the earth
in company with their subordinates.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (14.14-15) it is said that those who are highly
developed in the mode of goodness are promoted to the higher, heavenly
planetary system, and those who are overpowered by the mode of passion
are situated in the middle planetary systems, the earth and similar planets.
But those who are surcharged with the mode of ignorance are degraded to
the lower planetary systems or to the animal kingdom. The demigods are
highly developed in the mode of goodness, and thus they are situated in
the heavenly planets. Below human beings are the animals, although
some of them mingle with human society; cows, horses, dogs, etc., are
habituated to live under the protection of human beings.

The word atyantikena is very significant in this verse. By development
of the mode of goodness of material nature one can become situated in
the heavenly planets. But by excessive development of the modes of
passion and ignorance, the human being indulges in killing the animals
who are meant to be protected by mankind. Persons who indulge in
unnecessary animal killing have excessively developed in the modes of
passion and ignorance and have no hope of advancing to the mode of
goodness; they are destined to be degraded to lower statuses of life. The
planetary systems are calculated as upper and lower in terms of the classes
of living entities who live there.

TEXT 29
तार्तीयेन सखमावेन भगवनामिमाध्रिताः |
उभयोरन्तरं व्योम ये रुद्रपार्षदां गणाः ॥२९॥
tartiyena sva-bhavena
bhagavan nabhim asritah
ubhayor antararh vyoma
ye rudra-parsadarm ganah

tartiyena—by excessive development of the third mode of material
nature, the mode of ignorance; sva-bhavena—by such nature; bhagavat-
nabhim—the abdominal navel of the gigantic form of the Personality of
Godhead; asritah— those who are so situated; ubhayoh—between the two;
antaram—in between;vyoma— the sky;ye— all of them; rudra-parsadam—
associates of Rudra; ganah—population.


--- Page 242 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION i
Living entities who are associates of Rudra develop in the third mode of
material nature, or ignorance. They are situated in the sky between the
earthly planets.
PURPORT
This middle portion of the sky is called Bhuvarloka, as confirmed by
both Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti and Srila Jiva Gosvami. In Bhagavad-
gita it is stated that those who develop in the mode of passion are situated
in the middle region. Those who are situated in the mode of goodness are
promoted to the regions of the demigods, those who are situated in the
mode of passion are placed in human society, and those who are situated
in the mode of ignorance are placed in the society of animals or ghosts.
There are no contradictions in this conclusion. Numerous living entities
are distributed all over the universe in different planets and are so situated
in terms of their own qualities in the modes of material nature.
TEXT 30
भुखतोऽवत॑त AW पुरुपस्य TEE |
यस्तूनघुखत्वादर्णानां घरख्योऽभूद्राक्षणो गुरुः॥३०।
mukhato 1৮০৫178080৫ brahma 1
purusasya kurudvaha
yas tunmukhatvad varnanam
mukhyo ’bhud brahmano guruh
mukhatah—from the mouth; avartata—generated; brahma—the Vedic
wisdom; purusasya—of the virata-purusa, the gigantic form; kuru-udvaha—
O chief of the Kuru dynasty; yah—who are; tu—due to; unmukhatvat—
inclined to; varnanam—of the orders of society; mukhyah—the chief;
abhit—so became; brahmapah—called the brahmanas; guruh—the re-
cognized teacher or spiritual master.
TRANSLATION
O chief of the Kuru dynasty, the Vedic wisdom became manifested
from the mouth of the virata, the gigantic form. Those who are inclined to
this Vedic knowledge are called brahmanas, and they are the natural
teachers and spiritual masters of all the orders of society.


--- Page 243 ---
Text 30] Creation of the Universal Form 245
PURPORT

As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 4.13), the four orders of human
society developed with the order of the body of the gigantic form. The
bodily divisions are the mouth, arms, waist and legs. Those who are
situated on the mouth are called brahmanas, those who are situated on the
arms are called ksatriyas, those who are situated on the waist are called
vaisyas, and those who are situated on the legs are called sudras. Everyone
is situated in the body of the Supreme in His gigantic visva-ripa form. In
terms of the four orders, therefore, no caste is to be considered degraded
because of being situated on a particular part of the body. In our own
bodies we do not show any actual difference in our treatment towards
the hands or legs. Each and every part of the body is important, although
the mouth is the most important of the bodily parts. If other parts are
cut off from the body, a man can continue his life, but if the mouth is cut
off, one cannot live. Therefore, this most important part of the body of
the Lord is called the sitting place of the brahmanas, who are inclined to
the Vedic wisdom. One who is not inclined to the Vedic wisdom but to
mundane affairs cannot be called a brahmana, even if he is born of a
brahmana family or father. To have a brahmana father does not qualify
one as a brahmana. The main qualification of a brahmana is to be inclined
to the Vedic wisdom. The Vedas are situated on the mouth of the Lord,
and therefore anyone who is inclined to the Vedic wisdom is certainly
situated on the mouth of the Lord, and he is a brahmana. This inclination
towards Vedic wisdom is also not restricted to any particular caste or
community. Anyone from any family and from any part of the world may
become inclined to the Vedic wisdom, and that will qualify him as a real
brahmana.

A real brahmana is the natural teacher or spiritual master. Unless one
has Vedic knowledge, one cannot become a spiritual master. The perfect
knowledge of the Vedas is to know the Lord, the Personality of Godhead,
and that is the end of Vedic knowledge, or Vedanta. One who is situated
in the impersonal Brahman and has no information of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead may become a brahmana, but he cannot become a
spiritual master. It is said: sat-karma-nipupo vipro mantra-tantra-visaredah,
avaispava guru asat sat sva-paco vaispava guruh. An impersonalist can
become a qualified brahmana, but he cannot become a spiritual master
unless and until he is promoted to the stage of a Vaignava, or a devotee of
the Personality of Godhead. Lord Caitanya, the great authority of Vedic
wisdom in the modern age, stated:


--- Page 244 ---
246 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
kibavipra-kiba-nyast sudra kene naya
yei krsna tattvavitta sei guru haya.
A person may be a brahmana or 8 8007৫ or 8 sannyasi, but if he happens to
be well versed in the science of Krsna, then he is fit to become a spiritual
master. The qualification, then, of a spiritual master is not to be a qualified
brahmana, but to be well versed in the science of Krsna.

One who is conversant with Vedic wisdom is a brahmana. And only a
brahmana who is a pure Vaigpava and knows all the intricacies of the
science of Krsna can become a spiritual master.

TEXT 31
= 6 .
बाहुम्योऽवतेत ধর্ম शषत्रियस्तदलुत्रतः |
-
यो ARETE वर्णान्‌ पौरुषः FETA 1132)
bahubhyo ‘vartata ksatram
ksatriyas tad anuvratah
yo jatas trayate varnan
paurusah kantaka-ksatat

bahubhyah—from the arms; avartata—generated; ksatram—the power of
protection; ksatriyah—in relation to the power of protection; tat—that;
anuvratah—followers; yah—one who; jatah—so becomes; trayate—delivers;
varnan—the other occupations; paurusah—representative of the Personality
of Godhead; kaptaka—disturbing elements like thieves and debauchees;
ksatat— mischief.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter the power of protection was generated from the arms of the
gigantic virata form, and in relation to such power the ksatriyas also came
into existence by following the ksatriya principle of protecting society
from the disturbance of thieves and miscreants.

PURPORT

As the brahmanas are recognized by their particular qualification of
inclination towards the transcendental knowledge of Vedic wisdom, so also
the ksatriyas are recognized by the power to protect society from the
disturbing elements of thieves and miscreants. The word anuvratah is
significant. A person who follows the ksatriya principles by protecting
society from thieves and miscreants is called a kgatriya, not the one who is


--- Page 245 ---
Text 32] Creation of the Universal Form 247
simply born a ksatriya. The conception of the caste system is always based
on quality and not on the qualification of birth. Birth is an extraneous
consideration; it is not the main feature of the orders and divisions. In
Bhagavad-gita the qualifications of the brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and
Sudras are specifically mentioned, and it is understood that all such
qualifications are needed before one can be designated as belonging to a
particular group (Bg. 18.41).

Lord Visnu is always mentioned as the purusa in all Vedic scriptures.
Sometimes the living entities are also mentioned as purusas, although they
are essentially purusa-sakti (para-sakti or para-prakrti), the superior energy
of the purusa. Illusioned by the external potency of the purusa (the Lord),
the living entities falsely think of themselves as the purusa although they
actually have no qualifications. The Lord has the power to protect. Of the
three deities Brahma, Vispu and Mahegvara, the first has the power to
create, the second has the power to protect, and the third has the power to
destroy. The word purusa is significant in this verse because the ksatriyas
are expected to represent the purusa Lord in giving protection to the prajas,
or all those who are born in the land and water. Protection is therefore
meant for both man and the animals. In modern society the prajas are not
protected from the hands of thieves and miscreants. The modern democrat-
ic state, which has no ksatriyas, is a government of the vaisyas and sudras,
and not of brahmanas and ksatriyas as formerly. Maharaja Yudhisthira and
his grandson Maharaja Pariksit were typical ksatriya kings, for they gave
protection to all men and animals. When the personification of Kali
attempted to kill a cow, Maharaja Pariksit at once prepared himself to kill
the miscreant, and the personification of Kali was banished from his
kingdom. That is the sign of purusa, or the representative of Lord Vispu.
According to Vedic civilization, a qualified ksatriya monarch is given the
respect of the Lord because he represents the Lord by giving protection to
the prajas. Modern elected presidents cannot even give protection from
theft cases, and therefore one has to take protection from an insurance
company. The problems of modern human society are due to the lack of
qualified brahmanas and ksatriyas and the over-influence of the vaisyas
and sudras by so-called general franchise.

TEXT 32
विशोऽवतेन्त॒तस्ोोोकशतिकरीिोः |
वैश्यस्तदुद्धवो वातां चरणां यः समवर्तयत्‌ ।॥२२॥


--- Page 246 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
viso 'vartanta tasyorvor
loka-vrttikarir vibhoh
vaisyas tad-udbhavo vartam
nrnam yah samavartayat

visah—means of living by production and distribution; avartanta—
generated; tasya—His (the gigantic form’s); arvoli—from the thighs; loka-
vrttikarth— means of livelihood; vibhoh—of the Lord; vaisyah— the mercan-
tile community; tat—their; wdbhavah—orientation; vartam—means of
living; nrpam=—of all men; yah—one who; samavartayat—executed.

TRANSLATION

The means of livelihood of all persons, namely production of grains and
their distribution to the prajas, was generated from the thighs of the Lord's
gigantic form. The mercantile men who take charge of such execution are
called vaisyas.

PURPORT

Human society’s means of living is clearly mentioned here as visa, or
agriculture and the business of distributing agricultural products, which
involves transport, banking, etc. Industry is an artificial means of liveli-
hood, and large-scale industry especially is the source of all the problems
of society. In Bhagavad-gita also the duties of the vaisyas, who are engaged
in visa, are staled as cow protection, agriculture and business. We have
already discussed that the human being can safely depend on the cow and
agricultural land for his livelihood.

The exchange of produce by banking and transportation is a branch of
this ty pe of living. The vaisyas are divided into many subsections: some of
them are called khetry, or landowners, some are called krsana, or land
tillers, some of them are called tilvanika, or grain raisers, some are called
gandhavanika, or merchants in spices, and some are called suvarnavanika,
or merchants in” gold and banking. The brahmanas are the teachers and
spiritual masters, the ksatriyas protect the citizens from the hands of
thieves and miscreants, and the vaisyas are in charge of production and
distribution. The sudras, the unintelligent class of men who cannot act
independently in any of the above mentioned activilics, are meant for
serving the three higher classes for their livelihood.

Formerly, the brahrnanas were given all the necessities of life by the
ksatriyas and vaisyas because they had no time to spend making a living.
The ksatriyas would collect taxes from the vaisyas and 407৫5, but the


--- Page 247 ---
Text 33] Creation of the Universal Form 249
brahmanas were exempt from paying income tax or land revenue. That
system of human society was so nice that there were no political, social
and economic upheavals. The different castes or varna classifications are
therefore essential for maintaining a peaceful human society.
TEXT 33
+ -
पद्भयां भगवतो जज्ञे शुश्रुषा धमैसिद्धये |
-
तस्यां जातः पुरा शद्धो যন্ুদ্বব্যা तप्यते हरिः nan
padbhyam bhagavato jajiie
susrusa dharma-siddhaye
tasyam jatah pura sudro
yad-vrttya tusyate harih
padbhyam—from the legs; bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead;
Jajiie—became manifested; susrusa—service; dharma—occupational duty;
siddhaye—for the matter of; tasyam—in that; jatah— being generated; pura—
formerly; sudrah—the servitors; yat-vrityi—the occupation by which;
tusyate—becomes satisfied; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter service manifested from the legs of the Personality of
Godhead for the sake of perfecting the religious function. Situated on the
legs are the sudras, who satisfy the Lord by service.
PURPORT
Service is the real constitutional occupation of all living entities. The
living entities are meant to render service to the Lord, and they can attain
religious perfection by this service attitude. One cannot attain religious
perfection simply by speculating to attain theoretical knowledge. The
Jiiant division of spiritualists go on speculating only to distinguish the soul
from matter, but they have no information of the activities of the soul
after being liberated by knowledge. It is said that persons who only
mentally speculate to know things as they are and who do not engage in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord are simply wasting their time.
It is clearly said here that the principle of service was generated from
the legs of the Lord for the sake of perfecting the religious process, but
this transcendental service is different from the idea of service in the
material world. In the material world, no one wants to be a servant; every-
one wants to become the master because false mastership is the basic


--- Page 248 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
disease of the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul in the material world
wants to lord it over others. 11105101160 by the external energy of the Lord,
he is forced to become a servant of the material world. That is the real
position of the conditioned soul. The last snare of the illusory external
energy is the conception of becoming one with the Lord, and due to this
conception the illusioned soul remains in the bondage of material energy,
falsely thinking himself a liberated soul and “‘as good as Narayana.”

It is actually better to be a sudra than to be a brahmana and not develop
the service attitude because that attitude alone satisfies the Lord. Every
living being—even if he be a brahmana by qualification—must take to the
transcendental service of the Lord. Both Bhagavad-gita and the Srimad-
Bhagavatam support that this service attitude is the perfection of the
living entity. A brahmana, ksatriya, vaiSya or Sidra can perfect his
occupational duties only by rendering service unto the Lord. A brahmana
is supposed to know this fact due to his perfection in Vedic wisdom. The
other sections are supposed to follow the direction of the brahmana-
Vaignava (one who is a brahmana by qualification and a Vaisnava by
action). That will make the entire society perfect in regard to the order of
its social construction. A disordered society cannot satisfy either the
members of the society or the Lord. Even if one is not a perfect brahmana,
ksatriya, vaisya or Sidra but takes to the service of the Lord, not caring
for the perfection of his social position, he becomes a perfect human being
simply by developing the attitude of service to the Supreme Lord.

TEXT 34
एते वणा; खघर्मेण यजन्ति खगुरं हरिर्‌ ।
भद्धयाऽऽत्मबिष्छद्धघथं यजाताः सह ifs)
ete varnah sva-dharmena
yajanti sva-gururi harim
sraddhaya “’tma-visuddhyarthari
yaj jatah saha vrttibhih

ete—all these; varnah—orders of society; sva-dharmena—by one’s own
occupational duties; yajanti—worship; sva-gurum—with the spiritual master;
harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sraddhaya—with faith and
devotion; atma—self; visuddhyartham—for purifying; yat—from whom;
jatah—born; saha—along with; vrttibhih— occupational duty.


--- Page 249 ---
Text 34] Creation of the Universal Form 251
TRANSLATION

All these different social divisions are born, with their occupational
duties and living conditions, from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus for unconditional life and self-realization one has to worship the
Supreme Lord under the direction of the spiritual master.

PURPORT

Since they are born from different parts of the body of the Supreme
Lord in His gigantic form, all living entities in all parts of the entire
universe are supposed to be eternal servitors of the supreme body. Every
part of our own body, such as the mouth, hands, thighs and legs, is meant
to render service to the whole. That is their constitutional position. In
subhuman life the living entities are not conscious of this constitutional
position, but in the human form of life they are supposed to know this
through the system of the varnas, the social orders. As above mentioned,
the brahmana is the spiritual master of all the orders of society, and thus
brahminical culture, culminating in the transcendental service of the Lord,
is the basic principle for purifying the soul.

In conditioned life the soul is under the impression that he can become
the Lord of the universe, and the last point of this misconception is to
think oneself the Supreme. The foolish conditioned soul does not take into
account that the Supreme cannot be conditioned by maya, or illusion. If
the Supreme were to become conditioned by illusion, where would be His
supremacy? In that case, maya or illusion would be the Supreme. There-
fore, because the living entities are conditioned, they cannot be supreme.
The actual position of the conditioned soul is explained in this verse: all
the conditioned souls are impure due to contact with the material energy
in three modes of nature. Therefore it is necessary that they purify
themselves under the guidance of the bona fide spiritual master, who is not
only a brahmana by qualification but who must also be a Vaignava. The
only self-purifying process mentioned herein is to worship the Lord under
the recognized method—under the guidance of the bona fide spiritual
master. That is the natural way of purification, and no other method is
recommended as bona fide. The other methods of purification may be
helpful to come to this stage of life, but ultimately one has to come to
this last point before he attains actual perfection. Bhagavad-gita confirms
this truth as follows:


--- Page 250 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
bahunam janmanam ante jiianavan mam prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma sudurlabhah
(Bg. 7.19)
TEXT 35
एतशलर्भगवतो दैवकरमार्मरूपिणः |
कः अअदष्यादुपाङ्तं योगमायायलोदयम्‌ 113411
९८५८ ksattar bhagavato
daiva-karmatma-rapinah
kah Sraddadhyad upakartum
yoga-maya-balodayam
etat— this; ksattah--O Vidura; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; daiva-karma-atma-rupinah—of the gigantic form of transcen-
dental work, time and nature; kah—who else; sraddadhyat—can aspire;
upakartum— measure in totality ;yoga-maya—internal potency; balodayam—
manifested by the strength of.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, who can estimate or measure the transcendental time, work
and potency of the gigantic form manifested by the internal potency of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead?
PURPORT
The froggish philosophers may go on with their mental speculations on
the subject matter of the virata, the gigantic form exhibited by the yoga-
maya internal potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
factually no one can measure such a vast exhibition. In Bhagavad-gita,
Arjuna, the recognized devotee of the Lord, says:
aneka-bahudara-vaktra-netram
pasyami tvar sarvato ‘nanta-ripam
nantam na madhyam na punas tavadirm
pasyami visvesvara visva-rupa
“O my Lord, O gigantic visva-rapa form, O master of the universe, I see
innumerable hands, bodies, mouths, eyes, etc., in all directions, and they
are all unlimited. I cannot find the end of this manifestation, nor do [ see
the middle, nor the beginning.” (Bg. 11.16)
Bhagavad-gita was specifically spoken to Arjuna, and the visva-rupa was
exhibited before him at his request. He was awarded the specific eyes to


--- Page 251 ---
Text 36] Creation of the Universal Form 253
see this visva-rupa, yet although he was able to see the Lord’s innumerable
hands and mouths, he was unable to see Him completely. Since Arjuna
was unable to estimate the length and breadth of the potency of the Lord,
who else would be able to do so? One may only indulge in miscalculation
like the frog philosopher. The frog philosopher wanted to estimate the
length and breadth of the Pacific Ocean by his experience of a well three
cubic feet large, and thus he began to puff himself up to become as big as
the Pacific @cean, but at last he burst and died by this process. This
story is applicable to the mental philosophers who, under the illusion of
the Lord’s external energy, indulge in estimating the length and breadth of
the Supreme Lord. The best path is to become a cool-headed, submissive
devotee of the Lord, try to hear about the Lord from the bona fide
spiritual master, and thus serve the Lord in transcendental loving service,
as suggested in the previous verse.
TEXT 36
6
तथापि कीतयाम्यङ्ग यथामति यथाश्चुतम्‌ |
कीर्ति हरेः खां सत्कतुं गिरयन्यापिधाख्तीम्‌ ॥२६॥
tathapi kirtayamy anga
yatha-mati yatha-srutam
kirtirh hareh svar satkartum
giram anyabhidhasatim

tatha—therefore; api—although it is so; kitrtayami—1I do describe; anga—
O Vidura; yatha—as much as; mati—intelligence; yatha—as much as;
srutam— heard; kirtim—glorics; hareh— of the Lord; svam—own; satkartum—
just purify; girem—speeches; anyabhidha—otherwise; asatim—unchaste.

TRANSLATION

In spite of my inability, whatever I have been able to hear [from the
spiritual master] and whatever I could assimilate, I am now describing, in
glorification of the Lord by pure speech, for otherwise my power of
speaking would remain unchaste.

PURPORT

The purification of the conditioned soul necessitates purification of his
consciousness. By the presence of consciousness, the presence of the
transcendental soul is verified, and as soon as consciousness leaves the
body, the material body is not active. Consciousness is perecived, therefore,


--- Page 252 ---
254 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
by activities. The theory put forward by empiric philosophers that con-
sciousness can remain in an inactive state is the proof of their poor fund of
knowledge. One should not become unchaste by stopping the activities of
pure consciousness. If the activities of pure consciousness are stopped,
certainly the conscious living force will be otherwise engaged because
unless engaged the consciousness has no standing. Consciousness cannot be
silent, even for a moment. When the body does not act, the consciousness
acts in the form of dreams. Unconsciousness is artificial; by induced
extraneous help, it remains for a limited period, but when the intoxication
of the drug is finished or when one is awake, the consciousness again acts
earnestly.

Maitreya’s statement is that in order to avoid unchaste conscious activi-
ties, he was trying to describe the unlimited glories of the Lord, although
he had no capacity to describe them perfectly. This glorification of the
Lord is not a product of research, but the result of hearing submissively
from the authority of the spiritual master. It is also not possible to repeat
all that one has heard from his spiritual master, bul one can narrate as far
as possible by one’s honest endeavor. It does not matter whether the Lord’s
glories are fully explained or not. One must attempt to engage one’s
bodily, mental and verbal activities in the transcendental glorification of
the Lord, otherwise such activities will remain unchaste and impure. The
existence of the conditioned soul can be purified only by the method of
engaging mind and speech in the service of the Lord. The tridandi-sannyast
of the Vaisnava school accepts three rods, representing the vow to engage
in the service of the Lord with body, mind and speech, whereas the
ekadandi-sannyasi takes the vow to become one with the Supreme. Since
the Lord is the Absolute, there is no distinction between Him and His
glories. The glories of the Lord as chanted by the Vaispava-sannyast are as
substantial as the Lord Himself, and thus while glorifying the Lord the
devotee becomes one with Him in transcendental interest, although he
remains eternally a transcendental servitor. This simultaneously one and
different position of the devotee makes him eternally purified, and thus
his life becomes a complete success.

TEXT 37
एकान्तलाभं वचसो जु gai
सश्टोकमौकेगुणवादमाहुः ।
श्रुते बिदद्धिरुषाङृतायां
TYEE ।।२७।।


--- Page 253 ---
Text 37] Creation of the Universal Form 255
ekanta-labharh vacaso nu purmsarn
susloka-mauler guna-vadam ahuh
srutes ca vidvadbhir upakrtayarn
katha-sudhayam upasamprayogam

ekanta—the one which has no comparison; labham—gain; vacasah—by
discussions; nu pumsam—after the Supreme Person; susloka—pious;
mauleh—activities; guna-vadam—glorification; ahuh—it is so said; sruteh—of
the ear; ca—also; vidvadbhih—by the learned; upakrtayam—being so edited;
katha-sudhayam—in the nectar of such a transcendental message; upasam-
prayogam—serves the real purpose, being nearer to.

TRANSLATION

The highest perfectional gain of humanity is to engage in discussions of
the activities and glories of the pious actor. Such activities are so nicely
arranged in writing by the greatly learned sages that the actual purpose of
the ear is served just by being near to them.

PURPORT

The impersonalists are very much afraid of hearing the activities of the
Lord because they think that the happiness derived from the transcendental
situation of Brahman is the ultimate goal of life; they think that anyone’s
activity, even that of the Personality of Godhead, is mundane. But the idea
of happiness indicated in this verse is different because it rclates to the
activities of the Supreme Personality, who has transcendental qualities.
The word guna-vada is significant because the qualities of the Lord and His
activities and pastimes are the subject matter for the discussions of devo-
tees. A rsi like Maitreya is certainly not interested in discussing anything
pertaining to mundane qualities, yet he says that the highest perfectional
stage of transcendental realization is to discuss the Lord’s activities. Srila
Jiva Gosvami, therefore, concludes that topics regarding the transcendental
activities of the Lord are far beyond the transcendental realization of
kaivalya happiness. These transcendental activities of the lord arc so
arranged in writing by the great sages that simply by hearing of those
narrations one becomes perfectly self-realized, and the proper use of the
ear and the tongue is also achieved. Srtmad-Bhagavatam is one of such
great literatures, and the highest perfectional state of life is attained simply
by hearing and reciting its contents.


--- Page 254 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
TEXT 38
आत्मनोऽवसितो वत्स महिमा कविनाऽऽदिना ।
संवत्सरसदखान्ते धिया योगविपक्कया ।॥२८॥
atmano’ vasito vatsa
mahima kavina dina
samuvatsara-sahasrante
dhiya yoga-vipakkaya

atmanah—of the Supreme Soul; avasitah-known; vatsa—O my dear
sons; mahima—glories; kavina—by the poet Brahma; adina— original;
sarivatsara—celestial year; sahasra-ante—at the end of one thousand;
dhiya—by intelligence; yoga-vipakkaya—by matured meditation.

TRANSLATION

The original poet, Brahma, after mature meditation for one thousand
celestial years, could know only that the glories of the Supreme Soul are
inconceivable.

PURPORT

There are some froggish philosophers who want to know the Supreme
Soul by means of philosophy and mental speculation. And when the
devotees, who are, to some extent, in knowledge of the Supreme Lord,
admit that the glories of the Lord are inestimable or inconceivable, the
froggish philosophers adversely criticize them. These philosophers, like the
frog in the well who tried to estimate the measurement of the Pacific
Ocean, like to take trouble over fruitless mental speculation instead of
taking instructions from devotees like the original poet, namely, Brahma.
Lord Brahma underwent a severe type of meditation for one thousand
celestial years, yet he said that the glories of the Lord are inconceivable.
Therefore what can the froggish philosophers hope to gain from their
mental speculations?

It is said in the Brahma-samhita that the mental speculator may fly
through the sky of speculation with the velocity of the mind or the wind
for thousands of millions of years, and still he will find it inconceivable.
The devotees, however, do not waste time in such vain searching after
knowledge of the Supreme, but they submissively hear the glories of the
Lord from bona fide devotees. Thus they transcendentally enjoy the
process of hearing and chanting. The Lord approves of the devotional
activities of the devotees or mahatmas, and He says:


--- Page 255 ---
Text 39] Creation of the Universal Form 257
mahatmanas tu mam partha daivim prakrtim asritah
bhajanty ananya-manaso jiiatva bhutadim avyayam
satatamn kirtayanto mam yatantas ca drdha-vratah
na ma syantas ca mam bhaktya nitya-yukta upasate. (Bg. 9.13 -14)
The pure devotees of the Lord take shelter of the para-prakrti, the
internal potency of the Lord called Laksmidevi, Sitadevi, Srimati
Radharani or Srimati Rukminidevi, and thus they become actual mahat-
mas or great souls. Mahatmas are not fond of indulging in mental specu-
lations, but they actually take to the devotional service of the Lord,
without the slightest deviation. Devotional service is manifested by the
primary process of hearing and chanting about the activities of the Lord.
This transcendental method practiced by the mahatmas gives them suffi-
cient knowledge of the Lord because if the Lord can at all be known to
some extent, it is only through the means of devotional service and no
other way. One may go on speculating and waste the valuable time of his
human life, but that will not help anyone to enter into the precincts of the
Lord. The mahatmas, however, are not concerned with knowing the Lord
by mental speculation because they enjoy hearing about His glorious
activities in His transcendental dealings with His devotees or with the
demons. The devotees take pleasure in both and are happy in this life and
the life after.
TEXT 39
अतो मगवतो माया मायिनामपि मोहिनी ।
यत्खयं चात्मवत्मत्मा न वेद Rg ॥३९॥
ato bhagavato maya
mayinam api mohint
yal svayam catma-vartmatma
na veda kim-utapare
atah—therefore; bhagavatah—godly; maya—potencies; mayinam—of the
jugglers; api—even; mohini—enchanting; yat—that which; svayam— person-
ally; ca—also;atma-vartma—self-sufficient; atma—self; na— does not; veda—
know; kim—what; uta—to speak ০13 apare—others.
TRANSLATION
The wonderful potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
bewildering even to the jugglers. That potential power is unknown even
to the self-sufficient Lord, so it is certainlyu nknown to others.


--- Page 256 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 6
PURPORT

The froggish philosophers and mundane wranglers in science and mathe-
matical calculation may not believe in the inconceivable potency of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but they are sometimes puzzled by the
wonderful jugglery of man and nature. Such jugglers and magicians of the
mundane world are actually puzzled by the jugglery of the Lord in His
transcendental activities, but they try to adjust their bewilderment by
saying that it is all mythology. There is, however, nothing impossible or
mythological in the Supreme Omnipotent Person. The most wonderful
puzzle for the mundane wranglers is that while they remain calculating
the length and breadth of the unlimited potency of the Supreme Person,
His faithful devotees are set free from the bondage of material encagement
simply by appreciating the wonderful jugglery of the Supreme in the
practical field. The devotees of the Lord see the wonderful dexterity in
everything with which they come in contact in all circumstances of
eating, sleeping, working, etc. A small banyan fruit contains thousands of
small seeds, and each seed holds the potency of another tree, which again
holds the potency of many millions of such fruits as causes and effects.
So the trees and seeds engage the devotees in meditation about the activi-
ties of the Lord, while the mundane wranglers waste time in dry specula-
tion and mental concoction, which are fruitless both in this life and the
next. In spite of their pride in speculation, they can never appreciate the
simple potential activities of the banyan tree. Such speculators are poor
souls destined to remain in matter perpetually.

TEXT 40
यतोऽप्राप्य न्यवतेन्त वाचश मनसा सह |
अहं चान्य इमे [RE मगवते नमः gel
yato ‘prapya nyavartanta
vaca$ ca manasa saha
aha canya ime devas
tasmai bhagavate namah

yatah—from whom; aprapya—being unable to measure; nyavartanta—
cease to try; vdcah—words; ca—also; manasa—with the mind; saha—
with; aham ca—also the ego; anye—other;ime—all these; devah—demigods;
tasmai—unto Him; bhagavate—unto the Personality of Godhead; namah~
offer obeisances.


--- Page 257 ---
Text 40] Creation of the Universal Form 259
TRANSLATION

Words, mind and ego, with their respective controlling demigods, have
failed to achieve success in knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore, we simply have to offer our respectful obeisances unto Him as
a matter of sanity.

PURPORT

The froggish calculator may raise the objection that if the Absolute is
unknowable even by the controlling deities of speech, mind and ego,
namely the Vedas, Brahma, Rudra and all the demigods headed by
Brhaspati, then why should the devotees be so interested in this unknown
object? The answer is that the transcendental ecstasy enjoyed by the
devotees in delineating the pastimes of the Lord is certainly unknown to
nondevotees and mental speculators. Unless one relishes transcendental
joy, naturally one will come back from his speculations and concocted
conclusions because he will see them as neither factual nor enjoyable.
The devotees can at least know that the Absolute Truth is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Visnu, as the Vedic hymns confirm: tad visnoh
[00170171018 [0৫001 sada pasyanti surayah. Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 15.15) also
confirms this fact: vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. By culture of
Vedic knowledge one must know Lord Krsna and should not falsely
speculate on the word aham 011.” The only method for understanding
the Supreme Truth is devotional service, as stated in Bhagavaed-gita
(18.55): bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah. Only by
devotional service can one know that the ultimate truth is the Personality
of Godhead and that Brahman and Paramatma are only His partial features.
This is confirmed in this verse by the great sage Maitreya. With devotion
he offers his sincere surrender, namah, to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, bhagavate. One has to follow in the footsteps of great sages and
devotees like Maitreya and Vidura, Maharaja Pariksit and Sukadeva
Gosvami, and engage in the transcendental devotional service of the Lord
if he would know His ultimate feature, which is above Brahman and
Paramatma.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports of the Third Canto, Sixth Chapter,
of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled *‘Creation of the Universal Form.”


--- Page 258 ---
. CHAPTER SEVEN
Further Inquiries by Vidura
TEXT 1
श्रीड्युक उवाच
एवं FAW मेत्रेयं द्वैपायनसुतो बुधः |
प्रीणयन्निव भारत्या विदुरः प्रत्यभाषत ॥ १ ॥
$ri 5८८ ८४८८०
evan bruvaparin maitreyam
dvaipayana-suto budhah
prinayann iva bharatya
vidurah pratyabhasata
5 Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam— thus; bruvanam—
speaking; maitreyam—unto the sage Maitreya; dvaipayana-sutah— the son of
Dvaipayana; budhah—learned; pripayan—in a pleasing manner; iva—as it
was; bharatya—in the manner of a request; vidurah— Vidura; prati—
counter; abhasata—expressed.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, while Maitreya, the great sage, was
thus speaking, Vidura, the learned son of Dvaipayana Vyasa, expressed a
request in a pleasing manner by asking this question.
TEXT 2
विदुर उवाच
नक्षन्‌ कथं भगवतश्चिन्मात्रस्याविकारिणः |
लीलया चापि Teron गुणाः क्रियाः ॥ २ ॥
261


--- Page 259 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
vidura uvaca
brahman katham bhagavatas
cinmatrasyavikarinah
lilaya capi yujyeran
nirgunasya gunah kriyah

ওঃ vidurah uvaca—Sri Vidura said; brahman—O brahmana; katham—
how; bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead; cit-matrasya—of the
complete spiritual whole; avikarinah—of the unchangeable; lilaya—by His
pastime; ci—either; api—even though it is so; yujyerat—takes place;
nirgunasya— without the modes of nature; gunah—modes of nature;
kriyah— activities.

TRANSLATION

Sri Vidura said: 0 great brahmana, since the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the complete spiritual whole and is unchangeable, how is He
connected with the material modes of nature and their activities? If this is
His pastime, how do the activities of the unchangeable take place and
exhibit qualities without the modes of nature?

PURPORT

As described in the previous chapter, the difference between the Super-
soul, the Supreme Lord, and the living entities is that the activities of the
Lord in creating the cosmic manifestation are performed by the Lord
through the agency of His multifarious energies, but this manifestation is
bewildering to the living entities. The Lord is, therefore, the master of the
energies, whereas the living entities are subjugated by them. By asking
various questions about transcendental activities, Vidura is clearing the
misconception that when the Lord either descends on the earth in His
incarnation or appears Himself with all His potencies, He too is subjected
10 the influence of maya, just like an ordinary living entity. This is
generally the calculation of less intelligent philosophers who consider the
position of the Lord and that of the living entities to be on the same level.
Vidura is hearing the great sage Maitreya refute these arguments. The Lord
is described in this verse as cinmatra, or completely spiritual. The Person-
ality of Godhead has unlimited potencies to create and manifest many
wonderful things, both temporary and permanent. Because this material
world is the creation of His external energy, it thus appears to be tempo-
rary; it is manifested at certain intervals, maintained for some time, and
again dissolved and conserved in His own energy. As described in Bhagavad-


--- Page 260 ---
Text 2] Further Inquiries by Vidura 263
gitd, bhitva bhiitva praliyate (Bg. 8.19). But the creation of His internal
potency, the spiritual world, is not a temporary manifestation like the
material world, but is eternal and full of transcendental knowledge, opu-
lence, energy, strength, beauties and glories. Such manifestations of the
Lord’s potencies are eternal and are therefore called nirguna, or free from
all tinges of the modes of material nature, even up to the mode of
material goodness. The spiritual world is transcendental even to material
goodness and thus is unchangeable. Since the Supreme Lord of such
eternal and unchangeable qualities is never subjugated by anything like
material influence, how can His activities and form be conceived to be
under the influence of illusory maya, as is the case with the living entities?

A juggler or magician displays many wonders with his acts and arts. He
can become a cow by his magical tactics, and yet he is not that cow; but
at the same time, the cow displayed by the magician is not different from
him. Similarly, the material potency is not different from the Lord because
it is an emanation from Him, but at the same time, that potential manifes-
tation is not the Supreme Lord. The Lord’s transcendental knowledge and
potency always remain the same; they do not change, even when displayed
in the material world. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, the Lord descends on the
earth by His own internal potency, and therefore there is no question of
His becoming materially contaminated, changed or otherwise affected by
the modes of material nature. The Lord is saguna by His own internal
potency, but at the same time He is nirguna, since He is not in touch with
the material energy. The restrictions of the prison house are applicable to
prisoners who are condemned by the king’s law, but the king is never
affected by such implications, although he may visit the prison house out
of his good will. In the Visnu Purana the six opulences of the Lord are
stated to be nondifferent from Him. The opulences of transcendental
knowledge, strength, opulence, potency, beauty and renunciation are all
identical with the Personality of Godhead. When He personally displays
such opulences in the material world, they have no connection with the
modes of material nature. The very word cinmatratvam is the guarantee
that the Lord’s activities are always transcendental, even when displayed in
the material world. His activities are as good as the Supreme Personality
Himself, otherwise liberated devotees like Sukadeva Gosvami would not
have been attracted by them. Vidura inquired how the Lord’s activities can
be in the modes of material nature, as is sometimes miscalculated by
persons with a poor fund of knowledge. The inebriety of the material
qualities is due to the difference between the material body and the spirit
soul. The conditioned soul’s activities are displayed through the medium


--- Page 261 ---
264 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
of the modes of material nature and are therefore perverted in appearance.
However, the Lord’s body and the Lord Himself are one and the same, and
when the Lord’s activities are displayed, they are certainly nondifferent
from the Lord in all respects. The conclusion is that persons who consider
the Lord’s activities material are certainly mistaken.
TEXT 3
कीडायाघुयमो ऽस्य कामधिक्रीडिषान्यतः |
TAR च कथं निवृत्तस्य सदान्यतः ॥ २ ॥
kridayam udyamo ’rbhasya
kamas cikridisanyatah
svalas-trptasya ca kathari
nivrttasya sadanyatah

kridayam—in the matter of playing; udyamah—enthusiasm; arbhasya—
of the boys; kamah—desire; cikridisa—willingness to play; anyatah— with
other boys; svatah-trptasya—for one who is self-satisfied; ca—also; katham—
what for; nivrttasya—one who is detached; sada—for all time; anyatah—
otherwise.

TRANSLATION

Boys are enthusiastic to play with other boys or with various diversions
because they are encouraged by desire. But there is no possibility of such
desire for the Lord because He is self-satisfied and detached from every-
thing.

PURPORT

Since the Supreme Personality of Godhcad is one without a second,
there is no possibility that anything besides Himself can exist. He expands
Himself by His energies in multiforms of seclf-expansions and separated
expansions as well, just as fire expands itself by heat and light. Since there
is no other existence besides the Lord Himself, the Lord’s association with
anything manifests His association with Himself. In Bhagavad-gita (9.4) the
Lord says:

mayd tatam idam sarvarm jagadavyakta-miirtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani na caham tesv avasthitah

“The complete manifestation of the cosmic situation is an expansion of

the Lord Himself in His impersonal feature. All things are situated in Him


--- Page 262 ---
Text 5] Further Inquiries by Vidura 265
only, yet He is not in them.” That is the opulence of the Lord’s attachment
and detachment. He is attached to everything, yet He is detached from all.
TEXT 4
FETE विश्वं गुणमय्याऽऽत्ममायया |
तया संस्थापयत्येतद्भयः प्रत्यपिधास्यति ।। ४ ॥
০
asrakgsid bhagavan visvari
guna-mayya “’tma-mayaya
taya sarmsthapayaty etad
bhuyah pratyapidhasyati
asraksit—caused to create; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead;
visvam—the universe; gunamayya—endowed with three modes of material
nature; atma—self; mayaya—by the potency; taya—by her; sariisthapayati—
maintains; etat—all these; bhuyah—then again; praytapidhasyati—con-
versely dissolves also.
TRANSLATION
By His self-sheltered potency of the three modes of material nature,
the Lord has caused the creation of this universe. By her He maintains the
creation and conversely dissolves it, again and again.
PURPORT
This cosmic universe is created by the Lord for those living entities who
are carried away by the illusory thought of becoming one with Him by
imitation. The three modes of material nature are for the further bewilder-
ment of the conditioned souls. The conditioned living entity, bewildered
by the illusory energy, considers himself a part of the material creation
due to forgetfulness of his spiritual identity, and thus he becomes entangled
in material activities life after life. This material world is not for the pur-
pose of the Lord Himself, but is for the conditioned souls who wanted to
be controllers due to misuse of their God-gifted minute independence.
Thus the conditioned souls are subjected to repeated birth and death.
TEXT 5
देशतः कालतो योऽसाववस्थातः खतोऽन्यतः |
অবিত্তমাববাধান্মা स युज्येताजया कथम्‌ || ५॥


--- Page 263 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
desatah kalato yo ’ sav
avasthdatah svato ’nyatah
aviluptavabodhatma
sa yujyetdjayd katham
desatah—circumstantial; kalatah—by the influence of time; yah—one
who; asau—the living entity; avasthatah—by situation; svatah—by dream;
anyatah—by others; avilupta—extinct; avabodha—consciousness; atma—
pure self; sah—he; yujyeta—engaged; ajaya— with nescience; katham—how
is it so.
TRANSLATION
The pure soul is pure consciousness and is never out of consciousness,
either due to circumstances, time, situations, dreams or other causes. How
then does he become engaged in nescience?
PURPORT
The consciousness of the living being is always present and never changes
under any circumstances, as above mentioned. When a living man moves
from one place to another, he is conscious that he has changed his position.
He is always present in the past, present and future, like electricity. One
can remember incidents from his past and can conjecture about his future
also on the basis of past experience. He never forgets his personal identity,
even though he is placed in awkward circumstances. How then can the
living entity become forgetful of his real identity as pure spirit soul and
identify with matter unless influenced by something beyond himself? The
conclusion is that the living entity is influenced by the avidyd potency, as
confirmed in both the Visnu Purana and the beginning of Srimad-
Bhagavatam. The living entity is mentioned in Bhagavad-gita as para-
prakrti (Bg. 7.5), and in the Visnu Purana he is mentioned as the para-$ak ti.
He is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord as potency and not as the
potent. The potent can exhibit many potencies, but the potency cannot
equal the potent at any stage. One potency may be overcome by another
potency, but to the potent, all potencies are under control. The jiva
potency or the kgetrajiia-sakti of the Lord has the tendency to be
overpowered by the external potency, avidyd karma-sarhjiia, and in this
way he is placed in the awkward circumstances of material existence. The
living entity cannot be forgetful of his real identity unless influenced by the
avidya potency. Because the living entity is prone to the influence of the
avidya potency, he can never equal the supreme potent.


--- Page 264 ---
Text 6] Further Inquiries by Vidura 267
TEXT 6
ने 3 वशेतरेष्वदस्थितः
भगवानेक एवष सवेशषत्रे्बवस्थितः |
.
IGT दुर्भगत्वं वा BA वा कर्म॑भिः ङतः ॥ ६ ॥
bhagavan eka evaisa
sarva-ksetresv avasthitah
amusya durbhagatvar va
kleso va karmabhih kutah

bhagavan— the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ekah—alone; eva-esah—
all these; sarva—all; ksetresu—in the living entities; avasthitah—situated;
amugsya—of the living entities; durbhagatvam—misfortune; va—either;
klesah— miseries; va— or; karmabhili —by activities; kutah—what for.

TRANSLATION

The Lord, as the Supersoul, is situated in every living being’s heart. Why

then do the living entities’ activities result in misfortune and misery?
PURPORT

The next question put forward by Vidura to Maitreya is, “Why are the
living entities subjected to so many miseries and misfortunes in spite of the
Lord’s presence in their hearts as the Supersoul?” The body is considered
a fruitful tree, and the living entity and the Lord as Supersoul are like two
birds seated in that tree. The individual soul is eating the fruit of the tree,
but the Supersoul, the Lord, is witnessing the activities of the other bird.
A citizen of the state may be in miseries for want of sufficient supervision
by the state authority, but how can it be possible that a citizen suffers
from other citizens while the chief of the state is personally present? From
another point of view, it is understood that the jiva living entity is
qualitatively one with the Lord, and thus his knowledge in the pure state
of life cannot be covered by nescience, especially in the presence of the
Supreme Lord. How then does the living entity become subjected to igno-
rance and covered by the influence of maya? The Lord is the father and
protector of every living entity, and He is known as the bhita-bhrt, or the
maintainer of the living entities. Why then should the living entity be
subjected to so many sufferings and misfortunes? It should not be so,
but actually we see that it happens every where. This question is therefore
put forward by Vidura for solution.


--- Page 265 ---
268 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
TEXT 7
एतसिन्मे मनो विद्वन्‌ खियतेऽज्ञानसङ्कटे |
तन्नः पराणुद विभो करमर मानसं महत्‌ ॥ ७॥
etasmin me mano vidvan
khidyate’ jiana-sankate
tan nah paranuda vibho
kasmalar manasa mahat
etasmin—in this; me—my; manah— mind; vidvan—O learned one; khid-
yate—is troubling; ajiana—nescience; sankate—in distress; tat—therefore;
nah— mine; pardnuda—clear up; vibho—O great one; kasmalam—illusion;
manasam—relating to the mind; mahat—great.
TRANSLATION
O great and learned one, my mind is greatly illusioned by the distress of
this nescience, and I therefore request you to clear it up.
PURPORT
Such mental bewilderment as represented here by Vidura takes: place
for some living entities, but not for everyone, for if everyone were
bewildered there would be no possibility of a solution by higher person-
alities.
TEXT 8
श्रीड्युक उवाच
9 =
स इत्थं चोदितः gen त्वजिज्ञासुना निः |
TAR WARE: सयन्निव गतखयः || ८ ॥
$ri Suka uvaca
sa ittham coditah ksattra
tattva-jijiiasuna munih
pratyaha bhagavac-cittah
smayann iva gata-smayah
sri Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; sah—he (Maitreya Muni);
ittham—in this way; coditah—being agitated; ksattra—by Vidura; tattva-
jijiasuna—by one who was anxious to inquire to know the truth; munih—
the great sage; pratyadha—replied; bhagavat-cittah—God conscious; smay-
an—wonder; iva—since; gata-smayah— without hesitation.


--- Page 266 ---
Text 9] Further Inquiries by Vidura 269
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, Maitreya, being thus agitated by the
inquisitive Vidura, at first seemed to be astonished, but then he replied to
him without hesitation, since he was fully God conscious.
PURPORT
Since the great sage Maitreya was filled with God consciousness, he had
no reason to be astonished at such contradictory questions by Vidura.
Therefore, although as a devotee he externally expressed surprise, as if he
did not know how to reply to those questions, he immediately became
perfectly settled and properly replied to Vidura. Yasmin vijaate
sarvam eva vijiiatah bhavanti. Anyone who is a devotee of the Lord knows
about the Lord to some extent, and devotional service to the Lord makes
him able to know everything by the grace of the Lord. Although a devotee
may apparently express himself to be ignorant, he is full of knowledge in
every intricate matter.
TEXT 9
as
{HAT उवाच
सेयं भगवतो माया यस्येन Ree ।
शरस्य वियुक्तस्य कार्पण्ययुत बन्धनम्‌ । ९॥
maitreya uvaca
seyam bhagavato maya
yan nayena virudhyate
Svarasya vimuktasya
karpapyam uta bandhanam
বাঃ maitreyah uvaca—Sri Maitreya said; sa iyam—such a statement;
bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead; maya—illusion; yat—that
which; nayena—by logic; virudhyate—becomes contradictory; tsvarasya— of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vimuktasya—of the ever liberated;
karpanyam—insufficiency; uta—as also, what to ‘speak of; bandhanam—
bondage.
TRANSLATION
Sri Maitreya said: Certain conditioned souls put forward the theory
that the Supreme Brahman or the Personality of Godhead is overcome by
illusion or maya, and at the same time they maintain that He is uncon-
ditioned. This is against all logic.


--- Page 267 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
PURPORT

Sometimes it appears that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
one hundred percent spiritual, cannot be the cause of the illusory potency
which covers the knowledge of the individual soul. But factually there is no
doubt that the illusory external energy is also part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord. When Vyasadeva realized the Supreme Personality of God-
head, he saw the Lord along with His external potency, which covers the
pure knowledge of the individual living entities. Why the external encrgy
acts in this way may be considered as follows, as analyzed by great
commentators like Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakur and Srila Jiva Gosvami.
Although the material, illusory energy is distinct from the spiritual energy,
it is one of the many energies of the Lord, and thus the material modes of
nature (the mode of goodness, etc.) are surely qualities of the Lord. The
energy and the energetic Personality of Godhead are not different, and al-
though such energy is one with the Lord, He is never overpowered by it.
Although the living entities are also parts and parcels of the Lord, they
are overcome by the material energy. The inconceivable yogam aisvaram
of the Lord, as mentioned in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.5), is misunderstood by
the froggish philosophers. In order to support a theory that Narayana (the
Lord Himself) becomes a daridra-narayana, a poor man, they propose that
the material energy overcomes the Supreme Lord. Srila Jiva Gosvami and
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakur, however, offer a very nice example in
explanation. They say that although the sun is all light, the clouds, dark-
ness and snowfall are all part and parcel of the sun. Without the sun there
is no possibility of the sky’s being overcast with clouds or darkness, nor
can there be snowfall on the earth. Although life is sustained by the sun,
life is also disturbed by darkness and snowfall produced by the sun. But
it is also a fact that the sun itself is never overcome by darkness, clouds or
snowfall; the sun is far, far away from such disturbances. Only those who
have a poor fund of knowledge say that the sun is covered by a cloud or by
darkness. Similarly, the Supreme Brahman or the Param Brahman, the
Personality of Godhead, is always unaffected by the influence of the
material energy, although itis one of His energies (parasya saktir vividhaiva
Sruyate).

There is no reason to assert that the Supreme Brahman is overpowered
by the illusory energy. The clouds, darkness and snowfall can cover only a
very insignificant portion of the sun’s rays. Similarly, the modes of material
nature may react upon the ray-like living entities. It is the misfortune of
the living entity, certainly not without reason, that the influence of the
material energy acts on his pure consciousness and eternal bliss. This


--- Page 268 ---
Text 9) Further Inquiries by Vidura 271
covering up of pure consciousness and eternal bliss is due to avidya-
karma-sarhjia, the energy which acts on the infinitesimal living entities
who misuse their minute independence. According to Vispu Purana,
Bhagavad-gita and’ all other Vedic literatures, the living entities are
generated from the tatastha energy of the Lord, and thus they are always
the energy of the Lord and are not the energetic. The living entities are
like the sun’s rays. Although, as explained above, there is no qualitative
difference between the sun and its rays, the sun’s rays are sometimes
overpowered by another energy of the sun, namely by clouds or by snow-
fall. Similarly, although the living entities are qualitatively one with the
superior energy of the Lord, they have the tendency to be overpowered by
the inferior material energy. In the Vedic hymns it is said that the living
entities are like the sparks of a fire. The sparks of fire also are fire, but the
burning potency of the sparks is different from that of the original fire.
When the sparks fly out of touch with the original fire, they come under
the influence of a non-fiery atmosphere; thus they maintain the potency
to be again one with the fire as sparks, but not as the original fire. The
sparks can everlastingly remain within the original fire as its parts and
parcels, but the moment the sparks become separated from the original
fire, their misfortunes and miseries begin. The clear conclusion is that the
Supreme Lord, who is the original fire, is never overpowered, but the
infinitesimal sparks of the fire can become overpowered by the illusory
effect of maya. It is a most ludicrous argument to say that the Supreme
Lord is overpowered by His own material energy. The Lord is the master
of the material energy, but the living entities are in the conditioned state,
controlled by the material energy. That is the version of Bhagavad-gita.
The froggish philosophers who put forward the argument that the Supreme
Lord is overpowered by the material mode of goodness are themselves
illusioned by the same material energy, although they think of themselves
as liberated souls. They support their arguments by a false and laborious
jugglery of words, which is a gift of the same illusory energy of the Lord.
But the poor froggish philosophers, due to a false sense of knowledge,
cannot understand the situation.

In the Sixth Canto, Ninth Chapter, Thirty-fourth verse of the Srimad-
Bhagavatam it is stated:
duravabodha iva tavayari viharayogo yadasarano’sarira idam anaveksitasmat
samavdya atmanaivavi kriyamanena sagunam agunah srjasi pasiharasi.
“The demigods prayed to the Supreme Lord that although His activities are
very difficult to understand, they can still be understood to some extent


--- Page 269 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
by those who sincerely engage in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord.” The demigods admitted that although the Lord is apart from the
material influence or creation, He nevertheless creates, maintains and
annihilates the complete cosmic manifestation by the agency of the
demigods.
TEXT 10
यदर्थेन বিনাম্ব্স पंस आत्मदिप्ेयः ।
प्तीयत उपद्रष्टुः खशचिरछेद नादिकः ॥।१०॥
yad arthena vinamusya
0177250 atma-viparyayah
pratiyata upadrastuh
sva-Siras chedanadikah

yat—thus; arthena—by purpose or meaning; vina—without; amusya—of
such a one; purisah—of the living entity; atma-viparyayah—upset about
self-identification; pratiyate—so appear; upadrastuh—of the superficial on-
looker; sva-§ireh— own head; chedana-adikah— cutting off.

TRANSLATION

The living entity is in distress regarding his self-identity. He has no

factual background, like a man who dreams that he sees his head cut off.
PURPORT

A teacher in school once threatened his pupil that he would cut off his
head and hang it on the wall so that the child could see how his head had
been cut off. The child became frightened and stopped his mischief.
Similarly, the miseries of the pure soul and the disruption of his self-
identification are managed by the external energy of the Lord, which
controls those mischievous living entities who want to go against the will
of the Lord. Actually there is no bondage or misery for the living entity,
nor does he ever lose his pure knowledge. In his pure consciousness, when
he thinks a little seriously about his position he can understand that he is
eternally subordinate to the mercy of the Supreme and that his attempt to
become one with the Supreme Lord is a false illusion. Life after life the
living entity falsely tries to lord it over material nature and to become the
lord of the material world, but there is no tangible result. At last, when
frustrated, he gives up his material activities and tries to become one with
the Lord and speculate with much jugglery of words but without success.


--- Page 270 ---
Text 11] Further Inquiries by Vidura 273
These activities are performed under the dictation of the illusory energy.
The experience is compared to the experience of one’s having his head cut
off in a dream. The man whose head has been cut off also sees that his head
has been cut off. If a person’s head is severed he loses his power to see.
Therefore if a man sees that his head has been cut off, itl means that he
thinks like that in hallucination. Similarly a living entity is eternally sub-
ordinate to the Supreme Lord, and he has this knowledge with him, but,
artificially, he thinks that he is God himself and that although he is God he
has lost his knowledge due to maya. This conception has no meaning, just
as there is no meaning to seeing one’s head being cut off. This is the pro-
cess by which knowledge is covered. And because this artificial rebellious
condition of the living entity gives him all troubles, it is to be understood
that he should take to his normal life as a devotee of the Lord and be
relieved from the misconception of being God. The so-called liberation of
thinking oneself God is that last reaction of avidya by which the living
entity is entrapped. The conclusion is that a living entity deprived of
eternal transcendental service to the Lord becomes illusioned in many
ways. Even in his conditional life he is the eternal servant of the Lord. His
servitude under the spell of illusory maya is also a manifestation of his
eternal condition of service. Because he has rebelled against the service
of the Lord, he is therefore put in the service of the maya. He is still serv-
ing, but in a perverted manner. When he wants to get out of service under
material bondage, he next desires to become one with the Lord. This is an-
other illusion. The best course, therefore, is to surrender unto the Lord and
thus get rid of the illusory maya for good, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:
daivi hyesa gunamayi mama maya duratyaya
mam eva ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te (Bg. 7.14)
TEXT 11
यथा जले चन्द्रमसः कम्पादिस्तत्कृतो गुणः |
दृश्यतेऽसन्नपि बरष्टरात्मनो नात्मनो गुणः ॥।११॥
yatha jale candramasah
kampadis tat-krto gunah
drsyate’ sann api drastur
atmano ’natmano gunah

yatha—it is so; jale—in the water; candramasah—of the moon; kam-
padih—quivering; tat-krtah—done by the water; gurah—quality; dréyate—


--- Page 271 ---
274 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
it is so seen; asan api—without existence; drastuh—of the seer; atmanah—of
the self; anatmanah— of other than the self; gunah—quality.
TRANSLATION

As the moon reflected on water appears to the seer to tremble due to
being associated with the quality of the water, so the self associated with
matter appears to be qualified as matter.

PURPORT

The moon in the sky is compared to the Supreme Soul, the Personality
of Godhead, and the living entities are compared to the reflection of the
moon on water. The moon in the sky is fixed and does not appear to
quiver like the moon on the water. Actually, like the original moon in the
sky, the moon reflected on the water should also not quiver, but because
of being associated with water, the reflection appears to be quivering, al-
though in actual fact the moon is fixed. The water moves, but the moon
does not move. Similarly, the living entities appear to be tainted by ma-
terial qualities like illusion, lamentation, miseries, etc., although in the pure
soul such qualities are completely absent. The word pratiyate, which
means apparently and not actually (like the experience of having one’s
head cut off in a dream), is significant here. The reflection of the moon on
the water is the separated rays of the moon and not the actual moon. The
separated parts and parcels of the Lord entangled in the water of material
existence have the quivering quality, whereas the Lord is like the actual
moon in the sky, which is not at all in touch with water. The light of the
sun and moon reflected on matter makes the matter bright and praise-
worthy. The living symptoms are compared to the light of the sun and the
moon illuminating material manifestations like trees and mountains. The
reflection of the sun or moon is accepted as the real sun or moon by less
intelligent men, and the pure monistic philosophy develops from these
ideas. In fact, the light of the sun and the moon are actually different from
the sun and moon themselves, although they are always connected. The
light of the moon spread throughout the sky appears to be impersonal,
but the moon planet, as it is, is personal, and the living entities on the moon
planet are also personal. In the rays of the moon, different material en-
tities appear to be comparatively more or less important. The light of the
moon on the Taj Mahal appears to be more beautiful than the same light in
the wilderness. Although the light of the moon is the same everywhere,
due to being differently appreciated, it appears to be different. Similarly,


--- Page 272 ---
Text 12] Further Inquiries by Vidura 275
the light of the Lord is equally distributed everywhere, but due to being
differently received, it appears to be different. One should not, therefore,
accept the reflection of the moon on the water as actual and misunderstand
the whole situation through monistic philosophy. The quivering quality of
the moon is also variable. When the water is standing still, there is no
quivering. A more settled conditioned soul quivers less, but due to material
connection the quivering quality is more or less present everywhere.
TEXT 12
a ~
a वै निवृत्तिधर्मेण वासुदेवानुकम्पया ।
RA
ম্যাবস্ুক্কিয়াঈীন तिरोधत्ते शनेरिंह ॥१२॥
sa vai nivrtti-dharmena
vasudevanukampaya
bhagavad-bhakti-yogena
tirodhatte sanair tha
sah—that; vai—also; nivrtti—detachment; dharmena—by engagement;
vasudeva—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anukampaya—by the
mercy of; bhagavat—in relation with the Personality of Godhead; bhakti-
yogena— by linking up; tirodhatte—gradually diminishes; sanaih—very soon;
tha—in this existence.
TRANSLATION
But that misconception of self-identity can be diminished gradually by
the mercy of the Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva, by the process of
devotional service to the Lord in the mode of detachment.
PURPORT
The quivering quality of material existence, which comes from identifi-
cation with matter or thinking oneself, under the material influence of
philosophical speculation, to be God, can be eradicated by devotional
service to the Lord, by the mercy of the Personality of Godhead,
Vasudeva. As discussed in the First Canto, the application of devotional
service to Lord Vasudeva, because it invites pure knowledge, quickly de-
taches one from the material conception of life and thus revives one’s
normal condition of spiritual existence, even in this life, and frees one
from the material winds which cause one to quiver. Only knowledge in
devotional service can elevate one towards the path of liberation. The


--- Page 273 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
development of knowledge for the purpose of knowing everything without
rendering devotional service is considered fruitless labor, and one cannot
gel the desired result by such labor of love. Lord Vasudeva is pleased by
devotional service only, and thus His mercy is realized by association with
pure devotees of the Lord. Pure devotees of the Lord are transcendental
to all material desires, including the desire for the results of fruitive
activities and philosophical speculation. If one wants to acquire the mercy
of the Lord, he has to associate with pure devotees. Such association
alone can, by degrees, release one from the quivering elements.
TEXT 13 ।
LN -
यदेन्द्रियोपरामोऽथ द्र्रात्मनि परे हरौ ।
AN .
विलीयन्ते तदा केशाः संसु्स्येव TEE: ॥१२॥
yadendriyoparamo tha
dragtratmani pare harau
viliyante tada klesah
samsuptasyeva krtsnasah

yada—when; indriya—senses; uparamah—satiated; atha—thus; drasta-
atmani—unto the seer, the Supersoul; pare—in the transcendence; harau—
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viliyante—becomes merged in;
tada—at that time; klesah— miseries; samsuptasya—one who has enjoyed
sound sleep; iva—like; krtsnasah—in complete.

TRANSLATION

When the senses are satisfied in the seer-Supersoul, the Personality of
Godhead, and merge in Him, all miseries are vanquished, as after a sound
sleep.

PURPORT

The quivering of the living entity as described above is due to the senses.
Since the entire material existence is meant for sense gratification, the
senses are the medium of material activities, and they cause the quivering
of the steady soul. Therefore, these senses are to be detached from all such
material activities. According to the impersonalists the senses are stopped
from work by merging the soul in the Supersoul Brahman. The devotees,
however, do not stop the material senses from acting, but they engage


--- Page 274 ---
Text 14] Further Inquiries by Vidura 277
their transcendental senses in the service of the Transcendence, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In either case, the activities of the senses
in the material field are to be stopped by cultivation of knowledge, and, if
possible, they can be engaged in the service of the Lord. The senses are
transcendental in nature, but their activities become polluted when con-
taminated by matter. We have to treat the senses to cure them of the
material disease, not stop them from acting, as suggested by the imperson-
alist. In Bhagavad-gita (2.59) it is said that one ceases all material activities
only when satisfied by contact with a better engagement. Consciousness is
active by nature and cannot be stopped from working. Artificially stopping
a mischievous child is not the real remedy. The child must be given some
better engagement so that he will automatically stop causing mischief. In
the same way, the mischievous activities of the senses can only be stopped
by better engagement in relation with the Supreme Personality of God-
head. When the eyes are engaged in seeing the beautiful form of the
Lord, the tongue engaged in tasting prasadam or remnants of foodstuff
offered to the Lord, the ears engaged in hearing His glories, the hands
engaged in cleaning the temple of the Lord, the legs engaged in visiting His
temples—or when all the senses are engaged in transcendental variegated-
ness—then only can the transcendental senses become satiated and eternal-
ly free from material engagement. The Lord, as the Supersoul residing
in everyone’s heart and as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
the transcendental world far beyond the material creation, is the seer of
all our activities. Our activities must be so transcendentally saturated that
the Lord will be kind enough to look upon us favorably and engage us in
His transcendental service; then only can the senses be satisfied completely
and be no longer troubled by material attraction.
TEXT 14
अशेषसंङकेशशमं RR गुणानुवादश्रवणं ga: |
किं वा पुनस्तचरणारविन्दपरागसेवारतिरात्मरन्धा ॥१४॥
asesa-sanklesa-samarin vidhatte
gunanuvada-sravanam murareh
kim va punas tac-caraparavinda-
paraga-seva-ratir atma-labdha

asesa—unlimited; sanklesa— miserable conditions; samam— cessation; vid-

hatte—can perform; guna-anuvada— description of the transcendental name,


--- Page 275 ---
278 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
form, quality, pastimes, entourage and paraphernalia, etc; sravanam—
hearing and chanting; murareh—of Murari (Sri Krsna), the Personality of
Godhead; kim va—what to speak of; punah—again; tat—His; carana-
aravinda—lotus feet; paraga-seva—service of the dust of flavor; ratih—
attraction; atma-labdha— those who have gained such self-achievement.
TRANSLATION

Simply by chanting and hearing of the transcendental name, form, etc.,
of the Personality of Godhead, Si Krsna, one can achieve the cessation of
unlimited miserable conditions. Therefore what to speak of those who
have attained attraction for serving the flavor of the dust of the lotus feet
of the Lord?

PURPORT

Two different methods for controlling the material senses are recom-
mended in the Vedic scriptural wisdom. One of them is the process of
(दात, or the path of philosophical understanding of the Supreme—
Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. The other is that of direct engage-
ment in the transcendental loving devotional service of the Lord. Of these
two most popular methods, the path of devotional service is recommended
here as the best because one on the path of devotional service does not
have to wait for the attainment of the fruitive results of pious activities or
for the results of knowledge. The two stages of executing devotional
service are, first, the stage of practicing devotional service with our present
senses under the regulations of the recognized scriptures and, second,
attaining sincere attachment for serving the particles of the dust of the
lotus feet of the Lord. The first stage is called sadhana-bhakti, or devo-
tional service for the neophyte, which is rendered under the direction of
a pure devotee, and the second stage is called raga-bhakti, in which the
mature devotee automatically takes to the various services of the Lord out
of sincere attachment. The great sage Maitreya now gives the final answer
to all the questions of Vidura: devotional service to the Lord is the
ultimate means to mitigate all the miserable conditions of material exis-
tence. The path of knowledge or that of mystic gymnastics may be
adopted as a means for the purpose, but unless mixed with bhakti,
or devotional service, they are unable to award the desired result. By
practicing sadhanae-bhakti one may gradually rise to the point of rage-
bhakti, and by performing raga-bhakti in loving transcendental service one
can even control the Supreme Powerful Lord.


--- Page 276 ---
Text 16] Further Inquiries by Vidura 279
TEXT 15
विदुर उवाच
संछिन्नः संशयो मह्यं तव छक्तासिना बिभो ।
उभयत्रापि भगवन्मनो मे सम्प्रधावति ॥१५॥
vidura uvaca
safichinnah sarmsayo mahyarm
tava suktasina vibho
ubhayatrapi bhagavan
mano me sampradhavati
च vidurah uvaca— Sri Vidura said; saiichinnah—cut off; samsayah—
doubts; mahyam—unto me; tava—your; sikta-asina—by the weapon of
convincing words; vibho—O my lord; ubhayatra-api—both in God and the
living entity; bhagavan—O powerful one; manah—mind; me—my; sampra-
dhavati—perfectly getting in.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: O powerful sage, my lord, all my doubts about the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the living entities have now been
removed by your convincing words. My mind is now perfectly entering
into them.
PURPORT
The science of Krsna, or the science of God and the living entities, is so
subtle that even a personality like Vidura has to consult persons like the
sage Maitreya. Doubts about the eternal relationship of the Lord and the
living entity are created by mental speculators in different ways, but
the conclusive fact is that the relationship of God and the living entity is
one of the predominator and the predominated. The Lord is the eternal
predominator, and the living entities are eternally predominated. Real
knowledge of this relationship entails reviving the lost consciousness to
this standard, and the process for such revival is devotional service to the
Lord. By clearly understanding from authorities like the sage Maitreya,
one can become situated in real knowledge, and the disturbed mind can
thus be fixed on the progressive path.
TEXT 16
साष्वेतद्‌ RA विदनात्ममायायनं हरेः |
आभात्यपाथं निमूलं विश्वमूलं न यद्बहिः ॥१६॥


--- Page 277 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
sadhv etad vyahrtam vidvan
natma-mayayanarm hareh
abhaty apartham nirmularn
visva-mitlam na yadbahih
sadhu—as good as it should be; etat—all these explanations; vyahrtam=—
thus spoken; vidvan—O learned one; na—not; atma—the self; maya—ecnergy;
ayanam—movement; hareh—of the Personality of Godhead; abhati—
appears; apartham—without meaning; nirmialam-—-without basis; visva-
mitlam— the origin is the Supreme; na—not; yat— which; bahih— outside.
TRANSLATION
O learned sage, your explanations are very good, as they should be.
Disturbances to the conditioned soul have no other basis than the move-
ment of the external energy of the Lord.
PURPORT
A living entity’s unlawful desirc to become one with the Lord in every
respect is the root cause of the entire material manifestation, for other-
wise the Lord has no need to create such a manifestation, even for His
pastimes. The conditioned soul, under the spell of the external energy of
the Lord, falsely suffers many unfortunate incidents in material life. The
Lord is the predominator of the external energy, maya, whereas the living
entity is predominated by the same maya under the material condition.
The false attempt of the living entity to occupy the predominating post
of the Lord is the cause of his material bondage, and the conditioned
soul’s attempt to become one with the Lord is the last snare of maya.
TEXT 17
यश्च मूढतमो लोके यश्च बुद्धेः परं गतः ।
RD
নান্ধুনী सुखमेधेते ्धिश्यस्यन्तरितो जनः ॥१५७॥
yas ca mudhatamo loke
yas ca buddheh param gatah
tav ubhau sukham edhete
klisyaty antarito janah
yah—one who is; ca—also; mitdhatamah— the lowest of the fools; loke—
in the world; yah ca—and one who is; buddheh— of intelligence; param—
transcendental; gatah—gone; tau—all of them; ubhau—both; sukham—


--- Page 278 ---
Text 18] Further Inquiries by Vidura 281
happiness; edhete—enjoy; kliSyati—suffer; antaritah—via media; janah—
persons.
TRANSLATION

Both the lowest of fools and he who is transcendental to all intelli-
gence enjoy happiness, whereas persons who are between them suffer the
material pangs.

PURPORT

The lowest of fools do not understand material miseries; they pass
their lives merrily and do not inquire into the miseries of life. Such
persons are almost on the level of the animals, who, although in the eyes
of superiors are always miserable in life, are unaware of material dis-
tresses. A hog’s life is degraded in its standard of happiness, which entails
living in a filthy place, engaging in sex enjoyment al cvery opportune
moment and laboring hard in a struggle for existence, but this is unknown
to the hog. Similarly, human beings who are unaware of the miseries of
material existence and are happy in sex life and hard labor are the lowest of
fools. Yet because they have no sense of miseries, they supposedly enjoy
so-called happiness. The other class of men, those who are liberated and
are situated in the transcendental position above intelligence, are really
happy and are called paramahariisas. Bul persons who are neither like hogs
and dogs nor on the level of the paramahamsas feel the material pangs, and
for them inquiry on the Supreme Truth is necessary. The Vedanta-sutras
state, athato brahma-jijiiasa: “Now one should inquire about Brahman.”
This inquiry is necessary for those who are between the paramaharsas
and the fools who have forgotten the question of sclf-realization in the
midst of life in sense gratification.

TEXT 18
अर्थाभावं Affe प्रतीतस्यापि नात्मनः |
तां चापि युप्मच्चरणसेवयादं पराणुदे ॥१८॥
arthabhavam viniscitya
pratitasyapi natmanah
tari capi yusmac-carana
sevayaharh paranude

artha-abhavam— without substance; viniscitya—being ascertained; prati-

tasya—of the apparent values; api—also; na—never; atmanah—of the self;


--- Page 279 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
tam—that; ca—also; api—thus; yusmat—your; carapa—feet; sevaya—by ser-
vice;aham—myself; paranude—shall be able to give up.
TRANSLATION
But, my dear sir, I am obliged to you because now I can understand
that this material manifestation is without substance although it appears
to be real. I am confident that by serving your feet it will be possible for
me to give up the false idea.
PURPORT
The sufferings of the conditioned soul are superficial and have no
intrinsic value, like the cutting off of one’s head in a dream. Yet although
this statement is theoretically very true, it is very difficult for the common
man or the neophyte on the transcendental path to realize practically.
However, by serving the feet of great transcendentalists like Maitreya
Muni and by constantly associating with them, one is enabled to give up
the false idea that the soul suffers from material pangs.
TEXT 19
यत्सेवया भगवतः ङूटस्यस्य मधुद्धिषः |
रतिरासो भवेत्तीव्रः पादयोव्य॑सनारदन; 1220
yat-sevaya bhagavatah
kiuta-sthasya madhu-dvisah
rati-raso bhavet tivrah
padayor vyasanardanah
yat— which; sevaya—by service; bhagavatah—of the Personality of God-
head; kuta-sthasya—of the unchangeable; madhu-dvisah—the enemy of the
Madhu asura; rati-rasah—attachment in different relationships; bhavet—
develops; tivrah—highly ecslatic; padayoh—of the feet; vyasana— distresses;
ardanah—vanequishing.
TRANSLATION
By serving the feet of the spiritual master, one is enabled to develop
transcendental ecstasy in the service of the Personality of Godhead, who
is the unchangeable enemy of the Madhu demon and whose service
vanquishes one’s material distresses.


--- Page 280 ---
Text 20] Further Inquiries by Vidura 283
PURPORT
The association of a bona fide spiritual master like the sage Maitreya
can be of absolute help in achieving transcendental attachment for the
direct service of the Lord. The Lord is the enemy of the Madhu demon,
or in other words He is the enemy of the sufferings of His pure devotee.
The word rati-rasah is significant in this verse. Service to the Lord is
rendered in different transcendental mellows (relationships): neutral,
active, friendly, parental and nuptial. A living entity in the liberated
position of transcendental service to the Lord becomes attracted to
one of the above-mentioned mellows, and when one is engaged in tran-
scendental loving service to the Lord, one’s service attachment in the
material world is automatically vanquished. As stated in Bhagavad-gita
(2.59), rasa-varjam 7050 py asya param drstva nivartate.
TEXT 20
दुरापा श्षल्पतपसः सेवा ॒वैङुण्ठवत्म॑सु |
यत्रोपगीयते नित्यं देवदेवो जनार्दनः ॥२०॥
durapa hy alpatapasah
seva vaikuntha-vartmasu
yatropagiyate nityam
deva-devo janardanah
durapa—rarely obtainable; hi—certainly; alpa-tapasah—of one whose
austerity is meager; seva—service; vaikuptha—the transcendental kingdom
of God; vartmasu—on the path of; yatra— wherein; upagiyate—is glorified;
nityam—always; deva— Lord; devah—of the demigods; janardanah —the
controller of the living entities.
TRANSLATION
Persons whose austerity is meager can hardly obtain the service of the
pure devotees who are progressing on the path back to the kingdom
of Godhead, the Vaikunthas. Pure devotees engage one hundred percent
in glorifying the Supreme Lord, who is the Lord of the demigods and the
controller of all living entities.
PURPORT
The path of liberation, as recommended by all authorities, is to serve
the mahatma transcendentalists. As far as Bhagavad-gita is concerned, the


--- Page 281 ---
284. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
mahatmas are the pure devotees who are on the path to Vaikuntha, the
kingdom of God, and who always chant and hear the glories of the Lord
rather than talk of dry profitless philosophy. This system of association
has been recommended since time immemorial, but in this age of quarrel
and hypocrisy it is especially recommended by Lord Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu. Even one who has no assets of favorable austerity, if he neverthe-
less takes shelter of the mahatmas who are engaged in chanting and
hearing the glories of the Lord, is sure to make progress on the path back
home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 21
gg महदादीनि सविक्िराष्यनुकमात्‌ |
तेम्यो विराजघुद्धत्य तमनु प्राविशद्विभः ॥२१॥
srstvagre mahad-adini
sa-vikarany anukramat
tebhyo virajam uddhrtya
tam anu pravisad vibhuh
srstva—after creating; agre—in the beginning; mahad-adini—the total
material energy; se-vikarapi—along with the sense organs; anukramat—by a
gradual process of differentiation; tebhyah—out of that; virajam—the
gigantic universal form; uddrtya—manifesting; tam—into that; anu—Ilater
on; pravisat—entered; vibhuh —the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
After creating the total material energy, the mahat-tattva, and thereby
manifesting the gigantic universal form with senses and sense organs, the
Supreme Lord entered within it.
PURPORT
Fully satisficd by the answers of the sage Maitreya, Vidura wanted to
understand the remaining portions of the creative function of the Lord,
and he took the clue from the previous topics.
TEXT 22
यमाहुरा्य॑ पुरुषं सहस्राङ्घ्युरुबाहुकम्‌ ।
- 9
यत्र विश्च इमे लोकाः सबिकासं समासते ॥२२॥


--- Page 282 ---
Text 23] Further Inquiries by Vidura 285
yam ahur ৫0071 purusari
sahasranghry-uru-bahukam
yatra visva ime lokah
savikasarm sam asate
yam—who; ahuh—is called; adyam—original; purusam—incarnation for
cosmic manifestation; sahasra— thousand; anghri—legs; uru—thighs; bahu-
kam—hands; yatra— wherein; visvah—the universe; ime—all these; lokah—
planets; sa-vikasam— with respective developments; sam—all of them;asate
—living.
TRANSLATION
The purusa incarnation lying on the Causal Ocean is called the original
puruga in the material creations, and in His virata form, in whom all the
planets and their inhabitants live, He has many thousands of legs and
hands.
PURPORT
The first purusa is Karanodakasayi Visnu, the second purusa is Garbho-
dakasayi Visnu, and the third purusa is Ksirodakasayl Visnu, in whom
is contemplated the virata-purusa, the gigantic form in which all the planets
with their different developments and inhabitants are floating.
TEXT 23
यसिन्‌ दशविधः प्राणः सेन्द्रियार्थन्दरियशिवरत्‌ ।
त्वयेरितो यतो वर्गास्तद्विभूतीदख नः 130
yasmin dasa-vidhah pranah
sendriyarthendriyas trivrt
tvayerito yato varnas
tad-vibhutir vadasva nah
yasmin—in which; dasa-vidhah— ten kinds of ; prapah—air of life; sa— with;
indriya—senses; artha—interest; indriyah— of the senses; trivrt— three kinds
of life vigor; tvaya—by your; iritah—explained; yatah— wherefrom; varpah—
four specific divisions; tat-vibhutih—prowess; vadasva—please describe;
nah—unto me.
TRANSLATION
0 great brahmana, you have told me that the gigantic virata form, and
His senses, sense objects and ten kinds of life air, exist with three kinds of


--- Page 283 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
life vigor. Now, if you will, kindly explain to me the different powers of
the specific divisions.
TEXT 24
2 Ey EY
যঙ্গ EAN पौत्रेश्च नप्ठभिः सह गोत्रजैः ।
प्रजा विचित्राकृतय आसन्‌ याभिरिदं ततम्‌ ॥२४।।
yatra putrais ca pautrais ca
naptrbhih saha gotrajaih
praja vicitra-krtaya
a san yabhir ida tatam
yatra— wherein; putraih—along with sons; ca—and; pautraih—along with
grandsons; ca—also; naptrbhih—with grandsons from daughters; saha—
along with; gotrajath—of the same family; prajah—generations; vicitra—of
different kinds; krtayah—so done; asan—exist; yabhih—by whom; idam—all
these planets; tatam— overcast.
TRANSLATION
O my lord, I think that the prowess manifest in the forms of sons,
grandsons and family members has spread all over the universe in different
varieties and species.
TEXT 25
TAIT स पतिश्वकृल्पे कान्‌ प्रजापतीन्‌ |
R ९ 9
सगौश्चैवानुसगोश्च मनूर्मन्वन्तराधिपान्‌ २५
praja-patinarm sa patis
caklpe kan prajapatin
sargams caivanusargams ca
manun manvantaradhipan
praja-patinam—of the demigods like Brahma and others; sah—he; patih—
leader; caklpe— decided; kan—whomsoever; prajapatin—father of the living
entities; sargan— generations; ca— also; eva— certainly; anusargan—later gen-
erations; ca—and; maniin—the Manus; manvantara-adhipan—and the chang-
es of such.
TRANSLATION
0 learned brahmana, please describe how the leader of all the demigods,
namely Prajapati, Brahma, decided to establish the various Manus, the


--- Page 284 ---
Text 27] Further Inquiries by Vidura 287
heads of the ages. Please describe the Manus also, and please describe the
descendants of those Manus.
PURPORT
The human race, or manusya-sare, descends from the Manus, sons and
grandsons of the Prajapati, Brahma. The descendants of Manu reside in all
the different planets and rule all the universe.
TEXT 26
उपर्यधश्च ये लोका भूमेर्भित्रात्मजासते ।
तेषां संस्थां प्रमाणं च भूर्लोकस्य च वर्णय ॥२६॥
upary adhas ca ye loka
bhumer mitratmajasate
tesa samstham pramanam ca
bhur-lokasya ca varpaya
upari—on the head; adhah—underneath; ye ca—also; lokah—planets;
bhumeh—of the earth; mitra-atmaja—O son of Mitra (Maitreya Muni);
asate—do exist; tesam— their; samstham—situation; pramapam ca—also
their measurement;bhith-lokasya—of the earth planets; ca—also; varnaya—
please describe.
TRANSLATION
0 son of Mitra, kindly describe how the planets are situated above the
earth as well as underneath it, and also please mention their measurement
as well as that of the earthly planets.
PURPORT
Yasmin vijiate sarvam eva vijiatah bhavanti. This Vedic hymn declares
emphatically that the devotee of the Lord knows everything material and
spiritual in relationship with the Lord. Pevotees are not simply emotional,
as is ill-conceived by certain less intelligent men. Their direction is
practical. They know everything that is and all the details of the Lord’s
domination over the different creations.
TEXT 27
6
तियंङमानुषदेषानां सरीश्पपतत्त्रिणाम्‌ ।
Co ০ =
वद्‌ नः सगंसंबयूहं गाषस्वेददविजोद्धिदाम्‌ ।।২৩।


--- Page 285 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
tiryan-manusa-devanarm
sarisrpa-patattrinam
vada nah sarga-sarhvyuhari
garbha-sveda-dvijodbhidam
tiryan—subhuman; manusa—human beings; devanam— ef the superhuman
beings er demigeds; sarisrpa—reptiles; patattripam—ef the birds; vada—
kindly describe; nah—unte me; sarga—generatien; sarmvyiuham—specific
divisiens; garbha—embryenic; sveda—perspiratien; dvija—twice-bern;
udbhidam— planets, etc.
TRANSLATION
Also please describe the living beings under different classifications:
subhumans, humans, those born of the embryo, those born of perspiration,
those who are twice born [birds], and the plants and vegetables. Kindly
describe their generations and subdivisions also.
TEXT 28
a
गुणावतारेर्विंश्वस्य सग॑स्थित्यप्ययाश्रयम्‌ |
IN
सृजतः श्रीनिवासस्य व्याच््योदारर्किमम्‌ <I
gunavatarair visvasya
sarga-sthity-apyayasrayam
srjatah srinivasasya
vyacaksvodara-vikramam
gupa—medes of material nature; avataraih— eof the incarnatiens; visvasya
—ef the universe; sarga—creatien; stithi—maintenance;apyaya—destructien;
asrayam—and ultimate rest; srjatah—ef the ene whe creates; §rinivasasya—
of the Persenality ef Gedhead; vyacaksva—kindly describe; udara—
magnanimous; vikramam—specific activities.
TRANSLATION
Please also describe the incarnations of the material modes of nature—
Brahma, Vignu and Mahesvara—and please describe the incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and His magnanimous activities.
PURPORT
Although the three incarnatiens ef the material medes ef nature,
Brahma, Vignu and Mahesvara, are the principal deities fer the creatien,


--- Page 286 ---
Text 29] Further Inquiries by Vidura 289
maintenance and destruction of the cosmic manifestation, they are not
the final authority. The Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna is
the ultimate goal, the cause of all causes. He is the asraya, or the final rest
of everything.
TEXT 29
वर्णाश्रमविभागांश्च स्पजीठसमावतः |
ऋषीणां जन्मकमादि वेदस्य च विकरणम्‌ ॥२९॥
varpasrama-vibhagams ca
rupa-$ila-svabhavatah
rsinam janma-karmadi
vedasya ca vikarsanam
varna-asrama— the four divisions of social statuses and orders of spiritual
culture; vibhagan—respective divisions; ca—also; riipa—personal features;
sila-svabhavatah— personal character; rsinam—of the sages; janma—birth;
karmadi—activities; vedasya—of the Vedas; ca—and; vikarsanam— categori-
cal divisions.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, kindly describe the divisions and orders of human society
in terms of symptoms, behavior and the characteristics of mental
equilibrium and sense control. Also please describe the births of the great
sages and the categorical divisions of the Vedas.
PURPORT
The four statuses and orders of human society—brahmanas, ksatriyas,
vaisyas and Sudras, as well as brahmacaris, grhasthas, vanaprasthas and
sannyasis—are all the divisions of quality, education, culture and spiritual
advancement attained by practicing control of the mind and the senses.
All these divisions are based on the particular nature of each individual
person, not on the principle of birth. Birth is not mentioned in this verse
because birth is immaterial. Vidura is famous in history as born of a
sudrani mother, yet he is more than a brahmana by qualification because
he is seen here to be the disciple of a great sage, Maitreya Muni. Unless one
achieves at least the brahminical qualifications one cannot understand the
Vedic hymns. Mahabharata is also a division of the Vedas, but it is meant
for women, Sidras and dvija-bandhus, the worthless children of the higher
section. The less intelligent section of society can avail themselves of the
Vedic instructions simply by studying the Mahabharata.


--- Page 287 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
TEXT 30
यज्ञस्य च वितानानि योगस्य च पथः भ्रमो ।
© A .
नैष्कर्म्यस्य च सांख्यस्य तन्त्रं না মবাবলস্বলমূ।।২০।॥
yajiiasya ca vitanani
yogasya ca pathah prabho
naiskarmyasya ca sankhyasya
tantrari va bhagavat-smrtam
yajitasya—of sacrifices; ca—also; vitanani—expansions; yogasya—of the
mystic powers; ca— also; pathah— ways; prabho—O my lord; naiskarmyasya
—of knowledge; ca—and; sankhyasya—of analytical studies; tantram—the
path of devotional service; vi—as well as; bhagavat—in relation with the
Personality of Godhead; smrtam—regulative principles.
TRANSLATION
Please also describe the expansions of different sacrifices and the paths
of mystic powers, analytical study of knowledge, and devotional service,
all with their respective regulations.
PURPORT
The word tantram is significant herein. Sometimes tantram is mis
understood to be the black spiritual science of materialistic persons
engaged in sense gratification, but here tantram means the science of
devotional service compiled by Srila Narada Muni. One can take advantage
of such regulative explanations of the path of devotional service and make
progressive advancement in the devotional service of the Lord. Sankhya
-philosophy is the basic principle of acquiring knowledge, as will be
explained by the sage Maitreya. The Sankhya philosophy enunciated by
Kapiladeva, the son of Devahiiti, is the real source of knowledge about the
Supreme Truth. Knowledge not based on the Sankhya philosophy is
mental speculation and can yield no tangible profit.
TEXT 31
पाषण्डपथवैषम्यं प्रतिठोमनिवेशनम्‌ |
পাবে
जीवस्य गतयो याश्च यावतीगुंणकमेजाः ॥२३१॥
pasanda-pathae-vaisamyam
pratiloma-nivesanam


--- Page 288 ---
Text 32] Further Inquiries by Vidura 291
Jivasya gatayo yas ca
yavatir guna-karmajah
pasapda-patha—the path of the faithless; vaisamyam—imperfection by
contradiction; pratiloma—crossbreeding; nivesanam—situation; jivasya—of
the living entities; gatayah—movements; yah—as they are; ca— also; yavatih—
as many as; gupa—modes of material nature; karmajdh—generated by
different work.
TRANSLATION
Please also describe the imperfections and contradictions of the faithless
atheists, the situation of crossbreeding, and the movements of the living
entities in various species of life according to their particular modes of
nature and work.
PURPORT
The combination of living entities in different modes of material nature
is called crossbreeding. The faithless atheists do not believe in the existence
of God, and thus their paths of philosophy are contradictory. Atheistic
philosophies never agree with one another. Different species of life are
evidence of varieties of mixtures of the modes of material nature.
TEXT 32
ঘমাঁধীকামমীধাণা िमिक्ान्यविरोधतः |
वातीया दण्डनीतेश्च शरुतस्य च विधिं पथक्‌ ॥३२॥
dharmartha-kama-moksanar
nimittany avirodhatah
vartaya danda-nites ca ~
Srutasya ca vidhim prthak
dharma—religiosity ; artha—economic development; kama—sense gratifi-
cation; moksanam—salvation; nimittani—causes;avirodhatah—without being
contradictory; vartayah—on the principles of the means of livelihood;
danda-niteh—of law and order; ca—also; srutasya— of the codes of scriptures;
ca— also; vidhim—regulations; prthak— different.
TRANSLATION
You may also describe the noncontradictory causes of religiosity,
economic development, sense gratification and salvation and also the


--- Page 289 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
different means of livelihood and different processes of law and order as
mentioned in the revealed scriptures.
TEXT 33
श्राद्धस्य च विधिं se पितृणां सर्गमेव च ।
ক £3 +
ग्रहनक्षत्रताराणां कालावयवसंस्थितिम्‌ ॥३३॥
$raddhasya ca vidhim brahman
pitinam sargam eva ca
graha-naksatra-taranar
kalavayava-samsthitim
§raddhasya—of the periodical offerings of respects; ca—also; vidhim—
regulations; brahman—O brahmapa; pitinam—of the forefathers; sargam—
creation; eva—as; ca—also; graha—planctary system; nakgsatra—the stars;
taranam—luminaries; kala— time; avayava— duration; samsthitim—situations.
TRANSLATION
Please also explain the regulations for offering respects to the fore-
fathers, the creation of the Pitrloka, the time schedule in the planets,
stars and luminaries, and their respective situations.
PURPORT
The time durations of day and night as well as of months and years are
different in the different planets, stars and luminaries. The higher planets
like the moon and Venus have different time measurements than the
earth. It is said that six months of this planet earth is equal to one day of
the higher planets. In Bhagavad-gita the duration of one day in Brahmaloka
is measured te be 1,000 times the four yugas, or 4,300,000 multiplied by
1,000. And the month and year in Brahmaloka are calculated in that
measure.
TEXT 34
दानस तपसो वापि यचे्टापर्तयोः फम्‌ |
प्रवासस्थस्य यो धर्मो यश्च पुंस उतापदि 1331
danasya tapaso vapi
yac-cesta purtayoh phalam
pravasa-sthasya yo dharmo
yas ca purisa utapadi


--- Page 290 ---
Text 35] Further Inquiries by Vidura 293
danasya—of charity; tapasah—of penance; vapi—lake; yat—that which;
cesta—endcavor; pirtayoh—of reservoirs of water; phalam—fruitive result;
pravasa-sthasya—one who is away from home; yah— that which; dharmah—
duty; yah ca—and which; puritsah— of man; uta— described; apadi—in danger.
TRANSLATION
Please also describe the fruitive results of charity and penance and of
digging reservoirs of water. Please describe the situation of persons who
are away from home and also the duty of a man in an awkward position.
PURPORT
The digging of reservoirs of water for public use is a great work of
charity, and retiring from family life after fifty years of age is a great act
of penance performed by the sober human being.
TEXT 35
6.
येन वा मग्स्तष्येद्धर्मयोनिज॑नादं नः |
सम्प्रसीदति वा येषामेतदाख्याहि मेनघ ॥।३५॥
yena va bhagavams tusyed
dharma-yonir janardanah
samprasidati va yesam
etad akhyahi menagha
yena—by which; va—either; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead;
tusyet—is satisfied; dharma-yonih—the father of all religion; janardanah—
the controller of all living beings; samprasidati—completely satisfied; va—
either, or; yesam—of those; etat—all these; akhyahi—kindly describe; me—
unto me; anagha—O sinless one.
TRANSLATION
O sinless one, because the Personality of Godhead, the controller of all
living entities, is the father of all religion and all those who are candidates
for religious activities, kindly describe how He can be completely satisfied.
PURPORT
All religious activities are meant ultimately to satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The Lord is the father of all religious principles.
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 7.16), four kinds of pious men—the needy,


--- Page 291 ---
294 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
the distressed, the enlightened and the inquisitive—approach the Lord in
devotional service, and their devotion is mixed with material affection.
But above them are the pure devotees whose devotion is not tainted by
any material tinges of fruitive work or speculative knowledge. Those who
are only miscreants throughout their lives are compared to demons
(Bg. 7.15). They are bereft of all knowledge, in spite of any academic
educational career they may pursue. Such miscreants are never candidates
for satisfying the Lord.
TEXT 36
अनुक्तानां शिष्याणां पुत्राणां च द्विजोत्तम ।
(8
अनापृष्टमपि TRA दीनवत्सलाः ॥॥३६।।
anuvratanam Sisyanarm
putranar ca dvijottama
anaprstam api brayur
guravo dina-vatsalah
anuvratanam—the followers; sisyanam—of the disciples; putranam— of
the sons; ca—also; dvija-uttama—O best amongst the brahmanas; anaprstam
—that which is not asked for; api—in spite of; bruyuh—please describe;
guravah—the spiritual masters; dina-vatsalah—who are kind to the needy.
TRANSLATION
O best among the brahmanas, those who are spiritual masters are very
kind to the needy. They are always kind to their followers, disciples and
sons, and without being asked by them, the spiritual master describes all
that is knowledge.
PURPORT
There are many subjects to be known from the bona fide spiritual
master. The followers, disciples and sons are all on one level for the bona
fide spiritual master, and he is always kind to them and always speaks to
them on transcendental subjects, even though he is not asked by them.
That is the nature of the bona fide spiritual master. Vidura appealed to
Maitreya Muni to speak on subjects about which he might not have asked.
TEXT 37
तत्त्वानां भगवंस्तेषां कतिधा प्रतिसंक्रमः |
तत्रेमं क उपासीरन्‌ क उ खिद्‌नुङोरते ॥२५७।


--- Page 292 ---
Text 37] Further Inquiries by Vidura 295
tattvanam bhagavarns tesam
katidha pratisankramah
tatremam ka upasiran
ka u svid anuserate
tattvanam—of the elements of nature; bhagavan—O great sage; tesam—
of them; katidha—how many; pratisaikramah— dissolutions; tatra—there-
upon; imam—unto the Supreme Lord; ke—who are they; upasiran—being
saved; ke—who are they; u—who; svit—may; anuserate—serve the Lord
while He sleeps.
TRANSLATION
Please describe how many dissolutions there are for the elements of
material nature and who survives after the dissolutions to serve the Lord
while He is asleep.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-sarmhita it is said that all the material manifestations
with innumerable universes appear and disappear with the breathing of the
Maha-Vispu lying in yoga-nidra or mystic sleep.
yah karanarpava-jale bhajati sam yoga-
nidram ananta-jagadanda-saromakipah
adhara-$aktim avalambya param sva-murtim
govindam adi-purusarn tam 01107 bhajami
yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya
Jjtvanti loma-vilaja jagadanda-nathah
vispur mahan sa iha yasya kala-viseso
govindam adi-purusari tam 0110777, bhajami
“Govinda, the ultimate and Supreme Personality of Godhead [Lord
Krsna], lies sleeping unlimitedly on the Causal Ocean in order to create
unlimited numbers of universes during that sleep. He lies on the water by
His own internal potency, and I worship that original Supreme Godhead.
“Due to His breathing, innumerable universes come into existence, and
when He withdraws His breath there occurs the dissolution of all the
lords of the universes. That plenary portion of the Supreme Lord is called
Maha-Vispu, and He is a part of the part of Lord Krsna. 1 worship Govinda,
the original Lord.” (Bs.5.47-5.48)
After the dissolution of the material manifestations, the Lord and His
kingdom beyond the Causal Ocean do not disappear, nor do the inkabi-
tants, the Lord’s associates. The associaies of the Lord are far more


--- Page 293 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
numerous than the living entities who have forgotten the Lord due to
material association. The impersonalist’s explanation of the word aham
in the four verses of the original Bhdgavatam—aham evasam evagre
etc. -15 refuted here. The Lord and His eternal associates remain after the
dissolution. Vidura’s inquiry about such persons is a clear indication of the
existence of all the paraphernalia of the Lord. This is also confirmed in the
Kasi-khanda, as quoted by both Jiva Gosvami and Srila Vidvanatha
Cakravarti, who follow in the footsteps of Srila Sridhara Svami.
na cyavante ca yad-bhakta
mahatyar pralayapaditi
ato ‘cyute ’khile loke sa
ekah sarvavago vyayam
“The devotees of the l.ord never annihilate their individual existences
even after the dissolution of the entire cosmic manifestation. The Lord
and the devotees who associate with Him are always eternal, both in the
material and spiritual worlds.”
TEXT 38
पुरुषस्य च संस्थानं खरूपं না परस्य च |
A. -
ज्ञानं च সদ यत्तदुगुरुशिष्यगप्रयोजनम्‌ ।३८॥
purusasya ca saristhanam
5৮০10100118 va parasya
jii@nam ca 11018017101 yat tad
guru-sisya-prayojanam
purusasya-—of the living cntity; ca—also; samsthanam—existence;
svariipam—idenlity; vd—either, or; parasya—of the Supreme; ca—also;
jianam—knowledge; ca—also; naigamam—in the matter of the Upanisads;
yal—that;  tal—the same; guru—spiritlual master; $isya—disciple;
prayojanam—neccessity.
TRANSLATION
What are the truths regarding the living entities and the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead? What are their identities? What are the specific values in
the knowledge in the Vedas, and what are the necessities for the spiritual
master and his disciples?


--- Page 294 ---
Text 39] Further Inquiries by Vidura 297
PURPORT
The living entities are constitutionally servitors of the Lord, who can
accept all kinds of services from everyone. It is clearly declared (Bg. 5.29)
that the Lord is the supreme enjoyer of the benefits of all sacrifices and
penances, the proprietor of all that is manifested and the friend of all
living entities. That is His real identity. Therefore, when the living entity
accepts this supreme proprietorship of the Lord and acts in that attitude,
that is his real identity. In order to elevate the living entity to this stan-
dard of knowledge, there is the necessity of spiritual association. The bona
fide spiritual master desires that his disciples know the process of render-
ing transcendental service to the Lord, and the disciples also know that
they have to learn about the eternal relationship between God and the
living entity from a self-realized soul. To disseminate transcendental
knowledge one must retire from mundane activities on the strength of
enlightenment in knowledge in terms of Vedic wisdom. That is the
sum and substance of all the questions in this verse.
TEXT 39
~ a a
निमित्तानि च तस्येद प्रोक्तान्यनष खरिभिः ।
- R ५ „ ~
सता ज्ञान कतः gar मक्तिर्वेराम्यमेव वा ।॥२३९॥
nimittani ca tasyeha
proktany anagha saribhih
svato jianam kutah puritsam
bhaktir vairagyam eva va
nimittani—the source of knowledge; ca—also; tasya—of such knowledge;
iha—in this world; proktani—mentioned; anagha—spotless; sizribhih—by
devotees; svatah—self-sufficient; jianam—knowledge; kutah—how; pumsam
—of the living entity; bhaktih— devotional service; vairagyam—detachment;
eva—certainly; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Spotless devotees of the Lord have mentioned the source of such knowl-
edge. How could one have knowledge of devotional service and detach-
ment without the help of such devotees?
PURPORT
There are many inexperienced persons who advocate self-realization
without the help of a spiritual master. They decry the necessity of the


--- Page 295 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
spiritual master and try themselves to take his ८ "० by propagating the
theory that a spiritual master is not necessary. Srimad-Bhagavatam, how-
ever, does not approve this viewpoint. Even the great transcendental
scholar Vyasadeva had need of a spiritual master, and under the instruction
of his spiritual master, Narada, he prepared this sublime literature, Srimad-.
Bhagavatam. Even Lord Caitanya, although He is Krsna Himself, accepted
a spiritual master; even Lord Krsna accepted a spiritual master, Sandipani
Muni, in order to be enlightened; and all the dcaryas and saints of the
world had spiritual masters. In Bhagavad-gita Arjuna accepted Lord Krsna
as his spiritual master, although there was no necessity of such a formal
declaration. So, in all cases, there is no question about the necessity of
accepting a spiritual master. The only stipulation is that the spiritual
master should be bona fide; i.e., the spiritual master must be in the proper
chain of disciplic succession called the parampara system.

Siiribhih are great scholars, but they may not always be anagha, or
spotless. The anagha-siiri is one who is a pure devotee of the Lord. Those
who are not pure devotees of the Lord, or who want to be on an equal
level with Him, are not anagha-siiri. Pure devotees have prepared many
books of knowledge on the basis of authorized scriptures. Srila Riipa
Gosvami and his assistants, under the instructions of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, have all written various literatures for the guidance of
prospective devotees, and anyone who is very serious about raising himself
to the standard of a pure devotee of the Lord must take advantage of those
literatures.

TEXT 40
TAH TB: परान्‌ हरेः कमेविवित्सया |
ब्रूहि मेऽज्ञस्य मित्रत्वादजया नष्टचक्षुषः ।४०॥
etan me prcchatah prasnan
hareh karma-vivitsaya
brithi me’jiasya mitratvad
ajaya nasta-caksusah

etan—all these; me—mine; prcchatah—of one who inquires; prasnan—
questions; harefi—of the Supreme Lord; karma— pastimes; vivitsayd—de-
siring to know; brithi—kindly describe; me—unto me; ajitasya—of one who
is ignorant; mitratvat—because of friendship; ajayd—by the external energy;
nagta-caksusah—those who have lost their vision.


--- Page 296 ---
Text 41] Further Inquiries by Vidura 299
TRANSLATION
My dear sage, I have put all these questions before you with a view to
know the pastimes of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are
the friend of all, so kindly describe them for all those who have lost their
vision.
PURPORT
Vidura put forward many varieties of questions with a view to
understand the principles of transcendental loving service to the Lord. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 2.41), devotional service to the Lord is one,
and the mind of the devotee is not diverted to the many branches of
uncertainties. Vidura’s purpose was to be situated in that service to the
Lord, wherein one merges undivertedly. He claimed the friendship of
Maitreya Muni, not because he was Maitreya’s son but because Maitreya
was actually the friend of all who have lost their spiritual vision due to
material influence.
TEXT 41
सर्वे वेदाश्च यज्ञाश्च तपो दानानि चानघ ।
जीवाभयप्रदानस्य न FR कलामपि ॥४१॥
sarve vedas ca yajiias ca
tapo danani canagha
jivabhaya-pradanasya
na kurviran kalam api
sarve—all kinds of; vedah—divisions of the Vedas; ca—also; yajiiah—
sacrifices; ca—also; tapah—penances; danani—charities; ca—and; anagha—
O spotless one; jiva—the living entity; abhaya—immunity from material
pangs; pradanasya—of one who gives such assurance; na—not; kurviran—
can be equalized; kalam—even partially; api—certainly.
TRANSLATION
O spotless one, your answers to all these questions will grant immunity
to all material miseries. Such charity is greater than all Vedic charities,
sacrifices, penances, etc.
PURPORT
The highest perfectional work of charity is to give people in general
immunity from the anxieties of material existence. This can be done only


--- Page 297 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 7
by performing activities in devotional service to the Lord. Such knowledge
is incomparable. Cultivation of the knowledge in the Vedas, performance
of sacrifice and distribution of munificent charities all together cannot
form even a part of the immunity from the pangs of material existence
that is gained from devotional service. The charity of Maitreya will not
only help Vidura, but, due to its universal nature, will deliver all others in
all times. Thus Maitreya is immortal.
TEXT 42
श्रीशुक उवाच
स  इत्यमाषटपुराणकत्यः ऊुरुप्रथानेन उनिप्रभानः |
FLEET भगवस्कथायां सओोदितस्तं प्रहसन्निवाह ।॥४२॥
ॐ suka ५४८८०
sa ittham aprsta-purana-kalpah
kuru-pradhanena muni-pradhanah
pravrddha-harso bhagavat-kathayam
saiicoditas tam prahasann-ivaha

sri Sukah uvaca—Sr1 Sukadeva Gosvami said; sah—he; ittham—thus;
aprsta—being questioned; purana-kalpah—one who knows how to explain
the supplements of the Vedas (the Puranas); kuru-pradhanena—by the chief
of the Kurus; muni-pradhanah—the chief amongst the sages; pravrddha—
sufficiently enriched; harsah—satisfaction; bhagavat—the Personality of
Godhead; kathayam—in the topics of; saiicoditah—being so infused; tam—
unto Vidura; prahasan— with smiles; iva—like that;aha—replied.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Thus the chief of the sages, who was always
enthusiastic about describing topics regarding the Personality of Godhead,
began to narrate the descriptive explanation of the Puranas, being so in-
fused by Vidura. He was very much enlivened by speaking on the transcen-
dental activities of the Lord.

PURPORT

Great learned sages like Maitreya Muni are always very enthusiastic

about describing the transcendental activities of the Lord. Maitreya Muni,


--- Page 298 ---
Text 42] Further Inquiries by Vidura 301
being thus invited by Vidura to speak, appeared to be smiling because he
actually felt transcendental bliss.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Seventh
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Further Inquiries by Vidura.”


--- Page 299 ---
(१
CHAPTER EIGHT
Manifestation of Brahma
from Garbhodakaéayi Visnu
TEXT 1
an
HIF उवाच
सत्सेवनीयो नत पूरुवंशो
यष्छोकपालो भगवत्प्रधानः |
यभूवियेहाजितकीर्तिमालां
पदे पदे नूतनयस्यभीष्णम्‌ । १ |
maitreya ८४८८०
sat-sevaniyo bata puru-variso
yal loka-palo bhagavat-pradhanah
babhuvithehajita kirti-malam
pade pade nutanayasy abhtkspam
$ maitreyah uvaca—Sri Maitreya Muni said; sat-sevaniyah— worthy to
serve the pure devotecs; bata—oh, certainly; piiru-vamsah—the descendants
of King Piru; yat—in which; loka-palah—the kings are; bhagavat-
pradhdnah—chiefly devoted to the Personality of Godhead; babhivitha—
you are also born; itha—in this; gjita—the Lord, who is unconquerable;
kirti-malam—chain of transcendental activities; pade pade—step by step;
niitanayasi—becoming newer and newer; abhikspam—always.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya Muni said to Vidura: The royal dynasty of King
Paru is worthy to serve the pure devotees because all the descendants of
that family are devoted to the Personality of Godhead. You are also born
in that family, and it is wonderful that because of your attempt the
transcendental pastimes of the Lord are becoming newer and newer at
every moment.
303


--- Page 300 ---
304 Srimad-Bhagavatam |Canto 3, Ch. 8
PURPORT
The great sage Maitreya thanked Vidura and praised him by reference
to his family glories. The Piiru dynasty is full of devotees of the Personality
of Godhead and is therefore glorious. Because they are not attached to
impersonal Brahman or to the localized Paramitma but are directly
attached to Bhagavan, the Personality of Godhead, they are therefore
worthy to render service to the Lord and His pure devotees. Because
Vidura was one of the descendants of that family, naturally he engaged
in spreading wide the ever new glories of the Lord. Maitreya felt happy to
have such glorious company as Vidura. He considered the company of
Vidura to be most desirable because such association can accelerate one’s
dormant propensities for devotional service.
TEXT 2
~ : +
साऽह नृणां श्र्छखलाय दुख
महद्रतानां विरमाय तस्य ।
प्रवर्तये भागवतं पुराणं
यदाह साक्षाद्धगवायूषिभ्यः ।। २ ॥
56 वका 01 ksulla-sukhaya duh kham
mahadgatanari viramaya tasya
pravartaye bhagavatari puranam
yad aha saksad bhagavan rsibhyah
sah—that; aham—1; nrpam—of the human being; ksulla—very little;
sukhdaya—for happiness; duhkham—distress; mahat—great; gatanam—
entered into; viramaya—for mitigation; tasya—his; pravartaye—shall begin;
bhagavatam—Srimad-Bhagavatam; puranam—Vedic supplement; yat—
which; @ha—said; saksat—directly; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead;
rsibhyah—unto the sages.
TRANSLATION
Let me now begin speaking on the Bhagavata Purana, which was
directly spoken to the great sages by the Personality of Godhead for the
benefit of those who are entangled in extreme miseries for the sake of
very little pleasure.
PURPORT
The sage Maitreya proposed to speak on Srimad-Bhagavatam because
it is especially compiled, and traditionally comes down in the disciplic


--- Page 301 ---
Text 3] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakasayi Visnu 305
succession, for the solution of all the problems of human society. Only
one who is fortunate tan have the opportunity to hear Srimad-Bhagavatam
in the association of pure devotees of the Lord. Under the spell of material
energy, the living entities are entrapped in the bondage of many difficul-
tics simply for the sake of a little bit of material happiness. They engage in
fruitive activities, not knowing the implications. Under the false impression
that the body is the self, the living entities foolishly relate to so many
false attachments. They think that they can engage with materialistic
paraphernalia forever. This gross misconception of life is so strong that a
person suffers continually, life after life, under the external energy of the
Lord. If one comes in contact with the book Bhagavata as well as with the
devotee Bhagavata who knows what the Bhagavatam is, then such a
fortunate man gets out of the material entanglement. Therefore Sri
Maitreya Muni, oul of compassion for the suffering men in the world,
proposes lo speak on the Srimad-Bhagavatam first and last.
TEXT 3
आसीनरन्यां भगवन्तमाद्यं
ax देवमङ्कण्डसवम्‌ |
विवित्सवस्तत्वमतः परस्य
TAGE मुनयोऽन्वपृच्छन्‌ ॥ २ ॥
astnam urvyari bhagavantam adyari
sankarsanar devam akuptha-sattvam
vivitsavas tattvam atah parasya
kumara-mukhya munayo’nvaprcchan
asinam—seated; urvyam—down the universe; bhagavantam—unto the
Lord; adyam—the original; sankarsanam—Sankargana; devam—Personality
of Godhead; akunptha-sattvam—undeterred knowledge; vivitsavah—being
inquisitive to know; tattvam atah—truth like this; parasya—regarding the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; kumdra—the boy saint; mukhyah—the
chief; munayah—great sages; anvaprcchan—inquired like this.
TRANSLATION
Some time ago, being inquisitive to know, Sanatkumaira, the chief of
the boy saints, accompanied by other great sages, inquired exactly like
you about the truths regarding Vasudeva, the Supreme, from Lord
Sankargana, who is seated at the bottom of the universe.


--- Page 302 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 3, Ch. 8
PURPORT
This is in clarification of the statement that the Lord spoke directly on
the Srimad-Bhagavatam. When and unto whom the Bhagavatam was
spoken 15 explained herewith. Questions similar to those put forward by
Vidura were asked by great sages like Sanatkumara, and Lord Sankarsana,
the plenary expansion of the Supreme Lord Vasudeva, answered them.
TEXT 4
स्वमेव धिष्ण्यं बहु मानयन्तं
यद्वासुदेवाभिषमामनन्ति ।
-
शरत्यग्धताक्ाम्बुजकोशमीष-
दुन्मीरुयन्तं विबुधोदयाय ॥ ४ ॥
svam eva dhispyam bahu manayantam
yad vasudevabhidham amananti
pratyag-dhrtaksambuja-kosam isad
unmilayantam vibudhodayaya
svam—Himsell; eva—thus; dhispyam—situated; bahu—greatly; manayan-
tam—estecemed; yat—that which; vasudeva— Lord Vasudeva; abhidham—
by the name; amaenanti—acknowledge; pratyak-dhrta-aksa—eyes settled for
introspection; ambuja-kosam—lotuslike eye ; isat—slightly ; unmilayantam—
opened; vibudha—greatly learned sages; udayaya—for the sake of
advancement.
TRANSLATION
At that time Lord Sankarsana was meditating upon His Supreme Lord,
whom the learned esteem as Lord Vasudeva, but for the sake of the
advancement of the great learned sages He slightly opened His lotuslike
eyes and began to speak.
TEXT 5
खधुन्युदाद्रः खजटाकलापै-
रूपर्पृशन्तश्चरणोपधानम्‌ ।
पश्र यदैन्त्यदिराजकन्याः
सपेपनानादलिभिवराथाौः ॥ ५॥


--- Page 303 ---
Text 5] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakagayi Visnu 307
svar-dhunyudardraih svajata-kalapair
upasprsantas caranopadhanam
padman yad arcanly ahi-raja-kanyah
sa-prema nana-balibhir vararthah

svah-dhuni-uda—by the water of the Ganges; ardraih—being moistened:
svajata—bunch of hairs; kalapaih—situated on the head; upaspréantah—hby
so touching; carana-upadhanam—the shelter of His feet; padmam— the lotus
shelter; yat—that which; areanti— worships; ahi-raja— the serpent King:
kanyah— daughters; sa-prema—with great devotion;nana— various; balibhih—
paraphernalia; vara-arthah— being desirous of husbands.

TRANSLATION

The sages came from the highest planets down to the lower region
through the water of the Ganges, and therefore the hair on their heads
was wet. They touched the lotus feet of the Lord, which are worshiped
with various paraphernalia by the daughters of the serpent king when they
desire good husbands.

PURPORT

The Ganges water flows directly from the lotus feet of Vispu, and its
course runs from the highest planet of the universe down to the lowest.
The sages came down from Satyaloka by taking advantage of the flowing
water, a process of transportation made possible by the power of mystic
yoga. 11 a river flows thousands and thousands of miles, a perfect yogi can
al once transport himself from one place to another simply by dipping in
its water. The Ganges is the only celestial river which flows throughout the
universe, and great sages travel all over the universe via this sacred river.
The statement that their hair was wet indicates that it was directly
moistened by the water originating from the lotus fect of Vispu (the
Ganges). Whoever touches the water of the Ganges to his head surely
touches the lotus fect of the Lord directly and can become free from all
effects of sinful acts. If after taking a bath in the Ganges or being washed
of all sins, a man guards himself against committing further sinful acts,
then certainly he is delivered. But if he again takes up sinful activities, his
bath in the Ganges is as good as that of the elephant, who nicely takes his
bath in a river but later spoils the whole thing by covering himself with
dust on the land.


--- Page 304 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8
TEXT 6
gle वचसानुराग-
स्खलत्पदेनास्य कृतानि तज्ज्ञाः |
किरीटसाहखमणिप्रवेक-
“es
प्रयोतितोदामफणासदसम्‌ ॥ £ ॥
muhur 77101110 vacasanuragas
khalat-padenasya krtani taj-iah
kirtta-sahasra-mani-praveka-
pradyotitoddama-phana-sahasram
muhuh—again and again; grpantah—glorifying; wvacasa—by words;
anuragah— with great affection; khalat-padena—with symmetrical rhythm;
asya—of the Lord;krtani—aclivities; tat-jiah—one whoknows the pastimes;
kirita—helmets; sahasra— thousands; manpi-praveka—glowing effulgence of
the valuable stones; pradyotita—emanating from; uddama—raised; phana—
hoods; sahasram—thousands.
TRANSLATION
The four Kumaras, headed by Sanat-kumara, who all knew the transcen-
dental pastimes of the Lord, glorified the Lord in rhythmic accents with
selected words full of affection and love. At that time Lord Sarikarsana,
with His thousands of raised hoods, began to radiate an effulgence from
the glowing stones on His head.
PURPORT
The Lord is sometimes addressed as uttamasloka, which means “one
who is worshiped with selected words by devotees.” A profusion of such
selected words comes from a devotee who is fully absorbed in affection
and love for the devotional service of the Lord. There are many instances
in which even a small boy who was a great devotee of the Lord could offer
excellent prayers in the choicest words for glorification of the pastimes of
the Lord. In other words, without the development of fine affection and
love, one cannot offer prayers to the Lord very suitably.
TEXT 7
प्रोक्तं किरेतद्धगवत्तमेन
निवृत्तिथर्माभिरताय तेन ।


--- Page 305 ---
Text 8] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakagayi Visnu 309
सनत्कुमाराय स चाह पृष्टः
साख्यायनायाङ्ग धृतव्रताय ॥ ७ ll
proktam kilaitad bhagavattamena
nivrtti-dharmabhirataya tena
sanat-kumaraya sa caha prstah
sankhyayanayanga dhrtavrataya
proktam—was said; kila—certainly ; etat—this; bhagavattamena—by Lord
Sarikarsana; nivrtti—renunciation; dharma-abhirataya—unto one who has
taken this religious vow; tena—unto him; sanat-kumaraya—unto 5 41141 -
Kumara; sah—he; ca—also; aha—said; prstah—when inquired of;
sankhyayanaya—unto the greal sage Sarkhyayana; anga—my dear Vidura;
dhrtavrataya—unto one who has taken such a vow.
TRANSLATION
Lord Sarikarsana thus spoke the purport of Srimad-Bhagavatam to the
great sage Sanat-kumara, who had already taken the vow of renunciation.
Sanat-kumara also, in his turn, when inquired of by Sarikhyayana Muni,
explained Srimad-Bhagavatam as he had heard it from Sarkarsana.
PURPORT
This is the way of the parampara system. Although Sanat-kumara, the
well-known great saintly kumara, was in the perfect stage of life, still he
heard the message of Srimad-Bhagavatam from Lord Sankargana. Similarly,
when he was questioned by Sarikhyayana Rgi, he spoke to him the same
message which he heard from Lord Sarikargana. In other words, unless one
hears from the proper authority one cannot become a preacher. In devo-
tional service, therefore, two items out of the nine, namely hearing and
chanting, are most important. Without hearing nicely, one cannot preach
the message of Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 8
a ৬ -
साख्यायनः पार्सहसघुख्या
IN
विवक्षमाणो भगवद्विभूतीः |
-
जगाद सोऽसखदगुरवेऽन्विताय
पराशरायाथ बृहस्पतेश्च । ८ ॥


--- Page 306 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam |Canto 3, Ch. 8
saitkhyayanah paramahamsya-mukhyo
vivaksamano bhagavad-vibhutih
jagada so’smad-gurave’nvitaya
parasarayatha brhaspates ca
sankhyayanah—the great sage Sankhyayana; paramahamsya-mukhyah—
the chief of all transcendentalists; vivaksamanah— while reciting; bhagavat-
vibhiitth—the glories of the Lord; jagada—it came to; sai—he; asmat—mine;
gurave—unto my spiritual master; anvitaya—followed; parasaraya—unto the
sage Parasara; atha brhaspateh ca—also to Brhaspati.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Sarikhyayana was the chief amongst the transcen-
dentalists, and when he was describing the glories of the Lord in
terms of Srimad-Bhagavatam, it so happened that my spiritual master,
Parasara, and Brhaspati both heard him.
TEXT 9
प्रोवाच मद्यं स॒ दयाटरुक्तो
निः पुलस्त्येन पुराणमाद्यम्‌ |
(क 2
सोऽहं तवेतत्कथयामि वत्स
श्रद्धालवे नित्यमनुव्रताय ॥ ९ ॥
provaca mahyam sa dayalur ukto
munih pulastyena puranam adyam
so’ harm tavaitat kathayami vatsa
$raddha-lave nityam anuvrataya
provaca—said; mahyam—unto me;  sah—he; dayaluh—Kkindhearted;
uktah—aforementioned; munth—sage; pulastyena—by the sage Pulastya;
purapam adyam—the foremost of all the Puranas; sah aham— that also 1;
tava—unto you; elat—this; kathayami—shall speak; vatsa—my dear son;
§raddha-lave—unto one who is faithful; nityam—always; anuvratdya—unto
one who is a follower.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Parasara, as aforementioned, being so advised by the
great sage Pulastya, spoke unto me the foremost of the Puranas
[Bhagavatam]. I shall also describe this before you, my dear son, in
terms of my hearing, because you are always my faithful follower.


--- Page 307 ---
Text 10] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakasayi Visnu 311
PURPORT
The great sage of the name Pulastya is the father of all demoniac
descendants. Once upon a time Parasara began a sacrifice in which“all the
demons were to be burnt to death because his father had been killed and
devoured by onc of them. The great sage Vasistha Muni arrived at the
sacrifice and requested Parasara to stop the deadly action, and Parasara
could not deny the request because of Vasistha’s position and respect in
the community of sages. Parasara having stopped the sacrifice, Pulastya,
the father of the demons, appreciated his brahminical temperament and
gave the blessing that in the future he would be a great speaker on the
Vedic literatures called the Puranas, the supplements of the Vedas.
Parasara’s action was appreciated by Pulastya because he forgave the
demons out of his brahminical power of forgiveness. Parasara was able to
demolish all the demons in the sacrifice, but he considered: “Demons are
so made that they devour living creatures, men and animals, but why on
that account should I withdraw my brahminical qualification of forgive-
1685852" As the great speaker of the Puranas, Parasara first of all spoke on
the Srimad-Bhagavata Purana because it is the foremost of all the
Puranas. Maitreya Muni desired to narrate the same Bhagavatam which he
had heard from Para$ara, and Vidura was qualified to hear it because of his
faithfulness and his following the instructions received from superiors. So
Srimad-Bhagavatam was being narrated from time immemorial by the
disciplic succession, even before the time of Vyasadeva. The so-called
historians calculate the Puranas to be only a few hundred years old, but
factually the Puranas existed from time immemorial, before all historical
calculations by the mundaners and speculative philosophers.
TEXT 10
उदाप्लुतं विश्वमिदं तदाऽऽसीद्‌
य्निद्रयामीकितदडः न्यमीलयत्‌ |
अहीन्द्रतर्पेऽधिशयान एकः
कृतक्षणः खात्मरतौ निरीहः ॥१०॥
udaplutar visvam 10৫77 tadasid
yannidrayamilitadrin nyamilayat
ahindra-talpe ’dhisayana ekah
krtaksanah svatma-ratau nirthah
uda— water; aplutam—submerged in; visvam—the three worlds; idam—
this; tada—at that time; asit—it so remained; yat—in which; nidraya—in


--- Page 308 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam {Canto 3, Ch. 8
slumber; amilita—closed; drk—eyes; nyamilayat—not completely closed;
ahindra—the great snake Ananta; talpe—on the bed of; adhisayanah—
lying on; ekah— alone; krta-ksanah—being engaged; svat ma-ratau— enjoying
in His internal potency; nirthah— without any part of external energy.
TRANSLATION
At that time when the three worlds were submerged in water,
Garbhodakasayi Visnu was alone, lying on His bedstead the great snake
Ananta, and although He appeared to be in slumber in His own internal
potency, free from the action of the external energy, His eyes were not
completely closed.
PURPORT
The Lord is eternally enjoying transcendental bliss by His internal
potency, whereas the external potency is suspended during the time of the
dissolution of the cosmic manifestation.
TEXT 11
सोऽन्तःशरीरेऽर्षितभूतद्वश्ष्मः
कालात्मिकां शक्तिमुदीरयाणः |
उवास तसन्‌ सरि पदे स्वे
-
यथानलो दारुणि रुद्धवीर्यः ॥११॥
so’ntah sarire’rpita-bhuta-suksmah
kalatmikar saktim udirayanah
uvasa tasmin salile pade sve
yathanalo daruni ruddha-viryah
sah—the Supreme Lord; antah— within; sarire—in the transcendental
body; arpita—kept; bhiita—material elements; siksmah—subtle; kala-
atmikam—the form of time; saktim—energy; udirayapali—invigorating;
uvdsa—resided; tasmin— therein; salile—in the water; pade—in the place;
sve—His own; yathd—as much as; analah—fire; daruni—in the fuel wood;
ruddha-viryah—submerged strength.
TRANSLATION
Just like the strength of fire within fuel wood, the Lord remained
within the water of dissolution, submerging all the living entities in their
subtle bodies. He lay in the self-invigorated energy called kala.


--- Page 309 ---
Text 12] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakagayi Visnu 313
PURPORT |
After the three worlds—the upper, lower and middle planetary systems—
merged into the water of dissolution, the living entities of all the three
worlds remained in their subtle bodies by dint of the energy called kala. In
this dissolution, the gross bodies became unmanifest, but the subtle bodies
existed, just like the water of the material creation. Thus the material
energy was not completely wound up, as is the case in the full dissolution
of the material world.
TEXT 12
चतुर्युगानां च॒ सहखमप्सु
IN
खपन्‌ खयोदीरितया सखशक्त्या ।
कालार्ययाऽऽसादितकर्मतन्त्रो
लोकानपीतान्दटरे wR ॥१२॥
catur yuganam ca sahasram apsu
svapan svayodiritaya svasaktya
kalakhyaya ’’sadita-karma-tantro
lokan apitan dadrso svadehe
catuh—four; yuganam—of the millenniums; ca—also; sahasram—one
thousand; apsu—in the water; svapan—dreaming in sleep; svayd—with His
internal potency; udiritaya—for further development; svasaktya—by His
own energy; kala-akhyaya—by the name kala; asadita—being so engaged;
karma-tantrah—in the matter of fruitive activities; lokan—the total living
entities; apitan—bluish ; dadrse—saw it so; svadehe—in His own body.
TRANSLATION
The Lord lay down for four thousand yuga cycles in His internal
potency, and by His external energy He appeared to be sleeping within the
water. When the living entities were coming out for further development
of their fruitive activities, actuated by the energy called kala-dakti, He saw
His transcendental body as bluish.
PURPORT
In the Visnu Purana, kala-sakti is mentioned as avidyd. The symptom of
the influence of the kdla-sakti is that one has to work in the material world
for fruitive results. The fruitive workers are described in Bhagavad-gita as
miidhas, or foolish. Such foolish living entities are very enthusiastic to


--- Page 310 ---
314 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8
work for some temporary benefit within perpetual bondage. One thinks
himself very clever throughout his life if he is able to leave behind him a
great asset of wealth for his children, and to achieve this temporary
benefit he takes the risk of all sinful activities, without knowledge that
such activities will keep him perpetually bound by the shackles of material
bondage. Due to this polluted mentality and due to material sins, the
aggregate combination of living entities appeared to be bluish. Such an
impetus of activity for fruitive result is made possible by the dictation of
the external energy of the Lord, kala.
TEXT 13
तस्या््स्पाभिनिरिष्टे-
=
रन्तर्गतोऽर्थो रजसा तनीयान्‌ ।
गुणेन कालानुगतेन विद्धः
खष्यंस्तदाभियत नाभिदेज्ञात्‌ ॥१३॥
tasyarthasiksmabhinivista-drster
antar-gato’rtho rajasa tantyan
gunena kalanugatena viddhah
susyams tadabhidyata nabhidesat
tasya—His; artha—subject; siiksma—subtle; abhinivista-drsteh—of one
whose attention was fixed; antah-gatah—internal;arthah—purpose; rajasa—
by the mode of passion of material nature; taniyan—very subtle; gupena—
by the qualities; kala-anugatena—in due course of time; viddhah—agitated;
siisyah—generating; tat—that; abhidyata—pierced into; nabhidesat—from
the abdomen.
TRANSLATION
The subtle subject matter of creation, on which the Lord’s attention was
fixed, was agitated by the material mode of passion, and thus the subtle
form of creation pierced through His abdomen.
TEXT 14
स॒ प्यकोशः सहसोदतिष्ठत्‌
कालेन कर्मप्रतिबोधनेन |
खवरोविषा तत्सलिलं विशालं
विद्योतयकं इवात्मयोनिः 1280


--- Page 311 ---
Text 15] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakasayi Visnu 315
sa padma-kosah sahasodatisthat
kalena karma-pratibodhanena
sva-rocisa tat salilari visalam
vidyotayann arka ivatma-yonih
sahi—that; padma-kosah—bud of a lotus flower; sahasa—suddenly;
udatisthat—appeared;  kalena—by time; karma—fruitive activities;
pratibodhanena—awakening; sva-rocisa—by its own effulgence; tat—that;
salilam—water of devastation; visalam—vast; vidyotayan—illuminating;
arkah—the sun; iva—like; atma-yonih—generating from the Personality of
Visnu.
TRANSLATION
Piercing through, this sum total form of the fruitive activity of the
living entities took the shape of the bud of a lotus flower generated from
the Personality of Visnu, and by His supreme will it illuminated everything,
like the sun, and dried up the vast waters of devastation.
TEXT 15
GFE स उ एव विष्णुः
प्रावीविशत्सर्वगुणावभासम्‌ |
तसिन्‌ स्वयं वेदमयो विधाता
स्वयम्थवं यं ख वदन्ति सोऽमूत्‌ ॥ १५५॥
tal loka-padman sa u eva vispuh
pravisat sarva-gunavabhasam
tasmin svayarit veda-mayo vidhata
svayam-bhuvarit yarit sma vadanti so 01:06
tat—that; loka—universal; padmam—lotus flower; sah—He; u—certainly;
eva—factually; visnuh—the Lord; pravivisat—entered into; sarva—all; guna-
avabhasam—reservoir of all modes of nature; tasmin—in which; svayam—
in person; veda-mayah—the personality of Vedic wisdom; vidhata—con-
troller of the universe; svayam-bhuvam—self-born; yam—whom; sma—in
the past; vadanti—do say; sah—he; abhiit—generated.
TRANSLATION
Into that universal lotus flower Lord Visnu personally entered as the
Supersoul, and when it was thusimpregnated with all the modes of material
nature, the personality of Vedic wisdom, whom we call the self-born, was
generated.


--- Page 312 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8
PURPORT

This lotus flower is the universal virata form, or the gigantic form of the
Lord in the material world. It becomes amalgamated in the Personality of
Godhead "11111, in His abdomen, at the time of dissolution, and it becomes
manifest at the time of creation. This is due to Garbhodakasayi Visnu,
who enters into each of the universes. In this form is the sum total of all
the fruitive activities of the living entities conditioned by material nature,
and the first of them, namely Brahma, or the controller of the universe, is
generated from this lotus flower. This first-born living being, unlike al
the others, has no material father, and thus he is called self-born or
svayambhu. He goes to sleep with Narayana at the time of devastation,
and when there is another creation, he is born in this way. From this
description we have the conception of three—the gross virata form, the
subtle Hiranyagarbha and the material creative force, Brahma.

TEXT 16
तस्यां स ॒चाम्भोरुटकणिकाया-
मवस्ितो लोकमपश्यमानः |
परिक्रमन्‌ ম্যাক্সি विवृत्तनेत्र-
FR लेभेऽनुदिशं ga ।१६॥
tasyarn sa cambho-ruha-karpikayam
avasthito lokam apasyamanah
parikraman vyomni vivrtta-netras
catvari (60116 1118010৫118 mukhani

tasyam—in that; ca-ambho—water; ruha-karnikayam—whorl of the lotus;
avasthitah—being situated; lokam—the world; apasyamanah—without being
able to see; pariltraman—circumambulating; vyomni—in space; vivrtta-
netrah—while moving the eyes; catvari—four; lebhe—achieved; anudisam—
in terms of direction; mukhdani—mouths.

TRANSLATION

Brahma, born out of the lotus flower, could not see the world, although
he was situated in the whorl. He therefore circumambulated all of space,
and while moving his eyes in all directions he achieved four heads in terms
of the four directions.


--- Page 313 ---
Text 18] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakasayi Visnu 317
TEXT 17
तसादुगान्तश्चसनावधूणं -
अलोपिचकात्सतिरक्तदिरूटम्‌ ।
उपाध्नितः wg Awa
नात्मानयद्धाविददादिदेवः ॥१७॥
tasmad yuganta-svasanava-ghirna-
jalormi-cakrat salilad virudham
upasritah kaijam u loka-tattvam
natmanam addhavidad adi-devah
tasmat—from there; yuganta—at the end of the millennium; svasanava—
the air of devastation; ghiarna—because of movement; jala—water; urmi-
cakrat—out of the circle of waves; salilit—from the water; viridham—
situated on them; updasritah—having the shelter of; kaijam—Ilotus flower;
u—in astonishment; loka-tattvam—the mystery of creation; na—not;
atmanam—himself; addha— perfectly; avidat—could understand; adi-devah-
the first demigod.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, situated in that lotus, could not perfectly understand the
creation, the lotus or himself. At the end of the millennium the air of
devastation began to move the water and the lotus in great circular waves.
PURPORT
Lord Brahma was perplexed about his creation, the lotus and the world,
even though he tried to understand them for one millennium, which is
beyond calculation in the solar years of human beings. No one, therefore,
can know the mystery of the creation and cosmic manifestation simply by
mental speculation. The human being is so limited in his capacity that
without the help of the Supreme he can hardly understand the mystery of
the will of the Lord in terms of creation, continuance and destruction.
TEXT 18
क एष योऽसावहमन्जपृष्ठ
N
Tad वान्जमनन्यदप्सु |


--- Page 314 ---
318 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8
अस्ति द्यधस्तादिह किश्चनैत-
दधिष्ठितं यत्र सता जु भाव्यम्‌ ॥१८॥
ka esa yo’sav aham abja-prstha
etat kuto vabjam ananyad apsu
asti hy adhastad iha kificanaitad
adhisthitarh yatra sata nu bhavyam
kah— who; esah—this; yah asau aham—that | am; abja-prsthe—on top of
the lotus; etat—this; kutah—wherefrom; va—either; abjam—lotus flower;
ananyat—otherwise; apsu—in the water; asti—there is; hi—certainly;
adhastat—from below; tha—in this; kificana—anything; na—not; etat—this;
adhisthitam—situated; yatra—wherein; satd—automatically; nu—or not;
bhavyam—must be.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, in his ignorance, contemplated: Who am [ that am
situated on the top of this lotus? Wherefrom has it sprouted? There must
be something downwards, and that from which this lotus has grown must
be within the water.
PURPORT
The subject matter of the speculations of Brahma in the beginning
regarding the creation of the cosmic manifestation is still a subject matter
for mental speculators. The most intelligent man is he who tries to find
the cause of his personal existence and that of the whole cosmic creation
and thus tries to find the ultimate cause. If his attempt is properly executed
with penances and perseverance, it is sure to be crowned with success.
TEXT 19
स॒ ghar TEA
नाडीभिरन्तजेरमाविवेश ৷
नार्वाम्गतस्तत्खरनालनाल-
नामि विचिन्व॑स्तद्‌विन्द्ताजः ॥१९॥
sa ittham udvikgya-tad-abja-nala-
nadibhir antar-jalam avivesa
narvag-gatas tat-khara-nala-nala-nabhim
vicinvams tad avindatajah


--- Page 315 ---
Text 20] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakasayi Visnu 319
sah—he (Brahma); ittham—in this way; udviksya—contemplating; tat—
that; abja—lotus; nala—stem; nadibhih—by the pipe; antah-jalam-within the
walter; avivesa—entered into; na—not; arvak—in spite of going inside,
nearby; gatah tat—going into; khara-nala—the stem of the lotus; nala— pipe;
nabhim—of the navel; vicinvean—thinking much of it; tat—that; avindata—
understood; ajah—the self-born.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, thus contemplating, entered the channel of the stem of
the lotus. But in spite of his entering the stem and going nearer to the navel
of Visnu, he could not trace out the root.
PURPORT
By dint of one’s personal endeavor one may go nearer to the Lord, but
without the Lord’s mercy one cannot reach the ultimate point. Such
understanding of the Lord is possible only by devotional service, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita: bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi
tattvatah. (Bg.18.55)
TEXT 20
तमस्यपारे विदुरात्मसगं
=
बिविन्यतोऽमूतसुमहांखिणेमिः ।
यो देदभाजां भयमीरयाणः
परिक्षिणेतत्यायुरजस्य हेतिः ॥२०॥
tamasy apare viduratma-sargarn
vicinvato ’bhut sumaharns trinemih
yo 4९1५-6 बुं 217४ bhayam trayanah
pariksinoty ayur ajasya hetih
tamasi apidre—because of an ignorant way of searching; vidura—O Vidura;
atma-sargam—the cause of his creation; vicinvatah— while contemplating;
abhiit—it so became; sumahan—very great; trinemih—time of three dimen-
sions; yah—which; deha-bhajam—of the embodied; bhayam—fearfulness;
trayapah—generating; pariksinoti—diminishing the one hundred years;
ayuh—duration of life; ajasya—of the self-born; hetih— the wheel of eternal
time.
TRANSLATION
O Vidura, while searching in that way about his existence, Brahma
reached his ultimate time, which is the eternal wheel in the hand of Visnu


--- Page 316 ---
320 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8
and which generates fear in the mind of the living entity like the fear of
death.
TEXT 21
स
ततो निषत्तोऽग्रतिटन्धकामः
सखधिष्ण्यमासाय पूनः स देवः ৷
FARE
न्यषीददारूढसमाधियोगः ॥२१॥
tato nivrtto’pratilabdha-kamah
svadhisnyam asadya punah sa devah
$anair jita-$vasa-nivrtta-citto
nyasidad aridha-samadhi-yogah
tatah— thereafter; nivrttah—rctired from that endeavor; apratilabdha-
l:amah— without achievement of the desired destination; svadhisnyam—
own seat; asddya—reaching; punah—again; sah—he; devah—the demigod;
$anaih—without delay; jita-§vasa—controlling the breathing; nivrtta—retired;
cittah—intelligence; nyasidat—sat down; aradha—in confidence; samadhi-
yogah—in meditation on the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, being unable to achieve the desired destination, he retired
from such searching and came back again to the top of the lotus. Thus,
controlling all objectives, he concentrated his mind on the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Samadhi involves concentrating the mind upon the supreme cause of all,
even if one is unaware of whether His actual nature is personal, impersonal
or localized. Concentration of the mind on the Supreme is certainly a form
of devotional service. To cease from personal sense endeavors and to
concentrate on the supreme cause is a sign of self-surrender, and when
self-surrender is present, that is a sure sign of devotional service. Each and
every living entity needs to engage in devotional service to the Lord if he
wishes to understand the ultimate cause of his existence.
TEXT 22
TRA सोऽजः TERN
प्रृतयोगेन विरूटबोषः |


--- Page 317 ---
Text 23] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakasayi Visnu 321
खयं तदन्तदेदयेऽवभात-
मपर्यतापश्यत यज॒ पूर्वम्‌ IRR
kalena so’jah purusayusabhi-
pravrtta-yogena viridha-bodhah
svayam tad antar hrdaye *vabhatam
apasyatapasyata yan na piurvam
kalena—in due course of time; sah—he; ajah—the self-born Brahma;
purusa-dyusa—by the duration of his age; abhipravrtta—being engaged;
yogena—in meditation; viridha— developed; bodhali—intelligence; svayam—
automatically; tat antah—inside his; hrdaye—in the heart; avabhdatam—
manifested; apasyata—which he did not see before; apasyata—saw it; yat—
which; na—not; piirvam—before.
TRANSLATION
At the end of Brahma’s one hundred years, when his meditation was
complete, he developed the required knowledge, and as a result he could
see in his heart the Supreme within himself, whom he could not see before
with the greatest endeavor.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord can be experienced only through the process of
devotional service and not by one’s personal endeavor in mental specu-
lation. The age of Brahma is calculated in terms of divya years, which are
distinct from the solar years of human beings. The divya years are
calculated in Bhagavad-gita: sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmapo
ण्व (Bg. 8.17). Brahma’s one day is equal to one thousand times the
aggregate of the four yugas (calculated to be 4,300,000 years). On that
basis, Brahma meditated for one hundred years before he could understand
the supreme cause of all causes, and then he wrote the Brahma-sarhhita,
which is approved and recognized by Lord Caitanya and in which he
sings, govindam adi-purusar tam aharn bhajami. One has to wait for the
mercy of the Lord before one can either render service unto Him or know
Him as He 15.
TEXT 23
=
शृणाठगौर्यतरोकेपोग-
पर्यङ्क एकं पुरुषं शयानम्‌ ।


--- Page 318 ---
322 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8
फणातपत्रायुतमूषेरल-
युषिदतप्वान्तयुगान्ततोये 112311
mprnala-gaurayat asesabhoga-
paryanka ९0772 purusam sayanam
phanatapatrayute-murdha-ratna-
dyubhir hata-dhvanta-yuganta-toye
mrnala—lotus flower; gaurayat—white all over; asesabhoga—body; par-
yanke—on the bed; ekam—alone; purusam—the Supreme Person; sayanam—
was lying; phana-atapatra—umbrella of a serpent hood; ayuta—bedecked
with; miirdha—head; ratna—jewels; dyubhih—by the rays; hate-dhvanta—
darkness dissipated; yuganta—devastation; toye—in the water.
TRANSLATION
Brahma could see that on the water there was a gigantic lotuslike white
bedstead, the body of Seganaga, on which the Personality of Godhead was
lying alone. The whole atmosphere was illuminated by the rays of the
jewels bedecking the hood of Sesanaga, and that illumination dissipated
all the darkness of those regions.
TEXT 24
रक्षं Re हरितोपलाद्रेः
सन्ध्याभ्रनीवेरुरुरुक्ममूभैः ।
रोद धारौषधिसौपस्य-
वनखजो वेणुजाङ्धिपाडघेः ।।२७॥
preksam ksipantam haritopaladreh
sandhyabhra-ntver uru-rukma-murdhnah
ratnodadharausadhi-saumanasya-
vana-srajo venu-bhujanghripangreh
preksam—the panorama; ksipantam—deriding; harita—green; upala—
coral; adreh—of the hill; sandhyabhra-niveh—of the dress of the evening
cloud on the sky; uru—great; rukma—gold; mirdhnah—on the summit;
ratna—jewels; udadhara—waterfalls; ausadhi—herbs; saumanasya—of the
scenery; vana-srajah—flower garland; vepu—dress; bhuja—hands; anghri-
pa—trees; anghreh—legs.


--- Page 319 ---
Text 25] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakagayi Visnu 323
TRANSLATION
The luster of the transcendental body of the Lord mocked the beauty
of the coral mountain. The coral mountain is very beautifully dressed by
the evening cloud, but the yellow dress of the Lord mocked its beauty.
There is gold on the summit of the mountain, but the Lord’s helmet,
bedecked with jewels, mocked it. The mountain’s waterfalls, herbs, etc.,
with a panorama of flowers, seem like garlands, but the Lord’s gigantic
body, and His hands and legs, decorated with jewels, pearls, tulasi leaves
and flower garlands, mocked the scene on the mountain.
PURPORT
The panoramic beauty of nature, which strikes one with wonder, may be
taken as a perverted reflection of the transcendental body of the Lord. One
who is therefore attracted by the beauty of the Lord is no longer
attracted by the beauty of material nature, although he does not minimize
its beauty. In Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 2.59) it is described that one who is
attracted by param, the Supreme, is no longer attracted by anything
inferior.
TEXT 25
आयामतो विस्तरतः खमान-
देहेन  सोकत्रयसंग्रहेण ।
दिविदिव्याभरणांकानां
कृतभ्रियापा्रितवेषदेहम्‌ ॥२५॥
ayamato vistaratah svamana-
dehena lokatraya-sangrahena
vicitra-divyabharanarmsukanarn
krta-sriyapasrita-vesa-deham
ayamatah—by length; vistaratah—by breadth; svamana—by His own
measurement; dehena—by the transcendental body; lokatraya—the three
(upper, middle and lower) planetary systems; saiigrahena—by total absorp-
tion; vicitra—variegated; divya—transcendental; ebharapa-arsiikanam—rays
of the ornaments; krta-sriyd-apasrita—beauty created by those dresses and
ornaments; vesa—dressed; deham—transcendental body.


--- Page 320 ---
324 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8
TRANSLATION
His transcendental body, unlimited in length and breadth, occupied the
three planetary systems, upper, middle and lower. His body was self-
illuminated by unparalleled dress and variegatedness and was properly
ornamented.
PURPORT
The length and breadth of the transcendental body of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead could only be measured by His own measurement
because He is all-pervading throughout the complete cosmic manifestation.
The beauty of material nature is due to His personal beauty, yet He is
always magnificently dressed and ornamented to prove His transcendental
variegatedness, which is so important in the advancement of spiritual
knowledge.
TEXT 26
dai खकतामाय विविक्तमा्गे-
रभ्यचैतां Fwy |
WH कृपया नखेन्दु-
मयुरभिन्नाङ्गलिचारुपत्रम्‌ ॥२६॥
purisam svakamaya vivik ta-margair
abhyarcatam kama-dughangri-padmam
pradarsayantarm krpaya nakhendu-
mayitkha-bhinnanguli-carupatram
pumsam—of the human being; svak@maya—according to his desire;
vivikta-margaih—by the path of devotional service; abhyarcatim—wor-
shiped; kama-dugha-anghri-padmam—the lotus feet of the Lord, which can
award all desired fruits; pradarsayantam—while showing them; krpaya—by
causeless mercy; nakha—nails; indu —moonlike; mayukha—rays; bhinna—
divided; anguli—figures; carupatram—very beautiful.
TRANSLATION
The Lord showed His lotus feet by raising them. His lotus feet are the
source of all awards achieved by devotional service which is free from
material contamination. Such awards are for those who worship Him in
pure devotion. The splendor of the transcendental rays from His moonlike
toenails and fingernails appeared like the petals of a flower.


--- Page 321 ---
Text 27] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakaéayi Visnu 325
PURPORT

The Lord fulfills the desires of everyone just as one desires. Pure
devotees are interested in achieving the transcendental service of the Lord,
which is nondifferent from Him. Therefore, the Lord is the only desire of
the pure devotees, and devotional service is the only spotless process for
achieving His favor. Srila Riipa Gosvami says in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
that pure devotional service is jiidna-karmady-anavrtam: pure devotional
service is without any tinge of speculative knowledge and fruitive activities
(B.R.S. 1.11). Such devotional service is able to award the pure devotee
the highest result, namely direct association with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Lord Krsna. According to the Gopala-tapani Upanisad, the
Lord showed one of the many thousands of petals of His lotus feet. It is
said: brahmano ’sdvanavaratarih me dhydtah stutah parardhante so’budhyata
gopaveso me purastat dvirvabhiiva. After penetrating for millions of years,
Lord Brahma could understand the transcendental form of the Lord as
Sri Krsna, in the dress of a cowherd boy, and thus he recorded his experi-
ence in the Brahma-sarhita in the famous prayer, govindam adi-purugari
tam ahari bhajami.

TEXT 27
gaa लोकातिंहरसितेन
परिस्फुरत्ुण्डलमण्डितेन |
श्ोणायितेनाधरबिम्बभासा
TURE सुनसेन सुश्चा ॥२९७॥
mukhena lokarti-hara-smitena
parisphurat-kundala-manditena
Sonayitenadhara-bimba-bhasa
pratyarhayantam sunasena subhrva

mukhena—by a gesture of the face; loka-arti-hara—vanquisher of distress
of the devotees; smitena—by smiling; parisphurat—dazzling; kupdalo—
earrings; manditena—decorated with; sonayitena—acknowledging; adhara—
lips; bimba—reflection; bhdsa— rays; pratyarhayantam—reciprocating; suna-
sena—by His pleasing nose; subhrva—and pleasing eyebrows.

TRANSLATION

He also acknowledged the service of the devotees by His beautiful smile.
The reflection of His face was so pleasing because it dazzled with the rays
from His earrings and the beauty of His nose and eyebrows.


--- Page 322 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8
PURPORT
Devotional service to the Lord is very much obliging to Him. There are
many transcendentalists in different fields of spiritual activities, but de-
votional service to the Lord is unique. Devotees do not ask anything from
the Lord in exchange for their service. Even the most desirable liberation
is refused by devotees although offered by the Lord. Thus the Lord
becomes a kind of debtor to the devotees, and He can only try to repay
the devotees’ service with His ever-enchanting smile. The devotees are
ever satisfied by the smiling face of the Lord, and they become enlivened.
And by seeing the devotees so enlivened, the Lord Himself is further
satisfied. So there is continuous transcendental competition between the
Lord and His devotees by such reciprocation of service and acknowledge-
ment.
TEXT 28
FEAR RATE
অন্তক্ধন मेखलया नितम्बे ।
हारेण चानन्तथनेन वत्स
NET ETH ॥२८॥
kadamba-kifijalka-pisanga-vasasa
sv-alankrtarm mekhalaya nitambe
harepa cananta-dhanena vatsa
$rivatsa-vak sah-sthala-vallabhena
kadamba-kifijalka—saffron dust of the kadamba flower; pisanga—dress
of the color; vasasa—by clothing; su-alaitkrtam—well decorated; mekhalaya
—by the belt; nitambe—on the waist; harepa—by the garland; ca—also;
ananta—highly ; dhanena—valuable; vatsa—my dear Vidura; srivatsa—of the
transcendental stone; vaksah-sthala—on the chest; vallabhena—very pleasing.
TRANSLATION
O my dear Vidura, the Lord’s waist was covered with yellow colored
cloth resembling the saffron dust of the kadamba flower, and it was
encircled by a well-decorated belt. His chest was decorated with the highly
valuable érivatsa jewel and a necklace of unlimited value.
TEXT 29
परारध्यकेयुरमणिप्रवेक-
पर्यस्तदोरदण्डसहसखसाखम्‌ |


--- Page 323 ---
Text 30] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakasayi Visnu 327
अन्यक्तमूलं अवनाङ्घिपेन्द्र-
महीन्द्रभोगैरधिवीतवल्शम्‌  ॥२९॥
parardh ya-keyiira-manipraveka-
paryastadordanda-sahasra-sakham
avyakta-mitlari bhuvananghripendram
ahindra-bhogair-adhivita-valsam
par@rdhya—very high; keyiara—ornaments; manipraveka—highly valuable
jewels; paryastata—disseminating; urdanda—very high; sahasra-sakham—
with thousands of branches; avyakta-malam—self-situated; bhuvana—uni-
versal; anghripa—trees; indram—the Lord; ahindra—Anantadeva; bhogaih—
by hoods; adhivita—surrounded; valsam—branches.
TRANSLATION
As a sandalwood tree is decorated with fragrant flowers and branches,
the Lord’s body was decorated with valuable jewels and pearls. He
was the self-situated tree, the Lord of all others in the universe. And as a
sandalwood tree is covered with many snakes, so the Lord’s body was also
covered by the hoods of Ananta.
PURPORT
The word avyakta-mitlam is significant here. Generally, no one can see
the roots of a tree. Bul as far as the Lord is concerned, He is the root of
Himself because there is no other separate cause of His standing but He
Himself. In the Vedas il is said that the Lord is sva@srayasraya; He is His
own support, and there is no other support for Him. Therefore, avyakta
means the Supreme Lord Himself and no one else.
TEXT 30
FH मगवन्महीध-
महीन्द्रबन्धुं सकिलोषगढम्‌ |
किरीटसादस्रदिरष्य ङ्ग -
माविभवत्कौस्तुमरलगर्भम्‌ ell
caracarauko bhagavan mahidhram
ahindra-bandhum salilopagudham
kirtta-sahasra-hiranya-srngam
avirbhavat-kaustubha-ratna-garbham


--- Page 324 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8
cara—moving animals; acara—nonmoving trees; okah—the place of situa-
tion; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; mahidram—the mountain;
ahindra—Sri Anantadeva; bandhum—friend; salila—water; upagidham—
submerged; kirita—helmets; sahasra—thousands; hirapya—gold; sringam—
peaks; avirbhavat—manifested; kaustubha—the Kaustubha jewel; ratna-
garbham—ocean.
TRANSLATION
Like a great mountain, the Lord stands as the abode for all moving and
nonmoving living entities. He is the friend of the snakes because Lord
Ananta is His friend. As a mountain has thousands of golden peaks, so the
Lord was seen with the thousands of golden helmeted hoods of Anantanaga;
and as a mountain is sometimes filled with jewels, so also His transcen-
dental body was fully decorated with valuable jewels. As a mountain is
sometimes submerged in the ocean water, so the Lord is sometimes sub-
merged in the water of devastation.
TEXT 31
विषीतयास्ययपुवतश्रिया
खकीतिमय्या वनमालया हरिम्‌ |
wear त्रिषाममिः
EN
प्रिकपत्पाधविरेद्रासदय्‌ ॥३१॥
nivitam amnaya-madhu-vrata-sriya
sva-kirtimayya vana-malaya harim
suryendu-vayv-agny-agamarn tridhamabhih
parikramat-pradhanikair durasadam
nivitam—so being enclosed; amnaya—Vedic wisdom; madhu-vrata-sriya—
sweet sound in beauty; sva-kirtimayya—by His own glories; vana-malaya—
flower garland; harim—unto the Lord; sirya—the sun; indu—the moon;
vayu—the air; agni—the fire; agagmam—unapproachable; tridhamabhih—by
the three planetary systems; perikramat-circumambulating; pradhanikaih-
for fighting; durdsadam—very difficult to reach.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, thus looking upon the Lord in the shape of a mountain,
concluded that He was Hari, the Personality of Godhead. He saw that the
garland of flowers on His chest glorified Him with Vedic wisdom in sweet


--- Page 325 ---
Text 33] Manifestation of Brahma from Garbhodakasayi Visnu 329
songs and looked very beautiful. He was protected by the Sudarsana wheel
for fighting, and even the sun, moon, air, fire, etc., could not have access
to Him.
TEXT 32
तरव त्नाभिसरःसरोज-
मात्मानमम्मः श्वसनं विय ।
-
ददर्षं॑देबो जगतो विधाता
9
नातः परं लोकविसगंटष्टिः ।२२॥
tarhy-eva tan-nabhi-sarah-sarojam
atmanam ambhah $vasanam viyac ca
dadarsa devo jagato vidhata
natah-param loka-visarga-drstih
tarhi—therefore; eva— certainly; tat—that; nabhi—navel; sarah—lake; saro-
jam—Ilotus flower; atmanam—Brahma; ambhah—the devastating water;
svasanam—the drying air; viyat—the sky; ca—also; dadarsa—looked upon;
devah—demigod; jagatah—of the universe; vidhati—maker of the destina-
tion; natah-param—the Supreme; loka-visarga—creation of the cosmic
manifestation; drstih—glance.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Brahma, the maker of the universal destination, thus saw
the Lord, the Lord simultaneously glanced over creation. The Lord saw the
lake in His navel, and the lotus flower, as well as the devastating water, the
drying air and the sky. All became visible to the Lord.
TEXT 33
स॒ कर्मबीजं रजसोपरक्तः
प्रजाः सिसृक्षन्ियदोेव wm
मन्यक्तवत्मन्यभिवेशितात्मा ॥২২॥
sa karma-bijan rajasoparaktah
prajah sisrksann iyad eva drstva
astaud visargabhimukhas tam idyam
avyakta-vartmany-abhivesitatma


--- Page 326 ---
330 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 3, Ch. 8

safi—he (Brahma); Lkarma-bijam—seed of worldly activities; rajasa-upu-
raktah—initiated by the mode of passion; prajah—living entities; sisrksan—
willing to create progeny; iyat—all the five causes of creation; eva— thus;
drstva—looking on; astaut—prayed for; visarga—creation after the creation
by the Lord; abhimukhai—towards; tam—that; idyam—worshipable; avyak -
ta— transcendental; vartmani—on the path of; abhivesita—fixed;atma—mind.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma, thus being surcharged with the mode of passion, became
inclined to create, and after seeing the five causes of creation indicated by
the Personality of Godhead, he began to offer his respectful prayers on the
path of the creative mentality.

PURPORT

Even if oneis in the material mode of passion to create something in the
world, he has to take shelter of the Supreme for the necessary energy.
That is the path of the successful termination of any attempt.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Third Canto, Eighth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Manifestation of Brahma
from Garbhodakasayt Visnu.”

