
--- Page 1 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY
Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the
sacrificial Arena of Maharaja Prthu
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
EN o
मगवानपि वेङ्ण्टः साकं मघवता विः ৷
यज्ै्यज्ञपतिस्तुष्टो यज्ञञ्चव्‌. तमभाषत । १ ॥
maitreya uvaca
bhagavan api vaikunthah
sakarm maghavata vibhuh
yajiiair yajiia-patis tusto
yajiia-bhuk tam abhasata
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vignu; api—also; vaikunthah—the
Lord of Vaikuntha; sstkam— along with; maghavatd—King Indra; vibhuh—
the Lord; yajiiaith—by the sacrifices; yajiia-patih—the Lord of all yajiias;
tustah—satisfied; yajiia-bhuk—the enjoyer of the yajiia; tam—unto King
Prthu;abhasata—said.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, being very much
satisfied by the performance of ninety-nine horse sacrifices, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, appeared on the scene. Accompany-
ing Him was King Indra. Lord Visnu then began to speak.
TEXT 2
श्रीभगवाडवाच
एष॒ तेऽकाषींदधङ्गं हयमेधशतस्य ह ।
क्षमापयत आत्मानमयुष्य क्षन्तुमहंसि HM
765


--- Page 2 ---
766 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
§ri bhagavan uvaca
esa te ’karsid bhangarn
haya-medha-satasya ha
ksamapayata atmanam
amusya ksantum arhasi
৪78 bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Vignu,
spoke; esah—this Lord Indra; te—your; akarsit—performed; bhangam—dis-
turbance; haya—horse; medha—sacrifice; satasya—of the one-hundredth;
ha—indeed; ksamapayatah—who is asking pardon; @tmanam—unto your-
self; amusya—him; ksantum—to forgive; arhasi—you ought.
TRANSLATION
Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, said: My dear King
Prthu, Indra, the King of heaven, has disturbed your execution of one
hundred sacrifices. Now he has come with Me to be forgiven by you. There-
fore excuse him.
PURPORT
In this verse the word atmanam is very significant. It is a custom among
yogis and jfianis to address one another (even an ordinary man) as one’s
self, for a transcendentalist never accepts a living being to be the body.
Since the individual self is part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the self and the Superself are qualitatively nondifferent. As the
next verse will explain, the body is only a superficial covering, and conse-
quently an advanced transcendentalist will not make a distinction between
one self and another.
TEXT 3
सुधियः ম্রাঘনী रोके नरदेव नरोत्तमाः |
नाभिद्रुह्यन्ति भूतेभ्यो afd नात्मा कलेवरम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥
sudhiyah sadhavo loke
naradeva narottamah
nabhidruhyanti bhiatebhyo
yarhi natma kalevaram
su-dhiyah—the most intelligent persons; sidhavah—who are inclined to
perform welfare activities; loke—in this world; nara-deva—O King; nara-
uttamah—the best of human beings; na abhidruhyanti—never become mali-


--- Page 3 ---
Text 4] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 767
cious; bhiitebhyah—toward other living beings; yarhi—because; na—never;
atma—the self or soul; kalevaram—this body.
TRANSLATION
O King, one who is advanced in intelligence and eager to perform wel-
fare activities for others is considered best amongst human beings. An ad-
vanced human being is never malicious to others. Those with advanced in-
telligence are always conscious that this material body is different from the
soul.
PURPORT
In daily life we find that when a madman commits murder, he is excused
even by a high-court judge. The idea is that a living entity is always pure
because he is part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When
he falls into the clutches of material energy, he becomes a victim of the
three modes of material nature. Indeed, whatever he does, he does under
the influence of material nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:
na kartrtvar na karmani
lokasya srjati prabhuh
na karma-phala-samyogariu
svabhavas tu pravartate
“The embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does not create
activities, nor does he induce people to act, nor does he create the fruits of
action. All this is enacted by the modes of material nature.” (Bg. 5.14)
Actually the living entity or soul does not do anything; everything is
done under the influence of the modes of material nature. When a man is
diseased, the symptoms of the disease become a source of all kinds of pain.
Those who are advanced in transcendental consciousness or Krsna con-
sciousness are never envious, neither of the soul nor of the activities of the
soul under the influence of material nature. Advanced transcendentalists
are called sudhiyah. Sudhi means intelligence, sudhi meanshighly advanced,
and sudhi means devotee. One who is both devoted and highly advanced in
intelligence does not take action against the soul or the body. If there is any
discrepancy, he forgives. It is said that forgiveness is a quality of those who
are advancing in spiritual knowledge.
TEXT 4
पुरुषा यदि श्रद्यन्ति rem देवमायया |
6
श्रम एव परं जातो दीषंया इद्धसेवया ॥ ४॥


--- Page 4 ---
768 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
purusa yadi muhyanti
tvadrsa deva-mayaya
5707720 eva parari jato
dirghaya vrddha-sevaya
purusah—persons; yadi—if;-muhyanti—become bewildered; tva-driah—
like you; deva—of the Supreme Lord; mayaya—by the energy; sramah—
exertion; eva— certainly; param—only; jatah-- produced; dirghaya—foralong
time; vrddha-sevaya—by serving the superiors.
TRANSLATION
If a personality like you, who are so much advanced because of execut-
ing the instructions of the previous acaryas, is carried away by the influence
of My material energy, then all your advancement may be considered
simply a waste of time.
PURPORT
In this verse the word vrddha-sevaya is very significant. Vrddha means
“old.” Sevaya means “by service.” Perfect knowledge is acquired from the
dcaryas or liberated souls. No one can be perfect in knowledge without
being trained by the parampara system. Prthu Maharaja was completely
trained in that line; therefore he did not deserve to be considered an ordi-
nary man. An ordinary man, who has only a conception of bodily existence,
is always bewildered by the modes of material nature.
TEXT 5
९
अतः कायमिमं विद्धानविदाकामकमेभिः |
=
आरन्ध इति नैवासिन्‌ प्रतिबुदधोऽदषते || ५॥
atah kayam imam vidvan
avidya-kama-karmabhih
arabdha iti naivasmin
pratibuddho ’nusajjate
atah—therefore; kayam—body; imam—this; vidvan—he who has knowl-
edge; avidya—by nescience; kama—desires; karmabhih—and by activities;
arabdhah— created; iti—thus; na—never; eva—certainly ; asmin—to this body;
pratibuddhah—one who knows; anusajjate—becomes addicted.


--- Page 5 ---
Text 6] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 769
TRANSLATION

Those who are in full knowledge of the bodily conception of life, who
know that this body is composed of nescience, desires and activities result-
ing from illusion, do not become addicted to the body.

PURPORT

As stated in a previous verse, those with good intellect (sudhiyah) do
not accept themselves to be the body. Being a creation of nescience, the
body has two types of activities. In the bodily conception, when we think
that sense gratification will help us, we are in illusion. Another kind of
illusion is to think that one will become happy by trying to satisfy the
desires that arise from the illusory body, or by attaining elevation to the
higher planetary systems, or by performing various types of Vedic rituals.
This is all illusion. Similarly, material activities performed for political
emancipation and social and humanitarian activities performed with an
idea that people of the world will be happy are also illusory because the
basic principle is the bodily conception, which is illusory. Whatever we
desire or perform under the bodily conception is all illusion. In other
words, Lord Vispu informed Prthu Maharaja that although the sacrificial
performances set an example for ordinary people, there was no need for
such sacrificial performances as far as his personal self was concerned. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:

traigunya-visaya veda
nistraigunyo bhavarjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-ksema atmavan
“The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material
nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of
them. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety,
and be established in the self.” (Bg. 2.45)

The ritualistic performances recommended in the Vedas mainly depend
on the three modes of material nature. Consequently Arjuna was advised
to transcend the Vedic activities. The activities Arjuna was advised to per-
form were the transcendental activities of devotional service.

TEXT 6
असंसक्तः शरीरेऽसिनघुनोत्पादिते IR ।
अपत्ये द्रविणे वापि कः कुर्यान्ममतां बुधः || ६॥


--- Page 6 ---
770 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
asamsaktah sarire ’sminn
amunotpadite grhe
apatye dravine vapi
kah kuryan mamatam budhah
asamsak tah—being unattached; sarire—to the body ;asmin—this; amuna—
by such a bodily conception; utpadite—produced; grhe—house; apatye—
children; dravine—wealth; vda—or; api—also; kah—who; kuryat—would do;
mamatam—affinity ; budhah—learned person.
TRANSLATION
How can a highly learned person who has absolutely no affinity for
the bodily conception of life be affected by the bodily conception in regard
to house, children, wealth and similar other bodily productions?
PURPORT
The Vedic ritualistic ceremonies are certainly meant to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu. However, by such activities
one does not factually satisfy the Lord. Rather, with the sanction of the
Lord, one tries to satisfy his own senses. In other words, materialists who
are especially interested in sense gratification are given permission or license
to enjoy sense gratification by executing the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies.
That is called traigunya-visaya vedah. The Vedic performances are based on
the three modes of material nature. Those who are elevated above the
material condition are not at all interested in such Vedic performances.
Rather, they are interested in the higher duties of transcendental loving
service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such devotional service is
called nistraigunya. Devotional service to the Lord has nothing to do with
the material conception of bodily comfort.
TEXT 7
৬ '
TH: शुद्धः স্যত্যাবিনিযু্যী যী गुणाश्रयः |
4 (] ৬
सवेगोऽना¶ृतः साक्षी निरात्माऽऽत्माऽऽत्मनः परः ও
ekah suddhah svayar-jyotir
nirguno ’sau gunasrayah
sarva-go ’‘navrtah saksi
niratmatmdtmanah parah


--- Page 7 ---
Text 7] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 771

ekah—one; $uddhah—pure; svayam—self; jyotih—effulgent; nirgupeh—
without material qualifications; asau—that; guna-asrayah—the reservoir of
good qualities; sarva-gah—able to go everywhere; andvrtah— without being
covered by matter; saksi—witness; niratma—without another self; atma-
atmanah—to the body and mind; parah—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

The individual soul is one, pure, nonmaterial and self-effulgent. He is
the reservoir of all good qualities, and He is all-pervading. He is without
material covering, and He is the witness of all activities. He is completely
distinguished from other living entities, and He is transcendental to all
embodied souls.

PURPORT

In the previous verse two significant words are used: asarmsaktah, mean-
ing “without attachment,” and budhah, meaning “fully cognizant of
everything.” By full cognizance it is meant that one should know about
his own constitutional position as well as the position of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. According to Sri Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura,
in this verse Lord Visnu is describing Himself or the Paramatma. The
Paramatma is always distinguished from the embodied soul as well as the
material world. Therefore He has been described as para. That para, or
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is eka, meaning one. The Lord is one,
whereas the conditioned souls embodied within the material world exist in
many varieties of form. There are demigods, human beings, animals, trees,
birds, bees, and so forth. Thus the living entities are not eka but many. As
confirmed in the Vedas: nityo nityanam ८९८47105 cetananam. The living
entities, who are many and who are entangled in this material world, are
not pure. However, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is pure and
detached. Due to being covered by the material body, the living entities are
not self-effulgent, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramatma, is
self-effulgent. The living entities, being contaminated by the modes of
material nature, are called saguna, whereas Paramatma, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, is nirgunae, not being under the influence of the
material modes. The living entities, being encaged in material qualities, are
gunasrita, whereas the Supreme Personality of Godhead is gunasraya. The
conditioned soul’s vision is covered by material contamination; therefore
he cannot see the cause of his resultant action and he cannot see his past
lives. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, not being covered by a material
body, is the witness of all the activities of the living entity. But both of


--- Page 8 ---
772 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
them, the living entity and the Paramatma, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, are atmad, or spirit. They are one in quality, yet they are different
in so many ways, especially in regard to the six opulences the Supreme
Personality of Godhead has in full. Full knowledge means that the jiva-atmad,
the living entity, must know both his position and the Supreme’s position.
That is full knowledge.
TEXT 8
य॒ OF सन्तमात्मानमात्मस्थं वेद पूरुषः |
- .
नान्यते श्रृ तिस्थोऽपि ag: स मयि सितः ॥८॥
ya evar santam atmanam
atma-stham veda piirusah
najyate prakrti-stho ‘pi
tad-gunaih sa mayi sthitah
yah—anyone who; evam—thus; santam—existing; atmanam—the indi-
vidual dtma and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramatma; dtma-
stham—situated within his body; veda—knows; piirusah— person; na—never;
ajyate—is affected; prakrti—in material nature; sthah—situated: api—al-
though; tat-gunaih—by the material modes of nature; sah—such a person;
mayi—in Me; sthitah—situated.
TRANSLATION
Although within the material nature, one who is thus situated in full
knowledge of the Paramatma and dtma is never affected by the modes of
material nature, for he is always situated in My transcendental loving
service.
PURPORT
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in this material world,
He is not affected by the modes of material nature. Similarly, those who are
always connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even though
they be within the material body or the material world, are not affected
by the material qualities. That is explained very nicely in Bhagavad-gita:
mam ca yo vyabhicdrena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiiyaya kalpate


--- Page 9 ---
Text 9] Lord Visnu's Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 773
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any
circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus
comes to the level of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26)

Thus one who is unflinchingly engaged in the devotional service of the
Lord surpasses the material qualities and attains Brahman realization. In
this connection Srila 1003 Gosvami says that if a person is always engaged
in the service of the Lord with his body, words and mind, he is to be con-
sidered liberated, although living in the material world.

TEXT 9
यः खपर्मेण मां नित्यं forts भ्द्धयान्वितः।
a LY
मजते TARE मनो राजन्‌ प्रसीदति ॥ ९ ॥
yah sva-dharmena mari nityam
nirasih sraddhayanvitah
bhajate sanakais tasya
mano rdjan prasidati

yah—anyone who; sva-dharmena—by his occupational duties; mam—Me;
nityam—regularly ; nirasih—without any motive; sraddhaya—with faith and
devotion;anvitah—endowed; bhajate—worships;sanakaih—gradually; tasya—
his; manah—mind; r@jan—O King Prthu; prasidati—becomes fully satisfied.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Vignu, continued: My dear
King Prthu, when one situated in his occupational duty engages in My
loving service without motive for material gain, he gradually becomes very
satisfied within.

PURPORT

This verse is also confirmed by the Visnpu Purana. Occupational duties
are known as varnasrama-dharma and apply to the four divisions of ma-
terial and spiritual life—namely, brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and 88070, and
brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha and sannyasa. If one works according
to the varnasrama-dharma system and does not desire fruitive results, he
gets satisfaction gradually. Discharging one’s occupational duty as a means
of rendering devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is the ultimate goal of life. Bhagavad-gitda confirms this as the process of
karma-yoga. In other words, we should act only for the satisfaction and


--- Page 10 ---
774 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
service of the Lord. Otherwise we will be entangled by the resultant actions.

Everyone is situated in his occupational duty, but the purpose of material
occupations should not be for material gain. Rather, everyone should offer
the results of his occupational activities. A brahmana especially should exe-
cute his occupational duties not for material gain but to please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The ksatriya, vaisya and sidra should work in a
similar way. In this material world everyone is engaged in various pro-
fessional and occupational duties, but the purpose of such activities should
be to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Devotional service is
very simple, and anyone can adopt it. Let one remain what he is; he need
only install the Deity of the Supreme Lord in his house. The Deity may be
Radha-Krsna or Laksmi-Narayana (there are many other forms of the
Lord). In this way a brahmana, ksatriya, vaiSya or 8007৫ can worship the
Deity with the results of his honest labor. Regardless of one’s occupational
duty, one should adopt the devotional means of hearing, chanting, remem-
bering, worshiping, offering everything to the Lord, and engaging in His
service. In this way one can very easily engage himself in the service of the
Lord. When the Lord is pleased with one’s service, one’s mission in life is
fulfilled.

TEXT 10
परित्यक्तगुणः सम्यग्दर्शनो विशदाश्चयः |
शान्तिं मे समवस्थानं ब्रह्म HIE Lol
parityakta-gunah samyag
darsano visadasayah
santirh me samavasthanam
brahma kaivalyam asnute

parityakta-gunah—one who is disassociated from the material modes of
nature; samyak—equal; darsanah—whose vision; visada—uncontaminated;
asayah—whose mind or heart; santim—peace; me—My; samavasthanam—
equal situation; brahma—spirit; kaivalyam—freedom from material con-
tamination; asnute—achieves.

TRANSLATION

When the heart is cleansed of all material contamination, the devotee’s
mind becomes broader and transparent, and he can see things equally. At
that stage of life there is peace, and one is situated equally with Me as
sac-cid-ananda-vigraha.


--- Page 11 ---
Text 11] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 775
PURPORT
The Mayavada conception of kaivalya and that of the Vaisnava commu-
nity is different. The Mayavadi thinks that as soon as one is free from all
material contamination, he is merged into the existence of the Supreme.
The Vaisnava philosopher’s conception of kaivalya is different. He under-
stands both his position and the position of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In the uncontaminated condition, the living entity understands
that he is the eternal servitor of the Supreme, and that is called Brahman
realization, the spiritual perfection of the living entity. This rapport is
very easily achieved. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, when one is engaged in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord, he is immediately situated
on the transcendental platform of kaivalya or Brahman.
TEXT 11
उदासीनमिवाध्यक्षं द्रन्यज्ञानक्रियात्मनाम्‌ |
कूटस्थमिममारमानं यो IES शोभनम्‌ 12 210
udasinam ivadh yaksari
dravya-jiana-kriyatmanam
kutastham imam atmanam
yo vedapnoti sSobhanam
udasinam—indifferent; iva—simply; adhyaksam—the superintendent;
dravya—of the physical elements; jaiana—knowledge-acquiring senses;
kriya—working senses; atmanam—and of the mind; kate-stham—fixed;
imam—this; atmanam—soul; yah—anyone who; veda—knows; apnoti—gets;
S§obhanam—all good fortune.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who knows that this material body made of the five gross
elements, the sense organs, the working senses and the mind is simply
supervised by the fixed soul is eligible to be liberated from material
bondage.
PURPORT
This verse describeshow one can becomeliberated from material bondage.
The first point is that one must know that the soul is different from
his body. The soul is called dehi, or one who possesses the body, and the


--- Page 12 ---
776 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
material body is called deha, or the embodiment of the soul. The body is
changing at every moment, but the soul is fixed; therefore the soul is called
kutastham. The change of body is enacted by the reactions of the three
modes of nature. One who has understood the fixed position of the soul
should not be disturbed by the incoming and outgoing interactions of the
modes of material nature in the form of happiness and distress. In
Bhagavad-gita also Lord Krsna recommends that since happiness and dis-
tress come and go due to the interaction of the modes of nature on the
body, one should not be disturbed by such external movements. Even
though one is sometimes absorbed in such external movements, he has to
learn to tolerate them. The living entity should be always indifferent to the
action and reaction of the external body.

Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita that the body made of the gross physi-
cal elements (earth, water, fire, air and sky) and the subtle elements (mind,
intelligence and ego) is completely different from the soul proper. One
should therefore not be disturbed by the action and reaction of these
eight gross and subtle material elements. The practical process to attain
this stage of indifference is to execute devotional service. Only one who
constantly engages in devotional service twenty-four hours a day can be in-
different to the action and reaction of the external body. When a man is
absorbed in a particular thought, he does not hear or see any external ac-
tivities, even though they are enacted in his presence. Similarly, those who
are fully absorbed in devotional service do not care what is going on with
the external body. That status is called samadhi. One who is actually situ-
ated in samadhi is understood to be a first-class yogi.

TEXT 12
fmm fos गुणप्रवाहो
द्रन्यक्रियाकारकचेतनात्मनः |
दृष्टासु सम्परसु विपत्सु क्षरयो
न विक्रियन्ते मयि gate: ॥१२॥
bhinnasya lingasya guna-pravaho
dravya-kriya-karaka-cetanatmanah
drstasu sampatsu vipatsu 50700
na vikriyante mayi baddha-sauhrdah


--- Page 13 ---
Text 12] Lord Vignu's Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 777

bhinnasya—different; lingasya—of the body; guna—of the three modes
of material nature; pravahah—the constant change; drevya—physical ele-
ments; kriyd—activities of the senses; karaka—demigods; cetana—and the
mind; dtmanah—consisting of; drstasu—when experienced; sampatsu—
happiness; vipatsu—distress; siirayah—those who are advanced in knowl-
edge; na—never; vikriyante—become disturbed; mayi—unto Me; baddha-
sauhrdah—bound in friendship.

TRANSLATION

Lord Visnu told King Prthu: My dear King, the constant change of this
material world is due to the interaction of the three modes of material
nature. The five elements, the senses, the demigods who control the senses,
as well as the mind, which is agitated by spirit soul—all these taken together
comprise the body. Since the spirit soul is completely different from this
combination of gross and subtle material elements, My devotee who is
connected with Me in intense friendship and affection, being completely
in knowledge, is never agitated by material happiness and distress.

PURPORT

The question may be raised that if the living entity has to act as the
superintendent of the activities of the bodily combination, then how can
he be indifferent to the activities of the body? The answer is given here:
these activities are completely different from the activities of the spirit
soul of the living entity. A crude example can be given in this connection.
A businessman riding in a motorcar sits in the car, supervises its running,
and advises the driver. He knows how much gasoline is used up, and he
knows everything about the car, but still he is apart from the car and is
more concerned with his business. Even while riding in the car, he thinks
of his business and his office. He has no connection with the car, although
he is sitting there. As the businessman is always absorbed in thoughts of
his business, so the living entity can be. absorbed in thoughts of
rendering loving service to the Lord. Then it will be possible to remain sepa-
rate from the activities of the material body. This position of neutrality
can only be possible for a devotee.

The word baddha-sauhrdah— “bound in friendship”—is particularly
used here. Karmis, jianis and yogis cannot be bound in devotional ser-
vice. Karmis fully engage in the activities of the body. Their aim of life is
to give comfort to the body only. Jiianis try to get out of entanglement by


--- Page 14 ---
778 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
philosophical speculation, but they have no standing in the liberated
position. Because they do not take shelter under the lotus feet of the Lord,
they fall down from the exalted position of Brahman realization. Yogis
also have a bodily concept of life—they think that they can achieve some-
thing spiritual by exercising the body through dharana, asana, pranayama,
etc. A devotee’s position is always transcendental because of his intimate
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, to
remain always aloof from the actions and reactions of the body and
engage in one’s real occupation, namely, rendering service to the Lord,
can only be possible for devotees.
TEXT 13
समः SAHRA:
सुखे च दुःखे च जितेन्द्रियाशयः |
मयोपक्लप्नाणिललोकसंयुतो
विधत्ख वीराखिललोकरश्रणम्‌ 1230
samah samanottama-madhyamadhamah
sukhe ca duhkhe ca jitendriyasayah
mayopaklptakhila-loka-sarmyuto
vidhatsva virakhila-loka-raksanam
samah—equipoised; samana—all equal; uttama—one who is greater;
madhyama—one who is in an intermediate position; adhamah—one who is
in alower standard of life; sukhe—in happiness; ca—and;duhkhe—in distress;
ca—also; jita-indriya—having controlled the senses; dsayah—and mind;
maya—by Me; upaklpta—arranged;akhila— all; loka— by people;saryutah—
being accompanied; vidhatsva—give; vira—O hero; akhila—all; loka—to the
citizens; raksanam—protection.
TRANSLATION
My dear heroic King, please keep yourself always equipoised and treat

people equally, whether they are greater than you, in the intermediate
stage or lower than you. Do not be disturbed by temporary distress or
happiness. Fully control your mind and senses. In this transcendental
position, try to execute your duty as king in whatever condition of life


--- Page 15 ---
Text 13] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 779
you may be posted by My arrangement, for your only duty here is to give
protection to the citizens of your kingdom.

PURPORT

Here is an example of receiving direct instruction from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu. One has to execute the order of
Lord Visnu, whether receiving it directly from Him or from His bona
fide representative, the spiritual master. Arjuna fought the Battle of Kuru-
ksetra under the direct order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna. Similarly, here Prthu Maharaja is also being given orders by Lord
Visnu regarding the execution of his duty. We have to stick to the prin-
ciples stated in the Bhagavad-gita. Vyavasayatmika buddhih: every man’s
duty is to receive orders from Lord Krsna or from His bona fide repre-
sentative and take these orders as his life and soul, without personal
considerations. Srila Vi§vanatha Cakravarti Thakura states that one should
not care very much whether he is going to be liberated or not, but he
should simply execute the direct order received from the spiritual master.
If one sticks to the principle of abiding by the order of the spiritual mas-
ter, he will always remain in a liberated position. A common man must
execute the rules and regulations of varpasrama-dharma by working in his
prescribed duty according to the caste system (brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya
and $itdra) and the spiritual order system (brahmacarya, grhastha, vana-
prastha and sannyasa). If one simply executes regularly and strictly the
injunctions given for the different divisions of life, then one satisfies Lord
Visnu.

As a king, Prthu Maharaja was ordered by Lord Visnu to keep himself
always aloof from the activities of the bodily situation and to engage
always in the service of the Lord and thus keep himself in the liberated
stage. The word baddha-sauhrdah in the previous verse is explained here
with. One can fully remain in intimate connection with the Supreme Lord
directly or receive orders from His bona fide representative the spiritual
master and execute the orders sincerely when one keeps aloof from the
activities of the body. The Lord helps us by giving us directions how to
act in devotional service and thus advance on the path back home, back to
Godhead. He instructs us outwardly in the form of the spiritual master.
Therefore, one should not accept the spiritual master as an ordinary human
being. The Lord says, acaryarm mam vijaniyan navamanyeta karhicit: one
should not treat the spiritual master as an ordinary human being because


--- Page 16 ---
780 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
he is the substitute for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (Bhdg.11.17.27)
One should treat the spiritual master as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and never be envious of him or consider him to be an ordinary
human being. If we follow the instruction of the spiritual master and
execute devotional service to the Lord, we will remain always free from
the contamination of bodily or material activities, and our life will be
successful.
TEXT 14
श्रेयः प्रजापालनमेव राज्ञो
यत्साम्पराये सुकृतात्‌ BHI |
हर्तान्यथा हतपुण्यः प्रजाना-
मरश्षिता करहारोऽघमत्ति 12311
sreyah praja-palanam eva rajio
yat samparaye sukrtat sastham amsam
hartanyatha hrta-punyaeh prajanam
~ araksita karaharo ‘gham atti
sreyah—auspicious; praja-palanam—ruling over the general mass of
people; eva—certainly; rajiah—for the king; yat—because; samparaye—in
the next birth; su-krtat—from the pious activities; sastham ams$am—one-
sixth part; harta—collector; anyatha— otherwise; hrta-punyah—being bereft
of the results of pious activities; prajanam— of the citizens; araksita—one
who does not protect; kara-harah—tax collector; agham—sin; atti—receives
or suffers.
TRANSLATION
To give protection to the general mass of people who are citizens of the
state is the prescribed occupational duty for a king. By acting in that way,
the king in his next life shares one sixth of the result of the pious activities
of the citizens. But a king or executive head of state who simply collects
taxes from the citizens but does not give them proper protection as human
beings has the results of his own pious activities taken away by the citizens,
and in exchange for his not giving protection he becomes liable to punish-
ment for the impious activities of his subjects.
PURPORT
The question may be raised here that if everyone engaged in spiritual
activities to attain salvation and became indifferent to the activities of the


--- Page 17 ---
Text 14] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 781
material world, then how could things as they are go on? And if things are
to go on as they ought to, how can a head of state be indifferent to such
activities? In answer to this question the word sreyah, ‘‘auspicious,” is
used here. The division of activities in society as arranged by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead was not blindly or accidently created, as foolish
people say. The brahmana must do his duty properly, and the ksatriya,
the vaisya and even the 48070 must do the same. And every one of them
can achieve the highest perfection of life—liberation from this material
bondage. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita. Sve sve karmany abhiratah
50751001217 labhate narah: “By executing one’s prescribed duties, one can
attain the highest perfection.” (Bg. 18.45)

Lord Visnu advised Maharaja Prthu that a king is not enjoined to give up
his kingdom and the responsibility of protecting the prajas or citizens to
instead go away to the Himalayas for liberation. He can attain liberation
while executing his royal duties. The royal duty or the duty of the head of
state is to see that the prajas or the general mass of people are doing their
respective duties for spiritual salvation. A secular state does not necessitate
a king or head of state who is indifferent to the activities of the prajas.
In the modern state the government has many rules and regulations for
conducting the duties of the prajds, but the government neglects to see
that the citizens advance in spiritual knowledge. If the government is
careless in this matter, the citizens will act whimsically, without any
sense of God realization or spiritual life, and thus become entangled in
sinful activities.

An executive head should not be callous to the welfare of the general
mass of people while he simply goes on collecting taxes. The king’s real
duty is to see that the citizens gradually become fully Krsna conscious.
Krsna conscious means completely free from all sinful activities. As soon
as there is complete eradication of sinful activities in the state, then there
will be no more war, pestilence, famine or natural disturbances. This was
actually prevailing during the reign of Maharaja Yudhisthira. If a king or
head of the government is able to induce the citizens to become Krsna con-
scious, then he is worthy to rule over the mass of people; otherwise, he
has no right to levy taxes. If the king looks after the spiritual interests of
the citizens, he can levy taxes without difficulties. In this way both the
subjects and the king will be happy during this life, and in the next life the
king will be able to share one sixth of the pious activities of the citizens.
Otherwise, by levying taxes on the sinful citizens he will have to share the
reactions of their sinful activities.

This same principle can be applied to parents and the spiritual masters as
well. If parents simply give birth to children like cats and dogs but cannot


--- Page 18 ---
782 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
save their children from imminent death, they become responsible for the
activities of their animalistic children. Lately, such children are turning into
hippies. Similarly, if a spiritual master cannot direct his disciples to become
free of sinful activities, he becomes responsible for their sinful acts. These
subtle laws of nature are unknown to the present leaders of society. Since
the leaders of society have a poor fund of knowledge and the citizens in
general are rogues and thieves, there cannot be an auspicious situation for
human society. At the present moment the whole world is full of such an
incompatible combination of state and citizens, and therefore there is
constant tension, war and anxiety as an inevitable result of such social
conditions.
TEXT 15
एवं द्विजाग्याजुमतानुड्त्त-
धर्मप्रधानोऽन्यतमोऽवितास्याः |
(8
स्वेन कालेन गृदोपयातान्‌
द्रष्टासि सिद्धानतुरक्तलोकः 124
evarh dvijagryanumatanuvrtta-
dharma-pradhano ‘nyatamo ‘vitasyah
hrasvena kalena grhopayatan
drastasi siddhan anurakta-lokah
evam—thus; dvija—of the brahmanas; agrya—by the foremost; anumata—
approved; anuvrtta—received by disciplic succession; dharma—religious
principles; pradhanah—he whose chief interest is; anyatamah—unattached;
avita—the protector; asyah—of the earth;hrasvena— short;kalena—in time;
grha—to your home; upayiatan—having come personally; drastasi—you will
see; siddhan—perfected personalities; anurakta-lokah—being loved by the
citizens.
TRANSLATION
Lord Visnu continued: My dear King Prthu, if you continue to protect
the citizens according to the instructions of the learned brahmana authori-
ties, as they are received by the disciplic succession—by hearing—from
master to disciple, and if you follow the religious principles laid down by
them, without attachment to ideas manufactured by mental concoction,
then every one of your citizens will be happy and will love you, and very
soon you will be able to see such already liberated personalities as the four
Kumaras [ Sanaka, Sanitana, Sananda and Sanat-kumara].


--- Page 19 ---
Text 15] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 783
PURPORT

Lord Vignu advised King Prthu that everyone should follow the prin-
ciples of varnasrama-dharma; then, in whatever capacity one remains within
this material world, his salvation is guaranteed after death. In this age, how-
ever, since the system of varnpasrama-dharma is topsy-turvy, it is very diffi-
cult to strictly follow all the principles. The only method for becoming
perfect in life is to develop Krsna consciousness. As varpasrama-dharma is
executed from different positions by different men, so the Krsna conscious-
ness principles can be followed by everyone in every part of the world.

There is a specific purpose in mentioning herein that one should follow
the dvijagryas, the most prominent brahmanas like Parasara and Manu.
These great sages have already given us instructions how to live according
to the principles of varpasrama-dharma. Similarly, Sanatana Gosvami and
Ripa Gosvami have given us rules and regulations for becoming pure devo-
tees of the Lord. lt is essential, therefore, to follow the instructions of the
acaryas in the parampara system who have received the knowledge as
passed down from spiritual master to disciple. In this way, although living
in our material condition of life, we can get out of the entanglement of
material contamination without leaving our positions. Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu advises, therefore, that one does not have to change his posi-
tion. One simply has to hear from the perfect source (this is called param-
para) and follow the principles for practical application in life; thus one
can attain the highest perfection of life, liberation, and go back home, back
to Godhead. In other words, the change required is a change in conscious-
ness, not in the body. Unfortunately, in this fallen age, people are con-
cerned with the body, not with the soul. They have invented so many
“isms” pertaining to the body only, not to the soul.

In the modern age of democracy there are so many government repre-
sentatives voting for legislation. Every day they bring out a new law. But
because these laws are only mental concoctions manufactured by inex-
perienced conditioned souls, they cannot give relief to human society.
Formerly, although the kings were autocrats, they strictly followed the
principles laid down by great sages and saintly persons. There were no mis-
takes in ruling over the country, and everything went perfectly. The citi-
zens were completely pious, the king levied taxes legitimately, and therefore
the situation was very happy. At the present moment the so-called execu-
tive heads are more or less selected from materially ambitious persons who
simply look after their own personal interests; they have no knowledge of
the sastras. In other words, the executive heads are fools and rascals in the
strict sense of the terms, and the people in general are sidras. This combi-


--- Page 20 ---
784 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
nation of fools and rascals and sidras cannot bring about peace and pros-
perity in this world. Therefore we find periodic upheavals in society in the
forms of battles, communal riots and fratricidal quarrels. Under these
circumstances, not only are the leaders unable to lead the people towards
liberation, but they cannot even give them peace of mind. In Bhagavad-
gita it is stated that anyone who lives on concocted ideas, without refer-
ence to the sastras, never becomes successful and does not attain happiness
or liberation after death.
TEXT 16
४4
वरं च मत्‌ कञ्चन मानवेन्द्र
वृणीष्व तेऽहं गुणशीरयन्तितः |
. Xr
नादं मैव सुरभस्तपोभि-
योगिन वा यत्समचित्तवर्ती ।॥१६॥
varam ca mat kaficana manavendra
vrnisva te "ham guna-sila-yantritah
naham makhair vai sulabhas tapobhir
yogena va yat sama-citta-varti
varam—benediction; ca—also; mat—from Me; kaficana—whatever you
like; manava-indra—O chief of human beings; vrnisva— please request; te—
your; aham—1; guna-$ila—by elevated qualities and excellent behavior;
yantritah—being captivated; na—not; aham—1; makhaih—by sacrifices; vai—
certainly; su-labhah—easily obtained; tapobhih—by austerities; yogena—
by practice of mystic yoga; vi—or; yat—because of which; sama-citta—in
one who is equipoised; varti— being situated.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, I am very captivated by your elevated qualities and

excellent behavior, and thus I am very favorably inclined towards you. You
may therefore ask from Me any benediction you like. One who does not
possess elevated qualities and behavior cannot possibly achieve My favor
simply by performance of sacrifices, severe austerities, or mystic yoga. I
always remain equipoised in the heart of one who is also equipoised in all
circumstances.


--- Page 21 ---
Text 17] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 785
PURPORT
Lord Visnu was very pleased with Maharaja Prthu’s good character and
behavior and offered him a benediction. The Lord openly says that per-
forming great sacrifices or undergoing the austerities of mystic yoga prac-
tice cannot satisfy Him. He is only pleased by elevated character and be-
havior. But these cannot develop unless one becomes a pure devotee of the
Lord. Anyone who has developed unalloyed, unflinching devotional ser-
vice unto the Lord develops his original good qualities as spirit soul. The
spirit soul, as part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has
all the good qualities of the Lord. When the spirit soul is contaminated by
the material modes of nature, one is considered good or bad with
reference to the material qualities. But when one is transcendental to all
material qualities, all the good qualities come out. These qualities of a
devotee, twenty-six in number, are listed as follows: (1) kind to everyone,
(2) does not quarrel with anyone, (3) fixed in the Absolute Truth, (4) equal
to everyone, (5) faultless, (6) charitable, (7) mild, (8) clean, (9) simple,
(10) benevolent, (11) peaceful, (12) completely attached to Krsna, (13)
has no material hankering, (14) meek, (15) steady, (16) self-controlled,
(17) does not eat more than required, (18) sane, (19) respectful, (20)
humble, (21) grave, (22) compassionate, (23) friendly, (24) poetic,
(25) expert, (26) silent. The Lord is satisfied by development of the
transcendental qualities of the living entity and not by artificial perfor-
mance of sacrifices and mystic yoga. In other words, unless one is fully
qualified to become a pure devotee of the Lord one cannot expect to be
liberated from material entanglement.
TEXT 17
मैत्रेय उवाच
स इत्थं लोकगुरुणा विष्वक्सेनेन विश्वजित्‌ ।
अनुश्चासित आदेशं शिरसा जगृहे हरेः ॥ १७॥
maitreya uvaca
sa ittham loka-guruna
visvaksenena visva-jit
anusasita adesam
sirasa jagrhe hareh


--- Page 22 ---
786 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20

maitreyah uvdca—Maitreya said; sah—he; ittham—thus; loka-guruna—by
the supreme master of all people; visvak-senena—by the Personality of
Godhead; visva-jit— the conqueror of the world (Maharaja Prthu); anusasitah
—being ordered ;adesam—instructions;sirasi—on the head; jagrhe—accepted;
hareh— of the Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

The great saint Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, in this way Maha-
raja Prthu, the conqueror of the entire world, accepted the instructions of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead on his head.

PURPORT

One should accept the instructions of the Supreme Personality of God-
head by bowing down at the lotus feet of the Lord. This means that any-
thing spoken by the Personality of Godhead should be taken as it is, with
great care and attention and with great respect. It is not our business to
amend the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or make addi-
tions or alterations, as it has become a custom for many so-called scholars
and svamis who comment on the words of Bhagavad-gita. Here the practi-
cal example of how to accept the instruction of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is shown by Prthu Maharaja.This is the way to receive knowl-
edge through the parampara system.

TEXT 18
सन्तं पादयोः परेम्णा व्रीडितं स्वेन कर्मणा |
शतक्रतुं परिष्वज्य विद्वेषं विससजं ह ॥१८॥
sprsantam padayoh premna
vriditam svena karmana
Sata-kratum parisvajya
vidvesam visasarja ha

sprsantam—touching; padayoh—the feet; premna—in ecstasy; vriditam—
ashamed; svena—his own; karmana—by activities; sata-kratum—King Indra;
parisvajya—embracing; vidvesam— envy ; visasarja—gave up; ha—of course.


--- Page 23 ---
Text 19] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 787
TRANSLATION

As King Indra was standing by, he became ashamed of his own activities
and fell down before King Prthu to touch his lotus feet. But Prthu Maha-
raja immediately embraced him in great ecstasy and gave up all his envy
against him because of his stealing the horse meant for the sacrifice.

PURPORT

There are many cases in which a person becomes an offender to the
lotus feet of a Vaisnava and later becomes repentant. Here also we find
that although the King of heaven, Indra, is so powerful that he accompa-
nied Lord Visnu, he felt himself a great offender for stealing Prthu Maha-
raja’s horse that was meant for sacrifice. An offender at the lotus feet
of a Vaignava is never excused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
There are many instances illustrating this fact. Ambarisa Maharaja was
offended by Durvasa Muni, a great sage and mystic yogt, and Durvasa also
had to fall down at the lotus feet of Ambarisa Maharaja.

Indra decided to fall down at the lotus feet of King Prthu, but the King
was 80 magnanimous a Vaisnava that he did not want Maharaja Indra to
fall down at his feet. He immediately picked him up and embraced him,
and both of them forgot all the past incidents. Both King Indra and Maha-
raja Prthu were envious and angry with each other, but since both of them
were Vaisnavas, or servants of Lord Visnu, it was their duty to adjust the
cause of their envy. This is also a first-class example of cooperative behav-
ior between Vaisnavas. In the present days, however, because people are
not Vaisnavas, they fight perpetually among one another and are vanquished
without finishing the mission of human life. There is a great need to
propagate the Krsna consciousness movement in the world so that even
though sometimes people become angry and malicious towards one an-
other, because of their being Krsna conscious such rivalry, competition
and envy could be adjusted without difficulty.

TEXT 19
मगवानथ विश्वारमा प्धुनोपहतादणः |
सषठजिदानया भक्त्या गृहीतचरणाम्बुजः ॥१९॥
bhagavan atha visvatma
prthunopahrtarhanah


--- Page 24 ---
788 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
samujjthanaya bhaktya
grhita-caranambujah
. bhagavin—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atha—thereupon;
visva-atma— the Supersoul; prthuna—by King Prthu; upahrta—being offered;
arhapah—all the paraphernalia for worship; samujjithanaya—gradually in-
creased; bhaktya—whose devotional service; grhita—taken; carana-ambujah
—His lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
King Prthu abundantly worshiped the lotus feet of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, who was so merciful to him. While worshiping the lotus
feet of the Lord, Prthu Maharaja gradually increased his ecstasy in devo-
tional service.
PURPORT
When various ecstasies appear in the body of a devotee, it is to be under-
stood that his devotional service has become perfect. There are many
types of transcendental ecstasies in the forms of crying, laughing, perspir-
ing, falling down, and crying like a madman. All these symptoms are some-
times visible on the body of a devotee. They are called asta-sattvika-vikara,
which means eight kinds of transcendental transformations. They are
never to be imitated, but when a devotee actually becomes perfect, these
symptoms are visible on his body. The Lord is bhakta-vatsala. which means
that He is inclined towards His pure devotee (bhakta). Therefore the
transcendental ecstatic transaction between the Supreme Lord and His
devotee is never like the activities of this material world.
TEXT 20
प्रस्यानामिभ्रलोऽप्येनमनुग्रदविरुम्बितः ।
TH पद्रपठाशाक्षो न प्रतस्थे सुहृत्सताम्‌ ।२०॥
prasthanabhimukho ’py enam
anugraha-vilambitah
pasyan padma-palasakso
na pratasthe suhrt satam
prasthana—to leave; abhimukhah—ready; api—although; eram—him
(Prthu); anugraha—by kindness; vilambitah—detained; pasyan—seeing;


--- Page 25 ---
Text 21] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 789
padma-palasa-aksah—the Lord, whose eyes are like the petals of a lotus
flower; na—not; pratasthe— departed; suhrt—the well-wisher; satam—of the
devotees.

TRANSLATION

The Lord was just about to leave, but because He was so greatly inclined
towards the behavior of King Prthu, He did not depart. Seeing the behavior
of Maharaja Prthu with His lotus eyes, He was detained because He is always
the well-wisher of His devotees.

PURPORT

Here the words suhrt satam are very significant. The Supreme Personality
of Godhead is always very inclined towards His devotee and is always
thinking of his well-being. This is not partiality. As stated in Bhagavad-gita,
the Lord is equal to everyone (samo ‘ham sarva-bhiitesu), but to one who
particularly engages in His service, He is very much inclined. In another
place, the Lord says that a devotee always exists in His heart, and He also
exists always in the heart of the devotee.

The special inclination of the Supreme Personality of Godhead for His
pure devotee is not unnatural, nor is it partiality. For example, sometimes
a father has several children, but he has special affection for one child who
is very much inclined towards him. This is explained in Bhagavad-gita
(4. tesam satata-yuktanam

bhajatar priti-piarvakam
dadami buddhi-yogarm tam
yena mam upayanti te
Those who constantly engage in the devotional service of the Lord in love
and affection are directly in contact with the Supreme Personality of God-
head sitting as the Supersoul in everyone’s heart. The Lord is not far away
from the devotee. He is always in everyone’s heart, but only the devotee
can realize the Lord’s presence, and thus he is directly connected, and he
takes instruction from the Lord at every moment. Therefore, there is no
chance of a devotee’s being in error, nor is there any partiality on the part
of the Lord for His pure devotees.
TEXT 21
= (५
स॒ आदिराजो रचिताञ्ञटिषेरिं
विलोकितं नाश्दश्वुलोचनः |


--- Page 26 ---
790 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
न॒ किञ्चनोवाच स बाष्पविङ्कबो
हदोपगुद्याघ्रुमधादबयितः ॥२१॥
sa adi-rajo racitanjalir harim
vilokitum nasakad asru-locanah
na kificanovaca sa baspa-viklavo
hrdopaguhyamum adhad avasthitah
sah—he; adi-ragjah—the original King; racita-aiijalih— with folded hands;
harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vilokitum—to look upon;
na—not; asakat—was able; asru-locanah—his eyes full of tears; na—nor;
kificana—anything; uvaca—spoke; sah—he; baspa-viklavah—his voice being
choked up; hrda—with his heart; upaguhya—embracing; amum—the Lord;
adhat—he remained; avasthitah—standing.
TRANSLATION
The original King, Maharaja Prthu, his eyes full of tears and his voice
faltering and choked up, could neither see the Lord very distinctly nor
speak to address the Lord in any way. He simply embraced the Lord with-
in his heart and remained standing in that way with folded hands.
PURPORT
Just as Krsna is addressed in the Brahma-samhita as adi-purusa, the
original personality, so King Prthu, being an empowered incarnation of
the Lord, is referred to in this verse as adi-rajah, the original or ideal King.
He was a great devotee and at the same time a great hero who conquered
over all undesirable elements in his kingdom. He was so powerful that he
was equal to fighting with Indra, the King of heaven. He gave protection to
his citizens, keeping them engaged in pious activities and devotion to
the Lord. He did not collect a single cent of taxes from the citizens with-
out being able to give them protection from all calamities. The greatest
calamity in life is to become godless and therefore sinful. If the state head
or king allows the citizens to become sinful by indulging in illicit sex life,
intoxication, meat-eating and gambling, then the king is responsible, and
he has to suffer the resultant sequence of reactions for the sinful lives of
the citizens because he levies taxes on them unnecessarily. These are the
principles for a ruling power, and because Maharaja Prthu observed all the
principles for a ruling chief, he is referred to here as adi-rajah.
Even a responsible king like Maharaja Prthu can become a pure devotee


--- Page 27 ---
Text 22] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 791
of the first order. We can distinctly see from his behavior how he became
ecstatic, both externally and internally, in pure devotional service.

Just today we have seen in the newspapers of Bombay that the govern-
ment is going to repeal its prohibition laws. Ever since Gandhi’s noncoop-
eration movement, Bombay has been kept dry and has not allowed its
citizens to drink. But unfortunately the citizens are so clever that they
have increased illicit distillation of liquor, and although not being sold
publicly in shops, liquor is being sold in public lavatories and similar
abnormal places. Unable to check such illicit smuggling, the government
has decided to manufacture the liquor at cheaper prices so that people can
have their supply of intoxication directly from the government instead of
purchasing it in public lavatories. The government failed to change the
hearts of the citizens from indulging in sinful life, so instead of losing the
taxes they collect toinflate the treasury, they have decided to manufacture
liquor to supply to the citizens who hanker after it.

This kind of government cannot check the resultant actions of sinful
life, namely, war, pestilence, famine, earthquakes and similar other disturb-
ances. Nature’s law is that as soon as there are discrepancies in the laws of
God (which are described in Bhagavad-gita as dharmasya glanih, or dis-
obedience to the laws of nature of God), at once there will be heavy punish-
ment in the form of sudden outbreak of war. We have recently experienced
a war between India and Pakistan. Within fourteen days there have been
immense losses of men and money, and there have been disturbances to
the entire world. These are the reactions of sinful life. The Krsna conscious-
ness movement is meant to make people pure and perfect. If we become
even partially pure, as described in the Bhagavatam (nasta-prayesv abha-
dresu), by development of Krsna consciousness, then lust and greed, the
material diseases of the citizens, will be reduced. This can be made possible
simply by broadcasting the pure message of Srimad-Bhagavatam or Krsna
consciousness. Big commercial and industrial firms have contributed many
thousands of rupees to a Defense Fund that burns the money in the form
of gunpowder, but unfortunately if they are asked to contribute liberally
to advance the Krsna consciousness movement, they are reluctant. Under
the circumstances, the world will periodically suffer from such upsurges
and outbreaks of war, which are the consequences of not being Krsna
conscious.

TEXT 22
अथावमरज्याश्रुकला विलोकयन्‌-
नतृप्रग्गाचरमाह पूरुषम्‌ ।


--- Page 28 ---
792 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
पदा स्प्रशन्तं क्षितिमंस उन्नते
विन्यस्तदस्ताग्रमुरङ्गविद्धिषः IRR
athavamyjydsru-kala vilokayann
atrpta-drg-gocaram aha pirusam
pada sprsantari ksitim aritsa unnate
vinyasta-hastagram uranga-vidvisah

atha—thereupon; avamrjya—wiping; asru-kalah—the tears in his eyes;
vilokayan—observing; atrpta—not satisfied; drk-gocaram—visible to his
naked eyes; aha—he said; pitrusam —unto the Supreme Personality of God-
head; pada—with His lotus feet; sprsantam—just touching; ksitim—the
ground; amse—on the shoulder; unnate-raised;vinyasta—rested; hasta—of
this hand; agram—the front part; uranga-vidvisah—of Garuda, the enemy
of the snakes.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead stood with His lotus feet almost
touching the ground while He rested the front of His hand on the raised
shoulder of Garuda, the enemy of the snakes. Maharaja Prthu, wiping the
tears from his eyes, tried to look upon the Lord, but it appeared that he
was not fully satisfied by looking at Him. Thus he offered the following
prayers.

PURPORT

The significant point in this verse is that the Lord was standing above
the ground, almost touching it. The residents of the upper planetary
systems, beginning from Brahmaloka (the planet where Lord Brahma lives)
down to Svargaloka (the heavenly planet of Indra), are so advanced in
spiritual life that when they come to visit this or similar other lower
planetary systems, they keep their weightlessness. This means that they can
stand without touching the ground. Lord Visnu is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but because He lives in one of the planetary systems within
this universe, He sometimes plays as if one of the demigods of this uni-
verse. When He first appeared before Prthu Maharaja, He was not touching
the ground of this earth, but when He was fully satisfied with the behavior
and character of Maharaja Prthu, He immediately acted as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Narayana from Vaikuntha. Out of affection for
Prthu Maharaja, He touched the earth, but He rested the front of His hand
on the raised shoulder of Garuda, His carrier, as if to prevent Himself from
falling down, since the Lord is not accustomed to stand on earthly ground.


--- Page 29 ---
Text 23] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 793
These are all symptoms of His great affection for Prthu Maharaja. Perceiv-
ing his fortunate position, Prthu Maharaja could not fully look upon the
Lord due to ecstasy, but still, in a faltering voice, he began to offer prayers.
TEXT 23
एथुरुवाच
वरान्‌ विभो त्वद्वरदेश्वराद्‌ बुधः
कथं वृणीते गुणविक्रियात्मनाम्‌ |
ये नारकाणामपि सन्ति देहिनां
=
JAE कंवल्यपते बणे न च ॥२३॥
prthur ८४९८०
varan vibho tvad varadesvarad budhah
katham vrnite guna-vikriyatmanam
ye narakanam api santi dehinam
tan isa kaivalya-pate vrne na ca

prthup uvaca— Prthu Maharaja said; varan—benedictions; vibho—my dear
Supreme Lord; tvat—from You; vara-de-iSvarat—from the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the highest of the bestowers of benediction; budhah—
a learned person; katham—how; vrpite—could ask for; guna-vikriya—be-
wildered by the modes of material nature; atmanam— of the living entities;
ye—which; narakapam—of the living entities living in hell; api— also; santi—
exist; dehinam—of the embodied; tan—all those; iSa—O Supreme Lord;
kaivalya-pate— 0 bestower of merging in the existence of the Lord;vrne—
1 ask for; na—not;ca—also.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You are the best of the demigods who can offer bene-
dictions. Why therefore should any learned person ask You for benedictions
that are meant for living entities who are bewildered by the modes of
nature? Such benedictions are available automatically, even in the lives of
living entities who are suffering in hellish conditions. My dear Lord, You
can certainly bestow merging into Your existence, but I do not wish to
have such a benediction.

PURPORT

There are different kinds of benedictions according to a person’s de-

mands. For karmis the best benediction is promotion to the higher plane-


--- Page 30 ---
794 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
tary systems where the duration of life is very long and the standard of
living and happiness is very high. There are others, namely jianis and
yogis, who want the benediction of merging into the existence of the Lord.
This is called kaivalya. The Lord is therefore addressed as kaivalya-pati,
the master or Lord of the benediction known as kaivalya. But devotees
receive a different type of benediction from the Lord. Devotees are anxious
neither for the heavenly planets nor for merging into the existence of the
Lord. According to devotees, kaivalya, or merging into the existence of
the Lord, is considered as good as hell. The word naraka means hell.
Similarly, everyone who exists in this material world is called naraka
because this material existence itself is known as a hellish condition of life.
Prthu Maharaja, however, expressed that he was interested neither in the
benediction desired by the karmis nor that desired by the jiianis and yogis.
Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati Prabhu, a great devotee of Lord Caitanya,
described that kaivalya is no better than a hellish condition of life, and as
for the delights of the heavenly planets, they are factually will-o’-the-wisps
or phantasmagoria. They are not wanted by devotees. Devotees do not
even care for the positions held by Lord Brahma or Lord Siva, nor does a
devotee desire to become equal with Lord Vignu. As a pure devotee of the
Lord, Prthu Maharaja made his position very clear.
TEXT 24
न कामये नाय RAE कविन्‌-
न = युष्पचरणाम्बुजासवः |
महत्तमान्तदद यान्धुखग्युतो
frm कर्णायुतमेष मे वरः ॥२४॥
na kamaye natha tad apy aham kvacin
na yatra yusmac-caranambujasavah
mahattamantar-hrdayan mukha-cyuto
vidhatsva karnayutam esa me varah
na—not; kamaye—do 1 desire; natha—O master; tat—that; api—even;
aham—I; kvacit—at any time; na—not; yatra— where; yusmat— Your; carana-
ambuja—of the lotus feet; asavah—the nectarean beverage; mahattama— of
the great devotees; antah-hrdayat—from the core of the heart; mukha—
from the mouths; cyutah—being delivered; vidhatsva—give; karpa—ears;
ayutam—one million; esah—this; me—my ; varah—benediction.


--- Page 31 ---
Text 24] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 795
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, I therefore do not wish to have the benediction of merg-
ing into Your existence because in that position there is no existence of
the nectarean beverage of Your lotus feet. I want the benediction of at
least one million ears, for thus I may be able to hear about the glories of
Your lotus feet from the mouths of Your pure devotees.

PURPORT

In the previous verse Maharaja Prthu addressed the Lord as kaivalya-pati,
the master of the liberation of merging into His existence. This does not
mean that he was anxious for kaivalya liberation. That is made clear in this
verse: “My dear Lord, I do not want such a benediction.” Maharaja Prthu
wanted to have a million ears to hear the glories of the lotus feet of the
Lord. He specifically mentioned that the glories of the Lord should emanate
from the mouths of pure devotees who speak from the cores of their
hearts. It is stated in the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam, Suka-mukhad
amyrta-drava-sariyutam: the nectar of Srimad-Bhagavatam became more
relishable because it emanated from the mouth of Srila Sukadeva Gosvami
(Bhag. 1.1.3). One might think that these glories of the Lord can be heard
from anywhere, from the mouths of either devotees or nondevotees, but
here it is specifically mentioned that the glories of the Lord must emanate
from the mouths of pure devotees. Sri Sanatana Gosvami has strictly pro-
hibited hearing from the mouth of a nondevotee. There are many pro-
fessional reciters of Srimad-Bhagavatam who speak the narrations very
ornamentally, but a pure devotee does not like to hear from them because
such glorification of the Lord is simply a vibration of material sound. When
it is heard from the mouth of a pure devotee, glorification of the Lord is
immediately effective.

The words sata [0705017১801 mama virya-sarvidah mean that glorification
of the Lord is potent when uttered from the mouth of a pure devotee. The
Lord has innumerable devotees all over the universe, and they have been
glorifying the Lord since time immemorial and for an unlimited time. But
still they cannot completely finish enumerating the glories of the Lord.
Prthu Maharaja therefore wanted innumerable ears, as Ripa Gosvami also
desired to have millions of ears and millions of tongues to chant and hear the
glorification of the Lord. In other words, if our ears are always engaged in
hearing the glorification of the Lord, there will be no scope for hearing the
Mayavada philosophy, which is doom to spiritual progress. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said that if anyone hears from a Mayavadi philosopher preach-


--- Page 32 ---
796 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
ing about the activities of the Lord, even if it is a description from the
Vedic literature, he is ultimately doomed. By hearing such Mayavada phi-
losophy one cannot come to the destination of spiritual perfection of life.
TEXT 25
स॒ उत्तमश्छोक महन्ध्रखच्युतो
मवत्पदाम्भोजसुधाकणानिलः |
स्मृतिं पुनर्िस्छृततच््ववत्मनां
„+ = भ
कुयोगिनां नो वितररयलं वरे; nu
sa uttamasloka mahan-mukha-cyuto
bhavat-padambhoja-sudha-kananilah
5717171 punar vismrta-tattva-vartmanarn
kuyoginar no vitaraty alam varaih
sah—that; uttama-sloka—O Lord, who is praised by selected verses; mahat
—of great devotees; mukha-cyutah—delivered from the mouths; bhavat—
Your; pada-ambhoja—from the lotus feet; sudha—of nectar; kana—
particles; anilah—soothing breeze; smrtim—remembrance; punah—again;
vismrta—forgotten; tattva—to the truth; vartmanam—of persons whose
path; ku-yoginam—of persons not in the line of devotional service; nah—
of us; vitarati—restores; alam—unnecessary ; varaih—other benedictions.
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You are glorified by the selected verses uttered by great
personalities. Such glorification of Your lotus feet is just like saffron
particles. When the transcendental vibration from the mouths of great
devotees carries the aroma of the saffron dust of Your lotus feet, the for-
getful living entity gradually remembers his eternal relationship with You.
Devotees thus gradually come to the right conclusion about the value of
life. My dear Lord, I therefore do not need any other benediction but the

opportunity to hear from the mouth of Your pure devotee.

PURPORT

It is explained in the previous verse that one has to hear glorification of
the Lord from the mouth of a pure devotee. This is further explained here.
The transcendental vibration from the mouth of a pure devotee is so
powerful that it can revive the living entity’s memory of his eternal rela-


--- Page 33 ---
Text 26] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 797
tionship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In our material exis-
tence, under the influence of illusory maya, we have almost forgotten our
eternal relationship with the Lord, exactly like a man sleeping very deeply
who forgets his duties. In the Vedas it is said that every one of us is sleep-
ing under the influence of maya. We must get up from this slumber and
engage in the right service, for thus we can properly utilize the facility of
this human form of life. As expressed in a song by Thakura Bhaktivinoda,
Lord Caitanya says, ‘fiva jago, jiva jago.”” The Lord asks every sleeping
living entity to get up and engage in devotional service so that his mission
in this human form of life may be fulfilled. This awakening voice comes
through the mouth of a pure devotee.

A pure devotee always engages in the service of the Lord, taking shelter
of His lotus feet, and therefore he has direct connection with the saffron
mercy particles that are strewn over the lotus feet of the Lord. Although
when a pure devotee speaks the articulation of his voice may resemble the
sound of this material sky, because the voice touches the particles of
saffron dust on the lotus feet of the Lord, the voice is spiritually very
powerful. As soon as a sleeping living entity hears the powerful voice
emanating from the mouth of a pure devotee, he immediately remembers
his eternal relationship with the Lord, although up until that moment he
had forgotten everything.

For a conditioned soul, therefore, it is very important to hear from the
mouth of a pure devotee who is fully surrendered to the lotus feet of the
Lord without any material desire, speculative knowledge or contamination
of the modes of material nature. Every one of us is kuyogi because we have
engaged in the service of this material world, forgetting our eternal relation-
ship with the Lord as His eternal loving servants. It is our duty to rise from
the kuyoga platform to become suyogis, perfect mystics. The process
of hearing from a pure devotee is recommended in all Vedic scriptures,
especially by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. One may stay in his position of
life—it doesn’t matter what it is—but if one hears from the mouth of a pure
devotee, he gradually comes to the understanding of his relationship with
the Lord and thus engages in His loving service, and his life becomes com-
pletely perfect. Therefore, this process of hearing from the mouth of a
pure devotee is very important for making progress in the line of spiritual
understanding.

TEXT 26
ay: शिवं सुश्रव आर्यसङ्गमे
यद्च्छया चोपशृणोति ते a5 |


--- Page 34 ---
798 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
कथं गुणज्ञो বিমেহিলা দ্য
श्रर्यसप्रवत्रे गुणसंग्रहेच्छया IRE
yasah Siva susrava arya-sangame
yadrcchaya copasrnoti te sakrt
kathari gunajio viramed vina pasum
rir yat pravavre guna-sangrahecchaya
yasah—glorification; sivam—all-auspicious; su-§ravah—O highly glorified
Lord; arya-sangame—in the association of advanced devotees; yadrcchaya—
somehow or other; ca—also; upasrnoti—hears; te—Your; sakrt—even once;
katham—hew; guna-jiah—one who appreciates good qualities; viramet—
can cease; vind—unless; pasum—an animal; $rih—the goddess of fortune;
yat—which; pravavre—accepted; guna—Your qualities; saiigraha— to receive;
icchaya—with a desire.
TRANSLATION
My dear highly glorified Lord, if one, in the association of pure
devotees, hears even once the glories of Your activities, he does not, unless
he is nothing but an animal, give up the association of devotees, for no in-
telligent person would be so careless as to leave their association. The per-
fection of chanting and hearing about Your glories was even accepted by
the goddess of fortune, who desired to hear of Your unlimited activities
and transcendental glories.
PURPORT
The association of devotees (arya-saingama) is the most important factor
in this world. The word arya refers to those who are advancing spiritually.
In the history of the human race, the Aryan family is considered to be the
most elevated community in the world because it adopts the Vedic
civilization. The Aryan family is distributed all over the world and isknown
as Indo-Aryan. In prehistoric days all of the members of the Aryan family
followed the Vedic principles, and therefore they became spiritually ad-
vanced. The kings, known as rdjarsis, were so perfectly educated as
ksatriyas, or protectors of the citizens, and so greatly advanced in spiritual
life, that there was not a bit of trouble for the citizens.
The glorification of the Supreme Lord can be very much appreciated by
the Aryan family. Although there is no bar for others, the members of the
Aryan family very quickly catch the essence of spiritual life. How is it we


--- Page 35 ---
Text 27] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 799
are finding it very easy to spread Krsna consciousness amongst the Europeans
and Americans? History reports that the Americans and Europeans
proved their capability when they were anxious to expand colonization,
but at the present time, being contaminated by the advancement of
material science, their sons and grandsons are turning into reprobates. This
is due to their having lost their original spiritual culture, which is Vedic
civilization. Presently these descendants of the Aryan family are taking
this Krsna consciousness movement very seriously. Others also who are
associating with them and hearing the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra from the lips of pure devotees are also becoming captivated by the
transcendental vibration. Transcendental vibrations are very much effective
when chanted amongst Aryans, but even though one does not belong to
the Aryan family, he will become a Vaisnava simply by hearing the mantra
because the vibration has great influence over everyone.

Maharaja Prthu points out that even the goddess of fortune, who is the
constant companion of Lord Narayana, specifically wanted to hear about
the Lord’s glories, and for the association of the gopis, who are pure
devotees, the goddess of fortune, Laksmi, underwent severe austerities. The
impersonalist may ask why one should bother chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra continually for so many years instead of stopping and trying
for kaivalya, liberation, or merging into the existence of the Lord. In
answer, Maharaja Prthu maintains that the attraction of this chanting is
so great that one cannot give up the process unless he is an animal. This is
the case even if one comes in contact with this transcendental vibration by
chance. Prthu Maharaja isvery emphatic in this connection—only an animal
can give up the practice of chanting Hare Krsna. Those who are not ani-
mals, who are actually intelligent, advanced, human, civilized men, cannot
give up this practice of continually chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare / Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

TEXT 27
अथामजे स्वाखिलपूरूषोच्तमं
गुणालयं पद्मकरेव राठसः ।
अप्या्रयोरेकपतिस्पथोः कलि-
न स्यात्कृतसच्चरणेकतानयोः Rel
athabhaje tvakhila-purusottamam
gunalayam padma-kareva lalasah


--- Page 36 ---
800 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
apy avayor eka-pati-sprdhoh kalir
na syat krta-tvac-caranaika-tanayoh

atha—therefore; abhaje—I shall engage in devotional service; tva—unto
You; akhila—all-inclusive; parusa-uttamam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead;guna-alayam—the reservoir of all transcendental qualities; padma-
kara—the goddess of fortune, who carries a lotus flower in her hand; iva—
like; lalasah—being desirous; api—indeed; dvayoh—of Laksmi and me; eka-
pati—one master; sprdhoh—competing; kalih—quarrel; na—not; syat—may
take place; krta—having done; tvat-carana—unto Your lotus feet; eka-
tanayoh—one attention.

TRANSLATION

Now I wish to engage in the service of the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and to serve just as the goddess of fortune who
carries a lotus flower in her hand because His Lordship, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is the reservoir of all transcendental qualities.
I am afraid that the goddess of fortune and I will quarrel because both of
us would be attentively engaged in the same service.

PURPORT

The Lord is here addressed as akhila-piarusottama, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead who is Lord of the entire creation. Purusa means the
enjoyer, and uttama means the best. There are different kinds of purusas
or enjoyers within the universe. Generally they can be divided into three
classes—those who are conditioned, those who are liberated, and those who
are eternal. In the Vedas the Supreme Lord is called the supreme eternal
of all eternals (nityo nityanam). Both the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and the living entities are eternal. The supreme eternals are the vispu-
tattva or Lord Visnu and His expansions. So nitya refers to the Personality
of Godhead beginning from Krsna up to Maha-Visnu, Narayana and other
expansions of Lord Krsna. As stated in the Brahma-sammhita (ramadi-
maurtisu) there are millions and trillions of expansions of Lord Visnpu as
Rama, Nrsihha, Varaha and other incarnations. All of them are called
eternals.

The word mukta refers to the living entities who never come within this
material world. The baddhas are those living entities who are almost
eternally living within this material world. The baddhas are struggling very
hard within this material world to become free from the threefold miseries
of material nature and to enjoy life, whereas the muktas are


--- Page 37 ---
Text 27] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 801
already liberated. They never come into this material world. Lord Vignu is
the master of this material world, and there is no question of His being
controlled by material nature. Consequently, Lord Visnu is addressed here
as pitrusottama, the best of all living entities—namely visnu-tattvas and
Jiva-tattvas. It is a great offense, therefore, to compare Lord Visnu and the
Jiva-tattva or consider them on an equal level. The Mayavadi philosophers
equalize the jivas and the Supreme Lord and consider them to be one, but
that is the greatest offense to the lotus feet of Lord Visnu.

Here in the material world we have practical experience that a superior
person is worshiped by an inferior one. Similarly, piirusottama, the great-
est, the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna or Lord Visnu, is always
worshiped by others. Prthu Maharaja therefore decided to engage in the
service of the lotus feet of Lord Visnu. Prthu Maharaja is considered to be
an incarnation of Lord Visnu, but he is called a saktyavesa incarnation.
Another significant word in this verse is gunalayam, which refers to Visnu
as the reservoir of all transcendental qualities. The Mayavadi philosophers
take the Absolute Truth to be nirguna (without qualities), in accordance
with the impersonalistic view, but actually the Lord is the reservoir of all
good qualities. One of the most important qualities of the Lord is His
inclination to His devotees, called bhakta-vatsala. The devotees are always
very much inclined to render service to the lotus feet of the Lord, and the
Lord is also very much inclined to accept loving service from His devotees.
In that exchange of service there are so many transcendental transactions
which are called transcendental qualitative activities. Some of the transcen-
dental qualities of the Lord are that He is omniscient, omnipresent, all-
pervasive, all-powerful, the cause of all causes, the Absolute Truth, the
reservoir of all pleasures, the reservoir of all knowledge, the all-auspicious
and so on.

Prthu Maharaja desired to serve the Lord with the goddess of fortune,
but this desire does not mean that he was situated on the platform of
madhurya-rasa. The goddess of fortune is engaged in the service of the
Lord in the madhurya-rasa of conjugal love. Although her position is on
the chest of the Lord, the goddess of fortune, in her position as a devotee,
takes pleasure in serving the lotus feet of the Lord. Prthu Maharaja was
thinking only of the lotus feet of the Lord because he is on the platform
of dasya-rasa or servitorship of the Lord. From the next verse we learn
that Prthu Maharaja was thinking of the goddess of fortune as the universal
mother, jagan-mata. Consequently there was no question of his competing
with her on the platform of madhurya-rasa. Nonetheless he feared that she
might take offense at his engaging in the service of the Lord. This suggests
that in the absolute world there is sometimes competition between servitors


--- Page 38 ---
802 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
in the service of the Lord, but such competition is without malice. In the
Vaikuntha worlds if a devotee excels in the service of the Lord, others do
not become envious of his excellent service but rather aspire to come to the
platform of that service.
TEXT 28
? a
जगजनन्यां जगदीश ॒वेशसं
©
स्यादेव यत्कमेणि नः समीहितम्‌ |
करोषि फट्गप्युरु दीनवत्सलः
ख एव धिष्ण्येऽभिरतस्य किः तया ॥२८॥
Jjagaj-jananyar jagad-isa vaisasari
syad eva yat-karmani nah samihitam
karosi phalgv apy uru dina-vatsalah
sva eva dhisnye ’bhiratasya kim taya
jagat-jananyam—in the mother of the universe (Laksmi); jagat-isa—O
Lord of the universe; vaisasam—anger; sydt—may arise; eva—certainly ; yat-
karmanpi—in whose activity; nah—my ; samihitam—desire; karosi— You con-
sider; phalgu—insignificant service; api—even; uru—very great; dina-vatsalah
—favorably inclined to the poor; sve—own; eva— certainly ; dhispye—in Your
opulence; abhiratasya—of one who is fully satisfied; kim—what need is
there; taya— with her.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord of the universe, the goddess of fortune Laksmi is the
mother of the universe, and yet I think that she may be angry with me
because of my intruding on her service and my acting on that very plat-
form to which she is so much attached. Yet I am hopeful that, even though
there is some misunderstanding, You will take my part because You are
very much inclined to the poor, and You always magnify even insignificant
service unto You. Therefore even though she becomes angry, I think that
there is no harm for You, because You are so self-sufficient that You can
do without her.
PURPORT
Mother Laksmiji, the goddess of fortune, is well known for always
massaging the lotus feet of Lord Narayana. She is an ideal wife because
she takes care of Lord Narayana in every detail. She not only takes care of
His lotus feet but of the household affairs of the Lord as well. She cooks
nice foods for Him, fans Him while He eats, smoothes sandalwood pulp


--- Page 39 ---
Text 29] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 803
on His face, and sets His bed and sitting places in the right order. In this
way she is always engaged in the service of the Lord, and there is hardly
any opportunity for any other devotee to intrude upon His daily activities.
Prthu Maharaja is therefore almost certain that his intrusion into the service
of the goddess of fortune would irritate her and cause her to become angry
with him. But why should mother Laksmi, the mother of the universe, be
angry with an insignificant devotee like Prthu Maharaja? All this is not very
likely. Yet Prthu Maharaja, just for his personal protection, appealed to
the Lord to take his part. Prthu Maharaja was engaged in performing the
ordinary Vedic rituals and in performing sacrifices according to karma-
kanda, or fruitive activities, but the Lord, being so kind and magnanimous,
was ready to award Prthu Maharaja the highest perfectional stage of life,
namely devotional service.

When a person performs Vedic rituals and sacrifices, he does so to
elevate himself to the heavenly planets. No one can become qualified to
go back home, back to Godhead, by means of such sacrifices. But the
Lord is so kind that He accepts a little insignificant service, and therefore
it is stated in the Visnu Purana that by following the principles of
varnasrama-dharma one can satisfy the Supreme Lord. When the Lord is
satisfied, the performer of sacrifices is elevated to the platform of devo-
tional service. Prthu Maharaja therefore expected that his insignificant
service to the Lord would be accepted by Him as being greater than that of
Laksmiji. The goddess of fortune is called caiicala (restless) because she is
very restless and is always coming and going. So Prthu Maharaja indicates
that even though she might go away out of anger, there would be no harm
for Lord Visnu, because He is self-sufficient and can do anything and every-
thing without the help of Laksmiji. For example, when Garbhodakasayi
Visnu begot Lord Brahma from His navel, He didn’t take any help from
Laksmi, who was just sitting by Him and massaging His lotus feet. Gener-
ally if a son is to be begotten, the husband impregnates the wife, and in
due course of time the son is born. But in the case of Lord Brahma’s birth,
Garbhodakasayi Visnu did not impregnate Laksmiji. Being self-sufficient,
the Lord begot Brahma from His own navel. Therefore, Prthu Maharaja is
confident that even if the goddess of fortune became angry with him there
would be no harm, neither to the Lord nor to himself.

TEXT 29
भजन्त्यथ त्वामत एव साधवो
व्युद्स्तमायागुणविश्रयोदयम्‌ ।


--- Page 40 ---
804 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
: भवत्पदानुखरणाटते सतां
निमित्तमन्यद्धगवन्न विद्महे ka
bhajanty atha tvam ata eva sadhavo
vyudasta-maya-guna-vibhramodayam
bhavat-padanusmaranad rte satan
nimittam anyad bhagavan na vidmahe

bhajanti—they worship; atha— therefore; tvim—Y ou; ata eva—therefore;
sadhavah—all saintly persons; vyudasta—who dispel; maya-guna—the modes
of material nature; vibhrama—misconceptions; udayam—produced; bhavat
—Your; pada—lotus feet; anusmarapat—constantly remembering; rte—
except; satam—of great saintly persons; nimittam—reason; anyat—other;
bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; na—not; vidmahe—1I can
understand.

TRANSLATION

Great saintly persons who are always liberated take to Your devotional
service because only by devotional service can one be relieved from the
illusions of material existence. O my Lord, there is no other reason for the
liberated souls to take shelter at Your lotus feet except for the fact that
they are constantly thinking of them.

PURPORT

The karmis are generally engaged in fruitive activities for material bodily
comforts. The jiianis, however, are disgusted with searching after material
comforts. They understand that they have nothing to do with this material
world, being spirit souls. After self-realization, the jianis who are actually
matured in their knowledge must surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord,
as is stated in Bhagavad-gita (bahunam janmanam ante). Self-realization is
not complete unless one comes to the devotional platform. Therefore it is
stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam that those who are atmarama, self-
satisfied, are freed from all contaminations of the material modes of nature.
As long as one is affected by the modes of material nature, especially by
rajah and tamah, he will be very greedy and lusty and will therefore engage
in hard tasks, laboring all day and night. Such false egoism carries one
from one species of life into another perpetually, and there is no rest in
any species of life. The jiani understands this fact and therefore ceases to
work and takes to karma-sannyasa.


--- Page 41 ---
Text 30] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 805

Yet thisis not actually the platform of satisfaction. After self-realization,
the material wisdom of the jiiani leads him to the shelter of the lotus feet
of the Lord. Then he is only satisfied in contemplating the lotus feet of the
Lord constantly. Prthu Maharaja therefore concludes that liberated persons
taking to the devotional path have acquired the ultimate goal of life. If
liberation were the end in itself, there would be no question of a liberated
person’s taking to devotional service. In other words, the transcendental
bliss derived from self-realization,known as atmananda, is very insignificant
in the presence of the bliss derived from devotional service to the lotus
feet of the Lord. Prthu Maharaja therefore concluded that he would simply
hear of the glories of the Lord constantly and thus engage his mind upon
the lotus feet of the Lord. That is the highest perfection of life.

TEXT 30
मन्ये गिरं ते जगतां विमोहिनीं
वरं वृणीष्वेति मजन्तमात्थ यत्‌ |
वाचा जु तन्त्या यदि ते जनोऽसितः
कथं पुन; कमं करोति मोदितः ॥২০॥
manye giram te jagatarm vimohinim
00707 vrpisveti bhajantam attha yat
vacd nu tantyd yadi te jano ’sitah
katham punah karma karoti mohitah

manye—I consider; giram—words; te—Your; jagatim—to the material
world; vimohinim— bewildering; varam—benediction; vrpisva—just accept;
iti—in this way; bhajantam—unto Your devotee; attha— You spoke; yat—
because; vaca—by the statements of the Vedas; nu—certainly; tantya—by
the ropes; yadi—if; te—Your; janah—the people in general; asitah—not
bound; katham—how; punah—again and again; karma—fruitive activities;
karoti— perform; mohitah—being enamored.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, what You have said to Your unalloyed devotee is certainly
very much bewildering. The allurements which You offer in the Vedas
are certainly not suitable for pure devotees. People in general are bound


--- Page 42 ---
806 $rimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
by the sweet words of the Vedas, and they engage themselves again and
again in fruitive activities, enamored by the results of their actions.
PURPORT

Srila Narottama dasa Thakura, a great d@carya of the Gaudiya-sampradaya,
has said that persons who are very much attached to the fruitive activities
of the Vedas, namely karma-kanda and jiana-kanda, are certainly doomed.
In the Vedas there are three categories of activities known as karma-kanda,
fruitive activities, jiana-kanda, philosophical research, and upasana-kanda,
worship of different demigods for receiving material benefits. Those who
are engaged in karma-kanda and jiiana-kanda are doomed in the sense that
everyone is doomed who is entrapped by this material body, whether it is
a body of a demigod, a king, alower animal or whatever. The sufferings of
the threefold miseries of material nature are the same for all. Cultivation
of knowledge to understand one’s spiritual position is also, to a certain
extent, a waste of time. Because he is an eternal part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord, the immediate business of the living entity is to engage
himself in devotional service. Prthu Maharaja therefore says that the
allurement of material benedictions is another trap to entangle one in this
material world. He therefore frankly tells the Lord that the Lord’s offer-
ings of benedictions in the form of material facilities are certainly causes
for bewilderment. A pure devotee is not at all interested in bhukti or mukti.

The Lord sometimes offers benedictions to the neophyte devotees who
have not yet understood that material facilities will not make them happy.
In the Caitanya-caritamrta the Lord therefore says that a sincere devotee
who is not very intelligent may ask some material benefit from the Lord,
but the Lord, being omniscient, does not generally give material rewards
but, on the contrary, takes away whatever material facilities are being en-
joyed by His devotee so that ultimately the devotee will completely
surrender unto Him. In other words, the offering of benedictions in the
form of material profit is never auspicious for the devotee. The statements
of the Vedas which offer elevation to heavenly planets in exchange for
great sacrifices are simply bewildering. Therefore in Bhagavad-gita the Lord
says: yam imam pugspitam vacarn pravadanty avipascitah (Bg. 2.42). The less
intelligent class of men (avipascitah) are attracted by the flowery language
of the Vedas and therefore engage in fruitive activities to become materially
benefited. Thus they continue life after life, in different bodily forms, to
search very, very hard.


--- Page 43 ---
Text 31] Lord Vispu's Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 807
TEXT 31
त्वन्माययाद्धा जन ईश खण्डितो
यदन्यदाशास्त तामनोऽबुषः |
यथा चरेद्रालहितं पिता खयं
तथा त्वमेवासि नः समीहितुम्‌ 132
tvan-mayayaddha jana 40 khandito
yad anyad asasta rtatmano ’budhah
yatha cared bala-hitam pita svayam
tatha tvam evarhasi nah samihitum
tvat— Your; mayaya—by illusory energy; addha— certainly; janah—the
people in general; iSa—O my Lord; khanditah—separated; yat—because;
anyat—other; asaste—they desire; rta—real; atmanah—from the self;
abudhah—without proper understanding; yatha—as; caret—would engage
in; bala-hitam—the welfare of one’s child; pita—the father; svayam—
personally; tatha—similarly; tvam—Your Lordship eva— certainly; arhasi
nah samihitum—please act on my behalf.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, due to Your illusory energy, all living beings in this material
world have forgotten their real constitutional position, and out of ignor-
ance they are always desirous of material happiness in the form of society,
friendship and love. Therefore, please do not ask me to take some material
benefits from You, but as the father, not waiting for the son’s demand,
does everything for the benefit of the son, please bestow upon me what-
ever You think best for me.
PURPORT
It is the duty of the son to depend upon his father without asking any-
thing from him. The good son has faith that the father knows best how to
benefit him. Similarly, a pure devotee does not ask anything from
the Lord for material benefit. Nor does he ask anything for
spiritual benefit. The pure devotee is fully surrendered unto the lotus
feet of the Lord, and the Lord takes charge of him, as stated in Bhagavad-
gita: ५110772 00৫7 sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami (Bg. 18.66). The father


--- Page 44 ---
808 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
knows the necessities of the son and supplies them, and the Supreme
Lord knows the necessities of the living entities and supplies them sump-
tuously. Therefore the ISopanisad states that everything in this material
world is complete (p@rnam idam). The difficulty is that due to forgetful-
ness the living entities create unnecessary demands and entangle themselves
in material activities. The result is that there is no end to material activities
life after life.

Before us there are varieties of living entities, and everyone is entangled
in transmigrations and activities. Our duty is simply to surrender unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and let Him take charge, for He knows
what is good for us.

Prthu Maharaja therefore tells the Lord that as the Supreme Father He
may elect to bestow whatever He considers beneficial for Prthu Maharaja.
That is the perfect position of the living entity. Therefore Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu teaches us in His Siksastaka:

na dhanam na janam na sundarim kavitam va jagad-isa kamaye
mama janmani janmanisvare bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi
“O Almighty Lord! I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor have I any
desire to enjoy beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers.
I only want Your causeless devotional service in my life, birth after birth.”

The conclusion is that the pure devotee should not aspire after any
material benefit from devotional service, nor should he be enamored by
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. He should always be en-
gaged favorably in the service of the Lord. That is the highest perfection
of life.

TEXT 32
मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्यादिराजेन चुतः स aes
तमाह राजन्‌ मयि भक्तिरस्तु ते ।
दिषटयेदशी धीमेयि ते Fav यया
मायां मदीयां तरति ख दुस्त्यजाम्‌ IRR
maitreya ४४९८०
ity adi-rdjena nutah sa visva-drk
tam aha rajan mayi bhaktir astu te
distyedrsi dhir mayi te krta yaya
mayar madiyam tarati sma dustyajam


--- Page 45 ---
Text 33] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 809
maitreyah—Maitreya, the great sage; uvaca—spoke; iti—thus; adi-ragjena—
by the original King (Prthu); nutah—being worshiped; sah—He (the
Supreme Personality of Godhead); visva-drk—the seer of the whole
universe; tam—unto him; aha—said; rajan—my dear King; mayi—unto Me;
bhaktih—devotional service; astu—let it be; te—your; distya—by good
fortune; idrsi—like this; dhih—intelligence; mayi—unto Me; te—by you;
krta—having been performed; yaya—by which; mayam—illusory energy;
madiyam—My: tarati—crosses over; sma—certainly; dustyajam—very diffi-
cult to give up.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued to speak: The Lord, the seer of the
universe, after hearing Prthu Maharaja’s prayer, addressed the King: My
dear King, may you always be blessed by engaging in My devotional service.
Only by such purity of purpose, as you yourself very intelligently express,
can one cross over the insurmountable illusory energy of maya.
PURPORT
This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita wherein the Lord also claims that
the illusory energy is insurmountable. No one can transcend the illusory
energy of maya by fruitive activity, speculative philosophy or mystic yoga.
The only means for transcending illusory energy is devotional service, as
the Lord Himself states.
mam eva ye prapadyante
mayam etam taranti te (Bg. 7.14)
If one wants to cross over the ocean of material existence, there is no
alternative than to take to devotional service. A devotee, therefore, should
not care for any material position, whether in heaven or in hell. A pure
devotee should always engage in the service of the Lord, for that is his
real occupation. Simply by sticking to that position one can overcome
the stringent laws of material nature.
TEXT 33
ae TE मयाऽऽदिष्टमप्रमत्तः प्रजापते |
मदादेश्चकरो लोकः सर्वत्रामोति शोभनम्‌ 1330
tat tvam kuru mayadistam
apramattah prajapate


--- Page 46 ---
810 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
mad-adesa-karo lokah
sarvatrapnoti Sobhanam
tat—therefore; tvam—you; kuru—do; maya—by Me; adistam—what is
ordered; apramattah—without being misguided; praja-pate—O master of
the citizens; mat—of Me; adesa-karah—who executes the order; lokah—any
person; sarvatra—everywhere; apnoti—achieves; sobhanam—all good for-
tune.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, O protector of the citizens, henceforward be very care-
ful to execute My orders and not be misled by anything. Anyone who
lives in that way, simply carrying out My orders faithfully, will always
find good fortune all over the world.
PURPORT
The sum and substance of religious life is to execute the orders of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and one who does so is perfectly re-
ligious. In Bhagavad-gita the Supreme Lord Krsna says, man-mana bhava
mad-bhaktah: “Just think of Me always and become My devotee.” (Bg. 18.65)
Furthermore, the Lord says, sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekari saraparit
vraja: “Give up all kinds of material engagement and simply surrender unto
Me.” (Bg. 18.66) This is the primary principle of religion. Anyone who
directly executes such an order from the Personality of Godhead is actually
a religious person. Others are described as pretenders, for there are many
activities going on throughout the world in the name of religion which are
not actually religious. For one who executes the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, however, there is only good fortune throughout
the world.
TEXT 34
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति वैन्यस राजर्षेः प्रतिनन्दार्थवद्वनः |
পি ০ ও
पूजितोऽजगृदीत्वेनं गन्तुं चक्रेऽच्युतो मतिम्‌॥ २४॥
maitreya ५४९८०
iti vainyasya rajarseh
pratinandyarthavad vacah


--- Page 47 ---
Text 34] Lord Vignu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 811
pijito ‘nugrhitvainam
gantur cakre ’cyuto matim

maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; iti—thus;
vainyasya—of the son of King Vena (Prthu Maharaja); raje-rseh—of the
saintly King; pratinandya—appreciating; artha-vat vacah—the prayers,
which were full of meaning; pajitah—being worshiped; anugrhitva—
sufficiently benedicting; enam—King Prthu; gantum—to go from that
place; cakre—made up; acyutah—the infallible Lord; matim—His mind.

TRANSLATION

The great saint Maitreya told Vidura: The Supreme Personality of God-
head amply appreciated the meaningful prayers of Maharaja Prthu. Thus,
after being properly worshiped by the King, the Lord benedicted him and
decided to depart.

PURPORT

Most important in this verse are the words pratinandyarthavad vacah,
which indicate that the Lord appreciated the very meaningful prayers of
the King. When a devotee prays to the Lord, it is not to ask for material
benefits but to ask the Lord for His favor; he prays that he may be engaged
in the service of the Lord’s lotus feet birth after birth. Lord Caitanya
therefore uses the words mama janmani janmani, which mean “birth after
birth,” because a devotee is not even interested in stopping the repetition
of birth. The Lord and the devotee appear in this material world birth after
birth, but such births are transcendental. In the Fourth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gita the Lord informed Arjuna that both He and Arjuna had
undergone many, many births previously, but the Lord remembered every-
thing about them whereas Arjuna had forgotten. The Lord and His con-
fidential devotees appear many times to fulfill the Lord’s mission, but
since such births are transcendental, they are not accompanied by the
miserable conditions of material birth, and they are therefore called
divya, transcendental.

One must understand the transcendental birth of the Lord and the devo-
tee. The purpose of the Lord's taking birth is to establish devotional
service, which is the perfect system of religion, and the purpose of the
birth of a devotee is to broadcast the same system of religion, or the bhakti
cult, all over the world. Prthu Maharaja was an incarnation of the power
of the Lord to spread the bhakti cult, and the Lord blessed him to remain


--- Page 48 ---
812 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
fixed in his position. Thus when the King refused to accept any material
benediction, the Lord appreciated that refusal very much. Another signifi-
cant word in this verse is acyuta, which means “infallible.” Although the
Lord appears in this material world, He is never to be considered one of
the conditioned souls, who are all fallible. When the Lord appears, He
remains in His spiritual position, uncontaminated by the modes of material
nature, and therefore in Bhagavad-gita the Lord expresses the quality of
His appearance as atma-mayaya, “performed by internal potency.” The
Lord, being infallible, is not forced by material nature to take birth in this
material world. He appears in order to reestablish the perfect order of
religious principles and to vanquish the demoniac influence in human
society.
TEXTS 35-36
देवर्षिपिठ्गन्धर्वसिद्धचारणपन्नगाः |
किञराप्सरसो मत्याः खगा भूतान्यनेकशः 1340
यज्ञेश्वरधिया राज्ञा वाग्वित्ताज्ञतिमक्तितः |
=
सभाजिता ययुः स्वे वैङ्ण्ठाजुगतात्ततः 1381
devarsi-pitr-gandharva-
siddha-carana-pannagah
kinnarapsaraso martyah
khaga bhitany anekasah
yajiiesvara-dhiya rajia
vag-vittanjali-bhaktitah
sabhajita yayuh sarve
vaikunthanugatas tatah
deva—the demigods; rsi—the great sages; pitr—inhabitants of Pitrloka;
gandharva—inhabitants of Gandharvaloka; siddha— inhabitants of Siddha-
loka; carana—inhabitants of the Caranaloka; pannagah—inhabitants of the
planets where serpents live; kinnara—inhabitants of the Kinnara planets;
apsarasah—inhabitants of the Apsaroloka; martyah—inhabitants of the
earthly planets; khagah—birds; bhiitdni—other living entities; anekasah—
many; yajia-isvara-dhiya—with perfect intelligence of thinking as part
and parcel of the Supreme Lord; rajiia—by the King; vak—with sweet
words; vitta—wealth; afijali—with folded hands; bhaktitah—in a spirit of


--- Page 49 ---
Texts 35-36] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 813
devotional service; sabhajitdh—being properly worshiped; yayuh—went;
sarve—all; vaikuntha—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu;
anugatdh—followers; tatah—from that place.
TRANSLATION

King Prthu worshiped the demigods, the great sages, the inhabitants of
Pitrloka, the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka, and those of Siddhaloka,
Caranaloka, Pannagaloka, Kinnaraloka, Apsaroloka, the earthly planets
and the planets of the birds. He also worshiped many other living entities
who presented themselves in the sacrificial arena. With folded hands he
worshiped all these, as well as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
the personal associates of the Lord, by offering sweet words and as much
wealth as possible. After this function, they all went back to their respective
abodes, following in the footsteps of Lord Vignu.

PURPORT

In modern so-called scientific society the idea is very prevalent that
there 15 no life on other planets but that only on this earth do living entities
with intelligence and scientific knowledge exist. The Vedic literatures,
however, do not accept this foolish theory. The followers of Vedic wisdom
are fully aware of various planets inhabited by varieties of living entities
such as the demigods, the sages, the Pitas, the Gandharvas, the Pannagas,
the Kinnaras, the Caranas, the Siddhas and the Apsaras. The Vedas give
information that in all planets—not only within this material sky but also
in the spiritual sky—there are varieties of living entities. Although all these
living entities are of one spiritual nature, in quality the same as the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, they have varieties of bodies due to the
embodiment of the spirit soul by the eight material elements, namely,
earth, water, fire, air, sky, mind, intelligence and false ego. In the spiritual
world, however, there is no such distinction between the body and the
embodied. In the material world, distinctive features are manifested in
different types of bodies in the various planets. We have full information
from the Vedic literature that in each and every planet, both material and
spiritual, there are living entities of varied intelligence. The earth is one of
the planets of the Bhiirloka planetary system. There are six planetary
systems above Bhiirloka and seven planetary systems below it. Therefore
the entire universe is known as caturdasa-bhuvana, indicating that it has
fourteen different planetary systems. Beyond the planetary systems in the
material sky, there is another sky, which is known as paravyoma, or the


--- Page 50 ---
814 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
spiritual sky, where there are spiritual planets. The inhabitants of those
planets engage in varieties of loving service unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, which include different rasas or relationships known as dasya-
rasa, sakhya-rasa, vatsalya-rasa, madhurya-rasa and, above all, parakiya-
rasa. This paraktya-rasa, or paramour love, is prevalent in Krsnaloka, where
Lord Krsna lives. This planet is also called Goloka Vrndavana, and
although Lord Krsna lives there perpetually, He also expands Himself
in millions and trillions of forms. In one of such forms He appears on
this material planet in a particular place known as Vrndavana-dhama, where
He displays His original pastimes of Goloka Vrndavana-dhama in the
spiritual sky in order to attract the conditioned souls back home, back to
Godhead.
TEXT 37
मगवानपि राजर्षेः ATE चाच्युतः ।
रभि मनोऽ्रुष्य॒खधाम प्रस्यपदयत ॥२७॥
bhagavan api rajarseh
sopadhyayasya cacyutah
harann iva mano ’musya
sva-dhama pratyapadyata

bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api—also; rdja-rseh—of
the saintly King; sa-upddhydyasya—along with all the priests; ca—also;
acyutah—the infallible Lord; haran—captivating; iva—indeed; manah—the
mind; amusya— of him; sva-dhama—to His abode; pratyapadyata—returned.

TRANSLATION

The infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead, having captivated the
minds of the King and the priests who were present, returned to His
abode in the spiritual sky.

PURPORT

Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-spiritual, He can
descend from the spiritual sky without changing His body, and thus He is
known as acyuta, or infallible. When a living entity falls down to the
material world, however, he has to accept a material body, and therefore,
in his material embodiment, he cannot be called acyuta. Because he falls
down from his real engagement in the service of the Lord, the living


--- Page 51 ---
Text 38] Lord Visnu’s Appearance in the Sacrificial Arena 815
entity gets a material body to suffer or try to enjoy in the miserable
material conditions of life. Therefore the fallen living entity is
cyuta, whereas the Lord is called acyuta. The Lord was attractive for
everyone—not only the King but also the priestly order, who were very
much addicted to the performance of Vedic rituals. Because the Lord is
all-attractive, He is called Krsna, or “one who attracts everyone.” As will
be explained in the next verse, the Lord appeared in the sacrificial arena
of Maharaja Prthu as Ksirodakasayi Visnu, who is a plenary expansion of
Lord Krsna. He is the second incarnation from Karanodakasayi Visnu, who
is the origin of material creation and who expands as Garbhodakasayi
Visnu, who then enters into each and every universe. Ksirodakasayi Visnu
is one of the purusas who control the material modes of nature.
TEXT 38
ATW नमस्कृत्य चपः FREI |
अन्यक्ताय च देवानां देवाय खपुरं ययौ ॥३८॥
adrstaya namas-krtya
nrpah sandarsitatmane
avyaktaya ca devanam
devaya sva-puram yayau

adrstaiya—unto one who isbeyond the purview of material vision; namah-
krtya— offering obeisances; nrpah—the King; sandarsita—revealed; atmane—
unto the Supreme Soul; avyaktaya—who is beyond the manifestation of
the material world; ca—also; devanam—of the demigods; devaya—unto
the Supreme Lord; sva-puram—to his own house; yayau—returned.

TRANSLATION

King Prthu then offered his respectful obeisances unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the Supreme Lord of all demigods. Al-
though not an object of material vision, the Lord revealed Himself to the
sight of Maharaja Prthu. After offering obeisances to the Lord, the King
returned to his home.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord is not visible to material eyes, but when the material

senses are inclined to the transcendental loving service of the Lord and are


--- Page 52 ---
816 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 20
thus purified, the Lord reveals Himself to the vision of the devotee.
Avyakta means “unmanifested.”” Although the material world is the crea-
tion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is unmanifested to
material eyes. Maharaja Prthu, however, developed spiritual eyes by his
pure devotional service. Here, therefore, the Lord is described as san-
darsitatma, for He reveals Himself to the vision of the devotee, although
He is not visible to ordinary eyes.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Twentieth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Lord Visnu’s Appearance in
the Sacrificial Arena of Maharaja Prthu.” i


--- Page 53 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Instructions by Maharaja Prthu
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
a
मौक्तिकैः इसुपसग्भिटुंखकेः खणंतोरणेः |
< ५
महासुरभिमिधेषैर्मण्डितं বন तत्र॒ NN
५ maitreya uvaca
mauktikaih kusuma-sragbhir
dukiilaih svarnpa-toranaih
maha-surabhibhir dhipair
manditar tatra tatra vai
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; maukti-
kaih— with pearls; kusuma— of flowers;sragbhih—with garlands; dukilaih—
cloth; svarpa—golden; toranaih—by gates; maha-surabhibhih—highly per-
fumed; dhupaih—by incense; manditam—decorated; tatra tatra—here and
there; vai—certainly.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya told Vidura: When the King entered his city, it
was very beautifully decorated to receive him with pearls, flower garlands,
beautiful cloth and golden gates, and the entire city was perfumed with
highly fragrant incense.
PURPORT
Real opulence is supplied by natural gifts such as gold, silver, pearls,
valuable stones, fresh flowers, trees and silken cloth. Thus the Vedic
civilization recommends opulence and decoration with these natural gifts
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such opulence immediately
817


--- Page 54 ---
818 $rimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
changes the condition of the mind, and the entire atmosphere becomes
spiritualized. King Prthu’s capital was decorated with such highly opulent
decorations.
TEXT 2
चन्दनागुरुतोया्रेरथ्याचत्वरमार्गवत्‌ |
aN
पुष्पा्षतफरैस्तोक्मैलैरचिर्भिरचितम्‌ ॥ २॥
candandguru-toyardra-
rathyd-catvara-mdrgavat
puspaksata-phalais tokmair
lajair arcirbhir arcitam
candana—sandalwood; aguru—a kind of fragrant herb; toya—the water
of; ardra—sprinkled with; rathya—a path for driving a chariot; catvara—
small parks; margavat—lanes; puspa—flowers; aksata—unbroken; phalaih—
by the fruits; tokmaih—minerals; lajaih—wetted grains; arcirbhih—by lamps;
arcitam—decorated.
TRANSLATION
Fragrant water distilled from sandalwood and aguru herb was sprinkled
everywhere on the lanes, roads and small parks throughout the city, and
everywhere were decorations of unbroken fruits, flowers, wetted grains,
varied minerals, and lamps, all presented as auspicious paraphernalia.
TEXT 3
EN
UTE: कदलीस्तम्भैः पूगपोतैः परिष्डृतम्‌ |
तरूपष्छवमालाभिः सरवैतः समलंकृतम्‌ ll ३ ॥
savrndaih kadali-stambhaih
piiga-potaih pariskrtam
taru-pallava-madlabhih
sarvatah samalankrtam
sa-vrndaih—along with fruits and flowers; kadali-stambhaih—by the
pillars of banana trees; piga-potaih—by collections of young animals and
by processions of elephants; pariskrtam—very nicely cleansed; taru—
young plants; pallava—new leaves of mango trees; malabhih—by garlands;
sarvatah—everywhere; samalankrtam—nicely decorated.


--- Page 55 ---
Text 4] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 819
TRANSLATION

At the street crossings there were bunches of fruits and flowers, as well
as pillars of banana trees and betel nut branches. All these combined
decorations everywhere looked very attractive.

TEXT 4
sored दीपबरिभिः सम्भृताशेषमङ्गठै; |
अभीयुमृष्टकन्याश्च म्॒टङण्डलभण्डिताः ॥ ४॥
prajas tam dipa-balibhih
sambhrtasesa-mangalaih
abhiyur mrsta-kanyas ca
mrsta-kundala-manditah

prajah—citizens; tam—to him; dipa-balibhih—with lamps; sambhrta—
equipped with; asesa—unlimited; mangalaih— auspicious articles; abhiyuh—
came forward to welcome; mrsta— with beautiful bodily luster; kanydh ca—
and unmarried girls; mrsta—colliding with; kundala—earrings; manditah—
being bedecked with.

TRANSLATION

As the King entered the gate of the city, all the citizens received him
with many auspicious articles like lamps, flowers and yogurt. The King was
also received by many beautiful unmarried girls whose bodies were be-
decked with various ornaments, especially with earrings which collided
with one another.

PURPORT

Offerings of natural products such as betel nuts, bananas, newly grown
wheat, paddy, yogurt and vermillion, carried by the citizens and scattered
throughout the city, are all auspicious paraphernalia, according to Vedic
civilization, for receiving a prominent guest like a bridegroom, king or
spiritual master. Similarly, a welcome offered by unmarried girls who are
internally and externally clean and are dressed in nice garments and orna-
ments is also auspicious. Kumari, or unmarried girls untouched by
the hand of any member of the opposite sex, are auspicious members of
society. Even today in Hindu society the most conservative families do not
allow unmarried girls to go out freely or mix with boys. They are very
carefully protected by their parents while unmarried; after marriage they
are protected by their younghusbands, and when elderly they are protected


--- Page 56 ---
820 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
by their children. When thus protected, women as a class remain an always
auspicious source of energy to man.
TEXT 5
शद्धदुन्दुमिधोषेण ब्रह्मघोषेण चर्तिवजाम्‌ ।
fag মনল वीरः स्तूयमानो गतसखयः ॥ ५॥
Sankha-dundubhi-ghosena
brahma-ghosena cartvijam
८९६ bhavanari virah
stiiyamano gatasmayah
Sankha—conchshells; dundubhi—kettledrums; ghosena—by the sound of;
brahma—Vedic;ghosena—chanting;ca—also;rtvijam—of the priests;vivesa—
entered; bhavanam—the palace; virah—the King; stiyamanah—being wor-
shiped; gata-smayah— without pride.
TRANSLATION
When the King entered the palace, conchshells and kettledrums were
sounded, priests chanted Vedic mantras, and professional reciters offered
different prayers. But in spite of all this ceremony to welcome him, the
King was not the least bit affected.
PURPORT
The reception given to the King was full of opulence, yet he did not
become proud. It is said, therefore, that great personalities of power and
opulence never become proud, and the example is given that a tree which is
full of fruits and flowers does not stand erect in pride but instead bends
downwards to show submissiveness. This is a sign of the wonderful charac-
ter of great personalities.
TEXT 6
पूजितः पूजयामास तत्र तत्र মহামহাঃ |
पौराज्ञानपदास्तास्तान्‌ प्रीतः प्रियवरप्रदः ॥ ६ ॥
pijitah pijayamdsa
tatra tatra maha-yasah
paurdn janapaddris tars tan
pritah priyavara-pradah


--- Page 57 ---
Text 7] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 821
piijitah— being worshiped; piijaydmdsa— offered worship; tatra tatra—here
and there; maha-yasah—with a background of great activities; pauran—the
noble men of the city; jana-paddn—common citizens; tan tan—in that way;
pritah—being satisfied; priya-vara-pradah—was ready to offer them all
benediction.
TRANSLATION
Both the important citizens and the common citizens welcomed the
King very heartily, and he also benedicted them with their desired blessings.
PURPORT
A responsible king was always approachable by his citizens. Generally
the citizens, great and common, all had an aspiration to see the king
and take benediction from him. The king knew this, and therefore when-
ever he met the citizens he immediately fulfilled their desires or mitigated
their grievances. In such dealings, a responsible monarchy is better than a
so-called democratic government in which no one is responsible to miti-
gate the grievances of the citizens, who are unable to personally meet the
supreme executive head. In a responsible monarchy the citizens had no
grievances against the government, and even if they did, they could
approach the king directly for immediate satisfaction.
TEXT 7
स॒ एवमादीन्यनदद्यचेष्टितः
„ कमणि भूयां महान्महत्तमः ।
इवेन शशासावनिमण्डलं यशः
स्फीतं निधायारुरुहे परं पदम्‌ ॥ ७॥
sa evam ddiny anavadya-cestitah
karmdni bhiiydmsi mahdn mahattamah
kurvan sasasavani-mandalam yasah
sphitari nidhd@yaruruhe parari padam
sah—King Prthu;evam—thus;adini—from the very beginning; anavadya—
magnanimous; cestitah—performing various works; karmani—work; bhu-
yamsi—repeatedly; mahan—great; mahattamah—greater than the greatest;
kurvan—performing; sasasa—ruled; avani-mandalam—the surface of the
earth; yasah —reputation;sphitam— widespread; nidhaya—achieving;aruruhe
—was elevated; param padam—to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord.


--- Page 58 ---
822 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
TRANSLATION

King Prthu was greater than the greatest soul and was therefore wor-
shipable by everyone. He performed many glorious activities in ruling over
the surface of the world and was always magnanimous. After achieving
such great success and a reputation which spread throughout the universe,
he at last obtained the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

A responsible king or chief executive has many responsible duties to
attend to in ruling over the citizens. The most important duty of the
monarch or the government is to perform various sacrifices as enjoined in
the Vedic literatures. The next duty of the king is to see that every citizen
executes the prescribed duties for his particular community. It is the king’s
duty to see that everyone perfectly executes the duties prescribed for the
varna and asrama divisions of society. Besides that, as exemplified by King
Prthu, he must develop the earth for the greatest possible production of
food grains.

There are different types of great personalities—some are positive great
personalities, some comparative and some superlative—but King Prthu
exceeded all of them. He is therefore described here as mahattamah,
“greater than the greatest.” Maharaja Prthu was a ksatriya, and he dis-
charged his ksatriya duties perfectly. Similarly, brahmanas, vaisyas and
$001705 can discharge their respective duties perfectly and thus at the ulti-
mate end of life be promoted to the transcendental world, which is called
param padam. Param padam, or the Vaikuntha planets, can be achieved
only by devotional service. The impersonal Brahman region is also called
एनां padam, but unless one is attached to the Personality of Godhead
one must again fall down to the material world from the impersonal
param padam situation. It is said, therefore, aruhya krcchrena param padam
tatah: the impersonalists endeavor very strenuously to achieve the pararh
padam or impersonal brahmajyoti, but unfortunately, being bereft of a
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they come down
again to the material world. If one flies in outer space, he can go very
high up, but unless he reaches a planet he must come down again to earth.
Similarly, because the impersonalists who reach the param padam of the
impersonal brahmajyoti do not enter into the Vaikuntha planets, they
come down again to this material world and are given shelter in one of the
material planets. Although they may attain Brahmaloka or Satyaloka, all
such planets are situated in the material world.


--- Page 59 ---
Text 9] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 823
TEXT 8
सूत उवाच
तदादिराजस्य, यशो विजुम्मितं
RQ =
गुणैरशेषैगणवस्समाजितम्‌ |
कत्ता महाभागवतः सदस्पते
<
कौषारविं प्राह यृणन्तमचयन्‌ । ८ ॥
siita uvdaca
tad adi-rajasya yaso vijrmbhitarn
gunair asesair gunavat-sabhajitam
(50८८6 mahabhdagavatah sadaspate
kaus&raviri praha grnantam arcayan
sutah uvaca—Suta Gosvami said; tat—that; adi-rajasya—of the original
King; yasah—reputation; vijrmbhitam—highly qualified; gunaih—by quali-
ties; asesath—unlimited; gunavat—fittingly; sabhajitam—being praised;
ksatta—Vidura; maha-bhagavatah—the great saintly devotee; sadaspate—
leader of the great sages; kausaravim—unto Maitreya; praha—said; grnan-
tam— while talking; arcayan— offering all respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Sita Gosvami continued: O Saunaka, leader of the great sages, after
hearing Maitreya speak about the various activities of King Prthu, the
original King, who was fully qualified, glorified and widely praised all over
the world, Vidura, the great devotee, very submissively worshiped Maitreya
Rsi and asked him the following question.
TEXT 9
विदुर उवाच
~ AC
सोऽभिषिक्तः पधरविगरटन्धरेषसुरार्णः |
A. +
बिभ्रत्‌ स वैष्णवं तेजो बाहोर्याभ्यां दुदोह गाम्‌ ॥९॥
vidura uvaca
so ’bhisiktah prthur viprair
labdhasesa-surarhanah
bibhrat sa vaispavarm tejo
bahvor yabhydri dudoha gam


--- Page 60 ---
824. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
vidurah uvaca—Vidura said; sah—he (King Prthu); abhisiktah—when
enthroned; prthuh— King Prthu; vipraih—by the great sages and brahmanas;
labdha—achieved; asesa—innumerable; sura-arhanah—presentations by the
demigods; bibhrati—expanding; sah—he; vaisnavam—who has received
through Lord Visnu; tejah—strength; bahvoh—arms; yabhyam—by which;
dudoha—exploited; gam— the earth.
TRANSLATION
Vidura said: My dear brahmana Maitreya, it is very enlightening to
understand that King Prthu was enthroned by the great sages and
brahmanas. All the demigods presented him with innumerable gifts, and
he also expanded his influence upon personally receiving strength from
Lord श्प. Thus he greatly developed the earth.
PURPORT
Because Prthu Maharaja was an empowered incarnation of Lord Visnu
and was naturally a great Vaignava devotee of the Lord, all the demigods
were pleased with him and presented different gifts to help him in exer-
cising his royal power, and the great sages and saintly persons also joined
in his coronation. Thus blessed by them, he ruled over the earth and ex-
ploited its resources for the greatest satisfaction of the people in general.
This has already been explained in the previous chapters regarding the
activities of King Prthu. As will be apparent from the next verse, every
executive head of state should follow in the footsteps of Maharaja Prthu
in ruling over his kingdom. Regardless of whether the chief executive is a
king or president, or whether the government is monarchical or demo-
cratic, this process is so perfect that if it is followed, everyone will become
happy, and thus it will be very easy for all to execute devotional service to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 10
¢
को न्वस्य कीतिं न श्रगोत्यभिज्ञो
यद्धिक्रमोच्छि्टमरोषभूपाः |
FE: सपाला उपजीवन्ति काम-
९
मद्यापि तन्मे वद्‌ कमे शुद्धम्‌ ॥१०॥
ko nv asya kirtim na srpoty abhijiio
yad-vikramocchistam asesabhiipdh


--- Page 61 ---
Text 11] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 825
lokah sapald upajivanti kamam
adydpi tan me vada karma suddham
kah—who; nu—but; asye—King Prthu; kirtim—glorious activities; na
$rnoti—does not hear; abhijiiah—intelligent; yat—his; vikrama—chivalry;
ucchistam—remnants; asesa—innumerable; bhupah—kings; lokah— planets;
sa-palah—with their demigods; upajivanti—execute livelihood; kamam—
desired objects; adyapi—up to that; tat—that; me—unto me; vada—please
speak ; karma—activities; suddham—auspicious.
TRANSLATION
Prthu Maharaja was so great in his activities and magnanimous
in his method of ruling that all the kings and demigods on the various
planets still follow in his footsteps. Who is there who will not try
to hear about his glorious activities? 1 wish to hear more and more
about Prthu Maharaja because his activities are so pious and
auspicious.
PURPORT
Saint Vidura’s purpose in hearing about Prthu Maharaja over and over
again was to set an example for ordinary kings and executive heads, who
should all be inclined to hear repeatedly about Prthu Maharaja’s activities
in order to also be able to rule over their kingdoms or states very faithfully
for the peace and prosperity of the people in general. Unfortunately, at
the present moment no one cares to hear about Prthu Maharaja or to
follow in his footsteps; therefore no nation in the world is either happy or
progressive in spiritual understanding, although that is the sole aim and
objective of human life.
TEXT 11
मैत्रेय उवाच
© =
गङ्गायग्नयोनयोरन्तराकषत्रमाबसन्‌ ।
आरब्धानेव TH भोगान्‌ पुण्यजिहासया ॥११॥
maitreya uvdca
ganga-yamunayor nadyor
antara ksetram @vasan
arabdh@n eva bubhuje
bhogan punya-jihasaya


--- Page 62 ---
826 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21

maitreyah uvaca—the great saint Maitreya said; ganga—the River Ganges;
yamunayoh—of the River Yamuna; nadyoh—of the two rivers; antara—
between; ksetram—the land; avasan—living there; arabdhan—destined; eva—
like; bubhuje—enjoyed; bhogan—fortunes; punya—pious activities; jiha-
saya—for the purpose of diminishing.

TRANSLATION

The great saintly sage Maitreya told Vidura: My dear Vidura, King
Prthu lived in the tract of land between the two great rivers Ganges and
Yamuna. Because he was very opulent, it appeared that he was enjoying
his destined fortune in order to diminish the results of his past pious
activities.

PURPORT

The terms “pious” and “impious” are applicable only in reference to
the activities of an ordinary living being. But Maharaja Prthu was a directly
empowered incarnation of Lord Visnu; therefore he was not subject to
the reactions of pious or impious activities. As we have already explained
previously, when a living being is specifically empowered by the Supreme
Lord to act for a particular purpose, he is called a saktyavesa-avatara.
Prthu Maharaja was not only a saktyavesa-avatara but also a great devotee.
A devotee is not subjected to the reactions resulting from past deeds. In
the Brahma-sambhita it is said, karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam:
for devotees the results of past pious and impious activities are nullified
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The words arabdhan eva mean
‘as if achieved by past deeds,” but in the case of Prthu Maharaja there was
no question of reaction to past deeds, and thus the word eva is used here
to indicate comparison to ordinary persons. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says,
avajananti mari miadhah. This means that sometimes people misunderstand
an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be an ordinary
man. The Supreme Godhead, His incarnations or His devotees may pose
themselves as ordinary men, but they are never to be considered as such.
Nor should an ordinary man not supported by authorized statements of
the sastras and acaryas be accepted as an incarnation or devotee. By the
evidence of sastra, Sanatana Gosvami detected Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
to be a direct incarnation of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
although Lord Caitanya never disclosed the fact. It is therefore generally
recommended that the acarya or guru should not be accepted as an
ordinary man.


--- Page 63 ---
Text 12] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 827
TEXT 12
९ 2
सवत्रास्खकितादेशः सप्दरीपेकदण्डधक्‌ |
अन्यत्र ब्राह्मणङ्लादन्यत्राच्युतगोत्रतः ।॥।१२॥
sarvatraskhalitadesah
sapta-dvipatka-dandadhrk
anyatra brahmana-kulad
anyatracyuta-gotratah
sarvatra—every where; askhalita—irrevocable; adesah— order; sapta-dvipa—
seven islands; eka—one; danda-dhrk—the ruler who holds the scepter;
anyatra—except;brahmana-kulat—brahmanas and saintly persons;anyatra—
except; acyuta-gotratah—descendants of the Supreme Personality of God-
head (Vaisnavas).
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu was an unrivalled king and possessed the scepter for
ruling all the seven islands on the surface of the globe. No one could dis-
obey his irrevocable orders but the saintly persons, the brahmanas and the
descendants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead [the Vaisnavas].
PURPORT
Sapta-dvipa refers to the seven great islands or continents on the surface
of the globe: (1) Asia, (2) Europe, (3) Africa, (4) North America,(5) South
America, (6) Australia, and (7) Oceania. In the modern age people are
under the impression that during the Vedic period or the prehistoric ages
America and many other parts of the world had not been discovered, but
that is not a fact. Prthu Maharaja ruled over the world many thousands of
years before the so-called prehistoric age, and it is clearly mentioned here
that in those days not only were all the different parts of the world known,
but they were ruled by one king, Maharaja Prthu. The country where Prthu
Maharaja resided must have been India because it is stated in the eleventh
verse of this chapter that he lived in the tract of land called Brahmavarta,
which consists of what is known in the modern age as portions of Punjab
and northern India. It is clear that the kings of India once ruled all the
world and that their culture was Vedic.


--- Page 64 ---
828 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21

The word askhalita indicates that orders by the king could not be dis-
obeyed by anyone in the entire world. Such orders, however, were never
issued to control saintly persons or the descendants of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Visnu. The Supreme Lord is known as acyuta, and
Lord Krsna is addressed as such by Arjuna in Bhagavad-gita (senayor
ubhayor madhye ratham sthapaya me ‘cyuta). Acyuta refers to one who
does not fall because He is never influenced by the modes of material
nature. When a living entity falls down to the material world from his
original position, he becomes cyuta, which means that he forgets his re-
lationship with acyuta. Actually every living entity is a part and parcel or
a son of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When influenced by the
modes of material nature, a living entity forgets this relationship and thinks
in terms of different species of life; but when he again comes to his ori-
ginal consciousness, he does not observe such bodily designations. This is
indicated in Bhagavad-gita by the words panditah sama-darsinah (Bg. 5.18).

Material designations create differentiation in terms of caste, color,
creed, nationality, etc. Different gotras or family designations are distinc-
tions in terms of the material body, but when one comes to Krsna con-
sciousness he immediately becomes transcendental to all considerations of
caste, creed, color and nationality.

Prthu Maharaja had no control over the brahmana-kula, which refers to
the learned scholars in Vedic knowledge, nor over the Vaisnavas, who are
above the considerations of Vedic knowledge. It is therefore said:

arcye visnaeu Siladhir gurusu nara-matir vaispave jati-buddhir
visor va vaispavanam kali-mala-mathane pada-tirthe ‘'mbu-buddhih
Sri-vispor namni mantre sakala-kalusa-he sabda-samanya-buddhir
visnau sarvesvarese tad-itara-sama-dhir yasya va naraki sah
“One who thinks the Deity in the temple to be made of wood or stone,
who thinks of the spiritual master in the disciplic succession as an ordinary
man, who thinks the Vaisnava in the acyuta-gotra to belong to a certain
caste or creed, or who thinks of caranamrta or Ganges water as ordinary
water, is taken to be a resident of hell.” (Padma Purana)

From the facts presented in this verse, it appears that people in general
should be controlled by a king until they come to the platform of
Vaisnavas and brahmanas, who are not under the control of anyone.
Brahmana refers to one who knows Brahman, or the impersonal feature
of the Absolute Truth, and a Vaignava is one who serves the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 65 ---
Text 14] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 829
TEXT 13
एकदाऽऽसीन्महासत्रदीक्षा तत्र दिवौकसाम्‌ |
- ৬
समाजो ब्रहमषीणां च যাজধীণাঁ च सत्तम ॥१३॥
ekadasin mahasatra-
diksa tatra divaukasam
samajo brahmarsinam ca
rajarsinam ca sattama
ekada—once upon a time; asit—took a vow; maha-satra—great sacrifice;
diksa—initiation; tatra—in that function; divaukasam—of the demigods;
samajah—assembly; brahmarsinam—of great saintly brahmanas; ca—also;
rajarsinam—of great saintly kings; ca—also; sattama—the greatest of
devotees.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time King Prthu Maharaja initiated the performance of a
very great sacrifice in which great saintly sages, brahmanas, demigods
from higher planetary systems and great saintly kings known as rajarsis
all assembled together.
PURPORT
In this verse the most significant point is that although King Prthu’s
residential quarters were in India, between the rivers Ganges and Yamuna,
the demigods also participated in the great sacrifice he performed. This
indicates that formerly the demigods used to come to this planet. Similar-
ly, great personalities like Arjuna, Yudhisthira and many others used to
visit higher planetary systems. Thus there was interplanetary communica-
tion via suitable airplanes and space vehicles.
TEXT 14
hl, "५
afore सर्वेषु स्वर्चितेषु TR: |
iN
उत्थितः सदसो मध्ये ताराणा्ुडराडिव ॥१४॥
tasminn arhatsu sarvesu
sv-arcitesu yatharhatah
utthitah sadaso madhye
taranam udurad iva


--- Page 66 ---
830 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21

tasmin—in that great meeting; arhatsu— of all those who are worshipable;
sarvesu—all of them; su-arcitesu—being worshiped according to their re-
spective positions; yatharhatah—as they deserved; utthitah—stood up;
sadasah—amongst the assembly members; madhye—within the midst;
taranam—of the stars; udu-ra{—the moon; iva—like.

TRANSLATION

In that great assembly, Maharaja Prthu first of all worshiped all the
respectable visitors according to their respective positions. After this, he
stood up in the midst of the assembly, and it appeared that the full moon
had arisen amongst the stars.

PURPORT

According to the Vedic system, the reception of great, exalted per-
sonalities, as arranged by Prthu Maharaja in that great sacrificial arena, is
very important. The first procedure in receiving guests is to wash their
feet, and it is learned from Vedic literature that one time when Maharaja
Yudhisthira performed a rajasiya-yajiia, Krsna took charge of washing
the feet of the visitors. Similarly, Maharaja Prthu also arranged for the
proper reception of the demigods, the saintly sages, the brahmanas and
the great kings.

TEXT 15
Fg: पीनायतभुजो गौरः कञ्ञारुणेश्षणः |
सनासः gg: सौम्यः पीनांसः सुद्विजसितः।॥१५॥
pramsuh pinayata-bhujo
gaurah kanjaruneksanah
sunasah sumukhah saumyah
pinamsah su-dvija-smitah

pramsuh—very tall; pinayata—full and broad; bhujah—arms; gaurah—
fair complexioned; kaiija—lotuslike; aruna-tksanah—with bright eyes like a
morning sunrise; su-ndsah—straight nose; su-mukhah—with a beautiful face;
saumyah—of a grave bodily stature; pina-armsah—shoulders raised; su—
beautiful; dvija—teeth; smitah—smiling.

TRANSLATION

King Prthu’s body was tall and sturdy, and his complexion was fair. His

arms were full and broad and his eyes as bright as the rising sun. His nose


--- Page 67 ---
Text 17] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 831
was straight, his face very beautiful and his personality grave. His teeth
were set beautifully in his smiling face.

PURPORT

Amongst the four social orders (brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras),
the ksatriyas, both men and women, are generally very beautiful. As will
be apparent from the following verses, it is to be concluded that not only
were Maharaja Prthu’s bodily features attractive, as described here, but he
had specific all-auspicious signs in his bodily construction.

As it is said, “The face is the index of the mind.” One’s mental con-
stitution is exhibited by his facial features. The bodily features of a
particular person are exhibited in accordance with his past deeds, for
according to one’s past deeds, his next bodily features—whether in human
society, animal society or demigod society—are determined. This is proof
of the transmigration of the soul through different types of bodies.

TEXT 16
a ¢
व्यूढवक्षा TEAR RAISER |
आवतेनाभिरोजखी काञ्चनोरुरुद ग्रपात्‌ 11281
vyudha-vaksa brhac-chronir
vali-valgu-dalodarah
avarta-nabhir ojasvt
kancanorur udagra-pat

vyitdha—broad; vaksah—chest; brhat-sronih—thick waist; vali- wrinkles;
valgu—very beautiful; dala—like a leaf of a banyan tree; udarah— abdomen;
avarta—coiled; nabhih—navel; ojasvi—lustrous; kanicana—golden; uruh—
thighs; udagra-pat—arched instep.

TRANSLATION

The chest of Maharaja Prthu was very broad, his waist was very thick,
and his abdomen, wrinkled by lines of skin, resembled in construction a
banyan tree. His navel was coiled and deep, his thighs were of a golden hue,
and his instep was arched.

TEXT 17
ब्ष्मवक्रासितलिग्धमूर्धनः कम्बुकन्धरः |
महाधने TROY परिधायोपवीय च ॥१७॥


--- Page 68 ---
832 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
suksma-vakrasita-snigdha-
maurdhajah kambu-kandharah
maha-dhane dukulagrye
paridhayopaviya ca
siksma—very fine; vakra—curly ; asita—black ; snigdha—greasy ; murdha-
jah—hairs on the head; kambu—like a conch; kandharah — neck; maha-
dhane—very valuable; dukula-agrye—dressed with a dhoti; paridhaya—on
the upper portion of the body; upaviya—placed like a sacred thread;
ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The black, slick hair on his head was very fine and curly, and his neck,
like a conchshell, was decorated with auspicious lines. He wore a very
valuable dhoti, and there was a nice wrapper on the upper part of his body.
TEXT 18
व्यद्धिताशेषगात्रभीनिंयमे न्यस्तभूषणः |
कृष्णाजिनधरः श्रीमान्‌ ङशपाणिःकृतोचितः।॥। १८॥
1/1 711.
niyame nyasta-bhusanah
krsnajina-dhareh $riman
kusa-panih krtocitah
vyaijita—indicating; asesa—innumerable; gatra—bodily; srih—beauty;
niyame—regulated; nyasta—given up; bhusanah—garments; krspa—black;
ajina—skin; dharah—putting on; sriman—beautiful; kusa-panih—having
kusa grass on the fingers; krta—performed; ucitah—as it is required.
TRANSLATION
As Maharaja Prthu was being initiated to perform the sacrifice, he had
to leave aside his valuable dress, and therefore his natural bodily beauty
was visible. It was very pleasing to see him put on a black deerskin and
wear a ring of kusa grass on his finger, for this increased the natural beauty
of his body. It appears that Maharaja Prthu observed all the regulative
principles before he performed the sacrifice.
TEXT 19
शिशिरलिग्धताराक्षः समेक्षत॒ समन्ततः |
+ ©
ऊचिवानिदमुर्वीशः सदः संहषयन्निव ॥१९॥


--- Page 69 ---
Text 20] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 833
$isira-snigdha-taraksah
samaiksata samantatah
ucivan idam urvisah
sadah sarmharsayann iva
Sisira—dew; snigdha—wet; tara—stars; aksah—eyes; samaiksata—glanced
over; samantatah—all around; ucivan—began to speak; idam—this; urvisah—
highly elevated; sadah—amongst the members of the assembly; samhar-
sayan—enhancing their pleasure; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Just to encourage the members of the assembly and to enhance their
pleasure, King Prthu glanced over them with eyes that seemed like stars in
a sky wet with dew. He then spoke to them in a great voice.
TEXT 20
चार चित्रपदं ष्णं ad गूढमविङ्कवम्‌ |
सर्वेषामपकाराथं तदा FFA ॥२०॥
caru citra-padam slaksnpam
mrstam gudham aviklavam
sarvesam upakarartharn :
tada anuvadann iva
caru— beautiful; citra-padam— flowery; slakspam—very clear; mrstam—
very great; gidham—meaningful;aviklavam— without any doubt;sarvesam—
for all; upakara-artham—just to benefit them; tada—at that time; anu-
vadan—began to repeat; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu’s speech was very beautiful, full of metaphorical lan-
guage, clearly understandable and very pleasing to hear. His words were all
grave and certain. It appears that when he spoke, he expressed his personal
realization of the Absolute Truth in order to benefit all who were present.
PURPORT
Maharaja Prthu was beautiful in his external bodily features, and his
speech was also very glorious in all respects. His words, which were nicely
composed in highly metaphorical ornamental language, were pleasing to
hear and were not only mellow but also very clearly understandable and
without doubt or ambiguity.


--- Page 70 ---
834 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
TEXT 21
राजोवाक
सभ्याः शृणुत मद्रं वः साधवो य इहागताः |
सत्सु जिज्ञासुभि््ममावे्यं खमनीपितम्‌ 1:20
rajovaca
sabhyah Srnputa bhadrarm vah
sadhavo ya ihagatah
satsu jijiasubhir dharmam
avedyarii sva-manigitam
raja uvaca—the King began to speak; sabhyah—addressing the ladies and
gentlemen; $rputa—kindly hear; bhadram—good fortune; vah—your;
sadhavah—all great souls; ye—who; iha—here; agat@dh—present; satsu—
unto the noble men; jijitasubhih—one who is inquisitive; dharmam—
religious principles; avedyam—must be presented; sva-manisitam—con-
cluded by someone.
TRANSLATION
King Prthu said: O gentle members of the assembly, may all good for-
tune be upon you! May all of you great souls who have come to attend
this meeting kindly hear my prayer attentively. A person who is actually
inquisitive must present his decision before an assembly of noble souls.
PURPORT
In this verse the word sadhavah (“all great souls’) is very significant.
When a person is very great and famous, many unscrupulous persons be-
come his enemies, for envy is the nature of materialists. In any meeting
there are different classes of men, and it is to be supposed, therefore, that
because Prthu Maharaja was very great, he must have had several enemies
present in the assembly, although they could not express themselves.
Maharaja Prthu, however, was concerned with persons who were gentle,
and therefore he first addressed all the honest persons, not caring for the
envious. He did not, however, present himself as a royal authority em-
powered to command everyone because he wanted to present his state-
ment in humble submission before the assembly of great sages and saintly
persons. As a great king of the entire world, he could have given them
orders, but he was so humble, meek and honest that he presented his state-
ment for approval in order to clarify his mature decision. Everyone within
this material world is conditioned by the modes of material nature and


--- Page 71 ---
Text 22] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 835
therefore has four defects. But although Prthu Maharaja was above all
these, still, like an ordinary conditioned soul, he presented his statements
to the great souls, sages and saintly persons present there.
TEXT 22
अहं दण्डधरो राजा प्रजानामिह योजितः |
रक्षिता इत्तिदः स्वेषु सेतुषु स्थापिता ग्रथ्‌ ॥२२॥
aha danda-dharo raja
prajanam tha yojitah
raksita vrtti-dah svesu
setusu sthapita prthak
aham—1; danda-dharah—carrier of the scepter; raja—king; prajanam—of
the citizens; ihe—in this world; yojitah—engaged; raksita—protector;
vrtti-dah—employer; svesu—in their own; setusu—respective social orders;
sthapita—established; prthak— differently.
TRANSLATION
King Prthu continued: By the grace of the Supreme Lord I have been
appointed the King of this planet, and I carry the scepter to rule the citi-
zens, protect them from all danger and give them employment according
to their respective positions in the social order established by Vedic in-
junction.
PURPORT
A king is supposed to be appointed by the Supreme Personality of God-
head to look after the interests of his particular planet. On every planet
there is a predominating person, just as we now see that in every country
there is a president. If one is president or king, it should be understood
that this opportunity has been given to him by the Supreme Lord. Accord-
ing to the Vedic system, the king is considered a representative of Godhead
and is offered respects by the citizens as God in the human form of life.
Actually, according to Vedic information, the Supreme Lord maintains all
living entities, and especially human beings, to elevate them to the highest
perfection. After many, many births in lower species, when a living entity
evolves to the human form of life and in particular to the civilized human
form of life, his society must be divided into four gradations, as ordered
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Bhagavad-gita (catur-varnyam
maya srstam, etc.). The four social orders—the brahmanas, ksatriyas,
vaisyas and sidras—are natural divisions of human society, and, as declared


--- Page 72 ---
836 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4, Ch. 21
by Prthu Maharaja, every man in his respective social order must have
proper employment for his livelihood. It is the duty of the king or the
government to insure that the people observe the social order and that they
are also employed in their respective occupational duties. In modern
times, since the protection of the government or the king has been with-
drawn, social order has practically collapsed. No one knows who is a
brahmana, who is a ksatriya, who is a vaisya or who is a sidra, and people
claim to belong to a particular social order by birthright only. It is the
duty of the government to reestablish social order in terms of occupational
duties and the modes of material nature, for that will make the entire
world population actually civilized. If it does not observe the institutional
functions of the four social orders, human society is no better than animal
society in which there is never tranquility, peace and prosperity but only
chaos and confusion. Maharaja Prthu, as an ideal king, strictly observed the
maintenance of the Vedic social order.

Prajayate iti praja. The word praja refers to one who takes birth. There-
fore Prthu Maharaja guaranteed protection for prajanam—all living entities
who took birth in his kingdom. Praja refers not only to human beings but
also to animals, trees and every other living entity. It is the duty of the
king to give all living entities protection and food. The fools and rascals of
modern society have no knowledge of the extent of the responsibility of
the government. Animals are also citizens of the land in which they happen
to be born, and they also have the right to continue their existence at the
cost of the Supreme Lord. The disturbance of the animal population by
wholesale slaughter produces a catastrophic future reaction for the butcher,
his land and his government.

TEXT 23
तस्य॒ मे तदनुष्ठानायानादु॑ह्षबादिनः |
=
रोका; स्यु; कामसन्दोहा यस्य तुष्यति বিছক্ক!।২২।।
tasya me tad-anusthanad
yan ahur brahma-vadinah
lokah syuh kama-sandoha
yasya tusyati dista-drk
tasya—his; me—mine; tat—that; anusthanat—by executing; yan—that
which; ahuh—is spoken; brahma-vadinah—by the experts in Vedic knowl-
edge; lokah—planets; syuh— become; kama-sandohah— fulfilling one’s de-
sirable objectives; yasya— whose; tusyati—becomes satisfied; dista-drk— the
seer of all destiny. 7


--- Page 73 ---
Text 23] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 837
TRANSLATION

Maharaja Prthu said: I think that upon the execution of my duties as
king, I shall be able to achieve the desirable objectives described by ex-
perts in Vedic knowledge. This destination is certainly achieved by the
pleasure of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the seer of all
destiny.

PURPORT

Maharaja Prthu gives special stress to the word brahma-vadinah (“by the
experts in the Vedic knowledge). Brahma refers to the Vedas, which are
also known as sSabda-brahma, or transcendental sound. Transcendental
sound is not ordinary language, although it appears to be written in
ordinary language. Evidence from the Vedic literature should be accepted
as final authority. In the Vedic literature there is much information, and
of course there is information about the execution of a king’s duty. A
responsible king who executes his appointed duty by giving proper pro-
tection to all living entities on his planet is promoted to the heavenly
planetary system. This is also dependent upon the pleasure of the Supreme
Lord. It is not that if one executes his duty properly he is automatically
promoted, for promotion depends upon the satisfaction of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It must ultimately be concluded that one can
achieve the desired result of his activities upon satisfying the Supreme
Lord. This is also confirmed in the Second Chapter, First Canto, of
Srimad-Bhagavatam:

atah pumbhir dvija-Srestha
varpasrama-vibhagasah

svanusthitasya dharmasya
sarmsiddhir hari-tosapam.

The perfection of one’sexecution of his appointed duties is the ultimate
satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. The word kama-sandohah means
“achievement of the desired result.” Everyone desires to achieve the ulti-
mate goal of life, but in modern civilization the great scientists think that
man’s life has no plan. This gross ignorance is very dangerous and makes
civilization very risky. People do not know the laws of nature, which are
the rulings of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because they are
atheists of the first order, they have no faith in the existence of God and
His rulings and therefore do not know how nature is working. This gross
ignorance of the mass of people, including even the so-called scientists


--- Page 74 ---
838 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
and philosophers, makes life a risky situation in which human beings do
not know whether they are making progress in life. According to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, they are simply progressing to the darkest region of material
existence. Adanta-gobhir visatarn tamisram (Bhag. 7.5.30). The Krsna
consciousness movement has therefore been started to give philosophers,
scientists and people in general the proper knowledge about the destiny of
life. Everyone should take advantage of this movement and learn the real
goal of life.
TEXT 24
य उद्धरेत्करं राजा प्रजा धर्मेष्वशिक्षयन्‌ |
प्रजानां शमलं 4S भगं च स्वं जहाति सः ॥२४॥
ya uddharet karam raja
praja dharmesv asiksayan
prajanarm $amalam bhunkte
bhagar ca svar jahati sah

yah—anyone (king or governor); uddharet—exact; karam— taxes; raja—
king; prajah—the citizens; dharmesu—in executing their respective duties;
asiksayan—without teaching them how to execute their respective duties;
prajanam—of the citizens; samalam—impious; bhunkte—enjoys; bhagam—
fortune; ca—also; svam—own; jahati-gives up; sah— that king.

TRANSLATION

Any king who does not teach his citizens about their respective duties
in terms of varna and asrama but who simply exacts tolls and taxes from
them is liable to suffer for the impious activities. which have been
performed by the citizens. In addition to such degradation, the king also
loses his own fortune.

PURPORT

A king, governor or president should not take the opportunity to
occupy his post without also discharging his duty. He must teach the
people within the state how to observe the divisions of varpa and asrama.
If a king neglects to give such instructions and is simply satisfied with
levying taxes, then those who share in the collection—namely, all the
government servants and the head of the state--are liable to share in the
impious activities of the general masses. The laws of nature are very subtle.
For example, if one eats in a place which is very sinful, he shares in the
resultant reaction of the sinful activities performed there. (It is a Vedic


--- Page 75 ---
Text 25] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 839
system, therefore, for a householder to call brahmanas and Vaisnavas to
eat at ceremonial performances in his house because the brahmanas and
Vaisnavas can immunize him from sinful activities. But it is not the duty of
rigid brahmanas and Vaisnavas to accept invitations everywhere. There is,
of course, no objection to taking part in feasts in which prasada is
distributed.) There are many subtle laws which are practically unknown
to people in general, but the Krsna consciousness movement is very
scientifically distributing all this Vedic knowledge for the benefit of the
people of the world.
TEXT 25
Ly
तत्‌ प्रजा AE fen স্বাধমীবানন্থ্মৰঃ |
a
ङरुताथोक्षजयियस्तिं मेऽनुग्रहः कृतः ॥२५॥
tat praja bhartr-pindartham
svartham evanasiiyavah
kurutadhoksaja-dhiyas i
tarhi me ‘nugrahah krtah

tat—therefore; prajah—my dear citizens; bhartr—of the master; pinda-
artham—welfare after death; sva-artham—own interest; eva—certainly;
anasityavah—without being envious; kuruta—just execute; adhoksaja—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhiyah— thinking of Him; tarhi—there-
fore; me—unto me;anugrahah—mercy; krtah—being done.

TRANSLATION

Prthu Maharaja continued: Therefore, my dear citizens, for the welfare
of your king after his death, you should execute your duties properly
in terms of your positions of varna and asrama and should always think
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead within your hearts. By doing so,
your interests will be protected, and you will bestow mercy upon your
king for his welfare after death.

PURPORT

The words adhoksaja-dhiyah, meaning “Krsna consciousness,” are very
important in this verse. The king and citizens should both be Krsna
conscious, otherwise both of them will be doomed to lower species of
life after death. A responsible government must teach Krsna consciousness
very vigorously for the benefit of all. Without Krsna consciousness, neither
the state nor the citizens of the state can be responsible. Prthu Maharaja
therefore specifically requested the citizens to act in Krsna consciousness,


--- Page 76 ---
840 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
and he was also very anxious to teach them how to become Krsna con-
scious. A summary of Krsna consciousness is given in Bhagavad-gita:
yat karosi yad asnasi
yaj juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kurusva mad-arpanam
“Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you give in charity and
whatever penances you undergo should be done in Krsna consciousness or
for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” (Bg. 9.27)
If all the people of the state, including the government servants, are
taught the techniques of spiritual life, then although everyone is liable to
be punished in different ways by the stringent laws of material nature,
they will not be implicated.
TEXT 26
. . [J
यूयं तदनुमोदध्वं पिकदेवषयोऽमला; |
कलैः शास्तुरलुज्ञातुस्तुर्यं TORT तत्फलम्‌ ॥२६॥
yuyam tad anumodadhvari
pitr-devarsayo ‘malah
kartuh Sastur anujiatus
tulyam yat pretya tat-phalam
yuyam—all you respectable persons who are present here; tat—that;
anumodadhvam—kindly approve of my proposal; pitr—persons coming
from Pitrloka; deva—persons coming from the heavenly planets; rsayah—
great sages and saintly persons; amalah—those who are cleansed of all sin-
ful activities; kartuh—the performer; sastuh—the order-giver; anujniatuh—
of the supporter; tulyam—equal; yat—which; pretya—after death; tat—
that; phalam—result.
TRANSLATION
I request all the pure-hearted demigods, forefathers and saintly persons
to support my proposal because after death the result of an action is
equally shared by its doer, its director and its supporter.
PURPORT
The government of Prthu Maharaja was perfect because it was admin-
istered exactly according to the orders of the Vedic injunctions. Prthu


--- Page 77 ---
Text 27] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 841
Maharaja has already explained that the chief duty of the government is to
see that everyone executes his respective duty and is elevated to the plat-
form of Krsna consciousness. The government should be so conducted that
automatically one is elevated to Krsna consciousness. King Prthu there-
fore wanted his citizens to cooperate fully with him, for if they assented,
they would enjoy the same profit as him after death. If Prthu Maharaja,
as a perfect king, were elevated to the heavenly planets, the citizens who
cooperated by approving of his methods would also be elevated with him.
Since the Krsna consciousness movement which is going on at the present
moment is genuine, perfect and authorized and is following in the
footsteps of Prthu Maharaja, anyone who cooperates with this movement
or accepts its principles will get the same result as the workers who are
actively propagating Krsna consciousness.
~ TEXT 27
अस्ति यज्ञपतिर्नाम केषाचिदसत्तमाः |
इहात्र च लक्ष्यन्ते ज्योर्लावत्यः HAE: ।।২৩॥
asti yajiiapatir nama
kesaricid arha-sattamah
thamutra ca laksyante
Jyotsnavatyah kvacid bhuvah
asti—there must be; yajiia-patifi—the enjoyer of all sacrifices; nama—of
the name; kesaficit—in the opinion of some; arha-sattamah—O most
respectable; tha—in this material world; amutra—after death; ca—also;
laksyante—it is visible; jyotsnavatyah—powerful, beautiful; kvacit—some-
where; bhuvah— bodies.
TRANSLATION
My dear respectable ladies and gentlemen, according to the authorita-
tive statements of $astra, there must be a supreme authority who is able to
award the respective benefits of our present activities. Otherwise, why
should there be persons who are unusually beautiful and powerful both in
this life and in the life after death?
PURPORT
Prthu Maharaja’s sole aim in ruling his kingdom was to raise the citizens
to the standard of God consciousness. Since there was a great assembly in
the arena of sacrifice, there were different types of men present, but he
was especially interested in speaking to those who were not atheists. It has


--- Page 78 ---
842 Srimad-Bhagavatam { Canto 4, Ch. 21
already been explained in the previous verses that Prthu Maharaja advised
the citizens to become adhoksaja-dhiyah, which means God conscious or
Krsna conscious, and in this verse he specifically presents the authority of
Sastra, even though his father was a number one atheist who did not abide
by the injunctions mentioned in the Vedic sastras, who practically
stopped all sacrificial performances, and who so disgusted the brahmanas
that they not only dethroned him but cursed and killed him. Atheistic
men do not believe in the existence of God, and thus they understand
everything which is happening in our daily affairs to be due to physical
arrangement and chance. Atheists believe in the atheistic Sankhya
philosophy of the combination of prakrti and purusa. They believe only
in matter and hold that matter under certain conditions of amalgamation
gives rise to the living force, which then appears as purusa, the enjoyer;
then, by a combination of matter and the living force, the many varieties
of material manifestation come into existence. Nor do atheists believe in
the injunctions of the Vedas. According to them, all the Vedic injunctions
are simply theories that have no practical application in life. Taking all
this into consideration, Prthu Maharaja suggested that theistic men will
solidly reject the views of the atheists on the grounds that there cannot be
many varieties of existence without the plan of a superior intelligence.
Atheists very vaguely explain that these varieties of existence occur simply
by chance, but the theists who believe in the injunctions of the Vedas must
reach all their conclusions under the direction of the Vedas.

In the Vispu Purana it is said that the entire varnasrama institution is
meant to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The rules and regu-
lations set up for the execution of the duties of brahmanas, ksatriyas,
vai§yas and sudras or brahmacaris, grhasthas, vanaprasthas and sannyasts
are all meant to satisfy the Supreme Lord. At the present moment, al-
though the so-called brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras have lost
their original culture, they claim to be brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and
sudras by birthright. Yet they have rejected the proposition that such so-
cial and spiritual orders are especially meant for worship of Lord Visnu.
The dangerous Mayavada theory set forth by Sarikaracarya—that God is
impersonal—does not tally with the injunctions of the Vedas. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu therefore described the Mayavadi philosophers as the greatest
offenders against the Personality of Godhead. According to the Vedic
system, one who does not abide by the orders of the Vedas is called a
nastika, or atheist. When Lord Buddha preached his theory of nonviolence,
he was obliged to deny the authority of the Vedas, and for this reason he
was considered by the followers of the Vedas to be a nastika. But although


--- Page 79 ---
Text 27] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 843
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu very clearly enunciated that the followers of
Lord Buddha's philosophy are nastikas or atheists because of their denial
of the authority of the Vedas, He considered the Sankarites, who wanted
to establish Vedic authority by trickery and who actually followed the
Mayavada philosophy of Buddha’s school, to be more dangerous than the
Buddhists themselves. The Sarkarite philosophers’ theory that we have to
imagine a shape of God is more dangerous than denial of the existence of
God. Notwithstanding all the philosophical theorizing by atheists or
Mayavadis, the followers of Krsna consciousness rigidly live according to
the injunctions given in Bhagavad-gita, which is accepted as the essence of
all Vedic scripture. In Bhagavad-gita it is said:
yatah pravrttir bhutanam yena sarvam idam tatam
sva-karmana tam abhyarcya siddhim vindati manavah. (Bg.18.46)

This means that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the original source
of everything, as described in the Vedanta-sutra (janmddy asya yatah). The
Lord Himself also confirms in Bhagavad-gita, aha sarvasya prabhavo: “1
am the origin of everything.” The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
original source of all emanations, and at the same time, as Paramatma, He
is spread all over existence. The Absolute Truth is therefore the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and every living being is meant to satisfy the
Supreme Godhead by performing his respective duty (sva-karmapa tam
abhyarcya). Maharaja Prthu wanted to introduce this formula amongst his
citizens.

The most important point in human civilization is that while one
engages in different occupational duties, he must try to satisfy the Supreme
Lord by the execution of such duties. That is the highest perfection of life.
Svanusthitasya dharmasya samsiddhir hari-tosanam: by discharging one’s
prescribed duty, one can become very successful in life if he simply satisfies
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The vivid example is Arjuna. He was
a ksatriya, his duty was to fight, and by executing his prescribed duty he
satisfied the Supreme Lord and therefore became perfect. Everyone should
follow this principle. The atheists who do not are condemned in Bhagavad-
gita, in the Sixteenth Chapter, by the following statement: tan aham dvisatah
kriaran samsdresu naradhaman (Bg. 16.19). In this verse it is clearly said that
persons who are envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are the low-
est of mankind and are very mischievous. Under the regulative principles
of the Supreme, such mischievous persons are thrown into the darkest
region of material existence and are born of asuras or atheists. Birth after


--- Page 80 ---
844. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
birth, such asuras go still farther down, finally to animal forms like those
of tigers or similar ferocious beasts. Thus for millions of years they have to
remain in darkness without knowledge of Krsna.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as Purusottama, or the
best of all living entities. He is a person like all other living entities, but He
is the leader or the best of all living beings. That is stated in the Vedas also.
Nityo nityanari cetanas cetananam. He is the chief of all eternals, the chief
of all living entities, and He is complete and full. He has no need to derive
benefit by interfering with the affairs of other living entities, but because
He is the maintainer of all, He has the right to bring them to the proper
standard so that all living entities may become happy. As a father wants
all of his children to become happy under his direction, similarly, God, or
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has the right to see that all
living entities are happy. There is no possibility of becoming happy within
this material world. The father and the sons are eternal, but if a living
entity does not come to the platform of his eternal life of bliss and knowl-
edge, there is no question of happiness. Although Purusottama, the best of
all living entities, has no benefit to derive from the common living entities,
He does have the right to discriminate between their right and wrong ways.
The right way is the path of activities meant to satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as we have already discussed (svanusthitasya
dharmasya samsiddhir hari-tosapam). A living entity may engage in any
occupational duty, but if he wants to have perfection inhis duties, he must
satisfy the Supreme Lord. As such, one who pleases Him gets better fa-
cilities for living, but one who displeases Him gets involved in undesirable
situations.

It is therefore concluded that there are two kinds of duties—mundane
duty and duty performed for the sake of yajiia or sacrifice (yajidrthat
karma). Any karma or activity one performs which is not for the purpose
of yajna is a cause of bondage. Yajiiarthat karmano ’nyatra loko ‘yam
karma-bandhanah: “Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be per-
formed, otherwise work binds one to this material world.” (Bg. 3.9)
Karma-bandhanah, or the bondage of karma, is administered under the
regulations of the stringent laws of material nature. Material existence is a
struggle to conquer the impediments put forth by material nature. The
asuras are always fighting to overcome these impediments, and by the
illusory power of material nature the foolish living entities work very hard
within this material world and take this to be happiness. This is called
maya. In that hard struggle for existence, they deny the existence of the
supreme authority, Purusottama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 81 ---
Text 27] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 845

In order to regulate the activities of the living entities, God has given us
codes, just as a king gives codes of law in a state, and whoever breaks the
law is punished. Similarly, the Lord has given the infallible knowledge of
the Vedas, which are not contaminated by the four defects of human
life—namely, the tendency to commit mistakes, to be illusioned, to cheat
and to have imperfect senses. If we do not take direction from the Vedas
but act whimsically according to our own choice, we are sure to be
punished by the laws of the Lord, who offers different types of bodies in
the 8,400,000 species of forms. Material existence, or the sense gratifi-
cation process, is conducted according to the type of body we are given
by prakrti, or material nature. As such, there must be divisions of pious
and impious activities (punya and papa). In Bhagavad-gita it is clearly
stated:

yesdrh tv anta-gatarh papam jandnarm punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta bhajante mari drdha-vratah

“One who has completely surpassed the resultant activities of the impious
path of life (this is possible only when one engages exclusively in pious
activities) can understand his eternal relationship with the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. Thus he engages in His transcendental loving service.”
(Bg. 7.28) This life of engaging always in the loving service of the Lord
is called adhoksaja-dhiyah, or a life of Krsna consciousness, which King
Prthu meant his citizens to follow.

The different varieties of life and of material existence do not come
about by chance and necessity; they are different arrangements made by
the Supreme Lord in terms of the pious and impious activities of the living
entities. By performing pious activities one can take birth in a good family
in a good nation, one can get a beautiful body or can become very well-
educated or very rich. We see, therefore, that in different places and in
different planets there are different standards of life, bodily features and
educational statuses, all awarded by the Supreme Personality of Godhead
according to pious or impious activities. Varieties of life, therefore, do not
develop by chance but by prearrangement. There is a plan, which is
already outlined in the Vedic knowledge. One has to take advantage of
this knowledge and mold his life in such a way that at the end, especially
in the human form of life, he may go back home, back to Godhead, by
practicing Krsna consciousness.

The theory of chance can best be explained in the Vedic literature by
the words gjiiata-sukrti, which refer to pious activities performed without


--- Page 82 ---
846 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
the actor’s knowledge. But these are also planned. For example, Krsna
comes like an ordinary human being, He comes as a devotee like Lord
Caitanya, or He sends His representative, the spiritual master or pure
devotee. This is also the planned activity of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. They come to canvass and educate, and thus a person in the illu-
sory energy of the Supreme Lord gets a chance to mix with them, talk
with them, and take lessons from them, and somehow or other if a con-
ditioned soul surrenders to such personalities and by intimate association
with them chances to become Krsna conscious, he is saved from the
material conditions of life. Krsna therefore instructs:
sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekarn saranar vraja
0170771, [৮01 sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami ma sucah
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.” (Bg. 18.66) The word
sarva-papebhyah means “from all sinful activities.” A person who surren-
ders unto Him by utilizing the chance to associate with the pure devotee,
spiritual master or other authorized incarnations of Godhead like Prthu
Maharaja, is saved by Krsna. Then his life becomes successful.
TEXTS 28-29
मनोरुत्तानपादस्य भुबस्यापि महीपतेः |
प्रियव्रतस्य राजर्रद्गस्यासत्पितुः पितु; ॥२८॥
ईदशानामथान्येषामजसय च भवस्य च।
TERE बलेश्चापि कृत्यमस्ति TERIA ।।२९॥
manor uttanapadasya
dhruvasyapi mahipateh
priyavratasya rajarser
angasyasmat-pituh pituh
tdrsanam athanyesam
ajasya ca bhavasya ca
prahladasya bales capi
krtyam asti gada-bhrta
manoh—of Manu (Svayambhuva Manu); uttanapadasya—of Uttanapada,
the father of Dhruva Maharaja; dhruvasya—of Dhruva Maharaja; api—
certainly;mahipateh—of the great king; priyavratasya—of Priyavrata, in the


--- Page 83 ---
Text 30] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 847
family of Maharaja Dhruva; rajarseh—of great saintly kings; angasya—of
the name Anga; asmat—my; pituh—of my father; pituh—of the father;
idrsanam—of such personalities; atha—also; anyesam—of others; ajasya— of
the supreme immortal; ca—also; bhavasya—of the living entities; ca—also;
prahladasya—of Maharaja Prahlada; baleh—of Maharaja Bali; ca—also; api—
certainly; krtyam—acknowledged by them; asti—there is; gada-bhrta—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who carries a club.
TRANSLATION

This is confirmed not only by the evidence of the Vedas but also by the
personal behavior of the great personalities like Manu, Uttanapada, Dhruva,
Priyavrata and my grandfather Anga, as well as by many other great
personalities and ordinary living entities, exemplified by Maharaja
Prahlada and Bali, all of whom are theists who believe in the existence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead who carries a club.

PURPORT

Narottama dasa Thakura states that one has to ascertain the right path
for his activities by following in the footsteps of great saintly persons and
books of knowledge under the guidance of a spiritual master (sadhu-
Sastra-guru-vakya). A saintly person is one who follows the Vedic injunc-
tions, which are the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
word guru refers to one who gives proper direction under the authority of
the Vedic injunctions and according to the examples of the lives of great
personalities. The best way to mold one’s life is to follow in the footsteps
of the authorized personalities like those mentioned herein by Prthu
Maharaja, beginning with Svayambhuva Manu. The safest path in life is to
follow such great personalities, especially those mentioned in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam. The mahajanas or great personalities are Brahma, Lord Siva,
Narada Muni, Manu, the Kumaras, Prahlada Maharaja, Bali Maharaja,
Yamaraja, Bhisma, Janaka, Sukadeva Gosvami and Kapila Muni.

TEXT 30
दौदितरादीचते मृत्योः शोज्यान्‌ धम॑विमोरितान्‌ ।
बगंसर्गापवर्गाणां प्रायेणेषास्म्येतुजा ।।२०॥
dauvhitradin rte mrtyoh
Socyan dharma-vimohitan
varga-svargapavarganarm
prayenaikatmya-hetuna


--- Page 84 ---
848 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21

dauhitra-adin—grandsons like my father, Vena; rte—except; mrtyoh—of
personified death; socyan—abominable; dharma-vimohitan—bewildered on
the path of religiosity; varga—religion, economic development, sense
gratification and liberation; svarga—elevation to the heavenly planets;
apavarganam—being freed from material contamination; prayenpa—almost
always; eka—one; atmya—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hetuna—
on account of.

TRANSLATION

Although abominable persons like my father, Vena, the grandson of
death personified, are bewildered on the path of religion, all the great
personalities like those mentioned agree that in this world the only be-
stower of the benedictions of religion, economic development, sense
gratification, liberation or elevation to the heavenly planets is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

King Vena, the father of Prthu Maharaja, was condemned by the
brahmanas and saintly persons due to his denying the existence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and rejecting the method of satisfying
Him by performance of Vedic sacrifice. In other words, he was an atheist
who did not believe in the existence of God and who consequently stopped
all Vedic ritualistic ceremonies in his kingdom. Prthu Maharaja considered
his character abominable because he was foolish regarding the execution
of religious performances. Atheists are of the opinion that there is no
need to accept the authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be
successful in religion, economic development, sense gratification or libera-
tion. According to them, dharma, or religious principles, are meant to
establish an imaginary God to encourage one to become moral, honest and
just so that the social orders may be maintained in peace and tranquility.
Furthermore, they say that actually there is no need to accept God for this
purpose, for if one follows the principles of morality and honesty, that is
sufficient. Similarly, if one makes nice plans and works very hard for
economic development, automatically the result of economic develop-
ment will come. Similarly, sense gratification also does not depend on the.
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for if one earns enough
money by any process, he will have sufficient opportunity for sense grati-
fication. Insofar as liberation is concerned, they say that there is no need
to talk of liberation because after death everything is finished. Prthu
Maharaja, however, does not accept the authority of such atheists,


--- Page 85 ---
Text 30] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 849
headed by his father, who was the grandson of death personified. General-
ly, a daughter inherits the qualities of her father, and a son gets the
qualities of his mother. Thus Mrtyu’s daughter, Sunitha, got all the qualities
of her father, and Vena inherited the qualities of his mother. A person
who is always subjected to the rules and regulations of repeated birth and
death cannot accommodate anything beyond materialistic ideas. Since King
Vena was such a man, he did not believe in the existence of God. Modern
civilization agrees with the principles of King Vena, but factually if we
scrutinizingly study all the conditions of religion, economic development,
sense gratification and liberation, we must accept the principles of the
authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. According to Vedic
literature, religion consists only of the codes of law given by God.

If one does not accept the authority of the Supreme Godhead in matters
of religion and morality, one must explain why two persons of the same
moral standard achieve different results. It is generally found that even if
two men have the same moral standards of ethics, honesty and morality,
their positions are still not the same. Similarly, in economic development it
is seen that if two men work very hard day and night, still the results are
not the same. ®ne person may enjoy great opulence without even working,
whereas another person, although working very hard, does not even get
two sufficient meals a day. Similarly, in the matter of sense gratification,
sometimes one who has sufficient food is still not happy in his family
affairs or sometimes is not even married, whereas another person, even
though not economically well off, has the greatest opportunity for sense
gratification. Even an animal like a hog or a dog may have greater oppor-
tunities for sense gratification than a human being. Aside from liberation,
even if we consider only the preliminary necessities of life—dharma, artha
and kama (religion, economic development and sense gratification)—we
will see that they are not the same for everyone. Therefore it must be
accepted that there is someone who determines the different standards. In
conclusion, not only for liberation must one depend on the Lord, but
even for ordinary necessities in this material world. Prthu Maharaja there-
fore indicated that in spite of having rich parents, children are sometimes
not happy. Similarly, in spite of valuable medicine administered by a com-
petent physician, sometimes a patient dies; or in spite of having a big safe
boat, sometimes a man drowns. We may thus struggle to counteract
impediments offered by material nature, but our attempts cannot be
successful unless we are favored by the Supreme Personality of God-
head.


--- Page 86 ---
850 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
TEXT 31
सत्यादसेवामिरचिस्तपखिना- ।
मशेषजन्मोपवितं मलं धियः ।
सद्यः क्षिणोत्यन्वहमेखती सती
यथा पदाङ्षटविनिः खता सरित्‌ ॥२१॥
yat-pada-sevabhirucis tapasvinam
adesa-janmopacitarn malar dhiyah
sadyah ksinoty anvaham ০01৫8 satt
yatha padangustha-vinihsrta sarit
yat-pada—whose lotus feet; seva—service; abhirucih—inclination; tapas-
vinam— persons undergoing severe penances; asesa—innumerable; janma—
birth; upacitam—acquire; malam—dirtiness; dhiyah— mind; sadyah—im-
mediately; ksinoti—destroys; anvaham—day after day; edhafi—increasing;
sati—being; yathd—as; padangustha—the toes of His lotus feet; vinihsrta—
emanating from; sarit— water.
TRANSLATION
By the inclination to serve the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, suffering humanity can immediately cleanse the dirt which
has accumulated in their minds during innumerable births. Like the Ganges
water which emanates from the toes of the lotus feet of the Lord, such a
process immediately cleanses the mind, and thus spiritual or Krsna con-
sciousness gradually increases.
PURPORT
In India, one can actually see that a person who takes a bath in the
Ganges waters daily is almost free from all kinds of diseases. A very
respectable brahmana in Calcutta never took a doctor’s medicine. Even
though he sometimes felt sick, he would not accept medicine from the
physician but would simply drink Ganges water, and he was always cured
within a very short time. The glories of Ganges water are known to Indians
and to ourselves also. The River Ganges flows by Calcutta. Sometimes
within the water. there are many stools and other dirty things which are
washed away from neighboring mills and factories, but still thousands of
men take baths in the Ganges water, and they are very healthy as well
as spiritually inclined. That is the effect of Ganges water. The Ganges is
glorified because it emanates from the toes of the lotus feet of the Lord.


--- Page 87 ---
Text 32] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 851
Similarly, if one takes to the service of the lotus feet of the Lord or takes
to Krsna consciousness, he is immediately cleansed of the many dirty
things which have accumulated in his innumerable births. We have seen
that in spite of the very black record of their past lives, persons who take
to Krsna consciousness very swiftly become perfectly cleansed of all
dirty things and make spiritual progress. Therefore Prthu Maharaja advises
that without the benediction of the Supreme Lord, one cannot make
advancement—either in so-called morality, economic development or sense
gratification. One should therefore take to the service of the Lord, or
Krsna consciousness, and thus very soon become a perfect man, as con-
firmed in Bhagavad-gita (ksiprarn bhavati dharmatma $asvac-chantim
nigacchati). Being a responsible king, Prthu Maharaja recommends that
everyone take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus
be immediately purified. Lord Sri Krsna also says in Bhagavad-gita that
simply by surrendering unto Him one is immediately relieved of all sinful
reactions. As Krsna takes away all the sinful reactions of a person immedi-
ately upon his surrender unto Him, similarly the external manifestation of
Krsna, the representative of Krsna who acts as the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, takes all the resultant actions of the sinful life of
the disciple immediately after the disciple’s initiation. Thus if the disciple
follows the principles instructed by the spiritual master, he remains
purified and is not contaminated by the material infection.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore stated that the spiritual master who
plays the part of Krsna’s representative has to consume all the sinful
reactions of his disciple. Sometimes a spiritual master takes the risk of
being overwhelmed by the sinful reactions of the disciples and undergoes
a sort of tribulation due to their acceptance. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
therefore advised that one not accept many disciples.

TEXT 32
दिविपताजेषणनोपतः पुमा-
FERRER |
यदङभिमूखे कृतकेतनः TAL
न॒ संदृतिं স্্রহানহা प्रपद्यते ॥२२॥
vinirdhutasesa-mano-malah puman
asanga-vijiiana-visesa-viryavian
yad-anghri-mile krta-ketanah punar
na sarmsrtim klesa-vahar prapadyate )


--- Page 88 ---
852 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21

vinirdhuta—being specifically cleansed; asesa—unlimited; manah-malah—
mental speculation or the dirt accumulated in the mind; puman—the
person;asaiiga—being disgusted; vijiana—scientifically ; visesa— particularly;
viryavan—being strengthened in bhakti-yoga; yat—whese; anighri—lotus
feet; mule—at the root of; krta-ketenah—taken shelter; punah—again; na—
never; sarmsrtim—material existence; klesa-vaham—full of miserable con-
ditions; prapadyate—takes to.

TRANSLATION

When a devotee takes shelter at the lotus feet of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, he is completely cleansed of all misunderstanding or
mental speculation, and he manifests renunciation. This is possible only
when one is strengthened by practicing bhakti-yoga. Once having taken
shelter at the root of the lotus feet of the Lord, a devotee never comes
back to this material existence, which is full of the threefold miseries.

PURPORT

As stated by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu in His Siksdstaka instructions,
by the chanting of the holy name of the Lord—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare—or by the process of hearing and chanting of the glories of the
Lord, one’s mind is gradually cleansed of all dirt. Due to our material
association since time immemorial, we have accumulated heaps of dirty
things in our minds. The total effect of this takes place when a living entity
identifies himself with his body and is thus entrapped by the stringent
laws of material nature and put into the cycle of repeated birth and death
under the false impression of bodily identification. When one is strength-
ened by practicing bhakti-yoga, his mind is cleansed of this misunder-
standing, and he is no longer interested in material existence or in sense
gratification.

Bhakti, or devotional service, is characterized by wvairagya and jaana.
Jiana refers to understanding that one is not his body, and vairagya
means disinterest in sense gratification. These two primary principles of
separation from material bondage can be realized on the strength of
bhakti-yoga. Thus when a devotee is fixed in the loving service of the
lotus feet of the Lord, he will never come back to this material existence
after quitting his body, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita by the Lord
(tyaktva 4९110001 punar janma naiti mam eti so ’rjuna).

In this verse the word wijiana is specifically important. Jiana, the
knowledge of spiritual identity that one attains when he does not consider


--- Page 89 ---
Text 33] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 853
himself to be the body, is explained in Bhagavad-gita as brahma-bhiuta,
the revival of spiritual realization. In the conditioned state of material
existence one cannot be spiritually realized because he identifies himself
materially. The understanding of the distinction between material exis-
tence and spiritual existence is called jiana. After coming to the platform
of jiana, or the brahma-bhuta state, one ultimately comes to devotional
service, in which he completely understands his own position and the
position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This understanding is
explained here as vijiidna-visesa. The Lord says, therefore, that knowledge
of Him is vijiidna, science. In other words, when one is strengthened by
scientific knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his position
of liberation is guaranteed. In Bhagavad-gita also, the science of devotional
service is described as pratyaksavagamar dharmyam, direct understanding
of the principles of religion by realization (Bg. 9.2).

By practicing bhakti-yoga, one can directly perceive his advancement in
spiritual life. In other practices—like karma-yoga, jiana-yoga and dhyana-
yoga—one may not be confident about his progress, but in bhakti-yoga
one can become directly aware of his progress in spiritual life, just as a
person who eats can understand that his hunger is satisfied. Our false
appetite for enjoyment and lordship of the material world is due to a
prominence of passion and ignorance. By bhakti-yoga these two qualities
are diminished, and one becomes situated in the mode of goodness.
Gradually - surpassing the mode of goodness, one is situated in pure
goodness, which is not contaminated by the material qualities. When thus
situated, a devotee no longer has any doubts; he knows that he will not
come back to this material world.

i TEXT 33

तमेव यूथं मजतात्मष्ततिभि-
मनोवचःकायगुणैः खक्ममिः |
अमायिनः कामदुषाङधिपङ्कजं
यथाधिकारावसिता्सिद्धयः 13211
tam eva yityarn bhajatatma-vrttibhir
mano-vacah-kaya-gunaih sva-karmabhih
amayinah kama-dughanghri-pankajam
yathadhikaravasitartha-siddhayah

tem—unto Him; eva—certainly; yuyam—all you citizens; bhajata—wor-

ship; atma—own; vrttibhih—occupational duty; manah—mind; vacah—


--- Page 90 ---
854. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
words; kaya—body; gunaih—by the particular qualities; sva-karmabhih—by
occupational duties; amayinah—without reservation; kama-dugha—ful-
filling all desires; anghri-panikajam—the lotus feet; yatha—as far as; adhi-
kara—ability; avasita-artha—fully convinced of one’s interest; siddhayah—
satisfaction.
TRANSLATION

Prthu Maharaja advised his citizens: Engaging your minds, your words,
your bodies and the results of your occupational duties, and being always
open-minded, you should all render devotional service to the Lord.
According to your abilities and the occupations in which you are
situated, you should engage your service at the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead with full confidence and without reservation.
Then surely you will be successful in achieving the final objective in
your lives. PURPORT

As stated in the Eighteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, sva-karmana tam
abhyarcya: one has to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead by his
occupational duties. This necessitates accepting the principle of four
varnas and four asramas. Prthu Maharaja therefore says, gunaih sva-
karmabhih. This phrase is explained in Bhagavad-gita. Cdatur-varpyam
maya srstarh guna-karma-vibhagasah: “The four castes (the brahmanas,
ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras) are created by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead according to the material modes of nature and the particular
duties discharged in those modes.” A person who is situated in the mode
of goodness is certainly more intelligent than others. Therefore he can
practice the brahminical activities—namely, speaking the truth, controlling
the senses, controlling the mind, remaining always clean, practicing
tolerance, having full knowledge about one’s self-identity, and under-
standing devotional service. In this way, if he engages himself in the
loving service of the Lord as an actual brahmana, his aim to achieve the
final interest of life is attained. Similarly, the ksatriya’s duties are to give
protection to the citizens, to give all his possessions in charity, to be
strictly Vedic in the management of state affairs, and to be unafraid to
fight whenever there is an attack by enemies. In this way, a ksatriya can
satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead by his occupational duties.
Similarly, a vai§ya can satisfy the Supreme Godhead by properly executing
his occupational duties—engaging himself in producing foodstuffs, giving
protection to cows, and trading if necessary when there is an excess of
agricultural production. Similarly, because they do not have ample


--- Page 91 ---
Text 33] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 855
intelligence, sudras should simply engage as workers to serve the higher
statuses of social life. Everyone’s aim should be to satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by engaging his mind in thinking always of Krsna,
his words in always offering prayers to the Lord or preaching about the
glories of the Lord, and his body in executing the service required to
satisfy the Lord. As there are four divisions within our body—the head,
the arms, the belly and the legs—similarly, human society, taken as a
whole, is divided into four classes of men according to their material
qualities and occupational duties. Thus the brahminical or intelligent men
have to execute the duty of the head, the ksatriyas must fulfill the duty of
the arms, the vaisya class must fulfill the duty of the belly, and the sudras
must fulfill the duty of the legs. In executing the prescribed duties of life,
no one is higher or lower, for although there are such divisions as higher
and lower, since there is actually a common interest—to satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead—there are no distinctions between them.

The question may be raised that since the Lord is supposed to be wor-
shiped by great demigods like Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and others, how
can an ordinary human being on this planet serve Him? This is clearly
explained by Prthu Maharaja by the use of the word yathadhikara, “‘accord-
ing to one’s ability.” If one sincerely executes his occupational duty, that
will be sufficient. One does not need to become like Lord Brahma, Lord
Siva, Indra, Lord Caitanya or Ramanujacarya, whose capabilities are cer-
tainly far above ours. Even 8 sudra, who is in the lowest stage of life
according to the material qualities, can achieve the same success. Anyone
can become successful in devotional service provided he displays no
duplicity. It is explained here that one must be very frank and open-
minded (amayinah). To be situated in a lower status of life is not a dis-
qualification for success in devotional service. The only qualification is
that whether one is a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya or sudra, he must be
open, frank and free from reservations. Then, by performing his particular
occupational duty under the guidance of a proper spiritual master, he can
achieve the highest success in life. As confirmed by the Lord Himself,
striyo vaisyas tatha sudras te pi yanti param gatim (Bg. 9.32). It does not
matter what one is, whether a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, का or a de-
graded woman. If he engages himself seriously in devotional service, work-
ing with body, mind and intelligence, he is sure to be successful in going
back home, back to Godhead. The Lord’s lotus feet are described here as
kama-dughanghri-paitkajam because they have all power to fulfill the de-
sires of everyone. A devotee is happy even in this life because—although in


--- Page 92 ---
856 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
material existence we have many needs—all his material needs are satisfied,
and when he at last quits his body, he goes back home, back to Godhead,
without a doubt.
TEXT 34
असाविहानेकगुणोऽगुणोऽष्वरः
एृथग्विषद्रन्यगुणक्रियोक्तिमिः।
सम्पद्यतेऽ्याशयणिङ्गनाममि-
वंशदविज्ञनषनः खरूपतः 1380
asav thaneka-guno ‘guno ’dhvarah
prthag-vidha-dravya-guna-kriyoktibhih
sampadyate ’rthasaya-linga-namabhir
visuddha-vijiana-ghanah svarapatah
asau—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iha— in this material world;
aneka—various; gunah—qualities; agupah—transcendental ; adhvarah—yajiia;
prthak - vidha — varieties; dravya — physical elements; guna — ingredients;
kriya—performances; uktibhih—by chanting different mantras; sampad-
yate—is worshiped;artha—interest;asaya—purpose;linga—form;namabhih—
name; visuddha—without contamination; vijidna—science; ghanah—con-
centrated; svaritpatah—in His own form.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is transcendental and not contami-
nated by this material world. But although He is concentrated spirit soul
without material variety, for the benefit of the conditioned soul He never-
theless accepts different types of sacrifice performed with various material
elements, ritual and mantras and offered to the demigods under different
names according to the interests and purposes of the performers.
PURPORT
For material prosperity there are recommendations in the Vedas for
various types of yajia (sacrifice). In Bhagavad-gita (3.10) it is confirmed
that Lord Brahma created all living entities, including human beings and
demigods, and advised them to perform yajiia according to their material
desires (saha-yajiiah prajah srstva). These performances are called yajiias
because their ultimate goal is to satisfy the Supreme Personality of God-
head Visnu. The purpose of performing yajias is to get material benefit,
but because the aim is to simultaneously satisfy the Supreme Lord, such
yajiias have been recommended in the Vedas. Such performances are, of


--- Page 93 ---
Text 34] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 857
course, known as karma-kapda or material activities, and all material
activities are certainly contaminated by the three modes of material
nature. Generally the karma-kanda ritualistic ceremonies are performed
in the mode of passion, yet the conditioned souls, both human beings and
demigods, are obliged to perform these yajiias because without them one
cannot be happy at all.

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that these karma-kanda
ritualistic ceremonies, although contaminated, contain touches of devo-
tional service because whenever there is a performance of any yajita Lord
Visnu is given a central position. This is very important because even a
little endeavor to please Lord Visnu is bhakti and is of great value. A
tinge of bhakti purifies the material nature of the performances, which by
devotional service gradually come to the transcendental position. There-
fore although such yajiias are superficially material activities, the results
are transcendental. Such yajiias as Siirya-yajiia, Indra-yajiia, Candra-yajia,
etc., are performed in the names of the demigods, but these demigods are
bodily parts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The demigods can-
not accept sacrificial offerings for themselves, but they can accept them
for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as a departmental tax
collector of a government cannot collect taxes for his personal account
but can realize them for the government. Any yajiia performed with this
complete knowledge and understanding is described in Bhagavad-gita as
brahmarpanam, or a sacrifice offered to the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Since no one but the Supreme Lord can enjoy the results of sacrifice,
the Lord says that He is the actual enjoyer of all sacrifices (bhoktaram
yajiia-tapasam sarva-loka-mahesvaram). Sacrifices should be performed with
this view in mind. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:

brahmarpanari brahma havir
brahmagnau brahmana hutam
brahmaiva tena gantavyar
brahma-karma-samadhina
“A person who is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness is sure to attain
the spiritual kingdom because of his full contribution to spiritual activities
in which the consummation is absolute and that which is offered is of the
same spiritual nature.” (Bg. 4.24) The performer of sacrifices must always
keep in view that the sacrifices mentioned in the Vedas are meant to satis-
fy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Visnur aradhyate pantha (Visnu
Purana 3.8.9). Anything material or spiritual done for the satisfaction of
the Supreme Lord is understood to be an actual yajiia, and by performing


--- Page 94 ---
858 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
such yajiias one gets liberation from material bondage. The direct method
of getting liberation from material bondage is devotional service, compris-
ing the nine following methods:
$ravaparn 10070071011) visnoh smaranarh pada-sevanam
৫1700710118 vandanam dasyarm sakhyam atma-nivedanam
(Bhag. 7.5.23)

This ninefold process is described in this verse as visSuddha-vijiana-ghanah,
or satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly by transcen-
dental knowledge concentrated on the form of the Supreme Lord Visnu.
This is the best method for satisfying the Supreme Lord. One who cannot
take to this direct process, however, should take the indirect process of
performing yajitas for the satisfaction of Visnu or Yajiia. Visnu is therefore
called yajiia-pati. Sriyah patin: yajiia-patin jagat-patim. (Bhag. 2.9.15)

The Supreme Personality of Godhead’s deep scientific knowledge is
concentrated to the supreme point. For example, medical science knows
some things superficially, but the doctors do not know exactly how things
happen in the body. Lord Krsna, however, knows everything in detail.
Therefore His knowledge is vijiana-ghana because it does not have any of
the defects of material science. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
visuddha-vijiiana-ghana, concentrated transcendental knowledge; therefore,
even though He accepts karma-kandiya materialistic yajiias, He always
remains in a transcendental position. Therefore, the mention of aneka-guna
refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s many transcendental
qualities, for He is not affected by the material qualities. The different
kinds of material paraphernalia or physical elements are also gradually
transformed into spiritual understanding because ultimately there is no
difference between material and spiritual qualities, for everything emanates
from the Supreme Spirit. This is realized by a gradual process of realiza-
tion and purification. One vivid example of this is Dhruva Maharaja, who
took to meditation in the forest to achieve material benefit but ultimately
became spiritually advanced and did not want any benediction for material
profit. He was simply satisfied with the association of the Supreme Lord.
Adaya means determination. Generally a conditioned soul has the determi-
nation for material profit, but when these desires for material profit are
satisfied through performance of yajiia, one gradually achieves the spiritual
platform. Then his life becomes perfect. Srimad-Bhagavatam therefore
recommends:

akamah sarva-kamo va moksa-kama udaradhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena yajeta purusam param. (Bhag. 2.3.10)


--- Page 95 ---
Text 35] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 859
Everyone—whether akama (a devotee), sarva-kama (a karmi), or moksa-
kama (a jaan? or yogr)—is encouraged to worship the Supreme Personality
of Godhead by the direct method of devotional service. In this way one
can get both material and spiritual profit simultaneously.
TEXT 35
प्रधानकाराश्षयधमेसंग्र
शरीर एष प्रतिपद्य चेतनाम्‌ |
करियाफटत्वेन विशविंमान्यते
यथानलो दारुषु तद्गुणात्मकः 113411
pradhana-kalasaya-dharma-sangrahe
$arira esa pratipadya cetanam
kriya-phalatvena vibhur vibhavyate
yathanalo darusu lad-gupatmakah
pradhana—material nature; kale—time; asaya—desire; dharma—occu-
pational duties; sanigrahe—aggregate; sarire—body ; esah—this; pratipadya—
accepting; cetanam—consciousness; kriya—activities; phalatvena—by the
result of; vibhuh—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vibhavyate—
manifested; yatha—as much as; analah—fire; darusu—in the wood; tat-guna
atmakah— according to shape and quality.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-pervading, but He is also
manifested in different types of bodies which arise from a combination
of material nature, time, desires and occupational duties. Thus different
types of consciousness develop, just as fire, which is always basically the
same, blazes in different ways according to the shape and dimension of
firewood.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead constantly lives with the individual
soul as Paramatma. The individual soul has awareness in accord with his
material body, which he attains by virtue of prakrti or material nature. The
material ingredients are activated by force of time, and thus the three
material modes of nature are manifested. According to his association
with the three modes of nature, the living entity develops a particular
type of body. In animal life, the material mode of ignorance is so
prominent that there is very little chance of realizing the Paramatma, who


--- Page 96 ---
860 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
is also present within the heart of the animal; but in the human form of
life, because of developed consciousness (cetanam), one can be transferred
from ignorance and passion to goodness by the results of his activities
(kriya-phalatvena). A human being is therefore advised to associate with
spiritually advanced personalities. The Vedas give the direction tad-
viji@nartham sa gurum evabhigacchet: in order to reach the perfection of
life or to understand the real constitutional position of the living entity,
one must approach the spiritual master. (Mundaka Up. 1.2.12) Gurum eva-
bhigacchet—one must; it is not optional. It is imperative that one approach
the spiritual master, for by such association one proportionately develops
his consciousness towards the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
highest perfection of such consciousness is called Krsna consciousness.
According to the body given by prakrti, or nature, one’s consciousness is
present; according to the development of consciousness, one’s activities
are performed; and according to the purity of such activities, one realizes
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is present in everyone’s heart.
The example given herein is very appropriate. Fire is always the same, but
according to the size of the fuel or burning wood, the fire appears to be
straight, curved, small, big, etc.

According to the development of consciousness, God realization is
present. In the human form of life it is recommended, therefore, that one
undergo the different types of penances and austerities described in
Bhagavad-gita (karma-yoga, jiana-yoga, dhyana-yoga and bhakti-yoga).
Like a staircase, yoga has different steps for reaching the topmost floor,
and according to one’s position upon the staircase, he is understood to be
situated in karma-yoga, jiana-yoga, dhyana-yoga or bhakti-yoga. Of
course, bhakti-yoga is the topmost step on the staircase of realization of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, according to one’s
development in consciousness, one realizes spiritual identity, and thus
when one’s existential position is purified fully, he becomes situated in
brahmananda, which is ultimately unlimited. Therefore the sankirtana
movement contributed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Lord
Caitanya is the direct and easiest process for coming to the purest form of
consciousness—Krsna consciousness, the platform on which the Supreme
Personality is fully realized. Directions for performing different types of
yajias are specifically arranged for the highest realization of the Supreme
Lord, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita by the Lord Himself. Ye yatha marh
pradadyante tarivs tathaiva bhajamy aham (Bg. 4.11). The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is realized according to the proportion of one’s
surrender. Full surrender, however, occurs when a man is perfectly in
knowledge. 09012071077 janmandm ante jidnavan mam prapadyate (Bg. 7.19).


--- Page 97 ---
Text 36] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 861
TEXT 36
अहो ममामी वितरन्त्यनुग्रहं
दरिं गुरं यज्ञजापधीश्वरम्‌ ।
~
सखधर्मेयोगेन यजन्ति मामका
निरन्तरं श्लोणितले হত্যাঃ naa
aho mamami vitaranty anugraham
harim gurum yajia-bhujam adhi$varam
sva-dharma-yogena yajanti mamaka
nirantaram ksoni-tale drdha-vratah
aho—O all of you; mama—unto me; ami—all of them; vitaranti—dis-
tributing; anugraham—mercy; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
gurum—the supreme spiritual master; yajia-bhujam—all the demigods
eligible to accept yajia offering; adhiSvaram—the supreme master; sva-
dharma—occupational duties; yogena—by dint of; yajanti— worship; mama-
kah—having a relationship with me; nirantaram—incessantly; ksoni-tale—
on the surface of the globe; drdha-vratah— with firm determination.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master and enjoyer of the
results of all sacrifices, and He is the supreme spiritual master as well. All
of you citizens on the surface of the globe who have a relationship
with me and are worshiping Him by dint of your occupational duties are
bestowing your mercy upon me. Therefore, O my citizens, I thank you.
PURPORT
Maharaja Prthu’s advice to his citizens to take to devotional service is
now concluded in two ways. He has repeatedly advised persons who are
neophytes to engage themselves in devotional service according to the
capacities of the different orders of social and spiritual life, but here he
specifically thanks those who are already engaged in such devotional
service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is actually the enjoyer
of all sacrificial ceremonies and who is also the supreme teacher as
antaryami or Paramatma. There is specific mention of the word gurum,
which indicates the Supreme Personality as citta-guru. The Supreme
Godhead in His Paramatma feature is present in everyone’s heart, and He
is always trying to induce the individual soul to surrender unto Him and to
engage in devotional service; therefore He is the original spiritual master.
He manifests Himself as spiritual master both internally and externally to


--- Page 98 ---
862 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
help the conditioned soul both ways. Therefore He has been mentioned
herein as gurum. IL appears, however, that in the time of Maharaja Prthu
all the people on the surface of the globe were his subjects. Most of them—
in fact, almost all of them—were engaged in devotional service. Therefore
he thanked them in a humble way for engaging in devotional service and
thus bestowing their mercy upon him. In other words, in a state where the
citizens and the head of state are engaged in devotional service unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they help one another and are
mutually benefited.
TEXT 37
मा जातु तेजः प्रमकेन्मददधिभि-
स्तितिश्षया तपसा विद्या च ।
देदीप्यमानेऽजितदेकतानां
कृले खयं राजङ्लाद्‌ द्विजानाम्‌ ॥ ३७।
ma jatu tejah prabhaven maharddhibhis ,
titiksaya tapasa vidyaya ca
dedipyamane ’jita-devatanarn
kule 500) 018 raja-kulad dvijanam
ma—never do it; jatu—at any time; tejah—supreme power; prabhavet—
exhibit; maha—great; rddhibhih—by opulence; titiksaya—by tolerance;
tapasa—penance; vidyaya—by education; ca—also; dedipyamane—upon
those who are already glorified; ajita-devatanam—Vaisnavas, or the devotees
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kule—in the society; svayam—
personally; raja-kulat—greater than the royal family; dvijjanam—of the
brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
The brahmanas and Vaignavas are personally glorified by their charac-
teristic powers of tolerance, penance, knowledge and education. By dint
of all these spiritual assets, Vaisnavas are more powerful than royalty.
It is therefore advised that the princely order not exhibit its material
prowess before these two communities and should avoid offending them.
PURPORT
Prthu Maharaja has explained in the previous verse the importance of
devotional service for both the rulers and the citizens of the state. Now
he explains how one can be steadily fixed in devotional service. Sri


--- Page 99 ---
Text 37] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 863
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, while instructing Srila Ripa Gosvami, has compared
the devotional service of the Lord with a creeper. A creeper has a feeble
stem and requires the support of another tree to grow, and while growing,
it requires sufficient protection so that it may not be lost. While describing
the system of protection for the creeper of devotional service, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu has especially stressed protection from offenses unto the
lotus feet of Vaisnavas. This is called vaisnavaparadha. Aparadha means
offense. If one commits vaisnavaparadha, all of his progress in devotional
service will be checked. Even though one is very much advanced in
devotional service, if he commits offenses at the feet of a Vaignava, his
advancement is all spoiled. In the sastras it is found that a very great
yogi, Durvasa Muni, committed vaisnavaparadha, and thus for one full
year had to travel all over the universe, even to Vaikunthaloka, to defend
himself from the offense. At last, even when he approached the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in Vaikuntha, he was refused protection. Therefore
one should be very careful about committing offenses at the feet of a
Vaispava. The most grievous type of wvaisnavaparadha is called gurv-
aparadha, which refers to offenses at the lotus feet of the spiritual master.
In the chanting of the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
this gurv-aparadha is considered the most grievous offense. Guror कण्ण नरद
sruti-sastra-nindanam (Padma Purana). Among the ten offenses committed
against the chanting of the holy name, the first offenses are disobedience
of the spiritual master and blasphemy of the Vedic literature.

The simple definition of “‘Vaispava” is given by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu: a person who immediately reminds one of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is a Vaisnava. In this verse, both Vaisnavas
and brahmanas are mentioned. A Vaisnava is a learned brahmana and is
therefore designated as brahmana-vaisnava, brahmana-pandita or as a
Vaisnava and brahmana. In other words, a Vaisnava is supposed to be a
brahmana already, but a brahmana may not be a pure Vaisnava. When a
person understands his pure identity, brahma janati, he immediately
becomes a brahmana. In the brahmana stage, one’s understanding of the
Absolute Truth is mainly based on the impersonal view. When a brahmana,
however, rises to the platform of personal understanding of the Supreme
Godhead, he becomes a ७ 815114५३. A ७ 815118५३ is transcendental even to a
brahmana. In the material conception, the position of a brahmana is the
highest in human society, but a Vaignava is transcendental even to a
brahmana. Both the brahmana and Vaignava are spiritually advanced. A
brahmana’s qualifications are mentioned in Bhagavad-gita as truthfulness,
mental equanimity, control of the senses, the power of tolerance, sim-


--- Page 100 ---
864 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
plicity, knowledge of the Absolute Truth, firm faith in the scriptures, and
practical application of the brahminical qualities in life. In addition to all
these qualifications, when one fully engages in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, he becomes a Vaisnava. Prthu Maharaja warns his
citizens who are actually engaged in the devotional service of the Lord to
take care against offenses to the brahmanas and Vaisnavas. Offenses at
their lotus feet are so destructive that even the descendants of Yadu who
were born in the family of Lord Krsna were destroyed due to offenses at
their feet. The Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot tolerate any
offense at the lotus feet of brahmanas and Vaisnavas. Sometimes, due to
their powerful positions, princes or government servants neglect the
positions of brahmanas and Vaisnavas, not knowing that because of their
offense they will be ruined.
TEXT 38
ज्ह्मण्यदेवः पुरुषः पुरातनो
नित्यं हरि्थचरणाभिवन्दनात्‌ |
अवाप लक्ष्मीमनपायिनीं यो
जगत्पवित्रं च महलमाग्रणीः ॥३८॥
brahmanya-devah purusah puratano
nityam harir yac-caranabhivandanat
avapa laksmim anapayinim yaso
jagat-pavitramh ca mahattamagranth

brahmanya-devah—the Lord of the brahminical culture; purusah—the
Supreme Personality; puratanah—the oldest; nityam—eternal; harih—
Personality of Godhead; yat—whose; carapa—lotus feet; abhivandanat—by
means of worshiping; avapa—obtained; laksmim— opulences; anapayinim—
perpetually; yasah—reputation; jagat—universal; pavitram—purified; ca—
also; mahat—great; tama—supreme; agranth—foremost.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the ancient, eternal Godhead who
is foremost amongst all great personalities, obtained the opulence of His
staunch reputation, which purifies the entire universe, by worshiping the
lotus feet of those brahmanas and Vaignavas.

PURPORT

The Supreme Person is described herein as brahmanya-deva. Brahmanya

refers to the brahmanas, the Vaisnavas or the brahminical culture,


--- Page 101 ---
Text 38] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu , 865
and deva means ‘“‘worshipable Lord.” Therefore unless one is on the
transcendental platform of being a Vaisnava, or on the highest platform
of material goodness (as a brahmana ), he cannot appreciate the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In the lower stages of ignorance and passion, it is
difficult to appreciate or understand the Supreme Lord. Therefore the
Lordis described herein as the worshipable Deity for persons in brahminical
and Vaisnava culture.
namo brahmapya-devaya go-brahmana-hitaya ca
Jjagad-dhitaya krsndya govinddya namo namah
(Visnu Purana 1.19.65)

Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the prime protector
of brahminical culture and the cow. Without knowing and respect-
ing these, one cannot realize the science of God, and without this
knowledge, any welfare activities or humanitarian propaganda cannot be
successful. The Lord is purusa, or the supreme enjoyer. Not only is He the
enjoyer when He appears as a manifested incarnation, but He is the enjoyer
since time immemorial, from the very beginning (puratana), and eternally
(nityam). Yac-caranabhivandanat: Prthu Maharaja said that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead attained this opulence of eternal fame simply by
worshiping the lotus feet of the brahmanas. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that
the Lord does not need to work to achieve material gain. Since He is
perpetually supremely perfect, He does not need to obtain anything, but
still it is said that He obtained His opulences by worshiping the lotus
feet of the brahmanas. These are His exemplary actions. When Lord Sri
Krsna was in Dvaraka, He offered His respects by bowing down at the
lotus feet of Narada. When Sudama Vipra came to His house, Lord Krsna
personally washed his feet and gave him a seat on His personal bed. Al-
though He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna
offered His respects to Maharaja Yudhisthira and Kunti. The Lord's
exemplary behavior is to teach us. We should learn from His personal
behavior how to give protection to the cow, how to cultivate brahminical
qualities, and how to respect the brahmanas and the Vaisnavas. The Lord
says in Bhagavad-gita, yad yad acarati Sresthas tat tad evetaro janah: “If
the leading personalities behave in a certain manner, others follow them
automatically.” (Bg. 3.21) Who can be more of a leading personality than
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and whose behavior could be more
exemplary? It is not that He needed to do all these things to acquire
material gain, but all of these acts were performed just to teach us how to
behave in this material world.


--- Page 102 ---
866 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described herein as mahattama-
agranih. Within this material world, the mahattamas or great personalities
are Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, but He is above them all. Narayapah
paro vyaktat: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is in a transcendental
position, above everything that is created within this material world.
His opulence, His riches, His beauty, His wisdom, His knowledge, His
renunciation and His reputation are all jagat-pavitram, universally purifying.
The more we discuss His opulences, the more the universe becomes purer
and purer. In the material worid, the opulences possessed by a material
person are never fixed. Today one may be a very rich man, but tomorrow
he may become poor; today one is very famous, but tomorrow he may be
infamous. Materially obtained opulences are never fixed, but all six
opulences perpetually exist in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not
only in the spiritual world but also in this material world. Lord Krsna’s
reputationis fixed, and His book of wisdom, Bhagavad-gita, is still honored.
Everything pertaining to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternally
existing.
TEXT 39
यत्सेयारेषगुहाशखः खराड
दिप्प्रियस्तुष्यति काममीश्वरः |
5
तदेव aga विनीतैः
सर्वात्मना ब्रह्मकुलं निषेव्यताम्‌ ।२९॥
yat-sevayasesa-guhasayah sva-rad
vipra-priyas tusyati kamam svarah
tad eva tad-dharma-parair vinitaih
sarvatmana brahma-kulam nisevyatam
yat—whose; sevaya—by serving; asesa—unlimited; guha-asayah— dwelling
within the heart of everyone; sva-rat—but still fully independent; vipra-
priyah—very dear to the brahmanas and ४ ३1518५85; tusyati—becomes satis-
fied; kamam—of desires; $varah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat—
that; eva—certainly; tat-dharma-paraih—by following in the footsteps of
the Lord; vinitaih—by humbleness; sarvatmana—in all respects; brahma-
kulam—the descendants of brahmanas and Vaisnavas; nisevyatam—always
being engaged in their service.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is everlastingly independent
and who exists in everyone’s heart, is very pleased with those who follow


--- Page 103 ---
Text 40] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 867
in His footsteps and engage without reservation in the service of the
descendants of brahmanas and Vaignavas. For He is always dear to
brahmanas and Vaignavas, and they are always dear to Him.
PURPORT
It is said that the Lord is most pleased when He sees one engage in the
service of His devotee. He does not need any service from anyone because
He is complete, but it is in our own interest to offer all kinds of services
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. These services can be offered
to the Supreme Person not directly but through the service of brahmanas
and Vaignavas. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura sings, chadiya vaisnava-seva
nistara payeche keba, which means that unless one serves the Vaignavas
and brahmanas, one cannot get liberation from the material clutches.
Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura also says, yasya prasadad bhagavat-
prasadah: by satisfying the senses of the spiritual master one can satisfy
the senses of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus this behavior is
not only mentioned in scriptures but also followed by acaryas. Prthu
Maharaja advised his citizens to follow the exemplary behavior of the Lord
Himself and thus engage in the service of brahmanas and Vaisnavas.
TEXT 40
पु्मोहभेतानतिवेरमात्मनः
TREAT TH खतः खयम्‌ |
यन्नित्यसम्बन्धनिषेवया ततः
परं किमत्रास्ति ge दविश्चैजाम्‌ ॥४०।
pumal labhetanativelam atmanah
prasidato ‘tyanta-§amam svatah svayam
yan-nitya-sambandha-nisevaya tatah ध
param kim atrasti mukham havir-bhujam
puman—a person; labheta—can achieve; anativelam—without delay;
atmanah—of his soul; prastdatah—being satisfied; atyanta—the greatest;
samam—peacefulness; svatah—automatically; svayam—personally; yat—
whose; nitya—regular; sambandha—relationship; nisevaya—by dint of
service; tatah—after that; param—superior; kim—what; atra—here; asti—
there is; mukham—happiness; havih—clarified butter; bhujam—those who
drink.
TRANSLATION
By regular service to the brahmanas and Vaisnavas, one can clear the
dirt from his heart and thus enjoy supreme peace and liberation from


--- Page 104 ---
868 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
material attachment and be satisfied. In this world there is no fruitive
activity superior to serving the brahmana class, for this can bring pleasure
to the demigods for whom the many sacrifices are recommended.
PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita it is said: prasade sarva-duhkhanam hanir asyopajayate
(Bg. 2.65). Unless one is self-satisfied, he cannot be free from the miserable
conditions of material existence. Therefore it is essential to render service
to the brahmanas and Vaispavas to achieve the perfection of self-
satisfaction. Srila Narottama dasa Thikura therefore says:

tandera carana sevi bhakta-sane vasa
Jjaname janame haya, ei abhilasa

“Birth after birth I desire to serve the lotus feet of the acaryas and live in
a society of devotees.” A spiritual atmosphere can be maintained only by
living in a society of devotees and by serving the orders of the acaryas.
The spiritual master is the best brahmana. At present, in the age of Kali, it
is very difficult to render service to the brahmana-kula or the brahmana
class. The difficulty, according to the Varaha Purana, is that demons, taking
advantage of Kali-yuga, have taken birth in brahmana families. Raksasah
kalim asritya jayante brahma-yonisu (Varaha Purana). In other words, in
this age there are many so-called caste brahmanas and caste Gosvamis who,
taking advantage of the sastra and of the innocence of people in general,
claim to be brahmapas and Vaisnavas by hereditary right. One will not
derive any benefit by rendering service to such false brahmana-kulas. One
must therefore take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master and his associates
and should also render service to them, for such activity will greatly help
the neophyte in attaining full satisfaction. This has been very clearly
explained by Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura in his explanation of
the verse vyavasayatmika buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana (Bg. 2.41). By
actually following the regulated principles of bhakti-yoga as recommended
by Srila Narottama dasa Thakura, one can very quickly come to the tran-
scendental platform of liberation, as explained in this verse (atyanta-
samam). The particular use of the word anativelam (“without delay”) is
very significant because simply by serving brahmanas and Vaisnavas one
can get liberation. There is no need to undergo severe penances and
austerities. The vivid example of this is Narada Muni himself. In his
previous birth, he was simply a maidservant’s son, but he got the
opportunity to serve exalted brahmanas and Vaisnavas, and thus in his


--- Page 105 ---
Text 41] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 869
next life he not only became liberated but became famous as the supreme
spiritual master of the entire Vaisnava disciplic succession. According to
the Vedic system, therefore, it is customarily recommended that after
performing a ritualistic ceremony, one should feed the brahmanas.
TEXT 41
अश्नात्यनन्तः TF ATH:
श्रद्धाहुतं यन्धुख इज्यनामभिः |
<Q
न নী तथा चेतनया বমহিচ্তল
. (9
স্কুবাহাল ঘামেহ্াঘয হাঃ 119201
asnaty anantah khalu tattva-kovidaih
§raddha-hutarn yan-mukha ijya-namabhih
na vai tatha cetanaya bahiskrte
hutasane paramaharmsya-paryaguh
asnati—eats; anantah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; khalu—
nevertheless; tattva-kovidaih—persons who are in knowledge of the Abso-
lute Truth; sSraddha—faith; hutam— offering fire sacrifices; yat-mukhe—
whose mouth; ijya-namabhih—by different names of demigods; na—never;
vai—certainly; tatha—as much; cetanaya—by living force; bahiskrte—being
bereft of; huta-asane—in the fire sacrifice; paramahamsya—regarding
devotees; paryaguh—never goes away.
TRANSLATION
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Ananta, eats through
the fire sacrifices offered in the names of the different demigods, He does
not take as much pleasure in eating through fire as He does in accepting
offerings through the mouths of learned sages and devotees, for then He
does not leave the association of devotees.
PURPORT
According to Vedic injunctions, a fire sacrifice is held in order to give
food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the names of the different
demigods. While performing a fire sacrifice, one pronounces the word svaha
in mantras such as indraya svahd and aditydya svihd. These mantras are
uttered to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead through demigods
such as Indra and Aditya, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead says:
71611077 tisthami vaikunthe yogindari hrdayesu va
tattat tisthami narada yatra gayanti mad-bhaktah


--- Page 106 ---
870 Stimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
“I am not in Vaikuntha nor in the hearts of the yogis. I remain where My
devotees engage in glorifying My activities.” It is to be understood that
the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not leave the company of His
devotees.

Fire is certainly devoid of life, but devotees and brahmanas are the liv-
ing representatives of the Supreme Lord. Therefore to feed brahmanas and
Vaignavas is to feed the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly. It may
be concluded that instead of offering fire sacrifices, one should offer food-
stuffs to brahmanas and Vaisnavas, for that process is more effective than
fire yajia. The vivid example of this principle in action was given by
Advaita Prabhu. When he performed the sraddha ceremony for his father,
he first of all called Haridasa Thakura and offered him food. It is the prac-
tice that after finishing the sraddha ceremony, one should offer food to an
elevated brahmana. But Advaita Prabhu offered food first to Haridasa
Thakura, who had taken his birth in a Mohammedan family. Therefore
Haridasa Thakura asked Advaita Prabhu why he was doing something
which might jeopardize his position in brahmana society. Advaita Prabhu
replied that he was feeding millions of first-class brahmanas by offering
the food to Haridasa Thakura. He was prepared to talk with any learned
brahmana on this point aid prove definitely that by offering food to a
pure devotee like Haridasa Thakura, he was equally as blessed as he would
have been by offering food Lo thousands of learned brahmanas. When per-
forming sacrifices, one offers oblations to the sacrificial fire, but when such
oblations are offered to Vaisnavas, they are certainly more effective.

TEXT 42
we नित्यं विरजं सनातनं
श्रद्धातपोमङ्गलमीनसंयमेः ।
समाधिना बिभ्रति aed
यत्रेदमादञं इवावभासते ॥४२॥
yad brahma nityarm पावक sanatanarn
$raddha-tapo-mangala-mauna-sarmyamaih
samadhina bibhrati hartha-drstaye
yatredam adarsa ivavabhasate

yat—that which; brahma—the brahminical culture; nityam—eternally;
virajam— without contamination; sanatanam—without beginning; sraddha—
faith; tapah—austerity; mangala—auspicious; mauna—silence; sarmyamaih—
controlling the mind and senses; samadhina—with full concentration;


--- Page 107 ---
Text 42] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 871
bibhrati—illuminates; ha—as he did it; artha—the real purpose of the Vedas:
drstaye—for the purpose of finding out; yatra—wherein; idam—all this;
adarse—in a mirror; iva—like; avabhasate— manifests.
TRANSLATION

In brahminical culture a brahmana’s transcendental position is eternally
maintained because the injunctions of the Vedas are accepted with faith,
austerity, scriptural conclusions, full sense and mind control and medita-
tion. In this way the real goal of life is illuminated, just as one’s face in a
clear mirror is fully reflected.

PURPORT

Since it is described in the previous verse that feeding a living brahmana
is more effective than offering oblations in a fire sacrifice, in this verse it is
now clearly described what brahminism is and who a brehmana is. In the
age of Kali, taking advantage of the fact that by feeding a brahmana one
obtains a more effective result than by performing sacrifices, a class of
men with no brahminical qualifications claim the eating privilege known
as brahmana-bhojana simply on the basis of their births in brahmana fami-
lies. In order to distinguish this class of men from the real brahmanas,
Maharaja Prthu is giving an exact description of a brahmana and brahmini-
cal culture. One should not take advantage of his position simply to live
like a fire without light. A brahmana must be fully conversant with the
Vedic conclusion, which is described in Bhagavad-gita. Vedais ca sarvair
aham eva vedyah. (Bg. 15.15) The Vedic conclusion—the ultimate under-
standing, or Vedanta understanding—is knowledge of Krsna. Actually that
is a fact because simply by understanding Krsna as He is, as described in
Bhagavad-gita (janma karma ca me divyam evari yo vetti tattvatah), one
becomes a perfect brahmana. The brahmana who knows Krsna perfectly
well is always in a transcendental position. This is also confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita:

mam ca yo vyabhicarena bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhuyaya kalpate

“One who engages in full devotional service and who does not fall down in
any circumstance at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus
comes to the level of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26)

Therefore a devotee of Lord Krsna is actually a perfect brahmana. His
situation is transcendental, for he is free from the four defects of condi-


--- Page 108 ---
872 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
tional life, which are the tendencies to commit mistakes, to be illusioned,
to cheat and to possess imperfect senses. A perfect Vaisnava or Krsna con-
scious person is always in this transcendental position because he speaks
according to Krsna and His representative. Because Vaisnavas speak exactly
according to the tune of Krsna, whatever they say is free from these four
defects. For example, Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita that everyone should
always think of Him, everyone should become His devotee, offer Him
obeisances and worship Him, and ultimately everyone should surrender unto
Him. These devotional activities are transcendental and free from mistakes,
illusion, cheating and imperfection. Therefore anyone who is a sincere devo-
tee of Lord Krsna and who preaches this cult, speaking only on the basis
of Krsna’s instructions, is understood to be wvirajam, or free from the defects
of material contamination. A genuine brahmana or Vaisnava therefore de-
pends eternally on the conclusion of the Vedas or Vedic versions presented
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. Only from Vedic knowl-
edge can we understand the actual position of the Absolute Truth, who, as
described in Srimad-Bhagavatam, is manifested in three features—namely,
impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma and at last the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. This knowledge is perfect from time immemorial, and
the brahminical or Vaispava culture depends on this principle eternally.
One should therefore study the Vedas with faith, not only for one’s per-
sonal knowledge, but for the sake of spreading this knowledge and these
activities through real faith in the words of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and the Vedas. ५
The word 780118৫1৫ (“auspicious”) in this verse is very significant. Srila
Sridhara Svami quotes that to do what is good and to reject what is not
good is called mangala, or auspicious. To do what is good means to accept
everything which is favorable to the discharge of devotional service, and
to reject what is not good means to reject everything not favorable for dis-
charging devotional service. In our Krsna consciousness movement, we ac-
cept this principle by rejecting four prohibited items—namely, illicit sex life,
intoxication, gambling and flesh-eating—and accepting the daily chanting of
atleast sixteen rounds of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra and daily meditation
three times a day by chanting the Gayatri mantra. In this way one can keep
his brahminical culture and spiritual strength intact. By following these
principles of devotional service strictly, chanting twenty-four hours a day
the maha-mantre—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare—one makes positive progress
in spiritual life and ultimately becomes completely fit to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead face to face. Because the ultimate goal of studying


--- Page 109 ---
Text 43) Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 873
or understanding the Vedic knowledge is to find Krsna, one who follows
the Vedic principles as described above can from the very beginning see all
the features of Lord Krsna, the Absolute Truth, very distinctly, as one can
see his own face completely reflected in a clear mirror. The conclusion is,
therefore, that a brahmana does not become abrahmana simply because he
is a living entity or is born in a brahmana family; he must possess all the
qualities mentioned in the sastras and practice the brahminical principles
in his life. Thus he ultimately becomes a fully Krsna conscious person and
can understand what Krsna is. How a devotee continuously sees Krsna
face to face within his heart is described in the Brahma-samhita as follows:
premaijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yam $yamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupar
govindam adi-purusam tam aha bhajami
The devotee, by development of pure love for Krsna, constantly sees the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as Syamasundara, within
his heart. That is the perfectional stage of brahminical culture.
TEXT 43
तेषामहं पादसरोजरेणु-
मायां वहेयाधिकिरीरमायुः ।
यं नित्यदा fom आ पापं
नश्यत्ययं सर्वगुणा मजन्ति ॥४३॥
tesam aham pada-saroja-repum
arya vaheyadhikiritam ayuh
yam nityada bibhrata asu paparn
nasyaty amum sarva-guna bhajanti
tesam—of all of them; aham—1I; pada—feet; saroja—lotus; renum— dust;
aryah—O respectable persons; vaheya—shall bear; adhi—up to; kiritam—
helmet; ayuh—up to the end of life; yam—which; nityada—always;bibhra-
tah—carrying; asu—very soon; papam—sinful activities; nasyati—are van-
quished; amum— all those; sarva-gunah— fully qualified; bhajanti— worship.
TRANSLATION
O respectable personalities present here, I beg the blessings of all of you
that I may perpetually carry on my crown the dust of the lotus feet of such


--- Page 110 ---
874 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4, Ch. 21
brahmanas and Vaignavas until the end of my life. He who can carry such
dust on his head is very soon relieved of all the reactions which arise from
sinful life, and eventually he develops all good and desirable qualities.
PURPORT
It is said that one who has unflinching faith in the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, which means unflinching faith in the Vaisnava or the pure de-
votee of the Supreme Lord, develops all the good qualities of the demigods.
yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surah (Bhag. 5.18.12)
Prahlada Maharaja also said, naisam matis tavad urukramanghrim. (Bhag.
7.5.32) Unless one takes the dust of the lotus feet of a pure Vaignava on
one’s head, one cannot understand what the Supreme Personality of God-
head is, and unless one knows the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one’s
life remains imperfect. A great soul who has fully surrendered to the
Supreme Lord after understanding Him fully and after repeatedly under-
going austerities and penances for many, many lives is very rare. The
crown of a king is simply a big load if the king or head of the state does not
actually bear the dust of the lotus feet of brahmanas and Vaigpavas. In
other words, if a liberal king like Prthu Maharaja does not follow the in-
structions of brahmanas and Vaignavas or does not follow the brahminical
culture, he is simply a burden on the state, for he cannot benefit the
citizens. Maharaja Prthu is the perfect example of an ideal chief executive.
TEXT 44
गुणायनं lewd Fag
बद्धाश्रयं संबरृणतेऽलु सम्पद्‌; ।
प्रसीदतां जालं गवां च
जनार्दनः सानुचरश्च मदम्‌ 91)
gunayanam $ila-dhanam krta-jiiam
vrddhasrayarm sarmvrpate ‘nu sampadah
[07058000118 brahma-kulam gavarm ca
Jjanardanah sanucara$ ca mahyam
guna-ayanam—one who has acquired all the good qualities; Sila-dhanam—
one whose wealth is good behavior; krta-jiam—one who is grateful; vrddha-
asrayam—one who takes shelter of the learned; sarhvrnate—achieves; anu—


--- Page 111 ---
Text 44] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 875
certainly ;sampadah—all opulences; prasidatam—be pleased upon; brahma-
kulam—the brahmana class; gavam—the cows; ca—and; janardanah—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sa—with; anucarah—along with His
devotee; ca—and; mahyam—upon me.

TRANSLATION

Whoever acquires the brahminical qualifications—whose only wealth is
good behavior, who is grateful and who takes shelter of experienced per-
sons—gets all the opulence of the world. I therefore wish that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and His associates will be pleased with the
brahmana class, with the cows and with me.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped with the prayer
namo brahmanya-devaya go-brahmana-hitaya ca. Thus it is clear that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead respects and protects the brahmanas and
brahminical culture as well as the cows; in other words, wherever there are
brahmanas and brahminical culture, there are cows and cow protection. In
a society or civilization in which there are no brahmanas or brahminical
culture, cows are treated as ordinary animals and slaughtered at the sacri-
fice of human civilization. The specific mention of the word gavam by
Prthu Maharaja is significant because the Lord is always associated with
cows and His devotees. In pictures Lord Krsna is always seen with cows and
His associates such as the cowherd boys and the gopis. Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, cannot be alone. Therefore Prthu Maharaja said,
sanucaras ca, indicating that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always
associated with His followers and devotees.

A devotee acquires all the good qualities of the demigods; he is
gundyanam, the reservoir of all good qualities. His only asset is good be-
havior, and he is grateful. Gratitude for the mercy of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead is one of the qualities of brahmanas and Vaispavas. Every-
one should feel grateful to the Supreme Personality of Godhead because
He is maintaining all living entities and supplying all their necessities. As
stated in the Vedas, eko bahunam yo vidadhati kaman: the Supreme One
is supplying all necessities to the living entities (Katha Up. 2.2.13). The
living entity who is therefore grateful to the Supreme Personality of God-
head is certainly qualified with good characteristics.

The word vrddhasrayam is very significant in this verse. Vrddha refers to
one who is advanced in knowledge. There are two kinds of old men—he
who is advanced in years and he who is experienced in knowledge. One


--- Page 112 ---
876 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
who is advanced in knowledge is actually vrddha (jaiana-vrddha); one does
not become vrddha simply by advancing in age. Vrddhasrayam, a person
who takes shelter of a superior person who is advanced in knowledge, can
acquire all the good qualities of a brahmana and be trained in good behav-
ior. When one actually attains good qualities, becomes grateful for the
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and takes shelter of a bona
fide spiritual master, he is endowed with all opulence. Such a person is a
brahmana or Vaisnava. Therefore Prthu Maharaja invokes the blessings and
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, with His associates, devo-
tees, ४ 81511888, brahmanas and cows.
TEXT 45
मैरेय उवाच
इति जरवाणं বৃঘর্বি पिठदेवदिजातयः |
TIRE: साधुवादेन साधवः ॥४५॥
maitreya uvaca
iti bruvanarn nr-patim
pitr-deva-dvijatayah
tustuvur hrsta-manasah
sadhu-vadena sadhavah
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued tospeak; iti—thus;
bruvanam— while speaking; nr-patim—the King; pitr—the denizens of Pitr-
loka; deva—the demigods; dvijatayah—and the twice-born (the brahmanas
and the Vaisnavas); tustuvuh—satisfied; hrsta-manasah—greatly pacified in
mind; sadhu-vadena—by expressing congratulations; sadhavah—all the
saintly persons present.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya said: After hearing King Prthu speak so nicely,
all the demigods, the denizens of Pitrloka, the brahmanas and the saintly
persons present at the meeting congratulated him by expressing their
good will.
PURPORT
When a person speaks very nicely at a meeting, he is congratulated by
the audience, who express their good will with the words sadhu, sadhu.
This is called sadhu-vada. All the saintly persons—Pitas, denizens of Pitrloka
and demigods—who were present in the meeting and heard Prthu Maharaja
expressed their good will with the words sadhu, sadhu. They all accepted
the good mission of Prthu Maharaja, and they were fully satisfied.


--- Page 113 ---
Text 46] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 877
TEXT 46
AN जयते लोकानिति सत्यदती श्रुतिः |
जक्षदण्डहतः पापो यद्वेनोऽत्यतरत्तमः ॥४६॥
putrena jayate lokan
iti satyavali Srutih
brahma-danda-hatah papo
yad veno ’tyatarat tamah
putrena—by the son; jayate—one becomes victorious; lokan—all the
heavenly planets; iti—thus; satyavati—becomes true; srutih—the Vedas;
brahma-danda—by the curse of brahmanas; hatah—killed; papah— the most
sinful; yat—as; venah—the father of Maharaja Prthu; ati—great; atarat—
become delivered; tamah—from the darkness of hellish life.
TRANSLATION
They all declared that the Vedic conclusion that one can conquer the
heavenly planets by the action of a putra, or son, was fulfilled, for the
most sinful Vena, who had been killed by the curse of the brahmanas, was
now delivered from the darkest region of hellish life by his son, Maharaja
Prthu.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic version, there is a hellish planet called Put, and
one who delivers a person from there is called putra. The purpose of mar-
riage is, therefore, to have a putra or son who is able to deliver his father,
even if the father falls down to the hellish condition of Put. Maharaja
Prthu’s father, Vena, was a most sinful person and was therefore cursed to
death by the brahmanas. Now all the great saintly persons, sages and
brahmanas present in the meeting, after hearing from Maharaja Prthu
about his great mission in life, became convinced that the statement of the
Vedas had been fully proved. The purpose of accepting a wife in religious
marriage, as sanctioned in the Vedas, is to have a putra, a son qualified
to deliver his father from the darkest region of hellish life. Marriage is not
intended for sense gratification but for getting a son fully qualified to de-
liver his father. But if a son is raised to become an unqualified demon, how
can he deliver his father from hellish life? It is therefore the duty of a father
to become a Vaisnava and raise his children to become Vaigsnavas; then
even if by chance the father falls into a hellish life in his next birth, such a
son can deliver him, as Maharaja Prthu delivered his father.


--- Page 114 ---
878 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
TEXT 47
हिरण्यङक्लिषुश्वापि wefan तमः ।
विषिष्वुरत्यगात्खनोः प्रहादस्यालमादतः ॥४७॥
hiranyakasipu$ capi
bhagavan-nindaya tamah
viviksur atyagat sunoh
prahladasyanubhavatah

hiranyakasipuh—the father of Prahlada Maharaja; ca—also; api—again;
bhagavat—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nindaya—by blasphem-
ing; tamah—in the darkest region of hellish life; viviksuh—entered; atya-
gat—was delivered; sunoh—of his son; prahladasya—of Maharaja Prahlada;
anubhavatah—by the influence of.

TRANSLATION

Similarly, Hiranyakasipu, who by dint of his sinful activities always de-
fied the supremacy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, entered into
the darkest region of hellish life; but by the grace of his great son, Prahlada
Maharaja, he also was delivered and went back home, back to Godhead.

PURPORT

When Prahlada Maharaja was offered benediction by Nrsimhadeva, due
to his great devotion and tolerance he refused to accept any benediction
from the Lord, thinking that such acceptance was not befitting a sincere
devotee. The rendering of service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in expectation of a good reward is deprecated by Prahlada Maharaja as mer-
cantile business. Because Prahlada Maharaja was a Vaisnava, he did not ask
benediction for his personal self but was very affectionate towards his
father. Although his father tortured him and would have killed him had he
himself not been killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Prahlada
Maharaja begged pardon for him from the Lord. This favor was immediate-
ly granted by the Lord, and Hiranyakadipu was delivered from the darkest
region of hellish life, and he returned back home, back to Godhead, by
the grace of his son. Prahlada Maharaja is the topmost example of a
Vaisnava who is always compassionate toward sinful persons suffering a
hellish life within this material world. Krsna is therefore known as para-
duh kha-duhkhi krpambudhi, or one who is compassionate toward others’
suffering and who is an_ocean of mercy. Like Prahlada Maharaja, all pure


--- Page 115 ---
Text 48] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 879
devotees of the Lord come to this material world with full compassion to
deliver the sinful. They undergo all kinds of tribulations, suffering them
with tolerance, because that is another qualification of a Vaisnava, who
tries to deliver all sinful persons from the hellish conditions of material
existence. Vaisnavas are therefore offered the following prayer:
vaicha-kalpatarubhyas ca krpa-sindhubhya eva ca
10000801107) pavanebhyo vaisnavebhyo namo namah
The chief concern of a Vaisnava is to deliver the fallen souls.
TEXT 48
वीरवर्य पितः psa: समाःसञ्जीव शाश्वतीः |
©
TATE मक्तिः सर्वोकौक मतर ।४८॥
vira-varya pitah prthvyah
samah saiijiva sasvatih
yasyedrsy acyute bhaktih
sarva-lokaika-bhartari
vira-varya—the best of the warriors; pitah— the father; prthvyah— of the
globe; samah—equal to in years; saiijiva—live; sasvatih—forever; yasya—
whose; wdrsi—like this; acyute—unto the Supreme; bhaktih— devotion;
sarva—all; loka— planets; eka— one; bhartari— maintainer.
TRANSLATION
All the saintly brahmanas thus addressed Prthu Maharaja: 0 best of the
warriors, O father of this globe, may you be blessed with a long life, for you
have great devotion to the infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is the master of all the universe.
PURPORT
Prthu Maharaja was blessed by the saintly persons present at the meeting
to have a long life because of his unflinching faith and his devotion to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although one’s duration of life is limited
in years, if by chance one becomes a devotee, he surpasses the duration pre-
scribed for his life; indeed, sometimes yogis die according to their wish,
not according to the laws of material nature. Another feature of a devotee
is that he lives forever because of his infallible devotion to the Lord. It is
said, kirtir yasya sa jivati: “®ne who leaves a good reputation behind him


--- Page 116 ---
880 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
lives forever.” Specifically, one who is reputed as a devotee of the Lord
undoubtedly lives forever. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu was talking
with Ramananda Raya, Caitanya Mahaprabhu inquired, “What is the
greatest reputation?” Ramananda Raya replied that a person who is reputed
as a great devotee has the greatest reputation, for a devotee not only lives
forever in the Vaikuntha planets, but by his reputation he also lives forever
within this material world.
TEXT 49
(व
अहो वयं হাল पवित्रकीतें
स्वयैव नायेन शङन्दनाथाः |
य॒ उत्तमश्छोकतमस्य॒विष्णो-
dwg कथां व्यनक्ति 1g
aho vayam hy adya pavitra-kirte
tvayaiva nathena mukunda-nathah
ya uttamaslokatamasya visnor
brahmanya-devasya katham vyanakti
aho—O goodness; vayam—we; hi—certainly; adya—today ; pavitra-kirte—
O supreme purity; tvaya—by you; eva—certainly; nathena—by the Lord;
mukunda—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nathah—being the sub-
ject of the Supreme; ye—one who; uttamaslokatamasya—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is praised by the nicest verses; visnoh—of
Visnu; brahmanya-devasya—of the worshipable Lord of the brahmanas;
katham— words; vyanakti—expressed.
TRANSLATION
The audience continued: Dear King Prthu, your reputation is the purest
of all, for you are preaching the glories of the most glorified of all, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord of the brahmanas. Since, due
to our great fortune, we have you as our master, we think that we are
living directly under the agency of the Lord.
PURPORT
The citizens declared that through being under the protection of
Maharaja Prthu they were directly under the protection of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This understanding is the proper situation of
social steadiness within this material world. Since it is stated in the Vedas
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the maintainer and leader of


--- Page 117 ---
Text 50] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 881
all living entities, the king or the executive head of the government must
be a representative of the Supreme Person. Then he can claim honor
exactly like the Lord’s. How a king or leader of society can become the
representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is also indicated
in this verse by the statement that because Prthu Maharaja was preaching
the supremacy and the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Visnu, he was therefore a proper representative of the Lord. To remain
under the jurisdiction or administration of such a king or leader is the
perfect status for human society. The primary responsibility of such a
king or leader is to protect the brahminical culture and the cows in his
state.
TEXT 50
নান্যক্তুনমির্য नाय तपपजीव्यातुञासत्नम्‌ ।
प्रजानुरागो महतां प्रकृतिः करुणात्मनाम्‌ ।५०॥
natyadbhutam दव natha
tavajivyanusasanam
prajanurago mahatam
prakrtih karupatmanam
na—not; ati—very great; adbhutam—wonderful; idam—this; natha—@®@
lord; tava—your; ajivya—source of income; anusasanam-ruling over the
citizens; praja—citizens; anuragah—affection; mahatam—of the great;
prakrtih—nature; karuna—merciful; atmanam—of the living entities.
TRANSLATION
Our dear lord, it is your occupational duty to rule over your citizens.
That is not a very wonderful task for a personality like you, who are so
affectionate in seeing to the interests of the citizens, because you are
full of mercy. That is the greatness of your character.
PURPORT
A 10116 5 duty is to give protection to his citizens and levy taxes from
them for his livelihood. Since the ‘Vedic society is divided into four
classes of men—the brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sidras—their means
of livelihood are also mentioned in the scriptures. The brahmanas should
live by spreading knowledge and therefore should take contributions from
their disciples, whereas a king should give protection to the citizens for
their development to the highest standard of life, and he can therefore


--- Page 118 ---
882 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
levy taxes from them; businessmen or mercantile men, because they
produce foodstuffs for the whole of society, can take a little profit from
this, whereas the sudras, who cannot work as either brahmanas, ksatriyas
or wvaisyas, should give service to the higher classes of society and be
provided by them with a supply of the necessities of life.

The symptom of a qualified king or political leader is mentioned
herein—he must be very merciful and compassionate to the people and
see to their prime interest, which is to become elevated devotees of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Great souls are naturally inclined to
do good to others, and a Vaisnava especially is the most compassionate
and merciful personality in society. Therefore we offer our respects to
a Vaisnava leader as follows:

vaiicha-kalpatarubhyas ca krpa-sindhubhya eva ca
patitanam pavanebhyo vaisnavebhyo namo namah
Only a Vaigsnava leader can fulfill all the desires of the people (vaicha-
kalpataru), and he is compassionate because he is the contributor of the
greatest benefit to human society. He is patita-pavana, the deliverer of
all fallen souls, because if the king or the head of the government follows
in the footsteps of the brahmanas and Vaisnavas, who are naturally
leaders in missionary work, similarly the vai§yas will also follow in the
footsteps of the Vaisnavas and brahmanas, and the $iidras will give them
service. Thus the entire society becomes a perfect human institution for
combined progress to the highest perfection of life.
TEXT 51
अद्य नस्तमसः पारस्त्वयोपासादितः प्रमो ।
आम्यतां নীলা कममिर्देवसंहितेः ॥५१॥
adya nas tamasah paras
tvayopasaditah prabho
bhramyatam nasta-drstinam
karmabhir daiva-samjiiitaih

adya—today; nah—of us; tamasah— of the darkness of material existence;
parah—other side; tvaya—by you; upasaditah—increased; prabho—O lord;
bhramyatam—who are wandering; nasta-drstinam—who have lost their
goal of life; karmabhih—on account of past deeds; daiva-sarjiitaih—
arranged by superior authority.


--- Page 119 ---
Text 52] Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 883
TRANSLATION 1
The citizens continued: Today you have opened our eyes and revealed
how to cross to the other side of the ocean of darkness. By our past
deeds and by the arrangement of superior authority, we are entangled
in a network of fruitive activities and have lost sight of the destination of
life; thus we have been wandering within the universe.
PURPORT
In this verse, the words karmabhir daiva-samjiiitaih are very significant.
Due to the quality of our actions, we come to the association of the modes
of material nature, and by superior arrangement we are given a chance to
enjoy the fruitive results of such activities in different types of bodies.
In this way, having lost sight of their destinations in life, all living entities
are wandering in different species throughout the universe, sometimes
getting birth in a lower species and sometimes existence in higher planetary
systems; thus we are all wandering since time immemorial. It is by the
grace of the spiritual master and the Supreme Personality of Godhead
that we get the clue of devotional life, and thus progressive success in our
life begins. Here this is admitted by the citizens of King Prthu; in full
consciousness thoy admit the benefit they have derived from the activities
of Maharaja Prthu.
TEXT 52
नमो वि्द्धसस्वाय पुरुषाय महीयसे ।
यो ब्रह्म FER बिभर्तीदं स्वतेजसा ॥॥५२॥
namo vivrddha-sattvaya
purusaya mahiyase
yo brahma ksatram avisya
bibhartidam sva-tejasd
namah—all obeisances; vivrddha—highly elevated; sattvaya—unto the
existence; purusaya—unto the person; mahiyase—unto one who is so
glorified; yah— who; brahma—brahminical culture; ksatram—administrative
duty; avi§ya—entering; bibharti—maintaining; idam—this; svae-tejasa—by
his own prowess.
TRANSLATION
Dear lord, you are situated in your pure existential position of goodness;
therefore you are the perfect representative of the Supreme Lord. You


--- Page 120 ---
884 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 21
are glorified by your own prowess, and thus you are maintaining the
entire world by introducing brahminical culture and protecting everyone
in your line of duty as a ksatriya.
PURPORT

Without the spread of brahminical culture and without proper protec-
tion from the government no social standard can be maintained properly.
This is admitted in this verse by the citizens of Maharaja Prthu, who
could maintain the wonderful situation of his government due to his
position in pure goodness. The word vivrddha-sattvaya is significant. In
the material world there are three qualities — namely, goodness, passion
and ignorance. One has to be raised from the platform of ignorance
to the platform of goodness by devotional service. There is no other
means for elevating one from the lowest stage of life to the highest
stage but the execution of devotional service; as advised in the previous
chapters of Srimad-Bhagavatam, one can raise himself from the lowest
position to the highest simply by associating with devotees and hearing
Srimad-Bhagavatam regularly from their mouths.

Srpvatam sva-kathah krspah punya-sravana-kirtanah
hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani vidhunoti su-hrt satam
(Bhag. 1.2.17)

“When one engages in devotional service in the first stages of hearing
and chanting, the Lord who is in everyone’s heart helps the devotee in
cleansing his heart.” In the gradual cleansing process one is relieved of the
influence of passion and ignorance and is situated on the platform of
goodness. The result of association with the qualities of passion and
ignorance is that one becomes lusty and greedy. But when one is elevated
to the platform of goodness, he is satisfied in any condition of life and is
without lust and greed. This mentality indicates one’s situation on the
platform of goodness. One has to transcend this goodness and raise
himself to the pure goodness which is called vivrddha-sattva or the
advanced stage of goodness. In the advanced stage of goodness one can
become Krsna conscious. Therefore Maharaja Prthu is addressed here as
vivrddha-sattva, or one who is situated in the transcendental position.
But Maharaja Prthu, although situated in the transcendental position of a
pure devotee, comes down to the position of brahmana and ksatriya for
the benefit of human society and thus gives protection to the entire
world by his personal prowess. Although he was a king, a ksatriya,


--- Page 121 ---
Text 52 Instructions by Maharaja Prthu 885
because he was a Vaisnava he was also a brahmana. As a brahmana he
could give proper instruction to the citizens and as a ksatriya he could
rightly give protection to all of them. Thus the citizens of Maharaja Prthu
were protected in all respects by the perfect king.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Twenty-first
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam entitled, “Instructions by Mahardja
Prthu.”


--- Page 122 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Prthu Maharaja's Meeting
with the Four Kumaras
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
जनेषु प्रगृणत्स्वेवं पएरथुं॑पएुलविकरमम्‌ |
तत्रोपजग्बुधरुनयशवत्वारः घरयवर्चसः || १॥
maitreya uvaca
Janesu pragrpatsv evarn
prthurm prthula-vikramam
tatropajagmur munayas
catvarah surya-varcasah
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; janesu—
the citizens; pragrnatsu—while praying for; evam—thus; prthum—unto
Maharaja Prthu; prthula—highly; vikramam—powerful; tatra—there; upa-
jagmuh— arrived; munayah—the Kumaras; catvarah—four; siirya—as the sun;
varcasah—bright.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya said: While the citizens were thus praying to
the most powerful King Prthu, the four Kumaras, who were as bright
as the sun, arrived on the spot.
TEXT 2
तास्तु सिद्धेशषरान्‌ राजा व्योस्नोऽवतरतोऽ्चिंषा |
लोकानपापान्‌ कव णा न्‌ सानुगोऽचष्ट रशितान्‌॥। २।
12725 tu siddhesvaran raja
vyomno ‘vatarato 7015৫
lokan apapan kurvapan
sanugo ’casta laksitan
887


--- Page 123 ---
888 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
'tan—them; tu—but; siddhesvaran—masters of all mystic power; raja—the
King; vyomnah—from the sky; avataratah—while descending; arcisa—by
their glaring effulgence; lokan—all the planets; apapan—sinless; kurvapan—
doing 50; sa-anugah—with his associates; acasta—recognized; laksitan—by
seeing them.
TRANSLATION
When the King and his associates saw the glowing effulgence of the
four Kumaras, the masters of all mystic power, they could recognize them
as they descended from the sky.
PURPORT
The four Kumaras are described herein as siddhesvaran, which means
“masters of all mystic power.” One who has attained perfection in yoga
practice immediately becomes master of the eight mystic perfections—
to become smaller than the smallest, to become lighter than the lightest,
to become bigger than the biggest, to achieve anything he desires, to con-
trol everything, etc. These four Kumaras, as siddhesvaras, had achieved
all the yogic perfectional achievements, and as such they could travel
in outer space without machines. While they were coming to Maharaja
Prthu from other planets, they did not come by airplane, but personally.
In other words, these four Kumaras were also spacemen who could travel
in space without machines. The residents of the planet which is known as
Siddhaloka can travel in outer space from one planet to another without
vehicles. However, the special power of the Kumaras mentioned herewith
is that whatever place they went to would immediately become sinless.
During the reign of Maharaja Prthu, everything on the surface of this globe
was sinless, and therefore the Kumaras decided to see the King. Ordinarily
they do not go to any planet which is sinful.
TEXT 3
RANE प्राणान्‌ ध्त्यादित्सुरिवोस्थितः |
ससदस्यानुगो वैन्य इन्द्रियेशो गुणानिव ॥ ই ॥
tad-dar$anodgatan pranan
pratyaditsur ivotthitah
sa-sadasyanugo vainya
indriyeso gunan iva
tat—him; darsana—seeing; udgatan—being greatly desired; pranan—life;
pratyaditsuh— peacefully going; iva—like; utthitah—got up; sa—with;


--- Page 124 ---
Text 3] Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 889
sadasya—associates or followers; anugah—officers; vainyah—King Prthu;
indriya-iSah—a living entity; gunan iva—as influenced by the modes of
material nature.
TRANSLATION

Seeing the four Kumaras, Prthu Maharaja was greatly anxious to receive
them. Therefore the King, with all his officers, very hastily got up so
anxiously that he is compared herewith to a conditioned soul whose
senses are immediately attracted by the modes of material nature.

PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita it is said:
prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah
ahankara-vimudhatma kartaham iti manyate.
(Bg. 3.27)

Every conditioned soul is influenced by a particular mixture of the modes
of material nature. As such, the conditioned soul is attracted to certain
types of activity which he is forced to perform because he is completely
under the influence of material nature. Here Prthu Maharaja is compared
to such a conditioned soul, not because he was a conditioned soul but
because he was so anxious to receive the Kumaras that it was as if without
them he would have lost his life. The conditioned soul is attracted by
the objects of sense gratification. His eyes are attracted to see beautiful
things, his ears are attracted to hear nice music, his nose is attracted to
enjoy the aroma of a nice flower, and his tongue is attracted to taste nice
food. Similarly, all his other senses—his hands, his legs, his belly, his
genitals, his mind, etc.—are so susceptible to the attraction of the objects
of enjoyment that he cannot restrain himself. Prthu Maharaja, in the
same way, could not restrain himself from receiving the four Kumaras,
who were bright by dint of their spiritual progress, and thus not only he
himself but also his officers and associates all received the four Kumaras.
It is said, “Birds of a feather flock together.” In this world, everyone is
attracted by a person of the same category. A drunkard is attracted to
persons who are also drunkards. Similarly, a saintly person is attracted by
other saintly persons. Prthu Maharaja was in the topmost position of
spiritual advancement, and as such, he was attracted by the Kumaras, who
were of the same category. It is said, therefore, that a man is known by
his company.


--- Page 125 ---
890 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
TEXT 4
गोरवाघन्त्रितः सम्यः PEAR: |
दिषिदत्पूजयाश्वकरे ZiT ।। ४ ।।
gauravad yantritah sabhyah
prasrayanata-kandharah
vidhivat pujayancakre
grhitadhyarhanasanan
gauravat—glories; yantritah—completely; sabhyah—most civilized; pras-
raya—by humbleness; anata-kandharah—bowing down his shoulder; vidhi-
vat—according to the instructions of the $astra; pijayam—by worshiping;
cakre—performed; grhita—accepting; adhi—including; arhana—parapherna-
lia for reception; asanan—sitting places.
TRANSLATION
When the great sages accepted their reception, according to the instruc-
tions of the sastras, and finally took their seats offered by the King, the
King, influenced by the glories of the sages, immediately bowed down.
Thus he worshiped the four Kumaras.
PURPORT
The four Kumaras are the parampara spiritual masters of the Vaisnava
sampradaya. Out of the four sampradayas, namely Brahma-sampradaya,
Sri-sampradaya, Kumara-sampradaya and Rudra-sampradaya, the disciplic
succession of spiritual master to disciple known as the Kumara-sampradaya
is coming down from the four Kumaras. So Prthu Maharaja was very re-
spectful to the sampradaya-acaryas. As it is said by Srila Visvanatha
Cakravarti Thakura, saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastrair: a spiritual master
or the parampara-acarya should be respected exactly like the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The word vidhivat is significant in this verse. This
means that Prthu Maharaja also strictly followed the injunctions of the
৪৫57৫ in receiving a spiritual master or acarya of the transcendental dis-
ciplic succession. Whenever an acarya is seen, one should immediately bow
down before him. Prthu Maharaja did this properly; therefore the words
used here are prasrayanata-kandharah. Out of humility, he bowed down
before the Kumaras.
TEXT 5
तस्पादन्ञौचसलिलैमार्जितालकबन्धनः |
तत्र॒ शीलवतां इत्तमाचरन्मानयभिष || ५ ॥।


--- Page 126 ---
Text 6] Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 891
tat-pada-sauca-salilair
marjitalaka-bandhanah
tatra stlavatam vrttam
acaran manayann iva
tat-pada— their lotus feet; sauca—washed; salilaih—water; marjita—
sprinkled; alaka—hair; bandhanah—bunch; tatra—there; silavatam—of the
respectable gentlemen; vrttam—behavior; dcaran—behaving; manayan—
practicing; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
After this, the King took the water which had washed the lotus feet of
the Kumaras and sprinkled it over his hair. By such respectful actions, the
King, as an exemplary personality, showed how to receive a spiritually
advanced personality.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said, @apani acari prabhu jivere sikhaya. It
is very well known that whatever Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught in His
life as acarya, He Himself practiced. When He was preaching as a devotee,
although He was detected by several great personalities to be the incarnation
of Krsna, He never agreed to be addressed as an incarnation. Even though
one may be an incarnation of Krsna, or especially empowered by Him, he
should not advertise that he is an incarnation. People will automatically
accept the real truth in due course of time. Prthu Maharaja was the ideal
Vaignava king; therefore he taught others by his personal behavior how to
receive and respect saintly persons like the Kumaras. When a saintly person
comes to one’s home, it is the Vedic custom to wash his feet first with water
and then sprinkle this water over the heads of oneself and his family. Prthu
Maharaja did this, for he was an exemplary teacher of the people in general.
TEXT 6
हाटकासन आसीनान्‌ खधिष्ण्येध्विव पावकान्‌ |
शरद्धासंययसंयुक्तः प्रीतः प्राह मवाग्रजान्‌ ।। ৪ ॥
hatakasana asinan
sva-dhisnyesv iva pavakan
sraddha-samyama-saryuktah
pritah praha bhavagrajan
hataka-asane—on the throne made of gold; asinan—when they were
seated; sva-dhisnyesu—on the altar; iva— like; pavakan— the fire; Sraddha—


--- Page 127 ---
892 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
respect; sarmyama—restraint; samyuktah—being decorated with; pritah—
pleased; praha—said; bhava— Lord Siva; agrajan— the elder brothers.
TRANSLATION

The four great sages were elder to Lord Siva, and when they were seated
on the golden throne, they appeared just like fire blazing on an altar.
Maharaja Prthu, out of his great gentleness and respect for them, began to
speak with great restraint as follows.
ট PURPORT

The Kumaras are described herein as the elder brothers of Lord Siva.
When the Kumaras were born out of the body of Lord Brahma they were
requested to get married and increase the population. In the beginning of
the creation there was a great need of population; therefore Lord Brahma
was creating one son after another and ordering them to increase. However,
when the Kumaras were requested to do so, they declined. They wanted
to remain brahmacari throughout life and be engaged fully in the de-
votional service of the Lord. The Kumaras are called naisthika-brahmacari,
meaning they are never to marry. Because of their refusal to marry, Lord
Brahma became so angry that his eyes became reddish. Out of his eyes,
Lord Siva, or Rudra, appeared. The mode of anger is consequently known
as rudra. Lord Siva also has a sampradaya party known as the Rudra-
sampradaya, and they are also known as Vaisnavas.

TEXT 7
¶थरुवाच
अहो आचरितं किं मे मङ्गलं मङ्गलायनाः |
यस्थ वो दशनं arid च योगिभिः ।॥ ७ ॥
prthur uvaca
aho acaritam kim me
mangalam mangalayanah
yasya vo darsanam hy asid
durdarsanam ca yogibhih

prthuh uvaca—King Prthu spoke;aho—O Lord;acaritam—practice; kim—
what; me—by me; marigalam—good fortune; maigala-dyanah—O personi-
fied good fortune; yasya—by which; vah—your; darsanam—audience; hi—
certainly; asit—became possible; durdarsanam— visible with great difficulty;
ca—also;yogibhih—by great mystic yogis.


--- Page 128 ---
Text 8] .  Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 893
TRANSLATION
King Prthu spoke: My dear great sages, auspiciousness personified, it is
very difficult for even the mystic yogis to see you. Indeed, you are very
rarely seen. I do not know what kind of pious activity I performed for you
to grace me by appearing before me without difficulty.
PURPORT
When something uncommon happens in one’s progressive spiritual life,
it should be understood to be incurred by ajiiata-sukrti, or pious activities
beyond one’s knowledge. To see personally the Supreme Personality of
Godhead or His pure devotee is not an ordinary incident. When such
things happen, they should be understood to be caused by previous pious
activity, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita: yesamn tv anta-gatam paparm jana-
nam punya-karmanam (Bg. 7.28). One who is completely freed from all
the resultant actions of sinful activities and who is absorbed only in pious
activities can engage in devotional service. Although Maharaja Prthu’s life
is full of pious activities, he was wondering how his audience with the
Kumaras happened. He could not imagine what kind of pious activities he
had performed. This is a sign of humility on the part of King Prthu, whose
life was so full of pious activities that even Lord Visnu also came to see him
and predicted that the Kumaras would also come.
TEXT 8
कि तस्य दुलेमतरमिह रोके परत्र च ।
यस्य विप्राः प्रसीदन्ति शिवो विष्णुश angen ८ ॥
kim tasya durlabhataram
tha loke paratra ca
yasya viprah prasidanti
৪8৮০ visnus ca sanugah
kim —what; tasya— his; durlabhataram—very rare to achieve; itha—in this
world;loke—world;paratra—after death;ca—or;yasya—one whose; viprah—
the brahmanas and Vaisnavas; prasidanti—become pleased; sivah—all-
auspicious; visnuh— Lord Visnu; ca—as well as; sanugah —going along with.
TRANSLATION
Any person upon whom the brahmanas and Vaisnavas are pleased can
achieve anything which is very rare to obtain in this world as well as after
death. Not only that, but one also receives the favor of the auspicious
Lord Siva and Lord Visnu, who accompany the brahmanas and Vaisnavas.


--- Page 129 ---
894 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
PURPORT
The brahmanas and. Vaisnavas are the bearers of Lord Visnu, the all-
auspicious. As confirmed in the Brehma-samhita:
premaiijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yarn $yamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupar
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami.
The devotees, out of their extreme love for Govinda, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, always carry the Lord within their hearts. The Lord is
already in the heart of everyone, but the Vaisnavas and the brahmanas
actually perceive and see Him always in ecstasy. Therefore brahmanas and
Vaisnavas are carriers of Visnu. Wherever they go, Lord Visnu, Lord Siva
or the devotees of Lord Visnu are all carried. The four Kumaras are brah-
manas, and they visited the place of Maharaja Prthu. Naturally Lord Visnu
and His devotees were also present. Under the circumstances, the conclu-
sion is that when the brahmanas and Vaisnavas are pleased with a person,
Lord Visnu is also pleased. This is confirmed by Srila Vi$vanatha
Cakravarti Thakura in his eight stanzas on the spiritual master: yasya
prasadad bhagavat-prasadah. By pleasing the spiritual master, who is both
brahmana and Vaisnava, one pleases the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
If the Supreme Personality of Godhead is pleased, then one has nothing
more to achieve either in this world or after death.
TEXT 9
नैव लक्षयते लोको लोकान्‌ पर्यटतोऽपि यान्‌ ।
यथा सर्वदृशं सर्वं आत्मानं येऽस्य हेतवः ॥ ९ ॥
naiva laksayate loko
lokan paryatato ’pi yan
yatha sarva-drsam sarva
atmanam ye ’sya hetavah
na— not; eva— thus;laksayate— can see;lokah—people;lokan— all planets;
paryatatah—traveling; api—although; yan—whom; yatha—as much as;
sarva-drsam—the Supersoul; sarve—in all; atmanam— within everyone; ye—
those; asya—of the cosmic manifestation; hetavah — causes.
3 TRANSLATION
Prthu Maharaja continued: Although you are traveling in all planetary
systems, people cannot know you, just as they cannot know the Supersoul,
although He is within everyone’s heart as the witness of everything. Even
Lord Brahma and Lord Siva cannot understand the Supersoul.


--- Page 130 ---
Text 10] = Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 895
“PURPORT

In the beginning of the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said: muhyanti yat
surayah. Great demigods like Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Indra and Candra
are sometimes bewildered trying to understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It so happened that when Krsna was present on this planet,
Lord Brahma and King Indra also mistook Him. And what to speak of
great yogis or jianis who conclude that the Absolute Truth, the Personality
of Godhead, is impersonal? In the same way, great personalities and
Vaisna#as like the four Kumaras are also invisible to ordinary persons,
although they are traveling all over the universe in different planetary
systems. When Sanatana Gosvami went to see Lord Sri Caitanya Maha-
prabhu, he could not be recognized by Candrasekhara Acarya. The con-
clusizr is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in every-
one’s heart, and His pure devotees, the Vaisnavas, are also traveling all
over the world, but those who are under the modes of material nature
cannot understand the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
source of this cosmic manifestation, or the Vaisnavas. It is said, therefore,
that one cannot see the Supreme Personality of Godhead or a Vaisnava
with these material eyes. One has to purify his senses and engage in the
service of the Lord. Then gradually one can realize who is the Supreme

Personality of Godhead and who is a Vaisnava.

TEXT 10
अधना अपि ते धन्याः साधवो गृहमेधिनः |
यद्गृहा য্ইবযান্্যহণন্দ্যীষবত্বযাঃ iL ell
adhana api te dhanyah
sadhavo grha-medhinah
yad-grha hy arha-varyambu-
trna-bhumisvaravarah
adhanah—not very rich; api—although; te—they; dhanyah—glorious;
sadhavah—saintly persons; grha-medhinah—persons who are attached to
family life; yat-grhah— whose house; hi—certainly; arha-varya—the most
worshipable; ambu—water; trna—grass; bhumi—land; %vara—the master;
avarah—the servants.

TRANSLATION
A person who is not very rich and is attached to family life becomes
highly glorified when saintly persons are present in his home. Everyone,


--- Page 131 ---
896 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
including master and servants who are engaged in offering the exalted
visitors water, sitting place, paraphernalia for reception, and the home
itself, are also glorified.

PURPORT

Materially if a man is not very rich, he is not glorious, and spiritually if

a man is too attached to family life, he is also not glorious. But saintly

” persons are quite ready to visit the house of a poor man or a man who is
attached to material family life. When this happens, the owner of the
house and his servants are glorified because they offer water for washing
the feet of a saintly person, sitting places and other things to receive him.
The conclusion is that if a saintly person goes to the house of even an
unimportant man, such a person becomes glorious by his blessings. It is
therefore the Vedic system that a householder invite a saintly person in
his home to receive his blessings. This system is still current in India, and
therefore saintly persons, wherever they go, are hosted by the householders,
who in turn get an opportunity to receive transcendental knowledge. It is
the duty of a sannyasi, therefore, to travel everywhere just to favor the
householders who are generally ignorant of the values of spiritual life.

It may be argued that all householders are not very rich and that one
cannot receive great saintly persons or preachers because they are always
accompanied by their disciples. If a householder is to receive a saintly
person, he has to receive his entourage also. It is said in the sastras that
Durvasa Muni was always accompanied by 60,000 disciples and that if
there was a little discrepancy in their reception, he would be very angry
and would sometimes curse the host. The fact is that every householder,
regardless of his position or economic condition, can at least receive saintly
guests with great devotion and offer them drinking water, for drinking
water is available always. In India the custom is that even an ordinary
person is offered a glass of water if he suddenly visits and one cannot offer
him foodstuff. If there is no water, then one can offer a sitting place, even
if it is on straw mats. And if he has no straw mat, he can immediately
cleanse the ground and ask the guest to sit there. Supposing that a house-
holder cannot even do that, then with folded hands he can simply receive
the guest, saying welcome. And if he cannot do that, then he should feel
very sorry for his poor condition and shed tears and simply offer obeisances
with his whole family, wife and children. In this way he can satisfy any
guest, even if he is a saintly person or a king.


--- Page 132 ---
Text 11]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 897
TEXT 11
व्यालालयतुमा वै तेष्व रिक्तास्विलसम्यद ; |
सव्रहास्तीर्थपादीरणदतीरपरिवभिताः 1220
vyalalaya-druma vai tesv
ariktakhila-sampadah
yad-grhas tirtha-padiya-
padatirtha-vivarjitah
vyala—venomous serpents; alaya—home; drumah—tree; vai— certainly;
tesu—in those houses; arikta—abundantly; akhila—all; sampadah—opu-
lences; yat—that; grhah—houses; tirtha-padiya—in relation with the feet of
great saintly persons; pada-tirtha—the water which washed their feet;
vivarjitah— without.
TRANSLATION
On the contrary, even though full of all opulence and material pros-
perity, any householder’s house where the devotees of the Lord are never
allowed to come in, and where there is no water for washing their feet, is
to be considered as a tree in which all venomous serpents live.
PURPORT
In this verse the word tirtha-padiya indicates devotees of Lord Visnu, or
Vaignavas. As far as brahmanas are concerned, in the previous verse the
mode of reception has been already described. Now, in this verse, special
stress is being given to the Vaisnavas. Generally the sannyasis, or those in
the renounced order of life, take trouble to enlighten the householders.
There are 61600011008 sannyasis and tridandi sannyasis. The ekadandr
sannyasts are generally followers of Sankaracarya and are known as Maya-
vadi sannyasis, whereas the tridandi sannyasis are followers of Vaisnava
acaryas— Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya and so on—and they take trouble to
enlighten the householders. Ekadandi sannyasis can be situated on the
platform of pure Brahman because they are aware that the spirit soul is
different from the body, but they are mainly impersonalists. The Vaisnavas
know that the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person and that the Brahman
effulgence is based on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed
in the Bhagavad-gita: brahmano hi pratisthaham (Bg. 14.27). The con-
clusion is that tirtha-padiya refers to Vaisnavas. In the Bhagavatam there is
also another reference: firthikurvanti tirthani. Wherever he goes, a Vaisnava


--- Page 133 ---
898 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
immediately makes that place a tirtha, a place of pilgrimage. The Vaisnava
sannyasis travel all over the world to make every place a place of pilgrimage
by the touch of their lotus feet. It is mentioned there that any house
which does not receive a Vaisnava in the manner already explained in the
previous verse is to be considered the residential quarters of venomous
serpents. [1 is said that about the sandalwood tree, which is a very valuable
tree, there is a venomous serpent. Sandalwood is very cold, and venomous
serpents, because of their poisonous teeth, are always very warm, and they
take shelter of the sandalwood trees to become cooler. Similarly, there
are many rich men who keep watchdogs or doormen and put up signs that
say do not enter, trespassers not allowed, beware of the dog, etc. Some-
times in western countries a trespasser is shot, and there is no crime in
such shooting. This is the position of demoniac householders, and such
houses are considered to be the residential quarters of venomous snakes.
The members of such families are no better than snakes because snakes
are very much envious, and when that envy is directed to the saintly per-
sons, their position becomes more dangerous. It is said by Canakya Pandita
that there are two envious living entities, the snake and the envious man.
The envious man is more dangerous than a snake because a snake can be
subdued by charming mantras or by some herbs, but an envious person
cannot be pacified by any means.
TEXT 12
खागतं बो द्िजब्रेष्ठा यद्रतानि gee: |
चरन्ति शरद्धया धीरा বাকা एव बृहन्ति च ॥१२॥
svagatarh vo dvija-Srestha
yad-vratani mumuksavah
caranti Sraddhaya dhira
bala eva brhanti ca

svagatam—welcome; vah—unto you; dvija-sresthah—the best of the
brahmanas; yat—whose; vratani—vows; mumuksavah—of persons desiring
liberation; caranti—behave ; Sraddhaya—with great faith; dhirah —controlled;
balah—boys; eva—like; brhanti— observe; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

Maharaja Prthu offered his welcome to the four Kumaras, addressing
them as the best of the brahmanas. He welcomed them, saying: From the
beginning of your birth you were strictly observing the vows of celibacy,


--- Page 134 ---
Text 13]  Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumiras 899
and although you are experienced in the path of liberation, you are keep-
ing yourselves just like small children.
PURPORT

The specific importance of the Kumaras is that they were brahmacaris
living the life of celibacy from birth. They kept themselves as small
children about four or five years old because by growing into youth one’s
senses sometimes become disturbed and celibacy becomes difficult. The
Kumaras therefore purposefully remained children because in a child’s
life the senses are never disturbed by sex. This is the significance of the
life of the Kumaras, and as such Maharaja Prthu addressed them as the
best of the brahmanas. The Kumaras were not only born of the best
brahmana /1.010 Brahma), but they are addressed herein as dvija-sresthah
(the best ol the brahmanas) on account of their being Vaisnavas also. As
we have already explained, they have their sampradaya (disciplic succes-
sion), and even to date the sampradaya is being maintained and is known as
the Nimbarka-sampradaya. Out of the four sampradayas of the Vaisnava
acaryas, the Nimbarka-sampradaya is one. Maharaja Prthu specifically
appreciated the position of the Kumaras because they maintained the
brahmacarya vow from the very beginning of their birth. Maharaja Prthu,
however, expressed his great appreciation of Vaisnavism by addressing the
Kumiras as Vaisnava-srestha. In other words, everyone should offer respect
to a Vaispava without considering his source of birth. Vaisnave jati-
buddhih. No one should consider a Vaisnava in terms of birth. The
Vaisnava is always the best of the brahmanas, and as such one should offer
all respects to a Vaispava, not only as a brahmana but as the best of the
brahmanas.

TEXT 13
ww: gare नाथा इन्द्रियर्था्थवेदिनाम्‌ ।
SEAR एतसिन्‌ पतितानां खकरमममिः 1230
kaccin nah 10018010718 natha
indriyarthartha-vedinam
vyasanavapa etasmin
patitanam sva-karmabhih

kaccit—whether; nah—our; kusalem—good fortune; nathah—O masters;
indriya-artha—sense gratification as the ultimate goal of life; artha-vedi-
nam— persons who understand only sense gratification; vyasana—illness;


--- Page 135 ---
900 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
avape—got; etasmin—in this material existence; patitanam—those who are
fallen; sva-karmabhih—by their own ability.
TRANSLATION

Prthu Maharaja inquired from the sages about persons entangled in this
dangerous material existence because of their previous actions; could
such persons, whose only aim is sense gratification, be blessed with any
good fortune?

PURPORT

Maharaja Prthu did not ask the Kumaras about their good fortune, for
the Kumaras are always auspicious by dint of their life in celibacy. Since
they are always engaged on the path of liberation, there was no question
of ill fortune. In other words, brahmanas and Vaisnavas who are strictly
following the path of spiritual advancement are always fortunate. The
question was asked by Prthu Maharaja for his own sake, since he was in
the position of a grhastha and in charge of the royal authority. Kings are
not only grhasthas, who are generally absorbed in sense gratification, but
are sometimes employed to kill animals in hunting because they have to
practice the killing art, otherwise it is very difficult for them to fight
their enemies. Such things are not auspicious. Four kinds of sinful
activities—associating with woman for illicit sex, eating meat, intoxication
and gambling—are allowed for the ksatriyas. For political reasons, some-
times they have to take to these sinful activities. Ksatriyas do not refrain
from gambling. One vivid example is the Pandavas. When the Pandavas
were challenged by the opposite party, Duryodhana, to gamble and
risk their kingdom, they could not refrain, and by that gambling they
lost their kingdom, and their wife was insulted. Similarly, the ksatriyas
cannot refrain from fighting if challenged by the opposite party. There-
fore Prthu Maharaja, taking consideration of all these facts, inquired
whether there is any auspicious path. Grhastha life is inauspicious
because grhastha means consciousness for sense gratification, and as soon
as there is sense gratification, one’s position is always full of dangers.
This material world is said to be padam [0৫007 yad vipadam na tesam,
dangerous in every step (Bhag. 10.14.58). Everyone in this material world
is struggling hard for sense gratification. Clearing all these points, Maharaja
Prthu inquired from the four Kumaras about the fallen conditioned souls
who are rotting in this material world due to their past bad or inauspicious
activities. Is there any possibility for their auspicious spiritual life? In this
verse, the word indriyarthartha-vedinam is very significant. It indicates


--- Page 136 ---
Text 14] Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 901
persons whose only aim is to satisfy the senses. They are also described as
patitanam, or fallen. Only one who stops all activities for sense gratifica-
tion is considered to be elevated. Another significant word is sva-karmabhih.
One becomes fallen by dint of his own past bad activities. Everyone is
responsible for his fallen condition because of his own activities. When
activities are changed to devotional service, one’s auspicious life begins.
TEXT 14
मवत्सु TIGA आत्मारामेषु नेष्यते |
ক্তহাকান্তৃহাতা৷ यत्र न सन्ति मतिष्त्तयः ।१४॥
bhavatsu kusala-prasna
atmaramesu nesyate
kusalakusala yatra
na santi mati-vrttayah
bhavatsu—unto you; kusala—good fortune; prasnah—question; atma-
ramesu—one why is always engaged in spiritual bliss; nesyate—there is no
need of; kusala—good fortune; akusalah—inauspiciousness; yatra—where; na—
never; santi—exists; mati-vrttayah—mental concoction.
TRANSLATION
Prthu Maharaja continued: My dear sirs, there is no need to ask about
your good and bad fortune because you are always absorbed in spiritual
bliss. The mental concoction of the auspicious and inauspicious does not
exist in you.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said:
‘dvaite’ bhadrabhadra-jiiana, saba— ‘manodharma’
‘ei bhala, ei manda—ei saba ‘bhrama.’ (Ce. Antya 4.176)
In this material world the auspicious and inauspicious are simply mental
concoctions because such things exist only due to association with the
material world. This is called illusion or d@tma-maya. We think ourselves
created by material nature exactly as we think ourselves experiencing so
many things in a dream. The spirit soul is, however, always transcendental.
There is no question of becoming materially covered. This covering is
simply something like a hallucination or a dream. In Bhagavad-gita it is also
said, sangdt safijayate kamah (Bg. 2.62). Simply by association we create


--- Page 137 ---
902 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
artificial material necessities. Dhyayato visayan pumsah saigas
tesiipajayate (Bg. 2.62). When we forget our real constitutional position
and wish to enjoy the material resources, our material desires manifest,
and we associate with varieties of material enjoyment. As soon as the con-
coctions of material enjoyment are there, because of our association we
create a sort of lust or eagerness to enjoy them, and when that false enjoy-
ment does not actually make us happy, we create another illusion known
as anger, and by the manifestation of anger, the illusion becomes stronger.
When we are illusioned in this way, forgetfulness of our relationship with
Krsna follows, and by thus losing Krsna consciousness, our real intelligence
is defeated. In this way we become entangled in this material world.
In Bhagavad-gita it is said:
krodhad bhavati sammohah sarhmohat smrti-vibhramah
smyrti-bhramsad buddhi-naso buddhi-nasat pranasyati (Bg. 2.63)
By material association we lose our spiritual consciousness; consequently
there is the question of the auspicious and inauspicious. But those who are
atmarama or self-realized have transcended such questions. The atmaramas
or self-realized persons, gradually making further progress in spiritual bliss,
come to the platform of association with the Supreme Personality of God-
head. That is the perfection of life. In the beginning, the Kumaras were
self-realized impersonalists, but gradually they became attracted to the
personal pastimes of the Supreme Lord. The conclusion is that for those
who are always engaged in the devotional service of the Personality of
Godhead, the duality of the auspicious and inauspicious does nol arise.
Prthu Maharaja is therefore asking about auspiciousness not for the sake of
the Kumaras but for his own sake.
TEXT 15
तदहं कृतविश्रम्भः सुहदो वस्तपखिनाम्‌ |
HIS भव एतसिन्‌ क्षमः [NFAT भवेत्‌ ॥१५॥
tad aham krta-visrambhah
su-hrdo vas tapasvinam
sariipreche bhava etasmin
ksemah kenaiijasa bhavet
tat—therefore; aham—1; krta-visrambhah—being completely assured; su-
hrdah—friend;vah—our; tapasvinam—suffering material pangs; samprcche—
wish to inquire; bhave—in this material world; etasmin—this; ksemah—


--- Page 138 ---
Text 16]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 903
ultimate reality; kena—by which means; afijasa— without delay; bhavet—
can be achieved.
TRANSLATION

I am completely assured that personalities like you are the only friends
for persons who are blazing in the fire of material existence. I therefore
ask you how in this material world we can very soon achieve the ultimate
goal of life.

PURPORT

When saintly persons go from door to door to see those who are too
much materially engaged, it is to be understood that they do not go to ask
anything for their personal benefit. It is a fact that saintly persons go to
matlerialists just to give real information of the auspicious. Maharaja
Prthu was assured of this fact; therefore instead of wasting time by asking
the Kumaras about the auspicious, he preferred to inquire from them
whether he could soon be relieved from the dangerous position of mate-
rialistic existence. This was not, however, a question personally for Prthu
Maharaja. It was raised to teach the common man that whenever one
meets a great saintly person, he should immediately surrender unto him
and inquire about relief from the material pains of existence. Therefore
Srila Narottama dasa Thikura says: samsara-visinale, divd-nisi hiyd jvale,
juddite nd kainu updya. “We are always suffering from material pangs,
and our hearts are burning, but we can not find any way out of it.” The
materialistic person can also be called a tapasvi, which means someone who
is always suffering from material pains. One can only get rid of all these
material pains when he takes shelter of the chanting of the 11316 Krsna
mantra. This is also explained by Narottama dasa Thakura: gelokera prema-
dhana, harinama-sankirtana, rati na janmila kene taya. Narottama dasa
Thakura regretted that he did not pursue his attraction for the transcen-
dental vibration of the Hare Krsna mantra. The conclusion is that all
persons in this material world are suffering from material pains, and if
one wants to get rid of them, he must associate with saintly persons, pure
devotees of the Lord, and chant the maha-mantra, Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
That is the only auspicious way for materialistic persons.

TEXT 16
स्यक्तयातत्पर्तामात्मा अग गानात्ममावनः |
खवानायनुग्रहायेमां सिद्धरूपी चरत्यजः ।१६॥


--- Page 139 ---
904 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
vyaktam atmavatam atma
bhagavan atma-bhavanah
svanam anugrahayemar
siddha-rupt caraty ajah

vyaktam—clear; atmavatam—of the transcendentalists; atma—the goal of
life; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atma-bhavanah—
always wishing to elevate the living entities; svanam—whose own devotees;
anugrahaya—just to show mercy; imam—this way; siddha-rupi—perfectly
self-realized; carati—travels; ajah—Narayana.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always anxious to elevate the
living entities, who are His parts and parcels, and for their special benefit,
the Lord travels all over the world in the form of self-realized persons like
you.

PURPORT

There are different kinds of transcendentalists, namely the jianis, or
impersonalists, the mystic yogis, and, of course, all the devotees of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Kumaras, however, were both
yogis and janis and finally bhaktas later on. In the beginning they were
impersonalists, but later they developed devotional activities; therefore
they are the best of the transcendentalists. The devotees are representa-
tives of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and to elevate the condi
tioned souls to their original consciousness, they travel all over the universes
to enlighten the conditioned souls about Krsna consciousness. The best
devotees are atmavat, or those who have fully realized the Supreme Soul.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, as Paramatma, is sitting within
everyone’s heart, trying to elevate everyone to the platform of Krsna
consciousness. Therefore He is called atma-bhavana. The Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead is always trying to give intelligence to the individual
soul to understand about Himself. He is always with the individual as a
friend sitting by the side of a friend, and He gives facilities to all living
entities according to their desires.

The word atmavatam issignificant in this verse. There are three different
kinds of devotees, namely kanistha-adhikari, madhyama-adhikart and ut-
tama-adhikari: the neophyte, the preacher, and the maha-bhagavata or the
highly advanced devotees. The highly advanced devotee is one who knows
the conclusion of the Vedas in full knowledge; thus he becomes a devotee.


--- Page 140 ---
Text 16]  Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 905
Indeed, not only is he convinced himself, but he can convince others on
the strength of Vedic evidence. The advanced devotee can also seeall other
living entities as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, without discrimina-
tion. The madhyama-adhikari (preacher) is also well-versed in the sastras
and can convince others also, but he discriminates between the favorable
and the unfavorable. In other words, the madhyama-adhikari does not
care for the demoniac living entities, and the neophyte kanistha-adhikart
does not know much about sastra but has full faith in the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. The Kumaras were, however, maha-bhagavatas because
after scrutinizingly studying the Absolute Truth, they became devotees.
In other words, they were in full knowledge of the Vedic conclusion. In
the Bhagavad-gita it is confirmed by the Lord that there are many devotees,
but a devotee who is fully conversant in the Vedic conclusion is very dear
to Him. Everyone is trying to elevate himself to the highest position ac-
cording to his mentality. The karmis, who have a bodily concept of life,
try to enjoy sense gratification to the utmost. The jitanis’ idea of the
highest position is merging into the effulgence of the Lord. But a devotee’s
highest position is in preaching all over the world the glories of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the devotees are actually the
representatives of the Supreme Lord, and as such they travel all over the
world directly as Narayana because they carry Narayana within their
hearts and preach His glories. The representative of Narayana is as good
as Narayana, but he is not to conclude, like the Mayavadis, that he has
become Narayana. Generally, a sannyast is addressed as Narayana by the
Mayavadis. Their idea is that simply by taking sannyasa one becomes
equal to Narayana or becomes Narayana Himself. The Vaisnava conclu-
sion is different, as stated by Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura:

saksad-dharitvena samasta-$astrair

uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhih
kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
vande guroh $ri-caranaravindam

According to the Vaisnava philosophy, a devotee is as good as Narayana
not by becoming Narayana but by becoming the most confidential servant
of Narayana. Such great personalities act as spiritual masters for the bene-
fit of the people in general, and as such, a spiritual master who is preach-
ing the glorics of Narayana should be accepted as Narayana and be given
all respects due Him.


--- Page 141 ---
906 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
TEXT 17
मैत्रेय उवाच
पएृथोस्तत्छ्तमाकर्यं सारं सुषु मितं मधु ।
खयमान इव प्रीत्या कमारः प्रत्युवाच ह ॥। १५७
maitreya ८४०८०
prthos tat suktam akarnya
saram susthu mitam madhu
smayamana iva pritya
kumarah pratyuvaca ha
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; prthoh—
of King Prthu; tat—that; suktam— Vedic conclusion; akarnya—hearing;
saram—very substantial; susthu—appropriate; mitam—minimized; madhu—
sweet to hear; smayamanah—smiling; iva—like; pritya—out of great satis-
faction; kumarah—celibate; pratyuvaca—replied; ha—thus.
TRANSLATION
Thus Sanatkumara, the best of the celibates, after hearing the speech of
Prthu Maharaja, which was meaningful, appropriate, full of precise words
and very sweet to hear, smiled with full satisfaction and began to speak as
follows.
PURPORT
Prthu Maharaja’s talks before the Kumaras were very laudable because
of so many qualifications. A speech should be composed of selected words,
very sweet to hear and appropriate to the situation. Such speech is called
meaningful. All these good qualifications are present in Prthu Maharaja’s
speech because he is a perfect devotee. It is said, yasydsti bhaktir bhaga-
vaty akificana sarvair gunais tatra samdsate surah: “For one who has un-
flinching devotional faith and is engaged in His service, all good qualities
become manifest in his person.” (Bhag. 5.18.12) Thus the Kumaras were
very much pleased, and Sanat-kumara began to speak as follows.
TEXT 18
सनत्कमार उवाच
साधु पृष्टं महाराज सर्वभरूतटितात्यना ।
अवता विदुषा चापि साधूनां मतिरीरश्ची ॥१८॥


--- Page 142 ---
Text 19]  Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 907
sanat-kumadra uvaca
sadhu prstarh maharaja
sarvabhuta-hitatmana
bhavata vidusa capi
sadhunam matir idrst
sanat-kumdrah uvaca—Sanatkumara said; sadhu—saintly; prstam—ques-
tion; maharaja—my dear King; sarva-bhuta—all living entities; hita-atmana—
by one who desires good for all; bhavata—by you; vidusa—well learned;
ca—and; api—although; sadhunam—of the saintly persons; matih—intelli-
gence; 1drsi—like this.
TRANSLATION
Sanat-kumara said: My dear King Prthu, I am very nicely questioned by
you, and such questions are beneficial for all living entities, especially
because they are raised by you, who are always thinking of the good of
others. Although you know everything, still you ask such questions
because that is the behavior of saintly persons. Such intelligence is befit-
ting your position.
PURPORT
Maharaja Prthu was well conversant in transcendental science, yet he
presented himself before the Kumaras as one ignorant of it. The idea is
that even if a person is very exalted and knows e erything, before his
superior he should present questions. For instance, although Arjuna knew
all the transcendental science, he questioned Krsna as if he did not know.
Similarly, Prthu Maharaja knew everything, but he presented himself
before the Kumaras as if he did not know anything. The idea is that ques-
tions by exalted persons put before the Supreme Personality of Godhead
or His devotees are meant for the benefit of the general people. Therefore
sometimes great personalities put themselves in that position and inquire
from higher authority because they are always thinking of the benefit of
others.
TEXT 19
सङ्गमः खलु साधूनाणमयेषां च सम्मतः |
यत्सम्माषणसम्द्रक्षः सर्वेषां वितनोति शम्‌ ।१९॥
sangamah khalu sadhunam
ubhayesam ca sammatah


--- Page 143 ---
908 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
yat-sambhasana-samprasnah
sarvesarn vitanoti Sam

sangamah—association; khalu—certainly; sadhinam—of devotees; ubha-
yesam—for both; ca—also; sammatah—conclusive; yat— which; sambhasana—
discussion; samprasnah—question and answer; sarvesam—of all; vitanoti—
expands; Sam—real happiness.

TRANSLATION

When there is a congregation of devotees, their discussions, questions
and answers become conclusive to both the speaker and the audience. Thus
such a meeting is beneficial for everyone’s real happiness.

PURPORT

Hearing discussions among the devotees is the only means to receive
the powerful message of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For in-
stance, Bhagavad-gita has been well known all over the world for a very
long time, especially in the western world, but because the subject matter
was not discussed by devotees, there was no effect. Not a single person
in the West became Krsna conscious before the Krsna consciousness move-
ment was founded. When the same Bhagavad-gita was presented as it is
through the disciplic succession, there wasimmediately spiritual realization.

Sanat-kumara, one of the Kumaras, informed Prthu Maharaja that his
meeting with the Kumaras benefited not only Maharaja Prthu but
the Kumaras as well. When Narada Muni questioned Lord Brahma about
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Brahma thanked Narada Muni
because he gave him a chance to speak about the Supreme Lord. Therefore
questions about the Supreme Personality of Godhead or about the ultimate
goal of life put by a saintly person to another saintly person surcharge
everything spiritually. Whoever takes advantage of such discussions is
benefited both in this life and in the next.

The word ubhayesam can be described in many ways. Generally there
are two classes of men, the materialist and the transcendentalist. By hear-
ing discussions between devotees, both the materialist and transcendentalist
are benefited. The materialist is benefited by association with devotees,
and his life becomes regulated so that his chance of becoming a devotee
or making the present life successful for understanding the real position of
the living entity is increased. When one takes advantage of this opportu-
nity, he is assured of a human form of life in the next birth, or he may be
liberated completely and go back home, back to Godhead. The con-


--- Page 144 ---
Text 20] = Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 909
clusion is that if one participates in a discussion of devotees, he is both
materially and spiritually benefited. The speaker and the audience are
both benefited, and the karmis and jiianis are benefited. The discussion of
spiritual matters amongst devotees is beneficial for everyone without ex-
ception. Consequently the Kumaras admitted that not only was the King
benefited by such a meeting, but the Kumaras were as well.
TEXT 20
अस्त्येव राजन्‌ भवतो मधुद्विषः
पादारविन्दस्य गुणानुवादने |
रतिदुरापा विधुनोति नैष्ठिकी
कामं कषायं रमन्तरात्मनः Rell
asty eva rajan bhavato madhu-dvisah
padaravindasya gunanuvadane
ratir durapa vidhunoti naisthiki
kamam kasayam malam antaratmanah
asti—there is; eva—certainly; rajan—O King; bhavatah—your; madhu-
dvisah—of the Lord; pada-aravindasya—of the lotus feet; guna-anuvadane—
in glorifying; ratih—attachment; durapa—very difficult; vidhunoti—washes;
naisthiki—unflinching; kamam—lusty; kasayam—embellishment; malam—
dirty; antar-atmanah—from the core of the heart.
TRANSLATION
Sanat-kumara continued: My dear King, you already have an inclination
to glorify the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such
attachment is very difficult to achieve, but when one has attained such
unflinching faith in the Lord, it automatically cleanses lusty desires from
the core of the heart.
PURPORT
satarn prasangan mama virya-sarnvido
bhavanti hrt-karnae-rasayanah kathah
taj-josanad asv apavarga-vartmani
Sraddha-ratir bhaktir anukramisyati (Bhag. 3.25.25)
By association with devotees, dirty things within the heart of a materialis-
tic man are gradually washed away by the grace of the Supreme Person-


--- Page 145 ---
910 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
ality of Godhead. As silver becomes shiny by being polished, so lusty
desires within the heart of a materialistic person are cleansed by the good
association of devotees. Actually the living being has no connection with
this material enjoyment nor with lusty desires. He is simply imagining or
dreaming while asleep. But by the association of pure devotees, he
is awakened, and immediately the spirit soul is situated in his own
glory by understanding his constitutional position as the eternal servant
of the Lord. Prthu Maharaja was already a self-realized soul; therefore
he had a natural inclination to glorify the activities of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and the Kumaras assured him that there was no
chance of his falling victim to the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord. In
other words, the process of hearing and chanting about the glories of the
Lord is the only means to clarify the heart of material contamination. By
the process of karma, jiana and yoga, no one will succeed in driving away
contamination from the heart, but once a person takes to the shelter of the
lotus feet of the Lord by devotional service, automatically all dirty
things in the heart are removed without difficulty.
TEXT 21
जछाखष्वियानेव सुनिश्चितो aut
श्ेमस्य सध्यग्विमशेषु हेतुः ।
असङ्ग आत्मव्यतिरिक्त आत्मनि
ढा amt निर्गुणे च या ue
Sastresv iyan eva suniscito nrnpam
ksemasya sadhryag-vimrsesu hetuh
asanga atma-vyatirikta atmani
drdha ratir brahmani nirgune ca ya
sastresu—in the scriptures; iyan eva—this is only; suniscitah— positively
concluded; nrnam—of human society; ksemasya—of the ultimate welfare;
sadhryak— perfectly; vimrsesu—by full consideration; hetuh—cause;
asangah—unattachment; atma-vyatirikte—bodily concept of life; atmani—
unto the Supreme Soul; drdh@—strong; ratih—attachment; brahmani—tran-
scendence; nirgune—in the Supreme, who is beyond the material modes;
ca—and; ya—which.
TRANSLATION
It has been conclusively decided in the scriptures, after due considera-
tion, that the ultimate goal for the welfare of human society is detach-


--- Page 146 ---
Text 22] = Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 911
ment from the bodily concept of life and increased and steadfast attach-
ment for the Supreme Lord, who is transcendental and beyond the modes
of material nature.
PURPORT

Everyone in human society is engaged for the ultimate benefit of life,
but persons who are in the bodily conception cannot achieve the ultimate
goal, nor can they understand what it is. The ultimate goal of life is
described in Bhagavad-gita. Param drstva nivartate (Bg. 2.59). When one
finds out the supreme goal of life, he naturally becomes detached from the
bodily concept. Here in this verse the indication is that one has to stead-
fastly increase attachment for Transcendence (brahmani). Asit is confirmed
in the Vedanta-siitra, athato brahma-jijaasa (Vs. 1.1.1): without inquiry
about the Supreme or the Transcendence, one cannot give up attachment
for this material world. By the evolutionary process in 8,400,000 species
of life, one cannot understand the ultimate goal of life because in all those
species of life. tiie bodily conception is very prominent. Athato brahma-
Jijiiasa means that in order to get out of the bodily conception, one has to
increase attachment or inquiry about Brahman. Then he can be situated
in the transcendental devotional service—sravanam kirtanam visnoh. To
increase attachment for Brahman means to engage in devotional service.
Those who are attached to the impersonal form of Brahman cannot remain
altached for very long. Impersonalists, after rejecting this world as mithya
or false (jagan-mithya), come down again to this jagan-mithya, although
they take sannyasa to increase their attachment for Brahman. Similarly,
many yogis who are attached to the localized aspect of Brahman as
Paramatma-great sages like Visvamitra—also fall down as victims of
women. Therefore increased attachment for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is advised in all sastras. That is the only way of detachment from
material existence and is explained in Bhagavad-gita as param drstva
nivartate (Bg. 2.59). One can cease material activities when he actually has
the taste for devotional service. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also recom-
mended love of Godhead as the ultimate goal of life (prema pumdrtho
mahan). Without increasing love of Godhead, one cannol achieve the
perfectional stage or the transcendental position.

TEXT 22
सा श्रद्धया मगवद्धमेच्यया
जिन्ञासयाऽऽच्यात्पिकयोगनिष्ठया |


--- Page 147 ---
912 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
योगेश्वरोपासनया च॒ नित्यं
पृण्यश्चवःकथया पृण्यया च ।॥२२॥
sa $raddhaya bhagavad-dharma-caryaya
Jijiiasayadhyatmika-yoga-nisthaya
yogesSvaropasanaya ca nityam
punya-$ravah-kathaya punyaya ca
sa—that devotional service; sraddhaya—with faith and conviction;
bhagavat-dharma—devotional service; caryaya—by discussion; jijiasaya—
by inquiry ;adhyatmika—spiritual;yoga-nisthaya—by conviction in spiritual
understanding; yogesvara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upasa-
naya—by worship of Him; ca—and; nityam—regularly; punya-sravah—by
hearing which; kathaya—by discussion; punyaya—by pious; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Attachment for the Supreme can be increased by practicing devotional
service, inquiring about the Supreme Personality of God, applying bhakti-
yoga in life, worshiping the Yogesvara, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, and by hearing and chanting about the glories of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. These actions are pious in themselves.
PURPORT
The word yogesvara is applicable to both the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, and His devotees also. In Bhagavad-gita this word occurs
in two places. In the Eighteenth Chapter (18.78), Krsna is described as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who is the master of all mystic
power (yatra yogesvarah krsno). Yogesvara is also described at the end of
the Sixth Chapter (sa me yuktatamo matah) (Bg. 6.47). This yuktatama
indicates the topmost of all yogis—the devotees, who can also be called
yogesvara. In this verse yogesvara-upasana means to render service to a
pure devotee. Thus Narottama dasa Thakura says: chadiya vaisnava-seva
nistara payeche keba. Without serving a pure devotee, one cannot advance
in spiritual life. Prahlada Maharaja also has said:
17204501712 matis tavad urukramanghrim
sprsaty anarthapagamo yad arthah
# mahiyasar pada-rajo’bhisekarm
niskificananam na vrnita yavat. (Bhag. 7.5.32)


--- Page 148 ---
Text 23]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 913
One should take shelter of a pure devotee, who has nothing to do with this
material world but is simply engaged in devotional service. By serving him
only, one can transcend the qualitative material condition. In this verse it
is recommended (yogesvara-upasanaya) that one serve the lotus feet of the
topmost yogi, or the devotee. To serve the topmost devotee means to hear
from him about the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To
hear the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from the mouth of
a pure devotee is to acquire a pious life. In Bhagavad-gita it is also said
that without being pious one cannot engage in devotional service.
yesar tv anta-gatari paparn jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta bhajante mam drdha-vratah (Bg. 7.28)

To become fixed in devotional service one has to become completely
cleansed from the contamination of the material modes of nature. For
work in devotional service the first item is adau gurvasrayam: one should
accept a bona fide spiritual master, and from the bona fide spiritual master
(5८व-८९८ 7720-7 ८८112 / inquire about his transcendental occupational duties
(sadnhu-marga-anugamanam) and follow in the footsteps of great saintly
persons, devotees. These are the instructions given in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
by Rupa Gosvami.

The conclusion is that to increase attachment for the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead one has to accept a bona fide spiritual master and learn
from him the methods of devotional service and hear from him about the
transcendental message and glorification of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In this way one has to increase his conviction about devotional
service. Then it will be very easy to increase attachment for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 23
अर्थेन्द्रियारामसगोष्ठयदष्णया
तत्सम्मतानामपरिग्रहेण च ।
विविक्तरुच्या परितोष आत्मनि
Q
बिना हरेगगपीयूषयानात्‌ 112311
arthendriyarama-sagosthy-atrsnaya
. tat-sammatanam aparigrahena ca
vivikta-rucya paritosa atmani
vina harer guna-piyusa-panat


--- Page 149 ---
914 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22

artha—riches; indriya—senses; arama—gratification; sa-gosthi—with their
companion; atrsnaya—by reluctance; tat—that; sammatanam—since ap-
proved by them; aparigrahena—by nonacceptance; ca—also; vivikta-rucya—
disgusted taste; paritose—happiness; atmani—self; vina—without; hareh— of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guna—qualities; pryisa—nectar;
panat— drinking.

TRANSLATION

One has to make progress in spiritual life by not associating with per-
sons who are simply interested in making money and sense gratification.
Not only such persons, but one who associates with such persons should be
avoided. One should mold his life in such a way that he cannot live in
peace without drinking the nectar of the glorification of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Hari. One can be thus elevated by losing taste for
sense enjoyment.

PURPORT

In the material world everyone is interested in money and sense gratifi-
cation. The only objective is to earn as much money as possible and utilize
it for satisfaction of the senses. Srila Sukadeva Gosvimi thus described
the activities of the materialistic persons:

nidraya hriyate naktam vyavayena ca va vayah
diva carthehaya rajan kutumba-bharanena va (Bhag. 2.1.3)

This is a typical example of materialistic persons. At night they waste their
time by sleeping more than six hours or by wasting time in sex indulgence.
This is their occupation at night, and in the morning they go to their office
or business place just to earn money. As soon as there is some money, they
become busy in purchasing things for their children and others. Such per-
sons are never interested in understanding the values of life—what is God,
what is the individual soul, what is its relationship with God, etc. Things
are degraded to such an extent that those who are supposed to be religious
are also at the present moment only interested in sense gratification. The
number of materialistic persons in this age of Kali has increased more than
in any other age; therefore persons who are interested in going back home,
back to Godhead, should not only engage in the service of realized souls
but should give up the company of materialistic persons whose only aim is
to earn money and employ it in sense gratification. They should also not


--- Page 150 ---
Text 23] Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 915
accept the objectives of materialistic persons, namely money and sense
gratification. Therefore it is stated: bhakti—parasyanubhavarin viraktir
anyatha syat. To advance in devotional service one should be uninterested
in the materialistic way of life. That which is the subject matter of satis-
faction for the devotees is of no interest to the nondevotees.

Simple negation, or giving up the company of materialistic persons, will
not do. We must have engagements. Sometimes it is found that a person
interested in spiritual advancement gives up the company of material
society and goes to a secluded place as recommended for the yogis es-
pecially, but that will also not help a person in spiritual advancement, for
in many instances such yogis also fall down. As far as jadnis
are concerned, generally they fall down without taking shelter of the lotus
feet of the Lord. The impersonalists or the voidists can simply avoid the
positive material association; they cannot remain fixed in transcendence
without being engaged in devotjonal service. The beginning of devotional
service is to hear about the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
That is recommended in this verse: vina harer guna-piyusa-panat. One must
drink the nectar of the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and this means that one must be always engaged in hearing and chanting
the glories of the Lord. It is the prime method for advancing in spiritual
life. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu also recommends this in the Caitanya-
caritamrta. If one wants to make advancement in spiritual life, by great
fortune he may meet a bona fide spiritual master and from him learn about
Krsna. By serving both the spiritual master and Krsna he gets the seed of
devotional service (bhakti-lata-bija), and if he sows the seed within his heart
and waters it by hearing and chanting, it grows into a luxuriant bhakti-lata
or bhakti creeper. The creeper is so strong that it penetrates the covering
of the universe and reaches the spiritual world and continues to grow on
and on until it reaches and takes shelter of the lotus feet of Krsna. An
ordinary creeper also grows on and on until it takes a solid shelter on a
roof; then it very steadily grows and produces the required fruit. The real
cause of the growing of such fruit, which is here called nectar, is hearing
and chanting the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
purport is that one cannot live outside the society of devotees; one must
live in the association of devotees, where there is constant chanting and
hearing of the glories of the Lord. The Krsna consciousness movement is
started for this purpose, and there are hundreds of ISKCON centers to
give opportunity to all people to hear and chant and to accept the spiritual
master. By not associating with persons who are materially interested, one
can make solid advancement in going back home, back to Godhead.


--- Page 151 ---
916 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
TEXT 24
अहिंसया पारमहंस्यचर्यया
स्मृत्या घुङन्दाचरिताग़्यसीघुना |
यमेरकामेनिययेधाप्यनिन्दया
निरीहया इन्द्रतितिक्षया च ॥२४॥
ahimsaya paremahamsya-caryaya
smrtya mukundacaritagrya-sidhuna
yamair akamair niyamais capy anindaya
nirthaya dvandva-titiksaya ca
ahimsaya—by nonviolence; paramahamsya-caryaya—by following in the
footsteps of great acaryas; smrtya—by remembering; mukunda—the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead; acarita-agrya—simply preaching His ac-
tivities; stidhuna—by the nectar; yamaih—by following regulative principles;
akamaih—without material desires; niyamaih—by strictly following the
rules and regulations; ca—also;api—certainly; anindaya— without blasphem-
ing; nirthaya—living simply, plain living; dvandva—duality; titiksaya—by
tolerance; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
A candidate for spiritual advancement must be nonviolent, must follow
in the footsteps of great acaryas, must always remember the nectar of the
pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, must follow the regu-
lative principles without material desire, and, while following the regula-
tive principles, should not blaspheme others. A devotee should lead a very
simple life and not be disturbed by the duality of opposing elements. He
should learn to tolerate them.
PURPORT
The devotees are actually saintly persons or sadhus. The first qualifica-
tion of a sadhu or devotee is ahimsa or nonviolence. Persons interested in
the path of devotional service or in going back home, back to Godhead,
must first practice ahimsa or nonviolence. A sadhu is described as
titiksavah karunikah (Bhag. 3.25.21). A devotee should be tolerant and
should be very much compassionate toward others. For example, if he
suffers personal injury, he should tolerate it, but if someone else suffers
injury, he need not tolerate it. The whole world is full of violence, and a
devotee’s first business is to stop this violence, including the unnecessary


--- Page 152 ---
Text 24]  Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 917
slaughter of animals. A devotee is the friend not only of human society
but of all living entities, for he sees all living entities as sons of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. He does not claim himself to be the only
son of God and allow all others to be killed, thinking that they have no
soul. This kind of philosophy is never advocated by a pure devotee of the
Lord. Suhrdah sarva-dehinam: a true devotee is the friend of all living
entities. Krsna claims in Bhagavad-gita to be the father of all species of
living entities; consequently the devotee of Krsna is always a friend of all.
This is called ahimsa. Such nonviolence can be practiced only when we
follow in the footsteps of great acaryas. Therefore, according to our
Vaispava philosophy, we have to follow the great acaryas of the four
sampradayas or disciplic successions.

Trying to advance in spiritual life outside the disciplic succession is
simply ludicrous. It is said, therefore: acaryavan puruso veda (Chand.
Up. 6.14.2). One who follows the disciplic succession of acaryas knows
things as they are. Tad-vijiianartham sa gurum evabhigacchet (Mund. Up.
1.2.12). In order to understand the transcendental science, one must
approach the bona fide spiritual master. The word smrtya is very impor-
tant in spiritual life. Smrtya means remembering Krsna always. Life should
be molded in such a way that one cannot remain alone without thinking
of Krsna. We should live in Krsna so that while eating, sleeping, walking
and working we remain only in Krsna. Our Krsna consciousness society
recommends that we arrange our living so that we can remember Krsna.
In our ISKCON society the devotees, while engaged in making Spiritual
Sky incense, are also hearing about the glories of Krsna or His devotees.
The sastra recommends: smartavyah satatam visnuh. Lord Vignu should be
remembered always, constantly. Vismartavyo na jatucit: Visnu should
never be forgotten. That is the spiritual way of life. Smrtya. This
remembrance of the Lord can be continued if we hear about Him con-
stantly. It is therefore recommended in this verse: mukundacaritagrya-
sidhuna. Sidhu means nectar. To hear about Krsna from Srimad-
Bhagavatam or Bhagavad-gita or similar authentic literature is to live in
Krsna consciousness. Such concentration in Krsna consciousness can be
achieved by persons who are strictly following the rules and regulative
principles. We have recommended in our Krsna consciousness movement
that a devotee chant sixteen rounds on beads daily and follow the
regulative principles. That will help the devotee to spiritually advance in
life.

It is also stated in this verse that by controlling the senses one can
become a svami or gosvami. One who is therefore enjoying this super-


--- Page 153 ---
918 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
title, svami or gosvamt, must be very strict in controlling his senses. Indeed,
he must be master of his senses. This is possible when one does not desire
any material sense gratification. If, by chance, the senses want to work
independently, he must control them. If we simply practice avoiding
material sense gratification, controlling the senses is automatically
achieved.

Another important point mentioned in this connection (anindaya) is
that we should not criticize others’ methods of religion. There are
different types of religious systems operating under different qualities of
material nature. Those operating in the modes of ignorance and passion
cannot be as perfect as that system in the mode of goodness. In Bhagavad-
gita everything has been divided into three qualitative divisions; therefore
religious systems are similarly categorized. When people are mostly under
the modes of passion and ignorance, their system of religion will be of the
same quality. A devotee, instead of criticizing such systems, will encourage
the followers to stick to their principles so that gradually they can come
to the platform of religion in goodness. Simply by criticizing them, a
devotee’s mind will be agitated. Thus a devotee should tolerate and learn
to stop agitation.

Another feature of the devotee is nirthaya, simple living. Nirtha means
gentle, meek or simple. A devotee should not live very gorgeously and
imitate a materialistic person. Plain living and high thinking are recom-
mended for a devotee. He should accept only so much as he can to keep
the material body fit for the execution of devotional service. He should
not eat nor sleep more than is required. Simply eating for living, and not
living for eating, and sleeping only six to seven hours a day are principles
to be followed by devotees. As long as the body is there it is subjected to
the influence of climatic changes, disease and natural disturbances, the
threefold miseries of material existence. We cannot avoid them. Some-
times we receive letters from neophyte devotees questioning why they
have fallen sick, although pursuing Krsna consciousness. They should
learn from this verse that they have to become tolerant (dvandva-
titiksaya). This is the world of duality. Because he has fallen sick, one
should not think that he has fallen from Krsna consciousness. Krsna con-
sciousness can continue withoutimpediment from any material opposition.
Lord Sri Krsna therefore advises in Bhagavad-gita, tams titiksasva bharata:
“My dear Arjuna, please try to tolerate all these disturbances. Be fixed
in your Krsna conscious activities.” (Bg. 2.14)


--- Page 154 ---
Text 25] Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 919
TEXT 25
दरेहसतत्परकर्णपूर-
गुणाभिधानेन विजम्भमाणया |
भक्त्या GEE: सदसत्यनात्मनि
९
स्यानिगुणे ब्रह्मणि चाञ्जसा रतिः ॥ २५॥
harer muhus tat-para-karna-pura-
gunabhidhanena vijrmbhamanaya
bhaktya hy asangah sad-asaty anatmani
syan nirgune brahmani canjasa ratih
hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; muhuh—constantly;
tat-para—in relation with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; karpa-
pura—decoration of the ear: guna-abhidhanena—discussing transcendental
qualities; vijrmbhamanaya—by increasing Krsna consciousness; bhaktya—
by devotion; hi—certainly; asangah—uncontaminated; sat-asati—the mate-
rial world; anatmani—opposed to spiritual understanding; syat—should be;
nirgune—in transcendence; brahmani—in the Supreme Lord; ca—and;
anijasa—easily; ratih—attraction.
TRANSLATION
The devotee should gradually increase the culture of devotional service
by constant hearing of the transcendental qualities of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. These pastimes are like ornamental decorations on the
ears of devotees. By rendering devotional service and transcending the
material qualities, one can easily be fixed in transcendence in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
This verse is especially mentioned to substantiate the devotional process
of hearing the subject matter. A devotee does not like to hear anything
other than subjects dealing with spiritual activities, or the pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. We can increase our propensity for
devotional service by hearing Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam from
realized souls. The more we hear from realized souls, the more we make
advancement in our devotional life. The more we advance in devotional
life, the more we become detached from the material world. The more we
become detached from the material world, the less we associate with


--- Page 155 ---
920 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
persons who are after money and sense gratification. This is the advice
of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu:
niskificanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya
parari param jigamisor bhava-sagarasya
sandar$anari visayinam atha yositam ca
ha hanta hanta visa -bhaksanato’py asadhu.
(Cc. Madhya 11.8)

The word brahmani used in this verse is commented upon by the imper-
sonalists or professional reciters of Bhagavatam, who are mainly advocates
of the caste system by demoniac birthright. They say that brahmani means
the impersonal Brahman. But they cannot conclude this without reference
to the context of the words bhaktya and gunabhidhanena. According to
the impersonalists, there are no transcendental qualities in the impersonal
Brahman; therefore we should understand that brahmani means “in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.” Krsna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as admitted by Arjuna in Bhagavad-gita; therefore wherever the
word brahma is used, it must refer to Krsna, not to the impersonal
Brahman effulgence. Brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti sabdyate (Bhag.
1.2.11). Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan can all be taken in total as
Brahman, but when there is reference to the word bhakti or remembrance
of the transcendental qualities, the word indicates the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, not the impersonal Brahman.

TEXT 26
a
यदा रतित्रह्मणि नैष्टिकी gar
Q ५,
नाचायंवान्‌ ज्ञानविरागरंहसा ।
Tad हदयं जीवकोशं
पञात्मकं योनिपिदोत्थितोऽपिः 1s
yada ratir brahmani naisthiki puman
acaryavan jiana-viraga-rarmhasa
dahaty aviryam hrdayam jiva-kosarn
. paiicatmakarm yonim ivotthito ‘gnih

yada—when; ratih—attachment; brahmani—in the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; naisthiki—fixed; puman—the. person; acaryavan—completely
surrendered to the spiritual master; jiana—knowledge; viraga—detachment;
rarihasa—by the force of; dahati—burns; aviryam—impotent; hrdayam—


--- Page 156 ---
Text 26] Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 92]
within the heart; jiva-kosam—the covering of the spirit soul; paiica-
atmakam—five elements; yonim—source of birth; iva—like; wtthitah—
emanating; agnih—fire.
TRANSLATION

Upon becoming fixed in his attachment to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by the grace of the spiritual master and by awakening knowledge
and detachment, the living entity, situated within the heart of the body
and covered by the five elements, burns up his material surroundings
exactly as fire, arising from wood, burns the wood itself.

PURPORT

It is said that both the jivatma, the individual soul, and the Paramatma
live together within the heart. In the Vedic version it is stated, hrdi hy
ayam atma: the soul and Supersoul both live within the heart. The
individual soul is liberated when it comes out of the material heart or
cleanses the heart to make it spiritualized. The example given here is very
appropriate: yonim ivotthito ‘gnih. Agni, or fire, comes out of the wood,
and by it the wood is completely destroyed. Similarly, when a living
entity increases his attachment for the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
he is to be considered like fire. A blazing fire is visible by its exhibition of
heat and light; similarly, when the living entity within the heart becomes
enlightened with full spiritual knowledge, and detached from the material
world, he burns up his material covering of the five elements—earth,
water, fire, air and sky —and becomes free from the five kinds of material
attachments, namely, ignorance, false egoism, attachment to the material
world, envy and absorption in material consciousness. Therefore
paiticatmakam, as mentioned in this verse, refers to either the five elements
or the five coverings of material contamination. When these are all burned
into ashes by the blazing fire of knowledge and detachment, one is fixed
firmly in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Unless one takes shelter of a bona fide spiritual master and advances his
attraction for Krsna by his instructions, the five coverings of the living
entity cannot be uncovered from the material heart. The living entity is
centered within the heart, and to take him away from the heart is to
liberate him. This is the process. One must take shelter of a bona fide
spiritual master and by his instruction increase one’s knowledge in
devotional service, become detached from the material world and thus
become liberated. An advanced devotee therefore does not live within the
material body but within his spiritual body, just as a dry coconut lives


--- Page 157 ---
922 $rimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
detached from the coconut husk, even though within the husk. The pure
devotee’s ‘body is therefore called cinmaya-sarira (spiritualized body). In
other words, a devotee’s body is not connected with material activities,
and as such, a devotee is always liberated. Brahma-bhuyaya kalpate.
(Bg. 14.26) This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita. Srila Rapa Gosvami also
confirms this:
tha yasya harer dasye karmana manasa vaca
nikhilasv apy avasthasu jivan-muktah sa ucyate.
“One who is engaged fully with his body, mind and speech in the service of
the Lord is liberated even within this body, despite his condition.”
TEXT 27
नैवात्मनो बहिरन्तर्विचष्टे ।
परात्मनो्द्‌ व्यवधानं पुरस्तात्‌
| यथा पुरुषस्तदिनतञचे ॥२७॥
dagdhasayo mukta-samasta-tad-guno
naivatmano bahir antar vicaste
paratmanor yad-vyavadhanarm purastat
svapne yatha purusas tad-vinase
dagdha-asayah—all material desires being burned; mukta—liberated;
samasta—all; tat-gunah—qualities in connection with matter; na—not; eva—
certainly; atmanah—the soul or the Supersoul; bahih—external; antah—
internal; vicaste—acting; para-atmanoh—of the Supersoul; yat—that;
vyavadhanam—difference; purastat—as it was in the beginning; svapne—
in dream; yatha—as; purusah—a person; tat—that; vinase—being finished.
TRANSLATION
When a person becomes devoid of all material desires and liberated from

all material qualities, he transcends distinctions between actions executed
externally and internally. At that time the difference between the soul
and the Supersoul, which was existing before self-realization, is annihilated.
When a dream is over, there is no longer a distinction between the dream
and the dreamer.


--- Page 158 ---
-.
Text 27] Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 923
PURPORT

As described by Srila Ripa Gosvami (anyabhilasita-§itnyam), one must
be devoid of all material desires. When a person becomes devoid of all
material desires, there is no longer need for speculative knowledge or
fruitive activities. In that condition it is to be understood that one is free
from the material body. The example is already given above—a coconut
which is dry is loosened from its outward husk. This is the stage of
liberation. As said in Srimad-Bhagavatam, mukti (liberation) means
svarupena avasthitih—being situated in one’s own constitutional position.
All material desires are present as long as one is in the bodily concept of
life, but when one realizes that he is an eternal servant of Krsna, his
desires are no longer material. A devotee acts in this consciousness.
In other words, when material desires in connection with the body are
finished, one is actually liberated.

When one is liberated from the material qualities, he does not do any-
thing for his personal sense gratification. At that time all activities per-
formed by him are absolute. In the conditioned state there are two kinds
of activities. One acts on behalf of the body, and at the same time he acts
to become liberated. The devotee, when he is completely free from all
material desires or all material qualities, transcends the duality of action
for the body and soul. Then the bodily concept of life is completely over.
Therefore Srila Ripa Gosvami says: tha yasya harer dasye karmana manasa
vaca/ nikhilasv apy avasthasu jivan-muktah sa ucyate. When one 15 com-
pletely fixed in the service of the Lord, he is a liberated person in any
condition of life. He is called jivan-muk tah, liberated even within this body.
In such a liberated condition, there is no distinction between actions for `
sense gratification and actions for liberation. When one is liberated from
the desires of sense gratification, he has no longer to suffer the reactions
of lamentation or illusion. Activities performed by the karmis and jrants
are subjected to lamentation and illusion, but a self-realized liberated
person acting only for the Supreme Personality of Godhead experiences
none. This is the stage of oneness, or merging into the existence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This means that the individual soul,
while keeping his individuality, no longer has separate interests. He is
fully in the service of the Lord, and he has nothing to do for his personal
sense gratification; therefore he sees only the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and not himself. His personal interest completely perishes.
When a person comes out of a dream, the dream vanishes. While dreaming
a person may consider himself a king and see the royal paraphernalia, his
soldiers, etc., but when the dream is over, he does not see anything beyond


--- Page 159 ---
924 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
himself. Similarly, a liberated person understands that he is part and parcel
of the Supreme Lord acting in accordance with the desire of the Supreme
Lord, and as such there is no distinction between himself and the Supreme
Lord, although both of them retain their individuality. Nityo nityanam
cetanas cetananam. This is the perfect conception of oneness in relation
to the Supersoul and the soul.
TEXT 28
आत्मानमिन्द्रियाथे च परं यदुभयोरपि ।
सत्याय उपाधौ वै पुमान्‌ पस्यति नान्यदा ।।२८॥
atmanam indriyartham ca
param yad ubhayor api
satyasaya upadhau vai
puman pasyati nanyada
atmanam—the soul; indriya-artham—for sense gratification; ca—and;
param—transcendental; yat—that; ubhayoh—both; api—certainly; sati—
being situated ;asaye— material desires; upadhau—designation;vai—certainly;
puman— the person; pasyati—sees; nanyada—not otherwise.
TRANSLATION
When the soul exists for sense gratification, he creates different desires,
and for that reason he becomes subjected to designations. But when one is
in the transcendental position, he is no longer interested in anything
except fulfilling the desires of the Lord.
PURPORT
Being covered by material desires, a spirit soul is also considered to be
covered by designations belonging to a particular type of body. Thus he
considers himself an animal, man, demigod, bird, beast, etc. In so many
ways he is influenced by false identification caused by false egotism, and
being covered by illusory material desires, he distinguishes between matter
and spirit. When one is devoid of such distinctions, there is no longer a
difference between matter and spirit. At that time, the spirit is the only
predominating factor. As long as one is covered by material desires, he
thinks himself the master or the enjoyer. Thus he acts for sense gratifica-
tion and becomes subjected to material pangs, happiness and distress. But
when one is freed from such a concept of life, he is no longer subjected to
designations, and he envisions everything as spiritual in connection with
the Supreme Lord. This is explained by Srila Rupa Gosvami in his Bhakti-


--- Page 160 ---
Text 29]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 925
rasémrta-sindhu: anydsaktasya visayan yatharham upayuiijatah/ nirbandhah
krsna-sambandhe yuktam vairagyam ucyate (Bh.r.s. 1.2.255).

The liberated person has no attachment for anything material or for
sense gratification. He understands that everything is connected with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and that everything should be engaged in
the service of the Lord. Therefore he does not give up anything. There is
no question of renouncing anything because the paramaharsa knows how
to engage everything in the service of the Lord. @riginally everything is
spiritual; nothing is material. In the Caitanya-caritamrta also it is explained
that a maha-bhagavata, a highly advanced devotee, has no material
vision, sthavara-jangama dekhe, na dekhe tara marti/ sarvatra haya nija
istadeva-sphitrti (Cc. Madhya 8.274). Although he sees trees, mountains,
and other living entities moving here and there, he sees all as the creation
of the Supreme Lord, and, with reference to the context, sees only the
creator and not the created. In other words, he no longer distinguishes
between the created and the creator. He sees only the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in everything. He sees Krsna in everything and everything in
Krsna. This is oneness.

TEXT 29
निमित्ते सति सर्वत्र जलादावपि पूरुषः |
आत्मनश्च परस्यापि मिदां पश्यति नान्यदा ॥२९॥
nimitte sati sarvatra
jaladav api purusah
atmanas ca parasyapi
bhidam pasyati nanyada

nimitte—on account of causes; sati—being; sarvatra—every where; jala-
adau api—water and other reflecting mediums; purusah—the person:
almanah—oneself: ca—and; parasya api—another’s self; bhidam—differen-
tiation; pasyati—sees; nanyada— there is no other reason.

TRANSLATION

Only because of different causes does a person see a difference between
himself and others. It is like the reflection of a body on water or oil or ina
mirror appearing to be differently manifested.

PURPORT

The spirit soul is one, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is
manifested in svamsa and vibhinnamsa expansions. The jivas are
vibhinnamsa expansions. The different incarnations of the Supreme


--- Page 161 ---
926 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
Personality of Godhead are 5৮07৫ expansions. Thus there are different
potencies of the Supreme Lord, and there are different expansions of
the different potencies. In this way, for different reasons there are differ-
ent expansions of the same one principle, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. This understanding is real knowledge, but when the
living entity is covered by the upadhi or designated body, he sees
differences, exactly as one sees differences in reflections of oneself
on water, oil or in a mirror. When something is reflected on the water, it
appears to be moving. When it is reflected on ice, it appears fixed. When
it isreflected on oil, it appears hazy. The subject is one, but under different
conditions it appears differently. When the qualifying factor is taken away,
the whole appears to be one. In other words, when one comes to the
paramuhamsa or perfectional stage of life by practicing bhakti-yoga, he
sees only Krsna everywhere. For him there is no other objective.

In conclusion, due to different causes, the living entity is visible in
different forms as an animal, human being, demigod, tree, etc. Actually
every living entity is the marginal potency of the Supreme Lord. In
Bhagavad-gitd, therefore, it is explained that one who actually sees the
spirit soul does not distinguish between a learned brahmana and a dog, an
elephant or a cow. Panditah sama-darsinah (Bg. 5.18). One who is actually
learned sees only the living entity, not the outward covering. Differentia-
tion is therefore the result of different karma or fruitive activities, and
when we stop fruitive activities, turning them into acts of devotion, we can
understand that we are not different from anyone else, regardless of the
form. This is only possible in Krsna consciousness. In this movement
there are many different races of men from all parts of the world partici-
pating, but because they think of themselves as servants of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, they do not differentiate between black and
white, yellow and red. The Krsna consciousness movement is therefore
the only means to make the living entities transcend all designations.

TEXT 30
इन््रियर्विषयाृष्टैराधिसं व्यायतं मनः ।
चेतनां हरते बुद्धः स्तम्बस्तोयमिव इदात्‌ ।२०॥

indriyair visayakrstair
aksiptam dhyayatam manah

cetanam harate buddheh
stambas toyam iva hradat


--- Page 162 ---
Text 30]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 927

indriyoih—by the senses; visaya—the sense objects; akrstaih—being

attracted; aksiptam—agitated; dhyayatam—always thinking of; manah—

mind; cetanam—consciousness; harate—becomes lost; buddheh—of intelli-

gence;stambah—big straws; toyam—water; tva—like; hradat—frem the lake.
TRANSLATION

When one’s mind and senses are attracted to sense objects for enjoy-
ment, the mind becomes agitated. As a result of continually thinking of
sense objects, one’s real consciousness almost becomes lost, like the water
in a lake that is gradually sucked up by the big grass straws on its bank.

PURPORT

In this verse it is very nicely explained how our original Krsna con-
sciousness becomes polluted. Gradually we become almost completely
forgetful of our relationship with the Supreme Lord. In the previous verse
it is recommended that we should always keep in touch with the devotion-
al service of the Lord so that the blazing fire of devotional service can
gradually burn into ashes material desires and we can become liberated
from the repetition of birth and death. This is also how we can indirectly
keep our staunch faith in the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. When the mind is allowed to think of sense gratification con-
tinuously, it becomes the cause of our material bondage.If our mind is
simply filled with sense gratification, even though we want Krsna con-
sciousness, by continuous practice we cannot forget the subject matter of
sense gratification. If one takes up the sannyasa order of life but is not
able to control the mind, he will think of objects of sense gratification—
namely family, society, expensive house, etc. Even though he goes to the
Himalayas or the forest, his mind will continue thinking of the objects of
sense gratification. In this way, gradually one’s intelligence will be affected.
When intelligence is affected, one loses his original taste for Krsna con-
sciousness.

The example given here is very appropriate. If a big lake is covered all
around by long kusa grass, just like columns, the waters dry up. Similarly,
when the big columns of material desire increase, the clear water of con-
sciousness is dried up. Therefore these columns of kusa grass should be
cut or thrown away from the very beginning. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has
instructed that if from the very beginning we do not take care of unwant-
ed grass in the paddy fields, the fertilizing agents or water will be used by
them and the paddy plants will dry up. The material desire for sense en-


--- Page 163 ---
928 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
joyment is the cause of our falldown in this material world, and thus we
suffer the threefold miseries and continuous birth, death, old age and
disease. However, if we turn our desires toward the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, our desires become purified. We cannot kill desires.
We have to purify them of different designations. If we constantly think
of being a member of a particular nation, society or family and continuous-
ly think about them, we become very strongly entangled in the con-
ditioned life of birth and death. But if our desires are applied to the
service of the Lord, they become purified, and thus we become immediate-
ly freed from material contamination.
TEXT 31
ऋरस्यत्यनुस्मरतिथित्तं ज्ञानभ्रंशः afd |
तद्रोधं कवयः प्राहुरात्भाषष्टवमात्मनः 13211
bhrasyaty anusmrtis cittam
Jnrana-bhramsah smrti-ksaye
tad-rodham kavayah prahur
atmapahnavam atmanah

bhrasyati—becomes destroyed;anusmrtih—constantly thinking; cittam—
consciousness; jiana-bhramsah—bereft of real knowledge; smrti-ksaye—by
destruction of remembrance; tat-rodham— choking that process; kavayah—
great learned scholars; prahuh—have opined ;atma—ot the soul;apahnavam—
destruction; atmanah—of the soul.

TRANSLATION

When one deviates from his original consciousness, he loses the capacity
to remember his previous position or recognize his present one. When re-
membrance is lost, all knowledge that is acquired is based on a false foun-
dation. When this occurs, learned scholars consider that the soul is lost.

PURPORT

The living entity or the soul is ever existing and eternal. It cannot be
lost, but learned scholars say that it is lost when actual knowledge is not
working. That is the difference between animals and human beings. Accord-
ing to less intelligent philosophers, animals have no soul. But factually
animals have souls. Due to the animals’ gross ignorance, however, it appears
that they have lost their souls. Without the soul, a body cannot move. That
is the difference between a living body and a dead body. When the soul is
out of the body, the body is called dead. The soul is said to be lost when


--- Page 164 ---
Text 32]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 929
there is no proper knowledge exhibited. Our original consciousness is Krsna
consciousness because we are part and parcel of Krsna. When this conscious-
ness is misguided and one is put into the material atmosphere. which pol-
lutes the original consciousness, one thinks that he is a product of the
material elements. Thus one loses his real remembrance of his position as
part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as a man who
sleeps forgets himself. In this way, when the activities of proper conscious-
ness are checked, all the activities of the lost soul are performed on a
false basis. At the present moment human civilization is acting on a false
platform of bodily identification; therefore it can be said that the people
of the present age have lost their souls.
TEXT 32
- o
नातः परतरो रोके पुंसः स्कथंव्यतिकमः |
यद्यन्यस्य प्रेथस्त्वमात्मनः स्वच्यतिकमात्‌ 11321)
natah parataro loke
pumsah svartha-vyatikramah
yadadhy anyasya preyastvam
atmanah sva-vyatikramat

na—not;atah— after this; paratarah—greater;loke—in this world; purisah—
of the living entities; sva-artha— interest; vyatikramah—obstruction;
yadadhi—beyond that;anyasya—of others; preyastvam—to be more interest-
ing; atmanah—for the self; sva—own; vyatikramat—by obstruction.

TRANSLATION

There is no stronger obstruction to one’s self-interest than thinking other

subject matters to be more pleasing than one’s self-realization.
PURPORT

Human life is especially meant for self-realization. Self refers to the
Superself and the individual self, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
the living entity. When, however, one becomes more interested in the
body and bodily sense gratification, he creates for himself obstructions on
the path of self-realization. By the influence of mdyd, one becomes more
interested in sense gratification, which is prohibited in this world for
those interested in self-realization. Instead of becoming interested in
sense gratification, one should divert his activities to satisfy the senses of
the Supreme Soul. Anything performed contrary to this principle is cer-
tainly against one’s self-interest.


--- Page 165 ---
930 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
TEXT 33
अर्येन्वियायौमिष्यानं सर्वा्यापटयो Jom |
HEA ज्ञानविज्ञानायेनादिश्षति युख्यताम्‌ 12321
arthendriyarthabhidhyanam
sarvarthapahnavo nrnam
bhramsito jhana-vijianad
yenavisati mukhyatam

artha—riches; indriya-artha— for the satisfaction of the senses;
abhidhyyanam—constantly thinking of; sarva-artha—four kinds of achieve-
ments; apahnaval—destructive; nrnam—of human society; bhramsitah—
being devoid of; jiana—knowledge; vijianat— devotional service; yena—
by all this; avisati—enters; mukhyatam—immovable life.

TRANSLATION

For human society, constantly thinking of how to earn money and
apply it for sense gratification brings about the destruction of everyone’s
interests. When one becomes devoid of knowledge and devotional service,
he enters into species of life like those of trees and stones.

PURPORT

Jiiana, or knowledge, means to understand one’s constitutional position,
and vijiidna refers to practical application of that knowledge in life. In the
human form of life, one should come to the position of jiidna and vijiidna,
but despite this great opportunity if one does not develop knowledge and
practical application of knowledge through the help of a spiritual master
and the $dastras—in other words, if one misuses this opportunity —then in
the next life he is sure to be born in a species of nonmoving living entities.
Nonmoving living entities include hills, mountains, trees, plants, etc. This
stage of life is called punyatdm or mukhyatam, namely, making all activi-
ties zero. Philosophers who support stopping all activities are called sanya-
vadi. By nature’s own way, our activities are to be gradually diverted to
devotional service. But there are philosophers who, instead of purifying
their activities, try to make everything zero, or void of all activities. This
lack of activity is represented by the trees and the hills. This is a kind of
punishment inflicted by the laws of nature. If we do not properly execute
our mission of life in self-realization, nature’s punishment will render us
inactive by putting us in the form of trees and hills. Therefore activities
directed towards sense gratification are condemned herein. One who is


--- Page 166 ---
Text 34]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 931
constantly thinking of activities to earn money and gratify the senses is
following a path which is suicidal. Factually all human society is following
this path. Some way or other, people are determined to earn money or get
money by begging, borrowing or stealing and applying that for sense grati-
fication. Such a civilization is the greatest obstacle in the path of self-
realization.
TEXT 34
न कयात्कटिचित्सङ्गं तमसतीव्र॑तितीरिषुः ।
घर्माथकाममोश्षाणां यदत्यन्तविघातकम्‌ ॥३४॥
na kuryat karhicit sangam
tamas tivram titirisuh
dharmartha-kama-moksanam
yad atyanta-vighatakam

na—do not; kuryat—act; karhicit—at any time; saiigam—association;
tamah—ignorance; tivram— with great speed; titirisuh—persons who desire
to cross over nescience; dharma—religion; artha—economic development;
kama—sense gratification; moksanam—of salvation; yat—that which;
atyanta—very much; vighatakam— obstruction or stumbling block.

TRANSLATION

Those who strongly desire to cross the ocean of nescience must not
associate with the modes of ignorance because hedonistic activities are the
greatest obstructions to realization of religious principles, economic
development, regulated sense gratification and, at last, liberation.

PURPORT

The four principles of life allow one to live according to religious princi-
ples, to earn money according to one’s position in society, to allow the
senses to enjoy the sense objects according to regulations, and to progress
along the path of liberation from this material attachment. As long as the
body is there, it is not possible to become completely free from all these
material interests. It is not, however, recommended that one act only for
sense gratification and earn money for that purpose only, sacrificing all
religious principles. At the present moment, human civilization does not
care for religious principles. It is, however, greatly interested in economic
development without religious principles. For instance, in a slaughterhouse
the butchers certainly get money easily, but such business is not based on
religious principles. Similarly, there are many night clubs for sense gratifi-


--- Page 167 ---
932 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
cation and brothels for sex. Sex, however, is allowed in married life
only, and prostitution is prohibited because all our activities are ultimately
aimed at liberation, at freedom from the clutches of material existence. It
is advised therefore that one not act in a way that will obstruct the regular
process of advancement in spiritual life and liberation. The Vedic process
of sense gratification is therefore planned in such a way that one can
economically develop and enjoy sense gratification and yet ultimately
attain liberation. Vedic civilization offers us all knowledge in the 5251705,
and if welive a regulated life under the direction of $dstras and guru, all our
material desires will be fulfilled; at the same time we will be able to go for-
ward to liberation.
TEXT 35
(<
तत्रापि मोक्ष एवाथं आत्यन्तिकतयेष्यते । ।
IN ७
Frist यतो नित्यं कृतान्तभयसंयुतः ।॥३५५॥
tatrapi moksa evartha
atyantikatayesyate ५
traivargyo 700 yato nityam
krtanta-bhaya-samyutah

tatra—there; api—also; moksah—liberation; eva—certainly ; arthe—for the
matter of; atyantikataya—most important; isyate—taken in that way;
traivargyah—the three others, namely, religion, economic development
and sense gratification; arthah—interest; yatah—wherefrom; nityam—regu-
larly; krtanta— death; bhaya—fear; sam yutah—attached.

TRANSLATION

Out of the four principles—namely, religion, economic development,
sense gratification and liberation—liberation has to be taken very seriously.
The other three are subject to destruction by the stringent law of nature—
death.

PURPORT

Moksa, or liberation, has to be taken very seriously, even at the sacrifice
of the other three items. As advised by Sita Gosvami in the beginning of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, religious principles are not based on success in econom-
ic development. Because we are very attached to sense gratification, we
go to God, to the temple or churches, for some economic reasons. Then
again, economic development does not mean sense gratification. Every-
thing should be adjusted in such a way that we attain liberation. Therefore


--- Page 168 ---
Text 36) Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 933
in this verse, liberation, moksa, is stressed. The other three items are mate-
rial and therefore subject to destruction. Even if somehow we accumulate
a great bank balance in this life and possess many material things, every-
thing will be finished with death. In Bhagavad-gitd it is said that death is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who ultimately takes away every-
thing acquired by the materialistic person. Foolishly we do not care for
this. Foolishly we are not afraid of death, nor do we consider that death
will take away everything acquired by the process of dharma, artha and
kama. By dharma, or pious activities, we may be elevated to the heavenly
planets, but this does not mean freedom from the clutches of birth, death,
old age and disease. The purport is that we can sacrifice our interests in
traivargya, religious principles, economic development and sense gratifica-
tion, but we cannot sacrifice the cause of liberation. Regarding liberation,
it is stated in Bhagavad-gita: tyaktva dehari punar janma naiti (Bg. 4.9).
Liberation means that after giving up this body one does not have to accept
another material body. But to the impersonalists liberation means merging
into the existence of impersonal Brahman. But factually this is not moksa
because one has to again fall down into this material world from that im-
personal position. One should therefore seek the shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and engage in His devotional service. That is real
liberation. The conclusion is that we should not stress pious activities, eco-
nomic development and sense gratification but should concern ourselves
with approaching Lord Visnu in His spiritual planets, of which the topmost
15 Goloka Vrndavana where Lord Krsna lives. Therefore this Krsna con-
sciousness movement is the greatest gift for persons who are actually de-
siring liberation.
TEXT 36
परेऽवरे च ये भावा गुणन्यतिकरादयु।
न तेषां त्रियते श्षेमयीशविष्वंसिताशिषाम्‌ ।।২৪।।
pare *४५7€ ca ye bhava
guna-vyatikarad anu
na tesa vidyate ksemam
$a-vidhvamsitasisam
pare—in the higher status of life; avare—in the lower status of life; ca—
and; ye—all those; bhavah—conceptions; gupa—material qualities;
vyatikarat—by interaction; anu—following; na—never; tesam—of them;
vidyate—exist; ksemam—correction; tSa—the Supreme Lord; vidhvarisita—
destroyed; asisam— of the blessings.


--- Page 169 ---
934 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
TRANSLATION

We accept as blessings different states of higher life, distinguishing them
from lower states of life, but we should know that such distinctions exist
only in relation to the interchange of the modes of material nature. Actu-
ally these states of life have no permanent existence, for all of them will
be destroyed by the supreme controller.

PURPORT

In our material existence we accept a higher form of life as a blessing
and a lower form as a curse. This distinction of higher and lower only
exists as long as the different material qualities (gunas) interact. In other
words, by our good activities we are elevated to the higher planetary
systems or to a higher standard of life (good education, beautiful body,
etc.). These are the results of pious activities. Similarly, by impious
activities we remain illiterate, get ugly bodies, a poor standard of living,
etc. But all these different states of life are under the laws of material
nature through the interaction of the qualities of goodness, passion and
ignorance. However, all these qualities will cease to act at the time of the
dissolution of the entire cosmic manifestation. The Lord therefore says in
Bhagavad-gita:

abrahma-bhuvanal lokah punar avartino ’rjuna
mam upetya tu kaunteya punar janma na vidyate
(Bg. 8.16)

Even though we elevate ourselves to the highest planetary system by the
scientific advancement of knowledge or by the religious principles of life—
great sacrifices and fruitive activities—at the time of dissolution these
higher planetary systems and life on them will be destroyed. The words in
this verse (isa-vidhvamsitasisam) indicate that all such blessings will be
destroyed by the supreme controller. We will not be protected. Our bodies,
either in this planet or in another planet, will be destroyed, and again we
will have to remain for millions of years in an unconscious state within the
body of Maha-Visnu. And again, when the creation is manifested, we have
to take birth in different species of life and begin our activities. Therefore
we should not be satisfied simply by a promotion to the higher planetary
systems. We should try to get out of the material cosmic manifestation, go
to the spiritual world and take shelter of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. That is our highest achievement. We should not be attracted by any-
thing material, higher or lower, but should consider them all on the same


--- Page 170 ---
Text 36]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 935
level. Our real engagement should be in inquiring about the real purpose of
life and rendering devotional service to the Lord. Thus we will be eternally
blessed in our spiritual activities, full of knowledge and bliss.

Regulated human civilization promotes dharma, artha, kama and
moksa. In human society there must be religion. Without religion,
human society is only animal society. Economic development and sense
gratification must be based on religious principles. When religion,
economic development and sense gratification are adjusted, liberation from
this material birth, death, old age and disease is assured. In the present age
of Kali, however, there is no question of religion and liberation. People
have taken interest in economic development and sense gratification.
Therefore, despite sufficient economic development all over the world,
dealings in human society have become almost animalistic. When every-
thing becomes grossly animalistic, dissolution takes place. This dissolution
is to be accepted as iSa-vidhvarsitasisam. The Lord’s so-called blessings of
economic development and sense gratification will be conclusively dissolved
by destruction. At the end of this Kali-yuga, the Lord will appear as the
incarnation of Kalki, and His only business will be to kill all human beings
on the surface of the globe. After that killing, another golden age will be-
gin. We should therefore know that our material activities are just like
childish play. Children may play on the beach and the father will sit and
watch this childish play, the construction of buildings with sand, the con-
struction of walls and so many things, but finally the father will ask the
children to come home. Then everything is destroyed. Persons who are too
much addicted to the childish activities of economic development and
sense gratification are sometimes especially favored by the Lord when He
destroys their construction of these things.

It is said by the Lord: yasyaham anugrhpami harisye tad-dhanam
Sanath. The Lord told Yudhisthira Maharaja that His special favor is
shown to His devotee when He takes away all his material opulences.
Generally, therefore, it is experienced that Vaisnavas are not very opulent
in the material sense. When a Vaignava, pure devotee, tries to be materially
opulent and at the same time desires to serve the Supreme Lord, his
devotional service is checked. The Lord, in order to show him a special
favor, destroys his so-called economic development and material opulences.
Thus the devotee, being frustrated in his repeated attempts at economic
development, ultimately takes solid shelter under the lotus feet of the
Lord. This kind of action may also be accepted as T$a-vidhvamsitasisam,
whereby the Lord destroys one’s material opulences but enriches him in
spiritual understanding. In the course of our preaching work, we sometimes


--- Page 171 ---
936 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
see that materialistic persons come to us and offer their obeisances to take
blessings, which means they want more and more material opulences. If
such material opulences are checked, such persons are no longer interested
in offering obeisances to the devotees. Such materialistic persons are
always concerned about their economic development. They offer obeisances
to saintly persons or the Supreme Lord and give something in charity for
preaching work with a view that they will be rewarded with further
economic development.

However, when one is sincere in his devotional service, the Lord
obliges the devotee to give up his material development and completely
surrender unto Him. Because the Lord does not give blessings of material
opulence to His devotee, people are afraid of worshiping Lord Visnu
because they see that the Vaignavas, who are worshipers of Lord Visnu,
are poor in superficial material opulences. Such materialistic persons,
however, get immense opportunity for economic development by worship-
ing Lord Siva, for Lord Siva is the husband of the goddess Durga, and
Durga is the proprietor of this universe. By the grace of Lord Siva, a
devotee gets the opportunity to be blessed by the goddess Durga. Ravana,
for example, was a great worshiper and devotee of Lord Siva, and in return
he got all the blessings of goddess Durga, so much so that his whole
kingdom was constructed of golden buildings. In Brazil, in this present
age, huge quantities of gold have been found, and from historical references
in the Puranas, we can guess safely that this was Ravana’s kingdom.This
kingdom was, however, destroyed by Lord Ramacandra.

By studying such incidents, we can understand the full meaning of
wa-vidhvarsitasisam. The Lord does not bestow material blessings upon
the devotees, for they may be entrapped again in this material world by
continuous birth, death, old age, and disease. Due to materialistic opu-
lences, persons like Ravana become puffed up for sense gratification.
Ravana even dared kidnap Sita, who was both the wife of Lord Ramacandra
and the goddess of fortune, thinking that he would be able to enjoy the
pleasure potency of the Lord. But actually, by such action, Ravana became
০100072588৫ or ruined. At the present moment human civilization is too
much attached to economic development and sense gratification and is
therefore nearing the path of ruination.

TEXT 37
J नरेन्द्र जगतामथ तस्थूषां च
देदेन्द्रियासुधिषणात्मभिरावतानाम्‌ |


--- Page 172 ---
Text 37] Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 937
यः क्षेत्रवित्तपतय। हदि विश्वगाविः
प्रत्यक्‌ चकास्ति भगवांस्तमवेहि सोऽसि॥। ३७
tat tvam narendra jagatam atha tasthusam ca
dehendriyasu-dhisapnatmabhir avrtanam
yah ksetravit-tapataya hrdi visvag avih
pratyak cakasti bhagavams tam avehi so ‘smi
tat—therefore; tvam—you; narendra—O best of the kings; jagatam—of
the moving; atha—therefore; tasthisam—the immovable; ca—also; deha—
body; indriya—senses; asu—life air; dhisana—by consideration; atmabhih—
self-realization; avrtanam—those who are covered in that way; yah—one
who; ksetra-vit—knower of the field; tapataya—by controlling; hrdi—within
the heart; visvak—everywhere; avih—manifest; pratyak—in every hair
follicle; cakasti—shining; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
tam—unto Him; avehi—try to understand; sah asmi—I am that.
TRANSLATION
Sanat-kumara advised the King: My dear King Prthu, try to understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is living within everyone's heart
along with the individual soul, in each and every body, either moving or
not moving. They are fully covered by the gross material body and subtle
body made of the life air and intelligence.
PURPORT
In this verse it is specifically advised that instead of wasting time in
the human form of life endeavoring for economic development and sense
gratification, one should try to cultivate spiritual values by understanding
the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is existing within the individual
soul within everyone’s heart. The individual soul and the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead in His Paramatma feature are both sitting within this
body, which is covered by gross and subtle elements. To understand this is
to attain actual spiritual culture. There are two ways of advancing in
spiritual culture—by the method of the impersonalist philosophers and by
devotional service. The impersonalist comes to the conclusion that he and
the Supreme Spirit are one, whereas devotees or personalists realize the
Absolute Truth by understanding that the Absolute Truth is the supreme
predominator and we living entities are predominated; therefore our duty
is to serve Him. The Vedic injunctions say: tat tvam asi, “You are the
same,” and so ‘ham, ^] am the same.” The impersonalist conception of
these mantras is that the Supreme Lord or the Absolute Truth and the
living entity are one, but from the devotee’s point of view these mantras


--- Page 173 ---
938 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
assert that both the Supreme Lord and ourselves are of the same quality.
Tat tvam asi, ayam atma brahma. Both the Supreme Lord and the living
entity are spirit. Understanding this is self-realization. The human form of
life is meant for understanding the Supreme Lord and oneself by spiritual
cultivation of knowledge. One should not waste valuable life simply en-
gaged in economic development and sense gratification.

In this verse the word ksetra-vit is also important. This word is explained
in Bhagavad-gita: idam sarirarii kaunteya ksetram ity abhidhiyate (Bg.13.2).
This body is called ksetra, or the field of activities, and the proprietors of
the body, the individual soul and the Supersoul sitting within the body,
are both called ksetra-vit. But there is a difference between the two kinds
of ksetra-vit. One ksetra-vit, or knower of the body, namely the Paramatma
or the Supersoul, is directing the individual soul. When we rightly take the
direction of the Supersoul, our life becomes successful. He is directing
from within and from without. From within He is directing as caitya-guru,
or the spiritual master sitting within the heart. Indirectly He is also helping
the living entity by manifesting Himself as the spiritual master outside. In
both ways the Lord is giving directions to the living entity so that he may
finish up his material activities and come back home, back to Godhead.
The presence of the Supreme Soul and the individual soul within the body
can be perceived by anyone by the fact that 85 long as the individual soul
and the Supersoul are both living within the body, the body is always
shining and fresh. But as soon as the Supersoul and the individual soul
give up possession of the gross body, it immediately decomposes. One who
is spiritually advanced can thus understand the real difference between a
dead body and a living body. In conclusion, one should not waste his time
by so-called economic development and sense gratification but should
cultivate spiritual knowledge to understand the Supersoul and the indi-
vidual soul and their relationship. In this way, by advancement of knowl-
edge, one can achieve liberation and the ultimate goal of life. It is said that
if one takes to the path of liberation, even rejecting his so-called duties in
the material world, he is not a loser at all. But a person who does not take
to the path of liberation yet carefully executes economic development and
sense gratification, loses everything. Narada’s statement before Vyasadeva
is appropriate in this connection:

tyaktva sva-dharmarn caranambujari harer
bhajann apakvo’tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kim
ko vartha apto bhajatari sva-dharmatah
(Bhag. 1.5.17)


--- Page 174 ---
Text 38]  Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 939
If a person, out of sentiment or for some other reason, takes to the
shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord and in due course of time does not
succeed in coming to the ultimate goal of life or falls down due to lack of
experience, there is no loss. But for a person who does not take to the
devotional service, yet executes his material duties very nicely, there is no
gain.
TEXT 38
यसिन्निदं सदसदार्भतया विभाति
माया विवेकविधुति खनि वादिवुदिः।
तं नित्यग्क्तपरिशद्धविशुदधतसव
त
परत्यूटकमेककिलग्रकृतिं प्रपद्ये ।।३८॥
yasminn idan sad-asad-atmataya vibhati
maya viveka-vidhuti sraji vahi-buddhih
tam nitya-mukta-parisuddha-visuddha-tattvarm
pratyudha-karma-kalila-prakrtirn prapadye
yasmin—in which; idam—this; sat-asat—the Supreme Lord and His
different energies; atmataya—being the root of all cause and effect; vibhati—
manifests; maya—illusion;viveka-vidhuti—liberated by deliberate considera-
tion; sraji—on the rope; va—or; ahi—serpent; buddhih—intelligence; tam—
unto Him; nitya—eternally; muk ta—liberated; parisuddha—uncontaminated;
visuddha— pure; tattvam—truth; pratyidha—transcendental ; karma—fruitive
activities; kalila—impurities; prakrtim—situated in spiritual energy; pra-
padye—surrender.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead manifests Himself as one with the
cause and effect within this body and also as one who has transcended the
illusory energy. This clears the misconception of a snake for arope. Thus one
can understand that the Paramatma is eternally transcendental to the
material creation and situated in pure internal energy. Thus He is tran-
scendental to all material contamination. Unto Him only must one
surrender.
PURPORT
This verse is specifically stated to defy the Mayavada conclusion of one-
nesswithout differentiation between the individual soul and the Supersoul.
The Mayavada conclusion is that the living entity and the Supersoul are


--- Page 175 ---
940 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
one; there is no difference. They proclaim that there is no separate exis-
tence outside the impersonal Brahman and that the feeling of separation is
maya or an illusion by which one considers a rope to be a snake. The rope
and the snake argument is generally offered by the Mayavadi philosophers.
Therefore these words, which represent vivarta-vada, are specifically men-
tioned herein. Actually Paramatma, the Supersoul, is the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, and He is eternally liberated. In other words, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is living within this body along with the
individual soul, and this is confirmed in the Vedas. They are likened to
two friends sitting on the same tree. Yet Paramatma is above the illusory
energy. The illusory energy is called bahiranga sakti or external energy,
and the living entity is called tatastha Sakti or marginal potency. As stated
in Bhagavad-gita, the material energy, represented as earth, water, air, fire,
sky, etc., and the spiritual energy, the living entity, are both energies of
the Supreme Lord. Even though the energies and the energetic are identical,
the living entity, individual soul, being prone to be influenced by the
external energy, considers the Supreme Personality of Godhead as one with
himself.

The word prapadye is also significant in this verse, for it refers to the
conclusion of the Bhagavad-gita: sarva-dharman parityajya mam 61001
Saranam vraja (Bg. 18.66). In another place the Lord says: bahunam
janmanam ante jaanavan marn prapadyate (Bg. 7.19). This prapadye or
saranarmn vraja refers to the individual’s surrender to the Supersoul. The
individual soul, when surrendered, can understand that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, although situated within the heart of the individual
soul, is superior to the individual soul. The Lord is always transcendental
to the material manifestation, even though it appears that the Lord and
the material manifestation are one and the same. According to the Vaignava
philosophy, He is one and different simultaneously. The material energy
is a manifestation of His external potency, and since the potency is identi-
cal with the potent, it appears that the Lord and individual soul are one,
but actually the individual soul is under the influence of material energy,
and the Lord is always transcendental to it. Unless the Lord is superior to
the individual soul, there is no question of prapadye or surrender unto Him.
This word prapadye refers to the process of devotional service. Simply by
nondevotional speculation on the rope and the snake, one cannot approach
the Absolute Truth. Therefore devotional service is stressed as more im-
portant than deliberation or mental speculation to understand the Abso-
lute Truth.


--- Page 176 ---
Text 39]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 941
TEXT 39
यत्पाद पङ्जपलाकशवषिलासभक्त्या
Oh Safar
कमाश्यं ग्रथितयुद्रथयन्ति सन्तः |
तदन रिक्तमतयो यतयोऽपि &3-
स्रोतोगणास्तमरणं मज वासुदेवम्‌ ॥२९॥
yat-pada-pankaja-palasa-vilasa-bhaktya
karmasayarh grathitam udgrathayanti santah
tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo ए ruddha-
srotoganas tam aranarm bhaja vasudevam

yat—whose; pdda—feet; paikaja—lotus; palisa—petals or toes;
vilasa—enjoyment; bhaktya—by devotional service; karma—fruitive activi-
ties; asayam—desire; grathitam—hard knot; udgrathayanti—roots out;
santah— devotees; tat—that; vat—like; na—never; rikta-matayah— person de-
void of devotional service; yatayah—ever increasingly trying; api—even
though; ruddha—stopped; srotoganah—the waves of sense enjoyment;
tam—unto Him; aranam—worthy to take shelter; bhaja—engage in devo-
tional service; vasudevam—unto Krsna, the son of Vasudeva.

TRANSLATION

The devotees, who are always engaged in the service of the toes of the
lotus feet of the Lord, can very easily overcome hard-knotted desires for
fruitive activities. Because this is very difficult, the nondevotees—the jiianis
and yogis—although trying to stop the waves of sense gratification, cannot
do so. Therefore you are advised to engage in the devotional service of
Krsna, the son of Vasudeva.

PURPORT

There are three kinds of transcendentalists trying to overcome the
influence of the modes of material nature—the jianis, yogis and bhaktas.
All of them attempt to overcome the influence of the senses, which is
compared to the incessant waves of a river. The waves of a river flow
incessantly, and it is very difficult to stop them. Similarly, the waves of
desire for material enjoyment are so strong that they cannot be stopped
by any process other than bhakti-yoga. The bhaktas, by their transcenden-
tal devotional service unto the lotus feet of the Lord, become so over-
whelmed with transcendental bliss that automatically their desires for


--- Page 177 ---
942 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
material enjoyment stop. The jianis and yogis, who are not attached to
the lotus feet of the Lord,simply struggle against the waves of desire. They
are described in this verse as rikta-matayah, which means devoid of de-
votional service. In other words, the jianis and yogis, although trying to
be free from the desires of material activities, actually become more and
more entangled in false philosophical speculation or strenuous attempts to
stop the activities of the senses. As stated previously:

vasudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogah prayojitah

janayaly asu vairagyam jianam ca yad ahaitukam

(Bhag. 1.2.7)

Here also the same point is stressed. Bhaja vasudevam indicates that one
who is engaged in the loving service of Krsna, the son of Vasudeva, can
very easily stop the waves of desires. As long as one will continue to try to
artificially stop the waves of desires, he will certainly be defeated. That is
indicated in this verse. Desires for fruitive activities are strongly rooted,
but the trees of desire can be uprooted completely by devotional service
because devotional service employs superior desire. One can give up
inferior desires when engaged in superior desires. To try to stop desires is
impossible. One has to desire the Supreme in order not to be entangled in
inferior desires. Jiianis also maintain a desire to become one with the
Supreme, but such desire is also considered to be kama, lust. Similarly, the
yogis desire mystic power, and that is also kama. And the bhaktas, not
being desirous of any sort of material enjoyment, become purified. There
is no artificial attempt to stop desire. Desire becomes a source of spiritual
enjoyment under the protection of the toes of the lotus feet of the Lord.
It is stated herein by the Kumaras that the lotus feet of the Lord Krsna
are the ultimate reservoir of all pleasure. One should therefore take shelter
of the lotus feet of the Lord instead of trying unsuccessfully to stop de-
sires for material enjoyment. As long as one is unable to stop the desire
for material enjoyment, there is no possibility of becoming liberated from
the entanglement of material existence. It may be argued that the waves
of a river are incessantly flowing and that they cannot be stopped, but the
waves of the river flow towards the sea. When the tide comes over the
river, it overwhelms the flowing of the river, and the river itself becomes
overflooded, and the waves from the sea become more prominent than the
waves from the river. Similarly, a devotee with intelligence plans so many
things for the service of the Lord in Krsna consciousness that stagnant
material desires become overflooded by the desire to serve the Lord. As


--- Page 178 ---
Text 40]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 943
confirmed by Yamunacarya, since he has been engaged in the service of
the lotus feet of the Lord, there is always a current of newer and newer
desires flowing to serve the Lord, so much so that the stagnant desire’ of
sex life becomes very insignificant. Yamunacarya even says that he spits on
such desires. Bhagavad-gita also confirms: param drstva nivartate (Bg. 2.59).
The conclusion is that by developing a loving desire for the service of the
lotus feet of the Lord, we subdue all material desires for sense gratification.
TEXT 40
< 0০
कृच्छ्रो महानिह মনাযানমন্তবহা
पडवगेनकमसुखेन तितीर्षन्ति |
TH हरेभेगवतो भजनीयमङ्खि
FATT TRAY दुस्तरार्णम्‌ ॥४०।
krcchro mahan iha bhavarpavam aplavesam
sad-varga-nakram asukhena titirsanti
tat tvam harer bhagavato bhajantyam anghrim
krtvodupam vyasanam uttara dustararnam

krcchrah—troublesome; mahan— very great; tha—here in this life; bhava-
arpavam—ocean of material existence; aplava-iSam—of the nondevotees,
who have not taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sat-varga—six senses; nakram—sharks; asukhena—with great
difficulty; titirsanti—cross over; tat—therefore; tvam—you; hareh—of the
Personality of Godhead; bhagavatah-ef the Supreme; bhajantyam—worthy
of worship; anghrim-the lotus feet; krtva—making; udupam—Dbhoat;
vyasanam—all kinds of dangers; uttara—cross over; dustara—very difficult;
arnam—the ocean.

TRANSLATION

The ocean of nescience is very difficult to cross because it is infested
with many dangerous sharks. Although those who are nondevotees undergo
severe austerities and penances to cross that ocean, we recommend that
you simply take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, which are like boats
for crossing the ocean. Although the ocean is difficult to cross, by taking
shelter of His lotus feet you will overcome all dangers.

PURPORT

Material existence is compared herein with the great ocean of nescience.

Another name of this ocean is Vaitarani. In that Vaitarani ocean, which is


--- Page 179 ---
944 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
the Causal Ocean, there are innumerable universes floating like footballs.
On the other side of the ocean is the spiritual world of Vaikuntha, which
is described in Bhagavad-gita as paras tasmat tu bhavo nyo (Bg. 8.20). Thus
there is an ever-existing spiritual nature which is beyond this material
nature. Even though all the material universes are annihilated again and
again in the Causal Ocean, the Vaikuntha planets, which are spiritual, exist
eternally and are not subject to dissolution. The human form of life gives
the living entity a chance to cross the ocean of nescience, which is this
material universe, and enterinto the spiritual sky. Although there are many
methods or boats by which one can cross the ocean, the Kumaras recom-
mend that the King take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, just as one
would take shelter of a good boat. Nondevotees, who do not take shelter
of the Lord’s lotus feet, try to cross the ocean of nescience by other
methods (karma, jiiana and yoga), but they have a great deal of trouble.
Indeed, sometimes they become so busy simply enjoying their troubles
that they never cross the ocean. There is no guarantee that the nondevotees
will cross the ocean, but even though they manage to cross, they have to
undergo severe austerities and penances. On the other hand, anyone who
takes to the process of devotional service and has faith that the lotus feet
of the Lord are safe boats to cross that ocean is certain to cross very easily
and comfortably.

Prthu Maharaja is therefore advised to take the boat of the lotus feet of
the Lord to easily cross over all dangers. Dangerous elements in the universe
are compared to sharks in the ocean. Even though one may be a very
expert swimmer, he cannot possibly survive if he is attacked by sharks. One
often sees that many so called svamis and yogis sometimes advertise them-
selves as competent to cross the ocean of nescience and to help others
cross, but in actuality they are found to be simply victims of their own
senses. Instead of helping their followers to cross the ocean of nescience,
such svamis and yogis fall prey to maya, represented by the fair sex,
woman, and are thus devoured by the sharks in that ocean.

TEXT 41
४ मैत्रेय उवाच
स॒ एवं ब्रह्मपुत्रेण कुमारेणात्ममेधसा |
द्र्हितात्मगतिः सम्यक्प्रशस्योबाच तं नुपः ॥४१॥
maitreya uvaca
sa evar brahma-putrena
kumarenatma-medhasa


--- Page 180 ---
Text 42]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 945
darsitatma-gatih samyak
prasasyovaca tam nrpah
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to say; sah—the
King; evam—thus; brahma-putrena—by the son of Lord Brahma; kumarena—
by one of the Kumaras; atma-medhasa— well versed in spiritual knowledge;
darsita—being shown; atma-gatih—spiritual advancement; samyak—com-
pletely; prasasya—worshiping; uwvdca—said; tam—unto him; nrpah—the
King.
TRANSLATION
Being thus enlightened to complete spiritual knowledge by the son of
Brahma—one of the Kumaras, who was complete in spiritual knowledge—
the King worshiped them in the following words.
PURPORT
In this verse the word atma-medhasa is commented upon by Sripada
Vidvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, who says that atmani means unto Lord
Krsna, paramatmani. Lord Krsna is Paramatma (isvarah paramah krsnah,
Brahma-sarhita, 5.1); therefore one whose mind is acting fully in Krsna
consciousness is called atma-medhah. This may be contrasted to the word
grha-medhi, which refers to one whose brain is always engrossed with
thoughts of material activities. The atmae-medhah is always thinking of
Krsna’s activities in Krsna consciousness. Since Sanat-kumara, who was a
son of Lord Brahma, was fully Krsna conscious, he could point out the
path of spiritual advancement. The word atma-gatik refers to that path of
activities by which one can make progress in understanding Krsna.
TEXT 42
राजोवाच
ङतो मेऽलुग्रदः qd हरिणाऽऽतादुकभ्पिना |
तमापादयितुं रह्मन भगवन्‌ यूयमागताः ॥४२॥
rajovaca
krto me ’nugrahah purvam
harinartanukampina
tam apadayituri brahman
bhagavan yuyam agatah


--- Page 181 ---
946 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22

raja uvaca—the King said; krtah—done; me—unto me; anugrahah—
causeless mercy; pirvam—formerly; harina—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Visnu; arta-anukampina—compassionate for persons in
distress; tam—that; dpadayitum—to confirm it; brahman—O brahmana;
bhagavan—O powerful one; ya@yam—all of you; dgatah—have arrived
here.

TRANSLATION

The King said: O brahmana, O powerful one, formerly Lord Visnu
showed me His causeless mercy, indicating that you would come to my
house, and to confirm that blessing, you have all come.

PURPORT

When Lord Visnu appeared on the great arena of sacrifice at the time
when King Prthu was performing a great sacrifice (asvamedha), He pre-
dicted that the Kumaras would very soon come and advise the King.
Therefore Prthu Maharaja remembered the causeless mercy of the Lord
and thus welcomed the arrival of the Kumaras, who were fulfilling the
Lord’s prediction. In other words, when the Lord makes a prediction, He
fulfills that prediction through some of His devotees. Similarly, Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu predicted that both His glorious names and the Hare
Krsna mahéa-mantra would be broadcast in all the towns and villages of
the world. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura and Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvafi
Prabhupada desired to fulfill this great prediction, and we are following in
their footsteps.

Regarding His devotees, Lord Krsna told Arjuna, kaunteya pratijanihi
na me bhaktah pranasyati: “O son of Kunti, declare it boldly that My
devotee will never perish.” (Bg. 9.31) The point is that the Lord Himself
could declare such things, but it was His desire to make the declaration
through Arjuna and thus doubly assure that His promise would never be
broken. The Lord Himself promises, and His confidential devotees execute
the promise. The Lord makes so many promises for the benefit of suffering
humanity. Although the Lord is very compassionate upon suffering hu-
manity, human beings are generally not very anxious to serve Him. The re-
lationship is something like that between the father and the son; the
father is always anxious for the welfare of the son, even though the son
forgets or neglects the father. The word anukampina is significant; the
Lord is so compassionate upon the living entities that He comes Himself
into this world in order to benefit fallen souls.

yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata


--- Page 182 ---
Text 43]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 947
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanar srjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descen-
dant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time ] descend
Myself.” (Bg. 4.7)

Thus it is out of compassion that the Lord appears in His different
forms. Lord Sri Krsna appeared on this planet out of compassion for fallen
souls; Lord Buddha appeared out of compassion for the poor animals who
were being killed by the demons; Lord Nrsimhadeva appeared out of
compassion for Prahlada Maharaja. The conclusion is that the Lord is so
compassionate upon the fallen souls within this material world that He
comes Himself or sends His devotees and His servants to fulfill His desire
to have all the fallen souls come back home, back to Godhead. Thus Lord
Sri Krsna instructed Bhagavad-gita to Arjuna for the benefit of the entire
human society. Intelligent men should therefore seriously consider this
Krsna consciousness movement and fully utilize the instructions of
Bhagavad-gita as preached without adulteration by His pure devotees.

TEXT 43
९
निष्पादितश्च कातस्येन भगवद्धिषरणाठभिः ।
साधूच्छिष्टं हि मे सर्वमात्मना सह किं ददे 1830
nispaditas ca kartsnyena
bhagavadbhir ghrnalubhih
sadhucchistam hi me sarvam ক
atmana saha kim dade

nispaditah ca—also the order is properly carried out; kartsnyena—in full;
bhagavadbhih—by the representatives of the Supreme Personality of God-
head; ghrna-alubhih—by the most compassionate; sadhu-ucchistam—rem-
nants of the foodstuffs of saintly persons; hi—certainly ; me—mine;sarvam—
everything; atmana—heart and soul; saha—with; kim—what; dade—shall
give.

TRANSLATION

My dear brahmana, you have carried out the order thoroughly because
you are also as compassionate as the Lord. It is my duty, therefore, to
offer you something, but I only possess remnants of food taken by great
saintly persons. What shall I give?


--- Page 183 ---
948 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
PURPORT

The word sadhacchistam is significant in this verse. Prthu Maharaja got
his kingdom from great saintly persons like Bhrgu and others just as one
gets remnants of food. After the death of King Vena, the whole world was
bereft of a popular ruler. There were so many catastrophes occurring that
the great saintly persons, headed by Bhrgu, created the body of King Prthu
out of the body of his dead father, King Vena. Since King Prthu was thus
offered the kingdom by the virtue of the mercy of great saintly persons, he
did not want to divide his kingdom among saints like the Kumaras. When
a father is eating food, he may, out of compassion, offer the remnants of
his food to his son. Although such food may be already chewed by the
father, it cannot be offered to the father again. Prthu Maharaja’s position
was something like this; whatever he possessed had already been chewed,
and therefore he could not offer it to the Kumaras. Indirectly, however,
he offered everything he possessed to the Kumaras, and consequently they
utilized his possessions in whatever way they liked. The next verse
clarifies this matter.

TEXT 44
प्राणा दाराः सुता ब्रह्मन्‌ गृदाश्च सपरिच्छदाः |
राज्यं बलं मही कोश इति सवं निवेदितम्‌ ॥४४॥
prana darah suta brahman
grhas ca sa-paricchadah
rajyarn bala mah? kosa
iti sarvari niveditam

pranah—life; darah—wife; sutah—children; brahman—O great brahmana;
grhah—home; ca—also; sa—with; paricchadah—all paraphernalia; rajyam—
kingdom; balam—strength; mahi—land; kosah— treasury ; iti— thus; sarvam—
everything; niveditam—offered.

TRANSLATION

The King continued: Therefore, my dear brahmanas, my life, wife,
children, home, furniture and household paraphernalia, my kingdom,
strength, land, and especially my treasury, are all offered unto you.

PURPORT

In some readings, the word 0৫7৫1: is not used, but the word used then 15

rayah, which means wealth. In India there are still wealthy persons who


--- Page 184 ---
Text 45]  Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 949
are recognized by the state as r@ya. A great devotee of Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was called Ramananda Raya because he was governor of
Madras and very rich. There are still many holders of the title raya—
Raya Bahadur, Raya Chaudhuri and so on. The darah, or wife, is not
permitted to be offered to the brahmanas. Everything is offered to
worthy persons who are able to accept charity, but nowhere is it found
that one offers his wife; therefore in this case the reading rayah is more
accurate than darah. Also, since Prthu Maharaja offered everything to the
Kumaras, the word kosah (treasury) need not be separately mentioned.
Kings and emperors used to keep a private treasury which was known as
ratna-bhanda. The ratna-bhanda was a special treasury room which con-
tained special jewelries, such as bangles, necklaces and so on, which were
presented to the king by the citizens. This jewelry was kept separate from
the regular treasury house where all the collected revenues were kept. Thus
Prthu Maharaja offered his stock of private jewelry to the lotus feet of the
Kumaras. It has already been admitted that all the King’s property belonged
to the brahmapas and that Prthu Maharaja was simply using it for the
welfare of the state. If it were actually the property of the brahmanas,
how could it be offered again to them? In this regard, Sripada Sridhara
Svami has explained that this offering is just like the servant’s offering of
food to his master. The food already belongs to the master, for the master
has purchased it, but the servant, by preparing food, makes it acceptable
to the master and thus offers it to him. In this way, everything belonging
to Prthu Maharaja was offered to the Kumaras.
TEXT 45
सैनापत्यं च राज्यं च दण्डनेतत्वमेव च |
सवंलोकाधिपत्यं च वेदश्ाखरविद्दति ॥४५॥
sainapatyarn ca rajyam ca
danda-netrtvam eva ca
sarva-lokadhipatyam ca
veda-$astra-vid arhati

sainapatyam—post of commander-in-chief; ca—and; rajyam—post of
ruler over the kingdom; ca—and; dapda—ruling; netrtvam—leadership; eva—
certainly; ca—and; sarva—all; loka-adhipatyam—proprietorship of the plan-
et; ca—and; veda-sastra-vit—one who knows the purport of Vedic literature;
arhati— deserves.


--- Page 185 ---
950 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
TRANSLATION

Since only a person who is completely educated according to the
principles of Vedic knowledge deserves to be commander-in-chief, ruler
of the state, the first to chastise and the proprietor of the whole planet,
Prthu Maharaja offered everything to the Kumaras.

PURPORT

In this verse it is very clearly stated that a kingdom, state or empire
must be governed under the instructions of saintly persons and brahmanas
like the Kumaras. When monarchy ruled throughout the world, the
monarch was actually directed by a board of brahmanas and saintly persons.
The king, as the administrator of the state, executed his duties as a servant
of the brahmanas. It was not that the kings or brahmanas were dictators,
nor did they consider themselves proprietors of the state. The kings were
also well versed in Vedic literatures and thus were familiar with the injunc-
tion of Sri ISopanisad: isavasyam idam sarvam—everything that exists
belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita Lord
Krsna also claims that He is the proprietor of all planetary systems
(sarva-loka-mahesvaram). Since this is the case, no one can claim to be
proprietor of the state. The king, president or head of the state should
always remember that he is not the proprietor but the servant.

In the present age, the king or president forgets that he is the servant
of God and thinks of himself as servant of the people. The present
democratic government is proclaimed to be a people’s government, a
government by the people and for the people, but this type of government
is not sanctioned by the Vedas. The Vedas maintain that a kingdom should
be governed for the purpose of satisfying the Supreme Personality of God-
head and should therefore be ruled by a representative of the Lord. The
head of a state should not be appointed if he is bereft of all Vedic knowl-
edge. In this verse it is clearly stated (veda-sastra-vid arhati) that all high
government posts are especially meant for persons who are well conversant
with the teachings of the Vedas. In the Vedas there are definite instructions
defining how aking, commander-in-chief, soldier and citizen should behave.
Unfortunately there are many so-called philosophers in the present age
who give instruction without citing authority, and many leaders follow
their unauthorized instruction. Consequently people are not happy.

The modern theory of dialectic communism, set forth by Karl Marx
and followed by communist governments, is not perfect. According to
Vedic communism, no one in the state should ever starve. Presently there


--- Page 186 ---
Text 46] = Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 951
are many bogus institutions which are collecting funds from the public for
the purpose of giving food to starving people, but these funds are invariably
misused. According to the Vedic instructions, the government should
arrange things in such a way that there will be no question of starvation.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that a householder must see to it
that even a lizard or a snake does not starve. They also must be given food.
In actuality, however, there is no question of starvation because everything
is the property of the Supreme Lord, and He sees to it that there is ample
arrangement for feeding everyone. In the Vedas it is said: eko bahunam yo
vidadhati kaman (Katha Up. 2.2.13). The Supreme Lord supplies the
necessities of life to everyone, and there is no question of starvation. If
anyone starves, it is due to the mismanagement of the so-called ruler, gover-
nor or president.

It is clear therefore that a person who is not well versed in the Vedic
injunctions (veda-sastra-vit) should not run for election as president,
governor, etc. Formerly kings were rajarsis, which meant that although
they were serving as kings, they were as good as saintly persons because
they would not transgress any of the injunctions of the Vedic scriptures
and would rule under the direction of great saintly persons and brahmanas.
According to this arrangement, modern presidents, governors and chief
executive officers are all unworthy of their posts because they are not con-
versant with Vedic administrative knowledge and they do not take direc-
tion from great saintly persons and brahmanas. Because of his disobedience
to the orders of the Vedas and the brahmanas, King Vena, Prthu Maharaja’s
father, was killed by the brahmanas. Prthu Maharaja therefore knew very
well that it behooved him to rule the planet as the servant of saintly per-
sons and brahmanas.

TEXT 46
स्वमेव ब्राह्मणो YF स्वं वस्ते स्वं ददाति च ।
TERE IT क्षत्रियादयः |৪5।।
svam eva brahmano bhunkte
svam vaste svam dadati ca
tasyaivanugrahenannam
bhunjate ksatriyadayah
svam—own;eva—certainly ; brahmapah—the brahmanas; bhunkte—enjoy;
svam—own; vaste—clothing; svam—own; dadati—gives in charity; ca—and;
tasya—his; eva—certainly; anugrahepa—by the mercy of; annam—food


--- Page 187 ---
952 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
grains; bhunjate—eats; ksatriya-adayah—other divisions of the society,
headed by the ksatriyas.

TRANSLATION

The ksatriyas, vaiSyas and sudras eat their food by virtue of the
brahmanas’ mercy. It is the brahmanas who enjoy their own property,
clothe themselves with their own property and give charity with their own
property.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped with the words
namo brahmanya-devaya, which indicate that the Supreme Lord accepts
the brahmanas as worshipable gods. The Supreme Lord is worshiped by
everyone, yet lo teach others He worships the brahmanas. Everyone should
follow the instructions of the brahmanas, for their only business is to
spread Sabda-brahma or Vedic knowledge all over the world. Whenever
there is a scarcity of brahmanas to spread Vedic knowledge, chaos through-
out human society results. Since brahmanas and Vaispavas are direct ser-
vants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they do not dé¢pend on others.
In actuality, everything in the world belongs to the brahmanas, and out of
their humility the brahmanas accept charity from the ksatriyas, or kings,
and the wvaisyas, or merchants. Although everything belongs to the
brahmanas, the ksatriyas and vaiSyas keep everything in custody, and
whenever the brahmanas need money, they supply it. 1t is like a savings
account with money which the depositor can draw out at his will. The
brahmanas, being engaged in the service of the Lord, have very little time
to handle the finances of the world, and therefore the riches are kept by
the ksatriyas or the kings, who are to produce money upon the brahmanas’
demand. Actually the brahmanas or Vaisnavas do not live at others’ cost;
they live by spending their own money, although it appears that they are
collecting this money from others. Ksatriyas and vaisyas have no right to
give charity because whatever they possess belongs to the brahmanas.
Therefore charity should be given by the ksatriyas and vaisyas under the
instructions of the brahmanas. Unfortunately at the present moment there
is a scarcity of brahmanas, and since there is no one to advise the ksatriyas
and vaisyas, the world is in a chaotic condition.

The second line of this verse indicates that the ksatriyas, vaisyas and
sudras eat only by virtue of the brahmana’s mercy; in other words, they
should not eat anything which is forbidden by the brahmanas. The
brahmanpas and Vaisnavas know what to eat, and by their personal example
they do not eat anything which is not offered first to the Supreme Person-


--- Page 188 ---
Text 47] Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 953
ality of Godhead. They eat only prasada, or remnants of the food offered
to the Lord. The ksatriyas, vaisyas and Sudras should eat only Krsna-
prasadam, which is afforded them by the mercy of the brahmanas. They
cannot open slaughterhouses and eat meat, fish or eggs, or drink liquor, or
earn money for this purpose without authorization. In the present age, be-
cause society is not guided by brahminical instruction, the whole popula-
tion is only absorbed in sinful activities. Consequently everyone is de-
servedly being punished by the laws of nature. This is the situation in this
age of Kali.
TEXT 47
-
Theft भगवतो गतिरात्मवाद
=
एकान्ततो निगमिभिः; प्रतिपादिता नः |
TITER: खकृतेन नित्यं
क ७.4
को नाम तत्प्रतिकरोति विनोदपात्रम्‌ ॥४५७॥
yair idr$t bhagavato gatir atma-vada
ekantato nigamibhih pratipadita nah
tusyantv adabhra-karunah sva-krtena nityamn
ko nama tat pratikaroti vinoda-patram
yath—by those; idrsi—such kind of; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead; gatih—progress; atma-vade—spiritual consideration;
ekantatah—in complete understanding; nigamibhih—by Vedic evidences;
pratipadita—conclusively established; nah—unto us; tusyantu—be satisfied;
adabhra—unlimited; karunah—mercy; sva-krtena—by your own activity;
nityam—eternal; kah—who; nama—no one; tat—that; pratikaroti—counter-
acts; vina— without; uda-patram— offering of water in cupped hands.
TRANSLATION
Prthu Maharaja continued: How can such persons, who have rendered
unlimited service by explaining the path of self-realization inrelation to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and whose explanations are given for our
enlightenment with complete conviction and Vedic evidence, be repaid
except by folded palms containing water for their satisfaction? Such great
personalities can be satisfied only by their own activities, which are dis-
tributed amongst human society out of their unlimited mercy.
PURPORT
Great personalities of the material world are very eager to render
welfare service to human society, but actually no one can render better


--- Page 189 ---
954. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
service than one who distributes the knowledge of spiritual realization in
relation with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. All living entities are
within the clutches of the illusory energy. Forgetting their real identity,
they hover in material existence, transmigrating from one body to another
in search of a peaceful life. Since these living entities have very little knowl-
edge of self-realization, they are not getting any relief, although they are
very anxious to attain peace of mind and some substantial happiness.
Saintly persons like the Kumaras, Narada, Prahlada, Janaka, Sukadeva
Gosvami, Kapiladeva, as well as the followers of such authorities as the
Vaignava acaryas and their servants, can render a valuable service to hu-
manity by disseminating knowledge of the relationship between the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the living entity. Such knowledge
is the perfect benediction for humanity.

Knowledge of Krsna is such a great gift that it is impossible to repay
the benefactor. Therefore Prthu Maharaja requested the Kumaras to be
satisfied by their own benevolent activities, which involved delivering souls
from the clutches of maya. The King saw that there was no other way to
satisfy them for their exalted activities. The word vinodapatram can be
divided into two words, vina and uda-patram, or can be understood as one
word, vinoda-patram, which means joker. A joker’s activities simply
arouse laughter, and a person who tries to repay the spiritual master or
teacher of the transcendental message of Krsna becomes a laughing stock
just like a joker because it is not possible to repay such a debt. The best
friend and benefactor of all people is one who awakens humanity to its
original Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 48
मैत्रेय ITV
त आत्मयोगपतय आदिराजेन पूजिताः |
Ye तदीयं शंसन्तः खेऽभवन्मिषतां Jum ॥४८॥
maitreya uvaca
ta atma-yoga-pataya
adi-rajena pujitah
Sila tadiyam $amsantah
khe 61102012 17815002112 nrpam

maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; te— they;

atma-yoga-patayah—the masters of self-realization by devotional service;


--- Page 190 ---
Text 49)  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 955
adi-rajena—by the original King (Prthu); pujitah—being worshiped; slam —
character; tadiyam—of the King; samsantah—eulogizing; khe—in the sky;
abhavan— appeared; misatam—while observing; nrnam—of the people.
TRANSLATION

Being thus worshiped by Maharaja Prthu, the four Kumaras, who
were masters of devotional service, became very pleased. Indeed, they
appeared in the sky and praised the character of the King, and everyone
observed them.

PURPORT

It is said that the demigods never touch the surface of the earth.
They walk and travel in space only. Like the great sage Narada, the Kumaras
do not require any machine to travel in space. There are also residents of
Siddhaloka who can travel in space without machines. Since they can go
from one planet to another, they are called siddhas; that is to say they
have acquired all mystic and yogic powers. Such great saintly persons who
have attained complete perfection in mystic yoga are not visible in this age
on earth because humanity is not worthy of their presence. The Kumaras,
however, praised the characteristics of Maharaja Prthu and his great devo-
tional attitude and humility. The Kumaras were greatly satisfied by King
Prthu’s method of worship. It was by the grace of Maharaja Prthu that the
common citizens in his domain could see the Kumaras flying in outer
space.

TEXT 49
a Past)
बेनयस्तु धुर्यो महतां संस्ित्याध्यात्पशिक्षया |
आ्रूममिवात्पानं मेन आत्मन्यवखितः ॥४९॥
vainyas tu dhuryo mahatam
samsthityadhyatma-$iksaya
apta-kamam ivatmanam
mena atmany avasthitah

vainyah—the son of Vena Maharaja (Prthu); tu—of course; dhuryah—the
chief; mahatam—of great personalities; samsthitya—being completely
fixed; adhyatma-§iksaya—in the matter of self-realization; apta—achieved;
kamam— desires; iva—like;atmanam—in self-satisfaction; mene—considered;
atmani—in the self;avasthitah—situated.


--- Page 191 ---
956 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
TRANSLATION

Amongst great personalities, Maharaja Prthu was the chief by virtue
of his fixed position in relation to spiritual enlightenment. He remained
satisfied as one who has achieved all success in spiritual understanding.

PURPORT

Remaining fixed in devotional service gives one the utmost in self-
satisfaction. Actually self-satisfaction can be achieved only by pure devotees
who have no desire other than to serve the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Since the Supreme Personality of Godhead has nothing to desire, He
is fully satisfied with Himself. Similarly, a devotee who has no desire other
than to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead is as self-satisfied as the
Supreme Lord. Everyone is hankering after peace of mind and self-
satisfaction, but these can only be achieved by becoming a pure devotee of
the Lord.

King Prthu’s statements in previous verses regarding his vast knowledge
and perfect devotional service are justified here, for he is considered best
amongst all mahatmas. In Bhagavad-gita Sri Krsna speaks of mahatmas in
this way:

mahatmanas tu mam partha
daivim prakrtim asritah
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jnatva bhutadim avyayam
“0 son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the
protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional ser-
vice because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original
and inexhaustible.” (Bg. 9.13)

The mahatmas are not under the clutches of the illusory energy but
are under the protection of the spiritual energy. Because of this, the real
mahatma is always engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. Prthu
Maharaja exhibited all the symptoms of a mahatma; therefore he is men-
tioned in this verse as dhuryo mahatam, best of the mahatmas.

TEXT 50
कर्माणि च यथाकारं यथादेशं यथाबलम्‌ |
यथोचितं यथावित्तमकरोद्रङसात्कृतम्‌ (kell


--- Page 192 ---
Text 50] Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 957
karmani ca yatha-kalam
yatha-desamn yatha-balam
yathocitarm yatha-vittam
akarod brahma-sat-krtam

karmani—activities; ca—also; yatha-kalam—befitting time and circum-
stances; yatha-desam—befitting the place and situation; yatha-balam—
befitting one’s own strength; yatha-ucitam—as far as possible; yatha-vittam—
as far as one can spend money in this connection; akarot—performed;
brahma-sat—in the Absolute Truth; krtam—did.

TRANSLATION

Being self-satisfied, Maharaja Prthu executed his duties as perfectly as
possible according to the time and his situation, strength and financial
position. His only aim in all his activities was to satisfy the Absolute Truth.
In this way, he duly acted.

PURPORT

Maharaja Prthu was a responsible monarch, and he had to execute
the duties of a ksatriya, a king and a devotee at the same time. Being per-
fect in the Lord’s devotional service, he could execute his prescribed duties
with complete perfection as befitted the time and circumstance and his
financial strength and personal ability. In this regard, the word karmani in
this verse is significant. Prthu Maharaja’s activities were not ordinary be-
cause they were in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Srila Rupa Gosvami has advised that things which are favorable to devo-
tional service should not be rejected, nor should activity favorable for devo-
tional service be considered ordinary work or fruitive activity. For example,
an ordinary worker conducts business in order to earn money for his
sense gratification. A devotee may perform the same work in exactly the
same way, but his aim is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. Consequently his
activities are not ordinary.

Prthu Maharaja’s activities were therefore not ordinary but were all
spiritual and transcendental, for his aim was to satisfy the Lord. Just as
Arjuna, who was a warrior, had to fight to satisfy Krsna, Prthu Maharaja
performed his royal duties as king for the satisfaction of Krsna. Indeed,
whatever he did as emperor of the whole world was perfectly befitting a
pure devotee. It is therefore said by a Vaisnava poet, vaisnavera kriya
midha vijiie na bujhdaya: no one can understand the activities of a pure
devotee. A pure devotee’s activities may appear like ordinary activities, but


--- Page 193 ---
958 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
behind them there is profound significance—the satisfaction of the Lord.
In order to understand the activities of a Vaignava, one has to become very
expert. Maharaja Prthu did not allow himself to function outside the insti-
tution of four varpas and four asramas, although as a Vaisnava he was a
paramaharmsa, transcendental to all material activities. He remained at his
position as a ksatriya to rule the world and at the same time remained
transcendental to such activities by satisfying the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Concealing himself as a pure devotee, he externally manifested
himself as a very powerful and dutiful king. In other words, none of his
activities were carried out for his own sense gratification; everything he
did was meant for the satisfaction of the senses of the Lord. This is clearly
explained in the next verse.
TEXT 51
फलं ब्रह्मणि संन्यस्य निर्विषङ्गः समादितः |
कर्माध्यक्षं च मन्वान आतमानं प्रकृतेः परम्‌ ॥५१।।
phalari brahmani sannyasya
nirvisangah samahitah
karmadhyaksam ca manvana
atmanarn prakrteh param
phalam—result; brahmani—in the Absolute Truth; sannyasya—giving up;
nirvisangah— without being contaminated; samahitah—completely dedi-
cated; karma—activity; adhyaksam—superintendent; ca—and; manvanah —
always thinking of ;atmanam—the Supersoul; prakrteh—of material nature;
param—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu completely dedicated himself to be an eternal servant
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, transcendental to material nature.
Consequently all the fruits of his activities were dedicated to the Lord,
and he always thought of himself as the servant of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is the proprietor of everything.
PURPORT
The life and dedication of Maharaja Prthu in the transcendental loving
service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead serve as a good example of
karma-yoga. The term karma-yoga is often used in Bhagavad-gita, and
herein Maharaja Prthu is giving a practical example of what karma-yoga


--- Page 194 ---
Text 51) Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 959
actually is. The first requirement for the proper execution of karma-yoga
is given herein. Phalam brahmani sannyasya (or vinyasya): One must give
the fruits of his activities to the Supreme Brahman, Parabrahman, Krsna.
By doing so, one actually situates himself in the renounced order of life,
sannyasa. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, giving up the fruits of one’s activities
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is called sannyasa. Although he
was living as a householder, Prthu Maharaja was actually in the renounced
order of life, sannyasa. This will be clearer in the following verses.

The word nirvisaigah (uncontaminated) is very significant because
Maharaja Prthu was not attached to the results of his activities. In this
material world a person is always thinking of the proprietorship of every-
thing he accumulates or works for. When the fruits of one’s activities are
rendered to the service of the Lord, one is actually practicing karma-yoga.
Anyone can practice karma-yoga, but it is especially easy for the house-
holder who can install the Deity of the Lord in the home and worship Him
according to the methods of bhakti-yoga. This method includes nine
items: hearing, chanting, remembering, serving, worshiping the Deity,
praying, carrying out orders, serving Krsna as friend and sacrificing every-
thing for Him. These methods of karma-yoga and bhakti-yoga are being
broadcast all over the world by the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness. Anyone can learn these methods simply by following the
examples of the members of the Society.

In one’s home or a temple, the Deity is considered the proprietor of
everything, and everyone is considered the Deity’s eternal servant. The
Lord is transcendental, for He is not part of this material creation. The
words prakrteh param are used in this verse because everything within
this material world is created by the external material energy of the Lord,
but the Lord Himself is not a creation of this material energy. The Lord is
the supreme superintendent of all material creations, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita:

mayadhyaksena prakrtih
suyale sa-caracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
Jjagad viparivartate
“This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti, pro-
ducing all the moving and unmoving beings, and by its rule this manifesta-
tion is created and annihilated again and again.” (Bg. 9.10)


--- Page 195 ---
960 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
All material changes and material progress taking place by the wonderful
interaction of matter are under the superintendence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Events in the material world are not taking
place blindly. If one always remains as a servant of Krsna and engages
everything in His service, he is accepted as jivan-mukta, a liberated soul,
even during his lifetime within the material world. Generally liberation
takes place after one gives up this body, but one who lives according to the
example of Prthu Maharaja is liberated even in this lifetime. In Krsna
consciousness the results of one’s activities depend on the will of the
Supreme Person. Indeed, in all cases the result is not dependent on one’s
own personal dexterity but is completely dependent on the will of the
Supreme. This is the real significance of phalam brahmani sannyasya. A
soul dedicated to the service of the Lord should never think of himself as
the personal proprietor or the superintendent. A dedicated devotee should
prosecute his work according to the rules and regulations described in
devotional service. The results of his activities are completely dependent
on the supreme will of the Lord.
TEXT 52
गृहेषु वर्तमानोऽपि स साञ्जाज्यश्रियान्वितः |
[J
नासजतेन्द्रियर्थेषु REE ।५२।
grhesu vartamano ‘pi
sa samrajya-sriyanvitah
nasajjatendriyarthesu
nirahari-matir arka-vat
grhesu—at home; vartamanah—being present; api—although; sah—the
King, Prthu; samrajya—the entire empire; sriya—opulence; anvitah—being
absorbed in; na—never; asajjata— became attracted; indriya-arthesu—for
sense gratification; nir—nor; aham—1 am; matih—consideration; arka—the
sun; vat—like.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu, who was very opulent due to the prosperity of his
entire empire, remained at home as a householder. Since he was never
inclined to utilize his opulences for the gratification of his senses, he
remained unattached, exactly like the sun, which is unaffected in all
circumstances.


--- Page 196 ---
Text 53]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 961
PURPORT

The word grhesu is significant in this verse. Out of the four asramas—the
brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha and sannydasa—only agrhastha or house-
holder is allowed to associate with women; therefore the grhastha-asrama
is a kind of license for sense gratification given to the devotee. Prthu
Maharaja was special in that although he was given license to remain a
householder, and although he possessed immense opulences in his king-
dom, he never engaged in sense gratification. This was a special sign that
indicated him to be a pure devotee of the Lord. A pure devotee is never
attracted by sense gratification, and consequently he is liberated. In
material life a person engages in sense gratification for his own personal
satisfaction, but in the devotional or liberated life one aims to satisfy the
senses of the Lord.

In this verse Maharaja Prthu is likened to the sun (arka-vat). Sometimes
the sun shines on stool, urine and so many other polluted things, but
since the sun is all-powerful, it is never affected by the polluted things
with which it associates. On the contrary, the sunshine sterilizes and
purifies polluted and dirty places. Similarly, a devotee may engage in so
many material activities, but because he has no desire for sense gratifica-
tion, they never affect him. On the contrary, he dovetails all material
activities for the service of the Lord. Since a pure devotee knows how to
utilize everything for the Lord’s service, he is never affected by material
activities. Instead, by his transcendental plans he purifies such activities.
This is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam tat-
paratvena nirmalam: his aim is to become completely purified in the
service of the Lord without being affected by material designations.

TEXT 53
एवमध्यात्मयोगेन करमाप्यलुसमाचरन्‌ |
पुत्रायुत्पादयामास पञार्सिप्यात्परच्यतान्‌ ॥५३॥
evam adhyatma-yogena
karmany anusamacaran
putran utpadayamasa
paiicarcisy atma-sammatan
evam—thus;adhyatma-yogena—by the means of bhakti-yoga; karmani—ac-
tivities; anu—always; samacaran—executing; putran—sons; utpadayamasa—


--- Page 197 ---
962 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
begotten; pafica—five in number; arcisi—in his wife, Arci; dtma—own;
sammatan—according to his desire.
TRANSLATION

Being situated in the liberated position of devotional service, Prthu
Maharaja not only performed all fruitive activities but also begot five sons
by his wife Arci. Indeed, all his sons were begotten according to his own
desire.

PURPORT

As a householder, Prthu Maharaja had five sons by his wife Arci, and
all these sons were begotten as he desired them. They were not born
whimsically or by accident. How one can beget children according to one’s
own desire is practically unknown in the present age (Kali-yuga). In this
regard the secret of success depends on the parents’ acceptance of the
various purificatory methods known as sarmskaras. The first sariiskara, the
garbhadhana-samskara or child-begetting sarmskara, is compulsory, especial-
ly for the higher castes, the brahmanas and the ksatriyas. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita, sex life which is not against religious principles is Krsna
Himself, and according to religious principles when one wants to beget a
child he must perform the garbhadhana-samskara before having sex. The
mental state of the father and mother before sex will certainly affect the
mentality of the child to be begotten. A child who is begotten out of lust
may not turn out as the parents desire. As stated in the sastras, yatha
yonir yatha bijam. Yatha yonih indicates the mother, and yatha bijam
indicates the father. If the mental state of the parents is prepared before
they have sex, the child which they will beget will certainly reflect their
mental condition. It is therefore understood by the words atma-sammatan
that both Prthu Maharaja and Arci underwent the garbhadhana purificatory
process before begetting children, and thus they begot all their sons
according to their desires and purified mental states. Prthu Maharaja did
not beget his children out of lust, nor was he attracted to his wife for sense
gratificatory purposes. He begot the children as a grhastha for the future
administration of his government all over the world.

TEXT 54
विजितारवं धूम्रकेशं হ্যাঁ द्रविणं इकम्‌ ।
सर्वेषां लोकपालानां दधारेकः TLE 1481)


--- Page 198 ---
Text 55]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 963
vijitasvarn dhumrakesarm
haryaksam dravipam vrkam
sarvesam loka-palanam
dadharaikah prthur gunan

vijitasvam—of the name Vijitadva; dhiimrakesam— of the name Dhiimra-
16883; haryaksam—of the name Haryaksa; dravinam—of the name Dravina;
vrkam—of the name Vrka; sarvesgm—of all; loka-palanam—the governing
heads of all planets; dadhara—accepted; ekah—one; prthuh—King Prthu
Maharaja; gunpan—all qualities.

TRANSLATION

After begetting five sons named Vijitasva, Dhiimrakesa, Haryaksa,
Dravina and Vrka, Prthu Maharaja continued to rule the planet. He accept-
ed all the qualities of the deities who governed all other planets.

PURPORT ;

In each and every planet there is a predominating deity. It is understood
from Bhagavad-gita that in the sun there is a predominating deity named
Vivasvan. Similarly, there is a predominating deity of the moon and of the
various planets. Actually the predominating deities in all the other planets
are descendants from the predominating deities of the sun and moon. On
this planet earth there are two ksatriya dynasties, and one comes from the
predominating deity of the sun and the other from the predominating
deity of the moon, known as Surya-varisa and Candra-vamsa respectively.
When monarchy existed on this planet, the chief member was one of the
members of the Surya dynasty or Surya-vamsa, and the subordinate kings
belonged to the Candra-vamsa. However, Maharaja Prthu was so powerful
that he could exhibit all the qualities of the predominating deities in other
planets.

TEXT 55
गोपीथाय TGR: काले स्वे स्वेऽच्युतात्मकः |
मनोदाग्डततिमिः delat: संरञ्जयन्‌ प्रनाः।५५॥
gopithaya jagat-srsteh
kale sve sve ‘cyutatmakah
mano-vag-vrttibhih saumyair
gunaih sarmraiijayan prajah


--- Page 199 ---
964 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
gopithaya—for the protection of; jagat-srsteh—of the supreme creator;
kale—in due course of time; sve sve—own; acyuta-atmakah—being Krsna
conscious; manah—mind;vak— words; vrttibhih—by occupation; saumyaih—
very gentle; gunath—by qualification; samraiijayan—pleasing; prajah—the
citizens.
TRANSLATION

Since Maharaja Prthu was a perfect devotee of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, he wanted to protect the Lord’s creation by pleasing the
various citizens according to their various desires. Therefore Prthu Maharaja
used to please them in all respects by his words, mentality, works and
gentle behavior.

PURPORT

As will be explained in the next verse, Prthu Maharaja used to please all
kinds of citizens by his extraordinary capacity to understand the mentality
of others. Indeed, his dealings were so perfect that every one of the citizens
was very much satisfied and lived in complete peace. The word acyutatma-
kah is significant in this verse, for Maharaja Prthu used to rule this planet
as the representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He knew he
was the representative of the Lord and that the Lord’s creation must be
protected intelligently. Atheists cannot understand the purpose behind the
creation. Although this material world is condemned when it is compared
to the spiritual world, there is still some purpose behind it. Modern
scientists and philosophers cannot understand that purpose, nor do they
believe in the existence of a creator. They try to establish everything by
their so-called scientific research, but they do not center anything around
the supreme creator. A devotee, however, can understand the purpose of
creation, which is to give facilities to the individual living entities who
want to lord it over material nature. The ruler of this planet should there-
fore know that all the inhabitants, especially human beings, have come to
this material world for sense enjoyment. It is therefore the duty of the
ruler to satisfy them in their sense enjoyment as well as to elevate them to
Krsna consciousness so that they all can ultimately return home, back to
Godhead.

With this idea in mind, the king or government head should rule the
world. In this way, everyone will be satisfied. How can this be accom-
plished? There are many examples like Prthu Maharaja, and the history
of hisregency on this planet is elaborately described in Srimad-Bhagavatam.


--- Page 200 ---
Text 56]  Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 965
Evenin this fallen age if the rulers, governors and presidents take advantage
of Prthu Maharaja’s example, there will certainly be a reign of peace and
prosperity throughout the world.
TEXT 56
राजेत्पथानामधेयं सोमराज इवापरः |
खलवद्विसजन्‌ गृह्‌ प्रतपंश्च धवो वसु 145
rajety adhan nama-dheyam
soma-raja ivaparah
surya-vad visrjan grhpan
pratapams ca bhuvo vasu
raja—the King; iti—thus; adhat—took up; nama-dheyam—of the name;
soma-rajah—the king of the moon planet; iva—like; aparah—on the other
hand; surye-vat—like the sun-god; visrjan—distributing; grhnan—exacting;
pratapan—by strong ruling; ca—also; bhuvah—of the world; vasu—revenue.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu became as celebrated a king as Somaraja, the king of
the moon. He was also powerful and exacting, just like the sun-god who
distributes heat and light and at the same time exacts all the planetary
waters.
PURPORT
In this verse Maharaja Prthu is compared to the kings of the moon and
sun. The king of the moon and the king of the sun serve as examples of
how the Lord desires the universe to be ruled. The sun distributes heat and
light and at the same time exacts water from all planets. The moon is very
pleasing at night, and when one becomes fatigued after a day’s labor in
the sun, he can enjoy the moonshine. Like the sun-god, Prthu Maharaja
distributed his heat and light to give protection to his kingdom, for with-
out heat and light no one can exist. Similarly, Prthu Maharaja exacted
taxes and gave such strong orders to the citizens and government that no
one had the power to disobey him. On the other hand, he pleased everyone
just like the moonshine. Both the sun and the moon have particular
influences by which they maintain order in the universe, and modern
scientists and philosophers should become familiar with the Supreme
Lord’s perfect plan for universal maintenance.


--- Page 201 ---
966 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22

TEXT 57

९ ९ SEN
ुर्भस्तेजसेवाग्रिमेदेनद्र॒ @ दुजेयः ।
तितिक्षया धरित्रीव यौरिवामी्टो नणाम्‌ ।५७॥
durdharsas tejasevagnir
mahendra iva durjayah
titiksaya dharitriva
dyaur ivabhista-do nrnam
durdharsah—unconquerable; tejasa—by prowess; iva—like; agnih—fire;
mahendrah—the king of heaven; iva—likened; durjayah—insuperable;
titiksaya—by tolerance; dharitri—the earth; iva—like; dyauh—the heavenly
planets; iva—like;abhista-dah —fulfilling desires; nrpam—of human society.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu was so strong and powerful that no one could disobey
his orders any more than one could conquer fire itself. He was so strong
that he was compared to Indra, the king of heaven, whose power is
insuperable. On the other hand, Maharaja Prthu was also as tolerant as
the earth, and in fulfilling various desires of human society, he was like
heaven itself.

PURPORT
It is the duty of a king to give protection to the citizens and to fulfill
their desires. At the same time, the citizens must obey the laws of the
state. Maharaja Prthu maintained all the standards of good government,
and he was so invincible that no one could disobey his orders any more
than a person could stop heat and light emanating from a fire. He was so
strong and powerful that he was compared to the king of heaven, Indra.
In this age modern scientists have been experimenting with nuclear
weapons, and in a former age they used to release brahmastras, but all
these brahmastras and nuclear weapons are insignificant compared to
the thunderbolt of the king of heaven. When Indra releases a thunderbolt,
even the biggest hills and mountains crack. On the other hand, Maharaja
Prthu was as tolerant as the earth itself, and he fulfilled all the desires of
his citizens, just as torrents of rain from the sky fulfill the need of the
earth for water. Without rainfall, it is not possible to survive on this
planet. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (parjanyad anna-sambhavah, Bg. 3.14),
food grains are produced only because rain falls from the sky, and without


--- Page 202 ---
Text 59]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 967
grains, no one on the earth can survive. Consequently an unlimited
distribution of mercy is compared with the water falling from the clouds.
Maharaja Prthu distributed his mercy incessantly, much like rainfall. In
other words, Maharaja Prthu was softer than a rose flower and harder than
a thunderbolt. In this way he ruled over his kingdom.
TEXT 58
TR ख यथाकामं पर्जन्य इव तपयन्‌ ।
AYE इव दुर्बोधः सस्वेनाचठराडिव ॥५८॥
varsati sma yatha-kamam
parjanya iva tarpayan
samudra iva durbodhah
sattvenacala-rad iva
varsati— pouring; sma—used 10; yatha-kamam—as much as one can desire ;
parjanyah—water; iva—like; tarpayan—pleasing; samudrah—the sea; iva—
likened; durbodhah— not understandable; sattvena—by existential position;
acala—the hills; rat iva—like the king of.
TRANSLATION
Just as rainfall satisfies everyone’s desires, Maharaja Prthu used to
satisfy everyone. He was like the sea in that no one could understand his
depths, and he was like Meru, the king of hills, in the fixity of his purpose.
PURPORT
Maharaja Prthu used to distribute his mercy to suffering humanity,
and it was like rainfall after excessive heat. The ocean is wide and expan-
sive, and it is very difficult to measure its length and breadth; similarly,
Prthu Maharaja was so deep and grave that no one could fathom his
purposes. The hill known as Meru is fixed in the universe as a universal
pivot, and no one can move it an inch from its position; similarly, no one
could ever dissuade Maharaja Prthu when he was determined.
TEXT 59
धमेराडिव शिक्षायामाथर्ये दिमवानिव ।
FR इव कोशाढ्यो gam वरुणो यथा ॥५९॥
dharma-rad iva $iksayam
ascarye himavan iva


--- Page 203 ---
968 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
kuvera iva kosadhyo
guptartho varuno yatha
dharma-rat iva—like King Yamaraja (the superintendent of death);
Siksayam—in education; ascarye—in opulence; himavan iva—like the
Himalayan Mountains; kuverah—the treasurer of the heavenly planets;
iva—like; kosa-adhyah—in the matter of possessing wealth; gupta-arthah—
secrecy; varunnah— the demigod named Varuna; yatha— like.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu’s intelligence and education were exactly like that of
Yamar3ja, the superintendent of death. His opulence was comparable to the
Himalayan Mountains, where all valuable jewels and metals are stocked.
He possessed great riches like Kuvera, the treasurer of the heavenly
planets, and no one could reveal his secrets, for they were like the demigod
Varuna’s.
PURPORT
Yamaraja or Dharmaraja, as the superintendent of death, has to judge
the criminal living entities who have committed sinful activities throughout
their lives. Consequently Yamaraja is expected to be most expert in
judicial matters. Prthu Maharaja was also highly learned and exceedingly
exact in delivering his judgment upon the citizens. No one could excel
him in opulence any more than estimate the stock of minerals and jewels
in the Himalayan Mountains; therefore he is compared to Kuvera, the
treasurer of the heavenly planets. Nor could anyone discover the secrets
of his life any more than learn the secrets of Varuna, the demigod presiding
over the water, the night, and the western sky. Varuna is omniscient, and
since he punishes sins, he is prayed to for forgiveness. He is also the sender
of disease and is often associated with Mitra and Indra.
TEXT 60
मातरिश्वेष सर्वात्मा बलेन महसौजसा |
अविषह्यतया देवो भगवान्‌ भूतराडिव ।६०॥
matarisveva sarvatma
balena mahasaujasa
avisahyataya devo
bhagavan bhuta-rad iva


--- Page 204 ---
Text 62] Prthu Maharaja's Meeting with the Four Kumaras 969
matarisva—the air; iva—like; sarva-atma—all-pervading; balena— by bodily
strength; mahasa ojasa—by courage and power; avisahyataya—by intoler-
ance; devah—the demigod; bhagavan—the most powerful; bhuta-rat iva—
like Rudra or Sadasiva.
TRANSLATION
In his bodily strength and in the strength of his senses, Maharaja Prthu
was as strong as the wind, which can go anywhere and everywhere. As far
as his intolerance was concerned, he was just like the all-powerful Rudra
expansion of Lord Siva, or Sadasiva.
TEXT 61
कन्दर्पं हव सौन्दर्ये मनखी TRA |
वात्सल्ये मञुबन्तरणां সম্ভব भगवानजः ॥६१॥
kandarpa iva saundarye
manasvt mrga-rad iva
vatsalye manuvan nrnam
prabhutve bhagavan ajah
kandarpah—Cupid; iva—like; saundarye—in beauty; manasvi—in thought-
fulness; mrga-rat iva—like the king of the animals, the lion; vatsalye—in
affection; manu-vat—like Svayambhuva Manu; nrpam—of human society;
prabhutve—in the matter of controlling; bhagavan—the lord; ajah— Brahma.
TRANSLATION
In his bodily beauty he was just like Cupid, and in his thoughtfulness
he was like a lion. In his affection he was just like Svayambhuva Manu, and
in his ability to control he was like Lord Brahma.
TEXT 62
बृहस्पतित्रीह्मवादे. आस्मकर्वे खयं हरिः
भक्त्या गोगुरुविप्रेषु ॒दिष्यक्सेनावतिंषु |
हिया प्रश्रय्लीठाम्यामात्मतुत्यः परोद्यमे ।६२॥
brhaspatir brahma-vade
atmavattve svayam harih
bhaktya go-guru-vipresu
visvaksenanuvartisu
hriya prasraya-silabhyam
atma-tulyah parodyame


--- Page 205 ---
970 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22

brhaspatih—the priest of the heavenly planets; brahma-vade—in the
matter of spiritual understanding; atmavattve—in the matter of self-
control; svayam—personally; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhaktya—in devotion; go—cow; guru—spiritual master; vipresu—unto the
brahmanas; visvaksena— the Personality of Godhead; anuvartisu—followers;
hriya—by shyness; prasraya-silabhyam—by most gentle behavior; atma-
tulyah—exactly like his personal interest; para-udyame—in the matter of
philanthropic work.

TRANSLATION

In his personal behavior, Prthu Maharaja exhibited all good qualities,
and in spiritual knowledge he was exactly like Brhaspati. In self-control he
was like the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. As far as his de-
votional service was concerned, he was a great follower of devotees who
were attached to cow protection and the rendering of all service to the
spiritual master and the brahmanas. He was perfect in his shyness and in
his gentle behavior, and when he engaged in some philanthropic activity,
he worked as if he were working for his own personal self.

PURPORT

When Lord Caitanya talked to Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, the Lord
gave him the honor of becoming the incarnation of Brhaspati. Brhaspati is
the chief priest of the heavenly kingdom, and he is a follower of the
philosophy known as Brahmavada or Mayavada. Brhaspati is also a great
logician. It appears from this statement that Maharaja Prthu, although a
great devotee constantly engaged in the loving service of the Lord, could
defeat all kinds of impersonalists and Mayavadis by his profound knowledge
of Vedic scriptures. We should learn from Maharaja Prthu that a Vaignava
or devotee must not only be fixed in the service of the Lord, but, if
required, must be prepared to argue with the impersonalist Mayavadis with
all logic and philosophy and defeat their contention that the Absolute
Truth is impersonal.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ideal self-controller or
brahmacari. When Krsna was elected to be president of the Rajasiiya
yajiia performed by Maharaja Yudhisthira, Grandfather Bhismadeva praised
Lord Krsna as the greatest brahmacari. Because Grandfather Bhismadeva
was a brahmacari, he was quite fit to distinguish a brahmacart from a
vyabhicari. Although Prthu Maharija was a householder and father of five
children, he was still considered to be most controlled. One who begets
Krsna conscious children for the benefit of humanity is actually a brahma-


--- Page 206 ---
Text 63]  Prthu Maharaja’s Meeting with the Four Kumaras 971
cart. One who simply begets children like cats and dogs is not a proper
father. The word brahmacar? also refers to one who acts on the platform
of Brahman or devotional service. In the impersonal Brahman conception,
there is no activity, yet when one performs activities in connection with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is to be known as brahmacari.
Thus Prthu Maharaja was an ideal brahmacart and grhastha simultaneously.
Visvaksenanuvartisu refers to those devotees who are constantly engaged
in the service of the Lord. Other devotees must follow in their footsteps.
Srila Narottama dasa Thakura said, ei chaya gosaiii yanra, mui tanra dasa.
He is prepared to become anyone’s disciple who follows in the footsteps of
the six Gosvamis.

Also, like all Vaignavas, Maharaja Prthu was devoted to cow protection,
spiritual masters and qualified brahmanas. Prthu Maharaja was also very
humble, meek and gentle, and whenever he performed any philanthropic
work or welfare activity for the general public, he would labor exactly as
if he were tending to his own personal necessities. In other words, his
philanthropic activities were not for the sake of show but were performed
out of personal feeling and commitment. All philanthropic activities should
be thus performed.

TEXT 63
की््योष्वगीतया पुम्मिक्लैलोक्ये तत्र तत्र ह । |
प्रविष्टः FORAY ज्ञीणां रामः सतामिव ।॥६३॥
kirtyordhva-gitaya pumbhis
trailokye tatra tatra ha
pravistah karna-randhresu
strinarm ramah satam iva

kirtya—by reputation; urdhva-gitaya—by loud declaration; pumbhih—
by the general public; trailokye—all over the universe; tatra tatra—
here and there; ha—certainly ; pravistah—entering; karna-randhresu—in the
aural holes; strinam—of the women; ramah—Lord Ramacandra; satam—
of the devotees; iva—like.

TRANSLATION

Throughout the whole universe—in the higher, lower and middle
planetary systems—Prthu Maharaja’s reputation was loudly declared, and
all ladies and devotees heard his glories, which were as sweet as the
glories of Lord Ramacandra.


--- Page 207 ---
972 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 22
PURPORT

In this verse the words stripam and ramah are significant. It is the
practice amongst ladies to hear and enjoy the praises of certain heroes.
From this verse it appears that Prthu Maharaja’s reputation was so great
that ladies all over the universe would hear of it with great pleasure. At
the same time, his glories were heard all over the universe by the devotees,
and they were as pleasing as Lord Ramacandra’s glories. Lord Ramacandra’s
kingdom is still existing, and recently there was a political party in India
named the Ramarajya Party, which wanted to establish a kingdom
resembling the kingdom of Rama. Unfortunately, modern politicians want
the kingdom of Rama without Rama Himself. Although they have ban-
ished the idea of God consciousness, they still expect to establish the
kingdom of Rama. Such a proposal is rejected by devotees. Prthu
Maharaja’s reputation was heard by saintly persons because he exactly
represented Lord Ramacandra, the ideal king.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Twenty-
second Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “King Prthu Maharaja’s
Meeting with the Four Kumaras.”


--- Page 208 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home
TEXTS 1-3.
मैत्रेय उवाच
दृष्टाऽऽत्मानं प्रवयसमेकदा वैन्य आत्भवान्‌ |
आत्मना ARIE: प्रजापतिः || १ ॥
जगतस्तस्थुषथापि इततिदो धर्मभृत्सताम्‌ |
निष्यादितेश्वरदेशो यदथेमिह जज्ञिवान्‌ ।॥ २ ॥
आत्मजेष्वात्मजां न्यस्य ॒बिरहादद तीमिव |
प्रजासु विमनःस्वेकः सदारोऽगासपोवनम्‌ ।। ২ ॥
maitreya ८४९८०
drstvatmanar pravayasam
ekada vainya atmavan
atmana vardhitasesa-
svanusargah prajapatih
Jjagatas tasthusas capi
vrtti-do dharma-bhrt satam
nispaditesvaradeso
yad-artham iha jajiiivan
atma-jesv atma-jarn nyasya
virahad rudatim iva
prajasu vimanahsv ekah
sa-daro ‘gat tapo-vanam
maitreyah uvaca—the sage Maitreya continued to speak; drstva—after
seeing; atmanam—of the body; pravayasam—old age; ekada—once upon a
time; vainyah— King Prthu; atmavan—fully conversant in spiritual educa-
tion; atmana—by oneself; vardhita—increased; asesa—unlimitedly; sva-
973


--- Page 209 ---
974 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
anusargah—creation of material opulences; praja-patih—a protector of
citizens; jagatah—moving; tasthusah—not moving; ca—also; api—certainly;
vrtti-dah—one who gives pensions; dharma-bhrt—one who observes the
religious principles; satam—of the devotees; nispadita—fully executed;
isvara—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adesah—order; yat-artham
—in coordination with Him; tha—in this world; jajitivan—performed;
atma-jesu—unto his sons; atma-jam—the earth; nyasya—indicating; virahat—
out of separation; rudatim iva—just like lamenting; prajasu—unto the
citizens; vimanahsu— unto the aggrieved; ekah—alone; sa-darah—with his
wife; agat—went; tapah-vanam—in the forest where one can execute
austerities.
TRANSLATION

At the last stage of his life, when Maharaja Prthu saw himself getting
old, that great soul, who was King of the world, divided whatever opulence
he had accumulated amongst all kinds of living entities, moving and non-
moving. He arranged pensions for everyone according to religious prin-
ciples, and after executing the orders of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, in complete coordination with Him, he dedicated his sons unto the
earth, which was considered to be his daughter. Then Maharaja Prthu
left the presence of his citizens, who were almost lamenting and crying
from feeling separation from the King, and went to the forest alone with
his wife to perform austerities.

PURPORT

Maharaja Prthu was one of the saktyavesa incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and as such he appeared on the surface of the
earth to execute the orders of the Supreme. As stated in Bhagavad-gita,
the Supreme Lord is the proprietor of all planets, and He is always anxious
to see that in each and every planet the living entities are happily living
and executing their duties. As soon as there is some discrepancy in the
execution of duties, the Lord appears on earth, as confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita: yada yada hi dharmasya glanir bhavati bharata (Bg. 4.7).

Since there were so many discrepancies during the reign of King Vena,
the Lord sent His most confidential devotee, Maharaja Prthu, to settle
things. Therefore, after executing the orders of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and settling the affairs of the world, Maharaja Prthu was ready
to retire. He had been exemplary in his governmental administration, and
now he was to become exemplary in his retirement. He divided all his


--- Page 210 ---
Text 4] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 975
property amongst his sons and appointed them to rule the world, and
then he went to the forest with his wife. It is significant in this connection
that it is said that Maharaja Prthu retired alone and at the same time took
his wife with him. According to Vedic principles, when retiring from fam-
ily life, one can take his wife with him, for the husband and wife are con-
sidered to be one unit. Thus they can both combinedly perform austerities
for liberation. This is the path that Maharaja Prthu, who was an exemplary
character, followed, and this is also the way of Vedic civilization. One
should not simply remain at home until the time of death but should
separate from family life at a timely moment and prepare himself to go
back to Godhead. As a saktydvesa incarnation of God who had actually
come from Vaikuntha as a representative of Krsna, Maharaja Prthu was
certain to go back to Godhead. Nonetheless in order to set the example in
all ways, he also underwent severe austerities in the tapo-vana. It appears
that in those days there were many tapo-vanas, or forests especially meant
for retirement and the practice of austerities. Indeed, it was compulsory
for everyone to go to the tapo-vana to fully accept the shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, for it is very difficult to retire from
family life and at the same time remain at home.
TEXT 4
तवराप्यदाभ्यनियमो वैखवानसखुसम्भते |
आरन्ध उग्रतपति यथा खविजये पुरा ॥ ५ ॥
tatrapy adabhya-niyamo
vaik hanasa-susammate
arabdha ugra-tapasi
yatha sva-vijaye pura
tatra—there; api—also; adabhya—severe; niyamah—austerities; vaikha-
nasa—rules and regulations of retired life; susammate—perfectly recognized;
arabdhah—beginning; ugra—severe; tapasi—austerity; yatha—as much as;
sva-vijaye—in conquering the world; pura—formerly.
TRANSLATION
After retiring from family life, Maharaja Prthu strictly followed the
regulations of retired life and underwent severe austerities in the forest.
He engaged in these activities as seriously as he had formerly engaged in
leading the government and conquering everyone.


--- Page 211 ---
976 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
PURPORT

As it is necessary for one to become very active in family life, similarly,
after retirement from family life, it is necessary to control the mind and
senses. This is possible when one engages himself fully in the devotional
service of the Lord. Actually the whole purpose of the Vedic system, the
Vedic social order, is to enable one to ultimately return home, back to
Godhead. The grhastha-asrama is a sort of concession combining sense
gratification with a regulative life. It is to enable one to easily retire in the
middle of life and engage fully in austerities in order to transcend material
sense gratification once and for all. Therefore in the vanaprastha stage of
life, tapasya, or austerity, is strongly recommended. Maharaja Prthu
followed exactly all the rules of vanaprastha life, which is technically
known 85 vaikhanasa-asrama. The word vaikhanasa-susammate is significant
because in vanaprastha life the regulative principles are also to be strictly
followed. In other words, Maharaja Prthu was an ideal character in every
sphere of life. Mahajano yena gatah sa panthdh: one should follow in the
footsteps of great personalities. Thus by following the exemplary character
of Maharaja Prthu, one can become perfect in all respects while living this
life or while retiring from active life. Thus after giving up this body, one
can become liberated and go back to Godhead.

TEXT 5
कन्दमूलफलाहारः TWIT: कचित्‌ |
अन्भक्षः कतिचित्पक्षान्‌ वायुभक्षस्ततः परम्‌ ॥ ५॥
kanda-mula-phalaharah
Suskaparpasanah kvacit
ab-bhaksah katicit paksan
vayu-bhaksas tatah param

kanda—trunk; mula—roots; phala—fruits; aharah—eating; Suska—dry;
parna—leaves; asanah—eating; kvacit—sometimes; ap-bhaksah—drinking
water; katicit—for several; paksan—fortnights; vayu—the air; bhaksah—
breathing; tatah param—thereafter.

TRANSLATION

In the tapo-vana, Maharaja Prthu sometimes ate the trunks and roots of
trees, and sometimes he ate fruit and dried leaves, and for some weeks he
drank only water. Finally he lived simply by breathing air.


--- Page 212 ---
Text 5] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 977
PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita yogis are advised to go to a secluded place in the forest
and live alone in a sanctified spot there. By Prthu Maharaja’s behavior we
can understand that when he went to the forest,he did not eat any cooked
food sent from the city by some devotees or disciples. As soon as one
takes a vow to live in the forest, he must simply eat roots, tree trunks,
fruits, dried leaves or whatever nature provides in that way. Prthu Maharaja
strictly adopted these principles for living in the forest, and sometimes he
ate nothing but dried leaves and drank nothing but a little water. Some-
times he lived on nothing but air, and sometimes he ate some fruit from
the trees. In this way he lived in the forest and underwent severe austerity,
especially in regards to eating. In other words, overeating is not at all
recommended for one who wants to progress in spiritual life. Sri Rapa
Gosvami also warns (atyaharah prayasas ca) that too much eating and too
much endeavor are against the principles by which one can advance in
spiritual life.

It is also notable that according to Vedic injunction, to live in the forest
is to live in the mode of complete goodness, whereas to live in the city is
to live in the mode of passion, and to live in a brothel or drinking house is
to live in the mode of ignorance. However, to live in a temple is to live in
Vaikuntha, which is transcendental to all the modes of material nature.
This Krsna consciousness movement affords one the opportunity to live in
the temple of the Lord, which is as good as Vaikuntha. Consequently a
Krsna conscious person does not need to go to the forest and artificially
try to imitate Maharaja Prthu or the great sages and munis who used to
live in the forest.

Srila Rapa Gosvami, after retiring from his minister’s seat in the govern-
ment, went to Vrndavana and lived beneath a tree, like Maharaja Prthu.
Since then, many people have gone to Vrndavana to imitate Ripa Gosvami’s
behavior. Instead of advancing in spiritual life, many have fallen into
material habits and even in Vrndavana have become victims of illicit sex,
gambling and intoxication. This Krsna consciousness movement has been
introduced in the Western countries, but it is not possible for Westerners to
go to the forest and practice the severe austerities which were ideally
practiced by Prthu Maharaja or Ripa Gosvami. However, Westerners or
anyone else can follow in the footsteps of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura by living in a temple, which is transcendental to residence in a
forest, and to vow to accept Krsna prasada and nothing else, follow the
regulative principles, and chant sixteen rounds daily of the Hare Krsna
mantra. In this way, one’s spiritual life will never be disturbed.


--- Page 213 ---
978 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
TEXT 6
्ीषमे पञ्चतपा वीरो वर्षाल्वासारषाण्युनिः |
spoT: शिशिरे उदके स्थण्डिले्चयः ॥ ६ ।
grisme panca-tapa viro
varsasv asarasan munih
akantha-magnah Sisire
udake sthandile$ayah
grisme—in the summer season; painica-tapah—five kinds of heating;
virah—the hero; varsasu—in the rainy season;asarasat—being situated with-
in the torrents of rain; munih—like the great sages; akantha— up to the
neck; magnah—drowned; Sisire—in winter; udake— within water; sthandile-
sayah—lying down on the floor.
TRANSLATION
Following the principles of forest living and the footsteps of the great
sages and munis, Prthu Maharaja accepted five kinds of heating processes
during the summer season, exposed himself to torrents of rain in the rainy
season, and, in the winter, stood in water up to his neck. He also used to
simply lie down on the floor to sleep.
PURPORT
These are some of the austerities executed by the [रदाय and yogis, who
cannot accept the process of bhakti-yoga. They must undergo such severe
types of austerity in order to become purified from material contamination.
Paiica-tapah refers to five kinds of heating processes. ®ne is also enjoined
to sit within a circle of fire, with flames blazing from four sides and the
sun blazing directly overhead. This is one kind of paiica-tapah recommended
for austerity. Similarly, in the rainy season one is enjoined to expose him-
self to torrents of rain and in winter to sit in cold water up to the neck.
As far as bedding is concerned, the ascetic should be content with simply
lying on the floor. The purpose for undergoing such severe austerities is to
become a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, as
explained in the next verse.
TEXT 7
0
तितिश्ु्यतबाग्द न्त sa जितानिलः |
आरिराधयिषुः कृष्णमचरत्तप उत्तमम्‌ ॥ ७॥


--- Page 214 ---
Text 7] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 979
titiksur yata-vag danta
urdhva-reta jitanilah
ariradhayisuh krsnam
acarat tapa uttamam
titiksuh—tolerating; yata— controlling; vak—words; dantah—controlling
the senses; urdhva-retah—without discharge of semen; jita-anilah—con-
trolling the life air; ariradhayisuh—simply desiring; krspam—Lord Krsna;
acarat—practice; tapah— austerities; uttamam—the best.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu underwent all these severe austerities in order to control
his words and his senses, to refrain from discharging his semina and to
control the life air within his body. All this he did for the satisfaction of
Krsna. He had no other purpose.
PURPORT
In Kali-yuga the following is recommended:
harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha.
(Brhan-naradiya Purana)
In order to be recognized by Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
one should chant the holy name of the Lord continuously, twenty-four
hours a day. Unfortunate persons who cannot accept this formula prefer
to execute some type of pseudo-meditation without accepting the other
processes of austerity. The fact is, however, that one must accept either
the severe method of austerity described above to become purified or take
to the process of devotional service recommended for pleasing the Supreme
Lord, Krsna. The person who is Krsna conscious is most intelligent because
in Kali-yuga it is not at all possible to undergo such severe austerities. We
need only follow great personalities like Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In His
Siksastaka, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu wrote, param vijayate $ri-krsna-
sankirtanam: all glories to the holy names of Lord Krsna, which from the
very beginning purify the heart and immediately liberate one. Bhava-
mahadavagni-nirvapanam. If the real purpose of all yoga is to please Lord
Krsna, then this simple bhakti-yoga system recommended for this age is
sufficient. It is necessary, however, to engage constantly in the service of
the Lord. Although Prthu Maharaja executed his austerities long before
the appearance of Lord Krsna on this planet, his purpose was still to please
Krsna.


--- Page 215 ---
980 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23

There are many fools who claim that worship of Krsna began only about
five thousand years ago, after the appearance of Lord Krsna in India, but
this is not a fact. Prthu Maharaja worshiped Krsna millions of years ago,
for Prthu happened to be a descendant of the family of Maharaja Dhruva,
who reigned for 36,000 years during the Satya-yuga age. Unless his
total life span was 100,000 years, how could Dhruva Maharaja reign
over the world for 36,000 years? The point is that Krsna worship
existed at the beginning of creation and has continued to exist through-
out Satya-yuga, Treta-yuga and Dvapara-yuga, and now it is continuing
in Kali-yuga. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, Krsna not only appears in
this millennium of Brahma’s life, but in every millennium. Therefore
worship of Krsna is conducted in all millenniums. It is not that Krsna
worship began only when Krsna appeared on this planet five thou-
sand years ago. This is a foolish conclusion that is not substantiated by
Vedic literatures.

Also of significance in this verse are the words ariradhayisuh krspam
acarat tapa uttamam. Maharaja Prthu underwent severe types of austerities
for the express purpose of worshiping Krsna. Krsna is so kind, especially in
this age, that He appears in the transcendental vibration of His holy name.
As is said in the Narada-paiicaratra, aradhito yadi haris tapasa tatah kim. If
Krsna is worshiped, if He is the goal of advancement, there is no need for
one to execute severe types of tapasya, because one has already reached his
destination. If, after executing all types of tapasya, one cannotreach Krsna,
all his tapasya has no value, for without Krsna all austerity is simply wasted
labor. Srama eva hi kevalam (Bhag. 1.2.8). We should therefore not be dis-
couraged just because we cannot go to the forest and practice severe austeri-
ties. Our life is so short that we must strictly adhere to the principles laid
down by the Vaisnava a@caryas and peacefully execute Krsna consciousness.
There is no need to become despondent. Narottama dasa Thakura recom-
mends: anande bala hari, bhaja vrndavana, sri-guru-vaisnava-pade majaiya
mana. For a transcendental blissful life, chant the Hare Krsna mantra, come
worship the holy place of Vrndavana, and always engage in the service of
the Lord, of the spiritual master, and of the Vaisnavas. This Krsna con-
sciousness movement is therefore very safe and easy. We have only to exe-
cute the order of the Lord and fully surrender unto Him. We have only to
execute the order of the spiritual master, preach Krsna consciousness and
follow in the path of the Vaisnavas. The spiritual master represents both
Lord Krsna and the Vaisnavas; therefore by following the instructions of
the spiritual master and by chanting Hare Krsna, everything will be all right.


--- Page 216 ---
Text 8] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 981
TEXT 8
<
तेन॒ क्रमादुसिद्धेन ध्वस्तकमेमलाशयः |
प्राणायामैः सन्निरुदरषडपरगर्छिनबन्धनः || ८ ॥
tena kramanusiddhena
dhuvasta-karma-malasayah
pranayamaih sanniruddha-
sad-vargas chinna-bandhanah

tena—thus by practicing such austerities; krama—gradually; anu—con-
stantly; siddhena—by perfection; dhvasta—smashed; karma—fruitive
activities; mala—dirty things; asayah—desire; pranayamaih—by practice of
pranayama-yoga, breathing exercises; san—being; niruddha—stopped; sat-
vargah—the mind and the senses; chinna-bandhanah—completely cut off
from all bondage.

TRANSLATION

By thus practicing severe austerities, Maharaja Prthu gradually became
steadfast in spiritual life and completely free of all desires for fruitive
activities. He also practiced breathing exercises to control his mind and
senses, and by such control he became completely free from all desires for
fruitive activity.

PURPORT

The word prapayamaih is very important in this verse because the
hatha-yogis and astanga-yogis practice pranayama, but generally they do
not know the purpose behind it. The purpose of pranayama, or mystic
yoga, is to stop the mind and senses from engaging in fruitive activities.
The so-called yogis who practice in Western countries have no idea of this.
The aim of pranayama is not to make the body strong and fit for working
hard. The aim is worship of Krsna. In the previous verse it was specifically
mentioned that whatever austerity, pranayama and mystic yoga practices
Prthu Maharaja performed were performed for the sake of worshiping
Krsna. Thus Prthu Maharaja serves as a perfect example for yogis also.
Whatever he did, he did to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna.

The minds of those who are addicted to fruitive activity are always
filled with unclean desires. Fruitive activities are symptomatic of our
polluted desire to dominate material nature. As long as one continues to


--- Page 217 ---
982 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
be subject to polluted desires, he has to accept one material body after
another. So-called yogis, without knowledge of the real purpose of yoga,
practice it in order to keep the body fit. Thus they engage themselves in
fruitive activities, and thus they are bound by desire to accept another
body. They are not aware that the ultimate goal of life is to approach
Krsna. In order to save such yogis from wandering throughout the different
species of life, the sastras warn that in this age such yogic practice is simply
a waste of time. The only means of elevation is the chanting of the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra.

King Prthu’s activities took place in Satya-yuga, and in this age this
practice of yoga is misunderstood by fallen souls who are not capable of
practicing anything. Consequently the sastras enjoin: kalau nasty eva
nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha. The conclusion is that unless the karmis,
[दाऽ and yogis come to the point of devotional service to Lord Krsna,
their so-called austerities and yoga have no value. Naradhitah: if Hari, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is not worshiped, there is no point in
practicing meditational yoga, performing karma-yoga or culturing empiric
knowledge. As far as pranayama is concerned, chanting of the holy name
of the Lord and dancing in ecstasy are also considered pranayama. In a
previous verse, Sanatkumara instructed Maharaja Prthu to engage constant-
ly in the service of the Supreme Lord, Vasudeva:

yat pada-pankaja-palasa-vilasa-bhaktya
karmasayarm grathitam udgrathayanti santah

Only by worshiping Vasudeva can one become free from the desires of
fruitive activities. Outside of worshiping Vasudeva, the yogis and jianis
cannot attain freedom from such desires. Tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo’pi
ruddha-srotoganas tam 07010 bhaja vasudevam (Bhag. 4.22.39). Here the
word pranayama does not refer to any ulterior motive. The actual aim is
to strengthen the mind and senses in order to engage them in devotional
service. In the present age this determination can be very easily acquired
simply by chanting the holy names—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

५ TEXT 9
FACIAL यदाहाण्यात्मकं परम्‌ |
योगं तेनैव पुरुषमभजत्पुरूषषभः । ९॥
sanat-kumaro bhagavan
yad ahadhyatmikarm param


--- Page 218 ---
Text 9] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 983
yoga tenaiva purusam
abhajat purusarsabhah

sanat-kumarah—Sanat-kumira; bhagavan—most powerful; yat—that
which; aha—said; adhyatmikam—spiritual advancement of life; param—
ultimate; yogam—mysticism; tena—by that; eva--certainly; purusam—
Supreme Person; abhajat—worshiped; purusa-rsabhah—the best of the
human beings.

TRANSLATION

Thus the best amongst human beings, Maharaja Prthu, followed that
path of spiritual advancement which was advised by Sanat-kumara. That is
to say, he worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly said that Maharaja Prthu, practicing the
pranayama-yoga system, engaged in the service of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead as advised by the saint Sanat-kumara. In this verse the words
purusam abhajat purusarsabhah are significant: purusarsabha refers to
Maharaja Prthu, the best amongst human beings, and purusam refers to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The conclusion is that the best man
amongst all men engages in the service of the Supreme Person. One purusa
is worshipable, and the other purusa is the worshiper. When the purusa
who worships, the living entity, thinks of becoming one with the Supreme
Person, he simply becomes bewildered and falls into the darkness of ignor-
ance. As stated by Lord Krsna in Bhagavad-gita, all living entities assembled
in the battlefield, as well as Krsna Himself, were also present in the past as
individuals and would continue to be present in the future as individuals
also (Bg. 2.12). Therefore the two purusas, the living entity and the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, never lose their respective identities.

Actually one who is self-realized engages himself in the service of the
Lord perpetually, both in this life and in the next. Indeed, for devotees
there is no difference between this life and the next. In this life a neophyte
devotee is trained to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and in
the next life he approaches that Supreme Person in Vaikuntha and renders
the same devotional service. Even for the neophyte devotee, devotional
service is considered brahma-bhuyaya kalpate. Devotional service to the
Lord is never considered a material activity. Since he is acting on the
brahma-bhuta platform, a devotee is already liberated. He therefore has no
need to practice any other type of yoga in order to approach the brahma-
bhuta stage. If the devotee adheres strictly to the orders of the spiritual


--- Page 219 ---
984 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4, Ch. 23
master, follows the rules and regulations and chants the Hare Krsna mantra,
it should be concluded that he is already at the brahma-bhiita stage, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:
man ca yo vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gupan samatityaitan
brahma-bhuyaya kalpate
“One who is engaged in full devotional service, unfailing in all circum-
stances, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26)
TEXT 10
मगवदधर्मिणः साधोः श्रद्धया यततः सदा ।
भक्तिर्भगवति ब्रह्मण्यनन्यविषयाभवत्‌ ॥१०॥
bhagavad-dharminah sadhoh
$raddhaya yatatah sada
bhaktir bhagavati brahmany
ananya-visayabhavat
bhagavat-dharminah—one who executes devotional service; sadhoh—
of the devotee; sraddhaya—with faith; yatatah—endeavoring;sada—always;
bhaktih—devotion; bhagavati—unto the Personality of Godhead; brahmani—
the origin of impersonal Brahman; ananya-visaya—firmly fixed without
deviation; abhavat—became.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu thus engaged completely in devotional service, executing
the rules and regulations strictly according to principles, twenty-four hours
daily. Thus his love and devotion unto the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Krsna, developed and became unflinching and fixed.
PURPORT
The word bhagavad-dharminah indicates that the religious process
practiced by Maharaja Prthu was beyond all pretentions. As stated in the
beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam, dharmah projjhita-kaitavo 17৫ (Bhag.
1.1.2): Religious principles which are simply pretentious are actually
nothing but cheating. Bhagavad-dharminah is described by Viraraghavacarya
as nivrtta-dharmena, which indicates that it cannot be contaminated by
material aspiration. As described by Srila Ripa Gosvami:


--- Page 220 ---
Text 11] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 985

anyabhilasita-sunyam jiana-karmady-anavrtam

anukulyena krsnanusilanam bhaktir uttama
When one is not inspired by material desires and is not contaminated by
the processes of fruitive activity and empiric speculation, he fully engages
in the favorable service of the Lord. That is called bhagavad-dharma, or
pure devotional service. In this verse the word brahmani does not refer to
the impersonal Brahman. Impersonal Brahman is a subordinate feature of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and since impersonal Brahman
worshipers desire to merge into the Brahman effulgence, they cannot be
considered followers of bhagavad-dharma. After being baffled in his
material enjoyment, the impersonalist may desire to merge into the
existence of the Lord, but a pure devotee of the Lord has no such desire.
Therefore a pure devotee is really bhagavad-dharmi.

It is clear from this verse that Maharaja Prthu was never a worshiper
of the impersonal Brahman but was at all times a pure devotee of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhagavati brahmani refers to one who
is engaged in devotional service to the Personality of Godhead. A devotee’s
knowledge of the impersonal Brahman is automatically revealed, and he is
not interested in merging into the impersonal Brahman. Maharaja Prthu’s
activities in devotional service enabled him to become fixed and steady
in the discharge of devotional activities without having to take recourse
to karma, 72710 or yoga.

TEXT 11
तस्यानया भगवतः परिकर्मञ्चद्ध-
सच्वात्मनस्तदनुसंसरणानुप त्या |
ज्ञानं भिरक्तिमदभूनिश्चितेन येन
चिच्छेद संशयपदं निजजीभकोशम्‌।। ११॥
tasyanaya bhagavatah parikarma-suddha-
sattvatmanas tad-anusamsmarananupurtya
jhanam viraktimad abhun nisitena yena
ciccheda samsaya-padam nija-jiva-kosam

tasya—his; anaya—by this; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; parikarma—activities in devotional service; suddha—pure,
transcendental; sattva—existence; atmanah—of the mind; tat—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; anusamsmarapa—constantly remember-
ing; anupurtya—being perfectly done; jaanam—knowledge; virakti—non-
attachment; mat—possessing; abhut—became manifested; nisitena—by


--- Page 221 ---
986 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
sharpened activities; yena—by which; ciccheda—become separated;
sarsaya-padam—position of doubtfulness; nija—own; jiva-kos$am —encage-
ment of the living entity.

TRANSLATION

By regularly discharging devotional service, Prthu Maharaja became
transcendental in mind and could therefore constantly think of the lotus
feet of the Lord. Because of this, he became completely detached and
attained perfect knowledge by which he could transcend all doubt. Thus
he was freed from the clutches of false ego and the material conception
of life.

PURPORT

In the Narada-paiicaratra, devotional service to the Lord is likened
unto a queen. When a queen gives an audience, many maidservants follow
her. The maidservants of devotional service are material opulence,
liberation and mystic powers. The karmis are very much attached to
material enjoyment; the jianis are very anxious to become freed from
material clutches; and the yogis are very fond of attaining the eight kinds
of mystic perfection. From the Narada-paficaratra we understand that if
one attains the stage of pure devotional service, he also attains all the
opulences derived from fruitive activities, empiric philosophical specula-
tion and mystic yogic practice. Srila Bilvamargala Thakura therefore
prayed in his Krspa-karnamrta: “My dear Lord, if I have unflinching
devotion to You, You become manifest before me personally, and the
results of fruitive activity and empiric philosophical speculation—namely
religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation—become
like personal attendants and remain standing before me as if awaiting my
order.” The idea here is that the jianis, by culture of brahma-vidya,
spiritual knowledge, struggle very hard to get out of the clutches of
material nature, but a devotee, by dint of his advancement in devotional
service, automatically becomes detached from his material body. When
the devotee’s spiritual body begins to manifest, he actually enters into
his activities in transcendental life.

At present we have contacted a material body, material mind and
material intelligence, but when we become free from these material
conditions, our spiritual body, spiritual mind and spiritual intelligence
become manifest. In that transcendental state, a devotee attains all the
benefits of karma, jana and yoga. Although he never engages in fruitive
activities or empiric speculation to attain mystic powers, automatically


--- Page 222 ---
Text 11] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 987
mystic powers appear in his service. A devotee does not want any kind of
material opulence, but such opulence appears before him automatically.
He does not have to endeavor for it. Because of his devotional service, he
automatically becomes brahma-bhiita. As stated before, this is confirmed
in Bhagavad-gita:
mam ca yo ‘vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunpan samalityaitan
brahma-bhuyaya kalpate
“One who is engaged in full devotional service, unfailing in all circum-
stances, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes
to the level of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26)

Because of his regular discharge of devotional service, a devotee
attains the transcendental stage of life. Since his mind is transcendentally
situated, he cannot think of anything but the lotus feet of the Lord.
This is the meaning of the word sarmsmarana-anupurtya. By constantly
thinking of the lotus feet of the Lord, the devotee immediately becomes
situated in Suddha-sattva. Suddha-sattva refers to that platform which is
above the modes of material nature, including the mode of goodness.
In the material world, the mode of goodness is considered to be represen-
tative of the highest perfection, but one has to transcend this mode and
come to the stage of Suddha-sattva, or pure goodness, where the three
qualities of material nature cannot act.

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura gives the following example:
If one has strong digestive power, after eating he automatically lights a
fire within his stomach to digest everything and does not need to take
medicine to aid his digestion. Similarly, the fire of devotional service is so
strong that a devotee does not need to act separately to attain perfect
knowledge or detachment from material attractions. A jiiani may become
detached from material attractions by prolonged discussions on subjects
of knowledge and may in this way finally come to the brahma-bhuta
stage, but a devotee does not have to undergo so much trouble. By virtue
of his devotional service, he attains the brahma-bhita stage without a
doubt. The yogis and jaants are always doubtful about their constitutional
position; therefore they mistakenly think of becoming one with the
Supreme. However, a devotee’s relationship with the Supreme becomes
manifest beyond all doubt, and he immediately understands that his
position is that of eternal servant of the Lord. The jaanis and yogis may


--- Page 223 ---
988 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
think of attaining liberation without rendering devotional service, but
actually this is not possible because their intelligence is not as pure as that
of a pure devotee. In other words, the jianis and yogis cannot become
factually liberated unless they become elevated to the position of devotees.
Aruhya krcchrepa param padam tatah patanty adho ‘nadrta-yusmad-
anghrayah (Bhag. 10.2.32). The jiaants and yogis may rise to the highest
position, Brahman realization, but because of their lack of devotion unto
the lotus feet of the Lord, they again fall down into material nature.
Therefore jiiana and yoga should not be accepted as the real processes for
liberation. By discharging devotional service, Maharaja Prthu automatically
transcended all these positions. Since Maharaja Prthu was a saktyavesa
incarnation of the Supreme Lord, he did not have to act in any way to
attain liberation. He came from the Vaikuntha world, or spiritual sky, in
order to execute the will of the Supreme Lord on earth. Consequently he
was 10 return home, back to Godhead, without having to execute jiiana,
yoga or karma. Although Prthu Maharaja was eternally a pure devotee of
the Lord, he nonetheless adopted the process of devotional service in
order to teach the people in general the proper process for executing the
duties of life and ultimately returning home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 12
छिनान्यधीरधिगतात्मगतिनिरीह-
स्तत्त्यजेऽच्छिनदिद्‌ वयुनेन येन |
तान्न योगगतिभि्य॑तिर्रमत्तो
याबद्रदाग्रनकथासु रतिं न ङुर्यात्‌ ॥१२॥
chinndnya-dhir adhigatatma-gatir nirihas
tat tatyaje ’cchinad idarh vayunena yena
tavan na yoga-gatibhir yatir apramatto
yavad gadagraja-kathdsu ratim na kuryat
chinna—being separated; anya-dhih—all other concepts of life (the bodily
concept of life); adhigata—being firmly convinced; atma-gatih—ultimate
goal of spiritual life; nirihah—desireless; tat—that; tatyaje—gave up;
acchinat—he had cut; idam—this; vayunena—with the knowledge; yena—
by which; tavat—so long; na—never; yoga-gatibhih—the practice of the
mystic yoga system; yatih—the practicer; apramattah—without any illusion;
yavat—so long; gaddigraja—of Krsna; kathasu—words; ratim—attraction;
na—never; kuryat—do it.


--- Page 224 ---
Text 12] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 989
TRANSLATION

When he became completely free from the conception of bodily life,
Maharaja Prthu realized Lord Krsna sitting in everyone's heart as the
Paramatma. Being thus able to get all instructions from Him, he gave up all
other practices of yoga and jnana. He was not even interested in the per-
fection of the yoga and [डा systems, for he thoroughly realized that
devotional service to Krsna is the ultimate goal of life and that unless the
yogis and jianis become attracted to Krsna-katha [narrations about
Krsna], their illusions concerning existence can never be dispelled.

PURPORT

As long as one is too much absorbed in the bodily conception of life, he
becomes interested in many different processes of self-realization, such as
the mystic yoga system or the system utilizing the speculative empiric
methods. However, when one understands that the ultimate goal of life is
to approach Krsna, he realizes Krsna within everyone’s heart and therefore
helps everyone who is interested in Krsna consciousness. Actually the per-
fection of life depends on one’s inclination to hear about Krsna. It is there-
fore mentioned in this verse: ydvad gadagraja-kathdsu ratim na kuryat. Un-
less one becomes interested in Krsna, in His pastimes and activities, there
is no question of liberation by means of yoga practice or speculative
knowledge.

Having attained to the stage of devotion, Maharaja Prthu became un-
interested in the practices of jiidna and yoga and abandoned them. Thisis the
stage of pure devotional life as described by Rupa Gosvami: anyabhildsita-
Sunyam jiana-karmady-anavrtam/ anukulyena krsnanusilanam bhaktir
uttamd. Real jidna means understanding that the living entity is the eternal
servant of the Lord. This knowledge is attained after many, many births,
as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita: bahindr janmandm ante jiidnavin mdr
prapadyate (Bg. 7.19). In the paramaharisa stage of life, one fully realizes
Krsna as everything: 0৫508061018 sarvam iti sa mahatmd sudurlabhah. When
one understands fully that Krsna is everything and that Krsna consciousness
is the highest perfection of life, he becomes a paramaharisa, or mahdtma.
Such a mahdatmd or paramaharisa is very rare to find. A paramaharisa or
pure devotee is never attracted by hatha-yoga or speculative knowledge. He
is simply interested in the unalloyed devotional service of the Lord. Some-
times one who is formally addicted to these processes tries to perform
devotional service and the jidna and yoga practices at the same time, but
as soon as one comes to the unalloyed stage of devotional service, he is


--- Page 225 ---
990 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23°
able to give up all other methods of self-realization. In other words, when
one firmly realizes Krsna as the supreme goal, he is no longer attracted by
mystic yoga practice or the speculative empirical methods of knowledge.
TEXT 13
एवं § JIE संयोज्यारमानमात्मनि |
TAA ₹ কান্ড तत्याज स्वं FST ॥१३॥
evam sa vira-pravarah
samyojyatmanam dtmani
brahma-bhito drdham kale
tatydja svar kalevaram

evam— thus; sah—he; vira-pravarah—the chief of the heroes; samyojya—
applying; dtm@anam—mind; dtmani—unto the Supersoul; brahma-bhiitah—
being liberated; drdham—firmly; kdle—in due course of time; tatydja—
gave up; svam—own; kalevaram—body.

TRANSLATION

In due course of time, Prthu Maharaja was able to fix his mind firmly
upon the lotus feet of Krsna, and thus, completely situated on the brahma-
bhiita platform, he gave up the material body.

PURPORT

According to a Bengali proverb, whatever spiritual progress one makes
in life will be tested at the time of death. In Bhagavad-gitd it is also con-
firmed: yam yar vdpi smaran bhdvam tyajaty ante kalevaram/ tam tam
evaiti kaunteya sadd tad-bhdva-bhavitah (Bg. 8.6). Those who are practicing
Krsna consciousness know that their examination will be held at the time
of death. If one can remember Krsna at death, he is immediately trans-
ferred to Goloka Vrndavana, or Krsnaloka, and thus his life becomes suc-
cessful. Prthu Maharaja, by the grace of Krsna, could understand that the
end of his life was near, and thus he became very jubilant and proceeded to
completely give up his body on the brahma-bhiita stage by practicing the
yogic process. It is thoroughly described in the following verses how one
can voluntarily give up this body and return home, back to Godhead. The
yogic process practiced by Prthu Maharaja at the time of death accelerates
the giving up of this body while one is in sound health physically and
mentally. Every devotee desires to give up the body while it is sound
physically and mentally. This desire was also expressed by King Kulasekhara
in his Mukunda-mala-stotra:


--- Page 226 ---
Text 14] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 991
krsna tvadiya-padapankaja-paiijarantam
adyaiva me visalu mdnasa-rdja-harisah
prdna-praydnpa-samaye kapha-vdta-pittaih
kanthavarodhana-vidhau smaranan kutas te
King Kulasekhara wanted to give up his body while in a healthy state,
and he thus prayed to Krsna to let him die immediately while he was in
good health and while his mind was sound. When a man dies, he is generally
overpowered by mucus and bile, and thus he chokes. Since it is very diffi-
cult to vibrate any sound while choking, it is simply by Krsna’s grace that
one can chant Hare Krsna at the time of death. However, by situating one-
self in the muktdsana position, a yogi can immediately give up his body
and go to whatever planet he desires. A perfect yogi can give up his body
whenever he desires through the practice of yoga.
TEXT 14
. ০: ৯ E a
सम्पीञ्य पायुं पाष्णिम्यां वायुमुरपारयजञ्छनेः |
नाभ्यां केष्ठेष्ववस्थाप्य हृदुरःकण्ठशषीर्षणि 112811
sampidya pdyum parsnibhyam
vdyum utsarayani chanaih
nabhyam kosthesv avasthapya
hrd-urah-kantha-sirsani
sampidya—by blocking; pdyum—the door of the anus; parsnibhydm—by
the calves; v@ayum—the air which goes up; utsdirayan—pushing upward;
sanaih—gradually; ndbhydm—by the navel; kosthesu—in the heart and in
the throat; avasthdpya—fixing up; hrt—in the heart; urah—upwards;
kantha—throat; sirsani—between the two eyebrows.
TRANSLATION
When Maharaja Prthu practiced a particular yogic sitting posture, he
blocked the doors of his anus with his ankles, pressed his right and left
calves and gradually raised his life air upward, passing it on to the circle of
his navel, up to his heart and throat, and finally pushed it upward to the
central position between his two eyebrows.
PURPORT
The sitting posture described herein is called muktasana. In the yoga
process, after following the strict regulative principles controlling sleeping,


--- Page 227 ---
992 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
eating and mating, one is allowed to practice the different sitting postures.
The ultimate aim of yoga is to enable one to give up this body according to
his own free will. One who has attained the ultimate summit of yoga
practice can live in the body as long as he likes, or, as long as he is not
completely perfect, leave the body to go anywhere within or outside the
universe. Some yogis leave their bodies to go to the higher planetary
systems and enjoy the material facilities therein. However, intelligent yogis
do not wish to waste their time within this material world at all; they do
not care for the material facilities in higher planetary systems but are
interested in going directly to the spiritual sky, back home, back to God-
head.

From the description in this verse, it appears that Maharaja Prthu had no
desire to promote himself to the higher planetary systems. He wanted to
return home immediately, back to Godhead. Although Maharaja Prthu
stopped all practice of mystic yoga after realizing Krsna consciousness, he
nonetheless took advantage of his previous practice and immediately placed
himself on the brahma-bhuta platform in order to accelerate his return
to Godhead. The aim of this particular system of asana, known as the sit-
ting posture for liberation, or muktasana, is to attain success in kundalint-
cakra and gradually raise the life from the muladhara-cakra to the
svadhisthana-cakra, then to the manipira-cakra, the anahata-cakra, the
visuddha-cakra, and finally to the ajia-cakra. When the yogi reaches the
ajiia-cakra, between the two eyebrows, he is able to penetrate the brahma-
randhra, or the hole in his skull, and go to any planet he desires up to the
spiritual kingdom of Vaikuntha, or Krsnaloka. The conclusion is that one
has to come to the brahma-bhiita stage for going back to Godhead. However,
those who are in Krsna consciousness, or who are practicing bhakti-yoga
(Sravanam kirtanarm visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam), can return to God-
head without even practicing the muktasana process. The purpose of
muktasana practice is to come to the brahma-bhiita stage, for without
being on the brahma-bhuta stage, one cannot be promoted to the spiritual
sky. As stated in Bhagavad-gita: mam ca yo ‘vyabhicarena bhakti-yogena
sevate/ sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhuyaya kalpate (Bg. 14.26). The
bhakti-yogt, practicing bhakti-yoga, is always situated on the brahma-
bhuta stage (brahma-bhityaya kalpate). If a devotee is able to continue on
the brahma-bhuta platform, he enters the spiritual sky automatically after
death and returns to Godhead. Consequently a devotee need not feel sorry
for not having practiced the kundalint-cakra or not penetrating the six
cakras one after another. As far as Maharaja Prthu was concerned, he had
already practiced this process, and since he did not want to wait for the
time when his death would occur naturally, he took advantage of the sa¢-


--- Page 228 ---
Text 15] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 993
cakra penetration process and thus gave up the body according to his own
free will and immediately entered the spiritual sky.
TEXT 15
उत्सरषय॑स्तु तं qf क्रमेणावेश्य निःस्पृहः |
वायुं वायौ कितौ कायं तेजस्तेजस्ययु पु जत्‌ । १५५॥
utsarpayarms tu tam miardhni
kramendvesya nihsprhah
vayuri vayau ksitau kdyari
tejas tejasy ayityujat
utsarpayan—thus placing; tu—but; tam—the air; mirdhni—on the head;
kramena—gradually; dvesya—placing; nihsprhah—being freed from all
material desires; vayum—the air portion of the body; viyau—in the total air
covering the universe; ksitau—in the total covering of earth; kayam—this
material body; tejah—the fire in the body; tejasi—in the total fire of the
material covering; ay@yujat—mixed.
TRANSLATION
In this way, Prthu Maharaja gradually raised his air of life up to the hole
in his skull, whereupon he lost all desire for material existence. Gradually
he merged his air of life with the totality of air, his body with the totality
of earth, and the fire within his body with the totality of fire.
PURPORT
When the spiritual spark, which is described as one ten-thousandth part
of the tip of a hair, is forced into material existence, that spark is covered
by gross and subtle material elements. The material body is composed of
five gross elements—earth, water, fire, air and ether—and three subtle ele-
ments—mind, intelligence and ego. When one attains liberation, he is freed
from these material coverings. Indeed, success in yoga involves getting free
from these material coverings and entering into spiritual existence. Lord
Buddha's teachings of nirvana are based on this principle. Lord Buddha in-
structed his followers to give up these material coverings by means of
meditation and yoga. Lord Buddha did not give any information about
the soul, but if one follows his instructions strictly, he will ultimately
become free from the material coverings and attain nirvana.
When a living entity gives up the material coverings, he remains a spirit
soul. This spirit soul must enter into the spiritual sky to merge into the
Brahman effulgence. Unfortunately, unless the living entity has informa-


--- Page 229 ---
994 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
tion of the spiritual world and the Vaikunthas, there is a 99.9 percent
chance of his falling down again into material existence. There is, however,
a small chance of being promoted to a spiritual planet from the Brahman
effulgence, or the brahmajyoti. This brahmajyoti is considered by imper-
sonalists to be without variety, and the Buddhists consider it to be void.
In either case, whether one accepts the spiritual sky as being without
variety or void, there is none of the spiritual bliss which is enjoyed in the
spiritual planets, Vaikunthas or Krsnaloka. In the absence of varieties of
enjoyment, the spirit soul gradually feels an attraction to enjoy a life of
bliss, and not having any information of Krsnaloka or Vaikunthaloka, he
naturally falls down to material activities in order to enjoy material
varieties.
TEXT 16
खान्याकाशे द्रवं तोये यथाखानं Fw ।
क्षितिमम्भसि तत्तेजस्यदो নামী नमस्यश्चम्‌ ॥१६॥
khany akase dravam ८०१९
yatha-sthanam vibhagasah
ksitim ambhasi tat tejasy
ado vayau nabhasy amum

khani—the different holes in the body for the sense organs; akase—in the
sky; dravam—the liquid substance; toye—in the water; yatha-sthanam—
according to proper situation; vibhagasah—as they are divided; ksitim—
earth; ambhasi—in the water; tat—that; tejasi—in the fire; adah—the
fire; vayau—in the air; nabhasi—in the sky; amum—that.

TRANSLATION

In this way, according to the different positions of the various parts of
the body, Prthu Maharaja merged his bodily air with the air of the sky, his
bodily liquids, such as blood and various secretions, with the totality of
water, and he merged earth with water, then water with fire, fire with air,
air with sky, and so on.

PURPORT

In-this verse two words are very important: yatha-sthanarm vibhagasah.
In Srimad-Bhagavatam, Second Canto, Chapter Five, Lord Brahma clearly
explained to Narada how the creation took place, and he explained one
step after another the proper divisions of the senses, the controller of the
senses, the objects of the senses, and the material elements, and he also


--- Page 230 ---
Text 17] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 995
explained how they are created one after another: the air from the sky, the
fire from the air, the water from the fire, the earth from the water, etc. It
is important to know thoroughly the process of creation as it applies to this
cosmic manifestation. Similarly, this body is also created according to the
same process by the Supreme Lord. The Personality of Godhead, after
entering the universe, creates the cosmic manifestations one after another.
Similarly, the living entity, after entering a womb of a mother, also
collects his gross and subtle bodies, taking ingredients from the totality of
sky, air, fire, water and earth. The words yatha-sthanar vibhagasah
indicate that one should know the process of creation and should meditate
upon the creative process inversely and thus become free from material
contamination.
TEXT 17
REY -
इन्द्रियेषु मनस्तानि तन्मात्रेषु यथोद्भवम्‌ |
भूतादिनामून्युतृष्य महत्यात्मनि सन्दधे ॥१७॥
indriyesu manas tani
tanmatresu yathodbhavam
bhutadinamuny utkrsya
mahaty atmani sandadhe

indriyesu—in the sense organs; manah—the mind; tani—the sense organs;
tanmatresu—in the objects of the senses; yatha-udbhavam—wherefrom they
generated; bhita-adina—by the five elements; amuni—all those sense
objects; utkrsya—taking out; mahati—in the mahat-tattva; atmani—unto
the ego; sandadhe—amalgamated.

TRANSLATION

He amalgamated the mind with the senses and the senses with the sense
objects, according to their respective positions, and he also amalgamated
the material ego with the total material energy, mahat-tattva.

PURPORT

In respect to the ego, the total material energy is sundered in two
parts—one agitated by the mode of ignorance, and the other agitated by
the modes of passion and goodness. Due to agitation by the mode of
ignorance, the five gross elements are created. Due to agitation by the
mode of passion, the mind is created, and due to agitation by the mode
of goodness, false egoism or identification with matter is created. The
mind is protected by a particular type of demigod. Sometimes the mind


--- Page 231 ---
996 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
(manah) is also understood to have a controlling deity or demigod. In this
way the total mind, namely the material mind controlled by material
demigods, was amalgamated with the senses. The senses, in turn, were
amalgamated with the sense objects. The sense objects are forms, tastes,
smells, sounds, etc. Sound is the ultimate source of the sense objects. The
mind was attracted by the senses and the senses by the sense objects, and
all of them were ultimately amalgamated in the sky. The creation is so
arranged that cause and effect follow one after the other. The merging
process involves amalgamating the effect with the original cause. Since the
ultimate cause in the material world is the mahat-tattva, everything was
gradually wound up and amalgamated with the mahat-tattva. This may be
compared to siinyavdda, or voidism, in that this is the process for cleansing
the real spiritual mind, or consciousness.

When the mind is completely washed of all material contamination, the
pure consciousness acts. The sound vibration from the spiritual sky can
automatically cleanse all material contaminations, as confirmed by Caitanya
Mahaprabhu: ceto-darpana-marjanam. We need only take the advice of Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and chant the Hare Krsna mantra to cleanse the
mind of all material contamination, and this may be considered the sum-
mary of this difficult verse. As soon as the whole material contamination
is washed away by this process of chanting, all desires and reactions to
material activities become immediately vanquished, and real life, peaceful
existence, begins. In this age of Kali it is very difficult to adopt the yogic
process mentioned in this verse. Unless one is very expert in such yoga,
the best course is to adopt the ways and means of Lord Caitanya Maha-
prabhu, sri-krsna-sankirtanam. Thus one can gloriously become freed from
all material contamination by the simple process of chanting Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare. Just as life in this material world has its beginning in
material sound, similarly a spiritual life has its beginning in this spiritual
sound vibration.

TEXT 18
तं सर्वगुणविन्यासं जीवे मायामये न्यधात्‌ ।
तं चानुश्यमात्मस्थयसादनुशयी पुमान्‌ |
्ञानवैराग्यभीर्येण EERE: ॥ १८
tar sarva-guna-vinyasam
jive mayamaye nyadhat


--- Page 232 ---
Text 18] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 997
tam canusayam dtma-stham
050४ anusayi puman
JjAana-vairagya-viryena
svariipa-stho ’jahat prabhuh
tam—unto Him; sarva-guna-vinyasam—the reservoir of all qualities; jive—
unto the designations; mayamaye—the reservoir of all potencies; nyadhat—
placed; tam—that; ca— also; anusayam— designation; atma-stham— situated
in self-realization; asau—he;anusayi—the living entity ; puman—the enjoyer;
jidna—knowledge; vairdgya—renunciation; viryena—lby the prowess of;
svariipa-sthah—being situated in one’s constitutional position; ajahat—
returned back home; prabhuh—the controller.
TRANSLATION
Prthu Maharaja then offered the total designation of the living entity
unto the supreme controller of illusory energy. Being released from all the
designations by which the living entity became entrapped, he became free
by knowledge and renunciation and by the spiritual force of his devotional
service. In this way, being situated in his original constitutional position of
Krsna consciousness, he gave up this body as a prabhu, or controller of
the senses.
PURPORT
As stated in the 16005, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
source of material energy. Consequently He is sometimes called mayamaya,
or the Supreme Person who can create His pastimes through His potency
known as the material energy. The jiva, or the individual living entity,
becomes entrapped by the material energy by the supreme will of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita we understand:
i$varah sarva-bhutanarm
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhutani
yantrarudhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is direct-
ing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine,
made of the material energy.” (Bg. 18.61)
Tsvara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is situated within the heartof
all conditioned souls, and by His supreme will the living entity or individual


--- Page 233 ---
998 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
soul gets the facility to lord it over material nature in various types of
bodies, which are known as yantra, or the moving vehicle offered by the
total material energy, maya. Although the individual living entity (jiva)
and the Lord are both situated within the material energy, the Lord is
directing the movements of the jiva soul by offering him different types
of bodies through the material energy, and thus the living entity is wander-
ing throughout the universes in various forms of body and becomes
implicated in different situations, partaking of the reactions of fruitive
activities.

When Prthu Maharaja became spiritually powerful by the enhancement
of his spiritual knowledge, jiana and renunciation of material desires,
he became a prabhu, or master of his senses (sometimes called gosvam7 or
svamt). This means that he was no longer controlled by the influence of
material energy. When one is strong enough to give up the influence of
material energy, he is called prabhu. In this verse the word svarupasthah is
also very significant. The real identity of the individual soul lies in under-
standing or attaining the knowledge that he is eternally a servant of Krsna.
This understanding is called svarupopalabdhi. By culturing devotional
service, the devotee gradually comes to understand his actual relationship
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This understanding of one’s
pure spiritual position is called svarupopalabdhi, and when one attains that
stage he can understand how he is related with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as a servant or friend, or as a parent or conjugal lover. This stage
of understanding is called svaripasthah. Prthu Maharaja realized this
svarupa completely, and it will be clear in the later chapters that he per-
sonally left this world, or this body, by riding on a chariot sent from
Vaikuntha.

In this verse the word prabhu is also significant. As stated before, when
one is completely self-realized and acts according to that position, he can
be called prabhu. The spiritual master is addressed as “Prabhupada” because
he is a completely self-realized soul. The word pada means “position,” and
Prabhupada indicates that he is given the position of prabhu, or the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, for he acts on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unless one is a prabhu, or controller of the senses,
he cannot act as spiritual master. He is authorized by the Supreme Prabhu,
or Lord Krsna. In his verses praising the spiritual master, Srila Vigvanatha
Cakravarti Thakura writes:

saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastrair
uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhih
“The spiritual master is honored as much as the Supreme Lord because he


--- Page 234 ---
Text 19] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 999
is the most confidential servitor of the Lord.” Thus Prthu Maharaja can
also be called Prabhupada, or, as described herein, prabhu. Another ques-
tion may be raised in this connection. Since Prthu Maharaja was a power
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, saktyavesa-avatara,
why did he have to execute the regulative principles in order to become a
prabhu? Because he appeared on this earth as an ideal king and because it
is the duty of the king to instruct the citizens in the execution of devo-
tional service, he followed all the regulative principles of devotional service
in order to teach others. Similarly, Caitanya Mahaprabhu, although Krsna
Himself, taught us how to approach Krsna as a devotee. It is said: apani
dcari’ bhakti sikhainu savire. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed
others in the process of devotional service by setting the example Himself
through His own personal actions. Similarly, Prthu Maharaja, although a
Saktyavesa-avatara incarnation, still behaved exactly as a devotee in order
to achieve the position of prabhu. Furthermore, svaripasthah means com-
plete liberation. As it is said, hitvanyatha rupam svarupena avasthitih:
when a living entity abandons the activities of maya and attains the posi-
tion from which he can execute devotional service, his state is called
svarapasthah, or complete liberation.
TEXT 19
अविर्नाम महाराज्ञी तत्परन्यतुगता वनम्‌ ।
सुक्कमा्यतदह च यत्पद्भ्यां Ee थवः ॥१९॥
arcir nama mahad-rajii
tat-patny anugata vanam
sukumadry atad-arha ca
yat-padbhydm 51001801101 bhuvah
arcth nama—of the name Arci; maha-rajii—the Queen; tat-patni—the
wife of Maharaja Prthu; anugata—who followed her husband; vanam—in the
Qorest: sukumdri—very delicate body ;a-tat-erha—who did not deserve; ca—
also; yat-padbhyam—by the touch of whose feet; sparsanam— touching;
bhuvah—on the earth.
TRANSLATION
The Queen, the wife of Prthu Maharaja, whose name was Arci, followed
her husband into the forest. Since she was a queen, her body was very
delicate. Although she did not deserve to live in the forest, still she
voluntarily touched her lotus feet to the ground.


--- Page 235 ---
1000 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
PURPORT
Because Prthu Maharaja’s wife was the Queen and also a daughter of a
king, she never experienced walking on the ground because queens used to
never come out of the palace. They certainly never went to the forests and
tolerated all the difficulties of living in the wilderness. In Vedic civilization
there are hundreds of similar examples of such renunciation on the part of
queens and dedication to the husband. The goddess of fortune, mother
Sita, followed her husband Ramacandra when He went to the forest. Lord
Ramacandra went to the forest in compliance to the order of His father
Maharaja Dagaratha, but mother Sita was not so ordered. Nonetheless, she
voluntarily accepted the path of her husband. Similarly, Gandhari, the
wife of King Dhrtaragtra, also followed her husband into the forest. Being
the wives of great personalities like Prthu, Lord Ramacandra and
Dhrtaragtra, these were ideal, chaste women. Such queens also instructed
the general people by showing them how to become a chaste wife and
follow the husband in every stage of life. When the husband is king, she sits
beside him as the queen, and when he goes to the forest, she also follows,
despite having to tolerate all kinds of difficulties in living in the forest.
Therefore it is said here (a-tad-arha) that although she did not want to
touch her feet to the ground, she nonetheless accepted all difficulties when
she went to the forest with her husband.
TEXT 20
(AC; ©
अतीव Aga Ag
TIT चार्षदेहयात्रया |
नाविन्दतातिं परिकरितापि सा
= (y os
परेयस्करस्यक्चंनमाननि्रतिः ॥२०॥
ativa bhartur vrata-dharma-nisthaya
Sudriisayd carsa-deha-yatrayd @ `
navindatdrtir parikarsitapi sa
preyaskara-sparsana-mana-nirvrtih
ativa—very much; bhartuh—of the husband; vrata-dharma—vow 10 serve
him; nisthayd—by determination; susrisaya—by serving; ca—also; arsa—like
the great saintly sages; deha—body;ydtrayd—living condition; na—did not;
avindata—perceive; artim—any difficulty; parikarsita api—although trans-
formed to become lean and thin; si—she; preyaskara—very pleasing;
sparsana—touching; mana—engaged; nirvrtih—pleasure.


--- Page 236 ---
Text 20] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1001
TRANSLATION

Although she was not accustomed to such difficulties, Queen Arci
followed her husband in the regulative principles of living in the forest like
great sages. She lay down on the ground and ate only fruits, flowers and
leaves, and because she was not fit for these activities, she became frail and
thin. Yet because of the pleasure she derived in serving her husband, she
did not feel any difficulties.

PURPORT

The words bhartur vrata-dharma-nisthaya indicate that a woman’s duty
or religious principle is to serve her husband in all conditions. In Vedic
civilization a man is taught from the beginning of his life to become a
brahmacari, then an ideal grhastha, then vanaprastha, then sannyasi, and
the wife is taught just to follow the husband strictly in all conditions of
life. After the period of brahmacarya, a man accepts a householders life,
and the woman is also taught by her parents to be a chaste wife. Thus
when a girl and boy are united, both are trained for a life dedicated to a
higher purpose. The boy is trained to execute his duty in accordance with
the higher purpose of life, and the girl is trained to follow him. The chaste
wife’s duty is to keep her husband pleased in householder life in all
respects, and when the husband retires from family life, she is to go to the
forest and adopt the life of vanaprastha, or vana-vasi. At that time the wife
is to follow her husband and take care of him, just as she took care of
him in householder life. But when the husband takes the renounced order
of life, namely sannyasa, the wife is to return home and become a saintly
woman, setting an example for her children and daughters-in-law and show-
ing them how to live a life of austerity.

When Caitanya Mahaprabhu took sannydsa, His wife, Visnupriya-devi,
although only sixteen years old, also took the vow of austerity due to her
husband’s leaving home. She chanted her beads, and after finishing one
round, she collected one grain of rice. In this way, as many rounds as she

ened: she would receive the same number of rice grains and then cook
em and so take prasada. This is called austerity. Even today in India,
widows, or women whose husbands have taken sannyasa, follow the prin-
ciples of austerity, even though they live with their children. Prthu
Maharaja’s wife, Arci, was steadily determined to execute the duty of a
wife, and while her husband was in the forest, she followed him in eating
only fruits and leaves and lying down on the ground. Since a woman’s body

is considerably more delicate than a man’s, Queen Arci became very frail
and thin. Parikarsita. When one engages in austerities, his body generally
becomes lean and thin. Becoming fat is not a very good qualification in


--- Page 237 ---
1002 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
spiritual life because a person who is engaged in spiritual life must reduce
the comforts of the body—namely eating, sleeping and mating—to a
minimum. Although Queen Arci became very thin from living in the forest
according to regulative principles, she was not unhappy because she was
enjoying the honor of serving her great husband.
TEXT 21
देहं विपम्नाखिलचेतनादिकं
पत्युः परथिल्या दयितस्य चात्मनः |
आलक्ष्य किचि विरप्य सा सती
चितामथारोपयददिसानुनि ॥२१॥
1.111.111...
patyuh prthivya dayitasya catmanah
alaksya kificic ca vilapyea sd sati
citam athdropayad adrisanuni
deham—body; vipanna—completely failing; akhila—all; cetana—feeling;
dadikam—symptoms; patyuh—of her husband; prthivyah—the world;
dayitasya—of the merciful; ca atmanah—also of herself; dlaksya—by seeing;
kificit—very little; ca—and; vilapya—lamenting; si—she; sati—the chaste;
citam—unto the fire; atha—now; aropayat—placed; adri—hill; sanuni—on
the top.
TRANSLATION
When Queen Arci saw that her husband, who had been so merciful to
her and the earth, no longer showed symptoms of life, she lamented for a
little while and then built a fiery pyre on top of a hill and placed the body
of her husband on it.
PURPORT
After seeing all the life symptoms in her husband stop, the Queen
lamented for a while. The word (कला means “for a little while.” Thel§
Queen was completely aware that her husband was not dead, although
the symptoms of life—action, intelligence and sense perception—had
ceased. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:
dehino ’smin yatha dehe
kaumarariv yauvanari jara
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati


--- Page 238 ---
Text 22] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1003
“As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.” (Bg. 2.13)

When a living entity transfers from one body to another, a process
generally known as death, a sane man does not lament, for he knows that
the living entity is not dead but is simply transferred from one body to
another. The Queen should have been afraid of being alone in the forest
with the body of her husband, but since she was a great wife of a great
personality, she lamented for a while but immediately understood that she
had many duties to perform. Thus instead of wasting her time in lamenta-
tion, she immediately prepared a fiery pyre on top of a hill and then placed
the body of her husband on it to be burned.

Maharaja Prthu is described here as dayita, for he was not only the king
of the earth, but he treated the earth as his protected child. Similarly, he
protected his wife also. It was the duty of the king to give protection to
everyone, especially to the earth or land which he ruled, as well as the
citizens and his family members. Since Prthu Maharaja was a perfect king,
he gave protection to everyone, and therefore he is described here as dayita.

TEXT 22
बिधाय त्यं हदिनीजराप्ठता
दत्वोदकं AIEEE: |
नत्वा হিনিজ্ান্তিতযাত্তিঃ परीत्य
विवेश बर ध्यायती मंपादौ ॥२२॥
vidhaya krtyam hradini-jalapluta
dattvodakarn bhartur udara-karmanah
natva divi-stharms tri-dasams trih paritya
vivesa vahnim dhyayati bhartr-padau
vidhdya—executing; krtyam—the regulative function; hradini—in the
water of the river; jala-apluti—taking bath completely; dattva udakam—
offering oblations of water; bhartuh—of her husband; uddra-karmapah—
who was so liberal; natvd—offering obeisances; divi-sthdn—situated in the
sky; tri-dasan—the thirty million demigods; trih—three times; paritya—
circumambulating; vivesa—entered; vahnim—the fire; dhyayati—while think-
ing of ; bhartr—of her husband; padau—the two lotus feet.


--- Page 239 ---
1004 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
TRANSLATION

After this, the Queen executed the necessary funerary functions and
offered oblations of water. After bathing in the river, she offered
obeisances to various demigods situated in the sky in the different
planetary systems. She then circumambulated the fire and, while thinking
of the lotus feet of her husband, entered its flames.

PURPORT

The entrance of a chaste wife into the flames of the pyre of her dead
husband is known as saha-gamana. This means that it is customary for
the wife to die with her husband. This system of saha-gamana has been
practiced in Vedic civilization from time immemorial. Even after the
British period in India this practice was rigidly observed, but soon it
degraded to the point that even when the wife was not strong enough
to enter the fire of her dead husband the relatives would force her to
enter. Thus this practice had to be stopped, but even today there are
still some solitary cases where a wife will voluntarily enter the fire and
die with her husband. Even after 1940 we personally knew of a chaste
wife who died in this way.

TEXT 23
विलोक्यालुगतां adi पृथुं वीरवरं पतिम्‌ |
TERE देवेदेवपट्यः सदस्रशाः ॥२३॥
vilokyanugatarn sadhvim
prthum vira-varam patim
tustuvur vara-da devair
deva-patnyah sahasrasah

vilokya—by observing; anugatam—dying after the husband; sadhvim— the
chaste woman; prthum—of King Prthu; vira-varam—the great warrior;
patim—husband; tustuvuh— offered prayers; vara-dah—able to give benedic-
tion; devaih—by the demigods; deva-patnyah—the wives of the demigods;
sahasrasah—in thousands.

TRANSLATION

After observing this brave act performed by the chaste wife Arci, the
wife of the great King Prthu, many thousands of the wives of the
demigods, along with their husbands, offered prayers to the Queen, for
they were very much satisfied.


--- Page 240 ---
Text 25] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1005
TEXT 24
WO: FEWER तखिन्मन्द्रसाजुनि |
नदत्खमरतूर्येष॒॒ qf ख परस्परम्‌ ॥२४॥
kurvatyah kusumasaram
tasmin mandara-sanuni
nadatsv amara-turyesu
grnanti sma parasparam
kurvatyah—just showering; kusuma-asaram—showers of flowers; tasmin—
in that; mandara—of the Mandara hill; sdnuni—on the top; nadatsu—
vibrating; amara-tiryesu—beating of the drums of the demigods; grnanti
sma—they were talking; parasparam—amongst themselves as follows.
TRANSLATION
At that time the demigods were situated on the top of Mandara Hill,
and all their wives began to shower flowers on the funeral pyre and began
to talk amongst themselves as follows.
TEXT 25
देव्य ऊचुः
৬ ৬
अहो इयं वधूर्धन्या या चैवं age पतिम्‌ |
শে Ld
सर्वात्मना पतिं भेजे यज्ञेशं श्रीव॑धूरिव ॥२५॥
devya 8০08]
aho iyam vadhur dhanya
ya caivarn bhu-bhujarm patim
sarvatmana patim bheje
yajiesam $rir vadhur iva
devyah iicuh—the wives of the demigods said; aho—alas; iyam—this;
vadhih—the wife; dhanya—most glorious; ya—who; ca—also; evam—as;
bhii—of the world; bhujém—of all the kings; patim—the king; sarvatmand—
with full understanding; patim—unto the husband; bheje—worshiped;
yajiiesam—unto Lord Visnu; srih—the goddess of fortune; vadhith— wife;
iva—like.


--- Page 241 ---
1006 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
TRANSLATION

The wives of the demigods said: All glories to Queen Arci! We can see
that this Queen of the great King Prthu, the Emperor of all the kings of
the world, has served her husband with mind, speech and body exactly as
the goddess of fortune serves the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Yajfiesa or Vignu.

PURPORT

In this verse the words yajiiesarn srir vadhur iva indicate that Queen
Arci served her husband just as the goddess of fortune serves the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Vispu. We can observe that even in the
history of this world, when Lord Krsna, the Supreme Visnu, was ruling
over Dvaraka, Queen Rukmini, who was the chief of all Krsna’s queens,
used to serve Lord Krsna personally in spite of having many hundreds of
maidservants to assist her. Similarly, the goddess of fortune in the
Vaikuntha planets also serves Narayana personally, although there are
many thousands of devotees prepared to serve the Lord. This practice is
also followed by the wives of the demigods, and in days past the wives of
men also followed this same principle. In Vedic civilization the husband
and wife were not separated by such man-made laws as divorce. We should
understand the necessity for maintaining family life in human society and
should thus abolish this artificial law known as divorce. The husband
and wife should live in Krsna consciousness and follow the footsteps of
Laksmi-Narayana, or Krsna-Rukmini. In this way peace and harmony can
be possible within this world.

TEXT 26
qn बजत्यूष्व॑मनु वैन्यं पतिं सती ।
परश्यतासानतीत्याचिर्िभाव्येन कर्मणा ॥२६॥
saisa nunam vrajaty urdhvam
anu vainyar pati satt
pasyatasman atityarcir
durvibhavyena karmana

sd—she; esd—this; ninam—certainly; vrajati—going; irdhvam—upwards;
anu—following; vainyam—the son of Vena; patim—husband; sati—chaste;
pasyata—just see; asman—us; alitya—overpassing; arcih—of the name
Arci; durvibhdvyena—by inconceivable; karmapa— activities.


--- Page 242 ---
Text 26] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1007
TRANSLATION

The wives of the demigods continued: Just see how this chaste lady,
Arci, by dint of her inconceivable pious activities, is still following her
husband upwards, as far as we can see.

PURPORT

Both Prthu Maharaja’s airplane and the airplane carrying Queen Arci
were passing out of the vision of the ladies of the higher planetary
systems. These ladies were simply astonished to see how Prthu Maharaja
and his wife achieved such an exalted position. Although they were the
wives of the denizens of the higher planetary system and Prthu Maharaja
was an inhabitant of an inferior planetary system (the Earth), the King,
along with his wife, passed beyond the realms of the demigods and went
upward to Vaikunthaloka. The word ardhvam (upwards) is significant
here, for the ladies speaking were from the higher planetary systems,
which include the moon, sun and Venus up to Brahmaloka, or the
highest planet. Beyond Brahmaloka is the spiritual sky, and in that
spiritual sky there are innumerable Vaikunthalokas. Thus the word
irdhvam indicates that the Vaikuntha planets are beyond or above these
material planets, and it was to these Vaikuntha planets that Prthu
Maharaja and his wife were going. This also indicates that when Prthu
Maharaja and his wife, Arci, abandoned their material bodies in the
material fire, they immediately developed their spiritual bodies and
entered into spiritual airplanes which could penetrate the material
elements and reach the spiritual sky. Since they were carried by two
separate airplanes, it may be concluded that even after being burnt in the
funeral pyre they remained separate individual persons. In other words,
they never lost their identity or became void, as imagined by the
impersonalists.

The ladies in the higher planetary systems were capable of seeing both
downwards and upwards. When they looked down they could see that
the body of Prthu Maharaja was being burnt and that his wife, Arci, was
entering into the fire, and when they looked upwards they could see how
they were being carried in two airplanes to the Vaikunthalokas. All of this
is possible simply by durvibhavyena karmana, inconceivable activity.
Prthu Maharaja was a pure devotee, and his wife, Queen ला, simply
followed her husband. Thus they can both be considered pure devotees,
and thus they are capable of performing inconceivable activities. Such
activities are not possible for ordinary men. Indeed, ordinary men cannot
even take to the devotional service of the Lord, nor can ordinary women


--- Page 243 ---
1008 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
maintain such vows of chastity and follow their husbands in all respects.
A woman does not need to attain high qualifications, but if she simply
follows in the footsteps of her husband, who must be a devotee, then
both husband and wife attain liberation and are promoted to the
Vaikunthalokas. This is evinced by the inconceivable activities of Maharaja
Prthu and his wife.
TEXT 27
तेषां दुरापं क त्वन्यन्मत्यानां मगवत्यदम्‌ ।
श्वि लोलायुषो ये ৭ Few साधयन्त्युत HR
11111111. anyan
martyanam bhagavat-padam
bhuvi lolayuso ye vai
naiskarmyarm sadhayanty uta
tesam—of them; durdpam—difficult to obtain; kim—what; tu—but;
anyat—anything else; martydnam—of the human beings; bhagavat-padam—
the kingdom of God; bhuvi—in the world; lola—flickering; dyusah—span of
life; ye—those; wvai—certainly; naiskarmyam—the path of liberation;
sadhayanti—execute; uta—exactly.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, every human being has a short span of life,
but those who are engaged in devotional service go back home, back to
Godhead, for they are actually on the path of liberation. For such persons,
there is nothing which is not available.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna says: anityam asukham lokam imam
prapya bhajasva mam (Bg. 9.33). The Lord here declares that this material
world is full of miseries (asukham) and at the same time is very flickering
(anityam). Therefore one’s only duty is to engage himself in devotional
service. This is the best end to which human life can be put. Those
devotees who are constantly engaged in the service of the lotus feet of
the Lord achieve not only all material benefits but also all spiritual
benefits, for at the end of life they go back home, back to Godhead. Their
destination is described in this verse as bhagavat-padam. The word padam
means “abode,” and bhagavat means “the Supreme Personality of God-


--- Page 244 ---
Text 27] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1009
head.” Thus the destination of the devotees is the abode of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

In this verse the word naiskarmyam, which means transcendental
knowledge, is also significant. Unless one comes to the platform of
transcendental knowledge and offers devotional service to the Lord, he is
not perfect. Generally the processes of jana, yoga and karma are
executed life after life before one gets a chance to render pure devotional
service to the Lord. This chance is given by the grace of a pure devotee,
and it is in this way only that one can actually attain liberation. In the
context of this narration, the wives of the demigods repented because
although they had the opportunity of a birth in a higher planetary
system, a lifetime spanning many millions of years and all material
comforts, they were not as fortunate as Prthu Maharaja and his wife, who
were actually surpassing them. In other words, Prthu Maharaja and his
wife scorned promotion to the higher planetary systems and even to
Brahmaloka because the position which they were attaining was incom-
parable. In Bhagavad-gitd the Lord affirms, dbrahma-bhuvanal lokdh punar
avartino ‘rjuna: “From the highest planet in the material world to the
lowest, all are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take
place.” (Bg. 8.16) In other words, even if one goes to the highest planet,
Brahmaloka, he has to return to the miseries of birth and death. In the
Ninth Chapter of Bhagavad-gitd, Lord Krsna also asserts:

te tari bhuktva svarga-lokam visalarh

ksine punye martya-lokarn visanti
“When they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure, they return to
this mortal planet again.” (Bg. 9.21) Thus after exhausting the results of
pious activities, one has to come again to the lower planetary systems and
begin a new chapter of pious activities. It is therefore said in Srimad-
Bhagavatam, naiskarmyam apy acyuta-bhdva-varjitam: ‘The path of
liberation is not at all secure unless one attains the devotional service of
the Lord.” (Bhag. 1.5.12) Even if one is promoted to the impersonal
brahmajyoti, he runs every chance of falling down into this material
world. If it is possible to fall down from the brahmajyoti, which is beyond
the higher planetary systems in this material world, then what can be said
of the ordinary yogis and karmis who can only be elevated to the higher
material planets? Thus the wives of the denizens of the higher planetary
systems did not very much appreciate the results of karma, jiana and
yoga.


--- Page 245 ---
1010 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
TEXT 28
स वञ्चितो बतात्मधरक्‌ eR महता श्वि ।
seamed मालुप्यं विषयेषु fee Ren
sa vancito batatma-dhruk |
krcchrepa mahata bhuvi
labdhvapavargyam manusyarn
visayesu visajjate
sah—he; vanicitah—cheated; bata—certainly; atma-dhruk—envious of him-
self; krcchrena—with great difficulty; mahatd—by great activities; bhuvi—
in this world; labdhva—by achieving; dpavargyam—the path of liberation;
madanusyam—in the human form of life; visayesu—in the matter of sense
gratification; visajjate—becomes engaged.
TRANSLATION ;

Any person who engages himself within this material world in
performing activities that necessitate great struggle, and who, after
obtaining a human form of life—which is a chance to attain liberation
from miseries—undertakes the difficult tasks of fruitive activities, must be
considered to be cheated and envious of his own self.

PURPORT

In this material world people are engaged in different activities simply
to achieve a little success in sense gratification. The karmis are engaged
in performing very difficult activities, and thus they open gigantic
factories, build huge cities, make big scientific discoveries, etc. In other
words, they are engaged in performing very costly sacrifices in order to be
promoted to the higher planetary systems. Similarly, yogis are engaged in
achieving a similar goal by accepting the tedious practices of mystic yoga.
Jiidnis are engaged in philosophical speculation in order to gain release
from the clutches of material nature. In these ways everyone is engaged
in performing very difficult tasks simply for the gratification of the senses.
All of these are considered to be engaged in sense gratificatory activities
(or visaya) because they all demand some facility for material existence.
Actually the results of such activities are temporary, as Krsna Himself
proclaims in Bhagavad-gita: antavat tu [1001070 tesam: “The fruits [of
those who worship the demigods] are limited and temporary.” (Bg. 7.23)
Thus the fruits of the activities of the yogis, karmis and jiadnis are


--- Page 246 ---
Text 28] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1011
ephemeral. Moreover, Krsna says, tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam: “They
are simply meant for men of small intelligence.” (Bg. 7.23) The word
visaya denotes sense gratification. The karmis flatly state that they want
sense gratification. The yogis also want sense gratification, but they want
it to a higher degree. It is their desire to show some miraculous results
through the practice of yoga. Thus they strive very hard to achieve success
in becoming smaller than the smallest or greater than the greatest, or in
creating a planet like the earth, or, as scientists, by inventing so many
wonderful machines. Similarly, the jianis are also engaged in sense
gratification, for they are simply interested in becoming one with the
Supreme. Thus the aim of all these activities is sense gratification to a
higher or a lower degree. The bhaktas, however, are not interested in
sense gratificatory practices; they are simply satisfied to get an opportu-
nity to serve the Lord. Although they are satisfied in any condition, there
is nothing they cannot obtain because they are purely engaged in the
service‘of the Lord.
` The wives of the demigods condemn the performers of sense gratifica-
tory activities as vaiicita, cheated. Those so engaged are actually killing
themselves (@tma-ha). As stated in Srimad-Bhdgavatam:
nr-deham ৫0078 su-labhamn su-durlabham
plavar su-kalparih guru-karna-dharam
maydnukiilena nabhasvateritarn
pumdn bhavabdhirm na taret sa dtma-ha
(Bhdg. 11.20.17)

When one wants to cross a large ocean, he requires a strong boat. It is
said that this human form of life is a good boat by which one can cross the
ocean of nescience. In the human form of life one can obtain the guidance
of a good navigator, the spiritual master. He also gets a favorable wind by
the mercy of Krsna, and that wind is the instructions of Krsna. The human
body is the boat, the instructions of Lord Krsna are the favorable winds,
and the spiritual master is the navigator. The spiritual master knows well
how to adjust the sails to catch the winds favorably and steer the boat to
its destination. If, however, one does not take advantage of this opportu-
nity, he wastes the human form of life. Wasting time and life in this way is
the same as committing suicide.

The word labdhvapavargyam is significant in this verse because, accord-
ing to [iva Gosvami, dpavargyam, or the path of liberation, does not refer
to merging into the impersonal Brahman but to salokyddi-siddhi which


--- Page 247 ---
1012 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
means attaining the very planet where the Supreme Personality of Godhead
resides. There are five kinds of liberation, and one is called sayujya-mukti,
or merging into the existence of the Supreme or the impersonal Brahman
effulgence. However, since there is a chance of one’s falling down again
into the material sky from the Brahman effulgence, Srila Jiva Gosvami
advises that in this human form of life one’s only aim should be to go back
home, back to Godhead. The words sa vaficitah indicate that once a person
has obtained the human form of life, he is actually cheated if he does not
make preparations to go back home, back to Godhead. The position of all
nondevotees who are not interested in going back to Godhead is very
much lamentable, for the human form of life is meant for executing devo-
tional service and nothing else.
TEXT 29
मैत्रेय उवाच
स्तुवतीप्वमरज्जीषु पतिलोकं गता वधूः ।
a
यं बा जात्मविदां धुर्यो न्यः प्रापाच्युता श्रयः २९॥
maitreya uvaca
stuvatisv amara-strisu
70৫0৮101078 gata vadhuh
yam va atma-vidam dhuryo
vainyah prapacyutasrayah
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; stuvatisu—
while glorifying; amara-strisu—by the wives of the denizens of heaven;
pati-lokam—the planet where the husband had gone; guta—reaching;
vadhuh— the wife; yam— where; va— or; atma-vidam—of the self-realized
souls; dhuryah—the topmost; vainyah—the son of King Vena (Prthu
Maharaja); prapa—obtained; acyuta-asrayah—under the protection of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued speaking: My dear Vidura, when the
wives of the denizens of heaven were thus talking amongst themselves,
Queen Arci reached the planet which her husband, Maharaja Prthu, the
topmost self-realized soul, had attained.


--- Page 248 ---
Text 30] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1013
PURPORT

According to Vedic scriptures, a woman who dies with her husband, or
enters into the fire in which her husband is burning, also enters the same
planet her husband attains. In this material world there is a planet known
as Patiloka, just as there is a planet known as Pitrloka. But in this verse
the word pati-loka does not refer to any planet within this material uni-
verse, for Prthu Maharaja, being topmost amongst self-realized souls, cer-
tainly returned home, back to Godhead, and attained one of the Vaikuntha
planets. Queen Arci also entered patiloka, but this planet is not in the
material universe, for she actually entered the planet which her husband
attained. In the material world also, when a woman dies with her husband,
she again unites with him in the next birth. Similarly, Maharaja Prthu and
Queen Arci united in the Vaikuntha planets. In the Vaikuntha planets
there are husbands and wives, but there is no question of their giving birth
to children nor having sex life. In the Vaikuntha planets both husbands and
wives are extraordinarily beautiful, and they are attracted to one another,
but they do not enjoy sex life. Indeed, they consider sex not to be very
relishable because both husband and wife are always absorbed in Krsna
consciousness and in glorifying and chanting the glories of the Lord.

According to Bhaktivinoda Thakura also, a husband and wife can turn
the home into a place as good as Vaikuntha, even while in this material
world. Being absorbed in Krsna consciousness, even in this world husband
and wife can live in Vaikuntha simply by installing the Deity of the Lord
within the home and serving the Deity according to the directions of the
sastras. In this way, they will never feel the sex urge. That is the test
of advancement in devotional service. One who is advanced in devotional
service is never attracted by sex life, and as soon as one becomes detached
from sex life and proportionately attached to the service of the Lord, he
actually experiences living in the Vaikuntha planets. In the ultimate issue,
there is actually no material world, but when one forgets the service of the
Lord and engages himself in the service of his senses, he is said to be living
in the material world.

TEXT 30
HETRISE 99: स॒ भगवत्तमः |
कीर्तितं तस्य॒ चरितियुदामचरितस्य ते ॥२०॥
itthambhutanubhavo ‘sau
prthuh sa bhagavattamah


--- Page 249 ---
1014 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
kirtitam tasya caritam
uddama-caritasya te
itthambhuta—thus; anubhavah—very great, powerful; asau—that;
prthuh—King Prthu; sah—he; bhagavattamah—the best among the lords;
kirtitam—described; tasya—his; caritam—character; uddama—very great;
caritasya—one who possesses such qualities; te—to you.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya continued: The greatest of all devotees, Maharaja Prthu, was
very powerful, and his character was liberal, magnificent and magnanimous.
Thus I have described him to you as far as possible.
PURPORT
In this verse the word bhagavattamah is very significant, for the word
bhagavat is used especially to refer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
as the word bhagavan (the Supreme Personality of Godhead) is derived
from the word bhagavat. Sometimes, however, we see that the word
bhagavan is used for great personalities like Lord Brahma, Lord Siva
and Narada Muni. This is the case with Prthu Maharaja, who is described
here as the best of the bhagavans, or the best of the lords. A person can be
so addressed only if he is a great personality who exhibits extraordinary
and uncommon features, or who attains the greatest goal after his dis-
appearance, or who knows the difference between knowledge and igno-
rance. In other words, the word bhagavan should not be used for ordinary
persons.
TEXT 31
7 © सुमहत्पुण्यं अद्धयावदितः पटेत्‌ |
श्रावयेच्छ्णुयाद्वापि स प्रथः पदवीमियात्‌ ॥२१॥
ya 80077) su-mahat punyarn
sraddhayavahitah pathet
sravayec chrnuyad vapi
sa prthoh padavim iyat
yah—anyone; idam—this; su-mahat—very great; pupyam—pious;
sraddhaya—with great faith; avahitah—with great attention; pathet—
reads; sravayet—explains; srnuyat—hears; va— or; api—certainly; sah—that
person; prthoh—of King Prthu; padavim—situation; iyat—attains.


--- Page 250 ---
Text 31] : Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1015
TRANSLATION

Any person who describes the great characteristics of King Prthu with
faith and determination—whether he reads or hears of them himself or
helps others to hear of them—is certain to attain the very planet which-
Maharaja Prthu attained. In other words, such a person also returns home
to the Vaikuntha planets, back to Godhead.

PURPORT

In the execution of devotional service, sravaparn kirtanarn vispoh is
especially stressed. This means that bhakti, or devotional service, begins
by hearing and chanting about Visnu. When we speak of Vispu, we also
refer to that which relates to Visnu. In the Siva Purina, Lord Siva recom-
mends ছ 19120 worship to be the topmost worship, and better than Visnu
worship is worship of the Vaignava or anything that is related to Visnu. The
fact is explained herein that hearing and chanting about a Vaispava is as
good as hearing and chanting about Visnu, for Maitreya has explained that
anyone who hears about Prthu Maharaja with attention also attains the
planet which Maharaja Prthu attained. There is no duality between Visnu
and the Vaisnava, and this is called advaya-jii@na. A Vaisnavais asimportant
as Visnu, and therefore Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura wrote in his
Gurv-astaka:

saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastrair
uktas tathd bhavyata eva sadbhih

kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
vande guroh $ri-carandravindam

“The spiritual master is honored as much as the Supreme Lord because
he is the most confidential servitor of the Lord. This is acknowledged in all
revealed scriptures and is followed by all authorities. Therefore I offer my
respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master, who is a
bona fide representative of Sri Hari.”

The supreme Vaisnava is the spiritual master, and he is nondifferent
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is said that sometimes Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu used to chant the names of the gopis. Some of the
Lord’s students tried to advise Him to chant the name of Krsna instead,
but upon hearing this Caitanya Mahaprabhu became very angry with His
students. The controversy on this subject reached such a point that after
this incident Caitanya Mahaprabhu decided to take sannydsa because He
was not taken very seriously in His grhastha-israma. The point is that
since Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu chanted the names of the gopis, worship
of the gopis or the devotees of the Lord is as good as devotional service


--- Page 251 ---
1016 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
rendered directly to the Lord. It is also stated by the Lord Himself that
devotional service to His devotees is better than service offered directly
to Him. Sometimes the sahajiya class of devotees are only interested in
Krsna’s personal pastimes to the exclusion of the activities of the devotees.
This type of devotee is not on a very high level; one who sees the devotee
and the Lord on the same level has further progressed.
TEXT 32
AEN जक्षवचैखी राजन्यो जगतीपतिः ।
वैश्यः पठन्‌ विट्पतिः स्याच्छद्रः स्तमताभियात्‌। २२
brahmano brahma-varcasvt
rajanyo jagati-patih
wiSyah pathan vit-patih syac
chudrah sattamatam iyat

brahmanah—the brahmanas; brahma-varcasvi—one who has attained
the power of spiritual success; rajanyah—the royal order; jagati-patih—the
king of the world; vaisyah—the mercantile class of men; pathan—by
reading; vit-patih—becomes master of the animals; syat—becomes;
sudrah—the laborer class of men; sattamatam—the position of a great
devotee; iyat—attains.

TRANSLATION

If one hears of the characteristics of Prthu Maharaja and is a brahmana,
he becomes perfectly qualified with brahminical powers; if he is a ksatriya,
he becomes a king of the world; if he is a vaisya, he becomes a master of
other vaisyas and many animals; and if he is a ৪1013, he becomes the top-
most devotee.

PURPORT.

In Srimad-Bhdgavatam it is recommended that one should become a
devotee regardless of one’s condition. Whether one is without desire
(akdma), or with desire (sakdma), or whether one desires liberation
(moksa-kama), he is advised to worship the Supreme Lord and execute
devotional service unto Him. By so doing, one attains all perfection in any
field of life. The process of devotional service—especially hearing and
chanting—is so powerful that it can bring a person to the perfectional
stage. In this verse brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and $iidras are mentioned,
but here it should be understood that that reference is to the brahmana


--- Page 252 ---
Text 33] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1017
who is born in a brahminical family, the ksatriya who is born in a ksatriya
family, the vaisya who is born in a vai§ya family and the $iidra in a sudra
family. But whether one is a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya or Sidra, he can
attain perfection simply by hearing and chanting.

To take birth in a family of brahmanas is not the ultimate finishing
touch; one must have the power of a brahmana, which is called brahma-
tejas. Similarly, taking birth in a royal family is not the all in all; one must
possess the power to rule the world. Similarly, taking birth as a vaisya is
not all; one must possess hundreds or thousands of animals (specifically
cows) and rule over other vai§yas as Nanda Maharaja did in Vrndavana.
Nanda Maharaja was a vaisya who possessed 900,000 cows and ruled over
many cowherd men and boys. A person who is born in a 08070 family can
become greater than a brahmana simply by accepting devotional service
and giving aural reception to the pastimes of the Lord and His devotees.

TEXT 33
সি: त्व হহ্মাকছ্ नरो arse |
९
अप्रजः सुप्रजवमो লিদলী धनवत्तमः 133:

trih krtva idam akarnya

naro nary athavadrta
aprajah su-prajatamo

nirdhano dhanavattamah

trih—thrice; krtvah—repeating; idam—this; akarpya—hearing; narah—
man; nari—woman; athava—or; adrta—in great respect; aprajah—one who
has no children;su-prajatamah—surrounded by many children; nirdhanah—
without any money; dhanavat—rich; tamah—the greatest.

TRANSLATION

It doesn’t matter whether one is a man or woman. Anyone who, with
great respect, hears this narration of Maharaja Prthu, will become the
father of many children if he is without children, and will become the
richest of men if he is without money.

PURPORT

Materialistic persons who are very fond of money and great families
worship different demigods to attain their desires, especially Goddess
Durga, Lord Siva and Lord Brahma. Such materialistic persons are called


--- Page 253 ---
1018 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
sry-aisvarya-prajepsavah. Sri means beauty, aisvarya means riches, praja
means children and ipsavah means desiring. As described in the Second
Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, one has to worship various demigods for
different types of benedictions. However, here it is indicated that simply
by hearing of the life and character of Maharaja Prthu, one can have both
riches and children in enormous quantities. One simply has to read and
understand the history, the life and activities of Prthu Maharaja. It is ad-
vised that one read them at least three times. Those who are materially
afflicted will so benefit by hearing of the Supreme Lord and His devotees
that they need not go to any demigod. The word su-prajatamah (sur-
rounded by many children) is very significant in this verse, for one may
have many children but may not have any qualified children. Here, however,
it is stated (su-prajatamah) that all the children thus attained would be
qualified in education, wealth, beauty and strength—everything complete.
TEXT 34
अस्पष्टकीर्तिः सुयश्चा मूर्वा भवति पण्डितः |
इदं सखस्त्ययनं पुंखापयद्गत्थचिवारणम्‌ ।२३४॥
aspasta-kirtih su-yasa
murkho bhavati panditah
idam svasty-ayanarn pursam
amangalya-nivaranam

aspasta-kirtih—unmanifested reputation; su-yasah—very famous;
murkhah—illiterate; bhavati—becomes; panditah—learned; idam—this;
svasti-ayanam—auspiciousness; puriisam—of the men; amangalya—inauspi-
ciousness; nivarapam— prohibiting.

TRANSLATION

Also, one who hears this narration three times will become very reputable
if he is not recognized in society, and he will become a great scholar if he
is illiterate. In other words, hearing of the narrations of Prthu Maharaja is
80 auspicious that it drives away all bad luck.

PURPORT

In the material world, everyone wants some profit, some adoration and
some reputation. By associatingin different ways with the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead or His devotee, one can very easily become opulent in


--- Page 254 ---
Text 35] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1019
every respect. Even if one is not known or recognized by society, he be-
comes very famous and important if he takes to devotional service and
preaching. As far as education is concerned, one can become recognized in
society as a great learned scholar simply by hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam
and Bhagavad-gitd, wherein the pastimes of the Lord and His devotees are
described. This material world is full of dangers at every step, but a devotee
has no fear because devotional service is so auspicious that it automatically
counteracts all kinds of bad luck. Since hearing about Prthu Maharaja is
one of the items of devotional service (§ravanam), naturally hearing about
him brings all good fortune.
TEXT 35
धन्यं यञ्चस्यमायुष्यं खर्ग्यं ङलिमकापदम्‌ |
धर्माथकाममोक्षाणां सम्यक्सिद्धिममीप्सुभिः |
श्रदयेतदनुश्ाव्यं * चतुणां कारणं परम्‌ ।३५॥।
dhanyarn yasasyam ayusyam
svargyam kali-malapaham
dharmartha-kama-moksanam
samyak siddhim abhipsubhih
sraddhayaitad anusravyam
caturnam karanar param
dhanyam—the source of riches; yasasyam—the source of reputation;
ayusyam—the source of an increased span of life; svargyam—the source of
elevation to the heavenly planets; kali—of the age of Kali; mala-apaham—
decreasing the contamination; dharma—religion; artha—economic develop-
ment; kama—sense gratification; moksanam—of liberation; samyak—com-
pletely; siddhim— perfection; abhipsubhih—by those desiring; sraddhaya—
with great respect; etat—this narration; anusravyam—must one hear;
caturnam—of the four; kdranam— cause; param—ultimate.
TRANSLATION
By hearing the narration of Prthu Maharaja, one can become great,
increase his duration of life, gain promotion to the heavenly planets and
counteract the contaminations of this age of Kali. In addition, one can
promote the causes of religion, economic development, sense gratification
and liberation. Therefore from all sides it is advisable for a materialistic
person who is interested in such things to read and hear the narrations
of the life and character of Prthu Maharaja.


--- Page 255 ---
1020 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
PURPORT

By reading and hearing the narrations of the life and character of Prthu
Maharaja, one naturally becomes a devotee, and as soon as one becomes a
devotee, his material desires automatically become fulfilled. Therefore it is
recommended in Srimad-Bhagavatam: akamah sarva-kamo va moksa-kama
uddra-dhih/ tivrena bhakti-yogena yajeta purusam param (Bhag. 2.3.10).
It is recommended that if a person wants to return home, back to God-
head, or wants to become a pure devotee (akama), or wants some material
prosperity (sekama or sarva-kama), or wants to merge into the existence of
the Supreme Brahman effulgence (moksa-kama), he is recommended to take
to the path of devotional service and hear and chant of Lord Visnu or of His
devotee. This is the sum and substance of all Vedic literatures. Vedais ca
sarvair aham eva vedyo (Bg. 15.15). The purpose of Vedic knowledge is to
understand Krsna and His devotees. Whenever we speak of Krsna, we refer
to His devotees also, for He is not alone. He is never nirvisesa or sinya,
without variety or zero. Krsna is full of variety, and as soon as Krsna is
present, there cannot be any question of void.

TEXT 36
frente राजा भरत्वैतदभियाति यान्‌ ।
A >
TS तस्मे हरन्त्यग्रे राजानः पृथवे यथा ।२६॥
vijayabhimukho raja
Srutvaitad abhiyati yan
baliri tasmai haranty agre
rajanah prthave yatha

vijaya-abhimukhah—one who is about to start for victory; raja—king;
Srutva—hearing; etat—this; abhiyati—starts; yan—on the chariot; balim—
taxes; tasmai—unto him; haranti—present; agre—before; rajanah—other
kings; prthave—unto King Prthu; yatha—as it was done.

TRANSLATION

If a king, who is desirous of attaining victory and ruling power, chants
the narration of Prthu Maharaja three times before going forth on his
chariot, all subordinate kings will automatically render all kinds of taxes
unto him—as they rendered them unto Maharaja Prthu—simply upon his
order.


--- Page 256 ---
Text 37] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1021
PURPORT
Since a ksatriya king naturally desires to rule the world, he wishes to
make all other kings subordinate to him. This was also the position many
years ago when Prthu Maharaja was ruling over the earth. At that time he
was the only emperor on this planet. Even five thousand years ago, Maharaja
Yudhisthira and Maharaja Pariksit were the sole emperors of this planet.
Sometimes the subordinate kings rebelled, and it was necessary for the
emperor to go and chastise them. This process of chanting the narrations
of the life and character of Prthu Maharaja is recommended for conquering
kings if they want to fulfill their desire to rule the world.
TEXT 37
क्तान्यसङ्गो मगक्त्यमलां भक्तिघदइन्‌ |
EY . .
बेन्यस्य चरितं पण्यं शृणुयाध्ट्ावयेत्पठेत्‌ 1139)
muktanya-sango bhagavaty
amalarm bhaktim udvahan
vainyasya caritarn punyarm
srnuyac chravayet pathet
mukta-anya-sangah—being freed from all material contamination;
bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; amalam—unalloyed;
bhaktim— devotional service; udvahan— carrying out; vainyasya—of the son
of Maharaja Vena; caritam—character; punyam— pious; §rnuyat—must hear;
Sravayet—must induce others to hear; pathet—and go on reading.
TRANSLATION
A pure devotee who is executing the different processes of devotional
service may be situated in the transcendental position, being completely
absorbed in Krsna consciousness, but even he, while discharging devotional
service, must hear, read and induce others to hear about the character and
life of Prthu Maharaja.
PURPORT
There is a type of neophyte devotee who is very anxious to hear about
the pastimes of the Lord, especially the rdsa-lild chapters in Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Such a devotee should know by this instruction that the
pastimes of Prthu Maharaja are nondifferent from the pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. An ideal king, Prthu Maharaja exhibited


--- Page 257 ---
1022 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
all talents in showing how to rule the citizens, how to educate them, how
to develop the state economically, how to fight enemies, how to perform
great sacrifices (yajiias), etc. Thusit is recommended for the sahajiyd, or the
neophyte devotee, to hear, chant and get others to hear about the activities
of Prthu Maharaja, even though one may think himself to be in the tran-
scendental position of advanced devotional service.
TEXT 38
নীবিসবীযানিহিন महन्मादाःंम्यच््वकम्‌ ।
¢
अखिन्‌ छृतमतिमत्य॑म्‌ पार्थवीं गतिमाप्लुयात्‌ ।।३८॥
waicitraviryabhihitam
mahan-mahatmya-sucakam
asmin krtam atimartyam
parthavim gatim apnuyat
vaicitravirya—O son of Vicitravirya (Vidura); abhihitam—explained;
mahat—great; mahatmya— greatness; sucakam— awakening; asmin—in this;
krtam—performed; atimartyam—uncommon; parthavim—in connection
with Prthu Maharaja; gatim—advancement, destination; apnuyat—one
should achieve.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, I have as far as
possible spoken the narrations about Prthu Maharaja, which enrich one’s
devotional attitude. Whoever takes advantage of these benefits also goes
back home, back to Godhead, like Maharaja Prthu.
PURPORT
The word $ravayet, mentioned in a previous verse, indicates that one
should not only read for himself, but should also induce others to read and
hear. That is called preaching. Caitanya Mahaprabhu recommended this
practice: yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsnpa-upadesa (Cc. Madhya 7.128).
“Whomever you meet, simply talk with him about the instructions given by
Krsna or tell him of narrations about Krsna.” Prthu Maharaja’s history of
devotional service is as potent as narrations about the activities of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should not make distinctions be-
tween the pastimes of the Lord and the activities of Prthu Maharaja, and
whenever it is possible a devotee should attempt to induce others to hear
about Prthu Maharaja. One should not only read of his pastimes for one’s


--- Page 258 ---
Text 39] Maharaja Prthu’s Going Back Home 1023
own benefit but should induce others to read and hear about them also.
In this way everyone can be benefited.
TEXT 39
अनुदिनमिदमादरेण शरष्वन्‌
पृथुचरितं प्रथयन्‌ विगुक्तसङ्गः |
मगवति भवसिन्धुपोतपादे
स च निपुणां रभते रतिं मयुष्यः॥३९॥
anudinam idam adarena $] [00012
prthu-caritam prathayan vimukta-sangah
bhagavati bhava-sindhu-pota-pade
sa ca nipunam labhate ratim manugyah
anudinam—day after day; idam—this; adarepa—with great respect;
Srnvan—hearing;  prthu-caritam—the narration of Prthu Maharaja;
prathayan—chanting; vimukta—liberated; sangah—association; bhagavati—
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhava-sindhu—the ocean of
nescience; pota—the boat; pade—whose lotus feet; sah—he; ca—also;
nipunpam—complete; labhate—achieves; ratim—attachment; manusyah—the
person. i
TRANSLATION
Whoever, with great reverence and adoration, regularly reads, chants and
describes the history of Maharaja Prthu’s activities will certainly increase
unflinching faith and attraction for the lotus feet of the Lord. The Lord's
lotus feet are the boat by which one can cross the ocean of nescience.
PURPORT
The word bhava-sindhu-pota-pdde is significant in this verse. The lotus
feet of the Lord are known as mahat-padam; this means that the total
source of material existence rests on the lotus feet of the Lord. As stated
in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 10.8), aharh sarvasya prabhavah: everything is
emanating from Him. This cosmic manifestation, which is compared to an
ocean of nescience, is also resting on the lotus feet of the Lord. As such,
this great ocean of nescience is minimized by a person who is a pure
devotee. One who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord need not
cross over the ocean because he has already crossed it by virtue of his
position at the Lord’s lotus feet. By hearing and chanting of the glories


--- Page 259 ---
1024 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 23
of the Lord or the Lord’s devotee, one can become firmly fixed in the
service of the lotus feet of the Lord. This position can also be achieved
very easily by narrating the history of the life of Prthu Maharaja regularly
every day. The word vimukta-sangah is also significant in this connection.
Because we associate with the three qualities of material nature, our position
in this material world is full of dangers, but when we engage in the devo-
tional service of the Lord by the process of sravapam and kirtanam, we
immediately become vimukta-sanga, or liberated.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of Fourth Canto, Twenty-third
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Maharaja Prthu’s Going
Back Home.”


--- Page 260 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
Chanting the Song
Sung by Lord Siva
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
विजिताश्वोऽधिराजाऽऽसीत्ुपुत्रः पृथुश्रवाः |
यवीयोम्योऽददात्काष्टा ATT ्राक्वत्सलः।। १ |)
maitreya ५४९८०
vijitasvo ‘dhirdjasit
prthu-putrah prthu-sravah
yaviyobhyo ’dadat kastha
bhratrbhyo bhratr-vatsalah
maitreyah uvdca—Maitreya continued to speak; vijitasvah—of the name
Vijitasva; adhirdja—the emperor; dsit—became; prthu-putrah—the son of
Maharaja Prthu; prthu-sravah—of great activities; yaviyobhyah—unto the
younger brothers; adadat—offered; kasthah—different directions;
bhratrbhyah—unto the brothers; bhrdtr-vatsalah—very affectionate to the
brothers.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: Vijitasva, the eldest son of Maharaja
Prthu, who had a reputation like his father, became emperor and gave his
younger brothers different directions of the world to govern, for he was very
affectionate toward his brothers.
PURPORT
After describing the life and character of Maharaja Prthu in the previous
chapter, the great sage Maitreya began to speak about the sons and
grandsons in the genealogical line of the Prthu dynasty. After the death
of Maharaja Prthu, his eldest son, Vijitasva, became emperor of the world.
1025


--- Page 261 ---
1026 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
King Vijitasva was very affectionate toward his younger brothers, and
therefore he wanted them to rule different directions of the world. From
time immemorial the eldest son generally becomes king after the death of
the previous king. When the Pandavas ruled the earth, Maharaja Yudhisthira,
the eldest son of King Pandu, became emperor, and his younger brothers
assisted him. Similarly, King Vijitasva’s younger brothers were appointed
to govern the different directions of the world.
TEXT 2
हयंक्षायादिशतप्राचीं RE द षिणाम्‌ ।
प्रतीचीं बृकसंज्ञाय तुर्या द्रविणसे विशः ॥ ২॥|
haryaksayadisat pracim
dhiimrakesaya daksinam
praticim vrka-samjiadya
turyam dravinase vibhuh
haryaksaya—unto Haryaksa;adisat—delivered; pracim—eastern; dhiimra-
kesadya—unto Dhumrakesa; daksinam—the southern side; praticim— the
western side; uvrka-samjiidya—unto his brother whose name was Vrka;
turydm—the northern side; dravinase—unto another brother of his named
Dravina; vibhuh—the master.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Vijitasva offered the eastern part of the world to his brother
Haryaksa, the southern part to Dhiunrakesa, the western part to Vrka,
and the northern part to Dravina.
TEXT 3
FRR शक्राह्वञ्ध्वान्तर्ानसं RA: |
अपत्यत्रयमाधत्त शिखण्डिन्यां सुसम्मतम्‌ ॥ ২ ॥
antardhdna-gatim sakral
labdhvantardhdna-samjnitah
apatya-trayam adhatta
Sikhandinyarn su-sammatam


--- Page 262 ---
Text 4] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1027

antardhdna—of disappearance; gatim—achievement; sakrat—from King
Indra; labdhva—getting; antardhana—of the name; sarmmjiitah—so nomi-
nated; apatya—children; trayam—three; ddhatta—begot; sikhandinydm—in
Sikhandini, his wife; su-saemmatam—approved by everyone.

TRANSLATION

Formerly, Maharaja Vijitasva pleased the King of heaven, Indra, and
from him received the title Antardhana. His wife’s name was Sikhandini,
and by her he begot three good sons.

PURPORT

Maharaja Vijitasva was known as Antardhana, which means *disappear-
ance.” He received this title from Indra, and it refers to the time when
Indra stole Maharaja Prthu’s horse from the sacrificial arena. Indra
was not visible to others when he was stealing the horse, but Maharaja
Prthu’s son, Vijitasva, could see him. Yet despite his knowing that Indra
was taking away his father’s horse, he did not attack him. This indicates
that Maharaja Vijitasva respected the right persons. Although Indra was
stealing the horse from his father, Vijitasva knew perfectly well that Indra
was not an ordinary thief. Since Indra was a great and powerful demigod
and servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vijitasva purposefully
excused him due to sentiment only, even though Indra was acting wrongly.
Thus Indra became very pleased with Vijitasva at that time. The demigods
have the great mystic power of being able to appear and disappear
according to their will, and since Indra was very pleased with Vijitasva, he
bestowed this mystic power upon him. Thus Vijitasva became known as
Antardhana.

TEXT 4
पावकः पवमानश्च शचिरित्यम्रयः पुरा ।
वसिष्ठलापादुत्यन्नाः पुमर्योगगतिं गताः ॥ ४॥
pdvakah pavamanas ca
sucir ity agnayah pura
vasistha-sapad utpannah
punar yoga-gatiri gatah

pavakah—of the name Pavaka; pavaimanah—of the name Pavamana; ca—

also; sucih—of the name Suci; iti—thus; agnayah—the fire-gods; pura—


--- Page 263 ---
1028 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
formerly; wvasistha—the great sage Vasistha; $apdit—by being cursed;
utpanndh—now born as such; punah—again; yoga-gatim—the destination of
mystic yoga practice; gatdh—attained.
TRANSLATION

The three sons of Maharaja Antardhana were named Pavaka, Pavamana
and Suci. Formerly these three personalities were the demigods of fire,
but due to the curse of the great sage Vasistha, they became the sons of
Maharaja Antardhana. As such, they were as powerful as the fire-gods,
and they attained the destination of mystic yoga power, being again
situated as the demigods of fire.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita it is stated (Bg. 6.41-43) that one who falls down from
yoga practice is elevated to the heavenly planets, and after enjoying the
material facilities there he again comes down to the earthly planet and
takes birth in a very rich family or a very pious brahmana family. Thus
it is to be understood that when demigods fall down, they come to
earth as sons of very rich and pious families. In such families, the living
entity gets an opportunity to execute Krsna consciousness and thereby
gain promotion to his desired goal. The sons of Maharaja Antardhana had
been the demigods in charge of fire, and they again regained their former
position and by mystic power returned to the heavenly planets.

TEXT 5
জঅল্বণাঁনী नमखत्यां हविर्धानमविन्दत |
य इन्द्रमशवहतारं विद्वानपि न जघ्निवान्‌ || ५॥
antardhdno nabhasvatyari
havirdh@nam avindata
ya indram asva-hartaram
vidvan api na jaghnivan

antardhdnah—the king of the name Antardhiana; nabhasvatyam—unto
his wife Nabhasvati; havirdhanam—of the name Havirdhana; avindata—
obtained; yah—who; indram—King Indra; asva-hartaram—who was stealing


--- Page 264 ---
Text 5] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1029
the horse of his father; vidvan api—although he knew it; na jaghnivan—did
not kill. ।

TRANSLATION

Maharaja Antardhana had another wife named Nabhasvati, and by her
he was happy to beget another son named Havirdhana. Since Maharaja
Antardhana was very liberal, he did not kill Indra while the demigod was
stealing his father’s horse at the sacrifice.

PURPORT

It is understood from various scriptures and Purdnas that the King of
heaven, Indra, was very expert in stealing and kidnapping. He could steal
anything without being visible to the proprietor, and he could kidnap
anyone’s wife without being detected. Once he raped the wife of
Gautama Muni by using his disappearing art, and similarly by becoming
invisible he stole the horse of Maharaja Prthu. Although in human society
such activities are considered abominable, the demigod Indra was not
considered to be degraded by them. Although Antardhana could
understand that King Indra was stealing the horse from his father, he did
not kill him, for he knew that if one who is very powerful sometimes
commits an abominable act, it should be disregarded. In Bhagavad-gita
it is clearly stated:

api cet suduracaro
bhajate mam ananya-bhak
sadhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah
“Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated.” (Bg. 9.30)

Thus even if a devotee commits an abominable act, he should be
considered a sadhu, or a pious man, because of his unflinching devotion to
the Lord. The devotees of the Lord never willingly commit any sinful
act, but sometimes they commit something abominable due to their
previous habits. Such acts should not be taken very seriously, however,
because the devotees of the Lord are very powerful, whether they are on
the heavenly planets or on this planet. If by chance they commit something
abominable, it should not be taken into account but should be overlooked.


--- Page 265 ---
1030 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
TEXT 6
राज्ञां IN करादानदण्डड्ल्कादिदारुणाम्‌ |
€
मन्यमानो {eave विससजं ह ॥ ६॥
rajiarn vrttim karadana-
danda-sulkadi-darunam
manyamadno dirgha-sattra-
vyajena visasarja ha
rajiam—of the kings; vritim—source of livelihood; kara—taxes; adana—
realization; danda— punishment; $ulka— fines;adi—etc.;darunam— which are
very severe; manyamanah— thinking like that; dirgha— long; sattra—sacrifice;
vydjena—on the plea; visasarja—gave up; ha—in the past.
TRANSLATION
Whenever Antardhina, the supreme royal power, had to exact taxes,
punish his citizens, and fine them severely, he was not willing to do so.
Consequently he retired from the execution of such duties and engaged
himself in the performance of different sacrifices.
PURPORT
It is clear herein that the king sometimes has to perform duties which
are not very desirable just because he is the king. Similarly, Arjuna was
not at all willing to fight because fighting or killing one’s own kinsmen
and family members is not at all desirable. Nonetheless the ksatriyas had
to perform such undesirable actions as a matter of duty. Maharaja
Antardhana was not very happy while exacting taxes or punishing the
citizens for their criminal activities; therefore, on the plea of performing
sacrifices, he retired from the royal majestic power at a very early age.
TEXT 7
तत्रापि হর ged परमात्मानमात्मदक्‌ |
यजंस्तछ्छोकतामाप शेन समाधिना ॥ ७॥
tatrapi harmsam purusam
paramdtmanam atma-drk
yajams tal-lokatam apa
kusalena samadhina


--- Page 266 ---
Text 8] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1031
tatrapi— despite his engagement; hammsam—one who kills the distress of
his kinsmen ; purusam—unto the Supreme Person; paramatmanam— the most
beloved Supersoul; @tma-drk—one who has seen or acquired self-realization;
yajan—by worshiping; tat-lokatam—achieved the same planet; dpa—
achieved; kusalena—very easily; samadhin@—always keeping himself in
ecstasy.
TRANSLATION
Although Maharaja Antardhiana was engaged in performing sacrifices,
because he was a self-realized soul he very intelligently rendered devotional
service to the Lord, who eradicates all the fears of His devotees. By thus
worshiping the Supreme Lord, Maharaja Antardhana, rapt in ecstasy,
attained His planet very easily.
PURPORT
Since sacrifices are generally performed by fruitive actors, it is especially
mentioned here (tatrapi) that although Maharaja Antardhana was
externally engaged in performing sacrifices, his real business was rendering
devotional service by hearing and chanting. In other words, he was
performing the usual sacrifices by the method of sankirtana-yajiia, as
recommended herein:
Sravanpar kirtanarh vispoh smaranam pada-sevanam
arcanari vandanarh dasyam sakhyam atma-nivedanam (Bhag. 7.5.23)
Devotional service is called kirtana-yajiia, and by practicing the
sankirtana-yajiia, one is very easily elevated to the planet where the
Supreme Lord resides. Out of the five kinds of liberations, achieving the
same planet where the Lord resides and living with the Lord there is
called salokya liberation.
TEXT 8
हविर्धानाद्धविधानी बिदुरा्ठत षट्‌ सुतान्‌ ।
बहिंषदं गयं शक्टं Fi सत्यं जितव्रतम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
havirdhdnad dhavirdhani
vidurdsiita sat sutan
barhisadari gaya suklarh
krsnarn satyarn jitavratam
havirdhanat—from Havirdhana; havirdhdni—the name of the wife of
Havirdhana; vidura—O Vidura; asiita—gave birth; saf—six; sutin—sons;


--- Page 267 ---
1032 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
barhisadam—of the name Barhisat; gayam—of the name Gaya; suklam—
of the name Sukla; krsnam—of the name Krsna; satyam—of the name
Satya; jitavratam—of the name Jitavrata.
TRANSLATION
Havirdhana, the son of Maharaja Antardhana, had a wife named
Havirdhani, who gave birth to six sons named Barhigat, Gaya, Sukla, Krsna,
Satya and Jitavrata.
TEXT 9
बर्हिषत्‌ सुमहाभागो हाविर्धानिः प्रजापति; |
=
क्रियाकाण्डेषु निष्णातो योगेषु च इरूदढह || ९॥
barhisat su-mahdabhago
havirdhanih prajapatih
kriya-kandesu nisndto
yogesu ca kuriidvaha
barhisat—of the name Barhisat; su-mahabhagah—very fortunate; havir-
dhanih—of the name Havirdhani; prajipatih—the post of Prajapati; kriyd-
kandesu—in the matter of fruitive activities; nisnatah—being merged in;
yogesu—in mystic yoga practices; ca—also; kuridvaha—O best of the Kurus
(Vidura).
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, Havirdhana’s very
powerful son named Barhisat was very expert in performing various kinds
of fruitive sacrifices, and he was also expert in the practice of mystic
yoga. By his great qualifications, he became known as Prajapati.
PURPORT
In the beginning of the creation there were not many living entities,
and consequently the very powerful living entities or demigods were
appointed as prajapatis in order to beget children and increase the
population. There are many prajapatis—Brahma, Daksa and Manu are
sometimes known as prajipatis—and Barhisat, the son of Havirdhana,
became one of them.
TEXT 10
यस्येदं देवयजनमनुयज्ञं वितन्वतः |
সাস্বীলায়ীঃ रौरासीदास्तृतं वसुधातलम्‌ ॥१०॥


--- Page 268 ---
Text 10] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1033
yasyedari deva-yajanam
anuyajiarn vitanvatah
pracinagraih kusair ৫510
astrtarn vasudha-talam
yasya—whose; idam—this; deva-yajanam—satisfying the demigods by
sacrifices; anuyajiem—continually sacrificing; vitanvaetah—executing;
prdcina-agraih—keeping the kusa grass facing towards the eastern side;
kusaih—the kusa grass; dsit—remained; dastrtam—scattered; vasudhd-talam—
all over the surface of the globe.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja 13311118301 executed many sacrifices all over the world. He
scattered kusa grasses and kept the tops of the grasses pointed eastward.
PURPORT
As stated in the previous verse (kriya-kandesu nisnatah), Maharaja
Barhigat dived very deeply into the fruitive activities of sacrifice. This
means that as soon as he finished one yajiia in one place, he began
performing another yajiia in the immediate vicinity. At the present moment
there is a similar need to perform sankirtana-yajiia all over the world. The
Krsna consciousness movement has started performing sankirtana-yajia
in different places, and it has been experienced that wherever sankirtana-
yajiia is performed, many thousands of people gather and take part in
it. Imperceptible auspiciousness achieved in this connection should be con-
tinued all over the world. The members of the Krsna consciousness move-
ment should perform sankirtana-yajiia one after another, so much so that
all the people of the world will either jokingly or seriously chant
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and thus they will derive the benefit of cleansing
the heart. The holy name of the Lord (Harer ndma) is so powerful that
whether it is chanted jokingly or seriously the effect of vibrating this
transcendental sound will be equally distributed. It is not possible at the
present moment to perform repeated yajitas as Maharaja Barhigat per-
formed, but it is within our means to perform sarikirtana-yajia, which does
not cost anything. One can sit down anywhere and chant Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. If the surface of the globe is overflooded with the chanting of the
Hare Krsna mantra, the people of the world will be very, very happy.


--- Page 269 ---
1034 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4, Ch. 24
TEXT 11
স্রাস্তুনী IRTEWER शतदुतिम्‌ |
यां rey copper page Sin
परिकरमन्तीुद्ाहे चकमेऽग्निः ॥११॥
samudrim devadevoktam
upayeme Satadrutim
yarn viksya caru-sarvangim
kisorirh susthv-alankrtam
parikramantim udvdhe
cakame ‘gnih sukim iva
simudrim—unto the daughter of the ocean; devadeva-uktdm—being
advised by the supreme demigod, Lord Brahma; upayeme—married;
Satadrutim—of the name Satadruti; yam—whom; viksya—seeing; caru—very
attractive; sarva-angim—all the features of the body; kisorim— youthful;
susthu—sufficiently ; alaiitkrt@am—decorated with ornaments; parikraman-
tim—circumambulating; udvahe—in the marriage ceremony; cakame—
became attracted; agnih—the fire-god; Sukim—unto Suki; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Barhigat—henceforward known as Pracinabarhi—was ordered
by the supreme demigod Lord Brahma to marry the daughter of the ocean
named Satadruti. Her bodily features were completely beautiful, and she
was very young. She was decorated with the proper garments, and when
she came into the marriage arena and began circumambulating it, the fire-
god Agni became so attracted to her that he desired her company, exactly
as he had formerly desired to enjoy Suki.
PURPORT
In this verse the word susthv-alannkrtam is significant. According to the
Vedic system, when a girl is married, she is very profusely and gorgeously
decorated with costly saris and jewelry, and during the marriage ceremony
the bride circumambulates the bridegroom seven times. After this, the
bridegroom and bride look at one another and become attracted for life.
When the bridegroom finds the bride very beautiful, the attraction between
them immediately becomes very strongly fixed. As stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam, men and women are naturally attracted to one another, and
when they are united by marriage that attraction becomes very strong.
Being so strongly attracted, the bridegroom attempts to set up a nice home-
stead and eventually a good field for producing grains. Then children come,


--- Page 270 ---
Text 12] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1035
then friends and then wealth. In this way the male becomes more and
more entangled in the material conceptions of life, and he begins to think,
“This is mine,” and “It is I who am acting.” In this way the illusion of
material existence is perpetuated.

The words sukim iva are also significant, for the fire-god Agni became
attracted by the beauty of Satadruti while she was circumambulating the
bridegroom Pracinabarhi, just as he had previously been attracted to
the beauty of Suki, the wife of Saptarsi. When the fire-god had been
present long ago at the assembly of Saptarsi, he was attracted by the beauty
of Suki when she was circumambulating in the same way. Agni’s wife,
named Svaha, took the form of Suki and enjoyed sex life with Agni. Not
only the fire-god Agni but the heavenly god Indra and sometimes even
Lord Brahma and Lord Siva—all very highly situated demigods—are subject
to being attracted by sex at any time. The sex drive is so strong in the
living entities that the whole material world is running on sex attraction
only, and it is due to sex attraction that one remains in the material world
and is obliged to accept different types of bodies. The attraction of sex
life is more clearly explained in the next verse.

TEXT 12
विबुधासुरगन्धवनिसिद्धनरोरगाः |
विजिताः ada Ry ্ষমযল্যীৰ नूपुरैः ॥१२॥

vibudhasura-gandharva-
muni-siddha-naroragah

vijitah suryaya diksu
kvanayantyaiva niipuraih

vibudha—learned; asura—the demons; gandharva—the denizens of
Gandharvaloka; muni—great sages; siddha—the denizens of Siddhaloka;
nara—the inhabitants of the earthly planets; uragah—denizens of Nagaloka;
vijitah— captivated; suryaya—by the new bride; diksu—in all directions;
kvanayantya—tinkling; ९४०-- 011 ; nupuraih—by her ankle bells.

TRANSLATION

While Satadruti was thus being married, the demons, the denizens of
Gandharvaloka, the greatsages, and the denizens of Siddhaloka, the earthly
planets and Nagaloka, although highly exalted, were all captivated by the
tinkling of her ankle bells.

PURPORT

Generally a woman becomes more beautiful when, after an early mar-

riage, she gives birth to a child. To give birth to a child is the natural func-


--- Page 271 ---
1036 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
tion of a woman, and therefore a woman becomes more and more beautiful
as she gives birth to one child after another. In the case of Satadruti,
however, she was so beautiful that she attracted the whole universe at her
marriage ceremony. Indeed, she attracted all the learned and exalted demi-
gods simply by the tinkling of her ankle bells. This indicates that all the
demigods wanted to see her beauty completely, but they were not able to
see it because she was fully dressed and covered with ornaments. Since
they could only see the feet of Satadruti, they became attracted by her
ankle bells, which tinkled as she walked. In other words, the demigods
became captivated by her simply by hearing the tinkling of her ankle bells.
They did not have to see her complete beauty. It is sometimes understood
that a person becomes lusty just by hearing the tinkling of bangles on the
hands of women, or the tinkling of ankle bells, or just by seeing a woman’s
sari. Thus it is concluded that woman is the complete representation of
maya. Although Visvamitra Muni was engaged in practicing mystic yoga
with closed eyes, his transcendental meditation was broken when he
heard the tinkling of bangles on the hands of Menaka. In this way
Visvamitra Muni became a victim of Menaka and fathered a child who
is universally celebrated as Sakuntala. The conclusion is that no one can
save himself from the attraction of woman, even though he be an exalted
demigod or an inhabitant of the higher planets. Only a devotee of the Lord,
who is attracted by Krsna, can escape the lures of woman. Once one is
attracted by Krsna, the illusory energy of the world cannot attract him.
TEXT 13
प्राचीनबर्हिषः पुत्राः शतद्रुत्यां INE |
तुत्यनामवताः स्वे धर्मखाताः प्रचेतसः 1220
pracinabarhisah putrah
Satadrutyarm dasabhavan
tulya-nama-vratah sarve
dharma-snatah pracetasah
pracinabarhisah—of King Pracinabarhi; putrah—sons; satadrutyam—in
the womb of Satadruti; dasa—ten; abhavan—became manifest; tulya—
equally; nama—name; vratah— vow; sarve—all; dharma—religiosity; snatah—
completely merged in; pracetasah—all of them being designated as Pracetas.
TRANSLATION
King Pracinabarhi begot ten children in the womb of Satadruti, and all
of them were equally endowed with religiosity, and all of them were known
as the Pracetas.


--- Page 272 ---
Text 14] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1037
PURPORT
The word dharma-snatah is significant, for the ten children were all
merged in the practice of religion. In addition, they possessed all good
qualities. One is supposed to be perfect when one is perfectly religious,
perfect in the execution of one’s vows to render devotional service, perfect
in knowledge, perfect in good behavior and so on. All the Pracetas were on
the same level of perfection.
TEXT 14
पितराऽऽदिष्टाः प्रजासर्गे तपसेऽणंवमादिश्चन्‌ |
दशचवर्षसदखाणि तपसाऽऽचस्तपस्पतिम्‌ 11281)
pitradistah praja-sarge
tapase ‘rnavam avisan
dasa-varsa-sahasrani
tapasarcams tapas-patim
pitra—by the father; adistah— being ordered by; praja-sarge—in the matter
of begetting children; tapase—for executing austerity; arnavam—in the
ocean; avisan—entered; dasa-varsa—ten years; sahasrani—such thousands;
tapasa—by their austerity; arcan—worshiped; tapah—of austerity; patim—
the master.
TRANSLATION
When all these Pracetas were ordered by their father to marry and beget
children, they all entered the ocean and practiced austerities and penances
for ten thousand years. Thus they worshiped the master of all austerity, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Sometimes great sages and ascetics enter the Himalayan Mountains in
order to find seclusion from the turmoil of the world. It appears, however,
that all the Pracetas, the sons of Pracinabarhi, entered the depths of the
ocean to perform austerity in a secluded place. Since they performed
austerities for ten thousand years, this incident took place in the Satya-yuga,
when people used to live for a hundred thousand years. It is also significant
that by their austerity they worshiped the master of austerity Sri Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one wants to perform austerities
and penances in order to attain the supreme goal, one must attain the favor
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one achieves the favor of the


--- Page 273 ---
1038 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
Supreme Lord, it is to be understood that he has finished all kinds of
austerities and penances and has attained efficiency in their execution. On
the other hand, if one does not attain the perfect stage of devotional service,
all austerities and penances actually have no meaning, for without the
Supreme Lord no one can attain the highest results derived from performing
them. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, Lord Sri Krsna is the master of all
penances and sacrifices.

bhoktaram yajiia-tapasam

: sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdarn sarva-bhutanam
172४2 mam santim rcchati

“The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods, and the bene-
factor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from the pangs of
material miseries.” (Bg. 5.29)

In Srimad-Bhagavatam it is also stated that even if a person is born in a
family of candalas—the lowest birth one can get in human society —he is
glorious if he chants the holy names of the Lord, for it is to be understood
that by such chanting a devotee definitely proves that he underwent all
kinds of austerities in his previous life. By the grace of Lord Caitanya, one
who chants the maha-mantra (Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare) attains the highest
perfectional stage which had previously been attained by people who en-
tered the ocean and executed austerities for ten thousand years. In this age
of Kali, if a person does not take advantage of chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra, which is offered as a great concession to the fallen human beings
of this age, it is to be understood that he will become very much bewildered
by the illusory energy of the Lord.

TEXT 15
यदुक्तं पथि दृष्टेन गिरिशेन sedan)
TTR जपन्तश्च TEE संयताः ॥ १५
yad uktam pathi drstena
girisena prasidata
tad dhyayanto japanta$ ca
pujayantas$ ca saryatah


--- Page 274 ---
Text 16] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1039

yat—that; uktam—said: pathi—on the way; drstena—while meeting;
girisena—by Lord Siva; prasidata— being very much satisfied; tat— that;
dhyayantah—meditating; japantah ca—chanting also; pujayantah ca—
worshiping also; saryatah—with great control.

TRANSLATION

When all the sons of Pracinabarhi left home to execute austerities, they
met Lord Siva, who, out of great mercy, instructed them about the Abso-
lute Truth. All the sons of Pracinabarhi meditated upon the instructions,
chanting and worshiping them with great care and attention.

PURPORT

Itis clear that to perform austerities or penances, or, for that matter, any
form of devotional service, one has to be guided by a spiritual master. Here
it is clearly stated that the ten sons of Maharaja Pracinabarhi were favored
by an appearance of Lord Siva, who, out of great kindness, gave them
instructions regarding the execution of austerities. Lord Siva actually
became the spiritual master of the ten sons, and in turn his disciples took
his words so seriously that simply by meditating upon his instructions
(dhydyantah) they became perfect. This is the secret of success. After being
initiated and receiving the orders of the spiritual master, the disciple should
unhesitatingly think about the instructions or orders of the spiritual master
and should not allow himself to be disturbed by anything else. This is also
the verdict of Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, who, while explaining
a verse of Bhagavad-gita (vyavasdyatmika buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana,
Bg. 2.41), points out that the order of the spiritual master is the life sub-
stance of the disciple. The disciple shouldn’t consider whether he is going
back home, back to Godhead; his first business should be to execute the
order of his spiritual master. Thus a disciple should always meditate on
the order of the spiritual master, and that is perfectional meditation. Not
only should he meditate upon that order, but he should find out the means
by which he can perfectly worship and execute it.

TEXT 16
विदुर उवाच
प्रचेतसां गिर्तरिण यथाऽऽसीत्पथि सङ्गमः |
यदुताह हरः प्रीतस्तन्नो ब्रह्मन्‌ IEW ।१६॥


--- Page 275 ---
1040 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
vidura uvaca
770८९450 71 giritrena
yathasit pathi sangamah
yad utaha harah pritas
tan no brahman vadarthavat
vidurah uvaca— Vidura inquired; pracetasam—of all the Pracetas; giri-
trena—by Lord Siva; yatha—as and as; asit—it was; pathi—on the road;
sangamah—meeting; yat—which; utaha—said; harah—Lord Siva; pritah—
being pleased; tat—that; nah—unto us; brahman—O great brahmana; vada—
speak; arthavat—with clear meaning.
TRANSLATION
Vidura asked Maitreya: My dear brahmana, why did the Pracetas meet
Lord Siva on the way? Please tell me how the meeting happened, how Lord
Siva became very pleased with them, and how he instructed them. Cer-
tainly such talks are important, and I wish that you will please be merciful
upon me and describe them.
PURPORT
Whenever there are some important talks between a devotee and the
Lord or between exalted devotees, one should be very much curious to
hear them. At the meeting of Naimisaranya, where Sita Gosvami spoke
Srimad-Bhagavatam to all the great sages, Sita Gosvami was also asked
about the talks between Maharaja Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami, for the
sages believed that the talks between Sukadeva Gosvami and Maharaja
Pariksit must have been as important as the talks between Lord Krsna and
Arjuna. As everyone is still eager to learn the subject of Bhagavad-gita in
order to become perfectly enlightened, Vidura was similarly eager to learn
from the great sage Maitreya about the talks between Lord Siva and the
Pracetas.
TEXT 17
सङ्गमः खल বিমণ शिवेनेह gdfomg ।
दुमो सनयो दध्युरसङ्गायमभीष्ितम्‌ ॥ १५७॥
sangamah khalu viprarse
Siveneha saririnam
durlabho munayo dadhyur
asangad yam abhipsitam


--- Page 276 ---
Text 17) Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1041

saigamah—association; khalu—certainly; viprarse— O best of the
brahmanas; sivena—along with Lord Siva; iha—in this world; saririnam—
those who are encaged in material bodies; durlabhah—very rare; munayah—
great sages; dadhyuh—engaged themselves in meditation; asangat—being
detached from anything else; yam—unto whom; abhipsitam— desiring.

TRANSLATION

The great sage Vidura continued: O best of the brahmanas, it is very
difficult for living entities encaged within this material body to have
personal contact with Lord Siva. Even great sages who have no material
attachments do not contact him, despite their always being absorbed in
meditation to attain his personal contact.

PURPORT

Since Lord Siva does not incarnate himself unless there is some special
reason, it is very difficult for an ordinary person to contact him. However,
Lord Siva does descend on a special occasion when he is ordered by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this regard, it is stated in the Padma
Purana that Lord Siva appeared as a brahmana in the age of Kali to preach
the Mayavada philosophy, which is nothing but a type of Buddhist phi-
losophy. It is stated in Padma Purana:

mayavadam asac-chastram pracchannam bauddham ucyate
mayaiva vihitari devi kalau brahmana-miirtina

Lord Siva, speaking to Parvati Devi, foretold that he would spread the
Mayavada philosophy in the guise of a sannyasi brahmana just to eradicate
Buddhist philosophy. This sannyasi was Sripada Sankaracarya. In order to
overcome the effects of Buddhist philosophy and spread Vedanta philoso-
phy, Sripada Sarikaracarya had to make some compromise with the Buddhist
philosophy, and as such he preached the philosophy of monism, for it was
required at that time. Otherwise there was no need for his preaching
Mayavada philosophy. At the present moment there is no need for Maya-
vada philosophy nor Buddhist philosophy, and Lord Caitanya rejected
both of them. This Krsna consciousness movement is spreading the philoso-
phy of Lord Caitanya and rejecting the philosophy of both classes of
Mayavada. Strictly speaking, both Buddhist philosophy and Sarkara’s
philosophy are but different types of Mayavada dealing on the platform
of material existence. Neither of these philosophies has spiritual significance.
There is spiritual significance only after one accepts the philosophy of


--- Page 277 ---
1042 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
Bhagavad-gita, which culminates in surrendering unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Generally people worship Lord Siva for some material
benefit, and although they cannot see him personally, they nonetheless
derive great material profit by worshiping him.
TEXT 18
आत्मारामोऽपि यस्त्वस्य लोककल्पस्य राधसे ।
TE युक्तो विचरति घोरया भगवान्‌ मवः ॥१८।।
atmdramo ए yas tv asya
loka-kalpasya radhase
Saktyd yukto vicarati
ghorayd bhagavdan bhavah

atmdramah—self-satisfied; api—although he is; yah—one who is; tu—but;
asya— this; loka—material world; kalpasya—when manifested; radhase—for
the matter of helping its existence; saktya—potencies; yuktah—being en-
gaged; vicarati—he acts; ghorayd—very dangerous; bhagavan—His Lordship;
bhavah—Siva.

TRANSLATION

Lord Siva, the most powerful demigod, second only to Lord Visnu,
is self-sufficient. Although he has nothing to aspire for in the material
world, for the benefit of those in the material world he is always busily
engaged everywhere and is accompanied by his dangerous energies like
Goddess Kali and Goddess Durga.

PURPORT

Lord Siva is known as the greatest devotee of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. He is also known as vaisnavandr yathda sambhuh, the best
of all types of Vaispavas. Consequently Lord Siva has a Vaispava
sampraddya, the disciplic succession known as Rudra-sampradaya. Just
as there is a Brahma-sampradaya coming directly from Lord Brahma,
the Rudra-sampradaya comes directly from Lord Siva. As stated in Srimad-
Bhdgavatam, Lord Siva is one of the twelve great personalities. This
refers to the twelve great authorities who preach God consciousness.
The name Sambhu means Lord Siva. His disciplic succession is also
known as the Visnusvami-sampradaya, and the current Visnusvami-
sampradaya is also known as the Vallabha-sampradaya. The current
Brahma-sampradaya is known as the Madhva-Gaudiya-sampradaya. Even
though Lord Siva appeared to preach Mayavada philosophy, at the end of


--- Page 278 ---
Text 18] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1043
his pastime in the form of Sankaricarya, he preached the Vaisnava
philosophy: bhaja govindari bhaja govindam bhaja govinda miidha-mate.
He stressed worshiping Lord Krsna or Govinda three times in this verse and
especially warned his followers that they could not possibly achieve
deliverance or mukti simply by word jugglery and grammatical puzzles. If
one is actually serious to attain mukti, he must worship Lord Krsna. That
is Sripada Sarikaracarya’s last instruction.

Herein it is mentioned that Lord Siva is always accompanied by his
material energy (saktya ghoraya). Material energy—Goddess Durga or God-
dess Kali—is always under his control. Goddess Kali and Durga serve
him by killing all the asuras or demons. Sometimes Kali becomes so in-
furiated that she indiscriminately kills all kinds of asuras. There is a popu-
lar picture of Goddess Kali in which she wears a garland composed of the
heads of the asuras and holds in her left hand a captured head and in her
right hand a great khadga, or chopper, for killing asuras. Great wars are
symbolic representations of Kali’s devastation of the asuras and are
actually conducted by the Goddess Kali.

srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga (Bs. 5.44)
Asuras, however, try to pacify the Goddess Kali or Durga by worshiping
her in material opulence, but when the asuras become too intolerable,
Goddess Kali does not discriminate in killing them wholesale. Asuras do
not know the secret of the energy of Lord Siva, and they prefer to worship
Goddess Kali or Durga or Lord Siva for material benefit. Due to their
demonic character, they are reluctant to surrender to Lord Krsna, as
indicated by Bhagavad-gita:
na mam dugkrtino miadhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayaydpahrta-jiana
dsuram bhavam asritah (Bg. 7.15)

Lord Siva’s duty is very dangerous because he has to employ the energy
of Goddess Kali (or Durga). In another popular picture the Goddess Kali
is sometimes seen standing on the prostrate body of Lord Siva, which indi-
cates that sometimes Lord Siva has to fall down flat in order to stop God-
dess Kali from killing the asuras. Since Lord Siva controls the great mate-
rial energy (Goddess Durga), worshipers of Lord Siva attain very opu-
lent positions within this material world. Under Lord Siva’s direction, a


--- Page 279 ---
1044 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
worshiper of Lord Siva gets all kinds of material facilities. In contrast, a
Vaisnava, or worshiper of Lord Visnu, gradually becomes poorer in mate-
rial possessions because Lord Visnu does not trick His devotees into becom-
ing materially entangled by possessions. Lord Visnu gives His devotees
intelligence from within, as stated in Bhagavad-gita:
tesarh satata-yuktandr
bhajatari priti-piarvakam
dadami buddhi-yogarh tam
yena mam upaydnti te
“To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.” (Bg. 10.19)

Thus Lord Vispu gives intelligence to His devotee so that the devotee
can make progress on the path back home, back to Godhead. Since a
devotee has nothing to do with any kind of material possession, he does
not come under the control of Goddess Kali or the Goddess Durga.

Lord Siva is also in charge of the tamo-guna, or the mode of ignorance
in this material world. Both Lord Brahma and Lord Siva are incarnations of
Lord Vispu, but Lord Brahma is in charge of the creation whereas Lord
Siva is in charge of the destruction, which he carries out with the help of
his material energy, Goddess Kali or Goddess Durga. Thus in this verse
Lord Siva is described as being accompanied by dangerous potencies
($aktya ghoraya), and that is the actual position of Lord Siva.

TEXT 19
मैत्रेय उवाच
भरचेतसः पितुर्वाक्यं शिरसाऽऽदाय सापवः ।
दिं प्रतीचीं प्रययुस्तपस्यारतचेतसः ॥१९॥
maitreya uvaca
pracetasah pitur vakyar
Sirasadaya sadhavah
01078 praticiri prayayus
tapasy adrta-cetasah

maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; prace-
tasah—all the sons of King Pracinabarhi; pituh—of the father; vakyam—
words; §irasa—on the head; adaya—accepting; sadhavah—all pious; disam—


--- Page 280 ---
Text 20] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1045
direction; praticim—western; prayayuh—went away; tapasi—in austerities;
adrta—accepting seriously; cetasah—in the heart.
TRANSLATION

The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, because of their
pious nature, all the sons of Pracinabarhi very seriously accepted the words
of their father with heart and soul, and with these words on their heads,
they went toward the west to execute their father’s order.

PURPORT
. In this verse sadhavah (meaning pious or well behaved) is very impor-
tant, especially at the present moment. It is derived from the word sadhu.
A perfect sadhu is one who is always engaged in the devotional service of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Pracinabarhi’s sons are described
as sadhavah because of their complete obedience to their father. The
father, king and spiritual master are supposed to be representatives of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as such they have to be re-
spected as the Supreme Lord. It is the duty of the father, the spiritual
master and the king to regulate their subordinates in such a way that
they ultimately become fully unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Lord.
That is the duty of the superiors, and it is the duty of the subordinates
to obey their orders perfectly and in a disciplined way. The word sirasa
(on their heads) is also significant, for the Pracetas accepted the orders
of their father and carried them on their heads, which means they ac-
cepted them in complete surrender.
TEXT 20
स agEgu FETE सुमहत्सरः |
महन्मन इव॒ खच्छं प्रसनसकिठारयम्‌ ॥२०॥
sa samudram upa vistirnam
apasyan su-mahat sarah
mahan-mana tva svaccharn
prasanna-salilasayam

sa samudram—almost near the ocean; upa—more or less; vistirnam—very
wide and long; apasyan—they saw; su-mahat—very great; sarah—reservoir
of water; mahat—great soul; manah—mind; iva—like; su-accham—clear;
prasanna—joyful; salila— water; asayam—taken shelter of.


--- Page 281 ---
1046 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
TRANSLATION

While traveling, the Pracetas happened to see a great reservoir of water
which seemed almost as big as the ocean. The water of this lake was
so calm and quiet that it seemed like the mind of a great soul, and its
inhabitants, the aquatics, appeared to be very peaceful and happy to be
under the protection of such a watery reservoir.

PURPORT

The word sa samudra means 11681 the sea.” The reservoir of water was
like a bay, for it was not very far from the sea. The word upa, meaning
“more or less,” is used in many ways, as in the word upapati, which indi-
cates a husband “more or less,” that is to say a lover who is acting like
a husband. Upa also means greater, smaller or nearer. Considering all
these points, the reservoir of water which was seen by the Pracetas while
they were traveling was actually a large bay or lake. And unlike the sea
or ocean, which has turbulent waves, this reservoir was very calm and
quiet. Indeed, the water was so clear that it seemed like the mind of
some great soul. There may be many great souls—jaanis, yogis and bhaktas,
or pure devotees, are also called great souls—but they are very rarely
found. One can find many great souls amongst yogis and jaanis, but a
truly great soul, a pure devotee of the Lord who is fully surrendered
to the Lord, is very rarely found (sa mahatma sudurlabhah, Bg. 7.19).
A devotee’s mind is always calm, quiet and desireless because he is al-
ways anyabhilasita-sinyam, and he has no desire other than to serve Krsna
as His personal servant, friend, father, mother or conjugal lover. Due
to his association with Krsna, a devotee is always very calm and cool.
It is also significant that within that reservoir all the aquatics were also
very calm and quiet. Because the disciples of a devotee have taken shelter
of a great man, they become very calm and quiet and are not agitated
by the waves of the material world.

This material world is often described as an ocean of nescience. In
such an ocean, everything is agitated. The mind of a great devotee is
also like an ocean or a very large lake, but there is no agitation. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita: vyavasayatmika buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana
(Bg. 2.41). Those who are fixed in the service of the Lord are not agitated
by anything. It is also stated in Bhagavad-gita: yasmin sthito na duhkhena
gurunapi vicalyate (Bg. 6.22). Even if he suffers some reversals in life, a
devotee is never agitated. Therefore whoever takes shelter of a great soul
or a great devotee becomes pacified. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it 15 stated:


--- Page 282 ---
Text 21] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1047
krsna-bhakta——nisk@ma, ataeva ‘santa’(Cc. Madhya 19.149). A devotee of
Lord Krsna is always peaceful because he has no desire, whereas the yogis,
karmis and janis have so many desires to fulfill. One may argue that the
devotees have desires, for they wish to go home, back to Godhead, but
such a desire does not agitate the mind. Although he wishes to go back to
Godhead, a devotee is satisfied in any condition of life. Consequently the
word mahan-manah 15 used in this verse to indicate that the reservoir of
water was as calm and quiet as the mind of a great devotee.
TEXT 21
नीलरक्तोत्पलाम्भोजकहारेन्दीवराकरम्‌ |
ARETE HST (RAT, ॥२१॥
nila-raktotpalimbhoja-
kahlarendivardkaram
harhsa-sarasa-cakrahva-
karandava-nikijitam
nila—blue; rakta—red; utpala—lotus; ambhoja—born from the water;
kahlara—another kind of lotus; indivara—another kind of lotus; akaram—
the mine; hamsa—swans; sarasa—cranes; cakrahva—the ducks of the name;
karandava—birds of the name; nikitjitam—vibrated by their sounds.
TRANSLATION
In that great lake there were different types of lotus flowers. Some of
them were bluish, and some of them were red. Some of them grew at night,
some in the day, and some, like the indivara lotus flower, in the evening.
Combined together, the lotus flowers filled the lake so full that the lake
appeared to be a great mine of such flowers. Consequently on the shores
there were swans and cranes, cakravaka, karandava and other beautiful
water birds, standing about.
PURPORT
The word @karam (mine) is significant in this verse, for the reservoir of
water appeared like a mine from which different types of lotus flowers
were produced. Some of the lotus flowers grew during the day, some at
night and some in the evening, and accordingly they had different names
and different colors. All these flowers were present on that lake, and be-
cause the lake was so calm and quiet and filled with lotus flowers, superior


--- Page 283 ---
1048 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
birds, like swans, cakravakas and karandavas, stood on the shores and
vibrated their different songs, making the entire scene attractive and
beautiful. As there are different types of human beings, according to the
association of the three qualities of material nature, there are similarly dif-
ferent types of birds, bees, trees, etc. Everything is divided according to the
three qualities of material nature. Birds like swans and cranes, who enjoy
clear waters and lotus flowers, are different from crows, who enjoy filthy
places. Similarly, there are persons who are controlled by the modes of
ignorance and passion and those who are controlled by the mode of good-
ness. The creation is so varied that there are always varieties found in every
society. Thus on the bank of this lake all the superior birds lived to enjoy
that atmosphere created by that great reservoir filled with lotus flowers.
TEXT 22
मततश्रमरसौखयंहष्टरोमलताङ्धिपमू |
पद्मकोशरजो fy Alves RR
matta-bhramara-sausvarya-
hrsta-roma-latanghripam
padma-kosa-rajo diksu
viksipat-pavanotsavam

matta—mad; bhramara—bumblebees; sausvarya—with great humming;
hrsta—joyfully; roma—hair on the body; latd— creepers; anghri-pam—trees;
padma—lotus flower; kosa—whorl; rajah—saffron; diksu—in all directions;
vik sipat—throwing away ; pavana—air; utsavam— festival.

TRANSLATION

There were various trees and creepers on all sides of the lake, and there
were mad bumblebees humming all about them. The trees appeared to be
very jolly due to the sweet humming of the bumblebees, and the saffron,
which was contained in the lotus flowers, was being thrown into the air.
These all created such an atmosphere that it appeared as though a festival
were taking place there.

PURPORT

Trees and creepers are also different types of living beings. When bumble-
bees come upon trees and creepers to collect honey, certainly such plants
become very happy. On such an occasion the wind also takes advantage of


--- Page 284 ---
Text 23] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1049
the situation by throwing pollen or saffron contained in the lotus flowers.
All this combines with the sweet vibration created by the swans and the
calm of the water. The Pracetas consider such a place to be like a con-
tinuous festival. From this description it appears that the Pracetas reached
Sivaloka, which is supposed to be situated near the Himalayan Mountains.
TEXT 23
&
तत्र॒गान्धरवमाकण्यं =n |
बिसिस्म्य्‌ राजपुत्रास्ते गदङ्गपणवाद्यनु ॥२३॥
tatra gandharvam dkarnya
divya-mdrga-manoharam
visismyu rdja-putrds te
mrdanga-panavidy anu
tatra—there; gandharvam—musical sounds; akarpya—hearing; divya—
heavenly; mdrga—symmetrical; manoharam—beautiful; visismyuh— they
became amazed; rdja-putrah—all the sons of King Barhisat; te—all of them;
mrdanga— drums; panava— kettledrums; ddi—all together; anu—always.
TRANSLATION
The sons of the king became very much amazed when they heard vibra-
tions from various drums and kettledrums along with other orderly musical
sounds pleasing to the ear.
PURPORT
In addition to the various flowers and living entities about the lake, there
were also many musical vibrations. The void of the impersonalists, which
has no variegatedness, is not at all pleasing compared to such a scene.
Actually one has to attain the perfection of sac-cid-ananda, eternity, bliss
and knowledge. Because the impersonalists deny these varieties of creation,
they cannot actually enjoy transcendental bliss. The place where the
Pracetas arrived was the abode of Lord Siva. Impersonalists are generally
worshipers of Lord Siva, but Lord Siva is never without variety in his
abode. Thus wherever one goes, whether to the planet of Lord Siva, Lord
Vispu or Lord Brahma, there is variety to be enjoyed by persons full in
knowledge and bliss.


--- Page 285 ---
1050 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
TEXT 24-25
বর্ন सरषस्तखान्निष्कामन्तं सहानुगम्‌ |
उपगीयमानममरपरवरं নিস্তুধাত্তনী: nen
तषहेमनिकायाभं शितिकण्टं त्रिलोचनम्‌ ।
ARE वीक्ष्य प्रणेयुर्जातरोतकाः ॥ २५॥
tarhy eva sarasas (0572017
niskramantar sahanugam
upagiyamanam amara-
pravararh vibudhanugaih
tapta-hema-nikayabham
§iti-kantham tri-locanam
prasada-sumukham viksya
pranemur jata-kautukdah
tarhi—in that very moment; eva—certainly; sarasah—from the water;
tasmat—therefrom; niskramantam—coming out; seshanugam—accompanied
by great souls; upagiyamanam—glorified by the followers; amara-pravaram—
the chief of the demigods; vibudha-anugaih—followed by his associates;
tapta-hema—molten gold; nikdyabham—bodily features; $iti-kaptham—blue
throat; tri-locanam—with three eyes; prasida—merciful; su-mukham—
beautiful face; viksya—seeing;pranemuh—offered obeisances; jata—aroused;
kautukah—being amazed by the situation.
TRANSLATION
The Pracetas were fortunate to see Lord Siva, the chief of the demigods,
emerging from the water with his associates. His bodily luster was just like
molten gold, his throat was bluish, and he had three eyes, which looked
very mercifully upon his devotees. He was accompanied by many musicians
who were glorifying him. As soon as the Pracetas saw Lord Siva, they imme-
diately offered their obeisances in great amazement and fell down at the
lotus feet of the lord.
PURPORT
The word vibudhanugaih indicates that Lord Siva is always accompanied
by the denizens of the higher planets, known as Gandharvas and Kinnaras.
They are very expert in musical science, and Lord Siva is worshiped by


--- Page 286 ---
Text 26] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1051
them constantly. In pictures, Lord Siva is generally painted white, but here
we find that the color of his skin is not exactly white but is like molten
gold, or a glowing yellowish color. Because Lord Siva is always very, very
merciful, his name is Asutosa. Amongst all the demigods, Lord Siva can be
pacified even by the lowest class of men, who need only offer him obeisances
and leaves of a bael tree. Thus his name is Asutosa, which means that he is
pleased very quickly.

Generally those who are very fond of material prosperity approach Lord
Siva for such benediction. The lord, being very merciful, quickly awards
all the blessings the devotee asks of him. The demons take advantage of this
leniency and sometimes take benedictions from Lord Siva which can be
very dangerous to others. For instance, Vrkasura took a benediction
from Lord Siva by which he could kill everyone he touched on the head.
Although Lord Siva sometimes very liberally gives such benedictions to his
devotees, the difficulty is that the demons, being very cunning, sometimes
want to experiment improperly with such benedictions. For instance, after
receiving his benediction, Vrkasura tried to touch the head of Lord
Siva. Devotees of Lord Visnu, however, have no desire for such benedic-
tions, and Lord Visnu does not give His devotees benedictions which would
cause disturbance to the whole world.

TEXT 26
स तान्‌ FOE] भगवान्धर्मवत्सलः |
TR सीलसम्पलान्‌ प्रीतः प्रीताजुवाच ह ॥२६॥
sa tan prapanndrti-haro
bhagavin dharma-vatsalah
dharma-jiidn $ila-sampannan
pritah pritan uvdca ha

sah—Lord Siva; tan—them; prapanna-arti-harah—one who drives away
all kinds of dangers; bhagavin— the lord; dharma-vatsalah—very much fond
of religious principles; dharma-jidn—persons who are aware of religious
principles; $ila-sampannan—very well behaved; pritah—being pleased;
pritin—of very gentle behavior; uvdca—talked with them; ha—in the past.

TRANSLATION

Lord Siva became very pleased with the Pracetis because generally Lord
Siva is the protector of pious persons and persons of gentle behavior. Being
very much pleased with the princes, he began to speak as follows.


--- Page 287 ---
1052 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu or Krsna, is known as
bhakta-vatsala, and herein we find Lord Siva described as dharma-vatsala.
Of course the word dharma-vatsala refers to a person who lives according
to religious principles. That is understood. Nonetheless, these two words
have additional significance. Sometimes Lord Siva has to deal with persons
who are in the modes of passion and ignorance. Such persons are not always
very much religious and pious in their activities, but since they worship
Lord Siva for some material profit, they sometimes obey the religious
principles. As soon as Lord Siva sees that his devotees are following reli-
gious principles, he benedicts them. The Pracetas, sons of Pracinabarhi,
were naturally very pious and gentle, and consequently Lord Siva was
immediately pleased with them. Lord Siva could understand that the
princes were sons of Vaisnavas, and as such Lord Siva offered prayers to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as follows.
TEXT 27
श्रीरुद्र उवाच
यूयं वेदिषदः पुत्रा विदितं वश्चिकीषितम्‌ ।
अनुग्रहाय भद्रं ন एवं म TW FA ॥२७॥
sri-rudra uvaca
yuyam vedisadah putra
viditam vas cikirsitam
anugrahaya bhadram va
evan me 00750110718 krtam
srirudrah  uvdca—Lord Siva began to speak; yayam—all of you;
vedisadah—of King Pracinabarhi; putrah—sons; viditam—knowing; vah—
your; cikirsitam— desires; anugrahaya—for the matter of showing you
mercy; bhadram—all good fortune unto you; vah—all of you; evam—thus;
me—my; darSanam—audience; krtam—you have done.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva said: You are all the sons of King Pracinabarhi, and I wish all
good fortune to you. I also know what you are going to do, and therefore
I am visible to you just to show my mercy upon you.


--- Page 288 ---
Text 28] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1053
PURPORT

By these words Lord Siva indicates that what the princes were going to
do was known to him. It is a fact that they were going to worship Lord
Visnu by severe austerities and penances. Knowing this fact, Lord Siva
immediately became very pleased, as apparent by the next verse. This indi-
cates that a person who is not yet a devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead but who desires to serve the Supreme Lord receives the benedic-
tions of the demigods, headed by the chief demigod, Lord Siva. Thus a
devotee of the Lord does not need to try to please the demigods separately.
Simply by worshiping the Supreme Lord, a devotee can please all of them.
Nor does he have to ask the demigods for material benedictions, for the
demigods, being pleased with the devotee, automatically offer him every-
thing that he needs. The demigods are servants of the Lord, and they are
always prepared to help a devotee in all circumstances. Therefore Srila
Bilvamangala Thakura said that if one has unalloyed devotion for the
Supreme Lord, the goddess of liberation is ready to serve him, to say
nothing of the gods of material opulences. Indeed, all the demigods are
simply waiting for an opportunity to serve the devotee. Thus there is no
need for a devotee of Krsna to endeavor for material opulence or liberation.
By being situated in the transcendental position of devotional service, he
receives all the benefits of dharma, artha, kama and moksa.

TEXT 28
यः परं रंहसः साश्शत्विगुणकडीवसंसितात्‌ ।
भगवन्तं वासुदेवं प्रपलः स प्रियो हि मे ॥२८॥
yah param 70710501 saksat
tri-gunaj jiva-samjnitat
bhagavantam vasudevam
prapannah sa priyo hi me

yah—anyone; param—transcendental; ramhasah—of the controller;
saksat—directly; tri-gunat—from the three modes of material nature; jiva—
samjiitat—living entities called by the name jivas; bhagavantam—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; vasudevam—unto Krsna; prapannah—
surrendered; sah —he; priyah—very dear; hi—undoubtedly 3 me— of me.


--- Page 289 ---
1054 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
i TRANSLATION

Lord Siva continued: Any person who is surrendered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, the controller of everything—material
nature as well as the living entity —is actually very dear to me.

PURPORT

Now Lord Siva explains the reason he has personally come before the
princes. It is because all the princes are devotees of Lord Krsna. As stated
in Bhagavad-gita:

bahunam janmanam ante
jiianavan mar prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah
“After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a
great soul is very rare.” (Bg. 7.19)

Lord Siva is rarely seen by common men, and similarly a person who is
fully surrendered unto Vasudeva, Krsna, is also very rarely seen because a
person who is fully surrendered unto the Supreme Lord is very rare (sa
mahatma sudurlabhah). Consequently Lord Siva came especially to see the
Pracetas because they were fully surrendered unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Vasudeva. Vasudeva is also mentioned in the beginning of
Srimad-Bhagavatam in the mantra: om namo bhagavate vasudevaya. Since
Vasudeva is the ultimate truth, Lord Siva openly proclaims that one who
is a devotee of Lord Vasudeva, who is surrendered to Lord Krsna, is
actually very dear to him. Lord Vasudeva,Krsna, is worshipable not only by
ordinary living entities but by demigods like Lord Siva, Lord Brahma and
others. Yam brahma varunendra-rudra-marutah stunvanti divyaih stavaih
(Bhag. 12.13.1). Krsna is worshiped by Lord Brahma, Siva, Varuna, Indra,
Candra and all other demigods. That is also the situation with a devotee.
Indeed, one who takes to Krsna consciousness immediately becomes very
dear to anyone who is simply finding out and beginning to understand what
Krsna consciousness actually is. Similarly, all the demigods are also trying
to find out who is actually surrendered to Lord Vasudeva. Because the
Praceta princes were surrendered to Vasudeva, Lord Siva willingly came
forth to see them.

Lord Vasudeva, or Krsna, is described in Bhagavad-gita as Purugottama.
Actually He is the enjoyer (purusa) and the Supreme (uttama) as well. He


--- Page 290 ---
Text 28] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1055
is the enjoyer of everything—the prakrti and the purusa. Being influenced
by the three modes of material nature, the living entity tries to dominate
material nature, but actually he is not the purusa (enjoyer) but is prakrti,
as described in Bhagavad-gita:
apareyam itas tv anyarm
prakrtim viddhi me param
jiva-bhutarnm maha-baho
yayedarh dharyate jagat
“Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior
energy of Mine, which are all living entities who are struggling with material
nature and are sustaining the universe.” (Bg. 7.5)

Thus the jiva, or living entity, is actually prakrti, or the marginal energy
of the Supreme Lord. Being associated with material energy, he tries to
lord it over the material nature. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:

mamaivamso jiva-loke
jiva-bhutah sanatanah
manah sasthanindriyani
_ prakrti-sthant karsati
“The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six
senses, which include the mind.” (Bg. 15.7)

By endeavoring to dominate material nature, the living entity simply
struggles hard for existence. Indeed, he struggles so hard to enjoy himself
that he cannot even enjoy the material resources. Thus he is sometimes
called prakrti, or jiva, for he is situated in the marginal potency. When the
living entity is covered with the three modes of material nature, he is
called jiva-sarnjiiita. There are two kinds of living entities: one is called
ksara, and the other is aksara. Ksara refers to those who have fallen down
and become conditioned, and aksara refers to those who are not condi-
tioned. The vast majority of living entities live in the spiritual world and
are called aksara. They are in the position of Brahman, pure spiritual
existence. They are different from those who have been conditioned by the
three modes of material nature.

Being above both the ksara and aksara, Lord Krsna is described in
Bhagavad-gita as Purugottama:


--- Page 291 ---
1056 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
yasmat ksaram atito ‘ham
aksarad api cottamah
ato smi loke vede ca
prathitah purusottamah
“Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible,
and because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the world and in
the Vedas as that Supreme Person.” (Bg. 15.18)

The impersonalists may say that Krsna is the impersonal Brahman, but
actually the impersonal Brahman is subordinate to Krsna, as also confirmed
in Bhagavad-gita:

brahmano hi pratisthaham
amrtasyavyayasya ca
Sasvatasya ca dharmasya
sukhasyaikantikasya ca
“And I am the basis of the impersonal Brahman, which is the constitu-
tional position of ultimate happiness, and which is immortal, imperishable
and eternal.” (Bg. 14.27)

That Krsna is the source of the impersonal Brahman is also confirmed
in Brahma-samhita: yasya prabha prabhavato jagadanda-koti (Bs. 5.40).
The impersonal Brahman is nothing but the effulgence or bodily rays of
Krsna, and in those bodily rays there are innumerable universes floating.
Thus in all respects Krsna is the Supreme Lord, and Lord Siva is very
satisfied with those who are completely surrendered to Him. Complete
surrender is desired by Krsna, as He indicates in the last chapter of
Bhagavad-gita:

sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.” (Bg. 18.66)

The word saksat, meaning “directly,” is very significant. There are many
so-called devotees, but actually they are only karmis and jaants, for they
are not directly devotees of Lord Krsna. The karmis sometimes offer the
results of their activities to Lord Vasudeva, and this offering is called


--- Page 292 ---
Text 29] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1057
karmarpanam. These are considered to be fruitive activities, for the karmis
consider Lord Vispu to be one of the demigods like Lord Siva and Lord
Brahma. Because they consider Lord Visnu to be on the same level with
the demigods, they contend that surrendering to the demigods is as good
as surrendering unto Vasudeva. This contention is denied herein because if
it were true, Lord Siva would have said that surrender unto him, Lord
Vasudeva, Vigsnu or Brahma is the same. However, Lord Siva does not say
this because he himself surrenders unto Vasudeva, and whoever else sur-
renders unto Vasudeva is very, very dear to him. This is expressed herein
openly. The conclusion is that a devotee of Lord Siva is not dear to Lord
Siva, but a devotee of Lord Krsna is very dear to Lord Siva.
TEXT 29
खषम॑निष्ठः शतजन्मभिः पुमान्‌
दिरिऋचतामेति ततः परं हि माम्‌ |
Pd भागदतोऽथ वैष्णवं
पदं यथाहं विबुधाः करात्यये ॥२९॥
sva-dharma-nisthah sata-janmabhih puman
viriicatam eti tatah param hi mam
avydkrtarm bhagavato ‘tha vaispavari
00007 yathahar vibudhah kalatyaye
sva-dharma-nisthah—one who is situated in his own dharma or occupa-
tion; sata-janmabhih—for one hundred births; puman—a living entity;
viriicatam—the post of Lord Brahma; eti—gets; tatah—thereafter;
param—above; hi—certainly; mam—attains Me; avyakrtam—without devia-
tion; bhagavatah—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atha—there-
fore; vaispavam—a pure devotee of the Lord; padam—post; yatha—as;
aham—1; vibudhah—demigods; kala-atyaye—after the annihilation of the
material world.
TRANSLATION
A person who executes his occupational duty properly for one hundred
births becomes qualified to occupy the post of Brahma, and if he becomes
more qualified, he can approach Lord Siva. A person who is directly sur-
rendered to Lord Krsna or Visnu in unalloyed devotional service is imme-
diately promoted to the spiritual planets. Lord Siva and other demigods
attain these planets after the destruction of this material world.


--- Page 293 ---
1058 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
PURPORT

The highest perfection of the evolutionary process, as described by the
Vaignava poet Jayadeva Gosvami, is given herein. Pralaya-payodhi-jale
dhrtavan asi vedam. The evolutionary process begins from the point of
devastation (pralaya) when the whole universe is filled with water. At that
time there are many fishes and other aquatics, and from these aquatics
evolve creepers, trees, etc. From these, insects and reptiles evolve, and
from them birds, beasts, and then human beings. Finally civilized human
beings evolve, and at present these civilized human beings are at a junction
where they can make further evolutionary progress in spiritual life. Here it
is stated (sva-dharma-nisthah) that when a living entity comes to a civilized
form of life, there must be sva-dharma, social divisions according to one’s
work and qualifications. This is indicated in Bhagavad-gita:

catur-varnyam maya srstam
guna-karma-vibhagasah
“According to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed
to them, the four divisions of human society were created by Me.”
(Bg. 4.13)

In civilized human society there are the divisions of brahmana, ksatriya,
vaisya and sudra, and everyone must properly execute his occupational
duty in accordance to his division. Here it is described (sva-dharma-nisthah)
that it doesn’t matter whether one is a brdhmana, ksatriya, vai§ya or sudra.
If one sticks to his position and properly executes his particular duty, he
is considered a civilized human being. Otherwise he is no better than an
animal. It is also mentioned herein that whoever executes his occupational
duty (sva-dharma) for one hundred births (for instance, if a brahmana
continues to act as a brahmana), becomes eligible for promotion to
Brahmaloka, the planet where Lord Brahma lives. There is also a planet
called Sivaloka, or Sadagivaloka, which is situated in a marginal position
between the spiritual and material worlds. If, after being situated in
Brahmaloka, one becomes more qualified, he is promoted to Sadasivaloka.
Similarly, when one becomes even more qualified, he can attain the
Vaikunthalokas. The Vaikunthalokas are targets for everyone, even the
demigods, and they can be attained by a devotee who has no desire for
material benefit. As indicated in Bhagavad-gita, one does not escape mate-
rial miseries even if he is elevated to Brahmaloka.


--- Page 294 ---
Text 30] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1059
abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
punar avartino ‘rjuna
mam upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate
“From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are
places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But one who
attains to My abode, O son of Kunti, never takes birth again.” (Bg. 8.16)

Similarly, one is not very safe even if he is promoted to Sivaloka, because
the planet of Sivaloka is marginal. However, if one attains Vaikunthaloka
(mam upetya tu kaunteya punar janma na vidyate, Bg. 8.16), he attains
the highest perfection of life and the end of the evolutionary process.
In other words, it is confirmed herein that a person in human society who
has developed consciousness must take to Krsna consciousness in order to
be promoted to Vaikunthaloka, or Krsnaloka, immediately after leaving
the body. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:

janma karma ca me divyam
০৮৫7 yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deharh punar janma
naiti mam eti so rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activi-
ties does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material
world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.” (Bg. 4.9)

A devotee who is fully in Krsna consciousness, who is not attracted by
any other loka, or planet, including Brahmaloka and Sivaloka, is imme-
diately transferred to Krgnaloka (mam eti). That is the highest perfection
of life and the perfection of the evolutionary process.

TEXT 30
अथ भागवता युयं प्रियाः स्य भगवान्‌ यथा ।
न मद्भागवतानां च प्रेयानन्योऽस्ति क्चित्‌।।२०॥
atha bhagavata yityarn
priyah stha bhagavan yatha
na mad bhagavatanam ca
preyan anyo ’sti karhicit


--- Page 295 ---
1060 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24

atha—therefore; bhagavatih— devotees; yiyam—all of you; priyah—very

dear to me;stha—you are; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;

yatha—as; na—neither; mat—than me; bhagavatanam—of the devotees; ca—

also; preydn—very dear; anyah—others; asti—there is; karhicit—at any time.
TRANSLATION

You are all devotees of the Lord, and as such I appreciate that you are
as respectable as the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. I know in
this way that the devotees also respect me and that I am dear to them.
Thus no one can be as dear to the devotees as I am.

PURPORT

It is said (vaispavanam yatha sambhuh) that Lord Siva is the best of all
devotees; therefore all devotees of Lord Krsna are also devotees of Lord
Siva. In Vrndavana there is Lord Siva’s temple called Gopisvara. The gopis
used to worship not only Lord Siva but Katyayani or Durga as well, but
their aim was to attain the favor of Lord Krsna. A devotee of Lord Krsna
does not disrespect Lord Siva but worships Lord Siva as the most exalted
devotee of Lord Krsna. Consequently whenever a devotee worships Lord
Siva, he prays to him to achieve the favor of Krsna, and he does not request
material profit. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that generally people worship
demigods for some material profit. Kamais tais tair hrtajianah (Bg. 7.20).
Driven by material lust, they worship demigods, but a devotee never does
so, for he is never driven by material lust. That is the difference between
a devotee’s respect for Lord Siva and an asura’s respect for him. The
asura worships Lord Siva, takes some benediction from him, misuses the
benediction and ultimately is killed by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who awards him liberation.

Because Lord Siva is a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he loves all the devotees of the Supreme Lord. Lord Siva told
the Pracetas that because they were devotees of the Lord, he loved them
very much. Lord Siva was not only kind and merciful to the Pracetas; any-
one who is a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very dear
to Lord Siva. Not only are the devotees dear to Lord Siva, but he respects
them as much as he respects the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Simi-
larly, devotees of the Supreme Lord also worship Lord Siva as the most
dear devotee of Lord Krspa. They do not worship him as a separate Per-
sonality of Godhead. It is stated in the list of nama-aparadhas that it is an
offense to think that the chanting of the name of Hari and the chanting of
Hara or Siva are the same. The devotees must always know that Lord Visnu
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and that Lord Siva is His devotee.


--- Page 296 ---
Text 32] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1061
A devotee should be offered respect on the level of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and sometimes even more respect. Indeed, Lord Rama, the
Personality of Godhead Himself, sometimes worshiped Lord Siva. If a
devotee is worshiped by the Lord, why should a devotee not be worshiped
by other devotees on the same level with the Lord? This is the conclusion.
From this verse it appears that Lord Siva benedicts the asuras simply for
the sake of formality. Actually he loves one who is devoted to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 31
इदं विविक्तं जन्यं पवित्रं मङ्गरं परम्‌ ।
निःश्रेयसकरं चापि शरूयतां तढदामि वः ॥३१॥
idan vivik tam japtavyam
10001070712 mangalari param
nihsreyasa-karar capi
sriayatarn tad vadami vah
idam—this; viviktam—very, particular; japtavyam—always to be chanted;
pavitram—very pure; mangalam—auspicious; param—transcendental;
nihsreyasa-karam—very beneficial; ca—also; api—certainly; $riyatam—please
hear; tat—that; vadami—1I am speaking; vak—unto you.
TRANSLATION
Now I shall chant one mantra which is not only transcendental, pure
and auspicious but is the best prayer for anyone who is aspiring to attain
the ultimate goal of life. When I chant this mantra, please hear it carefully
and attentively.
PURPORT
The word viviktam is very significant. No one should think of the prayers
recited by Lord Siva as being sectarian; rather, they are very confidential,
so much so that anyone desiring the ultimate prosperity or auspicious goal
of life must take the instructions of Lord Siva and pray to and glorify the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as Lord Siva himself did.
TEXT 32
मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्ययुक्रोखहृदयो भगवानाह ताञ्छिवः |
बद्धाञ्जलीन्‌ राजपुच्रामारायणपरो वचः ॥।२२।


--- Page 297 ---
1062 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
maitreya uvdaca
ity anukrosa-hrdayo
bhagavan aha tan chivah
baddhanjalin raja-putran
narayana-paro vacah
71101767018 uvdca—the great saint Maitreya continued to speak; iti— thus;
anukrosa-hrdayah—very kindhearted; bhagavan—the lord; aha—said; tan—
unto the Pracetas; sivah—Lord Siva; baddha-aiijalin—who were standing
with folded hands; raja-putran—the sons of the king; nirdyana-parah— Lord
Siva, the great devotee of Narayana; vacah—words.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: Out of his causeless mercy, the
exalted personality, Lord Siva, a great devotee of Lord Narayana, con-
tinued to speak to the King’s sons, who were standing with folded hands.
PURPORT
Lord Siva voluntarily came to benedict the sons of the King as well as
do something beneficial for them. He personally chanted the mantra so
that the mantra would be more powerful, and he advised that the mantra
be chanted by the King’s sons (raja-putras). When a mantra is chanted by
a great devotee, the mantra becomes more powerful. Although the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra is powerful in itself, a disciple upon initiation receives
the mantra from his spiritual master, for when the mantra is chanted by
the spiritual master, it becomes more powerful. Lord Siva advised the sons
of the King to hear him attentively, for inattentive hearing is offensive.
TEXT 33
श्रीरुद्र SAT
जितं त आत्मविद्‌ वरथसखस्तये खस्तिरस्तु मे |
भवताराधसा राद्धं सवीत्मा आत्मने नमः ॥২২।
§ri-rudra uvdca
jitar ta atma-vid-varya-
svastaye svastir astu me
bhavataradhasa raddhari
sarvatma atmane namah


--- Page 298 ---
Text 33] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1063
§ri-rudrah uvdca— Lord Siva began to speak; jitam—all glories; te—unto
You; atma-vit—self-realized; varya— the best; svastaye—unto the auspicious;
svastih—auspiciousness; astu—let there be; me—of me; bhavati—by You;
daradhasd—Dby the all-perfect; raddham—worshipable;sarvatma— the Supreme
Soul; atmane—unto the Supreme Soul; namah—obeisances.
TRANSLATION

Lord Siva addressed the Supreme Personality of Godhead with the fol-
lowing prayer: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, all glories unto You.
You are the most exalted of all self-realized souls. Since You are always
auspicious for the self-realized, I wish that You will be auspicious for me.
You are worshipable by virtue of the all-perfect instructions which You
give. You are the Supersoul; therefore I offer my obeisances unto You as
the supreme living being.

PURPORT

As long as a devotee is inspired by the Lord to offer the Lord a prayer,
the devotee immediately glorifies the Lord in the beginning by saying, “All
glories unto You, my Lord.” The Lord is glorified because He is considered
to be the chief of all self-realized souls. As said in the Vedas (nityo
nityanarn cetanas cetananam, Katha, 2.2.13), the Supreme Being, the Per-
sonality of Godhead, is the chief living being amongst all living beings.
There are different kinds of individual living beings—some of them are in
this material world, and some are in the spiritual world. Those who are in
the spiritual world are known to be completely self-realized because on the
spiritual platform the living entity is not forgetful of his service to the
Lord. Therefore in the spiritual world all those who are in the devotional
service of the Lord are eternally fixed, for they understand the position of
the Supreme Being, as well as their individual constitution. Thus amongst
self-realized souls, the Lord is known as the perfectly self-realized soul.
Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam. When the individual soul is fixed in
his knowledge of the Lord as the Supreme Being, he actually becomes estab-
lished in an all-auspicious position. Lord va prays herein that his
auspicious position will continue eternally by virtue of the Lord’s mercy
upon him.

The Supreme Lord is all-perfect, and the Lord instructs that one who
worships Him also becomes perfect. As stated in Bhagavad-gita: mattah
smytir jianam apohanarm ca (Bg. 15.15). The Lord is situated as the Super-
soul in everyone’s heart, but He is so kind to His devotees that He gives
them instructions by which they may continue to progress. When they re-


--- Page 299 ---
1064 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
ceive instructions from the all-perfect, there is no chance of their being
misled. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita: dadami buddhi-yogam
tam yena mam upayanti te (Bg. 10.10). The Lord is always ready to give
instructions to the pure devotee so that the devotee can advance further
and further in devotional service. Since the Lord gives instructions as
Sarvatma, the Supersoul, Lord Siva offers Him respect with the words
sarvatma atmane namah. The individual soul is called atma, and the Lord
is also called atma as well as Paramatma. Being situated in everyone's
heart, the Lord is known as the supreme atma. Therefore all obeisances are
offered unto Him. In this regard, one may refer to the prayers of Kunti in
the First Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam:

tatha paramahamsanam muninam amalatmanam

bhaktiyoga-vidhanartham katham pasyema hi striyah (Bhag. 1.8.20)

The Lord is always ready to give instructions to the paramahamsas, or

the topmost devotees of the Lord who are completely liberated from all
contaminations of the material world. The Lord always gives instructions
to such exalted devotees to inform them how they can remain fixed in
devotional service. Similarly, it is stated in the atmarama verse:

atmaramas ca munayo nirgrantha apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukim bhaktim itthambhuta-guno harih (Bhag. 1.7.10)

The word atmarama refers to those who are not interested in the mate-
rial world but are simply engaged in spiritual realization. Such self-realized
persons are generally considered in two categories—impersonal and personal.
However, impersonalists also become devotees when they are attracted by
the personal transcendental qualities of the Lord. The conclusion is that
Lord Siva wanted to remain a fixed devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Vasudeva. As explained in the following verses, Lord Siva never
desires to merge into the existence of the Supreme Lord like the imper-
sonalists. Rather, he thinks that it would be good fortune for him to con-
tinue to be fixed in the understanding of the Lord as the Supreme Being.
By this understanding, one realizes that all living entities—including Lord
Siva, Lord Brahma and other demigods—are servants of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 34
नमः पड्कजनामाय ARAFAT |
वासुदेवाय शान्ताय FEE खरोचिषे ॥২৪।।


--- Page 300 ---
Text 34] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1065
namah pankaja-ndbhaya
bhita-siksmendriydtmane
vasudevaya santaya
katasthdya sva-rocise

namah—all obeisances unto You; paikaja-nabhaya—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead from whose navel the lotus flower emanates;
bhiita-siksma—the sense objects; indriya—the senses; dtmane—the origin;
vdsudevaya—unto Lord Vasudeva; sintdya—always peaceful; kiitasthdya—
without being changed; sva-rocise—unto the supreme illumination.

TRANSLATION

My Lord, You are the origin of the creation by virtue of the lotus
flower which sprouts from Your navel. You are the supreme controller of
the senses and the sense objects, and You are also the all-pervading
Vasudeva. You are most peaceful, and because of Your self-illuminated
existence, You are not disturbed by the six kinds of transformations.

PURPORT

The Lord as Garbhodakasayl Visnu lies in the ocean of Garbha within
this universe, and from His navel the lotus flower sprouts. Lord Brahma 18
generated from that lotus flower, and from Lord Brahma the creation of
this material world begins. As such, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Garbhodakasay1 Visnu, is the origin of the material senses and sense objects.
Since Lord Siva considers himself to be one of the products of the material
world, his senses are under the control of the supreme creator. The Supreme
Lord is also known as Hrsikesa, master of the senses, which indicates that
our senses and sense objects are formed by the Supreme Lord. As such, He
can control our senses and out of His mercy engage them in the service of
the master of the senses. In the conditioned state, the living entity struggles
in this material world and engages his senses for material satisfaction. How-
ever, if the living entity is graced by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
he can engage these very senses in the service of the Lord. Lord Siva desires
not to be misled by the material senses but to engage always in the service
of the Lord without being subject to contamination by materialistic in-
fluences. By the grace and help of Lord Vasudeva, who is all-pervading,
one can engage his senses in devotional service without deviation, just
as the Lord acts without deviation.


--- Page 301 ---
1066 Srimad-Bhagavatam ` [Canto 4, Ch. 24
The words santaya kutasthaya sva-rocise are very significant. Although
the Lord is within this material world, He is not disturbed by the waves of
material existence. However, conditioned souls are agitated by six kinds of
transformations; namely, they become agitated when they are hungry,
when they are thirsty, when they are aggrieved, when they are illu-
sioned, when they grow old, and when they are on the deathbed. Although
conditioned souls become very easily illusioned by these conditions in the
material world, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the Supersoul,
Vasudeva, is never agitated by these transformations. Therefore it is said
here (kutasthaya) that He is always peaceful and devoid of agitation be-
cause of His prowess, which is described herein as sva-rocise, indicating that
He is illuminated by His own transcendental position. In other words, the
individual soul, although within the illumination of the Supreme, some-
times falls down from that illumination because of his tiny position, and
when he falls down he enters into material conditional life. The Lord, how-
ever, is not subject to such conditioning; therefore He is described as self-
illuminated. Consequently any conditioned soul within this material uni-
verse can remain completely perfect when he is under the protection of
Vasudeva or when he is engaged in devotional service.
TEXT 35
सङ्कर्षणाय GEA दुरन्तायान्तकाय च |
नमो विश्वप्रबोधाय प्रदयुस्नायान्तरात्मने ॥२५॥
sankarsanaya sicksmaya
durantdayantakdya ca
namo visva-prabodhdya
pradyumndydntaratmane
saikarsandya—unto the master of integration; sitksmdya—unto the subtle
unmanifested material ingredients; durantdya--unto the unsurpassable;
antakaya—unto the master of disintegration; ca—also; namah—obeisances;
visva-prabodhdya—unto the master of the development of the universe;
pradyumndya—unto Lord Pradyumna; antardtmane—unto the Supersoul
in everyone’s heart.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are the origin of the subtle material ingredients, the
master of all integration as well as the master of all disintegration, the pre-
dominating Deity named Sarikarsana, and the master of all intelligence,


--- Page 302 ---
Text 36] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1067
known as the predominating Deity Pradyumna. Therefore, I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT

The whole universe is maintained by the integrating power of the
Supreme Lord, who is known in that capacity by the name of Sarnkarsana.
The material scientists might have discovered the law of gravity which
maintains the integration of objects within the material energy, yet the
master of all integration can create devastation by the disintegrating
blazing fire emanating from His mouth. A description of this can be found
in the Eleventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita wherein the universal form of the
Lord is described. The master of integration is also the destroyer of this
world by virtue of His disintegrating energy. Sankarsana is the master of
integration and disintegration, whereas Pradyumna, another feature of Lord
Vasudeva, is responsible for universal growth and maintenance. The word
suksmaya is significant because within this gross material body there are
subtle material bodies—namely mind, intelligence and ego. The Lord in His
different features (Vasudeva, Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Sarikargsana)
maintains both the material and subtle elements of this world. As men-
tioned in Bhagavad-gita, the material elements are earth, water, fire, air
and ether, and the material subtle elements are mind, intelligence and ego.
All of them are controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, and this will be further
explained in the following verse.

TEXT 36
नमो नमोऽनिरुद्धाय दषीकेशेन्द्रियात्मने |
नमः परमहंसाय पूर्णाय नि्ृतात्मने ।।३६॥
namo namo ’niruddhaya
hrsikesendriyatmane
namah paramahamsaya
pirnaya nibhrtatmane

namah—all my obeisances unto You; namah-obeisances again;
aniruddhaya—unto Lord Aniruddha; hrsikesa—the master of the senses;
indriya-atmane—the director of the senses; namah—all obeisances unto You;
paramaharisiya—unto the Supreme Perfect; pirna@ya—unto the Supreme
Complete; nibhrta-atmane—who 15 situated apart from this material
creation.


--- Page 303 ---
1068 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
TRANSLATION

My Lord, as the supreme directing Deity known as Aniruddha, You are
the master of the senses and the mind. I therefore offer my obeisances
unto You again and again. You are known as Ananta as well as Sanikarsana
because of Your ability to destroy the whole creation by the blazing fire
from Your mouth.

PURPORT

Hrsikesendriyatmane. The mind is the director of the senses, and Lord
Aniruddha is the director of the mind. In order to execute devotional
service, one has to fix his mind on the lotus feet of Krsna; therefore Lord
Siva prays to the controller of the mind, Lord Aniruddha, to be pleased
and to help him engage his mind on the lotus feet of the Lord. It is stated
in Bhagavad-gita: man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yajt mam namaskuru
(Bg. 9.34). The mind has to be engaged in meditation on the lotus feet of
the Lord in order to execute devotional service. It is also stated in Bhagavad-
4) sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto

mattah smrtir jianam apohanam ca
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham
“I am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowl-
edge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas am I to be known; indeed I am
the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.” (Bg. 15.15)

Thus if Lord Aniruddha is pleased, He can help the mind engage in the
service of the Lord. It is also indicated in this verse that Lord Aniruddha is
the sun-god by virtue of His expansions. Since the predominating deity of
the sun is an expansion of Lord Aniruddha, Lord Siva also prays to the
sun-god in this verse.

Lord Krgpa, by His quadruple expansion (Vasudeva, Sankarsana,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha), is the Lord of psychic action—namely, think-
ing, feeling, willing and acting. Lord Siva prays to Lord Aniruddha as the
sun-god who is the controlling deity of the external material elements which
constitute the construction of the material body. According to Srila
Visvanatha Cakravartt Thakura, the word paramahanisa is also another
name for the sun-god. The sun-god is addressed herein as nibhrtatmane,
which indicates that he always maintains the various planets by manipulat-
ing the rainfall. The sun-god evaporates water from the seas and oceans and
then forms the water into clouds and distributes it over land. When there is
sufficient rainfall, grains are produced, and these grains maintain living


--- Page 304 ---
Text 37] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1069
entities in each and every planet. The sun-god is also addressed herein as
pitrna, or complete, because the rays emanating from the sun have no end.
For millions and millions of years since the creation of this universe, the
sun-god has been supplying heat and light without diminution. The word
paramahariisa is applied to persons who are completely cleansed. When
there is sufficient sunshine, the mind remains clear and transparent—in
other words, the sun-god helps the mind of the living entity to become
situated on the platform of paramaharisa. Thus Lord Siva prays to
Aniruddha to be kind upon him so that his mind will always be in the
perfect state of cleanliness and will be engaged in the devotional service of
the Lord. Just as fire sterilizes all unclean things, the sun-god also keeps
everything sterilized, especially dirty things within the mind, thus enabling
one to attain elevation to the platform of spiritual understanding.
TEXT 37
सखर्गापवगंद्वाराय नित्यं शचिषदे नमः ।
नमो हिरण्यवीर्याय चातुर्होत्राय तन्तवे ||২৩॥
svargapavarga-dvdraya
nityam Suci-sade namah
namo hiranya-viryaya
cdturhotraya tantave
svarga—the heavenly planets; apavarga—the path of liberation; dvdirdya—
unto the door of; nityam—eternally; suci-sade—unto the most purified;
namah—my obeisances unto You; namah—my obeisances; hiranya—gold;
virydya—semina; cdtur-hotraya— the Vedic sacrifices of the name; tantave—
unto one who expands.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, O Aniruddha, You are the authority by which the doors of
the higher planetary systems and liberation are opened. You are always
within the pure heart of the living entity. Therefore I offer my obeisances
unto You. You are the possessor of semina which is like gold, and thus, in
the form of fire, You help the Vedic sacrifices, beginning with caturhotra.
Therefore 1 offer my obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
The word svarga indicates a position in the higher or heavenly planetary
systems, and the word apavarga means liberation. Those who are attached


--- Page 305 ---
1070 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4. Ch. 24
to the karma-kandiya activities described in the Vedas are actually entangled
in the three modes of material nature. The Bhagavad-gita therefore says
that one should be above the dominion of fruitive activities. There are
different kinds of liberation, or mukti. The best mukti is engagement in
the devotional service of the Supreme Lord. Lord Aniruddha not only
helps fruitive actors by elevating them to the higher planetary systems, but
He also helps the devotee engage in devotional service by dint of His in-
exhaustible energy. Just as heat is the source of material energy, the inspira-
tion of Lord Aniruddha is the energy by which one can engage in execut-
ing devotional service.
TEXT 38
नम জী इषे त्रय्याः पतये IRR |
RTA च जीवानां नमः AREER ॥ ३८॥
nama urja ise trayyah
pataye yajiia-retase
trpti-daya ca jivanam
namah sarva-rasatmane
namah—1 offer all obeisances unto You; urje—unto the provider of the
Pitrloka;ise—the provider of all the demigods; trayyah—of the three Vedas;
pataye—unto the master; yajiia—sacrifices; retase—unto the predominating
deity of the moon planet; trpti-daya—unto Him who gives satisfaction to
everyone; ca—also; jivanam—of the living entities; namah—1 offer my
obeisances; sarva-rasa-atmane—unto the all-pervading Supersoul.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the provider of the Pitrlokas as well as all the demi-
gods. You are the predominating deity of the moon and the master of all
three Vedas. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You because You are
the original source of satisfaction for all living entities.
PURPORT
When the living entity is born within this material world—especially as
a human being—he has several obligations unto the demigods, unto the
saintly persons and unto living entities in general. As enjoined in the
sastras: devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam [0167 22772. Thus one has an obligation to
one’s forefathers, the previous hierarchy. Lord Siva prays to Lord Aniruddha


--- Page 306 ---
Text 39] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1071
to give him strength so he can become free from all obligations to the pitas,
demigods, general living entities and saintly persons and completely engage
himself in the devotional service of the Lord. As stated:
devarsi-bhutapta-nrnari pitrnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajan
sarvatmana yah Saranam Saranyam
gato mukundam parihrtya kartam
(Bhag. 11.5.41)

One becomes free from all obligations to the demigods, saintly persons,
pitas, ancient forefathers, etc., if one is completely engaged in the
devotional service of the Lord. Lord Siva therefore prays to Lord
Aniruddha to give him strength so that he can be free from such obliga-
tions and entirely engage in the Lord’s service.

Soma, or the predominating deity of the moon, is responsible for the
living entity’s ability to relish the taste of food through the tongue. Lord
Siva prays to Lord Aniruddha to give him strength so that he will not
taste anything but the prasada of the Lord. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura
has sung a verse indicating that the tongue is the most vicious enemy and
is the most voracious of all the senses. If one can control the tongue, he
can easily control the other senses. The tongue can be controlled only by
eating prasada offered to the Deity. Lord Siva’s prayer to Lord Aniruddha
is meant for this purpose (trpti-daya); he prays to Lord Aniruddha to help
him be satisfied by eating only prasada offered to the Lord.

TEXT 39
सकसच्वात्मदेहाय विदोषाय स्थवीयसे ।
नमञ्ैठोक्यपालाय सहओजोगताख च ॥।३९॥
sarva-sattvatma-dehaya
visesaya sthaviyase
namas trailokya-palaya
saha ojo-balaya ca

sarva—all; sattva—existence; atma—soul; dehaya—unto the body;
visesaya—diversity; sthavtyase—unto the material world; namah— offering
obeisances; trailokya—three planetary systems; palaya—maintainer; saha—
along with; ojah—prowess; balaya—unto the strength; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You are the gigantic universal form which contains all

the individual bodies of the living entities. You are the maintainer of the


--- Page 307 ---
1072 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24

three worlds, and as such You maintain the mind, senses, body and air of

life within them. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT

As the individual body of the living entity is composed of millions of
cells, germs and microbes, the universal body of the Supreme Lord
similarly contains all the individual bodies of the living entities. Lord Siva
is offering his obeisances to the universal body, which includes all other
bodies, so that everyone’s body may fully engage in devotional service.
Since this individual body is composed of senses, all the senses should be
engaged in devotional service. For instance, the smelling instrument, the
nose, can engage in smelling the flowers offered to the lotus feet of the
Lord, the hands can engage in cleansing the temple of the Lord, etc.
Indeed, being the life air of every living entity, the Lord is the maintainer
of the three worlds. Consequently He can induce every living entity to
engage in his real life’s duty with full bodily and mental strength. Thus
every living entity should serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
his prapa (life), artha (wealth), intelligence and words. As stated in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam:

etavaj janma-saphalyari dehinam iha dehisu
pranair arthair dhiya vaca sreya evacaret sada (Bhag. 10.22.35)

Even though one may desire to engage in the service of the Lord, with-
out sanction one cannot do so. Lord Siva is offering his prayers in
so many different ways in order to show living entities how to engage in
the devotional service of the Lord.

TEXT 40
अर्थलिङ्गाय नमसे नमोऽन्तविरात्पने |
नमः पुण्याय लोकाय IR RIV ॥४०।।
artha-lingaya nabhase
namo ’‘ntar-bahir-atmane
namah pupyaya lekdya
amusmai bhitri-varcase

artha—meaning; lingaya—revealing; nabhase—unto the sky; namah—
offering obeisances; antah— within; bahih —and without; atmane—unto the
self; namah—offering obeisances; punyaya—pious activities; lokaya—for
creation;amusmai—beyond death; bhuri-varcase—the supreme effulgence.


--- Page 308 ---
Text 40] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1073
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, by expanding Your transcendental vibrations, You reveal
the actual meaning of everything. You are the all-pervading sky within and
without, and You are the ultimate goal of pious activities executed both
within this material world and beyond it. I therefore offer my respectful
obeisances again and again unto You.

PURPORT

Vedic evidence is called sabda-brahma. There are many things which are
beyond the perception of our imperfect senses, yet the authoritative
evidence of sound vibration is perfect. The Vedas are known as sabda-
brahma because evidence taken from the Vedas constitutes the ultimate
understanding. This is because sabda-brahma, or the Vedas, represents the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. However, the real essence of sabda-
brahma is the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra. By vibrating this tran-
scendental sound, the meaning of everything both material and spiritual is
revealed. This Hare Krsna is nondifferent from the Personality of Godhead.
The meaning of everything is received through the air through sound
vibration. The vibration may be material or spiritual, but without sound
vibration no one can understand the meaning of anything. In the Vedas it
is said: antar bahis ca tat sarvarn vyapya narayanah sthitah. “Narayana is
all-pervading, and He exists both within and without.” This is also con-
firmed in Bhagavad-gita:

yatha prakasayaty ekah
krtsnam lekam 11710771 ravih
ksetram ksetrt tatha krtsnam
prakasayati bharata
“0 son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so do
the living entity and the Supersoul illuminate the entire body by
consciousness.” (Bg. 13.34)

In other words, the consciousness of both the soul and Supersoul is all-
pervading; the limited consciousness of the living entity is pervading the
entire material body, and the supreme consciousness of the Lord is
pervading the entire universe. Because the soul is present within the body,
consciousness pervades the entire body; similarly, because the supreme
soul, or Krsna, is present within this universe, everything is working in
order. Mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram: “This material nature
is working under My direction, O son of Kunti, and it is producing all
moving and unmoving beings.” (Bg. 9.10)


--- Page 309 ---
1074 | Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
Lord Siva is therefore praying to the Personality of Godhead to be kind
to us so that simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra we can understand
everything in both the material and spiritual worlds. The word amusmai is
significant in this regard because it indicates the best target one can aim for
after attaining the higher planetary systems. Those who are engaged in
fruitive activities (karmis) attain the higher planetary systems as a result of
their past activities, and the janis, who seek unification or a monistic
merging with the effulgence of the Supreme Lord, also attain their desired
end, but in the ultimate issue, the devotees who desire to personally asso-
ciate with the Lord are promoted to the Vaikunthalokas, or Goloka
Vrndavana. The Lord is described in Bhagavad-gita as pavitram paramam
(Bg. 10.12), the supremely pious one. This is also confirmed in this verse.
Sukadeva Gosvami has stated that the cowherd boys who played with Lord
Krsna were not ordinary living entities. Only after accumulating many
pious activities in various births does one get the opportunity to personally
associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Since only the pure
can reach Him, He is the supreme pure.
TEXT 41
rE fem Rew कर्मणे ।
नमोऽधर्मविपाकाय TAX दुःखदा च ॥४१।।
pravrttaya nivrttaya
pitr-devaya karmane
namo ’dharma-vipakaya
mrtyave duhkha-daya ca
pravrttaya—inclination; nivrttaya—disinclination; pitr-devaya—unto the
master of Pitrloka; karmane—unto the resultant action of fruitive activities;
namah—offering respects; adharma—irreligious; vipakaya—unto the result;
mrtyave—unto death; duhkha-daya—the cause of all kinds of miserable
conditions; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are the viewer of the results of pious activities. You
are inclination, disinclination and their resultant activities. You are the
cause of the miserable conditions of life caused by irreligion, and therefore
You are death. I offer You my respectful obeisances.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in everyone’s heart,
and from Him issue a living entity’s inclinations and disinclinations. This
is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:


--- Page 310 ---
Text 42] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva ` 1075
sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jianam apohanarii ca
“I am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowl-
edge and forgetfulness.” (Bg. 15.15)

The Supreme Personality of Godhead causes the asuras to forget Him
and the devotees to remember Him. One’s disinclinations are due to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. According to Bhagavad-gita the asuras
do not know which way one should be inclined to act and which way one
should not beinclined to act. Pravrttim ca nivrttim ca jana na vidur asurah:
“Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not
to be done.” (Bg. 16.7) Although the asuras oppose devotional service, it
is to be understood that they are inclined that way due to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Because the asuras do not like to engage in the
Lord’s devotional service, the Lord within gives them the intelligence to
forget. Ordinary karmis desire promotion to Pitrloka, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita. Yanti deva-vrata devan pitin yanti pitr-vratah: “Those who
worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods, and those who
worship ancestors go to the ancestors.” (Bg. 9.25)

In this verse the word duhkha-daya is also very significant, for those
who are nondevotees are perpetually put into the cycle of birth and death.
This is a very miserable condition. Because one’s position in life is attained
according to one’s activities, the asuras, or nondevotees, are put into such
miserable conditions.

TEXT 42
नमस्त आशिषामीश मनवे कारणात्मने ।
नमो धमय शृदते इष्णायाङ्ष्टयेलसे |
पुरुषाय पुराणाय सां स्ययोगेश्वर्य च ४२
namas ta asisam isa
manave karanatmane
namo dharmaya brhate
krsnayakuntha-medhase
purusaya puranaya
sankhya-yogesvaraya ca

namah—offering obeisances; te—unto You; asisam 5०-0 topmost of all
bestowers of benediction; manave—unto the supreme mind or supreme
Manu; karana-atmane—the supreme cause of all causes; namah— offering
obeisances; dharmaya—unto one who knows the best of all religion;
brhate—the greatest; krsnaya—unto Krsna; akuntha-medhase—unto one


--- Page 311 ---
1076 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
whose brain activity is never checked; purusaya—the Supreme Person;
puranaya—the oldest of the old; sankhya-yoga-isvaraya—the master of the
principles of sankhya-yoga; ca—and.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You are the topmost of all bestowers of all benediction,
the oldest and supreme enjoyer amongst all enjoyers. You are the master
of all the worlds’ metaphysical philosophy, for You are the supreme cause
of all causes, Lord Krsna. You are the greatest of all religious principles,
the supreme mind, and You have a brain which is never checked by any
condition. Therefore I repeatedly offer my obeisances unto You.

PURPORT

The words krsnaya akuntha-medhase are significant in this verse.
Modern scientists have stopped their brainwork by discovering the theory
of uncertainty, but factually for a living being there cannot be any brain
activity which is not checked by time and space limitations. A living entity
is called anu, an atomic particle of the spirit soul, and therefore his brain
is also atomic. It cannot accommodate unlimited knowledge. This does not
mean, however, that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, has a
limited brain. What Krsna says and does is not limited by time and space.
In Bhagavad-gita it is said:

vedaham samatitani
vartamanani carjuna
bhavisyani ca bhutani
mam tu veda na kascana
“O Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything
that has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and all
things that are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me no one
knows.” (Bg. 7.26)

Krsna knows everything, but one cannot know Krsna without being
favored by Him. Thus for Krsna and His representative there is no question
of a theory of uncertainty. What Krsna says is all perfect and certain and
is applicable to the past, present and future. Nor is there any uncertainty
for one who knows exactly what Krsna says. The Krsna consciousness
movement is based on Bhagavad-gita as it is, as spoken by Lord Krsna, and
for those who are engaged in this movement, there is no question of
uncertainty.

Lord Krsna is also addressed herein as asisam 260. The great saintly
personalities, sages and demigods are able to offer benedictions to ordinary
living entities, but they in turn are benedicted by the Supreme Personality


--- Page 312 ---
Text 42] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1077
of Godhead. Without being benedicted by Krsna, one cannot offer bene-
diction to anyone else. The word manave, meaning “unto the supreme
Manu,” is also significant. The supreme Manu in Vedic literature is
Svayambhuva Manu, who is an incarnation of Krsna. All the Manus
are empowered incarnations of Krsna (manvantara-avatara). There are
fourteen Manus in one day of Brahma, 420 in one month, 5,040 in one
year, and 504,000 Manus in the lifetime of Brahma. Since all the Manus
are directors of human society, ultimately Krsna is the supreme director of
human society. In another sense, the word manave indicates the perfection
of all kinds of mantras. The mantra delivers the conditioned soul from his
bondage; so simply by chanting the mantra Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, one
can gain deliverance from any condition.

Karapatmane: everything has a cause. The theory of chance is repudiated
in this verse. Because everything has its cause, there is no question of
chance. Because so-called philosophers and scientists are unable to find
the real cause, they foolishly say that everything happens by chance. In
Brahma-samhita Krsna is described as the cause of all causes; therefore He
is addressed herein as karapatmane. His very personality is the original
cause of everything, the root of everything and the seed of everything. As
described in the Vedanta-siitra, janmady asya yatah (1.1.2): the Absolute
Truth is the supreme cause of all emanations.

The word sankhya-yogesvaraya is also significant herein, for Krsna is
described in Bhagavad-gita as Yogesvara, the master of all mystic powers.
Without possessing inconceivable mystic powers, one cannot be accepted
as God. In this age of Kali, those who have a little fragmental portion of
mystic power claim to be God, but such pseudo-Gods can only be accepted
as fools, for only Krsna is the Supreme Person who possesses all mystic
and yogic perfections. The sankhya-yoga system popular at the present
moment was propounded by the atheist Kapila, but the original sankhya-
yoga system was propounded by an incarnation of Krsna also named
Kapila, the son of Devahiiti. Similarly, Dattatreya, another incarnation of
Krsna, also explained the sankhya-yoga system. Thus Krsna is the origin of
all sankhya-yoga systems and mystic yoga powers.

The words puranaya purusaya are also worthy of special attention. In
Brahma-samhita, Krsna is accepted as the adi-purusa, the original person,
or the original enjoyer. In Bhagavad-gita, Lord Krsna is also accepted as
purana-purusa, the oldest person. Although He is the oldest of all per-
sonalities, He is also the youngest of all, or nava-yauvana. Another
significant word is dharmaya. Since Krsna is the original propounder of all
kinds of religious principles, it is said: dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-


--- Page 313 ---
1078 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
prapitam. No one can introduce a new type of religion, for religion is
already there, having been established by Lord Krsna. In Bhagavad-gita
Krsna informs us of the original dharma and asks us to give up all kinds of
religious principles. The real dharma is surrender unto Him. In the
Mahabharata, it is also said:
ye ca veda-vido vipra ye cadhyatma-vido janah
te vadanti mahatmanarh krsnam dharmar sanatanam
The purport is that one who has studied the Vedas perfectly, who is a
perfect vipra, or knower of the Vedas, who knows what spiritual life
actually is, speaks about Krsna, the Supreme Person, as one’s sanatana-
dharma. Lord Siva therefore teaches us the principles of sanatana-dharma.
TEXT 43
शक्तित्रयसमेताय  मीदुषेऽदंकृतात्मने |
चेतआङूतिरूपाय नमो वाचोविभूतये nel
Sakti-traya-sametaya
midhuse ’hankrtatmane
ceta-akuti-rupaya
namo vaco vibhutaye

Sakti-traya—three kinds of energies; sametaya—unto the reservoir;
midhuse—unto Rudra; ahankrta-atmane—the source of egotism; cetah—
knowledge; akiti—eagerness to work; ripaya—unto the form of; namah—
my obeisances;vacah—unto the sound; vibhiztaye—unto the different types
of opulences.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You are the supreme controller of the worker, sense
activities, and results of sense activities [karma]. Therefore You are the
controller of the body, mind and the senses. You are also the supreme
controller of egotism, known as Rudra. You are the source of knowledge
and the activities of the Vedic injunctions.

PURPORT

Everyone acts under the dictation of the ego. Therefore Lord Siva is
trying to purify false egotism through the mercy of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Since Lord Siva, or Rudra, is himself the controller
of egotism, he indirectly wants to be purified by the mercy of the Lord so
that his real egotism can be awakened. Of course Lord Rudra is always
spiritually awake, but for our benefit he is praying in this way. For the


--- Page 314 ---
Text 44] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1079
impersonalist, pure egotism is aha brahmasmi—*1 am not this body; I am
spirit soul.” But in its actual position, the spirit soul has devotional activi-
ties to perform. Therefore Lord Siva prays to be engaged both in mind
and in action in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord according to
the direction of the Vedas. This is the process for purifying false egotism..
Cetah means knowledge. Without perfect knowledge, one cannot act per-
fectly. The real source of knowledge is the vdacah, or sound vibration, given
by Vedic instructions. Here the word vacah, or vibration, means the Vedic
vibration. The origin of creation is sound vibration, and if the sound
vibration is clear and purified, perfect knowledge and perfect activities
actually become manifest. This is enacted by the chanting of the
maha-mantra Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Thus Lord Siva is praying again and
again for the purification of body, mind and activities through the purifi-
cation of knowledge and action under the pure directions of the Vedas.
Lord Siva prays to the Supreme Personality of Godhead so that his mind,
senses and words will all turn toward devotional activities only.
TEXT 44
god नो Regen देहि मागवतार्वितम्‌ ।
रूपं प्रियतमं खानां सर्वेन्द्ियगुणाञ्जनम्‌ nes
darsanarm no didrksunam
dehi bhagavatarcitam
ripam priyatamam svanar
sarvendriya-gunanjanam

darsanam—vision; nah—our; didrksinam—desirous to see; dehi—kindly
exhibit; bhagavata—of the devotees; arcitam—as worshiped by them;
riipam—form; priyatamam—dearmost; svanam—of Your devotees; sarva-
indriya—all the senses; guna—qualities; afijanam—very much pleasing.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, I wish to see You exactly in the form that Your very
dear devotees worship. You have many other forms, but I wish to see Your
form that is especially liked by the devotees. Please be merciful upon me
and show me that form, for only that form worshiped by the devotees can
perfectly satisfy all the demands of the senses.

PURPORT

In the sruti, or Veda-mantra, it is said that the Supreme Absolute Truth

is sarva-kamah sarva-gandhah sarva-rasah, or, in other words, He is known


--- Page 315 ---
1080 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
as raso vai sah, the source of all relishable relationships (rasas). We have
various senses—the power of seeing, tasting, smelling, touching, etc.—and
all the propensities of our senses can be satisfied when the senses are
engaged in the service of the Lord. Hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktir
ucyate (Narada-paiicaratra). “Bhakti means engaging all the senses in the
service of the master of the senses, Hrsikesa.”” These material senses,
however, cannot be engaged in the service of the Lord; therefore one has
to become free from all designations. Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam tatparatvena
nirmalam. One has to become free from all designation or false egotism
and thus become purified. When we engage our senses in the service of the
Lord, the desires or the inclinations of the senses can be perfectly fulfilled.
Lord Siva therefore wants to see the Lord in a form which is inconceivable
to the Buddhist philosophers or the Buddhists.

The impersonalists and the voidists also have to see the form of the
Absolute. In Buddhist temples there are forms of Lord Buddha in medi-
tation, but these are not worshiped like the forms of the Lord in Vaigpava
temples (forms like Radha-Krsna, Sita-Rama or Laksmi-Narayana).
Amongst the different sampradayas (Vaisnava sects) either Radha-Krsna or
Laksmi-Narayana is worshiped. Lord Siva wants to see that form perfectly,
just as the devotees want to see it. The words ripani priyatamam svanam
are specifically mentioned here, indicating that Lord Siva wants to see
that form which is very dear to the devotees. The word svanam is especially
significant because only the devotees are very, very dear to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The jianis, yogis and karmis are not particularly
dear, for the karmis simply want to see the Supreme Personality of God-
head as their order supplier. The jianis want to see Him to become one
with Him, and the yogis want to see Him partially represented within their
heart as Paramatma, but the bhaktas, or the devotees, want to see Him in
His complete perfection. As stated in Brahma-sarihita:

venum kvanantam aravinda-dalayataksari
barhavatarnsam asitambuda-sundarangam

kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-sobhari
govindam adi-purusam tam 0110771, bhajami

“1 worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is adept at playing on His
flute, whose eyes are blooming like lotus petals, whose head is bedecked
with peacock feathers, whose beauty is tinged with the hue of blue clouds,
and whose unique loveliness charms millions of Cupids.” (Bs. 5.30) Thus
Lord Siva’s desire is to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is
described in this way—that is, he wants to see Him as He appears to the


--- Page 316 ---
Texts 45-46) Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1081
bhagavatas, the devotees. The conclusion is that Lord Siva wants to see
Him in complete perfection and not in the impersonalist or voidist way.
Although the Lord is one in His various forms (advaitam acyutam anadim),
still His form as the young enjoyer of the gopis and companion of the
cowherd boys (kisora-murti) is the most perfect form. Thus Vaisnavas
accept the form of the Lord in His Vrndavana pastimes as the chief form.
TEXTS 45-46
खिरधपाङृटषनश्यामस्॑सोन्द यं सदम्‌ |
AIRE सुजातरुचिराननम्‌ ।७५।।
TRAE RTH |
স্তুততিস सुकपोलास्यं ॥४६॥
snigdha-pravrd-ghanasyamam
sarva-saundarya-sangraham
carv-ayata-catur-bahu
sujata-rucirananam
padma-kosa-palasaksam
sundara-bhru su-nasikam
su-dvijarn su-kapolasyam
sama-karna-vibhusanam
snigdha—glistening; pravrs—rainy season;ghana-§yamam—densely cloudy;
sarva—all; saundarya—beauty; sanigraham—collection; caru— beautiful;
dayata—bodily feature; catuh-bahu—unto the four-armed; sujata—ultimately
beautiful; rucira—very pleasing; ananam—face; padma-kosa—the whorl of
the lotus flower; palasa—petals; aksam—eyes; sundara—beautiful; bhru—
eyebrows; su-nasikam—raised nose; su-dvijam— beautiful teeth; su-kapola—
beautiful forehead; asyam—face; sama-karpa—equally beautiful ears;
vibhisanam—fully decorated.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s beauty resembles a dark cloud during the rainy season. As
the rainfall glistens, His bodily features also glisten. Indeed, He is the
sum total of all beauty. The Lord has four arms and an exquisitely beauti-
ful face with eyes like lotus petals, a beautiful highly raised nose, a mind-
attracting smile, a beautiful forehead and equally beautiful and fully
decorated ears.


--- Page 317 ---
1082 Srimad-Bhiagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
PURPORT

After the scorching heat of the summer season, it is very pleasing to see
dark clouds in the sky. As confirmed in Brahma-sarhhita: barhavatamsam
asitambuda-sundarangam. The Lord wears a peacock feather in His hair,
and His bodily complexion is just like a blackish cloud. The word sundara,
or snigdha, means very pleasing, even when compared with kandarpa-koti-
kamaniya. Krsna’s beauty is so pleasing that not even millions upon
millions of Cupids can compare to it.The Lord’s form as Visnu is decorated
in all opulence; therefore Lord Siva is trying to see that most opulent
form of Narayana, or Visnu. Generally the worship of the Lord begins with
the worship of Narayana or Visnu, whereas the worship of Lord Krsna
and Radha is most confidential. Lord Narayana is worshipable by the
Paiicaratrika-vidhi, or regulative principles, whereas Lord Krsna is wor-
shipable by the Bhagavata-vidhi. No one can worship the Lord in the
Bhagavata-vidhi without going through the regulations of the Paiicaratrika-
vidhi. Actually neophyte devotees worship the Lord according to the
Paiicaratrika-vidhi, or the regulative principles enjoined in the Narada-
paiicaratra. Radha-Krsna cannot be approached by the neophyte devotees;
therefore temple worship according to regulative principles is offered to
Laksmi-Narayana. Although there may be a Radha-Krsna vigraha, or form,
the worship of the neophyte devotees is acceptable as Laksmi-Narayana
worship. Worship according to the Paficaratrika-vidhi is called vidhi-marga,
and worship according to the Bhagavata-vidhi principles is called raga-
marga. The principles of raga-marga are especially meant for devotees who
are elevated to the Vrndavana platform.

The inhabitants of Vrndavana, the gopis, mother Yasoda, Nanda
Maharaja, the cowherd boys, the cows and everyone else, are actually on
the raga-marga or Bhagavata-marga platform. However, they participate in
five basic rasas—dasya, sakhya, vatsalya, madhurya and santa. Although
these five rasas are found in the Bhagavata-marga, the Bhagavata-marga is
especially meant for vatsalya and madhurya, or paternal and conjugal
relationships. Yet there is the vipralambha-sakhya, the higher fraternal
worship of the Lord especially enjoyed by the cowherd boys. Although
there is friendship between Krsna and the cowherd boys, this friendship
is different from the aisvarya friendship between Krsna and Arjuna. When
Arjuna saw the visva-ripa, the gigantic universal form of the Lord, he was
afraid for having treated Krsna as an ordinary friend; therefore he begged
Krsna’s pardon. However, the cowherd boys who are friends of Krsna in
Vrndavana sometimes ride on the shoulders of Krsna. They treat Krsna
equally, just as they treat one another, and they are never afraid of Him,


--- Page 318 ---
Texts 45-46] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1083
nor do they ever beg His pardon. Thus the raga-marga, or Bhagavata-marga,
friendship exists on a higher platform with Krsna, namely the platform of
vipralambha friendship. Paternal friendship, conjugal paternal service, as
well as conjugal service, are visible in the Vrndavana raga-marga relation-
ships.

Without serving Krsna according to the vidhi-marga regulative principles
of the Panicaratrika-vidhi, unscrupulous persons want to jump immediately
to the raga-marga principles. Such persons are called sahajiya. There are
also demons who enjoy depicting Krsna and His pastimes with the gopis,
taking advantage of Krsna by their licentious character. These demons who
print books and write lyrics on the raga-marga principles are surely on the
way to hell. Unfortunately, they lead others down with them. Devotees in
Krsna consciousness should be very careful to avoid such demons. One
should strictly follow the vidhi-marga regulative principles in the worship
of Laksmi-Narayana, although the Lord is present in the temple as Radha-
Krsna. Radha-Krspa includes Laksmi-Narayana; therefore when one wor-
ships the Lord according to the regulative principles, the Lord accepts the
service in the role of Laksmi-Narayana. In Nectar of Devotion full instruc-
tions are given about the vidhi-marga worship of Radha-Krsna or Laksmi-
Narayana. Although there are sixty-four kinds of offenses one can commit
in vidhi-marga worship, in raga-marga worship there is no consideration of
such offenses because the devotees on that platform are very much ele-
vated, and there is no question of offense. But if we do not follow the
regulative principles on the vidhi-marga platform and keep our eyes trained
to spot offenses, we will not make progress.

In his description of Krsna’s beauty, Lord Siva uses the words carv-
ayata-catur-bahu sujate-rucirananam, indicating the beautiful four-armed
form of Narayana, or Visnu. Those who worship Lord Krsna describe Him
as sujata-rucirananam. In the Visnu-tattva there are hundreds and thousands
and millions of forms of the Supreme Lord, but of all these forms, the
form of Krsna is the most beautiful. Thus for those who worship Krsna,
the word sujata-rucirananam is used.

The four arms of Lord Visnu have different purposes. The hands
holding a lotus flower and conchshell are meant for the devotees, whereas
the other two hands, holding a disc and mace or club, are meant for the
demons. Actually all of the Lord’s arms are auspicious, whether they are
holding conchshells and flowers or clubs and discs. The demons killed by
Lord Visnu’s cakra disc and club are elevated to the spiritual world, just like
the devotees who are protected by the hands holding the lotus flower and
conchshell. However, the demons who are elevated to the spiritual world


--- Page 319 ---
1084 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
are situated in the impersonal Brahman effulgence, whereas the devotees
are allowed to enter into the Vaikuntha planets. Those who are devotees
of Lord Krsna are immediately elevated to the Goloka Vrndavana planet.

The Lord’s beauty is compared to rainfall because when the rain falls in
the rainy season, it becomes more and more pleasing to the people. After
the scorching heat of the summer season, the people enjoy the rainy season
very much. Indeed, they even come out of their doors in the villages and en-
joy the rainfall directly. Thus the Lord’s bodily features are compared with
the clouds of the rainy season. The devotees enjoy the Lord’s beauty be-
cause it is a collection of all kinds of beauties. Therefore the word sarva-
saundarya-sangraham is used. No one can say that the body of the Lord is
wanting in beautiful parts. It is completely piirpam. Everything is complete:
God’s creation, God’s beauty, and God’s bodily features. All these are so
complete that all one’s desires can become fully satisfied when one sees the
beauty of the Lord. The word sarva-saundarya indicates that there are dif-
ferent types of beauties in the material and spiritual worlds, and that the
Lord contains all of them. Both materialists and spiritualists can enjoy the
beauty of the Lord. Because the Supreme Lord attracts everyone, including
demons and devotees, materialists and spiritualists, He is called Krsna.
Similarly, His devotees also attract everyone. As mentioned in the Sad-
gosvami-stotra: dhiradhira-jana-priyau— the Gosvamis are equally dear to the
dhira (devotees) and adhira (demons). Lord Krsna was not very pleasing to
the demons when He was present in Vrndavana, but the six Gosvamis were
pleasing to the demons when they were present in Vrndavana. That is the
beauty of the Lord’s dealings with His devotees; sometimes the Lord gives
more credit to His devotees than He takes for Himself. For instance, on
the Battlefield of Kurukgetra, Lord Krsna fought simply by giving directions.
Yet it was Arjuna who took the credit for fighting. Nimitta-matram bhava
savyasacin (Bg. 11.33). “You, O Savyasacin [ Arjuna], can be but an instru-
ment in the fight.” Everything was arranged by the Lord, but the credit of
victory was given to Arjuna. Similarly, in the Krsna consciousness move-
ment, everything is happening according to the predictions of Lord
Caitanya, but the credit goes to Lord Caitanya’s sincere servants. Thus the
Lord is described herein as sarva-saundarya-sarigraham.

TEXTS 47-48
्ोतिप्दसितापाङ्गपलङै रूपशोभितम्‌ |
लसत्यङ्कनकिज्ञल्कदुकूलं यृष्ङुण्डलम्‌ ॥४५७॥


--- Page 320 ---
Texts 47-48] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1085
स्फुरकक्रटशलयहारनूपुरमेखलम्‌ |
शङ्कवक्गदापयपाठापण्युलपदिपत्‌ ॥४८॥

priti-prahasitapangam
alakai ripa-sobhitam
lasat-pankaja-kinijalka-
dukitlarn mrsta-kundalam
sphurat-kirita-valaya-
hara-niipura-mekhalam
Sankha-cakra-gada-padma-
mala-many-uttamarddhimat
priti—merciful; prahasita—smiling; apangam—sidelong glance; alakaih—
with curling hair; rupa—beauty; sobhitam—increased; lasat—glittering;
paikaja—of the lotus; kiiijjalka—saffron; dukulam— clothing; mrsta—glitter-
ing; kundalam—earrings; sphurat—shiny; kirita—helmet; valaya—bangles;
hara—necklace; nupura—ankle bells; mekhalam—belt; sankha—conchshell;
cakra—wheel; gada— club; padma—lotus flower; mala—garland; mani— pearls;
uttama—first class; rddhimat—still more beautified on account of this.
TRANSLATION
The Lord is superexcellently beautiful on account of His open and
merciful smile and His sidelong glance upon His devotees. His black hair is
curly, and His garments, waving in the wind, appear as flying saffron pollen
from lotus flowers. His glittering earrings, shining helmet, bangles, garland,
ankle bells, waist belt and various other bodily ornaments combine with
conchshell, disc, club and lotus flower to increase the natural beauty of
the Kaustubha pearl on His chest.
PURPORT
The word prahasitapanga, referring to Krsna’s smile and sidelong glances
at His devotees, specifically applies to His dealings with the gopis. Krsna is
always in a joking mood when He increases the feelings of conjugal rasa in
the hearts of the gopis. The conchshell, club, disc and lotus flower can be
either held in His hands or seen on the palms of His hands. According to
palmistry, the signs of a conchshell, club, lotus flower and disc mark the
palms of great personalities and especially indicate the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.


--- Page 321 ---
1086 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
TEXT 49
सिदस्कन्धत्विषो Rahrig |
त्रियामपायिन्या धिप्निकूपस्पोरसोसत्‌ 11811
simiha-skandha-tviso bibhrat
saubhaga-griva-kaustubham
sriyanapayinya ksipta-
nikasasmorasollasat
simha—the lion; skandha—shoulders; tvisah—the coils of hair; bibhrat—
bearing; saubhaga—fortunate; griva—neck; kaustubham—the pearl of the
name; Sriya—beauty; anapayinya—never decreasing; ksipta—defeating;
nikagsa—the stone for testing gold; asma—stone; urasa—with the chest;
ullasat—glittering.
TRANSLATION
The Lord has shoulders just like a lion. Upon these shoulders are
garlands, necklaces and epaulets, and all of these are always glittering.
Besides these, there is the beauty of the Kaustubha mani pearl, and on the
dark chest of the Lord there are streaks named Srivatsa, which are signs of
the goddess of fortune. The glittering of these streaks excels the beauty of
the golden streaks on a gold-testing stone. Indeed, such beauty defeats a
gold-testing stone.
PURPORT
The curling hair on the shoulders of a lion always appears very, very
beautiful. Similarly, the shoulders of the Lord were just like a lion’s, and
the necklace and garlands, along with the Kaustubha pearl necklace, com-
bined to excel the beauty of a lion. The chest of the Lord is streaked with
Srivatsa lines, the sign of the goddess of fortune. Consequently the Lord’s
chest excels the beauty of a testing stone for gold. The black siliceous
stone on which gold is rubbed to test its value always looks very
beautiful, being streaked with gold lines. Yet the chest of the Lord excels
even such a stone in its beauty.
TEXT 50
RATE दिग्रदविबल्गुदेदरय्‌ \
प्रतिस॑कामयदिस्ं॑ाम्यारऽक्तंगमीरया ।॥५०॥


--- Page 322 ---
Text 51] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1087
pira-recaka-sarhvigna-
vali-valgu-dalodaram
pratisankramayad visvar
nabhyavarta-gabhiraya
pura—inhaling; recaka—exhaling; sarvigna—agitated; vali—the wrinkles
on the abdomen; valgu—beautiful; dala—like the banyan leaf; udaram—
abdomen; pratisankramayat—coiling down; visvam—universe; nabhya—
navel; avarta—screwing; gabhiraya—by deepness.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s abdomen is beautiful due to three ripples in the flesh. Being
so round, His abdomen resembles the leaf of a banyan tree, and when He
exhales and inhales, the movement of the ripples appears very, very beau-
tiful. The coils within the navel of the Lord are so deep that it appears that
the entire universe sprouted out of it and yet again wishes to go back.
PURPORT
The whole universe is born out of the lotus stem which sprouted from
the navel of the Lord. Lord Brahma sat on the top of this lotus stem to
create the whole universe. The navel of the Lord is so deep and coiling
that it appears that the whole universe again wants to withdraw into the
navel, being attracted by the Lord’s beauty. The Lord’s navel and the
ripples on His belly always increase the beauty of His bodily features. The
details of the bodily features of the Lord especially indicate the Personality
of Godhead. Impersonalists cannot appreciate the beautiful body of the
Lord which is described in these prayers by Lord Siva. Although the imper-
sonalists are always engaged in the worship of Lord Siva, they are unable
to understand the prayers offered by Lord Siva to the bodily features of
Lord Vignu. Lord Vispu is known as siva-virinici-nutam (Bhag. 11.5.33),
for He is always worshiped by Lord Brahma and Lord Siva.
TEXT 51
श्यामश्रोण्यषिरोचिष्णुदु कूलसख्णमेरलम्‌ |
समचार्वङ्रिजक्लोरुनिन्नजालुसुदर्लंनम्‌ ॥५१॥
Syama-srony-adhi-rocisnu-
dukila-svarna-mekhalam
sama-cdrv-anghri-janghoru-
nimna-janu-sudarsanam


--- Page 323 ---
1088 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
$yama—blackish; sropi—lower part of the waist; adhi—extra; rocisnu—
pleasing; dukiila—garments; svarna—golden; mekhalam—belt; sama—sym-
metrical; caru—beautiful; anghri—lotus feet; jangha— calves; uru— thighs;
nimna—lower; janu—knees; su-darsanam—very beautiful .
TRANSLATION
The lower part of the Lord's waist is dark and covered with yellow
garments and a belt bedecked with golden embroidery work. His sym-
metrical lotus feet and the calves, thighs and joints of His legs are extraor-
dinarily beautiful. Indeed, the Lord’s entire body appears to be well built.
PURPORT
Lord Siva is one of the twelve great authorities mentioned in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (6.3.20). These authorities are Svayambha, Narada, Sambhu,
Kumara, Kapila, Manu, Prahlada, Janaka, Bhisma, Bali, Vaiyasaki or
Sukadeva Gosvami, and Yamaraja. The impersonalists who generally wor-
ship Lord Siva should learn of the transcendental sac-cid-ananda-vigraha
form of the Lord. Here Lord Siva kindly describes the details of the Lord’s
bodily features. Thus the impersonalists’ argument that the Lord has no
form cannot be accepted under any circumstance.
TEXT 52
पदा शरत्पद्मपराश्चरोचिषा
नखद्युभिर्नोऽन्तरधं विधुन्वता |
रद्य खीयमपास्तसाष्वसं
पदं गुरो मार्गगुरुस्तमोडषाम्‌ ।।५२॥
padd sarat-padma-palasa-rocisa
nakha-dyubhir no ’ntar-aghar vidhunvata
pradarsaya sviyam apdsta-sadhvasari
padari guro mdrga-gurus tamo-jusam
pada—by the lotus feet; sarat—autumn; padma—lotus flower; paldsa—
petals; rocisi—very pleasing; nakha—nails; dyubhih—by the effulgence;
nah—our; antar-agham—dirty things; vidhunvati—which can cleanse;
pradarsaya—just show; sviyam—Your own;apdsta—diminishing; sadhvasam—
the trouble of the material world; padam—lotus feet; guro—O supreme
spiritual master; marga— the path; guruh— spiritual master; tamah-jusam—of
the persons suffering in ignorance.


--- Page 324 ---
Text 52] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1089
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, Your two lotus feet are so beautiful that they appear
like two blossoming petals of the lotus flower which grows during the
autumn season. Indeed, the nails of Your lotus feet emanate such a great
effulgence that they immediately dissipate all the darkness in the heart of
a conditioned soul. My dear Lord, kindly show me that form of Yours
which always dissipates all kinds of darkness in the heart of a devotee. My
dear Lord, You are the supreme spiritual master of everyone; therefore all
conditioned souls covered with the darkness of ignorance can be
enlightened by You as the spiritual master.

PURPORT

Lord Siva has thus described the bodily features of the Lord authori-
tatively. Now he wants to see the lotus feet of the Lord. When a devotee
wants to see the transcendental form of the Lord, he begins his meditation
on the Lords body by first looking at the feet of the Lord. Srimad-
Bhagavatam is considered to be the transcendental sound form of the Lord,
and the twelve cantos are divided in accordance with the transcendental
form of the Lord. The First and Second Cantos of Srimad-Bhagavatam are
called the two lotus feet of the Lord. It is therefore suggested by Lord Siva
that one should first try to see the lotus feet of the Lord. This also means
that if one is serious about reading Srimad-Bhagavatam, he must begin by
seriously studying the First and Second Cantos.

The beauty of the lotus feet of the Lord is compared to the petals of a
lotus flower which grows in the autumn season. By nature’s law, in autumn
the dirty or muddy waters of rivers and lakes become very clean. At that
time the lotus flowers growing in the lakes appear very bright and beautiful.
The lotus flower itself is compared with the lotus feet of the Lord, and the
petals are compared with the nails of the feet of the Lord. The nails of the
feet of the Lord are very bright, as Brahma-samhita testifies. Ananda-
cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya: every limb of the transcendental body of
the Lord is made of ananda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala. Thus every limb
is eternally bright. As sunshine dissipates the darkness of this ma-
terial world, the effulgence emanating from the body of the Lord
immediately dries up the darkness in the heart of the conditioned
soul. In other words, everyone serious about understanding the transcen-
dental science and seeing the transcendental form of the Lord must first of
all attempt to see the lotus feet of the Lord by studying the First and
Second Cantos of Srimad-Bhagavatam. When one sees the lotus feet of
the Lord, all kinds of doubts and fears within the heart are vanquished.


--- Page 325 ---
1090 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24.
In Bhagavad-gita it is said that in order to make spiritual progress, one

must become fearless. Abhayarn sattva-samsuddhih (Bg. 16.1). Fearfulness
is the result of material involvement. It is also said in Srimad-Bhagavatam:
bhayar dvitiyabhinivesatah syat (Bhag. 11.2.37). Fearfulness is a creation
of the bodily conception of life. As long as one is absorbed in the thought
that he is this material body, he is fearful, and as soon as one is freed from
this material conception, he becomes brahma-bhuta, or self-realized, and
immediately becomes fearless. Brahma-bhiitah praseannatma (Bg. 18.54).
Without being fearless, one cannot be joyful. The bhaktas, the devotees,
are fearless and always joyful because they are constantly engaged in the
service of the lotus feet of the Lord. It is also said:

evar prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogatah

bhagavat-tattva-vijiianarh mukta-sangasya jayate (Bhag. 1.2.20)

By practicing bhagavad-bhakti-yoga, one becomes fearless and joyful.
Unless one becomes fearless and joyful, he cannot understand the science
of God. Bhagavat-tattvae-vijiianarn mukta-sangasya jayate. This verse refers
to those who are completely liberated from the fearfulness of this material
world. When one is so liberated, he can really understand the transcendental
features of the form of the Lord. Lord Siva therefore advises everyone to
practice bhagavad-bhakti-yoga. As will be clear in the following verses, by
doing so one can become really liberated and enjoy spiritual bliss.

It is also stated:

om ajiiana-timirandhasya jiandiijana-salakayd
caksur unmilitarh yena tasmai sri-gurave namah

The Lord is the supreme spiritual master, and the bona fide representa-
tive of the Supreme Lord is also a spiritual master. The Lord from within
enlightens the devotees by the effulgence of the nails of His lotus feet, and
His representative, the spiritual master, enlightens from without. Only by
thinking of the lotus feet of the Lord and always taking the spiritual
master’s advice can one advance in spiritual life and understand Vedic
knowledge.

yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau
tasyaite kathita hy arthah prakasante mahatmanah (Svet. Up. 6.23)

Thus the Vedas enjoin that for one who has unflinching faith in the lotus
feet of the Lord, as well as in the spiritual master, the real import of Vedic
knowledge can be revealed.


--- Page 326 ---
Text 53] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1091
TEXT 53
एतषटपयतुष्येयणात्यष्दिषमो खाम्‌ |
यद्धक्तियोगोऽभयदः सखघर्ममनुतिषठताम्‌ ।॥५३॥।
etad ripam anudhyeyam
atma-suddhim abhipsatam
yad-bhakti-yogo ’bhaya-dah
` sva-dharmam anutigthatam

etat—this; riitpam—form; anudhyeyam—must be meditated upon; atma—
self; suddhim— purification; abhipsat@m— of those who are desiring 50; yat—
that which; bhakti-yogah—the devotional service; abhaya-dah—factual fear-
lessness; sva-dharmam—one’s own occupational duties; anutisthatam—
executing.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, those who desire to purify their existence must always
engage in the meditation of Your lotus feet, as described above. Those who
are serious about executing their occupational duties and who want free-
dom from fear must take to this process of bhakti-yoga.

PURPORT

It is said that the transcendental name, form, pastimes and entourage of
the Lord cannot be appreciated by the blunt material senses; therefore one
has to engage himself in devotional service so that the senses may be
purified and one can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here,
however, it is indicated that those who are constantly engaged in medi-
tating on the lotus feet of the Lord are certainly purified of the material
contamination of the senses and are thus able to see the Supreme Lord eye
to eye. The word “meditation” is very popular in this age amongst the
common people, but they do not know the actual meaning of meditation.
However, from Vedic literature we learn that the yogis are always
absorbed in meditation upon the lotus feet of the Lord. Dhyanavasthita-
tad-gatena manasa pasyanti yam yoginah (Bhag. 12.13.1). This is the real
business of the yogis: to think of the lotus feet of the Lord. Lord Siva
therefore advises that one who is actually serious about purification must
engage himself in this type of meditation or in the mystic yoga system,
which will help him not only to see the Lord within constantly but to see
Him eye to eye and become His associate in Vaikunthaloka or Goloka
Vrndavana.


--- Page 327 ---
1092 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24

The word sva-dharmam (as in sva-dharmam anutisthatam) indicates that
the system of varpasrama—which indicates the occupational duties of the
brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and sudra and which is the perfect institution
for humanity—must be supported by bhakti-yoga if one at all wants
security in life. Generally people think that simply by executing the
occupational duties of a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya or sudra, or the duty of
a brahmacari, grhastha, vanaprastha or sannyasi, one becomes fearless or
securely attains liberation, but factually unless all these occupational duties
are accompanied by bhakti-yoga, one cannot become fearless. In Bhagavad-
gita there are descriptions of karma-yoga, jiana-yoga, bhakti-yoga,
dhyana-yoga, etc., but unless one comes to the point of bhakti-yoga, these
other yogas cannot help one attain the highest perfection of life. In other
words, bhakti-yoga is the only means for liberation. We find this conclusion
also in Caitanya-caritamrta in a discussion between Lord Caitanya and
Ramananda Raya regarding a human being’s liberation from this material
world. In that discussion Ramananda Raya referred to the execution of
varnasrama-dharma, and Lord Caitanya indicated (eho bahya) that the
varnasrama-dharma was simply external. Lord Caitanya wanted to impress
upon Ramananda Raya that simply by executing the duties of varnasrama-
dharma one is not guaranteed liberation. Finally Ramananda Raya referred
to the process of bhakti-yoga: sthane sthitah sruti-gatam tanu-van-
manobhih (Bhag. 10.14.3). Regardless of one’s condition of life, if he
practices bhakti-yoga, which begins with hearing (sruti-gatam) the tran-
scendental messages of the Lord through the mouths of devotees, he
gradually conquers the unconquerable God.

God is known to be unconquerable, but one who submissively hears
the words of a self-realized soul conquers the unconquerable. The
conclusion is that if one is serious about liberation, he not only should
execute the occupational duties of varpasrama-dharma but should also
engage in bhakti-yoga by beginning hearing from a realized soul. This
process will help the devotee conquer the unconquerable Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and become His associate after giving up the material
body.

TEXT 54
भवान्‌ भक्तिमता लभ्यो दुरंमः स्देदिनाम्‌ |
खाराज्यस्याप्यभिमत एकान्तेनात्मविद्धतिः ॥५७॥
bhavan bhaktimata labhyo
durlabhah sarva-dehinam


--- Page 328 ---
Text 54] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1093
svdrdjyasydpy abhimata
ekantendtma-vid-gatih
bhavin— Your Grace; bhaktimatd—by the devotee; labhyah— obtainable;
durlabhah—very difficult to be obtained; sarva-dehinam—of all other living
entities; svdrgjyasya—of the king of heaven; api—even; abhimatah—the
ultimate goal; ekdntena—by oneness; atma-vit—of the self-realized; gatih—
the ultimate destination.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, the king in charge of the heavenly kingdom is also
desirous to obtain the ultimate goal of life—devotional service. Similarly,
You are the ultimate destination of those who identify themselves with
You [aharh brahmasmi]. However, it is very difficult for them to attain
You, whereas a devotee can very easily attain Your Lordship.
PURPORT
As stated in Brahma-sarihita: vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-
bhaktau. This indicates that it is very difficult for one to attain the
ultimate goal of life and reach the supreme destination, Vaikunthaloka or
Goloka Vrndavana, simply by studying Vedanta philosophy or Vedic litera-
ture. However, this highest perfectional stage can be attained by the
devotees very easily. That is the meaning of vedesu durlabham adurlabham
atma-bhaktau. The same point is confirmed by Lord Siva in this verse.
The Lord is very difficult for the karma-yogis, jriana-yogis and dh yana-yogis
to attain. Those who are bhakti-yogis, however, have no difficulty at all.
In the word svarajyasya, svar refers to Svargaloka, the heavenly planet,
and svarajya refers to the ruler of the heavenly planet, Indra. Generally,
karmis desire elevation to heavenly planets, but King Indra desires to
become perfect in bhakti-yoga. Those who also identify themselves as
aham brahmasmi (“1 am the Supreme Brahman, one with the Absolute
Truth.””) also ultimately desire to attain perfect liberation in the Vaikuntha
planets or Goloka Vrndavana. In Bhagavad-gita it is said:
bhaktya mam abhijandti
yavdn yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato jaatva
visate tad-anantaram
“One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by
such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of ০০৫.” (Bg. 18.55)


--- Page 329 ---
1094 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24

Thus if one desires to enter into the spiritual world, he must try to
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by practicing bhakti-yoga.
Simply by practicing bhakti-yoga one can understand the Supreme Lord
in truth, but without such understanding, one cannot enter the spiritual
kingdom. One may be elevated to the heavenly planets or may realize him-
self as Brahman (৫1807 brahmadsmi), but that is not the end of realization.
One must realize the position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
bhakti-yoga; then real perfection of life is attained.

TEXT 55
तं॒दुराराघ्यमाराध्य सतामपि दुरापया |
एकान्तमक्तया को बानज्छेत्पादमूलं विना बहिः॥।५५॥
tari duraradhyam daradhya
satam api durapaya
ekanta-bhaktya ko vanchet
pada-milari ving bahih

tam—unto You; duraradhyam—very difficult to worship;aradhya—hav-
ing worshiped; satam api—even for the most exalted persons; durapaya—
very difficult to attain; ekanta—pure; bhaktya—by devotional service;
kah—who is that man; vaiichet—should desire; pada-mulam—Ilotus feet;
vina— without; bahih—those who are outsiders.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, pure devotional service is even difficult for liberated
persons to discharge, but devotional service alone can satisfy You. Who
will take to other processes of self-realization if he is actually serious about
the perfection of life?

PURPORT

The word satam refers to transcendentalists. There are three kinds of
transcendentalists: the jidni, yogi and bhakta. Out of these three, the
bhakta is selected as the most suitable candidate to approach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It is emphasized herein that only one who is out-
side devotional service would not engage in searching for the lotus feet of
the Lord. Foolish people sometimes maintain that God may be attained in
any way—either by karma-yoga, jidna-yoga, dhydna-yoga, etc.—but here it
is clearly stated that it is impossible to obtain the mercy of the Lord by
any means but bhakti-yoga. The word durdradhya is especially significant.


--- Page 330 ---
Text 56] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1095
It is very difficult to attain the lotus feet of the Lord by any method other
than bhakti-yoga.
TEXT 56
यत्र॒ निरविश्मरणं कृतान्तो नाभिमन्यते ।
विस्वं विध्वंसयन्‌ वीर्यशौयंविस्पू्ितशरुवा ॥५६॥
Yyatra nirvistam aranam
krtanto nabhimanyate
৮80৫7 vidhvariisayan virya-
Saurya-visphiirjita-bhruva

yatra—wherein; nirvistam aranam—completely surrendered soul; krta-
antah—invincible time; na abhimanyate—does not go to attack; visvam—
the entire universe; vidhvamsayan—by vanquishing; virya— prowess; saurya—
influence; visphurjita—simply by expansion; bhruva—of the eyebrows.

TRANSLATION

Simply by expansion of His eyebrows, invincible Time personified can
immediately vanquish the entire universe. However, formidable Time does
not approach the devotee who has taken complete shelter at Your lotus
feats PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita it is said that the Lord in the shape and form of death
destroys all a person’s possessions. Mrtyuh sarva-haras caham: “I am all-
devouring death.” (Bg. 10.34) The Lord in the shape of death takes away
everything that is created by the conditioned soul. Everything in this
material world is subject to perish in due course of time. However, all the
strength of time cannot hamper the activities of a devotee because a
devotee takes complete shelter under the lotus feet of the Lord. For this
reason only is a devotee free from formidable time. All the activities of
the karmis and jaanis, which have no touch of devotional service, are
spoiled in due course of time. The material success of the karmis is destined
to be destroyed; similarly, the impersonal realization attained by the jianis
is also destroyed in the course of time.

aruhya krcchrena param [00007 tatah
patanty adho ’nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah (Bhag. 10.2.32)

To say nothing of the karmis, the jianis undergo severe austerities to
attain the impersonal brehmajyoti, but because they do not find the lotus
feet of the Lord, they fall down again into this material existence. Unless


--- Page 331 ---
1096 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
one is fully situated in unalloyed devotional service, there is no guarantee
of liberation, even if one is elevated to the heavenly planets or to the
impersonal Brahman effulgence. A devotee’s achievement, however, is
never lost by the influence of time. Even if a devotee cannot completely
execute devotional service, in his next life he begins from the point where
he left off. Such an opportunity is not given to the karmis and jianis,
whose achievements are destroyed. The bhakta’s achievement is never
destroyed, for it goes on perpetually, be it complete or incomplete. This is
the verdict of all Vedic literatures.
ने bhagavan uvaca
partha naiveha namutra
vindsas tasya vidyate
na hi kalyana-krt kascid
durgatirn tata gacchati
prapya punya-krtam lokan
ugitva sasvatih samah
Sucinam srimatar gehe
yoga-bhrasto ’bhijayate
“The Blessed Lord said: Son of Prtha, a transcendentalist engaged in
auspicious activities does not meet with destruction either in this world or
in the spiritual world;one who does good, My friend, is never overcome by
evil. The unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the
planets of the pious living entities, is born into a family of righteous
people, or into a family of rich aristocracy.” (Bg. 6.40-41)

Thus if one is unable to complete the process of bhakti-yoga, he is given
a chance in his next life to take birth in a pure family of devotees or in a
rich family. In such families a person can have a good opportunity to
further progress in devotional service.

When Yamaraja, the superintendent of death, was instructing his assis-
tants, he told them not to approach the devotees. “The devotees should be
offered respect,” he said, “but do not go near them.” Thus the devotees
of the Lord are not under the jurisdiction of Yamaraja. Yamaraja is a repre-
sentative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he controls the
death of every living entity. Yet he has nothing to do with the devotees.
Simply by blinking his eyes, Time personified can destroy the entire cosmic
manifestation, but he has nothing to do with the devotee. In other words,
devotional service which is rendered by the devotee in this lifetime can
never be destroyed by time. Such spiritual assets remain unchanged, being
beyond the influence of time.


--- Page 332 ---
Text 57] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1097
TEXT 57
क्णा्भेनापि तुलये न स्वगं नापुन॑वम्‌ |
भगवत्सङ्गिसङ्गस्य मर्त्यानां किुताशिषः well
ksanardhendapi tulaye
na svargarh napunarbhavam
bhagavat-sangi-sangasya
martydndr kimutdsisah

ksana-ardhena—by half of a moment; api—even; tulaye—compare; na—
never; svargam—heavenly planets; na—neither; apunarbhavam—merging
into the Supreme; bhagavat—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sangi—
associate; saingasya—one who takes advantage of associating; martyanam—
of the conditioned soul; kimuta—what is there; dsisah—blessings.

TRANSLATION

If one by chance associates with a devotee, even for a fraction of a
moment, he no longer is subject to attraction by the results of karma or
jnana. What interest then can he have in the benedictions of the demigods,
who are subject to the laws of birth and death?

PURPORT

Out of three kinds of men—the karmis, janis, and bhaktas—the bhakta
is described herein as the most exalted. Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati has
sung: kaivalyarh narakayate tridasapur akasa-puspayate (Caitanya-
candramrta, 5). The word kaivalya means to merge into the effulgence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the word tridasa-pur refers to
the heavenly planets where the demigods live. Thus for a devotee, kaivalya-
sukha, or merging into the existence of the Lord, is hellish because the
bhakta considers it suicidal to lose his individuality and merge into the
effulgence of Brahman. A bhakta always wants to retain his individuality
in order to render service to the Lord. Indeed, he considers promotion to
the upper planetary systems to be no better than a will-o’-the-wisp.
Temporary material happiness holds no value for a devotee. The devotee
is in such an exalted position that he is not interested in the actions of
karma or jiana. The resultant actions of karma and jiana are so insig-
nificant to a devotee situated on the transcendental platform that he is
not in the least interested in them. Bhakti-yoga is sufficient to give the
bhakta all happiness. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam: yayatma suprasidati
(Bhag. 1.2.6). One can be fully satisfied simply by devotional service, and
that is the result of association with a devotee. Without being blessed by a


--- Page 333 ---
1098 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
pure devotee, no one can be fully satisfied, nor can anyone understand the
transcendental position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 58
अथानघाङ्घ्रेस्तव कीतितीयेयो-
रन्तिः खानविधूतपाप्मनाम्‌ |
भूतेष्वयुकोशसुसष्वश्ीरिनां
स्थाःसङ्गमोऽजुग्रह एष॒ नस्तव ॥५८॥
athanaghanghres tava kirti-tirthayor
antar-bahih-snana-vidhiita-papmanam
bhiitesv anukrosa-susattva-silinarm
syat sangamo ‘nugraha esa nas tava
atha—therefore; anagha-anghreh—of my Lord, whose lotus feet destroy
all inauspiciousness; tava— Your; kirti—glorification; tirthayoh—the holy
Ganges water; antah—within; bahih—and outside; snana—taking bath;
vidhiita— washed; papmanam—contaminated state of mind; bhittesu—unto
the ordinary living beings; anukrosa—benediction or mercy; su-sattva—
completely in goodness; silinam— of those who possess such characteristics;
syat—let there be; sangamah—association; anugrehah—mercy; esah—this;
nah—unto us; tava— Your.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, Your lotus feet are the cause of all auspicious things and
the destroyer ofall the contamination of sin. I therefore beg Your Lordship
to benedict me by the association of Your devotees, who are completely
purified by worshiping Your lotus feet and who are so merciful upon the
conditioned souls. I think that Your real benediction will be to allow me
to associate with such devotees.
PURPORT
The Ganges water is celebrated as being able to eradicate all kinds of
sinful reactions. In other words, when a person takes his bath in the
Ganges, he becomes freed from all life’s contaminations. The Ganges water
is celebrated in this way because it emanates from the lotus feet of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Similarly, those who are directly in touch
with the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and who are
absorbed in the chanting of His glories are freed from all material contami-
nation. Such unalloyed devotees are able to show mercy to the common


--- Page 334 ---
Text 59] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1099
conditioned soul. Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura has sung that the devotees
of Lord Caitanya are so powerful that each one of them can deliver a
universe. In other words, it is the business of devotees to preach the glories
of the Lord and deliver all conditioned souls to the platform of suddha-
sattva, pure goodness. Here the word su-sattva means suddha-sattva, the
transcendental stage beyond material goodness. By his exemplary prayers,
Lord Siva teaches us that our best course is to take shelter of Lord Visnu
and His Vaisnava devotees.
TEXT 59
. [3 .
न यस्य चित्तं बदिरथंविन्रमं
तमोगुहायां च विशुद्धमाविशत्‌ |
यद्धक्तियोगानुगृदीतम्सा
©.
निषि चष्टे ag तत्र ते गतिम्‌ ॥५९॥
na yasya ০1007 bahir-artha-vibhramari
tamo-guhayari ca visuddham dvisat
yad-bhaktiyoganugrhitam anjasa
munir vicaste nanu tatra te gatim
na—never; yasya—whose; cittam—heart; bahih—external; artha—interest;
vibhramam—bewildered; tamah—darkness; guhd@yam—in the hole; ca—also;
visuddham— purified; avisat—entered; yat—that; bhakti-yoga— devotional
service;anugrhitam—being favored by; aiijasa—happily; munih— the thought-
ful; vicaste—sees; nanu—however; tatra— there; te— Your; gatim—activities.
TRANSLATION
The devotee whose heart has been completely cleansed by the process
of devotional service and who is favored by the Bhaktidevi does not
become bewildered by the external energy, which is just like a dark well.
Being completely cleansed of all material contamination in this way, a
devotee is able to understand very happily Your name, fame, form,
activities, etc.
PURPORT
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam:
satam prasangan mama virya-sariido
bhavanti hrt-karna-rasayanah kathah
taj-josanad asv apavarga-vartmani
sraddha ratir bhaktir anukramisyati
(Bhag. 3.25.25)


--- Page 335 ---
1100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
Simply by the association of pure devotees one can understand the
transcendental name, fame, quality and activities of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. उन Caitanya Mahaprabhu has repeatedly said:
‘sadhu-sanga’, ‘sadhu-sanga’—sarva-sastre kaya
lavamatra sadhu-sange sarva-siddhi haya (Cc. Madhya 22.54)

Simply by associating with a pure devotee, one becomes wonderfully
advanced in Krsna consciousness. Sadhu-sanga, or association with a devo-
tee, means always engaging in Krsna consciousness by chanting the Hare
Krsna mantra and by acting for Krsna. Specifically, chanting the Hare
Krsna mantra purifies one, and this chanting is therefore recommended by
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Ceto-darpana-marjanam: by chanting the names
of Krsna, the mirror of the heart is cleansed and the devotee loses interest
in everything external. When one is influenced by the external energy of
the Lord, his heart is impure. When one’s heart is not pure, he cannot see
how things are related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Idam hi
visvari bhagavan ivetaro (Bhag. 1.5.20). He whose heart is purified can see
that the whole cosmic manifestation is but the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but he whose heart is contaminated sees things differently.
Therefore by sat-sanga, or association with devotees, one becomes per-
fectly pure in heart.

One who is pure in heart is never attracted by the external energy,
which urges the individual soul to try to dominate material nature. The
pure heart of a devotee is never disturbed when he executes devotional
service in the form of hearing, chanting, remembering, etc. In all, there are
nine processes one can follow in the execution of devotional service. In
any case, a pure-hearted devotee is never disturbed. The bhakti-yoga
process must be carried out by avoiding the ten offenses one can commit
while chanting the maha-mantra and the sixty-four offenses one can commit
while worshiping the Deity. When a devotee strictly follows the rules and
regulations, Bhaktidevi becomes very much satisfied with him, and at that
time he is never disturbed by anything external. A devotee is also called a
muni. The word muni means thoughtful. A devotee is as thoughtful as a
nondevotee is speculative. The nondevotee’s speculation is impure, but a
devotee’s thoughts are pure. Lord Kapila and Sukadeva Gosvami are also
called muni, and Vyasadeva is addressed as Mahamuni. A devotee is
addressed as muni, or thoughtful, when he purely understands the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The conclusion is that when one’s heart is purified
by the association of devotees and by the avoidance of the offenses com-
mitted when chanting and worshiping the Lord, the transcendental name,
form and activities of the Lord are revealed by the Lord.


--- Page 336 ---
Text 60] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1101
TEXT 60
यत्रेदं व्यज्यते विश्वं विश्वसिलवभाति यत्‌ |
सत्‌ त्वं बह्म परं ज्योतिराकाशमिव विस्ठतम्‌ ॥६०॥
yatredar vyajyate visvarh
visvasminn avabhati yat
tat [৮৫7 brahma parari jyotir
akasam iva vistrtam

yatra—where; idam—this; vyajyate—manifested; visvam—the universe;
visvasmin—in the cosmic manifestation; avabhati—is manifested; yat— that;
tat—that; tvam—Y ou; brahma—the impersonal Brahman; param —transcen-
dental; jyotih —effulgence; dkasam —sky ; iva—like; vistrtam—spread.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You are the impersonal Brahman which is spread every-
where, like the sunshine or the sky. And You are also the entire manifested
universe. Indeed, You are spread all over the universe.

PURPORT

In Vedic literature it is said that everything is Brahman and nothing else.
The whole cosmic manifestation rests on the Brahman effulgence. The
impersonalists, however, cannot understand how such a huge cosmic mani-
festation can rest on a person. Thus this inconceivable power of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is not understood by the impersonalists;
therefore they are puzzled and always denying that the Absolute Truth is
a person. This wrong impression is cleared by Lord Siva himself, who says
that the impersonal Brahman which is spread all over the universe is
nothing but the Supreme Lord Himself. Here it is clearly said that the
Lord is spread everywhere, just like the sunshine, by virtue of His Brahman
feature. This example is very easy to understand. All the planetary systems
are resting upon the sunshine, yet the sunshine, as well as the source of
sunshine, are aloof from the planetary manifestations. Similarly, the sky
or air is spread everywhere; air is within a pot, but it also touches filthy
places and sanctified places alike. In any case, the sky is uncontaminated.
The sunshine also touches filthy places and sanctified places, and both are
actually produced by the sun, but in any case the sun is aloof from all
filthy things. Similarly, the Lord exists everywhere. There are pious things
and impious things, but in the sastras the pious things are described as the
front of the Supreme Lord, whereas impious things are described as the


--- Page 337 ---
1102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
backside of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita the
Lord clearly says: - 3 ke ढं
maya tatam idani sarvam
jagad avyakta-murtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhutani
na cahari [650 avasthitah
“By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.” (Bg. 9.4)

This verse explains that the Lord is spread everywhere by virtue of His
Brahman feature. Everything rests in Him, yet He is not there. The con-
clusion is that without bhakti-yoga, without rendering devotional service
to the Lord, even an impersonalist cannot understand the Brahma-tattva,
the Brahman feature. In the Vedanta-sutra it is stated: athato brahma-
jijnasa. This means that Brahman, Paramatma, or Parabrahman should be
understood. In Srimad-Bhagavatam also the Absolute Truth is described as
the one without a second, but He is realized in three features—impersonal
Brahman, localized Paramatma and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate issue, and in this verse
Lord Siva confirms that ultimately the Absolute Truth is a person. He
clearly says: tat (४०78 brahma [00707 jyotir akasam iva vistrtam. Here is a
common example: a successful businessman may have many factories and
offices, and everything rests on his order. If someone says that the entire
business rests on such and such a person, it does not mean that the person
is bearing all the factories and offices on his head. Rather, it is understood
that by his brain or his energetic expansion, the business is running with-
out interruption. Similarly, it is the brain and energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead that carry on the complete manifestation of the
material and spiritual worlds. The philosophy of monism, explained here
very clearly, adjusts itself to the fact that the supreme source of all energy
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. This is described very
clearly. It is also stated how the impersonal feature of Krsna can be under-
stood: +

7050 1101772 apsu kaunteya
prabhasmi sasi-suryayoh
pranavah sarva-vedesu
éabdah khe paurusam nrsu
“O son of Kunti [Arjuna], I am the taste of water, the light of the sun and
moon, the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound in ether and
ability in man.” (Bg. 7.8)
In this way Krsna can be understood as the mystic power in everything.


--- Page 338 ---
Text 61] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1103
TEXT 61
यो माययेदं पुरुरूपयाखुजद्‌
बिभर्ति भूयः क्षपयत्यविक्रियः ।
-
Rect (COI: (Cel Sep)
त्वमात्मतन्त्रं भगवन्‌ प्रतीमहि ॥६१॥
yo mayayedari puru-ripayasrjad
bibharti bhiyah ksapayaty avikriyah
yad-bheda-buddhih sad ivatma-duhsthayd
tvam dtma-tantrari bhagavan pratimahi
yah—one who; mayeya—by His energy; idam—this; puru—manifold;
riipaya—manifestation; asrjat—created; bibharti—maintains; bhiiyah—again;
ksapayati—annihilates; avikriyah— without being altered; yat—that; bheda-
buddhih—sense of differentiation; sat—eternal; iva—like; atma-duhsthaya—
giving trouble to oneself; tvam—unto You; dtma-tantram—fully self-
independent; bhagavan—O Lord, Supreme Personality of Godhead;
pratimahi—I can understand.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You have manifold energies, and these energies are
manifested in manifold forms. With such energies You have also created
this cosmic manifestation, and although You maintain it as if it were
permanent, You ultimately annihilate it. Although You are never disturbed
by such changes and alterations, the living entities are disturbed by them,
and therefore they find the cosmic manifestation to be different or sepa-
rated from You. My Lord, You are always independent, and I can clearly
see this fact.
PURPORT
It is clearly explained that Lord Krsna has multi-energies that can be
grouped into three: namely the external energy, the internal energy, and
the marginal energy. There are also different cosmic manifestations—
namely, the spiritual world and the material world—as well as different
types of living entities. Some living entities are conditioned, and others are
eternally free. The eternally free living entities are called nitya-mukta, for
they never come in contact with the material energy. However, some living
entities are conditioned in this material world, and thus they think them-
selves separated from the Supreme Lord. Due to their contact with the


--- Page 339 ---
1104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
material energy, their existence is always troublesome. Being always in
distress, the conditioned soul considers the material energy to be very
much disturbing. This fact is explained by a ४85118५8 kavi, or poet: krsna
bhuli’ sei jiva anadi-bahir-mukha/ ataeva maya tare deya samsara-duhkha.
When the living entity forgets the Supreme Lord and wants to enjoy him-
self independently, imitating the Supreme Lord, he is captured by the false
notion that he is the enjoyer and is separated from the Supreme Lord. This
material energy is therefore very much troublesome to the spiritual energy,
the living entity, but the material energy is never troublesome to the
Supreme Lord. Indeed, for the Supreme Lord, both material and spiritual
energy are the same. In this verse Lord Siva explains that the material energy
is never troublesome to the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is always
independent, but because the living entities are not independent—due to
their false idea of becoming independently happy—the material energy is
troublesome. Consequently the material energy creates differentiation.

Because the Mayavadi philosophers cannot understand this, they want
to be relieved from the material energy. However, because a Vaispava
philosopher is in full knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
he finds no disturbance even in the material energy. This is because he
knows how to utilize the material energy for the service of the Lord. In
the government, the criminal department and civil department may appear
different in the eyes of the citizens, but in the eyes of the government
both departments are one and the same. The criminal department is
troublesome for the criminal but not for the obedient citizen. Similarly,
this material energy is troublesome for the conditioned soul, but it has
nothing to do with the liberated souls who are engaged in the service of
the Lord. Through the puruse-avatara Maha-Vignu, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead created the whole cosmic manifestation. Simply by breathing
out all the universes, the Lord creates and maintains the cosmic manifes-
tation as Lord Visnu. Then as Sarkarsana, He annihilates the cosmic
manifestation. Yet despite the creation, maintenance and destruction of
the cosmos, the Lord is not affected. The various activities of the Lord
must be very disturbing to the tiny living entities, but since the Lord is
supremely great, He is never affected. Lord Siva or any other pure devotee
can see this clearly without being blinded by bheda-buddhi, or differen-
tiation. For a devotee, the Lord is the Supreme Spirit Soul. Since He is
supremely powerful, His various powers are also spiritual. For a devotee,
there is nothing material, for material existence only means forgetfulness
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 340 ---
Text 62] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1105
TEXT 62
क्रियाकलापैरिद्मेव योगिनः
श्रद्धान्विताः साधु यजन्ति सिद्धये |
मूतेन्द्रियान्तःकरणोपलधितं
वेदे च तन्त्रे च त एव कोविदाः ॥६९॥
kriya-kaldpair idam eva yoginah
sraddhanvitah sadhu yajanti siddhaye
bhiitendriyantahkaranopalaksitarn
vede ca tantre ca ta eva koviddh
kriya—activities; kalapaih—by processes; idam— this; eva—certainly; yogi-
nah—transcendentalists; sraddhd-anvitah—with faith and conviction;
sadhu—properly; yajanti—worship; siddhaye—for perfection; bhuta—the
material energy; indriya—senses;antah-karana—heart; upalaksitam—sympto-
mized by; vede—in the Vedas; ca—also; tantre—in the corollaries of the
Vedas; ca—also; te—Y our Lordship; eva—certainly; kovidah—those who are
experts.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, Your universal form consists of all five elements—the
senses, mind, intelligence, false ego (which is material) and the Paramatma,
Your partial expansion who is the director of everything. With the
exception of the devotees, the other yogis—namely the karma-yogi and
jidna-yogi—worship You by their respective actions in their respective
positions. It is stated both in the Vedas and in the sastras that are
corollaries of the Vedas, and indeed everywhere, that it is only You who
are to be worshiped. That is the expert version of all the Vedas.
PURPORT
In the previous verse Lord Siva wanted to see the form of the Lord
which the devotees are always interested in. There are other forms of the
Lord manifest in the material world, including Brahma and other demigods,
and these are worshiped by materialistic persons. In Srimad-Bhagavatam it
is stated that those who desire material benefits are recommended to wor-
ship different types of demigods.
akamah sarva-kamo va moksa-kama udara-dhih
fivrena bhakti-yogena yajeta purusam param (Bhag. 2.3.10)


--- Page 341 ---
1106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
The devotees, the jianis, who are known as moksa-kama, and the karmis,
who are known as sarva-kama, are all aspiring to worship the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Visnu. Even when one performs yajiias, as stated
here (kriya-kalapaih), he should always remember that the demigods are
but agents of the Supreme Lord. Actually the worshipful Lord is Visnu,
Yajiiesvara. Thus even when different demigods are worshiped in the Vedic
and Tantric sacrifices, the actual goal of sacrifice is Lord Visnu. Therefore
in Bhagavad-gtta it is said:
ye ’py anya-devata-bhakta
yajante sraddhayanvitah
te 0८ mam eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-purvakam
“Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunti, is really
meant for Me alone, but is offered without true understanding.”
(Bg. 9.23)

Thus the worshipers of various demigods also worship the Supreme
Lord, but they do so against the regulative principles. The purpose of the
regulative principles is to satisfy Lord Vispu. In the Visnpu Purana the
very same thing is confirmed:

varpasramacaravata purusena parah puman
visnur aradhyate pantha nanyat tat-tosa-karanam (Vispu P. 3.8.9)

Here it is clearly mentioned that the karmz, jiant or yogi—in fact, every-
one—worships Lord Vigpnu if he is actually expert in knowledge of the
Vedas and Tantras. The word kovidah is very significant, for it indicates
the devotees of the Lord. Only the devotees know perfectly that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, is all-pervading. Within the
material energy, He is represented by the five material elements as well as
the mind, intelligence and ego. He is also represented by another energy,
and all these manifestations in the spiritual and material world combined
are but representations of the different energies of the Lord. The con-
clusion is that the Lord is one and that He is expanded in everything. This
is understood by the Vedic version: sarvam khalv ida brahma. One who
knows this concentrates all his energy in worshiping Lord Visnu.

TEXT 63
त्वमेक आदयः पुरुषः सु्रक्ति-
स्तया रजःसत्वतमो विभिथते ।


--- Page 342 ---
Text 63] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1107
महानहं खं मरुद्भिवाधराः
सुरषंयो भूतगणा शं यतः ॥६३॥
tvam eka adyah purusah supta-saktis
taya rajah-sattva-tamo vibhidyate
mahan aham kha marud agni-var-dharah
surarsayo bhiita-gana 1007 yatah

tvam— Your Lordship; ekah—one; adyah— the original; purusah—person;
supta—dormant; saktih—energy; taya—by which; rajah—the passion energy;
sattva—goodness; tamah—ignorance; vibhidyate—is diversified; mahan—the
total material energy; aham—egotism; kham—the sky; marut—the air; agni—
fire; vah—water; dharah—earth; sura-rsayah—the demigods and the great
sages; bhiita-gandh—the living entities; idam—all this; yatah—from whom.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You are the only Supreme Person, the cause of all causes.
Before the creation of this material world, Your material energy remains
in a dormant condition. When Your material energy is agitated, the three
qualities—namely, goodness, passion and ignorance—act, and as a result
the total material energy—egotism, ether, air, fire, water, earth, and all
the various demigods and saintly persons—becomes manifest. Thus the
material world is created.

PURPORT

If the whole creation is one, that is, nothing but the Supreme Lord, or
Visnu, then why do the expert transcendentalists make such categories as
are found in the above verse? Why do learned and expert scholars distin-
guish between matter and spirit? In answer to these questions, Lord Siva
says that spirit and matter are not creations of various philosophers, but
are manifested by Lord Visnu, as described in this verse: tvam eka adyah
purusah. Spiritual and material categories are made possible by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but actually there are no such dis-
tinctions for the living entities who are eternally engaged in the service of
the Lord. There is only a material world for those who want to imitate the
Lord and become enjoyers. Indeed, the material world is nothing but
forgetfulness of the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, the creator


--- Page 343 ---
1108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
of everything. The distinction between matter and spirit is created by the
sleeping energy of the Lord when the Lord wants to give some facility to
those living entities who want to imitate the Lord in His enjoyment. It is
only for them that this material world is created by the dormant energy of
the Lord. For instance, sometimes children want to imitate their mother
and cook in the kitchen, and at such a time the mother supplies them with
some toys so that the children can imitate her cooking. Similarly, when
some of the living entities want to imitate the activities of the Lord, this
material cosmic manifestation is created for them by the Lord. The
material creation is therefore caused by the Lord through His material
energy. It is by the glance of the Lord that the material energy is activated.
At that time the three material qualities are set into motion, and the
material energy is manifested first in the form of the mahat-tattva, then
egotism, then ether, then air, fire, water, and earth. After the creation, the
living entities are impregnated in the cosmic manifestation, and they
emerge as Lord Brahma and the seven great rsis, then as different demigods.
From the demigods come human beings, animals, trees, birds, beasts and
everything else. The original cause, however, is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as verified herein—tvam eka adyah purusah. This is also con-
firmed in Brahma-sarhita:
ष्वा paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam

Those who are covered by the material energy cannot understand that
the origin of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
This is summarized in the Vedanta aphorism, janmady asya yatah
(Vedanta-siitra 1.1.2). Krsna also confirms this in Bhagavad-gita:

५110177 sarvasya prabhavo
mattah sarvam pravartate

iti matva bhajante mam
budha bhava-samanvitah

“I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates
from Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in My devotional
service and worship Me with all their hearts.” (Bg. 10.8)

When Krsna says that He is the origin of everything (ahari sarvasya
prabhavo), He means that He is even the source of Lord Brahma, Lord
Siva, the purusa-avatdras, the material manifestation and all the living entities
within the material world. Actually the word prabhava (creation) only
refers to this material world, for since the spiritual world is eternally


--- Page 344 ---
Text 64] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1109
existing, there is no question of creation. In the catuhslokt of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, the Lord says: aham evasam evagre (Bhag. 2.9.33). “I was
existing in the beginning before the creation.” In the Vedas it is also said,
eko narayana asit: ‘Before the creation there was only Narayana.” This is
also confirmed by Sarkaracarya: narayanah paro’vyaktat (Gita-bhasya).
“Narayana is transcendental to the creation.” Since all the activities of
Narayana are spiritual, when Narayana said, “Let there be creation,” that
creation was all-spiritual. The “material” only exists for those who have
forgotten that Narayana is the original cause.
TEXT 64
सृष्टं खशक्त्येद मनुप्रविष्ट-
Aad पुरमात्मांशकेन |
अथो विदुस्तं पुरुषं सन्तमन्त-
५५४ +
4g हषीकेमधु सारधं यः ॥६४॥
srstam ऽ४८-§०॥६८)/९व2771 anupravistas
catur-vidhari puram atmamsakena
atho vidus tam purusam santam antar
bhunkte hrsikair madhu sara-gham yah
srstam—in the creation; sva-sakty@—by Your own potency; idam—this
cosmic manifestation; anupravistah—entering afterwards; catuh-vidham—
four kinds of; puram—bodies; d@tma-armsakena—by Your own part and
parcel; atho—therefore; viduh—know; tam—him; purusam—the enjoyer;
santam— existing; antah—within; bhunkte—enjoys; hrsikaih—by the senses;
madhu—sweetness; sara-gham—honey; yah—one who.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, after creating by Your own potencies, You enter within
the creation in four kinds of forms. Being within the hearts of the living
entities, You know them and know how they are enjoying their senses.
The so-called happiness of this material creation is exactly like the bees’
enjoyment of honey after it has been collected in the honeycomb.
PURPORT
The material cosmic manifestation is an exhibition of the external
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but because dull matter
cannot work independently, the Lord Himself enters within this material


--- Page 345 ---
1110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
creation in the form of a partial expansion (Paramatma), and He enters
also by His separated parts and parcels (the living entities). In other words,
both the living entities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead enter into
the material creation just to make it active. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:
apareyam itas tv anyari
prakrtim viddhi me param
Jiva-bhutarm maha-baho
yayedam dharyate jagat
“Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior
energy of Mine, which are all living entities who are struggling with
material nature and are sustaining the universe.” (Bg. 7.5)

Since the material world cannot work independently, the living entities
enter into the material manifestation in four different types of bodies.
The word catur-vidham is significant in this verse. There are four types of
living entities born within this material world. Some are born by way of an
embryo (jarayu-ja), by way of eggs (anda-ja), perspiration (sveda-ja), and,
like the trees, by way of seeds (udbhij-ja). Regardless of how these living
entities appear, they are all busy in the pursuit of sense enjoyment.

The materialistic scientists’ contention that living entities other than
human beings have no soul is nullified herein. Whether they are born
through an embryo, eggs, perspiration or seeds, all living entities in the
8,400,000 species of life are parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and each therefore is an individual spiritual spark and soul.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead also remains within the heart of the
living entity, regardless of whether the living entity is a man, animal, tree,
germ or microbe. The Lord resides in everyone’s heart, and because all
living entities who come to this material world do so in order to fulfill
their desire for sense enjoyment, the Lord directs the living entities to
enjoy their senses. Thus the Paramatma, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, knows everyone’s desires. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:

sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto

mattah smrtir jianam apohanam ca
“I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness.” (Bg. 15.15)

Remaining within the hearts of all living entities, the Lord bestows
remembrance by which the living entities can enjoy certain things. Thus
the living entities create their enjoyable honeycombs and then enjoy them.
The example of the bees is appropriate because when bees try to enjoy
their honeycomb, they have to suffer the bites of other bees. Because bees


--- Page 346 ---
Text 64] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1111
bite one another when they enjoy honey, they are not exclusively enjoying
the sweetness of the honey, for there is also suffering. In other words, the
living entities are subjected to the pains and pleasures of material enjoy-
ment, whereas the Supreme Personality of Godhead, knowing their plans
for sense enjoyment, is aloof from them. In the Upanisads the example is
given of two birds sitting on a tree. One bird (the jiva, or living entity) is
enjoying the fruits of that tree, and the other bird (Paramatma) is simply
witnessing. In the Bhagavad-gita the Supreme Personality of Godhead as
Paramatma is described as upadrasta (the overseer) and anumanta (the
permitter).
upadrastanumanta ca
bharta bhokta mahesvarah
paramatmeti capy ukto
dehe ’smin purusah parah
“Yet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer, who is the
Lord, the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and permitter,
and who is known as the Supersoul.” (Bg. 13.23)

Thus the Lord simply witnesses and gives the living entity sanction for
sense enjoyment. It is the Paramatma also who gives the intelligence by
which the bees can construct a hive, collect honey from various flowers,
store it and enjoy it. Although the Paramatma is aloof from the living
entities, He knows their intentions, and He gives them facilities by which
they can enjoy or suffer the results of their actions. Human society is
exactly like a beehive, for everyone is engaged in collecting honey from
various flowers, or collecting money from various sources and creating
large empires for common enjoyment. However, after these empires are
created, the bites of other nations have to be suffered. Sometimes nations
declare war upon one another, and the human beehives become sources of
misery. Although human beings are creating their beehives in order to
enjoy the sweetness of their senses, they are at the same time suffering
from the bites of other persons or nations. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead as Paramatma is simply witnessing all these activities. The con-
clusion is that both the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the jivas
enter into this material world. However, the Paramatma, or Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, is worshipable because He has arranged for the
happiness of the living entity in the material world. Because it is the mate-
rial world, however, no one can enjoy any kind of happiness without
inebriety. Material enjoyment means inebriety, whereas spiritual enjoyment
means pure enjoyment under the protection of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.


--- Page 347 ---
1112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
TEXT 65
स॒ एष _ लोकानतिचण्डवेगो
fief त्वं खलु कारयानः |
भूतानि भूतेरयमेयतच्वो
घनावलीर्वायुखिाविषद्यः ॥5
sa esa lokan ati-canda-vego
vikarsasi $৮৫718 khalu kalayanah
bhutani bhutair anumeya-tattvo
ghanavalir vayur ivavisahyah
sah—that; esah—this; lokdn—all the planetary systems; ati—very much;
canda-vegah—the great force; vikarsasi—destroys; tvam—Your Lordship;
khalu—however; kdlayanah—in due course of time; bhiitani—all living enti-
ties; bhutaih—by other living entities; anumeya-tattvah—the Absolute
Truth can be guessed; ghana-gvalih—the clouds; v@yuh—air; iva—like;
avisahyah—unbearable.
‘TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, Your absolute authority cannot be directly experienced,
but one can guess by seeing the activities of the world that everything is
being destroyed in due course of time. The force of time is very strong,
and everything is being destroyed by something else—just as one animal is
being eaten by another animal. Time scatters everything, exactly as the
wind scatters clouds in the sky.
PURPORT
The process of destruction is going on according to the law of nature.
Nothing within this material world can be permanent, although scientists,
philosophers, workers and everyone else are trying to make things perma-
nent. One foolish scientist recently declared that eventually life will be
made permanent through science. Some so-called scientists are also trying
to manufacture living entities within the laboratory. Thus in one way or
another everyone is busy denying the existence of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and rejecting the supreme authority of the Lord. However, the
Lord is so powerful that He destroys everything in the form of death. As
Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita:mytyuh sarva-haras caham. (न्‌ am all-devouring
death.” (Bg. 10.34) The Lord is just like death to the atheists, for He takes
away everything they accumulate in the material world. Hiranyakasipu,
the father of Prahlada, always denied the existence of the Lord, and he


--- Page 348 ---
Text 66] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1113
tried to kill his five-year-old boy due to the boy’s unflinching faith in God.
However, in due course of time the Lord appeared as Nrsimhadeva and
killed Hiranyakasipu in the presence of his son. As stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam, this killing process is natural. Jivo jivasya jivanam: “0116
animal is food for another animal.” (Bhag. 1.13.47) A frog is eaten by a
snake, a snake is eaten by a mongoose, and the mongoose is eaten by
another animal. In this way the process of destruction goes on by the
supreme will of the Lord. Although we do not see the hand of the Supreme
Lord directly, we can feel the presence of that hand through the Lord’s
process of destruction. We can see the clouds scattered by the wind,
although we cannot see how this is being done because it is not possible to
see the wind. Similarly, although we do not directly see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, we can see that He controls the process of
destruction. The destructive process is going on fiercely under the control
of the Lord, but the atheists cannot see it.
TEXT 66
परमत्तुचैरितिकृत्यचिन्तया
সম্বত্রকীন विषयेषु लालसम्‌ |
त्वमप्रमत्तः सहसाभिपयसे
-
छ्षठेलिदहानोऽदिरिबासुमन्तकः ॥ 5৪
pramattam uccair iti krtya-cintaya
pravrddha-lobharn visayesu lalasam
tvam apramattah sahasabhipadyase
ksul-lelihano ’hir ivakhum antakah
pramattam—persons who are mad; uccaih—loudly; iti—thus; krtya—to
be done; cintaydi—by such desire; pravrddha—very much advanced;
lobham—greediness; visayesu—in the matter of material enjoyment;
lalasam—so desiring; tvam—Your Lordship; apramattah—completely in
transcendence; sahasa—all of a sudden; abhipadyase—seizes them;
ksut—hungry; lelihanah—by the greedy tongue; ahih—snake; iva—like;
akhum—mouse; antakah—destroyer.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, all living entities within this material world are mad after
planning for things, and they are always busy with a desire to do this or
that. This is due to uncontrollable greed. The greed for material enjoyment


--- Page 349 ---
1114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
is always existing in the living entity, but Your Lordship is always alert,
and in due course of time You strike him, just as a snake seizes a mouse
and very easily swallows him.

PURPORT

Everyone is greedy, and everyone makes plans for material enjoyment.
In his lust for material enjoyment, the living entity is described as a mad-
man. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:

prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah
ahankara-vimudhatma
kartaham iti manyate
“The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are in
actuality carried out by nature.” (Bg. 3.27)

Everything is enacted by the laws of nature, and these laws are under
the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The atheists, or
unintelligent men, do not know this. They are busy making their own
plans, and big nations are busy expanding their empire. And yet we know
that in due course of time many empires have come into existence and
been destroyed. Many aristocratic families were created by the people in
their extreme madness, but we can see that in the course of time those
families and empires have all been destroyed. But still the foolish atheists
do not accept the supreme authority of the Lord. Such foolish people
unnecessarily concoct their own duties without referring to the supreme
authority of the Lord. The so-called political leaders are busy making plans
to advance the material prosperity of their nation, but factually these
political leaders only want an exalted position for themselves. Due to their
greed for material position, they falsely present themselves as leaders before
the people and collect their votes, although they are completely under the
grip of the laws of material nature. These are some of the faults of modern
civilization. Without taking to God consciousness and accepting the
authority of the Lord, the living entities become ultimately confused and
frustrated in their planmaking attempts. Due to their unauthorized plans
for economic development, the price of commodities is rising daily all over
the world, so much so that it has become difficult for the poorer classes,
and they are suffering the consequences. And due to lack of Krsna con-
sciousness, people are being fooled by so-called leaders and planmakers.


--- Page 350 ---
Text 67] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1115
Consequently, the sufferings of the people are increasing. According to the
laws of nature, which are backed by the Lord, nothing can be permanent
within this material world; therefore everyone should be allowed to take
shelter of the Absolute in order to be saved. In this regard, Lord Krsna
says in Bhagavad-gita:
bhoktaram yajiia-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdam sarva-bhutanam
Jjiatva mam santim rcchati
“The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the bene-
factor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from the pangs of
material miseries.” (Bg. 5.29)

If one wants peace of mind and tranquility in society, he must accept
the fact that the real enjoyer is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
Lord is the proprietor of everything all over the universe, and He is the
supreme friend of all living entities as well. By understanding this, people
can become happy and peaceful individually and collectively.

TEXT 67
FIR विजहाति पण्डितो
यस्तेऽवमानन्ययमानकेतनः ।
रिशिङ्कयाखवुगुरूरचंति ख यद्‌
विनोपपत्ति मनवअतुदंश ॥६७॥
kas tvat-padabjam vijahati pandito
yas te 'vamana-vyayamana-ketanah
visankayasmad-gurur arcati sma yad
vinopapattirm manavas caturdasa
kah—who;tvat—Your; pada-abjam—lotus feet ; vijahati—avoids; panditah—
learned; yah—who; te—unto You; avamana—deriding; vyayamana—decreas-
ing; ketanah— this body; visaiikaya— without any doubt; asmat—our;guruh—
spiritual master, father; arcati—worships; sma—in the past; yat—that; vina—
without; upapattim—agitation; manavah—the Manus; caturdasa—fourteen
in number.


--- Page 351 ---
1116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, any learned person knows that unless he worships You,
his entire life is spoiled. Knowing this, how could he give up worshiping
Your lotus feet? Even our father and spiritual master, Lord Brahma,
unhesitatingly worshiped You, and the fourteen Manus followed in his
footsteps.

PURPORT
The word pandita means ‘““a wise man.” Who is actually a wise man? The
wise man is described in Bhagavad-gita in this way:
bahinam janmanam ante
Jiianavan mam prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah
“After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge sur-
renders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is.
Such a great soul is very rare.” (Bg. 7.19)

Thus when the wise man actually becomes wise after many births and
whimsical attempts at self-realization, he surrenders unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Such a mahatma, or learned person, knows
that Krsna, Vasudeva, is everything (vasudevah sarvam iti). Learned persons
always think that life is wasted unless they worship Lord Krsna or become
His devotee. Srila Riipa Gosvami also says that when one becomes an
advanced devotee he understands that he should be reserved and perse-
verent (ksantik) and that he should engage in the service of the Lord and
not waste time (avyartha-kalatvam). He should also be detached from all
material attraction (viraktih), and he should not long for any material
respect in return for his activities (mana-sinyata). He should be certain
that Krsna will bestow His mercy upon him (asa-bandhah), and he should
always be very eager to serve the Lord faithfully (samutkantha). The wise
man is always very eager to glorify the Lord by chanting and hearing
(nama-gane sada rucih) and heis always eager to describe the transcendental
qualities of the Lord (dsaktis tad-gunakhyane). He should also be attracted
to those places where the Lord had His pastimes (pritis tad-vasati-sthale).
These are symptoms of an advanced devotee.

An advanced devotee or a perfect human being who is actually wise and
learned cannot give up his service at the lotus feet of the Lord. Although
Lord Brahma has a long life span (4,320,000,000 years constitute twelve
hours in a day of Brahma), Brahma is nonetheless afraid of death and con-


--- Page 352 ---
Text 68] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1117
sequently engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. Silarly, all the
Manus who appear and disappear during the day of Brahma are also
engaged in the Lord’s devotional service. In Brahma’s one day, fourteen
Manus appear and disappear. The first Manu is Svayambhuva Manu. Each
Manu lives for seventy-one yugas, each consisting of some 4,320,000 years.
Although the Manus have such a long life span, they still prepare for the
next life by engaging in the devotional service of the Lord. In this age
human beings only live for sixty or eighty years, and even this small life
span is gradually decreasing. Therefore it is even more imperative for
human beings to take to the worship of the lotus feet of the Lord by
constantly chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, as recommended by Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
trpad api sunicena taror iva sahisnuna
amanina manadena kirtaniyah sada harih

When one is engaged in devotional service, he is often surrounded by
envious people, and often many enemies come to try to defeat him or stop
him. This is not new in this present age, for even in the days of yore
Prahlada Maharaja, who was engaged in the devotional service of the Lord,
was harassed by his demonic father, Hiranyakasipu. The atheists are always
prepared to harass a devotee; therefore Caitanya Mahaprabhu suggested
that one be very tolerant of these people. Nonetheless, one has to continue
chanting the Hare Krsna mantra and preaching the chanting of this mantra
because such preaching and chanting constitute the perfection of life. One
should chant and preach about the urgency of making this life perfect in
all respects. One should thus engage in the devotional service of the Lord
and follow in the footsteps of previous acaryas, beginning with Lord
Brahma and others.

TEXT 68
अश त्वमसि नो AW, परमात्मन्‌ विपश्चिताम्‌ |
दिश्वं॑रुद्रमयष्वस्तमङ़तञिद्धया गतिः ॥६८॥
atha tvam asi no brahman
paramatman vipascitam
visvari rudra-bhaya-dhvastam
akutascid-bhaya gatih

atha— therefore; tvam—my Lord, Yourself;asi—are; nah—our; brahman—
O Supreme Brahman; paramatman—O Supersoul; vipascitam—for the
learned wise men; visvam—the whole universe; rudra-bhaya—being afraid


--- Page 353 ---
1118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
of Rudra; dhvastam—annihilated; akutascit-bhaya—undoubtedly fearless;
gatih— destination.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, all actually learned persons know You as the Supreme
Brahman and the Supersoul. Although the entire universe is afraid of Lord
Rudra, who ultimately annihilates everything, for the learned devotees
You are the fearless destination of all.

PURPORT

For the purpose of creation, maintenance and annihilation of this cosmic
manifestation, there are three lords—Brahma, Visnu and Siva (Mahesvara).
The material body is finished at the time of annihilation. Both the universal
body and the small unit, the individual living entity’s body, are susceptible
to annihilation at the ultimate end. However, the devotees do not fear the
annihilation of the body, for they are confident that they will go back
home, back to Godhead, after the annihilation. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:

janma karma ca me divyam
evar yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so ’rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activi-
ties does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material
world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.” (Bg. 4.9)

If one strictly follows the process of devotional service, he has no fear
of death, for he is predestined to go back home, back to Godhead. The
nondevotees are fearful of death because they have no guarantee of where
they are going or of the type of body they are going to get in their next
life. The word rudra-bhaya is significant in this verse because Rudra
‘himself, Lord Siva, is speaking of “fear of Rudra.” This indicates that
there are many Rudras—eleven Rudras—and the Rudra (Lord Siva) who
was offering this prayer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is dif-
ferent from the other Rudras, although he is as powerful as they are. The
conclusion is that one Rudra is afraid of another Rudra because each and
every one of them is engaged in the destruction of this cosmic manifes-
tation. But for the devotee, everyone is afraid of Rudra, even Rudra
himself. A devotee is never afraid of Rudra because he is always secure,
being protected by the lotus feet of the Lord. As Sri Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita:


--- Page 354 ---
Text 69] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1119
ksiprari bhavati dharmatma
Sasvac-chantirh nigacchati
kaunteya pratijanihi
na me bhaktah pranpasyati
“He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kunti,
declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.” (Bg. 9.31)
TEXT 69
© जपत भद्रं बो विद्यद्धा नृपनन्दनाः ।
खधर्ममुतिष्न्तो भगक्त्यपिताशयाः ॥६९॥
10071 japata bhadrari vo
visuddha nrpa-nandanah
sva-dharmam anutisthanto
bhagavaty arpitasayah
idam — this; japata— while chanting; bhadram—all auspiciousness; vah—all
of you; visuddhah—purified; nrpa-nandanah—the sons of the king; sva-
dharmam— one’s occupational duties; anutisthantah—executing;bhagavati—
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arpita—given up; asayah—
possessing all kinds of faithfulness.
TRANSLATION
My dear sons of the King, just execute your occupational duty as kings
with a pure heart. Just chant this prayer fixing your mind on the lotus feet
of the Lord. That will bring you all good fortune, for the Lord will be very
much pleased with you.
PURPORT
The prayers offered by Lord Siva are very authoritative and significant.
Simply by offering prayers to the Supreme Lord one can become perfect,
even though engaged in his occupational duty. The real purpose of life is
to become a devotee of the Lord. It does not matter where one is situated.
Whether one is a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, sudra, American, Englishman,
Indian, etc., one can execute devotional service anywhere and everywhere
in the material existence simply by offering prayers unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The Hare Krsna maha-mantra is also a prayer, for
a prayer addresses the Supreme Personality of Godhead by His name and
invokes good fortune by petitioning the Lord to allow one to engage in
His devotional service. The Hare Krsna maha-mantra also says, “My dear
Lord Krsna, my dear Lord Rama, O energy of the Lord, Hare, kindly


--- Page 355 ---
1120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
engage me in Your service.” Although one may be lowly situated, he can
execute devotional service under any circumstance, as stated, ahaituky
apratihata (Bhag. 1.2.6). “Devotional service cannot be checked by any
material condition.” Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu also recommended this
process: 5 a Jt
jane prayasam udapasya namanta eva
Jivanti san-mukharitarih bhavadiya-vartam
sthane sthitah sruti-gatam tanu-van-manobhir
ye prayaso Jjita jito ‘py asi tais tri-lokyam
(Bhag. 10.14.3)

One may remain situated in his own place or in his own occupational
duty and still lend his ear to receive the message of the Lord from realized
souls. The Krsna conscious movement is based on this principle, and we
are opening centers all over the world to give everyone a chance to hear
the message of Lord Krsna in order to go back home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 70
TIAA सवभूतेष्वयस्थितम्‌ |
पूजयष्वं गृणन्तश्च घ्यायन्तथासङृद्धरिम्‌ ।॥७०॥
tam evatmanam atma-stham
sarva-bhitesv avasthitam
pujayadhvari grpantas ca
dhyadyantas casakrd dharim

tam—unto Him; eva—certainly; atmdnam—the Supreme Soul; atma-
stham—within your hearts; sarva—all; bhiitesu—in every living being;
avasthitam—situated; pajayadhvam—just worship Him; grnantah ca—always
chanting; dhydyantah ca—always meditating upon; asakrt—continually;
harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O sons of the king, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Hari is situated in everyone's heart. He is also within your hearts. Therefore
chant the glories of the Lord and always meditate upon Him continually.

PURPORT

The word asakrt is significant, for it means not just for a few minutes
but continually. This is the instruction given by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu
in His Siksastaka. Kirtantyah sada harih. “The holy name of the Lord should
be chanted twenty-four hours daily.” Therefore in this Krsna consciousness


--- Page 356 ---
Text 71] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1121
movement we request the devotees to chant at least sixteen rounds on their
beads daily. Actually one has to chant twenty-four hours daily, just like
Thakura Haridasa, who was chanting the Hare Krsna mantra 300,000 times
daily. Indeed, he had no other business. Some of the Gosvamis like
Raghunatha dasa Gosvami were also chanting very rigidly and also offer-
ing obeisances very rigidly. As stated in Srinivasacarya’s prayer to the
six Gosvamis (Sad-gosvamy-astaka): sankhya-parvaka-nama-gananatibhih
kalavasanikrtau. The word sankhya-purvaka means “maintaining a numeri-
cal strength.” Not only was Raghunatha dasa Gosvami chanting the holy
name of the Lord, but he was also offering obeisances in the same prolific
numbers.

Because the princes were ready to enter into some severe austerity in
order to worship the Lord, Lord Siva advised them to constantly chant
and meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is significant
that Lord Siva personally offered his prayers to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead just as he was taught by his father, Lord Brahma. Similarly, he
was also preaching to the princes according to the parampara system. One
should not only practice the instructions received from the spiritual master
but should also distribute this knowledge to his disciples.

The words atmanam atma-stham sarva-bhutesv avasthitam are also sig-
nificant. The Personality of Godhead is the origin of all living entities.
Because the living entities are parts and parcels of the Lord, He is the
father of all of them. One can search out the Supreme Lord very easily
within his heart, for He is situated in every living entity’s heart. In this
verse the process of worshiping the Lord is considered to be very easy and
complete, for anyone can sit down anywhere and in any condition of life
and simply chant the holy names of the Lord. By chanting and hearing,
one automatically engages in meditation.

TEXT 71
योगादेशमुपासाद्य RI gh: |
समाहितधियः सवं एतदम्यसताटताः ॥५७१॥
yogadesam upasadya
dharayanto muni-vratah
samahita-dhiyah sarva
etad abhyasatadrtah

yoga-ddesam—this instruction of bhakti-yoga; updsddya—constantly
reading; dhdarayantah—and taking within the heart; muni-vratah—just take
the vow of the great sages, the vow of silence; samdhita—always fixed in


--- Page 357 ---
1122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
the mind; dhiyah—with intelligence; sarve—all of you; etat—this;abhyasata—
practice; ddrtah—with great reverence.
TRANSLATION

My dear princes, in the form of a prayer I have delineated the yoga
system of chanting the holy name. All of you should take this important
stotra within your minds and promise to keep it in order to become great
sages. By acting silently like a great sage and by giving attention and
reverence, you should practice this method.

PURPORT

In the hatha-yoga system one has to practice bodily exercises, dhyana,
dharana, asana, meditation, etc. One also has to sit in one place in a par-
ticular posture and concentrate his gaze on the tip of the nose. There are
so many rules and regulations for the hatha-yoga system that it is
practically impossible to perform it in this age. The alternative system of
bhakti-yoga is very easy not only in this age but in others as well, for this
yoga system was advocated long ago by Lord Siva when he advised the
princes, the sons of Maharaja Pracinabarhisat. The bhakti-yoga system is
not newly introduced, for even five thousand years ago Lord Krsna
recommended this bhakti-yoga as the topmost yoga. As Krsna tells Arjuna
in Bhagavad-gita:

Yyoginam api sarvesari
mad-gatenantaratmana
$raddhavan bhajate yo mari
sa me yuktatamo matah

“Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me
in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga
and is the highest of all.” (Bg. 6.47)

In other words, this system of bhakti-yoga has been existing from time
immemorial and is now continuing in this Krsna consciousness movement.

The word muni-vratah is significant in this regard because those who are
interested in advancing in spiritual life must be silent. Silence means talking
only of Krsna-katha. This is the silence of Maharaja Ambarisa:

sa vai manah krsnpa-padaravindayor
vacarsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnane

“King Ambarisa always fixed his mind on the lotus feet of the Lord and
talked of Him only.” (Bhag. 9.4.18) We should also take this opportunity


--- Page 358 ---
Text 72] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1123
in life to become as good as a great saint simply by not talking unneces-
sarily with unwanted persons. We should either talk of Krsna or chant
Hare Krspa undeviatingly. This is called muni-vrata. The intelligence
(samahita-dhiyah) must be very sharp and should always be acting in Krsna
consciousness. The words etad abhyasatadrtah indicate that if one takes
these instructions from a spiritual master with great reverence (৫078৫) and
practices them accordingly, he will find this bhakti-yoga process to be very,
very easy.
TEXT 72
TR पुरासाकं भगवान्‌ विश्वसृक्पतिः ।
गृम्बादीनापात्यजानां fray: संसिदुश्चताम्‌॥७२॥
idam aha purasmakam
_.bhagavan visvasrk-patih
bhrgv-adinam atma-janarm
sisrksuh samsisrksatam
idam—this; aha— said; pura—formerly; asmakam—unto us; bhagavan—the
lord; visve-srk—the creators of the universe; patih— master; bhrgu-adinam—
of the great sages headed by Bhrgu; atma-janam—of his sons; sisrksuh—
desirous to create; sarisisrksatam—who are in charge of creation.
TRANSLATION
This prayer was first spoken to us by Lord Brahma, the master of all
creators. The creators, headed by Bhrgu, were instructed in these prayers
because they wanted to create.
PURPORT
Lord Brahma was created by Lord Visnu; then Lord Brahma created
Lord Siva and other great sages headed by Bhrgu Muni. These great sages
included Bhrgu, Marici, Atreya, Vasistha and others. All these great sages
were in charge of creating population. Since there were not very many
living entities in the beginning, Visnu entrusted Brahma with the business
of creation, and Brahma in his turn created many hundreds and thousands
of demigods and great sages to continue with the creation. At the same
time, Lord Brahma cautioned all his sons and disciples by reciting the
prayers now recited by Lord Siva. The material creation means material
engagement, but material engagements can be counteracted if we always
remember our relationship with the Lord as that relationship is described
in these prayers recited by Lord Siva. In this way we can remain constantly


--- Page 359 ---
1124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus despite our
engagement in the creation, we cannot be deviated from the path of Krsna
consciousness. The Krsna consciousness movement is especially meant for
this purpose. In this material world everyone is engaged in some particular
occupational duty which is prescribed in the varpasrama-dharma.
Brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas, sudras and everyone are engaged in their
occupational duty, but if one remembers his first duty—keeping in constant
contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead—everything will be
successful. If one simply executes the rules and regulations of the
varndsrama-dharma in the role of a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, ৪0070, and
keeps busy and does not remember one’s eternal relationship with the Lord,
one’s business and activities as well as occupational duties will simply be
awaste of time. Thisis confirmed in the First Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam:
dharmah svanusthitah pumsam visvaksena-kathasu yah
notpadayed yadi ratim srama eva hi kevalam (Bhag. 1.2.8)

The conclusion is that even if one is busy executing his occupational
duty, his business in Krsna consciousness need not be hampered. He has
simply to execute the devotional service of Sravapam kirtanam—hearing,
chanting, and remembering. One need not abandon his occupational duty.
As stated in Bhagavad-gita:

yatah pravrttir bhutanam
yena sarvam 1001 tatam
sva-karmana tam abhyarcya
siddhim vindati manavah
“By worship of the Lord—who is the source of all beings and who is
all-pervading—man can, in the performance of his own duty, attain
perfection.” (Bg. 18.46)

Thus one can continue with his occupational duty, but if he worships
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Lord Siva herein prescribes, he
attains his perfection of life. Svanusthitasya dharmasya sarmsiddhir hari-
tosanam (Bhag. 1.2.13). We should continue executing our occupational
duties, but if we try to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead by our
duties, then our lives will be perfected.

TEXT 73
ते बयं नोदिताः सवे प्रजासर्गे प्रजेश्वराः ।
अनेन ष्वस्ततमखः fret विविधाः प्रजाः ॥७३॥


--- Page 360 ---
Text 73] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1125
te vayam noditah sarve
praja-sarge prajesvarah
anena dhvasta-tamasah
sisrksmo vividhah prajah
te—by him;vayam—all of us; noditah—ordered; sarve—all; praja-sarge—at
the time of creating population; praja-tsvarah—the controllers of all living
entities; anena—by this; dhvasta-tamasah—being freed from all kinds of
ignorance; sisrksmah— we created; vividhah— various kinds of; prajah—living
entities.
TRANSLATION
When all Prajapatis were ordered to create by Lord Brahma, we chanted
these prayers in praise of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and became
completely free from all ignorance. Thus we were able to create different
types of living entities.
PURPORT
In this verse we can understand that the various types of living entities
were created simultaneously at the very beginning of the creation. The
nonsensical Darwinian theory of evolution is not applicable here. It is not
that intelligent human beings did not exist millions of years ago. On the
contrary, it is understood that the most intelligent creature, Lord Brahma,
was first created. Then Lord Brahma created other saintly sages like Marici,
Bhrgu, Atreya, Vasistha, Lord Siva and others. They in their turn created
different types of bodies according to karma. In Srimad-Bhagavatam Lord
Kapiladeva told His mother that the living entity gets a particular type of
body in accordance to his work and that this body is decided upon by
higher authorities. The higher authorities, as appointed by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, are Lord Brahma and all other Prajapatis and
Manus. Thus from the beginning of creation it can be seen that the first
creature is the most intelligent. It is not that so-called modern intelligence
has developed by the gradual process of evolution. As stated in Brahma-
vaivarta Purana, there is a gradual evolutionary process, but it is not the
body that is evolving. All the bodily forms are already there. It is the
spiritual entity or spiritual spark within the body that is being promoted
by the laws of nature under the supervision of superior authority. We can
understand from this verse that from the very beginning of creation dif-
ferent varieties of living entities were existing. It is not that some of them
have become extinct. Everythings there;it is due to our lack of knowledge
that we cannot see things in their proper perspective.
In this verse the word dhvasta-tamasah is very important, for without


--- Page 361 ---
1126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
being free of ignorance one cannot control the creation of different types
of living entities. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, daiva-netrena—bodies
are awarded under the supervision of superior powers. How can these
superior powers control the evolutionary process of the living entity if
they are not free from all imperfection? The followers of the Vedic instruc-
tions cannot accept the Darwinian theory of evolution, for it is marred by
imperfect knowledge.
TEXT 74
अथेदं नित्यदा युक्तो जप्वदहितः पुमान्‌ ।
अचिराच्द्रेय आमोति वासुदेवपरायणः ॥७४॥
011९०72 nityada yukto
Jjapann avahitah puman
i acirac chreya apnoti
vasudeva-parayanah

atha— thus; idam— this; nityada—regularly ; yuktah— with great attention;
Jjapan—by murmuring; avahitah—fully attentive; puman—a person;acirat—
without delay; sreyah—auspiciousness; apnoti—achieves; vasudeva-
parayanah—one who is a devotee of Lord Krsna.

TRANSLATION

A devotee of Lord Krsna whose mind is always absorbed in Him, who
with great attention and reverence chants this stotra [prayer], will achieve
the greatest perfection of life without delay.

PURPORT

Perfection means becoming a devotee of Lord Krsna. As stated in the
First Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam: vasudeva-para veda vasudeva-para
makhah (Bhag. 1.2.28). The ultimate goal of life is Vasudeva, or Krsna.
Any devotee of Lord Krsna can attain all perfection, material gains and
liberation simply by offering prayers to Him. There are many varieties of
prayers to Lord Krsna chanted by great sages and great personalities such
as Lord Brahma and Lord Siva. Lord Krsna is known as siva-virifici-nutam
(Bhag. 11.5.33). Siva means Lord Siva, and virifici means Lord Brahma.
Both of these demigods are engaged in offering prayers to Lord Vasudeva,
Krsna. If we follow in the footsteps of such great personalities and become
devotees of Lord Krsna, our lives become successful. Unfortunately people
do not know this secret. Na te viduh svartha-gatirn hi vispum (Bhag. 7.5.31).
“They do not know that the real interest and the highest perfection of life


--- Page 362 ---
Text 75] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1127
is to worship Lord Visnu [Krsna].” It is impossible to become satisfied by
trying to adjust the external energy. Without being a devotee of Lord
Krsna, one can only be baffled and confused. To save living entities from
such a calamity, Lord Krsna points out in Bhagavad-gita:
00108110118 janmandam ante
JjAianavdn mar prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatmd sudurlabhah
“After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a
great soul is very rare.” (Bg. 7.19)
We can achieve whatever benediction we want simply by becoming
devotees of Vasudeva.
TEXT 75
ক -
शेयसामिद सर्वेषां ज्ञानं नि {भयसं परम्‌ |
सुखं तरति दुष्पारं ज्ञाननौव्यंसनाणवम्‌ ।७५॥
sreyasam tha sarvesam
jana nihsreyasarn param
sukham tarati duspararm
jiiana-naur vyasanarpavam
sreyasam—of all benedictions; tha—in this world; sarvesam—of every
person; jianam—knowledge; nihisreyasam—the supreme benefit; param—
transcendental; sukham—happiness; tarati—crosses over; dusparam—
insurmountable; jiana—knowledge; nauh—boat;vyasana—danger; arnavam—
the ocean.
TRANSLATION
In this material world there are different types of achievement, but of
all of them the achievement of knowledge is considered to be the highest
because one can cross the ocean of nescience only on the boat of knowl-
edge. Otherwise the ocean is impassable.
PURPORT
Actually everyone is suffering within this material world due to igno-
rance. Every day we see that a person without knowledge commits some
criminal act and is later arrested and punished, despite the fact that he
actually may not have been conscious of his sinful activity. Such ignorance
prevails throughout the world. People do not consider how they are risking


--- Page 363 ---
1128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
their lives in an attempt to have illicit sex life, kill animals to satisfy their
tongue, enjoy intoxication and gamble. It is very regrettable that the
leaders of the world do not know of the effects of these sinful activities.
They are instead taking things very easily and are succeeding in making
the ocean of nescience wider and wider. =

Opposed to such ignorance, full knowledge is the greatest achievement
within this material world. We can practically see that one who has suffi-
cient knowledge is saved from many dangerous pitfalls in life. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita:

bahiinam janmandm ante
jiidnavan mdr prapadyate
vdsudevah sarvam iti
sa mahdtma sudurlabhah
“After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a
great soul is very rare.” (Bg. 7.19)

This Krsna consciousness movement is determined to open wide the
eyes of the so-called leaders who are full of ignorance and thus save them
from the many pitfalls and dangerous conditions of life. The greatest
danger is the danger of getting a body lower than a human being. It was
with great difficulty that we attained this human form of life just to take
advantage of this body and reestablish our relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Govinda. Lord Siva advises, however, that those
who take advantage of his prayers will very soon become devotees of Lord
Vasudeva and thus will be able to cross the ocean of nescience and make
life perfect.

TEXT 76
य इमं সন্ত্যা युक्तो AE WEY |
अधीयानो TOS हरिमाराधयत्यसौ ।७६।
ya 71078 Sraddhaya yukto
mad-gitarn bhagavat-stavam
adhiyano duraradhyam
harim aradhayaty asau

yah—anyone; imam— this; sSraddhaya— with great faith; yuktah—devoutly
attached; mat-gitam—the song composed by me or sung by me; bhagavat-
stavam—a prayer offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
adhiyanah—by regular study; duraradhyam—very difficult to worship;


--- Page 364 ---
Text 77] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1129
harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aradhayati—he can, however,
worship Him; asau—such a person.
TRANSLATION

Although rendering devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and worshiping Him are very difficult, if one vibrates or simply
reads this stotra [prayer] composed and sung by me, he will very easily
be able to invoke the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

It is especially significant that Lord Siva is a pure devotee of Lord
Vasudeva. Vaisnavandm yatha sambhuh: “Amongst all Vaisnavas, Lord
Siva is the topmost.” Consequently Lord Siva has a sampraddya, 8 Vaisnava
disciplic succession, called Rudra-sampradaya. At the present moment
those who belong to the Visnusvami-sampradaya of Vaisnavas come from
Rudra, Lord Siva. To become a devotee of Lord Krsna, Vasudeva, is very,
very difficult. The word especially used in this connection is durarddhyam.
The worship of the demigods is not very difficult, but becoming a devotee
of Lord Vasudeva, Krsna, is not so easy. However, if one adheres to the
principles and follows in the footsteps of the higher authorities, as advised
by Lord Siva, he can easily become a devotee of Lord Vasudeva. This is
also confirmed by Prahlada Maharaja. Devotional service cannot be prac-
ticed by a mental speculator. Devotional service is a special attainment
which can be acquired only by a person who has surrendered unto a pure
devotee. As confirmed by Prahlada Maharaja, 70/80/05৫7 pdda-rajo
’bhisekari niskificandndrh na vrnita ydvat: “Unless one accepts the dust of
the lotus feet of a pure devotee, who is free from all material contami-
nation, one cannot enter into the devotional service of the Lord.”
(Bhdg. 7.5.32)

TEXT 77
विन्दते पुरुषोऽयष्मादयदयदिच्छत्यसत्वरम्‌ ।
मद्रीतगीतात्सुीताच्छेषसामेकयलछमात्‌ ॥॥७७॥।
vindate puruso ‘'musmad
yad yad icchaty asatvaram
mad-gita-gitat su-pritac
chreyasam eka vallabhat

vindate—achieves; purusah—a devotee; amusmat—from the Personality

of Godhead; yat yat—that which; icchati— desires; asatvaram—being fixed;


--- Page 365 ---
1130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
mat-gita—sung by me; gitat—by the song; su-pritat—from the Lord who is
very pleased; sreyasam—of all benediction; eka—one; vallabhat—from the
dearmost. ~
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the dearmost objective of all
auspicious benedictions. A human being who sings this song sung by me
can please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a devotee, being
fixed in the Lord’s devotional service, can acquire whatever he wants from
the Supreme Lord.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita, yam labdhva ০০৫00৫70৫17 12011077 manyate
nadhikari tatah: “Established thus, one never departs from the truth, and
upon gaining it he thinks there is no greater gain.” (Bg. 6.22) If one can
attain the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he has nothing to
aspire for, nor does he desire any other gain. When Dhruva Maharaja
became perfect by austerity and saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead
eye to eye, he was offered any kind of benediction he wanted. However,
Dhruva replied that he did not want anything, for he was perfectly satisfied
with the benediction of seeing the Lord. Except for the service of the
Supreme Lord, whatever we want is called illusion, maya. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said: jivera ‘svariipa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’ (Cc. Madhya
20.108). Every living entity is an eternal servant of the Lord; therefore
when one engages in the service of the Lord, he realizes the highest per-
fection of life. A faithful servant can fulfill any desire by the grace of the
master, and one who engages in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord has nothing to aspire for separately. All his desires are fulfilled simply
by engaging constantly in the Lord's loving service. Lord Siva shows us
that any devotee can be successful simply by chanting the prayers which
he has recited.

TEXT 78
इदं यः कर्य उत्थाय प्राञ्जलिः श्रद्यान्वितः |
गृणयाच्टराचयेन्पत्यो go कर्मबन्धनैः ।।७८।।
1007 yah kalya utthaya
praijalih $raddhayanvitah
srpuyac chravayen martyo
mucyate karma-bandhanaih


--- Page 366 ---
Text 79] Chanting the Song Sung by Lord Siva 1131

idam—this prayer; yah—a devotee who; kalye—early in the morning;
utthaya—after getting up from bed; praijalih—with folded hands;
sraddhaya—with faith and devotion; anvitah—thus being absorbed;
Srnuyat—personally chants and hears; sravayet—and gets others to hear;
martyah—such a human being; mucyate—becomes freed; karma
bandhanaih—from all kinds of actions resulting from fruitive activities.

TRANSLATION

A devotee who rises early in the morning and with folded hands chants
these prayers sung by Lord Siva and gives facility to others to hear them
certainly becomes free from all bondage to fruitive activities.

PURPORT

Mukti or liberation means becoming free from the results of fruitive
activities. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam: muktir hitvanyatha rapam.
Mukti means giving up all other activities, and svaripena vyavasthitih
means being situated in one’s constitutional position. (Bhag. 2.10.6) In
this conditional state we are entangled by one fruitive activity after
another. Karma-bandhana means the bonds of fruitive activity. As long as
one’s mind is absorbed in fruitive activities, he has to manufacture plans
for happiness. The bhakti-yoga process is different, for bhakti-yoga means
acting according to the order of the supreme authority. When we act under
the direction of supreme authority, we do not become entangled by
fruitive results. For instance, Arjuna fought because the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead wanted him to; therefore he was not responsible for
the outcome of the fighting. As far as devotional service is concerned,
even hearing and chanting is as good as acting with our body, mind and
senses. Actually hearing and chanting are also activities of the senses. When
the senses are utilized for one’s own sense gratification, they entangle one
in karma, but when they are used for the satisfaction of the Lord, they
establish one in bhakti.

TEXT 79
गीतं मयेदं नरदेवनन्दनाः
परस्य पुंसः परमात्मनः स्तवम्‌ |
जपन्त एकाग्रधियस्तपो महत्‌-
WEAR तत आप्स्यथेप्सितम्‌ ॥॥७९॥


--- Page 367 ---
1132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 24
gitam mayedam naradeva-nandanah
parasya pumsah paramatmanah stavam
japanta ekagra-dhiyas tapo mahat-
caradhvam ante tata apsyathepsitam

gitam—sung; maya—by me; idam—this; naradeva-nandanah—O sons of
the king; parasya—of the Supreme; pumsah—Personality of Godhead;
paramatmanah—the Supersoul of everyone; stavam—prayer; japantah—
chanting; ekagra—perfect attention ;dhiyah —intelligence; tapah—austerities;
mahat—great; caradhvam—you practice; ante—at the end; tatah—thereafter;
apsyatha—will achieve; ipsitam—the desired result.

TRANSLATION

My dear sons of the King, the prayers which I have recited to you are
meant for pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul. I
advise you to recite these prayers, which are as effective as great aus-
terities. In this way, when you are mature, your life will be successful, and
you will certainly achieve all your desired objectives without fail.

PURPORT

If we persistently engage in devotional service, certainly all of our desires
will be fulfilled in due course of time.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Twenty-
fourth Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘‘Chanting the Song
Sung by Lord Siva.”

