
--- Page 1 ---
CHAPTER NINE
Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
त॒ एवसत्समया उरुक्रमे
कृतावनामाः प्रययुखिविष्टपम्‌ ।
सदखशीर्षापि ततो ` गरुत्मता
मधोर्वनं মূব্যবিহ্ধযা गतः ॥ १॥
maitreya uvaca
ta evam utsanna-bhaya urukrame
krtavanamah prayayus tri-vistapam
sahasrasirsapi tato garutmata
madhor vanam bhrtya-didrksaya gatah
maitreyah uvdca—the great sage Maitreya continued; te—the demigods;
evam— thus; utsanna-bhayah—being freed from all fears; urukrame—unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose actions are uncommon; krta-
avanamdh—they offered their obeisances; prayayuh—they returned; tri-
vistapam—1to their respective heavenly planets; sahasra-sirsa api—also the
Personality of Godhead known as Sahasrasirsa; tatah—from there;
garutmata—getting up on the back of Garuda; madhoh vanam—the forest
known as Madhuvana; bhrtya—servant; didrksaya— wishing to see him;
tah— t.
0855 ৮০ TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya told Vidura: When the demigods were reassured
by the Perscnality of Godhead, they were freed from all fears, and after
offering their obeisances, they returned to their heavenly planets. Then
the Lord, who is nondifferent from the Sahasradirsa incarnation, got on
the back of Garuda, who carried Him to the Madhuvana Forest to see His
servant Dhruva.
361


--- Page 2 ---
362 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
PURPORT
The word sahasrasirsa refers to the Personality of Godhead known as
Garbhodakasayl Vispu. Although the Lord appeared as Ksirodakasayl
Visnu, He has been described here as Sahasrasirsa Visnu because He is non-
different from Garbhodakasayl Vispu. According to Srila Sanatana
Gosvami in his Bhagavatamrta, the Sahasradirsa Personality of Godhead
who appeared at that time was the incarnation known as Prénigarbha. He
created the planet known as Dhruvaloka for the habitation of Dhruva
Maharaja.
TEXT 2
स ঈ fm योगदिपारूतीत्रया
- .
FURR स्फुरितं तदित्प्रमम्‌ |
तिरोहितं सहसैवोपलक््य
बहिःसिितं तदवस्थं ददक्चं ॥ २॥
sa vai dhiya yoga-vipaka-tivraya
hrt-padma-kose sphuritam tadit-prabham
tirohitarh sahasaivopalaksya
bahih 5८1८0778 tad-avastham dadarsa
sah—Dhruva Maharaja; vai—also; dhiya—by meditation; yoga-vipaka-
tivrayd—on account of mature realization of the yogic process; hrt—the
heart; padma-kose—on the lotus of; sphuritam—manifested; tadit-
prabham—brilliant like lightning; tirohitam—having disappeared; sahasa—
all of a sudden; eva—also; upalaksya—by observing; bahih sthitam—exter-
nally situated; tat-avastham—in the same posture; dadarsa—was able to see.
TRANSLATION
The form of the Lord, which was brilliant like lightning and in which
Dhruva Maharaja, in his mature yogic process, was fully absorbed in medi-
tation, all of a sudden disappeared. Thus Dhruva was perturbed, and his
meditation broke. As soon as he opened his eyes he saw the Supreme
Personality of Godhead personally present, just as he had been seeing Him
in his heart.
PURPORT
Because of his mature position in yogic meditation, Dhruva Maharaja
was constantly observing the form of the Personality of Godhead within


--- Page 3 ---
Text 3] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 363
his heart, but all of a sudden, when the Supreme Personality disappeared
from his heart, he thought that he had lost Him. He was perturbed, but
upon opening his eyes and breaking his meditation he saw the same form
of the Lord before him. In the Brahma-sarmhita (5.38) it is said, prem-
aiijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena: a saintly person who has developed
love of Godhead by devotional service always sees the Lord’s transcen-
dental form of Syamasundara. This Syamasundara form of the Lord within
the heart of a devotee is not imagination. When a devotee becomes mature
in his prosecution of devotional service, he sees eye to eye the same
Syamasundara he has thought of during the entire course of his devotional
service. Since the Supreme Lord is absolute, the form within the heart of a
devotee, the form in the temple and the original form in Vaikuntha,
Vrndavana-dhama, are all the same; they are nondifferent from one
another.
TEXT 3
ह
तदश्चनेनागतसाध्वसः বধিনা-
ववन्दताङ्खं॑विनमय्य दण्डवत्‌ |
¢
TE সদহ্যলু प्रपिवन्निवाभक-
इनुम्बभिवास्येन giao ॥ २॥
tad-darsanenagata-sadhvasah kgitav
avandatangam vinamayya dandavat
drgbhyam prapasyan prapibann ivarbhakas
cumbann £025 0110 bhujair ivaslisan
tat-darsanena—after seeing the Lord; agata-sadhvasah— Dhruva Maharaja,
being greatly confused; ksitau—on the ground;avandata—offered obeisances;
angam—his body; vinamayya—prostrating; danda-vat—just like a rod;
drgbhyam—with his eyes; prapasyan—looking upon; prapiban—drinking;
iva—like; arbhakah—the boy; cumban—kissing; iva—like; asyena—with his
mouth; bhujaih—with his arms; iva—like; aslisan—embracing.
TRANSLATION
When Dhruva Maharaja saw his Lord just in front of him, he was greatly

agitated and offered Him obeisances and respect. He fell flat before Him
like a rod and became absorbed in love of God. Dhruva Maharaja, in
ecstasy, looked upon the Lord as if he were drinking the Lord with his
eyes, kissing the lotus fcet of the Lord with his mouth, and embracing the
Lord with his arms.


--- Page 4 ---
364 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
PURPORT
Naturally, when Dhruva Maharaja personally saw the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead face to face, he was very much agitated in awe and
respect, and it appeared as if he were drinking the entire body of the Lord
with his eyes. The devotee’s love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is so intense that he wants to kiss the lotus feet of the Lord constantly,
and he wants to touch the tips of the toes of the Lord and constantly
embrace His lotus feet. All these features of Dhruva Maharaja’s bodily
expression indicate that upon seeing the Lord eye to eye he developed the
eight kinds of transcendental ecstasy in his body.
TEXT 4
स॒तं विवक्षन्तमतदिदं हरि-
ज्ञात्वास्य सर्वस्य च हृयवयितः |
कृताञ्जलिं . जह्ममयेन कम्बुना
€ ]
पस्पश् बालं कृपया कपोले || ४ ॥
sa tam vivaksantam atadvidam harir
Jiatvasya sarvasya ca hrdy avasthitah
krtanjalim brahmamayena kambuna
pasparsa balam krpaya kapole
sah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tam—Dhruva Maharaja;
vivaksantam—wanting to offer prayers describing his qualities;a-tat-vidam—
not experienced at that; harih —the Personality of Godhead; jiatva—having
understood; asya—of Dhruva Maharaja; servasya—of everyone; ca—and;
hrdi—in the heart; avasthitah—being situated; krta-aiijalim—situated with
folded hands; brahma-mayena-just up to the words of the Vedic hymns;
kambuna—with His conchshell; pasparsa—touched; balam—the boy;
krpaya—out of causeless mercy; kapole—on the forehead.
TRANSLATION
Although Dhruva Maharaja was a small boy, still he wanted to offer
prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in suitable language. But
because he was inexperienced, he could not adjust himself immediately.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being situated in everyone’s heart,
could understand Dhruva Maharaja's awkward position. Out of His cause-
less mercy He touched His conchshell to the forehead of Dhruva Maharaja,
who stood before Him with folded hands.


--- Page 5 ---
Text 5] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 365
PURPORT
Every devotee wants to chant the transcendental qualities of the Lord.
Devotees are always interested in hearing about the transcendental qualities
of the Lord, and they are always cager to glorify these qualities, but
sometimes they feel inconvenienced by humbleness. The Personality of
Godhead, being situated in everyone's heart, specifically gives a devotee
intelligence to describe Him. Itis therefore understood that when a devotee
writes or speaks about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it is dictated
by the Lord from within. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, Tenth Chap-
ter: to those who constantly engage in the transcendental loving service of
the Lord, the Lord, from within, dictates what to do next in order to serve
Him. When Dhruva Maharaja felt hesitant, not knowing how to describe
the Lord for want of sufficient experience, the Lord, out of His causeless
mercy, touched His conchshell to Dhruva’s forehead, and he was tran-
scendentally inspired. This transcendental inspiration is called brahma-
maya because when one is thus inspired, the sound he produces exactly
corresponds to the sound vibration of the Vedas. This is not the ordinary
sound vibration of this material world. Therefore the sound vibration of
the Hare Krsna mantra, although presented in the ordinary alphabet,
should not be taken as mundane or material.
TEXT 5
a _a .
a वै तदेव प्रतिपादितां गिरं
दैवीं परिज्ञातपरात्मनिर्णयः |
. ति
तं भक्तिमावोऽभ्यगृणादसत्वरं
परिशचेतोरुक्रसं ध्रुवक्षितिः ॥ ५॥
sa vai tadaiva pratipaditam giram
daivirih parijiata-paratma-nirpayah
(0772 bhakti-bhavo ’bhyagrnad asatvararn
parisrutoru-sravasam dhruva-ksitih
sah —Dhruva Maharaja; vai—certainly; tada—at that time; eva—just;
pratipaditim—having attained; giram—speech; daivim—transcendental;
parijiata—understood; para-atma— of the Supreme Soul; nirnayah-—the con-
clusion; tam—to the lord; bhakti-bhavah—situated in devotional service;
abhyagrndt—offered prayers; asalvaram—without any hasty conclusion;
parisruta—widely known; uru-sravasam—whose fame; dhruva-ksitih—
Dhruva, whose planet would not be annihilated.


--- Page 6 ---
366 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
TRANSLATION

At that time Dhruva Maharaja became perfectly aware of the Vedic con-
clusion and understood the Absolute Truth and His relationship with all
living entities. In accordance with the line of devotional service to the
Supreme Lord, whose fame is widespread, Dhruva, who in the future
would receive a planet which would never be annihilated, even during the
time of dissolution, offered his deliberate and conclusive prayers.

PURPORT

There are many important items to be considered in this verse. First of
all, the relationship between the Absolute Truth and the relative
material and spiritual energies is here understood by a student who has
complete knowledge of the Vedic literature. Dhruva Maharaja never went
to any school or academic teacher to learn the Vedic conclusion, but
because of his devotional service to the Lord, as soon as the Lord appeared
and touched his forehead with His conchshell, automatically the entire
Vedic conclusion was revealed to him. That is the process of understanding
Vedic literature. One cannot understand it simply by academic learning
The Vedas indicate that only to one who has unflinching faith in the Su-
preme Lord as well as in the spiritual master is the Vedic conclusion re-
vealed.

The example of Dhruva Maharaja is that he engaged himself in devotion-
al service to the Lord according to the order of his spiritual master, Narada
Muni. As a result of his rendering such devotional service with great
determination and austerity, the Personality of Godhead personally
manifested Himself before him. Dhruva was only a child. He wanted
to offer nice prayers to the Lord, but because he lacked sufficient
knowledge, he hesitated; but by the mercy of the Lord, as soon
as the Lord’s conchshell touched his forehead, he became completely
aware of the Vedic conclusion. That conclusion is based on proper under-
standing of the difference between jiva and Paramatma, the individual
soul and the Supersoul. The individual soul is forever a servant of the
Supersoul, and therefore his relationship with the Supersoul is to offer
service. That is called bhakti-yoga or bhakti-bhava. Dhruva Maharaja
offered his prayers to the Lord not in the way of the impersonalist
philosophers, but as a devotee. Therefore, it is clearly said here, bhakti-
bhava. The only prayers worth offering are those offered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose reputation is spread far and wide. Dhruva
Maharaja wanted to have the kingdom of his father, but his father refused
to even allow him to get on his lap. In order to fulfill his desire, the Lord


--- Page 7 ---
Text 6] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 367
had already created a planet known as the Pole Star, Dhruvaloka, which
was never to be annihilated even at the time of the dissolution of the
universe. Dhruva Maharaja did not attain this perfection by acting
hastily, but by patiently executing the order of his spiritual master, and
therefore he became so successful that he saw the Lord face to face. Now
he was further enabled, by the causeless mercy of the Lord, to offer
fitting prayers to the Lord. To glorify or offer prayers unto the Supreme,
one needs the Lord’s mercy. One cannot write to glorify the Lord unless
one is endowed with His causeless mercy.
TEXT 6
ga उवाच
योऽन्तः प्रविश्य मम वाचमिमां प्रसुप्ता
संजीवयत्यखिलसक्तिषरः am |
अन्यांश्च हस्तचरणश्रवणत्वगादीन्‌
प्राणान्नमो भगवते पुरुषाय तुभ्यम्‌ ॥ ६ ॥
dhruva ४४८८०
yo ‘ntah praviSya mama vacam imarh prasuptarn
saiijivayaty akhila-$akti-dharah sva-dhamna
anyams ca hasta-carana-sravana-tvag-adin
pranan namo bhagavate purusaya tubhyam
dhruvah uvdca— Dhruva Maharaja said; yah—the Supreme Lord who;
antah—within; pravisya—entering; mama—my; vacam—words; imam—all
these; prasuptam—which are all inactive or dead; saiijivayati—rejuvenates;
akhila—universal; sakti—energy; dharah— possessing; sva-dhamna— by His
internal potency; anyan ca—other limbs also; hasta—like hands; carana—
legs; sravana—ears; tvak—skin; adin—and so on; pranan—life force; namah—
let me offer my obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; purusaya—the Supreme Person; tubhyam—unto You.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja said: My dear Lord, You are all-powerful. After
entering within me, You have enlivened all my sleeping senses—my hands,
legs, ears, touch sensation, life force and especially my power of speech.
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.


--- Page 8 ---
368 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
PURPORT

Dhruva Maharaja could understand very easily the difference between
his condition before and after attaining spiritual realization and seeing the
Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. He could understand that his
life force and activities had been sleeping. Unless one comes to the spiritual
platform, his bodily limbs, mind and other facilities within the body are
understood to be sleeping. Unless one is spiritually situated, all his activities
are taken as a dead man’s activities or ghostly activities. Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura has composed a song in which he addresses himself: “O living
entity, get up! How long shall you sleep on the lap of maya? Now you
have the opportunity of possessing a human form of body; now try to get
up and realize yourself.” The Vedas also declare, “Get up! Get up! You
have the opportunity, the boon of the human form of life—now realize
yourself.”” These are the Vedic injunctions.

Dhruva Maharaja actually experienced that upon enlightenment of his
senses on the spiritual platform he could understand the essence of Vedic
instruction—that the Supreme Godhead is the Supreme Person; He is not
impersonal. Dhruva Maharaja could immediately understand this fact. He
was aware that for a very long time he was practically sleeping, and he felt
the impetus to glorify the Lord according to the Vedic conclusion. A mun-
dane person cannot offer any prayer or glorify the Supreme Personality of
Godhead because he has no realization of the Vedic conclusion.

When Dhruva Maharaja, therefore, found this difference within himself,
he could immediately understand that it was because of the causeless
mercy of the Lord. He offered obeisances to the Lord with great respect
and reverence, completely understanding that the Lord’s favor was upon
him. This spiritual enlivenment of Dhruva Maharaja’s senses, mind, etc.,
was due to the action of the internal potency of the Lord. In this verse,
therefore, the word sva-dhamna means by spiritual energy. Spiritual en-
lightenment is possible by the mercy of the spiritual energy of the Lord. The
chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra is first addressed to the spiritual energy
of the Lord, Hare. This spiritual energy acts when a living entity fully
surrenders and accepts his position as an eternal servitor. When a person
places himself at the disposal or order of the Supreme Lord, that is called
sevonmukha; at that time the spiritual energy gradually reveals the Lord to
him.

Without revelation by the spiritual energy, one is unable to offer
prayers glorifying the Lord. Any amount of philosophical speculation
or poetic expression by mundane persons is still considered to be the
action and reaction of the material energy. When one is actually enlivened


--- Page 9 ---
Text 7] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 369
by the spiritual energy, all his senses become purified, and he engages only
in the service of the Lord. At that time his hands, legs, ear, tongue, mind,
genitals—everything—engage in the service of the Lord. Such an enlightened
devotee no longer has any material activities, nor has he any interest in
being materially engaged. This process of purifying the senses and engaging
them in the service of the Lord is known as bhakti, or devotional service.
In the beginning, the senses are engaged by the direction of the spiritual
master and sastra, and after realization, when the same senses are purified,
the engagement continues. The difference is that in the beginning the
senses are engaged in a mechanical way, but after realization they are
engaged in spiritual understanding.
TEXT 7
एकस्त्वमेव PRAGA
मायाख्ययोरुगुणया महदाद्यरोषम्‌ |
PN
खष्टालुविश्य पुरुषस्तदसद्ध णेषु
नानेव दारुषु विमावसुवद्धिमासि ॥ ७॥
ekas tvam eva bhagavann idam atma-saktya
mayakhyayoru-gunaya mahadady-asesam
srstvanuvisya purusas tad-asad-gunesu
naneva darusu vibhavasu-vad vibhasi
ekah—one; tvam—you; eva—certainly ; bhagavan—O my Lord; idam—this
material world; atma-$aktya—by Your own potency; maya-akhyaya—of the
name mdya; uru—greatly powerful; gupayd—consisting of the modes of
nature; mahat-adi—the mahat-tattva, etc.; asesam—unlimited; srstva—after
creating; anuviSya—then after entering; purusah—the Supersoul; tat—of
maya; asat-gunesu—into the temporarily manifested qualities; nana—
variously; iva—as if; darusu—into pieces of wood; vibhavasu-vat—just like
fire; vibhasi—you appear.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the Supreme One, but by Your different energies

You appear differently in the spiritual and material worlds. You
create the total energy of the material world by Your external potency,
and after creation You enter within the material world as the Supersoul.
You are the Supreme Person, and through the temporary modes of
material nature You create varieties of manifestation, just as fire, entering
into wood of different shapes, burns brilliantly in different varieties.


--- Page 10 ---
370 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
PURPORT

Dhruva Maharaja realized that the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Person-
ality of Godhead, acts through His different energies, not that He becomes
void or impersonal and thus becomes all-pervading. The Mayavadi
philosopher thinks that the Absolute Truth, being spread throughout the
cosmic manifestation, has no personal form. But here Dhruva Maharaja,
upon realization of the Vedic conclusion, says, “You are spread all over
the cosmic manifestation by Your energy.” This energy is basically
spiritual, but because it acts in the material world temporarily, it is called
maya, or illusory energy. In other words, for everyone but the devotees the
Lord’s energy acts as external energy. Dhruva Maharaja could understand
this fact very nicely, and he could understand also that the energy and the
energetic are one and the same. The energy cannot be separated from the
energetic.

The identity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the feature of
Paramatma or Supersoul is admitted herein. His original spiritual energy
enlivens the material energy, and thus the dead body appears to have life
force. Voidist philosophers think that under certain material conditions
symptoms of life occur in the material body, but the fact is that the
material body cannot act on its own. Even a machine needs separate energy
(electricity, steam, etc.). It is stated in this verse that the material energy
acts in varieties of material bodies, just as fire burns differently in different
wood according to the size and quality of the wood. In the case of
devotees the same energy is transformed into spiritual energy; this is
possible because the energy is originally spiritual, not material. As it is
said, visnu-saktih para prokta. The original energy inspires a devotee, and
thus he engages all his bodily limbs in the service of the Lord. The same
energy, as external potency, engages the ordinary nondevotees in material
activities for sense enjoyment. We should mark the difference between
mayd and sva-dhama—for devotees the sva-dhama acts, whereas in the case
of nondevotees the maya energy acts.

TEXT 8
त्वदत्तया वयुनयेदमचष्ट विश्वं
ATE इव नाथ भवत्प्रपन्नः |
तस्यापवर्ग्यशरणं तव॒ पादमूलं
নিত্য कृतविदा कथमातंबन्धो ।॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 11 ---
Text 8] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 371
tvad-dattaya vayunayedam acasta visvari
supta-prabuddha iva natha bhavat-prapannah
tasyapavargya-saranam tava pada-mulam
vismaryate krtavida katham artabandho

tvat-dattaya—given by You; vayunaya—by knowledge; idam—this;
acasta—could see; visvam—whole universe; supta-prabuddhah—a man rising
from sleep; iva—like; natha—O my Lord; bhavat-prapannah—1I.ord Brahma,
who is surrendered unto You; tasya—his; apavargya—of persons desiring
liberation; $aranam—the shelter; tava—Your; pada-mitlam—lotus feet;
vismaryate—can be forgotten; krta-vidai—by a learned person; katham-—
how; arta-bandho—O friend of the distressed.

TRANSLATION

O my master, Lord Brahma is fully surrendered unto You. In the
beginning You gave him knowledge, and thus he could see and understand
the entire universe, just as a person awakens from sleep and visualizes
his immediate duties. You are the only shelter of all persons who desire
liberation, and You are the friend of all who are distressed. How, therefore,
can a learned person who has perfect knowledge ever forget You?

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be forgotten even for a
moment by His surrendered devotees. The devotee understands that the
Lord’s causeless mercy is beyond his estimation; he cannot know how
much he is benefited by the grace of the Lord. The more a devotee
engages himself in the devotional service of the Lord, the more encourage-
ment is supplied by the energy of the Lord. In the Bhagavad-gita the
Lord says that to those who are constantly engaged in devotional service
with love and affection, the Supreme Personality of Godhead gives
intelligence from within, and thus they may make further progress.
Being so encouraged, the devotee can never forget, at any moment, the
Personality of Godhead. He always feels obliged to Him for having achieved
increased power in devotional service by His grace. Saintly persons like
Sanaka, Sanatana and Lord Brahma were able to see the entire universe,
by the mercy of the Lord, through knowledge of the Lord. The example is
given that a person may apparently abstain from sleep all day, but as long
as he is not spiritually enlightened he is actually sleeping. He may sleep at
night and perform his duties in the daytime, but as long as he does not


--- Page 12 ---
372 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
come to the platform of working in spiritual enlightenment he is considered
to be always sleeping. A devotee, therefore, never forgets the benefit
derived from the Lord.

The Lord is addressed here as artabandhu, which means friend of the
distressed. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita, after many, many births of
executing severe austerities in search of knowledge, one comes to the
point of real knowledge and becomes wise when he surrenders unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Mayavadi philosopher who does
not surrender unto the Supreme Person is understood to be lacking in
real knowledge. The devotee in perfect knowledge cannot forget his obli-
gation to the Lord at any moment.

TEXT 9
नूलं विग्युषटमतयस्तव मायया ते
ये सवां मवाप्ययविमोश्षणमन्यहेतोः |
अचैन्ति FHS कुणपोपभोग्य-
मिच्छन्ति यत्स्पशजं निरयेऽपि वृणाम्‌॥।९॥
nunarm vimusta-matayas tava mayaya te
ye tvam bhavapyaya-vimoksanam anya-hetoh
arcanti kalpaka-tarum kupapopabhogyam
icchanti yat sparsa-jari niraye [08 nrpam
nianam—certainly; vimusta-matayah—those who have lost their right
intelligence; tava— Your; mayaya—by influence of the illusory energy; te—
they; ye—who; tvam—You; bhava—from birth; apyaya—and death;
vimoksanam-the cause of liberation; anya-hetoh—for other purposes;
arcanti—worship; kalpaka-tarum—who are like the desire tree; kunepa—
of this dead body; upabhogyam—sense gratification; icchanti—they desire;
yat—that which; sparse-jam—derived by touch sensation; niraye—in hell;
api—even; nfnam—for persons.
TRANSLATION

Persons who worship You simply for the sense gratification of this bag
of skin are certainly influenced by Your illusory energy. In spite of
having You, who are like a desire tree and are the cause of liberation from
birth and death, foolish persons, such as me, desire benediction from You
for sense gratification, which is available even for those who live in hellish
conditions.


--- Page 13 ---
Text 101] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 373
PURPORT
Dhruva Maharaja repented because he came to the Lord to render
devotional service for material profit. He here condemns his attitude.
Only due to gross lack of knowledge does one worship the Lord for
material profit or for sense gratification. The Lord is like a desire tree.
Anyone can have whatever he desires from the Lord, but people in general
do not know what kind of benediction they should ask from Him.
Happiness derived from the touch of skin, or sensuous happiness, is present
in the life of hogs and dogs. Such happiness is very insignificant. If a
devotee worships the Lord for such insignificant happiness, he must be
considered devoid of all knowledge.
TEXT 10
যা नि्तिस्तनुभृतां तव पादपश्च-
-
ध्यानाद्धरजनकयान्रवणन वा सयात्‌ |
सा ब्रह्मणि खमदहिमन्यपि नाथ मा भृत्‌
किं त्वन्तकासिलुलितातत्यततां विमानात्‌ 12 of
ya nirvrtis tanu-bhrtam tava pada-padma-
dhyanad bhavaj-jana-katha-sravanena va syat
sa brahmani sva-mahimany api natha ma bhut
kim tv antakasi-lulitat patatam vimanat
ya—that which; nirvrtith—blissfulness; tanu-bhrtam—of the embodied;
tava—your; pada-padma—lotus feet; dhyanat—from meditating upon;
bhavat-jana—from Your intimate devotees; katha—topics; sravanena—by
hearing; va—or; syat—comes into being; sa—that bliss; brahmani—in the
impersonal Brahman; sva-mahimani—Y our own magnificence; api—even;
natha—O Lord; ma—never; bhiit—exists; kim—what to speak of ; tu—then;
antaka-asi—by the sword of death; lulitat—being destroyed; patatam—
of those who fall down; vimanat—from their airplanes.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, the transcendental bliss derived from meditating upon Your
lotus feet or hearing about Your glories from pure devotees is so
unlimited that it is far beyond the stage of brahmananda, wherein one
thinks himself merged in the impersonal Brahman as one with the Supreme.
Since brahmananda is also defeated by the transcendental bliss derived


--- Page 14 ---
374 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
from devotional service, what to speak of the temporary blissfulness of
elevating oneself to the heavenly planets, which is ended by the separating
sword of time? Although one may be elevated to the heavenly planets, he
falls down in due course of time.

PURPORT

The transcendental bliss derived from devotional service, primarily from
Sravapari kirtanam, hearing and chanting, cannot be compared with the
happiness derived by karmis by elevating themselves to the heavenly
planets or by jiianis or yogis who enjoy oneness with the supreme imper-
sonal Brahman. Yogis generally meditate upon the transcendental form of
Visnu, but devotees not only meditate upon Him but actually engage in the
direct service of the Lord. In the previous verse we find the phrase
bhavapyaya, which means birth and death. The Lord can give relief from
the chain of birth and death. It is a misunderstanding to think, as do the
monists, that when one gets relief from the process of birth and death he
merges into the Supreme Brahman. Here it is clearly said that the tran-
scendental bliss derived from sravanam kirtanam by pure devotees cannot
be compared with brahmananda, or the impersonal conception of tran-
scendental bliss derived by merging into the Absolute.

The position of karmis is still more degraded. Their aim is to elevate
themselves to the higher planetary systems. It is said, yanti deva-vrata
devan: persons who worship the demigods are elevated to the heavenly
planets (Bg. 9.25). But elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 9.21) we find,
ksine punye martya-lokam visanti: those who are elevated to the higher
planetary systems must come down again as soon as the results of their
pious activities are exhausted. They are like the modern astronauts who go
to the moon; as soon as their fuel is used up, they are obliged to come
back down to this earth. As the modern astronauts who go to the moon or
other heavenly planets by force of jet propulsion have to come down again
after exhausting their fuel, so also do those who are elevated to the
heavenly planets by force of yajiias and pious activities. Antakasi-
lulitat: by the sword of time one is cut from his exalted position within
this material world, and he comes down again. Dhruva Maharaja appre-
ciated that the results of devotional service are far more valuable than
merging into the Absolute or being elevated to the heavenly planets. The
words patatam vimanat are very significant. Vimana means airplane: those
who are elevated to the heavenly planets are like airplanes, which drop
when they run out of fuel.


--- Page 15 ---
Text 11] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 375
TEXT 11
७ =
Af धुः प्रवहतां त्वयि मे प्रसङ्गो
न्त महतामलाशयानाप्‌ |
४ +
ol Lita wifey
नेष्ये मवदूगुणकथामृतपानमत्तः 1221)
bhakti muhuh pravahatar tvayi me prasango
bhiyad ananta mahatam amalasayanam
yenafjasolbanam uru-vyasanar bhavabdhim
nesye bhavad-guna-kathampta-pana-mattah
bhaktim—devotional service; muhuh—constantly; pravahatam—of those
who perform; tvayi—unto You; me—my; prasaigah—intimate association;
bhityat—may it become; ananta—O unlimited; mahatam—of the great
devotees; amala-asayanam—whose hearts are freed from material contami-
nation; yena—by which; anjasa—easily; ulbapam-—terrible; uru—great;
vyasanam~full of dangers; bhava-abdhim--the ocean of material existence:
nesye—l shall cross; bhavat—Y our; guna—transcendental qualities; katha—
pastimes; amyta—nectar, eternal; pana—by drinking; mattah—mad.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja continued: O unlimited Lord, kindly bless me so that
I can be associated with great devotees who engage in Your transcendental
loving service constantly, as the waves of a river constantly flow. Such
transcendental devotees are completely situated in an uncontaminated
state of life. By the process of devotional service I shall surely be able to
cross the nescient ocean of material existence, which is filled with the
waves of blazing, firelike dangers. It will be very easy for me, for I am
becoming mad to hear about Your transcendental qualities and pastimes,
which are eternally existent.
PURPORT
The significant point in Dhruva Maharaja’s statement is that he wanted
the association of pure devotees. Transcendental devotional service cannot
be complete and cannot be relishable without the association of devotees.
We have, therefore, established the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness. Anyone who is trying to be aloof from this Krishna Con-


--- Page 16 ---
376 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
sciousness Society and yet engage in Krsna consciousness is living in a great
hallucination, for this is not possible. From this statement of Dhruva
Maharaja it is clear that unless one is associated with devotees, his devo-
tional service does not mature; it does not become distinct from material
activities. The Lord says, satam [070501১8071 mama virya-samvido bhavanti
hrt-karpa-rasayanah kathah. Only in the association of pure devotees can
the words of Lord Krsna be fully potent and relishable to the heart and
ear. (Bhag. 3.25.25) Dhruva Maharaja explicitly wanted the association of
devotees. That association in devotional activities is just like the waves of
an incessantly flowing river. In our Krishna Consciousness Society we have
full engagement twenty-four hours a day. Every moment of our time is
always busily engaged in the service of the Lord. Thisis called the incessant
flow of devotional service.

A Mayavadi philosopher may question us, “You may be very happy in
the association of devotees, but what is your plan for crossing the ocean of
material existence?” Dhruva Maharaja’s answer is that it is not very
difficult. He clearly says that this ocean can be crossed very easily if one
simply becomes mad to hear the glories of the Lord. Bhavad-guna-katha:
for anyone who persistently engages in hearing the topics of the Lord from
Srimad Bhagavad-gita, Srimad-Bhagavatam and Caitanya-caritamrta and
who is actually addicted to this process, just as one becomes addicted to
intoxicants, it is very easy to cross the nescience of material existence. The
ocean of material nescience is compared with a blazing fire, but to a devo-
tee this blazing fire is insignificant because he is completely absorbed in
devotional service. Although the material world is blazing fire,to a devotee
it appears full of pleasure (visvari piarpam sukhayate).

The purport of this statement by Dhruva Maharaja is that devotional
service in the association of devotees is the cause of the development of
further devotionzl service. By devotional service only is one elevated to the
transcendental planet Goloka Vyndavana, and there also there is only
devotional service, for the activities of devotional service both in this
world and in the spiritual world are one and the same. Devotional service
does not change. The example of a mango can be given here. If one gets an
unripe mango, it is still a mango, and when it is ripe it remains the same
mango, but it becomes more tasteful and relishable. Similarly, there is
devotional service performed according to the direction of the spiritual
master and the injunctions and regulative principles of sastra, and there is
devotienal service in the spiritual world rendered directly in association
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But they are both the same.
There is no change. The difference is that one stage is unripe and the other


--- Page 17 ---
Text 12] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 377
is ripe and more relishable. It is possible to mature in devotional service
only in the association of devotees.
TEXT 12
ते न सरन्त्यतितरां সিযমীহা मत्यं
ये चान्वदः सुतसुहृद्‌गृवित्तदाराः |
ये লচ্জলাম मवदीयपदारविन्द-
सोगन्ध्यलु्यहदयेषु कृतप्रसङ्गाः 112311
te na smaranty atitararm priyam ia martyam
ye canv adah suta-suhrd-grha-vitta-darah
ye tv abja-nabha bhavadiya-padaravinda-
saugandhya-lubdha-hrdayesu krta-prasangah
te—they; na—never; smaranti—remember; atitaram—highly; priyam—
dear; iSa—O Lord; martyam—material body; ye—they who; ca—also; anu—
in relationship with; adah—that; suta—sons; suhrt—friends; grha—home;
vitta—wealth; daradh—and wife; ye—those who; tu—then; abja-nabha—O
Lord who has a lotus navel; bhavadiya—of Your; pada-aravinda—lotus feet;
saugandhya—the fragrance; lu bdha—have achieved; hrdayesu—with devotees
whose hearts; krta-prasangah—have association.
TRANSLATION
O Lord who has a lotus navel, if a person happens to associate with a
devotee whose heart always hankers after Your lotus feet, seeking always
their fragrance, he is never attached to the material body or, in relationship
with it, offspring, friends, home, wealth, and wife, which are very, very
dear to materialistic persons. He does not care for them.
PURPORT
A special advantage in devotional service is that devotees not only enjoy
the transcendental pastimes of the Lord by hearing and chanting and
glorifying them, but also they are not very much attached to their bodies,
unlike the yogis, who are too attached to the body and who think that by
performing bodily gymnastic exercises they will advance in spiritual con-
sciousness. Yogis are generally not very much interested in devotional
service; they want to regulate the breathing process. This is simply a
bodily concern. Here Dhruva Maharaja plainly says that a devotee has no
more bodily interest. He knows that he is not the body. From the very


--- Page 18 ---
378 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
beginning, therefore, without wasting time in bodily exercises, a devotee
searches out a pure devotee, and simply by his association becomes more
advanced in spiritual consciousness than any yogi. Because a devotee
knows that he is not the body, he is never affected by bodily happiness or
distress. He is not interested in bodily relationships with wife, children,
home, bank balance, etc., or in the distress or happiness which comes from
these things. This is the special advantage of being a devotee. This status
of life is possible only when a person is interested in associating with a
pure devotee who always enjoys the fragrance of the lotus feet of the
Lord.
TEXT 13
2,
तिथंङ्नगद्विजसरीलृपदेवदैत्य-
त्यादिभिः परिचितं aaa |
ডর स्थविष्ठमज ते महदाद्यनेकं
नातः परं परम वेभ्रि न यत्र वादः eR
tiryan-naga-dvija-sarisrpa-deva-daitya-
martyadibhih [00180880118 sad-asad-visesam
rupam sthavistham aja te mahad-ady-anekam
natah parari parama vedmi na yatra vadah
tiryak—by animals; naga—trees; dvija—Dbirds; sarisrpa—reptiles; deva—
demigods; daitya—demons; martya-adibhih—by men, etc.; paricitam—per-
vaded; sat-asat-visesam—with varieties manifest and nonmanifest; ripam—
form; sthavistham—gross universal; aja—O unborn; te—Y our; mahat-adi—
caused by the total material energy, etc.; anekam—various causes; na—not;
atah—from this; param—transcendental; parama—O Supreme; vedmi—
I know; na—not; yatra— where; vadah— various arguments.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O Supreme Unborn, I know that the different varieties
of living entities, such as animals, trees, birds, reptiles, demigods and
human beings, are spread throughout the universe, which is caused by the
total material energy, and I know that they are sometimes manifest and
sometimes unmanifest; but I have never experienced the supreme form I
behold as I see You now. Now all kinds of theorizing processes are
finished. PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that He has spread Himself through-
out the universe, but although everything is resting upon Him, He is aloof.


--- Page 19 ---
Text 14] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 379
The same concept is expressed here by Dhruva Maharaja. He states that
before seeing the transcendental form of the Lord, he had experienced
only the varieties of material forms, which are counted at 8,400,000
species of aquatics, birds, beasts, etc. The fact is that unless one engages
in the devotional service of the Lord, it is impossible for him to under-
stand the ultimate form of the Lord. This is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 18.55). Bhaktya mam abhijanati: factual understanding
of the Absolute Truth, who is the Supreme Person, cannot be obtained
by any process other than devotional service.

Dhruva Maharaja here compares his previous state of understanding
with the perfection of understanding in the presence of the Supreme
Lord. The position of a living entity is to render service; unless he comes
to the stage of appreciating the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he
engages in the service of the various forms of trees, reptiles, animals,
men, demigods, etc. One can experience that one man engages in the
service of a dog, another serves plants and creepers, another the demigods,
and another humanity or his boss in the office—but no one is engaged in
the service of Krsna. Aside from common men, even men who are
elevated in terms of spiritual understanding are at the utmost engaged in
the service of the virata-rupa, or, unable to understand the ultimate form
of the Lord, they worship voidism by meditation. Dhruva Maharaja,
however, had been blessed by the Supreme Lord. When the Lord touched
His conchshell to Dhruva’s forehead, real knowledge was revealed from
within, and Dhruva could understand the Lord’s transcendental form.
Dhruva Maharaja here admits that not only was he ignorant, but by
years he was only a child. It would not have been possible for an ignorant
child to appreciate the supreme form of the Lord had he not been blessed
by the Lord, who touched His conchshell to Dhruva’s forehead.

TEXT 14
कल्पान्त एतद विलं जठरेण गृहन्‌
शेते पुमान्‌ खदटगनन्तसरवस्तदङ्के |
यनाभिसिन्धुरुहकाश्चनरोकपद्म-
गर्भ द्युमान्‌ भगवते प्रणतोऽखि तस्मे।। १४॥
kalpanta etad akhilarn jatharena grhnan
Sete puman sva-drg ananta-sakhas tad-anke
yan-nabhi-sindhu-ruha-kaincana-loka-padma-
garbhe dyuman bhagavate pranato ’smi tasmai


--- Page 20 ---
380 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9

kalpa-ante—at the end of the millennium; etat—this universe; akhilam—
all; jatharepa—within the belly; grhpan—withdrawing; sete—lies down;
puman—the Supreme Person; sva-drk—looking upon Himself; ananta—the
unlimited being Sesa; sakhah--accompanied by; tat-ainke—on His lap; yat—
from whose; nabhi—navel; sindhu—ocean; ruha—sprouted; kaicana—golden;
loka—planet; padma—of the lotus; garbhe—on the whorl; dyuman—Lord
Brahma; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pranatah—
offering obeisances; asmi—1 am; tasmai—unto Him.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, at the end of each millennium the Supreme Personality
of Godhead Garbhodakasayi Visnu dissolves everything manifested within
the universe in His belly. He lies down on the lap of Sesanaga, from His navel
sprouts a golden lotus flower on a stem, and on that lotus Lord Brahma is
created. I can understand that You are the same Supreme Godhead. I
therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT

Dhruva Maharaja’s understanding of the Supreme Personality of
Gedhead is complete. In the Vedas it is said, yasmin vijidate sarvam evar
vijiatarh bhavanti: knowledge received through the transcendental cause-
less mercy of the Lord is so perfect that by that knowledge the devotee
becomes acquainted with all the different manifestations of the Lord.
Lord Ksirodakasayi Visnu was present before Dhruva Maharaja, who could
also understand the Lord’s two other forms, namely Garbhodakasayi
Visnu and Karanodakasayi (Maha) Visnu. Regarding Maha-Visnu, it is
stated in the Brahma-samhita:

yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya
jivanti loma-vilaja jogadanda-nathah
visnur mahan sa iha yasya kala-viseso
govindam adi-purugam tam aham bhajami (Bs. 5.48)

At the end of each and every millennium, when all the material worlds
are dissolved, everything enters the body of Garbhodakasayi Vispu, who
is lying on the lap of Sesanaga, another form of the Lord.

Those who are not devotees cannot understand the different forms of
Visnu and their positions in regard to the creation. Sometimes the
atheists argue, “How can a flower stem sprout from the navel of


--- Page 21 ---
Text 15] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 381
Garbhodakasay1 Vignu?” They consider all the statements of the $astras
to be stories. As a result of their inexperience in the Absolute Truth and
their reluctance to accept authority, they become more and more
atheistic; they cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
But a devotee like Dhruva Maharaja, by the grace of the Lord, knows all
the manifestations of the Lord and their different positions. It is said that
anyone who has even a little of the Lord’s grace can understand His
glories; others may go on speculating on the Absolute Truth, but they
will always be unable to understand the Lord. In other words, unless one
comes in contact with a devotee it is not possible to understand the
transcendental form or the spiritual world and its transcendental activities.
TEXT 15
त्वं नित्यञ्क्तपरिशदविबुद्ध आत्मा
कूटस्थ आदि पुरूषो भगवां ख्यषीञ्चः |
युषुद्‌ थयसिथितिपररष्डितया am
द्रष्टा सितावधिमखो व्यतिरिक्त आस्से॥ (4
tvam nitya-mukta-parisuddha-vibuddha atma
kuta-stha adi-puruso bhagavars try-adhisah
yad buddhy-avasthitim akhanditaya sva-drstya
drasta sthitav adhimakho vyatirikta asse
tvam—Y ou; nitya—eternally; mukta—liberated ; parisuddha—uncontami-
nated; vibuddha—full of knowledge; atma—the Supreme Soul; kiita-sthah—
changeless; adi—original; purusah—person; bhagavan—the Lord full with six
opulences; tri-adhisah—master of the three modes; yat—whence; buddhi—
of intellectual activities; avasthitim—all stages; akhanditaya—unbroken;
sva-drstya—by transcendental vision; drasta—You witness; sthitau—for
maintaining (the universe); adhimakhah—enjoyer of the results of all
sacrifices; vyatiriktah—differently; dsse—Y ou are situated.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, by Your unbroken transcendental glance You are the supreme
witness of all stages of intellectual activities. You are eternally liberated,
Your existence is situated in pure goodness, You are existent in the
Supersoul without change, You are the original Personality of Godhead,
full with six opulences, and You are eternally the master of the three
modes of material nature. Thus, You are always different from the


--- Page 22 ---
382 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
ordinary living entities. As Lord Vignu, You maintain all the affairs of the
entire universe, and yet You stand aloof and are the enjoyer of the
results of all sacrifices.

PURPORT

An atheistic argument against the supremacy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead states that if God, the Supreme Person, appears and dis-
appears and sleeps and awakens, then what is the difference between God
and the living entity? Dhruva Maharaja is carefully distinguishing the
existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from that of the living
entities. He points out the following differences. The Lord is eternally
liberated. Whenever He appears, even within this material world, He is
never entangled by the three modes of material nature. He is known,
therefore, as try-adhisa, the master of the three modes of material nature.
In Bhagavad-gita (7.14) it is said, daivi hy esa gunamayi mama maya
duratyaya: the living entities are all entangled in the three modes of
material nature. The external energy of the Lord is very strong, but the
Lord, as the master of the three modes of nature, is ever liberated from
the action and reaction of those modes. He is, therefore, uncontaminated,
as it is stated in the ISopanisad. The contamination of the material world
does not affect the Supreme Godhead. Krsna therefore says in the
Bhagavad-gita that those who are rascals and fools think of Him as an
ordinary human being, not knowing His param bhavam. Pararh bhavam
refers to His being always transcendentally situated. Material contami-
nation cannot affect Him.

Another difference between the Lord and the living entity is that a
living entity is always in darkness. Even though he may be situated in the
mode of goodness, there are still so many things which are unknown to
him. But it is not the same for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He
knows past, present and future and everything that is happening in every-
one’s heart. Bhagavad-gita confirms this (vedahar samatitani). The Lord
is not part of the soul-He is the unchangeable Supreme Soul, and the
living entities are His parts and parcels. The living entity is forced to
appear in this material world under the direction of daiva-maya, but when
the Lord appears, He comes by His own internal potency, atma-maya.
Besides that, a living entity is within the time of past, present and future.
His life has a beginning, a birth, and in the conditioned state his life ends
with death. But the Lord is adi-purusa, the original person. In the Brahma-
sarhita Lord Brahma offers his respect to the adi-puruse, Govinda, the
original person, who has no beginning, whereas the creation of this material


--- Page 23 ---
Text 16] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 383
world has a beginning. The Vedanta says, janmady asya yatah: everything
is born from the Supreme, but the Supreme has no birth. He has all the
six opulences in full and beyond comparison, He is the master of material
nature, His intelligence is not broken under any circumstances, and He
stands aloof, although He is the maintainer of the whole creation. As
stated in the Vedas (Katha Up. 2.2.13), nityo nityanar cetanas cetananam.
The Lord is the supreme maintainer. Living entities are meant to serve
Him by offering sacrifices, for He is the rightful enjoyer of the results of
all sacrifices. Everyone, therefore, should engage himself in the devotional
service of the Lord with his life, his riches, his intelligence and his words.
This is the original, constitutional position of the living entities. One
should never compare the sleeping of an ordinary living entity with the
sleeping of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the Causal Ocean.
There is no stage at which the living entity can compare to the Supreme
Person. The Mayavadi philosophers, being unable to adjust to all this,
come to the conclusion of impersonalism or voidism.
TEXT 16
यसिन्‌ विरुद्रगतयो निशं पतन्ति
fra वि विषशक्तय आनुपूर्व्यात्‌ |
तद्रक्ष विश्वमयमेकमनन्तमादय-
. -
मानन्दमात्रमविकारमहं प्रपद्य 1280
yasmin viruddha-gatayo hy anisam patanti
vidyadayo vividha-saktaya anupurvyat
tad brahma visva-bhavam ekam anantam adyam
ananda-matram avikaram aham prapadye
yasmin—in whom; viruddha-gatayah—of opposite character; hi—certainly;
anisam—always; patanti—are manifest; vidya-ddayah—knowledge and ignor-
ance, etc.; vividha—various; $aktayah—energies; anupiurvyat—continually;
tat—that; brahma—Brahman; visva-bhavam—the cause of material creation;
ekam—one; anantam—unlimited ; adyeam—original; ananda-matram—simply
blissful; avikaram—changeless; aham—1; prapadye—offer my obeisances.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, in Your impersonal manifestation of Brahman there are

always two opposing elements, knowledge and ignorance. Your multi-


--- Page 24 ---
384 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
energies are continually manifest, but the impersonal Brahman, which is
undivided, original, changeless, unlimited and blissful, is the cause of the
material manifestation. Because You are the same impersonal Brahman, I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT

In the Brahma-sarhita it is said that the unlimited impersonal Brahman
is the effulgence of the transcendental body of Govinda. In that unlimited
effulgent aura of the Supreme Personality of Godhead there are innumer-
able universes with innumerable planets of different categories. Although
the Supreme Person is the original cause of all causes, still His impersonal
effulgence, known as Brahman, is the immediate cause of the material
manifestation. Dhruva Maharaja, therefore, offered his respectful obeisances
unto the impersonal feature of the Lord. One who realizes this impersonal
feature can enjoy the unchangeable brahmananda described here as
spiritual bliss.

Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura describes that this impersonal
feature or Brahman manifestation of the Supreme Lord is meant for
persons who are essentially very advanced but still not able to under-
stand the personal features or variegatedness of the spiritual world. Such
devotees are known as jiiana-misra-bhaktas, or devotees whose devotional
service is mixed with empiric knowledge. Because the impersonal Brahman
realization is a partial understanding of the Absolute Truth, Dhruva
Maharaja offers his respectful obeisances.

It is said that this impersonal Brahman is the distant realization of the
Absolute Truth. Although apparently Brahman seems to be devoid of en-
ergy, factually it has different energies working under the headings of
knowledge and ignorance. On account of these different energies, there is
continually a manifestation of vidya and avidya. Vidya and avidya are very
nicely described in Fsopanisad. It is said there that sometimes, due to
avidya, or a poor fund of knowledge, one accepts the Absolute Truth as
ultimately impersonal. But in fact the impersonal and personal realizations
develop in proportion to the development of devotional service. The more
we develop our devotional service, the more closely we approach the
Absolute Truth, which, in the beginning, when we realize the Absolute
Truth from a distant place, is manifest as impersonal.

People in general, who are under the influence of avidya-sakti, or maya,
have neither knowledge nor devotion. But when a person who is a little
advanced and is therefore called a jian? advances even more, he is in the
category of a jiiana-misra-bhakta, or a devotee whose love is mixed with


--- Page 25 ---
Text 17] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 385
material knowledge. When he is still further advanced, he can realize that
the Absolute Truth is a person with multi-energies. An advanced devotee
can understand the Lord and His creative energy. As soon as one accepts
the creative energy of the Absolute Truth, the six opulences of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are also understood. Devotees who are
still further advanced, in full knowledge, can understand the transcendental
pastimes of the Lord. Only on that platform can one fully enjoy transcen-
dental bliss. An example is given in this connection by Viévanatha
Cakravarti Thakura of a person proceeding towards a destination. As he ap-
proaches, he sees the destination from a distant place, just as we see a city
from a distance. At that time he simply understands that the city is situated
at a distance. When, however, he comes still nearer, he sees the domes and
flags. But as soon as he enters the city, he sees various paths, gardens, lakes,
and marketplaces with shops and persons buying. He sees varieties of
cinema houses, and he sees dancing and jubilation. When a person actually
enters the city and personally sees the activities of the city, he becomes
satisfied.
TEXT 17
ayn हि भगवंस्तव ॒पादप्-
~~
माशोस्तयानुमजतः ER: |
©
अप्येवमयं मगवान्‌ परिपाति दीनान्‌
वाश्रेव वत्सकमनुग्रहकातरोऽखान्‌ ॥ १७
satyasiso hi bhagavams tava pada-padmam
asis tathanubhajatah purusartha-murteh
apy evam arya bhagavan paripati dinan
vasreva vatsakam anugraha-kataro 'sman
satya—real; asisah—compared with other benedictions; hi—certainly;
bhagavan—my Lord; tava—Y our; pada-padmam—lotus feet; asih--benedic-
tion; tatha—in that way; anubhajatah—for the devotees; purusa-artha—of
the real goal of life; marteh—the personification; api—although; evam—
thus; arya—O Lord; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; paripati—
maintains; dinan—the poor in heart; vasra-a cow; iva-like; vatsakam—
unto the calf; anugraha-to bestow mercy; katarah—eager; asman —upon me.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, O Supreme Lord, You are the supreme personified form of all
benediction. Therefore, for one who abides in Your devotional service


--- Page 26 ---
386 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
with no other desire, worshiping Your lotus feet is better than becoming
king and lording it over a kingdom. That is the benediction of worshiping
Your lotus feet. To ignorant devotees like me, You are the causelessly
merciful maintainer, just like a cow, who takes care of the newly born
calf by supplying milk and giving it protection from attack.

PURPORT

Dhruva Maharaja was cognizant of the defective nature of his own de-
votional service. Pure devotional service is without material form and is
not covered by mental speculation or fruitive activities. Pure devotional
service is therefore called ahaituki, unmotivated. Dhruva Maharaja knew
that he came to worship the Lord in devotional service with a motive—to
get the kingdom of his father. Such an adulterated devotee can never see
the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. He therefore felt very
grateful for the causeless mercy of the Lord. The Lord is so merciful that
He not only fulfills the desires of a devotee who is driven by ignorance and
desires for material benefit, but He also gives him all protection, just
as a cow gives milk to a newly born calf. In the Bhagavad-gita it is said that
the Lord gives intelligence to the constantly engaged devotee so that he
may gradually approach the Lord without difficulty. A devotee must be
very sincere in his devotional service; then, although there may be many
things wrong on the devotee’s part, Krsna will guide him and gradually
elevate him to the highest position of devotional service.

The Lord is addressed herein by Dhruva Maharaja as purusartha-mirti,
the ultimate goal of life. Generally purusartha is taken to mean execution
of a type of religious principle or worship of God in order to get material
benediction. Prayers for material benediction are intended for satisfying
the senses. And when one is frustrated and cannot fully satisfy the senses
in spite of all endeavor, he desires liberation, or freedom from material
existence. These activities are generally called purusartha. But actually the
ultimate goal is to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
is called pafica-purusartha, the ultimate goal of life. Lord Caitanya there-
fore taught us not to ask from the Supreme Personality any benediction
such as material wealth, popularity or a good wife. One should simply
pray to the Lord to be constantly engaged in His transcendental loving
service. Dhruva Maharaja, being cognizant of his desire for material
benefit, wanted protection from the Lord so that he might not be misled
or deviated from the path of devotional service by material desires.


--- Page 27 ---
Text 19] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 387
TEXT 18
#37 उवाच
अथामिष्टुत णवं वै सत्संकल्येन धीमता |
भृत्यानुरक्तो भगवान्‌ प्रतिनन्येद पकषयीत्‌ ।। १८॥
maitreya uvaca
athabhistuta evam vai
sat-sankalpena dhimata
bhrtyanurakto bhagavan
pratinandyedam abravit
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya said; atha—then; abhistutah—being wor-
shiped; evam—thus; vai—certainly; sat-sankalpena—by Bhruva Maharaja,
who had only good desires in his heart; dhimata—because he was very
intelligent; bhrtya-anuraktah—very favorably disposed to devotees; bhaga-
van—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratinandya—having congratu-
lated him; idam—this; abravit—said.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, when Dhruva
Maharaja, who had good intentions in his heart, finished his prayer, the
Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, who is very kind to His
devotees and servants, congratulated him, speaking as follows.
TEXT 19
खीभगव्जयुवाच
वेदाहं ते व्यवसितं हृदि राजन्यबालक ।
Frew भद्रं ते दुरापमपि gma ug
$ bhagavan uvaca
vedaharh te vyavasitam
hrdi rajanya-balaka
tat prayacchami bhadram te
durapam api suvrata


--- Page 28 ---
388 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9

sri bhagavan uvace—the Personality of Godhead said; veda—know;
cgham—1; te—your; vyavasitam—determination; hrdi—within the heart;
rajanya-balaka—O son of the King; tat—that; prayacchami—1I shall give
you; bhadram—all good fortune; te—unto you; durapam—although it is
very difficult to obtain; api—in spite of; su-vrata—one who has taken a
pious vow.

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead said: My dear Dhruva, son of the King, you
have executed pious vows, and I also know the desire within your heart.
Although your desire is very ambitious and very difficult to fulfill, still 1
shall favor you with its fulfillment. All good fortune unto you.

PURPORT

The Lord is so merciful to His devotee that He immediately said to
Dhruva Maharaja, “‘Let there be all good fortune for you.” The fact is that
Dhruva Maharaja was very much afraid in his mind, for he had aspired
after material benefit in discharging his devotional service and this was
hampering him from reaching the stage of love of God. In the Bhagavad-
gita (2.44) it is said, bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam: those who are addicted to
material pleasure cannot be attracted to devotional service. It was true
that at heart Dhruva Maharaja wanted a kingdom that would be far better
than Brahmaloka. This was a natural desire for a ksatriya. He was also only
five years old, and in his childish way he desired to have a kingdom far
greater than his father’s, grandfather’s or great-grandfather’s. His father,
Uttanapada, was the son of Manu, and Manu was the son of Lord Brahma.
Dhruva wanted to excel all these great family members. The Lord, how-
ever, knew Dhruva Maharaja's childish ambition, but at the same time how
was it possible to offer him a position more exalted than Lord Brahma’s?

The Lord assured Dhruva Maharaja that he would not be bereft of His
love. He encouraged Dhruva not to be worried that he childishly had
material desires and at the same time had the pure aspiration to be a great
devotee. Generally, the Lord does not award a pure devotee material
opulence, even though he may desire it. But Dhruva Maharaja’s case was
different. The Lord knew that he was such a great devotee that in spite of
having material opulence he would never be deviated from love of God.
This example illustrates that a highly qualified devotee can have the
facility of material enjoyment and at the same time execute love of God.
This, however, is a special case for Dhruva Maharaja.


--- Page 29 ---
Texts 20-21] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 389
TEXTS 20-21
नान्यैरधिष्ठितं भद्र यद्धानि्णु ध्रुवक्षिति ।
यत्र ग्र्षेताराणां ज्योतिषां चक्रमाहितम्‌ ।२०॥
UT गोचछयर्स्थास्यु परस्तात्कल्पयापिनाम्‌ |
Tish: FFT: TR नयो ये वनौकसः |
चरन्ति दक्षिणीकृत्य भ्रमन्तो यत्सतारकाः 12
nanyair adhisthitam bhadra
yad bhrajisnu dhruva-ksiti
yatra graharksa-taranam
Jyotisam cakram ahitam
medhydrm go-cakravat sthasnu
parastat kalpa-vasinam
dharmo ‘gnih kasyapah sukro
munayo ye vanaukasah
caranti daksini-krtya
bhramanto yat satarakah
na—never; anyaih—by others; adhisthitam—was ruled over; bhadra—my
good boy; yat—which; bhrajisnu—brightly glowing; dhruva-ksiti—the land
known as Dhruvaloka; yatra—where; graha—planets; rksa—constellations;
taranam—and stars; jyotisam—by luminaries; cakram—encirclement; ahitam
—is done; medhyam—around a central pole;go—of bulls; cakra—a multitude;
vat—like; sthasnu—stationary; parastat—beyond; kalpa—a day of Brahma
(millennium); vasinam—those who live; dharmah—Dharma; agnifi—Agni;
kasyapah—Kasyapa; sukreh—Sukra; munayah—great sages; ye--all of them
who; vana-okasah—living in the forest; caranti—move; daksini-krtya—keep-
ing it to their right; bhramantah—circumambulating; yat—which planet;
sa-tarakah—with all the stars.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead continued: My dear Dhruva, I
shall award you the glowing planet known as the Pole Star, which will
continue to stay even after the dissolution at the end of the millen-
nium. No one has ever ruled over this planet, which is surrounded
by all the solar systems, planets and stars. All the luminaries in the
sky circumambulate this planet, just as bulls go around a central
pole for the purpose of crushing grains. Keepingit to their right, all the stars
inhabited by the great sages like Dharma, Agni, Kasyapa and Sukra


--- Page 30 ---
390 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
circumambulate this planet, which continues to exist even after the
dissolution of all others.
PURPORT

Although the Pole Star existed before its occupation by Dhruva Maha-
raja, there was no predominating deity. Dhruvaloka, our Pole Star, is the
center for all other stars and solar systems, for all of them circle around
Dhruvaloka just as a bull erushes grains by walking around and around a
central pole. Dhruva wanted the best of all planets, and although it was a
childish prayer, the Lord satisfied his demand. A small child may demand
something from his father which his father has never given to anyone else,
yet out of affection the father offers it to the child; similarly, this unique
planet, Dhruvaloka, was offered to Maharaja Dhruva. The specific signifi-
cance of this planet is that until the entire universe is annihilated, this
planet will remain, even during the devastation which takes place during
the night of Lord Brahma. There are two kinds of dissolutions, one during
the night of Lord Brahma and one at the end of Lord Brahma’s life. At the
end of Brahma’s life, selected personalities go back home, back to God-
head. Dhruva Maharaja is one of them. The Lord assured Dhruva that he
would exist beyond the partial dissolution of this universe. Thus at the
end of the complete dissolution, Dhruva Maharaja would go directly to
Vaikunthaloka, to a spiritual planet in the spiritual sky. Srila Viévanatha
Cakravarti Thakura comments in this connection that Dhruvaloka is one of
the lokas like Svetadvipa, Mathura and Dvaraka. They are all eternal
places in the kingdom of Godhead, which is described in the Bhagavad-
gita (tad dhama paramam) and in the Vedas (om tad vispoh [00701770718
padam sada pasyanti siurayah). The words parastat kalpa-vasinam, tran-
scendental to the planets inhabited after the dissolution, refer to the Vai-
kuntha planets. In other words, Dhruva Maharaja’s promotion to the
Vaikunthalokas was guaranteed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 22
प्रसिते तु নল पित्रा द्वा गां धर्मसंश्रयः ।
षरातरिशदषैसादखं रशिताच्यादतेन्दियः ।२२॥
prasthite tu 00107 pitra
dattva gar dharma-samsrayah
sat-trimsad-varsa-sahasram
raksitavyahatendriyah


--- Page 31 ---
Text 23] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 391
prasthite—after departure; tu—but; vanam-to the forest; pitra—by your
father; dattva-awarding; gam— the whole world; dharma-samsrayah—under
the protection of piety; sat-trimsat—thirty-six; varsa—years; sahasram—one
thousand; raksiti—you will rule; avyahata—without decay; indriyah—the
power of the senses.
TRANSLATION
After your father goes to the forest and awards you the rule of his
kingdom, you will rule the entire world continually for 36,000 years, and
all your senses will continue to be as strong as they are now. You will
never become old.
PURPORT
In the Satya-yuga people generally lived for 100,000 years. Dhruva
Maharaja’s ruling the world for 36,000 years was quite possible in those
days.
TEXT 23
त्वद्भातयुंतमे नष्टे खृगयाय तु तन्मनाः ।
अन्वेषन्ती बनं माता द्वापरं सा प्रवेशयति ॥२३॥
tvad-bhratary uttame naste
mrgayayar tu tan-manah
anvesanti vanar mata
davagnirn sa praveksyati
tvat—your;bhratari—brother;uttame—Uttama;naste—being killed; mrga-
yayam—in hunting; tu—then; tat-manah—being too afflicted; anvesanti—
while searching out; vanam—in the forest; mata—the mother; dava-agnim—
in the forest fire; sa—she; praveksyati— will enter.
TRANSLATION
The Lord continued: Sometime in the future your brother Uttama will
go hunting in the forest, and while absorbed in hunting, he will be killed.
Your stepmother Suruci, being maddened upon the death of her son, will
go to search him out in the forest, but she will be devoured by a forest
fire.
PURPORT
Dhruva Maharaja came to the forest to search out the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead with a revenging spirit against his stepmother. His step-


--- Page 32 ---
392 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
mother insulted Dhruva, who was not an ordinary person, but a great
Vaisnava. An offense at the lotus feet of a Vaisnava is the greatest offense
in this world. Because of her insulting Dhruva Maharaja, Suruci would
become mad upon the death of her son and wouid enter a forest fire, and
thus her life would be ended. This was specifically mentioned by the Lord
to Dhruva because he was determined for revenge against her. From this
we should take the lesson that we should never try to insult a Vaisnava.
Not only should we not insult a Vaisnava, but we should not insult anyone
unnecessarily. When Suruci insulted Dhruva Maharaja, he was just a child.
She of course did not know that Dhruva was a great recognized Vaisnava,
and so her offense was committed unknowingly. Similarly, if one serves a
Vaisnava unknowingly, there is a good result. When one serves a Vaignava
without knowledge, he still gets the good result, and if he unknowingly
insults a Vaisnava, one suffers the bad result. A Vaisnava is especially
favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Pleasing him or dis-
pleasing him directly affects the pleasure and displeasure of the Supreme
Lord. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, in his eight stanzas of prayer to
the spiritual master, has sung, yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah: by pleasing
the spiritual master, who is a pure Vaisnava, one pleases the Personality of
Godhead, but if one displeases the spiritual master he does not know where
he is going.
TEXT 24
हृष्टा मां यज्ञहृदयं यत्तैः पुष्करुदकिणिः।
TF चेहाशिषः सत्या अन्ते मां संसरिभ्यसि ।२४।
istva mam yajiia-hrdayam
yajiaih puskala-daksinaih
bhuktva cehasisah satya
ante mam samsmarisyasi

istva—after worshiping; mam—Me; yajia-hrdayam—the heart of all
sacrifices; yajiiaih—by great sacrifices; puskala-daksinaih—comprehending
distribution of great charities; bhuktva—after enjoying; ca—also; iha—within
this world; asisah—blessings; satyah—true; ante—at the end; mam—Me;
sarsmarisyasi—you will be able to remember.

TRANSLATION

The Lord continued: 1 am the heart of all sacrifices. You will be able

to perform many great sacrifices and also give great charities. In this way


--- Page 33 ---
Text 25] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 393
you will be able to enjoy the blessings of material happiness in this life,
and at the time of your death you will be able to remember Me.
PURPORT

The most important factor in this verse is the Lord’s instructions
regarding how to remember the Supreme Personality of Godhead at the
end of life. Ante nardyana-smprtih: the result of whatever we do in
executing spiritual activities is successful if we can remember Narayana,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This program of constant remem-
brance can be disturbed by many things, but Dhruva Maharaja’s life would
be so pure, as assured by the Lord Himself, that he would never forget
Him. Thus at the time of his death he would remember the Supreme
Lord, and before his death he would enjoy this material world, not by
sense gratification, but by performing great sacrifices. As stated in the
Vedas, when one performs great sacrifices he must give in charity, not only
to the brahmanas, but also to the ksatriyas, vaiSyas and sudras. It is
assured here that Dhruva Maharaja would be able to perform such activi-
ties. In this age of Kali, however, the great sacrifice is the performance of
sankirtana-yajita. Our Krsna consciousness movement is designed to teach
people (and to learn ourselves) the exact instruction of the Personality of
Godhead. In this way we shall continue to perform the sankirtana-yajiia
continually and continually chant the Hare Krsna mantra. Then certainly
at the end of our lives we shall be able to remember Krsna, and our
program of life will be successful. In this age, distribution of prasdda has
replaced distribution of money. No one has sufficient money to distribute,
but if we distribute krspa-prasida as far as possible, it is more valuable
than the distribution of money.

TEXT 25
=
ततो गन्तासि मत्स्थानं सवंरोक्नमस्कृतम्‌ |
उपरिशाटषिम्यस्त्वं यतो नायते गतः ॥२५॥
tato gantasi 1710/-58110110 7
sarva-loka-namas-krtam
uparistad rsibhyas tvam
yato navartate gatah

tatah— thereafter; gantasi—you will go; mat-sthanam—to My abode;
sarva-loka—Dby all planetary systems;namah-krtam—offered obeisances to;
uparistat—situated higher; rsibhyah—than the planetary systems of the rsis;


--- Page 34 ---
394 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
tvam—you; yatah—wherefrom; na—never; avartate—will come back; gatah—
having gone there.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead continued: My dear Dhruva, after your
material life in this body, you will go to My planet, which is always offered
obeisances by the residents of all other planetary systems. It is situated
above the planets of the seven rgis, and when you go there you never have
to come back again to this material world.
PURPORT
In this verse the word navartate is very significant. The Lord says, “You
will not come back to this material world because you will reach mat-
sthanam, My abode.” Therefore Dhruvaloka, or the Pole Star, is the abode
of Lord Visnu within this material world. Upon it there is an ocean of
milk, and within that ocean there is an island known as Svetadvipa. It is
clearly indicated that this planet is situated above the seven planetary
systems of the rsis, and because this planet is Visnuloka, it is worshiped by
all other planetary systems. It may be questioned here what will happen
to the planet known as Dhruvaloka at the time of the dissolution of this
universe. The answer is simple: Dhruvaloka remains, like other
Vaikunthalokas, beyond this universe. Srila Visvanatha Cakravartf Thakura
has commented in this connection that the very word navartate indicates
that this planet is eternal.
TEXT 26
AN
मन्रय उवाच
इत्यचितः स भगवानतिदिश्यात्मनः पदम्‌ ।
बालस्य पश्यतो ঘাম खमगाद्ररुडभ्क्जः ॥२६।।
maitreya ९८४०८८०
ity arcitah sa bhagavan
atidi§yatmanah padam
balasya pasyato dhama svam
agad garuda-dhvajah
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak;iti— thus;
arcitah—being honored and worshiped; sah—the Supreme Lord; bhagavan—
Personality of Godhead; atidisya—after offering; atmanah—His personal;
padam—residence; balasya—while the boy; pasyatah—was looking on;


--- Page 35 ---
Text 27] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 395
dhama—to His abode; svam—own; agat—He returned; garuda-dhvajah—
Lord Vigsnu, whose flag bears the emblem of Garuda.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya said: After being worshiped and honored by the
boy, Dhruva Maharaja, and offering him His abode, Lord 15120 returned
to His abode on the back of Garuda as Dhruva Maharaja looked on.
PURPORT
From this verse it appears that Lord Visnu awarded Dhruva Maharaja
the same abode in which He resides. His abode is described in the Bhagavad-
gita (15.6): yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama [07071079 mama.
TEXT 27
सोऽपि संकल्पजं विष्णोः पादसेवोपसादितम्‌ |
प्राप्य संकल्पनिर्वाणं नातिप्रीतोऽभ्यगात्पुरम्‌।। २९७।।
so ’pi sankalpajari visnoh
pada-sevopasaditam
prapya sankalpa-nirvanam
natiprito ‘bhyagat puram
sah—he (Dhruva Maharaja); api—although; sanikalpa-jam—the desired
result; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; pada-seva—by serving the lotus feet;
upasaditam—obtained; prapya—having achieved; sarikalpa—of his determi-
nation; nirvanam—the satisfaction; na—not; atipritah—very much pleased;
abhyagat—he returned; puram—to his home.
TRANSLATION
Despite having achieved the desired result of his determination by
worshiping the lotus feet of the Lord, Dhruva Maharaja was not very pleased.
Thus he returned to his home.
PURPORT
By worshiping the lotus feet of the Lord in devotional service as in-
structed by Narada Muni, Dhruva Maharaja achieved the desired result. His
desire was to get a very exalted position, excelling those of his father,
grandfather and great-grandfather, and although it was a somewhat child-
ish determination because Dhruva Maharaja was nothing but a small child,
still Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is so kind and


--- Page 36 ---
396 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
merciful that He fulfilled his desire. Dhruva Maharaja wanted a residence
more exalted than any ever occupied by anyone else in his family. There-
fore he was offered the planet in which the Lord personally resides, and
his determination was completely satisfied. Still, when Dhruva Maharaja
returned home he was not very much pleased because although in pure
devotional service there is no demand from the Lord, because of his child-
ish nature he had demanded something, and although the Lord also fulfilled
his desire, he was not very pleased. Rather, he was ashamed that he had
demanded something from the Lord, for he should not have done this.
TEXT 28
विदुर उवाच
মুত यत्परमं षदं हरे-
मायाविनस्तरणाच॑ना्ितम्‌ |
EY
लब्ध्वाप्यसिद्धाथेमियैकजन्मना
कथं स्मात्मानममन्यताथंवित्‌ ॥२८॥
vidura uvaca
sudurlabhari yat paramari padam harer
mayavinas tac-caranarcanarjitam
labdhvapy asiddhartham ivaika-janmana
{01110772 svam atmanam amanyatartha-vit
vidurah uvaca— Vidura continued to inquire; sudurlabham—very rare;
yat—that which; paramam—is the supreme; padam situation; hareh—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mayavinah—very affectionate; tat—
His; carana—Ilotus feet; arcana—by worshiping; arjitam—achieved; labdhva—
having attained;api—although;asiddha-artham—not fulfilled ; iva—as if; eka-
janmand—in the duration of one life; katham—why; svam—own; dtmanam—
heart; amanyata—he felt; artha-vit—being very wise.
TRANSLATION
$ri Vidura inquired: My dear brahmana, the abode of the Lord is very
difficult to attain. It can be attained only by pure devotional service,
which alone pleases the most affectionate, merciful Lord. Dhruva
Maharaja achieved this position even in one life, and he was very wise and
conscientious. Why, then, was he not very pleased?


--- Page 37 ---
Text 29] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 397
PURPORT
Saint Vidura’s inquiry is very relevant. The word artha-vit, which refers
to one who knows how to discriminate between reality and unreality, is
very significant in this connection. An artha-vit is also called paramaharisa.
A paramaharmsa accepts only the active principle of everything; just as a
swan accepts only the milk from a mixture of water and milk, a
paramahamsa accepts only the Supreme Personality of Godhead as his life
and soul, neglecting all external material things. Dhruva Maharaja was in
this category, and due to his determination he achieved the result he de-
sired, but still when he returned home he was not very pleased.
TEXT 29
as
मन्नय उवाच
मातुः सपत्न्या AFAR विद्धस्तु तान्‌ सरन्‌ |
नैच्छन्यक्तिपतेधक्तिं TENE ॥२९॥
maitreya uvaca
matuh sapatnya vagbanair
hrdi viddhas tu tan smaran
naicchan mukti-pater muktim
tasmat tapam upeyivan
maitreyah uvaca—the gre:t sage Maitreya replied; matuh—of his mother;
sa-patnyah—of the co-wife; vak-bonaih—by the arrows of harsh words;
hrdi—in the heart; viddhah—pierced; tu—then; tan—all of them; smaran—
remembering; na—not; aicchat—desired; mukti-pateh—from the Lord, whose
lotus feet give liberation; muktim—salvation; tasmat—therefore; tapam—
grief; upeyivan—he suffered.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya answered: Dhruva Maharaja’s heart, which was pierced by the
arrow of the harsh words of his stepmother, was greatly aggrieved, and thus
when he fixed upon his goal of life he did not forget her misbehavior. He
did not demand actual liberation from this material world, but at the end
of his devotional service, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appeared before him, he was simply ashamed of the material demands he
had in his mind.


--- Page 38 ---
398 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
PURPORT

This important verse has been discussed by many stalwart commenta-
tors. Why was Dhruva Maharaja not very pleased, even after achieving the
goal of life he desired? A pure devotee is always free from any kind of
material desires. In the material world, one’s material desires are all most
demonic; one thinks of others as one’s enemies, one thinks of revenge
against one’s enemies, one aspires to become the topmost leader or top-
most person in this material world, and thus one competes with all others,
etc. This has been described in the Bhagavad-gita, Sixteenth Chapter, as
asuric. A pure devotee has no demand from the Lord. His only concern
is to serve the Lord sincerely and seriously, and he is not at all concerned
about what will happen in the future. In the Mukunda-mala-stotra, King
Kulasdekhara, author of the book, states in his prayer: “My dear Lord, I
don’t want any position of sense gratification within this material world. I
simply want to engage in Your service perpetually.” Similarly, Lord
Caitanya, in His Siksastaka, also prayed, “My Lord, I do not want any
amount of material wealth, I do not want any number of materialistic
followers, nor do I want any attractive wife to enjoy. The only thing I want
is that I may engage life after life in Your service.” Lord Caitanya did not
pray even for mukti, or liberation.

In this verse Maitreya replied to Vidura that Dhruva Maharaja, influenced
by a revengeful attitude towards his insulting stepmother, did not think of
mukti, nor did he know what mukti is. Therefore he failed to aim for
mukti as his goal in life. But a pure devotee also does not want liberation.
He is a soul completely surrendered to the Supreme Lord, and he does not
demand anything from the Lord. This position was realized by Dhruva
Maharaja when he saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead present person-
ally before him because he was elevated to the vasudeva platform. The
vasudeva platform refers to the stage at which material contamination is
conspicuous by absence only, or in other words where there is no question
of the material modes of nature—goodness, passion and ignorance—and one
can therefore see the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because on the
vasudeva platform one can see God face to face, the Lord is also called
Vasudeva.

Dhruva Maharaja’s demand was for a position so exalted that it was
never enjoyed even by Lord Brahma, his great-grandfather. Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is so affectionate and kind towards His
devotee, especially to a devotee like Dhruva Maharaja, who went to render
devotional service in the forest alone at the age of only five years, that
although the motive might be impure, the Lord does not consider the


--- Page 39 ---
Text 29] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 399
motive; He is concerned with the service. But if a devotee has a particular
motive, the Lord directly or indirectly knows it, and therefore He does
not leave the devotee’s material desires unfulfilled. These are some of the
special favors by the Lord to a devotee.

Dhruva Maharaja was offered Dhruvaloka, a planet that was never re-
sided upon by any conditioned soul. Even Brahma, although the topmost
living creature within this universe, was also not allowed to enter the
Dhruvaloka. Whenever there is a crisis within this universe, the demigods
go to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kgirodakaday1l Visnu, and
they stand on the beach of the Milk Ocean. So the fulfillment of Dhruva
Maharaja’s demand—a position more exalted than that of even his great-
grandfather Brahma—was offered to him.

Here in this verse the Lord is described as mukti-pati, which means one
under whose lotus feet there are all kinds of mukti. There are five kinds of
mukti—sayujya, sarupya, salokya, samipya, and sarsti. Out of these five
muktis, which can be achieved by any person engaged in devotional service
to the Lord, the one which is known as sayujya is generally demanded by
Mayavadi philosophers; they demand to become one with the impersonal
Brahman effulgence of the Lord. In the opinion of many scholars, this
sayujya-mukti, although counted among the five kinds of mukti, is not
actually mukti because from sayujya-mukti one may again fall down to
this material world. This information we have from Srimad-Bhagavatam,
wherein it is said patanty adah, which means ‘‘they again fall down.” The
monist philosopher, after executing severe austerity, merges into the
impersonal effulgence of the Lord, but the living entity always wants
reciprocation in loving affairs. Therefore, although the monist phi-
losopher is elevated to the status of being one with the effulgence of the
Lord, because there is no facility for associating with the Lord and render-
ing service unto Him, he again falls down into this material world, and his
service propensity is satisfied by material welfare activities like humanitar-
ianism, altruism and philanthropy. There are many instances of such fall-
downs, even for great sannyasis in the Mayavada school.

Therefore Vaisnava philosophers do not accept sayujya-mukti to be
within the category of mukti. According to them, mukti means transferral
to the loving service of the Lord from one’s position of serving maya. Lord
Caitanya also says in this connection that the constitutional position of a
living entity is to render service to the Lord. That is real mukti. When one
is situated in his original position, giving up artificial positions, he is called
mukta, or liberated. In the Bhagavad-gita this is confirmed: anyone who
engages in rendering transcendental loving service to the Lord is considered


--- Page 40 ---
400 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
to be mukta or brahma-bhuta. It is said in Bhagavad-gita that a devotee is
considered to be on the brahma-bhuta platform when he has no material
contamination. In the Padma Purana this is also confirmed: mukti means
engagement in the service of the Lord.

The great sage Maitreya explained that Dhruva Maharaja did not desire
in the beginning to engage in the service of the Lord, but he wanted an
exalted position better than his great-grandfather’s. This is more or less not
service to the Lord but service to the senses. Even if one gets the position
of Brahma, the most exalted position in this material world, he is a condi-
tioned soul. Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati says that if one is elevated to
real, pure devotional service, he considers even great demigods like Brahma
and Indra to be on an equal level with an insignificant insect. The reason is
that an insignificant insect has a desire for sense gratification, and even a
great personality like Lord Brahma also wants to dominate this material
nature.

Sense gratification means domination over material nature. The whole
competition between conditioned souls is based upon domination of this
material nature. Modern scientists are proud of their knowledge because
they are discovering new methods to dominate the laws of material
nature. They think that this is the advancement of human civilization—the
more they can dominate the material laws, the more advanced they think
they are. Dhruva Maharaja’s propensity in the beginning was like that. He
wanted to dominate this material world in a greater position than Lord
Brahma. Therefore elsewhere it is described that after the appearance of
the Lord, when Dhruva Maharaja thought and compared his determination
to his final reward, he realized that he had wanted a few particles of broken
glass but instead had received many diamonds. As soon as he saw the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead face (0 face, he immediately became con-
scious of the unimportance of his demand from the Lord to have an exalted
position better than Lord Brahma’s.

When Dhruva Maharaja became situated on the vdsudeva platform due
to seeing the Lord face to face, all his material contamination was cleared.
Thus he became ashamed of what his demands were and what he had
achieved. He was very much ashamed to think that although he had gone to
Madhuvana, giving up the kingdom of his father, and he had gotten a spiritual
master like Narada Muni, still he was thinking of revenge against his step-
mother and wanted to occupy an exalted post within this material world.
These were the causes for his moroseness even after he received all the
desired benedictions from the Lord.


--- Page 41 ---
Text 30] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 401

When Dhruva Maharaja factually saw the Supreme Personality of God-
head, there was no question of arevengeful attitude towards his stepmother
nor any aspiration to lord it over the material world, but the Supreme
Personality is so kind that He knew that Dhruva Maharaja wanted these.
Speaking before Dhruva Maharaja, He used the word vedaham because
when Dhruva Maharaja demanded material benefits, the Lord was present
within his heart and so knew everything. The Lord always knows every-
thing that a man is thinking. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita also:
vedaharm samatitani.

The Lord fulfilled all Dhruva Maharaja’s desires. His revengeful
attitude towards his stepmother and stepbrother was satisfied. He wanted
a more exalted position than his great-grandfather. That was also fulfilled.
And at the same time, his eternal position in Dhruvaloka was fixed. Al-
though Dhruva Maharaja’s achievement of an eternal planet was not
conceived by him, Krsna thought, “What will Dhruva do with an exalted
position within this material world?” Therefore He gave him the opportu-
nity to rule this material world for 36,000 years with unchangeable senses
and the chance to perform many great sacrifices and thus become the most
reputed king within this material world. And, after finishing with all this
material enjoyment, he would be promoted to the spiritual world, which
includes the Dhruvaloka.

TEXT 30
ya उवाच ॥
समाधिना नैकभवेन यत्पदं
विदुः सनन्दादय FAT: |
मासैरहं षडमिरघुष्य पादयो-
श्छायाघुपेत्यापगतः ERR
dhruva uvaca
samadhina naika-bhavena yat pada
viduh sanandadaya irdhva-retasah
masair aham sadbhir amusya padayos
chayam upetyapagatah prthan-matih

dhruvah uvaca—Dhruva Maharaja said; semadhina—by practicing yoga
in trance; na—never; eka-bhavena--by one birth; yat—which; padam—
position; viduh—understood; sananda-adayah—the four brahmacaris headed


--- Page 42 ---
402 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
by Sanandana; iirdhva-retasah—infallible celibates; masaih—within months;
aham—1; sadbhih—six; amusya—of Him; padayoh—of the lotus feet;
chayam—shelter;upetya—achieving;apagatah—fell down; prthak-matih—my
mind fixed on things other than the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja thought to himself: To endeavor to be situated in the
shade of the lotus feet of the Lord is not an ordinary task because even the
great brahmacaris headed by Sanandana, who practiced the agtanga-yoga in
trance, attained the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord only after many,
many births. Although within six months 1 achieved the same result,
nevertheless, due to my thinking differently from the Lord, I fell down
from my position.
PURPORT
In this verse Dhruva Maharaja himself explains the cause of his morose-
ness. First he laments that to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead
directly is not easy. Even great saintly persons like the four celebrated
brahmacaris headed by Sanandana—Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanatkumara and
Sanandana—practiced the yoga system for many, many births and remained
in trance before getting the opportunity to see the Supreme Lord face to
face. As far as Dhruva Maharaja was concerned, he saw the Supreme Lord
personally after only six months of practice in devotional service. He
expected, therefore, that as soon as he met the Supreme Lord, the Lord
would take him to His abode immediately, without waiting. Dhruva
Maharaja could understand very clearly that the Lord had offered him the
rule of the world for 36,000 years because in the beginning he was under
the spell of material energy and wanted to take revenge against his step-
mother and rule over his father’s kingdom. Dhruva Maharaja greatly
lamented his propensity for ruling the material world and his revengeful
attitude toward other living entities.
TEXT 31
अहो बत ममानात्म्यं मन्द भाग्यस्य TH |
weg: पादमूलं गत्वायाचे यदन्तवत्‌ 1220
aho bata mamanatmyarm
manda-bhagyasya pasyata
bhava-cchidah pada-milam
gatva yace yad antavat


--- Page 43 ---
Text 31] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 403

aho—oh;bata—alas; mama—my;andatmyam—bodily consciousness; manda-
bhagyasya—of the unfortunate; pasyata—just see; bhava—material existence;
chidah—of the Lord who can cut off; pada-miilam—the lotus feet; gatva—
having approached; yace—I prayed for; yat—that which; antavat—perishable.

TRANSLATION

Alas, just look at me! I am so unfortunate. I approached the lotus feet
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can immediately cut the
chain of the repetition of birth and death, but still, out of my foolishness,
I prayed for things which are perishable.

PURPORT

The word andtmyam is very significant in this verse. Atma means the soul,
and anatmya means without any conception of the soul. Srila Rsabhadeva
instructed his sons that unless a human being comes to the point of under-
standing the atma, or spiritual position, whatever he does is ignorance, and
this brings only defeat in his life. Dhruva Maharaja regrets his unfortunate
position, for although he approached the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is always able to give His devotee the highest benediction of cessation
of the repetition of birth and death, which is impossible for any demigod
to offer, he foolishly wanted something perishable. When Hiranyakasipu
asked immortality from Lord Brahma, Lord Brahma expressed hisinability
to offer such a benediction because he himself is not immortal; therefore
immortality or complete cessation of the chain of repeated birth and death
can be offered by the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead Himself,
not by others. Hari vind na stiri: taranti. It is said that without the blessings
of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no one can stop the continu-
ous chain of birth and death within this material world. Therefore the Su-
preme Lord is also called bhava-cchida. The Vaigpava philosophy in the pro-
cess of Krsna consciousness prohibits the devotee from all kinds of material
aspirations. A ४ 31518९8 devotee should always be anyabhilasita-sinya,
free from all material aspirations for the results of fruitive activities or em-
piric philosophical speculation. Dhruva Maharaja was actually initiated by
Narada Muni, the greatest Vaignava, in the chanting of 073 namo bhagavate
vasudevaya. This mantra is a visnu-mantra, for by practicing the chanting
of this mantra one is elevated to the Vignuloka. Dhruva Maharaja regrets
that although he was initiated in the vispu-mantra by a Vaignava, he still
aspired for material benefits. That was another cause for lamentation. Al-
though he got the result of the vispu-mantra by the causeless mercy of the
Lord, he lamented how foolish he was to strive for material benefits while


--- Page 44 ---
404 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
practicing devotional service. In other words, every one of us who is en-
gaged in devotional service in Krsna consciousness should be completely
free from all material aspirations. Otherwise we will have to lament like
Dhruva Maharaja.
TEXT 32
EN
मतिरिदूषिता देवैः पतद्भिरसदिष्णुषिः |
.
यो नारदवचस्तथ्यं नाग्राहिषमसत्तमः ॥३२॥
matir vidusita devaih
patadbhir asahispubhih
yo narada-vacas tathyarn
nagrahisam asattamah

matihi—intelligence; vidisité—contaminated; devaih—by the demigods;
patadbhih—who will fall down: asahispubhih—intolerant; yah—I who;
narada—of the great sage Narada; vacah—of the instructions; tathyam
—the truth; na—not; agrahisam—could accept; asat-tamah-—-the most
wretched.

TRANSLATION

Since all the demigods who are situated in the higher planetary system
will have to come down again, they are all envious of my being elevated to
Vaikunthaloka by devotional service. These intolerant demigods have
dissipated my intelligence, and only for this reason could I not accept the
genuine benediction of the instructions of Sage Narada.

PURPORT

As shown by many instances in the Vedic literature, when a person
undergoes severe austerities, the demigods become very much perturbed
because they are always afraid of losing their posts as the predominating
deities of the heavenly planets. It is known to them that their position in
the higher planetary system is not permanent, as it is stated in the
Bhagavad-gita, Ninth Chapter. It is said in the Gita that after exhausting
the results of their pious activities, all the demigods who are inhabitants of
the higher planetary system have to come back again to this earth.

It is a fact that the demigods control the different activities of the limbs
of our bodies. Factually we are not free even in moving our eyelids. Every-
thing is controlled by them. Dhruva Maharaja’s conclusion is that these
demigods, being envious of his superior position in devotional service,


--- Page 45 ---
Text 33] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 405
conspired against him to pollute his intelligence, and thus although he was
the disciple of a great Vaignava, Narada Muni, he could not accept his valid
instructions. Now Dhruva Maharaja regretted very much that he had ne-
glected these instructions. Narada Muni had asked him, “Why should you
bother about insult or adoration from your stepmother?” He of course
informed Dhruva Maharaja that since he was only a child, what did he
have to do with such insult or adoration? But Dhruva Maharaja was
determined to achieve the benediction of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, and therefore Narada advised him to go back home for the time
being, and in mature time he could try to practice devotional service.
Dhruva Maharaja regretted that he had rejected the advice of Narada Muni
and was adamant in asking him for something perishable, namely revenge
against his stepmother for her insult and possession of the kingdom of his
father.

Dhruva Maharaja regretted very much that he could not take seriously
the instruction of his spiritual master and that his consciousness was there-
fore contaminated. Still, the Lord is so merciful that due to Dhruva’s
execution of devotional service He offered him the ultimate Vaignava goal.

TEXT 33
देवीं মাযান্তুণাসি্য प्रसुस् श्व भिन्नटक्‌ |
तप्ये द्वितीयेऽप्यसति भ्रात॒ब्रातन्यहदढजा 133
daivirh mayam upasritya
prasupta iva bhinna-drk
tapye dvitiye ‘py asati
bhratr-bhratrvya-hrd-ruja

daivim—of the Personality of Godhead; mayam—the illusory energy;
upasritya— taking shelter of; prasuptah—dreaming while asleep; iva—like;
bhinna-drk—having separated vision; tapye—l lamented; dvitiye—in the
illusory energy; api—although; asati—temporary; bhratr—brother; bhra-
truya—enemy ; hyt— within the heart; ruja—by lamentation.

TRANSLATION

Dhruva Maharaja lamented: I was under the influence of the illusory
energy; being ignorant of the actual facts, I was sleeping on her lap. Under
a vision of duality, I saw my brother as my enemy, and falsely I lamented
within my heart, thinking, “They are my enemies.”


--- Page 46 ---
406 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
PURPORT
Real knowledge is revealed to a devotee only when he comes to the
right conclusion about life by the grace of the Lord. Our creation
of friends and enemies within this material world is something like
dreaming at night. In dreams we create so many things out of various
impressions in the subconscious mind, but all such creations are simply
temporary and unreal. In the same way, although apparently we are awake
in material life, because we have no information of the soul and the Super-
soul, we create many friends and enemies simply out of imagination.
Srila Krgnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami says that within this material world or
material consciousness, good and bad are the same. The distinction between
good and bad is simply a mental concoction. The actual fact is that all
living entities are sons of God, or by-products of His marginal energy.
Because of our being contaminated by the modes of material nature, we
distinguish one spiritual spark from another. That is also another kind of
dreaming. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gita that those who are actually
learned do not make any distinction between a learned scholar, a brahmana,
an elephant, a dog and a candala; they do not see in terms of the external
body, but they see the person as spirit soul. By higher understanding one
can know that the material body is nothing but a combination of the five
material elements. In that sense also the bodily construction of a human
being and that of a demigod are one and the same. From the spiritual
point of view we are all spiritual sparks, parts and parcels of the Supreme
Spirit, God. Either materially or spiritually we are basically one, but we
make friends and enemies as dictated by the illusory energy. Dhruva
Maharaja therefore said, 00800 mayam upasritya: the cause of his
bewilderment was his association with the illusory material energy.
TEXT 34
मयैतत्प्राथितं व्यथं चिकित्सेव गतायुषि ।
प्रसाय जगदात्मानं तपसा दुष्प्रसादनम्‌ |
भवच्छिदमयाचेऽहं भवं भाग्यविवर्जितः ॥२४॥
mayaitat [01211118072 vyarthar
cikitseva gatayusi
prasadya jagad-atmanari
tapasa dusprasadanam
bhava-cchidam ayace ’ham
bhava bhagya-vivarjitah
maya—by me; etat—this; prarthitam—prayed for; vyartham—uselessly;
cikitsa—treatment; iva—like; gata—has ended; ayusi—for one whose life;


--- Page 47 ---
Text 35] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 407
prasadya— after satisfying; jagat-atmanam—the soul of the universe; tapasa—
by austerity; dusprasadanam—who is very difficult to satisfy; bhava-chidam—
the Personality of Godhead, who can cut the chain of birth and death;
aydce—prayed for; aham—I; bhavam —again repetition of birth and death;
bhagya—fortune; vivarjitah—being without.
TRANSLATION
It is very difficult to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but in
my case, although I have satisfied the Supersoul of the whole universe, I
have prayed only for useless things. My activities were exactly like treat-
ment given to a person who is already dead. Just see how unfortunate I
am, for in spite of meeting the Supreme Lord, who can cut one’s link with
birth and death, I have prayed for the same conditions again.
PURPORT
Sometimes it so happens that a devotee engaged in the loving service of
the Lord desires some material benefit in exchange for this service. This is
not the proper way to discharge devotional service. Out of ignorance, of
course, sometimes a devotee does so, but Dhruva Maharaja regrets his per-
sonal behavior in this connection.
TEXT 35
aR यच्छतो मोद्यान्मानो मे मिक्षितो बत ।
ईशवरात्कषीणपुण्येन फलीकारानिवाधनः ॥२५॥
svarajyam yacchato maudhyan
mano me bhiksito bata
isvarat ksina-punyena
phali-karan ivadhanah
svarajyam—His devotional service; yacchatah—from the Lord, who was
willing to offer; maudhyat—by foolishness; manah—material prosperity;
me—by me; bhiksitah—was asked for; bata—alas; i$varat—from a great
emperor; ksina—reduced; pupyena—whose pious activities; phali-karan—
broken particles of husked rice; iva—like; adhanah—a poor man.
TRANSLATION
Because of my state of complete foolishness and paucity of pious activi-
ties, although the Lord offered me His personal service, still I wanted ma-
terial name, fame and prosperity. My case is just like that of the poor man


--- Page 48 ---
408 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9

who, when he satisfied a great emperor who wanted to give him anything he

might ask, out of ignorance asked only a few broken grains of husked rice.
PURPORT

In this verse the word svarajyam, which means complete independence,
is very significant. A conditioned soul does not know what complete inde-
pendence is. Complete independence means situation in one’s own consti-
tutional position. The real independence of a living entity, who is part and
parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is to remain always depen-
dent on the Supreme Lord, just like a child who plays in complete inde-
pendence, guided by his parents, who watch over him. The independence
of the conditioned soul does not mean to fight with the obstacles offered
by maya, but to surrender to Krsna. In the material world, everyone is
trying to become completely independent simply by fighting against the
obstacles offered by maya. This is called the struggle for existence. Real
independence is to be reinstated in the service of the Lord. Anyone who
goes to the Vaikuntha planets or Goloka Vrndavana planet is freely offering
his service to the Lord. That is complete independence. Just contrary to
this is material overlordship, which we wrongly take to be independence.
Many great political leaders have tried to establish independence, but due
to such so-called independence the people’s dependence has only increased.
The living entity cannot be happy trying to be independent in the material
world. One has to surrender, therefore, unto the lotus feet of the Lord and
engage in His original eternal service.

Dhruva Maharaja regrets that he wanted material opulence and greater
prosperity than that of his great-grandfather, Lord Brahma. His begging
from the Lord was like a poor man’s asking a great emperor for a few
grains of broken rice. The conclusion is that anyone who is engaged in the
loving service of the Lord should never ask for material prosperity from
the Lord. The awarding of material prosperity simply depends on the strin-
gent rules and regulations of the external energy. Pure devotees ask the
Lord only for the privilege of serving Him. This is our real independence.
If we want anything else, it is a sign of our misfortune.

TEXT 36
मैत्रेय उवाच
न वै gga पदारविन्दयो
रजोजुषस्तात भवादृशा जनाः |


--- Page 49 ---
Text 36] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 409
वाञ्छन्ति तदास्यमृतेऽथंमात्मनो
यचच्छया लनच्धमनःसथद्रयः RE
maitreya uvaca
na vai mukundasya padaravindayo
rajo-jusas tata bhavadrsa janah
vaiichanti tad-dasyam rte ’rtham atmano
yadrcchaya labdha-manah-samrddhayah

maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued; na—never; vai—
certainly; mukundasya—of the Lord, who can give liberation; pada-
aravindayoh—of the lotus feet; rajahjusah—persons who are eager to taste
the dust; tata—my dear Vidura; bhavadrsah—like yourself; janah—persons;
vaiichanti— desire; tat—His; dasyam—servitorship; rte—without; artham—
interest; atmanah—for themselves; yadrcchaya—automatically ; labdha—by
what is achieved; manah-samrddhayah—considering themselves to be very
rich.

TRANSLATION

The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, persons who, like
you, are pure devotees of the lotus feet of Mukunda [the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, who can offer liberation] and who are always attached
to the honey of His lotus feet, are always satisfied in serving at the lotus
feet of the Lord. In any condition of life, such persons remain satisfied,
and thus they never ask the Lord for material prosperity.

PURPORT

In the Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that He is the supreme enjoyer, the
supreme proprietor of everything and anything within this creation, and
the supreme friend of everyone. When one knows these things perfectly,
he is always satisfied. The pure devotee never hankers after any
kind of material prosperity. The karmis, however, or janis or yogis, en-
deavor always for their own personal happiness. Karmis work day and
night to improve their economic condition, jianis undergo severe aus-
terities in order to get liberation, and yogis also undergo severe austerities
by practicing the yoga system for attainment of wonderful mystic powers.
A devotee, however, is not interested in such activities; he does not want
mystic powers or liberation or material prosperity. He is satisfied in any
condition of life, as long as he is constantly engaged in the service of the
Lord. The Lord's feet are compared with the lotus, wherein there is saffron


--- Page 50 ---
410 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
dust. A devotee is always engaged in drinking the honey from the lotus feet
of the Lord. Unless one is freed from all material desires, he cannot actually
taste the honey from the Lord’s lotus feet. One has to discharge his devo-
tional duties without being disturbed by the coming and going of material
circumstances. This desirelessness for material prosperity is called niskama.
One should not mistakenly think that niskama means giving up all desires.
That is impossible. A living entity is eternally existent, and he cannot give
up desires. A living entity must have desires; that is the symptom of life.
When there is a recommendation to become desireless, it is to be under-
stood that this means that we should not desire anything for our sense
gratification. For a devotee this state of mind, niksprha, is the right posi-
tion. Actually every one of us already has an arrangement for our standard
of material comforts. A devotee should always remain satisfied with the
standard of comforts offered by the Lord, as stated in the Tsopanisad (tena
tyaktena bhuiijitha). This saves time for executing Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 37
आकर््यात्मजमायान्तं सम्परेत्य यथाऽऽगतम्‌ |
राजा न সহ मद्रमभद्रस्य कतो मम ॥३७॥
akarpyatma-jam ayantarn
samparetya yathagatam
raja na ৪70৫0000116 bhadram
abhadrasya kuto mama

akarpya—having heard; atma-jam—his son; dyantam—coming back;
samparetya—after dying; yatha—as if; dgatam—coming back; raja—King
Uttanapada; na—did not; §reddadhe—have any confidence; bhadram—good
fortune; abhadrasya—of the impious; kutah —whence; mama— my.

TRANSLATION

When King Uttanapada heard that his son Dhruva was coming back
home, as if coming back to life after death, he could not put his faith in
this message, for he was doubtful how it could happen. He considered.
himself the most wretched, and therefore he thought that it was not
possible for him to attain such good fortune.

PURPORT

Dhruva Maharaja, a five-year-old boy, went to the forest for penance
and austerity, and the King could not at all believe that a small boy of
such a tender age could live in the forest. He was certain that he was dead.


--- Page 51 ---
Texts 39-40] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 411
He therefore could not fix his faith in the message that Dhruva Maharaja
was coming back home again. For him this message said that a dead man
was coming back home, and so he could not believe it. After Dhruva
Maharaja’s departure from home, King Uttanapada thought that he was
the cause of his leaving, and thus he considered himself the most wretched.
Therefore, even though it was possible that his lost son was coming back
from the kingdom of death, he thought that since he was most sinful it was
not possible for him to be so fortunate as to get back his lost son.
TEXT 38
AEE वाक्यं ॒देवरपदषवेगेन भरषितः |
वार्ताहतैरतिप्रीतो हारं॒॑प्रादान्महाधनम्‌ Hell
sraddhaya vakyarh devarser
harsa-vegena dharsitah
varta-hartur atiprito
haram pradan maha-dhanam
sraddhaya—keeping faith; vdkyam—in the words; devarseh—of the great
sage Narada; harsa-vegena—by great satisfaction; dharsitah— overwhelmed;
varta-hartuh—with the messenger who brought the news; atipritah—being
very satisfied; haram—a pearl necklace; pradat—offered; maha-dhanam—
very valuable.
TRANSLATION
Although he could not believe the words of the messenger, he had full
faith in the word of the great sage, Narada. Thus he was greatly over-
whelmed by the news, and immediately he offered the messenger a highly
valuable garland in great satisfaction.
TEXTS 39-40
CH ম্যমাহয कातेखरपरिष्तम्‌ ।
जाहणैः इलबद्धैशच पयस्तोऽमात्यबन्धुभिः 13201
शङ्कदुन्दुभिनादेन ज्मथोषेण वेणुभिः |
निश्चक्राम पुरात्तूण॑मात्मजाभीक्षणोत्सुकः ।।४०।
sad-asvarm ratham aruhya
kartasvara-pariskrtam
५ brahmanaih kula-vrddhais ca
paryasto ‘'matya-bandhubhih


--- Page 52 ---
412 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
Sankha-dundubhi-nadena
brahma-ghosena venubhih
niscakrama purat turnam
atma-jabhiksanotsukah
sat-asvam—drawn by very fine horses; ratham—chariot; aruhya—
getting on; kartasvara-pariskrtam—bedecked with golden filigree; brahma-
naih—with brahmanas; kula-vrddhaith—along with elderly personalities of
the family; ca—also; paryastah—being surrounded; amatya—by officers and
ministers; bandhubhih—and friends; $afikha—of conchshells; dundubhi—
and kettledrums; nadena—with the sound; brahma-ghosena—by the chanting
of Vedic mantras; venubhih—by flutes; niscakrama—he came out; purat—
from the city; tarnam—with great haste; atma-ja—son; abhiksana—to see;
utsukah—very eager.
TRANSLATION
Then King Uttanapada, being very eager to see the face of his lost son,
mounted a chariot drawn by excellent horses and bedecked with golden
filigree. Taking with him many learned brahmanas, all the elderly per-
sonalities of his family, his officers, his ministers, and his immediate
friends, he immediately left the city. As he proceeded in this parade, there
were auspicious sounds of conchshells, kettledrums, flutes, and the chant-
ing of Vedic mantras to indicate all good fortune.
TEXT 41
सुनीतिः सुरुचिश्चास्य महिष्यौ रुक्मभूषिते |
sem शिबिकां सारधषु्येनाभिजम्मत; Heel
sunitih surucis casya
mahisyau rukma-bhasite
aruhya sibikar sardham
uttamenabhijagmatuh
sunitih—Queen Suniti; suructh—Queen Suruci; ca—also; asya—of the
King; mahisyau—queens; rukma-bhusite—being decorated with golden
ornaments; aruhya—getting on; sibikam—a palanquin;sardham—along with;
uttamena—the King’s other son, Uttama; abhijagmatuh-all proceeded along.
TRANSLATION
Both the queens of King Uttanapada, namely Suniti and Suruci, along
with his other son, Uttama, appeared in the procession. The queens were
seated on a palanquin.


--- Page 53 ---
Texts 42-43] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 413
PURPORT
After the departure of Dhruva Maharaja from the palace, the King was
very afflicted, but by the kind words of Saint Narada he was partially
satisfied. He could understand the great fortune of his wife Suniti and the
great misfortune of Queen Suruci, for these facts were certainly very open
in the palace. But still when the news reached the palace that Dhruva
Maharaja was returning, his mother, Suniti, out of her great compassion
and due to being the mother of a great Vaisnava, did not hesitate to take
the other wife, Suruci, and her son Uttama, on the same palanquin. That
is the greatness of Queen Suniti, the mother of the great Vaisnava Dhruva
Maharaja.
TEXTS 42-43
तं दृषटरोपवनाभ्याश्च आयान्तं तरसा रथात्‌ ।
अवरुह्य सृपस्तूण॑मासाद्य प्रेमविह्वलः ॥४२॥
परिरेभेऽङ्गजं दो्या दीर्घोत्कण्ठमनाः श्वसन्‌ |
विष्वक्सेनाडधिसंस्पशंहतारोषाघषन्धनम्‌ 1931
tari drstvopavanabhyasa
ayantam tarasa rathat
avaruhya nrpas turnam
asadya prema-vihvalah
parirebhe ‘figajariv dorbhyari
dirghotkantha-manah svasan
visvaksenanghri-samsparsa-
hatasesagha-bandhanam
tam—him (Dhruva Maharaja); drstva—having seen; upavana—the small
forest; abhydse—near;dayantam—returning; tarasa—with great haste; rathat—
from the chariot; avaruhya—got down; nrpah—the King; tirnam—immedi-
ately; dsadya—coming near; prema—with love; vihvalah—overwhelmed;
parirebhe—he embraced; anga-jam—his son; dorbhyam—with his arms;
dirgha—for a long time; utkantha—anxious; manah—the King, whose mind;
$vasan—breathing heavily ; visvaksena—of the Lord;anghri—by the lotus feet;
sarmsparsa—being touched; hata—were destroyed; asesa—unlimited; agha—
material contamination; bandhanam —whose bondage.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Dhruva Maharaja approaching the neighboring small forest,
King Uttanapada with great haste got down from his chariot. He had been


--- Page 54 ---
414. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
very anxious for a long time to see his son Dhruva, and therefore with
great love and affection he went forward to embrace his long lost boy.
Breathing very heavily, he embraced him with both arms. But Dhruva
Maharaja was not the same as before; he was completely sanctified by
spiritual advancement due to being touched by the lotus feet of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 44
9
अथाजिघरन्धुहमूभिं शीते नंयनवारिमिः |
खरापयामास तनयं जातोदाममनोरेथः ॥४४॥
athajighran muhur murdhni
Sitair nayana-varibhih
snapayam asa tanayam
jatoddama-mano-rathah
atha—thereupon; ajighran—smelling; muhuh—again and again; mirdhni—
on the head; sitath—cold; nayana—of his eyes; varibhih—with the water;
snapayam asa—he bathed; tanayam—son; jata—fulfilled; uddama—great;
manah-rathah—his desire.
TRANSLATION
Reunion with Dhruva Maharaja fulfilled King Uttanapada’s long cherished
desire, and for this reason he smelled Dhruva’s head again and again and
bathed him with torrents of very cold tears.
PURPORT
By nature’s way, when a man cries, there may be two causes. When one
cries in great happiness upon the fulfillment of some desire, the tears
coming forth from the eyes are very cold and pleasing, whereas tears in
times of distress are very hot.
TEXT 45
f= पितुः पादादाशीषिञ्चापियन्तरितः |
ननाम मातरौ शी्णा सत्कृतः सजनाग्रणीः ॥४५॥
abhivandya [८५१ padav
asirbhis cabhimantritah
nanama matarau Sirspa
sat-krtah saj-janagranih
abhivandya—worshiping; pituh—of his father; padau—the feet; asirbhih—
with benedictions; ca—and; abhimantritah—was addressed; nanama—he


--- Page 55 ---
Text 46] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 415
bowed; matarau—to his two mothers; §irsna—with his head; sat-krtah—was
honored; sat-jana—of the nobles; agranih—the foremost.
TRANSLATION
Then Dhruva Maharaja, the foremost of all nobles, first of all offered his
obeisances at the feet of his father and was honored by his father with
various questions. He then bowed his head at the feet of his two mothers.
PURPORT
It may be questioned why Dhruva Maharaja offered his respect not only
to his mother but also to his stepmother, due to whose insults he had to
leave home. The answer is that after achieving perfection by self-realization
and seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face, Dhruva
Maharaja was completely freed from all contamination of material desire.
Feelings of insult or honor in this material world are never perceived by a
devotee. Lord Caitanya therefore says that one has to be humbler than the
grass, and, He recommends, more tolerant than the tree, to execute devo-
tional service. Dhruva Maharaja, therefore, has in this verse been described
as sajjanagranih, the foremost of noble men. The pure devotee is the
noblest of all, and he has no feelings of animosity towards anyone. Duality
due to animosity is a creation of this material world. There is no such thing
in the spiritual world, which is the absolute reality.
TEXT 46
सुरुचिस्तं सघुत्थाप्य पादानतमर्भम्‌ |
परिष्वज्याद जीवेति बाष्पगद्रदया गिरा ngs
surucis tar samutthapya
padavanatam arbhakam
parisvajyaha jiveti
baspa-gadgadaya gira
surucih—Queen Suruci; tam—him; samutthapya—having picked up; pada-
avanatam—fallen at her feet; arbhakam—the innocent boy; parisvajya—
embracing; dha—she said; jiva—may you live long; iti—thus; baspa—with
tears; gadgadaya—choked up; gira—with words.
TRANSLATION
Suruci, the younger mother of Dhruva Maharaja, seeing that the
innocent boy had fallen at her feet, immediately picked him up, embracing


--- Page 56 ---
416 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
him with her hands, and with tears of feeling she blessed him with the
words, “My dear boy, long may you live!”
TEXT 47
यस्य FEW मगवान्‌ गुणेरमेभ्यादिमिर्दरिः |
तस्मै नमन्ति भूतानि निन्नमाप হন खयम्‌ well
yasya prasanno bhagavan
gunair maitryadibhir harih
tasmai namanti bhutani
nimnam apa iva svayam
yasya—anyone with whom; prasannah—is pleased; bhagavan—the Per-
sonality of Godhead; gunaih—by qualities; maitri-adibhih—by friendship,
etc.; harih—Lord Hari; tasmai—unto him: namanti—offer respect; bhittani—
all living entities; nimnam—to low ground; apah—water; iva—just as;
svayam—automatically.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who has transcendental qualities due to friendly behavior with
the Supreme Personality of Godhead receives honor from all living entities,
just as water automatically flows down by nature.
PURPORT
The question may be raised in this connection why Suruci, who was not
at all favorably disposed towards Dhruva, blessed him, ‘Long may you live,”
which means that she also desired good fortune for him. The answer is
given in this verse. Since Dhruva Maharaja was blessed by the Lord, due to
his transcendental qualities everyone was bound to offer him all respects
and benediction, just as water, by its nature, flows downward. A devotee
of the Lord does not demand respect from anyone, but wherever he goes
he is honored by everyone throughout the whole world with all respect.
Srinivasa Acarya said that the six Gosvamis of Vrndavana are respected
throughout the entire universe because a devotee, having pleased the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the source of all emanations, auto-
matically pleases everyone, and thus everyone offers him respect.
TEXT 48
उत्तमश्च धुवश्रोमावन्योन्यं ঈমনিষ্ধকী ।
अङ्गसङ्गादुस्पुलकाबखौषं घहुरूहत्‌ः ॥४८॥


--- Page 57 ---
Text 50) Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 417
uttamas ca dhruvas cobhav
anyonyam prema-vihvalau
anga-sangad utpulakav
0৫570008120 778 muhur ahatuh
uttamah ca—also Uttama; dhruvah ca—Dhruva also; ubhau—both; anyo-
nyam—one another; prema-vihvalau—being overwhelmed with affection;
anga-sangat—by embracing; utpulakau—their hair stood up; asru—of tears;
ogham—torrents; muhuh—again and again; ahatuh—they exchanged.
TRANSLATION
The two brothers Uttama and Dhruva Maharaja also exchanged their
tears. They were overwhelmed by the ecstasy of love and affection, and
when they embraced one another, the hair on both their bodies stood up.
TEXT 49
सुनीतिरस्य जननी प्राणेभ्योऽपि प्रियं सुतम्‌ ।
IW जहावाधिं तदङ्गस्पदौनिडैता ।॥४९॥
sunitir asya janani
pranebhyo ‘pi priyam sutam
upaguhya jahav adhim
tad-anga-sparsa-nirvrta
sunitih—Suniti, the real mother of Dhruva Maharaja; asya—his; janani—
mother; pranebhyah—more than life air; api—even; priyam—dear; sutam—
son; upaguhya—embracing; jehau—gave up; adhim—all grief; tat-anga—
his body ; sparsa—touching; nirvrta—being satisfied.
TRANSLATION
Suniti, the real mother of Dhruva Maharaja, embraced the tender body
of her son, who was dearer to her than her own life, and thus forgot all
material grief, for she was very pleased.
TEXT 50
पयःस्तनाम्यां GEE নঙ্গতীঃ सलिलैः fA: ।
तदापिष्च्यिपानास्यां वीर ET gg: ॥॥*५०॥


--- Page 58 ---
418 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
payah stanabhyam susrava
netra-jath salilaih sivaih
tadabhisicyamanabhyarm
vira vira-suvo muhuh

payah—milk; stanabhyam—from both breasts; susrava—began to flow
down; netra-jaih—from the eyes; salilaih—by tears; sivaih —auspicious; tada—
at that time; abhisicyamanabhyam—being wetted; vira—my dear Vidura;
vira-suvah—of the mother who gave birth to a hero; muhuh—constantly.

TRANSLATION

My dear Vidura, Suniti was the mother of a great hero. Her tears,
together with the milk flowing from her breasts, wet the whole body of
Dhruva Maharaja. This was a great auspicious sign.

PURPORT

When Deities are installed, They are washed with milk, yogurt and
water, and this ceremony is called abhiseka. In this verse it has been espe-
cially mentioned that the tears which flowed down from the eyes of Suniti
were all-auspicious. This auspiciousness of the abhiseka ceremony per-
formed by his beloved mother is the indication that in the very near
future Dhruva Maharaja would be installed on the throne of his father.
The history of Dhruva Maharaja’s leaving home was that his father refused
to give him a place on his lap, and Dhruva Maharaja determined that
unless he got the throne of his father he would not come back. Now this
abhiseka ceremony performed by his beloved mother was an indication
that he would occupy the throne of Maharaja Uttanapada.

11 is also significant in this verse that Suniti, mother of Dhruva Maharaja,
is described as vira-sii, a mother who produced a great hero. There are
many heroes in the world, but there is no comparison with Dhruva Maha-
raja, who was not only a heroic emperor of this planet, but also a great
devotee. A devotee is also a great hero because he conquers the influence
of maya. When Lord Caitanya inquired from Ramananda Raya about the
most famous man in this world, the latter replied that anyone who is
known as a great devotee of the Lord is to be accepted as the most famous.

TEXT 51
at ras Tt दिष्टथा ते पुत्र आर्तिहा ।
प्रविलन्धश्चिरं नष्टो रक्षिता मण्डलं वः ॥५१॥


--- Page 59 ---
Text 52] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 419
tam Sasamsur jana rajiim
distya te putra arti-ha
pratilabdhas ciram 7145 {0
raksita mandala bhuvah
tam—unto Queen Suniti; Sasamsuh—offered praise; janah—the people in
general; rajiim—unto the Queen; distya—by fortune; te—your; putrah—son;
arti-ha—will vanquish all your pains; pratilabdhah—now returned; ciram—
since a long time; nagtah—lost; raksitda— will protect; mandalam— the globe;
bhuvah—earthly.
TRANSLATION
The residents of the palace praised the Queen: Dear Queen, your
beloved son was lost a long time ago, and it is your great fortune that he
now has come back. It appears, therefore, that your son will be able to
protect you for a very long time and will put an end to all your material
pangs.
TEXT 52
FARE नूलं मगबान्‌ प्रणतातिंहा |
यदनुध्यायिनो drags जिग्युः grea ।५२॥
abhyarcitas tvaya nanam
bhagavan pranatarti-ha
yad-anudhyayino dhira
mrtyum jigyuh sudurjayam
abhyarcitah—worshiped; tvaya—by you; nitnam—however; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pranata-arti-ha—who can deliver His
devotees from the greatest danger; yat—whom: anudhyayinah—constantly
meditating upon; dhirah—great saintly persons; mrtyum—death; jigyuh—
conquered; sudurjayam—which is very, very difficult to overcome.
TRANSLATION
Dear Queen, you must have worshiped the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who delivers His devotees from the greatest danger. Persons who
constantly meditate upon Him surpass the course of birth and death. This
perfection is very difficult to achieve.


--- Page 60 ---
420 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
PURPORT
Dhruva Maharaja was the lost child of Queen Suniti, but during his
absence she always meditated upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is able to rescue His devotee from all dangers. While Dhruva Maharaja
was absent from his home, not only did he undergo severe austerities in the
forest of Madhuvana, but at home also his mother prayed to the Supreme
Lord for his safety and good fortune. In other words, the Lord was wor-
shiped by both the mother and the son, and both were able to achieve the
supreme benediction from the Supreme Lord. The word sudurjayam, an
adjective which indicates that no one can conquer death, is very significant.
When Dhruva Maharaja was away from his home, his father thought that
he was dead. Ordinarily a king’s son only five years old and away from
home in the forest would certainly be supposed dead, but by the mercy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not only was he saved, but he was
blessed with the highest perfection.
TEXT 53
लाल्यमानं जनैरेवं॑धुवं॑ सभ्रातरं चपः ।
आरोप्य करिणीं हृष्टः स्तूयमानोऽविशपुरम्‌ ।५२॥
lalyamanam janair evan
dhruvarm sabhrataram nrpah
aropya karinim hrstah
stuyamano ‘visat puram
lalyamanam— being thus praised;janaih—by the people in general; evam—
thus; dhruvam—Maharaja Dhruva; sa-bhrataram—with his brother; nrpeh—
the King; dropya—placing; karinim—on the back of a she-elephant; hrstah—
being so pleased; stiyamanah—and being so praised; avisat—returned;
puram—to his capital.
TRANSLATION
The sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, when everyone was thus
praising Dhruva Maharaja, the King was very happy, and he had Dhruva and
his brother seated on the back of a she-elephant. Thus he returned to his
capital, where he was praised by all classes of men.
TEXT 54
तत्र तत्रोपसं्ेरंसन्मकरतोरणैः |
EN
AFL: कदलीस्तम्भैः ` पूगपोतैश्च afd ॥५४॥


--- Page 61 ---
Text 55] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 421
tatra tatropasanklptair
lasan-makara-toranaih
savrndaih kadali-stambhaih
piga-potais ca tad-vidhaih
tatra tatra—here and there; upasanklptaih—set up; lasat—brilliant;
makara—shark-shaped; torapaih—with arched gateways; sa-vrndaih—with
bunches of fruits and flowers; kadali—of banana trees; stambhaih—with
columns; paga-potaih—with young betel nut trees; ca—also; tat-vidhaih —of
that kind.
TRANSLATION
The whole city was decorated with columns of banana trees containing
bunches of fruits and flowers, and betel nut trees with leaves and branches
were seen here and there. There were also many gates set up which were
structured to give the appearance of sharks.
PURPORT
Auspicious ceremonies with decorations of the green leaves of palms,
coconut trees, betel nut trees and banana trees and with fruits, flowers and
leaves are an age-old custom in India. To receive his great son Dhruva
Maharaja, King Uttanapada arranged a good reception, and all the citizens
very enthusiastically took part with great jubilation.
TEXT 55
चूतप्छववासःसशक्तादामविलम्बिमिः. ।
A ॐ
उपस्कृतं प्रतिद्वारमपां ङम्भैः सदीपकैः ॥५५॥
citta-pallava-vasah-sran-
mukta-dama-vilambibhih
upaskrtamn pratidvaram
apam kumbhaih sadipakaih
ciita-pallava—with mango leaves; vasah—cloth; srak—flower garlands;
mu kta-dama-strings of pearls:vilambibhih—hanging;upaskrtam-decorated;
pratidvaram—at every gate; apam—full of water; kumbhaih—with water
pols; sa-dipakaih—with burning lamps.
TRANSLATION
At each and every gate there were burning lamps and big water pots
decorated with differently colored cloth, strings of pearls, flower garlands,
and hanging mango leaves.


--- Page 62 ---
422 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
TEXT 56
प्राकारर्गोपुरागारैः शातङुम्मपरिष्छदः |
Coo tid d
सवेतोऽलंकृतं श्रीमदिमानशिखरदयभिः ।॥५६॥
prakarair gopuragaraih
$ata-kumbha-paricchadaih
sarvato ‘lankrtam srimad-
vimana-$ikhara-dyubhih
prakaraih—with surrounding walls; gopura—city gates; dgaraih—with
houses; s$ata-kumbha—golden; paricchadaih—with ornamental work;
sarvatah—on all sides; alannkrtam—decorated; srimat—valuable, beautiful;
vimana— airplanes; sikhara—domes; dyubhih—glittering.
TRANSLATION
In the capital city there were many palaces, city gates and surrounding
walls, which were already very, very beautiful, and on this occasion all of
them were decorated with golden ornaments. The domes of the city palaces
littered, as did the domes of the beautiful airplanes which hovered over
the city.
PURPORT
Regarding the mention of airplanes here, it is suggested by Srimad
Vijayadhvaja Tirtha that on this occasion the demigods from higher
planetary systems also came in their airplanes to bestow their blessings on
Dhruva Maharaja on his arrival at the capital of his father. It also appears
that all the domes of the city palaces as well as the pinnacles of the air-
planes were decorated with ornamental work in gold, and, being reflected
by the sunshine, they were all glittering. We can observe a specific distinc-
tion between Dhruva Maharaja’s time and modern days, for the airplanes
in those days were made of gold, whereas at the present moment airplanes
are made of base aluminum. This just gives a hint of the opulence of
Dhruva Maharaja’s days and the poverty of modern times.
TEXT 57
EITICAGER चन्दनचर्चितम्‌ |
TE: पृष्परठैस्तष्डलैवेलिपियुतम्‌ ।५७॥


--- Page 63 ---
Texts 58-59] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 423
mrsta-catvara-rathyatta-
77101807118 candana-carcitam
lajaksataih puspa-phalais
tandulair balibhir yutam
mysta—fully cleansed; catvara—quadrangles; rathya—highways; atta—
raised sitting places; margam—lanes; candana—with sandalwood; carcitam—
sprinkled; l@ja— with fried rice; aksataih—and barley; puspa—with flowers;
phalaih—and fruits; tepdulaih—with rice; balibhih—auspicious presenta-
tions; yutam—provided with.
TRANSLATION
All the quadrangles, lanes and streets in the city, and the raised sitting
places at the crossings, were thoroughly cleansed and sprinkled with
sandalwood water; and all over the city auspicious grains such as rice and
barley and flowers, fruits and many other auspicious presentations were
scattered.
TEXTS 58-59
भुवाय पथि दृष्टाय तत्र तत्र पुरख्ियः |
सिद्धार्थाक्षतदध्यम्बुटूरवापुष्यफलानि च ॥५८॥
उपजहुः प्रयुञ्जाना वात्सल्यादाशिषः सतीः |
भृष्व॑स्तद्त्गुगीतानि प्रादिशद्भवनं पितुः isan
dhruvaya pathi drstaya
tatra tatra pura-striyah
siddharthaksata-dadhy-ambu-
darva-puspa-phalani ca
upajehruh prayuiijana
vatsalyad asisah satih
$rnvarns tad-valgu-gitani
pravisad bhavanarm pituh
dhruvaya—on Dhruva; pathi—on the road; drstaya—seen; tatra tatra—
here and there; pura-striyah—household ladies; siddhartha—white mustard
seed; aksata—barley; dadhi—curd; ambu—water; diirvdi—newly grown grass;
puspa—tlowers; phalani—fruits; ca—also; upajahruh—they showered;
prayunjanah—uttering; vatsalyat—out of affection; asisah—blessings; satih—
gentle ladies; §rnvan—hearing; tat —their; valgu—very pleasing; gitani—songs;
pravisat—he entered; bhavanam—the palace; pituh—of his father.


--- Page 64 ---
424 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
TRANSLATION
Thus, as Dhruva Maharaja passed on the road, from every place in the
neighborhood all the gentle household ladies assembled to see him, and
out of maternal affection they offered their blessings, showering him with
white mustard seed, barley, curd, water, newly grown grass, fruits and
flowers. In this way Dhruva Maharaja, while hearing the pleasing songs sung
by the ladies, entered the palace of his father.
TEXT 60
महामणिव्रातमये स॒तसिन्‌ भवनोत्तमे |
लालितो नितरां पित्रा न्यवसदिवि देववत्‌ ॥६०।
mahamani-vrata-maye
sa tasmin bhavanottame
lalito nitaram pitra
nyavasad divi devavat
mahamani—greatly valuable jewels; vrata—groups of; maye—bedecked
with; seh—he (Dhruva Maharaja); tasmin—in that; bhavana-uttame—bril-
liant house; lalitah—being raised; nitaram—always; pitra—by the father;
nyavasat—lived there; divi—in the higher planetary systems; deva-vat—
like the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja thereafter lived in his father’s palace, which had walls
bedecked with highly valuable jewels. His affectionate father took par-
ticular care of him, and he dwelled in that house just as the demigods
live in their palaces in the higher planetary systems.
TEXT 61
पयःफेननिमाः शय्या दान्ता रुक्मपरच्छदाः।
आसनानि महार्हाणि यत्र रौक्मा उपस्कराः 118 21
payah-phena-nibhah sayya
danta rukma-paricchadah
asanani maharhani
yatra raukma upaskarah


--- Page 65 ---
Text 62] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 425
payah—milk; phena—foam; nibhah—like; s$ayyah—bedding; dantah—
made of ivory; rukma—golden; paricchadah—with embellishments; asanani—
sitting places; maha-arhapi—very valuable; yatra— where; raukmah—golden;
upaskarah—furniture.
TRANSLATION
The bedding in the palace was as white as the foam of milk and was very
soft. The bedsteads were made of ivory with embellishments of gold, and
the chairs, benches and other sitting places and furniture were made of gold.
TEXT 62
IT ERITH महामारकतेषु च |
मणिप्रदीपा आभान्ति ठलठनारत्रसंयुताः ॥६२॥
yatra sphatika-kudyesu
maha-marakatesu ca
mani-pradipa abhanti
lalana-ratna-samyutah
yatra—where; sphatika—made of marble; kudyesu—on walls; maha-
marakatesu—bedecked with valuable jewels like sapphires; ca—also; mani-
pradipah—lamps made of jewels; abhanti—shined; lalana—female figures;
ratna—made of jewels; sam yutah—held by.
TRANSLATION
The palace of the King was surrounded by walls made of marble with
many engravings made of valuable jewels like sapphires, which depicted
beautiful women with shining jewel lamps in their hands.
PURPORT
The description of King Uttanapada’s palace depicts the state of affairs
many hundreds and thousands of years ago, long before Srimad-Bhagavatam
was compiled. Since it is described that Maharaja Dhruvaruled for 36,000
years, he must have lived in the Satya-yuga, when people lived for 100,000
years. The life durations in the four yugas are also mentioned in the Vedic
literature. In the Satya-yuga people used to live for 100,000 years, in the
Treta-yuga people lived for 10,000 years, in Dvapara-yuga they lived for
1,000 years, and in this age, Kali-yuga, people may live up to 100 years.


--- Page 66 ---
426 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch.9
With the progressive advance of each new yuga, the duration of human life
is reduced by ninety percent—from 100,000 to 10,000, from 10,000 to
1,000, and from 1,000 to 100.

It is said that Dhruva Maharaja is the great-grandson of Lord Brahma.
This indicates that Dhruva Maharaja’s time was in the Satya-yuga in the
beginning of creation. During one day of Lord Brahma, as stated in the
Bhagavad-gita, there are many Satya-yugas. According to the Vedic calcu-
lation, at the present moment the twenty-eighth millennium is current. It
can be calculated that Dhruva Maharaja lived many millions of years ago,
but the description of the palace of Dhruva’s father is so glorious that
we cannot accept that advanced human civilization did not exist even
40,000 or 50,000 years ago. There were walls like those in the palace of
Maharaja Uttanapada even very recently, during the Mogul period. Anyone
who has seen the Red Fort in Delhi must have marked that the walls were
made of marble and were once decorated with jewels. During the British
Period all these jewels were taken away and dispatched to the British
Museum.

The conception of worldly opulence was formerly based mainly on
natural resources such as jewels, marble, silk, ivory, gold and silver. The
advancement of economic development was not based on big motor cars.
Advancement of human civilization does not depend on industrial enter-
prises, but on possession of natural wealth and natural food, which is all
supplied by the Supreme Personality of Godhead so that we may save time
for self-realization and success in the human form of body.

Another aspect of this verseis that Dhruva Maharaja’s father, Uttanapada,
would very soon give up attachment for his palaces and would go to the
forest for self-realization. From the description of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
therefore, we can make a very thorough comparative study of modern
civilization and the civilization of mankind in the other millenniums,
Satya-yuga, Treta-yuga and Dvapara-yuga.

TEXT 63
उद्यानानि च रम्याणि विचित्ररमरद्रमः |
छजदविहज्गमियुनेगायन्मत्तमधुवतैः N&R
udyanani ca ramyani
vicitrair amara-drumaih
kuja-dvihanga-mithunair
gayan-matta-madhuvrataih


--- Page 67 ---
Text 64] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 427
udyanani—gardens; ca—also; ramyani—very beautiful; vicitraih—various;
amara-drumath—with trees brought from the heavenly planets; kija—
singing; dvihanga—of birds; mithunaih—with pairs; gayat—humming; matta
—mad; madhu-vrataih—with bumblebees.
TRANSLATION

The King’s residence was surrounded by gardens wherein there were
varieties of trees brought from the heavenly planets, and in those trees
there were pairs of sweetly singing birds and almost mad bumblebees who
made a very relishable buzzing sound.

PURPORT

In this verse the word amara-drumaih, “with trees brought from the
heavenly planets,” is very significant. The heavenly planets are known as
amaraloka, the planets where death is very much delayed, because the people
there live for 10,000 years according to the calculations of the demigods, in
which our six months are equal to one day. The demigods live in the
heavenly planets for months, years and ten thousands of years according
to demigod time, and then again, after the results of their pious activities
are exhausted, they fall down again to this earth. These are the statements
that can be collected from Vedic literature. As the people there live for
10,000 years, so also do the trees. Of course, here on this earth there are
many trees which live for 10,000 years, so what to speak of the trees on
the heavenly planets? They must live for more than many ten thousands of
years, and sometimes, as practiced even now, some valuable trees are taken
from one place to another.

Itis elsewhere stated that when Lord Krsna went to the heavenly planets
with His wife Satyabhama He took a parijata flower tree from heaven and
brought it to the earth. There was a fight between Krsna and the demigods
due to the parijata tree’s being taken from heaven to this planet. The
parijata was planted in the palace of Lord Krsna which was occupied by
Queen Satyabhama. The flower and fruit trees in the heavenly planets are
superior, for they are very pleasant and tasteful, and it appears that in the
palace of Maharaja Uttanapada there were many varieties of such trees.

TEXT 64
बाप्यो वैद्य॑सोपानाः पद्योत्परङ्घठुदतीः |
(सकारण्डवङ्तेशकादसारतेः = ॥६४॥


--- Page 68 ---
428 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
vapyo vaidiirya-sopanah
padmotpala-kumudvatih
hamsa-karandava-kulair
Jjustas cakrahva-sarasaih
vapyah—lakes; vaidiirya—emerald; sopanah—with staircases; padma—
lotuses; utpala—blue lotuses; kumud-vatth—full of lilies; harisa—swans;
karandava—and ducks; kulaih—by flocks of; just@h—inhabited; cakrahva—
by cakravikas (geese); sarasaih—and by cranes.
TRANSLATION
There were emerald staircases which led to lakes full of variously colored
lotus flowers and lilies, and swans, karandavas, cakravakas, cranes and
similar other valuable birds were visible in those lakes.
PURPORT
It appears that the palace was not only surrounded by compounds and
gardens with varieties of trees, but there were small man-made lakes also
where the water was full of many colorful lotus flowers and lilies, and to
get down to the lakes there were staircases made of valuable jewels such as
emeralds. By the beautifully positioned garden houses there were many
luxuriant birds, such as swans, cakravakas, karandavas and cranes. These
birds generally do not live in filthy places like crows. The atmosphere of
the city was very healthy and beautiful; it can simply be imagined from its
description.
TEXT 65
उत्तानपादो राजर्षिः সমান तनयस्य तम्‌ |
श्रुत्वा Tyga प्रपेदे विखयं परम्‌ nga
uttanapado rajarsih
prabhavam tanayasya tam
$rutva drstvadbhuta-tamam
prapede vismayarm param
uttanapadah—King Uttanapada; rajarsih—great saintly king; prabhavam
—influence; tanayasya—of his son; tam—that; srutva—hearing; drstva—
seeing; adbhuta— wonderful; tamam—in the superlative degree; prapede—
happily felt; vismayam—wonder; param—supreme.


--- Page 69 ---
Text 66) Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 429
TRANSLATION
The saintly King Uttanapada, hearing of the glorious deeds of Dhruva
Maharaja and personally seeing also how influential and great he was, felt
very satisfied, for Dhruva’s activities were wonderful to the supreme
degree.
PURPORT
When Dhruva Maharaja was in the forest executing his austerities, his
father, Uttanapada, heard everything about his very wonderful activities.
Although Dhruva Maharaja was not only the son of a king but was
only five years old, he went to the forest and executed devotional service
under strict austerity. Therefore his acts were all wonderful, and when he
came back home, naturally, because of his spiritual qualifications, he be-
came very popular amongst the citizens. He must have performed many
wonderful activities by the grace of the Lord. No one is more satisfied
than the father of a person who is credited with glorious activities.
Maharaja Uttidnapada was not an ordinary king; he was a rajarsi, a saintly
king. Formerly this earth was ruled by one saintly king only. Kings were
trained to become saintly; therefore they had no other concern than the
welfare of the citizens. These saintly kings were properly trained, and as
mentioned in Bhagavad-gita also, the science of God, or the yoga system of
devotional service known as Bhagavad-gita, was spoken to the saintly king
of the sun planet, and gradually it descended through the ksatriya kings
who were generated from the sun and the moon. If the head of the govern-
ment is saintly, certainly the citizens not only become saintly, but they
are very happy because both their spiritual and physical needs and hanker-
ings are satisfied.
TEXT 66
वीक्ष्योढवयसं तं च प्रकृतीनां च सम्मतम्‌ |
. ~
अनुरक्तप्रजं राजा धुवं चक्रे वः पतिम्‌ ॥६६॥
viksyodha-vayasam tam ca
prakrtinam ca sammatam
anurakta-prajar raja
01110000118 cakre bhuvah patim
viksya—after seeing; idha-vayasam—mature in age; tam—Dhruva;ca— and;
prakrtinam—Mby the ministers; ca—also;sammatam—approved of ; anurakta—


--- Page 70 ---
430 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 9
beloved; prajam—by his subjects; raja—the King; dhruvam—Dhruva Maharaja;
cakre—made; bhuvah—of the earth; patim—master.

TRANSLATION

When, after concentration, King Uttanapada saw that Dhruva Maharaja
was suitably mature to take charge of the kingdom and that his ministers
were agreeable and the citizens were also very fond of him, he enthroned
him as Emperor of this planet.

PURPORT

Although it is misconceived that formerly the monarchial government
was autocratic, from the description of this verse it appears that not only
was King Uttanapada a rajarsi, but before installing his beloved son Dhruva
on the throne of the empire of the world, he consulted his ministerial
officers, considered the opinion of the public, and also personally examined
Dhruva’s character. Then he installed him on the throne to take charge of
the affairs of the world.

When a Vaisnava king like Dhruva Maharaja is the head of the govern-
ment of the entire world, the world is so happy that it is not possible to
imagine or describe. Even now, if people would all become Krsna conscious,
the democratic government of the present day would be exactly like the
kingdom of heaven. If all people became Krsna conscious they would vote
for persons who are of the category of Dhruva Maharaja. If the post of
chief executive were occupied by such a Vaisnava, all the problems of
satanic government would be solved. The youthful generation of the pres-
ent day is very enthusiastic in trying to overthrow the government in
different parts of the world. Unless people are Krsna conscious like Dhruva
Maharaja, there will be no appreciable changes in government because
people who hanker to attain political position by hook or by crook cannot
think of the welfare of the people. They are only busy to keep their
position of prestige and monetary gain. They have very little time to think
of the welfare of the citizens.

TEXT 67
आत्मानं च प्रवयसमाकलय्य विज्ाम्पतिः |
बनं बिरक्तः प्रातिषठद्विमृशन्नात्मनो गतिम्‌ ॥६७॥


--- Page 71 ---
Text 67] Dhruva Maharaja Returns Home 431
atmanam ca pravayasam
akalayya visam patih
vanam viraktah pratisthad
vimysann atmano gatim

atmanam—himself; ca—also; pravayasam—advanced in age; akalayya—
considering; visam patih—King Uttanapada; vanam—to the forest; viraktah—
detached; pratisthat—departed; vimrian—deliberating on; atmanah—of the
self; gatim—salvation.

TRANSLATION

After considering his advanced age and deliberating on the welfare of
his spiritual self, King Uttanapada detached himself from worldly aifairs
and entered the forest.

PURPORT

This is the sign of a rajarsi. King Uttanapada was very opulent and was
Emperor of the world, and these attachments were certainly very great.
Modern politicians are not as great as kings like Maharaja Uttanapada,
but because they get some political power for some days, they become so
much attached to their positions that they never retire unless they are re-
moved from their posts by cruel death or killed by some opposing political
party. It is within our experience that the politicians in India do not quit
their positions until death. This was not the practice in olden days, as it is
evident from the behavior of King Uttanapada. Immediately after installing
his worthy son Dhruva Maharaja on the throne, he left his home and palace.
There are hundreds and thousands of instances like this in which kings, in
their mature age, would give up their kingdoms and go to the forest to
practice austerity. Practice of austerity is the main business of human life.
As Maharaja Dhruva practiced austerity in his early age, similarly his father,
Maharaja Uttanapada, in his old age, also practiced austerity in the forest.
It is, however, not possible in modern days to give up one’s home and go to
the forest to practice austerity, but if people of all ages would take shelter
of the Krsna consciousness movement and practice the simple austerities
of no illicit sex, no intoxication, no gambling and no meat eating, and
chant the Hare Krsna mantra regularly (sixteen rounds), by this practical
method it would be a very easy task to get salvation from this material
world.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Ninth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Dhruva Maharaja Returns
Home.”


--- Page 72 ---
CHAPTER TEN
Dhruva Maharaja's Fight with the Yaksas
TEXT 1 .
ES
मेत्रेय उवाच
. E
प्रजापतेदुहितरं शि्यमारस्य ঈ श्रुवः ।
उपयेमे भ्रमिं नाम तत्सुतौ कल्पवत्सरौ ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvaca
prajapater duhitarari
fisumarasya vai dhruvah
upayeme bhramim nama
tat-sutau kalpa-vatsarau
maitreyah uvdca—the great sage Maitreya continued; praja-pateh—of the
prajapati; duhitaram— daughter; §isumarasya—of SiSumara; vai— certainly;
dhruvah—Dhruva Maharaja; upayeme—married; bhramim—Bhrami; name—
named; tal-sutau—her sons; kalpa—Kalpa; vatsarau—V atsara.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya said: My dear Vidura, thereafter Dhruva
Maharaja married the daughter of Prajapati Sisumara, whose name was
Bhrami, and two sons named Kalpa and Vatsara were born of her.
PURPORT
It appears that Dhruva Maharaja married after being installed on the
throne of his father and after the departure of his father for the forest for
self-realization. It is very important to note in this connection that since
Maharaja Uttanapada was greatly affectionate towards his son, and since it
is the duty of a father to get his sons and daughters married as quickly as
possible, why did he not get his son married before he left home? The
answer is that Maharaja Uttanapada was a rajarsi, saintly king. Although he
433


--- Page 73 ---
434 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 10
was busy in his political affairs and duties of government management,
still he was very anxious for self-realization. Therefore as soon as his son,
Dhruva Maharaja, was quite worthy to take charge of the government, he
took this opportunity to leave home, just like his son, who, without fear,
left home for self-realization, even at the age of five years. These are rare
instances from which we can see that the importance of spiritual realization
is above all other important work. Maharaja Uttanapada knew very well
that to get his son, Dhruva Maharaja, married was not so important that it
should take preference to his going away: to the forest for self-realization.
TEXT 2
इलायामपि भार्यायां वायोः पुत्रां महाबलः |
पत्रशुत्कलनामानं योषि द्र्मजीजनत्‌ | २॥
ilayam api bharyayam
vayoh putryarm maha-balah
putram utkala-namanar
yosid-ratnam ajijanat
ilayam—unto his wife named Ila; api—also; bharyayam—unto his wife;
vayoh—of the demigod Vayu (controller of air); putryam— unto the daugh-
ter; maha-balah—the greatly powerful Dhruva Maharaja; putram—son;
utkala—Utkala; namanam—of the name; yosit—female; ratnam—jewel;
ajijanat—he begot.
TRANSLATION
The greatly powerful Dhruva Maharaja had another wife named Ila, who
was the daughter of the demigod Vayu. In her he begot a son named Utkala
and a very beautiful daughter.
TEXT 3
उत्तमस्तकृतोद्राहो खगयायां बलीयसा ।
हतः पुण्यजनेनाद्रौ तन्मातास्य गतिं गता ॥ ३॥
uttamas tv akrtodvaho
mrgayayar baliyasa
hatah punya-janenadrau
tan-matasya gatim gata
uttamah—Uttama; tu—but; akrta— without; udvahah— marriage; mrgaya-
yadm—on a hunting excursion; baliyasai—very powerful; hatah—was killed;
punya-janena—by a Yaksa: adrau—on the Himalayan Mountains; tat—
his; mata—mother (Suruci); asya—of her son; gatim—way ; gata—followed.


--- Page 74 ---
Text 5] Dhruva Maharaja's Fight with the Yaksas 435
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja's younger brother Uttama, who was still unmarried,
once went on a hunting excursion and was killed by a powerful Yakga in
the Himalayan Mountains. Along with him, his mother, Suruci, also
followed the path of her son [died].
TEXT 4
- ক - ५९५
भुवा Ady भुत्वा कोपामषशुचार्पितः |
A स्यन्दनमासयाय गतः पृण्यजनाटखयम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥
dhruvo bhratr-vadham srutva
kopamarsa-Sucarpitah
jaitrar syandanam asthaya
gatah punya-janalayam
dhruvah— Dhruva Maharaja; bhratr-vadham—killing of his brother; srutva
—hearing this news; kopa—anger; amarsa—vengeance; suca—lamentation;
arpitah—being filled with; jaitram—victorious; syandanam—chariot; asthaya
—getting on; gatah—went; punya-jana-dlayam—to the city of the Y aksas.
i TRANSLATION
When Dhruva Maharaja heard of the killing of his brother Uttama by the
Yaksas in the Himalayan Mountains, being overwhelmed with lamentation
and anger, he got on his chariot and went for victory over the city of the
Yaksas, Alakapuri.
PURPORT
Dhruva Maharaja’s becoming angry, overwhelmed with grief, and envious
of the enemies was not incompatible with his position as a great devotee.
It is a misunderstanding that a devotee should not be angry, envious or
overwhelmed by lamentation. Dhruva Maharaja was the King, and when
his brother was unceremoniously killed, it was his duty to take revenge
against the Yaksas from the Himalayas.
TEXT 5
गत्वोदीचीं दिशं राजा रुद्रायुचरसेविताम्‌ |
ददश हिमवद्द्रोण्यां पुरीं गुद्यकसंङलाम्‌ ॥ ५॥
&०८४०कच्ट क" disarh raja
rudranucara-sevitam


--- Page 75 ---
436 { Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 10
dadarsa himavad-dronyari
purim guhyaka-sankulam
gatva—going; udicim—northern; disam— direction; raja—King Dhruva;
rudra-anucara—by followers of Rudra, Lord Siva; sevitam—inhabited;
dadarsa—saw; himavat—Himalayan; dropydm—in a valley; purim—a city;
guhyaka—ghostly persons; sankulam—full of.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja went to the northern direction of the Himalayan range.
In a valley he saw a city that was full of ghostly persons who were
followers of Lord Siva.
PURPORT
In this verse it is stated that the Yaksas are more or less devotees of
Lord Siva. By this indication the Yaksas may be taken to be the Himalayan
tribes like the Tibetans.
TEXT 6
दष्मौ OF TWEE: खं दिश्चश्ालुनादयन्‌ |
few: क्षत्तरुपदेन्योऽत्रसन्भृशम्‌ ॥ 5 ॥
dadhmau ৪0৫11101078 brhad-bahuh
kha disa$ canunadayan
yenodvigna-drsah ksattar
upadevyo ’trasan bhrsam
dadhmau—blew; sanikham—conchshell; brhat-bahuh—the mighty-armed;
kham—the sky; disah ca—and all directions; anunadayan—causing to re-
sound; yena—by which; udvigna-drsah—appeared to be very anxious;
ksattah—my dear Vidura; upadevyah—the wives of the Yaksas; atrasan—
became frightened; bhrsam—greatly.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, as soon as Dhruva Maharaja
reached Alakapuri, he immediately blew his conchshell, and the sound
reverberated throughout the entire sky and in every direction. The wives of
the Yaksas became very much frightened. From their eyes it was apparent
that they were full of anxiety.
TEXT 7
ततो निष्क्रम्य बिन उपदेवमहामटाः |
असदन्तस्तश्िनादपभिपेत्रुदायुधाः ne


--- Page 76 ---
Text 9] Dhruva Maharaja’s Fight with the Yaksas 437
tato niskramya balina
upadeva-maha-bhatah
asahantas tan-ninadam
abhipetur udayudhah
tatah--thereafter; niskramya—coming out; balinah—very powerful;
upadeva—of Kuvera; maha-bhatah—great soldiers; asahantah—unable to
tolerate; tat—of the conchshell; ninddam—sound; abhipetuh—attacked;
udayudhah—equipped with various weapons.
TRANSLATION
O hero Vidura, the greatly powerful heroes of the Yaksas, unable to
tolerate the resounding vibration of the conchshell of Dhruva Maharaja,
came forth from their city with weapons and attacked Dhruva.
TEXT 8
स॒ तानापततो वीर उग्रधन्वा महारथः |
एकेकं युगपत्सर्वानहन्‌ बाणै खिभिल्जिमिः ॥ ८ ॥
sa tan apatato vira
ugra-dhanva maha-rathah
ekaikariv yugapat sarvan
ahan banais tribhis tribhih
sah— Dhruva Maharaja; tan—all of them ; apatatah—falling upon him; virah
—hero; ugra-dhanva— powerful bowman; maha-rathah—who could fight
with many chariots;eka-ekam—one after another; yugapat—simultaneously;
sarvan—all of them; ahan—killed; banath—by arrows; tribhih tribhih—by
threes.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja, who was a great charioteer and certainly a great
bowman also, immediately began to kill them by simultaneously discharg-
ing arrows at the rate of three at a time.
TEXT 9
a
ते वै ललाटलग्ैततेरिषुमिः स्वं एव हि ।
मत्वा निरस्तमार्मानमाशंसन्‌ कम तस्य तत्‌ ॥ ९ ॥


--- Page 77 ---
438 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 10
te vai lalata-lagnais tair
isubhih sarva eva hi
matva nirastam atmanam
asarisan karma tasya tat
te—they; vai—certainly; lalata-lagnaih—intent upon their heads; tath—
by those; isubhih—arrows; sarve—all of them; eva—certainly; hi—without
fail; matva—thinking; nirastam—defeated; atmanam—themselves; asamsan—
praised; karma—action; tasya—of him; tat—that.
TRANSLATION
When the heroes of the Yaksas saw that all their heads were being thus
threatened by Dhruva Maharaja, they could very easily understand their
awkward position, and they concluded that they would certainly be
defeated. But, as heroes, they lauded the action of Dhruva.
PURPORT
This spirit of fighting in a sporting attitude is very significant in this
verse. The Yaksas were severely attacked. Dhruva Maharaja was their
enemy, but still upon witnessing the wonderful heroic action of Maharaja
Dhruva, they were very pleased with him. This straightforward apprecia-
tion of an enemy’s prowess is a characteristic of real ksatriya spirit.
TEXT 10
तेऽपि चाुमष्यन्तः पादस्य मिदोरगाः |
शरैरविध्यन्‌ युगपद्‌ द्विगुणं प्रचिकीषवः ।।१०॥
te 1008 camum amrsyantah
pada-sparsam ivoragah
Sarair avidhyan yugapad
dvi-gupam pracikirsavah
te—the Yaksas;api—also; ca—and; amum—at Dhruva; amysyantah—being
intolerant of; pada-sparsam—being touched by the feet; iva—like; uragah—
serpents; Saraih—with arrows; avidhyan—struck; yugapat—simultaneously ;
dvi-gunam—twice as much; pracikirsavah—trying to retaliate.
TRANSLATION
Just like serpents, who cannot tolerate being trampled upon by anyone’s
feet, the Yaksas, being intolerant of the wonderful prowess of Dhruva


--- Page 78 ---
Text 13] Dhruva Maharaja’s Fight with the Yaksas 439
Maharaja, threw twice as many arrows—six from each of the soldiers—and
thus they very valiantly exhibited their prowess.
TEXTS 11-12
a
ततः Raffel: प्रास्लपरश्ैः ।
(5 EY
शक्त्यष्टिमिशशचण्डीभि्ित्रवालैः शरेरपि ॥११॥
अभ्यवर्षन्‌ प्रकुपिताः सरथं सहसारथिम्‌ |
हन्छन्तस्तत्परतीकतमयुतानां त्रयोदश ILRI
tatah parigha-nistrimsaih
prasasiula-parasvadhaih
Sakty-rstibhir bhusundibhis
citra-vajaih sarair api
abhyavarsan prakupitah
saratham saha sarathim
icchantas tat pratikartum
ayutanam trayodasa
tatah—thereupon; parigha—with iron bludgeons; nistririsath—and swords;
prasasitla—with tridents; parasvadhaih—and lances; sakti—with pikes;
rstibhih—and spears; bhusundibhih—with bhusundi weapons; citra-vajaih—
having various feathers; saraih—with arrows; api—also; abhyavarsan—they
showered Dhruva; prakupitah—being angry; sa-ratham—along with his
chariot; saha sarathim—along with his charioteer; icchantah —desiring; tat—
Dhruva’s activities; pratikartum—to counteract; ayutanam—of ten-
thousands; trayodasa—thirteen.
TRANSLATION
The Yaksa soldiers were 130,000 strong, all greatly angry and all desiring
to defeat the wonderful activities of Dhruva Maharaja. With full strength
they showered various types of feathered arrows, parighas [iron bludgeons],
nistrimsas [swords], [01383803138 [tridents], parasvadhas [lances], saktis
[ pikes], rstis [spears], and bhusundi weapons upon Maharaja Dhruva along
with his chariot and charioteer.
TEXT 13
ओत्तानपादिः स तदा Fede भूरिणा ।
न एवाडश्यताच्छम आसारेण यथा गिरिः ॥१२॥


--- Page 79 ---
440 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 10
auttanapadih sa tada
Sastra-varsena bhitrina
na evadrsyatacchanna
asarena yatha girth
auttanapadih—Dhruva Maharaja; sah—he; tada—at that time; sastra-
varsena—by a shower of weapons; bhiirina—incessant; na—not; eva—certain-
ly: adrsyata—was visible; dcchannah—being covered; asirena—by constant
rainfall; yatha—as; girth—a mountain.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja was completely covered by an incessant shower of
weapons, just as a mountain becomes covered by incessant rainfall.
PURPORT
Srila Vi§vanatha Cakravarti Thakura points out in this connection that
although Dhruva Maharaja was covered by the incessant arrows of the
enemy, this does not mean that he succumbed in the battle. The example
of a mountain peak’s being covered by incessant rain is just suitable, for
when a mountain is covered by incessant rain, all dirty things are washed
from the body of the mountain. Similarly, the incessant shower of arrows
from the enemy gave Dhruva Maharaja new vigor to defeat them. In other
words, whatever incompetency he might have had was washed away.
TEXT 14
a
दाहाकारस्तदेवासीत्सिद्धानां दिवि पर्यताम्‌ |
हतोऽयं मानवः र्यो म्रः पुण्यजनार्णवे ॥१४॥
haha-karas tadaivasit
siddhanar divi pasyatam
hato ’yam manavah siryo
magnah punya-janarpave
haha-karah—tumult of disappointment; tada—at that time; eva—certainly;
asit—became manifest; siddhanam—of all the residents of Siddhaloka; वाण
in the sky; pasyatam—who were observing the fight; hatah—killed; ayam—
this; manavah—grandson of Manu; siryah—sun; magnah—set; punya-jana—
of the Yakgas; arnave—in the ocean.


--- Page 80 ---
Text 15] Dhruva Maharaja’s Fight with the Yakgas 441
TRANSLATION

All the Siddhas from the higher planetary systems were observing the
fight from the sky, and when they saw that Dhruva Maharaja had been
covered by the incessant arrows of the enemy, they roared tumultuously,
“The grandson of Manu, Dhruva, is now lost!” They cried that Dhruva
Maharaja was just like the sun and that now he had set within the ocean of
the Yaksas.

PURPORT

In this verse manava is very significant. Generally this word is used to
mean “human being.” Dhruva Maharaja is also described here as 71070४0.
Not only is Dhruva Maharaja a descendant of Manu, but all human society
descends from Manu. According to Vedic civilization, Manu is the lawgiver.
Even today Hindus in India follow the laws given by Manu. Everyone,
therefore, in human society is 8 manava, or descendant from Manu, but
Dhruva Maharaja is a distinguished manava because he is a great devotee.

The denizens of the planet Siddhaloka, where the residents can fly in the
sky without airplanes, were anxious over Dhruva Maharaja’s welfare in the
battlefield. Srila Riipa Gosvami says, therefore, that a devotee is not only
well protected by the Supreme Lord, but all the demigods, and even ordi-
nary men, are anxious for his security and safety. The comparison given
here that Dhruva Mahardja appeared to merge in the ocean of the Yaksas
is also significant. When the sun sets on the horizon, it appears that the
sun drowns in the ocean, but factually the sun has no difficulty. Similarly,
although Dhruva appeared to drown in the ocean of the Yaksas, he had no
difficulty. As the sun rises again in due course at the end of night, so
Dhruva Maharaja, although he might have been in difficulty (because, after
all, it was a fight, and in any fighting activities there are reverses), that did
not mean that he was defeated.

TEXT 15
नदत्सु यातुधानेषु जयकाशिष्वथो रषे ।
उदतिषठदरथस्तस्य नीहारादिव भास्करः ॥ १५
7100015५ yatudhanesu
Jayakasisv atho mrdhe
udatisthad rathas lasya
ntharad 1४५ bhaskarah


--- Page 81 ---
442 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 10
nadatsu—while exclaiming; yatudhanesu—the ghostly Yaksas: jaya-
kasigu—proclaiming victory; atho—then; mrdhe—in the fighting; udatisthat—
appeared; rathah—the chariot; tasya—of Dhruva Maharaja; ntharat—from
the mist; iva—like; bhaskarah—the sun.
TRANSLATION
The Yaksas, being temporarily victorious, exclaimed that they had
conquered Dhruva Maharaja. But in the meantime Dhruva’s chariot sud-
denly appeared, just as the sun suddenly appears from within foggy mist.
PURPORT
Here Dhruva Maharaja is compared to the sun and the great assembly
of the Yaksas to foggy mist. Fog is insignificant in comparison with the
sun. Although the sun is sometimes seen to be covered by fog, in fact the
sun cannot be covered by anything. Our eyes may be covered by a cloud,
but the sun is never covered. By this comparison with the sun, the great-
ness of Dhruva Maharaja in all circumstances is affirmed.
TEXT 16
धनुविस्फूर्जयन्दिव्यं द्विषतां खेदधदहन्‌ |
FE व्यधमद्राणेवनानीकमिवानिलः ॥१६॥
dhanur visphurjayan divyam
dvisatarm khedam udvahan
astraughari vyadhamad banair
ghananikam ivanilah ४
dhanuh—his bow; visphiarjayan—twanging; divyam—wonderful; dvisatam—
of the enemies; khedam—lamentation:; udvahan-— creating; astra-ogham—
different types of weapons: vyadhamat—he scattered: banaih—with his
arrows; ghana—of clouds; anikam—an army; iva—like; anilah—the wind.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja's bow and arrows twanged and hissed, causing lamen-
tation in the hearts of his enemies. He began to shoot incessant arrows
shattering all their different weapons, just as the blasting wind scatters the
assembled clouds in the sky.
TEXT 17
तस्य ते चापनि्क्ता भित्त्वा वर्माणि रक्षसाम्‌ |
कायानाविविद्यसि्मा गिरीनशनयो यथा ॥ १७


--- Page 82 ---
Texts 18-19] Dhruva Maharaja's Fight with the Yaksas 443
tasya te capa-nirmukta
bhittva varmani raksasam
kayan avivisus tigma
girin asanayo yatha
tasya—of Dhruva; te—those arrows; capa—from the bow; nirmuktah—
released; bhittva—having pierced; varmani—shields; raksasam—of the de-
mons; kayan—bodies; avivisSuh—entered; tigmah—sharp; girin—mountains;
asanayah—thunderbolts; yatha—just like.
TRANSLATION
The sharp arrows released from the bow of Dhruva Maharaja pierced the
shields and bodies of the enemy, like the thunderbolts released by the King
of heaven, which dismantle the bodies of the mountains.
TEXTS 18-19
महैः संछियमानानां िरोमिशवारुकुण्डलैः |
चे
उरूषिर्ताठाभेदोधिवठ्यवस्युभिः ॥१८॥
LUC (Ce zai] महाधनैः |
आस्ठतास्ता ORR रेजुर्वीरमनोहराः ॥१९॥
11/11/1111
Sirobhis caru-kundalaih
arubhir hema-talabhair
dorbhir valaya-valgubhih
hara-keyira-mukutair
usnisais ca maha-dhanaih
astrtas ta rana-bhuvo
rejur vira-mano-harah
bhallaih—by his arrows; saiichidyamananam—of the Yaksas who were
cut to pieces; Sirobhih—with heads; caru—beautiful; kupdalaih—with
earrings; wrubhth—with thighs; hema-talabhaih—like golden palm trees;
dorbhih—with arms; valaya-valgubhih—with beautiful bracelets; hara—
with garlands; key@ra—armlets; mukutaih—and helmets; usnisaif—with
turbans; ca—also; maha-dhanaih—very valuable; astrtah—covered; tah—
those; rapa-bhuvah—battlefields; rejuh—began to glimmer; vira—of the
heroes; manah-harah— bewildering the minds.


--- Page 83 ---
444 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 10
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, the heads of those
who were cut to pieces by the arrows of Dhruva Maharaja were decorated
very beautifully with earrings and turbans. The legs of their bodies
were as beautiful as golden palm trees, their arms were decorated with
golden bracelets and armlets, and on their heads there were very valuable
helmets bedecked with gold. All these ornaments lying on that battlefield
were very attractive and could bewilder the mind of a hero.
PURPORT
It appears that in those days soldiers used to go to the battlefield
highly decorated with golden ornaments and with helmets and turbans,
and when they were dead the booty was taken by the enemy party. Their
falling dead in battle with their many golden ornamental dresses was
certainly a lucrative opportunity to the heroes on the battlefield.
TEXT 20
हतावशिष्टा इतरे रणाजिराद्‌
रक्षोगणाः ृत्रियवयंसायकेः |
प्रायो Reema विदुदुञु-
मेन्द्र विक्रीडितयूथपा इव ॥२०॥
hatavasista itare ranajirad
rakso-ganah ksatriya-varya-sayakaih
prayo vivrknavayava vidudruvur
mrgendra-vikridita-yuthapa iva
hata-avadigtah— the remaining soldiers who were not killed; itare—others;
rana-gjirat—from the battlefield; raksah-ganah—the Yaksas; ksatriya-
varya—of the greatest of the ksatriyas or warriors; sayakaih—by the arrows;
prayah—mostly: vivrkpa—cut to pieces; avayavah—their bodily limbs;
vidudruvuh—fled; mrgendra—by a lion; vikridita—being defeated; yiathapah
—elephants; iva—like.
TRANSLATION -
The remaining Yaksas who somehow or other were not killed had their
limbs cut to pieces by the arrows of the great warrior Dhruva Maharaja.
Thus they began to flee, just as elephants flee when defeated by a lion.


--- Page 84 ---
Text 22] Dhruva Maharaja’s Fight with the Yaksas 445
TEXT 21
अपश्यमानः स तदाऽऽततायिनं
WEY कंचन मानवोत्तमः |
पुरीं Regafy नाविशचद्‌ द्विषां
न मायिनां वेद्‌ चिकीर्षितं जनः ॥२१॥
apasyamanah sa tadatatayinam
maha-mrdhe kaiicana manavottamah
puri didrksann api navisad dvisam
na mayinam veda cikirsitarn janah
apasyamanah—while not observing; sah—Dhruva; tadd—at that time;
atatayinam—armed opposing soldier; mahd-mrdhe—in that great battlefield;
kaiicana—any; manava-uttamah—the best of the human beings; purim—the
city; didrksan—wishing to see; api—although; na dvisat—did not enter;
dvisam—of the enemies; na—not; mayinam—of the mystics; veda—knows;
cikirsitam—the plans; janah— anyone.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja, the best of human beings, observed that in that great
battlefield not one of the opposing soldiers was left standing with proper
weapons. He then desired to see the city of Alakapuri, but he thought to
himself, *‘No one knows the plans of the mystic Yaksas.”
TEXT 22
इति gfe: surf
यत्तः परेषां sR: |
शुश्राव शब्दं जलधेरिवेरितं
=
नमखतो दिश्चु रजोऽन्वदृश्यत ॥२२॥
iti bruvams citra-rathah sva-sarathim
yattah paresam pratiyoga-sankitah
Susrava sabdam jaladher iveritam
nabhasvato diksu rajo nv adrsyata
iti— thus; bruvan—talking; citra-rathah— Dhruva Maharaja, whose chariot
was very beautiful; sva-sarathim—to his charioteer; yattah —being on guard;


--- Page 85 ---
446 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 10
paresam—from his enemies; pratiyoga—counterattack; sankitah—being ap-
prehensive; susrava—heard; sabdam—sound; jaladheh—from the ocean; iva—
as if; iritam—resounded; nabhasvatah—because of wind; diksu—in all direc
tions; rajah— dust; anu—then; adrsyata—was perceived.
TRANSLATION
In the meantime, while Dhruva Maharaja, doubtful of his mystic enemies,
was talking with his charioteer, they heard a tremendous sound, as if the
whole ocean were there, and they found that from the sky a great dust
storm was coming over them from all directions.
TEXT 23
५ = <
क्षणेनाच्छादितं व्योम घनानीकेन सवेतः |
विस्फुरचडिता Ky mesa ॥२३॥
ksanenacchaditarh vyoma
ghananikena sarvatah
visphurat-tadita diksu
trasayat-stanayitnuna
ksanena—within a moment; acchaditam—was covered; vyoma—the sky;
ghana—of dense clouds; anikena—with a mass; sarvatah—everywhere;
visphurat—dazzling; tadita—with lightning; diksu—in all directions; trasayat
—threatening; stanayitnuna—with thundering.
TRANSLATION
Within a moment the whole sky was overcast with dense clouds, and
severe thundering was heard. There was glittering electric lightning and
severe rainfall.
TEXT 24
WY रषिरोषासुरुएयदिण्ू्रथेदसः |
निपेतुगंगनादस्य FEES R81
vavrsu rudhiraughasrk-
puya-vin-mitra-medasah
nipetur gaganad asya
kabandhany agrato ‘nagha


--- Page 86 ---
Text 26 Dhruva Maharaja’s Fight with the Yaksas 447
vavrsuh—showered; rudhira—of blood; ogha—an inundation; asrk—mucus;
pitya—pus; vit—stool; miztra—urine; medasah—and marrow; nipetuh—began
to fall; gaganat—from the sky; asya—of Dhruva; kabandhani—trunks of
bodies; agratah—in front; anagha—O faultless Vidura.
TRANSLATION
My dear faultless Vidura, in that rainfall there was blood, mucus, pus,
stool, urine and marrow falling heavily before Dhruva Maharaja, and there
were trunks of bodies falling from the sky.
TEXT 25
ततः खेऽदृश्यत गिरिर्निपेतुः सर्वतोदिशम्‌ |
गदापरिषनिसिश्रसलाः सास्मवर्पिणः ॥ २५
tatah khe '014%000৫ girir
nipetuh sarvato-disam
gada-parigha-nistrimsa-
musalah sasma-varsinah
tatah—thereafter; khe—in the sky; adrsyata—was visible; girih—a moun-
tain; nipetuh—fell down; sarvatah-disam—from all directions; gada—clubs;
parigha—iron bludgeons; nistrimsa—swords; musalah—maces; sasma—great
pieces of stone; varsinah—with a shower of.
TRANSLATION
Next, a great mountain was visible in the sky, and from all directions
hailstones fell, along with lances, clubs, swords, iron bludgeons and great
pieces of stone.
TEXT 26
अहयोऽशनिनिभश्वासा वमन्तोऽग्निं रूषाक्षिमिः |
अभ्यधावन्‌ गजा मत्ताः सिंहन्याघ्राश्च যুযহাঃ।।২৪।।
ahayo ’$ani-nihsvasa
vamanto gnim rusaksibhih
abhyadhavan gaja mattah
siriha-vyaghras ca yuthasah


--- Page 87 ---
448 $rimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 10
ahayah—serpents; asani—thunderbolts; nih$vasah— breathing; vamantah—
vomiting; agnim—fire; rusa akgibhih—with angry eyes; abhyadhavan—
came forward; gajah—elephants; mattah—mad; simha—lions; vyaghrah—
tigers; ca— also; yitthasah—in groups.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja also saw many big serpents with angry eyes, vomiting
forth fire and coming to devour him, along with groups of mad elephants,
lions and tigers.
TEXT 27
सद्र ऊर्मिभिर्भीमः छावयन्‌ सर्वतो शवम्‌ |
आससाद महाहादः कर्पान्त इव भीषणः ॥२७॥
samudra urmibhir bhimah
plavayan sarvato bhuvam
asasada maha-hradah
kalpanta iva bhisanah
samudrah—the sea; irmibhih—with waves; bhimah—fierce; plavayan—in-
undating;sarvatah—in all directions; bhuvam—the earth; dsasida—came for-
ward; maha-hradah—making great sounds; kalpa-ante—(the dissolution) at
the end of a kalpa; iva—like; bhisanah—fearful.
TRANSLATION
Then, as if it were the time of the dissolution of the whole world, the
fierce sea with foaming waves and great roaring sounds came forward
before him.
TEXT 28
एवंविधान्यनेकानि त्रासनान्यमनखिनाम्‌ | ।
सखुजस्विश्मगतय आसुर्या माययासुराः ॥२८॥
evar vidhany anekani
trasanany amanasvinam
sasrjus ligma-gataya
asurya mayayasurah
evam vidhani— (phenomena) like this; anekani—many varieties of;
trasanani—fearful; amanasvinam—to the less intelligent men; sasrjuh—they
created; tigma-gatayah—of heinous nature; dsurya—demoniac; mayayd—
by illusion; asurah—the demons.


--- Page 88 ---
Text 30] Dhruva Maharaja’s Fight with the Yaksas 449
TRANSLATION
The demon Yaksas are by nature very heinous, and by their demoniac
power of illusion they can create many strange phenomena to frighten
one who is less intelligent.
TEXT 29
शुवे प्युक्तामसुरस्तां मायामतिदुस्तराम्‌ |
निशम्य तस्य नयः शमाशंसन्‌ समागताः ॥२९॥
dhruve prayuktam asurais
tar mayam atidustaram
nisamya tasya munayah
sam asariisan samagatah
dhruve—against Dhruva; prayuktam—inflicted; asuraih-by the demons;
tam—that; mayam—mystic power;atidustaram—very dangerous; nisamya—
after hearing; tasya—his; munayah—the great sages; sam—good fortune;
asamsan—giving encouragement for; samagatah—assembled.
TRANSLATION
When the great sages heard that Dhruva Mahardja was overpowered by
the illusory mystic tricks of the demons, they immediately assembled to
offer him auspicious encouragement.
TEXT 30
मुनय ऊचुः
ओत्तानपाद भगवांस्तव TRE
देवः क्षिणोत्ववनतार्तिहरो विपक्षान्‌ |
यज्ञामधेयममिधाय निशम्य चाद्धा
लोकोऽञ्जसा तरति दुस्तरमङ्ग मृत्युम्‌ ॥।२०॥
munaya ticuh
auttanapada bhagavars tava $arngadhanva
devah ksinotv avanatarti-haro vipaksan
yan-namadheyam abhidhaya nisamya caddha
loko ऽक tarati dustaram anga mrtyum
munayah Gcuh—the sages said; auttanapada—0 son of King Uttanapada;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tava—your; saraga-


--- Page 89 ---
450 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 10
dhanva—one who bears the bow called Sarnga; devah—the Lord; kginotu—
may He kill; avanata—of the surrendered soul; arti—the distresses; harah—
who removes; vipaksan—enemies; yat—whose; namadheyam—holy name;
abhidhaya—uttering; nisamya—hearing; ca—also; addha—immediately;
lokah—persons;aiijasa—fully; tarati—overcome; dustaram—insurmountable;
anga—O Dhruva; mrtyum—death.
TRANSLATION

All the sages said: Dear Dhruva, O son of King Uttanapada, may the
Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Sarigadhanus, who relieves the
distresses of His devotees, kill all your threatening enemies. The holy name
of the Lord is as powerful as the Lord Himself. Therefore, simply by chant-
ing and hearing the holy name of the Lord, many men can be fully
protected from fierce death without difficulty. Thus a devotee is saved.

PURPORT

The great rsis approached Dhruva Maharaja at a time when his mind
was very perplexed due to the magical feats exhibited by the Yaksas. A
devotee is always protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By
His inspiration only the sages came to encourage Dhruva Maharaja and
assure him that there was no danger because he was a soul fully surrendered
to the Supreme Lord. By the grace of the Lord, if a devotee can simply
chant His holy name—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare—at the time of death,
then he immediately surpasses the great ocean of the material sky and
enters the spiritual sky. He never has to come back for repetition of birth
and death. Simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, one can surpass
the ocean of death, so Dhruva Maharaja was certainly able to surpass the
illusory magical feats of the Yaksas which for the time being disturbed
his mind.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Tenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Dhruva Maharaja’s Fight
with the Yaksas.”


--- Page 90 ---
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Svayambhuva Manu Advises
Dhruva Maharaja to Stop Fighting
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
निशम्य गदतामेवश्षीणां ঘন্তুদি धुवः ।
संदघेऽसघुपस्प्श्य यसरारायणनिमिंतम्‌ ।॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvaca
nisamya gadatam evam
rsinam dhanusi dhruvah
sandadhe ‘stram upasprsya
yan narayana-nirmitam
77101769018 uvaca—the sage Maitreya continued to speak; nisamya—having
heard; gadatam—the words; evam—thus; rsinam—of the sages; dhanugsi—
upon his bow; dhruvah—Dhruva Maharaja; sandadhe—fixed; astram—an
arrow; upasprsSya—after touching water; yat—that which; narayana—by
Narayana; nirmitam—was made.
TRANSLATION
Sri Maitreya said: My dear Vidura, when Dhruva Mahirija heard the
encouraging words of the great sages, he performed the acamana by
touching water and then took up his arrow, which was made by Lord
Narayana, and fixed it upon his bow.
PURPORT
Dhruva Maharaja was given a specific arrow made by Lord Narayana
Himself, and he now fixed it upon his bow to finish the illusory atmos-
phere created by the Yaksas. As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gita, mam eva
ye prapadyante mayam eta taranti te. (Bg. 7.14) Without Narayana, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, no one is able to overcome the action
451


--- Page 91 ---
452 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
of the illusory energy. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has also given us a nice
weapon for this age, as stated in the Bhagavatam: sangopangastra—
in this age, the Narayanastra, or weapon to drive away maya, is
the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra in pursuance of the associates of
Lord Caitanya, such as Advaita Prabhu, Nityananda, Gadadhara and
Srivasa.
TEXT 2
संधीयमान रतसिन्माया गुह्यकनिर्मिताः |
शिग्र Rafi छशा ज्ञानोदये यथा ॥ २॥
sandhtyamana etasmin
maya guhyaka-nirmitah
ksipram vinesur vidura
klesa jaanodaye yatha
sandhiyamane—while joining to his bow; etasmin—this Narayanastra;
mayah—the illusions; guhyaka-nirmitah—created by the Yaksas; ksipram—
very soon; vinesuh—were destroyed; vidura—QO Vidura; klesah—illusory
pains and pleasures; jiana-udaye—upon the arising of knowledge; yatha—
just as.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Dhruva Maharaja joined the Narayanastra arrow to his bow,
the illusion created by the Yaksas was immediately vanquished, just as all
material pains and pleasures are vanquished when one becomes fully
cognizant of the self.
PURPORT
Krsna is like the sun, and maya, or the illusory energy of Krsna, is like
darkness. Darkness means absence of light; similarly, maya means absence
of Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness and maya are always there,
side by side. As soon as there is awakening of Krsna consciousness, all the
illusory pains and pleasures of material existence are vanquished. Mayam
etam taranti te: constant chanting of the maha-mantra will keep us always
aloof from the illusory energy of maya.
TEXT 3
तस्यार्षास्त्रं धलुषि प्रयुञ्जतः
५५ &
सुबणपृद्धाः कलह सवाससः |


--- Page 92 ---
Text 4] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 453
विनिःसृता আবিবিহান্তিণন্রপ্ত
यथा वनं भीमरवाः शिखण्डिनः । ३ ॥
tasyarsastram dhanusi prayuiijatah
suvarpa-punkhah kalaharhsa-vasasah
vinihsrta avivisur dvisad-balarh
yatha vanari bhima-ravah sikhandinah
tasya—while Dhruva; arsa-astram—the weapon given by Narayana Rsi;
dhanusi—on his bow; prayunjatah—fixed; suvarna-punkhah—(arrows) with
golden shafts; kalahamsa-vasasah—with feathers like the wings of a swan;
vinihsrtah—sprang out; avivisuh—entered; dvisat-balam—the soldiers of the
enemy; yatha—just as; vanam—into a forest; bhima-ravah— making a tumul-
tuous sound; sikhandinah— peacocks.
TRANSLATION
Even as Dhruva Maharaja fixed the weapon made by Narayana Rsi onto
his bow, arrows with golden shafts and feathers like the wings of a swan
flew out from it. They entered the enemy soldiers with a great hissing
sound, just as peacocks enter a forest with tumultuous crowing.
TEXT 4
RETR: प्रथने शिलीभुखै-
fama: पुण्यजना उपद्रुताः |
तमम्यधावन्‌ ङपिता उदायुधाः
FUIGEEEM  श्वाहयः ॥ ४॥
tais tigma-dharaih pradhane Sili-mukhair
itas tatah punya-jana upadrutah
tam abhyadhavan kupita udayudhah
suparnam unnaddha-phana ivahayah
taih—by those; tigma-dharaih—which had a sharp point; pradhane—on
the battlefield; $ili-mukhaih—arrows; itas tatah—here and there; punya-
Jjanah—the Yaksas; upadrutah—being greatly agitated; tam—toward Dhruva
Maharaja; abhyadhavan—rushed; kupitah—being angry; udayudhah—with
upraised weapons; suparpam—toward Garuda; unnaddha-phanah—with up-
raised hoods; iva—like; ahayah—serpents.


--- Page 93 ---
454 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
TRANSLATION

Those sharp arrows dismayed the enemy soldiers, who became almost
unconscious, but various Yakgas on the battlefield, in a rage against
Dhruva Maharaja, somehow or other collected their weapons and attacked.
Just as serpents agitated by Garuda rush toward him with upraised hoods,
৪০ all the Yaksa soldiers prepared to overcome Dhruva Maharaja with their
upraised weapons.

TEXT 5
स तान्‌ RATER सधे
निङृतबाहूरुशिरोधरोदरान्‌ |
निनाय रोकं परमकमण्डलं
6;
चजन्ति निर्भिद्य यमूष्वेरेतसः ॥ ५॥
sa tan prsatkair abhidhavato mrdhe
nikrtta-bahuru-sirodharodaran
ninaya loka param arka-mandalam
vrajanti nirbhidya yam ardhva-retasah

sah—he (Dhruva Maharaja); tan—all the Yaksas; prsatkaihi—by his arrows;
abhidhavatah—coming forward; mrdhe—in the battlefield; nikrtta—being
separated; b&hu—arms;  iru—thighs;  sirah-dhara—necks; udaran—
and bellies; ninaya— delivered; lokam—to the planet; param—supreme; arka-
mandalam—the sun globe; vrajanti—go; nirbhidya— piercing; yam—to which;
urdhva-retasah—those who do not discharge semina at any time.

TRANSLATION

When Dhruva Maharaja saw the Yaksas coming forward, he immediately
took his arrows and cut the enemies to pieces. Separating their arms,
legs, heads and bellies from their bodies, he delivered the Yaksas to the
planetary system which is situated above the sun-globe and which is
attainable only by first-class brahmacaris who have never discharged their
semina.

PURPORT

To be killed by the Lord or by His devotees is auspicious for non-
devotees. The Yakgsas were killed indiscriminately by Dhruva Maharaja,
but they attained the planetary system which was only attainable for
brahmacaris who had never discharged their semina. As the impersonalist


--- Page 94 ---
Text 6] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 455
janis or the demons who are killed by the Lord attain Brahmaloka, or
Satyaloka, so persons who are killed by a devotee of the Lord also attain
Satyaloka. To reach the Satyaloka planetary system described here, one
has to be elevated above the sun globe. Killing, therefore, is not always
bad. If the killing is done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His
devotee or in great sacrifices, it is for the benefit of the entity killed in that
way. Material so-called nonviolence is very insignificant in comparison to
killing done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His devotees. Even
when a king or the state government kills a person who is a murderer, that
killing is for the benefit of the murderer, for thus he may become cleared
of all sinful reactions.

An important word in this verse is &rdhva-retasah, which means brahma-
caris who have never discharged semina. Celibacy is so important that even
though one does not undergo any austerities, penances or ritualistic cere-
monies prescribed in the Vedas, if one simply keeps himself a pure brahma-
cart, not discharging his semina, the result is that after death he goes to the
Satyaloka. Generally, sex life is the cause of all miseries in the material
world. In the Vedic civilization sex life is restricted in various ways. Out
of the whole population of the social structure, only the grhasthas are
allowed restricted sex life. All others refrain from sex. The people of this
age especially do not know the value of not discharging semina. As such,
they are variously entangled with material qualities and suffer an existence
of struggle only. The word @rdhva-retasah especially indicates the Mayavadi
sannyasts, who undergo strict principles of austerity. But in the Bhagavad-
gita the Lord says that even if one goes up to Brahmaloka, he again comes
back. (Abrahma-bhuvanal lokah punar avartino ‘rjuna. Bg. 8.16) Therefore,
actual mukti or liberation can be attained only by devotional service,
because by devotional service one can go above Brahmaloka, or to the
spiritual world, wherefrom he never comes back. Mayavadi sannyasis are
very proud of becoming liberated, but actual liberation is not possible un-
less one is in touch with the Supreme Lord in devotional service. It is said,
hari vina na srtim taranti: without Krsna’s mercy, no one can have
liberation.

TEXT 6
तान्‌ हन्यमानानमिवीक््य गुद्यका-
ननागसध्ित्ररथेन भूरिञ्चः ।
ओत्तानपादिं कपया पितामहो
मलजेगादोपगतः सहर्षिमिः ॥ ६ ॥


--- Page 95 ---
456 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
tan hanyamanan abhiviksya guhyakan
anagasas citra-rathena bhurisah
auttanapadim krpaya pitamaho
manur jagadopagatah saharsibhih
tan—those Yaksas; hanyamanan—being killed; abhiviksya—seeing;
guhyakan—the Yaksas; andgasah-—offenseless; citra-rathena—by Dhruva
Maharaja, who had a beautiful chariot; bhitrisah—greatly; auttanapadim—
unto the son of Uttanapada; krpaya—out of mercy; pitamahah—
the grandfather; manuh—Svayambhuva Manu; jagida—gave instructions;
upagatah—approached; saha rsibhih— with great sages.
TRANSLATION
When Svayambhuva Manu saw that his grandson Dhruva Maharaja was
killing so many of the Yaksas who were not actually offenders, out of his
great compassion he approached Dhruva with great sages to give him good
instruction.
PURPORT
Dhruva Maharaja attacked Alakapuri, the city of the Yaksas, because
his brother was killed by one of them. Actually only one of the citizens,
not all of them, was guilty of killing his brother Uttama. Dhruva Maharaja,
of course, took a very serious step when his brother was killed by the
Yaksas. War was declared, and the fighting was going on. This sometimes
happens in present days also—for one man’s fault a whole state is some-
times attacked. This kind of wholesale attack is not approved by Manu,
the father and lawgiver of the human race. He therefore wanted to stop his
grandson Dhruva from continuing to kill the Yaksa citizens who were not
offenders.
TEXT 7
मलुरुवाख
अलं वत्सातिरोषेण तमोद्वारेण पाप्मना |
येन॒ पुण्यजनानेतान्बधीस्त्वमनागसः ॥ ও ॥
manur wvaca
alam vatsatirosena
tamo-dvarena papmana
yena punya-janan etan
avadhis tvam anagasah
manuh uvaca—Manu said; alam—enough ; vatsa—my dear boy; atirosena—
with excessive anger; lamah-dvarena—the path of ignorance; papmana—


--- Page 96 ---
Text 8] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 457
sinful; yena—by which; punya-janan—the Yaksas; etan—all these; avadhih—
you have killed; tvam—you; anagasah— offenseless.

TRANSLATION

Lord Manu said: My dear son, please stop. It is not good to become
unnecessarily angry—it is the path to hellish life. Now you are going
beyond the limit by Killing Yaksas who are actually not offenders.

PURPORT

In this verse the word atirosena means “with unnecessary anger.” When
Dhruva Maharaja went beyond the limits of necessary anger, his grand-
father, Svayambhuva Manu, immediately came to protect him from further
sinful action. From this we can understand that killing is not bad, but when
killing is done unnecessarily or when an offenseless person is killed, such
killing opens the path to hell. Dhruva Maharaja was saved from such sinful
action because he was a great devotee.

A ksatriya is allowed to kill only for maintenance of the law and order
of the state; he is not allowed to kill or commit violence without reason.
Violence is certainly a path leading to a hellish condition of life, but it is
also required for maintenance of the law and order of the state. Here Lord
Manu prohibited Dhruva Maharaja from killing the Yakgas because only
one of them was punishable for killing his brother Uttama; all of the Yaksa
citizens were not punishable. We find in modern warfare, however, that
attacks are made upon innocent citizens who are without fault. According
to the law of Manu, such warfare is a most sinful activity. Furthermore,
at the present moment civilized nations are unnecessarily maintaining
many slaughterhouses for killing innocent animals. When a nation is
attacked by its enemies, the wholesale slaughter of the citizens should be
taken as a reaction to their own sinful activities—that is nature’s law.

TEXT 8
नाखत्कुठतोवितं तात FATIMA |
वधो यदुपदेवानामारब्धस्तेऽकृतैनसाम्‌ ॥ < ॥
nasmat-kulocitarm tata
karmaitat sad-vigarhitam
vadho yad upadevanam
arabdhas te ’krtainasam


--- Page 97 ---
458 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
na—not; asmat-kula—our family; ucitam—befitting; tata—my dear son;
karma—action; etat— this; sat—by authorities on religion; vigarhitam—for-
bidden; vadhah—the killing; yat—which; upadevanam—of the Yaksas;
arabdhah—was undertaken; te—by you; akrta-enasam—of those who are
sinless.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, the killing of the sinless Yaksas which you have undertaken
is not at all approved by authorities, and it does not befit our family, which
is supposed to know the laws of religion and irreligion.
TEXT 9
नन्वेकस्यापराधेन प्रसङ्गाद्‌ बहवो हताः ।
शरातु्वधाभितेन त्वयाङ्ग ्राकवत्सल ॥ ९ ॥
nanv ekasyaparadhena
prasangad bahavo hatah
bhratur vadhabhitaptena
tvayanga bhratr-vatsala
nanu— certainly; ekasya—of one (Yaksa); aparadhena—with the offense;
prasangit—because of their association; bahavah—many; hatah—have been
killed; bhratuh—of your brother; vadha—by the death; abhitaptena—being
aggrieved; tvaya—by you; anga—my dear son; bhratr-vatsala—affectionate
t brother.
+ TRANSLATION
My dear son, it has been proved that you are very much affectionate
towards your brother and are greatly aggrieved at his being killed by the
Yaksas, but just consider—for one Yaksa’s offense, you have killed many
others, who are innocent.
TEXT 10
नायं मागो হি साधूनां হঘীকীযাত্তৰনিনাম্‌ ।
यदात्मानं पराग्णृद्य॒प्ुद्दतवैशसम्‌ ॥१०॥
nayarn margo hi sadhunarm
hrsikesanuvartinam
yad atmanar parag grhya
pasuvad bhuta-vaisasam
na— never; ayam— this; margah— path; hi—certainly; sadhiznam— of honest
persons; hrsikeia—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anuvartinam—


--- Page 98 ---
Text 11] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 459
following the path; yat—which; atmanam—self; parak—the body; grhya—
thinking to be; pasu-vat—like animals; bhiita—of living entities; vaisasam—
killing.
TRANSLATION

One should not accept the body as the self and thus, like the animals,
kill the bodies of others. It is especially forbidden by saintly persons who
follow the path of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of God-
head.

PURPORT

The words sadhitnarm hrsikesanuvartinam are very significant. Sadhu
means a saintly person. But who is a saintly person? A saintly person is he
who follows the path of rendering service unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hrsikesa. In the Narada-paiicardtra it is said, hrsikena hrsikesa-
56৮৫0110718 bhaktir ucyate: the process of rendering favorable service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead with one’s senses is called bhakti, or
devotional service. Therefore, why should a person who is already engaged
in the service of the Lord engage himself in personal sense gratification?
Dhruva Maharéja is advised here by Lord Manu that he is a pure servitor of
the Lord. Why should he unnecessarily engage, like the animals, in the
bodily concept of life? An animal thinks that the body of another animal
is his food; therefore, in the bodily concept of life, one animal attacks
another. A human being, especially one who is a devotee of the Lord,
should not act like this. Sadhu, a saintly devotee, is not supposed to kill
animals unnecessarily.

TEXT 11
सेभूतात्यमाकेन भूतायासं हरं भवान्‌ ।
आराध्याप दुराराध्यं विष्णोस्तत्परमं पदम्‌ 122101
sarva-bhutatma-bhavena
bhutavasarn harim bhavan
aradhyapa duraradhyarm
visnos tat [00701710118 padam

sarva-bhiita—in all living entities; atma—upon the Supersoul; bhavena—
with meditation; bhita—of all existence; avasam—the abode; harim— Lord
Hari; bhavan—you; aradhya—by worshiping; @pa—have achieved; dur-
aradhyam—very difficult to propitiate; vispoh—of Lord Visnu; tat—that;
paramam—supreme; padam—situation.


--- Page 99 ---
460 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
TRANSLATION

It is very difficult to achieve the spiritual abode of Hari in the Vaikuntha
planets, but you are so fortunate that you are already destined to go to
that abode by worshiping Him as the supreme abode of all living entities.

PURPORT

The material bodies of all living entities cannot exist unless sheltered by
the spirit soul and the Supersoul. The spirit soul is dependent on the Super-
soul, who is present even within the atom. Therefore, since anything
material or spiritual is completely dependent on the Supreme Lord, the
Supreme Lord is referred to here as bhiitavasa. Dhruva Maharaja, as a
ksatriya, could have argued with his grandfather, Manu, when Manu re-
quested him to stop fighting. But even though Dhruva could have argued
that as a kgatriya it was his duty to fight with the enemy, still he was in-
formed that since every living entity is a residence of the Supreme Lord
and can be considered a temple of the Lord, the unnecessary killing of any
living entity is not permitted.

स ॒त्व॑॑दरेरनुष्यातस्तत्पुंसामपि सम्मतः |
कथं त्ववद्यं कृतवाननुशिक्षन्‌ सतां व्रतम्‌ ॥१२॥
sa (४077१ harer anudhyatas
tat-pumsam api sammatah
katham tv avadyam krtavan
anusiksan satam vratam

sah—that person; tvam--you;hareh—by the Supreme Lord;anudhyatah—
being always remembered; tat—His; pumsam—by the devotees; api—also;
sammatah—esteemed; katham—why; tu—then; avadyam—abominable (act);
krtavan—you have undertaken; anusiksan—setting the example ; satam— of
saintly persons; vratam—a vow.

TRANSLATION

Because you are a pure devotee of the Lord, the Lord is always thinking
of you, and you are also recognized by all His confidential devotees. Your
life is meant for exemplary behavior. I am, therefore, surprised—why have
you undertaken such an abominable task?


--- Page 100 ---
Text 13] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 461
PURPORT
Dhruva Maharaja was a pure devotee and was accustomed to always
thinking of the Lord. Reciprocally, the Lord always thinks of those pure
devotees who think of Him only, twenty-four hours a day. As a pure
devotee does not know anything beyond the Lord, so the Lord does not
know anything beyond His pure devotee. Svayambhuva Manu pointed out
this fact to Dhruva Maharaja: “You are not only a pure devotee, but you
are recognized by all pure devotees of the Lord. You should always act in
such an exemplary way that others may learn from you. Under the circum-
stances, it is surprising that you have killed so many faultless Yaksas.”
TEXT 13
a
तितिक्षया करुणया मेत्या चाखिलजन्तुषु ।
समस्वेन च सर्वात्मा मगवान्‌ सम्धसीदति 1230
titiksaya karunaya
maitrya cakhila-jantusu
samatvena ca sarvatma
bhagavan samprasidati
titiksaya— by tolerance; karunaya—by mercy; maitrya—by friendship;
ca—also; akhila—universal; jantusu—unto the living entities; samatvena—
by equilibrium; ca—also; sarva-atma—the Supersoul; bhagavan—Personality
of Godhead; samprasidati—becomes very satisfied.
TRANSLATION
The Lord is very satisfied with His devotee when the devotee greets
other people with tolerance, mercy, friendship and equality.
PURPORT
It is the duty of an advanced devotee in the second stage of devotional
perfection to act in accordance with this verse. There are three stages of
devotional life. In the lowest stage, a devotee is simply concerned with the
Deity in the temple, and he worships the Lord with great devotion, ac-
cording to rules and regulations. In the second stage the devotee is
cognizant of his relationship with the Lord, his relationship with fellow
devotees, his relationship with persons who are innocent and his relation-
ship with persons who are envious. Sometimes devotees are ill-treated by


--- Page 101 ---
462 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
envious persons. It is advised that an advanced devotee should be tolerant;
he should show complete mercy to persons who are ignorant or innocent.
A preacher-devotee is meant to show mercy to innocent persons whom he
can elevate to devotional service. Everyone, by constitutional position, is
an eternal servant of God. Therefore, a devotee’s business is to awaken
everyones Krsna consciousness. That is his mercy. As for a devotee’s
treatment of other devotees who are his equals, he should maintain friend-
ship with them. His general view should be to see every living entity as
part of the Supreme Lord. Different living entities appear in different
forms of dress, but according to the instruction of the Bhagavad-gita, a
learned person sees all living entities equally. Such treatment by the
devotee is very much appreciated by the Supreme Lord. It is said, there-
fore, that a saintly person is always tolerant and merciful, he is a friend
for everyone, never an enemy to anyone, and is peaceful. These are some
of the good qualities of a devotee.
TEXT 14
सम्प्रसन्ने भगवति पुरुषः प्रारृतैगणैः |
विधुक्तो Naf ब्म निर्याणण्न्छति 123811
samprasanne bhagavati
purusah prakrtair gunaih
vimukto jiva-nirmukto
brahma nirvanam rcchati

samprasanne—upon satisfaction; bhagavati—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; purusah—a person; prakrtaih—from the material; gupaih—
modes of nature; vimuktah—beingliberated; jiva-nirmuktah—freed from the
subtle body also; brahma—unlimited; nirvanam—spiritual bliss; rcchati—
achieves.

TRANSLATION

One who actually satisfies the Supreme Personality of Godhead during
his lifetime becomes liberated from the gross and subtle material condi-
tions. Thus being freed from all material modes of nature, he achieves
unlimited spiritual bliss.

PURPORT

In the previous verse it has been explained that one should treat all

living entities with tolerance, mercy, friendship and equality. By such


--- Page 102 ---
Text 15] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 463
behavior one satisfies the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and upon His
satisfaction the devotee immediately becomes free from all material con-
ditions. The Lord also confirms this in the Bhagavad-gita: ‘Anyone who
sincerely and seriously engages in My service immediately becomes situated
in the transcendental stage wherein he can enjoy unlimited spiritual bliss.”
Everyone in this material world is struggling hard in order to achieve
blissful life. Unfortunately, people do not know how to achieve it.
Atheists do not believe in God, and certainly they do not please Him.
Here it is clearly said that upon pleasing the Supreme Personality of
Godhead one immediately attains to the spiritual platform and enjoys
unlimited blissful life. To become free from material existence means to
become free from the influence of material nature.

The word samprasanne, which is used in this verse, means ‘‘being
satisfied.” A person should act in such a way that the Lord is satisfied by
the activity; it is not that he himself is to be satisfied. Of course, when the
Lord is satisfied, the devotee automatically becomes satisfied. This is the
secret of the process of bhakti-yoga. Outside of bhakti-yoga, everyone is
trying to satisfy himself. No one is trying to satisfy the Lord. Karmis
grossly try to satisfy their senses, but even those who are elevated on the
platform of knowledge also try to satisfy themselves, in a subtle form.
Karmis try to satisfy themselves by sense gratification, and jianis try to
satisfy themselves by subtle activities or mental speculation and thinking
themselves to be God. Yogis also try to satisfy themselves by thinking
that they can achieve different mystic perfections. But only devotees try
to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The devotees’ process of
self-realization is completely different from the processes of the karmis,
janis and yogis. Everyone else is lrying to satisfy himself, whereas the
devotee tries only to satisfy the Lord. The devotional process is completely
different from the others; by working to please the Lord by engaging his
senses in His loving service, the devotee is immediately situated on the
transcendental platform, and he enjoys unlimited blissful life.

TEXT 15
भूतैः प्लमिरारभ्धर्योपितपुरुष एव दि ।
तयोव्य॑वायात्सम्भूतिर्योपित्पुरुषयोरिद ॥
bhutaih 001700৫0117 arabdhair
yosit purusa eva hi
tayor vyavayat sambhutir
yosit-purusayor iha


--- Page 103 ---
464 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
bhittaih—by the material elements; paficabhih—five; arabdhaih—de-
veloped; yosit—woman; purusah—man; eva—just so; hi—certainly; tayoh—
of them; vyavayat—by sexual life; sambhiitih—the further creation; yosit—
of women; purusayoh—and of men;iha—in this material world.
TRANSLATION

The creation of the material world begins with the five elements, and
thus everything, including the body of a man or a woman, is created of
the five elements. By the sexual life of a man and woman, the number of
men and women in this material world is further increased.

PURPORT

When Svayambhuva Manu saw that Dhruva Maharaja understood the
philosophy of Vaignavism, and yet was still dissatisfied because of his
brother’s death, he gave him an explanation of how this material body is
created by the five elements of material nature. In the Bhagavad-gita it is
also confirmed, prakrteh kriyamanpani: everything is created, maintained
and annihilated by the material modes of nature. In the background, of
course, there is the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (mayadhyaksena). In the Ninth
Chapter, Krsna says, “Under My superintendence material nature is acting.”
Svayambhuva Manu wanted to impress on Dhruva Maharaja that the death
of the material body of his brother was not actually the Yaksas’ fault; it
was an action of the material nature. The Supreme Personality of God-
head has immense varieties of potencies, and they act in different gross
and subtle ways.

It is by such powerful potencies that the universe is created, although
grossly it appears to be no more than the five elements—earth, water, fire,
air and ether. Similarly, the bodies of all species of living entities, whether
human beings or demigods, animals or birds, are also created by the same
five elements, and by sexual union they expand into more and more
living entities. That is the way of creation, maintenance and annihilation.
One should not be disturbed by the waves of material nature in this
process. Dhruva Maharaja was indirectly advised not to be afflicted by the
death of his brother because our relationship with the body is completely
material. The real self, spirit soul, is never annihilated or killed by anyone.


--- Page 104 ---
Text 16] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 465
TEXT 16
wd प्रवतत an: स्थितिः संयम एव च ।
गुणव्यतिकङराद्रानन्‌ मायया परमात्मनः ॥१६॥
evarn pravartate sargah
sthitih 50111701780 eva ca
guna-vyatikarad rajan
mayaya paramatmanah

evam—thus; pravartate—occurs; sargah—creation; sthitih— maintenance;
sanmyamah—annihilation; eva—certainly; ca—and; gunpa—of the modes;
vyatikarat—ly interaction; ra@jan—O King; mdyaya—by the illusory energy:
paramatmanah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

Manu continued: My dear King Dhruva, it is simply by the illusory
material energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and by the
interaction of the three modes of material nature that creation, main-
tenance and annihilation take place.

PURPORT

First, creation takes place with the ingredients of the five elements of
material nature. Then, by the interaction of the modes of material nature,
maintenance also takes place. When a child is born, the parents immediately
see to its maintenance. This tendency for maintenance of offspring is
present not only in human society, but in animal society as well. Even
tigers care for their cubs, although their propensity is to eat other animals.
By the interaction of the material modes of nature, creation, maintenance
and also annihilation take place inevitably. But at the same time we should
know that all is conducted under the superintendence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Everything is going on under that process.
Creation is the action of the rajo-guna, the mode of passion: maintenance
is the action of sattva-guna, the mode of goodness; and annihilation is the
action of tamo-guna, the mode of ignorance. We can see that those who
are situated in the mode of goodness live longer than those who are
situated in the tamo-guna or rajo-gupa. In other words, if one is elevated
to the mode of goodness, he is elevated to a higher planetary system where


--- Page 105 ---
466 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
the duration of life is very great. Urdhvari gacchanti sattva-sthah: Great
rsis, sages and sannyasis who maintain themselves in sattva-guna, or the
mode of material goodness, are elevated to a higher planetary system.
Those who are transcendental even to the material modes of nature are
situated in the mode of pure goodness; they attain eternal life in the spiri-
tual world.
TEXT 17
निमित्तमात्रं तत्रासीमिर्गुणः ger: |
.
ज्यक्ताव्यक्तमिदं विश्वं यत्र भ्रमति लोहवत्‌ ॥ १७॥
nimitta-matram tatrasin
nirgupah purusarsabhah
vyaktavyaktam 10011 visvam
yatra bhramati lohavat

nimitta-matram—remote cause; tatra—then; asit—was; nirgunah—uncon-
taminated; purusa-rsabhah—the Supreme Person; vyaktea—manifested;
avyaktam—unmanifested;  idam—this; visvam—world:  yatra—where;
bhramati—moves; loha-vat—like iron.

TRANSLATION

My dear Dhruva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is uncontaminated
by the material modes of nature. He is the remote cause of the creation of
this material cosmic manifestation. When He gives the impetus, many other
causes and effects are produced, and thus the whole universe moves, just
as iron moves by the integrated force of a magnet.

PURPORT

How the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead works
within this material world is explained in this verse. Everything is happen-
ing by the energy of the Supreme Lord. The atheistic philosophers who
do not agree to accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the original
cause of creation think that the material world moves by the action and
reaction of different material elements. A simple example of the interaction
of elements occurs when we mix soda and acid and the movement of ef-
fervescence is produced. But one cannot produce life by such interaction
of chemicals. There are 8,400,000 different species of life, with different
wishes and different actions. How the material force is working cannot be
explained just on the basis of chemical reaction. A suitable example in this
connection is that of the potter and the potter’s wheel. The potter’s wheel


--- Page 106 ---
Text 18] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 467
rotates, and several varieties of earthen pots come out. There are many
causes for the earthen pots, but the original cause is the potter who sets
a force on the wheel. That force comes by his superintendence. The same
idea is explained in Bhagavad-gita—behind all material action and reaction
there is Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna says that every-
thing depends on His energy and yet He is not everywhere. The pot is
produced under certain conditions of action and reaction of material
energy, but the potter is not in the pot. In a similar way, the material
creation is set up by the Lord, but He remains aloof. As stated in the
Vedas, He simply glanced over it, and the agitation of matter immediately
began.

In Bhagavad-gita it is also said that the Lord impregnates the material
energy with the part and parcel jivas, and thus the different forms and
different activities immediately ensue. Because of the different desires and
karmic activities of the jiva soul, different types of bodies in different
species are produced. In Darwin’s theory there is no acceptance of the
living entity as spirit soul, and therefore his explanation of evolution is
incomplete. Varieties of phenomena occur within this universe on account
of the action and reaction of the three material modes, but the original
creator, or the cause, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is men-
tioned here as nimitta-matram, the remote cause. He simply pushes the
wheel with His energy. According to the Mayavadi philosophers, the
Supreme Brahman has transformed Himself into many varieties of forms,
but that is not the fact. He is always transcendental to the action and re-
action of the material gunas, although He is the cause of all causes. Lord
Brahma says, therefore, in the Brahma-samhita: isvarah paramah krspah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah/ anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam. There
are many causes and effects, but the original cause is Sri Krsna.

TEXT 18
o
स खल्विदं भगवान्‌ कालशक्तया
गुणप्रवाहेण बिमक्तवीयैः |
करोत्यकर्तैव निहन्त्यहन्ता
चेष्टा विभूम्नः खल gwen ॥१८॥
sa khalv idarn bhagavan kala-saktya
guna-pravahena vibhakta-viryah
karoty akartaiva nihanty ahanta
cesta vibhumnah khalu durvibhavya


--- Page 107 ---
468 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11

sah—the; khalu—however; idam—this (universe); bhagavan—Personality
of Godhead; kala—of time; saktya—by the force; guna-pravahepa—by the
interaction of the modes of nature; vibhakta— divided; viryah—(whose)
potencies; karoti—acts upon; akarti—the non-doer; eva—although; nihanti—
kills; ahanta—non-killer; cesta—the energy; vibhismnah—of the Lord; khalu
—certainly ; durvibhdvyd—inconceivable.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His inconceivable supreme
energy, time, causes the interaction of the three modes of material nature,
and thus varieties of energy become manifest. It appears that He is acting,
but He is not the actor. He is killing, but He is not the killer. Thus it is
understood that only by His inconceivable power is everything happening.

PURPORT

The word durvibhavya means inconceivable by our tiny brain, and
vibhakta-viryah means divided in varieties of potencies. This is the right
explanation of the display of creative energies in the material world. We
can better understand the mercy of God by an example: a government
state is always supposed to be merciful, but sometimes, in order to keep
law and order, the government employs its police force, and thus punish-
ment is meted out to the rebellious citizens. Similarly, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is always merciful and full of transcendental qualities,
but certain individual souls have forgotten their relationship with Krsna
and have endeavored to lord it over material nature. As a result of their
endeavor, they are involved in varieties of material interaction. It is incor-
rect to argue, however, that because energy issues from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, He is therefore the actor. In the previous verse,
the word nimitta-matram indicates that the Supreme Lord is completely
aloof from the action and reaction of this material world. How is every-
thing being done? The word “inconceivable” has been used. It is not
within the power of one’s small brain to comprehend; unless one accepts
the inconceivable power and energy of the Lord, one cannot make any
progress. The forces which act are certainly set up by the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, but He is always aloof from their action and reaction.
The varieties of energies produced by the interaction of material nature
produce the varieties of species of life and their resultant happiness and
unhappiness.

How the Lord acts is nicely explained in Visnpu Purana: fire is situated
in one place, while the heat and light produced by the fire act in many
different ways. Another example given is that the electric powerhouse is


--- Page 108 ---
Text 19] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 469
situatedin one place, but by its energies many different types of machinery
move. The production is never identical with the original source of the
energy, but the original source of energy, being the prime factor, is simul-
taneously one and different from the product. Therefore, Lord Caitanya’s
philosophy, acintya-bhedabheda-tattva, is the perfect way of understand-
ing. In this material world, the Lord incarnates in three forms—as Brahma,
Visnu and Siva—by which He takes charge of the three modes of material
nature. By His incarnation of Brahma He creates, as the incarnation of
Visnu He maintains, and by His incarnation of Siva, He also annihilates.
But the original source of Brahma, Visnu and Siva—Garbhodakasayi
Vignu—is always apart from these actions and reactions of material nature.
TEXT 19
सोऽनन्तोऽन्तकरः कालोऽनादिरादिकृदव्ययः।
जनं जनेन जनयन्मारयन्मत्युनान्तकम्‌ ॥१९॥
৬০ ’nanto ’nta-karah kalo
‘nadir adi-krd avyayah
Janarn janena janayan
marayan mrtyunantakam

sah—He; anantah—infinite; anta-karah—annihilator; kalah—time;
anadih—without beginning; adi-krt—beginning of everything; avyayah—
without decrease; janam—living entities; janena—by living entities; janayan—
causing to be born; marayan—killing; mrtyuna—by death;anta-kam—Xkillers.

TRANSLATION

My dear Dhruva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is ever existing.
In the form of time, He is the killer of everything. He has no beginning,
although He is the beginning of everything, nor is He ever exhaustible,
although everything is exhausted in due course of time. The living entities
are created through the agency of the father, and they are killed through
the agency of death, but He is perpetually free of birth and death.

PURPORT

The supreme authority and inconceivable power of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead can be minutely studied from this verse. He is always
unlimited. That means that He has no creation or end. He is, however,
death (in the form of time), as described in Bhagavad-gita. Krsna says, "न्‌


--- Page 109 ---
470 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
am death. I take away everything at the end of life.” Eternal time is also
without beginning, but it is the creator of all creatures. The example is
given of touchstone, which creates many valuable stones and jewels but
does not decrease in power. Similarly, creation occurs many times, every-
thing is maintained, and, after a time, everything is annihilated एता the
original creator, the Supreme Lord, remains untouched and undiminished
in power. The secondary creation is made by Brahma, but Brahma is created
by the Supreme Godhead. Lord Siva annihilates the whole creation, but at
the end he is also annihilated by Visnu. Lord Visnu remains. In the Vedic
hymns it is stated that in the beginning there is only Visnu and that He
alone remains at the end.

An example can help us to understand the inconceivable potency of the
Supreme Lord. In the recent history of warfare the Supreme Personality of
Godhead created a Hitler and, before that, a Napoleon Bonaparte, and
they each killed many living entities in war. But in the end Bonaparte and
Hitler were also killed. People are still very much interested in writing and
reading books about Hitler and Bonaparte and how they killed so many
people in war. Year after year many books are published for public reading
regarding Hitler’s killing thousands of Jews in confinement. But no one is
researching who killed Hitler and who created such a gigantic killer of
human beings. The devotees of the Lord are not much interested in the
study of the flickering history of the world. They are interested only in
He who is the original creator, maintainer and annihilator. That is the
purpose of the Krsna consciousness movement.

TEXT 20
न वै खपक्षोऽस्य विपक्ष एव वा
परस्य TR: समं प्रजाः ।
तं धावमानमजुधावन्त्यनीश्ा
यथा रजांसखनिलं भूतसद्वाः (Rell
na vai sva-pakso ‘sya vipaksa eva va
parasya mrtyor visatah samar prajah
tar dhavamanam anu dhavanty anisa
yatha 70]2 7715) 0711107 bhuta-sanghah

na—not; vai—however; sva-paksah—ally; asya—of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead; vipaksah—enemy ; eva—certainly ; va—or; parasya—of the
Supreme; mrtyoh—in the form of time; visatah—entering; samam—equally;
prajah—living entities; tam—Him; dhavamanam—moving; anu dhavanti—


--- Page 110 ---
Text 20] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 471
follow behind; ani$ah—dependent living entities; yathd—as; rajamsi—
particles of dust;anilam—the wind; bhiila-sarighah—other material elements.
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His feature of eternal time, is
present in the material world and is neutral towards everyone. No one is
His ally, and no one is His enemy. Within the jurisdiction of the time
element, everyone enjoys or suffers the result of his own karma, or fruitive
activities. As, when the wind blows, small particles of dust fly in the air,
80, according to one’s particular karma, one suffers or enjoys material life.

PURPORT

Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the original cause of
all causes, He is not responsible for anyone’s material sufferings or enjoy-
ment. There is no such partiality on the part of the Supreme Lord. The
less intelligent accuse the Supreme Lord of being partial and claim that
this is why one enjoys in this material world and another suffers. But this
verse specifically says that there is no such partiality on the part of the
Supreme Lord. Living entities, however, are never independent. As soon as
they declare their independence of the supreme controller, they are im-
mediately put into this material world to try their luck freely, as far as
possible. When the material world is created for such misguided living
entities, they create their own karma, fruitive activities, and take advan-
tage of the time elements, and thereby they create their own fortune or
misfortune. Everyone is created, everyone is maintained, and everyone is
ultimately killed. As far as these three things are concerned, the Lord is
equal to everyone, it is according to his karma that a person suffers and
enjoys. The living entity’s higher or lower position, his suffering and
enjoying, are due to his own karma. The exact word used in this connection
is anisah, which means ‘dependent on their own karma.” The example is
given that the government gives everyone the facilities for governmental
action and management, but by one’s own choice he creates a situation
which obliges him to exist under different types of consciousness. The
example given in this verse is that when the wind blows, particles of dust
float in the air. Gradually lightning occurs, and then torrents of rain
follow, and thus the rainy season creates a situation of varieties in the
forest. God is very kind—He gives cveryone an equal chance—but by the
resultant actions of one’s own karma he suffers or enjoys this material
world.


--- Page 111 ---
472 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11

TEXT 21

आयुषोऽपचयं जन्तोस्तथैवोपचयं विभुः |
उमाम्यां रहितः खस्यो दुःस्थस्य विदधात्यसौ ।॥२१॥
ayuso ‘pacayam jantos
tathaivopacayar vibhuh
ubhabhyar rahitah sva-stho
duhsthasya vidadhaty asau
ayusah—of duration of life; apacayam—diminution; jantoh—of the living
entities; tathd—similarly; eva—also; upacayam—increase; vibhuh-the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ubhabhyam—from both of them;
rahitah—free; sva-sthah—always situated in Ilis transcendental position;
duhsthasya—of the living entities under the laws of karma; vidadhati—
awards; asau—He.
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, is all-powerful, and He
awards the results of one’s fruitive activities. Thus, although one living
entity's duration of life is very small whereas that of another is very great,
He is always in His transcendental position, and there is no question of

lessening or increasing His duration of life.

PURPORT
Both the mosquito and Lord Brahma are living entities in the material
world; both are minute sparks and are part of the Supreme Lord. The very
short duration of life of the mosquito and the very long lifetime of Lord
Brahma are both awarded by the Supreme Personality of Godhead accord-
ing to the results of their karma. But in the Brahma-sarihita we find it said,
karmani nirdahati: the Lord diminishes or vanquishes the reactions of
devotees. The same fact is explained in Bhagavad-gita, yajaarthat karmano
‘nyatra: one should perform karma only for the purpose of satisfying the
Supreme Lord, otherwise one is bound by the action and reaction of
karma. Under the laws of karma a living entity wanders within the universe
under the rule of eternal time, and sometimes he becomes a mosquito and
sometimes Lord Brahma. To a sane man this business is not very fruitful.
Bhagavad-gita (9.25) gives a warning to the living entities: yanti deva-vrata
devan—those who are addicted to the worship of the demigods go to the
planets of the demigods, and those who are addicted to worship of the
pitas, forefathers, go to the pitas. Those who are inclined to material activi-


--- Page 112 ---
Text 22] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 473
ties remain in the material sphere. But persons who engage in devotional
service reach the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, where
there is neither birth nor death nor different varieties of life under the
influence of the law of karma. The best interest of the living entity is
to engage himself in devotional service and go back home, back to Godhead.
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura advised: “My friend, you are being washed
away in material nature’s waves of time. Please try to understand that you
are the eternal servant of the Lord. Then everything will stop, and you will
be eternally happy.”
TEXT 22
९
केचित्कमं वदन्त्येनं सखमावमपरे J ।
५
एके कालं परे दैवं पसः wma ॥२२॥
kecit karma vadanty enam
svabhavam apare nrpa
eke kala pare daivam
purisah kamam utapare

kecit—some; karma—fruitive activities; vadanti—explain; enam—that;
svabhavam—nature; apare—others; nrpa—my dear King Dhruva; eke—some;
kalam—time; pare—others; daivam—fate; pumsah— of the living entity;
kamam—desire; uta—also; apare—others.

TRANSLATION

The differentiation among varieties of life and their suffering and enjoy-
ment is explained by some to be the result of karma. Others say it is due
to nature, others due to time, others due to fate, and still others say that it
is due to desire.

PURPORT

There are different types of philosophers—mimarmsakas, atheists, astrono-
mers, sexualists and so many other classifications of mental speculators.
The real conclusion is that it is our work only that binds us within this
material world in different varieties of life. How these varieties have sprung
up is explained in the Vedas: it is due 10 the desire of the living entity.
The living entity is not a dead stone; he has different varietics of desire, or
kama. The Vedas say, kamo ’karsit. The living entitics are originally parts
of the Lord, like sparks of a fire, but they have dropped to this material
world, attracted by a desire to lord it over nature. That is a fact. Every


--- Page 113 ---
474 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
living entity is trying to lord it over the material resources to the best of
his ability.

This kama, or desire, cannot be annihilated. There are some philosophers
who say’ that if one gives up his desires, he again becomes liberated. But
it is not at all possible to give up desire because desire is a symptom of the
living entity. If there were no desire, then the living entity would be a dead
stone. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura, therefore, advises that one turn his
desire to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then desire becomes
purified. And when one’s desires are purified, he becomes liberated from
all material contamination. The conclusion is that the different philoso-
phers’ theories to explain the varieties of life and their pleasure and pain
are all imperfect. The real explanation is that we are eternal servants of
God and that as soon as we forget this relationship, we are thrown into the
material world, where we create our different activities and suffer or enjoy
the result. We are drawn in this material world by desire, but the same
desire must be purified and employed in the devotional service of the Lord.
Then our disease of wandering in the universe under different forms and
conditions will end.

TEXT 23
FHA नानाश्स्त्युदयस्य च |
न वै चिकीर्षितं तात को वेदाथ खसम्भवम्‌ 1:30
avyaktasyaprameyasya
nana-$akty-udayasya ca
na vai cikirsitarn tata
ko vedatha sva-sambhavam

avyaktasya—of the unmanifested; aprameyasya—of the Transcendence;
nana—various; $akti—energies; udayasya—of He who gives rise to; ca—also;
na—never; vai—cer tainly; cikirsitam—the plan; tata—my dear boy; kah—who;
veda—can know; atha—therefore; sva—own; sambhavam—origin.

TRANSLATION

The Absolute Truth, Transcendence, is never subjected to the under
standing of imperfect sense endeavor, nor is He subject to direct experience.
He is the master of varieties of energies, like the full material energy, and
no one can understand His plans or actions; therefore it should be
concluded that although He is the original cause of all causes, no one can
know Him by mental speculation.


--- Page 114 ---
Text 23] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 475
PURPORT

The question may be raised, “Since there are so many varieties of
philosophers theorizing in different ways, which of them is correct?”
The answer is that the Absolute Truth, Transcendence, is never subject to
direct experience or mental speculation. The mental speculator may be
called Dr. Frog. The story is that a frog in a three-foot well wanted to
calculate the length and breadth of the Atlantic Ocean on the basis of his
knowledge of his own well. But it was an impossible task for Dr. Frog. A
person may be a great academician, scholar or professor, but he cannot
speculate and expect to understand the Absolute Truth because his senses
are limited. The cause of all causes, the Absolute Truth, can be known from
the Absolute Truth Himself, and not by our ascending process to reach
Him. When the sun is not visible at night or when it is covered by a cloud
in the day, it is not possible to uncover it, either by bodily or mental
strength or by scientific instruments, although the sun is there in the sky.
No one can say that he has discovered a torchlight so powerful that if one
goes on a roof and focuses the torchlight on the night sky, the sun will
then be seen. There is no such torchlight, nor is it possible.

The word avyakta, unmanifested, in this verse indicates that the Abso-
lute Truth cannot be manifested by any strain of so-called scientific
advancement of knowledge. Transcendence is not the subject matter of
direct experience. The Absolute Truth may be known in the same way as
the sun covered by a cloud or covered by night, for when the sun rises in
the morning, in its own way, then everyone can see the sun, everyone can
see the world, and everyone can see himself. This understanding of self-
realization is called atma-tattva. Unless, however, one comes to this point
of understanding atma-tattva, one remains in the darkness in which he was
born. Under the circumstances, no one can understand the plan of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is equipped with varieties of
energies, as stated in the Vedic literature (pardsya saktir vividhaiva sriyate).
He is equipped with the energy of eternal time. He has not only the material
energy which we see and experience, but He has also many reserve energies
that He can manifest in due course of time when necessary. The material
scientist can simply study the partial understanding of the varieties of
energies; he can take up one of the energies and try to understand it with
limited knowledge, but still it is not possible to understand the Absolute
Truth in full by dint of material science. No material scientist can foretell
what is going to happen in the future. The bhakti-yoga process is, however,
completely different from so-called scientific advancement of knowledge.


--- Page 115 ---
476 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
A devotee completely surrenders unto the Supreme, and He reveals Him-
self by His causeless mercy. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, dadami buddhi-
yogari tam. The Lord says, “I give him intelligence.” What is that intelli-
gence? Yena mam upayanti te. He gives him the intelligence to cross over
the ocean of nescience and come back home, back to Godhead. In conclu-
sion, the cause of all causes, the Absolute Truth or Supreme Brahman,
cannot be understood by philosophical speculation, but He reveals Himself
to His devotee because the devotee fully surrenders unto His lotus feet.
Bhagavad-gita is therefore to be accepted as a revealed scripture spoken by
the Absolute Truth Himself when He descended to this planet. If any
intelligent man wants to know what God is, he should study this transcen-
dental literature under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. Then
it is very easy to understand Krsna as He is.
TEXT 24
न चैते पुत्रक भ्रातुरन्तारो धनदानुगाः ।
विसर्गादानयो्तात पुंसो दैवं हि कारणम्‌ ॥२४॥
na ८१८९ putraka bhratur
hantaro dhana-danugah
visargadanayos tata
(0८07150 daivarn hi karanam
na—never; ca—also; ete—all these; putraka—my dear son; bhratuh—of
your brother; hantarah—killers; dhana-da—of Kuvera; anugah—followers;
visarga—of birth; adanayoh—of death; tata—my dear son; pumsafi—of a
living entity; daivam—the supreme; hi—certainly; karapnam— the cause.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, those Yaksas, who are descendants of Kuvera, are not
actually the killers of your brother; the birth and death of every living
entity is caused by the Supreme, who is certainly the cause of all causes.
TEXT 25
स एव विश्वं खृजति स एवावति हन्ति =)
अथापि EERE गुणकर्मभिः । २५॥
sa eva visvam srjati
sa evavati hanti ca
athapi hy anahainkaran
najyate guna-karmabhih


--- Page 116 ---
Text 25] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 477

sah—He; eva—certainly; visvam—the universe; srjati—creates; sah—He;
eva—certainly; avati—maintains; hanti—annihilates; ca—also; athapi—more-
over; hi—certainly; anahankarat—from being without ego; na—not; ajyate—
becomes entangled; guna—by the modes of material nature; karmabhih—
by activities.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead creates this material world, main-
tains it, and annihilates it in due course of time, but because He is
transcendental to such activities, He is never affected by ego in such action
or by the modes of material nature.

PURPORT

In this verse the word anaharikara means “without ego.” The condi-
tioned soul has a false ego, and as a result of his karma he gets different
types of bodies in this material world. Sometimes he gets the body of a
demigod, and he thinks that body to be his identity. Similarly, when he
gets the body of a dog he identifies his self with that body. But for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead there is no such distinction between
the body and the soul. Bhagavad-gita, therefore, certifies that anyone who
thinks of Krsna as an ordinary human being is without knowledge of His
transcendental nature and is a great fool. The Lord says, na mam karmani
limpanti: He is not affected by anything He does because He is never
contaminated by the material modes of nature. That we have a material
body proves that we are infected by the three material modes of nature.
The Lord says to Arjuna, “You and I had many, many births previously,
but I remember everything, whereas you do not.” That is the difference
between the living entity, or conditioned soul, and the Supreme Soul.
The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has no material
body, and because He has no material body, He is not affected by any
work that He executes. There are many Mayavadi philosophers who
consider that Krspa’s body is the effect of a concentration of the material
mode of goodness, and they distinguish Krsna’s soul from Krgna’s body.
The real situation, however, is that the body of the conditioned soul,
even if he has a large accumulation of material goodness, is material,
whereas Krspa’s body is never material; it is transcendental. Krsna has no
false ego, for He does not identify Himself with the false and temporary
body. His body is always eternal; He descends on this world in His own
original spiritual body. This is explained in Bhagavad-gita as parain bhavam.
The words param bhavam divyam are especially significant in understand-
ing Krsna’s personality.


--- Page 117 ---
478 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
TEXT 26
एष भूतानि भूतात्मा भूतेक्ो ET ।
खशक्तया मायया युक्तः सृजत्यत्ति च पाति TREN)
esa bhatani bhatatma
bhiiteso bhiita-bhavanah
sva-$aktya mayaya yuktah
srjaty atti ca pati ca
esah—this; bhiitani—all created beings; bhita-atma— the Supersoul of all
living entities; bhitta-iSah—the controller of everyone; bhitta-bhavanah—the
maintainer of everyone; sva-$aktyd—through His energy; mayaya—the
external energy; yuktah—through such agency; srjati—creates; atti—annihi-
lates; ca—and; pati—maintains; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Supersoul of all living
entities. He is the controller and maintainer of everyone; through the
agency of His external energy, He creates, maintains and annihilates every-
one.
PURPORT
There are two kinds of energies in the matter of creation. The Lord
creates this material world through His external, material energy, whereas
the spiritual world is a manifestation of His internal energy. He is always
associated with the internal energy, but He is always aloof from the mate-
rial energy. Therefore in Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, mat-sthani sarva-
bhiitani na caham tesv avasthitah: “All living entities are living on Me or
on My energy, but I am not everywhere.” (Bg. 9.4) He is personally always
situated in the spiritual world. In the material world also, wherever the
Supreme Lord is personally present is to be understood as the spiritual
world. For example, the Lord is worshiped in the temple by pure devotees.
The temple is therefore to be understood as the spiritual world.
TEXT 27
तमेव मृत्युमख्तं तात दैवं
सर्वात्मनोपेहि जगत्परायणम्‌ |


--- Page 118 ---
Text 27] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 479
यसै निं विश्वसृजो हरन्ति
गावो यथा वै नसि दामयन्त्रिताः Hel
tam eva mrtyum amrtam tata daivarn
sarvatmanopehi jagat-parayanam
yasmai balim visva-srjo haranti
gavo yatha vai nasi dama-yantritah
tam—unto Him; eva—certainly; mrtyum—death; amrtam—immortality;
tata—my dear son; daivam—the Supreme; sarva-atmana—in all respects;
upehi—surrender; jagat—of the world; parayapam—ultimate goal; yasmai—
unto whom; balim—offerings; visva-srjah—all the demigods like Brahma;
haranti—bear; gavah—bulls; yatha—as; vai—without fail; nasi—in the nose;
dama~—Dby a rope; yantritah—controlled.
TRANSLATION
My dear boy Dhruva, please surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the ultimate goal of the progress of the world. Everyone,
including the demigods headed by Lord Brahma, is working under His
control, just as a bull, prompted by a rope in its nose, is controlled by its
owner.
PURPORT
The material disease is to declare independence from the supreme
controller. Factually, our material existence begins when we forget the
supreme controller and wish to lord it over material nature. Everyone in
the material world is trying his best to become the supreme controller—
individually, nationally, socially and in many other ways. Dhruva Maharaja
was advised to stop fighting by his grandfather, who was concerned that
Dhruva was adhering to a personal ambition to fight to annihilate the whole
race of Yaksgas. In this verse, therefore, Svayambhuva Manu seeks to eradi-
cate the last tinge of false ambition in Dhruva by explaining the position
of the supreme controller. The words mrtyum amrtam, ‘‘death and immor-
tality,” are significant. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, “I am ultimate
death, who takes away everything from the demons.” The demons’ busi-
ness is to continually struggle for existence as lords over material nature.
The demons repeatedly meet death after death and create a network of
involvement in the material world. The Lord is death for the demons, but
for devotees He is amrta, eternal life. Devotees who render continuous
service to the Lord have already attained immortality, for whatever they


--- Page 119 ---
480 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
are doing in this life they will continue to do in the next. They will simply
change their material bodies for spiritual bodies. Unlike the demons, they
no longer have to change material bodies. The Lord, therefore, is simulta-
neously death and immortality. He is death for demons and immortality
for devotees. He is the ultimate goal of everyone because He is the cause of
all causes. Dhruva Maharaja was advised to surrender unto Him in all
respects, without keeping any personal ambition. One may put forward
the argument, “Why are the demigods worshiped?” The answer is given
here that demigods are worshiped by less intelligent men. The demigods
themselves accept sacrifices for the ultimate satisfaction of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 28
यः पञ्चवर्षो जननीं त्वं विहाय
मातु; सपटन्या वचसा भिन्नमर्मा |
बनं गतस्तपसा . प्रत्यगक्ष-
मारा्य लेमे দৃমি पदं त्रिलोक्याः ॥२८॥
yah paiica-vargo jananir (४07१ vihaya
matuh sapatnya vacasa bhinna-marma
vanarn gatas tapasa pratyag-aksam
aradhya lebhe mirdhni padarn tri-lokyah
yah—one who; paiica-varsah—five years old; jananim—mother; tvam—
you; vihdya—leaving aside; matuh—of the mother; sa-patnyah—of the co-
wife; vacasa—by the words; bhinna-marma—aggrieved at heart; vanam—to
the forest; gatah—went; tapasi—by austerity; pratyak-aksam—the Supreme
Lord; @aradhya—worshiping; lebhe—achieved; miirdhni—on the top; padam—
the position; tri-lokyah—of the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
My dear Dhruva, at the age of only five years you were very grievously
afflicted by the words of your mother’s co-wife, and you very boldly gave
up the protection of your mother and went to the forest to engage in the
yogic process for realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As a
result of this you have already achieved the topmost position in all the
three worlds.
PURPORT
Manu was very proud that Dhruva Maharaja was one of the descendants
in his family because at the age of only five years Dhruva began meditating


--- Page 120 ---
Text 29] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 481
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead and within six months he was
able to see the Supreme Lord face to face. Factually, Dhruva Maharaja is
the glory of the Manu dynasty, or the human family. The human family
begins from Manu. The Sanskrit word for man is manusya, which means
“descendant of Manu.” Dhruva Maharaja is not only the glory of the
family of Svayambhuva Manu, but he is the glory of the entire human
society. Because Dhruva Maharaja had already surrendered to the Supreme
Godhead, he was especially requested not to do anything unbefitting a
surrendered soul.
TEXT 29
तमेनमङ्गात्मनि een
sq मेकमक्षरम्‌ |
आत्मानमन्विच्छ विथुक्तमात्मदग्‌
यसिभिदं मेदमससप्रतीयते ॥२९॥
tam enam angatmani mukta-vigrahe
vyapasritam nirgunam ekam aksaram
atmanam anviccha vimuktam atma-drg
yasminn ida bhedam asat pratiyate
tam—Him; enam—that; anga—my dear Dhruva; atmani—in the mind;
mukta-vigrahe—free from anger; vyapasritam—situated; nirgunam—tran-
scendental ;ekam—one;aksaram—the infallible Brahman ;atmanam— the self;
anviccha—try to find out; vimuktam—uncontaminated: atma-drk—facing
toward the Supersoul; yasmin—in which; idam—this; bhedam—differentia-
tion; asat—unreal; pratiyate—appears to be.
TRANSLATION
My dear Dhruva, please, therefore, turn your attention to the Supreme
Person, who is the infallible Brahman. Face the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in your original position, and thus, by self-realization, you will
find this material differentiation to be merely flickering.
PURPORT
The living entities have three kinds of vision, according to their positions
in self-realization. According to the bodily concept of life, one sees
differentiation in terms of varieties of bodies. The living entity actually
passes through many varieties of material forms, but despite all such
changes of body, he is eternal. When living entities, therefore, are viewed


--- Page 121 ---
482 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
in the bodily concept of life, one appears to be different from another.
Lord Manu wanted to change the vision of Dhruva Maharaja, who was look-
ing upon the Yaksas as different from him or as his enemies. Factually no
one is an enemy or a friend. Everyone is passing through different types of
bodies under the law of karma, but as soon as one is situated in his spiritual
identity, he does not see differentiation in terms of this law. In other
words, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita, brah ma-bhutah prasannatma na $ocati
na kanksati/samah sarvesu bhittesu mad-bhaktiri labhate param (Bg. 18.54).
A devotee, who is already liberated, does not see differentiation in terms
of the outward body; he sees all living entities as spirit souls, eternal
servants of the Lord. Dhruva Maharaja was advised by Lord Manu to see
with that vision. He was specifically advised to do so because he was a
great devotee and should not have looked upon other living entities with
ordinary vision. Indirectly Manu pointed out to Dhruva Maharaja that out
of material affection Dhruva thought of his brother as his kin and the
Yaksas as his enemies. Such observation of differentiation subsides as soon
as one is situated in his original position as an eternal servant of the Lord.
TEXT 30
स्वं प्रत्यगात्मनि तदा भगवत्यनन्त
आनन्दमात्र उपपसमस्तशक्तौ |
क्ति विधाय परमां Tha
ग्रन्थि विभेत्स्यसि ममाहमिति प्ररूढम्‌॥२०॥
(00771 pratyag-atmani tada bhagavaty ananta
ananda-matra upapanna-samasta-saktau
bhaktim vidhaya paramarm sanakair avidya-
granthirh vibhetsyasi mamaham iti praridham

tvam—you; pratyak-atmani—unto the Supersoul; tada—at that time;
bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anante—who is
unlimited; ananda-matre—reservoir of all pleasure; upapanna—possessed of;
samasta—all; saktau—potencies; bhaktim—devotional service; vidhaya—by
rendering; paramdam—supreme; $anakaith—very soon; avidya—of illusion;
granthim—the knot; vibhetsyasi—you will undo; mama—my; aham—1; iti—
thus; praridham—firmly fixed.

TRANSLATION

Thus regaining your natural position and rendering service unto the

Supreme Lord, who is the all-powerful reservoir of all pleasure and who


--- Page 122 ---
Text 31] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 483
lives in all living entities as the Supersoul, you will very soon forget the
illusory understanding of “I” and *‘my.”
PURPORT
Dhruva Maharaja was already a liberated person because at the age of
five years he had seen the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But even
though liberated, he was, for the time being, afflicted by the illusion of
maya, thinking himself the brother of Uttama in the bodily concept of
life. The whole material world is working on the basis of “I” and “mine.”
This is the root of attraction to the material world. If one is attracted by
this root of illusory conceptions—“I"* and “mine” —he will have to remain
within this material world in different exalted or nasty positions. By the
grace of Lord Krsna, the sages and Lord Manu reminded Dhruva Maharaja
that he should not continue this material conception of “I” and *“‘mine.”
Simply by devotional service unto the Lord hisillusion could be eradicated
without difficulty.
TEXT 31
संयच्छ रोषं भद्रं ते प्रतीपं श्रेयसां परम्‌ ।
शरुतेन भूयसा THERA यथाऽऽमयम्‌ ॥२१॥
sariiyaccha 705072४ bhadram te
pratiparm sreyasam param
Srutena bhuyasa rajann
agadena yathamayam
sammyaccha—just control; rosam—anger; bhadram—all good fortune;
te—to you; pratipam—enemy; Sreyasim—of all goodness; param—the
foremost; Srutena—by hearing; bhityasa—constantly; rdgjan—my dear King;
agadena—by medicinal treatment; yatha—as; amayam— disease.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, just consider what I have said to you, which will act as
medicinal treatment upon disease. Control your anger, for anger is the
foremost enemy on the path of spiritual realization. I wish all good fortune
for you. Please follow my instructions.
PURPORT
Dhruva Maharaja was a liberated soul, and actually he was not angry
with anyone. But because he was the ruler, it was his duty to become


--- Page 123 ---
484 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
angry for some time in order to keep law and order in the state. His brother,
Uttama, was without fault, yet he was killed by one of the Yaksas. It was
the duty of Dhruva Mahar3ja to kill the offender (life for life) because he
was the king. When the challenge came, Dhruva Maharaja fought vehement-
ly and punished the Yaksas sufficiently. But anger is such that if one
increasesit, it increases unlimitedly. In order that Dhruva Maharaja’s kingly
anger not exceed the limit, Manu was kind enough to check his grandson.
Dhruva Maharaja could understand the purpose of his grandfather, and he
immediately stopped the fighting. The words srutena bhuyasa, by constant-
ly hearing, are very important in this verse. By constantly hearing about
devotional service, one can check the force of anger, which is detrimental
to the process of devotional service. Srila Pariksit Maharaja said that the
constant hearing of the pastimes of the Lord is the panacea for all material
diseases. Everyone, therefore, should hear about the Supreme Personality
of Godhead constantly. By hearing one can always remain in equilibrium,
and thus his progress in spiritual life will not be hampered.

Dhruva Mahirdja’s becoming angry with the miscreants was quite appro-
priate. There is a short story in this connection about a snake who became
a devotee upon instruction by Narada, who instructed him not to bite any
more. Since ordinarily a snake’s business is to fatally bite other living
entities, as a devotee he was forbidden to do so. Unfortunately, people took
advantage of this nonviolence on the part of the snake, especially the chil-
dren, who began to throw stones at him. He did not bite anyone, however,
because it was the instruction of his spiritual master. After a while, when
the snake met his spiritual master, Narada, he complained, “I have given
up the bad habit of biting innocent living entities, but they are mistreating
me by throwing stones at me.” Upon hearing this, Narada Muni instructed
him, “Don’t bite, but do not forget to expand your hood as if you were
going to bite. Then they will go away.” Similarly, a devotee is always non-
violent; he is qualified with all good characteristics. But, in the common
world, when there is mischief made by others, he should not forget to
become angry, at least for the time being, in order to drive away the
miscreants.

TEXT 32
येनोपयु्ातपुरुपालछठोक उद्विजते भशषम्‌ ।
न बुधस्तद्वशं गच्छेदिच्छन्नभयमात्मनः ॥२२॥


--- Page 124 ---
Text 33] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 485
yenopasrstat purusal
loka udvijate bhrsam
na budhas tad -vasum gacched
icchann abhayam atmanah
yena—by which; upasrstat—being overwhelmed; purusat—by the person;
lokah—everyone; udvijate—becomes terrified; bhrsam—greatly; na—never;
budhah—a learned person; tat—of anger; vasam—under the control;
gacchet—should go; icchan—desiring; abhayam—fearlessness, liberation;
atmanah—of the self.
TRANSLATION
A person who desires liberation from this material world should not fall
under the control of anger because when bewildered by anger one becomes
a source of dread for all others.
PURPORT
A devotee or saintly person should not be dreadful to others, nor should
anyone be a source of dread to him. If one treats others with non-enmity,
then no one will become his enemy. There is the example, however, of
Jesus Christ, who had enemies, and they crucified him. The demonic are
always present, and they find fault even in saintly persons. But a saintly
person never becomes angry, even if there is very great provocation.
TEXT 33
हेखनं गिरिशश्रातु्नदस्प त्वया इतम्‌ |
यञ्जध्निवान्‌ पुण्यजनान्‌ श्राध्नानित्यमर्षितः॥२२।
helanarn girisa-bhratur
dhanadasya tvaya krtam
yaj jaghnivan pupya-janan
bhratr-ghnan ity amarsitah
helanam— disrespectful behavior; girisa—of Lord Siva; bhratuh—the
brother; dhana-dasya—to Kuvera; tvaya—by you; krtam—was performed;
yat—because; jaghnivin—you have killed; punya-janan—the Yaksas;
bhratr—of your brother; ghnan—Kkillers: iti—thus (thinking); amarsitah—
angry.


--- Page 125 ---
486 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 11
TRANSLATION
My dear Dhruva, you thought that the Yaksas killed your brother, and
therefore you have killed great numbers of them. But by this action you
have agitated the mind of Lord Siva’s brother, Kuvera, who is the treasurer
of the demigods. Please note that your actions have been very disrespectful
to Kuvera and Lord Siva.
PURPORT
Lord Manu stated that Dhruva Maharaja had been offensive to Lord Siva
and his brother Kuvera because the Yaksas belonged to Kuvera’s family.
They were not ordinary persons. As such, they have been described as
punya-jana, pious men. Somehow or other the mind of Kuvera had been
agitated, and Dhruva Mahiraja was advised to pacify him.
TEXT 34
तं प्रसादय Trg संनत्या प्रश्रयोक्तिभिः |
न याश्न्महतां तेजः कलं नोऽभिभविष्यति ॥३४॥
tam prasadaya vatsasu
sannatya prasrayoktibhih
na yavan mahatam tejah
kulam no ’bhibhavisyati
tam—him; prasadaya—pacify; vatsa—my son; asu—immediately; san-
natya—by offering obeisances; prasraya—by respectful behavior; uktibhih—
by gentle words; na yavat—before; mahatam—of great personalities; tejah—
wrath; kulam—family ; nah —our; abhibhavigyati—will affect.
TRANSLATION
For this reason, my son, you should immediately pacify Kuvera with
gentle words and prayers, and thus his wrath may not affect our family.
PURPORT
In our common dealings we should maintain friendship with everyone
and certainly with such exalted demigods as Kuvera. Our behavior should
be such that no one should become angry and thereby commit a wrong to
individuals, families or society.


--- Page 126 ---
Text 35] Svayambhuva Manu Advises Dhruva Maharaja 487
TEXT 35
ক ও
od खायम्थुवः पौत्रमजुशास्य মন্তপ্তবদ |
तेनाभिवन्दितः सारूख्षिभिः स्वपुरं ययौ ॥३५॥
evan svayambhuvah pautram
anusasya manur dhruvam
tenabhivanditah sakam
rsibhih sva-puram yayau
evam—thus; svayambhuvah—Lord Svayambhuva Manu; pautram—to his
grandson; anusasya—after giving instruction; manuh—Lord Manu; dhruvam
—to Dhruva Maharaja; tena—by him;abhivanditah—being offered obeisances
to; sakam—together; rsibhih—with the sages; sva-puram—to his own abode;
yayau—went.
TRANSLATION
Thus Svayambhuva Manu, after giving instruction to Dhruva Maharaja,
his grandson, received respectful obeisances from him. Then Lord Manu
and the great sages went back to their respective homes.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Eleventh
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘“Svayambhuva Manu Advises
Dhruva Maharaja to Stop Fighting.”


--- Page 127 ---
CHAPTER TWELVE
Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead
TEXT 1
fig sg
. ड a
at fad afew बेशसा-
दपेतमन्युं भगवान्‌ धनेऽवरः ।
तत्रागतश्चारणयश्षकिनरः
संस्तूयमानो न्यवदत्कृताञ्जसिम्‌ ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvaca
dhruvam 11107880712 pratibuddhya vaisasad
apeta-manyum bhagavan dhanesvarah
tatragatas carana-yaksa-kinnaraih
samstuyamarto nyavadat krtanjalim
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya said; dhruvam—Dhruva Maharaja; nivrttam—
ceased; pratibuddhya—having learned; vaisasat—from killing; apeta—sub-
sided; manyum—anger; bhagavan—Kuvera; dhana-isvarah—master of the
treasury; tatra—there; agatah—appeared; carapa—by the Caranas; yaksa—
Yaksas; kinnaraih—and by the Kinnaras; sarmstityamanah—being worshiped;
nyavadat—spoke; krta-anijalim—te Dhruva with folded hands.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya said: My dear Vidura, Dhruva Maharaja’s anger
subsided, and he completely ceased killing Yaksas. When Kuvera, the most
blessed master of the treasury, learned this news, he appeared before him.
While being worshiped by Yaksas, Kinnaras and Caranas, he spoke to
Dhruva Maharaja, who stood before him with folded hands.
489


--- Page 128 ---
490 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
TEXT 2
धनद उवयाख
भो मोः क्षत्रियदायाद परितुषटोऽसि तेऽनष ।
यत्त्वं पितामहादेजादवैरं दुस्त्यजमत्यजः ॥ २॥
dhanada uvaca
bho bhoh ksatriya-dayada
paritusto smi te ‘nagha
yat tvarh pitamahadesad
vairarn dustyajam atyajah
dhana-dah uvaca—the master of the treasury (Kuvera) said; bhoh bhoh—
0; ksatriya-dayada—O son of a ksatriya; paritustah—very glad; asmi—I am;
te—with you; anagha—0O sinless one; yat—because; tvam—you; pitamaha—
of your grandfather; ddesat—under the instruction; vairam—enmity;
dustyajam— difficult to avoid; atyajah—have given up.
TRANSLATION
The master of the treasury, Kuvera said, O sinless son of a ksatriya,
I am very glad to know that under the instruction of your grandfather you
have given up your enmity, although it is very difficult to avoid. I am very
pleased with you.
TEXT 3
न मवानवधीद्यक्षान्न यक्षा आतरं तव ।
कार एव हि भूतानां प्रथचरप्ययभावयोः ॥ ই ॥
na bhavan avadhid yaksan
na yaksa bhratarar tava
kala eva hi bhuatanam
prabhur apyaya-bhavayoh
na—not; bhavan—you; avadhit—Kkilled; yaksan—the Yaksas; na—not;
yaksah—the Yaksas; bhrataram—brother; tava—your; kalah—time; eva—
certainly; hi—for; bhiitanam—of living entities; prabhuh—the Supreme
Lord; apyaya-bhavayoh—of annihilation and generation.
TRANSLATION
Actually, you have not killed the Yaksas, nor have they killed your
brother, for the ultimate cause of generation and annihilation is the
eternal time feature of the Supreme Lord.


--- Page 129 ---
Text 4] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 491
PURPORT

When the master of the treasury addressed him as sinless, Dhruva
Maharaja, considering himself responsible for killing so many Yaksas,
might have thought himself otherwise. Kuvera, however, assured him that
factually he did not kill any of the Yaksas; therefore, he was not at all sin-
ful. He did his duty as a king, as it is ordered by the laws of nature. “Nor
should you think that your brother was killed by the Yaksas,” said Kuvera.
“He died or was killed in due course of time by the laws of nature. Eternal
time, one of the features of the Lord, is ultimately responsible for annihi-
lation and generation. You are not responsible for such actions.”

TEXT 4
अहं त्वमित्यपार्था धीरज्ञानात्पुरुषस्य दि ।
खामीवामात्यतद्धथानायया बन्धविपर्ययौ || ४ ॥
aha tvam ity apartha dhir
ajiianat purusasya hi
svapnivabhaty atad-dhyanad
yaya bandha-viparyayau

aham~—I; tvam—you; iti—thus; apartha—misconceived ; dhih—intelligence;
ajiianat—from ignorance; purusasya—of a person; hi—certainly; svapni—a
dream; iva—like; abhati—appears; a-tat-dhyanat—from the bodily concept
of life; yaya—by which; bandha—bondage; viparyayau—and misery.

TRANSLATION

Misidentification of oneself and others as “I” and “you” on the basis of
the bodily concept of life is a product of ignorance. This bodily concept is
the cause of repeated birth and death, and it makes us go on continuously
in material existence.

PURPORT

The conception of "द" and “you,” aham tvam, as separate from one
another, is due to our forgetfulness of our eternal relationship with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Person, Krsna, is the
central point, and all of us are His parts and parcels, just as hands and
legs are parts and parcels of the whole body. When we actually come to this
understanding of being eternally related to the Supreme Lord, this dis-
tinction, which is based on the bodily concept of life, cannot exist. The
same example can be cited herewith: the hand is the hand, and the leg is
the leg, but when both of them engage in the service of the whole body,


--- Page 130 ---
492 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
there is no such distinction as hands and legs, for all of them belong to the
whole body, and all the parts working together constitute the whole body.
Similarly, when the living entities are in Krsna consciousness, there is no
such distinction as “I” and ‘““you” because everyone is engaged in the
service of the Lord. Since the Lord is absolute, the services are also abso-
lute; even though the hand is working one way and the leg is working in
another way, since the purpose is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
they are all one. This is not to be confused with the statement by the
Mayavadi philosopher that ‘“‘everything is one.” Real knowledge is that
hand is hand, leg is leg, body is body, and yet all together they are one.
As soon as the living entity thinks that he is independent, his conditional
material existence begins. The conception of independent existence is,
therefore, like a dream. One has to be in Krgna consciousness, his original
position. Then he can be freed from material bondage.
TEXT 5
EET ध्रुव भद्रं ते भगवन्तमधोक्षजम्‌ |
स्वेभूतात्ममावेन सर्व॑भूतात्मविग्रहम्‌ ।। ५५॥
tad gaccha dhruva bhadram te
bhagavantam adhoksajam
sarva-bhutatma-bhavena
sarva-bhutatma-vigraham

tat—therefore; gaccha—come; dhruva— Dhruva; bhadram—good fortune;
te—unto you; bhagavantarn—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
adhoksajam—who is beyond the concepts of material senses; sarva-bhiita—
all living entities; atma-bhavena—by thinking of them as one; sarva-bhiata—
in all living entities; @ma—the Supersoul; vigraham—having form.

TRANSLATION

My dear Dhruva, come forward. May the Lord always grace you with
good fortune. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond our
sensual perception, is the Supersoul of all living entities, and thus all
entities are one, without distinction. Begin, therefore, to render service
unto the transcendental form of the Lord, who is the ultimate shelter of all
living entities.

PURPORT

Here the word vigraham, ‘‘having specific form,” is very significant, for

it indicates that the Absolute Truth is ultimately the Supreme Personality


--- Page 131 ---
Text 6] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 493
of Godhead. That is explained in the Brahma-samhita. Sac-cid-ananda-
vigrahah: He has form, but His form is different from any kind of material
form. The living entities are the marginal energy of the supreme form. As
such, they are not different from the supreme form, but at the same time
they are not equal to the supreme form. Dhruva Maharaja is advised here-
with to render service unto the supreme form. That will include service to
other individual forms. For example, a tree has a form, and when water is
poured on the root of the tree, the other forms—the leaves, twigs, flowers
and fruits—are automatically watered. The Mayavada conception that be-
cause the Absolute Truth is everything He must be formless is rejected here.
Rather, it is confirmed that the Absolute Truth has form, and yet He is all-
pervading. Nothing is independent from Him.
TEXT 6
भजख যজনাযান্ধ্মমৰায় मवच्छिद्म्‌ |
युक्तं विरहितं शक्त्या गुणमय्याऽऽत्ममायया॥। ६ ॥
bhajasva bhajaniyanghrim
abhavaya bhava-cchidam
yuktarn virahitam saktya
guna-mayyatma-mayaya

bhajasva—engage in devotional service; bhajaniya—worthy to be wor-
shiped; anghrim—unto Him whose lotus feet; abhavaya—for deliverance
from material existence; bhava-chidam—who cuts the knot of material
entanglement; yuktam—attached; virahitam—aloof; $aktya—to His poten-
cy; gupa-mayyd—consisting of the modes of material nature: atma-mayaya
—by His inconceivable potency.

TRANSLATION

Engage yourself fully, therefore, in the devotional service of the Lord, for
only He can deliver us from this entanglement of materialistic existence.
Although the Lord is attached to His material potency, He is aloof from her
activities. Everything in this material world is happening by the inconceiv-
able potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

In continuation of the previous verse, it is specifically mentioned here
that Dhruva Maharaja should engage himself in devotional service. Devo-
tional service cannot be rendered to the impersonal Brahman feature of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Whenever the word “bhajasva’ appears,


--- Page 132 ---
494 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
meaning ‘‘engage yourself in devotional service,” there must be the servant,
service and the served. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is served, the
mode of activities to please Him is called service, and one who renders such
service is called the servant. Another significant feature in this verse is that
only the Lord, and no one else, is to be served. That is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita, (mam ০1০৫7 sarapam vraja). There is no need to serve the
demigods, who are just like the hands and legs of the Supreme Lord. When
the Supreme Lord is served, the hands and legs of the Supreme Lord are
automatically served. There is no need of separate service. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita, tesam aha samuddharta mrtyu-sarnsara-sagarat. (Bg.12.7)
This means that the Lord, in order to show specific favor to the devotee,
directs the devotee from within in such a way that ultimately he is deliv-
ered from the entanglement of material existence. No one but the Supreme
Lord can help the living entity to be delivered from the entanglement of
this material world. The material energy is a manifestation of one of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead’s varieties of potencies (parasya $৫/ (07
vividhaiva Sriyate). This material energy is one of the Lord’s potencies,
as much as heat and light are potencies of fire. The material energy is not
different from the Supreme Godhead, but at the same time He has nothing
to do with the material energy. The living entity, who is of the marginal
energy, is entrapped by the material energy on the basis of his desire to
lord it over the material world. The Lord is aloof from this, but when the
same living entity engages himself in the devotional service of the Lord,
then he becomes attached to this service. This situation is called yuktam.
For devotees the Lord is present even in the material energy. This is the in-
conceivable potency of the Lord. Material energy acts in the three modes of
material qualities, which produce the action and reaction of material exis-
tence. Those who are not devotees become involved in such activities,
whereas devotees, who are dovetailed with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, are freed from such action and reaction of the material energy.
The Lord is therefore described herewith as bhava-cchidam, one who can
give deliverance from the entanglement of material existence.
TEXT 7
wit कामं चप यन्मनोगतं
प्स्त्वयोन्ारपदेऽदिशद्धितः ।
बेरं वरारहोऽम्बुजनामपाद्यो-
रनन्तरं त्वां वयमङ्ग ANON


--- Page 133 ---
Text 7] ` Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 495
vrpihi kamam nrpa yan 77101108007
mattas tvam auttanapade ’visankitah
৮0707 vararho ‘mbuja-nabhe-padayor
anantaram tvam vayam anga Susruma

vrpihi—please ask; kdmam—desire; nrpa—O King; yat—whatever; manah-
gatam—within your mind; mattah—from me; tvam—you; auttanapade—
0 son of Maharaja Uttanapada; avisankitah—without hesitation; varam—
benediction; vara-arhah—worthy to take benediction; ambuja—lotus flower;
nabha—whose navel; padayoh—at His lotus feet; anantaram—constantly;
tvim—about you; vayam—we; anga—dear Dhruva; §usruma—have heard.

TRANSLATION

My dear Dhruva Maharaja, son of Maharaja Uttanapada, we have heard
that you are constantly engaged in transcendental loving service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known for His lotus navel. You
are therefore worthy to take all benediction from us. Please, therefore,
ask whatever benediction you want from me without hesitation.

PURPORT

Dhruva Maharaja, the son of King Uttanapada, was already known
throughout the universe as a great devotee of the Lord, constantly thinking
of His lotus feet. Such a pure, uncontaminated devotee of the Lord is
worthy to have all the benedictions that can be offered by the demigods.
He doesn’t have to worship the demigods separately for such benediction.
Kuvera is the treasurer of the demigods, and he is personally offering
whatever benediction Dhruva Maharaja would like to have from him. Srila
Bilvamarigala Thakura stated, therefore, that for persons who engage in the
devotional service of the Lord, all material benedictions wait like maid-
servants. Mukti-devi is just waiting at the door of the devotee to offer
liberation, or more than that, at any time. To be a devotee is therefore an
exalted position. Simply by rendering transcendental loving service unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead one can have all the benedictions of
the world without separate endeavor. Lord Kuvera said to Dhruva Maharaja
that he had heard that he was always in samadhi, or thinking of the lotus
feet of the Lord. In other words, he knew that for Dhruva Maharaja there
was nothing desirable within the three material worlds. He knew that
Dhruva would ask for nothing but to remember the lotus feet of the Su-
preme Lord constantly.


--- Page 134 ---
496 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
TEXT 8
Rg उवाच
स राजराजेन वराय चोदितो
HN मदामागवतो যহাদবিঃ |
हरौ स वव्रेऽचलितां स्मृतिं यया
तरस्ययन्नेन दुरत्ययं तमः ॥ ८ ॥
maitreya uvaca
sa raja-rajena varaya codito
dhruvo maha-bhagavato maha-matih
harau sa vavre ’calitam smrtir yaya
taraty ayatnena duratyayar tamah

maitreyah uvdca—the great sage Maitreya said; sash—he; rdja-rajena—by
the king of kings (Kuvera); vardya—for benediction; coditah—being
asked; dhruvah—Dhruva Maharaja; maha-bhagavatah—a first-class pure
devotee; mahd-matih—most intelligent or thoughtful; hareau—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sah—he;vavre—asked;acalit@m—unflinch-
ing;smrtim—remembrance; yayd—by which; tarati—crosses over;ayatnena—
without difficulty; duratyayam—unsurpassable; tamah— nescience.

TRANSLATION

The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, when thus asked to
accept a benediction from Kuvera the Yaksaraja [King of the Yaksas],
Dhruva Maharaja, that most elevated pure devotee, who was an intelligent
and thoughtful king, begged from him that he might have unflinching faith
in and remembrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for thus a
person can cross over the ocean of nescience very easily, although it is very
difficult for others to cross.

PURPORT

According to the opinion of expert followers of Vedic rites, there are
different types of benedictions in terms of religiosity, economic develop-
ment, sense gratification and liberation. These four principles are known
as catur-vargas. Of all the catur-vargas, the benediction of liberation is con-
sidered to be the highest in this material world. To be enabled to cross
over material nescience is known as the highest purusartha, or benediction
for the human being. But Dhruva Maharaja wanted a benediction which
surpasses even the highest purusartha, liberation. He wanted the benedic-


--- Page 135 ---
Text 9] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 497
tion that he might constantly remember the lotus feet of the Lord. This
stage of life is called paiica-purusartha. When a devotee comes to the
platform of paiica-purusartha, simply engaging in devotional service to
the Lord, the fourth purusartha, liberation, becomes very insignificant in his
eyes. Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati has stated in this connection that for
a devotee liberation is a hellish condition of life; as for sense gratification,
which is available in the heavenly planets, the devotee considers it to be a
will-o’-the-wisp, having no value in life. Yogis endeavor to control the
senses, but for a devotee, controlling the senses is no difficulty at all. The
senses are compared to serpents, but for a devotee the serpents’ poison
teeth are broken. Thus Srila Prabodhinanda Sarasvati has analyzed all
kinds of benedictions available in this world, and he clearly declares that
for a pure devotee they are all of no significance. Dhruva Maharaja was
also a maha-bhagavata, or a first-class pure devotee, and his intelligence was
very great (maha-matih). Unless one is very intelligent, one cannot take to
devotional service or Krsna consciousness. Naturally, anyone who is a first-
class devotee must be a first-class intelligent person and therefore not
interested in any kind of benediction within this material world. Dhruva
Maharaja was offered benediction by the king of the kings. Kuvera, the
treasurer of the demigods, whose only business is to supply immense riches
to persons within this materialistic world, is described as the king of kings
because unless benedicted by Kuvera one cannot become a king. The king
of the kings personally offered Dhruva Maharaja any amount of riches, but
he declined. He is described, therefore, as maha-matih, very thoughtful or
highly intellectual.
TEXT 9
तस्य प्रीतेन मनसा तां द्वैडविडस्ततः |
पयतोऽन्तर्दधे सोऽपि खपुरं प्रत्यपयत ॥ ९ ॥
tasya pritena manasa
८27. dattvaidavidas tatah
pasyato ’ntardadhe so pi
sva-purarn pratyapadyata

tasya—with Dhruva; pritena—being very pleased; manasa—with such a
mentality; tam—that remembrance; dattva—having given; aidavidah—
Kuvera, son of ldavida; tatah—thereafter; pasyatah—while Dhruva was
looking on; antardadhe—disappeared; sah—he (Dhruva); api—also; sva-
puram—to his city; pratyapadyata—returned.


--- Page 136 ---
498 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
TRANSLATION
The son of Idavida, Lord Kuvera, was very pleased, and happily he gave
Dhruva Maharaja the benediction he wanted. Thereafter he disappeared
from Dhruva’s presence, and Dhruva Maharaja also returned to his capital
city.
PURPORT
Kuvera, who is known as the son of Idavida, was very pleased with
Dhruva Maharaja because he did not ask him for anything materially enjoy-
able. Kuvera is one of the demigods, so one may put forward the argument,
“Why did Dhruva Maharaja take benediction from a demigod?” The an-
swer is that for a Vaignava there is no objection in taking benediction from
a demigod if it is favorable for advancing Krsna consciousness. The go pis,
for example, worshiped Katyayani, the demigoddess, but the only bene-
diction they wanted from the goddess was to have Krsna as their husband.
A ४३151३५३ is not interested in asking any benediction from the demigods,
nor is he interested in asking benediction from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is said in the Bhdgavatam that liberation can be offered by the
Supreme Person, but even if a pure devotee is offered liberation by the
Supreme Lord, he refuses to accept it. Dhruva Maharaja did not ask Kuvera
for transference to the spiritual world, which is called liberation; he simply
asked that wherever he would remain—whether in the spiritual or material
world—he would always remember the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
A Vaignava is always respectful to everyone. So when Kuvera offered him
a benediction, he did not refuse it. But he wanted something which would
be favorable to his advancement in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 10
अथायजत यहञेशं क्रतमिभूरिदक्िणैः।
दस्यकियादेदतानां कमं कमेफलप्रदम्‌ ॥ १०॥
athayajata yajiiesarn
kratubhir bhiri-daksinaih
dravya-kriya-devatanarn
karma karma-phala-pradam
atha—thereafter; ayajata—he worshiped; yajia-isSam—the master of
sacrifices; kratubhih—by sacrificial ceremonies; bhuri—great; daksinaih—
by charities; dravya-kriya-devatanam—of (sacrifices including various) para-
phernalia, activities, and demigods; karma—the objective; karma-phala—
the result of activities; pradam—who awards.


--- Page 137 ---
Text 10] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 499
TRANSLATION

As long as he remained at home, Dhruva Maharaja performed many great
ceremonial sacrifices in order to please the enjoyer of all sacrifices, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Prescribed ceremonial sacrifices are
especially meant to please Lord Visnu, who is the objective of all such
sacrifices and who awards the resultant benedictions.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (Bg.3.9) it is said, yajiiarthat karmano ‘nyatra loko yar
karma-bandhanah: one should act or work only in order to please the
Supreme Lord, otherwise he becomes entangled in the resultant reactions.
According to the four divisions of varpa and asrama, ksatriyas and vaisyas
are especially advised to perform great ceremonial sacrifices and to dis-
tribute their accumulated money very liberally. Dhruva Maharaja, as a
king and ideal ksatriya, performed many such sacrifices, giving very
liberally in charity. Ksatriyas and vaisyas are supposed to earn their money
and accumulate great riches. Sometimes they do it by acting sinfully.
Ksatriyas are meant to rule over a country; Dhruva Maharaja, for example,
in the course of ruling, had to fight and kill many Yaksas. Such action is
necessary for ksatriyas. A ksatriya should not be a coward, and he should
not be nonviolent; to rule over the country he has to act violently.

Ksatriyas and the vaisyas are therefore especially advised to give in
charity at least fifty percent of their accumulated wealth. In Bhagavad-
gita it is recommended that even though one enters the renounced order of
life, he still cannot give up the performance of yajiia, dana, and tapasya.
They are never to be given up. Tapasya is meant for the renounced order
of life; those who are retired from worldly activities should perform
tapasya, penances and austerities. Those who are in the material world,
the ksatriyas and the vaisyas, must give in charity. Brahmacaris, in the
beginning of their lives, should perform different kinds of yajiias.

Dhruva Maharaja, as an ideal king, practically emptied his treasury by
giving in charity. A king is not meant to simply realize taxes from the
citizens and accumulate wealth to spend in sense gratification. World
monarchy has failed ever since kings began lo satisfy their personal senses
with the taxes accumulated from the citizens. Of course, whether the
system is monarchy or democracy, the same corruption is still going on.
At the present moment there are different parties in the democratic gov-
ernment, but everyone is busy trying to keep their posts or trying to keep
their political party in power. They have very little time to think of the
welfare of the citizens, whom they oppress with heavy taxes in the form of


--- Page 138 ---
500 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
income tax, sales tax and many other taxes—people sometimes have eighty
to ninety percent of their income taken away, and these taxes are lavishly
spent for the high salaries drawn by the officers and rulers. Formerly, the
taxes accumulated from the citizens were spent for performing great
sacrifices as enjoined in the Vedic literature. At the present moment,
however, almost all forms of sacrifice are not at all possible; therefore, it is
recommended in the sastras that people should perform sarikirtana-yajia.
Any householder, regardless of his position, can perform this sankirtana-
yajita without expenditure. All the family members can sit down together
and simply clap their hands and chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Some-
how or other, everyone can manage to perform such a yajiia and distribute
10170৫5৫00৫ to the people in general. That is quite sufficient for this age of
Kali. The Krsna consciousness movement is based on this principle:chant
the Hare Krsna mantra every moment, as much as possible, both inside and
outside of the temples, and, as far as possible, distribute prasada. This
process can be accelerated with the cooperation of state administrators
and those who are producing the country’s wealth. Simply by liberal dis-
tribution of prasada and sankirtana, the whole world can become peace-
ful and prosperous.

Generally in all the material sacrifices recommended in the Vedic
literature there are offerings to the demigods. This demigod worship is
especially meant for less intelligent men. Actually, the result of such
sacrifice goes to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana. Lord
Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita, bhoktaram yajiia-tapasam: He is actually the
enjoyer of all sacrifices (Bg. 5.29). His name is, therefore, Y ajfiapurusa.

Although he was a great devotee and had nothing to do with these
sacrifices, still, to set an example to his people, Dhruva Maharaja performed
many sacrifices and gave all his wealth in charity. For as long as he lived
as a householder, he never spent a farthing for his sense gratification. In
this verse the word karma-phala-pradam is very significant. The Lord
awards everyone different kinds of karma as the individual living entities
desire; He is the Supersoul present within the heart of everyone, and He is
so kind and liberal that He gives everyone full facilities to perform whatever
acts one wants. Then the result of the action is also enjoyed by the living
entity. If anyone wants to enjoy or lord it over material nature, the Lord
gives him full facilities, but he becomes entangled in the resultant reactions.
Similarly, if anyone wants to engage himself fully in devotional service,
the Lord gives him full facilities, and the devotee enjoys the results. The
Lord is therefore known as karma-phala-prada.


--- Page 139 ---
Text 11] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 501
TEXT 11
सर्वार्मन्यच्युतेऽसर्वे तीव्रषां मक्तिघुददन्‌ |
হহ্হাঁল্সনি भूतेषु तमेवावसितं विम्‌ 1220
sarvatmany acyute 50706
tivraughdari bhak tim udvahan
dadarsatmani bhutesu
tam evavasthitarn vibhum

sarva-atmani—unto the Supersoul; acyute—infallible; asarve—without any
limit; tivre-ogham—with unrelenting force; bhaktim—devotional service;
udvahan—rendering; dadar§a—he saw; atmani—in the Supreme Spirit;
bhiitesu—in all living entities; tam—Him; eva—only; avasthitam—situated;
vibhum—all-powerful.

TRANSLATION

Dhruva Maharaja rendered devotional service unto the Supreme, the
reservoir of everything, with unrelenting force. While carrying out his
devotional service to the Lord, he could see that everything is situated in
Him only and that He is situated in all living entities. The Lord is called
acyuta because He never fails in His prime duty, to give protection to His
devotees.

PURPORT

Dhruva Maharaja not only performed many sacrifices, but he carried on
his transcendental occupation, engagement in the devotional service of the
Lord. The ordinary karmis who want to enjoy the results of fruitive
activities are concerned only with sacrifices and ritualistic ceremonies as
enjoined in the Vedic sastras. Although Dhruva Maharaja performed many
sacrifices in order to be an exemplary king, he was constantly engaged in
devotional service. The Lord always protects His surrendered devotee. A
devotee can see that the Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, as stated in
the Bhagavad-gita (isvarah sarva-bhutanam hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati). Ordi-
nary persons cannot understand how the Supreme Lord is situated in
everyone’s heart, but a devotee can actually see Him. Not only can he see
Him outwardly, but he can see, with spiritual vision, that everything is
resting in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as described in Bhagavad-
gita (mat-sthani sarva-bhutani). That is the vision of a maha-bhagavata. He
sees everything others see, but instead of seeing merely the trees, the


--- Page 140 ---
502 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Cante 4, Ch. 12
mountains, the cities or the sky, he sees only his worshipable Supreme
Personality of Godhead in everything, because everything is resting in Him
only. This is the vision of the maha-bhagavata. In summary, a maha-
bhagavata, a highly elevated pure devotee, sees the Lord everywhere as
well as within the heart of everyone. This is possible for devotees who have
developed elevated devotional service to the Lord. As stated in the Brahma-
sarhita, premaijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena: only those who have
smeared their eyes with the ointment of love of Godhead can see every-
where the Supreme Lord face to face; it is not possible by imagination or
so-called meditation (Bs. 5.38).
TEXT 12
तमेवं शीलसम्पन्नं ब्रह्मण्यं दीनक्त्सतम्‌ ।
गोरं धर्मसेतूनां मेनिरे पितरं प्रजाः nga
tam evarn stla-sampannarn
brahmanyam dina-vatsalam
goptaram dharma-setunam
menire pitaram prajah

tam—him; evam—thus; sila—with godly qualities; sampannam—endowed;
brahmapyam—respectful to the brahmanas; dina—to the poor; vatsalam—
kind; goptaram—protector;dharma-setinam—of religious principles; menire
—thought; pitaram—father; prajah—the citizens.

TRANSLATION

Dhruva Maharaja was endowed with all the godly qualities; he was very
respectful to the devotees of the Supreme Lord and very kind to the poor
and innocent, and he protected religious principles. With all these qualifi-
cations, he was considered to be the direct father of all the citizens.

PURPORT

The personal qualities of Dhruva Maharaja described herein are the
exemplary qualities of a saintly king. Not only a king but also the leaders
of a modern democratic or impersonal government must be qualified with
all these godly characteristics. Then the citizens of the state can be happy.
It is clearly stated here that the citizens thought of Dhruva Maharaja as
their father; as a child, depending on the able father, is completely satis-
fied, so the citizens of the state, being protected by the state or the king,
should remain satisfied in every respect. At the present moment, however,


--- Page 141 ---
Text 13] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead- 503
there is no guarantee by the government of even the primary necessities of
life in the state, namely, the protection of the lives and property of the
citizens.

One word 15 very significant in this connection: brahmanyam. Dhruva
Maharaja was very devoted to the brahmanas, who engage in the study of
the Vedas and thereby know the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They
are always busy propagating Krsna consciousness. The state should be very
respectful to societies that distribute God consciousness all over the world,
but, unfortunately, at the present moment there is no state or government
support given to such movements. As for good qualities, it is very difficult
to find anyone in state administration with any good qualities. The admin-
istrators simply sit in their administrative posts and say “no” to every
request, as if they were paid to say “no” to the citizens. Another word,
dina-vatsalam, is very significant also. The state head should be very kind
to the innocent. Unfortunately in this age the state agents and the presi-
dents draw good salaries from the state, and they pose themselves as very
pious, but they allow the running of slaughterhouses where innocent
animals are killed. If we try to compare the godly qualities of Dhruva
Maharaja to the qualities of modern statesmen, we can see that there is no
actual comparison. Dhruva Maharaja was present in the Satya-yuga, as will
be clear from the next verses. He was the ideal king in Satya-yuga. The
government administration in the present age (Kali-yuga) is bereft of all
godly qualities. Considering all these points, the people today have no
alternative but to take to Krsna consciousness for protection of religion,
life and property.

TEXT 13
षटू्रंशदरषेसादसं शशास धितिमण्डलम्‌ |
मोगैः पुण्यक्षयं ga 1231
sag-trimsad-varsa-sahasram
Sasasa ksiti-mandalam
bhogaih punpya-ksayar kurvann
abhogair asubha-ksayam

sat-trimsat—thirty-six; varsa—years; sahasram—thousand; $asasa—ruled;
ksiti-mandalam—the earth planet; bhogaih—by enjoyment; punya—of
reactions of pious activities; ksayam—diminution; kurvan—doing; abhogaih
—by austerities; asubha—of inauspicious reactions; ksayam—diminution.


--- Page 142 ---
504 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
TRANSLATION

Dhruva Maharaja ruled over this planet for 36,000 years; he diminished
the reactions of pious activities by enjoyment, and by practicing austerities
he diminished inauspicious reactions.

PURPORT

That Dhruva Maharaja ruled over the planet for 36,000 years means
that he was present in the Satya-yuga because in the Satya-yuga people
used to live for 100,000 years. In the next yuga, Treta, people used to live
for 10,000 years, and in the next yuga, Dvapara, for 1,000 years. In the
present age, the Kali-yuga, the maximum duration of life is 100 years. With
the change of the yugas, the duration of life and memory, the quality of
kindness—all good qualities—diminish. There are two kinds of activities,
namely pious and impious. By executing pious activities one can gain
facilities for higher material enjoyment, but due to impious activities one
has to undergo severe distress. A devotee, however, is not interested in
enjoyment or affected by distress. When he is prosperous he knows, “I am
diminishing the results of my pious activities,” and when he is in distress
he knows, “I am diminishing the reactions of my impious activities.” A
devotee is not concerned with enjoyment or distress; he simply desires to
execute devotional service. It is said in the Srimad-Bhagavatam that devo-
tional service should be apratihata, not checked by the material conditions
of happiness or distress. The devotee undergoes processes of austerity such
as observing Ekadagdi and similar other fasting days and restraining from
illicit sex life, intoxication, gambling and meat-eating. Thus he becomes
purified from the reactions of his past impious life, and because he engages
in devotional service, which is the most pious activity, he enjoys life with-
out separate endeavor.

TEXT 14
एवं बहुसवं कालं महात्माविचलेन्द्रियः ।
तरिवर्गोपयिकं नीत्वा पू्रायादान्तृपासनम्‌ ॥१४॥
evan bahu-savam kalam
mahatmavicalendriyah
trivargaupayikam nitva
putrayadan nrpasanam

evam—thus; bahu—many; savam—years; kalam—time; mahatma—great

soul; avicala-indriyah—without being disturbed by sense agitation;


--- Page 143 ---
Text 14] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 505
tri-varga—three kinds of worldly activities; aupayikam—favorable for
executing; nitva—having passed; putraya—to his son; adat—he handed over;
nrpa-asanam—the royal throne.

TRANSLATION

The self-controlled great soul Dhruva Maharaja thus passed many, many
years favorably executing three kinds of worldly activities, namely religios-
ity, economic development and satisfaction of all material desires. There-
after he handed over the charge of the royal throne to his son.

PURPORT

Perfection of materialistic life is suitably attained by the process of
observing religious principles. This leads automatically to successful eco-
nomic development, and thus there is no difficulty in satisfying all material
desires, but since, as a king, he had to keep up his status quo or it would
not have been possible to rule over the people in general, he did it perfect-
ly. But as soon as he saw that his son was grown up and could take charge
of the royal throne, he immediately handed over the charge and retired
from all material engagements.

One word used here is very significant—avicalendriya, which means that
neither was he disturbed by the agitation of the senses nor was his sense
power diminished, although in years he was a very old man. Since he ruled
over the world for 36,000 years, naturally one may conclude that he
became very, very old, but factually his senses were very young—and yet
he was not interested in sense gratification. In other words, he remained
self-controlled. He performed his duties perfectly according to the materi-
alistic way. That is the way of behavior of great devotees. Srila Raghunatha
dasa Gosvami, one of the direct disciples of Lord Caitanya, was the son of
a very rich man. Although he had no interest in enjoying material happiness,
when he was entrusted to do something in managing the state, he did it
perfectly. Srila Gaurasundara advised him, “From within, keep yourself
and your mind completely aloof, but externally execute the material duties
just as they need to be done.” This transcendental position can be achieved
by devotees only, as described in the Bhagavad-gita: while others, such as
yogis, try to control their senses by force, devotees, even though possessing
full sense powers, do not use them because they engage in higher transcen-
dental activities.


--- Page 144 ---
506 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
TEXT 15
मन्यमान © fd मायारचितमात्मनि ।
अदिद्यारवितखभगन्बवैनगरोपमम्‌ ॥
manyamana idam visvarmn
maya-racitam atmani
avidya-racita-svapna-
gandharva-nagaropamam
manyamanah—realizing; idam—this; viSvam—universe; maya—by the ex-
ternal energy; racitam— manufactured; atmani— unto the living entity;
avidya—by illusion; racita—manufactured; svapna—a dream; gandharva-
nagara—phantasmagoria; upamam-—like.
TRANSLATION
Srila Dhruva Maharaja realized that this cosmic manifestation bewilders
living entities like a dream or phantasmagoria because it is a creation of
the illusory external energy of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
In the deep forest sometimes it appears that there are big palaces and
nice cities. That is technically called gandharva-nagara. Similarly, in dreams
also we create many false things out of imagination. A self-realized person
or a devotee knows well that this material cosmic manifestation is a tempo-
rary illusory representation appearing to be truth. It is like phantasmagoria.
But behind this shadow creation there is reality—the spiritual world. A
devotee is interested in the spiritual world, not its shadow. Since he has
realization of the supreme truth, a devotee is not interested in this tempo-
rary shadow of truth. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (param
drstva nivartate).
TEXT 16
आत्यस्ब्यपत्यसुदृदो AEH
मन्तःपुरं परिविहार्वशच रम्याः ।
. Ar
SRNR स प्रययो विश्चालाम्‌। १६॥


--- Page 145 ---
Text 17] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 507
atma-stry-apatya-suhrdo balam rddha-kosam
antah-puram parivihara-bhuvas ca ramyah
bhu-mandalarn jaladhi-mekhalam akalayya
kalopasrstam iti sa prayayau visalam
atma—body; stri—wives; apatya—children; suhrdah—friends; balam—in-
fluence, army; rddha-kosam—rich treasury ;antah-puram—female residential
quarters; parivihare-bhuvah—pleasure-grounds; ca—and; ramyah—beautiful;
bhii-mandalam—the complete earth; jala-dhi—by oceans; mekhalam—bound;
dkalayya—considering; kala—by time; upasrstam—created; iti—thus; sah—
he; prayayau—went; visalam—to Badarikaérama.
TRANSLATION
Thus Dhruva Maharaja, at the end, left his kingdom, which extended all
over the earth and was bounded by the great oceans. He considered his
body, his wife, his children, his friends, his army, his rich treasury, his
very comfortable palaces and his many enjoyable pleasure-grounds to be
creations of the illusory energy. Thus in due course of time he retired to
the forest known as Badarikaérama in the Himalayas.
PURPORT
In the beginning of his life, when he went to the forest in search of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Dhruva Maharaja realized that all bodily
conceptions of pleasure are products ofthe illusory energy. In the very
beginning, of course, he was after the kingdom of his father, and in order
to get it he went to search for the Supreme Lord. But he later realized
that everything is the creation of the illusory energy. From the acts of
Srila Dhruva Maharaja we can understand that somehow or other if one
becomes Krsna conscious—it does not matter what his motivation is in the
beginning—he will eventually realize the real truth by the grace of the Lord.
In the beginning, Dhruva Maharaja was interested in the kingdom of his
father, but later on he became a great devotee, mahda-bhagavata,and had no
interest in material enjoyment. The perfection of life can be achieved only
by devotees. Even if one completes only a minute percentage of devotion-
al service and then falls down from hisimmature position, he is better than
a person who fully engages in the fruitive activities of this material world.
TEXT 17
तस्यां विशुद्धकरणः शिववार्विगाह्य
बद्ध्वाऽऽसनं जितमरुन्मनसाऽऽदहृताक्षः |


--- Page 146 ---
508 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
TS दधार भगवत्प्रतिरूप एतव्‌
ध्यायंस्तद व्यवहितो व्यसृजत्समाधौ ॥१७॥
tasyar visuddha-karanah $iva-var vigahya
baddhvasanam jita-marun manasahrtaksah
sthule dadhara bhagavat-pratirupa etad
dhyayaris tad avyavahito vyasrjat samadhau
tasyam—in Badarikasrama; visuddha—purified; karanah—his senses; $iva—
pure; vah—water; vigahya—bathing in; baddhva—having fixed; asanam—
sitting position; jita—controlled; marut—breathing process; manasi—by
the mind; ahrta—withdrawn; aksah—his senses; sthiile—physical; dadhara—
he concentrated; bhagavat-pratiripe—on the exact form ০1 the Lord; etat—
the mind; dhyayan—meditating upon; tat—that; avyavahitah—without
stopping; vyasrjat—he entered; samadhau—into trance.
TRANSLATION
In Badarikidsrama Dhruva Mahiraja’s senses became completely purified
because he bathed regularly in the crystal-clear purified water. He fixed his
sitting position and by yogic practice controlled the breathing process and
the air of life; in this way his senses were completely withdrawn. Then he
concentrated his mind on the arca-vigraha form of the Lord, which is the
exact replica of the Lord, and thus meditating upon Him he entered into
complete trance.
PURPORT
Here is a description of the astanga-yoga system, to which Dhruva
Maharaja was already accustomed. Astanga-yoga was never meant to be
practiced in a fashionable city. Dhruva Maharaja went to Badarikasrama,
and in a solitary place, alone, he practiced yoga. He concentrated his mind
on the arca-vigraha, the worshipable Deity of the Lord, which exactly
represents the Supreme Lord, and thus thinking constantly of that Deity,
he became absorbed in trance. Worship of the arca-vigraha is not idol
worship. The arca-vigraha is an incarnation of the Lord in a form appreci-
able by a devotee. Therefore devotees engage in the temple in the service
of the Lord as arcd-vigraha, a form made of sthiila (material) objects such as
stone, metal, wood, jewels or paint. All of these are called sthila, or
physical representations. Since the devotees follow the regulative principles
of worship, even though the Lord is there in His physical form, He is non-
different from His original spiritual form. Thus the devotee gets the benefit


--- Page 147 ---
Text 18] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 509
of achieving the ultimate goal of life, that is to say, becoming always
absorbed in thought of the Lord. This incessant thought of the Lord, as
prescribed in the Bhagavad-gita, makes one the topmost yogi.
TEXT 18
मक्त हरो भगवति प्रवहनजख-
मानन्द्बाप्पकलया GEE: |
विद्धियमानहदयः স্তুতকাত্িবাল্লী
नात्मानमसखरदसाविति य॒क्तलिङ्गः ॥।१८॥
bhakti harau bhagavati pravahann ajasram
dnanda-baspa-kalaya muhur ardyamanah
viklidyamana-hrdayah pulakacitango
natmanam asmarad asav iti mukta-lingah
bhaktim—devotional service; harau—unto Hari; bhagavati—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; pravahan—constantly engaging in; ajasram—always;
ananda—blissful; baspa-kalaya—by a stream of tears; muhuh—again and
again; ardyamanah—being overcome; viklidyamana—melting; hrdayah—his
heart; pulaka—standing of hairs; dcita—covered; angah—his body; na—not;
atmanam—body; asmarat—he remembered; asau—he; iti—thus; mukta-
lingah—free from the subtle body.
TRANSLATION
Due to his transcendental bliss, incessant tears flowed from his eyes, his
heart melted, and there was shivering and standing of the hairs all over his
body. Thus transformed, in a trance of devotional service, Dhruva
Maharaja completely forgot his bodily existence, and thus he immediately
became liberated from material bondage.
PURPORT
Due to constant engagement in devotional service—hearing, chanting,
remembering, worshiping the Deity, etc., as prescribed in nine varieties —
there are different symptoms which appear in the body of a devotee.
These eight bodily transformations, which indicate that a devotee is already
liberated within himself, are called asta-sattvika-vikara. When a devotee


--- Page 148 ---
510 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
completely forgets his bodily existence, he is to be understood as liberated.
He is no longer encaged inthe body. The example is given that when a coco-
nut becomes completely dry, the coconut pulp within the coconut shell
separates from the bondage of the shell and the outer covering. By moving
the dry coconut, one can hear that the pulp within is no longer attached
to the shell or to the covering. Similarly, when one is fully absorbed in
devotional service, he is completely disconnected from the two material
coverings, the subtle and gross bodies. Dhruva Maharaja actually attained
this stage of life by constantly discharging devotional service. He is already
described as a maha-bhagavata, for unless one becomes a maha-bhagavata, or
a first-class pure devotee, these symptoms are not visible. Lord Caitanya
exhibited all these symptoms. Thakura Haridasa also exhibited them, and
there are many pure devotees who manifested such bodily symptoms. They
are not to be imitated, but when one is actually advanced, these symptoms
are exhibited. At that time it is to be understood that a devotee is material-
ly free. Of course, from the beginning of devotional service the path of
liberation immediately opens, just as the coconut taken from the tree
immediately begins to dry; it simply takes some time for the shell and
pulp to separate from one another.

An important word in this verse is mukta-lingah. Mukta means liber-
ated, and linga means the subtle body. When a man dies, he quits the
gross body, but the subtle body of mind, intelligence and ego carries him
to a new body. While existing in the present body, the same subtle body
carries him from one stage of life to another (for example, from childhood
to boyhood) by mental development. The mental condition of a baby is
different from that of a boy, the mental condition of a boy is different
from that of a young man, and the mental condition of a young man is
different from that of an old man. So at death the process of changing
bodies takes place due to the subtle body; the mind, intelligence and ego
carry the soul from one gross body to another. This is called transmigration
of the soul. But there is another stage, when one becomes liberated even
from the subtle body; at that time the living entity is competent and fully
prepared to be transferred to the transcendental or spiritual world.

The description of the bodily symptoms of Sri Dhruva Maharaja makes
it apparent that he became perfectly fit to be transferred to the spiritual
world. One can experience the distinction between the subtle and gross
bodies even daily;in a dream, one’s gross body islying on the bed while the
subtle body carries the soul, the living entity, to another atmosphere. But
because the gross body has to be continued, the subtle body comes back
and settles in the present gross body. Therefore one has to become free
from the subtle body also. This freedom is known as mukta-linga.


--- Page 149 ---
Text 20] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 511
TEXT 19
स ददौ विमानाग्र्यं नभसोऽवतरद्‌ रुवः |
बिभ्राजयदश्च दिशो राकापतिमिवोदितम्‌ ॥१९॥
sa dadarsa vimanagryam
nabhaso ‘vatarad dhruvah
vibhrajayad dasa diso
rakapatim ivoditam
sah—he; dadaria—saw; vimdna—an airplane; agryam—very beautiful;
nabhasah—from the sky; avatarat—descending; dhruvah— Dhruva Maharaja;
vibhrajayat—illuminating; dasa—ten; disah—directions; rakd-patim—the full
moon; iva—like; uditam—visible.
TRANSLATION
As soon 28 the symptoms of his liberation were manifest, he saw a very
beautiful airplane coming down from the sky, as if the brilliant full moon
were coming down, illuminating all the ten directions.
PURPORT
There are different levels of acquired knowledge—direct knowledge,
knowledge received from authorities, transcendental knowledge, knowl-
edge beyond the senses, and finally spiritual knowledge. When one sur-
passes the stage of acquiring knowledge by the descending process, he is
immediately situated on the transcendental platform. Dhruva Maharaja,
being liberated from the material concept of life, was situated in tran-
scendental knowledge and could perceive the presence of a transcendental
airplane which was as brilliant as the full moonlight. This is not possible in
the stages of direct or indirect perception of knowledge. Such knowledge
is a special favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can, how-
ever, rise to this platform of knowledge by the gradual process of advanc-
ing in devotional service, or Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 20
तत्रालु ইনগলবী चतुजौ
হ্যামী किक्लोरावरुणाम्बुजेक्षणी |
स्थिताववष्टभ्य गदां सुवाससौ
किरीटदाराङ्गद चारुङ्ृण्डलौ ॥२०॥


--- Page 150 ---
512 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
tatranu deva-pravarau catur-bhujau
Syamau kisorav arunambujeksanau
sthitav avastabhya gadam suvasasau
kirita-harangada-caru-kundalau
tatra—there; anu—then; deva-pravarau—two very beautiful demigods;
catuh-bhujau—with four arms; Syamau—blackish; kiSorau—quite young;
aruna—reddish; ambuja—lotus flower; iksanau—with eyes; sthitau—situated;
avastabhya—holding; gadam— clubs; su-vasasau—with nice garments; kirita—
helmets; hara—necklaces; angada—bracelets; caru—beautiful; kunpdalau—
with earrings.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja saw two very beautiful associates of Lord Visnu in the
plane. They had four hands and a blackish bodily luster; they were very
youthful, and their eyes were just like reddish lotus flowers. They held
clubs in their hands, and they were dressed in very attractive garments with
helmets and were decorated with necklaces, bracelets and earrings.
PURPORT
The inhabitants of Visnuloka are of the same bodily feature as Lord
Visnu, and they also hold club, conchshell, lotus flower and disc. In this
verse it is distinctly stated that they had four hands and were nicely dressed;
the description of their bodily decorations corresponds exactly to that of
Visnu. So the two uncommon personalities who descended from the air-
plane came directly from Visnuloka, or the planet where Lord Visnu lives.
TEXT 21
विज्ञाय ताबुत्तसगायङिङ्रा-
वभ्युत्थितः साष्वसविस्मृतकमः |
ननाम नामानि quent:
6 N
पाषटपधानाविति संहताञ्जलिः ॥२१॥
vijiiaya tav uttamagaya-kinkarav
abhyutthitah sadhvasa-vismrta-kramah
nanama namani grpan madhu-dvisah
parsat-pradhanav iti samhataijalih
vijiiaya—after understanding; tau—them; uttama-gaya—of Lord Visnu (of
excellent renown); kinkarau—two servants; abhyutthitah—stood up; sadhvasa
—by being puzzled; vismrta—forgot; kramah— proper behavior; nanama—


--- Page 151 ---
Text 22] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 513
offered obeisances; namani—names; grnan—chanting; madhu-dvisah —of the
Lord (the enemy of Madhu); parsat—associates; pradhanau —chief; iti—thus;
samhata—respectfully joined; adjalih —with folded hands.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja, seeing that these uncommon personalities were direct
servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, immediately stood up.
But, being puzzled, in hastiness he forgot how to receive them in the
proper way. Therefore, he simply offered obeisances with folded hands and
chanted and glorified the holy names of the Lord.
PURPORT
Chanting of the holy names of the Lord is perfect in every way. When
Dhruva Maharaja saw the Visnudiitas, the direct associates of Lord Vispu,
four-handed and nicely decorated, he could understand who they were, but
for the time being he was puzzled. But simply by chanting the holy name
of the Lord, the Hare Krsna mantra, he could satisfy the uncommon guests
who had all of a sudden arrived before him. The chanting of the holy name
of the Lord is perfect; even though one does not know how to please Lord
Visnu or His associates, simply by sincerely chanting the holy name of the
Lord, everything becomes perfect. A devotee, therefore, either in danger
or in happiness, constantly chants the Hare Krsna mantra. When he is in
danger he is immediately relieved, and when he is in a position to see Lord
Visnu or His associates directly, by chanting this maha-mantra he can
please the Lord. This is the absolute nature of the maha-mantra. Either in
danger or in happiness, it can be chanted without limitation.
TEXT 22
तं छकृष्णपादाभिनिविष्टवेतसं
बद्धाञ्जलिं TERE |
सुनन्द नन्दावुपदसुत्य सस्मितं
प्रत्यूचतुः पुष्करनाभसम्पतौ IRR
tar krsna-padabhinivista-cetasam
baddhaiijalith prasraya-namra-kandharam
sunanda-nandav upasrtya sasmitan
pratyiicatuh puskara-nabha-sammatau


--- Page 152 ---
514 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 12

tam—him; krsna—of Lord Krsna; pada—of the lotus feet; abhinivista—
absorbed in thought; cetasam—whose heart; baddha-aiijalim—with folded
hands; prasraya—very humbly; namra—bowed; kandharam—whose neck;
sunanda—Sunanda; nandau—and Nanda; upasrtya—approaching; sa-smitam
—smilingly; pratyiicatuh—addressed; puskara-nabha—of Lord Visnu, who
has a lotus navel; semmatau—confidential servants.

TRANSLATION

Dhruva Maharaja was always absorbed in thinking of the lotus feet of
Lord Krsna. His heart was full with Krsna. When the two confidential
servants of the Supreme Lord, who were named Nanda and Sunanda,
approached him, smiling happily, Dhruva stood with folded hands, bowing
humbly. They then addressed him as follows.

PURPORT

In this verse the word puskara-nabha-sammatau is significant. Krsna, or
Lord Vispu, is known for His lotus eyes, lotus navel, lotus feet and lotus
palms. Here He is called puskara-nabha, which means the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead who has a lotus navel, and sammatau means two confi-
dential or very obedient servants. The materialistic way of life differs from
the spiritual way of life in that one is disobedience and one is obedience to
the will of the Supreme Lord. All living entities are part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord, and they are supposed to be always agreeable to the order
of the Supreme Person; that is perfect oneness.

In the Vaikuntha world all the living entities are in oneness with the
Supreme Godhead because they never defy His orders. lere in the material
world, however, they are nol sammata, agreeable, but always asammata,
disagreeable. This human form of life is a chance to be trained to be
agreeable to the orders of the Supreme Lord. To bring about this
training in society is the mission of the Krsna consciousness
movement. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita, the laws of material
nature are very strict; no one can overcome the stringent laws of material
nature. But one who becomes a surrendered soul and agrees to the
order of the Supreme Lord can easily overcome those stringent laws. The
example of Dhruva Maharaja is very fitting. Simply by becoming agreeable
to the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and by developing
love of Godhead, Dhruva got the chance to personally meet the confidential
servants of Lord Vispu face to face. What is possible for Dhruva Maharaja
is possible for everyone. Anyone who very seriously engages in devotional


--- Page 153 ---
Text 24] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 515
service can obtain, in due course of time, the same perfection of the human
form of life.
TEXT 23
सुनन्द नन्दावू चतुः
भो भो राजन्‌ GAS ते নাস नोऽवहितः श्रृणु |
यः पञ्चवर्षस्तपसा मवाम्देवमतीकेपत्‌ ॥२३॥
sunanda-nandav ८०८२८
bho bho rajan subhadrari te
৮৫০৫7 no ’vahitah srnu
yah paiica-varsas tapasa
bhavan devam atitrpat
sunanda-nandau icatuh—Sunanda and Nanda said; bhoh bhoh rajan—O
dear King; su-bhadram— good fortune; te—unto you; vdcam—words; nah—
our; avahitah— attentively; §rnu—hear; yah—who; paiica-varsah—five years
old; tapasa—by austerity; bhavan—yourself; devam—the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead;atitypat—greatly satisfied.
TRANSLATION
The two confidential associates of Lord Visnu, Nanda and Sunanda, said:
Dear King, let there be all good fortune unto you. Please attentively hear
what we shall say. When you were only five years old, you underwent
severe austerities, and you thereby greatly satisfied the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT
What was possible for Dhruva Maharaja is possible for anyone. Any five-
year-old child can be trained, and within a very short time his life will be-
come successful by realization of Krsna consciousness. Unfortunately, this
training is lacking all over the world. It is necessary for the leaders of the
Krsna consciousness movement to start educational institutions in different
parts of the world to train children, starting at the age of five years. Thus
such children will not become hippies or spoiled children of society, but
they can all become devotees of the Lord. The face of the world will then
change automatically.
TEXT 24
तस्थाखिलजगद्धातुरावां देवस्य wif ।
पार्षदाविह सम्प्राप्तौ नेतं त्वां भगवत्पदम्‌ ॥२४॥


--- Page 154 ---
516 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
tasyakhila-jagad-dhatur
৫৮৫7 devasya $arnginah
parsadav tha sampraptau
netum tvam bhagavat-padam
tasya—His; akhila—entire; jagat—universe; dhatuh—creator; avam— we;
devasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sariginah—who has the
bow named Sarnga; parsadau—associates; tha—now; sampraptau—ap-
proached; netum—to take; tvam—you; bhagavat-padam—to the position of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
We are representatives of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
creator of the whole universe, who carries in His hand the bow named
Sarfiga. We have been specifically deputed to take you to the spiritual
world.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that simply by knowing His transcenden-
tal pastimes (whether within this material world or in the spiritual world),
anyone who understands factually who He is, how He appears and how He
acts can be immediately fit for transfer to the spiritual world. This principle
stated in the Bhagavad-gita operated in the case of King Dhruva. Through-
out his life he tried to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
austerity and penances. Now, the mature result was that Dhruva Maharaja
became fit to be carried to the spiritual world, accompanied by the confi-
dential associates of the Lord.
TEXT 25 :
सदुजैयं विष्णुपदं মিল =m
यर्घरयोऽप्राप्य विचक्षते परम्‌ ।
आतिष्ठ तचन्द्रदिवाकरादयो
ग्रहक्षेताराः परियन्ति दक्षिणम्‌ ॥२५॥
sudurjayarn visnu-padarn jitarh tvaya
yat sdrayo ‘prdpya vicaksate param
atistha tac candra-divakaradayo
graharksa-tarh pariyanti daksinam


--- Page 155 ---
Text 26] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 517
sudurjayam—very difficult to achieve; visnu-padam—planet known as
Vaikunthaloka or Vispuloka; jitam—conquered;tvaya—by you; yat— which;
siirayah—great demigods; aprapya— without achieving; vicaksate—simply
see; param—supreme; atistha—please come; tat—that; candra—the moon;
divakara—sun; adayah—and others; graha—the nine planets (Mercury,
Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto); rksa-
tarah—stars; pariyanti—circumambulate; daksinam—to the right.
TRANSLATION
To achieve Visnuloka is very difficult, but by your austerity you have
conquered. Even the great rgis and demigods cannot achieve this position.
Simply to see the supreme abode [the Visnu planet], the sun and moon
and all the other planets, stars, lunar mansions, and solar systems are cir-
cumambulating it. Now please come; you are welcome to go there.
PURPORT
Even in this material world the so-called scientists, philosophers and
mental speculators strive to merge into the spiritual sky, but they can
never go there. But a devotee, by executing devotional service, not only
realizes what the spiritual world actually is, but he factually goes there to
live an eternal life of bliss and knowledge. The Krsna consciousness move-
ment is so potent that by adopting these principles of life and developing
love of God one can very easily go back home, back to Godhead. Here the
practical example is the case of Dhruva Maharaja. While the scientist and
philosopher go to the moon but are disappointed in their attempts to stay
there and live, the devotee makes an easy journey to other planets and
ultimately goes back to Godhead. Devotees have no interest in seeing
other planets, but while going back to Godhead, they see all of them as
passing phases, just as one who is going to a distant place passes through
many small stations.
TEXT 26
.
अनास्थितं ते पिठधिरन्यैरप्यज्ग कर्िचित्‌ ।
आतिष्ठ जगतां बन्धं तदिष्णोः परमं पदम्‌ ॥२६॥
andsthitari te pitrbhir
anyair apy anga karhicit
atistha jagatar vandyam
tad visnoh paramam padam


--- Page 156 ---
518 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12

anasthitam—never achieved; te—your; pitrbhih—by forefathers; anyaili—
by others; api—even; anga—O Dhruva; karhicit—at any time; atistha—please
come and live there; jagatam—by the inhabitants of the universe; vandyam
—worshipable; tat—that; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; paramam—supreme; padam
—situation.

TRANSLATION

Dear King Dhruva, neither your forefathers nor anyone else before you
ever achieved such a transcendental planet. The planet known as Visnuloka,
where Lord Visnu personally resides, is the highest of all. It is worshipable
by the inhabitants of all other planets within the universe. Please come with
us and live there eternally.

PURPORT

When Dhruva Maharaja went to perform austerities he was very deter-
mined to achieve a post never dreamed of by his forefathers. His father was
Uttanapada, his grandfather was Manu, and his great-grandfather was Lord
Brahma. So Dhruva wanted a kingdom even greater than Lord Brahma
could achieve, and he requested Narada Muni to give him facility for achiev-
ing it. The associates of Lord Visnu reminded him that not only his fore-
fathers but everyone else before him was unable to attain Visnuloka, the
planet where Lord Visnu resides. This is because everyone within this
material world is either a karmi, jiani, or a yogi, but there are hardly any
pure devotees. The transcendental planet known as Visnuloka is especially
meant for devotees, not for karmis, jianis or yogis. Great rsis or demigods
can hardly approach Brahmaloka, and, as stated in Bhagavad-gita, Brahma-
loka is not a permanent residence. Lord Brahma’s duration of life is so long
that it is difficult to estimate even the duration of one day in his life, and
yet Lord Brahma also dies, as do the residents of his planet. Bhagavad-gita
says, abrahma-bhuvandl (04६6 punar dvartino ’rjuna: except for those who
go to Visnuloka, everyone is subjected to the four principles of material life,
namely birth, death, old age and disease (Bg. 8.16). The Lord says, yad
gatvd na nivartante tad dhama [১৫7৫7710৫11 mama: the planet from which, once
going, no one returns, is My supreme abode (Bg. 15.6). Dhruva Maharaja was
reminded, “You are going in our company to that planet from which no
one returns to this material world.” Material scientists are attempting to go
to the moon and other planets, but they cannot imagine going to the top-
most planet, Brahmaloka, for it is beyond their imaginations. By material
calculation, traveling at the speed of light it would take forty thousand
years to reach the topmost planet. By mechanical processes we are unable


--- Page 157 ---
Text 27] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 519
to reach the topmost planet of this universe, but the process called bhakti-
yoga, as executed by Maharaja Dhruva, can give one the facility not only
to reach other planets within this universe, but also to reach beyond this
universe to the Visnuloka planets. We have outlined this in our small
booklet Easy Journey to Other Planets.
TEXT 27
एतद्विमानप्रबरख्॒तम्छोकमौलिना |
उपस्थापितमायुष्यजषिरों त्वमर्दसि ॥२७॥
etad vimana-pravaram
uttama-$loka-maulina
upasthapitam ayusmann
adhirodhurih tvam arhasi

etat—this; vimana—airplane; pravaram—unique; uttamasloka—the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead; maulina—by the head of all living entities;
upasthdpitam—sent; dyusman—O immortal one; adhirodhum—to board;
tvam—you;arhasi—are worthy.

TRANSLATION

O immortal one, this unique airplane has been sent by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is worshiped by selected prayers and who is
the chief of all living entities. You are quite worthy to board such a plane.

PURPORT

According to astronomical calculation, along with the Pole Star there is
another star, which is called Sisumara, where Lord Visnu, who is in charge
of the maintenance of this material world, resides. Sisumara or Dhruvaloka
can never be reached by anyone but the Vaisnavas, as will be described by
the following slokas. The associates of Lord Visnu brought the special air-
plane for Dhruva Maharaja and then informed him that Lord Vispu had
especially sent this airplane.

The Vaikuptha airplane does not move by mechanical arrangement.
There are three processes for moving in outer space. One of the processes
is known to the modern scientist. It is called kapota-vayu. Ka means
outer space, and pota means ship. There is a second process also called
kapota-vayu. Kapota means pigeon. One can train pigeons to carry one
into outer space. The third process is very subtle. It is called akasa-patana.
This akasa-patana system is also material. Just as the mind can fly anywhere


--- Page 158 ---
520 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
one likes without mechanical arrangement, so the akasa-patana airplane can
fly at the speed of mind. Beyond this akasa-patana system is the Vaikuntha
process, which is completely spiritual. The airplane sent by Lord Visnu to
carry Dhruva Maharaja to Sisumara was a completely spiritual, transcen-
dental airplane. Material scientists can neither see such vehicles nor imagine
how they fly in the air. The material scientist has no information about the
spiritual sky, although it is mentioned in the Bhagavad-gita (paras tasmat
tu bhavo 'nyah).
TEXT 28
मैत्रेय उवाच
a
far वेङ्ण्टनियोज्यघ्रुख्ययो-
AFF age: |
कृताभिषेकः कृतनित्यमङ्गरो
भुनीन्‌ प्रणम्याशिषमम्यवाद यत्‌ ॥२८॥
maitreya ५४९८०
nisamya vaikuntha-niyojya-mukhyayor
madhu-cyutari vaicam urukrama-priyah
krtabhisekah krta-nitya-mangalo
munin pranamyasisam abhyavadayat
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya said; niSamya—after hearing;
vaikuntha—of the Lord; niyojya—associates; mukhyayoh—of the chief;
madhu-cyutam—like pouring honey; vaicam—speeches; urukrama-priyah—
Dhruva Maharaja, who was very dear to the Lord; krta-abhisekah—took his
sacred bath; krta—performed; nitya-margalah—his daily spiritual duties;
munin—to the sages; prapamya—having offered obeisances; asisam—
blessings; abhyavadayat—accepted.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: Mahardja Dhruva was very dear to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When he heard the sweet speeches
of the Lord’s chief associates in the Vaikuntha planet, he immediately
took his sacred bath, dressed himself with suitable ornaments, and
performed his daily spiritual duties. Thereafter he offered his respectful
obeisances to the great sages present there and accepted their blessings.


--- Page 159 ---
Text 29] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 521
PURPORT
We should mark how dutiful Dhruva Maharaja was in his devotional
service, even at the time he left this material world. He was constantly
alert in the performance of devotional duties. Every devotee should take
his bath early in the morning and decorate his body with tilaka. In Kali-
yuga one can hardly acquire gold or jeweled ornaments, but the twelve
tilaka marks on the body are sufficient as auspicious decorations topuri-
fy the body. Since Dhruva Maharaja was living at that time at Badarik-
asrama, there were other great sages there. lle did not become puffed up
because the airplane sent by Lord Visnu was waiting for him; as a humble
Vaispava, he accepted blessings from all the sages before riding on the
plane brought by the chief of the Vaikuntha associates.
TEXT 29
क
परीत्याभ्यल्यं धिष्ण्याग्यं पाषदायभिवन्य च ।
इयेष तदयिष्ठातुं विभ्रदरपं॑दिरण्मयम्‌ ua
parityabhyarcya dhispyagryar
parsadav abhivandya ca
iyesa tad adhisthaturm
bibhrad 1010077 hiranmayam
paritya—having circumambulated;abhyarcya—having worshiped; dhisnya-
agryam—the transcendental airplane; parsadau—unto the two associates;
abhivandya—having offered obeisances; ca—also; iyesa—he attempted; tat—
that plane; adhisthatum—to board; bibhrat—illuminating; ripam—his form;
hirapmayam— golden.
TRANSLATION
Before getting aboard, Dhruva Maharaja worshiped the airplane, circum-
ambulated it, and also offered obeisances to the associates of Visnu. In
the meantime he became as brilliant and illuminating as molten gold. He
was thus completely prepared to board the transcendental plane.
PURPORT
In the absolute world, the plane as well as the associates of Lord Visnu
and Lord Vispu Himself are all spiritual. There is no material contami-
nation. In quality, everything there is one. As Lord Visnu is worshipable,
so also are His associates, His paraphernalia, His airplane and His abode,


--- Page 160 ---
522 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
for everything of Visnu’s is as good as Lord Visnu. Dhruva Maharaja knew
all this very well, as a pure Vaisnava, and he offered his respects to the
associates and to the plane before riding in it. But in the meantime, his
body changed into spiritual existence, and therefore it was illuminating
like molten gold. In this way he also became one with the other para-
phernalia of Visnuloka.

Mayavadi philosophers cannot imagine how this oneness can be achieved
even in different varieties. Their idea of oneness is that there is no variety.
Therefore they have become impersonalists. As Sisumara, Visnuloka or
Dhruvaloka are completely different from this material world, so a Visnu
temple within this world is also completely different from this material
world. As soon as we are in a temple we should know very well that we
are situated differently from the material world. In the temple, Lord Vishnu,
His throne, 1115 room and everything associated with the temple are tran-
scendental. The three modes, sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna, have
no entrance into the temple. It is said, therefore, that to live in the forest
isin the mode of goodness, to live in the city 15 in the mode of passion, and
to live in a brothel, liquor shop or slaughterhouse is in the mode of ignor-
ance. But to live in the temple means to live in Vaikunthaloka. Everything
in the temple is as worshipable as Lord Vishnu or Krsna.

TEXT 30
तदोत्तानपदः पुत्रो ददर्शान्तकमागतम्‌ |
Tif पदं दत्वा आरुरोहाद्भुतं गृहम्‌ ।२०॥
tadottanapadah putro
dadarsantakam agatam
myrtyor mirdhni 00007 dattva
arurohadbhutarih grham

tada—then; uttanapadah—of King Uttanapada; putrah—son; dadarsa—
could see; antakam— death personified; agatam—approached him; mrtyoh
mirdhni—on the head of death; padam—feet; dattva—placing; aruroha—
got up; adbhutam—wonderful; grham—on the airplane which resembled a
big house.

TRANSLATION

When Dhruva Maharaja was attempting to get on the transcendental

plane, he saw death personified approach him. Not caring for death, how-


--- Page 161 ---
Text 31] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 523

ever, he took advantage of the opportunity to put his feet on the head of

death, and thus he got up on the airplane, which was as big as a house.
PURPORT

To take the passing away of a devotee and the passing away of a non-
devotee as one and the same is completely misleading. While ascending the
transcendental airplane, Dhruva Maharaja suddenly saw death personified
before him, but he was not afraid. Instead of death’s giving him trouble,
Dhruva Maharaja took advantage of death’s presence and put his feet on
the head of death. People with a poor fund of knowledge do not know the
difference between the death of a devotee and the death of a nondevotee.
In this connection, an example can be given: a cal carries its kittens in its
mouth, and it also catches a rat in its mouth. Superficially, the catching of
the rat and the Kitten appear to be one and the same, but actually they are
not. When the cat catches the rat in its mouth it means death for the rat,
whereas when the cat catches the kitten, the kitten enjoys it. When Dhruva
Maharaja boarded the airplane, he took advantage of the arrival of death
personified, who came to offer him obeisances; putting his feet on the head
of death, he got up on the unique airplane, which is described here to be as
big as a house (grham,).

There are many other similar instancesin Bhagavata literature. It is stated
that when Kardama Muni created an airplane to carry his wife, Devahati,
all over the universe, the airplane was like a big city, carrying many houses,
lakes and gardens. Modern scientists have manufactured big airplanes, but
they are packed with passengers, who experience all sorts of discomforts
while riding in them.

Material scientists are not even perfect in manufacturing a material air-
plane. In order to compare with the plane used by Kardama or the plane
sent from Visnuloka, they must manufacture an airplane equipped like a
big city, with all the comforts of life—lakes, gardens, parks, etc. Their
plane must be able to fly in outer space and hover and visit all other
planets. If they invent such a plane they will not have to make different
space stations for fuel to travel into outer space. Such a plane would have
an unlimited supply of fuel, or, like the plane from Visnuloka, would fly
without it.

TEXT 31
तदा दुन्दुभयो नेदुर्दङ्गपणवादयः |
गन्धर्व॑युल्याः प्रजगुः पेतुः FEET: 11320)


--- Page 162 ---
524 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
tada dundubhayo nedur
mrdanga-panavadayah
gandharva-mukhyal prajaguh
petuh kusuma-vrstayah
tada—at that time; dundubhayah—kettledrums; neduh—resounded;
mrdanga—drums;panava—small drums;adayah—etc.;gandharva-mukhyah—
the chief residents of Gandharvaloka; prajaguh—sang; petuh—showered;
kusuma—flowers; vrstayah—like rains.
TRANSLATION
At that time drums and kettledrums resounded from the sky, the chief
Gandharvas began to sing, and other demigods showered flowers like
torrents of rain upon Dhruva Maharaja.
TEXT 32
स च खर्जोकमारोक्त्यन्‌ सुनीतिं जननीं रुवः |
अन्वसखरद गं हित्वा दीनां यास्य त्रिविष्टपम्‌ nz:
sa ca svarlokam aroksyan
sunitim jananim dhruvah
anvasmarad 08072 hitva
dinar yasye tri-vistapam
sah—He; ca—also; svar-lokam—to the celestial planet; aroksyan—about to
ascend; sunitim—Suniti; jenanim—mother; dhruvafi—Dhruva Maharaja;
anvasmarat—immediately remembered; agam—difficult to attain; hitva-
leaving behind; dinam—poor; yasye—I shall go; tri-vistapam—to the
Vaikuntha planet.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva was seated in the transcendental airplane, which was just about
to start, when he remembered his poor mother, Suniti. He thought to him-
self, “How shall I go alone to the Vaikuntha planet and leave behind my
poor mother?”
PURPORT
Dhruva had a feeling of obligation to his mother, Suniti. It was Suniti
who gave him the clue which had enabled him to now be personally carried
to the Vaikuntha planet by the associates of Lord Visnu. He now remem-
bered her and wanted to take her with him. Actually, Dhruva Maharaja’s
mother, Suniti, was his patha-pradarsaka-guru. Patha-pradarsaka-guru


--- Page 163 ---
Text 33] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 525
means the guru or the spiritual master who shows the way. Such a guru
is sometimes called siksa-guru. Although Narada Muni was his diksa-guru
(initiating spiritual master), Suniti, his mother, was the first who gave him
instruction on how to achieve the favor of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. It is the duty of the siksa-guru or diksa-guru to instruct the disciple
in the right way, and it depends on the disciple to execute the process.
According to éastric injunctions, there is no difference between siksa-guru
and diksa-guru, and generally the §iksa-guru later on becomes the diksa-
guru. Suniti, however, being a woman, and specifically his mother, could
not become Dhruva Maharaja's diksa-guru. Still, he was not less obliged to
Suniti. There was no question of carrying Narada Muni to Vaikunthaloka,
but Dhruva Maharaja thought of his mother.

Whatever plan the Supreme Personality of Godhead contemplates im-
mediately fructifies. Similarly, a devotee who is completely dependent on
the Supreme Lord can also fulfill his wishes by the grace of the Lord. The
Lord fulfills His wishes independently, but a devotee fulfills his wishes
simply by being dependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There-
fore as soon as Dhruva Maharaja thought of his poor mother, he was
assured by the associates of Vignu that Suniti was also going to Vaikuntha-
loka in another plane. Dhruva Maharaja had thought that he was going
alone to Vaikunthaloka, leaving behind his mother, which was not very
auspicious because people would criticize him for going alone to Vaikun-
thaloka and not carrying with him Suniti, who had given him so much.
But Dhruva also considered that he was not personally the Supreme.
Therefore, if Krsna fulfilled his desires, only then would it be possible.
Krsna could immediately understand his mind, and He told him that his
mother was also going with him. This incident proves that a pure devotee
like Dhruva Maharaja can fulfill all his desires; by the grace of the Lord,
he becomes exactly like the Lord, and thus whenever he thinks of any-
thing, his wish is immediately fulfilled.

TEXT 33
इति ज्यवसितं तस्य व्यवसाय सुरोलमौ |
दज्ञेयामासतुर्देवीं पुरो यानेन गच्छतीम्‌ ॥३३॥
iti vyavasitam tasya
vyavasaya surottamau
darsayam asatur devin
puro yanena gacchatim


--- Page 164 ---
526 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12

iti— thus; vyavasitam—contemplation; tasya—of Dhruva; vyavasadya—un-
derstanding; sura-uttamau—the two chief associates; darsayam asatuh—
showed (to him); devim—exalted Suniti; purah—before; yanena—by airplane;
gacchatim—going forward.

TRANSLATION

The great associates of Vaikunthaloka, Nanda and Sunanda, could
understand the mind of Dhruva Maharaja, and thus they showed him that
his mother, Suniti, was going forward in another plane.

PURPORT

This incident proves that the 8152 or diksa-guru who has a disciple who
strongly executes devotional service like Dhruva Maharaja can be carried
by the disciple even though the instructor is not as advanced. Although
Suniti was an instructor to Dhruva Maharaja, she could not go to the forest
because she was a woman, nor could she execute austerities and penances
as Dhruva Maharaja did. Still, Dhruva Maharaja was able to take his mother
with him. Similarly, Prahlada Maharaja also delivered his atheistic father,
Hiranyakasipu. The conclusion is that a disciple or an offspring who is a
very strong devotee can carry with him to Vaikunthaloka either his father,
mother or §iksa or diksa-guru. Srila Bhak tisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura used
to say, “If I could perfectly deliver even one soul back home, back to God-
head, 1 would think my mission—propagating Krsna consciousness—to be
successful.” The Krsna consciousness movement is spreading now all over
the world, and sometimes | think that even though I am crippled in many
ways, if one of my disciples becomes as strong as Dhruva Maharaja, then he
will be able to carry me with him to Vaikunthaloka.

TEXT 34
तत्र तत्र प्रशंसद्धिः पथि वैमानिकैः सुरः ।
अवकीर्यमाणे दरे gd: ARE ग्रहान्‌ ॥२४॥
tatra tatra prasarsadbhih
pathi vaimanikaih suraih
avakiryamano dadrse
kusumaih kramaso grahan

tatra tatra—here and there; prasamsadbhih—by persons engaged in the
praise of Dhruva Maharaja; pathi—on the path; vaimanikaih— carried by
different types of airplanes; suraih—by the demigods; avakiryamanah—


--- Page 165 ---
Text 35] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 527
being covered; dadrse—could see; kusumaifi—by flowers; kramasah—one
after another; grahan—all the planets of the solar system.

TRANSLATION

While Dhruva Maharaja was passing through space, he gradually saw all
the planets of the solar system, and on the path he saw all the demigods in
their airplanes showering flowers upon him like rain.

PURPORT

There is a Vedic version, yasmin vijiidte sarvam evam vijiatam bhavanti,
which means that by knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, every-
thing becomes known to the devotee. Similarly, by going to the planet of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can know all the other planetary
systems on the path to Vaikuntha. We should remember that Dhruva
Maharaja’s body was different from our bodies. While boarding the
Vaikuntha airplane, his body changed to a completely spiritual golden hue.
No one can surpass the higher planets in a material body, but when one
gets a spiritual body he can travel not only to the higher planetary system
of this material world, but he can go even to the still higher planetary
system known as Vaikunthaloka. It is well known that Narada Muni travels
everywhere, both in the spiritual and material worlds.

It should be noted also that while Suniti was going to Vaikunthaloka
she also changed her body into spiritual form. Like Sri Suniti, every mo-
ther should train her child to become a devotee like Dhruva Maharaja.
Suniti instructed her son, even at the age of five years, to be unattached to
worldly affairs and to go to the forest to search out the Supreme Lord. She
never desired that her son remain at home comfortably without ever under-
taking austerities and penances to achieve the favor of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. Every mother, like Suniti, must take care of her son and
train him to become a brahmacari from the age of five years and to under-
go austerities and penances for spiritual realization. The benefit will be
that if her son becomes a strong devotee like Dhruva, certainly not only
will he be transferred back home, back to Godhead, but she will also be
transferred with him to the spiritual world,even though she may be unable
to undergo austerities and penances in executing devotional service.

TEXT 35
त्रिलोकीं देवयानेन सोऽतिव्रज्य मुनीनपि ।
परस्तायद्‌ धुवगतिर्दिष्णोः पदमथाम्यगात्‌ 1340


--- Page 166 ---
528 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
tri-lokim deva-yanena
so ’tivrajya munin api
parastad yad dhruva-gatir
visnoh padam athabhyagat
tri-lokim—the three planetary systems; deva-yanena—by the transcenden-
tal airplane; sah—Dhruva; ativrajya—having surpassed; munin—great sages;
api—even; parastit—beyond; yat—which; dhruva-gatith—Dhruva, who at-
tained permanent life; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; padam—abode; atha—then;
abhyagat—achieved.
TRANSLATION
Dhruva Maharaja thus surpassed the seven planetary systems of the
great sages who are known as saptarsi. Beyond that region, he achieved
the transcendental situation of permanent life in the planet where Lord
Visnu lives.
PURPORT
The airplane was piloted by the two chief associates of Lord Visnu,
namely Sunanda and Nanda. Only such spiritual astronauts can pilot their
airplane beyond the seven planets and arrive in the region of eternal bliss-
ful life. It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita also (paras tasmat tu bhavo
nyah) that beyond this planetary system begins the spiritual sky, where
everything is permanent and blissful. The planets there are known as
Vignuloka or Vaikunthaloka. Only there can one get an eternal blissful life
of knowledge. Below Vaikunthaloka is the material universe, where Lord
Brahma and others in Brahmaloka can live until the annihilation of this
universe; but that life is not permanent. That is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita (abrahma-bhuvanal lokah). Even if one goes to the topmost
planet, one cannot achieve eternal life. Only by arriving in Vaikunthaloka
can one live an eternally blissful life.
TEXT 36
यव्‌ भ्राजमानं खरूचैव सरव॑तो
लोकाल्लयो ag विग्राजन्त एते |
यज्ञावजजन्त॒षु येऽननुग्रहा
जन्ति मद्राणि चरन्ति येऽनिशम्‌ ॥३६॥


--- Page 167 ---
Text 36] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 529
yad bhrajamanar sva-rucaiva sarvato
lokas trayo hy anu vibhrajanta ete
yan navrajaii jantusu ye 'nanugraha
vrajanti bhadrani caranti ye 'nisam
yat—which planet; bhrajamdanam—illuminating; sva-ruca—by self-efful-
gence; eva—only; sarvatah—everywhere; lokdh—planetary systems; trayah
—three; hi—certainly;anu—thereupon; vibhrajante—give off light; ete— these;
yat— which planet; na—not;avrajat—have reached;jantusu— to living entities;
ye—those who; ananugrahah—not merciful; vrajanti—reach; bhadrani—wel-
fare activities; caranti—engage in; ye—those who; anisam— constantly.
TRANSLATION
The self-effulgent Vaikuntha planets, by whose illumination alone all the
illuminating planets within this material world give off reflected light, can-
not be reached by those who are not merciful to other living entities. Only
persons who constantly engage in welfare activities for other living entities
can reach the Vaikuntha planets.
PURPORT
Here is a description of two aspects of the Vaikuntha planets. The first
is that in the Vaikuntha sky there is no need of the sun and moon. This is
confirmed by the Upanisads as well as Bhagavad-gita (na tad bhasayate
suryo na sasanko na pavakah). In the spiritual world the Vaikunthalokas
are themselves illuminated; there is therefore no need of sun, moon or
electric light. It is, in fact, the illumination of the Vaikunthalokas which is
reflected in the material sky. ®nly by this reflection are the suns in the
material universes illuminated; after the illumination of the sun, all the
stars and moons are illuminated. In other words, all the luminaries in the
material sky borrow illumination from Vaikunthaloka. From this material
world, however, people can be transferred to the Vaikunthaloka, if they
incessantly engage in welfare activities for all other living entities. Such in-
cessant welfare activities can really be performed only in Krsna conscious-
ness. There is no other philanthropic work within this material world but
Krsna consciousness which can engage a person twenty-four hours a day.
A Krsna conscious being is always engaged in planning how to take all
the suffering humanity back home, back to Godhead. Even if one is not
successful in reclaiming all the fallen souls back to Godhead, still, because
he is Krsna conscious, his path to Vaikunthaloka is open. He personally be-
comes qualified to enter the Vaikunthalokas, and if anyone follows such a


--- Page 168 ---
530 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
devotee, he also enters into Vaikunthaloka. Others, who engage in envious
activities, are known as karmis. Karmis are envious of one another. Simply
for sense gratification, they can kill thousands of innocent animals. Jiianis
are not as sinful as karmis, but they do not try to reclaim others back to
Godhead. They perform austerities for their own liberation. Yogis are also
engaged in self-aggrandizement by trying to attain mystic powers. But devo-
tees, Vaignavas, who are servants of the Lord, come forward in the actual
field of work in Krsna consciousness to reclaim fallen souls. Only Krsna
conscious persons are eligible to enter into the spiritual world. That is
clearly stated in this verse and is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita, wherein
the Lord says that there is no one dearer to Him than those who preach the
gospel of Bhagavad-gita to the world.
TEXT 37
[3
ATR HEX शद्धा; सवभूताचुरञ्जनाः |
यान्त्यञ्साच्युतपद मच्युतग्रियवान्धवाः ॥२७॥
santah samadrsah suddhah
sarva-bhitanuranijanah
ydnty afijasacyuta-padam
acyuta-priya-bandhavah

santah— peaceful; samadrsah— equipoised; suddhah—cleansed, purified;
sarva—all; bhuta—living entities; anuraiijanah— pleasing; yanti—go; aiijasa—
easily; acyuta—of the Lord; padam—to the abode; acyuta-priya—with

devotees of the Lord; bandhavah—friends.

TRANSLATION
Persons who are peaceful, equipoised, cleansed and purified, and who
know the art of pleasing all other living entities, keep friendship only with
devotees of the Lord; they alone can very easily achieve the perfection of
going back home, back to Godhead.

PURPORT
The description of this verse fully indicates that only devotees are eligi-
ble to enter into the kingdom of Godhead. The first point stated is that
devotees are peaceful, for they have no demands for their personal sense
gratification. They are simply dedicated to the service of the Lord. Karmis
cannot be peaceful because they have immense demands for sense gratifica-
tion. As for janis, they cannot be peaceful because they are too busy try-
ing to attain liberation or merge into the existence of the Supreme.


--- Page 169 ---
Text 38] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 531
Similarly, yogis are also restless to get mystic power. But a devotee is peace-
ful because he is fully surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and thinks of himself as completely helpless; just as a child feels com -
plete peace in depending on the parent, so a devotee is completely peace-
ful, for he depends on the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

A devotee is equipoised. He sees everyone on the same transcendental
platform. A devotee knows that although a conditioned soul has a particu-
lar type of body according to his past fruitive activities, factually everyone
is part of the Supreme Lord. A devotee sees all living entities with spiritual
vision and does not discriminate on the platform of the bodily concept of
life. Such qualities develop only in the association of devotees. Without the
association of devotees, one cannot advance in Krsna consciousness. There-
fore, we have established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness. Factually, whoever lives in this society automatically develops
Krsna consciousness. Devotees are dear to the Supreme Personality of God-
head, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is only dear to devotees.
On this platform only can one make progress in Krsna consciousness. Per-
sons in Krsna consciousness, or devotees of the Lord, can please everyone,
as is evident in the Krsna consciousness movement. We invite everyone,
without discrimination; we request everyone to sit down and chant the
Hare Krsna mantra and take as much prasada as we can supply —and thus
everyone is pleased with us. This is the qualification. Sarve-bhitanu-
rafijanah. As for purification, no one can be more pure than devotees. Any-
one who onceutters the name of Visnu immediately becomes purified, in-
side and outside (yah smaret pundartkaksam). Since a devotee constantly
chants the Hare Krsna mantra, no contamination of the material world can
touch him. He is, therefore, actually purified. Muci haya suci haya yadi
krsna bhaje. It is said that even a cobbler or person born in the family of a
cobbler can be elevated to the position of a brahmana (suci) if he takes to
Krsna consciousness. Any person who is purely Krsna conscious and who
engages in chanting the Hare Krsna mantra is the purest in the whole
universe.

TEXT 38
शत्युत्तानपदः पुत्रो भुवः कृष्णपरायणः |
अभूत्रयाणां लोकानां चूडामणिरिवामलः ॥३८॥
ity uttanapadah putro
dhruvah krspa-parayanah
abhiit trayaparn 10100170712
ciada-manir ivamalah


--- Page 170 ---
532 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12

iti—thus; uttdnapadah—of Maharaja Uttanapada; putrah—the son;
dhruvah—Dhruva Maharaja; krsna-parayanah—fully Krgna conscious; abhit
—became; trayanam—of the three; lokanam—worlds; cida-manih—the
summit jewel; iva—like; amalah— purified.

TRANSLATION

In this way, the fully Krsna conscious Dhruva Maharaja, the exalted son
of Maharaja Uttanapada, attained the summit of the three statuses of
planetary systems.

PURPORT

The exact Sanskrit terminology for Krsna consciousness is here
mentioned: krsna-parayanah. Pardyapa means going forward. Anyone
who is going forward to the goal of Krsna is called krspa-pardyanpa, or
fully Krsna conscious. The example of Dhruva Maharaja indicates that
every Krsna conscious person can expect to reach the topmost summit of
all three planetary systems within the universe. A Krsna conscious person
can occupy an exalted position beyond the imagination of any ambitious
materialist.

TEXT 39 hi
गस्पोरवेगोऽनिमिषं ज्योतिषां चक्रमाहितम्‌ |
यिन्‌ भ्रमति कोरन्य मेढ्यामिव गवां गणः 1320)
gambhira-vego 70711507
Jyotisarh cakram dhitam
yasmin bhramati kauravya
medhyam iva gavarh ganal

gambhira-vegah—with great force and speed; animisam—unceasingly;
jyotisam—of luminaries; cakram—sphere; ahitam—connected; yasmin—
around which; bhramati—encircles; kauravya—O Vidura; medhyim—a
central pole; iva—as; gavam—of bulls; ganah—a herd.

TRANSLATION

Saint Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, descendant of Kuru, as a herd
of bulls circumambulates a central pole on their right side, so all the
luminaries within the universal sky unceasingly circumambulate the abode
of Dhruva Maharaja with great force and speed.


--- Page 171 ---
Text 40] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 533
PURPORT
Each and every planet within the universe travels at a very high speed.
From a statement in Srimad-Bhagavatam it is understood that even the sun
travels 16,000 miles in a second, and from Brahma-sarihita we understand
from the sloka, yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahandm, that the sun is con-
sidered to be the eye of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, and
it also has a specific orbit within which it circles. Similarly, all other planets
have their specific orbits. But together all of them encircle the Pole Star, or
Dhruvaloka, where Dhruva Maharaja is situated at the summit of the three
worlds. We can only imagine how highly exalted the actual position of a
devotee is, and certainly we cannot even conceive how exalted is the posi-
tion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 40
महिमानं विलोक्यास्य नारदो मगवानृषिः |
आतोद्यं बितुदन्‌ शोकान्‌ सत्रेऽगायत्प्रचेतसाम्‌।।४०॥
mahimanari vilokyasya
narado bhagavan rsih
atodyarn vitudaii §lokan
satre ‘gayat pracetasam
mahimanam—glories; vilokya—observing; asya—of Dhruva Maharaja;
naradah—the great sage Narada; bhagavan—equally exalted like the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; rsih— the saint;atodyam— the string instrument,
vind; vitudan—playing on; slokan—verses; satre—in the sacrificial arena;
agayat—chanted; pracetasam— of the Pracetas.
TRANSLATION
After observing the glories of Dhruva Maharaja, the great sage Narada,
playing his vina, went to the sacrificial arena of the Pracetas and very
happily chanted the following three verses.
PURPORT
The great sage Narada was the spiritual master of Dhruva Maharaja. Cer-
tainly he was very glad to see his glories. As a father is very happy to see the


--- Page 172 ---
534 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
son’s advancement in every respect, so the spiritual master is very happy
to observe the ascendancy of his disciple.
TEXT 41
ANE उवाच
नूलं सुनीतेः पतिदेवताया-
स्तपःप्रभावस्य सुतस्य तां गतिम्‌ |
दृष्ट्ाभ्युपायानपि वेदवादिनो
नैवाधिगन्तुं प्रमवन्ति किं Tau ॥४१॥
ndrada २८०४९८०
nitnarh suniteh pati-devatayas
tapah-prabhavasya sutasya tam gatim
drstvabhyupayan api veda-vadino
naivadhigantur prabhavanti kirh nrpah
naradah uvaca—Narada said; niinam—certainly; suniteh—of Suniti; pati-
devatayah—very much attached to her husband; tapah-prabhavasya—by the
influence of austerity; sutasya—of the son; tam—that; gatim—position;
drstva—observing; abhyupayan—the means; api—although; veda-vadinah—
strict followers of the Vedic principles or the so-called Vedantists; na—
never; eva—certainly; adhigantum—to attain; prabhavanti—are eligible; kim
—what to speak of; nrpah— ordinary Kings.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Narada said: Simply by the influence of his spiritual ad-
vancement and powerful austerity, Dhruva Maharaja, the son of Suniti,
who was devoted to her husband, acquired an exalted position not possible
even for the so-called Vedantists or strict followers of the Vedic principles
to attain, not to speak of ordinary human beings.
PURPORT
In this verse the word veda-vadinah is very significant. Generally, a per-
son who strictly follows the Vedic principles is called veda-vadi. There are
also so-called Vedantists who advertise themselves as followers of Vedanta
philosophy but who misinterpret Vedanta. This expression is also found in
the Bhagavad-gita: veda-vada-ratah, which means persons who are attached
to the Vedas without understanding the purport of the Vedas. Such persons
may go on talking about the Vedas or may execute austerities in their own


--- Page 173 ---
Text 42] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 535
way, bul it 15 not possible for them to attain to such an exalted position as
Dhruva Maharaja. As far as ordinary kings are concerned, it is not at all
possible. The specific mention of kings is significant because formerly kings
were also rajarsis , for the kings were as good as great sages. Dhruva Maharaja
was a king, and at the same time he was as learned as a great sage. Bul
without devotional service, neither a great king, a ksatriya, nor a great
brahmana strictly adhering to the Vedic principles can be elevated to the
exalted position attained by Dhruva Maharaja.
TEXT 42
यः पञ्चवर्षो GEREN
भिन्नेन यातो हृदयेन दूयता ।
वनं मदादेछकरोऽजितं प्रं
ES
जिगाय तद्धक्तगुणं; पराजितम्‌ ॥४२॥
yah pafica-varso guru-dara-vak-sarair
bhinnena yato hrdayena diiyata
vanam mad-adesa-karo ’jitari prabhum
jigaya tad-bhakta-gunaih parajitam

yah—he who; paiica-varsah—at the age of five years; guru-dara—of the
wife of his father; vak-saraih—by the harsh words; bhinnena— being very
much aggrieved; yatah—went; hrdayena—because his heart; diiyata—very
much pained; vanam—to the forest; mat-adesa—according to my instruc-
tion; karah—acting; agjitam—unconquerable; prabhum—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; jigiya—he defeated; tat—His; bhakta—of devotees;
gunaih—with the qualities; parajitam—conquered.

TRANSLATION

The great sage Narada continued: Just see how Dhruva Maharaja,
aggrieved at the harsh words of his stepmother, went to the forest at the age
of only five years and under my direction underwent austerity. Although
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is unconquerable, still he defeated
Him with the specific qualifications possessed by the Lord's devotees.

PURPORT

The Supreme Godhead is unconquerable; no one can conquer the Lord.
But He voluntarily accepts subordination to the devotional qualities of His
devotees. For example, Lord Krsna accepted subordination to the control


--- Page 174 ---
536 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
of mother Yasoda because she was a great devotee. The Lord likes to be
under the control of His devotees. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that
everyone comes before the Lord and offers Him exalted prayers, but the
Lord does not feel as pleased when offered such prayers as He does when a
devotee, out of pure love, chastises Him as a subordinate. The Lord forgets
His exalted position and willingly submits to His pure devotee. Dhruva
Maharaja conquered the Supreme Lord because at a very tender age, only
five years old, he underwent all the austerities of devotional service. This
devotional service was of course executed under the direction of a great
sage, Narada. This is the first principle of devotional service—ddau gurv-
dsrayam. In the beginning one must accept a bona fide spiritual master,
and if a devotee follows strictly the direction of the spiritual master, as
Dhruva Maharaja followed the instruction of Narada Muni, then it is not
difficult for him to achieve the favor of the Lord.

The sum total of devotional qualities is development of unalloyed love
for Krsna. This unalloyed love for Krsna can be achieved simply by hearing
about Krsna. Lord Caitanya accepted this principle—that if one in any
position submissively hears the transcendental message spoken by Krsna or
about Krsna, then gradually he develops the quality of unalloyed love, and
by that love only he can conquer the unconquerable. The Mayavadi philoso-
phers aspire to become one with the Supreme Lord, but a devotee surpasses
that position. A devotee not only becomes one in quality with the Supreme
Lord, but he sometimes becomes the father, mother or master of the Lord.
Arjuna also, by his devotional service, made Lord Krsna his chariot driver;
he ordered the Lord, “Put my chariot here,” and the Lord executed his
order. These are some examples of how a devotee can acquire the exalted
position of conquering the unconquerable.

TEXT 43
यः क्षत्रबन्धुैवि तस्थाधिरूद-
मन्वारुरुक्षेदपि Tq: |
षट्पश्चवर्षो यदहोभिरल्पैः
प्रसाद्य वैङण्ठमवाप तत्पदम्‌ 11830
yah ksatra-bandhur bhuvi tasyadhiridham
anv aruruksed api varsa-pigaih
sat-paiica-varso yad ahobhir alpaih
prasadya vail:untham avapa tat-padam


--- Page 175 ---
Text 43] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 537

yah—one who; ksatra-bandhuh—the son of a ksatriya; bhuvi—on the
earth; tasya—of Dhruva; adhiridham—the exalted position; enu—after;
arurukset—can aspire to attain; api—even; varsa-pitgaih—after many years;
sat-paiica-varsah—five or six years old; yat— which; ahobhih alpaih—after a
few days; prasadya—after pleasing; vaikuntham—the Lord; avapa—attained;
tat-padam —His abode.

TRANSLATION

Dhruva Maharaja attained an exalted position at the age of only five or
six years, after undergoing austerity for six months. Alas, a great ksatriya
cannot achieve such a position even after undergoing austerities for many,
many years.

PURPORT

Dhruva Maharaja is described herein as ksatra-bandhuh, which indicates
that he was not fully trained as a ksatriya because he was only five years
old; he was not a mature ksatriya. A ksatriya or brahmana has to take
training. A boy born in the family of a brahmana is not immediately a
brahmana, but he has to take up the training and the purificatory process.

The great sage Narada Muni was very proud of having a devotee disciple
like Dhruva Maharaja. He had many other disciples, but he was very pleased
with Dhruva Maharaja because in one lifetime, by dint of his severe pen-
ances and austerities, he had achieved Vaikuntha, which was never achieved
by any other king's son or rajarsi throughout the whole universe. There is
the instance of the great King Bharata Maharaja, who was also a great devo-
tee, but he attained Vaikunthaloka in three lives. In the first life, although
he executed austerities in the forest, he became a victim of too much af-
fection for a small deer, and in his next life he had to take birth as a deer.
Although he had a deer’s body, he remembered his spiritual position, but
he still had to wait until the next life for perfection. In the next life he
took birth as Jada Bharata. Of course, in that life he was completely
freed from all material entanglement, and he attained perfection and was
elevated to Vaikunthaloka. The lesson from the life of Dhruva Maharaja is
that if one likes, one can attain Vaikunthaloka in one life, without waiting
for many other lives. My Guru Maharaja, Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Gosvami Prabhupada, used to say that every one of his disciples
could attain Vaikunthaloka in this life, without waiting for another life to
execute devotional service. One simply has to become as serious and sincere
as Dhruva Maharaja; then it is quite possible to attain Vaikunthaloka and
go back home, back to Godhead, in one life.


--- Page 176 ---
538 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
TEXT 44
a
मेत्रेय उवाच
एतत्तेऽभिदितं सवं यत्पृष्टोऽहमिह त्वया ।
धरवस्योदामयश्चसश्रितं सम्मतं सताम्‌ ।।४४॥
maitreya uvdca
etat te ’bhihitarh sarvari
yat prsto "ham tha tvaya
dhruvasyoddama-yasasas
caritarh sammatarn satam
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya said; etat—this; te—unto you;
abhihitam—described; sarvam—everything; yat—what; prstah aham—1 was
asked; tha—here; tvayda—by you;dhruvasya— of Dhruva Maharaja; uddama-
greatly uplifting; yasasah—whose reputation; caritam—character; sam-
matam—approved; satam—by great devotees.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, whatever you have
asked from me about the great reputation and character of Dhruva
Maharaja 1 have explained to you in all detail. Great saintly persons and
devotees very much like to hear about Dhruva Maharaja.
PURPORT
$rimad-Bhagavatam means everything in relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Whether we hear the pastimes and activities of the
Supreme Lord or we hear about the character, reputation and activities of
His devotees, they are all one and the same. Neophyte devotees simply try
to understand the pastimes of the Lord and are not very interested to hear
about the activities of His devotees, but such discrimination should not be
indulged in by any real devotee. Sometimes less intelligent men try to hear
about the rasa dance of Krsna and do not take care to hear about other
portions of Srimad-Bhagavatam, which they completely avoid. There are
professional Bhagavata reciters who abruptly go to the rasa-lila chapters of
Srimad-Bhagavatam ৪৪ if other portions of Srimad-Bhdagavatam were use-
less. This kind of discrimination and abrupt adoption of the rasa-lila pas-
times of the Lordis not approved by the dcaryas. A sincere devotee should
read every chapter and every word of Srimad-Bhagavatam, for the beginning
verses describe that it is the ripened fruit of all Vedic literature. Devotees
should not try to avoid even a word of Srimad-Bhagavatam. The great sage


--- Page 177 ---
Text 45] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 539
Maitreya therefore affirmed herein that the Bhagavatam is sammatain
satam, approved by great devotees.
TEXT 45
धन्यं यजस्यमायुष्यं पुण्यं खस्त्ययनं महत्‌ |
wd ध्रौव्यं सौमनस्यं प्रशस्यमघमर्षणम्‌ igi
dhanyarh yasasyam ayugsyarn
punyarn svasty-ayanam mahat
svargyari dhrauvyarh saumanasyari
prasasyam agha-marsanam
dhanyam—bestowing wealth: yasasyam—bestowing reputation: dyusyam
—increasing duration of life; pupyam—sacred; svasti-ayanam—creating aus-
piciousness; mahat—great; svargyam—bestowing achievement of heavenly
planets; dhrauvyam—or Dhruvaloka: saumanasyam—pleasing to the mind:
prasasyam—glorious; agha-marsanam—counteracting all kinds of sinful
activities.
TRANSLATION
By hearing the narration of Dhruva Maharaja one can fulfill desires for
wealth, reputation and increased duration of life. It is so auspicious that
one can even go to a heavenly planet or can attain Dhruvaloka, which was
achieved by Dhruva Maharaja, just by hearing about him. The demigods
also become pleased because it is so glorious, and it is so powerful that it
can counteract all the results of one’s sinful actions.
PURPORT
There are different types of men in this world, not all of them pure
devotees. Some are karmis, desiring to acquire vast wealth. There are also
persons who are only after reputation. Some desire to be elevated to the
heavenly planets or to go to Dhruvaloka, and others want to please the
demigods to get material profits. Ilerein it is recommended by Maitreya
that every one of them can hear the narration about Dhruva Maharaja and
thus get their desired goal. It is recommended that the devotees (akama),
the karmis (sarva-kama) and the janis who desire to be liberated (moksa-
kama) should all worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead to acquire
their desired goals of life. Similarly, if anyone hears about the activities of
the Lord’s devotee, he can achieve the same result. There is no difference
between the activities and character of the Supreme Personality of God-
head and His pure devotees.


--- Page 178 ---
540 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4 Ch. 12
TEXT 46
्रुत्वैतच्छद्भयामीकष्णमच्युतप्रियचेष्टितम्‌ |
भवेद्धक्तिभगवति यया स्यात्क्लेशसं्षयः ॥४६॥
Srutvaitac chraddhayabhiksnam
acyuta-priya-cestitam
bhaved bhaktir bhagavati
yaya sydt klesa-sanksayah
Srutva—by hearing; etat—this; sraddhaya—with faith; abhikspam—re-
peatedly: acyuta—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; priya—dear;
cestitam—activities; bhavet—develops; bhaktih—devotion; bhagavati—unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaydi—by which; sydt—must be;
klesa—of miseries; sanksayah—complete diminution.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who hears the narration of Dhruva Maharaja, and who
repeatedly tries with faith and devotion to understand his pure character,
attains the pure devotional platform and executes pure devotional service.
By such activities one can diminish the threefold miserable conditions of
material life.
PURPORT
Here the word acyuta-priya is very significant. Dhruva Maharaja’s
character and reputation are great because he is very dear to Acyuta, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the pastimes and activities of the
Supreme Lord are pleasing to hear, so hearing about His devotees, who
are very dear to the Supreme Person, is also pleasing and potent. If one
simply reads over and over again about Dhruva Maharaja by hearing and
reading this chapter, he can attain the highest perfection of life in any way
he desires; most importantly, he gets the chance to become a great devotee.
To become a great devotee means to finish all miserable conditions of
materialistic life.
TEXT 47
मदत्वमिच्छतां तीथं श्रोतुः शीलादयो गुणाः |
यत्र तेजस्तदिच्छनां मानो यत्र मनखिनाम्‌ ॥४७॥


--- Page 179 ---
Text 48] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 541
mahattvam icchatam tirthar
srotuh siladayo gunah
yatra tejas tad icchinarh
mano yatra manasvinam
mahattvam—greatness; icchatam—for those desiring; tirtham—the pro-
cess; Srotuh—of the hearer; sila-adayah—high character, etc.; gunah—
qualities; yatra—in which; tejah—prowess; tat—that; icchiinam—for those
who desire; manafi—adoration; yatra—in which; manasvinam—for thought-
ful men.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who hears this narration of Dhruva Maharaja acquires exalted
qualities like him. For anyone who desires greatness, prowess or influence,
here is the process to acquire them, and for thoughtful men who want
adoration, here is the proper means.
PURPORT
In the material world everyone is after profit, respectability and reputa-
tion, everyone wants the supreme exalted position, and everyone wants to
hear about the great qualities of exalted persons. All ambitions which are
desirable for great persons can be fulfilled simply by reading and under-
standing the narration of Dhruva Maharaja’s activities.
TEXT 48
प्रयतः कीर्तयेत्प्रातः समवाये द्विजन्मनाम्‌ |
णः 5 |
सायं च पुण्यश्लोकस्य धरुवस्य चरितं महत्‌ ॥४८॥
prayatah kirtayet pratah
samavaye dvijanmanam
sayarn ca punya-$lokasya
dhruvasya caritarn mahat
prayatah—with great care; kirtayet—one should chant; pratah—in the
morning: samavdye—in the association; dvi-janmanam—of the twice-born;
sdyam—in the evening; ca—also; pupya-$lokasya—of sacred renown;
dhruvasya—of Dhruva; caritam—character; mahat—great.


--- Page 180 ---
542 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
TRANSLATION

The great sage Maitreya recommended: One should chant of the character
and activities of Dhruva Maharaja both in the morning and in the evening,
with great attention and care, in a society of brahmanas or other twice-
born persons.

PURPORT

It is said that only in the association of devotees can one understand
the importance of the character and pastimes of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead or His devotees. In this verse it is especially recommended
that Dhruva Maharaja’s character should be discussed in a society of the
twice-born, which refers to the qualified brahmanas, ksatriyas and vaisyas.
One should especially seek the society of brahmanas who are elevated to
the position of Vaisnavas. Thus discussion of Srimad-Bhagavatam, which
describes the character and pastimes of devotees and the Lord, is very
quickly effective. The International Society for Krishna Consciousness
has been organized for this purpose. In every center of this society—not
only in the morning, evening or noon, but practically twenty-four hours a
day—there is continuous devotional service going on. Anyone who comes
in contact with the Society automatically becomes a devotee. We have
actual experience that many karmis and others come to the Society and
find a very pleasing and peaceful atmosphere in the temples of ISKCON.
In this verse the word dvijanmanam means “০0 the twice-born.” Anyone
can join the International Society for Krishna Consciousness and be initiat-
ed to become twice-born. As recommended by Sanatana Gosvami, by the
process of initiation and authorized training, any man can become twice-
born. The first birth is made possible by the parent, and the second birth
is made possible by the spiritual father and Vedic knowledge. Unless one
is twice-born one cannot understand the transcendental characteristics of
the Lord and His devotees. Study of the Vedas is therefore forbidden for
sudras. Simply by academic qualifications a Sidra cannot understand the
transcendental science. At the present moment, throughout the entire
world the educational system is geared to produce Siidras. A big technolo-
gist is no more than a big Sidra. Kalau Sidra-sambhava: in the age of
Kali, everyone is a दकाय, Because the whole population of the world
consists only of $idras, there is therefore a decline of spiritual knowledge,
and people are unhappy. The Krsna consciousness movement has been
started especially to create qualified brahmanas to broadcast spiritual
knowledge all over the world, for thus people may become very happy.


--- Page 181 ---
Texts 49-50] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 543
TEXTS 49-50
पौणमास्यां सिनीवाल्यां दादश्यां श्रवणेऽथवा।
दिनक्षये व्यतीपाते सङ्क्रमेऽकंदिनेऽपि वा ॥४९॥
श्रावयेच्छद्धानानां तीर्थपादपदाश्रयः |
नेच्छ॑स्तत्रारमनाऽऽत्मानं सन्तुष्ट इति सिष्यति।।५०॥
paurnamadsyari sinivalyarm
dvadasyam sravane ’thava
dinaksaye vyatipate
sankrame ’rkadine ’pi va
$ravayec chraddadhananarn
tirtha-pada-padasrayah
neccharis tatratmanatmanarn
5011८८80 iti sidhyati
paurnamdsyam—on the full moon; sinivalydm—on the dark moon; dva-
dasyam—on the day after Ekadasi; sravane— during the Sravana star’s appear-
ance; athava—or; dinaksave—at the end of the tithi; vyatipate—a particular
day of the name; saitkrame— at the end of the month; arkadine— on Sunday;
api—also; vi—or; §ravayet—one should recite; sraddadhananam—to a recep-
tive audience; tirtha-pada—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: pada-
asrayah—taken shelter of the lotus feet: na icchan—without desiring
remuneration; tatra—there; atmana—by the self; atmanam—the mind;
santustah— pacified; iti— thus; sidh yati—becomes perfect.
TRANSLATION
Persons who have completely taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord
should recite this narration of Dhruva Maharaja without taking remunera-
tion. Specifically, recitation is recommended on the full moon or dark
moon day, on the day after Ekada&i, on the appearance of the Sravana
star, at the end of a particular tithi, or the occasion of Vyatipita, at the end
of the month, or on Sunday. Such recitation should of course be
performed before a favorable audience. When recitation is performed this
way, without professional motive, the reciter and audience become
perfect.
PURPORT
Professional reciters may ask money to extinguish the blazing fire with-
in their bellies, but they cannot make any spiritual improvement or


--- Page 182 ---
544 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
become perfect. It is therefore strictly forbidden to recite Srimad-
Bhagavatam as a profession to earn alivelihood. Only one who is completely
surrendered at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
depending fully on Him for personal maintenance or even for maintenance
of his family, can attain perfection by recitation of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
which is full of narrations of the pastimes of the Lord and His devotees.
The process can be summarized as follows: the audience must be faithfully
receptive to the Bhdgavata message, and the reciter should completely
depend on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhagavata recitation
must not be a business. If done in the right way, not only does the reciter
achieve perfect satisfaction, but the Lord also is very satisfied with the
reciter and the audience, and thus both are liberated from material bond-
age simply by the process of hearing.
TEXT 51
ज्ञानपनज्ञाततत्वाय यो दयात्सत्पथेऽगृतम्‌ |
कृपालोदी ननाथस्य [EER [14211
jiidnam ajiiata-tattvaya
yo dadyat sat-pathe (7171071
krpalor dina-nathasya
devas tasyanugrhnate

jianam—knowledge; ajiidta-tattvaya—to those who are unaware of the
truth; yah—one who; dadyat—imparts; sat-pathe—on the path of truth;
amrtam—immortality; krpdloh—kind; dina-nathasya—protector of the
poor; devah—the demigods; tasya—to him; anugrhpate—give blessings.

TRANSLATION

The narration of Dhruva Maharaja is sublime knowledge for the
attainment of immortality. Persons who are unaware of the Absolute
Truth can be led to the path of truth. Those who out of transcendental
kindness take on the responsibility of becoming master protectors of the
poor living entities automatically gain the interest and blessings of the
demigods.

PURPORT

Janam ajiiata means knowledge which is unknown almost throughout

the entire world. No one knows actually what is the Absolute Truth.


--- Page 183 ---
Text 51] Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back to Godhead 545
Materialists are very proud of their advancement in education, in philo-
sophical speculation and in scientific knowledge, but no one actually knows
what the Absolute Truth is. The great sage Maitreya, therefore, recom-
mends that to enlighten people about the Absolute Truth (tattva),
devotees should preach the teachings of Srimad-Bhagavatam throughout
the entire world. Srila Vyasadeva especially compiled this great literature
of scientific knowledge because people are completely unaware of the
Absolute Truth. In the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam, First Canto, it is
said that Vyasadeva, the learned sage, compiled this great Bhagavata Purana
just to stop the ignorance of the mass of people. Because people do not
know the Absolute Truth, this Srimad-Bhagavatam was specifically com-
piled by Vyasadeva under the instruction of Narada. Generally, even
though people are interested in understanding the truth, they take to
speculation and reach at most the conception of impersonal Brahman.
But very few men actually know the Personality of Godhead.

Recitation of Srimad-Bhagavatam is specifically meant to enlighten
people about the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Although there is no fundamental difference between impersonal Brahman,
localized Paramatma and the Supreme Person, still factual immortality
cannot be obtained unless and until one attains the stage of associating
with the Supreme Person. Devotional service, which leads to the associa-
tion of the Supreme Lord, is actual immortality. Pure devotees, out of
compassion for the fallen souls, are krpalu, very kind to people in general;
they distribute this Bhagavata knowledge all over the world. A kindhearted
devotee is called dina-natha, protector of the poor, ignorant mass of
people. Lord Krsna is also known as dina-natha or dina-bandhu, the master
or actual friend of the poor living entities, and His pure devotee also takes
the same position of dina-natha. The dina-nathas, or devotees of Lord Krsna,
who preach the path of devotional service, become the favorites of the
demigods. Generally persons are interested in worshiping the demigods,
especially Lord Siva, in order to obtain material benefits, but a pure devo-
tee who engages in preaching the principles of devotional service, as
prescribed in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, does not need to separately worship
the demigods; the demigods are automatically pleased with him and offer
all the blessings within their capacity. As by watering the root of a tree the
leaves and branches are automatically watered, so, by executing pure
devotional service to the Lord, the branches, twigs and leaves of the Lord,
known as demigods, are automatically pleased with the devotee, and they
offer all benediction.


--- Page 184 ---
546 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 12
TEXT 52
इदं मया hfe seu
aw বিষ্যাববিশ্যত্রকমঘাঃ |
हित्वार्भकः कीडनकानि मातु-
गुहं च विष्णुं शरणं यो जगाम ॥।५२॥
1007 maya te ‘bhihitari kuradvaha
dhruvasya vikhyata-visuddha-karmanah
hitvarbhakah kridanakani matur
grharm ca visnuri Sarapar yo jagama
idam—this; maya—by me; te—unto you; abhihitam—described; kuru-
udvaha—O great one among the Kurus: dhruvasya—of Dhruva; vikhyata—
very famous: visuddha—very pure; karmapah—whose activities; hitva—
giving up: arbhakah—child; kridanakani—toys and playthings; matuh—of
his mother; grham—home; ca—also; visnum—to Lord Visnu: Sarapnam—
shelter; yah—one who; jagama—went.
TRANSLATION
The transcendental activities of Dhruva Maharaja are well known all
over the world, and they are very pure. In childhood Dhruva Maharaja
rejected all kinds of toys and playthings, left the protection of his mother
and seriously took shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu.
My dear Vidura, I therefore conclude this narration, for I have described to
you all its details.
PURPORT
It is said by Capakya Pandita that life is certainly short for everyone,
but if one acts properly, his reputation will remain for a generation. As the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is everlastingly famous, so the
reputation of Lord Krsna’s devotee is also everlasting. Therefore in de-
scribing Dhruva Maharaja’s activities two specific words have been used—
vikhyata, very famous, and visuddha, transcendental. Dhruva Maharaja's
leaving home at a tender age and taking shelter of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in the forest is a unique example in this world.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Twelfth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Dhruva Maharaja Goes Back
to Godhead.”


--- Page 185 ---
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Description of the Descendants
of Dhruva Maharaja
TEXT 1
सूत उवाच
निशम्य कोषारविणोपवणितं
ry
धरुवस्य वङ्ण्ठपद्‌धिरोदणम्‌ |
भररूढमावो मगवत्यधोश्षजे
ष्टुं पुनस्तं॑विदुरः प्रचक्रमे ॥ १ ॥
sitta uvaca
nisamya kausaravinopavarnitar
dhruvasya vaikuntha-padadhirohanam
praridha-bhavo bhagavaty adhoksaje
prasturh punas tari vidurah pracakrame
siitah uvaca—Sita Gosvami said; niSamya—after hearing; kausaravina—by
the sage Maitreya; upavarpitam—described; dhruvasya—of Maharaja Dhruva;
vaikuntha-pada—to the abode of Visnu; adhirohapnam—ascent; praridha—
increased; bhdvah—devotional emotion; bhagavati—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; adhoksaje—who is beyond the reach of direct
perception; prasfum—to inquire; punah—again; tam—unto Maitreya;
vidurah— Vidura; pracakrame—attempted.
TRANSLATION
Siita Gosvami, continuing to speak to all the rsis, headed by Saunaka,
said : After hearing Maitreya Rsi describe Dhruva Maharaja's ascent to Lord
Vignu’s abode, Vidura became very enlightened in devotional emotion, and
he inquired from Maitreya as follows.
547


--- Page 186 ---
548 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
PURPORT
As evidenced in the topics between Vidura and Maitreya, the activities
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the devotees are so fascinating
that neither the devotee who is describing them nor the devotee who is
hearing is at all fatigued by the inquiries and answers. Transcendental sub-
ject matter is so nice that no one becomes tired of hearing or speaking.
Others, who are not devotees, may think, “How can people devote so
much time simply to talks of God?” But devotees are never satisfied or
satiated in hearing and speaking about the Supreme Personality of God-
head or about His devotees. The more they hear and talk, the more they be-
come enthusiastic to hear. The chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra is
simply the repetition of three words, Hare, Krsna and Rama, but still
devotees can go on chanting this Hare Krsna mantra twenty-four hours a
day without feeling fatigued.
TEXT 2
भिदुर उवाच
के ते प्रचेतसो नाम कस्यापत्यानि gad |
कस्यान्ववाये प्रख्याताः FH वा सत्रमासत ॥ २ ।।
vidura uvaca
ke te pracetaso nama
kasydpatyani suvrata
kasyanvavaye prakhyatah
kutra va satram asata
vidurah uvdca—Vidura inquired; ke—who were; te—they; pracetasah—
the Pracetas; nama—of the name; kasya—whose; apatyani—sons; su-vrata—
© Maitreya, who has taken an auspicious vow; kasya—whose; anvavaye—in
the family; prakhyatah—famous; kutra—where; va—also; satram—the sacri-
fice; dsata—was performed.
TRANSLATION
Vidura inquired from Maitreya: O greatly advanced devotee, who were
the Pracetas? To which family do they belong? Whose sons were they, and
where did they perform the great sacrifices?
PURPORT
The great Narada’s singing, in the previous chapter, of three verses in the
sacrificial arena of the Pracetas gave another impetus to Vidura to ask fur-
ther questions.


--- Page 187 ---
Text 4] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 549
TEXT 3
मन्ये महाभागवतं नारदं देवदश्॑नम्‌ |
येन प्रोक्तः क्रियायोगः परिचयविधिरेः ॥। २ ॥
manye maha-bhagavatam
naradam deva-darsanam
yena proktah kriya-yogah
paricaryd vidhir hareh
manye—1 think; maha-bhagavatam—greatest of all devotees; naradam—
the sage Narada; deva—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; darsanam—
who met; yena—by whom; proktah—spoken; kriya-yogah—devotional
service; paricaryd—for rendering service; vidhih—the procedure; hareh—to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Vidura continued: I know that the great sage Narada is the greatest of
all devotees. He has compiled the pancaratrika procedure of devotional ser-
vice and has directly met the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
There are two different ways of approaching the Supreme Lord. One is
called bhdgavata-marga, or the way of Srimad-Bhdgavatam, and the other
is called pancardtrika-vidhi. Pancaratrika-vidhi is the method of temple
worship, and bhagavata-vidhi is the system of nine processes which begin
with hearing and chanting. The Krsna conscious movement accepts both
processes simultaneously and thus enables one to make steady progress on
the path of realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
paiicaratrika procedure was first introduced by the great sage Narada, as
referred to here by Vidura.
TEXT 4
खघर्मक्षीरेः पुरुषैर्भगवान्‌ यज्ञपूरुषः ।
इज्यमानो भक्तिमता नारदेनेरितः कि nen
sva-dharma-silaih purusair
bhagavan yajia-pirusah
ifyamano bhaktimata
naradeneritah kila


--- Page 188 ---
550 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4, Ch. 13

sva-dharma-§ilaih—executing sacrificial duties; purusath—by the men;
bhagavan—Supreme Personality of Godhead;yajiia-pirusah—the enjoyer of
all sacrifices; ijyamanah—being worshiped; bhaktimata—by the devotee;
naradena—by Narada; iritah—described; kile—indeed.

TRANSLATION

While all the Pracetas were executing religious rituals and sacrificial
ceremonies and thus worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead for
His satisfaction, the great sage Narada described the transcendental qualities
of Dhruva Maharaja.

PURPORT

Narada Muni is always glorifying the pastimes of the Lord. In this verse
we see that he not only glorifies the Lord, but he also likes to glorify the
devotees of the Lord. The great sage Narada Muni’s mission is to broadcast
the devotional service of the Lord. For this purpose he has compiled the
Narada-paiicaratra, a directory of devotional service, so that devotees can
always take information about how to execute devotional service and thus
engage twenty-four hours a day in performing sacrifices for the pleasure of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in the Bhagavad -gita, the
Lord has created four orders of social life, namely brihmana, ksatriya,
vaisya and siidra. In the Ndrada-paiicaratra it is very clearly described how
each of the social orders can please the Supreme Lord. In the Bhagavad-
gita (Bg.18.45) it is stated, sve sve karmany abhiratah 5৫715100117 labhate
narah: by executing one’s prescribed duties one can please the Supreme
Lord. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is stated, svanusthitasya
dharmasya sarsiddhir hari-tosanam: the perfection of duty is to see that
by discharging one’s specific duties one satisfies the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (Bhag.1.2.13). When the Pracetas were performing sacrifices
according to this direction, Narada Muni was satisfied to see these activi-
ties, and he also wanted to glorify Dhruva Maharaja in that sacrificial
arena.

TEXT 5
यास्ता देवर्षिणा तत्र वणिता भगवत्कथाः ।
महं PA ब्रह्मन्‌ कार्ये नाचष्टुमहंसि ॥ ৭ ॥
yas ta devarsind tatra
varnpita bhagavat-kathah
mahyarh susrisave brahman
kartsnyendcastum arhasi


--- Page 189 ---
Text 6] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 551
yah—which; tah—all those; devarsina—by the great sage Narada; tatra—
there; varnitah—narrated; bhagavat-kathah—preachings pertaining to the
activities of the Lord; mahyam—unto me; susrisave—very eager to hear;
brahman—my dear brahmana; kartsnyena—fully; acastum arhasi—kindly
explain.
TRANSLATION
My dear brahmana, how did Narada Muni glorify the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, and what pastimes were described in that meeting? I am
very eager to hear of them. Kindly explain fully about that glorification of
the Lord.
PURPORT
Srimad-Bhagavatam is the record of bhagavat-katha, topics about the
pastimes of the Lord. What Vidura was anxious to hear from Maitreya we
can also hear five thousand years later, provided we are very eager.
TEXT 6
मैत्रेय उवाच
धवस्य चोत्कलः पुत्रः पितरि प्रसिते वनम्‌ ।
सार्वमौमश्रियं नैच्छदधिराजासनं पितुः ॥ ६ ॥
maitreya ८४९८
dhruvasya cotkalah putrah
pitari prasthite vanam
sarvabhauma-sriyarm naicchad
adhirajasanarn pituh
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya said; dhruvasya—of Dhruva
Maharaja; ca—also; utkalah—Utkala; putrah—son; pitari—after the father;
prasthite—departed; vanam—for the forest; sarva-bhauma—including all
lands; $riyam— opulence; na aicchat— did not desire; adhiraja—royal; 25071472
—throne; pituh—of the father.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya replied: My dear Vidura, when Maharaja
Dhruva departed for the forest, his son, Utkala, did not desire to accept
the opulent throne of his father, which was meant for the ruler of all the
lands of this planet.


--- Page 190 ---
552 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
TEXT 7
स FEAT निःसङ्गः समदशनः |
ददश लोके विततमात्मानं लोकमात्मनि ॥ ७॥
sa janmanopasantatma
nihsangah samadarsanah
dadarsa loke vitatam
atmanar lokam atmani
sah—his son Utkala; janmana—from the very beginning of his birth; upa-
santa—very well satisfied; atma—soul; nihsangah—without attachment;
sama-darsanap—equipoised; dadarSa—saw; loke—in the world; vitatam—
spread; atmanam—the Supersoul; lokam—all the world; atmani—in the
Supersoul.
TRANSLATION
From his very birth, Utkala was fully satisfied and unattached to the
world. He was equipoised, for he could see everything resting in the Super-
soul and the Supersoul present in everyone's heart.
PURPORT
The symptoms and characteristics of Utkala, the son of Maharaja Dhruva,
are those of a maha-bhagavata. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 6.30),
yo 77107 pasyati sarvatra sarvarn ca mayi pasyati: a highly advanced devo-
tee sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead everywhere, and He also sees
everything resting in the Supreme. It is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 9.4), maya tatam 10078 sarvar jagad avyakta-mirtina: Lord Krsna is
spread all over the universe in His impersonal feature. Everything is resting
on Him, but that does not mean that everything is He Himself. A highly ad-
vanced maha-bhagavata devotee sees in this spirit: he sees the same Super-
soul, Paramatma, existing within everyone’s heart, regardless of discrimina-
tion based on the different material forms of the living entities. He sees
everyone as part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
maha-bhagavata who experiences the Supreme Godhead’s presence every-
where is never missing from the sight of the Supreme Lord, nor is the Su-
preme Lord ever lost from his sight. This is only possible when one is ad-
vanced in love of Godhead.


--- Page 191 ---
Texts 8-9] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 553
TEXTS 89
आत्मानं ब्रह्म निर्वाणं प्रत्यस्तमितविग्रम्‌ |
अरगोधरसेरक्त्प्ययाकूदपदुसन्तवय्‌ ॥ ८
अच्ययन्छियोगाधिदग्धर्यंषठाश्यः ।
स्रूपमवरन्धानो नात्मनोऽन्यं तदैक्षत || ९ ॥
৫6771011078 ९7011710 nirvanam
pratyastamita-vigraham
avabodha-rasaikatmyam
anandam anusantatam
avyavacchinna-yogagni-
dagdha-karma-malasayah
svariipam avarundhano
natmano ‘nya tadaiksata
atmanam—self; brahma—spirit; nirvanam—extinction of material exis-
tence; pratyastam-ita— ceased; vigraham—separation ; avabodha-rasa—by the
mellow of knowledge; eka-atmyam—oneness; anandam—bliss; anusantatam—
expanded; avyavacchinna—continuous; yoga—by practice of yoga; agni—by
the fire; dagdha—burned; karma—fruitive desires; mala—dirty; asayah—in
his mind; svaripam—constitutional position; avarundhanah—realizing; na—
not; atmanah—than the Supreme Soul; anyam—anything else; tada—then;
aiksata—saw.
TRANSLATION
By expansion of his knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, he had already
attained liberation from the bondage of the body. This is known as nirvana.
He was situated in transcendental bliss, and he continued always in that
blissful existence, which expanded more and more. This was possible for
him by continual practice of bhakti-yoga, which is compared with fire be-
cause it burns away all dirty material things. He was always situated in his
constitutional position of self-realization, and he could not see anything
else but the Supreme Lord and himself engaged in discharging devotional
service.
PURPORT
These two verses explain the verse in the Bhagavad-gita, brahma-bhiitah
prasanndtma na $ocati na kanksati/ samah sarvesu ९0 ८९३ mad-bhaktirm


--- Page 192 ---
554 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
labhate param: “One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the
Supreme Brahman. He never laments or desires to have anything. He is
equally disposed towards every living entity. In that state he achieves pure
devotional service unto Me.” (Bg. 18.54) This is also explained by Lord
Caitanya in His Siksastaka in the beginning of the first verse:

ceto-darpana-marjanarn bhava-maha-davagni-nirvapanari

sreyah kairava-candrika-vitaranam vidya-vadha-jivanam
The bhakti-yoga system is the topmost yoga system, and in this system the
chanting of the holy name of the Lord is the foremost performance of de-
votional service. By chanting the holy name one can attain the perfection
of nirvana, or liberation from material existence, and so increase one’s
blissful life of spiritual existence as described by Lord Caitanya (anandam-
budhi-vardhanam). When one is situated in that position he no longer has
any interest in material opulence or even a royal throne and sovereignty
over the whole planet. This situation is called viraktir anyatra syat. It is the
result of devotional service.

The more one makes advancement in devotional service, the more one
becomes detached from material opulence and materialactivity. This is the
spiritual nature, full of bliss. This is also described in Bhagavad-gita
(Bg. 2.59). Param drstva nivartate: one ceases to take part in material en-
joyment upon tasting superior, blissful life in spiritual existence. By ad-
vancement in spiritual knowledge, which is considered to be like blazing
fire, all material desires are burned to ashes. The perfection of mystic yoga
is possible when one is continuously in connection with the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead by discharging devotional service. A devotee is always
thinking of the Supreme Person at every step of his life. Every conditioned
soul is full of the reactions of his past life, but all dirty things are immedi-
ately burned to ashes if one simply executes devotional service. This is de-
scribed in the Narada-paiicardtra: sarvopadhi-vinirmuktarm tat-paratvena
nirmalam.

TEXT 10
जडाम्बदधिकते्तमरसारतिरतन्यतिः ।
लक्षितः पथि बालानां mame: ne

jadandha-badhironmatta-
mikdkrtir atanmatih

laksitah pathi balanarm
prasantarcir ivanalah


--- Page 193 ---
Text 11] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 555

jada—foolish;andha—blind; badhira—deaf; unmatta—mad; mika—dumb;
akrtih—appearance; a-tat—not like that; matih—his intelligence; lakgitah—
he was seen; pathi—on the road; balinam—by the less intelligent; prasanta—
calmed; arcih—with flames; iva—like; analah—fire.

TRANSLATION

Utkala appeared to the less intelligent persons on the road to be foolish,
blind, dumb, deaf and mad, although actually he was not so. He remained
like fire covered with ashes, without blazing flames.

PURPORT

In order to avoid contradiction, botheration and unfavorable situations
created by materialistic persons, a great saintly person like Jada Bharata or
Utkala remains silent. The less intelligent consider such saintly persons to
be mad, deaf or dumb. Factually, an advanced devotee avoids speaking with
persons who are not in devotional life, but to those who are in devotional
life he speaks in friendship, and he speaks to the innocent for their enlight-
enment. For all practical purposes, the whole world is full of nondevotees,
and so one kind of very advanced devotee is called bhajananandi. Those
who are gosthanandi, however, preach to increase the number of devotees.
But even such preachers also avoid opposing elements who are unfavorably
disposed towards spiritual life.

TEXT 11
मत्वा तं Seg ङलबृद्धाः समन्त्रिणः |
वत्सरं भूपतिं স্দ্ধ্যবীযা मेः सुतम्‌ ॥११॥
matva tarn jadam unmattarn
kula-vrddhah samantrinah
vatsaram bhipatim cakrur
yaviyamsarn bhrameh sutam

matva—thinking; tam—Utkala; jadam—without intelligence; unmattam—
mad; kula-vrddhah—elderly members of the family; sa-mantrinah—with the
ministers; vatsaram— Vatsara; bhii-patim—ruler of the world; cakruh—they
made; yaviyamsam—younger; bhrameh—of Bhrami; sutam—son.

TRANSLATION

For this reason the ministers and all the elderly members of the family

thought Utkala to be without intelligence and, in fact, mad. Thus his


--- Page 194 ---
556 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
younger brother, named Vatsara, who was the son of Bhrami and who was
junior to Utkala, was elevated to the royal throne, and he became king of
the world.
PURPORT
It appears that although there was monarchy, it was not at all an autoc-
racy. There were senior family members and ministers who could make
changes and elect the proper person to the throne, although the throne
could be occupied only by the royal family. In modern days also, wher-
ever there is monarchy, sometimes the ministers and elderly members of
the family select one member from the royal family to occupy the throne
in preference to another.
TEXT 12
खर्वीथिर्त्सरस्ये्टा भार्याख्चत षडात्मजान्‌ ।
got तिग्मकेतुं च श्षमूजं वसुं जयम्‌ ॥ १२
svarvithir vatsarasyesta
bharyasita sad-atmajan
pusparnarm tigmaketur ca
isam 0107 vasurh jayam
svarvithih—Svarvithi; vatsarasya—of King Vatsara; ista—very dear;
bharya—wife; asiita—gave birth to; sat—six; atmajan—sons; pusparpam—
Pusparna; tigmaketum—Tigmaketu; ca—also; isam—lsa; arjam—Urja; vasum—
Vasu; jayam—] aya.
TRANSLATION
King Vatsara had a very dear wife whose name was Svarvithi, and she
gave birth to six sons, named Pusparna, Tigmaketu, Isa, Urja, Vasu and
Jaya.
PURPORT
Vatsara’s wife is mentioned here as is¢a, which means worshipable. In
other words it appears that Vatsara’s wife had all good qualities; for
example, she was always very faithful and obedient and affectionate to her
husband. She had all good qualities for managing household affairs. If both
the husband and wife are endowed with good qualities and live peacefully,
then nice children take birth, and thus the whole family is happy and
prosperous.


--- Page 195 ---
Texts 15-16] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 557
TEXT 13
पुष्पार्णस्य प्रमा भार्या दोषा च दवे बभूवतुः |
परातर्मण्यन्दिनं सायमिति ara प्रमासुताः 12301
pusparnasya prabha bharya
005৫ ca dve babhiivatuh
pratar madhyandinarh sayam
iti hy asan prabha-sutah
pusparnasya—of Pusparna; prabha—Prabha; bharya—wife; dosa—Dosa;
ca—also; dve—two; babhivatuh—were; pratah—Pratah; madhyandinam—
Madhyandinam;sd@yam—Sayam; iti—thus; hi—certainly; dsan—were; prabha-
sutah—sons of Prabha.
TRANSLATION
Pugparna had two wives, named Prabha and Dosa. Prabha had three sons,
named Pratah, Madhyandinam and Sayam.
TEXT 14
प्रदोषो निरिथो व्युष्ट इति লীৰান্তবাজযঃ |
श्युष्टः gd पुष्करिण्यां सर्वतेजसमादधे ॥ १४॥
pradoso nisitho vyusta
iti dosa-sutas trayah
vyustah 5८८०777 puskarinyar
sarva-tejasam adadhe
pradosah—Pradosa; nisithah—Nisitha; vyustah—Vyusta; iti—thus; dosa—
of Dosa; sutah—sons; trayah—three; vyustah—Vyusta; sutam—son;
puskarinyam—in Puskarini; sarva-tejasam—named Sarvateja, all-powerful;
adadhe—begot.
TRANSLATION
Dosa had three sons—Pradosa, Nisitha and Vyusta. Vyusta’s wife was
named Pusgkarini, and she gave birth to a very powerful son named Sarva-
॥ TEXTS 15-16
स चक्षुः खतमाकृत्यां T&A मनुमवाप ह |
मनोरस्त महिषी विरजाखद्दता सुतान्‌ ॥ १५॥


--- Page 196 ---
558 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
पुरु gd সিব got सत्यवन्तं वतम्‌ ।
. .
अ्रि्टोमपतीरात्रं সমতা RrfRgegwg 1280
sa caksuh sutam akatyam
patnyam manum avdpa ha
manor asiita mahist
virajan nadvala sutan
pururi kutsarm tritarn dyumnari
satyavantam rtam vratam
agnistomam atiratram
pradyumnarn 810 177) ulmukam
sah—he (Sarvateja); caksuh—named Caksuh; sutam—son; akityam—in
1011) patnyam—wife; manum—Caksusa Manu; avdpa—obtained; ha—in-
deed; manoh—of Manu; asita—gave birth to; mahisi—queen; virajan—
without passion; nadvalda—Nadvala; sutan—sons; purum—Puru; kutsam—
Kutsa; tritam—Trita; dyumnam—Dyumna; satyavantam—Satyavan; rtam—
Rta; vratam—Vrata;  agnisfomam—Agnistoma;  atiratram—Atiratra;
pradyumnam—Pradyumna; §ibim—Sibi; ulmukam—Ulmuka.
TRANSLATION
Sarvateja’s wife, Akiti, gave birth to a son named Caksusa, who became
the sixth Manu at the end of the Manu millennium. Nadvala, the wife of
Caksusa Manu, gave birth to the following faultless sons: Puru, Kutsa, Trita,
Dyumna, Satyavan, Rta, Vrata, Agnistoma, Atiratra, Pradyumna, Sibi and
Ulmuka.
TEXT 17
उर्शुकोऽजनयत्पुत्रान्पुष्करिण्यां षड़समान्‌ |
अङ्गं सुमनसं ख्यातिं क्रत॒मङ्गिरसं गयम्‌ ॥१७॥
1/1 1.1. 11.7.11
puskarinyam sad uttaman
angarm sumanasam khyatiri
kratum angirasarn gayam
ulmukah—Ulmuka; ajanayat—begot; putran—sons; puskarinyam—in
Pusgkarini, his wife; saf—six; uttaman—very good; angam—Anga;
sumanasam—Sumana; khydtim—Khyati; kratum—Kratu; arigirasam—
Angira; gayam—Gaya.


--- Page 197 ---
Texts 19-20] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 559
TRANSLATION
Of the twelve sons, Ulmuka begot six sons in his wife Pugkarini. They
were all very good sons, and their names were Anga, Sumani, Khyati,
Kratu, Angira and Gaya.
TEXT 18
স্তনীযাক্সত্য या पली सुषुवे JPR |
यदौःशील्यात्स राजर्षिंनिर्विष्णो frame) <1)
sunithangasya ya patni
susuve venam ulbapam
yad-dauhsilyat sa rajarsir
nirvinno niragat purat
sunitha—Sunitha; angasya—of Anga; ya—she who; patni—the wife;
susuve—gave birth to; venam—Vena; ulbanam—very crooked; yat—whose;
dauhsilyat—on account of bad character;sah—he; raja-rsih—the saintly King
Anga; nirvipnah—very disappointed; niragat—went out; purat—from home.
TRANSLATION
The wife of Anga, Sunitha, gave birth to a son named Vena, who was
very crooked. The saintly King Anga was very disappointed with his bad
character, and he left home and kingdom and went out to the forest.
TEXTS 19-20
यमङ्ग JY: पिता वाग्वज्रा मुनयः किल ।
गतासोस्तस्य भूयस्ते ममन्युरद किणं करम्‌ ॥१९।॥
अराजके तदा रोके दस्युभिः पीडिताः प्रजाः |
जातो नारायणांशेन पृथुराद्यः क्षितीश्वरः ॥२०॥
yam anga sepuh kupita
vag-vajra munayah kila
gatasos tasya bhiiyas te
mamanthur daksinam karam
argjake tada loke
dasyubhih piditah prajah
jato narayanamsena
prthur adyah ksitisvarah


--- Page 198 ---
560 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13

yam—him (Vena) whom; anga—my dear Vidura; sepuh—they cursed;
kupitah—being angry; vak-vajrah—whose words are as strong as a thunder-
bolt; munayah—great sages; kila—indeed; gata-asoh tasya—after he died;
bhayah—moreover; te—they; mamanthuh—churned; daksinam—right;
karam—hand; arajake—being without a king; tada—then; loke—the world;
dasyubhih—by rogues and thieves; piditah—suffering; prajah—all the
citizens; jatah—advented; narayana—of the Supreme Personality of God-
head; amsena—by a partial representation; prthuh—Prthu; adyah— original;
ksiti-tsvarah—ruler of the world.

TRANSLATION

My dear Vidura, when great sages curse, their words are as invincible as
a thunderbolt. Thus when they cursed King Vena out of anger, he died.
After his death, since there was no king, all the rogues and thieves flour-
ished, the kingdom became unregulated, and all the citizens suffered great-
ly. On seeing this, the great sages took the right hand of Vena as a churning
rod, and as a result of their churning, Lord Visnu in His partial representa-
tion advented as King Prthu, the original emperor of the world.

PURPORT

Monarchy is better than democracy because if the monarchy is very
strong the regulative principles within the kingdom are upheld very nicely.
Even one hundred years ago in the state of Kashmir in India, the king was
so strong that if a thief were arrested in his kingdom and brought before
him, the king would immediately chop off the hands of the thief. As a re-
sult of this severe punishment there were practically no theft cases within
the kingdom. Even if someone left something on the street, no one would
touch it. The rule was that the things could be taken away only by the pro-
prietor and that no one else would touch them. In theso-called democracy,
wherever there is a theft case the police come and take note of the case,
but generally the thief is never caught, nor is any punishment offered to
him. As a result of incapable government, at the present moment thieves,
rogues and cheaters are very prominent all over the world.

TEXT 21
विदुर उवाच
तस्य शीलनिधेः awa महात्मनः |
राज्ञः कथममूदुष्टा प्रजा यद्विमना ययौ ॥२१॥


--- Page 199 ---
Text 22] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 561
vidura uvdca
tasya Sila-nidheh sadhor
brahmanyasya mahatmanah
rajiiah katham ৫০100 dusta
praja yad vimana yayau

vidurah uvaca—Vidura said; tasya—of him (Anga); sila-nidheh—reservoir
of good characteristics; sadhoh—saintly person; brahmanyasya—lover of
brahminical culture; mahatmanah—great soul; rajiah— of the king; katham—
how; abhiit—it was; dusta—bad; praja—son; yat—by which; vimanah—being
indifferent; yayau—he left.

TRANSLATION

Vidura inquired from the sage Maitreya: My dear brahmana, King Anga
was very gentle. He had high character and was a saintly personality and
lover of brahminical culture. How is it that such a great soul got a bad son
like Vena, because of whom he became indifferent to his kingdom and left
it?

PURPORT ॥

In family life a man is supposed to live happily with father, mother, wife
and children, but sometimes, under certain conditions, a father, mother,
child or wife becomes an enemy. It is said by Canakya Pandita that a father
is an enemy when he is too much in debt, a mother is an enemy if she
marries for a second time, a wife is an enemy when she is very beautiful,
and a son is an enemy when he is a foolish rascal. In this way, when a fam-
ily member becomes an enemy it is very difficult to live in family life or
remain a householder. Generally such situations occur in the material
world. Therefore according to Vedic culture one has to take leave of his
family members just after his fiftieth year so that the balance of his life
may be completely devoted in search of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 22
किं वांहो वेन उदिश्य ब्रह्मदण्डमयूयुजन्‌ |
दण्डव्रतधरे TR नयो धर्मकोविदाः ॥२२॥
1017 varmho vena uddisya
brahma-dapdam ayiiyujan
danda-vrata-dhare rajii
munayo dharma-kovidah


--- Page 200 ---
562 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13

kim —why; va— also;amhah—sinful activities; vene—unto Vena; uddisya—
seeing; brahma-dapdam—curse of a brahmana; ayuyujan—they desired to
award; danpda-vrata-dhare—who carries the rod of punishment; rajiii—unto
the king; munayah—the great sages; dharma-kovidah—completely conver-
sant with religious principles.

TRANSLATION

Vidura also inquired: How is it that the great sages, who were completely
conversant with religious principles, desired to curse King Vena, who him-
self carried the rod of punishment, and thus awarded him the greatest
punishment [brahma-sapa] ?

PURPORT

Itis understood that the king is able to give punishment to everyone, but
in this case it appears that the great sages punished him. The king must
have done something very serious, otherwise how could the great sages,
who were supposed to be the greatest and most tolerant, still punish him
in spite of their elevated religious consciousness? It appears also that the
king was not independent of the brahminical culture. Above the king there
was the control of the brahmanas, and if needed the brahmanas would
dethrone the king or would kill him, not with any weapon, but with the
mantra of a brahma-sapa. The brahmanas were so powerful that simply by
their cursing one would immediately die.

TEXT 23
नावध्येयः प्रजापालः प्रजाभिरघवानपि |
यदसौ लोकपालानां बिमर््योजः खतेजसा ॥२२॥
navadhyeyah praja-palah
prajabhir aghavan api
yad asau loka-palanam
bibharty ojah sva-tejasa

na—never; avadhyeyah—to be insulted; praja-palah—the king; prajabhih—
by the citizens; aghavan— ever sinful; api—even though; yat—because; asau—
he; loka-palanam—of many kings; bibharti—maintains; ojali—prowess; sva-
tejasa—by personal influence.

TRANSLATION

It is the duty of all citizens in a state never to insult the king, even

though he sometimes appears to have done something very sinful. Because


--- Page 201 ---
Text 24] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 563
of his prowess, the king is always more influential than all other ruling
chiefs.
PURPORT
According to Vedic civilization the king is supposed to be the represen-
tative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is called nara-narayana,
indicating that Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appears in
human society as the king. It is etiquette that neither a brahmapa nor a
ksatriya king is ever insulted by the citizens; even though a king appears to
be sinful, the citizens should not insult him. But in the case of Vena it
appears that he was cursed by the nara-devatas; therefore, it was con-
cluded that his sinful activities were very grievous.
TEXT 24
CARTER मे ब्रह्मन्‌ सुनीथात्पजखे्टितम्‌ |
श्रहधानाय भक्ताय त्वं परावरवित्तमः 1:80
etad akhyahi me brahman
sunithatmaja-cestitam
sraddadhandaya bhaktaya
(४५77 paravara-vittamali
etat—all these; akhyahi—please describe; me—unto me; brahman—O
great brahmana; sunitha-atmaja—ef the son of Sunitha, Vena; cesgfitam—
activities; sraddadhanaya—{faithful; bhaktaya—unto your devotee; tvam—
you; para-avara— with past and future; vit-tamah—well conversant.
TRANSLATION
Vidura requested Maitreya: My dear brahmana, you are well conversant
with all subjects, both past and future. Therefore I wish to hear from you
all the activities of King Vena. Iam your faithful devotee, so please explain
this.
PURPORT
Vidura accepted Maitreya as his spiritual master. A disciple always
inquires from the spiritual master, and the spiritual master answers the
question, provided the disciple is very gentle and devoted. Srila Viévanatha
Cakravarti Thakura said that by the mercy of the spiritual master one is
benedicted with the mercy of the Supreme Lord. The spiritual master is
not inclined to disclose all the secrets of transcendental science unless the


--- Page 202 ---
564 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
disciple is very submissive and devoted. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita,
the process of receiving knowledge from the spiritual master entails sub-
mission, inquiry and service.
TEXT 25
F399 उवाच
अङ्गोऽश्वमेधं राजर्षिराजहार महाक्रतुम्‌ ৷
IGRI जहावादिभिः HRI
maitreya uvdca
ango 80077601101 rajarsir
djahara maha-kratum
najagmur devatds tasminn
ahitta brahma-vadibhih
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya answered; angah— King Anga; asvamedham—
asvamedha sacrifice; rdja-rsih—the saintly king; d@jahdra—executed; maha-
kratum—great sacrifice; na—not; ajagmuh—came; devataih—the demigods;
tasmin—in that sacrifice; @hiitah—being invited; brahma-vadibhih—by the
brahmanas expert in executing sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
Sif Maitreya replied: My dear Vidura, once the great King Anga arranged
to perform the great sacrifice known as asvamedha. All the expert brah-
manas present knew how to invite the demigods, but in spite of their
efforts, no demigods participated or appeared in that sacrifice.
PURPORT
A Vedic sacrifice is not an ordinary performance. The demigods used to
participate in such sacrifices, and the animals sacrificed in such perform-
ances were reincarnated with new life. In this age of Kali there are no
powerful brahmanas who can invite the demigods or give renewed life to
animals. Formerly, the brahmanas well conversant in Vedic mantras
could show the potency of the mantras, but in this age, because there are
no such brahmanas, all such sacrifices are forbidden. The sacrifice in which
horses were offered was called asvamedha. Sometimes cows were sacrificed
(gavalambha), not for eating purposes, but to give them new life in order
to show the potency of the mantra. In this age, therefore, the only practi-
cal yajiia is sankirtana-yajiia or chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra
twenty-four hours a day.


--- Page 203 ---
Text 27] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 565
TEXT 26
तमूनुर्विखितास्तत्र यजमानमथत्विजः |
हवींषि हयमानानि न ते गृहन्ति देवताः ॥२६॥
tam 08007 vismitas tatra
yajamanam athartvijah
havirsi hiyamanani
na te grhnanti devatah p
tam—unto King Anga; ficuh—said; vismitah—in wonder; tatra—there;
yajamanam—to the institutor of the sacrifice; atha—then; rtvijah—the
priests; havimsi—offerings of clarified butter; hizyamanani—being offered;
na—not; te—they; grhpanti—accept; devatah—the demigods.
TRANSLATION
The priests engaged in the sacrifice then informed King Anga: O King,
we are properly offering the clarified butter in the sacrifice, but despite all
our efforts the demigods do not accept it.
TEXT 27
राजन्‌ दीष्यदुष्टानि श्रद्धयाऽऽसादितानि ते।
छन्दाँस्थयातयामानि योजितानि amd: ॥२७॥
rajan havimsy adustani
sraddhayasaditani te
chandamsy ayata-yamani
yojitani dhrta-vrataih
rajan—0 King; havimsi—sacrificial offerings; adustani—not polluted;
sraddhaya—with great faith and care; asaditani—collected; te—your;
chandamsi—the mantras; ayata-yamani—not deficient; yojitani—properly
executed; dhrta-vrataih—by qualified brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
O King, we know that the paraphernalia to perform the sacrifice is well
collected by you with great faith and care and is not polluted. Our chanting
of the Vedic hymns also is not deficient in any way because all the
brahmanas and priests present here are expert and are executing the
performances properly.


--- Page 204 ---
566 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
PURPORT
It is the practice of the brahmanas conversant with the science to
pronounce a Vedic mantra in the right accent. The combination of the
mantra and Sanskrit words must be chanted with the right pronunciation,
otherwise it will not be successful. In this age the brahmanas are neither
well versed in the Sanskrit language nor very pure in practical life. But by
chanting the Hare Krsna mantra one can attain the highest benefit of
sacrificial performances. Even if the Hare Krsna mantra is not chanted
properly, still it has so much potency that the chanter gains the effect.
TEXT 28
न fie देवानां हेलनं वयमण्वपि ।
य्न TH मागान्‌ खान्‌ ये देवाः कम॑साक्षिणः। २८।
na vidimeha devanam
18610710717 vayam anv api
yan na grhnanti bhagan svan
ye devah karma-saksinah
na—not; vidima—can find; iha—in this connection; devanam—of the
demigods; helanam—insult, neglect; vayam—we; anu—minute; api—even;
yat—because of which; na—not; grhnanti—accept; bhagan—shares; svan—
own; ye—who; devah—the demigods; karma-saksinah—witnesses for the
sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
Dear King, we do not find any reason that the demigods should feel
insulted or neglected in any way, but still the demigods who are witnesses
for the sacrifice do not accept their shares. We do not know why it is so.
PURPORT
It is indicated herein that if there is negligence on the part of the priest,
the demigods do not accept their share in sacrifices. Similarly, in devotional
service there are offenses known as seva-aparadha. Those who are engaged
in worshiping the Deity, Radha and Krsna in the temple, should avoid
such offenses in service. The offenses in service are described in The Nectar
of Devotion. If we simply make a show of offering services to the Deity
but do not care for the seva-aparadha, certainly the Radha-Krspa Deity
will not accept offerings from such nondevotees. Devotees engaged in
temple worship should not, therefore, manufacture their own methods,


--- Page 205 ---
Text 30] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 567
but should strictly follow the regulative principles of cleanliness, and then
offerings will be accepted.
TEXT 29
aq उवाच
अङ्गो द्विजवचः श्रत्वा यजमानः सुदुर्मनाः |
तत्प्रष्टुं व्यसृजद्वाच॑॑सदस्थांस्तद्‌ नुज्ञया IRR
maitreya uvaca
ango dvija-vacah srutva
yajamanah sudurmanah
tat prasturn vyasrjad vacarn
sadasyams tad-anujiiaya
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya answered; angah—King Anga;
dvija-vacah—the brahmanpas words; srutva—after hearing; yajamanah—
performer of the sacrifice; sudurmanali—very much aggrieved in mind;
tat—about that; praglum—in order to inquire; vyasrjat vacam—he spoke;
sadasyan—to the priests; tat—their; anujiaya—taking permission.
TRANSLATION
Maitreya explained that King Anga, after hearing the statements of the
priests, was greatly aggrieved. At that time he took permission from the
priests to break his silence and inquired from all the priests who were
present in the sacrificial arena.
TEXT 30
नागच्छन्त्यादता देवा न गृहन्ति ग्रहानिह |
सदसस्पतयो भूत॒ किमवद्यं मया छतम्‌ ॥२०॥
nagacchanty ahuta deva
na grhnanti grahan iha
sadasas patayo brata
kim avadyarn maya krtam
na—not; agacchanti—are coming; @hutah- being invited; devah—the
demigods; na—not; grhpanti—are accepting; grahan—shares; iha—in the
sacrifice; sadasah patayah—My dear priests; brita—kindly tell me; kim—
what; avadyam—offense; mayd—by me; krtam—was committed.


--- Page 206 ---
568 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
TRANSLATION
King Anga addressed the priestly order: My dear priests, kindly tell me
what offense I have committed. Although invited, the demigods are neither
taking part in the sacrifice nor accepting their shares.
TEXT 31
सदसस्पतय ऊचुः
नरदेवेह भवतो नाघं तावन्मनाक्‌ सितम्‌ |
अस्त्येकं प्राक्तनमधं यदिदेटक्‌ TAIT: UZ
sadasas pataya ८ ८८
nara-deveha bhavato
ndagham tavan manak sthitam
asty ekarn praktanam agharm
yad ihedrk tvam aprajah
sadasah patayah icuh—the head priests said; nara-deva—O King; tha—in
this life; bhavatah—of you; na—not; agham—sinful activity; tavat manak—
even very slight; sthitam—situated; asti—there is; ekam —one; praktanam—
in the previous birth; agham—sinful activity; yat—by which; iha—in this
life; idrk —like this; tvam—you; aprajah—without any son.
TRANSLATION
The head priests said: O King, in this life we do not find any sinful
activity, even within your mind, so you are not in the least offensive. But
we can see that in your previous life you performed sinful activities due to
which, in spite of your having all qualifications, you have no son.
PURPORT
The purpose of marrying is to beget a son because a son is necessary to
deliver his father and forefathers from any hellish conditional life in which
they may be. CanakyaPandita,therefore,says, putra-hinam grham sanyam:
without a son, married life is simply abominable. King 1৭638 was a very
pious king in this life, but because of his previous sinful activity he could
not get a son. It is concluded, therefore, that if a person does not get a son
it is due to his past sinful life.
TEXT 32
तथा साधय भद्रं ते आत्मानं सुप्रजं तृष |
इष्टस्ते पुत्रकामस्य पुत्रं दास्यति यज्ञथुक्‌ ।३२॥


--- Page 207 ---
Text 33] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 569
tatha sadhaya bhadrari te
৫6771011071) suprajam nrpa
istas te putra-kamasya
putrarh dasyati yajiia-bhuk
tatha—therefore; sadhaya—execute the sacrifice to get; bhadram—good
fortune; te—to you; atmanam—your own; su-prajam—good son; nrpa—QO
King; istah—being worshiped; te—by you; putra-kamasya—desiring to have
a son; putram—a son; dasyati—He will deliver; yajiia-bhuk —the Lord, the
enjoyer of the sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
O King, we wish all good fortune for you. You have no son, but if you
pray at once to the Supreme Lord and ask for a son, and if you execute
the sacrifice for that purpose, the enjoyer of the sacrifice, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, will fulfill your desire.
TEXT 33
तथा खमागवेयानि ग्रहीष्यन्ति दिवौकसः ।
ययन्ञपुरुषः साक्षादपत्याय हरितः 1330
tatha sva-bhaga-dheyani
grahisyanti divaul:asah
yad yajiia-purusah saksad
apatyaya harir vrtah
tatha—thereupon; sva-bhaga-dheyani—their shares in the sacrifice;
grahisyanti—will accept; diva-okasah—all the demigods; yat—because;
yajita-purusah—the enjoyer of all sacrifices; saksat—directly; apatyaya—
for the purpose of a son; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vrtah—is invited.
TRANSLATION
When Hari, the supreme enjoyer of all sacrifices, is invited to fulfill your
desire for a son, all the demigods will come with Him and take their shares
in the sacrifice.
PURPORT
Whenever a sacrifice is performed, it is meant for satisfying Lord Visnu,
the enjoyer of the fruits of all sacrifices; and when Lord Visnu agrees to
come to a sacrificial arena, all the demigods naturally follow their master,
and their shares are offered in such sacrifices. The conclusion is that the
sacrifices performed are meant for lord Visnu, not for the demigods.


--- Page 208 ---
570 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
TEXT 34
तांस्तान्‌ कामान्‌ SRA ATE यान्‌ कामयते जनः।
oy +
आराधितो यथैवैष तथा पुंसां रुलोदयः 1390
tarhs tan kaman harir dadyad
yan yan kamayate janah
aradhito yathaivaisa
tatha purhsar phalodayah
tan tan—those; kaman—desired objects; harih—the Lord; dadyat—will
award; ydn yan—whatsoever; kamayate—desires; janah—the person;
aradhitah—being worshiped; yatha—as; eva—certainly; esah—the Lord;
tatha—similarly ; pumsam—of men; phala-udayah—the result.
© TRANSLATION
The performer of the sacrifices [under karma-kanda activities] achieves
the fulfillment of the desire for which he worships the Lord.
PURPORT
In the Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that He awards benediction to the
worshiper according to his desire. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
gives all living entities conditioned within this material world full freedom
to act in their own way. But to His devotee He says that instead of working
in that way, it is better to surrender unto Him, for He will take charge of
the devotee. That is the difference between a devotee and a fruitive actor.
The fruitive actor enjoys only the fruits of his own activities, but a devotee,
being under the guidance of the Supreme Lord, simply advances in devo-
tional service to achieve the ultimate goal of life—to go back home, back to
Godhead. The significant word in this verse is kaman, which means sense
gratificatory desires. A devotee is devoid of all kaman. He is anyabhilasita-
Siinya: a devotee is always devoid of all desires for sense gratification.
His only aim is to satisfy or gratify the senses of the Lord. That is the
difference between a karmi and a devotee.
TEXT 35
इति safe विप्रास्तस्य राज्ञः प्रजातये |
पुरोडाशं निरवपन्‌ शिपिविष्टाय विष्णवे ॥३५५॥


--- Page 209 ---
Text 36] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 571
iti vyavasita vipras
tasya rajiah prajataye
puro-dasarn niravapan
Sipi-vistaya 75710४९
iti—thus; vyavasitah—having decided; viprah— the brahmanas; tasya—his;
ragjiah—of the king; prajataye—for the purpose of getting a son; purah-
ddsam—the paraphernalia of sacrifice; niravapan—offered; sipi-vistaya—to
the Lord, who is situated in the sacrificial fire; visnave—to Lord Visnu.
TRANSLATION
Thus for the sake of ason for King Anga, they decided to offer oblations
to Lord Visnu, who is situated in the hearts of all living entities.
PURPORT
According to sacrificial rituals, animals are sometimes sacrificed in the
yajiia arena. Such animals are sacrificed not to kill them but to give them
new life. Such action was an experiment to observe whether the Vedic
mantras were being properly pronounced. Sometimes small animals are
killed in a medical laboratory to investigate therapeutic effect. In a medi-
cal clinic the animals are not revived, but in the yajfia arena, when animals
were sacrificed, they were again given life by the potency of Vedic mantras.
The word Sipi-vistaya appears in this verse. Sipi means the flames of the
sacrifice. In the sacrificial fire if the oblations are offered into the flames,
then Lord Visnuis situated there in the form of the flames. Therefore Lord
Visnuis known as Sipivista.
TEXT 36
तसात्पुरुष उत्तस्थौ टहेममाल्यमराम्बरः |
हिरण्मयेन पात्रेण सिद्धमादाय पायसम्‌ ।।२६॥
(८05970८ purusa uttasthau
hema-mdly amaldmbarah
hiranmayena [6८7९710
siddham adaya payasam
tasmat—from that fire; purusah—a person; uttasthau—appeared; hema-
mali—with a golden garland; amala-ambarah—in white garments;


--- Page 210 ---
572 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
hirapmayena—golden; patrena—with a pot; siddham—cooked; dadaya—
carrying; payasam—rice boiled in milk.
TRANSLATION

As soon as the oblation was offered in the fire, a person appeared from
the fire altar wearing a golden garland and white dress. He was carrying a
golden pot filled with rice boiled in milk.

TEXT 37
स विप्रानुमतो राजा गृहीत्वाञ्ञणिनौदनम्‌ |
अवघ्राय JIT युक्तः प्रादात्पटन्या उदारधीः ॥३७॥
sa vipranumato raja
grhitvaijalinaudanam
avaghraya muda yuktah
pradat patnya udara-dhih

sah—he; vipra—of the brahmapas; anumatah—taking permission; raja—
the King;grhitva— taking; afijalina—in his joined palms; odanam—rice boiled
in milk; avaghraya—after smelling; mudd—with great delight; yuktah—fixed;
pradat— offered; patnyai—to his wife; udara-dhih—liberal-minded.

TRANSLATION

The King was very liberal, and after taking permission from the priests,
he took the preparation in his joined palms, and after smelling it he offered
a portion to his wife.

PURPORT

The word udara-dhih is significant in this connection. The wife of the
King, Sunitha, was not fit to accept this benediction, yet the King was so
liberal that without hesitation he offered to his wife the boiled rice in milk
prasada received from the yajiia-purusa. Of course everything is designed
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As will be explained in later
verses, this incident was not very favorable for the King. Since the King
was very liberal, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in order to increase
his detachment from this material world, willed that a cruel son be born of
the Queen so that the King would have to leave home. As stated above,
Lord Vignu fulfills the desires of the karmis as they desire, but the Lord
fulfills the desire of a devotee in a different way so that the devotee may


--- Page 211 ---
Text 39] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 573
gradually come to Him. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (dadami
buddhi-yogam tar yena mam upayanti te). The Lord gives the devotee the
opportunity to make progress further and further so that he may come
back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 38
: a
सा तत्पुंसवनं राज्ञी प्राश्य ৭ पत्युरादधे |
गभं कार उपादत्ते कुमारं सुषुवेऽप्रजा ॥२३८॥
sd tat purn-savanari rajai
prasya vai patyur adadhe
garbhari kala upavrtte
kumadram susuve ’praja
sa—she; tat—that food; puri-savanam—which produces a male child;
rajiti—the Queen; prasya—eating; vai—indeed; patyuh—from the husband;
adadhe—conceived;garbham—pregnancy ; kale—when the due time ; upavrtte
—appeared; kumaram—a son; susuve—gave birth to; apraja—having no son.
TRANSLATION
Although the Queen had no son, after eating that food, which had the
power to produce a male child, she became pregnant from her husband, and
in due course of time she gave birth to a son.
PURPORT
Among the ten kinds of purificatory processes, one is puri-savanam, in
which the wife is offered some prasida, or remnants of foodstuff
offered to Lord Visnu, so that after sexual intercourse with her husband
she may conceive a child.
TEXT 39
स॒ बार एव पुरूषो मातामहमचुव्रतः।
अधमाँश्लोद्धवं मृत्यं तेनाभवदधार्मिकः ॥२९॥
sa bala eva puruso
mata-maham anuvratah
adharmarsodbhavariv mrtyuri
tenabhavad adharmikah
sah—that; balah—child; eva—certainly; purusah—male; mata-maham—
maternal grandfather; anuvratah—a follower of; adharma—of irreligion;


--- Page 212 ---
574 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
arms$a—from a portion; udbhavam—who appeared; mrtyum—death; tena—
by this; abhavat—he became; adharmikah—irreligious.

TRANSLATION

That boy was born partially in the dynasty of irreligion. His grandfather
was death personified, and the boy grew up as his follower; he became a
greatly irreligious person.

PURPORT

The child’s mother, Sunitha, was the daughter of death personified.
Generally the daughter receives the qualifications of her father, and the son
acquires those of the mother. So, according to the axiomatic truth that
things equal to the same thing are equal to one another, the child born of
King Anga became the follower of his maternal grandfather. According to
smrti-$astra, a child generally follows the principles of his maternal uncle’s
house. Narapar matula-karma means that a child generally follows the
qualities of his maternal family. If the maternal family is very corrupt or
sinful, the child, even though born of a good father, becomes a victim of
the maternal family. According to Vedic civilization, therefore, before the
marriage takes place an account is taken of both the boy’s and girl’s
families. If according to astrological calculation the combination is perfect,
then marriage takes place. Sometimes, however, there is a mistake, and
family life becomes frustrating.

It appears that King Anga did not get a very good wife in Sunitha
because she was the daughter of death personified. Sometimes the Lord
arranges an unfortunate wife for His devotee so that gradually, due to
family circumstances, the devotee becomes detached from his wife and
home and makes progress in devotional life. It appears that by the arrange-
ment of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, King Anga, although a pious
devotee, got an unfortunate wife like Sunithi and later on a bad child like
Vena. But the result was that he got complete freedom from the entangle-
ment of family life and left home to go back to Godhead.

TEXT 40
स॒ शरासनशुद्यम्य मृगयुर्वनगोचरः |
इन्त्यसाधुमगान्‌ दीनान्‌ वेनोऽसावित्यरोजनः।।४०।


--- Page 213 ---
Text 41] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 575
sa sarasanam udyamya
mrgayur vana-gocarah
hanty asadhur mrgan dinan
veno ’siv ity arauj janah
sah—that boy of the name Vena; sarasanam—his bow; udyamya—taking
up; mrgayuh—the hunter; vana-gocarah—going into the forest; hanti—used
to kill; asadhuh— being very cruel; mrgan— deer; dinan—poor; venah— Vena;
asau—there he is; iti—thus; araut—would cry; janah— all the people.
TRANSLATION
After fixing his bow and arrow, the cruel boy used to go to the forest
and unnecessarily Kill innocent deer, and as soon as he came all the people
would cry, “Here comes cruel Vena! Here comes cruel Vena!”
PURPORT
Ksatriyas are allowed to hunt in the forest for the purpose of learning
the killing art, not to kill animals for eating or for any other purpose. The
ksatriya kings were sometimes expected to cut off the head of a culprit in
the state. For this reason the ksatriyas were allowed to hunt in the forest.
Because this son of King Anga, Vena, was born of a bad mother, he was very
cruel, and he used to go to the forest and unnecessarily kill the animals. All
the neighboring inhabitants would be frightened by his presence, and they
would call, “Here comes Vena! Here comes Vena!” So from the beginning
of his life he was fearful to the citizens.
TEXT 41
आक्रीडे कीडतो बाखान्‌ वयस्यानतिदिरुणः |
प्रसद्य निरनुकोश्चः पड्मारममारयत्‌ list
akride kridato balan
vayasyan atidarunah
prasahya niranukrosah
pasu-maram amarayat
akride—in the playground; kridatah— while playing; balan—boys; vayas-
yan—of his age; atidarunah—very cruel; prasahya—by force; niranukrosah-
merciless; pasu-maram—as if slaughtering animals; amarayat—killed.


--- Page 214 ---
576 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
TRANSLATION
The boy was so cruel that while playing with young boys of his age he
would kill them very mercilessly, as if they were animals meant for
slaughter.
TEXT 42
3 fr खलं पत्रं gare ।
यदा न श्चासितुं कल्पो भृश्चमासीत्सुदुर्भनाः 19
(072 vicaksya 11010702 putrar
$asanair vividhair nypah
yada na 5252८77 kalpo
bhrsam asit sudurmanah
tam—him; vicak sya—observing; khalam—cruel; putram—son; sasanaih—
by punishments; vividhaih— different kinds of ; nypah—the King; yada—when;
na—not; sasitum—to bring under control; kalpah—was able; bhrsam—great-
ly; asit—became; sudurmanah—aggrieved.
TRANSLATION
After seeing the cruel and merciless behavior of his son Vena, King Anga
punished him in different ways to reform him, but he was unable to bring
him to the path of gentleness. He thus became greatly aggrieved.
TEXT 43
श्रायेणाम्य्ितो देवो येऽप्रजा যুহমছিনঃ |
कदपत्यशतं दुःखं ये न विन्दन्ति दुर्भरम्‌ ean
prayenabhyarcito devo
ye ’praja grha-medhinah
kad-apatya-bhrtarin dubkharm
ye na vindanti durbharam
prayena—probably ; abhyarcitah—was worshiped; devah—the Lord; ye—
they who; aprajah—without a son; grha-medhinah—persons living at home;
kad-apatya—by a bad son; bhrtam—caused; duhkham—unhappiness; ye—
they who; na—not; vindanti—suffer; durbharam—unbearable.
TRANSLATION
The King thought to himself: Persons who have no son are certainly for-
tunate. They must have worshiped the Lord in their previous lives so that
they would not have to suffer the unbearable unhappiness caused by a bad
son.


--- Page 215 ---
Text 45] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 577
TEXT 44
यतः पापीयसी कीर्तिरधर्मश्च weeny |
यतो विरोधः सर्वेषां यत आधिरनन्तकः igen `
yatah papiyast kirtir
adharmas ca mahan nrnam
yato virodhah 507065৫1711
yata adhir anantakah
yatah—on account of a bad son; papiyasi—sinful; kirtili— reputation;
adharmah—irreligion; ca— also; mahan— great; npam—of men; yatah—from
which; virodhah—quarrel; sarvesam—of all people; yatah—from which;
adhih—anxiety; anantakah—endless.
TRANSLATION
A sinful son causes a person’s reputation to vanish. His irreligious activi-
ties at home cause irreligion and quarrel among everyone, and this creates
only endless anxiety.
PURPORT
It is said that a married couple must have a son, otherwise their family
life is void. But a son born without good qualities is as good as a blind eye.
A blind eye has no use for seeing, but it is simply unbearably painful. The
King therefore thought himself very unfortunate to have such a bad son.
TEXT 45
ने
कस्तं प्रजापदेशं ৭ मोदबन्धनमात्मनः |
पण्डितो बहु मन्येत यदर्थाः FITZ गृहाः 119401
10৫5 (0৫718 [0170]৫100068071 vai
moha-bandhanam atmanah
pandito bahu manyeta
yad-arthah klesada grhah
kah—who; tam—him; praja-apadesam—son in name only; vai— certainly;
moha— of illusion; bandhanam~—bondage; atmanah—for the soul; panditah—
intelligent man; bahu manyeta—would value; yat-arthah—because of whom;
klesa-dah—painful; grhah—home.
TRANSLATION
Who, if he is considerate and intelligent, would desire such a worthless
son? Such a son is nothing but a bondage of illusion for the living entity,
and he makes one’s home miserable.


--- Page 216 ---
578 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
TEXT 46
कदपत्यं वरं मन्ये FEUER पदात्‌ ।
निर्विद्येत गृहान्मत्यों यत्क्छेशनिवदा गृहाः ।।४६॥
kad-apatyari varam manye
sad-apatyac chucar padat
nirvidyeta grhan martyo
yat klesa-nivaha grhah
kad-apatyam—bad son; varam—better; manye—1I think; sat-apatydt—
than a good son; sucam—of grief; padat—the source; nirvidyeta—becomes
detached; grhdat—from home; martyah—a mortal man; yat—because of
whom; klesa-nivahdh—hellish; grhah—home.
TRANSLATION
Then the King thought: A bad son is better than a good son because a
good son creates an attachment for home, whereas a bad son does not. A
bad son creates a hellish home from which an intelligent man naturally
becomes very easily detached.
PURPORT
The King began to think in terms of attachment and detachment from
one’s material home. According to Prahlada Maharaja, the material home is
compared to a blind well. If a man falls down into a blind well, it is very
difficult to get out of it and begin life again. Prahlada Maharaja has advised
that one should give up this blind well of home life as soon as possible and
go to the forest to take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
According to Vedic civilization, this giving up of home with vanaprastha
and sannyasa is compulsory. But people are so attached to their homes
that even up to the point of death they do not like to retire from home life.
King Anga, therefore, thinking in terms of detachment, accepted his bad
son as a good impetus for detachment from home life. He therefore
considered his bad son his friend since he was helping him to become de-
tached from his home. Ultimately one has to learn how to detach oneself
from attachment to material life; therefore, if a bad son, by his bad
behavior, helps a householder to go away from home, it is a boon.
TEXT 47
एवं स निर्विष्णमना नृपो गृहा-
भिश्षीय उत्थाय महोदयोदयात्‌ |


--- Page 217 ---
Text 48] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 579
अलब्धनिद्रोऽलुषरश्वितो If
हित्वा गतो वेनसुवं sma von
evar sa nirvinnpe-mand nrpo grhan
nisitha utthaya mahodayodayat
alabdha-nidro ’nupalalgito nrbhir
hitva gato vena-suvari prasuptam
evam—thus; sah—he; nirvipna-manah—being indifferent in mind; ngpah—
King Anga; grhat—from home; nisithe—in the dead of night; utthaya—
getting up; maha-udaya-udayat—opulent by the blessings of great souls;
alabdha-nidrah—being without sleep; anupalaksitah—without being seen;
nrbhih—by people in general; hitva—giving up; gatah—went off; vena-suvam
—the mother of Vena; prasuptam—sleeping deeply.
TRANSLATION
Thinking like that, King Anga could not sleep at night. He became
completely indifferent to household life. Once, therefore, in the dead of
night, he got up from bed and left Vena’s mother [his wife], who was
sleeping deeply. He gave up all attraction for his greatly opulent kingdom,
and, unseen by anyone, he very silently gave up his home and opulence and
proceeded toward the forest.
PURPORT
In this verse the word mahodayodayat indicates that by the blessings of
a great soul one becomes materially opulent. But when one gives up
attachment to material wealth, that should be considered an even greater
blessing from the great souls. It was not a very easy task for the King to
give up his opulent kingdom and young faithful wife, but it was certainly
a great blessing of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that he could give
up the attachment and go out to the forest without being seen by anyone.
There are many instances of great souls leaving home in this way in the
dead of night, giving up attachment for home, wife and money.
TEXT 48
विज्ञाय निर्विद्य गतं पतिं प्रजाः
पुरोदितामात्यसुदृद्गणादयः |
यथा निगूढं पुरुषं योगिनः ॥४८॥


--- Page 218 ---
580 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 13
vijiidya nirvidya gatarn patirn prajah
purohitamatya-suhrd-ganadayah
vicikyur urvyam atisoka-katara
yatha nigiidharn purusam kuyoginah
vijiaya—after understanding; nirvidya—being indifferent; gatam—had
left; patim—the King; prajah—all the citizens; purohita—priests; amatya—
ministers; suhrt—friends; gana-ddayah—and people in general; vicikyuh—
searched; urvyam—on the earth; atisoka-katarah—being greatly aggrieved;
yatha—just as; nigidham—concealed; purusam—the Supersoul; ku-yoginah
—inexperienced mystics.
TRANSLATION
When it was understood that the King had indifferently left home, all
the citizens, priests, ministers, friends, and people in general were greatly
aggrieved. They began to search for him all over the world, just as a less
experienced mystic searches out the Supersoul within himself.
PURPORT
The example of searching for the Supersoul within the heart by the less
intelligent mystics is very instructive. The Absolute Truth is understood in
three different features, namely impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma,
and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such kuyoginah, or less intelli-
gent mystics, can by mental speculation reach the point of the impersonal
Brahman, but they cannot find the Supersoul who is sitting within each
living entity. When the King left, it was certain that he was staying some-
where else, but because they did not know how to find him they were
frustrated like the less intelligent mystics.
TEXT 49
अलक्षयन्तः पदवीं प्रजापते-
न pe: p=
saa: प्रत्युपत्य ते पुरीम्‌ |
ऋषीन्‌ समेतानभिवन्द्य साश्रवो
न्यवेदयन्‌ (RE AIAG ॥४९॥
alaksayantah padavim prajapater
hatodyamah pratyupasrtya te purim
rsin sametan abhivandya sasravo
nyavedayan paurava bhartr-viplavam


--- Page 219 ---
Text 49] Description of the Descendants of Dhruva Maharaja 581

alaksayantah—not finding; padavim—any trace; prajapateh—of King
Anga; hata-udyamah—having become disappointed; pratyupasrtya—after
returning; te—those citizens; purim—to the city; rsin—the great sages;
sametan—assembled; abhivandya—after making respectful obeisances; sa-
asravah—with tears in their eyes; nyavedayan—intformed;paurava—O Vidura;
bhartr—of the king; viplavam—the absence.

TRANSLATION

When the citizens could not find any trace of the King after searching
for him everywhere, they were very disappointed, and they returned to
the city, where all the great sages of the country assembled because of the
King’s absence. With tears in their eyes the citizens offered respectful
obeisances and informed them in full detail that they were unable to find
the King anywhere.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Thirteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Description of the Descend-
ants of Dhruva Maharaja.”


--- Page 220 ---
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The Story of King Vena
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
भरग्बादयस्ते मुनयो लोकानां क्षेमददिनः |
< जतिः
गोसर्यसति वै नृणां पड्यन्तः पञ्चसाम्यताम्‌ ॥ १॥
maitreya ५४९८०
bhrgv-adayas te munayo
lokanarm ksema-darsinah
goptary asali vai ninam
pasyantah pasu-samyatam
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued; bhrgu-adayah—
headed by Bhrgu; te—all of them; munayah—the great sages; lokanam— of
the people; ksema-darsinah—who always aspire for the welfare; goptari—
the King; asati—being absent; vai—certainly; nfn@am—of all the citizens;
pasyantah—having understood; pasu-simyatam—existence on the level of
the animals.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: O great hero Vidura, the great
sages, headed by Bhrgu, were always thinking of the welfare of the people
in general. When they saw that in the absence of King Anga there was no
one to protect the interests of the people, they understood that without a
ruler the people would become independent and nonregulated.
PURPORT
In this verse the significant word is ksema-darsinah, which refers to
those who are always looking after the welfare of the people in general.
However, all the great sages headed by Bhrgu were always thinking of how
to elevate all the people of the universe to the spiritual platform. Indeed,
583


--- Page 221 ---
584 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
they advised the kings of every planet to rule the people with that ultimate
goal of life in mind. The great sages used to advise the head of the state,
or the king, and he used to rule the populace in accordance with their
instruction. After the disappearance of King Anga, there was no one to
follow the instructions of the great sages. Consequently all the citizens
became unruly, so much so that they could be compared to animals. As
described in Bhagavad-gita (Bg. 4.13), human society must be divided into
four orders according to quality and work. In every society there must be
an intelligent class, administrative class, productive class and worker class.
In modern democracy these scientific divisions are turned topsy-turvy, and
by vote sitdras, or workers, are chosen for administrative posts. Having no
knowledge of the ultimate goal of life,such persons whimsically enact laws
without knowledge of life’s purpose. The result is that no one is happy.
TEXT 2
वीरमातरमाहूय सुनीथां ब्रह्मवादिनः ।
प्रहृत्यसम्मतं वेनमभ्यषिश्चन्‌ पतिं अवः ॥ २॥
vira-mdtaram ৫1090
sunithar brahma-vadinah
prakrty-asammatari venam
abhyasiiican [2007 bhuvah
vira—of Vena; mataram—mother; ahuya—calling; sunithdm—of the name
Sunitha; brahma-vadinah—the great sages learned in the Vedas; prakrti—by
the ministers; asammatam—not approved of; venam— Vena; abhyasifican—
enthroned; patim —the master; bhuvah—of the world.
TRANSLATION
The great sages then called for the Queen Mother, Sunitha, and with her
permission they installed Vena on the throne as master of the world. All
the ministers, however, disagreed with this.
TEXT 3
YA चुपासनगतं IHGA |
६
निरिल्युदंस्यवः सद्यः सर्पत्रस्ता इवाखवः ॥ २ ॥
57८00 nrpasana-gatam
venam aty-ugra-$asanam
nililyur dasyavah sadyah
sarpa-trasta ivakhavah


--- Page 222 ---
Text 4] The Story of King Vena 585
Srutva—after hearing; nrpa—of the King; asana-gatam—ascended to the
throne; venam—Vena;ati—very ; ugra—severe; sasanam—punisher; nililyuh—
hid themselves; dasyavah—all the thieves; sadyah—immediately; sarpa—from
snakes; trastah—being afraid; iva—like; akhavah—rats.
TRANSLATION
It was already known that Vena was very severe and cruel; therefore as
soon as all the thieves and rogues in the state heard of his ascendance to
the royal throne, they became very much afraid of him. Indeed, they hid
themselves here and there as rats hide themselves from snakes.
PURPORT
When the government is very weak, rogues and thieves flourish. Simi-
larly, when the government is very strong, all the thieves and rogues
disappear or hide themselves. ®f course Vena was not a very good king,
but he was known to be cruel and severe. Thus the state at least became
freed from thieves and rogues.
TEXT 4
स॒ आरूटचृपस्यान उननद्धोऽ्टबिभूतिभिः |
अवमेने महाभागान्‌ स्तन्धः सम्मावितः खतः।। ४ ॥
sa ariidha-nrpa-sthana
unnaddho ’sta-vibhitibhih
avamene maha-bhagan
stabdhah sambhavitah svatah
sah—King Vena; dariidha—ascended to; nrpa-sthanah—the seat of the king;
unnaddhah—very proud; asta—eight; vibhiitibhih—by opulences; avamene—
began to insult; maha-bhagan—great personalities; stabdhah—inconsiderate;
sambhavitah—considered great; svatah—by himself.
TRANSLATION
When the King ascended to the throne, he became all-powerful with
eight kinds of opulences. Consequently he became too proud. By virtue of
his false prestige, he considered himself to be greater than anyone. Thus he
began to insult great personalities.
PURPORT
In this verse the word asta-vibhiitibhih, meaning by eight opulences, is
very important. The king is supposed to possess eight kinds of opulences.


--- Page 223 ---
586 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
By dint of mystic yoga practice, kings generally acquired these eight kinds
of opulences. These kings were called rdjarsis, kings who were also great
sages. By practicing mystic yoga, a rdjarsi could become smaller than
the smallest, greater than the greatest, and could get whatever he desired.
A rajarsi could also create a kingdom, bring everyone under his control
and rule them. These were some of the opulences of a king. King Vena,
however, was not practiced in yoga, but he became very proud of his
royal position nonetheless. Because he was not very considerate, he began
to misuse his power and insult great personalities.
TEXT 5
एवं मदान्ध Shaw fg इव द्विपः ।
पर्यटन्‌ रथमास्थाय कम्पयन्निव रोदसी ॥ ५॥
০৮৫71) madandha utsikto
nirankusa iva dvipah
paryatan ratham asthdya
kampayann iva rodasi
evam—thus; mada-andhah—being blind with power; utsiktah—proud;
nirankusah—uncontrolled; iva—like; dvipah— an elephant; paryatan—travel-
ing; ratham—a chariot; dsthaya—having mounted; kampayan—-causing to
tremble; iva—indeed; rodasi—the sky and earth.
TRANSLATION
When he became overly blind due to his opulences, King Vena mounted
a chariot and, like an uncontrolled elephant, began to travel through the
kingdom causing the sky and earth to tremble wherever he went.
TEXT 6
न qe न दातन्यं न हातम्यं द्विजाः कचित्‌ ।
= ९ =
इति न्यवारयद्धमं भेरीघोषेण wag
na ‰/०${०४)/व777 na 0৫00৫৮১৫০৫7
na hotavyam dvijah kvacit
iti nyavarayad dharmar
bheri-ghosena sarvasah
na—not; yaslavyam—any sacrifices can be performed; na—not;
datavyam—any charity can be given; na—not; hotavyam—any clarified


--- Page 224 ---
Text 7] The Story of King Vena 587
butter can be offered; dvijah—O twice-born; kvacit—at any time; iti—thus;
nyaviarayat—he stopped; dharmam—the procedures of religious principles;
bheri—of kettledrums; ghosena—with the sound; sarvasah—everywhere.
TRANSLATION

All the twice-born [brahmanas] were forbidden henceforward to per-
form any sacrifice, and they were also forbidden to give charity or offer
clarified butter. Thus King Vena sounded kettledrums throughout the
countryside. In other words, he stopped all kinds of religious rituals.

PURPORT

What was committed by King Vena many years ago is at present being
carried out by atheistic governments all over the world. The world situation
is so tense that at any moment governments may issue declarations to stop
religious rituals. Eventually the world situation will become so degraded
that it will be impossible for pious men to live on the planet. Therefore
sane people should execute Krsna consciousness very seriously so that
they can go back home, back to Godhead, without having to further
suffer the miserable conditions predominant in this universe.

TEXT 7
FER gad gaa विचेष्टितम्‌ ।
दिग्श्य रोकन्यसनं कृपयोचुः स सत्रिणः ॥ ७॥
venasydveksya munayo
durvrttasya vicestitam
vimysya loka-vyasanam
krpayocuh sma satrinah

venasya—of King Vena; aveksya—after observing; munayah—all great
sages; durvrttasya—of the great rogue; vicesfitam—activities; vimrsya—
considering; loka-vyasanam—danger to the people in general; krpaya—out
of compassion; icuh—talked; sma—in the past; satrinah—the performers of
sacrifices.

TRANSLATION

Therefore all the great sages assembled together, and, after observing
cruel Vena's atrocities, concluded that a great danger and catastrophe was
approaching the people of the world. Thus out of compassion they began
to talk amongst themselves, for they themselves were the sacrificial per-
formers.


--- Page 225 ---
588 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
PURPORT
Before King Vena was enthroned, all the great sages were very much
anxious to see to the welfare of society. When they saw that King Vena
was most irresponsible, cruel and atrocious, they again began to think of
the welfare of the people. It should be understood that sages, saintly
persons and devotees are not unconcerned with the people’s welfare.
Ordinary karmis are busy acquiring money for sense gratification, and
ordinary janis are socially aloof when they speculate on liberation, but
actual devotees and saintly persons are always anxious to see how the
people can be made happy both materially and spiritually. Therefore the
great sages began to consult one another on how to get out of the danger-
ous atmosphere created by King Vena.
TEXT 8
अहो उमयतः TH लोकस्थ व्यसनं महत्‌ ।
दारुण्युमयतो दीप्ति शव॒ तस्करपालयोः ॥ ८ ॥
aho ubhayatah praptarm
lokasya vyasanam mahat
darupy ubhayato dipte
iva taskara-pdlayoh
aho—alas;ubhayatah—from both directions; praptam—received ; lokasya—
of the people in general; vyasanam—danger; mahat—great; daruni—a log;
ubhayatah—from both sides; dipte—burning;iva—like; taskara—from thieves
and rogues; palayoh—and from the king. |
TRANSLATION
When the great sages consulted one another, they saw that the people
were in a dangerous position from both directions. When a fire blazes on
both ends of a log, the ants in the middle are in a very dangerous situation.
Similarly, at that time the people in general were in a dangerous position
due to an irresponsible king on one side and thieves and rogues on the
other.
TEXT 9
अराजकमयादेष कृतो राजातदर्दणः |
ततोऽप्यासीद्धयं त्वच कथं स्यात्खतति देहिनाम्‌॥।९॥


--- Page 226 ---
Text 10] The Story of King Vena 589
ardjaka-bhaydd esa
krto rajatad-arhanah
tato ‘py asid bhayam tv adya
{0111072 sydt svasti dehinam
arajaka—being without a king; bhayat—out of fear of; esah—this Vena;
krtah—was made; raja—the king; a-tat-arhapnah—though not qualified for it;
tatah—from him; api—also; asit—there was; bhayam—danger; tu—then;
adya—now; katham—how; syat—can there be; svasti—happiness; dehinam—
of the people in general.
TRANSLATION
Thinking to save the state from irregularity, the sages began to consider
that it was due to a political crisis that they made Vena king although he
was not qualified. But alas, now the people were being disturbed by the
king himself. Under such circumstances, how could the people be happy?
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (Bg.18.5) it is stated that even in the renounced order
one should not give up sacrifice, charity and penance. The brahmacaris
must perform sacrifices, the grhasthas must give in charity, and those in
the renounced order of life (the vanaprasthas and sannyasis) must practice
penance and austerities. These are the procedures by which everyone can
be elevated to the spiritual platform. When the sages and saintly persons
saw that King Vena had stopped all these functions, they became con-
cerned about the people’s progress. Saintly people preach God conscious-
ness or Krsna consciousness because they are anxious to save the general
populace from the dangers of animalistic life. There must be a good
government to see that the citizens are actually executing their religious
rituals, and thieves and rogues must be curbed. When this is done, the
people can advance peacefully in spiritual consciousness and make their
lives successful.
TEXT 10
अहेरिव पयःपोषः पोष्कस्यप्यनर्थमृत्‌ |
वेनः प्रकृत्यैव खलः सुनीयानर्भसम्मवः ॥१०॥
aher iva payah-posah
posakasyapy anartha-bhrt
venah prakrtyaiva khalah
sunithd-garbha-sambhavah


--- Page 227 ---
590 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
aheh—of a snake; iva—like; payah—with milk; posah—the maintaining;
posakasya—of the maintainer; api—even; anartha—against the interest;
bhrt—becomes; venah—King Vena; prakrtya—by nature; eva—certainly;
khalah—mischievous; sunitha—of Sunitha, Vena’s mother; garbha—the
womb; sambhavah—born of.
TRANSLATION
The sages began to think within themselves: Because he was born in the
womb of Sunitha, King Vena is by nature very mischievous. Supporting
this mischievous king is exactly like maintaining a snake with milk. Now
he has become a source of all difficulties.
PURPORT
Saintly persons are generally aloof from social activities and the mate-
rialistic way of life. King Vena was supported by the saintly persons just
to protect the citizens from the hands of rogues and thieves, but after his
ascendance to the throne, he became a source of trouble to the sages.
Saintly people are especially interested in performing sacrifices and
austerities for the advancement of spiritual life, but Vena, instead of being
obliged because of the saints’ mercy, turned out to be their enemy because
he prohibited them from executing their ordinary duties. A serpent who is
maintained with milk and bananas simply stores poison in his teeth and
awaits the day to bite his master.
TEXT 11
निरूपितः प्रजापालः स जिषांसति वै प्रजाः |
तथापि सान्त्वयेमा्ठं नाखांस्तत्पातङ स़्रोत्‌ 112 2 1)
niriipitah praja-palah
sa jigharsati vai prajah
tathapi santvayemamum
1৮051710785 tat-patakan sprset
niriipitah—appointed; praji-palah—the king; sah—he; jighamsati—desires
to harm; vai—certainly; prajah—the citizens; tathapi—nevertheless;
santvayema—we should pacify; amum—him; na—not; asman—us; tat—his;
patakam—sinful result; spr§et—may touch.
TRANSLATION
We appointed this Vena king of the state in order to give protection
to the citizens, but now he has become the enemy of the citizens. Despite


--- Page 228 ---
Text 12] The Story of King Vena 591
all these discrepancies, we should at once try to pacify him. By doing so,
we may not be touched by the sinful results caused by him.
PURPORT
The saintly sages elected King Vena to become king, but he proved to
be mischievous; therefore the sages were very much afraid of incurring
sinful reaction. The law of karma even prohibits a person to associate with
a mischievous individual. By electing Vena to the throne, the saintly sages
certainly associated with him. Ultimately King Vena became so mischievous
that the saintly sages actually became afraid of becoming contaminated by
his activities. Thus before taking any action against him, the sages tried to
pacify and correct him so that he might turn from his mischief.
TEXT 12
तद्धिदरद्धिरसवुदृतो saa: Ha चपः ।
सान्त्वितो यदि नो वाच॑ न ग्रदीप्यत्यधर्मृत्‌ |
लोकूधिकारसन्दग्धं ददिष्यामः खतेजसा ॥१२॥
tad-vidvadbhir asad-vrtto
veno smdbhih krto nrpah
sdntvito yadi no vdcam
na grahisyaty adharma-krt
loka-dhik-kara-sandagdhari
dahisyamah sva-tejasa
tat—his mischievous nature; vidvadbhih—aware of; asat-vrttah —impious;
venah—Vena; asmabhih—by us; krtah—was made; nrpah—Kking; santvitah—
(in spite of) being pacified; yadi—if; nah— our; vicam— words; na—not; gra-
hisyati—he will accept; adharma-krt—the most mischievous; loka-dhik-kara
—by public condemnation; sandagdham—burned; dahisyamah—we shall
burn; sva-tejasai—by our prowess.
TRANSLATION
The saintly sages continued thinking: Of course we are completely aware
of his mischievous nature. Yet nevertheless we enthroned Vena. If we can-
not persuade King Vena to accept our advice, he will be condemned by
the public, and we will join them. Thus by our prowess we shall burn him
to ashes.
PURPORT
Saintly persons are not interested in political matters, yet they are
always thinking of the welfare of the people in general. Consequently they


--- Page 229 ---
592 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
sometimes have to come down to the political field and take steps to
correct the misguided government or royalty. However, in Kali-yuga,
saintly persons are not as powerful as they previously were. They used to
be able to burn any sinful man to ashes by virtue of their spiritual
prowess. Now saintly persons have no such power due to the influence of
the age of Kali. Indeed, the brahmanas do not even have the power to per-
form sacrifices in which animals are put into a fire to attain a new life.
Under these circumstances, instead of actively taking part in politics,
saintly persons should engage in chanting the maha-mantra, Hare Krsna.
By the grace of Lord Caitanya, by simply chanting this Hare Krsna maha-
mantra, the general populace can derive all benefits without political
implications.
TEXT 13
a
एवयच्यवसायेनं एनय गूढमन्यवः ।
ITE वेनं सान्त्वयित्वा च सामभिः 122m
evam adhyavasayainar
munayo giidha-manyavah
upavrajyabruvan venari
sdntvayitvd ca simabhih
evam—thus; adhyavasaya—having decided; enam—him; munayah—the
great sages; gidha-manyavah—concealing their anger; upavrajya—having
approached; abruvan—spoke; venam—to King Vena; santvayitvi—after
pacifying; ca—also; samabhih— with sweet words.
TRANSLATION
The great sages, having thus decided, approached King Vena. Concealing
their real anger, they pacified him with sweet words and then spoke as
follows.
"न~ TEXT 14
छनव ऊचुः
Td ART विह्ठापयाम _ भोः ।
आयुः ीकलङीतीनां तव तात विवर्धनम्‌ Neel
munaya 0001
nrpa-varya nibodhaitad
yat te vijiapayama bhoh
ayuh-$ri-bala-kirtinar
tava tata vivardhanam


--- Page 230 ---
Text 15] The Story of King Vena 593

munayah ucuh—the great sages said; nypa-varya—O best of the kings;
nibodha—kindly try to understand; etat—this; yat—which; te—to you;
vijidpayama—we shall instruct; bhoh—O King; ayuh—duration of life;
sri—opulences; bala—strength ; kirttnam—good reputation; tava— your; tata—
dear son; vivardhanam—which will increase.

TRANSLATION

The great sages said: Dear King, we have come to give you good advice.
Kindly hear us with great attention. By doing so, your duration of life,
your opulence, strength and reputation will increase.

PURPORT

According to Vedic civilization, in a monarchy the king is advised by
saintly persons and sages. By taking their advice, he can become the great -
est executive power, and everyone in his kingdom will be happy, peaceful
and prosperous. The great kings were very responsible in taking the instruc-
tions given by great saintly personalities. The kings used to accept the
instructions given by great sages like Parasara, Vyasadeva, Narada, Devala,
Asita, etc. In other words, they would first accept the authority of saintly
persons and then execute their monarchical power. Unfortunately, in the
present age of Kali, the head of government does not follow the instruc-
tions given by the saintly persons; therefore neither the citizens nor the
men of government are very happy. Their duration of life is shortened, and
almost everyone is wretched and bereft of bodily strength and spiritual
power. If citizens want to be happy and prosperous in this democratic age,
they should not elect rascals and fools who have no respect for saintly
persons.

TEXT 15
धम आचरितः पुंसां वाच्नःकाययुदिमिः |
लोकान्‌ विक्ोकान्‌ वितरस्यथानन्त्ययसङ्गियाम्‌। १५।
dharma dcaritah pumsdar
van-manah-kaya-buddhibhih
lokan visokan vitaraty
athdnantyam asanginam

dharmah—religious principles; dcaritah—executed; purisim—to persons;
vak—by words; manah—mind; kdya—body; buddhibhih—and by intelli-
gence; lokan—the planets; visokdn—without misery; vitarati—bestow; atha
—certainly; anantyam—unlimited happiness, liberation; asaniginam—to
those free from material influence.


--- Page 231 ---
594 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
TRANSLATION
Those who live according to religious principles and who follow them by
words, mind, body and intelligence, are elevated to the heavenly kingdom,
which is devoid of all miseries. Being thus rid of the material influence,
they achieve unlimited happiness in life.
PURPORT
The saintly sages herein instruct that the king or head of government
should set an example by living a religious life. As stated in Bhagavad-gita,
religion means worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One
should not simply make a show of religious life, but one should perform
devotional service perfectly with words, mind, body and good intelligence.
By doing so, not only will the king or government head rid himself of the
contamination of the material modes of nature, but the general public will
also, and they will all become gradually elevated to the kingdom of God
and go back home, back to Godhead. The instructions given herein serve as
a summary of how the head of government should execute his ruling power
and thus attain happiness not only in this life but also in the life after
death.
TEXT 16
सते मा fad sort awe: |
यसिन्‌ विनष्टे रृपतिरेशर्यादवरोहति ।॥१६॥
sa te md vinased vira
prajanari ksema-laksanah
yasmin vinaste nrpatir
aisvaryad avarohati
sah—that spiritual life; te—by you; ma—don’t; vinaset—let it be spoiled;
vira—® hero; prajanam—of the people; ksema-laksanah—the cause of pros-
perity; yasmin—which; vinaste—being spoiled; nrpatih—the king; aisvaryat—
from opulence; avarohati—falls down.
TRANSLATION
The sages continued: O great hero, for this reason you should not be
the cause of spoiling the spiritual life of the general populace. If their
spiritual life is spoiled because of your activities, you will certainly fall
down from your opulent and royal position.


--- Page 232 ---
Text 17] The Story of King Vena 595
PURPORT
Formerly, in practically all parts of the world, there were monarchies,
but gradually as monarchy declined from the ideal life of religion to the
godless life of sense gratification, monarchies all over the world were
abolished. However, simply abolishing monarchy and replacing it with
democracy is not sufficient unless the government men are religious and
follow the footsteps of great religious personalities.
TEXT 17
राचशषरष्वयात्पेग्य्ञेरारिस्यः प्रजा चपः |
~
रक्षन्‌ यथा निं गृह्णन्निह प्रेत्य च मोदते 12
rajann asadhv-amatyebhyas
coradibhyah praja nrpah
raksan yatha bali grhnann
iha pretya ca modate
rajan— QO King; asddhu—mischievous; amdtyebhyah—from ministers; cora-
adibhyah—from thieves and rogues; prajah—the citizens; nrpah—the king;
raksan— protecting; yathd—accordingly as; balim—taxes; grhnan—accepting;
iha—in this world; pretya—after death; ca—also; modate—enjoys.
TRANSLATION
The saintly persons continued: When the king protects the citizens from
the disturbances of mischievous ministers as well as from thieves and
rogues, he can, by virtue of such pious activities, accept taxes given by his
subjects. Thus a pious king can certainly enjoy himself in this world as well
as in the life after death.
PURPORT
The duty of a pious king is described very nicely in this verse. His first
and foremost duty is to give protection to the citizens from thieves and
rogues as well as from ministers who are no better than thieves and rogues.
Formerly, ministers were appointed by the king and were not elected.
Consequently, if the king was not very pious or strict, the ministers would
become thieves and rogues and exploit the innocent citizens. It is the
king's duty to see that there is no increase of thieves and rogues either in


--- Page 233 ---
596 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
the government secretariat or in the departments of public affairs. If a king
cannot give protection to citizens from thieves and rogues both in the
government service and in public affairs, he has no right to exact taxes from
them. In other words, the king or the government that taxes can levy taxes
from the citizens only if the king or government is able to give protection
to the citizens from thieves and rogues.

In the Twelfth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam there is a description of
these thieves and rogues in government service. As stated: prajas te
bhaksayisyanti mleccha rajanya-rupinah (Bhag. 12.1.42). “These proud
17710600105 [persons who are less than sudras], representing themselves as
kings, will tyrannize their subjects, and their subjects, on the other hand,
will cultivate the most vicious practices. Thus practicing evil habits and
behaving foolishly, the subjects will be like their rulers.” The idea is that in
the democratic days of Kali-yuga, the general population will fall down to
the standard of sudras. As stated (kalau sidra-sambhava), practically the
whole population of the world will be sizdra. A sudra is a fourth-class man
who is only fit to work for the three higher social castes. Being fourth-class
men, sudras are not very intelligent. Since the population is fallen in these
democratic days, they can only elect a person in their category, but a
government cannot run very well when it is run by sidras. The second
class of men, known as ksatriyas, are especially meant for governing a
country under the direction of saintly persons (brahmanas) who are sup-
posed to be very intelligent. In other ages—in Satya-yuga, Treta-yuga and
Dvapara-yuga—the general populace was not so degraded, and the head of
government was never elected. The king was the supreme executive per-
sonality, and if he caught any ministers stealing like thieves and rogues, he
would at once have them killed or dismissed from service. As it was the
duty of the king to kill thieves and rogues, it was similarly his duty to
immediately kill dishonest ministers in government service. By such strict
vigilance, the king could run the government very well, and the citizens
would be happy to have such a king. The conclusion is that unless the king
is perfectly able to give protection to the citizens from rogues and thieves,
he has no right to levy taxes from the citizens for his own sense gratifica-
tion. However, if he gives all protection to the citizens and levies taxes on
them, he can live very happily and peacefully in this life, and at the end of
this life be elevated to the heavenly kingdom or even to the Vaikunthas,
where he would be happy in all respects.

TEXT 18
TQ राष्ट पुरे चैव यगवान्‌ यज्ञप्रुषः ।
इज्यते स्वेन धर्मेण जनैवर्णा्नमान्वितैः ॥१८॥


--- Page 234 ---
Text 18] The Story of King Vena 597
Yyasya rastre pure caiva
bhagavan yajiia-purusah
ijyate svena dharmena
Jjanair varndsramanvitaih

yasya—whose; rastre—in the state or kingdom; pure—in the cities; ca—
also; eva—certainly ; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajiia-
pirusah—who is the enjoyer of all sacrifices; ijyate—is worshiped; svena—
their own; dharmena—by occupation; janaih—by the people; varna-asrama—
the system of eight social orders; anvitaih—who follow.

TRANSLATION

The king is supposed to be pious in whose state and cities the general
populace strictly observes the system of eight social orders of varna and
asrama,and where all citizens engage in worshiping the Supreme Personality
of Godhead by their particular occupations.

PURPORT

The state’s duty and the citizen’s duty are very nicely explained in this
verse. The activities of the government head, or king, as well as the activi-
ties of the citizens, should be so directed that ultimately everyone engages
in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The king, or
government head, is supposed to be the representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and is therefore supposed to see that things go on
nicely and that the citizens are situated in the scientific social order com-
prised of four varpas and four asramas. In the Visnu Purana it is stated that
unless people are educated or situated in the scientific social order com-
prised of four varpas (brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and sudra) and four
asramas (brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha and sannydsa) society can
never be considered real human society, nor can it make any advancement
toward the ultimate goal of human life. It is the duty of the government to
see that things go on in terms of varna and 66700710. Asstated herein, bhagavan
yajiia-pirusah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the
yajiia-purusa. As stated in Bhagavad-gita: bhoktararm yajiia-tapasam
(Bg. 5.29). Krsna is the ultimate purpose of all sacrifice. He is also the en-
joyer of all sacrifices; therefore He is known as yajiia-purusa. The word
yajiia-purusa indicates Lord Visnu or Lord Krsna, or any Personality of
Godhead in the category of visnu-tattva. In perfect human society, people
are situated in the orders of varna and asrama and are engaged in worship-
ing Lord Vispu by their respective activities. Every citizen engaged in an


--- Page 235 ---
598 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
occupation renders service by the resultant actions of his activities. That is
the perfection of life. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:
yatah pravrttir bhutanam
yena sarvam 10077 tatam
sva-karmana tam abhyarcya
siddhim vindati manavah
“By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-
pervading, man can, in the performance of his own duty, attain perfection.”
(Bg. 18.46)

Thus the brahmanas, ksatriyas, sudras and vaisyas must execute their
prescribed duties as these duties are stated in the sastras. In this way every-
one can satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vigpu. The king, or
government head, has to see that the citizens are thus engaged. In other
words, the state or the government must not deviate from its duty by de-
claring that the state is a secular one which has no interest in whether
or not the people advance in varpasrama-dharma. Today people engaged in
government service and people who rule over the citizens have no respect
for the varnasrama-dharma. They complacently feel that the state is secu-
lar. In such a government, no one can be happy. The people must follow
the varnasrama-dharma, and the king must see that they are following it
nicely.

TEXT 19
तस्य राज्ञो महामाग भगवान्‌ भूतभावनः |
परितुष्यति विश्वात्मा तिष्ठतो निजज्ासने ॥१९॥
tasya 72/70 mahd-bhdga
bhagavan bhita-bhavanah
paritusyati visvatma
tisthato nija-sasane

tasya—with him; rajiah—the king; maha-bhaga—O noble one; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhitta-bhavanah—who is the original
cause of the cosmic manifestation; paritusyati—becomes satisfied; visva-
atma—the Supersoul of the entire universe; tisthatah—being situated; nija-
$asane—in his own governing situation.

TRANSLATION

O noble one, if the king sees that the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the original cause of the cosmic manifestation and the Supersoul within
everyone, is worshiped, the Lord will be satisfied.


--- Page 236 ---
Text 20] The Story of King Vena 599
PURPORT

It is a fact that the government’s duty is to see that the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is satisfied by the activities of the people as well as by
the activities of the government. There is no possibility of happiness if the
government or citizenry have no idea of Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is the original cause of the cosmic manifestation, or if
they have no knowledge of bhita-bhavana, who is visvatma, or the Super-
soul, the soul of everyone’s soul. The conclusion is that without engaging
in devotional service, neither the citizens nor the government can be happy
in any way. At the present moment neither the king nor the governing
body is interested in seeing that the people are engaged in the devotional
service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Rather, they are more in-
terested in advancing the machinery of sense gratification. Consequently
they are becoming more and more implicated in the complex machinery of
the stringent laws of nature. People should be freed from the entanglement
of the three modes of material nature, and the only process by which this
is possible is surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is
advised in Bhagavad-gita. Unfortunately neither the government nor the
people in general have any idea of this; they are simply interested in sense
gratification and in being happy in this life. The word nija-sasane (in his
own governmental duty) indicates that both the government and the
citizens are responsible for the execution of varnasrama-dharma. Once the
populace is situated in the varndsrama-dharma, there is every possibility of
real life and prosperity both in this world and in the next.

TEXT 20
तसिंस्तषटे किभप्राप्यं जगतामीश्वरेश्वरे |
लोकाः सपासा dat हरन्ति बलिमादृताः ॥२०॥
tasmims tuste kim aprapyam
Jjagatam isvaresvare
lokah sapdla hy etasmai
haranti balim adrtah

tasmin—when He; tuste—is satisfied; kim—what; aprapyam—impossible
to achieve; jagatam—of the universe; isvara-isvare— controller of the control-
lers; lokah—the inhabitants of the planets; sa-paldh—with their presiding
deities; hi—for this reason; etasmai—unto Him; haranti— offer; balim—
paraphernalia for worship; adrtah—with great pleasure.


--- Page 237 ---
600 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped by the great demi-
gods, controllers of universal affairs. When He is satisfied, nothing is
impossible to achieve. For this reason all the demigods, presiding deities of
different planets, as well as the inhabitants of their planets, take great
pleasure in offering all kinds of paraphernalia for His worship.

PURPORT

All Vedic civilization is summarized in this verse: all living entities,
either on this planet or on other planets, have to satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by their respective duties. When He is satisfied, all
necessities of life are automatically supplied. In the Vedas it is also stated:
eko bahunam yo vidadhati kaman (Katha Up. 2.2.13). From the Vedas we
understand that He is supplying everyone’s necessities, and we can actually
see that the lower animals, the birds and the bees, have no business or pro-
fession, yet they are not dying for want of food. They are all living in
nalture’s way, and they all have the necessities of life provided—namely,
eating, sleeping, mating and defending.

Human society, however, has artificially created a type of civilization
which makes one forgetful of his relationship with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Modern society even enables one to forget the Supreme
Personality of Godhead’s grace and mercy. Consequently modern civilized
man is always unhappy and in need of things. People do not know that the
ultimate goal of life is to approach Lord Visnu and satisfy Him. They have
taken this materialistic way of life as everything and have become captivated
by materialistic activities. Indeed, their leaders are always encouraging
them to follow this path, and the general populace, being ignorant of the
laws of God, is following their blind leaders down the path of unhappi-
ness. In order to rectify this world situation, all people should be trained
in Krsna consciousness and act in accordance with the varpasrama system.
The state should also see that the people are engaged in satisfying the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the primary duty of the state. The
Krsna consciousness movement was started to convince the general popu-
lace to adopt the best process by which to satisfy the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and thus solve all problems.

TEXT 21
तं सब॑लोकामरयज्ंगरह
त्रयीमयं द्रव्यमयं तपोमयम्‌ |


--- Page 238 ---
Text 22] The Story of King Vena 601
यद््विचित्रर्यजतो ww _ ते
राजन्‌ खदेशाननुरोदधुमहसि ॥२१॥
tam sarva-lokamara-yajiia-sangraharm
trayimayari dravyamayariv tapomayam
yajiiair vicitrair yajato bhavaya te
rajan sva-desan anuroddhum arhasi
tam—Him; sarva-loka—in all planets; amara—with the predominating
deities; yajiia—sacrifices; sanngraham—who accepts; trayi-mayam—the sum
total of the three Vedas; dravya-mayam—the owner of all paraphernalia;
tapah-mayam—the goal of all austerity; yajiiaih—by sacrifices; vicitraih—
various; yajatah—worshiping; bhavdya—for elevation; te—your; rajan—O
King; sva-desan—your countrymen; anuroddhum—to direct; arhasi—you
ought.
TRANSLATION
Dear King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, along with the predomi-
nating deities, is the enjoyer of the results of all sacrifices in all planets.
The Supreme Lord is the sum total of the three Vedas, the owner of every-
thing, and the ultimate goal of all austerity. Therefore your countrymen
should engage in performing various sacrifices for your elevation. Indeed,
you should always direct them toward the offering of sacrifices.
TEXT 22
यज्ञेन युष्मद्विषये द्विजातिमि-
वितायमानेन सुराः कला हरेः |
खिष्टाः सुतष्टाः प्रदिञ्चन्ति वाञ्छितं
तद्धेलनं ARMA बीर चेष्टितम्‌ ॥२२॥
yajiiena yusmad-visaye dvijatibhir
vitdyamdanena surah kala hareh
svistah sutustah pradisanti vaiichitari
tad-dhelanariv narhasi vira cestitum
yajiiena—Dby sacrifice; yusmat—your; visaye—in the kingdom; dvijatibhih—
by the brahmanas; vitiyamanena—being performed; surah—all the demigods;
kalah—expansions; hareh—of the Personality of Godhead; su-istah—being
properly worshiped; su-tustdh—very much satisfied; pradisanti—will give;


--- Page 239 ---
602 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
vdiichitam—desired result; tat-helanam—disrespect to them; na—not;
arhasi—you ought; vira—O hero; cestitum—to do.
TRANSLATION
When all the brahmanas engage in performing sacrifices in your kingdom,
all the demigods, who are plenary expansions of the Lord, will be very
much satisfied by their activities and will give you your desired result.
Therefore, O hero, do not stop the sacrificial performances. If you stop
them, you will disrespect the demigods.
TEXT 23
वेन उवाच
बालिशा बत युयं না अधर्मे धर्ममानिनः |
ये वृत्तिदं पतिं हित्वा जारं पतिभरुपासते nan
vena uvaca
balisa bata yayam va
adharme dharma-mdninah
ye vrtti-dam [00017 hitva
jarar patim updsate
venah—King Vena; uwwvica—replied; balisah—childish;  bata—oh;
yiyam—all of you; va—indeed; adharme—in irreligious principles; dharma-
maninah—accepting as religious; ye—all of you who; vrtti-dam—providing
maintenance; patim—husband; hitvd—giving up: jaram— paramour; patim—
husband; upasate— worship.
TRANSLATION
King Vena replied: You are not at all experienced. It is very much re-
grettable that you are maintaining something which is not religious and are
accepting it as religious. Indeed, I think you are giving up your real husband
who maintains you and are searching after some paramour to worship.
PURPORT
King Vena was so foolish that he accused the saintly sages of being in-
experienced like small children. In other words, he was accusing them of
not having perfect knowledge. In this way he could reject their advice and
make accusations against them, comparing them with a woman who does
not care for her husband who maintains her but goes to satisfy a paramour
who does not maintain her. The purpose of this simile is apparent. It is the


--- Page 240 ---
Text 25] The Story of King Vena 603
duty of the ksatriyas to engage the brahmanas in different types of religious
activities, and the king is supposed to be the maintainer of the brahmanas.
If the brahmanas do not worship the king and go to the demigods, they
are as polluted as unchaste women.
TEXT 24
IEA मूढा सृपरूपिणमीश्वरम्‌ |
नानुविन्दन्ति ते मद्रमिह लोके परत्र च ॥२४॥
avajananty ami 771 10
nrpa-ripinam isvaram
nanuvindanti te bhadram
tha loke paratra ca
avajananti—disrespect; ami—those (who); midhah—being ignorant; nrpa-
ripinam—in the form of the king; isvaram—the Personality of Godhead;
na—not; anuvindanti—experience; te—they; bhadram—happiness; tha—in
this; loke—world; paratra—after death; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Those who, out of gross ignorance, do not worship the king, who is
actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead, experience happiness neither
in this world nor in the world after death.
TEXT 25
को यज्ञपुरुषो नाम यत्र নী भक्तिरीरज्ञी |
मरंलेदविद्राणां यथा जारे योषिताम्‌ ॥ २५॥
ko yajiia-puruso nama
yatra vo bhaktir idrsi
bhartr-sneha-vidiaranam
yatha jare kuyositam
kah—who (is); yajia-purusah—the enjoyer of all sacrifices; nama—by
name; yatra—unto whom; vah—your;bhaktih—devotional service; idrsi—so
great; bhartr—for the husband; sneha—affection; vidaranam—bereft of;
yatha—like; jare—unto the paramour; ku-yositam—of unchaste women.


--- Page 241 ---
604 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
TRANSLATION
You are so much devoted to the demigods, but who are they? Indeed,
your affection for these demigods is exactly like the affection of an un-
chaste woman who neglects her married life and gives all attention to her
paramour.
TEXTS 26-27
विष्णुविरिश्चो गिरिश इन्द्रो वायुर्यमो रविः |
पञन्यो धनदः; सोमः धितिरभ्रिरपाम्पतिः ॥२६॥
एते चान्ये च विबुधाः प्रमवो Iw: |
देहे मवन्ति नृपतेः सर्वदेवमयो दषः |২৩॥
visnur viriiico girisa
indro vayur yamo ravih
parjanyo dhanadah somah
ksitir agnir apam-patih
ete cinye ca vibudhah
prabhavo vara-sipayoh
dehe bhavanti nrpateh
sarva-devamayo nrpah
vispuh—Lord Vignu; viriicah—Lord Brahma; girisah— Lord Siva; indrah—
Lord Indra; vayuh— Vayu, the director of the air; yamah—Yama, the super-
intendent of death; ravih—the sun-god; parjanyah—the director of rainfall;
dhana-dah—Kuvera, the treasurer; somah—the moon-god; ksitih—the pre-
dominating deity of the earth; agnih—the fire-god; apam-patih— Varuna,
the lord of waters; ete—all these; ca—and; anye—others; ca—also; vibudhdh
—demigods; prabhavah—competent;vara-sapayoh— in both benedictionand
curse; dehe—in the body; bhavanti—abide; nrpateh—of the king; sarva-deva-
mayah—comprising all demigods; nrpah—the king.
TRANSLATION
Lord Visnu; Lord Brahma; Lord Siva; Lord Indra; Vayu, the master of
air; Yama, the superintendent of death; the sun-god; the director of rainfall;
Kuvera, the treasurer; the moon-god; the predominating deity of the earth;
Agni, the fire-god; Varuna, the lord of waters, and all others who are great
and competent to bestow benedictions or to curse, all abide in the body of
the king. For this reason the king is known as the reservoir of all demigods,
who are simply parts and parcels of the king’s body.


--- Page 242 ---
Text 29] The Story of King Vena 605
PURPORT
There are many demons who think of themselves as the Supreme and
present themselves as the directors of the sun, moon and other planets.
This is all due to false pride. Similarly, King Vena developed the demonic
mentality and presented himself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Such demons are numerous in this age of Kali, and all of them are con-
demned by great sages and saintly persons.
TEXT 28
तसान्मां কমমমিবিসা यजध्वं गतमत्सराः ।
बिं च মহা हरत ANS: WHER NR
(4571011 mari karmabhir vipra
yajadhvar gata-matsarah
balirh ca mahyam harata
matto ‘nyah ko ‘gra-bhuk puman
tasmat—for this reason; mam—me; karmabhih—by ritualistic activities;
viprah—O brahmanas; yajadhvam— worship; gata— without; matsarah —being
envious; balim—paraphernalia for worship; ca—also; mahyam—unto me;
harata—bring; mattah—than me; anyah—other; kah—who (is); agra-bhuk—
the enjoyer of the first oblations; puman—personality.
TRANSLATION
King Vena continued: For this reason, O brahmanas, you should abandon
your envy of me, and, by your ritualistic activities, you should worship me
and offer me all paraphernalia. If you are intelligent, you should know that
there is no personality superior to me, who can accept the first oblations
of all sacrifices.
PURPORT
As stated by Krsna Himself throughout Bhagavad-gita, there is no truth
superior to Him. King Vena was imitating the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and was also speaking out of false pride, presenting himself as
the Supreme Lord. These are all characteristics of a demonic person.
TEXT 29
मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्थं विपर्ययमतिः पापीयानुत्पथं गतः ।
अनुनीयमानस्तयाच्जां न चक्रे TEARS: ॥ २९॥


--- Page 243 ---
606 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
maitreya ५५४९८
ittham viparyaya-matih
paptyan utpatham gatah
anuniyamanas tad-yaciiam
na cakre bhrasta-mangalah
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya said; ittham—thus; viparyaya-matih—one
who has developed perverse intelligence; papiyan—most sinful; utpatham—
from the right path; gatah—having gone; anunityamanah—being offered all
respect; tat-yaciiam—the request of the sages; na—not; cakre—accepted;
bhrasta— bereft of; mangalah—all good fortune.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: Thus the King, who became unin-
telligent due to his sinful life and deviation from the right path, became
actually bereft of all good fortune. Thus he could not accept the requests
of the great sages, which the sages put before him with great respect, and
therefore he was condemned.
PURPORT
The demons certainly cannot have any faith in the words of authorities.
In fact, they are always disrespectful to authorities. They manufacture
their own religious principles and disobey great personalities like Vyasa,
Narada, and even the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. As soon as
one disobeys authority, he immediately becomes very sinful and loses his
good fortune. The King was so puffed up and impudent that he dared dis-
respect the great saintly personalities, and this brought him ruination.
TEXT 30
इति तेऽसत्कृतास्तेन द्विजाः पण्डितमानिना |
TAT मव्ययाच्जायां तस्मै विदुर IE: ॥३०॥
iti te ’sat-krtas tena
dvijah pandita-mdnina
bhagnayam bhavya-ydciiayam
tasmai vidura cukrudhuh
iti—thus; te—all the great sages; asat-krtah—being insulted; tena—by the
King; dvijah—the brahmanas; pandita-manina—thinking himself to be very
learned; bhagnayam—being broken; bhavya—auspicious; ydciiayam— their
request; tasmai—at him; vidura—O Vidura; cukrudhuh—became very angry.


--- Page 244 ---
Text 32] The Story of King Vena 607
TRANSLATION
My dear Vidura, all good fortune unto you. The foolish King, who
thought himself to be very learned, thus insulted the great sages, and the
sages, being brokenhearted by the King’s words, became very angry at him.
TEXT 31
हन्यतां हन्यतामेष पापः प्रकृतिदारुणः |
जीवञ्जगदसावाश करुते TWEE धुवम्‌ ॥३१॥
hanyatam hanyatam esa
papah prakrti-darunah
Jiva# jagad ৫5৫৮০ asu
kurute bhasmasad dhruvam
hanyatam—Kkill him; hanyatam—kill him; esah— this king; papah—repre-
sentative of sin; prakrti—by nature; darunah— most dreadful; jivan—while
living; jagat—the whole world; asau—he; asu—very soon; kurute— will make;
bhasmasal—into ashes; dhruvam— certainly.
TRANSLATION
All the great saintly sages immediately cried: Kill him! Kill him! He is
the most dreadful, sinful person. If he lives, he will certainly turn the
whole world into ashes in no time.
PURPORT
Saintly persons are generally very kind to all kinds of living entities, but
they are not unhappy when a serpent or a scorpion is killed. 11 is not good
for saintly persons to kill, but they are encouraged to kill demons who are
exactly like serpents and scorpions. Therefore all the saintly sages decided
to kill King Vena, who was so dreadful and dangerous to all human society.
We can appreciate the extent to which the saintly sages actually controlled
the king. If the king or government becomes demonic, it is the duty of a
saintly person to upset the government and replace it with deserving per-
sons who follow the orders and instructions of saintly persons.
TEXT 32
नायमरहत्यसवुृत्तो नरदेववरासनम्‌ |
योऽधियज्ञपतिं विष्णुं विनिन्दत्यनपत्रपः nn
nayam arhaty asad-vrtto
naradeva-vardasanam


--- Page 245 ---
608 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
yo ‘dhiyajiia-patirh visnur
vinindaty anapatrapah
na—never; ayam—this man; arhati—deserves; asat-vrttah—full of impious
activities; nara-deva—of the worldly king or worldly god; vare-asanam—
the exalted throne; yah—he who; adhiyajna-patim—master of all sacrifices;
visnum— Lord Visnu; vinindati—insults; anapatrapah—shameless.
TRANSLATION
The saintly sages continued: This impious, impudent man does not
deserve to sit on the throne at all. He is so shameless that he even dared in-
sult the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu.
PURPORT
One should not at any time tolerate blasphemy and insults against l.ord
Visnu or His devotees. A devotee is generally very humble and meek, and
he is reluctant to pick a quarrel with anyone. Nor does he envy anyone.
However, a pure devotee immediately becomes fiery with anger when he
sees that Lord Visnu or His devotee is insulted. This is the duty of a devo-
tee. Although a devotee maintains an attitude of meekness and gentleness,
it is a great fault on his part if he remains silent when the Lord or His devo-
tee is blasphemed.
TEXT 33
को वैनं परिचक्षीत वेनमेकमतेऽद्यमम्‌ ।
সাম ईदशमैश्वयं यदनुग्रहभाजनः 1330
ko एववा? paricaksita
venam ekam rte ’Subham
prapta idrsam aisvaryarn
yad-anugraha-bhajanah
kah—who; va—indeed; enam—the Lord; paricaksita—would blaspheme;
venam—King Vena; ekam—alone; rte—but for; asubham—inauspicious;
praptah—having obtained; idrsam—like this; aisvaryam—opulence; yat—
whose; anugraha—mercy ; bhajanah—receiving.


--- Page 246 ---
Text 35] The Story of King Vena 609
TRANSLATION
But for King Vena, who is simply inauspicious, who would blaspheme
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by whose mercy one is awarded all
kinds of fortune and opulence?
PURPORT
When human society individually or collectively becomes godless and
blasphemes the authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it is
certainly destined for ruination. Such a civilization invites all kinds of bad
fortune due to not appreciating the mercy of the Lord.
TEXT 34
इत्थं व्यवसिता FIT रूटमन्यदः |
(£5531 SEE दतमन्युतनिन्दया 11380
itthari vyavasita hantum
rsayo ridha-manyavah
nijaghnur hunkrtair venam
hatam acyuta-nindaya
ittham—thus; vyavasitah—decided; hantum—to 1011; rsayah—the sages;
ritdha— manifested; manyavah—their anger; nijaghnuh—they killed; hum-
krtaih—by angry words or by sounds of hum; venam—King Vena; hatam—
dead; acyuta—against the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nindayd—by
blasphemy.
TRANSLATION
The great sages, thus manifesting their covert anger, immediately decided
to kill the King. King Vena was already as good as dead due to his blasphemy
against the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus without using any
weapons, the sages killed King Vena simply by high-sounding words.
TEXT 35
ऋषिमिः खाश्रमपदं गते पुत्रकरेवरम्‌ |
सुनीथा पाटयामास रिदयायोगेन शोचती ॥ ३५॥


--- Page 247 ---
610 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
rsibhih svasrama-padari
gate putra-kalevaram
sunithd palayam asa
vidya-yogena socati
rsibhih—by the sages; sva-asrama-padam—to their own respective hermi-
tages; gate—having returned; putra—of her son; kalevaram—the body;
sunitha@—Sunitha, mother of King Vena; palayam asa— preserved; vidya-
yogena—by mantra and ingredients; §ocati—while lamenting.
TRANSLATION
After all the sages returned to their respective hermitages, the mother of
King Vena, Sunitha, became very much aggrieved because of her son’s death.
She decided to preserve the dead body of her son by the application of
certain ingredients and by chanting mantras [ mantra-yogena].
TEXT 36
एकदा EIR सरखत्सकिकाष्ठताः |
gM सत्कथाशक्तुरुपविष्टाः सरित्तटे ॥३६॥
ekada munayas te tu
sarasvat-salilaplu tah
hutvagnin sat-kathas cakrur
upavistah sarit-tate
ekada—once upon a time; munayah—all those great saintly persons; te—
they; tu—then; sarasvat—of the River Sarasvati; salila—in the water; aplutah
—bathed; hutvi—offering oblations; agnin—into the fires; sat-kathah—dis-
cussions about transcendental subject matters; cakruh—began to १०;
upavistah—sitting; sarit-tate—by the side of the river.
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, the same saintly persons, after taking their bath in the
River Sarasvafi, began to perform their daily duties by offering oblations
into the sacrificial fires. After this, sitting on the bank of the river, they
began to talk about the transcendental person and His pastimes.


--- Page 248 ---
Text 37] The Story of King Vena 611
TEXT 37
$,
वीक्ष्योत्थितांस्तदोत्पातानाहर्छीकभयङ्कराच्‌ |
अप्यमद्रमनायाया दस्युभ्यो न भवेद्भुवः Nill
viksyotthitams tadotpatan
ahur loka-bhayainkaran
apy abhadram anathaya
dasyubhyo na bhaved bhuvah

viksya—having seen; utthitin—developed; tada—then; utpatan—distur-
bances; ahuh—they began to say; loka—in society; bhayam-kardn— causing
panic; api—whether; abhadram—misfortune; anathayah—having no ruler;
dasyubhyah—from thieves and rogues; na—not; bhavet—may happen;
bhuvah—of the world.

TRANSLATION

In those days there were various disturbances in the country that were
creating a panic in society. Therefore all the sages began to talk amongst
themselves: Since the King is dead and there is no protector in the world,
misfortune may befall the people in general on account of rogues and
thieves.

PURPORT

Whenever there is a disturbance in the state, or a panic situation, the
property and lives of the citizens become unsafe. This is caused by the
uprising of various thieves and rogues. At such a time it is to be under-
stood that the ruler, or the government, is dead. All of these misfortunes
happened due to the death of King Vena. Thus the saintly persons became
very anxious for the safety of the people in general. The conclusion is that
even though saintly persons have no business in political affairs, they are
nonetheless always compassionate upon the people in general. Thus even
though they are always aloof from society, still out of mercy and com-
passion they consider how the citizens can peacefully execute their rituals
and follow the rules and regulations of varpasrama-dharma. That was the
concern of these sages. In this age of Kali, everything is disturbed. There-
fore saintly persons should take to the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra,
as recommended in the $astras. Harer nama harer nama harer namaiva
kevalari/ kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyathd. Both for spiritual
and material prosperity, everyone should devotedly chant the Hare Krsna
mantra.


--- Page 249 ---
612 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4, Ch. 14
TEXT 38
एवं Tg WT धावतां स्ंतोदिशम्‌ |
पांसुः agfeaat भूरिश्लोराणापयिलम्पताम्‌ ।२८॥
९7 mrsanta rsayo
dhavatarh sarvato-disam
parisuh samutthito bhiris
coranam abhilumpatam
evam— thus; mrsantah—while considering; rsayah—the great saintly per-
sons; dhavatam—running; sarvatah-disam—from all directions; parsuh—
dust; samutthitah—arose; bhisrih—much;coranam—from thieves and rogues;
abhilumpatam—engaged in plundering.
TRANSLATION
When the great sages were carrying on their discussion in this way, they
saw a dust storm arising from all directions. This storm was caused by the
running of thieves and rogues who were engaged in plundering the citizens.
PURPORT
Thieves and rogues simply await some political upset in order to take the
opportunity to plunder the people in general. To keep thieves and rogues
inactive in their profession, a strong government is always required.
TEXTS 39-40
तदुपद्रवमाज्ञाय लोकस्य वसु दुम्पताम्‌ |
मतयुपरते तसिभन्योन्यं च जिषांसताम्‌ ॥३९॥
चोरप्रायं जनपदं हीनसत्त्वमराजकम्‌ |
लोकाचावारयन्छक्ता अपि wha: igo
tad upadravam ajiaya
lokasya vasu lumpatam
bhartary uparate tasminn
anyonyam ca jighamsatam


--- Page 250 ---
Text 41] The Story of King Vena 613
cora-prayari jana-padari
hina-sattvam arajakam
lokan navarayain chakta
api tad-dosa-darsinah

tat—at that time; upadravam—the disturbance; @jiiagya—understanding;
lokasya—of the people in general; vasu—riches; lumpatam—by those who
were plundering; bhartari—the protector; uparate—being dead; tasmin—
King Vena; anyonyam—one another; ca—also; jighamsatam—desiring to kill;
cora-prayam—full of thieves; jana-padam—the state; hina—bereft of;
sattvam—regulation; ardjakam—without a king; lokan—the thieves and
rogues; na—not; avdirayan—they subdued; saktah—able to do so; api—al-
though; tat-dosa—the fault of that; darsinah—considering.

TRANSLATION

Upon seeing the dust storm, the saintly persons could understand that
there were a great deal of irregularities due to the death of King Vena.
Without government, the state was devoid of law and order, and conse-
quently there was a great uprising of murderous thieves and rogues who
were plundering the riches of the people in general. Although the great
sages could subdue the disturbance by their powers—just as they could kill
the King—they nonetheless considered it improper on their part to do so.
Thus they did not attempt to stop the disturbance.

PURPORT

The saintly persons and great sages killed King Vena out of emergency,
but they did not choose to take part in the government in order to subdue
the uprising of thieves and rogues, which took place after the death of
King Vena. It is not the duty of brahmanas and saintly persons to kill,
although they may sometimes do so in the case of an emergency. They
could kill all the thieves and rogues by the prowess of their mantras, but
they thought it the duty of ksatriya kings to do so. Thus they reluctantly
did not take part in the killing business.

TEXT 41
AWW: SCE शान्तो दीनानां gee: |

1 सवते बरह्म तस्यापि Rewer यथा ॥ ৪


--- Page 251 ---
614 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
brahmanah sama-drk $anto
dinanari samupeksakah
sravate brahma tasyapi
bhinna-bhapdat payo yatha

brahmanah—a  brahmana; sama-drk—equipoised; santah—peaceful;
dinanam—the poor; samupeksakah—grossly neglecting; sravate—diminishes;
brahma—spiritual power; tasya—his; api—certainly; bhinna-bhandat—from
a cracked pot; payah —water; yatha—just as.

TRANSLATION

The great sages began to think that although a brahmana is peaceful and
impartial because he is equal to everyone, it is still not his duty to neglect
poor humans. By such neglect, a brahmana’s spiritual power diminishes, just
as water kept in a cracked pot leaks out.

PURPORT

Brahmanas, the topmost section of human society, are mostly devotees.
They are generally not aware of the happenings within the material world
because they are always busy in their activities for spiritual advancement.
Nonetheless, when there is a calamity in human society, they cannot re-
main impartial. If they do not do something to relieve the distressed con-
dition of human society, it is said that due to such neglect their spiritual
knowledge diminishes. Almost all the sages go to the Himalayas for their
personal benefit, but Prahlada Maharaja said that he did not want liberation
alone. He decided to wait until he was able to deliver all the fallen souls of
the world.

In their elevated condition, the brahmanas are called Vaignavas. There
are two types of brahmanas—namely, brahmana-pandita and brahmana-
vaisnava. A qualified brahmapa is naturally very learned, but when his
learningis advanced in understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
he becomes a brahmana-vaisnava. Unless one becomes a Vaignava, one’s
perfection of brahminical culture is incomplete.

The saintly persons considered very wisely that although King Vena
was very sinful, he was nonetheless born in a family descending from
Dhruva Maharaja. Therefore the semina in the family must be protected by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kesava. As such, the sages wanted


--- Page 252 ---
Text 42] The Story of King Vena 615
to take some steps to relieve the situation. For want of a king, everything
was being disturbed and turned topsy-turvy.
TEXT 42
THW वंशो TERY संस्थातुमर्हति ।
अमोषषीरया हिनृपा वंशेऽसिन्‌ केशवाश्रयाः ।४२॥
nangasya vamso rajarser
esa samsthatum arhati
amogha-virya hi nrpa
varise ’smin kesavasrayah

na—not; angasya—of King Anga; varisah—family line; raja-rseh—of the
saintly King; esah—this; samsthatum—to be stopped; arhati—ought; amogha
—without sin, powerful; viryah—their semina; hi—because; nrpah—Kkings;
varm$e—in the family; asmin—this; kesava—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; asrayah—under the shelter.

TRANSLATION

The sages decided that the descendants of the family of the saintly King
Anga should not be stopped because in this family the semina was very
powerful and the children were prone to become devotees of the Lord.

PURPORT

The purity of hereditary succession is called amogha-virya. The pious
seminal succession in the twice-born family of the brahmanas and ksatriyas
especially, as well as in the family of vaiSyas also, must be kept very pure
by the observation of the purificatory processes beginning with garbha-
dhana-samskara, which is observed before giving birth to a child. Unless this
purificatory process is strictly observed, especially by the brahmanas, the
family descendants become impure, and gradually sinful activities become
visible in the family. Maharaja Anga was very pure because of the purifica-
tion of semina in the family of Maharaja Dhruva. However, his semina
became contaminated in association with his wife, Sunitha, who happened
to be the daughter of death personified. Because of this polluted semina,
King Vena was produced. This was a catastrophe in the family of Dhruva


--- Page 253 ---
616 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
Maharaja. All the saintly persons and sages considered this point, and they
decided to take action in this manner, as described in the following verses.
TEXT 43
-
विनिश्चित्यैवमृषयो few महीपतेः ।
AYES तरसा तत्रासीद्वादुको नरः ॥४२॥
viniscityaivam rsayo
vipannasya mahipateh
mamanthur Grum tarasa
tatrasid bahuko narah
viniscitya—deciding; evam—thus; rsayah—the great sages; vipannasya—
dead; mahi-pateh—of the King; mamanthuh—churned; arum—the thighs;
tarasa—with specific power; latra—thereupon; dasit—was born; bahukah—of
the name Bahuka (dwarf); narah—a person.
TRANSLATION
After making a decision, the saintly persons and sages churned the thighs
of the dead body of King Vena with great force and according to a specific
method. As a result of this churning, a dwarf-like person was born from
King Vena’s body.
PURPORT
That a person was born by the churning of the thighs of King Vena
proves that the spirit soul is individual and separate from the body. The
great sages and saintly persons could beget another person from the body
of the dead King Vena, but it was not possible for them to bring King
Vena back to life. King Vena was gone, and certainly he had taken another
body. The saintly persons and sages were only concerned with the body
of Vena because it was a result of the seminal succession in the family of
Maharaja Dhruva. Consequently the ingredients by which another body
could be produced were there in the body of King Vena. By a certain
process, when the thighs of the dead body were churned, another body came
out. Although dead, the body of King Vena was perserved by drugs and
mantras chanted by King Vena’s mother. In this way the ingredients for
the production of another body were there. When the body of the person
named Bahuka came out of the dead body of King Vena, it was really not


--- Page 254 ---
Text 45] The Story of King Vena 617
very astonishing. It was simply a question of knowing how to do it. From
the semina of one body, another body is produced, and the life symptoms
are visible due to the soul’s taking shelter of this body. One should not
think that it was impossible for another body to come out of the dead
body of Maharaja Vena. This was performed by the skillful action of the
sages.
TEXT 44
कारुङृष्णोऽतिदस्वाञ्गो इस्ववाहुमेहादनुः |
TERETE रक्ताकस्ताम्रमू्धजः ॥४४।।
kaka-krspo ’tihrasvango
hrasva-bahur maha-hanuh
hrasva-pan nimna-nasagro
raktaksas tamra-miirdhajah
kaka-krspah—as black as a crow; atihrasva—very short; angah—his limbs;
hrasva—short; bahuh—his arms; maha—big; hanuh—his jaws; hrasva—short;
pat—his legs; nimna—flat; nasa-agrah—the tip of his nose; rakta—reddish;
aksah—his eyes; tamra—copperlike; miirdha-jah—his hair.
TRANSLATION
This person born from King Vena’s thighs was named Bahuka, and his
complexion was as black as a crow’s. All the limbs of his body were very
short, his arms and legs were short, and his jaws were large. His nose was
flat, his eyes were reddish, and his hair copper-colored.
TEXT 45
तं तु तेऽवनतं दीनं कं करोमीति वादिनम्‌ ।
निषीदेत्यबुदंस्तात स॒ निषादस्ततोऽभवत्‌ su
(৫71১ [0 (6 1.11.
kim karomiti vadinam
nisidety abruvams tata
sa nisadas tato ’bhavat
tam—unto him;tu—then;te—the sages; avanatam—bowed down; dinam—
meek; kim—what; karomi—shall 1 do; iti—thus; vadinam—inquiring;


--- Page 255 ---
618 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 14
nisida—just sit down; iti—thus; abruvan—they replied; tata—my dear Vidura;
sah—he; nisadah—of the name Nigdda; tatah—thereafter; abhavat—became.
TRANSLATION
He was very submissive and meek, and immediately after his birth he
bowed down and inquired, “Sirs, what shall I do?” The great sages replied,
‘‘Please sit down [nisida].” Thus Nisada, the father of the Naisada race, was
born.
PURPORT
It is said in the $astras that the head of the body represents the brahmanas,
the arms represent the ksatriyas, the abdomen represents the vaisyas, and
the legs, beginning with the thighs, represent the sidras. The sidras are
sometimes called black or krsna. The brahmanas are called sukla, or white,
and the ksatriyas and the vaisyas are a mixture of black and white. However,
those who are extraordinarily white are said to have skin produced out of
white leprosy. It may be concluded that white or a golden hue is the color
of the higher caste, and black is the complexion of the §idras.
TEXT 46
तस्य व॑श्यास्तु नैषादा गिरिकाननगोचराः ।
येनाहरज्जायमानो वेनकल्मषमुल्बणम्‌ ।।४६॥
tasya vamsyads tu naisada
giri-kanana-gocarah
yendharaj jayamano
vena-kalmasam ulbanam
tasya—his (Nigada’s); varmsyah—descendants; tu—then; naisadah— called
Naigadas; giri-kanana—the hills and forests; gocarah—inhabiting; yena—
because; aharat—he took upon himself; jayamanah—being born; vena—of
King Vena; kalmasam—all kinds of sin; ulbanam—very fearful.
TRANSLATION
After his [Nigada’s] birth, he immediately took charge of all the resultant
actions of King Vena’s sinful activities. As such, this Naisada class is always
engaged in sinful activities like stealing, plundering and hunting. Conse-
quently they are only allowed to live in the hills and forests.


--- Page 256 ---
Text 46] The Story of King Vena 619
PURPORT
The Naigadas are not allowed to live in cities and towns because they are
sinful by nature. As such, their bodies are very ugly, and their occupations
are also sinful. We should, however, know that even these sinful men (who
are sometimes called kiratas) can be delivered from their sinful condition
to the topmost Vaignava platform by the mercy of a pure devotee. Engage-
ment in the transcendental loving devotional service of the Lord can make
anyone, however sinful he may be, fit to return home, back to Godhead.
One has only to become free from all contamination by the process of
devotional service. In this way everyone can become fit to return home,
back to Godhead. This is confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita:
mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye pi syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaiSyds tatha sidras
८९ 7 yanti param gatim
“0 son of Prtha, those who take shelter of Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as Siidras [workers] —can
approach the supreme destination.” (Bg. 9.32)
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Fourteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Story of King Vena.”


--- Page 257 ---
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
King Prthu’s Appearance and Coronation
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
अथ तस्य॒ पुनर्विपररपुत्रस्य महीपतेः ।
बाहुभ्यां पथ्यमानाम्यां मिथुनं समपद्यत ।। १॥
maitreya uvdca
atha tasya punar viprair
aputrasya mahipateh
bahubhyarm mathyamandabhyarm
mithunam samapadyata
maitreyah uvaca—Maitreya continued to speak; atha—thus; tasya—his;
punah—again; vipraih—by the brahmanas; aputrasya—without a son;
mahipateh—of the King; bdhubhyam—from the arms; mathyamanabhyam—
being churned; mithunam— a couple; samapadyata—took birth.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, thus the brahmanas
and the great sages churned the two arms of King Vena’s dead body. As a
result a male and female couple came out of his arms.
TEXT 2
तद्‌ Ty मिथुनं जातमृषयो ब्रह्मवादिनः ।
FF: परमसन्तष्टा विदित्वा मगक्त्कठाम्‌ ॥ २॥
tad drstva mithunam jatam
rsayo brahma-vadinah
621


--- Page 258 ---
622 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 15
00088 parama-santusta
viditva bhagavat-kalam
tat—that; drstva—seeing; mithunam—couple; jatam—born; rsayah—the
great sages; brahma-vadinah—very learned in Vedic knowledge; ८८४१-5 अप;
parama—very much ;santusfah—being pleased;viditva—knowing; bhagavat—
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kalam—expansion.
TRANSLATION
The great sages were highly learned in Vedic knowledge. When they
saw the male and female born of the arms of Vena’s body, they were very
pleased, for they could understand that the couple was an expansion of the
plenary portion of Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The method adopted by the great sages and scholars, who were learned
in Vedic knowledge, was perfect. They removed all the reactions of King
Vena’s sinful activities by seeing that King Vena first gave birth to Bahuka,
described in the previous chapter. After King Vena’s body was thus
purified, a male and female came out of it, and the great sages could
understand that this was an expansion of Lord Vignu. This expansion, of
course, was not visnu-tattva but a specifically empowered expansion of
Lord Visnu known as avesa.
TEXT 3
कषय ऊचुः
एष विष्णोभैगवतः कला GEA |
इयं च लक्ष्म्याः सम्भूतिः पुरुषस्यानपायिनी ॥ २ ॥
rsaya ८८८१
esa visnor bhagavatah
kala bhuvana-palini
iyari ca laksmyah sambhitih
purusasyanapdyini
rsayah #@cuh—the sages said; esah—this male; vispoh—of Lord Visnu;
bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kala—expansion;
bhuvana-palini—who maintains the world; iyam—this female; ca—also;
laksmyah—of the goddess of fortune; sambhitih—expansion; purusasya—
of the Lord; anapayini—inseparable.


--- Page 259 ---
Text 4] King Prthu’s Appearance and Coronation 623
TRANSLATION
The great sages said: The male is a plenary expansion of the power of
Lord Vignu, who maintains the entire universe, and the female is a plenary
expansion of the goddess of fortune, who is never separated from the Lord.
PURPORT
The significance of the goddess of fortune’s never being separated from
the Lord is clearly mentioned hercin. People in the material world are
very fond of the goddess of fortune, and they want her favor in the form
of riches. They should know, however, that the goddess of fortune is
inseparable from Lord Visnu. Materialists should understand that the
goddess of fortune should be worshiped along with Lord Vignu and should
not be regarded separately. Materialists seeking the favor of the goddess
of fortune must worship Lord Vignu and Lakgmi together to maintain
material opulence. If a materialist follows the policy of Ravapa, who
wanted to separate Sita from Lord Ramacandra, the process of separation
will vanequish him. Those who are very rich and have taken favor of the
goddess of fortune in this world must engage their money in the service
of the Lord. In this way they can continue in their opulent position with-
out disturbance.
TEXT 4
अयं तु प्रथमो राज्ञां पुमान्‌ प्रथयिता यज्ञः ।
QAM महाराजो भविष्यति पृथुश्रवाः ॥ ४।।
ayam tu prathamo rajiam
puman prathayita yasah
prthur nama mahdrdajo
bhavisyati prthu-sravah
ayam—this; tu—then; prathamah — the first; raji@am— of the kings; puman—
the male; prathayita—will expand; yasah—reputation; prthuh—Maharaja
Prthu; nama—by name; maha-rajah—the great king; bhavisyati—will be-
come; prthu-sravah—of wide renown.
TRANSLATION
Of the two, the male will be able to expand his reputation throughout the
world. His name will be Prthu. Indeed, he will be the first among kings.


--- Page 260 ---
624 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 15
PURPORT
There are different types of incarnations of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. In the sastras it is said that Garuda, the carrier of Lord Vignu,
and Lord Siva and Ananla are all very powerful incarnations of the Brahman
feature of the Lord. Similarly, Sacipati, or Indra, the King of heaven, is an
incarnation of the lusty feature of the Lord. Aniruddha is an incarnation
of the Lord’ mind. Similarly, King Prthu is an incarnation of the ruling
force of the Lord. Thus the saintly persons and greal sages predicted the
future activities of King Prthu, who was already explained as a partial
incarnation of the plenary expansion of the Lord.
TEXT 5
© 9 खदती देवी गुणभूषणभूषणा |
अचिर्नाम वरारोहा पृथुमेवावरुन्धती ॥ ५॥
iyam ca sudati devi
gunpa-bhiisana-bhisana
arcir nama vararoha
prthum evavarundhali
iyam—this female child; ca—and;su-dati—who has very nice teeth; devi—
the goddess of fortune; guna—by good qualities; bhisana—ornaments;
bhiisana—who beautifies; arcih—Arci; nama—by name; vara-aroha—very
beautiful; prthum—unto King Prthu; eva—certainly; avarundhati—being
very much attached.
TRANSLATION
The female has such beautiful teeth and beautiful qualities that she will
actually beautify the ornaments she wears. Her name will be Arci. In the
future she will accept King Prthu as her husband.
TEXT 6
एव साक्षाद्वरेरंशो जातो लोकरिरक्षया ।
श्यं च तत्परा हि शीरनुजज्ञेऽनषयिनी ॥ ६ ॥
esa saksad dharer 7140
jato loka-riraksaya
iyarm ca lal-para hi srir
anujajiie ‘napdayini


--- Page 261 ---
Text 7] King Prthu’s Appearance and Coronation 625
esah—this male; saksat— directly; hareh—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; amsah—partial representative; jatah—born; loka—the entire
world; riraksaya—with a desire to protect; iyam—this female; ca—also;
tat-para—very much attached to him; hi—certainly; srih—the goddess of
fortune; anujajie—took birth; anapayini—inseparable.
TRANSLATION
In the form of King Prthu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has
appeared through a part of His potency to protect the people of the world.
The goddess of fortune is the constant companion of the Lord, and there-
fore she has incarnated partially as Arci to become King Prthu’s queen.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that whenever one sees an extraordinary
power, he should conclude that a specific partial representation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is present. There are innumerable such
personalities, but not all of them are direct visnu-tattva plenary expansions
of the Lord. Many living entities are classified among the sakti-tattvas.
Such incarnations, empowered for specific purposes, are known as
Saktyavesa-avataras. King Prthu was such a saktyavesa-avatara of the Lord.
Similarly, Arci, King Prthu’s wife, was a saktyavesa-avatara of the goddess
of fortune.
TEXT 7
मैत्रेय उवाच
.
प्रशंसन्ति ख तं विप्रा गन्धर्वप्रवरा जगुः |
899: सुमनोधाराः सिद्धा नृत्यन्ति खःखियः।। ७॥
mailreya uvdca
prasamsanti sma tan vipra
gandharva-pravara jaguh
mumucuh sumano-dharah
siddha nrtyanti svah-striyah
maitreyah uvaca—the greal sainl Maitreya said; prasamsanti sma—
praised, glorified; tam—him (Prthu); viprah—all the brahmanas; gandharva-
pravarah— the best of the Gandharvas; jaguh— chanted; mumucuh—released;
sumanah-dharah—showers of flowers; siddhah—the personalitics from
Siddhaloka; nrtyanti— were dancing; svah—of the heavenly planets: striyah
—women (the Apsaras).


--- Page 262 ---
626 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Viduraji, at that time all the
brahmanas highly praised and glorified King Prthu, and the best singers
of Gandharvaloka chanted his glories. The inhabitants of Siddhaloka
showered flowers, and the beautiful women in the heavenly planets
danced in ecstasy.
TEXT 8
शहतरयश्दङ्गाया नेदुुन्दुमयो दिवि ।
तत्र॒ सर्व उपाजग्ध्देवषिंपितृणां गणाः || ८ ॥
Sankha-tirya-mrdangadya
nedur dundubhayo divi
tatra sarva updajagmur
devarsi-pitinar ganah
Sankha—conches; tirya—bugles; mrdanga—drums; adyah—and so on;
neduh—vibrated; dundubhayah—kettledrums; divi-in outer space; tatra—
there; sarve—all; upajagmuh—came;deva-rsi— demigods and sages; pitfnam—
of forefathers; ganah—groups.
TRANSLATION
Conchshells, bugles, drums and kettledrums vibrated in outer space.
Great sages, forefathers and personalities from the heavenly planets all
came to earth from various planetary systems.
TEXTS 9-10
AN जगद्गुरुदेव सहायृत्य सुरेश्वरैः |
वैन्यस्य दधिणे हस्ते दृष्टा সিদ্ধ गदाभृतः ॥ ९॥
पादयोररदिन्दं च तं वै मेने हरेः कलाम्‌ |
यस्याप्रतिदतं॑चक्रमंशः स॒ परमेष्ठिनः ॥१०॥
brahma jagad-gurur devaih
sahasrtya suresvaraih
vainyasya daksine haste
drstva cihnam gadabhrtah


--- Page 263 ---
Text 11] King Prthu’s Appearance and Coronation 627
padayor aravindar ca tan
vai mene hareh kalam
yasyapratihatari cakram
armsah sa paramegthinah

brahma—\L.ord Brahma; jagat-guruh— the master of the universe; devaih—
by the demigods; saha—accompanied; asrtya—arriving; sura-iSvaraih—with
the chiefs of all the heavenly planets; vainyasya—of Maharaja Prthu, the
son of Vena; daksine—right; haste—on the hand; drstva—seeing; cihnam—
mark; gada-bhrtah—of Lord Visnu, who carries the club; padayoh—on the
two feet; aravindam—lotus flower; ca—also; tam—him; vai—certainly ; mene
—he understood; hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kalam—
part of a plenary expansion; yasya—whose; apratihatam—invincible;
cakram—disc; amsah—partial representation; sah—he; paramesthinah—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma, the master of the entire universe, arrived there accom-
panied by all the demigods and their chiefs. Seeing the lines of Lord
Vignu’s palm on King Prthu’s right hand and impressions of lotus flowers
on the soles of his feet, Lord Brahma could understand that King Prthu
was a partial representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One
whose palm bears the sign of a disc, as well as other such lines, should be
considered a partial representation or incarnation of the Supreme Lord.

PURPORT

There is a system by which one can detect an incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nowadays it has become a cheap fashion
to accept any rascal as an incarnation of God, but from this incident we
can see that Lord Brahma personally examined the hands and feet of King
Prthu for specificsigns. In their prophecies the learned sages and brahmapas
accepted Prthu Maharaja as a plenary partial expansion of the Lord.
During the presence of Lord Krsna, however, a king declared himself
Vasudeva, and Lord Krsna killed him. Before accepting someone as an
incarnation of God, one should verify his identity according to the symp-
toms mentioned in the sastras. Without these symptoms the pretender is
subject to be killed by the authorities for pretending to be an incarnation
of God.

TEXT 11
तस्याभिषेक आरन्धो बाहमणेबेहावादिभिः |
आमिवेचनिकान्यस्मै आजुः स्तो जनाः 1220


--- Page 264 ---
628 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 15
tasyabhiseka arabdho
bréhmanair brahma-vadibhih
abhisecanikany asmai
djahruh sarvato janah
tasya—his;abhisekah—coronation;arabdhah—was arranged; brah manaih —
by the learned brahmanas; brahma-vidibhih—attached to the Vedic
rituals; @bhisecanikani—various paraphernalia for performing the ceremony;
asmai—unto him; djahruh—collected; sarvatah—from all directions; janah—
people.
TRANSLATION
The learned brahmanas, who were very attached to the Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies, then arranged for the King's coronation. People from all
directions collected all the different paraphernalia for the ceremony. Thus
everything was complete.
TEXT 12
सरित्सथ्द्रा गिरयो नागा गावः खगा मगाः |
a: क्षितिः सर्वभूतानि समाजहुरुपायनम्‌ ॥ १२
sarit-samudra girayo
naga gavah khaga mrgah
dyauh ksitih sarva-bhiitani
samajahrur upayanam
sarit—the rivers; samudrdh—the seas; girayah—the mountains; nagah—the
serpents; gavah—the cows; khagah—the birds; mrgah—the animals; dyauh—
the sky; ksitih—the earth; sarva-bhiitani—all living entities; samajahruh—
collected; upayanam— different kinds of presentations.
TRANSLATION
All the rivers, seas, hills, mountains, serpents, cows, birds, animals,
heavenly planets, the earthly planet and all other living entities collected
various presentations, according to their ability, to offer the King.
TEXT 13
सोऽभिषिक्तो महाराजः सुवासाः सा्वलङ्कुतः |
प्न्याचिषालङ्कतया विरेजेऽभ्रिरिवापरः nz


--- Page 265 ---
Text 15] King Prthu’s Appearance and Coronation 629
so ‘bhisikto maharajah
suvdsah sadhv-alankrtah
patnyarcisalankrtaya
vireje ‘gnir ivaparah
sah—the King; abhisiktah—being coronated; mahardjah—Maharaja Prthu;
su-vasah—exquisitely dressed; sadhu-alankrtah—highly decorated with orna-
ments; patnya—along with his wife; arcisa—named Arci; alarikrtaya—nicely
ornamented; vireje—appeared; agnih—fire; iva—like; aparah—another.
TRANSLATION
Thus the great King Prthu, exquisitely dressed with garments and orna-
ments, was coronated and placed on the throne. The King and his wife,
Arci, who was also exquisitely ornamented, appeared exactly like fire.
TEXT 14
तस्मै जहार धनदो ইম্‌ নী वरासनम्‌ ।
वरुणः सक्िलसखावमातपत्रं शशिप्रभम्‌ ॥१४॥
tasmai jahara dhanado
haimari vira varasanam
varunah salila-sravam
atapatram sasi-prabham
tasmai—unto him; jahara—presented; dhana-dah—the treasurer of the
demigods (Kuvera); haimam—made of gold; vira—O Vidura; vara-asanam—
royal throne; varupah—the demigod Varuna; salila-sravam—dropping
particles of water; atapatram—umbrella; sasi-prabham—as brilliant as the
moon.
TRANSLATION
The great sage continued: My dear Vidura, Kuvera presented the great
King Prthu a golden throne. The demigod Varuna presented him an
umbrella that constantly sprayed fine particles of water and was as
brilliant as the moon.
TEXT 15
वायुश्च वालव्यजने ঘমীঃ कीर्तिमयीं सखजम्‌ |
इन्द्रः छिरीरयुत्कृष्टं दण्डं संयमनं यमः ॥१५॥


--- Page 266 ---
630 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 15
vayus ca vila-vyajane
dharmah kirtimayim srajam
indrah kiritam utkrstarn
dandari samyamanari yamah
vayuh—the demigod of air; ca—also; vala-vyajane—two camaras made of
hair; dharmah—the King of religion; kirti-mayim—expanding one’s name
and fame; srajem—garland; indrah—the King of heaven; kirifam—helmet;
utkrstam—very valuable; dandam—sceptor; sariyamanam-for ruling the
world; yamah—the superintendent of death.
TRANSLATION
The demigod of air, Vayu, presented King Prthu two whisks [camaras |
of hair; the King of religion, Dharma, presented him a flower garland
which would expand his fame; the King of heaven, Indra, presented him a
valuable helmet; and the superintendent of death, Yamaraja, presented
him a sceptor with which to rule the world.
TEXT 16
जक्षा नद्ममयं নম মাবৌ ERE |
हरिः স্তুহহান चक्रं तत्पतन्यन्याहतां धियम्‌ ॥१६॥
brahma brahmamayam varma
bharati haram uttamam
harih sudar$anam cakram
tat-patny avyahatarm sriyam
brahma—Lord Brahma; brahma-mayam—made of spiritual knowledge;
varma—armor; bharati—the goddess of learning; haram—necklace; uttamam
—transcendental; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sudarsanam
cakram—Sudar§ana disc; (tat-patni—His wife (Laksmi); avyahatam—im-
perishable; sriyam—beauty and opulence.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma presented King Prthu a protective garment made of
spiritual knowledge. Bharati [Sarasvati], the wife of Brahma, gave him a
transcendental necklace. Lord Visnu presented him a Sudarsana disc, and
Lord Visnu’s wife, the goddess of fortune, gave him imperishable opulences.


--- Page 267 ---
Text 18] King Prthu’s Appearance and Coronation 631
PURPORT
All the demigods presented various gifts to King Prthu. Hari, an incarna-
tion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Upendra in the
heavenly planet, presented the King a Sudarsana disc. It should be under-
stood that this Sudarsana disc is not exactly the same type of Sudarsana
disc used by the Personality of Godhead, Krsna or Vignu. Since Maharaja
Prthu was a partial representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s
power, the Sudarsana disc given to him represented the partial power of the
original Sudarsana disc.
TEXT 17
TITAN रुद्रः शतचन्द्रं तथाम्बिका |
सोयोऽखृतमयानश्वास्त्वष्टा रूपाश्रयं रथम्‌ ॥१७॥
dasa-candram asim rudrah
Sata-candram tathambika
somo ‘mrta-mayan asvams
tvasta ripasrayam ratham
dasa-candram—decorated with ten moons; asim—sword; rudrah—Lord
Siva; Sata-candram —decorated with one hundred moons; tatha—in that
manner; ambika—the goddess Durga; somah—the moon demigod; amrta-
maydn—made of nectar; asvan—horses; tvasta—the demigod Visvakarma;
ripa-asrayam—very beautiful; ratham— a chariot.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva presented him a sword within a sheath marked with ten
moons, and his wife, the goddess Durga, presented him with a shield
marked with one hundred moons. The moon demigod presented him
horses made of nectar, and the demigod Visvakarma presented him a very
beautiful chariot.
TEXT 18
अभ्रिराजगवं चापं gd रश्मिमयानिषून्‌ |
मूः पादुके योगमय्यौ योः पुष्पावलिमन्वहम्‌ ॥ १८॥


--- Page 268 ---
632 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 15
agnir aja-gavam capam
siiryo ra$mimayan isin
bhih paduke yogamayyau
dyauh puspavalim anvaham

agnih—the demigod of fire; aja-gavam—made of the horns of goats and
cows; capam—a bow; siryah—the sun-god; rasmi-mayan—brilliant as
sunshine; isin—arrows; bhith—Bhumi, the predominating goddess of the
earth; paduke—two slippers; yoga-mayyau—full of mystic power; dyauh—
the demigods in outer space; puspa—of flowers; dvalim—presentation;
anvaham—day after day.

TRANSLATION

The demigod of fire, Agni, presented him a bow made of the horns of
goats and cows. The sun-god presented him arrows as brilliant as sunshine.
The predominating deity of Bhuloka presented him slippers full of mystic
power. The demigods from outer space brought him presentations of
flowers again and again.

PURPORT

This verse describes that the King’s slippers were invested with mystic
powers (paduke yogamayyau). Thus as soon as the King placed his feet in
the slippers they would immediately carry him wherever he desired.
Mystic yogis can transfer themselves from one place to another whenever
they desire. A similar power was invested in the slippers of King Prthu.

TEXT 19
নাশ্র सुगीतं वादित्रमन्तर्थानं च खेचराः ।
ऋषयश्चाशिषः सत्याः सदर TFA ॥ १९॥
nagyam sugitam vaditram
antardhanar ca khecarah
rsayas casisah satyah
samudrah $ankham atmajam

najyam—the art of drama; su-gitam—the art of singing sweet songs;
vaditram—the art of playing musical instruments; antardhanam—the art
of disappearing; ca—also; khe-carah—demigods traveling in outer space;


--- Page 269 ---
Text 21] King Prthu’s Appearance and Coronation 633
rsayah—the great sages; ca—also; asisah—blessings; satyah—infallible;
samudrah—the demigod of the ocean; §ainkham—conchshell; atma-jam—
produced from himself.
TRANSLATION
The demigods who always travel in outer space gave King Prthu the arts
to perform dramas, sing songs, play musical instruments and disappear at
his will. The great sages also offered him infallible blessings. The ocean
offered him a conchshell produced from the ocean.
TEXT 20
सिन्धवः पर्वता नयो रथवीथीर्महात्मनः |
छतोऽथ ARTE वन्दी तं स्तोतुुपतस्थिरे ॥२०॥
sindhavah parvata nadyo
ratha-vithir mahatmanah
$© ‘tha magadho vandi
tan stotum upatasthire
sindhavah—the seas; parvatah—the mountains; nadyah—the rivers;
ratha-vithih—the paths for the chariot to pass; mahatmanah—of the great
soul; sitah—a professional who offers praises; atha—then; magadhah—a
professional bard; vandi—a professional who offers prayers; tam—him;
stotum—to praise; upatasthire—presented themselves.
TRANSLATION
The seas, mountains and rivers gave him room to drive his chariot
without impediments, and a siita, a magadha and a vandi offered prayers
and praises. They all presented themselves before him to perform their
respective duties.
TEXT 21
AREER TI: प्रतापवान्‌ ।
মঘনিহাঁহ্যা वाचा प्रहसभिदमत्रवीत्‌ 120
stavakars tan abhipretya
prthur vainyah pratapavan


--- Page 270 ---
634 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 15
megha-nirhradaya vaca
prahasann idam abravit
stavakan—engaged in offering prayers; tan—those persons; abhipretya—
seeing, understanding; prthuh—King Prthu; vainyah—sen of Vena; pratapa-
van—greatly powerful: megha-nirhradaya—as grave as the thundering
of clouds; vaca—with a voice; prahasan—smiling; idam—this; abravit—he
spoke.
TRANSLATION
Thus when the greatly powerful King Prthu, the son of Vena, saw the
professionals before him, to congratulate them he smiled, and with the
gravity of the vibrating sounds of clouds he spoke as follows.
TEXT 22
पृथ॒र्वाच
>
भोः घत हे मागध सौम्य बन्दि
छोकेऽधुनास्पष्टगुणस्य मे स्यात्‌ |
किमाश्रयो मे स्तव एष योज्यतां
मा wag वितथा गिरो वः ॥२२॥
prthur uvaca ॥
bhoh siita he magadha saumya vandil
loke 'dhunaspasta-gunasya me syat
kim asrayo me stava esa yojyatam
ma mayy abhiivan vitatha giro vah
prthub uvaca—King Prthu said; bhoh sita—O siita; he magadha—O
magadha; saumya—gentle;vandin—O devolee offering prayers; loke—in this
world; adhuna—just now; aspasta—not distinct; gupasya—whose qualities;
me—of me; syat—there may be; kim—why; asrayah—shelter; me—of me;
stavah—praise; esah—this; yojyatam—may be applied; ma—never; mayi—
unto me; abhiivan—were; vitatha—in vain; girah— words; vah—your.
TRANSLATION
King Prthu said: O gentle ৪003, magadha and other devotee offering
prayers, the qualities of which you have spoken are not distinct in me.
Why then should you praise me for all these qualities when I do not


--- Page 271 ---
Text 23] King Prthu’s Appearance and Coronation 635
shelter these features? I do not wish for these words meant for me to go in
vain, but it is better that they be offered to someone else.
PURPORT

The prayers and praises by the siita, magadha and vandi all explain the
godly qualities of Maharaja Prthu, for he was a saktyavesa incarnation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because the qualities were not yet
manifest, however, King Prthu very humbly asked why the devotees
should praise him with such exalted words. He did not want anyone to
offer him prayers or glorify him unless he possessed the real qualities of
which they spoke. The offering of prayers was certainly appropriate, for
he was an incarnation of Godhead, but he warned that one should not be
accepted as an incarnation of the Personality of Godhead without having
the godly qualities. At the present moment there are many so-called
incarnations of the Personality of Godhead, but these are merely fools and
rascals whom people accept as incarnations of God although they have no
godly qualities. King Prthu desired that his real characteristics in the future
might justify such words of praise. Although there was no fault in the
prayers offered, Prthu Maharaja indicated that such prayers should not be
offered to an unfit person who pretends to be an incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 23
तसात्परोक्षेऽखटुपुतान्पलं-
करिप्यथ स्तोत्रमपीच्यवाचः।
सस्युत्तमश्छोकगुणायुवादे
जुगुष्सितं न स्तवयन्ति सभ्याः 1:30
tasmat parokse ’smad-upasrutany alam
karisyatha stotram apicya-vacah
saty uttamasloka-gunanuvade
jugupsitari na stavayanti sabhyah

tasmat—therefore; parokse—in some future time; asmat—my; upasrutani
—about the qualities spoken of; alam —sufficiently; karisyatha—you will be
able to offer; stotram—prayers; apicya-vacah—O gentle reciters; sati—being
the proper engagement; uttama-§loka—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; guna—of the qualities; anuvade—discussion; jugupsitam—to an


--- Page 272 ---
636 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 15
abominable person; na—never; stavayanti—offer prayers; sabhyah—persons
who are gentle.
TRANSLATION
O gentle reciters, offer such prayers in due course of time, when the
qualities of which you have spoken actually manifest themselves in me.
The gentle who offer prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead do
not attribute such qualities to a human being who does not actually have
them.
PURPORT
Gentle devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead know perfectly
well who is God and who is not. Nondevotee impersonalists, however, who
have no idea what God is and who never offer prayers to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, are always interested in accepting a human being
as God and offering such prayers to him. This is the difference between a
devotee and a demon. Demons manufacture their own gods, or a demon
himself claims to be God, following in the footsteps of Ravana and
Hiranyakasipu. Although Prthu Maharaja was factually an incarnation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he nonetheless rejected those praises
because the qualities of the Supreme Person were not yet manifest in him.
He wanted to stress that one who does not actually possess these qualities
should not try to engage his followers and devotees in offering him glory
for them, even though these qualities might be manifest in the future. If a
man who does not factually possess the attributes of a great personality
engages his followers in praising him with the expectation that such
attributes will develop in the future, that sort of praise is actually an insult.
TEXT 24
০
महद्गुणानात्मनि कतुमीशः
a
कः WER: स्तावयतेऽसतोऽपि |
तेऽस्यामविप्यननिति विप्रलन्धो
जनावहासं স্তমলিন वेद्‌ ॥२४॥
mahad-gunan atmani kartum isah
kah stavakaih stavayate ‘sato ‘pi
te ‘syabhavisyann iti vipralabdho
janavahdsarm kumatir na veda


--- Page 273 ---
Text 25] King Prthu’s Appearance and Coronation 637

mahat—exalted; gupan—the qualities; atmani—in himself; kartum—to
manifest; iSah—competent; kah—who; stavakaih—by followers; stavayate—
causes to be praised; asatah—not existing; api—although; te—they; asya—of
him; abhavisyan—might have been; iti—thus; vipralabdhah—cheated; jana—
of people; avahasam—insult; kumatih—a fool; na—does not; veda—know.

TRANSLATION

How could an intelligent man competent enough to possess such exalted
qualities allow his followers to praise him if he did not actually have them?
Praising a man by saying that if he were educated he might have become a
great scholar or great personality is nothing but a process of cheating. A
foolish person who agrees to accept such praise does not know that such
words simply insult him.

PURPORT

Prthu Maharaja was an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as Lord Brahma and other demigods had already testified when
they had presented the King many heavenly gifts. Because he had just
been coronated, however, he could not manifest his godly qualities in
action. Therefore he was not willing to accept the praise of the devotees.
So-called incarnations of Godhead should therefore take lessons from the
behavior of King Prthu. Demons without godly qualities should not
accept false praise from their followers.

TEXT 25
FAR ह्यात्मनः स्तोत्रं लगुष्सन्त्यपि gar |
हीमन्तः परमोदाराः पौरुषं वा विगर्हितम्‌ ॥२५॥
prabhavo hy atmanah stotram,
jugupsanty api visrutah
hrimantah paramodarah
paurusari va vigarhitam

prabhavah—very powerful persons; hi—certainly;atmanah—of themselves:
stotram—praise; jugupsanti—do not like; api—although; visrutah—very
famous; hrimantah—modest; parama-udarah—very magnanimous persons;
paurusam—powerful actions; va—also; vigarhitam—abominable.


--- Page 274 ---
638 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
As a person with a sense of honor and magnanimity does not like to
hear about his abominable actions, a person who is very famous and
powerful does not like to hear himself praised.
TEXT 26
बयं त्वविदिता लोके खतादयापि वरीममिः |
कर्मभिः कथमात्मानं गापयिष्याम बाखवत्‌ ।।२६॥
vayari tv avidita loke
siatadyapi varimabhih
karmabhih katham atmanar
gapayisyama balavat
vayam—we; tu—then; aviditdh—not famous; loke—in the world; sitta-
adya—O persons headed by the sita; api—just now; varimabhih—great,
praiseworthy; karmabhih—by actions; katham—how; atmanam—unto my-
self; gapayisyama—I shall engage you in offering; bala-vat—like children.
TRANSLATION
King Prthu continued: My dear devotees, headed by the ৪0313, just now I
am not very famous for my personal activities because I have not done
anything praiseworthy you could glorify. Therefore how could 1 engage
you in praising my activities exactly like children?
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifteenth Chapter, Fourth
Canto, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “King Prthu’s Appearance and
Coronation.”


--- Page 275 ---
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Praise of King Prthu
by the Professional Reciters
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति Faw FRE गायका मुनिचोदिताः |
तुष्ड्वुस्तु्टमनसस्तद्वागमतसेवया nen
maitreya uvaca
iti bruvanam nrpatim
gayaka muni-coditah
tustuvus tusta-manasas
tad-vag-amrta-sevaya
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya said; iti—thus; bruvanam—
speaking; nrpatim—the King; gayakah—the reciters; muni—by the sages;
coditah—having been instructed; tustuvuh—praised, satisfied; tusta—being
pleased; manasah—their minds; tat—his; vak—words; amrta—nectarean;
sevaya—by hearing.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: While King Prthu thus spoke, the
humility of his nectarean speeches pleased the reciters very much. Then
again they continued to praise the King highly with exalted prayers, as
they had been instructed by the great sages.
PURPORT
Here the word muni-coditah indicates instructions received from great
sages and saintly persons. Although Maharaja Prthu was simply enthroned
639


--- Page 276 ---
640 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 16
on the royal seat and was not at that time exhibiting his godly powers,
nonetheless the reciters like the sita, the magadha and the vandi under-
stood that King Prthu was an incarnation of God. They could understand
this by the instructions given by the great sages and learned brahmanas. We
have to understand the incarnations of God by the instructions of author-
ized persons. We cannot manufacture a God by our own concoctions. As
stated by Narottama dasa Thakura, sadhu-5astra-guru: one has to test all
spiritual matters according to the instructions of saintly persons, scriptures
and the spiritual master. The spiritual master is one who follows the in-
structions of his predecessors, namely the sadhus, or saintly persons. A
bona fide spiritual master does not mention anything not mentioned in the
authorized scriptures. Ordinary people have to follow the instructions of
sadhu, Sastra and guru. Those statements made in the sastras and those
made by the bona fide sadhu or guru cannot differ from one another.
Reciters like the site and the magadha were confidentially aware that
King Prthu was an incarnation of the Personality of Godhead. Although
the King denied such praise because he was not at that time exhibiting his
godly qualities, the reciters nonetheless did not stop praising him. Rather,
they were very pleased with the King, who, although actually an incarna-
tion of God, was so humble and delightful in his dealings with devotees. In
this connection we may note that previously (4.15.21) it was mentioned
that King Prthu was smiling and was in a pleasant mood while speaking to
the reciters. Thus we have to learn from the Lord or His incarnation how
to become gentle and humble. The King’s behavior was very pleasing to
the reciters, and consequently the reciters continued their praise and even
foretold the King’s future activities, as they had been instructed by the
sadhus and sages.
TEXT 2
नालं बयं ते Afi
यो देववर्योऽवततार मायया ।
वेनाङ्गजातस्य च पौरुषाणि ते
वाचस्पतीनामपि बश्रयुर्धियः; ॥ २॥
nalam vayam te mahimanuvarnane
yo deva-varyo ৮৫/৫/৫/৫ mayaya
venanga-jalasya ca pawrusani te
vacas-patindm api babhramur dhiyah


--- Page 277 ---
Text 2] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 641

na alam—not able; vayam—we; te—your; mahima—glories; anuvarpane—
in describing; yah—you who; deva—the Personality of Godhead; varyah—
foremost; avatatara—descended; mayaya—by His internal potencies or
causeless mercy; vena-anga—from the body of King Vena; jatasya—who
have appeared; ca—and; paurusani—glorious activities; te—of you; vacah-
patinam—of great orators; api—although; babhramuh—became bewildered;
dhiyah—the minds.

TRANSLATION

The reciters continued: Dear King, you are a direct incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, and by His causeless mercy
you have descended on this earth. Therefore it is not possible for us to
actually glorify your exalted activities. Although you have appeared
through the body of King Vena, even great oraters and speakers like Lord
Brahma and other demigods cannot exactly describe the glorious activities
of Your Lordship.

PURPORT

In this verse the word mayaya means ‘“‘by your causeless mercy.” The
Mayavadi philosophers explain the word maya as meaning “illusion” or
“falseness.” However, there is another meaning of maya—that is, ‘‘causeless
mercy.” There are two kinds of maya—yogamdaya and mahamaya. Maha-
mayd is an expansion of yogamdaya, and both these mayas are different ex-
pressions of the Lord’s internal potencies. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, the
Lord appears through His internal potencies (atma-mayaya). We should
therefore reject the Mayavada explanation that the Lord appears in a body
given by the external potency, the material energy. The Lord and His in-
carnation are fully independent and can appear anywhere and everywhere
by virtue of the internal potency. Although born out of the so-called dead
body of King Vena, King Prthu was still an incarnation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by the Lord’s internal potency. The Lord can ap-
pear in any family. Sometimes He appears as a fish incarnation (mautsya-
avatara),or 8 boar incarnation (varaha-avatara).Thus the Lord is completely
free and independent to appear anywhere and everywhere by His internal
potency. It is stated that Ananta, an incarnation of the Lord who has un-
limited mouths, cannot reach the end of His glorification of the Lord, al-
though Ananta has been describing the Lord since time immemorial. So
what to speak of demigods like Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and others? It is
said that the Lord is §iva-viriici-nutam—always worshiped by demigods like


--- Page 278 ---
642 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 16
Lord Siva and Lord Brahma. If the demigods cannot find adequate language
to express the glories of the Lord, then what to speak of others? Conse-
quently reciters like the 58৫ and the magadha felt inadequate to speak
about King Prthu.

By glorifying the Lord with exalted verses, one becomes purified. Al-
though we are unable to offer prayers to the Lord in an adequate fashion,
our duty is to make the attempt in order to purify ourselves. It is not that
we should stop our glorification because demigods like Lord Brahma and
Lord Siva cannot adequately glorify the Lord. Rather, as stated by
Prahlada Maharaja, everyone should glorify the Lord according to his own
ability. If we are serious and sincere devotees, the Lord will give us the
intelligence to offer prayers properly.

TEXT 3
अथाप्युदारश्रवसः पृथोर्हरेः
कृटावतारस् কযাম্ববাহবাঃ |
यथोपदेशं স্তলিদিঃ प्रचोदिताः
দ্তাচ্যানি कर्माणि वयं वितन्महि ॥ ३ ॥
athapy udara-sravasah prthor hareh
kalavatarasya kathamrtadrtah
yathopadesam munibhih pracoditah
§laghyani karmani vayam vitanmahi
athapi—nevertheless; udara—liberal; sravasah—whose fame; prthoh—of
King Prthu; hareh—of Lord Visnu; kala—part of a plenary expansion;
avatarasya—incarnation; kathd—words; amrta—nectarean; adrtah—attentive
to; yatha—according to; upadesam—instruction; munibhih—by the great
sages; pracoditah—being encouraged; slaghyani—laudable; karmani—activi-
ties; vayam—we; vitanmahi—shall try to spread.
TRANSLATION

Although we are unable to glorify you adequately, we nonetheless have
a transcendental taste to glorify your activities. We shall try to glorify you
according to the instructions received from authoritative sages and scholars.
Whatever we speak, however, is always inadequate and very insignificant.
Dear King, because you are a direct incarnation of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, all your activities are liberal and ever laudable.


--- Page 279 ---
Text 4] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 643
PURPORT
However expert one may be, he can never describe the glories of the
Lord adequately. Nonetheless, those engaged in glorifying the activities of
the Lord should try to do so as far as possible. Such an attempt will please
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Caitanya has advised all His
followers to go everywhere and preach the message of Lord Krsna. Since
this message is essentially Bhagavad-gitd, the preacher’s duty is to study
Bhagavad-gita as it is understood by disciplic succession and explained by
great sages and learned devotees. One should speak to the general populace
in accordance with one’s predecessors—sadhu, guru and sastras. This simple
processis the easiest method by which one can glorify the Lord. Devotional
service, however, is the real method, for by devotional service one can
satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead with just a few words. Without
devotional service, volumes of books cannot satisfy the Lord. Even though
preachers of the Krsna consciousness movement may be unable to describe
the glories of the Lord, they can nonetheless go everywhere and request
people to chant Hare Krsna.
TEXT 4
4 ক ५
एष धर्मभृतां श्रेष्ठो लोकं धर्मेऽचुवतयन्‌ |
गोप्ता च धर्मसेतूनां शास्ता तत्परिपन्थिनाम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥
esa dharma-bhrtam Srestho
lokam dharme ’nuvartayan
gopta ca dharma-setinam
sasta tat-paripanthinam
esah—this King Prthu; dharma-bhrtam—of persons executing religious
activities; §resthah—the best; lokam —the whole world; dharme—in religious
activities; anuvartayan—engaging them properly; gopti—the protector; ca—
also; dharma-setiitnam—of the principles of religiosity; $asta—the chastiser;
tat-paripanthinam—of those who are against religious principles.
TRANSLATION
This King, Maharaja Prthu, is the best amongst those who are following
religious principles. As such, he will engage everyone in the pursuit of reli-
gious principles and give them all protection. He will also be a great chas-
tiser to the irreligious and atheistic.


--- Page 280 ---
644 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 16
PURPORT
The duty of the king or the head of the government is described very
nicely in this verse. It is the duty of the governmental head to see that
people strictly follow a religious life. A king should also be strict in chastis-
ing the atheists. In other words, an atheistic or godless government should
never be supported by a king or governmental chief. That is the test of
good government. In the name of secular government, the king or govern-
mental head remains neutral and allows people to engage in all sorts of ir-
religious activities. In such a state people cannot be happy despite all eco-
nomic development. However, in this age of Kali there are no pious kings.
Instead, rogues and thieves are elected to head the government. But how
can the people be happy without religion and God consciousness? The
rogues exact taxes from the citizens for their own sense enjoyment, and
in the future the people will be so much harassed that according to
Srimad-Bhagavatam they will flee from their homes and country and take
shelter in the forest. However, in Kali-yuga, democratic government can
be captured by Krsna conscious people. If this can be done, the general
populace can be made very happy.
TEXT 5
aX = -
एष वै लोकपालानां बिभत्येकस्तनौ तन्‌; |
9
WS काले यथाभागं लोकयोरुमयोर्हितम्‌ ॥ ५॥
esa vai loka-palanam
bibharty ekas tanau tanih
kale kale yatha-bhagarm
lokayor ubhayor hitam
esah—this King; vai—certainly; loka-palanam—of all the demigods;
bibharti—bears; ekah—alone; tanau—in his body; tanh—the bodies; kale
kale—in due course of time; yathd—according to; bhagam—proper share;
lokayoh—of planetary systems; ubhayoh—both;hitam—welfare.
TRANSLATION
This King alone, in his own body, will be able in due course of time to
maintain all living entities and keep them in a pleasant condition by mani-
festing himself as different demigods to perform various departmental
activities. Thus he will maintain the upper planetary system by inducing


--- Page 281 ---
Text 6] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 645
the populace to perform Vedic sacrifices. In due course of time he will also
maintain this earthly planet by discharging proper rainfall.

PURPORT

The demigods in charge of the various departmental activities that main-
tain this world are but assistants to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When an incarnation of Godhead descends on this planet, demigods like
the sun-god, the moon-god, or the King of heaven, Indra, all join Him.
Consequently the incarnation of Godhead is able to act for the depart-
mental demigods to keep the planetary systems in order. The protection of
the earthly planetis dependent on proper rainfall, and as stated in Bhagavad-
gita and other scriptures, sacrifices are performed to please those demigods
who are in charge of rainfall.

annad bhavanti bhitani
parjanyad anna-sambhavah
yajiad bhavati parjanyo
yajiah karma-samudbhavah
“All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains.
Rains are produced by performance of yajiia [sacrifice], and yajiia is born
of prescribed duties.” (Bg. 3.14)

Thus the proper execution of yajiia, sacrifice, is required. As indicated
herein, King Prthu alone would induce all the citizens to engage in such
sacrificial activities so that there would not be scarcity or distress. In Kali-
yuga, however, in the so-called secular state, the executive branch of govern-
ment is in the charge of so-called kings and presidents who are all fools and
rascals ignorant of the intricacies of nature’s causes and ignorant of the
principles of sacrifice. Such rascals simply make various plans, which always
fail, and the people subsequently suffer disturbances. To counteract this
situation, the sastras advise: harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam/
kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha. Thus in order to counter-
act this unfortunate situation in government, the general populace is advised
to chant the maha-mantra: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

TEXT 6
वसु काल उपादत्ते কান चायं বিস্তুস্বনি।
समः सर्वेषु भूतेषु प्रतपन्‌ घर्यवद्िश्ुः ॥ ६ ॥


--- Page 282 ---
646 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 16
vasu kala upadatte
kale cayam vimuiicati
samah sarvesu bhiitesu
pratapan siaryavad vibhuh

vasu—riches; kale—in due course of time; upadatte—exacts; kale—in due
course of time; ca—also;ayam—this King Prthu; vimusicati—returns; samah—
equal; sarvesu—to all; bhitesu—living entities; pratapan—shining; sirya-vat—
like the sun-god; vibhuh—powerful.

TRANSLATION

This King Prthu will be as powerful as the sun-god, and just as the sun-
god equally distributes his sunshine to everyone, King Prthu will distribute
his mercy equally. Similarly, just as the sun-god evaporates water for eight
months and, during the rainy season, returns it profusely, similarly this
King will also exact taxes from the citizens and return these monies in times
of need.

PURPORT

The process of tax exaction is very nicely explained in this verse. Tax
exaction is not meant for the sense gratification of the so-called adminis-
trative heads. Tax revenues should be distributed to the citizens in times of
need, during emergencies such as famine or flood. Tax revenues should
never be distributed amongst governmental servants in the form of high
salaries and various other allowances. In Kali-yuga, however, the position
of the citizens is very horrible because taxes are exacted in so many forms
and are spent for the personal comforts of the administrators.

The example of the sun in this verse is very appropriate. The sun is many
millions of miles away from the earth, and although the sun does not
actually touch the earth, it manages to distribute land all over the planet
by exacting water from the oceans and seas, and it also manages to make
that land fertile by distributing water during the rainy season. As an ideal
king, King Prthu would execute all this business in the village and state as
expertly as the sun.

TEXT 7
तितिक्षत्यक्रमं॒वैन्य _ उपयोकमतामपि |
भूतानां करुणः शश्वदार्तानां ्ितिवत्तिमान्‌ ॥ ७ ॥


--- Page 283 ---
Text 8] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 647
titiksaty akramam vainya
upary akramatam api
bhitanam karunah sasvad
artanam ksiti-vrttiman
titiksati—tolerates; akramam— offense; vainyah—the son of King Vena;
upari—on his head; akramatam—of those who are trampling; api—also;
bhiitanam—to all living entities; karunah—very kindhearted; sasvat—always;
artanam—to the aggrieved; ksiti-vrtti-man—accepting the profession of the
earth.
TRANSLATION
This King Prthu will be very, very kind to all citizens. Even though a
poor person may trample over the King’s head by violating the rules and
regulations, the King, out of his causeless mercy, will be forgetful and for-
giving. As a protector of the world, he will be as tolerant as the earth itself.
PURPORT
King Prthu is herein compared to the earthly planet as far as his toler-
ance is concerned. Although the earth is always trampled upon by men
and animals, it still gives food to them by producing grains, fruits and vege-
tables. As an ideal king, Maharaja Prthu is compared to the earthly planet,
for even though some citizens might violate the rules and regulations of the
state, he would still be tolerant and maintain them with fruits and grains.
In other words, it is the duty of the king to look after the comforts of the
citizens, even at the cost of his own personal convenience. This is not the
case, however, in Kali-yuga, for in Kali-yuga the kings and heads of state
enjoy life at the cost of taxes exacted from the citizens. Such unfair taxa-
tion makes the people dishonest, and the people try to hide their income
in so many ways. Eventually the state will not be able to collect taxes and
consequently will not be able to meet its huge military and administrative
expenses. Everything will collapse, and there will be chaos and disturbance
all over the state.
TEXT 8
देवेऽवर्षत्यसौ देवो नरदेववपुदैरिः |
छृच्छरप्राणाः प्रजा ह्येष रकषिष्यत्यञ्ञसेनद्रबत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
deve ‘varsaty asau devo
naradeva-vapur harih


--- Page 284 ---
648 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 16
krechra-pranah praja hy esa
raksisyaty aiijasendravat

deve—when the demigod (Indra); avarsati—does not supply rains; asau—
that; devah—Maharaja Prthu; nara-deva—of the king; vepuh—having the
body; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; krcchra-pranah—suffer-
ing living entities; prajah—the citizens; hi—certainly ; esah—this; raksisyati—
will protect; aiijasa—very easily; indra-vat—like King Indra.

TRANSLATION

When there is no rainfall and the citizens are in great danger due to the
scarcity of water, this royal personality of Godhead will be able to supply
rains exactly like the heavenly King Indra. Thus he will very easily be able
to protect the citizens from drought.

PURPORT

King Prthu is very appropriately compared to the sun and the demigod
Indra. King Indra of the heavenly planets is in charge of distributing
water over the earth and other planetary systems. It is indicated that King
Prthu would arrange for the distribution of rainfall personally if Indra failed
to discharge his duty properly. It is, however, indicated that sometimes the
King of heaven, Indra, would become angry at the inhabitants of the earth
if they did not offer sacrifices to appease him. However, being an incarna-
tion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, King Prthu did not depend
on the mercy of the heavenly King. It is foretold herein that if there would
be a scarcity of rain, King Prthu would manage to counteract the deficiency
by virtue of his godly powers. Such powers were also exhibited by Lord
Krsna when He was present in Vrndavana. Indeed, when Indra poured in-
cessant water on Vrndavana for seven days, the inhabitants were protected
by Krsna, who raised Govardhana Hill over their heads as a great umbrella.
Thus Lord Krsna is also known as govardhana-dhari.

TEXT 9
आप्याययत्यसौ लोकं वदनामृतमूर्तिना |
सानुरागावलोकेन विशदखितचार्णा ॥ ९॥
apyayayaty asau lokam
vadanamrta-martina


--- Page 285 ---
Text 10] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 649
sanuragavalokena
visada-smita-caruna
apyayayati—enhances;asau—he; lokam—the whole world;vadana—by his
face; amrta-miirtina—moonlike; sa-anuraga—affectionate; avalokena—with
glances; visada— bright; smita—smiling; caruna—beautiful.
TRANSLATION
This King, Prthu Maharaja, by virtue of his affectionate glances and
beautiful full face, which is always smiling with great affection for the
citizens, will enhance everyone’s peaceful life.
TEXT 10
(+
अव्यक्तवर्त्मैष निमूटकार्यो
गम्भीरवेधा उपगुप्तवित्तः |
अनन्तमादात्म्यगुणैकधामा
पृथु; प्रचेता इव संवृतात्मा ॥१०॥
avyakta-vartmaisa nigiadha-karyo
gambhira-vedha upagupta-vittah
ananta-mahatmya-gunaika-dhama
prthuh (170८९८6 iva samvrtatma
avyakta—nonmanifested; vartma—his policies; esah— this King; nigigha—
confidential; karyah—his activities; gambhira—grave, secret; vedhah—his ac-
complishing; upagupta—secretly kept; vittah—his treasury; ananta—un-
limited; mahatmya—of glories; guna—of good qualities; eka-dhama—the
only reservoir; prthuh—King Prthu; pracetah—Varuna, the King of the seas;
iva—like; samuvrta—covered; atma—self.
TRANSLATION
The reciters continued: No one will be able to understand the policies
the King will follow. His activities will also be very confidential, and it will
not be possible for anyone to know how he will make every activity suc-
cessful. His treasury will always remain unknown to everyone. He will be
the reservoir of unlimited glories and good qualities, and his position will
be maintained and covered just as Varuna, the deity of the seas, is covered
all around by water.


--- Page 286 ---
650 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 16
PURPORT

There is a predominating deity for all the material elements, and Varuna,
or Praceta, is the predominating deity of the seas and the oceans. From
outward appearances the seas and oceans appear devoid of life, but a person
acquainted with the sea knows that within the water exist many varieties
of life. The king of that underwater kingdom is Varuna. Just as no one can
understand what is going on beneath the sea, no one could understand what
policy King Prthu was following to make everything successful. Indeed,
King Prthu’s path of diplomacy was very grave. His success was made pos-
sible because he was a reservior of unlimited glorified qualities.

The word upagupta-vittah is very significant in this verse. It indicates
that no one would know the extent of the riches King Prthu would confi-
dentially keep. The idea is that not only the king but everyone should keep
his hard earned money confidentially and secretly so that in due course of
time the money can be spent for good practical purposes. In Kali-yuga,
however, the king or government has no well-protected treasury, and the
only means of circulation is currency notes made of paper. Thusin times
of distress the government will artificially inflate the currency by simply
printing papers, and this artificially raises the price of commodities, and
the general condition of the citizens becomes very precarious. Thus keep-
ing one’s money very secretly is an old practice, for we find this practice
present even during the reign of Maharaja Prthu. Just as the king has the
right to keep his treasury confidential and secret, the people should also
keep their individual earnings a secret. There is no fault in such dealings.
The main point is that everyone should be trained in the system of
varndsrama-dharma so that the money is spent only for good causes and
nothing else.

TEXT 11
nd दुर्विषह आसन्नोऽपि विदूरत्‌ |
वाभिभवितं शक्यो वेनारण्युत्थितोऽनरः ॥११॥
durdsado durvisaha
asanno ‘pi vidiiraval
naivabhibhavitum $akyo
vendarany-ulthito 10104
durasadah—unapproachable; durvisahah—unbearable ; asannah— being ap-
proached; api—although; vididra-vat—as if far away; na—never; eva—


--- Page 287 ---
Text 12] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 651
certainly; abhibhavitum—to be overcome; sakyah—able; vena—King Vena;
arani—the wood that produces fire; utthitah—being born of; analah— fire.
TRANSLATION

King Prthu was born of the dead body of King Vena as fire is produced
from arani wood. Thus King Prthu will always remain just like fire, and his
enemies will not be able to approach him. Indeed, he will be unbearable to
his enemies, for although staying very near him, they will never be able to
approach him but will have to remain as if far away. No one will be able to
overcome the strength of King Prthu.

PURPORT

Arani wood is a kind of fuel used to ignite fire by friction. At the time
of performing sacrifices, one can ignite a fire from arapi wood. Although
born of his dead father, King Prthu would still remain just like fire. Just as
fire is not easily approached, similarly King Prthu would be unapproachable
by his enemies, even though they would appear to be very near him.

TEXT 12
ARR भूतानां पड्यन्‌ कर्माणि चारणैः |
उदासीन इवाध्यक्षो वायुरात्मेव देहिनाम्‌ NERA
antar bahis ca bhitanam
pasyan karmani caranaih
udasina ivadhyakso
vayur atmeva dehinam

antah—internally; bahih—externally; ca—and; bhitanam—of living enti-
ties; pasyan—seeing; karmani—activities; carapath—by spies; udasinah—
neutral; iva—like; adhyaksah—the witness; vayuh—the air of life; atma—the
living force; iva—like; dehinam—of all the embodied.

TRANSLATION

King Prthu will be able to see all the internal and external activities of
every one of his citizens. Still no one will be able to know his system of es-
pionage, and he himself will remain neutral regarding all matters of glorifi-
cation or vilification paid to him. He will be exactly like air, the life force


--- Page 288 ---
652 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 16
within the body, which is exhibited internally and externally but is always
neutral to all affairs.
TEXT 13
नादण्ड्यं दण्डयत्येष सुतमा्मद्विषामपि |
©
दण्डयत्यात्मजमपि दण्ड्यं धमेपथे स्थितः 1230
nadandyam dandayaty esa
sutam atma-dvisam api
dandayaty atma-jam api
dandyam dharma-pathe sthitah
na—not; adapdyam—not punishable; dandayati—punishes; esah—this
King; sutam—the son; atma-dvisam— of his enemies; api—even; dandayati—
he punishes; @tma-jam—his own son; api—even; dandyan—punishable;
dharma-pathe—on the path of piety; sthitah—being situated.
TRANSLATION
Since this King will always remain on the path of piety, he will be neutral
to both his son and the son of his enemy. If the son of his enemy is not
punishable, he will not punish him, but if his son is punishable, he will im-
mediately punish him.
PURPORT
These are the characteristics of an impartial ruler. It is the duty of a ruler
to punish the criminal and give protection to the innocent. King Prthu was
so neutral that if his own son were punishable, he would not hesitate to
punish him. On the other hand, if the son of his enemy were innocent, he
would not engage in some intrigue in order to punish him.
TEXT 14
अस्याप्रतिहतं चक्रं॑पृयोरामानसाचसात्‌ |
ध
वतते WEES यावत्तपति गोगणैः ॥१४॥
asyapratihatam cakram
prthor amanasdacalat
vartate bhagavan arko
yaval tapati go-ganaih


--- Page 289 ---
Text 15] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 653
asya—of this King; apratihatam—not being impeded; cakram— the circle
of influence; prthoh—of King Prthu; @-manasa-acalat—up to the Manasa
mountain; vartate—remains; bhagavan—the most powerful; arkah—sun-god;
yavat—just as; tapati—shines; go-ganaih—with rays of light.
TRANSLATION
Just as the sun-god expands his shining rays up to the Arctic region with-
out impedance, the influence of King Prthu will cover all tracts of land up
to the Arctic region and will remain undisturbed as long as he lives.
PURPORT
Although the Arctic region is not visible to ordinary persons, the sun
nonetheless shines there without impediment. Just as no one can check the
sunshine from spreading all over the universe, no one could check the in-
fluence and reign of King Prthu, which would remain undisturbed as long
as he lived. The conclusion is that the sunshine and the sun-god cannot be
separated, nor can King Prthu and his ruling strength be separated. His rule
over everyone would continue without disturbance. Thus the King could
not be separated from his ruling power.
TEXT 15
IN EN
रञ्जयिष्यति यच्लोकमयमामविचेष्टितेः |
५ =
अथाघ्ुमाहू राजानं मनोरञ्जनकैः प्रजाः ॥ १५॥
rafijayisyati yal lokam
ayam atma-vicestitaih
athamum ahi rdjanam
mano-raiijanakaih prajah
raiijayisyati— will please; yat—because; lokam —the entire world; ayam—
this King;atma— personal; vicestitaih—by activities; atha—therefore; amum—
him; dhuh—they call; rajgnam— the King; manah-raiijanakaih—very pleasing
to the mind; prajah —the citizens.
TRANSLATION E
This King will please everyone by his practical activities, and all of his
citizens will remain very satisfied. Because of this the citizens will take
great satisfaction in accepting him as their ruling king.


--- Page 290 ---
654 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 16
TEXT 16
TEAQ: सत्यसन्धो AEE शदधसेवकः |
शरण्यः सर्वभूतानां मानदो दीनवत्सलः ॥१६॥
drdha-vratah satya-sandho
brahmanyo vrddha-sevakah
Saranyah sarva-bhitanan
manado dina-vatsalah
drdha-vratah—firmly determined; satya-sandhah—always situated in
truth; brahmanyah—a lover of the brahminical culture; vrddha-sevakah—a
servitor of the old men; sarapyah—to be taken shelter of; sarva-bhitanam—
of all living entities; mana-dah—one who gives respect to all; dina-vatsalah—
very kind to the poor and helpless.
TRANSLATION
The King will be firmly determined and always situated in truth. He will
be a lover of the brahminical culture and will render all service to old men
and give shelter to all surrendered souls. Giving respect to all, he will al-
ways be merciful to the poor and innocent.
PURPORT
The word vrddha-sevakah is very significant. Vrddha means “০10 men.”
There are two kinds of old men: one is old by age, and another is old by
knowledge. This Sanskrit word indicates that one can be older by the ad-
vancement of knowledge. King Prthu was very respectful to the
brahmanas, and he protected them. He also protected persons advanced in
age. Whatever the King would decide to do, no one would be able
to stop. That is called drdha-sanikalpa or drdha-vrata.
TEXT 17
क्तिः eli ঘংল্যামণ इवारमनः
HAAR: WHY पलन्यामधे इवारमनः |
प्रजासु पितृवत्लिग्धः किङ्करो ब्रह्मवादिनाम्‌ 12s
matr-bhaktih para-strisu
patnyam ardha ivatmanah
prajasu pitrvat snigdhah
kinkaro brahma-vadinam


--- Page 291 ---
Text 18] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 655

matr-bhaktih—respectful as one is to his mother; para-strisu—to other
women; patnyam—to his own wife; ardhah—half; iva—like; atmanah—of his
body; prajasu—unto the citizens; pitr-vat—like a father; snigdhah—affec-
tionate; kinkarah—servant; brahma-vadinam—of the devotees who preach
the glories of the Lord.

TRANSLATION

The King will respect all women as if they were his own mother, and he
will treat his own wife as the other half of his body. He will be just like an
affectionate father to his citizens, and he will treat himself as the most
obedient servant of the devotees who always preach the glories of the Lord.

PURPORT

A learned man treats all women except his wife as his mother, looks on
others’ property as garbage in the street, and treats others as he would treat
his own self. These are the symptoms of a learned person as described by
Canakya Pandita. This should be the standard for education. Education
does not mean having academic degrees only. One should execute what he
has learned in his personal life. These learned characteristics were verily
manifest in the life of King Prthu. Although he was king, he treated himself
as a servant of the Lord’s devotees. According to Vedic etiquette, if a
devotee came to a king’s palace, the king would immediately offer his own
seat to him. The word brahma-vadinam is very significant. Brahma-vadi
refers to the devotees of the Lord. Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan are
different terms for the Supreme Brahman, and the Supreme Brahman is
Lord Krsna. This is accepted in Bhagavad-gita by Arjuna (param brahma
parariv dhama, Bg. 10.12). Thus the word brahma-vadinam refers to the devo-
tees of the Lord. The state should always serve the devotees of the Lord,
and the ideal state should conduct itself according to the instructions of the
devotee. Because King Prthu followed this principle, he is highly praised.

TEXT 18
=r . 7 (3
देहिनामात्मवस्ष्ठः सुहृदां नन्दिवर्धनः ।
यक्त सद्खप्रसद्धोऽयं दण्डपाणिरसाधुषु ॥१८॥
dehinam atmavat-presthah
suhrdam nandi-vardhanah
mukta-sariga-prasango ‘yan
danda-panir asadhusu


--- Page 292 ---
656 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 16
dehinam—to all living entities having a body; atma-vat—as himself;
presthah— considering as dear; suhrdam—of his friends; nandi-vardhanah—
increasing pleasures; mukta-sanga— with persons devoid of all material con-
tamination; prasangah—intimately associated; ayam—this King; danda-
panih—a chastising hand; asadhusu—to the criminals.
TRANSLATION
The King will consider all embodied living entities as dear as his own self,
and he will always be increasing the pleasures of his friends. He will inti-
mately associate with liberated persons, and he will be a chastising hand to
all impious persons.
PURPORT
The word dehinam refers to those who are embodied. The living entities
are embodied in different forms, which number 8,400,000 species. All of
these were treated by the King in the same way he would treat himself. In
this age, however, so-called kings and presidents do not treat all other living
entities as their own self. Most of them are meat-eaters, and even though
they may not be meat-eaters and may pose themselves to be very religious
and pious, they still allow cow slaughter within their state. Such sinful
heads of state cannot actually be popular at any time. Another significant
word in this verse is mukta-sanga-prasangah, which indicates that the King
was always associating with liberated persons.
TEXT 19
अयं तु साक्षाद्धगवांसू्मधीशः
कूटस्थ आत्मा कलयावतीणैः |
. ¢
यसिन्नविद्यारचितं निरथंकं
पञ्यन्ति नानात्वमपि प्रतीतम्‌ ॥१९॥
aya tu saksad 0110820৮৫75 try-adhisah
kiitastha ৫77৫ kalayavatirnah
yasminn avidya-racitam nirarthakam
pasyanti nanatvam api pratitam
ayam—this King; tu—then; saksat—directly ; bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; tri-adhisah—the master of the three planetary systems;
kiifasthah— without any change; @tma—the Supersoul; kalaya—by a partial


--- Page 293 ---
Text 19] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 657
plenary expansion; avatirnah—descended; yasmin—in whom; avidya-
racitam—created by nescience; nirarthakam— without meaning; pasyanti—
they see; nanatvam—material variegaledness; api—certainly; pratitam—
understood.

TRANSLATION

This King is the master of the three worlds, and he is directly empowered
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is without change, and he is an
incarnation of the Supreme known as a saktyavesa-avatara. Being a liberated
soul and completely learned, he understands that all material varieties are
without meaning because their basic principle is nescience.

PURPORT

The reciters of these prayers are describing the transcendental qualities
of Prthu Maharaja. These qualities are summarized in the words saksad
bhagavan. This indicates that Maharaja Prthu is directly the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and therefore possesses unlimited good qualities.
Being an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Maharaja
Prthu could not be equaled in his excellent qualities. The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is fully equipped with six kinds of opulences, and
King Prthu was also empowered in such a way that he could display these
six opulences of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in full.

The word kitastha, meaning “without change,” is also very significant.
There are two kinds of living entities—nitya-mukta and ritya-baddha. A
nitya-mukta never forgets his position as the eternal servant of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. One who does not forget this position and knows
that heis part and parcel of the Supreme Lord is nitya-mukta. Such a nitya-
mukta living entity represents the Supersoul as His expansion. As stated in
the Vedas, nityo nityanam. Thus the nitya-mukta living entity knows that
he is an expansion of the supreme nitya, or the eternal Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Being in such a position, he sees the material world with a
different vision. The living entity who is nitya-baddha, or eternally con-
ditioned, sees the material varieties as being actually different from one
another. In this connection we should remember that the embodiment of
the conditioned soul is considered to be like a dress. One may dress in dif-
ferent ways, bul a really learned man does not take dresses into considera-
tion. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:

vidyd-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastini


--- Page 294 ---
658 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 16
Suni caiva $vapdke ca
panditah sama-darsinah
“The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater
| outcaste].” (Bg. 5.18)

Thus a learned man does not look upon the dresses that externally cover
the living entity but sees the pure soul within the varieties of dress and
knows very well that the varieties of dress are the creation of nescience
(avidyd-racitam). Being a saktyavesa-avatara empowered by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Prthu Maharaja did not change his spiritual posi-
tion, and consequently there was no possibility of his viewing the material
world as reality.

TEXT 20
৬ - =
अयं YN मण्डलमोदयाद्रे-
LY
गेपिकवीरो नरदेवनाथः |
a
are অর্গ रथमात्तचापः
पर्थस्ते दक्षिणतो यथाकैः ॥२०॥
ayam bhuvo mandalam odayadrer
goplaika-viro naradeva-nathah
asthaya jaitram ratham atta-capah
paryasyate daksinalo yatharkah

ayam—this King; bhuvah—of the world; mandalam—the globe; a-udaya-
adreh—from the mountain where the first appearance of the sun is visible;
gopta—will protect; eka—uniquely; virah—powerful, heroic; nara-deva—
of all kings, gods in human society; nathah—the master; asthaya—being
situated on; jaitram—victorious; ratham—his chariot; atta-capah—holding
the bow; paryasyate—he will circumambulate; daksinatah—from the
southern side; yatha—like; arkah—the sun.

TRANSLATION

This King, being uniquely powerful and heroic, will have no competitor.
He will travel around the globe on his victorious chariot, holding his invin-
cible bow in his hand and appearing exactly like the sun, which rotates in
its own orbit from the south.


--- Page 295 ---
Text 21] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 659
PURPORT

In this verse the word yatharkah indicates that the sun is not fixed but
is rotating in its orbit, which is set by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
This is confirmed in the Brahma-sanihitd and also in other parts of Srimad-
Bhagavatam. In the Fifth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that the
sun rotates in its own orbit at the rate of 16,000 miles per second. Simi-
larly, Brahma-samhita states: yasydjiaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakrah.
The sun rotates in its own orbit according to the order of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The conclusion is that the sun is not fixed in one
place. As far as Prthu Maharaja is concerned, it is indicated that his ruling
power would extend all over the world. The Himalayan Mountains, from
which the sunrise is first seen, are called udaydcala or udayadri. It is herein
indicated that Prthu Maharaja’s reign over the world would cover even the
Himalayan Mountains and extend to the borders of all oceans and seas. In
other words, his reign would cover the entire planet.

Another significant word in this verse is naradeva. As described in pre-
vious verses, the qualified king—be he King Prthu or any other king who
rules over the state as an ideal king—should be understood to be God in
human form. According to Vedic culture, the king is honored as the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead because he represents Narayana, who also
gives protection to the citizens. He is therefore natha, or the proprietor.
Even Sanatana Gosvami gave respect to the Nawab Hussain Shah as
naradeva, although the Nawab was Mohammedan. A king or governmental
head must therefore be so competent to rule over the state that the citizens
will worship him as God in human form. That is the perfectional stage for
the head of any government or state.

TEXT 21
अस्मै चृपालाः किर तत्र तत्र
यलि हरिष्यन्ति सलोकपालाः |
मंस्यन्त एषां fag आदिराजं
चक्रायुधं तद्यश्च उद्धरन्त्यः ॥२१॥
asmai nrpdlah kila (५८70 tatra
balim harisyanti salokapalah
mamsyanta 6501? striya adi-rajari
cakrayudham tad-yasa uddharantyah


--- Page 296 ---
660 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 16
asmai—unto him; nr-palah—all the kings; kila—certainly; tatra tatra—
here and there; balim—presentations; harisyanti— will offer; sa—with; loka-
palah—the demigods; mamsyante—will consider; esam—of these kings;
striyah—wives; ddi-rajam—the original king; cekra-@Gyudham—bearing the
disc weapon; tat—his; yasah—reputation; uddharantyah— carrying on.
TRANSLATION
When the King travels all over the world, other kings, as well as the
demigods, will offer him all kinds of presentations. Their queens will also
consider him the original king, who carries in his hands the emblems of
club and disc, and will sing of his fame, for he will be as reputable as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
As far as reputation is concerned, King Prthu is already known as the in-
carnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The word adi-rajam
means ‘‘the original king.” The original king is Narayana, or Lord Vignu.
People do not know that the original king, or Narayana, is actually the
protector of all living entities. As confirmed in the Vedas: eko bahiinam yo
vidadhati kaman (Katha Up. 2.2.13). Actually the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is maintaining all living entities. The king, or naradeva, is His re-
presenlative. As such, the king's duty is to personally supervise the distri-
bution of wealth for the maintenance of all living entities. If he does so, he
will be as reputable as Narayana. As mentioned in this verse (tad-yasah),
Prthu Maharaja was actually carrying with him the reputation of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead because he was actually reigning over the
world in that capacity.
TEXT 22
৬ 3 -
अयं महीं गां दुदृहेऽधिराजः
प
प्रजापतिन्रेत्तिकरः प्रजानाम्‌ ।
यो लीलयाद्रीन्‌ खश्चरासकोव्या
भिन्दन्‌ समां गामकरोचयेन्द्रः ।॥२२॥
ayam mahim gam duduhe 'dhirdjah
prajapatir vrtti-karah prajanam
yo lilayadrin sva-Sarasa-kotya
bhindan samam gam akarod yathendrah


--- Page 297 ---
Text 23] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 661
ayam—this King; mahim—the earth; gam—in the form of a cow; duduhe—
will milk; adhirdjah—extraordinary king; praja-patih—progenitor of man-
kind; vrtti-karah—providing living facility ; prajanam—of the citizens; yah—
one who; lilaya—simply by pastimes; adrin—mountains and hills; sva-
$arasa—of his bow; kotya—by the pointed end; bhindan—breaking; samam—
level; gam—the earth; akarot—will make; yatha—as; indrah—the King of
heaven, Indra.
TRANSLATION
This King, this protector of the citizens, is an extraordinary king and is
equal to the prajapati demigods. For the living facility of all citizens, he will
milk the earth, which is like a cow. Not only that, but he will level the
surface of the earth with the pointed ends of his bow, breaking all the hills
exactly as King Indra, the heavenly King, breaks mountains with his power-
ful thunderbolt.
TEXT 23
€ र +
विस्फूजयनाजगवं धनुः खयं
र
यदाचरर्ष्मामविषद्यमाजों |
तदा निरि्युरदिक्चि दिश्यसन्तो
लाडमूलघरयम्य यथा मृगेन्द्रः ॥२३॥
visphiirjayann ajagavam dhanuh svayarn
yadacarat ksmam avisahyam ajau
tada nililyur disi disy asanto
1৫718010771 udyamya yatha mrgendrah
visphiirjayan—vibrating; @je-gavam—made of the horns of goats and bulls;
dhanuh—his bow; svayam—personally; yada—when; acarat—will travel;
ksmam—on the earth; avisahyam—irresistible; ajau—in battle; tada—at that
time; nililyuh—will hide themselves; disi disi—in all directions; asantah—
demoniac men; langilam—tail; udyamya—keeping high; yatha—as;
mygendrah—the lion.
TRANSLATION
When the lion travels in the forest with its tail turned upward, all menial
animals hide themselves. Similarly, when King Prthu will travel over his
kingdom and vibrate the string of his bow, which is made of the horns of
goats and bulls and is irresistible in battle, all demoniac rogues and thieves
will hide themselves in all directions.


--- Page 298 ---
662 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 16
PURPORT
It is very appropriate to compare a powerful king like Prthu to a lion. In
India, ksatriya kings are still called simha, which means “lion.” Unless
rogues, thieves and other demoniac people in astate are afraid of the execu-
tive head, who rules the kingdom with a strong hand, there cannot be
peace or prosperity in the state. Thus it is most regrettable when a woman
becomes the executive head instead of a lion-like king. In such a situation
the people are considered very unfortunate.
TEXT 24
एषोऽश्वमेधाज्‌ शतमाजहार
মংললী प्रादुरभावि यत्र |
ELLE हयं पुरन्दरः
शतक्रतुश्चरमे वर्तमाने ॥२४॥
eso ’svamedhain salam ajahara
sarasvati pradur abhavi yatra
aharsid yasya hayarni purandarah
Sata-kratus carame vartamane
esah - 11115 King; asvamedhan—sacrificesknown as asvamedha; satam—one
hundred; @jahara— will perform; sarasvati—the river of the name Sarasvati;
praduh abhdvi—became manifest; yatra—where; aharsit—will steal; yasya—
whose; hayam—horse; purandarah—the Lord Indra; sata-kratuh—who per-
formed one hundred sacrifices; carame—while the last sacrifice; vartamane—
is occurring.
TRANSLATION
At the source of the River Sarasvati, this King will perform one hundred
sacrifices known as asvamedha. In the course of the last sacrifice, the
heavenly King Indra will steal the sacrificial horse.
TEXT 25
एष खसबमोपव्रने समेत्य
सनत्कुमारं भगवन्तमेकम्‌ ।
आराध्य भक्त्यालभतामलं तज्‌-
ज्ञानं यतो ब्रह्म परं विदन्ति ॥२५॥


--- Page 299 ---
Text 25] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 663
esa sva-sadmopavane sametya
sanat-kumaram bhagavantam ekam
aradhya bhaktyalabhatamalam taj—
Jjaanam yato brahma param vidanti

esah—this King; sva-sadma—of his palace; upavane—in the garden;
samelya—meeting; sanal-kumaram—Sanat-kumara; bhagavantam—the wor-
shipable; ekam—alone; aradhya—worshiping; bhaktya—with devotion;
alabhata—he will achieve; amalam—without contamination; tat—that;
jaanam—transcendental knowledge; yatah—by which; brahma—spirit;
param—supreme, transcendental; vidanti—they enjoy, they know.

TRANSLATION

This King Prthu will meet Sanat-kumara, one of the four Kumaras, in
the garden of his palace compound. The King will worship him with devo-
tion and will be fortunate to receive instructions by which one can enjoy
transcendental bliss.

PURPORT

The word vidanti refers to one who knows something or enjoys some-
thing. When a person is properly instructed by a spiritual master and under-
stands transcendental bliss, he enjoys life. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:

brahma-bhiitah prasannatma
na Socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhitesu
mad-bhaktim labhate param
“One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is equally dis-
posed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service
unto Me.” (Bg. 18.54)

When one attains to the Brahman platform, he neither hankers nor
laments. He actually partakes of transcendental blissful enjoyment. Al-
though King Prthu was an incarnation of Visnu, he nonetheless taught the
people in his kingdom to take instructions from a spiritual master who
represents the disciplic succession. Thus one can become fortunate and
enjoy a blissful life even within this material world. In this verse the verb
vidanti is sometimes taken to mean “understanding.” Thus when a person
understands Brahman, or the supreme source of everything, he enjoys a
blissful life.


--- Page 300 ---
664 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 16
TEXT 26
तत्र तत्र गिरस्तास्ता इति विश्चुतविक्रमः |
श्रोष्यत्यात्माश्चिता गाथाः पृथुः पृथुपराक्रमः ॥२६॥
tatra (५८70 giras tas ta
iti visruta-vikramah
Srogyaty atmasrita gathah
prthuhb prthu-parakramah
tatra tatra—here and there; girah— words; tah tah—many, various; iti—
thus; viSruta-vikramah—he whose chivalrous activities are widely reputed;
srogyati—will hear; atma-asritah—about himself; gathah—songs, narrations;
prthuh—King Prthu; prthu-parakramah—distinctly powerful.
TRANSLATION
In this way when the chivalrous activities of King Prthu come to be
known to the people in general, King Prthu will always hear about himself
and his activities.
PURPORT
To artificially advertise oneself and thus enjoy a so-called reputation is
a kind of conceit. Prthu Maharaja was famous amongst the people because
of his chivalrous activities. He did not have to advertise himself artificially.
One’s factual reputation cannot be covered.
TEXT 27
दिशो विजित्याप्रतिरुदधचक्रः
खतेजसोत्पाटितलोकश्चल्यः |
EN
सुरासुरेनद्रेरपगीयमान-
~ (५
महानुभावो भविता पतिथेवः ure
diso vijityapratiruddha-cakrah
sva-tejasotpatita-loka-salyah
surasurendrair upagiyamana-
mahanubhavo bhavita patir bhuvah


--- Page 301 ---
Text 27] Praise of King Prthu by the Professional Reciters 665

disah—all directions; vijitya—conquering; apratiruddha—without check;
cakrah—his influence or power; sva-tejasai—by his own prowess; utpatita—
uprooted; loka-salyah—the miseries of the citizens; sura—of demigods;
asura—of demons; indraih—by the chiefs; upagiyamana—being glorified;
maha-anubhavah—the great soul; bhavita—he will become; patih—the lord;
bhuvah—of the world.

TRANSLATION

No one will be able to disobey the orders of Prthu Maharaja. After con-
quering the world, he will completely eradicate the threefold miseries of
the citizens. Then he will be recognized all over the world. At that time
both the suras and the asuras will undoubtedly glorify his magnanimous
activities.

PURPORT

At the time of Maharaja Prthu, the world was ruled by one emperor,
although there were many subordinate states. Just as there are many united
states in various parts of the world, in olden days the entire world was
ruled through many states, but there was a supreme emperor who ruled
over all subsidiary states. As soon as there were some discrepancies in the
maintenance of the varpasrama system, the emperor would immediately
take charge of the small states.

The word utpatita-loka-salyah indicates that Maharaja Prthu completely
uprooted all the miseries of his citizens. The word salya means ‘‘piercing
thorns.” There are many kinds of miserable thorns that pierce the citizens
of a state, but all competent rulers, even up to the reign of Maharaja
Yudhisthira, uprooted all the miserable conditions of the citizens. It is
stated that during the reign of Maharaja Yudhisthira there did not even
exist severe cold or scorching heat, nor did the citizens suffer from any
kind of mental anxiety. This is the standard of good government. Such a
peaceful and prosperous government, devoid of anxiety, was established
by Prthu Maharaja. Thus the inhabitants of both saintly and demoniac
planets were all engaged in glorifying the activities of Maharaja Prthu.
Persons or nations anxious to spread their influence all over the world
should consider this point. If one is able to eradicate completely the three-
fold miseries of the citizens, he should aspire to rule the world. One should
not aspire to rule for any political or diplomatic consideration.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Sixteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Praise of King Prthu by the
Professional Reciters.”’


--- Page 302 ---
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Maharaja Prthu
Becomes Angry at the Earth
TEXT 1
A537 उवाच
i 3 कमेभिः
एवं स मगवान्‌ बेन्यः ख्यापितो गुणकमेभिः |
EY
छन्दयामास तान्‌ FH: प्रतिपूज्याभिनन्य च॥ 2 1
maitreya uvaca
evar sa bhagavan vainyah
khyapito gune-karmabhih
chandayam asa tan kamaih
pratipiajyabhinandya ca
maitreyah uvaca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; evam—
thus; sah—he; bhagavan—the Personality of Godhead; vainyah—in the form
of the son of King Vena; khyapitah—being glorified; guna-karmabhih—by
qualities and factual activities; chandayam dasa—pacified; tan—those re-
citers; kadmaih—by various presentations; pratipiijya—offering all respects;
abhinandya—offering prayers; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: In this way the reciters who were
glorifying Maharaja Prthu readily described his qualities and chivalrous
activities. At the end, Maharaja Prthu offered them various presentations
with all due respect and worshiped them adequately.
TEXT 2
ब्राह्यणप्रम्लान्‌ वर्णान्‌ भृत्यामादयपुरोधसः |
पौराञ्नानपदान्‌ श्रेणीः प्रकृतीः समपूजयत्‌ ॥ २ ॥
667


--- Page 303 ---
668 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
brihmana-pramukhan varnan
bhrtyamatya-purodhasah
pauran jana-padan srepih
prakrtith samapiijayat
brahmana-pramukhan—unto the leaders of the brahmapa community;
varnan—to the other castes; bhrtya—servants; amadtya—ministers;
purodhasah—to the priests; pauran—to the citizens; jana-padan—to his
countrymen; srenith—to different communities; prakrtih—to the admirers;
samapiijayat—he gave proper respects.
TRANSLATION
King Prthu thus satisfied and offered all respect to all the leaders of the
brahmanas and other castes, to his servants, to his ministers, to the priests,
citizens, general countrymen, people from other communities, admirers,
as well as others, and thus they all became happy.
TEXT 3
कदर उवाच
कसाद्धार गोरूपं धरित्री बहुरूपिणी |
9 - 9
যা दुदोह TYR को वत्सो दोहनं च किम्‌॥ ३ ॥
vidura uvaca
kasmad dadhara go-riparn
dharitri bahu-ripini
yam dudoha prthus tatra
ko vatso dohanarm ca kim
vidurah uvdca— Vidura inquired; kasmat—why; dadhara—took; go-
ripam—the shape of a cow; dharitri—the earth; bahu-ripini—who has
many other forms; yam—whom; dudoha—milked; prthuh—King Prthu;
tatra—there; kah—who; vatsah—the calf; dohanam—the milking pot; ca—
also; kim—what.
TRANSLATION
Vidura inquired from the great sage Maitreya: My dear braihmana, since
mother earth can appear in different shapes, why did she take the shape of
a cow? And when King Prthu milked her, who became the calf, and what
was the milking pot?


--- Page 304 ---
Text 5| Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 669
TEXT 4
प्रकृत्या विषमा देवी कृता तेन समा कथम्‌ |
तस मेध्यं हयं देवः कस हेतोरपाहरत्‌ ॥ ४ ॥
prakrtya visama devi
krta tena sama katham
tasya medhyarm hayarh devah
kasya hetor apaharat

prakrtya—by nature; visama—not level; devi—the earth; krta—was made;
tena—by him; sama—level; katham—how; tasya—his; medhyam—meant for
offering in the sacrifice; hayam—horse; devah—the demigod Indra; kasya—
for what; hetoh—reason; apaharat—stole.

TRANSLATION

The surface of the earth is by nature low in some places and high in
others. How did King Prthu level the surface of the earth, and why did the
King of heaven, Indra, steal the horse meant for the sacrifice?

TEXT 5
सनत्ङुमाराद्ध गवतो व्रह्मन्‌ ब्रक्षविदुत्तमात्‌ |
लब्ध्वा ज्ञानं सविज्ञानं राजर्षिः कां गरतिं गतः | ५॥
sanat-kumarad bhagavato
brahman brahma-vid-uttamat
labdhva jiianarm sa-vijidnain
rajarsih kam gatim gatah

sanal-kumaral—from Sanat-kumara; bhagavatah—the most powerful;
brahman—my dear brahmana; brahma-vit-uttamat—well versed in the Vedic
knowledge; labdhva— after achieving; jianam—knowledge; sa-vijianam—for
practical application; raja-rsih—the great saintly King; kam— which; gatim—
destination; gatah— achieved.

TRANSLATION

The great saintly King, Maharaja Prthu, received knowledge from

Sanat-kumara, who was the greatest Vedic scholar. After receiving knowl-


--- Page 305 ---
670 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 17
edge to be applied practically in his life, how did the saintly King attain
his desired destination?
PURPORT
There are four Vaignava sampradayas (systems) of disciplic succession.
One sampradaya comes from Lord Brahma, one from the goddess of
fortune, one from the Kumaras headed by Sanat-kumara, and one from
Lord Siva. These four systems of disciplic succession are still going on. As
King Prthu has illustrated, one who is serious to receive transcendental
Vedic knowledge must accept a guru, or spiritual master, in one of these
four disciplic successions. It is said thal unless one accepts a mantra from
one of these sampradayas, the so-called mantra will not act in Kali-yuga.
Many sampradayas have sprung up without authority, and they are
misleading the people by giving unauthorized mantras. The rascals of these
so-called sampradayas do not observe the Vedic rules and regulations. Al-
though they are addicted to all kinds of sinful activities, they still offer the
people mantras and thus mislead them. Intelligent persons, however, know
that such mantras will never be successful, and as such they never patronize
such upstart spiritual groups. People should be very careful of these
nonsensical sampradayas. To get some facility for sense gratification,
unfortunate people in this age receive mantras from these so-called
sampraddyas. Prthu Maharaja, however, showed by his example that one
should receive knowledge from a bona fide sampraddya. Therefore
Maharaja Prthu accepted Sanat-kumara as his spiritual master.
TEXTS 6-7
TRAE कृष्णस्य सवान्‌ भगवतः प्रभो; ।
श्रवः सुश्रवसः पुण्यं पूवेदेहकथाश्रयम्‌ ॥ ६॥
=
भक्ताय मेऽचुरक्ताय तव चाधोक्षजस्य च।
९ a
वक्तुमहसि योऽदुद्यद्ैन्यरूपेण गामिमाम्‌ ॥ ७॥
yac canyad api krspasya
bhavan bhagavatah prabhoh
Sravah susravasah punyarn
pirva-deha-kathasrayam
bhaktaya me ’nuraktaya
tava cadhokgsajasya ca


--- Page 306 ---
Texts 6-7) Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 671
vaktum arhasi yo ‘duhyad
vainya-riipena gam imam

yat—which; ca—and; anyat—other; api—certainly; krsnasya—of Krsna;
bhavan—your good self; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of God-
head; prabhoh—powerful; §ravah—glorious activilies; su-sravasah—who 15
very pleasing to hear about; punpyam—pious; pirva-deha—of His
previous incarnation; katha-asrayam—connected with the narration;
bhaktaya—unto the devotee; me—to me; anuraktaya—very much atten-
tive; lava—of yourself; ca—and; adhoksajasya—of the Lord, who is known
as Adhoksaja; ca—also; vaktum arhasi—please narrate; yah—one who;
aduhyal—milked; vainya-ripepa—in the form of the son of King Vena;
gam—cow, earth; imam—this.

TRANSLATION

Prthu Maharaja was a powerful incarnation of Lord Krsna's potencies;
consequently any narration concerning his activities is surely very pleasing
to hear, and it produces all good fortune. As far as 1 am concerned, I am
always your devolee as well as a devotee of the Lord, who is known as
Adhoksaja. Please therefore narrate all the stories of King Prthu, who, in
the form of the son of King Vena, milked the cow-shaped earth.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna is also known as avatari, which means, “one from whom all
the incarnations emanate.” In Bhagavad-gita 1,010] Krsna says, aham sarvasya
prabhavo mattah sarvarm pravartate: “I am the source of all spiritual and
malerial worlds. Everything emanates from Me.” (Bg. 10.8) Thus Lord
Krsna is the origin of everyone’s appearance. As far as this material world
is concerned, Lord Brahma, Lord Visnu and Lord Siva are all emanations
from Krsna. These three incarnations of Krsna are called guna-avatdras.
The material world is governed by three material modes of nature, and
Lord Visnu, Lord Brahma and Lord Siva respectively take charge of the
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. Maharaja Prthu is also an
incarnation of those qualities of Lord Krsna by which one rules over
conditioned souls.

In this verse the word adhoksaja, meaning “beyond the perception of
the material senses,” is very significant. No one can perceive the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by mental speculation; therefore a person with a
poor fund of knowledge cannot understand the Supreme Personality of


--- Page 307 ---
672 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
Godhead. Since one can only form an impersonal idea on the strength of
one’s material senses, the Lord is known as Adhoksaja.
TEXT 8
सूत उवाच
क)
चोदितो विदुरेणेवं वासुदेवकथां प्रति ।
9 A= ~
प्रशस्य तं प्रीतमना मैत्रेयः प्रत्यभाषत ।॥ ८ ॥
$ (८ uvaca
০০০10 vidurenaivam
vasudeva-kathariv prati
prasasya tam prita-mana
mailreyah pratyabhasata
sittah uvaca—Suta Gosvami said; coditah—inspired; vidurena—by Vidura;
evam—thus; vasudeva—of Lord Krsna; katham—narration: prati—about;
prasasya—praising; tam—him; prita-mandh—being very pleased; maitreyah—
the saint Maitreya; pratyabhdsata—replied.
TRANSLATION
Sata Gosvami continued: When Vidura became inspired to hear of the
activities of Lord Krsna in His various incarnations, Maitreya, also being
inspired and being very pleased with Vidura, began to praise him. Then
Maitreya spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Talk of krsna-kathd, or topics about Lord Krsna or His incarnations, is
so spiritually inspiring that the reciter and hearer are never exhausted.
That is the nature of spiritual talks. We have actually seen that one can
never become satiated by hearing the conversations between Vidura and
Maitreya. Both of them are devotees, and the more Vidura inquires, the
more Maitreya is encouraged to speak. A symptom of spiritual talks is
that no one feels tired. Thus upon hearing the questions of Vidura, the
great sage Maitreya did not feel disgusted but rather felt encouraged to
speak al greater length.
TEXT 9
मैत्रेय उवाच
EN
यदाभिषिक्तः प्रथुरङ्ग विप्रे
रामन्तरितो जनतायाश्च पालः |


--- Page 308 ---
Text 9] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 673
प्रजा निरन्ने क्षितिषृष्ठ॒णएत्य
्ुलक्षामदेहाः पतिमभ्यवोचन्‌ । ९ ॥
mailtreya (८४८
yadabhisiktah prthur 01180 viprair
amantrito janatayas ca palah
praja niranne ksiti-prstha etya
ksut-ksama-dehdh patim abhyavocan
maitreyah uvica—the great sage Maitreya said; yada—when; abhisiktah—
was enthroned; prthuh— King Prthu: anga—my dear Vidura; vipraih—by the
brahmanas; amantritah—was declared; janatayah—of the people; ca—also;
palah—the protector; prajah—the citizens; niranne—being without food
grains; ksiti-prsthe—the surface of the globe; etya—coming near: ksudh—by
hunger; ksama—skinny; dehah—their bodies; patim—to the protector;
abhyavocan—they said.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, at the time King
Prthu was enthroned by the great sages and brahmanas and declared to be
the protector of the citizens, there was a scarcity of food grains. The
citizens actually became skinny due to starvation. Therefore they came
before the King and informed him of their real situation.
PURPORT
Information is given herein concerning the selection of the king by the
brahmanas. According to the varnasrama system, the brdhmanas are
considered to be the heads of the society and therefore to be situated in
the topmost social position. The varndrama-dharma, the institution of
four varnas and four @sramas, is very scientifically designed. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita, varnasrama-dharma is not a man-made institution but is
God-made. In this narration it is clearly indicated that the brahmanas used
to control the royal power. When an evil king like Vena ruled, the
brahmanas would kill him through their brahminical powers and would
select a proper ruler by testing his qualifications. In other words, the
brahmanas, the intelligent men or great sages, would control the monarchi-
cal powers. Here we have an indication of how the brahmanas elected King
Prthu to the throne as the protector of the citizens. The citizens, being
skinny due to hunger, approached the King and informed him that
necessary action should be taken. The structure of the varnasrama-dharma
was so nice thal the brahmanas would guide the head of state. The head


--- Page 309 ---
674 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 17
of state would then give protection to the citizens. The ksatriyas would
take charge of protecting the people in general, and under the protection of
the ksatriyas, the vaisyas would protect the cows, produce food grains and
distribute them. Sidras, the working class, would help the higher three
classes by manual labor. This is the perfect social system.
TEXTS 10-11
वयं TEER
यथा्निना कोटरस्थेन TE ।
AWE याताः शरणं शरण्यं
€
यः साधितो वृत्तिकरः पतिनः ॥१०॥
বন্দী मवानीढतु रातवेऽन्नं
क्षुधार्दितानां RIT
यावख्न नडक््यामह उज्छितोर्जा
वार्तापतिस्त्वं किल रोकपालः ॥११॥
vayari rdjaii jatharepabhitapta
yathagnina kotara-sthena vrksah
tvam adya yalah sarapari Saranyari
yah sadhito vrtti-karah patir nah
tan no bhavan ihatu ratave ‘nnariv
ksudharditanarn nara-deva-deva
yavan na nanksyamaha ujjhitorja
varta-patis (४५१२ kila loka-palah
vayam—we; rajan—Q King; jatharena—by the fire of hunger; abhitaptah—
very much aggrieved; yatha—just as; agnina—by the fire; kotara-sthena—in
the hollow of a tree; vrksah—trees; Luim—unto you; adya—today; yalah—
we have come; saranam—shelter; sarapyam— worth taking shelter of ; yah —
who; sadhitah—appointed; vrtti-karah—one who gives employment; patifi—
master; nah—our; /৫/- therefore; nah—to us; bhavan—Y our Majesty ; thatu—
please try; ratave—to give; annam—food grains; ksudha—with hunger;
arditanam—suffering; nara-deva-deva—O supreme master of all kings; yavat
na—lest; nanksyamahe—we will perish; ujjhita—being bereft of; irjah—food
grains; vdrtd—of occupational engagements; patih—bestower; tvam—you;
kila—indeed; loka-palah—the protector of the citizens.


--- Page 310 ---
Text 12] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 675
TRANSLATION
Dear King, just as a tree with a fire burning in the hollow of the trunk
gradually dries up, we are drying up due to the fire of hunger in our
stomach. You are the protector of surrendered souls, and you have been
appointed to give employment to us. Therefore we have all come to you
for protection. You are not only a king, but the incarnation of God as
well. Indeed, you are the King of all kings. You can give us all kinds of
occupational engagements, for you are the master of our livelihood. There-
fore, O King of all kings, please arrange to satisfy our hunger by the
proper distribution of food grains. Please take care of us, lest we soon die
for want of food.
PURPORT
It is the duty of the king to see that everyone in the social orders—
brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sidras—is fully employed in the state.
Just as it is the duty of the brahmanas to elect a proper king, it is the duty
of the king to see that all the varnas—the brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas
and 4007৫5- 816 fully engaged in their respective occupational duties. It is
here indicated that although the people were allowed to perform their
duties, they were still unemployed. Although they were not lazy, they
still could not produce sufficient food to satisfy their hunger. When the
people are perplexed in this way, they should approach the head of
government, and the president or king should take immediate action to
mitigate the distress of the people.
TEXT 12
मैत्रेय उवाक
og: प्रजानां कर्णं निशम्य परिदेवितम्‌ ।
$id दध्यौ geo निमित्तं सोऽन्वपद्यत ॥१२॥
maitreya ५४९८व
(2710144 prajanam karupar
nisamya paridevitam
dirghar dadhyau kurusrestha
nimittarn so ’nvapadyata
maitreyah uvdca—the great saint Maitreya said; prthuh—King Prthu;
prajanam—of the citizens; karupam—pitiable condition; nisamya—hearing;


--- Page 311 ---
676 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 17
paridevitam—lamentation; dirgham—for a long time; dadhyau—contem-
plated; kuru-srestha—O Vidura; nimittam —the cause; sah—he; anvapadyata—
found out.
TRANSLATION
After hearing this lamentation and seeing the pitiable condition of the
citizens, King Prthu contemplated this matter for a long time to see if he
could find out the underlying causes.
TEXT 13
इति उयदसितो बुद्ध्या प्रगृहीतशरासनः |
सन्दे विश्षिखं भूमेः छडखिपुरशा यथा ॥१३॥
iti vyavasito buddhya
pragrhita-sarasanah
sandadhe visikhariv bhitmeh
kruddhas tri-pura-ha yatha
iti—thus; vyavasitah—having arrived at the conclusion; buddhya—by in-
telligence; pragrhita— having taken up; sarasanah— the bow ; sandadhe—fixed;
visikham—an arrow; bhiimeh —at the earth: kruddhah—angry; tri-pura-ha—
Lord Siva; yatha—like.
TRANSLATION
Having arrived at a conclusion, the King took up his bow and arrow and
aimed them at the earth, exactly as Lord Siva destroyed the whole world
out of anger.
PURPORT
King Prthu found out the cause for the scarcity of food grains. He could
understand that it was not the people’s fault, for they were not lazy in
executing their duties. Rather, the earth was not producing sufficient
food grains. This indicates that the earth can produce sufficiently if
everything is properly arranged, but sometimes the earth can refuse to
produce food grains for various reasons. The theory thal there is a scarcity
of food grains due to an increase of population is not a very sound theory.
There are other causes that enable the earth to produce profusely or to
stop producing. King Prthu found out the proper causes and took the
necessary steps immediately.


--- Page 312 ---
Text 15] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 677
TEXT 14
hy ও
प्रवेपमाना धरणी निल्ाम्योदायुधं च तम्‌ ।
गौः सत्यपाद्रवद्भीता FE TEEN ॥१४॥
pravepamana dharani
nisamyodayudham ca tam
gauh saty apadravad bhita
myrgiva mrgayu-druta
pravepamana—trembling; dharani—the earth; nisamya—seeing; udayu-
dham—having taken his bow and arrow; ca—also; tam—the King; gauh—a
cow; sati—becoming; apadraval—began to flee; bhita—very much afraid;
myrgi iva—like a deer; mrgayu—by a hunter; druta—being followed.
TRANSLATION
When the earth saw that King Prthu was taking his bow and arrow to kill
her, she became very much afraid and began to tremble. She then began to
flee, exactly as a deer, which runs very swiftly when followed by a hunter.
Being afraid of King Prthu, she took the shape of a cow and began to run.
PURPORT
Just as a mother produces various children, both male and female, the
womb of mother earth produces all kinds of living entities in various
shapes. Thus it is possible for mother earth to take on innumerable shapes.
At this time, in order to avoid the wrath of King Prthu, she took the shape
of a cow. Since a cow is never lo be killed, mother earth thought it wise to
take the shape of a cow in order to avoid King Prthu’s arrows. King Prthu,
however, could understand this fact, and therefore he did not stop
chasing the cow-shaped earth.
TEXT 15
-
तामन्वधावत्तदैन्यः FRASIER: |
হাং WR सन्धाय यत्र यत्र पलायते ॥१५॥
tam anvadhavat tad vainyah
kupito ’tyaruneksanah


--- Page 313 ---
678 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
$aram dhanusi sandhaya
yatra yatra paldyate
tam—the cow-shaped earth; anvadhavat—he chased; tat—then; vainyah—
the son of King Vena; kupitah—being very much angry; ati-aruna— very
red; tksanah—his eyes; saram—an arrow; dhanusi—on the bow; sandhdya—
placing; yatra yatra—wherever; paldyate—she flees.
TRANSLATION
Seeing this, Maharaja Prthu became very angry, and his eyes became as
red as the early morning sun. Placing an arrow on his bow, he chased the
cow-shaped earth wherever she would run. )
TEXT 16
सा Ra ARI रोदसी चान्तरं as |
धावन्ती तत्र तत्रैनं ददर्शानूयतायुधम्‌ ॥१६॥
sa diso vidiso devi
rodasi cantarari tayoh
dhavanti tatra tatrainam
dadarsanadyatayudham
si—the cow-shaped earth; disah—in the four directions; vidisah—ran-
domly in other directions; devi—the goddess; rodasi—toward heaven and
earth; ca—also; antaram—between; tayoh—them; dhavanti—fleeing; tatra
tatra—here and there; enam—the King; dadarsa—she saw; anu—behind;
udyata—taken up; ayudham—his weapons.
TRANSLATION
The cow-shaped earth ran here and there in outer space between the
heavenly planets and the earth, and wherever she ran, the King chased
her with his bow and arrows.
TEXT 17
I नाचिन्दत TW वैन्यान्मरस्योचखि प्रजाः |
Ta तदा निवषेते हदयेन Rg ॥१५७॥


--- Page 314 ---
Text 18] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 679
loke navindata tranam
vainyan mrtyor iva prajah
trastd tada nivavrte
hrdayena vidiiyata
loke—within the three worlds; na—not; avindata—could obtain; tranam—
release; vainyat—from the hand of the son of King Vena; mrtyoh—from
death; iva—like; prajah—men; trasta—being very much afraid; tada—at that
time; nivavrte—turned back; hrdayena—within her heart; vidiyata—very
much aggrieved.
TRANSLATION
Just as a man cannot escape the cruel hands of death, the cow-shaped
earth could not escape the hands of the son of Vena. At length the earth,
fearful, her heart aggrieved, turned back in helplessness.
TEXT 18
उवाच च महाभागं धर्मज्ञापन्नवत्सल 1
ঙ্গাহি मामपि भूतानां पालनेऽवस्यितो मवान्‌ ॥१८॥
uvdca ca mahd-bhagarn
dharma-jiidpanna-vatsala
trahi mam api bhatanam
pdlane vasthito bhavan
uvaca—she said; ca—and; maha-bhagam—unto the great, fortunate King;
dharma-jiia—O knower of the principles of religion; dpanna-vatsala—O
shelter of the surrendered; trahi—save; mam—me;api—indeed; bhitanam—
of living entities; palane—in protection; avasthitah—situated; bhavan—Y our
Majesty.
TRANSLATION
Addressing the great opulent King Prthu as the knower of religious
principles and shelter of the surrendered, she said: Please save me. You are
the protector of all living entities. Now you are situated as the King of this
planet.
PURPORT
The cow-shaped earth addressed King Prthu as dharma-jiia, which refers
to one who knows the principles of religion. The principles of religion


--- Page 315 ---
680 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
dictate that a woman, a cow, a child, a brahmana and an old man must be
given all protection by the king or anyone else. Consequently mother
earth took the shape of a cow. She was also a woman. Thus she appealed
to the King as one who knows the principles of religion. Religious
principles also dictate that one is not to be killed if he surrenders. She
reminded King Prthu that not only was he an incarnation of God, but he
was situated as the King of the earth as well. Therefore his duty was to
excuse her.
TEXT 19
स स्वं जिघांससे कसादीनायङृत किल्विषाम्‌ ।
अहनिष्यत्कथं योषां धर्मज्ञ इति यो मतः ॥१९॥
sa (0৫7 jighamsase kasmad
dinam akrta-kilbisam
ahanisyat katham yosam
dharma-jiia iti yo matah

sah—that very person; tvam—you; jigharmsase—want to kill; kasmat—
why: dinam—poor; akrta—without having done; kilbisam—any sinful
activities; ahanisyat—would kill; katham—how; yosam—a woman; dharma-
jiiah—the knower of religious principles; iti—thus; yah—one who; matah—
is considered.

TRANSLATION

The cow-shaped earth continued to appeal to the King: I am very poor
and have not committed any sinful activities. I do not know why you
want to kill me. Since you are supposed to be the knower of all religious
principles, why are you so envious of me, and why are you so anxious to
kill a woman?

PURPORT

The earth appealed to the King in two ways. A king who knows religious
principles cannot kill anyone who has not committed sinful activities.
Apart from this, a woman is not to be killed, even if she does commit some
sinful activities. Since the earth was innocent and was also a woman, the
King should not kill her.

TEXT 20
प्रहरन्ति न्‌ वै জাত্ত छृतागःखपि जन्तवः |
forma न्वद्धिधा गजन करुणा दीनवत्सलाः ॥२०॥


--- Page 316 ---
Text 21] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 681
praharanti na vai strisu
krtagahsv api jantavah
kim uta tvad-vidha rajan
karuna dina-vatsaldh
praharanti—strike; na—never; vai—certainly; strisu—women; krta-agahsu—
having committed sinful activities; api—although; jantavah—human beings;
kim uta—then what to speak of; tvat-vidhah—personalities like you; rajan—
O King; karupah—merciful; dina-vatsaldh—affectionate to the poor.
TRANSLATION
Even if a woman does commit some sinful activity, no one should place
his hand upon her. And what to speak of you, dear King, who are so merci-
ful. You are a protector, and you are affectionate to the poor.
TEXT 21
मां विपाव्याजरां नावं यत्र বিহন प्रतिष्ठितम्‌ ।
आत्मानं च সআখীমাঃ कथमम्भसि धास्यसि nen
mam vipalydjaram navar
yatra visvar pratisthitam
datmadnam ca prajas cemdh
katham ambhasi dhasyasi
mam—me; vipa{ya—breaking lo pieces; ajaram—very strong; navam—
boat; yatra— where; visvam—all worldly paraphernalia; pratisthitam—stand-
ing: atmanam—yourself; ca—and; prajah—your subjects; ca—also; imah—all
these; katham—how ;ambhasi—in the water; dhdsyasi—you will hold.
TRANSLATION
The cow-shaped earth continued: My dear King, I am just like a strong
boat, and all the paraphernalia of the world is standing upon me. If you
break me to pieces, how can you protect yourself and your subjects from
drowning?
PURPORT
Beneath the entire planetary system is the garbha water. Lord Vignu lies
on this garbha water, and from His abdomen a lotus stem grows, and all
the planets within the universe are floating in the air being supported by
this lotus stem. If a planet is destroyed, it must fall into the water of


--- Page 317 ---
682 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
garbha. The earth therefore warned King Prthu that he could gain nothing
by destroying her. Indeed, how would he protect himself and his citizens
from drowning in the garbha water? In other words, outer space may be
compared to an ocean of air, and each and every planet is floating on it
just as a boat or island floats on the ocean. Sometimes planets are called
৫৮80৫, or islands, and sometimes they are called boats. Thus the cosmic
manifestation is partially explained in this reference by the cow-shaped
earth.
TEXT 22
पृथुरुवाच
बसुधे त्रां वधिष्यामि मच्छासनपराडप्लीम्‌ |
मागं बहिंषि या ब्ङक्तं न तनोति च नो वसु ॥२२॥
prthur ५८०८०
vasudhe tvam vadhisyami
mac-chasana-paran-mukhim
bhagari barhisi ya vrikte
na tanoti ca no vasu

prthuh wvaca—King Prthu replied; vasu-dhe—my dear earthly planet;
tvam—you; vadhisyami—1 shall kill; mat—my; $asana—rulings; parak-
mukhim—disobedient to; bhdgam—your share; barhisi—in the yajiia; ya—
who; vritkte—accepts; na—not; tanoti—does deliver; ca—and; nah—to us;
vasu—produce.

TRANSLATION

King Prthu replied to the earthly planet: My dear earth, you have
disobeyed my orders and rulings. In the form of a demigod you accepted
your share of the yajias we performed, but in return you have not
produced sufficient food grains. For this reason I must kill you.

PURPORT

The cow-shaped earthly planet submitted that she was not only a woman,
but was innocent and sinless as well. Thus she argued that she should not
be killed. Besides, she pointed out that being perfectly religious-minded,
the King could not violate the religious principles that forbade killing a
woman. In reply, Maharaja Prthu informed her that first of all she had
disobeyed his orders. This was her first sinful activity. Secondly he accused


--- Page 318 ---
Text 24] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 683
her of taking her share in the yajfias (sacrifices) but not producing sufficient
food grains in return.
TEXT 23
यवसं जग्ध्यनुदिनं नैव दोग्ध्यौधसं पयः ।
तस्यामेवं हि दुष्टायां दण्डो नात्र न शस्यते ॥२३॥
2०४०5! jagdhy anudinam
naiva dogdhy audhasam payah
tasyam evam hi dugtayarm
dando ndtra na sasyate
yavasam—green grass; jagdhi—you eat; anudinam— daily; na—never; eva—
certainly ; dogdhi—you yield; audhasam—in the milk bag; payah—milk;
tasyam—when a cow; evam—thus; hi—certainly; dustayam—being offensive;
dandah—punishment; na—not; atra—here; na—not; sasyate—is advisable.
TRANSLATION
Although you are eating green grass every day, you are not filling your
milk bag so we can utilize your milk. Since you are willfully committing
offenses, it cannot be said that you are not punishable due to your
assuming the form of a cow.
PURPORT
A cow eals green grasses in the pasture and fills her milk bag with
sufficient milk so that the cowherdsmen can milk her. Yajiias (sacrifices)
are performed to produce sufficient clouds that will pour water over the
earth. The word payah can refer both to milk and to water. As one of the
demigods, the earthly planet was taking her share in the yajiias—that is,
she was eating green grass—but in return she was not producing sufficient
food grains—that is, she was not filling her milk bag. Prthu Maharaja was
therefore justified in threatening to punish her for her offense.
TEXT 24
तवं खल्वोषधिबीजानि प्राक्‌ सृष्टानि खयम्भुवा।
न यचस्यात्मरुद्ानि माषतज्ञाय मन्दधीः ॥२४।।


--- Page 319 ---
684 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
tvari khalv osadhi-bijani
prak srstani svayambhuva
na muiicasy atma-ruddhani
mam avajiiadya manda-dhth
tvam—you; khalu—certainly; osadhi—of herbs, plants and grains; bfjani—
the seeds; prak—formerly; srstani—created; svayam-bhuva—by Lord Brahma;
na—do not; muiicasi—deliver; dtma-ruddhani—hidden within yourself;
mam—me; avajiidya—disobeying; manda-dhih—less intelligent.
TRANSLATION
You have so lost your intelligence that, despite my orders, you do not
deliver the seeds of herbs and grains—formerly created by Brahma—now
hidden within yourself.
PURPORT
While creating all the planets in the universe, Lord Brahma also created
the seeds of various grains, herbs, plants and trees. When sufficient water
falls from the clouds, the seeds fructify and produce fruits, grains,
vegetables, etc. By his example, Prthu Maharaja indicates that whenever
there is a scarcity in food production, the head of the government should
take steps to see why production is being held up and what should be done
to rectify the situation.
TEXT 25
अमूषां श्ुत्परीतानामार्तानां परिदेबितम्‌ |
<Q
शमयिष्यामि मद्वाणे भिमायास्तव मेदसा ॥२५॥
amitsam ksul-paritanam
artanam paridevitam
Samayisyami mad-banair
bhinnayds tava medasa
amiasam—of all of them; ksudh-paritanam—suffering from hunger;
artanam—of the distressed; paridevitam—the lamentation; samayisyami—1
shall pacify; mat-banaih—by my arrows; bhinnayah—being cut into pieces;
tava—of you; medasa—by the flesh.


--- Page 320 ---
Text 26] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 685
TRANSLATION

Now, with the help of my arrows, I shall cut you to pieces and with
your flesh satisfy the hunger-stricken citizens who are now crying for want
of grains. Thus I shall satisfy the crying citizens of my kingdom.

PURPORT

Here we find some indication how the government can arrange for the
eating of cow flesh. It is here indicated that in a rare circumstance when
there is no supply of grains, the government may sanction the eating of
meat. However, when there is sufficient food, the government should not
allow the eating of cow’s flesh just to satisfy the fastidious tongue. In
other words, in rare circumstances, when people are suffering for want of
grains, meat-eating or flesh-eating can be allowed, but not otherwise. The
maintenance of slaughterhouses for the satisfaction of the tongue and the
killing of animals unnecessarily should never be sanctioned by a government.

As described in the previous verse, animals or cows should be given ৪801
ficient grass to eat. If, despite a sufficient supply of grass, a cow does not
supply milk, and there is an acute shortage of food, the dried-up cow may
be utilized to feed the hungry masses of people. According to the law of
necessity, first of all human society must try to produce food grains and
vegetables, but if they fail in this, they can indulge in flesh-eating. Other-
wise not. As human society is presently structured, there is sufficient pro-
duction of grains all over the world. Therefore the opening of slaughter-
houses cannot be supported. In some nations there is so much surplus
grain that sometimes extra grain is thrown into the sea, and sometimes
the government forbids further production of grain. The conclusion is that
the earth produces sufficient grain to feed the entire population, but the
distribution of this grain is restricted due to trade regulations and a desire for
profit. Consequently in some places there is scarcity of grain and in others
profuse production. If there were one government on the surface of the
earth to handle the distribution of grain, there would be no question of
scarcity, no necessity to open slaughterhouses, and no need to present false
theories about overpopulation.

TEXT 26
पुमान्‌ योषिदुत স্তীন आत्मसम्भावनोऽधमः |
भूतेषु निरजुकोश्लो Fumi तद्वषोऽधः ॥२६॥


--- Page 321 ---
686 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
puman yosid uta kliba
atma-sambhavano ‘dhamah
bhitesu niranukroso
nrpanam tad-vadho ‘vadhah
puman—a man; yogil—a woman; utla—also; klibah—eunuch; atma-
sambhdvanah—interested in self-maintenance; adhamah—lowest of human-
kind; bhiitesu—to other living entities; niranukrosah—without compassion;
nrpanam—for the kings; tat—of him; vadhah—Kkilling; avadhah—not killing.
TRANSLATION
Any cruel person—be he a man, woman or impotent eunuch—who is only
interested in his personal maintenance and has no compassion for other
living entities, may be killed by the king. Such killing can never be con-
sidered actual killing.
PURPORT
The planet earth is actually a woman in her constitutional form, and as
such she needs to be protected by the king. Prthu Maharaja argues, however,
that if a citizen within the state—be he man, woman or a eunuch—is not
compassionate upon his fellow men, he or she may be killed by the king,
and such killing is never to be considered actual killing. As far as the field of
spiritual activities is concerned, when a devotee is self-satisfied and does
not preach the glories of Krsna, he is not considered a first-class devotee. A
devotee who tries to preach, who has compassion upon innocent persons
who have no knowledge of Krsna, is a superior devotee. In his prayer to
the Lord, Prahlada Maharaja said that he was not personally interested in
liberation from this material world; rather, he did not wish to be liberated
from this material condition until all fallen souls are delivered. Even in the
material field, if a person is not interested in others’ welfare, he should be
considered to be condemned by the Personality of Godhead or His incarna-
tion as Prthu Maharaja.
TEXT 27
at sig! नीत्वा मायागां तिरश्चः शरैः।
आः धारयिष्याम्यहं प्रजाः Rel
1110. 11/11/1111
nitva maya-gam tilasah saraih


--- Page 322 ---
Text 28] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 687
datma-yoga-balenema
dharayisyamy aham prajah

tvam—you; stabdham—very much puffed up; durmadam—mad; nitva—
bringing into such a condition; maya-gam—false cow; tilasah—into small
particles like grains; saraih—by my arrows; dtma—personal; yoga-balena—
by mystic power; imah—all these; dharayisyami—shall uphold; aham—1;
prajah—all the citizens, or all the living entities.

TRANSLATION

You are very much puffed up with pride and have become almost insane.
Presently you have assumed the form of a cow by your mystic powers.
Nonetheless I shall cut you into small pieces like grain, and I will uphold
the entire population by my personal mystic powers.

PURPORT

The earth informed King Prthu that if he destroyed her, he and his sub-
jects would all fall down into the waters of the garbha ocean. King Prthu
now replies to that point. Although the earth assumed the shape of a cow
by her mystic powers in order to be saved from being killed by the King,
the King was nonetheless aware of this fact and would not hesitate to cut
her to pieces, just like small bits of grain. As far as the destruction of the,
citizens is concerned, Maharaja Prthu maintained that he could uphold
everyone by his own mystic powers. He did not need the help of the earthly
planet. Being the incarnation of Lord Visnu, Prthu Maharaja possessed the
power of Sankarsana, which is explained by the scientists as the power of
gravitation. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is holding millions of
planets in space without any support; similarly, Prthu Maharaja would not
have had any difficulty supporting all his citizens and himself in space with-
out the help of the planet earth. The Lord is known as Yogesvara, master
of all mystic powers. Consequently the planet earth was informed by the
King that she need not worry about his standing without her help.

TEXT 28
एवं मन्युमयीं मूर्तिं कृतान्तमिव बिभ्रतम्‌ ।
प्रणता STATE: प्राह मही सञ्जातवेपथुः ॥२८॥
evar manyumayim mirtim
krtantam iva bibhratam


--- Page 323 ---
688 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
pranatd praiijalih praha
mahi saitjata-vepathuh
evam—thus; manyu-mayim—very much angry; mirtim—form; krta-
antam—death personified, Yamaraja; iva—like; bibhratam— possessing;
pranata—surrendered; prdiijalih— with folded hands; prdha—said; mahi—the
earthly planet; saiijata—arisen; vepathuh—trembling in her body.
TRANSLATION
At this time Prthu Maharaja became exactly like Yamaraja, and his whole
body appeared very angry. In other words, he was anger personified. After
hearing him, the planet earth began to tremble. She surrendered, and with
folded hands began to speak as follows.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is death personified to miscreants
and the supreme beloved Lord to the devotees. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord
says, mrtyuh sarva-haras cdham: “1 am all-devouring death.” (Bg. 10.34)
Faithless unbelievers who challenge the appearance of God will be delivered
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead when He appears before them as
death. Hiranyakasipu, for example, challenged the authority of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and the Lord met him in the form of Nrsimhadeva
and killed him. Similarly, the planet earth saw Maharaja Prthu as death
personified, and she also saw him in the mood of anger personified. There-
fore she began to tremble. One cannot challenge the authority of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead in any circumstance. It is better to surrender
unto Him and take His protection at all times.
TEXT 29
धरोवाच
नमः परसै पुरुषाय मायया
विन्यस्तनानातनवे गुणात्मने |
नमः खरूपानुभवेन निर्धुत-
द्रन्यक्रियाक्रारकविभ्रमोभेये ॥२९॥
dharovaca
namah parasmai purusdya mayayd
vinyasta-nand-tanave gundtmane


--- Page 324 ---
Text 29] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 689
namah svarapanubhavena nirdhuta-
dravya-kriya-karaka-vibhramormaye

dhara—the earthly planet; uvdca—said; namah—1I offer my obeisances;
parasmai—unto the Transcendence; purusiya—unto the person; mayaya—
by the material energy; vinyasta—expanded; n@na—various; tanave—whose
forms; guna-dtmane—unto the source of the three modes of material nature;
namah—1 offer my obeisances; sva-riippa—of the real form; anubhavena—by
understanding; nirdhuta—not affected by; dravya—matter; kriya—action;
karaka—doer; vibhrama—bewilderment; armaye—the waves of material
existence.

TRANSLATION

The planet earth spoke: My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of God-
head, You are transcendental in Your position, and by Your material
energy You have expanded Yourself in various forms and species of life
through the interaction of the three modes of material nature. Unlike some
other masters, You always remain in Your transcendental position and are
not affected by the material creation, which is subject to different material
interactions. Consequently You are not bewildered by material activities.

PURPORT

After King Prthu gave his royal command, the planet earth in the shape
of a cow could understand that the King was a directly empowered incar-
nation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Consequently the King
knew everything past, present and future. Thus there was no possibility
of the earth’s cheating him. The earth was accused of hiding the seeds of all
herbs and grains, and therefore she is preparing to explain how the seeds of
these herbs and grains can be again exposed. The earth knew that the King
was very angry with her, and she realized that unless she pacified his anger,
there was no possibility of placing a positive program before him. Therefore
in the beginning of her speech she very humbly presents herself as a part
and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s body. She submits
that the various bodily forms manifest in the physical world are but different
parts and parcels of the supreme gigantic body. It is said that the lower
planetary systems are parts and parcels of the legs of the Lord, whereas the
upper planetary systems are parts and parcels of the Lord’s head. The Lord
creates this material world by His external energy, but this external energy
is in one sense not different from Him. Yet at the same time the Lord is not
directly manifest in the external energy but is always situated in the spiritual
energy. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.10), mayadhyaksena prakrtih: material


--- Page 325 ---
690 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
nature is working under the direction of the Lord. Therefore the Lord is
not unattached to the external energy, and He is addressed in this verse as
guna-atmd, the source of the three modes of material nature. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita:

sarvendriya-gunabhdsarm

4 sarvendriya-vivarjitam
asaktari sarva-bhrc caiva
nirgunam guna-bhoktr ca

“The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without senses.
He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all living beings. He
transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He is the master of
all modes of material nature.” (Bg. 13.15)

Although the Lord is not attached to the external energy, He is nonethe-
less the master of it. The philosophy of Lord Caitanya, upholding that the
Lord is simultaneously one with and different from His creation (acintya-
bhedabheda-tattva), is very easily understandable in this connection. The
planet earth explains that although the Lord is attached to the external
energy, He is nonetheless nirdhuta; He is completely free from the activities
of the external energy. The Lord is always situated in His internal energy.
Therefore in this verse it is stated: svaripanubhavena. The Lord remains
completely in His internal potency and yet has full knowledge of the ex-
ternal energy as well as the internal energy, just as His devotee remains
always in a transcendental posilion, keeping himself in the service of the
Lord without becomingattached to the material body. Srila Ripa Gosvami
says that the devotee who is always engaged in the devotional service of the
Lord is always liberated, regardless of his material situation. If it is possible
for a devotee to remain transcendental, it is certainly possible for the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead to remain in His internal potency without
being attached to the external potency. There should be no difficulty in
understanding this situation. Just as a devotee is never bewildered by his
material body, the Lord is never bewildered by the external energy of this
material world. A devotee is not hampered by the material body, although
he is situated in a physical body that runs according to so many material
conditions, just as there are five kinds of air functioning within the body,
and so many organs—the hands, legs, the tongue, genitals, rectum, etc.—all
working differently. The spirit soul, the living entity who is in full knowl-
edge of his position, is always engaged in chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare


--- Page 326 ---
Text 30] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 691
and is not concerned with the bodily functions. Although the Lord is con-
nected with the material world, He is always situated in His spiritual energy
and is always unattached to the functions of the material world. As far as
the material body is concerned, there are six “waves” or symptomatic ma-
terial conditions: hunger, thirst, lamentation, bewilderment, old age and
death. The liberated soul is never concerned with these six physical interac-
tions. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being the all-powerful master
of all energies, has some connection with the external energy, but He is al-
ways free from the interactions of the external energy in the material
world.
TEXT 30
येनाहमात्मायतनं विनिर्भिता
धात्रा यतोऽयं गुणसर्गसडग्रदः |
स एव मां FIT खरा-
१ ৬ 3
इपस्थितोऽन्यं शरणं कमाश्रये ॥२०॥
yenaham dtmdyatanam vinirmita
dhdtra yato ‘yam guna-sarga-sanigrahah
sa eva mam hantum udayudhah sva-rad
upasthito nyam saranam kam asraye

yena—by whom; aham—1; atma-dyatanam—resting place of all living
entities; vinirmitd—was created; dhatra—by the Supreme Lord; yatah—on
account of whom; ayam—this; guna-sarga-sanigrahah—combination of का
ferent material elements; sah—He; eva—certainly ;mam— me; hantum— to kill;
udayudhah—prepared with weapons; sva-rit-completely independent;
upasthitah—now present before me;anyam-— other; sarapam— shelter;kam—
unto whom; dsraye—1 shall resort to.

TRANSLATION

The planet earth continued: My dear Lord, You are the complete con-
ductor of the material creation. You have created this cosmic manifestation
and the three material qualities, and therefore You have created me, the
planet earth, the resting place of all living entities. Yet You are always fully
independent, my Lord. Now that You are present before me and ready to
kill me with Your weapons, let me know where I should go to take shelter,
and tell me who can give me protection.


--- Page 327 ---
692 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
PURPORT

The planet earth herein exhibits the symptoms of full surrender before
the Lord. As stated, no one can protect the person whom Krsna is pre-
pared to kill, and no one can kill the person whom Krsna protects. Be-
cause the Lord was prepared to kill the planet earth, there was no one to
give protection to her. We are all receiving protection from the Lord, and
itis therefore proper that every one of us surrender unto Him. In Bhagavad-
gita the Lord instructs:

sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekar $aranarn vraja
aharn tvarn sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.” (Bg. 18.66)

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura sings: “My dear Lord, whatever I have—even
my mind, the center of all material necessities, namely my home, my body
and whatever I have in connection with this body—I now surrender unto
You. You are now completely independent to act however You like. If You
like, You can kill me, and if You like, You can save me. In any case, | am
Your eternal servant, and You have every right to do whatever You like.”

TEXT 31
य एतदादावसृजच्चराचरं
सखमाययाऽऽत्माश्रययावितक्यया |
तयैव सोऽयं किल गोप्तु्ु्यतः
১ ooh Ss
कथं नु মা धमेपरो जिघांसति ॥३१॥
ya etad adav asrjac ০৫7৫0০07077
sva-mayaydtmadsrayaydavitarkyaya
tayaiva so ’yam kila goptum udyatah
kathari nu mar dharma-paro jighamsati

yah—one who; etat—these; adau—in the beginning of creation; asrjat—
created; cara-acaram—moving and nonmoving living entities; sva-mayayd—
by His own potency; dtma-dsrayayd—sheltered under His own protection;
avitarkyayd—inconceivable; taya—by that same maya; eva—certainly; sah—


--- Page 328 ---
Text 32] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 693
he; ayam—this King; kila—certainly; goptum udyatah—prepared to give
protection; katham—how; nu—then; mam—me; dharma-parah—one who is
strictly following religious principles; jighamsati— desires to kill.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of creation You created all these moving and non-
moving living entities by Your inconceivable energy. Through this very
same energy You are now prepared to protect the living entities. Indeed,
You are the supreme protector of religious principles. Why are You so
anxious to kill me, even though I am in the form of a cow?
PURPORT
The planet earth argues that there is no doubt that one who creates can
also annihilate by His sweet will. The planet earth questions why she should
be killed when the Lord is prepared to give protection to everyone. After
all, it is the earth that is the resting place for all other living entities, and it
is the earth that produces grains for them.
TEXT 32
नूलं बतेशस्य समीहितं जनै-
©.
स्तन्मायया दुजेय याटृतात्मभिः |
न रक्ष्यते यस्त्रकरोद्‌ कारयद्‌-
योऽनेक एकः परतश्च ईरः ॥३२॥
nina batesasya samihitar janais
tan-mayaya durjayayakrtatmabhih
na laksyate yas tv akarod akarayad
yo ’'neka ekah paratas ca isvarah
nianam—surely; bata—certainly; isasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; samihitam—activities, plan; janath—by people; tat-mayaya—by
His potency; durjayaya—which is unconquerable; akrta-atmabhih—who are
not sufficiently experienced; na—never; laksyate—are seen; yah—he who;
tu—then; akarot—created; akdrayat—caused to create; yah—one who;
anekah—many; ekeh—one; paratah—by His inconceivable potencies; ca—
and; iSvarah—controller.


--- Page 329 ---
694 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, although You are one, by Your inconceivable potencies
You have expanded Yourself in many forms. Through the agency of Brahma,
You have created this universe. You are therefore directly the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Those who are not sufficiently experienced cannot
understand Your transcendental activities because they are covered by Your
illusory energy.

PURPORT

Godis one, but He expands Himself in a variety of energies—the material
energy, the spiritual energy, the marginal energy and so forth. Unless one
is favored and especially endowed with grace, he cannot understand how the
one Supreme Personality of Godhead acts through His different energies.
The living entities are also the marginal energy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Brahma is also one of these living entities, but he is especially
empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although Brahma is
supposed to be the creator of this universe, actually the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead is its ultimate creator. In this verse the word mayaya is
significant. Mdyd means “energy.” Lord Brahma is not the energetic but is
one of the manifestations of the Lord’s marginal energy. In other words,
Lord Brahma is only an instrument. Although sometimes plans appear con-
tradictory, there is a definite plan behind all action. One who is experienced
and is favored by the Lord can understand that everything 15 being done ac-
cording to the Lord’s supreme plan.

TEXT 33
सर्गादि disargeaty शक्तिभि-
„ ই্যকিযাক্াকেইননাংমমিঃ |
तस्मे सष्ुनद्निरुद्शक्तये
EN
नमः परस्मे पुरुषाय वेषसे 1
sargadi yo ’syanurunaddhi saktibhir
dravya-kriyd-karaka-cetanatmabhih
tasmai samunnaddha-niruddha-saktaye
namah parasmai purusiya vedhase

sarga-adi—creation, maintenance and dissolution; yah—one who; asya—of

this material world; anwrunaddhi—causes; saktibhih—by His own potencies;


--- Page 330 ---
Text 34] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 695
dravya—physical elements; kriya—senses; karaka—controlling demigods;
cetana—intelligence; atmabhih—consisting of false ego; tasmai—unto Him;
samunnaddha— manifest; niruddha— potential; §aktaye—one who possesses
these energies; namah—obeisances; parasmai—unto the transcendental;
purusaya—Supreme Personality of Godhead; vedhase—unto the cause of all
causes.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, by Your own potencies You are the original cause of the
material elements, as well as the performing instruments (the senses), the
workers of the senses (the controlling demigods), the intelligence and the
ego, as well as everything else. By Your energy You manifest this entire
cosmic creation, maintain it and dissolve it. Through Your energy alone
everything is sometimes manifest and sometimes not manifest. You are
therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes. I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
All activities begin with the creation of the total energy, the mahat-tattva.
Then, by the agitation of the three gunas, the physical elements are created,
as well as the mind, ego and the controllers of the senses. All of these are
created one after another by the inconceivable energy of the Lord. In
modern electronics, a mechanic may, by pushing only one button, set off an
electronic chain reaction by which so many actions are carried out one
after another. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead pushes the
button of creation, and different energies create the material elements and
various controllers of the physical elements, and their subsequent interac-
tions follow the inconceivable plan of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 34
स वै मवानाटमविनिमितं जगद्‌
भूतेन्द्रियान्तःकरणारमकं विमो ।
संस्यापयिष्यन्नज मां रसातला-
दभ्बुजदाराम्भस आदिकरः ॥२४॥
sa vai bhavan atma-vinirmitarn jagad
bhiitendriyantah-karanatmakari vibho


--- Page 331 ---
696 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
saristhapayisyann aja mar rasatalad
abhyujjaharambhasa adi-sikarah
sah—He;  vai—certainly;  bhavan—Yourself; atma—by Yourself;
vinirmitam—manufactured; jagat—this world; bhita—the physical ele-
ments; indriya—senses; antah-karana—mind, heart; atmakam—-consisting
of; vibho—O Lord; saristhapayisyan—maintaining; aja—O unborn; mam—
me; rasdtalit—from the plutonic region; abhyujjahara—took out;
ambhasah—from the water; ddi— original; sikarah—the boar.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are always unborn. Once in the form of the original
boar, You rescued me from the waters in the bottom of the universe.
Through Your own energy You created all the physical elements, the
senses and the heart, for the maintenance of the world.
PURPORT
This refers to the time when Lord Krsna appeared as the supreme boar,
Varaha, and rescued the earth, which had been merged in water. The asura
Hiranydksa had dislocated the earth from its orbit and thrown it beneath
the waters of the Garbhodaka Ocean. Then the Lord, in the shape of the
original boar, rescued the earth.
TEXT 35
अपामुपरथे मयि नान्यवसििताः
भजा मवानय रिरक्षिषुः किल ।
स॒ वीरमूर्तिः ange
यो मां पयस्युग्रश्रो जिघांससि ॥२३५॥
apam upasthe mayi navy avasthitah
praja bhavan adya riraksisuh kila -
sa vira-mirtih samabhid dharadharo
yo mdr payasy ugra-saro jigharsasi
apam—of the water; upasthe—situated on the surface; mayi—in me;
navi—in a boat; avasthitah—standing; prajah—living entities; bhavan—Y our-
self; adya—now; riraksisuh—desiring to protect; kila—indeed; sah—He; vira-


--- Page 332 ---
Text 36] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 697
martih—in the form of a great hero; samabhiit—became; dhara-dharah—the
protector of the earthly planet; yah—one who; mam—me; payasi—for the
sake of milk; ugra-sarah— with sharpened arrows; jighamsasi—you desire to
kill.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, in this way You once protected me by rescuing me from
the water, and consequently Your name has been famous as Dharadhara—
He who holds the planet earth. Yet at the present moment, in the form of
a great hero, You are about to kill me with sharpened arrows. I am, how-
ever, just like a boat on the water, keeping everything afloat.
PURPORT
The Lord is known as Dharadhara, meaning, He who keeps the planet
earth on His Lusks as the boar incarnation.” Thus the planet earth in the
shape of a cow is accounting the contradictory acts of the Lord. Although
He once saved the earth, He now wants to upset the earth, which is like a
boat on water. No one can understand the activities of the Lord. Due to a
poor fund of knowledge, human beings sometimes think the Lord’s activities
contradictory.
TEXT 36
-
नलं जनेरीहितमीश्वराणा-
ANTEATER |
न ज्ञायते मोहितचित्तवत्मभि-
स्तेम्यो नमो वीरयशस्करेभ्यः ।।२६॥
ninar janair thitam isvaranam
asmad-vidhais tad-guna-sarga-mayaya
na jiidyate mohita-citta-vartmabhis
tebhyo namo vira-yasas-karebhyah
nitnam—surely; janath—by the people in general; thitam—activities;
iSvaranam—of the controllers; asmat-vidhaih—like me; tat—of the Person-
ality of Godhead; guna—of the modes of material nature; sarga—which
brings forth creation; mayayd—by Your energy; na—never; jiidyate—are
understood; mohita—bewildered; citta—whose minds; vartmabhih—way;
tebhyah—unto them; namah—obeisances; vira-yasah-karebhyah—who bring
renown to heroes themselves.


--- Page 333 ---
698 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, I am also the creation of one of Your energies, composed
of the three modes of material nature. Consequently I am bewildered by
Your activities. Even the activities of Your devotees cannot be understood,
and what to speak of Your pastimes. Thus everything appears to us to be
contradictory and wonderful.

PURPORT

The activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His various forms
and incarnations are always uncommon and wonderful. It is not possible for
a tiny human being to estimate the purpose and plans of such activities;
therefore Srila Jiva Gosvami has said that unless the Lord’s activities are
accepted as inconceivable, they cannot be explained. The Lord is eternally
existing as Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in Goloka
Vrndavana. He has also simultaneously expanded Himself in innumerable
forms, beginning with Lord Rama, Lord Nrsithha, Lord Varaha and all the
incarnations coming directly from Sankargana. Sartkargana is the expansion
of Baladeva, and Baladeva is the first manifestation of Krsna. Therefore all
these incarnations are known as kala.

The word isvaranam refers to all the personalities of Godhead. As stated
in Brahma-sarnhita: (5.39) ramadi-mirtisu kald-niyamena tisthan. In the
Srimad-Bhdgavatam it is confirmed that all the incarnations are partial ex-
pansions or kala of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. However, Krsna
is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should not take the
plural number of the word #$varanam to mean that there are many Godheads.
The fact is that God is one, but He exists eternally and expands Himself in
innumerable forms and acts in various ways. Sometimes the common man
is bewildered by all this and considers such activities contradictory, but they
are not contradictory. There is a great plan behind all the Lord’s activities.

For our understanding it is sometimes said that the Lord is situated in
the heart of the thief as well as in the heart of the householder, but the
Supersoul in the heart of the thief dictates, “Go and steal things from that
particular house,” and at the same time the Lord tells the householder, “Now
be careful of thieves and burglars.” These instructions to different persons
appear contradictory, yet we should know that the Supersoul, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, has some plan, and we should not consider such
activities contradictory. The best course is to surrender unto the Supreme


--- Page 334 ---
Text 36] Maharaja Prthu Becomes Angry at the Earth 699
Personality of Godhead wholeheartedly, and, being protected by Him, re-
main peaceful.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Seventeenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Maharaja Prthu Becomes
Angry at the Earth.”


--- Page 335 ---
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्थं पृरथुममिष्टरय रुषा प्रस्फुरिताषरम्‌ |
पुनराहादनिर्यीता सखंस्तम्यात्मानमात्पना ।। १ ॥
maitreya ८४९८०
ittharh prthum abhistiiya
rusa prasphuritadharam
punar ahavanir bhita
samstabhyatmanam atmana
maitreyah uvaca—the great saint Maitreya continued to speak; ittham—
thus; prthum—unto King Prthu; abhistiya—after offering prayers; rusa—in
anger; prasphurita—trembling; adharam—his lips; punah—again; aha—she
said; avanih—the earthly planet; bhita—in fear; samstabhya—after settling;
atmanam—the mind; atmana—by the intelligence.
TRANSLATION
The great saint Maitreya continued to address Vidura: My dear Vidura,
at that time, after the planet earth finished her prayers, King Prthu was
still not pacified, and his lips trembled in great anger. Although the planet
earth was frightened, she made up her mind and began to speak as follows
in order to convince the King.
TEXT 2
संनियच्छामिमो मन्यु fre श्रावितं च मे।
=
सर्वतः सारमादत्ते यथा मधुकरो बुघः ॥ २॥
701


--- Page 336 ---
702 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 18
sanniyacchabhibho manyurm
nibodha sravitam ca me
sarvatah saram adatte
yatha madhu-karo budhah
sanniyaccha—please pacify;abhibho—O King; manyum—anger; nibodha—
try to understand; sravitam—what is said; ca—also; me—by me; sarvatah—
from everywhere; sairam—the essence; adatte—takes; yatha—as; madhu-
karah—the bumblebee; budhah—an intelligent person.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, please pacify your anger completely and patiently hear
whatever 1 submit before you. Please turn your kind attention to this. I
may be very poor, but a learned man takes the essence of knowledge from
all places, just as a bumblebee collects honey from each and every flower.
TEXT 3
अस्मिंलोकेऽथवाुष्यिन्युनिपिस्ततत्वदरिमिः।
दष्टा योगाः प्रयुक्ता पुंसां श्रेयःप्रसिद्धये ॥ ३॥
asmil (०५९ ’thavamusmin
munibhis tattva-darsibhih
drsta yogah prayuktas ca
pursam sreyah-prasiddhaye
asmin—in this; loke—duration of life; athava—or; amusmin—in the next
life; munibhih—by the great sages; tattva—the truth; darsibhih—by those
who have seen it; drstah—prescribed; yogah—methods; prayuktah—applied;
ca—also; purisam—of the people in general; Sreyah—benefit; prasiddhaye—
in the matter of obtaining.
TRANSLATION
To benefit all human society, not only in this life but in the next, the
great seers and sages have prescribed various methods conducive to the
prosperity of the people in general.


--- Page 337 ---
Text 3] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 703
PURPORT

Vedic civilization takes advantage of the perfect knowledge presented
in the Vedas and presented by the great sages and brahmapas for the
benefit of human society. Vedic injunctions are known as 7४८८, and the
additional supplementary presentations of these principles, as given by the
great sages, are known as smrti. They follow the principles of Vedic instruc-
tion. Human society should take advantage of the instructions from both
$ruti and smyti. If one wants to advance in spiritual life, he must take these
instructions and follow the principles. In Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Srila
Riipa Gosvami says that if one poses himself as advanced in spiritual life
but does not refer to the srutis and smytis he is simply a disturbance in
society. One should follow the principles laid down in $rutis and smrtis
not only in one’s spiritual life but in material life as well. As far as human
society is concerned, it should follow the Manu-smrti as well, for these
laws are given by Manu, the father of mankind.

In the Manu-smprti it is stated that a woman should not be given inde-
pendence but should be given protection by her father, husband and elderly
sons. In all circumstances a woman should remain dependent upon some
guardian. Presently women are given full independence like men, but actually
we can see that such independent women are no happier than those women
who are placed under guardians. If people follow the injunctions given by
the great sages, srutis and 317174८5, they can actually be happy in both this life
and the next. Unfortunately rascals are manufacturing so many ways and
means to be happy. Everyone is inventing so many methods. Consequently
human society has lost the standard ways of life, both materially and spiri-
tually, and as a result people are bewildered, and there is no peace or hap-
piness in the world. Although they are trying to solve the problems of human
society in the United Nations, they are still baffled. Because they do not
follow the liberated instructions of the Vedas, they are unhappy.

Two significant words used in this verse are asmin and amusmin. Asmin
means “in this life,” and amusmin means “in the next life.” Unfortunately
in this age, even exalted professors and learned men believe that there is
no next life and that everything is finished in this life. Since they are ras-
cals and fools, what advice can they give? Still they are passing as learned
scholars and professors. In this verse the word amugmin is very explicit. It
is the duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he will have a
profitable next life. Just as a boy is educated in order to become happy
later, one should be educated in this life in order attain an eternal and
prosperous life after death. It is therefore essential that people follow what


--- Page 338 ---
704 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 18
is given in the srutis and smrtis to make sure that the human mission is
successful.
TEXT 4
तानातिष्ठति यः सम्यगुपायाच्‌ पूर्वदर्दितान्‌ |
अवरः श्रद्धयोपेत उपेयान्‌ विन्दतेऽञ्जसा ॥ ও ॥
tan atisthati yah samyag
updyan parva-darsitan
avarah $raddhayopela
upeyan vindate ‘fijasa
tan—those; atisthati—follows; yah—anyone who; samyak—completely;
upayan— principles; pirva— formerly ; darsitan—instructed ; avarah —inexperi-
enced; sraddhaya—with faith; upetah—being situated; upeyan—the fruits
of activities; vindale—enjoys; aiijasa—very easily.
TRANSLATION
One who follows the principles and instructions enjoined by the great
sages of the past can ulilize these instructions for practical purposes. Such
a person can very easily enjoy life and pleasures.
PURPORT
The Vedic principles (mahajano yena gatah sa panthdh) urge us to
follow in the footsteps of greal liberated souls. In this way we can receive
benefit in both this life and the next, and we can also improve our material
life. By following the principles laid down by great sages and saints of the
past, we can very easily understand the aim of all life. The word avarah,
meaning “inexperienced,” is very significant in this verse. Every conditioned
soul is inexperienced. Everyone is abodha-jata—born a fool and rascal. In
democratic government at the present moment all kinds of fools and rascals
are making decisions. But what can they do? What is the result of their
legislation? They enact something today just to whimsically repeal it to-
morrow. One political party utilizes a country for one purpose, and the next
moment another political party forms a different type of government and
nullifies all the laws and regulations. This process of chewing the chewed
(punah punas carvita-carvapanam) will never make human society happy.
In order to make all human society happy and prosperous, we should
accept the standard methods given by liberated persons.


--- Page 339 ---
Text 5] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 705
TEXT 5
ताननादत्य यो ऽविद्रानथानारमते खयम्‌ ।
तस्य व्यमिचरन्त्यर्था आरब्धाश्च पुनः पुनः ॥ ৭ ॥
tan anddrtya yo ‘vidvan
arthan arabhate svayam
tasya vyabhicaranty artha
drabdhds ca punah punah

tan—those; anadrtya—neglecting; yah—anyone who; avidvan—rascal;
arthdn—schemes; arabhate—begins; svayam— personally ; tasya—his; vyabhi-
caranty—do not become successful; arthah—purposes; arabdhah—attempted;
ca—and; punah punah—again and again.

TRANSLATION

A foolish person who manufactures his own ways and means through
mental speculation and does not recognize the authority of the sages who
lay down unimpeachable directions is simply unsuccessful again and again
in his attempts.

PURPORT

At the present moment it has become fashionable to disobey the unim-
peachable directions given by the a@cdryas and liberated souls of the past.
Presently people are so fallen that they cannot distinguish between a
liberated soul and a conditioned soul. A conditioned soul is hampered by
four defects: he is sure (0 commit mistakes, he is sure to become
illusioned, he has a tendency to cheat others, and his senses are imperfect.
Consequently we have to take direction from liberated persons. This Krgna
consciousness movement directly receives instructions from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead via persons who are strictly following His instruc-
tions. Although a follower may not be a liberated person, if he follows the
supreme liberated Personality of Godhead, his actions are naturally liberated
from the contamination of the material nature. Lord Caitanya therefore
says: “By My order you may become a spiritual master.” One can imme-
diately become a spiritual master by having full faith in the transcendental
words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and by following His instruc-
tions. Materialistic men are not interested in taking directions from a
liberated person, but they are very much interested in their concocted


--- Page 340 ---
706 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 18
ideas, which make them repeatedly fail in their attempts. Because the
entire world is now following the imperfect directions of conditioned
souls, humanity is completely bewildered.
TEXT 6
षुरा gE GER क्षणा যা বিহ্যাম্মনী।
-
शज्यमाना मया दृष्टा असद्धिरश्तवतेः ॥ & ॥
purd srsta hy osadhayo
brahmana yd visam pate
bhujyamana maya drsta
asadbhir adhrta-vrataih
pura—in the past; srstah—created; hi—cerlainly; osadhayah—herbs and
food grains; brahmana— by Lord Brahma;yah—all those which;visam pate—
O King; bhujyamanah—being enjoyed; maya—by me;drstih—seen;asadbhih
—by nondevotees; adhrta-vrataih—devoid of all spiritual activities.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the seeds, roots, herbs and grains, which were created by
Lord Brahma in the past, are now being used by nondevotees, who are
devoid of all spiritual understanding.
PURPORT
Lord Brahma created this material world for the use of the living entities,
but it was created according to a plan that all living entities who come into
it to dominate it for sense gratification would be given directions by Lord
Brahma in the Vedas in order that they might ultimately leave it and
return home, back to Godhead. All necessities grown on earth—namely
fruits, flowers, trees, grains, animals and animal by-products—were created
for use in sacrifice for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Visnu. However, the planet earth in the shape of a cow herein
submits that all these utilities are being used by nondevotees who have no
plans for spiritual understanding. Although there are immense potencies
within the earth for the production of grains, fruits and flowers, this pro-
duction is checked by the earth itself when it is misused by nondevotees
who have no spiritual goals. Everything belongs to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and everything can be used for His satisfaction. Things should


--- Page 341 ---
Text 7] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 707
not be used for the sense gratification of the living entities. This is the
whole plan of material nature according to the directions of this material
nature.

In this verse the words asadbhih and adhrta-vrataik are important. The
word asadbhih refers to the nondevotees. The nondevotees have been
described in Bhagavad-gita as duskrtinah (miscreants), miidhah (asses or
rascals), naradhamah (lowest of mankind) and mayayapahrta-jiianah (those
who have lost their knowledge to the power of the illusory energy). All
these persons are asat, nondevotees. Nondevotees are also called grha-vrata,
whereas the devotee is called dhrta-vrata. According to plans, the misguided
conditioned souls who have come to lord it over material nature should be
trained to become dhrta-vrata. This means that they should take a vow to
satisfy their senses or enjoy material life only by satisfying the senses of
the Supreme Lord. Activities intended to satisfy the senses of the Surpeme
Lord, Krsna, are called krsnarthe ’khila-cestah. This indicates that one can
attempt all kinds of work, but one should do so to satisfy Krsna. This is
described in Bhagavad-gila as yajiarthat karma. The word yajiia indicates
Lord Visnu. We should work only for His satisfaction. In modern times
(Kali-yuga), however, people have forgotten Visnu altogether, and they
conduct their activities for sense gratification. Such people will gradually
become poverty-stricken, for they cannot use things which are to be
enjoyed by the Supreme Lord for their own sense gratification. If they
continue like this, there will ultimately be a state of poverty, and no grains,
fruits or flowers will be produced. Indeed, it is stated in the Twelfth Canto
of Bhagavatam that at the end of Kali-yuga people will be so polluted
that there will no longer be any grains, wheat, sugar cane or milk.

TEXT 7
अपालितानाद्ता च মবক্কিতৌকঘাককীঃ |
चोरीभूतेऽथ लोकेऽहं यज्ञार्थेऽग्रसमोषथीः ॥ ७॥
apalitanadrta ca
bhavadbhir loka-palakaih
coribhiite tha loke "ham
yajiarthe 7050171 osadhth

apalita—without being taken care of; anadrta—being neglected; ca—also;
bhavadbhih—like your good self; loka-palakaih—by the governors or kings;
coribhiite—being beset by thieves; atha—therefore;loke—this world; aham—


--- Page 342 ---
708 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4, Ch. 18
I; yajiia-arthe—for the purpose of performing sacrifices; agrasam—have
hidden; osadhii—all the herbs and grains.
TRANSLATION

My dear King, not only are grains and herbs being used by nondevotees,
but, as far as I'm concerned, I am not being properly maintained. Indeed,
1 am being neglected by kings who are not punishing these rascals who
have turned into thieves by using grains for sense gratification. Conse-
quently I have hidden all these seeds, which were meant for the per-
formance of sacrifice.

PURPORT

That which happened during the time of Prthu Maharaja and his father,
King Vena, is also happening at this present moment. A huge arrangement
exists for the production of large-scale industrial and agricultural products,
but all these products are meant for sense gratification. Therefore despite
such productive capacities there is scarcity because the world’s population
is full of thieves. The word coribhiite indicates that the population has
turned to thievery. According to Vedic understanding, men are transformed
into thieves when they plan economic development for sense gratification.
It is also explained in Bhagavad-gila that if one eats food grains without
offering them to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yajiia, he is a thief
and liable to be punished. According lo spiritual communism, all properties
on the surface of the globe belong to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The population has a right to use goods only after offering them to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the process of accepting prasada.
Unless one eats prasada, he is certainly a thief. It is the duty of governors
and kings to punish such thieves and maintain the world nicely. If this is
not done, grains will no longer be produced, and people will simply starve.
Indeed, not only will people be obliged to eat less, but they will kill one
another and eat their own flesh. They are already killing animals for flesh,
so when there will no longer be grains, vegetables and fruits, they will kill
their own sons and fathers and eat their flesh for sustenance.

TEXT 8
नूलं ता वीरुषः क्षीणा मयि कालेन भूयसा ।
तत्र॒ योगेन देन मवानादातुमरति ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 343 ---
Text 8] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 709
niinam ta virudhah ksina
mayi kalena bhityasa
(0৫7৫ yogena drstena
bhavan adatum arhati

ninam—therefore; tah—those; virudhah—herbs and grains; ksinah—
deteriorated; mayi—within me; kalena—in course of lime; bhiayasa—very
much; tatra—therefore; yogena—by proper means; drstena—acknowledged;
bhavan—Y our Majesty; adatum—to take; arhati—ought.

TRANSLATION

Due to being stocked for a very long time, all the grain seeds within me
have certainly deteriorated. Therefore you should immediately arrange to
take these seeds out by the standard process, which is recommended by
the acaryas or 8astras.

PURPORT

When there is a scarcity of grain, the government should follow the
methods prescribed in the sastra and approved by the dcdryas; thus there
will be a sufficient production of grains, and food scarcity and famine can
he checked. Bhagavad-gita recommends that we perform yajiia, sacrifices.
By the performance of yajia, sufficient clouds gather in the sky, and when
there are sufficient clouds, there is also sufficient rainfall. In this way
agricultural matters are taken care of. When there is sufficient grain produc-
tion, the general populace eats the grains, and animals like cows, goats
and other domestic animals eat the grasses and grains also. According to
this arrangement, human beings should perform the sacrificesrecommended
in the sastras, and if they do so there will no longer be food scarcity. In
Kali-yuga, the only sacrifice recommended is sarikirtana-yajia.

In this verse there are lwo significant words: yogena, “by the approved
method,” and drstena, “as exemplified by the former acaryas.” One is
mistaken if he thinks that by applying modern machines such as tractors,
grains can be produced. If one goes to a desert and uses a tractor, there is
still no possibility of producing grains. We may adopt various means, but
it is essential to know that the planet earth will stop producing grains if
sacrifices are not performed. The earth has already explained that because
nondevotees are enjoying the production of food, she has reserved food
seeds for the performance of sacrifice. Now, of course, atheists will not


--- Page 344 ---
710 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4, Ch. 18
believe in this spiritual method of producing grains, but whether they
believe or not, the fact remains that we are not independent to produce
grain by mechanical means. As far as the approved method is concerned,
it is enjoined in the sastras that intelligent men in this age will take to the
saiitkirtana movement, and by so doing they shall worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Lord Caitanya, whose bodily complexion is golden,
and who is always accompanied by His confidential devotees to preach
this Krsna consciousness movement all over the world. In its present
condition, the world can only be saved by introducing this sarikirtana, this
Krsna consciousness movement. As we have learned from the previous
verse, one who is not in Krsna consciousness is considered a thief. Even
though he may be very materially advanced, a thief cannot be placed in a
comfortable position. A thief is a thief, and he is punishable. Because
people are without Krsna consciousness, they have become thieves, and
consequently they are being punished by the laws of material nature. No
one can check this, not even by introducing so many relief funds and
humanitarian institutions. Unless the people of the world take to Krspa
consciousness, there will be a scarcity of food and much suffering.
TEXTS 9-10
वत्सं कर्पय मे वीर IE वत्सला तव |
धोक्ष्ये श्षीरमयान्‌ कामाननुरूपं च दोहनम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
दोग्धारं च মহাবাহী भूतानां भूतभावन |
अन्नमीप्सितमूजंखद्धगवान्‌ वाञ्छते थदि ॥१०॥
४८८5071 kalpaya me vira
yenaharh vatsala tava
dhoksye ksiramaydn kaman
anuriiparn ca dohanam
dogdharam ca maha-baho
bhiitanam bhita-bhavana
annam ipsitam @rjasvad
bhagavan varichate yadi
vatsam—a calf; kalpaya—arrange; me—for me; vira—O hero; yena—by
which; aham—1; vatsali—affectionate; tava—your; dhoksye—shall fulfill;
ksira-mayan—in the form of milk; kaman—desired necessities; anuripam—
according to different living entities; ca—also; dohanam—milking pot; dog-


--- Page 345 ---
Text 11] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 711
dharam—milkman; ca—also; maha-baho—O mighty -armed one; bhiitanam—
of all living entities; bhiita-bhavana—O protector of the living entities;
annam—food grains; ipsitam—desired; irjah-vat—nourishing; bhagavin—
your worshipable self; vaichate—desires; yadi—if.
TRANSLATION

O great hero, protector of living entities, if you desire to relieve the
living entities by supplying them sufficient grain, and if you desire to
nourish them by taking milk from me, you should make arrangements to
bring a calf suitable for this purpose and a pot in which the milk can be
kept, as well as a milkman to do the work. Since 1 will be very much
affectionate toward my calf, your desire to take milk from me will be
fulfilled.

PURPORT

These are nice instructions for milking a cow. The cow must first have a
calf so that out of affection for the calf she will voluntarily give sufficient
milk. There must also be an expert milkman and a suitable pot in which to
keep the milk. Just as a cow cannot deliver sufficient milk without being
affectionate to her calf, the earth cannot produce sufficient necessities
without feeling affection for those who are Krsna conscious. Even though
the earth’s being in the shape of a cow may be taken figuratively, the
meaning herein is very explicit. Just as a calf can derive milk from a cow,
all living entities—including animals, birds, bees, reptiles, aquatics, etc.—
can receive their respective foods from the planet earth provided that
human beings are not asat, or adhrta-vrata, as we have previously discussed.
When human society becomes asat, or ungodly, or devoid of Krsna con-
sciousness, the entire world suffers. If human beings are well-behaved,
animals will also receive sufficient food and be happy. The ungodly human
being, ignorant of his duty to give protection and food to the animals, kills
them to compensate for the insufficient production of grains. Thus no
one is satisfied, and that is the cause for the present condition in today’s
world.

TEXT 11
समां च Fo मां राजन्देववृष्टं यथा पयः ।
अपर्तावपि मद्रं ते उपावर्तेत मे विमो ॥११॥
samam ca kuru mar rajan
deva-vrstam yathd payah


--- Page 346 ---
712 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 18
apartav api bhadram te!
upavarteta me vibho
samam—equally level; ca—also; kuru—make; mam—me; rajan—0O King;
deva-vrstam—fallen as rain by the mercy of King Indra; yathd—so that;
payah—waler; apartau—when the rainy season has ceased; api—even;
bhadram—auspiciousness; te—unto you; upavarteta—it can remain; me—on
me; vibho—O Lord.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, may I inform you that you have to make the entire sur-
face of the globe level. This will help me, even when the rainy season has
ceased. Rainfall comes by the mercy of King Indra. Rainfall will remain on
the surface of the globe always keeping the earth moistened, and thus it
will be auspicious for all kinds of production.
PURPORT
King Indra of the heavenly planets is in charge of throwing thunderbolts
and giving rainfall. Generally thunderbolts are thrown on the tops of hills
in order to break them to pieces. As these pieces are spread asunder in due
course of time, the surface of the globe gradually becomes fit for agricul-
ture. Level land is especially conducive to the production of grain. Thus
the planet earth requested Maharaja Prthu to level the surface of the earth,
breaking up the high land and mountains.
TEXT 12
इति प्रियं हितं वाक्यं शेव आदाय भूपतिः ।
वत्सं कृत्वा मनुं पाणावदुहत्सकलोषधीः ॥ १२॥
iti priyam hitam vakyam
bhuva adaya bhipatih
vatsam krtva manum panav
aduhat sakalaugadhih
iti— thus; priyam—pleasing; hitam—beneficial; vakyam—words; bhuvah—
of the earth; @daya—taking into consideration; bhi-patih—the King; vatsam
—calf; krtva—making; manum—Svayambhuva Manu; panau—in his hands;
aduhat—milked; sakala—all; osadhih—herbs and grains.


--- Page 347 ---
Text 13] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 713
TRANSLATION

After hearing the auspicious and pleasing words of the planet earth, the
King accepted them. He then transformed Svayambhuva Manu into a calf
and milked all the herbs and grains from the earth in the form of a cow,
keeping them in his cupped hands.

TEXT 13
५
तथापरे च सवत्र सारमाददते बुधाः |
ततोऽन्ये च यथाकामं दुदुहुः प्रथुभाविताम्‌ 11231)
tathdapare ca sarvatra
saram adadate budhah
tato nye ca yatha-kamam
duduhuh prthu-bhavitam

tatha—so; apare—others; ca—also; sarvatra—everywhere; saram—the
essence; ddadate—took; budhah—the intelligent class of men; tatah—there-
after; anye—others; ca—also; yatha-kamam—as much as they desired;
duduhuh—milked; prthu-bhavitam—the earth planet controlled by Prthu
Maharaja.

TRANSLATION

Others, who were as intelligent as King Prthu, also took the essence out
of the earthly planet. Indeed, everyone took this opportunity to follow in
the footsteps of King Prthu and get whatever he desired from the planet
earth.

PURPORT

The planet earth is also called vasundhara. The word vasu means “wealth,”
and dhar@ means “one who holds.” All creatures within the earth fulfill
the necessities required for human beings, and all living entities can be
taken out of the earth by the proper means. As suggested by the planet
earth, and accepted and initiated by King Prthu, whatever is taken from
the earth—either from the mines, from the surface of the globe or from the
atmosphere—should always be considered the property of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and should be used for Yajiia, Lord Vignu. As soon
as the process of yajiia is stopped, the earth will withold all productions—
vegetables, trees, plants, fruits, flowers, other agricultural products,


--- Page 348 ---
714 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 18
minerals, etc. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gitd, the process of yajia was
instituted from the beginning of creation. By the regular performance of
yajiia, the equal distribution of wealth, and the restriction of sense gralifi-
cation, the entire world will be made peaceful and prosperous. As already
mentioned, in this age of Kali the simple performance of sankirtana-yajia—
the holding of festivals as initiated by the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness—should be introduced in every town and village. Intelligent
men should encourage the performance of sankirtana-yajia by their
personal behavior. This means that they should follow the process of
austerity by restricting themselves from illicit sex life, meat-eating, gambling
and intoxication. If the intelligent men, or the brahmanas of society,
would follow the rules and regulations, certainly the entire face of this
present world, which is in such chaotic condition, would change, and
people would be happy and prosperous.
TEXT 14
ऋषयो दुदुहूर्देवीभिन्द्रियेष्वय सत्तम |
वत्सं ब्रहस्पति कृत्वा पयश्छन्दोमयं श्चि ॥१४॥
rsayo duduhur devim
indriyesv atha sattama
vatsam brhaspatimm krtva
payas chandomayani suci

rsayah— the greal sages; duduhuh— milked; devim— the earth; indriyesu—
in the senses; atha— then; sattama—O Vidura; vatsam—the calf; brhaspatim—
the sage Brhaspati; krtva—making; payah—milk; chandah-mayam—in the
form of the Vedic hymns; suci— pure.

TRANSLATION

All the great sages transformed Brhaspati into a calf, and making the
senses into a pot, they milked all kinds of Vedic knowledge to purify words,
mind and hearing.

PURPORT

Brhaspatli is the priest of the heavenly planets. Vedic knowledge was
received in logical order by the great sages through Brhaspati for the bene-
fit of human society, not only on this planet, but throughout the universes.


--- Page 349 ---
Text 15] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 715
In other words, Vedic knowledge is considered one of the necessities for
human society. If human society remains satisfied simply by taking grains
from the planet earth as well as other necessities for maintaining the body,
society will not be sufficiently prosperous. Humanity must have food for
the mind and ear, as well as for the purpose of vibration. As far as tran-
scendental vibrations are concerned, the essence of all Vedic knowledge is
the maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. In Kali-yuga, if this Vedic
maha-mantra is chanted regularly and heard regularly by the devotional
process of sravanam kirtanam, it will purify all societies, and thus humanity

will be happy both materially and spiritually.

TEXT 15
FA वत्सं सुरगणा इन्द्रं सोममदूदुदन्‌ |
- = =
दिरण्मयेन पात्रेण बीयय॑मोजो बल पयः ॥ 4
(८१८४० vatsam sura-gana
indram somam aditduhan
hiranmayena patrena
viryam ojo balari payah
krtva—making; vatsam—-calf; sura-ganadh—the demigods; indram—Indra,
King of heaven; somam—nectar; aduduhan—they milked out: hirapmayena—
golden; patrena—with a pot; viryam—mental power; ojah—strength of the
senses; balam—strength of the body; payah— milk.

TRANSLATION
All the demigods made Indra, the King of heaven, into a calf, and from
the earth they milked the beverage soma, which is nectar. Thus they be-
came very powerful in mental speculation and bodily and sensual strength.

PURPORT

In this verse the word soma means “nectar.” Soma is a kind of beverage
made in the heavenly planets from the moon to the kingdoms of the
demigods in the various higher planetary systems. By drinking this soma
beverage the demigods become more powerful mentally and increase their
sensual power and bodily strength. The words hiranmayena patrepa indi-
cate that this soma beverage is not an ordinary intoxicating liquor. The


--- Page 350 ---
716 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 18
demigods would not touch any kind of liquor. Nor is soma a kind of drug.
It is a different kind of beverage available in the heavenly planets. Soma is
far different from the liquors made for demoniac people, as explained in
the next verse.
TEXT 16
दैतेया दानवा वत्सं॑प्रहादमसुरषमम्‌ |
hy
विधायादूदुहन्‌ क्षीरमयःपात्रे सुरासवम्‌ ॥१६।
daiteya danava vatsam
prahladam asura-rsabham
vidhayadaduhan ksiram
ayah-pdtre surasavam

daiteydh— the sons of Diti; danavah— demons; vatsam—the calf; prahladam
—Prahlada Maharaja; asura—demon; rsabham—the chief; vidhaya—making;
aditduhan—they milked out; ksiram— milk; ayah— iron; patre—in a pot; sura
— liquor; asavam—fermented liquids like beer.

TRANSLATION

The sons of Diti and the demons transformed Prahlada Maharaja, who
was born in an asura family, into a calf, and they extracted various kinds
of liquor and beer, which they put into a pot made of iron.

PURPORT

The demons also have their own types of beverage in the form of liquors
and beers, just as the demigods use soma-rasa for their drinking purposes.
The demons born of Diti take great pleasure in drinking wine and beer.
Even today people of demoniac nature are very much addicted to liquor
and beer. The name of Prahlada Mahar3ja is very significant in this connec-
tion. Because Prahlada Maharaja was born in a family of demons, as the
son of Hiranyakasipu, by his mercy the demons were and still are able to
have their drinks in the forms of wine and beer. The word ayah (iron) is
very significant. Whereas the nectarean soma was put in a golden pot, the
liquors and beers were put in an iron pot. Because the liquor and beer are
inferior, they are placed in an iron pot, and because soma-rasa is superior,
itis placed in a golden pot.


--- Page 351 ---
Text 18] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 717
TEXT 17
गन्धर्वाप्सरसोऽधुक्षन्‌ पात्रे पद्ममये पयः |
वसं विश्वावसुं त्वा মান্য Ag सोभगम्‌ ॥१७॥
gandharvapsaraso ‘dhuksan
10৫76 padmamaye payah
vatsarm visvavasum krtva
gandharvari madhu saubhagam
gandharva—inhabitants of the Gandharva planet; apsarasah—the inhabi-
tants of the Apsara planet; adhuksan—milked out; pdtre—in a pot; padma-
maye—made of a lotus; payah— milk; vatsam— calf; visvavasum—of the name
Visvavasu; krtva— making; gandharvam—songs; madhu—sweet; saubhagam—
beauty.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka and Apsaroloka made Vigvavasu into
a calf, and they drew the milk into a lotus flower pot. The milk took the
shape of sweet musical art and beauty.
TEXT 18
वत्सेन पितरोऽर्यम्णा कव्यं क्षीरमधुश्चत |
आमपात्रे महामागाः श्रद्धया श्राद्धदेवताः ॥१८॥
vatsena pitaro ‘ryampd
kavyar ksiram adhuksata
ama-pdtre maha-bhagah
sraddhaya sraddha-devatah
vatsena—by the calf; pitarah—the inhabitants of Pitrloka; aryamnpa—by
the god of Pitrloka, Aryama; kevyam—offerings of food to ancestors;
ksiram—milk; adhuksata—took out; dma-patre—into an unbaked earthen
pot; maha-bhagah—the greatly fortunate; sraddhayd—with great faith;
sraddha-devatah—the demigods presiding over sraddha ceremonies in
honor of deceased relatives.


--- Page 352 ---
718 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION

The fortunate inhabitants of Pitrloka, who preside over the funeral cere-
monies, made Aryama into a calf. With great faith they milked kavya, food
offered to the ancestors, into an unbaked earthen pot.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita it is said, pitfn yanti pitr-vratah. Those who are interested
in family welfare are called pitr-vratah. There is a planet called Pitrloka, and
the predominating deity of that planet is called Aryama. He is somewhat of
a demigod, and by satisfying him one can help ghostly family members
develop a gross body. Those who are very sinful and attached to their
family, house, village or country do not receive a gross body made of
material elements but remain in a subtle body composed of mind, ego and
intelligence. Those who live in such subtle bodies are called ghosts. This
ghostly position is very painful because a ghost has intelligence, mind and
ego and wants to enjoy material life, but because he doesn’t have a gross
material body, he can only create disturbances for want of material
satisfaction. It is the duty of family members, especially the son, to offer
oblations to the demigod Aryama, or Lord Visnu. From time immemorial
in India the son of a dead man goes to Gaya and, at a Visnu temple there,
offers oblations for the benefit of his ghostly father. It is not that every-
one’s father becomes a ghost, but the oblations of pinda are offered to the
lotus feet of Lord Visnu so that if a family member happens to become a
ghost, he will be favored with a gross body. However, if one is habituated
to taking the prasada of Lord Visnu, there is no chance of his becoming
a ghost or anything lower than a human being. In Vedic civilization there
is a performance called §raddha by which food is offered with faith and
devotion. If one offers oblations with faith and devotion—either to the
lotus feet of Lord Visnu or to His representative in Pitrloka, Aryama—one’s
forefathers will attain material bodies to enjoy whatever material enjoy-
ment is due them. In other words, they do not have to become ghosts.

TEXT 19
प्रकल्प्य वत्सं कपिलं सिद्धाः सङ्कल्पनामयीम्‌ |
सिद्धि नभसि विद्यां च ये च विद्याधरादयः ॥१९॥
19170০0000৫ ৮৫/5৫7 1০019000778
siddhah sankalpanamayim


--- Page 353 ---
Text 19) Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 719
siddhirn nabhasi vidya ca
ye ca vidyadharadayah

prakalpya—appointing; vatsam—calf; kapilam—the great sage Kapila;
siddhah—the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; sankalpana-mayim—proceeding
from will; siddhim—yogic perfection; nabhasi—in the sky; vidyam—knowl-
edge; ca—also; ye—those who; ca—also; vidyadhara-adayah—the inhabitants
of Vidyadhara-loka, and so on.

TRANSLATION

After this, the inhabitants of Siddhaloka, as well as the inhabitants of
Vidyadhara-loka, transformed the great sage Kapila into a calf, and making
the whole sky into a pot, they milked out specific yogic mystic powers,
beginning with anima. Indeed, the inhabitants of Vidyadhara-loka acquired
the art of flying in the sky.

PURPORT

The inhabitants of both Siddhaloka and Vidyadhara-loka are naturally
endowed with mystic yogic powers by which they can not only fly in outer
space without a vehicle but can also fly from one planet to another simply
by exerting their will. Just as fish can swim within water, the residents of
Vidyadhara-loka can swim in the ocean of air. As far as the inhabitants of
Siddhaloka are concerned, they are endowed with all mystic powers. The
yogis in this planet practice the eightfold yogic mysticism—namely yama,
niyama, asana, prapdyama, pratyahare, dharana, dhyana and samadhi. By
regularly practicing the yogic processes one after another, the yogis attain
various perfections; they can become smaller than the smallest, heavier
than the heaviest, etc. They can even manufacture a planet, get whatever
they like, and control whatever man they want. All the residents of Siddha-
loka are naturally endowed with these mystic yogic powers. It is certainly
a very wonderful thing if we see a person on this planet flying in the sky
without a vehicle, but in Vidyadhara-loka such flying is as commonplace
as a bird’s flying in the sky. Similarly, in Siddhaloka all the inhabitants are
great yogis, perfect in mystic powers.

The name of Kapila Muni is significant in this verse because He was the
expounder of the Sankhya philosophical system, and His father, Kardama
Muni, was a great yogi and mystic. Indeed, Kardama Muni prepared a
great airplane, which was as large as a small town and had various gardens,
palatial buildings, servants, maidservants, etc. With all this paraphernalia,


--- Page 354 ---
720 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 18
¥ Kapiladeva’s mother, Devahiiti, and His father, Kardama Muni, traveled
all over the universes and visited different planets.
TEXT 20
अन्ये च मायिनो मायामन्तधौनाद्धुतात्यनाम्‌ |
मय॑ प्रकरप्य वत्सं ते दुदुडुर्षारणामयीम्‌ ॥२०॥
anye ca mdayino mayam
antardhanadbhutatmanam
mayam prakalpya vatsari
te duduhur dharapamayim
anye—others; ca—also; mayinah—mystic magicians; mayam—mystic
powers; antardhana—disappearing; adbhuta—wonderful; atmanam—of the
body; mayam—the demon named Maya; prakalpya—making; vatsam—the
calf; te—they; duduhuh—milked out; dharana-mayim—proceeding from
will.
TRANSLATION
Others also, the inhabitants of planets known as Kimpurusa-loka, made
the demon Maya into a calf, and they milked out mystic powers by which
one can disappear immediately from another’s vision and appear again in a
different form.
PURPORT
It is said that the inhabitants of Kimpurusa-loka can perform many
wonderful mystic demonstrations. In other words, they can exhibit as
many wonderful things as one can imagine. The inhabitants of this planet
can do whatever they like, or whatever they imagine. Such powers are
also mystic powers. The possession of such mystic power is called isita.
The demons generally learn such mystic powers by the practice of yoga.
In the Dasama-skandha, the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, there is
a vivid description of how the demons appear before Krsna in various
wonderful forms. For instance, Bakasura appeared before Krsna and His
cowherd boy friends as a gigantic crane. While present on this planet, Lord
Krsna had to fight with many demons who could exhibit the wonderful
mystic powers of Kimpurusa-loka. Although the inhabitants of Kimpuruga-
loka are naturally endowed with such powers, one can attain these powers
on this planet by performing different yogic practices.


--- Page 355 ---
Text 22] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 721
TEXT 21
यक्षरक्षांसि भूतानि fr: पिशिताञ्लनाः।
भूतेशवत्सा दुदुहुः कपाले क्षतजासवम्‌ ॥२१॥
yaksa-rakgsamsi bhittani
pisacah pisitasanah
bhiatesa-vatsa duduhuh
५ kapale ksatajasavam
yaksa—the Yaksas (the descendants of Kuvera); raksamsi—the Raksasas
(meat-eaters); bhittani—ghosts; pisacah— witches; pisita-asanah—who are all
habituated to eating flesh; bhiitesa— Lord Siva’s incarnation Rudra; vatsah—
whose calf; duduhuh—milked out; kapale—in the pot of skulls; ksata-ja—
blood; asavam—a fermented beverage.
TRANSLATION
Then the Yaksas, the Raksasas, ghosts and witches, who are habituated
to eating flesh, transformed Lord Siva’s incarnation Rudra [ Bhiitanatha |
into a calf and milked out beverages made of blood and put them in a pot
made of skulls.
PURPORT
There are some types of living entities in the form of human beings
whose living conditions and eatables are most abominable. Generally they
eat flesh and fermented blood, which is mentioned in this verse as ksata-
jasavam. The leaders of such degraded men known as Yaksas, Raksasas,
bhitas, pisdcas. etc., are all in the mode of ignorance. They have been
placed under the control of Rudra. Rudra is the incarnation of Lord Siva
and isin charge of the mode of ignorance in material nature. Another name
of Lord Siva is Bhiitanatha, meaning “master of ghosts.” Rudra was born
out of Brahmaseyes when Brahma was very angry at the four Kumaras.
TEXT 22
तथाहयो दन्दशकाः सर्पा ARTA तक्षकम्‌ |
विधाय वत्सं दुदुहुर्विरुपात्रे विषं पयः n=
tathahayo dandasikah
sarpa nagas ca taksakam


--- Page 356 ---
722 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 18
vidhaya vatsari duduhur
bila-patre ৮15৫7 payah
tatha—similarly ; ahayah—snakes without hoods; dandasikah—scorpions;
sarpah—cobras; nagah—big snakes; ca—and; taksakam—Taksaka, chief of
the snakes; vidhaya—making; vatsam—calf; duduhuh—milked out; bila-
piatre—in the pot of snake holes; visam—poison; payah—as milk.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter cobras and snakes without hoods, large snakes, scorpions and
many other poisonous animals took poison out of the planet earth as their
milk and kept this poison in snake holes. They made a calf out of Taksaka.
PURPORT
Within this material world there are various types of living entities, and
the different types of reptiles and scorpions mentioned in this verse are
also provided with their sustenance by the arrangement of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The point is that everyone is taking
his eatables from the planet earth. According to one’s association with
the material qualities, one develops a certain type of character.
Payah-panam bhujaiiganam: if one feeds a serpent milk, the snake
will simply increase his venom. However, if one supplies milk to a
talented sage or saint, the sage will develop finer brain tissues by which he
can contemplate higher spiritual life. Thus the Lord is supplying everyone
food, but according to the living entity’s association with the modes of
material nature, the living entity develops his specific character.
TEXTS 23-24
पशवो यवसं क्षीरं वत्सं कृत्वा च ey ।
अरण्यपात्रे TEER च दंष्टिणः ॥२३॥
FAN: प्राणिनः क्रव्यं दुदुहुः स्वे FSA
सुपणवत्सा विहगाश्चरं चाचरमेव च ॥२४॥
pasavo yavasam ksiram
vatsam krtva ca go-vrsam
aranya-patre cadhuksan
mrgendrena ca damstrinah


--- Page 357 ---
Text 25] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 723
kravyadah praninah 107৫8) 077
duduhuh sve kalevare
suparna-vatsa vihagas
caram cdacaram eva ca
pasavah—cattle; yavasam—green grasses; ksiram—milk; vatsam—the calf;
krtvai—making; ca—also; go-vrsam—the bull carrier of Lord Siva; aranya-
pdatre—in the pot of the forest; ca—also; adhuksan—milked out; mrga-
indrena—by the lion; ca—and; damgstrinah—animals with sharp teeth;
kravya-adah—animals who eat raw flesh; praninah—living entities; kravyam—
flesh; duduhuh—took out; sve—own; kalevare—in the pot of their body;
suparpa—Garuda; vatsah—whose calf; viha-gah—the birds; caram—moving
living entities; ca—also; acaram—nonmoving living entities; eva—certainly;
ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The four-legged animals like the cows made a calf out of the bull who
carries Lord Siva and made a milking pot out of the forest. Thus they got
fresh green grasses to eat. Ferocious animals like tigers transformed a lion
into a calf, and thus they were able to get flesh for milk. The birds made
a calf out of Garuda and took milk from the planet earth in the form of
moving insects and nonmoving plants and grasses.
PURPORT
There are many carnivorous birds descended from Garuda, the winged
carrier of Lord Visnu. Indeed, there is a particular type of bird that is very
fond of eating monkeys. Eagles are fond of eating goats, and of course
many birds eat only fruits and berries. Therefore the words caram, referring
to moving animals, and acaram, referring to grasses, fruits and vegetables,
are mentioned in this verse.
TEXT 25
वटवत्सा वनस्पतयः पृथग्रसमयं पयः |
गिरयो दिमवद्वत्सा नानाधातून्‌ || Ey ॥ २५॥
vala-vatsa vanas-patayah
prthag rasamayam payah
girayo himavad-vatsa
nana dhatin sva-sanusu


--- Page 358 ---
724 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 18

vata-vatsaihi—making the banyan tree a calf; vanah-patayah—the trees;
prthak— different; rasa-mayam—in the form of juices; payah—milk; girayah—
the hills and mountains; himavat-vatsah— making the Himalayas the calf;
nand—various; dhatiin—minerals; sva—own; sanusu—on their peaks.

TRANSLATION

The trees made a calf out of the banyan tree, and thus they derived milk
in the form of many delicious juices. The mountains transformed the
Himalayas into a calf, and they milked a variety of minerals into a pot made
of the peaks of hills.

TEXT 26
सरवे खथुरूयदत्सेने स्वे स्वे पात्रे पथक्‌ पयः |
सवैकामदुषां ol दुदुहुः प्ृथुमािताम्‌ IRE)
sarve sva-mukhya-vatsena
sve sve [९८7९ prthak payah
sarva-kama-dughari prthvir
duduhuh prthu-bhavitam

sarve—all; sva-mukhya—by their own chiefs; vatsena—as the calf; sve
sve—in their own; patre— pots; prthak— different; payah— milk; sarva-kama—
all desirables; dugham—supplying as milk; prthvim—the earthly planet;
duduhuh— milked out; prthu-bhdvitam-—controlled by King Prthu.

TRANSLATION

The planet earth supplied everyone his respective food. During the time
of King Prthu, the earth was fully under the control of the King. Thus all
the inhabitants of the earth could get their food supply by creating various
types of calves and putting their particular types of milk in various pots.

PURPORT

This is evidence that the Lord supplies food to everyone. As confirmed
in the Vedas: eko bahinam yo vidadhati kaman. Although the Lord is one,
He is supplying all necessities to everyone through the medium of the planet
earth. There are different varieties of living entities on different planets,
and they all derive their eatables from their planets in different forms. On
the basis of these descriptions, how can one assume that there is no living
entity on the moon? Every moon is earthly, being composed of the five


--- Page 359 ---
Text 28] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 725
elements. Every planet produces different types of food according to the
needs of its residents. According to the Vedic sastras, it is not true that the
moon does not produce food nor that no living entity is living there.
TEXT 27
एवं पृथ्वादयः TARY: खनमात्मनः |
दोहवत्सादिभेदेन क्षीरभेदं ङरूढह ।२५७॥
evarit prthv-adayah prthvim
annadah svannam atmanah
doha-vatsadi-bhedena
ksira-bhedam kuridvaha
evam—thus; prthu-adayah—King Prthu and others; prthvim—the earth;
anna-adah—all living entities desiring food; su-annam—their desired food-
stuff; dtmanah—for self-preservation; doha—for milking; vatse-adi—by
calves, pots and milkers; bhedena—different; ksira—milk; bhedam—dif-
ferent; kuru-udvaha—O chief of the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
My dear Vidura, chief of the Kurus, in this way King Prthu and all the
others who subsist on food created different types of calves and milked
out their respective eatables. Thus they received their various foodstuffs,
which were symbolized as milk.
TEXT 28
ततो मदीपतिः प्रीतः सर्वकामदुषां 9g: |
दुदिदत्वे चकारेमां प्रेम्णा दुदिववत्सलः ॥२८॥
८५८० mahipatih pritah
sarva-kama-dughar prthuh
duhitrtve cakaremam
premna duhitr-vatsalah
tatah—thereafter; mahi-patih—the King; pritah—being pleased; sarva-
kama—all desirables; dugham—producing as milk; prthuh—King Prthu;
duhitrtve—treating as his daughter; caekdra—did; imam—unto the earthly


--- Page 360 ---
726 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 18
planet; prempa—out of affection; duhitr-vatsalah—affectionate to his
daughter.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter King Prthu was very satisfied with the planet earth, for she
sufficiently supplied all food to various living entities. Thus he developed
an affection for the planet earth, just as if she were his own daughter.
TEXT 29
चूैयन्‌ खधलुष्कोव्या गिरिकूटानि राजराट्‌ |
भूमण्डरमिदं वैन्यः प्रायशक्रे समं विशः ।॥२९॥
carpayan sva-dhanus-kotya
giri-kitani raja-rat
bhi-mandalam 10077 vainyah
prayas cakre samari vibhuh
cirnayan—making into pieces; sva—his own; dhanuh-kotya—by the
power of his bow; giri—of the hills; kiztani—the tops; raja-rat—the Emperor;
bhi-mandalam—the whole earth; idam—this; vainyah—the son of Vena;
prayah—almost; cakre—made; samam—level; vibhuh—the powerful.
TRANSLATION
After this, the King of all kings, Maharaja Prthu, leveled all rough places
on the surface of the globe by breaking up the hills with the strength of his
bow. By his grace the surface of the globe almost became flat.
PURPORT
Generally the mountainous and hilly portions of the earth are made
flat by the striking of thunderbolts. Generally this 15 the business of King
Indra of the heavenly planets, but King Prthu, an incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, did not wait for King Indra to break up
the hills and mountains but did so himself by using his strong bow.
TEXT 30
अथासिन्‌ भगवान्‌ वैन्यः प्रजानां gfe: पिता ।
निवासान्‌ कल्पयाश्चकरे तत्र तत्र यथादतः Rell


--- Page 361 ---
Text 32] Prthu Maharaja Milks the Earth Planet 727
athasmin bhagavan vainyah
prajanam vrtti-dah pita
nivasan kalpayan cakre
tatra tatra yatharhatah
atha—thus; asmin—on this earth planet; bhagavan—the Personality of
Godhead; vainyah—son of Vena; prajanam—of the citizens; vrtti-dah—who
supplies employment; [0112-8 father; nivasan—residences; kalpayan—suit-
able; cakre— make; tatra tatra—here and there; yatha— as;arhatah— desirable,
suitable.
TRANSLATION
To all the citizens of the state, King Prthu was as good as a father. Thus
he was visibly engaged in giving them proper subsistence and proper em-
ployment for subsistence. After leveling the surface of the globe, he ear-
marked different places for residential quarters, inasmuch as they were
desirable.
TEXT 31
ग्रामान्‌ पुरः पत्तनानि दुर्गाणि विविधानि च ।
घोषान्‌ जान्‌ सशिबिरानाकरान्‌ {TEAL |
graman purah pattanani
durgani vividhani ca
ghosan vrajan sa-§ibiran
akaran kheta-kharvatan
graman—villages; purah—cities; pattanani—settlements; durgani—forts;
vividhani—of different varieties; ca—also; ghosan—habitations for the milk-
men; vrajan— pens for cattle; sa-sibiran—with camps; akaran—mines; kheta—
agricultural towns; kharvatan—mountain villages.
TRANSLATION
In this way the King founded many types of villages, settlements and
towns and built forts, residences for cowherdsmen, stables for the animals,
and places for the royal camps, mining places, agricultural towns and moun-
tain villages.
TEXT 32
९.१
प्ाक्एथोरिद नैवैषा पुर्ायादिकल्पन |
यथासुखं वसन्ति सख तत्र तत्राङ़तोमयाः ।२२॥


--- Page 362 ---
728 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 18
prak prthor iha naivaisa
pura-gramadi-kalpana
yatha-sukhari vasanti sma
tatra tatrakutobhayah
prak—before; prthoh—King Prthu; iha—on this planet; na—never; eva—
certainly; esa—this; pura—of towns; grama-adi—of villages, etc.; kalpana—
planned arrangement; yathd—as; sukham—convenient; vasanti sma—lived;
tatra tatra—here and there; akutobhayah—without hesitation.
TRANSLATION
Before the reign of King Prthu there was no planned arrangement for
different cities, villages, pasturing grounds, etc. Everything was scattered,
and everyone constructed his residential quarters according to his own
convenience. However, since King Prthu plans were made for towns and
villages.
PURPORT
From this statement it appears that town and city planning is not new
but has been coming down since the time of King Prthu. In India we can
see regular planning methods evident in very old cities. In Srimad-
Bhagavatam there are many descriptions of such ancient cities. Even 5,000
years ago, Lord Krsna’s capital, Dvaraka, was well planned, and similar
other cities—Mathura, and Hastinapura (now New Delhi)—were also well
planned. Thus the planning of cities and towns is not a modern innovation
but was existing in bygone ages.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Eighteenth
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Prthu Maharaja Milks the
Earth Planet.”


--- Page 363 ---
CHAPTER NINETEEN
King 91070 5 One Hundred Horse Sacrifices
TEXT 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
अथादीक्षत राजा तु दयमेषसतेन सः |
बरह्मावते मनोः AX यत्र प्राची सरखती ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvdca
athadiksata raja tu
haya-medha-satena sah
brahmavarte manoh ksetre
Yatra pract sarasvatt
maitreyah uvaca— the sage Maitreya said; atha— thereafter; adiksata—took
initiation; raja—the King; tu—then; haya—horse; medha—sacrifices; satena—
to perform one hundred; sah—he; brahmavarte—known as Brahmavarta;
manoh—of Svayambhuva Manu; ksetre—in the land; yatra—where; praci—
eastern; sarasvati— the river named Sarasvati.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, King Prthu initiated
the performance of one hundred horse sacrifices at the spot where the
River Sarasvati flows toward the East. This piece of land is known as
Brahmavarta, and it was controlled by Svayambhuva Manu.
TEXT 2
WATT मगवान्‌ कर्मातिशयमात्मनः |
FHI WR परथोय॑क्महोत्सवम्‌ ॥। २ ।।
729


--- Page 364 ---
730 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
tad abhipretya bhagavan
karmatisayam atmanah
Sata-kratur na mamrse
prthor yajiia-mahotsavam

tat abhipretya—considering this matter; bhagavan—the most powerful;
karma-atisayam—excelling in fruitive activities; atmanali—of himself; sata-
kratuh—King Indra, who had performed a hundred sacrifices; na—not;
mamyrse—did tolerate; prthoh—of King Prthu; yajia—sacrificial; maha-
utsavam—greal ceremonies.

TRANSLATION

When the most powerful Indra, the King of heaven, saw this, he con-
sidered the fact that King Prthu was going to exceed him in fruitive aclivi-
ties. Thus Indra could not tolerate the great sacrificial ceremonies per-
formed by King Prthu.

PURPORT

In the material world everyone who comes to enjoy himself or lord it
over malerial nature is envious of others. This envy is also found in the
personality of the King of heaven, Indra. As evident from revealed scrip-
tures, Indra was several times envious of many persons. He was especially
envious of great fruitive activities and the execution of yoga practices, or
siddhis. Indeed, he could not tolerate them, and he desired to break them
up. He was envious due to fear that those who performed great sacrifices
for the execution of myslic yoga might occupy his seat. Since no one in this
material world can tolerate another’s advancement, everyone in the mate-
rial world is called matsara, envious. In the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam
it is therefore said that Srimad-Bhdgavatam is meant for those who are
completely nirmatsara (nonenvious). In other words, one who is not free
from the contamination of envy cannot advance in Krsna consciousness.
In Krsna consciousness, however, if someone excels another person, the
devotee who is excelled thinks how fortunate the other person is to be ad-
vancing in devotional service. Such non-envy is typical of Vaikuntha. How-
ever, when one is envious of his competitor, that is material. The demigods
posted in the material world are not exempt from envy.

TEXT 3
यत्र॒ यज्ञपतिः सा्षाद्धगवान्‌ हरिरीश्वरः ।
अन्वभूयत स्वार्मा स्ैरोकणुरुः TE: ॥ २ ॥


--- Page 365 ---
Text 3] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 731
yatra yajia-patih saksad
bhagavan harir isvarah
anvabhityala sarvatma
sarva-loka-guruh prabhuh

yatra—where; yajiia-patih—the enjoyer of all sacrifices; saksat—directly;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; harih—Lord Visnu;
isvarah—the supreme controller; anvabhiyata—became visible; sarva-atma—
the Supersoul of everyone; sarva-loka-guruh—the master of all planets or
the teacher of everyone; prabhuh— the proprietor.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, is present in every-
one’s heart as the Supersoul, and He is the proprietor of all planets and the
enjoyer of the results of all sacrifices. He was personally present at the
sacrifices made by King Prthu.

PURPORT

In this verse the word saksat is significant. Prthu Maharaja was a
Saklyavesa-avalara incarnation of Lord Visnu. Actually Prthu Maharaja was
a living enlily, but he acquired specific powers from Lord Visnu. Lord
Vigsnu, however, is directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus
belongs (० the category of visnu-tattva. Maharaja Prthu belonged to the
Jjiva-tattva. The vispu-tattva indicates God, whereas the jiva-tattva indicates
the part and parcel of God. When God’s part and parcel is especially em-
powered, he is called saktyavesa-avatiara. Lord 19110 is herein described as
harir iSvarah. The lord is so kind that He lakes all miserable conditions
away from His devotees. Consequently le is called hari. He is described as
isvara because He can do whatever He likes. He is the supreme controller.
The supreme isvara purusottama is Lord Krsna. He exhibits His powers as
iSvara, or the supreme controller, when He assures His devotee in Bhagavad-
gita: “Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. 1 shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.” (Bg. 18.66) He can im-
mediately make His devotee immune from all the reactions caused by sinful
life if the devotee simply surrenders unto Him. He is described herein as
sarvatma, meaning that He is present in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul,
and as such He is the supreme teacher of everyone. If we are fortunate
enough to take the lessons given by Lord Krsna in Bhagavad-gita, our lives
immediately become successful. No one can’ give better instructions to
human society than Lord Krsna.


--- Page 366 ---
732 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 19
TEXT 4
अन्वितो ब्रहमर्वाम्यां लोकपालैः TEER: |
उपगीयमानो गन्धर्ैशनिभिश्वाप्सरोगणैः । ও ॥
anvito brahma-sarvabhyar
loka-palaih sahdnugaih
upagiyamano gandharvair
munibhis capsaro-ganaih
anvitah—being accompanied; brahma—by Lord Brahma; $arvabhyam—
and by Lord Siva; loka-palaih—by the predominating chiefs of all different
planets; saha anugaih—along with their followers; upagiyamanah—Dbeing
praised; gandharvaih—by the residents of Gandharvaloka; munibhih—by
great sages; ca—also; apsarah-ganaih—by the residents of Apsaroloka.
TRANSLATION
^ When Lord Visnu appeared in the sacrificial arena, Lord Brahma, Lord
Siva and all the chief predominating personalities of every planet, as well as
their followers, came with Him. When He appeared on the scene, the resi-
dents of Gandharvaloka, the great sages and the residents of Apsaroloka all
praised Him.
TEXT 5
सिद्धा विद्याधरा दैत्या दानवा गुद्यकादयः |
सुनन्द नन्द प्साः पार्षदप्रवरा हरेः ॥ ५॥
siddha vidyadhara daitya
danava guhyakadayah
sunanda-nanda-pramukhah
parsada-pravara hareh
siddhah—the residents of Siddhaloka; vidyadharah—the residents of
Vidyadhara-loka; daityah—the demoniac descendants of Diti; danavah—
the asuras; guhyaka-adayah—the Y akgas, etc.; sunanda-nanda-pramukhah—
headed by Sunanda and Nanda, the chief of Lord Vignu’s associates from
Vaikuntha; parsada—associates; pravarah—most respectful; hareh—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 367 ---
Text 7] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 733
TRANSLATION
The Lord was accompanied by the residents of Siddhaloka, Vidyadhara-
loka, all the descendants of Diti, and the demons and the Yaksas. He was
also accompanied by His chief associates, headed by Sunanda and Nanda.
TEXT 6
कपिलो नारदो दत्तो योगेशाः सनकादयः ।
TEEGATE ये च तत्सेवनोत्सुकाः ॥ ६ ॥
kapilo narado datto
yogesah sanakadayah
tam anviyur bhagavata
ye ca tat-sevanotsukah
kapilah— Kapila Muni; naradah—the great sage Narada; dattah—
Dattatreya; yoga-Iidh—the masters of mystic power; sanaka-adayah—
headed by Sanaka; tam—Lord Visnu; aenviyuh—followed; bhagavatah—
great devotees; ye—all those who; ca—also; tat-sevana-utsukah—always
eager to serve the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Great devotees who were always engaged in the service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, as well as the great sages named Kapila, Narada,
and Dattatreya, and masters of mystic powers, headed by Sanaka Kumara,
all attended the great sacrifice with Lord Vignu.
TEXT 7
Q
यत्र॒ धमेदुषा भूमिः सरवंकामदुषा सती ।
दोग्धि सामीष्छितानर्थान्‌ यजमानस्य मारत ॥ ও ॥
yatra dharma-dugha bhimih
sarva-kama-dugha sati
dogdhi smabhipsitan arthan
yajamanasya bharata
yatra—where; dharma-dugha—producing sufficient milk for religiosity;
bhiamih—the land; sarva-kdma—all desires; dughd—yielding as milk; sati—


--- Page 368 ---
734 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
the cow; dogdhi sma—fulfilled; abhipsitan—desirable; arthan—objects;
yajamanasya—of the sacrificer; bharata—my dear Vidura.
TRANSLATION

My dear Vidura, in that great sacrifice the entire land came to be like
the milk-producing kama-dhenu, and thus, by the performance of yajia,
all daily necessities for life were supplied.

PURPORT

In this verse the word dharma-dugha is significant, for it indicates
kama-dhenu. Kama-dhenu is also known as surabhi. Surabhi cows inhabit
the spiritual world, and, as stated in Brahma-sarhita, Lord Krsna is en-
gaged in tending these cows: surabhir abhipalayantam. One can milk a
surabhi cow as often as he likes, and the cow will deliver as much milk
as one requires. Milk, of course, is necessary for the production of so
many milk products, especially clarified butter, which is required for the
performances of great sacrifices. Unless we are prepared to perform the
prescribed sacrifices, our supply of the necessities of life will be checked.
Bhagavad-gita confirms that Lord Brahma created human society along
with yajiia, the performance of sacrifice. Yajiia means Lord Visnu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and sacrifice means working for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this age, however,
itis very difficult to find qualified brahmanas who can perform sacrifices as
prescribed in the 6005. Therefore it is recommended in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (yajiiaih sankirtana-prayaih) that by performing sankirtana-
yajiia and by satisfying the yajiia-purusa, Lord Caitanya, one can derive
all the results derived by great sacrifices in the past. King Prthu and others
derived all the necessities of life from the earthly planet by performing
great sacrifices. Now this saitkirtana movement has already been started
by the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. People should take
advantage of this great sacrifice and join in the Society’s activities; then
there will be no scarcity. If sankirtana-yajiia is performed, there will be no
difficulty, not even in industrial enterprises. Therefore this system should
be introduced in all spheres of life—social, political, industrial, commercial,
etc. Then everything will run very peacefully and smoothly.

TEXT 8
उदः सव॑रसान्नद्यः क्षीरदष्यखगोरसान्‌ |
तरवो मूरिवष्माणः प्राखयन्त मधुच्युतः ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 369 ---
Text 8] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 735
huh sarva-rasin nadyah
ksira-dadhy-anna-go-rasan
taravo bhari-varsmanah
prasiyanta madhu-cyutah

@huh—bore; sarva-rasan—all kinds of tastes; nadyah— the rivers; ksira—
milk; dadhi— curd; anna— different kinds of food; go-rasén— other milk prod-
ucts; taravah—trees; bhiri—great; varsmanah—having bodies; prasiyanta—
bore fruit; madhu-cyutah—dropping honey.

TRANSLATION

The flowing rivers supplied all kinds of tastes—sweet, pungent, sour,
etc.—and very big trees supplied fruit and honey in abundance. The cows,
having eaten sufficient green grass, supplied profuse quantities of milk,
curd, clarified butter and similar other necessities.

PURPORT

If rivers are not polluted and are allowed to flow in their own way, or
sometimes allowed to flood the land, the land will become very fertile
and able to produce all kinds of vegetables, trees and plants. The word
rasa means “‘taste.” Actually all rasas are tastes within the earth, and as
soon as seeds are sown on the ground, various trees sprout up to satisfy our
different tastes. For instance, sugar cane provides its juices to satisfy our
taste for sweetness, and oranges provide their juices to satisfy our taste
for a mixture of the sour and the sweet. Similarly, there are pineapples
and other fruits. At the same time, there are chilis to satisfy our taste for
pungency. Although the earth’s ground is the same, different tastes arise
due to different kinds of seeds. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gitd, 0107
marin sarva-bhitanam: “I am the original seed of all existences.” (Bg. 7.10)
Therefore all arrangements are there. And as stated in ISopanisad: pirnam
idam. Complete arrangements for the production of all the necessities of
life are made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. People should
therefore learn how to satisfy the yajiia-purusa, Lord Visnu. Indeed, the
living entity's prime business is to satisfy the Lord because the living
entity is part and parcel of the Lord. Thus the whole system is so arranged
that the living entity must do his duty as he is constitutionally made.
Without doing so, all living entities must suffer. That is the law of nature.

The words taravo bhiri-varsmanah indicate very luxuriantly grown, big-
bodied trees. The purpose of these trees was to produce honey and varieties
of fruit. In other words, the forest also has its purpose in supplying honey,
fruits and flowers. Unfortunately in Kali-yuga, due to an absence of


--- Page 370 ---
736 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
yajiia, there are many big trees in the forests, but they do not supply
sufficient fruits and honey. Thus everything is dependent on the per-
formance of yajiia. The best way to perform yajiia in this age is to spread
the sarikirtana movement all over the world.
TEXT 9
सिन्वयो रलनिङरान्‌ गिरयोऽखं चतुर्विषम्‌ |
~~
ITP: स्वे लोकाः सपालकाः ॥ ९ ॥
sindhavo ratna-nikaran
girayo ‘nnam catur-vidham
upayanam upajahruh
sarve lokah sapalakah
sindhavah—the oceans; ratna-nikaran—heaps of jewels; girayah— the hills;
annam—eatables; catuh-vidham—four kinds of; upayanam—presentations;
updjahruh—brought forward; sarve—all; lokah—the people in general of all
planets; sa-palakaf—along with the governors.
TRANSLATION
King Prthu was presented with various gifts from the general populace
and predominating deities of all planets. The oceans and seas were full of
valuable jewels and pearls, and the hills were full of chemicals and fertilizers.
Four kinds of edibles were produced profusely.
PURPORT
As stated in Isopanisad, this material creation is supplied with all the
potencies for the production of all necessities required by the living
enlities—not only human beings, but animals, reptiles, aquatics, trees, etc.
The oceans and seas produce pearls, coral and valuable jewels so that
fortunate law-abiding people can utilize them. Similarly, the hills are
full of chemicals so when rivers flow down from them the chemicals
spread over the fields to fertilize the four kinds of foodstuffs. These
are technically known as carvya (those edibles which are chewed),
lehya (those which are licked up), ciusya (those which are swallowed) and
peya (those which are drunk).
Prthu Maharaja was greeted by the residents of other planets and their
presiding deities. They presented various gifts Lo the King and acknowledged


--- Page 371 ---
Text 10] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 737
him as the proper type of king by whose planning and activities everyone
throughout the universe could be happy and prosperous. It is clearly
indicated in this verse that the oceans and seas are meant for producing
jewels, bul in Kali-yuga the oceans are mainly being utilized for fishing.
30015 and poor men were allowed Lo fish, but the higher classes like the
ksatriyas and vaisyas would gather pearls, jewels and coral. Although poor
men would catch tons of fish, they would not be equal in value (0 one
piece of coral or pearl. In this age so many factories for the manufacture
of fertilizers have been opened, but when the Personality of Godhead is
pleased by the performance of yajias, the hills automatically produce
fertilizing chemicals, which help produce edibles in the fields. Everything
is dependent on the people’s acceptance of the Vedic principles of sacrifice.
TEXT 10
হালি चाधोक्षजेशस्य एयोस्तु परमोदयम्‌ ।
अख्यन्‌ मगवानिन्द्रः ध्रतिषातय्पीकरत्‌ ॥१०॥
iti-cadhoksajesasya
prthes tu paramodayam
asityan bhagavan indrah
pratighatam acikarat
iti—thus; ca—also; adhoksaja-isasya—who accepted Adhoksaja as his wor-
shipable Lord; prthoh—of King Prthu; tu—then; parama—the topmost;
udayam—opulence; asiityan—being envious of; bhagavain—the most power-
ful; indrah—the King of heaven; pratighdtam—impediments; acikarat—
made.
TRANSLATION
King Prthu was dependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is known as Adhoksaja. Because King Prthu performed so many sacrifices,
he was superhumanly enhanced by the mercy of the Supreme Lord. King
Prthu’s opulence, however, could not be tolerated by the King of heaven,
Indra, who tried to impede the progress of his opulence.
PURPORT
In this verse there are three significant purposes expressed in the words
adhoksaja, bhagavan indrah and prthoh. Maharaja Prthu is an incarnation


--- Page 372 ---
738 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
of Visnu, yet he is a great devotee of Lord Visnu. Although an empowered
incarnation of Lord Visnu, he is nonetheless a living entity. As such, he
must be a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although one
is empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is an incarnation,
he should not forget his eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. In Kali-yuga there are many self-made incarnations, rascals,
who declare themselves to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
words bhagavan indrah indicate that even a living entity can be as exalted
and powerful as King Indra, for even King Indra is an ordinary living
entity in the material world and possesses the four defects of the
conditioned soul. King Indra is described herein as bhagavan, which is
generally used in reference to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In
this case, however, King Indra is addressed as bhagavan because he has
so much power in his hands. Despite his becoming bhagavan, he is
envious of the incarnation of God, Prthu Maharaja. The defects of material
life are so strong that due to contamination King Indra becomes envious
of an incarnation of God.

We should try to understand, therefore, how a conditioned soul becomes
fallen. The opulence of King Prthu was not dependent on material con-
ditions. As described in this verse, he was a great devotee of Adhoksaja.
The word adhoksaja indicates the Personality of Godhead, who is beyond
the expression of mind and words. However, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead appears before the devotee in His original form of eternal bliss
and knowledge. The devotee is allowed to see the Supreme Lord eye to
eye, although the Lord is beyond the expression of our senses and beyond
our direct perception.

TEXT 11
चरमेणाश्वमेधेन यजमाने यजुष्पतिम्‌ |
वैन्ये mug स्पधंमपोवाह तिरोहितः ॥११।।
11111111 1
yajamane yajus-patim
vainye yajiia-pasuri spardhann
apovaha tirohitah

caramena—Dby the last one; asvamedhena—by the sacrifice of asvamedha-
yajiia; yajamane—when he was performing the sacrifice; yajuh-patim—for
satisfaction of the Lord of yajiia, Vignu; vainye—the son of King Vena;


--- Page 373 ---
Text 12] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 739
yajiia-pasum—the animal meant to be sacrificed in the yajiia; spardhan—
being envious; apovaha—stole; tirohitah—being invisible.
TRANSLATION
When Prthu Maharaja was performing the last horse sacrifice [asvamedha-
yajia], King Indra, invisible to everyone, stole the horse intended for
sacrifice. He did this because of his great envy of King Prthu.
PURPORT
King Indra is known as sata-kratu, which indicates that he has performed
one hundred horse sacrifices (asvamedha-yajiia). We should know, however,
that the animals sacrificed in the yajiia were not killed. If the Vedic
mantras were properly pronounced during the sacrifice, the animal
sacrificed would come out again with a new life. That is the test for a
successful yajiia. When King Prthu performed one hundred yajiias, Indra
became very envious because he did not want anyone to excel him. Being
an ordinary living entity, he became envious of King Prthu, and, making
himself invisible, he stole the horse and thus impeded the yajiia per-
formance.
TEXT 12
तिर्थगवाैशषन्दरपाणं fee
आष्चक्तमिव पाखण्डं योऽधमे fem ॥१२॥
tam atrir bhagavan aiksat
৷ tvaramanam vihayasa
amuktam iva pakhandam
yo ‘dharme dharma-vibhramah
tam—King Indra; atrih—the sage Atri; bhagavan—most powerful; aiksat—
could see; tvaramanam—moving very hastily; vihayasa—in outer space;
amuktam iva—like a liberated person; pakhapdam—imposter; yah—one
who; adharme—in irreligiosity ; dharma—religiosity ; vibhramah—mistaking.
When King Indra was taking away the horse, he dressed himself to appear
as a liberated person. Actually this dress is a form of cheating, for it
falsely created an impression of religion. When Indra went into outer


--- Page 374 ---
740 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
space in this way, the great sage Atri saw him and understood the whole
situation.

PURPORT

The word pakhanda used in this verse is sometimes pronounced pasanda.
Both of these words indicate an imposter who presents himself as a very
religious person but in actuality is sinful. Indra took up the saffron-
colored dress as a way of cheating others. This saffron dress has been
misused by many imposters who present themselves as liberated persons
or incarnations of God. In this way people are cheated. As we have
mentioned many times, the conditioned soul has a tendency to cheat;
therefore this quality is also visible in a person like King Indra. It is
understood that even King Indra is not liberated from the clutches of
material contamination. Thus the word amuktam iva, meaning “as if he
were liberated,” is used. The saffron dress worn by a sannydsi announces
to the world that he has renounced all worldly affairs and is simply en-
gaged in the service of the Lord. Such a devotee is actually a sannyasi or
liberated person. In Bhagavad-gita it is said:

andsritah karma-phalam
karyarm karma karoti yah
sa sannyast ca yogi ca
na niragnir na cakriyah
“One who is unattached to the fruits of his work and who works as he is
obligated is in the renounced order of life, and he is the true mystic: not
he who lights no fire and performs no work.” (Bg. 6.1)

In other words, one who offers the results of his activities to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is actually a sannyasi and yogi. Cheating sannydsis
and yogis have existed since the time of Prthu Maharaja’s sacrifice. This
cheating was very foolishly introduced by King Indra. In some ages such
cheating is very prominent, and in other ages not so prominent. It is the
duty of a sannydsi to be very cautious because, as stated by Lord Caitanya,
sannyadsira alpa chidra sarva-loke gaya: a little spot in a sannyasi’s character
will be magnified by the public. Therefore, unless one is very sincere and
serious, he should not take up the order of sannydsa. One should not use
this order as a means to cheat the public. It is better nol to take up sannyasa
in this age of Kali because provocations are very strong in this age. Only a
very exalted person advanced in spiritual understanding should attempt to
take up sannydsa. One should not adopt this order as a means of livelihood
or for some material purpose.


--- Page 375 ---
Text 14] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 741
TEXT 13
अत्रिणा चोदितो हन्तु पृथुपुत्रो महारथः |
अन्वधावत संक्ुद्धत्तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति चान्रवीत्‌ ॥१२॥
atrind codito hantum
prthu-putro maha-rathah
anvadhdvata sankruddhas
tistha tistheti cabravit
atrina—by the great sage Atri; coditahi—being encouraged; hantum—to
kill; prthu-putrah—the son of King Prthu; maha-rathah—a great hero;
anvadhavata—followed; sankruddhah—being very angry; tistha tistha—just
wail, just wait; iti—thus; ca—also; abravit—he said.
TRANSLATION
When the son of King Prthu was informed by Atri of King Indra’s trick,
he immediately became very angry and followed Indra to kill him, calling,
“Wait! Wait!”
PURPORT
The words tistha tistha are used by a ksatriya when he challenges his
enemy. When fighting, a ksatriya cannot flee from the battlefield. However,
when a ksatriya out of cowardice flees from the battlefield, showing his
back to his enemy, he is challenged with the words tistha tistha. A real
ksatriya does not kill his enemy from behind, nor does a real ksatriya turn
his back on the battlefield. According to ksatriya principle and spirit,
one either attains victory or dies in the battlefield. Although King Indra
was very exalted, being the King of heaven, he became degraded due to his
stealing the horse intended for sacrifice. Therefore he fled without observing
the ksatriya principles, and the son of Prthu had to challenge him with the
words tistha tistha.
TEXT 14
त॑ বাহহান্ধবি वीय मेने धमं शरीरिणब्‌ ।
जिल मखनान्छं तसे बाणं न gata ॥१४॥
tam tadrsakrtim viksya
mene dharmarh $aririnam


--- Page 376 ---
742 Srimad-Bhagavatam [ Canto 4, Ch. 19
jatilam bhasmand@cchannam
tasmai bana na muficati
tam—him; tadrsa-akrtim—in such dress; viksya—after seeing; mene—con-
sidered; dharmam—pious or religious; saririnam—having a body: jatilam—
having knotted hair; bhasmana—by ashes; dcchannam—smeared all over the
body; tasmai—unto him; banam—arrow ; na—not; muiicati—he did release.
TRANSLATION
King Indra was fraudulently dressed as a sannyasi, having knotted his
hair on his head and smeared ashes all over his body. Upon seeing such
dress, the son of King Prthu considered Indra a religious man and pious
sannyasi. Therefore he did not release his arrows.
TEXT 15
वधाभिशृ्तं तं भूयो दन्तवेऽत्रिरचोद यत्‌ ।
जहि awe तात महेन्द्रं विषुधाघमम्‌ ॥ १५॥
vadhan nivrttam tari bhiayo
hantave ’trir acodayat
Jjahi yajiia-hanam tata
mahendram vibudhadhamam
vadhat— from killing; nivrttam—stopped; tam—the son of Prthu; bhiyah—
again; hantave—for the purpose of killing; atrih—the great sage Atri;
acodayat— encouraged; jahi—Kkill; yajia-hanam—one who impeded the per-
formance of a yajiia; tata—my dear son; maha-indram—the great heavenly
King Indra; vibudha-adhamam—the lowest of all demigods.
TRANSLATION
When Atri Muni saw that the son of King Prthu did not kill Indra but
returned deceived by him, Atri Muni again instructed him to kill the
heavenly King because he thought that Indra had become the lowliest of
all demigods due to his impeding the execution of King Prthu’s sacrifice.
TEXT 16
एवं वैन्यसुतः शोक्तस्त्वरमाणं विहायसा ।
TERED रावणं गृभराडिव ||


--- Page 377 ---
Text 18] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 743
evar vainya-sutah proktas
tvaramanarh vihdyasa
anvadravad abhikruddho
ravanam grdhra-rad iva
evam—thus; vainya-sutah—the son of King Prthu; proktah—being or-
dered; tvaramanam—Indra, who was moving hastily; vihdyasa—in the sky;
anvadravat—began to chase; abhikruddhah—being very angry; ravanam—
Ravana; grdhra-rat—the king of vultures; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Being thus informed, the grandson of King Vena immediately began to
follow Indra, who was fleeing through the sky in great haste. He was very
angry with him, and he chased him just as the king of the vultures chased
Ravana.
TEXT 17
सोऽश्वं रूपं च तद्धित्वा तसा अन्तर्हितः स्वराट्‌ ।
[9
वीरः खपशमादाय पित॒यन्ञसुपेयिवान्‌ el
so ४८१1, 70007 ca tad dhitva
tasma antarhitah sva-rat
virah sva-pasum adaya
pitur yajiam upeyivan
sah—King Indra; asvam—the horse; ripam—the false dress of a saintly
person; ca—also; tat—that; hitva—giving up; tasmai—for him; antarhitah—
disappeared; sva-rat—Indra; vireah—the great hero; sva-pasum—his animal;
dédaya—having taken; pituh—of his father; yajiam—to the sacrifice;
upeyivan—he came back.
TRANSLATION
When Indra saw that the son of Prthu was chasing him, he immediately
abandoned his false dress and left the horse. Indeed, he disappeared from
that very spot, and the great hero, the son of Maharaja Prthu, returned the
horse to his father’s sacrificial arena.
TEXT 18
तत्तस्य चाद्भुतं कमं॑विचक््य परमर्षयः |
नामधेयं ददुस्ते विजिताश्व इति प्रमो ॥१८॥


--- Page 378 ---
744 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
tat tasya cadbhutar karma
vicaksya paramarsayah
namadheyar dadus tasmai
vijitasva iti prabho
tat—that; tasya—his; ca—also; adbhutam—wonderful; karma—activity;
vicaksya—after observing; parama-rsayah—the great sages; namadheyam—
the name; daduh—they offered; tasmai—to him; vijita-asvah— Vijitasva (he
who has won the horse); iti—thus; prabho—my dear Lord Vidura.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord Vidura, when the great sages observed the wonderful
prowess of the son of King Prthu, they all agreed to give him the name
Vijitasva.
TEXT 19
gw तमस्तीव्रं जहाराश्वं॑पुनर्दरिः |
चपाठयूपतरलस्रो दिरण्यरञ्जनं विच; nan
upasrjya tamas tivram
Jaharasvarm punar harih
cagala-yipalas channo
hirapya-rasanari vibhuh
upasrjya—creating; tamah—darkness; tivram—dense; jahara—took away;
asvam—the horse; punah—again; harih—King Indra; casala-yiipatah—from
the wooden instrument where the animals were sacrificed; channah—being
covered; hiranya-rasanam—tied with a gold chain; vibhuh—very powerful.
TRANSLATION
My dear Vidura, Indra, being the King of heaven and very powerful, im-
mediately brought a dense darkness upon the sacrificial arena. Covering
the whole scene in this way, he again took away the horse, which was
chained with golden shackles near the wooden instrument where animals
were sacrificed.
TEXT 20
अत्रिः सन्दशैयामास त्वरमाणं विहायसा ।
कपाटखटबाङ्गघरं वीरो नैनमबाधत Roll


--- Page 379 ---
Text 22] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 745
atrih sandarsayam asa
tvaramanparin vihayasa
kapala-khatvanga-dharam
viro nainam abadhata
atrih—the great sage Atri; sandarsayam dsa—caused to see; tvaramanam—
going very hastily; vihdyasa—in the sky; kapala-khatvanga—a staff with a
skull at the top; dharam—who carried; virah—the hero (King Prthu’s son);
na—not; enam—the King of heaven, Indra; abadhata—killed.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Atri again pointed out to the son of King Prthu that Indra
was fleeing through the sky. The great hero, the son of Prthu, chased him
again. But when he saw that Indra was carrying in his hand a staff with a
skull at the top and was again wearing the dress of a sannyasi, he still chose
not to kill him.
TEXT 21
अत्रिणा चोदितस्तस्मै सन्दधे Ride रुषा ।
सोऽइवं रूपं च तद्धित्वा तस्यावन्तदितः खराट्‌॥। २१॥
atrina coditas tasmai
sandadhe visikham rusa
so 3৮01 riipar ca tad dhitva
tasthav antarhitah sva-rat
atrina—by the greal sage Atri; codilah—inspired; tasmai—for Lord Indra;
sandadhe—fixed up; visikham—his arrow; rusi—out of great anger; sah—
King Indra; asvam—horse; ripam—the dress of a sannyasi; ca—also; tat—
that; hitva—giving up; tasthau—he remained there; antarhitah—invisible;
sva-rat—the independent Indra.
TRANSLATION
When the great sage Atri again gave directions, the son of King Prthu be-
came very angry and placed an arrow on his bow. Upon seeing this, King
Indra immediately abandoned the false dress of a sannyasi and, giving up
the horse, made himself invisible.
TEXT 22
वीरशवाश्वघपादाय  पिकयज्ञमथावजत्‌ |
Ed हरे কর্ণ অ্য্হ্ধবীলহুবতাঃ ॥॥२२॥


--- Page 380 ---
746 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
viras casvam upadaya
pitr-yajiiam athavrajat
tad avadyari hare riipam
Jagrhur jiiana-durbalah
virah—the son of King Prthu; ca—also; asvam—the horse; upadaya—tak-
ing; pitr-yajiam—to the sacrificial arena of his father: atha—thereafter;
avrajat—went; tat—that; avadyam—abominable; hareh—of Indra; ripam—
dress; jagrhuh—adopted; jiiana-durbalah—those with a poor fund of knowl-
edge:
TRANSLATION
Then the great hero, Vijitasva, the son of King Prthu, again took the
horse and returned to his father’s sacrificial arena. Since that time, certain
men with a poor fund of knowledge have adopted the dress of a false
sannyasi. It was King Indra who introduced this.
PURPORT
Since lime immemorial, the sannydsa order has carried the tridanda.
Later Sankaracarya introduced the ekadandi-sannyasi. A tridapdi-sannydasi
is a Vaisnava sannydasi, and an ekadandi-sannyasi is a Mayavadi sannyasi.
There are many other types of sannyasis who are not approved by Vedic
rituals. A type of pseudo-sannyasa was introduced by Indra when he tried
to hide himself from the attack of Vijitasva, the great son of King Prthu.
Now there are many different types of sannydasis. Some of them go naked,
and some of them carry a skull and trident, generally known as kapalika.
All of them were introduced under some meaningless circumstances, and
those who have a poor fund of knowledge accept these false sannydsis and
their pretenses, although they are not bona fide guides to spiritual advance-
ment. At the present moment some missionary institutions, without re-
ferring to the Vedic rituals, have introduced some sannyasis who engage in
sinful activities. The sinful activities forbidden by the $astras are illicit sex,
intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. These so-called sannyasis indulge
in all these activities. They eat meat and flesh, fish, eggs and just about
everything. They sometimes drink with the excuse that without alcohol,
fish and meat, it is impossible to remain in the cold countries near the
arctic zone. These sannyasis introduce all these sinful activities in the name
of serving the poor, and consequently poor animals are cut to pieces and go
into the bellies of these sannyasis. As described in the following verses, such
sannyasis are pakhandis. Vedic literature slates that a person who puts


--- Page 381 ---
Text 23] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 747
Lord Narayana on the level with Lord Siva or Lord Brahma immediately
becomes a pakhandi. As stated in the Puranas:
yas tu narayanarn devarm
brahma-rudradi-daivataih
samatvenaiva vikseta
sa pasandi bhaved dhruvam
In Kali-yuga the pakhandis are very prominent. However, Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu has tried to kill all these pdkhandis by introducing His
sankirtana movement. Those who take advantage of this santkirtana move-
ment of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness will be able
to save themselves from the influence of these pakhandis.
TEXT 23
यानि रूपाणि जगृहे EN हयजिहीषैया ।
तानि पापस्य खण्डानि लिङ्ग खण्डमिदोच्यते 1221
yani rapani jagrhe
indro haya-jihirsaya
tani papasya khandani
lingam khandam ihocyate
yani—all those which; rapani—forms; jagrhe— accepted; indrah—the King
of heaven; haya—the horse; jihirsaya—with a desire to steal; tani—all those;
papasya—of sinful activities; khapdani—signs; lingam—the symbol;
khandam—the word khanda; iha—here; ucyate—is said.
TRANSLATION
Whatever different forms Indra assumed as a mendicant because of his
desire to seize the horse were symbols of atheistic philosophy.
PURPORT
According to Vedic civilization, sannydsa is one of the essential items in
the program of the varna-aSrama institution. One should accept sannydsa
according to the parampara system of the acaryas. At the present moment,
however, many so-called sannyasis or mendicants have no understanding of
God consciousness. Such sannydsa was introduced by Indra because of his


--- Page 382 ---
748 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
jealousy of Maharaja Prthu, and what he introduced is again appearing in
the age of Kali. Practically none of the sannydsis in this age are bona fide.
No one can introduce any new system into the Vedic way of life; if one
does so out of malice, he is to be known as a pasandi, or atheist. In the
Vaignava tantra it is said:
yas tu nardyaparm devarm
brahma-rudradi-daivataih
samatvenaiva vikseta
sa pasandi bhaved dhruvam
Although it is forbidden, there are many pdsandis who coin terms like
daridra-nardyana and svami-ndrayana, although not even such demigods as
Brahma and Siva can be equal to Narayana.
TEXTS 24-25
एवमिन्द्रे aE বীন্যযব্তজিঘাযযা ।
तद्गरहीतविसृष्टेषु पाखण्डेषु ARR 113811
धमे इत्युपधर्मेषु नप्ररक्तपटादिषु |
प्रायेण सजते भ्रान्त्या IFS च वाग्मिषु ॥२५॥
evam indre haraty ৫8001
vainya-yajiia-jigharisaya
tad-grhita-visrstesu
pakhandesu matir nrpam
dharma ity upadharmesu
nagna-rakta-paiadisu
prayena sajjate bhrantya
pesalesu ca vagmisu
evam—thus; indre—when the King of heaven; harati—stole; asvam—the
horse; vainya—of the son of King Vena; yajiia—the sacrifice; jighamsaya—
with a desire to stop; tat—by him; grhita—accepted; visrstesu—abandoned;
pakhandesu—toward the sinful dress; matihi—attraction; nrnam—of the
people in general; dharmah—system of religion; iti— thus; upadharmesu—
toward false religious systems; nagna—naked;rakta-pata—redrobed; adisu—
etc.; prayena—generally; sajjate—is attracted; bhrantya—foolishly; pesalesu
—expert; ca—and; vagmisu—eloquent.


--- Page 383 ---
Text 26] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 749
TRANSLATION

In this way, King Indra, in order to steal the horse from King Prthu’s
sacrifice, adopted several orders of sannyasa. Some of these sannyasis go
naked, and sometimes they wear red garments and pass under the name of
kapalika. These are simply symbolic representations of their sinful activities.
These so-called sannyasis are very much appreciated by sinful men because
they are all godless atheists and very expert in putting forward arguments
and reasons to support their case. We must know, however, that they are
only passing as adherents of religion and are not so in fact. Unfortunately,
bewildered persons accept them as religious, and being attracted to them,
they spoil their life.

PURPORT

As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, men in this age of Kali are short-lived,
devoid of spiritual knowledge, and susceptible to accept false religious
systems due to their unfortunate condition. Thus they always remain men-
tally disturbed. The Vedic $astras practically prohibit the adoption of
sannyasa in the age of Kali because less intelligent men may accept the
sannyasa order for cheating purposes. Actually the only religion is the re-
ligion of surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We must
serve the Lord in Krgna consciousness. All other systems of sannydsa and
religion are actually not bona fide. In this age they are simply passing for
religious systems. This is most regrettable.

TEXT 26
तदभिज्ञाय भगवान्‌ पृथुः एथुपराकमः |
इन्द्राय पितो शणपादलोद्यतका्ङः ॥२६॥।
tad abhijiiaya bhagavan
prthuh prthu-parakramah
indraya kupito banam
ddattodyata-karmukah

tat—that; abhijiagya—understanding; bhagavan—the incarnation of God-
head; prthuh—King Prthu; prthu-parakramah—celebrated as very powerful;
indraya—upon Indra; kupitah—being very angry; banam—an arrow; adatta—
took up; udyata—having taken up; karmukah—the bow.


--- Page 384 ---
750 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Prthu, who was celebrated as very powerful, immediately took
up his bow and arrows and prepared to kill Indra himself, because Indra
introduced such irregular sannyasa orders.
PURPORT
Ttis the duty of the king not to tolerate any introduction of any irreligious
systems. Since King Prthu was an incarnation of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, certainly his duty was to cut down all kinds of irreligious
systems. Following in his footsteps, all heads of state should themselves be
bona fide representatives of God and should cut down all irreligious sys-
tems. Unfortunately they are cowards who declare a secular state. Such
a mentality is a way of compromising religious and irreligious systems,
but because of this citizens are generally becoming uninterested in spiritual
advancement. Thus the situation deteriorates to such an extent that human
society becomes hellish.
TEXT 27
तग्रत्विजः शक्रवधाभिसन्धितं
विच्य दुष्प्रस्यमसष्यरंदसम्‌ |
निवारयामासुरहो महामते
न युज्यतेऽत्रान्यवधः प्रचोदितात्‌ ।(२७॥
tam rtvijah $akra-vadhabhisandhitam
vicaksya duspreksyam asahya-ramhasam
nivarayam asur aho maha-mate
na yujyate ‘tranya-vadhah pracoditat
tam—King Prthu; rtvijah—the priests; sakra-vadha—killing the King of
heaven;abhisandhitam—thus preparing himself; vicaksya—having observed;
duspreksyam—terrible to look at; asahya—unbearable; ramhasam—whose
velocity; nivarayam asuh— they forbade; aho—oh; maha-mate—O great soul;
na—not; yujyate—is worthy for you; atra—in this sacrificial arena; anya—
others; vadhah— killing; pracoditat—from being so directed in the scriptures.
TRANSLATION
When the priests and all the others saw Maharaja Prthu very angry and
prepared to kill Indra, they requested him: O great soul, do not kill him,


--- Page 385 ---
Text 28] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 751
for only sacrificial animals can be killed in a sacrifice. Such are the direc-
tions given by sastra.
PURPORT
Animal killing is intended for different purposes. It tests the proper pro-
nunciation of Vedic mantras, and an animal being put into the sacrificial
fire should come oul with a new life. No one should ever be killed in a
sacrifice meant for the satisfaction of Lord Vignu. How then could Indra
be killed when he is actually worshiped in the yajiia and accepted as part
and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? Therefore the priests
requested King Prthu not to kill him.
TEXT 28
वयं मरुत्वन्तमिहाथनाञ्नं
हवयामहे त्वच्छ्रवसा हतत्विषम्‌ |
अयातयामोपहवेरनन्तरं
प्रसद्य राजन्‌ जुहवाम तेऽहितम्‌ ॥२८॥
vayam marutvantam thartha-nasanam
hvayamahe tvac-chravasa hata-tvisam
ayatayamopahavair anantarar
prasahya rajan juhavama te ’hitam
vayam—we; marutvantam—King Indra; tha—here; artha—of your interest;
nasanam—the destroyer; hvayamahe—we shall call; tvat-sravasi—by your
glory; hata-tvisam—already bereft of his power; ayatayama—never before
used; upahavaih—by mantras of invocation; anantaram—without delay;
prasahya—by force; ragjan—O King; juhavama—we shall sacrifice in the fire;
te—your; ahitam—enemy.
TRANSLATION
Dear King, Indra’s powers are already reduced due to his attempt to
impede the execution of your sacrifice. We shall call him by Vedic mantras,
which were never before used, and certainly he will come. Thus by the
power of our mantra, we shall cast him into the fire because he is your
enemy.
PURPORT
By chanting the Vedic mantras properly in a sacrifice, one can perform
many wonderful things. In Kali-yuga, however, there are no qualified


--- Page 386 ---
752 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
brahmanas who can chant the mantras properly. Consequently no attempt
should be made to perform such big sacrifices. In this age the only sacrifice
recommended is the saiikirtana movement.
TEXT 29
इत्यामन्त्य क्रतुपतिं विदुरास्यस्विजो रुषा ।
सुग्षस्ताञ्जुह्वतोऽम्येत्य स्वयम्भूः प्त्यषेषत ॥ २९
ity amantrya kratu-patim
vidurasyartvijo rusa
srug-ghastai juhvato ’bhyetya
svayambhiih pratyasedhata
iti—thus; amantrya—after informing; kratu-patim—King Prthu, the
master of the sacrifice; vidura—O Vidura; asya—of Prthu; rtvijah—the
priests; rusa—in great anger; sruk-hastan—with the sacrificial ladel in hand;
Juhvatah—performing the fire sacrifice; abhyetlya—having begun; svayam-
bhith—lLord Brahma; pratyasedhata—asked them to stop.
TRANSLATION
My dear Vidura, after giving the King this advice, the priests who had
been engaged in performing the sacrifice called for Indra, the King of
heaven, in a mood of great anger. When they were just ready to put the
oblation on the fire, Lord Brahma appeared on the scene and forbade them
to start the sacrifice.
TEXT 30
न वध्यो मदतामि्द्रो यद्यज्ञो मगवत्तनुः |
यं जिधांखथ यज्ञेन यस्येष्टास्तनवः सुराः ell
na vadhyo bhavatam indro
yad yajiio bhagavat-tanuh
yam jighamsatha yajitena
yasyestas tanavah surah
na—not; vadhyah—ought to be killed; bhavatam—by all of you; indrah—
the King of heaven; yat—because;yajiiah—a name of Indra; bhagavat-tanuh
—part of the body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yam—whom;


--- Page 387 ---
Text 32) King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 753
Jighamsatha—you wish to kill; yajiiena—by performing sacrifice; yasya—of
Indra; istah—being worshiped; tanavah—parts of the body; surdh—the
demigods.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma addressed them thus: My dear sacrificial performers, you
cannot kill Indra, the King of heaven. It is not your duty. You should know
that Indra is as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Indeed, he is
one of the most powerful assistants of the Personality of Godhead. You
are trying to satisfy all the demigods by the performance of this yajiia, but
you should know that all these demigods are but parts and parcels of Indra,
the King of heaven. How, then, can you kill him in this great sacrifice?
TEXT 31
तदिदं पश्यत महदधमेब्यतिकरं द्विजाः ।
हन्द्रेणालुष्ठितं राज्ञः करमैतद्िजिषांसता 13201
tad idam pasyata mahad-
dharma-vyatikararm dvijah
indrendnusthitam rajiah
karmaitad vijighamsata
tat—then; idam—this; pasyata—just see; mahat—great; dharma—of re-
ligious life; vyatikaram—violation; dvijadh—O great brahmanas; indrena—by
Indra; anusthitam—performed; rajiah—of the King; karma— activity; etat—
this sacrifice; vijighdmsata— desiring to impede.
TRANSLATION
In order to make trouble and impede the performance of King Prthu’s
great sacrifice, King Indra has adopted some means that in the future will
destroy the clear path of religious life. 1 draw your attention to this fact.
If you oppose him any further, he will further misuse his power and intro-
duce many other irreligious systems.
TEXT 32
ल
पृथुकीतेः দৃযৌয্যাতধক্কীনহানক্ষন্তঃ |
अं ते maf: खिष्टै॑द्धवान्योखषरमवित्‌ 13 11


--- Page 388 ---
754 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
prithu-kirteh prthor bhayat
tarhy ekona-sata-kratuh
alarm te kratubhih svistair
yad bhavan mokgsa-dharma-vit
prthu-kirteh—ef wide renown; prthoh—of King Prthu; bhiayat—let it be;
tarhi—therefore; ekona-sata-kratuh—he who performed ninety-nine yajnas;
alam—there is nothing to be gained; te—of you; kratubhih—by performing
sacrifices; su-istaih-well performed; yat—because; bhavin—yourself; moksa-
dharma-vit—the knower of the path of liberation.
TRANSLATION
“Let there be only ninety-nine sacrificial performances for Maharaja
Prthu,” Lord Brahma concluded. Lord Brahma then turned toward
Maharaja Prthu and informed him that since he was thoroughly aware of
the path of liberation, what was the use in performing more sacrifices?
PURPORT
Lord Brahma came down to pacify King Prthu regarding his continual
performance of one hundred sacrifices. King Prthu was determined to per-
form one hundred sacrifices, and King Indra took this very seriously be-
cause Indra himself was known as the performer of one hundred sacrifices.
Just as it is the nature of all living entities within this material world to be-
come envious of their competitors, King Indra, although King of heaven,
was also envious of King Prthu. Therefore, he wanted to stop him from per-
forming one hundred sacrifices. Actually there was greal compelition, and
King Indra, to satisfy his senses, began to invent so many irreligious sys-
tems lo obstruct King Prthu. To stop these irreligious inventions, Lord
Brahma personally appeared in the sacrificial arena. As far as Maharaja
Prthu was concerned, he was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; therefore it was nol necessary for him to perform the prescribed
Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. Such ceremonies are known as karma, and
there is no need for a devotee in the transcendental position to execute
them. As the ideal king, however, it was King Prthu’s duty to perform sac-
rifices. A compromise was therefore to be worked oul. By the blessings of
Lord Brahma, King Prthu would become more famous than King Indra. Thus
Prthu’s determination to perform one hundred sacrifices was indirectly
fulfilled by the blessings of Lord Brahma.


--- Page 389 ---
Text 34] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 755
TEXT 33
नैवात्मने महेन्द्राय रोषमादतमरपि |
उभावपि हि मद्रं॑ते उत्तमश्छोकविग्रदो nz
naivalmane mahendraya
rosam ahartum arhasi
ubhav api hi bhadram te
uttamasloka-vigrahau
na—not; eva—certainly; dmane—nondifferent from you; maha-indraya—
pon the King of heaven, Indra; rosam—anger; ahartum—to apply; arhasi—
ou ought; ubhau—both of you; api—certainly; hi—also; bhadram—good
ortune; te—unto you; uttama-sloka-vigrahau—incarnations of the Supreme
‘ersonality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma continued: Let there be good fortune to both of you, for
ou and King Indra are both part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of
sodhead. Therefore you should not be angry with King Indra, who is non-
lifferent from you.
TEXT 34
माखिन्महाराज छृथाः स चिन्तां
निश्षामयाखदच  आदतात्मा |
यद्धयायतो देवहतं जु कर्तु
मनोऽतिरुष्टं विशते तमोऽन्धम्‌ ॥२४॥
masmin maharaja krthah sma cintam
nisamayasmad-vaca adrtatma
yad dhyayato daiva-hatam nu kartum
mano ‘tirustam visate tamo ‘ndham
ma—do not; asmin—in this; maha-raja—O King; krthah—do; sma—as= done
in the past; cintam—agitation of the mind; nisamaya—please consider:
asmal—my ; vacah— words; adrta-atma— being very respectful; yal— because;
dhyayatah—of he who is contemplating; daiva-hatam—that which is


--- Page 390 ---
756 Srimad-Bhagavatam | Canto 4, Ch. 19
thwarted by providence; nu—certainly; kartum—te do; manah—the mind;
alirustam—very angry; visate—enters; tamah—darkness; andham— dense.
TRANSLATION

My dear King, don’t be agitated and anxious because your sacrifices have
not been properly executed due to providential impediments. Kindly take
my words with great respect. We should always remember that if something
happens by providential arrangement, we should not be very sorry. The
more we try to rectify such reversals, the more we enter into the darkest
region of materialistic thought.

PURPORT

Sometimes the saintly or very religious person also has to meet with
reversals in life. Such incidents should be taken as providential. Although
there may be sufficient cause for being unhappy, one should avoid counter-
acling such reversals because the more we become implicated in rectifying
such reversals, the more we enter into the darkest regions of material
anxiety. Lord Krsna has also advised us in this connection. We should
tolerate things instead of becoming agitated.

TEXT 35
FARHAN देवेषु दुरवग्रहः ।
धमेन्यतिकरो यत्र॒ पाखण्डैरिनद्रनिरमितैः ॥३५॥
kratur viramatam esa
devesu duravagrahah
dharma-vyatikaro yatra
pakhandair indra-nirmitaih

kratuh— the sacrifice;viramatam— let it stop; esah— this; devesu— amongst
the demigods; duravagrahah—addiction to unwanted things; dharma-
vyatikarah—violation of religious principles; yatra— where; pakhandaih—by
sinful activities; indra—by the King of heaven; nirmita th— manufactured.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma continued: Stop the performance of these sacrifices, for

they have induced Indra to introduce so many irreligious aspects. You


--- Page 391 ---
Text 36] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 757
should know very well that even amongst the demigods there are many un-
wanted desires.
PURPORT
There are many competitors in ordinary business affairs, and the karma-
kanda chapters of the Vedas sometimes cause competition and envy
amongst karmis. A karmi must be envious because he wishes Lo enjoy mate-
rial pleasures to their fullest extent. That is the material disease. Conse-
quently there is always competition amongst karmis, either in ordinary
business affairs or in the performance of yajiia. Lord Brahma’s purpose was
to end the competition between Lord Indra and Maharaja Prthu. Because
Maharaja Prthu was a great devolee and incarnation of God, he was re-
quested to stop the sacrifices so that Indra might not further introduce
irreligious systems, which are always followed by criminal-minded people.
TEXT 36
९.
FRITS: पाखण्डैदारिमिजनम्‌ |
हियमाणं fede यस्ते amram ।।২৪।
ebhir indropasamsrstaih
pakhandair haribhir janam
hriyamanari vicaksvainarm
yas te yajiia-dhrug asva-mu}
ebhih—by these; indra-upasarisystaih—created by the King of heaven,
Indra; pakhandaih—sinful activities; haribhili—very attractive to the heart;
janam—the people in general; hriyamanam—being carried away; vicaksva—
just see; enam—these; yah—one who; te—your; yajia-dhruk—creating a dis-
turbance in the performance of the sacrifice; asva-mut—who stole the horse.
TRANSLATION
Just see how Indra, the King of heaven, was creating a disturbance in
the midst of the sacrifice by stealing the sacrificial horse. These attractive
sinful activities, which he has introduced, will be carried out by the people
in general.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita:
yad yad acarati $resthas
tat tad evetaro janah


--- Page 392 ---
758 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
sa yat pramanam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
“Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow in his
footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world
pursues.” (Bg 3.21)

For his own sense gratification, King Indra thought to defeat Maharaja
Prthu in the performance of one hundred horse sacrifices. Consequently he
stole the horse and hid himself amid so many irreligious personalities,
taking on the guise of a false sannyasi. Such activities are attractive to the
people in general; therefore they are dangerous. Lord Brahma thought that
instead of allowing Indra to further introduce such irreligious systems, it
would be better to stop the sacrifice. A similar stance was taken by Lord
Buddha when people were overly engrossed in the animal sacrifices recom-
mended by Vedic instructions. Lord Buddha had to introduce the religion
of nonviolence by contradicting the Vedic sacrificial instructions. Actually
in the sacrifices the slaughtered animals were given a new life, but people
without such powers were taking advantage of such Vedic rituals and un-
necessarily Killing poor animals. Therefore Lord Buddha had to deny the
authority of the Vedas for the time being. One should not perform sacrifices
that will induce reversed orders. It is better Lo stop such sacrifices.

As we have repeatedly explained, due to a lack of qualified brahminical
priests in Kali-yuga, it is not possible to perform the ritualistic ceremonies
recommended in the Vedas. Consequently the sastras instruct us to perform
the sankirtana-yajiia. By the sankirtana sacrifice, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, in His form of Lord Caitanya, will be satisfied and worshiped.
The entire purpose of performing sacrifices is to worship the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Visnu. Lord Visnu or Lord Krsna is present in His
form of Lord Caitanya; therefore people who are intelligent should try to
satisfy Him by performing sarnkirtana-yajiia. This is the easiest way to
satisfy Lord Visnu in this age. People should take advantage of the in-
junctions in different $@stras concerning sacrifices in this age and not create
unnecessary disturbances during the sinful age of Kali. In Kali-yuga men
all over the world are very expert in opening slaughterhouses for killing
animals, which they eat. If the old ritualistic ceremonies were observed,
people would be encouraged to kill more and more animals. In Calcutta
there are many butcher shops which keep a deity of the goddess Kali, and
animal eaters think it proper to purchase animal flesh from such shopsin
hope that they are eating the remnants of food offered to goddess Kali.
They do not know that goddess Kali never accepts nonvegetarian food be-


--- Page 393 ---
Text 37] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 759
cause she is the chaste wife of Lord Siva. Lord Siva is also a greal Vaisnava
and never eats nonvegetarian food, and the goddess Kali accepts the
remnants of food left by Lord Siva. Therefore there is no possibility of her
ealing flesh or fish. Such offerings are accepted by the associates of goddess
Kali known as bhi (45, pisacasand Raksasas, and those who take the prasada
of goddess Kali in the shape of flesh or fish are nol actually taking the
prasada left by goddess Kali, but the food left by the ७ (2८५5 and pisacas.
TEXT 37
भवान्‌ परित्रातुमिदहावतीर्णो
धमं जनानां समयानुरूपम्‌ |
बेनापचारादठप्तपय
तदेहतो विष्णुकलासि वैन्य ।२७॥
bhavan paritratum ihavalirno
dharma janananm samayanurizgpam
venapacarad avaluptam adya
tad-dehato vispu-kalasi vainya
bhavan—Y our Majesty; paritralum—just to deliver; itha—in this world;
avatirnah—incarnated; dharmam—religious system; jananam—of the people
in general; samaya-anuripam—according to the time and circumstances;
vena-apacarat—by the misdeeds of King Vena; avalup tam—almost vanished;
adya—at the presenl moment; tat—his; dehatah—from the body; visnu—of
Lord Vignu; kald— part of a plenary portion; asi—you are; vainya—0 son of
King Vena.
TRANSLATION
0 King Prthu, son of Vena, you are the part and parcel expansion of
Lord Vispu. Due to the mischievous activities of King Vena, religious
principles were almost lost. At that opportune moment you descended as
the incarnation of Lord Visnu. Indeed, for the protection of religious
principles you have appeared from the body of King Vena.
PURPORT
The way in which Lord Visnu kills the demons and protects the faithful
is mentioned in Bhagavad-gita:


--- Page 394 ---
760 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
paritranaya sadhinam
vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge
“In order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to
reestablish the principles of religion, | advent Myself millennium after
millennium.” (Bg. 4.8)

In two hands Lord Visnu always carries a club and a cakra to kill
demons, and in His other two hands He holds a conchshell and a lotus to
give protection to His devotees. When His incarnation is present on this
planet or in this universe, the Lord kills the demons and protects His devo-
tees simultaneously. Sometimes Lord Visnu appears in His person as Lord
Krsna or Lord Rama. All of these appearances are mentioned in the sastras.
Sometimes He appears as a Saklyavesa-avatara like Lord Buddha. As ex-
plained before, these $aktyavesa-avalaras are incarnations of Visnu’s power
invested in a living entity. Living entities are also part and parcel of Lord
Visnu, but they are not as powerful; therefore when a living entity descends
as an incarnation of Visnu, he is especially empowered by the Lord.

When King Prthu is described as an incarnation of Lord Vignu, it should
be understood that he is a $aktyavesa-avatara, part and parcel of Lord
Vignu, and is specifically empowered by Him. Any living being acting as the
incarnation of Lord Visnu is thus empowered by Lord Visnu to preach the
bhakti cult. Such a person can act like Lord Visnu and defeat demons by
arguments and preach the bhakti cult exactly according to the principles
of $astra. As indicated in Bhagavad-gita, whenever we find someone extra-
ordinary preaching the bhakti cult, we should know that he is especially
empowered by Lord Visnu or Lord Krsna. As confirmed in Caitanya-
caritamyta, krsna-sakli vind nahe tara pravartana: one cannot explain the
glories of the holy name of the Lord without being specifically empowered
by Him. If one criticizes or finds fault with such an empowered personality,
one is to be considered an offender against Lord Visnu and is punishable.
Even though such offenders may dress as Vaisnavas with false tilaka and
mala, they are never forgiven by the Lord if they offend a pure Vaisnava.
There are many instances of this in the $astras.

TEXT 38
स त्वं विदधश्यास्य भवं प्रजापते
सङ्कल्पनं विश्वसुजां पिपीपृहि ।


--- Page 395 ---
Text 38] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 761
रद्र च माया्चपर्ममातरं
प्रचण्डपाखण्डपथं प्रमो जहि ॥३८॥
50৫ (४01 vimrsyasya bhavam prajapate
sankalpanar visva-srjariv pipiprhi
aindrim ca mayam upadharma-matararm
pracapda-pakhanda-patham prabho jahi
sah—the aforesaid; tvam—you; vimrsya— considering; asya—of the world;
bhavam—existence; praja-pate— O protector of the people; sarikalpanam—
the determination; visva-syjam—of the progenitors of the world; pipiprhi—
just fulfill; aindrim—created by the King of heaven; ca—also; mayam—
illusion; wupadharma—of the irreligious system of so-called sannyasa;
mataram—the mother; pracanda—furious, dangerous; pakhanda-patham—
the path of sinful activities; prabho—O Lord; jahi—please conquer.
TRANSLATION
0 protector of the people in general, please consider the purpose of your
being incarnated by Lord Visnu. The irreligious principles created by Indra
are but mothers of so many unwanted religions. Please therefore stop these
imitations immediately.
PURPORT
Lord Brahma addresses King Prthu as prajapate just to remind him of
his greal responsibility in maintaining the peace and prosperity of the
citizens. Maharaja Prthu was empowered by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead for this purpose only. It is the duly of the ideal king to see that
people are properly executing religious principles. Lord Brahma especially
requested King Prthu to conquer the pseudo-religious principles produced
by King Indra. In other words, it is the duty of the state or king to put a
stop to pseudo-religious systems produced by unscrupulous persons.
Originally a religious principle is one, given by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and it comes through the channel of disciplic succession in two
forms. Lord Brahma requested Prthu Maharaja to desist in his unnecessary
competition with Indra, who was determined to stop Prthu Maharaja from
completing one hundred yajitas. Instead of creating adverse reactions, it was
better for Maharaja Prthu to stop the yajitas in the interest of his original
purpose as an incarnation. This purpose was to establish good government
and set things in the right order.


--- Page 396 ---
762 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
TEXT 39
मैत्रेय उवाच
tf स लोकगुरुणा समादिष्टो विशाम्पतिः |
तथा च FATES मघोनापि च सन्दधे ।।২৭থ।।
maitreya uvaca
ittham sa loka-guruna
samadisto visam patih
tatha ca krtva vatsalyam
maghonapi ca sandadhe
maitreyah uvdca—the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; ittham—
thus; sah—King Prthu; loka-guruna—by the original teacher of all people,
Lord Brahma; samadistah—being advised; visam patih—king, master of the
people; tatha—in that way; ca—also; krtva—having done; vatsalyam—affec-
tion; maghonda—with Indra; api—even; ca—also; sandadhe—concluded peace.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Maitreya continued: When King Prthu was thus advised
by the supreme teacher, Lord Brahma, he abandoned his eagerness to per-
form yajnas and with great affection concluded a peace with King Indra.
TEXT 40
कृतावभृथस्नानाय पृथवे भूरिकर्मणे ।
वरान्ददुस्ते बरदा ये तद्भरहिषि तर्पिताः ॥४०॥
krtavabhrtha-snanaya
prthave bhiri-karmape
varan dadus te varada
ye tad-barhisi tarpitah
krta—having performed; avabhrtha-snanaya— taking bath after the sacri-
fice; prthave—unto King Prthu; bhiri-karmape—famous for performing
many virtuous acts; varan—benedictions; daduh—gave; te—all of them;
vara-dah—the demigods, bestowers of bhenedictions; ye—who; tat-barhisi—
in the performance of such a yajiia; tarpitah—became pleased.


--- Page 397 ---
Text 41] King Prthu’s One Hundred Horse Sacrifices 763
TRANSLATION
After this, Prthu Maharaja took his bath, which is customarily taken
after the performance of a yajna, and received the benedictions and due
blessings of the demigods, who were very pleased by his glorious activities.
PURPORT
Yajiia means Lord Vignu, for all yajia is meant to please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu. Since the demigods automatically
become very pleased with the performance of sacrifice, they bestow bene-
diction upon the executors of yajiias. When one pours water on the root of
a tree, the branches, trunks, twigs, flowers and leaves are all satisfied.
Similarly, when one gives food to the stomach, all parts of the body are
rejuvenated. In the same way, if one simply satisfies Lord Visnu by the
performance of yajiia, one satisfies all the demigods automatically. In turn,
the demigods offer their benedictions to such a devotee. A pure devotee
therefore does not ask benedictions directly from the demigods. His only
business is to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he 15 never
in need of those things supplied by the demigods.
TEXT 41
विग्राः सत्यारिषस्तुशः श्रद्धया लब्धदक्षिणाः |
आशिषो युयुजुः क्षत्तरादिराजाय सत्कृताः ॥४१॥
viprah salydsisas tustah
§raddhaya labdha-daksinah
asiso yuyujuh ksattar
adi-rajaya sat-krtah
viprah—all the brahmanas; satya—true;asisah—whose benedictions; tustah
—being very satisfied; sraddhaya—with great respect; labdha-daksinah—who
obtained rewards; asisafi—benedictions; yuyujuh—offered; ksattah—O
Vidura; adi-rajaya—upon the original King; sat-krtah—being honored.
TRANSLATION
With great respect, the original King, Prthu, offered all kinds of rewards
to the brahmanas present at the sacrifice. Since all these brahmanas were
very much satisfied, they gave their heartfelt blessings to the King.


--- Page 398 ---
764 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 4, Ch. 19
TEXT 42
ক 49
त्वयाऽऽदहूता TERRI सवे श्व समागताः |
पूजिता दानमानाम्यां ধিবইবদিমানবাঃ ॥४२॥
tvayahata maha-baho
sarva eva samagatah
(०१/८८ dana-manabhyam
pitr-devarsi-manavah
tvayd—by you; ahitah—were invited; maha-baho—O great mighty-armed
one; sarve—all; eva—certainly; samdgatah—assembled; pajitah—were
honored; dana—by charity; manabhyam—and by respect; pitr—the inhabi-
tants of Pitrloka; deva—demigods; rsi—great sages; manavah—as well as
common men.
TRANSLATION
All the great sages and brahmanas said: O mighty King, by your invita-
tion all classes of living entities have attended this assembly. They have
come from Pitrloka and the heavenly planets, and great sages as well as
common men have attended this meeting. Now all of them are very much
satisfied by your dealing and charity toward them.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Nineteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “King Prthu’s One Hundred
Horse Sacrifices.”

