
--- Page 1 ---
Preface

We must know the present need of human society. And what is that
need? Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to par-
ticular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the
Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one ‘human
society. The ideals of spiritual communism, according to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human
society, nay, on the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by
great thinkers to make this a successful ideology. Srimad-Bhagavatam
will fill this need in human society. It begins, therefore, with the aphor-
ism of Vedanta philosophy (janmady asya yatah) to establish the ideal of
a common cause.

Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of obli-
vion. It has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts, educa-
tion and economic development throughout the entire world. But there is
a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore there are
large-scale quarrels, even over less important issues. There is need of a
clue as to how humanity can become one in peace, friendship and
prosperity with a common cause. Srimad-Bhagavatam will fill this need,
for it is a cultural presentation for the re-spiritualization of the entire
human society.

Srimad-Bhagavatam should be introduced also in the schools and col-
leges, for it is recommended by the great student devotee Prahlada
Maharaja in order to change the demonic face of society.

kaumara acaret prajio
dharman bhagavatan iha
00871001207) manusam janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)

Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One, from whom everything
emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything is

2৫


--- Page 2 ---
xii Srimad-Bhagavatam

merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of
creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ultimate
source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained rationally
and authoritatively in the beautiful Bhagavatam or Srimad-
Bhagavatam.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the transcendental science not only for know-
ing the ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation
with Him and our duty towards perfection of the human society on the
basis of this perfect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the
Sanskrit language, and it is now rendered into English elaborately so that
simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well, so much so
that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend himself from the
onslaught of atheists. Over and above this, the reader will be able to con-
vert others to accept God as a concrete principle.

Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Vedanta-sitra by the same author,
Srila Vyasadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the
highest state of God realization. The only qualification one needs to study
this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step
cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly as with an ordinary
book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter, one after another.
The reading matter is so arranged with its original Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration, synonyms, translation and purports so that one is
sure to become a God realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine
cantos.

The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos, because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto
without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in
twelve cantos, each independent, but it is good for all to read them in
small installments one after another. र

I must admit my frailties in presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam, but still
I am hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society
on the strength of the following statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

tad vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin pratislokam abaddhavaty api


--- Page 3 ---
Preface 201
namdany anantasya yaso ‘nkitani yac
chrnvanti gayanti grnanti sadhavah
(Bhag. 1.5.11)
“On the other hand, that literature which is full with descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, form and pastimes of the
unlimited Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant to bring
about a revolution in the impious life of a misdirected civilization. Such
transcendental literatures, even though irregularly composed, are heard,
sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.”
Orn tat sat
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


--- Page 4 ---
Introduction

“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to His own abode, accompanied by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the
dense darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this
Purana.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43)

The timeless wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human knowledge. Originally
preserved through oral tradition, the Vedas were first put into writing
five thousand years ago by Srila Vyasadeva, the “literary incarnation of
God.” After compiling the Vedas, Vyasadeva set forth their essence in
the aphorisms known as Vedanta-sitras. Srimad-Bhagavatam is
Vyasadeva’s commentary on his own Vedanta-sitras. It was written in
the maturity of his spiritual life under the direction of Narada Muni, his
spiritual master. Referred to as “the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic
literature,” Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and authoritative
exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After compiling the Bhagavatam, Vyasa impressed the synopsis of it
upon his son, the sage Sukadeva Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami subse-
quently recited the entire Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assem-
bly of learned saints on the bank of the Ganges at Hastinapura (now
Delhi). Maharaja Pariksit was the emperor of the world and was a great
rajarsi (saintly king). Having received a warning that he would die
within a week, he renounced his entire kingdom and retired to the bank
of the Ganges to fast until death and receive spiritual enlightenment.
The Bhagavatam begins with Emperor Pariksit’s sober inquiry to
Sukadeva Gosvami:

“You are the spiritual master of great saints and
devotees. 1 am therefore begging you to show the
way of perfection for all persons, and especially for
one who is about to die. Please let me know what a
man should hear. chant. remember and worship.
and also what he should not do. Please explain all
this to me.”

xiv


--- Page 5 ---
Srimad-Bhagavatam xv

Sukadeva Gosvami’s answer to this question, and numerous other
questions posed by Maharaja Pariksit, concerning everything from the
nature of the self to the origin of the universe, held the assembled sages
in rapt attention continuously for the seven days leading to the King’s
death. The sage Sata Gosvami, who was present on the bank of the
Ganges when Sukadeva Gosvami first recited Srimad-Bhagavatam, later
repeated the Bhagavatam before a gathering of sages in the forest of
Naimisaranya. Those sages, concerned about the spiritual welfare of the
people in general, had gathered to perform a long, continuous chain of
sacrifices to counteract the degrading influence of the incipient age of
Kali. In response to the sages’ request that he speak the essence of Vedic
wisdom, Sita Gosvami repeated from memory the entire eighteen thou-
sand verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit. ,

The reader of Srimad-Bhagavatam hears Sita Gosvami relate the
questions of Maharaja Pariksit and the answers of Sukadeva Gosvami.
Also. Sita Gosvami sometimes responds directly to questions put by
Saunaka Rsi, the spokesman for the sages gathered at Naimisaranya. One
therefore simultaneously hears two dialogues: one between Maharaja
Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami on the bank of the Ganges, and another
at Naimisaranya between Sata Gosvami and the sages at Naimisaranya
Forest, headed by Saunaka Rsi. Furthermore, while instructing King
Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami often relates historical episodes and gives
accounts of lengthy philosophical discussions between such great souls as
the saint Maitreya and his disciple Vidura. With this understanding of
the history of the Bhagavatam, the reader will easily be able to follow its
intermingling of dialogues and events from various sources. Since
philosophical wisdom, not chronological order, is most important in the
text, one need only be attentive to the subject matter of Srimad-
Bhagavatam to appreciate fully its profound message.

It should also be noted that the volumes of the Bhagavatam need not
be read consecutively. starting with the first and proceeding to the last.
The translator of this edition compares the Bhagavatam to sugar
candy —wherever you taste it, you will find it equally sweet and
relishable.

This edition of the Bhagavatam is the first complete English transla-
tion of this important text with an elaborate commentary, and it is the


--- Page 6 ---
xi Introduction

first widely available to the English-speaking public. It is the product of
the scholarly and devotional effort of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His consummate Sanskrit
scholarship and intimate familiarity with Vedic culture and thought as
well as the modern way of life combine to reveal to the West a magnifi-
cent exposition of this important classic.

Readers will find this work of value for many reasons. For those in-
terested in the classical roots of Indian civilization, it serves as a vast
reservoir of detailed information on virtually every one of its aspects.
For students of comparative philosophy and religion. the Bhagavatam
offers a penetrating view into the meaning of India’s profound spiritual
heritage. To sociologists and anthropologists, the Bhagavatam reveals the
practical workings of a peaceful and scientifically organized Vedic
culture, whose institutions were integrated on the basis of a highly
developed spiritual world view. Students of literature will discover the
Bhagavatam to be a masterpiece of majestic poetry. For students of psy-
chology, the text provides important perspectives on the nature of con-
sciousness, human behavior and the philosophical study of identity.
Finally, to those seeking spiritual insight, the Bhagavatam offers simple
and practical guidance for attainment of the highest self-knowledge and
realization of the Absolute Truth. The entire multivolume text, pre-
sented by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant
place in the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern man for a
long time to come.

—The Publishers


--- Page 7 ---
CHAPTER ONE
The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata

This chapter describes how King Priyavrata enjoyed royal opulence and
majesty and then returned to full knowledge. King Priyavrata was
detached from worldly opulence, and then he became attached to his
kingdom, but finally he again became detached from material enjoyment
and thus achieved liberation. When King Pariksit heard about this, he
was struck with wonder, but he was somewhat bewildered as to how a
devotee with no attachment for material enjoyment could later become
attached to it. Thus in astonishment he questioned Sukadeva Gosvami
about this.

In response to the King’s inquiries, Sukadeva Gosvami said that devo-
tional service, being transcendental, cannot be deviated by any material
influences. Priyavrata had received transcendental knowledge from the
instructions of Narada, and therefore he did not want to enter a
materialistic life of enjoyment in a kingdom. He accepted the kingdom,
however, at the request of such superior demigods as Lord Brahma and
Lord Indra, the King of heaven.

Everything is under the control of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the supreme controller, and everyone must work accordingly.
Just as a bull is controlled by a rope tied to its nose, so all conditioned
souls are forced to work under the spells of the modes of nature. A
civilized man, therefore, works according to the institution of varna and
asrama. Even in materialistic life, however, no one is free to act. Every-
one is compelled to accept a certain type of body offered by the Supreme
Lord and thus be allotted different grades of happiness and distress.
Therefore even if one artificially leaves home and goes to the forest. he
again becomes attached to materialistic life. Family life is compared to a
fortress for practicing sense control. When the senses are controlled. one
may live either at home or in the forest: there is no difference.

When Maharaja Priyavrata, following the instruction of Lord Brahma.
accepted the royal throne, his father, Manu, left home for the forest.

1


--- Page 8 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
Maharaja Priyavrata then married Barhismati, the daughter of Visva-
karma. In the womb of Barhismati he begot ten sons, named Agnidhra,
Idhmajihva, Yajiiabahu, Mahavira, Hiranyareta, Ghrtaprstha, Savana,
Medhatithi, Vitihotra and Kavi. He also begot one daughter, whose name
was Urjasvati. Maharaja Priyavrata lived with his wife and family for
many thousands of years. The impressions from the rims of Maharaja
Priyavrata’s chariot wheels created seven oceans and seven islands. Of
the ten sons of Priyavrata, three sons named Kavi, Mahavira and Savana
accepted sannydsa, the fourth order of life, and the remaining seven
sons became the rulers of the seven islands. Maharaja Priyavrata also had
a second wife, in whom he begot three sons named Uttama, Raivata and
Tamasa. All of them were elevated to the post of Manu. Sukadeva
Gosvami thus described how Maharaja Priyavrata achieved liberation.
TEXT 1
राजोवाच
प्रियव्रतो भागवत आत्मारामः क्य gq |
৫
गृहेऽरमत यन्मूठकः कमबन्धः पराभवः ॥ १॥
rajovaca
priyavrato bhagavata
atmaramah katham mune
grhe ‘ramata yan-milah
karma-bandhah parabhavah
raja uvaca—King Pariksit said; priya-vratah—King Priyavrata;
bhagavatah—the great devotee; atma-aramah—who takes pleasure in
self-realization; katham—why; mune—O great sage: grhe—at home;
aramata—enjoyed: yat-mitlah—having which as the root cause: karma-
bandhah—the bondage of fruitive activities: parabhavah—the defeat of
one’s human mission.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami: O great sage,
why did King Priyavrata, who was a great, self-realized devotee of


--- Page 9 ---
Text 1] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 3
the Lord, remain in household life, which is the root cause of the
bondage of karma [fruitive activities] and which defeats the mis-
sion of human life?
PURPORT

In the Fourth Canto, Srila Sukadeva Gosvami explains that Narada
Muni perfectly instructed King Priyavrata about the mission of human
life. The mission of human life is to realize one’s self and then gradually
to go back home, back to Godhead. Since Narada Muni instructed the
King fully on this subject, why did he again enter household life, which
is the main cause of material bondage? Maharaja Pariksit was greatly
astonished that King Priyavrata remained in household life, especially
since he was not only a self-realized soul but also a first-class devotee of
the Lord. A devotee actually has no attraction for household life, but
surprisingly, King Priyavrata enjoyed household life very much. One
may argue, “Why is it wrong to enjoy household life?" The reply is that
in household life one becomes bound by the results of fruitive activities.
The essence of household life is sense enjoyment, and as long as one
engrosses his mind in working hard for sense enjoyment, one becomes
bound by the reactions of fruitive activities. This ignorance of self-
realization is the greatest defeat in human life. The human form of life is
especially meant for getting out of the bondage of fruitive activities. but
as long as one is forgetful of his life’s mission and acts like an ordinary
animal —eating, sleeping, mating and defending—he must continue his
conditioned life of material existence. Such a life is called svarapa-
vismrti, forgetfulness of one’s real constitutional position. Therefore in
Vedic civilization one is trained in the very beginning of life as a
brahmacari. A brahmacart must execute austerities and refrain from sex
indulgence. Therefore if one is completely trained in the principles of
brahmacarya, he generally does not enter household life. He is then
called a naisthika-brahmacari, which indicates total celibacy. King
Pariksit was thus astonished that the great King Priyavrata. although
trained in the principles of naisthika-brahmacarya, entered household
life.

The words bhagavata atmaramah are very significant in this verse. If
one is self-satisfied as is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. he is called
bhagavata atmaramah. There are different types of satisfaction. Karmis


--- Page 10 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
are satisfied in their fruitive activities, janis are satisfied to merge into
the effulgence of Brahman, and devotees are satisfied to engage in the
Lord's service. The Lord is self-satisfied because He is fully opulent, and
one who is satisfied by serving Him is called bhagavata atmaramah.
Manusyanar sahasresu: out of many thousands of persons, one may en-
deavor for liberation, and of many thousands of persons attempting to
become liberated, one may achieve liberation from the anxieties of
material existence and become self-satisfied. Even that satisfaction,
however, is not the ultimate satisfaction. The janis and the karmis have
desires, as do the yogis, but devotees have no desires. Satisfaction in the
service of the Lord is called akama, freedom from desire, and this is the
ultimate satisfaction. Therefore Maharaja Pariksit inquired, “How could
one who was fully satisfied on the highest platform be satisfied with
family life?”

The word parabhavah in this verse is also significant. When one is
satisfied in family life, he is doomed because he must already have
forgotten his relationship with the Lord. Prahlada Maharaja describes
how the activities of family life implicate one more and more. Atma-
patarn grham andha-kipam: household life is like a dark well. If one
falls into this well, his spiritual death is assured. How Priyavrata
Maharaja remained a liberated paramaharmsa even within family life is
described in the next verse.

TEXT 2
ও ৬ Py <
न नलं घुक्तसङ्गानां ताद्शानां FEE |
गरहेष्वभिनिवेशोऽयं पुंसां भवितमरहति ॥ २ ॥
na 7£0৬710ে7? mukta-sanganar
tadrsanar dvijarsabha
grhesv abhiniveso ‘yarn
pumsamn bhavitum arhati

na—not; ninam—certainly; mukta-saniganam—who are free from
attachment; tadrsanam—such; dvijja-rsabha—O greatest of the
brahmanas; grhesu—to family life; abhinivesah—excessive attach-
ment; ayam—this; pumsam—of persons; bhavitum—to be; arhati—is
possible.


--- Page 11 ---
Text 3] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 5
TRANSLATION

Devotees are certainly liberated persons. Therefore, O greatest
of the brahmanas, they cannot possibly be absorbed in family
affairs.

PURPORT

In Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is said that by executing devotional ser-
vice to the Lord, one can understand the transcendental position of the
living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead cannot be understood by any means except bhakti.
The Lord confirms this in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.14.21). Bhaktyaham
ekaya grahyah: “Only by executing devotional service can one appreci-
ate Me.” Similarly, in Bhagavad-gita (18.55) Lord Krsna says, bhaktya
mam abhijanati: “Simply by discharging devotional service, one can un-
derstand Me.” Thus for a bhakta to become attached to family affairs is
impossible, since a bhakta and his associates are liberated. Everyone is
searching after ananda, or bliss, but in the material world there can
never be any bliss. It is only possible in devotional service. Attachment
for family affairs and devotional service are incompatible. Therefore
Maharaja Pariksit was somewhat surprised to hear that Maharaja
Priyavrata was simultaneously attached to devotional service and to
family life.

TEXT 3
IY ~~ -
महतां ag নিসর্ধ उत्तमश्छोकपादयोः ।
छायानिग्ेतचित्तानां न कुटुम्बे स्एहामतिः || ३ ॥
mahatam khalu viprarse
uttamasloka-padayoh
chaya-nirvrta-cittanarn
na kutumbe sprha-matih

mahatam—of great devotees; khalu—certainly: vipra-rse—O great
sage among the brahmanas; uttama-sloka-padayoh—of the lotus feet of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead: chaya—by the shade: nirvrta—
satiated; cittanam—whose consciousness: na—never: kutumbe—to
family members: sprha-matih—consciousness with attachment.


--- Page 12 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION

Elevated mahatmas who have taken shelter of the lotus feet of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead are fully satiated by the shade
of those lotus feet. Their consciousness cannot possibly become at-
tached to family members.

PURPORT

Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has sung, nitai pada-kamala, koti-
candra susitala, ye chayaya jagat judaya. He describes the shade of the
lotus feet of Lord Nityananda as being so nice and cooling that all
materialists, who are always in the blazing fire of material activities, may
come under the shade of His lotus feet and be fully relieved and satiated.
The distinction between family life and spiritual life can be experienced
by any person who has undergone the tribulations of living with a
family. One who comes under the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord
never becomes attracted by the activities of family life. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (2.59), param drstva nivartate: one gives up lower
engagements when he experiences a higher taste. Thus one becomes
detached from family life as soon as he comes under the shelter of the
lotus feet of the Lord.

TEXT 4
4 bh 9
संशयोऽयं महान्‌ बहमन्दपरागारसुतादिषु |
सक्तस्य यत्सिद्धिरभूत्कृष्णे च मतिरच्युता ।। ४॥
sar$ayo yar mahan brahman
daragara-sutadisu
saktasya yat siddhir abhit
krsne ca matir acyuta

sarm$ayah—doubt; ayam—this; mahan—great; brahman—O
brahmana; dara—to the wife; agara—home; suta—children: adisu—
and so on; saktasya—of a person attached; yat—because; siddhih—per-
fection; abhiit—became; krsne—unto Krsna; ca—also; matih—attach-
ment; acyuta—infallible.


--- Page 13 ---
Text 5] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 7
TRANSLATION
The King continued: O great brahmana, this is my great doubt.
How was it possible for a person like King Priyavrata, who was so
attached to wife, children and home, to achieve the topmost infal-
lible perfection in Krsna consciousness?
PURPORT
King Pariksit wondered how a person so attached to wife, children and
home could become so perfectly Krsna conscious. Prahlada Maharaja has
said:
matir na krsne paratah svato va
mitho ’bhipadyeta grhavratanam
A grhavrata, one who has taken a vow to execute family duties. has no
chance to become Krsna conscious. This is because most grhavratas are
guided by sense gratification and therefore gradually glide down to the
darkest regions of material existence (adanta-gobhir visatarn tamisram).
How can they possibly become perfect in Krsna consciousness? Maharaja
Pariksit asked Sukadeva Gosvami to resolve this great doubt.
TEXT 5
श्रीद्युक INT
TRH भगवत उत्तमश्छोकस्य श्रीमचरणारविन्दमकरन्द्रस आवेशित-
चेतसो भागवतपरमहंस दयितकथां किश्चिदन्तरायविहतां खां शिवतमां
पदवीं न प्रायेण हिन्वन्ति ॥ এ ॥
sri-Suka uvdca
badham 04073 bhagavata uttamaslokasya srimac-
caranaravinda-makaranda-rasa avesita-cetaso bhagavata-
paramahamsa-dayita-kathar kificid antaraya-vihatar svar
Sivatamari padavirh na prayena hinvanti.
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: badham—correct: uk-
tam—what you have said: bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead:


--- Page 14 ---
8 Srimad -Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
uttama-slokasya—who is praised with excellent verses; srimat-carana-
aravinda —of the feet, which are just like the most beautiful fragrant
lotus flowers; makaranda—honey; rase—in the nectar; avesita—ab-
sorbed: cetasah—whose hearts; bhagavata—to the devotees; parama-
harnsa—liberated persons; dayita—pleasing; katham—glorification;
kificit—sometimes; antaraya—by impediments; vihatam—checked;
svam—own; Siva-tamdm—most exalted: padavim—position; na—do
not; prayena—almost always: hinvanti—give up.
TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: What you have said is correct. The
glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is praised in
eloquent, transcendental verses by such exalted personalities as
Brahma, are very pleasing to great devotees and liberated persons.
One who is attached to the nectarean honey of the Lord’s lotus
feet, and whose mind is always absorbed in His glories, may some-
times be checked by some impediment, but he still never gives up
the exalted position he has acquired.

PURPORT

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami accepted both of the King’s propositions —that
a person who is advanced in Krsna consciousness cannot embrace
materialistic life again and that one who has embraced materialistic life
cannot take up Krsna consciousness at any stage of his existence.
Although accepting both these statements, Sukadeva Gosvami qualified
them by saying that a person who has once absorbed his mind in the glo-
ries of the Supreme Personality of Godhead may sometimes be in-
fluenced by impediments, but he still does not give up his exalted devo-
tional position.

According to Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, there are two
kinds of impediments to devotional service. The first is an offense at the
lotus feet of a Vaisnava. This is called vaisnava-aparadha. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu warned His devotees not to commit vaisnava-aparadha,
which He described as the mad elephant offense. When a mad elephant
enters a beautiful garden, it destroys everything, leaving a barren field.
Similarly, the power of vaisnava-aparadha is so great that even an ad-
vanced devotee becomes almost devoid of his spiritual assets if he com-


--- Page 15 ---
Text 5] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 9
mits it. Since Krsna consciousness is eternal, it cannot be destroyed
altogether, but advancement may be checked for the time being. Thus
vaisnava-aparadha is one kind of impediment to devotional service.
Sometimes, however, the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His devotee
desires to impede one’s devotional service. For example, Hiranyakasipu
and Hiranyaksa were formerly Jaya and Vijaya, the gatekeepers in
Vaikuntha, but by the desire of the Lord, they became His enemies for
three lives. Thus the desire of the Lord is another kind of impediment.
But in both cases, the pure devotee, once advanced in Krsna conscious-
ness, cannot be lost. Following the orders of his superiors (Svayambhuva
and Lord Brahma), Priyavrata accepted family life, but this did not mean
he lost his position in devotional service. Krsna consciousness is perfect
and eternal, and therefore it cannot be lost under any circumstances.
Because the material world is full of obstructions to advancement in
Krsna consciousness, there may appear to be many impediments, yet
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, declares in Bhagavad-gita
(9.31), kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati: once one has
taken shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, he cannot be lost.

In this verse, the word Sivatamam is very significant. Sivatamam
means “‘the most auspicious.” The devotional path is so auspicious that a
devotee cannot be lost under any circumstances. This is described in the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita by the Lord Himself. Partha naiveha namutra
vinasas tasya vidyate: ‘My dear Arjuna, for a devotee there is no ques-
tion of being lost, either in this life or in the next.” (Bg. 6.40) In
Bhagavad-gita (6.43) the Lord clearly explains how this is so.

tatra tar buddhi-sarivyogam
labhate paurva-dehikam
yatate ca tato bhiryah
samsiddhau kuru-nandana
By the order of the Lord, a perfect devotee sometimes comes to this
material world like an ordinary human being. Because of his previous
practice, such a perfect devotee naturally becomes attached to devotional
service, apparently without cause. Despite all kinds of impediments due
to surrounding circumstances, he automatically perseveres in devotional
service and gradually advances until he once again becomes perfect.
Bilvamangala Thakura had been an advanced devotee in his previous


--- Page 16 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
life, but in his next life he became greatly fallen and was attached to a
prostitute. Suddenly, however, his entire behavior was changed by the
words of the very prostitute who had so much attracted him, and he
became a great devotee. In the lives of exalted devotees, there are many
such instances, proving that once one has taken to the shelter of the lotus
feet of the Lord, he cannot be lost (kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah
pranasyati).

The fact is, however, that one becomes a devotee when he is com-
pletely freed from all reactions to sinful life. As Krsna states in
Bhagavad-gita (7.28):

yesam tv anta-gatarn papari
Jjananari punya-karmanam
te dvanda-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah
“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose
sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the
duality of illusion, engage themselves in My service with determina-
tion.” On the other hand, as Prahlada Maharaja said:
matir na krsne paratah svato va
mitho ’bhipadyeta grhavratanam
A person who is too attached to materialistic family life—home, family,
wife, children and so on—cannot develop Krsna consciousness.

These apparent contradictions are resolved in the life of a devotee by
the grace of the Supreme Lord, and therefore a devotee is never bereft of
his position on the path of liberation, which is described in this verse as
Stvatamam padavim.

TEXT 6
-
यर्हि वाव ह राजन्‌ स राजपुत्रः प्रियव्रतः परम मागवतो
Q -

नारदस्य चरणोपसेबयाञ्जसा्रगतपरमाथं सतत्त्वो ब्रह्मसत्रेण दीक्षिप्यमाणो-

ऽवनितरुपरिपालनायाघ्नातप्रवरगुणगणैकान्तमाजनतया खपित्रोपामन्त्रितो

भगवति IEE एवान्यवधानसमाधि योगेन समावेशितसकलकारकक्रिया-


--- Page 17 ---
Text 6] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 11
कलापो AA RATTAN तदप्रत्यान्नातव्यं तद धिकरण आ्मनोऽन्यसाद्‌
सतोऽपि पराभवमन्वीक्षमाणः ॥ ৪ ॥

yarhi vava ha rajan sa raja-putrah priyavratah parama-bhagavato

naradasya caranopasevaydanjasavagata-paramartha-satattvo brahma-

satrena diksisyamano "vani-tala-paripalanayamnata-pravara-guna-
ganaikanta-bhajanataya sva-pitropamantrito bhagavati vasudeva
evavyavadhana-samadhi-yogena samavesita-sakala-karaka-kriya-
kalapo naivabhyanandad yadyapi tad apratyamnatavyam tad-
adhikarana atmano ’nyasmad asato ‘pi parabhavam anviksamanah.
yarhi—because; ৮৫৮৫ ha—indeed; rajan—O King; sah—he; raja-
putrah—the Prince; priyavratah—Priyavrata; parama—supreme;
bhagavatah —devotee; naradasya—of Narada; carana—the lotus feet;
upasevaya—by serving; aijasa—quickly; avagata—became aware of;
parama-artha—transcendental subject matter; sa-tattvah—with all
knowable facts; brahma-satrena—by continuous discussion of the
Supreme; diksisyamanah—desiring to fully dedicate himself; avani-
tala—the surface of the globe; paripalanaya—to rule over; amnata—
directed in the revealed scriptures; pravara—highest; guna—of
qualities; gana—the sum total; ekanta—without deviation; bha-

Janataya—because of his possessing; sva-pitra—by his father; upa-

mantritah—being asked; bhavagati—in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; wvasudeve—the all-pervading Lord; eva—certainly;
avyavadhana—without cessation; samadhi-yogena—by practicing yoga
in complete absorption; samavesita—completely dedicated; sakala—all;
karaka—senses; kriya-kalapah—whose total activities; na—not; eva—
thus; abhyanandat—welcomed; yadyapi—although; tat—that;
apratyamnatavyam—not to be rejected for any reason; tat-
adhikarane—in occupying that post; atmanah—of himself; an-
yasmat—by other engagements; asatah—material; api—certainly;
parabhavam —deterioration; anviksamanah—foreseeing.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, Prince Priyavrata
was a great devotee because he sought the lotus feet of Narada, his
spiritual master, and thus achieved the highest perfection in tran-


--- Page 18 ---
12 Srimad- Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
scendental knowledge. With advanced knowledge, he always
engaged in discussing spiritual subjects and did not divert his at-
tention to anything else. The Prince’s father then asked him to
take charge of ruling the world. He tried to convince Priyavrata
that this was his duty as indicated in the revealed scriptures. Prince
Priyavrata, however, was continuously practicing bhakti-yoga by
constantly remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
thus engaging all his senses in the service of the Lord. Therefore,
although the order of his father could not be rejected, the Prince
did not welcome it. Thus he very conscientiously raised the ques-
tion of whether he might be diverted from devotional service by
accepting the responsibility of ruling over the world.
PURPORT

Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has sung, chadiya vaisnava-seva
nistara payeche keba: “Without serving the lotus feet of a pure Vaisnava
or spiritual master, no one has ever attained perfect liberation from
material bondage.” Prince Priyavrata regularly served the lotus feet of
Narada, and thus the Prince perfectly understood transcendental sub-
jects in truth (sa-tattvah). The word sa-tattvah means that Priyavrata
knew all the facts about the spirit soul, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and the relationship between the spirit soul and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and he also knew all about this material world
and the relationship of the spirit soul and the Supreme Lord within the
material world. Thus the Prince decided to engage himself only in ren-
dering service to the Lord.

When Priyavrata’s father, Svayambhuva Manu, requested him to ac-
cept the responsibility of ruling over the world, he did not welcome the
suggestion. This is the symptom of a great, liberated devotee. Even
though engaged in worldly affairs, he does not take pleasure in them, but
remains always absorbed in the Lord’s service. While thus serving the
Lord, he deals externally with worldly affairs without being affected. For
example, although he has no attraction for his children, he cares for
them and educates them to become devotees. Similarly, he speaks to his
wife with affectionate words, but he is not attached to her. By rendering
devotional service, a devotee acquires all the good qualities of the


--- Page 19 ---
Text 7] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 13
Supreme Lord. Lord Krsna had sixteen thousand wives, all of them very
beautiful, and although He dealt with each of them as a beloved hus-
band, He was not attracted or attached to any of them. In the same way,
although a devotee may enter family life and act very affectionately
toward his wife and children, he is never attached to these activities.
This verse states that by serving the lotus feet of his spiritual master,
Prince Priyavrata very soon attained the perfectional stage of Krsna con-
sciousness. This is the only way to advance in spiritual life. As stated in
the Vedas:
yasya deve para bhaktir
yatha deve tatha gurau
tasyaite kathita hy arthah
prakasante mahatmanah
“If one has unflinching faith in the Supreme Lord and the spiritual
master, the essence of all Vedic knowledge is revealed to him.”
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.23) A devotee always thinks of the Lord con-
tinuously. While chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, the words Krsna and
Hare immediately remind him of all the Lord’s activities. Since his entire
life is engaged in the service of the Lord, a devotee cannot forget the
Lord at any time. Just as an ordinary man always engages his mind in
material activities, a devotee always engages his mind in spiritual ac-
tivities. This is called brahma-satra, or meditating upon the Supreme
Lord always. Prince Priyavrata was perfectly initiated into this practice
by Sri Narada.
TEXT 7
y ७

अथ ह भगवानादिदेव एतस्य Juana परिंहणानुध्यानव्यवसित
सकलजगदभिप्राय आत्मयोनिरखिलनिगमनिजगणपरिवेष्टितः खमवना-

दवततार।।७॥

atha ha bhagavan adi-deva etasya guna-visargasya

paribrmhananudhyana-vyavasita-sakala-jagad-abhipraya atma-yonir
akhila-nigama-nija-gana-parivestitah sva-bhavanad avatatara.


--- Page 20 ---
14 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1

atha—thus; ha—indeed; bhagavan—the most powerful; adi-
devah—the first demigod; etasya—of this universe; guna-visargasya—
the creation of the three modes of material nature; paribrrmhana—the
welfare; anudhyana—always thinking of; vyavasita—known; sakala—
whole; jagat—of the universe; abhiprayah—by whom the ultimate pur-
pose; atma—the Supreme Self; yonih—whose source of birth; akhila—
all; nigama—by the Vedas; nija-gana—by personal associates;
parivestitah—being surrounded; sva-bhavanat—{rom his own abode;
avatatara —descended.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: The first created being and
most powerful demigod in this universe is Lord Brahma, who is al-
ways responsible for developing universal affairs. Born directly
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he dedicates his ac-
tivities to the welfare of the entire universe, for he knows the pur-
pose of the universal creation. This supremely powerful Lord
Brahma, accompanied by his associates and the personified Vedas,
left his own abode in the highest planetary system and descended
to the place of Prince Priyavrata’s meditation.

PURPORT

Lord Visnu, the Supreme Self (atma), is the source of everything, as
explained in the Vedanta-siitra: janmady asya yatah. Because Brahma
was born directly from Lord Visnu. he is called atma-yoni. He is also
called bhagavan, although generally bhagavan refers to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (Visnu or Lord Krsna). Sometimes great per-
sonalities —such as demigods like Lord Brahma, Narada or Lord Siva—
are also addressed as bhagavan because they carry out the purpose of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Brahma is called bhagavan
because he is the secondary creator of this universe. He is always
thinking of how to improve the situation of the conditioned souls who
have come to the material world to enjoy material activities. For this
reason, he disseminates the Vedic knowledge throughout the universe
for everyone's guidance.

Vedic knowledge is divided into two parts: pravrtti-marga and nivrtti-
marga. Nivrtti-marga is the path of negating sense enjoyment, and
pravrtti-marga is the path by which the living entities are given a chance


--- Page 21 ---
Text 8] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 15
to enjoy and at the same time are directed in such a way that they can go
back home, back to Godhead. Because ruling over this universe is a great
responsibility, Brahma must force many Manus in different ages to take
charge of universal affairs. Under each Manu there are different kings
who also execute the purpose of Lord Brahma. It is understood from pre-
vious explanations that the father of Dhruva Maharaja, King Uttanapada,
ruled over the universe because his elder brother, Priyavrata, practiced
austerity from the very beginning of his life. Thus up to the point of the
Pracetas, the kings of the universe were all descendants of Uttanapada
Maharaja. Since there were no suitable kings after the Pracetas,
Svayambhuva Manu went to the Gandhamadana Hill to bring back his
eldest son, Priyavrata, who was meditating there. Svayambhuva Manu
requested Priyavrata to rule over the universe. When he refused, Lord
Brahma descended from the supreme planetary system, known as
Satyaloka, to request Priyavrata to accept the order. Lord Brahma did not
come alone. He came with other great sages like Marici, Atreya and
Vasistha. To convince Priyavrata that it was necessary for him to follow
the Vedic injunctions and accept the responsibility of ruling over the
world, Lord Brahma also brought with him the personified Vedas, his
constant associates.

A significant word in this verse is sva-bhavanat, indicating that Lord
Brahma descended from his own abode. Every demigod has his own
abode. Indra, the King of the demigods, has his own abode, as do Candra,
the lord of the moon planet, and Sirya, the predominating deity of the
sun planet. There are many millions of demigods, and the stars and
planets are their respective homes. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita.
Yanti deva-vrata devan: “Those who worship the demigods go to their
different planetary systems.” Lord Brahma's abode. the highest plan-
etary system, is called Satyaloka or sometimes Brahmaloka. Brahmaloka
usually refers to the spiritual world. The abode of Lord Brahma is
Satyaloka, but because Lord Brahma resides there, it is also sometimes
called Brahmaloka.

TEXT 8
सतत्र त्र गगनतल उडपतिखि विमा नावकिभिरजुपथममरपरिवटेरभिपूज्यमानः
पथि पथि च वरूथशः सिद्धगन्धवंसाध्यचारणषठनिगणेरुपगीय मानो गन्ध -
माद नद्रोणीमवभासयन्लुपससपं || ८ ||


--- Page 22 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
sa tatra tatra gagana-tala udu-patir iva vimanavalibhir anupatham
amara-parivrdhair abhipijyamanah pathi pathi ca varithasah siddha-
gandharva-sadhya-carana-muni-ganair upagiyamdno gandha-
madana-dronim avabhasayann upasasarpa.

sah—he (Lord Brahma); tatra tatra—here and there; gagana-taie —
under the canopy of the sky; udu-patih—the moon; iva—like; vimana-
avalibhih—in their different airplanes; anupatham—along the path:
amara—of the demigods; parivrdhaih—by the leaders; abhipij-
yamanah—being worshiped; pathi pathi—on the way, one after
another; ca—also; varithasah—in groups; siddha—by the residents of
Siddhaloka; gandharva—by the residents of Gandharvaloka; sadhya—
by the residents of Sadhyaloka; carana—by the residents of Caranaloka;
muni-ganaih—and by great sages; upagiyamanah—being worshiped;
gandha-madana —of the planet where the Gandhamadana Hill is found;
dronim—the border; avabhasayan—illuminating: upasasarpa—he
approached.

TRANSLATION

As Lord Brahma descended on his carrier, the great swan, all the
residents of the planets named Siddhaloka, Gandharvaloka,
Sadhyaloka and Caranaloka, as well as great sages and demigods
flying in their different airplanes, assembled within the canopy of
the sky to receive Lord Brahma and worship him. As he received
respect and adoration from the residents of the various planets,
Lord Brahma appeared just like the full moon surrounded by il-
luminating stars. Lord Brahma’s great swan then arrived at the
border of Gandhamadana Hill and approached Prince Priyavrata,
who was sitting there.

PURPORT

It appears from this description that there is regular interplanetary
travel between the planets of the demigods. Another significant point is
that there is a planet covered mostly by great mountains, one of which is
Gandhamadana Hill. Three great personalities —Priyavrata, Narada and
Svayambhuva Manu —were sitting on this hill. According to Brahma-


--- Page 23 ---
Text 9] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 17
sarhita, each universe is filled with different planetary systems, and
every system has a unique opulence. For example, on ৩1001181018, all the
residents are very advanced in the powers of mystic yoga. They can fly
from one planet to another without airplanes or other flying machines.
Similarly, the residents of Gandharvaloka are expert in musical science,
and those on Sadhyaloka are all great saints. The interplanetary system
undoubtedly exists, and residents of different planets may go from one to
another. On this earth, however, we have not invented any machine that
can go directly from one planet to another, although an unsuccessful at-
tempt has been made to go directly to the moon.
TEXT 9
+ + + ५

तत्र ह वा एनं देवर्षिंहंसयानेन पितरं भगवन्तं दिरण्यगर्भुपलममानः

LY <
सहसेबोत्थायाहंणेन सह पितापुत्राभ्यामवहिताज्ञलिरुपतस्थे ॥ ९ ॥
tatra ha va enam devarsir hamsa-yanena pitaram bhagavantam
hiranya-garbham upalabhamanah sahasaivotthayarhanena saha pita-
putrabhyam avahitanjalir upatasthe.

tatra—there; ha va—certainly; enam—him; deva-rsih—the great
saint Narada; harisa-yanena—by the swan carrier; pitaram—his
father; bhagavantam—most powerful; hiranya-garbham—Lord
Brahma; upalabhamanah—understanding; sahasd eva—immediately:
utthaya—having stood up; arhanena—with paraphernalia for worship:
saha—accompanied; pita-putrabhyam—by Priyavrata and his father.
Svayambhuva Manu; avahita-arjalih—with respect and folded hands:
upatasthe — worshiped.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma, the father of Narada Muni, is the supreme person
within this universe. As soon as Narada saw the great swan, he
could understand that Lord Brahma had arrived. Therefore he im-
mediately stood up, along with Svayambhuva Manu and his son
Priyavrata, whom Narada was instructing. Then they folded their
hands and began to worship Lord Brahma with great respect.


--- Page 24 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
PURPORT
As stated in the previous verse. Lord Brahma was accompanied by
other demigods, but his specific carrier was the great swan. Therefore as
soon as Narada Muni saw the swan, he could understand that his father,
Lord Brahma, who is also known as Hiranyagarbha, was arriving. Thus
he immediately stood up with Svayambhuva Manu and his son
Priyavrata to receive Lord Brahma and offer him respect.
TEXT 10
भगवानपि भारत तदुपनीताणः सखक्तवाकेना तितराघरदितगुणगणावतार -
सुजयः प्रियत्रतमादि पुरुषस्तं सदयहासावलोक इति होवाच ॥ १० ॥
bhagavan api bharata tad-upanitarhanah sikta-vakenatitaram udita-
guna-ganavatara-sujayah priyavratam adi-purusas tam sadaya-
hasavaloka iti hovaca.
bhagavan—Lord Brahma; api—moreover; bharata—O King
Pariksit: tat—by them: upanita—brought forward; arhanah—
worshipable paraphernalia; siikta—according to Vedic etiquette;
vakena—by language; atitaram—highly: udita —praised; guna-gana—
qualities; avatara—because of the descent; su-jayah—whose glories:
priyavratam—unto Priyavrata; adi-purusah—the original person;
tam —unto him: sa-daya—with compassion; hdsa—smiling;
avalokah—whose looking; iti—thus; ha—certainly; uvdca—said.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Pariksit, because Lord Brahma had finally de-
scended from Satyaloka to Bhualoka, Narada Muni, Prince
Priyavrata and Svayambhuva Manu came forward to offer him ob-
jects of worship and to praise him in highly qualified language, ac-
cording to Vedic etiquette. At that time, Lord Brahma, the original
person of this universe, felt compassion for Priyavrata and,
looking upon him with a smiling face, spoke to him as follows.
PURPORT
That Lord Brahma descended from Satyaloka to see Priyavrata indi-
cates that the matter was very serious. Narada Muni had come to advise


--- Page 25 ---
Text 11] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 19
Priyavrata about the value of spiritual life, knowledge, renunciation and
bhakti, and Lord Brahma knew that Narada's instructions were very
impressive. Therefore unless Lord Brahma personally went to
Gandhamadana Hill to request Priyavrata, Lord Brahma knew that
Prince Priyavrata would not accept his father’s order. Brahmas purpose
was to break Priyavrata’s determination. Therefore Brahma first looked
upon Priyavrata with compassion. His smile and compassionate features
also indicated that although Brahma would request Priyavrata to accept
household life, Priyavrata would not be out of touch with devotional ser-
vice. By the blessings of a Vaisnava, everything is possible. This is de-
scribed in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu as krpa-siddhi, or perfection attained
simply by the blessings of a superior person. One usually becomes liber-
ated and perfect by executing the regulative principles set down in the
sastras. Nonetheless, many persons have achieved perfection simply by
the blessings of a spiritual master or superior.

Priyavrata was the grandson of Lord Brahma, and as joking competi-
tion sometimes takes place between grandson and grandfather, in this
case also Priyavrata was determined to remain in meditation, whereas
Brahma was determined that he rule the universe. Thus Lord Brahma's
affectionate smile and glance meant, “My dear Priyavrata, you have
decided not to accept household life, but I have decided to convince you
that you must accept 11.77" Actually, Brahma had come to praise Priyavrata
for his high standard of renunciation, austerity, penance and devotion so
that he would not be deviated from devotional service, even though he
would accept household life.

In this verse, one important word 15 sikta-vakena (by Vedic hymns).
In the Vedas, there is the following prayer to Lord Brahma: hiranya-
garbhah samavartatagre bhitasya jatah patir eka asit. Brahma was
received with the appropriate Vedic hymns, and because he was
welcomed according to the Vedic etiquette, he was very pleased.

TEXT 11
श्रीभ्रगवाहवाच
निबोध _ तातेदश्तं ada
माघ्यितुं देवमर्हस्यप्रमेयम्‌ |


--- Page 26 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
वयं भबस्ते तत एष॒ সহদি-
=
Fem सर्वे विवशा यसख दिष्टम्‌ ॥११॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca
nibodha tatedam [1077 bravimi
masiyiturn devam arhasy aprameyam
vayarh bhavas te tata esa maharsir
vahama sarve vivasa yasya distam
ri-bhagavan wvaca—the supreme person, Lord Brahma, said;
nibodha—kindly hear with attention; tata—my dear son; idam—this;
rtam—true; bravimi—] am speaking; ma—not; asiayitum—to be
jealous of; devam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: arhasi—you
ought; aprameyam—who is beyond our experimental knowledge;
vayam—we; bhavah—Lord Siva; te—your; tatah—father; esah—this;
maha-rsih—Narada; vahamah—carry out; sarve—all; vivasah—unable
to deviate; yasya—of whom; distam —the order.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, the supreme person within this universe, said: My
dear Priyavrata, kindly hear attentively what I shall say to you. Do
not be jealous of the Supreme Lord, who is beyond our experi-
mental measurements. All of us, including Lord Siva, your father
and the great sage Maharsi Narada, must carry out the order of the
Supreme. We cannot deviate from His order.
PURPORT
Of the twelve great authorities in devotional service, four—Lord
Brahma himself, his son Narada, Svayambhuva Manu and Lord Siva—
were present before Priyavrata. They were accompanied by many other
authoritative sages. Brahma first wanted to impress upon Priyavrata that
although these great personalities are all authorities, they cannot possibly
disobey the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is de-
scribed in this verse as deva, which means “always glorious.” The
power. glory and potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can
never be diminished. In the [Sopanisad, the Lord is described as apapa-


--- Page 27 ---
Text 11] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 21
viddha, which indicates that He is never affected by anything materially
considered sinful. Similarly, Srimad-Bhagavatam describes the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as being so powerful that nothing we might con-
sider abominable can affect Him. An example sometimes given to explain
the position of the Supreme Lord is that of the sun, which evaporates
urine from the earth but is never affected by contamination. The
Supreme Lord can never be accused of doing anything wrong.

When Lord Brahma went to induce Priyavrata to accept the respon-
sibility for ruling the universe, he did not go whimsically: he was
following the dictations of the Supreme Lord. Indeed, Brahma and other
genuine authorities never do anything without His permission. The
Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart. In the beginning of
Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said, tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye: the
Lord dictated Vedic knowledge to Brahma through his heart. The more a
living entity is purified by devotional service, the more he comes in
direct contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in
Srimad Bhagavad-gitd:

tesa satata-yuktanam
bhajatarh priti-piarvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tar
yena mam upayanti te
“To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love. I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.” (Bg. 10.10) Lord
Brahma, therefore, had not come to Priyavrata by his own whims:
rather, it is understood that he had been ordered to persuade Priyavrata
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose activities cannot be un-
derstood by material senses and who is therefore described herein as
aprameya. Thus Lord Brahma first advised Priyavrata to hear his words
with attention and without envy.

Why one is induced to perform certain acts despite his desire to do
something else is indicated herein. One cannot disobey the orders of the
Supreme Lord, even if one is as powerful as Lord Siva. Lord Brahma.
Manu or the great sage Narada. All these authorities are certainly very
powerful, but they do not have the power to disobey the orders of the


--- Page 28 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Since Lord Brahma had come to
Priyavrata in accordance with the orders of the Supreme Lord, he first
wanted to dispel any suspicions that he might be acting as Priyavrata’s
enemy. Lord Brahma was following the orders of the Supreme Lord, and
therefore it would be worthwhile for Priyavrata to accept Lord Brahma’s
order, as the Lord desired.
TEXT 12
न तस्य कथित्तपसा विद्या वा
=~ -
न योगवीर्येण मनीषया वा।
=. Je
नैवाथेधर्मेः परतः खतो वा
कृतं विदन्तं तनुभृद्विभूयात्‌ ॥१२॥
na tasya kascit tapasa vidyaya va
na yoga-viryena manisaya va
naivartha-dharmaih paratah svato va
krtari vihanturi tanu-bhrd vibhivyat
na—never; tasya—His; kascit—anyone; tapasa—by austerity;
vidyaya—by education; va—or; na—never; yoga—by power of mystic
yoga; viryena—by personal strength; manisaya—by intelligence; va—
or; na—never; eva—certainly; artha—by material opulence; dhar-
math—by the power of religion; paratah—by any external power;
svatah—by personal endeavor; va—or; krtam—the order: vihantum—
to avoid; tanu-bhrt—a living entity who has accepted a material body;
vibhiyat—is able.
TRANSLATION
One cannot avoid the order of the Supreme Personality of

Codhead, not by the strength of severe austerities, an exalted
Vedic education, or the power of mystic yoga, physical prowess or
intellectual activities. Nor can one use his power of religion, his
material opulence or any other means, either by himself or with
the help of others, to defy the orders of the Supreme Lord. That is
not possible for any living being, from Brahma down to the ant.


--- Page 29 ---
Text 12] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 23
PURPORT

In the Garga Upanisad, Gargamuni says to his wife. etasya va ak-
sarasya prasasane gargi sirya-candramasau vidhrtau tisthatah: “My
dear Gargi, everything is under the control of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Even the sun, the moon and other controllers and demigods
like Lord Brahma and King Indra are all under His control.” An ordi-
nary human being or animal who has accepted a material body cannot go
beyond the jurisdiction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s control.
A material body includes senses. However, the sense activities of so-
called scientists who try to be free from God's law or the laws of nature
are useless. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (7.14). Mama maya
duratyaya: it is impossible to surpass the control of material nature, for
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is working behind it. Sometimes we
are proud of our 85106111165, penances and mystic yogic powers, but it is
clearly stated herein that one cannot surpass the laws and directions of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, either by dint of mystic power. a
scientific education, or austerities and penances. It is impossible.

The word manisaya (“by intelligence) is of special significance.
Priyavrata might argue that Lord Brahma was requesting him to accept
family life and the responsibility for ruling a kingdom, although Narada
Muni had advised him not to enter household life and be entangled in
material affairs. Whom to accept would be a puzzle for Priyavrata
because both Lord Brahma and Narada Muni are authorities. Under the
circumstances, the use of the word manisaya is very appropriate, for it
indicates that since both Narada Muni and Lord Brahma are authorized
to give instruction, Priyavrata should neglect neither of them but should
use his intelligence to follow the advice of both. To solve such dilemmas,
Srila Rapa Gosvami has given a very clear conception of intelligence. He
says:

andasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatah
nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktari vairagyam ucyate
Visayan, material affairs, should be accepted without attachment. and
everything should be dovetailed with the service of the Lord. That is real


--- Page 30 ---
24. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
intelligence (manisa). Becoming a family man or king in the material
world is not harmful if one accepts everything for Krsna’s service. That
necessitates clear intelligence. Mayavadi philosophers say, brahma
satyar jagan mithya: this material world is false, and only the Absolute
Truth is real. However, an intelligent devotee in the line of Lord Brahma
and the great sage Narada—or, in other words, in the Brahma-
sampradaya—does not consider this world false. That which is created by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be false, but using it for en-
joyment is. Everything is meant to be enjoyed by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (5.29). Bhoktaram
yajiia-tapasam sarva-loka-mahesvaram: the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the supreme proprietor and enjoyer, and therefore every-
thing should be dovetailed for His enjoyment and service. Regardless of
one’s circumstances, favorable or unfavorable, one should use every-
thing to serve the Supreme Lord. That is the perfect way to use one’s
intelligence.
TEXT 13
५
WE AEE च कमे कतुं
शोकाय मोहाय सदा भयाय |
सुखाय दुःखाय च देहयोग-
मन्यक्तदिष्टं जनताङ्ग धत्ते ॥१२॥
bhavaya nasaya ca karma karturh
Sokaya mohaya sada bhayaya
sukhaya duhkhaya ca deha-yogam
avyakta-distarh janatanga dhatte
bhavaya—for birth; nasaya—for death; ca—also; karma —activity;
kartum—to do; Sokaya—for bereavement; mohaya—for illuson;
sada—always; = bhayaya—for fear;  sukhaya—for happiness;
duhkhaya—for distress; ca—also; deha-yogam—connection with a
material body; avyakta—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dis-
tam —directed; janatd—the living entities; arga—O Priyavrata;
dhatte—accept.


--- Page 31 ---
Text 13] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 25
TRANSLATION

My dear Priyavrata, by the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, all living entities accept different types of bodies for
birth and death, activity, lamentation, illusion, fear of future
dangers, and happiness and distress.

PURPORT

Every living entity who has come to this material world has come here
for material enjoyment, but according to his own karma, activities, he
must accept a certain type of body given to him by material nature under
the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (3.27), prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah:
everything is being done by prakrti, material nature, under the direction
of the Supreme Lord. Modern scientists do not know why there are
varieties of bodies in 8,400,000 forms. The fact is that all these bodies
are ordained for the living entities by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead according to the living entities’ desires. He gives the living en-
tities freedom to act as they like, but on the other hand they must accept
a body according to the reactions of their activities. Thus there are
different types of bodies. Some living entities have short durations of
life, whereas others live for fantastic durations. Every one of them.
however, from Brahma down to the ant, acts according to the direction of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is sitting in everyone's heart.
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (15.15):

sarvasya cahari hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jianam apohanari ca

*] am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance.
knowledge and forgetfulness.” It is not a fact, however. that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead gives direction to certain living entities
in one way and other living entities in another way. The truth is that
every living entity has a certain desire, and the Supreme Lord gives him
a chance to fulfill it. The best course, therefore. is to surrender unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and act according to His desire. One
who does so is liberated.


--- Page 32 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
TEXT 14
৬ Q
यद्वाचि तन्त्यां गुणकमेदामभिः
০২৫ A -
सुदुस्तरेवत्स वयं सुयोजिताः |
सर्वे वहामो बलिमीश्वराय
प्रोता नसीव द्विपदे चतुष्पदः ।१४॥
yad-vaci tantyar guna-karma-damabhih
sudustarair vatsa vayari swyojitah
sarve vahamo balim iSvaraya
prota nasiva dvi-pade catus-padah
yat—of whom; vaci—in the form of Vedic instruction; tantyam—to a
long rope; guna—of quality; karma—and work; damabhih—by the
ropes; su-dustaraih—very difficult to avoid; vatsa—my dear boy;
vayam—we; su-yojitadh—are engaged; sarve—all; vahamah—carry
out; balim—orders to please Him; #varaya—unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; protah—being bound; nasi—in the nose; iva—
like; dvi-pade—to the two-legged (driver); catuh-padah—the four-
legged (bulls).
TRANSLATION
My dear boy, all of us are bound by the Vedic injunctions to the
divisions of varnasrama according to our qualities and work. These
divisions are difficult to avoid because they are scientifically ar-
ranged. We must therefore carry out our duties of varnasrama-
dharma, like bulls obliged to move according to the direction of a
driver pulling on ropes knotted to their noses.
PURPORT
In this verse, the words tantyari guna-karma-damabhih are very im-
portant. We each get a body according to our association with the gunas,
the qualities or modes of material nature, and we act accordingly. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita, the four orders of the social system —namely
brahmana, ksatriya, vaiSya and siidra— are arranged according to guna
and karma, their qualities and work. There is some controversy about


--- Page 33 ---
Text 14] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 27
this, however, because some say that since one receives a body according
to the guna and karma of his past life, it is one’s birth that determines
his social status. Others say, however, that one’s birth according to the
guna and karma of his past life is not the essential consideration, since
one can change his guna and karma even in this life. Thus they say that
the four divisions of the social order — brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and
Sudra— should be arranged according to the guna and karma of this life.
This version is confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam by Narada Muni.
While instructing Maharaja Yudhisthira about the symptoms of guna
and karma, Narada Muni said that these symptoms must govern the divi-
sion of society. In other words, if a person born in the family of a
brahmana has the symptoms of a Sidra, he should be designated as a
Sidra. Similarly, if a Sidra has brahminical qualities, he should be desig-
nated a brahmana.

The varnasrama system is scientific. Therefore if we accept the divi-
sions of varna and asrama according to the Vedic instructions, our lives
will be successful. Unless human society is thus divided and arranged, it
cannot be perfect. As stated in the Visnu Purana (3.8.9):

varnasramacaravata
purusena parah puman
visnur aradhyate pantha
nanyat tat-tosa-karanam
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, is worshiped by the
proper execution of prescribed duties in the system of varna and asrama.
There is no other way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One must be situated in the institution of the four varnas and asramas.”
All of human society is meant to worship Lord Visnu. At the present
moment, however, human society does not know that this is the ultimate
goal or perfection of life. Therefore instead of worshiping Lord Visnu.
people have been educated to worship matter. According to the direction
of modern society, men think they can advance in civilization by
manipulating matter to build skyscrapers, big roads, automobiles and so
on. Such a civilization must certainly be called materialistic because its
people do not know the goal of life. The goal of life is to reach Visnu. but


--- Page 34 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
instead of reaching Visnu, people are bewildered by the external
manifestation of the material energy. Therefore progress in material ad-
vancement is blind, and the leaders of such material advancement are
also blind. They are leading their followers in the wrong way.

It is best, therefore, to accept the injunctions of the Vedas, which are
mentioned in this verse as yad-vaci. In accordance with those injunc-
tions, everyone should find out whether he is a brahmana, ksatriya,
vaiSya or Siidra and should thus be educated accordingly. Then his life
will be successful. Otherwise, all of human society will be confused. If
human society is divided scientifically according to varna and asrama,
and if the Vedic directions are followed, one’s life, regardless of his posi-
tion, will be successful. It is not that brahmanas will be elevated to the
transcendental platform but not the sidras. If the Vedic injunctions are
followed, all of them —brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaiSyas and Siadras—will
be elevated to the transcendental platform, and their lives will be suc-
cessful. The injunctions in the Vedas are explicit directions from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The example cited in this verse is that
bulls tied by ropes in their nostrils move according to the direction of the
driver. Similarly, if we move according to the instructions of the Vedas,
the perfect paths for our lives will be set. Otherwise, if we do not move in
that way but act according to our whimsical ideas, our lives will be
spoiled by confusion and will end in despair. Actually, because people at
the present moment are not following the instructions of the Vedas, they
are all confused. We must therefore accept this instruction by Lord
Brahma to Priyavrata as the factual scientific direction leading to the
success of life. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (16.23):

yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya
vartate kama-karatah
na sa siddhim avapnoti
na sukhariv na param gatim
If we do not live according to the injunctions of the Sastras, the Vedas, we
shall never achieve success in life, to say nothing of happiness or eleva-
tion to higher statuses of living.


--- Page 35 ---
Text 15] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 29
TEXT 15
fig? दयवरुन्ध्मदेऽङ्ग
दुःखं सुखं वा गुणकर्मसङ्गात्‌ |
अआब्याय तत्तद्यदयुद्ध नाथ-
ALTAR इव॒ नीयमानाः ॥१५॥
iSabhisrstarn hy avarundhmahe niga
duhkhar sukhari va guna-karma-sangat
asthaya tat tad yad ayurikta nathas
caksusmatandha iva niyamanah
isa-abhisrstam —created or given by the Lord; hi—certainly;
avarundhmahe—we have to accept; arnga—my dear Priyavrata;
duhkham—distress; sukham —happiness; va—or; guna-karma—with
quality and work; sarigat—by association; dsthaya—being situated in;
tat tat—that condition; yat—which body; ayurnkta—He gave; nathah—
the Supreme Lord; caksusmata—by a person having eyes; andhah—
blind men; iva—like; niyamanah—being conducted.
TRANSLATION

My dear Priyavrata, according to our association with different
modes of material nature, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
gives us our specific bodies and the happiness and distress we
achieve. One must therefore remain situated as he is and be con-
ducted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, exactly as a blind

man is led by a person who has eyes with which to see.

PURPORT

By material means, one cannot avoid the happiness and distress
unique to his particular body. There are 8.400.000 bodily forms. each
destined to enjoy and suffer a certain amount of happiness and distress.
This we cannot change, for the happiness and distress are ordained by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in accordance with whose decision


--- Page 36 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
we have received our bodies. Since we cannot avoid the plan of the
Supreme Godhead, we must agree to be directed by Him, just as a blind
man is led by a person who has eyes. Under any circumstances, if we
remain in the condition allotted to us by the Supreme Lord and follow
His instructions, we will become perfect. The main purpose of life is to
follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is such
instructions that constitute one’s religion or occupational duty.

In Bhagavad-gita, therefore, Lord Krsna says, sarva-dharman
parityajya mam eka Saranari vraja: “Give up all other engagements.
Simply surrender unto Me and follow Me.” (Bg. 18.66) This process of
surrendering by following the instructions of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is not meant for any particular caste or creed. A brahmana can
surrender, and so can a ksatriya, vai§ya or Sidra. Everyone can adopt
this process. As stated in this verse, caksusmatandha iva niyamanah:
one should follow the Lord the way a blind man follows a person who has
eyes. If we follow the Supreme Personality of Godhead by following the
directions He gives in the Vedas and Bhagavad-gita, our lives will be
successful. The Lord therefore says:

man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskuru
mam evaisyasi satyam te
pratijane priyo ’si me
“Always think of Me, become My devotee, and offer respect and obei-
sances unto Me. Then you will certainly come back home, back to
Godhead. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend.” (Bg.
18.65) This instruction is meant for everyone— brahmana, ksatriya,
vaisya or Sidra. If anyone, from any division of life, surrenders to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and follows His instructions, his life
will be successful.

The previous verse has given the analogy of bulls moving under the
direction of the driver of a bullock cart. The bulls, being completely sur-
rendered to the driver, remain wherever he wants to place them and eat
whatever he wants them to eat. Similarly, being completely surrendered
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we should not aspire for happi-
ness, or regret distress; we must be satisfied with the position allotted to


--- Page 37 ---
Text 16] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 31
us by the Lord. We should follow the path of devotional service and not
be dissatisfied with the happiness and distress He has given. People in = =
the material modes of passion and ignorance generally cannot under-
stand the plan of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with its 8.400.000
forms of life, but the human form affords one the special privilege to un-
derstand this plan, engage in devotional service and elevate oneself to the
highest position of perfection by following the Lord's instructions. The
entire world is working under the influence of the modes of material
nature, especially ignorance and passion, but if people engage in hearing
and chanting about the glories of the Supreme Lord, their lives can be
successful, and they can be elevated to the highest perfection. In the
Brhan-naradiya Purana, therefore, it is said:
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha
“In this age of Kali, there is no other way, no other way, no other way for
spiritual perfection than the holy name, the holy name, the holy name of
the Lord.” Everyone should be given the chance to hear the holy names
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for thus one will gradually come
to understand his real position in life and be elevated to the transcenden-
tal position above the mode of goodness. Thus all impediments to his
progress will be cut to pieces. In conclusion, therefore, we must be
satisfied in whatever position we have been put into by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and we should try to engage ourselves in His devo-
tional service. Then our lives will be successful.
TEXT 16
क्तोऽपि तावद्विभूयात्खदेद-
मारन्धमन्नन्नभिमानशून्यः |
यथानुभूतं प्रतियातनिद्रः
= ~
ff स्वन्यदेहाय गुणान्न 35 1281


--- Page 38 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
mukto ‘pi tavad bibhryat sva-deham
arabdham asnann abhimana-sinyah
yathanubhitarh pratiyata-nidrah
kira tv anya-dehaya gunan na ४7/9८

muktah—a liberated person; api—even; tavat—so long; bibhryat—
must maintain; sva-deham—his own body; arabdham—obtained as a
result of past activity; asnan—accepting; abhimana-sinyah—without
erroneous conceptions; yatha—as; anubhittam—what was perceived;
pratiyata-nidrah—one who has awakened from sleep; kim tu—but;
anya-dehaya—for another material body; gunan—the material
qualities; na—never; vrriikte —enjoys.

TRANSLATION

Even if one is liberated, he nevertheless accepts the body he has
received according to his past karma. Without misconceptions,
however, he regards his enjoyment and suffering due to that
karma the way an awakened person regards a dream he had while
sleeping. He thus remains steadfast and never works to achieve
another material body under the influence of the three modes of
material nature.

PURPORT

The difference between a liberated and conditioned soul is that the
conditioned soul is under the concept of bodily life, whereas a liberated
person knows that he is not the body but a spirit, different from the
body. Priyavrata might have thought that although a conditioned soul is
forced to act according to the laws of nature, why should he, who was far
advanced in spiritual understanding, accept the same kind of bondage
and impediments to spiritual advancement? To answer this doubt, Lord
Brahma informed him that even those who are liberated do not resent ac-
cepting, in the present body, the results of their past activities. While
sleeping, one dreams many unreal things, but when he awakens he dis-
regards them and makes progress in factual life. Similarly, a liberated
person—one who has completely understood that he is not the body but a
spirit soul —disregards past activities performed in ignorance and per-
forms his present activities in such a way that they produce no reactions.


--- Page 39 ---
Text 17] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 33
This is described in Bhagavad-gita (3.9). Yajiarthat karmano ’nyatra
loko ’yari karma-bandhanah: if one performs activities for the satisfac-
tion of the Supreme Personality, the yajia-purusa, his work does not
produce reactions, whereas karmis, who act for themselves, are bound by
the reactions of their work. A liberated person, therefore, does not think
about whatever he has ignorantly done in the past; instead, he acts in
such a way that he will not produce another body by fruitive activities.
As clearly mentioned in Bhagavad-gita:
mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhityaya kalpate
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26) Regardless of what we
have done in our past lives, if we engage ourselves in unalloyed devo-
tional service to the Lord in this life, we will always be situated in the
brahma-bhita (liberated) state, free from reactions, and will not be
obliged to accept another material body. Tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna (Bg. 4.9). After giving up the body, one who has
acted in that way does not accept another material body, but instead goes
back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 17
मयं प्रमत्तस्य वनेष्वपि स्थाद्‌
यतः स॒ आस्ते सहषटसपलः |
৫
जितेन्द्रियस्यात्मरतेबधस्य
गृहाश्रमः किं जु करोत्यवद्यम्‌ ॥१७।।
bhayam pramattasya vanesv api syad
yatah sa aste saha-sat-sapatnah
Jitendriyasyatma-rater budhasya
grhasramah kirh nu karoty avadyam


--- Page 40 ---
34. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1

bhayam—fear: pramattasya—of one who is bewildered: vanesu—in
forests; api—even; syat—there must be; yatah—because; sah—he (one
who is not self-controlled); dste—is existing; saha—with: sat-sapat-
nah—six co-wives; jita-indriyasya—for one who has already conquered
the senses; atma-rateh—self-satisfied; budhasya—for such a learned
man; grha-asramah—household life; kim—what; nu—indeed; karoti—
can 00: avadyam—harm.

TRANSLATION

Even if he goes from forest to forest, one who is not self-
controlled must always fear material bondage because he is living
with six co-wives—the mind and knowledge-acquiring senses.
Even householder life, however, cannot harm a self-satisfied,
learned man who has conquered his senses.

PURPORT

Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has sung, grhe va vanete thake, ‘ha
gaurariga’ bale dake: whether one is situated in the forest or at home, if
he is engaged in the devotional service of Lord Caitanya, he is a liberated
person. Here this is also repeated. For one who has not controlled his
senses, going to the forest to become a so-called yogi is meaningless.
Because his uncontrolled mind and senses are going with him, he cannot
achieve anything, even by giving up household life and staying in the
forest. Formerly many mercantile men from the up-country of India
used to go to Bengal, and thus there is a familiar saying, “If you go to
Bengal, your fortune will go with you.” Our first concern, therefore.
should be to control the senses, and since the senses cannot be controlled
unless engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, our most important
duty is to engage the senses in devotional service. Hrsikena hrsikesa-
sevanari bhaktir ucyate: bhakti means engagement of the purified senses
in the service of the Lord.

Herein Lord Brahma indicates that instead of going to the forest with
uncontrolled senses, it is better and more secure to engage the senses in
the service of the Lord. Even household life can do no harm to a self-
controlled person acting in this way: it cannot force him into material
bondage. Srila Ripa Gosvami has further enunciated this position:


--- Page 41 ---
Text 18] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 35
tha yasya harer dasye
karmana manasa gira
nikhilasv apy avasthasu
Jivan-muktah sa ucyate
“Regardless of one’s circumstances, if one fully engages his activities,
mind and words in the devotional service of the Lord, he should be un-
derstood to be a liberated person.” Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura was a
responsible officer and a householder, yet his service to the cause of ex-
panding the mission of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is unique. Srila Pra-
bodhananda Sarasvati Thakura says, durdantendriya-kala-sarpa-patalt
protkhata-daristrayate. The sense organs are certainly our greatest
enemies, and they are therefore compared to venomous serpents.
However. if a venomous serpent is bereft of its poison fangs, it is no
longer fearful. Similarly, if the senses are engaged in the service of the
Lord, there is no need to fear their activities. The devotees in the Krsna
consciousness movement move within this material world, but because
their senses are fully engaged in the service of the Lord, they are always
aloof from the material world. They are always living in a transcendental
position.
TEXT 18
यः षट्‌ qua विजिगीषमाणो
९
गृहेषु নিশিহম यतेत पूवम्‌ ।
अत्येति gta ऊर्जितारीन्‌
क्षीणेषु कामं विचरेदिपधित्‌ ॥ १८॥
yah sat sapatnan vijigisamano
grhesu nirvisya yateta piarvam
atyeti durgasrita urjitarin
ksinesu kamam vicared vipascit
yah—anyone who:  sat—six:  sapatnan—adversaries: চে
Jigisamanah—desiring to conquer: grhesu—in household life: nir-


--- Page 42 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
viSya—having entered: yateta—must try; parvam—*first; atyeti—con-
quers: durga-asritah—being in a fortified place; urjita-arin—very
strong enemies; hsinesu—decreased; kamam—lusty desires; vicaret—
can go: vipascit—the most experienced, learned.
TRANSLATION

One who is situated in household life and who systematically
conquers his mind and five sense organs is like a king in his
fortress who conquers his powerful enemies. After one has been
trained in household life and his lusty desires have decreased, he
can move anywhere without danger.

PURPORT

The Vedic system of four varpas and four asramas is very scientific,
and its entire purpose is to enable one to control the senses. Before en-
tering household life (grhastha-asrama). a student is fully trained to
become jitendriya, a conqueror of the senses. Such a mature student is
allowed to become a householder, and because he was first trained in con-
quering his senses, he retires from household life and becomes
vanaprastha as soon as the strong waves of youthful life are past and he
reaches the verge of old age at fifty years or slightly more. Then, after
being further trained, he accepts sannyasa. He is then a fully learned
and renounced person who can move anywhere and everywhere without
fear of being captivated by material desires. The senses are considered
very powerful enemies. As a king in a strong fortress can conquer
powerful enemies, so a householder in grhastha-asrama, household life,
can conquer the lusty desires of youth and be very secure when he takes
vanaprastha and sannyasa.

TEXT 19
1 -
तवं त्वन्जनामाङ्घ्रिसरोजकोशच-
दर्गाभ्रितो निर्जिंतषट्‌सपलः |
EIT भोगान्‌ पुरुषातिदिष्टान्‌
वियुक्तसङ्गः प्रकृतिं भजख nee


--- Page 43 ---
Text 19] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 37
7৮৫78 tv abja-nabhanghri-saroja-kosa-
durgasrito nirjita-sat-sapatnah
bhunksveha bhogan purusatidistan
vimukta-sangah prakrtim bhajasva

tvam—yourself; tu—then; abja-nabha—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, whose navel 15 like a lotus lower; arnghri—feet; saroja—
lotus; koSa—hole; durga—the stronghold; asritah—taken shelter of;
nirjita—conquered; sat-sapatnah—the six enemies (the mind and five
senses); bhunksva—enjoy; iha—in this material world; bhogan—en-
joyable things; purusa—by the Supreme Person; atidistan—extraor-
dinarily ordered; vimukta—liberated; sangah—from material associ-
ation; prakrtim—constitutional position; bhajasva—enjoy.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma continued: My dear Priyavrata, seek shelter inside
the opening in the lotus of the feet of the Lord, whose navel is also
like a lotus. Thus conquer the six sense organs [the mind and
knowledge-acquiring senses]. Accept material enjoyment because
the Lord, extraordinarily, has ordered you to do this. You will thus
always be liberated from material association and be able to carry
out the Lord’s orders in your constitutional position.

PURPORT

There are three kinds of men within this material world. Those who
are trying to enjoy the senses to the utmost are called karmis, above them
are the jiidanis, who try to conquer the urges of the senses, and above
them are the yogis, who have already conquered the senses. None of
them, however, are situated in a transcendental position. Only devotees.
who belong to none of the above-mentioned groups. are transcendental.
As explained in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):

mam ca yo *vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiyaya kalpate


--- Page 44 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” Lord Brahma herein advises
Priyavrata to remain transcendental in the fortress not of family life but
of the lotus feet of the Lord (abja-nabhanghri-saroja). When a
bumblebee enters the opening of a lotus flower and drinks its honey, it is
fully protected by the petals of the lotus. The bee is undisturbed by
sunshine and other external influences. Similarly, one who always seeks
shelter at the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead is protected from
all dangers. It is therefore said in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.58):
samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavari
mahat-padam punya-yaso murareh
bhavambudhir vatsa-padar param padari
padari padam yad vipadam na tesam

For one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, everything
becomes easier. Indeed, even crossing the great ocean of nescience
(bhavambudhi) is exactly like crossing the hoofprint created by a calf
(vatsa-padam). For such a devotee, there is no question of remaining in
a place where every step is dangerous.

Our actual duty is to carry out the supreme order of the Personality of
Godhead. If we are fixed in our determination to carry out the supreme
order of the Lord, we are always secure, regardless of where we are situ-
ated, whether in hell or in heaven. Herein the words prakrtim bhajasva
are very significant. Prakrtim refers to one’s constitutional position.
Every living entity has the constitutional position of being an eternal ser-
vant of God. Therefore Lord Brahma advised Priyavrata, “Be situated in
your original position as an eternal servant of the Lord. If you carry out
His orders, you will never fall, even in the midst of material enjoyment.”
Material enjoyment achieved by dint of one’s fruitive activities differs
from material enjoyment given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
A devotee sometimes appears to be in a very opulent position, but he ac-
cepts that position to follow the orders of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore a devotee is never affected by material influences.
The devotees in the Krsna consciousness movement are preaching all
over the world in accordance with the order of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 45 ---
Text 20] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 39
They have to meet many karmis, but by the mercy of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, they are unaffected by material influences. He has blessed
them, as described in the Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 7.129):
kabhu na badhibe tomara visaya-taranga
punarapi 68 thani pabe mora sarige
A sincere devotee who engages in the service of Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu by preaching His cult all over the world will never be
affected by visaya-taranga, material influences. On the contrary, in due
course of time he will return to the shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and will thus have perpetual association with Him.
TEXT 20
श्रीञ्युक उवाच
इति समभिहितो महाभागवतो भगवतस्िश्वनगुरोरयज्ाखनमारमनो
लघुतयावनतश्षिरोधरो बाढमिति सबदुमानञुवाद | Re ॥
Sri-Suka २८९८0

iti samabhihito maha-bhagavato bhagavatas tri-bhuvana-guror
anusasanam dtmano laghutayavanata-sirodharo badham iti sabahu-
manam uvaha.

sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: iti—thus:
samabhihitah—completely instructed: maha-bhagavatah—the great
devotee; bhagavatah—of the most powerful Lord Brahma: tri-
bhuvana—of the three worlds: guroh—the spiritual master:
anusasanam—the order: atmanah—of himself: laghutaya —because of
inferiority: avanata—bowed down: Sirodharah—his head: badham—
yes, sir: iti—thus: sa-bahu-manam—with great respect: uvaha—car-
ried out.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After thus being fully in-

structed by Lord Brahma, who is the spiritual master of the three


--- Page 46 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
worlds, Priyavrata, his own position being inferior, offered obei-
sances, accepted the order and carried it out with great respect.
PURPORT

Sri Priyavrata was the grandson of Lord Brahma. Therefore according
to social etiquette, his position was inferior. It is the duty of the inferior
to carry out the order of the superior with great respect. Priyavrata
therefore immediately said, “Yes, sir. I shall carry out your order.”
Priyavrata is described as a mahd-bhagavata, a great devotee. The duty
of a great devotee is to carry out the order of the spiritual master, or the
spiritual master of the spiritual master in the parampara system. As de-
scribed in Bhagavad-gita (4.2), 6৮৫7 parampara praptam: one has to
receive the instructions of the Supreme Lord through the disciplic chain
of spiritual masters. A devotee of the Lord always considers himself a
servant of the servant of the servant of the Lord.

TEXT 21
भगबानपि मनुना यथावदुपकल्पितापचितिः प्रियत्रतनारद योरविषमम-
= . ; व

मिसमीक्षमाणयोरात्मसमवस्थानमनाङमनसं क्यमव्यवहतं प्रवतेयन्नगमत ॥२१॥
bhagavan api manuna yathavad upakalpitapacitih priyavrata-
naradayor avisamam abhisamiksamanayor atmasam avasthanam avarn-
manasa ksayam avyavahrtar pravartayann agamat.

bhagavan—the most powerful Lord Brahma; api—also; manuna—by
Manu; yathavat—as deserved; upakalpita-apacitih—being worshiped;
priyavrata-naradayoh—in the presence of Priyavrata and Narada;
avisamam—without aversion; abhisamiksamanayoh—looking on; at-
masam—just suitable for his position; avasthanam—to his abode; a-
vak-manasam—beyond the description of mind and words; ksayam—
the planet; avyavahrtam—extraordinarily situated; pravartayan—
departing; agamat—returned.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma was then worshiped by Manu, who respectfully

satisfied him as well as he could. Priyavrata and Narada also looked


--- Page 47 ---
Text 21] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 41
upon Brahma with no tinges of resentment. Having engaged
Priyavrata in accepting his father’s request, Lord Brahma
returned to his abode, Satyaloka, which is indescribable by the en-
deavor of mundane mind or words.

PURPORT

Manu was certainly very satisfied that Lord Brahma had persuaded his
son Priyavrata to take the responsibility for ruling the world. Priyavrata
and Narada were also very satisfied. Although Brahma had forced
Priyavrata to accept the management of worldly affairs, thus breaking
his vow to remain brahmacari and completely engage in devotional ser-
vice, Narada and Priyavrata did not look upon Brahma with resentment.
Narada was not at all sorry that he had been frustrated in making
Priyavrata a disciple. Both Priyavrata and Narada were exalted per-
sonalities who knew how to respect Lord Brahma. Therefore instead of
looking upon Brahma with resentment, they very feelingly offered him
their respect. Lord Brahma then returned to his celestial abode, known as
Satyaloka, which is described here as being impeccable and being unap-
proachable by words.

It is stated in this verse that Lord Brahma returned to his residence,
which is as important as his own personality. Lord Brahma is the creator
of this universe and the most exalted personality within it. His lifetime is
described in Bhagavad-gita (8.17). Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad
brahmano viduh. The total duration of the four yugas is 4,300,000 years,
and when that is multiplied a thousand times, it equals twelve hours in
the life of Brahma. Therefore we cannot factually comprehend even
twelve hours of Brahma’s life, to say nothing of the one hundred years
that constitute his entire lifetime. How, then, can we understand his
abode? The Vedic literatures describe that in Satyaloka there is no birth.
death, old age or disease. In other words, since Satyaloka is situated next
to Brahmaloka, or the Brahman effulgence, it is almost as good as
Vaikunthaloka. Lord Brahma’s abode is practically indescribable from
our present status. Therefore it has been described as avarn-manasa-
gocara, or beyond the description of our words and the imagination of
our minds. The Vedic literatures thus describe the abode of Lord
Brahma: yad vai parardhyar tad uparamesthyar na yatra soko na jara
na mrtyur nartir na codvegah. “In Satyaloka. which is situated many


--- Page 48 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
millions and billions of years away, there is no lamentation, nor is there
old age. death, anxiety or the influence of enemies.”
TEXT 22
= + ~

मनुरपि परेणेवं प्रतिसन्धितमनोरथः सुरषिबरानुमतेनात्मजमखिलधरामण्डल।
सितिगुप्य ene खयमति विषमविपयविषजलाशयाशाया उपरराम २२

manur api parenaivam pratisandhita-manorathah surarsi-
varanumatendtmajam akhila-dhara-mandala-sthiti-guptaya asthapya
svayam ati-visama-visaya-visa-jalasayasaya upararama.

manuh—Svayambhuva Manu; api—also; parena—by Lord Brahma;
evam —thus; pratisandhita—executed; manah-rathah—his mental
aspiration; sura-rsi-vara—of the great sage Narada; anumatena—by the
permission; dtma-jam—his son; akhila—of the entire universe; dhara-
mandala—of planets; sthiti—maintenance; guptaye—for the protec-
tion; asthapya—establishing; svayam—personally; ati-visama —very
dangerous; visaya —material affairs; visa—of poison; jala-asaya—
ocean; asayah—from desires; upararama—got relief.

TRANSLATION

Svayambhuva Manu, with the assistance of Lord Brahma, thus
fulfilled his desires. With the permission of the great sage Narada,
he delivered to his son the governmental responsibility for main-
taining and protecting all the planets of the universe. He thus
achieved relief from the most dangerous, poisonous ocean of
material desires.

PURPORT

Svayambhuva Manu was practically hopeless because such a great per-
sonality as Narada was instructing his son Priyavrata not to accept house-
hold life. Now he was very pleased that Lord Brahma had interfered by
inducing his son to accept the responsibility for ruling the government of
the universe. From Bhagavad-gita we get information that Vaivasvata
Manu was the son of the sun-god and that his son, Maharaja lksvaku,


--- Page 49 ---
Text 22] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 43
ruled this planet earth. Svayambhuva Manu, however, appears to have
been in charge of the entire universe, and he entrusted to his son,
Maharaja Priyavrata, the responsibility for maintaining and protecting
all the planetary systems. Dhara-mandala means “planet.” This earth,
for instance, is called dhara-mandala. Akhila, however, means “all” or
“universal.” It is therefore difficult to understand where Maharaja
Priyavrata was situated, but from this literature his position certainly ap-
pears greater than that of Vaivasvata Manu, for he was entrusted with all
the planetary systems of the entire universe.

Another significant statement is that Svayambhuva Manu took great
satisfaction from abnegating the responsibility for ruling all the plane-
tary systems of the universe. At present, politicians are very eager to
take charge of the government, and they engage their men in canvassing
from door to door to get votes to win the post of president or a similar ex-
alted office. On the contrary, however, herein we find that King
Priyavrata had to be persuaded by Lord Brahma to accept the post of em-
peror of the entire universe. Similarly, his father, Svayambhuva Manu,
felt relieved to entrust the universal government to Priyavrata. Thus it is
evident that the kings and executive heads of government in the Vedic
age never accepted their positions for sense enjoyment. Such exalted
kings, who were known as rajarsis, ruled only to maintain and protect
the kingdom for the welfare of the citizens. The history of Priyavrata
and Svayambhuva Manu describes how exemplary, responsible monarchs
performed the duties of government with disinterest, keeping them-
selves always aloof from the contamination of material attachment.

Material affairs have herein been compared to an ocean of poison.
They have been described in a similar way by Srila Narottama dasa
Thakura in one of his songs:

samsara-visanale, diva-nisi hiya jvale,
Judaite na kainu upaya
“My heart is always burning in the fire of material existence. and [ have
made no provisions for getting out of it.”
golokera prema-dhana, hari-nama-sankirtana,
rati na janmila kene taya


--- Page 50 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
“The only remedy 15 hari-nama-sarkirtana, the chanting of the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra, which is imported from the spiritual world, Goloka
Vrndavana. How unfortunate | am that I have no attraction for this.”
Manu wanted to seek shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, and therefore
when his son Priyavrata took charge of his worldly affairs, Manu was
very relieved. That is the system of Vedic civilization. At the end of life,
one must free himself from worldly affairs and completely engage in the
service of the Lord.

The word surarsi-vara-anumatena 15 also significant. Manu entrusted
the government to his son with the permission of the great saint Narada.
This is particularly mentioned because although Narada wanted
Priyavrata to become free from all material affairs, when Priyavrata took
charge of the universe by the request of Lord Brahma and Manu, Narada
was also very pleased.

TEXT 23

इति ह নান स जगतीपतिरीश्वरेच्छयाधिनिवेशितकर्माधिकारोऽखिलजगद्वन्ध-
ध्वंसनपराुमावस्य मगवत आदिपुरुषस्याडधियुगलानवरत्यानानुमावेन
परिरन्धितकफयाशयोऽवदातोऽपि मानवधनो महतां मदीतरपनुक्षशास ॥ २२॥

iti ha vava sa jagati-patir iSvarecchayadhinivesita-karmadhikaro
*khila-jagad-bandha-dhvamsana-paranubhavasya bhagavata adi-
purusasyanghri-yugalanavarata-dhyananubhavena parirandhita-
kasayasayo “vadato ‘pi mana-vardhano mahatarh mahitalam anusasasa.

iti—thus; ha vava—indeed; sah—he; jagati-patih—the emperor of
the whole universe; iSvara-icchaya—by the order of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; adhinivesita—completely engaged; karma-
adhikarah—in material affairs; akhila-jagat—of the entire universe;
bandha—bondage; dhvarisana—destroying; para—transcendental;
anubhavasya—whose influence; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; adi-purusasya—the original person; arighri—on
the lotus feet; yugala—two; anavarata—constant; dhydna-
anubhavena—by meditation; parirandhita—destroyed; kasaya—all the
dirty things; @Sayah—in his heart; avadatah—completely pure; api—


--- Page 51 ---
Text 23] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 45
although; mana-vardhanah—just to give honor; mahatam—to
superiors; mahitalam—the material world; anusasasa—ruled.
TRANSLATION

Following the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Maharaja Priyavrata fully engaged in worldly affairs, yet he always
thought of the lotus feet of the Lord, which are the cause of libera-
tion from all material attachment. Although Priyavrata Maharaja
was completely freed from all material contamination, he ruled the
material world just to honor the orders of his superiors.

PURPORT

The words mana-vardhano mahatam (“just to show honor to
superiors”) are very significant. Although Maharaja Priyavrata was
already a liberated person and had no attraction for material things, he
engaged himself fully in governmental affairs just to show respect to
Lord Brahma. Arjuna had also acted in the same way. Arjuna had no
desire to participate in political affairs or the fighting at Kuruksetra, but
when ordered to do so by the Supreme Lord, Krsna, he executed those
duties very nicely. One who always thinks of the lotus feet of the Lord is
certainly above all the contamination of the material world. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita:

yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantaratmanda
sraddhavan bhajate yo mari
sa me yuktatamo matah

“Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith. worshiping
Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in
yoga and is the highest of all.” (Bg. 6.47) Maharaja Priyavrata.
therefore, was a liberated person and was among the highest of yogis, yet
superficially he became the emperor of the universe in accordance with
the order of Lord Brahma. Showing respect to his superior in this way
was another of his extraordinary qualifications. As stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (6.17.28):


--- Page 52 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
ndarayana-parah sarve
na kutascana bibhyati
svargapavarga-narkesv

api tulyartha-darsinah
A devotee who is actually advanced is not afraid of anything, provided he
has the opportunity to execute the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is the proper explanation of why Priyavrata engaged in
worldly affairs although he was a liberated person. Also, only because of
this principle does a maha-bhagavata, who has nothing to do with the
material world, come down to the second platform of devotional service
to preach the glories of the Lord all over the world.

TEXT 24
५ -
अथ च दुदितरं प्रजापतेविंश्चकर्मण उपयेमे बर्हिष्मतीं नाम
तस्या হ वाव आत्मजानात्म समानश्चीलगुणकर्मरूपवीयोदारान्दज
+ ©
भावयाम्बभूव कन्यां च यवीयसीमूजेखतीं नाम ॥ २४ ॥
atha ca duhitaram prajapater visvakarmana upayeme barhismatim
nama tasyam u ha vava atmajan atma-samana-sila-guna-karma-ripa-
viryodaran dasa bhavayam babhiwva kanyam ca yaviyasim irjasvatirn
nama.
atha—thereafter; ca—also; duhitaram—the daughter; prajapateh—

of one of the prajapatis entrusted with increasing population; visvakar-
manah —named Viévakarma; upayeme—married; barhismatim—
Barhismati; ndma—named; tasyam—in her; u ha—as it is celebrated;
va@va—wonderful; atma-jan—sons; datma-samana—exactly equal to
him; $ila—character; guna —quality; karma —activities; rizpa—beauty;
virya—prowess; udaran—whose magnanimity; dasa—ten; bhavayam
babhiiva—he begot; kanyam—daughter; ca—also: yaviyasim—the
youngest of all; arjasvatim—Urjasvati; nama —named.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter, Maharaja Priyavrata married Barhismati, the

daughter of the prajapati named Visvakarma. In her he begot ten


--- Page 53 ---
Text 24] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 47
sons equal to him in beauty, character, magnanimity and other
qualities. He also begot a daughter, the youngest of all, named Ur-
jasvati.

PURPORT

Maharaja Priyavrata not only carried out the order of Lord Brahma by
accepting the duties of government, but also married Barhismati, the
daughter of Viévakarma, one of the prajapatis. Since Maharaja
Priyavrata was fully trained in transcendental knowledge, he could have
returned home and conducted the business of government as a
brahmacari. Instead, however, when he returned to household life, he
accepted a wife also. The principle is that when one becomes a grhastha,
he must live perfectly in that order, which means he must live peacefully
with a wife and children. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s first wife died,
His mother requested Him to marry for a second time. He was twenty
years old and was going to take sannyasa at the age of twenty-four, yet
by the request of His mother, He married. “*As long as I am in household
life,”” He told His mother, “I must have a wife, for household life does
not mean staying in a house. Real household life means living in a house
with a wife.”

Three words in this verse are very significant—u ha vava. These
words are used to express wonder. Priyavrata Maharaja had taken a vow
of renunciation, but accepting a wife and begetting children have
nothing to do with the path of renunciation; these are activities on the
path of enjoyment. It was a source of great wonder, therefore, that
Priyavrata Maharaja, who had followed the path of renunciation, had
now accepted the path of enjoyment.

Sometimes we are criticized because although 1 am a sannyasi, I have
taken part in the marriage ceremonies of my disciples. It must be ex-
plained, however, that since we have started a Krsna conscious society
and since a human society must also have ideal marriages. to correctly es-
tablish an ideal society we must take part in marrying some of its mem-
bers, although we have taken to the path of renunciation. This may be
astonishing to persons who are not very interested in establishing daiva-
varndsrama, the transcendental system of four social orders and four
spiritual orders. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura. however.
wanted to reestablish daiva-varnasrama. In daiva-varnasrama there
cannot be acknowledgement of social status according to birthright


--- Page 54 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
because in Bhagavad-gita it is said that the determining considerations
are guna and karma, one’s qualities and work. It is this daiva-var-
nasrama that should be established all over the world to continue a per-
fect society for Krsna consciousness. This may be astonishing to foolish
critics, but it is one of the functions of a Krsna conscious society.
TEXT 25
आ्रीभरेष्मजिहयत्तवादुमटाोरदिरण्यरेतोधतप्ष्ठ AFAR RN TT
€

इति सवं एवाभ्रि नामानः Ru
agnidhredhmajihva-yajiiabahu-mahavira-hiranyareto-ghrtaprstha-
savana-medhatithi-vitihotra-kavaya iti sarva evagni-namanah.

agnidhra—Agnidhra; idhma-jihva—ldhmajihva; yajiia-bahu—
Yajnabahu; maha-vira—Mahavira; hiranya-retah—Hiranyareta; ghrta-
prstha—Ghrtaprstha; savana—Savana; medha-tithi—Medhatithi; viti-
hotra—Vitihotra; kavayah—and Kavi: iti—thus; sarve—all these;
eva—certainly; agni—of the demigod controlling fire; namanah—
names.

TRANSLATION

The ten sons of Maharaja Priyavrata were named Agnidhra,
Idhmajihva, Yajfiabahu, Mahavira, Hiranyareta, Ghrtaprstha,
Savana, Medhatithi, Vitihotra and Kavi. These are also names of
Agni, the fire-god.

TEXT 26

एतेषां कविम॑दावीरः सवन इति त्रय HERAT AAT -
भावादारभ्य कृतपरिचयाः पारमदंस्ययेाश्रपमभजन्‌ || २६ ॥
etesar kavir mahavirah savana iti traya asann ardhva-retasas ta atma-
vidyayam arbha-bhavad arabhya krta-paricayah paramaharisyam
evasramam abhajan.


--- Page 55 ---
Text 26] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 49

etesam —of these; kavih—Kavi; mahavirah—Mahavira; savanah—
Savana; iti—thus; trayah—three; asan—were; irdhva-retasah—com-
pletely celibate; te —they; atma-vidyayam—in transcendental
knowledge; arbha-bhavat—from childhood; arabhya—beginning; krta-
paricayah—very well versed; paramahamsyam —of the highest
spiritual perfection of human life; eva—certainly; asramam—the
order; abhajan—executed.

TRANSLATION

Three among these ten —namely Kavi, Mahavira and Savana—
lived in complete celibacy. Thus trained in brahmacari life from
the beginning of childhood, they were very conversant with the
highest perfection, known as the paramaharnsa-asrama.

PURPORT

The word ardhva-retasah in this verse is very significant. Urdhva-
retah refers to one who can control sex life and who instead of wasting
semen by discharging it, can use this most important substance ac-
cumulated in the body to enrich the brain. One who can completely con-
trol sex life is able to work wonderfully with his brain, especially in
remembering. Thus students who simply hear Vedic instructions once
from their teacher could remember them verbatim without needing to
read books, which therefore did not exist in former times.

Another significant word is arbha-bhavat, which means “from very
childhood.” Another meaning is “from being very affectionate to
children.” In other words, paramaharisa life is dedicated for the benefit
of others. Just as a father sacrifices many things out of affection for his
son, great saintly persons sacrifice all kinds of bodily comforts for the
benefit of human society. In this connection there is a verse concerning
the six Gosvamis:

tyaktva tirnam asesa-mandala-pati-srenim sada tucchavat

bhiatva dina-ganesakau karunaya kaupina-kanthdsritau
Because of their compassion for the poor fallen souls. the six Gosvamis
gave up their exalted positions as ministers and took vows as mendicants.


--- Page 56 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
Thus minimizing their bodily wants as far as possible, they each accepted
only a loincloth and a begging bowl. Thus they remained in Vrndavana to
execute the orders of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu by compiling and
publishing various Vaisnava literatures.
TEXT 27
तस्मिन्नु ह वा उपशमशीलाः WANT: सकलजीवनिकायायासष्य भगवतो
वासुदेवस्य भीतानां शरणभूतस्य श्रीमच्रणारविन्दाविरतसरणाविगलितपरम्‌-
- ~~

भक्तियोगाजुभादेन परिभावितान्तहंदयाधिगते भगवति सर्वेषां भूतानाम-
त्मभूते प्रत्यगात्मन्येवात्मनस्तादाम्यमविशेषेण समीयुः ॥ २७ ॥
tasminn u ha va upasama-silah paramarsayah sakala-jiva-
nikayavasasya bhagavato vasudevasya bhitanam sarana-bhiitasya
Srimac-carandravindavirata-smaranavigalita- parama-bhakti-yoganu-
bhavena paribhavitantar-hrdayadhigate bhagavati sarvesarn bhistanam
atma-bhiite pratyag-atmany evatmanas tadatmyam avisesena samiyuh.

tasmin—in that paramahamsa-asrama; u—certainly: ha—so cele-
brated: va—indeed: upasama-sildh—in the renounced order of life:
parama-rsayah—the great sages: sakala—all: jiva—of living entities:
nikdya—in total; davasasya—the residence: bhagavatah—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead: wvasudevasya—Lord Vasudeva:
bhitanam—of those afraid of material existence; sarana-bhitasya—the
one who is the only shelter: srimat—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: carana-aravinda—the lotus feet: avirata—-constantly:
smarana—remembering: avigalita—completely uncontaminated:
parama —supreme: bhakti-yoga—of mystic devotional service:
anubhavena —by the prowess: paribhavita—purified: antah—within:
hrdayya—the heart; adhigate — perceived: bhagavati—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead: sarvesam—of all: bhatanam—living entities:
atma-bhiste—situated within the body: pratyak—directly: atmani—
with the Supreme Supersoul: eva—certainly; atmanah—of the self:
tadatmyam —qualitative equality: avisesena—without differences:
samiyuh—realized.


--- Page 57 ---
Text 27] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 51
TRANSLATION

Thus situated in the renounced order from the beginning of
their lives, all three of them completely controlled the activities of
their senses and thus became great saints. They concentrated their
minds always upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the resting place of the totality of living entities
and who is therefore celebrated as Vasudeva. Lord Vasudeva is the
only shelter of those who are actually afraid of material existence.
By constantly thinking of His lotus feet, these three sons of
Maharaja Priyavrata became advanced in pure devotional service.
By the prowess of their devotional service, they could directly per-
ceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in
everyone’s heart as the Supersoul, and realize that there was
qualitatively no difference between themselves and Him.

PURPORT

The paramahariisa stage is the topmost position in renounced life. In
sannyasa, the renounced order, there are four stages— kuticaka,
bahiidaka, parivrajakacarya and paramaharisa. According to the Vedic
system, when one accepts the renounced order, he stays outside his
village in a cottage, and his necessities, especially his food, are supplied
from home. This is called the kuticaka stage. When a sannyast advances
further, he no longer accepts anything from home: instead. he collects
his necessities, especially his food, from many places. This system is
called madhukari, which literally means “the profession of the
bumblebees.” As bumblebees collect honey from many flowers, a little
from each, so a sannyasi should beg from door to door but not accept
very much food from any particular house: he should collect a little bit
from every house. This is called the bahiidaka stage. When a sannyasi is
still more experienced, he travels all over the world to preach the glories
of Lord Vasudeva. He is then known as parivrgjakacarya. The sannyasi
reaches the paramahamsa stage when he finishes his preaching work
and sits down in one place, strictly for the sake of advancing in spiritual
life. An actual paramaharisa is one who completely controls his senses
and engages in the unalloyed service of the Lord. Therefore all three of


--- Page 58 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
these sons of Priyavrata, namely Kavi, Mahavira and Savana, were situ-
ated in the paramaharisa stage from the very beginning. Their senses
could not disturb them, for their senses were completely engaged in
serving the Lord. Therefore the three brothers are described in this
verse as upasama-$ilah. Upasama means “completely subdued.”
Because they completely subdued their senses, they are understood to
have been great sages and saints.

After subduing their senses, the three brothers concentrated their
minds upon the lotus feet of Vasudeva, Lord Krsna. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (7.19), vasudevah sarvam iti. The lotus feet of Vasudeva
are everything. Lord Vasudeva is the reservoir of all living entities.
When this cosmic manifestation is dissolved, all living entities enter the
supreme body of the Lord, Garbhodakasayi Visnu, who merges within
the body of Maha-Visnu. Both of these visnu-tattvas are vasudeva-tat-
tvas, and therefore the great sages Kavi, Mahavira and Savana concen-
trated always upon the lotus feet of Lord Vasudeva, Krsna. In this way
they could understand that the Supersoul within the heart is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. and they could recognize their identity
with Him. The complete description of this realization is that simply by
discharging the unalloyed form of devotional service, one can realize his
self completely. The parama-bhakti-yoga mentioned in this verse means
that a living entity, by dint of unalloyed devotional service, has no other
interest than the service of the Lord, as described in Bhagavad-gita
(vasudevah sarvam iti). By parama-bhakti-yoga, by elevating oneself to
the highest platform of loving service, one can automatically be relieved
from the bodily concept of life and see the Supreme Personality of
Godhead face to face. As confirmed in Brahma-samhita:

premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yam $yamasundaram acintya-guna-svaraparm
govindam adi-purusarm tam ahari bhajami
An advanced devotee, who is known as a sat, or saint, can always see
within his heart the Supreme Personality of Godhead, face to face.
Krsna, Syamasundara, expands Himself by His plenary portion, and thus
a devotee can always see Him within his heart.


--- Page 59 ---
Text 29] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 53
TEXT 28
अन्यस्यामपि जायायां ঈভমঃ पुत्रा आसन्नुत्तमस्तामसो रैवत इति
मन्वन्तराधिपतयः ॥२८ ॥
anyasyam api jayayar trayah putra dsann uttamas tamaso raivata iti
manvantaradhipatayah
anyasyam—other; api—also; jayayam—in the wife; trayah—three;
putrah—sons; asan—there were; uttamah tamasah raivatah—Uttama,
Tamasa and Raivata; iti—thus: manu-antara—of the manvantara
millennium; adhipatayah—rulers.
TRANSLATION
In his other wife, Maharaja Priyavrata begot three sons, named
Uttama, Tamasa and Raivata. All of them later took charge of man-
vantara millenniums.
PURPORT
In every day of Brahma there are fourteen manvantaras. The duration
of one manvantara, the lifespan of one Manu, is seventy-one yugas, and
each yuga is 4,320,000 years. Almost all the Manus selected to rule the
manvantaras came from the family of Maharaja Priyavrata. Three of
them are particularly mentioned herein, namely Uttama, Tamasa and
Raivata.
TEXT 29
(y
CEIEUIAEAY खतनयेष्वथ जगतीपतिजंगतीमवदान्येकादश
परिवत्सराणापन्याहताखिर पुरुषकारसारसम्भ्रतदोदण्डयुगलापीडितमोवीगुण-
स्तनितविरमितधरमंप्रतिपकषो बर्हिष्मत्याश्ाजुदिनमेधमानप्रमोदप्रसरणयौषिण्य -
चीडाप्र्ुषितदासावलोक रुचिरश्वेल्यादिमिः पराभूयमानविवेक इवानव-
TINA इव महामना JES ॥ २९ ॥


--- Page 60 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1

evam upasamadyanesu sva-tanayesv atha jagati-patir jagatim
arbudany ekadasa parivatsaranam avyahatakhila-purusa-kara-sara-
sambhrta-dor-danda-yugalapidita-maurvi-guna-stanita-viramita-
dharma-pratipakso barhismatyas canudinam edhamana-pramoda-
prasarana-yausinya-vrida-pramusita- hasavaloka-rucira-ksvely-adibhih
parabhiyamana-viveka ivanavabudhyamana iva mahamana bubhuje.

evam—thus; upasama-ayanesu—all well qualified; sva-tanayesu—
his own sons; atha—thereafter; jagati-patih—the master of the
universe; jagatim—the universe; arbudani—arbudas (one arbuda
equals 100,000,000); ekadosa—eleven; parivatsarandm—of years;
avyahata—without being interrupted: akhila—universal; purusa-
kara—prowess; sara—strength; sambhrta—endowed with; doh-dan-
dah—of powerful arms; yugala—by the pair; apidita—being drawn;
maurvi-guna—of the bowstring; stanita—by the loud sound;
viramita—defeated; dharma —religious principles; pratipaksah—those
who are against; barhismatyah—of his wife Barhismati; ca—and;
anudinam—daily; edhamdana—increasing; pramoda—pleasing inter-
course; prasarana—amiability; yausinya—feminine behavior; vrida—
by shyness; pramusita—held back; hasa—laughing; avaloka—
glancing; rucira—pleasing; ksveli-adibhih—by exchanges of loving pro-
pensities; parabhityamana—being defeated; wvivekah—his true
knowledge; iva—like; anavabudhyamanah—a less intelligent person;
iwwa—like; mahd-manah—the great soul: bubhuje—ruled.

TRANSLATION

After Kavi, Mahavira and Savana were completely trained in the
paramaharnsa stage of life, Maharaja Priyavrata ruled the universe
for eleven arbudas of years. Whenever he was determined to fix
his arrow upon his bowstring with his two powerful arms, all op-
ponents of the regulative principles of religious life would flee
from his presence in fear of the unparalleled prowess he displayed
in ruling the universe. He greatly loved his wife Barhismati, and
with the increase of days, their exchange of nuptial love also in-
creased. By her feminine behavior as she dressed herself, walked,
got up, smiled, laughed, and glanced about, Queen Barhismati in-


--- Page 61 ---
Text 29] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 55

creased his energy. Thus although he was a great soul, he appeared

lost in the feminine conduct of his wife. He behaved with her just

like an ordinary man, but actually he was a great soul.
PURPORT

In this verse, the word dharma-pratipaksah (‘*‘opponents of religious
principles”) refers not to a particular faith, but to varnasrama-dharma,
the division of society, socially and spiritually, into four 27005
(brahmana, ksatriya, vaiSya and Sidra) and four asramas
(brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha and sannyasa). To maintain
proper social order and help the citizens gradually progress toward the
goal of life—namely spiritual understanding—the principles of ण्ण
nasrama-dharma must be accepted. From this verse, Maharaja
Priyavrata appears to have been so strict in maintaining this institution
of varnasrama-dharma that anyone neglecting it would immediately flee
from his presence as soon as the King warned him by fighting or ad-
ministering light punishment. Indeed, Maharaja Priyavrata would not
have to fight, for simply because of his strong determination, they dared
not disobey the rules and regulations of varpasrama-dharma. It is said
that unless human society is regulated by varndsrama-dharma, it is no
better than a bestial society of cats and dogs. Maharaja Priyavrata,
therefore, strictly maintained varnasrama-dharma by his extraordinary.
unparalleled prowess.

To maintain such a life of strict vigilance, one needs encouragement
from his wife. In the varnasrama-dharma system, certain classes, such
as the brahmanas and sannyasis, do not need encouragement from the
opposite sex. Ksatriyas and grhasthas, however, actually need the en-
couragement of their wives in order to execute their duties. Indeed. a
grhastha or ksatriya cannot properly execute his responsibilities without
the association of his wife. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally admitted
that a grhastha must live with a wife. Ksatriyas were even allowed to
have many wives to encourage them in discharging the duties of govern-
ment. The association of a good wife is necessary in a life of karma and
political affairs. To execute his duties properly, therefore. Maharaja
Priyavrata took advantage of his good wife Barhismati. who was always
very expert in pleasing her great husband by properly dressing herself.


--- Page 62 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
smiling, and exhibiting her feminine bodily features. Queen Barhismati
always kept Maharaja Priyavrata very encouraged, and thus he executed
his governmental duty very properly. In this verse iva has twice been
used to indicate that Maharaja Priyavrata acted exactly like a henpecked
husband and thereby seemed to have lost his sense of human respon-
sibility. Actually, however, he was fully conscious of his position as a
spirit soul, although he seemingly behaved like an acquiescent karmi
husband. Maharaja Priyavrata thus ruled the universe for eleven ar-
budas of years. One arbuda consists of 100,000,000 years, and Maharaja
Priyavrata ruled the universe for eleven such arbudas.
TEXT 30
यावद्बमासयति सुरगिरिमनुपरिकरामन्‌ भगवानादित्यो वुधाततमर्भनेव
~~

प्रतपत्यर्धेनावच्छादयतितद! हि भगवदुपासनोपवितातिपुरुषपरथादस्तद गपिवन्दन्‌
समजवेन रथेन ज्योतिर्मयेन रजनीमपि दिनं करिष्यामीति सपतकृलस्तरणिम
जुपयंकामद्‌ दवितीय इव पतङ्गः ॥ ২০ ॥

yavad avabhasayati sura-girim anuparikraman bhagavan adityo
vasudha-talam ardhenaiva pratapaty ardhendavacchadayati tada hi
bhagavad-upasanopacitati-purusa-prabhavas tad anabhinandan
samajavena rathena jyotirmayena rajanim api dinar karisyamiti sapta-
krt vastaranim anuparyakramad dvitiya iva patarigah.

yavat—so long: avabhasayati—illuminates; sura-girim—the Sumeru
Hill; anuparikraman—by circumambulating; bhagavan—the most
powerful; adityah—sun-god; wvasudha-talam—the lower planetary
system; ardhena—by half; eva—certainly; pratapati—makes dazzling:
ardhena—by half; avacchddayati—covers with darkness; tada—at that
time; hi—certainly; bhagavat-upasand—by worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead: upacita—by satisfying Him perfectly; ati-
purusa—superhuman; prabhavah—influence; tat—that; anabhinan-
dan—without appreciating; samajavena—by equally powerful;
rathena—on a chariot; jyotih-mayena—dazzling: rajanim—night;
api—also; dinam—day: karisyami—I shall make it; iti—thus: sapta-
krt—seven times; vastaranim—exactly following the orbit of the sun;


--- Page 63 ---
Text 30] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 57
anuparyakramat—circamambulated; dvitiyah—second: iva—like:
patarigah—sun.

TRANSLATION

While so excellently ruling the universe, King Priyavrata once
became dissatisfied with the circumambulation of the most power-
ful sun-god. Encircling Sumeru Hill on his chariot, the sun-god il-
luminates all the surrounding planetary systems. However, when
the sun is on the northern side of the hill, the south receives less
light, and when the sun is in the south, the north receives less.
King Priyavrata disliked this situation and therefore decided to
make daylight in the part of the universe where there was night.
He followed the orbit of the sun-god on a brilliant chariot and thus
fulfilled his desire. He could perform such wonderful activities
because of the power he had achieved by worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

There is a Bengali saying which describes that someone is so powerful
that he can make the night day and the day night. That saying is current
because of the prowess of Priyavrata. His activities demonstrate how
powerful he became by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Lord Krsna is known as Yogesvara, the master of all mystic powers. In
Bhagavad-gita (18.78) it is said wherever there is the master of all
mystic powers (yatra yogesvarah krsnah), victory, fortune and all other
opulences are present. Devotional service is so powerful. When a devotee
achieves what he wants to accomplish, it is not by his own mystic power
but by the grace of the master of mystic power. Lord Krsna: by His
grace, a devotee can accomplish wonderful things unimaginable even to
the most powerful scientist.

From the description in this verse, it appears that the sun moves. Ac-
cording to modern astronomers, the sun is fixed in one place. surrounded
by the solar system. but here we find that the sun is not stationary: it is
rotating in a prescribed orbit. This fact is corroborated by Brahma-
samhita (5.52). Yasyajraya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakrah: the sun is
rotating in its fixed orbit in accordance with the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. According to Jyotir Veda, the science of


--- Page 64 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
astronomy in the Vedic literature, the sun moves for six months on the
northern side of the Sumeru Hill and for six months on the southern
side. We have practical experience on this planet that when there is sum-
mer in the north there is winter in the south and vice versa. Modern
materialistic scientists sometimes present themselves as knowing all the
ingredients of the sun, yet they are unable to offer a second sun like
Maharaja Priyavrata’s.

Although Maharaja Priyavrata devised a very powerful chariot as
brilliant as the sun, he had no desire to compete with the sun-god, for a
Vaisnava never wants to supersede another Vaisnava. His purpose was to
give abundant benefits in material existence. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti
Thakura remarks that in the months of April and May the rays of
Maharaja Priyavrata’s brilliant sun were as pleasing as the rays of the
moon, and in October and November, both morning and evening, that
sun provided more warmth than the sunshine. In short, Maharaja
Priyavrata was extremely powerful, and his actions extended his power
in all directions.

TEXT 31
ये লা उ ह तद्रथचरणनेपिकृतपरिस्वातास्ते सप सिन्धव आसन्‌ यत एव
कृताः सप्त शवो द्वीपाः ॥ ३१ ॥
ye va u ha tad-ratha-carana-nemi-krta-parikhatas te sapta sindhava
asan yata eva krtah sapta bhuvo dvipah.

ye—that: va u ha—certainly; tat-ratha—of his chariot; carana—of
the wheels: nemi—by the rims; krta—made: parikhatah—trenches:;
te—those; sapta—seven: sindhavah—oceans:; asan—became: yatah—
because of which: eva—certainly: krtah—were made: sapta—seven:
bhuvah—of the Bhi-mandala; dvipah—islands.

TRANSLATION

When Priyavrata drove his chariot behind the sun, the rims of

his chariot wheels created impressions that later became seven


--- Page 65 ---
Text 32] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 59
oceans, dividing the planetary system known as Bhii-mandala into
seven islands.
PURPORT

Sometimes the planets in outer space are called islands. We have ex-
perience of various types of islands in the ocean, and similarly the
various planets, divided into fourteen lokas, are islands in the ocean of
space. As Priyavrata drove his chariot behind the sun, he created seven
different types of oceans and planetary systems, which altogether are
known as Bhia-mandala, or Bhiloka. In the Gayatri mantra, we chant,
07 bhir bhuvah svah tat savitur varemyam. Above the Bhuloka plane-
tary system is Bhuvarloka, and above that is Svargaloka, the heavenly
planetary system. All these planetary systems are controlled by Savita,
the sun-god. By chanting the Gayatri mantra just after rising early in the
morning, one worships the sun-god.

TEXT 32
নি ৬ ¢ ©

जम्बऽश्षशाल्मरिशक्रोश्चशाकपुप्करसंज्ञस्तेषां परिमाणं पूवंखात्पूसादुत्तर
उत्तरो यथासंख्यं द्विगुणमानेन बहिः समन्तत उपक्लृप्ताः ॥ ३२ ॥
101716८ -1210/60-5617017- ८50 - (०२८१2८० - 50/04 - 79115८7८ -5 व पुनव tesarn
parimanari pitrvasmat pirvasmad uttara uttaro yatha-sankhyarm dvi-
guna-manena bahih samantata upaklptah.

jambi—Jambu: plaksa—Plaksa; salmali—Salmali: ८६० —Kusa:
krauica—Kraunca: saka—Saka; puskara—Puskara: saryiiah—known
as: tesam—of them: parimanam—measurement: pirvasmat pir-
vasmat—from the former: uttarah uttarah—the following: yatha—ac-
cording to: sarnkhyam—number: dvi-guna—twice as much: manena—
with a measure; bahih—outside; samantatah—all around: upakiptah—
produced.

TRANSLATION

The names of the islands are Jamba, Plaksa, Salmali, Kusa,

वपत छ, Saka and Puskara. Each island is twice as large as the one


--- Page 66 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
preceding it, and each is surrounded by a liquid substance, beyond
which is the next island.
PURPORT

The ocean in each planetary system has a different type of liquid. How

they are situated is explained in the next verse.
TEXT 33
्षारोदेश्रसोदसरोदध्रतोदीरोददधिमण्डोद्चद्धोदाः TY जलथयः सस

AWE इवाभ्यन्तर दवीपसमाना एककस्येन यथानुपूवं सप्खपि
बहिद्ीपेषु पृथक्‌परित उपकलिपितास्तेषु जम्ब्वादिषु वर्दिष्मतीपतिरनुवताना
त्मजानाग्रीघेष्मजिद्वयज्ञवाहदिरण्यरेतोधतपृष्ठमेधातिथिवीतिदोत्र संज्ञान्‌ यथा
संख्येनैकेकसिन्नेकमेवाधिपति विदधे ॥ ২২ ॥
ksarodeksu-rasoda-suroda-ghrtoda-ksiroda-dadhi-mandoda-suddhodah
sapta jaladhayah sapta dvipa-parikha ivabhyantara-dvipa-samana
ekaika$yena yathanupirvari saptasv api bahir dvipesu prthak parita
upakalpitas tesu jambv-adisu barhismati-patir anuvratanatmajan
agnidhredhmajihva-yajiiabahu-hiranyareto ghrtaprstha-medhatithi-
vitihotra-samjaan yatha-sarikhyenaikaikasminn ekam evadhi-patirm
vidadhe.

ksara—salt; uda—water: iksu-rasa—the liquid extract from sugar-
cane; uda—water; sura—liquor; uda—water: ghrta—clarified butter;
uda —water; ksira—milk; uda—water; dadhi-manda—emulsified
yogurt: uda— water; Suddha-udah—and drinking water; sapta—seven:
jala-dhayah—oceans; sapta—seven; dvipa—islands; parikhah—
trenches: iva—like; abhyantara—internal; dvipa—islands: samanah—
equal to; eka-ekasyena—one after another; yatha-anupirvam—in
chronological order; saptasu—seven; api—although; bahih—outside;
dvipesu—in islands: prthak—separate: paritah—all around;
upakalpitah—situated; tesu—within them; jambi-adisu—beginning
with Jamba: barhismati—of Barhismati: patih—the husband;
anuvratan—who were actually followers of the father’s principles;


--- Page 67 ---
Text 34] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 61
atma-jan—sons;  agnidhra-idhmajihva-yajiabahu-hiranyaretah-
ghrtaprstha-medhatithi-vitihotra-sarnjiian—named Agnidhra, Idhma-
jihva, Yajiabahu, Hiranyareta, Ghrtaprstha, Medhatithi and Vitihotra;
yatha-sarikhyena—by the same number; eka-ekasmin—in each island:
ekam—one; eva—certainly; adhi-patim—king: vidadhe—he made.
TRANSLATION

The seven oceans respectively contain salt water, sugarcane
juice, liquor, clarified butter, milk, emulsified yogurt, and sweet
drinking water. All the islands are completely surrounded by these
oceans, and each ocean is equal in breadth to the island it sur-
rounds. Maharaja Priyavrata, the husband of Queen Barhismati,
gave sovereignty over these islands to his respective sons, namely
Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajiabahu, Hiranyareta, Ghrtaprstha,
Medhatithi and Vitihotra. Thus they all became kings by the order
of their father.

PURPORT

It is to be understood that all the dvipas, or islands, are surrounded by
different types of oceans, and it is said herein that the breadth of each
ocean is the same as that of the island it surrounds. The length of the
oceans, however, cannot equal the length of the islands. According to
Viraraghava Acarya, the breadth of the first island is 100.000 yojanas.
One yojana equals eight miles, and therefore the breadth of the first is-
land is calculated to be 800,000 miles. The water surrounding it must
have the same breadth, but its length must be different.

TEXT 34

दुहितरं चोजेखतीं नामोशनसे प्रायच्छद्यस्या मासीद्‌ देवयानी नाम
कान्यसुता ॥ ३४ ॥
duhitararh corjasvatim namo$anase prayacchad yasyam asid devayani
nama kavya-suta.

duhitaram—the daughter; ca—also: arjasvatim—Urjasvati: nama —
named; usanase—unto the great sage USana (Sukracarya): prayac-


--- Page 68 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
chat—he gave: yasyam—unto whom: dsit—there was: devayani—
Devayani: nama—named: kavya-suta—the daughter of Sukracarya.
TRANSLATION
King Priyavrata then gave his daughter, Urjasvati, in marriage
to Sukracarya, who begot in her a daughter named Devayani.
TEXT 35
नेव॑विधः पुरुषकार उरुक्रमसख
पुंसां तदङ्घ्रिरजसा जितषड्गुणानाम्‌ |
चित्रं विदूरविगतः सकृदाददीत
यन्नामधेयमधुना स॒ जहाति बन्धम्‌ 11341)
naivam-vidhah purusa-kara urukramasya
puriisam tad-anghri-rajasa jita-sad-gunanam
citram vidiira-vigatah sakrd adadita
yan-namadheyam adhuna sa jahati bandham
na—not: evam-vidhah—Ilike that: purusa-karah—personal in-
fluence: uru-kramasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: puri-
sam —of the devotees: tat-arighri—of His lotus feet: rajasa—by the
dust: jita-sat-gunanam—who have conquered the influence of the six
kinds of material whips: citram —wonderful: vidira-vigatah—the fifth-
grade person. or the untouchable: sakri—only once: adadita—if he ut-
ters; yat—whose: namadheyam—holy name: adhuna—immediately:
sah—he: jahati—gives up: bandham—material bondage.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, a devotee who has taken shelter of the dust from
the lotus feet of the Lord can transcend the influence of the six
material whips —namely hunger, thirst, lamentation, illusion, old
age and death—and he can conquer the mind and five senses.
However, this is not very wonderful for a pure devotee of the Lord
because even a person beyond the jurisdiction of the four castes —


--- Page 69 ---
Text 35] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 63
in other words, an untouchable —is immediately relieved of bon-
dage to material existence if he utters the holy name of the Lord
even once.

PURPORT

Sukadeva Gosvami was speaking to Maharaja Pariksit about the ac-
tivities of King Priyavrata, and since the King might have had doubts
about these wonderful, uncommon activities, Sukadeva Gosvami
reassured him. “My dear King,” he said, "don’t be doubtful about the
wonderful activities of Priyavrata. For a devotee of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, everything is possible because the Lord is also
known as Urukrama.” Urukrama is a name for Lord Vamanadeva, who
performed the wonderful act of occupying the three worlds with three
footsteps. Lord Vamanadeva requested three paces of land from Mahara-
ja Bali, and when Maharaja Bali agreed to grant them. the Lord im-
mediately covered the entire world with two footsteps, and for His third
step He placed His foot upon Bali Maharaja's head. Sri Jayadeva Gosvami
says:

chalayasi vikramane balim adbhuta-vamana

pada-nakha-nira-janita-jana-pavana

kesava dhrta-vamana-ripa jaya jagadisa hare
“All glories to Lord Kesava, who assumed the form of a dwarf. O Lord of
the universe, who takes away everything inauspicious for the devotees!
0 wonderful Vamanadeva! You tricked the great demon Bali Maharaja by
Your steps. The water that touched the nails of Your lotus feet when You
pierced through the covering of the universe purifies all living entities in
the form of the River Ganges.”

Since the Supreme Lord is all-powerful, He can do things that seem
wonderful for a common man. Similarly, a devotee who has taken shelter
at the lotus feet of the Lord can also do wonderful things. unimaginable
to a common man, by the grace of the dust of those lotus feet. Caitanya
Mahaprabhu therefore teaches us to take shelter of the Lord's lotus feet:

ayi nanda-tanuja kinkarar
patitarin mar visame bhavambudhau


--- Page 70 ---
64 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
krpaya tava pada-parikaja-
sthita-dhili-sadrsam vicintaya
"0 son of Nanda Maharaja, I am Your eternal servant, yet somehow or
other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick me up
from this ocean of death and place me as one of the atoms of Your lotus
feet.”” Lord Caitanya teaches us to come in touch with the dust of the
Lord’s lotus feet, for then there will undoubtedly be all success.
Because of the material body, every living entity in material existence
is always disturbed by sad-guna, six whips — hunger, thirst, lamentation,
illusion, invalidity and death. Furthermore, another sad-guna are the
mind and five sense organs. Not to speak of a sanctified devotee, even a
candala, an outcaste, who is untouchable, is immediately freed from
material bondage if he utters the holy name of the Lord even once. Some-
times caste brahmanas argue that unless one changes his body he cannot
be accepted as a brahmana, for since the present body is obtained as a
result of past actions, one who has in the past acted as a brahmana takes
birth in a brahmana family. Therefore, they contend, without such a
brahminical body, one cannot be accepted as a brahmana. Herein it is
said, however, that even vidira-vigata, a candala—a fifth-class un-
touchable—is freed if he utters the holy name even once. Being freed
means that he immediately changes his body. Sanatana Gosvami confirms
this:
yatha kancanatarn yati
karnsyari rasa-vidhanatah
tatha diksa-vidhanena
dvijatvarn jayate nrnam
When a person, even though a candala, is initiated by a pure devotee
into chanting the holy name of the Lord, his body changes as he follows
the instructions of the spiritual master. Although one cannot see how his
body has changed, we must accept, on the grounds of the authoritative
statements of the 3astras, that he changes his body. This is to be under-
stood without arguments. This verse clearly says. sa jahati bandham:
“He gives up his material bondage.” The body is a symbolic representa-
tion of material bondage according to one’s karma. Although sometimes


--- Page 71 ---
Text 36] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 65
we cannot see the gross body changing, chanting the holy name of the
Supreme Lord immediately changes the subtle body, and because the
subtle body changes, the living entity is immediately freed from material
bondage. After all, changes of the gross body are conducted by the subtle
body. After the destruction of the gross body. the subtle body takes the
living entity from his present gross body to another. In the subtle body.
the mind is predominant, and therefore if one’s mind is always absorbed
in remembering the activities or the lotus feet of the Lord, he is to be un-
derstood to have already changed his present body and become purified.
Therefore it is irrefutable that a canddla, or any fallen or lowborn
person, can become a brahmana simply by the method of bona fide
initiation.
TEXT 36
स॒श्वमपरिमितषलपराकम एकदा तु देवर्षिचरणानुशयनाजुपतितगुण-
° (3 = ° = নক
विसग॑संसरगेणानिटैतमिवात्मानं मन्यमान आत्मनिर्वेद इदमाह ।॥२६॥
sa evam aparimita-bala-parakrama ekada tu devarsi-
carananusayananu-patita-guna-visarga-sarmsargenanirvrtam
ivatmanam nanyamana atma-nirveda idam aha.
sah—he (Maharaja Priyavrata): evam—thus: aparimita—un-
paralleled: bala—strength: parakramah—whose influence: ekada—
once upon a time: tu—then; deva-rsi—of the great saint Narada:
carana-anusayana—surrendering unto the lotus feet: anu—thereafter:
patita—fallen down: guna-visarga—with material affairs (created by
the three material modes of nature): samsargena —by connection:
anirvrtam —not satisfied: iva—like: atmanam—himself:
manyamanah—thinking like that: atma—self: nirvedah—possessing
renunciation: idam—this; aha —said.
TRANSLATION
While enjoying his material opulences with full strength and in-
fluence, Maharaja Priyavrata once began to consider that although
he had fully surrendered to the great saint Narada and was actually


--- Page 72 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
on the path of Krsna consciousness, he had somehow become again
entangled in material activities. Thus his mind now became rest-
less, and he began to speak in a spirit of renunciation.
PURPORT
In Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17) it is said:
tyaktva sva-dharmari caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vabhadram abhid amusya kim
ko vartha apto ’bhajatar sva-dharmatah

“One who has forsaken his material occupations to engage in the devo-
tional service of the Lord may sometimes fall down while in an immature
stage, yet there is no danger of his being unsuccessful. On the other
hand. a nondevotee. though fully engaged in occupational duties, does
not gain anything.” If one somehow or other comes to the shelter of a
great Vaisnava, takes to Krsna consciousness because of sentiment or
realization, but in course of time falls down because of immature under-
standing, he is not actually fallen, for his having engaged in Krsna con-
sciousness is a permanent asset. If one falls down, therefore, his progress
might be checked for a certain time. but it will again become manifest at
an opportune moment. Although Priyavrata Maharaja was serving ac-
cording to the instructions of Narada Muni meant for going back home,
back to Godhead. he returned to material affairs at the request of his
father. In due course of time, however. his consciousness for serving
Krsna reawakened by the grace of his spiritual master, Narada.

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (6.41), Sucinam srimatarn gehe yoga-
bhrasto ’bhijayate. One who falls down from the process of bhakti-yoga
is again offered the opulence of the demigods, and after enjoying such
material opulence, he is given a chance to take birth in a noble family of
a pure brahmana, or in a rich family, to be given the chance to revive his
Krsna consciousness. This actually happened in the life of Priyavrata: he
is a most glorious example of this truth. In due course of time, he no
longer wanted to enjoy his material opulences and his wife, kingdom and
sons: instead, he wanted to renounce them all. Therefore, after having


--- Page 73 ---
Text 37] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 67
described the material opulences of Maharaja Priyavrata, Sukadeva
Gosvami, in this verse, describes his tendency for renunciation.

The words devarsi-carananusayana indicate that Maharaja
Priyavrata, having fully surrendered to the great sage Devarsi Narada,
was strictly following all the devotional processes and regulative prin-
ciples under his direction. In regard to strictly following the regulative
principles, Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says: dandavat-pra-
namas tan anupatitah. By immediately offering obeisances (dandavat)
unto the spiritual master and by strictly following his directions, the stu-
dent becomes advanced. Maharaja Priyavrata was doing all these things
regularly.

As long as one is in the material world, he has to be under the in-
fluence of the modes of material nature (guna-visarga). It is not that
Maharaja Priyavrata was freed from material influence because he
possessed all material opulences. In this material world, both the very
poor man and the very rich man are under material influences, for both
wealth and poverty are creations of the modes of material nature. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.27), prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani
sarvasah. According to the modes of material nature we acquire. the
material nature gives us facility for material enjoyment.

TEXT 37
अहो असाप्बनुष्ठितं यदभिनिवेशितोऽहमिन्द्रियैरविद्यारचितविषमविषयान्ध-
कूपे तदलमलमघुष्या वनिताया विनोदं मां धिग्धिगिति गरहंयाश्कार
॥ ২৩।॥
aho asadhv anusthitari yad abhinivesito 30772 indriyair avidya-racita-
visama-visayandha-kipe tad alam alam amusya vanitaya vinoda-
mrgarm mar dhig dhig iti garhayam cakara.

aho—alas; asadhu—not good; anusthitam—executed: yat—because:
abhinivesitah—being completely absorbed: aham—I: indriyaih—for
sense gratification; avidya—by nescience: racita—made: visama—
causing distress; visaya—sense gratification: andha-kipe—in the dark
well; tat—that: alam —insignificant: alam—of no importance:


--- Page 74 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
amusyah—of that; vanitayah—wife: wvinoda-mrgam—just like a
dancing monkey: mdm—unto me; dhik—all condemnation; dhik—all
condemnation; iti—thus; garhayam—criticism; cakara—he did.
TRANSLATION

The King thus began criticizing himself: Alas, how condemned I
have become because of my sense gratification! I have now fallen
into material enjoyment, which is exactly like a covered well. I
have had enough! I am not going to enjoy any more. Just see how I
have become like a dancing monkey in the hands of my wife.
Because of this, I am condemned.

PURPORT

How condemned is the advancement of material knowledge can be un-
derstood from the behavior of Maharaja Priyavrata. He performed such
wonderful acts as creating another sun, which shined during the night,
and creating a chariot so great that its wheels formed vast oceans. These
activities are so great that modern scientists cannot even imagine how
such things can be done. Maharaja Priyavrata acted very wonderfully in
the material field of activities, but because he was dealing in sense
gratification —ruling his kingdom and dancing to the indications of his
beautiful wife—he personally condemned himself. When we think about
this example of Maharaja Priyavrata, we can just consider how degraded
is the modern civilization of materialistic advancement. Modern so-called
scientists and other materialists are very satisfied because they can con-
struct great bridges, roads and machines, but such activities are nothing
comparable to those of Maharaja Priyavrata. If Maharaja Priyavrata
could condemn himself in spite of his wonderful activities, how con-
demned we are in our so-called advancement of material civilization. We
can conclude that such advancement has nothing to do with the problems
of the living entity entangled within this material world. Unfortunately,
modern man does not understand his entanglement and how condemned
he is, nor does he know what kind of body he is going to have in the next
life. From a spiritual point of view, a great kingdom. beautiful wife and
wonderful material activities are all impediments to spiritual advance-
ment. Maharaja Priyavrata had served the great sage Narada sincerely.


--- Page 75 ---
Text 38] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 69
Therefore even though he had accepted material opulences, he could not
be deviated from his own task. He again became Krsna conscious. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:
nehabhikrama-naso ’sti
pratyavayo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya
trayate mahato bhayat
“In devotional service there is no loss or diminution, and even a small
service rendered in devotional life is sufficient to save one from the
greatest danger.” (Bg. 2.40) Such renunciation as Maharaja Priyavrata’s
is possible only by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Generally when people are powerful or when they have a beautiful wife,
a beautiful home and material popularity, they become more and more
entangled. Priyavrata Maharaja, however, having been completely
trained by the great sage Narada, revived his Krsna consciousness in
spite of all impediments.

TEXT 38
परदेकताप्रसादाधिगतात्मप्रत्यवमरशे AFIT: AT इमां यथादायं
विभज्य शक्तमोगां च महिषीं खतकमिव सहमहाबिभूतिमपदाय खयं

भ

निदितनिर्ेदो हदि गृदीतहरिविहारालुभावो भगवतो नारदस्य पदवीं
पुनरेबाडससार ॥ ২৫ ॥
para-devata-prasadadhigatatma-pratyavamarsenanupravrttebhyah
putrebhya imam yatha-dayar vibhajya bhukta-bhogar ca mahisirn
mrtakam iva saha maha-vibhitim apahaya svayar nihita-nirvedo hrdi
grhita-hari-viharanubhavo bhagavato naradasya padavim punar
evanusasara.

para-devata—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: prasada—by
the mercy; adhigata—obtained; datma-pratyavamarsena—by self-
realization: anupravrttebhyah—who exactly follow his path:


--- Page 76 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
putrebhyah—unto his sons; imam—this earth; yatha-dayam—exactly
according to the inheritance: vibhajya—dividing: bhukta-bhogam—
whom he enjoyed in so many ways: ca—also; mahisim—the Queen;
mrtakam iva—exactly like a dead body; saha —with; maha-vibhiatim—
great opulence; apahdya—giving up; svayam—himself; nihita —per-
fectly taken to: nirvedah—renunciation; hrdi—in the heart: grhita—ac-
cepted; hari—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: vihara—
pastimes: anubhdvah—in such an attitude; bhagavatah—of the great
saintly person: ndaradasya—of Saint Narada: padavim—position;
punah—again; eva—certainly; anusasira—began to follow.
TRANSLATION

By the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Maharaja
Priyavrata reawakened to his senses. He divided all his earthly
possessions among his obedient sons. He gave up everything, in-
cluding his wife, with whom he had enjoyed so much sense
gratification, and his great and opulent kingdom, and he com-
pletely renounced all attachment. His heart, having been cleansed,
became a place of pastimes for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Thus he was able to return to the path of Krsna con-
sciousness, spiritual life, and resume the position he had attained
by the grace of the great saint Narada.

PURPORT

As enunciated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in His Siksastaka, ceto-
darpana-marjanarn bhava-mahadavagni-nirvapanam: as soon as one’s
heart is cleansed, the blazing fire of material existence is immediately ex-
tinguished. Our hearts are meant for the pastimes of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. This means that one should be fully Krsna con-
scious, thinking of Krsna, as He Himself advises (man-mana bhava
mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru). This should be our only busi-
ness. One whose heart is not clean cannot think of the transcendental
pastimes of the Supreme Lord, but if one can once again place the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in his heart, he very easily becomes


--- Page 77 ---
Text 38] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 71
qualified to renounce material attachment. Mayavadi philosophers, yogis
and [76775 try to give up this material world simply by saying, brahma
satya jagan mithya: “This world is false. There is no use of it. Let us
take to Brahman.” Such theoretical knowledge will not help us. If we
believe that Brahman is the real truth, we have to place within our hearts
the lotus feet of Sri Krsna, as Maharaja Ambarisa did (sa vai manah
krsna-padaravindayoh). One has to fix the lotus feet of the Lord within
his heart. Then he gets the strength to be freed from material
entanglement.

Maharaja Priyavrata was able to give up his opulent kingdom, and he
also gave up the association of his beautiful wife as if she were a dead
body. However beautiful one’s wife and however attractive her bodily
features, one is no longer interested in her when her body is dead. We
praise a beautiful woman for her body, but that same body, when bereft
of a spirit soul, is no longer interesting to any lusty man. Maharaja
Priyavrata was so strong, by the grace of the Lord, that even though his
beautiful wife was alive, he could give up her association exactly like one
who is forced to give up the association of a dead wife. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu said:

na dhanam na jana na sundarim
kavitarm va jagadisa kamaye
mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaitukt tvayi
“0 almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desire
beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want
Your causeless devotional service birth after birth.” For one who desires
to advance in spiritual life, attachment to material opulence and attach-
ment to a beautiful wife are two great impediments. Such attachments
are condemned even more than suicide. Therefore anyone desiring to
cross beyond material nescience must, by the grace of Krsna. be freed
from attachment to women and money. When Maharaja Priyavrata
became completely free from these attachments. he could again
peacefully follow the principles instructed by the great sage Narada.


--- Page 78 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
TEXT 39
तस ह वा एते शछोकाः--
प्रियव्रतछृतं ক্ষ ক্ষ चु दुर्याद्विनेश्वरम्‌ |
a .
यो नेमिविभरेररूतेच्छायां घन्‌ सप्त वारिधीन्‌ 13201
tasya ha va ete slokah—
priyavrata-krtari karma
ko nu kuryad vinesvaram
yo nemi-nimnair akaroc
chayari ghnan sapta varidhin

tasya—his; ha va—certainly; ete—all these; Slokah—verses;
priyavrata—by King Priyavrata; krtam—done; karma—activities;
kah—who; nu—then; kuryat—can execute; vind —without; iSvaram—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yah—one who; nemi—of the rim
of the wheels of his chariot; nimnaih—by the depressions; akarot—
made;  chayam—darkness;  ghnan—dissipating;  sapta—seven;
varidhin —oceans.

TRANSLATION

There are many famous verses regarding Maharaja Priyavrata’s
activities:

“No one but the Supreme Personality of Godhead could do what
Maharaja Priyavrata has done. Maharaja Priyavrata dissipated the
darkness of night, and with the rims of his great chariot, he exca-
vated seven oceans.’

PURPORT

There are many excellent verses, famous all over the world, con-
cerning the activities of Maharaja Priyavrata. He is so celebrated that his
activities are compared to those of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Sometimes a sincere servant and devotee of the Lord is also called
bhagavan. Sri Narada is called bhagavan, and Lord Siva and Vyasadeva
are also sometimes called bhagavan. This designation, bhagavan, is
sometimes conferred upon a pure devotee by the grace of the Lord so that


--- Page 79 ---
Text 40] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 73
he will be very highly esteemed. Maharaja Priyavrata was such a devo-
tee.
TEXT 40
भूसंस्थानं कृतं येन सरिदिखिनादिभिः |
सीमा च भूतनिैत्य द्वीपे द्वीपे বিমাবাহাঃ ॥४०॥
bhii-samsthanam krtar yena
sarid-giri-vanadibhih
sima ca bhita-nirvrtyai
dvipe dvipe vibhagasah

bhi-samsthanam —the situation of the earth; krtam—done; yena—
by whom: sarit—by rivers; giri—by hills and mountains; vana-
adibhih—by forests and so on; sima—boundaries; ca—also: bhiita—of
different nations; nirvrtyai—to stop fighting; dvipe dvipe—on the
various islands; vibhagaSah—separately.

TRANSLATION

“To stop the quarreling among different peoples, Maharaja
Priyavrata marked boundaries at rivers and at the edges of moun-
tains and forests so that no one would trespass upon another’s pro-
perty.”

PURPORT

The example set by Maharaja Priyavrata in marking off different
states is still followed. As indicated here, different classes of men are
destined to live in different areas, and therefore the boundaries of
various tracts of land, which are described here as islands. should be
defined by different rivers, forests and hills. This is also mentioned in
relation to Maharaja Prthu, who was born from the dead body of his
father by the manipulation of great sages. Maharaja Prthu’s father was
very sinful, and therefore a black man called Nisada was first born from
his dead body. The Naisada race was given a place in the forest because
by nature they are thieves and rogues. As animals are given places in
various forests and hills, men who are like animals are also destined to


--- Page 80 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 1
live there. One cannot be promoted to civilized life unless one comes to
Krsna consciousness, for by nature one is destined to live in a particular
situation according to one’s karma and association with the modes of
nature. If men want to live in harmony and peace, they must take to
Krsna consciousness, for they cannot achieve the highest standard while
absorbed in the bodily concept of life. Maharaja Priyavrata divided the
surface of the globe into different islands so that each class of men would
live peacefully and not clash with the others. The modern idea of nation-
hood has gradually developed from the divisions made by Maharaja
Priyavrata.
TEXT 41
ক ৬ ক ৬ C=
সীম दिव्यं मानुषं च महित्वं कमेयोगजम्‌ |
= ५
यश्चक्रे निरयौपम्यं पुरुषानुजनप्रियः 1220
bhaumarm 010 077 manusam ca
77101800078 karma-yogajam
yas cakre nirayaupamyari
purusanujana-priyah
bhaumam—of the lower planets; divyam—heavenly; manusam—of
human beings; ca—also; mahitvam—all opulences: karma —by fruitive
activities; yoga—by mystic power; jam—born; yah—one who; cakre—
did: niraya—with hell; aupamyam—comparison or equality; purusa —
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: anujana—to the devotee:
priyah—most dear.
TRANSLATION
“As a great follower and devotee of the sage Narada, Maharaja
Priyavrata considered hellish the opulences he had achieved by
dint of fruitive activities and mystic power, whether in the lower
or heavenly planetary systems or in human society.”
PURPORT
Srila Rapa Gosvami has said that the position of a devotee is so
superexcellent that a devotee does not consider any material opulence


--- Page 81 ---
Text 41] The Activities of Maharaja Priyavrata 75
worth having. There are different types of opulences on earth, in the
heavenly planets and even in the lower planetary system, known as
Patiala. A devotee, however, knows that they are all material, and conse-
quently he is not at all interested in them. As stated in Bhagavad-gita,
param drstva nivartate. Sometimes yogis and jiidnis voluntarily give up
all material opulences to practice their system of liberation and taste
spiritual bliss. However, they frequently fall down because artificial
renunciation of material opulences cannot endure. One must have a
superior taste in spiritual life; then he can give up material opulence.
Maharaja Priyavrata had already tasted spiritual bliss, and therefore he
had no interest in any of the material achievements available in the
lower, higher or middle planetary systems.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Fifth Canto, First Chapter,
of Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Activities of Maharaja
Priyavrata.”


--- Page 82 ---
CHAPTER TWO
The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra
In this chapter, the character of Maharaja Agnidhra is described. When
Maharaja Priyavrata went off for spiritual realization, his son Agnidhra
became the ruler of Jambudvipa, in accordance with Maharaja
Priyavrata’s instructions, and maintained its residents with the same
affection a father feels for his sons. Once Maharaja Agnidhra desired to
have a son, and therefore he entered a cave of Mandara Mountain to
practice austerity. Understanding his desire, Lord Brahma sent a celestial
girl named Parvacitti to Agnidhra’s hermitage. After dressing herself
very attractively, she presented herself before him with various
feminine movements, and Agnidhra was naturally attracted to her. The
girl’s actions, expressions, smile, sweet words and moving eyes were
fascinating to him. Agnidhra was expert in flattery. Thus he attracted the
celestial girl, who was pleased to accept him as her husband because of
his mellifluous words. She enjoyed royal happiness with Agnidhra for
many years before returning to her abode in the heavenly planets. In her
womb Agnidhra begot nine sons —Nabhi, Kimpurusa, Harivarsa, Ilavrta.
Ramyaka, Hiranmaya, Kuru, Bhadrasva and Ketumala. He gave them
nine islands with names corresponding to theirs. Agnidhra, however, his
senses unsatisfied, was always thinking of his celestial wife, and
therefore in his next life he was born in her celestial planet. After the
death of Agnidhra, his nine sons married nine daughters of Meru named
Merudevi, Pratirapa, Ugradamstri, Lata, Ramya, Syama, Nari, Bhadra
and Devaviti.
TEXT 1
श्रीद्युक उवाच

एवं पितरि মফ্গন্ধল तदनुशासने वर्तमान ARE जम्बृद्धीपौकसः

মলা ओरसकद्धर्मा वेश्वमाणः पर्यगोपायत्‌ || १ ॥
77


--- Page 83 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
sri-suka uvaca

evar pitari sampravrtte tad-anusasane vartamana agnidhro
Jjambudvipaukasah praja aurasavad dharmaveksamanah paryagopayat.

sri-sukah —Sri Sukadeva Gosvami; wuvdca—said; evam—thus;
pitari—when his father; sampravrtte—took to the path of liberation;
tat-anusasane—according to his order; vartamanah—situated;
agnidhrah—King Agnidhra; jambi-dvipa-okasah—the inhabitants of
Jambudvipa; prajah—citizens; aurasa-vat—as if they were his sons;
dharma —religious principles; aveksamanah—strictly observing;
paryagopayat—completely protected.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After his father, Maharaja
Priyavrata, departed to follow the path of spiritual life by un-
dergoing austerities, King Agnidhra completely obeyed his order.
Strictly observing the principles of religion, he gave full protec-
tion to the inhabitants of Jambudvipa as if they were his own
begotten sons.

PURPORT

Following the instruction of his father, Maharaja Priyavrata, Maharaja
Agnidhra ruled the inhabitants of Jambadvipa according to religious
principles. These principles are exactly contrary to the modern principles
of faithlessness. As clearly stated here, the King protected the citizens
the way a father protects his begotten children. How he ruled the citizens
is also described here—dharmaveksamanah, strictly according to
religious principles. It is the duty of the executive head of a state to see
that the citizens strictly follow religious principles. The Vedic religious
principles begin with varpasrama-dharma, the duties of the four varnas
and four asramas. Dharma refers to principles given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The first principle of dharma, or religion, is to
observe the duties of the four orders as enjoined by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. According to people’s qualities and activities,
society should be divided into brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and Sidras
and then again into brahmacaris, grhasthas, vanaprasthas and san-
nyasis. These are religious principles, and it is the duty of the head of


--- Page 84 ---
Text 2] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 79
state to see that his citizens strictly follow them. He should not merely act
officially; he should be like a father who is always a well-wisher of his
sons. Such a father strictly observes whether his sons are performing
their duties, and sometimes he also punishes them.

Just contrary to the principles mentioned here, the presidents and
chief executives in the age of Kali are simply tax collectors who do not
care whether religious principles are observed. Indeed, the chief execu-
tives of the present day introduce all kinds of sinful activity, especially
illicit sex, intoxication, animal killing and gambling. These sinful ac-
tivities are now very prominently manifested in India. Although a
hundred years ago these four principles of sinful life were strictly
prohibited in the families of India, they have now been introduced into
every Indian family; therefore they cannot follow religious principles. In
contrast to the principles of the kings of old, the modern state is con-
cerned only with propaganda for levying taxes and is no longer respon-
sible for the spiritual welfare of the citizens. The state is now callous to
religious principles. Srimad-Bhagavatam predicts that in Kali-yuga the
government will be entrusted with dasyu-dharma, which means the oc-
cupational duty of rogues and thieves. Modern heads of state are rogues
and thieves who plunder the citizens instead of giving them protection.
Rogues and thieves plunder without regard for law. but in this age of
Kali, as stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, the lawmakers themselves
plunder the citizens. The next prediction to be fulfilled, which is already
coming to pass. is that because of the sinful activities of the citizens
and the government. rain will become increasingly scarce.
Gradually there will be complete drought and no production of food
grains. People will be reduced to eating flesh and seeds, and many good.
spiritually inclined people will have to forsake their homes because they
will be too harassed by drought, taxation and famine. The Krsna con-
sciousness movement is the only hope to save the world from such
devastation. It is the most scientific and authorized movement for the ac-
tual welfare of the whole human society.

TEXT 2
स॒ च कदाचित्पिठलोककामः सुररनिताकटात्ल द्रोण्यां भगवन्तं विश्च-
gut पतिमाश्रतपरिचर्योपकरण आत्मैकाग्येण तपस्ब्याराधयाम्बभूव ॥ २ ॥


--- Page 85 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
sa ca kadacit pitrloka-kamah sura-vara-vanitakridacala-dronyarm
bhagavantam visva-srjam patim abhrta-paricaryopakarana
atmaikagryena tapasvy aradhayam babhiiva.

sah—he (King Agnidhra); ca—also; kadacit—once upon a time; pitr-
loka —the Pitrloka planet; kamah—desiring; sura-vara—of the great
demigods; vanita—the women; akrida—the place of pastimes; acala-
dronyam—in one valley of the Mandara Hill; bhagavantam—unto the
most powerful (Lord Brahma): visva-srjam —of personalities who have
created this universe; patim—the master; abhrta—having collected;
paricarya-upakaranah—ingredients for worship; atma—of the mind;
eka-agryena—with full attention; tapasvi—one who executes austerity;
aradhayam babhiva—became engaged in worshiping.

TRANSLATION

Desiring to get a perfect son and become an inhabitant of
Pitrloka, Maharaja Agnidhra once worshiped Lord Brahma, the
master of those in charge of material creation. He went to a valley
of Mandara Hill, where the damsels of the heavenly planets come
down to stroll. There he collected garden flowers and other neces-
sary paraphernalia and then engaged in severe austerities and
worship.

PURPORT

The King became pitrloka-kama, or desirous of being transferred to
the planet named Pitrloka. Pitrloka is mentioned in Bhagavad-gita
(yanti deva-vrata devan pitin yanti pitr-vratih). To go to this planet,
one needs very good sons who can make offerings to Lord Visnu and then
offer the remnants to their forefathers. The purpose of the sraddha
ceremony is to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu,
so that after pleasing Him one may offer prasada to one’s forefathers and
in this way make them happy. The inhabitants of Pitrloka are generally
men of the karma-kandiya, or fruitive activities category, who have
been transferred there because of their pious activities. They can stay
there as long as their descendants offer them visnu-prasada. Everyone in
heavenly planets such as Pitrloka, however, must return to earth after


--- Page 86 ---
Text 2] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 81
exhausting the effects of his pious acts. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(9.21), ksine punye martya-lokam visanti: persons who perform pious
acts are transferred to higher planets, but when the effects of their pious
acts are over, they are again transferred to earth.

Since Maharaja Priyavrata was a great devotee, how could he have
begotten a son who desired to be transferred to Pitrloka? Lord Krsna
says, pitrn yanti pitf-vratah: persons who desire to go to Pitrloka are
transferred there. Similarly, yanti mad-ydjino ’pi mam: persons who
desire to be transferred to the spiritual planets, Vaikunthalokas, can also
go there. Since Maharaja Agnidhra was the son of a Vaisnava, he should
have desired to be transferred to the spiritual world, Vaikunthaloka.
Why, then, did he desire to be transferred to Pitrloka? I'n answer to this,
Gosvami Giridhara, one of the Bhagavatam commentators, remarks that
Agnidhra was born when Maharaja Priyavrata was infatuated by lusty
desires. This may be accepted as a fact because sons are begotten with
different mentalities according to the time of their conception. According
to the Vedic system, therefore, before a child is conceived, the
garbhadhana-samskara is performed. This ceremony molds the men-
tality of the father in such a way that when he plants his seed in the
womb of his wife, he will beget a child whose mind will be completely
saturated with a devotional attitude. At the present moment, however,
there are no such garbhadhana-samskdaras, and therefore people
generally have a lusty attitude when they beget children. Especially in
this age of Kali, there are no garbhadhana ceremonies: everyone enjoys
sex with his wife like a cat or dog. Therefore according to $astric injunc-
tions, almost all the people of this age belong to the sitdra category. Of
course, although Maharaja Agnidhra had a desire to be transferred to
Pitrloka, this does not mean that his mentality was that of a Sidra; he
was a ksatriya.

Maharaja Agnidhra desired to be transferred to Pitrloka, and
therefore he needed a wife because anyone desiring to be transferred to
Pitrloka must leave behind a good son to offer yearly pinda, or prasada
from Lord Visnu. To have a good son, Maharaja Agnidhra wanted a wife
from a family of demigods. Therefore he went to Mandara Hill. where
the women of the demigods generally come, to worship Lord Brahma. In
Bhagavad-gita (4.12) it is said, kanksantah karmanan siddhim yajanta
tha devatah: materialists who want quick results in the material world


--- Page 87 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
worship demigods. This is also confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam. Sri-
aiSvarya-prajepsavah: those who desire beautiful wives, substantial
wealth and many sons worship the demigods, but an intelligent devotee,
instead of being entangled by the happiness of this material world in the
form of a beautiful wife, material opulence and children, desires to be
immediately transferred back home, back to Godhead. Thus he worships
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu.
TEXT 3
ne <

तदुपलभ्य भगवानादिपुरुषः सदसि गायन्तीं पूयचित्ति नामाप्सरसम-
भियापयामास ।।२॥
tad upalabhya bhagavan adi-purusah sadasi gayantim 00700018187
namapsarasam abhiyapayam asa.

tat—that; upalabhya—understanding; bhagavan—the most power-
ful; adi-purusah—the first created being within this universe; sadasi —
in his assembly; gayantim—dancing girl; pirvacittim—Parvacitti;
nama—named; apsarasam—the heavenly dancing girl; abhiyapayam
asa—sent down.

TRANSLATION

Understanding King Agnidhra’s desire, the first and most
powerful created being of this universe, Lord Brahma, selected the
best of the dancing girls in his assembly, whose name was Pur-
vacitti, and sent her to the King.

PURPORT

In this verse, the words bhagavan adi-purusah are significant.
Bhagavan adi-purusah is Lord Krsna. Govindam adi-purusam tam
aha bhajami. Lord Krsna is the original person. In Bhagavad-gita, He
is also addressed by Arjuna as purusam adyam, the original person, and
He is called Bhagavan. In this verse, however, we see that Lord Brahma
is described as bhagavan adi-purusah. The reason he is called bhagavan


--- Page 88 ---
Text 4] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 83
is that he fully represents the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is the
first-born creature in this universe. Lord Brahma could understand
Maharaja Agnidhra’s desire because he is as powerful as Lord Visnu. As
Lord Visnu, situated as Paramatma, can understand the desire of the
living entity, so Lord Brahma can also understand the living entity’s
desire, for Visnu, as a via medium, informs him. As stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.1.1), tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye: Lord Visnu in-
forms Lord Brahma of everything from within his heart. Because
Maharaja Agnidhra specifically worshiped Lord Brahma, Lord Brahma
was pleased, and he sent Parvacitti, the Apsara, to satisfy him.
TEXT 4

साच तदाश्रमोपवनमतिरमणीयं विविधनिबिडविटपिविटपनिकरसंश्लिषटपुरटल-
तारूटस्थलबिदद्गमपिथुनैः प्रोच्य पानश्चुतिभिः प्रतिबोध्यपानसणिलङुस्कुटकार-
ग्डवकलहंसादिमिविंचित्रषचपद्ूनितामलजलाशयकमलाकरसुप बभ्राम ॥४॥
sa ca tad-asramopavanam ati-ramaniyam vividha- nibida-vitapi-vitapa-
nikara-samslista-purata-lataridha-sthala-viharngama-mithunaih
procyamana-srutibhih pratibodhyamana-salila-kukkuta-karandava-
kalaharsadibhir vicitram upakijitamala-jalasaya-kamalakaram
upababhrama.

sa—she (Pirvacitti); ca—also; tat—of Maharaja Agnidhra:
asrama—of the place of meditation: upavanam—the park: ati—very:
ramaniyam—beautiful; vividha —varieties of; nibida—dense: vitapi—
trees; vitapa—of branches and twigs: nikara—masses: sarislista—at-
tached; purata—golden: lata—with creepers: aridha—going high:
sthala-viharigama—of land birds; mithunaih—with pairs: pro-
cyamana—vibrating; Srutibhih —pleasing sounds: pratibodhyamana—
responding: salila-kukkuta—water fowl: karandava—ducks: kala-
harisa —with various kinds of swans; adibhih—and so on: vicitram—
variegated: upakijita—resounding with the vibration: amala—clear:
jala-asaya—in the lake; kamala-akaram—the source of lotus Howers:
upababhrama —began to walk in.


--- Page 89 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
TRANSLATION

The Apsara sent by Lord Brahma began strolling in a beautiful
park near the place where the King was meditating and
worshiping. The park was beautiful because of its dense green
foliage and golden creepers. There were pairs of varied birds such
as peacocks, and in a lake there were ducks and swans, all vibrating
very sweet sounds. Thus the park was magnificently beautiful
because of the foliage, the clear water, the lotus flowers and the
sweet singing of various kinds of birds.

TEXT 5

तस्याः सुकितिगमनपदविन्यासगतिविलासायाश्रानुपदं खणखणायमानरुचिर!
चरणायरणखनणुपाकण्य नरदेवकुमारः समाधियोगेनापीदितनयननरिन-
ृङलयुगर मीषद्धिकचरय व्यचष्ट ॥५॥

tasyah sulalita-gamana-pada-vinyasa-gati-vilasayas canupadam
khana-khanayamana-rucira-caranabharana-svanam upakarnya
naradeva-kumarah samadhi-yogenamilita-nayana-nalina-mukula-
yugalam isad vikacayya vyacasta.

tasyah—of her (Parvacitti): sulalita—in a very beautiful; gamana—
movements; pada-vinyasa—with styles of walking; gati—in the
progression; vilasayah—whose pastime; ca—also; anupadam —with
every step; khana-khanayamana—making a tinkling sound; rucira—
very pleasing; carana-abharana—of the ornaments on the feet;
svanam—the sound; updakarnya—hearing; naradeva-kumarah—the
Prince; samadhi—in ecstasy; yogena—by controlling the senses;
amilita—half-open; nayana—eyes; nalina—of lotus; mukula—buds;
yugalam—like a pair; isat—slightly; vikacayya—opening; vyacasta—
saw.

TRANSLATION

As Piuirvacitti passed by on the road in a very beautiful style and
mood of her own, the pleasing ornaments on her ankles tinkled
with her every step. Although Prince Agnidhra was controlling his


--- Page 90 ---
Text 5] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 85
senses, practicing yoga with half-open eyes, he could see her with
his lotuslike eyes, and when he heard the sweet tinkling of her
bangles, he opened his eyes slightly more and could see that she
was just nearby.

PURPORT

It is said that yogis always think of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead within their hearts. Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa
pasyanti yam yoginah (Bhag. 12.13.1). The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is always observed by yogis who practice controlling the
venomous senses. As recommended in Bhagavad-gita, yogis should prac-
tice sampreksya nasikagram, keeping their eyes half-open. If the eyes
are closed completely, there will be a tendency to sleep. So-called yogis
sometimes practice a fashionable form of yoga by closing their eyes and
meditating, but we have actually seen such so-called yogis sleeping and
snoring while meditating. This is not the practice of yoga. To actually
practice yoga, one should keep his eyes half-open and gaze at the tip of
his nose.

Although Agnidhra, the son of Priyavrata, was practicing mystic yoga
and trying to control his senses, the tinkling sound of Purvacitti's ankle
bells disturbed his practice. Yoga indriya-sarmyamah: actual yoga prac-
tice means controlling the senses. One must practice mystic yoga, to con-
trol the senses, but the sense control of a devotee who fully engages in
the service of the Lord with his purified senses (hrsikena hrsikesa-
sevanam) can never be disturbed. Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati
therefore stated, durdantendriya-kala-sarpa-patali protkhata-darnstra-
yate (Caitanya-candramrta 5). The practice of yoga is undoubtedly
good because it controls the senses, which are like venomous serpents.
When one engages in devotional service, however. completely employing
all the activities of the senses in the service of the Lord. the venomous
quality of the senses is completely nullified. It is explained that a serpent
is to be feared because of its poison fangs, but if those fangs are broken.
the serpent, although it seems fearsome, is not at all dangerous. Devo-
tees, therefore, may see hundreds and thousands of beautiful women
with fascinating bodily movements and gestures but not be allured.
whereas such women would make ordinary yogis fall. Even the advanced
yogi Visvamitra broke his mystic practice to unite with Menaka and


--- Page 91 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
beget a child known as Sakuntala. The practice of mystic yoga, therefore,
is not sufficiently strong to control the senses. Another example is Prince
Agnidhra, whose attention was drawn to the movements of Purvacitti,
the Apsara, simply because he heard the tinkling of her ankle bells. In
the same way that Viévamitra Muni was attracted by the tinkling bangles
of Menaka, Prince Agnidhra, upon hearing the tinkling bangles of Par-
vacitti, immediately opened his eyes to see her beautiful movements as
she walked. The prince was also very handsome. As described herein, his
eyes were just like the buds of lotus flowers. As he opened his lotuslike
eyes, he could immediately see that the Apsara was present by his side.
TEXT 6
. )
तामेवाविदूरे मघुकरीभिव सुमनस उपजिघन्तीं दि विजिमन॒जमनोनयनाह्ाद-
LY বিবি EN aC ৬
दुषेगतिविदारवीडारिनयाठोङसुख्राक्षरावयवेमेनसि নূণা FEAR,
त - १
विदधतीं विवरं निजञखविगकिताग्रेतासवसदासमाषणामोदमदान्धमधुकर-
= ক
निकरोपरोधेन दुतपद विन्यसिन वर्णुस्यन्दनस्तनकलशकबरमाररशनां देवीं
तदवलोकनेन विड़ृतादसरस्य भगवतो मकरध्वजस्य বহাদ্থমনীবী,
-

जडवदिति होवाच || ६ ॥
tam evavidire madhukarim iva sumanasa upajighrantim divija-manuja-
mano-nayanahlada-dughair gati-vihara-vrida-vinayavaloka-
susvaraksaravayavair manasi nrnam kusumayudhasya vidadhatir
vivaram nija-mukha-vigalitamrtasava-sahasa-bhasanamoda-
madandha-madhukara-nikaroparodhena druta-pada-vinyasena valgu-
spandana-stana-kalasa-kabara-bhara-rasanam devin tad-avalokanena
vivrtavasarasya bhagavato makara-dhvajasya vasam upanito jadavad iti
hovaca.

tam —to her; eva—indeed; avidire—nearby; madhukarim iva—like
a honeybee; sumanasah—beautiful flowers; upajighrantim—smelling;
divi-ja—of those born in the heavenly planets; manu-ja—of those born
in human society; manah—mind; nayana—for the eyes; ahlada—


--- Page 92 ---
Text 6] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 87
pleasure; dughaih—producing; gati—by her movement; vihdara—by
pastimes; vrid@—by shyness; vinaya—by humility; avaloka—by
glancing; su-svara-aksara—by her sweet voice; avayavaih—and by the
limbs of the body; manasi—in the mind; nrnam—of men; kusuma-
ayudhasya—of Cupid, who has a flower arrow in his hand;
vidadhatim—making; vivaram—aural reception; nija-mukha—from
her own mouth; vigalita—pouring out; amrta-asava—nectar like
honey; sa-hasa—in her smiling; bhasana—and talking; amoda—by the
pleasure; mada-andha—blinded by intoxication; madhukara—of bees;
nikara—by groups; uparodhena—because of being surrounded; druta-
—hasty; pada—of feet; vinyasena—by stylish stepping; valgu—a little;
spandana—moving; stana—breasts; kalosa—like waterpots; kabara—
of her braids of hair; bhara—weight; rasanam—the belt upon the hips;
devim—the goddess; tat-avalokanena—simply by seeing her; vivrta-
avasarasya—taking the opportunity of; bhagavatah—of the greatly
powerful; makara-dhvajasya—of Cupid; vasam—under the control;
upanitah—being brought in; jada-vat—as if stunned; iti—thus; ha—
certainly; uvdca—he said.
TRANSLATION

Like a honeybee, the Apsara smelled the beautiful and attractive
flowers. She could attract the minds and vision of both humans
and demigods by her playful movements, her shyness and
humility, her glances, the very pleasing sounds that poured from
her mouth as she spoke, and the motion of her limbs. By all these
qualities, she opened for Cupid, who bears an arrow of flowers, a
path of aural reception into the minds of men. When she spoke,
nectar seemed to flow from her mouth. As she breathed, the bees,
mad for the taste of her breath, tried to hover about her beautiful
lotuslike eyes. Disturbed by the bees, she tried to move hastily, but
as she raised her feet to walk quickly, her hair, the belt on her
hips, and her breasts, which were like water jugs, also moved in a
way that made her extremely beautiful and attractive. Indeed, she
seemed to be making a path for the entrance of Cupid, who is most
powerful. Therefore the prince, completely subdued by seeing
her, spoke to her as follows.


--- Page 93 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
PURPORT

How a beautiful woman’s movements and gestures, her hair and the
structure of her breasts, hips and other bodily features attract the minds
not only of men but of demigods also is very finely described in this
statement. The words divija and manuja specifically emphasize that the
attraction of feminine gestures is powerful everywhere within this
material world, both on this planet and in the higher planetary systems.
It is said that the standard of living in the higher planetary systems is
thousands and thousands of times higher than the standard of living on
this planet. Therefore the beautiful bodily features of the women there
are also thousands and thousands of times more attractive than the
features of the women on earth. The creator has constructed women in
such a way that their beautiful voices and movements and the beautiful
features of their hips, their breasts, and the other parts of their bodies
attract the members of the opposite sex, both on earth and on other
planets, and awaken their lusty desires. When one is controlled by Cupid
or the beauty of women, he becomes stunned like matter such as stone.
Captivated by the material movements of women, he wants to remain in
this material world. Thus one’s promotion to the spiritual world is
checked simply by seeing the beautiful bodily structure and movements
of women. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has therefore warned all devotees to
beware of the attraction of beautiful women and materialistic civiliza-
tion. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu even refused to see Prataparudra
Maharaja because he was a very opulent person in the material world.
Lord Caitanya said in this connection, niskificanasya bhagavad-bha-
janonmukhasya: those who are engaged in the devotional service of the
Lord because they are very serious about going back home, back to
Godhead, should be very careful to avoid seeing the beautiful gestures of
women and should also avoid seeing persons who are very rich.

niskiicanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya
param param jigamisor bhava-sagarasya
sandarsanam visayinam atha yositam ca
ha hanta hanta visa-bhaksanato ‘py asadhu

“Alas, for a person who is seriously desiring to cross the material ocean
and engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord without


--- Page 94 ---
Text 7] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 89
material motives, seeing a materialist engaged in sense gratification or
seeing a woman who is similarly interested is more abominable than
drinking poison willingly.” (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya 11.8)
One who is serious about going back home, back to Godhead, should not
contemplate the attractive features of women and the opulence of rich
men. Such contemplation will check one’s advancement in spiritual life.
Once a devotee is fixed in Krsna consciousness, however, these attrac-
tions will not agitate his mind.
TEXT 7
. 3 5 a
का त्वं चिकीपसि च क नियं a
मायासि कापि भगवत्परदेवतायाः |
x
विज्ये बिभि wat सुहदात्मनोऽं
किं वा सगान्रगयतसे विपिने प्रमत्तान्‌ ।। ৩ ॥
ka (एवो cikirsasi ca kim muni-varya saile
mayasi kapi bhagavat-para-devatayah
vijye bibharsi dhanusi suhrd-atmano ’rthe
kirh va mrgan mrgayase vipine pramattan
ka—who; tvam—are you; cikirsasi—are you trying to do; ca—also;
kim —what; muni-varya—O best of munis; saile—on this hill; maya —
illusory potency; asi—are you; kapi—some; bhagavat—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; para-devatayah—of the transcendental Lord:
vijye—without strings; bibharsi—you are carrying; dhanusi—two bows;
suhrt—of a friend; atmanah—of yourself; arthe—for the sake; kim
va—or; mrgan—forest animals; mrgayase—are you trying to hunt;
vipine—in this forest; pramattan—who are materially maddened.
TRANSLATION
The Prince mistakenly addressed the Apsara: O best of saintly
persons, who are you? Why are you on this hill, and what do you
want to do? Are you one of the illusory potencies of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead? You seem to be carrying two bows with-
out strings. What is the reason you carry these bows? Is it for some


--- Page 95 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.2
purpose of your own or for the sake of a friend? Perhaps you
carry them to kill the mad animals in this forest.

PURPORT

While undergoing severe penances in the forest, Agnidhra was capti-
vated by the movements of Purvacitti, the girl sent by Lord Brahma. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita, kamais tais tair hrta-jianah: when one
becomes lusty, he loses his intelligence. Therefore Agnidhra, having lost
his intelligence, could not distinguish whether Purvacitti was male or
female. He mistook her for a muni-putra, the son of a saintly person in
the forest, and addressed her as muni-varya. Because of her personal
beauty, however, he could not believe her to be a boy. He therefore
began studying her features. First he saw her two eyebrows, which were
so expressive that he wondered whether he or she might be the maya of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The words used in this connection
are bhagavat-para-devatayah. Devatah, the demigods, all belong to this
material world, whereas Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna, is always beyond this material world and is therefore known as
para-devata. The material world is certainly created by maya, but it is
created under the direction of para-devata, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (mayadhyaksena prakrtih
siwyate sa-caracaram), maya is not the ultimate authority for the crea-
tion of this material world. Maya acts on behalf of Krsna.

Piirvacitti’s eyebrows were so beautiful that Agnidhra compared them
to bows without strings. He therefore asked her whether they were to be
used for her own purposes or for the sake of someone else. Her eyebrows
were like bows meant to kill animals in the forest. This material world is
like a great forest, and its inhabitants are like forest animals such as deer
and tigers meant to be killed. The killers are the eyebrows of beautiful
women. Captivated by the beauty of the fair sex, all the men of the world
are killed by bows without strings, but cannot see how they are killed by
maya. It is a fact, however, that they are being killed (bhatva bhatva
praliyate). By dint of his tapasya, Agnidhra could understand how maya
acts under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The word pramattan is also significant. Pramatta refers to one who
cannot control his senses. The entire material world is being exploited by
people who are pramatta, or vimiidha. Prahlada Maharaja therefore said:


--- Page 96 ---
Text 8] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 91
Soce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyartha-
maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimidhan
“They are rotting in material activities for transient material pleasure
and spoiling their lives toiling all day and night simply for sense
gratification, with no attachment for love of Godhead. I am simply
lamenting for them and devising various plans to deliver them from the
clutches of maya.” (Bhdg. 7.9.43) Karmis who act very seriously for
sense gratification are always referred to in the $astras by such terms as
pramatta, vimukha and vimidha. They are killed by maya. However,
one who is apramatta, a sane, sober person, a dhira, knows very well
that a human being’s primary duty is to render service to the Supreme
Person. Maya is always ready to kill those who are pramatta with her in-
visible bows and arrows. Agnidhra questioned Piirvacitti about this.
TEXT 8
बाणाविमो भगवतः शतपत्रपत्रौ
ज्ान्तावथुद्खरुचिरावतितिग्मदन्तौ ।
LY
कस्मे gggfa নল विचरन्न विद्मः |
-
क्षेमाय नो जडधियां तव Ris ८ ||
banav imau bhagavatah jata-patra-patrau
santav apurikha-rucirav ati-tigma-dantau
kasmai yuyunksasi vane vicaran na vidmah
ksemaya no jada-dhiyari tava vikramo ’stu
banau—two arrows; imau—these; bhagavatah—of you, the most
powerful; Sata-patra-patrau—having feathers like the petals of a lotus
flower; $antau—peaceful; apurikha—without a shaft; rucirau—very
beautiful; ati-tigma-dantau—having a very sharp point; kasmai—
whom; ywyuriksasi—you want to pierce; vane —in the forest; vicaran—
loitering; na vidmah—we cannot understand; ksemaya—for welfare:
nah—of us; jada-dhiyam—who are dull-headed: tava—your:
vikramah—prowess; astu—may be.


--- Page 97 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.2
TRANSLATION
Then Agnidhra observed the glancing eyes of Pirvacitti and
said: My dear friend, you have two very powerful arrows, namely
your glancing eyes. Those arrows have feathers like the petals of a
lotus flower. Although they have no shafts, they are very beautiful,
and they have very sharp, piercing points. They appear very
peaceful, and thus it seems that they will not be shot at anyone.
You must be loitering in this forest to shoot those arrows at some-
one, but I cannot understand whom. My intelligence is dull, and I
cannot combat you. Indeed, no one can equal you in prowess, and
therefore I pray that your prowess will be for my good fortune.
PURPORT
Agnidhra thus began appreciating Piarvacitti’s powerful glance upon
him. He compared her glancing eyes to very sharp arrows. Although her
eyes were as beautiful as lotuses, they were simultaneously like shaftless
arrows, and Agnidhra was therefore afraid of them. He hoped that her
glances upon him would be favorable because he was already captivated,
and the more captivated he became, the more impossible it would be for
him to remain without her. Agnidhra therefore prayed to Parvacitti that
her glances at him would be auspicious, not futile. In other words, he
prayed that she would become his wife.
TEXT 9
शिष्या হম भगवतः परितः परन्ति
गायन्ति साम सरदस्यमजखमीशम्‌ |
युष्यन्छिवाविदकिताः सुमनोऽमिचृष्टीः
सवे भजन्त्युषिगणा হন वेदशाखाः ।। ९ ॥
Sisya ime bhagavatah paritah pathanti
gayanti sama sarahasyam ajasram iam
yusmac-chikha-vilulitah sumano ’bhivrstih
sarve bhajanty rsi-gana ia veda-$akhah


--- Page 98 ---
Text 10] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 93
Sisyah—disciples, followers; ime—these; bhagavatah—of your
worshipable self; paritah—surrounding; pathanti—are reciting; gay-
anti—are singing; sama—the Sama Veda; sa-rahasyam—with the con-
fidential portion; gjasram —incessantly; iSam—unto the Lord; yusmat—
your; $ikha—from bunches of hair; vilulitah—fallen; sumanah—of
flowers; abhivrstth—showers; sarve—all; bhajanti—enjoy, resort to;
rsi-ganah—sages; iva—like; veda-sakhah—branches of Vedic
literature.
TRANSLATION
Seeing the bumblebees following Piirvacitti, Maharaja Agnidhra
said: My dear Lord, the bumblebees surrounding your body are
like disciples surrounding your worshipable self. They are inces-
santly chanting the mantras of the Sama Veda and the Upanisads,
thus offering prayers to you. Just as great sages resort to the
branches of Vedic literatures, the bumblebees are enjoying the
showers of flowers falling from your hair.
TEXT 10
वाचं परं sta
जकनसूपद्खरां शृणवाम तुभ्यम्‌ |
FV कदम्बरुचिरङ्विटङ्बिम्बे
यस्यामलातपरिधिः & च वल्कलं ते॥१०॥
vdcarm [00707 carana-painjara-tittirinari
brahmann aripa-mukharari Srnavama tubhyam
labdha kadamba-rucir anka-vitarika-bimbe
yasyam alata-paridhih kva ca valkalari te
vacam —the resounding vibration; param—only; carana-panjara—
of the ankle bells; tittirinam—of the tittiri birds; brahman—O
brahmana; arépa—without form; mukharam—able to be very dis-
tinctly heard; $rnavama—I hear; tubhyam—your; labdha—gotten:
kadamba —like the kadamba flower; rucih—lovely color: arka-vitarika-


--- Page 99 ---
94 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
bimbe—on the beautiful circular hips; yasyam—on which; alata-
paridhih—encirclement of burning cinders; kva—where; ca—also;
valkalam—covering cloth; te—your.
TRANSLATION
O brahmana, I can simply hear the tinkling of your ankle bells.
Within those bells, tittiri birds seem to be chirping among them-
selves. Although I do not see their forms, I can hear how they are
chirping. When I look at your beautiful circular hips, I see they
are the lovely color of kadamba flowers, and your waist is encircled
by a belt of burning cinders. Indeed, you seem to have forgotten to
dress yourself.
PURPORT
With lusty desires to see Parvacitti, Agnidhra especially gazed upon
the girl’s attractive hips and waist. When a man looks upon a woman
with such lusty desires, he is captivated by her face, her breasts and her
waist, for a woman first attracts a man to fulfill his sexual desires by the
beautiful features of her face, by the beautiful slope of her breasts and
also by her waist. Parvacitta was dressed in fine yellow silk, and
therefore her hips looked like kadamba flowers. Because of her belt, her
waist seemed to be encircled by burning cinders. She was fully dressed,
but Agnidhra had become so lusty that he asked, “Why have you come
naked?”
TEXT 11
किं सम्भृतं रुचिरयोर्दिज यङ्गयोस्ते
मध्ये FN वहति यत्र दशि; धितामे ।
पङ्कोऽरुणः सुरमिरास्मविषाण ईदग्‌
येनाश्रमं सुमग मे सुरभीकरोषि 11 ११ ॥
kirh sambhrtar rucirayor dvija Srigayos te
madhye 10180 vahasi yatra drsih srita me
pariko ‘runah surabhir atma-visana idrg
yenasramarn subhaga me surabhi-karosi


--- Page 100 ---
Text 11] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 95

kim —what; sambhrtam—Afilled; rucirayoh—very beautiful: dvija—O
brahmana; srngayoh—within two horns; te—your; madhye—in the
middle; krsah—thin; wvahasi—you are carrying; yatra—wherein;
driih—eyes; $rita—attached; me—my; parnkah—powder; arunah—
red; surabhih—fragrant; atma-visane—on the two horns; idrk—such;
yena—by which; asramam—place of residence; su-bhaga—O most for-
tunate one; me—my; surabhi-karosi—you are perfuming.

TRANSLATION

Agnidhra then praised Piirvacitti’s raised breasts. He said: My
dear brahmana your waist is very thin, yet with great difficulty you
are carefully carrying two horns, to which my eyes have become at-
tracted. What is filling those two beautiful horns? You seem to
have spread fragrant red powder upon them, powder that is like
the rising morning sun. 0 most fortunate one, I beg to inquire
where you have gotten this fragrant powder that is perfuming my
arama, my place of residence.

PURPORT

Agnidhra appreciated Parvacitti’s raised breasts. After seeing the
girl’s breasts, he became almost mad. Nevertheless, he could not recog-
nize whether Parvacitti was a boy or a girl, for as a result of his
austerity, he saw no distinction between the two. He therefore addressed
her with the word dvija, "0 brahmana.” Yet why should a dvija, a
brahmana boy, have horns on his chest? Because the boy's waist was
thin, Agnidhra thought, he was carrying the horns with great difficulty.
and therefore they must be filled with something very valuable. Other-
wise why would he carry them? When a woman’s waist is thin and her
breasts are full, she looks very attractive. Agnidhra, his eyes attracted.
contemplated the heavy breasts on the girl’s thin body and imagined how
her back must sustain them. Agnidhra imagined that her raised breasts
were two horns she had covered with cloth so that others would not see
the valuables within them. Agnidhra, however, was very anxious to see
them. Therefore he requested, “‘Please uncover them so that I can see
what you are carrying. Rest assured that I shall not take it away. If you


--- Page 101 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
feel an inconvenience in removing the covering, I can help you; I myself
can uncover them to see what valuable things those raised horns con-
tain.” He was also surprised to see the red dust of perfumed kurikuma
spread over her breasts. Nevertheless, still considering Pirvacitti a boy,
Agnidhra addressed her as subhaga, most fortunate muni. The boy must
have been fortunate; otherwise how simply by standing there could he
perfume Agnidhra’s entire asrama ?
TEXT 12
ANY स्य ५ 2
लाकं प्रद सुहृत्तम तावकं म
यत्रत्य इत्थञ्चरखावयवायपूवो |
असद्विधस्य मनउश्नयनौ निभिं
TEES सरसराससुषादि वक्त्रे ।॥ १२॥
lokam pradarsaya suhrttama tavakarm me
yatratya ittham urasavayavav apirvau
asmad-vidhasya mana-unnayanau bibharti
bahv adbhutari sarasa-rasa-sudhadi vaktre
lokam —residential place; pradariaya—please show; suhrt-tama—O
best of friends; tavakam—your; me—unto me; yatratyah—a person
born wherein; ittham—like this; urasa—by the chest; avayavau—two
limbs (breasts); apuarvau—wonderful; asmat-vidhasya—of a person
like me; manah-unnayanau—very agitating to the mind; bibharti—
sustains; bahu—many; adbhutam—wonderful; sarasa—sweet words;
rasa—amorous gestures like smiling; sudhad-adi—such as nectar;
vaktre —in the mouth.
TRANSLATION
O best friend, will you kindly show me the place where you
reside? I cannot imagine how the residents of that place have got-
ten such wonderful bodily features as your raised breasts, which
agitate the mind and eyes of a person like me who sees them.
Judging by the sweet speech and kind smiles of those residents, I
think that their mouths must contain nectar.


--- Page 102 ---
Text 13] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 97
PURPORT
Still bewildered, Agnidhra wanted to see the place from which the
brahmana boy had come, where the men had such raised breasts. Such
attractive features, he thought, must be due to the severe austerities per-
formed there. Agnidhra addressed the girl as suhrttama, the best friend,
so that she would not refuse to take him there. Not only was Agnidhra
captivated by the girl’s raised breasts; he was also attracted by her sweet
speech. Nectar seemed to emanate from her mouth, and therefore he was
increasingly surprised.
TEXT 13
Iss वाति
विष्णोः कलास्निमिषोन्मकरी च कर्णो।
उद्वि्रमीनयुगलं द्विजपङ्किशोचि-
रासन्नथेङ्गनिषरं सर gd ते ॥१२॥
ka vatma-vrttir adanad dhavir 27180 vati
visnoh kaldsy animisonmakarau ca karnau
udvigna-mina-yugalar dvija-pankti-Socir
asanna-bhrrga-nikaram sara in mukhar te
ka—what: va—and; atma-vrttih—food for maintenance of the body:
adanat—by the chewing (of betel); havih—pure sacrificial ingredients;
anga—my dear friend; vdti—emanate; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; kala—
expansion of the body: asi—you are; animisa—without blinking; un-
makarau—two brilliant sharks: ca—also: karnau—two ears; udvigna—
restless: mina-yugalam—possessing two fish; dvija-pankti—of lines of
teeth: Socih—beauty: dsanna—nearby; bhriga-nikaram—possessing
swarms of bumblebees; sarah it—like a lake; mukham—face: te—your.
TRANSLATION
My dear friend, what do you eat to maintain your body? Because
you are chewing betel, a pleasing scent is emanating from your
mouth. This proves that you always eat the remnants of food
offered to Visnu. Indeed, you must also be an expansion of Lord


--- Page 103 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.2
Visnu’s body. Your face is as beautiful as a pleasing lake. Your
jeweled earrings resemble two brilliant sharks with unblinking
eyes like those of Visnu, and your own eyes resemble two restless
fish. Simultaneously, therefore, two sharks and two restless fish
are swimming in the lake of your face. Besides them, the white
rows of your teeth seem like rows of very beautiful swans in the
water, and your scattered hair resembles swarms of bumblebees
following the beauty of your face.
PURPORT
The devotees of Lord Visnu are also His expansions. They are called
vibhinnamsa. Lord Visnu is offered all kinds of sacrificial ingredients,
and because devotees always eat prasada, the remnants of His food, the
scent of sacrificial ingredients emanates not only from Visnu but also
from the devotees who eat the remnants of His food or the food of His
devotees. Agnidhra considered Parvacitti an expansion of Lord Visnu
because of the pleasing scent of her body. Aside from that, because of her
jeweled earrings, shaped like sharks, because of her scattered hair,
resembling bumblebees mad after the scent of her body, and because of
the white rows of her teeth, which resembled swans, Agnidhra compared
Piarvacitti’s face to a beautiful lake decorated with lotus flowers, fish,
swans and bumblebees.
TEXT 14
योऽसौ त्वया छरसरोजहतः पतङ्गो
fg ्रमन्‌ भ्रमत एजयतेऽक्षिणी मे ।
शक्तं न ते सरसि बक्रजटावस्थं
कष्टोऽनिलो हरति लम्पट एष नीवीम्‌॥। १४॥
yo ’sau tvayd kara-saroja-hatah patarigo
diksu bhraman bhramata ejayate ’ksini me
muktar na te smarasi vakra-jata-varitham
kasto 120 harati lampata esa nivim


--- Page 104 ---
Text 15] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 99
yah—which; asau—that; tvaya—by you; kara-saroja—with the
lotus palm; hatah—struck; patarigah—the ball; diksu—in all direc-
tions; bhraman—moving; bhramatah—restless; ejayate—disturbs; ak-
sini—eyes; me—of me; muktam—scattered; na—not; te—your;
smarasi—are you mindful of; wvakra—curling; jata—of hair;
varitham—bunches; kastah—giving trouble; anilah—wind; harati—
takes away; lampatah—Ilike a man attached to women; esah—this;
nivim—lower garment.
TRANSLATION
My mind is already restless, and by playing with a ball, moving it
all about with your lotuslike palm, you are also agitating my eyes.
Your curling black hair is now scattered, but you are not attentive
to arranging it. Are you not going to arrange it? Like a man at-
tached to women, the most cunning wind is trying to take off your
lower garment. Are you not mindful of it?
PURPORT
The girl Parvacitti was playing with a ball in her hand, and the ball
seemed like nothing but another lotus flower captured by her lotuslike
palm. Because of her movements, her hair was loose, and the belt
holding her cloth was giving way, as if the cunning wind were trying to
make her naked. Yet she paid no attention to arranging her hair or fixing
her dress. As Agnidhra tried to see the girl’s naked beauty, his eyes were
very agitated by her movements.
TEXT 15
रूपं तपोधन तपश्चरतां तपोघ्नं
ह्येतत्तु केन तपसा FFAS |
I .
चतु तपोऽसि मया सह मित्र মহা
A
कवा प्रसीदति स वं मवमावनो मे ॥ १५॥
ripari tapodhana tapas caratam tapoghnam
hy etat tu kena tapasa bhavatopalabdham


--- Page 105 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
carturi tapo 70051 maya saha mitra mahyam
kirh va prasidati sa vai bhava-bhavano me

riipam—beauty; tapah-dhana—O best of the sages performing
austerity; tapah caratdim—of persons engaged in executing austerities
and penances; tapah-ghnam—which dismantles the austerities; hi—
certainly; etat—this; tu—indeed; kena—by what; tapasa —austerity;
bhavata—by you; upalabdham—achieved; cartum—to execute;
tapah—austerity; arhasi—you ought; maya saha—with me; mitra—
my dear friend; mahyam —unto me; kim va—or maybe; prasidati—is
pleased; sah—he; vai—certainly; bhava-bhavanah—the creator of this
universe; me—with me.

TRANSLATION

O best among those performing austerities, where did you get
this wonderful beauty that dismantles the austerities performed by
others? Where have you learned this art? What austerity have you
undergone to achieve this beauty, my dear friend? I desire that
you join me to perform austerity and penance, for it may be that
the creator of the universe, Lord Brahma, being pleased with me,
has sent you to become my wife.

PURPORT

Agnidhra appreciated the wonderful beauty of Parvacitti. Indeed, he
was surprised to see such exceptional beauty, which must have been the
result of past austerities and penances. He therefore asked the girl
whether she had achieved such beauty just to break the penances and
austerities of others. He thought that Lord Brahma, the creator of the
universe, might have been pleased with him and might therefore have
sent her to become his wife. He requested Parvacitti to become his wife
so that together they could perform austerities and penances in family
life. In other words, a suitable wife helps her husband perform penances
and austerities in household life if both of them are on the same elevated
platform of spiritual understanding. Without spiritual understanding,
husband and wife cannot be equally situated. Lord Brahma, the creator
of the universe, is interested in good progeny. Therefore unless he is


--- Page 106 ---
Text 16] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 101
pleased, one cannot get a suitable wife. In fact, Lord Brahma is
worshiped in marriage ceremonies. In India even today, wedding invita-
tions are still issued with a picture of Lord Brahma on the face of the
card.
TEXT 16
न त्वां त्यजामि दयितं fee
यखिन्मनो गपि नो न वियाति लग्रम्‌।
ক ©. []
मां TERR नेतमुवतं ते
चित्तं यतः प्रतिसरन्तु शिवाः सविन्यः। १६।
na tvamm tyajami dayitari dvija-deva-dattarn
yasmin mano drg api no na viyati lagnam
mari caru-$rngy arhasi netum anuvratarn te
cittari yatah pratisarantu Sivah sacivyah
na—not; tvam—you; tyajami—I shall give up; dayitam—very dear;
dvijja-deva—by Lord Brahma, the demigod worshiped by the
brahmanas; dattam—given; yasmin—unto whom; manah—mind;
drk—eyes; api—also; nah—my; na viyati—do not go away; lagnam—
tightly attached; mam —me; caru-sriigi —O woman with beautiful raised
breasts; arhasi—you ought; netum—to lead; anuvratam—follower;
te—your; cittam —desire; yatah— wherever; pratisarantu—may follow;
Sivah —favorable; sacivyah—{friends.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, who is worshiped by the brahmanas, has very
mercifully given you to me, and that is why I have met you. I do
not want to give up your company, for my mind and eyes are fixed
upon you and cannot be drawn away. O woman with beautiful
raised breasts, I am your follower. You may take me wherever you
like, and your friends may also follow me.
PURPORT
Now Agnidhra frankly admits his weakness. He was attracted to एषा -
vacitti, and therefore before she could say. “But I have no business with


--- Page 107 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.2
you,” he expressed his desire to be united with her. He was so attracted
that he was ready to go anywhere, hell or heaven, in her company. When
one is absorbed in lust and the influence of sex, one surrenders to the
feet of a woman without reservations. Srila Madhvacarya remarks in this
connection that when one engages in joking and talking like a crazy per-
son, one may say anything and everything, but his words will be
meaningless.
TEXT 17
~ श्रीड्युक उवाच
इति ललनालुनयातिविश्चारदो श्राम्यवैद्ग्ध्यया परिमाषया तां fed
विबुधमतिरधिसमाजयामास ॥ १७॥
sri-suka uvaca
iti lalananunayati-visarado gramya-vaidagdhyaya paribhasaya tam
vibudha-vadhiiri vibudha-matir adhisabhajayam asa.
sri-sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; lalana—
women; anunaya—in winning over; ati-visadradah—very expert;
gramya-vaidagdhyaya—expert in fulfilling one’s material desires:
paribhasaya—by selected words; tam—her; vibudha-vadham—the
celestial girl; vibudha-matih—Agnidhra, who possessed intelligence like
that of the demigods; adhisabhajayam asa—gained the favor of.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Maharaja Agnidhra, whose intel-
ligence was like that of a demigod, knew the art of flattering
women to win them to his side. He therefore pleased that celestial
girl with his lusty words and gained her favor.
PURPORT
Since King Agnidhra was a devotee, he actually had no attraction for
material enjoyment, but because he wanted a wife for progeny and Lord
Brahma had sent Parvacitti for this purpose, he expertly pleased her


--- Page 108 ---
Text 18] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 103
with flattering words. Women are attracted by a man’s flattering words.
One who is expert in this art of flattery is called vidagdha.
TEXT 18

सा च ततस्तस्य ACAI हूपवयःभ्रियोदार्येण पराधिसमनास्तेन
सहायुतायुतपरिवत्सरोपठक्षणं कालं जम्बरूद्ीपपतिना भोमखगभोगान्‌ बुशचजे
1ং৫।
sd ca tatas tasya vira-yiutha-pater buddhi-sila-ripa-vayah-
Sriyaudaryena paraksipta-mands tena sahayutayuta-
parivatsaropalaksanam kdalam jambudvipa-patina bhauma-svarga-
bhogan bubhuje.

sa—she: ca—also: tatah—thereafter: tasya—of him: vira-yitha-
pateh—the master of heroes; buddhi—by the intelligence: 5८ --
behavior; ripa—beauty; vayah—youth: sriya—opulence: audar-
yena—and by the magnanimity; paraksipta—attracted: manah—her
mind; tena saha—with him; ayuta—ten thousand: ayuta—ten thou-
sand; parivatsara—years: upalaksanam—extending: kalam—time:
Jambitdvipa-patina—with the King of Jambudvipa: bhauma—earthly:
svarga—heavenly; bhogan—pleasures: bubhuje—enjoyed.

TRANSLATION

Attracted by the intelligence, learning, youth, beauty, behavior,
opulence and magnanimity of Agnidhra, the King of Jambadvipa
and master of all heroes, Purvacitti lived with him for many thou-
sands of years and luxuriously enjoyed both worldly and heavenly
happiness.

PURPORT

By the grace of Lord Brahma, King Agnidhra and the heavenly girl.
Parvacitti, found their union quite suitable. Thus they enjoyed worldly
and heavenly happiness for many thousands of years.


--- Page 109 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
TEXT 19
-

TAME वा आत्मजान्‌ स राजवर आप्रीधो नाभिरिम्पुरुषदरिदरेठागृतरम्यक-
दिरण्मयङ्करुमद्रा्चकेतुमालसंज्ञाननव पुजानजनयत्‌॥। १९॥
tasyam u ha va atmajan sa raja-vara agnidhro nabhi-kirmpurusa-
harivarselavrta-ramyaka- hiranmaya-kuru-bhadrasva-ketumala-
sarijnan nava putran ajanayat.

tasyam—in her; u ha va—certainly; atma-jan—sons; sah—he; raja-
varah—the best of kings; agnidhrah—Agnidhra; nabhi—Nabhi; kirn-
purusa—Kimpurusa; hari-varsa—Harivarsa; ilavrta—llavria;
ramyaka—Ramyaka; hiranmaya—Hiranmaya; kuru—Kuru;
bhadrasva—Bhadrasva; ketu-mala—Ketumala; sarijiian —named;
nava—nine; putran—sons; ajanayat—begot.

TRANSLATION

In the womb of Parvacitti, Maharaja Agnidhra, the best of
kings, begot nine sons, named Nabhi, Kimpurusa, Harivarsa, [1-
avrta, Ramyaka, Hiranmaya, Kuru, Bhadra$va and Ketumala.

TEXT 20
९ ९ .

सा gy सुतान्नवानुवत्सरं गृह হলাণহায पूवेचित्तिभूय एवाजं
देवमुपतस्थे ॥२०॥

sa sutvatha sutan navanuvatsaram grha evapahdaya pirvacittir bhizya
evajarn devam upatasthe.

sa—she; sitva—after giving birth to; atha —thereafter; sutan—sons;
nava—nine; anuvatsaram—year after year; grhe —at home; eva —cer-
tainly; apahaya—Ileaving; purvacittih—Puarvacitti; bhityah—again;
eva—certainly; ajam—Lord Brahma; devam—the demigod;
upatasthe —approached.


--- Page 110 ---
Text 21] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 105
TRANSLATION

Parvacitti gave birth to these nine sons, one each year, but after
they grew up, she left them at home and again approached Lord
Brahma to worship him.

PURPORT

There are many instances in which Apsaras, heavenly angels, have
descended to this earth by the order of a superior demigod like Lord
Brahmi or Lord Indra, have followed the demigod’s order by marrying
someone and giving birth to children, and have then returned to their
celestial homes. For example, after Menaka, the celestial woman who had
come to delude Visvamitra Muni, gave birth to the child Sakuntala, she
left both the child and her husband and returned to the heavenly planets.
Pirvacitti did not remain permanently with Maharaja Agnidhra. After
cooperating in his household affairs, she left Maharaja Agnidhra and all
nine sons and returned to Brahma to worship him.

TEXT 21

आग्नीध्रसुतास्ते मातुरयुग्रहादौत्पत्तिकेनैव संहननबलोपेताः पित्रा विभक्ता,
आत्मतुल्यनामानि यथाभागं जम्बूद्रीपवर्षाणि बुभुजुः ॥ २१ ॥
agnidhra-sutas te matur anugrahad autpattikenaiva sarmhanana-
balopetah pitra vibhakta atma-tulya-namani yatha-bhagam
Jambiidvipa-varsani bubhujuh.

agnidhra-sutah—the sons of Maharaja Agnidhra: te—they: matuh—
ज the mother; anugrahat—by the mercy or by drinking the breast milk:
autpattikena —naturally: eva—certainly; sarnhanana—well-built body:
bala —strength; upetah—obtained; pitra—by the father: vibhaktah—
divided; atma-tulya—following their own: namani—possessing names:
yatha-bhagam—divided properly; jambidvipa-varsani—different parts
of Jambudvipa (probably Asia and Europe combined together): bubhu-
Juh—ruled.


--- Page 111 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2
TRANSLATION

Because of drinking the breast milk of their mother, the nine
sons of Agnidhra naturally had strong, well-built bodies. Their
father gave them each a kingdom in a different part of Jam-
1১00 ৬1108. The kingdoms were named according to the names of the
sons. Thus the sons of Agnidhra ruled the kingdoms they received
from their father.

PURPORT

The acaryas specifically mention that in this verse the words matuh
anugrahat (“by the mercy of their mother”) refer to the breast milk of
their mother. In India it is a common belief that if a baby is fed his
mother’s milk for at least six months, his body will be very strong.
Besides that, it is mentioned herein that all the sons of Agnidhra were
endowed with the nature of their mother. Bhagavad-gita (1.40) also
declares, strisu dustasu varsneya jayate varna-sarikarah: when women
are polluted, varna-sarnikara, unqualified children, are generated. and
when the varna-sarikara population increases, the entire world becomes
hellish. Therefore, according to Manu-sarhita, a woman needs a great
deal of protection in order to remain pure and chaste so that her children
can be fully engaged for the benefit of human society.

TEXT 22

ARIA राजावप्तः कामानामप्सरसमेवाचुदिनमधिमन्यमानस्तस्याः
सङ़रोकतां श्ुतिभिरवारुन्ध यत्र पितरो मादयन्ते॥ २२॥
agnidhro rajatrptah kamanam apsarasam evanudinam adhi-
manyamanas tasyah salokatarn Srutibhir avarundha yatra pitaro
madayante.

agnidhrah —Agnidhra; raja—the King; atrptah—not satisfied:
kamanam—with sense gratification; apsarasam—the celestial woman
(Parvacitti); eva—certainly; anudinam—day after day: adhi—ex-
ceedingly: manyamanah—thinking of: tasyah—of her: sa-lokatam—
promotion to the same planet: Srutibhih—by the Vedas; avarundha—


--- Page 112 ---
Text 23] The Activities of Maharaja Agnidhra 107
got; yatra—where; pitarah—the forefathers; madayante —take
pleasure.
TRANSLATION

After Purvacitti’s departure, King Agnidhra, his lusty desires
not at all satisfied, always thought of her. Therefore, in accordance
with the Vedic injunctions, the King, after his death, was pro-
moted to the same planet as his celestial wife. That planet, which is
called Pitrloka, is where the pitas, the forefathers, live in great
delight.

PURPORT

If one always thinks of something, he certainly gets a related body
after death. Maharaja Agnidhra was always thinking of Pitrloka, the
place where his wife had returned. Therefore after his death he achieved
that same planet, probably to live with her again. Bhagavad-gita also
says:

yar yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tar tam evaiti kaunteya
sada tad-bhava-bhavitah
“Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body. that
state he will attain without fail.” (Bg. 8.6) We can naturally conclude
that if we always think of Krsna or become fully Krsna conscious. we can
be promoted to the planet of Goloka Vrndavana. where Krsna eternally
lives.
TEXT 23

सम्परेते पितरि नव भ्रातरो मेरुदुदितृ्मरुदेवीं प्रतिरूपाघूग्रदं प्रीं सतां रम्यां
श्यामां नारीं भद्रां देववीतिभि तिसंज्ञा नवोदवहन्‌ ॥२३॥
samparete pitari nava bhrataro meru-duhitir merudevim pratiripam
ugradarstrim lata ramyam Syamarn narim bhadram devavitim iti
ऽत navodavahan.


--- Page 113 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 2

samparete pitari—after the departure of their father; nava—nine;
bhratarah—brothers; meru-duhitirh—the daughters of Meru; meru-
devim —Merudevi; prati-ripam—Pratirapa; ugra-darastrim—
Ugradarnstri; latam—Lata; ramyam—Ramya; Syamam—Syama;
narim—Nari; bhadram —Bhadra; deva-vitim—Devaviti; iti —thus;
samjiiah—the names; nava—nine; udavahan—married.

TRANSLATION

After the departure of their father, the nine brothers married
the nine daughters of Meru named Merudevi, Pratiripa,
Ugradarhstri, Lata, Ramya, Syama, Nari, Bhadra and Devaviti.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Second
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Activities of Maha-
raja Agnidhra.”


--- Page 114 ---
CHAPTER THREE
Rsabhadeva’s Appearance
in the Womb of Merudevi,
the Wife of King Nabhi
In this chapter the spotless character of King Nabhi, the oldest son of
Agnidhra, is described. Wanting to have sons, Maharaja Nabhi under-
went severe austerities and penances. He performed many sacrifices
along with his wife and worshiped Lord Visnu, master of all sacrifices.
Being very kind to His devotees, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
was very pleased with the austerities of Maharaja Nabhi. He personally
appeared before the King in His four-handed feature. and the priests,
who were performing the sacrifices, began to offer their prayers unto
Him. They prayed for a son like the Lord, and Lord Visnu agreed to take
birth in the womb of Merudevi, the wife of King Nabhi, and incarnate as
King Rsabhadeva.
TEXT 1
Hw उवाच
नाभिरपत्यकामोऽग्रनया FET WI QTE RATA
nen
$ri-Suka uvaca

nabhir apatya-kamo ‘prajaya merudevya bhagavantari
yajiia-purusam avahitatmayajata.

sri-Sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami said: nabhih—the son of
Maharaja Agnidhra: apatya-kamah—desiring to have sons: aprajaya—
who had not given birth to any children: merudevya—with Merudevi:
bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: yajia-purusam—
Lord Visnu. the master and enjoyer of all performances of sacrifice:

109


--- Page 115 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
avahita-atma—with great attention; ayajata—offered prayers and
worshiped.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak: Maharaja Nabhi, the son
of Agnidhra, wished to have sons, and therefore he attentively
began to offer prayers and worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Visnu, the master and enjoyer of all sacrifices.
Maharaja Nabhi’s wife, Merudevi, who had not given birth to any
children at that time, also worshiped Lord Visnu along with her
husband.

TEXT 2
-
तस्य ह IAEA विद्यद्धभावेन यजतः प्रवर्ग्येषु प्रचरत्सु द्रन्यदेशकाल-
मन्त्रिग्द्क्षिणाविधानयोगोपपर्या दुरधिगमो ऽपि भगवान्‌ भागवतवात्सल्यतया
५ N = ५

सुप्रतीकं आत्मानमपराजितं निजजनामिपेठाथविधित्सया गृदीतदृदयो हद यज्गमं

N
मनोनयनानन्द नाचयवाभिराममाविश्वकार ॥ २॥
tasya ha vava sraddhaya visuddha-bhavena yajatah pravargyesu
pracaratsu dravya-desa-kala-mantrartvig-daksina-vidhana-
yogopapattya duradhigamo 101 bhagavan bhagavata-vatsalyataya
supratika atmanam apardjitam nija-janabhipretartha-vidhitsaya grhita-
hrdayo hrdayangamarm mano-nayananandanavayavabhiramam
aviscakara.

tasya—when he (Nabhi) ; ka vava—certainly; sraddhaya — with great
faith and devotion; visuddha-bhavena—with a pure, uncontaminated
mind; yajatah—was worshiping; pravargyesu—while the fruitive ac-
tivities called pravargya; pracaratsu —were being performed; dravya—
the ingredients; desa—place; kdla—time; mantra—hymns: rtvik—
priests conducting the ceremony; daksina—gifts to the priests;
vidhana—regulative principles; yoga—and of the means; upapattya —
by the performance; duradhigamah—not obtainable; api—although;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhagavata-vat-
salyataya —because of His being very affectionate to His devotee; su-


--- Page 116 ---
Text 2] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 111
pratitkah—possessing a very beautiful form; atmanam—Himself;
aparajitam—not to be conquered by anyone; nija-jana—of His devotee;
abhipreta-artha—the desire: vidhitsaya—to fulfill; grhita-hrdayah—
His heart being attracted; hrdayarigamam—captivating; manah-
nayana-anandana—pleasing to the mind and eyes; avayava—by the
limbs; abhiramam —beautiful: aviscakara—manifested.
TRANSLATION
In the performance of a sacrifice, there are seven transcendental
means to obtain the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: (1) by sacrificing valuable things or eatables, (2) by
acting in terms of place, (3) by acting in terms of time, (4) by
offering hymns, (5) by going through the the priest, (6) by
offering gifts to the priests and (7) by observing the regulative
principles. However, one cannot always obtain the Supreme Lord
through this paraphernalia. Nonetheless, the Lord is affectionate
to His devotee; therefore when Maharaja Nabhi, who was a devo-
tee, worshiped and offered prayers to the Lord with great faith and
devotion and with a pure uncontaminated mind, superficially per-
forming some yajfia in the line of pravargya, the kind Supreme
Personality of Godhead, due to His affection for His devotees, ap-
peared before King Nabhi in His unconquerable and captivating
form with four hands. In this way, to fulfill the desire of His devo-
tee, the Supreme Personality of Godhead manifested Himself in
His beautiful body before His devotee. This body pleases the mind
and eyes of the devotees.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita it is clearly said:
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato jratva
visate tad-anantaram
“One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devo-
tional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme


--- Page 117 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.”
(Bg. 18.55)

One can understand and see the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through the process of devotional service, and not in any other way.
Although Maharaja Nabhi performed prescribed duties and sacrifices, it
should still be considered that the Lord appeared before him not due to
his sacrifices but because of his devotional service. It was for this reason
that the Lord agreed to appear before him in His beautiful bodily
features. As stated in Brahma-samhita (5.30), the Supreme Lord in His
original nature is very beautiful. Venum kvanantam aravinda-
dalayataksam barhavatamsam asitambuda-sundarangam: the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, although blackish, is very, very beautiful.

TEXT 3

. $ =< ~
अथ ह तमाविष्कृतथजयुगलद्वयं हिरण्मयं पुरुषविशेषं कपिकोशेयाम्बरधरणरसि
विलसच्छरी वत्सललामं द्रवरवनरुहवनमाराच्छयंसतमणिगदा दिभिरुपरक्षितं
iil pd een SU a al Ul =
त्िक्‌सद स्यगृहपतयोऽधना इवोत्तमधनघरपलम्य सबहु মান EGER
उपतस्थुः ॥ ২ ॥
atha ha tam aviskrta-bhuja-yugala-dvayarn hiranmayar purusa-
visesarn kapisa-kauseyambara-dharam urasi vilasac-chrivatsa-lalamarn
daravara-vanaruha-vana-malacchiry-amrta-mani-gadadibhir
upalaksitam sphuta-kirana-pravara-mukuta-kundala-kataka-kati-
sutra-hara-keyira-niapurady-anga-bhisana-vibhisitam rtvik-sadasya-
grha-patayo 14120720 ivottama-dhanam upalabhya sabahu-manam
arhanendvanata-$irsana upatasthuh.

atha—thereafter; ha—certainly; tam —Him; aviskrta-bhuja-yugala-
dvayam —who manifested Himself with four arms; hiranmayam—very
bright; purusa-visesam —the topmost of all living beings, Purusottama;
kapisa-kauseya-ambara-dharam —wearing a yellow silk garment;
urasi—on the chest; wvilasat—beautiful; s$rivatsa—called Srivatsa;
lalamam —possessing the mark; dara-vara—by a conchshell; vana-
ruha—lotus flower; vana-mala—garland of forest flowers; acchiri—


--- Page 118 ---
Text 3] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 113
disc; amrta-mani—the Kaustubha gem: gada-adibhih—and by a club
and other symbols: upalaksitam—symptomized: sphuta-kirana—
radiant; pravara—excellent; mukuta—helmet; kundala—earrings:
kataka—bracelets; kati-siitra—girdle; hara —necklace: keyira—
armlets; nitpura—ankle bells; .adi—and so on; anga—of the body:
bhisana—with ornaments; vibhiisitam—decorated; rtvik—the priests;
sadasya—associates; grha-patayah—and King Nabhi: adhanah—poor
persons; iva—like: uttama-dhanam—a great treasure; upalabhya—
having achieved: sa-bahu-manam—with great regard; arhanena—with
ingredients for worship; avanata—bent; Sirsanah—their heads;
upatasthuh—worshiped.
TRANSLATION

Lord Visnu appeared before King Nabhi with four arms. He was
very bright, and He appeared to be the best of all personalities.
Around the lower portion of His body, He wore a yellow silken
garment. On His chest was the mark of Srivatsa, which always dis-
plays beauty. He carried a conchshell, lotus flower, disc and club,
and He wore a garland of forest flowers and the Kaustubha gem.
He was beautifully decorated with a helmet, earrings, bangles,
belt, pearl necklace, armlets, ankle bells and other bodily orna-
ments bedecked with radiant jewels. Seeing the Lord present
before them, King Nabhi and his priests and associates felt just
like poor people who have suddenly attained great riches. They
received the Lord and respectfully bent their heads and offered
Him things in worship.

PURPORT

It is distinctly mentioned here that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead did not appear as an ordinary human being. He appeared before
King Nabhi and his associates as the best of all personalities (Purusot-
tama). As stated in the Vedas: Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is also a living being. but He is the
supreme living being. In Bhagavad-gita (7.7). Lord Krsna Himself says.
mattah paratararn nanyat kincid asti dhananjaya: 0 conquerer of
wealth [Arjuna], there is no truth superior to 016. No one is more at-
tractive or more authoritative than Lord Krsna. That is one of the


--- Page 119 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
differences between God and an ordinary living being. According to this
description of the transcendental body of Lord Visnu, the Lord can easily
be distinguished from all other living beings. Consequently Maharaja
Nabhi and his priests and associates all offered the Lord obeisances and
began to worship Him with various things. As stated in Bhagavad-gita
(6.22), yam labdhva caparam labhami manyate nadhikam tatah. That
15. “Upon gaining this, one thinks that there is no greater gain.” When
one realizes God and sees the Lord face to face, one certainly thinks that
he has gained the best of all things. Raso ‘py asya [02707 drstva nivar-
tate: when one experiences a higher taste, his consciousness is fixed.
After seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. one ceases to be at-
tracted by anything material. One then remains steady in his worship of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 4-5
ऋत्विज उचः
< (4 ৬ -
असि बुहुररद॑तमाहणमसाकमनुपथानां नमो नम॒ इत्येतावत्सदुपशिक्ितं
श =
को ऽहंति पुमान्‌ प्रकृतिगुणव्यतिकरमतिरनीश RTE परस्य प्रकृतिपुरुषयो
र्वाक्तनामिर्नामरूपाकृतिभी रूपनिरूपणम्‌ ॥ ও ॥ सकलजननिकायवृजिन-
লং
निरसनशिव तमप्रवरगुणगणे केदेशकयनादते ॥ ५ ॥
rtvija icuh
arhast muhur arhattamarhanam asmakam anupathanam namo
nama ity etavat sad-upasiksitarn ko 78008 puman prakrti-guna-
vyatikara-matir anisa iSvarasya parasya prakrti-purusayor
arvaktanabhir nama-riapakrtibhi ripa-niripanam.  sakala-jana-
nikaya-vrjina-nirasana-sivatama-pravara-guna-ganaika-desa-
kathanad rte.
rtvijah dicuh—the priests said: arhasi—please (accept); muhuh—
again and again: arhat-tama—O most exalted, worshipable person:
arhanam—offering of worship: asmakam—of us; anupathanam —who
are Your servants: namah—respectful obeisances: namah—respectful
০0619811069: iti—thus; etavat—so far; sat—by exalted personalities:
upasiksitam —instructed; kah—what; arhati—is able (to make);


--- Page 120 ---
Text 5] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 115
puman—man; prakrti—of material nature: guna—of the modes:
vyatikara—in the transformations; matih—whose mind (is absorbed):
anisah—who is most incapable: Svarasya—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead: parasya—beyond: prakrti-purusayoh—the jurisdiction of
the three modes of material nature; arvaktanabhih—which do not reach
up to, or which are of this material world: nama-ripa-akrtibhih—by
names, forms and qualities; ripa—of Your nature or position:
niripanam—ascertainment, perception: sakala—all: jana-nikaya—of
mankind: wvrjina—sinful actions; nirasana—which wipe out: Siva-
tama —most auspicious; pravara—excellent: guna-gana—of the tran-
scendental qualities; eka-desa—one part; kathanat—by speaking: rte—
except.
TRANSLATION

The priests began to offer prayers to the Lord, saying: O most
worshipable one, we are simply Your servants. Although You are
full in Yourself, please, out of Your causeless mercy, accept a little
service from us, Your eternal servants. We are not actually aware
of Your transcendental form, but we can simply offer our
respectful obeisances again and again, as instructed by the Vedic
literatures and authorized acaryas. Materialistic living entities are
very much attracted to the modes of material nature, and therefore
they are never perfect, but You are above the jurisdiction of all
material conceptions. Your name, form and qualities are all tran-
scendental and beyond the conception of experimental knowledge.
Indeed, who can conceive of You? In the material world we can
perceive only material names and qualities. We have no other
power than to offer our respectful obeisances and prayers unto
You, the transcendental person. The chanting of Your auspicious
transcendental qualities will wipe out the sins of all mankind. That
is the most auspicious activity for us, and we can thus partially un-
derstand Your supernatural position.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has nothing to do with material
perception. Even the impersonalist Sankaracarya says. narayanah paro
“vyaktat: “*Narayana. the Supreme Personality of Godhead. is beyond the


--- Page 121 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
material conception.” We cannot concoct the form and attributes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. We must simply accept the description
given in Vedic literatures about the Lord’s form and activities. As stated
in Brahma-sarihita (5.29):
cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa-
laksavrtesu surabhir abhipalayantam
laksmi-sahasra-5ata-sambhrama-sevyamanarn
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is
tending the cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems
and surrounded by millions of purpose trees. He is always served with
great reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of
fortune.” We can have some conception of the Absolute Truth, His form
and His attributes simply by reading the descriptions given in Vedic
literatures and authoritative statements given by exalted personalities
like Brahma, Narada, Sukadeva Gosvami and others. Srila Ripa Gosvami
says, atah sri-krsna-namadi na bhaved grahyam indriyaih: "सल cannot
conceive the name, form and qualities of Sri Krsna through our material
senses.” Because of this, other names for the Lord are adhoksaja and
aprakrta, which indicate that He is beyond any material senses. Out of
His causeless mercy upon His devotees, the Lord appeared before
Maharaja Nabhi. Similarly, when we are engaged in the Lord’s devo-
tional service, the Lord reveals Himself to us. Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah. This is the only way to understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, bhak-
tya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah: one can understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead through devotional service. There is no
other way. We have to hear from the authorities and from the sastras and
consider the Supreme Lord in terms of their statements. We cannot
imagine or concoct forms and attributes of the Lord.
TEXT 6
परिजनानुरागविरचित शवसंशब्दसलिलसितकिंखलयतुरसिकादूर्वाङ्रेरपि
सम्श्तया सपर्यया किल परम परितुष्यसि 1&1


--- Page 122 ---
Text 6] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 117
parijananuraga-viracita-sabala-sarmsabda-salila-sita-kisalaya-tulasika-
dirvankurair api sambhrtaya saparyaya kila parama paritusyasi.
parijana—by Your servants; anuraga—in great ecstasy: viracita —ex-
০০৮60; Sabala—with a faltering voice; samSabda—with prayers:
salila—water; sita-kisalaya—twigs bearing new leaves: tulasika—tulasi
leaves: dirva-ankurath—and with newly grown grass: api—also:
sambhrtaya —performed; saparyaya—by worship: kila—indeed:
parama—O Supreme Lord: paritusyasi—You become satisfied.
TRANSLATION

O Supreme Lord, You are full in every respect. You are certainly
very satisfied when Your devotees offer You prayers with faltering
voices and in ecstasy bring You tulasi leaves, water, twigs bearing
new leaves, and newly grown grass. This surely makes You
satisfied.

PURPORT

One does not need great wealth, education or opulence to satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one is fully absorbed in love and
ecstasy, he need offer only a flower and a little water. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita, patram puspari phalam toyam yo me bhaktya prayac-
chati: “If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf. a flower. fruit or
water, | will accept it.” (Bg. 9.26)

The Supreme Lord can be pleased only by devotional service:
therefore it is said here that the Lord is surely satisfied by devotion and
nothing else. Quoting from the Gautamiya-tantra, the Hari-bhakti-
vilasa states:

tulasi-dala-matrena
jalasya culukena va
vikrinite svam atmanarm
bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalah
“Sri Krsna, who is very affectionate toward His devotees. sells Himself to
a devotee who offers merely a tulasi leaf and a palmful of water.” The
Supreme Lord is causelessly merciful upon His devotee. so much so that


--- Page 123 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.3
even the poorest of men can offer Him a little water and a flower in devo-
tion and thus please Him. This is due to His affectionate dealings with
His devotees.
TEXT 7
-
अथानयापि न भवत SERA सश्चचितमर्थमिहोपलभामहे

(ell

athanayapi na bhavata ijyayoru-bhara-bharaya samucitam artham
ihopalabhamahe.

atha—otherwise; anaya—this; api—even; na—not; bhavatah—of
Your exalted personality; ijyayd—by performance of sacrifice; uru-
bhara-bharaya —encumbered by much paraphernalia; samucitam—re-
quired; artham—use; tha—here; upalabhamahe—we can see.

TRANSLATION

We have engaged in Your worship with many things and have
offered sacrifices unto You, but we think that there is no need for
so many arrangements to please Your Lordship.

PURPORT

Srila Ripa Gosvami says that if one is offered varied foods but has no
appetite, the offering has no value. In a big sacrificial ceremony there
may be many things accumulated to satisfy the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but if there is no devotion, attachment or love for the Lord, the
arrangement is useless. The Lord is complete in Himself. and He does not
need anything from us. However, if we offer Him a little water, a lower
and 8 tulast leaf, He will accept them. Bhakti, devotional service, is the
main way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is not a ques-
tion of arranging huge sacrifices. The priests were regretful, thinking
that they were not on the path of devotional service and that their
sacrifice was not pleasing to the Lord.


--- Page 124 ---
Text 8] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 119
TEXT 8

आत्मन एवाजुसवनमञ्जसाव्यतिरेकेण बोभूयमानाशेषुरुषाथंखरूपस्य কিন্ত
नायाशिष आज्ञासानानायेतदभिसंराधनमात्रं मवितुमरंति।। ८ ॥
atmana evanusavanam anjasavyatirekena bobhiyamanasesa-
purusartha-svaripasya kintu nathasisa asasananam etad
abhisariradhana-matrari bhavitum arhati.

atmanah—self-sufficiently; eva—certainly; anusavanam—at every
moment; anjasa—directly; avyatirekena—without stopping;
bobhiyamana—increasing; asesa—unlimitedly; purusa-artha—the
goals of life; sva-rapasya—Your actual identity; kintu—but; natha—0O
Lord; asisah—benedictions for material enjoyment; asasananam—of
us, who are always desiring; etat—this; abhisariradhana—for getting
Your mercy; matram—only; bhavitum arhati—can be.

TRANSLATION

All of life’s goals and opulences are directly, self-sufficiently,
unceasingly and unlimitedly increasing in You at every moment.
Indeed, You are unlimited enjoyment and blissful existence itself.
As far as we are concerned, O Lord, we are always after material
enjoyment. You do not need all these sacrificial arrangements, but
they are meant for us so that we may be benedicted by Your Lord-
ship. All these sacrifices are performed for our fruitive results,
and they are not actually needed by You.

PURPORT

Being self-sufficient, the Supreme Lord does not need huge sacrifices.
Fruitive activity for a more opulent life is for those who desire such
material opulence for their interest. Yajiarthat karmano ’nyatra loko
yam karma-bandhanah: if we do not act to satisfy the Supreme Lord.
we engage in maya’s activities. We may construct a gorgeous temple and
spend thousands of dollars, but such a temple is not required by the
Lord. The Lord has many millions of temples for His residence. and He
does not need our attempt. He does not require opulent activity at all.


--- Page 125 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.3
Such engagement is meant for our benefit. If we engage our money in
constructing a gorgeous temple, we are freed from the reactions of our
endeavors. This is for our benefit. In addition, if we attempt to do some-
thing nice for the Supreme Lord, He is pleased with us and gives us His
benediction. In conclusion, the gorgeous arrangements are not for the
Lord’s sake but for our own. If we somehow or other receive blessings
and benedictions from the Lord, our consciousness can be purified and
we can become eligible to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 9
+ + ५

तद्यथा बारिल्चानां खयमामनः श्रेयः परमविदुषां परमपरमपुरुष प्रकषं -
करुणया खमदिमानं चापवर्गार्य्चपकरपयिष्यन्‌ खयं नापचित
एवैतरदि होपलक्षितः ॥ ९॥
tad yatha balisanam svayam atmanah sreyah param avidusar parama-
parama-purusa prakarsa-karunaya sva-mahimanam capavargakhyam
upakalpayisyan svayarn napacita evetaravad ihopalaksitah.

tat—that; yatha—as; balisanam—of the fools; svayam —by Yourself:
atmanah—own; S$reyah—welfare; param—ultimate; avidusam—of
persons who do not know; parama-parama-purusa—O Lord of lords;
prakarsa-karunaya—by abundant causeless mercy; sva-mahimanam—
Your personal glory; ca—and: apavarga-akhyam—called apavarga
(liberation); upakalpayisyan—desiring to give; svayam—personally:
na apacitah—not properly worshiped; eva—although: itara-vat—Ilike
an ordinary person: iha—here; upalaksitah—(You are) present and
seen (by us).

TRANSLATION

O Lord of lords, we are completely ignorant of the execution of
dharma, artha, kama and moksa, the process of liberation, because
we do not actually know the goal of life. You have appeared per-
sonally before us like a person soliciting worship, but actually You
are present here just so we can see You. You have come out of Your
abundant and causeless mercy in order to serve our purpose, our


--- Page 126 ---
Text 10] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 121
interest, and give us the benefit of Your personal glory called
apavarga, liberation. You have come, although You are not
properly worshiped by us due to our ignorance.
PURPORT

Lord Visnu was personally present at the sacrificial arena, but this
does not mean that He had any interest in His own personal benefit.
Similarly, the arca-vigraha, the Deity in the temple, is present for the
same purpose. Out of His causeless mercy, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead presents Himself before us so that we can see Him. Since we
have no transcendental vision, we cannot see the spiritual sac-cid-an-
anda-vigraha of the Lord: therefore, out of His causeless mercy He
comes in a form we can see. We can only see material things like stone
and wood, and therefore He accepts a form of stone and wood and thus
accepts our service in the temple. This is an exhibition of the Lord’s
causeless mercy. Although He has no interest in such things, in order to
receive our loving service, He agrees to act as He does. We cannot ac-
tually offer suitable paraphernalia for the Lord's worship because we are
completely ignorant. It was out of His causeless mercy that the Lord ap-
peared in the sacrificial arena of Maharaja Nabhi.

TEXT 10
[J

अथायमेव वरो হাইতম यर्हि बर्हिषि aE भवान्न पुरुषे्षणविषय
आसीत्‌ ॥ १०॥
athayam eva varo hy arhattama yarhi barhisi rajarser varadarsabho
bhavan nija-puruseksana-visaya asit.

atha—then: ayam—this: eva—certainly; varah—benediction: hi—
indeed: arhat-tama—O most worshipable of the worshipable: yarhi—
because: barhisi—in the sacrifice; raja-rseh—of King Nabhi: varada-
rsabhah—the best of the benefactors; bhavan— Your Lordship: nija-
purusa—of Your devotees: iksana-visayah—the object of the sight:
asit—has become.


--- Page 127 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
TRANSLATION

O most worshipable of all, You are the best of all benefactors,
and Your appearance at saintly King Nabhi’s sacrificial arena is
meant for our benediction. Because You have been seen by us, You
have bestowed upon us the most valuable benediction.

PURPORT

Nija-purusa-iksana-visaya. In Bhagavad-gita (9.29) Krsna says, samo
ham sarva-bhiitesu: ^" envy no one, nor am [ partial to anyone. I am
equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend,
is in Me, and [ am also a friend to him.”

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal to everyone. In that
sense, He has no enemies and no friends. Everyone is enjoying the
fruitive reactions of his own work, and the Lord, within everyone's
heart, is observing and giving everyone the desired result. However, just
as the devotees are always anxious to see the Supreme Lord satisfied in
every way, similarly the Supreme Lord is very anxious to present Him-
self before His devotees. Sri Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (4.8):

paritrandya sadhinar
vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge
“To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to re-
establish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after
millennium.”

Thus Krsna’s appearance 15 for the deliverance and satisfaction of His
devotees. Actually He does not advent Himself simply to kill the demons,
for that can be done by His agents. Lord Visnu’s appearance at the
sacrificial arena of Maharaja Nabhi was just to please the King and his
assistants. Otherwise there was no reason for His being present there.

TEXT 11
असङ्गनिशितज्ञानानरुविधूतारोषमलानां भवत्‌खमावानामात्मारामाणां
नीनामनबरतपरिगुणितगुणगण परममङ्गठायनगुणगणकथनो ऽसि।। ११॥


--- Page 128 ---
Text 11] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 123

asanga-nisita-jiananala-vidhiitasesa-malanar bhavat-svabhavanam
atmaramanar muninam anavarata-parigunita-guna-gana parama-
mangalayana-guna-gana-kathano ए.

asanga—by detachment; nisita—strengthened; jiana—of
knowledge; anala —by the fire; vidhitta—removed; asesa—unlimited;
malanam—whose dirty things; bhavat-svabhavanam —who have at-
tained Your qualities; atma-aramanam—who are self-satisfied;
muninam—of great sages; anavarata—incessantly; parigunita—
recounted; guna-gana—O Lord, whose spiritual qualities; parama-
mangala—supreme bliss; ayana—produces; guna-gana-kathanah—
He, the chanting of whose attributes; asi—You are.

TRANSLATION

Dear Lord, all the great sages who are thoughtful and saintly
persons incessantly recount Your spiritual qualities. These sages
have already burned up all the unlimited dirty things and, by the
fire of knowledge, strengthened their detachment from the
material world. Thus they have attained Your qualities and are
self-satisfied. Yet even for those who feel spiritual bliss in chanting
Your attributes, Your personal presence is very rare.

PURPORT

The priests in Maharaja Nabhi’s sacrificial arena appreciated the per-
sonal presence of the Supreme Lord ৬1910. and they considered them-
selves very much obliged. The Lord's appearance is rare even for great
saintly persons who have become completely detached from this material
world and whose hearts are clean due to constantly chanting the glories
of the Lord. Such people are satisfied by chanting the transcendental
qualities of the Lord. The Lord's personal presence is not actually re-
quired. The priests are pointing out that the Lord's personal presence is
very rare even for such elevated sages but that He was so kind to them
that now He was personally present. Therefore the priests were very
much obliged.


--- Page 129 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
TEXT 12
अथ कयज्िर्स्वलनश्मुत्पतनजम्भणदुरबस्थानादिषु विवशानां नः सरणाय
०3

ज्वरमरणदशायामपि सकलकरपठनिरसनानि तव गुणकृतनामधेयानि वचन
गोचराणि भवन्तु ॥ १२ ॥

atha kathaiicit skhalona-ksut-patana-jrmbhana-duravasthanadisu
vivasanam nah smarandya jvara-marana-dasayam api sakala-kasmala-
nirasanani tava guna-krta-namadheyani vacana-gocarani bhavantu.

atha—still; kathaficit—somehow or other; skhalana—stumbling;
ksut—hunger: patana—falling down: jrmbhana—yawning;
duravasthana—because of being placed in an undesirable position;
adisu—and so on; vivasanam—unable; nah—of ourselves;
smarandya—to remember; jvara-marana-dasayam—in the case of
having a high fever at the time of death; api—also; sakala—all;
kasmala—sins; nirasanani—which can dispel; tava— Your; guna—at-
tributes; krta—activities; namadheyani—names; vacana-gocarani—
possible to be uttered: bhavantu—let them become.

TRANSLATION

Dear Lord, we may not be able to remember Your name, form
and qualities due to stumbling, hunger, falling down, yawning or
being in a miserable diseased condition at the time of death when
there is a high fever. We therefore pray unto You, O Lord, for You
are very affectionate to Your devotees. Please help us remember
You and utter Your holy names, attributes and activities, which can
dispel all the reactions of our sinful lives.

PURPORT

The real success in life is ante narayana-smrti—remembering the
holy name, attributes, activities and form of the Lord at the time of
death. Although we may be engaged in the Lord's devotional service in
the temple, material conditions are so tough and inevitable that we may
forget the Lord at the time of death due to a diseased condition or mental
derangement. Therefore we should pray to the Lord to be able to remem-


--- Page 130 ---
Text 13] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 125
ber His lotus feet without fail at the time of death, when we are in such a
precarious condition. In this regard, one may also see Srimad-
Bhagavatam (6.2.9-10 and 14-15).
TEXT 13
किञ्चायं राजपिरपरयकामः प्रजां मवाटशीमाशासान ईश्वरमाशिषां

खगौपवगंयोरपि भवन्तशपथावति प्रजायामथंप्रत्ययो धनदमिवाधनः
फलीकरणम्‌ 11230

kificayari rajarsir apatya-kamah [ए व्यद?! bhavadrsim 05250774
iSvaram asisarn svargapavargayor api bhavantam upadhavati prajayam
artha-pratyayo dhanadam ivadhanah phalikaranam.

kifica—moreover; ayam—this; raja-rsih—pious King (Nabhi);
apatya-kamah—desiring offspring: prajam—a son: bhavadrsim—ex-
actly like You: asasanah—hoping for; iSvaram—the supreme controller:
asisam—of benedictions; svarga-apavargayoh—of the heavenly planets
and liberation; api—although: bhavantam—You; upadhavati—wor-
ships; prajayam—children: artha-pratyayah—regarding as the ulti-
mate goal of life; dhana-dam—unto a person who can give immense
wealth as charity; iva—like; adhanah—a poor man: phalikaranam—a
little husk.

TRANSLATION

Dear Lord, here is the great King Nabhi, whose ultimate goal in
life is to have a son like You. Your Lordship, his position is like
that of a person approaching a very rich man and begging for a lit-
tle grain. Maharaja Nabhi is so desirous of having a son that he is
worshiping You for a son, although You can offer him any exalted
position, including elevation to the heavenly planets or liberation
back to Godhead.

PURPORT

The priests were a little ashamed that King Nabhi was performing a

great sacrifice just to ask the Lords benediction for a son. The Lord could


--- Page 131 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
offer him promotion to the heavenly planets or the Vaikuntha planets.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has taught us how to approach the Supreme
Lord and ask Him for the ultimate benediction. He said: na dhanam na
Janam na sundarim kavitam va jagad-isa kamaye. He did not want to
ask the Supreme Lord for anything material. Material opulence means
riches, a nice family, a good wife and many followers, but an intelligent
devotee doesn’t ask the Supreme Lord for anything material. His only
prayer is: mama janmani janmanisvare bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi.
He wants to be engaged perpetually in the loving service of the Lord. He
does not want promotion to the heavenly planets or mukti, liberation
from material bondage. If this were the case, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
would not have said, mama janmani janmani. It doesn’t matter to a
devotee whether or not he takes birth life after life, as long as he remains
a devotee. Actually eternal liberty means returning home, back to
Godhead. A devotee is never concerned about anything material.
Although Nabhi Maharaja wanted a son like Visnu, wanting a son like
God is also a form of sense gratification. A pure devotee wants only to
engage in the Lords loving service.
TEXT 14

को वा इह तेऽपराजितोऽपराजितया माययानवसितपदव्यानादृतमति्विषय-
विषरमानाढृतप्रकृतिरयुपासितमदहचरणः ॥ १४॥
ko va iha te ‘parajito [0070]1800 mayayanavasita-padavyandvrta-matir
visaya-visa-rayanavrta-prakrtir anupdasita-mahac-caranah.

kah va—who is that person: iha—within this material world: te—of
Your Lordship: aparajitah—not conquered: aparajitaya—by the uncon-
querable: mayaya—illusory energy: anavasita-padavya—whose path
cannot be ascertained: andvrta-matih—whose intelligence is not
bewildered: visaya-visa—of material enjoyment, which is like poison:
raya—Dby the course: anavrta—not covered: prakrtih—whose nature:
anupdsita—without worshiping: mahat-caranah—the lotus feet of great
devotees.


--- Page 132 ---
Text 14] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 127
TRANSLATION

Dear Lord, unless one worships the lotus feet of great devotees,
one will be conquered by the illusory energy, and his intelligence
will be bewildered. Indeed, who has not been carried away by the
waves of material enjoyment, which are like poison? Your illusory
energy is unconquerable. No one can see the path of this material
energy or tell how it is working.

PURPORT

Maharaja Nabhi was inclined to performing great sacrifices for
begetting a son. The son might be as good as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but such a material desire—be it great or insignificant—is
brought about by the influence of maya. A devotee does not at all desire
anything for sense gratification. Devotion is therefore explained as
devoid of material desires (anyabhilasita-sinya). Everyone is subjected
to the influence of maya and entangled in all kinds of material desire.
and Maharaja Nabhi was no exception. Freedom from maya’s influence is
possible when one engages in the service of the great devotees (mahac-
carana-sevd). Without worshiping the lotus feet of a great devotee. one
cannot be freed from maya’s influence. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura
therefore says, chadiya vaisnava-seva nistara payeche keba: Who has
been freed from mdya’s clutches without serving the lotus feet of a
Vaisnava?” Maya is apargjita, and her influence is also apardjita. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (7.14):

dai hy esa gunamayi
mama maya duratyaya
“This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome.”

Only a devotee can surpass maya’s great influence. It was no fault on
Maharaja Nabhi’s part that he wanted a son. He wanted a son like the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the best of all sons. By the asso-
ciation of the Lord’s devotee, one no longer desires material opulence.
This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.54):


--- Page 133 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
“sadhu-sanga”, “‘sadhu-sanga” sarva-sastre kaya
lava-matra sadhu-sange sarva-siddhi haya

and Madhya 22.51:
mahat-krpa vina kona karme ‘bhakti’ naya
krsna-bhakti dire rahu, ऽव कका ठ nahe ksaya

If one is serious about escaping maya’s influence and returning home,

back to Godhead, one must associate with a sadhu (devotee). That is the

verdict of all scriptures. By the slight association of a devotee, one can be
freed from the clutches of maya. Without the mercy of the pure devotee,
one cannot get freedom by any means. Certainly a pure devotee’s asso-
ciation is necessary in order to obtain the loving service of the Lord. One
cannot be freed from maya’s clutches without sadhu-sanga, the benedic-
tion of a great devotee. In Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.5.32) Prahlada

Maharaja says:

naisarn matis tavad urukramanghrim
sprsaty anarthapagamo yad arthah

mahiyasarn pada-rajo-"bhisekarn
niskificandanari na vrpita yavat

One cannot become the Lord’s pure devotee without taking the dust of a

great devotee on his head (pada-rajo-’bhisekam). A pure devotee is

niskificana; he has no material desire to enjoy the material world. One
has to take shelter of such a pure devotee in order to attain his qualities.

The pure devotee is always free from the clutches of maya and her

influence.

TEXT 15
© ও ও
यदु ह নান तव पुनरदभ्रकर्तरिह समाहृतस्तत्रा्थधियां मन्दानां ARAL TESA देव -
(भ्‌

FARR साम्थेन सर्वान्‌ प्रतियोढुमिद्षाम्‌ Deu

yad u ha vava tava punar adabhra-kartar iha samahiitas tatrartha-

dhiyam mandanam nas tad yad deva-helanam deva-devarhasi samyena

sarvan prativodhum avidusam.


--- Page 134 ---
Text 15] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 129

yat—because; u ha vava—indeed; tava—Your: punah—again;
adabhra-kartah—O Lord, who performs many activities; iha—here, in
this arena of sacrifice; samahiitah —invited: tatra —therefore; artha-
dhiyam—who aspire to fulfill material desires; mandanam—not very
intelligent; nah—of us; tat—that; yat—which; deva-helanam—dis-
respect of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; deva-deva—Lord of
lords; arhasi—please; samyena —because of Your equipoised position;
sarvan—everything: prativodhum—tolerate; avidusam—of us, who are
all ignorant.

TRANSLATION

O Lord, You perform many wonderful activities. Our only aim
was to acquire a son by performing this great sacrifice; therefore
our intelligence is not very sharp. We are not experienced in
ascertaining life’s goal. By inviting You to this negligible sacrifice
for some material motive, we have certainly committed a great
offense at Your lotus feet. Therefore, O Lord of lords, please ex-
cuse our offense because of Your causeless mercy and equal mind.

PURPORT

The priests were certainly unhappy to have called the Supreme Lord
from Vaikuntha for such an insignificant reason. A pure devotee never
wants to see the Lord unnecessarily. The Lord is engaged in various ac-
tivities, and the pure devotee does not want to see Him whimsically, for
his own sense gratification. The pure devotee simply depends on the
Lord’s mercy, and when the Lord is pleased, he can see Him face to face.
The Lord is unseen even by demigods like Lord Brahma and Lord Siva.
By calling on the Supreme Lord, the priests of Nabhi Maharaja proved
themselves unintelligent: nonetheless, the Lord came out of His cause-
less mercy. All of them therefore wanted to be excused by the Lord.

Worship of the Supreme Lord for material gain is not approved by
authorities. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.16):

catur-vidha bhajante mam
janah sukrtino ‘rjuna
arto jiynasur artharthi
JjAani ca bharatarsabha


--- Page 135 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
0 best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me —the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the in-
quisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.”

Initiation into bhakti begins when one is in a distressed condition or in
want of money, or when one is inquisitive to understand the Absolute
Truth. Nonetheless, people who approach the Supreme Lord in this way
are not actually devotees. They are accepted as pious (sukrtinah) due to
their inquiring about the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Not knowing the various activities and engagements of the
Lord, such people unnecessarily disturb the Lord for material gain.
However, the Lord is so kind that even though disturbed, He fulfills the
desires of such beggars. The pure devotee is anyabhilasita-sinya; he has
no motive behind his worship. He is not conducted by the influence of
maya in the form of karma or jana. The pure devotee is always pre-
pared to execute the order of the Lord without personal consideration.
The rtvijah, the priests at the sacrifice, knew very well the distinction
between karma and bhakti, and because they considered themselves
under the influence of karma, fruitive activity, they begged the Lord’s
pardon. They knew that the Lord had been invited to come for some pal-
try reason.

TEXT 16
Had उवाच
इति निगदेनाभिष्ूयमानो मगवाननिमिषर्षभो वर्षधराभिवादिताभिवन्दित-
चरणः सदयमिदमाह ।१६।
Sri-Suka wvaca

iti nigadenabhistiicyamano bhagavan animisarsabho varsa-
dharabhivaditabhivandita-caranah sadayam idam aha.

$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; nigadena—
by prayers in prose; abhistiiyamanah—being worshiped; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; animisa-rsabhah—the chief of all
the demigods; varsa-dhara—by King Nabhi, the Emperor of Bharata-
varsa; abhivadita—worshiped; abhivandita—were bowed down to;
caranah—whose feet; sadayam—kindly; idam —this: aha—said.


--- Page 136 ---
Text 17] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 131
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: The priests, who were even
worshiped by King Nabhi, the Emperor of Bharata-varsa, offered
prayers in prose [generally they were in poetry] and bowed down
at the Lord’s lotus feet. The Lord of lords, the ruler of the
demigods, was very pleased with them, and He began to speak as
follows.
TEXT 17
श्रीमगवाडवाच
<
अहो IRA मवद्धिरवितथगीरभिवेरमसुरमममियाचितो यद्‌ -
RN व -
य्यात्मजो मया सदशो भूयादिति ममाहमेवाभिरूपः केवस्यादथापि ब्रह्मवादो
(५ ~ +
न मृषा भवितुमहेति ममेव हि gd ag दिजदेषङ्कलम्‌ ।१७॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca
aho bataham rsayo bhavadbhir avitatha-girbhir varam asulabham
abhiyacito yad amusyatmajo maya sadrso bhivyad iti mamaham
evabhiriapah kaivalyad athapi brahma-vado na mrsa bhavitum arhati
mamaiva hi mukhari yad dvija-deva-kulam.
sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said:
aho—alas; bata—certainly [ am pleased: aham—I: rsayah—O great
sages; bhavadbhih—by you; avitatha-girbhih—whose words are all
true; varam—for a benediction; asulabham—very difficult to achieve:
abhiyacitah—have been requested; yat—that: amusya—of King
Nabhi; datma-jah—a son: maya sadrsah—like Me: bhiiyat—there may
be; iti—thus; mama—My: aham—I: eva—only: abhiripah—equal:
kaivalyat—because of being without a second: athapi—nevertheless:
brahma-vadah—the words spoken by exalted brahmanas; na—not:
mrsa—false; bhavitum—to become; arhati—ought; mama—My: eva—
certainly; hi—because; mukham —mouth; yat—that: dvija-deva-
kulam —the class of pure brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied: O great sages, I
am certainly very pleased with your prayers. You are all truthful.


--- Page 137 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
You have prayed for the benediction of a son like Me for King
Nabhi, but this is very difficult to obtain. Since I am the Supreme
Person without a second and since no one is equal to Me, another
personality like Me is not possible to find. In any case, because you
are all qualified brahmanas, your vibrations should not prove
untrue. I consider the brahmanas who are well qualified with
brahminical qualities to be as good as My own mouth.
PURPORT
The word avitatha-girbhih means “‘they whose spoken vibrations can-
not be nullified.” The brahmanas (dvija, the twiceborn), are given a
chance by the sastric regulations to become almost as powerful as the
Supreme Lord. Whatever a brahmana speaks cannot be nullified or
changed in any circumstance. According to the Vedic injunctions, a
brahmana is the mouth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
therefore in all rituals a brahmana is offered food (brahmana-bhojana)
because when a brahmana eats, it is considered that the Supreme Lord
Himself eats. Similarly. whatever a brahmana speaks cannot be changed.
It must act. The learned sages who were priests at Maharaja Nabhi’s
sacrifice were not only brahmanas but were so qualified that they were
like devas, demigods, or God Himself. If this were not the case, how
could they invite Lord Visnu to come to the sacrificial arena? God is one,
and God does not belong to this or that religion. In Kali-yuga, different
religious sects consider their God to be different from the God of others,
but that is not possible. God is one, and He is appreciated according to
different angles of vision. In this verse the word kaivalyat means that
God has no competitor. There is only one God. In the Svetasvatara
Upanisad (6.8) it is said, na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate: "No one
is found to be equal to Him or greater than Him.” That is the definition
of God.
TEXT 18
तत आ्रीध्रीयेऽज्चकल्यावतरिष्याम्यात्मतुल्यमनुपलममानः ॥ १८॥
tata agnidhriye ’msSa-kalayavatarisyamy atma-tulyam
anupalabhamanah.


--- Page 138 ---
Text 19] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 133
_ tatah—therefore; agnidhriye—in the wife of Nabhi, the son of
Agnidhra: amsa-kalaya—by an expansion of My personal form:
avatarisyami—I shall advent Myself; atma-tulyam—My equal;
anupalabhamanah—not finding.
TRANSLATION
Since I cannot find anyone equal to Me, I shall personally expand
Myself into a plenary portion and thus advent Myself in the womb
of Merudevi, the wife of Maharaja Nabhi, the son of Agnidhra.
PURPORT
This is an example of the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Although He is one without a second, He expands Himself by
svarnsa, His personal expansion, and sometimes by vibhinnarisa, or His
separated expansion. Lord Visnu herein agrees to send His personal ex-
pansion as the son of Merudevi, the wife of Maharaja Nabhi, who is the
son of Agnidhra. The rtijah, the priests, knew that God is one, yet they
prayed for the Supreme Lord to become the son of Maharaja Nabhi to let
the world know that the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is one without a second. When He incarnates. He expands
Himself in different potencies.
TEXT 19
श्रीञ्युक उवाच
a <)
इति निशामयन्त्या मेरुदेन्याः पतिमभिधायान्तद घे मगबान्‌ ॥१९॥
sri-suka uvaca
iti nisamayantya merudevyah patim abhidhayantardadhe bhagavan.
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: iti—thus: nisamayan-
tyah—who was listening; merudevyah—in the presence of Merudevi:
patim—unto her husband: abhidhaya—having spoken: antardadhe—
disappeared; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 139 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After saying this, the Lord disap-
peared. The wife of King Nabhi, Queen Merudevi, was sitting by
the side of her husband, and consequently she could hear every-
thing the Supreme Lord had spoken.

PURPORT

According to the Vedic injunctions, one should perform sacrifices in
the company of one’s own wife. Sapatniko dharmam dacaret: religious
rituals should be performed with one’s wife: therefore Maharaja Nabhi
conducted his great sacrifice with his wife by his side.

TEXT 20

बर्हिषि तसिन्नेव विष्णुदत्त मगवान्‌ परमर्षिभिः प्रसादितो नाभेः प्रियचिकीर्षया
तदवरोधायने मेरुदेव्यां धर्मान्द शंयितुकामो वातरशनानां श्रमणानाग्रषीणाम-
ष्वेमन्थिनां TEN तजुबाप्रततार ||২০॥
barhisi tasminn eva visnudatta bhagavan paramarsibhih prasadito
nabheh priya-cikirsaya tad-avarodhayane merudevyarh dharman
darsayitu-kamo vata-rasananarin sSramananam rsinam irdhva-
manthinam Suklaya tanuvavatatara.

barhisi—in the arena of sacrifice: tasmin—that: eva—in this way:
visnu-datta—O Maharaja Pariksit: bhagavan—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead: parama-rsibhih—by the great rsis; prasaditah—being
pleased: nabheh priya-cikirsaya—to please King Nabhi: tat-
avarodhayane —in his wife: merudevyam—Merudevi: dharman—the
principles of religion: darsayitu-kamah—desiring to exhibit how to per-
form: vata-rasananam—of the sannyasis (who have almost no cloth):
Sramananam—of the wvanaprasthas; rsinam—of the great sages:
ardhva-manthinam—of the brahmacaris; suklaya tanuva—in His origi-
nal spiritual form, which is above the modes of material nature:
avatatdra—appeared as an incarnation.


--- Page 140 ---
Text 20] Rsabhadeva’s Appearance 135
TRANSLATION

O Visnudatta, Pariksit Maharaja, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead was pleased by the great sages at that sacrifice. Conse-
quently the Lord decided to personally exhibit the method of exe-
cuting religious principles [as observed by brahmacaris, sannyasis,
vanaprasthas and grhasthas engaged in rituals] and also satisfy
Maharaja Nabhi’s desire. Consequently He appeared as the son of
Merudevi in His original spiritual form, which is above the modes
of material nature.

PURPORT

When the Supreme Lord appears or descends as an incarnation within
this material world, He does not accept a body made of the three modes
of material nature (sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna). Mayavadi
philosophers say that the impersonal God appears in this material world
by accepting a body in the sattva-guna. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti
states that the word $ukla means “consisting of suddha-sattva.” Lord
Visnu descends in His suddha-sattva form. Suddha-sattva refers to the
sattva-guna which is never contaminated. In this material world, even
the mode of goodness (sattva-guna) is contaminated by tinges of rajo-
guna and tamo-guna. When sattva-guna is never contaminated by rajo-
guna and tamo-guna, it is called Suddha-sattva. Sattvam visuddharm
vasudeva-sabditam (Bhag. 4.3.23). That is the platform of vasudeva,
whereby the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva, can be ex-
perienced. In Bhagavad-gita (4.7) Sri Krsna Himself says:

yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanam srjamy aham

“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice. O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion —at that time I
descend Myself.”

Unlike ordinary living entities, the Supreme Lord is not forced by the
modes of material nature to appear. He appears dharman darsayitu-


--- Page 141 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 3
kama —to show how to execute the functions of a human being. The
word dharma is meant for human beings and is never used in connection
with beings inferior to human beings, such as animals. Unfortunately,
without being guided by the Supreme Lord, human beings sometimes
manufacture a process of dharma by concoction. Actually dharma cannot
be made by man. Dharman tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam. (Bhag.
6.3.19) Dharma is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as
the law is given by the state government. Man-made dharma has no
meaning. Srimad-Bhagavatam refers to man-made dharma as kaitava-
dharma, cheating religion. The Supreme Lord sends an avatdra (incar-
nation) to teach human society the proper way to execute religious prin-
ciples. Such religious principles are bhakti-marga. As the Supreme Lord
Himself says in Bhagavad-gita: sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam
Saranam vraja. The son of Maharaja Nabhi, Rsabhadeva, appeared on
this earth to preach the principles of religion. That will be explained in
the Fifth Chapter of this Fifth Canto.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Third
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Rsabhadeva’s Ap-
pearance in the Womb of Merudevi, the wife of King Nabhi.”


--- Page 142 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead
In this chapter, Rgabhadeva, the son of Maharaja Nabhi, begot a hundred
sons, and during the reign of those sons the world was very happy in all
respects. When Rsabhadeva appeared as the son of Maharaja Nabhi, He
was appreciated by the people as the most exalted and beautiful per-
sonality of that age. His poise, influence, strength, enthusiasm. bodily
luster and other transcendental qualities were beyond compare. The
word rsabha refers to the best, or the supreme. Due to the superexcellent
attributes of the son of Maharaja Nabhi, the King named his son Rsabha,
or “the best.” His influence was incomparable. Although there was a
scarcity of rain, Rsabhadeva did not care for Indra, the King of heaven.
who is in charge of supplying rain. Through His own potency,
Rsabhadeva sumptuously covered Ajanabha with ample rain. Upon
receiving Rsabhadeva, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. as
his son, King Nabhi began to raise Him very carefully. After that. he
entrusted the ruling power to Him and, retiring from family life, lived at
Badarikasrama completely engaged in the worship of Vasudeva. the
Supreme Lord. To follow social customs, Lord Rsabhadeva for a while
became a student in the gurukula, and after returning. He followed the
orders of His guru and accepted a wife named Jayanti. who had been
given to Him by the King of heaven, Indra. He begot a hundred sons in
the womb of Jayanti. Of these hundred sons. the eldest was known as
Bharata. Since the reign of Maharaja Bharata, this planet has been called
Bharata-varsa. Rsabhadeva’s other sons were headed by Kusavarta. [1-
avarta, Brahmavarta, Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena. Indrasprk. Vidarbha
and Kikata. There were also other sons named Kavi. Havi. Antariksa.
Prabuddha, Pippalayana. Avirhotra, Drumila. Camasa and Karabhajana.
Instead of ruling the kingdom. these nine became mendicant preachers
of Krsna consciousness, following the religious precepts of the
Bhagavatam. Their characteristics and activities are described in the
137


--- Page 143 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
Eleventh Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam during the talks between
Vasudeva and Narada at Kuruksetra. To teach the general populace.
King Rsabhadeva performed many sacrifices and taught His sons how to
rule the citizens.
TEXT 1
श्रीद्युक उवाच
=, ५ EY
अथ ह तथुत्पस्यैवाभिव्यज्यमानभगव्टक्षणं साम्योपशमवैराग्यैर्यमहा-
विभूतिभिरयुदिनमेध मानालुभाबं प्रकृतयः प्रजा ब्राह्मणा देवताधावनितल-
समवनायातितरां जगरधुः।। १
sri-Suka uvaca

atha ha tam utpattyaivabhivyajyamana-bhagaval-laksanam
samyopasama-vairagyaisvarya-maha-vibhitibhir anudinam
edhamananubhavarm prakrtayah praja brahmana devatas cavani-tala-
samavandyatitararm jagrdhuh.

sri-Sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; atha ha—thus (after
the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared); tam —Him; utpattya—
from the beginning of His appearance; eva—even; abhivyajyamana—
distinctly manifested; bhagavai-laksanam— possessing the symptoms of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samya—equal to everyone;
upasama—completely peaceful, in control of the senses and mind:
vairagya—renunciation; aiSvarya—opulences; maha-vibhitibhih—
with great attributes; anudinam—day after १४४; edhamana—in-
creasing; anubhavam—His power; prakrtayah—the ministers: pra-
jah—the citizens; brahmanah—the learned scholars in full knowledge
of Brahman; devatah —the demigods; ca—and; avani-tala—the surface
of the globe; samavanaya—to rule; atitaram—greatly; jagrdhuh—
desired.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: As soon as the Lord was born as the
son of Maharaja Nabhi, He manifested symptoms of the Supreme
Lord, such as marks on the bottoms of His feet [the flag,


--- Page 144 ---
Text 2] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 139
thunderbolt, etc.]. This son was equal to everyone and very
peaceful. He could control His senses and His mind, and, possess-
ing all opulence, He did not hanker for material enjoyment. En-
dowed with all these attributes, the son of Maharaja Nabhi became
more powerful day after day. Due to this, the citizens, learned
brahmanas, demigods and ministers wanted Rsabhadeva to be ap-
pointed ruler of the earth.
PURPORT

In these days of cheap incarnations, it is very interesting to note the
bodily symptoms found in an incarnation. From the very beginning of
His birth, it was observed that Rsabhadeva’s feet were marked with the
transcendental signs (a flag, thunderbolt, lotus flower, etc.). In addition
to this, as the Lord began to grow, He became very prominent. He was
equal to everyone. He did not favor one person and neglect another. An
incarnation of God must have the six opulences—wealth. strength.
knowledge, beauty, fame and renunciation. It is said that although
Rsabhadeva was endowed with all opulences. He was not at all attached to
material enjoyment. He was self-controlled and therefore liked by every-
one. Due to His superexcellent qualities, everyone wanted Him to rule
the earth. An incarnation of God has to be accepted by experienced
people and by the symptoms described in the $astras. An incarnation is
not accepted simply by the adulation of foolish people.

TEXT 2

तस्य ह वा इत्थं वर्मणा वरीयसा बृहच्छलोकेन चौजसा নল श्रिया यशसा वीय॑-
शौ्याम्यां च पिता ऋषम इतीदं नाम चकार ॥। २ ॥
tasya ha va ittham varsmana variyasa brhac-chlokena caujasa balena
Sriya yasasa virya-sauryabhyam ca pita rsabha itidarm nama cakara.

tasya—of Him: ha va—certainly: ittham—thus: varsmana—by the
bodily features: variyasa—most exalted: brhat-slokena—decorated with
all the high qualities described by poets: ca—also: ojasa—by prowess:
balena—by strength: Sriya—by beauty: yaSasa—by fame: virya-
Sauryabhyam—by influence and heroism: ca—and: pita—the father


--- Page 145 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
(Maharaja Nabhi); rsabhah—the best; iti—thus; idam—this; nama—
name: cakdara—gave.
TRANSLATION

When the son of Maharaja Nabhi became visible, He evinced all
good qualities described by the great poets —namely, a well-built
body with all the symptoms of the Godhead, prowess, strength,
beauty, name, fame, influence and enthusiasm. When the father,
Maharaja Nabhi, saw all these qualities, he thought his son to be
the best of human beings or the supreme being. Therefore he gave
Him the name Rsabha.

PURPORT

To accept someone as God or an incarnation of God, one must observe
the symptoms of God in his body. All the symptoms were found in the
body of Maharaja Nabhi’s extraordinarily powerful son. His body was
well structured, and He displayed all the transcendental qualities. He
showed great influence, and He could control His mind and senses. Con-
sequently He was named Rsabha, which indicates that He was the
supreme living being.

TEXT 3
यस्य हीन्द्रः स्पर्धमानो WEE वर्थ न ववर्ष तद्वधाय भगवान्‌
- © [] ky

षभदेवो योगेश्वरः प्रहस्यात्मयोगमायया सखवषेमजनाभं नामाभ्यवषेत्‌ ।। ২ ॥

yasya hindrah spardhamano bhagavan varse na vavarsa tad
avadharya bhagavan rsabhadevo yogesvarah prahasyatma-
yogamayaya sva-varsam ajanabham namabhyavarsat.

yasya—of whom: hi—indeed; indrah—King Indra of heaven:
spardhamanah—being envious; bhagavan—very opulent: varse—on
Bharata-varsa: na vavarsa—did not pour water: tat—that; avadharya—
knowing; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: rsabha-
devah—Rsabhadeva; yoga-iSvarah—the master of all mystic power:
prahasya—smiling; atma-yoga-mayaya—by His own spiritual potency:
sva-varsam—on His place; agjanabham—Ajanabha; ndma—named;
abhyavarsat—He poured water.


--- Page 146 ---
Text 3] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 141
TRANSLATION

Indra, the King of heaven, who is very materially opulent,
became envious of King Rsabhadeva. Consequently he stopped
pouring water on the planet known as Bharata-varsa. At that time
the Supreme Lord, Rsabhadeva, the master of all mystic power,
understood King Indra’s purpose and smiled a little. Then, by His
own prowess, through yogamaya [His internal potency], He
profusely poured water upon His own place, which was known as
Ajanabha.

PURPORT

We find the word bhagavan used twice in this verse. Both King Indra
and Rsabhadeva, the incarnation of the Supreme Lord, are described as
bhagavan. Sometimes Narada and Lord Brahma are also addressed as
bhagavin. The word bhagavan means that one is a very opulent and
powerful person like Lora Brahma, Lord Siva, Narada or Indra. They are
all addressed as bhagavan due to their extraordinary opulence. King
Rsabhadeva is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord, and therefore He was
the original Bhagavan. Consequently He 15 described herein as
yogesvara, which indicates that He has the most powerful spiritual
potency. He is not dependent on King Indra for water. He can supply
water Himself, and He did so in this case. In Bhagavad-gita, it is stated:
yajiiad bhavati parjanyah. Due to the performance of yajia, clouds of
water are manifest in the sky. Clouds and rainfall are under the manage-
ment of Indra, the heavenly King, but when Indra is neglectful. the
Supreme Lord Himself, who is also known as yajiia or yajiia-pati, takes
the task upon Himself. Consequently there was sufficient rainfall in the
place named Ajanabha. When yajia-pati wants to, He can do anything
without the help of any subordinate. Therefore the Supreme Lord is
known as almighty. In the present age of Kali there will eventually be a
great scarcity of water (anauvrsti). for the general populace. due to ig-
norance and the scarcity of yajiic ingredients. will neglect to perform
yajaas. Srimad-Bhagavatam therefore advises: yajiaih sankirtana-
prayaih yajanti hi sumedhasah. After all. yajiia is meant to satisfy the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this age of Kali. there is great scar-
city and ignorance: nonetheless. everyone can perform sarkirtana-
yajiia. Every family in every society can conduct sarnkirtana-yajia at
least every evening. In this way there will be no disturbance or scarcity


--- Page 147 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
of rain. It is essential for the people in this age to perform the
sankirtana-ygjia in order to be materially happy and to advance
spiritually.
TEXT 4
লাসিংন্তু यथाभिलषितं खुग्रजस्त्वमवरुष्यातिप्रमोद भरविह्यलो गद्भदाक्षरया
A. 18 ৬ পে
गिरा स्वैरं गृहीत नरलोकसधमं मगवन्तं पुराणपुरुषं मायाविलसितमति्व॑त्स
~ 6

तातेति साचुरागघ्ठपलालयन्‌ परां निव्रे तिश्चुपगतः ॥  ॥
nabhis tu yathabhilasitarh suprajastvam avarudhyati-pramoda-bhara-
vihvalo gadgadaksaraya gira svairam grhita-naraloka-sadharmarm
bhagavantam purana-purusam maya-vilasita-matir vatsa tateti
sanuragam upalalayan parari nirvrtim upagatah.

nabhih—King Nabhi; tu—certainly: yatha-abhilasitam—according
10 his desire; su-prajastvam—the most beautiful son: avarudhya—
getting: ati-pramoda—of great jubilation; bhara—by an excess:
vihvalah—being overwhelmed: gadgada-aksaraya—faltering in
ecstasy; gira—with a voice; svairam—by His independent will; grhita—
accepted: nara-loka-sadharmam—acting as if a human being: bhaga-
vantam —the Supreme Personality of Godhead; purana-purusam—the
oldest among living beings: maya—by yogamaya; vilasita—bewildered:
matih—his mentality; vatsa—my dear son; tata—my darling; iti—thus:
sa-anuragam —with great affection; wupalalayan—raising; param—
transcendental; nirvrtim—bliss; upagatah—achieved.

TRANSLATION

Due to getting a perfect son according to his desire, King Nabhi
was always overwhelmed with transcendental bliss and was very
affectionate to his son. It was with ecstasy and a faltering voice that
he addressed Him, ‘“My dear son, my darling.” This mentality was
brought about by yogamaya, whereby he accepted the Supreme
Lord, the supreme father, as his own son. Out of His supreme
good will, the Lord became his son and dealt with everyone as if He
were an ordinary human being. Thus King Nabhi began to raise


--- Page 148 ---
Text 5] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 143
his transcendental son with great affection, and he was over-
whelmed with transcendental bliss, joy and devotion.
PURPORT

The word maya is used in the sense of illusion. Considering the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to be his own son, Maharaja Nabhi was
certainly in illusion, but this was transcendental illusion. This illusion is
required; otherwise how can one accept the supreme father as his own
son? The Supreme Lord appears as the son of one of His devotees, just as
Lord Krsna appeared as the son of Yasoda and Nanda Maharaja. These
devotees could never think of their son as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, for such appreciation would hamper their relationship of
paternal love.

TEXT 5
विदितानुरागमापौरभकरृति जनपदो राजा नाभिरात्मजं समयसेतु-

रक्षायामभिषिच्य तब्राह्मणेषूपनिधाय सह मेरुदेव्या विक्लालायां प्रसन्न-
निपुणेन तपसा समाधियोगेन नरनारायणाख्यं भगवन्तं वासुदेवघरुपासीनः
कालेन तन्महिमानमवाप ॥ ५ ॥

viditanurdgam apaura-prakrti jana-pado raja nabhir atmajarn
samaya-setu-raksayam abhisicya brahmanesipanidhaya saha
merudevya visalayarm prasanna-nipunena tapasa samadhi-yogena
nara-narayandkhyam bhagavantam vasudevam upasinah kalena tan-
mahimanam avapa.

vidita—known very well: anuragam—popularity: apaura-prakrti—
among all the citizens and government officers: jana-padah—desiring to
serve the people in general: raja—the King: nabhih—Nabhi: atma-
jam —his son; samaya-setu-raksayam—to protect the people strictly ac-
cording to the Vedic principles of religious life: abhisicya—enthroning:
brahmanesu—to the learned brahmanas; upanidhdya—entrusting:
saha —with; merudevyd—his wife. Merudevi: visalayam—in
Badarikasrama: prasanna-nipunena—performed with great satisfaction


--- Page 149 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
and expertise; tapasa—by austerities and penances; samadhi-yogena—
by full samadhi; nara-narayana-akhyam—named Nara-Narayana;
bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vasudevam—
Krsna; upasinah—worshiping: kalena—in due course of time: tat-
mahimanam—His glorious abode, the spiritual world, Vaikuntha:
avapa —achieved.
TRANSLATION

King Nabhi understood that his son, Rsabhadeva, was very
popular among the citizens and among government officers and
ministers. Understanding the popularity of his son, Maharaja
Nabhi enthroned Him as the emperor of the world to give protec-
tion to the general populace in terms of the Vedic religious system.
To do this, he entrusted Him into the hands of learned brahmanas,
who would guide Him in administrating the government. Then
Maharaja Nabhi and his wife, Merudevi, went to Badarikasrama in
the Himalaya Mountains, where the King engaged Himself very ex-
pertly in austerities and penances with great jubilation. In full
samadhi he worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nara-
Narayana, who is Krsna in His plenary expansion. By doing so, in
course of time Maharaja Nabhi was elevated to the spiritual world
known as Vaikuntha.

PURPORT

When Maharaja Nabhi saw that his son Rsabhadeva was popular with
the general populace and the governmental servants, he chose to install
Him on the imperial throne. In addition, he wanted to entrust his son
into the hands of the learned brahmanas. This means that a monarch was
supposed to govern strictly according to Vedic principles under the guid-
ance of learned brahmanas, who could advise Him according to the stan-
dard Vedic scriptures like Manu-smrti and similar $astras. It is the duty
of the king to rule the citizens according to Vedic principles. According to
Vedic principles. society is divided into four categories—brahmana,
ksatriya, vaiSya and Sidra. Catur-varnyam .aaya srstam guna-karma-
vibhagasah. After dividing society in this way, it is the king’s duty to see
that everyone executes Vedic principles according to his caste. A


--- Page 150 ---
Text 5] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 145
brahmana must perform the duty of a brahmana without cheating the
public. It is not that one attains the name of a brahmana without the
qualifications. It is the king's duty to see that everyone engages in his oc-
cupational duty according to Vedic principles. In addition, retirement at
the end of life is compulsory. Maharaja Nabhi, although still a king.
retired from family life and went with his wife to a place called
Badarikasrama in the Himalayas. where the Deity Nara-Narayana is
worshiped. The words prasanna-nipunena tapasa indicate that the King
accepted all kinds of austerity very expertly and jubilantly. He did not at
all mind leaving his comfortable life at home, although he was the em-
peror. Despite undergoing severe austerities and penances. he felt very
pleased at Badarikasrama, and he did everything there expertly. In this
way, being fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness (samadhi-yoga). al-
ways thinking of Krsna, Vasudeva, Maharaja Nabhi attained success at
the end of his life and was promoted to the spiritual world,
Vaikunthaloka.

This is the way of Vedic life. One must stop the process of repeated
birth and death and return home, back to Godhead. The words tan-
mahimanam avapa are significant in this regard. Srila Sridhara Svami
says that mahima means liberation in this life. We should act in such a
way in this life that after giving up this body, we will become liberated
from the bondage of repeated birth and death. This is called jivan-mukti.
Srila Viraraghava Acirya states that in the Chandogya Upanisad there
are eight symptoms of a jivan-mukta, a person who is already liberated
even when living in this body. The first symptom of one so liberated is
that he is freed from all sinful activity (apahata-papa). As long as one is
under the clutches of maya in the material energy. one has to engage in
sinful activity. Bhagavad-gita describes such people as duskrtinah,
which indicates that they are always engaged in sinful activity. One who
is liberated in this life does not commit any sinful activities. Sinful ac-
tivity involves illicit sex. meat-eating, intoxication and gambling.
Another symptom of a liberated person is vijara, which indicates that he
is not subjected to the miseries of old age. Another symptom is vimrtyu.
A liberated person prepares himself in such a way that he does not take
on any more material bodies. which are destined to die. In other words.
he does not fall down again to repeat birth and death. Another symptom
is visoka, which indicates that he is callous to material distress and


--- Page 151 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
happiness. Another is wvijighatsa, which indicates that he no longer
desires material enjoyment. Another symptom is apipata, which means
that he has no desire other than to engage in the devotional service of
Krsna, his dearmost pursuable Lord. A further symptom is satya-kama,
which indicates that all his desires are directed to the Supreme Truth,
Krsna. He does not want anything else. He 15 satya-sarikalpa. Whatever
he desires is fulfilled by the grace of Krsna. First of all, he does not
desire anything for his material benefit, and secondly if he desires any-
thing at all, he simply desires to serve the Supreme Lord. That desire is
fulfilled by the Lord’s grace. That is called satya-sarikalpa. Srila
Visvanatha Cakravarti points out that the word mahima means return-
ing to the spiritual world, back home. back to Vaikuntha. Sri Sukadeva
says that the word mahima means that the devotee attains the qualities of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is called sadharma, or “the
same quality.” Just as Krsna is never born and never 0165. His devotees
who return to Godhead never die and never take birth within the
material world.
TEXT 6
यस्य ह पाण्डवेय शछोकाबुदाहरन्ति--
को जु तत्कर्म राजर्षेनाभेरन्वाचरेत्पु मान्‌ |
अपत्यतामगाद्यस्य हरिः 3A FAW ॥ ६ ॥
yasya ha pandaveya $lokav udaharanti—
ko nu tat karma rajarser
nabher anv acaret puman
apatyatam agad yasya
harih suddhena karmana

yasya—of whom; ha—indeed; pandaveya—O Maharaja Pariksit;
$lokau—two verses; uddharanti—recite; kah—who; nu—then; tat—
that; karma—work: raja-rseh—of the pious King; nabheh—Nabhi;
anu—following; acaret—could execute; puman—a man; apatyatam—
sonhood; agat—accepted; yasya—whose; harih—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; suddhena—pure. executed in devotional service;
karmana —by activities.


--- Page 152 ---
Text 7] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 147
TRANSLATION
O Maharaja Pariksit, to glorify Maharaja Nabhi, the old sages
composed two verses. One of them is this: “Who can attain the
perfection of Maharaja Nabhi? Who can attain his activities?
Because of his devotional service, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead agreed to become his son.”
PURPORT
The words suddhena karmana are significant in this verse. If work is
not carried out in devotional service, it is contaminated by the modes of
material nature. That is explained in Bhagavad-gita: yajadarthat kar-
mano ‘nyatra loko yam karma-bandhanah. Activities performed only
for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord are pure and are not contami-
nated by the modes of material nature. All other activities are contami-
nated by the modes of ignorance and passion, as well as goodness. All
material activities meant for satisfying the senses are contaminated. and
Maharaja Nabhi did not perform anything contaminated. He simply exe-
cuted his transcendental activities even when performing yajria. Conse-
quently he obtained the Supreme Lord as his son.
TEXT 7
ब्रह्मण्योऽन्यः कुतो नाभेर्विप्रा मङ्गलपूजिताः |
Ae ¢ =
यस्य बर्हिषि यज्ञेशं दशंयामासुरोजसा ॥ ७॥
brahmanyo 71010) kuto nabher
vipra mangala-pujitah
yasya barhisi yajiiesarn
darsayam asur ojasa
brahmanyah—a devotee of the brahmanas; anyah—any other:
kutah—where is: nabheh—besides Maharaja Nabhi: wviprah—the
brahmanas; mangala-pijitah—well worshiped and satisfied: yasya—of
whom: barhisi—in the sacrificial arena: yajfia-iSam —the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. the enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies: darsayam
asuh—showed; ojasa—by their brahminical prowess.


--- Page 153 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION

[The second prayer is this.] “Who is a better worshiper of
brahmanas than Maharaja Nabhi? Because he worshiped the
qualified brahmanas to their full satisfaction, the brahmanas, by
their brahminical prowess, showed Maharaja Nabhi the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Narayana, in person.”

PURPORT

The brahmanas engaged as priests in the sacrificial ceremony were not
ordinary brahmanas. They were so powerful that they could bring forth
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by their prayers. Thus Maharaja
Nabhi was able to see the Lord face to face. Unless one is a Vaisnava, he
cannot call forth the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord does not
accept an invitation unless one is a Vaisnava. Therefore it is said in
Padma Purana:

sat-karma-nipuno vipro
mantra-tantra-visaradah
avaisnavo gurur na syad
vaisnavah Sva-paco guruh
**A scholarly brahmana expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge is unfit
to become a spiritual master without being a Vaisnava, but a person born
in a family of a lower caste can become a spiritual master if he is a
Vaisnava.” These brahmanas were certainly very expert in chanting the
Vedic mantras. They were competent in the performance of the Vedic
rituals, and over and above this they were Vaisnavas. Therefore by their
spiritual powers they could call on the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and enable their disciple, Maharaja Nabhi, to see the Lord face to face.
Srila Vi$vanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that the word ojasa
means “by dint of devotional service.”
TEXT 8

अथ ह मगवानृषभदेवः खवर ক্মবীসমন্তমল্মমানঃ प्रद रितगुरुढल-

LN ट - -
वासो लन्धवरगुरुभिरयुज्ञातो गृहमेधिनां धर्माननुशिक्षमाणो जयन्त्यामिन्द्र-


--- Page 154 ---
Text 8] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 149
दत्तायाघ्ुमयलक्षणं कमं समान्नायान्नातममियुञ्ननाटमजानामातमसमानानां
शत जनयामास ।॥ ८ ॥

atha ha bhagavan rsabhadevah ऽएव -एकाऽवक karma-ksetram
anumanyamanah pradarsita-gurukula-vaso labdha-varair gurubhir
anwiato grhamedhinar dharman anusiksamano jayantyam indra-dat-
tayam ubhaya-laksanam karma samamnayamndatam abhiyurijann at-
majanam atma-samanandam satam janayam dasa.

atha—thereupon (after the departure of his father): ha—indeed:
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: rsabha-devah—
Rsabhadeva: sva—His own: varsam—kingdom: karma-ksetram—the
field of activities: anumanyamanah—accepting as: pradarsita—shown
as an example: guru-kula-vasah—Ilived at the gurukula; labdha—hav-
ing achieved: varaih—gifts: gurubhih—by the spiritual masters:
anwnatah—being ordered: grha-medhinam—of the householders:
dharman—duties: anusiksamanah—teaching by example: jayan-
tyam—in His wife. Jayanti: indra-dattayam—offered by Lord Indra:
ubhaya-laksanam—of both types: karma —activities: samamnayam-
natam—mentioned in the scriptures: abhiyuijan—performing: atma-
janam—sons; atma-samandanam—exactly like Himself: satam—one
hundred: janayam asa —begot.

TRANSLATION

After Nabhi Maharaja departed for Badarikasrama, the Supreme
Lord, Rsabhadeva, understood that His kingdom was His field of
activities. He therefore showed Himself as an example and taught
the duties of a householder by first accepting brahmacarya under
the direction of spiritual masters. He also went to live at the
spiritual masters’ place, gurukula. After His education was
finished, He gave gifts (guru-daksina) to His spiritual masters and
then accepted the life of a householder. He took a wife named
Jayanti and begot one hundred sons who were as powerful and
qualified as He Himself. His wife Jayanti had been offered to Him
by Indra, the King of heaven. Rsabhadeva and Jayanti performed


--- Page 155 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
householder life in an examplary way, carrying out ritualistic ac-
tivities ordained by the $ruti and smrti $astra.
PURPORT

Being an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Rsabhadeva had nothing to do with material affairs. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita, paritrandya sadhiinam vinasaya ca duskrtam: the pur-
pose of an incarnation is to liberate His devotees and to stop the demoniac
activities of nondevotees. These are the two functions of the Supreme
Lord when He incarnates. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said that in
order to preach, one must live a practical life and show people how to do
things. Apani dcari’ bhakti ikhaimu sabare. One cannot teach others
unless he behaves the same way himself. Rsabhadeva was an ideal king,
and He took His education in the gurukula, although He was already
educated because the Supreme Lord is omniscient. Although Rsabhadeva
had nothing to learn from gurukula, He went there just to teach the peo-
ple in general how to take an education from the right source, from Vedic
teachers. He then entered householder life and lived according to the
principles of Vedic knowledge —$ruti and smrti. In his Bhakti-rasamrta-
sindhu (1.2.10) Srila Rapa Gosvami, quoting the Skanda Purana, states:

Sruti-smrti-puranadi-
paiicaratra-vidhim vind
aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva kalpate

Human society must follow the instructions received from sruti and
smrti, Vedic literature. Practically applied in life this is worship of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead according to the paiicaratrika-vidhi.
Every human being must advance his spiritual life and at the end return
home, back to Godhead. Maharaja Rsabhadeva strictly followed all these
principles. He remained an ideal grhastha and taught His sons how to
become perfect in spiritual life. These are some examples of how He
ruled the earth and completed His mission as an incarnation.


--- Page 156 ---
Text 9] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 151
TEXT 9

3 - - च o
येषां खल महायोगी मरतो ज्येष्टः Agu आसीद्येनेदं वषं भारतमिति
व्यपदिशन्ति ॥ ९॥
yesarn khalu maha-yogi bharato jyesthah srestha-guna asid yenedarn
varsam bharatam iti vyapadisanti.

yesam—of whom; khalu—indeed: maha-yogi—a very highly exalted
devotee of the Lord; bharatah—Bharata; jyesthah—the eldest; srestha-
gunah—qualified with the best attributes; dsit—was; yena—by whom:
idam—this; varsam—planet; bharatam—Bharata; iti—thus; vyapadi-
Santi—people call.

TRANSLATION

Of Rsabhadeva’s one hundred sons, the eldest, named Bharata,
was a great, exalted devotee qualified with the best attributes. In
his honor, this planet has become known as Bharata-varsa.

PURPORT

This planet known as Bharata-varsa is also called punya-bhiimi, the
pious land. At the present moment Bharata-bhaimi, or Bharata-varsa. is a
small piece of land extending from the Himalaya Mountains to Cape
Comorin. Sometimes this peninsula is called punya-bhami. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu has given special importance to the people of this land.

bharata-bhamite haila manusya-janma yara
janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara

“One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India
(Bharata-varsa) should make his life successful and work for the benefit
of all other people.” (Cc. Adi 9.41) The inhabitants of this piece of land
are very fortunate. They can purify their existence by accepting this
Krsna consciousness movement and go outside Bharata-bhami (India)
and preach this cult to benefit the whole world.


--- Page 157 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
TEXT 10
४९६ 0
तमनु TTT इलावर्तो ब्रह्मावर्तो मलयः केतुर्भद्रसेन इन्द्रस्परग्बिदर्भः कीकट
इति नव नवति प्रधानाः ॥ १०॥
tam anu kusavarta ilavarto brahmavarto malayah ketur bhadrasena
indrasprg vidarbhah kikata iti nava navati pradhandah.
tam—him; anu—{following; kusavarta—Kusavarta; ilavartah—II-
avarta; brahmavartah—Brahmavarta; malayah—Malaya; ketuh—
Ketu; bhadra-senah—Bhadrasena; indra-sprk—Indrasprk;
vidarbhah — Vidarbha; kikatah—Kikata; iti—thus; nava—nine;
navati—ninety; pradhanah—older than.
TRANSLATION
Following Bharata, there were ninety-nine other sons. Among
these were nine elderly sons, named Kus$avarta, Ilavarta,
Brahmavarta, Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena, Indrasprk, Vidarbha and
Kikata.
TEXTS 11-12
&
कविहिरन्तरिक्षः प्रबुद्धः पिप्पलायनः ।
आविहेत्रऽथ द्रुमिलश्चमसः करभाजनः 12201
इति मागवतध्मदशश॑ना नव मदाभागरतास्तेषां सुचरितं मगवन्महिमो पवंहितं
वसुदेवनारद संबादञ्ुपशमायनयुपरिशद्वण पिष्यामः ॥ १२॥
kavir havir antariksah
prabuddhah pippalayanah
avirhotro tha drumilas
camasah karabhajanah
iti bhagavata-dharma-darsana nava maha-bhagavatas tesa
৩1800788077 bhagavan-mahimopabrmhitarn vasudeva-narada-sarmvadam
upasamayanam uparistdd varnayisyamah.


--- Page 158 ---
Text 13] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 153

kavih—Kavi; havih—Havi; antariksah—Antariksa: prabuddhah—
Prabuddha;  pippalayanah—Pippalayana;  avirhotrah—Avirhotra;
atha—also; drumilah—Drumila; camasah—Camasa; karabhajanah—
Karabhajana;  iti—thus;  bhagavata-dharma-darsanah—authorized
preachers of Srimad-Bhagavatam; nava—nine; maha-bhagavatah—
highly advanced devotees; tesam—of them; sucaritam—good charac-
teristics; bhagavat-mahima-upabrmhitam—accompanied by the glories
of the Supreme Lord; vasudeva-narada-sarimvadam —within the conver-
sation between Vasudeva and Narada; upasamayanam—which gives
full satisfaction to the mind; uparistat—hereafter (in the Eleventh
Canto); varnayisyamah—1I shall vividly explain.

TRANSLATION

In addition to these sons were Kavi, Havi, Antariksa, Prabud-
dha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhajana.
These were all very exalted, advanced devotees and authorized
preachers of Srimad-Bhagavatam. These devotees were glorified
due to their strong devotion to Vasudeva, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Therefore they were very exalted. To satisfy the mind
perfectly, I [Sukadeva Gosvami] shall hereafter describe the
characteristics of these nine devotees when I discuss the conversa-
tion between Narada and Vasudeva.

TEXT 13
यवीयांस एकाशीतिर्जायन्तेयाः पितुरादेशकरा महाशालीना महाश्रोत्रिया
©

IIMS FAR शुद्धा ब्राह्मणा बभूवुः 11 १३ ॥
yaviyarsa ekasitir jayanteyah pitur adesakara maha-salina maha-
Srotriya yajia-silah karma-visuddha brahmana babhavuh.

yaviyamsah—younger; ekasitih—numbering eighty-one: jayan-
teyah—the sons of Jfayanu, the wife of Rsabhadeva; pituh—of their
father; adesakarah—following the order; maha-salinah—well behaved.
well cultured; maha-srotriyah—extremely learned in Vedic knowledge:
yajaa-stlah—expert in performing ritualistic ceremonies: karma-visud-


--- Page 159 ---
154 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
dhah—very pure in their activities; brahmanah—qualified brahmanas;
babhiivuh—became.
TRANSLATION

In addition to these nineteen sons mentioned above, there were
eighty-one younger ones, all born of Rsabhadeva and Jayanti. Ac-
cording to the order of their father, they became well cultured,
well behaved, very pure in their activities and expert in Vedic
knowledge and the performance of Vedic rituals. Thus they all
became perfectly qualified brahmanas.

PURPORT

From this verse we have good information of how the castes are
qualified according to quality and work. Rsabhadeva, a king, was cer-
tainly a ksatriya. He had a hundred sons, and out of these, ten were
engaged as ksatriyas and ruled the planet. Nine sons became good
preachers of Srimad-Bhagavatam (maha-bhagavatas), and this indicates
that they were above the position of brahmanas. The other eighty-one
sons became highly qualified brahmanas. These are some practical ex-
amples of how one can become fit for a certain type of activity by
qualification, not by birth. All the sons of Maharaja Rsabhadeva were
ksatriyas by birth, but by quality some of them became ksatriyas, and
some became brahmanas. Nine became preachers of Srimad-
Bhagavatam (bhagavata-dharma-darsanah), which means that they
were above the categories of ksatriya and brahmana.

TEXT 14
+ ४ cl
भगवानृषभसंज्ञ आत्मतन्त्रः खयं नित्यनिडृत्तानथंपरम्परः

केवलानन्दालुमव ईश्वर एव विपरीतवत्कर्माण्यारममाणः काठेनाजुगतं

©. ক - ¢
धर्ममाचरणेनोपरशिक्षयन्नतद्विदां सम उपच्ान्तो मैत्रः कारुणिको ঘমাধী-
यश्चःप्रजानन्दाखृतावरोधेन गृहेषु लोकं नियमयत्‌ ॥ १४॥

bhagavan rsabha-sariyiia atma-tantrah svayarm nitya-nivrttanartha-
paramparah kevalanandanubhava रष्वाद eva viparitavat karmany


--- Page 160 ---
Text 14] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 155
arabhamanah kalenanugatarin dharmam dcaranenopasiksayann atad-
vida sama upas$anto maitrah karuniko dharmartha-yasah-prajanan-
damrtavarodhena grhesu lokam niyamayat.

bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: rsabha—Rsabha;
saryiiah—named:; datma-tantrah—fully independent; svayam—per-
sonally: nitya—eternally: nivrtta—free from: anartha—of things not
wanted (birth, old age, disease and death): paramparah—the continual
succession, one after another; kevala—only; ananda-anubhavah—full
of transcendental bliss; iSvarah—the Supreme Lord, the controller:
eva—indeed: viparita-vat—just like the opposite: karmani—material
activities; darabhamanah—performing; kalena—in course of time:
anugatam—neglected; dharmam—the wvarnasrama-dharma; dacara-
nena—by executing: upasiksayan—teaching: a-tat-vidam—persons
who are in ignorance: samah—equipoised: upasantah—undisturbed by
the material senses: maitrah—very friendly to everyone; karunikah—
very merciful to all; dharma —religious principles: artha—economic
development; yasah—reputation; praja—sons and daughters: danan-
da—material pleasure; amrta—eternal life:  avarodhena—for
achieving: grhesu—in household life: lokam —the people in general:
niyamayat—He regulated.

TRANSLATION

Being an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Lord Rsabhadeva was fully independent because His form was
spiritual, eternal and full of transcendental bliss. He eternally had
nothing to do with the four principles of material misery [birth,
death, old age and disease]. Nor was He materially attached. He was
always equipoised, and He saw everyone on the same level. He was
unhappy to see others unhappy, and He was the well-wisher of all
living entities. Although He was a perfect personality, the
Supreme Lord and controller of all, He nonetheless acted as if He
were an ordinary conditioned soul. Therefore He strictly followed
the principles of varnasrama-dharma and acted accordingly. In due
course of time, the principles of varnasrama-dharma had become
neglected; therefore through His personal characteristics and
behavior, He taught the ignorant public how to perform duties


--- Page 161 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
within the varnasrama-dharma. In this way He regulated the
general populace in householder life, enabling them to develop
religion and economic well-being and to attain reputations, sons
and daughters, material pleasure and finally eternal life. By His in-
structions, He showed how people could remain householders and
at the same time become perfect by following the principles of var-
nasrama-dharma.
PURPORT
The varnasrama-dharma is meant for imperfect, conditioned souls. It
trains them to become spiritually advanced in order to return home, back
to Godhead. A civilization that does not know the highest aim of life is no
better than an animal society. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam: na te
viduh svartha-gatir hi visnum. A human society is meant for elevation
to spiritual knowledge so that all of the people can be freed from the
clutches of birth, death, old age and disease. The varnasrama-dharma
enables human society to become perfectly fit for getting out of the
clutches of maya, and by following the regulative principles of var-
nasrama-dharma, one can become successful. In this regard, see
Bhagavad-gita (3.21-24).
TEXT 15
यद्यच्ीषण्यायरितं तत्तद लुवतेते लोकः।। 9% ॥
yad yac chirsanydacaritar tat tad anuvartate lokah.
yat yat—whatever; S$irsanya—by the leading personalities:
acaritam—performed; tat tat—that; anuvartate—follow: lokah—the
people in general.
TRANSLATION
Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men
follow.
PURPORT
A similar verse is also found in Bhagavad-gita (3.21). It is essential
for human society to have a section of men perfectly trained as qualified


--- Page 162 ---
Text 16] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 157
brahmanas according to the instructions of Vedic knowledge. Those
below the brahminical qualification—administrators, merchants and
workers —should take instructions from those ideal people who are con-
sidered to be intellectuals. In this way, everyone can be elevated to the
highest transcendental position and be freed from material attachment.
The material world is described by Lord Krsna Himself as duhkhalayam
asasvatam, a temporary place of misery. No one can stay here, even if he
makes a compromise with misery. One has to give up this body and ac-
cept another, which may not even be a human body. As soon as one gets a
material body, he becomes deha-bhrt, or dehi. In other words, he is sub-
jected to all the material conditions. The leaders of society must be so
ideal that by following them one can be relieved from the clutches of
material existence.
TEXT 16
+ ७ a

यद्यपि खविदितं सकलधरमं সাহা qd Aid दिीतमार्गेण सामादिभिरुपायै-
जैनतामलुशशास ॥१६॥
yadyapi sva-viditar sakala-dharmam brahmar guhyar brahmanair
darsita-margena samadibhir updayair janatam anusasdasa.

yadyapi—although: sva-viditam—known by Him: sakala-dhar-
mam—which includes all different types of occupational duties:
brahmam —Vedic instruction; guhyam—very confidential:
brahmanaih—by the brahmanas; darsita-margena—by the path
showed; sama-adibhih —sama, dama, titiksa (controlling the mind. con-
trolling the senses, practicing tolerance) and so on: updyaih—by the
means: janatim—the people in general: anusasasa—he ruled over.

TRANSLATION

Although Lord Rsabhadeva knew everything about confidential
Vedic knowledge, which includes information about all types of
occupational duties, He still maintained Himself as a ksatriya and
followed the instructions of the brahmanas as they related to mind
control, sense control, tolerance and so forth. Thus He ruled the
people according to the system of varnasrama-dharma, which


--- Page 163 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
enjoins that the brahmanas instruct the ksatriyas and the ksatriyas
administer to the state through the vaiSyas and 500 10735.
PURPORT
Although Rsabhadeva knew all the Vedic instructions perfectly well,
He nonetheless followed the instructions of the brahmanas in order to
perfectly maintain the social order. The brahmanas would give advice
according to the $astras, and all the other castes would follow. The word
brahma means “perfect knowledge of all activities,” and this knowledge
is very confidentially described in the Vedic literatures. Men trained per-
fectly as brahmanas should know all Vedic literature, and the benefit
derived from this literature should be distributed to the general
populace. The general populace should follow the perfect brahmana. In
this way, one can learn how to control the mind and senses and thus
gradually advance to spiritual perfection.
TEXT 17
=a EY ५५ ক
द्रव्यदेशकाठवयःश्रद्धल्विग्विविधोदेशोपचितैः सर्वैरपि क्रतभियेथोपदेशं
TAHA इयाज ॥ ২৩ ॥
dravya-desa-kala-vayah-sraddhartvig-vividhoddesopacitaih sarvair api
kratubhir yathopadesam sata-krtva iyaja.
dravya—the ingredients for performing yajia; desa—the particular
place, a holy place or a temple; kala—the suitable time, such as
springtime; vayah—the age, especially youth; Sraddha—faith in good-
ness, not in passion and ignorance; rtvik—the priests; vividha-uddesa—
worshiping different demigods for different purposes; upacitaih—
enriched by; sarvaih—all kinds of; api—certainly; kratubhih—by
sacrificial ceremonies; yatha-upadesam—according to the instruction;
Sata-krtvah—one hundred times; iyaja—He worshiped.
TRANSLATION
Lord Rsabhadeva performed all kinds of sacrifices one hundred
times according to the instructions of the Vedic literatures. Thus
He satisfied Lord Visnu in every respect. All the rituals were


--- Page 164 ---
Text 18] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 159
enriched by first-class ingredients. They were executed in holy
places according to the proper time by priests who were all young
and faithful. In this way Lord Visnu was worshiped, and the
prasida was offered to all the demigods. Thus the functions and
festivals were all successful.
PURPORT

It is said, kaumara dacaret prajio dharman bhagavatan iha
(Bhag. 7.6.1). A ritual should be performed by young men. even boys,
at a tender age in order for the ritual to be performed successfully. From
childhood, people should be trained in Vedic culture, especially in devo-
tional service. In this way, one can perfect one’s life. A Vaisnava does not
disrespect the demigods, but on the other hand he is not so foolish that he
accepts each and every demigod as the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord
is master of all demigods: therefore the demigods are His servants. The
Vaisnava accepts them as servants of the Supreme Lord, and he worships
them directly. In the Brahma-sarhita, the important demigods— Lord
Siva, Lord Brahma and even the incarnations and expansions of Lord
Krsna like Maha-Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnu and all the other vispu-
tattvas, as well as the Sakti-tattvas like Durgadevi—are all worshiped by
the process of worshiping Govinda with the words govindam adi-
purusari tam ahari bhajami. A Vaisnava worships the demigods in rela-
tion to Govinda, not independently. Vaisnavas are not so foolish that they
consider the demigods independent of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritamrta. Ekale isvara krsna,
ara saba bhrtya: the supreme master is Krsna, and all others are His
servants.

TEXT 18

भगवतर्षभेण परिरक्ष्यमाण एतस्िन्‌ वर्षे न कथन पुरुषो वाज्छत्य-
विद्यमानमिवार्मनोऽन्यसात्कथञ्चन किमपि करिंचिदवेश्षते मतयंलुसवनं
विजृम्मितस्नेहातिशयमन्तरेण ॥ १८ ॥
bhagavatarsabhena pariraksyamana etasmin varse na kascana puruso
vanchaty avidyamanam iatmano ‘nyasmat katharicana kimapi
karhicid aveksate bhartary anusavanam virmbhita-snehatisayam an-
tarena.


--- Page 165 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4

bhagavata—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rsabhena—
King Rsabha; pariraksyamane—being protected; etasmin—on this;
varse—planet; na—not; kascana—anyone; purusah—even a common
man; varnichati—desires: avidyamanam—not existing in reality; iva—as
if; atmanah—for himself; anyasmat—from anyone else; kathaiicana—
by any means; kimapi—anything; karhicit—at any time; aveksate—
does care to see; bhartari—toward the master; anusavanam—always;
vijrmbhita—expanding; sneha-atiSayam—very great affection; an-
tarena —within one’s self.

TRANSLATION

No one likes to possess anything that is like a will-o’-the-wisp or
a flower in the sky, for everyone knows very well that such things
do not exist. When Lord Rsabhadeva ruled this planet of Bharata-
varsa, even common men did not want to ask for anything, at any
time or by any means. No one ever asks for a will-o’-the-wisp. In
other words, everyone was completely satisfied, and therefore
there was no chance of anyone’s asking for anything. The people
were absorbed in great affection for the King. Since this affection
was always expanding, they were not inclined to ask for anything.

PURPORT

In Bengal the word ghoda-dimba is used, which means “the egg of a
horse.” Since a horse never lays an egg, the word ghoda-dimba actually
has no meaning. In Sanskrit there is a word kha-puspa, which means
“the flower in the sky.” No flower grows in the sky: therefore no one is
interested in asking for kha-puspa or ghoda-dimba. During the reign of
Maharaja Rsabhadeva, people were so well equipped that they did not
want to ask for anything. They were immensely supplied with all
necessities for life due to King Rsabhadeva’s good government. Conse-
quently everyone felt full satisfaction and did not want anything. This is
the perfection of government. If the citizens are unhappy due to bad
government, the heads of government are condemned. During these
democratic days, monarchy is disliked by the people, but here is an ex-
ample of how an emperor of the whole world kept all the citizens fully


--- Page 166 ---
Text 19] The Characteristics of Rsabhadeva 161
satisfied by supplying the necessities of life and following the Vedic prin-
ciples. Thus everyone was happy during the reign of Maharaja
Rsabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19

स कदाचिदटमानो मगवानरृषभो त्रह्मावतेगतो त्रहमपिप्रवरसमायां प्रजानां
निञामयन्तीनामात्मजानवदितात्मनः प्रश्रयप्रणयभरसुयन्त्रितानप्युपरिक्ष-
यन्निति होवाच ।१९।
sa kadacid atamano bhagavan rsabho brahmavarta-gato brahmarsi-
pravara-sabhdayam prajanar nisamayantinam atmajan avahitatmanah
prasraya-pranaya-bhara-suyantritan apy upasiksayann iti hovaca.

sah—He; kadacit—once; atamanah—while on tour; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; rsabhah—Lord Rsabha; brahmavarta-
gatah—when He reached the place known as Brahmavarta (identified by
some as Burma and by others as a place near Kanpura, Uttar Pradesh);
brahma-rsi-pravara-sabhayam—in a meeting of first-class brahmanas;
prajanam—while the citizens; nisamayantinam—were hearing; atma-
jan—His sons; avahita-atmanah—attentive; prasraya—of good
behavior; pranaya—of devotion; bhara—by an abundance; su-
yantritan—well controlled; api—although; upasiksayan—teaching;
iti—thus; ha—certainly; uvaca—said.

TRANSLATION

Once while touring the world, Lord Rsabhadeva, the Supreme
Lord, reached a place known as Brahmavarta. There was a great
conference of learned brahmanas at that place, and all the King’s
sons attentively heard the instructions of the brahmanas there. At
that assembly, within the hearing of the citizens, Rsabhadeva in-
structed His sons, although they were already very well behaved,
devoted and qualified. He instructed them so that in the future
they could rule the world very perfectly. Thus he spoke as follows.


--- Page 167 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 4
PURPORT

The instructions of Lord Rsabhadeva to His sons are very valuable if
one wants to live peacefully within this world, which is full of miseries.
In the next chapter, Lord Rsabhadeva gives His sons these valuable
instructions.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fourth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Characteristics of
Rsabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”


--- Page 168 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings to His Sons
In this chapter there is a description of bhagavata-dharma, religious
principles in devotional service that transcend religious principles for
liberation and the mitigation of material misery. It is stated in this
chapter that a human being should not work hard like dogs and hogs for
sense gratification. The human life is especially meant for the revival of
our relationship with the Supreme Lord, and to this end all kinds of
austerities and penances should be accepted. By austere activities. one’s
heart can be cleansed of material contamination, and as a result one can
be situated on the spiritual platform. To attain this perfection, one has to
take shelter of a devotee and serve him. Then the door of liberation will
be open. Those who are materially attached to women and sense gratifica-
tion gradually become entangled in material consciousness and suffer the
miseries of birth, old age, disease and death. Those who are engaged in
the general welfare of all and who are not attached to children and family
are called mahatmas. Those who are engaged in sense gratification. who
act piously or impiously, cannot understand the purpose of the soul.
Therefore they should approach a highly elevated devotee and accept
him as a spiritual master. By his association, one will be able to under-
stand the purpose of life. Under the instructions of such a spiritual
master, one can attain devotional service to the Lord. detachment from
material things, and tolerance of material misery and distress. One can
then see all living entities equally, and one becomes very eager to know
about transcendental subject matters. Endeavoring persistently for the
satisfaction of Krsna. one becomes detached from wife. children and
home. He is not interested in wasting time. In this way one becomes self-
realized. A person advanced in spiritual knowledge does not engage any-
one in material activity. And one who cannot deliver another person by
instructing him in devotional service should not become a spiritual
master, father. mother. demigod or husband. Instructing His one
hundred sons. Lord Rsabhadeva advised them to accept their eldest
163


--- Page 169 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
brother. Bharata. as their guide and lord. and thereby serve him. Of all
living entities. the brahmanas are the best, and above the brahmanas the
Vaisnavas are situated in an even better position. Serving a Vaisnava
means serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus Sukadeva
Gosvami describes the characteristics of Bharata Maharaja and the
sacrificial performance executed by Lord Rsabhadeva for the instruction
of the general populace.
TEXT 1
ऋषभ उवाच
नायं देहो देदभाजां नृलोके
५५. নে
कष्टान्‌ कामानदते विडुजां ये ।
तपो दिव्यं पुत्रका येन as
= .
शद्धये्यसाद्‌ ब्रह्मसौख्यं त्वनन्तम्‌ RET
rsabha ८४९८०
nayam deho deha-bhajari nrioke
kastan kaman arhate vid-bhujar ye
tapo divyam putraka yena sattvari
suddhyed yasmad brahma-saukhyam tv anantam
rsabhah uvdaca—Llord Rsabhadeva said: na—not: ayam—this;
dehah—body: deha-bhajam—of all living entities who have accepted
material bodies: nr-loke —in this world; kastan—troublesome; kaman—
sense gratification; arhate—deserves; vit-bhujam—of stool-eaters: ye—
which: tapah—austerities and penances: divyam—divine: putrakah—
My dear sons: yena—by which: sattvam—the heart: suddhyet—
becomes purified: yasmat—from which: brahma-saukhyam—spiritual
happiness: tu—certainly: anantam—unending.
TRANSLATION
Lord Rsabhadeva told His sons: My dear boys, of all the living
entities who have accepted material bodies in this world, one who
has been awarded this human form should not work hard day and


--- Page 170 ---
Text 1] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 165
night simply for sense gratification, which is available even for
dogs and hogs that eat stool. One should engage in penance and
austerity to attain the divine position of devotional service. By
such activity, one’s heart is purified, and when one attains this
position, he attains eternal, blissful life, which is transcendental to
material happiness and which continues forever.
PURPORT

In this verse Lord Rsabhadeva tells His sons about the importance of
human life. The word deha-bhak refers to anyone who accepts a material
body, but the living entity who is awarded the human form must act
differently from animals. Animals like dogs and hogs enjoy sense
gratification by eating stool. After undergoing severe hardships all day,
human beings are trying to enjoy themselves at night by eating.
drinking, having sex and sleeping. At the same time, they have to
properly defend themselves. However, this is not human civilization.
Human life means voluntarily practicing suffering for the advancement
of spiritual life. There is, of course, suffering in the lives of animals and
plants, which are suffering due to their past misdeeds. However. human
beings should voluntarily accept suffering in the form of austerities and
penances in order to attain the divine life. After attaining the divine life.
one can enjoy happiness eternally. After all, every living entity is trying
to enjoy happiness. but as long as one is encaged in the material body. he
has to suffer different kinds of misery. A higher sense is present in the
human form. We should act according to superior advice in order to at-
tain eternal happiness and go back to Godhead.

It is significant in this verse that the government and the natural
guardian, the father, should educate subordinates and raise them to
Krsna consciousness. Devoid of Krsna consciousness. every living being
suffers in this cycle of birth and death perpetually. To relieve them from
this bondage and enable them to become blissful and happy. bhakti-yoga
should be taught. A foolish civilization neglects to teach people how to
rise to the platform of bhakti-yoga. Without Krsna consciousness. a per-
son is no better than a hog or dog. The instructions of Rsabhadeva are
very essential at the present moment. People are being educated and
trained to work very hard for sense gratification. and there is no sublime
aim in life. A man travels to earn his livelihood. leaving home early in


--- Page 171 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
the morning, catching a local train and being packed in a compartment.
He has to stand for an hour or two in order to reach his place of business.
Then again he takes a bus to get to the office. At the office he works hard
from nine to five: then he takes two or three hours to return home. After
eating. he has sex and goes to sleep. For all this hardship, his only happi-
ness is a little sex. Yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukharin hi tuccham.
Rsabhadeva clearly states that human life is not meant for this kind of
existence, which is enjoyed even by dogs and hogs. Indeed, dogs and hogs
do not have to work so hard for sex. A human being should try to live in
a different way and should not try to imitate dogs and hogs. The alterna-
tive is mentioned. Human life is meant for tapasya, austerity and
penance. By tapasya, one can get out of the material clutches. When one
is situated in Krsna consciousness, devotional service, his happiness is
guaranteed eternally. By taking to bhakti-yoga, devotional service, one’s
existence is purified. The living entity is seeking happiness life after life,
but he can make a solution to all his problems simply by practicing bhak-
ti-yoga. Then he immediately becomes eligible to return home, back to
Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
Jjanma karma ca me divyam
০৮৫7) yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehari punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this
material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.”
TEXT 2
=
मदत्सेवां द्वारमादुर्विं॒क्ते-
स्तमोद्वारं योषितां सङ्गिसङ्गम्‌ |
महान्तस्ते समचित्ताः प्रशान्ता
-
विमन्यवः सुहृदः साधवो ये ॥ २॥
mahat-sevarn dvaram ahur vimuktes
tamo-dvarar yositarn sangi-sangam


--- Page 172 ---
Text 2] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 167
mahantas te sama-cittah prasanta
vimanyavah suhrdah sadhavo ye

mahat-sevam —service to the spiritually advanced persons called
mahatmas; dvaram—the way; ahuh—they say: vimukteh—of libera-
tion; tamah-dvaram—the way to the dungeon of a dark, hellish condi-
tion of life; yositam—of women: sangi—of associates; sarigam—asso-
ciation; mahantah—highly advanced in spiritual understanding: te—
they; sama-cittah—persons who see everyone in a spiritual identity:
prasantah—very peaceful, situated in Brahman or Bhagavan:
vimanyavah—without anger (one must distribute Krsna consciousness
to persons who are hostile without becoming angry at them): suhrdah—
well-wishers of everyone: sadhavah—qualified devotees. without
abominable behavior: ye—they who.

TRANSLATION

One can attain the path of liberation from material bondage only
by rendering service to highly advanced spiritual personalities.
These personalities are impersonalists and devotees. Whether one
wants to merge into the Lord’s existence or wants to associate with
the Personality of Godhead, one should render service to the
mahatmas. For those who are not interested in such activities, who
associate with people fond of women and sex, the path to hell is
wide open. The mahatmas are equipoised. They do not see any
difference between one living entity and another. They are very
peaceful and are fully engaged in devotional service. They are
devoid of anger, and they work for the benefit of everyone. They
do not behave in any abominable way. Such people are known as
mahatmas.

PURPORT

The human body is like a junction. One may either take the path of
liberation or the path leading to a hellish condition. How one can take
these paths is described herein. On the path of liberation. one associates
with mahatmas, and on the path of bondage one associates with those at-
tached to sense gratification and women. There are two types of mahat-
mas—the impersonalist and the devotee. Although their ultimate goal is


--- Page 173 ---
168 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
different. the process of emancipation is almost the same. Both want
eternal happiness. One seeks happiness in impersonal Brahman, and the
other seeks happiness in the association of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. As described in the first verse: brahma-saukhyam. Brahman
means spiritual or eternal; both the impersonalist and the devotee seek
eternal blissful life. In any case. it is advised that one become perfect. In
the words of Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.87):
asat-sanga-tyaga, —ei vaisnava-acara
‘stri-sangi’——eka asadhu, ‘krsnabhakta’ ara
To remain unattached to the modes of material nature, one should avoid
associating with those who are asat, materialistic. There are two kinds of
materialists. One is attached to women and sense gratification, and the
other is simply a nondevotee. On the positive side is association with
77000877105, and on the negative side is the avoidance of nondevotees and
women-hunters.
TEXT 3
ये वा मयीशे कतसौहदा्था
जनेषु देहम्भरवातिंकेषु |
गृहेषु जायात्मजरातिमलत्सु
न प्रीतियुक्ता याघदर्थाथ लोके ॥ ३ ॥
ye va mayise krta-sauhrdartha
८7९5८ dehambhara-vartikesu
grhesu jayatmaja-ratimatsu
na priti-yukta yavad-arthas ca loke
ye—those who; wa—or; mayi—unto Me; iSe—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead: krta-sauhrda-arthah—very eager to develop love
(in a relationship of dasya, sakhya, vatsalya or madhurya); janesu—to
people; dehambhara-vartikesu—who are interested only in maintaining
the body, not in spiritual salvation; grhesu—to the home: jaya —wife;
atma-ja—children; rati—wealth or friends; matsu—consisting of ; na—


--- Page 174 ---
Text 4] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 169
not; priti-yuktah—very attached: yavat-arthah—who live by collecting
only as much as required; ca—and: loke—in the material world.
TRANSLATION

Those who are interested in reviving Krsna consciousness and
increasing their love of Godhead do not like to do anything that is
not related to Krsna. They are not interested in mingling with
people who are busy maintaining their bodies, eating, sleeping,
mating and defending. They are not attached to their homes,
although they may be householders. Nor are they attached to
wives, children, friends or wealth. At the same time, they are not
indifferent to the execution of their duties. Such people are in-
terested in collecting only enough money to keep the body and
soul together.

PURPORT

Whether he is an impersonalist or a devotee, one who is actually in-
terested in advancing spiritually should not mingle with those who are
simply interested in maintaining the body by means of the so-called ad-
vancement of civilization. Those who are interested in spiritual life
should not be attached to homely comforts in the company of wife.
children. friends and so forth. Even if one is a grhastha and has to earn
his livelihood, he should be satisfied by collecting only enough money to
maintain body and soul together. One should not have more than that nor
less than that. As indicated herein, a householder should endeavor to
earn money for the execution of bhakti-yoga—sravanam kirtanam
visnoh smaranarm pada-sevanam/ arcana vandanari dasyam sakhyam
atma-nivedanam. A householder should lead such a life that he gets full
opportunity to hear and chant. He should worship the Deity at home. ob-
serve festivals, invite friends in and give them prasada. A householder
should earn money for this purpose. not for sense gratification.

TEXT 4
+ ६५
नूनं प्रमत्तः ङुरुते विकमं
यदिन्द्रियप्रीतय  आ्णोति |


--- Page 175 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
न साघु मन्ये यत आत्मनोऽय-
मसनपि क्लेशद आस देहः ॥ ४॥
ग्वा pramattah kurute vikarma
yad indriya-pritaya aprnoti
na sadhu manye yata atmano yam
asann api klesada asa dehah
nitnam—indeed: pramattah—mad: kurute—performs: vikarma—
sinful activities forbidden in the scriptures: yat—when: indriya-
pritaye—for sense gratification: @prnoti—engages: na—not: sadhu—
befitting: manye—I think: yatah—by which: atmanah—of the soul:
ayam—this: asan—being temporary: api—although: klesa-dah—
giving misery: dsa—became possible: dehah—the body.
TRANSLATION
When a person considers sense gratification the aim of life, he
certainly becomes mad after materialistic living and engages in all
kinds of sinful activity. He does not know that due to his past
misdeeds he has already received a body which, although tempo-
rary, is the cause of his misery. Actually the living entity should
not have taken on a material body, but he has been awarded the
material body for sense gratification. Therefore I think it not
befitting an intelligent man to involve himself again in the ac-
tivities of sense gratification by which he perpetually gets material
bodies one after another.
PURPORT
Begging, borrowing and stealing to live for sense gratification is con-
demned in this verse because such consciousness leads one to a dark,
hellish condition. The four sinful activities are illicit sex. meat-eating.
intoxication and gambling. These are the means by which one gets
another material body that is full of miseries. In the Vedas it is said:
asango hy ayam purusah. The living entity is not really connected with
this material world. but due to his tendency to enjoy the material senses,
he is put into the material condition. One should perfect his life by asso-


--- Page 176 ---
Text 5] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 171
ciating with devotees. He should not become further implicated in the
material body.
TEXT 5
-
परामवस्तावदबोधजातो
यावन्न जिज्ञासत आत्मतस्वम्‌ |
पि ~ =>
यावत्करियास्तावदिदं मनो वें
कर्मात्मकं येन॒ शरीरबन्धः ॥। "५ |
parabhavas tavad abodha-jato
yavan na jynasata atma-tattvam
yavat kriyas tavad 80077 mano vai
karmatmakar yena Sarira-bandhah
parabhavah—defeat, misery; tavat—so long: abodha-jatah—pro-
duced from ignorance; yavat—as long as; na—not; jijiidsate—inquires
about; atma-tattvam—the truth of the self; yavat—as long as: kriyah—
fruitive activities; tavat—so long: idam —this; manah—mind: vai—in-
deed: karma-atmakam—absorbed in material activities: yena—by
which: Sarira-bandhah—bondage in this material body.
TRANSLATION
As long as one does not inquire about the spiritual values of life,
one is defeated and subjected to miseries arising from ignorance.
Be it sinful or pious, karma has its resultant actions. If a person is
engaged in any kind of karma, his mind is called karmatmaka, col-
ored with fruitive activity. As long as the mind is impure, con-
sciousness is unclear, and as long as one is absorbed in fruitive ac-
tivity, he has to accept a material body.
PURPORT
Generally people think that one should act very piously in order to be
relieved from misery, but this is not a fact. Even though one engages in
pious activity and speculation. he is nonetheless defeated. His only aim
should be emancipation from the clutches of maya and all material


--- Page 177 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
activities. Speculative knowledge and pious activity do not solve the
problems of material life. One should be inquisitive to understand his
spiritual position. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.37):
yathaidharisi samiddho ‘gnir
bhasmasat kurute ’rjuna
Jjranagnih sarva-karmani
bhasmasat kurute tatha
“As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes. O Arjuna, so does the fire of
knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities.”

Unless one understands the self and its activities, one has to be con-
sidered in material bondage. In Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.2.32) it is also
said: ye ‘nye ’ravindaksa vimukta-maninas tvayy asta-bhavad avisud-
dha-buddhayah. A person who doesn’t have knowledge of devotional
service may think himself liberated, but actually he is not. Aruhya krc-
chrena pararh padam tatah patanty adho ’nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah:
such people may approach the impersonal Brahman effulgence. but they
fall down again into material enjoyment because they have no knowledge
of devotional service. As long as one is interested in karma and jiiana, he
continues enduring the miseries of material life—birth, old age. disease
and death. Karmis certainly take on one body after another. As far as
Jjianis are concerned, unless they are promoted to the topmost under-
standing, they must return to the material world. As explained in
Bhagavad-gita (7.19): bahinam janmanam ante jiianavan mam pra-
padyate. The point is to know Krsna, Vasudeva, as everything and sur-
render unto Him. Karmis do not know this, but a devotee who is one
hundred percent engaged in the devotional service of the Lord knows
fully what is karma and jana; therefore a pure devotee is no longer in-
terested in karma or jaana. Anyabhilasita-sinyam jaana-karmady-
anavrtam. The real bhakta is untouched by any tinge of karma and
Jaana. His only purpose in life 15 to serve the Lord.

TEXT 6
५ . ~
एमं मनः कर्मवशं प्रयुङ्क्ते
अविद्ययाऽऽत्मन्युपथीयमाने


--- Page 178 ---
Text 6] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 173
(3
प्रीतिनं यावन्मयि aE
=
न gad देहयोगेन तावत्‌ ॥ & ॥
61071 manah karma-vasar prayurikte
avidyayatmany upadhiyamane
pritir na yavan mayi vasudeve
na mucyate deha-yogena tavat

evam —thus; manah—the mind; karma-vasam—subjugated by frui-
tive activities; prayunkte—acts; avidyaya—by ignorance; atmani—
when the living entity; upadhiyamane—is covered; pritih—love: na—
not; yavat—as long as; mayi—unto Me: vasudeve— Vasudeva, Krsna:
na—not; mucyate—is delivered: deha-yogena—from contact with the
material body; tavat—so long.

TRANSLATION

When the living entity is covered by the mode of ignorance, he
does not understand the individual living being and the supreme
living being, and his mind is subjugated to fruitive activity.
Therefore, until one has love for Lord Vasudeva, who is none
other than Myself, he is certainly not delivered from having to ac-
cept a material body again and again.

PURPORT

When the mind is polluted by fruitive activity. the living entity wants
to be elevated from one material position to another. Generally everyone
is involved in working hard day and night to improve his economic con-
dition. Even when one understands the Vedic rituals. he becomes in-
terested in promotion to heavenly planets, not knowing that one’s real
interest lies in returning home, back to Godhead. By acting on the plat-
form of fruitive activity. one wanders throughout the universe in
different species and forms. Unless he comes in contact with a devotee of
the Lord, a guru, he does not become attached to the service of Lord
Vasudeva. Knowledge of Vasudeva requires many births to understand.
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (7.19): vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahat-
ma sudurlabhah. After struggling for existence for many births. one


--- Page 179 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
may take shelter at the lotus feet of Vasudeva, Krsna. When this hap-
pens. one actually becomes wise and surrenders unto Him. That is the
only way to stop the repetition of birth and death. This is confirmed in
Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 19.151) in the instructions given by Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu to Srila Ripa Gosvami at Dasasvamedha-ghata.
brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
The living entity wanders throughout different planets in different
forms and bodies, but if by chance he comes in contact with a bona fide
spiritual master, by the grace of the spiritual master he receives Lord
Krsna’s shelter. and his devotional life begins.
TEXT 7
यदा न पश्यत्ययथा गुणेहां
=~
আধ प्रमत्तः सहसा বিঘশ্রিন ।
गतस्यृतिर्विन्दति तत्र॒ तापा-
a
নামান मथुन्यमगारमज्ञः 1 ७ ॥
yada na paSyaty ayatha gunehari
svarthe pramattah sahasa vipascit
gata-smrtir vindati tatra tapan
asadya maithunyam agaram ajiah
yada—when: na—not: paSyati—sees: ayathd—unnecessary:
guna-tham—endeavor to satisfy the senses: sva-arthe—in self-interest:
pramattah—mad: sahasd—very soon: vipascit—even one advanced in
knowledge: gata-smrtih—being forgetful: vindati—gets: tatra—there:
tapan—material miseries: dsadya—getting: maithunyam—based on
sexual intercourse: agaram—a home: ajiiah—being foolish.
TRANSLATION
Even though one may be very learned and wise, he is mad if he

does not understand that the endeavor for sense gratification is a


--- Page 180 ---
Text 8] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 175
useless waste of time. Being forgetful of his own interest, he tries
to be happy in the material world, centering his interests around
his home, which is based on sexual intercourse and which brings
him all kinds of material miseries. In this way one is no better than
a foolish animal.
PURPORT
In the lowest stage of devotional life, one is not an unalloyed devotee.
Anyabhilasita-sanyam jiana-karmady-anavrtam: to be an unalloyed
devotee, one must be freed from all material desires and untouched by
fruitive activity and speculative knowledge. On the lower platform. one
may sometimes be interested in philosophical speculation with a tinge of
devotion. However, at that stage one is still interested in sense gratifica-
tion and is contaminated by the modes of material nature. The influence
of maya is so strong that even a person advanced in knowledge actually
forgets that he 15 Krsna's eternal servant. Therefore he remains satisfied
in his householder life, which is centered around sexual intercourse.
Conceding to a life of sex, he agrees to suffer all kinds of material mis-
eries. Due to ignorance, one is thus bound by the chain of material laws.
TEXT 8
১ 1০. Ba,
पुंसः fam मिथुनीभावमेतं
=
तयोर्भिथो हृदयग्रन्थिमाहुः |
EN
अतो गृह्ेत्रसुतासवित्ते-
cs LN নে
Sa" মাীাহী5্মল ममेति ॥ ८ ॥
puriisah striya mithuni-bhavam etam
tayor mitho hrdaya-granthim ahuh
ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
Janasya moho ’yam aham mameti
purisah—of a male: striyah—of a female: mithuni-bhavam—attrac-
tion for sexual life: etam—this: tayoh—of both of them: mithah—be-
tween one another: hrdaya-granthim—the knot of the hearts: ahuh—
they call; atah—thereafter: grha—by home: ksetra—field: suta—


--- Page 181 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
children: apta—relatives; vittath—and by wealth; janasya—of the
living being: mohah—illusion; ayam—this; aham—I; mama—mine;
iti—thus.
TRANSLATION

The attraction between male and female is the basic principle of
material existence. On the basis of this misconception, which ties
together the hearts of the male and female, one becomes attracted
to his body, home, property, children, relatives and wealth. In this
way one increases life’s illusions and thinks in terms of “I and
mine.”

PURPORT

Sex serves as the natural attraction between man and woman, and
when they are married, their relationship becomes more involved. Due to
the entangling relationship between man and woman, there is a sense of
illusion whereby one thinks, “This man is my husband,” or “This
woman is my wife.” This is called hrdaya-granthi, “‘the hard knot in the
heart.” This knot is very difficult to undo, even though a man and
woman separate either for the principles of varnasrama or simply to get
a divorce. In any case, the man always thinks of the woman, and the
woman always thinks of the man. Thus a person becomes materially at-
tached to family, property and children, although all of these are tempo-
rary. The possessor unfortunately identifies with his property and
wealth. Sometimes, even after renunciation, one becomes attached to a
temple or to the few things that constitute the property of a sannyast, but
such attachment is not as strong as family attachment. The attachment to
the family is the strongest illusion. In the Satya-samhita, it is stated:

brahmadya yajravalkadya
mucyante stri-sahdyinah
bodhyante kecanaitesarn
visesam ca vido viduh

Sometimes it is found among exalted personalities like Lord Brahma that
the wife and children are not a cause of bondage. On the contrary, the


--- Page 182 ---
Text 9] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 177
wife actually helps further spiritual life and liberation. Nonetheless,
most people are bound by the knots of the marital relationship, and con-
sequently they forget their relationship with Krsna.
TEXT 9
यदा मनोहदयग्रन्थिरख
कर्मायुबद्धो द्द ASAT |
तदा जनः सम्परिवर्ततेऽखाद्‌
शक्तः परं यात्यतिहाय टतम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
yada mano-hrdaya-granthir asya
karmanubaddho drdha aslatheta
tada janah samparivartate smad
muktah param yaty atihaya hetum

yada—when:; manah—the mind: hrdaya-granthih—the knot in the
heart; asya—of this person; karma-anubaddhah—bound by the results
of his past deeds; drdhah—very strong: aslatheta—becomes slackened:
tada—at that time; janah—the conditioned soul; samparivartate—turns
away: asmdat—from this attachment for sex life; muktah—Iliberated:
param—to the transcendental world; yati—goes; atihaya—giving up:
hetum—the original cause.

TRANSLATION

When the strong knot in the heart of a person implicated in
material life due to the results of past action is slackened, one
turns away from his attachment to home, wife and children. In this
way, one gives up the basic principle of illusion [I and mine] and
becomes liberated. Thus one goes to the transcendental world.

PURPORT

When, by associating with sadhus and engaging in devotional service.
one is gradually freed from the material conception due to knowledge.
practice and detachment. the knot of attachment in the heart is


--- Page 183 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
slackened. Thus one can get freed from conditional life and become eli-
gible to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 10-13
हंसे गुरौ मयि भक्त्यानुचरत्या
परिठ॒ष्णया दन्दरतितिक्षया च।
অন जन्तो्व्यसनावगत्या
जिज्ञासया तपसेहानिदृ्या ॥१०॥
मत्कर्मभिर्म॑त्कथया च नित्यं
6
मदेवसङ्गाद्‌ गुणकीतेनान्मे |
निर्वेरसाम्योपश्चमेन पत्रा
fren देदगेहात्मबुदधेः ॥११॥
अध्यात्मयोगेन विविक्तसेषया
प्राणेन्द्रियात्मामिजयेन सभ्यक्‌ |
सच्द्ृद्धया ब्रह्मचयण चश्वद्‌
„ असम्प्रमादेन यमेन वाचाम्‌ ॥१२॥
RE मद्भावविचक्षणेन
ज्ञानेन विज्ञानविराजितेन |
योगेन धृत्युद्यमसच्वयुक्तो
fog व्यपोहेरकुशलोऽहमाख्यम्‌ ॥१३॥
110775९ gurau mayi bhaktyanuvrtya
vitrsnaya dvandva-titiksaya ca
sarvatra jantor vyasanavagatyda
JijRasaya tapaseha-nivrttya
mat-karmabhir mat-kathaya ca nityarn
mad-deva-sangad guna-kirtanan me
nirvaira-samyopasamena putra
Jihasaya deha-gehatma-buddheh


--- Page 184 ---
Text 13] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 179
adhyatma-yogena vivikta-sevaya
pranendriyatmabhijayena sadhryak
sac-chraddhaya brahmacaryena sasvad
asampramadena yamena vacam
sarvatra mad-bhava-vicaksanena
Jadnena vynana-virgjitena
yogena dhrty-udyama-sattva-yukto
lingam vyapohet kusalo ham-akhyam
hamse—who is a paramahamsa, or the most exalted. spiritually ad-
vanced person: gurau—to the spiritual master: mayi—unto Me. the
Supreme Personality of Godhead: bhaktya—by devotional service:
anuvrtya—by following: vitrsnaya—by detachment from sense
gratification: dvandva—of the dualities of the material world: titik-
saya—by tolerance: ca—also: sarvatra—everywhere: jantoh—of the
living entity: vyasana—the miserable condition of life: avagatya—by
realizing: jijrdsaya—by inquiring about the truth: tapasa—by prac-
ticing austerities and penances: iha-nivrttya—by giving up the endeavor
for sense enjoyment: mat-karmabhih—by working for Me: mat-
kathaya—by hearing topics about Me; ca—also: nityam—always: mat-
deva-sangat—by association with My devotees: guna-kirtanat me—by
chanting and glorifying My transcendental qualities: nirvaira—being
without enmity: samya—seeing everyone equally by spiritual under-
standing: upasamena—by subduing anger. lamentation and so on:
putrah—O sons: jihasaya—by desiring to give up: deha—with the
body: geha—with the home: atma-buddheh—identification of the self:
adhyatma-yogena—by study of the revealed scriptures: vivikta-
sevaya—by living in a solitary place: prana—the life air: indriya—the
senses: atma—the mind: abhijayena—by controlling: sadhryak—com-
pletely: sat-sraddhaya—by developing faith in the scriptures:
brahmacaryena—by observing celibacy: Sasvat—always:
asampramadena—by not being bewildered: yamena—by restraint:
vacam—of words: sarvatra—everywhere: mat-bhava—thinking of Me:
vicaksanena—by observing: jianena—by development of knowledge:
vijiana—by practical application of knowledge: virgjitena—illumined:


--- Page 185 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
yogena—by practice of bhakti-yoga; dhrti—patience: udyama—
enthusiasm: sattva—discretion: yuktah—endowed with: lingam —the
cause of material bondage: vyapohet—one can give up; kusalah—in full
auspiciousness: aham-akhyam—{false ego, false identification with the
material world.
TRANSLATION

O My sons, you should accept a highly elevated paramaharisa, a
spiritually advanced spiritual master. In this way, you should place
your faith and love in Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
You should detest sense gratification and tolerate the duality of
pleasure and pain, which are like the seasonal changes of summer
and winter. Try to realize the miserable condition of living en-
tities, who are miserable even in the higher planetary systems.
Philosophically inquire about the truth. Then undergo all kinds of
austerities and penances for the sake of devotional service. Give up
the endeavor for sense enjoyment and engage in the service of the
Lord. Listen to discussions about the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and always associate with devotees. Chant about and
glorify the Supreme Lord, and look upon everyone equally on the
spiritual platform. Give up enmity and subdue anger and lamenta-
tion. Abandon identifying the self with the body and the home,
and practice reading the revealed scriptures. Live in a secluded
place and practice the process by which you can completely control
your life air, mind and senses. Have full faith in the revealed scrip-
tures, the Vedic literatures, and always observe celibacy. Perform
your prescribed duties and avoid unnecessary talks. Always
thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, acquire
knowledge from the right source. Thus practicing bhakti-yoga,
you will patiently and enthusiastically be elevated in knowledge
and will be able to give up the false ego.

PURPORT

In these four verses, Rsabhadeva tells His sons how they can be freed
from the false identification arising from false ego and material con-
ditional life. One gradually becomes liberated by practicing as mentioned


--- Page 186 ---
Text 13] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 181
above. All these prescribed methods enable one to give up the material
body (lingam vyapohet) and be situated in his original spiritual body.
First of all one has to accept a bona fide spiritual master. This is advo-
cated by Srila Rapa Gosvami in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu: Sri-guru-
padasrayah. To be freed from the entanglement of the material world.
one has to approach a spiritual master. Tad-vijnanarthar sa gurum
evabhigacchet. By questioning the spiritual master and by serving him,
one can advance in spiritual life. When one engages in devotional ser-
vice, naturally the attraction for personal comfort —for eating. sleeping
and dressing—is reduced. By associating with the devotee, a spiritual
standard is maintained. The word mad-deva-sarigat is very important.
There are many so-called religions devoted to the worship of various
demigods, but here good association means association with one who
simply accepts Krsna as his worshipable Deity.

Another important item is dvandva-titiksa. As long as one is situated
in the material world, there must be pleasure and pain arising from the
material body. As Krsna advises in Bhagavad-gita, tars titiksasva
bharata. One has to learn how to tolerate the temporary pains and
pleasures of this material world. One must also be detached from his
family and practice celibacy. Sex with one’s wife according to the scrip-
tural injunctions is also accepted as brahmacarya (celibacy), but illicit
sex is opposed to religious principles, and it hampers advancement in
spiritual consciousness. Another important word is vijiana-virgjita.
Everything should be done very scientifically and consciously. One
should be a realized soul. In this way, one can give up the entanglement
of material bondage.

As Sri Madhvacarya points out, the sum and substance of these four
slokas is that one should refrain from acting out of a desire for sense
gratification and should instead always engage in the Lord's loving ser-
vice. In other words, bhakti-yoga is the acknowledged path of liberation.
Srila Madhvacarya quotes from the Adhyatma:

atmano “vihitari karma
varjayitvanya-karmanah

kamasya ca parityago
nirthety ahur uttamah


--- Page 187 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
One should perform activities only for the benefit of the soul; any other
activity should be given up. When a person is situated in this way, he is
said to be desireless. Actually a living entity cannot be totally desireless,
but when he desires the benefit of the soul and nothing else, he is said to
be desireless.

Spiritual knowledge is jiana-vijiana-samanvitam. When one is fully
equipped with jana and vijiana, he is perfect. Jiana means that one
understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, to be the
Supreme Being. Vijrnanarefers to the activities that liberate one from the
ignorance of material existence. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(2.9.31): jranam parama-guhyamn me yad vijiana-samanvitam.
Knowledge of the Supreme Lord is very confidential, and the supreme
knowledge by which one understands Him furthers the liberation of all
living entities. This knowledge is vijiiana. As confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita (4.9):

Jjanma karma ca me divyam
evan yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this
material world. but attains My eternal abode. O Arjuna.”
TEXT 14
कर्माशयं हृदयग्रन्थिवन्ध-
मविद्ययाऽऽसादितमप्रमत्तः |
अनेन योगेन. यथोपदेशं
सम्यग्न्यपोद्योपरमेत योगात्‌ ॥१४॥
karmasayam hrdaya-granthi-bandham
avidyayasaditam apramattah
anena yogena yathopadesar
samyag vyapohyoparameta yogat


--- Page 188 ---
Text 14] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 183
karma-asayam—the desire for fruitive activities; hrdaya-granthi—
the knot in the heart; bandham—bondage; avidyaya—because of ig-
norance; asaditam—brought about: apramattah—not being covered by
ignorance or illusion, very careful; anena—by this: yogena —practice of
yoga; yatha-upadesam—as advised; sarmyak—completely: vyapohya—
becoming free from; uparameta—one should desist: yogat—from the
practice of yoga, the means of liberation.
TRANSLATION
As I have advised you, My dear sons, you should act accordingly.
Be very careful. By these means you will be freed from the ig-
norance of the desire for fruitive activity, and the knot of bondage
in the heart will be completely severed. For further advancement,
you should also give up the means. That is, you should not become
attached to the process of liberation itself.
PURPORT
The process of liberation is brahma-jijiasa, the search for the Ab-
solute Truth. Generally brahma-jiyjiiasa is called neti neti, the process by
which one analyzes existence to search out the Absolute Truth. This
method continues as long as one is not situated in his spiritual life.
Spiritual life is brahma-bhita, the self-realized state. In the words of
Bhagavad-gita (18.54):
brahma-bhitah prasannatma
na Socati na karksati
samah sarvesu bhiitesu
mad-bhaktir labhate param
“One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
anything: he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state. he
attains pure devotional service unto Me.”
The idea is to enter into the para bhakti, the transcendental devotional
service of the Supreme Lord. To attain this. one must analyze one’s exis-
tence, but when one is actually engaged in devotional service. he should


--- Page 189 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
not bother seeking out knowledge. By simply engaging in devotional ser-
vice undeviatingly, one will always remain in the liberated condition.
mar ca yo vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhivyaya kalpate
(Bg. 14.26)

The unflinching execution of devotional service is in itself brahma-
bhiita. Another important feature in this connection is anena yogena
yathopadesam. The instructions received from the spiritual master must
be followed immediately. One should not deviate from or surpass the in-
structions of the spiritual master. One should not be simply intent on
consulting books but should simultaneously execute the spiritual
master’s order (yathopadesam). Mystic power should be achieved to en-
able one to give up the material conception, but when one actually
engages in devotional service, one does not need to practice the mystic
yoga system. The point is that one can give up the practice of yoga, but
devotional service cannot be given up. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.7.10):

atmaramas ca munayo
nirgrantha apy urukrame
kurvanty ahaitukim bhaktim
ittham-bhita-guno harih
Even those who are liberated (atmarama) must always engage in devo-
tional service. One may give up the practice of yoga when one is self-
realized, but at no stage can one give up devotional service. All other ac-
tivities for self-realization, including yoga and philosophical speculation.
may be given up, but devotional service must be retained at all times.
TEXT 15
s on ক ~ Q
पुत्राच খচ্দায चषा JE
मल्लोककामो मदनुग्रहार्थः |


--- Page 190 ---
Text 15] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 185
इत्थं विमन्युरनुशिष्याद तज्ज्ञान्‌
न योजयेत्कर्मसु कर्ममूढान्‌ |
कं योजयन्मनुजोऽथं लमेत
निपातयन्ष्टच्सं হি गते ॥१५॥
putrams ca $isyars ca nrpo gurur va
mal-loka-kamo mad-anugraharthah
ittharh vimanyur anusisyad ataj-jian
na yojayet karmasu karma-miadhan
karin yojayan manujo ’rthari labheta
nipatayan nasta-drsari hi garte
putran—the sons: ca—and; Sisyan—the disciples: ca—and: nrpah—
the king: guruh—the spiritual master: va—or: mat-loka-kamah—
desiring to go to My abode: mat-anugraha-arthah—thinking that to
achieve My mercy is the aim of life: ittham—in this manner:
vimanyuh—free from anger: anusisyat—should instruct: a-tat-jian—
bereft of spiritual knowledge: na—not: yojayet—should engage: kar-
masu—in fruitive activities; karma-miidhan—simply engaged in pious
or impious activities; kam—what: yojayan—engaging: manu-jah—a
man; artham—benefit; labheta—can achieve: nipdtayan—causing to
fall: nasta-driam—one who is already bereft of his transcendental sight:
hi—indeed; garte—in the hole.
TRANSLATION
If one is serious about going back home, back to Godhead, he
must consider the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
the summum bonum and chief aim of life. If he is a father in-
structing his sons, a spiritual master instructing his disciples, or a
king instructing his citizens, he must instruct them as I have ad-
vised. Without being angry, he should continue giving instruc-
tions, even if his disciple, son or citizen is sometimes unable to
follow his order. Ignorant people who engage in pious and im-
pious activities should be engaged in devotional service by all
means. They should always avoid fruitive activity. If one puts into


--- Page 191 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
the bondage of karmic activity his disciple, son or citizen who is
bereft of transcendental vision, how will one profit? It is like
leading a blind man to a dark well and causing him to fall in.
PURPORT
It is stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.26):
na buddhi-bhedam janayed
ajAanam karma-sanginam
Josayet sarva-karmani
vidvan yuktah samacaran
“Let not the wise disrupt the minds of the ignorant who are attached to
fruitive action. They should be encouraged not to refrain from work, but
to work in the spirit of devotion.”
TEXT 16
लोकः खयं श्रेयसि নহি
योऽर्थान्‌ समीहेत निकामकामः |
~, ~
अन्योन्यवैरः सुखलेशहेतो-
रनन्तदुःखं च न वेद मूढः 1280
lokah svayam sreyasi nasta-drstir
yo ’rthan samiheta nikama-kamah
anyonya-vairah sukha-lesa-hetor
ananta-duhkhari ca na veda miidhah
lokah— people; svayam—personally; Sreyasi—of the path of
auspiciousness; nasta-drstih—who have lost sight; yah—who: arthan —
things meant for sense gratification; samiheta—desire; nikama-
kamah—having too many lusty desires for sense enjoyment; anyonya-
vairah—being envious of one another; sukha-lesa-hetoh—simply for
temporary material happiness; ananta-duhkham —unlimited sufferings:
ca—also; na—do not; veda —know; miidhah—foolish.


--- Page 192 ---
Text 17] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 187
TRANSLATION

Due to ignorance, the materialistic person does not know any-
thing about his real self-interest, the auspicious path in life. He is
simply bound to material enjoyment by lusty desires, and all his
plans are made for this purpose. For temporary sense gratification,
such a person creates a society of envy, and due to this mentality,
he plunges into the ocean of suffering. Such a foolish person does
not even know about this.

PURPORT

The word nasta-drstih, meaning “one who has no eyes to see the
future.” is very significant in this verse. Life goes on from one body to
another, and the activities performed in this life are enjoyed or suffered
in the next life, if not later in this life. One who is unintelligent. who has
no eyes to see the future, simply creates enmity and fights with others for
sense gratification. As a result, one suffers in the next life. but due to
being like a blind man, he continues to act in such a way that he suffers
unlimitedly. Such a person is a miidha, one who simply wastes his time
and does not understand the Lord’s devotional service. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (7.25):

naham prakasah sarvasya
yogamayd-samavrtah
miudho ‘yarn nabhijanati
loko mam ajam avyayam
`" am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them 1 am
covered by My eternal creative potency [yogamayal: and so the deluded
world knows Me not. who am unborn and infallible.”

In the Katha Upanisad it is also said: avidyayam antare vartamanah
svayari dhirah panditarh manyamanah. Although ignorant. people still
go to other blind men for leadership. As a result. both are subjected to
miserable conditions. The blind lead the blind into the ditch.

TEXT 17
कस्तं स्वयं aga faafag
९
अविद्यायामन्तरे वतमानम्‌ |


--- Page 193 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
दृष्टा पुनस्तं सघृणः बुद्धि
प्रयोजयेदुत्पथगं यथान्धम्‌ ॥१७॥
kas 4078 svayar tad-abhijfio vipascid
avidyayam antare vartamanam
drstva punas tari saghrnah kubuddhir
prayojayed utpathagar yathandham
kah—who is that person: tam—him; svayam—personally: tat-
abhijiiah—knowing spiritual knowledge: vipascit—a learned scholar:
avidyayam antare—in ignorance: vartamdanam—existing: drstva—
seeing: punah—again; tam—him; sa-ghrnah—very merciful: ku-bud-
dhim—who is addicted to the path of samsara; prayojayet— would
engage: utpatha-gam—who is proceeding on the wrong path: yatha—
like: andham—a blind man.
TRANSLATION
If someone is ignorant and addicted to the path of sarnsara, how
can one who is actually learned, merciful and advanced in spiritual
knowledge engage him in fruitive activity and thus further en-
tangle him in material existence? If a blind man is walking down
the wrong path, how can a gentleman allow him to continue on his
way to danger? How can he approve this method? No wise or kind
man can allow this.
TEXT 18
© =
गुरुनं स स्यात्सखजना न स सात्‌
पितानस् सयाज्ञननीन Imag |
दैवं न तत्सखान्न पतिश्च स स्या-
न॒ मोचयेयः सथुपेतमर्युम्‌ ॥१८॥
gurur na sa syat sva-jano na sa syat
pita na sa sydj janani na sa syat
daivam na tat syan na patis ca sa syan
na mocayed yah samupeta-mrtyum


--- Page 194 ---
Text 18] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 189

guruh—a spiritual master; na—not; sah—he; syat—should become:
sva-janah—a relative; na—not; sah—such a person; syat—should
become: pita—a father: na—not; sah—he; syat—should become:
janani—a mother: na—not: sa—she; syat—should become; daivam—
the worshipable deity; na—not; tat—that; syat—should become; na—
not; patih—a husband; ca—also; sah—he; syat—should become; na—
not; mocayet—can deliver; yah—who; samupeta-mrtyum—one who is
on the path of repeated birth and death.

TRANSLATION

““One who cannot deliver his dependents from the path of re-
peated birth and death should never become a spiritual master, a
father, a husband, a mother or a worshipable demigod.

PURPORT

There are many spiritual masters, but Rsabhadeva advises that one
should not become a spiritual master if he is unable to save his disciple
from the path of birth and death. Unless one is a pure devotee of Krsna.
he cannot save himself from the path of repeated birth and death.
Tyaktva dehariv punar janma naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna. One can stop birth
and death only by returning home, back to Godhead. However. who can
go back to Godhead unless he understands the Supreme Lord in truth?
Janma karma ca me divyam 6077 yo vetti tattvatah.

We have many instances in history illustrating Rsabhadeva’s instruc-
tions. Sukracarya was rejected by Bali Maharaja due to his inability to
save Bali Maharaja from the path of repeated birth and death.
Sukracarya was not a pure devotee. he was more or less inclined to fru-
itive activity, and he objected when Bali Maharaja promised to give
everything to Lord Visnu. Actually one is supposed to give everything to
the Lord because everything belongs to the Lord. Consequently. the
Supreme Lord advises in Bhagavad-gita (9.27):

yat karosi yad asnasi
yaj juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kurusva mad-arpanam


--- Page 195 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
*-0 son of Kunti, all that you do. all that you eat, all that you offer and
give away. as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done
as an offering unto Me.” This is bhakti. Unless one is devoted, he cannot
give everything to the Supreme Lord. Unless one can do so, he cannot
become a spiritual master, husband, father or mother. Similarly, the
wives of the brahmanas who were performing sacrifices gave up their
relatives just to satisfy Krsna. This is an example of a wife rejecting a
husband who cannot deliver her from the impending dangers of birth
and death. Similarly, Prahlada Maharaja rejected his father, and Bharata
Maharaja rejected his mother (janani na sa syat). The word daivam indi-
cates a demigod or one who accepts worship from a dependent.
Ordinarily, the spiritual master, husband, father, mother or superior
relative accepts worship from an inferior relative, but here Rsabhadeva
forbids this. First the father, spiritual master or husband must be able to
release the dependent from repeated birth and death. If he cannot do
this, he plunges himself into the ocean of reproachment for his unlawful
activities. Everyone should be very responsible and take charge of his
dependents just as a spiritual master takes charge of his disciple or a
father takes charge of his son. All these responsibilities cannot be dis-
charged honestly unless one can save the dependent from repeated birth
and death.
TEXT 19
इदं शरीरं मम॒ gms
सच हि मे हदयं यत्र॒ wu)
N ९
98 कृतो मे মহল आराद्‌
- .
अतो हि mami प्राहुरार्याः ।१९॥
idan इव कः mama durvibhavyarmn
sattvarn hi me hrdayam yatra dharmah
prsthe krto me yad adharma arad
ato hi mam rsabham prahur aryah
idam—this: Sariram—transcendental body, sac-cid-ananda-vigraha;

mama—My: durvibhavyam—inconceivable: sattvam —with no tinge of


--- Page 196 ---
Text 19] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 191
the material modes of nature; hAi—indeed; me—My:; hrdayam—heart:
yatra—wherein; dharmah—the real platform of religion, bhakti-yoga;
prsthe—on the back; krtah—made; me—by Me; yat—because: adhar-
mah—irreligion; arat—far away; atah—therefore: hi—indeed: mam —
Me; rsabham—the best of the living beings; prahuh—call: aryah—
those who are advanced in spiritual life, or the respectable superiors.
TRANSLATION

My transcendental body [sac-cid-ananda-vigraha] looks exactly
like a human form, but it is not a material human body. It is incon-
ceivable. I am not forced by nature to accept a particular type of
body; I take on a body by My own sweet will. My heart is also
spiritual, and I always think of the welfare of My devotees.
Therefore within My heart can be found the process of devotional
service, which is meant for the devotees. Far from My heart have I
abandoned irreligion [adharma] and nondevotional activities.
They do not appeal to Me. Due to all these transcendental qualities,
people generally pray to Me as Rsabhadeva, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the best of all living entities.

PURPORT

In this verse the words idam Sarirarh mama durvibhavyam are very
significant. Generally we experience two energies—material energy and
spiritual energy. We have some experience of the material energy (earth.
water, air, fire, ether, mind. intelligence and ego) because in the material
world everyone's body is composed of these elements. Within the
material body is the spirit soul, but we cannot see it with the material
eyes. When we see a body full of spiritual energy. it is very difficult for
us to understand how the spiritual energy can have a body. It is said that
Lord Rsabhadeva’s body is completely spiritual: therefore for a
materialistic person, it is very difficult to understand. For a materialistic
person, the completely spiritual body is inconceivable. We have to accept
the version of the Vedas when our experimental perception cannot un-
derstand a subject. As stated in Brahma-sarmhita: iSvarah paramah
krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah. The Supreme Lord has a body with
form. but that body is not composed of material elements. It is made of


--- Page 197 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
spiritual bliss, eternity and living force. By the inconceivable energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord can appear before us in
His original spiritual body, but because we have no experience of the
spiritual body. we are sometimes bewildered and see the form of the
Lord as material. The Mayavadi philosophers are completely unable to
conceive of a spiritual body. They say that the spirit is always imper-
sonal, and whenever they see something personal, they take it for
granted that it is material. In Bhagavad-gita (9.11) it is said:
avajananti mam mudha
manusim tanum 05774071
param bhavam ajananto
mama bhita-mahesvaram

“Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know
My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that 06.

Unintelligent people think that the Supreme Lord accepts a body com-
posed of the material energy. We can easily understand the material
body, but we cannot understand the spiritual body. Therefore
Rsabhadeva says: idam Sarirarhn mama durvibhavyam. In the spiritual
world, everyone has a spiritual body. There is no conception of material
existence there. In the spiritual world there is only service and the
receiving of service. There is only sevya, seva, and sevaka —the person
served, the process of service and the servant. These three items are
completely spiritual, and therefore the spiritual world is called absolute.
There is no tinge of material contamination there. Being completely
transcendental to the material conception, Lord Rsabhadeva states that
His heart is composed of dharma. Dharma is explained in Bhagavad-gita
(18.60): sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam Saranam vraja. In the
spiritual world, every living entity is surrendered to the Supreme Lord
and is completely on the spiritual platform. Although there are servitors,
the served and service, all are spiritual and variegated. At the present
moment, due to our material conception. everything is durvibhavya, in-
conceivable. Being the Supreme, the Lord is called Rsabha, the best. In
terms of the Vedic language, nityo nityanam. We are also spiritual, but
we are subordinate. Krsna, the Supreme Lord, is the foremost living en-


--- Page 198 ---
Text 20] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 193
tity. The word rsabha means “the chief.” or “‘the supreme,” and indi-
cates the Supreme Being, or God Himself.
TEXT 20
तसाद्धवन्तो हदयेन जाताः
ধন a 9,
सर्वे महीयांसमयं gam |
अङ्किष्टबुद्धया भरतं भजध्वं
TATE तद्भरणं प्रजानाम्‌ ॥२०॥
tasmad bhavanto hrdayena jatah
sarve mahtyarisam amum sanabham
aklista-buddhya bharatari bhajadhvari
Susriisanam tad bharanari prajanam
tasmat—therefore (because | am the Supreme): bhavantah—you:
hrdayena—from My heart; jatah—born: sarve—all: mahiyamsam—
the best; amum—that: sa-nabham—brother: aklista-buddhya—with
your intelligence, without material contamination: bharatam —Bharata:
bhajadhvam—just try to serve: SuSriisanam—service: tat—that:
bharanam prajanam—ruling over the citizens.
TRANSLATION
My dear boys, you are all born of My heart, which is the seat of
all spiritual qualities. Therefore you should not be like
materialistic and envious men. You should accept your eldest
brother, Bharata, who is exalted in devotional service. If you
engage yourselves in Bharata’s service, your service to him will in-
clude My service, and you will rule the citizens automatically.
PURPORT
In this verse the word hrdaya indicates the heart. which is also called
urah, the chest. The heart is situated within the chest. and although in-
strumentally the son is born with the aid of the genitals. he is actually
born from within the heart. According to the heart's situation. the


--- Page 199 ---
194 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
semen takes the form of a body. Therefore according to the Vedic
system. when one begets a child his heart should be purified through the
ritualistic ceremony known as garbhadhana. Rsabhadeva’s heart was al-
ways uncontaminated and spiritual. Consequently all the sons born from
the heart of Rsabhadeva were spiritually inclined. Nonetheless.
Rsabhadeva suggested that His eldest son was superior, and He advised
the others to serve him. All the brothers of Bharata Maharaja were ad-
vised by Rsabhadeva to adhere to Bharata’s service. The question may be
asked why one should be attached to family members, for in the
beginning it was advised that one should not be attached to home and
family. However, it is also advised, mahiyasam pada-rajo-bhiseka —one
has to serve the mahiyan, one who is very spiritually advanced. Mahat-
56৫77 dvaram ahur vimukteh: by serving the mahat, the exalted devo-
tee, one’s path for liberation is open. The family of Rsabhadeva should
not be compared to an ordinary materialistic family. Bharata Maharaja,
Rsabhadeva’s eldest son, was specifically very exalted. For this reason the
other sons were advised to serve him for his pleasure. That was to be
their duty.

The Supreme Lord was advising Bharata Maharaja to be the chief
ruler of the planet. This is the real plan of the Supreme Lord. In the Bat-
tle of Kuruksetra. we find that Lord Krsna wanted Maharaja Yudhisthira
to be the supreme emperor of this planet. He never wanted Duryodhana
to take the post. As stated in the previous verse, Lord Rsabhadeva’s heart
is hrdayam yatra dharmah. The characteristic dharma is also explained
in Bhagavad-gita: surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
To protect dharma (paritranaya sadhanam), the Lord always wants the
ruler of the earth to be a devotee. Then everything goes on nicely for the
benefit of everyone. As soon as a demon rules the earth, everything
becomes chaotic. At the present moment. the world is inclined toward the
democratic process, but the people in general are all contaminated by the
modes of passion and ignorance. Consequently they cannot select the
right person to head the government. The president is selected by the
votes of ignorant Sidras; therefore another sidra is elected. and im-
mediately the entire government becomes polluted. If people strictly
followed the principles of Bhagavad-gita, they would elect a person who
is the Lord's devotee. Then automatically there would be good govern-
ment. Rsabhadeva therefore recommended Bharata Maharaja as the em-


--- Page 200 ---
Text 22] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 195
peror of this planet. Serving a devotee means serving the Supreme Lord.
for a devotee always represents the Lord. When a devotee is in charge.
the government is always congenial and beneficial for everyone.
TEXTS 21-22
भूतेषु वीरुद्भ्य उदुत्तमा ये
सरीसृपास्तेषु सबोधनिष्ठाः |
ततो मनुष्याः प्रमथास्ततोऽपि
४
गन्भवसिद्धा Rng ये ॥२१॥
देवासुरेभ्यो मघवत्प्रधाना
दक्षादयो ब्रह्मसुतास्तु तेषाम्‌ ।
९
भवः परः सोऽय Aft
स॒ मत्परोऽहं द्विजदेवदेवः IRR
bhutesu virudbhya uduttama ye
sarisrpas tesu sabodha-nisthah
tato manusyah pramathas tato pi
gandharva-siddha vibudhanuga ye
devasurebhyo maghavat-pradhana
daksadayo brahma-sutas tu tesam
bhavah parah so ’tha virifica-viryah
sa mat-paro "ham dvija-deva-devah
bhittesu—among things generated (with and without symptoms of
life): virudbhyah—than the plants: uduttamah—far superior: ye—
those who: sarisrpah—moving entities like worms and snakes: tesu—of
them: sa-bodha-nisthah—those who have developed intelligence:
tatah—than them: manusyah—the human beings: pramathah—the
ghostly spirits: tatah api—better than them: gandharva—the inhabi-
tants of Gandharvaloka (appointed singers in the planets of the
demigods); siddhah—the inhabitants of Siddhaloka. who have all mystic
powers: vibudha-anugah—the Kinnaras: ye—those who: deva—the


--- Page 201 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
demigods: asurebhyah—than the asuras; maghavat-pradhanah—
headed by Indra: daksa-adayah—beginning with Daksa: brahma-
sutgh—the direct sons of Brahma; tu—then; tesam—of them;
bhavah—Lord Siva; parah—the best; sah—he (Lord Siva): atha—
moreover: virifica-viryah—producing from Lord Brahma: sah—he
(Brahma): mat-parah—My devotee; aham—I; dvija-deva-devah—a
worshiper of the brahmanas, or the Lord of the brahmanas.
TRANSLATION

Of the two energies manifest [spirit and dull matter], beings
possessing living force [vegetables, grass, trees and plants] are
superior to dull matter [stone, earth, etc.]. Superior to nonmoving
plants and vegetables are worms and snakes, which can move.
Superior to worms and snakes are animals that have developed in-
telligence. Superior to animals are human beings, and superior to
human beings are ghosts because they have no material bodies.
Superior to ghosts are the Gandharvas, and superior to them are
the Siddhas. Superior to the Siddhas are the Kinnaras, and
superior to them are the asuras. Superior to the asuras are the
demigods, and of the demigods, Indra, the King of heaven, is
supreme. Superior to Indra are the direct sons of Lord Brahma,
sons like King Daksa, and supreme among Brahma’s sons is Lord
Siva. Since Lord Siva is the son of Lord Brahma, Brahma is con-
sidered superior, but Brahma is also subordinate to Me, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because I am inclined to the
brahmanas, the brahmanas are best of all.

PURPORT

In this verse the brahmanas are given a position superior to that of the
Supreme Lord. The idea is that the government should be conducted
under the guidance of the brahmanas. Although Rsabhadeva recom-
mended His eldest son, Bharata, as emperor of the earth, he still had to
follow the instructions of the brahmanas in order to govern the world
perfectly. The Lord is worshiped as brahmanya-deva. The Lord is very
fond of devotees, or brahmanas. This does not refer to so-called caste
brahmanas, but to qualified brahmanas. A brahmana should be


--- Page 202 ---
Text 22] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 197
qualified with the eight qualities mentioned in text 24, such as sama,
dama, satya and titiksa. The brahmanas should always be worshiped.
and under their guidance the ruler should discharge his duty and rule
the citizens. Unfortunately. in this age of Kali, the executive is not
selected by very intelligent people, nor is he guided by qualified
brahmanas. Consequently, chaos results. The mass of people should be
educated in Krsna consciousness so that according to the democratic pro-
cess they can select a first-class devotee like Bharata Maharaja to head the
government. If the head of the state is headed by qualified brahmanas,
everything is completely perfect.

In this verse. the evolutionary process is indirectly mentioned. The
modern theory that life evolves from matter is to some extent supported
in this verse because it is stated, bhittesu virudbhyah. That is, the living
entities evolve from vegetables, grass, plants and trees, which are
superior to dull matter. In other words, matter also has the potency to
manifest living entities in the form of vegetables. In this sense. life
comes out of matter, but matter also comes out of life. As Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (10.8), aha sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvar pravar-
tate: ^] am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything
emanates from Me.”

There are two energies —material and spiritual —and both originally
come from Krsna. Krsna is the supreme living being. Although it may be
said that in the material world a living force is generated from matter. it
must be admitted that originally matter is generated from the supreme
living being. Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam. The conclusion is that
everything, both material and spiritual, is generated from the Supreme
Being. From the evolutionary point of view, perfection is reached when
the living entity attains the platform of a brahmana. A brahmana is a
worshiper of the Supreme Brahman. and the Supreme Brahman wor-
ships the brahmana. In other words. the devotee is subordinate to the
Supreme Lord. and the Lord is inclined to see to the satisfaction of His
devotee. A brahmana is called dvija-deva, and the Lord is called dvija-
deva-deva. He is the Lord of brahmanas.

The evolutionary process is also explained in Caitanya-caritamrta
(Madhya, Chapter Nineteen). wherein it is said that there are two types
of living entities—moving and nonmoving. Among moving entities.
there are birds. beasts. aquatics, human beings and so on. Of these. the


--- Page 203 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
human beings are supposed to be the best. but they are few. Of these
small numbers of human beings. there are many low-class human beings
like mlecchas, Pulindas, bauddhas and Sabaras. The human being ele-
vated enough to accept the Vedic principles is superior. Among those who
accept the Vedic principles generally known as varndasrama (presently
known as the Hindu system). few actually follow these principles. Of
those who actually follow the Vedic principles. most perform fruitive ac-
tivity or pious activity for elevation to a high position. Manusyanam
sahasresu kascid yatati siddhaye: out of many attached to fruitive ac-
tivity, one may be a jAani—that is, one philosophically inclined and
superior to the karmis. Yatatam api siddhanam kascin mar vetti tat-
tvatah: out of many jiianis, one may be liberated from material bondage.
and out of many millions of liberated jiianis, one may become a devotee
of Krsna.
TEXT 23
a
न॒ ब्राह्मणेस्तुलये भूतमन्यत्‌
पश्यामि विप्राः किमतः परं तु ।
यसिनुमिः प्रहुतं সত্ত্যাহ-
मश्नामि कामं न FEE ॥२३
na brahmanais tulaye bhiitam anyat
pasyami viprah kim atah parari tu
yasmin nrbhih prahutari sraddhayaham
asnami kamari na tathagni-hotre
na—not: brahmanaih—with the brahmanas; tulaye—I count as

equal: bhittam—entity: anyat—other: pasyami—I can see: viprah—O
assembled brahmanas; kim—anything: atah—to the brahmanas;
param —superior: tu—certainly: yasmin —through whom: nrbhih —by
people: prahutam —food offered after ritualistic ceremonies are properly
performed: Sraddhaya—with faith and love: aham—I: asnami—eat:
kamam—with full satisfaction: na—not: tatha—in that way: agni-
hotre—in the fire sacrifice.


--- Page 204 ---
Text 24] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 199
TRANSLATION
O respectful brahmanas, as far as 1 am concerned, no one is
equal or superior to the brahmanas in this world. I do not find any-
one comparable to them. When people know My motive after per-
forming rituals according to the Vedic principles, they offer food
to Me with faith and love through the mouth of a brahmana. When
food is thus offered unto Me, I eat it with full satisfaction. Indeed,
I derive more pleasure from food offered in that way than from
the food offered in the sacrificial fire.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic system. after the sacrificial ceremony the
brahmanas are invited to eat the remnants of the offered food. When the
brahmanas eat the food. it is to be considered directly eaten by the
Supreme Lord. Thus no one can be compared to qualified brahmanas.
The perfection of evolution is to be situated on the brahminical platform.
Any civilization not based on brahminical culture or guided by
brahmanas is certainly a condemned civilization. Presently human
civilization is based on sense gratification, and consequently more and
more people are becoming addicted to different types of things. No one
respects brahminical culture. Demoniac civilization is attached to ugra-
karma, horrible activities, and big industries are created to satisfy un-
fathomable lusty desires. Consequently the people are greatly harassed
by governmental taxation. The people are irreligious and do not perform
the sacrifices recommended in Bhagavad-gita. Yajiad bhavati par-
Janyah: by the performance of sacrifice, clouds form and rain falls. Due
to sufficient rainfall, there is sufficient production of food. Guided by the
brahmanas, society should follow the principles of Bhagavad-gita. Then
people will become very happy. Annad bhavanti bhiitani: when animals
and man are sufficiently fed with grains, they become stronger. their
hearts become tranquil and their brains peaceful. They can then advance
in spiritual life, life's ultimate destination.
TEXT 24
খঘুনা तनरुक्चती मे पुराणी
येनेह सत्वं परमं पवित्रम्‌ ।


--- Page 205 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
शमो दमः सत्यमनुग्रहश्च
सपत्तितिक्षानुमवथ यत्र ॥२४॥
dhrta tanir usati me purani
yeneha sattvarn paramar pavitram
Samo damah satyam anugrahas ca
tapas titiksanubhavas ca yatra

dhrta—maintained by transcendental education: tanih—body:
uSati—free from material contamination: me—My: purani—eternal:
yena—by whom: iha—in this material world: sattvam—the mode of
goodness: paramam—supreme: pavitram—purified: samah—control of
the mind: damah—control of the senses: satyam—truthfulness:
anugrahah—mercy: ca—and: tapah—austerity: titiksa—tolerance:
anubhavah —realization of God and the living entity: ca—and: yatra—
wherein.

TRANSLATION

The Vedas are My eternal transcendental sound incarnation.
Therefore the Vedas are $abda-brahma. In this world, the
brahmanas thoroughly study all the Vedas, and because they
assimilate the Vedic conclusions, they are also to be considered the
Vedas personified. The brahmanas are situated in the supreme
transcendental mode of nature —sattva-guna. Because of this, they
are fixed in mind control [éama], sense control [dama], and
truthfulness [satya]. They describe the Vedas in their original
sense, and out of mercy [anugraha] they preach the purpose of the
Vedas to all conditioned souls. They practice penance [tapasya] and
tolerance [titiksa], and they realize the position of the living entity
and the Supreme Lord [anubhava]. These are the eight qualifica-
tions of the brahmanas. Therefore among all living entities, no
one is superior to the brahmanas.

PURPORT

This is a true description of a brahmana. A brahmana is one who has

assimilated the Vedic conclusions by practicing mind and sense control.


--- Page 206 ---
Text 25] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 201
He speaks the true version of all the Vedas. As confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita (15.15): vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. By studying
all the Vedas, one should come to understand the transcendental position
of Lord Sri Krsna. One who actually assimilated the essence of the Vedas
can preach the truth. He is compassionate to conditioned souls who are
suffering the threefold miseries of this conditional world due to their not
being Krsna conscious. A brahmana should take pity on the people and
preach Krsna consciousness in order to elevate them. Sri Krsna Himself.
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, personally descends into this
universe from the spiritual kingdom to teach conditioned souls about the
values of spiritual life. He tries to induce them to surrender unto Him.
Similarly, the brahmanas do the same thing. After assimilating the Vedic
instructions, they assist the Supreme Lord in His endeavor to deliver
conditioned souls. The brahmanas are very dear to the Supreme Lord
due to their high sattva-guna qualities, and they also engage in welfare
activities for all conditioned souls in the material world.
TEXT 25
मत्तोऽप्यनन्तारंपरतः ব্যান
५
खर्गापबगोधिपतेनं किश्ित्‌ ।
+
येषां किचि स्यादितरेण तेषा-
मकिंञचचनानां मयि भक्रिमाजाम्‌ ॥२५॥
7710410 ‘py anantat paratah parasmat
svargapavargadhipater na kiricit
yesarn kim u syad itarena tesam
akincananarh mayi bhakti-bhajam
mattah—from Me: api—even: anantat—unlimited in strength and
opulence: paratah parasmat—higher than the highest: svarga-
apavarga-adhipateh—able to bestow happiness obtainable by living in
the heavenly kingdom. by liberation. or by enjoyment of material com-
fort and then liberation: na—not: kificit—anything: yesam—of whom:
kim —what need: u—oh: syat—can there be: itarena—with any other:


--- Page 207 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
tesam—of them: akificandandam—without needs or without possessions;
mayi—unto Me: bhakti-bhajam—executing devotional service.
TRANSLATION

I am fully opulent, almighty and superior to Lord Brahma and
Indra, the King of the heavenly planets. I am also the bestower of
all happiness obtained in the heavenly kingdom and by liberation.
Nonetheless, the brahmanas do not seek material comforts from
Me. They are very pure and do not want to possess anything. They
simply engage in My devotional service. What is the need of their
asking for material benefits from anyone else?

PURPORT

The perfect brahminical qualification is stated herein: akificananam
mayi bhakti-bhajam. The brahmanas are always engaged in the devo-
tional service of the Lord: consequently they have no material wants, nor
do they possess material things. In Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 11.8),
Caitanya Mahaprabhu explains the position of pure Vaisnavas who are
anxious to return home. back to Godhead. Niskiricanasya bhagavad-bha-
Janonmukhasya. Those who actually want to return back to Godhead are
niskiricana—that is, they have no desire for material comfort. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu advises, sandarsanam visayinam atha yositar ca
ha hanta hanta visa-bhaksanato ’py asadhu: material opulence and
sense gratification through the association of women are more dangerous
than poison. Brahmanas who are pure Vaisnavas always engage in the
Lord’s service and are-devoid of any desire for material gain. The
brahmanas do not worship demigods like Lord Brahma. Indra or Lord
Siva for any material comfort. They do not even ask the Supreme Lord
for material profit; therefore it is concluded that the brahmanas are the
supreme living entities of this world. Sri Kapiladeva also confirms this in
Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.29.33):

tasman mayy arpitasesa-
kriyarthatma nirantarah
mayy arpitatmanah puriso
mayi sannyasta-karmanah


--- Page 208 ---
Text 26] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 203
na pasyami param bhiitam
akartuh sama-darsanat
The brahmanas are always dedicated to the Lord’s service with their
bodies, words and mind. There is no better person than a brahmana who
thus engages himself and dedicates himself to the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 26
सर्वाणि मद्धिष्ण्यतया भबद्धि-
n
अराणि भूतानि सुता ध्रुवाणि |
सम्भावितव्यानि पदे पदे बो
~ রা 4
विविक्तदटम्भिस्तदु हार्हणं मे UREN
sarvani mad-dhisnyataya bhavadbhis
carani bhitani suta dhruvani
sambhavitavyani pade pade vo
vivikta-drgbhis tad u harhanam me
sarvani—all; mat-dhisnyataya—because of being My sitting place:
bhavadbhih—by you: carani—that move: bhuatani—living entities:
sutah—My dear sons: dhruvani—that do not move: sambhavitavyani—
to be respected; pade pade—at every moment: vah—by you: vivikta-
drgbhih— possessing clear vision and understanding (that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His Paramatma feature is situated every-
where): tat u—that indirectly; ha—certainly: arhanam—offering
respect: me—unto Me.
TRANSLATION
My dear sons, you should not envy any living entity—be he
moving or nonmoving. Knowing that I am situated in them, you
should offer respect to all of them at every moment. In this way,
you offer respect to Me.
PURPORT
In this verse the word vivikta-drgbhih, meaning without envy. is used.
All living entities are the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead


--- Page 209 ---
204. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
in His Paramiatma feature. As confirmed in Brahma-sarhita: andan-
tara-stharii paramanu-cayantara-stham. The Lord is situated in this
universe as Garbhodakasayi Visnu and Ksirodakasayi Visnu. He is also
situated within every atom. According to the Vedic statement: iSavasyam
idari sarvam. The Supreme Lord is situated everywhere, and wherever
He is situated is His temple. We even offer respects to a temple from a
distant place, and all living entities should similarly be offered respect.
This is different from the theory of pantheism, which holds that every-
thing is God. Everything has a relationship with God because God is situ-
ated everywhere. We should not make any particular distinction between
the poor and the rich like the foolish worshipers of daridra-narayana.
Narayana is present in the rich as well as the poor. One should not simply
think Narayana is situated among the poor. He is everywhere. An ad-
vanced devotee will offer respects to everyone—even to cats and dogs.
vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastini
Suni caiva $va-pake ca
panditah sama-darsinah
“The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater
[outcaste].” (Bg. 5.18) This sama-darsinah, equal vision, should not be
mistaken to mean that the individual is the same as the Supreme Lord.
They are always distinct. Every individual person is different from the
Supreme Lord. It is a mistake to equate the individual living entity with
the Supreme Lord on the plea of vivikta-drk, sama-drk. The Lord is al-
ways in an exalted position, even though He agrees to live everywhere.
Srila Madhvacarya, quoting Padma Purana, states: vivikta-drsti-jivanar
dhisnyataya paramesvarasya bheda-drstih. "One who has clear vision
and who is devoid of envy can see that the Supreme Lord is separate
from all living entities, although He is situated in every living entity.”
Madhvacarya further quotes from Padma Purana:
upapadayet [00708771070 772
Jivebhyo yah pade pade
bhedenaiva na caitasmat
priyo visnos tu kascana


--- Page 210 ---
Text 27] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 205
“One who sees the living entity and the Supreme Lord as always distinct
is very dear to the Lord.” Padma Purana also states, yo hares caiva
Jivanam bheda-vakta hareh priyah: “One who preaches that the living
entities are separate from the Supreme Lord is very dear to Lord Visnu.™
TEXT 27
मनोवचोदकरणेदितस्य
साक्षात्छृतं मे परणं दि ।
विना पुमान्‌ येन महाविमोहात्‌
कृतान्तपाञ्चान्न विमोक्तुमीरोत्‌ Rel
mano-vaco-drk-karanehitasya
saksat-krtamm me paribarhanarn hi
ving pumdan yena maha-vimohat
krtanta-pasan na vimoktum iset
manah—mind: vacah—words: drk—sight: karana—of the senses:
thitasya—of all activities (for maintenance of body. society. friendship
and so on): saksat-krtam—directly offered: me—of Me: pari-
barhanam —worship: hi—because: vina—without: puman—any per-
son: yena—which: maha-vimohat—from the great illusion: krtanta-
pasat—exactly like the stringent rope of Yamaraja: na—not: vimok-
tum —to become free: iSet—becomes able.
TRANSLATION
The true activity of the sense organs —mind, sight, words and all
the knowledge-gathering and working senses —is to engage fully
in My service. Unless his senses are thus engaged, a living entity
cannot think of getting out of the great entanglement of material
existence, which is exactly like Yamaraja’s stringent rope.
PURPORT
As stated in the Narada-pancaratra:
sarvopadhi-vinirmuktarm
tat-paratvena nirmalam


--- Page 211 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
hrsikena hrstkesa-
sevanam bhaktir ucyate
This is the conclusion of bhakti. All the time, Lord Rsabhadeva has been
stressing devotional service, and now He is concluding by saying that all
the senses should be engaged in the Lord's service. There are five senses
by which we gather knowledge and five senses with which we work.
These ten senses and the mind should be fully engaged in the Lord's ser-
vice. Without engaging them in this way, one cannot get out of the
clutches of maya.
TEXT 28
HF उवाच
পট. তত
RERCRISIRISIC IAEA ककाचुज्लासनाथ महायचुमवः
[JH 8
परमसुदृद्धगवानृषभापदेशच उपशमशीलानाघ्रपरतकमेणां महायनीनां भक्तिज्ञान-
= . . © ९ .
वराग्यटक्षण पारमहंस्यथमेङ्खपशिक्षमाणः स्वतनय शतञ्ये्ठं परमभागवतं
७ ৬ o Falla ৬ Ao
भगवजनपरायण मरत धराणपाटनायामाषिस्य खय ऽभि एवोवेरित-
शारीरमात्रपरिग्रह उन्मत्त इव॒ गगनपरिधानः प्रकीणकेश आत्मन्या
रोपिताहबनीयो ब्र्माप्रतीतप्रवव्राज।।२८॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
evam anusasyatmajan svayam anusistan api lokanusasanartham
mahanubhavah parama-suhrd bhagavan rsabhapadesa upasama-
silanam uparata-karmanam maha-muninarm bhakti-jaana-vairagya-
laksanam paramahamsya-dharmam upasiksamanah sva-tanaya-sata-
Jyestham parama-bhagavatarmn bhagavaj-jana-parayanam bharatam
dharani-palanayabhisicya svayam bhavana evorvarita-sarira-matra-
parigraha unmatta iva gagana-paridhanah prakirna-kesa atmany
aropitahavaniyo brahmavartat pravavrdja.
éri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: evam—in this way:
anusasya—after instructing: atma-jan—His sons: svayam — personally:
anusistan—highly educated in culture: api—although: loka-anusasana-
artham—just to instruct the people: maha-anubhavah—the great per-


--- Page 212 ---
Text 28] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 207
sonality: parama-suhrt—everyone's sublime well-wisher: bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead: rsabha-apadesah—who is cele-
brated and known as Rsabhadeva: upasama-silanam—of persons who
have no desire for material enjoyment: uparata-karmanam—who are no
longer interested in fruitive activities: maha-muninam—who are san-
nyasis; bhakti—devotional service: jaana—perfect knowledge:
vairagya—detachment: laksanam —characterized by: paramaharsya—
of the best of human beings: dharmam—the duties: upasiksamanah—
instructing; sva-tanaya—of His sons: Sata—hundred: jyestham—the
eldest; parama-bhagavatam —a topmost devotee of the Lord: bhagavat-
Jjana-parayanam—a follower of the devotees of the Lord. brahmanas
and Vaisnavas; bharatam —Bharata Maharaja: dharani-palanaya—with
a view to ruling the world: abhisicya—placing on the throne; svayam —
personally: bhavane—at home: eva—although: urvarita—remaining:
Sarira-matra—the body only: parigrahah—accepting: unmattah—a
madman: iva—exactly like: gagana-paridhanah—taking the sky as His
dress: prakirna-kesah—having scattered hair: atmani—in Himself:
aropita—keeping; ahavaniyah—the Vedic fire: brahmavartat—from
the place known as Brahmavarta: pravavraja—began to travel all over
the world.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: Thus the great well-wisher of everyone,
the Supreme Lord Rsabhadeva, instructed His own sons. Although
they were perfectly educated and cultured, He instructed them
just to set an example of how a father should instruct his sons
before retiring from family life. Sannyasis, who are no longer
bound by fruitive activity and who have taken to devotional ser-
vice after all their material desires have been vanquished, also
learn by these instructions. Lord Rsabhadeva instructed His one
hundred sons, of whom the eldest, Bharata, was a very advanced
devotee and a follower of Vaisnavas. In order to rule the whole
world, the Lord enthroned His eldest son on the royal seat.
Thereafter, although still at home, Lord Rsabhadeva lived like a
madman, naked and with disheveled hair. Then the Lord took the
sacrificial fire within Himself, and He left Brahmavarta to tour the
whole world.


--- Page 213 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5

PURPORT

Actually the instructions given to Lord Rsabhadeva’s sons were not ex-
actly meant for His sons because they were already educated and highly
advanced in knowledge. Rather, these instructions were meant for san-
nyasis who intend to become advanced devotees. Sannyasis must abide
by Lord Rsabhadeva’s instructions while on the path of devotional ser-
vice. Lord Rsabhadeva retired from family life and lived like a naked
madman even while still with His family.

TEXT 29
जडान्धमूकवधिरपिल्ञाचोन्माद कवदव धूतवेषोऽभिमाप्यमाणोऽपि जनानां
गृहीतम नव्रतस्तप्णीं वभूव ॥२९॥
Jjadandha-mika-badhira-pisaconmadakavad-avadhiita-veso

’bhibhasyamano ‘pi jananar grhita-mauna-vratas tissnirn babhiva.
jada—idle: andha—blind: mika—dumb: badhira—deaf: pisaca—

ghost: unmadaka—a madman: vat—like: avadhiita-vesah—appearing

like an avadhiita (having no concern with the material world):

abhibhasyamanah—being thus addressed (as deaf. dumb and blind):

api—although: jananam—by the people: grhita—took: mauna—of

silence: vratah—the vow: tiisnim babhiiva—He remained silent.

TRANSLATION

After accepting the feature of avadhuta, a great saintly person
without material cares, Lord Rsabhadeva passed through human
society like a blind, deaf and dumb man, an idle stone, a ghost or a
madman. Although people called Him such names, He remained
silent and did not speak to anyone.

PURPORT

The word avadhiita refers to one who does not care for social conven-
tions, particularly the varnasrama-dharma. However, such a person may
be situated fully within himself and be satisfied with the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, on whom he meditates. In other words. one who has


--- Page 214 ---
Text 30] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 209
surpassed the rules and regulations of varnasrama-dharma is called
avadhiita. Such a person has already surpassed the clutches of maya, and
he lives completely separate and independent.
TEXT 30
<Q ©
तत्र तत्र पुरग्रामाकरखेटवाट खव टश्शिबिरत्रजघोषसाधेगिखिनाश्रमादिष्वनुपय
~] [ = ©.
मवनिचरापसद: परिभूयमानो मक्षिकाभिरिव वनगजस्तजनताडनाव मेहन -
EN = ५

छीवनग्रावशङ्ृद्रजःप्रक्षेपपूतिवातदुरुक्तेस्तद बिगणयनेवासत्संस्थान एतसिन्‌
[WEIN सदपदेश उभयानुमवखरूपेण सखमहिमावरस्ानेनासमारोपिताहं-
ममामिमानत्वाद विखण्डितमनाः पृथिवीमेकचरः परिवभ्राम ॥२०॥
tatra tatra pura-gramakara-kheta-vata- kharvata-sibira-vraja-ghosa-
sartha-giri-vanasramadisv anupatham avanicarapasadaih
paribhityamano maksikabhir iva vana-gajas tarjana-tadanavamehana-
sthivana-grava-sakrd-rajah-praksepa-piiti-vata-duruktais tad
aviganayann evasat-sarsthana etasmin dehopalaksane sad-apadesa
ubhayanubhava-svaripena sva-mahimavasthanenasamaropitahari-
mamabhimanatvad avikhandita-manah prthivim eka-carah
paribabhrama.

tatra tatra—here and there: pura—cities: grama—villages: akara—
mines; kheta—agricultural places: vata —gardens: kharvata—villages
in valleys: $ibira—military encampments: vraja—cow pens: ghosa—
residential places of cowherd men: sartha—resting places for pilgrims:
giri—hills: vana—forests: asrama—in the residential places of hermits:
adisu—and so on: anupatham—as He passed through: avanicara-
apasadaih—by undesirable elements, wicked persons: pari-
bhityamanah—being surrounded: maksikabhih—by flies: iva—like:
vana-gajah—an elephant coming from the forest: tarjana—by threats:
tadana—beating: avamehana —passing urine on the body: sthivana—
spitting on the body: grava-sakrt—stones and stool: rajah—dust: prak-
sepa—throwing: piiti-vata —passing air over the body: duruktaih—and
by bad words: tat—that: aviganayan—without caring about: eva—
thus: asat-samsthane—habitat not fit for a gentleman: etasmin—in this:
deha-upalaksane—in the shape of the material body: sat-apadese—


--- Page 215 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
called real; ubhaya-anubhava-svaripena—by understanding the proper
situation of the body and the soul: sva-mahima—in His personal glory:
avasthanena—by being situated: asamaropita-aham-mama-
abhimanatvat—from not accepting the misconception of ^" and mine™:
avikhandita-manah—undisturbed in mind: prthivim—all over the
world: eka-carah—alone: paribabhrama—He wandered.
TRANSLATION

Rsabhadeva began to tour through cities, villages, mines,
countrysides, valleys, gardens, military camps, cow pens, the
homes of cowherd men, transient hotels, hills, forests and her-
mitages. Wherever He traveled, all bad elements surrounded Him,
just as flies surround the body of an elephant coming from a
forest. He was always being threatened, beaten, urinated upon and
spat upon. Sometimes people threw stones, stool and dust at Him,
and sometimes people passed foul air before Him. Thus people
called Him many bad names and gave Him a great deal of trouble,
but He did not care about this, for He understood that the body is
simply meant for such an end. He was situated on the spiritual
platform, and, being in His spiritual glory, He did not care for all
these material insults. In other words, He completely understood
that matter and spirit are separate, and He had no bodily concep-
tion. Thus, without being angry at anyone, He walked through the
whole world alone.

PURPORT

Narottama dasa Thakura says: deha-smrti nahi yara, samsara
bandhana kahan tara. When a person fully realizes that the material
body and world are temporary. he is not concerned with pain and
pleasures of the body. As Sri Krsna advises in Bhagavad-gita (2.14):

matra-sparsas tu kaunteya
Sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah
agamapayino ‘nityas
tams titiksasva bharata


--- Page 216 ---
Text 31] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 211
“0 son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and dis-
tress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and
disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense per-
ception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without
being disturbed.”

As far as Rsabhadeva is concerned. it has already been explained:
idam sarirarh mama durvibhavyam. He did not at all possess a material
body; and therefore He was tolerant of all the trouble offered to Him by
the bad elements in society. Consequently He could tolerate people's
throwing stool and dust upon Him and beating Him. His body was tran-
scendental and consequently did not at all suffer pain. He was always
situated in His spiritual bliss. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.61);

Svarah sarva-bhitanam
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhatani
yantraradhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart. O Arjuna. and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities. who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.”

Since the Lord is situated in everyone's heart, He is in the heart of
hogs and dogs also. If hogs and dogs in their material bodies live in filthy
places. one should not think that the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
His Paramatma feature also lives in a filthy place. Although Lord
Rsabhadeva was maltreated by the bad elements of the world. He was not
at all affected. Therefore it is stated here. sva-mahima-avasthanena:
“He was situated in His own glory.” He was never saddened due to
being insulted in the many ways described above.

TEXT 31
अतिसुङकमारकरचरणोरः स्यटवि पुराहं सगखवद नादयवयवविन्यासः भ्रकृति-
सुन्दरखभावहाससुभरखो नवनलिनदलायमानशि शिरतारारुणायतनयन-
रुचिरः सदशसुमगक्रपोलकणैकण्डनासो विगूढस्ितवदन प्दोत्सवेन


--- Page 217 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
पुरवनितानां मनसि कखुमश्चरासनयुषदधानः परागवलम्बमानङुटिलजटिल-
कपिशकेशभूरिभारोऽवधृतमलिननिजशरीरेण ग्रहगृहीत इवाद्यत ॥ ३१॥
ati-sukumara- kara-caranora h-sthala-vipula-bahv-arsa-gala-
vadanady-avayava-vinyasah prakrti-sundara-svabhava-hasa-sumukho
nava-nalina-dalayamana-sisira-tararundyata-nayana-rucirah sadrsa-
subhaga-kapola-karna-kantha-naso vigidha-smita-vadana-
mahotsavena pura-vanitanarn manasi kusuma-sarasanam
upadadhanah parag-avalambamana-kutila-jatila-kapisa-kesa-bhiri-
bharo vadhita-malina-nija-sarirena graha-grhita ivadrsyata.

ati-su-kumara—very delicate: kara—hands: carana—feet: urah-
sthala—chest: vipula—long: bahu—arms: amsa—shoulders: gala—
neck: vadana—face: adi—and so on: avayava—limbs: vinyasah—
properly situated: prakrti—by nature: sundara—lovely: sva-bhdava—
natural: hdsa—with smiling: su-mukhah—His beautiful mouth: nava-
nalina-dalayamana—appearing like the petals of a new lotus flower:
sisira—taking away all miseries: tara—the irises: aruna—reddish:
ayata—spread wide: nayana—with eyes: rucirah—lovely: sadrsa—
such: subhaga—beauty: kapola—forehead: karna—ears: kantha—
neck: nasah—His nose: vigidha-smita—by deep smiling: vadana—by
His face: maha-utsavena—appearing like a festival: pura-vanitanam—
of women within household life: manasi—in the heart: kusuma-
Sarasanam—Cupid: upadadhdanah—awakening: parak—all around:
avalambamana —spread: kutila—curly: jatila—matted: kapisa—
brown: kesa—of hair: bhiri-bharah—possessing a great abundance:
avadhita—neglected: malina—dirty: nija-sarirena—by His body:
graha-grhitah—haunted by a ghost: iva—as if: adrsyata—He appeared.

TRANSLATION

Lord Rsabhadeva’s hands, feet and chest were very long. His
shoulders, face and limbs were all very delicate and symmetrically
proportioned. His mouth was beautifully decorated with His
natural smile, and He appeared all the more lovely with His red-
dish eyes spread wide like the petals of a newly grown lotus flower
covered with dew in the early morning. The irises of His eyes were


--- Page 218 ---
Text 32] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 213
so pleasing that they removed all the troubles of everyone who saw
Him. His forehead, ears, neck, nose and all His other features were
very beautiful. His gentle smile always made His face beautiful, so
much so that He even attracted the hearts of married women. It
was as though they had been pierced by arrows of Cupid. About
His head was an abundance of curly, matted brown hair. His hair
was disheveled because His body was dirty and not taken care of.
He appeared as if He were haunted by a ghost.
PURPORT

Although Lord Rsabhadeva’s body was very much neglected. His
transcendental features were so attractive that even married women were
attracted to Him. His beauty and dirtiness combined to make His
beautiful body appear as though it were haunted by a ghost.

TEXT 32
aff নান स मगवान्‌ लोकमिमं योगस्याद्ा = प्रतीपमिवाचक्षाण-

स्तरप्रतिक्रियाकमं बीमत्सितमिति व्रतमाजगरमासितः शयान एवाश्नाति
पिवति खादत्यवमेहति हदति सख ॒वेष्टमान उबरित आदिग्धोदेशः ॥ ३२

(८14 vava sa bhagavan lokam imam yogasyaddha pratipam
wacaksanas tat-pratikriya-karma bibhatsitam iti vratam ajagaram
asthitah Sayana evasnati pibati khadaty avamehati hadati sma
cestamana uccarita adigdhoddesah.

yarhi vava—when: sah—He: bhagavan—the Personality of
Godhead: lokam—the people in general: imam—this: yogasya—to the
performance of yoga; addha—directly: pratipam—antagonistic: iva—
like: acaksanah—observed: tat—of that: pratikriya—for counteraction:
karma —activity: bibhatsitam —abominable: iti—thus: vratam—the
behavior: ajagaram—of a python (to stay in one place): asthitah—ac-
cepting: Sayanah—Ilying down: eva—indeed: asndti—eats: pibati—
drinks: khadati—chews: avamehati—passes urine: hadati— passes
stool: sma—thus: cestamanah—rolling: uccarite—in the stool and
urine: adigdha-uddesah—His body thus smeared.


--- Page 219 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, @. 5
TRANSLATION

When Lord Rsabhadeva saw that the general populace was very
antagonistic to His execution of mystic yoga, He accepted the
behavior of a python in order to counteract their opposition. Thus
He stayed in one place and lay down. While lying down, He ate and
drank, and He passed stool and urine and rolled in it. Indeed, He
smeared His whole body with His own stool and urine so that op-
posing elements might not come and disturb Him.

PURPORT

According to one’s destiny, one enjoys allotted happiness and distress.
even though one keeps himself in one place. This is the injunction of the
sastras. When one is spiritually situated, he may stay in one place. and all
his necessities will be supplied by the arrangement of the supreme con-
troller. Unless one is a preacher, there is no need to travel all over the
world. A person can stay in one place and execute devotional service
suitably according to time and circumstance. When Rsabhadeva saw that
He was simply being disturbed by traveling throughout the world, He
decided to lie down in one place like a python. Thus He ate. drank. and
He passed stool and urine and smeared His body with them so that people
would not disturb Him.

TEXT 33
. রমন © ক ha ৬

तस्य ह यः पुरीपसुरभिसोगन्ध्यवायुस्तं ইহা दशयोजनं समन्तात्‌ aid
चकार ॥ ३३॥
tasya ha yah purisa-surabhi-saugandhya-vayus tar 4९507! 4050 -
yojanari samantat surabhirm cakara.

tasya—His: ha—indeed: yah—which: purisa—of the stool:
surabhi—by the aroma: saugandhya—possessing a good fragrance:
va@yuh—the air: tam—that: deSam—country: dasa—up to ten: yo-
janam—yojanas (one yojana equals eight miles): samantat—all around:
surabhim —aromatic: cakara—made.


--- Page 220 ---
Text 34] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 215
TRANSLATION

Because Lord Rsabhadeva remained in that condition, the public
did not disturb Him, but no bad aroma emanated from His stool
and urine. Quite the contrary, His stool and urine were so aromatic
that they filled eighty miles of the countryside with a pleasant
fragrance.

PURPORT

From this we can certainly assume that Lord Rsabhadeva was tran-
scendentally blissful. His stool and urine were so completely different
from material stool and urine that they were aromatic. Even in the
material world, cow dung is accepted as purified and antiseptic. A person
can keep stacks of cow dung in one place, and it will not create a bad odor
to disturb anyone. We can take it for granted that in the spiritual world.
stool and urine are also pleasantly scented. Indeed, the entire atmosphere
became very pleasant due to Lord Rsabhadeva’s stool and urine.

TEXT 34

० (~ ©. 9 te IY <
एवं गग्गकाक्चयया ASAE: शयानः काकमगगाचारतः
पि्रति खादत्यवमेहति स ॥२३४॥
evar go-mrga-kaka-caryaya vrajaris tisthann 57710 / sayanah kaka-
mrga-go-caritah pibati khadaty avamehati sma.

evam—thus; go—of cows; mrga—deer: kaka—crows: caryaya—by
the activities: wrajan—moving: tisthan—standing: dasinah—sitting:
Sayanah—Ilying down: kaka-mrga-go-caritah—behaving exactly like
the crows. deer and cows: pibati—drinks: khadati—eats: avamehati—
passes urine: sma—He did so.

TRANSLATION

In this way Lord Rsabhadeva followed the behavior of cows,
deer and crows. Sometimes He moved or walked, and sometimes
He sat down in one place. Sometimes He lay down, behaving


--- Page 221 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.5
exactly like cows, deer and crows. In that way, He ate, drank,
passed stool and urine and cheated the people in this way.
PURPORT

Being the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Rsabhadeva
possessed a transcendental, spiritual body. Since the general public could
not appreciate His behavior and mystic yoga practice, they began to dis-
turb Him. To cheat them, He behaved like crows. cows and deer.

TEXT 35
> - =, ~ _ © —

इति नानायोगचर्याचरणो भगवान्‌ कैवस्यपति्छैषभोऽविरतपरममहानन्दाचुमव
आत्मनि सर्वेषां भूतानामात्मभूते भगवति वासुदेव आ्मनोऽव्यवधानानन्त-
= ~ € ~~ - RA EY
रोदरमावेन सिद्धसमस्ताथंपरिपूर्णो योगेशर्याणि वैहायसमनोजवान्तर्घानपरकायः
प्रेशद्रग्रहणादीनि यचच्छयोपगतानि नाञ्जसा नष हृदयेनाभ्यनन्दत्‌ ॥३५॥।
iti nana-yoga-caryacarano bhagavan kaivalya-patir rsabho ’virata-
parama-mahanandanubhava atmani ৩০710650778 bhitanam atma-bhite
bhagavati vasudeva atmano vyavadhanananta-rodara-bhavena siddha-
samastartha-paripurno yogaisvaryani vaihayasa-mano-javantardhana-
parakaya-pravesa-diira-grahanadini yadrcchayopagatani nanjasa nrpa
hrdayenabhyanandat.

iti—thus; nand—various; yoga—of mystic yoga; carya—perfor-
mances; dcaranah—practicing: bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; kaivalya-patih—the master of kaivalya, oneness, or the giver
of sayujya-mukti; rsabhah—Lord Rsabha; avirata—incessantly:
parama—supreme: maha —great: ananda-anubhavah—{feeling tran-
scendental bliss: atmani—in the Supreme Soul: sarvesam—of all:
bhiatanam—Iliving entities: atma-bhite—situated in the heart: bhaga-
vati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vasudeve—Krsna. the
son of Vasudeva: atmanah—of Himself; avyavadhana—by the non-
difference of constitution: ananta—unlimited: rodara—like crying,
laughing and shivering; bhavena —by the symptoms of love: siddha—
completely perfect: samasta—all: artha—with desirable opulences:
paripurnah—full: yoga-aisvaryani—the mystic powers; vaihayasa—


--- Page 222 ---
Text 35] Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings 217
flying in the sky: manah-java—traveling at the speed of mind: an-
tardhana—the ability to disappear; parakaya-pravesa—the ability to
enter another’s body: dira-grahana—the ability to perceive things far.
far away: adini—and others: yadrcchaya—without difficulty, automati-
cally: upagatani—achieved: na—not: afjasa—directly: nrpa—O King
Pariksit; hrdayena—within the heart: abhyanandat—accepted.
TRANSLATION

O King Pariksit, just to show all the yogis the mystic process,
Lord Rsabhadeva, the partial expansion of Lord Krsna, performed
wonderful activities. Actually He was the master of liberation and
was fully absorbed in transcendental bliss, which increased a thou-
sandfold. Lord Krsna, Vasudeva, the son of Vasudeva, is the origi-
nal source of Lord Rsabhadeva. There is no difference in Their
constitution, and consequently Lord Rsabhadeva awakened the
loving symptoms of crying, laughing and shivering. He was always
absorbed in transcendental love. Due to this, all mystic powers
automatically approached Him, such as the ability to travel in outer
space at the speed of mind, to appear and disappear, to enter the
bodies of others, and to see things far, far away. Although He
could do all this, He did not exercise these powers.

PURPORT
In the Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 19.149) it is said:
krsna-bhakta —niskama, ataeva ‘Santa’
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kami—sakali ‘asanta’

The word santa means completely peaceful. Unless all one’s desires are
fulfilled, one cannot be peaceful. Everyone is trying to fulfill his aspira-
tions and desires, be they material or spiritual. Those in the material
world are asanta (without peace) because they have so many desires to
fulfill. The pure devotee. however. is without desire. Anyabhilasita-
Sanya: a pure devotee is completely free from all kinds of material
desire. Karmis, on the other hand. are simply full of desires because they
try to enjoy sense gratification. They are not peaceful in this life. nor the
next. during the past, present or future. Similarly. jidnis are always


--- Page 223 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 5
aspiring after liberation and trying to become one with the
Supreme. Yogis are aspiring after many siddhis (powers) —anima,
laghima, prapti, etc. However, a devotee is not at all interested in these
things because he is fully dependent on the mercy of Krsna. Krsna is
yogesvara, the possessor of all mystic powers (siddhis). and He is at-
marama, fully self-satisfied. The yoga-siddhis are described in this
verse. One can fly in outer space without the aid of a machine, and he can
travel at the speed of mind. This means that as soon as a yogi desires to
go somewhere within this universe or even beyond this universe, he can
do so immediately. One cannot estimate the speed of mind, for within a
second the mind can go many millions of miles. Sometimes yogis enter
into the bodies of other people and act as they desire when their bodies
are not working properly. When the body becomes old, a perfect yogi can
find a young, able body. Giving up his old body, the yogi can enter into
the young body and act as he pleases. Being a plenary expansion of Lord
Vasudeva, Lord Rsabhadeva possessed all these mystic yoga powers. but
He was satisfied with His devotional love of Krsna, which was evinced by
the ecstatic symptoms, such as crying, laughing and shivering.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fifth Chapter
of the Srimad-Bhagavatam entitled “Lord Rsabhadeva’s Teachings to His
Sons.”


--- Page 224 ---
CHAPTER SIX

The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva
This chapter tells how Lord Rsabhadeva left His body. He was not at-
tached to His body even when it was being burned up in a forest fire.
When the seed of fruitive activity is burned by the fire of knowledge, the
spiritual properties and mystic powers are automatically manifest. yet
bhakti-yoga is not affected by these mystic powers. An ordinary yogi is
captivated by mystic powers and his progress checked: therefore a per-
fect yogt does not welcome them. Because the mind is restless and unde-
pendable, it must remain always under control. Even the mind of the
advanced yogi Saubhari created such a disturbance that he lost his yogic
mystic powers. Due to a restless mind. even a very advanced yogi can fall
down. The mind is so restless that it induces even a perfect yogi to be
controlled by the senses. Therefore Lord Rsabhadeva. for the instruction
of all yogis, showed the process of quitting the body. While traveling in
South India, through the provinces of Karnata. Konka, Venka and
Kutaka, Lord Rsabhadeva arrived in the neighborhood of Kutakacala.
Suddenly there was a forest fire that burned the forest and Lord
Rsabhadeva’s body to ashes. The pastimes of Lord Rsabhadeva as a liber-
ated soul were known by the King of Konka, Venka and Kutaka. This
King’s name was Arhat. He later became captivated by the illusory
energy, and in this condition he set forth the basic principles of Jainism.
Lord Rsabhadeva set forth the principles of religion that can free one
from material bondage. and He put an end to all kinds of atheistic
activities. On this earth. the place known as Bharata-varsa was a very
pious land because the Supreme Lord appeared there when He wanted to
incarnate.

Lord Rsabhadeva neglected all the mystic powers for which the so-
called yogis hanker. Because of the beauty of devotional service. devotees
are not at all interested in so-called mystic power. The master of all yogic
power, Lord Krsna. can exhibit all powers on behalf of His devotee.
Devotional service is more valuable than yogic mystic powers. Devotees
who are sometimes misled aspire for liberation and mystic powers. The

219


--- Page 225 ---
220 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
Supreme Lord gives these devotees whatever they desire, but they cannot
attain the most important function of devotional service. Devotional ser-
vice to the Lord is guaranteed for those who do not desire liberation and
mystic power.
TEXT 1
राजोवाच
न नूनं भगव आत्मारामाणां योगसमीरितज्ञानावभितकर्मबीजानामै-
श्वयांणि पुनः Fa भवितुमर्हन्ति यचच्छयोपगतानि | १॥
rajovaca
na nunam bhagava atmaramanam yoga-samirita-jianavabharjita-
karma-bijanam aisvaryani punah klesadani bhavitum arhanti yadrc-
chayopagatani.
raja uvaca—King Pariksit inquired: na—not; ninam—indeed:
bhagavah—O most powerful Sukadeva Gosvami: atmaramanam—of
pure devotees simply engaged in devotional service: yoga-samirita—
achieved by practice of yoga; jaana—by knowledge: avabharjita—
burned; karma-bijanam—of those whose seeds of fruitive activities:
aisvaryani—the mystic powers: punah—again: klesadani—sources of
distress: bhavitum—to become: arhanti—are able: yadrcchaya—auto-
matically: upagatani—achieved.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit asked Sukadeva Gosvami: My dear Lord, for those
who are completely pure in heart, knowledge is attained by the
practice of bhakti-yoga, and attachment for fruitive activity is
completely burned to ashes. For such people, the powers of mystic
yoga automatically arise. They do not cause distress. Why, then,
did Rsabhadeva neglect them?
PURPORT
A pure devotee is constantly engaged in the service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Whatever is necessary for the discharge of devo-


--- Page 226 ---
Text 2] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 221
tional service is automatically attained, though it may appear to be the
result of mystic yoga power. Sometimes a yogi displays a little yogic
power by manufacturing gold. A little quantity of gold captivates foolish
people, and thus the yogi gets many followers, who are willing to accept
such a tiny person as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a yogi
may also advertise himself as Bhagavan. However, a devotee does not
have to exhibit such magical wonders. Without practicing the mystic
yogic process, he achieves even greater opulence all over the world.
Under the circumstances, Lord Rsabhadeva refused to manifest mystic
yogic perfections, and Maharaja Pariksit asked why He did not accept
them, since, for a devotee, they are not at all disturbing. A devotee is
never distressed or satisfied by material opulence. His concern is how to
please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, by the grace of the
Supreme Lord. a devotee achieves extraordinary opulence, he utilizes the
opportunity for the Lords service. He is not disturbed by the opulence.
TEXT 2
ऋषिरुवाच
gags किन्त्विह वा एकै न मनसोऽद्धा विभ्रम्भमनवस्थानस्य
शठकिरात इव सङ्गच्छन्ते ॥ २॥
rsir 8৮৫০৫
satyam uktam kintv tha va eke na manaso ’ddha visrambham
anavasthanasya Satha-kirdata iva sangacchante.
rsih uvdca—Sukadeva Gosvami said: satyam —the correct thing: uk-
tam—have said: kintu—but: iha—in this material world: va—either:
eke—some: na—not: manasah—of the mind: addha—directly:
visrambham —{faithful: anavasthanasya—being unsteady: satha—very
cunning: kiratah—a hunter: iva—like: sangacchante —become.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami replied: My dear King, you have spoken
correctly. However, after capturing animals, a cunning hunter
does not put faith in them, for they might run away. Similarly,


--- Page 227 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
those who are advanced in spiritual life do not put faith in the
mind. Indeed, they always remain vigilant and watch the mind’s
action.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (18.5) Lord Krsna says:
yajaa-dana-tapah-karma
na tyajyam karyam eva tat
yajiio danam tapas caiva
pavanani manisinam
“Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but should
be performed. Indeed. sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the
great souls.”

Even one who has renounced the world and has taken sannyasa should
not renounce chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Renunciation does
not mean that one has to renounce sarikirtana-yajia. Similarly, one
should not renounce charity or tapasya. The yoga system for control of
the mind and senses must be strictly followed. Lord Rsabhadeva showed
how severe types of tapasya could be performed. and He set an example
for all others.

TEXT 3
तथा चोक्तम्‌--
न डर्यास्कर्दिचित्सख्यं मनसि ह्यनघस्यिते |
यद्विश्रम्भाचिराचीणं चस्कन्द तप Trg 11 ३ ॥
tatha coktam—
na kuryat karhicit sakhyam
manasi hy anavasthite
yad-visrambhdc cirac cirnar
caskanda tapa aisvaram

tatha—so: ca—and: uktam—it is said: na—never: kuryat—should

do: karhicit—at any time or with anyone: sakhyam—friendship:


--- Page 228 ---
Text 3] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 223
manasi—in the mind: hi—certainly: anavasthite—which is very
restless: yat—in which: visrambhat—from placing too much faith:
cirat—for a long time: cirnam—practiced: caskanda—became dis-
turbed: tapah—the austerity: aiSvaram—of great personalities like Lord
Siva and the great sage Saubhari.
TRANSLATION
All the learned scholars have given their opinion. The mind is
by nature very restless, and one should not make friends with it. If
we place full confidence in the mind, it may cheat us at any
moment. Even Lord Siva became agitated upon seeing the Mohini
form of Lord Krsna, and Saubhari Muni also fell down from the
mature stage of yogic perfection.
PURPORT
The first business of one trying to advance in spiritual life is to control
the mind and senses. As Sri Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (15.7):
mamaivariso jiva-loke
Jiva-bhiitah sandtanah
manah sasthanindriyani
prakrti-sthani karsati
Although the living entities are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord and
are therefore in a transcendental position. they are still suffering in this
material world and struggling for existence due to the mind and the
senses. To get out of this false struggle for existence and become happy
in the material world. one has to control the mind and senses and be
detached from material conditions. One should never neglect austerities
and penances: one should always perform them. Lord Rsabhadeva per-
sonally showed us how to do this. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.19.17) it
is specifically stated:
matra svasra duhitra va
naviviktasano bhavet
balavan indriya-gramo
vidvarisam api karsati


--- Page 229 ---
224 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
A grhastha, vanaprastha, sannyasi and brahmacari should be very
careful when associating with women. One is forbidden to sit down in a
solitary place even with one’s mother. sister or daughter. In our Krsna
consciousness movement it has been very difficult to disassociate our-
selves from women in our society, especially in Western countries. We
are therefore sometimes criticized, but nonetheless we are trying to give
everyone a chance to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra and thus ad-
vance spiritually. If we stick to the principle of chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra offenselessly, then. by the grace of Srila Haridasa
Thakura, we may be saved from the allurement of women. However, if
we are not very strict in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, we may
at any time fall victim to women.
TEXT 4
. .

fred ददाति कामसखयच्छिद्रं तमनु येऽरयः |

(3 a .

योगिनः कृतमेत्रस्य पत्यु्जायेव GHA ॥ ४॥

111...
cchidramh tam anu ye ’rayah
yoginah krta-maitrasya
patyur jayeva puriscali
nityam—always; dadati—gives; kamasya—of lust; chidram—facili-
ty; tam—that (lust); anu—following; ye—those; arayah—enemies;
yoginah—of the yogis or persons trying to advance in spiritual life; krta-
maitrasya—having put faith in the mind; patyuh—of the husband; jaya
iva—like the wife; pumscali—who is unchaste or easily carried away by
other men.
TRANSLATION
An unchaste woman is very easily carried away by paramours,

and it sometimes happens that her husband is violently killed by
her paramours. If the yogi gives his mind a chance and does not
restrain it, his mind will give facility to enemies like lust, anger
and greed, and they will doubtlessly kill the yogi.


--- Page 230 ---
Text 5] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 225
PURPORT

In this verse the word purmscali refers to a woman who is easily carried
away by men. Such a woman is never to be trusted. Unfortunately. in the
present age, women are never controlled. According to the directions of
the $astras, women are never to be given freedom. When a child. a
woman must be strictly controlled by her father. When she is young. she
must be strictly controlled by her husband. and when she is old. she must
be controlled by her elderly sons. If she is given independence and
allowed to mingle unrestrictedly with men. she will be spoiled. A spoiled
woman, being manipulated by paramours, might even kill her husband.
This example is given here because a yogi desiring to get free from
material conditions must always keep his mind under control. Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura used to say that in the morning our
first business should be to beat the mind with shoes a hundred times.
and. before going to bed. to beat the mind a hundred times with a
broomstick. In this way one’s mind can be kept under control. An un-
controlled mind and an unchaste wife are the same. An unchaste wife
can kill her husband at any time. and an uncontrolled mind. followed by
lust, anger, greed, madness. envy and illusion. can certainly kill the yogi.
When the yogi is controlled by the mind. he falls down into the material
condition. One should be very careful of the mind. just as a husband
should be careful of an unchaste wife.

TEXT 5
कामो मन्युमेदो सोमः शोकमोहभयादयः |
कर्मबन्धश्च यन्मूरः SFR च तद्‌ बुधः ॥ ५॥
kamo manyur mado lobhah
Soka-moha-bhayadayah
karma-bandhas ca yan-milah
svikuryat ko nu tad budhah

kamah—lust: manyuh—anger: madah—pride: lobhah—greed:
Soka—lamentation: moha—illusion: bhaya—fear: adayah—all these
together: karma-bandhah—bondage to fruitive activities: ca—and: yat-


--- Page 231 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
miilah—the origin of which: svikurydat—would accept: kah—who: nu—
indeed: tat—that mind: budhah—if one is learned.
TRANSLATION

The mind is the root cause of lust, anger, pride, greed, lamenta-
tion, illusion and fear. Combined, these constitute bondage to
fruitive activity. What learned man would put faith in the mind?

PURPORT

The mind is the original cause of material bondage. It is followed by
many enemies, such as anger, pride, greed, lamentation. illusion and
fear. The best way to control the mind is to engage it always in Krsna
consciousness (sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh). Since the
followers of the mind bring about material bondage. we should be very
careful not to trust the mind.

TEXT 6
a ~ a © a
अथेवमखिरलोकपालललामोऽपि वषिलक्षणेजंडबद्बधृतवेषमाषाचरितेर-

विलक्षितमगवस्रमाषो योगिनां साम्परायविधिमदुशिक्षयन्‌ awed
जिहाषुरात्मन्यार्मानमसंव्यवहितमनर्थान्तरभावेना न्वीक्षमाण
उपरतानुडत्तिर्परराप्र ।॥६॥

athaivam akhila-loka-pala-lalamo ‘pi vilaksanair jadavad avadhita-
vesa-bhasa-caritair avilaksita-bhagavat-prabhdvo yoginarm sampardaya-
vidhim anusiksayan sva-kalevaram jihasur atmany atmanam
asarvyavahitam anarthantara-bhavenanviksamana uparatanuvrttir
upararama.

atha—thereafter: evam—in this way: akhila-loka-pala-lalamah—
the head of all kings and monarchs of the universe: api—although:
vilaksanath—various: jada-vat—as if stupid: avadhita-vesa-bhasa-
caritath—by the dress, language and characteristics of an avadhiita;
avilaksita-bhagavat-prabhavah—hiding the opulence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (keeping Himself like an ordinary human


--- Page 232 ---
Text 6] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 227
being): yoginam—of the yogis; samparaya-vidhim—the method of
giving up this material body; anusiksayan—teaching: sva-kalevaram—
His own personal body, which is not at all material; jihasuh—desiring to
give up like an ordinary human being: atmani—unto Vasudeva. the
original person; atmanam—Himself, Lord Rsabhadeva. being an avesa-
avatara of Lord Visnu; asamvyavahitam—without intervention by the
illusory energy: anartha-antara-bhavena—Himself in the status of
Visnu: anviksamanah—always seeing: uparata-anuvrttth—who was
acting as if giving up His material body: upararama—ceased His
pastimes as the King of this planet.
TRANSLATION

Lord Rsabhadeva was the head of all kings and emperors within
this universe, but assuming the dress and language of an avadhita,
He acted as if dull and materially bound. Consequently no one
could observe His divine opulence. He adopted this behavior just
to teach yogis how to give up the body. Nonetheless, He main-
tained His original position as a plenary expansion of Lord
Vasudeva, Krsna. Remaining always in that state, He gave up His
pastimes as Lord Rsabhadeva within the material world. If,
following in the footsteps of Lord Rsabhadeva, one can give up his
subtle body, there is no chance that one will accept a material body
again.

PURPORT
As Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evar yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehari punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna

“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body. take his birth again in this
material world. but attains My eternal abode. O Arjuna.”

This is possible simply by keeping oneself an eternal servant of the
Supreme Lord. One must understand his constitutional position and the


--- Page 233 ---
228 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
constitutional position of the Supreme Lord as well. Both have the same
spiritual identity. Maintaining oneself as a servant of the Supreme Lord.
one should avoid rebirth in this material world. If one keeps himself
spiritually fit and thinks of himself as an eternal servant of the Supreme
Lord. he will be successful at the time he has to give up the material
body.
TEXT 7
TEE एवं शुक्तलिङ्गस्य भगवत ऋषमस्य योगमाया वासनया देह
इमां जगतीमभिमानाभासेन संकममाणः कोङ्कवेङ्डरटकान्दसिणकर्णाटका
न्देशान्‌ यदच्छयोपगतः ऊटकाचरोपवन आस्यङृतास्मकवल उन्माद इव
€ [1 ~

यक्तमूधेजोऽसंवीत एव विचचार ॥ ও ॥
tasya ha va evar mukta-lingasya bhagavata rsabhasya yogamaya-
vasanaya deha imam jagatim abhimanabhasena sankramamanah
konka-verka-kutakan daksina-karnatakan desan yadrcchayopagatah
kutakacalopavana asya krtasma-kavala unmada iva mukta-mirdhajo
’sarwita eva vicacara.

tasya—of Him (Lord Rsabhadeva): ha va—as it were: evam—thus:
mukta-lingasya—who had no identification with the gross and subtle
body: bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
rsabhasya—of Lord Rsabhadeva: yoga-maya-vasanaya—by the ac-
complishment of yogamaya for the purpose of the Lord's pastimes:
dehah—body: imam—this: jagatim—earth; abhimana-abhasena—
with the apparent conception of having a body of material elements:
sarikkramamanah—traveling:  kornka-venka-kutakan—Konka. Venka
and Kutaka: daksina—in South India: karnatakan—in the province of
Karnata desan—all the countries: yadrcchaya—of His own accord:
upagatah—reached: kutakacala-upavane—a forest near Kutakacala:
asya—within the mouth: krta-asma-kavalah—having put a mouthful of
stone: unmdadah iva—just like a madman: mukta-miardhajah—having
scattered hair: asamvitah—naked: eva—just: vicacara—traveled.

TRANSLATION

Actually Lord Rsabhadeva had no material body, but due to

yogamaya, He considered His body material, and therefore,


--- Page 234 ---
Text 8] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 229
because He played like an ordinary human being, He gave up the
mentality of identifying with it. Following this principle, He began
to wander all over the world. While traveling, He came to the
province of Karnata in South India and passed through Konka,
Venka and Kutaka. He had no plan to travel this way, but He ar-
rived near Kutakacala and entered a forest there. He placed stones
within His mouth and began to wander through the forest, naked
and with His hair disheveled like a madman.
TEXT 8
EQ)

अथ समीरवेगविधूतवेणुविकषणजातो ग्रदावानलस्तद्नमालेलिहानः
सह तेन ददाह ॥८॥
atha samira-vega-vidhiita-venu-vikarsana-jatogra-davanalas tad
vanam alelihanah saha tena dadaha.

atha—thereafter: samira-vega—by the force of the wind: vidhita —
tossed about: venu—of bamboos: vikarsana—by the rubbing: jata—
produced: ugra—fierce: dava-analah—a forest fire: tat—that:
vanam—forest near Kutakacala: alelihanah—devouring all around:
saha—with: tena—that body: dadaha—burned to ashes.

TRANSLATION

While He was wandering about, a wild forest fire began. This
fire was caused by the friction of bamboos, which were being
blown by the wind. In that fire, the entire forest near Kutakacala
and the body of Lord Rsabhadeva were burnt to ashes.

PURPORT

Such a forest fire can burn the external bodies of animals. but Lord
Rsabhadeva was not burned. although He apparently seemed so. Lord
Rsabhadeva is the Supersoul of all living entities within the forest. and
His soul is never burned by fire. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, adahyo
yam —the soul is never burned by fire. Due to Lord Rsabhadeva’s
presence, all the animals in the forest were also liberated from material
encagement.


--- Page 235 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
TEXT 9
यस्य किलानुचरितयचपाकरण्य कोङ्वेङ्कङटकानां राजा मामोपच्िष््य

कलावधर्म उत्कृष्यमाणे मपरितव्येन विमोहितः खधमेपथमङ़तोभयमपदाय
पथपाखण्डमसमञ्सं निजमनीषया मन्दः सम्प्वर्तयिष्यते ॥ ९॥

yasya kilanucaritam upakarnya konka-verika-kutakanar rajarhan-
namopasiksya kalav adharma utkrsyamane bhavitavyena vimohitah
sva-dharma-patham akuto-bhayam apahaya kupatha-pakhandam
asamanjasarn nija-manisaya mandah sampravartayisyate.

yasya—of whom (Lord Rsabhadeva): kila anucaritam—pastimes as a
paramahamsa, above all regulative varnasrama principles: upakar-
nya—hearing: konka-venka-kutakinam—ot Konka, Venka and
Kutaka; raja—the King: arhat-nama—whose name was Arhat (now
known as the Jain): upasiksya—imitating the activities of Lord
Rsabhadeva in His paramaharisa feature: kalau—in this age of Kali:
adharme utkrsyamane —because of increasing irreligious life: bhavi-
tavyena—by that which was about to happen: vimohitah—bewildered:
sva-dharma-patham —the path of religion: akutah-bhayam—which is
free from all kinds of fearful danger: apahaya—giving up (such prac-
tices as cleanliness, truthfulness, control of the senses and mind.
simplicity, the principles of religion, and practical application of
knowledge): ku-patha-pakhandam—the wrong path of atheism:
asamanjasam—improper or against the Vedic literature; nija-
manisaya—by his own fertile brain: mandah—most foolish:
sampravartayisyate —will introduce.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued speaking to Maharaja Pariksit: My
dear King, the King of Konka, Venka and Kutaka whose name was
Arhat, heard of the activities of Rsabhadeva and, imitating
Rsabhadeva’s principles, introduced a new system of religion.
Taking advantage of Kali-yuga, the age of sinful activity, King
Arhat, being bewildered, gave up the Vedic principles, which are
free from risk, and concocted a new system of religion opposed to


--- Page 236 ---
Text 10] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 231
the Vedas. That was the beginning of the Jain dharma. Many other
so-called religions followed this atheistic system.
PURPORT

When Lord Sri Krsna was present on this planet, a person named
Paundraka imitated the four-handed Narayana and declared himself the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He desired to compete with Krsna.
Similarly, during the time of Lord Rsabhadeva, the King of Konka and
Venka acted like a paramaharmsa and imitated Lord Rsabhadeva. He in-
troduced a system of religion and took advantage of the fallen condition
of the people in this age of Kali. It is said in Vedic literatures that people
in this age will be more inclined to accept anyone as the Supreme Lord
and accept any religious system opposed to Vedic principles. The people
in this age are described as mandah sumanda-matayah. Generally they
have no spiritual culture, and therefore they are very fallen. Due to this.
they will accept any religious system. Due to their misfortune. they
forget the Vedic principles. Following non-Vedic principles in this age.
they think themselves the Supreme Lord and thus spread the cult of
atheism all over the world.

TEXT 10

येन ह वाव FW मनुजापसदा देवमायामोहिताः खबिधिनियोगशौच-
TEAR देवहेलनान्यपव्रतानि निजनिजेच्छया गृह्णाना
अस्रानानाचमनाश्चोचकेरोल्छश्चनादीनि कणिनाधर्मबदुेनोपहतधियो
जह्यव्राह्मणयज्ञपुरुषलोकविदृषकाः प्रायेण मविष्यन्ति ॥ १० ॥
yena ha vava kalau manujapasada deva-maya-mohitah sva-vidhi-
niyoga-Sauca-caritra-vihina deva-helanany apavratani nija-nijecchaya
grhnana asnananacamanasauca-kesolluricanadini kalinadharma-
bahulenopahata-dhiyo brahma-brahmana-yajia-purusa-loka-
vidisakah prayena bhavisyanti.

yena—by which pseudo religious system: ha wvava—certainly:
kalau—in this age of Kali: manuja-apasadah—the most condemned


--- Page 237 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
men: deva-mayd-mohitah—bewildered by the external energy. or il-
lusory energy. of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: sva-vidhi-
niyoga-sauca-caritra-vihinah—without character, cleanliness, and the
rules and regulations given according to one’s own duty in life: deva-
helanani—negligent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
apavratani—impious vows; nija-nija-icchaya—by their own desires;
grhnanah—accepting; asnana-andacamana-asauca-kesa-ulluiicana-adi-
ni—concocted religious principles such as no bathing, no washing of the
mouth, being unclean and plucking out the hair; kalina—by the age of
Kali; adharma-bahulena—with an abundance of irreligion; upahata-
dhiyah—whose pure consciousness is destroyed; brahma-brahmana-
yajia-purusa-loka-vidiisakah—blasphemous toward the Vedas, the
strict brahmanas, ritualistic ceremonies such as sacrifice, and toward the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the devotees; prayena—almost en-
tirely; bhavisyanti—will become.
TRANSLATION

People who are lowest among men and bewildered by the illu-
sory energy of the Supreme Lord will give up the original var-
nasrama-dharma and its rules and regulations. They will abandon
bathing three times daily and worshiping the Lord. Abandoning
cleanliness and neglecting the Supreme Lord, they will accept non-
sensical principles. Not regularly bathing or washing their mouths
regularly, they will always remain unclean, and they will pluck out
their hair. Following a concocted religion, they will flourish.
During this age of Kali, people are more inclined to irreligious
systems. Consequently these people will naturally deride Vedic
authority, the followers of Vedic authority, the brahmanas, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the devotees.

PURPORT

Presently the hippies in the Western countries fit this description.
They are irresponsible and unregulated. They do not bathe. and they
deride standard Vedic knowledge. They concoct new life-styles and
religions. There are many hippie groups at the present moment. but they
all originated from King Arhat, who imitated the activities of Lord
Rsabhadeva, who was situated on the paramaharsa stage. King Arhat


--- Page 238 ---
Text 11] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 233
did not care for the fact that although Lord Rsabhadeva acted like a mad-
man, His stool and urine were nonetheless aromatic, so much so that they
nicely scented the countryside for miles around. The followers of King
Arhat went under the name Jains, and they were later followed by many
others, particularly by the hippies, who are more or less offshoots of
Mayavada philosophy because they think themselves the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Such people do not respect the real followers of
Vedic principles, the ideal brahmanas. Nor do they have respect for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Brahman. Due to the in-
fluence of this age of Kali, they are apt to concoct false religious systems.
TEXT 11
नया निजोकयाचयान

ते च ह्यव।क्तनया निजरोकयात्रयान्धपरम्परयाऽऽश्स्तास्तमखन्धे खयमेव
प्रपतिष्यन्ति 11221
te ca hy arvaktanaya nija-loka-yatrayandha-paramparayasvastas
tamasy andhe svayam eva prapatisyanti.

te—those people not following the Vedic principles: ca—and: hi—
certainly; arviktanayd—deviating from the eternal principles of Vedic
religion: nija-loka-yatraya—by a practice arrived at by their own men-
tal concoction; andha-paramparaya—by a disciplic succession of blind.
ignorant people; asvastah—being encouraged: tamasi—into the dark-
ness of ignorance; andhe—blindness: svayam eva—themselves: pra-
patisyanti—will fall down.

TRANSLATION

Low-class people, due to their gross ignorance, introduce a
system of religion that deviates from the Vedic principles.
Following their own mental concoctions, they automatically fall
down into the darkest regions of existence.

PURPORT

In this connection. one may see Bhagavad-gita, Chapter Sixteen.
where there is a description of the downfall of the asuras (16.16 and
16.23).


--- Page 239 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
TEXT 12
EY (4
अयमवतारो रजसोप्ष्डतकबल्योपशिक्षणाथः १२
ayam avataro rajasopapluta-kaivalyopasiksanarthah.
ayam avatarah—this incarnation (Lord Rsabhadeva); rajasa—by the
mode of passion: upapluta—overwhelmed: kaivalya-upasiksana-
arthah—to teach people the path of liberation.
TRANSLATION
In this age of Kali, people are overwhelmed by the modes of pas-
sion and ignorance. Lord Rsabhadeva incarnated Himself to
deliver them from the clutches of maya.
PURPORT
The symptoms of Kali-yuga are predicted in the Twelfth Canto, Third
Chapter, of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Lavanyari kesa-dharanam. It is pre-
dicted how fallen souls will behave. They will keep their hair long and
consider themselves very beautiful. or they will pluck out their hair as
the Jains do. They will keep themselves unclean and will not wash their
mouths. Jains refer to Lord Rsabhadeva as their original preceptor. If
such people are serious followers of Rsabhadeva, they must also take His
instructions. In the Fifth Chapter of this canto. Rsabhadeva gave His one
hundred sons instructions whereby they could become free from the
clutches of maya. If one actually follows Rsabhadeva. he will certainly be
delivered from the clutches of maya and return home. back to Godhead.
If one strictly follows the instructions of Rsabhadeva given in the Fifth
Chapter. he will certainly be liberated. Lord Rsabhadeva incarnated
specifically to deliver these fallen souls.
TEXT 13
तसाचुगुणान्‌ छोकान्‌ गायन्ति-
अहो अवः REE
द्वीपेषु वर्वेष्वधिपुण्यमेतत्‌ |


--- Page 240 ---
Text 13] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 235
गायन्ति यत्रत्यजना सुरारेः
कर्माणि मद्राण्यवतारवन्ति 1230
tasyanugunan Slokan gayanti—
aho bhuvah sapta-samudravatya
dvipesu varsesv adhipunyam etat
gayanti yatratya-jana murareh
karmani bhadrany avataravanti
tasya—of Him (Lord Rsabhadeva); anugundn—conforming to the in-
structions for liberation: slokan—verses: gayanti—chant: aho—oh:
bhuvah—of this earthly planet: sapta-samudra-vatyah—possessing
seven seas; dvipesu—among the islands: varsesu—among the lands:
adhipunyam —more pious than any other island: etat—this (Bharata-
varsa): gayanti—sing about: yatratya-janah—the people of this tract of
land: murareh—of Murari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead: kar-
mani—the activities: bhadrani—all-auspicious: avataravanti—in many
incarnations such as Lord Rsabhadeva.
TRANSLATION
Learned scholars chant about the transcendental qualities of
Lord Rsabhadeva in this way: ‘Oh, this earthly planet contains
seven seas and many islands and lands, of which Bharata-varsa is
considered the most pious. People of Bharata-varsa are accustomed
to glorifying the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in His incarnations as Lord Rsabhadeva and others. All these ac-
tivities are very auspicious for the welfare of humanity.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said:
bharata-bhiamite haila manusya-janma yara
janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara
As stated in this verse, Bharata-varsa is a most pious land. The followers
of Vedic literature understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead in


--- Page 241 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
His different incarnations, and they are privileged to glorify the Lord by
following the directions of Vedic literature. After realizing the glories of
human life. such people should take up the mission to spread the impor-
tance of human life throughout the whole world. This is the mission of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The word adhipunyam indicates that there
are certainly many other pious men throughout the world, but the people
of Bharata-varsa are even more pious. Therefore they are fit to spread
Krsna Consciousness throughout the world for the benefit of all human
society. Srila Madhvacarya also recognizes the land of Bharata-varsa:
visesad bharate punyam. Throughout the world, there is no question of
bhagavad-bhakti or devotional service, but the people of Bharata-varsa
can easily understand the devotional service of the Lord. Thus every in-
habitant of Bharata-varsa can perfect his life by discharging bhagavad-
bhakti and then preaching this cult throughout the world for the benefit
of everyone.
TEXT 14
अहो चु वेशो যযযাবহারঃ
Ly
प्रेयत्रतो यत्र पुमान्‌ पराणः |
कृतावतारः पुरुषः स आद्य
अचार धर्म॑ यदकर्महेतुम्‌ 1128
aho nu ०८750 yasasavadatah
praiyavrato yatra puman puranah
krtavatarah purusah sa adyas
cacara dharmam yad akarma-hetum
aho—oh; nu—indeed; vamsah—the dynasty; yaSasa—with wide-
spread fame; avadatah—fully pure; praiyavratah—related to King
Priyavrata; yatra—wherein; puman—the Supreme Person; puranah—
the original; krta-avatarah—descended as an incarnation: purusah—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sah—He; adyah—the original per-
son; cacara—executed; dharmam—religious principles: yat—from
which; akarma-hetum —the cause of the end of fruitive activities.


--- Page 242 ---
Text 15] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 237
TRANSLATION

“Oh, what shall I say of the dynasty of Priyavrata, which is pure
and very much celebrated. In that dynasty, the Supreme Person,
the original Personality of Godhead, descended as an incarnation
and executed religious principles that could free one from the
results of fruitive activity.

PURPORT

There are many dynasties in human society wherein the Supreme Lord
descends as an incarnation. Lord Krsna appeared in the Yadu dynasty.
and Lord Ramacandra appeared in the lksviaku. or Raghu. dynasty.
Similarly, Lord Rsabhadeva appeared in the dynasty of King Priyavrata.
All these dynasties are very famous, and of them the dynasty of
Priyavrata is most famous.

TEXT 15
को न्वस्य काष्टामपरोऽलुगच्छे-
-
न्मनोरथेनाप्यमवस्य योगी |
यो योगमायाः स्पृहयल्ुदस्ता
ह्यसत्तया येन॒ Awan ॥ १५॥
ko nv asya kastham aparo ’nugacchen
mano-rathenapy abhavasya yogi
yo yoga-mayah sprhayaty udasta
hy asattaya yena krta-prayatnah

kah—who; nu—indeed:; asya—of Lord Rsabhadeva: kastham —the
example: aparah—else: anugacchet—can follow: manah-rathena—by
the mind: api—even: abhavasya—of the unborn: yogi—the mystic:
yah—who; yoga-mayah—the mystic perfections of yoga; sprhayati—
desires: udastah—rejected by Rsabhadeva: hi—certainly: asattaya—by
the quality of being insubstantial: yena—by whom. Rsabhadeva: krta-
prayatnah—although eager to serve.


--- Page 243 ---
238 Srimad -Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION

“Who is that mystic yogi who can follow the examples of Lord
Rsabhadeva even with his mind? Lord Rsabhadeva rejected all
kinds of yogic perfection, which other yogis hanker to attain. Who
is that yogi who can compare to Lord Rsabhadeva?”’

PURPORT

Generally yogis desire the yogic perfections of anima, laghima,
mahima, prakamya, prapti, iSitva, vasitva and kamavasayita. Lord
Rsabhadeva, however, never aspired for all these material things. Such
siddhis (perfections) are presented by the illusory energy of the Lord.
The real purpose of the yoga system is to achieve the favor and shelter of
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. but this purpose is
covered by the illusory energy of yogamaya. So-called yogis are
therefore allured by the superficial material perfections of anima,
laghima, prapti and so forth. Consequently ordinary yogis cannot com-
pare to Lord Rsabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 16
= + ७
इति ह ख सकर्वेदलोकदेवत्राह्मणगवां WHET ऋषभाख्यस्य
विशुद्धाचरितमीरितं पुंसां समस्तदुश्रिताभिहरणं परममहा-
मङ्गलायनमिदमुश्रद्धयोपचितयाुस्ृणोत्याश्रावरयति वावहितो भगवति
> „~ हे

तसिन्‌ वासुदेव एकान्ततो भक्तिरनयोरपि समुवतते ॥ १६ ॥

iti ha sma sakala-veda-loka-deva-brahmana-gavam parama-guror
bhagavata rsabhakhyasya visuddhacaritam tritarn purasar samasta-
duscaritabhiharanar parama-maha-mangalayanam idam
anusraddhayopacitayanusrnoty asravayati vavahito bhagavati tasmin
vasudeva ekantato bhaktir anayor api samanuvartate.

iti—thus; ha sma—indeed: sakala—all: veda—of knowledge: loka—
of people in general: deva—of the demigods: brahmana—of the
brahmanas; gavam—of the cows: parama—the supreme: guroh—
master: bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: rsabha-


--- Page 244 ---
Text 16] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 239
akhyasya—whose name was Lord Rsabhadeva: visuddha—pure:
acaritam—activities: iritam—now explained: pumsam—of every living
entity: samasta—all: duScarita—sinful activities: abhiharanam—
destroying: parama—{foremost: maha —great: marngala—of auspicious-
ness: ayanam—the shelter: idam—this: anusraddhaya—with faith:
upacitaya —increasing: anusrnoti—hears from the authority:
asravayati—speaks to others: wva—or: avahitah—being attentive:
bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: tasmin—unto Him:
vasudeve—to Lord Vasudeva, Lord Krsna: eka-antatah—unflinching:
bhaktih—devotion: anayoh—of both groups, the listeners and the
speakers: api—certainly: samanuvartate—factually begins.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Lord Rsabhadeva is the master of
all Vedic knowledge, human beings, demigods, cows and
brahmanas. I have already explained His pure, transcendental
activities, which will vanquish the sinful activities of all living en-
tities. This narration of Lord Rsabhadeva’s pastimes is the reser-
voir of all auspicious things. Whoever attentively hears or speaks
of them, following in the footsteps of the acaryas, will certainly at-
tain unalloyed devotional service at the lotus feet of Lord
Vasudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

The teachings of Lord Rsabhadeva are for the people of all yugas—
Satya-yuga, Treta-yuga, Dvipara-yuga and especially Kali-yuga. These
instructions are so powerful that even in this age of Kali. one can attain
perfection simply by explaining the instructions. following in the
footsteps of the dacaryas or listening to the instructions with great atten-
tion. If one does so. one can attain the platform of pure devotional service
to Lord Vasudeva. The pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and His devotees are recorded in Srimad-Bhagavatam so that those who
recite these pastimes and listen to them will become purified. Nityam
bhagavata-sevaya. As a matter of principle. devotees should read. speak
and hear Srimad-Bhagavatam persistently. twenty-four hours daily if
possible. That is the recommendation of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 245 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
Kirtantyah sada harih. One should either chant the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra or read Srimad-Bhagavatam and thereby try to understand the
characteristics and instructions of the Supreme Lord. who appeared as
Lord Rsabhadeva, Lord Kapila and Lord Krsna. In this way one can
become fully aware of the transcendental nature of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, one who knows the
transcendental nature of the Lord's birth and activities attains liberation
from material bondage and returns to Godhead.
TEXT 17

यस्यामेव कवय आत्मानमविरतं विविधदजिनसंसारपरितापोपतप्यमानमनुसवन
स्ापयन्तस्तयैव परया नित्या ह्यपव्भमात्यन्तिकं परमपुरुषार्थमपि खय-
मासादितं नो एवाद्रियन्ते भगवदीयत्वेनैव परि समाप्तसरवा्थाः || १७॥

yasyam eva kavaya atmanam aviratam vividha-vrjina-sarisara-
paritapopatapyamanam anusavanar snapayantas tayaiva paraya
nirvrtya hy apavargam atyantikam parama-purusartham api svayam
asaditam no evadriyante bhagavadiyatvenaiva parisamapta-sarvarthah.

yasyam eva—in which (Krsna consciousness or the nectar of devo-
tional service); hkavayah—the advancement of learned scholars or
philosophers in spiritual life; atmanam—the self; aviratam—con-
stantly: vividha—various: vrjina—full of sins: samsara—in material
existence: paritdpa—from miserable conditions: upatapyamanam—
suffering: anusavanam—without stopping: snapayantah—bathing:
taya—by that: eva—certainly: parayd—great: nirvrtya—with happi-
ness; hi—certainly: apavargam —liberation: atyantikam—uninter-
rupted: parama-purusa-artham—the best of all human achievements:
api—although: svayam—itself: asaditam—obtained: no—not; eva—
certainly: dadriyante—endeavor to achieve; bhagavadiyatvena eva—
because of a relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
parisamapta-sarva-arthah—those who have ended all kinds of material
desires.


--- Page 246 ---
Text 18] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 241
TRANSLATION
Devotees always bathe themselves in devotional service in order
to be relieved from the various tribulations of material existence.
By doing this, the devotees enjoy supreme bliss, and liberation
personified comes to serve them. Nonetheless, they do not accept
that service, even if it is offered by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself. For the devotees, liberation [mukti] is very
unimportant because, having attained the Lord’s transcendental
loving service, they have attained everything desirable and have
transcended all material desires.
PURPORT
Devotional service unto the Lord is the highest attainment for anyone
desiring liberation from the tribulations of material existence. As stated
in Bhagavad-gita (6.22), yam labdhva caparam labhari manyate na-
dhikar tatah: “Gaining this. one thinks there is no greater gain.” When
one attains the service of the Lord. which is non-different from the Lord.
one does not desire anything material. Mukti means relief from material
existence. Bilvamangala Thakura says: muhktih mukulitanjalih sevate
sman. For a devotee. mukti is not a very great achievement. Mukti
means being situated in one’s constitutional position. The constitutional
position of every living being is that of the Lord's servant: therefore
when a living entity is engaged in the Lord's loving service. he has
already attained muhti. Consequently a devotee does not aspire for muhti,
even if it is offered by the Supreme Lord Himself.
TEXT 18
© + ठ
राजन्‌ पतिगुरुरलं मवतां यदूनां
A eo ~ -
देवं प्रियः कुखपतिः क्र च किङ्करो a: |
अस्त्वेवमङ्ग भगवान्‌ भजतां RETA
ত্র ha
aftr ददाति कर्हिचित्स्म न भक्तियोगम्‌ १८
rajan patir gurur alarm bhavatam 20010071077
00007 priyah kula-patih kva ca kinkaro vah


--- Page 247 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6
astv evam anga bhagavan bhajatar mukundo
muktirn dadati karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam

rajan—0 my dear King: patih—maintainer: guruh—spiritual
master: alam —certainly: bhavatam—of you: yaditnam—the Yadu
dynasty: daivam—the worshipable Deity: priyah—very dear friend:
kula-patih—the master of the dynasty: kva ca—sometimes even:
kinkarah—servant; vah—of you (the Pandavas); astu—to be sure:
evam—thus; anga—O King: bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: bhajatam—of those devotees engaged in service: mukun-
dah—the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead: muktim—Ilibera-
tion: dadati—delivers: karhicit—at any time: sma—indeed: na—not:
bhakti-yogam—Iloving devotional service.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, the Supreme Per-
son, Mukunda, is actually the maintainer of all the members of the
Pandava and Yadu dynasties. He is your spiritual master, worshipa-
ble Deity, friend, and the director of your activities. To say
nothing of this, He sometimes serves your family as a messenger
or servant. This means He worked just as ordinary servants do.
Those engaged in getting the Lord’s favor attain liberation from
the Lord very easily, but He does not very easily give the oppor-
tunity to render direct service unto Him.

PURPORT

While instructing Maharaja Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami thought it
wise to encourage the King because the King might be thinking of the
glorious position of various royal dynasties. Especially glorious is the
dynasty of Priyavrata, in which the Supreme Lord Rsabhadeva incar-
nated. Similarly, the family of Uttanapada Maharaja. the father of
Maharaja Dhruva. is also glorious due to King Prthu’s taking birth in it.
The dynasty of Maharaja Raghu is glorified because Lord Ramacandra
appeared in that family. As far as the Yadu and Kuru dynasties are con-
cerned. they existed simultaneously. but of the two, the Yadu dynasty
was more glorious due to the appearance of Lord Krsna. Maharaja


--- Page 248 ---
Text 19] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 243
Pariksit might have been thinking that the Kuru dynasty was not as for-
tunate as the others because the Supreme Lord did not appear in that
family. neither as Krsna. Lord Ramacandra. Lord Rsabhadeva or
Maharaja Prthu. Therefore Pariksit Maharaja was encouraged by
Sukadeva Gosvami in this particular verse.

The Kuru dynasty may be considered more glorious due to the pres-
ence of devotees like the five Pandavas. who rendered unalloyed devo-
tional service. Although Lord Krsna did not appear in the Kuru dynasty.
He was so obligated to the Pandavas” devotional service that He acted as a
maintainer of the family and spiritual master of the Pandavas. Although
He took birth in the Yadu dynasty. Lord Krsna was more affectionate to
the Pandavas. By His actions. Lord Krsna proved that He was more in-
clined to the Kuru dynasty than the Yadu dynasty. Indeed. Lord Krsna.
indebted to the Pandavas™ devotional service. sometimes acted as their
messenger. and He guided them through many dangerous situations.
Therefore Maharaja Pariksit should not have been saddened because
Lord Krsna did not appear in his family. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is always inclined toward His pure devotees. and by His action it
is clear that liberation is not very important for the devotees. Lord Krsna
easily gives one liberation. but He does not so easily give one the facility
to become a devotee. Muktirh dadati karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam.
Directly or indirectly. it is proved that bhakti-yoga is the basis for the
supreme relationship with the Supreme Lord. It is far superior to libera-
tion. For a pure devotee of the Lord. mukti is automatically attained.

TEXT 19
नित्याचुभूतनिजलामनिचत्तदष्णः
श्रयस्यतद्रचनया चरसप्तबुद्धः |
लोकस्य यः करुणयामयमात्मलोक-
মাফযাল্সদী मगवते ऋषभाय तस्मै ।।१९॥
nityanubhita-nija-labha-nivrtta-trsnah
Sreyasy atad-racanaya cira-supta-buddheh
lokasya yah karunayabhayam atma-lokam
akhyan namo bhagavate rsabhaya tasmai


--- Page 249 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 6

nitya-anubhiita—due to being always conscious of His real identity;
nija-labha-nivrtta-trsnah—who was complete in Himself and had no
other desire to fulfill; s$reyasi—in life’s genuine welfare: a-tat-
racanaya—by expanding activities in the material field, mistaking the
body for the self: cira—for a long time: supta—sleeping: buddheh—
whose intelligence; lokasya—of men; yah—who (Lord Rsabhadeva);
karunaya—by His causeless mercy: abhayam—fearlessness: atma-
lokam —the real identity of the self: akhyat—instructed: namah—
respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: rsabhaya—unto Lord Rsabhadeva: tasmai—unto Him.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Rsabhadeva, was
fully aware of His true identity; therefore He was self-sufficient,
and He did not desire external gratification. There was no need for
Him to aspire for success, since He was complete in Himself. Those
who unnecessarily engage in bodily conceptions and create an at-
mosphere of materialism are always ignorant of their real self-
interest. Out of His causeless mercy, Lord Rsabhadeva taught the
self’s real identity and the goal of life. We therefore offer our
respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who appeared as Lord
Rsabhadeva.

PURPORT

This is the summary of this chapter, in which the activities of Lord
Rsabhadeva are described. Being the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Himself. Lord Rsabhadeva is complete in Himself. We living entities. as
parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. should follow the instructions of
Lord Rsabhadeva and become self-sufficient. We should not create
unnecessary demands due to the bodily conception. When one is self-
realized, he is sufficiently satisfied due to being situated in his original
spiritual position. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (18.54): Brahma-
bhitah prasannatma na socati na kanksati. This is the goal of all living
entities. Even though one may be situated within this material world. he
can become fully satisfied and devoid of hankering and lamentation
simply by following the instructions of the Lord as set forth in


--- Page 250 ---
Text 19] The Activities of Lord Rsabhadeva 245
Bhagavad-gita or Srimad-Bhagavatam. Satisfaction through self-
realization is called svaripananda. The conditioned soul. eternally
sleeping in darkness. does not understand his self-interest. He simply
tries to become happy by making material adjustments, but this is im-
possible. It is therefore said in Srimad-Bhagavatam, na te viduh svartha-
gatim hi visnum: due to gross ignorance, the conditioned soul does not
know that his real self-interest is to take shelter at the lotus feet of Lord
Visnu. To try to become happy by adjusting the material atmosphere is a
useless endeavor. Indeed, it is impossible. By His personal behavior and
instructions, Lord Rsabhadeva enlightened the conditioned soul and
showed him how to become self-sufficient in his spiritual identity.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Sixth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Activities of Lord
Rsabhadeva.”


--- Page 251 ---
CHAPTER SEVEN
The Activities of King Bharata
In this chapter, the activities of King Bharata Maharaja, the emperor of
the whole world, are described. Bharata Maharaja performed various
ritualistic ceremonies (Vedic yajias) and satisfied the Supreme Lord by
his different modes of worship. In due course of time, he left home and
resided in Hardwar and passed his days in devotional activities. Being or-
dered by his father, Lord Rsabhadeva, Bharata Maharaja married
Paiicajani, the daughter of Visvartupa. After this, he ruled the whole
world peacefully. Formerly this planet was known as Ajanabha. and after
the reign of Bharata Maharaja it became known as Bharata-varsa.
Bharata Maharaja begot five sons in the womb of Paicajani. and he
named the sons Sumati. Rastrabhrta. Sudaréana. Avarana and
Dhiumraketu. Bharata Maharaja was very rigid in executing religious
principles and following in the footsteps of his father. He therefore ruled
the citizens very successfully. Because he performed various yajiias to
satisfy the Supreme Lord, he was personally very satisfied. Being of un-
disturbed mind, he increased his devotional activities unto Lord
Vasudeva. Bharata Maharaja was competent in understanding the prin-
ciples of saintly persons like Narada, and he followed in the footsteps of
the sages. He also kept Lord Vasudeva constantly within his heart. After
finishing his kingly duties, he divided his kingdom among his five sons.
He then left home and went to the place of Pulaha known as
Pulahasrama. There he ate forest vegetables and fruits, and worshiped
Lord Vasudeva with everything available. Thus he increased his devo-
tion toward Vasudeva, and he automatically began to realize further his
transcendental, blissful life. Due to his highly advanced spiritual posi-
tion, there were sometimes visible in his body the asta-sattvika transfor-
mations, such as ecstatic crying and bodily trembling, which are
symptoms of love of Godhead. It is understood that Maharaja Bharata
worshiped the Supreme Lord with the mantras mentioned in the Rg
Veda, generally known as Gayatri mantra, which aim at the Supreme
Narayana situated within the sun.
247


--- Page 252 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.7
TEXT 1
AH उवाच
भरतस्तु महामागवतो यदा भगवतावनितरपरिपालनाय सञिन्तित-
स्तद नुशाक्तनपरः पश्चजनीं विश्वरूपदु हितरथुपयेमे ॥ १ ॥
$ri-suka uvaca
bharatas tu maha-bhagavato yada bhagavatavani-tala-paripalanaya
sancintitas tad-anusasana-parah paficajanim visvaripa-duhitaram
upayeme.
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami said: bharatah—Maharaja
Bharata: tu—but: maha-bhagavatah—a maha-bhagavata, most exalted
devotee of the Lord: yada—when: bhagavata—by the order of his
father, Lord Rsabhadeva; avani-tala—the surface of the globe; pari-
pdlandaya—for ruling over; sadcintitah—made up his mind; tat-
anusasana-parah—engaged in governing the globe; paficajanim—
Paiicajani; wviSvaripa-duhitaram—the daughter of Viévarapa; upa-
yeme—married.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued speaking to Maharaja Pariksit: My
dear King, Bharata Maharaja was a topmost devotee. Following the
orders of his father, who had already decided to install him on the
throne, he began to rule the earth accordingly. When Bharata
Maharaja ruled the entire globe, he followed the orders of his
father and married Paricajani, the daughter of Visvarapa.
TEXT 2
ag ह वा आत्मजान्‌ कातसन्यनानुरूपानात्मनः पश्च जनयामास भूतादिरि
भूतखक्माणि सुमतिं राष्ट्रं सुदशेनमाबरणं धूश्रकेतुमिति ॥ २ ॥
tasyam w ha va atmajan kartsnyenanuripan atmanah [207८ janayam
asa bhatadir iva bhita-siksmani. sumatir rastrabhrtamn sudarsanam
avaranam dhiamraketum iti.


--- Page 253 ---
Text 4] The Activities of King Bharata 249

tasyam—in her womb: ४ ha va—indeed: atma-jan—sons: karts-
nyena—entirely: anuripan—exactly like: atmanah—himself: panca—
five: janayam asa—begot: bhita-adih iva—like the false ego: bhita-
siksmani—the five subtle objects of sense perception: su-matim—
Sumatim: rastra-bhrtam—Rastrabhrta: su-darsanam—Sudars$ana:
avaranam—Avarana: dhiamra-ketum—Dhuamraketu: iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

Just as the false ego creates the subtle sense objects, Maharaja
Bharata created five sons in the womb of Paiicajani, his wife. These
sons were named Sumati, Rastrabhrta, Sudar§ana, Avarana and
Dhuamraketu.

TEXT 3

अजनाभं नामैतद्रषं भारतमिति यत आरभ्य व्यपदिशन्ति ॥ ३॥
ajanabham namaitad varsam bharatam iti yata arabhya vyapadisanti.

agjanabham —Ajanabha: nama—by the name: etat—this: varsam—
island: bharatam—Bharata: iti—thus: yatah—{rom whom: arabhya—
beginning: vyapadisanti—they celebrate.

TRANSLATION

Formerly this planet was known as Ajanabha-varsa, but since

Maharaja Bharata’s reign, it has become known as Bharata-varsa.
PURPORT

This planet was formerly known as Ajaniabha because of the reign of
King Nibhi. After Bharata Mahardja ruled the planet. it became cele-
brated as Bharata-varsa.

TEXT 4
<
स बहुबिन्मदीपतिः पितृपितामहवदुरूत्सलतया स्वे स्वे wit saan:
ए, ©

प्रजाः खथममचुवतमानः पयंपालयत्‌ Hell


--- Page 254 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 7

sa bahuvin mahi-patih pitr-pitamahavad uru-vatsalataya sve sve
karmani vartamanah prajah sva-dharmam anuvartamanah
paryapalayat.

sah —that King (Maharaja Bharata): bahu-vit—being very advanced
in knowledge: mahi-patih—the ruler of the earth: pitr—father: pita-
maha—grandfather: vat—exactly like: uru-vatsalataya—with the
quality of being very affectionate to the citizens: sve sve—in their own
respective: karmani—duties: vartamanah—remaining: prajah—the
citizens: sva-dharmam anuvartamanah—being perfectly situated in his
own occupational duty: paryapalayat—ruled.

TRANSLATION

Maharaja Bharata was a very learned and experienced king on
this earth. He perfectly ruled the citizens, being himself engaged
in his own respective duties. Maharaja Bharata was as affectionate
to the citizens as his father and grandfather had been. Keeping
them engaged in their occupational duties, he ruled the earth.

PURPORT

It is most important that the chief executive rule the citizens by
keeping them fully engaged in their respective occupational duties. Some
of the citizens were brahmanas, some were ksatriyas, and some were
vaiSyas and Sidras. It is the duty of the government to see that the
citizens act according to these material divisions for their spiritual ad-
vancement. No one should remain unemployed or unoccupied in any
way. One must work as a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya or Sidra on the
material path. and on the spiritual path. everyone should act as a
brahmacari, grhastha, vanaprastha or sannyasi. Although formerly the
government was a monarchy. all the kings were very affectionate toward
the citizens. and they strictly kept them engaged in their respective
duties. Therefore society was very smoothly conducted.

TEXT 5
৬ [] 2 S

ईजे च मगवन्तं यज्ञक्रतुरूपं करतुभिरूबावचैः श्रद्धयाऽऽहताभिहोत्रद खं -
पूणेमासचातुर्मास्यपञ्चसोमानां प्रकृतिविकृतिभिरसवनं चातुरोत्रविधिना ।१ ५ ॥


--- Page 255 ---
Text 5] The Activities of King Bharata 251
চাও ca bhagavantam yajia-kratu-riipar kratubhir uccavacaih
sraddhayahrtagnihotra-darsa-pirnamasa-caturmasya-pasu-somandri
prakrti-vikrtibhir anusavanam caturhotra-vidhina.

tje—worshiped: ca—also: bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: yajaa-kratu-ripam—having the form of sacrifices without
animals and sacrifices with animals: kratubhih—by such sacrifices: uc-
cavacath—very great and very small: sSraddhaya—with faith: ahrta—
being performed: agni-hotra—of the agnihotra-yajiia; daria—of the
darsa-yqjiia; parnamasa—of the piarnamasa-yajia; caturmasya—of
the caturmasya-yajiia; pasu-somanam—of the yajia with animals and
the yajaa with soma-rasa; prakrti—by full performances: vikrtibhih—
and by partial performances: anusavanam—almost always: catuh-hotra-
vidhina—by the regulative principles of sacrifice directed by four kinds
of priests.

TRANSLATION

With great faith King Bharata performed various kinds of
sacrifice. He performed the sacrifices known as agni-hotra, darsa,
purnamasa, citurmasya, paSu-yajiia [wherein a horse is sacrificed]
and soma-yajiia [wherein a kind of beverage is offered]. Sometimes
these sacrifices were performed completely and sometimes par-
tially. In any case, in all the sacrifices the regulations of caturhotra
were strictly followed. In this way Bharata Maharaja worshiped the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

Animals like hogs and cows were offered in sacrifice to test the proper
execution of the sacrifice. Otherwise. there was no purpose in killing the
animal. Actually the animal was offered in the sacrificial fire to get a re-
Juvenated life. Generally an old animal was sacrificed in the fire. and it
would come out again in a youthful body. Some of the rituals. however.
did not require animal sacrifice. In the present age. animal sacrifices are
forbidden. As stated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu:

asvamedham gavalambham
sannyasam pala-paitrkam


--- Page 256 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 7
devarena sutotpattirm
kalau parca vivarjayet
“In this age of Kali. five acts are forbidden: the offering of a horse in
sacrifice. the offering of a cow in sacrifice. the acceptance of the order of
sannyasa, the offering of oblations of flesh to the forefathers, and a
man’s begetting children in his brother's wife.” (Ce. Adi 17.164) Such
sacrifices are impossible in this age due to the scarcity of expert brahma-
nas or rtvijah who are able to take the responsibility. In the absence of
these. the sankirtana-yajia is recommended. Yajiaih sankirtana-
prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah (Bhag. 11.5.32). After all. sacrifices are
executed to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yajrartha-kar-
ma: such activities should be carried out for the Supreme Lord's
pleasure. In this age of Kali, the Supreme Lord in His incarnation of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu should be worshiped with His associates by perfor-
mance of sankirtana-yajiia, the congregational chanting of the Hare
Krsna mantra. This process is accepted by intelligent men. Yajiaih
sankirtana-prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah. The word sumedhasah refers
to intelligent men who possess very good brain substance.
TEXT 6
सम्प्रचरत्सु नानायागेषु विरचिताङ्गक्रियेष्वपू्ं यत्तत्क्रियाफलं धर्माख्यं
९
परे बह्मणि यज्ञपुरुषे सवेदेवतालिङ्गानां मन्त्राणामथनियामकतया
साक्षात्कतैरि परदेवतायां भगवति वासुदेव एब भावयमान आत्मनेपुण्य-
= ९
खृदितकषायो हविः्वष्वयुमिशं्यमाणेषु स यजमानो यज्ञमाजो
देवांस्तान्‌ पुरूषाग्रयवेभ्वम्यच्यापरत्‌ ॥। ६ ॥
sampracaratsu nand-yagesu viracitanga-kriyesv apurvam yat tat kriya-
phalarm dharmakhyarm pare brahmani yajiia-puruse sarva-devata-
linganarh mantranam artha-niyama-kataya saksat-kartari para-
devatayarm bhegavati vasudeva eva bhavayamana atma-naipunya-
mrdita-kasayo havihsv adhvaryubhir grhyamanesu sa yajamano yajia-
bhajo devams tan purusavayavesv abhyadhyayat.


--- Page 257 ---
Text 6] The Activities of King Bharata 253

sampracaratsu—when beginning to perform: nana-yagesu—various
kinds of sacrifice: viracita-arnga-kriyesu—in which the supplementary
rites were performed: apiirvam—remote: yat—whatever: tat—that:
kriya-phalam—the result of such sacrifice: dharma-akhyam-—hy the
name of religion: pare—unto the transcendence: brahmani—the
Supreme Lord: yajia-puruse—the enjoyer of all sacrifices: sarva-
devata-linganam —which manifest all the demigods: mantranam—of
the Vedic hymns: artha-niyama-kataya—due to being the controller of
the objects: saksat-kartari—directly the performer: para-devatayam—
the origin of all demigods: bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: vasudeve—unto Krsna: eva—certainly: bhavayamanah—al-
ways thinking; datma-naipunya-mrdita-kasayah—freed from all lust
and anger by his expertise in such thinking: havihsu—the ingredients to
be offered in the sacrifice: adhvaryubhih—when the priests expert in
the sacrifices mentioned in the Atharva Veda; grhyamanesu—taking:
sah—Maharaja Bharata: yajamanah—the sacrificer: yajia-bhajah—the
recipients of the results of sacrifice: devan—all the demigods: tan—
them: purusa-avayavesu—as different parts and limbs of the body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda; abhyadhyayat—he thought.

TRANSLATION

After performing the preliminaries of various sacrifices,
Maharaja Bharata offered the results in the name of religion to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva. In other words, he
performed all the yajiias for the satisfaction of Lord Vasudeva,
Krsna. Maharaja Bharata thought that since the demigods were
different parts of Vasudeva’s body, He controls those who are ex-
plained in the Vedic mantras. By thinking in this way, Maharaja
Bharata was freed from all material contamination, such as attach-
ment, lust and greed. When the priests were about to offer the
sacrificial ingredients into the fire, Maharaja Bharata expertly un-
derstood how the offering made to different demigods was simply
an offering to the different limbs of the Lord. For instance, Indra
is the arm of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Sirya [the
sun] is His eye. Thus Maharaja Bharata considered that the


--- Page 258 ---
254 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 7
oblations offered to different demigods were actually offered unto
the different limbs of Lord Vasudeva.
PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead says that as long as one does not
develop the pure devotional service of sravanam kirtanam, hearing and
chanting. one must carry out his prescribed duties. Since Bharata
Maharaja was a great devotee, one may ask why he performed so many
sacrifices that are actually meant for karmis. The fact is that he was
simply following the orders of Vasudeva. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-
gita, sarva dharman parityajya mam ekari saranari vraja: *"Abandon all
varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me.” (Bg. 18.66) Whatever
we do. we should constantly remember Vasudeva. People are generally
addicted to offering obeisances to various demigods, but Bharata Mahara-
ja simply wanted to please Lord Vasudeva. As stated in Bhagavad-gita:
bhoktaram yajiia-tapasar sarva-loka-mahesvaram (Bg. 5.29). A yajiia
may be carried out to satisfy a particular demigod. but when the व्यव is
offered to the yajiia-purusa, Narayana. the demigods are satisfied. The
purpose of performing different yajias is to satisfy the Supreme Lord.
One may perform them in the name of different demigods or directly. If
we directly offer oblations to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. the
demigods are automatically satisfied. If we water the root of a tree. the
branches. twigs. fruits and flowers are automatically satisfied. When one
offers sacrifices to different demigods. one should remember that the
demigods are simply parts of the body of the Supreme. If we worship the
hand of a person. we intend to satisfy the person himself. If we massage a
person's legs. we do not really serve the legs but the person who
possesses the legs. All the demigods are different parts of the Lord. and if
we offer service to them, we actually serve the Lord Himself. Demigod
worship is mentioned in Brahma-sarihita, but actually the slokas advo-
cate worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda. For in-
stance, worship of the goddess Durga is mentioned this way in Brahma-
sarmhita (5.44) :

srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani vibharti durga


--- Page 259 ---
Text 6] The Activities of King Bharata 255
icchanuripam api yasya ca cestate sa
govindam adi-purusari tam aham bhajami

Following the orders of Sri Krsna, the goddess Durga creates. maintains
and annihilates. Sri Krsna also confirms this statement in Bhagavad-gita.
Mayadhyaksena prakrtih sityate sa-caracaram: “This material nature is
working under My direction. O son of Kunti. and it is producing all
moving and unmoving beings.” (Bg. 9.10)

We should worship the demigods in that spirit. Because the goddess
Durga satisfies Krsna, we should therefore offer respects to goddess
Durga. Because Lord Siva is nothing but Krsna's functional body. we
should therefore offer respects to Lord Siva. Similarly. we should offer
respects to Brahma. Agni and Sarya. There are many offerings to
different demigods, and one should always remember that these
offerings are usually meant to satisfy the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Bharata Maharaja did not aspire to receive some benediction
from demigods. His aim was to please the Supreme Lord. In the
Mahabharata, among the thousand names of Visnu. it is said yajia-bhug
yajaa-krd yajaiah. The enjoyer of yajia, the performer of yajia and
yajiia itself are the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is the performer
of everything. but out of ignorance the living entity thinks that he is the
actor. As long as we think we are the actors. we bring about karma-
bandha (bondage to activity). If we act for yajria, for Krsna. there is no
karma-bandha. Yajaarthat karmano ‘nyatra loko ‘yam karma-
bandhanah: “*“Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed.
otherwise work binds one to this material world.” (Bg. 3.9)

Following the instructions of Bharata Maharaja. we should act not for
our personal satisfaction but for the satisfaction of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita (17.28) it is also stated:

asraddhaya hutari 00107
tapas taptari krtam ca yat
asad ity ucyate partha
na ca tat pretya no iha
Sacrifices. austerities and charities performed without faith in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are nonpermanent. Regardless of


--- Page 260 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 7
whatever rituals are performed. they are called asat, nonpermanent.
They are therefore usless both in this life and the next.

Kings like Maharaja Ambarisa and many other rajarsis who were pure
devotees of the Lord simply passed their time in the service of the
Supreme Lord. When a pure devotee executes some service through the
agency of another person, he should not be criticized. for his activities
are meant for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. A devotee may have
a priest perform some karma-kanda, and the priest may not be a pure
Vaisnava. but because the devotee wants to please the Supreme Lord. he
should not be criticized. The word apirva is very significant. The resul-
tant actions of karma are called apiirva. When we act piously or im-
piously. immediate results do not ensue. We therefore wait for the
results. which are called apiirva. The results are manifest in the future.
Even the smartas accept this apirva. Pure devotees simply act for the
pleasure of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: therefore the results of
their activities are spiritual, or permanent. They are not like those of the
karmis, which are nonpermanent. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(4.23):

gata-sangasya muktasya
Jjaanavasthita-cetasah
yajaayacaratah karma
samagram praviliyate
~The work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature
and who is fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely
into transcendence.”

A devotee is always free from material contamination. He is fully situ-
ated in knowledge, and therefore his sacrifices are intended for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 7
एवं कमेविश्ुद्धया विशयद्धसच्स्यान्तदंदयाकाशश्चरीरे ब्रह्मणि भगवति वासुदेवे
महापुरुषरूपोपलशक्षणे श्रीषत्सकोस्तुमवनमारारिदिरगद्‌ादिभिरुपरक्िते


--- Page 261 ---
Text 7] The Activities of King Bharata 257
निजयुरुषहटिखितेनात्मनि पुरुषरूपेण विरोचमान उचैस्तरां मक्तिर-
जुदिनमेधमानरयाजायत ॥ ७॥
evar karma-visuddhya visuddha-sattvasyantar-hrdayakasa-sarire
brahmani bhagavati vasudeve maha-purusa-riapopalaksane srivatsa-
kaustubha-vana-malari-dara-gadadibhir upalaksite nija-purusa-hri-
likhitenatmani purusa-ripena virocamana uccaistaram bhaktir
anudinam edhamana-rayajayata.

evam—thus: karma-visuddhya—by offering everything for the ser-
vice of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and not desiring any results
of his pious activities: viSuddha-sattvasya—of Bharata Maharaja. whose
existence was completely purified: antah-hrdaya-akasa-sarire—the
Supersoul within the heart. as meditated on by yogis; brahmani—into
impersonal Brahman. which is worshiped by impersonalist janis;
bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead: vasudeve—the
son of Vasudeva. Lord Krsna: maha-purusa—of the Supreme Person:
ripa—of the form: upalaksane—having the symptoms: srivatsa—the
mark on the chest of the Lord: kaustubha—the Kaustubha gem used by
the Lord: vana-mala—flower garland: ari-dara—by the disc and conch-
shell: gada-adibhih—by the club and other symbols: upalaksite—being
recognized: nija-purusa-hrt-likhitena—which 15 situated in the heart of
His own devotee like an engraved picture: atmani—in his own mind:
purusa-ripena—by His personal form: virocamane—shining: uc-
caistaram—on a very high level: bhaktih —devotional service:
anudinam —day after day: edhamana—increasing: raya—possessing
force: ajayata—appeared.

TRANSLATION

In this way, being purified by ritualistic sacrifices, the heart of
Maharaja Bharata was completely uncontaminated. His devotional
service unto Vasudeva, Lord Krsna, increased day after day. Lord
Krsna, the son of Vasudeva, is the original Personality of Godhead
manifest as the Supersoul [Paramatma] as well as the impersonal
Brahman. Yogis meditate upon the localized Paramatma situated in


--- Page 262 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 7
the heart, jhanis worship the impersonal Brahman as the Supreme
Absolute Truth, and devotees worship Vasudeva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose transcendental body is described in
the 5851795. His body is decorated with the Srivatsa, the Kaustubha
jewel and a flower garland, and His hands hold a conchshell, disc,
club and lotus flower. Devotees like Narada always think of Him
within their hearts.
PURPORT

Lord Vasudeva. or Sri Krsna, the son of Vasudeva, is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He is manifest within the hearts of yogis in His
Paramatma feature, and He is worshiped as impersonal Brahman by
Jaanis. The Paramatma feature is described in the sastras as having four
hands. holding disc. conchshell. lotus flower and club. As confirmed in
the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.2.8):

kecit sva-dehantar-hrdayavakase
pradesa-matram purusam vasantam
catur-bhujam kanja-rathanga-sarkha-
gada-dharar dharanaya smaranti
Paramatma is situated in the hearts of all living beings. He has four
hands. which hold four symbolic weapons. All devotees who think of the
Paramatma within the heart worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as the temple Deity. They also understand the impersonal
features of the Lord and His bodily rays. the Brahman effulgence.
TEXT 8 +

एवं वर्षायुतसदस्रपय॑न्ता्सितकर्मनिर्वाणावसरोऽधि्चज्यमानं खतनयेभ्यो
रिक्थं पिकवैतामहं यथादायं त्रिमज्य खयं सकलसम्पनिकेतात्खनिकेतात्‌
पुखदाश्चमं प्रवव्राज ॥ < ॥

evan varsayuta-sahasra-paryantavasita- karma-nirvanavasaro
‘dhibhujyamanarn sva-tanayebhyo 71/00/0771 pitr-paitamahari yatha-
dayarn vibhajya svayarn sakala-sampan-niketat sva-niketat
pulahasramarn pravavraja.


--- Page 263 ---
Text 9] The Activities of King Bharata 259

evam—thus being always engaged: varsa-ayuta-sahasra—one thou-
sand times ten thousand years: paryanta—until then: avasita-karma-
nirvana-avasarah—Maharija Bharata who ascertained the moment of
the end of his royal opulence: adhibhujyamanam—being enjoyed in this
way for that duration: sva-tanayebhyah—unto his own sons: riktham—
the wealth; pitr-paitamaham —which he received from his father and
forefathers: yatha-dayam—according to the daya-bhak laws of Manu:
vibhajya—dividing: svayam—personally: sakala-sampat—of all kinds
of opulence: niketat—the abode: sva-niketat—from his paternal home:
pulaha-asramam pravavraja—he went to the asrama of Pulaha in Hard-
war (where the salagrama-§ilas are obtainable).

TRANSLATION

Destiny fixed the time for Maharaja Bharata’s enjoyment of
material opulence at one thousand times ten thousand years. When
that period was finished, he retired from family life and divided
the wealth he had received from his forefathers among his sons.
He left his paternal home, the reservoir of all opulence, and
started for Pulahasrama, which is situated in Hardwar. The
salagrama-$ilas are obtainable there.

PURPORT

According to the law of daya-bhak, when one inherits an estate. he
must hand it over to the next generation. Bharata Maharaja did this
properly. First he enjoyed his paternal property for one thousand times
ten thousand years. At the time of his retirement, he divided this prop-
erty among his sons and left for Pulaha-asrama.

TEXT 9

यत्र ह নান मगवान्‌ हरिरद्यापि तत्रत्यानां निजजनानां needa सं निधाप्यत
EE ॥ ९ ॥
yatra ha vava bhagavan harir adyapi tatratyanam nija-jananar
vatsalyena sannidhdpyata iccha-ripena.

yatra—where: ha wvava—certainly: bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead: harih—the lord: adya-api—even todav: tatra-


--- Page 264 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 7
tyanam—residing in that place: nija-jananam—for His own devotees:
vatsalyena—by His transcendental affection: sannidhapyate —becomes
visible: iccha-rizpena—according to the desire of the devotee.
TRANSLATION

At Pulaha-asrama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari,
out of His transcendental affection for His devotee, becomes
visible to His devotee, satisfying His devotee’s desires.

PURPORT

The Lord always exists in different transcendental forms. As stated in
Brahma-samhita (5.39):
ramadi-mitrtisu kala-niyamena tisthan
nanavataram akarod bhuvanesu kintu
krsnah svayam samabhavat paramah puman yo
govindam adi-purusam tam aha bhajami
The Lord is situated as Himself. Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. and He is accompanied by His expansions like Lord Rama.
Baladeva. Sankarsana. Narayana, Maha-Visnu and so forth. The devotees
worship all these forms according to their liking, and the Lord. out of His
affection. presents Himself as arca-vigraha. He sometimes presents
Himself personally before the devotee out of reciprocation or affection. A
devotee is always fully surrendered to the loving service of the Lord. and
the Lord is visible to the devotee according to the devotee’s desires. He
may be present in the form of Lord Rama. Lord Krsna. Lord
Nrsimmhadeva and so on. Such is the exchange of love between the Lord
and His devotees.

TEXT 10
यत्राभ्रमपदान्युमयतोनामि Reve am dl नाम सरित्प्रवरा सर्वतः पवित्री-
करोति 11 १०॥
yatrasrama-padany ubhayato nabhibhir drsac-cakrais cakra-nadi nama
sarit-pravara sarvatah pavitri-karoti.


--- Page 265 ---
Text 11] The Activities of King Bharata 261

yatra—where: asrama-padani—all hermitages: ubhayatah—both on
top and below; nabhibhih—like the symbolic mark of a navel: drsat—
visible: cakraih—with the circles: cakra-nadi—the Cakra-nadi River
(generally known as the Gandaki): ndma—of the name: sarit-pravara—
the most important river of all: sarvatah—everywhere: pavitri-karoti—
sanctifies.

TRANSLATION

In Pulaha-asrama is the Gandaki River, which is the best of all
rivers. The salagrama-sila, the marble pebbles, purify all those
places. On each and every marble pebble, up and down, circles like
navels are visible.

PURPORT

Salagrama-sila refers to pebbles that appear like stones with circles
marked up and down. These are available in the river known as Gan-
daki-nadi. Wherever the waters of this river ow. the place becomes im-
mediately sanctified.

TEXT 11

तसिन्‌ वाव किर स एकलः पुलहाश्रमोपवने विविधडङ्सुम-
किंसर्यतुलसिकाम्बुभिः कन्दमूलफलोपहारं च समीहमानो मगवत
आराधनं विविक्त उपरतदिषयामिलाप उपभरतोपञमः परां निशेतिमयाप ॥ ११॥

tasmin vava kila sa ekalah pulahasramopavane vividha-kusuma-
kisalaya-tulasikambubhih kanda-mila-phalopaharais ca samihamano
bhagavata aradhanar vivikta uparata-visayabhilasa upabhrtopasamah
parar nirvrtim avapa.

tasmin—in that asrama; vava kila—indeed: sah—Bharata Maharaja:
ekalah—alone. only: pulaha-asrama-upavane—in the gardens situated
in Pulaha-asrama: vividha-kusuma-kisalaya-tulasika-ambubhih —with
varicties of Howers. twigs and tulasi leaves. as well as with water: kanda-
mitla-phala-upaharaih—hy offerings of roots. bulbs and fruits: ca—
and: samihamanah—performing: bhagavatah—of the Supreme


--- Page 266 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 7
Personality of Godhead; aradhanam —worshiping; viviktah—purified;
uparata—being freed from: visaya-abhilasah—desire for material
sense enjoyment; upabhrta—increased; upaSamah—tranquility;
param —transcendental; nirvrtim—satisfaction; avapa—he obtained.
TRANSLATION
In the gardens of Pulaha-asrama, Maharaja Bharata lived alone
and collected a variety of flowers, twigs and tulasi leaves. He also
collected the water of the Gandaki River, as well as various roots,
fruits and bulbs. With these he offered food to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Vasudeva, and, worshiping Him, he remained
satisfied. In this way his heart was completely uncontaminated, and
he did not have the least desire for material enjoyment. All
material desires vanished. In this steady position, he felt full
satisfaction and was situated in devotional service.
PURPORT
Everyone is searching after peace of mind. This is obtainable only
when one is completely freed from the desire for material sense gratifica-
tion and is engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita: patram puspari phalarm toyar yo me bhaktya prayac-
chati (9.26). Worship of the Lord is not at all expensive. One can offer
the Lord a leaf. a flower. a little fruit and some water. The Supreme Lord
accepts these offerings when they are offered with love and devotion. In
this way. one can become freed from material desires. As long as one
maintains material desires. he cannot be happy. As soon as one engages
in the devotional service of the Lord. his mind is purified of all material
desires. Then one becomes fully satisfied.
sa vai [0775077 paro dharmo
yato bhaktir adhoksaje
ahaituky apratihata
yayatma suprasidati
vasudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogah prayojitah


--- Page 267 ---
Text 12] The Activities of King Bharata 263
Janayaty asu vairagyari
Janam ca yad ahaitukam
“The supreme occupation [dharma] for all humanity is that by which
men can attain to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord.
Such devotional service must be unmotivated and uninterrupted in order
to completely satisfy the self. By rendering devotional service unto the
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, one immediately acquires causeless
knowledge and detachment from the world.” (Bhag. 1.2.6-7)

These are the instructions given in Srimad-Bhagavatam, the supreme
Vedic literature. One may not be able to go to Pulaha-asrama. but
wherever one is one can happily render devotional service to the Lord by
adopting the processes mentioned above.

TEXT 12
तयेत्थमधिरतपुरषपरिचर्यया भगवति परय्॑पाबाडलगयरडवहट यञैथि्यः
शरदरदेगेनयात्यन्युद्धियमानरोमपुलककुलक ओत्कण्ट्यप्रबत्तप्रणयवाष्पनिरुद्धा-
बलोकनयन एवं REE TRI RE IRR IRS
परिष्डतपरमाह्ादगम्पीरहद यहदारगाटविष्णस्तायपि क्रियमाणां भगवत्प-
पयां न ॒सस्मार॥॥१२॥
tayettham avirata-purusa-paricaryaya bhagavati pravardhamana-
nuraga-bhara-druta-hrdaya-saithilyah praharsa-vegenatmany
udbhidyamana-roma-pulaka-kulaka autkanthya-pravrtta-pranaya-
baspa-niruddhavaloka-nayana evar nija-ramanaruna-
caranaravindanudhyana-paricita-bhakti-yogena paripluta-
paramahlada-gambhira- hrdaya-hradavagadha-dhisanas tam api
kriyamanam bhagavat-saparyam na sasmara.

taya—by that: ittham—in this manner: avirata—constant: purusa—
of the Supreme Lord: paricaryaya—by service: bhagavati—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead: pravardhamana—constantly in-
creasing: anuraga—of attachment: bhara—by the load: druta —melted:
hrdaya—heart; Saithilyah—laxity: praharsa-vegena—by the force of


--- Page 268 ---
264 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 7
transcendental ecstasy; atmani—in his body: udbhidyamana-roma-
pulaka-kulakah—standing of the hair on end: autkanthya—because of
intense longing: pravrtta—produced: pranaya-baspa-niruddha-
avaloka-nayanah—awakening of tears of love in the eyes. obstructing
the vision: evam—thus: nija-ramana-aruna-carana-aravinda—on the
Lord's reddish lotus feet: anudhyana—by meditating: paricita—in-
creased: bhakti-yogena—by dint of devotional service: paripluta—
spreading everywhere: parama—highest: ahlada—of spiritual bliss:
gambhira—very deep: hrdaya-hrada—in the heart, which is compared
to a lake: avagadha—immersed: dhisanah—whose intelligence: tam—
that: api—although: kriyamanam—executing: bhagavat—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead: saparyam—the worship: na—not:
sasmara—remembered.
TRANSLATION

That most exalted devotee, Maharaja Bharata, in this way
engaged constantly in the devotional service of the Lord. Naturally
his love for Vasudeva, Krsna, increased more and more and melted
his heart. Consequently he gradually lost all attachment for regula-
tive duties. The hairs of his body stood on end, and all the ecstatic
bodily symptoms were manifest. Tears flowed from his eyes, so
much so that he could not see anything. Thus he constantly medi-
tated on the reddish lotus feet of the Lord. At that time, his heart,
which was like a lake, was filled with the water of ecstatic love.
When his mind was immersed in that lake, he even forgot the
regulative service to the Lord.

PURPORT

When one is actually advanced in ecstatic love for Krsna, eight tran-
scendental, blissful symptoms are manifest in the body. Those are the
symptoms of perfection arising from loving service to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Since Maharaja Bharata was constantly engaged in
devotional service. all the symptoms of ecstatic love were manifest in his
body.


--- Page 269 ---
Text 13] The Activities of King Bharata 265
TEXT 13
oid पु
इत्थं धतमगवद्रत एेणेयाजिनवाससानुसवनामिषेकाद्रेकपिश्चङटिलजटाकलापिन
© [|

च विरोचमानः र्चा भगवन्तं हिरण्मयं पुरुपमुजजिदाने घर्यमण्डले-
ऽम्युपतिष्टन्नेतद्‌ होवाच--।॥।१३॥
ittham dhrta-bhagavad-vrata aineyajina-vasasanusavanabhisekardra-
kapisa-kutila-jata-kalapena ca virocamanah siryarca bhagavantarn
hiranmayarh purusam ujjihane sirya-mandale ’bhyupatisthann etad u
hovaca.

ittham—in this way: dhrta-bhagavat-vratah—having accepted the
vow to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead: aineya-agjina-
vasasa—with a dress of a .deerskin: anusavana—three times in a day:
abhiseka—by a bath: ardra—wet: kapisa—tawny: kutila-jata—of
curling and matted hair: kaldpena—by masses: ca—and:
virocamanah—being very beautifully decorated: siaryarca—by the
Vedic hymns worshiping the expansion of Narayana within the sun:
bhagavantam—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead: hiran-
mayam—the Lord. whose bodily hue is just like gold: purusam—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead: wjjihane —when rising: siarya-man-
dale—the sun globe; abhyupatisthan—worshiping: etat—this: u ha—
certainly: uvaca—he recited.

TRANSLATION

Maharaja Bharata appeared very beautiful. He had a wealth of
curly hair on his head, which was wet from bathing three times
daily. He dressed in a deerskin. He worshiped Lord Narayana,
whose body was composed of golden effulgence and who resided
within the sun. Maharaja Bharata worshiped Lord Narayana by
chanting the hymns given in the Rg Veda, and he recited the
following verse as the sun rose.

PURPORT

The predominating Deity within the sun is Hiranmaya. Lord

Narayana. He is worshiped by the Gavatri mantra: orm bhiir bhuvah svah


--- Page 270 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 7
tat savitur varenyam bhargo devasya dhimahi. He is also worshiped by
other hymns mentioned in the Rg Veda, for instance: dhyeyah sada
savitr-mandala-madhya-varti. Within the sun, Lord Narayana is situ-
ated. and He has a golden hue.
TEXT 14
परोरजः सवित्॒जातवेदो
देवस्य भगो मनसेदं जजान |
सुरेतसादः पुनराविश्य चष्टे
हंसं॑गृध्ाणं रृषद्िङ्गिरामिमः nes
paro-rajah savitur jata-vedo
devasya bhargo manasedam jajana
suretasadah punar avisya caste
hamsam grdhranam nrsad-ringiram imah
parah-rajah—beyond the mode of passion (situated in the pure mode
of goodness): savituh—of the one who illuminates the whole universe:
jata-vedah—from which all the devotee’s desires are fulfilled:
devasya—of the Lord; bhargah—the self-effulgence: manasa —simply
by contemplating; idam —this universe: jajana —created: su-retasa—by
spiritual potency; adah—this created world; punah—again; avisya—
entering: caste—sees or maintains; harsam—the living entity:
grdhranam—desiring for material enjoyment; nrsat—to the intelli-
gence: ringiram—to one who gives motion: imah—Ilet me offer my obei-
sances.
TRANSLATION
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in pure good-

ness. He illuminates the entire universe and bestows all benedic-
tions upon His devotees. The Lord has created this universe from
His own spiritual potency. According to His desire, the Lord en-
tered this universe as the Supersoul, and by virtue of His different
potencies, He is maintaining all living entities desiring material


--- Page 271 ---
Text 14] The Activities of King Bharata 267
enjoyment. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord,
who is the giver of intelligence.”

PURPORT

The predominating Deity of the sun is another expansion of Narayana.
who is illuminating the entire universe. The Lord enters the hearts of all
living entities as the Supersoul, and He gives them intelligence and
fulfills their material desires. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita.
Sarvasya cahari hrdi sannivistah. “1 am sitting in everyone's heart.”
(Bg. 15.15)

As the Supersoul, the Lord enters the hearts of all living entities. As
stated in Brahma-samhita (5.35). andantara-stha-paramanu-cayan-
tara-stham: “He enters the universe and the atom as well.” In the Rg
Veda, the predominating Deity of the sun is worshiped by this mantra:
dhyeyah sada savitr-mandala-madhya-varti narayanah sarasijasana-
sannivistah. Narayana sits on His lotus lower within the sun. By reciting
this mantra, every living entity should take shelter of Narayana just as
the sun rises. According to modern scientists. the material world rests on
the sun's effulgence. Due to the sunshine. all planets are rotating and
vegetables are growing. We also have information that the moonshine
helps vegetables and herbs grow. Actually Narayana within the sun is
maintaining the entire universe: therefore Narayana should be
worshiped by the Gayatri mantra or the Rg mantra.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Seventh
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam. entitled “The activities of King
Bharata.”


--- Page 272 ---
CHAPTER EIGHT
A Description of the Character
of Bharata Maharaja
Although Bharata Maharaja was very elevated, he fell down due to his at-
tachment to a young deer. One day after Bharata Maharaja had taken his
bath as usual in the River Gandaki and was chanting his mantra, he saw
a pregnant deer come to the river to drink water. Suddenly there could
be heard the thundering roar of a lion, and the deer was so frightened
that it immediately gave birth to its calf. It then crossed the river, but
died immediately thereafter. Maharaja Bharata took compassion upon the
motherless calf, rescued it from the water, took it to his @asrama and
cared for it affectionately. He gradually became attached to this young
deer and always thought of it affectionately. As it grew up. it became
Maharaja Bharata’s constant companion, and he always took care of it.
Gradually he became so absorbed in thinking of this deer that his mind
became agitated. As he became more attached to the deer, his devotional
service slackened. Although he was able to give up his opulent kingdom.
he became attached to the deer. Thus he fell down from his mystic yoga
practice. Once when the deer was absent, Maharaja Bharata was so dis-
turbed that he began to search for it. While searching and lamenting the
deer’s absence, Maharaja Bharata fell down and died. Because his mind
was fully absorbed thinking of the deer. he naturally took his next birth
from the womb of a deer. However. because he was considerably ad-
vanced spiritually, he did not forget his past activities. even though he
was in the body of a deer. He could understand how he had fallen down
from his exalted position, and remembering this. he left his mother deer
and again went to Pulaha-asrama. He finally ended his fruitive activities
in the form of a deer, and when he died he was released from the deer’'s
body.
269


--- Page 273 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
TEXT 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
एकदा तु महानयां कतापिषेरेयपिकावञयको बह्माक्षरमभिगरणानो

©

FEATTELF ভদবিহা ॥ १॥
sri-Suka uvaca

ekada tu maha-nadyar krtabhiseka-naiyamikavasyako
brahmaksaram abhigrnano muhiirta-trayam udakanta upavivesa.

sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: ekadd—once upon a
time: tu—but: maha-nadyam—in the great river known as Gandaki:
krta-abhiseka-naiyamika-avasyakah—having taken a bath after
finishing the daily external duties such as passing stool and urine and
brushing the teeth: brahma-aksaram—the pranava-mantra (om):
abhigrnanah—chanting: muhirta-trayam—for three minutes: udaka-
ante—on the bank of the river: upavivesa—he sat down.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, one day, after
finishing his morning duties—evacuating, urinating and
bathing—Maharaja Bharata sat down on the bank of the River
Gandaki for a few minutes and began chanting his mantra,
beginning with omkara.

TEXT 2
जे,

तत्र तदा राजन्‌ हरिणी पिपासया जलाञ्चयाम्याजमेकबोपजगाम ॥२॥

tatra 1002 rajan harini pipasaya jalasayabhyasam ekaivopajogama.

tatra—on the bank of the river: tada—at the time: rgjan—O King:
harini—a doe: pipasaya—because of thirst: jalasaya-abhyasam—near
the river: eka—one: eva—certainly: upajogama—arrived.

TRANSLATION

0 King, while Bharata Maharaja was sitting on the bank of that

river, a doe, being very thirsty, came there to drink.


--- Page 274 ---
Text 4] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 271
TEXT 3

तया पेपीयमान उदके লালইবাশিল্টা नदतो मृगपतेरुन्नादो लोकभयङ्कर
उदपतत्‌ ॥ २ ॥

taya pepiyamana udake tavad evavidirena nadato mrga-pater
unnado loka-bhayarikara udapatat.

taya—by the doe: pepityamane —being drunk with great satisfaction:
udake —the water: tavat eva—exactly at that time: avidirena—very
near: nadatah—roaring: mrga-pateh—of one lion: unnadah—the
tumultuous sound: loka-bhayam-kara—very fearful to all living en-
tities: udapatat—arose.

TRANSLATION

While the doe was drinking with great satisfaction, a lion, which
was very close, roared very loudly. This was frightful to every
living entity, and it was heard by the doe.

TEXT 4

तश्रुपश्वुत्य सा मृगवधूः प्रकृति নিজ্তনা चकितनिरीक्षणा सुतरामपिहरि-
भयामिनि वेशव्यग्रहदया RITE मयात्‌ सदसेवोचक्राम ॥ ४ ॥

tam upasrutya sa mrga-vadhih prakrti-viklava cakita-nirtksana
sutaram api hari-bhayabhinivesa-vyagra-hrdaya pariplava-drstir
agata-trsa bhayat sahasaivoccakrama.

tam upasrutya—hearing that tumultuous sound: sa—that: mrga-
vadhith—wife of a deer: prakrti-viklava—by nature always afraid of
being killed by others: cakita-niriksana—having wandering eves:
sutaram api—almost immediately: hari—of the lion: bhaya—of fear:
abhinivesa—by the entrance: vyagra-hrdayda—whose mind was agi-
tated: pariplava-drstih—whose eyes were moving to and fro: agata-
trsa—without fully satisfying the thirst: bhayat—out of fear: sahasa—
suddenly: eva—certainly: uccakrama—crossed the river.


--- Page 275 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
TRANSLATION

By nature the doe was always afraid of being killed by others,
and it was always looking about suspiciously. When it heard the
lion’s tumultuous roar, it became very agitated. Looking here and
there with disturbed eyes, the doe, although it had not fully
satisfied itself by drinking water, suddenly leaped across the river.

TEXT 5
तसा उत्तन्त्या AE उरूमयावगकितो योनिनिर्गतो गर्भैः

स्रोतसि निपपात ॥ ५॥

tasya utpatantya antarvatnya uru-bhayavagalito yoni-nirgato
garbhah srotasi nipapata.

tasyah—of it: utpatantyah—forcefully jumping up: antarvatnyah—
having a full womb: uru-bhaya—due to great fear: avagalitah—having
slipped out: yoni-nirgatah—coming out of the womb: garbhah—the
offspring: srotasi—in the flowing water: nipapata—fell down.

TRANSLATION

The doe was pregnant, and when it jumped out of fear, the baby

deer fell from its womb into the flowing waters of the river.
PURPORT

There is every chance of a woman's having a miscarriage if she ex-
periences some ecstatic emotion or is frightened. Pregnant women should
therefore be spared all these external influences.

TEXT 6

तस्प्रसवोत्सपेणमयखेदातुरा खगणेन वियुज्यमाना FIAT FORRES
निपपाताथ च ममार ॥ & ॥

tat-prasavotsarpana-bhaya-khedatura sva-ganena viyujyamana
kasyancid daryam krsna-sarasati nipapatatha ca mamara.


--- Page 276 ---
Text 7) The Character of Bharata Maharaja 273
tat-prasava—from untimely discharge of that (baby deer): utsar-
pana—from jumping across the river; bhaya—and from fear; kheda—
by exhaustion; atura—afHlicted: sva-ganena—from the flock of deer:
viyujyamana —being separated: kasyaricit—in some; daryam—cave of
a mountain; krsna-sarasati—the black doe: nipapata—fell down:
atha—therefore; ca—and; mamara—died.
TRANSLATION
Being separated from its flock and distressed by its miscarriage,
the black doe, having crossed the river, was very much distressed.
Indeed, it fell down in a cave and died immediately.
TEXT 7
d त्वेणङ्कणकं कृपणं स्रोतसान्‌ल्यमानमभिवीक्त्यापविद्धं बन्धुरि
वाुकम्पया राजर्षिर्भरत आदाय ग्तमातरमित्याश्रमपदमनयत्‌ ॥ ७ ॥
tari tv ena-kunakarn krpanari srotasanihyamanam
abhiviksyapaviddhar bandhur ivanukampaya rajarsir bharata adaya
mrta-mataram ity asrama-padam anayat.
tam—that; tu—but; ena-kunakam—the deer calf: krpanam—help-
less; srotasa—by the waves; anithyamanam—floating: abhiviksya—
seeing; apaviddham—removed from its own kind: bandhuh iva—just
like a friend; anukampaya—with compassion: raja-rsih bharatah—the
great, saintly King Bharata: addya—taking: mrta-mataram—who lost
its mother; iti—thus thinking: dasrama-padam—to the dasrama;
anayat—brought.
TRANSLATION
The great King Bharata, while sitting on the bank of the river,
saw the small deer, bereft of its mother, floating down the river.
Seeing this, he felt great compassion. Like a sincere friend, he
lifted the infant deer from the waves, and, knowing it to be
motherless, brought it to his asrama.


--- Page 277 ---
274 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.8
PURPORT

The laws of nature work in subtle ways unknown to us. Maharaja
Bharata was a great king very advanced in devotional service. He had
almost reached the point of loving service to the Supreme Lord, but even
from that platform he could fall down onto the material platform. In
Bhagavad-gita we are therefore warned:

yar hi na vyathayanty ete
[01871050718 purusarsabha
sama-duhkha-sukham dhirari
so ‘mrtatvaya kalpate
0 best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happi-
ness and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation.”
(Bg. 2.15)

Spiritual salvation and liberation from material bondage must be
worked out with great caution, otherwise a little discrepancy will cause
one to fall down again into material existence. By studying the activities
of Maharaja Bharata, we can learn the art of becoming completely freed
from all material attachment. As it will be revealed in later verses,
Bharata Maharaja had to accept the body of a deer due to being overly
compassionate for this infant deer. We should be compassionate by
raising one from the material platform to the spiritual platform: other-
wise at any moment our spiritual advancement may be spoiled, and we
may fall down onto the material platform. Maharaja Bharata’s compas-
sion for the deer was the beginning of his falldown into the material
world.

TEXT 8
तस्य ह वा एणङ्गणक उच्चैरेतसिन्‌ FATA AAR EERIE
लालनप्रीणनानुध्यानेनात्मनियमाः सहयमाः पुरुषपरिचर्यादय TR:
कतिपयेनाहगंणेन वियुज्यमानाः किल ad एवोदवसन्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
tasya ha va ena-kunaka uccair etasmin krta-nijabhimanasyahar-ahas
tat-posana-pdlana-lalana-prinananudhyanendtma-niyamah saha-


--- Page 278 ---
Text 8] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 275
yamah purusa-paricaryadaya ekaikasah katipayenahar-ganena
viyujyamanah kila sarva evodavasan.

tasya—of that King: ha va—indeed: ena-kunake—in the deer calf:
uccath—greatly: etasmin—in this: krta-nija-abhimanasya—who ac-
cepted the calf as his own son: ahah-ahah—every day: tat-posana—
maintaining that calf: palana—protecting from dangers: lalana—
raising it or showing love to it by kissing and so on: prinana—petting it
in love: anudhyanena—by such attachment: atma-niyamah—his per-
sonal activities for taking care of his body: saha-yamah—with his
spiritual duties, such as nonviolence, tolerance and simplicity: purusa-
paricarya-adayah—worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and performing other duties: eka-ekasah—every day: katipayena—
with only a few: ahah-ganena—days of time: viyujyamanah—being
given up: kila—indeed: sarve—all: eva—certainly: udavasan—became
destroyed.

TRANSLATION

Gradually Maharaja Bharata became very affectionate toward the
deer. He began to raise it and maintain it by giving it grass. He was
always careful to protect it from the attacks of tigers and other
animals. When it itched, he petted it, and in this way he always
tried to keep it in a comfortable condition. He sometimes kissed it
out of love. Being attached to raising the deer, Maharaja Bharata
forgot the rules and regulations for the advancement of spiritual
life, and he gradually forgot to worship the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. After a few days, he forgot everything about his
spiritual advancement.

PURPORT

From this we can understand how we have to be very cautious in exe-
cuting our spiritual duties by observing the rules and regulations and
regularly chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. If we neglect doing
this, we will eventually fall down. We must rise early in the morning.
bathe, attend marigala-arati, worship the Deities, chant the Hare Krsna
mantra, study the Vedic literatures and follow all the rules prescribed by


--- Page 279 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
the dcaryas and the spiritual master. If we deviate from this process, we
may fall down, even though we may be very highly advanced. As stated
in Bhagavad-gita (18.5):
yajia-dana-tapah-karma
na tyajyam karyam eva tat
yajiio danam tapas caiva
pavanani manisinam
“Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but should
be performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the
great soul.” Even if one is in the renounced order. he should never give
up the regulative principles. He should worship the Deity and give his
time and life to the service of Krsna. He should also continue following
the rules and regulations of austerity and penance. These things cannot
be given up. One should not think oneself very advanced simply because
one has accepted the sannyasa order. The activities of Bharata Maharaja
should be carefully studied for one’s spiritual advancement.
TEXT 9
अहो बतायं हरिणङ्कणकः कृपण ईश्ररथचरणपरिश्रमणरयेण स्वगणसुहृद-
बन्धुभ्यः परिवजितः शरणं च मोपसादितो मामेव मातापितरौ AEE
a .
यौधिकांथेवोपेयाय नान्यं कश्चन वेद्‌ मय्यतिविसन्धशात एव मया मत्परायणख
पोषणपाठनपीणनाठनयन्ठयुनायुष्ठेयं श्रण्योपेक्षादोषविदुषा ॥ ९ ॥
aho batayarm harina-kunakah krpana isvara-ratha-carana-
paribhramana-rayena sva-gana-suhrd-bandhubhyah parivarjitah
Saranari ca mopasadito mam eva mati-pitarau bhratr-jiatin
yauthikars caivopeyaya nanyam kanicana veda mayy ati-visrabdhas
cata eva maya mat-parayanasya posana-palana-prinana-lalanam
anasityundanustheyarin saranyopeksa-dosa-vidusa.
aho bata—alas: ayam—this: harina-kunakah—the deer calf:
krpanah—helpless: isvara-ratha-carana-paribhramana-rayena—by
the force of the rotation of the time agent of the Supreme Personality of


--- Page 280 ---
Text 9] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 277
Godhead, which is compared to the wheel of His chariot; sva-gana—own
kinsmen; suhrt—and friends; bandhubhyah—relatives; parivarjitah—
deprived of: Saranam—as shelter; ca—and; ma—me; upasaditah—
having obtained: mam-—me: eva—alone: mata-pitarau—father and
mother; bhratr-jaatin—brothers and kinsmen: yauthikan—belonging to
the herd: ca—also; eva—certainly; upeyaya—having gotten; na—not;
anyam—anyone else; karicana—some person: veda—it knows; mayi—
in me; ati—very great; visrabdhah—having faith: ca—and: atah eva—
therefore; maya—by me; mat-parayanasya—of one who is so depen-
dent upon me: posana-palana-prinana-lalanam—raising. maintaining.
petting and protecting: anasityuna—who am without any grudge:
anustheyam—to be executed; Sarapya—the one who has taken shelter:
upeksa—of neglecting; dosa-vidusa—who knows the fault.
TRANSLATION

The great King Maharaja Bharata began to think: Alas, this help-
less young deer, by the force of time, an agent of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, has now lost its relatives and friends and has
taken shelter of me. It does not know anyone but me, as I have
become its father, mother, brother and relatives. This deer is
thinking in this way, and it has full faith in me. It does not know
anyone but me; therefore I should not be envious and think that
for the deer my own welfare will be destroyed. I should certainly
raise, protect, gratify and fondle it. When it has taken shelter with
me, how can I neglect it? Even though the deer is disturbing my
spiritual life, I realize that a helpless person who has taken shelter
cannot be neglected. That would be a great fault.

PURPORT

When a person is advanced in spiritual consciousness or Krsna con-
sciousness, he naturally becomes very sympathetic toward all living en-
tities suffering in the material world. Naturally such an advanced person
thinks of the suffering of the people in general. However. if one does not
know of the material sufferings of fallen souls and becomes sympathetic
because of bodily comforts, as in the case of Bharata Maharaja. such sym-
pathy or compassion is the cause of one’s downfall. If one is actually


--- Page 281 ---
278 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
sympathetic to fallen, suffering humanity, he should try to elevate peo-
ple from material consciousness to spiritual consciousness. As far as the
deer was concerned, Bharata Maharaja became very sympathetic, but he
forgot that it was impossible for him to elevate a deer to spiritual con-
sciousness, because, after all, a deer is but an animal. It was very danger-
ous for Bharata Maharaja to sacrifice all his regulative principles simply
to take care of an animal. The principles enunciated in Bhagavad-gita
should be followed. Yar hi na vyathayanty ete [01071450778 purusarsabha.
As far as the material body is concerned, we cannot do anything for any-
one. However, by the grace of Krsna, we may raise a person to spiritual
consciousness if we ourselves follow the rules and regulations. If we give
up our own spiritual activities and simply become concerned with the
bodily comforts of others, we will fall into a dangerous position.
TEXT 10

: +
gal: साधव उपशमशीकाः TWEE णवं विधार्थे खा्थानपि
गुरुूतरादुपेशवन्ते ॥ १० ॥
nitnar hy aryah sadhava upasama-silah krpana-suhrda evari-
vidharthe svarthan api gurutaran upeksante.

nitnam—indeed; hi—certainly; aryah—those who are advanced in
civilization; sadhavah—saintly persons; upasama-silih—even though
completely in the renounced order of life: krpana-suhrdah—the friends
of the helpless: evarn-vidha-arthe—to execute such principles: sva-
arthan api—even their own personal interests: guru-taran—very im-
portant: upeksante —neglect.

TRANSLATION

Even though one is in the renounced order, one who is ad-
vanced certainly feels compassion for suffering living entities. One
should certainly neglect his own personal interests, although they
may be very important, to protect one who has surrendered.

PURPORT

Maya is very strong. In the name of philanthropy, altruism and com-

munism, people are feeling compassion for suffering humanity


--- Page 282 ---
Text 11] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 279
throughout the world. Philanthropists and altruists do not realize that it
is impossible to improve people's material conditions. Material conditions
are already established by the superior administration according to one’s
karma. They cannot be changed. The only benefit we can render to
suffering beings is to try to raise them to spiritual consciousness.
Material comforts cannot be increased or decreased. It is therefore said in
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.18), tal labhyate duhkhavad anyatah
sukham: “As far as material happiness is concerned, that comes without
effort, just as tribulations come without effort.” Material happiness and
pain can be attained without endeavor. One should not bother for
material activities. If one is at all sympathetic or able to do good to others.
he should endeavor to raise people to Krsna consciousness. In this way
everyone advances spiritually by the grace of the Lord. For our instruc-
tion, Bharata Maharaja acted in such a way. We should be very careful
not to be misled by so-called welfare activities conducted in bodily terms.
One should not give up his interest in attaining the favor of Lord Visnu
at any cost. Generally people do not know this. or they forget it. Conse-
quently they sacrifice their original interest, the attainment of Visnu's
favor, and engage in philanthropic activities for bodily comfort.
TEXT 11
इति कृतानुषङ्ग आसनज्ञयनाटनस्नानाश्चनादिषु सह मृगजहुना

स्नेदाचुबद्भहृदय आसीत्‌ ॥ ११ ॥

iti krtanusanga asana-Sayanatana-snanasanadisu saha mrga-jahuna
snehanubaddha-hrdaya asit.

iti—thus: krta-anusangah—having developed attachment: asana—
sitting: Sayana—Ilying down: atana—walking: snana—bathing: dsana-
adisu—while eating and so on: saha mrga-jahuna—with the deer calf:
sneha-anubaddha—captivated by affection: hrdayah—his heart: asit—
became.

TRANSLATION

Due to attachment for the deer, Maharaja Bharata lay down with
it, walked about with it, bathed with it and even ate with it. Thus
his heart became bound to the deer in affection.


--- Page 283 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
TEXT 12

FATT AIST FSH CHIARA शकसाराकादिभ्यो भयमा-
शंसमानो यदा सह॒ हरिणङ्कणकेन चनं समाविशति ॥ १२ ॥
kusa-kusuma-samit-palasa-phala-mitlodakany aharisyamano vrkasala-
vrkadibhyo bhayam 05077150 7700710 yada saha harina-kunakena vanar
samavisati.

kusa—a kind of grass required for ritualistic ceremonies: kusuma—
Howers: samit—firewood: palasa—leaves: phala-mitla—fruits and
roots: udakani—and water: aharisyamanah—desiring to collect:
vrkasala-vrka—from wolves and dogs: adibhyah—and other animals,
such as tigers: bhayam—fear: dsarmhsamanah—doubting: yada —when:
saha—with; harina-kunakena—the deer calf: vanam—the forest:
samavisati —enters.

TRANSLATION

When Maharaja Bharata wanted to enter the forest to collect
kusa grass, flowers, wood, leaves, fruits, roots and water, he would
fear that dogs, jackals, tigers and other ferocious animals might
kill the deer. He would therefore always take the deer with him
when entering the forest.

PURPORT

How Maharaja Bharata increased his affection for the deer is described
herein. Even such an exalted personality as Bharata Maharaja. who had
attained loving affection for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. fell
down from his position due to his affection for some animal. Conse-
quently, as will be seen, he had to accept the body of a deer in his next
life. Since this was the case with Bharata Maharaja, what can we say of
those who are not advanced in spiritual life but who become attached to
cats and dogs? Due to their affection for their cats and dogs, they have to
take the same bodily forms in the next life unless they clearly increase
their affection and love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unless
we increase our faith in the Supreme Lord, we shall be attracted to many
other things. That is the cause of our material bondage.


--- Page 284 ---
Text 13] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 281
TEXT 13

पथिषु च भुग्धमावेन লগ লম विषक्तमतिश्रणयमरहृदयः कापेण्या-
तस्कन्धेनोदवहति IgE उरसि चाधायोपलालयन्छुदं परमामवाप।१३।
pathisu ca mugdha-bhavena tatra tatra visakta- mati-pranaya-bhara-
hrdayah karpanyat skandhenodvahati evam utsanga urasi
cadhayopalalayan mudam paramam avapa.

pathisu—on the forest paths: ca—also: mugdha-bhavena—by the
childish behavior of the deer: tatra tatra—here and there: visakta-
mati—whose mind was too much attracted: pranaya—with love:
bhara—loaded: hrdayah—whose heart: karpanyat—because of affec-
tion and love: skandhena—by the shoulder: udvahati—carries: evam—
in this way: utsarige —sometimes on the lap: urasi—on the chest while
sleeping: ca—also: ddhaya—keeping: upalalayan —fondling:
mudam —pleasure: paramam—very great: avapa—he felt.

TRANSLATION

When entering the forest, the animal would appear very attrac-
tive to Maharaja Bharata due to its childish behavior. Maharaja
Bharata would even take the deer on his shoulders and carry it due
to affection. His heart was so filled with great love for the deer that
he would sometimes keep it on his lap or, when sleeping, on his
chest. In this way he felt great pleasure in fondling the animal.

PURPORT

Maharaja Bharata left his home. wife. children. kingdom and every-
thing else to advance his spiritual life in the forest. but again he fell vic-
tim to material affection due to his attachment to an insignificant pet
deer. What, then. was the use of his renouncing his family? One who is
serious in advancing his spiritual life should be very cautious not to
become attached to anything but Krsna. Sometimes. in order to preach.
we have to accept many material activities. but we should remember that
everything is for Krsna. If we remember this. there is no chance of our
being victimized by material activities.


--- Page 285 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.8
TEXT 14

क्रियायां Fem STi यदैनमभिचक्षीत aff वाय
स वर्षपतिः THT मनसा तसा आशिष आशास्ते खस्ति स्तादवस्स ते

९
सवेत इति ॥ १४॥
kriyayam nirvartyamanayam antarale py utthayotthaya yadainam
abhicaksita tarhi vava sa varsa-patih prakrti-sthena manasa tasma asisa
asaste svasti stad vatsa te sarvata iti.

kriyayam —the activities of worshiping the Lord or performing
ritualistic ceremonies: nirvartyamanayam—even without finishing: an-
tarale—at intervals in the middle: api—although: utthaya utthaya—
repeatedly getting up: yada—when: enam—the deer calf:
abhicaksita—would see: tarhi vava—at that time: sah—he: varsa-
patih—Maharaja Bharata; prakrti-sthena—happy: manasa —within his
mind: tasmai—unto it: asisah asaste—bestows benedictions: svasti—all
auspiciousness: stat—let there be: vatsa—O my dear calf: te—unto you:
sarvatah—in all respects: iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

‘When Maharaja Bharata was actually worshiping the Lord or was
engaged in some ritualistic ceremony, although his activities were
unfinished, he would still, at intervals, get up and see where the
deer was. In this way he would look for it, and when he could see
that the deer was comfortably situated, his mind and heart would
be very satisfied, and he would bestow his blessings upon the deer,
saying, ‘‘My dear calf, may you be happy in all respects.”

PURPORT

Because his attraction for the deer was so intense, Bharata Maharaja
could not concentrate upon worshiping the Lord or performing his
ritualistic ceremonies. Even though he was engaged in worshiping the
Deity. his mind was restless due to his inordinate affection. While trying
to meditate. he would simply think of the deer, wondering where it had
gone. In other words, if one’s mind is distracted from worship, a mere


--- Page 286 ---
Text 15] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 283
show of worship will not be of any benefit. The fact that Bharata Maha-
raja had to get up at intervals to look for the deer was simply a sign that
he had fallen down from the spiritual platform.
TEXT 15
अन्यदा স্বহান্তুপ্তিমমলা नष्टद्रविण इव कृषणः सकरुणमतितर्षेण

हरिणङणक विरह बिद्धलहूदयसन्तापस्तमेवालुशोचन्‌ किर কহমন্ত महद भिरम्मित
इति होवाच ।। १५॥

anyada bhrsam udvigna-mana nasta-dravina va krpanah
sakarunam ati-tarsena harina-kunaka-viraha-vihvala-hrdaya-santapas
tam evanusocan kila kasmalarn mahad abhirambhita iti hovaca.

anyada—sometimes (not seeing the calf): bhrsam—very much: ud-
vigna-manah—his mind full of anxiety: nasta-dravinah—who has lost
his riches: iva—like: krpanah—a miserly man: sa-karunam—
piteously: ati-tarsena—with great anxiety: harina-kunaka—from the
calf of the deer: viraha—by separation: vihvala—agitated: hrdaya—in
mind or heart: santapah—whose affliction: tam —that calf: eva—only:
anusocan—continuously thinking of: kila—certainly: kasmalam—illu-
sion: mahat—very great: abhirambhitah—obtained: iti—thus: ha—
certainly: uvaca—said.

TRANSLATION

If Bharata Maharaja sometimes could not see the deer, his mind
would be very agitated. He would become like a miser, who,
having obtained some riches, had lost them and had then become
very unhappy. When the deer was gone, he would be filled with
anxiety and would lament due to separation. Thus he would
become illusioned and speak as follows.

PURPORT

If a poor man loses some money or gold. he at once becomes very agi-
tated. Similarly. the mind of Maharaja Bharata would become agitated
when he did not see the deer. This is an example of how our attachment


--- Page 287 ---
284 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.8
can be transferred. If our attachment is transferred to the Lord's service,
we progress. Srila Ripa Gosvami prayed to the Lord that he would be as
naturally attracted to the Lord's service as young men and young women
are naturally attracted to each other. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu exhibited
such attachment to the Lord when He jumped into the ocean or cried at
night in separation. However. if our attachment is diverted to material
things instead of to the Lord, we will fall down from the spiritual
platform.
TEXT 16

अपि बत स वै कृपण एणबालको सृतदरिणीसुतोऽहो ममानार्यसख FERRER
कृतसुकृतस्य कृतविस्रम्भ आत्मप्रत्ययेन तदविगणयन्‌ सुजन इवागमिष्यति
॥ १६॥
api bata sa vai krpana ena-balako mrta-harini-suto "ho mamanaryasya
Satha-kirata-mater akrta-sukrtasya krta-visrambha atma-pratyayena
tad aviganayan sujana ivagamisyati.

api—indeed: bata—alas; sah—that calf: vai—certainly: krpanah—
aggrieved: ena-balakah—the deer child: mrta-harini-sutah—the calf of
the dead doe: aho—oh: mama—of me: anaryasya—the most ill-
behaved: Satha—of a cheater: kirdta—or of an uncivilized aborigine:
mateh—whose mind is that: akrta-sukrtasya—who has no pious ac-
tivities:  krta-visrambhah—putting all faith: atma-pratyayena—by
assuming me to be like himself: tat aviganayan— without thinking of all
these things: su-janah iva—like a perfect gentle person: agamisyati—
will he again return.

TRANSLATION

Bharata Maharaja would think: Alas, the deer is now helpless. I
am now very unfortunate, and my mind is like a cunning hunter,
for it is always filled with cheating propensities and cruelty. The
deer has put its faith in me, just as a good man who has a natural
interest in good behavior forgets the misbehavior of a cunning
friend and puts his faith in him. Although I have proved faithless,
will this deer return and place its faith in me?


--- Page 288 ---
Text 17] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 285
PURPORT
Bharata Maharaja was very noble and exalted, and therefore when the
deer was absent from him he thought himself unworthy to give it protec-
tion. Due to his attachment for the animal, he thought that the animal
was as noble and exalted as he himself was. According to the logic of at-
mavan manyate jagat, everyone thinks of others according to his own
position. Therefore Maharaja Bharata felt that the deer had left him due
to his negligence and that due to the animal's noble heart, it would again
return.
TEXT 17
अपि क्षेमेणासिनाश्रमोपवने शष्पाणि चरन्तं देवगुप्तं द्रह्यामि ॥१७७॥
api ksemenasminn asramopavane Saspani carantarn deva-guptam drak-
syami.
api—it may be: ksemena—with fearlessness because of the absence of
tigers and other animals; asmin—in this; dsrama-upavane—garden of
the hermitage; Saspani carantam —walking and eating the soft grasses:
deva-guptam—being protected by the demigods: draksyami—shall I
see.
TRANSLATION
Alas, is it possible that I shall again see this animal protected by
the Lord and fearless of tigers and other animals? Shall I again see
him wandering in the garden eating soft grass?
PURPORT
Maharaja Bharata thought that the animal was disappointed in his pro-
tection and had left him for the protection of a demigod. Regardless. he
ardently desired to see the animal again within his asrama eating the soft
grass and not fearing tigers and other animals. Maharaja Bharata could
think only of the deer and how the animal could be protected from all
kinds of inauspicious things. From the materialistic point of view. such
kind thoughts may be very laudable. but from the spiritual point of view


--- Page 289 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
the King was actually falling from his exalted spiritual position and un-
necessarily becoming attached to an animal. Thus degrading himself, he
would have to accept an animal body.
TEXT 18
a
अपिचन वरकः सालावृकोऽन्यतमो वा नैकचर एकचरो वा म्यति
| १<।
api ca na vrkah sala-vrko ’nyatamo va naika-cara eka-caro va bhak-
sayati.
api ca—or; na—not; vrkah—a wolf; sala-vrkah—a dog: anya-
tamah—any one of many; vd—or; na-eka-carah—the hogs that flock
together: eka-carah—the tiger that wanders alone; va—or; bhak-
sayati—is eating (the poor creature).
TRANSLATION
I do not know, but the deer might have been eaten by a wolf or a
dog or by the boars that flock together or the tiger who travels
alone.
PURPORT
Tigers never wander in the forest in flocks. Each tiger wanders alone,
but forest boars keep together. Similarly. hogs, wolves and dogs also do
the same. Thus Maharaja Bharata thought that the deer had been killed
by some of the many ferocious animals within the forest.
TEXT 19
निम्खोचति ह भगवान्‌ सकलजगरक्षेमोद यखय्यारमाद्यापि मम न॒ मृगव
धून्यास आगच्छति ॥१९॥
nimlocati ha bhagavan sakala-jagat- ksemodayas trayy-atmadyapi
mama na mrga-vadhii-nyasa agacchati.


--- Page 290 ---
Text 20] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 287

nimlocati—sets: ha—alas: bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, represented as the sun: sakala-jagat—of all the universe:
ksema-udayah—who increases the auspiciousness: trayi-atma—who
consists of the three Vedas; adya api —until now; mama—my; na—not;
mrga-vadhii-nyasah—this baby deer entrusted to me by its mother;
agacchati—has come back.

TRANSLATION

Alas, when the sun rises, all auspicious things begin. Unfor-
tunately, they have not begun for me. The sun-god is the Vedas
personified, but I am bereft of all Vedic principles. That sun-god is
now setting, yet the poor animal who trusted in me since its
mother died has not returned.

PURPORT

In the Brahma-sarihita (5.52), the sun is described as the eye of the

Supreme Personality of Godhead.
yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam
raja samasta-sura-mirtir asesa-tejah
yasyajaaya bhramati sarmbhrta-kala-cakro
govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami
As the sun arises, one should chant the Vedic mantra beginning with the
Gayatri. The sun is the symbolic representation of the eves of the
Supreme Lord. Maharaja Bharata lamented that although the sun was
going to set. due to the poor animal's absence. he could not find anything
auspicious. Bharata Maharaja considered himself most unfortunate. for
due to the animal's absence. there was nothing auspicious for him in the
presence of the sun.
TEXT 20
अपिखिदकृतसुङृतमागत्य मां सुखयिष्यति दरिणराजङ्मारो
५ = 0

विविधरुचिरदश्नीयनिजम्रगदारक विनोदे रसन्तोषं खानामपनुदन्‌।। २०॥


--- Page 291 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.8
api svid akrta-sukrtam agatya mam sukhayisyati harina-raja-kumaro
vividha-rucira-darsaniya-nija-mrga-daraka-vinodair asantosari
svanam apanudan.

api svit—whether it will: akrta-sukrtam—who has never executed
any pious activities: dgatya—coming back: mam—to me:
sukhayisyati—give pleasure: harina-raja-kumarah—the deer, who was
just like a prince because of my taking care of it exactly like a son:
vividha—various: rucira—very pleasing: darsaniya—to be seen: nija—
own: mrga-daraka—befitting the calf of the deer: vinodaih—by
pleasing activities: asantosam—the unhappiness: svanam—of his own
kind: apanudan—driving away.

TRANSLATION

That deer is exactly like a prince. When will it return? When
will it again display its personal activities, which are so pleasing?
When will it again pacify a wounded heart like mine? I certainly
must have no pious assets, otherwise the deer would have returned
by now.

PURPORT

Out of strong affection, the King accepted the small deer as if it were a
prince. This is called moha. Bue to his anxiety over the deer’s absence,
the King addressed the animal as though it were his son. Out of affection,
anyone can be addressed as anything.

TEXT 21

्षवेलिकायां मां गृषासमाधिनाऽऽमीणितद्शं प्रेमसंरम्भेण चकितचकित
आगत्य एषदपरुपविषाणात्रेण FIR ॥ २१ ॥
105৮611/027 2772 mar mrsa-samadhinamilita-drsam prema-sarirambhena
cakita-cakita agatya prsad-aparusa-visanagrena luthati.

ksvelikayam —while playing; mam—unto me: mrsa—feigning:
samadhina —by a meditational trance: amilita-driam—with closed eyes:


--- Page 292 ---
Text 22] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 289
prema-sarnrambhena—because of anger due to love: cakita-cakitah—
with fear; agatya—coming; prsat—Ilike drops of water: aparusa—very
soft; visana—of the horns: agrena—by the point: luthati—touches my
body.
TRANSLATION

Alas, the small deer, while playing with me and seeing me
feigning meditation with closed eyes, would circumambulate me
due to anger arising from love, and it would fearfully touch me
with the points of its soft horns, which felt like drops of water.

PURPORT

Now King Bharata considers his meditation false. While engaged in
meditation, he was actually thinking of his deer, and he would feel great
pleasure when the animal pricked him with the points of its horns.
Feigning meditation, the King would actually think of the animal. and
this was but a sign of his downfall.

TEXT 22

आपादितहविषि वर्हिषि FAY मयोपालब्धो भीतमीतः सपद्युपरतरास
ऋषिद्कमारदबहितकरणकलाप आस्ते ॥ २२॥
asadita-havisi barhisi disite mayopalabdho bhita-bhitah sapady
uparata-rasa rsi-kumaravad avahita-karana-kalapa 51९.

asadita—placed: havisi—all the ingredients to be offered in the
sacrifice: barhisi—on the (८50 grass: duasite—when polluted: maya
upalabdhah—being scolded by me: bhita-bhitah—in great fear:
sapadi—immediately: uparata-rasah—stopped its playing: rsi-kumara-
vat—exactly like the son or disciple of a saintly person: avahita—com-
pletely restrained: karana-kalapah—all the senses: aste—sits.

TRANSLATION

When I placed all the sacrificial ingredients on the kusa grass,

the deer, when playing, would touch the grass with its teeth and


--- Page 293 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
thus pollute it. When I chastised the deer by pushing it away, it
would immediately become fearful and sit down motionless, ex-
actly like the son of a saintly person. Thus it would stop its play.
PURPORT

Bharata Maharaja was constantly thinking of the activities of the deer,
forgetting that such meditation and diversion of attention was killing his
progress in spiritual achievement.

TEXT 23
किं वा अरे आचरितं तपस्तपखिन्यानया यदियमवनिः

सविनयङृष्णसारतनयतलुतरसुभगशिवतमाखरखुरपद पङ्किमिद्रंविण बिघुरातुरस्य
कृपणस्य मम द्रविणपदवीं शचयन्त्यात्मानं च स्व॑तः कृतकौतुक
द्विजानां खरगापवगंकामानां देवयजनं करोति॥२२॥

kim va are acaritar tapas tapasvinyanaya yad iyam avanih
savinaya-krsna-sara-tanaya-tanutara-subhaga-sivatamakhara-khura-
pada-panktibhir dravina-vidhuraturasya krpanasya mama dravina-
padavim sicayanty atmanam ca sarvatah krta-kautukarm dvijanarm
svargapavarga-kamanam deva-yajanarn karoti.

kim va—what: are—oh: dacaritam—practiced: tapah—penance:
tapasvinya—by the most fortunate: anaya—this planet earth: yat—
since: iyam—this; avanih—earth: sa-vinaya—very mild and well-
behaved: krsna-sara-tanaya—of the calf of the black deer: tanutara—
small; subhaga—beautiful: Siva-tama—most auspicious: akhara—soft;
khura—of the hooves: pada-pariktibhih—by the series of the marks:
dravina-vidhura-aturasya—who is very aggrieved because of loss of
wealth: krpanasya—a most unhappy creature; mama—for me: dra-
vina-padavim—the way to achieve that wealth: sicayanti—indicating:
atmanam—her own personal body: ca—and: sarvatah—on all sides:
krta-kautukam —ornamented: dvijanam—of the brahmanas; svarga-
apavarga-kamanam—who are desirous of achieving heavenly planets or


--- Page 294 ---
Text 24] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 291
liberation; deva-yajanam—a place of sacrifice to the demigods: karoti—
it makes.
TRANSLATION

After speaking like a madman in this way, Maharaja Bharata got
up and went outside. Seeing the footprints of the deer on the
ground, he praised the footprints out of love, saying: O unfortu-
nate Bharata, your austerities and penances are very insignificant
compared to the penance and austerity undergone by this earth
planet. Due to the earth’s severe penances, the footprints of this
deer, which are small, beautiful, most auspicious and soft, are im-
printed on the surface of this fortunate planet. This series of
footprints show a person like me, who am bereaved due to loss of
the deer, how the animal has passed through the forest arrd how 1
can regain my lost wealth. By these footprints, this land has
become a proper place for brahmanas who desire heavenly planets
or liberation to execute sacrifices to the demigods.

PURPORT

It is said that when a person becomes overly involved in loving affairs.
he forgets himself as well as others, and he forgets how to act and how to
speak. It is said that once when a man’s son was blind since birth. the
father, out of staunch affection for the child, named him Padmalocana.
or “lotus-eyed.” This is the situation arising from blind love. Bharata
Maharaja gradually fell into this condition due to his material love for
the deer. It is said in the smrti-sastra:

yasmin dese mrgah krsnas
tasmin dharmann ivodhata
“That tract of land wherein the footprints of a black deer can be seen is
to be understood as a suitable place to execute religious rituals.”
TEXT 24

अपिखिदसो WEEE मृगपतिभयान्यृतमातरं खगबालकं
स्वाश्रयपरिनरटयनुकम्पया रपणजनक्त्सलः परिपाति 112301


--- Page 295 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
api svid asau bhagavan udu-patir 67071) mrga-pati-bhayan mrta-
matararh mrga-balakam svasrama-paribhrastam anukampaya krpana-
jana-vatsalah paripati.

api svit—can it be: asau—that: bhagavan—most powerful: udu-
patih—the moon: enam—this: mrga-pati-bhayat—because of fear of
the lion: mrta-mataram—who lost its mother: mrga-balakam—the son
of a deer: sva-asrama-paribhrastam—who strayed from its asrama;
anukampaya—out of compassion: krpana-jana-vatsalah— (the moon)
who is very kind to the unhappy men: paripati—now is protecting it.

TRANSLATION

Maharaja Bharata continued to speak like a madman. Seeing
above his head the dark marks on the rising moon, which
resembled a deer, he said: Can it be that the moon, who is so kind
to an unhappy man, might also be kind upon my deer, knowing
that it has strayed from home and has become motherless? This
moon has given the deer shelter near itself just to protect it from
the fearful attacks of a lion.

TEXT 25

ক্ষি वाऽऽ्त्पजशिश्केषज्यरदवदहनश्लिखामिरुप्तप्यमानददयस्यठनकिनीकं
माघरपदतग्रगी तनयं श्िश्िरशचान्ताचरागगुणितनिजवदनसलिलाण्तमयगभस्तिभिः
सखधयतीति च ॥२५॥
kim vatmaja-vislesa-jvara-dava-dahana-sikhabhir upatapyamana-
hrdaya-sthala-nalinikarn mam upasrta-mrgi-tanayarn sisira-
Santanuraga-gunita-nija-vadana-salilamrtamaya-gabhastibhih
svadhayatiti ca.

kim va—or it may be: atma-ja—from the son: vislesa—because of
separation: jvara—the heat: dava-dahana—of the forest fire:
Sikhabhih—by the lames: upatapyamana—being burned: hrdaya—the
heart: sthala-nalintkam—compared to a red lotus Hower: mam—unto
me: upasrta-mrgi-tanayam—to whom the son of the deer was so sub-


--- Page 296 ---
Text 26] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 293
missive: §iSira-santa—which is so peaceful and cool: anuraga—out of
love: gunita—flowing; nija-vadana-salila—the water from its mouth:
amrta-maya—as good as nectar: gabhastibhih—by the rays of the
moon: svadhayati—is giving me pleasure: iti—thus: ca—and.
TRANSLATION

After perceiving the moonshine, Maharaja Bharata continued
speaking like a crazy person. He said: The deer’s son was so sub-
missive and dear to me that due to its separation I am feeling sepa-
ration from my own son. Due to the burning fever of this separa-
tion, I am suffering as if enflamed by a forest fire. My heart, which
is like the lily of the land, is now burning. Seeing me so distressed,
the moon is certainly splashing its shining nectar upon me just as a
friend throws water on another friend who has a high fever. In
this way, the moon is bringing me happiness.

PURPORT

According to Ayur-vedic treatment, it is said that if one has a high
fever, someone should splash him with water after gargling this water.
In this way the fever subsides. Although Bharata Maharaja was very ag-
grieved due to the separation of his so-called son. the deer. he thought
that the moon was splashing gargled water on him from its mouth and
that this water would subdue his high fever, which was raging due to
separation from the deer.

TEXT 26
पवमषटमानथनोरथाङलद्दयो मृगदारकाभासेन स्वारन्धकरमणा

योगारम्भणतो वित्रितः स योगतापसो भगवदाराधनलक्षणा्च
कथमितरथा जात्यन्तर एणङ्गक आसङ्गः सासाननिः्ेयसप्रतिपक्षतया
प्राक्परित्यक्तदुस्त्यजहृदयागिजातस्य तस्यैवमन्तरायबिहत योगारम्भणस्य
THREE TTS IEA ANAS AIR Ra
अत्मानमदिरिवाखु्ठिं दुरतिकमः कालः करालरमस आपद्यत ॥२६॥


--- Page 297 ---
294 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8

evam aghatamana-manorathakula-hrdayo mrga-darakabhasena
svarabdha-karmana yogarambhanato vibhramsitah sa yoga-tapaso
bhagavad-aradhana-laksanac ca katham itaratha jaty-antara ena-
kunaka asangah saksan nihsreyasa-pratipaksataya prak-parityakta-
dustyaja-hrdayabhijatasya tasyaivam antaraya-vihata-
yogarambhanasya rajarser bharatasya tavan mrgarbhaka-posana-
palana-prinana-lalananusangenaviganayata atmanam ahir ivakhu-
bilan duratikramah kalah karala-rabhasa apadyata.

evam—in that way: aghatamana—impossible to be achieved:
manah-ratha—by desires. which are like mental chariots: akula —ag-
grieved: hrdayah—whose heart: mrga-daraka-abhasena—resembling
the son of a deer: sva-arabdha-karmana—by the bad results of his un-
seen fruitive actions: yoga-arambhanatah—from the activities of yoga
performances: vibhramsitah—fallen down: sah—he (Maharaja
Bharata): yoga-tapasah—executing the activities of mystic yoga and
austerities: bhagavat-aradhana-laksanat—from the activities of devo-
tional service rendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead: ca—
and: katham—how: itaratha—else: jati-antare—belonging to a
different species of life: ena-kunake—to the body of a deer calf:
asangah—so much affectionate attachment: saksat—directly:
nihsreyasa—to achieve the ultimate goal of life: pratipaksataya— with
the quality of being an obstacle: prak—who previously: parityakta—
given up: dustyaja—although very dithcult to give up: hrdaya-abhi-
jatasya—his sons, born of his own heart: tasya—of him: evam —thus;
antaraya—by that obstacle: vihata —obstructed: yoga-arambhanasya—
whose path of executing the mystic yoga practices: raja-rseh—of the
great saintly King: bharatasya—of Maharaja Bharata: tavat—in that
way: mrga-arbhaka—the son of a deer: posapa—in maintaining:
pdlana—in protecting: prinana—in making happy: lalana—in
fondling: anusarigena—by constant absorption: aviganayatah—
neglecting: atmanam—his own soul: ahih iva—like a serpent: akhu-
bilam —the hole of a mouse: duratikramah—unsurpassable: kalah—
ultimate death: karala—terrible: rabhasah —having speed: apadyata—
arrived.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, in this way Bharata

Maharaja was overwhelmed by an uncontrollable desire which was


--- Page 298 ---
Text 26] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 295
manifest in the form of the deer. Due to the fruitive results of his
past deeds, he fell down from mystic yoga, austerity and worship
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If it were not due to his
past fruitive activity, how could he have been attracted to the deer
after giving up the association of his own son and family, con-
sidering them stumbling blocks on the path of spiritual life? How
could he show such uncontrollable affection for a deer? This was
definitely due to his past karma. The King was so engrossed in
petting and maintaining the deer that he fell down from his
spiritual activities. In due course of time, insurmountable death,
which is compared to a venomous snake that enters the hole cre-
ated by a mouse, situated itself before him.
PURPORT

As will be seen in later verses, Bharata Maharaja, at the time of death.
would be forced to accept the body of a deer due to his attraction for the
deer. In this regard, a question may be raised. How can a devotee be
affected by his past misconduct and vicious activities? In Brahma-
samhita (5.54) it is said, karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam:
“For those engaged in devotional service, bhakti-bhajana, the results of
past deeds are indemnified.” According to this, Bharata Maharaja could
not be punished for his past misdeeds. The conclusion must be that
Maharaja Bharata purposefully became over-addicted to the deer and
neglected his spiritual advancement. To immediately rectify his mistake.
for a short time he was awarded the body of a deer. This was just to in-
crease his desire for mature devotional service. Although Bharata
Maharaja was awarded the body of an animal, he did not forget what had
previously happened due to his purposeful mistake. He was very anxious
to get out of his deer body, and this indicates that his affection for devo-
tional service was intensified. so much so that he was quickly to attain
perfection in a brahmana body in the next life. It is with this conviction
that we declare in our Back to Godhead magazine that devotees like the
gosvamis living in Vrndavana who purposely commit some sinful activity
are born in the bodies of dogs, monkeys and tortoises in that holy land.
Thus they take on these lower life forms for a short while. and after they
give up those animal bodies. they are again promoted to the spiritual
world. Such punishment is only for a short period. and it is not due to


--- Page 299 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
past karma. It may appear to be due to past karma, but it is offered to
rectify the devotee and bring him to pure devotional service.
TEXT 27

तदानीमपि पारशववर्तिनमात्मजमिवानुशोचन्तममिवीक्षमाणो खरगएवामिनिवेशित-
मना शिखृञ्य लोकमिमं सह सगेण कलेवरं तमनु न मरतञन्मानुस्परति-
रितरबन्मरगशरीरमवाप ॥२७॥
tadanim api parsva-vartinam atmajam ivanusocantam abhiviksamano
mrga evabhinivesita-mana visrjya lokam imarh saha mrgena kalevararm
mriam anu na mrta-janmanusmrtir itaravan mrga-sariram avapa.

tadanim—at that time; api —indeed: parsva-vartinam—by the side of
his deathbed; atma-jam—his own son; iwa—like; anuSocantam—
lamenting; abhiviksamanah—seeing; mrge—in the deer; eva—cer-
tainly: abhinivesita-manah—his mind was absorbed; visrjya—giving
up; lokam —world; imam—this; saha—with; mrgena—the deer;
kalevaram—his body: mrtam—died: anu—thereafter: na—not;
mrta—destroyed: janma-anusmrtih—remembrance of the incident
before his death; itara-vat—like others; mrga-sariram—the body of a
deer: avapa—got.

TRANSLATION

At the time of death, the King saw that the deer was sitting by
his side, exactly like his own son, and was lamenting his death. Ac-
tually the mind of the King was absorbed in the body of the deer,
and consequently —like those bereft of Krsna consciousness—he
left the world, the deer, and his material body and acquired the
body of a deer. However, there was one advantage. Although he
lost his human body and received the body of a deer, he did not
forget the incidents of his past life.

PURPORT

There was a difference between Bharata Maharaja's acquiring a deer

body and others acquiring different bodies according to their mental


--- Page 300 ---
Text 28] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 297
condition at the time of death. After death, others forget everything that
has happened in their past lives, but Bharata Maharaja did not forget.
According to Bhagavad-gita:
yar yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tar tam evaiti kaunteya
sada tad-bhava-bhavitah
“Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that
state he will attain without fail.” (Bg. 8.6)

After quitting his body. a person gets another body according to his
mental condition at the time of death. At death. a person always thinks of
that subject matter in which he has been engrossed during his life. Ac-
cording to this law, because Bharata Maharaja was always thinking of the
deer and forgetting his worship of the Supreme Lord, he acquired the
body of a deer. However, due to his having been elevated to the topmost
platform of devotional service, he did not forget the incidents of his past
life. This special benediction saved him from further deterioration. Due
to his past activities in devotional service, he became determined to
finish his devotional service even in the body of a deer. It is therefore
said in this verse, mrtam, although he had died, anu, afterwards. na
mrta-janmanusmrtir itaravat, he did not forget the incidents of his past
life as others forget them. As stated in Brahma-sarhita: karmani nir-
dahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam (Bs. 5.54). It is proved herein that due to
the grace of the Supreme Lord, a devotee is never vanquished. Due to his
willful neglect of devotional service. a devotee may be punished for a
short time, but he again revives his devotional service and returns home.
back to Godhead.

TEXT 28
तत्रापि ह वा आत्मनो मृगत्वकारणं बगददाराधयखयोदाठुगारेबाजुस्यत्य
श शमचुतप्यमान आह ॥२८॥
tatrapi ha va atmano mrgatva-karanam bhagavad-aradhana-
samihanubhavenanusmrtya bhrsam anutapyamana aha.


--- Page 301 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8

tatra api—in that birth: ha wvi—indeed: atmanah—of himself;
mrgatva-karanam—the cause of accepting the body of a deer: bhagavat-
aradhana-samiha —of past activities in devotional service:
anubhavena—by consequence: anusmrtya—remembering: bhrsam—
always; anutapyamanah—repenting; aha —said.

TRANSLATION

Although in the body of a deer, Bharata Maharaja, due to his
rigid devotional service in his past life, could understand the cause
of his birth in that body. Considering his past and present life, he
constantly repented his activities, speaking in the following way.

PURPORT

This is a special concession for a devotee. Even if he attains a body that
is nonhuman, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead he ad-
vances further in devotional service, whether by remembering his past
life or by natural causes. It is not easy for a common man to remember
the activities of his past life, but Bharata Maharaja could remember his
past activities due to his great sacrifices and engagement in devotional
service.

TEXT 29
अहो FE श्रष्टोऽहमात्मवतापजुपथादद्धिथुक्तसमस्तसङ्गस्य विविक्तपुण्यारण्य-
शरणस्यात्मवत आत्मनि सर्वेषामात्मनां भगवति वासुदेवे तदनुश्रवणमनन-
सङ्कीतेनाराधनानुखरणाभियोगेनाशूल्यसकलयामेन कालेन समावेशितं
৬ সে

समाहितं Feet मनस्तत्तु पुनम॑माबुधस्यारान्मृगघुतमलु परिषुसखराव IE
aho kastari bhrasto "ham atmavatam anupathad yad-vimukta-samasta-
sangasya vivikta-punyaranya-saranasyatmavata atmani sarvesam
atmanari bhagavati vasudeve tad-anusravana-manana-
sankirtanaradhananusmaranabhiyogenasiinya-sakala-yamena 1101९710
samavesitarn samahitari kartsnyena manas tat tu punar
mamabudhasydran mrga-sutam anu parisusrava.


--- Page 302 ---
Text 29] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 299

aho kastam—alas, what a miserable condition of life: bhrastah—
fallen; aham—I1 (am); atma-vatam—of great devotees who have
achieved perfection; anupathat—from the way of life; yat—from
which: vimukta-samasta-sarigasya—although having given up the asso-
ciation of my real sons and home; vivikta —solitary; punya-aranya—of
a sacred forest: saranasya—who had taken shelter; atma-vatah—of one
who had become perfectly situated on the transcendental platform; at-
mani—in the Supersoul; sarvesam—of all: atmanam—living entities:
bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead: vasudeve—Lord
Vasudeva; tat—of Him: anusravana—constantly hearing; manana—
thinking: sankirtana—chanting; aradhana —worshiping:
anusmarana—constantly remembering: abhiyogena—by absorption in:
asunya—hilled: sakala-yamena—in which all the hours: kalena—by
time: samave$itam—{fully established: samahitam—{fixed:; karts-
nyena—totally; manah—the mind in such a situation: tat—that mind;
tu—but: punah—again: mama—of me: abudhasya—a great fool:
arat—from a great distance: mrga-sutam—the son of a deer: anu—
being affected by: parisusrava—{fell down.

TRANSLATION

In the body of a deer, Bharata Maharaja began to lament: What
misfortune! I have fallen from the path of the self-realized. I gave
up my real sons, wife and home to advance in spiritual life, and I
took shelter in a solitary holy place in the forest. I became self-
controlled and self-realized, and I engaged constantly in devo-
tional service, hearing, thinking, chanting, worshiping and
remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva. I
was successful in my attempt, so much so that my mind was always
absorbed in devotional service. However, due to my personal
foolishness, my mind again became attached —this time to a deer.
Now I have obtained the body of a deer and have fallen far from
my devotional practices.

PURPORT

Bue to his stringent execution of devotional service. Maharaja Bharata

could remember the activities of his past life and how he was raised to


--- Page 303 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
the spiritual platform. Due to his foolishness. he became attached to an
insignificant deer and thus fell down and had to accept the body of a
deer. This is significant for every devotee. If we misuse our position and
think that we are fully engaged in devotional service and can do
whatever we like, we have to suffer like Bharata Maharaja and be con-
demned to accept the type of body that impairs our devotional service.
Only the human form is able to execute devotional service, but if we
voluntarily give this up for sense gratification, we certainly have to be
punished. This punishment is not exactly like that endured by an ordi-
nary materialistic person. By the grace of the Supreme Lord, a devotee is
punished in such a way that his eagerness to attain the lotus feet of Lord
Vasudeva is increased. By his intense desire, he returns home in the next
lifetime. Devotional service is very completely described here:
tad-anusravana-manana-sarikirtanaradhananusmaranabhiyogena. The
constant hearing and chanting of the glories of the Lord is recommended
in Bhagavad-gita: satatarn kirtayanto mam yatantas ca drdha-vratah.
Those who have taken to Krsna consciousness should be very careful that
not a single moment is wasted and that not a single moment is spent
without chanting and remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and His activities. By His own actions and by the actions of His devotees,
Krsna teaches us how to become cautious in devotional service. Through
the medium of Bharata Maharaja, Krsna teaches us that we must be
careful in the discharge of devotional service. If we want to keep our
minds completely fixed without deviation, we must engage them in devo-
tional service full time. As far as the members of the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness are concerned, they have sacrificed
everything to push on this Krsna consciousness movement. Yet they must
take a lesson from the life of Bharata Maharaja to be very cautious and to
see that not a single moment is wasted in frivolous talk, sleep or
voracious eating. Eating is not prohibited, but if we eat voraciously we
shall certainly sleep more than required. Sense gratification ensues, and
we may be degraded to a lower life form. In that way our spiritual
progress may be checked at least for the time being. The best course is to
take the advice of Srila Rapa Gosvami: avyartha-kalatvam. We should
see that every moment of our lives is utilized for the rendering of devo-
tional service and nothing else. This is the secure position for one
wanting to return home, back to Godhead.


--- Page 304 ---
Text 30] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 301
TEXT 30
৬ Ss. . <,
gd निगूढनिर्वेदो विसृज्य मृगीं मातरं पुनभेगव-
सक्ेत्रश्चपश्लमशीरघ्रुनिगणदयितं शाटग्रामं॑पुलस्त्य पुटदहाश्रमं कारज्ञरास्रत्या-
जगाम ॥३०॥
ity evam 77 00180-71870600 visrjya mrgirh mataram punar bhagavat-
ksetram upasama-sila-muni-gana-dayitam salagramarn pulastya-
pulahasramam kalanjarat pratyajagama.
iti—thus: evam—in this way: nigidha—hidden: nirvedah—com-
pletely unattached to material activities: visrjya—giving up: mrgim—
the deer: mataram—its mother: punah —again: bhagavat-ksetram—the
place where the Supreme Lord is worshiped; upasama-sila —completely
detached from all material attachments: muni-gana-dayitam—which is
dear to the great saintly residents: Salagramam—the village known as
Salagrama: pulastya-pulaha-asramam—to the asrama conducted by
such great sages as Pulastya and Pulaha: kalanjarat—from the Kalaiijara
Mountain, where he had taken his birth in the womb of a deer: pratya-
Jjagama—he came back.
TRANSLATION
Although Bharata Maharaja received the body of a deer, by con-
stant repentance he became completely detached from all material
things. He did not disclose these things to anyone, but he left his
mother deer in a place known as Kalaiijara Mountain, where he was
born. He again went to the forest of Salagrama and to the aSrama of
Pulastya and Pulaha.
PURPORT
It is significant that Maharaja Bharata. by the grace of Vasudeva.
remembered his past life. He did not waste a moment: he returned to
Pulaha-asrama to the village known as Salagrama. Association is very
meaningful: therefore ISKCON tries to perfect one who enters the
society. The members of this society should always remember that the
society is not like a free hotel. All the members should be very careful to


--- Page 305 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 8
execute their spiritual duties so that whoever comes will automatically
become a devotee and will be able to return back to Godhead in this very
life. Although Bharata Maharaja acquired the body of a deer, he again
left his hearth and home, in this case the Mountain Kalafnjara. No one
should be captivated by his birthplace and family: one should take
shelter of the association of devotees and cultivate Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 31
. = ९
तखिनपि कालं प्रतीक्षमाणः gee भरशधुद्विभ्र आत्मसहचरः शष्कपण-
6, S ৬
तृणवीरुधा ননমানা मरगत्वनिमित्तावरसानमेव EERE
pelt
तीर्थोदकङ्किनयुत्ससजं ॥ ३१ ॥
tasminn api kalam pratiksamanah sangac ca bhrsam udvigna atma-
sahacarah Suska-parna-trna-virudha vartamano mrgatva-
nimittGvasinam eva ganayan mrga-Sariram tirthodaka-klinnam ut-
sasarja.
tasmin api—in that asrama (Pulaha-aérama): kalam—the end of the
duration of life in the deer body: pratiksamanah—always waiting for:
sangat—from association: ca—and: bhrsam—constantly: udvignah—
full of anxiety: atma-sahacarah—having the Supersoul as the only con-
stant companion (no one should think of being alone): suska-parna-
trna-virudha—by eating only the dry leaves and herbs: vartamanah—
existing: mrgatva-nimitta—of the cause of a deer’s body: avasanam—
the end: eva —only; ganayan—considering: mrga-sariram—the body of
a deer: tirtha-udaka-klinnam—bathing in the water of that holy place:
utsasarja—gave up.
TRANSLATION
Remaining in that aSrama, the great King Bharata Maharaja was
now very careful not to fall victim to bad association. Without dis-
closing his past to anyone, he remained in that aSrama and ate dry
leaves only. He was not exactly alone, for he had the association of
the Supersoul. In this way he waited for death in the body of a
deer. Bathing in that holy place, he finally gave up that body.


--- Page 306 ---
Text 31] The Character of Bharata Maharaja 303
PURPORT

Holy places like Vrndavana, Hardwar, Prayaga and Jagannatha Puri
are especially meant for the execution of devotional service. Vrndavana
specifically is the most exalted and preferred holy place for Vaisnava
devotees of Lord Krsna who are aspiring to return back to Godhead, the
Vaikuntha planets. There are many devotees in Vrndavana who
regularly bathe in the Yamuna, and this cleanses all the contamination of
the material world. By constantly chanting and hearing the holy names
and pastimes of the Supreme Lord, one certainly becomes purified and
becomes a fit candidate for liberation. However, if one purposefully falls
victim to sense gratification, he has to be punished, at least for one
lifetime, like Bharata Maharaja.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eighth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “4 Description of the
Character of Bharata Maharaja.”


--- Page 307 ---
CHAPTER NINE
The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata
In this chapter Bharata Maharaja’s attainment of the body of a brahmana
is described. In this body he remained like one dull, deaf and dumb, so
much so that when he was brought before the goddess Kali to be killed as
a sacrifice, he never protested but remained silent. After having given up
the body of a deer, he took birth in the womb of the youngest wife of a
brahmana. In this life he could also remember the activities of his past
life, and in order to avoid the influence of society, he remained like a
deaf and dumb person. He was very careful not to fall down again. He
did not mix with anyone who was not a devotee. This process should be
adopted by every devotee. As advised by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu: asat-
sanga-tyaga, —ei vaisnava-acara. One should strictly avoid the com-
pany of nondevotees, even though they may be family members. When
Bharata Maharaja was in the body of a brahmana, the people in the
neighborhood thought of him as a crazy, dull fellow, but within he was
always chanting and remembering Vasudeva, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Although his father wanted to give him an education and
purify him as a brahmana by offering him the sacred thread. he
remained in such a way that his father and mother could understand that
he was crazy and not interested in the reformatory method. Nonetheless.
he remained fully Krsna conscious, even without undergoing such offi-
cial ceremonies. Due to his silence, some people who were no better than
animals began to tease him in many ways, but he tolerated this. After the
death of his father and mother, his stepmother and stepbrothers began to
treat him very poorly. They would give him the most condemned food.
but still he did not mind; he remained completely absorbed in Krsna con-
sciousness. He was ordered by his stepbrothers and mother to guard a
paddy field one night, and at that time the leader of a dacoit party took
him away and tried to kill him by offering him as a sacrifice before
Bhadra Kali. When the dacoits brought Bharata Maharaja before the
goddess Kali and raised a chopper to kill him, the goddess Kali became
305


--- Page 308 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
immediately alarmed due to the mistreatment of a devotee. She came out
of the deity and, taking the chopper in her own hands, killed all the
dacoits there. Thus a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead can remain silent despite the mistreatment of nondevotees.
Rogues and dacoits who misbehave toward a devotee are punished at last
by the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 1-2
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथ कस्यचिद्‌ द्विजवरस्याद्धिरःप्रवरस्य शमदमतपःखान्यायाघ्ययनत्याग्‌-
सन्तोपतितिक्षाप्र्रयविद्यान्यात्मन्ञानानन्दयुक्तस्यात्मसद्राश्वुतश्चीलाचाररूपौ-
दार्यगुणा नव॒ सोदयं अङ्गजा बभूवुभिथुनं च यबीयस्यां भार्यायाम्‌
॥ १॥ यस्तु तत्र पुमांस्तं परमभागवतं राजर्षिप्रवरं भरतघुत्सृष्टस्ग-
शरीरं चरमशरीरेण विप्रत्वं गतमाहुः ॥ २ ॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
atha kasyacid dvija-varasyangirah-pravarasya sama-dama-tapah-
svadhyayadhyayana-tyaga-santosa-titiksa-prasraya-vidyanasiiyatma-
Jaanananda-yuktasyatma-sadrsa-sruta-silacara-ripaudarya-guna nava
sodarya angaja babhiivur mithunam ca yaviyasyar bharyayam. yas tu
tatra pumaris tari parama-bhagavatari rajarsi-pravarari bharatam
utsrsta-mrga-Sariram carama-sarirena vipratvari gatam ahuh.
sri-sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak; atha—
thereafter; kasyacit—of some; dvija-varasya—brahmana; angirah-pra-
varasya—who came in the dynasty of the great saint Angira; Sama—
control of the mind: dama—control of the senses; tapah—practice of
austerities and penances; suddhydya—recitation of the Vedic literatures;
adhyayana—studying; tyaga—renunciation; santosa—satisfaction;
titiksa—tolerance; prasraya—very gentle; vidya—knowledge;
anasitya— without envy; datma-jiana-ananda—satisfied in self-
realization; yuktasya—who was qualified with; atma-sadrsa—and ex-
actly like himself; Sruta—in education; Sila—in character; acara—in
behavior; ripa—in beauty; audarya—in magnanimity; gundh—


--- Page 309 ---
Text 2] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 307
possessing all these qualities; nava sa-udaryah—nine brothers born of
the same womb; arnga-jah—sons; babhivuh—were born; mithunam—a
twin brother and sister; ca—and; yaviyasyam—in the youngest;
bharyayam—wife; yah—who; tu—but; tatra—there; puman—the
male child; tam—him; parama-bhagavatarn—the most exalted devotee;
raja-rsi—of saintly kings; pravaram—most honored; bharatam—
Bharata Maharaja; utsrsta—having given up; mrga-sariram—the body
of a deer; carama-sarirena—with the last body; vipratvam—being a
brahmana; gatam—obtained; ahuh—they said.
TRANSLATION

Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, after giving
up the body of a deer, Bharata Maharaja took birth in a very pure
brahmana family. There was a braihmana who belonged to the
dynasty of Angira. He was fully qualified with brahminical
qualifications. He could control his mind and senses, and he had
studied the Vedic literatures and other subsidiary literatures. He
was expert in giving charity, and he was always satisfied, tolerant,
very gentle, learned and nonenvious. He was self-realized and
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. He remained always
in a trance. He had nine equally qualified sons by his first wife, and
by his second wife he begot twins —a brother and asister, of which
the male child was said to be the topmost devotee and foremost of
saintly kings—Bharata Maharaja. This, then, is the story of the
birth he took after giving up the body of a deer.

PURPORT

Bharata Maharaja was a great devotee, but he did not attain success in
one life. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that a devotee who does not fulfill his
devotional duties in one life is given the chance to be born in a fully
qualified brahmana family or a rich ksatriya or vaisya family. Sucinam
srimatam gehe (Bg. 6.41). Bharata Maharaja was the firstborn son of
Maharaja Rsabha in a rich ksatriya family, but due to his willful
negligence of his spiritual duties and his excessive attachment to an in-
significant deer, he was obliged to take birth as the son of a deer.
However, due to his strong position as a devotee, he was gifted with the
remembrance of his past life. Being repentant, he remained in a solitary


--- Page 310 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
forest and always thought of Krsna. Then he was given the chance to
take birth in a very good brahmana family.
TEXT 3
(3 ৬
तत्रापि खजनसङ्गाच भृशषघुदधिजमानो भगवतः कमेबन्धविष्वंसनश्रवणसरण्‌-
गुणविवरणचरणारविन्दयुगटं मनसा विदधदात्मनः प्रतिधातमाशङ्कमानो
(५

भगवदुग्रहेणालुस्मृतसखपू्वजन्माधकिरात्मानन्मत्तजडान्धबधिरखरूपेण হহাযা-
मास aw ॥ २ ॥
tatrapi svajana-sangac ca bhrsam udvijamano bhagavatah karma-
bandha-vidhvarmsana-Sravana-smarana-guna-vivarana-
caranaravinda-yugalam manasa vidadhad atmanah pratighatam
asarikamano bhagavad-anugrahenanusmrta-sva-pirva-janmavalir
atmanam unmatta-jadandha-badhira-svaripena darsayam asa lokasya.

tatra api—in that brahmana birth also; sva-jana-sangat—from asso-
ciation with relatives and friends; ca—and; bhrsam—greatly; udvi-
Jjamanah—being always afraid that he would fall down again;
bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; karma-bandha—
the bondage of the reactions of fruitive activities; vidhvarmsana—which
vanquishes; Sravana—hearing; smarana—remembering; guna-
vivarana—hearing descriptions of the qualities of the Lord; carana-ara-
vinda—lotus feet; yugalam—the two; manasa—with the mind;
vidadhat—always thinking of; atmanah—of his soul; pratighatam—
obstruction on the path of devotional service; asarikamanah—always
fearing; bhagavat-anugrahena—by the special mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; anusmrta—remembered; sva-pirva—his own
previous; janma-avalih—string of births; atmanam—himself; un-
matta—mad; jada—dull; andha—blind; badhira—and deaf; sva-
ripena—with these features; darsayam asa—he exhibited; lokasya—to
people in general.

TRANSLATION

Due to his being especially gifted with the Lord’s mercy, Bharata
Maharaja could remember the incidents of his past life. Although
he received the body of a brahmana, he was still very much afraid


--- Page 311 ---
Text 3] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 309
of his relatives and friends who were not devotees. He was always
very cautious of such association because he feared that he would
again fall down. Consequently he manifested himself before the
public eye as a madman —dull, blind and deaf —so that others
would not try to talk to him. In this way he saved himself from bad
association. Within he was always thinking of the lotus feet of the
Lord and chanting the Lord’s glories, which save one from the
bondage of fruitive action. In this way he saved himself from the
onslaught of nondevotee associates.
PURPORT

Every living entity is bound by different activities due to association
with the modes of nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, karanarh guna-
sango ’sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu: “This is due to his association with
that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among various
species.” (Bg. 13.22)

We get different types of bodies among 8,400,000 species according to
our karma. Karmana daiva-netrena: we work under the influence of
material nature contaminated by the three modes, and thus we get a cer-
tain type of body according to superior order. This is called karma-
bandha. To get out of this karma-bandha, one must engage himself in
devotional service. Then one will not be affected by the modes of
material nature.

mar ca yo vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiyaya kalpate
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26) To remain immune
from the material qualities, one must engage himself in devotional ser-
vice— §ravanari kirtanari visnoh. That is the perfection of life. When
Maharaja Bharata took birth as a brahmana, he was not very interested
in the duties of a brahmana, but within he remained a pure Vaisnava. al-
ways thinking of the lotus feet of the Lord. As advised in Bhagavad-gita:


--- Page 312 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 9
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru. This is the
only process by which one can be saved from the danger of repeated
birth and death.
TEXT 4
- © নে
तस्यापि ह्‌ वाआररमजस्य विप्रः पुत्रसदादलुक्द्धमनाआसमावतनात्सस्कारान्‌
यथोपदेशं विदधान उप नीतस्य च पुनः शौचाचमनादीन्‌ कर्मनियमानन-
-

भिप्रेतानपि समशिष्षयद्लुशिष्टेन हि भाव्यं पितुः ofa ॥ ४ ॥

tasyapi ha va atmajasya viprah putra-snehanubaddha-mana
dasamavartanat sariskaran yathopadesam vidadhana upanitasya ca
punah Saucacamanadin karma-niyaman anabhipretan api
samasiksayad anusistena hi bhavyam pituh putreneti.

tasya—of him: api ha va—certainly; datma-jasya—of his son;
viprah—the brahmana father of Jada Bharata (mad, crazy Bharata);
putra-sneha-anubaddha-manah—who was obliged by affection for his
son; a-sama-avartanat—until the end of the brahmacarya-asrama;
sariskaran—the purificatory processes; yatha-upadesam —as prescribed
in the Sastras; vidadhanah—performing; upanitasya—of one who has a
sacred thread; ca—also; punah—again; Sauca-acamana-adin— practice
of cleanliness, washing of the mouth, legs and hands, etc.; karma-niya-
man—the regulative principles of fruitive activities; anabhipretan
api—although not wanted by Jada Bharata; samasiksayat—taught;
anusistena—taught to follow the regulative principles; hi—indeed;
bhavyam—should be; pituh—from the father; putrena—the son; iti—
thus.

TRANSLATION

The brahmana father’s mind was always filled with affection
for his son, Jada Bharata [Bharata Maharaja]. Therefore he was al-
ways attached to Jada Bharata. Because Jada Bharata was unfit to
enter the grhastha-asrama, he simply executed the purificatory
process up to the end of the brahmacarya-asrama. Although Jada
Bharata was unwilling to accept his father’s instructions, the
brahmana nonetheless instructed him in how to keep clean and
how to wash, thinking that the son should be taught by the father.


--- Page 313 ---
Text 4] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 311
PURPORT

Jada Bharata was Bharata Maharaja in the body of a brahmana, and he
outwardly conducted himself as if he were dull, deaf, dumb and blind.
Actually he was quite alert within. He knew perfectly well of the results
of fruitive activity and the results of devotional service. In the body of a
brahmana, Maharaja Bharata was completely absorbed in devotional ser-
vice within; therefore it was not at all necessary for him to execute the
regulative principles of fruitive activity. As confirmed in Srimad-
Bhagavatam: svanusthitasya dharmasya samsiddhir hari-tosanam
(Bhag. 1.2.13). One has to satisfy Hari, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. That is the perfection of the regulative principles of fruitive
activity. Besides that, it is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam:

dharmah svanusthitah pursam
visvaksena-kathasu yah
notpadayed yadi 7017
Srama eva hi kevalam

“Duties [dharma] executed by men, regardless of occupation. are only so
much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of
the Supreme Lord.”” (Bhag. 1.2.8) These karma-kanda activities are re-
quired as long as one has not developed Krsna consciousness. If one is
developed in Krsna consciousness, there is no need to execute the prior
regulative principles of karma-kanda. Srila Madhavendra Puri said. --0
regulative principles of karma-kanda, please excuse me. I cannot follow
all these regulative principles, for I am fully engaged in devotional ser-
vice.” He expressed the desire to sit somehwere beneath a tree and con-
tinue chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Consequently he did not
execute all the regulative principles. Similarly, Haridasa Thakura was
born in a Mohammedan family. From the very beginning of his life he
was never trained in the karma-kanda system. but because he was al-
ways chanting the holy name of the Lord, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ac-
cepted him as namdcarya, the authority in chanting the holy name. As
Jada Bharata, Bharata Maharaja was always engaged in devotional service
within his mind. Since he had executed the regulative principles


--- Page 314 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
continuously for three lives, he was not interested in continuing to
execute them, although his brahmana father wanted him to do so.
TEXT 5

aay तदु ह पिविसंनिधावेवासधीचीनमिव स्म करोति छन्दांख-
wut सह व्याहृतिमिः सप्रणवशिरखिपदीं सावित्रीं doe
वासन्तिकान्मासानधीयानमप्यसमवेतरूपं ग्राहयामास ॥ ५ ॥
sa capi tad u ha pitr-sannidhav evasadhricinam iva sma karoti
chandarisy adhyapayisyan saha vyahrtibhih sapranava-siras tripadirh
savitrim graisma-vasantikan masan adhiyanam apy asamaveta-ripariu
grahayam asa.

sah—he (Jada Bharata) ; ca—also; api—indeed; tat u ha—that which
was instructed by his father; pitr-sannidhau—in the presence of his
father; eva—even; asadhricinam iva—not correct, as if he could not un-
derstand anything; sma karoti—used to perform; chandamsi
adhyapayisyan—desiring to teach him Vedic mantras during the
months beginning with Sravana or during the period of Caturmasya;
30/10 —along with; vyahrtibhih—the utterance of the names of the
heavenly planets (bhiih, bhuvah, svah); sa-pranava-sirah—headed by
omkara; tri-padim —three-footed; savitrim—the Gayatri mantra;
graisma-vasantikan—for four months, beginning with Caitra, on the fif-
teenth of May; masan—the months; adhiyanam api—although fully
studying; asamaveta-riipam—in an incomplete form; grahayam asa—
he made him learn.

TRANSLATION

Jada Bharata behaved before his father like a fool, despite his
father’s adequately instructing him in Vedic knowledge. He
behaved in that way so that his father would know that he was unfit
for instruction and would abandon the attempt to instruct him
further. He would behave in a completely opposite way. Although
instructed to wash his hands after evacuating, he would wash them
before. Nonetheless, his father wanted to give him Vedic instruc-


--- Page 315 ---
Text 6] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 313
tions during the spring and summer. He tried to teach him the
Gayatri mantra along with ormkara and vyahrti, but after four
months, his father still was not successful in instructing him.
TEXT 6
° on
एवं @AgH आत्मन्यनुरागावेशितचित्तः शोचाष्ययनव्रतनियम-

(9
गुर्भनरश्चशरुषणायोपङुर्बाणककर्माण्यनभियुक्तान्यपि समनुशिष्टेन
मान्यमिस्यसदाग्रदः पुत्रमलुशास खयं ताद्‌ अनधिगतमनोरथः
कालेनाप्रमत्तेन खयं गृह एव प्रमत्त उपसंहृतः ॥ § ॥

evarh sva-tanuja atmany anuragavesita-cittah saucadhyayana-vrata-
niyama-gurv-anala-susrisanady-aupakurvanaka-karmany
anabhiyuktany api samanusistena bhavyam ity asad-agrahah putram
anusasya svayam tavad anadhigata-manorathah kalenapramattena
svayam grha eva pramatta upasarhrtah.

evam—thus; sva—own; tanu-je—in his son, Jada Bharata; atmani—
whom he considered to be himself; anuraga-avesita-cittah—the
brahmana who was absorbed in love for his son; sauca—cleanliness;
adhyayana—study of Vedic literature; vrata—accepting all the vows:
niyama—regulative principles; guru—of the spiritual master; anala—
of the fire; susriisana-adi—the service, etc.; aupakurvanaka—of the
brahmacarya-asrama; karmani—all the activities; anabhiyuktani api—
although not liked by his son; samanusistena—fully instructed:
bhavyam—should be; iti—thus; asat-agrahah—having unsuitable
obstinacy; putram—his son; anusasya—instructing; svayam—himself:
tavat—in that way; anadhigata-manorathah—not having fulfilled his
desires: kalena—by the influence of time; apramattena—which is not
forgetful; svayam—he himself; grhe—to his home; eva—certainly:
pramattah—being madly attached; upasarihrtah—died.

TRANSLATION

The brahmana father of Jada Bharata considered his son his

heart and soul, and therefore he was very much attached to him.


--- Page 316 ---
314 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
He thought it wise to educate his son properly, and being absorbed
in this unsuccessful endeavor, he tried to teach his son the rules
and regulations of brahmacarya—including the execution of the
Vedic vows, cleanliness, study of the Vedas, the regulative
methods, service to the spiritual master and the method of offer-
ing a fire sacrifice. He tried his best to teach his son in this way, but
all his endeavors failed. In his heart he hoped that his son would
be a learned scholar, but all his attempts were unsuccessful. Like
everyone, this brahmana was attached to his home, and he had
forgotten that someday he would die. Death, however, was not
forgetful. At the proper time, death appeared and took him away.
PURPORT

Those too attached to family life, who forget that death comes in the
future to take them away, become attached and unable to finish their
duty as human beings. The duty of human life is to solve all the prob-
lems of life, but instead people remain attached to family affairs and
duties. Although they forget death, death will not forget them. Suddenly
they will be kicked off the platform of a peaceful family life. One may
forget that he has to die, but death never forgets. Death comes always at
the right time. The brahmana father of Jada Bharata wanted to teach his
son the process of brahmacarya, but he was unsuccessful due to his son’s
unwillingness to undergo the process of Vedic advancement. Jada
Bharata was simply concerned with returning home, back to Godhead, by
executing devotional service through sravanar kirtanari visnoh. He did
not care for the Vedic instructions of his father. When one is fully in-
terested in the service of the Lord, he does not need to follow all the
regulative principles enunciated in the Vedas. Of course, for an ordinary
man, the Vedic principles are imperative. No one can avoid them. But
when one has attained the perfection of devotional service, it is not very
important to follow the Vedic principles. Lord Krsna advised Arjuna to
ascend to the platform of nistraigunya, the transcendental position above
the Vedic principles.

traigunya-visaya veda
nistraigunyo bhavarjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-ksema atmavan


--- Page 317 ---
Text 8] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 315
“The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material
nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of
them. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and
safety, and be established in the Self.” (Bg. 2.45)
TEXT 7
अथ afd द्विजसती खगभजातं मिथुनं सपर्या उपन्यस्य खय-
मयुसंस्यया पतिलोकमगात्‌ ।। ७॥
atha yaviyasi dvija-sati sva-garbha-jatam mithunam sapatnya
upanyasya svayam anusaristhaya patilokam agat.
atha—thereafter; yaviyasi—the youngest; dvija-sati—wife of the
brahmana; sva-garbha-jatam—born of her womb; mithunam—the
twins; sapatnyai—unto the co-wife; upanyasya—entrusting; svayam—
personally; anusariisthaya—by following her husband; pati-lokam —the
planet named Patiloka; agat—went to.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the brahmana’s younger wife, after entrusting her
twin children—the boy and girl—to the elder wife, departed for
Patiloka, voluntarily dying with her husband.
TEXT 8
¢ +
पितयुपरते आतर एनमतत्प्रमावविदचखय्यां विद्यायामेव पर्यवसितमतयो
न परविद्यायां जडमतिरिति भ्रातुरुलासननिर्बन्धान्न्यच्रत्सन्त ॥ < ॥
pitary uparate bhratara enam atat-prabhava-vidas trayyam
vidyayam eva paryavasita-matayo na para-vidyayam jada-matir iti
bhratur anusasana-nirbandhan nyavrtsanta.
pitari uparate—after the death of the father: bhratarah—the
stepbrothers; enam—unto this Bharata (Jada Bharata): a-tat-prabhava-
vidah—without understanding his exalted position; trayyam—of the
three Vedas; vidyayam—in the matter of material ritualistic knowledge:


--- Page 318 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
eva—indeed; paryavasita—settled; matayah—whose minds; na—not;
para-vidyayam—in the transcendental knowledge of spiritual life
(devotional service); jada-matih—most dull intelligence; iti—thus;
bhratuh—their brother (Jada Bharata); anu$asana-nirbandhdat—from
the endeavor to teach; nyavrtsanta—stopped.
TRANSLATION

After the father died, the nine stepbrothers of Jada Bharata,
who considered Jada Bharata dull and brainless, abandoned the
father’s attempt to give Jada Bharata a complete education. The
stepbrothers of Jada Bharata were learned in the three Vedas —the
Rg Veda, Sama Veda and Yajur Veda— which very much encourage
fruitive activity. The nine brothers were not at all spiritually
enlightened in devotional service to the Lord. Consequently they
could not understand the highly exalted position of Jada Bharata.

TEXTS 9-10
EY
स च प्राञतेरदिपदपञ्भिरुन्मत्तजडबधिरमूकेत्यमिमाप्य माणो यदा तदनुरूपाणि
TAMA कर्माणि च॒ कार्यमाणः परेच्छया करोति विष्टितो वेतनतो वा
याच्जया ISBT वोपसादितमस्पं बहु सृष्टं कदल्नं वाभ्यवहरति परं
नेन्द्रियप्रीतिनिभित्तम्‌ । निरयनिवृत्तनिमितख्सिद्धविशद्वायुडयष्वन्दस्ात्-
০

खामाधिगमः सुखदुःखयोदरन्द्रनिमित्तयोरसम्भावितदेहाभिमानः ॥ ९ ॥
शीतोष्णवातवर्पेषु शूष॒ शवानाबरताङ्गः पीनः संहननाङ्गः खण्डिलसंवेशना-
चन्मर्दनामज्ञनरजसा महामणिरिवानभिव्यक्तन्रवचसः इपटाडृत कटिरु-
पवीतेनोरुमपिणा द्विजातिरिति बरक्चबन्धुरिति संज्ञयातञ्ज्जनावमतो विचचार
॥ १०॥
sa ca prakrtair dvipada-pasubhir unmatta-jada-badhira-mikety
abhibhasyamano yada tad-anuriapani prabhdasate karmani ca
karyamanah parecchaya karoti vistito vetanato va yaciaya yadrcchaya
vopasaditam alpam bahu mrstari kadannam vabhyavaharati param
nendriya-priti-nimittam. nitya-nivrtta-nimitta-sva-siddha-


--- Page 319 ---
Text 10] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 317
visSuddhanubhavananda-svatma-labhadhigamah sukha-duhkhayor
dvanda-nimittayor asambhavita-dehabhimanah. sitosna-vdta-varsesu
vrsa wanavrtangah pinah sarmhananangah sthandila-
sarwesananunmardanamajjana-rajasa mahamanir ivanabhivyakta-
brahma-varcasah kupatavrta-katir upavitenoru-masina dvijatir iti
brahma-bandhur iti sarjiiayataj-jiajanavamato vicacara.

sah ca—he also; prakrtaih—by common persons who have no access
to spiritual knowledge; dvi-pada-pasubhih—who are nothing but
animals with two legs; unmatta—mad; jada—dull; badhira—deaf;
mitka —dumb; iti—thus; abhibhasyamanah—being addressed; yada —
when; tat-anuripani—words suitable to reply to theirs; prabhdsate—he
used to speak; karmani—activities; ca—also; kdaryamanah—being
caused to execute; para-icchayd—by the order of others; karoti—he
used to act; vistitah—by force; vetanatah—or by some wages; vd —
either; yaciaya—by begging; yadrcchaya—by its own accord; va—or;
upasaditam—gotten; alpam—a very small quantity; bahu—a large
quantity; mrstarm—very palatable; kat-annam—stale, tasteless foods;
va—or; abhyavaharati—he used to eat; param —only; na—not; in-
driya-priti-nimittam—for the satisfaction of the senses; nitya—eter-
nally; nivrtta—stopped; nimitta—fruitive activity; sva-siddha—by self-
accomplished; visuddha—transcendental; anubhava-ananda— blissful
perception; sva-atma-labha-adhigamah—who has achieved knowledge
of the self; sukha-duhkhayoh—in happiness and distress; dvandva-
nimittayoh—in the causes of duality; asambhavita-deha-abhimanah—
not identified with the body; Sita —in the winter; usna—in the summer:
vata—in the wind; varsesu—in the rainfall; vrsah—a bull; iva—like:
anavrta-angah—uncovered body; pinah—very strong; sarmhanana-
angah—whose limbs were firm; sthandila-sarwesana—from lying
down on the ground; anunmardana —without any massage: amajjana—
without bathing; rajasa—by dirt; maha-manih—highly valuable gem:
iva—like; anabhivyakta—unmanifested; brahma-varcasah—spiritual
splendor; ku-pata-avrta—covered by a dirty cloth; katih—whose loins:
upavitena—with a sacred thread; uru-masina—which was highly
blackish due to dirt; dvi-jatih—born in a brahmana family: iti—thus
(saying out of contempt); brahma-bandhuh—a friend of a brahmana;
iti—thus; saryiiaya—by such names: a-tat-jiia-jana—by persons not


--- Page 320 ---
318 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
knowing his real position; avamatah—being disrespected; vicacara—he
wandered.
TRANSLATION

Degraded men are actually no better than animals. The only
difference is that animals have four legs and such men have only
two. These two-legged, animalistic men used to call Jada Bharata
mad, dull, deaf and dumb. They mistreated him, and Jada Bharata
behaved for them like a madman who was deaf, blind or dull. He
did not protest or try to convince them that he was not so. If others
wanted him to do something, he acted according to their desires.
Whatever food he could acquire by begging or by wages, and
whatever came of its own accord —be it a small quantity, palatable,
stale or tasteless—he would accept and eat. He never ate anything
for sense gratification because he was already liberated from the
bodily conception, which induces one to accept palatable or un-
palatable food. He was full in the transcendental consciousness of
devotional service, and therefore he was unaffected by the
dualities arising from the bodily conception. Actually his body was
as strong as a bull’s, and his limbs were very muscular. He didn’t
care for winter or summer, wind or rain, and he never covered his
body at any time. He lay on the ground, and never smeared oil on
his body or took a bath. Because his body was dirty, his spiritual
effulgence and knowledge were covered, just as the splendor of a
valuable gem is covered by dirt. He only wore a dirty loincloth and
his sacred thread, which was blackish. Understanding that he was
born in a brahmana family, people would call him a brahma-
bandhu and other names. Being thus insulted and neglected by
materialistic people, he wandered here and there.

PURPORT

Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has sung: deha-smrti nahi yara, sam-
sara-bandhana kahan tara. One who has no desire to maintain the body
or who is not anxious to keep the body in order and who is satisfied in
any condition must be either mad or liberated. Actually Bharata
Maharaja in his birth as Jada Bharata was completely liberated from
material dualities. He was a paramaharisa and therefore did not care for
bodily comfort.


--- Page 321 ---
Text 11] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 319
TEXT 11

यदा तु परत आहारं कर्मवेतनत ईहमानः खघ्राठमिरपि केदारकर्मणि
निरूपितस्तदपि करोति किन्तु न समं विषमं न्यूनपधिरुमिति वेद
रणपिष्यारूफठीङूरणकुर्माषस्यालीपुरीषादीन्यप्यग्रतक्दम्यरदरति ॥ ११॥
yada tu parata aharam karma-vetanata thamanah sva-bhratrbhir api
kedara-karmani niripitas tad api karoti kintu na samam visamam
nyunam adhikam iti veda kana-pinyaka-phali-karana-kulmasa-
sthalipurisadiny apy amrtavad abhyavaharati.

yada —when; tu—but; paratah—from others; aharam—food:
karma-vetanatah—in exchange for wages from working; thamanah—
looking for; sva-bhratrbhih api—even by his own stepbrothers; kedara-
karmani—in working in the field and adjusting the agricultural work;
niripitah—engaged; tat api—at that time also; karoti—he used to do:
kintu—but; na—not; samam—level; visamam—uneven; nyianam—
deficient; adhikam—more raised; iti—thus; veda—he knew; kana—
broken rice; pinyaka—oil cakes; phali-karana—the chaff of rice:
kulmasa—worm-eaten grains; sthali-purisa-adini—burned rice stuck to
the pot and so on; api—even; amrta-vat—like nectar: abhyavaharati—
used to eat.

TRANSLATION

Jada Bharata used to work only for food. His stepbrothers took
advantage of this and engaged him in agricultural field work in ex-
change for some food, but actually he did not know how to work
very well in the field. He did not know where to spread dirt or
where to make the ground level or uneven. His brothers used to
give him broken rice, oil cakes, the chaff of rice, worm-eaten
grains and burned grains that had stuck to the pot, but he gladly
accepted all this as if it were nectar. He did not hold any grudges
and ate all this very gladly.

PURPORT

The platform of paramaharisa is described in Bhagavad-gita (2.15):

sama-duhkha-sukham dhiram so ‘mrtatvaya kalpate. When one is


--- Page 322 ---
320 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 9
callous to all duality, the happiness and distress of this material world,
one is fit for amrtatva, eternal life. Bharata Maharaja was determined to
finish his business in this material world, and he did not at all care for
the world of duality. He was complete in Krsna consciousness and was
oblivious to good and evil, happiness and distress. As stated in Caitanya-
caritamrta (Antya 4.176):
‘dvaite’ bhadrabhadra-jaana, saba- ‘manodharma’
‘ei bhala, ei manda’,—saba ‘bhrama’
“In the material world, conceptions of good and bad are all mental
speculations. Therefore, saying, ‘This is good and this is bad,” is all a
mistake.”” One has to understand that in the material world of duality, to
think that this is good or that this is bad is simply a mental concoction.
However, one should not imitate this consciousness; one should actually
be situated on the spiritual platform of neutrality.
TEXT 12
aS

अथ कदाचित्कथिद्‌ TIRE पुरुषपडछमालतापत्यकामः॥ १२॥

atha kadacit kascid vrsala-patir bhadra-kalyai purusa-pasum
alabhatapatya-kamah.

atha—thereafter; kadacit—at some time; kascit—some; vrsala-
patih—the leader of $80705 engaged in plundering the property of
others; bhadra-kalyai—unto the goddess known as Bhadra Kali;
purusa-pasum—an animal in the shape of a man; dlabhata—started to
sacrifice; apatya-kamah—desiring a son.

TRANSLATION

At this time, being desirous of obtaining a son, a leader of
dacoits who came from a Sidra family wanted to worship the god-
dess Bhadra Kali by offering her in sacrifice a dull man, who is
considered no better than an animal.


--- Page 323 ---
Text 13] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 321
PURPORT

Low-class men such as Siidras worship demigods like goddess Kali, or
Bhadra Kali, for the fulfillment of material desires. To this end, they
sometimes kill a human being before the deity. They generally choose a
person who is not very intelligent—in other words, an animal in the
shape of a man.

TEXT 13
a 3

तस्य ह ITYHW पञ्चोः OFA तदनुचराः परिधावन्तो লিখি निशीथसमये
तमसाऽऽदृतायामनधिगतपञ आकसिकेन विधिना केदारान्‌ वीरासनेन
मृगव गादादिम्यः सरश्चमाणमद्धिरः प्रवर सुतमपश्यन्‌। १३।
tasya ha daiva-muktasya pasoh padavirh tad-anucarah paridhavanto
nisi nisitha-samaye tamasavrtayam anadhigata-pasava akasmikena
vidhina kedaran virasanena mrga-varahadibhyah sarmraksamanam
angirah-pravara-sutam apaSyan.

tasya—of the leader of the dacoits; ha—certainly; daiva-muktasya—
by chance having escaped; pasoh—of the human animal; padavim—the
path; tat-anucarah—his followers or assistants; paridhavantah—
searching here and there to find; nisi—at night; nisitha-samaye—at
midnight; tamasa avrtayam—being covered by darkness: anadhigata-
pasavah—not catching the man-animal; akasmikena vidhina—by the
unexpected law of providence; kedaran—the fields: vira-asanena—by a
seat on a raised place; mrga-varaha-adibhyah—from the deer, wild pigs
and so on: sariraksamanam—protecting: angirah-pravara-sutam —the
son of the brahmana descending from the Angira family: apasyan—
they found.

TRANSLATION

The leader of the dacoits captured a man-animal for sacrifice,
but he escaped, and the leader ordered his followers to find him.
They ran in different directions but could not find him. Wander-
ing here and there in the middle of the night, covered by dense
darkness, they came to a paddy field where they saw the exalted


--- Page 324 ---
322 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 9
son of the Angira family [Jada Bharata], who was sitting in an ele-
vated place guarding the field against the attacks of deer and wild
pigs.
TEXT 14
5
अथ त एनमनरद्यलख्णम्वगडश्य मतंकर्मनिष्पतति मन्यमाना बद्ध्वा रशनया
Q

चण्टिकागहयुपनिन्युभुदा रिकसितवदनाः । १४॥
atha ta enam anavadya-laksanam avamrsya bhartr-karma-nispattirin
manyamana baddhva rasanaya candika-grham upaninyur muda
vikasita-vadanah.

atha—thereafter; te—they (the servants of the leader of the dacoits);
enam—this (Jada Bharata); anavadya-laksanam—as bearing the
characteristics of a dull animal because of a fat body like a bull’s and
because of being deaf and dumb; avamrSya—recognizing; bhartr-
karma-nispattim—the accomplishment of their master’s work;
manyamanah—understanding; baddhva—binding tightly; rasanaya—
with ropes; candika-grham—to the temple of goddess Kali;
upaninyuh—brought; muda —with great happiness; vikasita-
vadanah—with bright faces.

TRANSLATION

The followers and servants of the dacoit chief considered Jada
Bharata to possess qualities quite suitable for a man-animal, and
they decided that he was a perfect choice for sacrifice. Their faces
bright with happiness, they bound him with ropes and brought
him to the temple of the goddess Kali.

PURPORT

In some parts of India, animalistic men are still sacrificed before the
goddess Kali. However, such a sacrifice is only performed by sidras and
dacoits. Their business is to plunder the wealthy, and to become suc-
cessful they offer an animalistic man before the goddess Kali. It should
be noted that they never sacrifice an intelligent man before the goddess.


--- Page 325 ---
Text 15] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 323
In the body of a brahmana, Bharata Maharaja appeared deaf and dumb,
yet he was the most intelligent man in the world. Nonetheless, being
completely surrendered unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he
remained in that condition and did not protest being brought before the
deity for slaughter. As we have learned from the previous verses, he was
very strong and could have very easily avoided being bound with ropes,
but he did not do anything. He simply depended on the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead for his protection. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura de-
scribes surrender unto the Supreme Lord in this way:
marabi rakhabi——yo iccha tohara
nitya-dasa-prati tuya adhikara
“My Lord, I am now surrendered unto You. I am Your eternal servant,
and if You like You can kill me, or, if You like, You can protect me. In
any case, | am fully surrendered unto You.”
TEXT 15
अथ पणयस्तं सखविधिनाभिषिच्याहतेन बाससाऽऽच्छाय

भूषणालेपस्तकतिरकादिभिरुपस्छृतं अक्तवन्तं धूपदीपमाल्यलाजकिसलया-
इरफलोपहारोपेतया वैशससंखथया महता गीतस्ततिमरदङ्गपणवघोपेण च
IEE भद्रकाल्याः पुरत उपवेशयामासुः ॥ १५ ॥

atha panayas tam sva-vidhinabhisicyahatena vasasacchadya
bhasanalepa-srak-tilakadibhir upaskrtarn bhuktavantarm dhipa-dipa-
malya-laja-kisalayarnkura-phalopaharopetaya vaisasa-sarsthaya
mahata gita-stuti-mrdariga-panava-ghosena ca purusa-pasurit bhadra-
kalyah purata upavesayam asuh.

atha—thereafter; panayah—all the followers of the dacoit: tam—
him (Jada Bharata); sva-vidhina —according to their own ritualistic
principles; abhisicya—bathing; ahatena—with new: wvasasa—gar-
ments; dcchddya—covering; bhisana—ornaments: dlepa—smearing
the body with sandalwood pulp: srak—a flower garland: tilaka-
adibhih—with markings on the body and so on: upaskrtam —completely


--- Page 326 ---
324 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
decorated; bhuktavantam—having eaten; dhiipa—with incense; dipa —
lamps; malya—garlands; laja—parched grain; kisalaya-ankura—twigs
and sprouts; phala—fruits; upahara—other paraphernalia; upetayd—
fully equipped; vaiSasa-samsthayd—with complete arrangements for
sacrifice; mahatd—great; gita-stuti—of songs and prayers; mrdanga—
of the drums; panava—of the bugles; ghosena —by vibration; ca—also;
purusa-pasum—the man-animal; bhadra-kalyah—of the goddess Kali;
puratah—just in front; upavesayam asuh—made him sit down.
TRANSLATION

After this, all the thieves, according to their imaginative ritual
for killing animalistic men, bathed Jada Bharata, dressed him in
new clothes, decorated him with ornaments befitting an animal,
smeared his body with scented oils and decorated him with tilaka,
sandalwood pulp and garlands. They fed him sumptuously and
then brought him before the goddess Kali, offering her incense,
lamps, garlands, parched grain, newly grown twigs, sprouts, fruits
and flowers. In this way they worshiped the deity before killing the
man-animal, and they vibrated songs and prayers and played
drums and bugles. Jada Bharata was then made to sit down before
the deity.

PURPORT

In this verse the word sva-vidhina (according to their own ritualistic
principles) is very significant. According to the Vedic $astras, everything
must be done according to regulative principles, but here it is stated that
the thieves and rogues devised their own process for killing an
animalistic man. The tamasic $astras give instructions for the sacrifice of
an animal like a goat or buffalo before the goddess Kali, but there is no
mention of killing a man, however dull he may be. This process was
manufactured by the dacoits themselves; therefore the word sva-vidhina
is used. Even at this time there are many sacrifices being conducted with-
out reference to the Vedic scriptures. For instance, in Calcutta recently a
slaughterhouse was being advertised as a temple of the goddess Kali.
Meat-eaters foolishly purchase meat from such shops, thinking it
different from ordinary meat and taking it to be the prasada of goddess


--- Page 327 ---
Text 17] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 325
Kali. The sacrifice of a goat or a similar animal before the goddess Kali is
mentioned in $dstras just to keep people from eating slaughterhouse meat
and becoming responsible for the killing of animals. The conditioned
soul has a natural tendency toward sex and meat-eating; consequently
the $astras grant them some concessions. Actually the Sastras aim at put-
ting an end to these abominable activities, but they impart some regula-
tive principles so that gradually meat-eaters and sex hunters will be rec-
tified.
TEXT 16

अथ वृषराजपणिः पुरुषपशोरदगासवेन देवीं मद्रकारीं यक्ष्यमाण-
स्तदभिमन्तितमसिमतिकरारनिशितमुपाददे॥।१६॥
atha vrsala-raja-panih purusa-pasor asrg-asavena 0687 bhadra-kalim
yaksyamanas tad-abhimantritam asim ati-karala-nisitam upadade.

atha—thereafter; vrsala-raja-panih—the so-called priest of the
leader of the dacoits (one of the thieves); purusa-pasoh—of the
animalistic man for being sacrificed (Bharata Maharaja); asrk-asavena —
with the liquor of blood; devim—to the deity; bhadra-kalim —the god-
dess Kali; yaksyamanah—desiring to offer; tat-abhimantritam—con-
secrated by the mantra of Bhadra Kali; asim—the sword: ati-kardla—
very fearful; niSitam—finely sharpened; upadade—he took up.

TRANSLATION

At this time, one of the thieves, acting as the chief priest, was
ready to offer the blood of Jada Bharata, whom they imagined to
be an animal-man, to the goddess Kali to drink as a liquor. He
therefore took up a very fearsome sword, which was very sharp
and, consecrating it by the mantra of Bhadra Kali, raised it to kill
Jada Bharata.

TEXT 17

इति तेषां इृषलानां रजस्तमः ग्रृतीनां धनद रजउत्सिक्तमरसां मगक्त्कलावीर-

लं कदर्थीङृत्योस्पथेन स्वैरं विहरतां हिंसाविहाराणां कर्मातिदारुणं यद्रहम-


--- Page 328 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
Ar €, নে

भूतस्य साकषद्रदमपिसुतस्य निर्वैरस्य सर्वभूतसुहृदः दनायामप्यनजुमतमालम्भनं
तदुपलभ्य ब्रह्मतेजसातिदुर्विषहेण दन्दह्यमानेन वपुषा सहसोच्चचाट सैव
देवी भद्रकाली ॥ १७ ॥

iti tesarn vrsalanam rajas-tamah-prakrtinar dhana-mada-raja-
utsikta-manasar bhagavat-kala-vira-kulari kadarthi-krtyotpathena
svairarh viharatar hirsa-viharanam karmati-darunam yad brahma-
bhittasya saksad brahmarsi-sutasya nirvairasya sarva-bhiita-suhrdah
sienayam apy ananumatam alambhanar tad upalabhya brahma-
tejasati-durvisahena dandahyamanena vapusa sahasoccacata saiva devi
bhadra-kals.

iti—thus; tesam—of them; vrsalanam—the $00705, by whom all
religious principles are destroyed; rajah—in passion; tamah—in ig-
norance; prakrtinam —having natures; dhana-mada—in the form of in-
fatuation by material wealth; rajah—by passion; utsikta—puffed up;
manasam —whose minds; bhagavat-kala —an expansion of the plenary
expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vira-kulam—the
group of elevated personalities (the brahmanas); kat-arthi-krtya—dis-
respecting; utpathena—by a wrong path; svairam—independently;
viharatam —who are proceeding; hirisa-viharanam—whose business is
to commit violence against others; karma—the activity; ati-darunam—
very fearful; yat—that which; brahma-bhitasya—of a self-realized
person born in a brahmana family; saksat—directly; brahma-rsi-
sutasya—of the son born of a brahmana exalted in spiritual conscious-
ness; nirvairasya—who had no enemies; sarva-bhiita-suhrdah—a well-
wisher to all others; sizn@yam—at the last moment; api—even though;
ananumatam—not being sanctioned by law; alambhanam—against the
desire of the Lord; tat—that; upalabhya—perceiving; brahma-tejasa—
with the effulgence of spiritual bliss; ati-durvisahena —being too bright
and unbearable; dandahyamanena—burning; vapusa—with a physical
body; sahasd—suddenly; uccacata—{fractured (the deity); sa—she;
eva—indeed; devi—the goddess; bhadra-kali—Bhadra Kali.

TRANSLATION

All the rogues and thieves who had made arrangements for the

worship of goddess Kali were low minded and bound to the modes


--- Page 329 ---
Text 17] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 327
of passion and ignorance. They were overpowered by the desire to
become very rich; therefore they had the audacity to disobey the
injunctions of the Vedas, so much so that they were prepared to
kill Jada Bharata, a self-realized soul born in a brahmana family.
Due to their envy, these dacoits brought him before the goddess
Kali for sacrifice. Such people are always addicted to envious ac-
tivities, and therefore they dared to try to kill Jada Bharata. Jada
Bharata was the best friend of all living entities. He was no one’s
enemy, and he was always absorbed in meditation on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He was born of a good brihmana father,
and killing him was forbidden, even though he might have been
an enemy or aggressive person. In any case, there was no reason to
kill Jada Bharata, and the goddess Kali could not bear this. She
could immediately understand that these sinful dacoits were about
to kill a great devotee of the Lord. Suddenly the deity’s body burst
asunder, and the goddess Kali personally emerged from it in a
body burning with an intense and intolerable effulgence.
PURPORT

According to the Vedic injunctions, only an aggressor can be killed. If
a person comes with an intent to kill, one can immediately take action
and kill in self-defense. It is also stated that one can be killed if he comes
to set fire to the home or to pollute or kidnap one’s wife. Lord Rama-
candra killed the entire family of Ravana because Ravana kidnapped His
wife, Sitadevi. However, killing is not sanctioned in the $astras for other
purposes. The killing of animals in sacrifice to the demigods. who are ex-
pansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is sanctioned for those
who eat meat. This is a kind of restriction for meat-eating. In other
words, the slaughter of animals is also restricted by certain rules and
regulations in the Vedas. Considering these points, there was no reason
to kill Jada Bharata, who was born in a respectable, highly exalted
brahmana family. He was a God-realized soul and a well-wisher to all
living entities. The Vedas did not at all sanction the killing of Jada
Bharata by rogues and thieves. Consequently the goddess Bhadra Kali
emerged from the deity to give protection to the Lord's devotee. Srila
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura explains that due to the Brahman
effulgence of such a devotee as Jada Bharata. the deity was fractured.


--- Page 330 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
Only thieves and rogues in the modes of passion and ignorance and mad-
dened by material opulence offer a man in sacrifice before the goddess
Kali. This is not sanctioned by the Vedic instructions. Presently there are
many hundreds and thousands of slaughterhouses throughout the world
that are maintained by a puffed-up population mad for material opu-
lence. Such activities are never supported by the Bhagavata school.
TEXT 18
शृशाममर्षरोषावेशरमसविलसितशर्कटिविटपडङ्टिरदष्रारुणेक्षणाटोपातिभयानक -
वदना हन्तुकामेवेदं मपदाडदासपतिसंरम्भेण gs तत
५ ৩২.
उत्पत्य पापीयसां दुष्टानां तेनेवासिना बिच्क्णज्ञीष्णौ गलार्खवन्तमसगासव-
Tegel सह गणेन निपयातिपानमद gated खपाषदैः सह जगौ aad च
विजहार च शिरःकन्दुकलीरया ॥ १८ ॥
bhrsam amarsa-rosavesa-rabhasa-vilasita-bhru-kuti-vitapa-kutila-
damstraruneksanatopati-bhayanaka-vadana hantu-kamevedarn
mahatta-hasam ati-samrambhena vimuficanti tata utpatya paptyasarin
dustandrm tenaivasind vivrkna-sirspam galat sravantam asrg-asavam
atyusnam saha ganena nipiyati-pana-mada-vihvaloccaistararm sva-
parsadaih saha jagau nanarta ca vijahara ca $irah-kanduka-lilaya.
bhrsam—very highly; amarsa—in intolerance of the offenses; rosa—
in anger; avesa—of her absorption; rabhasa-vilasita—expanded by the
force; bhru-kuti—of her eyebrows; vitapa—the branches; kutila—
curved; damstra—teeth; aruna-iksana—of reddish eyes; atopa—by the
agitation; ati—very much; bhayanaka—fearful; vadana—having a
face; hantu-kama—desirous to destroy; iva—as if; idam—this
universe; mahd-atta-hasam—a greatly fearful laugh; ati—great;
samrambhena —because of anger; vimunicanti—releasing; tatah—from
that altar; utpatya—coming forth; papiyasam—of all the sinful;
dustanam —great offenders; tena eva asina—by that same chopper;
vivrkna—separated; Sirspam—whose heads; galat—from the neck; sra-
vantam—oozing out; asrk-asavam—the blood, compared to an intoxi-
cating beverage; ati-usnam —very hot; saha—with; ganena—her asso-
ciates; nipiya—drinking; ati-pana—from drinking so much; mada —by


--- Page 331 ---
Text 19] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 329
intoxication; vihvald —overwhelmed; uccaih-taram—very loudly; sva-
parsadaih—her own associates; saha—with; jagau—sang; nanarta—
danced; ca—also; vijahdara—played; ca—also; Sirah-kanduka—using
the heads as balls; lilaya—by sports.
TRANSLATION

Intolerant of the offenses committed, the infuriated goddess
Kali flashed her eyes and displayed her fierce, curved teeth. Her
reddish eyes glowed, and she displayed her fearsome features. She
assumed a frightening body, as if she were prepared to destroy the
entire creation. Leaping violently from the altar, she immediately
decapitated all the rogues and thieves with the very sword with
which they had intended to kill Jada Bharata. She then began to
drink the hot blood that flowed from the necks of the beheaded
rogues and thieves, as if this blood were liquor. Indeed, she drank
this intoxicant with her associates, who were witches and female
demons. Becoming intoxicated with this blood, they all began to
sing very loudly and dance as though prepared to annihilate the
entire universe. At the same time, they began to play with the
heads of the rogues and thieves, tossing them about as if they were
balls.

PURPORT

It is evident from this verse that the devotees of goddess Kali are not at
all favored by her. It is goddess Kali’s work to kill and punish the
demons. Goddess Kali (Durga) engages in decapitating many demons,
dacoits and other unwanted elements in society. Neglecting Krsna con-
sciousness, foolish people try to satisfy the goddess by offering her many
abominable things, but ultimately when there is a little discrepancy in
this worship, the goddess punishes the worshiper by taking his life.
Demoniac people worship goddess Kali to obtain some material benefit.
but they are not excused of the sins performed in the name of worship.
To sacrifice a man or animal before the deity is specifically forbidden.

TEXT 19

एवमेव অস্ত महदभिचारातिक्रमः कात्सनयेनात्मने फकति ॥ १९ ॥


--- Page 332 ---
330 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.9
evam eva khalu mahad-abhicarati-kramah kartsnyenatmane phalati.

evam eva—in this way; khalu—indeed; mahat—to great per-
sonalities; abhicara—in the form of envy; ati-kramah—the limit of
offense; kartsnyena—always; atmane—unto oneself; phalati—gives the
result.

TRANSLATION

When an envious person commits an offense before a great per-

sonality, he is always punished in the way mentioned above.
TEXT 20
নল না एतद्विष्णुदत्त महदद्भुतं यदसम्भ्रमः खशिरश्छेदन आपतितेऽपि
+ x.

BEE EH PISCE EERE RIC po निर्वैराणां
साकषाद्भगवतानिमिषाखििरायुधेनाप्रमत्तन तैस्तै्माबिः परिरक्ष्यमाणानां
तत्पादमूरमङतचिद्धयथुपसृतानां मागवतपरमहंसानाम्‌ | २०॥
na va etad visnudatta mahad-adbhutam yad asambhramah sva-siras-
chedana apatite ‘pi vimukta-dehady-atma-bhava-sudrdha-hrdaya-
granthinam sarva-sattva-suhrd-atmanar nirvairanam saksad
bhagavatanimisari-varayudhenapramattena tais tair bhavaih
pariraksyamananarn tat-pada-mitlam akutascid-bhayam upasrtanam
bhagavata-paramaharisanam.

na—not; va—or; etat—this; visnu-datta—O Maharaja Pariksit, who
was protected by Lord Visnu; mahat—a great; adbhutam—wonder;
yat—which; asambhramah—lack of perplexity; sva-Sirah-chedane—
when the chopping off of the head; apatite—was about to happen; api—
even though; vimukta—completely liberated from; deha-adi-atma-
bhava—the false bodily concept of life; su-drdha—very strong and
tight; hrdaya-granthinam—of those whose knots within the heart;
sarva-sattva-suhrt-atmanam—of persons who in their hearts always
wish well to all living entities; nirvairanam—who do not find anyone as
their enemy; saksat—directly; bhagavata—by the Supreme Personality


--- Page 333 ---
Text 20] The Supreme Character of Jada Bharata 331
of Godhead; animisa—invincible time; ari-vara—and the best of weap-
ons, the Sudarsana cakra; ayudhena—by Him who possesses the weap-
ons; apramattena—not agitated at any time; taih taih—by those respec-
tive; bhavaih—moods of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parirak-
syamananam—of persons who are protected; tat-pada-miilam—at the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akutascit—from
nowhere; bhayam—{fear; upasrtanam—of those who have taken com-
plete shelter; bhagavata—of devotees of the Lord; parama-hari-
sanam—of the most liberated persons.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami then said to Maharaja Pariksit: O Visnudatta,
those who already know that the soul is separate from the body,
who are liberated from the invincible knot in the heart, who are al-
ways engaged in welfare activities for all living entities and who
never contemplate harming anyone are always protected by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who carries His disc [the Sudar-
$ana cakra)] and acts as supreme time to kill the demons and protect
His devotees. The devotees always take shelter at the lotus feet of
the Lord. Therefore at all times, even if threatened by decapi-
tation, they remain unagitated. For them, this is not at all
wonderful.

PURPORT

These are some of the great qualities of a pure devotee of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. First, a devotee is firmly convinced of his
spiritual identity. He never identifies with the body; he is firmly con-
vinced that the spirit soul is different from the body. Consequently he
fears nothing. Even though his life may be threatened, he is not at all
afraid. He does not even treat an enemy like an enemy. Such are the
qualifications of devotees. Devotees are always fully dependent on the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the Lord is always eager to give
them all protection in all circumstances.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Ninth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Supreme Character of
Jada Bharata.”


--- Page 334 ---
CHAPTER TEN
The Discussion Between
Jada Bharata and Maharaja Rahagana
In this chapter Bharata Maharaja, now Jada Bharata, was successfully ac-
cepted by King 10811068138, ruler of the states known as Sindhu and
Sauvira. The King forced Jada Bharata to carry his palanquin and
chastised him because he did not carry it properly. A carrier of King
Rahiigana’s palanquin was needed, and to fulfill this need the chief car-
riers found Jada Bharata as the most likely person to do the work. He was
therefore forced to carry the palanquin. Jada Bharata, however, did not
protest this proud order, but humbly accepted the job and carried the
palanquin. While carrying it, however, he was very careful to see that he
did not step on an ant, and whenever he saw one, he would stop until the
ant had passed. Because of this, he could not keep pace with the other
carriers. The King within the palanquin became very disturbed and
chastised Jada Bharata with filthy language, but Jada Bharata, being
completely freed from the bodily conception, did not protest: he pro-
ceeded carrying the palanquin. When he continued as before, the King
threatened him with punishment, and being threatened by the King,
Jada Bharata began to talk. He protested against the filthy language used
by the King when the King chastised him, and the King, hearing the in-
structions of Jada Bharata, was awakened to his real knowledge. When
he came to his consciousness, he understood that he had offended a great,
learned and saintly person. At that time he very humbly and respectfully
prayed to Jada Bharata. He now wanted to understand the deep meaning
of the philosophical words used by Jada Bharata, and with great sin-
cerity, he begged his pardon. He admitted that if one offends the lotus
feet of a pure devotee, he is certainly punished by the trident of Lord
Siva.
333


--- Page 335 ---
334 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
TEXT 1
श्रीद्युक उवाच
अथ सिन्धुसौवीरपते रहूगणस्य व्रजत হয্মহ্যালই तत्कुलपतिना
क्िबिकाराहयपुरुषान्वेषण समये दैवेनोपसादितः स द्विजवर उपलन्ध एष पीवा
युवा संहननाङ्गो गो्खद्धुरं बोढुमकमिति पू विषटिगृहीतेः सह गृहीतः
sewed उवाद शिबिकां स महानुभावः ॥ १ ॥
sri-suka uvaca

atha sindhu-sauvira-pate rahiiganasya vrajata iksumatyas tate tat-
kula-patina sibika-vaha-purusanvesana-samaye daivenopasaditah sa
dvija-vara upalabdha esa piva yuva sarhananango go-kharavad
dhurari vodhum alam iti purva-visti-grhitaih saha grhitah prasabham
atad-arha uvaha Sibikam sa mahanubhavah.

$ri-sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak: atha—thus;
sindhu-sauvira-pateh—of the ruler of the states known as Sindhu and
Sauvira; rahii-ganasya—the King known as Rahuagana; vrajatah —while
going (to the asrama of Kapila); iksu-matyah tate—on the bank of the
river known as Iksumati; tat-kula-patina—by the leader of the palan-
quin carriers; Sibikd-vaha—to become a carrier of the palanquin;
purusa-anvesana-samaye—at the time of searching for a man;
daivena—by chance; upasaditah—led near; sah—that; dvija-varah—
Jada Bharata, the son of a brahmana; upalabdhah—obtained; esah—
this man; piva—very strong and stout; yuvd—young; sarmhanana-
angah—having very firm limbs; go-khara-vat—like a cow or an ass;
dhuram—a load; vodhum—to carry; alam—able; iti—thus thinking;
purva-visti-grhitaih —others who were formerly forced to do the task;
saha—with; grhitah—being taken; prasabham—by force; a-tat-
arhah—although not fit for carrying the palanquin; uvaha—carried;
Sibikam—the palanquin; sah—he; maha-anubhavah—a great soul.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, after this, King

Rahiigana, ruler of the states known as Sindhu and Sauvira, was


--- Page 336 ---
Text 2] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 335
going to KapilaSrama. When the King’s chief palanquin carriers
reached the banks of the River Iksumati, they needed another car-
rier. Therefore they began searching for someone, and by chance
they came upon Jada Bharata. They considered the fact that Jada
Bharata was very young and strong and had firm limbs. Like cows
and asses, he was quite fit to carry loads. Thinking in this way,
although the great soul Jada Bharata was unfit for such work, they
nonetheless unhesitatingly forced him to carry the palanquin.
TEXT 2
यदा हि दिजवरस्येषुमात्रावरोकानुगतेन समादिता पुरुषगतिस्ठदा

शिषमगतां aff रहूगण उपधाय पुरुपानविवहत आह ই वोढारः
साध्वतिक्रमत किमिति रिषमघद्यते यानमिति ॥ २॥

yada hi dvija-varasyesu-matravalokanugater na samahita purusa-
gatis tada visama-gatdrm sva-$ibikarh rahiigana upadharya purusan
adhivahata aha he vodharah sadhv atikramata kim iti visamam uhyate
yanam iti.

yada—when; hi—certainly; dvija-varasya—of Jada Bharata; isu-
matra—the measurement of an arrow (three feet) ahead; avaloka-
anugateh—from moving only after glancing; na samahita—not united;
purusa-gatih—the movement of the carriers; tada—at that time:
visama-gatam—becoming uneven; sva-§ibikam—his own palanquin;
rahiaganah—King Rahogana; upadharya—understanding; purusan—
unto the men; adhivahatah—who were carrying the palanquin: aha —
said; he—oh; wvodharah—carriers of the palanquin; sadhu
atikramata—please walk evenly so that there will not be bouncing; kim
iti—for what reason; visamam—uneven; uhyate—is being carried;
yanam—the palanquin; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

The palanquin, however, was very erratically carried by Jada
Bharata due to his sense of nonviolence. As he stepped forward, he
checked before him every three feet to see whether he was about


--- Page 337 ---
336 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
to step on ants. Consequently he could not keep pace with the
other carriers. Due to this, the palanquin was shaking, and King
Rahiigana immediately asked the carriers, “Why are you carrying
this palanquin unevenly? Better carry it properly.”
PURPORT

Although Jada Bharata was forced to carry the palanquin, he did not
give up his sympathetic feelings toward the poor ants passing on the
road. A devotee of the Lord does not forget his devotional service and
other favorable activities, even when he is in a most distressful condi-
tion. Jada Bharata was a qualified brahmana, highly elevated in spiritual
knowledge, yet he was forced to carry the palanquin. He did not mind
this, but while walking on the road, he could not forget his duty to avoid
killing even an ant. A Vaisnava is never envious or unnecessarily
violent. There were many ants on the path, but Jada Bharata took care by
looking ahead three feet. When the ants were no longer in his way, he
would place his foot on the ground. A Vaisnava is always very kind at
heart to all living entities. In His sankhya-yoga, Lord Kapiladeva ex-
plains: suhrdah sarva-dehinam. Living entities assume different bodily
forms. Those who are not Vaisnavas consider only human society worthy
of their sympathy, but Krsna claims to be the supreme father of all life
forms. Consequently the Vaisnava takes care not to annihilate untimely
or unnecessarily any life form. All living entities have to fulfill a certain
duration for being encaged in a particular type of material body. They
have to finish the duration allotted a particular body before being pro-
moted or evolved to another body. Killing an animal or any other living
being simply places an impediment in the way of his completing his term
of imprisonment in a certain body. One should therefore not kill bodies
for one’s sense gratification, for this will implicate one in sinful activity.

TEXT 3
अथ त॒ ईश्वरवचः सोपालम्मयुपार््योपाय तुरीयाच्छङ्कितमनसस्तं

विज्ञापयां बभूवुः 1 ২ ॥

atha ta Svara-vacah sopalambham upakarnyopaya-turiyac charkita-
manasas tam vijiapayam babhiivuh.


--- Page 338 ---
Text 4] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 337

atha—thus; te—they (the carriers of the palanquin); i§vara-vacah—
the words of the master, King Rahugana; sa-upalambham—with
reproach; upakarnya—hearing; upaya—the means; turiyat—from the
fourth one; s$ankita-manasah—whose minds were afraid; tam —him
(the King); vijiapayam babhuavuh—informed.

TRANSLATION

When the palanquin carriers heard the threatening words of
Maharaja Rahiigana, they became very afraid of his punishment
and began to speak to him as follows.

PURPORT

According to political science, a king sometimes tries to pacify his
subordinates, sometimes chastises them, sometimes derides them and
sometimes rewards them. In this way the king rules his subordinates.
The bearers of the palanquin could understand that the King was angry
and that he would chastise them.

४ TEXT 4

न वयं नरदेव प्रमत्ता मवननियमालुपथाः साष्वेव वहामः | अयमधुनव
नियुक्तोऽपि न gd व्रजति नानेन सह digg ह वयं पारयाम इति ॥ ও ॥
na vayam nara-deva pramatta bhavan-niyamanupathah sadhv eva
vahamah. ayam adhunaiva niyukto ’pi na drutamvrajati nanena saha
vodhum u ha vayar parayama iti.

na—not; vayam—we; nara-deva—O lord among human beings (the
king is supposed to be the representative of deva, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead); pramattah—neglectful in our duties: bhavat-
niyama-anupathah—who are always obedient to your order: sadhu—
properly; eva—certainly: vahamah—we are carrying; ayam—this
man; adhuna—just recently; eva—indeed; niyuktah—being engaged to
work with us: api—although: na—not; drutam—very quickly: vra-
jati—works; na—not; anena—him; saha—with: vodhum—to carry: u
ha—oh; vayam—we: parayamah—are able; iti—thus.


--- Page 339 ---
338 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
TRANSLATION

O lord, please note that we are not at all negligent in discharging
our duties. We have been faithfully carrying this palanquin ac-
cording to your desire, but this man who has been recently
engaged to work with us cannot walk very swiftly. Therefore we
are not able to carry the palanquin with him.

PURPORT

The other palanquin carriers were Siidras, whereas Jada Bharata was
not only a high-caste brahmana but also a great devotee. Sitdras do not
sympathize with other living beings, but a Vaisnava cannot act like a
Sidra. Whenever a $iidra and a brahmana Vaisnava are combined, there
will certainly be imbalance in the execution of duties. The Sidras were
walking with the palanquin without at all caring for the ants on the
ground, but Jada Bharata could not act like a Sidra, and therefore
difficulty arose.

TEXT 5
सांसर्गिको दोष एव नूनमेकस्यापि सर्वेषां aie
সস

मरितुम्हंतीति নিশি निश्चम्य ङपणर्चो राजा रहूगण उपासित-
Tash निसर्गेण बलात्कृत ईषदुत्थित मन्युर मिस्प्टब्रह्मतेजसं
जातवेदसमिव रजसाऽऽद्त মত্তিহা ॥ ५॥

sarnsargiko dosa eva ninam ekasyapi sarvesam sarnsargikanar
bhavitum arhatiti niscitya nisamya krpana-vaco raja rahiigana upasita-
vrddho ‘pi nisargena balat krta tsad-utthita-manyur avispasta-brahma-
tejasarh jata-vedasam iva rajasavrta-matir aha.

sarsargikah—resulting from intimate association; dosah—a fault;
eva—indeed; niinam—certainly; ekasya—of one; api—although; sar-
vesam —of all other; sarisargikanam—persons associated with him;
bhavitum —to become; arhati—is able; iti—thus; niscitya—ascertain-
ing; nisamya—by hearing; krpana-vacah—the words of the poor ser-
vants, who were very afraid of being punished; raja—the King;


--- Page 340 ---
Text 6] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 339
rahiganah—Rahiugana; updsita-vrddhah—having served and heard
from many elderly sages; api—in spite of; nisargena—by his personal
nature, which was that of a ksatriya; balat—by force; krtah—done;
tsat—slightly; utthita—awakened; manyuh—whose anger; avispasta—
not being distinctly visible; brahma-tejasam—his (Jada Bharata’s)
spiritual effulgence; jata-vedasam—a fire covered by ashes in Vedic
ritualistic ceremonies; wa—like; rajasd avrta—covered by the mode of
passion; matih—whose mind; aha —said.
TRANSLATION

King Rahiigana could understand the speeches given by the car-
riers, who were afraid of being punished. He could also under-
stand that simply due to the fault of one person, the palanquin was
not being carried properly. Knowing this perfectly well and hear-
ing their appeal, he became alittle angry, although he was very ad-
vanced in political science and was very experienced. His anger
arose due to his inborn nature as a king. Actually King Rahiuigana’s
mind was covered by the mode of passion, and he therefore spoke
as follows to Jada Bharata, whose Brahman effulgence was not
clearly visible, being covered like a fire covered by ashes.

PURPORT

The distinction between rajo-guna and sattva-guna is explained in this
verse. Although the King was very upright and advanced in political
science and governmental management, he was nonetheless in the mode
of passion, and therefore, due to a slight agitation, he became angry. Jada
Bharata, despite all kinds of injustice endured because of his deaf and
dumb display, remained silent by the strength of his spiritual advance-
ment. Nonetheless his brahma-tejah, his Brahman effulgence. was indis-
tinctly visible in his person.

TEXT 6

अहो कं ्ातव्य॑क्तघ्रु परिश्रान्तो दीर्घमध्वानमेक एव ऊहिवान्‌ सुचिरं
नातिपीवा न संहननाङ्गो जरसा NEA भवान्‌ सखे नो एवापर एते


--- Page 341 ---
340 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
aE इति बहु षिभ्रलज्धोऽप्यविद्यया रचित द्रन्यगुणकर्माशयस चरमकलेवरे
ऽवस्त॒नि संस्थानविशेषेऽहं ममेयनध्यारोपितमिथ्याप्रत्ययो Fagen
शिबिकां पूर॑वदुवाह ॥ & ॥
aho kastariv bhratar vyaktam uru-parisranto dirgham adhvanam eka eva
hivan suciram nati-piva na sarhananarigo jarasa copadruto bhavan
sakhe no evapara ete sarighattina iti bahu-vipralabdho ‘py avidyaya
racita-dravya-guna-karmasaya-sva-carama-kalevare *vastuni
saristhana-visese "hari mamety anadhyaropita-mithya-pratyayo
brahma-bhiitas tusnim Sibikarm parvavad uvaha.

aho—alas; kastam—how troublesome it is; bhratah—my dear
brother; vyaktam—clearly; uru—very much; parisrantah—fatigued;
dirgham—a long; adhvanam—path; ekah—alone; eva—certainly;
zhivan—you have carried; su-ciram—for a long time; na—not; ati-
piwva—very strong and stout; na—nor; sarhanana-arigah—having a
firm, tolerant body; jarasa—by old age; ca—also; upadrutah—dis-
turbed; bhavan—yourself; sakhe—my friend; no eva—not certainly;
apare—the other; ete—all these; sanghattinah—co-workers; iti—thus;
bahu—very much; vipralabdhah—sarcastically criticized; api—
although; avidyaya—by nescience; racita—manufactured; dravya-
guna-karma-dasaya—in a combination of material elements, material
qualities, and the results of past activities and desires; sva-carama-
kalevare —in the body, which is moved by the subtle elements (mind, in-
telligence and ego); avastuni—in such physical things; samsthana-
viSese—having a particular disposition; aham mama—I and mine; iti—
in this way; anadhyaropita—not interposed; mithya—false; pra-
tyayah—Dbelief; brahma-bhitah—who was self-realized, standing on
the Brahman platform; tisnim—being silent; §ibikam—the palanquin;
purva-vat—as before; uvaha—carried.

TRANSLATION

King Rahiigana told Jada Bharata: How troublesome this is, my

dear brother. You certainly appear very fatigued because you have


--- Page 342 ---
Text 6] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 341
carried this palanquin alone without assistance for a long time and
for a long distance. Besides that, due to your old age you have
become greatly troubled. My dear friend, I see that you are not
very firm, nor very strong and stout. Aren’t your fellow carriers
cooperating with you?

In this way the King criticized Jada Bharata with sarcastic words,
yet despite being criticized in this way, Jada Bharata had no bodily
conception of the situation. He knew that he was not the body, for
he had attained his spiritual identity. He was neither fat, lean nor
thin, nor had he anything to do with a lump of matter, a combina-
tion of the five gross and three subtle elements. He had nothing to
do with the material body and its two hands and legs. In other
words, he had completely realized his spiritual identity [aham
brahmasmi]. He was therefore unaffected by this sarcastic criticism
from the King. Without saying anything, he continued carrying
the palanquin as before.

PURPORT

Jada Bharata was completely liberated. He did not even care when the
dacoits attempted to kill his body; he knew that he certainly was not the
body. Even if the body were killed, he would not have cared, for he was
thoroughly convinced of the proposition found in Bhagavad-gita (2.20):
na hanyate hanyamane $arire. He knew that he could not be killed even
if his body were killed. Although he did not protest, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead in His agent could not tolerate the injustice of the
dacoits; therefore he was saved by the mercy of Krsna, and the dacoits
were killed. In this case, while carrying the palanquin, he also knew that
he was not the body. This body was very strong and stout, in sound con-
dition and quite competent to carry the palanquin. Due to his being freed
from the bodily conception. the sarcastic words of the King did not at all
affect him. The body is created according to one’s karma, and material
nature supplies the ingredients for the development of a certain type of
body. The soul the body covers is different from the bodily construction:
therefore anything favorable or mischievous done to the body does not
affect the spirit soul. The Vedic injunction is asarigo hy ayam purusah:
the spirit soul is always unaffected by material arrangements.


--- Page 343 ---
342 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
TEXT 7
अथ पुनः खरशिबिकायां भिषमगतायां प्रकुपित उवाच रहूगणः
५ ©

किमिदमरे त्वं জীবল্দ্বনী मां कदथींङृत्य भतेशासनमतिचरसि प्रमत्त
च ते करोमि चिकित्सां दण्डपाणिरिव जनताया যথা গন্ধবি खां
मिष्य इति ॥ ७॥

atha punah sva-Sibikayarm visama-gatayam prakupita uvaca
rahiiganah kim idam are tvar jivan-mrto mar kadarthi-krtya bhartr-
Sasanam aticarasi pramattasya ca te karomi cikitsarih danda-panir iva
Jjanataya yathd prakrtim svar bhajisyasa iti.

atha—thereafter; punah—again; sva-sibikdyam—in his own palan-
वृणा; visama-gatayam—being unevenly carried because of Jada
Bharata’s not walking properly; prakupitah—becoming very angry;
uvdca—said; rahiganah—King Rahugana; kim idam—what is this
nonsense; are—O fool; tvam—you; jivat—living; mrtah—dead;
mam—me;  kat-arthi-krtya—neglecting;  bhartr-sasanam — chastise-
ment by the master; aticarasi—you are overstepping; pramattasya—
who are almost crazy; ca—also; te—your; karomi—I shall do; cikit-
sam —proper treatment; danda-panih iva—like Yamaraja; janatayah—
of the people in general; yatha—so that; prakrtim—natural position;
svam—your own; bhajisyase—you will take to; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter, when the King saw that his palanquin was still being
shaken by the carriers, he became very angry and said: You rascal,
what are you doing? Are you dead despite the life within your
body? Do you not know that I am your master? You are disregard-
ing me and are not carrying out my order. For this disobedience I
shall now punish you just as Yamaraja, the superintendent of
death, punishes sinful people. I shall give you proper treatment so
that you will come to your senses and do the correct thing.


--- Page 344 ---
Text 8] Maharaja [03111008108 Meets Jada Bharata 343
TEXT 8
एवं बहबद्भमपि भाषमाणं नरदेवाभिमानं रजसा तमसानुविद्धेन
मदेन तिरस्कृताञञेषभगदस्प्ियनिकेतं पण्डितमानिनं स॒ भगवान्‌ ब्राह्मणो
(प = न

TEE: स्ेभूतसहदात्मा योगेश्वरचर्यायां नातिव्युस्पन्नमतिं सयमान इव
विगतखय इदमाह ।॥ ८ ॥

evar bahv abaddham api bhasamanari nara-devabhimanar rajasa
tamasanuviddhena madena tiraskrtasesa-bhagavat-priya-niketarn
pandita-maninar sa bhagavan brahmano brahma-bhitae-sarva-bhita-
suhrd-atma yogesvara-caryayar nati-vyutpanna-matirn smayamana
iva vigata-smaya idam aha.

evam—in this way; bahu—much; abaddham—nonsensical; api—
although; bhasamanram—talking; nara-deva-abhimanam—King
Rahiigana; who thought himself the ruler; rajasa —by the material mode
of passion; tamasa—as well as by the mode of ignorance; anuvid-
dhena—being increased; madena—by madness; tiraskrta—who
rebuked; aSesa—innumerable; bhagavat-priya-niketam—devotees of
the Lord; pandita-maninam—considering himself a very learned
scholar; sah—that; bhagavdn—spiritually most powerful (Jada
Bharata); brahmanah—a fully qualified brahmana; brahma-bhita—
fully self-realized; sarva-bhita-suhrt-atma—who was thus the friend of
all living entities; yoga-iSvara—of the most advanced mystic yogis;
caryayam—in the behavior; na ati-vyutpanna-matim—unto King
Rahtigana, who was not actually experienced; smayamanah—slightly
smiling; iva—like; vigata-smayah—who was relieved from all material
pride; idam—this; aha —spoke.

TRANSLATION

Thinking himself a king, King Rahiigana was in the bodily con-
ception and was influenced by material nature’s modes of passion
and ignorance. Due to madness, he chastised Jada Bharata with un-
called-for and contradictory words. Jada Bharata was a topmost


--- Page 345 ---
344 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
devotee and the dear abode of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Although considering himself very learned, the King
did not know about the position of an advanced devotee situated in
devotional service, nor did he know his characteristics. Jada
Bharata was the residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
he always carried the form of the Lord within his heart. He was the
dear friend of all living beings, and he did not entertain any bodily
conception. He therefore smiled and spoke the following words.
PURPORT
The distinction between a person in the bodily conception and a person
beyond the bodily conception is presented in this verse. In the bodily
conception, King Rahtigana considered himself a king and chastised Jada
Bharata in so many unwanted ways. Being self-realized, Jada Bharata,
who was fully situated on the transcendental platform, did not at all
become angry; instead, he smiled and began to deliver his teachings to
King Rahtgana. A highly advanced Vaisnava devotee is a friend to all
living entities, and consequently he is a friend to his enemies also. In
fact, he does not consider anyone to be his enemy. Suhrdah sarva-
dehinam. Sometimes a Vaisnava becomes superficially angry at a non-
devotee, but this is good for the nondevotee. We have several examples
of this in Vedic literature. Once Narada became angry with the two sons
of Kuvera, Nalakuvera and Manigriva, and he chastised them by turning
them into trees. The result was that later they were liberated by Lord Sri
Krsna. The devotee is situated on the absolute platform, and when he is
angry or pleased, there is no difference, for in either case he bestows his
benediction.
TEXT 9
নাত उवाच
त्वयोदितं व्यक्तमविप्रखन्धं
मतैः स मे स्याद्यदि वीर भारः |
€
गन्तुयंदि स्यादधिगम्यमध्वा
पीति राज्ञी न विदां प्रवादः ॥ ९॥


--- Page 346 ---
Text 9] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 345
brahmana uvaca
tayoditarh vyaktam avipralabdhari
bhartuh sa me syad yadi vira bharah
gantur yadi syad adhigamyam adhva
piveti rasau na vida pravadah

brahmanah uvaca—the learned brahmana (Jada Bharata) spoke;
tvaya—by you; uditam—explained; vyaktam—very clearly; avipra-
labdham—without contradictions; bhartuh—of the bearer, the body;
sah—that; me—mine; syat—it would have been; yadi—if; vira—O
great hero (Maharaja Rahiigana); bharah—a load; gantuh—of the
mover, also the body; yadi—if; syat—it had been; adhigamyam—the
object to be obtained; adhva—the path; piva—very stout and strong;
iti—thus; rasau—in the body; na—not; vidam—of the self-realized
persons; pravadah—subject matter for discussion.

TRANSLATION

The great brahmana Jada Bharata said: My dear King and hero,
whatever you have spoken sarcastically is certainly true. Actually
these are not simply words of chastisement, for the body is the car-
rier. The load carried by the body does not belong to me, for I am
the spirit soul. There is no contradiction in your statements
because I am different from the body. I am not the carrier of the
palanquin; the body is the carrier. Certainly, as you have hinted, I
have not labored carrying the palanquin, for I am detached from
the body. You have said that I am not stout and strong, and these
words are befitting a person who does not know the distinction
between the body and the soul. The body may be fat or thin, but
no learned man would say such things of the spirit soul. As far as
the spirit soul is concerned, I am neither fat nor skinny; therefore
you are correct when you say that I am not very stout. Also, if the
object of this journey and the path leading there were mine, there
would be many troubles for me, but because they relate not to me
but to my body, there is no trouble at all.


--- Page 347 ---
346 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita it is stated that one who is advanced in spiritual
knowledge is not disturbed by the pains and pleasures of the material
body. The material body is completely separate from the spirit soul, and
the pains and pleasures of the body are superfluous. The practice of
austerity and penance is meant for understanding the distinction be-
tween the body and the soul and how the soul can be unaffected by the
pleasures and pains of the body. Jada Bharata was actually situated on
the platform of self-realization. He was completely aloof from the bodily
conception; therefore he immediately took this position and convinced
the King that whatever contradictory things the King had said about his
body did not actually apply to him as a spirit soul.
TEXT 10
oid कार्यं व्याधय oA
gE भयं कलिरिच्छा जरा च |
निद्रा रतिर्मन्युरहंमदः चो
RT जातस्य हि मे न सन्ति ॥१०॥
sthaulyarh karsyam vyadhaya adhayas ca
ksut trd bhayar kalir iccha jara ca
nidra ratir manyur aha madah 5५८०
dehena jatasya hi me na santi
sthaulyam—Dbeing very stout and strong; kar§yam—being skinny and
weak; vyddhayah—the pains of the body, such as disease; adhayah—
the pains of the mind; ca—and; ksut trt bhayam—hunger, thirst and
fear; kalih—quarrels between two persons; iccha—desires; jara—old
age; ca—and; nidra—sleep; ratih—attachment for sense gratification;
manyuh—anger; aham—false identification (in the bodily concept of
life) ; madah—illusion; $ucah—lamentation; dehena—with this body;
jatasya—of one who has taken birth; hi—certainly; me—of me; na—
not; santi—exist.


--- Page 348 ---
Text 10] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 347
TRANSLATION

Fatness, thinness, bodily and mental distress, thirst, hunger,
fear, disagreement, desires for material happiness, old age, sleep,
attachment for material possessions, anger, lamentation, illusion
and identification of the body with the self are all transformations
of the material covering of the spirit soul. A person absorbed in
the material bodily conception is affected by these things, but I am
free from all bodily conceptions. Consequently I am neither fat
nor skinny nor anything else you have mentioned.

PURPORT

Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has sung: deha-smrti nahi yara, sari-
sara-bandhana kahan tara. One who is spiritually advanced has no con-
nection with the body or with the bodily actions and reactions. When one
comes to understand that he is not the body and therefore is neither fat
nor skinny, one attains the topmost form of spiritual realization. When
one is not spiritually realized, the bodily conception entangles one in the
material world. At the present moment all human society is laboring
under the bodily conception; therefore in the $astras people in this age
are referred to as dvipada-pasu, two-legged animals. No one can be
happy in a civilization conducted by such animals. Our Krsna conscious-
ness movement is trying to raise fallen human society to the status of
spiritual understanding. It is not possible for everyone to become im-
mediately self-realized like Jada Bharata. However, as stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.2.18): nasta-prayesv abhadresu 7৮007 bhagavata-
sevaya. By spreading the Bhagavata principles, we can raise human
society to the platform of perfection. When one is not affected by the
bodily conceptions, one can advance to the Lord’s devotional service.

nasta-prayesv abhadresu
nityarn bhagavata-sevaya
bhagavaty uttamasloke
bhaktir bhavati naistiki

The more we advance our freedom from the bodily conception. the more
we are fixed in devotional service, and the more we are happy and


--- Page 349 ---
348 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
peaceful. In this regard, Srila Madhvacarya says that those who are too
materially affected continue the bodily conception. Such persons are con-
cerned with different bodily symptoms, whereas one freed from bodily
conceptions lives without the body even in the material condition.
TEXT 11
Wee नियमेन राजन्‌
आचयन्तवदयद्विकृतसखय दृष्टम्‌ ।
खखाम्यभायो धुव ইত্স यत्र
त -
ag व्यतेऽसौ विधिृत्ययोगः 1221
Jivan-mrtatvam niyamena rajan
adyantavad yad vikrtasya drstam
sva-svamya-bhavo dhruva idya yatra
tarhy ucyate ‘sau vidhikrtya-yogah
Jivat-mrtatvam—the quality of being dead while living; niyamena—
by the laws of nature; rajan—O King; adi-anta-vat—everything
material has a beginning and an end; yat—because; vikrtasya—of
things that are transformed, such as the body; drstam—is seen; sva-
svamya-bhavah—the condition of servanthood and mastership;
dhruvah—unchangeable; idya—O you who are worshiped; yatra—
wherein; tarhi—then; ucyate—it is said; asau—that; vidhi-krtya-
yogah—fitness of order and duty.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, you have unnecessarily accused me of being dead
though alive. In this regard, I can only say that this is the case
everywhere because everything material has its beginning and
end. As far as your thinking that you are the king and master and
are thus trying to order me, this is also incorrect because these
positions are temporary. Today you are a king and I am your ser-
vant, but tomorrow the position may be changed, and you may be
my servant and I your master. These are temporary circumstances
created by providence.


--- Page 350 ---
Text 12] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 349
PURPORT
The bodily conception is the basic principle of suffering in material
existence. In Kali-yuga especially, people are so uneducated that they
cannot even understand that the body is changing at every moment and
that the ultimate change is called death. In this life one may be a king,
and in the next life one may be a dog, according to karma. The spirit soul
is in a deep slumber caused by the force of material nature. He is put in
one type of condition and again changed into another type. Without self-
realization and knowledge, conditional life continues, and one falsely
claims himself a king, a servant, a cat or a dog. These are simply
different transformations brought about by the supreme arrangement.
One should not be misled by such temporary bodily conceptions. Actually
no one is master within the material world, for everyone is under the
control of material nature, which is under the control of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna, is the ultimate master. As explained in Caitanya-caritamrta,
ekale svara krsna, ara saba bhrtya: the only master is Krsna, and every-
one else is His servant. Forgetfulness of our relationship with the
Supreme Lord brings about our suffering in the material world.
TEXT 12
विशेषवुद्धर्धिंवरं मनाक्‌ च
पश्याम यनन व्यवहारतोऽन्यत्‌ |
क ईश्वरस्तत्र किमीशितव्यं
तथापि राजन्‌ करवाम f& ते॥१२॥
visesa-buddher vivaram manak ca
pasyama yan na vyavahdarato ‘nyat
ka isvaras tatra kim iSitavyam
tathapi rajan karavama kim te
visesa-buddheh —of the conception of the distinction between master
and servant; vivaram—the scope; mandk—a little: ca—also:
pasyamah—1 see; yat—which; na—not; vyavahdratah—than the tem-
porary usage or convention; anyat—other: kah—who: iSvarah—the


--- Page 351 ---
350 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.10
master; tatra—in this; kim—who; iSitavyam—is to be controlled;
tathapi—nevertheless; rajan—O King (if you still think that you are
master and | am servant); karavama—I may do; kim—what; te—
for you.
TRANSLATION

My dear King, if you still think that you are the King and that I
am your servant, you should order me, and I should follow your
order. I can then say that this differentiation is temporary, and it
expands only from usage or convention. I do not see any other
cause. In that case, who is the master, and who is the servant?
Everyone is being forced by the laws of material nature; therefore
no one is master, and no one is servant. Nonetheless, if you think
that you are the master and that I am the servant, I shall accept this.
Please order me. What can I do for you?

PURPORT

It is said in Srimad-Bhagavatam, aham mameti: One thinks, “I am
this body, and in this bodily relationship he is my master, he is my ser-
vant, she is my wife, and he is my son.” All these conceptions are tem-
porary due to the inevitable change of body and the arrangement of
material nature. We are gathered together like straws floating in the
waves of an ocean, straws that are inevitably separated by the laws of the
waves. In this material world, everyone is floating on the waves of the
ocean of nescience. As described by Bhaktivinoda Thakura:

(miche) mayara vase, yaccha bhese’,
khaccha habudubu, bhai
(jiva) krsna-dasa, € visvasa,
karle ta’ ara duhkha nai

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura states that all men and women are floating
like straws on the waves of material nature. If they come to the under-
standing that they are the eternal servants of Krsna, they will put an end
to this floating condition. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.37): kama esa
krodha esa rajoguna-samudbhavah. Due to the mode of passion, we
desire many things, and according to our desire or anxiety and according


--- Page 352 ---
Text 13] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 351
to the order of the Supreme Lord, material nature gives us a certain type
of body. For some time we play as master or servant, as actors play on the
stage under someone else’s direction. While we are in the human form,
we should put an end to this nonsensical stage performance. We should
come to our original constitutional position, known as Krsna conscious-
ness. At the present moment, the real master is material nature. Daivi hy
esa gunamayi mama maya duratyaya (Bg. 7.14). Under the spell of
material nature, we are becoming servants and masters, but if we agree
to be controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His eternal
servants, this temporary condition ceases to exist.
TEXT 13
उन्मत्तमक्तनडबरस्व संस्थां
oo
गतस्य मे वीर चिकित्सितेन |
€
अथः कियान्‌ भवता शिक्षितेन
स्तब्धप्रमत्तस्य च पिष्टपेषः ॥१३॥
unmatta-matta-jadavat sva-saristham
gatasya me vira cikitsitena
arthah kiyan bhavata $iksitena
stabdha-pramattasya ca pistapesah
unmatta—madness; matta—a drunkard; jada-vat—like a dunce:
sva-saristham—situation in my original constitutional position:
gatasya—of one who has obtained; me—of me; vira—O King; cikit-
sitena—by your chastisement; arthah—the meaning or purpose:
kiyan—what; bhavata—by you; Siksitena—by being instructed:
stabdha—dull; pramattasya—of a crazy man: ca—also: pista-pesah—
like grinding flour.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, you have said, ‘You rascal, you dull, crazy fellow!
I am going to chastise you, and then you will come to your senses.”
In this regard, let me say that although I live like a dull, deaf and
dumb man, I am actually a self-realized person. What will you gain
by punishing me? If your calculation is true and I am a madman,


--- Page 353 ---
352 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
then your punishment will be like beating a dead horse. There will
be no effect. When a madman is punished, he is not cured of his
madness.
PURPORT
Everyone in this material world is working like a madman under cer-
tain impressions falsely acquired in the material condition. For example,
a thief who knows that stealing is not good and who knows that it is
followed with punishment by a king or by God, who has seen that thieves
are arrested and punished by the police, nonetheless steals again and
again. He is obsessed with the idea that by stealing he will be happy. This
is a sign of madness. Despite repeated punishment, the thief cannot give
up his stealing habit; therefore the punishment is useless.
TEXT 14
श्री्ुक उवाच
S
एतावद चुवाद परिभाषया प्रत्युदीयं अुनिषर उपशमज्ीर उपरतानालम्य-
- [4
निमित्त उपमोगेन FATE व्यपनयन्‌ राजयानमपि तथोवाह | १४॥
sri-Suka uvaca
etavad anuvada-paribhasaya pratyudirya muni-vara upasama-sila
uparatandatmya-nimitta upabhogena karmarabdhari vyapanayan raja-
yanam api tathovaha.
éri-sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak; etavat—so
much; anuvada-paribhasaya—by explanatory repetition of words
spoken previously by the King; pratyudirya—giving replies one after
another; muni-varah—great sage Jada Bharata; upasama-silah—who
was calm and peaceful in character; uparata—ceased; anatmya—things
not related to the soul; nimittah —whose cause (ignorance) for identifica-
tion with things not related to the soul; upabhogena—by accepting the
consequences of his karma; karma-arabdham—the resultant action now
attained; vyapanayan—finishing; raja-yanam—the palanquin of the
King; api—again; tatha—as before; uvaha—continued to carry.


--- Page 354 ---
Text 14] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 353
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: O Maharaja Pariksit, when King
Rahiigana chastised the exalted devotee Jada Bharata with harsh
words, that peaceful, saintly person tolerated it all and replied
properly. Nescience is due to the bodily conception, and Jada
Bharata was not affected by this false conception. Out of his
natural humility, he never considered himself a great devotee, and
he agreed to suffer the results of his past karma. Like an ordinary
man, he thought that by carrying the palanquin, he was destroying
the reactions of his past misdeeds. Thinking in this way, he began
to carry the palanquin as before.

PURPORT

An exalted devotee of the Lord never thinks that he is a paramaharisa
or a liberated person. He always remains a humble servant of the Lord.
In all reverse conditions, he agrees to suffer the results of his past life.
He never accuses the Lord of putting him into a distressed condition.
These are the signs of an exalted devotee. Tat te ’nukampar
susamiksyamanah. When suffering reversed conditions, the devotee al-
ways considers that the reverse conditions are the Lord’s concessions. He
is never angry with his master; he is always satisfied with the position his
master offers. In any case, he continues performing his duty in devo-
tional service. Such a person is guaranteed promotion back home, back to
Godhead. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.8):

tat te ‘nukamparn susamiksamano
bhunjana evatma-krtarm vipakam
hrd-vag-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
Jiveta yo mukti-pade sa daya-bhak

“My dear Lord, one who constantly waits for Your causeless mercy to be
bestowed upon him and who goes on suffering the reactions of his past
misdeeds, offering You respectful obeisances from the core of his heart.
is surely eligible for liberation, for it has become his rightful claim.”


--- Page 355 ---
354 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
TEXT 15

स चापि पाण्डवेय सिन्धुसोबीरपतिस्त्व जिज्ञासायां सम्यक्‌ ध्रदवयाधिरूताधिकार-
स्तदुधृदयग्रन्यिमोचनं द्विजवच आश्रुत्य बहुयोगग्रन्धसम्मतं त्वरयावरुद्य
शिरसा M@HIPIGA: क्षमापयन्‌ विगतनृपदेवखय उवाच ॥ १५॥

sa capi pandaveya sindhu-sauvira-patis tattva-jijidasayam samyak-
$raddhayadhikrtadhikaras tad dhrdaya-granthi-mocanam dvija-vaca
asrutya bahu-yoga-grantha-sammatam tvarayavaruhya Sirasa pada-
millam upasrtah ksamdpayan vigata-nrpa-deva-smaya uvdca.
sah—he (Maharaja Rahigana); ca—also; api—indeed; pandaveya—
0 best of the Pindu dynasty (Maharaja Pariksit); sindhu-sauvira-
patih—the King of the states known as Sindhu and Sauvira; tattva-
Jynasayam—in the matter of inquiring about the Absolute Truth;
samyak-sraddhaya—by faith consisting of complete control of the senses
and the mind; adhikrta-adhikarah—who attained the proper qualifica-
tion; tat—that; hrdaya-granthi—the knot of false conceptions within
the heart; mocanam —which eradicates; dvija-vacah—the words of the
brahmana (Jada Bharata); asrutya—hearing; bahu-yoga-grantha-sam-
matam—approved by all yogic processes and their scriptures; tvaraya—
very hastily; avaruhya—getting down (from the palanquin); siras@—by
his head; pada-miilam—at the lotus feet; upasrtah—falling down flat to
offer obeisances; ksamapayan—obtaining pardon for his offense;
vigata-nrpa-deva-smayah—giving up the false pride of being the King
and therefore being worshipable; uvaca—said.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: O best of the Pandu dynasty
[Maharaja Pariksit], the King of the Sindhu and Sauvira states
[Maharaja Rahiigana] had great faith in discussions of the Absolute
Truth. Being thus qualified, he heard from Jada Bharata that
philosophical presentation which is approved by all scriptures on
the mystic yoga process and which slackens the knot in the heart.
His material conception of himself as a king was thus destroyed.
He immediately descended from his palanquin and fell flat on the


--- Page 356 ---
Text 15] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 355
ground with his head at the lotus feet of Jada Bharata in such a way
that he might be excused for his insulting words against the great
brahmana. He then prayed as follows.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (4.2) Lord Krsna says:
০৮৫7 parampara-praptam
imam rajarsayo viduh
sa kaleneha mahata
yogo nastah parantapa
“This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in course
of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it is ap-
pears to be lost.”

Through the disciplic succession the royal order was on the same plat-
form as great saintly persons (raja-rsis). Formerly they could understand
the philosophy of life and knew how to train the citizens to come to the
same standard. In other words, they knew how to deliver the citizens
from the entanglement of birth and death. When Maharaja Dasaratha
ruled Ayodhya, the great sage Visvamitra once came to him to take away
Lord Rimacandra and Laksmana to the forest to kill a demon. When the
saintly person Viévamitra came to the court of Maharaja Dasaratha. the
King, in order to receive the saintly person, asked him, aihistarn yat tat
punar-janma-jaydaya. He asked the sage whether everything was going
on well in his endeavor to conquer the repetition of birth and death. The
whole process of Vedic civilization is based on this point. We must know
how to conquer the repetition of birth and death. Maharaja Rahagana
also knew the purpose of life; therefore when Jada Bharata put the
philosophy of life before him, he immediately appreciated it. This is the
foundation of Vedic society. Learned scholars, brahmanas, saintly per-
sons and sages who were fully aware of the Vedic purpose advised the
royal order how to benefit the general masses, and by their cooperation.
the general masses were benefited. Therefore everything was successful.
Maharaja Rahiagana attained this perfection of understanding the value


--- Page 357 ---
356 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
of human life; therefore he regretted his insulting words to Jada
Bharata. and he immediately descended from his palanquin and fell
down at the lotus feet of Jada Bharata in order to be excused and to hear
from him further about the values of life known as brahma-jijaasa (in-
quiry into the Absolute Truth). At the present moment, high govern-
ment officials are ignorant of the values of life, and when saintly persons
endeavor to broadcast the Vedic knowledge, the so-called executives do
not offer their respectful obeisances but try to obstruct the spiritual
propaganda. Thus one can say that the former kingly government was
like heaven and that the present government is like hell.
TEXT 16
कस्त्वं निगूढश्चरसि द्विजानां
विभर्षि af कतमोऽवधूतः।
कस्यासि कुत्रत्य इहापि कसात्‌
- -
क्षेमाय नधेदसि नोत gE: ।१६॥
kas tvam nigiudhas carasi dvijanam
bibharsi siitrari katamo ’vadhiitah
kasyasi kutratya ihapi kasmat
ksemaya nas ced asi nota Suklah
kah tvam—who are you; nigidhah—very much covered; carasi—you
move within this world; dvijanam—among the brahmanas or saintly
persons; bibharsi—you also wear; sitram—the sacred thread belonging
to the first-class brahmanas; katamah—which; avadhiitah—highly ele-
vated person; kasya asi—whose are you (whose disciple or son are you);
kutratyah—from where; iha api—here in this place; kasmat—for what
purpose; ksemaya—for the benefit; nah—of us; cet—if; asi—you are;
na uta—or not; Suklah—the personality of the pure mode of goodness
(Kapiladeva).
TRANSLATION
King Rahugana said: O brahmana, you appear to be moving in

this world very much covered and unknown to others. Who are


--- Page 358 ---
Text 17] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 357
you? Are you a learned brihmana and saintly person? I see that
you are wearing a sacred thread. Are you one of those exalted,
liberated saints such as Dattatreya and other highly advanced,
learned scholars? May I ask whose disciple you are? Where do you
live? Why have you come to this place? Is your mission in coming
here to do good for us? Please let me know who you are.
PURPORT
Maharaja [২3110868113 was very anxious to receive further enlighten-
ment in Vedic knowledge because he could understand that Jada Bharata
belonged to a brahmana family either by disciplic succession or by birth
in a brahmana dynasty. As stated in the Vedas: tad vijiandartham sa
gurum evabhigacchet. Rahiigana was accepting Jada Bharata as a guru,
but a guru must prove his position not only by wearing a sacred thread
but by advancing knowledge in spiritual life. It is also significant that
Rahtigana asked Jada Bharata which family he belonged to. There are
two types of families—one according to dynasty and the other according
to disciplic succession. In either way, one can be enlightened. The word
Suklah refers to a person in the mode of goodness. If one wants to receive
spiritual knowledge, he must approach a bona fide brahmana-guru,
either in the disciplic succession or in a family of learned brahmanas.
TEXT 17
নি ~
नाहं विशङ्के सुरराजवज्रा-
SAAS यमस्य दण्डात्‌ |
९
नाग्न्यकसोमानिरवित्तपाखा-
BF भशं वब्रह्मकुलावमानात्‌ ॥ १७॥
naharm visarike sura-raja-vajran
na tryaksa-silan na yamasya dandat
nagny-arka-somanila-vittapastrac
charike bhrsam brahma-kulavamanat
na—not; aham—I; visarike—am afraid: sura-raja-vajrat—from the
thunderbolt of the King of heaven, Indra: na—nor: tryaksa-sialat—


--- Page 359 ---
358 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
from the piercing trident of Lord Siva; na—nor; yamasya—of the
superintendent of death, Yamaraja; dandat—from the punishment;
na—nor; agni—of fire; arka—of the scorching heat of the sun; soma —
of the moon; anila—of the wind; vitta-pa—of the owner of riches,
Kuvera, the treasurer of the heavenly planets; astrat—from the weap-
ons; Sanke—I am afraid; bhrsam—very much; brahma-kula—the
group of the brahmanas; avamandat—from offending.
TRANSLATION

My dear sir, I am not at all afraid of the thunderbolt of King In-
dra, nor am I afraid of the serpentine, piercing trident of Lord
Siva. I do not care about the punishment of Yamaraja, the superin-
tendent of death, nor am I afraid of fire, scorching sun, moon,
wind, nor the weapons of Kuvera. Yet I am afraid of offending a
brahmana. I am very much afraid of this.

PURPORT

When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was instructing Ripa Gosvami at the
Dasaévamedha-ghata in Prayaga, He pointed out very clearly the serious-
ness of offending a Vaisnava. He compared the vaispava-aparadha to
hati mata, a mad elephant. When a mad elephant enters a garden, it
spoils all the fruits and flowers. Similarly, if one offends a Vaisnava, he
spoils all his spiritual assets. Offending a brahmana is very dangerous,
and this was known to Maharaja Rahagana. He therefore frankly admit-
ted his fault. There are many dangerous things —thunderbolts, fire,
Yamaraja’s punishment, the punishment of Lord Siva’s trident, and so
forth —but none is considered as serious as offending a brahmana like
Jada Bharata. Therefore Maharaja Rahugana immediately descended
from his palanquin and fell flat before the lotus feet of the brahmana
Jada Bharata just to be excused.

TEXT 18
तद्‌ ब्रूह्यसङ्गो जडवनिगूढ-
विज्ञानवीर्यो विचरस्यपारः |


--- Page 360 ---
Text 18] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 359
वचांसि योगग्रथितानि साधो
न नः क्षमन्ते मनसापि मत्तम्‌ ।॥१८॥
tad brithy asango jadavan nigidha-
vijAidna-viryo vicarasy apdarah
vacarist yoga-grathitani sadho
na nah ksamante manasapi bhettum
tat—therefore; brithi—please speak; asarigah—who have no associ-
ation with the material world; jada-vat—appearing like a deaf and dumb
man; nigidha—completely hidden; wvijiana-viryah—who have full
knowledge of the spiritual science and are thus very powerful;
vicarasi—you are moving; aparah—who possess unlimited spiritual glo-
ries; vacamsi—the words uttered by you; yoga-grathitani—bearing the
complete meaning of mystic yoga; sadho—O great, saintly person; na—
not; nah—of us; ksamante—are able; manasa api—even by the mind;
bhettum—to understand by analytical study.
TRANSLATION
My dear sir, it appears that the influence of your great spiritual
knowledge is hidden. Factually you are bereft of all material asso-
ciation and fully absorbed in the thought of the Supreme. Conse-
quently you are unlimitedly advanced in spiritual knowledge.
Please tell me why you are wandering around like a dullard. O
great, saintly person, you have spoken words approved by the
yogic process, but it is not possible for us to understand what you
have said. Therefore kindly explain it.
PURPORT
Saintly people like Jada Bharata do not speak ordinary words.
Whatever they say is approved by great yogis and those advanced in
spiritual life. That is the difference between ordinary people and saintly
people. The listener must also be advanced to understand the words of
such exalted, spiritually advanced people as Jada Bharata. Bhagavad-gita
was spoken to Arjuna, not to others. Lord Krsna especially selected


--- Page 361 ---
360 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
Arjuna for instruction in spiritual knowledge because Arjuna happened
to be a great devotee and confidential friend. Similarly, great per-
sonalities also speak to the advanced, not to $idras, vaiSyas, women or
unintelligent men. Sometimes it is very risky to give great philosophical
instructions to ordinary people, but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for the
benefit of the fallen souls of Kali-yuga, has given us a very nice instru-
ment, the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra. The general mass of peo-
ple, although Sidras and less, can be purified by chanting this Hare
Krsna mantra. Then they can understand the exalted philosophical state-
ments of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. Our Krsna conscious-
ness movement has therefore adopted the chanting of the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra for the general masses. When people gradually become
purified, they are instructed in the lessons of Bhagavad-gita and
Srimad-Bhagavatam. Materialistic people like stri, Sidra and dvija-
bandhu cannot understand words of spiritual advancement, yet one can
take to the shelter of a Vaisnava, for he knows the art of enlightening
even Siidras in the highly elevated subject matter spoken in Bhagavad-
gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 19
अहं च योगेश्वरमात्मतच्च-
o "1
विदां सनीनां परमं गुरं ৭ ।
प्रष्टुं प्रवृत्तः किमिहारणं तत्‌
(=
साक्षाद्ररिं ज्ञानकरावतीणेम्‌ neal
aham ca yogesvaram atma-tattva-
viddrh muninari paramari gururi vai
prasturi pravrttah kim iharanam tat
saksad dharim jaiana-kalavatirnam

aham—1; ca—and; yoga-iSvaram—the master of all mystic power;
atma-tattva-vidam —of the learned scholars who are aware of the
spiritual science; muninam—of such saintly persons; paramam—the
best; gurum—the preceptor; vai—indeed; prasturmm—to inquire; pravrt-
tah—engaged; kim—what; iha—in this world; aranam—the most


--- Page 362 ---
Text 19] Maharaja Rahtigana Meets Jada Bharata 361
secure shelter; tat—that which; saksat harim—directly the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; jidana-kala-avatirnam—who has descended as
the incarnation of complete knowledge in His plenary portion known as
Kapiladeva.

TRANSLATION

I consider your good self the most exalted master of mystic
power. You know the spiritual science perfectly well. You are the
most exalted of all learned sages, and you have descended for the
benefit of all human society. You have come to give spiritual
knowledge, and you are a direct representative of Kapiladeva, the
incarnation of God and the plenary portion of knowledge. I am
therefore asking you, O spiritual master, what is the most secure
shelter in this world?

PURPORT
As Krsna confirms in Bhagavad-gita:
yoginam api sarvesar
mad-gatenantaratmand
Sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah
“Of all yogis, he who abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in
transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga
and is the highest of all.” (Bg. 6.47)

Jada Bharata was a perfect yogi. He was formerly the emperor Bharata
Maharaja, and he was now the most exalted personality among learned
sages and the master of all mystic powers. Although Jada Bharata was an
ordinary living entity, he had inherited all the knowledge given by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kapiladeva. He could therefore be
taken directly as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed by
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura in his stanzas to the spiritual
master: saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastraih. An exalted personality like
Jada Bharata is as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead because
he fully represents the Lord by giving knowledge to others. Jada Bharata


--- Page 363 ---
362 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.10
is herein accepted as the direct representative of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead because he was imparting knowledge on behalf of
the Supreme Lord. Therefore Maharaja Rahagana concluded that it was
appropriate to ask him about atma-tattva, the spiritual science. Tad-
vijiianarthari sa gurum evabhigacchet. This Vedic injunction is also con-
firmed herein. If anyone is at all interested in knowing the spiritual
science (brahma-jijfiasa), he must approach a guru like Jada Bharata.
TEXT 20
aX ५, ক ®
स॒वं मर्ब्छोकनिरीक्षणाथ-
-
मव्यक्तलिङ्गो विचरत्यपिखित्‌ |
योगेश्वराणां गतिमन्धबुद्धिः
कथं विचक्षीत गृहाचुबन्धः Rel
sa vai bhaval loka-niriksanartham
avyakta-lingo vicaraty api svit
yogesvaranam gatim andha-buddhih
kathari vicaksita grhanubandhah
sah—that Supreme Personality of Godhead or His incarnation
Kapiladeva; vai—indeed; bhavan—your good self; loka-niriksana-
artham—just to study the characteristics of the people of this world;
avyakta-lingah—without manifesting your real identity; vicarati—are
traveling in this world; api svit—whether; yoga-isvaranam—of all the
advanced yogis; gatim—the characteristics or actual behavior; andha-
buddhih—who are 11105101160 and have become blind to spiritual
knowledge; katham—how; vicaksita—may know; grha-anubandhah—I
who am bound by attachment to family life, or worldly life.
TRANSLATION
Is it not a fact that your good self is the direct representative of
Kapiladeva, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead? To examine people and see who is actually a human
being and who is not, you have presented yourself to be a deaf and
dumb person. Are you not moving this way upon the surface of the


--- Page 364 ---
Text 21] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 363
world? I am very attached to family life and worldly activities, and
I am blind to spiritual knowledge. Nonetheless, I am now present
before you and am seeking enlightenment from you. How can I ad-
vance in spiritual life?
PURPORT
Although Maharaja Rahiagana was playing the part of a king, he had
been informed by Jada Bharata that he was not a king nor was Jada
Bharata deaf and dumb. Such designations were simply coverings of the
spirit soul. Everyone must come to this knowledge. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (2.13): dehino ’smin yatha dehe. Everyone is encased
within the body. Since the body is never identical with the soul, the
bodily activities are simply illusory. In the association of such a sadhu as
Jada Bharata, Maharaja Rahiigana came to the awareness that his ac-
tivities as a royal authority were simply illusory phenomena. He
therefore agreed to receive knowledge from Jada Bharata, and that was
the beginning of his perfection. Tad-vijianarthari sa gurum evabhigac-
chet. A person like Maharaja Rahiigana, who was very inquisitive to
know the value of life and the spiritual science, must approach a per-
sonality like Jada Bharata. Tasmad gurum prapadyeta jijidasuh sreya ut-
tamam (Bhag. 11.3.21). One must approach a guru like Jada Bharata, a
representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, to inquire about
the goal of human life.
TEXT 21
Ly aN
TE श्रमः कमत आत्मना ৭
ce _.&
मतुगेन्त॒भवतशालुमन्ये
यथासतोदानयनाद्यभावात्‌
समूल इष्टो व्यवहारमार्गः ॥२१॥
drstah sramah karmata atmano vai
bhartur gantur bhavatas canumanye
yathasatodanayanady-abhavat
samila isto vyavahara-margah


--- Page 365 ---
364 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10

drstah—it is experienced by everyone; sramah—fatigue; karmatah—
from acting in some way; atmanah—of the soul; vai—indeed; bhar-
tuh—of one who is carrying the palanquin; gantuh—of one who is mov-
ing; bhavatah—of yourself; ca—and; anumanye—I guess like that;
yatha—as much as; asatda—with something that is not an actual fact;
uda—of water; anayana-adi—of the bringing and other such tasks;
abhavat—from the absence; sa-millah—based on evidence; istah—
respected; vyavahara-mdrgah—phenomenon.

TRANSLATION

You have said, “I am not fatigued from labor.” Although the
soul is different from the body, there is fatigue because of bodily
labor, and it appears to be the fatigue of the soul. When you are
carrying the palanquin, there is certainly labor for the soul. This is
my conjecture. You have also said that the external behavior ex-
hibited between the master and the servant is not factual, but
although in the phenomenal world it is not factual, the products of
the phenomenal world can actually affect things. That is visible
and experienced. As such, even though material activities are im-
permanent, they cannot be said to be untrue.

PURPORT

This is a discussion on impersonal Mayavada philosophy and the prac-
tical philosophy of Vaisnavas. The Mayavada philosophy explains this
phenomenal world to be false, but Vaisnava philosophers do not agree.
They know that the phenomenal world is a temporary manifestation, but
it is not false. A dream that we see at night is certainly false, but a hor-
rible dream certainly affects the person seeing it. The soul's fatigue is not
factual, but as long as one is immersed in the illusory bodily conception,
one is affected by such false dreams. When dreaming, it is not possible to
avoid the actual facts, and the conditioned soul is forced to suffer due to
his dream. A waterpot is made of earth and is temporary. Actually there
is no waterpot; there is simply earth. However, as long as the waterpot
can contain water, we can use it in that way. It cannot be said to be ab-
solutely false.


--- Page 366 ---
Text 22] Maharaja Rahuigana Meets Jada Bharata 365
TEXT 22
स्थाल्यभ्रितापात्पयसोऽभिताप-
Gy
स्तत्तापतस्तण्डुलगमेरन्धिः
देहेन्द्रियाखाश्चयसननिकर्षात्‌
ক -
तत्संछतिः पुरुषस्यायुरोधात्‌ ।॥२२॥
sthaly-agni-tapat payaso ’bhitapas
tat-tapatas tandula-garbha-randhih
dehendriyasvasaya-sannikarsat
tat-sariisrtih purusasyanurodhat
sthali—on the cooking pot; agni-tapat—because of the heat of fire;
payasah—the milk put into the pot; abhitapah—becomes hot; tat-
tapatah—because of the milk’s becoming hot; tandula-garbha-
randhih— the center of the rice within the milk becomes cooked; deha-
indriya-asvasaya—the bodily senses; sannikarsat—from having
connections with; tat-samsrtih—the experience of fatigue and other mis-
eries; purusasya—of the soul; anurodhat—from compliance due to
being grossly attached to the body, senses and mind.
TRANSLATION
King Rahuigana continued: My dear sir, you have said that desig-
nations like bodily fatness and thinness are not characteristics of
the soul. That is incorrect because designations like pain and
pleasure are certainly felt by the soul. You may put a pot of milk
and rice within fire, and the milk and rice are automatically heated
one after the other. Similarly, due to bodily pains and pleasures,
the senses, mind and soul are affected. The soul cannot be com-
pletely detached from this conditioning.
PURPORT
This argument put forward by Maharaja Rahagana is correct from the
practical point of view, but it arises from an attachment to the bodily
conception. It can be said that a person sitting in his car is certainly


--- Page 367 ---
366 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
different from his car, but if there is damage to the car, the owner of the
car, being overly attached to the car, feels pain. Actually, the damage
done to the car has nothing to do with the car’s proprietor, but because
the proprietor has identified himself with the interest of the car, he feels
pleasure and pain connected with it. This conditional state can be avoided
if attachment is withdrawn from the car. Then the proprietor would not
feel pleasure or pain if the car is damaged or whatever. Similarly, the
soul has nothing to do with the body and the senses, but due to ig-
norance, he identifies himself with the body, and he feels pleasure and
pain due to bodily pleasure and pain.
TEXT 23
शास्ताभिगोप्ता चृपतिः प्रजानां
=
यः किङ्करो वै न पिनष्टि पिष्टम्‌ ।
खधर्मेमाराधनमच्युतस्य
यदीहमानो विजहात्यघौघम्‌ ।२३॥
sastabhigopta nrpatih prajanarin
yah kinkaro vai na pinasti pistam
sva-dharmam aradhanam acyutasya
yad thamano vijahaty aghaugham
sasta—the governor; abhigopta—a well-wisher of the citizens as a
father is the well-wisher of his children; nr-patih—the king; pra-
janam—of the citizens; yah—one who; kirikarah—order carrier; vai—
indeed; na—not; pinasti pistam—grinds what is already ground; sva-
dharmam—one’s own occupational duty; d@radhanam—worshiping;
acyutasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yat—which;
thamanah—performing; vijahati—they are released from; agha-
ogham —all kinds of sinful activity and faulty action.
TRANSLATION
My dear sir, you have said that the relationship between the king
and the subject or between the master and the servant are not eter-


--- Page 368 ---
Text 23] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 367
nal, but although such relationships are temporary, when a person
takes the position of a king, his duty is to rule the citizens and
punish those who are disobedient to the laws. By punishing them,
he teaches the citizens to obey the laws of the state. Again, you
have said that punishing a person who is deaf and dumb is like
chewing the chewed or grinding the pulp; that is to say, there is no
benefit in it. However, if one is engaged in his own occupational
duty as ordered by the Supreme Lord, his sinful activities are cer-
tainly diminished. Therefore if one is engaged in his occupational
duty by force, he benefits because he can vanquish all his sinful ac-
tivities in that way.
PURPORT

This argument offered by Maharaja Rahtigana is certainly very effec-
tive. In his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.4), Srila Ripa Gosvami says,
tasmat kenapy upayena manah krsne nivesayet: somehow or other, one
should engage in Krsna consciousness. Actually every living being is an
eternal servant of Krsna, but due to forgetfulness. a living entity engages
himself as an eternal servant of mayd. As long as one is engaged in
maya’s service, he cannot be happy. Our Krsna consciousness movement
aims at engaging people in Lord Krsna’s service. That will help them
become freed from all material contamination and sinful activity. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.10): vita-raga-bhaya-krodhah. By
becoming detached from material activities, we will be freed from fear
and anger. By austerity, one becomes purified and eligible to return
home, back to Godhead. The duty of the king is to rule his citizens in
such a way that they can become Krsna conscious. This would be very
beneficial for everyone. Unfortunately the king or president engages
people in sense gratification instead of the Lord’s service, and such ac-
tivities are certainly not beneficial for anyone. King Rahigana tried to
engage Jada Bharata in carrying the palanquin, which is a form of sense
gratification for the King. However, if one is engaged as a palanquin car-
rier in the Lord’s service, that is certainly beneficial. In this godless
civilization, if a president engages people somehow or other in devotional
service or the awakening of Krsna consciousness, he renders the very
best service to the citizens.


--- Page 369 ---
368 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
TEXT 24
तन्मे मवान्नरदेयाभिमान-
मदेन तच्छीकृतसतमस्य |
a
Fite मत्रीदशमातेबन्धो
यथा तरे सदवध्यानमंहः ॥२४॥
tan me bhavan nara-devabhimana-
madena tucchikrta-sattamasya
krsista maitri-drsam arta-bandho
yatha tare sad-avadhyanam arihah

tat—therefore; me—unto me; bhavan—your good self; nara-deva-
abhimana-madena—by madness due to having the body of a king and
thus being proud of it; tucchikrta—who has insulted; sat-tamasya—you
who are the best among human beings; krsista—kindly show; maitri-
drsam—your causeless mercy upon me like a friend; arta-bandho—O
friend of all distressed persons; yatha—so; tare—I can get relief from;
sat-avadhyanam —neglecting a great personality like you; armhah—
the sin.

TRANSLATION

Whatever you have spoken appears to me to be contradictory. O
best friend of the distressed, I have committed a great offense by
insulting you. I was puffed up with false prestige due to possessing
the body of a king. For this I have certainly become an offender.
Therefore I pray that you kindly glance at me with your causeless
mercy. If you do so, I can be relieved from sinful activities
brought about by insulting you.

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said that by offending a Vaisnava, one
finishes all his spiritual activities. Offending a Vaisnava is considered the
mad elephant offense. A mad elephant can destroy an entire garden
which has been developed with great labor. One may attain the topmost
platform of devotional service, but somehow or other if he offends a


--- Page 370 ---
Text 25] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 369
Vaisnava, the whole structure collapses. Unconsciously, King Rahagana
offended Jada Bharata, but due to his good sense, he asked to be excused.
This is the process by which one can be relieved from a vaisnava-
aparadha. Krsna is always very simple and by nature merciful. When
one commits an offense at the feet of a Vaisnava, one must immediately
apologize to such a personality so that his spiritual advancement may not
be hampered.
TEXT 25
न॒ विक्रिया विश्वसुहृरंसखस्य
साम्येन वीताभिमतेस्तवापि |
महद्धिमानात्‌ खड़ृताद्वि awe
नह्कयत्यद्रादपि शलपाणिः ॥२५॥
na vikriya visva-suhrt-sakhasya
samyena vitabhimates tavapi
mahad-vimanat sva-krtad dhi madm
nanksyaty adirad api silapanih

na—not; vikriyda—material transformation; wvisva-suhrt—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is a friend to everyone;
sakhasya—of you, the friend; samyena—because of your mental
equilibrium; vita-abhimateh—who has completely forsaken the bodily
concept of life; tava—your; api—indeed; mahat-vimanat—of insulting
a great devotee; sva-krtat—from my own activity; hi—certainly;
madrk—a person like me; narnksyati—will be destroyed; adirat—very
soon; api—certainly; sila-panih—even though as powerful as Lord Siva
(Salapani).

TRANSLATION

O my dear lord, you are the friend of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is the friend of all living entities. You are
therefore equal to everyone, and you are free from the bodily con-
ception. Although I have committed an offense by insulting you, I
know that there is no loss or gain for you due to my insult. You are


--- Page 371 ---
370 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 10
fixed in your determination, but I have committed an offense.
Because of this, even though I may be as strong as Lord Siva, I
shall be vanquished without delay due to my offense at the lotus
feet of a Vaisnava.
PURPORT
Maharaja Rahagana was very intelligent and conscious of the in-
auspicious effects arising from insulting a Vaisnava. He was therefore
very anxious to be excused by Jada Bharata. Following in the footsteps of
Maharaja Rahtgana, everyone should be very cautious not to commit an
offense at the lotus feet of a Vaisnava. Srila Vrndavana dasa Thakura in
the Caitanya-bhagavata (Madhya 13) says:
Sulapani-sama yadi bhakta-ninda kare
bhagavata pramana——tathapi sighra mare
hena vaisnavere ninde sarvajia ha-i
se janera adhah-pata sarva-sastre ka-i
“Even if one is as strong as Lord Siva, who carries a trident in his hand,
one will nonetheless fall down from his spiritual position if he tries to in-
sult a Vaisnava. That is the verdict of all Vedic scriptures.” He also says
this in Caitanya-bhagavata (Madhya 22).
vaisnavera nindd karibeka yara gana
tara raksa samarthya nahika kona jana
Silapani-sama yadi vaisnavere ninde
tathaptha nasa yaya—kahe $astra-vrnde
tha na maniya ye sujana ninda kare
janme janme se papistha daiva-dose mare
“One who blasphemes a Vaisnava cannot be protected by anyone. Even if
a person is as strong as Lord Siva, if he blasphemes a Vaisnava, he is sure
to be destroyed. This is the verdict of all sastras. If one does not care for


--- Page 372 ---
Text 25] Maharaja Rahiigana Meets Jada Bharata 371
the verdict of the Sdstras and dares blaspheme a Vaisnava, he suffers life
after life because of this.”

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Tenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, ‘The Discussion Between
Jada Bharata and Maharaja Rahigana.”


--- Page 373 ---
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahiigana
In this chapter the brahmana Jada Bharata instructs Maharaja Rahtgana
in detail. He tells the King: “You are not very experienced. yet you pose
yourself as a learned person because you are very proud of your
knowledge. Actually a person who is on the transcendental platform does
not care for social behavior that sacrifices spiritual advancement. Social
behavior comes within the jurisdiction of karma-kanda, material benefit.
No one can spiritually advance by such activities. The conditioned soul is
always overpowered by the modes of material nature, and consequently
he is simply concerned with material benefits and auspicious and in-
auspicious material things. In other words. the mind. which is the leader
of the senses, is absorbed in material activities life after life. Thus he
continuously gets different types of bodies and suffers miserable material
conditions. On the basis of mental concoction. social behavior has been
formulated. If one’s mind is absorbed in these activities. he certainly
remains conditioned within the material world. According to different
opinions, there are eleven or twelve mental activities. which can be
transformed into hundreds and thousands. A person who is not Krsna
conscious is subjected to all these mental concoctions and is thus
governed by the material energy. The living entity who is free from
mental concoctions attains the platform of pure spirit soul. devoid of
material contamination. There are two types of living entities —jivatma
and paramatma, the individual soul and the Supreme Soul. That
Supreme Soul in His ultimate realization is Lord Vasudeva. Krsna. He
enters into everyone's heart and controls the living entity in his different
activities. He is therefore the supreme shelter of all living entities. One
can understand the Supreme Soul and one’s position in relationship with
Him when one is completely freed from the unwanted association of or-
dinary men. In this way one can become fit to cross the ocean of nes-
cience. The cause of conditional life is attachment to the external energy.
One has to conquer these mental concoctions: unless one does so. he will
373


--- Page 374 ---
374. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
never be freed from material anxieties. Although mental concoctions
have no value. their influence is still very formidable. No one should
neglect to control the mind. If one does. the mind becomes so powerful
that one immediately forgets his real position. Forgetting that he is an
eternal servant of Krsna and that service to Krsna is his only business.
one is doomed by material nature to serve the objects of the senses. One
should kill mental concoctions by the sword of service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and His devotee [guru-krsna-prasade paya
bhakti-lata-bijal.”
TEXT 1
ब्राह्मण उवाच
अकोविदः कोविदवादवादान्‌
वदस्यथो नातिविदां वरिष्ठः ।
9
न रयो हि व्यवहारमेनं
तच्चावमर्शेन सहामनन्ति ॥ १ ॥
brahmana uvaca
akovidah kovida-vada-vadan
vadasy atho nati-vidarn varisthah
na sirayo hi vyavaharam enam
tattvavamarsena sahamananti
brahmanah wvaca—the brahmana said: akovidah—without having
experience: kovida-vada-vadan—words used by experienced persons:
vadasi—you are speaking: atho—therefore: na—not: ati-vidam—of
those who are very experienced: varisthah—the most important: na—
not: sarayah—such intelligent persons: hi—indeed: vyavaharam—
mundane and social behavior: enam—this: tattva—of the truth:
avamarsena—fine judgment by intelligence: saha—with: amananti—
discuss.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana Jada Bharata said: My dear King, although you
are not at all experienced, you are trying to speak like a very ex-


--- Page 375 ---
Text 2] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahiigana 375
perienced man. Consequently you cannot be considered an ex-
perienced person. An experienced person does not speak the way
you are speaking about the relationship between a master and a
servant or about material pains and pleasures. These are simply ex-
ternal activities. Any advanced, experienced man, considering the
Absolute Truth, does not talk in this way.
PURPORT
Krsna similarly chastised Arjuna. Asocyan anvasocas tvam prajia-
vadams ca bhasase: "While speaking learned words, you are lamenting
for what is not worthy of grief.” (Bg. 2.11) Similarly. among people in
general, 99.9 percent try to talk like experienced advisers. but they are
actually devoid of spiritual knowledge and are therefore like inex-
perienced children speaking nonsensically. Consequently their words
cannot be given any importance. One has to learn from Krsna or His
devotee. If one speaks on the basis of this experience —that is. on the
basis of spiritual knowledge—one’s words are valuable. At the present
moment, the entire world is full of foolish people. Bhagavad-gita de-
scribes these people as mitdhas. They are trying to rule human society.
but because they are devoid of spiritual knowledge. the entire world is in
a chaotic condition. To be released from these miserable conditions. one
has to become Krsna conscious and take lessons from an exalted per-
sonality like Jada Bharata. Lord Krsna and Kapiladeva. That is the only
way to solve the problems of material life.
TEXT 2
तथैव राजन्नुरुगार्मेध-
वितानवियोरूदिजुम्मितेषु ।
८
न॒ वेदवादेषु हि तत्त्ववादः
प्रायेण शद्धो ल॒ चकास्ति साधुः ॥२॥
tathaiva rajann uru-garhamedha- ’
vitana-vidyoru-vijrmbhitesu
na veda-vadesu hi tattva-vadah
prayena Suddho nu cakasti sadhuh


--- Page 376 ---
376 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
tatha—therefore: eva—indeed: rgjan—O King: uru-garha-medha—
rituals related to material household life: vitana-vidya—in knowledge
that expands: uru—very greatly: vijrmbhitesu —among those interested:
na—not: veda-vadesu—who speak the version of the Vedas; hi—in-
deed: tattva-vadah—the spiritual science: prayena—almost always:
Suddhah—free from all contaminated activities: nu—indeed: cakasti—
appear: sadhuh—a person who is advanced in devotional service.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, talks of the relationship between the master and
the servant, the king and the subject and so forth are simply talks
about material activities. People interested in material activities,
which are expounded in the Vedas, are intent on performing
material sacrifices and placing faith in their material activities. For
such people, spiritual advancement is definitely not manifest.
PURPORT
In this verse, two words are significant —veda-vada and tattva-vada.
According to Bhagavad-gita, those who are simply attached to the Vedas
and who do not understand the purpose of the Vedas or the Vedanta-
siitra are called veda-vada-ratah.
yam imam puspitam vacam
pravadanty avipascitah
veda-vada-ratah partha
nanyad astiti vadinah
kamatmanah svarga-para
Jjanma-karma-phala-pradam
kriya-visesa-bahulam
bhogaisvarya-gatim prati
“Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the Howery words of
the Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to
heavenly planets, resultant good birth, power and so forth. Being
desirous of sense gratification and opulent life, they say there is nothing
more than this.” (Bg. 2.42-43)


--- Page 377 ---
Text 2] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahiagana 377

The veda-vada followers of the Vedas are generally inclined to karma-
kanda, the performance of sacrifice according to the Vedic injunctions.
They are thereby promoted to higher planetary systems. They generally
practice the Caturmasya system. Aksayyari ha vai caturmasya-yajinah
sukrtarin bhavati: one who performs the caturmasya-yajiia becomes
pious. By becoming pious, one may be promoted to the higher planetary
systems (ardhvari gacchanti sattva-sthah). Some of the followers of the
Vedas are attached to karma-kanda, the fruitive activities of the Vedas,
in order to be promoted to a higher standard of life. Others argue that
this is not the purpose of the Vedas. Tad yathaiveha karma-jitah lokah
ksiyate evam evam utra punya-jitah lokah ksiyate. In this world some-
one may become very highly elevated by taking birth in an aristocratic
family. by being well educated, beautiful or very rich. These are the gifts
for pious activities enacted in the past life. However. these will be
finished when the stock of pious activity is finished. 11 we become at-
tached to pious activities. we may get these various worldly facilities in
the next life and may take birth in the heavenly planets. But all this will
eventually be finished. Ksine punye martya-lokari visanti (Bg. 9.21):
when the stock of pious activity is finished. one again has to come to this
martya-loka. According to the Vedic injunctions. the performance of
pious activity is not really the objective of the Vedas. The objective of the
Vedas is explained in Bhagavad-gita. Vedais ca sarvair aham eva
vedyah: the objective of the Vedas is to understand Krsna. the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Those who are veda-vadis are not actually ad-
vanced in knowledge, and those who are followers of jirana-kanda
(Brahman understanding) are also not perfect. However. when one
comes to the platform of updsana and accepts the worship of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. he becomes perfect (aradhananarn
sarvesam visnor aradhanari param). In the Vedas the worship of
different demigods and the performance of sacrifice are certainly men-
tioned. but such worship is inferior because the worshipers do not know
that the ultimate goal is Visnu (na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum).
When one comes to the platform of visnor aradhanam, or bhakti-yoga,
one has attained the perfection of life. Otherwise. as indicated in
Bhagavad-gita, one is not a tattva-vadi but a veda-vadi, a blind follower
of the Vedic injunctions. A veda-vadi cannot be purified from material
contamination unless he becomes a tattva-vadi, that is. one who knows
tattva, the Absolute Truth. Tattva is also experienced in three features—


--- Page 378 ---
378 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti sabdyate. Even after coming to the
platform of understanding tattva, one must worship Bhagavan. Visnu
and His expansions, or one is not yet perfect. Bahinar janmandam ante
Jranavan mam prapadyate: after many births, one who is actually in
knowledge surrenders unto Krsna. The conclusion is that unintelligent
men with a poor fund of knowledge cannot understand Bhagavan, Brah-
man or Paramatma, but after studying the Vedas and attaining the un-
derstanding of the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
one is supposed to be on the platform of perfect knowledge.
TEXT 3
न॒ বন্ধ तच्वग्रहणाय साक्षाद्‌
वरीयसीरपि वाचः समासन्‌ ।
aw निरुक्त्या गृदमेधिसोख्यं
न यख हेयानुमितं खयं स्यात्‌ ॥ २ ॥
na tasya tattva-grahandya saksad
variyasir api vacah samasan
svapne niruktya grhamedhi-saukhyarm
na yasya heyanumitari svayam syat
na—not; tasya—of him (a student studying the Vedas): tattva-
grahanaya—for accepting the real purpose of Vedic knowledge: sak-
sat—directly: variyasith—very exalted: api—although: vacah—words
of the Vedas; samasan—sufficiently became: svapne—in a dream:
niruktya—by example: grha-medhi-saukhyam—happiness within this
material world: na—not: yasya—of him who: heya-anumitam—con-
cluded to be inferior: svayam —automatically: syat—become.
TRANSLATION
A dream becomes automatically known to a person as false and
immaterial, and similarly one eventually realizes that material hap-
piness in this life or the next, on this planet or a higher planet, is
insignificant. When one realizes this, the Vedas, although an ex-


--- Page 379 ---
Text 3] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahigana 379
cellent source, are insufficient to bring about direct knowledge of
the truth.
PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (2.45), Krsna advised Arjuna to become transcen-
dental to the material activities impelled by the three material modes of
nature (traigunya-visaya veda nistraigunyo bhavarjuna). The purpose
of Vedic study is to transcend the activities of the three modes of material
nature. Of course in the material world the mode of goodness is accepted
as the best, and one can be promoted to the higher planetary systems by
being on the sattva-guna platform. However, that is not perfection. One
must come to the conclusion that even the sattva-guna platform is also
not good. One may dream that he has become a king with a good family.
wife and children, but immediately at the end of that dream he comes to
the conclusion that it is false. Similarly. all kinds of material happiness
are undesirable for a person who wants spiritual salvation. If a person
does not come to the conclusion that he has nothing to do with any kind
of material happiness, he cannot come to the platform of understanding
the Absolute Truth, or tattva-jnana. Karmis, janis and yogis are after
some material elevation. The karmis work hard day and night for some
bodily comfort, and the [दाऽ simply speculate about how to get out of
the entanglement of karma and merge into the Brahman effulgence. The
yogis are very much addicted to the acquisition of material perfection
and magical powers. All of them are trying to be materially perfect. but a
devotee very easily comes to the platform of nirguna in devotional ser-
vice. and consequently for the devotee the results of karma, jiiana and
yoga become very insignificant. Therefore only the devotee is on the
platform of tattva-jiidna, not the others. Of course the jaani’s position is
better than that of the karmi but that position is also insufficient. The
पठथ must actually become liberated. and after liberation he may be
situated in devotional service (mad-bhaktiri labhate param).

TEXT 4
যাবল্দনীা EH
स्वेन না तमसा वानुरुद्धम्‌ |


--- Page 380 ---
380 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
-
चेतोभिराकतिभिरातनोति
५ + +
निरङ्कशं शरं चेतरं angen
y@van mano rajasa purusasya
sattvena va tamasa vanuruddham
cetobhir akutibhir atanoti
nirankusam kusalam cetaram va

yavat—as long as; manah—the mind; rajasa—by the mode of pas-
sion: purusasya—of the living entity: sattvena—by the mode of good-
ness: va—or; tamasa—by the mode of darkness: va—or: anurud-
dham—controlled; cetobhih—by the knowledge-acquiring senses:
akutibhih—Dby the senses of action: atanoti—expands: nirankusam—in-
dependent like an elephant not controlled by a trident: kusalam—
auspiciousness; ca—also: itaram—other than auspiciousness, sinful
activities: v@—or.

TRANSLATION

As long as the mind of the living entity is contaminated by the
three modes of material nature (goodness, passion and ignorance),
his mind is exactly like an independent, uncontrolled elephant. It
simply expands its jurisdiction of pious and impious activities by
using the senses. The result is that the living entity remains in the
material world to enjoy and suffer pleasures and pains due to
material activity.

PURPORT

In Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that material pious and impious ac-
tivities are both opposed to the principle of devotional service. Devo-
tional service means mukti, freedom from material entanglement. but
pious and impious activities result in entanglement within this material
world. If the mind is captivated by the pious and impious activities men-
tioned in the Vedas, one remains eternally in darkness: one cannot attain
the absolute platform. To change the consciousness from ignorance to
passion or from passion to goodness does not really solve the problem. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (14.26), sa gunan samatityaitain brahma-


--- Page 381 ---
Text 5] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahagana 381
bhityaya kalpate. One must come to the transcendental platform; other-
wise life's mission is never fulfilled.
TEXT 5
स॒ वासनात्मा विषयोपरक्तो
-
गुणप्रवाहो विकृतः seman |
बिजनतफयडनाममि रूपभेद -
नि তন
मन्तबेदिष्रं च पुरस्तनोति ॥ ५॥
sa vasandtma visayoparakto
guna-pravaho vikrtah sodosatma
bibhrat prthan-namabhi rapa-bhedam
antar-bahistvari ca purais tanoti
sah—that: vasana—endowed with many desires: atma—the mind:
visaya-uparaktah—attached to material happiness. sense gratification:
guna-pravaihah—driven by the force of either sattva-guna, rajo-guna or
tamo-guna; vikrtah—transformed by lust and so on: sodasa-atma —the
chief of the sixteen material elements (the five gross elements. the ten
senses and the mind): bibhrat—wandering: prthak-namabhih—with
separate names: ripa-bhedam —assuming different forms: antah-
bahistvam—the quality of being first-class or last-class: ca—and:
purath—with different bodily forms: tanoti—manifests.
TRANSLATION
Because the mind is absorbed in desires for pious and impious
activities, it is naturally subjected to the transformations of lust
and anger. In this way, it becomes attracted to material sense en-
joyment. In other words, the mind is conducted by the modes of
goodness, passion and ignorance. There are eleven senses and five
material elements, and out of these sixteen items, the mind is the
chief. Therefore the mind brings about birth in different types of
bodies among demigods, human beings, animals and birds. When
the mind is situated in a higher or lower position, it accepts a
higher or lower material body.


--- Page 382 ---
382 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
PURPORT

Transmigration among the 8.400.000 species is due to the mind's
being polluted by certain material qualities. Due to the mind. the soul is
subjected to pious and impious activities. The continuation of material
existence is like the waves of material nature. In this regard. Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura says. mayara vase yaccha bhese’, khaccha
habudubu, bhai: “*My dear brother, the spirit soul is completely under
the control of maya, and you are being carried away by its waves.” This
is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:

prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah
ahankara-vimadhatma
kartaham iti manyate
“The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself the doer of activities, which are in ac-
tuality carried out by nature.” (Bg. 3.27)

Material existence means being fully controlled by material nature.
The mind is the center for accepting the dictations of material nature. In
this way the living entity is carried away in different types of bodies con-
tinuously. millennium after millennium.

krsna bhuli’ sei jiva anadi-bahirmukha
ataeva maya tare deya sarnsara-duhkha
(Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya 20.117)
Due to the living entity’s forgetfulness of Krsna, one is bound by the
laws of material nature.
TEXT 6
दुःखं gd व्यतिरिक्तं च तीव्रं
कालोपपन्नं फटमान्यनक्ति |
आलिङ्गय मायारवितान्तरात्मा
खदेहिनं संसृतिचक्रकूटः ॥ & ॥


--- Page 383 ---
Text 6] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahiigana 383
duhkhari sukharh vyatiriktarh ca tivram
kalopapannarin phalam avyanakti
alingya maya-racitantaratma
sva-dehinam samsrti-cakra-kitah
duhkham—unhappiness due to impious activities; sukham—happi-
ness due to pious activities; vyatiriktam—illusion; ca—also; tivram—
very severe; kdla-upapannam—obtained in the course of time;
phalam—the resultant action; dvyanakti—creates;  alingya—
embracing; maya-racita—created by material nature; antah-atma—the
mind; sva-dehinam—the living being himself; samsrti—of the actions
and reactions of material existence; cakra-kiitah—which deceives the
living entity into the wheel.
TRANSLATION
The materialistic mind covering the living entity’s soul carries it
to different species of life. This is called continued material exis-
tence. Due to the mind, the living entity suffers or enjoys material
distress and happiness. Being thus illusioned, the mind further
creates pious and impious activities and their karma, and thus the
soul becomes conditioned.
PURPORT
Mental activities under the influence of material nature cause happi-
ness and distress within the material world. Being covered by illusion.
the living entity eternally continues conditioned life under different
designations. Such living entities are known as nitya-baddha, eternally
conditioned. On the whole. the mind is the cause of conditioned life:
therefore the entire yogic process is meant to control the mind and the
senses. If the mind is controlled. the senses are automatically controlled.
and therefore the soul is saved from the reactions of pious and impious
activity. If the mind is engaged at the lotus feet of Lord Krsna (sa vai
manah krsna-padaravindayoh). the senses are automatically engaged in
the Lord's service. When the mind and senses are engaged in devotional
service. the living entity naturally becomes Krsna conscious. As soon as
one always thinks of Krsna. he becomes a perfect yogi, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (yoginam api sarvesam mad-gatenantaratmana). This


--- Page 384 ---
384 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.11
antaratmd, the mind, is conditioned by material nature. As stated here,
maya-racitantaratma sva-dehinam samsrti-cakra-kitah: the mind,
being most powerful. covers the living entity and puts him in the waves
of material existence.
TEXT 7
तावानयं व्यवहारः सदाविः
Fegan मवति स्थूलघक्ष्मः |
तस्मान्मनो लिङ्गमदो वदन्ति
गुणायुणलसख परावरस्य ॥ ७ ॥
tavan ayam vyavaharah sadavih
ksetrajiia-saksyo bhavati sthitla-saksmah
tasman mano lingam ado vadanti
gunagunatvasya paravarasya

tavan—until that time: ayam—this: vyavaharah—the artificial
designations (being fat or skinny. or belonging to the demigods or
human beings): sadd —always: @vih—manifesting: ksetra-jiia—of the
living entity: saksyah—testimony: bhavati—is: sthila-suksmah—fat
and skinny: tasmat—therefore: manah—the mind: lingam —the cause:
adah—this: vadanti—they say; guna-agunatvasya—of being absorbed
in material qualities or devoid of material qualities: para-avarasya—and
of lower and higher conditions of life.

TRANSLATION

The mind makes the living entity within this material world
wander through different species of life, and thus the living entity
experiences mundane affairs in different forms as a human being,
demigod, fat person, skinny person and so forth. Learned scholars
say that bodily appearance, bondage and liberation are caused by
the mind.

PURPORT

Just as the mind is the cause of bondage. it can also be the cause of

liberation. The mind is described here as para-avara. Para means tran-


--- Page 385 ---
Text 8] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahiigana 385
scendental, and avara means material. When the mind is engaged in the
Lord's service (sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh), it is called para,
transcendental. When the mind is engaged in material sense gratifica-
tion. it is called avara, or material. At the present moment. in our condi-
tioned state. our mind is fully absorbed in material sense gratification,
but it can be purified and brought to its original Krsna consciousness by
the process of devotional service. We have often given the example of
Ambarisa Maharaja. Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor vacarsi
vaikuntha-gunanuvarnane. The mind must be controlled in Krsna con-
sciousness. The tongue can be utilized to spread the message of Krsna
and glorify the Lord or take prasada, the remnants of food offered to
Krsna. Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau: when one utilizes the tongue in the ser-
vice of the Lord. the other senses can become purified. As stated in the
Narada-paiicaratra, sarvopadhi-vinirmuktari tat-paratvena nirmalam:
when the mind and senses are purified. one’s total existence is purified.
and one’s designations are also purified. One no longer considers himself
a human being, a demigod, cat, dog, Hindu, Muslim and so forth. When
the senses and mind are purified and one is fully engaged in Krsna's ser-
vice, one can be liberated and return home. back to Godhead.
TEXT 8
ক bo
ge व्यसनाय जन्ताः
AQ
क्षेमाय नैगुण्यमथो मनः स्यात्‌ |
यथा प्रदीपो घृतवर्तिमरनन्‌
शिखाः सधूमा मजति ह्यन्यदा खम्‌ |
पदं तथा गुणकर्मानुबद्धं
९
इत्तीमंनः श्रयतेऽन्यत्र तत्वम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
gunanuraktari vyasandya jantoh
ksemaya nairgunyam atho manah syat
yatha pradipo ghrta-vartim asnan
Sikhah sadhama bhajati hy anyada svam
padam tatha guna-karmanubaddharm
vrttir manah Srayate ‘nyatra tattvam


--- Page 386 ---
386 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11

guna-anuraktam —being attached to the material modes of nature:
vyasandya—for the conditioning in material existence: jantoh—of the
living entity: ksemdya—for the ultimate welfare: nairgunyam—being
unaffected by the material modes of nature: atho—thus: manah—the
mind: syat—becomes: yatha—as much as: pradipah—a lamp: ghrta-
vartim—a wick within clarified butter: asnan—burning: Sikhah—the
flame; sadhimah—with smoke; bhajati—enjoys; hi—certainly; an-
yada —otherwise; svam—its own original; padam —position; tath@a—so;
guna-karma-anubaddham—bound by the modes of nature and the reac-
tions of material activities; vrttth—various engagements; manah—the
mind; Srayate—takes shelter of; anyatra—otherwise; tattvam —its orig-
inal condition.

TRANSLATION

When the living entity’s mind becomes absorbed in the sense
gratification of the material world, it brings about his conditioned
life and suffering within the material situation. However, when the
mind becomes unattached to material enjoyment, it becomes the
cause of liberation. When the flame in a lamp burns the wick im-
properly, the lamp is blackened, but when the lamp is filled with
ghee and is burning properly, there is bright illumination.
Similarly, when the mind is absorbed in material sense gratifica-
tion, it causes suffering, and when detached from material sense
gratification, it brings about the original brightness of Krsna
consciousness.

PURPORT

It is therefore concluded that the mind is the cause of material exis-
tence and liberation also. Everyone is suffering in this material world
because of the mind: it is therefore proper to train the mind or to cleanse
the mind from material attachment and engage it fully in the Lord's ser-
vice. This is called spiritual engagement. As confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita:

mari ca yo *vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhizyaya kalpate


--- Page 387 ---
Text 9] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahiigana 387
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance. at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26)

We should engage the mind fully in Krsna conscious activities. Then it
will be the cause of our liberation. for our returning home, back to
Godhead. However. if we keep the mind engaged in material activities
for sense gratification. it will cause continuous bondage and will make us
remain in this material world in different bodies. suffering the conse-
quences of our different actions.

TEXT 9
एकादज्ञासन्मनसो हि वृत्तय
N
आकूतयः पश्च धियोऽभिमानः ।
ক
मात्राणि कर्माणि पुरं च तासां
वदन्ति हैकादश वीर भूमीः॥ ९॥
ekadasasan manaso hi vrttaya
akitayah paca dhiyo 'bhimanah
matrani karmani puram ca tasam
vadanti haikadasa vira bhiamih

ekadasa —eleven: asan—there are: manasah —of the mind: hi—cer-
tainly: vrttayah—activities: akittayah—senses of action: panca—fve:
dhiyah—senses for gathering knowledge: abhimanah—the false ego:
matrani—different sense objects: karmani—different material ac-
tivities: puram ca—and the body. society. nation. family or place of
nativity: tasam—of those functions: wvadanti—they say: ha—oh:
ekadasa—eleven: vira—O hero: bhamih—tields of activity.

TRANSLATION

There are five working senses and five knowledge-acquiring
senses. There is also the false ego. In this way, there are eleven
items for the mind’s functions. O hero, the objects of the senses
[such as sound and touch], the organic activities [such as


--- Page 388 ---
388 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
evacuation] and the different types of bodies, society, friendship
and personality are considered by learned scholars the fields of ac-
tivity for the functions of the mind.
PURPORT
The mind is the controller of the five knowledge-acquiring senses and
the five working senses. Each sense has its particular field of activity. In
all cases. the mind is the controller or owner. By the false ego one thinks
oneself the body and thinks in terms of "my body. my house, my family,
my society. my nation” and so on. These false identifications are due to
the expansions of the false ego. Thus one thinks that he is this or that.
Thus the living entity becomes entangled in material existence.
TEXT 10
९ .
गन्धाछृतिस्प्॒चरसभ्वांसि
विसगंरत्यत्यभिजल्पशिल्पाः ।
एकादशं स्वीकरणं _ ममेति
शय्यामहं द्वादश्चमेक आहुः ॥१०॥
gandhakrti-sparsa-rasa-sravarisi
visarga-raty-arty-abhijalpa-silpah
ekadasam svikaranam mameti
Sayyam aham dvadasam eka ahuh
gandha—smell: a@krti—form: sparsa—touch: rasa—taste: Ssra-
vamsi—and sound: visarga—evacuating: rati—sexual intercourse;
arti—movement: abhijalpa—speaking: Silpah—grasping or releasing;
ekadasam—eleventh: svikaranam—accepting as: mama—mine: iti—
thus: Sayyam—this body: aham—I: dvadasam—twelfth: eke—some:
ahuh—have said.
TRANSLATION
Sound, touch, form, taste and smell are the objects of the five
knowledge-acquiring senses. Speech, touch, movement, evacua-
tion and sexual intercourse are the objects of the working senses.


--- Page 389 ---
Text 11] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahugana 389
Besides this, there is another conception by which one thinks,
“This is my body, this is my society, this is my family, this is my
nation,’ and so forth. This eleventh function, that of the mind, is
called the false ego. According to some philosophers, this is the
twelfth function, and its field of activity is the body.
PURPORT
There are different objects for the eleven items. Through the nose we
can smell, by the eyes we can see, by the ears we can hear. and in this
way we gather knowledge. Similarly, there are the karmendriyas, the
working senses —the hands. legs, genitals. rectum. mouth and so forth.
When the false ego expands. it makes one think. “This is my body.
family, society, country.” etc.
TEXT 11
& aA
द्रव्यस्वमावराज्ञयकमककि
रेकादश्चामी मनसो वषिकाराः ।
-
सहस्रशः হালহাঃ www
LN
Jagat न पिथो न खतः स्युः 1220
dravya-svabhavasaya-karma-kalair
ekadasami manaso vikarah
sahasrasah satasah kotisas ca
ksetrajinato na mitho na svatah syuh
dravya—by physical objects: sva-bhava—by nature as the cause of
development: asaya—by culture: karma —by predestined resultant ac-
tions: kalaith—by time: ekadasa—eleven: ami—all these: manasah—of
the mind: wvikarah—transformations: sahasrasah—in thousands:
Satasah—in hundreds: kotiSah ca—and in millions: ksetra-jiatah—
from the original Supreme Personality of Godhead: na—not: mithah—
one another: na—nor: svatah—from themselves: syuh—are.
TRANSLATION
The physical elements, nature, the original cause, culture,
destiny and the time element are all material causes. Agitated by


--- Page 390 ---
390 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
these material causes, the eleven functions transform into
hundreds of functions and then into thousands and then into
millions. But all these transformations do not take place auto-
matically by mutual combination. Rather, they are under the
direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT

One should not think that all the interactions of the physical elements,
gross and subtle. that cause the transformation of mind and conscious-
ness are working independently. They are under the direction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita (15.15). Krsna says
that the Lord 15 situated in everyones heart (sarvasya caham hrdi san-
nivisto mattah smrtir jignam apohanam ca). As mentioned herein,
Supersoul (ksetrajiia) is directing everything. The living entity is also
ksetrajiia, but the supreme ksetrajiia is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is the witness and order giver. Under His direction, every-
thing takes place. The different inclinations of the living entity are cre-
ated by his own nature or his expectations, and he is trained by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead through the agency of material nature.
The body, nature and the physical elements are under the direction of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They do not function auto-
matically. Nature is neither independent nor automatic. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is behind nature.

mayadhyaksena prakrtih
sityate sa-caracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
Jagad viparivartate
“This material nature is working under My direction. O son of (पात.
and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this
manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.” (Bg. 9.10)
TEXT 12
कषेत्रज्ञ एता मनसो विमूती-
जीवस्य मायारचितस्य नित्याः ।


--- Page 391 ---
Text 12] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahiigana 391
आविर्हिताः क्रापि तिरोहिता
शुद्धो विचष्टे afiggwd: । १२॥
(९८/70 eta manaso vibhiitir
Jivasya maya-racitasya nityah
avirhitah kvapi tirohitas ca
Suddho vicaste hy avisuddha-kartuh

ksetra-jiah—the individual soul; et@h—all these: manasah—of the
mind: wvibhitth—different activities: jivasya—of the living entity:
madya-racitasya—created by the external, material energy: nityah—
from time immemorial: avirhitdh—sometimes manifested: kvapi—
somewhere: tirohitdh ca—and not manifested: Suddhah—purified:
vicaste—sees this: hi—certainly: aviSuddha—unpurified: kartuh—of
the doer.

TRANSLATION

The individual soul bereft of Krsna consciousness has many
ideas and activities created in the mind by the external energy.
They have been existing from time immemorial. Sometimes they
are manifest in the wakening state and in the dream state, but dur-
ing deep sleep [unconsciousness] or trance, they disappear. A per-
son who is liberated in this life [jivan-mukta] can see all these
things vividly.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (13.3). ksetrajiam capi mam viddhi
sarva-ksetresu bharata. There are two kinds of ksetrajia, or living
beings. One is the individual living being. and the other is the supreme
living being. The ordinary living being knows about his body to some ex-
tent. but the Supreme. Paramatma. knows the condition of all bodies.
The individual living being is localized. and the Supreme. Paramatma. is
all-pervading. In this Sloka the word ksetrajria refers to an ordinary liv-
ing being. not the supreme living being. This ordinary living being is of
two kinds —nitya-baddha or nitya-mukta. One is eternally conditioned
and the other eternally liberated. The eternally liberated living beings


--- Page 392 ---
392 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
are in the Vaikuntha jagat, the spiritual world. and they never fall into
the material world. Those in the material world are conditioned souls,
nitya-baddha. The nitya-baddhas can become liberated by controlling
the mind because the cause of conditioned life is the mind. When the
mind is trained and the soul is not under the mind’s control. the soul can
be liberated even in this material world. When it is liberated, one is
called jivan-mukta. A jivan-mukta knows how he has become condi-
tioned: therefore he tries to purify himself and return home. back to
Godhead. The eternally conditioned soul is eternally conditioned because
he is controlled by the mind. The conditioned state and liberated state are
compared to the sleeping. unconscious state and the awakened state.
Those who are sleeping and unconscious are eternally conditioned. but
those who are awake understand that they are eternally part and parcel
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna. Therefore even in this
material world. they engage in Krsna's service. As confirmed by Srila
Rapa Gosvami: tha yasya harer dasye. 11 one takes to Krsna's service, he
is liberated, even though he appears to be a conditioned soul within the
material world. Jivan-muktah sa ucyate. In any condition. one is to be
considered liberated if his only business is to serve Krsna.
TEXTS 13-14
कषेत्रज्ञ आत्मा पुरुषः पुराणः
साक्षात्खयंज्योतिरजः RE: |
नारायणो भगवान्‌ वासुदेवः
खमाययाऽऽत्मन्यवधीयमानः ॥१३॥
यथानिलः स्यावरजज्गमाना-
मात्मखरूपेण निविष्ट ईशेत्‌ ।
एवं परो भगवान्‌ वासुदेवः
QA आत्मेद मुप्रविष्टः 112201
ksetrajiia atma purusah puranah
saksat svayarn jyotir ajah paresah
narayano bhagavan vasudevah
sva-mayayatmany avadhiyamanah


--- Page 393 ---
Text 14] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahiigana 393
yathanilah sthavara-jarigamanam
atma-svaripena nivista iset
evar paro bhagavan vasudevah
ksetrajiia atmedam anupravistah

ksetra-jiah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead": atma—all-
pervading. present everywhere: purusah—the unrestricted controller,
who has unlimited power: puranah—the original: saksat—perceivable
by hearing from the authorities and by direct perception: svayam—per-
sonal: jyotih—manifesting His bodily rays (the Brahman effulgence):
ajah—never born: paresah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
narayanah—the resting place of all living entities: bhagavan—the Per-
sonality of Godhead with six full opulences: vasudevah—the shelter of
everything. manifested and nonmanifest: sva-mayaya—by His own
potency: atmani—in His own self. or in the ordinary living entities:
avadhiyamanah—existing as the controller: yathda—as much as;
anilah—the air:  sthavara—of nonmoving living entities:
Jjanigamanam—and of the moving living entities; dtma-svaripena—
by His expansion as the Supersoul: nivistah—entered: iset—controls:
evam —thus: parah—transcendental: bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead: vdsudevah—the shelter of everything: ksetra-
Jjaiah—known as ksetrajia; atma—the vital force: idam —this material
world: anupravistah—entered within.

TRANSLATION

There are two kinds of ksetrajna—the living entity, as explained
above, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is explained
as follows. He is the all-pervading cause of creation. He is full in
Himself and is not dependent on others. He is perceived by hear-
ing and direct perception. He is self-effulgent and does not ex-
perience birth, death, old age or disease. He is the controller of all
the demigods, beginning with Lord Brahma. He is called Narayana,
and He is the shelter of living entities after the annihilation of this
material world. He is full of all opulences, and He is the resting
“In text 12 the word ksetrajiia described the living being. but in this
verse the word ksetrajiia indicates the Supreme Person.


--- Page 394 ---
394 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
place of everything material. He is therefore known as Vasudeva,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By His own potency, He is
present within the hearts of all living entities, just as the air or
vital force is within the bodies of all beings, moving and nonmov-
ing. In this way He controls the body. In His partial feature, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead enters all bodies and controls
them.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (15.15). Sarvasya cahar hrdi
sannivisto mattah smrtir jidnam apohanam ca. Every living being is
controlled by the supreme living being, Paramatma. who resides within
everyone's heart. He is the purusa, the purusa-avatara, who creates this
material world. The first purusa-avatara is Maha- Visnu. and that Maha-
Visnu is the plenary portion of the plenary portion of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Krsna. Krsna's first expansion is Baladeva. and His
next expansions are Vasudeva. Sankarsana, Aniruddha and Pradyumna.
Vasudeva is the original cause of the brahmajyoti, and the brahmajyoti is
the expansion of the rays of the body of Vasudeva.
yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti-
kotisv asesa-vasudhadi-vibhiiti-bhinnam
tad brahma niskalam anantam asesa-bhiitarn
govindam adi-purusam tam aharih bhajami
=] worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great
power. The glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is the imper-
sonal Brahman, which is absolute, complete and unlimited and which
displays the varieties of countless planets, with their different opulences,
in millions and millions of universes.” (Brahma-sarihita 5.40) The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is thus described in Bhagavad-gita:
maya tatam 1027 sarvariu
10800 avyakta-martina
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
na caham tesv avasthitah


--- Page 395 ---
Text 15] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahiagana 395
“By Me. in My unmanifested form. this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me. but [ am not in them.” (Bg. 9.4)
This is the position of the plenary expansions of Krsna as the all-
pervading Vasudeva. Sankarsana. Pradyumna and Aniruddha.
TEXT 15
न यावदेतां तनुभृन्नरेन्द्र
विधूय मायां वयुनोदयेन ।
विधरुक्तसङ्गो जितषट्‌ूसपलो
वेदात्मतचं भ्रमतीह तावत्‌ ॥१५॥
na yavad 61277) tanu-bhrn narendra
vidhitya mayam vayunodayena
vimukta-sarngo jita-sat-sapatno
vedatma-tattvarh bhramatiha tavat
na—not: yavat—as long as: etam—this: tanu-bhrt—one who has ac-
cepted a material body: narendra—O King: vidhitya mayam—washing
away the infection accumulated because of contamination by the material
world: vayuna udayena—by awakening of transcendental knowledge
due to good association and study of the Vedic literatures: vimukta-
sangah—free from all material association: jita-sat-sapatnah—conquer-
ing the six enemies (the five knowledge-acquiring senses and the mind):
veda—knows: datma-tattvam—spiritual truth: bhramati—he wanders:
tha—in this material world: tavat—until that time.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Rahugana, as long as the conditioned soul accepts
the material body and is not freed from the contamination of
material enjoyment, and as long as he does not conquer his six
enemies and come to the platform of self-realization by awakening
his spiritual knowledge, he has to wander among different places
and different species of life in this material world.


--- Page 396 ---
396 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 11
PURPORT
When one’s mind is absorbed in the material conception. he thinks
that he belongs to a particular nation, family, country or creed. These are
all called upadhis, designations. and one has to become freed from them
(sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam). As long as one is not freed. he has to con-
tinue conditioned life in material existence. The human form of life is
meant for cleansing away these misconceptions. If this is not done. one
has to repeat the cycle of birth and death and thus suffer all material
conditions.
TEXT 16
न॒ यावदेतन्मन आत्मलिङ्गं
संसारतापावपन जनस्य |
- -
यच्छोकमोहामयरागलोभ-
2 + =
वेराचुबन्धं ममतां पिधत्ते ॥१६॥
na yavad etan mana atma-lingarn
samsara-tapavapanam janasya
yac choka-mohamaya-raga-lobha-
vairanubandharm mamatam vidhatte
na—not; yavat—as long as: etat—this: manah—mind: datma-
lingam —existing as the false designation of the soul: sarsara-tapa—of
the miseries of this material world; avapanam—the growing ground:
janasya—of the living being: yat—which: Soka—of lamentation:
moha—of illusion: amaya—of disease: raga —of attachment: lobha —of
greed: vaira—of enmity: anubandham—the consequence: mamatam—
the sense of ownership: vidhatte —gives.
TRANSLATION
The soul’s designation, the mind, is the cause of all tribulations
in the material world. As long as this fact is unknown to the condi-
tioned living entity, he has to accept the miserable condition of the
material body and wander within this universe in different posi-
tions. Because the mind is affected by disease, lamentation, illu-


--- Page 397 ---
Text 17] Jada Bharata Instructs King Rahigana 397
sion, attachment, greed and enmity, it creates bondage and a false
sense of intimacy within this material world.
PURPORT
The mind is the cause of both material bondage and liberation. The
impure mind thinks, "I am this body.” The pure mind knows that he is
not the material body: therefore the mind is considered to be the root of
all material designations. Until the living entity is aloof from the associ-
ation and contaminations of this material world. the mind will be
absorbed in such material things as birth. death. disease. illusion. attach-
ment, greed and enmity. In this way the living entity is conditioned. and
he suffers material miseries.
TEXT 17
भ्राठव्यमेनं तददभ्रवी्य-
gga maga:
- C -
TARANEH
जहि व्यलीकं सखयमात्ममोषम्‌ ॥१७॥
bhratrvyam enarn tad adabhra-viryam
upeksayadhyedhitam apramattah
guror hares caranopasanastro
jahi vyalikarh svayam atma-mosam
bhratrvyam—the formidable enemy: enam—this mind: tat—that:
adabhra-viryam —very. very powerful: upeksaya—by neglecting:
adhyedhitam—unnecessarily increased in power: apramattah—one who
15 without illusion: guroh—of the spiritual master: hareh—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead: carana—of the lotus feet: updsana-
astrah—applying the weapon of worshiping: jahi—conquer:
vyalikam —false: svayam —personally: atma-mosam—which covers the
constitutional position of the living entity.
TRANSLATION
This uncontrolled mind is the greatest enemy of the living en-
tity. If one neglects it or gives it a chance, it will grow more and


--- Page 398 ---
398 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.11
more powerful and will become victorious. Although it is not fac-
tual, it is very strong. It covers the constitutional position of the
soul. O King, please try to conquer this mind by the weapon of ser-
vice to the lotus feet of the spiritual master and of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Do this with great care.
PURPORT

There is one easy weapon with which the mind can be conquered —
neglect. The mind is always telling us to do this or that: therefore we
should be very expert in disobeying the mind's orders. Gradually the
mind should be trained to obey the orders of the soul. It is not that one
should obey the orders of the mind. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thiakura used to say that to control the mind one should beat it with
shoes many times just after awakening and again before going to sleep.
In this way one can control the mind. This is the instruction of all the
5050705. If one does not do so. one is doomed to follow the dictations of the
mind. Another bona fide process is to abide strictly by the orders of the
spiritual master and engage in the Lord's service. Then the mind will be
automatically controlled. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has instructed Srila
Ripa Gosvami:

brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija

When one receives the seed of devotional service by the mercy of the
guru and Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. one’s real life
begins. If one abides by the orders of the spiritual master. by the grace of
Krsna he is freed from service to the mind.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eleventh
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘Jada Bharata Instructs
King Rahigana.”


--- Page 399 ---
CHAPTER TWELVE

Conversation Between
Maharaja Rahiigana and Jada Bharata
Because Maharaja Rahtigana was still doubtful about his enlightenment.
he asked the brahmana Jada Bharata to repeat his instructions and
clarify ideas he could not understand. In this chapter, Maharaja
Rahugana offers his respectful obeisances to Jada Bharata. who was con-
cealing his real position. The King could understand by his speech how
exalted and advanced he was in spiritual knowledge. He very much
regretted his offense against him. Maharaja Rahtagana was bitten by the
serpent of ignorance, but was cured by the nectarean words of Jada
Bharata. Later, because he was doubtful about tke subjects discussed. he
made further inquiries, one question after another. First he wanted to be
released from the offense he had committed at the lotus feet of Jada
Bharata.

Maharaja Rahagana was somewhat unhappy at not being able to grasp
Jada Bharata’s instructions, which were full of meaning that could not be
understood by a materialistic person. Therefore Jada Bharata repeated
his instructions more clearly. He said that on the surface of the globe all
living entities, moving and unmoving. were but transformations of the
earth in different ways. The King was very proud of his king's body. but
that body was simply another transformation of the earth. Out of his
false prestige. the King was misbehaving toward the palanquin carrier.
as a master toward a servant. and he was actually very unkind to other
living entities. Consequently King Rahtigana was unfit to give protection
to the citizens. and because he was ignorant. he was unfit to be counted
among advanced philosophers. Everything in the material world is but a
transformation of the earth. although things have different names ac-
cording to their transformations. Actually the varieties are one and the
same, and ultimately all these varieties are vanquished into atoms.
Nothing is permanent in this material world. The variety of things and
their distinctions are simply mental concoctions. The Absolute Truth is
beyond illusion and is manifest in three features —impersonal Brahman.

399


--- Page 400 ---
400 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
localized Paramitma and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ultimate
realization of the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
called Vasudeva by His devotees. Unless one is blessed with the dust
from the feet of a pure devotee on his head. one cannot possibly become a
devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Jada Bharata also told about his own previous birth and informed the
King that by the grace of the Lord he still remembered all the incidents
of his past life. Due to the activities of his past life. Jada Bharata was
being very cautious and was therefore assuming the characteristics of a
deaf and dumb man to avoid mingling with the material world. Associ-
ation with the material modes of nature is very powerful. The bad associ-
ation of materialistic men can be avoided only in the association of
devotees. In the association of devotees, one is given an opportunity to
render devotional service in nine different ways—Sravanari 16871071011
visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam arcanari vandanam dasyam sakhyam
atma-nivedanam. In this way. in the association of devotees, one can pass
over material association, cross over the ocean of nescience and return
home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 1
TEIN उवाच
नमो नमः कारणविग्रहाय
खरूपतुच्छीकृतविग्रहाय |
नमोऽवधूत दिजबन्धुलिङ्ख-
निगूढनित्यानुभवाय तुभ्यम्‌ UL
rahiigana uvaca
namo namah karana-vigrahaya
svaripa-tucchikrta-vigrahaya
namo "vadhiita dvija-bandhu-linga-
nigidha-nityanubhavaya tubhyam

rahiganah uvaca—King Rahagana said; namah—my respectful
obeisances: namah—obeisances: karana-vigrahaya—to one whose body
emanates from the Supreme Person. the cause of all causes: svaripa-


--- Page 401 ---
Text 2] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 401
tucchikrta-vigrahaya—who has completely removed all the contradic-
tions of the scriptures by manifesting his true self: namah—respectful
obeisances: avadhita—O master of all mystic power: dvija-bandhu-
linga—by the characteristics of a person born in a brahmana family but
not executing the duties of a brahmana; nigidha—covered: nitya-
anubhavaya—to him whose eternal self-realization: tubhyam—to you.
TRANSLATION
King Rahaigana said: O most exalted personality, you are not
different from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By the in-
fluence of your true self, all kinds of contradiction in the $astras
have been removed. In the dress of a friend of a brahmana, you are
hiding your transcendental blissful position. I offer my respectful
obeisances unto you.
PURPORT
From the Brahma-sarihita we understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the cause of all causes (sarva-karana-karanam). Rsabhadeva
was the direct incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. the
cause of all causes. His son. Bharata Maharaja, who was now acting as the
brahmana Jada Bharata, had received his body from the cause of all
causes. Therefore he is addressed as karana-vigrahaya.
TEXT 2
ज्वरामयातस्य यथागदं सत्‌
निदाषदग्धसख यथा हिमाम्भः |
कदेहमानादिविदष्टच््टेः
रहमान्‌ वचस्तेऽमरनमौषधं AN
Jvaramayartasya yathagadarn sat
nidagha-dagdhasya yatha himambhah
kudeha-manahi-vidasta-drsteh
brahman vacas te ’'mrtam ausadharn me
jvara—of a fever: amaya—by the disease: artasya—of a distressed
person: yatha —just as: agadam—the medicine: sat—right: nidagha-


--- Page 402 ---
402 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
dagdhasya—of one scorched by the heat of the sun: yatha—just as:
hima-ambhah—very cold water: ku-deha—in this body made of matter
and full of dirty things such as stool and urine: mana—of pride: ahi—
by the serpent: vidasta—bitten: drsteh—of one whose vision: brah-
man—O best of the brahmanas; vacah—words: te—your: amrtam—
nectar: ausadham —medicine: me —for me.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brahmanas, my body is filled with dirty things, and
my vision has been bitten by the serpent of pride. Due to my
material conceptions, I am diseased. Your nectarean instructions
are the proper medicine for one suffering from such a fever, and
they are cooling waters for one scorched by the heat.
PURPORT
The conditioned soul has a body full of dirty things—bones, blood,
urine, stool and so forth. Nonetheless, the most intelligent men in this
material world think they are these combinations of blood, bone, urine
and stool. If this is so, why can’t other intelligent men be made with
these ingredients, which are so readily available? The entire world is
going on under the bodily conception and creating a hellish condition un-
fit for any gentleman's living. The instructions given to King Rahtigana
by Jada Bharata are very valuable. They are like the medicine that can
save one from a snakebite. The Vedic instructions are like nectar and cool
water for one suffering from scorching heat.
TEXT 3
तसाद्भबन्तं মদ संशयार्थे
्र्ष्यामि TARGA सुबोधम्‌ |
अध्यात्मयोगग्रथितं  तवोक्त-
माख्याहि कोतृहलचेतसो मे ॥ ३ ॥
tasmad bhavantarh mama sarsayartham
praksyami pascad adhuna subodham


--- Page 403 ---
Text 3] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 403
adhyatma-yoga-grathitamn tavoktam
akhyahi kautihala-cetaso me

tasmat—therefore: bhavantam—to you: mama—of me: sarmsaya-
artham—the subject matter that is not clear to me: praksyami—I shall
submit: pascat—afterwards: adhund—now: su-bodham—so that it can
be clearly understood: adhyatma-yoga—of mystic instruction for self-
realization: grathitam—as composed: tava—your: uktam—speech:
akhyahi—please explain again: kautithala-cetasah—whose mind is very
inquisitive to understand the mystery of such statements; me—to me.

TRANSLATION

Whatever doubts I have about a particular subject matter I shall
ask you about later. For the time being, these mysterious yoga in-
structions you have given me for self-realization appear very
difficult to understand. Please repeat them in a simple way so that I
can understand them. My mind is very inquisitive, and I want to
understand this clearly.

PURPORT

The Vedic literature instructs: tasmad gurum prapadyeta jifidasuh
Sreya uttamam. An intelligent man must be very inquisitive to know the
transcendental science deeply. Therefore one must approach a guru, a
spiritual master. Although Jada Bharata explained everything to
Maharaja Rahiigana. it appears that his intelligence was not perfect
enough to understand clearly. He therefore requested a further explana-
tion. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.34): tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevayd. The student must approach a spiritual master and
surrender unto him fully (pranipatena). He must also question him in
order to understand his instructions (pariprasnena). One should not only
surrender to the spiritual master but also render loving service unto him
(sevaya) so that the spiritual master will be pleased with the student and
explain the transcendental subject matter more clearly. A challenging
spirit before the spiritual master should be avoided if one is at all in-
terested in learning the Vedic instructions in depth.


--- Page 404 ---
404 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
TEXT 4
यदाह योगेश्वर दश्यमानं
क्रियाफलं सदृव्यवहारमूलम्‌ ।
न॒ হাস্সঘা तच्वविमर्श॑नाय
WAGE সমন मनो मे॥ ४॥
yad aha yogesvara 015) 07710712077
kriya-phalanm sad-vyavahara-miilam
na hy anjasa tattva-vimarsanaya
bhavan amusmin bhramate mano me
yat—that which; @dha—have said; yoga-iSvara—O master of mystic
power: dr§yamdanam—being clearly seen; kriya-phalam—the results of
moving the body here and there, such as feeling fatigue; sat—existing;
vyavahara-mitllam —whose basis is etiquette alone; na—not; hi—cer-
tainly; anjasa—on the whole, or in fact: tattva-vimarsandya—for un-
derstanding the truth by consultation; bhavan—your good self;
amusmin—in that explanation: bhramate—is bewildered; manah—
mind: me—my.
TRANSLATION
O master of yogic power, you said that fatigue resulting from
moving the body here and there is appreciated by direct percep-
tion, but actually there is no fatigue. It simply exists as a matter of
formality. By such inquiries and answers, no one can come to the
conclusion of the Absolute Truth. Because of your presentation of
this statement, my mind is a little disturbed.
PURPORT
Formal inquiries and answers about the bodily conception do not con-
stitute knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Knowledge of the Absolute
Truth is quite different from the formal understanding of bodily pains
and pleasures. In Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna informs Arjuna that the
pains and pleasures experienced in relation to the body are temporary;
they come and go. One should not be disturbed by them but should toler-
ate them and continue with spiritual realization.


--- Page 405 ---
Text 6] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 405
TEXTS 5-6
नराद्मण उवाच
अयं जनो नाम चलन्‌ gist
यः पार्थिवः पार्थिव कस हेतोः ।
तस्यापि चाङ्घ्योरधि गुल्फजद्गा-
जानरुमभ्योरशिरोधरांसाः ॥ ५॥
अंसेऽधि दीं शितरिका च यथ्यां
सौवीरराजेत्यपदेश आस्ते |
यिन्‌ भवान्‌ रूढनिजाभिमानो
राजासि सिन्धुष्विति दुमदान्धः ॥ ६ ॥
brahmana uvaca
aya jano nama calan prthivyam
yah parthivah parthiva kasya hetoh
tasyapi canghryor adhi gulpha-jangha-
janaru-madhyora-sirodhararmsah
arse 'dhi darvi sibika ca yasyam
sauvira-rajety apadesa aste
yasmin bhavan rudha-nijabhimano
rajasmi sindhusv iti durmadandhah
brahmanah uvaca—the brahmana said: ayam—this: janah—person:
nama —celebrated as such: calan—moving; prthivyam—on the earth:
yah—who: parthivah—a transformation of the earth: parthiva—O
King. who possesses a similar earthly body: kasya—for what: hetoh—
reason: tasya api—of him also; ca—and: anghryoh—feet: adhi—
above: gulpha—ankles: jarigha—calves: janu—knees: uru—thighs:
madhyora—waist: Sirah-dhara—neck: arsah—shoulders: armse—
shoulder: adhi—upon: darvi—made of wood: $ibika —palanquin: ca—
and: yasyam—on which: sauvira-raja—the King of Sauvira: iti—thus:
apadesah—known as: aste—there is: yasmin—in which: bhavan—
Your Lordship; ridha—imposed upon; nija-abhimanah—having a


--- Page 406 ---
406 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
conception of false prestige; raja asmi—I am the King; sindhusu—in the
state of Sindhu; iti—thus; durmada-andhah—captivated by false
prestige.
TRANSLATION

The self-realized brahmana Jada Bharata said: Among the
various material combinations and permutations, there are various
forms and earthly transformations. For some reason, these move
on the surface of the earth and are called palanquin carriers. Those
material transformations which do not move are gross material ob-
jects like stones. In any case, the material body is made of earth
and stone in the form of feet, ankles, calves, knees, thighs, torso,
throat and head. Upon the shoulders is the wooden palanquin, and
within the palanquin is the so-called King of Sauvira. The body of
the King is simply another transformation of earth, but within that
body Your Lordship is situated and falsely thinking that you are
the King of the state of Sauvira.

PURPORT

After analyzing the material bodies of the palanquin carrier and the
palanquin passenger, Jada Bharata concludes that the real living force is
the living entity. The living entity is the offshoot or offspring of Lord
Visnu: therefore within this material world, among moving and non-
moving things, the real principle is Lord Visnu. Due to His presence.
everything is working, and there are actions and reactions. One who un-
derstands Lord Visnu as the original cause of everything is to be under-
stood to be perfectly situated in knowledge. Although he was falsely
proud of being a king. King Rahiigana was not really situated in
knowledge. Therefore he was rebuking the palanquin carriers. including
the self-realized brahmana, Jada Bharata. This is the first accusation
Jada Bharata made against the King, who was daring to talk to a learned
brahmana from the flimsy ground of ignorance. identifying everything
with matter. King Rahiigana argued that the living entity is within the
body and that when the body is fatigued the living entity within must
therefore be suffering. It is clearly explained in the following verses that
the living entity does not suffer due to the body's fatigue. Srila
Viévanatha Cakravarti gives an example of a child heavily decorated


--- Page 407 ---
Text 7] Rahuigana Converses with Jada Bharata 407
with ornaments: although the child's body is very delicate, he does not
feel fatigue. nor do the parents think that his ornaments should be taken
away. The living entity has nothing to do with bodily pains and
pleasures. These are simply mental concoctions. An intelligent man will
find the original cause of everything. Material combinations and per-
mutations may be a matter of fact in worldly dealings, but actually the
living force. the soul, has nothing to do with them. Those who are
materially upset take care of the body and manufacture daridra-
narayana (poor Narayana). However, it is not a fact that the soul or
Supersoul becomes poor simply because the body is poor. These are the
statements of ignorant people. The soul and Supersoul are always apart
from bodily pleasure and pain.
TEXT 7
श्ोच्यानिमांस्स्वमधिकषटदीनान्‌
विष्टथा _ निगृहनिरनुग्रहोऽसि ।
जनस्य गोप्तासि विकत्थमानो
न॒ शोमसे IgE T=: lel)
Socyan imams tvam adhikasta-dinan
vistya nigrhnan niranugraho ’si
Janasya goptasmi vikatthamano
na Sobhase vrddha-sabhasu dhrstah
Socyan—lamentable: iman—all these: tvam—you: adhi-kasta-
dinan—poor persons suffering more pains because of their poverty-
stricken position: vistya—by force: nigrhnan—seizing: niranugrahah
asi—you have no mercy in your heart: janasya—of the people in
general: gopta asmi—1 am the protector (king): vikatthamanah—brag-
ging: na Sobhase—you do not look very good: vrddha-sabhasu—in the
society of learned persons: dhrstah—simply impudent.
TRANSLATION
It is a fact, however, that these innocent people carrying your

palanquin without payment are certainly suffering due to this


--- Page 408 ---
408 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
injustice. Their condition is very lamentable because you have
forcibly engaged them in carrying your palanquin. This proves
that you are cruel and unkind, yet due to false prestige you were
thinking that you were protecting the citizens. This is ludicrous.
You were such a fool that you could not have been adored as a
great man in an assembly of persons advanced in knowledge.
PURPORT

King 1২311063118 was proud of being king, and he felt he had the right
to control the citizens as he liked, but actually he was engaging men in
carrying his palanquin without payment, and therefore he was causing
them trouble without reason. Nonetheless, the King was thinking that he
was the protector of the citizens. Actually the king should be the repre-
sentative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For this reason he is
called nara-devata, the Lord among human beings. However. when a
king thinks that because he is the head of the state, he can utilize the
citizens for his sense gratification, he is in error. Such an attitude is not
appreciated by learned scholars. According to the Vedic principles, the
king should be advised by learned sages, brahmanas and scholars, who
advise him according to the injunctions given in the dharma-sastra. The
duty of the king is to follow these instructions. Learned circles do not ap-
preciate the king's utilizing publicendeavor for his own benefit. His duty
is to give protection to the citizens instead. The king should not become
such a rogue that he exploits the citizens for his own benefit.

It is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam that in Kali-yuga the heads of
government will be plunderers and thieves. These thieves and plun-
derers take the money and property of the public by force or connivance.
Therefore it is said in Srimad-Bhdgavatam, rajanyair nirghrnair dasyu-
dharmabhih. As Kali-yuga advances, we can see that these charac-
teristics are already visible. We can certainly imagine how deteriorated
human civilization will be by the end of Kali-yuga. Indeed. there will no
longer be a sane man capable of understanding God and our relationship
with Him. In other words, human beings will be just like animals. At that
time, in order to reform human society, Lord Krsna will come in the
form of the Kalki avatara. His business will be to kill all the atheists
because ultimately the real protector is Visnu, or Krsna.

The Lord incarnates and sets things in order when things are


--- Page 409 ---
Text 8] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 409
mismanaged by so-called kings and heads of government. As Krsna says
in Bhagavad-gita, yada yada hi dharmasya glanir bhavati bharata. Of
course this takes many years, but the principle is there. When the king
or governmental head does not follow the proper principles, nature deals
out the punishments in the forms of war, famine and so forth. Therefore
if the governmental head is not aware of life’s goal, he should not take
charge of ruling the people. Actually the supreme proprietor of every-
thing is Lord Visnu. He is the maintainer of everyone. The king, the
father, and the guardian are simply representatives of Lord Visnu, em-
powered by Him to look after the management and maintain things. It is
therefore the duty of the head of the state to maintain the general
populace in such a way that people will ultimately know the goal of life.
Na te viduh svartha-gatirn hi visnum. Unfortunately the foolish govern-
mental head and the general populace do not know that the ultimate goal
of life is to understand and approach Lord Visnu. Without this
knowledge, everyone is in ignorance, and all society is crowded with
cheaters and cheated.
TEXT 8
यदा क्षितावेव चराचरस्य
विदाम निष्ठं प्रमवं च नित्यम्‌ ।
तनामतोऽन्यद्‌ व्यवदारमूलं
निरूप्यतां सतुक्रिययानुमेयम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
yada ksitav eva caracarasya
vidama nisthar prabhavar ca nityam
tan namato 'nyad vyavahara-malam
nirapyatam sat-kriyayanumeyam
yada—therefore: ksitau—in the earth: eva—certainly: cara-
acarasya—of different bodies, some moving and some not moving:
vidama—we know: nistham—annihilation: prabhavam—appearance:
ca—and: nityam—regularly by the principles of nature: tat—that:
namatah—than simply by name: anyat—other: vyavahara-milam—
cause of material activities: niripyatam—Ilet it be ascertained: sat-
kriyaya—by actual employment: anumeyam—to be inferred.


--- Page 410 ---
410 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
TRANSLATION

All of us on the surface of the globe are living entities in
different forms. Some of us are moving and some not moving. All
of us come into existence, remain for some time and are annihi-
lated when the body is again mingled with the earth. We are all
simply different transformations of the earth. Different bodies and
capacities are simply transformations of the earth that exist in
name only, for everything grows out of the earth and when every-
thing is annihilated it again mingles with the earth. In other
words, we are but dust, and we shall but be dust. Everyone can
consider this point.

PURPORT

In the Brahma-sitra it is said: tad-ananyatvam agrabhambhana-sab-
dadibhyah (2.1.14). This cosmic manifestation is a mixture of matter
and spirit, but the cause is the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Therefore in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.20) it is
said: 70077 hi viva bhagavan ivetarah. The entire cosmic manifesta-
tion is but a transformation of the energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but because of illusion, no one can appreciate that God is non-
different from the material world. Actually He is not different, but this
material world is simply a transformation of His different energies:
parasya saktir vividhaiva srivyate. There are also other versions of this in
the Vedas: sarvam khalv ida brahma. Matter and spirit are all non-
different from the Supreme Brahman, Bhagavan. Lord Sri Krsna con-
firms this statement in the Bhagavad-gita (7.4): me bhinna prakrtir
astadha. The material energy is Krsna’s energy. but it is separated from
Him. The spiritual energy is also His energy, but it is not separated from
Him. When the material energy is engaged in the service of the Supreme
Spirit, so-called material energy is also transformed into spiritual energy,
just as an iron rod becomes fire when placed in contact with fire. When
we can understand by an analytical study that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is the cause of all causes, our knowledge is perfect. Simply
understanding the transformations of different energies is partial
knowledge. We must come to the ultimate cause. Na te viduh svartha
gatirn hi visnum. The knowledge of those who are not interested in
knowing the original cause of all emanations is never perfect knowledge.


--- Page 411 ---
Text 9] Rahugana Converses with Jada Bharata 411
There is nothing in the phenomenal world that is not produced by the
supreme energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Aromas from
the earth are different scents manufactured and used for different pur-
poses, but the original cause is the earth, nothing else. A waterpot made
of earth can be used to carry water for some time. but ultimately the pot
is nothing but earth. Therefore there is no difference between the pot
and its original ingredient, earth. It is simply a different transformation
of the energy. Originally the cause or primary ingredient is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and the varieties are only by-products. In the
Chandogya Upanisad it is stated: yatha saumy ekena mrt-pindena sar-
vam mramayari vijiatarn syad vacarambhasiam vikaro namadheyam
mrttikety eva satyam. If one studies the earth, he naturally understands
the by-products of the earth. The Vedas therefore enjoin, yasmin vijiate
sarvam evar vijiidatarn bhavati: if one simply understands the original
cause, Krsna, the cause of all causes. then naturally everything else is
understood, although it may be presented in different varieties. By un-
derstanding the original cause of different varieties, one can understand
everything. If we understand Krsna, the original cause of everything. we
do not need to separately study the subsidiary varieties. Therefore from
the very beginning it is said: satyam parar dhimahi. One has to con-
centrate one’s understanding on the Supreme Truth. Krsna or Vasudeva.
The word Vasudeva indicates the Supreme Personality of Godhead. who
is the cause of all causes. Mat-sthani sarva-bhiitani na caharin tesv
avasthitah. This is a summary of phenomenal and noumenal philosophy.
The phenomenal world depends on the noumenal existence: similarly.
everything exists by virtue of the potency of the Supreme Lord. although
due to our ignorance the Supreme Lord is not perceived in everything.
TEXT 9
एवं निरुक्तं कषितिशब्दबरत्त-
भसन्निधानात्परमाणयो ये ।
अविद्यया मनसा कल्पितास्ते
येषां समूहेन कृतो विशेषः ॥ ९॥
evarn का ८/८) ksiti-sabda-vrttam
asan nidhanat paramanavo ye


--- Page 412 ---
412 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
avidyaya manasa kalpitas te
yesam samithena krto visesah
evam —thus; niruktam —falsely described; ksiti-Sabda—of the word
“earth”; vrttam —the existence; asat—not real; nidhanat—from the
dissolution; parama-anavah—atomic particles; ye—all of which;
avidyayda—because of less intelligence; manasa—in the mind;
kalpitah—imagined; te—they; yesam—of which; samihena—by the
aggregate; krtah—made; viSesah—the particulars.
TRANSLATION
One may say that varieties arise from the planet earth itself.
However, although the universe may temporarily appear to be the
truth, it ultimately has no real existence. The earth was originally
created by a combination of atomic particles, but these particles
are impermanent. Actually the atom is not the cause of the
universe, although some philosophers think so. It is not a fact that
the varieties found in this material world simply result from
atomic juxtaposition or combination.
PURPORT
Those who follow the atomic theory think that the protons and
electrons of atoms combine in such a way as to bring all material exis-
tence into being. However, the scientists fail to discover the cause of
atomic existence itself. Under these circumstances. we cannot accept that
the atom is the cause of the universe. Such theories are advanced by
unintelligent people. According to real intelligence, the real cause of the
cosmic manifestation is the Supreme Lord. Janmady asya yatah: He is
the original cause of all creation. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (10.8):
aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate. Krsna is the origi-
nal cause. Sarva-karana-karanam: He is the cause of all causes. Krsna is
the cause of atoms, the material energy.
bhamir apo 72010 vayuh
kha mano buddhir eva ca
ahankara ittyam me
bhinna prakrtir astadha (Be. 7.4)


--- Page 413 ---
Text 10] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 413
The ultimate cause is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and only
those in ignorance try to find out other causes by posing different
theories.
TEXT 10
एव कृञ्च स्थुलमणुब्ृहययद्‌
Aq] सज्ञीवमजीवमन्यत्‌ |
द्रन्यसखभावाशयकालकर्म-
+
नान्नाजयावेदहि तं द्वितीयम्‌ nen
(1111111 1/1 11.1.18
asac ca saj jivam ajivam anyat
dravya-svabhavasaya-kala-karma-
namnajayavehi krtari dvittyam
evam —thus; krsam—skinny or short: sthilam—fat; anuh—tiny;
brhat—big; yat—which; asat—impermanent; ca—and; sat—existing;
Jivam—the living entities; ajivam—inanimate, lifeless matter; anyat—
other causes; dravya—phenomena; sva-bhava—nature: asaya—dis-
position; kdla—time; karma —activities; namna—only by such names:
ajaya—by material nature; avehi—you should understand: krtam—
done; dvittyam—duality.
TRANSLATION
Since this universe has no real ultimate existence, the things
within it—shortness, differences, grossness, skinniness, small-
ness, bigness, result, cause, living symptoms, and materials —are
all imagined. They are all pots made of the same substance, earth,
but they are named differently. The differences are characterized
by the substance, nature, predisposition, time and activity. You
should know that all these are simply mechanical manifestations
created by material nature.
PURPORT
The temporary manifestations and varieties within this material world
are simply creations of material nature under various circumstances:


--- Page 414 ---
414 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.12
prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah. The actions and reac-
tions carried out by the material nature are sometimes accepted as our
scientific inventions; therefore we want to take credit for them and defy
the existence of God. This is described in Bhagavad-gita (3.27)
ahankara-vimiadhatma kartaham iti manyate: due to being covered by
the illusory external energy, the living entity tries to take credit for the
differentiated creations within the material world. Actually all these are
being created automatically by the material force set in motion by the
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the ultimate
cause is the Supreme Person. As stated in Brahma-samhita:
Svarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
He is the cause of all causes, the ultimate cause. In this regard Srila
Madhviacarya says: evam sarvam tatha prakrtvayai kalpitarin visnor
anyat. evar prakrtyadharah svayam ananyadharo visnur eva. atah
sarva-5abdas ca tasminn eva. Actually the original cause is Lord Visnu,
but out of ignorance people think that matter is the cause of everything.
raja goptasrayo bhumih
saranam ceti laukikah
vyavaharo na tat satyam
tayor brahmasrayo vibhuh
Things are contemplated on the ephemeral or external platform, but ac-
tually this is not the truth. The actual protector and shelter of everyone is
Brahman, the Supreme, not the king.
goptri ca tasya prakrtis
tasya visnuh svayam prabhuh
tava goptri tu prthivi
na tvam 80010 ksiteh smrtah
atah sarvasrayais caiva
gopta ca harir iSvarah


--- Page 415 ---
Text 11] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 415
sarva-Sabdabhidheyas ca
sabda-vrtter hi karanam
sarvantarah sarva-bahir
eka eva janardanah
The actual protectress is the material nature, but Visnu is her Lord. He is
the Lord of everything. Lord Janardana is the director both externally
and internally. He is the cause of the function of words and what is ex-
pressed in all sound.
Sirasodharata yadvad
grivayas tadvad eva tu
asrayatvari ca goptrtvam
anyesam upacaratah
Lord Visnu is the resting place of the entire creation: brahmano hi pra-
tisthaham (Bg. 14.27). On Brahman, everything is resting. All the
universes are resting on the brahmajyoti, and all the planets are resting
on the universal atmosphere. In each and every planet there are oceans.
hills, states and kingdoms, and each planet is giving shelter to so many
living entities. They are all standing on the earth of feet and legs. torso
and shoulders, but actually everything is resting ultimately on the
potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore He is
known ultimately as sarva-karana-karanam, the cause of all causes.
TEXT 11
ज्ञानं वद्धं परमा्थमेक-
मनन्तरं त्वबदित्रंह्य सत्यम्‌ ।
प्रत्यक्‌ प्रशान्तं भगवच्छब्दसंज्ञं
+ -~
यद्वासुदेवं कवयो वदन्ति 1220
jaanari visuddham paramartham ekam
anantaram tv abahir brahma satyam
pratyak prasantarn bhagavac-chabda-sarijrarn
yad 00518061073 kavayo vadanti


--- Page 416 ---
416 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12

Jjaanam—the supreme knowledge; viSuddham—without contamina-
tion; parama-artham—giving the ultimate goal of life; ekam—unified;
anantaram—without interior, unbroken; tu—also; abahih—without
exterior; brahma—the Supreme; satyam—Absolute Truth; pratyak—
inner; prasantam—the calm and peaceful Supreme Lord, worshiped by
the yogis; bhagavat-Sabda-sarijiiam—known in the higher sense as
Bhagavan, or full of all opulences; yat—that; vasudevam—Lord Krsna,
the son of Vasudeva; kavayah—the learned scholars; vadanti—say.

TRANSLATION

What, then, is the ultimate truth? The answer is that nondual
knowledge is the ultimate truth. It is devoid of the contamination
of material qualities. It gives us liberation. It is the one without a
second, all-pervading and beyond imagination. The first realiza-
tion of that knowledge is Brahman. Then Paramatma, the Super-
soul, is realized by the yogis who try to see Him without grievance.
This is the second stage of realization. Finally, full realization of
the same supreme knowledge is realized in the Supreme Person.
All learned scholars describe the Supreme Person as Vasudeva, the
cause of Brahman, Paramatma and others.

PURPORT

In Caitanya-caritamrta it is said: yad advaitarn brahmopanisadi tad
apy asya tanu-bha. The impersonal Brahman effulgence of the Absolute
Truth consists of the bodily rays of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Ya atmantaryami purusa iti so ’syari$a-vibhavah. What is known as
atma and antaryami, the Supersoul, is but an expansion of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Sad-aisvaryaih [0070 ya iha bhagavan sa
svayam ayam. What is described as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, complete with all six opulences, is Vasudeva, and Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is nondifferent from Him. Great learned scholars and
philosophers accept this after many, many births. Vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah (Bg. 7.19). The wise man can understand that
ultimately Vasudeva, Krsna, is the cause of Brahman, and Paramatma,
the Supersoul. Thus Vasudeva is sarva-karana-karanam, the cause of all
causes. This is confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam. The real tattva, Ab-


--- Page 417 ---
Text 11] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 417
solute Truth, is Bhagavan, but due to incomplete realization of the Ab-
solute Truth, people sometimes describe the same Visnu as impersonal
Brahman or localized Paramatma.
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvamn yaj jianam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate
(Bhag. 1.2.11)

From the very beginning, Srimad-Bhagavatam says, satyam param
dhimahi: we meditate on the supreme truth. The supreme truth is ex-
plained here as jianam visuddham satyam. The Absolute Truth is
devoid of material contamination and is transcendental to the material
qualities. It gives all spiritual success and liberation from this material
world. That Supreme Absolute Truth is Krsna, Vasudeva. There is no
difference between Krsna's inner self and outward body. Krsna is parna, = `
the complete whole. There is no distinction between His body and soul as
there is between ours. Sometimes so-called scholars, not knowing the
constitutional position of Krsna, mislead people by saying that the Krsna
within is different from the Krsna without. When Krsna says, man-
mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mar namaskuru, so-called scholars
advise the reader that it is not the person Krsna to whom we must sur-
render but the Krsna within. So-called scholars, Mayavadis. cannot un-
derstand Krsna with their poor fund of knowledge. One should therefore
approach an authorized person to understand Krsna. The spiritual
master has actually seen Krsna; therefore he can explain Him properly.

tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya
upadeksyanti te jianam
JAaninas tattva-darsinah
(Bg. 4.34)
Without approaching an authorized person. one cannot understand
Krsna.


--- Page 418 ---
418 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
TEXT 12
a
रेहगणतत्तपसा ল याति
¢
न चेज्यया निवेपणाद्‌ EE |
= | न
नच्छन्दसा नैव जलाग्नखयै
विना महत्पाद्रजोऽभिषेकम्‌ ।१२॥
rahiiganaitat tapasa na yati
na cejyaya nirvapanad grhad va
na cchandasa naiva jalagni-siaryair
vina mahat-pada-rajo-"bhisekam
rahigana—O King Rahugana; etat—this knowledge; tapasa—by
severe austerities and penances; na yati—does not become revealed:
na—not; ca—also; ijyaya—by a great arrangement for worshiping the
Deity; nirvapandat—or from finishing all material duties and accepting
sannyasa; grhat—from ideal householder life; va—or; na—nor; chan-
dasa—by observing celibacy or studying Vedic literature; na eva—nor;
Jala-agni-siryaih—by severe austerities such as keeping oneself in
water, in a burning fire or in the scorching sun; wvina—without;
mahat—of the great devotees; pada-rajah—the dust of the lotus feet;
abhisekam —smearing all over the body.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Rahiaigana, unless one has the opportunity to
smear his entire body with the dust of the lotus feet of great devo-
tees, one cannot realize the Absolute Truth. One cannot realize the
Absolute Truth simply by observing celibacy [brahmacarya],
strictly following the rules and regulations of householder life,
leaving home as a vanaprastha, accepting sannyasa, or undergoing
severe penances in winter by keeping oneself submerged in water
or surrounding oneself in summer by fire and the scorching heat
of the sun. There are many other processes to understand the Ab-
solute Truth, but the Absolute Truth is only revealed to one who
has attained the mercy of a great devotee.


--- Page 419 ---
Text 13] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 419
PURPORT
Actual knowledge of transcendental bliss can be bestowed upon any-
one by a pure devotee. Vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau.
One cannot attain the perfection of spiritual life simply by following the
directions of the Vedas. One has to approach a pure devotee: an-
yabhilasita-sanyar jidana-karmady-andvrtam. By the grace of such a
devotee, one can understand the Absolute Truth, Krsna, and one’s rela-
tionship with Him. A materialistic person sometimes thinks that simply
by executing pious activities and remaining at home one can understand
the Absolute Truth. That is denied in this verse. Nor can one understand
the Absolute Truth simply by observing the rules and regulations of
brahmacarya (celibacy). One only has to serve the pure devotee. That
will help one understand the Absolute Truth without fail.
TEXT 13
04
यत्रोत्तमश्छोकगुणायुवादः
प्रस्तूयते _ ग्राम्यकथाविषातः |
निषेव्यमाणोऽलुदिनं भ॒क्षो
मतिं सतीं यच्छति वासुदेवे ॥ १३॥
2/८17011077105 101८ -& १०2१२८64.
7 ०5 ()/41९ gramya-katha-vighatah
nisevyamano ‘nudinam mumuksor
matim satim yacchati vasudeve
yatra—in which place (in the presence of exalted devotees): uttama-

sloka-guna-anuvadah—discussion of the pastimes and glories of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead: prastiiyate—is presented: gramya-
katha-vighatah—due to which there is no chance of talking of worldly
matters: nisevyamanah—being heard very seriously: anudinam—day
after day: mumuksoh—of persons who are very serious about getting out
of material entanglement: matim—meditation: sattim —pure and simple:
yacchati—is turned: vasudeve—unto the lotus feet of Lord Vasudeva.


--- Page 420 ---
420 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
TRANSLATION
Who are the pure devotees mentioned here? In an assembly of
pure devotees, there is no question of discussing material subjects
like politics and sociology. In an assembly of pure devotees, there
is discussion only of the qualities, forms and pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is praised and worshiped
with full attention. In the association of pure devotees, by con-
stantly hearing such topics respectfully, even a person who wants
to merge into the existence of the Absolute Truth abandons this
idea and gradually becomes attached to the service of Vasudeva.
PURPORT
The symptoms of pure devotees are described in this verse. The pure
devotee is never interested in material topics. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
has strictly prohibited His devotees to talk about worldly matters.
Gramya-varta na kahibe: one should not indulge in talking un-
necessarily about news of the material world. One should not waste time
in this way. This is a very important feature in the life of a devotee. A
devotee has no other ambition than to serve Krsna, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. This Krsna consciousness movement was started to
engage people twenty-four hours daily in the service of the Lord and in
His glorification. The students in this institution engage in the cultiva-
tion of Krsna consciousness from five in the morning to ten at night.
They actually have no opportunity to waste their time unnecessarily by
discussing politics, sociology and current events. These will go their own
way. A devotee is concerned only with serving Krsna positively and
seriously.
TEXT 14
अहं पुरा भरतो नाम राजा
विमुक्त दष्टश्चुतसङ्खबन्धः |
आराधनं भगवत ईहमानो „
- ৬
ম্বাসদল ম্ববামল্লান্তনামঃ ॥१४॥
aha pura bharato nama raja
vimukta-drsta-sruta-sanga-bandhah


--- Page 421 ---
Text 14] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 421
aradhanari bhagavata thamano †
mrgo ’bhavari mrga-sarigad dhatarthah

aham—1; pura—formerly (in my previous birth): bharatah nama
raja—a King named Maharaja Bharata; vimukta—liberated from: drsta-
Sruta —by experiencing personally through direct association, or by get-
ting knowledge from the Vedas; sanga-bandhah—bondage by associ-
ation; aradhanam—the worship; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Vasudeva; ihamanah—always performing; mrgah
abhavam—I became a deer; mrga-sarigat—because of my intimate asso-
ciation with a deer; hata-arthah—having neglected the regulative prin-
ciples in the discharge of devotional service.

TRANSLATION

In a previous birth I was known as Maharaja Bharata. I attained
perfection by becoming completely detached from material ac-
tivities through direct experience, and through indirect ex-
perience I received understanding from the Vedas. I was fully
engaged in the service of the Lord, but due to my misfortune, I
became very affectionate to a small deer, so much so that I
neglected my spiritual duties. Due to my deep affection for the
deer, in my next life I had to accept the body of a deer.

PURPORT

The incident herein described is very significant. In a previous verse
it is stated, vina mahat-pada-rajo- 'bhisekam: one cannot attain perfec-
tion without smearing the dust from the lotus feet of an exalted devotee
on his head. If one always follows the orders of the spiritual master.
there is no question of falling down. As soon as a foolish disciple tries to
overtake his spiritual master and becomes ambitious to occupy his post.
he immediately falls down. Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasado
yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto ‘pi. If the spiritual master is considered an
ordinary man, the disciple surely loses his chance to advance further.
Despite a very rigid life in devotional service, Bharata Maharaja did not
consult a spiritual master when he became overly attached to a deer.
Consequently he became strongly attached to the deer. and. forgetting
his spiritual routine, he fell down.


--- Page 422 ---
422 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
TEXT 15
सा मां स्तिमरगदेदेऽपि बीर
6.
FEAR नो जहाति |
- .
अथो _ अदं _ जनसङ्गादसङ्गो
विशङ्कमानोऽविदृतश्वरामि ॥१५॥
sa mam smrtir mrga-dehe 01 vira
krsnarcana-prabhava no jahati
atho aham jana-sangad asango
visannkamano ‘vivrtas carami
sa—that; mam—me: smrtih—remembrance of the activities of my
previous life; mrga-dehe —in the body of a deer; api—although; vira—
O great hero; krsna-arcana-prabhava —which appeared because of the
influence of sincere service to Krsna; no jahati—did not leave; atho—
therefore; aham—I; jana-sangat—from the association of ordinary
men; asarngah—completely detached; visarikamanah—being afraid;
avivrtah—unobserved by others; carami—I go here and there.
TRANSLATION
My dear heroic King, due to my past sincere service to the Lord,
I could remember everything of my past life even while in the
body of a deer. Because I am aware of the falldown in my past life,
I always keep myself separate from the association of ordinary
men. Being afraid of their bad, materialistic association, I wander
alone unnoticed by others.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita it is said: svalpam apy asya dharmasya (Bg. 2.40).
Itis certainly a great fall to go from human life to animal life, but in the
case of Bharata Maharaja or any devotee. devotional service to the Lord
never goes in vain. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (8.6): yam yam vapi
smaran bhavam tyajaty ante kalevaram. At the time of death, by
nature's law the mind is absorbed in a certain type of thinking. This may
lead one to animal life, yet for a devotee there is no loss. Even though


--- Page 423 ---
Text 16] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 423
Bharata Maharaja received the body of a deer, he didn’t forget his posi-
tion. Consequently, in the body of a deer he was very careful to remem-
ber the cause of his downfall. As a result, he was given a chance to be
born in a family of very pure brahmanas. Thus his service to the Lord
never went in vain.
TEXT 16
-
तसखानराोऽसद्गसुसद्गजात-
जञानासिनेदैव fw: |
हरिं तदीदाकथयनश्चुताभ्यां
9
रन्धस्मृतिय।त्यतिपारमध्वनः ॥१६॥
tasman 71070 ‘sarniga-susanga-jata-
Jianasinehaiva vivrkna-mohah
hari tad-iha-kathana-srutabhyam
labdha-smrtir yaty atiparam adhvanah
tasmat—for this reason; narah—every person; asariga—by detach-
ment from the association of worldly people; su-sariga—by the associ-
ation of devotees; jata—produced; jridna-asina—by the sword of
knowledge; iha—in this material world; eva—even; vivrkna-mohah—
whose illusion is completely cut to pieces; harim—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; tad-iha—of His activities; kathana-Srutabhyam—
by the two processes of hearing and chanting; labdha-smrtih—the lost
consciousness is regained; yati—achieves; atiparam—the ultimate end:
adhvanah—of the path back home, back to Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Simply by associating with exalted devotees, anyone can attain

perfection of knowledge and with the sword of knowledge can cut
to pieces the illusory associations within this material world.
Through the association of devotees, one can engage in the service
of the Lord by hearing and chanting [éravanarh kirtanam]. Thus
one can revive his dormant Krsna consciousness and, sticking to
the cultivation of Krsna consciousness, return home, back to
Godhead, even in this life.


--- Page 424 ---
424 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 12
PURPORT
To become liberated from material bondage, one must give up the as-
sociation of worldly people and accept the association of devotees. Posi-
tive and negative processes are mentioned in this regard. Through the
association of devotees, one develops Krsna consciousness, which is dor-
mant within. This Krsna consciousness movement is giving this chance
to everyone. We are giving shelter to everyone who is serious about
progressing in Krsna consciousness. We arrange for their lodging and
board so that they can peacefully cultivate Krsna consciousness and
return home, back to Godhead, even in this life.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twelfth
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, “The Conversation Between
Maharaja Rahiigana and Jada Bharata.”


--- Page 425 ---
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Further Talks Between
King Rahugana and Jada Bharata
The brahmana Jada Bharata became very kind to King Rahtgana, and to
disassociate him from the material world, he spoke figuratively of the
forest of the material world. He explained that this material world is like
a great forest in which one becomes entangled due to association with
material life. In this forest there are plunderers (the six senses) as well as
carnivorous animals like jackals, wolves and lions (wife, children and
other relatives) who are always anxious to suck the blood from the head
of the family. The forest plunderers and the carnivorous blood-sucking
animals combine to exploit the energy of a man within this material
world. In this forest there is also a black hole, covered by grass. into
which one may fall. Coming into the forest and being captivated by so
many material attractions, one identifies himself with this material
world, society, friendship, love and family. Having lost the path and not
knowing where to go, being harassed by animals and birds, one is also
victimized by many desires. Thus one works very hard within the forest
and wanders here and there. He becomes captivated by temporary happi-
ness and becomes aggrieved by so-called distress. Actually one simply
suffers in the forest from so-called happiness and distress. Sometimes he
is attacked by a snake (deep sleep). and due to the snakebite he loses con-
sciousness and becomes puzzled and bewildered about discharging his
duties. Sometimes he is attracted by women other than his wife, and thus
he thinks he enjoys extramarital love with another woman. He is at-
tacked by various diseases, by lamentation and by summer and winter.
Thus one within the forest of the material world suffers the pains of
material existence. Expecting to become happy. the living entity changes
his position from one place to another, but actually a materialistic person
within the material world is never happy. Being constantly engaged in
materialistic activities, he is always disturbed. He forgets that one day he
has to die. Although he suffers severely. being illusioned by the material
energy, he still hankers after material happiness. In this way he
425


--- Page 426 ---
426 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 13
completely forgets his relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

By hearing this from Jada Bharata, Maharaja Rahtgana revived his
Krsna consciousness and thus benefited from Jada Bharata’s association.
He could understand that his illusion was over, and he begged pardon
from Jada Bharata for his misbehavior. All this was told to Maharaja
Pariksit by Sukadeva Gosvami.

TEXT 1
नाद्यण उवाच
दुरत्ययेऽष्वन्यजया निवेशितो
ইস বৈ
रजस्तमःसच्चविभक्तकमेदक्‌ ।
स एष सार्थोऽर्थपरः परिभ्रमन्‌
x Se
भवाटवीं याति न शमं विन्दति ॥ १॥
brahmana uvdca
duratyaye ‘dhvany ajaya nivesito
rajas-tamah-sattva-vibhakta-karmadrk
sa esa sartho ’rtha-parah paribhraman
bhavatavim yati na Sarma vindati

brahmanah uvaca—the brahmana Jada Bharata continued to speak:
duratyaye—which is very difficult to traverse; adhvani—on the path of
fruitive activities (performing actions in this life, creating a body in the
next life by those actions, and in this way continuously accepting birth
and death); ajaya—by maya, the external energy of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; nivesitah—caused to enter; rajah-tamah-sattva-
vibhakta-karma-drk—a conditioned soul who sees only immediately
beneficial fruitive activities and their results, which are divided into
three groups by the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance; sah—he;
esah—this; sa-arthah—the living entity falsely seeking sense gratifica-
tion; artha-parah—intent upon gaining wealth; paribhraman—wander-
ing all over; bhava-atavim—the forest known as bhava, which means
the repetition of birth and death; yati—enters: na—not: Sarma —happi-
ness; vindati—obtains.


--- Page 427 ---
Text 2] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 427
TRANSLATION

Jada Bharata, who had fully realized Brahman, continued: My
dear King Rahiuigana, the living entity wanders on the path of the
material world, which is very difficult for him to traverse, and he
accepts repeated birth and death. Being captivated by the material
world under the influence of the three modes of material nature
(sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna), the living entity can see
only the three fruits of activities under the spell of material
nature. These fruits are auspicious, inauspicious and mixed. He
thus becomes attached to religion, economic development, sense
gratification and the monistic theory of liberation (merging with
the Supreme). He works very hard day and night exactly like a
merchant who enters a forest to acquire some articles to sell later
for profit. However, he cannot really achieve happiness within this
materizl world.

PURPORT

One can very easily understand how difficult and insurmountable the
path of sense gratification is. Not knowing what the path of sense
gratification is, one becomes implicated in the repetition of birth and ac-
cepts different types of bodies again and again. Thus one suffers in
material existence. In this life one may think that he is very happy being
an American, Indian, Englishman or German, but in the next life one has
to accept another body among 8,400,000 species. The next body has to be
immediately accepted according to karma. One will be forced to accept a
certain type of body, and protesting will not help. That is the stringent
law of nature. Due to the living entity’s ignorance of his eternal blissful
life, he becomes attracted to material activities under the spell of maya.
In this world, he can never experience happiness, yet he works very hard
to do so. This is called maya.

TEXT 2
यस्यामिमे षण्नरदेव दस्यवः
सां विलुम्पन्ति कुनायकं बलात्‌ |
गोमायवो यत्र हरन्ति साधिकं
= = ৬
प्रमत्तमाविश्य यथोरणं TH]: ॥ २॥


--- Page 428 ---
428 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
yasyam ime san nara-deva dasyavah
sarthari vilumpanti kunayakari balat
gomayavo yatra haranti sarthikam
pramattam avisya yathoranam vrkah

yasyam—in which (in the forest of material existence): ime—these:
sat—six: nara-deva—O King: dasyavah—the plunderers: sa-artham—
the conditioned souls, who are interested in false ideas: vilumpanti—
plunder, regularly taking away all the possessions: ku-nayakam—who
are always misguided by so-called gurus, or spiritual masters: balat—by
force: gomayavah—exactly like foxes: yatra—in which forest:
haranti—they take away: sa-arthikam—the conditioned soul who is
seeking material profits to maintain the body and soul: pramattam —who
is a crazy man not knowing his self-interest; avisya—entering the heart:
yatha—just as; uranam—nicely protected lambs: vrkah—the tigers.

TRANSLATION

O King Rahiigana, in this forest of material existence there are
six very powerful plunderers. When the conditioned soul enters
the forest to acquire some material gain, the six plunderers
misguide him. Thus the conditioned merchant does not know how
to spend his money, and it is taken away by these plunderers. Like
tigers, jackals and other ferocious animals in a forest that are ready
to take away a lamb from the custody of its protector, the wife and
children enter the heart of the merchant and plunder him in so
many ways.

PURPORT

In the forest there are many plunderers, dacoits. jackals and tigers.
The jackals are compared to one’s wife and children. In the dead of
night. jackals cry very loudly, and similarly one’s wife and children in
this material world also cry like jackals. The children say, “Father. this is
wanted: give me this. [ am your dear son.” Or the wife says. ` am your
dear wife. Please give me this. This is now needed.” In this way one is
plundered by the thieves in the forest. Not knowing the aim of human
life. one is constantly being misguided. The aim of life is Visnu (na te


--- Page 429 ---
Text 3] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 429
viduh svartha-gatim hi vispum). Everyone works very hard to earn
money, but no one knows that his real self-interest is in serving the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Instead of spending money for advanc-
ing the Krsna consciousness movement, one spends his hard-earned
money on clubs, brothels, liquor, slaughterhouses and so forth. Due to
sinful activities, one becomes implicated in the process of transmigration
and thus has to accept one body after another. Being thus absorbed in a
distressed condition, one never attains happiness.
TEXT 3
प्रभूतवीरुत्तणगुर्मगह्यरे
ry
कटोरदश्ेमंशकेरूपद्ुतः |
Co
कचित्तु गन्धवेपुरं प्रपश्यति
कचिरकचिचाशुरयोर्यकग्रहम्‌ ॥ २ ॥
prabhita-virut-trna-gulma-gahvare
kathora-damsair masakair upadrutah
kvacit tu gandharva-purariv prapasyati
kvacit kvacic casu-rayolmuka-graham
prabhiita—a very large number: virut—of creepers: trna—of
varieties of grass: gulma—of thickets: gahvare—in bowers: kathora—
cruel: darmsaih—by bites: masakaih—by mosquitoes: upadrutah—dis-
turbed: kvacit—sometimes: tu—but: gandharva-puram—a false palace
created by the Gandharvas: prapasyati—he sees: kvacit—and some-
times:  kvacit—sometimes: ca—and: dSu-raya—very quickly:
ulmuka—Ilike a meteor: graham —a fiend.
TRANSLATION
In this forest there are dense bowers composed of thickets of

bushes, grass and creepers. In these bowers the conditioned soul is
always disturbed by cruelly biting mosquitoes [envious people].
Sometimes he sees an imaginary palace in the forest, and some-
times he is bewildered by seeing a fleeting fiend or ghost, which
appears like a meteor in the sky.


--- Page 430 ---
430 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
PURPORT
The material household is actually a hole of fruitive activity. To earn a
livelihood. one engages in different industries and trades. and sometimes
one performs great sacrifices to go to higher planetary systems. Apart
from this. at least everyone is engaged in earning a livelihood in some
profession or occupation. In these dealings. one has to meet many un-
desirable people. and their behavior is compared to the biting of mos-
quitoes. This creates very undesirable conditions. Even in the midst of
these disturbances. one imagines that he is going to construct a grand
house and live there permanently, although he knows that he cannot.
Gold is compared to a quickly fleeting fiend. which appears like a meteor
in the sky. It displays itself for a moment and is then gone. Generally
karmis are attracted to gold or money. but these are compared herein to
ghosts and witches.
TEXT 4
निवासतोयद्रविणात्मबुद्धि-
= =
स्ततस्ततो धावति মা अन्याम्‌ |
=
ww  वात्योत्थितपांसुपूप्रा
fa न जानाति रजखलाक्षः ॥ ४॥
nivasa-toya-dravinatma-buddhis
tatas tato dhavati bho atavyam
kvacic ca vatyotthita-parmsu-dhiamra
0850 na janati rajas-valaksah
nivasa—residential place: toya—water: dravina—wealth: atma-bud-

dhih—who considers these material things the atma, or self: tatah
tatah—here and there: dhavati—he runs: bhoh—O King: atavyam—on
that forest path of material existence: kvacit ca—and sometimes:
vatya—by the whirlwind: utthita—raised: parmsu—by dust:
dhimrah—appear smoke-colored: disah—the directions: na—not:
janati—knows: rajah-vala-aksah—whose eyes are covered by the dust
of the wind or who is captivated by his wife during her menstrual period.


--- Page 431 ---
Text 4] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 431
TRANSLATION

My dear King, the merchant on the forest path of the material
world, his intelligence victimized by home, wealth, relatives and so
forth, runs from one place to another in search of success. Some-
times his eyes are covered by the dust of a whirlwind —that is to
say, in his lust he is captivated by the beauty of his wife, especially
during her menstrual period. Thus his eyes are blinded, and he
cannot see where to go or what he is doing.

PURPORT

It is said that household attraction resides in the wife because sex is
the center of household life: yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukhari hi tuc-
cham. A materialistic person, making his wife the center of attraction.
works very hard day and night. His only enjoyment in material life is
sexual intercourse. Therefore karmis are attracted to women as friends
or wives. Indeed. they cannot work without sex. Under the circumstances
the wife is compared to a whirlwind, especially during her menstrual
period. Those who strictly follow the rules and regulations of house-
holder life engage in sex only once a month. at the end of the menstrual
period. As one looks forward to this opportunity. his eyes are over-
whelmed by the beauty of his wife. Thus it is said that the whirlwind
covers the eyes with dust. Such a lusty person does not know that all his
material activities are being observed by different demigods. especially
the sun-god. and are being recorded for the karma of one’s next body.
Astrological calculations are called jyoti-Sastra. Because the jyoti, or
effulgence, in the material world comes from the different stars and
planets. the science is called jyoti-sastra, the science of the luminaries.
By the calculations of jyoti, our future is indicated. In other words. all
the luminaries —the stars. sun and moon —witness the activities of the
conditioned soul. Thus he is awarded a particular type of body. A lusty
person whose eyes are covered by the dust of the whirlwind of material
existence does not at all consider that his activities are being observed by
different stars and planets and are being recorded. Not knowing this. the
conditioned soul commits all kinds of sinful activities for the satisfaction
of his lusty desires.


--- Page 432 ---
432 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
TEXT 5
Ly
अदश्यज्ि्टीखनकणेशूल
EERIE RI REIS
अपुण्यघ्क्षान्‌ अयते क्षुधार्दितो
मरीवितोयान्यभिधावति कचित्‌ ॥ ५॥
adrsya-jhilli-svana-karna-sila
ulika-vagbhir vyathitantaratma
apunya-vrksan srayate ksudhardito
marici-toyany abhidhavati kvacit
adrsya—invisible: jhilli—of crickets or a kind of bee: svana—by the
sounds: karna-sila—whose ears are disturbed: ulika—of the owls:
vagbhih—by sound vibrations: wvyathita—very disturbed: antah-
atma —whose mind and heart: apunya-vrksan—impious trees that have
no fruits or flowers: Srayate—he takes shelter of: ksudha—from
hunger: arditah—suffering: marici-toyani—the waters of a mirage in
the desert: abhidhavati—he runs after: kvacit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
Wandering in the forest of the material world, the conditioned
soul sometimes hears an invisible cricket making harsh sounds,
and his ears become very much aggrieved. Sometimes his heart is
pained by the sounds of owls, which are just like the harsh words
of his enemies. Sometimes he takes shelter of a tree that has no
fruits or flowers. He approaches such a tree due to his strong ap-
petite, and thus he suffers. He would like to acquire water, but he
is simply illusioned by a mirage, and he runs after it.
PURPORT
In Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said that the Bhagavata philosophy is
meant for people who are completely free from envy (paramo nirmat-
saranam). The material world is full of envious people. Even within
one’s inner circle there is much backbiting. and this is compared to the


--- Page 433 ---
Text 6] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 433
sound vibration of a cricket in the forest. One cannot see the cricket, but
one hears its sounds and thus becomes aggrieved. When one takes to
Krsna consciousness, one always hears unpalatable words from relatives.
This is the nature of the world: one cannot avoid mental distress due to
the backbiting of envious people. Being very much aggrieved. sometimes
one goes to a sinful person for help, but he has no means to help because
he has no intelligence. Thus the living entity is disappointed. This is like
running after a mirage in the desert in an effort to find water. Such ac-
tivities do not produce any tangible results. Due to being directed by the
illusory energy. a conditioned soul suffers in so many ways.
TEXT 6
क्चिद्वितोया;ः सरितोऽभियाति
परस्परं चालषते निरन्धः |
. -
आसाद्य दावं क्चिदग्नितो
[9
निर्विद्यते क च यकैहंतासुः॥ ६ ॥
kvacid vitoyah sarito ’bhiyati
parasparar calasate nirandhah
asadya 020077 kvacid agni-tapto
nirvidyate kva ca yaksair hrtasuh
kvacit—sometimes: vitoyah—without depth to the water: saritah—
rivers: abhiydti—he goes to bathe or jumps into: parasparam—one
another: ca—and: alasate —desires: nirandhah—being with no stock of
food: asadya—experiencing: davam—a forest fire in family life:
kvacit—sometimes: agni-taptah—burned by fire: nirvidyate—is de-
spondent: kva—somewhere: ca—and: yaksaih—by kings resembling
rogues and thieves: hrta—taken away: asuh—wealth. which is as dear as
one’s life.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the conditioned soul jumps into a shallow river, or
being short of food grains, he goes to beg food from people who
are not at all charitable. Sometimes he suffers from the burning


--- Page 434 ---
434 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 13
heat of household life, which is like a forest fire, and sometimes he
becomes sad to have his wealth, which is as dear as life, plundered
by kings in the name of heavy income taxes.

PURPORT

When one is hot due to the scorching sun. one sometimes jumps into a
river to gain relief. However. if the river is almost dried up and the
water is too shallow. one may break his bones by jumping in. The condi-
tioned soul is always experiencing miserable conditions. Sometimes his
efforts to get help from friends are exactly like jumping into a dry river.
By such actions, he does not derive any benefit. He only breaks his bones.
Sometimes, suffering from a shortage of food, one may go to a person
who is neither able to give charity nor willing to do so. Sometimes one is
stationed in household life. which is compared to a forest fire (samsara-
davanala-lidha-loka). When a man is heavily taxed by the government,
he becomes very sad. Heavy taxation obliges one to hide his income, but
despite this endeavor the government agents are often so vigilant and
strong that they take all the money anyway, and the conditioned soul
becomes very aggrieved.

Thus people are trying to become happy within the material world. but
this is like trying to be happy in a forest fire. No one need go to a forest to
set it ablaze; fire takes place automatically. Similarly, no one wants to be
unhappy in family life or worldly life, but by the laws of nature unhap-
piness and distress are forced upon everyone. To become dependent on
another’s maintenance is very degrading: therefore, according to the
Vedic system, everyone should live independently. Only the sadras are
unable to live independently. They are obliged to serve someone for
maintenance. It is said in the $astras: kalau sadra-sambhavah. In this
age of Kali. everyone is dependent on another's mercy for the mainte-
nance of the body: therefore everyone is classified as a Sidra. In the
Twelfth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said that in Kali-yuga the
government will levy taxes without reciprocally benefiting the citizens.
Anavrstyda vinanksyanti durbhiksa-kara-piditah. In this age there will
also be a shortage of rain: therefore a scarcity of food will arise, and the
citizens will be very much harassed by government taxation. In this
way the citizens will abandon their attempts to lead a peaceful life


--- Page 435 ---
Text 7) Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 435
and will leave their homes and hearths and go to the forest in sheer
disappointment.
TEXT 7
ह
Weaa: & च निर्विण्णचेताः
शोचन्‌ बिगुद्यन्नुपयाति कश्मलम्‌ |
५
चिच्च गन्धर्वपुरं प्रविष्टः
~ €
प्रमोदते निव्रेतवन्युहूरतम्‌ ॥ ७॥
sirair hrta-svah kva ca nirvinna-cetah
Socan vimuhyann upayati kasmalam
kvacic ca gandharva-puram pravistah
pramodate nirvrtavan muhiirtam
suraih—by very powerful enemies: hrta-svah—all of whose posses-
sions have been stolen: kva ca—sometimes: nirvinna-cetdh—very
morose and aggrieved at heart: socan—deeply lamenting: vimuhyan—
becoming bewildered: upaydti—achieves: kasmalam—unconscious-
ness: kvacit—sometimes: ca—also: gandharva-puram—an imaginary
city in the forest: pravistah—having entered: pramodate—he enjoys:
nirvrta-vat—exactly like a person who has achieved success: muhir-
tam—for a moment only.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, being defeated or plundered by a superior, power-
ful agent, a living entity loses all his possessions. He then becomes
very morose, and lamenting their loss, he sometimes becomes un-
conscious. Sometimes he imagines a great palatial city in which he
desires to live happily with his family members and riches. He
thinks himself fully satisfied if this is possible, but such so-called
happiness continues only for a moment.
PURPORT
The word gandharva-puram is very significant in this verse. Some-
times in the forest a very big castle appears. and this is called a castle in


--- Page 436 ---
436 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
the air. Actually this castle does not exist anywhere but in one’s imagina-
tion. This is called gandharva-pura. In the material forest, the condi-
tioned soul sometimes contemplates great castles and skyscrapers, and he
wastes his energy for such things, hoping to live in them very peacefully
with his family forever. However, the laws of nature do not allow this.
When he enters such castles, he temporarily thinks that he is very
happy. even though his happiness is impermanent. His happiness may
last for a few years. but because the owner of the castle has to leave the
castle at the time of death, everything is eventually lost. This is the way
of worldly transactions. Such happiness is described by Vidyapati as the
happiness one derives upon seeing a drop of water in the desert. The
desert is heated by scorching sunshine. and if we want to reduce the
desert temperature, we need huge amounts of water —millions and
millions of gallons. What effect will one drop have? Water certainly has
value, but one drop of water cannot reduce the heat of the desert. In this
material world everyone is ambitious, but the heat is very scorching.
What will an imaginary castle in the air do to help? Srila Vidyapati has
therefore sung: tatala saikate, vari-bindu-sama, suta-mita-ramani-
samaje. The happiness of family life, friends and society is compared to a
drop of water in the scorching desert. The entire material world is busy
trying to attain happiness because happiness is the prerogative of the liv-
ing being. Unfortunately. due to falling in contact with the material
world. the living entity simply struggles for existence. Even if one
becomes happy for a while, a very powerful enemy may plunder every-
thing. There are many instances in which big businessmen suddenly
become paupers in the street. Yet the nature of material existence is such
that foolish people are attracted to these transactions and they forget the
real business of self-realization.
TEXT 8
चलन्‌ क्चित्कण्टकरर्षराद्धि-
न॑गाररशचर्विमना इवास्ते ।
पदे  पदेऽभ्यन्तरवद्िनारदितः
कौटुम्बिकः FARM वै जनाय ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 437 ---
Text 8] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 437
calan kvacit kantaka-Sarkaranghrir
nagaruruksur vimana ivaste
pade pade ‘bhyantara-vahninarditah
kautumbikah krudhyati vai janaya

calan—wandering; kvacit—sometimes: kantaka-sarkara—pierced by
thorns and small stones; arighrih—whose feet; naga—the hills: aruruk-
suh—one desiring to climb; vimanah—disappointed: iva—like; aste—
becomes; pade pade—step by step: abhyantara—within the abdomen:
vahnina—by the strong fire of appetite: arditah—being fatigued and ag-
grieved: kautumbikah—a person living with his family members:
krudhyati—becomes angry: wvai—certainly; jandya—at the family
members.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the merchant in the forest wants to climb the hills
and mountains, but due to insufficient footwear, his feet are
pricked by small stone fragments and by thorns on the mountain.
Being pricked by them, he becomes very aggrieved. Sometimes a
person who is very attached to his family becomes overwhelmed
with hunger, and due to his miserable condition he becomes
furious with his family members.

PURPORT

The ambitious conditioned soul wants to be very happy in this material
world with his family, but he is compared to a traveler in the forest who
desires to climb a hill full of thorns and small stones. As stated in the
previous verse, the happiness derived from society. friendship and love
is like a drop of water in the scorching heat of the desert. One may want
to become very great and powerful in society. but this is like attempting
to climb a hill full of thorns. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura com-
pares one’s family to high mountains. Becoming happy in their associ-
ation is like a hungry man’s endeavoring to climb a mountain full of
thorns. Almost 99.9 percent of the population is unhappy in family life.
despite all the attempts being made to satisfy the family members. In the
Western countries, due to the dissatisfaction of the family members.


--- Page 438 ---
438 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 13
there is actually no family life. There are many cases of divorce, and out
of dissatisfaction, the children leave the protection of their parents.
Especially in this age of Kali, family life is being reduced. Everyone is
becoming self-centered because that is the law of nature. Even if one has
sufficient money to maintain a family, the situation is such that no one is
happy in family life. Consequently according to the varnasrama institu-
tion, one has to retire from family life in middle age: parnicasordhvarn
vanam vrajet. One should voluntarily retire from family life at the age of
fifty and go to Vrndavana or a forest. This is recommended by Srila
Prahlada Maharaja (Bhag. 7.5.5):
tat sadhu manye ’sura-varya dehinam
sada samudvigna-dhiyam asad-grahat
hitvatma-patarmm grham andha-kaparn
vanarh gato yad dharim asrayeta

There is no benefit in transferring from one forest to another. One must
go to the Vrndivana forest and take shelter of Govinda. That will make
one happy. The International Society for Krishna Consciousness is
therefore constructing a Krsna-Balarama temple to invite its members as
well as outsiders to come and live peacefully in a spiritual atmosphere.
That will help one become elevated to the transcendental world and
return home, back to Godhead. Another sentence in this verse is very
significant: kautumbikah krudhyati vai janaya. When one’s mind is dis-
turbed in so many ways, he satisfies himself by becoming angry with his
poor wife and children. The wife and children are naturally dependent
on the father, but the father, being unable to maintain the family
properly. becomes mentally distressed and therefore chastises the family
members unnecessarily. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.2.9): ৫০-
chinna-dara-dravina yasyanti giri-kananam. Being disgusted with
family life, one separates from the family by divorce or some other
means. If one has to separate, why not separate willingly? Systematic
separation is better than forced separation. Forced separation cannot
make anyone happy. but by mutual consent or by the Vedic arrangement
one must separate from his family affairs at a certain age and fully
depend on Krsna. This makes one’s life successful.


--- Page 439 ---
Text 9] Rahuigana Converses with Jada Bharata 439
TEXT 9
कचिनिगीर्णोऽजगराटिना _ जनो
oS
नावेति किञ्चिद्विपिनेऽपविद्धः |
a
दष्टः WWF च दन्दशक-
-
रन्धोऽन्धक्ूपे पतितस्तमिखे ॥ ९ ॥
kvacin nigirno jagarahina jano
navaiti kincid vipine ‘paviddhah
dastah sma sete kva ca danda-$ikair
andho ’ndha-kiipe patitas tamisre
kvacit—sometimes: nigirnah—being swallowed: ajagara-ahina—by
the great snake known as the python: janah—the conditioned soul: na—
not: avaiti—understands: kifcit—anything: vipine—in the forest:
apaviddhah—pierced by arrows of suffering: dastah—being bitten:
sma—indeed; Sete—lies down: (एव ca—sometimes: danda-s$ikaih—by
other kinds of snakes: andhah—blind: andha-kipe—in a blind well:
patitah—fallen; tamisre—in a hellish condition of life.
TRANSLATION
The conditioned soul in the material forest is sometimes
swallowed by a python or crushed. At such a time he is left lying in
the forest like a dead person, devoid of consciousness and
knowledge. Sometimes other poisonous snakes bite him. Being
blind to his consciousness, he falls down into a dark well of hellish
life with no hope of being rescued.
PURPORT
When one becomes unconscious due to being bitten by a snake. one
cannot understand what is taking place outside the body. This un-
conscious condition is the condition of deep sleep. Similarly, the con-
ditioned soul is actually sleeping on the lap of the illusory energy. Bhak-
tivinoda Thakura has sung, kata nidra yao maya-pisacira kole: "0
living entity, how long will you sleep in this condition on the lap of the


--- Page 440 ---
440 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 13
illusory energy?” People do not understand that they are actually sleep-
ing in this material world, being devoid of knowledge of spiritual life.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore says:
enechi ausadhi maya nasibara lagi’
hari-nama-maha-mantra lao tumi magi’
=I have brought medicine to awaken every living being from perpetual
sleep. Please receive the holy name of the Lord, the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra, and awaken.” The Katha Upanisad (1.3.14) also says, uttistha
jagrata prapya varan nibodhata: *‘O living entity. you are sleeping in
this material world. Please get up and take advantage of your human
form of life.” The sleeping condition means loss of all knowledge. In
Bhagavad-gita (2.69) it is also said, ya nisa sarva-bhitanam tasyam
jagarti sariyami: “*What is night for all beings is the time of awakening
for the self-controlled.” Even in the higher planets, everyone is under
the spell of the illusory energy. No one is really interested in the real
values of life. The sleeping condition, called kala-sarpa (the time factor).
keeps the conditioned soul in a state of ignorance, and therefore pure
consciousness is lost. In the forest there are many blind wells, and if one
falls down in one there is no chance of being rescued. In a state of sleep,
one remains perpetually bitten by some animals, especially snakes.
TEXT 10
कहिं स चित्शुद्ररसाच्‌ विचिन्वं-
९
स्तन्मक्षिकाभिग्यथितो विमानः |
तत्रातिद्च्छ्रासरतिन्धमानो
बलाद्विलम्पन्त्यथ तं ततोऽन्ये ॥१०॥
karhi sma cit ksudra-rasan vicinvams
tan-maksikabhir vyathito vimanah
tatrati-krcchrat pratilabdhamano
balad vilumpanty atha tam tato nye


--- Page 441 ---
Text 10] Rahigana Converses with Jada Bharata 441

karhi sma cit—sometimes: ksudra—very insignificant: rasan —sexual
enjoyment: vicinvan—searching for: tat—of those women: mak-
sikabhih—by honeybees, or the husbands or family members:
vyathitah—very much aggrieved: vimanah—insulted: tatra—in that:
ati—very much: krcchrat—with difficulty because of spending money:
pratilabdhamanah—obtaining sexual enjoyment: balat—by force:
vilumpanti—kidnapped: atha—thereafter: tam—the object of sense en-
joyment (the woman): tatah—from him: anye—another debauchee.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes, in order to have a little insignificant sex enjoyment,
one searches after debauched women. In this attempt, one is in-
sulted and chastised by the women’s kinsmen. This is like going to
take honey from a beehive and being attacked by the bees. Some-
times, after spending lots of money, one may acquire another
woman for some extra sense enjoyment. Unfortunately, the object
of sense enjoyment, the woman, is taken away or kidnapped by
another debauchee.

PURPORT

In a great forest, honeycombs are very important. People often go
there to collect honey from the combs, and sometimes the bees attack and
punish them. In human society, those who are not Krsna conscious
remain in the forest of material life simply for the honey of sex life. Such
debauchees are not at all satisfied with one wife. They want many
women. Day after day, with great difficulty. they try to secure such
women, and sometimes. while trying to taste this kind of honey. one is
attacked by a woman's kinsmen and chastised very heavily. By bribing
others, one may secure another woman for enjoyment. vet another
debauchee may kidnap her or offer her something better. This woman
hunting is going on in the forest of the material world. sometimes legally
and sometimes illegally. Consequently in this Krsna consciousness move-
ment the devotees are forbidden to have illicit sex. Thus they avoid so
many difficulties. One should remain satisfied with one woman. being
duly married. One can satisfy one’s lusty desires with his wife without
creating disturbances in society and being punished for doing so.


--- Page 442 ---
442 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
TEXT 11
wR शीतातपवातवर्ष
प्रतिक्रियां कर्तुमनीश्च आस्ते |
-
कचिन्मिथो विपणन्‌ यच्च किञ्चिद्‌
hy
विद्धेषश्च्छत्युत वित्तशास्यात्‌ ॥११।।
kvacic ca Sitatapa-vata-varsa-
pratikriyari kartum anisa aste
kvacin mitho vipanan yac ca kinicid
vidvesam rcchaty uta vitta-sathyat
kvacit—sometimes: ca—also: Sita-atapa-vata-varsa—of freezing
cold, scorching heat, strong wind and excessive rainfall: pratikriyam—
counteraction; karturn—to do: anisah—being unable: aste—remains in
misery: kvacit—sometimes: mithah—one another: vipanan—selling:
yat ca—whatever: kincit—a little bit: vidvesam—mutual enmity: rc-
chati—obtain: uta—it is so said: vitta-5athyat—because of cheating one
another merely for money.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the living entity is busy counteracting the natural
disturbances of freezing cold, scorching heat, strong wind, ex-
cessive rainfall and so forth. When he is unable to do so, he
becomes very unhappy. Sometimes he is cheated in business trans-
actions one after another. In this way, by cheating, living entities
create enmity among themselves.
PURPORT
This is an example of the struggle for existence, the attempt to coun-
teract the onslaught of material nature. This creates enmity in society.
and consequently society is filled with envious people. One person is en-
vious of another, and this is the way of the material world. The Krsna
consciousness movement aims at creating an atmosphere of non-envy. Of
course it is not possible for everyone to become Krsna conscious, but the


--- Page 443 ---
Text 12] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 443
Krsna consciousness movement can create an exemplary society wherein
there is no envy.
TEXT 12
कचित्कचित्शलोणधनस्तु॒ तसिन्‌
शययासनस्थानविहारहीनः ।
याचन्‌ पराद्रतिलन्धकामः
५
पारक्यरष्टिरमतेऽवमानम्‌  ॥१२॥
kvacit kvacit ksina-dhanas tu tasmin
Sayyasana-sthana-vihara-hinah
yacan parad apratilabdha-kamah
parakya-drstir labhate 'vamanam

kvacit kvacit—sometimes; ksina-dhanah—becoming bereft of all
riches: tu—but: tasmin—in that forest: Sayya—of bedding for lying
down: asana—of a sitting place; sthana—of a residential house:
vihara—of enjoyment with a family: hinah—being bereft: yacan —beg-
ging: parat—from others (friends and relatives): apratilabdha-
kamah—not getting his desires fulfilled: parakya-drstih—becomes
greedy for the wealth of others: labhate—he obtains: avamanam—
dishonor.

TRANSLATION

On the forest path of material existence, sometimes a person is
without wealth and due to this does not have a proper home, bed
or sitting place, nor proper family enjoyment. He therefore goes
to beg money from others, but when his desires are not fulfilled by
begging, he wants to borrow or steal the property of others. Thus
he is insulted in society.

PURPORT

The principles of beg. borrow or steal are very appropriate in this

material world. When one is in want, he begs. borrows or steals. If


--- Page 444 ---
444 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
begging is unsuccessful, he borrows. If he cannot pay, he steals, and
when he is caught, he is insulted. This is the law of material existence.
No one can live here very honestly; therefore by trickery, cheating, beg-
ging, borrowing or stealing, one tries to satisfy his senses. Thus no one in
this material world is living peacefully.
TEXT 13
अन्योन्यवित्तन्यतिषङ्गवृद्ध-
EN
gE विवहन्मिथश्च |
अध्वन्युष्मिन्नुरुकृच्ट्रवित्त-
बाधोपसगरविंहरन्‌ विपः ॥१२॥
anyonya-vitta-vyatisanga-vrddha-
vairanubandho vivahan mithas ca
adhvany amusminn uru-krcchra-vitta-
badhopasargair viharan vipannah
anyonya—with one another: vitta-vyatisaniga—by monetary transac-
tions; vrddha—increased: vaira-anubandhah—one is encumbered by
enmity: vivahan—sometimes marrying: mithah—one another: ca—
and: adhvani—on the path of material existence: amusmin—that: uru-
krechra—by great difficulties: vitta-badha—by scarcity of money:
upasargaih—by diseases:  wviharan—wandering: vipannah—one
becomes fully embarrassed.
TRANSLATION
Due to monetary transactions, relationships become very
strained and end in enmity. Sometimes the husband and wife walk
on the path of material progress, and to maintain their relation-
ship they work very hard. Sometimes due to scarcity of money or
due to diseased conditions, they are embarrassed and almost die.
PURPORT
In this material world, there are many transactions between peoples
and societies as well as between nations, but gradually these end in en-


--- Page 445 ---
Text 14] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 445
mity between the two parties. Similarly. in the marriage relationship,
monetary transactions are sometimes overpowered by the dangerous con-
ditions of material life. One then becomes diseased or monetarily embar-
rassed. In the modern age most countries have developed economically.
but due to business exchanges, relationships seem to be strained. Finally
wars are declared between nations. and as a result of these upheavals
there is destruction all over the world. and people suffer heavily.
TEXT 14
तांस्तान्‌ विपन्नान्‌ स हि तत्र तत्र
विहाय जातं परिगृह्य साथः
oS
आवरतेतेऽ्यापि न॒ कथिदत्र
2 -
वीराध्वनः पारणुपंति योगम्‌ gel
tars tan vipannan sa hi tatra tatra
vihaya jatam parigrhya sarthah
avartate ‘dyapi na kascid atra
viradhvanah param upaiti yogam
tan tan—all of them: vipannan—embarrassed in various ways: sah—
the living being: hi—certainly: tatra tatra—here and there: vihaya—
giving up: jatam—those who are newly born: parigrhya—taking: sa-
arthah—the living being searching for his own interest: avartate —wan-
ders in this forest: adya api—even until now: na—not: kascit—any of
them: atra—here in this forest: vira—O hero: adhvanah—of the path
of material life: param —the ultimate end: upaiti—gets: yogam—the
process of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, on the forest path of material life, first a person is

bereft of his father and mother, and after their death he becomes
attached to his newly born children. In this way he wanders on the
path of material progress and is eventually embarrassed. Nonethe-
less, no one knows how to get out of this, even up to the moment
of death.


--- Page 446 ---
446 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
PURPORT
In this material world. family life is an institution of sex. Yan
maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukham (Bhag. 7.9.45). Through sex. the
father and mother beget children, and the children get married and go
down the same path of sexual life. After the death of the father and
mother, the children get married and beget their own children. Thus
generation after generation these things go on in the same way without
anyone's attaining liberation from the embarrassment of material life.
No one accepts the spiritual processes of knowledge and renunciation,
which end in bhakti-yoga. Actually human life is meant for jiana and
vairagya, knowledge and renunciation. Through these one can attain the
platform of devotional service. Unfortunately people in this age avoid the
association of liberated people (sadhu-sariga) and continue in their
stereotyped way of family life. Thus they are embarrassed by the ex-
change of money and sex.
TEXT 15
০. =
मनखिनो निर्जितदिग्गजेन्दरा
-~ [+ LY
ममेति सवे वि बद्धवैराः ।
मृधे शयीरन्न तु॒तद्रजन्ति
यन्न्यस्तदण्डो गतवैरोऽभियाति ॥
manasvino nirjita-dig-gajendra
mameti sarve bhuvi baddha-vairah
mrdhe Sayiran na tu tad vrajanti
yan nyasta-dando gata-vairo ’bhiyati
manasvinah—very great heroes (mental speculators): nirjita-dik-ga-
jendrah—who have conquered many other heroes as powerful as
elephants: mama—my (my land. my country. my family. my com-
munity. my religion): iti—thus: sarve—all (great political. social and
religious leaders): bhuvi—in this world: baddha-vairah—who have cre-
ated enmity among themselves: mrdhe—in battle: sayiran—fall dead on
the ground: na—not: tu—but: tat—the abode of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead: wvrajanti—approach; yat—which: nyasta-dan-


--- Page 447 ---
Text 16] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 447
dah—a sannydasi; gata-vairah—who has no enmity throughout the
whole world; abhiyati—attains that perfection.
TRANSLATION

There were and are many political and social heroes who have
conquered enemies of equal power, yet due to their ignorance in
believing that the land is theirs, they fight one another and lay
down their lives in battle. They are not able to take up the spiritual
path accepted by those in the renounced order. Although they are
big heroes and political leaders, they cannot take to the path of
spiritual realization.

PURPORT

Big political leaders might be able to conquer equally powerful politi-
cal enemies. but unfortunately they cannot subdue their strong senses.
the enemies that always accompany them. Not being able to conquer
these nearby enemies, they simply try to conquer other enemies. and
ultimately they die in the struggle for existence. They do not take to the
path of spiritual realization or become sannyasis. Sometimes these big
leaders take up the guise of a sannydsi and call themselves mahatmas,
but their only business is conquering their political enemies. Because
they spoil their lives with the illusion of “this is my land and my
family,” they cannot progress spiritually and attain liberation from the
clutches of maya.

TEXT 16
भ्रसज्ञति क्रापि SAAT
स्तदाश्रयान्यक्तपदद्विजस्परहः |
क्चित्कदाचिद्धरिचक्रतखरसन्‌
° SY aA
सख्यं বিমল वककङ्गृधेः 1280
prasajjati kvapi lata-bhujasrayas
tad-asrayavyakta-pada-dvija-sprhah
kvacit kadacid dhari-cakratas trasan
sakhyari vidhatte baka-karka-grdhraih


--- Page 448 ---
448 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 13

prasajjati—becomes more and more attached: kvapi—sometimes:
lata-bhuja-asrayah—who takes shelter of the soft arms of his beautiful
wife which are like creepers: tat-asraya—who are sheltered by such
creepers: avyakta-pada—who sing unclear songs: dvija-sprhah—desir-
ing to hear birds: kvacit—sometimes: kadacit—somewhere: hari-
cakratah trasan—being afraid of the roaring sound of a lion:
sakhyam—{riendship: vidhatte—makes:; baka-karika-grdhraih—with
cranes. herons and vultures.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the living entity in the forest of material existence
takes shelter of creepers and desires to hear the chirping of the
birds in those creepers. Being afraid of roaring lions in the forest,
he makes friends with cranes, herons and vultures.

PURPORT

In the forest of the material world there are many animals and birds,
trees and creepers. Sometimes the living entity wants to take shelter of
the creepers: in other words, he wants to be happy by being embraced by
the creeperlike arms of his wife. Within the creepers there are many
chirping birds: this indicates that he wants to satisfy himself by hearing
the sweet voice of his wife. In old age. however. he sometimes becomes
afraid of imminent death, which is compared to a roaring lion. To save
himself from the lion’s attack. he takes shelter of some bogus svamis,
‘yogis, incarnations, pretenders and cheaters. Being misled by the illusory
energy in this way. he spoils his life. It is said. harim vina mrtin na
taranti: no one can be saved from the imminent danger of death without
taking shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The word hari in-
dicates the lion as well as the Supreme Lord. To be saved from the hands
of Hari. the lion of death, one must take shelter of the supreme Hari, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. People with a poor fund of knowledge
take shelter of nondevotee cheaters and pretenders in order to be saved
from the clutches of death. In the forest of the material world. the living
entity first of all wants to be very happy by taking shelter of the
creeperlike arms of his wife and hearing her sweet voice. Later. he some-
times takes shelter of so-called gurus and sadhus who are like cranes.


--- Page 449 ---
Text 17] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 449
herons and vultures. Thus he is cheated both ways by not taking shelter
of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 17
< o ৬
ননস্বিল। mgd समाविश-
- 2
नरोचयन्‌ शीटखुपेति वानरान्‌ |
श
तजातिरसेन  संनिदतेन्द्ियः
परस्परोदवक्षणविस्खरताबधिः ।॥१७॥
tair vancito harmsa-kulam samavisann
arocayan Silam upaiti vanaran
taj-jati-rasena sunirvrtendriyah
parasparodviksana-vismrtavadhih
taih—by them (the cheaters and pretenders. the so-called yogis,
svamis, incarnations and gurus): vancitah—being cheated: harisa-
kulam—the association of great paramaharisas, or devotees:
samavisan—contacting; arocayan—not being satished with: $ilam—
their behavior: upaiti—approaches: vanaran—the monkeys. which are
३॥ debauchees with no good character: tat-jati-rasena—by
sense gratification in the association of such debauchees: sunirvrta-in-
driyah—being very satisfied with getting the opportunity of sense
gratification; paraspara—of one another; udviksana—by seeing the
faces; vismria—who has forgotten; avadhih—the end of life.
TRANSLATION
Being cheated by them, the living entity in the forest of the
material world tries to give up the association of these so-called
yogis, svamis and incarnations and come to the association of real
devotees, but due to misfortune he cannot follow the instructions
of the spiritual master or advanced devotees; therefore he gives up
their company and again returns to the association of monkeys
who are simply interested in sense gratification and women. He
derives satisfaction by associating with sense gratifiers and


--- Page 450 ---
450 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
enjoying sex and intoxication. In this way he spoils his life simply
by indulging in sex and intoxication. Looking into the faces of
other sense gratifiers, he becomes forgetful and thus approaches
death.
PURPORT
Sometimes a foolish person becomes disgusted with bad association
and comes to the association of devotees and brahmanas and takes initia-
tion from a spiritual master. As advised by the spiritual master, he tries
to follow the regulative principles, but due to misfortune he cannot
follow the instructions of the spiritual master. He therefore gives up the
company of devotees and goes to associate with simian people who are
simply interested in sex and intoxication. Those who are so-called
spiritualists are compared to monkeys. Outwardly. monkeys sometimes
resemble sadhus because they live naked in the forest and pick fruits,
but their only desire is to keep many female monkeys and enjoy sex life.
Sometimes so-called spiritualists seeking a spiritual life come to associate
with Krsna conscious devotees, but they cannot execute the regulative
principles or follow the path of spiritual life. Consequently they leave the
association of devotees and go to associate with sense gratifiers. who are
compared to monkeys. Again they revive their sex and intoxication. and
looking at one another's faces. they are thus satisfied. In this way they
pass their lives up to the point of death.
TEXT 18
दमेषु रंस्यन्‌ सुतदारषत्सलो
व्ववायदीनो विवशः खवन्धने |
क्चितप्रमादाद्विरिकन्दरे पतन्‌
वष्ट गृहीत्वा गजभीत आसितः ॥१८॥
drumesu rarmsyan suta-dara-vatsalo
vyavaya-dino vivasah sva-bandhane
kvacit pramadad giri-kandare patan
vallim grhitva gaja-bhita asthitah
drumesu—in the trees (or in houses standing like trees in which

monkeys jump from one branch to another); ramsyan—enjoying: suta-


--- Page 451 ---
Text 19] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 451
dara-vatsalah—being attached to the children and wife: vyavaya-
dinah—who is poorhearted because of acting on the platform of sex
desire: vivasah—unable to give up: sva-bandhane—in bondage to the
reactions of one’s own activities: kvacit—sometimes; pramadat—from
fear of imminent death: giri-kandare —in a cave in a mountain: patan—
falling down: vallim—the branches of a creeper: grhitva—capturing:
gaja-bhitah—being afraid of the elephant of death: asthitah—remains
in that position.
TRANSLATION
When the living entity becomes exactly like a monkey jumping
from one branch to another, he remains in the tree of household
life without any profit but sex. Thus he is kicked by his wife just
like the he-ass. Unable to gain release, he remains helplessly in
that position. Sometimes he falls victim to an incurable disease,
which is like falling into a mountain cave. He becomes afraid of
death, which is like the elephant in the back of that cave, and he
remains stranded, grasping at the twigs and branches of a creeper.
PURPORT
The precarious condition of a householders life is described herein. A
householder’s life is full of misery, and the only attraction is sex with the
wife who kicks him during sexual intercourse, just as the she-ass does
her mate. Due to continuous sex life. he falls victim to many incurable
diseases. At that time, being afraid of death. which is like an elephant. he
remains hanging from the twigs and branches of the tree. just like a
monkey.
TEXT 19
अतः HAA वियुक्त ge
पुनश्च साथं प्रविशत्यरिन्दम ।
अध्वन्ययरुष्मिन्नजया निवेशितो
भ्रमञ्जनोऽद्यापि न वेद कथचन 124
atah kathancit sa vimukta apadah
punas ca sartharh pravisaty arindama


--- Page 452 ---
452 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 13
adhvany amusminn ajaya nivesito
bhraman jano ’dyapi na veda kascana
atah—from this: kathancit—somehow; sah—he; vimuktah—liber-
ated: apadah—from the danger; punah ca—again: sa-artham—taking
interest in that life; pravisati—begins; arim-dama—O King, killer of
the enemies: adhvani—on the path of enjoyment: amusmin—that;
ajaya—by the influence of the illusory energy; nivesitah—being ab-
sorbed; bhraman—traveling: janah—the conditioned soul; adya api—
even up to death: na veda—does not understand: kascana—anything.
TRANSLATION
O killer of enemies, Maharaja Rahiigana, if the conditioned soul
somehow or other gets out of his dangerous position, he again
returns to his home to enjoy sex life, for that is the way of attach-
ment. Thus, under the spell of the Lord’s material energy, he con-
tinues to loiter in the forest of material existence. He does not dis-
cover his real interest even at the point of death.
PURPORT
This is the way of material life. When one is captured by sexual attrac-
tion. he becomes implicated in so many ways and cannot understand the
real aim of life. Therefore Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.5.31) says, na te
viduh svartha-gatirh hi vispum: generally people do not understand the
ultimate goal of life. As stated in the Vedas, om tad visnoh paramam
padari sada pasyanti sirayah: those who are spiritually advanced
simply look to the lotus feet of Visnu. The conditioned soul. however, not
being interested in reviving his relationship with Visnu. becomes capti-
vated by material activities and remains in everlasting bondage. being
misled by so-called leaders.
TEXT 20
रहूगण त्वमपि द्य्वनोऽस्य
संन्यप्तदण्डः कृतभूतमैत्रः |
असज्जितात्मा हर्सिवया fd
ज्ञ।नातसिमादापर तरातिपारम्‌ Rell


--- Page 453 ---
Text 20] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 453
rahitgana tvam api hy adhvano sya
sannyasta-dandah krta-bhiuta-maitrah
asaj-jitatma hari-sevaya Sitar
Jjaandasim adaya tarati-param
rahiigana—O King Rahtgana: tvam—you: api—also: hi—certainly:
adhvanah—of the path of material existence: asya—this: sannyasta-
dandah—having given up the king's rod for punishing criminals: krta-
bhita-maitrah—having become friendly to everyone: asat-jita-atma—
whose mind is not attracted to the material pleasure of life: hari-
sevaya—by the means of loving service to the Supreme Lord: sitam—
sharpened: jiana-asim—the sword of knowledge: addya—taking in
hand; tara—cross over: ati-param—to the ultimate end of spiritual exis-
tence.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Rahiigana, you are also a victim of the external
energy, being situated on the path of attraction to material
pleasure. So that you may become an equal friend to all living en-
tities, I now advise you to give up your kingly position and the rod
by which you punish criminals. Give up attraction to the sense ob-
jects and take up the sword of knowledge sharpened by devotional
service. Then you will be able to cut the hard knot of illusory
energy and cross to the other side of the ocean of nescience.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna compares the material world to a tree of
illusion from which one must cut oneself free:
na ripam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nanto na cadir na ca sampratistha
asvattham enam suviridha-miilam
asanga-sastrena drdhena chittva
tatah padarh tat parimargitavyam
yasmin gata na nivartanti bhivyah
tam eva cadyam [01871850112 prapadye
yatah pravrttih prasrta purant


--- Page 454 ---
454 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
~The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can
understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation is.
But with determination, one must cut down this tree with the weapon of
detachment. So doing, one must seek that place from which. having once
gone. one never returns, and there surrender to that Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead from whom everything has begun and in whom
everything is abiding since time immemorial.” (Bg. 15.3-4)
TEXT 21
राजोवात्
अहो नृजन्माखिलजन्मश्ोमन
किं जन्मभिस्त्वपरैरप्यश्ुष्मिन्‌ |
न॒ यदृ्रषीकेशयश्चःकृतारमनां
महात्मनां वः प्रचुर; समागमः ॥२१
rajovaca
aho nr-janmakhila-janma-sobhanari
10878 janmabhis tv aparair apy amusmin
na yad dhrsikesa-yasah-krtatmanarn
mahatmanar vah pracurah samagamah
raja uvaca—King Rahigana said; aho—alas: nr-janma—you who
have taken birth as a human being: akhila-janma-sobhanam—the best
of all species of life; kim—what need: janmabhih—with births in a
higher species like the demigods in the heavenly planets: tu—but;
aparaih—not superior: api—indeed; amusmin—in the next birth; na—
not; yat—which: hrsikesa-yasah—by the glories of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Hrsikeséa, the master of all senses: krta-atmanam—
of those whose hearts are purified: maha-atmanam—who are actually
great souls: vah—of us; pracurah—abundant; samagamah —the associ-
ation.
TRANSLATION
King Rahagana said: This birth as a human being is the best of
all. Even birth among the demigods in the heavenly planets is not


--- Page 455 ---
Text 22] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 455
as glorious as birth as a human being on this earth. What is the use
of the exalted position of a demigod? In the heavenly planets, due
to profuse material comforts, there is no possibility of associating
with devotees.
PURPORT
Human birth is a great opportunity for self-realization. One may take
birth in a high planetary system among the demigods. but due to the
profusion of material comforts, one cannot gain release from material
bondage. Even on this earth those who are very opulent do not generally
care to take to Krsna consciousness. An intelligent person actually in-
terested in getting freed from the material clutches must associate with
pure devotees. By such association, one can gradually become detached
from the material attraction of money and women. Money and women
are the basic principles of material attachment. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
therefore advised those who are actually serious about returning back to
Godhead to give up money and women in order to be fit to enter the
kingdom of God. Money and women can be fully utilized in the service of
the Lord, and one who can utilize them in this way can become freed
from material bondage. Satam prasarngan mama virya-sarmvido bhavanti
hrt-karna-rasayanah kathah (Bhag. 3.25.25). Only in the association of
devotees can one relish the glorification of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Just through a little association with a pure devotee. one can
become successful in his journey back to Godhead.
TEXT 22
न ggd  त्वचरणान्जरेण॒मि-
हतांहसो भक्तिरथोक्षजेऽमला |
EN
मोहूतिंकायस्य समागमाच मे
(भ -
दुस्तकमूखोऽपहतोऽबिवेकः ॥ २२॥
na hy ०4614107 tvac-caranabja-renubhir
hatarmhaso bhaktir adhoksaje ‘mala
mauhurtikad yasya samagamac ca me
dustarka-milo ’pahato “vivekah


--- Page 456 ---
456 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 13
na—not: hi—certainly: adbhutam—wonderful: tvat-carana-abja-
renubhih—by the dust of your lotus feet: hata-amhasah—who am com-
pletely freed from the reactions of sinful life: bhaktih—love and devo-
tion: adhoksaje—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. who is
beyond the capture of experimental knowledge: amala—completely
freed from all material contamination: mauhiirtikat—momentary:
yasya—of whom: samagamat—by the visit and association: ca—also:
me—my: dustarka—of false arguments: mitlah—the root: apahatah—
completely vanquished: avivekah—not discriminating.
TRANSLATION
It is not at all wonderful that simply by being covered by the
dust of your lotus feet, one immediately attains the platform of
pure devotional service to Adhoksaja, which is not available even
to great demigods like Brahma. By associating with you just for a
moment, | am now freed from all argument, false prestige and lack
of discrimination, which are the roots of entanglement in the
material world. Now I am free from all these problems.
PURPORT
Association with pure devotees certainly frees one from the material
clutches. This is certainly true of King Rahugana’s association with Jada
Bharata. King Rahiigana was immediately freed from the misgivings of
material association. The arguments offered by pure devotees to their
disciples are so convincing that even a dull-headed disciple is im-
mediately enlightened with spiritual knowledge.
TEXT 23
नमो महद्भ्योऽस्तु नमः fagean
-
नमो IFA नम EASA: |
ये ब्राह्मणा गामवधूतलिङ्गा-
रन्ति तेभ्यः शिवमस्तु राज्ञाम्‌ ॥२३॥
namo mahadbhyo stu namah Sisubhyo
namo yuvabhyo nama avatubhyah


--- Page 457 ---
Text 23] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 457
ye brahmana gam avadhita-lingas
caranti tebhyah $ivam astu rajiam

namah—all obeisances: mahadbhyah—unto the great personalities:
astu—let there be: namah—my obeisances: §isubhyah—unto those
great personalities who appear as boys: namah—respectful obeisances:
yuvabhyah—unto those who appear as young men: namah—respectful
obeisances: a-vatubhyah—unto those who appear as children: ye—all
those who: brahmandh—self-realized in transcendental knowledge:
gam—the earth: avadhita-lingah—who remain hidden under different
bodily guises: caranti—they traverse: tebhyah—from them: sivam
astu—Ilet there be all good fortune: rajiam—unto the royal dynasties or
kings (who are always very puffed up).

TRANSLATION

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the great personalities,
whether they walk on the earth’s surface as children, young boys,
avadhiitas or great brahmanas. Even if they are hidden under
different guises, I offer my respects to all of them. By their mercy,
may there be good fortune in the royal dynasties that are always
offending them.

PURPORT

King Rahtigana was very repentant because he had forced Jada
Bharata to carry his palanquin. He therefore began offering prayers to all
kinds of brahmanas and self-realized persons. even though they might
be playing like children or hiding in some guises. The four Kumairas
walked everywhere in the guise of five-year-old boys. and similarly there
are many brahmanas, knowers of Brahman. who traverse the globe
either as young men. children or avadhiitas. Being puffed up due to their
position, the royal dynasties generally offend these great personalities.
Therefore King Rahiigana began to offer his respectful obeisances unto
them so that the offensive royal dynasties might not glide down into a
hellish condition. If one offends a great personality. the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead does not excuse one. although the great personalities
themselves might not take offense. Maharaja Ambarisa was offended by
Durvasa. who even approached Lord Visnu for pardon. Lord Visnu


--- Page 458 ---
458 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 13
would not grant him pardon; therefore he had to fall down at the lotus
feet of Maharaja Ambarisa, even though Maharaja Ambarisa was a
ksatriya-grhastha. One should be very careful not to offend the lotus feet
of Vaisnavas and brahmanas.
TEXT 24
श्रीशुक उवाच
a त E Ms
इत्येवष्ठत्तरामातः स वे ब्रह्मर्षिसुतः सिन्धुपतय आमस तच
विगणयतः परायुभावः परमकारुणिकतयोपदि्य रहूगणेन सकरुणम
भिवन्दिति चरण आपूर्णाणव इव निमूतकरणोम्याशयो धरणिमिमां वि चचार
॥२४॥
sri-suka uvaca
ity evam uttara-matah sa vai brahmarsi-sutah sindhu-pataya atma-
satattvari viganayatah paranubhavah parama-karunikatayopadisya
rahiiganena sakarunam abhivandita-carana apirnarnava iva nibhrta-
karanormy-asayo dharanim imam vicacara.
sri-sukah wvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti evam—in this way:
uttara-matah—O Maharaja Pariksit, son of mother Uttara: sah—that
brahmana; vai—indeed; brahma-rsi-sutah—Jada Bharata, the son of a
highly educated brahmana; sindhu-pataye—unto the king of the
province of Sindhu; @tma-sa-tattvam—the actual constitutional position
of the soul; viganayatah—although insulting Jada Bharata: para-
anubhavah—who was very exalted in spiritual realization; parama-
karunikataya—by his quality of being very kind to the fallen souls:
upadisya —instructing; rahiiganena—by King Rahugana: sa-
karunam— piteously; abhivandita-caranah—whose lotus feet were
worshiped; apirna-arnavah iva—Ilike the full ocean: nibhrta—com-
pletely silenced: karana—of the senses: armi—the waves: asayah—
possessing a heart in which; dharanim—the earth: imam—this:
vicacara—continued to roam.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, O son of
mother Uttara, there were some waves of dissatisfaction in the


--- Page 459 ---
Text 25] Rahigana Converses with Jada Bharata 459
mind of Jada Bharata due to his being insulted by King Rahiigana,
who made him carry his palanquin, but Jada Bharata neglected
this, and his heart again became calm and quiet like an ocean.
Although King Rahiigana had insulted him, he was a great
paramaharisa. Being a Vaisnava, he was naturally very
kindhearted, and he therefore told the King about the constitu-
tional position of the soul. He then forgot the insult because King
Rahugana pitifully begged pardon at his lotus feet. After this, he
began to wander all over the earth, just as before.
PURPORT

In Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.25.21), Kapiladeva describes the symptoms
of great personalities: titiksavah karunikah suhrdah sarva-dehinam. A
saintly devotee is certainly very tolerant. He is the friend of all living en-
tities, and he does not create enemies within the world. A pure devotee
has all the qualities of a sadhu. Jada Bharata is an example of this. Due to
the material body, his senses were certainly agitated when he was in-
sulted by King 1২311003113, but later, due to the King's humble submis-
sion, Jada Bharata excused him. It is the duty of everyone desiring to
return to Godhead to become submissive like King [03110063113 and beg
pardon of Vaisnavas one may have offended. Vaisnavas are generally
very kindhearted; therefore if one immediately submits himself at the
lotus feet of a Vaisnava, one is immediately cleared of offensive reac-
tions. If one does not do so, the reactions will remain. and the results will
not be very palatable.

TEXT 25

सोवीरपतिरपि सुजनसमवगतपरमात्मसतच्च आतमन्यविद्याध्यारोपितां च
देहात्ममतिं विससजं | एवं হি 39 मगवदा्रिता न्रिताजुमावः ॥२५॥

sauvira-patir api sujana-samavagata-paramatma-satattva atmany
avidyadhyaropitarm ca dehatma-matim visasarja. evar hi nrpa
bhagavad-asritasritanubhavah.

sauvira-patih—the King of the state of Sauvira: api—certainly: su-
Jana —from an elevated person: samavagata—having completely under-


--- Page 460 ---
460 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.13
stood: paramatma-sa-tattvah—the truth of the constitutional position of
the spirit soul and the Supersoul: atmani—in himself: avidya—by ne-
science: adhydropitam—erroneously attributed: ca—and: deha—in the
body: atma-matim—the concept of the self: visasarja—completely gave
up: evam—thus: hi—certainly: nrpa—O King: bhagavat-asrita-asrita-
anubhavah—the consequence of taking shelter of a devotee who has
similarly taken shelter of a spiritual master in the parampara system
(one is sure to get out of the great nescience of the bodily concept of life).
TRANSLATION

After receiving lessons from the great devotee Jada Bharata,
King Rahugana of the state of Sauvira became completely aware of
the constitutional position of the soul. He thus gave up the bodily
conception completely. My dear King, whoever takes shelter of the
servant of the servant of the Lord is certainly glorified because he
can without difficulty give up the bodily conception.

PURPORT
As stated in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.54):
“sadhu-sanga’, “‘sadhu-sanga’——sarva-sastre kaya
lava-matra sadhu-sange sarva-siddhi haya

It is a fact that if one takes shelter of a pure devotee, one attains all per-
fection. even if the association is a short one. A sadhu is a pure devotee
of the Lord. It has been our practical experience that the first instruction
of our spiritual master infused us with Krsna consciousness so that now
we are at least on the path of Krsna consciousness and can understand
the philosophy. As a result, there are many devotees engaged in this
Krsna consciousness movement. The whole world is revolving under the
bodily conception: therefore there must be devotees all over the world to
deliver people from the false bodily conception and fully engage them in
Krsna consciousness.


--- Page 461 ---
Text 26] Rahiigana Converses with Jada Bharata 461
TEXT 26
राजोवाच
योहवा इह बहुविदा महामागत त्वयाभिहितः परोक्षेण वचसा
- ४५, =
जीवलोकभवाध्वा स द्यायेमनीषया करिपितविषयो नाज्ञसाव्युत्पननरोक-
समधिगमः | अथ IRATE समेतायुकल्पेन निर्दि्यतामिति ॥२६॥
rajovaca

ya ha va iha bahu-vida maha-bhagavata tvayabhihitah paroksena
vacasa jiva-loka-bhavadhva sa hy arya-manisaya kalpita-visayo
nanjasavyutpanna-loka-samadhigamah. atha tad evaitad
duravagamam samavetanukalpena nirdisyatam iti.

raja uvaca—King Pariksit said: yah—which: ha—certainly: va—or:
tha—in this narration: bahu-vidd—who are aware of many incidents of
transcendental knowledge: maha-bhagavata—O great devotee sage:
tvaya—by you: abhihitah—described: paroksena—figuratively:
vacasa—by words: jiva-loka-bhava-adhva—the path of material exis-
tence of the conditioned soul: sah —that: hi—indeed: arya-manisaya—
by the intelligence of advanced devotees: kalpita-visayah—the subject
matter is imagined: na—not: arjasa—directly: avyutpanna-loka—of
persons who are not very experienced or intelligent: samadhigamah—
the complete understanding: atha—therefore: tat eva—because of that:
etat—this matter: duravagamam—which is difficult to understand:
samaveta-anukalpena—by substituting the direct meaning of such inci-
dents: nirdiSyatam—Ilet it be described: iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

King Pariksit then told Sukadeva Gosvami: My dear lord, O
great devotee sage, you are omniscient. You have very nicely de-
scribed the position of the conditioned soul, who is compared to a
merchant in the forest. From these instructions intelligent men
can understand that the senses of a person in the bodily concep-
tion are like rogues and thieves in that forest, and one’s wife and
children are like jackals and other ferocious animals. However, it


--- Page 462 ---
462 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 13
is not very easy for the unintelligent to understand the purport of
this story because it is difficult to extricate the exact meaning from
the allegory. I therefore request Your Holiness to give the direct
meaning.
PURPORT

There are many stories and incidents in Srimad-Bhagavatam that are
described figuratively. Such allegorical descriptions may not be under-
stood by unintelligent men: therefore it is the duty of the student to ap-
proach a bona fide spiritual master for the direct explanation.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Thirteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, “Further Talks Between
King Rahigana and Jada Bharata.”


--- Page 463 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent devotional scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic Institutes), liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed. Srila
Prabhupada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, assisted the
Gaudiya Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance. started an
English fortnightly magazine, edited 10, typed the manuscripts and
checked the galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies
freely and struggled to maintain the publication. Once begun. the maga-
zine never stopped: it is now being continued by his disciples in the
West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion.
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
“Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of fifty-four. Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life. and four years later he adopted the
vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his studies and writ-
ing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana. where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and
writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At
Radha-Damodara, Srila Prabhupada began work on his life’s master-
piece: a multivolume translation and commentary on the eighteen thou-
sand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote
Easy Journey to Other Planets. |

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States. in 1965. to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time, His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes
of authoritative translations. commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

463


--- Page 464 ---
464 Srimad-Bhagavatam

In 1965. when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
grown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of almost one
hundred asramas, schools, temples. institutes and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana, an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana, now a thriving farm community of more than one thou-
sand acres. his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. The school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the
beginning of 1975 the enrollment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large interna-
tional center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India. which is also
the site for a planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the
magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guest House in
Vrndavana, India. These are centers where Westerners can live to gain
firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their
authoritativeness. depth and clarity, they are used as standard textbooks
in numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into
eleven languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, established in 1972
exclusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace. has thus become
the world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and
philosophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most
recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —com-
pleted by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature and culture.


--- Page 465 ---
References
The statements of Srimad-Bhagavatam are all confirmed by standard

Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are quoted in this

book on the pages listed.

Bhagavad-gita, 10, 21, 23, 28, 41, 45, 69, 80 81, 90, 113, 114, 117, 122,
129, 135, 150, 172, 173, 181, 183. 187, 189, 192, 197, 199, 201,
211,222, 223, 229, 239-240, 244, 245, 255, 274, 276, 278, 279,
309-310, 314-315, 319, 341, 350, 351, 361, 377, 379, 383, 386,
390, 408-409. 410, 412, 422, 453

Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Rapa Gosvami), 5, 19, 150, 181, 367

Brahma-samhita, 17,52, 57,112,116, 159, 191, 204, 254, 260, 267. 287.
295, 394, 401, 414.

Brhan-naradiya Purana, 31

Caitanya-bhagavata (Vrndavana dasa Thakura). 370

Caitanya-candramrta (Prabodhananda Sarasvati), 85

Caitanya-caritamrta (Krsnadasa Kaviraja). 89, 127-128. 168. 174. 217.
320

Chandogya Upanisad, 145-146, 411

Garga Upanisad, 23

Gautamiya-tantra, 117

Hari-bhakti-vilasa (Sanatana Gosvami). 117

15079071500, 20-21

Jyotir Veda, 59-60

465


--- Page 466 ---
466 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Jyotir Veda, 59-60

Katha Upanisad, 187, 440

Mahabharata, 255

Manu-sambhita, 106

Narada-paiicaratra, 205-206, 385

Padma Purana, 148, 204-205

Satya-samhita, 176

Skanda Purana, 150

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 5, 21, 38, 46, 66, 82-83, 128, 141, 153, 156, 159,
172, 182, 184, 202-203, 223, 234, 245, 252, 258, 279, 311, 347,
353, 363, 408, 410, 438, 446, 452, 459

Svetasvatara Upanisad, 13, 132

Vedanta-sitra, 14

Visnu Purana, 27


--- Page 467 ---
Glossary

A
Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by his own example.
Adhoksaja—the Supreme Lord, who cannot be seen with material eyes.
Ahari brahmasmi—the realization that “I am spirit soul.”
Ahariv mameti—the false conception of “I” and “mine.”
Akama —freedom from material desire.
Ananda—spiritual bliss.
Apavarga—liberation from pavarga, the miseries of material existence.
Apipata—desiring only to perform devotional service to Krsna.
Aprakrta—transcendental to material nature.
Aprameya—immeasurable.
Apsaras —the society girls of the heavenly planets.
Arca-vigraha—the Deity form of the Lord.
Artha—economic development.
Asat—temporary.
Asrama—one of the four orders of spiritual life.
Atma—the self.
Atma-tattva —spiritual science.
Avadhiita—a great saintly person who has surpassed the need for regulative

principles.

Avara— material.
Avatara—an incarnation of the Lord who descends from the spiritual sky.

B
Bhagavad-bhakti—See: Bhakti-yoga.
Bhagavan —Krsna, who is full in six opulences.
Bhakta—a devotee.
Bhakti-yoga—devotional service to Krsna.
Brahma-bandhu—a fallen member of a brahmana family.
Brahma-bhita—the joyful state of being free from material contamination.
Brahmacarya—the vow of strict abstinence from sex indulgence.

467


--- Page 468 ---
468 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Brahma-jijiidsa—inquiry into the Absolute Truth.
Brahmajyoti—the effulgence emanating from the body of the Lord.
Brahma-satra—meditating on the Supreme Lord always.
Brahmacari—a celibate student under the care of a bona fide spiritual
master.
Brahmana—the intelligent class of men.
C
Candala—an outcaste or untouchable; a dog-eater.
D
Daiva-varnasrama—the transcendental system of four social orders and four
spiritual orders.
Dama—sense control; a quality of brahmanas.
Dandavat—offering respect to a superior by falling flat like a stick.
Dasyu-dharma—the occupational duty of rogues and thieves.
Devas —demigods.
Dhara-mandala—a planet.
Dharma —the capacity to render service, which is the essential quality of a
living being.
Dharmanveksamanah—strictly according to religious principles.
Dhira—a sober person who has controlled senses.
Dvija—a brahmana.
Dvija-bandhu— See: Brahma-bandhu.
G
Garbhadhana-sarskara— Vedic ceremony of purification performed by the
parents before conceiving a child.
Govinda—a name of Krsna meaning He who gives pleasure to the cows and
the senses.
Grhastha—one who lives in God conscious married life.
Grhavrata—one who has taken a vow to execute family duties.


--- Page 469 ---
Glossary 469
Gunas—the modes of nature.
Guru—a bona fide spiritual master.
Guru-daksina—a gift given to one’s spiritual master.
Gurukula—the place of the spiritual master, where his disciples come to
study and perform devotional service.
H
Hari—a name of Krsna meaning He who removes all inauspicious things
from the heart.
Hari-nama-sarkirtana—See: Sarikirtana.
Hrdaya-granthi—the hard knot of family attachment in the heart.
||
58880 -- 111 mystic yoga, the perfection of control over others.
J
Jwan-mukta—a person who is already liberated even while living in this
body.
Jitendriya—one who has conquered the senses.
Jaana-kanda—the division of the Vedas dealing with empirical speculation
in pursuit of the truth.
JAani—one who is engaged in the cultivation of knowledge.
Jyoti-sastra—the Vedic science of astronomy.
K
Kaitava-dharma —cheating religion.
Kala-sarpa—the snakelike time factor.
Kama —lust.
Karma—fruitive activities and their subsequent reactions.
Karma-bandha—the bondage of fruitive activities.
Karma-kanda—the performance of fruitive sacrifices according to Vedic in-
junctions.


--- Page 470 ---
470 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Karmatmaka—one whose mind is colored with fruitive activity.

Karmendriyas—the working senses.

Karmis—{ruitive workers.

Kirtana—the devotional process of chanting.

Krpa-siddhi—perfection attained simply by the blessings of a superior per-
son.

Ksatriya—the administrative class of men.

Kunkuma—a red cosmetic powder.

L
Laghima—in mystic yoga, the perfection of becoming the heaviest.
M

Maha-bhagavata—a great devotee.

Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Raima Rama, Hare
Hare.

Mahatma —a great soul.

Manisaya—by intelligence.

Mantra—a transcendental sound heard and chanted to purify one’s con-
sciousness and raise it to the spiritual platform.

Martya-loka—the earth planet, where death is very prominent.

Maya —the energy of the Lord which deludes the living entities who desire
to forget Him.

Mlecchas—those who cannot follow Vedic regulative principles; meat-eaters.

Moha—illusion.

Moksa—liberation.

Miidhas—fools and rascals.

Mukti—liberation from material bondage.

Muni—a sage or self-realized soul.

Muni-putra—the son of a saintly person.

N

Naisthika-brahmacari—one who has been celibate since birth.

Nirguna—without material qualities.


--- Page 471 ---
Glossary 471

Niskificana—having no desire for material comfort.

Nistraigunya—the transcendental position above the three modes of nature.

Nitya-baddha—an eternally conditioned soul.

Nitya-mukta—an eternally liberated soul.

Nivrtti-marga—the path of renouncing sense enjoyment.

0
Orikara—the primal sound chanted in Vedic hymns which represents Krsna.
ए

Paricaratrika-vidhi—the devotional process of Deity worship.

Para—transcendental.

Para bhakti—transcendental devotional service of the Supreme Lord.

Paramahamsa—a sannyasi or devotee on the highest spiritual platform.

Paramitma—the Supersoul, the localized aspect of the Supreme Lord.

Pinda—prasada from Lord Visnu offered to the forefathers.

Pitas—forefathers.

Pitrloka —the planet where the forefathers live in great delight as long as
they are remembered by their descendants.

Prakamya—in mystic yoga, the perfection of automatically realizing any
desire.

Pramatta—one who is crazy because he cannot control his senses.

Prajapatis—the progenitors of mankind.

Prapti—in mystic yoga, the perfection of obtaining anything simply by
reaching out.

Prasada—the remnants of food offered to Krsna.

Pravrtti-marga—the path by which the living entities are given a chance to
enjoy and at the same time are regulated so that they can eventually
come to spiritual life.

Purnscali—a woman who 15 easily carried away by men. not to be trusted.

Pirna—the complete whole. Krsna.

Purusa-avataras—the primary Visnu expansions of Krsna who are involved
in the creation of the universe.

Purusottama—the greatest living personality. Krsna.


--- Page 472 ---
472 Srimad-Bhagavatam

R
Rajarsis—great saintly kings.
Rajo-guna—the material mode of passion.

S
Sabda-brahma—transcendental sound vibration.
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the eternal form of the Lord which is full of bliss

and knowledge.

Sadhu —a great saintly person.
Sadhu-sariga—the association of liberated persons.
Salagrama-sila—a Deity incarnation of Narayana in the form of a stone.
Sama —fixed in mind control; a quality of brahmanas.
Sama-darsinah—seeing with equal vision.
Samadhi—trance, absorption in God consciousness.
Sampreksya nasikagram—keeping eyes half-open in practice of yoga.
Sarisara—the cycle of birth and death in the material world.
Sankirtana—congregational chanting of the holy name of the Lord.
Sannyasi—one in the renounced order of life.
Santa —peaceful.
Sarva-karana-karanam —the cause of all causes, Krsna.
Sastras—revealed scriptures.
Sattva-guna—the material mode of goodness.
Satya—truthfulness; a quality of brahmanas.
Satya-kama—all of one’s desires being directed to the Supreme Truth.
Seva—devotional service.
Sevaka—a servant.
Sevya—one who is served.
Siddhis—mystic powers or perfections.
Sivatama—the most auspicious.
Smrti—scriptures compiled by living entities under transcendental direction.
Sraddha ceremony —the offering of visnu-prasada to one’s forefathers.
Sravana—the devotional process of hearing.
Srivatsa—the sign of the goddess of fortune on the chest of Visnu.


--- Page 473 ---
Glossary 473
Sruti—scriptures received directly from God.
Stri—woman.
Siidra—the laborer class of men.
Sukla—a person in the mode of goodness; also a name of Visnu.
Sukrtinah— pious persons.
Svamsa—nondifferent plenary expansions of the Lord.
Svarapa-vismrti—forgetting one’s real constitutional position.
T
Tamo-guna—the material mode of ignorance.
Tapasya—voluntary acceptance of some material trouble for progress in
spiritual life.
Tilaka—sacred clay used to mark twelve temples of Visnu on the body of a
devotee.
Titiksa— tolerance; a quality of brahmanas.
Tulasi—Krsna’s favorite plant.
U
Ugra-karma—horrible activities which are the basis of a demoniac civiliza-
tion.
Upasana-kanda —worship of demigods, ultimately of Visnu. as prescribed in
the Vedas.
Upadhis —material designations.
Urukrama—Krsna, who performs wonderful feats.
\%
Vaikuntha—the spiritual sky, where there is no anxiety.
Vairagya—the spirit of renunciation.
Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Visnu.
Vaisnava-aparadha—an offense at the lotus feet of a Vaisnava.
Vaisya—the class of men involved in business and farming.
Vanaprastha—retired life in which one travels to holy places in preparation
for the renounced order of life.


--- Page 474 ---
474 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Varna—the four divisions of society according to quality of work and situa-
tion in the modes of nature.

Varna-sarikara—unwanted children produced from illicit sex.

Varnasrama-dharma—See Daiva-varnasrama.

Vibhinnarsa—separated expansions of the Lord, the minute living entities.

Vidagdha—one who is expert in the art of flattering women.

Vidira-vigata—See: Candala.

Vijara—not subjected to the miseries of old age.

Vijighatsa—free from desire for material enjoyment.

Vijriana—practical knowledge.

Vimrtyu—not subjected to death and rebirth.

Vimidha—See: Pramatta.

Visaya—material affairs of sense gratification.

Visaya-tarariga—the waves of material existence.

Visoka —callous to material distress and happiness.

Visnu-tattvas—the innumerable plenary expansions of Krsna, each of whom
is also God.

Y

Yajia— Vedic sacrifice.

Yajia-purusa—the enjoyer of all Vedic sacrifices, Visnu.

Yogamayd —the internal potency of the Lord.

Yogesvara— Krsna, who is the master of all mystic powers.

Yojana —eight miles.

Yuga—the four ages of the universe.


--- Page 475 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide
Vowels
FA: आ इः ই; Fu Fs Wr ऋः
-
त्तु] ष ट Wai ओ० AT au
=+ 771 (anusvara) ई 1 (visarga)
Consonants
Gutturals: Fh ka I kha I ga चश gna
Palatals: चच ca cha A ja = jha A fa
Cerebrals: ठ ta & tha ड da ও dha Ql na
Dentals: d ta थ tha (= da दय dha wna
Labials: प pa FR pha ba म्‌ bha Homa
Semivowels: H ya Ira la J va
Sibilants: श da 9 sa H sa
Aspirate: ह ha S =’ (avagraha) - the apostrophe
The vowels above should be pronounced as follows:
a - like the ain organ or the u in but.
৪ — like the a in far but held twice as long as a.
1 — like the i in pin.
1 - like the i in pique but held twice as long as i.
u — like the u in push.
प — like the @ in rule but held twice as long as u.
4.75


--- Page 476 ---
476 Srimad-Bhagavatam
r — like the ri in Rita (but more like French ru).
I — same as ए but held twice as long.
1 - like 1766 (17४५,
€ - like thee in they.
ai — like the ai in aisle.
o - like the ० in go.
au — like the ow in how.
m (anusvara) — a resonant nasal like the n in the French word bon.
h (visarga) — a final h-sound: ah is pronounced like aha; ith like ihi.
The consonants are pronounced as follows:
k - asin kite kh— asin Eckhart
g ~ asingive gh- asin dig-hard
A - asin sing ८ — asin chair
ch— asin staunch-heart j — asin joy
jh — as in hedgehog 7 — asin canyon
t - asintub th — as in light-heart
n - asrna (prepare to say dha- as in red-hot
the r and say na). d - asin dove
Cerebrals are pronounced with tongue to roof of mouth, but the following
dentals are pronounced with tongue against teeth:
t - asin tub but with tongue against teeth.
th — asin light-heart but tongue against teeth.
d — asin dove but tongue against teeth.
dh asin red-hot but with tongue against teeth.
n — asin nut but with tongue in between teeth.
p - asinpine ph— as in up-hill (not f)
b — asin bird bh- asin rub-hard
m — asin mother y — asinyes
r — asinrun 1 - asin light
# _ 25 171 vine. ও — asinsun
§ (palatal) — as in the s in the German word sprechen
5 (cerebral) — as the sh in shine
h - asin home
There is no strong accentuation of syllables in Sanskrit, only a flowing
of short and long (twice as long as the short) syllables.


--- Page 477 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each of the
Sanskrit poetry verses and the first line of each Sanskrit prose verse of this volume of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, arranged in English alphabetical order. In the first column the
Sanskrit transliteration is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the
chapter-verse references and page number for each verse are to be found.
A anyasyam api jaydyarn trayah putrd 1.28 53
anyonya-vairah sukha-lesa-hetor 5.16 186
anyonya-vitta-vyatisanga-vrddha 13.13 444
adhvany amusminn ajaya nivesito 13.19 452 apatyatam agad yasya 4.6 146
adhvany amusminn uru-kpechra-vitta- 13.13 444 api bata sa vai kipana ena-balako 8.16 284
adhyatma-yoga-grathitari tavoktam 12.3 403
adhyatma-yogena vivikta-sevaya 5.12 179 api ca na vrkah sald-vrko ‘nyatamo 8.18 286
adrsya-jhilli-svana-karna-sila 13.5 432 api ksemenasminn asramopavane 8.17 285
api svid akrta-sukrtam agatya 8.20 288
agnidhra-sutds te métur anugrahad 2.21 105 api svid asau bhagavan udu-patir 8.24 292
agnidhredhmajihva-yajiabahu-mahavira 1.25 48 apunya-vrksan srayate ksudhardito 13.5 432
agnidhro rajatiptah kamanam 2.22 106
ahari ca yogesvaram atma-tattva- 10.19 360 aradhanari bhagavata thamano 12.14 421
aharn pura bharato nama raja 12.14 420 arhasi muhur arhattamarhanam ३.4 114
arthah kiyan bhavata siksitena 10.13 351
aho asadhv anusthitari yad abhinivesito = 1.37 67 asadita-havisi barhisi ৫0516 8.22 289
aho bataham rsayo bhavadbhir avitatha == 3.17 131 asadya 0207 kvacid agni-tapto 136 433
aho batayari harina-kunakah 89 276
aho bhuvah sapta-samudravatya 6.13 235 asaj-jitatma hari-sevaya Sitar 13.20 453
aho kastarh bhrasto ham 829 298  asanga-nisita-jadnanala-vidhatdsesa 3.11 123
asmad-vidhasya mana-unnayanau 2.12 9%
aho kastari bhratar vyaktam uru- 106 340 ৫5002) tat tad yad ayurkta nathas 1.15 29
aho nr-janmakhila-janma-sobhanari 13.21 454 astv evam ariga bhagavan bhajatarn 6.18 242
aho nu variso yasasavadatah 6.14 236
ajanabhari namaitad varsari bharatam 7.3 249 atah kathancit sa vimukta dpadah 13.19 451
aklista-buddhya bharatari bhajadhvarn == 5.20 193 atha ca duhitarari prajapater 1.24 49
atha ha bhagavan adi-deva etasya 1.7 13
akovidah kovida-vida-vadan 11.1 374 atha ha bhagavan rsabhadevah 48 149
alingya maya-racitantaratma 11.6 383 atha ha tam aviskrta-bhuja-yugala 3.3 112
05९ ‘dhi darvi 5007072 ca yasyarm 126 405
anena yogena yathopadesari 5.14 182 atha ha tam utpattyaivabhivyajyamana 4.1] 138
anyada bhrsam udvigna-mana 8.15 283 athaivam akhila-loka-pala-lalamo ‘pi 6.6 226
atha kadacit kascid vrsala-patir 912 320
ati-sukumdra-kara-caranorah 531 212 athakasyacid dvija-varasyargirah 9.1 306
atmana evanusavanam aijasavyatirekena 3.8 119
ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair 58 175 atha katharicit skhalana-ksut-patana 3.12 124
atyeti durgasrita arjitarin 1.18 35 athanayapi na bhavata ijyayoru 37 118
avartate 'dyapi na kascid atra 13.14 445 atha panayas tari sva- 9.15 323
477


--- Page 478 ---
478 Srimad-Bhagavatam
atha punah sva-sibikayam visama 10.7 342 cetobhir akatibhir atanoti 11.4 380
atha samira-vega-vidhiita-venu 68 229 chaya-nirvrta-citténdrn 1.3 5
atha sindhu-sauvira-pate 704: 880৫705%/৫ 10.1 334
atha tad evaitad duravagamari 13.26 461
atha ta enam anavadya-laksanam 9.14 322 D
atha ta $vara-vacah sopalambham 10:3" ` 330
atha vrsala-raja-panih purusa- 9.16 325 daivam na tat syan na patis ca sa syan 5.18 188
athayam eva varo hy arhattama 31011 dastah sma sete kva ca danda-sukair 139 439
atha yaviyast dvija-sati sva-garbha 9.7 315 dehendriyasvasaya-sannikarsat 10.22 365
atho aha jana-sangad asango 12.15 422 devasurebhyo maghavat-pradhana 522 195
dhrta tanir usati me purani 5.24 200
avidyayd manasa kalpitds te 129 412
avirhitah kvapi tirohitas ca 11.12 391 dravya-desa-kala-vayah-sraddhartvig 4.17 158
avirhotra 100 drumilas 4.11 152 dravya-svabhavaiaya-kala-karma- 12.10 413
ayam 0101070 rajasopapluta- 6.12 234 dravya-svabhavasaya-karma-kalair 11.11 389
ayari jano nama calan prthivyam 12.5 405 drstah sramah karmata 61772710 vai 10.21 363
drstva punas tari saghrnah kubuddhim 5.17 188
B drumesu rarisyan suta-dara-vatsalo 13.18 450
dubhitararh corjasvatim namosanase 1.34 61
badham ५4८07) bhagavata uttamaslokasya 1.5 Jf duratyaye ‘dhvany ajaya nivesito 13.1 426
banav imau bhagavatah 2.8 91
barhisi tasminn eva visnudatta bhagavan 3.20 134
bhagavan api bharata tad-upanitarhanah 1.10 18 E
bhagavan api manuné yathavad 1.21 40
bhagavan rsabha-sarjiia atma-tantrah == 4.14 154 ekadasam svikaranam mameti 11.10 388
bhagavatarsabhena pariraksyamana 4.18 159 ekadasasan manaso hi vrttaya 11.9 387
bharatas tu maha-bhagavato yada 7.1 248 ekada tu maha-nadyan krtabhiseka- 81 270
bhauman divyarh manusar ca 1.41 74 etavad anuvada-paribhasaya pratyudirya 10.14 352
bhavah parah so "tha virinca-viryah 5:22 195 etesarn kavir mahavirah savana iti 1.26 48
bhaviya nasaya ca karma karturh 1.13 23 evam aghatamana-manorathkula 826 294
bhayar pramattasya vanesv api syad 1.17 33 evam anusdsydtmajan svayam anusistan = 5.28 206
bhratrvyam 67073 tad adabhra-viryam = 11.17 397 evar bahv abaddham api bhasamanarn = 10.8 343
bhrsam amarsa-rosavesa-rabhasa 9.18 328 evam eva khalu mahad-abhicarati 9.19 330
bhuriksveha bhogan purusatidistan 1.19 37 evarn go-mpga-kaka-caryaya 5.34: 215
bha-sarnsthanar krtar yena 140 73 evar karma-visuddhya visuddha 74. 287
bhistesu virudbhya uduttama ye 5.21 195 ण्णः प्राः sthilam anur brhad yad 12.10 413
bibkrat prthan-némabhi ripa-bhedam 11.5 381 evar manah karma-vasarm prayurikte 56 173
brahmanyo 'nyah kuto nabher 4.7 147 evarn niruktari ksiti-sabda-vrttam 129 411
evar paro bhagavan vasudevah 11.14 393
C evarn pitari sampravrtte tad কা 70
6৮073 sva-tanuja atmany anuragavesita 9.0 313
calan kvacit kantaka-sarkaranghrir 13.8 437 evam upasamayanesu sva-tanayesv 129 54
carturh tapo 1711057 maya saha mitra 2.15 100 evar varsayuta-sahasra-paryantavasita = 7.8 258


--- Page 479 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 479
G J
gandhakrti-sparsa-rasa-§ravamsi 11.10 388 Jadandha-mika-badhira-pisacon- 5.29 208
gantur yadi 57৫0 adhigamyam adhva 10.9 345 Jambii-plaksa-salmali-kusa-krauiica- 1.32 59
gatasmytir vindati tatra tapan 5.7 174 Janasya goptasmi vikatthamano 12.7 407
gayanti yatratya-jana murdreh 6.13 235 Jitendriyasyatma-rater budhasya 1.17 33
gomayavo yatra haranti sarthikar 13.2 428
Jivan-mrtatvari niyamena rajan 10.11 348
grhe 7८71010 yan-miilah 1.1 2 Jaanar visuddharh paramartham ekam 12.11 415
grhesu jayatmaja-ratimatsu 53 168 Jvardmayartasya yathagadam sat 12.2 401
grhesv abhiniveso "yarn 12 4
gunanuraktarh vyasandya jantoh 11.8 385 K
guror hares caranopdsandstro 11.17 397
gurur na sa sydtsva-jano na sa syat 5.18 188
ka iSvaras tatra kim 61100 0773 10.12 349
kamo manyur mado lobhah 0.9 226
H karhi sma cit ksudra-rasan vicinvaris 13.10 446
karma-bandhas ca yan-milah 6.5 225
karmasayam hrdaya-granthi-bandham 5.14 182
(49 5410 10 kas 10773 svayarh tad-abhijiio vipascid 5.17 188
harim tad-iha-kathana-Srutabhyarn 12.16 423 ৮০ तनि व pet 1016 356
kasyasi kutratya ihapi kasmat 10.16 356
ka (एमा, cikirsasi ca kim 257) 89
I ka vitma-vrttir adanad dhavir 008৫ ण्व 2.13 97
kavir havir antariksah 4411. 182
1007 $arirarh mama durvibhavyam 5.19 190 कोः sambhrtar rucirayor dvija $rigayos te 2.11 = 94
ije ca bhagavantar yajna-kratu- 75 251 kirh ৮৫ are 0८077107 tapas 8.23 290
iabhisrstarh hy avarundhmahe ‘nga 1.5 29 kim vatmaja-vislesa-juara-dava 8.25 292
iti bhagavata-dharma-dariana 4.12 152 1111111 1.1.111 3.13, 125
iti ha sma sakala-veda-loka-deva 0.10 238
ko nu tat karma rajarser 4.0 146
iti ha ४८४८ sa jagati-patir 1.23 44 ko nv asya kastham aparo 'nugacchen 6.15 237
iti krtdnusariga asana-sayandtana 8.11 279 ko va tha te ‘parajito ‘pardjitayd 3.14 120
iti lalananunayati-visarado gramya 2.17 102 kriyayam nirvartyamandayam antarale 8.14 282
iti ndna-yoga-carydcarano bhagavan 5.35 216 krsista maitri-drsam arta-bandho 10.24 368
iti nigadenabhisttyamano bhagavan 3.10 130
krtavartarah purusah sa adyas 0.14 230
iti nisamayantya merudevyah patim 3.19 133 ksarodeksu-rasoda-suroda-ghrtoda- 1.33 60
iti samabhihito maha-bhagavato 1.20 39 ksetrajiia atma purusah puranah 11.13 392
iti tesa vrsalanam rajas-tamah 9.17 326 ksetrajiia etd manaso vibhitir 11.12 391
10107 dhrta-bhagavad-vrata १.13 265 ksvelikayarm mar mrsa-samadhinamilita 8.21 288
itthari vimanyur anusisyad ataj-jaan 5.15 185 kudeha-manahi-vidasta-drsteh 12.2 401
ity evar nigidha-nirvedo visrjya 8.30 301 kusa-kusuma-samit-palasa-phala 8.12 280
ity evam uttard-matah sa vai 13.24 458 kvacic ca gandharva-purar pravistah 13.7 435


--- Page 480 ---
480 Srimad-Bhagavatam
kvacic ca §itatapa-vata-varsa 13.11 442 na hy adbhutarh tvac-caranabja-renubhir 13.22 455
kvacic ca vatyotthita-parsu-dhimra 13.4 430 na hy 7005৫ tattva-vimarsandya 12.4 404
kvacid vitoyah sarito "bhiyati 136 433 naivartha-dharmaih paratah svato va 1१2 22
kvacin mitho vipanan yac ca kiricid 13.11 442 na kuryat karhicit sakhyarn 63 222
kvacin nigirno ‘jagarahind jano 139 439 namo mahadbhyo stu namah $isubhyo ` 13.23 456
kvacit kadacid dhari-cakratas trasan 13.16 447 namo namah karana-vigrahaya 12.1 400
kvacit kvacit ksina-dhanas tu tasmin 13.12 443 namo "vadhita dvija-bandhu-linga 12.1 400
kvacit pramadad giri-kandare patan 13.18 450 na niinari bhagava atmaramanarn 04. 220
kvacit tu gandharva-purariprapasyati 13.3 429 na ninarh mukta-sangandr 1.2 4
L nardyano bhagavan vasudevah 11.13 392
na sadhu manye yata atmano yam 54 170
na siirayo hi vyavahdram 67077. 11.1 374
lokah 5৮০ ৫1 Sreyasi nasta-drstir 5.16 186 na tasya kascit tapasa vidyaya va 1124722
lokarh pradariaya suhrttama 1200407 71९ 2.12 96 na tasya tattva-grahandya saksad 11.3 378
lokasya yah karunayabhayam 6.19 243 na 10৫71 tyajami dayitarh dvija-deva 210 151
M na vd etad visnudatta mahad-adbhutarn 9.20 330
na vaya nara-deva pramatta- 10.4 337
na veda-vadesu hi tattva-vadah 1.2 78
mahad-vimanat sva-krtad dhi mad 10.25 369 na vikriya visva-suhrt-sakhasya 10.25 369
mahantas te sama-cittah prasanta 52. 160 na yad dhrsikesa-yasah-krtatmanar 13.21 454
77101001071 khalu viprarse 1.3 $
mahat-sevar dvaram ahur vimuktes 52 166 nayar deho deha-bhajar nrloke 5.1 164
mah caru-$migy arhasi netum 2.16 101 na yavad eta tanu-bhm narendra 11.15 395
na yavad etan mana atma-lingam 11.16 396
manasvino nirjita-dig-gajendra 13.15 446 nibodha tatedam rtar bravimi LLY +20
mano-vaco-drk-karanehitasya 9.27 205 nidra ratir manyur aha madah 5५८० 10.10 346
manur api parenaivari pratisandhita 1.22 42
mat-karmabhir mat-kathaya ca nityarn = 5.11 178 nimlocati ha bhagavan sakala-jagat- 8.19 286
matrani karmani pura ca tasam 9. 387 nirvaira-samyopasamena putra 5.11 178
nisevyamano ‘nudinar mumuksor 12.13 419
matto ‘py anantdt paratah parasmat 5.25 201 nityarn dadati kdmasya 6.4 224
mauhirtikad yasya samagamac came = 13.22 455 nitya-nivrita-nimitta-sva-siddha- 99 316
mydhe Sayiran na tu tad vrajanti 13.15 446
muktari na te smarasi vakra-jata- 2.14 98 nityanubhita-nija-labha-nivrtta-trsnak == 6.19 243
mubkto ‘pi tavad bibhryat sva-deham L16 32 nivdsa-toya-dravindtma-buddhis 134 430
nana hy aryah sadhava upasama- 8.10 278
N nanarh pramattah kurute vikarma 54 170
nabhir apatya-kamo ‘prajaya merudevya 3.1 109 P
nabhis tu yathabhilasitar suprajastvam = 4.4 142
na brahmanais tulaye bhitamanyat =` 5.23 198
na cchandasa naiva jalagni-siryair 12.12 418 pade pade ‘bhyantara-vahninarditah 138 437
nagny-arka-somanila-vittapastrac 10.17 “357 pariko 'runah surabhir atma-visina 2.11 94
naharh visarike sura-raja-vajran 10.17 357  parabhavas 12800 abodha-jdto 5.5 171


--- Page 481 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 481
para-devata-prasadadhigatatma 1.38 69 sa mar smytir mrga-dehe ‘pi vira 12.15 422
parijandnuraga-viracita-iabala 36 117 sambhavitavyani pade pade vo 5.26 203
paro-rajah savitur jata-vedo 7.14 266 Samo damah satyam anugrahas ca 5.24 200
pathisu ca mugdha-bhavena tatra 8.13 281 samparete pitari nava bhrataro meru 2.23 107
pitary uparate bhratara enam atat 98 আঃ sampracaratsu nand-yagesu viracitanga- 7.6 252
sarmsargiko dosa eva nitnam ekasyapi 10.5 338
prabhita-virut-trma-gulma-gahvare 13.3 429
prasajjati kvapi lata-bhujasrayas 13.16 447 samm$ayo yar mahan brahman 1.4 6
prasturh pravrttah kim iharanam tat 10.19 360 sarvani mad-dhisnyataya bhavadbhis 5.26 203
pratyak praiantar bhagavac-chabda- = 12.11 415  sarvatra jantor vyasandvagatya 5.10 178
pritir na yavan mayi vasudeve 56 173 sarvatra mad-bhava-vicaksanena 5.13 179
sarve vahamo balim isvaraya 1.14 26
priyavrata-krtam karma 1.39. 22
priyavrato bhagavato 1.1 2 sastabhigopta nipatih prajanar 10.23 366
prsthe krto me yad adharma arad 5.19 190 sa siuvatha sutan navanuvatsarara grha = 2.20 104
purisah striya mithuni-bhavam etarn 58 175  satatra tatra gagana-tala udu-patir 1.8 16
purhsari tad-anghri-rajasa jita 1.35 62 satyam 10407 kintviha ১৫ eke 6.2 221
putras ca Sisydms ca nrpogurur va 5.15 185 sauvira-patir api sujana-samavagala 13.25 459
sa vai bhaval loka-niriksanartham 10.20 362
R sa vdsandtma visayoparakto 11.5 381
sima ca bhita-nirvrtyai 140 73
Sisyd ime bhagavatah 29 92
rahiiganaitattapasa na yati 12.12 418  Socyan imarhs tvam adhikasta-dinan 12.7 407
rahiigana tvam api hy adhvano ‘sya 13.20 453
rijan patir gurur alari bhavatar 6.18 241 sthaly-agni-tapat payaso 'bhitapas 10.22 365
मोः tapodhana tapas caratar 215 9 sthaulyari karsyam vyadhaya adhayas ০৫ 10.10 346
sukhaya duhkhaya ca deha-yogam 113) 233
s Surair hrta-svah kva ca nirvipna-cetdh 137 435
suretasadah punar Gvisya caste 7.14 266
sva-dharmam aradhanam acyutasya 10.23 366
sa bahuvin mahi-patih pitr-pitimahavad 7.4 = 250 == svapne niruktya grhamedhi-saukhyarn 11.3 378
sa ca kadacit pitrloka-kamah 2.2 80  sva-svdmya-bhavo dhruva idya yatra 10.11 348
sa capi pandaveya sindhu-sauvira 10.15 354
sa capi tad u ha pitr-sannidhav 95 312
sa ca prakrtair dvipada-pasubhir 9.10 317 1:
sd ca tad-asramopavanam ati-ramaniyarn 2.4 83
sd ca tatas tasya vira-yiitha-pater 2.18 103 tada janah samparivartate ‘smad 59 177
sac-chraddhaya brahmacaryena 5०5०० = 5.12 179 tadanim api parsva-vartinam atmajam 8.27 296
sa esa sartho 'rtha-parah paribhraman = 13.1 = 426 tad brizhy asarigo jadavan nigadha- 10.18 359
sa evam aparimita-bala-parakrama 1.36 65 tad upalabhya bhagavan adi-purusah 2.3 82
sahasrasah satasah kotisas ca 11.11 389 tad yatha balisanam svayam datmanah 39 120
sa kadacid atamano bhagavan rsabho 4.19 161 tair vancito harisa-kulam samavisann 13.17 449
sakala-jana-nikaya-vrjina-nirasana 35 114 taj-jati-rasena sunirvrtendriyah 13.17 449
saktasya yat siddhir abhi 1.4 6 tam anu kusavarta ilavarto brahmavarto 4.10 152


--- Page 482 ---
482 Srimad-Bhagavatam
tam evavidire madhukarim iva 26 86 U
taris tan vipanndn sa hi tatra tatra 13.14 445
(07 tv ena-kunakari krpanari 9.7. 1273
tam upasrutya 5৫ mrga-vadhith 84 271 udvigna-mina-yugalarh dvija- 2:30 97
tan me bhavan nara-devabhimana- 10.24 368 unmatta-matta-jadavat sva-saristharn = 10.13 351
tan namato 'nyad vyavahara-milarh 128 409
tapo divyari putraka yena sattvari 5.1 164 AY
tasmad bhavantarh mama samsayartharm 12.3 402
tasmad bhavanto hrdayena jatah 5.20 193
tasman mano lingam ado vadanti 11.7 384 vacarh parari carana-paijara- 210 93

vacamsi yoga-grathitani sadho 10.18 359
tasman naro ’sanga-susanga-jita- 12.16 423 vaya bhavas te tata esa maharsir 1.11 20
11111 1.111.111 8.31 302 viditanuragam apaura-prakrtijana-pado 4.5 143
tasminn u ha va upasama-silah 130 = 50
tasmin vava kila sa ekalah 1411 -261 vimukta-sango jita-sat-sapatno 11.15 395
tasya ha daiva-muktasya pasoh 9.13 321 vin@ puman yena maha-vimohat 5.27 205

visesa-buddher vivaram manak ca 10.12 349
tasya ha va ena-kunaka uccair 88 274
tasya ha va evar mukta-lingasya 6.7 228
tasya ha ৮৫ ittharh varsmana variyasa 4.2 139 Y
tasya ha ৮৫৮৫ sraddhaya visuddha 32 110
tasya ha yah purisa-surabhi-saugandhya- 5.33 214

yacan parad apratilabdha-kamah 13.12 443
tasyah sulalita-gamana-pada-vinyasa 25 84 2৫০ choka-mohamaya-raga-lobha- 11.16 396
tasyam u ha va atmajan 7.2 248 21৫0৫ aha yogesvara drfyamanar 124 404
tasyam u ha va atmajan sa raja-vara 2.19 104 yada hi dvija-varasyesu 10.2 335
tasydpi ha va atmajasya viprah 94 310 yada ksitav eva cardcarasya 128 409
tasya utpatantya antarvatnya 8.5: 1272

2৫03 mano-hrdaya-granthir asya 59 177
tata agnidhriye 750 3.18 132 yada na pasyaty ayatha gunehan 57 174
tathaiva rajann uru-garhamedha- 11:2 375 yada tu parata aharari karma- 9.11 319
tato manusyah pramathas tato ‘pi 5.21 195 yad u ha viva tava punar adabhra- 3.15 128
tat-prasavotsarpana-bhaya-khedaturi 8.6 272 yad-vaci tantyarh guna-karma-damabhih 1.14 20
tatra ha va enari devarsir harasa-yanena 1.9 17

yad-visrambhac 007৫0 cirnan 6:3 =222
tatrapi ha va atmano mrgatva 8.28 297 2৫৫ yac chirsanyacaritari tat tad 4.15 156
tatrapi svajana-sargac ca bhriam 9.3 308 yadyapi sva-viditarh sakala-dharmara 4.16 157
tatra tada rajan harini pipasaya 8.2 270 ya ha va iha bahu-vida 13.26 461
tatra tatra pura-gramakara-kheta 5.30 209 yah sat sapatnan vijigisamano 1.18 35
tatrati-krcchrat pratilabdhamano 13.10 440

yarhi ৮৫৮৫ ha rajan sa raja-putrah 1.6 11
tavan ayari vyavaharah sadavih 11.7 384 yarhi ৮৫৮৫ sa bhagavan lokam 5.32 213
taya peptyamana udake tavad 83 27) yas cakre nirayaupamyari 1.41 74
tayettham avirata-purusa-paricaryaya 7.12 263
te ca hy arvaktanaya nija-loka- 6.11 233 yasmin bhavan radha-nijabhimano 12.6 405
tvam tv abja-nabhanghri-saroja-kosa- 1.19 37 yasmin nrbhih prahutarh sraddhayaham 5.23 198
tvayoditari vyaktam avipralabdhari 10.9 345 yas tu tatra pumas tari 9.2 300


--- Page 483 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 483
yasya barhisi yajiesarn 47 147 yavat kriyas tavad 1007 mano vai 55 171
yasya hindrah spardhamano bhagavan = 4.3 140 yaviyarisa ekasitir jayanteydh pitur 4.13 153
yasya kilanucaritam upakarnya korka = 6.9 230 ye brahmana gam avadhita-lingas 13.23 457
yasyam eva kavaya atmanam aviratarn = 6.17 240 26507: khalu maha-yogibharato jyesthah 4.9 151
‘yasyam ime san nara-deva dasyavah 13.2 428 yesdrn kim u syad itarena tesam 925 [201
‘yathanilah sthavara-jaigamanam 11.14 393 yena ha viva kalau manujipasadi deva = 6.10 231
yathanubhitam pratiyata-nidrah 1.16 32 ye va mayise krta-sauhrdartha 53 168
‘yatha pradipo ghrta-vartim asnan 11.8 385 ye va u ha tad-ratha-carana-nemi- 1.31 58
yathasatodanayandady-abhavat 10.21 363 yogena dhrty-udyama-sattva-yukto 2.13 179
20170 ha ০৫০৫ bhagavan harir adyapi 7.9 259 yogesvaranarh gatim andha-buddhih 10.20 362
yatrasrama-padany ubhayato nabhibhir = 7.10 260 yoginah krta-maitrasya 64 224
yatrottamasloka-gunanuvidah 12.13 419 yo nemi-nimnair akaroc 1.39 72
2200 avabhasayati sura-girim 1.30 56 ० 180 tvayya kara-saroja-hatah patarigo 2.14 98
2৫0৫7 mano rajasd piirusasya 11.4 380 yo yoga-mayah sprhayaty udasta 6.15 237


--- Page 484 ---
General Index
Numerals in boldface type indicate references to translations of the verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
A Affection
for devotees as cause of Supreme Lord's
appearance, 111
Absolute Truth Aggressor
brahma-jijiiasa as search for, 183 can be killed according to Vedas, 327
descriptions in Vedic literature give one Agni
conception of, 116 one should offer respects to. 255
is Bhagavan. 416-417 ten names of, 48
only revealed to one who has mercy of Agnidhra Maharaja
great devotee, 418 appreciated beauty of Parvacitti. 100
three features of, 377-378 as example of fallen yogi, 86
Acaryas as father of Nabhi, 110, 133
cited on mother’s breast milk, 106 as King of Jambadvipa, 103
give instruction on offering obeisances, as son of Priyavrata. 48, 78, 81
115 began appreciating Purvacitti’s glance.
Acchinna-dara-dravina 92
quoted, 438 begot nine sons. 104
Activities Brahma understood desire of. 82-83
bewildered people rotting in material, 91 compared Pirvacitti’s eyebrows to string-
knowledge destroys reactions to material, less bows, 89-90
172 gave protection to inhabitants of Jam-
living entities bound by due to modes of badvipa. 78
nature, 309 hears tinkling of Parvacitti’s bangles.
performed in this life enjoyed or suffered 84-86
in next. 187 kingdoms in Jambudvipa received by
performed to satisfy yajia-purusa, 33 sons of. 106
Rsabhadeva performed wonderful. 217 knew art of flattering women. 102
should be performed for benefit of soul. praises Parvacitti’s breasts. 95-96
182 promoted to Pitrloka. 107
society divided according to people's. 78 questioned Parvacitti about workings of
Adahyo’ yam maya, 91
quoted, 229 worshiped Brahma. 80
Adanta-gobhir visatam tamisram Ahari sarvasya prabhavo mattah
quoted. 7 quoted. 197. 412
Adhoksaja Aharkara-vimudhatma kartaham
as name of Krsna. 456 quoted. 414
Adhyatma Aihistam yat tat punar-janma
quoted on becoming desireless. 181 quoted. 355
485


--- Page 485 ---
486 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Ajanabha Anxiety
as place of Rsabhadeva, 141 in three modes of material nature, 315
Ajanabha-varsa Anyabhilasita-sinyam jana
this planet formerly known as, 249 quoted. 172, 175. 419
Aksayyam ha vai caturmasya Apani cari’ bhakti sikhaimu sabare
quoted. 377 quoted. 150
Ambarisa Maharaja Apsaras
as rajarsi, 256 began strolling in park, 84
example of. 385 descend to earth, 105
offended by Durvasa. 457-458 Parvacitti as one of, 83. 86
placed lotus feet of Lord in his heart, 71 smelled flowers. 87
Anasaktasya visayan yatharham Arca-vigraha
verse quoted, 23 appears out of causeless mercy, 121
Anavrstya vinariksyanti durbhiksa Arhat
quoted. 434 concocted Jain religion, 230-231
Andantara-stham paramanu Arjuna
quoted. 204, 267 acted for satisfaction of the Lord. 45
Anger addresses Krsna as purusam dadyam in
mahatmas devoid of. 167 Gita, 82
of a Vaisnava. 344 advised by Krsna to ascend to transcen-
Rsabadeva's sons instructed to subdue. dental platform, 314-315
180 as devotee and friend of Krsna, 359-360
teacher must instruct without, 185 chastised by Krsna. 375
Animals Aruhya krechrena param padam
become strong when fed sufficient grains, quoted. 172
199 Asarigo hy ayam purusah
degraded men no better than, 318 quoted. 170, 341
human beings must act differently from, Asat-sariga-tyaga, —ei vaispava
165 verse quoted. 168
liberated by Rsabhadeva, 229 Asocyan anvasocas tvam prajiavadanms
modern society conducted by animals, quoted. 375
347 Asraddhaya hutar dattarn
those endeavoring for sense gratification _ verses quoted. 255
are no better than, 175 Asrama
with intelligence as superior to worms Bharata brought baby deer to his, 273
and snakes, 196 kurikuma powder perfumes Agnidhra’s.
word dharma never used in connection 95
with, 136 Association
Animal killing Bharata very cautious of, 309
regulated by Ssdstras to rectify meat- hearing and chanting in devotees’ revives
eaters, 325 Krsna consciousness. 423
Annad bhavanti bhitani importance of devotees’. 456-460
quoted, 199 of devotees is very meaningful. 301
Antariksa of devotees vanquishes desires for
as son of Rsabhadeva. 153 material opulence, 127


--- Page 486 ---
General Index 487
Association Austerities
with people fond of women and sex, 167 Agnidhra engaged in severe, 80
with those interested in maintaining the attractive bodily features as result of
body, 169 severe, 97
Asuras beauty as result of past, 100
as superior to Kinnaras, 196 engagement in leads to devotional ser-
Asvamedhari gavalambhari vice, 165
verses quoted, 251-252 human life meant for, 166
Atah sarvdsrayais caiva one becomes purified by, 367
verses quoted, 414 Priyavrata departed to undergo, 78
Atah $ri-krsna-namadi Rsabhadeva’s sons instructed to undergo,
quoted. 116 180
Atmano “vihitar karma should be done as offering to Krsna. 190
verses quoted. 181 Avajananti mar midha
Atma-patarii grham andha-kapam verses quoted, 192
ध quoted, 4 Avarana
Atmaramas as son of Bharata, 249
must always engage in devotional service, Avidyayam antare vartamanah
184 quoted, 187
Atmaramas ca munayo Avirhotra
verses quoted, 184 as son of Rsabhadeva. 153
Atom Ayi nanda-tanuja kirkaram
is not the cause of the universe, 412 verse quoted, 63-64
Atreya
accompanied Brahma to see Priyavrata, B
15
Attachment Back to Godhead
of ignorant to fruitive action, 186 cited on rebirth as lower animal in
of man to women, 99 Vrndavana, 295
to family as strongest illusion. 176 Badarikasrama
to family causes forgetfulness of death, Deity Nara-Narayana worshiped at. 145
314 Nabhi Maharaja went to. 144-145
to Lord required in sacrifice. 118 Bahiinari janmanam ante
turning away from family. 177 quoted, 172. 378
Attraction Baladeva
Agnidhra had none for material enjoy- as first expansion of Krsna. 394
ment, 102 Bali Maharaja
between male and female as basic princi- rejected Sukracarya. 189
ple of material existence, 176 tricked by Vamana. 63
of man to woman's face. breasts. and Barhismati
waist, 94 _ increased energy of Privavrata. 54-55
of Parvacitti to Agnidhra’s qualities. 103 as wife of Priyavrata. 46-47
Austerities Battle of Kuruksetra
Agnidhra couldn't distinguish between Krsna wanted Yudhisthira as emperor of
sexes as result of his. 95 planet in. 194


--- Page 487 ---
488 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Beauty Bhagavad-gita
as one of six opulences of God, 139 quoted on creations of modes of nature,
as result of austerities and penances, 100 67
displayed on Visnu's chest, 113 quoted on demigod worship, 15
of Apsara’s movements, 87 quoted on detachment from material ac-
of Parvacitti’s face, 98 tivities, 367
Pirvacitti attracted by Agnidhra's, 103 quoted on devotees as never lost, 9, 10
Bhadra quoted on devotees’ indifference to
as daughter of Meru, 108 material opulences, 75
Bhadra Kali quoted on devotees’ not falling down,
emerged from diety to protect Jada 37-38
Bharata, 327 quoted on devotional service as greatest
Sudra leader of dacoits wanted to worship, gain, 241
320 quoted on devotional service as never in
Bhadrasena vain, 422
as son of Rsabhadeva, 152 quoted on difficulty of overcoming divine
Bhadrasva energy, 127
as son of Parvacittiand Agnidhra, 104 quoted on disciplic succession, 40, 355
Bhagavad-gita quoted on encouraging ignorant to work
Arjuna addresses Krsna as purusem in spirit of devotion, 186
adyam in, 82 quoted on experiencing higher taste, 6
characteristic dharma explained in, 194 quoted on faithless rituals, 255
cited on good rebirth of a devotee, 307 quoted on falldown of devotee, 66
cited on practicing yoga with half-open quoted on flowery words of Vedas, 376
eyes, 85 quoted on full surrender to Krsna, 30
cited on temporary pains and pleasures, quoted on full surrender to spiritual
404 master. 403
quoted on acting for satisfaction of the quoted on giving up all varieties of
Lord, 33 religion, 136
quoted on activities performed for quoted on goal of living entities, 244
satisfaction of Krsna, 147 quoted on happiness and distress, 274
quoted on association with material quoted on highest yogi, 45, 361
nature, 309 quoted on immortality of soul, 341
quoted on attaining certain bodies after quoted on incarnation to rectify
death, 107 mismanagement, 408-409
quoted on attainment of Krsna's abode, quoted on inexpensive worship of the
227 Lord, 262
quoted on bewilderment of soul, 382 quoted on knowing that Krsna is every-
quoted on bodily encagement, 363 thing, 172
quoted on coming to transcendental plat- quoted on knowledge destroying reac-
form, 33, 380-381 tions to material activities, 172
quoted on constant hearing and chanting, quoted on Krsna as friend to devotee. 122
300 quoted on Krsna as original cause. 412
quoted on control of Lord over living en- quoted on Krsna as source of spiritual and
tities, 394 material worlds, 197


--- Page 488 ---
General Index 489
Bhagavad-gita Bhagavad-gita
quoted on Krsna as supreme truth, 113 quoted on regulative principles, 276
quoted on Krsna being covered from quoted on result of hearing and chanting.
foolish and unintelligent, 187 239-240
quoted on Krsna enlightening devotees, quoted on sacrifice, charity and penance,
21 222
quoted on Krsna's human form, 192 quoted on soul never burned by fire, 229
quoted on lifetime of Brahma, 41 quoted on state of mind at death, 297
quoted on living entity in false ego, 414 quoted on stringent laws of nature, 23
quoted on Lord as director of wanderings quoted on struggling with mind and
of living entities, 211 senses, 223
quoted on Lord in the heart, 267, 390 quoted on studying Vedas to understand
quoted on losing intelligence due to lust, Krsna, 201
90 quoted on surrender to Krsna. 254
quoted on material and spiritual energy, quoted on taking shelter of Vasudeva.
410 173
quoted on material energy, 278 quoted on those who do not follow injunc-
quoted on material nature, 255 tions of Vedas, 28
quoted on maya acting on behalf of quoted on those who engage in devotional
Krsna, 90 service. 10
quoted on mind at time of death, 422 quoted on tolerating pleasure and pain.
quoted on mode of passion, 350 181
quoted on no loss in devotional service, quoted on total surrender. 192
69 quoted on transcending modes of nature.
quoted on objective of Vedas, 377 314-315, 379. 386
quoted on occasions for Krsna descend- quoted on transferal to higher planets. 81
ing, 135 quoted on tree of material world. 453
quoted on overcoming mode of nature, quoted on two kinds of living entities.
351 391
quoted on offering everything to Lord, quoted on unattached work. 256
189 quoted on understanding Lord only by
quoted on offerings to Krsna, 117 devotional service. 5. 116
quoted on performance of sacrifice. 199 quoted on understanding Supreme Lord
quoted on perfect yogi, 383 by devotional service. 111
quoted on pious men rendering service to quoted on understanding transcendental
Krsna, 129 nature of Krsna's appearance. 166.
quoted on Pitrloka, 80 182
quoted on platform of paramaharisa, 319 quoted on unmanifested form of the
quoted on process of rescue from birth Lord. 394
and death. 309-310 quoted on using up pious activities. 377
quoted on purpose of an incarnation. 150 quoted on Vasudeva as everything. 52
quoted on purpose of Krsna's advent. 122 quoted on women becoming polluted. 106
quoted on reaching state of God-realiza- quoted on work for Visnu. 255
tion, 114 quoted on working of material nature.
quoted on realizing Brahman, 183 390


--- Page 489 ---
490 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bhagavad-gita Bhakti-yoga
quoted on worshiping demigods, 81 knowledge attained by practice of, 220
quoted on yajaa, 141, 254 Rsabhadeva's sons instructed to practice,
quoted on Yogesvara, 57 180
spoken to Arjuna, 359-360 should be taught to relieve living entities
Bhagavan from bondage. 165
always beyond material world, 90 See also: Devotional service
Krsna as, 82 Bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah
Bhagavan quoted, 5
use of word explained, 141 Bhaktya mam abhijanati
Bhagavan adi-purusah quoted, 5, 111, 116
Krsna as, 82 Bharata-bhimite haila manusya
Bhakta verse quoted, 151, 235
untouched by any tinge of karma ano Bharata Maharaja
17210, 172 affectionate to the citizens, 250
Bhakti as eldest son of Rsabhadeva, 151,
conclusion of. 206 207
initiation unto, 130 beauty of described, 265
Supreme Lord understood only by, 5 chanted mantra, 270
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu five sons of, 249
cited on blessings of a ४३६११४३. 19 rejected his mother, 190
cited on result of devotional service, 5 ruled entire globe, 248
quoted on approaching spiritual master, sacrifices performed by. 251
181 saved infant deer, 273
quoted on engaging in Krsna conscious- took birth in pure brahmana family.
ness, 367 307
quoted on instructions received from Bhirata-varsa
Vedic literature. 150 considered most pious land, 235
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura Indra stopped pouring water on, 141
cited on beating the mind, 398 Nabhi as Emperor of, 131
cited on controlling the mind, 225 named in honor of Bharata. 151
wanted to reestablish daiva-varnasrama, this planet known as, 3
47 Bhoktaram yajia-tapasari
Bhaktivinoda Thakura quoted. 254
as householder, 35 Bhiiloka
quoted on sleeping conditioned soul, created by Priyavrata, 59
439-440 Bhi-mandala
quoted on surrender to Supreme Lord, See: 8111०1३
323 Bhamir apo 71010 vayuh
quoted on waves of material nature, 350 verses quoted, 412
382 Bhitva bhiitva praliyate
Bhakti-yoga quoted, 90
as acknowledged path of liberation, 181 Bilvamangala Thakura
as perfection of life, 377 behavior of changed by words of prosti-
householder should endeavor to earn tute, 10
money for execution of, 169 quoted on mukti, 241


--- Page 490 ---
General Index 491
Birth Brahma
continues for one interested in karma and lifetime of, 41
Jaana, 172 Lord unseen by, 129
danger if repeated, 310 one should offer respects to. 255
devotee doesn’t care for repeated, 126 prayer in Vedas to quoted, 19
one may take shelter of Vasudeva after Satyaloka as abode of, 15
many, 173-174 sent Piirvacitti to Agnidhra, 82-83. 190
one who understands Krsna’s appearance sent Parvacitti to produce progeny. 102
doesn’t take material, 166 Supreme Lord superior to, 202
spiritual master, etc. must be able to union of Agnidhra and Parvacitti suit-
deliver dependents from, 189 able by grace of, 103
Blasphemy worshiped by Agnidhra, 80
See: Offenses worshiped by Parvacitti, 105
Body. material worshiped in marriage ceremonies. 101
acquired by association with modes of Brahma-bhitah prasannatma
nature, 26-27, 29-31 verses quoted, 183, 244.
as cause of misery, 170 Brahmacari
devotees know soul is separate from. 331 must refrain from sex. 3
different kinds of miseries suffered in. observes religious principles. 135
165 Brahmacarya
8,400,000 types of, 309 as division of society. 78
ghost has no, 196 rules and regulations of. 314
made of earth and stone, 406 Brahmadya yajavalkadya
pains and pleasures of as superfluous, verses quoted. 176
346 Brahma-jijiasa
pains and pleasures of temporary, 404 as search for Absolute Truth. 183
prescribed methods enabling one to give Brahmajyoti
up, 180-181 all universes resting on. 415
Rsabhadeva doesn’t possess, 211 as expansion of rays of body of Vasudeva.
until one has love for Vasudeva one must 394
accept, 173 Brahman
Body, spiritual as bodily rays of Supreme Lord. 416
Mayavadi can’t conceive of, 192 brahmana as worshiper of. 197
prescribed methods enabling one to ac- impersonalist seeks happiness in. 168
cept original. 180-181 [काप satisfied to merge into. 4
Rsabhadeva possessed. 216 Jnanis worship. 257-258
Brahma one without knowledge of devotional ser-
addressed as bhagavan, 141 vice falls down from. 172
Apsara sent by. 84 one who is transcendentally situated real-
as authority and exalted personality. 116 izes. 183
as father of Narada. 17 one who performs devotional service
as first created being. 14 comes to level of. 309
as master of those in charge of material Brahmana
creation, 80 as division of society. 78
direct sons of as superior to Indra. 196 as good as Lord's own mouth. 132
family not cause of bondage for. 176-177 as superior to Supreme Lord. 196-197


--- Page 491 ---
492 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Brahmana Brahma satyam jagan mithya
Bharata took birth in family of. 307, 308 quoted, 71
birth in family of. 307 Brahmavarta
does not need encouragement from op- as son of Rsabhadeva, 152
posite sex, 55 Rsabhadeva left, 207
expert is rare. 6 Brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan
meant to instruct the ksatriyas, 157-158 quoted, 378
no one equal or superior to, 199 Brhan-naradiya Purana
offense against is dangerous, 358 quoted on chanting holy name, 31
Pirvacitti referred to as. 94, 95
Rsabhadeva entrusted into hands of, C
144-145
studies Vedas, 200
wanted Rsabhadeva to rule earth, Caitanya-bhagavata
138-139 quoted on offenses against Vaisnavas, 370
worshiped by Maharaja Nabhi. 148 Caitanya-candramrta
Brahmanda bhramite kona quoted on practice of yoga, 85
verse quoted, 174, 398 Caitanya-caritamrta
Brahmano hi pratisthaham evolution explained in, 197
quoted, 415 position of pure Vaisnavas explained in,
Brahma-samhita 202
cited on different planetary systems. 17 quoted on association of devotees,
cited on worship of demigods in relation 127-128
to Govinda, 159 quoted on avoiding association of
demigod worship mentioned in. 254 materialists, 168
quoted on beauty of Lord in His original quoted on fulfilling desires, 217
nature, 112 quoted on “good and ৮৪৫” as mental
quoted on Brahman effulgence, 394 speculation, 320
quoted on devotees as never vanquished. quoted on living entity contacting
297 spiritual master, 174
quoted on devotees seeing Lord in heart. quoted on seeing materialists engaged in
52 sense gratification, 89
quoted on forms of Supreme Lord, 260 Caitanya Mahaprabhu
quoted on Govinda, 116 cited on giving up women and money.
quoted on indemnification of devotees’ 455
misdeeds, 295 cited on mad elephant offenses, 358
quoted on Krsna as ultimate cause, 414 explains position of pure Vaisnavas. 202
quoted on Lord in every atom. 204 mission of, 236
quoted on sun as eye of Lord, 57, 287 protects preachers, 39
quoted on Supreme Lord as cause of all quoted on approaching Supreme Lord.
causes, 401 126
quoted on Supreme Lord's body. 191 quoted on Bharata-varsa, 235
quoted on the Lord in the universe and quoted on forbidden acts, 251-252
atom, 267 quoted on medicine of maha-mantra,
quoted on worship of Durga. 254 440


--- Page 492 ---
General Index 493
Caitanya Mahaprabhu Chanting
quoted on receiving seed of devotional householder should have full opportunity
service, 398 for, 169
quoted on special importance of people in of Lord's qualities wipes out sins. 115
India, 151 of mantra by Bharata, 270
quoted on taking shelter of Lord’s lotus of mantras by bumblebees. 93
feet, 63-64 Chastity
recommended chanting maha-mantra, women need protection to maintain. 106
360 Children
strictly prohibited talk of worldly mat- Agnidhra wanted wife to produce. 102
ters, 420 born to human beings and Apsaras. 105
warns against becoming attracted to Brahma interested in good. 100
beautiful women, 88 devotees not entangled by happiness of.
warns against offenses to Vaisnavas. 8-9. 82
368-369 garbhadhana-sariskara performed to
Camasa produce good. 81
as son of Rsabhadeva. 153 polluted women produce unqualified. 186
Candala protection of inhabitants of Jambadvipa
purified by holy name. 64-65 compared to that of. 78
Candra those interested in reviving Krsna con-
as lord of moon, 15 sciousness arent attached to. 169
Caturmasya system Cintamani-prakara-sadmasu
practiced for promotion to higher planets, verses quoted, 116
377 Cleanliness
Catur-varpyam maya अश्मः abandoned in Kali-yuga. 232
quoted, 144 as part of regulations of brahmacarya,
Catur-vidha bhajante mar 314
verses quoted, 129 Conditioned souls
Celibacy brahmanas preach purpose of Vedas to.
Rsabhadeva’s sons instructed to observe. 200
180 compared to merchants in the forest.
sex with one’s wife as. 181 428-462
Ceto-darpana-marjanari compared to monkeys. 451
quoted, 70 have tendency toward sex and meat-
Chadiya vaisnava-seva nistara eating. 325
quoted, 12 sleeping in material world. 439-40
Chalayasi vikramane balim Consciousness
verse quoted, 63 becomes fixed upon experiencing higher
Chandogya Upanisad taste. 114
cited on eight symptoms of jivan-mukta, of living for sense gratification leads to
145-146 hellish condition. 170
quoted on cause of all causes. 411 purified by receiving Lord's blessings.
Chanting 120
Bharata always engaged in. 309 Cupid
heart cleansed by constant. 123 bears arrow of lowers. 87


--- Page 493 ---
494 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Cupid Demigods
one under control of becomes stunned, 88 Apsara could attract minds of, 87
as different parts of Vasudeva's body.
D 253
as servants of the Lord, 159
as superior to asuras, 196
Daivi hy esa gunamayi have their own abodes. 15
verse quoted. 127. 351 material activities observed and recorded
Daksa by, 431
as direct son of Brahma. 196 must be able to deliver dependents from
Dandavat-pranamas tan birth and death, 189
quoted, 67 order Apsaras to descend to earth, 105
Dasaratha Maharaja religions devoted to worship of, 181
Visvamitra came to court of, 355 Supreme Lord as ruler of, 131
Dasyu-dharma Supreme Lord unseen by, 129
in Kali-yuga government is entrusted under control of Lord, 23
with, 79 wanted Rsabhadeva to rule earth,
Death 138-139
Agnidhra promoted to Pitrloka after, 107 worship of mentioned in Vedas, 377
always comes at the right time, 314 worshiped by §idras, 321
compared to elephant, 451 Demons
compared to venomous snake, 295 associate of Kali were, 329
continues for one interested in karma and can be killed by Krsna's agents. 122
1702712, 172 ruling earth results in chaos, 194
danger of repeated, 310 Desires
Hari can save one from, 448 devotion as devoid of material, 127
mind absorbed at time of. 422 of living entity understood by
none in Satyaloka, 41-42 Paramatma, 83
of black doe, 273 unalloyed devotee free from material.
of Jada Bharata’s parents, 313-315 175
remembering Lord at time of, 124. Devaviti
spiritual assured by household life, 4 as daughter of Meru, 108
spiritual master, etc. must be able to Devayani
deliver dependents from. 189 as daughter of Urjasvati, 62
Deha-smrti nahi yara, sarisara Devotees
quoted, 210, 318, 347 Absolute Truth understood only by
Dehino ’smin yatha dehe mercy of, 418-419
quoted, 363 acquire good qualities of the Lord. 12-13
Deity alone are on transcendental platform,
appears out of causeless mercy. 121 37-39
devotees worship Supreme Lord as, 258 always anxious to see Lord, 122
worship should be performed by house- always free from material contamination,
holder. 169 256
Demigods as highly advanced spiritual personalities,
Agnidhra’s intelligence like that of, 102 167
all belong to material world, 90 as liberated persons, 5


--- Page 494 ---
General Index 495
Devotees Devotional service
as servants of servants of Lord, 40 one may forget Lord at death even though
bathe in devotional service for relief, engaged in, 124
241 one must engage in to get out of karma-
desire transference back to Godhead, 82 bandha, 309
don’t speak ordinary words. 359-360 one who engages in transcends modes of
free from reactions to sin, 10 nature, 309
have no attraction for household life, 3 process of found in Lord's heart. 191
never allured by beautiful women, 85 purifies one’s existence, 166
never forget their devotional activities. Supreme Lord understood by. 111
336 those engaged in should avoid seeing
of Kali not favored by her, 329 beautiful women, 88
of Visnu as His expanions, 98 two kinds of impediments to, 8-10
Rsabhadeva always thinks of welfare of. Dharma
191 first principle of, 78
Rsabhadeva’s sons instructed to associate Rsabhadeva’s heart composed of, 192
with, 180 word never used in connection with
should read, speak and hear Bhagavatam animals, 136
persistently, 239 Dharmah svanusthitah pumsar
Supreme Lord affectionate to. 124 verses quoted, 311
Supreme Lord satisfies desires of, 111 Dharmari tu saksad bhagavat
transcend influence of six material whips. quoted, 136
62-65 Dhira
wanted by Lord to rule earth. 194 knows primary duty of human being.
worshiping lotus feet of great, 127 91
Devotional service Dhimraketu
brahmana in dynasty of Angira was as son of Bharata, 249
engaged in, 307 Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa
as main way to satisfy Lord. 118 quoted. 85
brahmana always engaged in. 202-203 Dhyeyah sada savitr-mandala
devotees bathe in for relief. 241 quoted, 266. 267
engagement in penance and austerity Disciplic succession
leads to, 165 one must receive instructions of Lord
four kinds of pious men render, 130 through. 40
ignorant people should be engaged in. royal order on same platform as saintly
185 persons through. 355
Jada Bharata knew results of. 311 Disease
Jada Bharata’s step-brothers not at death may cause forgetfulness of
enlightened in. 316 Krsna. 124
knowledge not sought out by one engaged continues for one interested in karma and
in, 183-184 Jana, 172
Lord reveals Himself to one engaged in. Distress
116 one is fit for eternal life if he is callous to.
Lord understood only by. 5 319-320
mind conquered by. 397-398 Divine energy
no loss or diminution in. 69 See: Energy. internal


--- Page 495 ---
496 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Drumila Envy
as son of Rsabhadeva, 153 materialist creates society of, 187
Durdantendriya-kala-sarpa-patali Etasya va aksarasya prasasane gargi
quoted. 35. 85 quoted, 23
Durga Eva parampara praptam
Brahma-sarhita explains worship 01, quoted, 40, 355
254 Evolution
Durvasa description of, 196-198
Ambarisa offended by. 457-458 perfection of, 199
Duryodhana Expansion
never wanted by Krsna as emperor, 194 of Lord in womb of Merudevi, 133
Duties Parvacitti falsely considered one of
Bharata neglected spiritual, 307 Visnu, 97-98
Nabhi performed prescribed, 112 Rsabhadeva as partial, 217
of evacuating, urinating and bathing per- Eva sarvar tatha prakrtvayai
formed in the morning, 270 quoted, 414
of executive head of state, 78
those interested in reviving Krsna con-
sciousness aren't indifferent to ex- F
ecuting, 169
useless if not done for Supreme Lord, 311 Faith
‘Dvaite’ bhadrabhadra-jiiana advanced devotees don’t put in mind,
verse quoted, 320 222
Dwija in Lord and spiritual master, 13
Parvacitti addressed as, 95 False ego
as function of mind, 389
| can be given up by practicing bhakti-
E yoga, 180
Fame
Ecstatic symptoms as one of six opulences of God, 139
manifest in body of advanced devotee. Family
264. compared to high mountains, 438
of Rsabhadeva. 218 Family life
Ekale isvara krsna, 070 saba bhrtya See: Household life
quoted, 159. 349 Food
Elements Jada Bharata would eat any that came,
as material cause, 389-390 318
five material, 381 Jada Bharata would work only for. 319
Enechi ausadhi maya nasibara lagi offered to brahmanas in all rituals, 132
quoted, 440 offered to Lord through mouth of
Energy, external brahmana, 199
elements of, 191 Forms
is separated from Krsna, 410 Supreme Lord exists in transcendental,
Envy 260
dacoits wanted to sacrifice Jada Bharata Fruitive activities
out of, 327 chanting saves one from, 309


--- Page 496 ---
General Index 497
Fruitive activities Gayatri mantra
color mind of person engaged in karma, Hiranmaya worshiped by. 265-266
171 Jada Bharata did not learn, 313
encouraged by Rg, Sama and Yajur quoted on planetary systems. 59
Vedas, 316 Ghost
inhabitants of Pitrloka in category 0 80 as superior to human being, 196
Jada Bharata knew results of, 311 Rsabhadeva appeared as if haunted by,
mind of ignorant living entity subjugated 213
to, 173 Rsabhadeva passed through human
performed for self-interest, 119 society likea, 208
priests considered themselves under in- Ghrtaprstha
fluence of, 130 as son of Priyavrata, 48
should be avoided by ignorant people, Giridhara Gosvami
, 185 cited on Agnidhra as product of lusty con-
Sukracarya inclined to, 189 ception, 81
unalloyed devotee untouched by, 175 Goddess of fortune
Govinda served by, 116
Goloka Vrndavana
G maha-mantra imported from, 44
promotion to, 107
Gandaki River Golokera prema-dhana, hari-nama
Bharata Maharaja collected water 0 verse quoted, 43
262 Goodness, mode of
Bharata sat by to chant, 270 accepted as best in material world, 379
salagrama-silas found in, 261 Goptri ca tasya prakrtis
Gandhamadana Hill verses quoted, 414
as place of Priyavrata’s meditation. 15. Gosvamis
16, 19 gave up exalted positions to become men-
Gandharvaloka dicants, 49
residents of expert in musical science. 17 Govinda
Gandharvas as name of Krsna, 159
as superior to ghosts, 196 as primeval Lord, 116
Ganges Govindam adi-purusar tam
origin of, 63 quoted, 82. 159
Garbhadhana-samskara Grhastha
performance of, 81 as division of society. 78
Garbhodakasayi Visnu can conquer lusty desires of youth. 36
merges in body of Maha-Visnu. 52 observes religious principles. 135
Garga Upanisad needs encouragement of his wife. 55
quoted on control of Lord over every- should have enough money to maintain
thing, 23 body and soul together. 169
Gata-sarigasya muktasya Grhe va vanete thake, "ha gauranga
verses quoted, 256 quoted. 34
Gautamiya-tantra Guru
quoted on devotees’ offerings to Krsna. must prove his position. 357
117 necessity of approaching. 302


--- Page 497 ---
498 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Guru Havi
to become attached to devotional service as son of Rsabhadeva. 153
on must contact. 173 Hearing
one must approach a. 403 householder should have full opportunity
See also: Spiritual master for, 169
Heart
a yogi always thinks of Supreme Lord
H within his, 85
becomes peaceful from eating grains, 199
Happiness cleansed by constant chanting, 123
devotees not entangled by material. 82 everyone's desires fulfilled by Lord in.
enjoyed according to destiny. 214 122
eternal. blissful life as transcendental to of Bharata like a lake of ecstatic love, 264
material. 165 of Rsabhadeva composed of dharma, 192
Lord as bestower of all heavenly. 202 son born from father’s, 193-194
material as insignificant. 378-379 Visnu informs Brahma from within. 83
material comes without effort. 279 of male and female tied together in
material compared to drop of water in material existence. 176
desert. 436 of Rsabhadeva as spiritual, 191
none in material world. 427 purified by penance and austerity. 165
nonpermanent appearance and disap- slackeningof knot in, 177
pearance of. 211 Heaven
one is fit for eternal life if he is callous to. See: Heavenly planets
319-320 Heavenly planets
Parvacitti and Agnidhra enjoyed Agnidhra prepared to go to, 102
heavenly, 103 developing interest in promotion to,
sarikirtana-yajiia must be performed in 173
order to get material. 141-142 Indra as King of, 202
sought by living entity life after life. 100 Lord can offer elevation to, 125
two types of mahdtmas want eternal, 168 return of Menaka to, 105
Harer nama harer nama harer namaiva Hell
verse quoted. 31 Agnidhra prepared to go to, 102
Hari associates of people fond of women and
becomes visible to His devotee. 260 sex are on path (0. 167
can save one from death, 448 Hippies
See also: Krsna originated from King Arhat, 232
Hari-bhakti-vilasa Hiranmaya
quoted on devotees” offerings to Krsna. as Lord Narayana within the sun, 265
117 as son of Parvacitti and Agnidhra, 104
Haridasa Thakura Hiranyagarbhah samavartatagre
Caitanya accepted as namacarya, 311 prayer quoted, 19
grace of saves on from allurement of Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa
women, 224 were formerly Jaya and Vijaya, 9
Harivarsa Hiranyareta
as son of Agnidhra and Parvacitti. 104 as son of Priyavrata, 48


--- Page 498 ---
General Index 499
Holy name Iksvaku Maharaja
everyone should be given chance to hear, as son of Vaivasvata Manu, 42
31 Ramacandra appeared in dynasty of, 237
Haridasa Thakura as authority in chant- llavrta B
ing of, 311 as son of Agnidhra and Parvacitti, 104
purifies even candala, 64-65 Ilavarta
Household life as son of Rsabhadeva, 152
as dark well, 4 Illusory energy
as institution of sex, 446. 451 See: Illusion
as root cause of bondage of karma, 3-4 Illusion
compared to forest fire, 433-434 as thinking in terms of “I and mine”.
father should instruct sons before retir- 176
ing from, 207 created by relationship between man and
reduced in Kali-yuga. 438 woman, 176
remaining satisfied in. 175 giving up basic principle of. 177
retirement from, 438 one who doesn’t worship great devotees is
sex as center of, 431 conquered by, 127
wife helps husband perform penances in, Impersonalists
100 as highly advanced spiritual personalities.
Hrsikena hrsikesa sevanam bhaktir 167
quoted, 34. 85 Incarnations
Human life description of bodily symptoms of. 139
mission of defeated by household life. of Lord don’t accept material bodies. 135
3-4 Vedas as sound incarnation, 200
Humility India
of Apsara, 87 common belief of importance of breast-
feeding in. 106
men still sacrificed to Kali in parts of. 322
I sinful activities now prominently
manifested in, 79
Ida hi visvam bhagavan ivetarah Indra
quoted. 410 as arm of Supreme Lord. 253
Idhmajihva as superior demigod. 105. 196
as son of Priyavrata. 48 became envious of Rsabhadeva. 141
Ignorance described as bhagavan, 141
binds one to chain of material laws, Jayanti offered to Rsabhadeva by.
175 149-150
in Kali-yuga people overwhelmed by. Supreme Lord superior to. 202
141, 234 Indrasprk
living entities covered by mode of. 173 as son of Rsabhadeva. 152
materialist doesn’t know real self-interest Intelligence
due to, 187 as dovetailing everything in service of
miseries arise from, 171 Lord. 23
Tha yasya harer dasye karmana as element of material energy. 191
verse quoted, 35 lost due to lust. 90


--- Page 499 ---
500 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Intelligence Janardana
of Agnidhra as dull. 92 as internal and external director. 415
of Agnidhra like that of demigod, 102 Janmady asya yatah
of one who doesn’t worship great devo- quoted, 14. 412
tees is bewildered, 127 Janma karma ca me divyam
of priests not very sharp, 129 verses quoted, 166, 182, 189, 227
of Rahiigana Maharaja not perfect. 403 Jaya and Vijaya
Pirvacitti attracted by Agnidhra's, 103 became Lord’s enemies for three lives, 9
ISKCON Jayadeva Gosvami
Krsna-Balarama temple constructed by, quoted on Vamanadeva, 63
438 Jayanti
tries to perfect one who enters the as wife of Rsabhadeva, 149-150
society, 301 Jiana
Iopanisad perfection as being fully equipped with
Lord described as apapaviddha in. 20-21 vijiidna and, 182
Fsvarah paramah krsnah pure devotee not influenced by, 130
quoted. 191, 414 (तापा! parama-guhyari me yad
Isavasyam 10077) sarvam quoted, 182
_ quoted, 204 Janis
Fsvarah sarva-bhitanar aspire after liberation, 217-218
verses quoted. 211 as superior to karmis, 198
must return to material world, 172
satisfaction of, 4
J worship impersonal Brahman. 257-258
Jyotir Veda
Jada Bharata cited on orbit of sun, 59-60
always carried form of Lord in his heart,
343-344 K
as young and strong, 335
body of described. 318
Brahman effulgence of not clearly visible, Kabhu na badhibe tomara visaya
339 verse quoted, 39
brahmana father of attached to. 313 Kadamba flowers
considered brainless by his stepbrothers, Pirvacitti’s hips compared to, 94
316 Kalau sadra-sambhavah
unfit to enter grhastha-asrama, 310 quoted, 434
Jain dharma Kali
beginning of, 230-231 appearance of. 329
Jains siidra dacoits sacrifice men to, 322
refer to Lord Rsabhadeva as their original See also: Bhadra Kali
preceptor, 234 Kali-yuga
Jambidvipa as age of sinful activity, 230-231
Agnidhra as King of, 103 attaining perfection in, 239
Agnidhra’s sons each received a kingdom chanting maha-mantra recommended in,
in, 106 31. 360


--- Page 500 ---
General Index 501
Kali-yuga Karmana daiva-netrena
five acts forbidden in, 252 quoted, 309
government leaders as tax collectors in Karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam
age of, 79, 408 quoted, 295, 297
government leaders not advised by Karmis
brahmanas in, 197 as inferior to jaanis, 198
people inclined to irreligious systems in, attracted to gold or money, 430
232 referred to as pramatta, etc., 91
people overwhelmed by passion and ig- satisfaction of, 3-4
norance in, 234 Karnata
people uneducated in, 349 Rsabhadeva travelled to, 228
qualities of those in, 434-435 Kata nidra yao maya
religious sects present different Gods in, quoted, 439
132 Katha Upanisad
scarcity of water in, 141 quoted on blind leading the blind. 187
symptoms of predicted in Bhagavatam, quoted on sleeping conditioned souls.
234 40
Kalki avatdra Kaumadra acaret prajio dharman
business of to kill atheists, 408 quoted. 159
Kama esa krodha esa rajoguna Kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah
quoted, 350 quoted, 9, 10
Kamatmanah svarga-para Kaustubha gem
verse quoted, 376 decorates the Lord's body, 257-258
Kariksantah karmanam siddhim worn by Visnu, 113
quoted, 81 Kavi
Kapiladeva as son of Priyavrata, 48
describes different forms assumed by liv- as son of Rsabhadeva, 153
ing entities, 336 Kecit sva-dehantar-hrdayavakase
Jada Bharata as direct representative of, verses quoted, 258
362 Kesava
Karabhajana as name of Krsna. 63
as son of Rsabhadeva, 153 Ketu
Karanam guna-sarigo ’sya as son of Rsabhadeva. 152
quoted, 309 Ketumala
Karma as son of Parvacitti and Agnidhra. 104
different bodies awarded according to, Kikata
309 as son of Rsabhadeva. 152
has resultant actions. 171 Kimpurusa
household life as root cause of bondage as son of Agnidhra and Prvacitti. 104
of, 3-4 King
material conditions established by. 279 duty of saintly. 144-145
pure devotee not influenced by. 130 protects citizens as father protects
Karma-kanda children. 78
only required when there is no Krsna should be representative of Supreme
consciousness, 311 Lord. 408


--- Page 501 ---
502 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Kinnaras Krsna
as superior to Siddhas. 196 had sixteen thousand wives, 13
Kirtaniyah sada harih Kesava as name of, 63
quoted. 240 known as para-devata, 90
Knowledge known as Yogeévara, 57
as one of six opulences of God, 139 one bound by knots of marriage forgets
as ultimate truth, 416 relationship with, 176
compared to sword. 423 one is promoted to Vrndavana by always
destroys reactions to material activities, thinking of, 107
172 quoted on transferral to Pitrloka, 81
is attained by practice of bhakti-yoga, wanted Yudhisthira as emperor of planet,
220 194
Krsna's name beyond conception of ex- Krsna bhuli’ sei jiva anadi
perimental, 115 verse quoted, 382
of Jada Bharata covered by his dirt, 318 Krsna consciousness
of Vasudeva requires many births to un- as only hope to save world from devasta-
derstand, 173 tion, 79
one who sees with equal vision has true, brahmana should preach, 201
204 government should raise subordinates to,
pure devotee can bestow on anyone, 419 165
received by Brahma through his heart, 21 Jada Bharata was complete in, 320
revealed to one with faith, 13 material attractions not agitating to one
Rsabhadeva’s sons instructed to acquire fixed in, 89
from right source. 180 one who is developed in has no need of
strengthens detachment from material karma-kanda, 311
world, 123 Ksatriya
two parts of Vedic, 14-15 administers to state through vaiSyas and
Konka sidras, 157-158
Rsabhadeva passed through province of, Agnidhra as, 81
228 as division of society, 78
Krsna birth in family of, 307
Adhoksaja as name of, 456 needs encouragement of wife, 55
advised Arjuna to ascend transcendental Ksetrajaan capi mam viddhi
platform, 314-315 quoted, 391
appeared in Yadu dynasty. 237 Ksine punye martya-lokam visanti
as original person, 82 quoted. 81, 377
as simple and by nature merciful, 369 Kumaras
as son of Yasoda and Nanda, 143 travel in guise of five-year-old boys.
as the only master, 349 457
as ultimate cause, 412-413 Kurkuma
chastised Arjuna. 375 spread over Purvacitti's breasts. 96
claims to be father of all life forms, 336 Kuru x
descends to induce conditioned souls to as son of Parvacitti and Agnidhra, 104
surrender, 201 dynasty glorious due to presence of Pan-
Govinda as name of. 159 davas, 243


--- Page 502 ---
General Index 503
Kusavarta Living entities
as son of Rsabhadeva, 152 as superior to dull matter. 196
Kutaka attracted to modes of material nature,
Rsabhadeva passed through province 01, 115
228 bound by activities due to modes. 309
Kutakicala brahmanas as supreme, 200
Rsabhadeva’s body burnt in forest fire can be manifested from matter, 196
near, 229 can’t think of getting out of material ex-
istence, 205
covered by ignorance don’t understand
L individual living being, 173
create enmity among themselves.
Lamentation 442-443
of Prahlada Maharaja, 91 engaged as servants of maya, 367
Rsabhadeva’s sons instructed to subdue. forced to appear by material nature. 135
180 happiness as prerogative of. 436
Lata Jada Bharata as best friend of all. 327
as daughter of Meru. 108 lion's roar as frightening to all. 271
Lavanyam kesa-dharanam Lord directs wanderings of, 211
quoted, 234 mahatmas don’t distinguish between.
Liberation 167
attained by serving advanced per- not connected with material world. 170
sonalities, 167 Paramatma understands desires of. 83
bhakti-yoga as acknowledged path of. Rsabhadeva as best of all. 191
181 Rsabhadeva instructs sons to realize
by serving spiritual master, 12 miserable condition of. 180
Caitanya doesn’t want. 126 suffer in cycle of birth and death. 165
devotees do not accept service of, 17, 241 two types of, 197. 391-392
given by knowledge. 416 Vasudeva as reservoir of . 52
Jjaanis aspire after, 217-218 Lotus feet of Krsna
Lord can offer. 125 as cause of liberation. 45-10
lotus feet of Krsna as cause of. 45-46 Bharata always thought of. 309
mind as cause of bondage or, 384-387 Bharata meditated on reddish. 264
must be worked out carefully, 274 devotees always take shelter at. 331
of Jada Bharata from material conception. mahatmas satiated by shade of. 6
318 Lust
one shouldn't become attached to process Agnidhra gazed upon Parvacitti's hips
of. 183 and waist with. 94
satisfaction of. 4 awakened by construction of women. 88
wife helps further spiritual life and. materialist bound to material enjoyment
176-177 by. 187
Living entities of Agnidhra not satisfied after Par-
as abode of Paramatmai feature. 203-204 vacitti’s departure. 107
as offspring of Visnu. 400 one surrenders to feet of woman when
assume different bodily forms. 330 absorbed in. 102


--- Page 503 ---
504... Srimad-Bhagavatam
Lust Mahavira
Priyavrata infatuated by, 81 lived in complete celibacy, 49
takes away intelligence. 90 Maha-Visnu
Lusty desires as first purusa-avatara, 394
See: Lust Garbhodakagayi Visnu merges in body of,
52
Malaya
M as son of Rsabhadeva, 152
Mamaivasmso jiva-loke
verses quoted, 223
Madhvacarya Mama janmani janmanisvare
cited on engaging in devotional service, quoted, 126
181 Mama maya duratyaya
cited on those in bodily conception, 348 quoted, 23
quoted on Bharata-varsa, 236 Mar ca yo 'vyabhicarena
quoted on one who has clear vision, 204 verse quoted, 37, 184, 309, 386
quoted on Visnu as original cause, 414 Mandah sumanda-matayah
Madhavendra Puri quoted, 231
quoted on rejection of regulative princi- Mandara Hill
ples. 311 Agnidhra went to, 80
Madhya-lila Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
quoted on Caitanya’s protection of verse quoted, 30, 70, 310, 417
preachers, 39 Manus
Mahabharata almost all come from family of
cited on Visnu as enjoyer of yajita, 255 Priyavrata, 53
Maha-mantra Manu-sarhita
as medicine, 440 cited on necessity of protection for
chanting of recommended in Kali-yuga, women, 106
360 Manu-smrti
imported from Goloka Vrndavana, 44 brahmanas advised king according to,
Madhavendra Puri chanted underneath a 144.
tree, 311 Manusyanar sahasresu kascid
offenseless chanting of, 224 quoted, 198
one should not renounce chanting of, Marici
222 accompanied Brahma to see Priyavrata,
reminds one of Krsna’s activities. 13 15
Mahat-krpa vind kona karme Marriage
verse quoted, 128 Brahma worshiped in ceremonies. 101
Mahatmas Material bondage
rendering service to, 167 Caitanya doesn’t want liberation from,
satiated by shade of Lords lotus feet, 6 126
Mahat-sevarmn dvaram ahur service to advanced personalities liberates
quoted, 194 one from. 167
Mahavira unless one understands the self one is in.
as son of Priyavrata. 48 172


--- Page 504 ---
General Index 505
Material existence Me bhinna prakrtir astadha
attraction between male and female as quoted, 410
basic principle of, 176 Medhatithi
living entities can’t think of getting out as son of Priyavrata, 48
of, 205 Meditation
wise can’t allow ignorant to be entangled falling asleep during, 85
in, 188 Jada Bharata always absorbed in. 327
Material whips of Agnidhra in park, 84
devotees transcend influence of six. Menaka
62-65 returned to heavenly planets, 105
Matir na krsne paratah svato va Vi$vamitra Muni attracted by tinkling
verse quoted, 7, 10 bangles of, 86
Matra-sparsas tu kaunteya Viévamitra united with, 85
verses quoted, 210 Mental speculation
Matra svasra duhitra va one is defeated although engaged in. 171
verses quoted, 223 unalloyed devotee untouched by. 175
Mat-sthani sarva-bhatani Mercy
quoted, 411 Bharata especially gifted with Krsna's.
Mattah parataram nanyat kiiicid 308
quoted, 113 of Lord as chief aim of life. 185
Maya ॥ of Lord obtained by seven means in
avadhiita has surpassed clutches of, 209 sacrifice, 111
desire to have son brought about by in- of pure devotee required to get freedom.
fluence of, 127 128
living entities engaged as servants of, 367 of Supreme Lord upon His devotee.
one advanced in knowledge can come 117-118
under influence of, 175 pure devotee depends on Lords. 129
one must associate with sadhu to escape Meru
influence of, 128 nine brothers marry daughters of. 108
Prahlada plans to deliver materialists Merudevi
from clutches of, 91 as daughter of Meru. 108
Parvacitti thought to be, 90 as wife of Nabhi. 110, 133. 144
Mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate heard every word spoken by Lord. 134
quoted, 90, 255, 390 (Miche) mayara vase, yaccha bhese’
Mayara vase yaccha bhese’ verse quoted. 350. 382
quoted, 350, 382 Mind
Maya tatam idam sarvam advanced devotees don’t put faith in.
verse quoted, 394 222
Mayavadis as cause of bondage or liberation.
cannot understand Krsna. 417 384-387
can’t conceive of spiritual body. 192 as designation of the soul. 396-397
say God accepts body in sattva-guna, as element of material energy. 191
135 compared to unchaste woman. 225
say material world is false. 364 compared to uncontrolled elephant.
say this world is false, 71 380-381


--- Page 505 ---
506 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Mind Modes of nature
conquered by devotional service, material body acquired by association
397-398 with, 26-27, 29-31
distracted from worship cancels benefit, remaining unattached to. 168
282-283 Mohini i
false ego as function of. 389 form of Krsna agitated Siva, 223
fields of activity for functions of, 388 Money
is restless by nature, 223 and women as basic principles of material
Jada Bharata engaged in service with his, attachment, 455
311 compared to ghost or witch, 430
of Agnidhra fixed on Parvacitti, 101 Moon
of Bharata immersed in ecstatic love, 264 Brahma appeared like. 16
of brahmana always dedicated to Lord, Candra as lord of, 15
203 Midha
of devotee engaged in spiritual activities, materialist as, 187
13 Muktih mukulitanjalih sevate 'sman
of devotee fixed in Krsna consciousness quoted, 241
unagitated by material attractions, 89 Muktirh dadati karhicit sma
of devotees pleased by body of Supreme quoted, 243
Lord. 111 Mukunda
of ignorant living entity subjugated to as maintainer of Pandava and Yadu
fruitive activity, 173, 186 dynasties, 242
of men and demigods attracted by Muni
women, 87-89 Parvacitti addressed as most fortunate,
if one engaged in karma as karmatmaka, 96
171 Mystic powers
purified of material desires, 262 arise from practice of bhakti-yoga, 220
Parvacitti’s raised breasts agitate automatically approached Rsabhadeva,
Agnidhra’s, 96-97 217
Rsabhadeva controlled His, 139, 140 should be used to give up material con-
Rsabhadeva’s sons instructed to control, ception. 184
180
Supreme Lord has equal, 129
transmigration due to polluted, 381-385 N
travelling in space at speed of. 217
Miseries
arise from ignorance. 171 Nabhi Maharaja
home of materialist brings all kinds of. as Emperor of Bharata-varsa, 131
175 as son of Agnidhra and Puarvacitti, 104,
material body as cause of, 170 110, 133
suffered when one is in material body. desires to have son, 125
165 performed prescribed duties and
Modes of nature sacrifices. 112
living entities attracted to, 115 two verses in glorification of. 147-148
Lord's original form as above, 135 Visnu appeared before, 113, 122


--- Page 506 ---
General Index 507
Na buddhi-bhedam janayed Narottama dasa Thakura
verses quoted, 186 quoted on shade of Nityananda's lotus
Na dhanari na janam na 51471001711 feet, 6
verse quoted, 71, 126 Na rapam asyeha tathopalabhyate
Naharh prakasah sarvasya verse quoted, 453
verses quoted, 187 Nasta-prayesv abhadresu
Na hanyate hanyamane Sarire verse quoted. 347
quoted, 341 Na tat-samas cabhyadhikas
Naisam matis tavad urukramarghrim quoted. 132
verses quoted, 128 Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi
Narada Muni quoted, 156, 245, 409, 410, 428-429. 452
addressed as bhagavan, 141 Nature, material
always thinks of the Lord within his neither independent nor automatic. 390
heart, 257-258 Nehabhikrama-naso ‘sti
as authority and exalted personality, 116 verse quoted, 69
as spiritual master of Priyavrata, 11-13 Nija-purusa-iksana-visaya
became angry at Nalakavara and quoted, 122
Manigriva, 344 Niskinicanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya
Brahma as father of. 17 verses quoted, 88
called bhagavan, 72 Nitai pada-kamala, koti candra
Priyavrata instructed by. 3 quoted. 6
Narada-parcaratra Nityarh bhagavata-sevaya
quoted on engaging senses in devotional quoted, 239
service, 205-200 Nityananda
quoted on purification of mind. 385 shade of lotus feet of. 6
Narayana Nityo nityanam cetanas$ cetananam
as beyond material conception. 115-116 quoted, 113.197
present in rich as well as poor. 204
Supreme Lord called, 393
within the sun maintains entire universe. 0
265, 267
॥ (11.11.11 Oceans
quoted, 115 seven kinds of. 61
Narayana-parah sarve Offenses
verse quoted, 40 as impediment to devotional service. 8-9
Narottama dasa Thakura before a great person always punished.
quoted on becoming indifferent to bodily 330
pains and pleasures, 210 danger of those against Vaisnavas.
quoted on bodily maintenance, 318 370-371
quoted on fire of material existence. goddess Kali intolerant of. 329
43-44 how to rectify those against devotees. 309
quoted on liberated person. 34 Old age
quoted on one who is spiritually ad- continues for one interested in karma and
vanced, 347 jana, 172
quoted on serving pure devotee. 12. 127


--- Page 507 ---
508 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Orn bhiir bhuvah svah tat savitur Paramatma
quoted. 59. 205-266 yogis meditate on, 257-258
(07৫70 Param drstva nivartate
Bharata’s mantra began with, 270 quoted, 6, 75
@ tad visnoh paraman padam Parasya saktir vividhaiva srityate
quoted, 452 quoted, 410
Opulence Paritranaya sadhinam vindsaya
association of devotees vanquishes desires quoted, 122, 150
for material, 127 Partha naiveha namutra vinasas
devotee not disturbed by, 221 quoted, 9
devotees not entangled by happiness of Passion, mode of
material, 82 in Kali-yuga people overwhelmed by,
increases in Lord at every moment, 119 234
meaning of material, 126 many desires born of, 350-351
not required to understand Supreme Rahiigana’s mind covered by, 339,
Lord, 117 343-344
Pirvacitti attracted by Agnidhra’s, 103 Pastimes of Krsna
our hearts are meant for, 70
P recorded for our purification, 239
Patiloka
Jada Bharata’s mother went to, 315
Padma Purana Patrariv puspari phalarii toyari
quoted on one who has clear vision, 204 verse quoted, 117, 262
quoted on preaching that living entities Paundraka
and Lord are separate, 205 imitated Narayana, 231
quoted on seeing living entity and Lord as Peace
distinct, 204-205 of mind, everyone searching for, 262
quoted on spiritual master as Vaignava, Penances
148 Agnidhra underwent severe, 90
Pain beauty as result of past, 100
Rsabhadeva as transcendental to all, 211 engagement in leads to devotional ser-
Rsabhadeva instructs sons to tolerate vice, 165
duality of pleasure and, 180 practiced by brahmanas, 200
Paiicajani Rsabhadeva’s sons instructed to undergo,
as wife of Bharata Maharaja, 248 180
Pandava Perfection
dynasty maintained by Mukunda, 242 as being fully equipped with jidna and
Paramahariisa vijadna, 182
Jadu Bharata was a, 318 of life is chanting and hearing about
platform of described, 319-320 Visnu, 309
Paramatma of life reached by associating with devo-
as all-pervading, 391 tees, 170-171
doesn’t live in filthy place, 211 reached when living entity attains plat-
living entities as abode of, 203-204 form of brahmana, 197
realized by yogis, 416 Philanthropists
understands desires of living entity, 83 are without realization, 279


--- Page 508 ---
General Index 509
Pious activities Prasada
gifts for, 377 offered to forefathers, 80
one is defeated although engaged in, 171 tongue used to preach and to taste, 385
one is transferred to Pitrloka by perfor- Pratirapa
mance of, 80 as daughter of Meru, 108
Pippalayana Prataparudra Maharaja
as son of Rsabhadeva, 153 Caitanya refused to see, 88
Pitrloka Prayers
Agnidhra desired to become inhabitant in prose offered by priests, 131
of, 80 offered to Pirvacitti by bumblebees. 93
Agnidhra promoted to, 107 to Lord to remember Him at time of
Pitrn yanti pitr-vratah death, 124-125
quoted, 81 to Supreme Lord offered by Nabhi, 110
Pleasure Priyavrata Maharija
Rsabhadeva instructs sons to tolerate as father of Agnidhra, 78, 81
duality of pain and, 180 as great devotee, 81
Potencies departed to follow path of spiritual life.
expansions in different, 133 78
illusory, 89 instructed by Narada Muni, 3
Power marked off different states, 73-74
of attraction of feminine gestures, 88 Narada Muni as spiritual master of.
of Brahma equal to Visnu’s, 83 11-13
of brahmanas, 132 Rsabhadeva appeared in dynasty of. 237
of Pirvacitti, 92 ten sons of listed, 48
Prabodhananda Sarasvati Protection
quoted on practice of yoga, 85 given to inhabitants of Jambadvipa. 78
quoted on senses as serpents, 35 Jada Bharata depended on Krsna for. 323
Prabuddha of devotees by Supreme Lord. 331
as son of Rsabhadeva, 153 required for women. 106
Pracetas Prthu Maharaja
as kings of the universe, 15 marked off different states. 73-74
Prahlada Maharaja Pulaha-aérama
entanglement in family life described by, Hari becomes visible to His devotee at.
4 260
quoted on family attachment, 7. 10 salagrama-silas obtainable in. 259
quoted on materialists rotting in material Pulastya
activities, 90-91 Bharata as deer went to asrama of. 301
quoted on retirement from family life. Punishment
438 of son by father. 79
quoted on taking dust of great devotee on Pure devotees
one's head, 128 as anyabhilasita-sianya, 130
rejected his father, 190 can save themselves from birth and
Prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih death. 189
quoted, 67. 382, 414 don’t want to see Lord for their sense gra-
Prasada tification. 129
householders should offer to friends. 169 no freedom without mercy of. 128


--- Page 509 ---
510 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Pure devotees R
qualities of described, 331
symptoms of, 420 Raghu Maharaja
want only to engage in Lord's service, dynasty of glorified due to Raimacandra’s
126 birth, 242
Purification Ramacandra appeared in dynasty of, 237
of consciousness by receiving Lord's 10311068113 Maharaja
blessings, 120 as ruler of Sindhu and Sauvira, 334-335
of heart by performance of penance and mind of covered by mode of passion, 339,
austerity, 165 343-344
of heart through garbhadhana, 194 Raivata
of one’s existence by devotional service, as son of Priyavrata, 53
166 Raja goptasrayo bhumih
Purusottama quoted, 414
Visnu appeared before Nabhi as, 113 Rajanyair nirghrnair dasyu-
Parvacitti quoted, 408
Agnidhra appreciated beauty of, 100 Ramacandra
Agnidhra began appreciating glance of, appeared in lksvaku (or Raghu) dynasty,
92 237,
Agnidhra hears tinkling of bangles of, killed family of Ravana, 327
84-86 Ramadi-martisu kala-niyamena tisthan
Agnidhra praises breasts of, 95-96 verses quoted, 260
as Apsara, 86 Ramya
departure of, 107 as daughter of Meru, 108
eyebrows of compared to bows without Ramyaka
strings, 89-90 as son of Parvacittiand Agnidhra, 104
gave birth to nine sons, 104 Raso ‘py asya param drstva
plays with ball, 99 quoted, 114
questioned by Agnidhra about workings Rastrabhrta
of maya, 91 as son of Bharata, 249
surrounded by bumblebees, 93 Ravana
worships Brahma, 105 kidnapped Sitadevi, 327
Regulative principles
everything must be done according to,
Q 324
imperative for ordinary man, 314
Qualities observance of as means to obtain Lord's
devotional service makes one immune mercy, 111
from material, 309 should never be given up, 276
heart as seat of all spiritual, 193 unnecessary for Jada Bharata, 311
of Apsara, 87 Relationship
of brahmanas, 197 between man and woman creates illusion.
of Krsna as transcendental, 115 176
society divided according to people's, 78 Religion
taking shelter of pure devotee to attain Agnidhra observed principles of, 78
his. 128 Arhat concocted Jain, 230-231


--- Page 510 ---
General Index 511
Religion Rsabhadeva
devoted to worship of demigods, 181 transcendental signs on feet of, 139
God doesn’t belong to particular, 132 Rapa Gosvami
Krsna advents Himself to re-establish cited on offering food. 118
principles of, 122 quoted on approaching spiritual master.
Rsabhadeva appeared to preach principles 181
of, 136 quoted on devotee as liberated, 392
Renunciation quoted on liberated person, 34-35
as one of six opulences of God, 139 quoted on real intelligence. 23
attachments in stage of, 176 quoted on understanding Krsna with
of sacrifice, charity and penance not material senses, 116
recommended, 222
Priyavrata speaks in spirit of, 65-69
Rg Veda S
encourages fruitive activity, 316
hymns to Narayana given in, 265
Rsabhadeva Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha
appeared in dynasty of Priyavrata, 237 can’t be seen by us, 121
appeared to preach principles of religion, looks like human form, 191
136 Sacrifice
as incarnation of the Supreme Lord, 141. kinds of performed by Bharata Maharaja.
401 251
as master of all mystic power, 141 Lord pleased by sages at, 135
as plenary expansion of Vasudeva, 227 method of offering part of brahmacarya
as Supersoul, 229 rules. 314
as well-wisher of everyone, 207 not being performed at present. 199
auspicious narration of pastimes of, 239 of a man not mentioned in any $astras,
Bharata as firstborn son of, 307 324
considered His body material. 228 of man-animal to Bhadra Kali. 321-322
description of bodily features of, of man or animal before deity forbidden.
212-213 329
enthroned as emperor of the world, 144 performed by Nabhi. 112
incarnated to deliver people from maya, performed to acquire son. 129
234 seven means to obtain Lord's mercy in
instructs sons on engaging in penance performance of. 111
and austerity, 164-165 Visnu as master and enjoyer of all. 110
instructs sons on giving up false ego. Sad-aisvaryaih [08700 ya iha
180-182 quoted, 416
poured water on Ajanabha by His own Sadhu
prowess, 141 freedom from material conception by as-
qualities of, 139-140 sociation with. 177
refused to manifest mystic yogic perfec- necessity of association with. 128
tions, 221 “Sadhu-sanga”, “sadhu-sariga’-sarva-sastre
satisfied Visnu in every respect, 158-159 verse quoted. 128. 460
strictly followed principles of wvar- Sadhyaloka
nasrama-dharma, 155-156 residents of are all great saints. 17


--- Page 511 ---
512 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Sa gunan samatityaitan brahma Sannydst
quoted, 380-381 १ learn from Rsabahadeva's instructions,
Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad 207
quoted, 41 observes religious principles, 135
Saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastraih Sarva-dharman parityajya mam
, quoted, 361 quoted, 30, 136, 192, 254
Sakuntala Sarva-karana-karanam
born to Menaka and Viévamitra, 85-86, quoted, 401
105 Sarva khaly 1007 brahma
Sama-duhkha-sukhari dhiram quoted, 410
quoted, 319 Sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
Samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavari quoted, 267, 390, 394
verse quoted, 38 Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktarn
Sama Veda verses quoted, 205-206, 385
bumblebees chant mantras of, 93 Sastras
encourages fruitiveactivity, 316 say that everything must be done by
Samo ’har sarva-bhiitesu regulative principles, 324
quoted, 122 Supreme Lord's body described in,
Samsara 257-258
addiction to path of, 188 symptoms of genuine incarnation de-
Samsara-visanale, diva-nisi hiya scribed in, 139
song quoted, 43 Satatar kirtayanto mam
Sanatana Gosvami quoted, 300
quoted on purification of candala, 64 Satisfaction
Sandarsanarm visayinam atha different types of, 3-4
quoted, 202 Sat-karma-nipuno vipro
Sankaracarya verses quoted, 148
quoted on Narayana as beyond material Sattva-guna
conception, 115-116 brahmanas situated in, 200
Sarnkhya-yoga Mayavadis say God accepts body in, 135
different forms of living entities de- Satyaloka
scribed in, 336 almost as good as Vaikuntha, 41-42
Sarikirtana-yajiia as abode of Brahma, 15
everyone can perform, 141-142 Satya-sarnhita
recommended for Kali-yuga, 252 quoted on family relationships of exalted
should not be renounced, 222 personalities, 176
Sannyasa Saubhari Muni
as division of society, 78 fell down from yogic perfection, 223
chanting not renounced by one who Sauvira
takes, 222 Rahugana as ruler of, 334-335
four stages of, 51 Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh
Sannyasi quoted, 71, 226, 383, 385
attachments of not as strong as family at- Sa vai pumsam paro dharmo
tachment, 176 verses quoted, 262
doesn’t need encouragement from op- Savana
posite sex, 55 as son of Priyavrata, 48


--- Page 512 ---
General Index 513
Savita Senses
as the sun-god, 59 Rsabhadeva controlled His, 139, 140
Scientists Rsabhadeva’s sons instructed to control,
fail to discover cause of atomic existence, 180
412 tendency of living entities to enjoy
say material world rests on sun's material, 170
effulgence, 267 true activity of, 205
unable to offer a second sun, 58 working and knowledge acquiring.
Self-realization 387-389
brahma-bhiita as state 0 183 Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam
Sense gratification quoted, 116, 385
as essence of household life, 3 Sex
considered as aim of life leads to sin, 170 as center of household life, 431
devotees don’t desire anything for, 127 as material attraction between man and
endeavoring for as waste of time, woman, 176
174-175 as only happiness for materialist,
householders shouldn’t earn money for, 166
169 brahmacari must refrain from, 3
human beings shouldnt work hard for, conditioned soul has tendency toward.
164-165 325
human civilization presently based on, family life as institution of. 446. 451
199 home of materialist based on, 175
insurmountable path of, 427 materialists work for honey of. 441
Jada Bharata never ate anything for, 318 one surrenders to feet of woman when in-
materialist creates society of envy for, fluenced by, 102
187 path to hell open for associates of people
modern leaders engage people in, 367 fond of, 167
one should not kill bodies for, 336 with one’s wife as brahmacarya, 181
pure devotee doesn’t want to see Lord for Scientists
his, 129 sense activities of are useless. 23
Rsabhadeva instructs sons to detest, 180 Siddhaloka
seeing materialist engaged in as abomin- residents of advanced in mystic powers.
able, 89 17
bewildered people spoiling lives for. 91 Siddhas
wanting son like God as form of, 126 _ 85 superior to Gandharvas. 196
Senses Siksastaka
Agnidhra was controlling his, 84-85 quoted, 70. 71
automatically controlled if mind is con- Sin
trolled, 383 chief executives introduce. 79
can’t be controlled by yoga alone, 86 four kinds of, 145. 170
considered powerful enemies, 36 one who considers sense gratification as
eleven, 381 aim of life engages in. 170
Krsna can’t be conceived with material. uttering holy names can dispel reactions
116 10. 124.
purified engaged in devotional service. wiped out by chanting of Lord's qualities.
34-35 115


--- Page 513 ---
514 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Sindhu Spiritual master
„ Rahiganaas ruler of, 334-335 instructions received from must be
Sirasodharata yadvad followed immediately, 184
verses quoted, 415 liberation by serving, 12
Siva living entity contacts bona fide, 174
addressed as bhagavan, 141 must be able to deliver dependents from
as Krsna's functional body, 255 birth and death, 189
as son of Brahma, 196 must never be considered an ordinary
became agitated by seeing Mohini form, man, 421
223 perfection achieved by blessings of, 19
Lord unseen by, 129 Rsabhadeva instructs sons to accept,
sometimes called bhagavan, 72 180-181
Skanda Purana _ service of as duty of brahmacarya, 314
quoted on instructions received form Sraddha ceremony
Vedic literature, 150 purpose of, 80
Smrti-$astra Sravanam kirtanam visnoh
I quoted on place for religions rituals, 291 verse quoted, 169
Soce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyartha Sri-aisvarya-prajepsavah
verse quoted, 91 ॥ quoted, 82
Son Sridhara Svami
Agnidhra desired to get perfect, 80 र, cited on liberation in this life, 145
time of conception determines mentality Sri-guru-padasrayah
of, 81 . quoted, 181
Soul Srimad-Bhagavatam
activities should be performed for benefit contains information on remembering
of, 182 Lord at time of death, 125
always unaffected by material arrange- Giridhara Gosvami as commentator on,
ments, 341 81
can be liberated even in this world, 392 meant for those free from envy, 432
devotees know body separate from, 331 prediction on government officials in.
feels pleasure and pain due to bodily 79
pleasure and pain, 366 quoted on approaching guru, 363
in deep slumber, 349 quoted on association with women, 223
is always apart from bodily pleasure and quoted on brahmanas dedicated to
pain, 407 Supreme Lord, 202-203
is never burned by fire, 229 quoted on Brahma receiving knowledge
mind as designation of, 396-397 in his heart, 21
situated within material body, 191 quoted on cosmic manifestation, 410
subjected to pious and impious activities, quoted on crossing ocean of nescience, 38
382 quoted on devotee as fearless, 46
Speculative knowledge quoted on falldown of devotee, 66
See: Mental speculation quoted on family life, 446
Spiritual master quoted on having knowledge of devo-
duty of devotee to carry out order of, 40 tional service, 172
has actually seen Krsna. 417 quoted on jiana and vijidna, 182


--- Page 514 ---
General Index 515
Srimad-Bhagavatam Strisu dustasu varsneya jayate
quoted on liberated souls engaging in quoted, 106
devotional service, 184 Sucindri 57710107! gehe yoga-bhrasto
quoted on material happiness, 279 quoted, 66
quoted on necessity of sarnkirtana-yajria, Sudarsana
141 as son of Bharata, 249
quoted on one eligible for liberation, 353 Sudaréana cakra
quoted on Paramatma, 258 , 95 weapon of Supreme Lord. 331
quoted on people's ignorance of goal of Sudras
life, 452 almost all people of this age are, 81
quoted on proper execution of Vedic as division of society, 78
rituals, 159 do not sympathize with others, 338
quoted on purpose of human society, 156 government leaders selected by, 194
quoted on real self-interest, 245 unable to live independently, 434
quoted on retirement from. family life, worship demigods to fulfill material
438 desires, 321
sons of Rsabhadeva as authorized Suffering
preachers of, 153 materialist plunges into ocean of, 187
quoted on sacrifice in Kali-yuga, 252 voluntarily for advancement in spiritual
quoted on satisfaction of Hari, 311 life, 165
quoted on spreading Bhagavata princi- Suhrdah sarva-dehinam
ples, 347 quoted, 336, 344
quoted on symptoms of great per- Suhrttama
sonalities, 459  abest friend. 97
quoted on taking dust of great devotee on Sukadeva Gosvami
one’s head, 128 , asauthority and exalted personality. 116
quoted on thievish heads of government Sukracarya
in Kali-yuga, 408 married Urjasvati, 62
quoted on understanding Lord only by rejected by Bali Maharaja, 189
devotional service, 5 Siilapani-sama yadi bhakta-ninda
quoted on useless duties, 311 verses quoted, 370
quoted on Vedic knowledge revealed to Sumati
Brahma, 83 as son of Bharata, 249
quoted on worshiping demigods, 82 Sumeru Hill
symptoms of Kali-yuga predicted in, 234 sun-god encircles. 57
written for our purification, 239 Sun
Srivatsa Deity of is expansion of Narayana. 267
decorates the Lord's body, 257-258 rotates in prescribed orbit. 57-58
Visnu’s chest marked with, 113 Savita as god of. 59
Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka Supreme Lord compared to. 21
verses quoted, 254-255 Supersoul
Sruti-smrti-puranadi-pancardtra Bharata as deer had association of.
verse quoted, 150 302
Strength directs everything. 390
as one of six opulences of God. 139 in hearts of all living entities. 267


--- Page 515 ---
516 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Supersoul Supreme Lord
is always apart from bodily pleasure and yajia is meant to satisfy, 141
pain, 407 yogisalways think of, 85
Lord Rsabhadeva is. 229 Surrender
Supreme Lord as characteristic dharma, 194
always eager to protect devotees, 331 described by Bhaktivinoda Thakura, 323
always exists in transcendental forms, Krsna descends to induce conditioned
260 souls to, 201
appearance in material world of, 135-136 of Jada Bharata to Krsna complete, 323
as best of all living entities, 191 of lusty man to feet of woman, 102
as cause of all causes, 401 unto Vasudeva after many births,
as self-satisfied, 4 173-174
Brahma as subordinate to, 196 Sarya
Brahma fully represents, 83 as eye of Supreme Lord, 253
brahmanas almost as powerful as, 132 one should offer respects to, 255
called Narayana, 393 Svalpam apy asya dharmasya
compared to sun, 21 quoted, 422
character of those He protects described, Svanusthitasya dharmasya
331 quoted, 311
devotees always anxious to see, 122 Svayambhuva Manu
devotee seeks happiness in association of, „ एण Priyavrata in charge of universe, 43
168 Svetasvatara Upanisad
didn’t appear as ordinary human being, quoted on faith in Lord and spiritual
113 master, 13
directs wanderings of living entities, 211 , quoted on no one greater than God, 132
has nothing to do with material percep- Syama
tion, 115 । as daughter of Meru, 108
intelligent devotee worships, 82
Jada Bharata always meditated on, 327
Jada Bharata completely surrendered to, T
323
known as Vasudeva, 394
mercy of as chief aim of life, 185 Tad-ananyatvam arabhambhana
Merudevi heard every word spoken by, quoted, 410
134 Tad-anusravana-manana-
must be satisfied, 311 quoted, 300
obtaining mercy of in performance of Tad viddhi pranipatena
sacrifice, 111 quoted, 403, 417
perceived by hearing and direct percep- Tad-vijaanartham sa gurum
tion, 393 quoted, 181. 357, 362, 363
purpose of sréddha ceremony to please, Tad yathaiveha karma-jitah lokah
80 quoted, 377
Rsabhadeva manifested symptoms of, Tal labhyate duhkhavad
139-140 quoted, 279
superior to Brahma and Indra, 202 Tamasa
understood by devotional service, 111 as son of Priyavrata, 53


--- Page 516 ---
General Index 517
Tams titiksasva bharata Tulasi
quoted, 181 Lord satisfied when devotees bring Him
Tapasya leaves of, 117
Agnidhra understood actions of maya by Tulasi-dala-matrena
dint of, 90 verses quoted, 117
should not be renounced, 222 Tyaktva deham punar janma
See also: Austerities quoted, 33, 189
Tasmad gurum prapadyeta jijiasuh Tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam
quoted, 363, 403 verse quoted, 66
Tasman mayy arpitasesa Tyaktva tirnam asesa-mandala
verses quoted, 202-203 verse quoted, 49
Tasmat kenapy upayena manah
quoted, 367
Tatah padarh tat parimargitavyan U
verse quoted, 453
Tatala saikate, vari-bindu-sama Ugradamstri
quoted, 436 as daughter of Meru, 108
Tatra tar buddhi-sarivyogam Universe
verse quoted, 9 as temporary appearance of truth, 412
Tat sadhu manye ’sura-varya Brahma as secondary creator of, 14
verse quoted, 438 has no real ultimate existence, 412-413
Tat te’ nukampan susamiksyamanah things within are all imagined. 413
verse quoted, 353 Upanisads
Tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye bumblebees chant mantras of. 93
quoted, 21, 83 Upapadayet paratmanam
Tesam satata-yuktandim bhajatarm verses quoted, 204
verse quoted, 21 Urjasvati
Time as daughter of Priyavrata, 47
acting in terms of as means to obtain married Sukracarya, 62
Lord's mercy, 111 Urukrama
death always comes at the right, 314 See: Vimanadeva
demons killed by Supreme Lord as, 331 Uttama
endeavoring for sense gratification as as son of Priyavrata, 53
waste of, 174-175 Uttanapada Maharaja
Titiksavah karunikah suhrdah as ruler of universe. 15
quoted, 459
Traigunya-visayd-veda ष
verses quoted, 314, 379
Transcendental world
See: World, spiritual Vadanti tat tattva-vidas
Transmigration verses quoted. 417
due to polluted mind, 381-385 Vaikuntha
Tulasi eternally liberated beings are in. 391-392
Bharata Maharaja collected leaves of , Lord called to sacrifice from. 129
262 Lord can offer promotion to. 125-126
Lord will accept offering of, 118 Maharaja Nabhi elevated to. 144


--- Page 517 ---
518 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Vaikunthaloka Vasudeva
See: Vaikuntha Bharata Maharaja performed yajiias for,
Vaisnavas 253
Agnidhra as son of Vaisnava, 81 Rsabhadeva as plenary expansion of, 227
Bharata as follower of, 207 Supreme Lord known as, 394
Caitanya explains position of pure, 202 surrendering to, 173-174
danger of offenses against, 370-371 Vasudevah sarvam iti
everything possible by blessings of, 19 quoted, 52, 173, 416
how to rectify offenses against, 369 Vasudeve bhagavati
never envious or unnecessarily violent, verses quoted, 262-263
336 Vedais ca sarvair aham eva
never want to supersede other Vaisnavas, quoted, 201, 377
58 Vedanta-sitra
offense against compared to mad quoted on Lord as source of everything,
elephant, 358 14
serving lotus feet of, 127 Vedas
superficial anger of, 344 accepting version of, 191
Vaisya as sound incarnation, 200
as division of society, 78 deal with three modes of material nature,
birth in family of, 307 315
Vaivasvata Manu flowery words of, 376
as son of sun-god, 42 insufficient to bring about direct
Vamanadeva knowledge of the truth, 378-379
tricked Bali Maharaja, 63 Jada Bharata’s stepbrothers learned in,
Vanaprastha 316
as division of society, 78 objective of, 377
observes religious principles, 135 quoted on Supreme Lord as supreme liv-
Varna-sarikara ing being, 113
generated from polluted women, 106 quoted on tendency of living entity to en-
Varnasramacaravata purusena joy senses, 170
verse quoted, 27 study of as part of rules for
Varnasrama-dharma brahmacarya, 314
abandoned in Kali-yuga, 232 Vedesu durlabham adurlabham
as scientific system, 26-28 quoted, 419
avadhiita doesn’t care for, 208 Venka
Rsabhadeva strictly followed principles Rsabhadeva passed through province of,
of, 155-156 228
society without as bestial, 55 Venum kvanantam aravinda
Vedic religious principles begin with, 78 quoted, 112
Vasistha Vidarbha
accompanied Brahma to see Priyavrata, as son of Rsabhadeva, 152
15 Vidyapati
Vasudeva quoted on material happiness, 436
as plenary expansion, 218 Vidya-vinaya-sampanne
as reservoir of all living entities, 52 verses quoted, 204


--- Page 518 ---
General Index 519
17৫7৫ Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura
perfection as being fully equipped with cited on two kinds of impediments to
Jaana and, 182 devotional service, 8-10
Viraraghava Acarya compares family to high mountains, 438
cited, 61 quoted on spiritual master, 61,361
cited on symptoms of jivan-mukta, 145 Visvariipa
Visesad bharate punyam Paiicajani as daughter of, 248
quoted, 236 Vita-raga-bhaya-krodhah
Visnu quoted, 367
appeared before Nabhi, 113 Vitihotra
as aim of human life, 428-429 as son of Priyavrata, 48
as enjoyer of yajia, 255 Vivikta-drsti-jivanarm
as master and enjoyer of all sacrifices, quoted, 204
110 Vrndavana
as original cause, 414 as most exalted holy place for Vaisnavas,
as real principle within material world, 303
406 Vyasadeva
as source of everything, 14 sometimes called bhagavan, 72
Bali Maharaja promised to give every-
thing to, 189
Brahma as powerful as, 83 Ww
in every respect Rsabhadeva satisfied,
158-159 Wealth
offerings to, 80 as one of six opulences of God, 139
Parvacitti always eats prasada of, 97-98 devotees should avoid seeing persons
worshiped by varnasrama-dharma, with great, 88
27-28 devotional service rendered by pious men
Visnudatta who desire, 130
as name of Pariksit Maharaja, 331 not required to satisfy Supreme Lord. 117
Visnu Purana those interested in reviving Krsna con-
quoted on varnasrama-dharma, 27 sciousness aren't attached to, 169
Viévakarma Wife
as father of Barhismati, 46-47 compared to jackal, 428-429
Visvamitra Muni compared to a whirlwind, 431
as advanced yogi, 85 Women
attracted by Menaka's tinkling bangles, and money as basic principles of material
86, 105 attachment, 455
came to court of Dasaratha Maharaja, 355 Agnidhra knew art of flattering. 102-103
Viévanitha Cakravarti Thakura association with, 224
cited on Brahman effulgence of Jada attachment of man to. 99
Bharata, 327 attract men with their faces. breasts. and
cited on meaning of word sukla, 135 waists, 94
cited on Priyavrata’s sun, 58 attract minds of men and demigods.
cited on soul and Supersoul as separate 88-89
from body, 406-407 make ordinary yogis fall. 85


--- Page 519 ---
520 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Women World, material
path to hell open for associates of people principles of beg, borrow or steal in,
fond of, 167 443-444
pregnant may miscarry if frightened, 272 woman hunting in, 441
Rsabhadeva attracted hearts of married, worshiping demigods for quick results in,
213 81-82
surrender to feet of, 102 World, spiritual
unchaste can kill husband, 225 Agnidhra should have desired
unqualified children produced from transference to, 81
polluted, 106 by giving up basic principle of illusion
World, material one goes to, 177
as temporary but not false, 364 everyone has spiritual body in. 192
as temporary place of misery, 157 Krsna as source of, 197
as transformation of energy of God, 410 stool and urine pleasantly scented in, 215
attraction of feminine gestures as power- Worship
ful everywhere in, 88 Nabhi and associates offered things to
conditioned souls sleeping in, 439-440 Visnu in, 113
compared to a tree, 453-454 of Brahma by Agnidhra, 80
compared to forest fire, 434 of Brahma by Purvacitti, 105
cow dung accepted as purified in, 215 of Brahma in marriage ceremonies, 101
demigods all belong to, 90 of brahmanas, 197
everyone floating in ocean of nescience of Deity should be performed by house-
in, 350-351 holder, 169
everyone in working like madman, 352 of demigods by $itdras, 321
everyone suffering in because of the of Kali by dacoits described, 324
mind, 386 of Lord by Nabhi to get son, 125
full of anxious people, 432 of Lord for material gain as unauthorized,
full of obstructions to advancement in 129
Krsna consciousness, 9 of lotus feet of great devotees, 127
happiness and distress in, 320 of priests by Nabhi, 131
incarnations of Lord within, 135 of superior by dependent, 190
instructions of the Lord can satisfy one of Supreme Lord performed by Nabhi,
in, 244 110
JAanis must return to, 172 performed by Agnidhra in park, 84
knowledge strengthens detachment from, Visnu appeared as person soliciting, 120
123
Krsna as source of, 197
living entity takes credit for creations in, ১৫
414
mode of goodness accepted as best in, 379
no bliss in, 5, 427 Ya atmantaryami purusa iti
no one as master in, 349 quoted, 416
one who understands Krsna's appearance Yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam
doesn’t take birth in, 182 verses quoted, 287
only material names and qualities per- Yad advaitarh brahmopanisadi
ceived in, 115 quoted, 416


--- Page 520 ---
General Index 521

Yada yada hi dharmasya Yasmin vijiiate sarvam evar

verses quoted, 135, 409 quoted, 411
Yadu dynasty Yasya deve para bhaktir yatha

Krsna appeared in, 237 verse quoted, 13

maintained by Mukunda, 242 Yasyajiiaya bhramati sarbhrta
Yad vai paradhyam tad uparamesthyari quoted, 57

quoted, 41 Yasya prabha prabhavato
Yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya verse quoted, 394

verse quoted, 28 Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasido
Yajnabahu quoted, 421

as son of Priyavrata, 48 Yatatam api siddhanar kascin
Yajia-dana-tapah-karma quoted, 198

verses quoted, 222, 276 Yatha karicanatam yati
Yajiiad bhavati parjanyah verse quoted, 64

quoted, 141, 199 Yatha saumy ekena mrt-pindena
Yajiiaih sarikirtana-prayaih quoted, 411

quoted, 141, 252 Yat karosi yad asnasi
YajAa-pati verses quoted, 189

Supreme Lord known as, 141 Yatra yogesvarah krsnah
YajAarthat karmano ‘nyatra loko quoted, 57

quoted, 33, 119, 147, 255 Ye’ nye’ ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
Yajur Veda quoted, 172

encourages fruitive activity, 316 Yesam tv anta-gatar papa
Yamaraja verse quoted, 10

entanglement of material existence com- Yoga

pared to rope of, 205 general populace antagonistic to

Yar hi na vyathayanty ete Rsabhadeva’s execution of, 214

verses quoted, 274, 278 not strong enough to control senses. 86
Yam imam pugspitar vacam practice can be given up, 184

verse quoted, 376 practiced with half-open eyes, 84-85
Yar labdhva caparari (06007 Yoga indriya-sarivyamah

quoted, 114, 241 quoted, 85
Yamuna River Yogamaya

bathing in cleanses contamination. 303 as Rsabhadeva’s internal potency. 141
Yar yar vapi smaran bhavar King Nabhi under influence of. 142-

verses quoted, 107, 297, 422 143
Ya nisa sarva-bhatanam Krsna covered by, 187

quoted, 440 Yogesvara
Yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukham Krsna known as, 57

quoted, 166, 431, 446 Rsabhadeva described as. 141
Yanti deva-vrata devan Yogi

quoted, 15, 80 killed by his unrestrained mind. 224
Yanti mad-yajino 01 mam Rsabhadeva not comparable to any.

quoted, 81 238
Yasmin dese mrgah krsnas Yoginam api sarvesan

verse quoted, 291 verse quoted. 45. 361. 383


--- Page 521 ---
522 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Yogis Yo hares caiva jivandri bheda-vakta
always think of Supreme Lord within quoted, 205
their hearts, 85 Yudhisthira
aspire after siddhis, 218 wanted by Krsna as emperor of planet,
meditate on Paramatma. 257-258 194
try to see Paramatma without grievance,
416

