
--- Page 1 ---
Preface

We must know the present need of human society. And what is that
need? Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to par-
ticular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the
Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one human
society. The ideals of spiritual communism, according to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human
society, nay, on the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by
great thinkers to make this a successful ideology. Srimad-Bhagavatam
will fill this need in human society. It begins, therefore, with the aphor-
ism of Vedanta philosophy (janmady asya yatah) to establish the ideal of
a common cause.

Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of obli-
vion. It has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts, educa-
tion and economic development throughout the entire world. But there is
a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore there are
large-scale quarrels, even over less important issues. There is need of a
clue as to how humanity can become one in peace. friendship and
prosperity with a common cause. Srimad-Bhagavatam will fill this need.
for it is a cultural presentation for the re-spiritualization of the entire
human society.

Srimad-Bhagavatam should be introduced also in the schools and col-
leges, for it is recommended by the great student devotee Prahlada
Maharaja in order to change the demonic face of society.

kaumara acaret prajio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabharih manusari janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)

Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One. from whom everything
emanates. by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything is

£7)


--- Page 2 ---
xii Srimad-Bhagavatam

merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of
creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ultimate
source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained rationally
and authoritatively in the beautiful Bhagavatam or Srimad-
Bhagavatam.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the transcendental science not only for know-
ing the ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation
with Him and our duty towards perfection of the human society on the
basis of this perfect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the
Sanskrit language, and it is now rendered into English elaborately so that
simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well, so much so
that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend himself from the
onslaught of atheists. Over and above this, the reader will be able to con-
vert others to accept God as a concrete principle.

Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Vedanta-sitra by the same author,
Srila Vyasadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the
highest state of God realization. The only qualification one needs to study
this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step
cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly as with an ordinary
book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter, one after another.
The reading matter is so arranged with its original Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration, synonyms, translation and purports so that one is
sure to become a God realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine
cantos.

The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos, because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto
without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in
twelve cantos, each independent, but it is good for all to read them in
small installments one after another. |

I must admit my frailties in presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam, but still
I am hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society
on the strength of the following statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

tad vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin pratislokam abaddhavaty api


--- Page 3 ---
Preface xiii
namany anantasya yaso ‘nkitani yac
chrnvanti gayanti grnanti sadhavah
(Bhag. 1.5.11)
“On the other hand, that literature which is full with descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, form and pastimes of the
unlimited Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant to bring
about a revolution in the impious life of a misdirected civilization. Such
transcendental literatures, even though irregularly composed, are heard.
sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.”
Orn tat sat
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


--- Page 4 ---
Introduction

“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to His own abode, accompanied by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the
dense darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this
Purana.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43)

The timeless wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human knowledge. Originally
preserved through oral tradition, the Vedas were first put into writing
five thousand years ago by Srila Vyasadeva, the “literary incarnation of
God.” After compiling the Vedas, Vyasadeva set forth their essence in
the aphorisms known as Vedanta-sitras. Srimad-Bhagavatam 15
Vyasadeva’s commentary on his own Vedanta-sitras. It was written in
the maturity of his spiritual life under the direction of Narada Muni, his
spiritual master. Referred to as ‘““the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic
literature,” Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and authoritative
exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After compiling the Bhagavatam, Vyasa impressed the synopsis of it
upon his son, the sage Sukadeva Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami subse-
quently recited the entire Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assem-
bly of learned saints on the bank of the Ganges at Hastinapura (now
Delhi). Maharaja Pariksit was the emperor of the world and was a great
rajarsi (saintly king). Having received a warning that he would die
within a week, he renounced his entire kingdom and retired to the bank
of the Ganges to fast until death and receive spiritual enlightenment.
The Bhagavatam begins with Emperor Pariksit’s sober inquiry to
Sukadeva Gosvami:

“You are the spiritual master of great saints and
devotees. I am therefore begging you to show the
way of perfection for all persons, and especially for
one who is about to die. Please let me know what a
man should hear, chant, remember and worship,
and also what he should not do. Please explain all
this to me.”

2৮


--- Page 5 ---
Srimad-Bhagavatam 2৮

Sukadeva Gosvami’s answer to this question, and numerous other
questions posed by Maharaja Pariksit, concerning everything from the
nature of the self to the origin of the universe, held the assembled sages
in rapt attention continuously for the seven days leading to the King’s
death. The sage Sita Gosvami, who was present on the bank of the
Ganges when Sukadeva Gosvami first recited Srimad-Bhagavatam, later
repeated the Bhagavatam before a gathering of sages in the forest of
Naimisaranya. Those sages, concerned about the spiritual welfare of the
people in general, had gathered to perform a long, continuous chain of
sacrifices to counteract the degrading influence of the incipient age of
Kali. In response to the sages’ request that he speak the essence of Vedic
wisdom, Sata Gosvami repeated from memory the entire eighteen thou-
sand verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit.

The reader of Srimad-Bhagavatam hears Sita Gosvami relate the
questions of Maharaja Pariksit and the answers of Sukadeva Gosvami.
Also, Sita Gosvami sometimes responds directly to questions put by
Saunaka Rsi, the spokesman for the sages gathered at Naimisaranya. One
therefore simultaneously hears two dialogues: one between Maharaja
Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami on the bank of the Ganges, and another
at Naimisaranya between Sata Gosvami and the sages at Naimisaranya
Forest, headed by Saunaka Rsi. Furthermore, while instructing King
Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami often relates historical episodes and gives
accounts of lengthy philosophical discussions between such great souls as
the saint Maitreya and his disciple Vidura. With this understanding of
the history of the Bhagavatam, the reader will easily be able to follow its
intermingling of dialogues and events from various sources. Since
philosophical wisdom, not chronological order, is most important in the
text, one need only be attentive to the subject matter of Srimad-
Bhagavatam to appreciate fully its profound message.

It should also be noted that the volumes of the Bhagavatam need not
be read consecutively, starting with the first and proceeding to the last.
The translator of this edition compares the Bhagavatam to sugar
candy —wherever you taste it, you will find it equally sweet and
relishable.

This edition of the Bhagavatam is the first complete English transla-
tion of this important text with an elaborate commentary, and it is the


--- Page 6 ---
xvi Introduction

first widely available to the English-speaking public. It is the product of
the scholarly and devotional effort of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His consummate Sanskrit
scholarship and intimate familiarity with Vedic culture and thought as
well as the modern way of life combine to reveal to the West a magnifi-
cent exposition of this important classic.

Readers will find this work of value for many reasons. For those in-
terested in the classical roots of Indian civilization, it serves as a vast
reservoir of detailed information on virtually every one of its aspects.
For students of comparative philosophy and religion, the Bhagavatam
offers a penetrating view into the meaning of India’s profound spiritual
heritage. To sociologists and anthropologists, the Bhagavatam reveals the
practical workings of a peaceful and scientifically organized Vedic
culture, whose institutions were integrated on the basis of a highly
developed spiritual world view. Students of literature will discover the
Bhagavatam to be a masterpiece of majestic poetry. For students of psy-
chology, the text provides important perspectives on the nature of con-
sciousness, human behavior and the philosophical study of identity.
Finally, to those seeking spiritual insight, the Bhagavatam offers simple
and practical guidance for attainment of the highest self-knowledge and
realization of the Absolute Truth. The entire multivolume text. pre-
sented by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant
place in the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern man for a
long time to come.

—The Publishers


--- Page 7 ---
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The Material World as the
Great Forest of Enjoyment
The direct meaning of the forest of material existence is given in this
chapter. Merchants sometimes enter the forest to collect many rare
things and sell them at a good profit in the city, but the forest path is al-
ways bedecked with dangers. When the pure soul wants to give up the
Lord’s service to enjoy the material world, Krsna certainly gives him a
chance to enter the material world. As stated in the Prema-vivarta:
krsna-bahirmukha hana bhoga vanicha kare. This is the reason the pure
spirit soul falls down to the material world. Due to his activities under
the influence of the three modes of material nature, the living entity
takes different positions in different species. Sometimes he is a demigod
in the heavenly planets and sometimes a most insignificant creature in
the lower planetary systems. In this regard, Srila Narottama dasa
Thakura says, nana yoni sada phire: the living entity passes through
various species. Kardarya bhaksana kare: he is obliged to eat and enjoy
abominable things. Tara janma adhah-pate yaya: in this way his whole
life is spoiled. Without the protection of an all-merciful Vaisnava. the
conditioned soul cannot get out of the clutches of maya. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (manah sasthanindriyani prakrti-sthani karsati). the liv-
ing entity begins material life with his mind and the five knowledge-
acquiring senses, and with these he struggles for existence within the
material world. These senses are compared to rogues and thieves within
the forest. They take away a man’s knowledge and place him in a net-
work of nescience. Thus the senses are like rogues and thieves that
plunder his spiritual knowledge. Over and above this, there are family
members, wife and children. who are exactly like ferocious animals in
the forest. The business of such ferocious animals is to eat a man’s flesh.
The living entity allows himself to be attacked by jackals and foxes (wife
and children), and thus his real spiritual life is finished. In the forest of
material life, everyone is envious like mosquitoes. and rats and mice are
1


--- Page 8 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
always creating disturbances. Everyone in this material world is placed in
many awkward positions and surrounded by envious people and disturb-
ing animals. The result is that the living entity in the material world is
always plundered and bitten by many living entities. Nonetheless,
despite these disturbances, he does not want to give up his family life,
and he continues his fruitive activities in an attempt to become happy in
the future. He thus becomes more and more entangled in the results of
karma, and thus he is forced to act impiously. His witnesses are the sun
during the day and the moon during the night. The demigods also wit-
ness, but the conditioned soul thinks that his attempts at sense gratifica-
tion are not being witnessed by anyone. Sometimes, when he is detected,
he temporarily renounces everything, but due to his great attachment for
the body, his renunciation is given up before he can attain perfection.

In this material world there are many envious people. There is the tax-
exacting government, which is compared to an owl, and there are invisi-
ble crickets that create unbearable sounds. The conditioned soul is
certainly greatly harassed by the agents of material nature, but his intel-
ligence is lost due to undesirable association. In an attempt to gain relief
from the disturbances of material existence, he falls victim to so-called
yogis, sadhus and incarnations who can display some magic but who do
not understand devotional service. Sometimes the conditioned soul is
bereft of all money, and consequently he becomes unkind to his family
members. In this material world there is not a pinch of actual happiness,
for which the conditioned soul is longing life after life. The government
officials are like carnivorous Raksasas who exact heavy taxes for the
maintenance of the government. The hard-working conditioned soul is
very saddened due to these heavy taxes.

The path of fruitive activities leads to difficult mountains, and some-
times the conditioned soul wants to cross these mountains, but he is
never successful, and consequently he becomes more and more aggrieved
and disappointed. Becoming materially and financially embarrassed, the
conditioned soul unnecessarily chastises his family. In the mdterial con-
dition there are four principal needs, out of which sleep is compared to a
python. When asleep, the conditioned soul completely forgets his real ex-
istence, and in sleep he does not feel the tribulations of material life.
Sometimes, being in need of money, the conditioned soul steals and
cheats, although he may apparently be associated with devotees for


--- Page 9 ---
Text 1] The Forest of Enjoyment 3
spiritual advancement. His only business is getting out of the clutches of
maya, but due to improper guidance he becomes more and more en-
tangled in material dealings. This material world is simply an embarrass-
ment and is composed of tribulations presented as happiness. distress.
attachment, enmity and envy. On the whole it is simply full of tribula-
tion and misery. When a person loses his intelligence due to attachment
to wife and sex, his entire consciousness becomes polluted. He thus only
thinks of the association of women. The time factor, which is like a ser-
pent. takes away everyone's life. including that of Lord Brahma and the
insignificant ant. Sometimes the conditioned soul tries to save himself
from inexorable time and thus takes shelter of some bogus savior. Unfor-
tunately. the bogus savior cannot even save himself. How. then. can he
protect others? The bogus saviors do not care for bona fide knowledge
received from qualified brahmanas and Vedic sources. Their only busi-
ness is indulging in sex and recommending sexual freedom even for
widows. Thus they are like monkeys in the forest. Srila Sukadeva
Gosvami thus explains the material forest and its difficult path to
Maharaja Pariksit.

TEXT 1

सोवाच

य एष देहाटममानिनां स्वादिगुणविशेषविकल्यितङुशलाङ्शलसमवहार-
विनिर्मितविविधदेदावतिमिर्वियोगसंयोगायनादिसंसारानुमवस्य हार
=

भूतेनषडिन्द्ियवर्गे ण तस्िन्दुर्गाध्ववद्‌ सुगमेऽध्वन्यापतित ईश्वरस्य भगवतो
विष्णोवंशवर्तिन्या मायया जीवलोकोऽयं यथा वणिक्साथोऽर्थपरः
FERRITIN: उमश्चानवदशिवतमायां संसाराटव्यां गतो नाद्यापि
विफलबहुप्रतियोगेदस्तत्तापोपशमनीं हरिगुरुचरणारविन्दमधुकरानुपदवीम
वरुन्धे ॥१।

sa hovaca

sa esa dehatma-maninam sattvadi-guna-visesa-vikalpita-kusalaku-

Sala-samavahara-vinirmita-vividha-dehavalibhir viyoga-sarivyogady-
anadi-sarsaranubhavasya dvara-bhiitena sad-indriya-vargena tasmin
durgadhvavad asugame ‘dhvany apatita isvarasya bhagavato visnor


--- Page 10 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
vasa-vartinyd mayaya jiva-loko yarn yatha vanik-sartho ‘rtha-parah
sva-deha-nispadita-karmanubhavah sSmasanavad asivatamayarm
samsaratavyam gato nadyapi viphala-bahu-pratiyogehas tat-
tapopasamanirin  hari-guru-caranaravinda-madhukaranupadavim
avarundhe.

sah—the self-realized devotee (Sri Sukadeva Gosvami); ha—indeed;
uvaca—spoke: sah—he (the conditioned soul): esah—this one: deha-
atma-maninam —of those who foolishly take the body to be the self: sat-
tva-adi—of sattva, rajah and tamah; guna—by the modes: ४5९5८ —par-
ticular; vikalpita—falsely constituted: kuSala—sometimes by favorable
actions; akuSala—sometimes by very unfavorable actions:
samavahara—by a mixture of both: vinirmita—obtained: vividha—
various types; deha-avalibhih—by the series of bodies; viyoga-
sarnyoga-adi—symptomized by giving up one type of body (viyoga) and
accepting another (sarivyoga): anadi-samsara-anubhavasya—of the per-
ception of the beginningless process of transmigration; dvara-bhitena—
existing as the doorways: sat-indriya-vargena—by these six senses (the
mind and five knowledge-acquiring senses, namely the eyes, ears,
tongue, nose and skin); tasmin—on that; durga-adhva-vat—like a path
that is very difficult to traverse: asugame—being difficult to pass
through: adhvani—on a path in the forest: dpatitah—happened:
iSvarasya—of the controller; bhagavatah—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: vispoh—of Lord Visnu: vasa-vartinya—acting under the con-
trol; mayaya—by the material energy: jiva-lokah—the conditioned liv-
ing entity: ayam—this; yatha—exactly like: vanik—a merchant; sa-
arthah—having an object: artha-parah—who is very attached to
money: sva-deha-nispadita—performed by his own body; karma—the
fruits of activities; anubhavah—who experiences: $masana-vat
asivatamayam—Ilike an inauspicious cemetery or place of burial; san-
sara-atavyam—in the forest of material life: gatah—having entered:
na—not; adya api—until now: viphala—unsuccessful: bahu-pra-
tiyoga—full of great difficulties and varieties of miserable conditions;
thah—whose activities here in this material world: tat-tapa-upasa-
manim —which pacifies the miseries of the forest of material life: hari-
guru-carana-aravinda—to the lotus feet of the Lord and His devotee:


--- Page 11 ---
Text 1] The Forest of Enjoyment 5
madhukara-anupadavim—the road followed in pursuance of devotees
who are attached like bumblebees: avarundhe—gain.
TRANSLATION

When King Pariksit asked Sukadeva Gosvami about the direct
meaning of the material forest, Sukadeva Gosvami replied as
follows: My dear King, a man belonging to the mercantile com-
munity [vanik] is always interested in earning money. Sometimes
he enters the forest to acquire some cheap commodities like wood
and earth and sell them in the city at good prices. Similarly, the
conditioned soul, being greedy, enters this material world for
some material profit. Gradually he enters the deepest part of the
forest, not really knowing how to get out. Having entered the
material world, the pure soul becomes conditioned by the material
atmosphere, which is created by the external energy under the
control of Lord Visnu. Thus the living entity comes under the con-
trol of the external energy, daivi maya. Living independently and
bewildered in the forest, he does not attain the association of devo-
tees who are always engaged in the service of the Lord. Once in the
bodily conception, he gets different types of bodies one after the
other under the influence of material energy and impelled by the
modes of material nature [sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-gunal.
In this way the conditioned soul goes sometimes to the heavenly
planets, sometimes to the earthly planets and sometimes to the
lower planets and lower species. Thus he suffers continuously due
to different types of bodies. These sufferings and pains are some-
times mixed. Sometimes they are very severe, and sometimes they
are not. These bodily conditions are acquired due to the condi-
tioned soul’s mental speculation. He uses his mind and five senses
to acquire knowledge, and these bring about the different bodies
and different conditions. Using the senses under the control of the
external energy, maya, the living entity suffers the miserable con-
ditions of material existence. He is actually searching for relief,
but he is generally baffled, although sometimes he is relieved after
great difficulty. Struggling for existence in this way, he cannot get


--- Page 12 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
the shelter of pure devotees, who are like bumblebees engaged in
loving service at the lotus feet of Lord Visnu.

PURPORT

The most important information in this verse is hari-guru-carana-
aravinda-madhukara-anupadavim. In this material world the condi-
tioned souls are baffled by their activities, and sometimes they are
relieved after great difficulty. On the whole the conditioned soul is never
happy. He simply struggles for existence. Actually his only business is to
accept the spiritual master, the guru, and through him he must accept
the lotus feet of the Lord. This is explained by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu:
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija. People struggling for exis-
tence in the forests or cities of the material world are not actually enjoy-
ing life. They are simply suffering different pains and pleasures,
generally pains that are always inauspicious. They try to gain release
from these pains, but they cannot due to ignorance. For them it is stated
in the Vedas: tad-vijianartham sa gurum evabhigacchet. When the liv-
ing entity is lost in the forest of the material world, in the struggle for
existence. his first business is to find a bona fide guru who is always
engaged at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Visnu.
After all, if he is at all eager to be relieved of the struggle for existence.
he must find a bona fide guru and take instructions at his lotus feet. In
this way he can get out of the struggle.

Since the material world is compared herein to a forest, it may be
argued that in Kali-yuga modern civilization is mainly situated in the
cities. A great city, however. is like a great forest. Actually city life is
more dangerous than life in the forest. If one enters an unknown city
without friend or shelter. living in that city is more difficult than living
in a forest. There are many big cities all over the surface of the globe.
and wherever one looks he sees the struggle for existence going on
twenty-four hours a day. People rush about in cars going seventy and
eighty miles an hour, constantly coming and going, and this sets the
scene of the great struggle for existence. One has to rise early in the
morning and travel in that car at breakneck speed. There is always the
danger of an accident, and one has to take great care. In his automobile.
the living entity is full of anxieties, and his struggle is not at all


--- Page 13 ---
Text 2] The Forest of Enjoyment 7
auspicious. Apart from human beings, other species like cats and dogs
are also struggling very hard day and night for existence. Thus the
struggle for existence continues, and the conditioned soul changes from
one position to another. For a while, he is a child, but he has to become a
boy. From a boy, he has to change into a youth, and from youth to man-
hood and old age. Finally, when the body is no longer workable, he has to
accept a new body in a different species. Giving up the body is called
death, and accepting another body is called birth. The human form is an
opportunity to take shelter of the bona fide spiritual master and. through
him. the Supreme Lord. This Krsna consciousness movement has been
started to give an opportunity to all the members of human society. who
are misled by foolish leaders. No one can get out of this struggle for exis-
tence, which is full of miseries. without accepting a pure devotee of the
Lord. The material attempt changes from one position to another, and no
one actually gains relief from the struggle for existence. The only resort
is the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master. and. through him, the
lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 2

यस्या ह वा एते षडिन्द्रियनामानः कमणा दस्यव एव ते | तद्यथा पुरुषस
धनं यरिकि्चिद्धर्मोपयिकं wea साक्षात्परमधृरूपाराधूनलक्षणो योऽसौ
धर्मस्तं त॒ साम्पराय उदाहरन्ति | aged धनं दशनस्पशंनश्रवणा-
खादनावघ्राणसङ्ल्य व्यवसायगहग्राम्योपभोगेन इनायस्याजितात्मनो यथा
सार्थस्य विलुम्पन्ति ॥ २ ॥
yasyam u ha va ete sad-indriya-namanah karmana dasyava eva te. tad
yatha purusasya dhanam yat kificid dharmaupayikam bahu-
krechradhigatar saksat parama-purusaradhana-laksano yo sau
dharmas tam tu samparaya udaharanti. tad-dharmyari dhanarn
dariana-sparsana-sravandsvadanavaghrana-sarkalpa-vyavasaya-
grha-gramyopabhogena kunathasyajitatmano yatha sarthasya vilum-
panti. ४

yasyam—in which: u ha—certainly: va—or: ete—all these: sat-in-
driya-namanah—who are named the six senses (the mind and the five


--- Page 14 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
knowledge-acquiring senses); karmand—by their activity; dasyavah—
the plunderers: eva—certainly: te—they: tat—that: yatha—as:
purusasya—of a person: dhanam—the wealth; yat— whatever; kincit—
something: dharma-aupayikam—which is a means to religious princi-
ples: bahu-krcchra-adhigatam —earned after much hard labor: saksat—
directly: parama-purusa-aradhana-laksanah—whose symptoms are
worship of the Supreme Lord by performance of sacrifices and so on:
yah—which: asau—that; dharmah—religious principles; tam—that;
tu—but; samparaye—for the benefit of the living entity after death:
udaharanti—the wise declare: tat-dharmyam—religious (relating to the
prosecution of the varnasrama-dharma); dhanam—wealth: darsana—
by seeing: sparsana —by touching: sravana—by hearing: asvadana —by
tasting: avaghrana—by smelling: sarnkalpa—by determination:
vyavasiya—by a conclusion: grha—in the material home: gramya-
upabhogena—by material sense gratification: kundathasya—of the
misguided conditioned soul; ajita-atmanah—who has not controlled
himself: yatha—just as: sarthasya—of the living entity interested in
sense gratification: vilumpanti—they plunder.
TRANSLATION

In the forest of material existence, the uncontrolled senses are
like plunderers. The conditioned soul may earn some money for
the advancement of Krsna consciousness, but unfortunately the
uncontrolled senses plunder his money through sense gratifica-
tion. The senses are plunderers because they make one spend his
money unnecessarily for seeing, smelling, tasting, touching, hear-
ing, desiring and willing. In this way the conditioned soul is
obliged to gratify his senses, and thus all his money is spent. This
money is actually acquired for the execution of religious princi-
ples, but it is taken away by the plundering senses.

PURPORT

Parva-jamnarjita vidya puarva-janmarjitarn dhanariv 08276 dhavati
dhavati. By following the principles of the varnasrama-dharma, one at-
tains a better position in the material world. One may be rich, learned,
beautiful or highborn. One who has all these assets should know that


--- Page 15 ---
Text 3] The Forest of Enjoyment 9
they are all meant for the advancement of Krsna consciousness. Unfor-
tunately, when a person is misguided he misuses his high position for
sense gratification. Therefore the uncontrolled senses are considered
plunderers. The good position one attains by executing religious princi-
ples is wasted as the plundering senses take it away. By executing
religious principles under the laws of varnasrama-dharma, one is placed
in a comfortable position. One may very easily use his assets for the
further advancement of Krsna consciousness. One should understand
that the wealth and opportunity one gets in the material world should not
be squandered in sense gratification. They are meant for the advance-
ment of Krsna consciousness. This Krsna consciousness movement is
therefore teaching people to control the mind and five knowledge-
acquiring senses by a definite process. One should practice a little
austerity and not spend money on anything other than the regulative life
of devotional service. The senses demand that one see beautiful things;
therefore money should be spent for decorating the Deity in the temple.
Similarly, the tongue has to taste good food. which should be bought and
offered to the Deity. The nose can be utilized in smelling the flowers
offered to the Deity, and the hearing can be utilized by listening to the
vibration of the Hare Krsna mantra. In this way the senses can be regu-
lated and utilized to advance Krsna consciousness. Thus a good position
might not be spoiled by material sense gratification in the form of illicit
sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. One spoils an opulent posi-
tion in the material world by driving cars, spending time in nightclubs or
tasting abominable food in restaurants. In these ways, the plundering
senses take away all the assets that the conditioned soul has acquired with
great difficulty.
TEXT 3

EN -
अय च यत्र कौटुम्बिका दारापत्यादया লামা कर्मणा बक्सगाखा
एवानिच्छतोऽपि कदर्यस्य कुटुम्बिन उरणकवतसंरक्ष्यमाणं मिषतोऽपि
हरन्ति ।॥ ३ ॥
atha ca yatra kautumbika darapatyadayo namna karmana vrka-srgala
evanicchato ‘pi kadaryasya kutumbina uranakavat 50778070105) 07710 10773
misato ‘pi haranti.


--- Page 16 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.

atha—in this way: ca—also: yatra—in which: kautumbikah—the
family members: dara-apatya-adayah—beginning with the wife and
children: namna—by name only: karmana—by their behavior: vrka-
srgalah—tigers and jackals: eva—certainly: anicchatah—of one who
does not desire to spend his wealth: api—certainly: kadaryasya—being
too miserly: kutumbinah—who is surrounded by family members:
uranaka-vat—like a lamb: samraksyamanam—although protected:
misatah—of one who is observing: api—even: haranti—they forcibly
take away.

TRANSLATION

My dear King, family members in this material world go under
the names of wife and children, but actually they behave like tigers
and jackals. A herdsman tries to protect his sheep to the best of his
ability, but the tigers and foxes take them away by force. Similarly,
although a miserly man wants to guard his money very carefully,
his family members take away all his assets forcibly, even though
he is very vigilant.

PURPORT

One Hindi poet has sung: din ka dakini rat ka baghini palak palak
rahu cuse. During the daytime, the wife is compared to a witch, and at
night she is compared to a tigress. Her only business is sucking the blood
of her husband both day and night. During the day there are household
expenditures, and the money earned by the husband at the cost of his
blood is taken away. At night. due to sex pleasure, the husband dis-
charges blood in the form of semen. In this way he is bled by his wife
both day and night, yet he is so crazy that he very carefully maintains
her. Similarly, the children are also like tigers, jackals and foxes. As
tigers. jackals and foxes take away lambs despite the herdsman’s vigilant
protection, children take away the father’s money. although the father
supervises the money himself. Thus family members may be called
wives and children, but actually they are plunderers.

TEXT 4

यथा ह्यनुवत्सरं दकृष्यमाणमप्यदग्ध्ीजं क्षत्रं पुनरेवावपनकाले
THUR REA भवत्येवमेव गृहाश्रमः कर्मक्षेत्रं यसिन्न ছি कर्मा-
ण्युत्सीदन्ति यदयं कामकरण्ड एष आवसथः 1 ४॥


--- Page 17 ---
Text 4] The Forest of Enjoyment 11
yatha hy anuvatsaram krsyamanam apy adagdha-bijam ksetram punar
evavapana-kale gulma-trna-virudbhir gahvaram iva bhavaty evam eva
grhasramah karma-ksetram yasmin na hi karmamny utsidanti yad ayam
kama-karanda esa avasathah.

yatha—just as: hi—certainly: anuvatsaram—every year:
krsyamanam—being plowed: api—although: adagdha-bijam—in which
the seeds are not burned: ksetram—the field: punah—again: eva—cer-
tainly: avapana-kale—at the times for sowing the seeds: gulma—by
bushes: trna—by grasses: virudbhih—by the creepers: gahvaram iva—
like a bower: bhavati—becomes: evam—thus: eva—certainly: grha-
asramah—family life: karma-ksetram—the field of activities: yasmin—
in which: na —not: hi—certainly: karmani utsidanti—fruitive activities
disappear: yat—therefore: ayam—this: kama-karandah—the
storehouse of fruitive desire: esah—this: avasathah—abode.

TRANSLATION

Every year the plowman plows over his grain field, completely
uprooting all weeds. Nonetheless, the seeds lie there and, not
being completely burned, again come up with the plants sown in
the field. Even after being plowed under, the weeds come up
densely. Similarly, the grhastha-asrama [family life] is a field of
fruitive activity. Unless the desire to enjoy family life is completely
burned out, it grows up again and again. Even though camphor
may be removed from a pot, the pot nonetheless retains the aroma
of camphor. As long as the seeds of desire are not destroyed, frui-
tive activities are not destroyed.

PURPORT

Unless one’s desires are completely transferred to the service of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. the desire for family life continues.
even after one has taken sannydsa. Sometimes in our society. ISKCON. a
person out of sentiment may take sannydsa, but because his desires are
not burned completely. he again takes to family life. even at the risk of
losing his prestige and disgracing his good name. These strong desires
can be burned out completely when one fully engages in the service of
the Lord in devotional service.


--- Page 18 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
TEXT 5
; AC ২ i
TANT द॑श्मशकसमापसदेमंवुजैः CERES SIS TE LEAL Sa
[9 চু €
परुष्यमानयदिःप्राणः क्रचित्‌ परितेमानोऽसिन्न्वन्यवरिद्याकामकमेभिरु
श्‌ PAN

परक्त मनसानुपपनाथेः नरलोकं गन्धवनगरघपपनमिति भिथ्यादष्टर-
FIER ॥ ५॥

tatra gato dar$a-masaka-samapasadair manujaih salabha-sakunta-
taskara-mitsakadibhir uparudhyamana-bahih-pranah kvacit
parivartamano ’sminn adhvany avidya-kama-karmabhir uparakta-
manasanupapannartham nara-lokam gandharva-nagaram upapannam
iti mithya-drstir anupasyati.

tatra—to that household life: gatah—gone: damsa—gadflies:
masaka—mosquitoes: sama—equal to: apasadaih—who are low-class:
manu-jaih—by men: Salabha—locusts; $akunta—a large bird of prey:
taskara—thieves: musaka-adibhih—by rats and so on:
uparudhyamana—being disturbed: bahih-pranah—the external life air
in the form of wealth and so on: kvacit—sometimes: parivartamanah—
wandering: asmin—in this: adhvani—path of material existence:
avidya-kama—by ignorance and lust: karmabhih—and by fruitive ac-
tivities: uparakta-manasa—due to the mind's being influenced:
anupapanna-artham —in which the desired results are never obtained:
nara-lokam—this material world: gandharva-nagaram—a will-o’-the-
wisp city: upapannam—existing: iti—taking it as: mithya-drstih—he
whose vision is mistaken: anupasyati—observes.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the conditioned soul in household life, being at-
tached to material wealth and possessions, is disturbed by gadflies
and mosquitoes, and sometimes locusts, birds of prey and rats give
him trouble. Nonetheless, he still wanders down the path of
material existence. Due to ignorance he becomes lusty and engages
in fruitive activity. Because his mind is absorbed in these activities,
he sees the material world as permanent, although it is temporary
like a phantasmagoria, a house in the sky.


--- Page 19 ---
Text 6] The Forest of Enjoyment 13
PURPORT
The following song is sung by Narottama dasa Thakura:
aharikare matta hana, nitdi-pada pasariya,
asatyere satya kari mani
Due to forgetting the lotus feet of Lord Nityananda and being puffed up
by material possessions, wealth and opulence. one thinks the false, tem-
porary material world to be an actual fact. This is the material disease.
The living entity is eternal and blissful. but despite miserable material
conditions, he thinks the material world to be real and factual due to his
ignorance.
TEXT 6

লগ च क्रचिद्‌ातपोदकनिमान्‌ विषयानुपधावति पानमोजनढयवायादि-
व्यसनलोद्धपः ॥ ৪ ॥
tatra ca kvacid atapodaka-nibhan visayan upadhavati pana-bhojana-
vyavayadi-vyasana-lolupah.

tatra—there (in this phantom place): ca—also: kvacit—sometimes:
atapa-udaka-nibhan—like the water in a mirage in the desert:
visayan—the objects of sense enjoyment: upadhavati—runs after:
pana—to drinking: bhojana—to eating: vyavaya—to sex life: adi—and
so on; vyasana—with addiction: lolupah—a debauchee.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes in this house in the sky [gandharva-pura] the condi-
tioned soul drinks, eats and has sex. Being overly attached, he
chases after the objects of the senses just as a deer chases a mirage
in the desert.

PURPORT

There are two worlds—the spiritual and the material. The material

world is false like a mirage in the desert. In the desert. animals think


--- Page 20 ---
14 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
they see water, but actually there is none. Similarly, those who are
animalistic try to find peace within the desert of material life. It is
repeatedly said in different Sastras that there is no pleasure in this
material world. Furthermore, even if we agree to live without pleasure,
we are not allowed to do so. In Bhagavad-gita, Lord Krsna says that the
material world is not only full of miseries (duhkhalayam) but also tem-
porary (asasvatam). Even if we want to live here amid miseries. material
nature will not allow us to do so. It will oblige us to change bodies and
enter another atmosphere full of miserable conditions.
TEXT 7
৬ ५ 8, ~ ©

कचि्चादोषदोपनिपदनं पुरीषविशेषं तद्वणेगुणनिर्मितमतिः सुबणभुपा-
दिस्सत्यभ्रिकामकातर इशोल्छुकपिशाचम्‌।।७॥
kvacic casesa-dosa-nisadanarm purisa-visesar tad-varna-guna-nirmita-
matih suvarnam upaditsaty agni-kama-katara ivolmuka-pisacam.

kvacit—sometimes; ca—also; asesa—unlimited: dosa—of faults;
nisadanam—the source of: purisa—of stool: visesam—a particular
type: tat-varna-guna—whose color is the same as that of the mode of
passion (reddish): nirmita-matih—whose mind is absorbed in that;
suvarnam—gold ; upaditsati—desiring to get: agni-kama—by the desire
for fire: katurah—who is troubled: iva—like: ulmuka-pisacam—a
phosphorescent light known as a will-o’-the-wisp, which is sometimes
mistaken for a ghost.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the living entity is interested in the yellow stool
known as gold and runs after it. That gold is the source of material
opulence and envy, and it can enable one to afford illicit sex, gam-
bling, meat-eating and intoxication. Those whose minds are over-
come by the mode of passion are attracted by the color of gold, just
as a man suffering from cold in the forest runs after a phosphores-
cent light in a marshy land, considering it to be fire.


--- Page 21 ---
Text 8] The Forest of Enjoyment 15
PURPORT

Pariksit Maharaja told Kali-yuga to leave his kingdom immediately
and reside in four places: brothels, liquor shops, slaughterhouses and
gambling casinos. However, Kali-yuga requested him to give him only
one place where these four places are included, and Pariksit Maharaja
gave him the place where gold is stored. Gold encompasses the four
principles of sin, and therefore. according to spiritual life. gold should be
avoided as far as possible. If there is gold, there is certainly illicit sex.
meat-eating, gambling and intoxication. Because people in the Western
world have a great deal of gold, they are victims of these four sins. The
color of gold is very glittering, and a materialistic person becomes very
much attracted by its yellow color. However. this gold is actually a type
of stool. A person with a bad liver generally passes yellow stool. The color
of this stool attracts a materialistic person, just as the will-o-the-wisp at-
tracts one who needs heat.

TEXT 8

अथ कदाचिननिवासपानीयद्रविणा्यनेकात्मोपजीवनाभिनिवेश एतस्यां
संसाराटव्यामितस्ततः परिधाप्रति ne
atha kaddacin nivasa-paniya-dravinady-anekatmopajivanabhinivesa
etasyam samsaratavyam itas tatah paridhavati.

atha—in this way; kaddcit—sometimes; nivasa—residence:
paniya—water; dravina—wealth; ddi—and so on: aneka—in various
items: datma-upajivana—which are considered necessary to maintain
body and soul together: abhiniveSah—a person fully absorbed:
etasyam—in 11115; samsara-atavyam—the material world, which is like a
great forest: itah tatah—here and there: paridhavati—runs around.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the conditioned soul is absorbed in finding residen-
tial quarters or apartments and getting a supply of water and riches
to maintain his body. Absorbed in acquiring a variety of


--- Page 22 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
necessities, he forgets everything and perpetually runs around the
forest of material existence.
PURPORT

As originally mentioned, a poor man belonging to the mercantile com-
munity goes to the forest to get some cheap goods to bring back to the city
to sell at a profit. He is so absorbed in the thought of maintaining body
and soul together that he forgets his original relationship with Krsna and
seeks only the bodily comforts. Thus material activities are the condi-
tioned soul’s only engagement. Not knowing the aim of life. the
materialist perpetually wanders in material existence. struggling to get
the necessities of life. Not understanding the aim of life, even though he
acquires sufficient necessities, he manufactures artificial necessities and
thus becomes more and more entangled. He creates a mental situation
whereby he needs greater and greater comforts. The materialist does not
know the secret of nature's ways. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (3.27):

prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah
aharikara-vimadhatma
kartaham iti manyate
“The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities which are in
actuality carried out by nature.” Due to lusty desire. the living entity
creates a certain mental situation whereby he wants to enjoy this material
world. He thus becomes entangled. enters different bodies and suffers in
them.
TEXT 9
त्यौ =
कचिच वात्योपम्यया प्रमद्याऽऽरोहमारोपितस्तत्कालरजसा रजनीभूत
(स्‌

इवासाधुमर्यादो रजखलाक्षोऽपि दिग्देवता अतिरजखलमतिन
विजानाति ॥ ९॥


--- Page 23 ---
Text 9] The Forest of Enjoyment 17
kvacic ca vatyaupamyaya pramadaydroham aropitas tat-kala-rajasa
rajani-bhita ivasadhu-maryado rajas-valakso 07 dig-devata atirajas-
vala-matir na vijanati.

kvacit—sometimes; ca—also: 13/05 aupamyayd—compared to a
whirlwind; pramadaya—by a beautiful woman: droham daropitah—
raised onto the lap for sex enjoyment; tat-kala-rajasa—by the passion of
lusty desires at that moment; rajani-bhitah—the darkness of night:
iva—like: asddhu-maryadah—who is without proper respect for the
higher witnesses; rajah-vala-aksah—blinded by strong lusty desires:
api—certainly; dik-devatah—the demigods in charge of different direc-
tions, like the sun and the moon; atirajah-vala-matih—whose mind is
overcome by lust; na vijandti—he does not know (that witnesses all
around take note of his impudent sexual act).

TRANSLATION

Sometimes, as if blinded by the dust of a whirlwind, the condi-
tioned soul sees the beauty of the opposite sex, which is called pra-
mada. Being thus bewildered, he is raised upon the lap of a
woman, and at that time his good senses are overcome by the force
of passion. He thus becomes almost blind with lusty desire and dis-
obeys the rules and regulations governing sex life. He does not
know that his disobedience is witnessed by different demigods,
and he enjoys illicit sex in the dead of night, not seeing the future
punishment awaiting him.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (7.11) it is said: dharmaviruddho 611८1९5८ kamo
’smi bharatarsabha. Sex is allowed only for the begetting of children. not
for enjoyment. One can indulge in sex to beget a good child for the
benefit of the family, society and world. Otherwise. sex is against the
rules and regulations of religious life. A materialistic person does not
believe that everything is managed in nature, and he does not know that
if one does something wrong, he is witnessed by different demigods. A
person enjoys illicit sex. and due to his blind, lusty desire. he thinks that
no one can see him, but this illicit sex is thoroughly observed by the


--- Page 24 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
agents of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the person is
punished in so many ways. Presently in Kali-yuga there are many preg-
nancies due to illicit sex, and sometimes abortions ensue. These sinful ac-
tivities are witnessed by the agents of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. and a man and woman who create such a situation are
punished in the future by the stringent laws of material nature (daivi hy
esa gunamayi mama maya duratyaya). lllicit sex is never excused, and
those who indulge in it are punished life after life. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (16.20):
asuririn yonim apannda
miidhda janmani janmani
mam aprapyaiva kaunteya
tato yanty adhamar gatim
“Attaining repeated birth among the species of demoniac life. such per-
sons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most
abominable type of existence.”

The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not allow anyone to act
against the stringent laws of material nature: therefore illicit sex is
punished life after life. Illicit sex creates pregnancies. and these un-
wanted pregnancies lead to abortion. Those involved become implicated
in these sins. so much so that they are punished in the same way the next
life. Thus in the next life they also enter the womb of a mother and are
killed in the same way. All these things can be avoided by remaining on
the transcendental platform of Krsna consciousness. In this way one does
not commit sinful activity. Illicit sex is the most prominent sin due to
lusty desire. When one associates with the mode of passion. he is impli-
cated in suffering life after life.

TEXT 10
. +
कचिर्सशद्वगतविषयवेतथ्यः অর पराभिध्यानेन fife
मरीचितोयग्रायांस्तानेबाभिधावति ॥१०॥
क
kvacit sakrd avagata-visaya-vaitathyah svayar parabhidhyanena
vibhramsita-smrtis tayaiva marici-toya-prayams tan evabhidhavati.


--- Page 25 ---
Text 10] The Forest of Enjoyment 19

kvacit—sometimes: sakrt—once: avagata-visaya-vaitathyah—
becoming conscious of the uselessness of enjoying material sense
gratification; svayam—himself; para-abhidhyanena—by the bodily
concept of the self; vibhramsita—destroyed: smrtih—whose
remembrance; taya—by that: eva—certainly: marici-toya—water in a
mirage: prayan—similar to: tan—those sense objects: eva—certainly:
abhidhdavati—runs after.

TRANSLATION

The conditioned soul sometimes personally appreciates the
futility of sense enjoyment in the material world, and he some-
times considers material enjoyment to be full of miseries.
However, due to his strong bodily conception, his memory is
destroyed, and again and again he runs after material enjoyment,
just as an animal runs after a mirage in the desert.

PURPORT

The main disease in material life is the bodily conception. Being
baffled again and again in material activity, the conditioned soul tem-
porarily thinks of the futility of material enjoyment. but he again tries
the same thing. By the association of devotees. a person may become con-
vinced of the material futility. but he cannot give up his engagement.
although he is very eager to return home, back to Godhead. Under these
circumstances, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. who is situated in
everyone's heart, compassionately takes away all the material possessions
of such a devotee. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.88.8):
yasyaham anugrhnpami harisye tad-dhanam sanaih. Lord Krsna says
that He takes everything away from the devotee whom He especially
favors when that devotee is overly attached to material possessions.
When everything is taken away, the devotee feels helpless and frustrated
in society, friendship and love. He feels that his family does not care for
him any longer, and he therefore completely surrenders unto the lotus
feet of the Supreme Lord. This is a special favor granted by the Lord to a
devotee who cannot fully surrender to the Lord due to a strong bodily
conception. As explained in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.39):
ami—uijna, ei murkhe ‘visaya’ kene diba. The Lord understands the


--- Page 26 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
devotee who hesitates to engage in the Lords service. not knowing
whether he should again try to revive his material life. After repeated at-
tempts and failures, he fully surrenders to the lotus feet of the Lord. The
Lord then gives him directions, and, attaining happiness. he forgets all
material engagement.
TEXT 11
चिदु टूकश्चिष्टीखनवद तिपरुषरभसाटोपं प्रत्यक्ष॑परोक्षं লা ॒रिपुराजङ्ल-
cn ¢ ©

निभेत्सितेनातिन्यथितकणमूलहदयः 1221
kvacid ulika-jhilli-svanavad ati-parusa-rabhasatopam pratyaksarn
paroksari va ripu-raja-kula-nirbhartsitenati-vyathita-karna-mala-
hrdayah.

kvacit—sometimes: uliika—of the owl: jhilli—and the cricket: svana-
vat—exactly like intolerable sounds: ati-parusa—extremely piercing:
rabhasa—by perseverance: datopam—agitation: pratyaksam—directly:
paroksam—indirectly: va—or: ripu—of enemies: raja-kula—and of
government officers: nirbhartsitena—by chastisement: ati-vyathita—
very aggrieved: karna-mila-hrdayah—whose ear and heart.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the conditioned soul is very aggrieved by the
chastisement of his enemies and government servants, who use
harsh words against him directly or indirectly. At that time his
heart and ears become very saddened. Such chastisement may be
compared to the sounds of owls and crickets.

PURPORT

There are different types of enemies within this material world. The
government chastises one due to not paying income taxes. Such criticism,
direct or indirect, saddens one, and sometimes the conditioned soul tries
to counteract that chastisement. Unfortunately. he cannot do anything.


--- Page 27 ---
Text 12] The Forest of Enjoyment 21
TEXT 12

स यदा दुग्धपू्सुङृतस्तदा कारस्करकाकतुण्डाद्यपुण्यदुमलताविषोदषानवदुभ-
याथशल्यद्रविणान्‌ ATER खयं जीवन्त्रियमाण उपधावति ।। १२

sa yada dugdha-pirva-sukrtas tada karaskara-kakatundady-apunya-
druma-lata-visoda-panavad ubhayartha-sinya-dravinan jivan-mrtan
svayam jivan-mriyamana upadhavati.

sah —that conditioned soul: yada—when: dugdha —exhausted:
pirva—previous: sukrtah—pious activities: tada—at that time:
karaskara-kakatunda-adi— named karaskara, kakatunda, etc.: apunya-
druma-lata—impious trees and creepers: visa-uda-pana-vat—like wells
with poisonous water: ubhaya-artha-sinya— which cannot give happi-
ness either in this life or in the next; dravinan—those who possess
wealth: jivat-mrtan—who are dead. although apparently alive:
svayam—he himself: jivat—living: mriyamanah—being dead:
upadhavati—approaches for material acquisition.

TRANSLATION

Due to his pious activities in previous lives, the conditioned soul
attains material facilities in this life, but when they are finished, he
takes shelter of wealth and riches, which cannot help him in this
life or the next. Because of this, he approaches the living dead who
possess these things. Such people are compared to impure trees,
creepers and poisonous wells.

PURPORT

The wealth and riches acquired through previous pious activities
should not be misused for sense gratification. Enjoying them for sense
gratification is like enjoying the fruits of a poisonous tree. Such activities
will not help the conditioned soul in any way, neither in this life nor the
next. However. if one engages his possessions in the service of the Lord
under the guidance of a proper spiritual master. he will attain happiness


--- Page 28 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
both in this life and the next. Unless he does so. he eats a forbidden apple
and thereby loses his paradise. Lord Sri Krsna therefore advises that
one’s possessions should be given unto Him.
vat karosi yad asnasi
yaj juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kurusva mad-arpanam
=O son of Kunti. all that you do. all that you eat. all that you offer and
give away. as well as all austerities that you may perform. should be done
as an offering unto Me.” (Bg. 9.27) Material wealth and opulence at-
tained through previous pious activities can be fully utilized for one’s
benefit in this life and the next if one is Krsna conscious. One should not
try to possess more than he needs for the bare necessities. If one gets
more than is needed, the surplus should be fully engaged in the Lord's
service. That will make the conditioned soul. the world and Krsna happy.
and this is the aim of life.
TEXT 13
১. ৯ *
एकदासत्प्रसङ्गाननिकृतमतिन्यदकसरोतः स्खरनवद्डभयतोऽपि दु;खद्‌
पाखण्डमभियाति 1122
ekadasat-prasangan nikrta-matir vyudaka-srotah-skhalanavad
ubhayato pi duhkhadarm pakhandam abhiyati.
ekada—sometimes: asat-prasangat—by association of nondevotees
who are against the Vedic principles and who manufacture different
paths of religion: nikrta-matih—whose intelligence has been brought to
the abominable status of defying the authority of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead: vyudaka-srotah—into rivers without sufficient
water; skhalana-vat—like jumping: ubhayatah—ftrom both sides:
api—although; duhkha-dam—giving distress: pakhandam—the
atheistic path; abhiyati—he approaches.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes, to mitigate distresses in this forest of the material
world, the conditioned soul receives cheap blessings from atheists.


--- Page 29 ---
Text 13] The Forest of Enjoyment 23
He then loses all intelligence in their association. This is exactly
like jumping in a shallow river. As a result one simply breaks his
head. He is not able to mitigate his sufferings from the heat, and in
both ways he suffers. The misguided conditioned soul also ap-
proaches so-called sadhus and svamis who preach against the prin-
ciples of the Vedas. He does not receive benefit from them, either
in the present or in the future.
PURPORT

Cheaters are always there to manufacture their own way of spiritual
realization. To get some material benefit. the conditioned soul approaches
these pseudo sannydsis and yogis for cheap blessings. but he does not
receive any benefit from them, either spiritual or material. In this age
there are many cheaters who show some jugglery and magic. They even
create gold to amaze their followers, and their followers accept them as
God. This type of cheating is very prominent in Kali-yuga. 15৬81131113
Cakravati Thakura describes the real guru in this way.

samsara-davanala-lidha-loka-
tranaya karunya-ghanaghanatvam
praptasya kalyana-gunarnavasya
vande guroh $ri-caranaravindam

One should approach a guru who can extinguish the blazing fire of this
material world, the struggle for existence. People want to be cheated. and
therefore they go to yogis and svamis who play tricks. but tricks do not
mitigate the miseries of material life. If being able to manufacture gold is
a criterion for becoming God. then why not accept Krsna. the proprietor
of the entire universe, wherein there are countless tons of gold? As men-
tioned before. the color of gold is compared to the will-o'-the-wisp or
yellow stool: therefore one should not be allured by gold-manufacturing
gurus but should sincerely approach a devotee like Jada Bharata. Jada
Bharata instructed 10317063103 Maharaja so well that the King was relieved
from the bodily conception. One cannot become happy by accepting a
false guru. A guru should be accepted as advised in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(11.3.21). Tasmad gururi prapadyeta jijigsuh sreya uttamam: One
should approach a bona fide guru to inquire about the highest benefit of
life. Such a guru is described as follows: sabde pare ca nispatam. Such a


--- Page 30 ---
24 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
guru does not manufacture gold or juggle words. He is well versed in the
conclusions of Vedic knowledge (vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah). He
is freed from all material contamination and is fully engaged in Krsna's
service. If one is able to obtain the dust of the lotus feet of such a guru,
his life becomes successful. Otherwise he is baffled both in this life and
in the next.
TEXT 14

यदा तु परबाधयान्ध आत्मने नोपनमति तदा BR ER LEN CLEA GE
[a3
पिदपुत्रान्‌ वा स खल भक्षयति ॥१४॥
yada tu para-badhayandha atmane nopanamati tada hi pitr-putra-
barhismatah pitr-putran va sa khalu bhaksayati.

yada—when: tu—but (because of misfortune): para-badhaya—in
spite of exploiting all others: andhah—blind: atmane—for himself: na
upanamati—does not fall into one’s share: tada—at that time: hi—cer-
tainly: pitr-putra—of the father or sons: barhismatah—as insignificant
as a piece of grass; pitr-putran—father or sons: va—or: sah—he (the
conditioned soul): khalu—indeed: bhaksayati—gives trouble to.

TRANSLATION

In this material world, when the conditioned soul cannot ar-
range for his own maintenance, despite exploiting others, he tries
to exploit his own father or son, taking away that relative’s posses-
sions, although they may be very insignificant. If he cannot ac-
quire things from his father, son or other relatives, he is prepared
to give them all kinds of trouble.

PURPORT

Once we actually saw a distressed man steal ornaments from his
daughter just to maintain himself. As the English proverb goes. necessity
knows no law. When a conditioned soul needs something. he forgets his
relationship with his relatives and exploits his own father or son. We also
receive information from Srimad-Bhagavatam that in this age of Kali
the time is quickly approaching when a relative will kill another relative
for a small farthing. Without Krsna consciousness, people will deterio-


--- Page 31 ---
Text 15] The Forest of Enjoyment 25
rate further and further into a hellish condition wherein they will per-
form abominable acts.
TEXT 15
৬ ৮ ९

कचिदासादयय गृहं दाचवत््रियाथविधुरमसुखोदकं शोकाभिना दह्यमानो

+ =.
शशं निर्वेद गुपगच्छति ॥१५॥
kvacid asadya grham davavat priyartha-vidhuram asukhodarkam
Sokagnina dahyamano bhrsam nirvedam upagacchati.

kvacit—sometimes: asddya—experiencing: grham—the home life:
dava-vat—exactly like a blazing fire in the forest: priya-artha-
vidhuram—without any beneficial object: asukha-udarkam—resulting
only in more and more unhappiness: Soka-agnina—by the fire of lamen-
tation: dahyamanah—being burned: bhrsam —very great: nirvedam—
disappointment: upagacchati—he obtains.

TRANSLATION

In this world, family life is exactly like a blazing fire in the
forest. There is not the least happiness, and gradually one becomes
more and more implicated in unhappiness. In household life,
there is nothing favorable for perpetual happiness. Being impli-
cated in home life, the conditioned soul is burned by the fire of
lamentation. Sometimes he condemns himself as being very unfor-
tunate, and sometimes he claims that he suffers because he per-
formed no pious activities in his previous life.

PURPORT
In the Gurv-astaka, Srila Visvanatha Cakravati Thakura has sung:
sarmsara-davanala-lidha-loka-
tranaya karunya-ghanaghanatvam

A life in this material world is exactly like a blazing forest fire. No one
goes to set fire to the forest. yet the fire takes place. Similarly. everyone


--- Page 32 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
wants to be happy in the material world. but the miserable conditions of
material life simply increase. Sometimes a person caught in the blazing
fire of material existence condemns himself. but due to his bodily con-
ception he cannot get out of the entanglement. and thus he suffers more
and more.

TEXT 16
कचित्कारविषमितराजङ्कररक्षसापहतप्रियतमधनासुः प्रमृतक इव
बिगतजीवलक्षण आस्ते॥ १६
kvacit kala-visa-mita-raja-kula-raksasapahrta-priyatama-dhanasuh
pramrtaka iva vigata-jiva-laksana aste.

kvacit—sometimes: kala-visa-mita—made crooked by time: raja-
kula —the government men: raksasa—by those who are like carnivorous
human beings: apahrta—being plundered: priya-tama—most dear:
dhana—in the form of wealth: asuh—whose life air: pramrtakah—
dead: iva —like: vigata-jiva-laksanah—bereft of all signs of life: aste—
he remains.

TRANSLATION

Government men are always like carnivorous demons called
Raksasas [man-eaters]. Sometimes these government men turn
against the conditioned soul and take away all his accumulated
wealth. Being bereft of his life’s reserved wealth, the conditioned
soul loses all enthusiasm. Indeed, it is as though he loses his life.

PURPORT

The word raja-kula-raksasa is very significant. Srimad-Bhagavatam
was compiled about five thousand years ago, yet government men are
referred to as Raksasas. or carnivorous demons. If government men are
opposed to a person, that person will be bereft of all his riches. which he
has accumulated with great care over a long period of time. Actually no
one wants to pay income taxes —even government men themselves try to
avoid these taxes—but at unfavorable times income taxes are exacted
forcibly, and the taxpayers become very morose.


--- Page 33 ---
Text 18] The Forest of Enjoyment 27
TEXT 17
=
कदाचिन्मनोरथोपगतपिठपिता महायसत्सदिति स्वभनिञैतिलक्षणम-
चुमवति॥।१५७॥
kadacin manorathopagata-pitr-pitamahady asat sad iti svapna-nirvrti-
laksanam anubhavati.
kadacit—sometimes: manoratha-upagata—obtained by mental con-
coction: pitr—the father: pita-maha-adi—or grandfather and others:
asat—although long dead (and although no one knows that the soul has
gone): sat—again the father or grandfather has come: iti—thus think-
ing: svapna-nirvrti-laksanam—the kind of happiness found in dreams:
anubhavati—the conditioned soul feels.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the conditioned soul imagines that his father or
grandfather has again come in the form of his son or grandson. In
this way he feels the happiness one sometimes feels in a dream,
and the conditioned soul sometimes takes pleasure in such mental
concoctions.
PURPORT
Due to ignorance of the real existence of the Lord. the conditioned soul
imagines many things. Influenced by fruitive activity. he comes together
with his relatives. fathers. sons and grandfathers. exactly as straws
gather together in a moving stream. In a moment the straws are thrown
everywhere. and they lose contact. In conditional life. the living entity is
temporarily with many other conditioned souls. They gather together as
family members. and the material affection is so strong that even after a
father or grandfather passes away. one takes pleasure in thinking that
they return to the family in different forms. Sometimes this may happen.
but in any case the conditioned soul likes to take pleasure in such con-
cocted thoughts.
TEXT 18
कचिद्‌ गृहाश्रमकमचोदनातिमरगिरिमारुरश्षमाणो लोकन्यसनकर्षितमनाः
S ৬
कण्टकटाकरा्षत्र प्रविशन्निव सीदति nen


--- Page 34 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
kvacid grhasrama-karma-codanati-bhara-girim aruruksamano loka-
vyasana-karsita-manah kantaka-sarkara-ksetram pravisann iva sidati.

kvacit—sometimes: grha-asrama—in householder life: karma-
codana—of the rules of fruitive activity: ati-bhara-girim—the big hill:
aruruksamanah—desiring to ascend: loka—material: vyasana—to pur-
suits: karsita-manah—whose mind is attracted: kantaka-sarkara-
ksetram —a field covered with thorns and sharp pebbles: pravisan—en-
tering: iva—like: sidati—he laments.

TRANSLATION

In household life one is ordered to execute many yajhas and
fruitive activities, especially the vivaha-yajia [the marriage
ceremony for sons and daughters] and the sacred thread
ceremony. These are all the duties of a grhastha, and they are very
extensive and troublesome to execute. They are compared to a big
hill over which one must cross when one is attached to material ac-
tivities. A person desiring to cross over these ritualistic ceremonies
certainly feels pains like the piercing of thorns and pebbles en-
dured by one attempting to climb a hill. Thus the conditioned soul
suffers unlimitedly.

PURPORT

There are many social functions for keeping a prestigious position in
society. In different countries and societies there are various festivals
and rituals. In India. the father is supposed to get his children married.
When he does so, his responsibility to the family is complete. Arranging
marriages is very difficult, especially in these days. At the present
moment no one can perform the proper ritual of sacrifice. nor can anyone
afford to pay for the marriage ceremony of sons and daughters.
Therefore householders are very much distressed when they are con-
fronted by these social duties. It is as though they were pierced by thorns
and hurt by pebbles. Material attachment is so strong that despite the
suffering. one cannot give it up. Prahlada Maharaja therefore recom-
mends (Bhag. 7.5.5):


--- Page 35 ---
Text 19] The Forest of Enjoyment 29
hitvatma-patam grham andha-kipam
vanar gato yad dharim asrayeta
The so-called comfortable family position is compared to a dark well in a
field. If one falls in a dark well covered by grass, his life is lost. despite
his cry for rescue. Highly advanced spiritualists therefore recommend
that one should not enter the grhastha-asrama. It is better to prepare
oneself in the brahmacarya-asrama for austerities and remain a pure
brahmacari throughout one’s life so that one will not feel the piercing
thorns of material life in the grhastha-asrama. In the grhastha-asrama
one has to accept invitations from friends and relatives and perform
ritualistic ceremonies. By so doing. one becomes captivated by such
things, although he may not have sufficient resources to continue them.
To maintain the grhastha life-style, one has to work very hard to acquire
money. Thus one is implicated in material life. and he suffers the thorn
pricks.
TEXT 19

चिच दुःसहेन कायाभ्यन्तरवष्टिना गृदीतसारः खङ्टम्बाय FAM ॥१९॥
kvacic ca duhsahena kayabhyantara-vahnina grhita-sarah sva-
kutumbaya krudhyati.

kvacit ca—and sometimes: duhsahena—unbearable: kaya-abhyan-
tara-vahnina—because of the fire of hunger and thirst within the body:
grhita-sarah—whose patience is exhausted: sva-kutumbaya—unto his
own family members: krudhyati—he becomes angry.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes, due to bodily hunger and thirst, the conditioned
soul becomes so disturbed that he loses his patience and becomes
angry with his own beloved sons, daughters and wife. Thus, being
unkind to them, he suffers all the more.

PURPORT
Srila Vidyapati Thakura has sung:


--- Page 36 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
tatala saikate, vari-bindu-sama,
suta-mita-ramani-samaje
The happiness of family life is compared to a drop of water in the desert.
No one can be happy in family life. According to the Vedic civilization,
one cannot give up the responsibilities of family life. but today everyone
is giving up family life by divorce. This is due to the miserable condition
experienced in the family. Sometimes. due to misery. one becomes very
hardened toward his affectionate sons. daughters and wife. This is but

part of the blazing fire of the forest of material life.
TEXT 20

स एव पुननिंद्राजगरगृदीतोऽन्ये तमसि मग्नः शूल्यारण्य इव शेते
नान्यत्किञ्चन वेद॒ হাল इवापविद्धः ॥ २० ॥
sa eva punar nidrajagara-grhito ‘ndhe tamasi magnah sinyaranya iva
Sete nanyat-kinicana veda Sava wapaviddhah.

sah—that conditioned soul: eva—certainly: punah—again: nidra-
agjagara—by the python of deep sleep: grhitah—being devoured:
andhe—in deep darkness; tamasi—in ignorance: magnah—being ab-
sorbed: Sinya-aranye—in the isolated forest: iva—like: sete—he lies
down: na—not: anyat—else: kiiicana—anything: veda—knows:
Savah—a dead body: iva—like: apaviddhah—thrown away.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued speaking to Maharaja Pariksit: My
dear King, sleep is exactly like a python. Those who wander in the
forest of material life are always devoured by the python of sleep.
Being bitten by this python, they always remain in the darkness of
ignorance. They are like dead bodies thrown in a distant forest.
Thus the conditioned souls cannot understand what is going on in
life.


--- Page 37 ---
Text 21] The Forest of Enjoyment 31
PURPORT

Material life means being fully absorbed in eating. sleeping. mating
and defending. Out of these, sleep is taken very seriously. While asleep.
one completely forgets the object of life and what to do. For spiritual
realization, one should try to avoid sleep as much as possible. The
Gosvamis of Vrndavana practically did not sleep at all. Of course. they
slept some, for the body requires sleep. but they slept only about two
hours, and sometimes not even that. They always engaged in spiritual
cultivation. Nidrahara-viharakadi-viitau. Following in the footsteps of
the Gosvamis, we should try to reduce sleeping, eating, mating and
defending.

TEXT 21
ক ©
कदाचिदूभग्रमानदष्रौ दुज॑नदन्द शकेरटग्धनिद्राक्षणो व्यथित-

हृदयेनालुक्षीयमाणविज्ञानोऽन्धक्कपेऽन्धवत्यतति ॥ २९१ ॥

kadacid bhagna-mana-damstro durjana-danda-$ikair alabdha-
nidra-ksano vyathita-hrdayenanukstyamana-vynano ‘ndha-kipe
‘ndhavat patati.

kadacit—sometimes: bhagna-mana-damstrah—whose teeth of pride
are broken: durjana-danda-$§itkaih—by the envious activities of evil
men. who are compared to a kind of serpent: alabdha-nidra-ksanah—
who does not get an opportunity to sleep: pyathita-hrdayena—by a dis-
turbed mind: anuksiyamana—gradually being decreased: vijianah—
whose real consciousness: andha-kipe—in a blind well: andha-vat—
like illusion: patati—he falls down.

TRANSLATION

In the forest of the material world, the conditioned soul is some-
times bitten by envious enemies, which are compared to serpents
and other creatures. Through the tricks of the enemy, the condi-
tioned soul falls from his prestigious position. Being anxious, he
cannot even sleep properly. He thus becomes more and more
unhappy, and he gradually loses his intelligence and


--- Page 38 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
consciousness. In that state he becomes almost perpetually like a
blind man who has fallen into a dark well of ignorance.
TEXT 22
[a
करि ख चवित्कायमधुठयान्‌ विचिन्वन्‌ यदा परदारपरद्रभ्याण्यवरुन्धानो
राज्ञा खामिभिर्वा निहतः पतत्यपारे निरये ॥२२॥
karhi sma cit kama-madhu-lavan vicinvan yada para-dara-para-drav-
yany avarundhano rajia svamibhir va nihatah pataty apare niraye.
karhi sma cit—sometimes: kama-madhu-lavan—little drops of
honeylike sense gratification: vicinvan—searching after: yada—when:
para-dara—another’s wife, or a woman other than his own wife: para-
dravyani—another’s money and possessions: avarundhanah—taking as
his own property: rajia—by the government: svamibhih va—or by the
husband or relatives of the woman: nihatah—severely beaten: patati—
he falls down: apare—into unlimitedly: niraye—hellish conditions of
life (the government's prison for criminal activities like rape. kidnap-
ping or theft of others’ property).
TRANSLATION
The conditioned soul is sometimes attracted to the little happi-
ness derived from sense gratification. Thus he has illicit sex or
steals another’s property. At such a time he may be arrested by the
government or chastised by the woman’s husband or protector.
Thus simply for a little material satisfaction, he falls into a hellish
condition and is put into jail for rape, kidnapping, theft and so
forth.
PURPORT
Material life is such that due to indulgence in illicit sex. gambling. in-
toxication and meat-eating, the conditioned soul is always in a dangerous
condition. Meat-eating and intoxication excite the senses more and more.
and the conditioned soul falls victim to women. In order to keep women.
money is required, and to acquire money, one begs, borrows or steals. In-


--- Page 39 ---
Text 23] The Forest of Enjoyment 33
deed, he commits abominable acts that cause him to suffer both in this
life and in the next. Consequently illicit sex must be stopped by those
who are spiritually inclined or who are on the path of spiritual realiza-
tion. Many devotees fall down due to illicit sex. They may steal money
and even fall down from the highly honored renounced order. Then for a
livelihood they accept menial services and become beggars. It is therefore
said in the $astras, yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukharn hi tuccham:
materialism is based on sex, whether licit or illicit. Sex is full of dangers
even for those who are addicted to household life. Whether one has a
license for sex or not, there is great trouble. Bahu-duhkha-bhak: after
one indulges in sex, many volumes of miseries ensue. One suffers more
and more in material life. A miserly person cannot properly utilize the
wealth he has, and similarly a materialistic person misuses the human
form. Instead of using it for spiritual emancipation, he uses the body for
sense gratification. Therefore he is called a miser.
TEXT 23

अथ च तसादुमयथापि हि रमाखिनात्मनः संसारावपनपुद्‌ाहरन्ति ।॥२३॥
atha ca tasmad ubhayathapi hi karmasminn atmanah sarnsaravapanam
udaharanti.

atha—now; ca—and; tasmat—because of this: ubhayatha api —both
in this life and in the next; hi—undoubtedly: karma—fruitive ac-
tivities: asmin—on this path of sense enjoyment: atmanah—of the liv-
ing entity; samsara—of material life: avapanam—the cultivation
ground or source: uddharanti—the authorities of the Vedas say.

TRANSLATION

Learned scholars and transcendentalists therefore condemn the
materialistic path of fruitive activity because it is the original
source and breeding ground of material miseries, both in this life
and in the next.

PURPORT

Not knowing the value of life. karmis create situations whereby they

suffer in this life and the next. Unfortunately. karmis are very attached


--- Page 40 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
to material sense gratification. and they cannot appreciate the miserable
condition of material life, neither in this life nor in the next. Therefore
the Vedas enjoin that one should awaken to spiritual consciousness and
utilize all his activities to attain the favor of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gita (9.27):
yat karosi yad asnasi
20] juhosi daddasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kurusva mad-arpanam

"0 son of Kunti, all that you do. all that you eat, all that you offer and
give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform. should be done
as an offering unto Me.™

The results of all one’s activities should be utilized not for sense
gratification but for the mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The Supreme Lord gives all information in Bhagavad-gita about the aim
of life. and at the end of Bhagavad-gita He demands surrender unto
Him. People do not generally like this demand. but one who cultivates
spiritual knowledge for many births eventually surrenders unto the lotus
feet of the Lord (bahitnarm janmanam ante jiagnavan mar prapadyate).

TEXT 24
- ~

क्तस्ततो _ यदि बन्धादेवदत्त उपाच्छिनत्ति तसादपि विष्णुमित्र
इत्यनवस्थितिः ॥ २४ ॥
muktas tato yadi bandhad devadatta upacchinatti tasmad api visnpumitra
ity anavasthitih.

muktah—liberated: tatah—from that: yadi—if: bandhat—from the
government imprisonment or being beaten by the protector of the
woman; deva-dattah—person named Devadatta: upacchinatti—takes
the money from him; tasmat—from the person named Devadatta: api—
again: visnu-mitrah—a person named Visnumitra: iti—thus:
anavasthitih—the riches do not stay in one place but pass from one hand
to another.


--- Page 41 ---
Text 24] The Forest of Enjoyment 35
TRANSLATION

Stealing or cheating another person out of his money, the condi-
tioned soul somehow or other keeps it in his possession and
escapes punishment. Then another man, named Devadatta, cheats
him and takes the money away. Similarly, another man, named
Visnumitra, steals the money from Devadatta and takes it away. In
any case, the money does not stay in one place. It passes from one
hand to another. Ultimately no one can enjoy the money, and it
remains the property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

Riches come from Laksmi, the goddess of fortune. and the goddess of
fortune is the property of Narayana. the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The goddess of fortune cannot stay anywhere but by the side of
Narayana: therefore another of her names is Caficala. restless. She can-
not be peaceful unless she is in the company of her husband, Narayana.
For example, Laksmi was carried away by the materialistic Ravana.
Ravana kidnapped Sita. the goddess of fortune belonging to Lord Rama.
As a result. Ravana’s entire family. opulence and kingdom were
smashed. and Sita. the goddess of fortune, was recovered from his
clutches and reunited with Lord Rama. Thus all property. riches and
wealth belong to Krsna. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (5.29):

bhoktarar yajia-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaram
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the true beneficiary of all
sacrifices and austerities. and He is the supreme proprietor of all the
planetary systems.”

Foolish materialistic people collect money and steal from other thieves.
but they cannot keep it. In any case. it must be spent. One person cheats
another, and another person cheats someone else: therefore the best way
to possess Laksmi is to keep her by the side of Narayana. This is the point
of the Krsna consciousness movement. We worship Laksmi (Radharani)
along with Narayana (Krsna). We collect money from various sources.
but that money does not belong to anyone but Radha and Krsna (Laksmi-


--- Page 42 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
Narayana). If money is utilized in the service of Laksmi-Narayana. the
devotee automatically lives in an opulent way. However. if one wants to
enjoy Laksmi the way Ravana did. he will be vanquished by the laws of
nature. and whatever few possessions he has will be taken away. Finally
death will take everything away. and death is the representative of
Krsna.
TEXT 25

चिच शीतवातायनेकाधिदेविकमोतिकार्मीयानां दश्चानां प्रतिनिवारणे-
ऽकस्पो दुरन्तचिन्तया विषण्ण आस्ते ॥ २५॥
kvacic ca Sita-vatady-anekadhidaivika-bhautikatmiyanam dasanam
pratinivarane ’kalpo duranta-cintaya visanna daste.

kvacit—sometimes: ca—also: Sita-vata-adi—such as cold and strong
wind: aneka—various: adhidaivika—created by the demigods:
bhautika —adhibhautika, created by other living beings: atmiyanam—
adhyatmika, created by the body and mind: dasanam—of conditions of
misery: pratinivarane—in the counteracting: akalpah—unable:
duranta—very severe: cintaya—by anxieties: visannah—morose:
aste—he remains.

TRANSLATION

Being unable to protect himself from the threefold miseries of
material existence, the conditioned soul becomes very morose and
lives a life of lamentation. These threefold miseries are miseries
suffered by mental calamity at the hands of the demigods [such as
freezing wind and scorching heat], miseries offered by other living
entities, and miseries arising from the mind and body themselves.

PURPORT

The so-called happy materialistic person is constantly having to en-
dure the threefold miseries of life, called adhidaivika, adhyatmika and
adhibhautika. Actually no one can counteract these threefold miseries.
All three may assail one at one time. or one misery may be absent and the
other present. Thus the living entity is full of anxiety. fearing misery


--- Page 43 ---
Text 26] The Forest of Enjoyment 37
from one side or the other. The conditioned soul must be disturbed by at
least one of these three miseries. There is no escape.
TEXT 26

क्रचिन्मिथो व्यवहरन्‌ यत्किचिद्धनमन्येम्यो वा का$िणिकामात्रमप्यपहरन्‌
यत्किञ्चिद्वा विद्वेषमेति Frege ॥ २६ ॥
kvacin mitho vyavaharan yat kiricid dhanam anyebhyo va kakinika-
madtram apy apaharan yat kiricid va vidvesam eti vitta-sathyat.

kvacit—sometimes: mithah—with one another: vyavaharan—trad-
ing: yat kificit— whatever little bit: dhanam—money: anyebhyah—
from others; va—or: kakinika-matram—a very small amount (twenty
cowries): api—certainly: apaharan—taking away by cheating: yat
kiricit—whatever small amount: va—or: vidvesam eti—creates enmity:
vitta-sathyyat—because of cheating.

TRANSLATION

As far as transactions with money are concerned, if one person

cheats another by a farthing or less, they become enemies.
PURPORT

This is called sarmsara-davanala. Even in ordinary transactions be-
tween two people. there is invariably cheating because the conditioned
soul is defective in four ways —he 15 illusioned. he commits mistakes. his
knowledge is imperfect. and he has a propensity to cheat. Unless one is
liberated from material conditioning. these four defects must be there.
Consequently every man has a cheating propensity. which is employed in
business or money transactions. Although two friends may be living
peacefully together, due to their propensity to cheat they become
enemies when there is a transaction between them. A philosopher ac-
cuses an economist of being a cheater. and an economist may accuse a
philosopher of being a cheater when he comes in contact with money. In
any case. this is the condition of material life. One may profess a high
philosophy. but when one is in need of money. he becomes a cheater. In
this material world. so-called scientists. philosophers and economists are


--- Page 44 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
nothing but cheaters in one way or another. The scientists are cheaters
because they present so many bogus things in the name of science. They
propose going to the moon. but actually they end up cheating the entire
public of large sums of money for their experiments. They cannot do
anything useful. Unless one can find a person transcendental to the four
basic defects. one should not accept advice and become a victim of the
material condition. The best process is to take the advice and instructions
of Sri Krsna or His bona fide representative. In this way one can be
happy in this life and the next.
TEXT 27
=
अध्वन्य्ुष्मिननिम्‌ उपसर्गास्तथा सुखदुःखरागढेषमयामिमानप्रमादोन्माद-

शोकमोहलोभमात्सरयष्यावमानक्ुत्पिषासाधिव्याधिजन्मजरामरणादयः।। २७॥

adhvany amusminn ima upasargas tatha sukha-duhkha-raga-dvesa-
bhayabhimana-pramadonmada-soka-moha-lobha-matsaryersyava-
mana-ksut-pipasadhi-vyadhi-janma-jara-maranadayah.

adhvani—on the path of material life: amusmin—on that: ime—all
these: upasargah—eternal difficulties: {41/16 —so much also: sukha—so-
called happiness: duhkha—unhappiness: raga—attachment: dvesa—
hate: bhaya—fear: abhimana—false prestige: pramada—illusion: un-
mdda—madness: Soka—lamentation: moha—bewilderment: lobha—
greed: matsarya—envy: irsya—enmity: avamana—insult: ksut—
hunger: pipasa —thirst: adhi—tribulations: vyadhi—disease: janma—
birth: jara—old age: marana—death: adayah—and so on.

TRANSLATION

In this materialistic life, there are many difficulties, as I have
just mentioned, and all of these are insurmountable. In addition,
there are difficulties arising from so-called happiness, distress, at-
tachment, hate, fear, false prestige, illusion, madness, lamenta-
tion, bewilderment, greed, envy, enmity, insult, hunger, thirst,
tribulation, disease, birth, old age and death. All these combine


--- Page 45 ---
Text 27] The Forest of Enjoyment 39
together to give the materialistic conditioned soul nothing but
misery.

PURPORT

The conditioned soul has to accept all these conditions simply to enjoy
sense gratification in this world. Although people declare themselves
great scientists, economists, philosophers. politicians and sociologists.
they are actually nothing but rascals. Therefore they have been described
as mudhas and naradhamas in Bhagavad-gita (7.15):

na mam duskrtino mudhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jiana
asuram bhavam asritah
“Those miscreants who are grossly foolish. lowest among mankind.
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic
nature of demons. do not surrender unto Me.”

Due to their foolishness. all these materialists are described in
Bhagavad-gita as naradhamas. They have attained the human form in
order to get released from material bondage. but instead of doing so. they
become further embarrassed amid the miserable material conditions.
Therefore they are naradhamas, the lowest of men. One may ask
whether scientists. philosophers. economists and mathematicians are also
naradhamas, the lowest of men. and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead replies that they are because they have no actual knowledge.
They are simply proud of their false prestige and position. Actually they
do not know how to get relief from the material condition and renovate
their spiritual life of transcendental bliss and knowledge. Consequently
they waste time and energy in the search for so-called happiness. These
are the qualifications of the demons. In Bhagavad-gita it says that when
one has all these demonic qualities. he becomes a mizdha. Due to this. he
envies the Supreme Personality of Godhead: therefore birth after birth
he is born into a demonic family, and he transmigrates from one demonic
body to another. Thus he forgets his relationship with Krsna and remains
a naradhama in an abominable condition life after life.


--- Page 46 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
TEXT 28

क्षापि देवमायया सिया जल तोपगूढः प्रस्कनविवेक विज्ञानो यद्िहारग्रदारम्मा-
कुलद यस्तदाश्रयाव सक्त सुतददिठकलत्रमापितावलोकविवेष्टितापहृतहदय
आत्मानमजितात्मापारेऽन्धे तमसि प्रहिणोति।।२८॥
kvapi deva-mayaya striya bhuja-latopagidah praskanna-viveka-vijiano
yad-vihara-grharambhakula-hrdayas tad-asrayavasakta-suta-duhitr-
kalatra-bhasitavaloka-vicestitapahrta-hrdaya atmanam ajitatmapare
‘ndhe tamasi prahinoti.

kvapi—somewhere: deva-mayaya—by the influence of the illusory
energy: striya—in the form of one’s girl friend or wife: bhuja-lata—by
beautiful arms. which are compared to tender creepers in the forest:
upagiidhah—being deeply embarrassed: praskanna—lost: viveka—all
intelligence: vijianah —scientific knowledge: yat-vihara—for the en-
joyment of the wife: grha-arambha—to find a house or apartment:
akula-hrdayah—whose heart becomes engrossed: tat—of that house:
asraya-avasakta—who are under the shelter: suta—of sons: duhitr—of
daughters: kalatra—of the wife: bhasita-avaloka—by the conversations
and by their beautiful glances: wvicestita—by activities: apahrta-
hrdayah—whose consciousness is taken away: datmanam—himself:
ajita—uncontrolled: atma—whose self: apare—in unlimited: andhe—
blind darkness: tamasi—in hellish life: prahinoti—he hurls.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the conditioned soul is attracted by illusion per-
sonified (his wife or girl friend) and becomes eager to be em-
braced by a woman. Thus he loses his intelligence as well as
knowledge of life’s goal. At that time, no longer attempting
spiritual cultivation, he becomes overly attached to his wife or girl
friend and tries to provide her with a suitable apartment. Again, he
becomes very busy under the shelter of that home and is captivated
by the talks, glances and activities of his wife and children. In this
way he loses his Krsna consciousness and throws himself in the
dense darkness of material existence.


--- Page 47 ---
Text 29] The Forest of Enjoyment 41
PURPORT
When the conditioned soul is embraced by his beloved wife, he forgets
everything about Krsna consciousness. The more he becomes attached to
his wife, the more he becomes implicated in family life. One Bengali
poet, Bankim Chandra, says that to the eyes of the lover the beloved is al-
ways very beautiful, even though ugly. This attraction is called deva-
maya. The attraction between man and woman 15 the cause of bondage
for both. Actually both belong to the para prakrti, the superior energy of
the Lord. but both are actually prakrti (female). However. because both
want to enjoy one another. they are sometimes described as purusa
(male). Actually neither is purusa, but both can be superficially de-
scribed as purusa. As soon as man and woman are united. they become
attached to home, hearth. land, friendship and money. In this way they
are both entrapped in material existence. The word bhuja-lata-
upagiidha, meaning “being embraced by beautiful arms which are com-
pared to creepers.” describes the way the conditioned soul is bound
within this material world. The products of sex life—sons and
daughters —certainly follow. This is the way of material existence.
TEXT 29
कदाचिदीश्वरस्य भगवतो विष्णोधक्रात्परमाण्वादिद्धिपराधापवगे-
कारोपटश्णात्परिवरतितेन वयसा रंहसा हरत आत्रह्मवृणस्तम्बादीनां भूताना-
o - . ক .
मनिमिषतो मिषतां बित्रस्तहृदयस्तमेवेश्वरं कार चक्र निजायुधं साक्षाद्भगवन्तं
¢,
यज्ञपुरुषमना दत्य पाखण्डदेवताः कङ्गध्रचकषटभ्राया आयंसमयपरिहताः
साङ्केत्येनाभिधनत्ते ॥२९॥।
kadacid isvarasya bhagavato visnos cakrat paramanv-adi-dvi-
parardhapavarga-kalopalaksanat parivartitena vayasa rarmhasa harata
abrahma-trna-stambadinam bhiitanam animisato misatam vitrasta-
hrdayas tam evesvararm kala-cakra-nijayudham saksad bhagavantarn
yajra-purusam anddrtya pakhanda-devatah kanka-grdhra-baka-vata-
prayd arya-samaya-parihrtah sanketyenabhidhatte.
kadacit—sometimes: Svarasya—of the Supreme Lord: bhagavatah —
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: wisnoh—of Lord Visnu:


--- Page 48 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
cakrat—from the disc: paramanu-adi—beginning from the time of
minute atoms: dvi-parardha—the duration of the life of Brahma:
apavarga—ending: kala—of time: upalaksapat—having the
symptoms: parivartitena—revolving: vayasa—by the chronological
order of ages: rarmhasa—swiftly: haratah—taking away: a-brahma—
beginning from Lord Brahma: trna-stamba-adinam—down to the small
clumps of grass: bhiatanam—of all living entities: animisatah—without
blinking the eyes (without fail): misatam—before the eyes of the living
entities (without their being able to stop it): vitrasta-hrdayah—being
afraid in the heart: tam—Him: eva—certainly: iSvaram—the Supreme
Lord: kala-cakra-nija-ayudham—whose personal weapon is the disc of
time: saksat—directly: bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: yajia-purusam—who accepts all kinds of sacrificial
ceremonies: anadrtya—without caring for: pakhanda-devatah— con-
cocted incarnations of God (man-made gods or demigods): karnka—
buzzards: grdhra—vultures: baka—herons: ata-prayah—Ilike crows:
arya-samaya-parihrtah—who are rejected by authorized Vedic scrip-
tures accepted by the Aryans: sanketyena—by concoction or with no
basis of authority indicated by scripture: abhidhatte—he accepts as
worshipable.
TRANSLATION

The personal weapon used by Lord Krsna, the 0150, is called
hari-cakra, the disc of Hari. This cakra is the wheel of time. It ex-
pands from the beginning of the atoms up to the time of Brahma’s
death, and it controls all activities. It is always revolving and
spending the lives of the living entities, from Lord Brahma down
to an insignificant blade of grass. Thus one changes from infancy,
to childhood, to youth and maturity, and thus one approaches the
end of life. It is impossible to check this wheel of time. This wheel
is very exacting because it is the personal weapon of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Sometimes the conditioned soul, fearing
the approach of death, wants to worship someone who can save
him from imminent danger. Yet he does not care for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, whose weapon is the indefatigable time
factor. The conditioned soul instead takes shelter of a man-made
god described in unauthorized scriptures. Such gods are like


--- Page 49 ---
Text 30] The Forest of Enjoyment 43
buzzards, vultures, herons and crows. Vedic scriptures do not
refer to them. Imminent death is like the attack of a lion, and
neither vultures, buzzards, crows nor herons can save one from
such an attack. One who takes shelter of unauthorized man-made
gods cannot be saved from the clutches of death.
PURPORT

It is stated: harim vina mrtim na taranti. No one can save himself
from the cruel hands of death without being favored by Hari. the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita it is stated. mam eva
ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te: whoever fully surrenders unto
Krsna can be saved from the cruel hands of material nature. The condi-
tioned soul, however, sometimes wants to take shelter of a demigod.
man-made god. pseudo incarnation or bogus svami or yogi. All these
cheaters claim to follow religious principles. and all this has become very
popular in this age of Kali. There are many pasandis who. without refer-
ring to the $astras, pose themselves as incarnations. and foolish people
follow them. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. has left behind
Him Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita. Not referring to these
authorized scriptures. rascals take shelter of man-made scriptures and
try to compete with Lord Krsna. That is the greatest difficulty one en-
counters when trying to promote spiritual consciousness in human
society. The Krsna consciousness movement is trying its best to bring
people back to Krsna consciousness in its pure form. but the pasandis
and atheists, who are cheaters. are so numerous that sometimes we
become perplexed and wonder how to push this movement forward. In
any case. we cannot accept the unauthorized ways of so-called incarna-
tions. gods. cheaters and bluffers. who are described here as crows.
vultures. buzzards and herons.

TEXT 30

यदा पाखण्डिभिरारमवचितैस्तेरुरु वचितो ब्रह्मृलं समावसंस्तेषां शीर -
मुपनयनादिश्रौतसातैकर्मालुष्ठानेन भगवतो यज्ञपुरुषस्याराधनमेव तदरोचयन्‌
शद्रङ्कलं भजते निगमाचारेऽश्द्वितो यस्य मिथुनीभावः TIAA
यथा वानरजातेः ॥ ३० ॥


--- Page 50 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
yada pakhandibhir atma-vancitais tair uru varncito brahma-kular
samavasams tesam Silam upanayanadi-srauta-smarta-karmanustha-
nena bhagavato yajiia-purusasyaradhanam eva tad arocayan sidra-
kulari bhajate nigamacare ’suddhito yasya mithuni-bhavah kutumba-
bharanam yatha vanara-jateh.

yada—when: pakhandibhih—by pasandis (godless atheists): atma-
vancitaih—who themselves are cheated: tath—by them: uru—more and
more: vancitah—being cheated: brahma-kulam—the bona fide
brahmanas strictly following the Vedic culture: samavasan—settling
among them to advance spiritually: tesam—of them (the brahmanas
who strictly follow Vedic principles): $ilam—the good character:
upanayana-adi—beginning with offering the sacred thread or training
the conditioned soul to qualify as a bona fide brahmana; srauta—accord-
ing to the Vedic principles: smarta—according to the authorized scrip-
tures derived from the Vedas; karma-anusthanena—the performance of
activities: bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: yajria-
purusasya—who is worshiped by Vedic ritualistic ceremonies:
aradhanam—the process of worshiping Him: eva—certainly: tat
arocayan—not finding pleasure in it due to its being difhcult for
unscrupulous persons to perform: Sidra-kulam—the society of उदका;
bhajate—he turns to: nigama-acare—in behaving according to Vedic
principles: asuddhitah—not purified: yasya—of whom: mithuni-
bhavah—sex enjoyment or the materialistic way of life: kutumba-
bharanam—the maintenance of the family: yatha—as it is: vanara-
jateh—of the society of monkeys. or the descendants of the monkey.

TRANSLATION

The pseudo svamis, yogis and incarnations who do not believe in
the Supreme Personality of Godhead are known as pasandis. They
themselves are fallen and cheated because they do not know the
real path of spiritual advancement, and whoever goes to them is
certainly cheated in his turn. When one is thus cheated, he some-
times takes shelter of the real followers of Vedic principles
[brahmanas or those in Krsna consciousness], who teach everyone
how to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to
the Vedic rituals. However, being unable to stick to these princi-


--- Page 51 ---
Text 30] The Forest of Enjoyment 45
ples, these rascals again fall down and take shelter among $iidras
who are very expert in making arrangements for sex indulgence.
Sex is very prominent among animals like monkeys, and such peo-
ple who are enlivened by sex may be called descendants of
monkeys.

PURPORT

By fulfilling the process of evolution from the aquatics to the animal
platform. a living entity eventually reaches the human form. The three
modes of material nature are always working in the evolutionary process.
Those who come to the human form through the quality of sattva-guna
were cows in their last animal incarnation. Those who come to the human
form through the quality of rajo-guna were lions in their last animal in-
carnation. And those who come to the human form through the quality of
tamo-guna were monkeys in their last animal incarnation. In this age.
those who come through the monkey species are considered by modern
anthropologists like Darwin to be descendants of monkeys. We receive
information herein that those who are simply interested in sex are ac-
tually no better than monkeys. Monkeys are very expert in sexual enjoy-
ment. and sometimes sex glands are taken from monkeys and placed in
the human body so that a human being can enjoy sex in old age. In this
way modern civilization has advanced. Many monkeys in India were
caught and sent to Europe so that their sex glands could serve as replace-
ments for those of old people. Those who actually descend from the
monkeys are interested in expanding their aristocratic families through
sex. In the Vedas there are also certain ceremonies especially meant for
sexual improvement and promotion to higher planetary systems. where
the demigods are enjoying sex. The demigods are also very much
inclined toward sex because that is the basic principle of material
enjoyment.

First of all. the conditioned soul is cheated by so-called svamis, yogis
and incarnations when he approaches them to be relieved of material
miseries. When the conditioned soul is not satisfied with them. he comes
to devotees and pure brahmanas who try to elevate him for final libera-
tion from material bondage. However, the unscrupulous conditioned soul
cannot rigidly follow the principles prohibiting illicit sex. intoxication.
gambling and meat-eating. Thus he falls down and takes shelter of


--- Page 52 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
people who are like monkeys. In the Krsna consciousness movement
these monkey disciples, being unable to follow the strict regulative prin-
ciples, sometimes fall down and try to form societies based on sex. This is
proof that such people are descendants of monkeys. as confirmed by Dar-
win. In this verse it is therefore clearly stated: yatha vanara-jateh.
TEXT 31

तत्रापि faa: स्वैरेण विहरन्नतिकृपणबुद्धिरन्योन्यगुख-
निरीक्षणादिना ग्राम्यकर्मणैव विस्तकालाषधिः ॥ २१ ॥
tatrapi niravarodhah svairena viharann ati-krpana-buddhir anyonya-
mukha-niriksanadina gramya-karmanaiva vismrta-kalavadhih.

tatra api—in that condition (in the society of human beings descended
from monkeys): niravarodhah—without hesitation: svairena—indepen-
dently. without reference to the goal of life: viharan—enjoying like
monkeys: ati-krpana-buddhih—whose intelligence is dull because he
does not properly utilize his assets: anyonya—of one another: mukha-
nirtksana-adina—by seeing the faces (when a man sees the beautiful
face of a woman and the woman sees the strong build of the man’s body.
they always desire one another): gramya-karmana—by material ac-
tivities for sense gratification: eva—only: vismrta—forgotten: kala-
avadhih—the limited span of life (after which one’s evolution may be
degrading or elevating).

TRANSLATION

In this way the descendants of the monkeys intermingle with
each other, and they are generally known as Sudras. Without
hesitating, they live and move freely, not knowing the goal of life.
They are captivated simply by seeing the faces of one another,
which remind them of sense gratification. They are always engaged
in material activities, known as gramya-karma, and they work hard
for material benefit. Thus they forget completely that one day
their small life spans will be finished and they will be degraded in
the evolutionary cycle.


--- Page 53 ---
Text 31] The Forest of Enjoyment 47
PURPORT

Materialistic people are sometimes called sudras, or descendants of
monkeys, due to their monkeylike intelligence. They do not care to know
how the evolutionary process is taking place, nor are they eager to know
what will happen after they finish their small human life span. This is
the attitude of Sidras. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mission, this Krsna
consciousness movement, is trying to elevate $idras to the brahmana
platform so that they will know the real goal of life. Unfortunately, being
overly attached to sense gratification, materialists are not serious in help-
ing this movement. Instead, some of them try to suppress it. Thus it is
the business of monkeys to disturb the activities of the brahmanas. The
descendants of monkeys completely forget that they have to die, and they
are very proud of scientific knowledge and the progress of material
civilization. The word gramya-karmana indicates activities meant only
for the improvement of bodily comforts. Presently all human society is
engaged in improving economic conditions and bodily comforts. People
are not interested in knowing what is going to happen after death. nor do
they believe in the transmigration of the soul. When one scientifically
studies the evolutionary theory, one can understand that human life is a
junction where one may take the path of promotion or degradation. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.25):

yanti deva-vrata devan
pitrn yanti pitr-vratah
61171677 yanti bhutejya
yanti mad-ydjino ‘pi mam
“Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods:
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings:
those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors: and those who worship
Me will live with Me.”

In this life we have to prepare ourselves for promotion to the next life.
Those who are in the mode of rajo-guna are generally interested in being
promoted to the heavenly planets. Some. unknowingly. are degraded to
lower animal forms. Those in the mode of goodness can engage in devo-
tional service, and after that they can return home. back to Godhead
(yanti mad-yajino pi mam). That is the real purpose of human life. This


--- Page 54 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
Krsna consciousness movement is trying to bring intelligent human
beings to the platform of devotional service. Instead of wasting time try-
ing to attain a better position in material life. one should simply endeavor
to return home, back to Godhead. Then all problems will be solved. As
stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.17):
srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
punya-sravana-kirtanah
hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani
vidhunoti su-hrt-satam
Sri Krsna, the Personality of Godhead. who is the Paramitma
[Supersoul] in everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devo-
tee, cleanses the desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the
devotee who relishes His messages, which are in themselves virtuous
when properly heard and chanted.”

One simply has to follow the regulative principles. act like a
brahmana, chant the Hare Krsna mantra and read Bhagavad-gita and
Srimad-Bhagavatam. In this way one purifies himself of the baser
material modes (tamo-guna and rajo-guna) and, becoming freed from
the greed of these modes, can attain complete peace of mind. In this way
one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead and one’s rela-
tionship with Him and thus be promoted to the highest perfection (sid-
dhiri paramam gatah).

TEXT 32
hood ক,
कचिद्‌ मवद हिकार्थेषु गेषु ॒र॑स्यन्‌ यथा वानरः सुतदारवत्सरो
व्यवायक्षणः RR
kvacid drumvad aihikarthesu grhesu rarnsyan yatha vanarah suta-dara-
vatsalo vyavaya-ksanah.

kvacit—sometimes:; druma-vat—Ilike trees (as monkeys jump from
one tree to another, the conditioned soul transmigrates from one body to
another): aihika-arthesu—simply to bring about better worldly com-
forts: grhesu—in houses (or bodies): ramsyan—delighting (in one body


--- Page 55 ---
Text 33] The Forest of Enjoyment 49
after another, either in animal life. human life or demigod life): yatha—
exactly as: vanarah—the monkey: suta-dara-vatsalah—very affec-
tionate to the children and wife: vyavaya-ksanah—whose leisure time is
spent in sex pleasure.
TRANSLATION

Just as a monkey jumps from one tree to another, the condi-
tioned soul jumps from one body to another. As the monkey is
ultimately captured by the hunter and is unable to get out of cap-
tivity, the conditioned soul, being captivated by momentary sex
pleasure, becomes attached to different types of bodies and is en-
caged in family life. Family life affords the conditioned soul a
festival of momentary sex pleasure, and thus he is completely una-
ble to get out of the material clutches.

PURPORT

As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.9.29): visayah khalu sarvatah
syat. Bodily necessities —eating. sleeping. mating and defending —are all
very easily available in any form of life. It is stated here that the vanara
(monkey) is very much attracted to sex. Each monkey keeps at least two
dozen wives. and he jumps from one tree to another to capture the
female monkeys. Thus he immediately engages in sexual intercourse. In
this way the monkey's business is to jump from one tree to another and
enjoy sex with his wives. The conditioned soul is doing the same thing.
transmigrating from one body to another and engaging in sex. He thus
completely forgets how to become free from the clutches of material en-
cagement. Sometimes the monkey is captured by a hunter. who sells its
body to doctors so that its glands can be removed for the benefit of
another monkey. All this is going on in the name of economic develop-
ment and improved sex life.

TEXT 33

एवमध्वन्यवरुन्धानो मृत्युगजभयात्तमसि गिरिकन्दरप्राये ॥ ३२ ॥

evam adhvany avarundhano mrtyu-gaja-bhayat 10771057 giri-kandara-
praye.


--- Page 56 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14

evamm—in this way: adhvani—on the path of sense gratification:
avarundhanah—being confined. he forgets the real purpose of life:
mrtyu-gaja-bhayat—out of fear of the elephant of death: tamasi—in the
darkness: giri-kandara-praye—similar to. the dark caves in the
mountains.

TRANSLATION

In this material world, when the conditioned soul forgets his
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and does
not care for Krsna consciousness, he simply engages in different
types of mischievous and sinful activities. He is then subjected to
the threefold miseries, and, out of fear of the elephant of death, he
falls into the darkness found in a mountain cave.

PURPORT

Everyone is afraid of death. and however strong a materialistic person
may be. when there is disease and old age one must certainly accept
death’s notice. The conditioned soul becomes very morose to receive
notice of death. His fear is compared to the fear experienced upon enter-
ing a dark mountain cave. and death is compared to a great elephant.

TEXT 34
. .

कचिच्छीतवाता यनेकदैविकमौतिकात्मीयानां दुःखानां प्रति-
निवारणेऽकल्पो दुरन्तविषयविषण्ण आस्ते ॥३४॥
kvacic chita-vatady-aneka-daivika-bhautikatmiyanarm duhkhanam
pratinivarane ’kalpo duranta-visaya-visanna aste.

kvacit—sometimes: Sita-vata-adi—such as extreme cold or wind:
aneka —many: daivika—offered by the demigods or powers beyond our
control; bhautika—offered by other living entities: atmiyanam—
offered by the conditioned material body and mind: duhkhanam—the
many miseries: pratinararane—in counteracting: akalpah—being una-
ble: duranta—insurmountable; visaya—from connection with sense
gratification; visannah—morose: dste—he remains.


--- Page 57 ---
Text 35] The Forest of Enjoyment 51
TRANSLATION

The conditioned soul suffers many miserable bodily conditions,
such as being affected by severe cold and strong winds. He also
suffers due to the activities of other living beings and due to
natural disturbances. When he is unable to counteract them and
has to remain in a miserable condition, he naturally becomes very
morose because he wants to enjoy material facilities.

TEXT 35
=

क चिन्मिथो व्यवहरन्‌ यत्किचिद्धनपरुपयाति वित्तशाठथेन ॥॥ ২৭
kvacin mitho vyavaharan yat kificid dhanam upayati vitta-sathyena.

kvacit—sometimes or somewhere; mithah vyavaharan—transacting
with each other; yat—whatever; kinicit—little bit; dhanam—material
benefit or wealth; upayati—he obtains; vitta-sathyena—by means of
cheating someone of his wealth.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes conditioned souls exchange money, but in due
course of time, enmity arises because of cheating. Although there
may be a tiny profit, the conditioned souls cease to be friends and
become enemies.

PURPORT
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.8):
purisah striya mithuni-bhavam etarn
tayor mitho hrdaya-granthim ahuh
ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
Janasya moho ’yam aharih mameti

The monkeylike conditioned soul first becomes attached to sex. and when
intercourse actually takes place he becomes more attached. He then re-
quires some material comforts —apartment. house. food. friends. wealth


--- Page 58 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
and so on. In order to acquire these things he has to cheat others, and this
creates enmity even among the most intimate friends. Sometimes this en-
mity is created between the conditioned soul and the father or spiritual
master. Unless one is firmly fixed in the regulative principles, one may
perform mischievous acts, even if one is a member of the Krsna con-
sciousness movement. We therefore advise our disciples to strictly follow
the regulative principles; otherwise the most important movement for
the upliftment of humanity will be hampered due to dissension among its
members. Those who are serious about pushing forward this Krsna con-
sciousness movement should remember this and strictly follow the
regulative principles so that their minds will not be disturbed.
TEXT 36

कचितक्षीणधनः शय्यासनाशनायुपमोगदिदीनो याबदश्रविलन्धमनोरथोपगता-
दानेऽवसितमतिस्ततस्ततोऽवमानादीनि जनादभिलमते ।॥२६॥
kvacit ksina-dhanah sayyasanasanady-upabhoga-vihino yavad
apratilabdha-manorathopagatadane ‘vasita-matis tatas tato
vamanadini janad abhilabhate.

kvacit—sometimes; ksina-dhanah—not having sufficient money;
Sayya-asana-asana-adi—accommodations for sleeping, sitting or eating;
upabhoga —of material enjoyment: vihinah—being bereft; yavat—as
long as; apratilabdha—not achieved; manoratha—by his desire:
upagata—obtained; ddane—in seizing by unfair means: avasita-
matih—whose mind is determined; tatah—because of that; tatah—from
that; avamana-adini—insults and punishment; janat—from the people
in general: abhilabhate—he gets.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes, having no money, the conditioned soul does not get
sufficient accommodations. Sometimes he doesn’t even have a
place to sit, nor does he have the other necessities. In other words,
he falls into scarcity, and at that time, when he is unable to secure
the necessities by fair means, he decides to seize the property of


--- Page 59 ---
Text 37] The Forest of Enjoyment 53
others unfairly. When he cannot get the things he wants, he
simply receives insults from others and thus becomes very morose.
PURPORT

It is said that necessity knows no law. When the conditioned soul needs
money to acquire life’s bare necessities, he adopts any means. He begs,
borrows or steals. Instead of receiving these things. he is insulted and
chastised. Unless one is very well organized, one cannot accumulate
riches by unfair means. Even if one acquires riches by unfair means. he
cannot avoid punishment and insult from the government or the general
populace. There are many instances of important people's embezzling
money, getting caught and being put in prison. One may be able to avoid
the punishment of prison, but one cannot avoid the punishment df the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who works through the agency of
material nature. This is described in Bhagavad-gita (7.14): daivi hy esa
gunamayi mama maya duratyayd. Nature is very cruel. She does not
excuse anyone. When people do not care for nature, they commit all
kinds of sinful activities, and consequently they have to suffer.

TEXT 37

নে fe) a (J
एवं वित्तन्यतिषङ्भविव्रद्धवेरातुचन्धोऽपि पूवंबासनया मिथ उद्वहत्यथा-
पवहति ॥२७॥
evam vitta-vyatisanga-vivrddha-vairanubandho pi pirva-vasanaya
mitha udvahaty athapavahati.

evam—in this way; vitta-vyatisariga—because of monetary transac-
tions; vivrddha—increased: vaira-anubandhah—having relationships
of enmity; api—although; pirva-vasanaya—by the fructifying results
of previous impious activities; mithah—with each other: udvahati—
become united by means of the marriage of sons and daughters: atha—
thereafter: apavahati—they give up the marriage or get a divorce.

TRANSLATION

Although people may be enemies, in order to fulfill their desires

again and again, they sometimes get married. Unfortunately, these


--- Page 60 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
marriages do not last very long, and the people involved are sepa-
rated again by divorce or other means.
PURPORT
As stated previously, every conditioned soul has the propensity to
cheat, even in marriage. Everywhere in this material world. one condi-
tioned soul is envious of another. For the time being. people may remain
friends, but eventually they become enemies again and fight over money.
Sometimes they marry and then separate by divorce or other means. On
the whole, unity is never permanent. Due to the cheating propensity.
both parties always remain envious. Even in Krsna. consciousness,
separation and enmity take place due to the prominence of material
propensities.
TEXT 38
५ ' <
एतसिन्‌ संसाराध्वनि नानाङ्कशोपस्गंबाधित आपन्नविपन्नो यत्र
यस्तशु ह वावेतरस्तत्र वियुज्य जातं जातमुपादाय शओोचन्युद्यन्‌
_ di ह =, 6.
वि म्यदिदन्‌ क्रन्दन्‌ संहृष्यन्‌ गायन्नद्यमानः साधुवर्जितो नेवावतेतेऽ्यापि
यत ART एष नरलोकशार्थो यमध्वनः पारघरुपदिशन्ति ॥३८॥
etasmin sarmsaradhvani nanda-klesopasarga-badhita Gpanna-vipanno
yatra yas tam u ha vavetaras tatra visrjya jatam jatam upadaya Socan
muhyan bibhyad-vivadan krandan samhrsyan gayan nahyamanah
sadhu-varjito naivavartate ’dyapi yata arabdha esa nara-loka-sartho
yam adhvanah param upadisanti.
etasmin—on this; sarisara—of miserable conditions; adhvani—path;
nana—various; kleSa—by miseries: upasarga—by the troubles of
material existence: badhitah—disturbed: dpanna—sometimes having
gained; vipannah—sometimes having lost; yatra—in which: yah—
who: tam—him; ८८ ha vdva—or; itarah—someone else; tatra—
thereupon: visrjya—giving up; jatam jatam—newly born: upadaya—
accepting: Socan—lamenting: muhyan—being 11108101160; bibhyat—
fearing: vivadan—sometimes exclaiming loudly: krandan—sometimes
crying: sarmhrsyan—sometimes being pleased: gayan—singing:


--- Page 61 ---
Text 38] The Forest of Enjoyment 55
nahyamanah—being bound; sadhu-varjitah—being away from saintly
persons; na—not; eva—certainly; @vartate—achieves; adya api—even
until now; yatah—from whom; arabdhah—commenced: esah—this;
nara-loka—of the material world; sa-arthah—the self-
interested living entities; yam—whom (the Supreme Personality of
Godhead); adhvanah—of the path of material existence; param—the
other end; upadiSanti—saintly persons indicate.
TRANSLATION

The path of this material world is full of material miseries, and
various troubles disturb the conditioned souls. Sometimes he
loses, and sometimes he gains. In either case, the path is full of
danger. Sometimes the conditioned soul is separated from his
father by death or other circumstances. Leaving him aside he
gradually becomes attached to others, such as his children. In this
way, the conditioned soul is sometimes illusioned and afraid.
Sometimes he cries loudly out of fear. Sometimes he is happy
maintaining his family, and sometimes he is overjoyed and sings
melodiously. In this way he becomes entangled and forgets his
separation from the Supreme Personality of Godhead since time
immemorial. Thus he traverses the dangerous path of material ex-
istence, and on this path he is not at all happy. Those who are self-
realized simply take shelter of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in order to get out of this dangerous material existence.
Without accepting the devotional path, one cannot get out of the
clutches of material existence. The conclusion is that no one can be
happy in material life. One must take to Krsna consciousness.

PURPORT

By thoroughly analyzing the materialistic way of life. any sane man
can understand that there is not the least happiness in this world.
However, due to continuing on the path of danger from time immemorial
and not associating with saintly persons, the conditioned soul. under illu-
sion, wants to enjoy this material world. Material energy sometimes gives
him a chance at so-called happiness, but the conditioned soul is per-
petually being punished by material nature. It is therefore said: dandya-


--- Page 62 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
jane raja yena nadite cubaya (Cc. Madhya 20.118). Materialistic life
means continuous unhappiness, but sometimes we accept happiness as it
appears between the gaps. Sometimes a condemned person is submerged
in water and hauled out. Actually all of this is meant for punishment, but
he feels a little comfort when he is taken out of the water. This is the
situation with the conditioned soul. All the sastras therefore advise that
one associate with devotees and saintly people.
‘sadhu-sanga’, ‘sadhu-sanga’——sarva-sastre kaya
lava-matra sadhu-sange sarva-siddhi haya
(Ce. Madhya 22.54)
Even by a little association with devotees, the conditioned soul can get
out of this miserable material condition. This Krsna consciousness move-
ment is therefore trying to give everyone a chance to associate with
saintly people. Therefore all the members of this Krsna consciousness
society must themselves be perfect sadhus in order to give a chance to
fallen conditioned souls. This is the best humanitarian work.
TEXT 39
+

यदिदं योगानुशासनं न वा एतदवरुन्धते यन्न्यस्तदण्डा GA
उपशमशीला उपरतात्मानः समवगच्छन्ति ॥ २९॥
yad ववत yoganusasanar na va etad avarundhate yan nyasta-danda
munaya upasama-sila uparatatmanah samavagacchanti.

yat—which; idam—this ultimate abode of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: yoga-anusasanam—only to be achieved by practicing devo-
tional service; na—not; va—either: etat—this path of liberation:
avarundhate—obtain; yat—therefore;: nyasta-dandah—persons who
have given up envying others; munayah—saintly persons: upasama-
Stlah—who are now situated in a most peaceful existence: uparata-at-
manah—who have control over the mind and senses: samavagac-
chanti—very easily obtain.


--- Page 63 ---
Text 40] The Forest of Enjoyment 57
TRANSLATION

Saintly persons, who are friends to all living entities, have a
peaceful consciousness. They have controlled their senses and
minds, and they easily attain the path of liberation, the path back
to Godhead. Being unfortunate and attached to the miserable
material conditions, a materialistic person cannot associate with
them.

PURPORT

The great saint Jada Bharata described both the miserable condition
and the means to get out. The only way out of it is association with devo-
tees, and this association is very easy. Although unfortunate people also
get this opportunity, due to their great misfortune they cannot take
shelter of pure devotees. and consequently they continuously suffer.
Nonetheless, this Krsna consciousness movement insists that everyone
take to this path by adopting the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra. The preachers of Krsna consciousness go from door to door to
inform people how they can be relieved from the miserable conditions of
material life. As stated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. guru-krsna-prasade
paya bhakti-lata-bija: by the mercy of Krsna and guru, one can get the
seed of devotional service. If one is a little intelligent. he can cultivate
Krsna consciousness and be freed from the miserable conditions of
material life.

TEXT 40
AN a ~

यदपि दिगिमजयिनो यज्िनोयेवै राजर्षयः किंतुषरं मृधे
शयीरन्नस्यामेव ममेयमिति कृतवैरानुबन्धायां विसृज्य खयञरुपसंहताः ॥४०॥
yad api dig-ibha-jayino yajvino ye vai rajarsayah kim tu parari mrdhe
Sayirann asyam eva mameyam iti krta-vairanubandhayarh visrjya
svayam upasarnhrtah.

yat api—although: dik-ibha-jayinah—who are victorious in all direc-
tions: yajvinah—expert in performing great sacrifices: ye—all of


--- Page 64 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
whom: vai—indeed: raja-rsayah—very great saintly kings: kim tu—
but: param —only this earth: mrdhe—in battle: sayiran—lying down:
asyam—on this (earth): eva—indeed: mama —mine: iyam—this; iti—
considering in that way: Arta—on which is created: wvaira-anu-
bandhayam—a relationship of enmity with others: visrjya—giving up:
svayam—his own life: upasamhrtah—being killed.
TRANSLATION
There were many great saintly kings who were very expert in
performing sacrificial rituals and very competent in conquering
other kingdoms, yet despite their power they could.not attain the
loving service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is
because those great kings could not even conquer the false con-
sciousness of ‘I am this body, and this is my property.’ Thus they
simply created enmity with rival kings, fought with them and died
without having discharged life’s real mission.
PURPORT
The real mission of life for the conditioned soul is to reestablish the
forgotten relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
engage in devotional service so that he may revive Krsna consciousness
after giving up the body. One doesn’t have to give up his occupation as a
brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, $iidra or whatever. In any position, while
discharging his prescribed duty, one can develop Krsna consciousness
simply by associating with devotees who are representatives of Krsna and
who can teach this science. Regretfully, the big politicians and leaders in
the material world simply create enmity and are not interested in
spiritual advancement. Material advancement may be very pleasing to an
ordinary man, but ultimately he is defeated because he identifies himself
with the material body and considers everything related to it to be his
property. This is ignorance. Actually nothing belongs to him. not even
the body. By one’s karma, one gets a particular body, and if he does not
utilize his body to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all his ac-
tivities are frustrated. The real purpose of life is stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.2.13):
atah pumbhir dvija-srestha
varndasrama-vibhagasah


--- Page 65 ---
Text 41] The Forest of Enjoyment 59
svanusthitasya dharmasya
samsiddhir hari-tosanam
It really doesn’t matter what activity a man engages in. If he can simply
satisfy the Supreme Lord. his life is successful.
TEXT 41
कर्मवह्ीमधरम्न्य तत॒ आपदः कथलिनरकादिगुक्तः पुनरप्येवं
9, . < eX -
dara faa REFEREE agai गतोऽपि ॥४१॥
karma-vallim avalambya tata apadah kathaficin narakad vimuktah
punar apy 6170 77? sarisaradhvani vartamano nara-loka-sartham upayati
evam upari gato pi.
karma-vallim—the creeper of fruitive activities: avalambya—taking
shelter of: tatah—from that: apadah—dangerous or miserable condi-
tion; kathancit—somehow or other; narakat—from the hellish condition
of life; vimuktah—being freed: punah api—again: evam—in this way:
sarnsara-adhvani—on the path of material existence: vartamdanah —ex-
isting: nara-loka-sa-artham—the field of self-interested material ac-
tivities; upayati—he enters; evam—thus: upari—above (in the higher
planetary systems): gatah api—although promoted.
TRANSLATION
When the conditioned soul accepts the shelter of the creeper of
fruitive activity, he may be elevated by his pious activities to
higher planetary systems and thus gain liberation from hellish
conditions, but unfortunately he cannot remain there. After reap-
ing the results of his pious activities, he has to return to the lower
planetary systems. In this way he perpetually goes up and comes
down.
PURPORT
In this regard Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says:
brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
(Cc. Madhya 19.151)


--- Page 66 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14.
Even if one wanders for many millions of years, from the time of cre-
ation until the time of annihilation. one cannot get free from the path of
material existence unless one receives shelter at the lotus feet of a pure
devotee. As a monkey takes shelter of the branch of a banyan tree and
thinks he is enjoying, the conditioned soul, not knowing the real interest
of his life. takes shelter of the path of karma-kanda, fruitive activities.
Sometimes he is elevated to the heavenly planets by such activities, and
sometimes he again descends to earth. This is described by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu as brahmanda bhramite. However, if by Krsna's grace one
is fortunate enough to come under the shelter of the guru, by the mercy
of Krsna he receives lessons on how to execute devotional service to the
Supreme Lord. In this way he receives a clue of how to get out of his con-
tinuous struggle up and down within the material world. Therefore the
Vedic injunction is that one should approach a spiritual master. The
Vedas declare: tad-vijiianartharn sa gurum evabhigacchet (Mun-
daka Upanisad 1.2.12). Similarly in Bhagavad-gita (4.34) the Supreme
Personalty of Godhead advises:
tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya
upadeksyanti te jianarn
Jianinas tattva-darsinah
“Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized
soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.”
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1 3.21) gives similar advice:
tasmad gururi prapadyeta
Jynasuh sreya uttamam
Sabde pare ca nisndatarn
brahmany upasamasrayam
“Any person who seriously desires to achieve real happiness must seek
out a bona fide spiritual master and take shelter of him by initiation. The
qualification of his spiritual master is that he must have realized the con-
clusion of the scriptures by deliberation and be able to convince others of


--- Page 67 ---
Text 42] The Forest of Enjoyment 61
these conclusions. Such great personalities, who have taken shelter of
the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside all material considerations. are to
be understood as bona fide spiritual masters.” Similarly, Visvanatha
Cakravarti, a great Vaisnava, also advises, yasya prasadad bhagavat-
prasadah: “By the mercy of the spiritual master one receives the mercy
of Krsna.” This is the same advice given by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
(guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija). This is essential. One must
come to Krsna consciousness, and therefore one must take shelter of a
pure devotee. Thus one can become free from the clutches of matter.
TEXT 42
तस्येदमुपगायन्ति--
© ~~
आर्षभस्येह ॒राजर्वर्मनसापि महात्मनः ।
९
GTA रूपो मक्षिकेव गरुत्मतः IRR
tasyedam upagayanti—
arsabhasyeha rajarser
manasapi mahatmanah
nanuvartmdrhati nrpo
maksikeva garutmatah
tasya—of Jada Bharata; idam—this glorification: upagayanti—they
sing; arsabhasya—of the son of Rsabhadeva; iha—here: raja-rseh—of
the great saintly King: manasa api—even by the mind: maha-at-
manah—of the great personality Jada Bharata; na—not: anuvartma
arhati—able to follow the path; nrpah—any king: maksika—a fly:
iva—like; garutmatah—of Garuda, the carrier of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Having summarized the teachings of Jada Bharata, Sukadeva
Gosvami said: My dear King Pariksit, the path indicated by Jada
Bharata is like the path followed by Garuda, the carrier of the
Lord, and ordinary kings are just like flies. Flies cannot follow the


--- Page 68 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
path of Garuda, and to date none of the great kings and victorious
leaders could follow this path of devotional service, not even
mentally.
PURPORT
As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.3):
manusyanam 50110517650
kascid yatati siddhaye
yatatam api siddhanarn

kascin mam vetti tattvatah
“Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection.
and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in
truth.” The path of devotional service is very difficult, even for great
kings who have conquered many enemies. Although these kings were
victorious on the battlefield, they could not conquer the bodily
conception. There are many big leaders, yogis, svamis and so-called in-
carnations who are very much addicted to mental speculation and who
advertise themselves as perfect personalities, but they are not ultimately
successful. The path of devotional service is undoubtedly very difficult to
follow, but it becomes very easy if the candidate actually wants to follow
the path of the mahajana. In this age there is the path of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who appeared to deliver all fallen souls. This path is so
simple and easy that everyone can take to it by chanting the holy name of
the Lord.

harer nama harer nama

harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha

We are very satisfied that this path is being opened by this Krsna con-
sciousness movement because so many European amd American boys
and girls are taking this philosophy seriously and gradually attaining
perfection.


--- Page 69 ---
Text 43] The Forest of Enjoyment 63
TEXT 43
या दुस्त्यजान्दारसुतान्‌ CHAR] हृदिस्पृशः |
ES
जहौ युवैव मलवदुत्तमश्छोकलालसः 1193
yo dustyajan dara-sutan
suhrd rajyam hrdi-sprsah
jahau yuvaiva malavad
uttamasloka-lalasah
yah—the same Jada Bharata who was formerly Maharaja Bharata. the
son of Maharaja Rsabhadeva; dustyajan—very difficult to give up: dara-
sutan—the wife and children or the most opulent family life; suhrt—
friends and well-wishers; rajyam—a kingdom that extended all over the
world; hrdi-spréah—that which is situated within the core of one’s
heart; jahau—he gave up; yuva eva—even as a young man; mala-vat—
like stool: uttama-sloka-lalasah—who was so fond of serving the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as Uttamasloka.
TRANSLATION
While in the prime of life, the great Maharaja Bharata gave up
everything because he was fond of serving the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Uttamasloka. He gave up his beautiful wife,
nice children, great friends and an enormous empire. Although
these things were very difficult to give up, Maharaja Bharata was so
exalted that he gave them up just as one gives up stool after
evacuating. Such was the greatness of His Majesty.
PURPORT
The name of God is Krsna, because He is so attractive that the pure
devotee can give up everything within this material world on His behalf.
Maharaja Bharata was an ideal king, instructor and emperor of the
world. He possessed all the opulences of the material world. but Krsna is
so attractive that He attracted Maharaja Bharata from all his material
possessions. Yet somehow or other. the King became affectionate to a lit-
tle deer and, falling from his position, had to accept the body of a deer in


--- Page 70 ---
64. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
his next life. Due to Krsna's great mercy upon him, he could not forget
his position. and he could understand how he had fallen. Therefore in
the next life, as Jada Bharata, Maharaja Bharata was careful not to spoil
his energy, and therefore he presented himself as a deaf and dumb per-
son. In this way he could concentrate on his devotional service. We have
to learn from the great King Bharata how to become cautious in cultivat-
ing Krsna consciousness. A little inattention will retard our devotional
service for the time being. Yet any service rendered to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is never lost: svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate
mahato bhayat (Bg. 2.49). A little devotional service rendered sincerely
is a permanent asset. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17):
tyaktva sva-dharmarm caranambujari harer
bhajann apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi :
yatra kva vabhadram abhid amusya kim
ko vartha apto ’bhajatar sva-dharmatah

Somehow or other, if one is attracted to Krsna, whatever he does in devo-
tional service is a permanent asset. Even if one falls down due to im-
maturity or bad association, his devotional assets are never lost. There
are many examples of this—Ajamila, Maharaja Bharata, and many
others. This Krsna consciousness movement is giving everyone a chance
to engage in devotional service for at least some time. A little service will
give one an impetus to advance and thus make one’s life successful.

In this verse the Lord is described as Uttamasloka. Uttama means ` "1116
best.” and $loka means “reputation.” Lord Krsna is full in six opulences,
one of which is reputation. Aisvaryasya samagrasya viryasya yasasah
sriyah. Krsna's reputation is still expanding. We are spreading the glo-
ries of Krsna by pushing forward this Krsna consciousness movement.
Krsna’s reputation, five thousand years after the Battle of Kuruksetra, is
still expanding throughout the world. Every important individual within
this world must have heard of Krsna, especially at the present moment,
due to the Krsna consciousness movement. Even people who do not like
us and want to suppress the movement are also somehow or other chant-
ing Hare Krsna. They say. “The Hare Krsna people should be chastised.”
Such foolish people do not realize the true value of this movement, but
the mere fact that they want to criticize it gives them a chance to chant
Hare Krsna, and this is its success.


--- Page 71 ---
Text 44] The Forest of Enjoyment 65
TEXT 44
त
यो दुस्स्यजान्‌ क्षितिसुतखजनाथदारान्‌
प्राया भियं सुरवरैः सदयावलोकाम्‌ |
2 + ५
नेच्छमपस्तदुचितं महतां मधुद्धिट-
सेषानुरक्तमनसाममबोऽपि फल्गुः ॥७५।॥
yo dustyajan ksiti-suta-svajanartha-daran
prarthyam sriyam sura-varaih sadayavalokam
naicchan nrpas tad-ucitarn mahatarn madhudvit-
sevanurakta-manasam abhavo pi phalguh
yah—who; dustyajan—very difficult to give up; ksiti—the earth;
suta—children; sva-jana-artha-daran—relatives, riches and a beautiful
wife; prarthyam—desirable; Sriyam—the goddess of fortune: sura-
varaih—by the best of the demigods; sa-daya-avalokam—whose mer-
ciful glance; na—not; aicchat—desired; nrpah—the King: tat-
ucitam—this is quite befitting him; mahatam—of great personalities
(mahatmas); madhu-dvit—of Lord Krsna. who killed the demon
Madhu; seva-anurakta—attracted by the loving service; manasam—of
those whose minds; abhavah api—even the position of liberation;
phalguh—insignificant.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, the activities of

Bharata Maharaja are wonderful. He gave up everything difficult
for others to give up. He gave up his kingdom, his wife and his
family. His opulence was so great that even the demigods envied it,
yet he gave it up. It was quite befitting a great personality like him
to be a great devotee. He could renounce everything because he
was so attracted to the beauty, opulence, reputation, knowledge,
strength and renunciation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna. Krsna is so attractive that one can give up all
desirable things for His sake. Indeed, even liberation is considered
insignificant for those whose minds are attracted to the loving ser-
vice of the Lord.


--- Page 72 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
PURPORT

This verse confirms Krsna's all-attractiveness. Maharaja Bharata was
so attracted to Krsna that he gave up all his material possessions.
Generally materialistic people are attracted by such possessions.

ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
Janasya moho ’yam ahari mameti
(Bhag. 5.5.8)
“One becomes attracted to his body. home, property, children, relatives
and wealth. In this way one increases life's illusions and thinks in terms
of ‘I and mine.” 7" The attraction for material things is certainly due to il-
lusion. There is no value in attraction to material things, for the condi-
tioned soul is diverted by them. One’s life is successful if he is absorbed
in the attraction of Krsna's strength, beauty and pastimes as described in
the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam. The Mayavadis are attracted to
merging into the existence of the Lord, but Krsna is more attractive than
the desire to merge. The word abhavah means “not to take birth again in
this material world.”” A devotee doesn’t care whether he is going to be
reborn or not. He is simply satisfied with the Lord’s service in any condi-
tion. That is real mukti.
tha yasya harer dasye
karmana manasa gira
nikhilasv apy avasthasu
Jjiwan-muktah sa ucyate
“One who acts to serve Krsna with his body, mind, intelligence and
words is a liberated person, even within this material world.” (Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.187) A person who always desires to serve Krsna is
interested in ways to convince people that there is a Supreme Personality
of Godhead and that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is Krsna. That
is his ambition. It doesn’t matter whether he is in heaven or in hell. This
is called uttamasloka-lalasa.
TEXT 45
यज्ञाय धर्म॑पतये विधिनपुणाय
योगाय सांख्यशिरसे प्रकृतीश्वराय |


--- Page 73 ---
Text 45] The Forest of Enjoyment 67

नारायणाय हरये नम इत्युदारं

TFTA यः सथ्ुदाजहार 1184)
yajiaya dharma-pataye vidhi-naipunaya
yogaya sankhya-Sirase prakrtisvaraya
narayandaya haraye nama ity udaram
hasyan mrgatvam api yah samudajahara
yajiidya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enjoys the
results of all great sacrifices; dharma-pataye—unto the master or pro-
pounder of religious principles; vidhi-naipunaya—who gives the devo-
tee the intelligence to follow the regulative principles expertly;
yogaya—the personification of mystic yoga; sarnkhya-sirase—who
taught the Sankhya philosophy or who actually gives knowledge of
Sankhya to the people of the world; prakrti-isvaraya—the supreme con-
troller of this cosmic manifestation; narayanaya—the resting place of
the innumerable living entities (nara means the living entities, and
ayana means the shelter); haraye—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, known as Hari; namah—respectful obeisances; iti—thus;
udaram—very loudly; hasyan—smiling; mrgatvam api—although in
the body of a deer; yah—who: samudajahara—chanted.
TRANSLATION
Even though in the body of a deer, Maharaja Bharata did not

forget the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore when he
was giving up the body of a deer, he loudly uttered the following
prayer: “The Supreme Personality of Godhead is sacrifice per-
sonified. He gives the results of ritualistic activity. He is the pro-
tector of religious systems, the personification of mystic yoga, the
source of all knowledge, the controller of the entire creation, and
the Supersoul in every living entity. He is beautiful and attractive.
I am quitting this body offering obeisances unto Him and hoping
that ] may perpetually engage in His transcendental loving ser-
vice.” Uttering this, Maharaja Bharata left his body.


--- Page 74 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
PURPORT

The entire Vedas are meant for the understanding of karma, jaana
and yoga—fruitive activity, speculative knowledge and mystic yoga.
Whatever way of spiritual realization we accept, the ultimate goal is
Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The living entities are
eternally connected with Him via devotional service. As stated in
Srimad-Bhagavatam, ante narayana-smrtih: the perfection of life is to
remember Narayana at the time of death. Although Bharata Maharaja
had to accept the body of a deer, he could remember Narayana at the
time of death. Consequently he took birth as a perfect devotee in a
brahmana family. This confirms the statement of Bhagavad-gita (6.41),
Sucinam Srimatarn gehe yoga-bhrasto ’bhijayate: "One who falls from
the path of self-realization takes birth in a family of brahmanas or
wealthy aristocrats.” Although Maharaja Bharata appeared in the royal
family, he became neglectful and took birth as a deer. Because he was
very cautious within his deer body. he took birth in a brahmana family
as Jada Bharata. During this lifetime, he remained perfectly Krsna con-
scious and preached the gospel of Krsna consciousness directly, begin-
ning with his instructions to Maharaja Rahugana. In this regard, the
word yogaya is very significant. The purpose of astarnga-yoga, as stated
by Madhvacarya, is to link or connect with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The goal is not to display some material perfections.

TEXT 46
य॒ इदं भागवतसमभाजिताबदातगुणकर्मणो राजर्ेर्भरतस्यानु चरितं

खस्त्ययनमायुप्यं धन्यं यशस्यं EET वानुमृणोत्याल्य स्यत्यभिनन्दति
च सवां CNT आत्मन आशास्ते न काश्चन परत इति BEN

ya idari bhagavata-sabhajitavadata-guna-karmano rajarser
bharatasyanucaritar svasty-ayanam ayusyarm dhanyarm yasasyarn
svargyapavargyar vanusrnoty akhyasyaty abhinandati ca sarva evdasisa
atmana asaste na kancana parata iti.

yah—anyone who; idam—this; bhagavata—by exalted devotees;
sabhajita—greatly worshiped: avadata—pure; guna—whose qualities;
karmanah—and activities; raja-rseh—of the great saintly King:


--- Page 75 ---
Text 46] The Forest of Enjoyment 69
bharatasya—of Bharata Maharaja: anucaritam—the narration: svasti-
ayanam—the abode of auspiciousness: ayusyam—which increases one’s
duration of life: dhanyam—increases one’s fortune: yasasyam—
bestows reputation; svargya—gives promotion to the higher planetary
systems (the goal of the karmis); apavargyam—gives liberation from
this material world and enables one to merge into the Supreme (the goal
of the jaanis); va—or: anusrnoti—always hears, following the path of
devotional service: akhyasyati—describes for the benefit of others:
abhinandati—glorifies the characteristics of devotees and the Supreme
Lord; ca—and: sarvah—all: eva—certainly: asisah—blessings: at-
manah—for himself: asaste—he achieves: na—not: kanicana—any-
thing: paratah—from anyone else: iti—thus.
TRANSLATION

Devotees interested in hearing and chanting [éravanarh
kirtanam] regularly discuss the pure characteristics of Bharata
Maharaja and praise his activities. If one submissively hears and
chants about the all-auspicious Maharaja Bharata, one’s life span
and material opulences certainly increase. One can become very
famous and easily attain promotion to the heavenly planets, or at-
tain liberation by merging into the existence of the Lord.
Whatever one desires can be attained simply by hearing, chanting
and glorifying the activities of Maharaja Bharata. In this way, one
can fulfill all his material and spiritual desires. One does not have
to ask anyone else for these things, for simply by studying the life
of Maharaja Bharata, one can attain all desirable things.

PURPORT

The forest of material existence is summarized in this Fourteenth
Chapter. The word bhavatavi refers to the path of material existence.
The merchant is the living entity who comes to the forest of material ex-
istence to try to make money for sense gratification. The six plunderers
are the senses —eyes, ears, nose, tongue, touch and mind. The bad leader
is diverted intelligence. Intelligence is meant for Krsna consciousness.
but due to material existence we divert all our intelligence to achieve
material facilities. Everything belongs to Krsna. the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but due to our perverted mind and senses. we plunder the


--- Page 76 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 14
property of the Lord and engage in satisfying our senses. The jackals and
tigers in the forest are our family members, and the herbs and creepers
are our material desires. The mountain cave is our happy home, and the
mosquitoes and serpents are our enemies. The rats, beasts and vultures
are different types of thieves who take away our possessions, and the
gandharva-pura is the phantasmagoria of the body and home. The will-
o"-the-wisp is our attraction for gold and its color, and material residence
and wealth are the ingredients for our material enjoyment. The whirl-
wind is our attraction for our wife, and the dust storm is our blinding
passion experienced during sex. The demigods control the different
directions, and the cricket is the harsh words spoken by our enemy dur-
ing our absence. The owl is the person who directly insults us. and the
impious trees are impious men. The waterless river represents atheists
who give us trouble in this world and the next. The meat-eating demons
are the government officials, and the pricking thorns are the impedi-
ments of material life. The little taste experienced in sex is our desire to
enjoy another’s wife, and the flies are the guardians of women, like the
husband, father-in-law, mother-in-law and so forth. The creeper itself is
women in general. The lion is the wheel of time, and the herons, crows
and vultures are so-called demigods, pseudo svamis, yogis and incarna-
tions. All of these are too insignificant to give one relief. The swans are
the perfect brahmanas, and the monkeys are the extravagant Siadras
engaged in eating, sleeping, mating and defending. The trees of the
monkeys are our households, and the elephant is ultimate death. Thus all
the constituents of material existence are described in this chapter.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fourteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Material World as the
Great Forest of Enjoyment.”


--- Page 77 ---
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The Glories of the
Descendants of King Priyavrata
In this chapter the descendants of Bharata Maharaja and many other
kings are described. The son of Maharaja Bharata was named Sumati. He
followed the path of liberation given by Rsabhadeva. Some people
mistakenly thought Sumati to be the direct incarnation of Lord Buddha.
The son of Sumati was Devatajit, and his son was Devadyumna.
Devadyumna’s son was Paramesthi, and his son was Pratiha. Pratitha was
a very great devotee of Lord Visnu, and he had three sons, named Pra-
tiharta, Prastota and Udgata. Pratiharta had two sons. Aja and Bhama.
The son of Bhima was Udgitha, and the son of Udgitha was Prastava.
The son of Prastiva was Vibhu, and the son of Vibhu was Prthusena,
whose son was Nakta. The wife of Nakta, Druti. gave birth to Gaya, who
was a very famous and saintly king. Actually King Gaya was a partial in-
carnation of Lord Visnu, and because of his great devotion to Lord Visnu
he received the title Mahapurusa. King Gaya had sons named Citraratha,
Sumati and Avarodhana. The son of Citraratha was the emperor Samrat.
and his son was Marici, whose son was Bindu. Bindu’s son was Madhu,
and Madhu’s son was Viravrata. Viravrata’s two sons were Manthu and
Pramanthu, and the son of Manthu was Bhauvana. The son of Bhauvana
was Tvasta, and the son of Tvasta was Viraja, who glorified the whole
dynasty. Viraja had one hundred sons and one daughter. Of these. the
son named Satajit became very famous.
TEXT 1
HAF उनाच
भरतस्यात्मजः सुमतिनामाभिदहितो यमु ह॒ वाव केचित्पाखण्डिन
क ) 3
ऋषभपद वीमनुवर्तमानं चानार्या अवेदसमाञ्नातां देवतां स्वमनीषया पापीयस्या
कलो करटपयिष्यन्ति ॥ १ ॥
71


--- Page 78 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 15
$ri-suka uvaca

bharatasyatmajah sumatir namabhihito yam u ha vava kecit
pakhandina rsabha-padavim anuvartamanam canarya aveda-
samamnatar devatari sva-manisaya papiyasya kalau kalpayisyanti.

Sri-Sukah uvaca—Sr1 Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak:
bharatasya—of Bharata Maharaja: atma-jah—the son: sumatih nama-
abhihitah—named Sumati: yam—unto whom; u ha vava—indeed:
kecit—some; pakhandinah—atheists, men without Vedic knowledge;
rsabha-padavim—the path of King Rsabhadeva; anuvartamanam—
following; ca—and; anaryah—not belonging to the Aryans who strictly
follow the Vedic principles: aveda-samamnatam—not enumerated in
the Vedas; devatam—to be Lord Buddha or a similar Buddhist deity:
sva-manisayd—by their own mental speculation; papiyasyd—most sin-
ful; kalau—in this age of Kali; kalpayisyanti—will imagine.

TRANSLATION

Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: The son of Maharaja Bharata
known as Sumati followed the path of Rsabhadeva, but some
unscrupulous people imagined him to be Lord Buddha himself.
These people, who were actually atheistic and of bad character,
took up the Vedic principles in an imaginary, infamous way to sup-
port their activities. Thus these sinful people accepted Sumati as
Lord Buddhadeva and propagated the theory that everyone should
follow the principles of Sumati. In this way they were carried away
by mental concoction.

PURPORT

Those who are Aryans strictly follow the Vedic principles, but in this
age of Kali a community has sprung up known as the arya-samaja,
which is ignorant of the import of the Vedas in the parampara system.
Their leaders decry all bona fide acaryas, and they pose themselves as
the real followers of the Vedic principles. These acaryas who do not
follow the Vedic principles are presently known as the arya-samajas, or
the Jains. Not only do they not follow the Vedic principles. but they have
no relationship with Lord Buddha. Imitating the behavior of Sumati,


--- Page 79 ---
Text 3] The Descendants of King Priyavrata 73
they claim to be the descendants of Rsabhadeva. Those who are
Vaisnavas carefully avoid their company because they are ignorant of the
path of the Vedas. In Bhagavad-gita (15.15) Krsna says, vedais ca sar-
vair aham eva vedyah: “The real purpose of the Vedas is to understand
Me.” This is the injunction of all Vedic literatures. One who does not
know the greatness of Lord Krsna cannot be accepted as an Aryan. Lord
Buddha, an incarnation of Lord Krsna, adopted a particular means to
propagate the philosophy of bhagavata-dharma. He preached almost
exclusively among atheists. Atheists do. not want any God, and Lord Bud-
dha therefore said that there is no God, but he adopted the means to in-
struct his followers for their benefit. Therefore he preached in a
duplicitous way, saying that there is no God. Nonetheless, he himself was
an incarnation of God.
TEXT 2
JERE इद्धसेनायां देवताजिन्नाम पुत्रोऽभवत्‌ ॥ २ ॥
tasmad vrddhasenayarm devatajin-nama putro ’bhavat.

tasmat—from Sumati; vrddha-senayam—in the womb of his wife.
named Vrddhasena; devatajit-nama—named Devatajit; putrah—a son:
abhavat—was born.

TRANSLATION

From Sumati, a son named Devatajit was born by the womb of

his wife named Vrddhasena.
TEXT 3

अथासुयौ तत्तनयो देवद्युम्नस्ततो धेचुमत्यां सुतः परमेष्ठी तख
Tom! प्रतीह उपजातः ॥ ३॥
athasuryarn tat-tanayo devadyumnas 1010 dhenumatyam sutah
paramesthi tasya suvarcalayarn prattha upajatah.

atha—thereafter; asuryam—in the womb of his wife, named Asuri;
tat-tanayah—one son of Devatajit: deva-dyumnah—named


--- Page 80 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.15
Devadyumna; tatah—from Devabhyumna; dhenu-matyam—in the
womb of Dhenumati, the wife of Devadyumna; sutah—one son;
paramesthi—named Paramesthi; tasya—of Paramesthi; suvar-
calayam—in the womb of his wife, named Suvarcala; patrihah—the son
named Pratiha; upajatah—appeared.
TRANSLATION

Thereafter, in the womb of Asuri, the wife of Devatajit, a son
named Devadyumna was begotten. Devadyumna begot in the
womb of his wife, Dhenumati, a son named Paramesthi.
Paramesthi begot a son named Pratiha in the womb of his wife,
Suvarcala.

TEXT 4
य आत्मविद्यामाख्याय खयं संशुद्धो महापुरुषमनुससार 11 ४॥

ya atma-vidyam akhyaya svayam samsuddho mahda-purusam
anusasmara.

yah—who (King Pratiha); atma-vidyam akhyaya—after instructing
many people about self-realization; svayam —personally; sarmsuddhah—
being very advanced and purified in self-realization; maha-purusam—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu; anusasmara—perfectly
understood and always remembered.

TRANSLATION

King Pratiha personally propagated the principles of self-
realization. In this way, not only was he purified, but he became a
great devotee of the Supreme Person, Lord Visnu, and directly
realized Him.

PURPORT

The word anusasmara is very significant. God consciousness is not
imaginary or concocted. The devotee who is pure and advanced realizes
God as He is. Maharaja Pratiha did so. and due to his direct realization of
Lord Visnu, he propagated self-realization and became a preacher. A real


--- Page 81 ---
Text 6] The Descendants of King Priyavrata 75
preacher cannot be bogus; he must first of all realize Lord Visnu as He is.
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.34), upadeksyanti te jiianam jiianinas
tattva-darsinah: ““One who has seen the truth can impart knowledge.”
The word tattva-darsi refers to one who has perfectly realized the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a person can become a guru and
propound Vaisnava philosophy all over the world. The paragon of bona
fide preachers and guru is King Pratiha.
TEXT 5
© ৬ ५५

प्रतीहात्सुवर चलायां গবিহসাব্যন্লম आसन्निज्याकोविदाः नवः प्रतिहतः
स्तुत्यामजभूभाना वजनिषाताम्‌ ॥५॥
pratihat suvarcalayam pratihartradayas traya asann ijya-kovidah
sinavah pratihartuh stutyam aja-bhimanav ajanisatam.

pratihat—from King Pratiha: suvarcalayam—in the womb of his
wife, named Suvarcala; pratihartr-adayah trayah—the three sons Pra-
tiharta, Prastota and Udgata: dsan—came into being: ijya-kovidah—
who were all very expert in the ritualistic ceremonies of the Vedas;
siunavah—sons; pratihartuh—from Pratiharta; stutyam—in the womb
of आपत, his wife; aja-bhimanau—the two sons Aja and Bhama:
ajanisatam—were brought into existence.

TRANSLATION

In the womb of his wife Suvarcala, Pratiha begot three sons,
named Pratiharta, Prastota and Udgata. These three sons were very
expert in performing Vedic rituals. Pratiharta begot two sons,
named Aja and Bhima, in the womb of his wife, named Stuti.

TEXT 6

भूम्न ऋषिङल्यायाघरुद्धीथस्ततः प्रस्तावो देवकुल्यायां प्रस्तावाननियुत्सायां
हृदयज आसीद्िखर्विमो रत्यां च पृथुषेणस्तसानक्त आङ्कत्यां जज्ञे
नक्ताद्‌ ZA गयो राजर्षिप्रवर उदारश्रवा अजायत साक्षाद्भगवतो


--- Page 82 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 15
विष्णोज॑गद्‌ रिरक्षिषया गृहीतसच्छस्य कलाऽऽत्मवत्वादिलक्षणेन महापुरुषतां
aa: ६।॥
bhamna rsikulyayam udgithas tatah prastavo devakulyayar prastavan
niyutsayarn hrdayaja asid vibhur vibho ratyam ca prthusenas tasman
nakta akityam jajiie naktad druti-putro gayo rajarsi-pravara udara-
Srava ajayata saksad bhagavato visnor jagad-riraksisaya grhita-
sattvasya kalatmavattvadi-laksanena maha-purusatam praptah.

bhamnah—from King प्राणव; rsi-kulyayam—in the womb of his
wife, named Rsikulya; udgithah—the son named Udgitha; tatah—again
from King Udgitha; prastavah—the son named Prastava; deva-
kulyayam —his wife, named Devakulya; prastavat—from King
Prastava; niyutsaiyam—in his wife, named Niyutsa; hrdaya-jah—the
son; asit—was begotten; vibhuh—named Vibhu; vibhoh—from King
Vibhu; ratyam—in his wife, named Rati; ca—also; prthu-senah—
named Prthusena; tasmat—from him (King Prthusena); naktah—a son
named Nakta; akiutyam—in his wife, named Akati; Jajie—was begot-
ten: naktat—from King Nakta; druti-putrah—a son in the womb of
Druti; gayah—named King Gaya; raja-rsi-pravarah—most exalted
among the saintly royal order; udara-sravah—famous as a very pious
king; ajayata—was born; saksat bhagavatah—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead directly; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; jagat-rirak-
sisaya—for the purpose of giving protection to the whole world;
grhita—who is conceived; sattvasya—in the suddha-sattva qualities;
kala-atma-vattva-adi—of being a direct incarnation of the Lord; lak-
sanena—by symptoms; maha-purusatam—the chief quality of being
the leader of the human society (exactly like the chief leader of all living
beings, Lord Visnu); praptah—achieved.

TRANSLATION

In the womb of his wife, Rsikulya, King Bhima begot a son
named Udgitha. From Udgitha’s wife, Devakulya, a son named
Prastava was born, and Prastava begot a son named Vibhu through
his wife, Niyutsa. In the womb of his wife, Rati, Vibhu begot a son
named Prthusena. Prthusena begot a son named Nakta in the


--- Page 83 ---
Text 7] The Descendants of King Priyavrata 77
womb of his wife, named Akiti. Nakta’s wife was Druti, and from
her womb the great King Gaya was born. Gaya was very famous and
pious; he was the best of saintly kings. Lord Visnu and His expan-
sions, who are meant to protect the universe, are always situated in
the transcendental mode of goodness, known as visuddha-sattva.
Being the direct expansion of Lord Visnu, King Gaya was also situ-
ated in the viSuddha-sattva. Because of this, Maharaja Gaya was
fully equipped with transcendental knowledge. Therefore he was
called Mahapurusa.
PURPORT

From this verse it appears that the incarnations of God are various.
Some are part and parcel of the direct expansions, and some are direct
expansions of Lord Visnu. A direct incarnation of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is called amsa or svamsa, whereas an incarnation
from amsa is called kala. Among the kalas there are the vibhinnarsa-
Jivas, or living entities. These are counted among the jiva-tattvas. Those
who come directly from Lord Visnu are called visnu-tattva and are some-
times designated as Mahapurusa. Another name for Krsna 15
Mahapurusa. and a devotee is sometimes called maha-paurusika.

TEXT 7

১২ =
स वे स्वधर्मेण प्रजापारन पोषणप्रीणनोपलारनाचुशासनरक्षणेनेज्यादिना च
भगवति महापुरुषे परावरे व्रह्मणि सर्वात्मना पिंतपरमार्थलक्रणेन
ब्रह्मविच्चरणानुसेव्रयाऽऽपादित भगवद्धक्तियोगेन चाभीक्ष्णशः परिभाविता-

~ ~ _ = _ রঃ -

frag मातरुपरतानात्म्य आत्मान स्य्रपलम्यमाननब्रह्मात्माचुभवोऽपि
निरभिमान एवावनिमजूगुपत्‌ ॥७॥
sa vai sva-dharmena praja-palana-posana-prinanopalilananusasana-
laksanenejyadina ca bhagavati maha-puruse paravare brahmani
sarvatmanarpita-paramartha-laksanena brahmavic-
carananusevaydapadita-bhagavad-bhakti-yogena cabhiksnasah
paribhavitati-suddha-matir uparatandatmya atmani svayam
upalabhyamana-brahmatmanubhavo ’pi nirabhimana evavanim
ajigupat.


--- Page 84 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 15

sah—that King Gaya; vai—indeed; sva-dharmena—by his own duty:
praja-palana—of protecting the subjects: posana—of maintaining
them; prinana—of making them happy in all respects; upalalana—of
treating them as 50115; anu$asana—of sometimes chastising them for
their mistakes; laksanena—by the symptoms of a king: ijya-adina—by
performing the ritualistic ceremonies as recommended in the Vedas;
ca—also: bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ৬1910:
maha-puruse—the chief of all living entities; para-avare—the source of
all living entities, from the highest, Lord Brahma, to the lowest, like the
insignificant ants; brahmani—unto Parabrahman, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Vasudeva; sarva-atmana—in all respects; arpita—
of being surrendered; parama-artha-laksanena—with spiritual
symptoms; brahma-vit—of self-realized, saintly devotees: carana-
anusevayd—by the service of the lotus feet; apadita—achieved:;
bhagavat-bhakti-yogena—by the practice of devotional service to the
Lord; ca—also: abhiksnasah—continuously; paribhavita—saturated;
ati-Suddha-matih—whose completely pure consciousness (full realiza-
tion that the body and mind are separate from the soul); uparata-anat-
mye—wherein identification with material things was stopped; at-
mani—in his own self; svayam—personally: upalabhyamana—being
realized; brahma-atma-anubhavah—perception of his own position as
the Supreme Spirit; api—although: nirabhimanah—without false
prestige; eva—in this way; avanim—the whole world: ajugupat—ruled
strictly according to the Vedic principles.

TRANSLATION

King Gaya gave full protection and security to the citizens so
that their personal property would not be disturbed by undesir-
able elements. He also saw that there was sufficient food to feed all
the citizens. [This is called posana.] He would sometimes distribute
gifts to the citizens to satisfy them. [This is called prinana.] He
would sometimes call meetings and satisfy the citizens with sweet
words. [This is called upalalana.] He would also give them good in-
structions on how to become first-class citizens. [This is called
anuéasana.] Such were the characteristics of King Gaya’s royal
order. Besides all this, King Gaya was a householder who strictly


--- Page 85 ---
Text 7] The Descendants of King Priyavrata 79
observed the rules and regulations of household life. He per-
formed sacrifices and was an unalloyed pure devotee of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He was called Mahapurusa
because as a king he gave the citizens all facilities, and as a house-
holder he executed all his duties so that at the end he became a
strict devotee of the Supreme Lord. As a devotee, he was always
ready to give respect to other devotees and to engage in the devo-
tional service of the Lord. This is the bhakti-yoga process. Due to
all these transcendental acitivites, King Gaya was always free from
the bodily conception. He was full in Brahman realization, and
consequently he was always jubilant. He did not experience
material lamentation. Although he was perfect in all respects, he
was not proud, nor was he anxious to rule the kingdom.
PURPORT

As Lord Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita, when He descends on earth,
He has two types of business—to give protection to the faithful and an-
nihilate the demons (paritranaya sadhéinarm vinasaya ca duskrtam).
Since the king is the representative of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he is sometimes called nara-deva, that is, the Lord as a human
being. According to the Vedic injunctions, he is worshiped as God on the
material platform. As a representative of the Supreme Lord, the king had
the duty to protect the citizens in a perfect way so that they would not be
anxious for food and protection and so that they would be jubilant. The
king would supply everything for their benefit, and because of this he
would levy taxes. If the king or government otherwise levies taxes on the
citizens, he becomes responsible for the sinful activities of the citizens.
In Kali-yuga, monarchy is abolished because the kings themselves are
subjected to the influence of Kali-yuga. It is understood from the
Ramayana that when Bibhisana became friends with Lord Ramacandra.
he promised that if by chance or will he broke the laws of friendship
with Lord Ramacandra, he would become a brahmana or a king in Kali-
yuga. In this age, as Bibhisana indicated, both brahmanas and kings are
in a wretched condition. Actually there are no kings or brahmanas in this
age, and due to their absence the whole world is in a chaotic condition
and is always in distress. Compared to present standards, Maharaja Gaya


--- Page 86 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 15
was a true representative of Lord Visnu; therefore he was known as
Mahapurusa.
TEXT 8
तस्येमां गाथां पाण्डवेय पुराविद ITAL ८॥
tasyemarn gatharm pandaveya puravida upagayanti.
tasya—of King Gaya: imam—these: gatham—poetic verses of
glorification: pandaveya—O Maharaja Pariksit; pura-vidah—those
learned in the historical events of the Puranas; upagayanti—sing.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Pariksit, those who are learned scholars in the
histories of the Puranas eulogize and glorify King Gaya with the
following verses.
PURPORT
The historical references to exalted kings serve as a good example for
present rulers. Those who are ruling the world at the present moment
should take lessons from King Gaya, King Yudhisthira and King Prthu
and rule the citizens so that they will be happy. Presently the govern-
ments are levying taxes without improving the citizens in any cultural,
religious, social or political way. According to the Vedas, this is not
recommended.
TEXT 9
+ ~ Cen
गयं नृपः कः प्रतियाति कमभि-
6: ¢
यज्वाभिमानी बहुविद्धर्मगोप्रा |
समागतश्रीः सदसस्पतिः सतां
सत्सेवकोऽन्यो मगवत्कलामरते ॥ ९ ॥
gayari nrpah kah pratiyati karmabhir
yajvabhimani bahuvid dharma-gopta


--- Page 87 ---
Text 10] The Descendants of King Priyavrata 81
samagata-$rih sadasas-patih satam
sat-sevako ‘nyo bhagavat-kalam rte
gayam—King Gaya: nrpah—king; kah—who: pratiyati—is a match
for: karmabhih—Dby his execution of ritualistic ceremonies: yajva —who
performed all sacrifices: abhimani—so widely respected all over the
world; bahu-vit—fully aware of the conclusion of Vedic literature:
dharma-gopta—protector of the occupational duties of everyone:
samagata-srih—possessing all kinds of opulence; sadasah-patih
satam—the dean of the assembly of great persons: sat-sevakah—servant
of the devotees; anyah—anyone else; bhagavat-kalam—the plenary in-
carnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: rte—besides.
TRANSLATION ` ~
The great King Gaya used to perform all kinds of Vedic rituals.
He was highly intelligent and expert in studying all the Vedic
literatures. He maintained the religious principles and possessed
all kinds of opulence. He was a leader among gentlemen and a ser-
vant of the devotees. He was a totally qualified plenary expansion
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore who could
equal him in the performance of gigantic ritualistic ceremonies?
TEXT 10
यमसम्यपिश्वन्‌ परया पदा सतीः
सत्याशिषो दक्षकन्याः सरिद्धिः।
यस प्रजानां दुदुहे Sassi
निराशिषो गुणवत्सस्नुतोधाः ॥१०॥
yam abhyasifican paraya muda satth
satyasiso daksa-kanyah saridbhih
yasya prajanam duduhe dharasiso
nirasiso guna-vatsa-snutodhah
yam—whom: abhyasifican—bathed: paraya—with great: muda—
satisfaction; satth—all chaste and devoted to their husbands: satya—


--- Page 88 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 15
true: asisah—whose blessings; daksa-kanyah—the daughters of King
Daksa: saridbhih—with sanctified water: yasya—whose; prajanam—of
the citizens: duduhe—fulfilled: dhara—the planet earth; asisah—of all
desires; nirasisah—although personally having no desire; guna-vatsa-
snuta-udhdh—earth becoming like a cow whose udders flowed upon
seeing Gaya’s qualities in ruling over the citizens.
TRANSLATION
! All the chaste and honest daughters of Maharaja Daksa, such as
Sraddha, Maitri and Daya, whose blessings were always effective,
bathed Maharaja Gaya with sanctified water. Indeed, they were very
satisfied with Maharaja Gaya. The planet earth personified came as
a cow, and, as though she saw her calf, she delivered milk
profusely when she saw all the good qualities of Maharaja Gaya. In
other words, Maharaja Gaya was able to derive all benefits from the
earth and thus satisfy the desires of his citizens. However, he per-
sonally had no desire.
PURPORT

The earth over which Maharaja Gaya ruled is compared to a cow. The
good qualities whereby he maintained and ruled the citizens are com-
pared to the calf. A cow delivers milk in the presence of her calf;
similarly the cow. or earth, fulfilled the desires of Maharaja Gaya, who
was able to utilize all the resources of the earth to benefit his citizens.
This was possible because he was bathed in sanctified water by the honest
daughters of Daksa. Unless a king or ruler is blessed by authorities, he
cannot rule the citizens very satisfactorily. Through the good qualities of
the ruler, the citizens become very happy and well qualified.

TEXT 11
छन्दांस्यकामस्य च यख कामान्‌
दुदहुराजहूरथो बिं नृपाः |
-
satan युधि धर्मेण লিসা
यदाशिषां षष्ठमंशं परेत्य ॥११॥


--- Page 89 ---
Text 11] The Descendants of King Priyavrata 83
chandamsy akamasya ca yasya kaman
dudihur ajahrur atho bali nrpah
pratyancita yudhi dharmena vipra
yadasisarm sastham armsam paretya

chandarisi—all the different parts of the Vedas; akamasya—of one
who has no desire for personal sense gratification; ca—also: yasya—
whose: kaman—all desirables; dudahuh—yielded; @jahruh—offered;
atho—thus; balim—presentation; nrpah—all the kings; pratyancitah—
being satisfied by his fighting in opposition; yudhi—in the war: dhar-
mena—by religious principles; viprah—all the brahmanas; yada—
when; asisam—of blessings: sastham amsam—one sixth: paretya—in
the next life.

TRANSLATION

Although King Gaya had no personal desire for sense gratifica-
tion, all his desires were fulfilled by virtue of his performance of
Vedic rituals. All the kings with whom Maharaja Gaya had to fight
were forced to fight on religious principles. They were very
satisfied with his fighting, and they would present all kinds of gifts
to him. Similarly, all the brahmanas in his kingdom were very
satisfied with King Gaya’s munificent charities. Consequently the
brahmanas contributed a sixth of their pious activities for King
Gaya’s benefit in the next life.

PURPORT

As a ksatriya or emperor, Maharaja Gaya sometimes had to fight with
subordinate kings to maintain his government, but the subordinate kings
were not dissatisfied with him because they knew that he fought for
religious principles. Consequently they accepted their subordination and
offered all kinds of gifts to him. Similarly, the brahmanas who per-
formed Vedic rituals were so satisfied with the King that they very
readily agreed to part with a sixth of their pious activities for his benefit
in the next life. Thus the brahmanas and ksatriyas were all satisfied with
Maharaja Gaya because of his proper administration. In other words.
Maharaja Gaya satisfied the ksatriya kings by his fighting and satisfied


--- Page 90 ---
84. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 15
the brahmanas by his charities. The vaiSyas were also encouraged by
kind words and affectionate dealings, and due to Maharaja Gaya’s con-
stant sacrifices, the Sitdras were satisfied by sumptuous food and charity.
In this way Maharaja Gaya kept all the citizens very satisfied. When
brahmanas and saintly persons are honored, they part with their pious
activities, giving them to those who honor them and render them service.
Therefore, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.34), tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya: one should try to approach a spiritual master sub-
missively and render service unto him.
TEXT 12
यस्याध्वरे भगवानध्वरात्मा
मघोनि मायत्युरुसोमपीथे |
शरद्ाविदयद्धाचरलमक्तियोग-
समर्पितेञ्याफलमाजदार ॥१२॥
yasyadhvare bhagavan adhvaratma
maghoni madyaty uru-soma-pithe
Sraddha-visuddhacala-bhakti-yoga-
samarpitejya-phalam ajahara
yasya—of whom (King Gaya); adhvare—in his different sacrifices;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: adhvara-atma —the
supreme enjoyer of all sacrifices. the yajia-purusa; maghoni—when
King Indra; madyati—intoxicated; uru —greatly; soma-pithe—drinking
the intoxicant called soma; sraddha —by devotion; visuddha —purified;
acala—and steady; bhakti-yoga—by devotional service; samarpita—
offered; ijya—of worshiping: phalam—the result; ajahara—accepted
personally.
TRANSLATION
In Maharaja Gaya’s sacrifices, there was a great supply of the in-

toxicant known as soma. King Indra used to come and become in-
toxicated by drinking large quantities of soma-rasa. Also, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu [the yajfia-purusa]


--- Page 91 ---
Text 13] The Descendants of King Priyavrata 85
also came and personally accepted all the sacrifices offered unto
Him with pure and firm devotion in the sacrificial arena.
PURPORT
Maharaja Gaya was so perfect that he satisfied all the demigods, who
were headed by the heavenly King Indra. Lord Visnu Himself also per-
sonally came to the sacrificial arena to accept the offerings. Although
Maharaja Gaya did not want them, he received all the blessings of the
demigods and the Supreme Lord Himself.
TEXT 13
यत््रीणनाद्वर्दिपि देवतिर्यङ्‌
मुष्यवीरुत्तणमाविरिश्वात्‌ ।
प्रीयेत सदयः स ह विश्वजीवः
परीतः खयं प्रीतिमगाद्यसख ॥ १३
yat-prinanad barhisi deva-tiryari-
manusya-virut-trnam auirincat
priyeta sadyah sa ha visva-jivah
pritah svayar pritim agad gayasya
yat-prinandt—because of pleasing the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; barhisi—in the sacrificial arena: deva-tiryak—the demigods
and lower animals: manusya—human society: virut—the plants and
trees; trnam—the grass: a-virificat—beginning from Lord Brahma:
priyeta—becomes satisfied; sadyah—immediately; sah—that Supreme
Personality of Godhead: ha—indeed; visva-jivah—maintains the living
entities all over the universe; pritah—although naturally satisfied:
svayam—personally;  pritim—satisfaction; = agat—he obtained:
gayasya—of Maharaja Gaya.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Lord is pleased by a person’s actions, auto-
matically all the demigods, human beings, animals, birds, bees,
creepers, trees, grass and all other living entities, beginning with


--- Page 92 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.15
Lord Brahma, are pleased. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
is the Supersoul of everyone, and He is by nature fully pleased.
Nonetheless, He came to the arena of Maharaja Gaya and said, "न्‌
am fully pleased.”
PURPORT
It is explicitly stated herein that simply by satisfying the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, one satisfies the demigods and all other living en-
tities without differentiation. If one pours water on the root of a tree, all
the branches, twigs, flowers and leaves are nourished. Although the
Supreme Lord is self-satished, He was so pleased with the behavior of
Maharaja Gaya that He personally came to the sacrificial arena and said,
“I am fully satisfied.” Who can compare to Maharaja Gaya?
TEXTS 14-15
गयाद्रयन्त्यां चित्ररथः सुगतिरवरोधन इति तयः gan बभूवुधि -
त्ररथादूर्णायां सम्राडजनिष्ट तत॒ उत्कलायां मरीचिर्भरीचे ॥ १४॥
विन्दुमत्यां बिन्दुमानुदपद्यत तसात्सरघायां मधुर्नामामवन्मधोः सुमनसि
= = ক : ৮০
वीरव्रतस्ततो मोजायां मन्धुत्रमन्धू जज्ञाते मन्थोः सत्यायां भौवनस्ततो
दूषणायां त्वष्टाजनिष्ट RATA विरजो विरजस्य शतजित्प्रवरं
gwd कन्या च विषूच्यां किर जातम्‌ ॥१५॥
gayad gayantyarn citrarathah sugatir avarodhana iti trayah putra
babhavus citrarathad arnayam samrad ajanista. tata utkalayam maricir
maricer bindumatyar bindum anudapadyata tasmat saraghayam
madhur namabhavan madhoh sumanasi viravratas tato bhojayam
manthu-pramanthi jajiate manthoh satyayam bhauvanas tato
diisandyarm tvastajanista tvastur virocandyar virajo virajasya Satajit-
pravarari putra-$atamn kanya ca visucyarn kila jatam.
gayat—from Maharaja Gaya; gayantyam—in his wife, named
Gayanti; citra-rathah—named Citraratha; sugatih—named Sugati;


--- Page 93 ---
Text 15] The Descendants of King Priyavrata 87
avarodhanah—named Avarodhana; iti—thus: trayah—three: putrah—
80115; babhiivuh—were born: citrarathat—from Citraratha; drnayam—
in the womb of Urna: samrat—named Samrat; ajanista—was born;
tatah—from him; utkaldyam—in his wife named Utkala; maricth—
named Marici: mariceh—from Marici; bindu-matyam—in the womb of
his wife Bindumati; bindum—a son named Bindu; anudapadyata—was
born; tasmat—from him; saraghayam—in the womb of his wife
Saragha; madhuh—Madhu: nama—named: abhavat—was born:
madhoh—from Mahdu; sumanasi—in the womb of his wife. Sumana:
vira-vratah—a son named Viravrata; tatah—from Viravrata; bho-
jayam—in the womb of his wife Bhoja: manthu-pramanthii—two sons
named Manthu and Pramanthu: jajidte—were born: manthoh—from
Manthu; satyayam—in his wife, Satya: bhauvanah—a son named
Bhauvana; tatah—from him: disandyam—in the womb of his wife
Dusana: tvasta—one son named Tvasta: ajanista—was born: tvastuh—
from Tvasta: virocanayam—in his wife named Virocana: virajah—a son
named Viraja; virajasya—of King Viraja; satajit-pravaram—headed by
Satajit; putra-$atam—one hundred sons: kanya—a daughter: ca—also:
visticyam—in his wife 19001: kila—indeed: jatam—took birth.
TRANSLATION

In the womb of Gayanti, Maharaja Gaya begot three sons, named
Citraratha, Sugati and Avarodhana. In the womb of his wife Urna,
Citraratha begot a son named Samrat. The wife of Samrat was
Utkala, and in her womb Samrat begot a son named Marici. In the
womb of his wife Bindumati, Marici begot a son named Bindu. In
the womb of his wife Saragha, Bindu begot a son named Madhu. In
the womb of his wife named Sumana, Madhu begot a son named
Viravrata. In the womb of his wife Bhoja, Viravrata begot two sons
named Manthu and Pramanthu. In the womb of his wife Satya,
Manthu begot a son named Bhauvana, and in the womb of his wife
Dasana, Bhauvana begot a son named Tvasta. In the womb of his
wife Virocana, Tvasta begot a son named Viraja. The wife of Viraja
was Visaci, and in her womb Viraja begot one hundred sons
and one daughter. Of all these sons, the son named Satajit was pre-
dominant.


--- Page 94 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 15
TEXT 16
तत्रायं श्लोकः--
fad वंशमिमं নিংজখৌভুবঃ ।
अकरोदत्यलं कीर्त्या विष्णुः सुरगणं यथा ॥१६॥
tatrayarn $lokah—
praiyavratam vamsam imam
viraja$ caramodbhavah
akarod aty-alarm kirtya
visnuh sura-ganam yatha

tatra—in that connection; ayam Slokah—there is this famous verse:
praiyavratam—coming from King Priyavrata: vamsam—the dynasty:
imam —this: viragjah—King Viraja; carama-udbhavah—the source of
one hundred sons (headed by Satajit): akarot—decorated; ati-alam—
very greatly; kirtya—by his reputation: visnuh—Lord Visnu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sura-ganam—the demigods: yatha—
just as.

TRANSLATION

There is a famous verse about King Viraja. ‘Because of his high
qualities and wide fame, King Viraja became the jewel of the
dynasty of King Priyavrata, just as Lord Visnu, by His transcen-
dental potency, decorates and blesses the demigods.”

PURPORT

Within a garden, a flowering tree attains a good reputation because of
its fragrant flowers. Similarly, if there is a famous man in a family, he is
compared to a fragrant flower in a forest. Because of him, an entire
family can become famous in history. Because Lord Krsna took birth in
the Yadu dynasty, the Yadu dynasty and the Yadavas have remained
famous for all time. Because of King Viraja’s appearance, the family of
Maharaja Priyavrata has remained famous for all time.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fifteenth
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, “The Glories of the Descendants of
King Priyavrata.”


--- Page 95 ---
CHAPTER SIXTEEN

A Description of Jambudvipa
While describing the character of Maharaja Priyavrata and his descen-
dants, Sukadeva Gosvami also described Meru Mountain and the plan-
etary system known as Bhii-mandala. Bhi-mandala is like a lotus flower,
and its seven islands are compared to the whorl of the lotus. The place
known as Jambudvipa is in the middle of that whorl. In Jambudvipa
there is a mountain known as Sumeru, which is made of solid gold. The
height of this mountain is 84,000 yojanas, of which 16,000 yojanas are
below the earth. Its width is estimated to be 32,000 yojanas at its summit
and 16,000 yojanas at its foot. (One yojana equals approximately eight
miles.) This king of mountains, Sumeru, is the support of the planet
earth.

On the southern side of the land known as Ilavrta-varsa are the moun-
tains known as Himavian, Hemakita and Nisadha, and on the northern
side are the mountains Nila, Sveta and ৩0868. Similarly, on the eastern
and western side there are Malyavan and Gandhamadana. two large
mountains. Surrounding Sumeru Mountain are four mountains known as
Mandara. Merumandara, Suparsva and Kumuda, each 10.000 yojanas
long and 10,000 yojanas high. On these four mountains there are trees
1.100 yojanas high —a mango tree, a rose apple tree. a kadamba tree and
a banyan tree. There are also lakes full of milk, honey, sugarcane juice
and pure water. These lakes can fulfill all desires. There are also gardens
named Nandana, Citraratha, Vaibhrajaka and Sarvatobhadra. On the side
of Supar$va Mountain is a kadamba tree with streams of honey flowing
from its hollows. and on Kumuda Mountain there is a banyan tree named
Satavaléa, from whose roots flow rivers containing milk. yogurt and
many other desirable things. Surrounding Sumeru Mountain like fila-
ments of the whorl of a lotus are twenty mountain ranges such as
Kuranga, Kurara, Kusumbha, Vaikarnka and Trikata. To the east of
Sumeru are the mountains Jathara and Devakiita, to the west are Pavana
and Pariyatra, to the south are Kailasa and Karavira, and to the north are
Trisrnga and Makara. These eight mountains are about 18.000 yojanas
long, 2,000 yojanas wide and 2,000 yojanas high. On the summit of

89


--- Page 96 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
Mount Sumeru is Brahmapuri, the residence of Lord Brahma. Each of its
four sides is 10,000 yojanas long. Surrounding Brahmapuri are the cities
of King Indra and seven other demigods. These cities are one fourth the
size of Brahmapuri.
TEXT 1
राजोवाच
उक्तस्त्वया भूमण्डलायामविरेषो यावदादित्यस्तपति यत्र चासौ ज्योतिषां
a
गणअन्द्रमा वा सह दृश्यते ॥ १ ॥
rajovaca
uktas tvaya bhi-mandalayama-viseso yavad adityas tapati yatra
casau Jyotisam ganai$ candrama va saha drsyate.
raja uvaca—Maharaja Pariksit said; uktah—already been said:
tvaya—by you: bhi-mandala—of the planetary system known as Bha-
mandala; @dyama-visSesah—the specific length of the radius: ydvat—as
far as: adityah—the sun: tapati—heats; yatra—wherever: ca—also:
asau—that; jyotisam—of the luminaries; ganaih—with hordes:
candrama—the moon: va—either: saha—with: drsyate—is seen.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit said to Sukadeva Gosvami: O brahmana, you have
already informed me that the radius of Bhii-mandala extends as far
as the sun spreads its light and heat and as far as the moon and all
the stars can be seen.
PURPORT
In this verse it is stated that the planetary system known as Bhi-man-
dala extends to the limits of the sunshine. According to modern science,
the sunshine reaches earth from a distance of 93.000.000 miles. If we
calculate according to this modern information, 93,000,000 miles can be
considered the radius of Bha-mandala. In the Gayatri mantra, we chant
om bhir bhuvah svah. The word bhiir refers to Bhi-mandala. Tat savitur


--- Page 97 ---
Text 2] A Description of Jambudvipa 91
varenyam: the sunshine spreads throughout Bha-mandala. Therefore
the sun is worshipable. The stars, which are known as naksatra, are not
different suns, as modern astronomers suppose. From Bhagavad-gita
(10.21) we understand that the stars are similar to the moon (nak-
satranam aham $asi). Like the moon, the stars reflect the sunshine.
Apart from our modern distinguished estimations of where the planetary
systems are located, we can understand that the sky and its various
planets were studied long, long before Srimad-Bhagatavam was com-
piled. Sukadeva Gosvami explained the location of the planets, and this
indicates that the information was known long, long before Sukadeva
Gosvami related it to Maharaja Pariksit. The location of the various
planetary systems was not unknown to the sages who flourished in the
Vedic age.
TEXT 2

तत्रापि प्रियत्रतरथ चरणपरिखातैः स्मिः aq सिन्धव उपक्लप्ता यत
एतस्याः सप्द्रीपविशेषबिकस्पस्त्वया भगवन्‌ खलु घ चित एतदेवाखिरमदं
मानतो लक्षणतश्च सवं विजिज्ञासामि ॥ २॥
tatrapi priyavrata-ratha-carana-parikhataih saptabhih sapta sindhava
upaklpta yata etasyah sapta-dvipa-visesa-vikalpas tvaya bhagavan
khalu sicita etad evakhilam aha manato laksanatas ca sarvam vi-
Jynasami.

tatra api—in that Bha-mandala; priyavrata-ratha-carana-
parikhataih—by the ditches made by the wheels of the chariot used by
Priyavrata Maharaja while circumambulating Sumeru behind the sun:
saptabhih—by the seven: sapta—seven:; sindhavah—oceans:
upaklptah—created; yatah—because of which; etasyah—of this Bha-
mandala; sapta-dvipa—of the seven islands: visesa-vikalpah—the mode
of the construction; tvaya—by you; bhagavan—O great saint: khalu—
indeed; siacitah—described: etat—this: eva—certainly: akhilam—
whole subject: aham —I: manatah—from the point of view of measure-
ment; laksanatah—and from symptoms: ca—also; sarvam—every-
thing: vijijiasami— wish to know.


--- Page 98 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, the rolling wheels of Maharaja Priyavrata’s
chariot created seven ditches, in which the seven oceans came into
existence. Because of these seven oceans, Bhii-mandala is divided
into seven islands. You have given a very general description of
their measurement, names and characteristics. Now I wish to know
of them in detail. Kindly fulfill my desire.

TEXT 3

मगवतो गुणमये स्थूलरूप आवेश्चितं मनो ह्यगुणेऽपि खष्मतम आत्मज्योतिषि परे
afl भमवति वासुदेवाख्ये क्षममावेशितं तदु रैतद्‌ गुरोऽदंस्यनुवणयित्‌-
मिति nz
bhagavato gunamaye sthiila-riipa avesitarn mano hy agune pi
sitksmatama atma-jyotisi pare brahmani bhagavati vasudevakhye
ksamam avesituri tad u haitad guro ’rhasy anuvarpayitum iti.

bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guna-maye—
into the external features, consisting of the three modes of material
nature; sthitla-ripe—the gross form: avesitam —entered; manah—the
mind; hi—indeed; agune—transcendental; api—although; siksma-
tame—in His smaller form as Paramatma within the heart; atma-
Jyotisi—who is full of Brahman effulgence: pare—the supreme;
brahmani—spiritual entity; bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; vasudeva-akhye—known as Bhagavan Vasudeva; ksamam—
suitable; avesSitum—to absorb; tat—that: u ha—indeed: etat—this:
guro—O my dear spiritual master; arhasi anuvarnayitum—please de-
scribe factually; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

When the mind is fixed upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His external feature made of the material modes of
nature —the gross universal form —it is brought to the platform of
pure goodness. In that transcendental position, one can under-
stand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva, who in His


--- Page 99 ---
Text 3] A Description of Jambudvipa 93
subtler form is self-effulgent and beyond the modes of nature. O
my lord, please describe vividly how that form, which covers the
entire universe, is perceived.
PURPORT

Maharaja Pariksit had already been advised by his spiritual master.
Sukadeva Gosvami, to think of the universal form of the Lord, and
therefore, following the advice of his spiritual master, he continuously
thought of that form. The universal form is certainly material. but
because everything is an expansion of the energy of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, ultimately nothing is material. Therefore Pariksit
Maharaja’s mind was saturated with spiritual consciousness. Srila Rapa
Gosvami has stated:

prapaiicikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih parityago
vairagyam phalgu kathyate
Everything, even that which is material. is connected with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore everything should be engaged in the
service of the Lord. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura translates
this verse as follows:
“hari-sevaya yaha haya anukila
visaya baliya tahara tyage haya bhula

“One should not give up anything connected with the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. thinking it material or enjoyable for the material
senses.” Even the senses, when purified. are spiritual. When Maharaja
Pariksit was thinking of the universal form of the Lord, his mind was
certainly situated on the transcendental platform. Therefore although he
might not have had any reason to be concerned with detailed information
of the universe. he was thinking of it in relationship with the Supreme
Lord, and therefore such geographical knowledge was not material but
transcendental. Elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.20) Narada Muni
has said, idari hi visvarn bhagavan ivetarah: the entire universe is also


--- Page 100 ---
94 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.16
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although it appears different from
Him. Therefore although Pariksit Maharaja had no need for geographical
knowledge of this universe. that knowledge was also spiritual and tran-
scendental because he was thinking of the entire universe as an expan-
sion of the energy of the Lord.

In our preaching work also, we deal with so much property and money
and so many books bought and sold, but because these dealings all per-
tain to the Krsna consciousness movement, they should never be con-
sidered material. That one is absorbed in thoughts of such management
does not mean that he is outside of Krsna consciousness. If one rigidly
observes the regulative principle of chanting sixteen rounds of the
maha-mantra every day, his dealings with the material world for the
sake of spreading the Krsna consciousness movement are not different
from the spiritual cultivation of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 4
ऋषिरुवाच
a ८
न ৭ महाराज भगवतो मायागुणविभूतेः काष्टां मनसा बचसा
वाधिगन्तुमलं विबुधायुषापि पुरुपस्तसाप्राधान्येनैव भूगोलकविरोषं नाम-
रूप मानलक्षणतो व्याख्यास्यामः ॥ ४ ॥
rsir uvaca

na vai maharaja bhagavato maya-guna-vibhiiteh kastharn manasa
vacasa vadhigantum 10772 vibudhayusapi purusas tasmat pradhan-
yenaia bhii-golaka-visesarh nama-ripa-mana-laksanato
vyakhyasyamah.

rsih uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak: na—not:
vai—indeed: maha-raja—O great King: bhagavatah—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead: maya-guna-vibhiiteh—of the transformation of
the qualities of the material energy: kastham—the end: manasa—by the
mind: vacasa—by words: wi—either: adhigantum—to understand
fully: alam—capable: vibudha-ayusa—with a duration of life like that
of Brahma: api—even: purusah—a person: tasmat—therefore:
pradhanyena—by a general description of the chief places: eva—cer-


--- Page 101 ---
Text 4] A Description of Jambudvipa 95
tainly; bhii-golaka-visesam —the particular description of Bhualoka:
nama-ripa—names and forms: mana—measurements: laksanatah—
according to symptoms: vyakhyasyamah—I shall try to explain.
TRANSLATION

The great rsi Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, there is no
limit to the expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s
material energy. This material world is a transformation of the
material qualities [sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-gunal, yet no
one could possibly explain it perfectly, even in a lifetime as long as
that of Brahma. No one in the material world is perfect, and an
imperfect person could not describe this material universe ac-
curately, even after continued speculation. O King, I shall
nevertheless try to explain to you the principal regions, such as
Bhi-golaka [17311010181], with their names, forms, measurements
and various symptoms.

PURPORT

The material world is only one fourth of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead’s creation, but it is unlimited and impossible for anyone to
know or describe, even with the qualification of a life as long as that of
Brahma. who lives for millions and millions of years. Modern scientists
and astronomers try to explain the cosmic situation and the vastness of
space, and some of them believe that all the glittering stars are different
suns. From Bhagavad-gita, however. we understand that all these stars
(naksatras) are like the moon, in that they reflect the sunshine. They are
not independent luminaries. Bhiiloka is explained to be that portion of
outer space through which the heat and light of the sun extend.
Therefore it is natural to conclude that this universe extends in space as
far as we can see and encompasses the glittering stars. Srila Sukadeva
Gosvami admitted that to give full details of this expansive material
universe would be impossible, but nevertheless he wanted to give the
King as much knowledge as he had received through the parampara
system. We should conclude that if one cannot comprehend the material
expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. one certainly cannot
estimate the expansiveness of the spiritual world. The Brahma-samhita
(5.33) confirms this:


--- Page 102 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam
adyam purana-purusarm nava-yauvanarm ca
The limits of the expansions of Govinda, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. cannot be estimated by anyone, even a person as perfect as
Brahma, not to speak of tiny scientists whose senses and instruments are
all imperfect and who cannot give us information of even this one
universe. We should therefore be satisfied with the information obtain-
able from Vedic sources as spoken by authorities like Sukadeva Gosvami.
TEXT 5

- ५
यो वायं द्वीपः वर्यकभतकोशाम्यन्तरकोशो नियुतयोजन विशालः ange
यथा पुष्करपत्रम्‌ । ५ ॥
yo vayam dvipah kuvalaya-kamala-kosabhyantara-koso niyuta-yojana-
visalah samavartulo yatha puskara-patram.

yah—which; va—either: ayam—this: dvipah—island: kuvalaya—
the 2111०1८9; kamala-kosa—of the whorl of a lotus flower: abhyan-
tara—inner; kosah—whorl: niyuta-yojana-visalah—one million yo-
janas (eight million miles) wide; samavartulah—equally round, or hav-
ing a length and breadth of the same measurement; yatha—like;
puskara-patram—a lotus leaf.

TRANSLATION

The planetary system known as Bhii-mandala resembles a lotus
flower, and its seven islands resemble the whorl of that flower. The
length and breadth of the island known as Jambuadvipa, which is
situated in the middle of the whorl, are one million yojanas [eight
million miles]. Jambudvipa is round like the leaf of a lotus flower.

TEXT 6

यिन वर्षाणि चवयोडनसदस्वायायात्यश्मि मैयादागिरिभिः सुविभक्तानि
भवन्ति ॥६£॥


--- Page 103 ---
Text 7] A Description of Jambudvipa 97
yasmin nava varsani nava-yojana-sahasrayamany astabhir maryada-
giribhih suvibhaktani bhavanti.

yasmin—in that Jambadvipa; nava—nine: wvarsani—divisions of
land; nava-yojana-sahasra—72,000 miles in length: ayamani—
measuring; astabhih—by eight: maryada—indicating the boundaries;
giribhih—by mountains; suvibhaktani—nicely divided from one
another; bhavanti—are.

TRANSLATION

In Jambudvipa there are nine divisions of land, each with a
length of 9,000 yojanas [72,000 miles]. There are eight mountains
that mark the boundaries of these divisions and separate them
nicely.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura gives the following quotation
from the Vayu Purana, wherein the locations of the various mountains,
beginning with the Himalayas, are described.

dhanurvat samsthite jiieye dve varse daksinottare. dirghani tatra cat-
vari caturasram ilavrtam iti daksinottare bharatottara-kuru-varse cat-
vari kimpurusa-harivarsa-ramyaka-hiranmayani ~~ varsani  nila-
nisadhayos  tirascinibhitya == samudra-pravistayoh  sarhlagnatvam
angikrtya bhadrasva-ketumalayor api dhanur-akrtitvam. atas tayor
dairghyata eva madhye sankucitatvena nava-sahasrayamatvam. il-
avrtasya tu meroh sakasat catur-diksu nava-sahasrayamatvarn
saribhavet vastutas tv ilavrta-bhadrasva-ketumalanam catus-trimsat-
sahasrayamatvari jaeyam.

TEXT 7
+ =. < ५ ~
एषां मध्ये इलाडृतं नामाभ्यन्तरवषं यस्य नाभ्यामवस्थितः सवतः dan: कुलगिरिराजो
৫

মভন্তাঘাযামনমপ্তলাহ: कणिकाभूतः कुवलयकमलस्य मूधेनि द्वात्रिंशत्‌ सहस्र
योजनविततो मूले पोडशसहसं तावतान्तथूम्यां সবি: ॥ ७॥


--- Page 104 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
০5077 madhye ilavrtarn namabhyantara-varsam yasya nabhyam
avasthitah sarvatah sauvarnah kula-giri-rajo merur dvipayama-
samunnahah karnika-bhitah kuvalaya-kamalasya miardhani dva-
trirhsat sahasra-yojana-vitato mile sodasa-sahasram tavat antar-
bhamyarn pravistah.

esam—all these divisions of Jambuadvipa; madhye—among: ilavrtam
nama—named Ilavrta-varsa; abhyantara-varsam—the inner division:
yasya—of which; nabhyam—in the navel: avasthitah—situated; sar-
vatah—entirely; sauvarnah—made of gold: kula-giri-rajah—the most
famous among famous mountains; meruh—Mount Meru; dvipa-ayama-
samunnahah—whose height is the same measurement as the width of
Jambudvipa: karnika-bhitah—existing as the pericarp: kuvalaya—of
this planetary system: kamalasya—like a lotus flower: mirdhani—on
the top; dva-trirhsat —thirty-two; sahasra—thousand: yojana—yojanas
(eight miles each): vitatah—expanded: mile—at the base; sodasa-
sahasram —sixteen thousand yojanas; tavat—so much: dntah-
bhiamyam —within the earth: pravistah—entered.

TRANSLATION

Amidst these divisions, or varsas, is the varsa named Ilavrta,
which is situated in the middle of the whorl of the lotus. Within Il-
avrta-varsa is Sumeru Mountain, which is made of gold. Sumeru
Mountain is like the pericarp of the lotuslike Bhii-mandala plan-
etary system. The mountain’s height is the same as the width of
Jambadvipa—or, in other words, 100,000 yojanas [800,000
miles]. Of that, 16,000 yojanas [128,000 miles] are within the
earth, and therefore the mountain’s height above the earth is
84,000 yojanas [672,000 miles]. The mountain’s width is 32,000
yojanas [256,000 miles] at its summit and 16,000 yojanas at its
base.

TEXT 8

उत्तरो्तरेणेराढ़तं नीलः शवेतः भृद्गवानिति त्रयो रम्यकदिरण्मयङ्रूणां वर्षाणां
TART: प्रागायता उभयतः क्षारोदावधयो द्विसहस्रपृथव एकैकशः
पू्सखात्पूर्वसादुत्तर उत्तरो दशांशाधिकांशेन 4 एव हसन्ति ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 105 ---
Text 8] A Description of Jambudvipa 99
uttarottarenelavrtarn nilah svetah Srriigavan iti trayo ramyaka-
hiranmaya-kuranam 17075071277 maryada-girayah prag-ayata
ubhayatah ksarodavadhayo dvi-sahasra-prthava ekaikasah pirvasmat
purvasmad uttara uttaro dasamsadhikamsena dairghya eva hrasanti.

uttara-uttarena ilavrtam—further and further north of llavrta-varsa;
nilah—Nila: svetah—Sveta: Srigavan—Srngavan; iti—thus; trayah—
three mountains: ramyaka—Ramyaka; hirapnmaya—Hiranmaya:
kurinam—of the Kuru division; varsanam—of the varsas; maryada-
girayah—the mountains marking the borders: prak-ayatah—extended
on the eastern side; ubhayatah—to the east and the west; ksaroda—the
ocean of salt water; avadhayah—extending to; dvi-sahasra-prthavah—
which are two thousand yojanas wide: eka-ekasah—one after another:
purvasmat—than the former: piarvasmat—than the former; uttarah—
further north: uttarah—further north: dasa-amsa-adhika-amsena—by
one tenth of the former: dairghyah—in length: eva—indeed: hra-
santi—become shorter.

TRANSLATION

Just north of Ilavrta-varsa—and going further northward, one
after another—are three mountains named Nila, Sveta and
Srigavan. These mark the borders of the three varsas named
Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and Kuru and separate them from one
another. The width of these mountains is 2,000 yojanas [16,000
miles]. Lengthwise, they extend east and west to the beaches of the
ocean of salt water. Going from south to north, the length of each
mountain is one tenth that of the previous mountain, but the
height of them all is the same.

PURPORT

In this regard, Madhvacarya quotes the following verses from the

Brahmanda Purana:
yatha bhagavate tiktari
bhauvanam kosa-laksanam
tasyavirodhato yojyam
anya-granthantare sthitam


--- Page 106 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
mandode puranar caiva
vyatyasam ksira-sagare
rahu-soma-ravinam ca
mandalad dvi-gunoktitam
vinaiva sarvam unneyarm
yojanabhedato tra tu
It appears from these verses that aside from the sun and moon, there is
an invisible planet called Rahu. The movements of Rahu cause both solar
and lunar eclipses. We suggest that the modern expeditions attempting to
reach the moon are mistakenly going to Rahu.
TEXT 9
एवं दक्षिणेनेलाडतं निषधो हेमङूटो हिमालय इति प्रागायता यथा नीरादयो-
Q ও ক
ऽयुतयोजनोर्सेधा हरिवषकिम्पुरुषभारतानां यथासंख्यम्‌ ।९॥
evar daksinenelavrtar nisadho hemakiito himalaya iti prag-ayata
yatha niladayo ’yuta-yojanotsedha hari-varsa-kimpurusa-bharatanam
yatha-sarikhyam.
evam—thus; daksinena—by degrees to the southern side; ilavrtam—
of llavrta-varsa; nisadhah hema-kitah himalayah—three mountains
named Nisadha, Hemakiita and Himalaya: iti—thus; prak-ayatah—ex-
tended to the east; yathd—just as; nila-adayah—the mountains headed
by Nila; ayuta-yojana-utsedhah—ten thousand yojanas high: hari-
varsa—the division named Hari-varsa; kimpurusa—the division named
Kimpurusa: bhdratanarmm—the division named Bharata-varsa: yatha-
sarikhyam —according to number.
TRANSLATION
Similarly, south of Ilavrta-varsa and extending from east to west
are three great mountains named (from north to south) Nisadha,
Hemak ita and Himalaya. Each of them is 10,000 yojanas [80,000
miles] high. They mark the boundaries of the three varsas named
Hari-varsa, Kimpurusa-varsa and Bharata-varsa [India].


--- Page 107 ---
Text 10] A Description of Jambiidvipa 101
TEXT 10
-~ - R ৬

तथेवेकाङृतमपरेण [OT मास्यव दन्धमादनावानीर निषधायती दि ससं
पप्रथतुः केतुमालमद्राश्चयोः सीमानं विदधाते ॥ १० ॥
tathaivelavrtam aparena purvena ca malyavad-gandhamadanav anila-
nisadhayatau dvi-sahasram paprathatuh ketumala-bhadrasvayoh
simanarit vidadhate.

tatha eva—exactly like that; ilavrtam aparena—on the western side
of Ilavrta-varsa; pirvena ca—and on the eastern side; malyavad-
gandha-madanau—the demarcation mountains of Malyavan on the west
and Gandhamadana on the east; a-nila-nisada-ayatau—on the northern
side up to the mountain known as Nila and on the southern side up to the
mountain known as Nisadha; dvi-sahasram—two thousand yojanas;
paprathatuh—they extend; ketumala-bhadrasvayoh—of the two varsas
named Ketumila and Bhadrasva; simanam—the border; vidadhdate —
establish.

TRANSLATION

In the same way, west and east of Ilavrta-varsa are two great
mountains named Malyavan and Gandhamadana respectively.
These two mountains, which are 2,000 yojanas [16,000 miles]
high, extend as far as Nila Mountain in the north and Nisadha in
the south. They indicate the borders of Ilavrta-varsa and also the
varsas known as Ketumaila and Bhadrasva.

PURPORT

There are so many mountains, even on this planet earth. We do not
think that the measurements of all of them have actually been calculated.
While passing over the mountainous region from Mexico to Caracas, we
actually saw so many mountains that we doubt whether their height,
length and breadth have been properly measured. Therefore, as indi-
cated in Srimad-Bhagavatam by Sukadeva Gosvami, we should not try to
comprehend the greater mountainous areas of the universe merely by
our calculations. Sukadeva Gosvami has already stated that such


--- Page 108 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
calculations would be very difficult even if one had a duration of life like
that of Brahma. We should simply be satisfied with the statements of
authorities like Sukadeva Gosvami and appreciate how the entire cosmic
manifestation has been made possible by the external energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The measurements given herein, such
as 10,000 yojanas or 100,000 yojanas, should be considered correct
because they have been given by Sukadeva Gosvami. Our experimental
knowledge can neither verify nor disprove the statements of Srimad-
Bhagavatam. We should simply hear these statements from the
authorities. If we can appreciate the extensive energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, that will benefit us.
TEXT 11 व

मन्द्रो मेरुमन्दरः सुपा्वः इद इत्ययुतयोजनविस्तारोत्नाहा मेरो-
अतुदिं शमवश्टम्भगिरय sagem: ॥ ११ ॥
mandaro merumandarah suparsvah kumuda ity ayuta-yojana-
vistaronnaha mero$ catur-disam avastambha-giraya upaklptah.

mandarah—the mountain named Mandara; meru-mandarah—the
mountain named Merumandara; suparsvah—the mountain named
Suparsva; kumudah—the mountain named Kumuda; iti—thus; ayuta-
yojana-vistara-unnahah—which measure ten thousand yojanas high
and wide; meroh—of Sumeru; catuh-disam—the four sides;
avastambha-girayah—mountains that are like the belts of Sumeru;
upaklptah—situated.

TRANSLATION

On the four sides of the great mountain known as Sumeru
are four mountains—Mandara, Merumandara, Supar§va and
Kumuda—which are like its belts. The length and height of these
mountains are calculated to be 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles].

TEXT 12
iS ©,

चतुर्ष तेषु चूतजम्बुकद्म्बन्यग्नोधाश्चत्वारः पादप प्रवराः पवेतकेतव इवाधि-
सदस्रयोजनोनाहास्तावद्‌ विटपविततयः शतयोजनपरिणाहाः ॥ १२॥


--- Page 109 ---
Text 14] A Description of Jambidvipa 103
catursv etesu cita-jambi-kadamba-nyagrodhas catvarah padapa-
pravarah parvata-ketava ivadhi-sahasra-yojanonnahas tavad vitapa-
vitatayah Sata-yojana-parinahdah.

catursu—on the four: etesu—on these mountains, beginning with
Mandara; cita-jambi-kadamba—of trees such as the mango, rose apple
and kadamba; nyagrodhdh—and the banyan tree; catvarah—four
kinds: padapa-pravarah—the best of trees: parvata-ketavah—the
flagstaffs on the mountains: iva—like; adhi—over; sahasra-yojana-un-
nahah—one thousand yojanas high: tavat—so much also; vitapa-
vitatayah—the length of the branches: $ata-yojana—one hundred yo-
Janas; parinahah—wide.

TRANSLATION

Standing like flagstaffs on the summits of these four mountains
are a mango tree, a rose apple tree, a kadamba tree and a banyan
tree. Those trees are calculated to have a width of 100 yojanas [800
miles] and a height of 1,100 yojanas [8,800 miles]. Their branches
also spread to a radius of 1,100 yojanas.

TEXTS 13-14
हदाश्चत्वारः पयोमच्िक्रसग्र्टजला यदुपस्पदिीन उपदेवगणा योगैशर्याणि
खामाविकानि भरतषम धारयन्ति ॥ १३॥ देवो यानानि च मवन्ति
. = ९.९

चत्वारि नन्दनं चैत्ररथं वैभ्राजकं सर्वतोभद्रमिति ।॥१४॥
hradas catvarah payo-madhv-iksurasa-mrsta-jala yad-upasparsina
upadeva-gana yogaisvaryani svabhavikani bharatarsabha dharayanti.
devodyanani ca bhavanti catvari nandanarm caitrarathari vaibhrajakari
sarvatobhadram iti.

hradah—lakes: catvarah—four; payah—milk: madhu—honey:
iksu-rasa—sugarcane juice; mrsta-jalah—filled with pure water: yat—
of which: upasparsinah—those who use the liquids: upadeva-ganah—
the demigods: yoga-aisvaryani—all the perfections of mystic yoga;
svabhavikani—without being tried for: bharata-rsabha—O best of the


--- Page 110 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
Bharata dynasty: dharayanti—possess: deva-udyanani—celestial gar-
dens: ca—also; bhavanti—there are; catvari—four; nandanam—of the
Nandana garden; caitra-ratham—Caitraratha garden; vaibhrajakam —
Vaibhrajaka garden; sarvatah-bhadram—Sarvatobhadra garden; iti—
thus.
TRANSLATION

O Maharaja Pariksit, best of the Bharata dynasty, between these
four mountains are four huge lakes. The water of the first tastes
just like milk; the water of the second, like honey; and that of the
third, like sugarcane juice. The fourth lake is filled with pure
water. The celestial beings such as the Siddhas, Caranas and
Gandharvas, who are also known as demigods, enjoy the facilities
of those four lakes. Consequently they have the natural perfec-
tions of mystic yoga, such as the power to become smaller than the
smallest or greater than the greatest. There are also four celestial
gardens named Nandana, Caitraratha, Vaibhrajaka and Sar-
vatobhadra.

TEXT 15
a

येष्वमर परिब्रढाः सद सुरलनाललामयूथपतय उपदेवगणेरुपगीयमानमहिमानः
किर विहरन्ति ।॥। १५॥
yesv amara-parivrdhah saha sura-lalana-lalama-yutha-pataya
upadeva-ganair upagiyamana-mahimanah kila viharanti.

yesu—in which; amara-parivrdhah—the best of the demigods;
saha—with; sura-lalana—of the wives of all the demigods and semi-
demigods; lalama—of those women who are like ornaments; yitha-
patayah—the husbands; upadeva-ganaih—by the semi-demigods (the
Gandharvas); upagiyamana—being chanted; manimanah—whose
glories; kila—indeed; viharanti—they enjoy sports.

TRANSLATION

The best of the demigods, along with their wives, who are like

ornaments of heavenly beauty, meet together and enjoy within


--- Page 111 ---
Text 17] A Description of Jambudvipa 105
those gardens, while their glories are sung by lesser demigods
known as Gandharvas.
TEXT 16
मन्दरोत्सङ्ग एकाद श्चशतयोजनोनुङ्गदेवचूतरिरसो गिरिशिखरस्थूलानि
FETE पतन्ति ॥१६॥
mandarotsanga ekadasa-sata-yojanottunga-devacita-siraso giri-
Sikhara-sthalani phalany amrta-kalpani patanti.
mandara-utsarige—on the lower slopes of Mandara Mountain;
ekadosa-sata-yojana-utturiga—1.100 yojanas high; devacita-sirasah—
from the top of a mango tree named Devaciita; giri-sikhara-sthilani—
which are as fat as mountain peaks; phalani—fruit; amrta-kalpani—as
sweet as nectar; patanti—fall down.
TRANSLATION
On the lower slopes of Mandara Mountain is a mango tree named
Devacita. It is 1,100 yojanas high. Mangoes as big as mountain
peaks and as sweet as nectar fall from the top of this tree for the
enjoyment of the denizens of heaven.
PURPORT
In the Vayu Purana there is also a reference to this tree by great
learned sages:
aratninam Satany astav
eka-sasty-adhikani ca
phala-pramanam akhyatam
rsibhis tattva-darsibhir
TEXT 17
9 "২ ( ~ - -
तेषां विशीयेमाणानामतिमघुरसुरमिखुगन्धि बहुलारुणरसोदेनारुणोदा नाम नदी
मन्दरगिरिशिखराननिपतन्ती पूर्वेणेखाटृतमुपश्ावयति ॥ १७॥


--- Page 112 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
tesa visiryamananam ati-madhura-surabhi-sugandhi-bahularuna-
rasodenarunodd nama nadi mandara-giri-sikharan nipatanti pir-
venelavrtam upaplavayati.

tesam—of all the mangoes; visiryamananam—being broken because
of falling from the top; ati-madhura—very sweet; surabhi—fragrant;
sugandhi—scented with other aromas; bahula—large quantities; aruna-
rasa-udena—by reddish juice; arunoda—Arunoda; nama—named;
nadi—the river; mandara-giri-Sikharat—from the top of Mandara
Mountain; nipatanti—falling down; piérvena—on the eastern side; il-
avrtam —through llavrta-varsa; upaplavayati—flows.

TRANSLATION

When all those solid fruits fall from such a height, they break,
and the sweet, fragrant juice within them flows out and becomes
increasingly more fragrant as it mixes with other scents. That juice
cascades from the mountain in waterfalls and becomes a river
called Arunoda, which flows pleasantly through the eastern side of
Ilavrta.

TEXT 18
. &

यदुपजोषणाद्धवान्या अचुचरीणां पुण्यजनवधूनामवयवस्पशेसुगन्धवातो
TIA समन्तादलुवासयति 112 <1
yad-upajosanad bhavanya anucarinarm punya-jana-vadhiinam
avayava-sparsa-sugandha-vato dasa-yojanam samantad anuvdasayati.

yat—of which; upajosanat—because of using the fragrant water:
bhavanyah—of Bhavani, the wife of Lord Siva; anucarinam—of atten-
dant maidservants; punya-jana-vadhiinam—who are wives of the most
pious Yaksas; avayava—of the bodily limbs: sparsa—from contact;
sugandha-vatah—the wind, which becomes fragrant: dasa-yojanam—
up to ten yojanas (about eighty miles); samantat—all around:
anuvasayati—makes fragrant.


--- Page 113 ---
Text 19] A Description of Jambudvipa 107
TRANSLATION

The pious wives of the Yaksas act as personal maidservants to
assist Bhavani, the wife of Lord Siva. Because they drink the water
of the River Arunoda, their bodies become fragrant, and as the air
carries away that fragrance, it perfumes the entire atmosphere for
eighty miles around.

TEXT 19
एवं SRST (Ta RE TAA A TA TORAH ATT रसेन
~ - -

जम्ब नाम नदी मेरुमन्दर्चिखरादयुतयोजनाद वनितखे नि पतन्ती दक्षिणेना
त्मानं यावदिलादरतश्पस्यन्द यति 12a
evar jambi-phalanam atyucca-nipata-visirnanam anasthi-prayanam
ibha-kaya-nibhanar rasena 07716 nama nadi meru-mandara-sikharad
ayuta-yojandd avani-tale nipatanti daksinendatmanam yavad ilavrtam
upasyandayati.

evam—similarly: jambi-phalanam—of the fruits called jamba (the
rose apple): ati-ucca-nipata—because of falling from a great height:
visirnanam —which are broken to pieces: anasthi-prayanam—having
very small seeds: ibha-kaya-nibhanam—and which are as large as the
bodies of elephants; rasena—by the juice; jambi nama nadi—a river
named Jambi-nadi; meru-mandara-sikharat—from the top of Meru-
mandara Mountain; ayuta-yojanat—ten thousand yojanas high: avani-
tale—on the ground; nipatanti—falling: daksinena—on the southern
side; atmanam—itself; yavat—the whole: ilavrtam—Illavria-varsa:
upasyandayati—Hfows through.

TRANSLATION

Similarly, the fruits of the jambu tree, which are full of pulp
and have very small seeds, fall from a great height and break to
pieces. Those fruits are the size of elephants, and the juice gliding
from them becomes a river named Jambii-nadi. This river falls a
distance of 10,000 yojanas, from the summit of Merumandara to


--- Page 114 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
the southern side of Ilavrta, and floods the entire land of Ilavrta
with juice.
PURPORT

We can only imagine how much juice there might be in a fruit that is
the size of an elephant but has a very tiny seed. Naturally the juice from
the broken jambi fruits forms waterfalls and floods the entire land of II-
avrta. That juice produces an immense quantity of gold, as will be ex-
plained in the next verses.

TEXTS 20-21
= ~ अ)
तावदुभयोरपि रोधसोथा TAH तद्रसेनाजुविष्यमाना वास्थक॑संयोगविपाकेन
= ५ . त
सदामरटङाकामरण जाम्बूनद नाम सुवण भवति |।২০॥ यदुहवाव विबुधा-
©

दयः सह युवतिमि्ङटकटककटिख्त्रा्याभरणरूपेण खल धारयन्ति ॥२१॥
tavad ubhayor api rodhasor ya mrttika tad-rasenanuvidhyamana vayv-
arka-sarivyoga-vipakena sadamara-lokabharanari jambi-nadar nama
suvarnari bhavati. yad u ha vava vibudhadayah saha yuvatibhir
mukuta-kataka-kati-sitrady-abharana-ripena khalu dharayant.

tavat—entirely; ubhayoh api—of both; rodhasoh—of the banks;
ya—which; mrttika —the mud; tat-rasena—with the juice of the jamb
fruits that flows in the river; anuvidhyamana —being saturated; vayu-
arka-sammyoga-vipakena—because of a chemical reaction with the air
and sunshine; sada—always; amara-loka-abharanam—which is used
for the ornaments of the demigods, the denizens of the heavenly planets;
jambii-nadam nama —named Jambii-nada; suvarnam—gold; bhavati —
becomes; yat—which; u ha vava—indeed; vibudha-adayah—the great
demigods; saha—with; yuvatibhih—their everlastingly youthful wives;
mukuta—crowns; kataka—bangles; kati-sitra—belts; adi—and so on;
abharana—of all kinds of ornaments; rizpena—in the form; khalu—in-
deed; dharayanti—they possess.

TRANSLATION

The mud on both banks of the River Jambii-nadi, being

moistened by the flowing juice and then dried by the air and the


--- Page 115 ---
Text 21] A Description of Jambidvipa 109
sunshine, produces huge quantities of gold called Jambii-nada.
The denizens of heaven use this gold for various kinds of orna-
ments. Therefore all the inhabitants of the heavenly planets and
their youthful wives are fully decorated with golden helmets,
bangles and belts, and thus they enjoy life.
PURPORT

By the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the rivers
on some planets produce gold on their banks. The poor inhabitants of
this earth, because of their incomplete knowledge, are captivated by a so-
called bhagavan who can produce a small quantity of gold. However, it is
understood that in a higher planetary system in this material world, the
mud on the banks of the Jambii-nadi mixes with jamb juice, reacts with
the sunshine in the air, and automatically produces huge quantities of
gold. Thus the men and women are decorated there by various golden or-
naments, and they look very nice. Unfortunately, on earth there is such a
scarcity of gold that the governments of the world try to keep it in
reserve and issue paper currency. Because that currency is not backed
up by gold, the paper they distribute as money is worthless. but
nevertheless the people on earth are very proud of material advance-
ment. In modern times, girls and ladies have ornaments made of plastic
instead of gold, and plastic utensils are used instead of golden ones. yet
people are very proud of their material wealth. Therefore the people of
this age are described as mandah sumanda-matayo manda-bhagya hy
upadrutah (Bhag. 1.1.10). In other words, they are extremely bad and
slow to understand the opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
They have been described as sumanda-matayah because their concep-
tions are so crippled that they accept a bluffer who produces a little gold
to be God. Because they have no gold in their possession, they are ac-
tually poverty-stricken, and therefore they are considered unfortunate.

Sometimes these unfortunate people want to be promoted to the
heavenly planets to achieve fortunate positions, as described in this
verse, but pure devotees of the Lord are not at all interested in such
opulence. Indeed, deyotees sometimes compare the color of gold to that of
bright golden stool. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has instructed devotees not
to be allured by golden ornaments and beautifully decorated women. Na
dhanar na janarh na sundarim: a devotee should not be allured by gold.


--- Page 116 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
beautiful women or the prestige of having many followers. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, therefore, confidentially prayed, mama janmani jan-
manisvare bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi: “My Lord, please bless Me
with Your devotional service. I do not want anything else.” A devotee
may pray to be delivered from this material world. That is his only
aspiration.
ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
patitari mam visame bhavambudhau
krpaya tava pada-parikaja-
sthita-dhiili-sadrsam vicintaya
The humble devotee simply prays to the Lord, “Kindly pick me up from
the material world, which is full of varieties of material opulence, and
keep me under the shelter of Your lotus feet.”
Srila Narottama dasa Thakura prays:
ha ha prabhu nanda-suta, vrsabhanu-suta-yuta,
karuna karaha ei-bara
narottama-dasa kaya, na theliha ranga-paya,
toma vine ke ache amara
"0 my Lord, O son of Nanda Maharaja, now You are standing before me
with Your consort, the daughter of Vrsabhanu, Srimati Radharani.
Kindly accept me as the dust of Your lotus feet. Please do not kick me
away, for 1 have no other shelter.”

Similarly, Prabodhananda Sarasvati indicates that the position of the
demigods, who are decorated with golden helmets and other ornaments,
is no better than a phantasmagoria (tri-dasa-pir akasa-puspayate). A
devotee is never allured by such opulences. He simply aspires to become
the dust of the lotus feet of the Lord.

TEXT 22
९ =
यस्तु महाकदम्बः सुपाश्वनिरूढो यास्तसख कोटरेभ्यो विनिःसृताः पच्चाया-
& = = ~
मपरिणाहाः पञ्च मधुधाराः सुपाश्वंशशिखरात्पतन्त्योऽपरेणात्मानमिलाव्रतमलमोद -
यन्ति॥२२॥


--- Page 117 ---
Text 23] A Description of Jambudvipa 111

yas tu maha-kadamba {2 suparsva-niridho yas tasya kotarebhyo
vinihsrta h panicayama-parinahah 47८८. madhu-dharah suparsva-
Sikharat patantyo ‘parenatmanam ilavrtam anumodayanti.

yah—which; tu—but; maha-kadambah—the tree named
Mahakadamba; suparsva-niridhah—which stands on the side of the
mountain known as Suparsva; yah—which; tasya—of that:
kotarebhyah —from the hollows; wvinihsrtah—flowing: parica—five;
ayama—vyama, a unit of measurement of about eight feet:
parinahah—whose measurement; pafica—five; madhu-dharah—flows
of honey; suparsva-sikharat—from the top of Suparéva Mountain;
patantyah—flowing down; aparena—on the western side of Sumeru
Mountain; @tmanam—the whole of; ilavrtam —Ilavrta-varsa:
anumodayanti—make fragrant.

TRANSLATION

On the side of Suparéva Mountain stands a big tree called
Mahakadamba, which is very celebrated. From the hollows of this
tree flow five rivers of honey, each about five vyamas wide. This
flowing honey falls incessantly from the top of Suparsva Mountain
and flows all around Ilavrta-varsa, beginning from the western
side. Thus the whole land is saturated with the pleasing fragrance.

PURPORT

The distance between one hand and another when one spreads both his
arms is called a vyama. This comes to about eight feet. Thus each of the
rivers was about forty feet wide, making a total of about two hundred
feet.

TEXT 23

या FIFA मुखनिर्वासितो वायुः समन्ताच्छतयोजनमनुवासयति 112301
ya hy upayunjananam mukha-nirvasito vayuh samantac chata-yojanam
anuvasayati.

yah—which (those flows of honey); hi—indeed; upayunjananam—
of those who drink; mukha-nirvasitah vayuh—the air emanating from


--- Page 118 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
the mouths: samantat—all around; Sata-yojanam—up to one hundred
yojanas (eight hundred miles); anuvasayati—makes sweetly flavored.
TRANSLATION
The air carrying the scent from the mouths of those who drink
that honey perfumes the land for a hundred yojanas around.
TEXT 24
ও = _ ক -
एव EAE (| यः शतवल्शो नाम वटस्तसख स्कन्धेभ्यो
= 6
नीचीनाः पयादाधमधुष्तयुडान्नाद्यम्बरशस्यास्नाभरणादयः सव एव
कामदुघा नदाः इदा ग्रार्पतन्तस्तम्रत्तरेणेखावरतप्रुपयोजयन्ति ।२४॥
evar kumuda-niridho yah ०८९८1७० nama vatas tasya skandhebhyo
nicinah payo-dadhi-madhu-ghrta-gudannady-ambara-
Sayyasanabharanadayah sarva eva kama-dugha nadah kumudagrat
patantas tam uttarenelavrtam upayojayanti.
evam—thus; kumuda-nirighah—having grown on Kumuda Moun-
tain; yah—that; sata-valSah nama—the tree named Sataval$a (because
of having hundreds of trunks); vatah—a banyan tree; tasya—of it;
skandhebhyah—from the thick branches: nicinah—flowing down;
payah —milk; dadhi—yogurt; madhu—honey: ghrta—clarified butter;
guda—molasses; anna—food grains; adi—and so on: ambara—
clothing; Sayya—bedding; asana—sitting places; abharana-adayah—
carrying ornaments and so on; sarve—everything: eva—certainly:
kama-dughah—fulfilling all desires; nadah—big rivers; kumuda-
agrat—from the top of Kumuda Mountain; patantah—flowing; tam —to
that; uttarena—on the northern side; ilavrtam—the land known as Il-
avrta-varsa; upayojayanti—give happiness.
TRANSLATION
Similarly, on Kumuda Mountain there is a great banyan tree,
which is called Sataval$a because it has a hundred main branches.
From those branches come many roots, from which many rivers
are flowing. These rivers flow down from the top of the mountain


--- Page 119 ---
Text 25] A Description of Jambuadvipa 113
to the northern side of Ilavrta-varsa for the benefit of those who
live there. Because of these flowing rivers, all the people have
ample supplies of milk, yogurt, honey, clarified butter [ghee],
molasses, food grains, clothes, bedding, sitting places and orna-
ments. All the objects they desire are sufficiently supplied for their
prosperity, and therefore they are very happy.
PURPORT
The prosperity of humanity does not depend on a demoniac civilization
that has no culture and no knowledge but has only gigantic skyscrapers
and huge automobiles always rushing down the highways. The products
of nature are sufficient. When there is a profuse supply of milk, yogurt,
honey, food grains, ghee, molasses, dhotis, saris, bedding, sitting places
and ornaments, the residents are actually opulent. When a profuse sup-
ply of water from the river inundates the land, all these things can be
produced, and there will not be scarcity. This all depends, however, on
the performance of sacrifice as described in the Vedic literature.
annad bhavanti bhitani
parjanyad anna-sambhavah
yajaad bhavati parjanyo

yajiah karma-samudbhavah
“All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains.
Rains are produced by performance of yajiia [sacrifice]. and yajria is
born of prescribed duties.” These are the prescriptions given in
Bhagavad-gita (3.14). If people follow these principles in full Krsna
consciousness, human society will be prosperous, and they will be happy
both in this life and in the next.

TEXT 25
. ४ 6
यानुपजुषाणानां न कदाचिदपि प्रजानां बरीपलितङ्कमस्वेददौगन्ध्यजरामय-
EY + N

FAR TEETER भवन्ति यावजीवं सुखं निरतिशयमेव
॥ৰ २५ ॥


--- Page 120 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
yan upajusananam na kadacid api prajanar vali-palita-klama-sveda-
daurgandhya-jaramaya-mrtyu-sitosna-vaivarnyopasargadayas tapa-
visesa bhavanti yavaj jivarn sukhari niratisayam eva.

yan—which (all the products produced because of the flowing rivers
mentioned above); upajusananam—of persons who are fully utilizing;
na—not; kadacit—at any time; api—certainly; prajanam—of the
citizens; vali—wrinkles; palita—grey hair; klama—fatigue; sveda—
perspiration; daurgandhya—bad odors because of unclean perspiration;
Jara—old age; amaya—disease; mrtyu—untimely death; 520 —severe
cold; usnpa—scorching heat; vaivarnya—fading of the luster of the
body; upasarga—troubles; adayah—and so on; tapa—of sufferings;
visesah—varieties; bhavanti—are; yavat—as long as; jivam—life;
sukham —happiness; niratisayam—unlimited; eva—only.

TRANSLATION

The residents of the material world who enjoy the products of
these flowing rivers have no wrinkles on their bodies and no grey
hair. They never feel fatigue, and perspiration does not give their
bodies a bad odor. They are not afflicted by old age, disease or un-
timely death, they do not suffer from chilly cold or scorching heat,
nor do their bodies lose their luster. They all live very happily,
without anxieties, until death.

PURPORT

This verse hints at the perfection of human society even within this
material world. The miserable conditions of this material world can be
corrected by a sufficient supply of milk, yogurt, honey, ghee, molasses,
food grains, ornaments, bedding, sitting places and so on. This is human
civilization. Ample food grains can be produced through agricultural en-
terprises, and profuse supplies of milk, yogurt and ghee can be arranged
through cow protection. Abundant honey can be obtained if the forests
are protected. Unfortunately, in modern civilization, men are busy kill-
ing the cows that are the source of yogurt, milk and ghee, they are cut-
ting down all the trees that supply honey, and they are opening factories
to manufacture nuts, bolts, automobiles and wine instead of engaging in


--- Page 121 ---
Text 26] A Description of Jambudvipa 115
agriculture. How can the people be happy? They must suffer from all the
misery of materialism. Their bodies become wrinkled and gradually
deteriorate until they become almost like dwarves, and a bad odor ema-
nates from their bodies because of unclean perspiration resulting from
eating all kinds of nasty things.. This is not human civilization. If people
actually want happiness in this life and want to prepare for the best in
the next life, they must adopt a Vedic civilization. In a Vedic civilization,
there is a full supply of all the necessities mentioned above.
TEXT 26
a
" „ इरङ्गङररङ्सम्भवेकङ्त्रि TE A TRE AT AER ETE
J ५ - ~ - -

वेदूयजारुधिहंसषेभनागकालञ्जरनारदादयो Gaffe मेरोः कर्णिकाया
इव॒ केसरभूता मूरदेशे परित Sugar ॥ २६ ॥

kuranga-kurara-kusumbha-vaikanka-trikiata-sisira-patanga-rucaka-
nisadha-$inivasa-kapila-sankha-vaidirya-jarudhi-hamsa-rsabha-naga-
kalafijara-naradadayo vimsati-girayo meroh karnikaya iva kesara-
bhita mila-dese parita upaklptah.

kuranga—Kuranga: kurara—Kurara: kusumbha-vaikarka-trikita-
Sisira-patanga-rucaka-nisadha-sinivasa-kapila-sankha-vaidirya-
Jarudhi-harsa-rsabha-naga-kalafijara-narada—the names of moun-
tains; adayah—and so on: vimsati-girayah—twenty mountains;
meroh—of Sumeru Mountain; karnikayah—of the whorl of the lotus:
iva—like; kesara-bhiitah—as filaments: miila-dese—at the base:
paritah—all around: upaklptah—arranged by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

There are other mountains beautifully arranged around the foot
of Mount Meru like the filaments around the whorl of a lotus
flower. Their names are Kuranga, Kurara, Kusumbha, Vaikanka,
Trikata, ज, Patanga, Rucaka, Nisadha, Sinivasa, Kapila,
Sanikha, Vaidirya, Jarudhi, Harhsa, Rsabha, Naga, Kalaijara and
Narada.


--- Page 122 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.16
TEXT 27
जठरदेवकूटौ AE पूर्वेणा्टादशयोजनसहस्रघदगयतौ दिसदस्रं॑एथुतङ्गौ
मवतः । एवमपरेण पवनपारियात्रौ दक्षिणेन कैलासकरवीरौ प्रागाय-
तावेवयुत्तरत लिश्रङ्गमकरावष्टभिरेतैः परिस्तोऽभ्रिरिव परितशथ्कास्तिकाश्चन -
गिरिः ॥२७॥
Jjathara-devakiitau merum purvenastadasa-yojana-sahasram
udagayatau dvi-sahasram prthu-turigau bhavatah. evam aparena
pavana-pariyatrau daksinena kailasa-karavirau prag-ayatav evam
uttaratas trisrnga-makarav astabhir etaih parisrto ‘gnir iva paritas
cakasti kancana-girih.

Jjathara-devakitau—two mountains named Jathara and Devakita;
merum—Sumeru Mountain; péirvena—on the eastern side; astadasa-yo-
Jjana-sahasram—eighteen thousand yojanas; udgayatau—stretching
from north to south; dvi-sahasram—two thousand yojanas; prthu-
turigau—in width and height; bhavatah—there are; evam—similarly;
aparena—on the western side; pavana-pdariyatrau—two mountains
named Pavana and Pariyatra; daksinena—on the southern side; kailasa-
karavirau—two mountains named Kailasa and Karavira; prak-ayatau—
expanding east and west; evam—similarly; uttaratah—on the northern
side; triSrriga-makarau—two mountains named Trisriga and Makara:
astabhih etaih—by these eight mountains; parisrtah—surrounded; ag-
nih iwa—like fire; paritah—all over; cakasti—brilliantly shines;
kanicana-girih—the golden mountain named Sumeru, or Meru.

TRANSLATION

On the eastern side of Sumeru Mountain are two mountains
named Jathara and Devakiita, which extend to the north and south
for 18,000 yojanas [144,000 miles]. Similarly, on the western side
of Sumeru are two mountains named Pavana and Pariyatra, which
also extend north and south for the same distance. On the
southern side of Sumeru are two mountains named Kailasa and
Karavira, which extend east and west for 18,000 yojanas, and on
the northern side of Sumeru, extending for the same distance east
and west, are two mountains named TriSrnga and Makara. The


--- Page 123 ---
Text 29] A Description of Jambiudvipa 117
width and height of all these mountains is 2,000 yojanas [16,000
miles]. Sumeru, a mountain of solid gold shining as brilliantly as
fire, is surrounded by these eight mountains.
TEXT 28
ध = 0 s त्‌
मेरोमूर्धनि भगवत आत्मयोनेर्मध्यत उपक्परां पुरीमयुतयोजनसाहसी
समचतुरखां TAREE वदन्ति ॥ २८ ॥
meror miirdhani bhagavata atma-yoner madhyata upaklptari purim
ayuta-yojana-sahasrim sama-caturasram $atakaumbhim vadanti.
meroh—of Sumeru Mountain; mirdhani—on the head;
bhagavatah—of the most powerful being; atma-yoneh—of Lord
Brahma; madhyatah—in the middle: upaklptam —situated; purim—the
great township: ayuta-yojana—ten thousand yojanas; sahasrim—one
thousand; sama-caturasram—of the same length on all sides: Sata-
kaumbhim—made entirely of gold; vadanti—the great learned sages
say.
TRANSLATION
In the middle of the summit of Meru is the township of Lord
Brahma. Each of its four sides is calculated to extend for ten
million yojanas [eighty million miles]. It is made entirely of gold,
and therefore learned scholars and sages call it Satakaumbhi.
TEXT 29
तापरजुपरितो रोकपालानामष्टानां यथादिशं यथारूपं तुरीयमानेन पुरोऽष्टा-
बुपक्टप्ताः RAN
tam anuparito loka-pdalanam astanarn yatha-disarn yatha-ripari
turiya-manena puro {2४ upaklptah.
tam—that great township named Brahmapuri; anuparitah—sur-
rounding; loka-palanam—of the governors of the planets: astanam—
eight; yatha-disam—according to the directions; yatha-ripam—in


--- Page 124 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 16
exact conformity with the township of Brahmapuri; turiya-manena—
by measurement only one fourth; purah—townships; astau—eight;
upaklptah —situated.
TRANSLATION
Surrounding Brahmapuri in all directions are the residences of
the eight principal governors of the planetary systems, beginning
with King Indra. These abodes are similar to Brahmapuri but are
one fourth the size.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura confirms that the townships of
Lord Brahma and the eight subordinate governors of the planetary
systems, beginning with Indra, are mentioned in other Puranas.
merau nava-pérani syur
manovaty amaravati
tejovati sarityamani
tatha krsnanganda para
sraddhavati gandhavati
tatha canya mahodaya
yasovati ca brahmendra
bahyadinarm yatha-kramam
Brahma’s township is known as Manovati, and those of his assistants
such as Indra and Agni are known as Amaravati, Tejovati, Sarnyamani,
Krsnangana, Sraddhavati, Gandhavati, Mahodaya and Yasovati.
Brahmapuri is situated in the middle, and the other eight puris surround
it in all directions.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Sixteenth
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, “A Description of
Jambudvipa.”


--- Page 125 ---
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

The Descent of the River Ganges
The Seventeenth Chapter describes the origin of the Ganges River and
how it flows in and around llavrta-varsa. There is also a description of
the prayers Lord Siva offers to Lord Sankarsana, part of the quadruple
expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Visnu once ap-
proached Bali Maharaja while the King was performing a sacrifice. The
Lord appeared before him as Trivikrama, or Vamana, and begged alms
from the King in the form of three steps of land. With two steps, Lord
Vamana covered all three planetary systems and pierced the covering of
the universe with the toes of His left foot. A few drops of water from the
Causal Ocean leaked through this hole and fell on the head of Lord Siva,
where they remained for one thousand millenniums. These drops of
water are the sacred Ganges River. It first flows onto the heavenly
planets, which are located on the soles of Lord Visnu's feet. The Ganges
River is known by many names, such as the Bhagirathi and the Jahnavi.
It purifies Dhruvaloka and the planets of the seven sages because both
Dhruva and the sages have no other desire than to serve the Lord's lotus
feet.

The Ganges River, emanating from the lotus feet of the Lord, inun-
dates the heavenly planets, especially the moon, and then flows through
Brahmapuri atop Mount Meru. Here the river divides into four branches
(known as Sita, Alakananda, Caksu and Bhadra), which then flow down
to the ocean of salt water. The branch known as Sita flows through
Sekhara-parvata and Gandhamadana-parvata and then flows down to
Bhadrasva-varsa, where it mixes with the ocean of salt water in the West.
The Caksu branch flows through Malyavan-giri and, after reaching
Ketumala-varsa, mixes with the ocean of salt water in the West. The
branch known as Bhadra flows onto Mount Meru. Mount Kumuda. and
the Nila, Sveta and Srngavan mountains before it reaches Kuru-desa.
where it flows into the ocean of salt water in the north. The Alakananda
branch flows through Brahmalaya, crosses over many mountains. includ-
ing Hemakata and Himakdta, and then reaches Bharata-varsa. where it

119


--- Page 126 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
flows into the southern side of the ocean of salt water. Many other rivers
and their branches flow through the nine varsas.

The tract of land known as Bharata-varsa is the field of activities, and
the other eight varsas are for persons who are meant to enjoy heavenly
comfort. In each of these eight beautiful provinces, the celestial denizens
enjoy various standards of material comfort and pleasure. A different in-
carnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead distributes His mercy
in each of the nine varsas of Jambudvipa.

In the [lavrta-varsa. Lord Siva is the only male. There he lives with his
wife, Bhavani, who is attended by many maidservants. If any other male
enters that province, Bhavani curses him to become a woman. Lord Siva
worships Lord Sankarsana by offering various prayers, one of which is as
follows: **My dear Lord, please liberate all Your devotees from material
life and bind all the nondevotees to the material world. Without Your
mercy, no one can be released from the bondage of material existence.”

TEXT 1
HF उवाच
तत्र मगवतः साक्षाद्यज्ञरिङ्गस्य विष्णोर्विक्रमतो वामपादाङ्खष्टनखनि्भिनो-
्वाण्डकटाहविवरेणान्तःभ्रविष्टा या बाद्यजरधारा ROAR -
रुणकिस्नर्कोपरञ्चिताखिखजगदषमलापहोपस्परनामला साक्षाद्धगवत्पदीत्य
जुषलक्षितवचोऽभिधीयमानातिमहता कठेन युगसदस्लोपलक्षणेन दिवो

९

मूषेन्यवततार यत्तदिष्णुपद माहुः ।॥।१॥
sri-Suka uvaca

tatra bhagavatah saksad yajia-lingasya visnor vikramato vama-
padangustha-nakha-nirbhinnordhvanda-kataha-vivarenantah-pravista
ya bahya-jala-dhara tac-carana-parikajavanejanaruna-
kinjalkoparanjitakhila-jagad-agha-malapahopasparsanamala saksad
bhagavat-padity anupalaksita-vaco ‘bhidhiyamanati-mahata kalena
yuga-sahasropalaksanena divo mirdhany avatatara yat tad visnu-
padam ahuh.


--- Page 127 ---
Text 1] The Descent of the River Ganges 121

sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: tatra—at that time:
bhagavatah—of the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
saksat—directly; yajiia-lingasya—the enjoyer of the results of all
sacrifices: visnoh—of Lord Visnu; vikramatah—while taking His second
step; vama-pada—of His left leg; arigustha—of the big toe: nakha—by
the nail; nirbhinna—pierced; d@rdhva—upper; anda-kataha—the
covering of the universe (consisting of seven layers —earth, water. fire.
etc.); vivarena—through the hole; antah-pravista—having entered the
universe; ya—which; bahya-jala-dhara—the flow of water from the
Causal Ocean outside the universe; tat—of Him: carana-parkaja—of
the lotus feet; avanejana—by the washing; aruna-kinjalka—by reddish
powder; uparafjita—being colored: akhila-jagat—of the whole world:
agha-mala—the sinful activities: apaha—destroys: upasparsana—the
touching of which; amala—completely pure; saksat—directly:
bhagavat-padi—emanating from the lotus feet of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; iti—thus; anupalaksita—described; vacah —by the
name; abhidhiyamana—being called; ati-mahata kalena—after a long
time; yuga-sahasra-upalaksanena—consisting of one thousand millen-
niums; divah—of the sky: mirdhani—on the head (Dhruvaloka):
avatatara—descended; yat—which; tat—that; visnu-padam—the lotus
feet of Lord Visnu; ahuh—they call.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, Lord Visnu, the enjoyer
of all sacrifices, appeared as Vamanadeva in the sacrificial arena of
Bali Maharaja. Then He extended His left foot to the end of the
universe and pierced a hole in its covering with the nail of His big
toe. Through the hole, the pure water of the Causal Ocean entered
this universe as the Ganges River. Having washed the lotus feet of
the Lord, which are covered with reddish powder, the water of the
Ganges acquired a very beautiful pink color. Every living being
can immediately purify his mind of material contamination by
touching the transcendental water of the Ganges, yet its waters
remain ever pure. Because the Ganges directly touches the lotus
feet of the Lord before descending within this universe, she is
known as Visnupadi. Later she received other names like Jahnavi


--- Page 128 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
and Bhagirathi. After one thousand millenniums, the water of the
Ganges descended on Dhruvaloka, the topmost planet in this
universe. Therefore all learned sages and scholars proclaim
Dhruvaloka to be Visnupada [*“‘situated on Lord Visnu’s lotus
feet].
PURPORT

In this verse, Sukadeva Gosvami describes the glories of the Ganges
River. The water of the Ganges is called patita-pavani, the deliverer of
all sinful living beings. It is a proven fact that a person who regularly
bathes in the Ganges is purified both externally and internally. Exter-
nally his body becomes immune to all kinds of disease, and internally he
gradually develops a devotional attitude toward the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Throughout India, many thousands of people live on the
banks of the Ganges, and by regularly bathing in her waters, they are
undoubtedly being purified both spiritually and materially. Many sages,
including Sankaracarya, have composed prayers in praise of the Ganges,
and the land of India itself has become glorious because such rivers as
the Ganges, Yamuna, Godavari, Kaveri, Krsna and Narmada flow there.
Anyone living on the land adjacent to these rivers is naturally advanced
in spiritual consciousness. Srila Madhvacarya says:

varahe vama-padam tu
tad-anyesu tu daksinam
padam kalpesu bhagavan
ujjahara trivikramah
Standing on His right foot and extending His left to the edge of the
universe, Lord Vamana became known as Trivikrama, the incarnation
who performed three heroic deeds.
TEXT 2
यत्रं ह বান वीरव्रत ओत्तानपादिः परममागवतोऽखल््कलदेवताचरणारविन्दो-
+ S|

दकमिति यामनुसवनयुत्कृष्यमाणभगवद्धक्तियोगेन ददं छ्िधमानान्तदहदय
ओत्कण्ठ्यविवशामीलितलो चनयुगलङ्कड मल विगलिता मलबाप्पकलयाभिव्यज्य-
मानरोमपुलकङ्कलकोऽधुनापि परमादरेण शिरसा भिमर्तिं nn


--- Page 129 ---
Text 2] The Descent of the River Ganges 123
yatra ha vava vira-vrata auttanapadih parama-bhagavato ’smat-kula-
devata-caranaravindodakam iti yam anusavanam utkrsyamana-
bhagavad-bhakti-yogena drdharn klidyamanantar-hrdaya autkanthya-
vivasamilita-locana-yugala-kudmala-vigalitamala-baspa-
kalayabhivyajyamana-roma-pulaka-kulako 10818700708 paramadarena
Sirasa bibharti.

yatra ha vava—in Dhruvaloka: vira-vratah— firmly determined: aut-
tanapadih—the famous son of Maharaja Uttanapada: parama-
bhagavatah—the most exalted devotee: asmat—our: kula-devata—of
the family Deity: carana-aravinda—of the lotus feet: udakam—in the
water; iti—thus:; yam —which: anusavanam—constantly:
utkrsyamana—being increased; bhagavat-bhakti-yogena—by devo-
tional service unto the Lord: drdham—greatly: klidyamana-antah-
hrdayah—being softened within the core of his heart: autkanthya—by
great anxiety: vivasa—spontaneously: amilita—slightly open: locana—
of eyes: yugala—pair; kudmala—from the flowerlike: wvigalita—
emanating: amala—uncontaminated: baspa-kalaya—with tears:
abhivyajyamana—being manifested: roma-pulaka-kulakah—whose
symptoms of ecstasy on the body: adhuna api—even now: parama-
adarena—with great reverence: Sirasa—by the head: bibharti—he
bears.

TRANSLATION

Dhruva Maharaja, the famous son of Maharaja Uttanapada, is
known as the most exalted devotee of the Supreme Lord because of
his firm determination in executing devotional service. Knowing
that the sacred Ganges water washes the lotus feet of Lord Visnu,
Dhruva Maharaja, situated on his own planet, to this very day ac-
cepts that water on his head with great devotion. Because he cons-
tantly thinks of Krsna very devoutly within the core of his heart,
he is overcome with ecstatic anxiety. Tears flow from his half-open
eyes, and eruptions appear on his entire body.

PURPORT

When a person is firmly fixed in devotional service to the Supreme

Personality of Godhead. he is described as vira-vrata, fully determined.


--- Page 130 ---
124. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
Such a devotee increases his ecstasy in devotional service more and more.
Thus as soon as he remembers Lord Visnu. his eyes fill with tears. This is
a symptom of a maha-bhagavata. Dhruva Maharija maintained himself
in that devotional ecstasy. and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also gave us a
practical example of transcendental ecstasy when He lived at Jagannatha
Puri. His pastimes there are fully narrated in Caitanya-caritamrta.
TEXT 3
ततः सप्र ऋषयस्ततप्रभावामिज्ञा यां नयु तपसञआत्य
न्तिकी सिद्धिरेतावती भगवति सर्वात्मनि वापुदेवेऽनुपरतम क्ति-
= ~ - +
योगलाभेनेबोपकषितान्यार्थात्मगतयो क्ति मिवागतां रक्ष॒ इव
जर

सबहुमानमद्यापि जटाजूटे रुढहन्ति ॥२॥

tatah sapta rsayas tat prabhavabhijria yam nanu tapasa atyantiki
siddhir etavati bhagavati sarvatmani vasudeve ‘nuparata-bhakti-yoga-
labhenaivopeksitanyarthatma-gatayo muktim ivagatam mumuksava iva
sabahu-manam adyapi jata-jitair udvahanti.

tatah—thereafter; sapta rsayah—the seven great sages (beginning
with Marici): tat prabhava-abhijiah—who knew very well the influence
of the Ganges River: ydm—this Ganges water: nanu—indeed:
tapasah—of our austerities: atyantiki—the ultimate; siddhih—perfec-
tion: etavati—this much: bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: sarva-atmani—in the all-pervading: vasudeve—Krsna;
anuparata—continuous: bhakti-yoga—of the mystic process of devo-
tional service: labhena—simply by achieving this platform: eva —cer-
tainly; upeksita—neglected: anya—other: artha-atma-gatayah—all
other means of perfection (namely religion, economic development,
sense gratification and liberation): muktim—liberation from material
bondage: iva—like; agatam—obtained: mumuksavah—persons desir-
ing liberation: iva—like: sa-bahu-manam—with great honor: adya
api—even now; jata-jutaih—with matted locks of hair: udvahanti—
they carry.


--- Page 131 ---
Text 3] The Descent of the River Ganges 125
भै
TRANSLATION
The seven great sages [Marici, Vasistha, Atri and so on] reside on
planets beneath Dhruvaloka. Well aware of the influence of the
water of the Ganges, to this day they keep Ganges water on the
tufts of hair on their heads. They have concluded that this is the
ultimate wealth, the perfection of all austerities, and the best
means of prosecuting transcendental life. Having obtained unin-
terrupted devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they neglect all other beneficial processes like religion,
economic development, sense gratification and even merging into
the Supreme. Just as jiianis think that merging into the existence
of the Lord is the highest truth, these seven exalted personalities
accept devotional service as the perfection of life.
PURPORT
Transcendentalists are divided into two primary groups: the nirvisesa-
vadis, or impersonalists, and the bhaktas, or devotees. The imper-
sonalists do not accept spiritual varieties of life. They want to merge into
the existence of the Supreme Lord in His Brahman feature (the brahma-
Jyoti). The devotees, however, desire to take part in the transcendental
activities of the Supreme Lord. In the upper planetary system. the top-
most planet is Dhruvaloka, and beneath Dhruvaloka are the seven
planets occupied by the great sages, beginning with Marici, Vasistha and
Atri. All these sages regard devotional service as the highest perfection
of life. Therefore they all carry the holy water of the Ganges on their
heads. This verse proves that for one who has achieved the platform of
pure devotional service, nothing else is important. even so-called libera-
tion (kaivalya). Srila Sridhara Svami states that only by achieving pure
devotional service of the Lord can one give up all other engagements as
insignificant. Prabodhananda Sarasvati confirms his statement as
follows:
kaivalyam narakayate tri-dasa-pur akasa-puspayate
durdantendriya-kala-sarpa-patali protkhata-damstrayate
visvari purna-sukhayate vidhi-mahendradis ca kitayate
yat karunya-kataksa-vaibhavavatar tam gauram eva stumah


--- Page 132 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.17
ऽत Caitanya Mahaprabhu has perfectly enunciated and broadcast the
process of bhakti-yoga. Consequently, for one who has taken shelter at
the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the highest perfection of the
Mayavadis, kaivalya, or becoming one with the Supreme, is considered
hellish, to say nothing of the karmis’ aspiration to be promoted to the
heavenly planets. Devotees consider such goals to be worthless phan-
tasmagoria. There are also yogis, who try to control their senses, but
they can never succeed without coming to the stage of devotional service.
The senses are compared to poisonous snakes, but the senses of a bhakta
engaged in the service of the Lord are like snakes with their poisonous
fangs removed. The yogi tries to suppress his senses, but even great
mystics like Visvamitra fail in the attempt. Visvamitra was conquered by
his senses when he was captivated by Menaka during his meditation. She
later gave birth to Sakuntala. The wisest persons in the world, therefore,
are the bhakti-yogis, as Lord Krsna confirms in Bhagavad-gita (6.47):
yoginam api sarvesari
mad-gatenantaratmanda
sraddhavan bhajate yo mar
sa me yuktatamo matah
“Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping
Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in
yoga and is the highest of all.”
TEXT 4
a (५

ततोऽनेकसदसरकोटिविमानानीकसङ्करदेवयानेनावतरन्तीन्दुमण्डरमाबायं গন্ধ
सदने निपतति ॥ ४॥
tato ‘neka-sahasra-koti-vimananika-sankula-deva-yanenavatar-
antindu mandalam avarya brahma-sadane nipatati.

tatah—after purifying the seven planets of the seven great sages:
aneka—many; sahasra—thousands; koti—of millions; vimana-anika—
with contingents of airplanes; sarnkula—congested; deva-yanena—by
the spaceways of the demigods; avataranti—descending; indu-man-


--- Page 133 ---
Text 5] The Descent of the River Ganges 127
dalam —the moon planet; avarya—inundated; brahma-sadane—to the
abode of Lord Brahma atop Sumeru-parvata: nipatati—falls down.
TRANSLATION

After purifying the seven planets near Dhruvaloka [the
polestar], the Ganges water is carried through the spaceways of the
demigods in billions of celestial airplanes. Then it inundates the
moon [Candraloka)] and finally reaches Lord Brahma’s abode atop
Mount Meru.

PURPORT

We should always remember that the Ganges River comes from the
Causal Ocean, beyond the covering of the universe. After the water of
the Causal Ocean leaks through the hole created by Lord Vamanadeva, it
flows down to Dhruvaloka (the polestar) and then to the seven planets
beneath Dhruvaloka. Then it is carried to the moon by innumerable
celestial airplanes, and then it falls to the top of Mount Meru, which is
known as Sumeru-parvata. In this way, the water of the Ganges finally
reaches the lower planets and the peaks of the Himalayas, and from there
it lows through Hardwar and throughout the plains of India, purifying
the entire land. How the Ganges water reaches the various planets from
the top of the universe is explained herein. Celestial airplanes carry the
water from the planets of the sages to other planets. So-called advanced
scientists of the modern age are trying to go to the higher planets. but at
the same time they are experiencing a power shortage on earth. If they
were actually capable scientists, they could personally go by airplane to
other planets, but this they are unable to do. Having now given up their
moon excursions, they are attempting to go to other planets. but without
success.

TEXT 5
तत्र॒ चतुर्धां भिद्यमाना चतुर्भि्नाममि agate

नदनदीपतिमेवामि निविश्चति सीतालकनन्दा चक्षुभ॑द्रेति ॥ ५ ॥

tatra caturdha bhidyamana caturbhir namabhis catur-disam
abhispandanti nada-nadi-patim evabhinivisati sitalakananda caksur
bhadreti.


--- Page 134 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17

tatra—there (on top of Mount Meru); caturdha—into four branches;
bhidyamana—being divided: caturbhih —with four; namabhih—
names: catuh-disam—the four directions (east, west, north and south);
abhispandanti—profusely flowing; nada-nadi-patim—the reservoir of
all great rivers (the ocean); eva—certainly; abhinivisati—enters; sita-
alakananda—Sita and Alakananda; caksuh—Caksu; bhadra—Bhadra;
iti—known by these names.

TRANSLATION

On top of Mount Meru, the Ganges divides into four branches,
each of which gushes in a different direction [east, west, north and
south]. These branches, known by the names Sita, Alakananda,
Caksu and Bhadra, low down to the ocean.

TEXT 6
सीता तु ब्रह्मसदनात्केसराचलादिगिरिशिखरेभ्यो ऽधोऽधः प्रखबन्ती
९ 5

गन्धमाद नमूधेसु पतित्वान्तरेण भद्राश्ववषं प्राच्यां दि्ि Qiagen
भिप्रविश्ति ॥६॥
5/6 tu brahma-sadanat kesaracaladi-giri-sikharebhyo 41/10 *4114 4
prasravanti gandhamadana-miirdhasu patitvantarena bhadrasva-
varsam pracyam disi ksara-samudram abhipravisati.

sita—the branch known as Sita; tu—certainly; brahma-sadanat—
from Brahmapuri; kesaracala-adi—of Kesaracala and of other great
mountains; giri—hills; sikharebhyah—from the tops; adhah adhah—
downward; prasravanti—flowing; gandhamadana—of Gandhamadana
Mountain; mirdhasu—on the top; patitva—falling down: antarena—
within; bhadrasva-varsam—the province known as Bhadrasva: pra-
cyam—in the western; disi—direction: ksara-samudram—the ocean of
salt water; abhipravisati—enters.

TRANSLATION

The branch of the Ganges known as the Sita flows through

Brahmapuri atop Mount Meru, and from there it runs down to the


--- Page 135 ---
Text 8] The Descent of the River Ganges 129
nearby peaks of the Kesaracala Mountains, which stand almost as
high as Mount Meru itself. These mountains are like a bunch of
filaments around Mount Meru. From the Kesaracala Mountains,
the Ganges falls to the peak of Gandhamadana Mountain and then
flows into the land of Bhadrasva-varsa. Finally it reaches the ocean
of salt water in the west. ध
TEXT 7

एवं मास्यवच्छिखरान्निष्पतन्ती ततो ऽनुपरतवेगा केतुमालमभि चक्चुः
प्रतीच्यां दिशि सरित्पतिं प्रविशति ।॥७॥
evari malyavac-chikharan nispatanti tato ‘nuparata-vega ketumalam
abhi caksuh praticyam disi sarit-patim pravisati.

evam—in this way: malyavat-sikharat—from the top of Malyavan
Mountain: nispatanti—falling down: tatah—thereafter: anuparata-
vega—whose force is uninterrupted: ketumdalam abhi—into the land
known as Ketumala-varsa: caksuh—the branch known as Caksu:
praticyam—in the West; disi—direction; sarit-patim —the ocean; pra-
visati—enters into.

TRANSLATION

The branch of the Ganges known as Caksu falls onto the summit
of Malyavan Mountain and from there cascades onto the land of
Ketumala-varsa. The Ganges flows incessantly through Ketumala-
varsa and in this way also reaches the ocean of salt water in the
West.

TEXT 8

मद्रा चोत्तरतो मेरुशिरसो निपतिता गिरिशिखराद्विरिशिखरमतिहाय शङ्गवतः
शृद्धाद वस्यन्द्‌ माना उत्तरांस्तु कुरूनभित उदीच्यां दिश्चि जकधिममिग्रवि्लति
lel
bhadra cottarato meru-siraso nipatita giri-sikharad giri-sikharam
atihaya $rrigavatah srmgad avasyandamana uttarars tu kuriin abhita
udicyam disi jaladhim abhipravisati.


--- Page 136 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.17
bhadra—the branch known as Bhadra; ca—also; uttaratah—to the
northern side; meru-sirasah—from the top of Mount Meru; nipatita—
having fallen; giri-§ikharat—from the peak of Kumuda Mountain; giri-
Sikharam—to the peak of Nila Mountain; atihdya—passing over as if
not touching; Srriigavatah—of the mountain known as Srngavan;
srngat—from the peak; avasyandamana—Hflowing; uttaran—the north-
ern; tu—but; kurin—the land known as Kuru; abhitah—on all sides;
udicyam—in the northern; disi—direction; jaladhim—the ocean of salt
water; abhipravisati—enters into.
TRANSLATION
The branch of the Ganges known as Bhadra flows from the
northern side of Mount Meru. Its waters fall onto the peaks of
Kumuda Mountain, Mount Nila, Sveta Mountain and Sringavan
Mountain in succession. Then it runs down into the province of
Kuru and, after crossing through that land, flows into the salt-
water ocean in the north.
TEXT 9
EN
तथैवालकनन्दा दक्षिणेन ब्रह्मसदनाद्वहूनि गिरिङूटान्यतिक्रम्य
=] ~ < $. >
हेमङूटाद्धेमकूटान्यतिरभसतररंहसा लटयन्ती भारतमभिवषं दाक्षणा
on A . =
दिशि जलधिमभिप्रविशति यस्यां am चागच्छतः पुंसः पदे पदेऽश्वरमेधराज-
ड Is ©
यादीनां फरं न दुरुमपिति nal
tathaivalakananda daksinena brahma-sadanad bahini giri-katany
atikramya hemakitad dhaimakitany ati-rabhasatara-ramhasa
luthayanti bharatam abhivarsari daksinasyar disi jaladhim
abhipravisati yasyarm snanartham cagacchatah purisah pade pade
’Svamedha-rajasityadinar phalari na durlabham iti.
tatha eva—similarly; alakananda—the branch known as Alaka-
nanda; daksinena—by the southern side; brahma-sadanat—from the
city known as Brahmapuri; bahiini—many; giri-kitani—the tops of
mountains; atikramya—crossing over; hemakitat—from Hemakita
Mountain; haimakitani—and Himakita; ati-rabhasatara— more


--- Page 137 ---
Text 9] The Descent of the River Ganges 131
fiercely; ramhasa—with great force; luthayanti—plundering;
bharatam abhivarsam—on all sides of Bharata-varsa; daksinasyam—in
the southern; disi—direction; jaladhim—the ocean of salt water;
abhipravisati—enters into; yasyam—in which; snana-artham—for
bathing; ca—and; agacchatah—of one who is coming; pumsah—a per-
son; pade pade—at every step; asvamedha-rajasitya-adinam—of great
sacrifices like the Aévamedha yajiia and Rajasiya yajiia; phalam—the
result; na—not; durlabham—very difficult to obtain; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION

Similarly, the branch of the Ganges known as Alakananda flows
from the southern side of Brahmapuri [Brahma-sadana]. Passing
over the tops of mountains in various lands, it falls down with
fierce force upon the peaks of the mountains Hemakita and
Himakiata. After inundating the tops of those mountains, the
Ganges falls down onto the tract of land known as Bharata-varsa,
which she also inundates. Then the Ganges flows into the ocean of
salt water in the south. Persons who come to bathe in this river are
fortunate. It is not very difficult for them to achieve with every
step the results of performing great sacrifices like the Rajasiiya
and Asvamedha yajiias.

PURPORT

The place where the Ganges flows into the salt water of the Bay of
Bengal is still known as Ganga-sagara, or the meeting place of the Ganges
and the Bay of Bengal. On Makara-sankranti, in the month of January-
February, thousands of people still go there to bathe, hoping to be liber-
ated. That they can actually be liberated in this way is confirmed herein.
For those who bathe in the Ganges at any time, the results of great
sacrifices like the ASvamedha and Rajasuya yajiias are not at all difficult
to achieve. Most people in India are still inclined to bathe in the Ganges.
and there are many places where they can do so. At Prayaga (Allahabad).
many thousands of people gather during the month of January to bathe
in the confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna. Afterward. many of them
go to the confluence of the Bay of Bengal and the Ganges to take bath
there. Thus it is a special facility for all the people of India that they can
bathe in the water of the Ganges at so many places of pilgrimage.


--- Page 138 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.17
TEXT 10

अन्ये च नदा नद्यश्च 9 নদ सन्ति बहुशो मेर्वादिगिरिदुहितरः शतशः
॥ १० ॥
anye ca nada nadyas ca varse varse santi bahuso merv-adi-giri-
duhitarah satasah.

anye—many others; ca—also; nadah—rivers; nadyah—small
rivers; ca—and; varse varse—in each tract of land; santi—are;
bahusah—of many varieties; meru-adi-giri-duhitarah —daughters of
the mountains beginning with Meru; $atasah—in the hundreds.

TRANSLATION

Many other rivers, both big and small, flow from the top of
Mount Meru. These rivers are like daughters of the mountain, and
they flow to the various tracts of land in hundreds of branches.

TEXT 11
तत्रापि भारतमेव वर्प कर्मक्षत्रमन्यान्यष्ट वर्षाणि afi
= = (५ rN

पुण्येषोपभोगय्थानानि भौमानि खगंपदानि व्यपदिशन्ति ॥ 22 |

tatrapi bharatam eva varsarh karma-ksetram anyany asta varsani
svarginam punya-Sesopabhoga-sthanani bhaumani svarga-padani
vyapadisanti.

tatra api—out of all of them; bharatam—known as Bharata-varsa;
eva —certainly; varsam—the tract of land; karma-ksetram—the field of
activities; anyani—the others; asta varsani—eight tracts of land;
svarginam—of the living entities elevated to the heavenly planets by ex-
traordinary pious activities; punya—of the results of pious activities;
Sesa—of the remainder; upabhoga-sthanani—the places for material
enjoyment; bhaumani svarga-padani—as the heavenly places on earth;
vyapadisanti—they designate.


--- Page 139 ---
Text 11] The Descent of the River Ganges 133
TRANSLATION
Among the nine varsas, the tract of land known as Bharata-varsa
is understood to be the field of fruitive activities. Learned scholars
and saintly persons declare the other eight varsas to be meant for
very highly elevated pious persons. After returning from the
heavenly planets, they enjoy the remaining results of their pious
activities in these eight earthly varsas.
PURPORT
The heavenly places of enjoyment are divided into three groups: the
celestial heavenly planets, the heavenly places on earth, and the bila
heavenly places, which are found in the lower regions. Among these
three classes of heavenly places (bhauma-svarga-padani), the heavenly
places on earth are the eight wvarsas other than Bharata-varsa. In
Bhagavad-gita (9.21) Krsna says, ksine punye martya-lokam visanti:
when the persons living in the heavenly planets exhaust the results of
their pious activities, they return to this earth. In this way. they are ele-
vated to the heavenly planets, and then they again fall to the earthly
planets. This process is known as brahmanda bhramana, wandering up
and down throughout the universes. Those who are intelligent—in other
words, those who have not lost their intelligence —do not involve them-
selves in this process of wandering up and down. They take to the devo-
tional service of the Lord so that they can ultimately penetrate the
covering of this universe and enter the spiritual kingdom. Then they are
situated on one of the planets known as Vaikunthaloka or, still higher.
Krsnaloka (Goloka Vrndavana). A devotee is never caught in the process
of being promoted to the heavenly planets and again coming down.
Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says:
ei 70106 brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
Among all the living entities wandering throughout the universe. one
who is most fortunate comes in contact with a representative of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus gets the opportunity to exe-
cute devotional service. Those who are sincerely seeking the favor of


--- Page 140 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.17
Krsna come in contact with a guru, a bona fide representative of Krsna.
The Mayavadis indulging in mental speculation and the karmis desiring
the results of their actions cannot become gurus. A guru must be a direct
representative of Krsna who distributes the instructions of Krsna with-
out any change. Thus only the most fortunate persons come in contact
with the guru. As confirmed in the Vedic literatures, tad-vijianartham
sa gurum evabhigacchet: one has to search out a guru to understand the
affairs of the spiritual world. Srimad-Bhagavatam also confirms this
point. Tasmad gurum prapadyeta jijiiasuh Sreya uttamam: one who is
very interested in understanding the activities in the spiritual world
must search out a guru— a bona fide representative of Krsna. From all
angles of vision, therefore, the word guru is especially meant for the
bona fide representative of Krsna and no one else. Padma Purana states,
avaisnavo gurur na sydat: one who is not a Vaisnava, or who is not a
representative of Krsna, cannot be a guru. Even the most qualified
brahmana cannot become a guru if he is not a representative of Krsna.
Brahmanas are supposed to acquire six kinds of auspicious qualifica-
tions: they become very learned scholars (pathana) and very qualified
teachers (pathana): they become expert in worshiping the Lord or the
demigods (yajana), and they teach others how to execute this worship
(yajana); they qualify themselves as bona fide persons to receive alms
from others (pratigraha), and they distribute the wealth in charity
(dana). Yet even a brahmana possessing these qualifications cannot
become a guru unless he is the representative of Krsna (gurur na syat).
Vaisnavah sva-paco guruh: but a Vaisnava, a bona fide representative of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, can become a guru, even if
he is sva-paca, a member of a family of dog-eaters. Of the three divisions
of heavenly planets (svarga-loka), bhauma-svarga is sometimes accepted
as the tract of land in Bharata-varsa known as Kashmir. In this region
there are certainly good facilities for material sense enjoyment, but this
is not the business of a pure transcendentalist. Ripa Gosvami describes
the engagement of a pure transcendentalist as follows:
anyabhilasita-sanyam
Jjaana-karmady-anavrtam
anukulyena krsnanu-
Stlanarh bhaktir uttama


--- Page 141 ---
Text 12] The Descent of the River Ganges 135
“One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devo-
tional service.” Those who fully engage in devotional service to Krsna
just to please Him are not interested in the three divisions of heavenly
places, namely, divya-svarga, bhauma-svarga and bila-svarga.
TEXT 12
(I ५ +
Tg पुरुषाणामयुतपुरुषायुर्षाणां देवकट्पानां ARTI IAAT
धि सः 6 €^ ९
वजरसंहननवर्षयोमोदप्रुदितमहासोरतमिथुनव्यवायापवगंवषधतैकगमं कल-
ক - - <
त्राणां तत्र तु त्रेतायुगसमः कालो वतेते ।१२।
esu purusanam ayuta-purusayur-varsandm deva-kalpanarm nagayuta-
prananar vajra-sarmhanana-bala-vayo-moda-pramudita-maha-
saurata-mithuna-vyavayapavarga-varsa-dhrtaika-garbha-kalatranam
tatra tu treta-yuga-samah kalo vartate.
esu—in these (eight) varsas, or tracts of land; purusanam—of all the
men; ayuta—ten thousand; purusa—by the measure of men: ayuh-var-
sanam—of those whose years of life; deva-kalpanam—who are like the
demigods: naga-ayuta-prananam—having the strength of ten thousand
elephants; vajra-sarnhanana—by bodies as solid as thunderbolts; bala—
by bodily strength: vayah—by youth; moda—by abundant sense enjoy-
ment; pramudita—being excited: mahda-saurata—a great deal of sex-
ual: mithuna—combinations of man and woman: vyavaya-apavarga—
at the end of their period of sexual enjoyment; varsa—in the last year:
dhrta-eka-garbha—who conceive one child: kalatranam—of those who
have wives: tatra—there: tu—but; treta-yuga-samah—exactly like the
Treta-yuga (when there is no tribulation) : kalah—time; vartate —exists.
TRANSLATION
In these eight varsas, or tracts of land, human beings live ten
thousand years according to earthly calculations. All the inhabi-
tants are almost like demigods. They have the bodily strength
of ten thousand elephants. Indeed, their bodies are as sturdy as


--- Page 142 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
thunderbolts. The youthful duration of their lives is very pleasing,
and both men and women enjoy sexual union with great pleasure
for a long time. After years of sensual pleasure — when a balance of
one year of life remains—the wife conceives a child. Thus the stan-
dard of pleasure for the residents of these heavenly regions is ex-
actly like that of the human beings who lived during Treta-yuga.
PURPORT

There are four yugas: Satya-yuga, Treta-yuga, Dvapara-yuga and
Kali-yuga. During the first yuga, Satya-yuga. people were very pious.
Everyone practiced the mystic yoga system for spiritual understanding
and realization of God. Because everyone was always absorbed in
samadhi, no one was interested in material sense enjoyment. During
Treta-yuga, people enjoyed sense pleasure without tribulations. Material
miseries began in Dvapara-yuga, but they were not very stringent.
Stringent material miseries really began from the advent of Kali-yuga.

Another point in this verse is that in all eight of these heavenly varsas,
although men and women enjoy sex pleasure, there is no pregnancy.
Pregnancy takes place only in lower-grade life. For example, animals
like dogs and hogs become pregnant twice a year, and each time they
beget at least half a dozen offspring. Even lower species of life such as
snakes give birth to hundreds of young at one time. This verse informs
us that in grades of life higher than ours, pregnancy occurs once in a
lifetime. People still have sex life, but there is no pregnancy. In the
spiritual world, people are not very attracted to sex life, due to their ex-
alted devotional attitude. Practically speaking, there is no sex life in the
spiritual world, but even if sometimes it does occur. there is no preg-
nancy at all. On the planet earth, however, human beings do become
pregnant, although the tendency is to avoid having children. In this sin-
ful age of Kali, people have even taken to the process of killing the child
in the womb. This is the most degraded practice; it can only perpetuate
the miserable material conditions of those who perform it.

TEXT 13

यत्र ह देवपतयः स्वैः स्वै्गणनायकैविहितमहार्दणाः स्व॑तुङसम-
स्तबकफलकिसलयश्रियाऽऽनम्यमानविटपलता विटपिभिर्पदम्भमानरुचिर-


--- Page 143 ---
Text 13] The Descent of the River Ganges 137
Co - - ~ ~

काननाश्रमायतनवषगिद्द्रिणीषु तथा चामलजलाशयेषु विकचिविधनववन-
TEMES AAA AST TE कारण्डवसारसचक्रवाकादि मिर्मधुकरनिकराकृति-
PETRY जलक्रीडादि pa ER: सुखलितिसरसुन्दरीणां
कामकलिलव्रिकासदहासलीलावलोकाद्ृ्टमनोदृ्टयः स्वैरं विहरन्ति || १३॥
yatra ha deva-patayah svaih svair gana-nayakair vihita-maharhanah
sarvartu-kusuma-stabaka-phala-kisalaya-sriyanamyamana-vitapa-
lata-vitapibhir upasumbhamana-rucira-kananasramayatana-varsa-
giri-dronisu tatha camala-jalasayesu vikaca-vividha-nava-
vanaruhamoda-mudita-raja-harisa-jala-kukkuta-karandava-sarasa-
cakravakadibhir madhukara-nikarakrtibhir upakijitesu jala-kridadibhir
vicitra-vinodaih sulalita-sura-sundarinam kama-kalila-vildsa-hasa-
lilavalokakrsta-mano-drstayah svairar viharanti.

yatra ha—in those eight tracts of land; deva-patayah—the lords of
the demigods, such as Lord Indra; svaih svaih—by their own respective:
gana-nayakaih—leaders of the servants; vihita—furnished with:
maha-arhanah—valuable gifts, such as sandalwood pulp and garlands:
sarva-rtu—in all seasons; kusuma-stabaka—of bunches of flowers;
phala—of fruits; kisalaya-sriya—by the opulences of shoots:
anamyamana—being bent down; vitapa—whose branches: lata—and
creepers; vitapibhih—by many trees; uposumbhamana—being fully
decorated; rucira—beautiful; kanana—gardens: asrama-ayatana—and
many hermitages; varsa-giri-dronisu—the valleys between the moun-
tains designating the borders of the tracts of land: tatha—as well as:
ca—also; amala-jala-asayesu—in lakes with clear water: vikaca—just
fructified; vividha—varieties; nava-vanaruha-amoda—by the
fragrance of lotus flowers: mudita—enthused: raja-harmsa—great
swans; jala-kukkuta— water fowl; karandava—aquatic birds called
karandavas; sarasa—cranes: cakraviaka-adibhih—by birds known as
cakravakas and so on; madhukara-nikara-akrtibhih—by the
bumblebees: upakijitesu—which were made to resound: jala-krida-
adibhih —such as water sports: wvicitra—various: vinodaih—by
pastimes: su-lalita—attractive: sura-sundarinam—of the women of the
demigods; kama—from lust; kalila—born: vilasa—pastimes: hdsa—


--- Page 144 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
smiling; lila-avaloka—by playful glances: akrsta-manah—whose minds
are attracted: drstayah—and whose vision is attracted; svairam—very
freely: viharanti—engage in sportive enjoyment.
TRANSLATION

In each of those tracts of land, there are many gardens filled
with flowers and fruits according to the season, and there are
beautifully decorated hermitages as well. Between the great moun-
tains demarcating the borders of those lands lie enormous lakes of
clear water filled with newly grown lotus flowers. Aquatic birds
such as swans, ducks, water chickens, and cranes become greatly
excited by the fragrance of lotus flowers, and the charming sound
of bumblebees fills the air. The inhabitants of those lands are im-
portant leaders among the demigods. Always attended by their
respective servants, they enjoy life in gardens alongside the lakes.
In this pleasing situation, the wives of the demigods smile play-
fully at their husbands and look upon them with lusty desires. All
the demigods and their wives are constantly supplied with sandal-
wood pulp and flower garlands by their servants. In this way, all
the residents of the eight heavenly varsas enjoy, attracted by the
activities of the opposite sex.

PURPORT

Here is a description of the lower heavenly planets. The inhabitants of
those planets enjoy life in a pleasing atmosphere of clear lakes filled with
newly grown lotus flowers and gardens filled with fruits, lowers, various
kinds of birds and humming bees. In that atmosphere they enjoy life
with their very beautiful wives, who are always sexually stimulated.
Nonetheless, they are all devotees of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as will be explained in subsequent verses. The inhabitants of
this earth also desire such heavenly enjoyment, but when they somehow
or other achieve imitation pleasures like sex and intoxication, they com-
pletely forget the service of the Supreme Lord. In the heavenly planets,
however, although the residents enjoy superior sense gratification, they
never forget their positions as eternal servants of the Supreme Being.


--- Page 145 ---
Text 14] The Descent of the River Ganges 139
TEXT 14
नवस्पि वर्षेषु मगवान्नारायणो महापुरुषः पुरुषाणां तद चुग्रहायारमतच्च

व्यूहेनात्मनाद्यापि संनिधीयते ॥ १४॥

navasv api varsesu bhagavan narayano mahda-purusah purusanar
tad-anugrahaydatma-tattva-vyithenatmanadyapi sannidhiyate.

navasu—in the nine; api—certainly: varsesu —tracts of land known
as wvarsas; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
narayanah—Lord Visnu; maha-purusah—the Supreme Person:
purusanam—unto His various devotees: tat-anugrahdaya—to show His
mercy; dtma-tattva-vyithena—by expansions of Himself in the quadru-
ple forms Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha: atmana—
personally: adya api—until now; sannidhiyate —is near the devotees for
accepting their services.

TRANSLATION

To show mercy to His devotees in each of these nine tracts of
land, the Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Narayana ex-
pands Himself in His quadruple principles of Vasudeva, Sankar-
sana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. In this way He remains near His
devotees to accept their service.

PURPORT

In this connection, Vi§vanatha Cakravarti Thakura informs us that the
demigods worship the Supreme Lord in His various Deity forms (arca-
vigraha) because except in the spiritual world, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead cannot be directly worshiped in person. In the material
world, the Lord is always worshiped as the arca-vigraha, or Deity in the
temple. There is no difference between the arca-vigraha and the original
person, and therefore those who are engaged in worshiping the Deity in
the temple in full opulence, even on this planet, should be understood to
be directly in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead without a
doubt. As enjoined in the $astras, arcye visnau Sila-dhir gurusu nara-
matih: "No one should treat the Deity in the temple as stone or metal.


--- Page 146 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.17
nor should one think that the spiritual master is an ordinary human
being.” One should strictly follow this §astric injunction and worship the
Deity, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without offenses. The
spiritual master is the direct representative of the Lord, and no one
should consider him an ordinary human being. By avoiding offenses
against the Deity and the spiritual master, one can advance in spiritual
life, or Krsna consciousness.
In this regard, the following quotation appears in the Laghu-
bhagavatamrta:
padme tu parama-vyomnah
puarvadye dik-catustaye
vasudevadayo vyiuhas
catvarah kathitah kramat
tatha pada-vibhitau ca
nivasanti kramadi me
Jalavrti-stha-vaikuntha-
sthita vedavati-pure
satyordhve vaisnave loke
nityakhye dvaraka-pure
Suddhodad uttare Sveta-
dvipe cairavati-pure
ksirambudhi-sthitante
kroda-paryanka-dhamani
satvatiye kvacit tantre
nava vyuhah prakirtitah
catvaro vasudevadya
narayana-nrsirmhakau
hayagrivo maha-krodo
brahma ceti navoditah
tatra brahma tu vijiieyah
purvokta-vidhaya harih


--- Page 147 ---
Text 15] The Descent of the River Ganges 141
“In the Padma Purana it is said that in the spiritual world the Lord per-
sonally expands in all directions and is worshiped as Vasudeva, Sankar-
sana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. The same God is represented by the
Deity in this material world, which is only one quarter of His creation.
Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are also present in
the four directions of this material world. There is a Vaikunthaloka
covered with water in this material world, and on that planet is a place
called Vedavati, where Vasudeva is located. Another planet known as
Visnuloka is situated above Satyaloka, and there Sankarsana is present.
Similarly, in Dvaraka-puri, Pradyumna is the predominator. On the is-
land known as Svetadvipa, there is an ocean of milk, and in the midst of
that ocean is a place called Airavati-pura, where Aniruddha lies on
Ananta. In some of the satvata-tantras, there is a description of the nine
varsas and the predominating Deity worshiped in each: (1) Vasudeva,
(2) Sankarsana, (3) Pradyumna, (4) Aniruddha, (5) Narayana,
(6) Nrsimha, (7) Hayagriva, (8) Mahavariha, and (9) Brahma.” The
Lord Brahma mentioned in this connection is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. When there is no fit human being to empower as Lord Brahma,
the Lord Himself takes the position of Lord Brahma. Tatra brahma tu
vijieyah pirvokta-vidhaya harih. That Brahma mentioned here is Hari
Himself.
TEXT 15

PEAY भगवान्‌ मव एक एव पुमान्न यन्यस्तत्रापरो निरविंति
मवान्याः शापनिमित्तज्ञो यत्प्रवेक्ष्यतः स्ीमावस्तत्पशादक््यामि ॥ १५॥
ilavrte tu bhagavan bhava eka eva puman na hy anyas tatraparo
nirvisati bhavanyah sapa-nimitta-jiio yat-praveksyatah stri-bhavas tat
pascad vaksyami.

ilavrte—in the tract of land known as llavrta-varsa: tu—but:
bhagavan—the most powerful; bhavah—Lord Siva; eka—only: eva—
certainly: puman—male person: na—not: hi—certainly: anyah—any
other; tatra—there; aparah—besides: nirvisati—enters: bhavanyah
$apa-nimitta-jiah—who knows the cause of the curse by Bhavani. the


--- Page 148 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
wife of Lord Siva; yat-praveksyatah—of one who forcibly enters that
tract of land; stri-bhavah—transformation into a female; tat—that;
pascat—Ilater; vaksyami—I shall explain.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: In the tract of land known as Ilavrta-
varsa, the only male person is Lord Siva, the most powerful
demigod. Goddess Durga, the wife of Lord Siva, does not like any
man to enter that land. If any foolish man dares to do so, she im-
mediately turns him into a woman. I shall explain this later [in the
Ninth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam].

TEXT 16
a

भवानीनाथैः स्ीगणाबुंद सहसतै खरूष्यमानो भगवत्चतुरूतेर्महापुरूषस्य
तुरीयां तामसीं मूर्तिं प्रकृतिमास्मनः सङ्कर्षणसंज्ञामार्मसमाधिरूपेण
संनिधाप्यैतदमिगृणन्‌ মন उपधावति ॥ १६॥
bhavani-nathaih stri-ganarbuda-sahasrair avarudhyamano bhagavatas
catur-miirter maha-purusasya turiyarm tamasirh mirtiri prakrtim
atmanah sankarsana-sarmyinam atma-samadhi-ripena sannidhapyaitad
abhigrnan bhava upadhavati.

bhavani-nathaih—by the company of Bhavani; stri-gana—of
females; arbuda-sahasraih—by ten billion; avarudhyamanah—always
being served; bhagavatah catuh-mirteh—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is expanded in four; maha-purusasya—of the Supreme
Person; turiyam—the fourth expansion; tamasim—related to the mode
of ignorance; martim—the form; prakrtim—as the source; atmanah—
of himself (Lord Siva); sankarsana-sarijiiam —known as Sankarsana;
atma-samadhi-riipena—by meditating upon Him in trance; san-
nidhapya—bringing Him near; etat—this; abhigrnan—clearly chant-
ing; bhavah—Lord Siva: upadhavati—worships.

TRANSLATION

In Ilavrta-varsa, Lord Siva is always encircled by ten billion

maidservants of goddess Durga, who minister to him. The quadru-


--- Page 149 ---
Text 17] The Descent of the River Ganges 143
ple expansion of the Supreme Lord is composed of Vasudeva, Pra-
dyumna, Aniruddha and Sankarsana. Sankarsana, the fourth ex-
pansion, is certainly transcendental, but because his activities of
destruction in the material world are in the mode of ignorance, He
is known as tamasi, the Lord’s form in the mode of ignorance.
Lord Siva knows that Sankarsana is the original cause of his own
existence, and thus he always meditates upon Him in trance by
chanting the following mantra.
PURPORT

Sometimes we see a picture of Lord Siva engaged in meditation. This
verse explains that Lord Siva is always meditating upon Lord Sankarsana
in trance. Lord Siva is in charge of the destruction of the material world.
Lord Brahma creates the material world, Lord Visnu maintains it, and
Lord Siva destroys it. Because destruction is in the mode of ignorance,
Lord Siva and his worshipable Deity, ৩৪113198118, are technically called
tamasi. Lord Siva is the incarnation of tamo-guna. Since both Lord Siva
and Sankarsana are always enlightened and situated in the transcenden-
tal position, they have nothing to do with the modes of material nature —
goodness, passion and ignorance—but because their activities involve
them with the mode of ignorance, they are sometimes called tamast.

TEXT 17
श्रीनगवावाच
>) ©. = =
ॐ नमो भगवते महापुरुषाय सवगुणसङ्यानायानन्तायाग्यक्ताय
नम इति ॥१७॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca

orn namo bhagavate maha-purusaya sarva-guna-sarnkhyanay-
anantayavyaktaya nama iti.

$ri-bhagavan uvaca—the most powerful Lord Siva says: om namo
bhagavate—O Supreme Personality of Godhead. 1 offer my respectful
obeisances unto You; maha-purusaya—who are the Supreme Person:
sarva-guna-sarikhyanaya—the reservoir of all transcendental qualities:


--- Page 150 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
anantaya—the unlimited; avyaktdya—not manifested within the
material world: namah—my respectful obeisances: iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
The most powerful Lord Siva says: O Supreme Personality of
Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You in Your
expansion as Lord Sankarsana. You are the reservoir of all tran-
scendental qualities. Although You are unlimited, You remain un-
manifest to the nondevotees.
TEXT 18
भजे मजन्यारणपाद्‌ पङ्कजं
WE रसस्य परं परायणम्‌ |
भक्तेष्वलं भावितभूतभावनं
भवापहं त्वा भवभावमीश्वरम्‌ ॥१८॥
bhaje bhajanyarana-pada-parikajari
bhagasya krtsnasya param parayanam
bhaktesv alam bhavita-bhita-bhavanarm
bhavapahari tva bhava-bhavam isvaram
bhaje—1 worship; bhajanya—O worshipable Lord: arana-pada-
parikajam—whose lotus feet protect His devotees from all fearful situa-
tions; bhagasya—of opulences; krtsnasya—of all different varieties
(wealth, fame, strength, knowledge, beauty and renunciation); param—
the best; parayanam—the ultimate shelter: bhaktesu—to the devotees:
alam—beyond value; bhavita-bhitta-bhavanam —who manifests His
different forms for the satisfaction of His devotees; bhava-apaham—
who stops the devotees’ repetition of birth and death: tva—unto You;
bhava-bhavam—who is the origin of the material creation: Svaram—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, You are the only worshipable person, for You are
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all


--- Page 151 ---
Text 19] The Descent of the River Ganges 145
opulences. Your secure lotus feet are the only source of protection
for all Your devotees, whom You satisfy by manifesting Yourself in
various forms. O my Lord, You deliver Your devotees from the
clutches of material existence. Nondevotees, however, remain en-
tangled in material existence by Your will. Kindly accept me as
Your eternal servant.
TEXT 19
A यस्य मायागुणचित्तवरत्तिमि-
निरीक्षतो ह्यण्वपि दष्टिरज्यते |
ईशे यथा नोऽजितमन्युरंहसां
৪ [4
कस्तं न मन्येत जिगीषुरात्मनः ॥ १९॥
na yasya maya-guna-citta-vrttibhir
nirthsato hy anv api drstir ajyate
ise yatha no Jjita-manyu-rarhasar
kas tar na manyeta jigisur atmanah
na—never: yasya—whose: maya—of the illusory energy: guna—in
the qualities: citta—of the heart: vrttibhih—by the activities (thinking.
feeling and willing): nirtksatah—of Him who is glancing: hi—certainly:
anu—slightly: api—even: drstih—vision: ajyate—is affected: iSe—for
the purpose of regulating: yatha—as: nah—of us: ajita—who have not
conquered: manyu—of anger: ramhasam—the force: kah—who:
tam—unto Him (the Supreme Lord): na—not: manyeta—would wor-
ship: jigisuh—aspiring to conquer: datmanah—the senses.
TRANSLATION
We cannot control the force of our anger. Therefore when we
look at material things, we cannot avoid feeling attraction or
repulsion for them. But the Supreme Lord is never affected in this
way. Although He glances over the material world for the purpose
of creating, maintaining and destroying it, He is not affected, even
to the slightest degree. Therefore, one who desires to conquer the
force of the senses must take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.
Then he will be victorious.


--- Page 152 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always equipped with incon-
ceivable potencies. Although creation takes place by His glancing over
the material energy, He is not affected by the modes of material nature.
Because of His eternally transcendental position, when the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead appears in this material world, the modes of material
nature cannot affect Him. Therefore the Supreme Lord is called Tran-
scendence, and anyone who wants to be secure from the influence of the
modes of material nature must take shelter of Him.
TEXT 20
असदृदशो यः प्रतिभाति मायया
क्षीबेव  मध्वासवताग्ररोचनः |
न नागवध्वोऽर्हण ईषिरे हिया
€
यत्पादयोः स्पशंनधर्षितेन्द्रियाः॥२०॥
asad-drso yah pratibhati mayaya
ksibeva madhv-asava-tamra-locanah
na naga-vadhvo ’rhana Sire hriya
yat-padayoh sparsana-dharsitendriyah
asat-drsah—for a person with polluted vision; yah—who; pra-
tibhati —appears; mayaya—the influence of maya; ksibah—one who is
inebriated or angry; iva—like; madhu—by honey; asava—and liquor;
tamra-locanah—having eyes reddish like copper; na—not; naga-
vadhvah—the wives of the serpent demon; arhane—in worshiping;
iSire—were unable to proceed; hriya—because of bashfulness; yat-
padayoh—of whose lotus feet; sparsana—by the touching; dharsita—
agitated; indriyah—whose senses.
TRANSLATION
For persons with impure vision, the Supreme Lord’s eyes appear
like those of someone who indiscriminately drinks intoxicating
beverages. Thus bewildered, such unintelligent persons become
angry at the Supreme Lord, and due to their angry mood the Lord


--- Page 153 ---
Text 21] The Descent of the River Ganges 147
Himself appears angry and very fearful. However, this is an illu-
sion. When the wives of the serpent demon were agitated by the
touch of the Lord’s lotus feet, due 00 shyness they could proceed
no further in their worship of Him. Yet the Lord remained unagi-
tated by their touch, for He is equipoised in all circumstances.
Therefore who will not worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead?
PURPORT
Anyone who remains unagitated, even in the presence of cause for
agitation, is called dhira, or equipoised. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, being always in a transcendental position, is never agitated by
anything. Therefore someone who wants to become dhira must take
shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gita (2.13) Krsna says.
dhiras tatra na muhyati: a person who is equipoised in all circumstances
is never bewildered. Prahlada Maharaja is a perfect example of a dhira.
When the fierce form of Nrsimhadeva appeared in order to kill
Hiranyakasipu, Prahlada was unagitated. He remained calm and quiet.
whereas others, including even Lord Brahma, were frightened by the
features of the Lord.
TEXT 21
यमाहुरस्य  यितिजन्मसंयमं
त्रिभिर्विहीनं यमनन्तमूषयः ।
न वेद सिद्धाथेमिव कृचिरिसतं
. 5
भूमण्डलं मूधसहस्रधामसु ।।२१।।
yam ahur asya sthiti-janma-sarmyamari
tribhir vihinam yam anantam rsayah
na veda siddhartham iva kvacit sthitarm
bhi-mandalarh mirdha-sahasra-dhamasu
yam —whom: ahuh—they said; asya—of the material world: sthiti—
the maintenance;  janma—creation:  sarityamam—annihilation:
tribhih—these three: wvihinam—without: yam —which: anantam—


--- Page 154 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.17
unlimited: rsayah—all the great sages; na —not; veda—feels; siddha-
artham—a mustard seed; iva—like; kvacit—where; sthitam—situated;
bhii-mandalam—the universe; miirdha-sahasra-dhamasu—on the
hundreds and thousands of hoods of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva continued: All the great sages accept the Lord as the
source of creation, maintenance and destruction, although He ac-
tually has nothing to do with these activities. Therefore the Lord is
called unlimited. Although the Lord in His incarnation as Sesa
holds all the universes on His hoods, each universe feels no
heavier than a mustard seed to Him. Therefore, what person desir-
ing perfection will not worship the Lord?
PURPORT
The incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Sesa
or Ananta has unlimited strength, fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty and
renunciation. As described in this verse, Ananta’s strength is so great
that the innumerable universes rest on His hoods. He has the bodily
features of a snake with thousands of hoods, and since His strength is
unlimited, all the universes resting on His hoods feel no heavier than
mustard seeds. We can just imagine how insignificant a mustard seed is
on the hood of a serpent. In this connection, the reader is referred to Sr
Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi-lila, Chapter Five, verses 117-125. There it is
stated that Lord Visnu’s incarnation as the serpentine Ananta Sesa Naga
supports all the universes on His hoods. By our calculation, a universe
may be very, very heavy, but because the Lord is ananta (unlimited), He
feels the weight to be no heavier than a mustard seed.
TEXTS 22-23
यस्याद्य आसीद्‌ गुणविग्रहो महान्‌
विज्ञानधिष्ण्यो भगवानजः किल |
यत्सम्भवोऽहं faa खतेजसा
Ey ५ EN .
IRE तामसमेन्द्रियं सृजे ॥२२॥


--- Page 155 ---
Text 23] The Descent of the River Ganges 149
एते वयं AW লহী महात्मनः
सिताः शकुन्ता इव Eta |
1 R o
महानदं শক্ধলবাম্জন্লিমাঃ
~~ ~
gam सवं यदनुग्रहादिदम्‌ ॥२२॥
yasyadya asid guna-vigraho mahan
vyiiana-dhisnyo bhagavan ajah kila
yat-sambhavo ham tri-vrta sva-tejasa
vaikarikari tamasam aindriyam srje
ete vayar yasya vase mahatmanah
sthitah sakuntd iva sitra-yantritah
mahan aha vaikrta-tamasendriyah
srjama sarve yad-anugrahad idam
yasya—from whom: adyah—the beginning: asit—there was: guna-
vigrahah—the incarnation of the material qualities: mahan—the total
material energy; vijiana—of full knowledge: dhisnyah—the reservoir:
bhagavan—the most powerful: ajah—Lord Brahma: kila—certainly:
yat—from whom: sambhavah—born: aham—I: tri-vrta —having three
varieties according to the three modes of nature: sva-tejasa—by my
material strength; wvaikarikam—all the demigods: tamasam— material
elements: aindriyam—the senses: srje—l create: ete—all of these:
vayam—we: yasya—of whom: vase—under the control: maha-at-
manah—great personalities: sthitah—situated: Sakuntah—vultures:
iva—like; sitra-yantritth—bound by rope: mahan—the mahat-tattva;
aham—1I; vaikrta—the demigods: tamasa—the five material elements:
indriyah —senses: srjamah—we create; sarve—all of us: yat—of whom:
anugrahat—by the mercy: idam—this material world.
TRANSLATION
From that Supreme Personality of Godhead appears Lord
Brahma, whose body is made from the total material energy, the
reservoir of intelligence predominated by the passionate mode
of material nature. From Lord Brahma, I myself am born as a


--- Page 156 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
representation of false ego known as Rudra. By my own power I
create all the other demigods, the five elements and the senses.
Therefore, I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
greater than any of us and under whose control are situated all the
demigods, material elements and senses, and even Lord Brahma
and I myself, like birds bound by a rope. Only by the Lord’s grace
can we create, maintain and annihilate the material world.
Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme
Being.
PURPORT
A summary of creation is given in this verse. From Sankarsana, Maha-
Visnu expands, and from Maha-Visnu, Garbhodakasiyi Visnu expands.
Lord Brahma, who was born of Garbhodakasayi Visnu, fathers Lord
Siva, from whom all the other demigods gradually evolve. Lord Brahma,
Lord Siva and Lord ৬1910 are incarnations of the different material
qualities. Lord Visnu is actually above all material qualities, but He ac-
cepts control of sattva-guna (the mode of goodness) to maintain the
universe. Lord Brahma is born from the mahat-tattva. Brahma creates
the entire universe, Lord Visnu maintains it, and Lord Siva annihilates
it. The Supreme Personality of Godhead controls all the most important
demigods—especially Lord Brahma and Lord Siva—exactly as the owner
of a bird controls it by binding it with a rope. Sometimes vultures are
controlled in this way.
TEXT 24
+ ९ ol fg
यन्निर्मितां कदयपि कमेपवेणीं
< ENG ९
मायां जनोऽयं गुणसगंमोहितः |
ল वेद्‌ निस्तारणयोगमञ्ञसा
तस्मै नमस्ते विरयोद्‌ यात्मने ॥२४॥
yan-nirmitam karhy api karma-parvanim
mayam jano ’yarh guna-sarga-mohitah
na veda nistarana-yogam arnjasa
tasmai namas te vilayodayatmane


--- Page 157 ---
Text 24] The Descent of the River Ganges 151
yat—by whom; nirmitam—created; karhi api—at any time; karma-
parvanim—which ties the knots of fruitive activity; mayam—the il-
lusory energy; janah—a person; ayam—this; guna-sarga-mohitah—
bewildered by the three modes of material nature; na—not; veda—
knows; nistarana-yogam—the process of getting out of material en-
tanglement; afijasd —soon; tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme); namah—
respectful obeisances; te—unto You; vilaya-udaya-atmane—in whom
everything is annihilated and from whom everything is again
manifested.
TRANSLATION
The illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
binds all of us conditioned souls to this material world. Therefore,
without being favored by Him, persons like us cannot understand
how to get out of that illusory energy. Let me offer my respectful
obeisances unto the Lord, who is the cause of creation and
annihilation.
PURPORT
Krsna clearly states in Bhagavad-gita (7.14):
daivi hy esa guna-mayi
mama maya duratyayd
mam eva ye prapadyante
mayam etam taranti te
“This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me
can easily cross beyond it.” All conditioned souls working within the il-
lusory energy of the Lord consider the body to be the self. and thus they
continuously wander throughout the universe. taking birth in different
species of life and creating more and more problems. Sometimes they
become disgusted with the problems and seek out a process by which
they can get out of this entanglement. Unfortunately. such so-called
research workers are unaware of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and His illusory energy, and thus all of them work only in darkness.
never finding a way out. So-called scientists and advanced research


--- Page 158 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 17
scholars are ludicrously trying to find the cause of life. They take no
notice of the fact that life is already being produced. What will be their
credit if they find out the chemical composition of life? All their chemi-
cals are nothing but different transformations of the five elements—
earth, water, fire, air and ether. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.20), the
living entity is never created (na jayate mriyate va kadacin). There are
five gross material elements and three minor material elements (mind,
intelligence and ego), and there are eternal living entities. The living en-
tity desires a certain type of body, and by the order of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, that body is created from material nature, which is
nothing but a kind of machine handled by the Supreme Lord. The Lord
gives the living entity a particular type of mechanical body, and the liv-
ing entity must work with it according to the law of fruitive activities.
Fruitive activities are described in this verse: karma-parvanirh mayam.
The living entity is seated on a machine (the body), and according to the
order of the Supreme Lord, he operates the machine. This is the secret of
transmigration of the soul from one body to another. The living entity
thus becomes entangled in fruitive activities in this material world. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (15.7), manah sasthanindriyani prakrti-
sthani karsati: the living entity is struggling very hard against the six
senses, which include the mind.

In all the activities of creation and annihilation, the living entity is en-
tangled in fruitive activities, which are executed by the illusory energy,
maya. He is exactly like a computer handled by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The so-called scientists say that nature acts independently,
but they cannot explain what nature is. Nature is nothing but a machine
operated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one understands
the operator, his problems of life are solved. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-
gita (7.19):

bahinari janmanam ante
Jadnavan mar prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah
“After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surren-
ders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is.


--- Page 159 ---
Text 24] The Descent of the River Ganges 153
Such a great soul is very rare.” A sane man, therefore, surrenders to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus gets out of the clutches of the
illusory energy, maya.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Seventeenth
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Descent of the River
Ganges.”


--- Page 160 ---
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
The Prayers Offered to the Lord
by the Residents of Jambuadvipa
In this chapter Sukadeva Gosvami describes the different varsas of Jam-
badvipa and the incarnation of the Supreme Lord worshiped in each. The
predominating ruler of Bhadrasva-varsa is Bhadrasrava. He and his
many servants always worship the incarnation known as Lord Hayagriva.
At the end of each kalpa, when the demon Ajfana steals the Vedic
knowledge, Lord Hayagriva appears and preserves it. Then He delivers it
to Lord Brahma. In the land known as Hari-varsa, the exalted devotee
Prahlada Maharaja worships Lord Nrsirmhadeva. (The appearance of
Lord Nrsimmhadeva is described in the Seventh Canto of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.) Following in the footsteps of Prahlada Maharaja, the in-
habitants of Hari-varsa always worship Lord Nrsimhadeva to receive
from Him the benediction of being engaged in His loving service. In the
tract of land known as Ketumala-varsa, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (Lord Hrsikesa) appears in the form of Cupid. The goddess of
fortune and the demigods living there engage in His service day and
night. Manifesting Himself in sixteen parts, Lord Hrsikesa is the source
of all encouragement, strength and influence. The conditioned living en-
tity has the defect of being always fearful, but simply by the mercy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he can rid himself of this defect of
material life. Therefore the Lord alone can be addressed as master. In the
tract of land known as Ramyaka-varsa, Manu and all the inhabitants
worship Matsyadeva to this very day. Matsyadeva. whose form is pure
goodness, is the ruler and maintainer of the whole universe. and as such
He is the director of all the demigods, headed by King Indra. In Hiran-
maya-varsa Lord Visnu has assumed the form of a tortoise (Karma
marti) and is worshiped there by Aryama, along with all the other resi-
dents. Similarly, in the tract of land known as Uttarakuru-varsa. Lord
Sri Hari has assumed the form of a boar, and in that form He accepts ser-
vice from all the inhabitants living there.
155


--- Page 161 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18

All the information in this chapter can be fully realized by one who as-
sociates with devotees of the Lord. Therefore in the $astras it is recom-
mended that one associate with devotees. This is better than residing on
the banks of the Ganges. In the hearts of pure devotees reside all good
sentiments as well as all the superior qualities of the demigods. In the
hearts of nondevotees, however, there cannot be any good qualities, for
such people are simply enchanted by the external, illusory energy of the
Lord. Following in the footsteps of devotees, one should know that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the only worshipable Deity. Everyone
should accept this proposal and worship the Lord. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (15.15). vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah: the purpose
of studying all Vedic literature is to worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna. If after studying all the Vedic literature, one does not
awaken his dormant love for the Supreme Lord, it is to be understood
that he has labored for nothing. He has simply wasted his time. Lacking
attachment for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he remains attached
to family life in this material world. Thus the lesson of this chapter is
that one should get out of family life and completely take shelter of the
lotus feet of the Lord.

TEXT 1
HF उवाच
तथा च भद्रश्रत्रा नाम धर्मसुतस्तत्कुरपवयः पुरुषा भद्राश्ववर्षे
साक्षाद्भगवतो वासुदेवस्य प्रियां तयुं धर्ममयीं हयशीर्षाभिधानां परमेण
समाधिना संनिधाप्येदममिगृणन्त उपधावन्ति ॥ १ ॥
sri-Suka uvaca

tatha ca bhadrasrava nama dharma-sutas tat-kula-patayah purusa
bhadrasva-varse saksad bhagavato vasudevasya priyari tanurin
dharmamayim hayasirsabhidhanam paramena samadhina
sannidhapyedam abhigrnanta upadhavanti.

sri-sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; tatha ca—similarly (just as
Lord Siva worships Sankarsana in Ilavrta-varsa); bhadra-srava—
Bhadrasrava; nama—known as; dharma-sutah—the son of Dhar-


--- Page 162 ---
Text 2] The Residents of Jambadvipa Offer Prayers 157
mardja; tat—of him; kula-patayah—the chiefs of the dynasty:
purusah—all the residents: bhadrasva-varse—in the land known as
Bhadrasva-varsa: saksat—directly; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead: vasudevasya—of Lord Vasudeva; priyam tanum—
very dear form: dharma-mayim—the director of all religious principles:
hayasirsa-abhidhanam—the Lord’s incarnation named Hayaéirsa (also
called Hayagriva); paramena samadhina—with the highest form of
trance; sannidhapya—coming near: idam—this: abhigrnantah—chant-
ing: upadhavanti—they worship.
TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Bhadrasrava, the son of Dharmaraja,
rules the tract of land known as Bhadra$va-varsa. Just as Lord Siva
worships Sankarsana in Ilavrta-varsa, Bhadrasrava, accompanied
by his intimate servants and all the residents of the land, worships
the plenary expansion of Vasudeva known as HayaSirsa. Lord
HayaSirsa is very dear to the devotees, and He is the director of all
religious principles. Fixed in the topmost trance, Bhadrasrava and
his associates offer their respectful obeisances to the Lord and
chant the following prayers with careful pronunciation.

TEXT 2
मद्रश्रवस ऊचुः
ॐ नमो भगवते धर्मायात्मविशोधनाय नम इति ॥ २ ॥
bhadrasravasa ucuh
om namo bhagavate dharmayatma-visodhandaya nama iti.

bhadrasravasah icuh—the ruler Bhadrasrava and his intimate asso-
ciates said; om—O Lord: namah—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead: dharmaya—the source of all
religious principles; atma-visodhanaya—who purifies us of material
contamination; namah—our obeisances; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

The ruler Bhadrasrava and his intimate associates utter the

following prayer: We offer our respectful obeisances unto the


--- Page 163 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all religious
principles, who cleanses the heart of the conditioned soul in this
material world. Again and again we offer our respectful obeisances
unto Him.
PURPORT

Foolish materialistic persons do not know how they are being con-
trolled and punished at every step by the laws of nature. They think they
are very happy in the conditioned state of material life, not knowing the
purpose of repeated birth, death, old age and disease. Therefore in
Bhagavad-gita (7.15) Lord Krsna describes such materialistic persons as
mudhas (rascals): na mam duskrtino muadhak prapadyante
naradhamah. These mitdhas do not know that if they want to purify
themselves, they must worship Lord Vasudeva (Krsna) by performing
penances and austerities. This purification is the aim of human life. This
life is not meant for blind indulgence in sense gratification. In the human
form, the living being must engage himself in Krsna consciousness to
purify his existence: tapo 08) 0718 putraka yena sattvarn suddhyet. This
is the instruction of King Rsabhadeva to His sons. In the human form of
life, one must undergo all kinds of austerities to purify his existence.
Yasmad brahma-saukhyar tv anantam. We are all seeking happiness,
but because of our ignorance and foolishness, we cannot know what
unobstructed happiness really is. Unobstructed happiness is called
brahma-saukhya, spiritual happiness. Although we may get some so-
called happiness in this material world, that happiness is temporary. The
foolish materialists cannot understand this. Therefore Prahlada
Maharaja points out, maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimadhan:
merely for temporary materialistic happiness, these rascals are making
huge arrangements, and thus they are baffled life after life.

TEXT 3
अहो विचित्रं मगवदिचेषटितं
भन्तं जनोऽयं हि मिषन्न पश्यति ।
भ्यायनसयर्दि विकर्म सेवितं
निहत्य go पितरं जिजीविषति nz ॥


--- Page 164 ---
Text 3] The Residents of Jambadvipa Offer Prayers 159
aho vicitram bhagavad-vicestitarn
ghnantarn jano ‘yar hi misan na paSyati
dhyayann asad yarhi vikarma sevitumn
nirhrtya putram pitararm jijivisati

aho—alas; vicitram—wonderful; bhagavat-vicestitam—the pastimes
of the Lord; ghnantam—death; janah—a person; ayam—this; hi—cer-
tainly; misan—although seeing; na paSyati—does not see; dhyayan—
thinking about; asat—material happiness; yarhi—because; vikarma—
forbidden activities; sevitum—to enjoy; nirhrtya—burning: putram—
sons; pitaram—the father; jijivisati—desires a long life.

TRANSLATION

Alas! How wonderful it is that the foolish materialist does not
heed the great danger of impending death! He knows that death
will surely come, yet he is nevertheless callous and neglectful. If
his father dies, he wants to enjoy his father’s property, and if his
son dies, he wants to enjoy his son’s possessions as well. In either
case, he heedlessly tries to enjoy material happiness with the ac-
quired money.

PURPORT

Material happiness means to have good facilities for eating. sleeping,
sexual intercourse and defense. Within this world, the materialistic per-
son lives only for these four principles of sense gratification, not caring
for the impending danger of death. After his father’s death, a son tries to
inherit his money and use it for sense gratification. Similarly, one whose
son dies tries to enjoy the possessions of his son. Sometimes the father of
a dead son even enjoys his son’s widow. Materialistic persons behave in
this way. Thus Sukadeva Gosvami says, “How wonderful are these
pastimes of material happiness transacted by the will of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead!” In other words, materialistic persons want to
commit all kinds of sinful activities, but without the sanction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, no one can do anything. Why does the
Supreme Personality of Godhead permit sinful activities? The Supreme
Lord does not want any living being to act sinfully, and He begs him
through his good conscience to refrain from sin. But when someone


--- Page 165 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
insists upon acting sinfully, the Supreme Lord gives him the sanction to
act at his own risk (mattah smrtir jianam apohana ca). No one can do
anything without the sanction of the Lord, but He is so kind that when
the conditioned soul persists in doing something, the Lord permits the
individual soul to act at his own risk.

According to Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, sons always out-
live their fathers in other planetary systems and other lands in this
universe, especially on Svargaloka. However, on this planet earth a son
often dies before his father, and the materialistic father is pleased to en-
joy the possessions of his son. Neither the father nor the son can see the
reality—that both of them are awaiting death. When death comes,
however, all their plans for material enjoyment are finished.

TEXT 4
वदन्ति विश्वं कवयः सख नश्वरं
पश्यन्ति चाध्यात्मविदो Fafa: |
कथापि शुद्यन्ति तवाज मायया
9 == ५५ ho oo
सुविसितं कृत्यमजं नतोऽसि तम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥
vadanti visvari kavayah sma nasvaram
pasyanti cadhyatmavido vipascitah
tathapi muhyanti tavaja mayaya
suvismitar krtyam ajar nato smi tam
vadanti—they say authoritatively: visvam—the entire material cre-
ation: kavayah—great learned sages: sma—certainly: nasvaram—
perishable: pasyanti—they see in trance: ca—also: adhyatma-vidah—
who have realized spiritual knowledge: vipascitah—very learned
scholars: tatha api—still; muhyanti—become illusioned; tava—your:
aja—O unborn one: mayaya—by the illusory energy: su-vismitam—
most wonderful: krtyam—activity: ajam—unto the supreme unborn
one: natah asmi—I offer my obeisances: tam —unto Him.
TRANSLATION

O unborn one, learned Vedic scholars who are advanced in

spiritual knowledge certainly know that this material world is


--- Page 166 ---
Text 4] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 161
perishable, as do other logicians and philosophers. In trance they
realize the factual position of this world, and they preach the truth
as well. Yet even they are sometimes bewildered by Your illusory
energy. This is Your own wonderful pastime. Therefore, I can un-
derstand that Your illusory energy is very wonderful, and I offer
my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT

Not only does the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead act on the conditioned soul within this material world, but
sometimes it also acts on the most advanced learned scholars, who fac-
tually know the constitutional position of this material world through
realization. As soon as someone thinks, “I am this material body (ahari
mameti) and everything in relationship with this material body is mine."
he is in illusion (moka). This illusion caused by the material energy acts
especially on the conditioned souls, but it sometimes also acts on liberated
souls as well. A liberated soul is a person who has sufficient knowledge of
this material world and is therefore unattached to the bodily conception
of life. But because of association with the modes of material nature for a
very long time, even liberated souls sometimes become captivated by the
illusory energy due to inattentiveness in the transcendental position.
Therefore Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.14), mam eva ye prapa-
dyante mayam etari taranti te: ("0119 those who surrender unto Me can
overcome the influence of the material energy.” Therefore no one should
think of himself as a liberated person immune to the influence of maya.
Everyone should very cautiously execute devotional service by rigidly
following regulative principles. Thus he will remain fixed at the lotus
feet of the Lord. Otherwise, a little inattention will create havoc. We
have already seen an example of this in the case of Maharaja Bharata.
Maharaja Bharata was undoubtedly a great devotee, but because he
turned his attention slightly toward a small deer, he had to suffer two
more births, one as a deer and another as the brahmana Jada Bharata.
Afterward he was liberated and went back home, back to Godhead.

The Lord is always prepared to excuse His devotee. but if a devotee
takes advantage of the Lord’s leniency and purposefully commits
mistakes again and again, the Lord will certainly punish him by letting
him fall down into the clutches of the illusory energy. In other words.


--- Page 167 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
theoretical knowledge acquired by studying the Vedas is insufficient to
protect one from the clutches of maya. One must strongly adhere to the
lotus feet of the Lord in devotional service. Then one’s position is secure.
TEXT 5
= (ष
विश्वोद्धवस्थाननिरोधकमं ते
दकतुरङ्ीकृतमप्यपात्रृतः |
| ৬ ¢
युक्तं न चित्रं त्वयि कायकारण
o =
सर्वात्मनि भ्यतिरिक्ते च वस्तुतः ॥ ५॥
visvodbhava-sthana-nirodha-karma te
hy akartur angikrtam apy apavrtah
yuktarh na citrarh tvayi karya-karane
sarvatmani vyatirikte ca vastutah
visva—of the whole universe; udbhava—of the creation; sthana —of
the maintenance; nirodha—of the annihilation; karma —these activities;
te—of You (0 dear Lord); hi—indeed; akartuh —aloof ; angikrtam —still
accepted by the Vedic literature; api—although; apavrtah—untouched
by all these activities; yuktam—befitting; na—not; citram—wonderful;
tvayi—in You; karya-karane—the original cause of all effects; sarva-at-
mani—in all respects; vyatirikte —set apart; ca—also; vastutah—the
original substance.
TRANSLATION
O Lord, although You are completely detached from the cre-
ation, maintenance and annihilation of this material world and are
not directly affected by these activities, they are all attributed to
You. We do not wonder at this, for Your inconceivable energies
perfectly qualify You to be the cause of all causes. You are the ac-
tive principle in everything, although You are separate from
everything. Thus we can realize that everything is happening
because of Your inconceivable energy.


--- Page 168 ---
Text 6] The Residents of Jambiidvipa Offer Prayers 163
i TEXT 6
वेदान्‌ युगान्ते तमसा तिरस्छृतान्‌
रसातलाधो नृतुरङ्गविग्रहः |
प्रत्याददे वं कवयेऽभियाचते
तस्मै नमस्तेऽवितथेहिताय इति॥ ६ ॥
vedan yugante tamasa tiraskrtan
rasatalad yo nr-turarnga-vigrahah
pratyadade vai kavaye ’bhiydcate
tasmai namas te vitathehitaya iti
vedan—the four Vedas; yuga-ante—at the end of the millennium;
tamasa—by the demon of ignorance personified; tiraskrtan—stolen
away: rasdtalit—from the lowest planetary system (Rasitala); yah—
who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); nr-turariga-vigrahah—
assuming the form of half-horse, half-man: pratyadade—returned:
vai—indeed; kavaye—to the supreme poet (Lord Brahma); abhiya-
cate—when he asked for them; tasmai—unto Him (the form of
Hayagriva): namah—my respectful obeisances: te—to You:
avitatha-ihitaya—whose resolution never fails; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
At the end of the millennium, ignorance personified assumed
the form of a demon, stole all the Vedas and took them down to the
planet of Rasatala. The Supreme Lord, however, in His form of
Hayagriva retrieved the Vedas and returned them to Lord Brahma
when he begged for them. I offer my respectful obeisances unto
the Supreme Lord, whose determination never fails.
PURPORT
Although Vedic knowledge is imperishable, within this material world
it is sometimes manifest and sometimes not. When the people of this
material world become too absorbed in ignorance, the Vedic knowledge
disappears. Lord Hayagriva or Lord Matsya, however. always protects


--- Page 169 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
the Vedic knowledge, and in due course of time it is again distributed
through the medium of Lord Brahma. Brahma is the trustworthy repre-
sentative of the Supreme Lord. Therefore when he again asked for the
treasure of Vedic knowledge, the Lord fulfilled his desire.
TEXT 7
हरिवर्षे चापि मगवानरहरिरूपेणास्ते। तद्रपग्रहणनिमित्तयुत्तरत्राभिधास्थे
+ ५ ~ >
| तदयितं सूपं महापुरुषगुणभाजनो महाभागवतो देत्यदानवङलतीर्थी-
= ~ a

करणन्ीसाचरितः प्रहादोऽव्यवधानानन्यमक्तियोगेन सह तदर्पुरूषैरुपास्ते
इदं चोदाहरति ell

hari-varse capi bhagavin nara-hari-riipenaste. tad-ripa-grahana-
nimittam uttaratrabhidhasye. tad dayitam ripam maha-purusa-guna-
bhajano maha-bhagavato daitya-danava-kula-tirthikarana-sila-caritah
prahlado vyavadhanananya-bhakti-yogena saha tad-varsa-purusair
upaste ida codaharati.

hari-varse—in the tract of land known as Harivarsa: ca—also; api—
indeed; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: nara-hari-
ripena—His form of Nrsimhadeva: daste—is situated: tat-ripa-
grahana-nimittam—the reason why Lord Krsna (Kesava) assumed the
form of Nrsirnha: uttaratra—in later chapters: abhidhasye—I shall de-
scribe; tat—that; dayitam—most pleasing: ripam—form of the Lord:
mahd-purusa-guna-bhajanah—Prahlada Maharaja, who is the abode of
all the good qualities of great personalities; maha-bhagavatah —the top-
most devotee; daitya-danava-kula-tirthi-karana-sila-caritah —whose
activities and character were so exalted that he delivered all the daityas
(demons) born in his family; prahladah—Maharaja Prahlada;
avyavadhana-ananya-bhakti-yogena—by uninterrupted and unflinch-
ing devotional service; saha—with; tat-varsa-purusaih—the inhabitants
of Hari-varsa; upaste—offers obeisances to and worships; idam—this;
ca—and; uddharati—chants.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, Lord Nrsithhadeva

resides in the tract of land known as Hari-varsa. In the Seventh


--- Page 170 ---
Text 7] The Residents of Jambidvipa Offer Prayers 165
Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, I shall describe to you how Prahlada
Maharaja caused the Lord to assume the form of Nrsirnhadeva.
Prahlada Maharaja, the topmost devotee of the Lord, is a reservoir
of all the good qualities of great personalities. His character and
activities have delivered all the fallen members of his demoniac
family. Lord Nrsimmhadeva is very dear to this exalted personality.
Thus Prahlada Maharaja, along with his servants and all the
denizens of Hari-varsa, worships Lord Nrsirhhadeva by chanting
the following mantra.
PURPORT

Jayadeva Gosvami’s ten prayers worshiping the incarnations of Lord
Krsna (Kesava) contain His name in every stanza. For example, kesava
dhrta-nara-hari-ripa jaya jagad-isa hare, kesava dhrta-mina-sarira
jaya jagad-isa hare, and kesava dhrta-vamana-ripa jaya jagad-isa
hare. The word jagad-isa refers to the proprietor of all the universes. His
original form is the two-handed form of Lord Krsna. standing with a
flute in His hands and engaged in tending the cows. As stated in
Brahma-sarnhita:

cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa-
laksavrtesu surabhir abhipalayantam
laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanari
govindam adi-purusari tam aha bhajami
“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is tend-
ing the cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems and
surrounded by millions of purpose trees. He is always served with great
reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of for-
tune.” From this verse we learn that Govinda, or Krsna, is the adi-
purusa (the original person). The Lord has innumerable incarnations,
exactly like the innumerable waves of a flowing river, but the original
form is Krsna, or Kesava.

Sukadeva Gosvami refers to Nrsimhadeva because of Prahlada
Maharaja. Prahlada Maharaja was put into great distress by his powerful
father, the demon Hiranyakasipu. Apparently helpless before him.
Prahlada Maharaja called on the Lord, who immediately assumed the


--- Page 171 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
gigantic form of Nrsimmhadeva, half-lion and half-man, to kill the gigan-
tic demon. Although Krsna is the original person, one without a second,
He assumes different forms just to satisfy His devotees or to execute a
specific purpose. Therefore Jayadeva Gosvami always repeats the name
of Kesava, the original Personality of Godhead, in his prayers describing
the Lord’s different incarnations for different purposes.
TEXT 8
ॐ नमो मगवते नरसिंहाय नमस्तेजस्तेजसे आविराविर्भव वज्जनख
9 ~ os

TAZY कर्माशयान्‌ रन्धय रन्धय तमो ग्रस ग्रस ॐ खाहा | अभयमभयमात्मनि
भूयिष्ठा ॐ शम्‌ ॥ ८॥
ori namo bhagavate 707057772/103/व namas tejas-tejase avir-avirbhava
vajra-nakha vajra-daristra karmasayan randhaya randhaya tamo grasa
grasa om svaha. abhayam abhayam atmani bhiyistha or ksraum.

om—O Lord; namah—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate —unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-simhaya—known as Lord
Nrsimha; namah—obeisances: tejah-tejase—the power of all power;
avih-avirbhava—please be fully manifest; vajra-nakha—O You who
possess nails like thunderbolts; vajra-daristra—O You who possess teeth
like thunderbolts; karma-asayan—demoniac desires to be happy by
material activities; randhaya randhaya—kindly vanquish; tamah—ig-
norance in the material world; grasa —kindly drive away; grasa—kindly
drive away; om—O my Lord; svaha—respectful oblations; abhayam—
fearlessness; abhayam—fearlessness; atmani—in my mind;
bhityisthah—may You appear; om —O Lord; ksraum—the bija, or seed,
of mantras offering prayers to Lord Nrsimha.

TRANSLATION

I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Nrsithhadeva, the
source of all power. O my Lord who possesses nails and teeth just
like thunderbolts, kindly vanquish our demonlike desires for
fruitive activity in this material world. Please appear in our hearts
and drive away our ignorance so that by Your mercy we may


--- Page 172 ---
Text 8] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 167
become fearless in the struggle for existence in this material
world.

PURPORT

In Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.22.39) Sanat-kumara speaks the following

words to Maharaja Prthu:
yat-pada-pankaja-palasa-vilasa-bhaktya
karmasayar grathitam udgrathayanti santah
tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo pi ruddha-
srotoganas tam aranari bhaja vasudevam
“Devotees always engaged in the service of the toes of the Lord’s lotus
feet can very easily become free from hard-knotted desires for fruitive
activities. Because this is very difficult, the nondevotees —the jAanis and
yogis—cannot stop the waves of sense gratification, although they try to
do so. Therefore you are advised to engage in the devotional service of
Krsna, the son of Vasudeva.”

Every living being within this material world has a strong desire to en-
joy matter to his fullest satisfaction. For this purpose, the conditioned
soul must accept one body after another, and thus his strongly fixed frui-
tive desires continue. One cannot stop the repetition of birth and death
without being completely desireless. Therefore Srila Ripa Gosvami de-
scribes pure bhakti (devotional service) as follows:

anyabhilasita-sinyam
Jjaana-karmady-andavrtam
anukulyena krsnanu-
sStlanarn bhaktir uttama
“One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devo-
tional service.” Unless one is completely freed of all material desires.
which are caused by the dense darkness of ignorance, one cannot fully
engage in the devotional service of the Lord. Therefore we should always
offer our prayers to Lord Nrsithhadeva, who killed Hiranyakasipu. the


--- Page 173 ---
168 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
personification of material desire. Hiranya means “gold,” and kasipu
means “a soft cushion or bed.” Materialistic persons always desire to
make the body comfortable, and for this they require huge amounts of
gold. Thus Hiranyakasipu was the perfect representative of materialistic
life. He was therefore the cause of great disturbance to the topmost devo-
tee, Prahlada Maharaja, until Lord Nrsimhadeva killed him. Any devotee
aspiring to be free of material desires should offer his respectful prayers
to Nrsirhhadeva as Prahlada Maharaja did in this verse.
TEXT 9
खस्त्यस्त॒ विश्वस्य खलः प्रसीदतां
ध्यायन्तु भूतानि शिवं मिथो धिया।
मनश्च मद्रं भजतादघोक्षजे
अवि्यतां नो मतिरप्यदैतुकी ।। ९ ॥।
svasty astu visvasya khalah [07058001077
dhyayantu bhitani $80071 mitho dhiya
manas ca bhadrar bhajatad adhoksaje
avesyatarm no matir apy ahaituki
svasti—auspiciousness; astu—let there be; visvasya—of the entire
universe; khalah—the envious (almost everyone); prasidatam—let
them be pacified; dhyayantu—let them consider; bhatani—all the liv-
ing entities; §ivam—auspiciousness; mithah—mutual; dhiya—by their
intelligence; manah—the mind; ca—and; bhadram—calmness; bha-
Jatat—Ilet it experience; adhoksaje—in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is beyond the perception of mind. intelligence and senses;
avesyatam—let it be absorbed; nah—our; matih—intelligence: api—
indeed; ahaituki—without any motive.
TRANSLATION
May there be good fortune throughout the universe, and may all
envious persons be pacified. May all living entities become calm by
practicing bhakti-yoga, for by accepting devotional service they
will think of each other’s welfare. Therefore let us all engage in


--- Page 174 ---
Text 9] The Residents of Jambiidvipa Offer Prayers 169
the service of the supreme transcendence, Lord Sri Krsna, and al-
ways remain absorbed in thought of Him.
PURPORT
The following verse describes a Vaisnava:
vancha-kalpa-tarubhyas ca
krpa-sindhubhya eva ca
patitanari pavanebhyo
vaisnavebhyo namo namah
Just like a desire tree, a Vaisnava can fulfill all the desires of anyone who
takes shelter of his lotus feet. Prahlada Maharaja is a typical Vaisnava.
He prays not for himself, but for all living entities—the gentle, the en-
vious and. the mischievous. He always thought of the welfare of
mischievous persons like his father, Hiranyakasipu. Prahlada Maharaja
did not ask for anything for himself: rather, he prayed for the Lord to
excuse his demoniac father. This is the attitude of a Vaisnava, who al-
ways thinks of the welfare of the entire universe.

Srimad-Bhagavatam and bhagavata-dharma are meant for persons
who are completely free of envy (parama-nirmatsaranam). Therefore
Prahlada Maharaja prays in this verse, khalah prasidatam: “May all the
envious persons be pacified.” The material world is full of envious per-
sons, but if one frees himself of envy, he becomes liberal in his social
dealings and can think of others’ welfare. Anyone who takes up Krsna
consciousness and engages himself completely in the service of the Lord
cleanses his mind of all envy (manas ca bhadrari bhajatad adhoksaje).
Therefore we should pray to Lord Nrsimmhadeva to sit in our hearts. We
should pray, bahir nrsirnho hrdaye nrsirnhah: **Let Lord Nrsimhadeva
sit in the core of my heart, killing all my bad propensities. Let my mind
become clean so that I may peacefully worship the Lord and bring peace
to the entire world.”

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura has given us a very fine purport
in this regard. Whenever one offers a prayer to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, one always requests some benediction from Him. Even pure
(niskama) devotees pray for some benediction. as instructed by Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu in His Siksastaka:


--- Page 175 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18

ayi nanda-tanyja kirikararm
patitarh mam visame bhavambudhau
krpaya tava pada-pankaja-
sthiti-dhili-sadrsam vicintaya
"0 son of Maharaja Nanda [Krsnal, I am Your eternal servitor, yet some-
how or other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick
Me up from the ocean of death and place Me as one of the atoms at Your
lotus feet.” In another prayer Lord Caitanya says, mama janmani jan-
manisvare bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi: “Life after life, kindly let
Me have unalloyed love and devotion at Your Lordship’s lotus feet.”
When Prahlada Maharaja chants 073 namo bhagavate narasimhaya, he
prays for a benediction from the Lord, but because he is also an exalted
Vaisnava, he wants nothing for his personal sense gratification. The first
desire expressed in his prayer is svasty astu visvasya: ‘“Let there be good
fortune throughout the entire universe.” Prahlada Maharaja thus re-
quested the Lord to be merciful to everyone, including his father, a most
envious person. According to Canakya Pandita, there are two kinds of
envious living entities: one is a snake, and the other is the man like
Hiranyakasipu, who is by nature envious of everyone, even of his father
or son. HiranyakaSipu was envious of his little son Prahlada, but
Prahlada Maharaja asked a benediction for the benefit of his father.
Hiranyakasipu was very envious of devotees, but Prahlada wished that
his father and other demons like him would give up their envious nature
by the grace of the Lord and stop harassing the devotees (khalah
prasidatam). The difficulty is that the khala (envious living entity) is
rarely pacified. One kind of khala, the snake, can be pacified simply by
mantras or by the action of a particular herb (mantrausadhi-vasah sar-
pah khalakena nivaryate). An envious person, however, cannot be
pacified by any means. Therefore Prahlada Maharaja prays that all en-
vious persons may undergo a change of heart and think of the welfare of
others.

If the Krsna consciousness movement spreads all over the world, and
if by the grace of Krsna everyone accepts it, the thinking of envious peo-
ple will change. Everyone will think of the welfare of others. Therefore
Prahlada Maharaja prays, Sivan mitho dhiya. In material activities,
everyone is envious of others, but in Krsna consciousness, no one is en-


--- Page 176 ---
Text 10] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 171
vious of anyone else; everyone thinks of the welfare of others. Therefore
Prahlada Maharaja prays that everyone’s mind may become gentle by
being fixed at the lotus feet of Krsna (bhajatad adhoksaje). As indicated
elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam (sa vai manah krsna-padaravin-
dayoh) and as advised by Lord Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (18.65), man-
mana bhava mad-bhaktah, one should constantly think of the lotus feet
of Lord Krsna. Then one’s mind will certainly be cleansed (ceto-dar-
pana-marjanam). Materialists always think of sense gratification, but
Prahlada Maharaja prays that the Lord's mercy will change their minds
and they will stop thinking of sense gratification. If they think of Krsna
always, everything will be all right. Some people argue that if everyone
thought of Krsna in that way, the whole universe would be vacated
because everyone would go back home, back to Godhead. However, Srila
Viévanatha Cakravati Thakura says that this is impossible because the
living entities are innumerable. If one set of living entities is actually
delivered by the Krsna consciousness movement, another set will fill the
entire universe.
TEXT 10
मागारदारात्मजवित्तबन्धुषु
सङ्गो यदि स्याद्धगवस्मियेषु नः ।
यः प्राणड्त्या परितुष्ट आत्मवान्‌
सिद्धयत्यद्रान तथेन्द्रियप्रियः neon
magara-daratmaja-vitta-bandhusu
sango yadi syad bhagavat-priyesu nah
yah prana-vrttya paritusta atmavan
siddhyaty adiiran na tathendriya-priyah
ma—not; agara—house; dara—wife; atma-ja—children: vitta—

bank balance; bandhusu—among friends and relatives; sarigah—associ-
ation or attachment; yadi—if; syat—there must be; bhagavat-priyesu—
among persons to whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very
dear; nah—of us; yah—anyone who; prana-vrttya—by the bare
necessities of life; paritustah—satisfied; atma-van—who has controlled
his mind and realized his self; siddhyati—becomes successful: adurat—


--- Page 177 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
very soon; na—not: tatha—so much: indriya-priyah—a person at-
tached to sense gratification.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, we pray that we may never feel attraction for the
prison of family life, consisting of home, wife, children, friends,
bank balance, relatives and so on. If we do have some attachment,
let it be for devotees, whose only dear friend is Krsna. A person
who is actually self-realized and who has controlled his mind is
perfectly satisfied with the bare necessities of life. He does not try
to gratify his senses. Such a person quickly advances in Krsna con-
sciousness, whereas others, who are too attached to material
things, find advancement very difficult.

PURPORT

When Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu was requested to explain the
duty of a Vaisnava, a Krsna conscious person, He immediately said, asat-
sanga-tyaga, — ei vaisnava-acara. The first business of a Vaisnava is to
give up the association of persons who are not devotees of Krsna and who
are too attached to material things—wife, children, bank balance and so
on. Prahlada Maharaja also prays to the Personality of Godhead that he
may avoid the association of nondevotees attached to the materialistic
way of life. If he must be attached to someone, he prays to be attached
only to a devotee.

A devotee is not interested in unnecessarily increasing the demands of
the senses for gratification. Of course, as long as one is in this material
world, one must have a material body, and it must be maintained for
executing devotional service. The body can be maintained very easily by
eating krsna-prasada. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (9.26):

patram puspari [0100 0717 toyarm
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad aha bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah
“If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a lower, fruit or water, 1
will accept it.” Why should the menu be unnecessarily increased for the


--- Page 178 ---
Text 11] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 173
satisfaction of the tongue? Devotees should eat as simply as possible.
Otherwise, attachment for material things will gradually increase, and
the senses, being very strong, will soon require more and more material
enjoyment. Then the real business of life—to advance in Krsna con-
sciousness — will stop.
TEXT 11
+ oR.
यत्सङ्गलन्धं  निजवीयं वैमवं
तीरथ gg: संस्प्शतां हि मानसम्‌ ।
हरत्यजोऽन्तः श्वुतिभिगैतोऽङ्गजं
=, ज,
को वें न सेवेत भुङन्दरिकमम्‌ 11221
yat-sanga-labdhari nija-virya-vaibhavam
tirtharn muhuh sarsprsatar hi manasam
haraty ajo 7808 Srutibhir gato ‘rigajarn
ko vai na seveta mukunda-vikramam
yat—of whom (the devotees); sanga-labdham—achieved by the asso-
ciation;  nja-virya-vaibhavam —whose influence is uncommon;
tirtham—holy places like the Ganges; muhuh—repeatedly;
sarispréatam—of those touching; hi—certainly; manasam—the dirty
things in the mind; harati—vanquishes; ajah—the supreme unborn
one; antah—in the core of the heart; Srutibhih—by the ears; gatah—
entered; ariga-jam—dirty things or infections of the body; kah—who;
vai—indeed; na—not; seveta—would serve; mukunda-vikramam—the
glorious activities of Mukunda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
By associating with persons for whom the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Mukunda, is the all in all, one can hear of His
powerful activities and soon come to understand them. The ac-
tivities of Mukunda are so potent that simply by hearing of them
one immediately associates with the Lord. For a person who con-
stantly and very eagerly hears narrations of the Lord’s powerful
activities, the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead in the


--- Page 179 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
form of sound vibrations, enters within his heart and cleanses it of
all contamination. On the other hand, although bathing in the
Ganges diminishes bodily contaminations and infections, this pro-
cess and the process of visiting holy places can cleanse the heart
only after a long time. Therefore who is the sane man who will not
associate with devotees to quickly perfect his life?
PURPORT

Bathing in the Ganges can certainly cure one of many infectious dis-
eases, but it cannot cleanse one’s materially attached mind, which creates
all kinds of contaminations in material existence. However, one who
directly associates with the Supreme Lord by hearing of His activities
cleanses the dirt from his mind and very soon comes to Krsna conscious-
ness. Sita Gosvami confirms this in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.17):

Srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
punya-Sravana-kirtanah
hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani
vidhunoti suhrt-satam

The Supreme Lord within everyone’s heart becomes very pleased when a
person hears narrations of His activities, and He personally cleanses the
dirt from the mind of the listener. Hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani
vidhunoti: He washes off all dirt from the mind. Material existence is
caused by dirty things within the mind. If one can cleanse his mind, he
immediately comes to his original position of Krsna consciousness, and
thus his life becomes successful. Therefore all the great saints in the
devotional line very strongly recommend the process of hearing. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu introduced the congregational chanting of the
Hare Krsna mantra to give everyone a chance to hear Krsna’s holy name,
for simply by hearing Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, one becomes purified
(ceto-darpana-marjanam). Therefore our Krsna consciousness move-
ment is chiefly engaged in chanting the Hare Krsna mantra all over the
world.

After one’s mind becomes cleansed by chanting Hare Krsna, one
gradually comes to the platform of Krsna consciousness and then reads


--- Page 180 ---
Text 12] The Residents of Jambuadvipa Offer Prayers 175
books like Bhagavad-gita, Srimad-Bhagavatam, Caitanya-caritémrta
and The Nectar of Devotion. In this way, one becomes more and more
purified of material contamination. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.2.18):
nasta-prayesv abhadresu
nityarn bhagavata-sevaya
bhagavaty uttama-sloke
bhaktir bhavati naisthiki

“By regularly hearing the Bhagavatam and rendering service unto the
pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practically destroyed,
and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with transcen-
dental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact.” In this way, simply by
hearing of the powerful activities of the Lord, the devotee’s heart
becomes almost completely cleansed of material contamination, and thus
his original position as an eternal servant who is part and parcel of the
Lord becomes manifest. While the devotee engages in devotional service,
the passionate and ignorant modes of material nature are gradually van-
quished, and then he acts only in the mode of goodness. At that time he
becomes happy and gradually advances in Krsna consciousness.

All the great acaryas strongly recommend that people be given a
chance to hear about the Supreme Lord. Then success is assured. The
more we cleanse the dirt of material attachment from our hearts, the
more we will be attracted by Krsna’s name, form, qualities, parapher-
nalia and activities. This is the sum and substance of the Krsna con-
sciousness movement.

TEXT 12
यस्यास्ति भक्ति्भगकत्यकिश्चना
सर्वशुणेसतत्र॒ समासते सुराः ।
हरावभक्तस्य कृतो महदूयुणा
मनोरथेनासति धावतो बहिः new
yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akiiicana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surah


--- Page 181 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
harav abhaktasya kuto mahad-guna
manorathenasati dhavato bahih

yasya—of whom; asti—there 15; bhaktih—devotional service;
bhagavati—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akiicana—without
any motive; sarvaih—with all; gunaih—good qualities; tatra—there (in
that person); samasate—reside; surah—all the demigods; harau—unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhaktasya—of a person who is
not devoted; kutah—where; mahat-gunah—good qualities;
manorathena—by mental speculation; asati—in the temporary material
world; dhavatah—who is running; bahih—outside.

TRANSLATION

All the demigods and their exalted qualities, such as religion,
knowledge and renunciation, become manifest in the body of one
who has developed unalloyed devotion for the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Vasudeva. On the other hand, a person
devoid of devotional service and engaged in material activities has
no good qualities. Even if he is adept at the practice of mystic yoga
or the honest endeavor of maintaining his family and relatives, he
must be driven by his own mental speculations and must engage in
the service of the Lord’s external energy. How can there be any
good qualities in such a man?

PURPORT

As explained in the next verse, Krsna is the original source of all liv-
ing entities. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (15.7), wherein Krsna
says:

mamaivarso jiva-loke
Jjiva-bhitah sanatanah
manah sasthanindriyani
prakrti-sthani karsati

“The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six


--- Page 182 ---
Text 13] The Residents of Jambiidvipa Offer Prayers 177
senses, which include the mind.” All living entities are part and parcel
of Krsna, and therefore when they revive their original Krsna conscious-
ness, they possess all the good qualities of Krsna in a small quantity.
When one engages himself in the nine processes of devotional service
(Sravanar kirtanam visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam/ arcana van-
dana dasyam sakhyam atma-nivedanam), one’s heart becomes
purified, and he immediately understands his relationship with Krsna.
He then revives his original quality of Krsna consciousness.

In the Adi-lila of Caitanya-caritamrta, Chapter Eight, there is a
description of some of the qualities of devotees. For example, Sri Pandita
Haridasa is described as being very well-behaved, tolerant, peaceful,
magnanimous and grave. In addition, he spoke very sweetly, his en-
deavors were very pleasing, he was always patient, he respected every-
one, he always worked for everyone’s benefit, his mind was free of
duplicity, and he was completely devoid of all malicious acitivites. These
are all originally qualities of Krsna, and when one becomes a devotee
they automatically become manifest. Sri Krsnadasa Kaviraja, the author
of Caitanya-caritamrta, says that all good qualities become manifest in
the body of a Vaisnava and that only by the presence of these good
qualities can one distinguish a Vaisnava from a non-Vaisnava. Krsnadasa
Kaviraja lists the following twenty-six good qualities of a Vaisnava:
(1) He is very kind to everyone. (2) He does not make anyone his
enemy. (3) He is truthful. (4) He is equal to everyone. (5) No one can
find any fault in him. (6) He is magnanimous. (7) He is mild. (8) He is
always clean. (9) He is without possessions. (18) He works for every-
one’s benefit. (11) He is very peaceful. (12) He is always surrendered to
Krsna. (13) He has no material desires. (14) He is very meek. (15) He
is steady. (16) He controls his senses. (17) He does not eat more than
required. (18) He is not influenced by the Lord's illusory energy.
(19) He offers respect to everyone. (20) He does not desire any respect
for himself. (21) He is very grave. (22) He is merciful. (23) He is
friendly. (24) He is poetic. (25) He is expert. (26) He issilent.

TEXT 13
हरिं साक्षाद्भगवान्‌ शरीरिणा-
मात्मा क्षषाणामिव तोयमीप्सितम्‌ |


--- Page 183 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
हित्वा महांस्तं यदि सजते गृहे
तदा महत्वं वयसा दम्पतीनाम्‌ ॥१३॥
harir hi saksad bhagavan saririnam
atma jhasanam iva toyam ipsitam
hitva maharns tar yadi sajjate grhe
tada mahattvari vayasa dampatinam
harih—the Lord; hi—certainly; saksat—directly; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; saririnam—of all living entities who
have accepted material bodies; atma—the life and soul; jhasanam—of
the aquatics; iva—like; toyam—the vast water; ipsitam—is desired;
hitva—giving up; mahan—a great personality; tam—Him; yadi—if;
sajjate —becomes attached; grhe —to household life; tadd —at that time;
mahattvam—greatness; vayasa—by age; dam-patinam—of the hus-
band and wife.
TRANSLATION
Just as aquatics always desire to remain in the vast mass of water,
all conditioned living entities naturally desire to remain in the vast
existence of the Supreme Lord. Therefore if someone very great
by material calculations fails to take shelter of the Supreme Soul
but instead becomes attached to material household life, his great-
ness is like that of a young, low-class couple. One who is too at-
tached to material life loses all good spiritual qualities.
PURPORT
Although crocodiles are very fierce animals, they are powerless when
they venture out of the water onto land. When they are out of the water,
they cannot exhibit their original power. Similarly, the all-pervading
Supersoul, Paramatma, is the source of all living entities, and all living
entities are part and parcel of Him. When the living entity remains in
contact with the all-pervading Vasudeva, the Personality of Godhead, he
manifests his spiritual power, exactly as the crocodile exhibits its
strength in the water. In other words, the greatness of the living entity
can be perceived when he is in the spiritual world, engaged in spiritual


--- Page 184 ---
Text 14] The Residents of Jambiidvipa Offer Prayers 179
activities. Many householders, although well-educated in the knowledge
of the Vedas, become attached to family life. They are compared herein
to crocodiles out of water, for they are devoid of all spiritual strength.
Their greatness is like that of a young husband and wife who, though
uneducated, praise one another and become attracted to their own tem-
porary beauty. This kind of greatness is appreciated only by low-class
men with no qualifications.

Everyone should therefore seek the shelter of the Supreme Soul, the
source of all living entities. No one should waste his time in the so-called
happiness of materialistic household life. In the Vedic civilization, this
type of crippled life is allowed only until one’s fiftieth year, when one
must give up family life and enter either the order of vanaprastha (inde-
pendent retired life for cultivation of spiritual knowledge) or sannyasa
(the renounced order, in which one completely takes shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead).

TEXT 14
तसखाद्रजोरागविषादमन्यु-
EY
मानस्प्रहामयदन्याधिमूलम्‌ ।
हित्वा गृहं संसृतिचक्रवालं
चृरसिंहपादं मजताङ़तोमयमिति ॥१४॥
tasmad rajo-raga-visada-manyu-
mana-sprha-bhayadainyadhimillam
hitva grham sarsrti-cakravalarm
nrsirmha-padar bhajatakutobhayam iti
tasmat—therefore; rajah—of passion or material desires; raga—at-
tachment for material things; visada—then disappointment: manyu—
anger; mana-sprha—the desire to be respectable in society: bhaya—
fear; dainya—of poverty; adhimitlam—the root cause; hitvda—giving
up; grham—household life; sarsrti-cakravalam—the cycle of repeated
birth and death; nrsiriha-padam—the lotus feet of Lord Nrsithhadeva:
bhajata— worship; akutah-bhayam—the shelter of fearlessness: iti—
thus.


--- Page 185 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
TRANSLATION

Therefore, O demons, give up the so-called happiness of family
life and simply take shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Nrsirnhadeva,
which are the actual shelter of fearlessness. Entanglement in
family life is the root cause of material attachment, indefatigable
desires, moroseness, anger, despair, fear and the desire for false
prestige, all of which result in the repetition of birth and death.

TEXT 15
केतुमालेऽपि भगवान्‌ कामदेवस्वरूपेण लक्ष्म्याः प्रियचिकीर्षया
प्रजापतेदंहितृणां पुत्राणां तदरषेपतीनांपुरुषायुषाहोरात्रपरिसंरूयानानां यासां
गर्भा महापुरुषमदाख्तेजसोद्धेजितमनसां विध्वस्ता व्यसवः संवत्सरान्ते
विनिपतन्ति ॥ १५॥

९1171612 7 bhagavan kamadeva-svaripena laksmyah priya-
cikirsaya prajapater duhitrnam putranam tad-varsa-patinam
purusayusaho-ratra-parisarnkhyananam ydsam garbha maha-purusa-
mahastra-tejasodvejita-manasam vidhvasta vyasavah sarwatsarante
vinipatanti.

ketumale —in the tract of land known as Ketumala-varsa; api—also;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu;
kamadeva-svaripena—in the form of Kamadeva (Cupid or Pra-
dyumna); laksmydah—of the goddess of fortune; priya-cikirsaya—with
a desire to bring about the satisfaction; prajapateh—of Prajapati;
duhitinam—of the daughters; putranam—of the sons; tat-varsa-
patinam—the ruler of that land; purusa-ayusa—in a human lifetime
(about one hundred years); ahah-ratra—the days and nights;
parisankhyananam—which equal in number; ydsam—of whom (the
daughters); garbhah—fetuses; maha-purusa—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; maha-astra—of the great weapon (the disc); te-
jasa—by the effulgence; udvejita-manasam—whose minds are agitated;
vidhvastah—ruined; vyasavah—dead; sarwatsara-ante—at the end of
the year; vinipatanti—fall down.


--- Page 186 ---
Text 16] The Residents of Jambiidvipa Offer Prayers 181
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: In the tract of land called
Ketumala-varsa, Lord Visnu lives in the form of Kamadeva, only
for the satisfaction of His devotees. These include Laksmiji [the
goddess of fortune], the Prajapati Samvatsara and all of Sarnvat-
sara’s sons and daughters. The daughters of Prajapati are con-
sidered the controlling deities of the nights, and his sons are
considered the controllers of the days. The Prajapati’s offspring
number 36,000, one for each day and each night in the lifetime of
a human being. At the end of each year, the Prajapati’s daughters
become very agitated upon seeing the extremely effulgent disc of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus they all suffer
miscarriages.

PURPORT

This Kamadeva, who appears as Krsna’s son named Pradyumna, is
visnu-tattva. How this is so is explained by Madhvacarya, who quotes
from the Brahmanda Purana: kamadeva-sthitarin visnum updste.
Although this Kamadeva is visnu-tattva, His body is not spiritul but
material. Lord Visnu as Pradyumna or Kamadeva accepts a material
body, but He still acts spiritually. It does not make any difference
whether He accepts a spiritual or a material body: He can act spiritually
in any condition of existence. Mayavadi philosophers regard even Lord
Krsna’s body as material, but their opinions cannot impede the spiritual
activity of the Lord.

TEXT 16

अतीव सुलकितगतितिलाप्षविलसितरुचिरहासलेश्ा्रलोकलीलया
किञ्चिदुत्तम्मितसुन्द्रभ्रुमण्डलसुभगवद नारविन्दभरिया रमां
रमयन्निन्द्रियाणि रमयते ॥१६॥
ativa sulalita-gati-vilasa-vilasita-rucira-hasa-lesavaloka-lilaya kincid-
uttambhita-sundara-bhri-mandala-subhaga-vadandaravinda-sriya
ramar ramayann indriyani ramayate.


--- Page 187 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18

ativa—very much; su-lalita—beautiful; gati—with movements;
vilasa—by pastimes; wvilasita—manifested; rucira—pleasing; hdsa-
leSa—mild smiling; avaloka-lilaya—by playful glancing; kincit-ut-
tambhita—slightly raised; sundara—beautiful; bhri-mandala—by the
eyebrows; subhaga—auspicious; vadana-aravinda-sriya—with His
beautiful lotuslike face; ramam—the goddess of fortune; ramayan—
pleasing; indriyani—all the senses; ramayate —He pleases.

TRANSLATION

In Ketumala-varsa, Lord Kamadeva [Pradyumna] moves very
graciously. His mild smile is very beautiful, and when He increases
the beauty of His face by slightly raising His eyebrows and glanc-
ing playfully, He pleases the goddess of fortune. Thus He enjoys
His transcendental senses.

TEXT 17
तद्भगवतो मायामयं रूपं परमसमाधियोगेन रमा देवी संवत्सरस्य रात्रिषु
© +

प्रजापतेदुहिठभिरूपेतादःसु च तद्धतेभिरुपास्ते इदं चोदाहरति 11290)
tad bhagavato mayamayar ripari parama-samadhi-yogena rama devi
sariwatsarasya ratrisu prajapater duhitrbhir upetahahsu ca tad-
bhartrbhir upaste idari codaharati.

tat—that; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
maya-mayam—full of affection for the devotees; riapam—form;
parama—highest; samadhi-yogena—by absorption of the mind in the
service of the Lord; rama—the goddess of fortune; devi—divine
woman; sariwatsarasya—known as Samvatsara; ratrisu—during the
nights; prajapateh—of Prajapati; duhitrbhih—with the daughters;
upeta—combined; ahahsu—during the days; ca—also; tat-
bhartrbhih —with the husbands; updste —worships; idam—this; ca—
also; udaharati—chants.

TRANSLATION

Accompanied during the daytime by the sons of the Prajapati

[the predominating deities of the days] and accompanied at night


--- Page 188 ---
Text 18] The Residents of Jambidvipa Offer Prayers 183
by his daughters [the deities of the nights], Laksmidevi worships
the Lord during the period known as the Samvatsara in His most
merciful form as Kamadeva. Fully absorbed in devotional service,
she chants the following mantras.
PURPORT

The word mayamayam used in this verse should not be understood
according to the interpretations of the Mayavadis. Maya means affection
as well as illusion. When a mother deals with her child affectionately, she
is called mayamaya. In whatever form the Supreme Lord Visnu appears,
He is always affectionate toward His devotees. Thus the word
mayamayam is used here to mean “very affectionate toward the devo-
tees.” Srila Jiva Gosvami writes in this regard that mayamayam can also
mean krpa-pracuram, deeply merciful. Similarly, Srila Viraraghava
says, mdya-pracuranatmiya-sankalpena parigrhitam ity arthah jiana-
paryayo ‘tra maya-sabdah: when one is very affectionate due to an inti-
mate relationship, one is described as mayamaya. Srila ৬1531131103
Cakravati Thakura explains mayamayam by dividing it into the words
maya and amayam. He explains these words to indicate that because the
living entity is covered by the disease of illusion, the Lord is always eager
to deliver His devotee from the clutches of maya and cure him of the dis-
ease caused by the illusory energy.

TEXT 18

~ > ५ ॐ এ =+ Ly
১ ছা हीं हँ. ॐ नमो भगवते हृषीकेशाय सर्वगुणविकषैविंलक्षितात्मने
आकूतीनां चित्तीनां चेतसां विषाणां चाधिपतये
ज (२
षोडशकलायच्छन्दोमयायान्नमयायाखरृतमयाय सवेमयाय सदसे ओजसे
बलाय कान्ताय कामाय नमस्ते उमयत्र भूयात्‌ ॥१८॥
ori 7077 (771 [হন ডন? or namo bhagavate hrsikesaya sarva-guna-visesair
vilaksitatmane akiitinarn cittinar cetasarn visesandam cadhipataye
sodasa-kalaya cchando-maydayanna-mayayamrta-maydya sarva-
mayaya sahase ojase balaya kantaya kamaya namas te ubhayatra
bhuyat.


--- Page 189 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18

om —O Lord; hram hrim hriim —the seeds of the mantra, chanted for
a successful result; om —O Lord; namah—respectful obeisances; bhaga-
vate—unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
hrsikesaya—unto Hrsikesa, the Lord of the senses; sarva-guna —with all
transcendental qualities; visesaih—with all varieties; vilaksita—particu-
larly observed; atmane—unto the soul of all living entities; akiatinam—
of all kinds of activity; cittinam—of all kinds of knowledge; cetasam—
of the functions of the mind, such as determination and mental effort;
visesanam—of their respective objects; ca—and; adhipataye—unto the
master; sodesa-kalaya—whose parts are the sixteen original ingredients
of creation (namely the five objects of the senses and the eleven senses,
including the mind); chandah-mayaya—unto the enjoyer of all
ritualistic ceremonies; anna-maydya—who maintains all living entities
by supplying the necessities of life; amrta-mayaya—who awards eternal
life; sarva-mayaya—who is all-pervading; sahase—the powerful;
ojase—who supplies strength to the senses; balaya—who supplies
strength to the body; kantaya—the supreme husband or master of all
living entities; kamaya—who supplies all necessities for the devotees;
namah—respectful obeisances: te—unto You; ubhayatra—always (dur-
ing both day and night, or both in this life and the next); bhiiyat—may
there be all good fortune.

TRANSLATION

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Lord Hrsikesa, the controller of all my senses
and the origin of everything. As the supreme master of all bodily,
mental and intellectual activities, He is the only enjoyer of their
results. The five sense objects and eleven senses, including the
mind, are His partial manifestations. He supplies all the necessities
of life, which are His energy and thus nondifferent from Him, and
He is the cause of everyone’s bodily and mental prowess, which is
also nondifferent from Him. Indeed, He is the husband and pro-
vider of necessities for all living entities. The purpose of all the
Vedas is to worship Him. Therefore let us all offer Him our
respectful obeisances. May He always be favorable toward us in this
life and the next.


--- Page 190 ---
Text 19] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 185
PURPORT

In this verse the word mayamaya is further explained in regard to
how the Lord expands His mercy in different ways. Pardsya Saktir
vividhaiva $rizyate: the energies of the Supreme Lord are understood in
different ways. In this verse He is described as the original source of
everything, even our body, senses, mind, activities, prowess, bodily
strength, mental strength and determination for securing the necessities
of life. Indeed, the Lord’s energies can be perceived in everything. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.8), raso "ham apsu kaunteya: the taste of
water is also Krsna. Krsna is the active principle of everything we need
for our maintenance.

This verse offering respectful obeisances unto the Lord was composed
by Rama, the goddess of fortune, and is full of spiritual power. Under
the guidance of a spiritual master, everyone should chant this mantra
and thus become a complete and perfect devotee of the Lord. One may
chant this mantra for complete liberation from material bondage, and
after liberation one may continue to chant it while worshiping the
Supreme Lord in Vaikunthaloka. All mantras, of course, are meant for
this life and the next life, as Krsna Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gita
(9.14):

satatarn kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratah
namasyanta$ ca mar bhaktya
nitya-yukta updasate
“Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination.
bowing down before Me, the great souls perpetually worship Me with
devotion.” A devotee who both in this life and the next chants the maha-
mantra, or any mantra, is called nitya-yuktopasaka.
TEXT 19
ft तरतेस्त्वा हषिकेश्वरं स्वतो
ह्याराध्य लोके पतिमाशासतेऽन्यम्‌ |


--- Page 191 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
9 न ক
तासां न ते वे परिपान्त्यपत्यं
प्रियं धनायुंषि यतोऽखतन्त्राः neal
striyo vratais tva hrsikesvararm 50010
hy aradhya loke patim asasate 'nyam
tasam na te vai paripanty apatyar
priya dhanayumsi yato ’sva-tantrah
striyah—all women; vrataih—by observing fasting and other vows;
tva—you; hrsikesvaram—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, master
of the senses; svatah—of your own accord; hi—certainly; aradhya—
worshiping; loke—in the world; patim—a husband; asasate—ask for;
anyam—another; tasam—of all those women; na—not; te—the hus-
bands; wvai—indeed: paripanti—able to protect; apatyam—the
children; priyam—very dear; dhana—the wealth; ayamsi—or the
duration of life; yatah—because; asva-tantrah—dependent.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are certainly the fully independent master of
all the senses. Therefore all women who worship You by strictly
observing vows because they wish to acquire a husband to satisfy
their senses are surely under illusion. They do not know that such
a husband cannot actually give protection to them or their
children. Nor can he protect their wealth or duration of life, for he
himself is dependent on time, fruitive results and the modes of
nature, which are all subordinate to You.
PURPORT
In this verse, Laksmidevi (Rama) shows compassion toward women
who worship the Lord for the benediction of possessing a good husband.
Although such women desire to be happy with children, wealth, a long
duration of life and everything dear to them, they cannot possibly do so.
In the material world, a so-called husband is dependent on the control of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are many examples of a
woman whose husband, being dependent on the result of his own frui-


--- Page 192 ---
Text 19] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 187
tive actions, cannot maintain his wife, her children, her wealth or her
duration of life. Therefore, factually the only real husband of all women
is Krsna, the supreme husband. Because the gopis were liberated souls,
they understood this fact. Therefore they rejected their material hus-
bands and accepted Krsna as their real husband. Krsna is the real hus-
band not only of the gopis, but of every living entity. Everyone should
perfectly understand that Krsna is the real husband of all living entities,
who are described in the Bhagavad-gita as prakrti (female), not purusa
(male). In Bhagavad-gita (10.12), only Krsna is addressed as purusa:
param brahma param dhama
pavitrari [00217077107 bhavan
purusar Sasvatarn divyam
adi-devam ajar vibhum
“You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and
purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the
primal God, transcendental and original. and You are the unborn and all-
pervading beauty.”

Krsna is the original purusa, and the living entities are prakrti. Thus
Krsna is the enjoyer, and all living entities are meant to be enjoyed by
Him. Therefore any woman who seeks a material husband for her pro-
tection, or any man who desires to become the husband of a woman, is
under illusion. To become a husband means to maintain a wife and
children nicely by supplying wealth and security. However, a material
husband cannot possibly do this, for he is dependent on his karma. Kar-
mand daiva-netrena: his circumstances are determined by his past frui-
tive activities. Therefore if one proudly thinks he can protect his wife. he
is under illusion. Krsna is the only husband, and therefore the relation-
ship between a husband and wife in this material world cannot be ab-
solute. Because we have the desire to marry, Krsna mercifully allows the
so-called husband to possess a wife, and the wife to possess a so-called
husband, for mutual satisfaction. In the Fsopanisad it is said, tena tyak-
tena bhunjitha: the Lord provides everyone with his quota. Actually.
however, every living entity is prakrti, or female, and Krsna is the only
husband.


--- Page 193 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
ekale vara krsna, ara saba bhrtya
yare yaiche nacaya, se taiche kare nrtya
(Ce. Adi 5.142)
Krsna is the original master or husband of everyone, and all other living
entities, having taken the form of so-called husbands, or wives, are danc-
ing according to His desire. A so-called husband may unite with his wife
for sense gratification, but his senses are conducted by Hrsikesa, the
master of the senses, who is therefore the actual husband.
TEXT 20
स वै पतिः स्यादकुतोभयः खयं
समन्ततः पाति मयातुरं जनम्‌ |
स एक एवेतरथा मिथो भयं
नैवात्मलामाद धि मन्यते परम्‌ ॥२०॥
sa vai patih syad akutobhayah svayarn
samantatah pati bhaydaturari janam
sa eka evetaratha mitho bhayarin
naivatmalabhad adhi manyate param
sah—he; vai—indeed; patih—a husband; syat—would be; akutah-
bhayah—who is not fearful of anyone; svayam —self-sufficient; saman-
tatah—entirely; pati—maintains; bhaya-aturam—who is very afraid;
Janam—a person; sah—therefore he; ekah—one; eva—only;
itaratha—otherwise; mithah—from one another; bhayam —fear; na—
not; eva—indeed; atma-labhat—than the attainment of You; adhi—
greater; manyate—is accepted; param —other thing.
TRANSLATION
He alone who is never afraid but who, on the contrary, gives
complete shelter to all fearful persons can actually become a hus-
band and protector. Therefore, my Lord, you are the only hus-
band, and no one else can claim this position. If you were not the
only husband, You would be afraid of others. Therefore persons


--- Page 194 ---
Text 21] The Residents of Jambiadvipa Offer Prayers 189
1
learned in all Vedic literature accept only Your Lordship as every-
one’s master, and they think no one else a better husband and pro-
tector than You.
PURPORT

Here the meaning of husband or guardian is clearly explained. People
want to become a husband, a guardian, a governor or a political leader
without knowing the actual meaning of such a superior position. There
are many people all over the world —indeed, throughout the universe—
who claim for some time that they are husbands, political leaders or
guardians, but in due course of time the Supreme Lord desires their
removal from their posts, and their careers are immediately finished.
Therefore those who are actually learned and advanced in spiritual life
do not accept any leader, husband or maintainer other than the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

Lord Krsna personally states in Bhagavad-gita (18.66), aham tvam
sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami: "न shall deliver you from all sinful reac-
tions.” Krsna is not afraid of anyone. On the contrary, everyone is afraid
of Krsna. Therefore He can actually give protection to a subordinate liv-
ing entity. Since so-called leaders or dictators are completely under the
control of material nature, they can never give complete protection to
others, although they claim this ability due to false prestige. Na te viduh
svartha-gatiri hi visnum: people do not know that real advancement in
life consists of accepting the Supreme Personality of Godhead as one’s
master. Instead of deceiving themselves and others by pretending to be
all-powerful, all political leaders, husbands and guardians should spread
the Krsna consciousness movement so that everyone can learn how to
surrender to Krsna, the supreme husband.

TEXT 21
M gE ते पादसरोरुहाणं
निकामयेत्साखिलकामलम्पटा |
तदेव रासीष्सितमीष्सितोऽचितो
यद्धमरयाच्जा भगवन्‌ प्रतप्यते 12200


--- Page 195 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
ya tasya te pada-saroruhdarhanam
nikamayet sakhila-kama-lampata
tad eva rasipsitam ipsito 70880
yad-bhagna-yacna bhagavan pratapyate

ya—a woman who; tasya—of Him; te—of You; pada-saroruha—of
the lotus feet; arhanam—the worship; nikamayet—{fully desires; sa—
such a woman; akhila-kama-lampata —although maintaining all kinds
of material desire; tat—that; eva—only; rasi— You award; ipsitam—
some other desired benediction; ipsitah—being looked to for; arcitah—
worshiped; yat—from which; bhagna-yacina—one who desires objects
other than Your lotus feet and who thus becomes broken; bhagavan—O
my Lord; pratapyate—is pained.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You automatically fulfill all the desires of a
woman who worships Your lotus feet in pure love. However, if a
woman worships Your lotus feet for a particular purpose, You also
quickly fulfill her desires, but in the end she becomes bro-
kenhearted and laments. Therefore one need not worship Your
lotus feet for some material benefit.

PURPORT

Srila Rapa Gosvami describes pure devotional service as any-
abhilasita-sanyarn jiana-karmady-andvrtam. One should not worship
the Supreme Personality of Godhead to fulfill some material desire for
success in fruitive activities or mental speculation. To serve the lotus feet
of the Lord means to serve Him exactly as He desires. The neophyte
devotee is therefore ordered to worship the Lord strictly according to the
regulative principles given by the spiritual master and the Sastras. By
executing devotional service in that way, he gradually becomes attached
to Krsna, and when his original dormant love for the Lord becomes
manifest, he spontaneously serves the Lord without any motive. This
condition is the perfect stage of one’s relationship with the Lord. The
Lord then looks after the comfort and security of His devotee without
being asked. Krsna promises in Bhagavad-gita (9.22):


--- Page 196 ---
Text 21] The Residents of Jambuadvipa Offer Prayers 191
ananyas cintayanto mar
ye janah paryupdsate
tesa nityabhiyuktanarm
yoga-ksemari vahamy aham
The Supreme Lord personally takes care of anyone who is completely
engaged in His devotional service. Whatever he has, the Lord protects,
and whatever he needs, the Lord supplies. Therefore why should one
bother the Lord for something material? Such prayers are unnecessary.
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura explains that even if a devotee
wishes the Lord to fulfill a particular desire, the devotee should not be
considered a sakama-bhakta (a devotee with some motive). In the
Bhagavad-gita (7.16) Krsna says:
catur-vidha bhajante mar
Jjanah sukrtino ’rjuna
arto jynasur artharthi
jaani ca bharatarsabha
"0 best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me —the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the in-
quisitive and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.” The
arta and the artharthi, who approach the Supreme Personality of
Godhead for relief from misery or for some money, are not sakama-
bhaktas, although they appear to be. Being neophyte devotees, they are
simply ignorant. Later in Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, udarah sarva
evaite: they are all magnanimous (udarah). Although in the beginning a
devotee may harbor some desire, in due course of time it will vanish.
Therefore the Srimad-Bhagavatam enjoins:
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
व्यात्‌, purusar param
“A person who has broader intelligence, whether he is full of all material
desire, is free from material desire, or has a desire for liberation, must


--- Page 197 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
by all means worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead.”
(Bhag. 2.3.10)

Even if one wants something material, he should pray to no one but
the Lord to fulfill his desire. If one approaches a demigod for the fulfill-
ment of his desires, he is to be considered nasta-buddhi, bereft of all
good sense. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.20):

kamais tais tair hrta-jianah
prapadyante ’nya-devatah
tar tarh niyamam asthaya
prakrtya niyatah svaya
“Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship ac-
cording to their own natures.”

Laksmidevi advises all devotees who approach the Lord with material
desires that according to her practical experience, the Lord is Kamadeva,
and thus there is no need to ask Him for anything material. She says that
everyone should simply serve the Lord without any motive. Since the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is sitting in everyone's heart, He knows
everyone's thoughts, and in due course of time He will fulfill all desires.
Therefore let us completely depend on the service of the Lord without
bothering Him with our material requests.

TEXT 22
मत्मराप्येऽजेशसुराखुरादय-
स्तप्यन्त उग्रं तप रेन्द्रियेधियः ।
ऋते भवत्पादपरायणान्न मां
विन्दन्त्यहं spa यतोऽजित ॥२२॥
mat-praptaye Jjesa-surasuradayas
tapyanta ugram tapa aindriye dhiyah
rte bhavat-pada-parayanan na mam
vindanty aha tvad-dhrdaya yato 80


--- Page 198 ---
Text 22] The Residents of Jambuadvipa Offer Prayers 193
, mat-praptaye—to obtain my mercy; aja—Lord Brahma; ia—Lord
Siva; sura—the other demigods, headed by King Indra, Candra and
Varuna; asura-ddayah—as well as the demons; tapyante—undergo;
ugram—severe; tapah—austerity; aindriye dhiyah—whose minds are
absorbed in thoughts of superior sense gratification; rte—unless;
bhavat-pada-parayanat—one who is wholly and solely engaged in the
service of the Supreme Lord’s lotus feet; na—not; mam—me; vin-
danti—obtain; aham—I; tvat—in You; hrdayah—whose hearts;
yatah—therefore; ajita—O unconquerable one.
TRANSLATION

O supreme unconquerable Lord, when they become absorbed in
thoughts of material enjoyment, Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, as
well as other demigods and demons, undergo severe penances and
austerities to receive my benedictions. But I do not favor anyone,
however great he may be, unless he is always engaged in the ser-
vice of Your lotus feet. Because I always keep You within my heart,
I cannot favor anyone but a devotee.

PURPORT

In this verse the goddess of fortune, Laksmidevi, clearly states that
she does not bestow her favor on any materialistic person. Although
sometimes a materialist becomes very opulent in the eyes of another
materialist, such opulence is bestowed upon him by the goddess
Durgadevi, a material expansion of the goddess of fortune, not by
Laksmidevi herself. Those who desire material wealth worship
Durgadevi with the following mantra: dhanari dehi 70100 77 dehi ripa-
pati-bhajari dehi. ("0 worshipable mother Durgadevi, please give me
wealth, strength, fame, a good wife and so on.” By pleasing goddess
Durga one can obtain such benefits, but since they are temporary, they
result only in maya-sukha (illusory happiness). As stated by Prahlada
Maharaja, maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimiidhan: those who work
very hard for material benefits are vimidhas, foolish rascals, because
such happiness will not endure. On the other hand, devotees like
Prahlada and Dhruva Maharaja achieved extraordinary material


--- Page 199 ---
194 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
opulences, but such opulences were not maya-sukha. When a devotee ac-
quires unparalleled opulences, they are the direct gifts of the goddess of
fortune, who resides in the heart of Narayana.

The material opulences a person obtains by offering prayers to the
goddess Durga are temporary. As described in Bhagavd-gita (7.23), an-
tavat tu phalam tesa tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam: men of meager in-
telligence desire temporary happiness. We have actually seen that one of
the disciples of Bhaktisiddhinta Sarasvati Thakura wanted to enjoy the
property of his spiritual master, and the spiritual master, being merciful
toward him, gave him the temporary property, but not the power to
preach the cult of Caitanya Mahaprabhu all over the world. That special
mercy of the power to preach is given to a devotee who does not want
anything material from his spiritual master but wants only to serve him.
The story of the demon Ravana illustrates this point. Although Ravana
tried to abduct the goddess of fortune Sitadevi from the custody of Lord
Ramacandra, he could not possibly do so. The Sitadevi he forcibly took
with him was not the original Sitadevi, but an expansion of maya, or
Durgadevi. As a result, instead of winning the favor of the real goddess
of fortune, Ravana and his whole family were vanquished by the power
of Durgadevi (srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka).

TEXT 23
स त्वं ममाप्यच्युत शीष्णिं वन्दितं
कराम्बुजं यत्त्वदधायि सात्वताम्‌ |
निमर्षिं मां लक्ष्म वरेण्य मायया
क ईघरस्येद्ितमूदितं বিস্তবিলি ॥२३॥
sa {एव mamapy acyuta Sirsni vanditamn
karambujari yat tvad-adhayi satvatam
bibharsi mam laksma varenya mayaya
ka isvarasyehitam @hituri vibhur iti

sah—that; tvam—You; mama—of me; api—also; acyuta—O infalli-
ble one; Sirsni—on the head; vanditam —worshiped; kara-ambujam—
Your lotus hand; yat—which; tvat—by You; adhayi—placed; sat-


--- Page 200 ---
Text 23] The Residents of Jambadvipa Offer Prayers 195
vatam—on the head of the devotees; bibharsi—You maintain; mam—
me; laksma—as an insignia on Your chest; varenya—O worshipable
one; mayayd—with deceit; kah—who; @varasya—of the supremely
powerful controller; thitam—the desires; @hitum—to understand by
reason and argument; vibhuh—is able; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
O infallible one, Your lotus palm is the source of all benediction.
Therefore Your pure devotees worship it, and You very mercifully
place Your hand on their heads. I wish that You may also place
Your hand on My head, for although You already bear my insignia
of golden streaks on Your chest, I regard this honor as merely a
kind of false prestige for me. You show Your real mercy to Your
devotees, not to me. Of course, You are the supreme absolute con-
troller, and no one can understand Your motives.
PURPORT
In many places, the $astras describe the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as being more inclined toward His devotees than toward His
wife, who always remains on His chest. In Srimad-Bhagavatam
(11.14.15) it is stated:
na tatha me priyatama
atma-yonir na Sarikkarah
na ca sarikarsano na srir
naivatma ca yatha bhavan
Here Krsna plainlv savs that His devotees are more dear to Him than
Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Lord Sankarsana (the original cause of cre-
ation, the goddess of fortune or even His own Self. Elsewhere in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (10.9.20) Sukadeva Gosvami says,
nemam virifico na bhavo
na $rir apy anga samsraya
prasadam lebhire gopi
yat tat prapa vimuktidat


--- Page 201 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
The Supreme Lord, who can award liberation to anyone, showed more
mercy toward the gopis than to Lord Brahma, Lord Siva or even the god-
dess of fortune, who is His own wife and is associated with His body.
Similarly, Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.47.60) also states:
ndyarh $riyo niga u nitanta-rateh prasadah
svar-yositarh nalina-gandha-rucam kuto ’nyah
rasotsave ‘sya bhuja-danda-grhita-kantha-
labdhasisarn ya udagad vraja-sundarinam
“The gopis received benedictions from the Lord that neither Laksmidevi
nor the most beautiful dancers in the heavenly planets could attain. In
the rasa dance, the Lord showed His favor to the most fortunate gopis by
placing His arms on their shoulders and dancing with each of them in-
dividually. No one can compare with the gopis, who received the cause-
less mercy of the Lord.”

In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that no one can receive the real
favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead without following in the
footsteps of the gopis. Even the goddess of fortune could not receive the
same favor as the gopis, although she underwent severe austerities and
penances for many years. Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu discusses
this point with Vyenkata Bhatta in Caitanya-caritamrta
(Madhya 9.111-131): “The Lord inquired from Vyenkata Bhatta, ‘Your
worshipable goddess of fortune, Laksmi, always remains on the chest of
Narayana, and she is certainly the most chaste woman in the creation.
However, My Lord is Lord Sri Krsna, a cowherd boy engaged in tending
cows. Why 15 it that Laksmi, being such a chaste wife, wants to associate
with My Lord? Just to associate with Krsna, Laksmi abandoned all tran-
scendental happiness in Vaikuntha and for a long time accepted vows
and regulative principles and performed unlimited austerities.”

“Vyenkata Bhatta replied, ‘Lord Krsna and Lord Narayana are one
and the same, but the pastimes of Krsna are more relishable due to their
sportive nature. They are very pleasing for Krsna’s saktis. Since Krsna
and Narayana are both the same personality, Laksmi’s association with
Krsna did not break her vow of chastity. Rather, it was in great fun that
the goddess of fortune wanted to associate with Lord Krsna. The goddess
of fortune considered that her vow of chastity would not be damaged by


--- Page 202 ---
Text 24] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 197
her relationship with Krsna. Rather, by associating with Krsna she could
enjoy the benefit of the rasa dance. If she wanted to enjoy herself with
Krsna what fault is there? Why are you joking so about this?”

“Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu replied, ‘I know that there is no fault in
the goddess of fortune, but still she could not enter into the rasa dance.
We hear this from revealed scriptures. The authorities of Vedic
knowledge met Lord Ramacandra in Dandakaranya, and by their
penances and austerities, they were allowed to enter into the rasa dance.
But can you tell me why the goddess of fortune, Laksmi, could not get
that opportunity?’

“To this Vyenkata Bhatta replied, ‘I cannot enter into the mystery of
this incident. I am an ordinary living being. My intelligence is limited.
and [ am always disturbed. How can I understand the pastimes of the
Supreme Lord? They are deeper than millions of oceans.’

“Lord Caitanya replied, ‘Lord Krsna has a specific characteristic. He
attracts everyone's heart by the mellow of His personal conjugal love. By
following in the footsteps of the inhabitants of the planet known as Vra-
jaloka or Goloka Vrndavana, one can attain the shelter of the lotus feet of
Sri Krsna. However, the inhabitants of that planet do not know that Lord
Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unaware that Krsna is the
Supreme Lord, the residents of Vrndavana like Nanda Maharaja.
Yasodadevi and the gopis treat Krsna as their beloved son or lover.
Mother Yasoda accepts Him as her son and sometimes binds Him to a
grinding mortar. Krsna’s cowherd boy friends think He is an ordinary
boy and get up on His shoulders. In Goloka Vrndavana no one has any
desire other than to love Krsna.” 7"

The conclusion is that one cannot associate with Krsna unless he has
fully received the favor of the inhabitants of Vrajabhami. Therefore if
one wants to be delivered by Krsna directly, he must take to the service
of the residents of Vrndavana, who are unalloyed devotees of the Lord.

TEXT 24
+ + (५
रम्यके च भगवतः प्रियतमं मात्स्यमवताररूपं तद्षपुरुषस्य मनोः
प्राक्म्दर्दितं स इदानीमपि महता मक्तियोगेनाराधयतीदं
चोदाहरति ।।২৬।।


--- Page 203 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
ramyake ca bhagavatah priyatamari matsyam avatara-ripar tad-
varsa-purusasya manoh prak-pradarsitari sa idanim api mahata bhakti-

yogenaradhayatidar codaharati.

ramyake ca—also in Ramyaka-varsa; bhagavatah—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; priya-tamam—the foremost; matsyam—Afish;
avatara-riipam—the form of the incarnation; tat-varsa-purusasya—of
the ruler of that land; manoh—Manu; prak—previously (at the end of
the Caksusa-manvantara); pradarsitam —exhibited; sah—that Manu;
idanim api—even until now; mahata bhakti-yogena—by dint of ad-
vanced devotional service; aradhayati—worships the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; idam —this; ca—and; udaharati—chants.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: In Ramyaka-varsa, where
Vaivasvata Manu rules, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appeared as Lord Matsya at the end of the last era [the Caksusa-
manvantara]. Vaivasvata Manu now worships Lord Matsya in pure
devotional service and chants the following mantra.

TEXT 25

ॐ नमो भगवते मुख्यतमाय नमः स्वाय प्राणायौजसे सहसे बलाय
महामर्स्याय नम इति ॥२५॥
or namo bhagavate mukhyatamaya namah sattvaya pranayaujase
sahase balaya maha-matsyaya nama iti.

om—O my Lord; namah—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mukhya-tamaya—the first incar-
nation to appear; namah—my respectful obeisances; sattvaya—unto the
pure transcendence; prandya—the origin of life; ojase—the source of
the potency of the senses; sahase—the origin of all mental power;
balaya—the origin of bodily strength; mahad-matsyaGya—unto the
gigantic fish incarnation; namah—respectful obeisances; iti—thus.


--- Page 204 ---
Text 26] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 199
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is pure transcendence. He is the origin of all life,
bodily strength, mental power and sensory ability. Known as Mat-
syavatara, the gigantic fish incarnation, He appears first among all
the incarnations. Again I offer my obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Srila Jayadeva Gosvami sings:
pralayo payodhi-jale dhrtavan asi vedam
vihita-vahitra-caritram akhedam
kesava dhrta-mina-sarira jaya jagad-isa hare
Soon after the cosmic creation, the entire universe was inundated with
water. At that time Lord Krsna (Kesava) incarnated as a gigantic fish to
protect the Vedas. Therefore Manu addresses Lord Matsya as
mukhyatama, the first incarnation to appear. Fish are generally con-
sidered a mixture of the modes of ignorance and passion, but we must
understand that every incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is completely transcendental. There is never any deterioration
of the Supreme Lord’s original transcendental quality. Therefore the
word sattvaya is used here, meaning pure goodness on the transcenden-
tal platform. There are many incarnations of the Supreme Lord: Varaha
marti (the boar form), Karma marti (the tortoise form), Hayagriva marti
(the form of a horse) and so on. Yet we should never think any of Them
material. They are always situated on the platform of Suddha-sattva,
pure transcendence.
TEXT 26
ও EN
अन्तबेहिश्वाखिललोकपालक-
रद््टरूपो षिचरस्युरुखनः |
स ईश्वरस्त्वं य॒ इदं TAT
AN यथा दारुमयीं नरः स्यम्‌ ।२६॥


--- Page 205 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
antar bahis cakhila-loka-palakair
adrsta-ripo vicarasy uru-svanah
sa iSvaras tvam ya idam vase ‘nayan
namna yatha darumayim narah striyam

antah—within; bahih—without; ca—also; akhila-loka-palakaih—by
the leaders of the different planets, societies, kingdoms and so on;
adrsta-rapah—not seen; vicarasi—You wander; uru—very great;
svanah—whose sounds (Vedic mantras); sah—He; iSvarah—the
supreme controller; tvam—You; yah—who; idam—this; vase—under
control; anayat—has brought; namna—by different names like
brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and Sidra; yatha—exactly like; daru-
mayim—made of wood; narah—a man: striyam—a doll.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, just as a puppeteer controls his dancing dolls and
a husband controls his wife, Your Lordship controls all the living
entities in the universe, such as the brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaiSyas
and $adras. Although You are in everyone’s heart as the supreme
witness and commander and are outside everyone as well, the so-
called leaders of societies, communities and countries cannot real-
ize You. Only those who hear the vibration of the Vedic mantras
can appreciate You.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is antarbahih, present within
and without everything. One must overcome the delusion caused by the
Lord’s external energy and realize His presence both externally and in-
ternally. In Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.8.19) Srimati Kuntidevi has ex-
plained that Krsna appears in this world nato natyadharo yatha,
“exactly like an actor dressed as a player.” In Bhagavad-gita (18.61)
Krsna “says, ©varah sarva-bhatanar hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati: “The
Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna.” The Lord is
situated within everyone’s heart, and outside as well. Within the heart
He is the Supersoul, the incarnation who acts as the adviser and witness.
Yet although God is residing within their hearts, foolish people say, “I
cannot see God. Please show Him to me.”


--- Page 206 ---
Text 27] The Residents of Jambidvipa Offer Prayers 201

Everyone is under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
exactly like dancing dolls controlled by a puppeteer or a woman con-
trolled by her husband. A woman is compared to a doll (darumayi)
because she has no independence. She should always be controlled by a
man. Still, due to false prestige, a class of women wants to remain inde-
pendent. What to speak of women, all living entities are prakrti (female)
and therefore dependent on the Supreme Lord, as Krsna Himself ex-
plains in Bhagavad-gita (apareyam itas tv anyarn prakrtir viddhi me
param). The living entity is never independent. Under all circumstances,
he is dependent on the mercy of the Lord. The Lord creates the social
divisions of human society — brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sidras—
and ordains that they follow rules and regulations suited to their particu-
lar position. In this way, all members of society remain always under the
Supreme Lord’s control. Still, some people foolishly deny the existence
of God.

Self-realization means to understand one’s subordinate position in
relation to the Lord. When one is thus enlightened, he surrenders to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and is liberated from the clutches of the
material energy. In other words, unless one surrenders to the lotus feet
of the Lord, the material energy in its many varieties will continue to
control him. No one in the material world can deny that he is under con-
trol. The Supreme Lord, Narayana, who is beyond this material exis-
tence, controls everyone. The following Vedic mantra confirms this
point: eko ha vai narayana asit. Foolish persons think Narayana to be on
the platform of ordinary material existence. Because they do not realize
the natural constitutional position of the living entity, they concoct
names like daridra-narayana, svami-narayana or mithya-narayana.
However, Narayana is actually the supreme controller of everyone. This
understanding is self-realization.

TEXT 27
यं लोकपालाः किल मत्सरज्वरा
हित्वा यतन्तोऽपि प्रथक्‌ समेत्य च |
पातुं न शेकुर्दिषदश्तुष्पदः
सरीसुपं स्थाणु यदत्र ॒टदर्यते ।।২৩।।


--- Page 207 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
yarn loka-palah kila matsara-jvara
hitva yatanto 7 prthak sametya ca
paturi na Sekur dvi-padas$ catus-padah
sarisrpari sthanu yad atra driyate
yam—whom (You); loka-palah—the great leaders of the universe,
beginning with Lord Brahma; kila—what to speak of others; matsara-
juarah—who are suffering from the fever of envy; hitva—leaving
aside; yatantah—endeavoring; api—although; prthak—separately;
sametya—combined; ca—also; patum—to protect; na—not; Sekuh—
able; dvi-padah—two-legged; catuh-padah—four-legged; sarisrpam—
reptiles; sthanu—not moving; yat—whatever; atra—within this
material world; drSyate—is visible.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, from the great leaders of the universe, such as Lord
Brahma and other demigods, down to the political leaders of this
world, all are envious of Your authority. Without Your help,
however, they could neither separately nor concertedly maintain
the innumerable living entities within the universe. You are ac-
tually the only maintainer of all human beings, of animals like
cows and asses, and of plants, reptiles, birds, mountains and
whatever else is visible within this material world.
PURPORT
It is fashionable for materialistic persons to compete with the power of
God. When so-called scientists try to manufacture living entities in their
laboratories, their only purpose is to defy the talent and ability of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is called illusion. It exists even in
the higher planetary systems, where great demigods like Lord Brahma,
Lord Siva and others reside. In this world everyone is puffed up with
false prestige despite the failure of all his endeavors. When so-called
philanthropists, who supposedly want to help the poor, are approached
by members of the Krsna consciousness movement, they say, “You are
simply wasting your time, while I am feeding vast masses of starving
people.” Unfortunately, their meager efforts, either singly or together,
do not solve anyone’s problems.


--- Page 208 ---
Text 28] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 203
Sometimes so-called svamis are very eager to feed poor people, think-
ing them to be daridra-narayana, the Lord’s incarnations as beggars.
They prefer to serve the manufactured daridra-narayana than the origi-
nal, supreme Narayana. They say, “Don’t encourage service to Lord
Narayana. It is better to serve the starving people of the world.” Unfor-
tunately such materialists, either singly or combined in the form of the
United Nations, cannot fulfill their plans. The truth is that the many
millions of human beings, animals, birds and trees —indeed, all living
entities —are maintained solely by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Eko bahunar yo vidadhati kaman: one person, the Supreme Lord, is
supplying the necessities of life for all other living entities. To challenge
the authority of Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the
business of asuras (demons). Yet sometimes suras, or devotees, are also
bewildered by the illusory energy and falsely claim to be the maintainer
of the entire universe. Such incidents are described in the Tenth Canto of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, where Sukadeva Gosvami tells how Lord Brahma
and King Indra became puffed up and were eventually chastised by
Krsna.
TEXT 28
मवान्‌ युगान्ताणंव ऊर्मिमालिनि
क्षोणीभिमामोषधिवीरुधां निधिम्‌ ।
मया सहोरु क्रमतेऽज ओजसा
तस्मै जगत्पराणगणात्मने नम इति ।।২৫।।
bhavan yugantarnava iirmi-malini
ksonim imam osadhi-virudhari nidhim
maya sahoru kramate ’ja ojasa
tasmai jagat-prana-ganatmane nama iti
bhavan —Your Lordship; yuga-anta-arnave —in the water of devasta-

tion at the end of the millennium; @rmi-malini—possessing rows of big
waves; ksonim—the planet earth; imam —this; osadhi-virudham —of all
kinds of herbs and drugs; nidhim—the storehouse; maya —me; saha—
with; uru—great; kramate—You roamed; aja—O unborn one; ojasa—
with speed; tasmai—unto Him; jagat—of the entire universe: prana-
gana-atmane—the ultimate source of life; namah—my respectful obei-
sances; iti—thus.


--- Page 209 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
TRANSLATION
O almighty Lord, at the end of the millennium this planet earth,
which is the source of all kinds of herbs, drugs and trees, was in-
undated by water and drowned beneath the devastating waves. At
that time, You protected me along with the earth and roamed the
sea with great speed. O unborn one, You are the actual maintainer
of the entire universal creation, and therefore You are the cause of
all living entities. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Envious persons cannot appreciate how wonderfully the Lord creates,
maintains and annihilates the universe, but devotees of the Lord can un-
derstand this perfectly well. Devotees can see how the Lord is acting
behind the wonderful workings of the material nature. In Bhagavad-gita
(9.10) the Lord says:
mayadhyaksena prakrtih
siiyate sa-caracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
Jagad viparivartate
“This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti,
and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this
manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.” All the won-
derful transformations of nature are happening under the superinten-
dence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Envious persons cannot
see this, but a devotee, even though very humble and even if unedu-
cated, knows that behind all the activities of nature is the supreme hand
of the Supreme Being.
TEXT 29
& ৫ ५
हिरण्मयेऽपि मगवान्निवसति कमेतं बिभ्राणस्तस्य तस्परियतमां
७
agra सह वर्षपुरुषैः पिठृगणापिपतिरुपभावति मन्त्रमिमं चानुजपति
IEA}


--- Page 210 ---
Text 29] The Residents of Jambidvipa Offer Prayers 205

hiranmaye ’pi bhagavan nivasati kiirma-tanurm bibhranas tasya tat
priyatamar tanum aryama saha varsa-purusaih pitr-ganadhipatir
upadhavati mantram imar canujapai.

hirapmaye—in Hiranmaya-varsa; api—indeed; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; nivasati—resides; kiarma-tanum—the
body of a tortoise; bibhranah—manifesting; tasya—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; tat—that; priya-tamam—dearmost; tanum—
body; aryama— Aryama, the chief resident of Hiranmaya-varsa; saha—
with; varsa-purusaih—the people of that tract of land; pitr-gana-
adhipatih—who is the chief of the pitas; upadhavati—worships in devo-
tional service; mantram—hymn; imam—this; ca—also; anujapati—
chants.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: In Hiranmaya-varsa, the Supreme
Lord, Visnu, lives in the form of a tortoise [kiirma-$arira]. This
most dear and beautiful form is always worshiped there in devo-
tional service by Aryama, the chief resident of Hiranmaya-varsa,
along with the other inhabitants of that land. They chant the
following hymns.

PURPORT

The word priyatama (dearmost) is very significant in this verse. Each
devotee regards a particular form of the Lord as most dear. Because of an
atheistic mentality, some people think that the tortoise, boar and fish in-
carnations of the Lord are not very beautiful. They do not know that any
form of the Lord is always the fully opulent Personality of Godhead.
Since one of His opulences is infinite beauty, all the Lord’s incarnations
are very beautiful and are appreciated as such by devotees. Nondevotees,
however, think that Lord Krsna’s incarnations are ordinary material
creatures, and therefore they distinguish between the beautiful and the
not beautiful. A certain form of the Lord is worshiped by a particular
devotee because he loves to see that form of the Lord. As stated in
Brahma-samhita (5.33): advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam
adyam purana-purusarm nava-yauvanar ca. The very beautiful form of


--- Page 211 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
the Lord is always youthful. Sincere servants of a particular form of the
Lord always see that form as very beautiful, and thus they engage in con-
stant devotional service to Him.
TEXT 30

ॐ नमो भगवते अङूपाराय सर्वस च्वगुणविेषणाया नुपलक्षितस्थानाय नमो

© ক =
THO नमो भूम्ने नमो नमोऽवस्थानाय नमस्ते ।॥२०॥
or namo bhagavate akiparaya sarva-sattva-guna-visesandayanu-
palaksita-sthanaya namo varsmane namo bhimne namo namo
vasthandya namas te.

om—O my Lord; namah—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto
You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akiparaya—in the form of a
tortoise; sarva-sattva-guna-visesandya—whose form consists of suddha-
sattva, transcendental goodness; anupalaksita-sthanaya—unto You,
whose position is not discernible; namah—my respectful obeisances;
varsmane —unto You who, although the oldest, are unaffected by time;
namah—my respectful obeisances; bhitmne—to the great one who can
go everywhere; namah namah—repeated obeisances; avasthanaya—
the shelter of everything; namah—respectful obeisances; te—unto You.

TRANSLATION

O my Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who have
assumed the form of a tortoise. You are the reservoir of all tran-
scendental qualities, and being entirely untinged by matter, You
are perfectly situated in pure goodness. You move here and there
in the water, but no one can discern Your position. Therefore I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You. Because of Your tran-
scendental position, You are not limited by past, present and
future. You are present everywhere as the shelter of all things, and
therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and
again.

PURPORT

In the Brahma-sarhita it is said, goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-

bhiitah: the Lord always remains in Goloka, the topmost planet in the


--- Page 212 ---
Text 31] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 207
spiritual world. At the same time, He is all-pervading. This paradox is
only possible for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full of all
opulences. The Lord’s all-pervasiveness is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(18.61) where Krsna states, i§varah sarva-bhutanam hrd-dese ’rjuna
tisthati: “The Supreme Lord is seated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna.”
Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita (15.15) the Lord says, sarvasya caham hrdi
sannivisto mattah smrtir jidnam apohanam ca: ‘I am seated in every-
one’s heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetful-
ness.” Therefore, although the Lord is present everywhere, He cannot be
seen with ordinary eyes. As Aryama says, the Lord is anupalaksita-
sthana: no one can locate Him. This is the greatness of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TEXT 31
यद्रूपमेतन्निजमाययार्पित-
weed बहुरूपरूपितम्‌ |
संरू्या न यस्यास्त्ययथोपलम्मनात्‌-
EN
वस्म नमस्तेऽन्यपदेखरूपिणे NR 201
yad-ripam etan nija-mayayarpitam
artha-svariapari bahu-ripa-ripitam
sartkhya na yasyasty ayathopalambhanat
tasmai namas te 'vyapadesa-ripine
yat—of whom; ripam—the form; etat—this; nija-mayaya ar-
pitam—manifested by Your personal potency; artha-svaripam—this
entire visible cosmic manifestation; bahu-ripa-ripitam —manifested in
various forms; sarikhya —the measurement; na—not; yasya—of which;
asti—there is; ayatha—falsely; upalambhanat—from perceiving;
tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme Lord); namah—my respectful obei-
sances; te—unto You; avyapadesa—cannot be ascertained by mental
speculation; ripine —whose real form.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, this visible cosmic manifestation is a demon-
stration of Your own creative energy. Since the countless varieties


--- Page 213 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
of forms within this cosmic manifestation are simply a display of
Your external energy, this virata-riipa [universal body] is not Your
real form. Except for a devotee in transcendental consciousness,
no one can perceive Your actual form. Therefore I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Mayavadi philosophers think the universal form of the Lord to be real
and His personal form illusory. We can understand their mistake by a
simple example. A fire consists of three elements: heat and light, which
are the energy of the fire, and the fire itself. Anyone can understand that
the original fire is the reality and that the heat and light are simply the
fire’s energy. Heat and light are the formless energies of fire, and in that
sense they are unreal. Only the fire has form, and therefore it is the real
form of the heat and light. As Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita (9.4), maya
tatam £027 sarvam jagad avyakta-mirtina: “By Me, in My un-
manifested form, this entire universe is pervaded.” Thus the impersonal
conception of the Lord is like the expansion of heat and light from a fire.
In Bhagavad-gita the Lord also says, mat-sthani sarva-bhitani na
cahari tesv avasthitah: the entire material creation is resting on Krsna’s
energy, either material, spiritual or marginal, but because His form is
absent from the expansion of His energy, He is not personally present.
This inconceivable expansion of the Supreme Lord’s energy is called
acintya-Sakti. Therefore no one can understand the real form of the Lord
without becoming His devotee.
TEXT 32
जरायुजं स्वेदजयण्डजोद्धिदं
2 =
चराचरं देवर्षिपिठ्भूतमेन्द्रियम्‌ |
s Ey
at: खं क्षितिः शैलसरित्सुद्र-
ELE ERIE ER एकः ॥३२॥
1270) 80277 svedajarn andajodbhidarn
০০700070778 devarsi-pitr-bhiitam aindriyam
dyauh khar ksitih saila-sarit-samudra-
dvipa-graharksety abhidheya ekah


--- Page 214 ---
Text 32] The Residents of Jambuadvipa Offer Prayers 209

jarayu-jam—one born from a womb; sveda-jam—one born from
perspiration; anda-ja—one born from an egg; udbhidam —one born of
the earth; cara-acaram—the moving and the stationary; deva—the
demigods; rsi—the great sages; pitr—the inhabitants of Pitrloka;
bhiitam —the material elements air, fire, water and earth; aindriyam—
all the senses; dyauh—the higher planetary systems; kham—the sky;
ksitih—the earthly planets; Saila—the hills and mountains; sarit—the
rivers; samudra—the oceans; dvipa—the islands; graha-rksa—the stars
and planets; iti—thus; abhidheyah—to be variously named; ekah—one.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You manifest Your different energies in countless
forms: as living entities born from wombs, from eggs and from
perspiration; as plants and trees that grow out of the earth; as all
living entities, both moving and standing, including the demigods,
the learned sages and the pitas; as outer space, as the higher plan-
etary system containing the heavenly planets, and as the planet
earth with its hills, rivers, seas, oceans and islands. Indeed, all the
stars and planets are simply manifestations of Your different
energies, but originally You are one without a second. Therefore
there is nothing beyond You. This entire cosmic manifestation is
therefore not false but is simply a temporary manifestation of
Your inconceivable energy.

PURPORT

This verse completely rejects the theory of brahma satyarn jagan
mithya, which states that spirit, or Brahman, is real, whereas the
manifested material world, with its great variety of things, is false.
Nothing is false. One thing may be permanent and another temporary.
but both the permanent and the temporary are facts. For example, if
someone becomes angry for a certain period, no one can say that his
anger is false. It is simply temporary. Everything we experience in our
daily lives is of this same character; it is temporary but real.

The different kinds of living entities coming from various sources are
very clearly described in this verse. Some are born from a womb and
some (like certain insects) from human perspiration. Others hatch from
eggs, and still others sprout from the earth. A living entity takes birth


--- Page 215 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
under different circumstances according to his past activities (karma).
Although the body of the living entity is material, it is never false. No
one will accept the argument that since a person’s material body is false,
murder has no repercussions. Our temporary bodies are given to us ac-
cording to our karma, and we must remain in our given bodies to enjoy
the pains and pleasures of life. Our bodies cannot be called false; they
are only temporary. In other words, the energy of the Supreme Lord is as
permanent as the Lord Himself, although His energy is sometimes
manifest and sometimes not. As summarized in the Vedas, sarvam khalv
ida brahma: “Everything is Brahman.”
TEXT 33
यसिनसंख्येयविरेषनाम-
হযযান্কনী कविभिः कल्पितेयम्‌ |
dem यया तत्व द्शापनीयते
A .
तस्मं नमः सांख्यनिदशंनाय ते इति ॥२२॥
yasminn asarnikhyeya-visesa-nama-
riapakrtau kavibhih kalpiteyam
sankhya yaya tattva-drsapaniyate
tasmai namah sarnkhya-nidarsanaya te iti

yasmin—in You (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
asarikhyeya—innumerable; viSesa —particular; nama —names; ripa—
forms; akrtau—possessing bodily features; kavibhih—by great learned
persons; kalpitd —imagined; iyam—this; sarikhyd—number; yaya —by
whom; tattva—of the truth; drsa—by knowledge: apaniyate—is ex-
tracted; tasmai—unto Him; namah—respectful obeisances; sankhya-
nidarsandya—who is the revealer of this numerical knowledge; te—
unto You; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

O my Lord, Your name, form and bodily features are expanded
in countless forms. No one can determine exactly how many forms
exist, yet You Yourself, in Your incarnation as the learned scholar
Kapiladeva, have analyzed the cosmic manifestation as containing


--- Page 216 ---
Text 34] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 211
twenty-four elements. Therefore if one is interested in Sankhya
philosophy, by which one can enumerate the different truths, he
must hear it from You. Unfortunately, nondevotees simply count
the different elements and remain ignorant of Your actual form. 1
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT

Philosophers and scientists have been trying to study the entire cosmic
situation and have been theorizing and calculating in different ways for
millions and millions of years. However, the speculative research work
of a so-called scientist or philosopher is always interrupted when he dies,
and the laws of nature go on without regard for his work.

For billions of years changes take place in the material creation, until
at last the whole universe is dissolved and remains in an unmanifested
state. Constant change and destruction (bhiitva bhiitva praliyate) is per-
petually going on in nature, yet the material scientists want to study
natural laws without knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is the background of nature. As Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita (9.10):

mayddhyaksena prakrtih
sityate sa-caracaram
hetundanena kaunteya
Jjagad viparivartate
“This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti.
and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this
manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.”

Now the material creation is manifest. eventually it will be annihilated
and remain for many millions of years in a dormant state, and finally it
will again be created. This is the law of nature.

TEXT 34
उत्तरेषु च FY भगवान्‌ यज्ञपुरुषः कृतवराहरूप आस्ते तं तु देवी
=, (= = 2
हेषा भूः सह ङुरुभिर स्वकलितमक्तियोगेनोपधाव्रति इमां च परमामुपनिषद्‌-
मावतैयति ॥ ३४ ॥


--- Page 217 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18
uttaresu ca kurusu bhagavan yajia-purusah krta-varaha-ripa 250८
tar tu devi haisa 01:08 saha kurubhir askhalita-bhakti-yogenopadhavati

imam ca paramam upanisadam avartayati.

uttaresu —on the northern side; ca—also; kurusu—in the tract of land
known as Kuru; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
yajiia-purusah—who accepts all results of sacrifices; krta-varaha-
riipah—having accepted the form of a boar; dste—exists eternally;
tam —Him; tu—certainly; devi—the goddess; ha—certainly; esa—this;
bhith—planet earth; saha—along with; kurubhih—the inhabitants of
the land known as Kuru; askhalita—unfailing; bhakti-yogena—by
devotional service; upadhdavati—worship; imam—this; ca—also;
paramam upanisadam—the supreme Upanisad (the process by which
one can approach the Lord); avartayati—chants again and again for the
purpose of practice.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: Dear King, the Supreme Lord in His
boar incarnation, who accepts all sacrificial offerings, lives in the
northern part of Jambiudvipa. There, in the tract of land known as
Uttarakuru-varsa, mother earth and all the other inhabitants wor-
ship Him with unfailing devotional service by repeatedly chanting
the following Upanisad mantra.

TEXT 35

ॐ नमो भगवते मन््रतस्वलिद्भाय यज्ञक्रतवे महाध्वरावयवाय महापुरुषाय
नमः TIE त्रियुगाय नमस्ते ॥३५॥
ori namo bhagavate mantra-tattva-lingaya yajaa-kratave maha-
dhvaravayavaya maha-purusaéya namah karma-suklaya tri-yugaya
namas te.

om—O Lord; namah—respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; mantra-tattva-lingaya—who is un-
derstood in truth by different mantras; yajia—in the form of animal


--- Page 218 ---
Text 35] The Residents of Jambadvipa Offer Prayers 213
sacrifices; kratave—and animal sacrifice; maha-dhvara—great
sacrifices; avayavaya—whose limbs and bodily parts; maha-
purusaya—unto the Supreme Person; namah—respectful obeisances;
karma-sukl@dya—who purifies the fruitive activities of the living en-
tities; tri-yugdya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
full with six opulences and who appears in three yugas (remaining con-
cealed in the fourth yuga): namah—my respectful obeisances; te—unto
You.
TRANSLATION

O Lord, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You as the
gigantic person. Simply by chanting mantras, we shall be able to
understand You fully. You are yajfia [sacrifice], and You are the
kratu [ritual]. Therefore all the ritualistic ceremonies of sacrifice
are part of Your transcendental body, and You are the only enjoyer
of all sacrifices. Your form is composed of transcendental good-
ness. You are known as tri-yuga because in Kali-yuga You appeared
as a concealed incarnation and because You always fully possess the
three pairs of opulences.

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the incarnation for this age of Kali. as
confirmed in many places throughout the Puranas, the Mahabharata,
Srimad-Bhagavatam and the Upanisads. The summary of His ap-
pearance is given in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 6.99) as follows:

kali-yuge lilavatara na kare bhagavan
ataeva ‘tri-yuga’ kari’ kahi tara nama

In this age of Kali, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Bhagavan) does
not appear as a lilavatara, an incarnation to display pastimes. Therefore
He is known as tri-yuga. Unlike other incarnations, Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu appears in this age of Kali as a devotee of the Lord.
Therefore He is called a concealed incarnation (channavatara).


--- Page 219 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
TEXT 36
५ ~ -
यस्य स्वरूपं कवयो विपधितो
गुणेषु दारुष्विव जातवेदसम्‌ |
মন্লল্বি म्रा मनसा दिदृक्षवो
९
गदं ক্ষিমাপধনদ ईरितात्मने ॥३६॥
yasya svaripari kavayo vipascito
gunesu darusv iva jata-vedasam
mithnanti mathna manasa didrksavo
gudham kriyarthair nama iritatmane
yasya—whose: sva-ripam—form; kavayah—the greatly learned
sages; vipascitah—expert in ascertaining the Absolute Truth: gunesu—
in the material manifestation, consisting of the three modes of nature:
darusu—in wood; iva—like; jata—manifested: vedasam—fire; mith-
nanti—stir; mathna—with a piece of wood used for producing fire;
manasa—by the mind: didrksavah—who are inquisitive: gidham—
hidden; kriya-arthaih—by fruitive activities and their results;
namah—respectful obeisances; irita-atmane—unto the Lord, who is
manifested.
TRANSLATION
By manipulating a fire-generating stick, great saints and sages
can bring forth the fire lying dormant within wood. In the same
way, O Lord, those expert in understanding the Absolute Truth
try to see You in everything—even in their own bodies. Yet you
remain concealed. You are not to be understood by indirect pro-
cesses involving mental or physical activities. Because You are self-
manifested, only when You see that a person is wholeheartedly
engaged in searching for You do You reveal Yourself. Therefore I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
The word kriyarthaih means “by performing ritualistic ceremonies to
satisfy the demigods.”” The word vipascitah is explained in the Taittiriya


--- Page 220 ---
Text 37] The Residents of Jambuadvipa Offer Prayers 215
Upanisad as follows: satyari jianam anantarih brahma. yo veda nihitari
guhayam parame vyoman. so ’Snute sarvan kaman saha brahmana
vipasciteti. As Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita (7.19), bahanam jan-
manam ante jianavan mam prapadyate: “After many births and
deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me.” When one
understands that the Lord is situated in everyone's heart and actually
sees the Lord present everywhere, he has perfect knowledge. The word
Jjata-vedah means “fire which is produced by rubbing wood.” In Vedic
times, learned sages could bring forth fire from wood. Jata-vedah also
indicates the fire in the stomach, which digests everything we eat and
which produces an appetite. The word gidha is explained in the
Svetasvatara Upanisad. Eko devah sarva-bhitesu gidhah: The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is understood by chanting the Vedic mantras.
Sarva-vyapi sarva-bhitantar-atma: He is all-pervading, and He is
within the heart of living entities. Karmadhyaksah sarva-
bhutadhivasah: He witnesses all activities of the living entity. Saks ceta
kevalo nirgunas ca: The Supreme Lord is the witness as well as the living

force, yet He is transcendental to all material qualities.

TEXT 37
७
द्रष्यक्रियाहेत्वयनेश्षकठंभि-
मायागुणेवस्त॒निरीकषितास्मने |
अन्वीक्षयाज्गातिशयात्मबुद्धिभि-
निरस्तमायाकृतये नमो नमः ॥३७॥
dravya-kriya-hetv-ayanesa-kartrbhir
maya-gunair vastu-niriksitatmane
anviksayangatisayatma-buddhibhir

nirasta-maydkrtaye namo namah
dravya—by the objects of sense enjoyment; kriya—the activities of
the senses; hetu—the predominating deities of sensory activities:
ayana—the body: iSa—the predominating time; kartrbhih—by false
egotism: mayd-gunaih—by the modes of material nature: vastu—as a
fact; nirthsita—being observed; datmane—unto the Supreme Soul:


--- Page 221 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.18
anviksayd—Dby careful consideration; ariga—by the limbs of yogic prac-
tice; atiSaya-atma-buddhibhih—by those whose intelligence has become
fixed; nirasta—completely freed from: maya—the illusory energy;
akrtaye—whose form; namah—all respectful obeisances; namah—
respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION

The objects of material enjoyment [sound, form, taste, touch
and smell], the activities of the senses, the controllers of sensory
activities [the demigods], the body, eternal time and egotism are all
creations of Your material energy. Those whose intelligence has
become fixed by perfect execution of mystic yoga can see that all
these elements result from the actions of Your external energy.
They can also see Your transcendental form as Supersoul in the
background of everything. Therefore I repeatedly offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT

The objects of material enjoyment, the sensory activities, attachment
to sensual pleasure, the body, false egotism and so on are produced by
the Lord’s external energy, maya. The background of all these activities
is the living being, and the director of the living beings is the Supersoul.
The living being is not the all in all. He is directed by the Supersoul. In
Bhagavad-gita (15.15) Krsna confirms this:

sarvasya cahari hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jianam apohanam ca

“I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness.” The living entity depends on the Super-
soul for directions. A person advanced in spiritual knowledge, or a per-
son expert in the practice of mystic yoga (yama, niyama, dsana and so
on) can understand transcendence either as Paramitma or as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord is the original cause
of all natural events. Therefore He is described as sarva-kdarana-
karanam, the cause of all causes. Behind everything visible to our


--- Page 222 ---
Text 38] The Residents of Jambiadvipa Offer Prayers 217
material eyes is some cause, and one who can see the original cause of all
causes, Lord Krsna, can actually see. Krsna, the sac-cid-ananda-vigraha,
is the background of everything, as He Himself confirms in Bhagavad-
gita (9.10):
mayadhyaksena prakrtih
sityate sa-caracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
Jagad viparivartate
“This material nature is working under My direction, 0 son of Kunti,
and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this
manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.”
TEXT 38
करोति विश्वश्ितिसंयमोदयं
.
यस्येप्सितं नेष्सितमीकषितुगणेः |
= 9
माया यथायो भ्रमते तदाश्रयं
- ¢
ग्रान्णो नमस्ते गुणकमंसाक्षिणे ॥३८॥
karoti visva-sthiti-sarnyamodayari
yasyepsitarn nepsitam iksitur gunaih
maya yathdayo bhramate tad-asrayarn
gravno namas te guna-karma-saksine
karoti— performing; visva—of the universe; sthiti—the maintenance:
sarhyama—winding up; udayam—creation; yasya—of whom:
ipsitam—desired; na—not; ipsitam—desired: iksituh—of the one
glancing over; gunath—with the modes of material nature: maya—the
material energy; yathd—as much as; ayah—iron; bhramate—moves:
tat-asrayam—placed near that: gravnah—a magnetic stone: namah—
my respectful 00615811069: te—unto You: guna-karma-saksine—the wit-
ness of the actions and reactions of material nature.


--- Page 223 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, (11. 18
TRANSLATION

O Lord, You do not desire the creation, maintenance or an-
nihilation of this material world, but You perform these activities
for the conditioned souls by Your creative energy. Exactly as a
piece of iron moves under the influence of a lodestone, inert mat-
ter moves when You glance over the total material energy.

PURPORT

Sometimes the question arises why the Supreme Lord has created this
material world, which is so full of suffering for the living entities en-
trapped in it. The answer given herein is that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead does not wish to create this material world just to inflict suffer-
ing on the living entities. The Supreme Lord creates this world only
because the conditioned souls want to enjoy it.

The workings of nature are not going on automatically. It is only
because the Lord glances over the material energy that it acts in wonder-
ful ways, just as a lodestone causes a piece of iron to move here and
there. Because materialistic scientists and so-called Sankhya philosophers
do not believe in God, they think that material nature is working without
supervision. But that is not the fact. In Caitanya-caritamrta
(Adi 6.18-19) the creation of the material world is explained as follows:

yadyapi sankhya mane ‘pradhana’—karana

jada ha-ite kabhu nahe jagat-srjana

nija-srsti-sakti prabhu saricare pradhane

iSvarera Saktye tabe haye ta’ nirmane ध
“‘Atheistic Sankhya philosophers think that the total material energy
causes the cosmic manifestation, but they are wrong. Dead matter has no
moving power, and therefore it cannot act independently. The Lord in-
fuses the material ingredients with His own creative potency. Then, by
the power of the Lord, matter moves and interacts.” Sea waves are
moved by the air, the air is created from ether, the ether is produced by
the agitation of the three modes of material nature, and the three modes
of material nature interact due to the Supreme Lord’s glance over the


--- Page 224 ---
Text 39] The Residents of Jambudvipa Offer Prayers 219
total material energy. Therefore the background of all natural occur-
rences is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sa-caracaram). This is
also further explained in Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 5.59-61):
Jagat-karana nahe prakrti jada-riipa
Sakti sancariya tare krsna kare krpa
krsna-saktye prakrti haya gauna karana
agni-saktye lauha yaiche karaye jarana
ataeva krsna mila-jagat-karana
prakrti—karana yaiche aja-gala-stana
“Because prakrti [material nature] is dull and inert, it cannot actually be
the cause of the material world. Lord Krsna shows His mercy by infusing
His energy into the dull, inert material nature. Thus prakrti, by the
energy of Lord Krsna, becomes the secondary cause, just as iron becomes
red-hot by the energy of fire. Therefore Lord Krsna is the original cause
of the cosmic manifestation. Prakrti is like the nipples on the neck of a
goat, for they cannot give any milk.” Thus it is a great mistake on the
part of the material scientists and philosophers to think that matter
moves independently.
TEXT 39
= ১ ७
प्रमथ्य दत्य प्रतिवारणं सधे
यो मां रसाया जगदादिखकरः |
FAURE निरगादृदन्वतः
क्रीडन्निवेभः प्रणतासि तं विथुमिति।।२९॥
pramathya daityarn prativairanam mrdhe
yo mar rasdaya jagad-adi-sakarah
krtvagra-darmstre niragad udanvatah
kridann ivebhah pranatasmi 1071 vibhum iti


--- Page 225 ---
220 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 18

pramathya—after killing: daityam—the demon: prativaranam—
most formidable opponent; mrdhe—in the fight; yah—He who; mam —
me (the earth); rasayah—fallen to the bottom of the universe; jagat—in
this material world; adi-sitkarah—the original form of a boar: krtva—
keeping it; agra-darmstre—on the end of the tusk; niragat—came out of
the water; udanvatah—from the Garbhodaka Ocean; kridan—playing:
iva—like; ibhah—elephant; pranata asmi—I bow down: tam —to Him;
vibhum—the Supreme Lord; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

My Lord, as the original boar within this universe, You fought
and killed the great demon Hiranyaksa. Then You lifted me [the
earth] from the Garbhodaka Ocean on the end of Your tusk, ex-
actly as a sporting elephant plucks a lotus flower from the water. I
bow down before You.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eighteenth
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, “The Prayers Offered to the
Lord by the Residents of Jambidvipa.”


--- Page 226 ---
CHAPTER NINETEEN

A Description of the Island of Jambuadvipa
This chapter describes the glories of Bharata-varsa, and it also describes
how Lord Ramacandra is being worshiped in the tract of land known as
Kimpurusa-varsa. The inhabitants of Kimpurusa-varsa are fortunate
because they worship Lord Ramacandra with His faithful servant Hanu-
man. Lord Ramacandra exemplifies an incarnation of Godhead who de-
scends for the mission of paritranaya sadhianam vinasaya ca
duskrtam—protecting the devotees and destroying the miscreants. Lord
Ramacandra exhibits the actual purpose of an incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the devotees take the opportunity
to offer loving transcendental service to Him. One should surrender fully
to the Lord, forgetting one’s so-called material happiness, opulence and
education, which are not at all useful for pleasing the Lord. The Lord is
pleased only by the process of surrender unto Him.

When Devarsi Narada descended to instruct Sarvani Manu. he de-
scribed the opulence of Bharata-varsa, India. Sarvani Manu and the in-
habitants of Bharata-varsa engage in devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the origin of creation, maintenance and
annihilation and who is always worshiped by self-realized souls. In the
planet known as Bharata-varsa there are many rivers and mountains, as
there are in other tracts of land, yet Bharata-varsa has special signifi-
cance because in this tract of land there exists the Vedic principle of var-
nasrama-dharma, which divides society into four varnpas and four
asramas. Furthermore, Narada Muni’s opinion is that even if there is
some temporary disturbance in the execution of the varnasrama-dharma
principles, they can be revived at any moment. The effect of adhering to
the institution of varndsrama is gradual elevation to the spiritual plat-
form and liberation from material bondage. By following the principles
of varnasrama-dharma, one gets the opportunity to associate with devo-
tees. Such association gradually awakens one’s dormant propensity to
serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead and frees one from all the
basic principles of sinful life. One then gets the opportunity to offer
unalloyed devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Vasudeva. Because of

221


--- Page 227 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.19
this opportunity, the inhabitants of Bharata-varsa are praised even in the
heavenly planets. Even in the topmost planet of this universe,
Brahmaloka, the position of Bharata-varsa is discussed with great relish.

All the conditioned living entities are evolving within the universe in
different planets and different species of life. Thus one may be elevated
to Brahmaloka, but then one must again descend to earth, as confirmed
in Srimad Bhagavad-gita (abrahma-bhuvanal lokah punar avartino
’rjuna). If those who live in Bharata-varsa rigidly follow the principles of
varnasrama-dharma and develop their dormant Krsna consciousness,
they need not return to this material world after death. Any place where
one cannot hear about the Supreme Personality of Godhead from realized
souls, even if it be Brahmaloka, is not very congenial to the living entity.
If one who has taken birth in the land of Bharata-varsa as a human being
does not take advantage of the opportunity for spiritual elevation, his
position is certainly the most miserable. In the land known as Bharata-
varsa, even if one is a sarva-kama-bhakta, a devotee seeking the fulfill-
ment of some material desire, he is freed from all material desires by his
association with devotees, and ultimately he becomes a pure devotee and
returns home, back to Godhead, without difficulty.

At the end of this chapter, Sri Sukadeva Gosvami describes to
Maharaja Pariksit the eight sub-islands within the island of Jambudvipa.

TEXT 1
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
किम्पुरुषे वर्वे भगवन्तमादिपुरुषं रक्ष्मणाग्रं सीताभिरामं रामं तचरण-
संनिकर्षामिरतः परममागवतो SII सह किम्पुरूषैरविरतमक्तिरुपास्ते 112 |
sri-Suka uvaca

kimpuruse varse bhagavantam adi-purusam laksmanagrajarm
sitabhiramari rama tac-carana-sannikarsabhiratah parama-
bhagavato hanuman saha kimpurusair avirata-bhaktir upaste.

sri-sukah uvdaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak; kim-
puruse varse—the tract of land known as Kimpurusa: bhagavantam—


--- Page 228 ---
Text 2] The Island of Jambaidvipa 223
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adi-purusam—the original cause
of all causes; laksmana-agra-jam—the elder brother of Laksmana; sita-
abhiramam—who is very pleasing to mother Sita, or who is the husband
of Sitadevi; ramam—Lord Ramacandra; tat-carana-sannikarsa-
abhiratah—one always engaged in service at the lotus feet of Lord
Ramacandra; parama-bhagavatah—the great devotee celebrated
throughout the universe; hanuman—His Grace Hanumanji; saha—
with; kimpurusaih—the inhabitants of the tract of land known as Kim-
purusa; avirata—continuous; bhaktih—who possesses devotional ser-
vice; upaste—worships.
TRANSLATION

Srila Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, in Kimpurusa-varsa
the great devotee Hanuman is always engaged with the inhabitants
of that land in devotional service to Lord Ramacandra, the elder
brother of Laksmana and dear husband of Sitadevi.

TEXT 2
= . + ५५ =

आटिषेणेन सह गन्धर्वैरजगीयमानां परमकल्याणीं मठेमगवत्कथां
agri सख्यं चेदं गायति ॥ २॥
arstisenena saha gandharvair anugiyamanar parama-kalyanirn
bhartr-bhagavat-katharm samuposrnoti svayari cedar gayati.

arsti-senena— Arstisena, the chief personality of Kimpurusa-varsa:
saha—with; gandharvaih—by a company of Gandharvas;
anugiyamanam—being chanted; parama-kalyanim —most auspicious:
bhartr-bhagavat-katham—the glories of his master, who is also the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; samupasrnoti—he hears with great at-
tention; svayam ca—and personally; idam —this; gayati—chants.

TRANSLATION

A host of Gandharvas is always engaged in chanting the glories
of Lord Ramacandra. That chanting is always extremely
auspicious. Hanumanji and Arstisena, the chief person in


--- Page 229 ---
224. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
Kimpurusa-varsa, constantly hear those glories with complete
attention. Hanuman chants the following mantras.
PURPORT
In the Puranas there are two different opinions concerning Lord
Ramacandra. In the Laghu-bhagavatamrta (5.34-36) this is confirmed in
the description of the incarnation of Manu.
vasudevadi-ripanam
avatarah prakirtitah
visnu-dharmottare rama-
laksmanadyah kramadami
padme tu ramo bhagavan
narayana itiritah
sesas cakram ca $ankhas ca
kramat syur laksmanadayah
madhya-desa-sthitayodhya-
pure ’sya vasatih smrta
maha-vaikunthaloke ca
raghavedrasya kirtita
The Visnu-dharmottara describes that Lord Ramacandra and His
brothers —Laksmana, Bharata and Satrughna—are incarnations of
Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha respectively. The
Padma Purana, however, says that Lord Ramacandra is an incarnation of
Narayana and that the other three brothers are incarnations of Sesa,
Cakra and Sankha. Therefore Srila Baladeva Vidyabhasana has con-
cluded, tad idam kalpa-bhedenaiva sambhavyam. In other words, these
opinions are not contradictory. In some millenniums Lord Ramacandra
and His brothers appear as incarnations of Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pra-
dyumna and Aniruddha, and in other millenniums They appear as incar-
nations of Narayana, Sesa, Cakra and Sankha. The residence of Lord
Ramacandra on this planet is Ayodhya. Ayodhya City is still existing in
the district of Hyderabad, which is situated on the northern side of Ut-
tara Pradesh.


--- Page 230 ---
Text 3] The Island of Jambiidvipa 225
TEXT 3

ॐ नमो भगवते उत्तमश्लोकाय नम आयेलक्षणशीलव्रताय नम
उपशिक्षितात्मन उपाक्तितलोकाय नमः साधुवादनिकषणाय नमो ब्ह्मण्य-
देवाय महापुरुषाय महाराजाय नम इति ॥ ३ ॥

ori namo bhagavate uttamaslokaya nama arya-laksana-sila-vrataya
nama upasiksitatmana upasita-lokaya namah sadhu-vada-nikasandaya
namo brahmanya-devaya maha-purusaya maha-rajaya nama iti.

om—O my Lord; namah—my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uttama-slokaya—who is al-
ways worshiped with selected verses; namah—my respectful obeisances:
arya-laksana-sila-vrataya—who possesses all the good qualities of ad-
vanced personalities; namah—my respectful obeisances; upasiksita-at-
mane —unto You whose senses are under control; upasita-lokaya—who
is always remembered and worshiped by all the different classes of living
entities; namah—my respectful obeisances; sadhu-vada-nikasanaya—
to the Lord, who is like a stone for examining all the good qualities of a
sadhu; namah—my respectful obeisances; brahmanya-devaya—who is
worshiped by the most qualified brahmanas; maha-purusaéya—unto the
Supreme Lord, who is worshiped by the Purusa-sitkta because of being
the cause of this material creation; maha-rajaya—unto the supreme
king, or the king of all kings; namah—my respectful obeisances; iti—
thus.

TRANSLATION

Let me please Your Lordship by chanting the bija-mantra
ornkara. I wish to offer my respectful obeisances unto the Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is the best among the most highly ele-
vated personalities. Your Lordship is the reservoir of all the good
qualities of Aryans, people who are advanced. Your character and
behavior are always consistent, and You always control Your senses
and mind. Acting just like an ordinary human being, You exhibit
exemplary character to teach others how to behave. There is a
touchstone that can be used to examine the quality of gold, but
You are like a touchstone that can verify all good qualities. You are


--- Page 231 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
worshiped by brahmanas who are the foremost of all devotees.
You, the Supreme Person, are the King of kings, and therefore I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 4
यत्द्विद्धावुमवमात्रमेकं
खतेजसा ध्वस्तगुणन्यवस्थम्‌ |
+ ५
प्रत्यक्‌ प्रशान्तं सुधियोपलम्भनं
[4 ক =
ह्यनामरूपं निरहं प्रपद्ये ॥ ४॥
yat tad visuddhanubhava-matram ekarn
sva-tejasa dhvasta-guna-vyavastham
pratyak prasantari sudhiyopalambhanari
hy anama-riapari nirahari prapadye
yat—which; tat—to that supreme truth; viSuddha —transcendentally
pure, without contamination by material nature; anubhava—ex-
perience; matram—that sac-cid-ananda transcendental body; ekam—
the one; sva-tejasa—by His own spiritual potency; dhvasta—van-
quished; guna-vyavastham—the influence of the modes of material
nature; pratyak—transcendental, not to be seen with material eyes; pra-
$antam —undisturbed by material agitation; sudhiya—by Krsna con-
sciousness, or purified consciousness, uncontaminated by material
desires, fruitive activities and speculative philosophy; upalambhanam—
who can be achieved; hi—indeed; anama-rapam—without a material
name and form; niraham—without a material ego; prapadye—let me
offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
The Lord, whose pure form [sac-cid-ananda-vigraha] is uncon-
taminated by the modes of material nature, can be perceived by
pure consciousness. In the Vedanta He is described as being one
without a second. Because of His spiritual potency, He is un-
touched by the contamination of material nature, and because He
is not subjected to material vision, He is known as transcendental.


--- Page 232 ---
Text 4] The Island of Jambuadvipa 227
He has no material activities, nor has He a material form or name.
Only in pure consciousness, Krsna consciousness, can one per-
ceive the transcendental form of the Lord. Let us be firmly fixed at
the lotus feet of Lord Ramacandra, and let us offer our respectful
obeisances unto those transcendental lotus feet.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, appears in various ex-

pansions, as stated in the Brahma-sambhita (5.39):

ramadi-martisu kala-niyamena tisthan
nanavataram akarod bhuvanesu kintu
krsnah svayarn samabhavat paramah puman yo
govindam adi-purusar tam ahari bhajami

I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Govinda. who is always
situated in various incarnations such as Rama, Nrsimha and many subin-
carnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godhead known
as Krsna and who incarnates personally also.” Krsna, who is visnu-tattva,
has expanded Himself in many Visnu forms, of which Lord Ramacandra
is one. We know that the visnu-tattva is carried by the transcendental
bird Garuda and is equipped with different types of weapons in four
hands. Therefore we may doubt whether Lord Ramacandra could be in
the same category, since He was carried by Hanuman. not by Garuda,
and had neither four hands nor the sarnkha, cakra, gada and padma.
Consequently this verse clarifies that Ramacandra is as good as Krsna
(ramadi-martisu kala). Although Krsna is the original Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Ramacandra is not different from Him. Ramacandra
is unaffected by the modes of material nature, and therefore He is pra-
Santa, never disturbed by those modes.

Unless one is saturated with love for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one cannot appreciate the transcendental value of Lord Rama-
candra: one cannot see Him with material eyes. Because demons like
Ravana have no spiritual vision, they consider Lord Ramacandra an or-
dinary ksatriya king. Ravana therefore attempted to kidnap Lord Rama-
candra’s eternal consort, Sitadevi. Actually, however. Ravana could not
carry off Sitadevi in her original form. As soon as she was touched by


--- Page 233 ---
228 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
Ravana’s hands, she gave him a material form, but she maintained her
original form beyond his vision. Therefore in this verse the words pra-
tyak prasantam indicate that Lord Ramacandra and His potency, the god-
dess Sita, keep themselves aloof from the influence of the material
energy.

In the Upanisads it is said: yam evaisa vrnute tena labhyah. The
Supreme Lord, Paramatma, the Personality of Godhead, can be seen or
perceived only by persons who are saturated with devotional service. As
stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.38):

premaijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yam S§yamasundaram acintya-guna-svaripar
govindam adi-purusarm tam aham bhajami
“I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devo-
tee whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eter-
nal form of Syamasundara, situated within the heart of the devotee.”
Similarly, in the Chandogya Upanisad it is stated, 6125 tisro devata
anena jivena. In this verse of the Chandogya Upanisad the word anena
is used to distinguish the ৫৮7৫ and Paramatma as two separate iden-
tities. The words tisro devatd indicate that the body of the living entity is
made of three material elements—fire, earth and water. Although the
Paramatma enters the heart of the jivatma, who is influenced and desig-
nated by a material body, the Paramitma has nothing to do with the
Jivatma’s body. Because the Paramatma has no material connections, He
is described here as anama-ripam niraham. The Paramatma has no
material identity, whereas the jivatma does. The jivatma may introduce
himself as an Indian, American, German and so on, but the Paramatma
has no such material designations, and therefore He has no material
name. The jivatma is different from his name, but the Paramatma is not;
His name and He Himself are one and the same. This is the meaning of
niraham, which means “without material designations.” This word can-
not possibly be twisted to mean that the Paramatma has no aharikara, no
“I-ness” or identity. He has His transcendental identity as the Supreme.
This is the explanation given by Srila Jiva Gosvami. According to another
interpretation, given by Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, niraham


--- Page 234 ---
Text 5] The Island of Jambuadvipa 229
means nirniscayena aham. Niraham does not mean that the Supreme
Lord has no identity. Rather, the stress given by the word aham proves
strongly that He does have His personal identity because nir not only
means “‘negative’” but also means “‘strong ascertainment.”
TEXT 5
मर्त्यावतारस्त्विह मत्येशिक्षणं
A . ~
रक्षोवधायैव न केवरं विमोः।
कतोऽन्यथा स्याद्रमतः स्व आत्मनः
सीताकृतानि व्यसनानीश्वरस्य । ५ ॥
martyavataras tv tha martya-siksanam
rakso-vadhayaiva na kevalari vibhoh
kuto ’nyatha syad ramatah sva atmanah
sita-krtani vyasananisvarasya
martya—as a human being; avatarah—whose incarnation; tu—
however; iha—in the material world; martya-$iksanam—for teaching
all the living entities, especially human beings: raksah-vadhaya—to kill
the demon Ravana; eva—certainly; na—not; kevalam—only; vibhoh—
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kutah—from where; anyatha—
otherwise; syat—there would be; ramatah—of one enjoying: sve—in
Himself; atmanah—the spiritual identity of the universe; sita—of the
wife of Lord Ramacandra; krtani—appearing due to the separation;
vyasandani—all the miseries: iSvarasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
It was ordained that Ravana, chief of the Raksasas, could not be
killed by anyone but a man, and for this reason Lord Ramacandra,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appeared in the form of a
human being. Lord Ramacandra’s mission, however, was not only
to kill Ravana but also to teach mortal beings that material happi-
ness centered around sex life or centered around one’s wife is the
cause of many miseries. He is the self-sufficient Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and nothing is lamentable for Him.


--- Page 235 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
Therefore why else could He be subjected to tribulations by the
kidnapping of mother Sita?

PURPORT

When the Lord appears in this universe in the form of a human being,
He has two purposes, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.9) — paritranaya
sadhana vinasaya ca duskrtam: to destroy the demons and protect the
devotees. To protect the devotees, the Lord not only satisfies them by His
personal presence but also teaches them so that they will not fall down
from devotional service. By His personal example, Lord Ramacandra
taught the devotees that it is better not to enter married life, which is
certainly followed by many tribulations. As confirmed in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (7.9.45):

yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukhari hi tucchariu
kandiyanena karayor iva duhkha-duhkham
trpyanti neha krpana bahu-duhkha-bhajah
kanditivan manasijari visaheta-dhirah
Krpanas, those who are not advanced in spiritual knowledge and who are
therefore just the opposite of brahmanas, generally take to family life,
which is a concession for sex. Thus they enjoy sex again and again,
although that sex is followed by many tribulations. This is a warning to
devotees. To teach this lesson to devotees and to human society in
general, Lord Sri Ramacandra, although the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself, underwent a series of tribulations because He accepted
a wife, mother Sita. Lord Ramacandra underwent these austerities, of
course, only to instruct us; actually He never has any reason to lament
for anything.

Another aspect of the Lord’s instructions is that one who accepts a wife
must be a faithful husband and give her full protection. Human society is
divided into two classes of men—those who strictly follow the religious
principles and those who are devotees. By His personal example, Lord
Ramacandra wanted to instruct both of them how to fully adopt the dis-
cipline of the religious system and how to be a beloved and dutiful hus-
band. Otherwise He had no reason to undergo apparent tribulations. One
who strictly follows religious principles must not neglect to provide all


--- Page 236 ---
Text 6] The Island of Jambudvipa 231
facilities for the complete protection of his wife. There may be some
suffering because of this, but one must nevertheless endure it. That is
the duty of a faithful husband. By His personal example, Lord Rama-
candra demonstrated this duty. Lord Ramacandra could have produced
hundreds and thousands of Sitas from His pleasure energy, but just to
show the duty of a faithful husband, He not only rescued Sita from the
hands of Ravana but also killed Ravana and all the members of his
family.

Another aspect of the teachings of Lord Ramacandra is that although
Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His devotees may
apparently suffer from material tribulations, they have nothing to do
with such tribulations. They are mukta-purusas, liberated persons,
under all circumstances. It is therefore said in the Caitanya-bhagavata:

yata dekha vaisnavera vyavahara duhkha
niscaya janiha taha paramananda-sukha
A Vaisnava is always firmly situated in transcendental bliss because of
engagement in devotional service. Although he may appear to suffer
material pains, his position is called transcendental bliss in separation
(viraha). The emotions a lover and beloved feel when separated from
one another are actually very blissful, although apparently painful.
Therefore the separation of Lord Ramacandra from Sitadevi, as well as
the consequent tribulation they suffered, is but another display of tran-
scendental bliss. That is the opinion of Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti
Thakura.
TEXT 6
न वै स आ्माऽऽत्मवतां सुहृत्तमः
सक्तञिलोक्यां भगवान्‌ वासुदेवः |
न॒ स्रीकृतं कर्मलमञ्लुवीत
. ऽ
न लक्ष्मणे चापि विहातुमहंति || £ ॥
na vai sa atmatmavatan suhrttamah
saktas tri-lokyarm bhagavan vasudevah
na stri-krtari kasmalam asnuvita
na laksmanam capi vihatum arhati


--- Page 237 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19

na—not; vai—indeed; sah—He; atma—the Supreme Soul; atma-
vatam —of the self-realized souls; suhrt-tamah—the best friend; sak-
tah—attached; tri-lokyam—to anything within the three worlds;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vasudevah—the all-
pervading Lord; na—not; stri-krtam—obtained because of His wife;
kasmalam —sufferings of separation; asnuvita—would obtain; na—not;
laksmanam—His younger brother Laksmana; ca—also; api—certainly;
vihatum—to give up; arhati—be able.

TRANSLATION

Since Lord Sri Ramacandra is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Vasudeva, He is not attached to anything in this material
world. He is the most beloved Supersoul of all self-realized souls,
and He is their very intimate friend. He is full of all opulences.
Therefore He could not possibly have suffered because of separa-
tion from His wife, nor could He have given up His wife and
Laksmana, His younger brother. To give up either would have
been absolutely impossible.

PURPORT

In defining the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we say that He is full
in all six opulences—wealth, fame, strength, influence, beauty and
renunciation. He is called renounced because He is not attached to any-
thing in this material world; He is specifically attached to the spiritual
world and the living entities there. The affairs of the material world take
place under the superintendence of Durgadevi (srsti-sthiti-pralaya-
sadhana-saktir eka/ chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga). Every-
thing is going on under the strict rules and regulations of the material
energy, represented by Durga. Therefore the Lord is completely
detached and need not give attention to the material world. Sitadevi
belongs to the spiritual world. Similarly, Lord Laksmana, Ramacandra’s
younger brother, is a manifestation of Sankarsana, and Lord Ramacandra
Himself is Vasudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Since the Lord is always spiritually qualified, He is attached to ser-
vants who always render transcendental loving service unto Him. He is
attached to the truth in life, not to brahminical qualities. Indeed, He is
never attached to any material qualities. Although He is the Supersoul of


--- Page 238 ---
Text 7] The Island of Jambudvipa 233
all living entities, He is specifically manifest to those who are self-
realized, and He is especially dear to the hearts of His transcendental
devotees. Because Lord Ramacandra descended to teach human society
how dutiful a king should be, He apparently gave up the company of
mother Sita and Laksmana. Factually, however, He could not have given
them up. One should therefore learn about the activities of Lord Rama-
candra from a self-realized soul. Then one can understand the transcen-
dental activities of the Lord.
TEXT 7
न जन्म नूलं महतो न সীমা
न वाङ्‌ न बुद्धिर्नाकृतिस्तोषहेतुः।
A ^ hr, -
तेयद्विखृष्टानपि नो वनौकस-
अकार सख्ये बत लक्ष्मणाग्रजः । ७ ॥
na janma nina mahato na saubhagarm
na van na buddhir nakrtis tosa-hetuh
tair yad visrstan api no vanaukasas
cakara sakhye bata laksmanagrajah
na—not; janma—birth in a very polished, aristocratic family:
ninam—indeed; mahatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
na—nor; saubhagam—great fortune; na—nor; vak—an elegant man-
ner of speaking; na—nor; buddhih—sharpness of intelligence: na—
not; akrtih—features of the body; tosa-hetuh—the cause of pleasure to
the Lord; tath—by all those above-mentioned qualities: yat—because:
visrstan—rejected; api—although; nah —us; vana-okasah—the inhabi-
tants of the forest; cakara—accepted; sakhye—in friendship: bata—
alas; laksana-agra-jah—Lord Sri Ramacandra, the elder brother of
Laksmana.
TRANSLATION
One cannot establish a friendship with the Supreme Lord Rama-

candra on the basis of material qualities such as one’s birth in an
aristocratic family, one’s personal beauty, one’s eloquence, one’s
sharp intelligence or one’s superior race or nation. None of these


--- Page 239 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
qualifications is actually a prerequisite for friendship with Lord
Sri Ramacandra. Otherwise how is it possible that although we un-
civilized inhabitants of the forest have not taken noble births,
although we have no physical beauty and although we cannot
speak like gentlemen, Lord Ramacandra has nevertheless accepted
us as friends?
PURPORT
In a prayer to Krsna expressing her feelings, Srimati Kuntidevi called

Him akifcana-gocara. The prefix a means “not,” and kificana
“something of this material world.” One may be very proud of his
prestigious position, material wealth, beauty, education and so on, but
although these are certainly good qualifications in material dealings, they
are not necessary for achieving friendship with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. One who possesses all these material qualities is expected to
become a devotee, and when he actually does, the qualities are properly
utilized. Those who are puffed up by a high birth, wealth, education and
personal beauty (janmaisvarya-sruta-sri) unfortunately do not care for
developing Krsna consciousness, nor does the Supreme Personality of
Godhead care about all these material qualifications. The Supreme Lord
is achieved by devotion (bhaktya mam abhijanati). One’s devotion and
sincere desire to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead are the only
qualifications. Rapa Gosvami has also said that the price for achieving
God’s favor is simply one’s sincere eagerness to have it (laulyam ekar
milyam). In the Caitanya-bhagavata it is said:

kholaveca sevakera dekha bhagya-sima

brahma Siva kande yara dekhiya mahima

dhane jane panditye krsna nahi pai

kevala bhaktira vasa caitanya-gosani
“Behold the great fortune of the devotee Kholaveca. Lord Brahma and
Siva shed tears upon seeing his greatness. One cannot attain Lord Krsna
by any amount of wealth, followers, or learning. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is controlled only by pure devotion.”” Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu had a very sincere devotee whose name was Kholaveca


--- Page 240 ---
Text 8] The Island of Jambuadvipa 235
Sridhara and whose only business was to sell pots made of the skin of
banana trees. Whatever income he had, he used fifty percent for the wor-
ship of mother Ganges, and with the other fifty percent he provided for
his necessities. On the whole, he was so very poor that he lived in a cot-
tage that had a broken roof with many holes in it. He could not afford
brass utensils, and therefore he drank water from an iron pot. Neverthe-
less, he was a great devotee of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He is a
typical example of how a poor man with no material possessions can
become a most exalted devotee of the Lord. The conclusion is that one
cannot attain shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Krsna or Sri Caitanya
Gosani through material opulence; that shelter is attainable only by pure
devotional service.
anyabhilasita-sanyam
jrana-karmady-anavrtam
anukilyena krsnanu-
Stlanarh bhaktir uttama
“One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devo-
tional service.”
TEXT 8
- AN = ro)
sql वाप्यथ वानरा नरः
सर्वात्मना यः सुकरतज्ञ्त्तमम्‌ ।
मजेत বাদ मनुजाकृतिं हरिं
य उत्तराननयत्कोसान्दिवमिति ॥ ८ ॥
suro 50870 vapy atha vanaro narah
sarvatmana yah sukrtajiam uttamam
bhajeta ramarh manujakrtirn harim
ya uttaran anayat kosalan divam iti
surah—demigod: asurah—demon: vd api—or: atha—therefore:
va —or; anarah—other than a human being (bird. beast. animal and so
on): narah—a human being: sarva-atmana—wholeheartedly: yah—


--- Page 241 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
who; su-krtajiam—easily made grateful; uttamam—most highly ele-
vated; bhajeta—should worship; ramam—Lord Ramacandra; manuja-
akrtim—appearing as a human being; harim—the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; yah—who; uttaran—of northern India; anayat—brought
back; kosalan—the inhabitants of Kosala-desa, Ayodhya; divam—to the
spiritual world, Vaikuntha; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION

Therefore, whether one is a demigod or a demon, a man or a
creature other than man, such as a beast or bird, everyone should
worship Lord Ramacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who appears on this earth just like a human being. There is no
need of great austerities or penances to worship the Lord, for He
accepts even a small service offered by His devotee. Thus He is
satisfied, and as soon as He is satisfied, the devotee is successful.
Indeed, Lord Sri Ramacandra brought all the devotees of Ayodhya
back home, back to Godhead [Vaikuntha].

PURPORT

Lord Sri Ramacandra is so kind and merciful to His devotees that He is
very easily satisfied by a little service rendered by anyone, human or not.
This is the special advantage of worshiping Lord Ramacandra, and there
is the same advantage in worshiping Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Lord Krsna and Lord Ramacandra, in the manner of ksatriyas, some-
times showed Their mercy by killing asuras, but Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu awarded love of God without difficulty even to the asuras.
All the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead —but
especially Lord Ramacandra, Lord Krsna and, later, Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu—delivered many of the living entities present before
Them, indeed almost all of them. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is therefore
represented in the six-armed form of sad-bhija-mirti, which is a com-
bination of Lord Ramacandra, Lord Krsna and Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. The best purpose of human life can be fulfilled by
worshiping the sad-bhiija-mairti, the form of the Lord with six arms—
two arms of Ramacandra, two arms of Krsna and two arms of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.


--- Page 242 ---
Text 9] The Island of Jambudvipa
TEXT 9
a
भारतेऽपि TH भगवान्नरनारायणार्य आकल्यान्तयुपचितधम॑ज्ञानवराग्यै-

शवर्योपश्चमोपरमात्मोपलम्मनमनुग्रहायात्मवतामनुकम्पया तपोऽव्यक्तगतिश्वरति
Hall

bharate ‘pi varse bhagavan nara-narayanakhya akalpantam upacita-
dharma-jidana-vairagyaisvaryopasamoparamatmopalambhanam
anugrahayatmavatam anukampaya tapo vyakta-gatis carat.

bharate—in Bharata; api—also; varse—the tract of land;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-narayana-
akhyah—known as Nara-Narayana; a-kalpa-antam—up to the end of
the millennium; upacita —increasing; dharma—religion; jidna—
knowledge; wvairdgya—renunciation or nonattachment: aiSvarya—
mystic opulences; upasama—control of the senses; uparama—freedom
from false ego; atma-upalambhanam—self-realization; anugrahaya—
to show favor; @tma-vat@m—unto persons interested in self-realization;
anukampaya—by causeless mercy; tapah —austerities; avyakta-gatih—
whose glories are inconceivable; carati—executes.

TRANSLATION

[Sukadeva Gosvami continued:] The glories of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are inconceivable. He has appeared in the
form of Nara-Narayana in the land of Bharata-varsa, at the place
known as Badarikasrama, to favor His devotees by teaching them
religion, knowledge, renunciation, spiritual power, sense control
and freedom from false ego. He is advanced in the opulence of
spiritual assets, and He engages in executing austerity until the
end of this millennium. This is the process of self-realization.

PURPORT

People in India may visit the temple of Nara-Narayana at
Badarikasrama just to learn how the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
His incarnation as Nara-Narayana engages in austerities to teach the peo-
ple of the world how to achieve self-realization. It is impossible to realize


--- Page 243 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
oneself simply by absorbing oneself in speculation and material ac-
tivities. One must be very serious about self-realization and the practice
of austerity. Unfortunately, the people of this age of Kali do not even
know the meaning of austerity. Under these circumstances, the Lord has
appeared as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to bestow upon the fallen souls the
easiest method of self-realization, technically called ceto-darpana-mar-
Janam, cleansing of the dirt from the core of one’s heart. This method is
extremely simple. Anyone can chant the glorious krsna-sankirtana—
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. In this age there are different forms of
so-called advanced scientific knowledge, such as anthropology, Marxism,
Freudianism, nationalism and industrialism, but if we work very hard
under their guidance instead of adopting the process practiced by Nara-
Narayana, we shall waste our valuable human form of life. Thus we shall
certainly be cheated and misled.
TEXT 10

तं भगवान्नारदो वरणाश्रमवतीमिर्मारतीभिः प्रजाभिभेगवत्प्रोक्ताम्यां
सांख्ययोगाभ्यां भगवद्‌ नुमाबोपवणेनं  साव्णेरुपदे्यमाणः परम
क्तिभावेनोपसरति इदं चाभिगृणाति nee
tarh bhagavan narado varndasramavatibhir bharatibhih prajabhir
bhagavat-proktabhyam sankhya-yogabhyarh bhagavad-
anubhavopavarnanarm savarner upadeksyamanah parama-bhakti-
bhavenopasarati idan cabhigrnati.

tam —Him (Nara-Narayana) ; bhagavan—the most powerful saintly
person; ndradah—the great sage Narada; varna-asrama-vatibhih—by
followers of the institution of the four wvarnas and four dasramas;
bharatibhih—of the land known as Bharata-varsa (India); prajabhih—
who are the inhabitants: bhagavat-proktabhyam —which was stated by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarkhya—by the sankhya-yoga
system (the analytical study of material conditions); yogabhyam—by
practice of the yoga system: bhagavat-anubhava-upavarnanam—which
describes the process of God realization; sdvarneh—unto Savarni Manu;
upadeksyamanah—instructing; parama-bhakti-bhavena—in greatly


--- Page 244 ---
Text 10] The Island of Jambuadvipa 239
ecstatic loving service to the Lord; upasarati—serves the Lord; idam—
this; ca—and; abhigrnati—chants.
TRANSLATION

In his own book, known as Narada Paficaratra, Bhagavan Narada
has very vividly described how to work to achieve the ultimate goal
of life—devotion —through knowledge and through execution of
the mystic yoga system. He has also described the glories of the
Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The great sage Narada
instructed the tenets of this transcendental literature to Savarni
Manu in order to teach those inhabitants of Bharata-varsa who
strictly follow the principles of varnaérama-dharma how to achieve
the devotional service of the Lord. Thus Narada Muni, along with
the other inhabitants of Bharata-varsa, always engages in the ser-
vice of Nara-Narayana, and he chants as follows.

PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has clearly declared:
bharata-bhamite haila manusya-janma yara
Jjanma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara

The real success or fulfillment of the mission of human life can be
achieved in India, Bharata-varsa, because in Bharata-varsa the purpose
of life and the method for achieving success are evident. People should
take advantage of the opportunity afforded by Bharata-varsa, and this is
especially so for those who are following the principles of varnasrama-
dharma. If we do not take to the principles of varnasrama-dharma by
accepting the four social orders (brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and Sidra)
and the four orders of spiritual life (brahmacari, grhastha, vanaprastha
and sannyasa), there can be no question of success in life. Unfor-
tunately, because of the influence of Kali-yuga, everything is now being
lost. The inhabitants of Bharata-varsa are gradually becoming degraded
mlecchas and yavanas. How then will they teach others? Therefore, this
Krsna consciousness movement has been started not only for the inhabi-
tants of Bharata-varsa but for all the people of the world, as announced
by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. There is still time, and if the inhabitants of


--- Page 245 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
Bharata-varsa take this movement of Krsna consciousness seriously, the
entire world will be saved from gliding down to a hellish condition. The
Krsna consciousness movement follows the process of panicaratrika-vidhi
and that of bhagavata-vidhi simultaneously, so that people can take ad-
vantage of the movement and make their lives successful.
TEXT 11
- -

ॐ नमो भगवते उपशमशीलायोपरतानात्म्याय नमोऽकिञ्चनवित्ताय
ऋषिच्षमाय नरनारायणाय परमहंसपरमगुरवे आत्मारामाधिपतये नमो
नम इति ॥१६॥
07707710 bhagavate upasama-$ilayoparatanatmyaya namo ’kificana-
vitt@ya rsi-rsabhaya nara-narayandya paramahamsa-parama-gurave
atmaramadhipataye namo nama iti.

om—O Supreme Lord; namah—my respectful obeisances; bhaga-
vate —unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upasama-silaya—who
has mastered the senses; uparata-andtmyaya—having no attachment
for this material world; namah—my respectful obeisances; akiricana-
vittdya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the only asset
of persons who have no material possessions; rsi-rsabhaya—the most ex-
alted of saintly persons; nara-narayandaya—Nara-Narayana;
paramaharisa-parama-gurave—the most exalted spiritual master of all
paramaharisas, liberated persons; atmarama-adhipataye—the best of
self-realized persons; namah namah—my respectful obeisances again
and again; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Nara-Narayana, the
best of all saintly persons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
He is the most self-controlled and self-realized, He is free from
false prestige, and He is the asset of persons who have no material
possessions. He is the spiritual master of all paramahariisas, who
are the most exalted human beings, and He is the master of the
self-realized. Let me offer my repeated obeisances at His lotus feet.


--- Page 246 ---
Text 12] The Island of Jambudvipa 241
TEXT 12
गायति चेदम्‌--
कर्तास्य सर्गादिषु योन बध्यते
= = ৯৯২,
न हन्यते देहगतोऽपि देहिकेः |
९ EY
्रष्टुन TAY qui
্ - -
तस्म नमोऽसक्तविविक्तसाक्षिणे 11220)
gayati cedam
kartasya sargadisu yo na badhyate
na hanyate deha-gato pi daihikaih
drastur na drg yasya gunair vidisyate
tasmai namo ’sakta-vivikta-saksine
gayati—he sings; ca—and; idam —this; karta—the executor; asya—
of this cosmic manifestation; sarga-adisu —of the creation, maintenance
and destruction; yah—one who; na badhyate—is not attached as the
creator, master or proprietor; na—not; hanyate—is victimized; deha-
gatah api—although appearing as a human being; daihikaih—by bodily
tribulations such as hunger, thirst and fatigue; drastuh—of Him who is
the seer of everything; na—not; drk—the power of vision; yasya—of
whom; gunaih—by the material qualities; vidisyate—is polluted;
tasmai—unto Him; namah—my respectful obeisances; asakta—unto
the Supreme Person, who is unattached; vivikta— without affection; sak-
sine —the witness of everything.
TRANSLATION
Narada, the most powerful saintly sage, also worships Nara-
Narayana by chanting the following mantra: The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is the master of the creation, maintenance and
annihilation of this visible cosmic manifestation, yet He is com-
pletely free from false prestige. Although to the foolish He ap-
pears to have accepted a material body like us, He is unaffected by
bodily tribulations like hunger, thirst and fatigue. Although He is
the witness who sees everything, His senses are unpolluted by the
objects He sees. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto that


--- Page 247 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.19
unattached, pure witness of the world, the Supreme Soul, the Per-
sonality of Godhead.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is described as sac-cid-
ananda-vigraha, the body of eternity, transcendental bliss and full
knowledge. Now in this verse He is more fully described. Krsna is the
creator of the entire cosmic manifestation, yet He is unattached to it. If
we were to construct a very tall skyscraper, we would be very attached to
it, but Krsna is so renounced that although He has created everything,
He is not attached to anything (na badhyate). Furthermore, although
Krsna has His transcendental form, sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, He is not
disturbed by the bodily necessities of life, which are called daihika; for
example, He is never hungry, thirsty or fatigued (na hanyate deha-gato
pi daihikaih). Then again, since everything is Krsna’s property, He sees
everything and is present everywhere, but because His body is transcen-
dental, He is above vision, the objects of vision and the process of vision.
When we see someone beautiful, we are attracted. The sight of a
beautiful woman immediately attracts a man, and the sight of a man
naturally attracts a woman. Krsna, however, is transcendental to all these
faults. Although He is the seer of everything, He is not afflicted with
faulty vision (na drg yasya gunair vidusyate). Therefore, although He is
the witness and seer, He is aloof from all affection for the activities He
sees. He is always unattached and separate; He is only a witness.
TEXT 13
इदं हि योगेश्वर योगनैपुणं
दहिरण्यगर्मो भगवाञ्जगाद यत्‌ ।
यदन्तकाले त्वयि faa मनो
भक्तया दधीतोज््ितदुष्केवरः 1231
80077 hi yogesvara yoga-naipunar
hiranyagarbho bhagavan jagada yat
yad anta-kale tvayi nirgune mano
bhaktya dadhitojjhita-duskalevarah


--- Page 248 ---
Text 13] The Island of Jambuadvipa 243
idam—this; hi—certainly; yoga-isvara—O my Lord, master of all
mystic power; yoga-naipunam—the expert process of executing yogic
principles; hiranya-garbhah—Lord Brahma; bhagavan—the most
powerful; jagada—spoke; yat—which; yat—which; anta-kale—at the
time of death; tvayi—in You; nirgune—the transcendence; manah—the
mind; bhaktya—with a devotional attitude; dadhita—one should place;
yjjhita-duskalevarah—having given up his identification with the
material body.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, master of all mystic yoga, this is the explanation of
the yogic process spoken of by Lord Brahma [Hiranyagarbha],
who is self-realized. At the time of death, all yogis give up the
material body with full detachment simply by placing their minds
at Your lotus feet. That is the perfection of yoga.
PURPORT
Srila Madhvacarya says:
yasya samyag bhagavati
Jjaanarn bhaktis tathaiva ca
niscintas tasya moksah syat
sarva-papa-krto pi tu
“For one who very seriously practices devotional service during his
lifetime in order to understand the constitutional position of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, liberation from this material world is guaran-
teed, even if he has previously been addicted to sinful habits.” This is
also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:
api cet suduracdaro
bhajate mam ananya bhak
sadhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah
“Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly


--- Page 249 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
situated.” (Bg. 9.30) The only purpose of life is to be fully absorbed in
thoughts of Krsna and His form, pastimes, activities and qualities. If one
is able to think of Krsna in this way, twenty-four hours a day, he is
already liberated (svaripena vyavasthitih). Whereas materialists are ab-
sorbed in material thoughts and activities, devotees, on the contrary, are
always absorbed in thoughts of Krsna and Krsna’s activities. Therefore
they are already on the platform of liberation. One has to think of Krsna
with full absorption at the time of death. Then he will certainly return
home, back to Godhead, without a doubt.
TEXT 14
यथैदिकाघ्प्मिककामलम्पटः
सुतेषु दारेषु धनेषु चिन्तयन्‌ |
gga विद्वान्‌ कुकठेवरात्ययाद्‌
यस्तस्य यलः श्रम एव केवलम्‌ ।१४॥
yathaihikamusmika-kama-lampatah
sutesu daresu dhanesu cintayan
Sanketa vidvan kukalevaratyayad
yas tasya yatnah srama eva kevalam
yatha—as; aihika—in the present life; amusmika—in the expected
future life; kama-lampatah—a person who is very attached to lusty
desires for bodily enjoyment; sutesu—children; daresu—wife;
dhanesu—wealth; cintayan—thinking about; Sanketa—is afraid; vid-
van—a person advanced in spiritual knowledge; ku-kalevara—of this
body, which is full of stool and urine; atyayat—because of loss; yah—
anyone; tasya—his; yatnah—endeavors: sramah—a waste of time and
energy; eva—certainly; kevalam—only.
TRANSLATION
Materialists are generally very attached to their present bodily
comforts and to the bodily comforts they expect in the future.
Therefore they are always absorbed in thoughts of their wives,
children and wealth and are afraid of giving up their bodies, which


--- Page 250 ---
Text 15] The Island of Jambudvipa 245
are full of stool and urine. If a person engaged in Krsna conscious-
ness, however, is also afraid of giving up his body, what is the use
of his having labored to study the 58517852 It was simply a waste of
time.
PURPORT
At the time of death a materialist thinks of his wife and children. He is
absorbed in thinking of how they will live and who will take care of them
after he leaves. Consequently he is never prepared to give up his body;
rather, he wants to continue to live in his body to serve his society,
family, friends and so on. Therefore by practicing the mystic yoga
system one must become detached from bodily relationships. If despite
practicing bhakti-yoga and studying all the Vedic literature, one is afraid
of giving up his bad body, which is the cause of all his suffering. what is
the use of his attempts to advance in spiritual life? The secret of success
in practicing yoga is to become free from bodily attachments. Srila
Narottama dasa Thakura says, deha-smrti nahi yara, samsara-bandhana
kahan tara: one whose practice has freed him from the anxieties of
bodily needs is no longer in conditional life. Such a person is freed from
conditional bondage. A person in Krsna consciousness must fully dis-
charge his devotional duties without material attachment. Then his
liberation is guaranteed.
TEXT 15
तनः प्रभो स्वं कुकलेवरापितां
स्वन्माययाहं ममतामधोक्षज |
भिन्द्याम Fag वयं सुदुभिदां
विधेहि योगं त्वयि नः खभावमिति gun
tan nah prabho (एचो kukalevararpitar
tvan-mayayahari-mamatam adhoksaja
bhindyama yendasu vayam sudurbhidam
vidhehi yogara tvayi nah svabhavam iti
tat—therefore; nah—our: prabho—O my Lord: tvam—You: ku-

kalevara-arpitam —invested in this bad body full of stool and urine:


--- Page 251 ---
246 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
tvat-mayaya—Dby Your illusory energy; aham-mamatam—the concep-
tion of “I and my”; adhoksaja—O Transcendence; bhindyama—may
give up; yena—by which; @su—very soon; wvayam—we:
sudurbhidam—which is very difficult to give up; vidhehi—please give;
yogam—the mystic process; tvayi—unto You; nah—our; svabhavam —
which is symptomized by a steady mind; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION

Therefore, O Lord, O Transcendence, kindly help us by giving
us the power to execute bhakti-yoga so that we can control our
restless minds and fix them upon You. We are all infected by Your
illusory energy; therefore we are very attached to the body, which
is full of stool and urine, and to anything related with the body.
Except for devotional service, there is no way to give up this at-
tachment. Therefore kindly bestow upon us this benediction.

PURPORT

The Lord advises in Bhagavad-gita: man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mar namaskuru. The perfect yoga system consists of always
thinking of Krsna, always engaging in devotional service, always
worshiping Krsna and always offering obeisances unto Him. Unless we
practice this yoga system, our illusory attachment for this bad body,
which is full of stool and urine, is impossible to give up. The perfection
of yoga consists of giving up attachment for this body and bodily rela-
tionships and transferring that attachment to Krsna. We are very
attached to material enjoyment, but when we transfer that same attach-
ment to Krsna, we traverse the path of liberation. One has to practice this
yoga system and none other.

TEXT 16
भारतेऽप्यसिन्‌ নদ सरिच्छैलाः सन्ति बहवो मलयो मङ्गरग्रस्थो
KR - ~ द
मैनाकच्िक्रट ऋषमः कूटकः ge: सद्यो देवगिरिकऋरष्यमूकः भ्रीशेलो
वेङ्कटो महेन्द्रो वारिधारो विन्ध्यः शुक्तिमानृक्षगिरिः पारियात्रो
€ = त

द्रोणित्र्टो गोवधेनो रैवतकः FFA नीलो गोकाभ्ुख इन्द्रकीलः


--- Page 252 ---
Text 16] The Island of Jambadvipa 247
कामगिरिरिति चान्ये च शतसहस्रशः शैलास्तेषां नितम्बग्रमवा नदा
नद्य सन्त्य सहयाताः।॥ १६।

bharate py asmin varse ऽवा८-९10210/1. santi bahavo malayo mangala-
prastho maindkas trikita rsabhah kitakah kollakah sahyo devagirir
rsyamitkah sri-sailo verikato mahendro varidharo vindhyah Suktiman
rksagirih pariyatro dronas citrakiito govardhano raivatakah kakubho
nilo gokamukha indrakilah kamagirir iti canye ca Sata-sahasrasah sailas
tesari nitamba-prabhava nada nadyas ca santy asarikhyatah.

bharate—in the land of Bharata-varsa; api—also; asmin—in this;
varse—tract of land; sarit—rivers; Saildh—mountains; santi—there
are; bahavah—many; malayah—Malaya; mangala-prasthah—
Mangala-prastha; mainakah—Mainaka; tri-kitah—Trikata; rsabhah—
Rsabha; katakah—Kitaka; kollakah—Kollaka; sahyah—Sahya; deva-
girth—Devagiri; rsya-mikah—Rsyamuka; $ri-Sailah—Sri-Saila;
verikatah—Venkata; mahendrah—Mahendra; wvari-dharah —
Varidhara; vindhyah—Vindhya; Suktiman—Suktiman; rksa-girih—
Rksagiri; pariyatrah—Pariyatra; dronah—Drona; citra-kitah —
Citrakita; govardhanah—Govardhana; raivatakah—Raivataka;
kakubhah—Kakubha; nilah—Nila; gokamukhah—Gokamukha; in-
drakilah—Indrakila; kama-girih—Kamagiri; iti—thus; ca—and;
anye—others; ca—also; Sata-sahasrasah—many hundreds and thou-
sands; $aildh—mountains; tesam—of them; nitamba-prabhavah—born
of the slopes; nadah—big rivers; nadyah—small rivers; ca—and:
santi—there are; asarikhyatah—innumerable.

TRANSLATION

In the tract of land known as Bharata-varsa, as in Ilavrta-varsa,
there are many mountains and rivers. Some of the mountains are
known as Malaya, Mangala-prastha, Mainaka, Trikiita, Rsabha,
Kiutaka, Kollaka, Sahya, Devagiri, Rsyamika, Sri-$aila, Venkata,
Mahendra, Varidhara, Vindhya, Suktiman, Rksagiri, Pariyatra,
Drona, Citrakiita, Govardhana, Raivataka, Kakubha, Nila,
Gokamukha, Indrakila and Kamagiri. Besides these, there are
many other hills, with many large and small rivers flowing from
their slopes.


--- Page 253 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
TEXTS 17-18
एतासामपो मारत्यः प्रजा नामभिरेव पुनन्तीनामात्मना चोपस्पृ्न्ति
~ 2

॥१७॥ चन्द्रवसा ताभ्नपर्णीं अवटोदा FAAS वैहायसी कावेरी वेणी
पयस्विनी शरकरावर्ता तुङ्गभद्रा कृष्णा वेण्या भीमरथी गोदावरी निर्विन्ध्या

- _ + C प =
पयोष्णी तापी रेवा सुरसा नमेदा चमेण्वती सिन्धुरन्धः शोणश्च नदौ

~ [+ বে 2 6১

महानदी वेदस्प्रतिक्रषिङल्या त्रिसामा कौक्लिकी मन्दाकिनी aga सरखती
दृषद्वती गोमती सरयू रोधस्वती सप्रवती सुषोमा शतदर्न्द्रमागा AGT
वितस्ता असिक्री विश्वेति महानद्यः ॥१८॥
etasam apo bharatyah praja namabhir eva punantinam atmana
copasprsanti. candravasa tamraparni avatoda krtamala vaihayasi kaveri
veni payasvini Sarkaravarta tungabhadra krsnavenya bhimarathi
godavari nirvindhya payosni tapi reva surasa narmada carmanvati
sindhur andhah 50710 ca nadau mahanadi vedasmrtir rsikulya trisama
kausiki mandakini yamuna sarasvati drsadvati gomati sarayit rodhasvati
saptavati susoma Satadriis candrabhaga marudvrd ha vitasta asikni
visveti maha-nadyah.

etasam—of all these; apah—water; bharatyah—of Bharata-varsa
(India); prajah—the residents; namabhih—by the names; eva—only;
punantinam—are purifying; atmana—by the mind; ca—also; upaspr-
Santi—touch; candra-vasa—Candravasa: tamra-parni—Tamraparni;
avatoda —Avatoda; krta-mala—Krtamala; vaihayasi—Vaihayasi;
kaveri —Kaveri; veni—Veni; payasvini—Payasvini; Sarkaravarta—
Sarkaravarta; tunga-bhadra—Tungabhadra; krspa-venya—
Krsnavenya; bhima-rathi—Bhimarathi; godavari—Godavari; nir-
vindhya—Nirvindhya; payosni—Payosni; tapi—Tapi; reva—Reva;
surasa—Surasa; narmadd—Narmada; carmanvati—Carmanvati;
sindhuh—Sindhu; andhah—Andha; sonah—Sona; ca—and; nadau—
two rivers; maha-nadi—Mahinadi; veda-smrtih —Vedasmrti; rsi-
kulya —Rsikulya; tri-sama—Trisama; kausiki—Kausiki; mandakini—
Mandakini; yamund—Yamuna; sarasvati—Sarasvati; drsadvati—
Drsadvati; gomati—Gomati; sarayi—Sarayi; rodhasvati—Rodhasvati;
saptavati—Saptavati; susomda—Susoma: Sata-drith—Satadru; candra-


--- Page 254 ---
Text 19] The Island of Jambudvipa 249
bhaga—Candrabhaga; marudvrdha—Marudvrdha; vitasta— Vitasta;
asikni—Asikni; visva—Visva; iti—thus; maha-nadyah—big rivers.
TRANSLATION

Two of the rivers—the Brahmaputra and the Sona—are called
nadas, or main rivers. These are other great rivers that are very
prominent: Candravasa, Tamraparni, Avatoda, Krtamala,
Vaihayasi, Kaveri, Veni, Payasvini, Sarkaravarta, Tungabhadra,
Krsnavenya, Bhimarathi, Godavari, Nirvindhya, Payosni, Tapi,
Reva, Surasa, Narmada, Carmanvati, Mahanadi, Vedasmrti,
Rsikulya, Trisama, Kausiki, Mandakini, Yamuna, Sarasvati, Drsad-
vati, Gomati, Saray, Rodhasvati, Saptavati, Susoma, Satadru,
Candrabhaga, Marudvrdha, Vitasta, Asikni and Viva. The inhabi-
tants of Bharata-varsa are purified because they always remember
these rivers. Sometimes they chant the names of these rivers as
mantras, and sometimes they go directly to the rivers to touch
them and bathe in them. Thus the inhabitants of Bharata-varsa
become purified.

PURPORT

All these rivers are transcendental. Therefore one can be purified by
remembering them, touching them or bathing in them. This practice is
still going on.

TEXT 19
९ र (

असिन्नेव वर्षे पुरुैलंन्धजन्मभिः शुङ्कलोहितदृष्णवर्णेन EE कमणा
दिन्यमाचुषनारकगतयो बह्मय आत्मन AGI सर्वा হীন सर्वेषां विधीयन्ते
यथावणं विधानमपवग आपि भवति ।१९॥
asminn eva varse purusair labdha-janmabhih sukla-lohita-krsna-
varnena svarabdhena karmana divya-manusa-naraka-gatayo bahvya
atmana anupiirvyena sarvd hy eva sarvesam vidhiyante yatha-varna-
vidhanam apavargas capi bhavati.

asmin eva varse—in this tract of land (Bharata-varsa); purusaih—by
the people; labdha-janmabhih—who have taken birth; Sukla—of the


--- Page 255 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
mode of goodness; lohita—of the mode of passion; krsna—of the mode
of ignorance; varnena—according to the division; sva—by himself;
arabdhena —begun; karmana—by activities; divya—divine; manusa—
human; naraka—hellish; gatayah—goals; bahvyah—many; at-
manah—of his own; anupiirvyena—according to acts performed pre-
viously; sarvah—all; hi—certainly; eva—indeed; sarvesam—of all of
them; vidhiyante—are allotted; yathd-varna-vidhanam—in terms of
different castes; apavargah—the path of liberation; ca—and; api —also;
bhavati—is possible.
TRANSLATION

The people who take birth in this tract of land are divided ac-
cording to the qualities of material nature — the modes of goodness
[sattva-guna], passion [rajo-guna], and ignorance [tamo-guna].
Some of them are born as exalted personalities, some are ordinary
human beings, and some are extremely abominable, for in
Bharata-varsa one takes birth exactly according to one’s past
karma. If one’s position is ascertained by a bona fide spiritual
master and one is properly trained to engage in the service of Lord
Visnu according to the four social divisions [brahmana, ksatriya,
vaiS§ya and ও00 13] and the four spiritual divisions [brahmacari,
grhastha, vanaprastha and sannyasa), one’s life becomes perfect.

PURPORT

For further information, one should refer to Bhagavad-gita (14.18
and 18.42-45). Srila Ramanujacarya writes in his book Vedanta-
sangraha:

evam-vidha-parabhakti-svaripa-jiana-visesasyotpadakah  piirvok-
taharahar  upaciyamana-jaiana-pirvaka-karmanugrhita-bhakti-yoga
eva; yathoktarn bhagavata parasarena—varnasrameti. nikhila-jagad-
uddharanayavanitale ‘vatirnar para-brahma-bhitah purusottamah
svayam etad uktavan— “‘svakarma-niratah siddhim yatha vindati tac
chrnu” “yatah pravrttir bhitanam yena sarvam idari tatam/ svakar-
mana tam abhyarcya siddhim vindati manavah”
Quoting from the Visnu Purana (389), the great sage Parasara Muni has
recommended:


--- Page 256 ---
Text 20] The Island of Jambudvipa 251
varnasramdcaravata
purusena parah puman
visnur aradhyate pantha
nanyat tat-tosa-kdaranam
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, is worshiped by the
proper execution of prescribed duties in the system of varna and asrama.
There is no other way to satisfy the Lord.” In the land of Bharata-varsa,
the institution of varndsrama-dharma may be easily adopted. At the pre-
sent moment, certain demoniac sections of the population of Bharata-
varsa are disregarding the system of varnasrama-dharma. Because there
is no institution to teach people how to become brahmanas, ksatriyas,
vaiSyas and Sidras or brahmacaris, grhasthas, vanaprasthas and san-
nyasis, these demons want a classless society. This is resulting in chaotic
conditions. In the name of secular government, unqualified people are
taking the supreme governmental posts. No one is being trained to act ac-
cording to the principles of varnasrama-dharma, and thus people are
becoming increasingly degraded and are heading in the direction of
animal life. The real aim of life is liberation, but unfortunately the op-
portunity for liberation is being denied to people in general, and
therefore their human lives are being spoiled. The Krsna consciousness
movement, however, is being propagated all over the world to reestablish
the varnasrama-dharma system and thus save human society from glid-
ing down to hellish life.
TEXT 20

योऽसौ मगवति सर्वभूतात्मन्यनात्म्येऽनिरुक्तेऽनिलयने परमात्मनि वासुदेवे-
ऽनन्यनिमित्तमक्तियोगलक्षणो नानागतिनिमित्ताविदयाग्रन्थिरन्धनद्यारेण

यदा হি महापुरुषपुरुषप्रसङ्गः ।। Re ॥
yo ‘sau bhagavati sarva-bhitatmany anatmye 72271४८ ‘nilayane
paramatmani vasudeve ‘nanya-nimitta-bhakti-yoga-laksano nana-gati-
nimittavidya-granthi-randhana-dvarena yada hi maha-purusa-purusa-
prasangah

yah—anyone who; asau—that; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Per-

sonality of Godhead; sarva-bhita-atmani—the Supersoul of all living


--- Page 257 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
entities; andtmye—having no attachment; anirukte—who is beyond the
mind and speech; anilayane—not dependent on anything else; parama-
atmani—unto the Supreme Soul; vasudeve—Lord Vasudeva, the son of
Vasudeva; ananya—without any other; nimitta—cause: bhakti-yoga-
laksanah —having symptoms of pure devotional service; nana-gati—of
varied destinations; nimitta—the cause; avidya-granthi—the bondage
of ignorance; randhana—of cutting; dvarena—by means; yada—
when; hi—indeed; maha-purusa—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; purusa—with the devotee; prasarigah—an intimate relation-
ship.
TRANSLATION

After many, many births, when the results of one’s pious ac-
tivities mature, one gets an opportunity to associate with pure
devotees. Then one is able to cut the knot of bondage to ignorance,
which bound him because of varied fruitive activities. As a result
of associating with devotees, one gradually renders service to Lord
Vasudeva, who is transcendental, free from attachment to the
material world, beyond the mind and words, and independent of
everything else. That bhakti-yoga, devotional service to Lord
Vasudeva, is the real path of liberation.

PURPORT

Brahman realization is the beginning of liberation, and Paramatma
realization is still further advancement toward the realm of liberation,
but one achieves real liberation when he understands his position as an
eternal servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (muktir hit-
vanyatha rapam svaripena vyavasthitih). In the material world, in the
bodily concept of life, everyone is working in the wrong direction. When
one becomes brahma-bhiita, spiritually realized, one understands that he
is not the body and that working in the bodily concept of life is useless
and misdirected. Then his devotional service begins. As Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (18.54):

brahma-bhiatah prasannatma
na Socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhiitesu
mad-bhaktir labhate param


--- Page 258 ---
Text 21] The Island of Jambadvipa 253
“One who is thus transcendentally situated realizes the Supreme Brah-
man and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have any-
thing; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he at-
tains pure devotional service unto ১16.” Devotional service is actual
liberation. When one is attracted by the beauty of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and his mind is always engaged at the Lord’s lotus
feet, he is no longer interested in subjects that do not help him in self-
realization. In other words, he loses all attraction for material activities.
In the Taittirtya Upanisad (2.7) it is said: esa hy evanandayati. yada hy
evaisa etasmin na dr§ye ‘natmye anirukte ‘nilayane *bhayarh pratistham
vindate tha so ’bhayarh gato bhavati. A living entity becomes estab-
lished in spiritual, blissful life when he fully understands that his happi-
ness depends on spiritual self-realization, which is the basic principle of
ananda (bliss), and when he is eternally situated in the service of the
Lord, who has no other lord above Him.
TEXT 21
एतदेव दि देवा _ गायन्ति--
অহী अमीषां किमकारि शोमनं
प्रसन्न एषां Raga खयं हरिः ।
यैजैन्म रन्धं षु भारताजिरे
छ्न्दसेवोपयिकं स्पृहा हि नः ॥२१॥
etad eva hi deva gayanti—
aho amisam kim akari sobhanam
prasanna 65৫71 svid uta svayari harih
yair janma labdhari nrsu bharatajire
mukunda-sevaupayikari sprha hi nah
etat—this; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; devah—all the demigods:
gayanti—chant; aho—oh; amisam—of these inhabitants of Bharata-
varsa; kim—what; akari—was done; Sobhanam—pious, beautiful ac-
tivities; prasannah—pleased; esam—upon them; svit—or; uta—it is
said; svayam —personally; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
yaih—by whom; janma —birth; labdham —obtained; nrsu—in human


--- Page 259 ---
254 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
society; bharata-ajire—in the courtyard of Bharata-varsa; mukunda—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can offer liberation; seva-
aupayikam—which is the means of serving; sprha—desire; hi—indeed;
nah—our.

TRANSLATION

Since the human form of life is the sublime position for
spiritual realization, all the demigods in heaven speak in this way:
How wonderful it is for these human beings to have been born in
the land of Bharata-varsa. They must have executed pious acts of
austerity in the past, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Him-
self must have been pleased with them. Otherwise, how could they
engage in devotional service in so many ways? We demigods can
only aspire to achieve human births in Bharata-varsa to execute
devotional service, but these human beings are already engaged
there.

PURPORT
These facts are further explained in Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 9.41):
bharata-bhiamite haila manusya-janma yara
Janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara
“One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India
[Bharata-varsa] should make his life successful and work for the benefit
of all other people.”

There are many facilities in India, Bharata-varsa, for executing devo-
tional service. In Bharata-varsa, all the कन्दा) contributed their ex-
perience, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu personally appeared to teach the
people of Bharata-varsa how to progress in spiritual life and be fixed in
devotional service to the Lord. From all points of view, Bharata-varsa is
the special land where one can very easily understand the process of
devotional service and adopt it to make his life successful. If one makes
his life successful in devotional service and then preaches devotional ser-
vice in other parts of the world, people throughout the world will ac-
tually benefit.


--- Page 260 ---
Text 22] The Island of Jambudvipa 255
TEXT 22
a x
किं दुष्करैनंः क्रतुभिस्तपोवते-
दीनादिभि्वा স্ভুলবীন फल्गुना |
न॒ यत्र नारयणपादपड्ज
स्मृतिः प्रथष्टातिशयेन्द्रियोर्सवात्‌।॥। २२
प्र duskarair nah kratubhis tapo-vratair
danadibhir va dyujayena phalguna
na yatra narayana-pada-paikaja-
smrtih pramustatisayendriyotsavdt
kim —what is the value; duskaraih—very difficult to perform; nah—
our; kratubhih—with performances of sacrifice; tapah—with
austerities; vrataih—vows; dana-adibhih—with executing charitable
activities and so on; va—or; dyujayena—with achieving the heavenly
kingdom; phalguna—which is insignificant; na—no; yatra—where;
narayana-pada-parikaja—of the lotus feet of Lord Narayana; smrtih—
the remembrance; pramusta—lost; atiSaya—excessive; indriya-ut-
savat—due to material sense gratification.
TRANSLATION
The demigods continue: After performing the very difficult
tasks of executing Vedic ritualistic sacrifices, undergoing
austerities, observing vows and giving charity, we have achieved
this position as inhabitants of the heavenly planets. But what is the
value of this achievement? Here we are certainly very engaged in
material sense gratification, and therefore we can hardly remem-
ber the lotus feet of Lord Narayana. Indeed, because of our ex-
cessive sense gratification, we have almost forgotten His lotus feet.
PURPORT
The land of Bharata-varsa is so exalted that by taking birth there one
can not only attain the heavenly planets but also go directly back home.
back to Godhead. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (9.25):


--- Page 261 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.19
yanti deva-vrata devan
pitFn yanti pitr-vratah
bhitani yanti bhitejya
yanti mad-ydjino 17 mam
“Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods;
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings;
those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors: and those who worship
Me will live with Me.” People in the land of Bharata-varsa generally
follow the Vedic principles and consequently perform great sacrifices by
which they can be elevated to the heavenly planets. However. what is the
use of such great attainments? As stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.21), ksine
punye martya-lokari visanti: after the results of one’s sacrifices, charity
and other pious activities expire, one must return to the lower planetary
systems and again feel the pangs of birth and death. However, one who
becomes Krsna conscious can go back to Krsna (yanti-mad-yajino ‘pi
mam). Therefore the demigods even regret having been elevated to the
higher planetary systems. The denizens of the heavenly planets regret
that they could not take full advantage of being born in the land of
Bharata-varsa. Instead, they became captivated by a higher standard of
sense gratification, and therefore they forgot the lotus feet of Lord
Narayana at the time of death. The conclusion is that one who has taken
birth in the land of Bharata-varsa must follow the instructions given per-
sonally by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yad gatva na nivartante
tad dhama paramarm mama. One should try to return home, back to
Godhead, to the Vaikuntha planets—or to the topmost Vaikuntha planet.
Goloka Vrndavana—to live eternally in full, blissful knowledge in the
company of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 23
कल्पायुषां स्यानजयात्पुनभवात्‌
क्षणायुषां भारतभूजयो वरम्‌ |
क्षणेन मर्त्येन कृतं मनखिनः
संन्यस्य संयान्त्यभयं पदं हरेः IRR


--- Page 262 ---
Text 23] The Island of Jambadvipa 257
kalpayusarh sthanajayat punar-bhavat
ksanayusam bharata-bhijayo varam
ksanena martyena krtarh manasvinah
sannyasya sarvyanty abhayari padarn hareh
kalpa-ayusam—of those who have a life duration of many millions of
years, like Lord Brahma; sthana-jayat—than achievement of the place
or planetary systems; punah-bhavat—which is liable to birth, death and
old age; ksana-ayusam—of persons who have only one hundred years of
life; bharata-bhii-jayah—a birth in the land of Bharata-varsa; varam—
more valuable; ksanena—for such a short life; martyena—by the body;
krtam—the work executed; manasvinah—those actually understanding
the value of life; sannyasya—surrendering unto the lotus feet of Krsna;
sariyyanti—they achieve; abhayam—where there is no anxiety;
padam—the abode; hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
A short life in the land of Bharata-varsa is preferable to a life
achieved in Brahmaloka for millions and billions of years because
even if one is elevated to Brahmaloka, he must return to repeated
birth and death. Although life in Bharata-varsa, in a lower plan-
etary system, is very short, one who lives there can elevate himself
to full Krsna consciousness and achieve the highest perfection,
even in this short life, by fully surrendering unto the lotus feet of
the Lord. Thus one attains Vaikunthaloka, where there is neither
anxiety nor repeated birth in a material body.
PURPORT
This is further confirmation of the statement given by Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu:
bharata-bhumite haila manusya-janma yara
Janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara
One who has taken birth in the land of Bharata-varsa has a full oppor-
tunity to study the direct instructions given by Krsna in Bhagavad-gita


--- Page 263 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
and thus finally decide what to do in his human form of life. One should
certainly give up all other propositions and surrender to Krsna. Krsna
will then immediately take charge and relieve one of the results of past
sinful life (aham (ष्कः sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami ma Sucah).
Therefore one should take to Krsna consciousness, as Krsna Himself
recommends. Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mari namas-
kuru: “Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer
Me obeisances.”” This is very easy, even for a child. Why not take this
path? One should try to follow the instructions of Krsna exactly and thus
become fully eligible to be promoted to the kingdom of God (tyaktva
dehari punar janma naiti mam eti so ’rjuna). One should go directly to
Krsna and engage in His service. This is the best opportunity offered to
the inhabitants of Bharata-varsa. One who is fit to return home, back to
Godhead, is no longer liable to the results of karma, good or bad.
TEXT 24
न॒यत्र॒वैङृण्ठकथासुधापगा
न साधवो भागवतास्तदाश्रयाः |
न यत्र IITA महोत्सवाः
सुरेश्षलोकोऽपि न वै स सेव्यताम्‌ ॥।२४।
na yatra vaikuntha-katha-sudhapaga
na sadhavo bhagavatas tadasrayah
na yatra yajiesa-makha mahotsavah
suresa-loko pi na vai sa sevyatam
na—not; yatra—where; vaikuntha-katha-sudha-apagah—the nec-
tarean rivers of discussions about the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who is called Vaikuntha, or one who drives away all anxiety; na—nor;
sadhavah—devotees; bhagavatah—always engaged in the service of the
Lord; tat-asrayah—who are sheltered by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; na—nor; yatra—where; yajia-isa-makhah—the perfor-
mance of devotional service to the Lord of sacrifices; maha-utsavah—
which are actual festivals; suresa-lokah—a place inhabited by the
denizens of heaven; api—although; na—not; vai—certainly; sah—
that; sevyatam—be frequented.


--- Page 264 ---
Text 24] The Island of Jambudvipa 259
TRANSLATION

An intelligent person does not take interest in a place, even in
the topmost planetary system, if the pure Ganges of topics con-
cerning the Supreme Lord’s activities does not flow there, if there
are not devotees engaged in service on the banks of such a river of
piety, or if there are no festivals of sankirtana-yajia to satisfy the
Lord [especially since sankirtana-yajiia is recommended in this
age].

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared in the land of Bharata-varsa,
specifically in Bengal, in the district of Nadia, where Navadvipa is situ-
ated. It is therefore to be concluded, as stated by Srila Bhaktivinoda
Thakura, that within this universe, this earth is the best planet, and on
this planet the land of Bharata-varsa is the best; in the land of Bharata-
varsa, Bengal is still better, in Bengal the district of Nadia is still better,
and in Nadia the best place is Navadvipa because Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu appeared there to inaugurate the performance of the
sacrifice of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. The $astras recom-
mend:

krsna-varnarm tvisakrsnam
sangopangastra-parsadam
yajiiaih sankirtana-prayair
yajanti hi sumedhasah

Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is always accompanied by His very confi-
dential associates such as Sri Nityananda, Sri Gadadhara and Sri Advaita
and by many devotees like ४३5३. They are always engaged in chanting
the name of the Lord and are always describing Lord Krsna. Therefore
this is the best among all the places in the universe. The Krsna con-
sciousness movement has established its center in Mayapur, the birthsite
of Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, to give men the great opportunity to
go there and perform a constant festival of sarnkirtana-yajiia, as recom-
mended herein (yajiiesa-makha mahotsavah) and to distribute prasada
to millions of hungry people hankering for spiritual emancipation. This
is the mission of the Krsna consciousness movement. Caitanya-
bhagavata confirms this as follows: “One should not desire to be elevated


--- Page 265 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
even to a place in the heavenly planetary systems if it has no propaganda
to expand the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no trace of
Vaisnavas, pure devotees of the Lord, and no festivals for spreading
Krsna consciousness. It would be better to live perpetually cramped
within the airtight bag of a mother’s womb, where one can at least
remember the lotus feet of the Lord, than to live in a place where there is
no opportunity to remember His lotus feet. I pray not to be allowed to
take birth in such a condemned place.” Similarly, in Caitanya-
caritamrta, Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami says that since Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is the inaugurator of the sarikirtana movement, anyone who
performs sarikirtana to please the Lord is very, very glorious. Such a per-
son has perfect intelligence, whereas others are in the ignorance of
material existence. Of all the sacrifices mentioned in the Vedic
literatures, the performance of sarikirtana-yajiia is the best. Even the
performance of one hundred asvamedha sacrifices cannot compare to the
sacrifice of sarkirtana. According to the author of Sri Caitanya-
caritamrta, if one compares sarikirtana-yajiia to other yajiias, he is a
pasandi, an infidel, and is liable to be punished by Yamaraja. There are
many Mayavadis who think that the performance of sarikirtana-yajna is
a pious activity similar to the performance of the asvamedha-yajiia and
other such pious functions, but this is a nama-aparadha. Chanting of the
holy name of Narayana and chanting of other names are never equal,
despite what Mayavadis think.
TEXT 25
মামা चजातिं त्विह ये च जन्तवो
जलायकियदव्यरुतापखञ्शूताम्‌ |
न वै यतेरन्नपुनर्भवाय ते
भूयो बनोका इव यान्ति बन्धनम्‌ ॥२५॥
prapta nr-jatirn tv tha ye ca jantavo
Jaana-kriya-dravya-kalapa-sambhrtam
na vai yaterann apunar-bhavaya te
bhityo vanauka iva yanti bandhanam


--- Page 266 ---
Text 25] The Island of Jambudvipa 261

praptah—who have obtained; nr-jatim—a birth in human society;
tu—certainly; tha—in this land of Bharata-varsa; ye—those who; ca—
also; jantavah—the living beings; jiana—with knowledge; kriya —with
activities; dravya—of ingredients; kaldpa—with a collection;
sambhrtam—full; na—not; wvai—certainly; yateran—endeavor;
apunah-bhavaya—for the position of immortality; te—such persons;
bhityah—again; vanaukah—birds; wa—like; yanti—go;
bandhanam —to bondage.

TRANSLATION

Bharata-varsa offers the proper land and circumstances in which
to execute devotional service, which can free one from the results
of jiidna and karma. If one obtains a human body in the land of
Bharata-varsa, with clear sensory organs with which to execute the
sankirtana-yajfia, but in spite of this opportunity he does not take
to devotional service, he is certainly like liberated forest animals
and birds that are careless and are therefore again bound by a
hunter.

PURPORT

In the land of Bharata-varsa one can very easily perform the
sankirtana-yajiia, which consists of Sravanam kirtanari visnoh, or one
can perform other methods of devotional service, such as smaranam
vandanam arcana dasyam sakhyam and datma-nivedanam. In
Bharata-varsa one has the opportunity to visit many holy places,
especially Lord Caitanya’s birthsite and Lord Krsna’s birthsite—
Navadvipa and Vrndavana—where there are many pure devotees who
have no desire other than to execute devotional service (anyabhilasita-
Sanyam jiana-karmady-anavrtam), and one may thus become free from
the bondage of material conditions. Other paths, such as the path of
Jaana and the path of karma, are not very profitable. Pious activities can
elevate one to the higher planetary systems, and by speculative
knowledge one can merge into the Brahman existence, but that is not real
profit, for one has to come down again even from the liberated condition
of being merged in Brahman, and certainly one must come down from
the heavenly kingdom. One should endeavor to go back home, back to


--- Page 267 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
Godhead (yanti mad-yajino "ण mam). Otherwise there is no difference
between human life and the lives of jungle animals and birds. Animals
and birds also have freedom, but because of their lower birth, they can-
not use it. Taking advantage of all the facilities offered him, a human
being who has taken birth in the land of Bharata-varsa should become a
fully enlightened devotee and go back home, back to Godhead. This is
the subject matter of the Krsna consciousness movement. The inhabi-
tants of places other than Bharata-varsa have facilities for material en-
joyment, but they do not have the same facility to take to Krsna con-
sciousness. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has advised that one who
has taken birth as a human being in Bharata-varsa must first realize
himself as a part and parcel of Krsna. and after taking to Krsna con-
sciousness, he must distribute this knowledge all over the world.
TEXT 26
यैः wg बर्हिषि भागशो হুনি-
निरुप्तमिष्टं विधिमन्त्रवस्तुतः |
एकः प्रथङ्नामभिराहुतो भरदा
गृहणाति पूणः खयमाश्िषां प्रथः ॥२६॥
yaih sraddhaya barhisi bhagaso havir
niruptam istari vidhi-mantra-vastutah
ekah prthan-namabhir ahuto muda
grhnati piurnah svayam asisarm prabhuh
yaih—by whom (the inhabitants of Bharata-varsa); sraddhaya—faith

and confidence; barhisi—in the performance of Vedic ritualistic
sacrifices; bhagasah—by division; havih—oblations; niruptam—
offered; istam—to the desired deity; vidhi—by the proper method;
mantra—Dby reciting mantras; vastutah —with the proper ingredients;
ekah—that one Supreme Personality of Godhead; prthak—separate;
namabhih—by names; ahutah—called; muda—with great happiness;
grhnati—He accepts: pitrnah—the Supreme Lord. who is full in Him-
self; svayam—personally: asisam—of all benedictions: prabhuh—the
bestower.


--- Page 268 ---
Text 26] The Island of Jambuadvipa 263
TRANSLATION

In India [Bharata-varsa], there are many worshipers of the
demigods, the various officials appointed by the Supreme Lord,
such as Indra, Candra and Siirya, all of whom are worshiped
differently. The worshipers offer the demigods their oblations,
considering the demigods part and parcel of the whole, the
Supreme Lord. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead ac-
cepts these offerings and gradually raises the worshipers to the
real standard of devotional service by fulfilling their desires and
aspirations. Because the Lord is complete, He offers the
worshipers the benedictions they desire even if they worship only
part of His transcendental body.

PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (9.13) Lord Krsna says:
mahatmadnas tu mam partha
daivirh prakrtim asritah
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jaatva bhiatadim avyayam

“O son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under
the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional
service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
original and inexhaustible.” Mahatmas, advanced devotees, worship
only the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Others, however. who are also
sometimes called mahdtmas, worship the Lord as ekatvena prthaktvena.
In other words, they accept the demigods as different parts of Krsna and
worship them for various benedictions. Although the devotees of the
demigods thus achieve the desired results offered by Krsna, they have
been described in Bhagavad-gita as hrta-jiana, not very intelligent.
Krsna does not desire to be worshiped indirectly through the different
parts of His body; Krsna wants direct devotional worship. Therefore a
devotee who directly worships Lord Krsna through staunch devotional
service, as recommended in Srimad-Bhagavatam, (tivrena bhakti-
‘yogena yajeta purusarit param), is very quickly elevated to the transcen-
dental position. Nevertheless, devotees who worship the demigods. the


--- Page 269 ---
264 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
different parts of the Lord, receive the benedictions they desire because
the Lord is the original master of all benedictions. If anyone wants a par-
ticular benediction, for the Lord to award it is not at all difficult.
TEXT 27
सत्यं दिशत्यधितमधितो gor
नैवार्थदो यत्पुनरर्थिता यतः ।
स्वयं विधत्ते भजतामनिन्छता-
मिच्छापिभानं निजपाद्पछयम्‌ ।२९७॥
satyam disaty arthitam arthito nrnarm
naivarthado yat punar arthita yatah
svayar vidhatte bhajatam anicchatam
icchapidhanar nija-pada-pallavam
satyam—certainly; disati—He offers; arthitam—the object prayed
for; arthitah—being prayed to; nrnam—by the human beings; na—
not; eva—indeed; artha-dah—the bestower of benedictions; yat—
which; punah—again; arthiti—a demand for a benediction; yatah—
from which; svayam—personally; vidhatte—He gives; bhajatam—unto
those engaged in His service; anicchatam—although not desiring it; ic-
cha-pidhanam—which covers all desirable things; nija-pada-
pallavam —His own lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead fulfills the material
desires of a devotee who approaches Him with such motives, but
He does not bestow benedictions upon the devotee that will cause
him to demand more benedictions again. However, the Lord
willingly gives the devotee shelter at His own lotus feet, even
though such a person does not aspire for it, and that shelter
satisfies all his desires. That is the Supreme Personality’s special
mercy.
PURPORT
The devotees mentioned in the previous verse approach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead with material motives, but this verse explains


--- Page 270 ---
Text 27] The Island of Jambudvipa 265
how such devotees are saved from those desires. Srimad-Bhagavatam
(2.3.10) advises:
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
yajeta purusam param

“Whether one is freed from all material desires, is full of material
desires, or desires to become one with the Supreme, he should engage in
devotional service.” In this way, not only will the devotee’s desires be
fulfilled, but the day will come when he will have no other desire than to
serve the lotus feet of the Lord. One who engages in the service of the
Lord with some motive is called a sakama-bhakta, and one who serves
the Lord without any motives is called an akama-bhakta. Krsna is so
merciful that He turns a sakama-bhakta into an akama-bhakta. A pure
devotee, an akama-bhakta, who has no material motives, is satisfied
simply to serve the lotus feet of the Lord. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (6.22). Yam labdhva caparam  [30/07 manyate
nadhikam tatah: if one engages in the service of the lotus feet of the
Lord, he does not want anything more. This is the highest stage of devo-
tional service. The Lord is so kind even to a sakama-bhakta, a motivated
devotee, that He satisfies his desires in such a way that one day he
becomes an akama-bhakta. Dhruva Maharaja, for example, became a
bhakta with the motive of getting a better kingdom than that of his
father, but finally he became an akama-bhakta and said to the Lord,
svamin krtartho smi varari na yace: “My dear Lord, I am very satisfied
simply to serve Your lotus feet. I do not want any material benefits.”
Sometimes it is found that a small child eats dirty things, but his parents
take away the dirty things and offer him a sandesa or some other sweet-
meat. Devotees who aspire for material benedictions are compared to
such children. The Lord is so kind that He takes away their material
desires and gives them the highest benediction. Therefore, even for
material motives, one should not worship anyone other than the Supreme
Personality of Godhead: one must fully engage himself in the devotional
service of the Lord so that all his desires will be fulfilled and at the end
he can go back home, back to Godhead. This is explained in Caitanya-
caritamrta (Madhya 22.37-39, 41) as follows.


--- Page 271 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
Anyakami—a devotee may desire something other than service to the
lotus feet of the Lord; yadi kare krsnera bhajana—but if he engages in
Lord Krsna's service; na magiteha krsna tare dena sva-carana—Krsna
gives him shelter at His lotus feet, even though he does not aspire for it.
Krsna kahe—the Lord says; ama bhaje—‘‘He is engaged in My ser-
vice”; mage visaya-sukha—*‘but he wants the benefits of material sense
gratification.” Amrta chadi’ visa mage: “Such a devotee is like a person
who asks for poison instead of nectar.” Ei bada miirkha: “That is his
foolishness.” Ami—vijiia: “But I am experienced.” Ei mirkhe ‘visaya’
kene diba: “Why should I give such a foolish person the dirty things of
material enjoyment?” Sva-caranamrta: “It would be better for Me to
give him shelter at My lotus feet.” ‘Visaya’ bhuldiba: “1 shall cause him
to forget all material desires.” Kama lagi’ krsna bhaje—if one engages
in the service of the Lord for sense gratification; paya krsna-rase—the
result is that he ultimately gets a taste for serving the lotus feet of the
Lord. Kama chadi’ ‘dasa’ haite haya abhilase: He then gives up all
material desires and wants to become an eternal servant of the Lord.
TEXT 28
TE नः SEERA
खिष्टस्य दक्तस्य कृतस्य शोभनम्‌ |
तेनाजनाभे स्यतिमजन्म नः स्याद्‌
वर्ध॑ sfdw शं तनोति Rel
yady atra nah svarga-sukhavasesitarn
svistasya sitktasya krtasya Sobhanam
tenajanabhe smrtimaj janma nah syad
varse harir yad-bhajatarn sarh tanoti
yadi—if; atra—in this heavenly planet; nah—of us; svarga-sukha-
avasesitam —whatever remains after the enjoyment of heavenly happi-
ness; su-istasya—of a perfect sacrifice; su-uktasya—of diligently study-
ing the Vedic literature; krtasya—of having performed a kind act;
Sobhanam—the resultant actions; tena—by such a resultant action;
ajanabhe—in the land of Bharata-varsa; smrti-mat janma—a birth
enabling one to remember the lotus feet of the Lord; nah—of us; syat—


--- Page 272 ---
Text 28] The Island of Jambadvipa 267
let there be; varse—in the land; harih—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yat—wherein; bhajatam—of the devotees; Sam tanoti—ex-
pands the auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION

We are now living in the heavenly planets, undoubtedly as a
result of our having performed ritualistic ceremonies, pious ac-
tivities and yajiias and having studied the Vedas. However, our
lives here will one day be finished. We pray that at that time, if any
merit remains from our pious activities, we may again take birth in
Bharata-varsa as human beings able to remember the lotus feet of
the Lord. The Lord is so kind that He personally comes to the land
of Bharata-varsa and expands the good fortune of its people.

PURPORT

It is certainly as a result of pious activities that one takes birth in the
heavenly planets, but from those planets one must nevertheless come
down again to earth, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (ksine punye martya-
lokam visanti). Even the demigods must return to earth to work like or-
dinary men when the results of their pious activities expire. Neverthe-
less, the demigods desire to come to the land of Bharata-varsa if even a
small portion of the merits of their pious activities remains. In other
words, to take birth in Bharata-varsa, one must perform more pious ac-
tivities than the demigods. In Bharata-varsa one is naturally Krsna con-
scious, and if one further cultivates his Krsna consciousness, by the grace
of Krsna he certainly expands his good fortune by becoming perfect in
Krsna consciousness and very easily going back home, back to Godhead.
In many other places in the Vedic literature it is found that even the
demigods want to come to this land of Bharata-varsa. A foolish person
may desire to be promoted to the heavenly planets as a result of his pious
activities, but even the demigods from the heavenly planets want to come
to Bharata-varsa and achieve bodies that may be very easily used to culti-
vate Krsna consciousness. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
repeatedly says:

bharata bhamite haila manusya-janma yara
janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara


--- Page 273 ---
268 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
A human being born in the land of Bharata-varsa has the special pre-
rogative to develop Krsna consciousness. Therefore those already born in
Bharata-varsa should take lessons from the $astras and guru and should
fully take advantage of the mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in order
to be fully equipped with Krsna consciousness. By taking full advantage
of Krsna consciousness, one goes back home, back to Godhead (yanti
mad-ydjino ‘pi mam). The Krsna consciousness movement is therefore
spreading this facility to human society by opening many, many centers
all over the world so that people may associate with the pure devotees of
the Krsna consciousness movement, understand the science of Krsna
consciousness and ultimately go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 29-30
Nig उवाच
a
जम्बूदरीपस्य च राजन्नुपद्वीपानष्टौ रैक उपदिञ्न्ति सगरात्मनैर-
(| ४ |
शवान्वेषण इमां महीं परितो निखनद्भिरुपकल्पितान्‌ || ২৭।। तयथा खणप्रस्थ-
अन्दर युक आवर्तनो रमणको मन्दरहरिणः पाश्चजन्यः सिदलो लङ्केति ॥३०॥
Sri-Suka uvaca

Jambiidvipasya ca rajann upadvipan astau haika upadisanti
sagaratmajair asvanvesana imam mahi parito nikhanadbhir
upakalpitan. tad yatha svarnaprasthas candrasukla avartano ramanako
mandaraharinah pancajanyah simhalo larnketi.

$ri-sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak; jam-
bidvipasya—of the island known as Jambadvipa; ca—also; rajan—O
King; upadvipan astau—eight subordinate islands: ha—certainly;
eke—some; upadisanti—learned scholars describe; sagara-atma-jaih—
by the sons of Maharija Sagara; asva-anvesane—while trying to find
their lost horse; imam—this; mahim—tract of land; paritah—all
around; nikhanadbhih—digging; upakalpitan—created; tat—that;
yatha—as follows; svarna-prasthah—Svarnaprastha; candra-suklah—
Candrasukla; avartanah—Avartana; ramanakah—Ramanaka; man-
dara-harinah —Mandaraharina; pdancajanyah —Pafcajanya;
simhalah—Simhala; lanka —Lanka; iti—thus.


--- Page 274 ---
Text 31] The Island of Jambudvipa 269
TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, in the opinion of
some learned scholars, eight smaller islands surround Jam-
100 108. When the sons of Maharaja Sagara were searching all over
the world for their lost horse, they dug up the earth, and in this
way eight adjoining islands came into existence. The names of
these islands are Svarpaprastha, Candra$ukla, Avartana,
Ramanaka, Mandaraharina, Paficajanya, Sirnhala and Lanka.

PURPORT

In the Kitrma Purana there is this statement about the desires of the

demigods:
anadhikarino devah
svarga-stha bharatodbhavam
vanchanty atma-vimoksartha-
mudrekarthe ‘dhikarinah
Although the demigods are situated in exalted positions in the heavenly
planets, they nevertheless desire to descend to the land of Bharata-varsa
on the planet earth. This indicates that even the demigods are unfit to
reside in Bharata-varsa. Therefore if persons already born in Bharata-
varsa live like cats and dogs, not taking full advantage of their birth in
this land, they are certainly unfortunate.
TEXT 31

एवं तव भारतोत्तम जम्बरदधीपवषैविमागो यथोपदेशुपवर्णित इति ॥२१॥
evar tava bharatottama jambudvipa-varsa-vibhago yathopadesam
upavarnita iti.

evam—thus; fava—unto you; bhdarata-uttama—O best of the descen-
dents of Bharata; jambidvipa-varsa-vibhagah—the divisions of the is-
land of Jambidvipa; yatha-upadesam—as much as I am instructed by
the authorities; upavarnitah—explained; iti—thus.


--- Page 275 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION

My dear King Pariksit, O best of the descendants of Bharata
Maharaja, I have thus described to you, as I myself have been in-
structed, the island of Bharata-varsa and its adjoining islands.
These are the islands that constitute Jambudvipa.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Nineteenth
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “A Description of the
Island of Jambudvipa.”


--- Page 276 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY
Studying the Structure of the Universe

In this chapter there is a description of various islands, beginning with
Plaksadvipa, and the oceans that surround them. There is also a descrip-
tion of the location and dimensions of the mountain known as Lokaloka.
The island of Plaksadvipa, which is twice as broad as Jambidvipa, is sur-
rounded by an ocean of salt water. The master of this island is Idhma-
jihva, one of the sons of Maharaja Priyavrata. The island is divided into
seven regions, each with a mountain and a large river.

The second island is called Salmalidvipa. It is surrounded by an ocean
of liquor and is 3,200,000 miles wide, twice as wide as Plaksadvipa. The
master of this island is Yajfiabahu, one of the sons of Maharaja
Priyavrata. Like Plaksadvipa, this island is also divided into seven
regions, each with a mountain and a very large river. The inhabitants of
this island worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of
Candratma.

The third island, which is surrounded by an ocean of clarified butter
and is also divided into seven regions, is called Kusadvipa. Its master is
Hiranyareta, another son of Maharaja Priyavrata, and its inhabitants
worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of Agni, the
fire-god. The width of this island is 6,400,000 miles, or, in other words.
twice the width of Salmalidvipa.

The fourth island, Krauficadvipa, which is surrounded by an ocean of
milk, is 12,800,000 miles wide and is also divided, like the others, into
seven regions, each with a large mountain and a large river. The master
of this island is Ghrtaprstha, another son of Maharaja Priyavrata. The in-
habitants of this island worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
the form of water.

The fifth island, Sakadvipa, which is 25,600,000 miles wide, is sur-
rounded by an ocean of yogurt. Its master is Medhatithi, another son of
Maharaja Priyavrata. It is also divided into seven regions, each with a
large mountain and a large river. Its inhabitants worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in the form of Vayu, air.

271


--- Page 277 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20

The sixth island, Puskaradvipa, which is twice as wide as the previous
island, is surrounded by an ocean of clear water. Its master is Vitihotra,
another son of Maharaja Priyavrata. The island is divided in two by a
large mountain named Manasottara. The inhabitants of this island wor-
ship Svayambhii, another feature of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Beyond Puskaradvipa there are two islands, one always lit by
the sunshine and the other always dark. Between them is a mountain
called Lokaloka, which is situated one billion miles from the edge of the
universe. Lord Narayana, expanding His opulence, resides upon this
mountain. The area beyond Lokiloka Mountain is called Aloka-varsa,
and beyond Aloka-varsa is the pure destination of persons who desire
liberation.

Vertically, the sun-globe is situated just in the middle of the universe,
in Antariksa, the space between Bhirloka and Bhuvarloka. The distance
between the sun and the circumference of Anda-golaka, the globe of the
universe, is estimated to be twenty-five koti yojanas (two billion miles).
Because the sun enters the universe and divides the sky, it is known as
Martanda, and because it is produced from Hiranyagarbha, the body of
the mahat-tattva, it is also called Hiranyagarbha.

TEXT 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
अतः परं GEER प्रपाणलश्षणसंस्थानतते वर्षविभाग उपवण्यंते
nen
Sri-Suka uvdaca

atah parari plaksadinar pramana-laksana-saristhanato varsa-
vibhaga upavarmnyate.

Sri-Sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; atah param—after this;
plaksa-adinam —of the island named Plaksa and others; pramana-lak-
sana-samsthanatah—from the angle of dimensions, particular charac-
teristics and form; varsa-vibhagah—the division of the island; upavar-
nyate—is described.


--- Page 278 ---
Text 2] The Structure of the Universe 273
TRANSLATION

The great sage Sukadeva Gosvami said: Hereafter I shall de-
scribe the dimensions, characteristics and forms of the six islands
beginning with the island of Plaksa.

TEXT 2
जम्बुद्रीपोऽयं याकत्प्पाणरिस्तारस्त्वयता क्षारोदधिना परिवेष्टितो यथा
वास्येन लवणोदधिरपि ततो दिगुणविशाठेन থাকল परिकषिपो
यथा परिखा बाह्योपवनेन । पक्षो जम्बूप्रमाणो द्वीपाख्याकरो हिरण्मय
उत्थितो यत्रामनिरुपास्ते सप जिदस्तस्याधिपतिः प्रियवतात्मज इध्मजिह्वः स्वं
द्वीपं सपतवपीणि विभज्य सप्तवर्षनामभ्य आत्मजेभ्य आकलच्य सखयमात्मयोगेनो-
परराम ॥ ৭1
Jambudvipo ‘yar yavat-pramana-vistaras tavata ksarodadhina
parivestito yatha merur jambv-akhyena lavanodadhir api tato dvi-guna-
visalena plaksakhyena pariksipto yatha parikha bahyopavanena. plakso
Jambu-pramano dvipakhyakaro hiranmaya utthito yatragnir upaste
sapta-jihvas tasyadhipatih priyavratatmaja idhmajihvah svam dvipar
sapta-varsani vibhajya sapta-varsa-namabhya atmajebhya akalayya
svayam atma-yogenopararama.

Jjambi-dvipah—Jambidvipa, the island named Jamba: ayam—this;
yavat-pramana-vistarah—as much as the measure of its width, namely
100,000 yojanas (one yojana equals eight miles); tavata—so much;
ksara-udadhina —by the ocean of salt water: parivestitah —surrounded;
yatha—just 85; meruh—Sumeru Mountain; jambi-akhyena—by the is-
land named Jambi; lavana-udadhih—the ocean of salt water; api—cer-
tainly; tatah—thereafter; dvi-guna-visalena—which is twice as wide:
plaksa-akhyena—by the island named Plaksa; pariksiptah—sur-
rounded; yatha—like: parikha—a moat; bahya—external;
upavanena—by a gardenlike forest; plaksah—a plaksa tree: jambi-
pramanah—having the height of the jambi tree: dvipa-akhya-karah—


--- Page 279 ---
274 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
causing the name of the island; hiranmayah—magnificently splen-
dorous; utthitah—rising; yatra—where; agnih—a fire; updste—is situ-
ated; sapta-jthvah—having seven flames; tasya—of that island;
adhipatih—the king or master; priyavrata-atmajah—the son of King
Priyavrata; idhma-jihvah—named Idhmajihva; svam—own; dvipam—
island; sapta—seven; varsani—tracts of land; vibhajya—dividing into;
sapta-varsa-namabhyah—for whom the seven tracts of land were
named; atmajebhyah—to his own sons; akalayya—offering; svayam—
personally; dtma-yogena—by the devotional service of the Lord;
upararama—he retired from all material activities.
TRANSLATION

As Sumeru Mountain is surrounded by Jambudvipa, Jam-
पतभ is also surrounded by an ocean of salt water. The breadth
of Jambadvipa is 100,000 yojanas [800,000 miles], and the
breadth of the saltwater ocean is the same. As a moat around a fort
is sometimes surrounded by gardenlike forest, the saltwater ocean
surrounding Jambudyvipa is itself surrounded by Plaksadvipa. The
breadth of Plaksadvipa is twice that of the saltwater ocean—in
other words 200,000 yojanas [1,600,000 miles]. On Plaksadvipa
there is a tree shining like gold and as tall as the jambi tree on
Jambudvipa. At its root is a fire with seven flames. It is because this
tree is a plaksa tree that the island is called Plaksadvipa. Plak-
sadvipa was governed by Idhmajihva, one of the sons of Maharaja
Priyavrata. He endowed the seven islands with the names of his
seven sons, divided the islands among the sons, and then retired
from active life to engage in the devotional service of the Lord.

TEXTS 3-4

शिवं यवसं सुभद्रं शान्तं क्षेममग्रतममयमिति Toto तेषु गिरयो Tas
सप्तैवाभिज्ञाताः ॥३।॥ मणिकूटो वज्रकूट इन्द्रसेनो ज्योतिष्मान्‌ सुपर्णो
हिरण्यष्ठीवो मेषमाल इति सेतुशैलाः । अरुणा नम्णाऽऽङ्गिरसी सावित्री gw


--- Page 280 ---
Text 4] The Structure of the Universe 275
ऋतम्भरा सत्यम्भरा इति महान्यः । यासां जलोपस्पशेनविधृतरजस्तमसो
हंसपतङ्खोर््वायनसत्याङ्गसंज्ञा्त्वारो वर्णाः सदखायुपो बिबुधोपमसन्दर्चन-
प्रजननाः EER त्र्या विद्यया मगवन्तं त्रयीमयं agar यजन्ते ॥ ४॥
Sivan yavasari subhadram santa ksemam amrtam abhayam iti
varsani tesu girayo nadyas ca saptaivabhijiatah. manikito vajrakita
indraseno Jyotisman suparno hiranyasthivo meghamala iti setu-sailah
aruna nrmnangirasi savitri suptabhatd rtambhara satyambhara iti
maha-nadyah. yasam jalopasparsana-vidhiita- rajas-tamaso hamsa-
patangordhvayana-satyanga-sarjias catvaro varnah sahasrayuso
vibudhopama-sandarsana-prajananah svarga-dvaram trayya vidyayd
bhagavantamh trayimayarn suryam atmanam yajante.

sivam —Siva; yavasam—Yavasa; subhadram—Subhadra; santam—
Santa; ksemam—Ksema; amrtam—Amrta; abhayam—Abhaya; iti—
thus; varsani—the tracts of land according to the names of the seven
sons; tesu—in them; girayah—mountains; nadyah ca—and rivers;
sapta—seven; eva—indeed; abhijiatah—are known; mani-kiatah—
Manikita; vajra-kitah—Vajrakata; indra-senah—Indrasena; jyotis-
man —Jyotisman; suparnah—Suparna; hiranya-sthivah—
Hiranyasthiva; megha-malah—Meghamaila; iti—thus; setu-Sailah—the
ranges of mountains marking the borders of the varsas; arunda—Aruna;
nrmna—Nrmna; dngirasi—Angirasi; savitri—Savitri; supta-bhata —
Suptabhata; rtambhara—Rtambhara; satyambhara —Satyambhara;
iti—thus; maha-nadyah—very large rivers; yasam—of which; jala-
upasparsana—simply by touching the water; vidhiita—washed off; ra-
Jjah-tamasah—whose modes of passion and ignorance: harisa—Harnsa;
patanga—Patanga; irdhvayana—Urdhvayana; satyariga—Satyanga:
sarnjidh—named; catvarah—four; varnah—castes or divisions of men:
sahasra-ayusah—living for one thousand years; vibudha-upama—simi-
lar to the demigods; sandarsana—in having very beautiful forms; pra-
Jjananah—and in producing children; svarga-dvaram—the gateway to
the heavenly planets; trayya vidyaya—by performing ritualistic
ceremonies according to Vedic principles; bhagavantam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; trayi-mayam—established in the Vedas;


--- Page 281 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
suryam atmanam—the Supersoul, represented by the sun-god; ya-
Jjante—they worship.
TRANSLATION

The seven islands [varsas] are named according to the names of
those seven sons—Siva, Yavasa, Subhadra, Santa, Ksema, Amrta
and Abhaya. In those seven tracts of land, there are seven moun-
tains and seven rivers. The mountains are named Manikiita, Vajra-
kata, Indrasena, Jyotisman, Suparna, Hiranyasthiva and
Meghamala, and the rivers are named Aruna, Nrmna, Angirasi,
Savitri, Suptabhata, Rtambhara and Satyambhara. One can im-
mediately be free from material contamination by touching or
bathing in those rivers, and the four castes of people who live in
Plaksadvipa—the Harnsas, Patangas, Urdhvayanas and Satyangas —
purify themselves in that way. The inhabitants of Plaksadvipa live
for one thousand years. They are beautiful like the demigods, and
they also beget children like the demigods. By completely per-
forming the ritualistic ceremonies mentioned in the Vedas and by
worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead as represented by
the sun-god, they attain the sun, which is a heavenly planet.

PURPORT

According to general understanding, there are originally three
deities—Lord Brahma, Lord Visnu and Lord Siva—and people with a
poor fund of knowledge consider Lord Visnu no better than Lord
Brahma or Lord Siva. This conclusion, however, is invalid. As stated in
the Vedas, istapurtarn bahudha jayamanari visvarn bibharti bhuvanasya
nabhih tad evagnis tad vayus tat siryas tad u candramah agnih sarva-
daivatah. This means that the Supreme lord, who accepts and enjoys the
results of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies (technically called istapurta), who
maintains the entire creation, who supplies the necessities of all living
entities (eko bahunam yo vidadhati kaman) and who is the central point
of all creation, is Lord Visnu. Lord Visnu expands as the demigods
known as Agni, Vayu, Sarya and Candra, who are simply parts and par-
cels of His body. Lord Krsna says in Srimad Bhagavad-gita (9.23):

ye py anya-devata-bhakta
yajante Sraddhayanvitah


--- Page 282 ---
Text 4] The Structure of the Universe 277

te ‘pi mam eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pirvakam
“Devotees who worship the demigods with firm faith worship Me also,
but not according to regulative principles.” In other words, if one wor-
ships the demigods but does not understand the relationship between the
demigods and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his worship is ir-
regular. Krsna also says in Bhagavad-gita (9.24), aham hi sarva-
yajaanar bhokta ca prabhur eva ca: “I am the only enjoyer of ritualistic
ceremonies.”

It may be argued that the demigods are as important as Lord Visnu
because the names of the demigods are different names of Visnu. This,
however, is not a sound conclusion, for it is contradicted in the Vedic
literatures. The Vedas declare:

candrama manaso jatas caksoh siryo ajayata. srotradayas ca pranas
ca mukhad agnir ajayata. narayanad brahma, narayanad rudro jayate,
narayandt prajapatih jayate, narayanad indro jayate, narayanad astau
vasavo jayante, narayandad ekadasa rudra jayante.

“The demigod of the moon, Candra, came from the mind of Narayana,
and the sun-god came from His eyes. The controlling deities of hearing
and the life air came from Narayana, and the controlling deity of fire was
generated from His mouth. Prajapati, Lord Brahma, came from
Narayana, Indra came from Narayana, and the eight Vasus, the eleven
expansions of Lord Siva and the twelve Adityas also came from
Narayana.” In the smrti Vedic literature it is also said:
brahma sambhus tathaivarkas
candramas ca Satakratuh
evam adyds tathaivanye
yukta vaisnava-tejasa
Jagat-karyavasane tu
viyujyante ca tejasa
vitejas ca te sarve
paficatvam upayanti te


--- Page 283 ---
278 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
“Brahma, Sambhu, Surya and Indra are all merely products of the power
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also true of the many
other demigods whose names are not mentioned here. When the cosmic
manifestation is annihilated, these different expansions of Narayana’s
potencies will merge into Narayana. In other words, all these demigods
will die. Their living force will be withdrawn, and they will merge into
Narayana.”

Therefore it should be concluded that Lord Visnu, not Lord Brahma or
Lord Siva, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As a government of -
ficer is sometimes accepted as the entire government although he is ac-
tually but a departmental manager, so the demigods, having achieved
power of attorney from Visnu, act on His behalf, although they are not as
powerful as He. All the demigods must work under the orders of Visnu.
Therefore it is said, ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya. The only master
is Lord Krsna, or Lord Visnu, and all others are His obedient servants,
who act exactly according to His orders. The distinction between Lord
Visnu and the demigods is also expressed in Bhagavad-gita (9.25). Yanti
deva-vrata devan. . . yanti mad-ydjino pi mam: those who worship the
demigods go to the planets of the demigods, whereas the worshipers of
Lord Krsna and Lord Visnu go to the planets in Vaikuntha. These are the
statements of the smrti. Therefore the idea that Lord Visnu is on the
same level as the demigods is in contradiction to the $astras. The
demigods are not supreme. The supremacy of the demigods is dependent
on the mercy of Lord Narayana (Visnu, or Krsna).

TEXT 5
wr विष्णो रूपं यत्सत्यस्यर्तस्य ब्रह्मणः |
अगतस्य च त्यो CREE ॥ ५ ॥
pratnasya visno चकः yat
satyasyartasya brahmanah
amrtasya ca mrtyos ca
siiryam atmanam imahiti

pratnasya—of the oldest person; visnoh—Lord Visnu: ripam—the

form; yat—which; satyasya—of the Absolute Truth: rtasya—of


--- Page 284 ---
Text 5] The Structure of the Universe 279

dharma; brahmanah—of the Supreme Brahman; amrtasya—of the

auspicious result; ca—and; mrtyoh—of death (the inauspicious result);

ca—and; siryam—the demigod Surya; atmanam—the Supersoul or

origin of all souls; imahi—we approach for shelter; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION

[This is the mantra by which the inhabitants of Plaksadvipa wor-
ship the Supreme Lord.] Let us take shelter of the sun-god, who is
a reflection of Lord Visnu, the all-expanding Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the oldest of all persons. Visnu is the only worship-
able Lord. He is the Vedas, He is religion, and He is the origin of
all auspicious and inauspicious results.

PURPORT

Lord Visnu is even the Supreme Lord of death, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (mrtyuh sarva-haras caham). There are two kinds of ac-
tivity —auspicious and inauspicious—and both are controlled by Lord
Visnu. Inauspicious activities are said to be behind Lord Visnu, whereas
auspicious activities stand before Him. The auspicious and the in-
auspicious exist throughout the entire world, and Lord Visnu is the con-
troller of them both.

In regard to this verse, Srila Madhvacarya says:

siirya-somagni-varisa-
vidhatrsu yatha-kramam
plaksadi-dvipa-samsthasu
sthitarn harim upasate
There are many lands, fields, mountains and oceans throughout the cre-
ation, and everywhere the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped
by His different names. ॥

Srila Viraraghava Acarya explains this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam
as follows. The original cause of the cosmic manifestation must be the
oldest person and must therefore be beyond material transformations. He
is the enjoyer of all auspicious activities and is the cause of conditional
life and also liberation. The demigod Surya, who is categorized as a very


--- Page 285 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
powerful jiva, or living entity, is a representation of one of the parts of
His body. We are naturally subordinate to powerful living entities, and
therefore we can worship the various demigods as living beings who are
powerful representatives of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Although the worship of the sun-god is recommended in this mantra, He
is worshiped not as the Supreme Personality of Godhead but as His
powerful representative.
In the Katha Upanisad (1.3.1) it is said:
क! pibantau sukrtasya loke
guhar pravistau parame parardhe
chayatapau brahmavido vadanti
paficagnayo ye ca tri-ndaciketah
“0 Naciketa, the expansions of Lord Visnu as the tiny living entity and
the Supersoul are both situated within the cave of the heart of this body.
Having entered that cavity, the living entity, resting on the chief of the
life airs, enjoys the results of activities, and the Supersoul, acting as wit-
ness enables him to enjoy them. Those who are well-versed in knowledge
of Brahman and those householders who carefully follow the Vedic
regulations say that the difference between the two is like the difference
between a shadow and the sun.”
In the Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.16) it is said:
sa visvakrd visvavidatmayonih
17047 kalakaro guni sarvavid yah
pradhana-ksetrajiia-patir gunesah
samsara-moksa-sthiti-bandha-hetuh
“The Supreme Lord, the creator of this cosmic manifestation, knows
every nook and corner of His creation. Although He is the cause of cre-
ation, there is no cause for His appearance. He is fully aware of every-
thing. He is the Supersoul, the master of all transcendental qualities, and
He is the master of this cosmic manifestation in regard to bondage to the
conditional state of material existence and liberation from that bondage.”
Similarly, in the Taittiriya Upanisad (2.8) it is said:


--- Page 286 ---
Text 6] The Structure of the Universe 281
bhisasmad vatah pavate
bhisodeti siryah
bhisasmad agnis cendras ca
mrtyur dhavati paiicamah
“It is out of fear of the Supreme Brahman that the wind is blowing, out
of fear of Him that the sun regularly rises and sets, and out of fear of
Him that fire acts. It is only due to fear of Him that death and Indra, the
King of heaven, perform their respective duties.”

As described in this chapter, the inhabitants of the five islands begin-
ning with Plaksadvipa worship the sun-god, the moon-god, the fire-god,
the air-god and Lord Brahma respectively. Although they engage in the
worship of these five demigods, however, they actually worship Lord
Visnu, the Supersoul of all living entities, as indicated in this verse by
the words pratnasya visno rapam. Visnu is brahma, amrta, mrtyu—the
Supreme Brahman and the origin of everything, auspicious and in-
auspicious. He is situated in the heart of everyone, including all the
demigods. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.20), kamais tais tair hrta-
07724, prapadyante ‘nya devatah: those whose minds are distorted by
material desires surrender unto the demigods. People who are almost
blind because of lusty desires are recommended to worship the demigods
to have their material desires fulfilled, but actually those desires are not
fulfilled by the material demigods. Whatever the demigods do is done
with the sanction of Lord Visnu. People who are too lusty worship
various demigods instead of worshiping Lord Visnu, the Supersoul of all
living entities, but ultimately it is Lord Visnu they worship because He is
the Supersoul of all demigods.

TEXT 6
शक्षादिषु पञ्चसु पुरुषाणमायुरिन्द्रियमोजः सहो बलं बुद्धिविक्रम হলি च
सर्वेषामोत्पत्तिकी सिदिरविरोषेण वतते ॥ ६ ॥
plaksadisu paiicasu purusanam ayur indriyam ojah 50/10 bala buddhir
vikrama iti ca sarvesam autpattiki siddhir avisesena vartate.


--- Page 287 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20

plaksa-adisu—in the islands headed by Plaksa; paficasu—five;
purusanam—of the inhabitants; ayuh—Ilong duration of life; in-
driyam—soundness of the senses; ojah—bodily strength; sahah—men-
tal strength; balam—physical strength; buddhih—intelligence;
vikramah—bravery; iti—thus; ca—also; sarvesam —of all of them; aut-
pattiki—inborn; siddhih— perfection; aviSesena—without distinction;
vartate —exists.

TRANSLATION

O King, longevity, sensory prowess, physical and mental
strength, intelligence and bravery are naturally and equally
manifested in all the inhabitants of the five islands headed by
Plaksadvipa.

TEXT 7
छश्च; सखसमानेनेश्षुरसोदेनाइतो यथा तथा दीपोऽपि

श्चास्मलो दिगुणविशालः समानेन सुरोदेनाडृतः परिबद्धे ॥ ७ ॥

plaksah sva-samaneneksu-rasodenavrto yatha tatha dvipo ए salmalo
dvi-guna-visalah 50770716780 surodenavrtah parivrrikte.

plaksah—the land known as Plaksadvipa; sva-samanena—equal in
width; iksu-rasa—of sugarcane juice; udena—by an ocean; avrtah—
surrounded; yathd—just as; tathd —similarly; dvipah—another island;
api—also; $almalah—known as Salmala; dvi-guna-visalah—twice as
big; samanena—equal in width; surd-udena—by an ocean of liquor;
avrtah—surrounded; parivritkte —exists.

TRANSLATION

Plaksadvipa is surrounded by an ocean of sugarcane juice, equal
in breadth to the island itself. Similarly, there is then another is-
land —Salmalidvipa—twice as broad as Plaksadvipa [400,000 yo-
janas, or 3,200,000 miles] and surrounded by an equally broad
body of water called Surasagara, the ocean that tastes like liquor.


--- Page 288 ---
Text 9] The Structure of the Universe 283
TEXT 8
यत्र ह वै श्ार्मली SHE यस्यां वाव किल कव्तियगादुषंगयतञ्ठन्दः
स्तुतः पतत्त्रिराजस्य सा द्वीपहूतये उपलक्ष्यते || ८ ॥
yatra ha vai salmali plaksayama yasyam vava kila nilayam ahur
bhagavatas chandah-stutah patattri-rajasya sa dvipa-hiitaye
upalaksyate.
yatra—where; ha vai—certainly; salmali—a $almali tree; plaksa-
ayama—as big as the plaksa tree (one hundred yojanas broad and
eleven hundred yojanas high); yasyam—in which; 2৫৮৫ kila—indeed;
nilayam—rest or living place; ahuh—they say; bhagavatah—of the
most powerful; chandah-stutah—who worships the Lord by Vedic
prayers; patattri-rajasya—of Garuda, the carrier of Lord Visnu: sa—
that tree; dvipa-hitaye—for the name of the island: upalaksyate—is
distinguished.
TRANSLATION
On Salmalidvipa there is a §almali tree, from which the island
takes its name. That tree is as broad and tall as the plaksa tree—in
other words 100 yojanas [800 miles] broad and 1,100 yojanas
[8,800 miles] tall. Learned scholars say that this gigantic tree is the
residence of Garuda, the king of all birds and carrier of Lord
Visnu. In that tree, Garuda offers Lord Visnu his Vedic prayers.
TEXT 9
तदुद्रीपापिपतिः प्रियवतात्मजो a 9g: स्वसुतेभ्यः सपभ्यस्तन्नामानि
ARAN व्यमजत्सुरोचनं सौमनस्यं रमणक देववषं पारिमभद्रमाप्यायनम-
विज्ञातमिति ॥९॥
tad-dvipadhipatih priyavratatmajo yajiiabahuh sva-sutebhyah
saptabhyas tan-namani sapta-varsani vyabhajat surocanam
saumanasyam ramanakam deva-varsam paribhadram apyayanam
aviyjriatam iti.


--- Page 289 ---
284 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20

tat-dvipa-adhipatih—the master of that island; priyavrata-atmajah—
the son of Maharaja Priyavrata; yajiia-bahuh—named Yajhabahu; sva-
sutebhyah—unto his sons; saptabhyah—seven in number; tat-
namani—having names according to their names; sapta-varsani—seven
tracts of land; vyabhajat—divided; surocanam —Surocana;
saumanasyam —Saumanasya; ramanakam —Ramanaka; deva-varsam —
Deva-varsa; paribhadram—Paribhadra; dpyayanam—Apyayana;
avijiatam —Avijhata; iti —thus.

TRANSLATION
_ The son of Maharaja Priyavrata named Yajiiabahu, the master of
Salmalidvipa, divided the island into seven tracts of land, which he
gave to his seven sons. The names of those divisions, which corre-
spond to the names of the sons, are Surocana, Saumanasya,
Ramanaka, Deva-varsa, Paribhadra, Apyayana and Avijiata.
TEXT 10
=

तेषु वर्षाद्रयो नद्यश्च सपैवाभिज्ञाताः स्वरसः JOR वामदेवः छन्दो
ङ्द : पुष्पवर्षः स्स्रधुतिरिति। अनुमतिः सिनीवाली सरखती कह रजनी
नन्दा राकेति ॥१०।
tesu varsadrayo nadyas ca saptaivabhijiatah svarasah satasrigo
vamadevah kundo mukundah puspa-varsah sahasra-Srutir iti. anumatih
sinivali sarasvati kuh@ rajani nanda raketi.

tesu—in those tracts of land; varsa-adrayah—mountains; nadyah
ca—as well as rivers; sapta eva—seven in number; abhijnatah—under-
stood; svarasah—Svarasa; Sata-Sringah—Sataéringa; vama-devah—
Vamadeva; kundah—Kunda; mukundah—Mukunda; puspa-varsah—
Puspa-varsa; sahasra-$rutih—Sahasrasruti; iti—thus; anumatih—
Anumati; sinwali—Sinivali; sarasvati —Sarasvati; kuhi—Kuha; ra-
Jjani—Rajani; nandd—Nanda: raka—Raka; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

1 In those tracts of land there are seven mountains —Svarasa,
Satasrnga, Vamadeva, Kunda, Mukunda, Puspa-varsa and


--- Page 290 ---
Text 12] The Structure of the Universe 285
Sahasrasruti. There are also seven rivers—Anumati, Sinivali,
Sarasvati, Kuhu, Rajani, Nanda and Raka. They are still existing.
TEXT 11
तद्वर्षपुरुषाः श्रुतधरवी्यधरवसुन्धरेषन्धरसंज्ञा भगवन्तं वेदमयं सोममात्मानं
वेदेन यजन्ते ।॥११॥
tad-varsa-purusah srutadhara-viryadhara-vasundharesandhara-sarijia
bhagavantari vedamayarih somam atmanar vedena yajante.
tat-varsa-purusih —the residents of those tracts of land; ऊय
tadhara—Srutadhara; viryadhara—Viryadhara; vasundhara—
Vasundhara; isandhara—Isandhara; saryiiah—known as; bhagavan-
tam —the Supreme Personality of Godhead; veda-mayam —fully con-
versant with the Vedic knowledge; somam atmanam—represented by
the living entity known as Soma; vedena —by following the Vedic rules
and regulations; yajante —they worship.
TRANSLATION
Strictly following the cult of varnasrama-dharma, the inhabi-
tants of those islands, who are known as Srutidharas, Viryadharas,
Vasundharas and Isandharas, all worship the expansion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead named Soma, the moon-god.
TEXT 12
स्वगोभिः पितदेवेभ्यो विभजन्‌ Forge:
प्रजानां सवासां राजान्धः सोभो न आस्त्विति neu
sva-gobhih pitr-devebhyo
vibhajan krsna-suklayoh
prajanam sarvasam raja-
ndhah somo na astv iti
sva-gobhih—by expansion of his own illuminating rays; pitr-
devebhyah —unto the pitas and the demigods; vibhajan—dividing;
krsna-Suklayoh —into the two fortnights, dark and light; prajanam —of


--- Page 291 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
the citizens; sarvasam—of all; raja—the king; andhah—food grains;
somah—the moon-god; nah—toward us: astu—Ilet him remain favor-
able; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION

[The inhabitants of Salmalidvipa worship the demigod of the
moon in the following words.] By his own rays, the moon-god has
divided the month into two fortnights, known as §ukla and krsna,
for the distribution of food grains to the pitas and the demigods.
The demigod of the moon is he who divides time, and he is the
king of all the residents of the universe. We therefore pray that he
may remain our king and guide, and we offer him our respectful
obeisances.

TEXT 13

एवं सुरोदाद्वटिस्तद्‌ द्विगुणः समानेनाढ़तो দ্বনীইন TUR: FIA यसिन्‌
कुशस्तम्बो देवङ्ृतस्तद द्वीपाख्याकरो ज्वलन इवापरः खशप्परोचिषा दिशो
विराजयति nz

evar surodad bahis tad-dvi-gunah samanenavrto ghrtodena yatha-
purvah kusa-dvipo yasmin kusa-stambo deva-krtas tad-dvipakhyakaro
Jvalana ivaparah sva-Saspa-rocisa 00850 virajayati.

evam —thus; surodat—from the ocean of liquor; bahih—outside; tat-
dvi-gunah—twice that; samdnena—equal in width; dvrtah—sur-
rounded; ghrta-udena—an ocean of clarified butter; yatha-pirvah—as
previously with Salmalidvipa; kusa-dvipa—the island called Kuéadvipa;
yasmin —in which; kusa-stambah—kusa grass; deva-krtah—created by
the supreme will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-dvipa-
akhya-karah—giving the island its name; jvalanah—fire: iva—like;
aparah—another; sva-Saspa-rocisa—by the effulgence of the young
sprouting grass; diSah—all directions; virdjayati—illuminates.

TRANSLATION

Outside the ocean of liquor is another island, known as

Kusadvipa, which is 800,000 yojanas [6,400,000 miles] wide,


--- Page 292 ---
Text 14] The Structure of the Universe 287
twice as wide as the ocean of liquor. As Salmalidvipa is surrounded
by a liquor ocean, Kusadvipa is surrounded by an ocean of liquid
ghee as broad as the island itself. On Kusadvipa there are clumps
of kusa grass, from which the island takes its name. This kusa
grass, which was created by the demigods by the will of the
Supreme Lord, appears like a second form of fire, but with
very mild and pleasing flames. Its young shoots illuminate all
directions.
PURPORT

From the descriptions in this verse, we can make an educated guess
about the nature of the flames on the moon. Like the sun, the moon must
also be full of flames because without flames there cannot be illumina-
tion. The flames on the moon, however, unlike those on the sun, must be
mild and pleasing. This is our conviction. The modern theory that the
moon is full of dust is not accepted in the verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
In regard to this verse, Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura says,
susaspani sukomala-sikhas tesarn rocisa: the kusa grass illuminates all
directions, but its flames are very mild and pleasing. This gives some
idea of the flames existing on the moon.

TEXT 14

तदुद्वीपपतिः प्रयवरतो राजन्‌ हिरण्यरेता नाम स्वं द्वीपं सप्तम्यः खपुतरेभ्यो यथाभागं
विभज्य स्वयं तप आतिष्ठत वसुव सुदानटटरुचिनामिगुपषस्तत्यवत बिविक्तवाम-
देवनामम्यः॥ १४॥
tad-dvipa-patih praiyavrato rajan hiranyareta nama svar dvipari
saptabhyah sva-putrebhyo yatha-bhagari vibhajya svayar tapa
atisthata vasu-vasudana-drdharuci-nabhigupta-stutyavrata-vivikta-
vamadeva-namabhyah.

tat-dvipa-patih—the master of that island; praiyavratah—the son of
Maharaja Priyavrata; rajan—O King; hiranyareta—Hiranyareta:
nama—named; svam—his own; dvipam—island; saptabhyah —unto
seven; sva-putrebhyah—his own sons; yatha-bhagam—according to
division; wvibhajya—dividing; svayam—himself: tapah atisthata—


--- Page 293 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
engaged in austerities; vasu—unto Vasu; vasudana—Vasudana; drdha-
ruci—Drdharuci; nabhi-gupta—Nabhigupta; stutya-vrata—
Stutyavrata; vivikta—Vivikta; vama-deva—Vamadeva; namabhyah—
named.
TRANSLATION

O King, another son of Maharaja Priyavrata, Hiranyareta, was
the king of this island. He divided it into seven parts, which he
delivered to his seven sons according to the rights of inheritance.
The King then retired from family life to engage in austerities.
The names of those sons are Vasu, Vasudana, Drdharuci,
Stutyavrata, Nabhigupta, Vivikta and Vamadeva.

TEXT 15

तेषां वर्धेषु सीमागिरयो নলখানিহ্বানা: सप्त सपैव चक्रश्चतुःशृङ्गः कपि
shims देवानीक Seam द्रविण इति रसङ्ल्या Agen मित्रविन्दा
श्वुतविन्दा देवगमां घृतध्युता मन्त्रमालेति । १५ ॥
19507 varsesu sima-girayo nadyas cabhijiatah sapta saptaiva cakras
catuhsrngah kapilas citrakito devanika iirdhvaroma dravina iti
rasakulya madhukulya mitravinda srutavinda devagarbha ghrtacyuta
mantramaleti.

tesam—all those sons; varsesu—in the tracts of land; sima-girayah—
border mountains; nadyah ca—as well as rivers; abhijjiiatah—known;
sapta—seven; sapta—seven; eva—certainly; cakrah—Cakra; catuh-
अह्व —Catuhérnga;  kapilah—Kapila; citra-kiatah—Citrakita;
devanikah—Devanika; drdhva-roma—Urdhvaroma; dravinah—Dra-
vina; iti—thus; rama-kulya—Ramakulya; madhu-kulya—
Madhukulya; mitra-vinda—Mitravinda; Sruta-vinda —Srutavinda;
deva-garbha—Devagarbha; ghrta-cyuta—Ghrtacyuta; mantra-mala—
Mantramala; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

In those seven islands there are seven boundary mountains,

known as Cakra, Catuhérnga, Kapila, Citrakita, Devanika,


--- Page 294 ---
Text 17] The Structure of the Universe 289
Urdhvaroma and Dravina. There are also seven rivers, known as
Ramakulya, Madhukulya, Mitravinda, Srutavinda, Devagarbha,
Ghrtacyuta and Mantramala.
TEXT 16
यासां पयोभिः TARE: इशलकोविदामियुक्तङुलकसंज्ञा भगवन्तं
(९

जातवेदसरूपिणं ক্ষ্মকীহাল্টন यजन्ते ॥ १६ ॥
yasam payobhih kusSadvipaukasah kusala-kovidabhiyukta-kulaka-
saryna bhagavantam jataveda-saripinari karma-kausalena yajante.

yasam—of which; payobhih—by the water; kusa-dvipa-okasah—the
inhabitants of the island known as Kusadvipa; kusala—Kusala;
kovida—Kovida; abhiyukta—Abhiyukta; kulaka—Kulaka; samjrah—
named; bhagavantam—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jata-
veda —the demigod of fire; sa-ripinam —manifesting the form; karma-
kausalena—by expertise in ritualistic ceremonies; yajante —they
worship.

TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of the island of KuSadvipa are celebrated as the
Kus$alas, Kovidas, Abhiyuktas and Kulakas. They are like the
brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaiSyas and 600 1485 respectively. By bathing
in the waters of those rivers, they all become purified. They are ex-
pert in performing ritualistic ceremonies according to the orders
of the Vedic scriptures. Thus they worship the Lord in His aspect
as the demigod of fire.

TEXT 17
परस्य ब्रह्मणः साक्षाजातवेदोऽसि हव्यवार्‌ ।
देवानां पुरुषाङ्गानां यज्ञेन पुरुषं यजेति ॥१७॥
parasya brahmanah saksaj
jata-vedo si havyavat


--- Page 295 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
devanar purusanganam
yajiiena purusari yajeti

parasya—of the Supreme; brahmanah—Brahman; saksat—directly;
Jata-vedah—O fire-god; asi—you are; havyavat—the carrier of Vedic
offerings of grains and ghee; devanam—of all the demigods; purusa-
anganam—who are limbs of the Supreme Person; yajiiena—by per-
forming the ritualistic sacrifices; purusam—to the Supreme Person;
yaja—please carry oblations; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

[This is the mantra by which the inhabitants of Kusadvipa wor-
ship the fire-god.] O fire-god, you are a part of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Hari, and you carry to Him all the offerings
of sacrifices. Therefore we request you to offer to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead the yajiic ingredients we are offering the
demigods, for the Lord is the real enjoyer.

PURPORT

The demigods are servants who assist the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. If one worships the demigods, the demigods, as servants of the
Supreme, carry the sacrificial offerings to the Lord, like tax collectors
collecting revenue from the citizens and bringing it to the governments
treasury. The demigods cannot accept the sacrificial offerings; they
simply carry the offerings to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
stated by Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, yasya prasadad
bhagavat-prasadah: since the guru is a representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he carries to the Lord whatever is offered to
him. Similarly, all the demigods, as faithful servants of the Supreme
Lord, hand over to the Supreme Lord whatever is offered to them in
sacrificial performances. There is no fault in worshiping the demigods
with this understanding, but to think that the demigods are independent
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and equal to Him is called hrta-
17710, a loss of intelligence (kamais tais tair hrta-jrianah). One who
thinks that the demigods themselves are the actual benefactors is
mistaken.


--- Page 296 ---
Text 19] The Structure of the Universe 291
TEXT 18

तथा IAF: ক্ষীস্বন্তাণী दगुणः खमानेन क्षीरोदेन परित STF! बरतो
यथा FIAT TAXA यसिन्‌ क्रौञ्चो नाम पवेतराजो दवीपनामनिवेतंक
आस्ते ॥१८॥
tatha ghrtodad bahih kraunicadvipo dvi-gunah sva-manena ksirodena
parita upakipto vrto yatha kusadvipo ghrtodena yasmin kraufico nama
parvata-rajo dvipa-nama-nirvartaka daste.

tatha—so also; ghrta-udat—from the ocean of clarified butter;
bahih—outside; kraunca-dvipah—another island, known as
Krauncadvipa; dvi-gunah—twice as big; sa-manena—as the same
measurement; ksira-udena—by an ocean of milk; paritah—all around;
upakiptah—surrounded; vrtah—surrounded; yatha—like; kusa-
dvipah—the island known as Kusadvipa; ghrta-udena—by an ocean of
clarified butter; yasmin—in which; krauricah nama —named Kraufica;
parvata-rajah—a king of mountains; dvipa-nama—the name of the is-
land; nirvartakah—bringing about; dste —exists.

TRANSLATION

Outside the ocean of clarified butter is another island, known as
Krauficadvipa, which has a width of 1,600,000 yojanas [12,800,-
000 miles], twice the width of the ocean of clarified butter. As
Ku$éadvipa is surrounded by an ocean of clarified butter,
Krauiicadvipa is surrounded by an ocean of milk as broad as the is-
land itself. On Krauficadvipa there is a great mountain known as
Krauiica, from which the island takes its name.

TEXT 19

योऽसौ गुहप्रदरणोन्मथितनितम्बङुखोऽपि क्षीरोदेनासिशच्यमानो भगवता
वरुणेनाभियुस्लो विमयो बभूव ॥ १९॥
yo ’sau guha-praharanonmathita-nitamba-kunjo pi ksirodena-
sicyamano bhagavata varunenabhigupto vibhayo babhiiva.


--- Page 297 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20

yah—which; asau—that (mountain); guha-praharana—by the
weapons of Karttikeya, the son of Lord Siva; unmathita—shaken;
nitamba-kunjah—whose trees and vegetables along the slopes; api—
although; ksira-udena—by the ocean of milk; a@sicyamanah—being al-
ways bathed; bhagavatda—by the greatly powerful; varunena—the
demigod known as Varuna; abhiguptah—protected; vibhayah
babhiiva—has become fearless.

TRANSLATION

Although the vegetables living on the slopes of Mount Krauiica
were attacked and devastated by the weapons of Karttikeya, the
mountain has become fearless because it is always bathed on all
sides by the ocean of milk and protected by Varunadeva.

TEXT 20
FN

तसिन्पि प्रैयव्रतो EE नामाधिपतिः स्वे द्वीपे adr सप्त॒ Resa
तेषु पुत्रनामसु মম रिक्थादान्‌ वर्षपान्निवेश्य स्वथं मगवान्‌ भगवतः परमकल्याण
TIA आत्मभूतस्य हरेश्वरणारविन्दयुपजगाम । २०॥
tasminn api praiyavrato ghrtaprstho namadhipatih sve dvipe varsani
sapta vibhajya tesu putra-namasu sapta rikthadan varsapan nivesya
svayarn bhagavan bhagavatah parama-kalyana-yasasa atma-bhitasya
hares caranaravindam upajagama.

tasmin—in that island; api—also; praiyavratah—the son of Maharaja
Priyavrata; ghrta-prsthah—Ghrtaprstha; nama—named; adhipatih—
the king of that island; sve—his own; dvipe—in the island; varsani—
tracts of land; sapta—seven; wvibhajya—dividing; tesu—in each of
them; putra-namasu—possessing the names of his sons; sapta—seven;
riktha-dan—sons; varsa-pan—the masters of the varsas; nivesya—ap-
pointing; svayam—himself; bhagavan—very powerful; bhagavatah—
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parama-kalyana-yasasah—
whose glories are so auspicious; atrma-bhitasya—the soul of all souls;
hareh carana-aravindam—the lotus feet of the Lord; upajagama—took
shelter at.


--- Page 298 ---
Text 21] The Structure of the Universe 293
TRANSLATION

The ruler of this island was another son of Maharaja Priyavrata.
His name was Ghrtaprstha, and he was a very learned scholar. He
also divided his own island among his seven sons. After dividing
the island into seven parts, named according to the names of his
sons, Ghrtaprstha Maharaja completely retired from family life
and took shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, the soul of all souls,
who has all auspicious qualities. Thus he attained perfection.

TEXT 21
आमो ATER मेषपृष्ठः सुधामा भ्राजिष्ठो लोहितार्णो वनस्पतिरिति धतपृष्ठसु-
तास्तेषां वर्षगिरयः सम॒ सप्तैव नवश्चाभिरू्याताः शुद्धो वधमानो भोजन
6 Q

उपबर्दिणो नन्दो नन्दनः सर्वतोभद्र इति अभया SFE आर्यका तीर्थवती
रूपवती पवित्रथती शङ्केति ॥ २१॥
amo madhuruho meghaprsthah sudhama bhrajistho lohitarno vanaspatir
iti ghrtaprstha-sutas tesa varsa-girayah sapta saptaiva nadyas
cabhikhyatah Suklo vardhamano bhojana upabarhino nando nandanah
sarvatobhadra iti abhaya amrtaugha aryaka tirthavati ripavati
pavitravatt Sukleti.

amah —Ama; madhu-ruhah—Madhuruha; megha-prsthah —
Meghaprstha; sudhama—Sudhama; bhrajisthah—Bhrajistha; lohitar-
nah—Lohitarna; vanaspatih—Vanaspati; iti—thus; ghrtaprstha-
sutah— the sons of Ghrtaprstha; tesam —of those sons; varsa-girayah—
boundary hills of the tracts of land; sapta—seven; sapta—seven; eva—
also; nadyah—rivers; ca—and; abhikiyatah—celebrated; suklah
vardhamanah—Sukla and Vardhamana; bhojanah—Bhojana:
upabarhinah—Upabarhina; nandah—Nanda; nandanah—Nandana:
sarvatah-bhadrah —Sarvatobhadra; _iti—thus; abhaya—Abhaya;
amrtaugha—Amrtaugha; aryaka—Aryaka; tirthavati—Tirthavati:
riupavati—Rupavati; pavitravati—Pavitravati; Sukla —Sukla; iti —thus.


--- Page 299 ---
294. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION

The sons of Maharaja Ghrtaprstha were named Ama,
Madhuruha, Meghaprstha, Sudhama, Bhrajistha, Lohitarna and
Vanaspati. In their island there are seven mountains, which indi-
cate the boundaries of the seven tracts of land, and there are also
seven rivers. The mountains are named Sukla, Vardhamina, Bho-
jana, Upabarhina, Nanda, Nandana and Sarvatobhadra. The rivers
are named Abhaya, Amrtaugha, Aryaka, Tirthavati, Ruapavati,
Pavitravati and Sukla.

TEXT 22
[1 Lo)

यासामम्भः पवित्रममल्ुपयु्नानाः पृरूष्छषम द्रविणदेवकसंज्ञा॒ वषेपुरुष।
आपोमयं देवमपां पूर्णेनाञ्जलिना यजन्ते ॥ २२॥
yasam ambhah pavitram amalam upayunjanah purusa-rsabha-
dravina-devaka-sarijia varsa-purusa apomayarm devam apa
pumendnjalina yajante.

yasam—of all the rivers; ambhah—the water; pavitram—very
sanctified; amalam—very clean; upayunjanah—using; purusa—
Purusa; rsabha—Rsabha; dravina—Dravina; devaka—Devaka;
sariyiadh—endowed with the names; varsa-purusah—the inhabitants of
those varsas; apah-mayam—Varuna, the lord of water; devam—as the
worshipable deity; apam—of water; purnena—with full; ajalina—
folded palms; yajante—do worship.

TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of Krauficadvipa are divided into four castes,
called the Purusas, Rsabhas, Dravinas and Devakas. Using the
waters of those sanctified rivers, they worship the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead by offering a palmful of water at the lotus feet
of Varuna, the demigod who has a form of water.

PURPORT

Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says, apomayah asmayam: with
joined palms the inhabitants of the various sections of Krauficadvipa
offer the sanctified waters of the rivers to a deity made of stone or iron.


--- Page 300 ---
Text 23] The Structure of the Universe 295
TEXT 23
आपः पुरुषवीर्याः स्थ पुनन्तीभूंधवः सुवः |
तानः पुनीतामीवघ्नीः स्पृश्चतामारम ना भुव इति ॥ २२॥
apah purusa-viryah stha
punantir bhiir-bhuvah-suvah
ta nah punitamiva-ghnih
sprsatam atmana bhuva iti
apah—O water; purusa-viryadh—endowed with the energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; stha—you are; punantth—sanctify-
ing; bhuh—of the planetary system known as Bhih; bhuvah—of the
Bhuvah planetary system; suvah—of the Svah planetary system; tah—
that water; nah—of us; punita—purify; amiva-ghnith—who destroys
sin; sprsatam—of those touching; atmana—by your constitutional posi-
tion; bhuvah—the bodies; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
[The inhabitants of Krauiicadvipa worship with this mantra.] 0
water of the rivers, you have obtained energy from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore you purify the three planetary
systems, known as Bhiilloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka. By your
constitutional nature, you take away sins, and that is why we are
touching you. Kindly continue to purify us.
PURPORT
Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.4):
bhiamir apo 7৮010 vayuh
kharih mano buddhir eva ca
ahankdara ittyarh me
bhinna prakrtir astadha
“Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all
together these eight comprise My separated material energies.”


--- Page 301 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20

The energy of the Lord acts throughout the creation, just as heat and
light, the energies of the sun, act within the universe and make every-
thing work. The specific rivers mentioned in the Sastras are also energies
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and people who regularly bathe
in them are purified. It can actually be seen that many people are cured
of diseases simply by bathing in the Ganges. Similarly, the inhabitants of
Krauiicadvipa purify themselves by bathing in the rivers there.

TEXT 24
एवं पुरस्तारक्षीरोदात्परित उपवेशितः श्चाकदवीपो BA ERR RIFE IRIE

समानेन च दधिमण्डोदेन परीतो यसिन्‌ WR नाभ महीरुहः खक्षेत्रव्यप-
{TN यस्य ह महासुरभिगन्धस्तं द्वीपमनुबासयति 1:81

evarin purastat ksirodat parita upavesitah sakadvipo dvatrimsal-laksa-
yojanayamah samanena ca dadhi-mandodena parito yasmin sako nama
mahiruhah sva-ksetra-vyapadesako yasya ha maha-surabhi-gandhas
10771 dvipam anuvasayati.

evam —thus; parastat—beyond; ksira-udat—from the ocean of milk;
paritah—all around; upavesitah—situated; $aka-dvipah—another is-
land, known as Sakadvipa; dva-trimsat—thirty-two; laksa—100,000;
yojana—yojanas; dayamah—whose measure; samanena—of equal
length: ca—and; dadhi-manda-udena—by an ocean containing water
resembling churned yogurt: paritah—surrounded; yasmin—in which
land: sakah—s$aka; nama —named; mahiruhah—a fig tree: sva-ksetra-
vyapadesakah—giving the island its name: yasya—of which: ha—in-
deed; maha-surabhi—a greatly fragrant; gandhah—aroma: tam
dvipam —that island; anuvdsayati—makes fragrant.

TRANSLATION

Outside the ocean of milk is another island, Sakadvipa, which
has a width of 3,200,000 yojanas [25,600,000 miles]. As
Krauiicadvipa is surrounded by its own ocean of milk, Sakadvipa is
surrounded by an ocean of churned yogurt as broad as the island


--- Page 302 ---
Text 25] The Structure of the Universe 297
itself. In Sakadvipa there is a big $aka tree, from which the island
takes its name. This tree is very fragrant. Indeed, it lends its scent
to the entire island.
TEXT 25
a द

तस्यापि Sa एवाधिपतिनाम्ना मेधातिथिः सोऽपि विभज्य सस्त वर्षाणि
पुत्रनामानि तेषु खात्मजान्‌ पुरोजवमनोजवपव मानधूप्रानीकचित्ररेफबहुरूप-
विश्वधारसंज्ञानिधाप्याधिपतीन्‌ खयं भगवत्यनन्त अवेशितमतिस्तपोवनं
प्रविवेश ।२५॥
tasyapi pratyavrata evadhipatir namna medhatithih so ‘pi vibhajya
sapta varsani putra-namani tesu svitmajan purojava-manojava-
pavamana-dhiumranika-citrarepha-bahuripa-visvadhara-sarynan
nidhapydadhipatin 5৮007 bhagavaty ananta a-vesita-matis
tapovanari pravivesa.

tasya api—of that island also: praiyavratah—a son of Maharaja
Priyavrata; eva—certainly: adhipatih—the ruler: namna—by the
name: medhd-tithih—Medhatithi; sah api—he also: vibhajya—divid-
ing: sapta varsani—seven divisions of the island: putra-namani—
possessing the names of his sons; tesu—in them: sva-atmajan—his own
sons: purojava—Purojava: manojava—Manojava: pavamana—
Pavamana:  dhamranika—Dhamranika;  citra-repha—Citrarepha:
bahu-rapa—Bahuriipa; visvadhara—Visvadhara; samyjian—having as
names: nidhapya—establishing as: adhipatin—the rulers: svayam—
himself: bhagavati—in the Supreme Personality of Godhead: anante—
in the unlimited: dvesita-matih—whose mind was fully absorbed:
tapah-vanam—in the forest where meditation is performed: pra-
vivesa—he entered.

TRANSLATION

The master of this island, also one of the sons of Priyavrata, was
known as Medhatithi. He also divided his island into seven sec-
tions, named according to the names of his own sons, whom he


--- Page 303 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
made the kings of that island. The names of those sons are Puro-
java, Manojava, Pavamana, Dhamranika, Citrarepha, Bahuripa
and ViSvadhara. After dividing the island and situating his sons as
its rulers, Medhatithi personally retired, and to fix his mind com-
pletely upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, he entered a forest suitable for meditation.
TEXT 26
© + ৬
एतेषां वकमर्यादागिरयो নল सप्र समैव ইহযান उरमङ्गो बलमद्रः शतकेसरः
-

TEA देवपालो महानस इति अनधाऽऽयुदां उभयस्यृष्टिरपराजिता
पञ्चपदी सहसस तिर्निज्तिरिति ॥२६॥
€1९ऽका7 varsa-maryada-girayo nadyas ca sapta saptaiva isana urusrngo
balabhadrah satakesarah sahasrasroto devapalo mahanasa iti
anaghayurda ubhayasprstir aparajita [00160070008 sahasrasrutir nijadhrtir
iti.

etesam—of all these divisions: varsa-maryada— acting as the bound-
ary limits: girayah—the big hills: nadyah ca—and the rivers also;
sapta—seven: sapta—seven; eva—indeed: isanah—I$ana: uru-
Srngah—Urusrnga: bala-bhadrah—Balabhadra: Sata-kesarah —
Satakesara: sahasra-srotah—Sahasrasrota: deva-palah—Devapala:
mahanasah—Mahanasa; iti—thus; anagha—Anagha: ayurda—
Ayurda: ubhayasprstih—Ubhayasprsti: apardjita—Aparajita:
pancapadi—Paficapadi: sahasra-srutih—Sahasrasruti: nija-dhrtih —Ni-
jadhrti: iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

For these lands also, there are seven boundary mountains and
seven rivers. The mountains are I$ana, Uruérnga, Balabhadra,
Satakesara, Sahasrasrota, Devapala and Mahanasa. The rivers are
Anagha, Ayurda, Ubhayasprsti, Aparajita, Pafncapadi, Sahasrasruti
and Nijadhrti.


--- Page 304 ---
Text 28] The Structure of the Universe 299
TEXT 27

SEV] ऋतव्रतसत्यत्रतदानवरतानुत्रतनामानो भगवन्तं बाय्बात्मक
प्राणायामविधूतरजस्तमसः परमसमाधिना यजन्ते [Rel
tad-varsa-purusa rtavrata-satyavrata-danavratanuvrata-namano
bhagavantam vayv-atmakar prandyama-vidhiita-rajas-tamasah
parama-samadhind yajante.

tat-varsa-purusah—the inhabitants of those tracts of land: rta-
vrata—Rtavrata; satya-vrata—Satyavrata: dana-vrata—Danavrata:
anuvrata—Anuvrata: namanah—having the four names: bhagavan-
tam —the Supreme Personality of Godhead: vayu-atmakam—repre-
sented by the demigod Vayu: prandyama—by the practice of regulating
the airs within the body: vidhiita—cleansed away: rajah-tamasah—
whose passion and ignorance; parama—sublime: samddhina—by
trance: yajante—they worship.

TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of those islands are also divided into four
castes— Rtavrata, Satyavrata, Danavrata and Anuvrata—which ex-
actly resemble brahmana, ksatriya, vai§ya and 60013. They practice
pranayama and mystic yoga, and in trance they worship the
Supreme Lord in the form of Vayu.

TEXT 28
अन्तः प्रविश्य भूतानि यो निभरत्यात्मकेतुभिः |
अन्तर्यामीश्वरः साक्षात्पातु नो যন্তহী स्फुटम्‌ ॥२८॥
antah-pravisya bhitani
yo bibharty atma-ketubhih
antaryamisvarah saksat
patu no yad-vase sphutam


--- Page 305 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20

antah-pravi§ya—entering within: bhiatani—all living entities: yah—
who: bibharti—maintains: atma-ketubhih—by the functions of the in-
ner airs (prana, apana, etc); antaryami—the Supersoul within;
isvarah—the Supreme Person: saksat—directly: patu—please maintain:
nah—us: yat-vase—under whose control: sphutam—the cosmic
manifestation.

TRANSLATION

[The inhabitants of Sakadvipa worship the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in the form of Vayu in the following words.] O
Supreme Person, situated as the Supersoul within the body, You
direct the various actions of the different airs, such as prana, and
thus You maintain all living entities. O Lord, O Supersoul of
everyone, O controller of the cosmic manifestation under whom
everything exists, may You protect us from all dangers.

PURPORT

Through the mystic yoga practice called pranayama, the yogi controls
the airs within the body to maintain the body in a healthy condition. In
this way, the yogi comes to the point of trance and tries to see the Super-
soul within the core of his heart. Pranayama is the means to attain
samadhi, trance, in order to fully absorb oneself in seeing the Supreme
Lord as antrayami, the Supersoul within the core of the heart.

TEXT 29
एवमेव दधिमण्डोदात्परतः पुष्करद्वीपस्तत्ते द्विगुणायामः समन्तत

उपकट्पितः समानेन खादृदकेन सथुद्रेण RAI यसिन्‌ बृहत्पुष्करं
ज्वलनश्िखामरुकनकपत्रायुतायुतं मगवतः कमलासनस्याध्यासनं परिकल्पितम्‌
TEN

evam eva dadhi-mandodat paratah puskaradvipas tato dvi-
gunayamah samantata upakalpitah samanena svadiidakena samudrena
bahir avrto yasmin brhat-puskaram jvalana-sikhamala-kanaka-
patrayutayutarn bhagavatah kamalasanasyadhyasanar parikalpitam.


--- Page 306 ---
Text 30] The Structure of the Universe 301

evam eva—thus: dadhi-manda-udat—the ocean of yogurt:
paratah—beyond; puskara-dvipah—another island, named
Puskaradvipa: tatah—than that (Sakadvipa): dvi-guna-ayamah—
whose measurement is twice as great: samantatah—on all sides:
upakalpitah—surrounded: samanena—equal in width: svadu-
udakena— possessing sweet water: samudrena—by an ocean: bahih—
outside: avrtah—surrounded: yasmin—in which: brhat—very big:
puskaram—lotus flower: jvalana-sikha—like the flames of a blazing
fire: amala—pure: kanaka—gold: patra—leaves: ayuta-ayutam—
possessing 100,000,000; bhagavatah—greatly powerful: kamala
asanasya—of Lord Brahma. whose sitting place is on the lotus flower:
adhyasanam—sitting place: parikalpitam—considered.

TRANSLATION

Outside the ocean of yogurt is another island, known as
Puskaradvipa, which is 6,400,000 yojanas [51,200,000 miles]
wide, twice as wide as the ocean of yogurt. It is surrounded by an
ocean of very tasteful water as broad as the island itself. On
Puskaradvipa there is a great lotus flower with 100,000,000 pure
golden petals, as effulgent as the flames of fire. That lotus flower is
considered the sitting place of Lord Brahma, who is the most
powerful living being and who is therefore sometimes called
bhagavan.

TEXT 30
= ~ = ~

ATER मानसोत्तरनामैक एवार्वाचीनपराचीनवषयोम्॑यादाचलोऽयुतयोजनो-
च्छ्रायायामो यत्र तु चतसृषु दिक्च चत्वारि पुराणि लोक्पाठानामिन्द्रादीनां
यदुपरिषात्छयंरथस्य मेर परिभ्रमतः संवत्सरात्मकं च॑र देदानामदोरात्राभ्यां
परिभ्रमति ॥ ২০॥
tad-dvipa-madhye manasottara-namaika evarvacina-paracina-varsayor
maryadacalo *yuta-yojanocchrayayamo yatra tu catasrsu diksu catvari
purani loka-palanam indradinar yad-uparistat sirya-rathasya 77167 1471
paribhramatah sarwatsaratmakari cakram devanam aho-ratrabhyam
paribhramati.


--- Page 307 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20

tat-dvipa-madhye—within that island: manasottara—Manasottara:
nama—named: ekah—one: eva—indeed: arvacina—on this side:
paracina—and beyond. or outside: varsayoh—of tracts of land:
maryada—indicating the boundary: acalah—a great mountain:
ayuta—ten thousand: ygana—eight miles: ucchraya-ayamah—whose
height and width: yatra—where: tu—but: catasrsu—in the four:
diksu—directions: catvari—four: purani—cities: loka-palanam—of the
directors of planetary systems: indra-adinam—headed by Indra: yat—
of which: uparistat—on the top: siurya-rathasya—of the chariot of the
sun-god: merum—Meru Mountain: paribhramatah—while circumam-
bulating: sarmvatsara-atmakam—consisting of one sarwvatsara;
cakram—wheel or orbit: devanam—of the demigods: ahah-
ratrabhyam —by the day and night: paribhramati— moves around.

TRANSLATION

In the middle of that island is a great mountain named Manasot-
tara, which forms the boundary between the inner side and the
outer side of the island. Its breadth and height are 10,000 yojanas
[80,000 miles]. On that mountain, in the four directions, are the
residential quarters of demigods such as Indra. In the chariot of
the sun-god, the sun travels on the top of the mountain in an orbit
called the Sarivatsara, encircling Mount Meru. The sun’s path on
the northern side is called Uttarayana, and its path on the southern
side is called Daksinayana. One side represents a day for the
demigods, and the other represents their night.

PURPORT

The movement of the sun is confirmed in the Brahma-samhita (5.52):
yasyajiiaya bhramati sarmbhrta-kala-cakrah. The sun orbits around
Mount उपला प. for six months on the northern side and for six months
on the southern. This adds up to the duration of a day and night of the
demigods in the upper planetary systems.

TEXT 31

तदुद्रीपस्याप्यधिपतिः प्रैयव्रतो वीतिहोत्रो नामैतस्यात्मजौ रमणकधातकि-
नामानौ वषपती निमज्य स खयं पू्॑जवद्धगवल्कमशीर एवास्ते 13201


--- Page 308 ---
Text 32] The Structure of the Universe 303
tad-dvipasyapy adhipatih praiyavrato vitihotro namaitasyatmajau
ramanaka-dhataki-namanau varsa-pati niyujya sa svayarn pirvajovad-
bhagavat-karma-sila evaste.

tat-dvipasya—of that island; api—also; adhipatih—the ruler:
praiyavratah—a son of Maharaja Priyavrata: vitihotrah nama—named
Vitihotra; etasya—of him; atma-jau—unto the two sons: ramanaka—
Ramanaka: dhataki—and Dhataki; namanau—having the names:
varsa-pati—the rulers of the two tracts of land; niyujya—appointing:
sah svayam—himself; pirvaja-vat—like his other brothers; bhagavat-
karma-Silah—being absorbed in activities to satisfy the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead: eva—indeed; aste—remains.

TRANSLATION

The ruler of this island, the son of Maharaja Priyavrata named
Vitihotra, had two sons named Ramanaka and Dhataki. He granted
the two sides of the island to these two sons and then personally
engaged himself in activities for the sake of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead like his elder brother Medhatithi.

TEXT 32

तद्व्पुरूषा भगवन्तं बह्मरूपिणं सकर्मकेण कर्मेणाऽऽराधयन्तीदं चोदाहरन्ति
॥२३२॥
tad-varsa-purusa bhagavantarn brahma-rapinam sakarmakena
karmanaradhayantidarh codaharanti.

tat-varsa-purusah—the inhabitants of that island: bhagavantam —the
Supreme Personality of Godhead: brahma-ripinam —exhibited as Lord
Brahma being seated on the lotus; sa-karmakena—for fulfillment of
material desires: karmana—by performing ritualistic activities accord-
ing to the Vedas; aradhayanti—worship: idam—this: ca—and:
udaharanti—they chant.

TRANSLATION

For the fulfillment of material desires, the inhabitants of this

tract of land worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead as


--- Page 309 ---
304 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
represented by Lord Brahma. They offer prayers to the Lord as
follows.
TEXT 33
ক ५
Tat fog ब्रह्मलिङ्गं जनोऽचयेत्‌ |
एकान्तमद्वयं शान्तं तस्मै भगवते नम इति ॥২২।।
yat tat karmamayar lingam
brahma-lingam jano ’rcayet
ekantam advayam $antam
tasmai bhagavate nama iti
yat—which: tat—that: karma-mayam—obtainable by the Vedic
ritualistic system: lingam—the form: brahma-lingam —which makes
known the Supreme Brahman: janah—a person; arcayet—must wor-
ship: ekantam —who has full faith in the one Supreme; advayam—non-
different: santam—peaceful: tasmai—unto him: bhagavate—the most
powerful: namah—our respects: iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma is known as karma-maya, the form of ritualistic
ceremonies, because by performing ritualistic ceremonies one may
attain his position and because the Vedic ritualistic hymns become
manifest from him. He is devoted to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead without deviation, and therefore in one sense he is not
different from the Lord. Nevertheless, he should be worshiped not
as the monists worship him, but in duality. One should always
remain a servitor of the Supreme Lord, the supreme worshipable
Deity. We therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto Lord
Brahma, the form of manifest Vedic knowledge.
PURPORT
In this verse. the word karma-mayam (“obtainable by the Vedic
ritualistic system™) is significant. The Vedas say, svadharma-nisthah
Sata-janmabhih puman virificatam eti: “One who strictly follows the
principles of varnasrama-dharma for at least one hundred births will be


--- Page 310 ---
Text 35] The Structure of the Universe 305
rewarded with the post of Lord Brahma.” It is also significant that
although Lord Brahma is extremely powerful, he never thinks himself
one with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; he always knows that he
is an eternal servitor of the Lord. Because the Lord and the servant are
identical on the spiritual platform, Brahma is herein addressed as
bhagavan. Bhagavan is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna. but
if a devotee serves Him with full faith, the meaning of the Vedic
literature is revealed to him. Therefore Brahma is called brahma-linga,
which indicates that his entire form consists of Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 34
ऋषिरुवाच
ततः परस्ताष्छोकालोकनामाचसो रलोकालोकयोरन्तराठे परित Safin:
॥ २४॥
tatah parastal lokaloka-namacalo lokalokayor antardle parita
upaksiptah.
tatah—from that ocean of sweet drinking water: parastat—beyond:
lokaloka-nama—named Lokaloka: acalah—a mountain: loka-alokayoh
antarale—between the countries full of sunlight and those without
sunlight: paritah—all around: upaksiptah—exists.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, beyond the ocean of sweet water and fully sur-
rounding it, is a mountain named Lokaloka, which divides the
countries that are full of sunlight from those not lit by the sun.
TEXT 35
यावन्मानसोत्तरमेवोरन्तरं तावती भूमिः काश्न्यन्याऽऽदशेतलोषमा Fai प्रहितः
पदार्थो न कथञ्चित्पुनः प्रत्युपलम्यते तसात्सवसतत्वपरिट्ताऽऽसीत्‌ 11 ३५॥
देष्ठः manasottara-mervor antararn tavati bhiomih kancany anyadarsa-
talopama yasyam prahitah padartho na kathancit punah
pratyupalabhyate tasmat sarva-sattva-parihrtasit.


--- Page 311 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20

yavat—as much 88; manasottara-mervoh antaram—the land between
Manasottara and Meru (beginning from the middle of Mount Sumeru);
tavati—that much: bhiamih—land; kanicani—made of gold; anya—
another: adarsa-tala-upama—whose surface 15 just like the surface of a
mirror; yasyam—on which; prahitah—dropped: padarthah—a thing;
na—not; kathanicit—in any way; punah—again; pratyupalabhyate—is
found; tasmat—therefore: sarva-sattva—by all living entities;
parihrta—abandoned; dasit—was.

TRANSLATION

Beyond the ocean of sweet water is a tract of land as broad as the
area between the middle of Mount Sumeru and the boundary of
Manasottara Mountain. In that tract of land there are many living
beings. Beyond it, extending to Lokaloka Mountain, is another
land, which is made of gold. Because of its golden surface, it
reflects light like the surface of a mirror, and any physical article
that falls on that land can never be perceived again. All living
entities, therefore, have abandoned that golden land.

TEXT 36

लोकालोक इति समाख्या यदनेनाचलेन लोकाठोकस्यान्तर्तिनावस्थाप्यते
LEX]
lokaloka iti samakhya yad anendcalena lokalokasyantarvar-
tinavasthapyate.

loka—with light (or with inhabitants); alokah—without light (or
without inhabitants); iti—in this way; samakhya—designation; yat—
which; anena—by this; acalena—mountain; loka—of the land inhab-
ited by living entities; alokasya—and of the land not inhabited by living
entities; antarvartina—which is in the middle: avasthapyate—is estab-
lished.

TRANSLATION

Between the lands inhabited by living entities and those that are
uninhabited stands the great mountain which separates the two
and which is therefore celebrated as Lokaloka.


--- Page 312 ---
Text 37] The Structure of the Universe 307
TEXT 37

स लोकत्रयान्ते परित ईश्वरेण विदितो यसात्छयादीनां धुवापवर्गाणां

- 5 -~ PCIE =
ज्योतिर्गणानां गभस्तयोऽर्वाचीनांखी ` छलोकानावितन्वाना ন कदाचिस्पराचीना
भवितु्ुत्सहन्ते तादद्बहनायामः ॥২৩।।
sa loka-trayante parita iSvarena vihito yasmat siryadinar
dhruvapavargandarm jyotir-gananarin gabhastayo ‘rvacinarms tril lokan
avitanvand na kaddacit paracina bhavitum utsahante tavad un-
nahandayamah.

sah—that mountain: loka-traya-ante—at the end of the three lokas
(Bhirloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka): paritah—all around: #varena—
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna: vihitah—created:
yasmat—from which: sirya-adinam—of the sun planet: dhruva-
apavarganam—up to Dhruvaloka and other. inferior luminaries: jyotih-
gananam—of all the luminaries; gabhastayah—the rays: arvacinan—
on this side: trin—the three: lokan—planetary systems: avitanvanah—
spreading throughout: na—not; kaddcit—at any time: pardcinah—
beyond the jurisdiction of that mountain: bhavitum—to be: utsahante—
are able: tavat—that much: unnahana-ayamah—the measure of the
height of the mountain.

TRANSLATION

By the supreme will of Krsna, the mountain known as Lokaloka
has been installed as the outer border of the three worlds —
Bhuarloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka—to control the rays of the
sun throughout the universe. All the luminaries, from the sun up
to Dhruvaloka, distribute their rays throughout the three worlds,
but only within the boundary formed by this mountain. Because it
is extremely high, extending even higher than Dhruvaloka, it
blocks the rays of the luminaries, which therefore can never
extend beyond it.

PURPORT

When we speak of loka-traya, we refer to the three primary planetary

systems— Bhah. Bhuvah and Svah—into which the universe is divided.


--- Page 313 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
Surrounding these planetary systems are the eight directions, namely
east. west, north, south, northeast, southeast, northwest and southwest.
Lokaloka Mountain has been established as the outer boundary of all the
lokas to distribute the rays of the sun and other luminaries equally
throughout the universe.

This vivid description of how the rays of the sun are distributed
throughout the different planetary systems of the universe is very scien-
tific. Sukadeva Gosvami described these universal affairs to Maharaja
Pariksit as he had heard about them from his predecessor. He explained
these facts five thousand years ago, but the knowledge existed long, long
before because Sukadeva Gosvami received it through disciplic succes-
sion. Because this knowledge is accepted through the disciplic succession,
it is perfect. The history of modern scientific knowledge, on the contrary.
does not go back more than a few hundred years. Therefore, even if
modern scientists do not accept the other factual presentations of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, how can they deny the perfect astronomical
calculations that existed long before they could imagine such things?
There is so much information to gather from Srimad-Bhagavatam.
Modern scientists, however, have no information of other planetary
systems and, indeed, are hardly conversant with the planet on which we
are now living.

TEXT 38
एलार्वहछनिकविन्यासो मानटक्षणसंस्याभिर्विचिन्तितः कविभिः स
त॒ पश्चाशत्कतैरिगणितस्य भूगोलस्य तुरीयभागोऽयं लोकालोकाचलः ॥२३८।।
etaval loka-viny dso mana-laksana-samsthabhir vicintitah kavibhih sa
tu pancasat-koti-ganitasya bhi-golasya turiya-bhago ‘yam
lokalokacalah.

etavan—this much; loka-vinyasah—the placing of the different
planets: mdna—with measurements; laksana—symptoms:
sariisthabhih—as well as with their different situations; vicintitah—es-
tablished by scientific calculations: kavibhih—by learned scholars:
sah -- 11181; tu—but; pancasat-koti—500.000.000 yojanas; ganitasya—
which is measured at; bhi-golasya—of the planetary system known as


--- Page 314 ---
Text 38] The Structure of the Universe 309
Bhuagolaka; turiya-bhagah—one fourth; ayam—this: lokaloka-
acalah—the mountain known as Lokaloka.
TRANSLATION

Learned scholars who are free from mistakes, illusions and pro-
pensities to cheat have thus described the planetary systems and
their particular symptoms, measurements and locations. With
great deliberation, they have established the truth that the distance
between Sumeru and the mountain known as Lokaloka is one
fourth of the diameter of the universe—or, in other words,
125,000,000 yojanas [1 billion miles].

PURPORT

Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura has given accurate astronomical
information about the location of Lokaloka Mountain, the movements of
the sun globe and the distance between the sun and the circumference of
the universe. However, the technical terms used in the astronomical
calculations given by the Jyotir Veda are difficult to translate into
English. Therefore to satisfy the reader, we may include the exact
Sanskrit statement given by Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura. which
records exact calculations regarding universal affairs.

sa tu lokalokas tu bhii-golakasya bhii-sambandhanda-golakasyety arthah.
siryasy eva bhuvo ‘py anda-golakayor madhya-vartitvat kha-golam iva bhii-
golam api panicasat-koti-yojana-pramanar tasya turiya-bhagah sardha-
dvadasa-koti-yojana-vistarocchraya ity arthah bhis tu catus-trimsal-
laksonapancasat-koti-pramanda jiieya. yatha meru-madhyan manasottara-
madhya-paryantari sard ha-sapta- pancasal-laksottara-koti-yojana-pramanam.
manasottara-madhyat svadidaka-samudra-paryantarn san-navati-laksa-
yojana-pramanarh tatah kaficani-bhiimih sardha-sapta-pancasal-laksottara-
koti-yojana-pramana evam ekato meru-lokalokayor antaralam ekadasa-sal-
laksadhika-catus-koti-parimitam anyato 7 tathatyeto lokalokal loka-
paryantarh sthanarh dvavirhsati-laksottarasta-koti-parimitarn lokalokad bahir
apy ekatah etavad eva anyato ‘py etavad eva yad vaksyate, yo ‘ntar-vistara
etena hy aloka-parimanari ca vyakhyatarn yad-bahir lokalokacalad ity ekato
lokalokah sardha-dvadasa-koti-yojana-parimanah anyato ‘pi sa tathety evarn
catus-trimsal-laksonapancasat-koti-pramana bhith sabdhi-dvipa-parvata
Jreya. ata evanda-golakat sarvato diksu sapta-dasa-laksa-yojanavakase
vartamane sati prthivyah Sesa-nagena dharanarn dig-gajais ca niscali-karanam


--- Page 315 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
sarthakari bhaved anyatha tu vyakhyantare paincasat-koti-pramanatvad anda-
golaka-lagnatve tat tat sarvam akiricit-karam syat caksuse manvantare
cakasmat majjanari sri-varaha-devenotthapanam ca durghatari syad ity
adikar vivecaniyam.

TEXT 39
तदुपरिशचतसृष्वाशाखात्मयोनिनाखिलजगद्भरुणा धिनिवेश्चिता ये द्विरदपतय
ऋषमः पुष्करचूडो वामनोऽपराजित इति सकरोकस्ितिदेतवः।।२९॥
tad-uparistac catasrsv asasvatma-yoninakhila-jagad-gurunadhinivesita
ye dvirada-pataya rsabhah puskaraciido vamano ‘pardjita iti sakala-
loka-sthiti- hetavah.

tat-uparistat—on the top of Lokaloka Mountain; catasrsu asasu—in
the four directions: atma-yonina—by Lord Brahma: akhila-jagat-
gurund—the spiritual master of the whole universe: adhinivesitah—es-
tablished: ye—all those: dvirada-patayah—the best of elephants:
rsabhah—Rsabha: puskara-cidah—Puskaracida: vamanah—Vamana;
apardjitah — Aparajita: iti —thus: sakala-loka-sthiti-hetavah —the
causes of the maintenance of the different planets within the universe.

TRANSLATION

On the top of Lokaloka Mountain are the four gaja-patis, the
best of elephants, which were established in the four directions by
Lord Brahma, the supreme spiritual master of the entire universe.
The names of those elephants are Rsabha, Puskaraciida, Vamana
and Aparajita. They are responsible for maintaining the planetary
systems of the universe.

TEXT 40
तेषां स्वविमूतीनां लोकपालानां च विविधवीर्योप्ंदणाय भगवान्‌ परममहा-

च i: EN
पुरुषो महाविभूतिपतिरन्त्याम्यार्मनो विशचद्धसच्वं धर्मज्ञानवैराग्येशवर्या्यष्ट-
. 2
महासिद्धच॒पलक्षणं विष्वक्सेनादिभिः खपाषैदग्रवरेः परिवारितो निजवरायुधो-
- o~
पशोभितैर्निजथजदण्डेः सन्धारयमाणस्तसिन्‌ गिरिवरे समन्तात्सकललोकस्वस्तय
आस्ते ।४०॥


--- Page 316 ---
Text 40] The Structure of the Universe 311
tesarn sva-vibhiitinarn loka-palanar ca vividha-viryopabrrithanaya
bhagavan parama-mahda-puruso maha-vibhiti-patir antaryamy atmano
visuddha-sattvarih dharma-jaana-vairagyaisvaryady-asta-maha-siddhy-
upalaksanam visvaksenadibhih sva-parsada-pravaraih parivdrito nija-
varayudhopasobhitair nija-bhuja-dandaih sandharayamanas tasmin
giri-vare samantat sakala-loka-svastaya daste.

tesam—of all of them: sva-vibhiitinam —who are his personal expan-
sions and assistants: loka-palanam—who are entrusted with looking
after the universal affairs: ca—and: vividha—varieties; virya-
upabrmhanaya—for expanding the powers: bhagavan—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead: parama-maha-purusah—the foremost master
of all kinds of opulence, the Supreme Personality of Godhead: maha-
vibhiti-patih—the master of all inconceivable potencies: antaryami—
the 3৩106150111: atmanah—of Himself: visuddha-sattvam —having an ex-
istence without contamination by the material modes of nature; dharma-
Jjaana-vairagya—of religion, pure knowledge and renunciation:
ai$varya-adi—of all kinds of opulence: asta—eight; maha-siddhi—and
of great mystic perfections: upalaksanam—having the characteristics:
visvaksena-adibhih—by His expansion known as Visvaksena and others:
sva-parsada-pravaraih—the best of personal assistants: parivaritah—
surrounded; nija—His own: vara-ayudha—by different types of weap-
ons: upasobhitaih—being decorated: nija—own: bhuja-dandaih—with
stout arms: sandharayamdanah—manifesting this form: tasmin—on
that; giri-vare—great mountain; samantat—all around: sakala-loka-
svastaye—for the benefit of all the planetary systems: dste—exists.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of all tran-
scendental opulences and the master of the spiritual sky. He is the
Supreme Person, Bhagavan, the Supersoul of everyone. The
demigods, led by Indra, the King of heaven, are entrusted with
seeing to the affairs of the material world. To benefit all living
beings in all the varied planets and to increase the power of those
elephants and of the demigods, the Lord manifests Himself on top
of that mountain in a spiritual body, uncontaminated by the modes
of material nature. Surrounded by His personal expansions and


--- Page 317 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
assistants like Visvaksena, He exhibits all His perfect opulences,
such as religion and knowledge, and His mystic powers such as
anima, laghima and mahima. He is beautifully situated, and He is
decorated by the different weapons in His four hands.
TEXT 41

आकल्पमेवं वेषं गत॒ एष भगवानात्मयोगमायया विरचितवि विधरोक-
॥ le
यात्रागोपीयायेत्यथे : 12201
akalpam evar vesari gata esa bhagavan atma-yogamayaya viracita-
vividha-loka-yatra-gopiyayety arthah.

a-kalpam —for the duration of the time of creation: evam—thus:
vesam —appearance: gatah—has accepted: esah—this: bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead: atma-yoga-mayaya—by His own
spiritual potency: viracita—perfected: vividha-loka-yatra—the liveli-
hood of the various planetary systems: gopiyaya—just to maintain; iti—
thus: arthah—the purpose.

TRANSLATION

The various forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, such
as Narayana and Visnu, are beautifully decorated with different
weapons. The Lord exhibits those forms to maintain all the varied
planets created by His personal potency, yogamaya.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (4.6) Lord Krsna says, sambhavamy atma-mayaya:
=I appear by My internal potency.” The word atma-maya refers to the
Lord’s personal potency, yogamaya. After creating both the material
world and spiritual world through yogamaya, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead personally maintains them by expanding Himself in
different categories as the Visnu mitrtis and the demigods. He maintains
the material creation from beginning to end. and He personally
maintains the spiritual world.


--- Page 318 ---
Text 43] The Structure of the Universe 313
TEXT 42
योऽन्तर्विस्तार एतेन ह्यलोकपरिमाणं च STFA यद्धहिर्लोकारोकाचलात्‌।
ततः परस्ताद्योगेश्वरगतिं विदद्वाघदाहरन्ति ॥४२॥
yo ’ntar-vistara etena hy aloka-parimanam ca vyakhyatar yad bahir
lokalokacalat. tatah parastad yogesvara-gati visuddham udaharanti.
yah—that which; antah-vistarah—the distance inside Lokaloka
Mountain; etena—by this; hi—indeed; aloka-parimanam—the width of
the tract of land known as Aloka-varsa; ca—and: vyakhyatam—de-
scribed; yat—which; bahih—outside: lokaloka-acalat—beyond
Lokaloka Mountain; tatah—that; parastat—beyond; yogesvara-gatim—
the path of Yogesvara (Krsna) in penetrating the coverings of the
universe; visuddham—without material contamination; udaharanti—
they say.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, outside Lokiloka Mountain is the tract of land
known as Aloka-varsa, which extends for the same breadth as the
area within the mountain —in other words, 125,000,000 yojanas
[one billion miles]. Beyond Aloka-varsa is the destination of those
who aspire for liberation from the material world. It is beyond the
jurisdiction of the material modes of nature, and therefore it is
completely pure. Lord Krsna took Arjuna through this place to
bring back the sons of the brahmana.
TEXT 43
. Cees
अण्डमध्यगतः BA चावाभूम्योयदन्तरम्‌ |
©
सर्याण्डगोख्योमेभ्ये Wat: स्यु; पश्चविंशतिः।।४३॥
anda-madhya-gatah siryo
dyav-abhumyor yad antaram
siryanda-golayor madhye
kotyah syuh panca-virmsatih


--- Page 319 ---
314 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20

anda-madhya-gatah—situated in the center of the universe;
siryah—the sun globe; dyav-abhumyoh—the two planetary systems
Bhirloka and Bhuvarloka; yat—which; antaram—in between; sirya—
of the sun: anda-golayoh—and the globe of the universe: madhye—in
the middle; kotyah—groups of ten million: syuh—are; panca-virn-
Satih—twenty-five.

TRANSLATION

The sun is situated [vertically] in the middle of the universe, in
the area between Bhiirloka and Bhuvarloka, which is called an-
tariksa, outer space. The distance between the sun and the circum-
ference of the universe is twenty-five koti yojanas [two billion
miles].

PURPORT

The word koti means ten million, and a yojana is eight miles. The
diameter of the universe is fifty koti yojanas (four billion miles).
Therefore, since the sun is in the middle of the universe, the distance
between the sun and the edge of the universe is calculated to be twenty-
five koti yojanas (two billion miles).

TEXT 44
6,
मृतेऽण्ड एष एतसखिन्‌ यद मूत्ततो মানত इति व्यपदेश्चः |
९
हिरण्यगभे इति यद्धिरण्याण्डसयुद्धवः ।।४४॥
mrte ‘nda esa etasmin yad abhit tato martanda iti vyapadesah.
hiranyagarbha iti yad dhiranyanda-samudbhavah.

mrte—dead; ande—in the globe: esah —this; etasmin—in this; yat—
which; abhiit—entered personally at the time of creation; tatah—from
that; martanda—Martanda; iti—thus; vyapadesah—the designation;
hiranya-garbhah—known as Hiranyagarbha; iti—thus; yat—because:
hiranya-anda-samudbhavah—his material body was created from
Hiranyagarbha.


--- Page 320 ---
Text 45] The Structure of the Universe 315
TRANSLATION
The sun-god is also known as Vairaja, the total material body for
all living entities. Because he entered this dull egg of the universe
at the time of creation, he is also called Martanda. He is also known
as Hiranyagarbha because he received his material body from
Hiranyagarbha [Lord Brahma].
PURPORT
The post of Lord Brahma is meant for very highly elevated, spiritually
advanced living beings. When such living beings are unavailable, Lord
Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, expands Himself as Lord
Brahma. This takes place very rarely. Consequently there are two kinds
of Brahmas. Sometimes Brahma is an ordinary living entity, and at other
times Brahma is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Brahma
spoken of here is an ordinary living being. Whether Brahma is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead or an ordinary living being, he is
known as Vairdja Brahma and Hiranyagarbha Brahma. Therefore the
sun-god is also accepted as Vairaja Brahma.
TEXT 45
ह ५ RC
घर्येण हि विभज्यन्ते दिशः खं ्यौमंही भिदा |
न ও ly
खर्गापव्गो नरका रसौकांसि च सवशः ॥४५॥
saryena hi vibhajyante
disah kham dyaur mahi bhida
svargapavargau naraka
rasaukarisi ca sarvasah
siryena—by the sun-god within the sun planet: hi—indeed; vibha-
Jyvante—are divided: diSah—the directions: kham—the sky: dyauh—
the heavenly planets: mahi—the earthly planets: bhida—other divi-
sions: svarga—the heavenly planets: apavargau—and the places for
liberation: narakah—the hellish planets: rasaukamsi—such as Atala:
ca—also: sarvasah—all.


--- Page 321 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION

O King, the sun-god and the sun planet divide all the directions
of the universe. It is only because of the presence of the sun that
we can understand what the sky, the higher planets, this world and
the lower planets are. It is also only because of the sun that we can
understand which places are for material enjoyment, which are for
liberation, which are hellish and subterranean.

TEXT 46
७ $ i
देवतियं्नुष्याणां सरीसपस्तवीरुधाम्‌ |
९ ক
सवेजीवनिकायानां BF आत्मा TAT ॥४६॥
deva-tiryan-manusyanar
sarisrpa-savirudham
sarva-jiva-nikayanar
siarya atma drg-iSvarah

deva—of the demigods: tiryak—the lower animals: manusyanam—
and the human beings; sarisrpa—the insects and the serpents; sa-
virudham—and the plants and trees: sarva-jiva-nikayanam—of all
groups of living entities; siryah—the sun-god; atma—the life and soul:
drk—of the eyes: isvarah—the Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

All living entities, including demigods, human beings, animals,
birds, insects, reptiles, creepers and trees, depend upon the heat
and light given by the sun-god from the sun planet. Furthermore,
it is because of the sun’s presence that all living entities can see,
and therefore he is called drg-i$vara, the Personality of Godhead
presiding over sight.

PURPORT

In this regard, Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura says, sarya atma
atmatvenopasyah. The actual life and soul of all living entities within
this universe is the sun. He is therefore updasya, worshipable. We wor-


--- Page 322 ---
Text 46] The Structure of the Universe 317
ship the sun-god by chanting the Gayatri mantra (ori bhar bhuvah svah
tat savitur varenyarm bhargo devasya dhimahi). Surya is the life and soul
of this universe, and there are innumerable universes for which a sun-
god is the life and soul, just as the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
life and soul of the entire creation. We have information that Vairaja,
Hiranyagarbha, entered the great, dull, material globe called the sun.
This indicates that the theory held by so-called scientists that no one lives
there is wrong. Bhagavad-gita also says that Krsna first instructed
Bhagavad-gita to the sun-god (imam vivasvate yogam proktavan aham
avyayam). Therefore the sun is not vacant. It is inhabited by living en-
tities, and the predominating deity is Vairaja, or Vivasvan. The
difference between the sun and earth is that the sun is a fiery planet, but
everyone there has a suitable body and can live there without difficulty.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twentieth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, “Studying the Structure of
the Universe.”


--- Page 323 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
The Movements of the Sun
This chapter informs us of the movements of the sun. The sun is not sta-
tionary; it is also moving like the other planets. The sun’s movements
determine the duration of night and day. When the sun travels north of
the equator, it moves slowly during the day and very quickly at night,
thus increasing the duration of the daytime and decreasing the duration
of night. Similarly, when the sun travels south of the equator, the exact
opposite is true—the duration of the day decreases, and the duration of
night increases. When the sun enters Karkata-rasi (Cancer) and then
travels to Simnha-rasi (Leo) and so on through Dhanuh-rasi (Sagittarius),
its course is called Daksinayana, the southern way, and when the sun en-
ters Makara-rasi (Capricorn) and thereafter travels through Kumbha-
1851 (Aquarius) and so on through Mithuna-rasi (Gemini), its course is
called Uttarayana, the northern way. When the sun is in Mesa-rasi
(Aries) and Tula-raséi (Libra), the duration of day and night are equal.

On Manasottara Mountain are the abodes of four demigods. East of
Sumeru Mountain is Devadhani, where King Indra lives, and south of
Sumeru is Sarhyamani, the abode of Yamaraja, the superintendent of
death. Similarly, west of Sumeru is Nimlocani, the abode of Varuna, the
demigod who controls the water, and north of Sumeru is Vibhavari,
where the demigod of the moon lives. Sunrise, noon, sunset and mid-
night occur in all these places because of the movements of the sun.
Diametrically opposite the place where the sunrise takes places and the
sun is seen by human eyes, the sun will be setting and passing away from
human vision. Similarly, the people residing diametrically opposite the
point where it is midday will be experiencing midnight. The sun rises
and sets with all the other planets, headed by the moon and other
luminaries.

The entire kala-cakra, or wheel of time, is established on the wheel of
the sun-god’s chariot. This wheel is known as Samvatsara. The seven
horses pulling the chariot of the sun are known as Gayatri, Brhati,

319


--- Page 324 ---
320 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 21
Usnik, Jagati, Tristup, Anustup and Pankti. They are harnessed by a
demigod known as Arunadeva to a yoke 900,000 yojanas wide. Thus the
chariot carries Adityadeva, the sun-god. Always staying in front of the
sun-god and offering their prayers are sixty thousand sages known as
Vilikhilyas. There are fourteen Gandharvas, Apsaras and other
demigods, who are divided into seven parties and who perform ritualistic
activities every month to worship the Supersoul through the sun-god ac-
cording to different names. Thus the sun-god travels through the
universe for a distance of 95,100,000 yojanas (760,800,000 miles) at a
speed of 16,004 miles at every moment.
TEXT 1

Fw उवाच

एतावानेव भूवलयस्य संनिवेशः प्रमाणलक्षणतो व्याख्यातः ।। १ ॥
sri-suka uvaca

etavan eva bhit-valayasya sannivesah pramana-laksanato
vyakhyatah.

Sri-sukah uvdaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; etdvan—so much;
eva—certainly; bhii-valayasya sannivesah—the arrangement of the
whole universe; pramana-laksanatah—according to measurement (fifty
crores of yojanas, or four billion miles in width and length) and charac-
teristics; vyakhyatah—estimated.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, I have thus far described
the diameter of the universe [fifty crores of yojanas, or four
billion miles] and its general characteristics, according to the
estimations of learned scholars.

TEXT 2
एतेन हि दिवो मण्डलमानं तदिद उपदिशन्ति यथा द्विदल्योनिष्पावादीनां
ते अन्तरेणान्तरिक्षं तदुभयसन्धितम्‌ IR


--- Page 325 ---
Text 3] The Movements of the Sun 321
etena hi divo mandala-manar tad-vida upadisanti yatha dvi-dalayor
nispavadinam te antarenantariksam tad-ubhaya-sandhitam. ॥
etena—by this estimation; hi—indeed; divah—of the upper planetary
system; mandala-manam—the measurement of the globe; tat-vidah—
the experts who know about it; upadiSanti—instruct; yatha—just as;
dvi-dalayoh—in the two halves; nispava-adinam—of grain such as
wheat; te—of the two divisions; antarena—in the intervening space;
antariksam—the sky or outer space; tat—by the two; ubhaya—on both
sides; sandhitam—where the two parts join.
TRANSLATION
As a grain of wheat is divided into two parts and one can estimate
the size of the upper part by knowing that of the lower, so, expert
geographers instruct, one can understand the measurements of
the upper part of the universe by knowing those of the lower part.
The sky between the earthly sphere and heavenly sphere is called
antariksa, or outer space. It adjoins the top of the sphere of earth
and the bottom of that of heaven.
TEXT 3
यन्मध्यगतो भगवां स्तपताम्पतिस्तपन आतपेन त्रिलोकीं प्रतपत्यवभासयत्यारम-
न्ह, . 6. _ *১ Con -
भसासणएष उदगयनदक्षिणायनषुवत स ज्ञाभिमान्यशेध्यसमानाभिगं तिभिरारोदण-
वरोहणसमानस्यानेषु यथासवनममिपद्यमानो मकरादिषु राशिष्वहारात्राणि
दीषेहस्वसमानानि विधत्ते 120
yan-madhya-gato bhagavarms tapatam patis tapana atapena tri-lokim
pratapaty avabhasayaty atma-bhasa sa esa udagayana-daksinayana-
vaisuvata-sarmjaabhir mandya-saighrya-samanabhir gatibhir
arohanavarohana-samana-sthanesu yatha-savanam abhipadyamano
makaradisu rasisv aho-ratrani dirgha-hrasva-samanani vidhatte.
yat—of which (the intermediate space); madhya-gatah—being situ-
ated in the middle; bhagavan—the most powerful; tapatam patih—the
master of those that heat the whole universe; tapanah—the sun:
atapena—by heat: tri-lokim—the three worlds: pratapati—heats:


--- Page 326 ---
322 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 21
avabhasayati—lights; atma-bhasa—by its own illuminating rays; sah —
that; esah—the sun globe; udagayana—of passing to the northern side
of the equator; daksina-ayana—of passing to the southern side of the
equator; vaisuvata—or of passing through the equator; saryjiabhih—by
different names; mandya—characterized by slowness; Saighrya—swift-
ness; samanabhih—and by equality; gatibhih—by movement;
arohana—of rising; avarohana—of going down; samana—or of staying
in the middle; sthanesu—in positions; yatha-savanam—according to the
order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhipadyamanah—mov-
ing; makara-adisu—headed by the sign Makara (Capricorn); rdsisu—in
different signs; ahah-ratrani—the days and nights; dirgha—long;
hrasva—short; samanani—equal; vidhatte—makes.
TRANSLATION
In the midst of that region of outer space [antariksa] is the most
opulent sun, the king of all the planets that emanate heat, such as
the moon. By the influence of its radiation, the sun heats the
universe and maintains its proper order. It also gives light to help
all living entities see. While passing toward the north, toward the
south or through the equator, in accordance with the order of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, it is said to move slowly, swiftly
or moderately. According to its movements in rising above, going
beneath or passing through the equator—and correspondingly
coming in touch with various signs of the zodiac, headed by
Makara [Capricorn] —days and nights are short, long or equal to
one another.
PURPORT
Lord Brahma prays in his Brahma-sarihita (5.52):
yac caksur esa savita sakala-grahanarm
raja samasta-sura-miirtir asesa-tejah
yasyajiaya bhramati saribhrta-kala-cakro
govindam adi-purusam tam ahari bhajami
“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead under whose control even the sun, which is considered to be the


--- Page 327 ---
Text 4] The Movements of the Sun 323
eye of the Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time. The sun is
the king of all planetary systems and has unlimited potency in heat and
light.” Although the sun is described as bhagavan, the most powerful,
and although it is actually the most powerful planet within the universe,
it nevertheless has to carry out the order of Govinda, Krsna. The sun-god
cannot deviate even an inch from the orbit designated to him. Therefore
in every sphere of life, the supreme order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is carried out. The entire material nature carries out His orders.
However, we foolishly see the activities of material nature without un-
derstanding the supreme order and Supreme Person behind them. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, mayadhyaksena prakrtih: material nature
carries out the orders of the Lord, and thus everything is maintained in
an orderly way.
TEXT 4
९९ = = =
यदा मेषतुरयोवेतते तदाहोरात्राणि समानानि भवन्ति यद्‌. दृषभादिषु
3 = N

पञ्चसु च राशिषु चरति तदाहान्येव F971 हसति च मासि मास्येकेका घटिका
रात्रिषु ng
yada mesa-tulayor vartate tadaho-ratrani samanani bhavanti yada
vrsabhadisu paicasu ca rasisu carati tadahany eva vardhante hrasati ca
71052 masy ekaika ghatika ratrisu.

yada—when; mesa-tulayoh—in Mesa (Aries) and Tula (Libra); var-
tate—the sun exists; tada—at that time; ahah-ratrani—the days and
nights; samanani—equal in duration; bhavanti—are; yada—when:
vrsabha-adisu —headed by Vrsabha (Taurus) and Mithuna (Gemini);
pancasu—in the five; ca—also; rasisu—signs; carati—moves; tadd—at
that time; ahani—the days; eva—certainly; vardhante—increase:
hrasati—is diminished; ca—and; mdsi masi—in every month; eka-
eka —one; ghatika—half hour; ratrisu—in the nights.

TRANSLATION

When the sun passes through Mesa [Aries] and Tula [Libra], the
durations of day and night are equal. When it passes through the
five signs headed by Vrsabha [Taurus], the duration of the days


--- Page 328 ---
324. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 21
increases [until Cancer], and then it gradually decreases by half
an hour each month, until day and night again become equal [in
Libra].
TEXT 5
श. ८४. ५

यदा व्रृिकादिषु पञ्चसु वतेते तदाहोरात्राणि बिपयेयाणि मवन्ति ॥ ५ ॥
yada vricikadisu [०८१८९5८ vartate tadaho-ratrani viparyayani bhavanti.

yada —when; vrscika-adisu—headed by Vrécika (Scorpio);
pancasu—five; vartate—remains; tadd—at that time; ahah-ratrani—
the days and nights; viparyayani—the opposite (the duration of the day
decreases, and that of night increases); bhavanti—are.

TRANSLATION

When the sun passes through the five signs beginning with
Vrécika [Scorpio], the duration of the days decreases [until
Capricorn], and then gradually it increases month after month,
until day and night become equal [in Aries].

TEXT 6
यावदक्षिणायनमहानि वधन्ते यावदुदगयनं रात्रयः ॥ & ॥

yavad daksinayanam ahani vardhante yavad udagayanam ratrayah.

yavat—until; daksina-ayanam—the sun passes to the southern side;
ahani—the days; vardhante—increase; yavat—until; udagayanam—
the sun passes to the northern side; ratrayah—the nights.

TRANSLATION

Until the sun travels to the south the days grow longer, and until

it travels to the north the nights grow longer.


--- Page 329 ---
Text 7] The Movements of the Sun 325
TEXT 7

4 ५ 4 ক
एवं नव कोटय एकपचाशद्छक्षाणि योजनानां मानसोत्तर-
गिरिपरिर्वनस्योपदिश्चन्ति तसिननन्द्रौ पुरीं पूर्वसान्मेरोर्देवधानीं
नाम दक्षिणतो याम्यां संयमनीं नाम पश्चादारुणीं निम्लोचनीं नाम उत्तरतः
सौम्यां विभावरीं नाम ताघ्ठदयमध्याहास्तमयनिश्षीथानीति भूतानां प्रवृत्तिनि
धत्तिनिमित्तानि समयविद्रोषेण मेरोधतुर्दिशम्‌ ।॥ ७ ॥

evar nava kotaya eka-paricasal-laksani yojananarm manasottara-
giri-parivartanasyopadisanti tasminn aindriri puri piirvasman meror
devadhanim nama daksinato yamyar sarmyamanirm nama pascad
varunirh nimlocanim nama uttaratah saumyar vibhavarir nama
tasudaya-madhyahnastamaya-nisithaniti bhitanarm pravrtti-nivrtti-
nimittani samaya-visesena 771९705 catur-disam.

evam—thus; nava—nine; kotayah—ten millions; eka-paricdsat—
fifty-one; laksani—hundred thousands; yojananam—of the yojanas;
manasottara-giri—of the mountain known as Manasottara; parivar-
tanasya—of the circumambulation; upadisanti—they (learned scholars)
teach; tasmin—on that (Manasottara Mountain); aindrim—of King In-
dra; purim—the city; pirvasmat—on the eastern side; meroh—of
Sumeru Mountain; devadhanim—Devadhani; nama—of the name;
daksinatah—on the southern side; yamyam—of Yamaraja; sarmya-
manim—Sarmyamani; ndma—named; pascat—on the western side:
varunim—of Varuna; nimlocanim—Nimlocani; nama—named; ut-
taratah—on the northern side; saumyam—of the moon: vibhavarim—
Vibhavari; nama—named; tasu—in all of them; udaya—rising;
madhyahna—midday; astamaya—sunset; nisithani—midnight: iti—
thus; bhiitanam—of the living entities; pravrtti—of activity: nivrtti—
and cessation of activity; nimittani—the causes; samaya-visesena—by
the particular times; meroh—of Sumeru Mountain; catuh-disam—the
four sides.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued; My dear King, as stated before,

the learned say that the sun travels over all sides of Manasottara


--- Page 330 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 21
Mountain in a circle whose length is 95,100,000 yojanas
[760,800,000 miles]. On Manasottara Mountain, due east of Mount
Sumeru, is a place known as Devadhani, possessed by King Indra.
Similarly, in the south is a place known as Sarnyamani, possessed
by Yamaraja, in the west is a place known as Nimlocani, possessed
by Varuna, and in the north is a place named Vibhavari, possessed
by the moon-god. Sunrise, midday, sunset and midnight occur in
all those places according to specific times, thus engaging all living
entities in their various occupational duties and also making them
cease such duties.
॥
TEXTS 8-9
तत्रत्यानां दिवसमध्यङ्गत एव सदाऽऽदित्यस्तपति सव्येनाचलं दक्षिणेन करोति
Nell यत्रोदेति तस्य ह॒ समानसूत्रनिपाते निम्लोचति यत्र॒ कचन
3 +

खन्देनाभितपति तस्य हेष समानघ्त्रनिपाते प्रखापयति तत्र गतं न परयन्ति
ये तं समनुपश्येरन्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
tatratyanam divasa-madhyargata eva sadadityas tapati savyendacalam
daksinena karoti. yatrodeti tasya ha samana-sitra-nipate nimlocati
yatra kvacana syandenabhitapati tasya haisa samana-sitra-nipate
prasvapayati tatra gatarin na pasyanti ye tam samanupasyeran.

tatratyanam—for the living entities residing on Mount Meru; divasa-
madhyangatah—being positioned as at midday; eva—indeed; sada—al-
ways; adityah—the sun; tapati—heats; savyena—to the left side;
acalam—Sumeru Mountain; daksinena—to the right (being forced by
wind blowing to the right, the sun moves to the right); karoti—moves;
yatra—the point where; udeti—it rises; tasya—of that position; ha—
certainly; samana-sitra-nipate—at the diametrically opposite point;
nimlocati—the sun sets; yatra—where; kvacana—somewhere; syan-
dena—with perspiration; abhitapati—heats (at midday); tasya—of
that; ha—certainly; esah—this (the sun); samana-sitra-nipate—at the
diametrically opposite point; prasvapayati—the sun causes to sleep (as at
midnight); tatra—there; gatam—gone; na pasyanti—do not see; ye —
who; tam —the sunset; samanupasyeran —seeing.


--- Page 331 ---
Text 10] The Movements of the Sun 327
TRANSLATION

The living entities residing on Sumeru Mountain are always very
warm, as at midday, because for them the sun is always overhead.
Although the sun moves counterclockwise, facing the constella-
tions, with Sumeru Mountain on its left, it also moves clockwise
and appears to have the mountain on its right because it is in-
fluenced by the daksinavarta wind. People living in countries at
points diametrically opposite to where the sun is first seen rising
will see the sun setting, and if a straight line were drawn from a
point where the sun is at midday, the people in countries at the op-
posite end of the line would be experiencing midnight. Similarly,
if people residing where the sun is setting were to go to countries
diametrically opposite, they would not see the sun in the same
condition.

TEXT 10
यदा A gal: प्रचरते पञ्चदशघटिकाभिरयाम्यां सपाद कोटिदधयं
9 (स -

योजनानां साधेदादज्ञलक्षाणि साधिकानि चोपयाति ॥ १० ॥

yada caindryah puryah pracalate paiicadasa-ghatikabhir yamyari
sapada-koti-dvayarm yojananar sardha-dvadasa-laksani sadhikani
copayati.

yada—when; ca—and; aindryah—of Indra; puryah—from the resi-
dence; pracalate—it moves; paiicadasa—by fifteen; ghatikabhih—half
hours (actually twenty-four minutes); y@myam—to the residence of
Yamaraja; sapada-koti-dvayam—two and a quarter crores (22,500,000);
yojananam—of yojanas; sardha—and one half; dvadasa-laksani—
twelve hundred thousand; sadhikani—twenty-five thousand more; ca—
and; upayati—he passes over.

TRANSLATION

When the sun travels from Devadhani, the residence of Indra, to
Sarnyamani, the residence of Yamaraja, it travels 23,775,000 yo-
janas [190,200,000 miles] in fifteen ghatikas [six hours].


--- Page 332 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 21
PURPORT
The distance indicated by the word sadhikani is pafica-virnsati-
sahasradhikani, or 25,000 yojanas. That plus two and a half crores and
twelve and a half laksa of yojanas is the distance the sun travels between
each two cities. This comes to 23,775,000 yojanas, or 190,200,000 miles.
The total orbit of the sun is four times that distance, or 95,100,000 yo-
Janas (760,800.000 miles).
TEXT 11
৬ 9 oe - -
एवं ततो वारुणीं सौम्यामेन्द्रीं च पुनस्तथान्ये च ग्रहाः सोमादयो
EN - =
नक्षत्रैः सह॒ ifaw ! समभ्युद्यन्ति सह वा निम्लोचन्ति ॥११॥
০৮৫71 1010 varunir saumyam aindriri ca punas tathanye ca grahah
somadayo naksatraih saha jyotis-cakre samabhyudyanti saha va nimlo-
canti.
evam—in this way; tatah—from there; varunim—to the quarters
where Varuna lives; saumyam—to the quarters where the moon lives;
aindrim ca—and to the quarters where Indra lives; punah—again;
tatha—so also; anye—the others; ca—also; grahah—planets; soma-
adayah—headed by the moon; naksatraih—all the stars; saha—with;
Jyotih-cakre—in the celestial sphere; samabhyudyanti—rise; saha—
along with; va—or; nimlocanti—set.
TRANSLATION
From the residence of Yamaraja the sun travels to Nimlocani, the
residence of Varuna, from there to Vibhavari, the residence of the
moon-god, and from there again to the residence of Indra. In a
similar way, the moon, along with the other stars and planets,
becomes visible in the celestial sphere and then sets and again
becomes invisible.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (10.21) Krsna says, naksatranam aham Sasi: “01
stars | am the moon.” This indicates that the moon is similar to the other


--- Page 333 ---
Text 13] The Movements of the Sun 329
stars. The Vedic literature informs us that within this universe there is
one sun, which is moving. The Western theory that all the luminaries in
the sky are different suns is not confirmed in the Vedic literature. Nor
can we assume that these luminaries are the suns of other universes, for
each universe is covered by various layers of material elements, and
therefore although the universes are clustered together, we cannot see
from one universe to another. In other words, whatever we see is within
this one universe. In each universe there is one Lord Brahma, and there
are other demigods on other planets, but there is only one sun.
TEXT 12

७ = = नि १६

एवं मुहूर्तेन चतुस्त्िश्टक्षयोजनान्यषटश्चताधिकानि सौरो रथस्रयीमयोऽसौी चतसृषु
S

परिवतेते पुरीषु ॥१२॥
evan muhirtena catus-trirhsal-laksa-yojanany asta-satadhikani sauro
rathas trayimayo 5018 catasrsu parivartate purisu.

evam—thus; muhirtena—in a muhirta (forty-eight minutes):
catuh-trimsat—thirty-four; laksa—hundred thousands: yojanani—
yojanas; asta-Sata-dhikani—increased by eight hundred; saurah
rathah—the chariot of the sun-god; trayi-mayah—which is worshiped
by the Gayatri mantra (ori bhir bhuvah svah tat savitur, etc.): asau—
that; catasrsu—to the four; parivartate—he moves: purisu—through
different residential quarters.

TRANSLATION

Thus the chariot of the sun-god, which is trayimaya, or
worshiped by the words or bhiir bhuvah svah, travels through the
four residences mentioned above at a speed of 3,400,800 yojanas
[27,206,400 miles] in a muhiirta.

TEXT 13
यस्यैकं चक्र द्वाद शारं षण्नेमि त्रिणाभि संवत्सरा स्मकं
- <
समामनन्ति तस्याक्षो मेरोमूधैनि कृतो मानसोत्तरे कृतेतरभागो यत्र
+ . A = 2

प्रोतं रविरथचक्रं तेलयन्त्रचकवद्‌ श्रमन्मानसोत्तरगिरो परिभ्रमति १३।


--- Page 334 ---
330 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 21

yasyaikari cakrari dvadasarari san-nemi tri-nabhi
sarwvatsaratmakari samamananti tasyakso meror miardhani krto
manasottare krtetara-bhago yatra protari ravi-ratha-cakram taila-
yantra-cakravad bhraman manosottara-girau paribhramati.

yasya—of which; ekam—one; cakram—wheel; dvadasa—twelve;
aram—spokes; sat—six; nemi—the segments of the rim; tri-nabhi—the
three pieces of the hub; saratsara-atmakam—whose nature is a sari-
vatsara; samamananti—they fully describe; tasya—the chariot of the
sun-god; aksah—the axle; meroh—of Sumeru Mountain; miardhani—
on the top; krtah—fixed; manasottare—on the mountain known as
Manasottara; krta—fixed; itara-bhagah—the other end; yatra—where;
protam—fixed on; ravi-ratha-cakram—the wheel of the chariot of the
sun-god; taila-yantra-cakra-vat—like the wheel of an oil-pressing
machine; bhramat—moving; manasottara-girau—on Manasottara
Mountain; paribhramati—turns.

TRANSLATION

The chariot of the sun-god has only one wheel, which is known
as Sariivatsara. The twelve months are calculated to be its twelve
spokes, the six seasons are the sections of its rim, and the three
catur-masya periods are its three-sectioned hub. One side of the
axle carrying the wheel rests upon the summit of Mount Sumeru,
and the other rests upon Manasottara Mountain. Affixed to the
outer end of the axle, the wheel continuously rotates on Manasot-
tara Mountain like the wheel of an oil-pressing machine.

TEXT 14
a

तसिननक्षे कृतमूलो द्वितीयोऽक्षस्तुय॑मानेन सम्मितस्तैलयन्त्राक्षवद्‌ धरुवे

IN
कृतोपरिभागः ॥ १४ ॥
tasminn akse krtamiilo dvitiyo ’ksas turyamanena sammitas taila-
yantraksavad dhruve krtopari-bhagah.

tasmin akse—in that axle; krta-miillah—whose base is fixed;
dvitiyah—a second; aksah—axle; turyamanena—by one fourth; sam-


--- Page 335 ---
Text 15] The Movements of the Sun 331
mitah—measured; taila-yantra-aksa-vat—like the axle of an oil-
pressing machine; dhruve—to Dhruvaloka; krta—fixed; upari-
bhagah—upper portion.
TRANSLATION

As in an oil-pressing machine, this first axle is attached to a sec-
ond axle, which is one-fourth as long [3,937,500 yojanas, or
31,500,000 miles]. The upper end of this second axle is attached
to Dhruvaloka by a rope of wind.

TEXT 15
रथनीडस्तु षटत्रिशष्टक्षथोजनायतस्तत्तरीयभागवि्ालस्तावान्‌ रविरथयुगो

यत्र हयाश्छन्दोनामानः सप्तारुणयोजिता वहन्ति देवमादित्यम्‌ ।॥ १५॥

ratha-nidas tu sat-trimsal-laksa-yojandyatas tat-turiya-bhaga-visalas
tavan ravi-ratha-yugo yatra hayas chando-namanah saptaruna-yojita
vahanti devam adityam.

ratha-nidah—the interior of the chariot; tu—but; sat-trimsat-laksa-
yojana-ayatah—3,600,000  yojanas long; tat-turiya-bhaga—one
quarter of that measure (900,000 yojanas); visalah—having a width;
tavan—so much also; ravi-ratha-yugah—the yoke for the horses:
yatra—where;  hayah—horses; chandah-namanah—having the
different names of Vedic meters; sapta—seven; aruna-yojitah—hooked
up by Arunadeva; vahanti—carry; devam—the demigod; adityam—the
sun-god.

TRANSLATION

My dear King, the carriage of the sun-god’s chariot is estimated
to be 3,600,000 yojanas [28,800,000 miles] long and one-fourth
as wide [900,000 yojanas, or 7,200,000 miles]. The chariot’s
horses, which are named after Gayatri and other Vedic meters, are
harnessed by Arunadeva to a yoke that is also 900,000 yojanas
wide. This chariot continuously carries the sun-god.


--- Page 336 ---
332 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 21
PURPORT
In the Visnu Purana it is stated:
gayatri ca brhaty usnig
jagati tristup eva ca
anustup panktir ity uktas
chandamsi harayo raveh
The seven horses yoked to the sun-god’s chariot are named Gayatri,
Brhati, Usnik, Jagati, Tristup, Anustup and Pankti. These names of
various Vedic meters designate the seven horses that carry the sun-god’s
chariot.
TEXT 16
9
पुरस्तात्सवितुररुणः पशाच नियुक्तः सौत्ये कमणि किलास्ते ॥१६॥
purastat savitur arunah pascac ca niyuktah sautye karmani kilaste.
purastat—in front; savituh—of the sun-god; arunah—the demigod
named Aruna; paScat—looking backward; ca—and; niyuktah—
engaged; sautye—of a charioteer; karmani—in the work; kila—cer-
tainly; dste—remains.
TRANSLATION
Although Arunadeva sits in front of the sun-god and is engaged
in driving the chariot and controlling the horses, he looks back-
ward toward the sun-god.
PURPORT
In the Vayu Purana the position of the horses is described:
saptasva-rapa-cchandarsi
vahante vamato ravim
cakra-paksa-nibaddhani
cakre vaksah samahitah


--- Page 337 ---
Text 18] The Movements of the Sun 333
Although Arunadeva is in the front seat, controlling the horses, he looks
back toward the sun-god from his left side.
TEXT 17

तथा वालखिटया ऋषयोऽङगषठपर्वमात्राः (RARE पुरतः यं छक्तवाकाय
नियुक्ताः संस्तुवन्ति ॥ १७॥
tatha valakhilya rsayo rigustha-parva-matrah sasti-sahasrani puratah
siryam sikta-vakaya niyuktah samstuvanti.

tatha—there; valikhilyah—Valikhilyas; rsayah—great sages;
angustha-parva-matrah—whose size is that of a thumb; sasti-
sahasrani—sixty thousand; puratah—in front; siryam—the sun-god;
su-ukta-vakaya—for speaking eloquently; niyuktah—engaged; samstu-
vanti—offer prayers.

TRANSLATION

There are sixty thousand saintly persons named Valikhilyas,
each the size of a thumb, who are located in front of the sun-god
and who offer him eloquent prayers of glorification.

TEXT 18
LY
तथान्ये च ऋषयो गन्धर्वाप्सरसो नागा ग्रामण्यो यातुधाना देवा शत्येकेकलो
Ly 4 ৬ (|

गणाः सप्त चतुर्दश मासि मासि भगवन्तं बर्यमात्मानं नानानामानं पथङनाना
नामानः प्रथक्‌ कर्ममिदनद्श उपासते ॥१८॥
tathanye ca rsayo gandharvapsaraso naga gramanyo yatudhana deva
ity ekaikaso ganah sapta caturdasa masi masi bhagavantarh siiryam
atmanam nanda-namanam prthan-nana-namanah prthak-karmabhir
dvandvasa updsate.

tatha—similarly; anye—others; ca—also; rsayah—saintly persons:
gandharva-apsarasah—Gandharvas and Apsaras; nagah—Naga snakes:
gramanyah—Yaksas; yatudhanah—Raksasas; devah—demigods: iti—


--- Page 338 ---
334 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 21
thus; eka-ekasah—one by one; ganah—groups; sapta—seven; catur-
dasa—fourteen in number; 71058 masi—in every month; bhagavan-
tam —unto the most powerful demigod; siryam—the sun-god; at-
manam—the life of the universe; nanda—various; namanam—who
possesses names; prthak—separate; nana-namanah—having various
names; prthak—separate; karmabhih—by ritualistic ceremonies;
dvandvasah—in groups of two; updsate —worship.
TRANSLATION
Similarly, fourteen other saints, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Nagas,
Yaksas, Raksasas and demigods, who are divided into groups of
two, assume different names every month and continuously per-
form different ritualistic ceremonies to worship the Supreme Lord
as the most powerful demigod Siiryadeva, who holds many names.
PURPORT
In the Visnu Purana it is said:
stuvanti munayah siryari
gandharvair giyate purah
nrtyanto ‘psaraso yanti
siryasyanu nisacarah
vahanti pannaga yaksaih
kriyate ’bhisusarngrahah
valikhilyas tathaivainari
parivarya 50771050146
so 'yam sapta-ganah siurya-
mandale muni-sattama
himosna vari-vrstinari
hetutve samayarm gatah
Worshiping the most powerful demigod Surya, the Gandharvas sing in
front of him, the Apsaras dance before the chariot, the Nisacaras follow
the chariot, the Pannagas decorate the chariot, the Yaksas guard the


--- Page 339 ---
Text 19] The Movements of the Sun 335
chariot, and the saints called the Valikhilyas surround the sun-god and
offer prayers. The seven groups of fourteen associates arrange the proper
times for regular snow, heat and rain throughout the universe.
TEXT 19
न ५१४ | নে

लक्षोत्तरं साधनवकोरियोजनपरिमण्डरं भूवलयस्य क्षणेन सगव्युत्यु्तरं द्विसहसर
योजनानि स 9 ॥ १९॥
laksottarari sardha-nava-koti-yojana-parimandalar bhi-valayasya
ksanena sagavyuty-uttaram dvi-sahasra-yojanani sa bhurikte.

laksa-uttaram —increased by 100,000; sardha—with 5,000,000;
nava-koti-yojana—of 90,000,000 yojanas; parimandalam—circum-
ference; bhi-valayasya—of the earthly sphere; ksanena—in one
moment; sagavyiti-uttaram—augmented by two krosas (four miles);
dvi-sahasra-yojanani—2,000 yojanas; sah—the sun-god: bhurikte—
traverses.

TRANSLATION

My dear King, in his orbit through Bhamandala, the sun-god
traverses a distance of 95,100,000 yojanas [760,800,000 miles] at
the speed of 2,000 yojanas and two kro$as [16,004 miles] in a
moment.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-first
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, ‘The Movements of the
Sun.”


--- Page 340 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
The Orbits of the Planets
In this chapter the orbits of the planets are described. According to the
movements of the moon and other planets, all the inhabitants of the
universe are prone to auspicious and inauspicious situations. This is
referred to as the influence of the stars.

The sun-god, who controls the affairs of the entire universe, especially
in regard to heat, light, seasonal changes and so on, is considered an ex-
pansion of Narayana. He represents the three Vedas—Rg, Yajur and
Sama —and therefore he is known as Trayimaya, the form of Lord
Narayana. Sometimes the sun-god is also called Surya Narayana. The
sun-god has expanded himself in twelve divisions, and thus he controls
the six seasonal changes and causes winter, summer, rain and so on.
Yogis and karmis following the varnasrama institution, who practice
hatha or astarga-yoga or who perform agnihotra sacrifices, worship
Surya Narayana for their own benefit. The demigod Surya is always in
touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana. Residing in
outer space, which is in the middle of the universe, between Bhiloka and
Bhuvarloka, the sun rotates through the time circle of the zodiac, repre-
sented by twelve rasis, or signs, and assumes different names according
to the sign he is in. For the moon, every month is divided into two
fortnights. Similarly, according to solar calculations, a month is equal to
the time the sun spends in one constellation; two months constitute one
season, and there are twelve months in a year. The entire area of the sky
is divided into two halves, each representing an ayana, the course tra-
versed by the sun within a period of six months. The sun travels some-
times slowly, sometimes swiftly and sometimes at a moderate speed. In
this way it travels within the three worlds, consisting of the heavenly
planets, the earthly planets and outer space. These orbits are referred to
by great learned scholars by the names 9९815878, Parivatsara, Idavat-
sara, Anuvatsara and Vatsara.

The moon is situated 100,000 yojanas above the rays of the sunshine.
Day and night on the heavenly planets and Pitrloka are calculated ac-

337


--- Page 341 ---
338 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 22
cording to its waning and waxing. Above the moon by a distance of
200,000 yojanas are some stars, and above these stars is Sukra-graha
(Venus), whose influence is always auspicious for the inhabitants of the
entire universe. Above Sukra-graha by 200,000 yojanas is Budha-graha
(Mercury), whose influence is sometimes auspicious and sometimes in-
auspicious. Next, above Budha-graha by 200,000 yojanas, is Angaraka
(Mars), which almost always has an unfavorable influence. Above
Angaraka by another 200,000 yojanas is the planet called Brhaspati-
graha (Jupiter), which is always very favorable for qualified brahmanas.
Above Brhaspati-graha is the planet Sanaiécara (Saturn), which is very
inauspicious, and above Saturn is a group of seven stars occupied by
great saintly persons who are always thinking of the welfare of the entire
universe. These seven stars circumambulate Dhruvaloka, which is the
residence of Lord Visnu within this universe.
TEXT 1
राजोवाच
यदेतदद्भगबत आदित्यस्य मेरं धुवं च प्रदक्षिणेन परिक्रामतो
राशीनामभिशखं प्रचरितं चाप्रदक्षिणं भगवतोपवणितमयुष्य वयं कथमनु-
मिमीमहीति ॥ १॥
rajocaca
yad etad bhagavata adityasya meruri dhruvam ca pradaksinena
parikramato rasinam abhimukhar pracalitarh capradaksinarn
bhagavatopavarnitam amusya vayari katham anumimimahiti.
raja uvaca—the King (Maharaja Pariksit) inquired; yat—which;
etat—this; bhagavatah—of the most powerful; adityasya—of the sun
(ऽप Narayana); merum —the mountain known as Sumeru; dhruvam
ca—as well as the planet known as Dhruvaloka; pradaksinena—by plac-
ing on the right; parikramatah—which is going around; rasinam—the
different signs of the zodiac; abhimukham—facing toward; pra-
calitam—moving; ca—and; apradaksinam—placing on the left;
bhagavata—by Your Lordship; upavarnitam—described; amusya—of
that; vayam—we (the hearer); katham—how; anumimimahi—can ac-
cept it by argument and inference; iti—thus.


--- Page 342 ---
Text 2] The Orbits of the Planets 339
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami: My dear lord,
you have already affirmed the truth that the supremely powerful
sun-god travels around Dhruvaloka with both Dhruvaloka and
Mount Sumeru on his right. Yet at the same time the sun-god faces
the signs of the zodiac and keeps Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on his
left. How can we reasonably accept that the sun-god proceeds
with Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on both his left and right
simultaneously?
TEXT 2
स होवाच
= 9 1 :
यथा कुलालचक्रेण श्रमता सह भ्रमतां तदाश्रयाणां पिपीलिकादीनां
EN pod त
गतिरन्यैव शरदेशान्तरेष्वप्युपटम्यमानतदेषं नकषत्रराशिभिरुपलक्षितेन
कालचक्रेण धुवं मरं च प्रदक्षिणेन परिधावता सह॒ परिथादमानानां
. + . IY
तदाश्रयाणां EEA ग्रहाणां गतिरन्यैव नशत्रान्तरे राश्यन्तरे
चोपलभ्यमानत्वात्‌ ॥ २॥
sa hovaca
yatha kulala-cakrena bhramata saha bhramatar tad-asrayanarm
pipilikadinarh gatir anyaiva pradesantaresv apy upalabhyamanatvad
evarn naksatra-rasibhir upalaksitena kala-cakrena dhruvarm meruri ca
pradaksinena paridhavata saha paridhavamananarm tad-asrayanarm
58770080727) grahanam gatir anyaiva naksatrantare rasy-antare
copalabhyamanatvat.
sah—Sukadeva Gosvami; ha—very clearly; uvdca—answered;
yatha—just as; kulala-cakrena—a potter’s wheel; bhramata—turning
around; saha—with; bhramatam—of those turning around; tat-
asrayanam—being located on that (wheel); pipilika-adinam—of small
ants; gatih—the motion; anya —other; eva—certainly; pradesa-an-
taresu—in different locations; api—also; upalabhyamanatvat—due to
being experienced; evam—similarly; naksatra-rasibhih—by the stars
and signs; upalaksitena—being seen; kala-cakrena—with the great


--- Page 343 ---
340 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.22
wheel of time; dhruvam —the star known as Dhruvaloka; merum—the
mountain known as Sumeru; ca—and; pradaksinena—on the right;
paridhavata —going around; saha—with; paridhavamananam—of
those going around; tat-asrayanam—whose shelter is that wheel of
time; sirya-adinam—headed by the sun; grahanam—of the planets;
gatih—the motion; anya —other; eva—certainly; naksatra-antare—in
different stars; rdsi-antare—in different signs; ca—and;
upalabhyamanatvat—due to being observed.
TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami clearly answered: When a potter’s wheel
is moving and small ants located on that big wheel are moving with
it, one can see that their motion is different from that of the wheel
because they appear sometimes on one part of the wheel and some-
times on another. Similarly, the signs and constellations, with
Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on their right, move with the wheel of
time, and the antlike sun and other planets move with them. The
sun and planets, however, are seen in different signs and constella-
tions at different times. This indicates that their motion is
different from that of the zodiac and the wheel of time itself.

TEXT 3

स एष मगवानादि पुरुष एव साक्षान्नारायणो लोकानां खस्तय आत्मानं त्रयीमयं
कर्मबिञद्धिनिमित्तं करिभिरपि च वेदेन विजिज्ञाखमानो दादशधा
विभज्य 28 बसन्तादिष्ठृतुषु यथोपजोषर्तण्णान्‌ विदधाति ॥ ३ ॥
sa esa bhagavan adi-purusa eva saksan narayano lokanam svastaya
atmanam trayimayari karma-visuddhi-nimittarn kavibhir api ca vedena
vijijiasyamano dvadasadha vibhajya satsu vasantadisv rtusu yathopa-
Jjosam rtu-gunan vidadhati.

sah—that; esah—this; bhagavan—the supremely powerful; adi-
purusah—the original person; eva—certainly; saksat—directly;
narayanah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana;
lokanam—of all the planets; svastaye—for the benefit; atmanam—


--- Page 344 ---
Text 4] The Orbits of the Planets 341
Himself; trayi-mayam—consisting of the three Vedas (Sama, Yajur and
Rg); karma-visuddhi—of purification of fruitive activities; nimittam—
the cause; kavibhih—by great saintly persons; api—also; ca—and;
vedena—by Vedic knowledge; vijyiasyamanah—being inquired about;
dvadasa-dha—in twelve divisions; vibhajya—dividing; satsu—in six;
vasanta-adisu—headed by spring; rtusu—seasons; yatha-upajosam—
according to the enjoyment of their past activities; rtu-gundan—the
qualities of the different seasons; vidadhati—he arranges.
TRANSLATION

The original cause of the cosmic manifestation is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Narayana. When great saintly persons,
fully aware of the Vedic knowledge, offered prayers to the
Supreme Person, He descended to this material world in the form
of the sun to benefit all the planets and purify fruitive activities.
He divided Himself into twelve parts and created seasonal forms,
beginning with spring. In this way He created the seasonal
qualities, such as heat, cold and so on.

TEXT 4
EY Ly
तमेतमिह पुरुषास्रय्या धि दयया व्णाश्रमाचाराचुपथा उचावचैः कर्मभिरान्नातै-
-

्योगवितानेश श्रद्धया यजन्तोऽञ्जसा श्रेयः समधिगच्छन्ति || ४ ॥
tam etam tha purusas 74/30 vidyayd varndsramacaranupatha
uccavacaih karmabhir amnatair yoga-vitanais ca sraddhaya yajanto
’Ajasa 57६१2 samadhigacchanti.

tam —Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); etam —this; iha—
in this world of mortality; purusah—all people; trayya—having three
divisions; vidyaya—by the Vedic knowledge; varna-asrama-acara—the
practices of the wvarndsrama system; anupathah—following; ucca-
avacaih—higher or lower according to the different positions in the var-
nasrama-dharma (brahmana, ksatriya, vaiS§ya and = ङ्का); kar-
mabhih—Dby their respective activities; amnataih—handed down; yoga-
vitanaih—by meditation and other yogic processes; ca—and: $700-


--- Page 345 ---
342 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 22
dhaya—with great faith; yajantah —worshiping; aijasda —without
difficulty; Sreyah —the ultimate benefit of life; samadhigacchanti—they
attain.
TRANSLATION

According to the system of four varnas and four aSramas, people
generally worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana,
who is situated as the sun-god. With great faith they worship the
Supreme Personality as the Supersoul according to ritualistic
ceremonies handed down in the three Vedas, such as agnihotra and
similar higher and lower fruitive acts, and according to the process
of mystic yoga. In this way they very easily attain the ultimate goal
of life.

TEXT 5
अथ स एप आत्मा लोकानां चाबाए्थिन्योरन्तरेण नमोवरयस्य काल-
৬ 9. 9
चक्रगतो TET मासान्‌ शङ्के राशिसंजञान्‌ संबत्सरावयवान्मास : ঘষত্তণ दिवा
. ५५ EY

T% AM सपादर्षद्यञ्चपदिशन्ति যায়না qed gdm स वै
ऋतुरित्युपदिस्यते संवत्सरावयवः ॥ ५ ॥
atha sa esa atma lokanar dyav-aprthivyor antarena nabho-valayasya
kalacakra-gato dvadasa masan bhurikte rasi-sarijian
sarwatsaravayavan masah paksa-dvayarn diva naktar ceti sapadarksa-
dvayam upadisanti yavata sastham চো? bhunjita sa vai rtur ity
upadisyate samvatsaravayavah.

atha—therefore; sah—He; esah—this; atma—the living force;
lokanam—of all the three worlds; dyav-a-prthivyoh antarena—between
the upper and lower portions of the universe; nabhah-valayasya—of
outer space; kala-cakra-gatah—positioned in the wheel of time;
dvadasa masan—twelve months; bhunkte—passes; rasi-sarmjiian—
named after the zodiac signs; sarivatsara-avayavan—the parts of the
whole year; masah—one month; paksa-dvayam—two fortnights;
diva—a day; naktam ca—and a night; iti—thus; sapada-rksa-
dvayam—by stellar calculations, two and a quarter constellations;
upadisanti —they instruct; yavatda—by as much time; sastham amsam—


--- Page 346 ---
Text 6] The Orbits of the Planets 343
one sixth of his orbit; bhuiijita—pass; sah—that portion; vai—indeed;
rtuh—a season; iti—thus; upadisyate—is instructed; sarwvatsara-
avayavah—a part of a year.
TRANSLATION
The sun-god, who is Narayana, or Visnu, the soul of all the
worlds, is situated in outer space between the upper and lower
portions of the universe. Passing through twelve months on the
wheel of time, the sun comes in touch with twelve different signs
of the zodiac and assumes twelve different names according to
those signs. The aggregate of those twelve months is called a sarn-
vatsara, or an entire year. According to lunar calculations, two
fortnights—one of the waxing moon and the other of the
waning —form one month. That same period is one day and night
for the planet Pitrloka. According to stellar calculations, a month
equals two and one quarter constellations. When the sun travels
for two months, a season passes, and therefore the seasonal
changes are considered parts of the body of the year.
TEXT 6
कध By न्विमे 9
अथ च यावतार्धेन AREER प्रचरति तं कालमयनमाचक्षते ॥ &॥
atha ca yavatardhena 7700/0-2800 27 pracarati tar kalam ayanam
acaksate.
atha—now; ca—also; ydvata—by as long as; ardhena—half:
nabhah-vithyam—in outer space; pracarati—the sun moves; tam—
that; kdlam—time; ayanam—ayana; dacaksate—is said.
TRANSLATION
Thus the time the sun takes to rotate through half of outer space
is called an ayana, or its period of movement [in the north or in the
south].


--- Page 347 ---
344 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 22
TEXT 7
अथ च यावन्नमोमण्डलं सह दचात्राएथिन्योर्मण्डलाभ्यां कार्स्न्येन
स ह 95m तं काटं संवत्सरं परिवत्सरमिडावटसरमुवत्सरं
- A

वत्सरमिति भानोपान्धरेध्यसमगतिभिः समामनन्ति ॥ ७॥
atha ca yavan nabho-mandalari sa ha dyav-aprthivyor mandalabhyarn
kartsnyena sa ha bhuiijita tam 162 077) sarmvatsaram parivatsaram
idavatsaram anuvatsarari vatsaram iti bhanor mandya-saighrya-sama-
gatibhih samamananti.

atha—now; ca—also; ydvat—as long as; nabhah-mandalam—outer
space, between the upper and lower world; saha—along with; dyav—of
the upper world; aprthivyoh—of the lower world; mandalabhyam—the
spheres; kartsnyena—entirely; sah—he; ha—indeed; bhunjita—may
pass through; tam—that; kalam—time; sarwatsaram—Samvatsara;
pariwatsaram—Parivatsara; idavatasaram —Idavatsara; anuvatsaram—
Anuvatsara; vatsaram—Vatsara; iti—thus; bhanoh—of the sun; man-
dya—slow; Saighrya—speedy; sama—and equal; gatibhih—by the
speeds; samamananti—the experienced scholars describe.

TRANSLATION

The sun-god has three speeds—slow, fast and moderate. The
time he takes to travel entirely around the spheres of heaven, earth
and space at these three speeds is referred to, by learned scholars,
by the five names Sarnvatsara, Parivatsara, Idavatsara, Anuvatsara
and Vatsara.

PURPORT

According to solar astronomical calculations, each year extends six
days beyond the calendar year, and according to lunar calculations, each
year is six days shorter. Therefore, because of the movements of the sun
and moon, there is a difference of twelve days between the solar and
lunar years. As the Sarmvatsara, Parivatsara, [davatsara, Anuvatsara and
Vatsara pass by, two extra months are added within each five years. This
makes a sixth samvatsara, but because that sarvatsara is extra, the solar
system is calculated according to the above five names.


--- Page 348 ---
Text 8] The Orbits of the Planets 345
TEXT 8
एवं चन्द्रमा IRR उपरिषटा्क्षयोजनत उपलम्यमानोऽक॑स

संबत्सरथक्ति पक्षाभ्यां मासथक्तिं सपादक्षाभ्यां दिनेनैव पक्ष्क्तिमग्रचारी
द्रुततरगमनो IS ॥ ८ ||

০৮৫7) candrama arka-gabhastibhya uparistal laksa-yojanata
upalabhyamano ‘rkasya sarmvatsara-bhuktirn paksabhyarm masa-
bhuktirm sapadarksabhyarm dinenaiva paksa-bhuktim agracart
drutatara-gamano bhurikte.

evam—thus; candramd—the moon; arka-gabhastibhyah—from the
rays of the sunshine; uparistat—above; laksa-yojanatah—by a
measurement of 100,000 yojanas; upalabhyamanah—being situated;
arkasya—of the sun globe; sarmwatsara-bhuktim—the passage of one
year of enjoyment; paksabhyam—by two fortnights; masa-bhuktim—
the passage of one month; sapada-rksabhyam—by two and a quarter
days; dinena—by a day; eva—only; paksa-bhuktim—the passage of a
fortnight; agracari—moving impetuously; druta-tara-gamanah—pass-
ing more speedily; bhurikte—passes through.

TRANSLATION

Above the rays of the sunshine by a distance of 100,000 yojanas
[800,000 miles] is the moon, which travels at a speed faster than
that of the sun. In two lunar fortnights the moon travels through
the equivalent of a sarhvatsara of the sun, in two and a quarter days
it passes through a month of the sun, and in one day it passes
through a fortnight of the sun.

PURPORT

When we take into account that the moon is 100,000 yojanas, or
800,000 miles, above the rays of the sunshine, it is very surprising that
the modern excursions to the moon could be possible. Since the moon is
so distant, how space vehicles could go there is a doubtful mystery.
Modern scientific calculations are subject to one change after another,
and therefore they are uncertain. We have to accept the calculations of


--- Page 349 ---
346 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 22
the Vedic literature. These Vedic calculations are steady; the astronomi-
cal calculations made long ago and recorded in the Vedic literature are
correct even now. Whether the Vedic calculations or modern ones are
better may remain a mystery for others, but as far as we are concerned,
we accept the Vedic calculations to be correct.
TEXT 9
अथ चापूर्यमाणाभिश्च कलाभिरमराणां क्षीयमाणाभिश्च se
- © ५ (भ) 9
पितणामहोरात्राणि पूवेषक्षापरपक्षाभ्यां वितन्वान £ सवंजीवनिवहप्राणो
(का ७ =. 0

जीवश्चैकमेकं नक्षत्रं त्रिंशता বুদ ॥ ९॥
atha capuryamanabhis ca kalabhir amaranar ksiyamanabhis ca
kalabhih pitrnam aho-ratrani purva-paksapara-paksabhyar
vitanvanah sarva-jiva-nivaha-prano jivas caikam 6192 77১ naksatrar
trirsata muhirtair bhurkte.

atha—thus; ca—also; apiryamanabhih—gradually increasing; ca—
and; kalabhih—Dby the parts of the moon; amaranam—of the demigods;
kstyamanabhih—by gradually decreasing; ca —and; kalabhih—Dby parts
of the moon; pitfnam—of those on the planet known as Pitrloka; ahah-
ratrani—the days and nights; pirva-paksa-apara-paksabhyam—by the
period of waxing and waning; vitanvanah—distributing; sarva-jiva-
nivaha—of the total living entities; pranah—the life; jivah—the chief
living being; ca—also; ekam ekam—one after another; naksatram—a
constellation of stars; tririsata—by thirty; muhirtaih —muhirtas;
bhurikte —passes through.

TRANSLATION

When the moon is waxing, the illuminating portions of it in-
crease daily, thus creating day for the demigods and night for the
pitas. When the moon is waning, however, it causes night for the
demigods and day for the pitas. In this way the moon passes
through each constellation of stars in thirty muhiirtas [an entire
day]. The moon is the source of nectarean coolness that influences
the growth of food grains, and therefore the moon-god is con-


--- Page 350 ---
Text 10] The Orbits of the Planets 347
sidered the life of all living entities. He is consequently called Jiva,
the chief living being within the universe.
TEXT 10

य एष ॒भोडशकलः . परुषो भगवान्मनोमयोऽ्नमयोऽखतमयो देवपिद्‌-
मनुष्यभूतपश्युपक्षिसरीसृपवीरुधां प्राणाप्यायनश्चीरत्वात्सवेमय হলি

(४
वणंयन्ति 1 १०॥
ya esa sodasa-kalah puruso bhagavan manomayo 78780771090 "mrtamayo
deva-pitr-manusya-bhita-pasu-paksi-sarisrpa-virudhdri pranapy
ayana-silatvat sarvamaya iti varnayanti.

yah—that; esah—this; sodasa-kalah—having all sixteen parts (the
full moon); purusah—the person; bhagavan—having great power
received from the Supreme Personality of Godhead; manah-mayah—
the predominating deity of the mind; anna-mayah—the source of po-
tency for food grains; amrta-mayah—the source of the substance of life;
deva—of all the demigods; pitr—of all the inhabitants of Pitrloka;
manusya—all human beings; bhiita—all living entities; pasu—of the
animals; paksi—of the birds; sarisrpa—of the reptiles; virudham—of
all kinds of herbs and plants; prana—life air; api—certainly; ayana-
stlatvat—due to refreshing; sarva-mayah—all-pervading; iti—thus;
varnayanti—the learned scholars describe.

TRANSLATION

Because the moon is full of all potentialities, it represents the
influence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The moon is the
predominating deity of everyone’s mind, and therefore the moon-
god is called Manomaya. He is also called Annamaya because he
gives potency to all herbs and plants, and he is called Amrtamaya
because he is the source of life for all living entities. The moon
pleases the demigods, pitas, human beings, animals, birds, rep-
tiles, trees, plants and all other living entities. Everyone is satisfied
by the presence of the moon. Therefore the moon is also called
Sarvamaya [all-pervading].


--- Page 351 ---
348 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 22
TEXT 11
तत॒  उपरिषटा्द्िलक्षयोजनतो नक्षत्राणि मेरुं दक्षिणेनैव
कालायन ईश्वरयोजितानि सहाभिनिताष्टाविंशतिः ॥११॥
tata uparistad dvi-laksa-yojanato naksatrani merur daksinenaiva
kalayana isvara-yojitani sahabhijitasta-vimsatih.
tatah—from that region of the moon; uparistat—above; dvi-laksa-yo-
Janatah—200,000 yojanas; naksatrani—many stars; merum—Sumeru
Mountain; daksinena eva—to the right side; kala-ayane—in the wheel
of time; iSvara-yojitani—attached by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; saha—with; abhijita—the star known as Abhijit; asta-vim-
Satih—twenty-eight.
TRANSLATION
There are many stars located 200,000 yojanas [1,600,000 miles]
above the moon. By the supreme will of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, they are fixed to the wheel of time, and thus they
rotate with Mount Sumeru on their right, their motion being
different from that of the sun. There are twenty-eight important
stars, headed by Abhijit.
PURPORT
The stars referred to herein are 1,600,000 miles above the sun, and
thus they are 4,000,000 miles above the earth.
TEXT 12
= ९
तत उपरिषशदुश्चना द्विलक्षयोजनत उपलभ्यते पुरतः TARGET वाकं
< ॥
रोध्यमान्यसाम्यामिर्गतिमिरकंवचरति लोकानां नित्यदानुकूल oF
Rl
प्रायेण वषयंश्वारेणानुमीयते स बृष्टिविष्टम्भग्रहोपश्मनः ।। १२॥
tata uparistad usand dvi-laksa-yojanata upalabhyate puratah pascat
sahaiva varkasya Saighrya-mandya-samyabhir gatibhir arkavac carati
lokanan nityadanukila eva prayena varsayams carenanumiyate sa
vrsti-vistambha-grahopasamanah.


--- Page 352 ---
Text 13] The Orbits of the Planets 349

tatah—from that bunch of stars; uparistat—above; uSanda— Venus;
dvi-laksa-yojanatah—200,000 yojanas (1,600,000 miles); upalabh-
yate—is experienced; puratah—in front; pascat—behind; saha—along
with; eva—indeed; ण्ठ —and; arkasya—of the sun; Saighrya—speedy;
mandya—slow; samyabhih—equal; gatibhih—the movements; arka-
vat—exactly like the sun; carati—rotates; lokanam—of all the planets
within the universe; nityadda—constantly; anukiilah—offering favor-
able conditions; eva—indeed; prayena—almost always; varsayan—
causing rainfall; carena—by infusing the clouds; anumiyate—is per-
ceived; sah—he (Venus); vrsti-vistambha—obstacles to rainfall; graha-
upasamanah—nullifying planets.

TRANSLATION

Some 1,600,000 miles above this group of stars is the planet
Venus, which moves at almost exactly the same pace as the sun ac-
cording to swift, slow and moderate movements. Sometimes Venus
moves behind the sun, sometimes in front of the sun and some-
times along with it. Venus nullifies the influence of planets that are
obstacles to rainfall. Consequently its presence causes rainfall, and
it is therefore considered very favorable for all living beings
within this universe. This has been accepted by learned scholars.

TEXT 13
उशनसा बुधो व्याख्यातस्तत उपरिष्टाद्‌ द्विलक्षयोजनतो बुधः,
सोमसुत उपलभ्यमानः प्रायेण शुमकृ्यदाकौद्‌ व्यतिरिच्येत तदातिवाता-
अप्रायानाड्ष्य्यादिभयमाशचंसते ।॥ १३ ॥

25071050 budho vyakhyatas tata uparistad dvi-laksa-yojanato budhah
soma-suta upalabhyamanah prayena Subha-krd yadarkad vyatiricyeta
tadativatabhra-prayanavrsty-adi-bhayam asarmsate.

usanasa—with Venus; budhah—Mercury; vyakhydtah—explained;
tatah—from that (Venus); uparistat—above; dvi-laksa-yojanatah—
1,600,000 miles; budhah—Mercury; soma-sutah—the son of the moon;
upalabhyamanah—is situated; prayena—almost always; Subha-krt—


--- Page 353 ---
350 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 22
very auspicious to the inhabitants of the universe; yada —when; arkat—
from the sun; vyatiricyeta—is separated: tada—at that time; ativata—
of cyclones and other bad effects; abhra—clouds; praya—almost al-
ways; anavrsti-adi—such as scarcity of rain; bhayam—fearful condi-
tions; dSamsate —expands.
TRANSLATION

Mercury is described to be similar to Venus, in that it moves
sometimes behind the sun, sometimes in front of the sun and
sometimes along with it. It is 1,600,000 miles above Venus, or
7,200,000 miles above earth. Mercury, which is the son of the
moon, is almost always very auspicious for the inhabitants of the
universe, but when it does not move along with the sun, it for-
bodes cyclones, dust, irregular rainfall, and waterless clouds. In
this way it creates fearful conditions due to inadequate or ex-
cessive rainfall.

TEXT 14

अत ङर्ध्वमङ्गारकोऽपि योजनरक्षद्धितय उपलमभ्यमानसिभिखिभिः

~) ডে Sy ५ -
पक्षरेकैकशो राशीन्दरादज्ञाुखद्धे यदि न वक्रेणाभिवतते, प्रायेणाञ्चभग्रदो-
See: HIRE
ata irdhvam angarako ‘pi yojana-laksa-dvitaya upalabhyamanas
tribhis tribhih paksair ekaikaso rasin dvadasanubhurikte yadi na
vakrenabhivartate prayenasubha-graho ‘gha-samsah.

atah—from this; @#rdhvam—above; arngarakah—Mars; api—also;
yojana-laksa-dvitaye—at a distance of 1,600,000 miles; upa-
labhyamanah —is situated; tribhih tribhih—with each three and three;
paksaih—fortnights; eka-ekasah—one after another; rasin—the signs;
dvadasa—twelve; anubhurikte—passes through; yadi—if; na—not;
vakrena—with a curve; abhivartate—approaches; prayena—almost al-
ways; aSubha-grahah—an unfavorable, inauspicious planet; agha-sam-
sah—creating trouble.

TRANSLATION

Situated 1,600,000 miles above Mercury, or 8,800,000 miles
above earth, is the planet Mars. If this planet does not travel in a
crooked way, it crosses through each sign of the zodiac in three


--- Page 354 ---
Text 16] The Orbits of the Planets 351
fortnights and in this way travels through all twelve, one after
another. It almost always creates unfavorable conditions in respect
to rainfall and other influences.
TEXT 15

तत उपरिष्टाद्‌ द्विलक्षयोजनान्तरगत। मगवान्‌ ब्रहस्पतिरेकैकसिन्‌ राशौ
पसित्सरं परिवत्सरं चरति यदि न वक्रः स्यात्प्रायेणानुकररो ब्राह्मणङ्कलख
॥ १५॥
tata uparistad dvi-laksa-yojanantara-gata bhagavan brhaspatir
ekaikasmin rasau parivatsarari parivatsaram carati yadi na vakrah syat
prayenanukilo brahmana-kulasya.

tatah—that (Mars); uparistat—above; dvi-laksa-yojana-antara-
gatah—situated at a distance of 1,600,000 miles; bhagavan—the most
powerful planet; brhaspatih—Jupiter; eka-ekasmin—in one after
another; rasau—sign; parivatsaram parivatsaram—for the period of
Parivatsara; carati—moves; yadi—if; na—not; vakrah—curved;
syat—becomes; prayena—almost always; anukitlah—very favorable;
brahmana-kulasya—to the brahmanas of the universe.

TRANSLATION

Situated 1,600,000 miles above Mars, or 10,400,000 miles
above earth, is the planet Jupiter, which travels through one sign
of the zodiac within the period of a Parivatsara. If its movement is
not curved, the planet Jupiter is very favorable to the brahmanas
of the universe.

TEXT 16
~ =
qq उपरिष्टाग्रोजनलक्षद्कयासप्रतीयमानः FRAT एककासन्‌

= - ~ a
বাহ त्रिशन्मासान्‌ विलम्बमानः सर्वानिवाुपर्येति तावद्धिरलुवत्सरे; प्रायेण
दि सर्वेपामशान्तिकरः ।॥१६॥

tata uparistad yojana-laksa-dvaydt pratiyamanah sanaiscara
ekaikasmin rasau trirnsan masan vilambamanah sarvan evanuparyeti
tavadbhir anuvatsaraih prayena hi sarvesam asantikarah.


--- Page 355 ---
352 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 22

tatah—that (Jupiter); uparistat—above; yojana-laksa-dvayat—by a
distance of 1,600,000 miles; pratiyamanah—is situated; SanaiScarah—
the planet Saturn; eka-ekasmin—in one after another; rasau—zodiac
signs; trimsat masan—for a period of thirty months in each; vilam-
bamanah—lingering; sarvan—all twelve signs of the zodiac; eva—
certainly; anuparyeti—passes through; tavadbhih—by so many;
anuvatsaraih— Anuvatsaras; prayena—almost always; hi—indeed; sar-
vesam—to all the inhabitants; asantikarah—very troublesome.

TRANSLATION

Situated 1,600,000 miles above Jupiter, or 12,000,000 miles
above earth, is the planet Saturn, which passes through one sign of
the zodiac in thirty months and covers the entire zodiac circle in
thirty Anuvatsaras. This planet is always very inauspicious for the
universal situation.

TEXT 17
तत उत्तरसादषय एकादशलक्षयोजनान्तर उपरभ्यन्ते य एष लोकानां
- = Sea 0 ক ণ]

शमलुभावयन्तो भगवतो विष्णोयत्परमं पदं प्रदक्षिणं प्रक्रमन्ति ।।৩।।
tata uttarasmad rsaya ekadasa-laksa-yojanantara upalabhyante ya eva
lokanari 50772 anubhavayanto bhagavato visnor yat paramarn padari
pradaksinarih prakramanti.

tatah—the planet Saturn; uttarasmat—above; rsayah—great saintly
sages; ekddasa-laksa-yojana-antare—at a distance of 1,100,000 yo-
janas; upalabhyante—are situated; ye—all of them; eva—indeed;
lokanam—for all the inhabitants of the universe; sam—the good for-
tune; anubhdvayantah—always thinking of; bhagavatah—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; vispoh—Lord Visnu; yat—which;
paramam padam—the supreme abode; pradaksinam—placing on the
right; prakramanti—circumambulate.

TRANSLATION

Situated 8,800,000 miles above Saturn, or 20,800,000 miles

above earth, are the seven saintly sages, who are always thinking of


--- Page 356 ---
Text 17] The Orbits of the Planets 353
the well-being of the inhabitants of the universe. They circumam-
bulate the supreme abode of Lord Visnu, known as Dhruvaloka,
the polestar.
PURPORT
Srila Madhvacarya quotes the following verse from the Brahmanda
Purana:
JjAdnanandatmano visnuh
Sisumara-vapusy atha
irdhva-lokesu sa vyapta
adityadyas tad-asrita
Lord Visnu, who is the source of knowledge and transcendental bliss, has
assumed the form of SiSumara in the seventh heaven, which 15 situated
in the topmost level of the universe. All the other planets, beginning
with the sun, exist under the shelter of this SiSumara planetary system.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-
second Chapter of Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Orbits of the
Planets.”


--- Page 357 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
The SiSumara Planetary System
This chapter describes how all the planetary systems take shelter of the
polestar, Dhruyvaloka. It also describes the totality of these planetary
systems to be SiSumara, another expansion of the external body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Dhruvaloka, the abode of Lord Visnu
within this universe, is situated 1,300,000 yojanas from the seven stars.
In the planetary system of Dhruvaloka are the planets of the fire-god, In-
dra, Prajapati, Kasyapa and Dharma, all of whom are very respectful to
the great devotee Dhruva, who lives on the polestar. Like bulls yoked to a
central pivot, all the planetary systems revolve around Dhruvaloka, im-
pelled by eternal time. Those who worship the virata-purusa, the univer-
sal form of the Lord, conceive of this entire rotating system of planets as
an animal known as Sisumara. This imaginary SiSumara is another form
of the Lord. The head of the Sisumara form is downward, and its body
appears like that of a coiled snake. On the end of its tail is Dhruvaloka,
on the body of the tail are Prajapati, Agni, Indra and Dharma, and on the
root of the tail are Dhata and Vidhata. On its waist are the seven great
sages. The entire body of the siSumara faces toward its right and appears
like a coil of stars. On the right side of this coil are the fourteen promi-
nent stars from Abhijit to Punarvasu, and on the left side are the four-
teen prominent stars from Pusya to Uttarasadha. The stars known as
Punarvasu and Pusya are on the right and left hips of the $isumara, and
the stars known as Ardra and Aélesa are on the right and left feet of the
Sisumara. Other stars are also fixed on different sides. of the ৩1501101318
planetary system according to the calculations of Vedic astronomers. To
concentrate their minds, yogis worship the SiSumara planetary system,
which is technically known as the kundalini-cakra.
TEXT 1
श्रीक उवाच
- - < =

अथ तसखात्परतस्रयोद ASIANA यत्तद्विष्णोः परमं पदम-

भिवदन्ति यत्र হ महाभागवतो ध्रुव ओत्तानपादिरभ्निनेन्दरेण प्रजापतिना
355


--- Page 358 ---
356 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 23
FEW धर्मेण च समकालयुम्मिः सबहुमानं दक्षिणतः क्रियमाण
इदानीमपि कल्पजीषिनामाजीव्य उपास्ते तस्येहानुभाव उपव णितः || १॥
sri-Suka uvaca

atha tasmat paratas trayodasa-laksa-yojanantarato yat tad visnoh
paramari padam abhivadanti yatra ha maha-bhagavato dhruva
auttanapdadir agninendrena prajapatind kasyapena dharmena ca
samakala-yugbhih sabahu-manar daksinatah kriyamana idanim api
kalpa-jivinam ajivya upaste tasyehanubhava upavarnitah.

sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; atha—thereupon;
tasmat—the sphere of the seven stars; paratah—beyond that;
trayodasa-laksa-yojana-antaratah—another 1,300,000 yojanas; yat—
which; tat—that; visnoh paramam padam—the supreme abode of Lord
Visnu, or the lotus feet of Lord Visnu; abhivadanti—the Rg Veda
mantras praise; yatra—on which; ha—indeed; maha-bhagavatah—the
great devotee; dhruvah—Maharaja Dhruva; auttanapadih—the son of
Maharaja Uttanapada; agninda—by the fre-god; indrena—by the
heavenly King, Indra; prajapatind—by the Prajapati; kasyapena—by
Kasyapa; dharmena—by Dharmaraja; ca—also; samakala-yugbhih—
who are engaged at the time; sa-bahu-manam—always respectfully;
daksinatah—on the right side; kriyamanah—being circumambulated;
idanim —now; api—even; kalpa-jivinam—of the living entities who ex-
ist at the end of the creation; @jivyah—the source of life; updste—
remains; tasya—his; iha—here; anubhavah—greatness in discharging
devotional service; upavarnitah—already described (in the Fourth Canto
of Srimad-Bhagavatam).

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, 1,300,000 yojanas
[10,400,000 miles] above the planets of the seven sages is the place
that learned scholars describe as the abode of Lord Visnu. There
the son of Maharaja Uttanapada, the great devotee Maharaja
Dhruva, still resides as the life source of all the living entities who
live until the end of the creation. Agni, Indra, Prajapati, Kasyapa
and Dharma all assemble there to offer him honor and respectful


--- Page 359 ---
Text 2] The Si$umara Planetary System 357
obeisances. They circumambulate him with their right sides
toward him. I have already described the glorious activities of
Maharaja Dhruva [in the Fourth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam)].
TEXT 2

a हि सवेषां ज्योतिर्गणानां ग्रहनश्त्रादौयायनिपिषेणाव्यक्तरंटस) भगवता
कालेन त्राम्यमाणानां स्थाणुरिबावष्टम्म an विहितः शश्वदवभासते।र
sa hi sarvesarm jyotir-ganandar graha-naksatradinam animisenavyakta-
rarithasa bhagavata kalena bhramyamananam sthanur ivavastambha
tSvarena vihitah sasvad avabhasate.

sah—that planet of Dhruva Maharaja; hi—indeed; sarvesam—of all;
Jyotih-gananam—the luminaries; graha-naksatra-adinam—such as the
planets and stars; animisena—who does not rest; avyakta—inconceiv-
able; rarnhasa —whose force; bhagavata —the most powerful; kalena—
by the time factor; bhramyamananam—being caused to revolve;
sthanuh iva—like a post; avastambhah—the pivot; iSvarena—by the
will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vihitah—established;
Sasvat—constantly; avabhasate—shines.

TRANSLATION

Established by the supreme will of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the polestar, which is the planet of Maharaja Dhruva,
constantly shines as the central pivot for all the stars and planets.
The unsleeping, invisible, most powerful time factor causes these
luminaries to revolve around the polestar without cessation.

PURPORT

It is distinctly stated herein that all the luminaries, the planets and
stars, revolve by the influence of the supreme time factor. The time fac-
tor is another feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone
is under the influence of the time factor, but the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is so kind and loves His devotee Maharaja Dhruva so much that
He has placed all the luminaries under the control of Dhruva’s planet


--- Page 360 ---
358 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 23
and has arranged for the time factor to work under him or with his
cooperation. Everything is actually done according to the will and direc-
tion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but to make His devotee
Dhruva the most important individual within the universe, the Lord has
placed the activities of the time factor under his control.
TEXT 3
यथा मेदीस्तम्भ आक्रमणपशवः पंयोजिताखिभि fi सवनेयंयाखानं
৬ <
मण्डलानि चरन्त्येवं भगणा ग्रहादय एतसिनन्तवंहिर्योगेन कालचक्र
- €. [1
आयोजिता धुवमेबाक्ठम्न्य वायुनोदीयंमाणा आ कल्पान्त परिचङ्क्रमन्ति
नभसि यथा मेषाः अथेनादयो वायुवशाः कृमंसारथयः_ पखितेन्ते एवं
PEN Q -

ज्योतिगंणाः प्रकृतिपुरुषसंयोगाचुगृदीताः कमेनिर्मिंतगतयो वि न
पतन्ति ॥ ३ ॥

yatha medhistambha akramana-pasavah sarvyojitas tribhis tribhih
savanair yatha-sthanam mandalani caranty evar bhagana grahadaya
etasminn antar-bahir-yogena kala-cakra ayojita dhruvam evavalambya
vayunodiryamana akalpantam parican kramanti nabhasi yatha meghah
Syenadayo vayu-vasah karma-sarathayah parivartante evan
Jyotirganah prakrti-purusa-sarmyoganugrhitah karma-nirmita-gatayo
bhuvi na patanti.

yatha—exactly like; medhistambhe—to the pivot post; akramana-
pasavah—bulls for threshing rice; samyojitah—being yoked; tribhih
tribhih—by three; savanaih—movements; yatha-sthanam—in their
proper places; mandalani—orbits; caranti—traverse; evam—in the
same way; bha-ganah—the luminaries, like the sun, the moon, Venus,
Mercury, Mars and Jupiter; graha-adayah—the different planets;
etasmin—in this; antah-bahih-yogena—by connection with the inner or
outer circles; kala-cakre—in the wheel of eternal time; ayojitah—fixed;
dhruvam—Dhruvaloka; eva—certainly; avalambya—taking support
of; vayuna—by the wind; udiryamanah—being propelled; a-kalpa-an-
tam—until the end of the creation; parican kramanti—revolve all
around; nabhasi—in the sky; yatha—exactly like; meghah—heavy


--- Page 361 ---
Text 3] The Si$umira Planetary System 359
clouds; §yena-adayah—birds such as the big eagle; vayu-vasah—con-
trolled by the air; karma-sarathayah—whose chariot drivers ate the
results of their own past activities; parivartante —move around; evam—
in this way; jyotih-ganah—the luminaries, the planets and stars in the
sky; prakrti—of material nature; purusa—and of the Supreme Per-
sonality, Krsna; samyoga-anugrhitah—supported by the combined
efforts; karma-nirmita—caused by their own past fruitive activities;
gatayah—whose movements; bhuvi—on the ground; na—not;
patanti—fall down.
TRANSLATION

When bulls are yoked together and tied to a central post to
thresh rice, they tread around that pivot without deviating from
their proper positions —one bull being closest to the post, another
in the middle, and a third on the outside. Similarly, all the planets
and all the hundreds and thousands of stars revolve around the
polestar, the planet of Maharaja Dhruva, in their respective orbits,
some higher and some lower. Fastened by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead to the machine of material nature according to the
results of their fruitive acts, they are driven around the polestar by
the wind and will continue to be so until the end of creation. These
planets float in the air within the vast sky, just as clouds with
hundreds of tons of water float in the air or as the great S§yena
eagles, due to the results of past activities, fly high in the sky and
have no chance of falling to the ground.

PURPORT

According to the description of this verse, the hundreds and thousands
of stars and the great planets such as the sun, the moon, Venus, Mercury,
Mars and Jupiter are not clustered together because of the law of gravity
or any similar idea of the modern scientists. These planets and stars are
all servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda or Krsna,
and according to His order they sit in their chariots and travel in their
respective orbits. The orbits in which they move are compared to
machines given by material nature to the operating deities of the stars
and planets, who carry out the orders of the Supreme Personality of


--- Page 362 ---
360 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 23
Godhead by revolving around Dhruvaloka, which is occupied by the
great devotee Maharaja Dhruva. This is confirmed in the Brahma-
sarithitd (5.52) as follows:
yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam
raja samasta-sura-martir aSesa-tejah
yasyajiaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakro
govindam adi-purusari tam aha bhajami
“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, under whose control even the sun, which is considered to be
the eye of the Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time. The
sun is the king of all planetary systems and has unlimited potency in heat
and light.” This verse from Brahma-sarihita confirms that even the
largest and most powerful planet, the sun, rotates within a fixed orbit, or
kala-cakra, in obedience to the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This has nothing to do with gravity or any other imaginary
laws created by the material scientists.

Material scientists want to avoid the ruling government of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore they imagine different
conditions under which they suppose the planets move. The only condi-
tion, however, is the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. All
the various predominating deities of the planets are persons, and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is also a person. The Supreme Per-
sonality orders the subordinate persons, the demigods of various names,
to carry out His supreme will. This fact is also confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita (9.10), wherein Krsna says:

mayadhyaksena prakrtih
siwyate sa-caracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
Jagad viparivartate
“This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti,
and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this
manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.”


--- Page 363 ---
Text 3] The Si$umara Planetary System 361
The orbits of the planets resemble the bodies in which all living en-
tities are seated because they are both machines controlled by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita
(18.61):
iSvarah sarva-bhitanam
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhitani
yantraridhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.” The machine given by material
nature— whether the machine of the body or the machine of the orbit, or
kala-cakra—works according to the orders given by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality of Godhead and material
nature work together to maintain this great universe, and not only this
universe but also the millions of other universes beyond this one.

The question of how the planets and stars are floating is also answered
in this verse. It is not because of the laws of gravity. Rather, the planets
and stars are enabled to float by manipulations of the air. It is due to such
manipulations that big, heavy clouds float and big eagles fly in the sky.
Modern airplanes like the 747 jet aircraft work in a similar way: by con-
trolling the air, they float high in the sky, resisting the tendency to fall to
earth. Such adjustments of the air are all made possible by the coopera-
tion of the principles of purusa (male) and prakrti (female). By the
cooperation of material nature, which is considered to be prakrti, and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is considered the purusa, all the
affairs of the universe are going on nicely in their proper order. Prakrti,
material nature, is also described in the Brahma-samhita (5.44) as
follows:

srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga

icchanuripam api yasya ca cestate sa
govindam adi-purusari tam aha bhajami


--- Page 364 ---
362 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 23
“The external potency, maya, who is of the nature of the shadow of the
cit [spiritual] potency, is worshiped by all people as Durga, the creating,
preserving and destroying agency of this mundane world. I adore the
primeval Lord Govinda, in accordance with whose will Durga conducts
herself.” Material nature, the external energy of the Supreme Lord, is
also known as Durga, or the female energy that protects the great fort of
this universe. The word Durga also means fort. This universe is just like
a great fort in which all the conditioned souls are kept, and they cannot
leave it unless they are liberated by the mercy of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The Lord Himself declares in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
Jjanma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehariv punar janma
naiti mam eti so ’rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this
material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.” Thus simply by
Krsna consciousness, by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one can be liberated, or, in other words, one can be released
from the great fort of this universe and go outside it to the spiritual
world.

It is also significant that the predominating deities of even the greatest
planets have been offered their exalted posts because of the very valu-
able pious activities they performed in previous births. This is indicated
herein by the words karma-nirmita-gatayah. For example, as we have
previously discussed, the moon is called jiva, which means that he is a
living entity like us, but because of his pious activities he has been ap-
pointed to his post as the moon-god. Similarly, all the demigods are living
entities who have been appointed to their various posts as the masters of
the moon, the earth, Venus and so on because of their great service and
pious acts. Only the predominating deity of the sun, Sarya Narayana, is
an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Maharaja
Dhruva, the predominating deity of Dhruvaloka, is also a living entity.
Thus there are two kinds of entities—the supreme entity, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and the ordinary living entity, the jiva (nityo


--- Page 365 ---
Text 4] The Sisumara Planetary System 363
nityanarn cetanas cetananam). All the demigods are engaged in the ser-
vice of the Lord, and only by such an arrangement are the affairs of the
universe going on.

Regarding the great eagles mentioned in this verse, it is understood
that there are eagles so big that they can prey on big elephants. They fly
so high that they can travel from one planet to another. They start flying
in one planet and land in another, and while in flight they lay eggs that
hatch into other birds while falling through the air. In Sanskrit such
eagles are called Syena. Under the present circumstances, of course, we
cannot see such huge birds, but at least we know of eagles that can cap-
ture monkeys and then throw them down to kill and eat them. Similarly,
itis understood that there are gigantic birds that can carry off elephants,
kill them and eat them.

The two examples of the eagle and the cloud are sufficient to prove
that flying and floating can be made possible through adjustments of the
air. The planets, in a similar way, are floating because material nature
adjusts the air according to the orders of the Supreme Lord. It could be
said that these adjustments constitute the law of gravity, but in any case,
one must accept that these laws are made by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The so-called scientists have no control over them. The scien-
tists can falsely, improperly declare that there is no God, but this is not a
fact.

TEXT 4
केचनेतज्ज्योतिरनीकं शिश्चमारसंस्थानेन भगवतो वासुदेवस्य
योगधारणायामजुवर्णयन्ति | ४ ॥

kecanaitaj jyotir-anikam $isumara-saristhanena bhagavato
vasudevasya yoga-dharandayam anuvarnayanti.

kecana—some yogis or learned scholars of astronomy: etat—this:
Jjyotih-anikam —great wheel of planets and stars: $iSumara-
saristhanena—imagine this wheel to be a §isumara (dolphin);
bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vasudevasya—
Lord Vasudeva (the son of Vasudeva), Krsna; yoga-dharanayam—in
absorption in worship: anuvarnayanti—describe.


--- Page 366 ---
364 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 23
TRANSLATION

This great machine, consisting of the stars and planets, resem-
bles the form of a §iSumara [dolphin] in the water. It is sometimes
considered an incarnation of Krsna, Vasudeva. Great yogis medi-
tate upon Vasudeva in this form because it is actually visible.

PURPORT

Transcendentalists such as yogis whose minds cannot accommodate the
form of the Lord prefer to visualize something very great, such as the
virata-purusa. Therefore some yogis comtemplate this imaginary
SiSumara to be swimming in the sky the way a dolphin swims in water.
They meditate upon it as the virata-ripa, the gigantic form of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 5
यस पुच्छाग्रेऽवाकशिरसः ङण्डलीभूतदेदस्य धुव॒उपकरिपतस्तस्य लाङ्गूले
RATER धमे इति पुच्छमूरे धाता विधाता च कट्यां सप्त॑यः ।
५ oN hal

तस्य॒ दक्षिणावतङ्कण्डलीभूतशरीरस्य यान्युदगयनानि दक्षिणपार्श्वे तु
नक्षत्राण्युपकल्पयन्ति दक्षिणायनानि तु सव्ये। यथा शिद्चमारस्य कुण्डला -
- © প্র
मोगसनिवेशस्य দাহযীডমযীংত্যনযবাঃ समसंख्या भवन्ति । দৃষ্ট त्वजवीथी
ARIEL चोदरतः ॥ ५ ॥

yasya pucchagre vaksirasah kundali-bhita-dehasya dhruva
upakalpitas tasya langile prajapatir agnir indro dharma iti puccha-
mile dhata vidhata ca katyam saptarsayah. tasya daksinavarta-
kundali-bhata-$arirasya yany udagayanani daksina-parsve tu
naksatrany upakalpayanti daksinayanani tu savye. yatha siSumarasya
kundala-bhoga-sannivesasya parsvayor ubhayor apy avayavah
samasankhya bhavanti. prsthe tv ajavithi akasa-gariga codaratah.

yasya—of which; puccha-agre—at the end of the tail; avak-
Sirasah—whose head is downward; kundali-bhata-dehasya—whose
body, which is coiled; dhruvah—Maharaja Dhruva on his planet, the
polestar; upakalpitah—is situated; tasya—of that; langiile—on the tail;


--- Page 367 ---
Text 6] The Sisumara Planetary System 365
prajapatih—of the name Prajapati; agnih— Agni; indrah—Indra; dhar-
mah—Dharma; iti—thus; puccha-miile—at the base of the tail: dhata
vidhata—the demigods known as Dhata and Vidhata; ca—also;
katyam—on the hip; sapta-rsayah—the seven saintly sages; tasya—of
that; daksina-avarta-kundali-bhita-sarirasya—whose body is like a coil
turning toward the right side; yani—which; udagayanani—marking
the northern courses; daksina-parsve—on the right side; tu—but; nak-
satrani—constellations; upakalpayanti—are situated; daksina-
ayanani—the fourteen stars, from Pusya to Uttarasadha, marking the
northern course; tu—but; savye—on the left side; yatha—just like;
sisumarasya—of the dolphin; kundala-bhoga-sannivesasya—whose
body appears like a coil; parsvayoh—on the sides; ubhayoh—both;
api—certainly; avayavah—the limbs; samasankhyah—of equal num-
ber (fourteen); bhavanti—are; prsthe—on the back; tu—of course;
ajavithi—the first three stars marking the southern route (Mila, Par-
vasadha and Uttarasadha); akasa-gariga—the Ganges in the sky (the
Milky Way); ca—also; udaratah—on the abdomen.
TRANSLATION

This form of the $§iSumara has its head downward and its body
coiled. On the end of its tail is the planet of Dhruva, on the body of
its tail are the planets of the demigods Prajapati, Agni, Indra and
Dharma, and at the base of its tail are the planets of the demigods
Dhata and Vidhata. Where the hips might be on the $iSumara are
the seven saintly sages like Vasistha and Angira. The coiled body of
the SiSumara-cakra turns toward its right side, on which the four-
teen constellations from Abhijit to Punarvasu are located. On its
left side are the fourteen stars from Pusya to Uttarasadha. Thus its
body is balanced because its sides are occupied by an equal number
of stars. On the back of the §iSumara is the group of stars known as
Ajavithi, and on its abdomen is the Ganges that flows in the sky
[the Milky Way].

TEXT 6

पुनर्वसुपुष्यौ दक्षिणवामयोः श्रोण्योराद्रीरलेषे च दक्षिणवामयोः पथिमयोः
पादयोरभिजिदुत्तरापाटे दश्षिणवामयोर्नासिकयोर्यथाषंख्यं श्रवणपूर्वाषाटे


--- Page 368 ---
366 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 23
दक्षिणवामयोर्खोचनयोध॑निष्ठा দৃপ্ত च दक्षिणवामयोः कर्णयोर्मघादीन्यष्ट
Ls a

नक्षत्राणि दक्षिणायनानि वामपा्वङ्क्रिषु IFA तथेव SEE
नानि दक्षिणपा्चंवङ्क्रिषु प्रातिलोम्येन प्रयुञ्जीत शतभिषाज्येष्ठे
स्कन्धयोरदक्षिणवामयोन्य॑सेत्‌ 11 ६ ॥

punarvasu-pusyau daksina-vamayoh sronyor ardraslese ca daksina-
vamayoh pascimayoh padayor abhijid-uttarasadhe daksina-vamayor
nasikayor yatha-sarkhyarm sravana-pirvasadhe daksina-vamayor
locanayor dhanistha 7710 0777 ca daksina-vamayoh karnayor maghadiny
asta naksatrani daksinayanani vama-parsva-varkrisu yunjita tathaiva
mrga-sirsadiny udagayanani daksina-parsva-varikrisu pratilomyena
prayunjita Satabhisa-jyesthe skandhayor daksina-vamayor nyaset.

punarvasu—the star named Punarvasu; pusyau—and the star named
Pusya; daksina-vamayoh—on the right and left; Sronyoh—loins;
ardra—the star named Ardra; aslese—the star named Aslesa; ca—also;
daksina-vamayoh—at the right and left; pascimayoh—behind;
padayoh—feet; abhijit-uttarasadhe—the stars named Abhijit and Ut-
tarasadha; daksina-vamayoh—on the right and left; nasikayoh—
nostrils; yatha-sarikhyam—according 16 numerical order; Sravana-pitr-
vasadhe —the stars named Sravana and Parvasadha; daksina-
vamayoh—at the right and left; locanayoh—eyes; dhanistha milam
ca—and the stars named Dhanistha and Mala; daksina-vamayoh—at the
right and left; karnayoh—ears; magha-adini—the stars such as Magha;
asta naksatrani—eight stars; daksina-ayanani—which mark the
southern course; vama-parsva—of the left side; varkrisu—at the ribs;
yuijita—may place; tatha eva—similarly; mrga-sirsa-adini—such as
Mrgasirsa; udagayanani—marking the northern course; daksina-
parsva-varikrisu—on the right side; pratilomyena—in the reverse
order; prayufjita—may place; Satabhisa —Satabhisa; jyesthe—Jyestha;
skandhayoh—on the two shoulders; daksina-vamayoh—right and left;
nyaset—should place.

TRANSLATION

„ On the right and left sides of where the loins might be on the
SiSumara-cakra are the stars named Punarvasu and Pusya. Ardra


--- Page 369 ---
Text 7] The Siéumara Planetary System 367
and Aslesa are on its right and left feet, Abhijit and Uttarasadha are
on its right and left nostrils, Sravana and Purvasadha are at its
right and left eyes, and Dhanistha and Miila are on its right and left
ears. The eight stars from Magha to Anuradha, which mark the
southern course, are on the ribs of the left of its body, and the
eight stars from MrgaSirsa to Parvabhadra, which mark the north-
ern course, are on the ribs on the right side. Satabhisa and Jyestha
are on the right and left shoulders.
TEXT 7
उत्तराहनावगस्तिरधराहनौ यमो JAY चाङ्गारकः शनेश्र उपस्थे बहस्पतिः
Cp - -

FIR वक्षस्यादित्यो हृदये नारायणो मनसि चन्द्रो नाभ्यामुशना स्तनयोरश्विनो
बुधः प्राणापानयो राहुर्गले केतवः GRY रोमसु सर्वे तारागणाः
॥ৰ ও ।।

uttara-hanav agastir adhara-hanau yamo mukhesu cangarakah
Sanaiscara upasthe brhaspatih kakudi vaksasy adityo hrdaye narayano
manasi candro nabhyam usana stanayor asvinau budhah pranapanayo
rahur gale ketavah sarvangesu romasu sarve tara-ganah.

uttara-hanau—on the upper jaw; agastih—the star named Agasti;
adhara-hanau—on the lower jaw; yamah—Yamaraja; mukhe—on the
mouth; ca—also; angarakah—Mars; Sanaiscarah—Saturn; upasthe —
on the genitals; brhaspatih—Jupiter; kakudi—on the back of the neck;
vaksasi—on the chest; adityah—the sun; hrdaye—within the heart:
narayanah—Lord Narayana; manasi—in the mind; candrah—the
moon; nabhyam—on the navel; uSana—Venus; stanayoh—on the two
breasts; asvinau—the two stars named Asvin; budhah—Mercury: pra-
napanayoh—in the inner airs known as prana and apana; rahuh —the
planet Rahu; gale—on the neck; ketavah—comets; sarva-angesu—all
over the body; romasu—in the pores of the body; sarve—all; tara-
ganah—the numerous stars.

TRANSLATION

On the upper chin of the §iSumara is Agasti; on its lower chin,

Yamaraja; on its mouth, Mars; on its genitals, Saturn; on the back


--- Page 370 ---
368 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 23
of its neck, Jupiter; on its chest, the sun; and within the core of its
heart, Narayana. Within its mind is the moon; on its navel, Venus;
and on its breasts, the ASvinikumaras. Within its life air, which is
known as pranapana, is Mercury, on its neck is Rahu, all over its
body are comets, and in its pores are the numerous stars.
TEXT 8
£ ক > ङ
एतदु ইন भगवतो विष्णोः स्बेदेवतामयं रूपमहरहः सन्ध्यायां
प्रयतो वाग्यतो निरीक्षमाण उपतिष्ठेत नमो ज्योतिर्लोकाय काठायनाया
निमिषां पतये महापुरुषायाभिधीमदीति ॥ ८ ॥
etad u haiva bhagavato visnoh sarva-devatamayam rispam aharahah
sandhyayam prayato vagyato nirtksamana upatistheta namo jyotir-
lokaya kalayanayanimisarh pataye maha-purusayabhidhimahiti.
etat—this; u ha—indeed; eva—certainly; bhagavatah—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; sarva-devata-
mayam—consisting of all the demigods; ripam—form; ahah-ahah—
always; sandhyayam—in the morning, noon and evening; prayatah—
meditating upon; vagyatah—controlling the words; nirtksamanah—ob-
serving; upatistheta—one should worship; namah—respectful obei-
sances; Jyotih-lokaya—unto the resting place of all the planetary
systems; kalayanaya—in the form of supreme time; animisam—of the
demigods; pataye—unto the master: maha-purusaya—unto the
Supreme Person; abhidhimahi—let us meditate; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the body of the $iSumara, as thus described,
should be considered the external form of Lord Visnu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Morning, noon and evening,
one should silently observe the form of the Lord as the SiSumara-
cakra and worship Him with this mantra: ‘“O Lord who has
assumed the form of time! O resting place of all the planets mov-
ing in different orbits! O master of all demigods, O Supreme Per-
son, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You and meditate upon
You.”


--- Page 371 ---
Text 9] The Siéumara Planetary System 369
TEXT 9
त ५
ग्र तारामयमाधिदेविकं
पापापहं मन्त्रकृतां त्रिकालम्‌ |
ane: सरतो वा त्रिकाटं
नश्येत तत्कालजमाशु पापम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
graharksataramayam adhidaivikarm
papapaham mantra-krtam tri-kalam
namasyatah smarato va tri-kalam
nasyeta tat-kalajam asu papam
graha-rksa-tara-mayam—consisting of all the planets and stars;
adhidaivikam —the leader of all the demigods; pdpa-apaham—the
killer of sinful reactions; mantra-krtam—of those who chant the mantra
mentioned above; tri-kdlam—three times; namasyatah—offering obei-
sances; smaratah—meditating; va—or; tri-kalam—three times;
nasyeta—destroys; tat-kala-jam—born at that time; dsu—very quickly;
papam—all sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
_ The body of the Supreme Lord, Visnu, which forms the
SiSumara-cakra, is the resting place of all the demigods and all the
stars and planets. One who chants this mantra to worship that
Supreme Person three times a day —morning, noon and evening —
will surely be freed from all sinful reactions. If one simply offers
his obeisances to this form or remembers this form three times a
day, all his recent sinful activities will be destroyed.
PURPORT
Summarizing the entire description of the planetary systems of the
universe, Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that one who is able
to meditate upon this arrangement as the virata-riipa, or visva-ripa, the
external body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and worship Him
three times a day by meditation will always be free from all sinful reac-
tions. Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura estimates that Dhruvaloka, the


--- Page 372 ---
370 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch.23
polestar, is 3,800,000 yojanas above the sun. Above Dhruvaloka by
10,000,000 yojanas is Maharloka, above Maharloka by 20,000,000 yo-
Janas is Janaloka, above Janaloka by 80,000,000 yojanas is Tapoloka,
and above Tapoloka by 120,000,000 yojanas is Satyaloka. Thus the dis-
tance from the sun to Satyaloka is 233,800,000 yojanas, or 1,870,400,-
000 miles. The Vaikuntha planets begin 26,200,000 yojanas
(209,600,000 miles) above Satyaloka. Thus the Visnu Purana describes
that the covering of the universe is 260,000,000 yojanas (2,080,000,000
miles) away from the sun. The distance from the sun to the earth is
100,000 yojanas, and below the earth by 70,000 yojanas are the seven
lower planetary systems called Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala,
Rasatala and Patala. Below these lower planets by 30,000 yojanas, ৩০৪৪
Naga is lying on the Garbhodaka Ocean. That ocean is 249,800,000 yo-
janas deep. Thus the total diameter of the universe is approximately
500,000,000 yojanas, or 4,000,000,000 miles.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Fifth Canto, Twenty-third
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “116 Sisumdra Planetary
System.”


--- Page 373 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
The Subterranean Heavenly Planets

This chapter describes the planet Rahu, which is 10,000 yojanas (80,000
miles) below the sun, and it also describes Atala and the other lower
planetary systems. Rahu is situated below the sun and moon. It is
between these two planets and the earth. When Rahu conceals the sun
and moon, eclipses occur, either total or partial, depending on whether
Rahu moves in a straight or curving way.

Below Rahu by another 1,000,000 yojanas are the planets of the Sid-
dhas, Caranas and Vidyadharas, and below these are planets such as Yak-
saloka and Raksaloka. Below these planets is the earth, and 70,000
yojanas below the earth are the lower planetary systems — Atala, Vitala,
Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala and Patala. Demons and Raksasas
live in these lower planetary systems with their wives and children, al-
ways engaged in sense gratification and not fearing their next births. The
sunshine does not reach these planets, but they are illuminated by jewels
fixed upon the hoods of snakes. Because of these shining gems there is
practically no darkness. Those living in these planets do not become old
or diseased, and they are not afraid of death from any cause but the time
factor, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

In the planet Atala, the yawning of a demon has produced three kinds
of women, called svairini (independent), kamini (lusty) and puriscali
(very easily subdued by men). Below Atala is the planet Vitala, wherein
Lord Siva and his wife Gauri reside. Because of their presence, a kind of
gold is produced called hataka. Below Vitala is the planet Sutala. the
abode of Bali Maharaja, the most fortunate king. Bali Maharaja was
favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vamanadeva. because
of his intense devotional service. The Lord went to the sacrificial arena of
Bali Maharaja and begged him for three paces of land, and on this plea
the Lord took from him all his possessions. When Bali Maharaja agreed
to all this, the Lord was very pleased, and therefore the Lord serves as
his doorkeeper. The description of Bali Maharaja appears in the Eighth
Canto of Srirad-Bhagavatam.

371


--- Page 374 ---
372 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24

When the Supreme Personality of Godhead offers a devotee material
happiness, this is not His real favor. The demigods, who are very puffed
up by their material opulence, pray to the Lord only for material happi-
ness, not knowing anything better. Devotees like Prahlada Maharaja,
however, do not want material happiness. Not to speak of material happi-
ness, they do not want even liberation from material bondage, although
one can achieve this liberation simply by chanting the holy name of the
Lord, even with improper pronunciation.

Below Sutala is the planet Talatala, the abode of the demon Maya. This
demon is always materially happy because he is favored by Lord Siva,
but he cannot achieve spiritual happiness at any time. Below Talatala is
the planet Mahatala, where there are many snakes with hundreds and
thousands of hoods. Below Mahatala is Rasatala, and below that is Patala,
where the serpent Vasuki lives with his associates.

TEXT 1
श्रीक उवाच
~ Q - ©
अधस्तात्सवितर्योजनायुते खर्भानुर्नक्षत्रवचरतीत्येके योऽसघ्रमरत्वं
ग्रहत्वं ASAT भगवदनुकम्पया खयमसुरापसदः सेंदिकेयो द्यतद हस्तस्य
तात जन्म कर्माणि चोपरिष्टाद्स्यामः ॥ १॥
sri-Suka uvaca

adhastat savitur yojanayute svarbhanur naksatravac caratity eke yo
’sav amaratvari grahatvari calabhata bhagavad-anukampaya svayam
asurapasadah sairihikeyo hy atad-arhas tasya tata janma karmani
coparistad vaksyamah.

$ri-sukah ८४००-5 Sukadeva Gosvami said; adhastat—below;
savituh—the sun globe; yojana—a measurement equal to eight miles;
ayute—ten thousand; svarbhanuh—the planet known as Rahu; nak-
satra-vat—like one of the stars; carati—is rotating; iti—thus; eke—
some who are learned in the Puranas; yah—which; asau—that;
amaratvam—a lifetime like those of the demigods; grahatvam—a posi-
tion as one of the chief planets; ca—and; alabhata—obtained;


--- Page 375 ---
Text 2] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 373
bhagavat-anukampaya—by the compassion of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; svayam—personally; asura-apasadah—the lowest of the
asuras; sairmhikeyah—being the son of जाव; hi—indeed; a-tat-
arhah—not qualified for that position; tasya—his; tata—O my dear
King; janma—birth; karmani—activities; ca—also; uparistat—later;
vaksyamah—1I shall explain.
TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, some historians, the
speakers of the Puranas, say that 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles]
below the sun is the planet known as Rahu, which moves like one
of the stars. The presiding deity of that planet, who is the son of
Sirmhika, is the most abominable of all asuras, but although he is
completely unfit to assume the position of a demigod or planetary
deity, he has achieved that position by the grace of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Later I shall speak further about him.

TEXT 2
Sl व = ¢
यददस्तरणेमेण्डलं प्रतपतस्तद्विस्तरतो योजनायुतमाचक्षते दादशसदखं
= = ক = ९ 2

মামম্তয £2 | CEN ES FAC | राहोर्यः पवेणि तदुन्यवधानन्रद राचुचन्धः घर्या-
चन्द्रमसावभिधावति | २॥
yad ados taraner mandala pratapatas tad vistarato yojanayutam
acaksate dvadasa-sahasrari somasya trayodasa-sahasrari rahor yah
parvani tad-vyavadhana-krd vairanubandhah sirya-candramasav
abhidhavati.

yat—which; adah—that; taraneh—of the sun; mandalam—globe;
pratapatah—which is always distributing heat; tat—that; vistaratah—
in terms of width; yojana—a distance of eight miles; ayutam—ten thou-
sand; dcaksate—they estimate; dvadasa-sahasram—20.000 yojanas
(160,000 miles); somasya—of the moon; trayodasa—thirty:
sahasram—one thousand; rahoh—of the planet Rahu; yah—which:
parvani—on occasion; tat-vyavadhana-krt—who created an obstruction
to the sun and moon at the time of the distribution of nectar; vaira-anu-


--- Page 376 ---
374 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24
bandhah—whose intentions are inimical; sirya—the sun:
candramasau—and the moon; abhidhdvati—runs after them on the
full-moon night and the dark-moon day.
TRANSLATION

The sun globe, which is a source of heat, extends for 10,000 yo-
janas [80,000 miles]. The moon extends for 20,000 yojanas
[160,000 miles], and Rahu extends for 30,000 yojanas [240,000
miles]. Formerly, when nectar was being distributed, Rahu tried to
create dissension between the sun and moon by interposing him-
self between them. Rahu is inimical toward both the sun and the
moon, and therefore he always tries to cover the sunshine and
moonshine on the dark-moon day and full-moon night.

PURPORT

As stated herein, the sun extends for 10,000 yojanas, and the moon
extends for twice that, or 20,000 yojanas. The word dvadasa should be
understood to mean twice as much as ten, or twenty. In the opinion of Vi-
jayadhvaja, the extent of Rahu should be twice that of the moon, or
40,000 yojanas. However, to reconcile this apparent contradiction to the
text of the Bhagavatam, Vijayadhvaja cites the following quotation con-
cerning Rahu: rahu-soma-ravinam tu mandala dvi-gunoktitam. This
means that Rahu is twice as large as the moon, which is twice as large as
the sun. This is the conclusion of the commentator Vijayadhvaja.

TEXT 3

~ = ~ 3 Cle +
तानद्चम्याभयत्राप भगवता रक्षणाय प्रयुक्तं Ad नाम भागवत

~ ক "का; (~ म ~ 0 ই
दायततमचछ्च तत्तेजसा HERES यहुः परवतमानमम्यवास्ता gragls-

(> ~ CG on Ce) =

FAAFATZT आरादेव निवतेते तदुपरागमिति वदन्ति रोकाः UW
tan nisamyobhayatrapi bhagavata raksanaya prayuktar 51800180710 711
nama bhagavatam dayitam astram tat tejasa durvisahari muhuh
parivartamanam abhyavasthito muhirtam udvijamanas cakita-hrdaya
arad eva nivartate tad uparagam iti vadanti lokah.


--- Page 377 ---
Text 3] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 375

tat—that situation; niSamya—hearing; ubhayatra—around both the
sun and moon; api—indeed; bhagavata—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; raksanaya—for their protection; prayuktam—engaged;
sudarsanam—the wheel of Krsna; nama—named; bhagavatam—the
most confidential devotee; dayitam—the most favorite; astram—
weapon; tat—that; tejasa—by its effulgence; durvisaham —unbearable
heat; muhuh—repeatedly; parivartamanam—moving around the sun
and moon; abhyavasthitah—situated; muhirtam—for a muhirta
(forty-eight minutes); udvijamanah—whose mind was full of anxieties;
cakita—{rightened; hrdayah—the core of whose heart; arat—to a dis-
tant place; eva—certainly; nivartate—flees; tat—that situation;
uparagam—an eclipse; iti—thus; vadanti—they say; lokah—the
people.

TRANSLATION

After hearing from the sun and moon demigods about Rahu’s
attack, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, engages His
disc, known as the Sudar$ana cakra, to protect them. The Sudar-
Sana cakra is the Lord’s most beloved devotee and is favored by the
Lord. The intense heat of its effulgence, meant for killing non-
Vaisnavas, is unbearable to Rahu, and he therefore flees in fear of
it. During the time Rahu disturbs the sun or moon, there occurs
what people commonly know as an eclipse.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, is always the protector of
His devotees, who are also known as demigods. The controlling demigods
are most obedient to Lord Visnu, although they also want material sense
enjoyment, and that is why they are called demigods, or almost godly. Al-
though Rahu attempts to attack both the sun and the moon, they are pro-
tected by Lord Visnu. Being very afraid of Lord Visnu’s cakra, Rahu
cannot stay in front of the sun or moon for more than a muhirta (forty-
eight minutes). The phenomenon that occurs when Rahu blocks the light
of the sun or moon is called an eclipse. The attempt of the scientists of
this earth to go to the moon is as demoniac as Rahu’s attack. Of course.
their attempts will be failures because no one can enter the moon or sun


--- Page 378 ---
376 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24.
so easily. Like the attack of Rahu, such attempts will certainly be
failures.
TEXT 4
ततोऽधस्तात्सिद्धचारणविद्याधराणां सदनानि तावन्मात्र एव ॥ ४ ॥
tato ‘dhastat siddha-carana-vidyadharanam sadanani tavan matra
eva.

tatah—the planet Rahu; adhastat—below; siddha-carana—of the
planets known as Siddhaloka and Caranaloka; vidyadharanam—-and the
planets of the Vidyadharas; sadanani—the residential places; tavat
matra—only that much distance (eighty thousand miles); eva—indeed.

TRANSLATION

Below Rahu by 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles] are the planets

known as Siddhaloka, Caranaloka and Vidyadhara-loka.
PURPORT

It is said that the residents of Siddhaloka, being naturally endowed
with the powers of yogis, can go from one planet to another by their
natural mystic powers without using airplanes or similar machines.

TEXT 5

ततोऽधस्ता्क्षरक्षः पिशाचप्रेतमूतगणानां विदाराजिरमन्तरिभषं यावद्वायुः प्रवाति
यावन्मेषा उपलम्यन्ते । ५ ॥
tato 'dhastad yaksa-raksah-pisaca-preta-bhita-gananam viharajiram
antariksam yavad vayuh pravati yavan megha upalabhyante.

tatah adhastat—beneath the planets occupied by the Siddhas, Caranas
and Vidyadharas; yaksa-raksah-pisaca-preta-bhita-gananam—of Yak-
sas, Raksasas, Pisacas, ghosts and so on; vihdra-ajiram—the place of
sense gratification; antariksam—in the sky or outer space; yavat—as far


--- Page 379 ---
Text 7] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 377
as; vayuh—the wind; pravati—blows; yavat—as far as; meghah—the
clouds; upalabhyante—are seen.
TRANSLATION

Beneath Vidyadhara-loka, Caranaloka and Siddhaloka, in the
sky called antariksa, are the places of enjoyment for the Yaksas,
Raksasas, Pisacas, ghosts and so on. Antariksa extends as far as the
wind blows and the clouds float in the sky. Above this there is no
more air.

TEXT 6

ततोऽधस्ताच्छतयोजनान्तर इयं पृथिवी याबद्धंसमासञ्येन सुपर्णादयः
ARATE उत्पतन्तीति ॥ & ॥
tato ‘dhastac chata-yojanantara iyam prthivi yavad 4/1077150-6/105व-
Syena-suparnadayah patattri-pravara utpatantiti.

tatah adhastat—beneath that; Sata-yojana—of one hundred yojanas;
antare—by an interval; iyam—this; prthivi—planet earth; yavat—as
high as; harmsa—swans; bhdsa—vultures; Syena—eagles; suparna-
adayah—and other birds; patattri-pravarah—the chief among birds;
utpatanti—can fly; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

Below the abodes of the Yaksas and Raksasas by a distance of 100
yojanas [800 miles] is the planet earth. Its upper limits extend as
high as swans, hawks, eagles and similar large birds can fly.

TEXT 7
+ वः 1 wis

उपवर्णितं भूमेयथासंनिवेशावस्ानमवनेरप्यधस्तात्‌ सप्र भूविवरा एकैकशो
योजनायुतान्तरेणायामविस्तारेणोपङ्कपा अतलं वितलं सुतलं तलातलं
महातलं रसातलं पातारमिति ॥ ७॥ :


--- Page 380 ---
378 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24.
upavarnitar bhiimer yatha-sannivesavasthanam avaner apy adhastat
sapta bhi-vivara ekaikaso yojanayutdntarenayama-vistarenopaklpta
atalari vitalarn sutalam talatalarh mahatalam rasatalarn patalam iti.

upavarnitam—stated previously; bhameh—of the planet earth;
yatha-sannivesa-avasthanam —according to the arrangement of the dif-
ferent places; avaneh—the earth; api—certainly; adhastat—beneath;
sapta—seven; bhii-vivarah—other planets; eka-ekasah—in succession,
up to the outer limit of the universe; yojana-ayuta-antarena—with an
interval of ten thousand yojanas (eighty thousand miles); ayama-
vistarena—by width and length; upaklptah—situated; atalam—named
Atala; vitalam—Vitala; sutalam—Sutala; talatalam —Talatala;
mahatalam —Mahatala; rasatalam—Rasatala; patalam—Patala; iti—
thus.

TRANSLATION

My dear King, beneath this earth are seven other planets, known
as Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala and Patala. I
have already explained the situation of the planetary systems of
earth. The width and length of the seven lower planetary systems
are calculated to be exactly the same as those of earth.

TEXT 8
एतेषु টি freaiy खर्गादप्यधिककाममोगैशचर्यानन्द भूतिविमूतिभिः
न

सुसमृद्रमवनोद्यानाक्रीडविहारेषु देत्यदानवकाद्रवेया नित्यम्रयुदितानुरक्त
कटत्रापत्यचन्धुसहद लुचरा गृहपतय ईश्वरादप्यप्रविहतकामा मायाविनोदा
निवक्षन्ति ॥ ८ ॥
etesu hi bila-svargesu svargad apy adhika-kama-bhogaisvaryananda-
bhuti-vibhutibhih susamrddha-bhavanodyanakrida-viharesu daitya-
danava-kadraveya nitya-pramuditanurakta-kalatrapatya-bandhu-
suhrd-anucara grha-pataya iSvarad apy apratihata-kama maya-vinoda
nivasanti.


--- Page 381 ---
Text 8] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 379

etesu—in these; hi—certainly; bila-svargesu—known as the heavenly
subterranean worlds; svargat—than the heavenly planets; api—even;
adhika—a greater quantity; kama-bhoga—enjoyment of sense gratifica-
tion; aiSvarya-ananda—bliss due to opulence; bhiti—influence;
vibhiitibhih—by those things and wealth; su-samrddha —improved;
bhavana—houses; udyana—gardens; akrida-viharesu—in places for
different types of sense gratification; daitya—the demons; danava—
ghosts; kadraveyah—snakes; nitya—who are always; pramudita—
overjoyed; anurakta—because of attachment; kalatra—to wife;
apatya—children; bandhu—family relations; suhrt—friends;
anucarah—followers; grha-patayah—the heads of the households;
varat—than those more capable, like the demigods; api—even;
apratihata-kamah—whose fulfillment of lusty desires is unimpeded;
maya—illusory; vinodah—who feel happiness; nivasanti—live.

TRANSLATION

In these seven planetary systems, which are also known as the
subterranean heavens [bila-svarga], there are very beautiful
houses, gardens and places of sense enjoyment, which are even
more opulent than those in the higher planets because the demons
have a very high standard of sensual pleasure, wealth and in-
fluence. Most of the residents of these planets, who are known as
Daityas, Danavas and Nagas, live as householders. Their wives,
children, friends and society are all fully engaged in illusory, ma-
terial happiness. The sense enjoyment of the demigods is some-
times disturbed, but the residents of these planets enjoy life with-
out disturbances. Thus they are understood to be very attached to
illusory happiness.

PURPORT

According to the statements of Prahlada Maharaja, material enjoyment
is maya-sukha, illusory enjoyment. A Vaisnava is full of anxieties for
the deliverance of all living entities from such false enjoyment. Prahlada
Maharaja says, maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimidhan: these fools
(vimudhas) are engaged in material happiness, which is surely tempo-
rary. Whether in the heavenly planets, the lower planets or the earthly


--- Page 382 ---
380 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24
planets, people are engrossed in temporary, material happiness, forget-
ting that in due course of time they have to change their bodies according
to the material laws and suffer the repetition of birth, death, old age and
disease. Not caring what will happen in the next birth, gross materialists
are simply busy enjoying during the present short span of life. A
Vaisnava is always anxious to give all such bewildered materialists the
real happiness of spiritual bliss.
TEXT 9
IY महाराज मयेन मायाविना विनिर्मिताः पुरो नानामणिग्रवर-
प्रवेकविरचितविचित्रभवनप्राकारगोपुरसमाचैत्यचत्वरायतनादिभिर्नागासुरमि -
{> 6 _~ (~ - a

धुनपारावतश्चुकसारिकाकीणद्त्रिमभूमिभिर्विवरेशवरगृहोत्तमः समलङ्कुताश्चका-
सति॥ ९॥
yesu maharaja mayena mayavina vinirmitah puro nana-mani-pravara-
praveka-viracita-vicitra-bhavana-prakara-gopura-sabha-caitya-
catvarayatanddibhir nagasura-mithuna-paravata-suka-sarikakirna-
krtrima-bhiamibhir vivaresvara-grhottamaih samalankrtas cakasati.

yesu—in those lower planetary systems; maha-raja—O my dear
King; mayena—by the demon named Maya; maya-vina—possessing ad-
vanced knowledge in the construction of material comforts; vinir-
mitah—constructed; purah—cities; nana-mani-pravara—of valuable
gems; praveka—with excellent; wviracita—constructed; vicitra—won-
derful; bhavana—houses; prakara—walls; gopura—gates; sabha—
legislative meeting rooms; caitya—temples; catvara—schools; ayatana-
adibhih—with hotels or recreation halls and so on; naga—of living en-
tities with snakelike bodies; asura—of demons, or godless persons;
mithuna—by couples; pdravata—pigeons; Suka—parrots; sarika—
mynas; akirna—crowded; krtrima—artificial; bhiamibhih—possessing
areas; vivara-iSsvara—of the leaders of the planets; grha-uttamaih—
with first-class houses; samalankrtah—decorated; cakasati—shine mag-
nificently.


--- Page 383 ---
Text 10] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 381
TRANSLATION

My dear King, in the imitation heavens known as bila-svarga
there is a great demon named Maya Danava, who is an expert artist
and architect. He has constructed many brilliantly decorated cities.
There are many wonderful houses, walls, gates, assembly houses,
temples, yards and temple compounds, as well as many hotels serv-
ing as residential quarters for foreigners. The houses for the
leaders of these planets are constructed with the most valuable
jewels, and they are always crowded with living entities known as
Nagas and Asuras, as well as many pigeons, parrots and similar
birds. All in all, these imitation heavenly cities are most beautifully
situated and attractively decorated.

TEXT 10
उद्यानानि चातितरां CH EC ICI EAC HIE UR TS RETR QI ECR
वनतरुचिर विटपविटपिनां ন্তরাল্লান্তি্লিবানা श्रीभिः समिथुन विविधविहङ्गम-
जलाज्ञयानाममलजलपू्णानां श्षपङ्लोषटङ्खनक्चुभितनीरनीरजङ्खदङ्वलयकट्ार-
नीरोत्पल लोहितश्चतपत्रादिवनेषु कृतनिकेतनानामेकविहाराङलमधुरविविध-
= ~

सखनादिमिरिन्द्रियोत्सयैरमरलोकश्रियमकिशयितानि ।१०॥
udyanani catitarar mana-indriyanandibhih kusuma-phala-stabaka-
subhaga-kisalayavanata-rucira-vitapa-vitapinam latangalingitanam
Sribhih samithuna-vividha-viharigama-jalasayanam amala-jala-
parmanam jhasakulollanghana-ksubhita-nira-niraja-kumuda-kuva-
laya-kahlara-nilotpala-lohita-satapatradi-vanesu krta-niketananam
eka-viharakula-madhura-vividha-svanadibhir indriyotsavair amara-
loka-$riyam atisayitani.

udyanani—the gardens and parks; ca—also; atitaram—greatly:
manah—to the mind; indriya—and to the senses; anandibhih—which
cause pleasure; kusuma—by flowers; phala—of fruits; stabaka—
bunches; subhaga—very beautiful; kisalaya—new twigs; avanata—
bent low; rucira—attractive; vitapa — possessing branches; vitapinam—


--- Page 384 ---
382 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24.
of trees; lata-anga-alingitanam—which are embraced by the limbs of
creepers; $ribhih—by the beauty; sa-mithuna—in pairs; vividha—
varieties; vihangama—frequented by birds; jala-asayanam—of reser-
voirs of water; amala-jala-piarnanam—full of clear and transparent
water; jhasa-kula-ullarighana—by the jumping of different fish;
ksubhita —agitated; nira—in the water; nirgja—of lotus flowers;
kumuda—lilies; kuvalaya—flowers named kuvalaya; kahlara—
kahlara flowers; nila-utpala—blue lotus flowers; lohita—red; sata-
patra-adi—lotus flowers with a hundred petals and so on; vanesu—in
forests; krta-niketananam—of birds that have made their nests; eka-
vihara-akula—full of uninterrupted enjoyment; madhura—very sweet;
vividha—varieties; svana-adibhih—by vibrations; indriya-utsavaih—
invoking sense enjoyment; amara-loka-sriyam—the beauty of the resi-
dential places of the demigods; atiayitani—surpassing.
TRANSLATION

The parks and gardens in the artificial heavens surpass in beauty
those of the upper heavenly planets. The trees in those gardens,
embraced by creepers, bend with a heavy burden of twigs with
fruits and flowers, and therefore they appear extraordinarily
beautiful. That beauty could attract anyone and make his mind
fully blossom in the pleasure of sense gratification. There are
many lakes and reservoirs with clear, transparent water, agitated
by jumping fish and decorated with many flowers such as lilies,
kuvalayas, kahlaras and blue and red lotuses. Pairs of cakravakas
and many other water birds nest in the lakes and always enjoy in a
happy mood, making sweet, pleasing vibrations that are very
satisfying and conducive to enjoyment of the senses.

TEXT 11
यत्र ह वाव न भयमहोरात्रादिभिः कारविभागेरुपलक्ष्यते 1221

yatra ha vava na bhayam aho-ratradibhih kala-vibhagair upalaksyate.

yatra—where; ha vava—certainly; na—not; bhayam—fearfulness;
ahah-ratra-adibhih—because of days and nights; kala-vibhagaih—the
divisions of time; upalaksyate—is experienced.


--- Page 385 ---
Text 13] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 383
TRANSLATION

Since there is no sunshine in those subterranean planets, time is
not divided into days and nights, and consequently fear produced
by time does not exist.

TEXT 12
यत्र हि महादिप्रवरशिरोमणयः सवं तमः प्रवाधन्ते ॥१२॥

yatra hi mahahi-pravara-siro-manayah sarvam tamah prabadhante.

yatra—where; hi—indeed; maha-ahi—of great serpents; pravara—
of the best; Sirah-manayah—the gems on the hoods; sarvam—all;
tamah—darkness; prabadhante—drive away.

TRANSLATION

Many great serpents reside there with gems on their hoods, and
the effulgence of these gems dissipates the darkness in all
directions.

TEXT 13
न वा एतेषु वसतां दिव्यौपधिरसरसायनान्पानलानादिभिराधयो व्याधयो
aA ५५ (प

वलीपलितजरादयश्च देहवैवण्य॑दौगंन्ध्यस्वेद छमग्लानिरिति वयोऽवस्थाश्च
भवस्ति ॥१३॥
na va etesu vasatar divyausadhi-rasa-rasayananna-pana-snanadibhir
adhayo vyadhayo vali-palita-jaradayas ca deha-vaivarnya-
daurgandhya-sveda-klama-glanir iti vayo ’vasthas ca bhavanti.

na—not; va—either; etesu—in these planets; vasatam—of those
residing; divya—wonderful; ausadhi—of herbs; rasa—the juices;
rasayana—and elixirs; anna—by eating; pana—drinking; snana-
adibhih—by bathing in and so on; dadhayah—mental troubles;
vyadhayah—diseases; vali—wrinkles; palita—grey hair; jara—old
age; ddayah—and so on: ca—and; deha-vaivarnya—the fading of
bodily luster; daurgandhya—bad odor; sveda—perspiration; klama—


--- Page 386 ---
384 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24
fatigue; glanih—lack of energy; iti—thus; vayah avasthah—miserable
conditions due to increasing age; ca—and; bhavanti—are.
TRANSLATION

Since the residents of these planets drink and bathe in juices and
elixirs made from wonderful herbs, they are freed from all
anxieties and physical diseases. They have no experience of grey
hair, wrinkles or invalidity, their bodily lusters do not fade, their
perspiration does not cause a bad smell, and they are not troubled
by fatigue or by lack of energy or enthusiasm due to old age.

TEXT 14

ন হিলঙদা कल्याणानां प्रभवति gama मृत्युर्विना मगवत्तनसथक्रा-
ঘ্যান १४॥
na hi 1650 718 kalyananam prabhavati kutascana mrtyur vina bhagavat-
tejasas cakrapadesat.

na hi—not; tesam—of them; kalyananam—who are by nature
auspicious; prabhavati—able to influence; kutascana—from anywhere;
mrtyuh—death; vind —except; bhagavat-tejasah—of the energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; cakra-apadesat—from that weapon
named the Sudarsana cakra.

TRANSLATION

They live very auspiciously and do not fear death from anything
but death’s established time, which is the effulgence of the Sudar-
sana cakra of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

This is the defect of material existence. Everything in the subterra-
nean heavens is very nicely arranged. There are well situated residential
quarters, there is a pleasing atmosphere, and there are no bodily incon-
veniences or mental anxieties, but nevertheless those who live there have
to take another birth according to karma. Persons whose minds are dull


--- Page 387 ---
Text 16] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 385
cannot understand this defect of a materialistic civilization aiming at ma-
terial comforts. One may make his living conditions very pleasing for the
senses, but despite all favorable conditions, one must in due course of
time meet death. The members of a demoniac civilization endeavor to
make their living conditions very comfortable, but they cannot check
death. The influence of the Sudarsana cakra will not allow their so-called
material happiness to endure.
TEXT 15

यसिन्‌ प्रव्िष्टेऽसुरवधूनां प्रायः पुंसवनानि भयादेव स्रवन्ति
पतन्ति च NN
yasmin praviste 51070-800/80702 77, prayah purisavanani bhayad eva
sravanti patanti ca.

yasmin—where; praviste—when entered; asura-vadhinam—of the
wives of those demons; prayah—almost always; pumsavanani—fetuses:
bhayat—because of fear; eva—certainly; sravanti—slip out; patanti—
fall down; ca—and.

TRANSLATION

When the Sudaréana disc enters those provinces, the pregnant
wives of the demons all have miscarriages due to fear of its
effulgence.

TEXT 16
AYES मयपुत्रोऽसुरो बलो निवसति येन ह वा इह
gen: पण्णवतिर्मायाः काथनाद्यापि मायाविनो धारयन्ति यख च लजुम्भ-
EN ক
माणस्य FETA: জীবণা उदपद्यन्त स्पेरिण्यः कामिन्यः पुंश्चल्य इति
= [] 1 ५
या वे बिलायनं प्रविष्टं पुरुषं रसेन हाटकाख्येन साधयित्वा खविलासा-
[1 = ~ RD.

वलोकनानुरागसितसंखापोपगूहनादिभिः स्वैरं © रमयन्ति
यसिन्नुषयुक्ते पुरुष ईश्वरोऽहं सिद्धोऽदमित्ययुतमहागजवरमात्मानम-
भिमन्यमानः कत्थते मदान्ध इव ॥१६॥


--- Page 388 ---
386 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24

athatale maya-putro 5207-0 balo nivasati yena ha va iha srstah san-
navatir mayah kascanadyapi mayavino dharayanti yasya ca
Jjrmbhamanasya mukhatas trayah stri-gana udapadyanta svairinyah
kaminyah pumscalya iti ya vai 01100072077 [07007510718 purusam rasena
hatakakhyena sadhayitva sva-vildsavalokananuraga-smita-
samlapopagiihanadibhih svairam kila ramayanti yasminn upayukte
purusa isvaro "ham siddho "ham ity ayuta-maha-gaja-balam atmanam
abhimanyamanah katthate madandha iva.

atha—now; atale—on the planet named Atala; maya-putrah
asurah—the demon son of Maya; balah—Bala; nivasati—resides;
yena—by whom; ha vd—indeed; tha —in this; srstah —propagated; sat-
navatih—ninety-six; mayah—varieties of illusion; kascana—some:
adya api—even today; maya-vinah—those who know the art of magical
feats (like manufacturing gold); dharayanti—utilize; yasya—of whom;
ca—also; jrmbhamanasya—while yawning; mukhatah—from the
mouth; trayah—three; stri-ganah—varieties of women; udapa-
dyanta—were generated; svairinyah—svairini (one who only marries in
her same class); kaminyah—kamini (one who, being lusty, marries men
from any group); puriscalyah—puriscali (one who wants to go from one
husband to another); iti—thus; yah—who; wvai—certainly; bila-
ayanam—the subterranean planets; pravistam—entering; purusam—a
male; rasena—by a juice; hataka-akhyena—made from an intoxicating
herb known as hataka; sadhayitva—making sexually fit; sva-vilasa—
for their personal sense gratification; avalokana—by glances;
anuraga—lustful; smita—by smiling; samlapa—by talking;
upagihana-adibhih—and by embracing; svairam—according to their
own desire; kila—indeed; ramayanti—enjoy sex pleasure; yasmin—
which; upayukte —when used; purusah—a man; iSvarah aham—I am
the most powerful person; siddhah aham—I am the greatest and most
elevated person; iti—thus; ayuta—ten thousand; maha-gaja—of big
elephants; balam —the strength; atmanam —himself;
abhimanyamanah—being full of pride; katthate—they say; mada-
andhah—blinded by false prestige; iva—like.

TRANSLATION

My dear King, now I shall describe to you the lower planetary

systems, one by one, beginning from Atala. In Atala there is a


--- Page 389 ---
Text 17] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 387
demon, the son of Maya Danava named Bala, who created ninety-
six kinds of mystic power. Some so-called yogis and svamis take
advantage of this mystic power to cheat people even today. Simply
by yawning, the demon Bala created three kinds of women, known
as svairini, kamini and pumsScali. The svairinis like to marry men
from their own group, the kaminis marry men from any group,
and the purnécalis change husbands one after another. If a man en-
ters the planet of Atala, these women immediately capture him and
induce him to drink an intoxicating beverage made with a drug
known as hataka [cannabis indica]. This intoxicant endows the
man with great sexual prowess, of which the women take advan-
tage for enjoyment. A woman will enchant him with attractive
glances, intimate words, smiles of love and then embraces. In this
way she induces him to enjoy sex with her to her full satisfaction.
Because of his increased sexual power, the man thinks himself
stronger than ten thousand elephants and considers himself most
perfect. Indeed, illusioned and intoxicated by false pride, he
thinks himself God, ignoring impending death.
TEXT 17
- ০
ततोऽधस्ताद्वितले हरो AEM हाटकेश्वरः खपापंदभूतगणाव्रतः

प्रजापतिसगोपवृंदणाय भवो भवान्या सह मिथुनीभूत आस्ते यतः
সম্বলা सरित्प्ररा हाटकी नाम भवयोर्वीर्येण यत्र
चित्रमानुर्मातरिश्चना समिध्यमान ओजसा पिबति तनििष्टय॒तं
हाटकाख्यं सुवणं भूषणेनासरेन्द्रावरोधेषु पुरूषाः सह पुरुषीभिर्घारयन्ति
॥ १७॥

tato ‘dhastad vitale haro bhagavan hatakesvarah sva-parsada-bhiita-
ganavrtah prajapati-sargopabrmhanaya bhavo bhavanya saha mithuni-
bhita aste yatah pravrtta sarit-pravara hataki nama bhavayor viryena
yatra citrabhanur matarisvana samidhyamana ojasa pibati tan
nisthyitarn hatakakhyam suvarnam bhisanendsurendravarodhesu
purusah saha purusibhir dharayanti.

tatah—the planet Atala; adhastat—beneath; vitale—on the planet;
harah—Lord Siva: bhagavan—the most powerful personality: hata-


--- Page 390 ---
388 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24.
kesvarah—the master of gold; sva-parsada—by his own associates;
bhiita-gana—who are ghostly living beings; avrtah—surrounded; pra-
Jjapati-sarga—of the creation of Lord Brahma; upabrmhanaya—to in-
crease the population: bhavah—Lord Siva; bhavanya saha—with his
wife, Bhavani; mithuni-bhiitah—being united in sex; dste—remains;
yatah—from that planet (Vitala); pravrtta—being emanated; sarit-pra-
vara—the great river; hataki—Hataki; nama—named; bhavayoh
viryena—due to the semina and ovum of Lord Siva and Bhavani;
yatra—where; citra-bhanuh —the fire-god; matarisvana—by the wind;
samidhyamanah—being brightly inflamed; ojasa—with great strength;
pibati—drinks; tat—that; nisthyitam—spit out with a hissing sound;
hataka-akhyam—named Hataka; suvarnam—gold; bhisanena—by
different types of ornaments; asura-indra—of the great asuras;
avarodhesu—in the homes; purusih—the males; saha—with;
purusibhih—their wives and women; dhdrayanti—wear.
TRANSLATION

The next planet below Atala is Vitala, wherein Lord Siva, who is
known as the master of gold mines, lives with his personal associ-
ates, the ghosts and similar living entities. Lord Siva, as the pro-
genitor, engages in sex with Bhavani, the progenitress, to produce
living entities, and from the mixture of their vital fluid the river
named Hataki is generated. When fire, being made to blaze by the
wind, drinks of this river and then sizzles and spits it out, it pro-
duces gold called Hataka. The demons who live on that planet with
their wives decorate themselves with various ornaments made
from that gold, and thus they live there very happily.

PURPORT

It appears that when Bhava and Bhavani, Lord Siva and his wife, unite
sexually, the emulsification of their secretions creates a chemical which
when heated by fire can produce gold. It is said that the alchemists of the
medieval age tried to prepare gold from base metal, and Srila Sanatana
Gosvami also states that when bell metal is treated with mercury, it can
produce gold. Srila Sanatana Gosvami mentions this in regard to the


--- Page 391 ---
Text 18] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 389
initiation of low-class men to turn them into brahmanas. Sanatana
Gosvami said:
yatha karncanatam yati
kamsyam rasa-vidhanatah
tatha diksa-vidhanena
dvijatvam jayate nrnam
“As one can transform karmsa, or bell metal, into gold by treating it with
mercury, one can also turn a lowborn man into a brahmana by initiating
him properly into Vaisnava activities.” The International Society for
Krishna Consciousness is trying to turn mlecchas and yavanas into real
brahmanas by properly initiating them and stopping them from engag-
ing in meat-eating, intoxication, illicit sex and gambling. One who stops
these four principles of sinful activity and chants the Hare Krsna maha-
mantra can certainly become a pure brahmana through the process of
bona fide initiation, as suggested by Srila Saniatana Gosvami.

Apart from this, if one takes a hint from this verse and learns how to
mix mercury with bell metal by properly heating and melting them, one
can get gold very cheaply. The alchemists of the medieval age tried to
manufacture gold, but they were unsuccessful, perhaps because they did
not follow the right instructions.

TEXT 18
ततोऽधस्तात्सुतले उदारश्रवाः पुण्यश्छोको विरोचनात्मजो
© ৬ ^ © 0
बलिभेगवता महेन्द्रस्य प्रियं चिकीषमाणेनादितेलेन्धकायो भूत्वा
- न्ह
वटुवामनरूपेण पराकषिप्ररोकत्रयो भगवद्‌ नुकम्पयेव पुनः प्रवेशित
इन्द्रादिष्वविद्यमानया স্তবমদ্বভম। च्रियामिजुष्टः सखधर्मेणाराधयंस्तमेव
भगवन्तमाराधनीयमपगतसाध्वस आस्तेऽधुनापि ।।१८॥

tato ’dhastat sutale udara-sravah punya-sloko virocanatmajo balir
bhagavata mahendrasya priya cikirsamanenaditer labdha-kayo
bhitva vatu-vamana-ripena paraksipta-loka-trayo bhagavad-
anukampayaiva punah pravesita indradisv avidyamanaya


--- Page 392 ---
390 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24
susamrddhaya sriyabhijustah sva-dharmenaradhayaris tam eva
bhagavantam aradhaniyam apagata-sadhvasa aste ‘dhundapi.

tatah adhastat—beneath the planet known as Vitala; sutale—on the
planet known as Sutala; udara-§ravah—very greatly celebrated: punya-
Slokah—very pious and advanced in spiritual consciousness; virocana-
atmajah—the son of Virocana; balih—Bali Maharaja; bhagavata—by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; maha-indrasya—of the King of
heaven, Indra; priyam—the welfare; cikirsamanena—desiring to per-
form: aditeh—from Aditi; labdha-kayah—having obtained His body;
bhiitva—appearing; vatu—brahmacari; vamana-ripena—in the form
of a dwarf; paraksipta—wrested away; loka-trayah—the three worlds;
bhagavat-anukampaya—by the causeless mercy of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; eva —certainly; punah—again; pravesitah —caused
to enter; indra-adisu—even among the demigods like the King of
heaven; avidyamanaya—not existing; susamrddhaya—much enriched
by such exalted opulence; $riya—by good fortune; abhijustah—being
blessed; sva-dharmena—by discharging devotional service;
aradhayan—worshiping; tam—Him; eva—certainly; bhagavantam—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aradhaniyam—who is most
worshipable: apagata-sadhvasah—without fear; dste—remains;
adhuna api—even today.

TRANSLATION

Below the planet Vitala is another planet, known as Sutala,
where the great son of Maharaja Virocana, Bali Maharaja, who is
celebrated as the most pious king, resides even now. For the
welfare of Indra, the King of heaven, Lord Visnu appeared in the
form of a dwarf brahmacari as the son of Aditi and tricked Bali
Maharaja by begging for only three paces of land but taking all the
three worlds. Being very pleased with Bali Maharaja for giving all
his possessions, the Lord returned his kingdom and made him
richer than the opulent King Indra. Even now, Bali Maharaja
engages in devotional service by worshiping the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead in the planet of Sutala.


--- Page 393 ---
Text 19] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 391
PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as Uttamasloka,
“He who is worshiped by the best of selected Sanskrit verses,” and His
devotees such as Bali Maharaja are also worshiped by punya-sloka,
verses that increase one’s piety. Bali Maharaja offered everything to the
Lord—his wealth, his kingdom and even his own body (sarvatma-
nivedane balih). The Lord appeared before Bali Maharaja as a brahmana
beggar, and Bali Maharaja gave Him everything he had. However, Bali
Maharaja did not become poor; by donating all his possessions to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he became a successful devotee and got
everything back again with the blessings of the Lord. Similarly, those
who give contributions to expand the activities of the Krsna conscious-
ness movement and to accomplish its objectives will never be losers; they
will get their wealth back with the blessings of Lord Krsna. On the other
side, those who collect contributions on behalf of the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness should be very careful not to use even
a farthing of the collection for any purpose other than the transcendental
loving service of the Lord.

TEXT 19
EN Pay ५ _^
नो एषेतत्ताक्षात्कारो भूमिदानस्य यत्तद्ध गवत्यशेषजीव निकायानां जोध्र-
ल

भूतात्मभूते परमात्मनि वासुदेवे तीथंतमे দাগ उपपन्ने परया श्रद्धया .
परमादरसमाहितमनसा सम्प्रतिपादितसख साक्षाद पवगद्वारस्

[+ = ¢.
यद्विलनिरय॑श्वयम्‌ ।।१९॥
no evaitat saksatkaro bhimi-danasya yat tad bhagavaty asesa-jiva-
nikayanam jiva-bhitatma-bhite paramatmani vasudeve tirthatame
patra upapanne paraya Sraddhaya paramadara-samahita-manasa
sampratipaditasya saksad apavarga-dvarasya yad bila-nilayaisvaryam.

no—not: eva—indeed: etat—this; saksatharah—the direct result:
bhimi-danasya—of contribution of land: yat—which: tat—that:
bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead: asesa-jiva-
nikayanam—of unlimited numbers of living entities: jiva-bhita-atma-


--- Page 394 ---
392 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24
bhite—who is the life and the Supersoul; parama-atmani—the supreme
regulator: vasudeve—Lord Vasudeva (Krsna); tirtha-tame—who is the
best of all places of pilgrimage; pdtre—the most worthy recipient;
upapanne—having approached; paraya—by the topmost; sraddhaya—
faith: parama-adara—with great respect; samahita-manasa—with an
attentive mind: sampratipaditasya—which was given; saksat—directly;
apavarga-dvarasya—the gate of liberation; yat—which; bila-nilaya—
of bila-svarga, the imitation heavenly planets; ai$varyam—the
opulence.
TRANSLATION

My dear King, Bali Maharaja donated all his possessions to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vamanadeva, but one should
certainly not conclude that he achieved his great worldly opulence
in bila-svarga as a result of his charitable disposition. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the source of life for all living en-
tities, lives within everyone as the friendly Supersoul, and under
His direction a living entity enjoys or suffers in the material world.
Greatly appreciating the transcendental qualities of the Lord, Bali
Maharaja offered everything at His lotus feet. His purpose,
however, was not to gain anything material, but to become a pure
devotee. For a pure devotee, the door of liberation is automatically
opened. One should not think that Bali Maharaja was given so
much material opulence merely because of his charity. When one
becomes a pure devotee in love, he may also be blessed with a good
material position by the will of the Supreme Lord. However, one
should not mistakenly think that the material opulence of a devo-
tee is the result of his devotional service. The real result of devo-
tional service is the awakening of pure love for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, which continues under all circumstances.

TEXT 20

यसय ₹ নান क्षुतपतनप्रस्खलनादिषु বিনহাঃ सक्रनामामिगरणन्‌ पुरुषः
कर्मबन्धनमञ्रसा व्रिधुनोति यस्य॒ ইল সলিলাশল मुश्चवोऽन्यथवोपलमन्ते
॥॥२०॥


--- Page 395 ---
Text 20] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 393
yasya ha vava ksuta-patana-praskhalanadisu vivasah sakrn
namabhigrnan purusah karma-bandhanam anjasa vidhunoti yasya
haiva pratibadhanar mumuksavo ‘nyathaivopalabhante.

yasya—of whom; ha vava—indeed; ksuta—when in hunger;
patana—falling down: praskhalana-adisu—stumbling and so on;
vivaSah—being helpless; sakrt—once; nama abhigrnan—chanting the
holy name of the Lord; purusah—a person; karma-bandhanam—the
bondage of fruitive activity; afjasa—completely; vidhunoti—washes
away; yasya—of which; ha—certainly; eva—in this way; pra-
tibadhanam —the repulsion; mumuksavah— persons desiring liberation;
anyatha —otherwise; eva—certainly; upalabhante—are trying to
realize.

TRANSLATION

If one who is embarrassed by hunger or who falls down or stum-
bles chants the holy name of the Lord even once, willingly or un-
willingly, he is immediately freed from the reactions of his past
deeds. Karmis entangled in material activities face many
difficulties in the practice of mystic yoga and other endeavors to
achieve that same freedom.

PURPORT

It is not a fact that one has to offer his material possessions to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and be liberated before he can engage
in devotional service. A devotee automatically attains liberation without
separate endeavors. Bali Maharaja did not get back all his material
possessions merely because of his charity to the Lord. One who becomes a
devotee. free from material desires and motives, regards all oppor-
tunities, both material and spiritual, as benedictions from the Lord. and
in this way his service to the Lord is never hampered. Bhukti, material
enjoyment, and mukti, liberation, are only by-products of devotional ser-
vice. A devotee need not work separately to attain mukti. Srila
Bilvamangala Thakura said, muktih 5৮00 07 mukulitanijalih sevate
’sman: a pure devotee of the Lord does not have to endeavor separately
for mukti, because mukti is always ready to serve him.


--- Page 396 ---
394 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24.
In this regard, Caitanya-caritamrta (Antya 3.177-188) describes
Haridasa Thakura’s confirmation of the effect of chanting the holy name
of the Lord.
keha bale— ‘nama haite haya papa-ksaya’
keha bale— ‘nama haite jivera moksa haya’
Some say that by chanting the holy name of the Lord one is freed from all
the reactions of sinful life, and others say that by chanting the holy name
of the Lord one attains liberation from material bondage.
haridasa kahena,— ‘“namera ei dui phala naya
namera phale krsna-pade prema upajaya
Haridasa Thakura, however, said that the desired result of chanting the
holy name of the Lord is not that one is liberated from material bondage
or freed from the reactions of sinful life. The actual result of chanting
the holy name of the Lord is that one awakens his dormant Krsna con-
sciousness, his loving service to the Lord.
anusarigika phala namera— ‘mukti’, ‘papa-nasa’
tahara drstanta yaiche siryera prakasa
Haridasa Thakura said that liberation and freedom from the reactions of
sinful activities are only by-products of chanting the holy name of the
Lord. If one chants the holy name of the Lord purely, he attains the plat-
form of loving service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this
regard Haridasa Thakura gave an example comparing the power of the
holy name to sunshine.
ei Slokera artha kara panditera gana”
sabe kahe,— ‘tumi kaha artha-vivarana’
He placed a verse before all the learned scholars present, but the learned
scholars asked him to state the purport of the verse.
haridasa kahena,— “‘yaiche suryera udaya
udaya na haite arambhe tamera haya ksaya


--- Page 397 ---
Text 21] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 395
Haridasa Thakura said that as the sun begins to rise, it dissipates the
darkness of night, even before the sunshine is visible.
caura-preta-raksasadira bhaya haya nasa
udaya haile dharma-karma-adi parakasa
Before the sunrise even takes place, the light of dawn destroys the fear of
the dangers of the night, such as disturbances by thieves, ghosts and
Riksasas, and when the sunshine actually appears, one engages in his
duties.
aiche namodayarambhe papa-adira ksaya
udaya kaile krsna-pade haya premodaya
Similarly, even before one’s chanting of the holy name is pure, one is
freed from all sinful reactions, and when he chants purely he becomes a
lover of Krsna.
‘mukti’ tuccha-phala haya namabhasa haite
ye mukti bhakta na laya, se krsna cahe dite”
A devotee never accepts mukti, even if Krsna offers it. Mukti, freedom
from all sinful reactions, is obtained even by namabhasa, or a glimpse of
the light of the holy name before its full light is perfectly visible.

The namabhasa stage is between that of nama-aparadha, or chanting
of the holy name with offenses, and pure chanting. There are three
stages in chanting the holy name of the Lord. In the first stage, one com-
mits ten kinds of offenses while chanting. In the next stage, namabhasa,
the offenses have almost stopped, and one is coming to the platform of
pure chanting. In the third stage, when one chants the Hare Krsna
mantra without offenses, his dormant love for Krspa immediately
awakens. This is the perfection.

TEXT 21
५, be মা LY
तद्ध क्तानामात्मवतां सवषापात्मन्यात्मद्‌ आत्मतयव ।।२१॥।
tad bhaktanam atmavatar sarvesam atmany dtrmada atmatayaiva.


--- Page 398 ---
396 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24

tat—that; bhaktanam—of great devotees; datma-vatam—of self-
realized persons like Sanaka and Sanatana; sarvesam—of all; atmani—
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the soul; atma-de —who
gives Himself without hesitation; atmataya—who is the Supreme Soul,
Paramatma; eva—indeed.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in every-
one’s heart as the Supersoul, sells Himself to His devotees such as
Narada Muni. In other words, the Lord gives pure love to such
devotees and gives Himself to those who love Him purely. Great,
self-realized mystic yogis such as the four Kumaras also derive
great transcendental bliss from realizing the Supersoul within
themselves.

PURPORT

The Lord became Bali Maharaja's doorkeeper not because of his giving
everything to the Lord, but because of his exalted position as a lover of
the Lord.

TEXT 22

aA oo ক
नतर भगुवान्‌नमगुष्यानुजग्राह यदुत ॒पुनरात्मानुस्म्रातमाषण मायामय
मोगैश्र्यमेषातयुतेति।।२२॥
na vai bhagavan niinam amusyanujagraha yad uta punar atmanusmrti-
mosanarm mayamaya-bhogaisvaryam evatanuteti.

na—not; vai—indeed; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ninam—certainly; amusya—unto Bali Maharaja; anu-
jagraha—showed His favor; yat—because; uta—certainly; punah—
again; atma-anusmrti—of remembrance of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; mosanam—which robs one; maya-maya—an attribute of
Maya; bhoga-aisvaryam—the material opulence; eva—certainly;
atanuta—extended; iti—thus.


--- Page 399 ---
Text 23] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 397
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead did not award His mercy
to Bali Maharaja by giving him material happiness and opulence,
for these make one forget loving service to the Lord. The result of
material opulence is that one can no longer absorb his mind in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

There are two kinds of opulence. One, which results from one’s
karma, is material, whereas the other is spiritual. A surrendered soul
who fully depends upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not
want material opulence for sense gratification. Therefore when a pure
devotee is seen to possess exalted material opulence, it is not due to his
karma. Rather, it is due to his bhakti. In other words, he is in that posi-
tion because the Supreme Lord wants him to execute service to Him very
easily and opulently. The special mercy of the Lord for the neophyte
devotee is that he becomes materially poor. This is the Lord’s mercy
because if a neophyte devotee becomes materially opulent, he forgets the
service of the Lord. However, if an advanced devotee is favored by the
Lord with opulence, it is not material opulence but a spiritual oppor-
tunity. Material opulence offered to the demigods causes forgetfulness of
the Lord, but opulence was given to Bali Maharaja for continuing service
to the Lord, which was free from any touch of maya.

TEXT 23
यत्तद्धगवतानधिगतान्योपायेन याच्जाच्छलेनापहूतखन्लरीराघरोपितलोकत्रयो
2 + = ~ ।

वरुणपाश्चे् सम्प्रातञक्ता frien चापविद्ध उति होवाच ॥ RR
2/८ tad bhagavatanadhigatanyopayena ydacna-cchalenapahrta-sva-
Sariravasesita-loka-trayo varuna-pasais ca sampratimukto giri-daryam
capaviddha iti hovaca.

yat—which; tat—that; bhagavata—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; anadhigata-anya-upayena—who is not perceived by other
means; ydcnid-chalena—by a trick of begging: apahrta—taken away:


--- Page 400 ---
398 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24
sva-Sarira-avasesita—with only his own body remaining; loka-trayah—
the three worlds; varuna-pasaih—by the ropes of Varuna; ca—and;
sampratimuktah—completely bound; giri-daryam—in a cave in a
mountain; ca—and; apaviddhah—being detained; iti—thus: ha—in-
deed: uvaca—said.
TRANSLATION

When the Supreme Personality of Godhead could see no other
means of taking everything away from Bali Maharaja, He adopted
the trick of begging from him and took away all the three worlds.
Thus only his body was left, but the Lord was still not satisfied. He
arrested Bali Maharaja, bound him with the ropes of Varuna and
threw him in a cave in a mountain. Nevertheless, although all his
property was taken and he was thrown into a cave, Bali Maharaja
was such a great devotee that he spoke as follows.

TEXT 24
नूनं बतायं भगवानर्थेषु न निष्णाता योऽसाविन्द्रो यस सचिवो
- ~ LN

मन्त्राय FA एकान्तता वरहस्पतिस्तमतिहाय FAZER THA
तात्मनयादिपो না एव तदाखमतिगम्भीरवयसः कालस्य मन्वन्तर-
afta करियछ्ठाक्त्रयमिदम्‌ ॥२४॥
nitnam batayarm bhagavan arthesu na nisnato yo ’sav indro yasya sacivo
mantraya vrta ekantato brhaspatis tam atihdaya svayam
upendrenatmanam aydcatatmanas casiso no eva tad-dasyam ati-
gambhira-vayasah kalasya manvantara-parivrttarn kiyal loka-trayam
idam.

nianam—certainly; bata—alas; ayam—this; bhagavan—very
learned; arthesu—in self-interest: na—not; nisnatah—very ex-
perienced; yah—who; asau—the King of heaven: indrah—Indra;
yasya—of whom; sacivah—the prime minister; mantraya—for giving
instructions; wvrtah—chosen; ekantatah—alone; brhaspatih—named
Brhaspati; tam —him; atihaya—ignoring; svayam—personally;


--- Page 401 ---
Text 24] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 399
upendrena—by means of Upendra (Lord Viamanadeva); atmanam—
myself: aydcata—requested; atmanah—for himself; ca—and; asisah—
blessings (the three worlds); no—not; eva—certainly; tat-dasyam—the
loving service of the Lord; ati—very; gambhira-vayasah—having an
insurmountable duration; kdlasya—of time; manvantara-parivrttam—
changed by the end of a life of a Manu; kiyat—what is the value of;
loka-trayam—three worlds; idam—these.
TRANSLATION

Alas, how pitiable it is for Indra, the King of heaven, that
although he is very learned and powerful and although he chose
Brhaspati as his prime minister to instruct him, he is completely
ignorant concerning spiritual advancement. Brhaspati is also unin-
telligent because he did not properly instruct his disciple Indra.
Lord Vamanadeva was standing at Indra’s door, but King Indra, in-
stead of begging Him for an opportunity to render transcendental
loving service, engaged Him in asking me for alms to gain the
three worlds for his sense gratification. Sovereignty over the three
worlds is very insignificant because whatever material opulence
one may possess lasts only for an age of Manu, which is but a tiny
fraction of endless time.

PURPORT

Bali Maharaja was so powerful that he fought with Indra and took
possession of the three worlds. Indra was certainly very advanced in
knowledge, but instead of asking Vamanadeva for engagement in His
service, he used the Lord to beg for material possessions that would be
finished at the end of one age of Manu. An age of Manu, which is the
duration of Manu’s life, is calculated to last seventy-two yugas. One yuga
consists of 4,300,000 years, and therefore the duration of Manu’s life is
309,600,000 years. The demigods possess their material opulence only
until the end of the life of Manu. Time is insurmountable. The time one
is allotted, even if it be millions of years, is quickly gone. The demigods
own their material possessions only within the limits of time. Therefore
Bali Maharaja lamented that although Indra was very learned. he did not
know how to use his intelligence properly, for instead of asking


--- Page 402 ---
400 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24
Vamanadeva to allow him to engage in His service, Indra used Him to
beg Bali Maharaja for material wealth. Although Indra was learned and
his prime minister, Brhaspati, was also learned, neither of them begged
to be able to render loving service to Lord Vamanadeva. Therefore Bali
Maharaja lamented for Indra.
TEXT 25

यस्यानुदास्यमेवासत्पितामहः किट वरे नतु खप््ं यदुताकुनोमयं
দল दीयमानं भगवतः परमिति भगवतोपरते खलु सपितर ॥ २५॥
yasyanuddsyam evasmat-pitamahah kila vavre na tu sva-pitryam yad
utakutobhayarin padam diyamanar bhagavatah param iti
bhagavatoparate khalu sva-pitari.

yasya—of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
anudasyam—the service; eva—certainly; asmat—our; pita-mahah—
grandfather; kila—indeed; vavre—accepted; na—not: tu—but: sva—
own; pitryam—paternal property; yat—which; uta—certainly; akutah-
bhayam—fearlessness; padam— position; diyamanam—being offered;
bhagavatah—than the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param —other;
iti—thus; bhagavatda—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upar-
ate—when killed; khalu—indeed; sva-pitari—his own father.

TRANSLATION

Bali Maharaja said: My grandfather Prahlada Maharaja is the
only person who understood his own self-interest. Upon the death
of Prahlada’s father, Hiranyakasipu, Lord Nrsirnhadeva wanted to
offer Prahlada his father’s kingdom and even wanted to grant him
liberation from material bondage, but Prahlada accepted neither.
Liberation and material opulence, he thought, are obstacles to
devotional service, and therefore such gifts from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are not His actual mercy. Consequently,
instead of accepting the results of karma and jhana, Prahlada
Maharaja simply begged the Lord for engagement in the service of
His servant.

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has instructed that an unalloyed devotee

should consider himself a servant of the servant of the servant of the


--- Page 403 ---
Text 26] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 401
Supreme Lord (gopi-bhartuh pada-kamalayor dasa-dasanudasah). In
Vaisnava philosophy, one should not even become a direct servant.
Prahlada Maharaja was offered all the blessings of an opulent position in
the material world and even the liberation of merging into Brahman, but
he refused all this. He simply wanted to engage in the service of the ser-
vant of the servant of the Lord. Therefore Bali Maharaja said that
because his grandfather Prahlada Maharaja had rejected the blessings of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in terms of material opulence and
liberation from material bondage, he truly understood his self-interest.
TEXT 26

तस्य महानुभावरस्यानुपथममजितकषायः को वाखद्विघः परिहीणभगवदनुग्रह
उपजिगमिषतीति । २६ \।
tasya mahanubhavasyanupatham amrjita-kasayah ko vasmad-vidhah
parihina-bhagavad-anugraha upajigamisatiti.

tasya—of Prahlada Maharaja; maha-anubhdavasya—who was an ex-
alted devotee; anupatham—the path; amrjita-kasayah—a person who is
materially contaminated; kah—what; va—or; asmat-vidhah—like us:
parihina-bhagavat-anugrahah—being without the favor of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; upajigamisati—desires to follow; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

Bali Maharaja said: Persons like us, who are still attached to
material enjoyment, who are contaminated by the modes of
material nature and who lack the mercy of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, cannot follow the supreme path of Prahlada
Maharaja, the exalted devotee of the Lord.

PURPORT

It is said that for spiritual realization one must follow great per-
sonalities like Lord Brahma, Devarsi Narada, Lord Siva and Prahlada
Maharaja. The path of bhakti is not at all difficult if we follow in the
footsteps of previous dcaryas and authorities, but those who are too
materially contaminated by the modes of material nature cannot follow
them. Although Bali Maharaja was actually following the path of his


--- Page 404 ---
402 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24.
grandfather, because of his great humility he thought that he was not. It
is characteristic of advanced Vaisnavas following the principles of bhakti
that they think themselves ordinary human beings. This is not an ar-
tificial exhibition of humility; a Vaisnava sincerely thinks this way and
therefore never admits his exalted position.
TEXT 27

तस्यानुचरितशुपरिष्टादिस्तरिभ्यते यस्य भगवान्‌ खयमखिरजगद्‌ I

o ~ ~ - = - -
FIR गदापाणिखतिष्टते निजजनानुकम्पितहद्यो येनाङ्षटेन पदा दशकन्धरो
योजनायुतायुतं दिगिजय उचाटितः |। ২৩ ॥
tasyanucaritam uparistad vistarisyate yasya bhagavan svayam akhila-
Jjagad-gurur narayano dvari gada-panir avatisthate nija-
Jananukampita-hrdayo yenangusthena pada dasa-kandharo
yojanayutayutarn dig-vijaya uccatitah.

tasya—of Bali Maharaja; anucaritam—the narration; uparistat—
later (in the Eighth Canto); vistarisyate—will be explained; yasya—of
whom; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; svayam—per-
sonally; akhila-jagat-guruh—the master of all the three worlds;
narayanah—the Supreme Lord, Narayana Himself; dvari—at the gate;
gada-panih—bearing the club in His hand; avatisthate—stands; nija-
Jana-anukampita-hrdayah—whose heart is always filled with mercy for
His devotees; yena—by whom; arngusthena—by the big toe; pada —of
His foot; dasa-kandharah—Ravana, who had ten heads; yojana-ayuta-
ayutam—a distance of eighty thousand miles; dik-vijaye—for the pur-
pose of gaining victory over Bali Maharaja; uccatitah—driven away.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, how shall I glorify
the character of Bali Maharaja? The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the master of the three worlds, who is most compas-
sionate to His own devotee, stands with club in hand at Bali
Maharaja’s door. When Ravana, the powerful demon, came to gain
victory over Bali Maharaja, Vamanadeva kicked him a distance of


--- Page 405 ---
Text 28] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 403
eighty thousand miles with His big toe. I shall explain the
character and activities of Bali Maharaja later [in the Eighth Canto
of Srimad-Bhagavatam].
TEXT 28
ततोऽघस्तात्तरातले मयो नाम दानचेन्द्रखिपुराधिपतिभगवता
क হে ~ ~ ^ ५ 6 2, वि
पुरारिणा त्रिखोकीश्चं चिकीषृणा निदंग्धष्ठपुरत्रयस्तत्प्रसादाह्टन्धपदो
~ - ~~ (प - -

मायाविनामाचार्यो महादेवेन परिरक्षितो विगतसुदशचनभयो महीयते ॥ २८ ॥

{010 ‘dhastat talatale mayo nama danavendras tri-puradhipatir
bhagavata purarina tri-loki-sarm cikirsuna nirdagdha-sva-pura-trayas
tat-prasadal labdha-pado mayavinam acaryo mahadevena pariraksito
vigata-sudarsana-bhayo mahiyate.

tatah—the planet known as Sutala; adhastat—below; taldtale—in the
planet known as Talatala; mayah—Maya; nama—named; danava-in-
drah—the king of the Danava demons; tri-pura-adhipatih—the Lord of
the three cities; bhagavata—by the most powerful; purarina—Lord
Siva, who is known as Tripurari; tri-loki—of the three worlds; sam —the
good fortune; cikirsuna—who was desiring; nirdagdha—burned; sva-
pura-trayah—whose three cities; tat-prasadat—by Lord Siva’s mercy:
labdha—obtained; padah—a kingdom; mdya-vinam acaryah—who is
the acarya, or master, of all the conjurers; maha-devena—by Lord Siva;
pariraksitah— protected; vigata-sudarsana-bhayah—who is not afraid
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His Sudarsana cakra;
mahiyate—is worshiped.

TRANSLATION

Beneath the planet known as Sutala is another planet, called
Talatala, which is ruled by the Danava demon named Maya. Maya is
known as the acarya [master] of all the mayavis, who can invoke
the powers of sorcery. For the benefit of the three worlds, Lord
Siva, who is known as Tripurari, once set fire to the three
kingdoms of Maya, but later, being pleased with him, he returned
his kingdom. Since that time, Maya Danava has been protected by


--- Page 406 ---
404 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24
Lord Siva, and therefore he falsely thinks that he need not fear the
Sudarsana cakra of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 29
= - ९ ५ ৩২ ১ ह - =
ततोऽधस्तान्मदातले काद्रवेयाणां सपाणां नेकशिरसां क्रोधवशो नाम
o iN ~ - =

गणः ईहकतक्षककारयसुषणादद प्रधाना महामागवन्तः पतत्तिराजाधिपतेः
पुरुषवाहादनवरतमद्विजंमानाः ARCATA FTG A क्रचित्प्रमत्ता
विहरन्ति ॥ २९ ॥

tato ‘dhastan mahatale kadraveyanar sarpanari naika-sirasarm
krodhavaso nama ganah kuhaka-taksaka-kaliya-susenadi-pradhana
maha-bhogavantah patattri-rajadhipateh purusa-vahad anavaratam
udvijamanah sva-kalatrapatya-suhrt-kutumba-sargena kvacit pramatta
viharanti.

tatah—the planet Talatala; adhastat—beneath; mahatale—in the
planet known as Mahatala; kadraveyanam—of the descendants of
Kadra; sarpanam—who are big snakes; na eka-$irasam—who have
many hoods; krodha-vasah—always subject to anger; nama —named;
ganah—the group; hkuhaka—Kuhaka; taksaka—Taksaka; kaliya—
Kaliya; susena—Susena; adi—and so on; pradhanah—who are the
prominent ones; maha-bhogavantah—addicted to all kinds of material
enjoyment; patattri-raja-adhipateh—from the king of all birds, Garuda;
purusa-vahat—who carries the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
anavaratam— constantly; udvijamanah—afraid; sva—of their own:
kalatra-apatya—wives and children; suhrt—friends; kutumba—rela-
tives; sarigena—in the association; kvacit—sometimes; pramattah—in-
furiated; viharanti—they sport.

TRANSLATION

The planetary system below Talatala is known as Mahatala. It is
the abode of many-hooded snakes, descendants of Kadri, who are
always very angry. The great snakes who are prominent are
Kuhaka, Taksaka, Kaliya and Susena. The snakes in Mahatala are
always disturbed by fear of Garuda, the carrier of Lord Visnu, but


--- Page 407 ---
Text 30] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 405
although they are full of anxiety, some of them nevertheless sport
with their wives, children, friends and relatives.
PURPORT

It is stated here that the snakes who live in the planetary system
known as Mahatala are very powerful and have many hoods. They live
with their wives and children and consider themselves very happy,
although they are always full of anxiety because of Garuda, who comes
there to destroy them. This is the way of material life. Even if one lives
in the most abominable condition, he still thinks himself happy with his
wife, children, friends and relatives.

TEXT 30
ततोऽधम्ताद्रसातले देतेया दानवाः पणयो नाम निवातकवचाः
कालेया हिरण्यपुरवासिन इति विबुधप्रत्यनीका उत्पस्या महोजसो
महासाहसिनो भगवतः सकललोकानुभावस्य हरेरेव तेजसा
EN क [३

प्रतिहतबलावलेपा विले्ञया इ वसन्ति ये वे सरमयेन्द्रदूत्या वामि-
९
म॑न्त्रव्णाभिरिन्द्राद्िम्यति ॥ ২০ ॥

tato ’dhastad rasatale daiteya danavah panayo nama nivata-kavacah
kaleya hiranya-puravdsina iti vibudha-pratyanika utpattya mahaujaso
maha-sahasino bhagavatah sakala-lokanubhavasya harer eva tejasa
pratihata-balavalepa bilesaya iva vasanti ye vai saramayendra-diitya
vagbhir mantra-varnabhir indrad bibhyati.

tatah adhastat—below the planetary system Mahatala; rasatale—on
the planet called Rasatala: daiteyah—the sons of Diti; danavah—the
sons of Danu: panayah nama—named Panis: nivata-kavacah—Nivata-
kavacas: kaleyah—Kaleyas: hiranya-puravasinah—Hiranya-puravasis:
iti—thus; vibudha-pratyanikah—enemies of the demigods: utpattyah—
from birth: maha-ojasah—very powerful: maha-sahasinah—very
cruel: bhagavatah—of the Personality of Godhead: sakala-loka-
anubhavasya—who is auspicious for all planetary systems: hareh—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead: eva—certainly; tejasa—by the


--- Page 408 ---
406 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 24
Sudar$ana cakra; pratihata—defeated; bala—strength; avalepah—and
pride (because of bodily strength); bila-isayah—the snakes; iva—like;
vasanti—they live; ye—who; vai—indeed; saramaya—by Sarama; in-
dra-diitya —the messenger of Indra; vagbhih—by the words; mantra-
varnabhih—in the form of a mantra; indrat—from King Indra;
bibhyati—are afraid.
TRANSLATION

Beneath Mahatala is the planetary system known as Rasatala,
which is the abode of the demoniac sons of Diti and Danu. They
are called Panis, Nivata-kavacas, Kaleyas and Hiranya-puravasis
[those living in Hiranya-pura]. They are all enemies of the
demigods, and they reside in holes like snakes. From birth they
are extremely powerful and cruel, and although they are proud of
their strength, they are always defeated by the Sudar§ana cakra of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who rules all the planetary
systems. When a female messenger from Indra named Sarama
chants a particular curse, the serpentine demons of Mahatala
become very afraid of Indra.

PURPORT

It is said that there was a great fight between these serpentine demons
and Indra, the King of heaven. When the defeated demons met the
female messenger Sarama, who was chanting a mantra, they became
afraid, and therefore they are living in the planet called Rasatala.

TEXT 31
ततोऽधस्तात्पाताठे नागखोकपतयो THREAT: THD SFA -
उ्वेतथनञ्जयध तराष्रशचद्धयूडकम्बलाश्चतरदेवद तादयो महामोगिनो
o p=

महामा निवसन्ति Ing ह वे पचससदशशतसदहस्रशीरषाणां फणासु
विरचिता महामणयो रोचिष्णवः पातारविवरतिभिरनिकरं स्वरोचिषा
विधमन्ति ॥ ३१ ॥

tato ‘dhastat patale naga-loka-patayo vasuki-pramukhah sarikha-
kulika-mahasarnkha-sveta-dhananjaya-dhrtarastra-sarikhacida-
kambalasvatara-devadattadayo maha-bhogino mahamarsa nivasanti


--- Page 409 ---
Text 31] The Subterranean Heavenly Planets 407
yesam u ha vai pafica-sapta-dasa-sata-sahasra-sirsanar phanasu
viracita maha-manayo rocisnavah patala-vivara-timira-nikararn sva-
rocisa vidhamanti.

tatah adhastat—beneath that planet Rasatala; patale—on the planet
known as Patiala; naga-loka-patayah—the masters of the Nagalokas;
vasuki—by Vasuki; pramukhah—headed; sankha —Sankha; kulika—
Kulika; maha-sankha—Mahasankha; sveta—Sveta; dhananjaya—
Dhanajaya; dhrtarastra—Dhrtarastra; sankha-ciida—Sankhacada;
kambala—Kambala; asvatara— . 5८१81; deva-datta—Devadatta;
adayah—and so on; maha-bhoginah—very addicted to material happi-
ness; maha-amarsah—greatly envious by nature; nivasanti—live:
yesam—of all of them; u ha—certainly; vai—indeed; panca—five;
sapta—seven; dasa—ten; Sata—one hundred; sahasra—one thousand;
sirsanam—of those possessing hoods; phandsu—on those hoods:
viracitah—fixed; maha-manayah—very valuable gems: rocisnavah—
full of effulgence; patala-vivara—the caves of the Patala planetary
system; timira-nikaram—the mass of darkness; sva-rocisa—by the
effulgence of their hoods; vidhamanti—disperse.

TRANSLATION

Beneath Rasatala is another planetary system, known as Patala or
Nagaloka, where there are many demoniac serpents, the masters of
Nagaloka, such as Sankha, Kulika, MahaSankha, Sveta,
Dhanaijaya, Dhrtarastra, Sankhaciida, Kambala, ASvatara and
Devadatta. The chief among them is Vasuki. They are all extremely
angry, and they have many, many hoods —some snakes five hoods,
some seven, some ten, others a hundred and others a thousand.
These hoods are bedecked with valuable gems, and the light
emanating from the gems illuminates the entire planetary system
of bila-svarga.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-
fourth Chapter of Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Subterranean
Heavenly Planets.”


--- Page 410 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
The Glories of Lord Ananta
In this chapter, Sukadeva Gosvami describes Ananta, the source of Lord
Siva. Lord Ananta, whose body is completely spiritual, resides at the root
of the planet Patala. He always lives in the core of Lord Siva’s heart, and
He helps him destroy the universe. Ananta instructs Lord Siva how to
destroy the cosmos, and thus He is sometimes called tamast, or “one who
is in the mode of darkness.” He is the original Deity of material con-
sciousness, and because He attracts all living entities, He is sometimes
known as Sankarsana. The entire material world is situated on the hoods
of Lord Sankarsana. From His forehead He transmits to Lord Siva the
power to destroy this material world. Because Lord Sankarsana is an ex-
pansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, many devotees offer
Him prayers, and in the planetary system of Patala, all the suras, asuras,
Gandharvas, Vidyadharas and learned sages offer Him their respectful
obeisances. The Lord talks with them in a sweet voice. His bodily con-
struction is completely spiritual and very, very beautiful. Anyone who
hears about Him from a proper spiritual master becomes free from all
material conceptions of life. The entire material energy is working ac-
cording to the plans of Anantadeva. Therefore we should regard Him as
the root cause of the material creation. There is no end to His strength,
and no one can fully describe Him. even with countless mouths.
Therefore He is called Ananta (unlimited). Being very merciful coward
all living entities, He has exhibited His spiritual body. Sukadeva
Gosvami describes the glories of Anantadeva to Maharaja Pariksit in
this way.
TEXT 1
श्रीद्युक उवाच

तस्य मूलदेरो  त्रिंशद्योजनसदखान्तर आस्ते या ৭ कला

भगवतस्तामसी समाख्यातानन्त इति सात्वतीया द्रषटुदश्ययोः
Q ক ক Q
सङ्कषेणमहमित्यभिमानटक्षणं यं सङ्कषणमित्याचक्षते ॥ १ ॥
409


--- Page 411 ---
410 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
sri-suka uvaca

tasya mila-dese trimsad-yojana-sahasrantara aste ya vai kala
bhagavatas tamast samakhyatananta iti satvatiya drastr-drsyayoh
sarikarsanam aham ity abhimana-laksanar yam sarikarsanam ity
acaksate.

sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; tasya—of the planet
Patala; miila-dese—in the region beneath the base; trimsat—thirty; yo-
Jana—eight-mile units of measurement; sahasra-antare—at an interval
of one thousand; aste—remains; ya—which; vai—indeed; kala —an ex-
pansion of an expansion; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tamasi—related to darkness; samakhyata—called; anantah—
Ananta; iti—thus; satvatiyah—the devotees; drastr-drsyayoh—of mat-
ter and spirit; sarikarsanam—the drawing together; aham—I; iti—
thus; abhimana—by self-conception; laksanam —symptomized; yam —
whom; sankarsanam—Sankarsana; iti—thus; dacaksate—learned
scholars describe.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said to Maharaja Pariksit: My dear King,
approximately 240,000 miles beneath the planet Patala lives
another incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is
the expansion of Lord Visnu known as Lord Ananta or Lord
Sankarsana. He is always in the transcendental position, but
because He is worshiped by Lord Siva, the deity of tamo-guna or
darkness, He is sometimes called tamasi. Lord Ananta is the pre-
dominating Deity of the material mode of ignorance as well as the
false ego of all conditioned souls. When a conditioned living being
thinks, “I am the enjoyer, and this world is meant to be enjoyed by
me,” this conception of life is dictated to him by Sankarsana. Thus
the mundane conditioned soul thinks himself the Supreme Lord.

PURPORT

There is a class of men akin to Mayavadi philosophers who misin-
terpret the aha brahmasmi and so "ham Vedic mantras to mean, “I am
the Supreme Brahman’ and “I am identical with the Lord.” This kind of


--- Page 412 ---
Text 2] The Glories of Lord Ananta 411
false conception, in which one thinks himself the supreme enjoyer, is a
kind of illusion. It is described elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(5.5.8): janasya moho ‘yam aham mameti. As explained in the above
verse, Lord Sankarsana is the predominating Deity of this false concep-
tion. Krsna confirms this in Bhagavad-gita (15.15):
sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jidnam apohanari ca
“l am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness.” The Lord is situated in everyone's heart
as Sankarsana, and when a demon thinks himself one with the Supreme
Lord, the Lord keeps him in that darkness. Although such a demoniac
living entity is only an insignificant part of the Supreme Lord, he forgets
his true position and thinks he is the Supreme Lord. Because this forget-
fulness is created by Sankarsana, He is sometimes called tamasi. The
name tdmasi does not indicate that He has a material body. He is always
transcendental, but because He is the Supersoul of Lord Siva, who must
perform tamasic activities, Sankarsana is sometimes called tamast.
TEXT 2

= iS জা +১. ক - =^ ~ =
Tog क्षितिमण्डलं मगवतोऽनन्तमूरतेः सदसरदिगस एकसिन्नेव

Ce ५ ९ =
হাদি ध्रियमाणं सिद्धां इव रक्ष्यत ॥ २ ॥
yasyedari ksiti-mandalam bhagavato 7107210-71 71९4 sahasra-Sirasa
ekasminn eva Sirsani dhriyamanam siddhartha iva laksyate.

yasya—of whom: idam—this; ksiti-mandalam —universe:
bhagavatah —of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: ananta-mirteh—
in the form of Anantadeva:; sahasra-sSirasah—who has thousands of
hoods; ekasmin—on one: eva—only; Sirsani—hood; dhriyamanam—is
being sustained; siddharthah iva—and like a white mustard seed: laksy-
ate—is seen.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: This great universe, situated on

one of Lord Anantadeva’s thousands of hoods, appears just like a


--- Page 413 ---
412 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
white mustard seed. It is infinitesimal compared to the hood of
Lord Ananta.
TEXT 3
~ ৬ - ©
यस्य ह वा इदं कालेनोपरसञ्जिदीपतोऽमर्षविरचितरुचिर-
= त ~ ~

श्रमदभ्रवोरन्तरेण साङ्कपणा नाम रद्र ण्कादखव्यूदस्ज्यक्नास्रा्ख
शालमुत्तम्भयन्नुद तिष्ठत्‌ ।। 3 11
yasya ha va 10277 kdlenopasanjihirsato ‘marsa-viracita-rucira-
bhramad-bhruvor antarena sarikarsano nama rudra ekadasa-vyihas
try-aksas tri-Sikhar $itlam uttambhayann udatisthat.

yasya—of whom; ha va—indeed; idam—this (material world);
kalena—in due course of time; upasanjihirsatah —desiring to destroy;
amarsa—by anger; wviracita—formed; rucira—very beautiful;
bhramat—moving; bhruvoh—the two eyebrows; antarena—from
between; sankarsanah nama—named Sankarsana; rudrah—an
incarnation of Lord Siva; ekadasa-vyiithah—who has eleven expansions;
tri-aksah—three eyes; tri-Sikham—having three points; Salam —a tri-
dent; uttambhayan—raising; udatisthat—arose.

TRANSLATION

At the time of devastation, when Lord Anantadeva desires to
destroy the entire creation, He becomes slightly angry. Then from
between His two eyebrows appears three-eyed Rudra, carrying a
trident. This Rudra, who is known as Sankarsana, is the embodi-
ment of the eleven Rudras, or incarnations of Lord Siva. He ap-
pears in order to devastate the entire creation.

PURPORT

In each creation, the living entities are given a chance to close their
business as conditioned souls. When they misuse this opportunity and do
not go back home, back to Godhead, Lord Sankarsana becomes angry.
The eleven Rudras, expansions of Lord Siva, come out of Lord Sankar-
sana’s eyebrows due to His angry mood, and all of them together devas-
tate the entire creation.


--- Page 414 ---
Text 5] The Glories of Lord Ananta 413
TEXT 4
यस्याद्भिकमलयुगलारणविश्दनखमणिपण्डमण्डलष्वहिपतयः सह॒ सात्वत-

९२ क ~ ~ ~
पभरकान्तभक्तियागेनावनमन्तः HAAN पररस्फुरल्ङकण्डलप्रभामाण्डत-
गण्डस्लान्यतिमनोहराणि प्रमुदितमनसः खट विरोक धन्ति igi
yasyanghri-kamala-yugalaruna-visada-nakha-mani-sanda-mandalesv
ahi-patayah saha satvatarsabhair ekanta-bhakti-yogenavanamantah
sva-vadanani parisphurat-kundala-prabha-mandita-ganda-sthalany
ati-manoharani pramudita-manasah khalu vilokayanti.

yasya—of whom; anghri-kamala—of lotus feet; yugala—of the pair;
aruna-visada—brilliant pink; nakha—of the nails; mani-sanda—Ilike
gems; mandalesu—on the round surfaces; ahi-patayah—the leaders of
the snakes; saha—with; satvata-rsabhaih—the best devotees; ekanta-
bhakti-yogena—with unalloyed devotional service; avanamantah—
offering obeisances; sva-vadanani—their own faces; parisphurat—glit-
tering; kundala—of the earrings; prabha—by the effulgence; man-
dita—decorated; ganda-sthalani—whose cheeks; ati-manoharani—
very beautiful; pramudita-manasah—their minds refreshed; khalu—
indeed; vilokayanti—they see.

TRANSLATION

The pink, transparent toenails on the Lord’s lotus feet are ex-
actly like valuable gems polished to a mirror finish. When the
unalloyed devotees and the leaders of the snakes offer their obei-
sances to Lord Sankarsana with great devotion, they become very
joyful upon seeing their own beautiful faces reflected in His
toenails. Their cheeks are decorated with glittering earrings, and
the beauty of their faces is extremely pleasing to see.

TEXT 5

= _ (~ © = ९.
यस्येव॒दहि नागराजङ्मायं आरिष आलशासानाधावेज्गवखयविलसित-
विद विपुरुधवलसुभगरुचिरथुजरजतस्तम्भेष्वगुरुचन्द नङ्कङ्कमपङ्कानुलेपे-

~ Sa a ~

नावछिम्पमानास्तद भिम नोन्मथितहदयमकरध्वजावेशरुचिरललितसितास्तद -


--- Page 415 ---
414 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
लुरागमद युदितमद्‌ विघूर्णितारुणकरुणावरोकनयनवद नारविन्दं सव्रीडं किट
विलोकयन्ति ॥ ५॥
yasyaiva hi naga-raja-kumarya 25250 asasanas carv-anga-valaya-
vilasita-visada-vipula-dhavala-subhaga-rucira-bhuja-rajata-stambhesv
aguru-candana-kurikuma-parnkanulepenavalimpamands tad-
abhimarsanonmathita-hrdaya-makara-dhvajavesa-rucira-lalita-smitas
tad-anuragamada-mudita-mada-vighurnitaruna-karunavaloka-
nayana-vadandravindam savridam kila vilokayanti.

yasya—of whom; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; ndga-raja-
kumaryah—the unmarried princesses of the serpent kings; asisah—
blessings; asasanah—hoping for; caru—beautiful; anga-valaya—on
the sphere of His body; vilasita—gleaming; visada—spotless; vipula—
long; dhavala—white; subhaga—indicating good fortune; rucira—
beautiful; bhuja—on His arms; rajata-stambhesu—Ilike columns of
silver; aguru—of aloe; candana—of sandalwood; kurkuma—of
saffron; parka —from the pulp; anulepena—with an ointment; avalim-
pamanah—smearing; tat-abhimarsana—by contact with His limbs; un-
mathita —agitated; hrdaya—in their hearts; makara-dhvaja—of Cupid;
avesa—due to the entrance; rucira—very beautiful; lalita—delicate;
smitah—whose smiling: tat—of Him: anuraga—of attachment;
mada —Dby the intoxication; mudita —delighted; mada—due to intoxica-
tion with kindness; vighirnita—rolling; aruna—pink; karuna-
avaloka—glancing with kindness; nayana—eyes; vadana—and face:
aravindam—like lotus flowers; sa-vridam —with bashfulness; kila—in-
deed; vilokayanti—they see.

TRANSLATION

Lord Ananta’s arms are attractively long, beautifully decorated
with bangles and completely spiritual. They are white, and so they
appear like silver columns. When the beautiful princesses of the
serpent kings, hoping for the Lord’s auspicious blessing, smear
His arms with aguru pulp, sandalwood pulp and kunkuma, the
touch of His limbs awakens lusty desires within them. Understand-
ing their minds, the Lord looks at the princesses with a merciful


--- Page 416 ---
Text 6] The Glories of Lord Ananta 415
smile, and they become bashful, realizing that He knows their
desires. Then they smile beautifully and look upon the Lord’s
lotus face, which is beautified by reddish eyes rolling slightly from
intoxication and delighted by love for His devotees.
PURPORT

When males and females touch each other’s bodies, their lusty desires
naturally awaken. It appears from this verse that there are similar sensa-
tions in spiritual bodies. Both Lord Ananta and the women giving Him
pleasure had spiritual bodies. Thus all sensations originally exist in the
spiritual body. This is confirmed in the Vedanta-sitra: janmady asya
yatah. Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura has commented in this con-
nection that the word adi means adi-rasa, the original lusty feeling,
which is born from the Supreme. However, spiritual lust and material
lust are as completely different as gold and iron. Only one who is very
highly elevated in spiritual realization can understand the lusty feelings
exchanged between Radha and Krsna, or between Krsna and the damsels
of Vraja. Therefore, unless one is very experienced and advanced in
spiritual realization, he is forbidden to discuss the lusty feelings of Krsna
and the gopis. However, if one is a sincere and pure devotee, the material
lust in his heart is completely vanquished as he discusses the lusty feel-
ings between the gopis and Krsna, and he makes quick progress in
spiritual life.

TEXT 6

स॒ एव भगवाननन्तो ऽनन्तगुणाणेव आदिदेव उपपंहृतामर्षरोषवेगो
लोकानां खस्तय आस्ते ।॥ & ॥
sa eva bhagavan 0710710 ’nanta-gunarnava adi-deva upasarihrtamarsa-
rosa-vego lokanar svastaya 2516.

sah—that; eva—certainly; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: anantah—Anantadeva; ananta-guna-arnavah—the reservoir
of unlimited transcendental qualities; adi-devah—the original Lord. or
nondifferent from the original Supreme Personality of Godhead:


--- Page 417 ---
416 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
upasarnhrta—who has restrained; amarsa—of His intolerance; rosa—
and wrath: vegah—the force; lokanam—of all people on all planets:
svastaye—for the welfare; daste—remains.
TRANSLATION

Lord Sankarsana is the ocean of unlimited spiritual qualities,
and thus He is known as Anantadeva. He is nondifferent from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the welfare of all living en-
tities within this material world, He resides in His abode, restrain-
ing His anger and intolerance.

PURPORT

Anantadeva’s main mission is to dissolve this material creation, but He
checks His anger and intolerance. This material world is created to give
the conditioned souls another chance to go back home, back to Godhead,
but most of them do not take advantage of this facility. After the cre-
ation, they again exercise their old propensity for lording it over the
material world. These activities of the conditioned souls anger Anan-
tadeva, and He desires to destroy the entire material world. Yet, because
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is kind toward us and
checks His anger and intolerance. Only at certain times does He express
His anger and destroy the material world.

TEXT 7
= ~ Ss ~ pS ০
ध्यायमानः सुरासुरोरगसिद्धगन्धवंविद्याधरमुनिगणैरनवरतमदमुदितविदत-
~ - ~ ~ Sp
विह्वललोचनः सुललितघ्रुखरिकामृतेनाप्यायमानः खपाषेद विबुधपुथपती -
नपरिम्लानरागनवतुलसिकामोदमध्वापस्तवेन माचन्मधुकरव्रातमधुरगी तभियं
a ~ . 3 ~
वेजयन्तीं स्वां वनमारां नीलवासा एकङ्कण्डलो EGE
कृतसुभगसन्दरथजो मगवान्मादृन्द्रो वारणेन्द्र इव काश्वनीं
=, ५८.

कश्षाञ्ुदारलीलो विभर्ति nen

dhyayamanah surasuroraga-siddha-gandharva-vidyadhara-muni-
ganair anavarata-mada-mudita-vikrta-vihvala-locanah sulalita-


--- Page 418 ---
Text 7] The Glories of Lord Ananta 417
mukharikamrtenapyayamanah sva-parsada-vibudha-yitha-patin
aparimlana-raga-nava-tulasikamoda-madhv-asavena madyan
madhukara-vrata-madhura-gita-sriyari vaijjayantir svar vanamalam
nila-vasa eka-kundalo hala-kakudi krta-subhaga-sundara-bhujo
bhagavan mahendro varanendra iva kanicanirn kaksam udara-lilo
bibharti.

dhyayamanah—being meditated upon; sura—of demigods; asura—
demons; uraga—snakes; siddha—inhabitants of Siddhaloka;
gandharva—inhabitants of Gandharvaloka; vidyadhara—Vidyadharas;
muni—and of great sages; ganaih—by groups: anavarata—constantly:
mada-mudita—delighted by intoxication; vikrta—moving to and fro;
vihvala—rolling; locanah—whose eyes; su-lalita—excellently com-
posed; mukharika—of speech; amrtena—by the nectar;
apyayamanah—pleasing; sva-parsada—His own associates; vibudha-
yitha-patin—the heads of the different groups of demigods;
aparimlana—never faded; raga—whose luster; nava—ever fresh;
tulasika—of the tulasi blossoms; amoda—by the fragrance; madhu-
asavena—and the honey; madyan—being intoxicated; madhukara-
vrata—of the bees; madhura-gita—by the sweet singing; Sriyam—
which is made more beautiful: vajayantim—the garland named vai-
Jayanti; svam—His own; vanamalam—garland; nila-vasah—covered
with blue garments; eka-kundalah—wearing only one earring; hala-
kakudi—on the handle of a plow; krta—placed; subhaga—auspicious:
sundara—beautiful: bhujah—hands: bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; maha-indrah—the King of heaven: varana-in-
drah—the elephant; iwa—Ilike; kancanim—golden; kaksam—belt:
udara-lilah—engaged in transcendental pastimes; bibharti—wears.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: The demigods, the demons, the
Uragas [serpentine demigods], the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the
Vidyadharas and many highly elevated sages constantly offer
prayers to the Lord. Because He is intoxicated, the Lord looks
bewildered, and His eyes, appearing like flowers in full bloom,
move to and fro. He pleases His personal associates, the heads of


--- Page 419 ---
418 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
the demigods, by the sweet vibrations emanating from His mouth.
Dressed in bluish garments and wearing a single earring, He holds
a plow on His back with His two beautiful and well-constructed
hands. Appearing as white as the heavenly King Indra, He wears a
golden belt around His waist and a vaijayanti garland of ever-fresh
tulasi blossoms around His neck. Bees intoxicated by the
honeylike fragrance of the tulasi flowers hum very sweetly around
the garland, which thus becomes more and more beautiful. In this
way, the Lord enjoys His very magnanimous pastimes.
TEXT 8
het (२ o

य॒ पष एवमनुश्रुता ध्यायमानो मुक्षुणामनादिकालकमेवासनाग्रथितम
a . ৫ ~ _ ~
विद्यामयं दहृदयग्रस्थि सखरजस्तमोमयमन्तहेदयं गत॒ আহা निर्भिनत्ति
तद्यासुभावान्‌ भगवान्‌ खायम्धुवो नारदः सह तुम्बुर्णा सभायां -
ब्रह्मणः संश्छोकयामास ॥ ৫ ॥
ya esa evam anusruto dhyayamano mumuksinam andadi-kala-karma-
vasana-grathitam avidyamayarn hrdaya-granthir sattva-rajas-
tamomayam antar-hrdayari gata asu nirbhinatti tasyanubhavan
bhagavan svayambhuvo naradah saha tumburuna sabhayari
brahmanah sarmslokayam asa.

yah—who; esah—this one: evam—thus; anusSrutah—being heard
from a bona fide spiritual master; dhyayamanah—being meditated
upon; mumuksinam—of persons desiring liberation from conditioned
life; anadi—from immemorial; kdla—time; karma-vasana—by the
desire for fruitive activities; grathitam—tied tightly: avidya-mayam—
consisting of the illusory energy: hrdaya-granthim—the knot within the
heart; sattva-rajah-tamah-mayam—made of the three modes of
material nature: antah-hrdayam—in the core of the heart; gatah —situ-
ated; dsu—very soon: nirbhinatti—cuts; tasya—of Sankarsana;
anubhavan—the glories; bhagavan—the greatly powerful;
svayambhuvah—the son of Lord Brahma; naradah—the sage Narada:
saha—along with; tumburuna—the stringed instrument called a Tum-


--- Page 420 ---
Text 8] The Glories of Lord Ananta 419
buru; sabhayam—in the assembly; brahmanah—of Lord Brahma;
samslokayam asa—described in verses.

TRANSLATION

If persons who are very serious about being liberated from
material life hear the glories of Anantadeva from the mouth of a
spiritual master in the chain of disciplic succession, and if they al-
ways meditate upon Sankarsana, the Lord enters the cores of their
hearts, vanquishes all the dirty contamination of the material
modes of nature, and cuts to pieces the hard knot within the heart,
which has been tied tightly since time immemorial by the desire to
dominate material nature through fruitive activities. Narada Muni,
the son of Lord Brahma, always glorifies Anantadeva in his father’s
assembly. There he sings blissful verses of his own composition,
accompanied by his stringed instrument [or a celestial singer]
known as Tumburu.

PURPORT

None of these descriptions of Lord Anantadeva are imaginary. They
are all transcendentally blissful and full of actual knowledge. However.
unless one hears them directly from a bona fide spiritual master in the
line of disciplic succession, one cannot understand them. This knowledge
is delivered to Narada by Lord Brahma, and the great saint Narada, along
with his companion, Tumburu, distributes it all over the universe. Some-
times the Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as Uttamasloka,
one who is praised by beautiful poetry. Narada composes various poems
to glorify Lord Ananta, and therefore the word samslokayam asa
(praised by selected poetry) is used in this verse.

The Vaisnavas in the Gaudiya-sampradaya belong to the disciplic suc-
cession stemming from Lord Brahma. Lord Brahma is the spiritual
master of Narada, Narada is the spiritual master of Vyasadeva. and
Vyasadeva wrote the Srimad-Bhagavatam as a commentary on the
Vedanta-sitra. Therefore all devotees in the Gaudiya-sampradaya accept
the activities of Lord Ananta related in the Srimad-Bhagavatam as
authentic, and they are thus benefited by going back home. back to


--- Page 421 ---
420 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
Godhead. The contamination in the heart of a conditioned soul is like a
huge accumulation of garbage created by the three modes of material
nature, especially the modes of rajas (passion) and tamas (ignorance).
This contamination becomes manifest in the form of lusty desires and
greed for material possessions. As confirmed herein, unless one receives
transcendental knowledge in disciplic succession, there is no question of
his becoming purified of this contamination.
TEXT 9
hd oN = ৮০
उत्पात्तस्थातख्यह ततराऽस्य कर्पाः
ATE प्रकृतिगुणा यदीक्षयाऽऽसन्‌ |
यद्रूपं श्रुवमकृतं यदेकमात्मन्‌
©
नानाधात्कथमु ह वेद तस्थ TH Ql
utpatti-sthiti-laya-hetavo sya kalpah
sattvadyah prakrti-guna yad-iksayasan
yad-ripar dhruvam akrtam yad ekam atman
nanadhat katham ४८ ha veda tasya vartma
utpatti—of creation; sthiti—maintenance; laya—and dissolution;
hetavah—the original causes; asya—of this material world; kalpah—
capable of acting; sattva-adyah—headed by the sattva-guna; prakrti-
gunah—the modes of material nature; yat—of whom; thsaya—by the
glance; asan—became; yat-rapam—the form of whom; dhruvam—
unlimited; akrtam—uncreated; yat—who; ekam—one; atman—in
Himself; nana—variously; adhat—has manifested; katham—how; u
ha —certainly; veda—can understand; tasya—His; vartma —path.
TRANSLATION
By His glance, the Supreme Personality of Godhead enables the

modes of material nature to act as the causes of universal creation,
maintenance and destruction. The Supreme Soul is unlimited and
beginningless, and although He is one, He has manifested Himself
in many forms. How can human society understand the ways of the
Supreme?


--- Page 422 ---
Text 9] The Glories of Lord Ananta 421
PURPORT
From Vedic literature we learn that when the Supreme Lord glances
(sa aiksata) over the material energy, the three modes of material nature
become manifest and create material variety. Before He glances over the
material energy, there is no possibility of the creation, maintenance and
annihilation of the material world. The Lord existed before the creation,
and consequently He is eternal and unchanging. Therefore how can any
human being, however great a scientist or philosopher he may be, under-
stand the ways of the Supreme Personality of Godhead?
The following quotations from Caitanya-bhagavata (Adi-
khanda, 1.48-52 and 1.58-69) tell of the glories of Lord Ananta:
ki brahma, ki Siva, ki sanakadi ‘kumara’
vyasa, Suka, naradadi, ‘bhakta’ nama yanra

“Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, the four Kumaras [Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanan-
dana and Sanat-kumara], Vyasadeva, Sukadeva Gosvami and Narada are
all pure devotees, eternal servants of the Lord.

sabara च्छव sri-ananta-mahasaya

sahasra-vadana prabhu——bhakti-rasamaya
“Lord Sri Ananta is worshiped by all the uncontaminated devotees men-
tioned above. He has thousands of hoods and is the reservoir of all devo-
tional service.

adideva, maha-yogi, 5৮070 ১ ‘vaisnava’

mahimara anta irha na janaye saba
“Lord Ananta is the original person and the great mystic controller. At
the same time, He is a servant of God, a Vaisnava. Since there is no end
to His glories, no one can understand Him fully.

sevana 5८72170, ebe Suna thakurala
atma-tantre yena-mate vaisena patala

**] have already spoken to you of His service to the Lord. Now hear how
the self-sufficient Anantadeva exists in the lower planetary system of
Patala.


--- Page 423 ---
422 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
sri-narada-gosani ‘tumburu’ kari’ sange
se yasa gayena brahma-sthane sloka-vandhe
“Bearing his stringed instrument, the tumburu, on his shoulders, the
great sage Narada Muni always glorifies Lord Ananta. Narada Muni has
composed many transcendental verses in praise of the Lord.”
srsti, sthiti, pralaya, sattvadi yata guna
yanra drsti-pate haya, yaya punah punah
“Simply due to the glance of Lord Ananta, the three material modes of
nature interact and produce creation, maintenance and annihilation.
These modes of nature appear again and again.
advitiya-ripa, satya anadi mahattva
tathapi ‘ananta’ haya, ke bujhe se tattva?
“The Lord is glorified as one without a second and as the supreme truth
who has no beginning. Therefore He is called Anantadeva [unlimited].
Who can understand Him?
Suddha-sattva-miirti prabhu dharena karunaya
ye-vigrahe sabara prakasa sulilaya
““His form is completely spiritual, and He manifests it only by His mercy.
All the activities in this material world are conducted only in His form.
yanhara taranga sikhi’ sinha mahavali
nija-jana-mano raije hana kutihali
“He is very powerful and always prepared to please His personal asso-
ciates and devotees.
ye ananta-namera Sravana-sarikirtane
ye-te mate kene nahi bole ye-te jane
asesa-janmera bandha chinde sei-ksane
ataeva vaisnava na chade kabhu tane


--- Page 424 ---
Text 9] The Glories of Lord Ananta 423
“If we simply try to engage in the congregational chanting of the glories
of Lord Anantadeva, the dirty things in our hearts, accumulated during
many births, will immediately be washed away. Therefore a Vaisnava
never loses an opportunity to glorify Anantadeva.
‘Sesa’ ba-i sarhsarera gati nahi ara
anantera name sarva-jivera uddhara
“Lord Anantadeva is known as Sesa [the unlimited end] because He ends
our passage through this material world. Simply by chanting His glories,
everyone can be liberated.
ananta prthivi-giri samudra-sahite
ye-prabhu dharena gire palana karite
“On His head, Anantadeva sustains the entire universe, with its millions
of planets containing enormous oceans and mountains.
sahasra phanara eka-phane ‘bindu’ yena
ananta vikrama, na janena, ‘ache’ hena
“He is so large and powerful that this universe rests on one of His hoods
just like a drop of water. He does not know where it is.
sahasra-vadane krsna-yasa nirantara
gaite achena adi-deva mahi-dhara
“While bearing the universe on one of His hoods, Anantadeva chants the
glories of Krsna with each of His thousands of mouths.
gayena ananta, Sri-yasera nahi anta
Jjaya-bhariga nahi karu, dornhe — balavanta
“Although He has been chanting the glories of Lord Krsna since time
immemorial, He has still not come to their end.
adyapiha ‘Sesa’-deva sahasra-sri-mukhe
gayena caitanya-yasa anta nahi dekhe


--- Page 425 ---
424. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
“To this very day, Lord Ananta continues to chant the glories of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and still He finds no end to them.”
TEXT 10
मूतिं नः पुरुकृपया TAR aw
হাত सदसदिदं ` विमाति यत्र ।
यष्टीलां खगपतिराददेऽनवदया-
৬ ৬ Q
मादातं स्वननमनांस्युदारवीयः ॥१०॥
गयः nah puru-krpaya babhara sattvarn
sarm$uddham sad-asad ida vibhati tatra
yal-lilarh mrga-patir adade 70000) ৫777
addturh svajana-mandarsy udara-viryah
mitrtim—different forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
nah—unto us; puru-krpaya—because of great mercy; babhara—ex-
hibited; sattvam—existence; samsuddham—completely transcendental;
sat-asat idam —this material manifestation of cause and effect; vibhati—
shines; tatra—in whom; yat-lilam—the pastimes of whom: mrga-
patih—the master of all living beings, who is exactly like a lion (the
master of all other animals); adade—taught; anavadyam—without
material contamination; adatum—to conquer; sva-jana-mandarmsi—the
minds of His devotees; udara-viryah—who is most liberal and powerful.
TRANSLATION
This manifestation of subtle and gross matter exists within the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Out of causeless mercy toward
His devotees, He exhibits various forms, which are all transcen-
dental. The Supreme Lord is most liberal, and He possesses all
mystic power. To conquer the minds of His devotees and give
pleasure to their hearts, He appears in different incarnations and
manifests many pastimes.
PURPORT
Srila Jiva Gosvami has translated this verse as follows. “The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes. It is by His will that


--- Page 426 ---
Text 11] The Glories of Lord Ananta 425
gross and subtle ingredients interact. He appears in various incarnations
just to please the hearts of His pure devotees.” For example. the
Supreme Lord appeared in the transcendental incarnation of Lord
Varaha (the boar) just to please His devotees by lifting the planet earth
from the Garbhodaka Ocean.
TEXT 11
C=
यन्नाम श्रुतमनुकीतेयेद्‌ कसा-
o
दार्तो वा यदि पतितः সন্তফ্মনান্রা।
हन्त्यंहः सपदि वचृणामशेपमन्यं
कं रोपाद्धगवत आश्रयेन्ु॒श्चः 112211
yan-nama Srutam anukirtayed akasmad
arto va yadi patitah pralambhanad va
hanty ahah sapadi nrmam asesam anyam
19077) Sesad bhagavata asrayen mumuksuh
yat—of whom: nama—the holy name: S$rutam—heard:
anukirtayet—may chant or repeat: akasmat—by accident: artah—a dis-
tressed person: wva—or: yadi—if; patitah—a fallen person:
pralambhanat—out of joking: va—or: hanti—destroys: armmhah—sin-
ful: sapadi—that instant: nrpam—of human society: asesam—
unlimited: anyam—of other: kam —what: Sesat—than Lord Sesa:
bhagavatah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: asrayet—should
take shelter of: mumuksuh—anyone desiring liberation.
TRANSLATION
Even if he be distressed or degraded, any person who chants the

holy name of the Lord, having heard it from a bona fide spiritual
master, is immediately purified. Even if he chants the Lord’s name
jokingly or by chance, he and anyone who hears him are freed
from all sins. Therefore how can anyone seeking disentanglement
from the material clutches avoid chanting the name of Lord Sesa?
Of whom else should one take shelter?


--- Page 427 ---
426 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
TEXT 12
ह्‌
मूषन्यर्पिंतमणुवर्सदखमूर्भो
= 9 # =
gag सगिरिसरित्स्द्रसम्‌ |
आनन्त्यादनिमितविक्रमसखय भूश्च
को वीर्याण्यधिगणयेत्सहस्रजिह्ः 122101
mardhany arpitam anuvat sahasra-mirdhno
bhi-golam sagiri-sarit-samudra-sattvam
anantyad animita-vikramasya bhumnah
ko viryany adhi ganayet sahasra-jihvah
mirdhani—on a hood or head; arpitam—fixed; anu-vat—just like an
atom; sahasra-mirdhnah—of Ananta, who has thousands of hoods;
bhii-golam —this universe; sa-giri-sarit-samudra-sattvam —with many
mountains, trees, oceans and living entities; anantyat—due to being
unlimited; animita-vikramasya—whose power is immeasurable; bhiam-
nah—the Supreme Lord; kah—who; viryani—potencies; adhi—in-
deed; ganayet—can count; sahasra-jihvah—although having thousands
of tongues.
TRANSLATION
Because the Lord is unlimited, no one can estimate His power.
This entire universe, filled with its many great mountains, rivers,
oceans, trees and living entities, is resting just like an atom on one
of His many thousands of hoods. Is there anyone, even with thou-
sands of tongues, who can describe His glories?
TEXT 13
एवम्प्रभावो मगवाननन्तो
दुरन्तवीर्योरुगुणाचमावः |
मूले रसायाः स्थित आत्मतन्त्रो
यो लीलया क्ष्मां জিন विभर्ति ॥१३॥
evam-prabhavo bhagavan ananto
duranta-viryoru-gunanubhavah


--- Page 428 ---
Text 14] The Glories of Lord Ananta 427
miile rasayah sthita atma-tantro
yo lilaya ksmam sthitaye bibharti

evam-prabhavah—who is so powerful; bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; anantah—Ananta; duranta-virya—insurmount-
able prowess; uru—great; guna-anubhavah—possessing transcendental
qualities and glories; miile—at the base; rasayah—of the lower plan-
etary systems; sthitah—existing; datma-tantrah—completely 59105
sufficient; yah—who; lilaya—easily; ksmam—the universe; sthitaye—
for its maintenance: bibharti—sustains.

TRANSLATION

There is no end to the great and glorious qualities of that power-
ful Lord Anantadeva. Indeed, His prowess is unlimited. Though
self-sufficient, He Himself is the support of everything. He resides
beneath the lower planetary systems and easily sustains the entire
universe.

TEXT 14
- ১ oe = ^~ {~ ১০. =
TAT AE नृभिरुपगन्तव्या गतयो यथाक्मंविनिमिता यथोपदेशमनु-
EN

वर्णिताः कामान्‌ कामयमाने: ॥१४॥

eta hy eveha nrbhir upagantavya gatayo yatha-karma-vinirmita
yathopadesam anuvarnitah kaman kamayamanaih.

etah—all these: hi—indeed: eva—certainly: itha—in this universe:
nrbhih—by all living entities; upagantavyah—achievable: gatayah—
destinations; yatha-karma—according to one’s past activities: vinir-
mitah—created; yatha-upadesam—as instructed: anuvarnitah—de-
scribed accordingly; kaman—material enjoyment: kamayamanaih—by
those who are desiring.

TRANSLATION

My dear King, as I heard of it from my spiritual master, I have
fully described to you the creation of this material world according
to the fruitive activities and desires of the conditioned souls.


--- Page 429 ---
428 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 25
Those conditioned souls, who are full of material desires, achieve
various situations in different planetary systems, and in this way
they live within this material creation.
PURPORT
In this regard, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura sings,
anadi karama-phale,
padi’ bhavarnava-jale, taribare na dekhi upaya
“My Lord, I do not know when I commenced my material life, but I can
certainly experience that I have fallen in the deep ocean of nescience.
Now I can also see that there is no other way to get out of it than to take
shelter of Your lotus feet.” Similarly, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu offers
the following prayer:
ayi nanda-tanuja kinkaram
patitarh mar visame bhavambudhau
krpaya tava pada-pankaja-
sthita-dhili-sadrsari vicintaya
“My dear Lord, son of Nanda Maharaja, [ am Your eternal servant.
Somehow or other, I have fallen into this ocean of nescience. Kindly,
therefore, save me from this horrible condition of materialistic life.”
TEXT 15
९ . ~ ९ =

एतावतीहि राजन्‌ पुसः प्रन्रात्तटश्रणद्धचरमस्य वपाक्गतय उचातरचा
विसद्शा यथाप्रदनं व्याचख्ये किमन्यत्कथयाम इति ॥ १५ ॥
etavatir hi rajan purisah pravrtti-laksanasya dharmasya vipaka-gataya
uccavaca visadrsa yatha-prasnam vyacakhye kim anyat kathayama iti.

etavatih—of such a kind; hi—certainly; rajan—O King; purisah—of
the human being; pravrtti-laksanasya—symptomized by inclinations:
dharmasya—of the execution of duties; vipaka-gatayah—the resultant


--- Page 430 ---
Text 15] The Glories of Lord Ananta 429
destinations; ucca-avacah—high and low; visadrsah—different; yatha-
prasnam—as you inquired; vyacakhye—I have described; kim anyat—
what else; kathayama—shall [ speak; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION

My dear King, I have thus described how people generally act ac-
cording to their different desires and, as a result, get different
types of bodies in higher or lower planets. You inquired of these
things from me, and I have explained to you whatever I have heard
from authorities. What shall I speak of now?

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-fifth
Chapter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Glories of Lord
Ananta.”


--- Page 431 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
A Description of the Hellish Planets
The Twenty-sixth Chapter describes how a sinful man goes to different
hells, where he is punished in various ways by the assistants of Yamaraja.
As stated in the Bhagavad-gita (3.27):
prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah
ahankara-vimiudhatma
kartaham iti manyate

“The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature. thinks himself to be the doer of activities. which are in
actuality carried out by nature.” The foolish person thinks he is indepen-
dent of any law. He thinks there is no God or regulative principle and
that he can do whatever he likes. Thus he engages in different sinful ac-
tivities, and as a result, he is put into different hellish conditions life
after life, to be punished by the laws of nature. The basic principle of his
suffering is that he foolishly thinks himself independent, although he is
strictly under the control of the laws of material nature. These laws act
due to the influence of the three modes of nature, and therefore each
human being also works under three different types of influence. Ac-
cording to how he acts, he suffers different reactions in his next life or in
this life. Religious persons act differently from atheists, and therefore
they suffer different reactions.

Sukadeva Gosvami describes the following twenty-eight hells:
Tamisra, Andhatamisra, Raurava, Maharaurava. Kumbhipaka.
Kalasutra, Asi-patravana, Sukaramukha., Andhakapa. Krmibhojana.
Sandarnsa, Taptasarmi, Vajrakantaka-salmali. Vaitarani. Payoda. Pra-
narodha. Visasana, Lalabhaksa, Sarameyadana. Avici. Ayahpana.
Ksarakardama, Raksogana-bhojana. Salaprota. Dandasika. Avata-
nirodhana, Paryavartana and Sacimukha.

431


--- Page 432 ---
432 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26

A person who steals another’s money. wife or possessions is put into
the hell known as Tamisra. A man who tricks someone and enjoys his
wife is put into the extremely hellish condition known as Andhatamisra.
A foolish person absorbed in the bodily concept of life, who on the basis
of this principle maintains himself or his wife and children by commit-
ting violence against other living entities, is put into the hell known as
Raurava. There the animals he killed take birth as creatures called rurus
and cause great suffering for him. Those who kill different animals and
birds and then cook them are put by the agents of Yamaraja into the hell
known as Kumbhipaka, where they are boiled in oil. A person who kills a
brahmana is put into the hell known as Kalasiitra, where the land, per-
fectly level and made of copper, is as hot as an oven. The killer of a
brahmana burns in that land for many years. One who does not follow
scriptural injunctions but who does everything whimsically or follows
some rascal is put into the hell known as Asi-patravana. A government
official who poorly administers justice, or who punishes an innocent man,
is taken by the assistants of Yamarija to the hell known as Sakaramukha,
where he is mercilessly beaten.

God has given advanced consciousness to the human being. Therefore
he can feel the suffering and happiness of other living beings. The
human being bereft of his conscience, however, is prone to cause suffer-
ing for other living beings. The assistants of Yamaraja put such a person
into the hell known as Andhakipa, where he receives proper punish-
ment from his victims. Any person who does not receive or feed a guest
properly but who personally enjoys eating is put into the hell known as
Krmibhojana. There an unlimited number of worms and insects con-
tinuously bite him.

A thief is put into the hell known as Sandamsa. A person who has
sexual relations with a woman who is not to be enjoyed is put into the
hell known as Taptasirmi. A person who enjoys sexual relations with
animals is put into the hell known as Vajrakantaka-$alamali. A person
born into an aristocratic or highly placed family but who does not act ac-
cordingly is put into the hellish trench of blood. pus and urine called the
Vaitarani River. One who lives like an animal is put into the hell called
Payoda. A person who mercilessly kills animals in the forest without
sanction is put into the hell called Pranarodha. A person who kills


--- Page 433 ---
Text 1] The Hellish Planets 433
animals in the name of religious sacrifice is put into the hell named
Visasana. A man who forces his wife to drink his semen is put into the
hell called Lalabhaksa. One who sets a fire or administers poison to kill
someone is put into the hell known as Sarameyadana. A man who earns
his livelihood by bearing false witness is put into the hell known as
Avici.

A person addicted to drinking wine is put into the hell named
Ayahpana. One who violates etiquette by not showing proper respect to
superiors is put into the hell known as Ksarakardama. A person who
sacrifices human beings to Bhairava is put into the hell called Raksogana-
bhojana. A person who kills pet animals is put into the hell called
Salaprota. A person who gives trouble to others is put into the hell
known as Dandasiika. One who imprisons a living entity within a cave is
put into the hell known as Avata-nirodhana. A person who shows unwar-
ranted wrath toward a guest in his house is put into the hell called
Paryavartana. A person maddened by possessing riches and thus deeply
absorbed in thinking of how to collect money is put into the hell known
as Sacimukha.

After describing the hellish planets. Sukadeva Gosvami describes how
pious persons are elevated to the highest planetary system, where the
demigods live, and how they then come back again to this earth when the
results of their pious activities are finished. Finally he describes the
universal form of the Lord and glorifies the Lord's activities.

TEXT 1
राजोवाच
© A ~~ > ক্ষ = ~
HEY Tsay काकस्य कथामत । १ ॥
rajovaca
maharsa etad vaicitryam lokasya katham iti.

raja uvaca—the King said: maharse—O great saint (Sukadeva
Gosvami); etat—this: vaicitryam —variegatedness: lokasya—of the liv-
ing entities: katham—how: iti—thus.


--- Page 434 ---
434 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami: My dear sir,
why are the living entities put into different material situations?
Kindly explain this to me.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura explains that the different
hellish planets within this universe are held slightly above the
Garbhodaka Ocean and remain situated there. This chapter describes
how all sinful persons go to these hellish planets and how they are
punished there by the assistants of Yamaraja. Different individuals with
different bodily features enjoy or suffer various reactions according to
their past deeds.
TEXT 2
कऋधिरुवाच
~ S রে
[ERUIRIR IR সুমা कर्मगतयः प्रयग्विधाः सर्वा एव सवस्य
=
तारतम्येन wi ।॥ R
sir uvaca
tri-gunatvat kartuh sraddhaya karma-gatayah prthag-vidhah sarva
eva sarvasya taratamyena bhavanti.
rsih uvaca—the great saint (Sukadeva Gosvami) said: tri-gunatvat—
because of the three modes of material nature: kartuh—of the worker:
sraddhaya—because of the attitudes: karma-gatayah—destinations
resulting from activity: prthak—different: vidhah —varieties: sarvah—
all: eva—thus; sarvasya—of all of them; taratamyena—in different
degrees; bhavanti—become possible.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, in this
material world there are three kinds of activities—those in the
mode of goodness, the mode of passion and the mode of ig-
norance. Because all people are influenced by the three modes of


--- Page 435 ---
Text 3] The Hellish Planets 435
material nature, the results of their activities are also divided into
three. One who acts in the mode of goodness is religious and
happy, one who acts in passion achieves mixed misery and happi-
ness, and one who acts under the influence of ignorance is always
unhappy and lives like an animal. Because of the varying degrees
to which the living entities are influenced by the different modes
of nature, their destinations are also of different varieties.
TEXT 3

= ५ ~~ (9 = 6, ২ ডঃ ly
अथेदानीं प्रातषिद्धरक्षणलखाधमख तथव कतुः श्रद्धाया वसारश्याक्कमफल
विसद्शं मवति या ह्यनायविद्यया कृतकामानां तत्परिणामलक्षणाः

+ = [PN

सृतयः सहस्रशः प्रव्रत्तास्तासा प्राचुयणाचुवणेयप्यामः।।२॥
athedanim pratisiddha-laksanasyadharmasya tathaiva kartuh
Sraddhaya vaisadrsyat karma-phalam visadriam bhavati ya hy anady-
avidyaya krta-kamanar tat-parinama-laksanah srtayah sahasrasah
pravrttas tasam pracuryenanuvarnayisyamah.

atha—thus: idanim—now: pratisiddha—by what is forbidden: lak-
sanasya—symptomized: adharmasya—of impious activities; tatha—so
also: eva—certainly; kartuh—of the performer: sraddhayah—of faith:
vaisadrsyat—by the difference; karma-phalam—the reaction of fruitive
activities: visadrsam—different: bhavati—is: ya—which: hi—indeed:
anadi—from time immemorial: avidyaya—by ignorance: krta—per-
formed: kamanam—of persons possessing many lusty desires: tat-
parinama-laksanah—the symptoms of the results of such impious
desires; srtayah—hellish conditions of life: sahasrasah—by thousands
upon thousands: pravrttah—resulted: tasam—them: pracuryena—very
widely: anuvarnayisyamah—1 shall explain.

TRANSLATION

Just as by executing various pious activities one achieves

different positions in heavenly life, by acting impiously one


--- Page 436 ---
436 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
achieves different positions in hellish life. Those who are activated
by the material mode of ignorance engage in impious activities,
and according to the extent of their ignorance, they are placed in
different grades of hellish life. If one acts in the mode of ig-
norance because of madness, his resulting misery is the least
severe. One who acts impiously but knows the distinction between
pious and impious activities is placed in a hell of intermediate
severity. And for one who acts impiously and ignorantly because
of atheism, the resultant hellish life is the worst. Because of ig-
norance, every living entity has been carried by various desires
into thousands of different hellish planets since time immemorial.
I shall try to describe them as far as possible.
TEXT 4
राजोवाच
नरका नाम मगवन्‌ ক্ষি देशविशेषा अथवा बहिचखिलोक्या
आहोखिदन्तराल इति ॥ ४ ॥
rajovaca
naraka nama bhagavan kirh desa-visesa athava bahis tri-lokya
ahosvid antarala iti.
raja uvaca—the King said: narakah—the hellish regions: nama—
named: bhagavan—O my Lord: kim—whether: desa-visesah—a par-
ticular country; athava—or: bahih—outside; tri-lokyah—the three
worlds (the universe): ahosvit—or: antarale—in the intermediate
spaces within the universe; iti—thus.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami: My dear lord,
are the hellish regions outside the universe, within the covering of
the universe, or in different places on this planet?


--- Page 437 ---
Text 5] The Hellish Planets 437
TEXT 5
ऋषिरुवाच
= n 43 [क
अन्तराल एव त्रिजगत्यास्तु दिशि दक्षिणस्यामघत्तादधमेरुपरि्टाच
जलाद्यस्यामश्रिष्वात्तादयः पितरिगणा दिशि खानां गोत्राणां परमेण
समाधिना सत्या एवाक्षिप आशासाना निव्रसन्ति ॥ ५॥
rsir uvdaca
antarala eva tri-jagatyas tu disi daksinasyam adhastad bhamer
uparistdc ca jalad yasyam agnisvattadayah pitr-gana disi svanarn
gotranarh paramena samadhind satya evdsisa asasana nivasanti.
rsih uvaca—the great sage replied: antarale—in the intermediate
space: eva—certainly: tri-jagatyah—of the three worlds: tu—but:
disi—in the direction: daksinasyam—southern: adhastat—beneath:
bhiameh—on the earth: uparistat—a little above: ca—and: jalat—the
Garbhodaka Ocean: yasyam—in which: agnisvatta-adayah—headed by
Agnisvaua; pitr-ganah—the persons known as pitas; disi—direction:
svanam—their own: gotranam—of the families: paramena—with
great: samddhina—absorption in thoughts of the Lord: satyah—in
truth: eva—certainly: asisah—blessings: asasanah—desiring: niva-
santi—they live.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Sukadeva Gosvami answered: All the hellish
planets are situated in the intermediate space between the three
worlds and the Garbhodaka Ocean. They lie on the southern side
of the universe, beneath Bhii-mandala, and slightly above the
water of the Garbhodaka Ocean. Pitrloka is also located in this
region between the Garbhodaka Ocean and the lower planetary
systems. All the residents of Pitrloka, headed by Agnisvatta, medi-
tate in great samadhi on the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
always wish their families well.
PURPORT
As previously explained. below our planetary system are seven lower
planetary systems. the lowest of which is called Patalaloka. Beneath


--- Page 438 ---
438 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
Patalaloka are other planets, known as Narakaloka, or the hellish
planets. At the bottom of the universe lies the Garbhodaka Ocean.
Therefore the hellish planets lie between Patalaloka and the Garbhodaka
Ocean.
TEXT 6
=A . AC

यत्र ह वाव भगवान्‌ पितृराजो वेवखतः खविषयं प्रापितेषु खपुरषेजन्तुपु
सम्परेतेषु TATRA दोषमेवानछद्वितमगवच्छासन; सगणो दमं
धारयति ॥ & ॥
১৫870 ha vava bhagavan pitr-rajo vaivasvatah sva-visayarn prapitesu
sva-purusair jantusu samparetesu yatha-karmavadyarn dosam
evanullanghita-bhagavac-chasanah sagano damari dharayati.

yatra—where: ha vava—indeed; bhagavan—the most powerful;
pitr-rajah— Yamaraja, the king of the pitas; vaivasvatah—the son of the
sun-god; sva-visayam—his own kingdom; prapitesu—when caused to
reach: sva-purusaith—by his own messengers: jantusu—the human
beings: samparetesu—dead: yatha-karma-avadyam—according to how
much they have violated the rules and regulations of conditional life;
dosam—the fault: eva—certainly: anullanghita-bhagavat-sasanah—
who never oversteps the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s order: sa-
ganah—along with his followers: damam—punishment: dharayati—
executes.

TRANSLATION

The King of the pitas is Yamaraja, the very powerful son of the
sun-god. He resides in Pitrloka with his personal assistants and,
while abiding by the rules and regulations set down by the
Supreme Lord, has his agents, the Yamaditas, bring all the sinful
men to him immediately upon their death. After bringing them
within his jurisdiction, he properly judges them according to their
specific sinful activities and sends them to one of the many hellish
planets for suitable punishments.


--- Page 439 ---
Text 7] The Hellish Planets 439
PURPORT
Yamaraja is not a fictitious or mythelogical character: he has his own
abode, Pitrloka, of which he is king. Agnostics may not believe in hell,
but Sukadeva Gosvami affirms the existence of the Naraka planets.
which lie between the Garbhodaka Ocean and Patalaloka. Yamaraja is ap-
pointed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to see that the human
beings do not violate His rules and regulations. As confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (4.17):
karmano hy api boddhavyarn
boddhavyam ca vikarmanah
akarmanas ca boddhavyarn
gahana karmano gatih
“The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one
should know properly what action is, what forbidden action is. and what
inaction is.”” One should understand the nature of karma, vikarma and
akarma, and one must act accordingly. This is the law of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The conditioned souls. who have come to this
material world for sense gratification. are allowed to enjoy their senses
under certain regulative principles. If they violate these regulations, they
are judged and punished by Yamaraja. He brings them to the hellish
planets and properly chastises them to bring them back to Krsna con-
sciousness. By the influence of maya, however. the conditioned souls
remain infatuated with the mode of ignorance. Thus in spite of repeated
punishment by Yamarija. they do not come to their senses. but continue
to live within the material condition. committing sinful activities again
and again.
TEXT 7

a - ~ [+ . ह
तत्र हैके नरकानेकविंशतिं गणयन्ति अथ तांस्ते राजनामरूपलक्षणतो-

~ = [NEL TN =
ऽनुक्रमिष्यामस्तामिस्रोऽन्धतामिसरो रारो महारौरवः कुम्भीपाकः নাতআলসনলি-

र ~~ 3 [५
पत्रवन बक्ररयुखमन्धहूषः कृमिमाजनः AZ ARR ART FAAS]


--- Page 440 ---
440 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
<Q - - = ~ ५ ~
वतरणी पूयोदः प्राणरोधो বিহাঅল रालामक्षः सारमेयादनमबीचिरयःपा-
नमिति । किञ्च क्षारकर्दमो रक्षोगणमोजनः शूलप्रोतो दन्दश्ुकोऽवटनि-
रोधनः पर्यावर्तनः खवीमुखमित्यष्टाविंशतिनंरका विषिधयातनाभूमयः।।७।।
tatra haike narakan eka-vimsatirh ganayanti atha tars te rajan nama-
ripa-laksanato ‘nukramisyamas tamisro ‘ndhatamisro rauravo
maharauravah kumbhipakah kalasitram asipatravanam
sakaramukham andhakipah krmibhojanah sandarnsas taptasiirmir
vajrakantaka-$almalivaitarant piyodah pranarodho ৮1505070773
lalabhaksah sarameyadanam avicir ayahpanam iti. kisica ksarakardamo
raksogana-bhojanah silaproto dandasiko "vata-nirodhanah
paryavartanah sicimukham ity asta-vimsatir naraka vividha-yatana-
bhamayah.

tatra—there: ha—certainly: eke —some: narakan—the hellish
planets: eka-vimsatim —twenty-one; ganayanti—count: atha—
therefore: tan—them; te—unto you: rajan—O King: nama-ripa-lak-
sanatah —according to their names, forms and symptoms:
anukramisyamah—we shall outline one after another: tamisrah—
Tamisra: andha-tamisrah—Andhatamisra: rauravah—Raurava: maha-
rauravah —Maharaurava: kumbhi-pakah —Kumbhipaka: kala-
siutram —Kalastatra: asi-patravanam —Asi-patravana; sikara-
mukham —Siakaramukha: andha-kipah—Andhakapa: krmi-bho-
janah—Krmibhojana; sandarm$ah—Sandamsa: tapta-sirmih—Tap-
tasirmi;  vajra-kantaka-salmali— Vajrakantaka-salmali;  vaitarani—
Vaitarani: piayodah—Piuyoda: prana-rodhah—Pranarodha:
visSasanam —Viéasana; lala-bhaksah—Lalabhaksa: sarameyadanam—
Sarameyadana; avicih—Avici: ayah-panam—Ayahpana: iti—thus:
kinca—some more: ksara-kardamah—Ksarakardama: raksah-gana-
bhojanah—Raksogana-bhojana: Ssala-protah—Salaprota: danda-
sakah—Dandasiuka: avata-nirodhanah— Avata-nirodhana; paryavar-
tanah—Paryavartana; siaci-mukham—Stcimukha: iti—in this way:
asta-vimsatih —twenty-eight: narakah—hellish planets: vividha —
various; yatana-bhamayah—lands of suffering in hellish conditions.


--- Page 441 ---
Text 8] The Hellish Planets 441
TRANSLATION

Some authorities say that there is a total of twenty-one hellish
planets, and some say twenty-eight. My dear King, I shall outline
all of them according to their names, forms and symptoms. The
names of the different hells are as follows: Tamisra,
Andhatamisra, Raurava, Maharaurava, Kumbhipaka, Kalasitra,
Asipatravana, Siikaramukha, Andhakipa, Krmibhojana, San-
darnsa, Taptasiirmi, Vajrakantaka-salmali, Vaitarani, Piiyoda, Pra-
narodha, Vidasana, Lalabhaksa, Sarameyadana, Avici, Ayahpana,
Ksarakardama, Raksogana-bhojana, Silaprota, Dandasika, Avata-
nirodhana, Paryavartana and Sicimukha. All these planets are
meant for punishing the living entities.

TEXT 8
त॒त्र यस्तु परवित्तापत्यकलत्राण्यपहरति स॒ হি कारपाशवद्धो
ब, ~ A ~ = ~
यपपुरषरातमयानकस्ताभस्र नरके TRAITS HATHA
oC ~ ©, ~ - ©

नुदपानदण्डताडनसं तजेनादि मिर्यातनाभिर्यास्यमानो जन्तुयत्र कृरमट-
माप्तादित एकदेव मूच्छायपयाति तामिस्रप्राये ॥८॥

tatra yas tu para-vittapatya-kalatrany apaharatisa hi kala-pasa-
baddho yama-purusair ati-bhayanakais tamisre narake balan nipatyate
anasananudapana-danda-tadana-santarjanadibhir yatanabhir
yatyamano jantur yatra kasmalam asadita ekadaiva mirccham upayati
tamisra-praye.

tatra—in those hellish planets: yah—a person who: tu—but: para-
vitta-apatya-kalatrani—the money. wife and children of another:
apaharati—takes away: sah—that person: hi—certainly: kala-pasa-
baddhah—being bound by the ropes of time or Yamaraja: yama-
purusaih—by the assistants of Yamaraja: ati-bhayanakaih—who are
very fearful: tamisre narake—into the hell known as Tamisra: balat—
by force: nipatyate—is thrown: anasana—starvation: anudapana—
without water: danda-tadana—beaten with rods: santarjana-adibhih—
by scolding and so on: yatanabhih—by severe punishments:


--- Page 442 ---
442 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
yatyamanah—being punished: jantuh—the living entity; yatra—
where: kasmalam—misery; dasaditah—obtained: ekadd—sometimes;
eva—certainly; miirccham—fainting: upayati—obtains; tamisra-
praye—in that condition, which is almost entirely dark.
TRANSLATION

My dear King, a person who appropriates another’s legitimate
wife, children or money is arrested at the time of death by the
fierce Yamaditas, who bind him with the rope of time and forcibly
throw him into the hellish planet known as Tamisra. On this very
dark planet, the sinful man is chastised by the Yamadutas, who
beat and rebuke him. He is starved, and he is given no water to
drink. Thus the wrathful assistants of Yamaraja cause him severe
suffering, and sometimes he faints from their chastisement.

TEXT 9
= > Y = n দা ে -
एवमेवान्धतामिसे यस्तु वश्वयित्वा पुरुषं दारादीनुषयुङक्तं यत्र॒ शरीरी
N = ~ 6 ~ ao
निपात्यमानो Tae वेदनया नष्टमतिनषटष्टि्च मवति यथा
Q _ oe o_o

EERIE EERE EE CISC EER GEC] तघुपदिश्न्ति nal
evam evandhatdamisre yas tu vaficayitva purusar daradin upayurikte
yatra Sariri nipatyamano yatand-stho vedanaya nasta-matir nasta-drstis
ca bhavati yatha vanaspatir vricyamana-miilas tasmad andhatamisrarn
tam upadisanti.

evam—in this way; eva—certainly; andhatamisre—in the hellish
planet known as Andhatamisra; yah—the person who; tu—but:
vaiicayitva —cheating; purusam—another person; dara-adin—the wife
and children; upayunkte—enjoys: yatra—where: Sariri—the embodied
person; nipatyamanah—being forcibly thrown: yatana-sthah—always
situated in extremely miserable conditions: vedanaya—by such suffer-
ing: nasta—lost; matih—whose consciousness; nasta—lost; drstth—
whose sight; ca—also: bhavati—becomes: yatha—as much as;
vanaspatih—the trees; vrcyamana—being cut; mitlah—whose root;


--- Page 443 ---
Text 10] The Hellish Planets 443
tasmat—because of this; andhatamisram—Andhatamisra: tam—that:
upadisanti—they call.
TRANSLATION

The destination of a person who slyly cheats another man and
enjoys his wife and children is the hell known as Andhatamisra.
There his condition is exactly like that of a tree being chopped at
its roots. Even before reaching Andhatamisra, the sinful living
being is subjected to various extreme miseries. These afflictions
are so severe that he loses his intelligence and sight. It is for this
reason that learned sages call this hell Andhatamisra.

TEXT 10
यस्त्विह वा एतदहमिति ममेदमिति भूतद्रोहेण केवलं

स्वङुटुम्बमेवानुदिनं प्रपुष्णाति ল तदिह विहाय स्वयमेव तदश्युमेन বাণ
निपतति ॥ १०॥

yas tv tha va etad aham iti mamedam iti bhita-drohena kevalari sva-
kutumbam evanudinari prapusnati sa tad tha vihaya svayam eva tad-
asubhena raurave nipatati.

yah—one who: tu—but: itha—in this life; va—or: etat—this body:
aham—I. iti—thus; mama—mine; idam—this; iti—thus: bhita-
drohena—by envy of other living entities: kevalam —alone: sva-kutum-
bam —his family members; eva—only: anudinam—day to day: pra-
pusnati—supports; sah—such a person; tat—that; itha—here: vihaya—
giving up: svayam—personally: eva—certainly; tat—of that:
asubhena—by the sin: raurave—in Raurava: nipatati—he falls down.

TRANSLATION

A person who accepts his body as his self works very hard day

and night for money to maintain his own body and the bodies of


--- Page 444 ---
444 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
his wife and children. While working to maintain himself and his
family, he may commit violence against other living entities. Such
a person is forced to give up his body and his family at the time of
death, when he suffers the reaction for his envy of other creatures
by being thrown into the hell called Raurava.
PURPORT
In Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said:
yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma-ijya-dhih
yat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
Janesv abhijiiesu sa eva go-kharah

"076 who accepts this bodily bag of three elements [bile, mucus and air]
as his self, who has an affinity for an intimate relationship with his wife
and children, who considers his land worshipable, who takes bath in the
waters of the holy places of pilgrimage but never takes advantage of
those persons who are in actual knowledge —he is no better than an ass
or a cow.” (Bhag. 10.84.13) There are two classes of men absorbed in
the material concept of life. Out of ignorance, a man in the first class
thinks his body to be his self, and therefore he is certainly like an animal
(sa eva go-kharah). The person in the second class, however, not only
thinks his material body to be his self, but also commits all kinds of sin-
ful activities to maintain his body. He cheats everyone to acquire money
for his family and his self, and he becomes envious of others without
reason. Such a person is thrown into the hell known as Raurava. If one
simply considers his body to be his self, as do the animals, he is not very
sinful. However, if one needlessly commits sins to maintain his body, he
is put into the hell known as Raurava. This is the opinion of Srila
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura. Although animals are certainly in the
bodily concept of life, they do not commit any sins to maintain their
bodies, mates or offspring. Therefore animals do not go to hell. However,
when a human being acts enviously and cheats others to maintain his
body. he is put into a hellish condition.


--- Page 445 ---
Text 11] The Hellish Planets 445
TEXT 11

33 o EN ~ 0৬ ৮১ ह
य॒ विह यर्थवाघ्रुना विहिंसिता जन्तवः परत्र यमयातनाग्रुषगत त एव

डस চস ~
रुखो समृत्वा तथा तमेव विहिंसन्ति तस्माद्रौरवमित्याह रुरुरिति
सर्पादतिक्रूरसच्स्यापदेशः ॥ ११।।
ye tv iha yathaivamund vihimsita jantavah paratra yama-ydatanam
upagatari ta eva ruravo bhiitvd tatha tam eva vihirmsanti tasmad
rauravam ity aha rurur iti sarpad ati-krira-sattvasyapadesah.

ye—those who; tu—but; tha—in this life: yatha—as much as: eva—
certainly; amuna—by him; vihirisitah—who were hurt; jantavah—the
living entities; paratra—in the next life; yama-yatanam upagatam—
being subjected to miserable conditions by Yamaraja; te—those living
entities; eva—indeed; ruravah—rurus (a kind of envious animal);
bhiatva—becoming: tatha—that much; tam—him; eva—certainly;
vihirnsanti—they hurt; tasmat—because of this; rauravam—Raurava:
iti—thus; @huh—learned scholars say; ruruh—the animal known as
ruru; iti—thus; sarpat—than the snake; ati-krira—much more cruel
and envious; sattvasya—of the entity; apadesah—the name.

TRANSLATION

In this life, an envious person commits violent acts against many
living entities. Therefore after his death, when he is taken to hell
by Yamaraja, those living entities who were hurt by him appear as
animals called rurus to inflict very severe pain upon him. Learned
scholars call this hell Raurava. Not generally seen in this world, the
ruru is more envious than a snake.

PURPORT

According to Sridhara Svami, the ruru is also known as the bhara-
श्य (ati-krarasya bhara-srgakhya-sattvasya apadesah ऽव). Srila
Jiva Gosvami confirms this in his Sandarbha: ruru-sabdasya svayarm
muninaiva tika-vidhanal lokesv aprasiddha evayam jantu-visesah. Thus
although rurus are not seen in this world. their existence is confirmed in
the sastras.


--- Page 446 ---
446 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
TEXT 12
भक - os noe (4 ৬ bY
एवमेव WEEE यत्र॒ निपतितं पुस्पं क्रव्यादा नाम FEE क्रव्यण
घातयन्ति यः केवलं देहम्भरः ॥१२॥
evam eva mahdarauravo yatra nipatitari purusam kravyada nama
ruravas tam kravyena ghatayanti yah kevalar dehambharah.
evam—thus; eva—certainly; mahd-rauravah—the hell known as
Maharaurava; yatra—where; nipatitam—being thrown: purusam—a
person: kravyadah nama—named kravyada; ruravah—the ruru
animals; tam —him (the condemned person); kravyena—for eating his
flesh; ghatayanti—kill; yah—who; kevalam—only; dehambharah—
intent upon maintaining his own body.
TRANSLATION
Punishment in the hell called Maharaurava is compulsory for a
person who maintains his own body by hurting others. In this hell,
ruru animals known as kravyada torment him and eat his flesh.
PURPORT
The animalistic person who lives simply in the bodily concept of life is
not excused. He is put into the hell known as Maharaurava and attacked
by ruru animals known as kravyadas.
TEXT 13
यस्त्विह লা उग्रः पशून्‌ पक्षिणो वा प्राणत उपरन्धयति
. =. ^~ £২১ -.
तमपकरुणं पुरूपादेरपि विगर्हितममुत्र यमानुचराः कम्मीपाके ana
उपरन्धयन्ति ॥ १३ ॥
yas tv tha va ugrah pasiin paksino va pranata uparandhayati tam
apakarunam purusadair api vigarhitam amutra yamanucarah
kumbhipake tapta-taile uparandhayanti.


--- Page 447 ---
Text 14] The Hellish Planets 447
yah—a person who: tu—but: iha—in this life: va—or; ugrah—very
cruel; pasin—animals: paksinah—birds: va—or: pranatah—in a live
condition; uparandhayati—cooks: tam —him; apakarunam—very
cruel-hearted; purusa-adaih—by those who eat human flesh: api—
even: vigarhitam—condemned: amutra—in the next life: yama-
_anucarah—the servants of Yamaraja: kumbhipdake—in the hell known
as Kumbhipaka: tapta-taile—in boiling oil: uparandhayanti—cook.
TRANSLATION
For the maintenance of their bodies and the satisfaction of their
tongues, cruel persons cook poor animals and birds alive. Such
persons are condemned even by man-eaters. In their next lives
they are carried by the Yamadiitas to the hell known as
Kumbhipaka, where they are cooked in boiling oil.
TEXT 14
यस्त्विद व्रहमधुक्‌ स॒ काटबरत्रसंज्ञके नरके अयुतयाजनपग्मिण्डले
6 6 ~ (~ (~ ~ ~
ताम्रमये तप्तखले उपयंधस्तादग्न्यकाभ्यामतितप्यमानेऽभिनिवेशितः
~ : ডল on
FETA] च दद्यमानान्तबेहिःशरीर आस्ते रेते चेष्टतेऽवतिष्टति
PN ১ ~ ९
परिधावति च यप्रन्ति IATA तावद्रषसहस्राणि 11 ৫৩ |)
yas tv tha brahma-dhruk sa kalasitra-sarmjiiake narake ayuta-yojana-
parimandale tamramaye tapta-khale upary-adhastad agny-arkabhyam
ati-tapyamane ’bhinivesitah ksut-pipasabhyam ca dahyamanantar-
bahih-sarira aste Sete cestate “vatisthati paridhavati ca yavanti pasu-
romani tavad varsa-sahasrani.
yah—anyone who: tu—but; tha—in this life: brahma-dhruk—the
killer of a brahmana; sah—such a person: kalasitra-sarmjiake—named
Kalasitra; narake—in the hell: ayuta-yojana-parimandale—having a
circumference of eighty thousand miles: tamra-maye—made of copper:
tapta—heated: khale—in a level place: upari-adhastat—above and
beneath: agni—by fire; arkabhyam—and by the sun: ati-tapyamane —
which is being heated: abhinivesitah—being made to enter: ksut-


--- Page 448 ---
448 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
pipasabhyam—by hunger and thirst; ca—and:; dahyamana—being
burned; antah—internally; bahih—externally; Sarirah—whose body:
dste—remains; Sete—sometimes lies; cestate—sometimes moves his
limbs: auvatisthati—sometimes stands: paridhdvati—sometimes runs
here and there; ca —also; yavanti—as many: pasu-romani—hairs on the
body of an_ animal; t@vat—that long; varsa-sahasrani—thousands of
years.
TRANSLATION

The killer of a brahmana is put into the hell known as Kalasutra,
which has a circumference of eighty thousand miles and which is
made entirely of copper. Heated from below by fire and from
above by the scorching sun, the copper surface of this planet is ex-
tremely hot. Thus the murderer of a brahmana suffers from being
burned both internally and externally. Internally he is burning
with hunger and thirst, and externally he is burning from the
scorching heat of the sun and the fire beneath the copper surface.
Therefore he sometimes lies down, sometimes sits, sometimes
stands up and sometimes runs here and there. He must suffer in
this way for as many thousands of years as there are hairs on the
body of an animal.

TEXT 15
यस्त्विह वै निजवेदपथाद्‌ नापयपगतः पाखण्डं चोपग-
तस्तमसिपत्रवनं प्रवेश्य काया प्रहरन्ति तत्र॒ हासावितस्ततो
= S [Nn -

धावमान उभयतो धारेस्तालनासिपतरैदिछदयमानसरवाङ्गो हा हतोऽसीति
परमया वेदनया मृच्छितः पदे पदे निपतति खधमहा पाखण्डायुगतं
फलं FSI १५।।

yas tv iha vai nija-veda-pathad anapady apagatah pakhandam
copagatas tam asi-patravanam praveSya kasaya praharanti tatra hasav
itas tato dhavamana ubhayato dharais tala-vanasi-patrais chidyamana-
sarvarigo ha hato ’smiti paramaya vedanaya mircchitah pade pade
nipatati sva-dharmaha pakhandanugatam phalam bhunkte.


--- Page 449 ---
Text 15] The Hellish Planets 449

yah—anyone who: tu—but: tha—in this life; vai—indeed: nija-
veda-pathat—from his own path, recommended by the Vedas;
andpadi—even without an emergency: apagatah—deviated: pakhan-
dam—a concocted, atheistic system: ca—and: upagatah—gone to:
tam—him; asi-patravanam—the hell known as Asi-patravana; pra-
ve§ya—making enter: kasaya—with a whip: praharanti—they beat:
tatra—there; ha—certainly: asau—that; itah tatah—here and there:
dhavamanah—running: ubhayatah—on both sides: dharaih—by the
edges: tala-vana-asi-patraih—by the swordlike leaves of palm trees:
chidyamdana—being cut: sarva-arigah—whose entire body; ha—alas:
hatah—killed: asmi—I am: iti—thus: paramaya—with severe:
vedanayd—pain; mircchitah—fainted; pade pade—at every step:
nipatati—falls down: sva-dharma-ha—the killer of his own principles
sf religion: pakhanda-anugatam phalam—the result of accepting an
atheistic path; hhurnikte—he suffers.

TRANSLATION

If a person deviates from the path of the Vedas in the absence of
an emergency, the servants of Yamaraja put him into the hell
called Asi-patravana, where they beat him with whips. When he
runs hither and thither, fleeing from the extreme pain, on all sides
he runs into palm trees with leaves like sharpened swords. Thus
injured all over his body and fainting at every step, he cries out,
“Oh, what shall I do now! How shall I be 58৬০0 1” This is how one
suffers who deviates from the accepted religious principles.

PURPORT

There is actually only one religious principle: dharmam tu saksad
bhagavat-pranitam. The only religious principle is to follow the orders
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unfortunately. especially in this
age of Kali, everyone is an atheist. People do not even believe in God.
what to speak of following His words. The words nija-veda-patha can
also mean “one’s own set of religious principles.” Formerly there was
only one veda-patha, or set of religious principles. Now there are many.
It doesn’t matter which set of religious principles one follows: the only
injunction is that he must follow them strictly. An atheist. or nastika, is


--- Page 450 ---
450 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
one who does not believe in the Vedas. However, even if one takes up a
different system of religion, according to this verse he must follow the
religious principles he has accepted. Whether one is a Hindu, or a
Mohammedan or a Christian, he should follow his own religious princi-
ples. However, if one concocts his own religious path within his mind, or
if one follows no religious principles at all, he is punished in the hell
known as Asi-patravana. In other words, a human being must follow
some religious principles. If he does not follow any religious principles.
he is no better than an animal. As Kali-yuga advances, people are becom-
ing godless and taking up so-called secularism. They do not know the
punishment awaiting them in Asi-patravana, as described in this verse.
TEXT 16
a (8 +
यस्त्विह वे राजा राजपुरुषो না अदण्ड्ये दण्डं प्रणयति ब्राह्मणे वा
2
शरीरदण्डं स पापीयानरकेऽुत्र दकरपुखे निपतति तत्रातिवरेिं
~ Q o
निष्पिष्यमाणावयवो यथैवेहेश्चुखण्ड आतंखरेण खनयन्‌ कचिन्मूच्छितः
- a >
কুহ্মকমন্তুমবাবা यथेवेदादटदाषा उपरुद्धाः R&I
yas tv tha vai raja raja-puruso va adandye dandar pranayati
brahmane va sarira-dandar sa paptyan narake ‘mutra sikaramukhe
nipatati tatratibalair vinispisyamandvayavo yathaiveheksukhanda arta-
svarena svanayan kvacin miircchitah kasmalam upagato yathaiveha-
drsta-dosa uparuddhah.
yah—anyone who; tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed: raja—a
king; raja-purusah—a king's man; va—or; adandye—unto one not
punishable; dandam—punishment; pranayati—inflicts; brahmane —
unto a brahmana; va—or; Sarira-dandam—corporal punishment:
sah—that person, king or government officer; papiyan—the most sin-
ful; narake—in the hell; amutra—in the next life; sukaramukhe—
named Sukharamukha; nipatati—falls down; tatra —there; ati-balaih —
by very strong assistants of Yamaraja; vinispisyamana—being crushed;
avayavah—the different parts of whose body; yatha—like: eva—cer-
tainly; iha—here; ihksu-khandah—sugarcane; darta-svarena—with a
pitiable sound: svanayan—crying; kvacit—sometimes; miircchitah—


--- Page 451 ---
Text 17] The Hellish Planets 451
fainted; kasmalam upagatah—becoming illusioned; yatha—just like;
eva—indeed; itha—here; adrsta-dosah—who is not at fault: uparud-
dhah—arrested for punishment.
TRANSLATION
In his next life, a sinful king or governmental representative
who punishes an innocent person, or who inflicts corporal punish-
ment upon a brahmana, is taken by the Yamadiitas to the hell
named Siukharamukha, where the most powerful assistants of
Yamaraja crush him exactly as one crushes sugarcane to squeeze
out the juice. The sinful living entity cries very pitiably and faints,
just like an innocent man undergoing punishments. This is the
result of punishing a faultless person.
TEXT 17
a - : .
यस्त्विह वै भूतानामीश्वरोपकल्पितदत्तीनामबिविक्तपरव्यथानां खयं
- ~ - [> - -
पुरुषोपकर्पितचृत्तिर्थिविक्तपरन्यथो व्यथामाचरति स परत्रान्धकूपे तदभिद्रोहेण
= 6 EY
निपतति ax TE तैजन्तुभिः पञ्ुमृगपक्षिपरीसषै्भश्ञकयुकामत्ङण -
2 < oo
मकषिकादिभिरं के चाभिद्रुग्धास्तेः सवेतोऽभिद्वुह्यमाणस्तमसि विहतनिद्रा-
निन्रेतिररब्धावस्थानः परिक्रामति यथा FER जीवः 1 १७ ॥
yas tv tha vai bhatanam isvaropakalpita-vrttinam avivikta-para-
vyathanam svayari purusopakalpita-vrttir vivikta-para-vyatho vyatham
acarati sa paratrandhakipe tad-abhidrohena nipatati tatra hasau tair
Jantubhih pasu-mrga-paksi-sarisrpair masaka-yika-matkuna-
maksikadibhir ye ke cabhidrugdhas taih sarvato ’bhidruhyamanas
tamasi vihata-nidra-nirvrtir alabdhavasthanah parikramati yatha
kusarire jivah.
yah—any person who: tu—but; tha—in this life: vai—indeed:
bhitanam—to some living entities; vara—by the supreme controller:
upakalpita—designed; vrttinam—whose means of livelihood: avivikta—
not understanding; para-vyathanam—the pain of others: svayam—
himself; purusa-upakalpita—designed by the Supreme Personality of


--- Page 452 ---
452 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
Godhead; wvrttth—whose livelihood; wvivikta—understanding; para-
vyathah—the painful conditions of others; vyatham acarati—but still
causes pain; sah—such a person; paratra—in his next life;
andhakipe—to the hell named Andhakiipa; tat—to them;
abhidrohena—by the sin of malice; nipatati—falls down; tatra—there;
ha—indeed; asau—that person; taih jantubhih—by those respective
living entities; pasu—animals; mrga—wild beasts; paksi—birds;
sarisrpaith—snakes; masaka—mosquitoes; yuka—lice; mathuna—
worms; maksika-adibhih—1flies and so on; ye ke—whoever else; ca—
and; abhidrugdhah—persecuted; taih—by them; sarvatah—every-
where; abhidruhyamanah—being injured; tamasi—in the darkness;
vihata—disturbed; nidra-nirvrtih—whose resting place; alabdha—not
being able to obtain; avasthanah—a resting place; parikramati—wan-
ders; yatha—just as; ku-Sarire—in a low-grade body; jivah—a living
entity.
TRANSLATION

By the arrangement of the Supreme Lord, low-grade living
beings like bugs and mosquitoes suck the blood of human beings
and other animals. Such insignificant creatures are unaware that
their bites are painful to the human being. However, first-class
human beings —brahmanas, ksatriyas and vaiSyas—are developed
in consciousness, and therefore they know how painful it is to be
killed. A human being endowed with knowledge certainly commits
sin if he kills or torments insignificant creatures, who have no dis-
crimination. The Supreme Lord punishes such a man by putting
him into the hell known as Andhakiipa, where he is attacked by all
the birds and beasts, reptiles, mosquitoes, lice, worms, flies, and
any other creatures he tormented during his life. They attack him
from all sides, robbing him of the pleasure of sleep. Unable to rest,
he constantly wanders about in the darkness. Thus in Andhakipa
his suffering is just like that of a creature in the lower species.

PURPORT

From this very instructive verse we learn that lower animals, created

by the laws of nature to disturb the human being, are not subjected to


--- Page 453 ---
Text 18] The Hellish Planets 453
punishment. Because the human being has developed consciousness,
however, he cannot do anything against the principles of varnasrama-
dharma without being condemned. Krsna states in Bhagavad-gita
(4.13), catur-varnyar maya 57507 guna-karma-vibhagasah: *Ac-
cording to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed to
them, the four divisions of human society were created by 6.” Thus all
men should be divided into four classes —brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas
and $itdras—and they should act according to their ordained regulations.
They cannot deviate from their prescribed rules and regulations. One of
these states that they should never trouble any animal, even those that
disturb human beings. Although a tiger is not sinful if he attacks another
animal and eats its flesh, if a man with developed consciousness does so,
he must be punished. In other words, a human being who does not use
his developed consciousness but instead acts like an animal surely under-
goes punishment in many different hells.
TEXT 18
यस्त्विह वा असंबिभज्या्नाति यत्किञ्चनोपनतमनिमिंतपश्चयज्ञा

वायसमंस्तुतः स परत्र कृमिमोजने नरकाधमे निपतति तत्र शतसहस्रयोजने
कृमिदकण्डे कृमिभूतः स्वयं कृमिभिरेव भक्ष्यमाणः कृमिभोजनो यावत्तदप्रत्ताप्रहुताद्‌।
ऽनिर्वेशमास्मानं यातयने॥ १८॥

yas tv tha va asarmvibhajyasnati yat kificanopanatam anirmita-paica-
৩0780 vayasa-saristutah sa paratra krmibhojane narakadhame nipatati
tatra Sata-sahasra-yojane krmi-kunde krmi-bhittah svayam krmibhir
eva bhaksyamanah krmi-bhojano yavat tad aprattaprahitado ‘nirvesam
atmanam yatayate.

yah—any person who; tu—but; iha—in this life; va—or; asam-
vibhajya—without dividing: asnati—eats; yat kificana—whatever:
upanatam—obtained by Krsna's grace: anirmita—not performing:
panca-yajiiah—the five kinds of sacrifice: vayasa—with the crows:
sariistutah—who is described as equal; sah—such a person: paratra—in
the next life; krmibhojane—named Krmibhojana: naraka-adhame—
into the most abominable of all hells: nipatati—falls down: tatra—


--- Page 454 ---
454 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
there; Sata-sahasra-yojane—measuring 100,000 yojanas (800,000
miles); krmi-kunde—in a lake of worms; krmi-bhitah—becoming one
of the worms; svayam—he himself; krmibhih—by the other worms:
eva—certainly: bhaksyamanah—being eaten: krmi-bhojanah—eating
worms; yavat—as long as; tat—that lake is wide; apratta-aprahita—
unshared and unoffered food: adah—one who eats; anirvesam —who
has not performed atonement; atmanam—to himself; ydtayate —gives
pain.
TRANSLATION

A person is considered no better than a crow if after receiving
some food, he does not divide it among guests, old men and
children, but simply eats it himself, or if he eats it without per-
forming the five kinds of sacrifice. After death he is put into the
most abominable hell, known as Krmibhojana. In that hell is a lake
100,000 yojanas [800,000 miles] wide and filled with worms. He
becomes a worm in that lake and feeds on the other worms there,
who also feed on him. Unless he atones for his actions before his
death, such a sinful man remains in the hellish lake of Krmibho-
jana for as many years as there are yojanas in the width of the lake.

PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.13):
yajna-sistasinah santo
mucyante sarva-kilbisaih
bhunijate te tv agham papa
ya pacanty atma-karanat

“The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because
they eat food which is first offered for sacrifice. Others, who prepare food
for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.”” All food is given to us
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Eko bahianam yo vidadhati
kaman: the Lord supplies everyone with the necessities of life. Therefore
we should acknowledge His mercy by performing yajria (sacrifice). This
is the duty of everyone. Indeed, the sole purpose of life is to perform
yajria. According to Krsna (Bg. 3.9):


--- Page 455 ---
Text 19] The Hellish Planets 455
yajnarthat karmano ’‘nyatra
loko yam karma-bandhanah
tad-artham karma kaunteya
mukta-sangah samacara
“Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work
binds one to this material world. Therefore, O son of (पात. perform
your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will al-
ways remain unattached and free from bondage.” If we do not perform
yajia and distribute prasada to others, our lives are condemned. Only
after performing yajnia and distributing the prasada to all dependents —
children, brahmanas and old men—should one eat. However, one who
cooks only for himself or his family is condemned, along with everyone
he feeds. After death he 15 put into the hell known as Krmibhojana.
TEXT 19
a
यस्त्विह वं॒स्तेयेन बसाद्वा॒दहिरण्यरलादीनि  बाह्मणस्य॒ वापहरत्यन्यस्य
on ২ (> ry

वानापदि पुरूषस्तमयुत्र राजन्‌ यमपुरुषा अयसयैरग्रिपिण्डेः सन्दंशौस्त्वचि
निष्डषन्ति ॥ १९॥
yas tv iha vai steyena balad va hiranya-ratnadini brahmanasya
vapaharaty anyasya vandpadi purusas tam amutra rajan yama-purusa
ayasmayair agni-pindaih sandarisais tvaci niskusanti.

yah —any person who: tu—but: iha—in this life; vai—indeed:
steyena—by thievery: balat—by force; va—or: hiranya—gold: ratna—
gems; adini—and so on; brahmanasya—of a brahmana; va—or:
apaharati—steals: anyasya—of others: va—or: anapadi—not in a
calamity: purusah—a person; tam—him: amutra—in the next life: ra-
jan—O King: yama-purusah —the agents of Yamaraja: ayah-mayaih—
made of iron: agni-pindath—balls heated in fire: sandamsaih—with
tongs: tvaci—on the skin: niskusanti—tear to pieces.

TRANSLATION

My dear King, a person who in the absence of an emergency robs

a brahmana—or, indeed, anyone else—of his gems and gold is put


--- Page 456 ---
456 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
into a hell known as Sandari$a. There his skin is torn and sepa-
rated by red-hot iron balls and tongs. In this way, his entire body is
cut to pieces.
TEXT 20
ol ০ 1 =~ os

यस्त्विह वा अगम्यां स्ियमगम्यं वा पुरुषं योषिदभिगच्छति तावत्र
FTAA ताडयन्त स्तिम्मया দ্কম| लोहमय्या पुरुषमालिङ्गयन्ति स्ियं च
पुरुषरूपया खर्म्या | २०॥
yas tv tha va 08077 27) striyam agamyar va purusari yosid
abhigacchati tav amutra kasaya tadayantas tigmaya sirmya lohamayya
purusam alingayanti striyam ca purusa-ripaya sarmya.

yah—any person who; tu—but; iha—in this life; va—or;
agamyam—unsuitable; striyam—a woman; agamyam—unsuitable;
vd—or; purusam—a man; yosit—a woman; abhigacchati—approaches
for sexual intercourse; tau—both of them; amutra—in the next life;
kasaya—by whips; tadayantah—beating; tigmaya—very hot; sir-
mya—by an image: loha-mayya—made of iron; purusam—the man;
alingayanti—they embrace; striyam—the woman; ca—also; purusa-
ripayd—in the form of a man; sirmya—by an image.

TRANSLATION

A man or woman who indulges in sexual intercourse with an un-
worthy member of the opposite sex is punished after death by the
assistants of Yamaraja in the hell known as Taptasiirmi. There
such men and women are beaten with whips. The man is forced to
embrace a red-hot iron form of a woman, and the woman is forced
to embrace a similar form of a man. Such is the punishment for
illicit sex.

PURPORT

Generally a man should not have sexual relations with any woman
other than his wife. According to Vedic principles, the wife of another
man is considered one’s mother, and sexual relations are strictly forbid-


--- Page 457 ---
Text 21] The Hellish Planets 457
den with one’s mother, sister and daughter. If one indulges in illicit
sexual relations with another man’s wife, that activity is considered iden-
tical with having sex with one’s mother. This act is most sinful. The same
principle holds for a woman also: if she enjoys sex with a man other than
her husband, the act is tantamount to having sexual relations with her
father or son. Illicit sex life is always forbidden. and any man or woman
who indulges in it is punished in the manner described in this verse.
TEXT 21
a - এ ° = -
यस्त्विह নী सर्थाभिगमस्तमुत्र॒ निरये নবমান वज्रकण्टकशास्मलीमारोप्य
Ce

निष्कपन्ति ॥ २१॥
yas tv tha vai sarvabhigamas tam amutra niraye vartamanari
vajrakantaka-salmalim aropya niskarsanti.

yah—anyone who: tu—but: itha—in this life: vai—indeed: sarva-
abhigamah—indulges in sex life indiscriminately, with both men and
animals; tam —him: amutra—in the next life: niraye—in the hell: var-
tamanam—existing; vajrakantaka-$almalim—a silk-cotton tree with
thorns like thunderbolts: dropya—mounting him on: niskarsanti—they
pull him out.

TRANSLATION

A person who indulges in sex indiscriminately —even with
animals —is taken after death to the hell known as Vajrakantaka-
$almali. In this hell there is a silk-cotton tree full of thorns as
strong as thunderbolts. The agents of Yamaraja hang the sinful
man on that tree and pull him down forcibly so that the thorns
very severely tear his body.

PURPORT

The sexual urge is so strong that sometimes a man indulges in sexual
relations with a cow, or a woman indulges in sexual relations with a dog.
Such men and women are put into the hell known as Vajrakantaka-


--- Page 458 ---
458 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
$almali. The Krsna consciousness movement forbids illicit sex. From the
description of these verses, we can understand what an extremely sinful
act illicit sex is. Sometimes people disbelieve these descriptions of hell,
but whether one believes or not, everything must be carried out by the
laws of nature, which no one can avoid.
TEXT 22
= (~ Ea TL
य Ig ৭ राजन्या राजपुरुषा वा अपाखण्डा LRAT
Ey ५ .
भिन्दन्ति ते सम्परेत्य वैतरण्यां निपतन्ति भिन्नमर्यादास्तसयां
ক ৬ - A ~ -
निरयपरिखाभूतायां नद्यां यादोगणंरितस्ततो REE आत्मना न
वियुज्यमानाश्वासुभिरुद्यमानाः स्वाघेन कमपाकमयचुखसरन्ता
विण्मूत्रप्यज्ञोणितकेशनखास्यिमेदोमांसवसावाहिन्या्रुपतप्यन्ते ॥ २२॥
ye tv iha vai rajanya raja-purusa va apakhanda dharma-setin
bhindanti te samparetya vaitaranyam nipatanti bhinna-maryadas
tasyari niraya-parikha-bhitayarn nadyarm yado-ganair itas tato
bhaksyamana atmana na viyujyamanas casubhir uhyamanah svaghena
karma-pakam anusmaranto vin-miitra-piya-sonita-kesa-nakhasthi-
medo-marisa-vasa-vahinyam upatapyante.
ye—persons who: tu—but: iha—in this life: wvai—indeed: ra-
Jjanydh—members of the royal family, or ksatriyas; raja-purusah—
government servants: va—or: apakhandah —although born in responsi-
ble families: dharma-setiin —the bounds of prescribed religious princi-
ples: bhindanti—transgress: te —they: samparetya—after dying:
vaitaranyam—named Vaitarani: nipatanti—fall down: bhinna-
maryadah—who have broken the regulative principles: tasyam—in
that: niraya-parikha-bhitayam —the moat surrounding hell:
nadyam—in the river: yddah-ganaih—by ferocious aquatic animals:
itah tatah—here and there: bhaksyamanah—being eaten: atmana—
with the body: na—not: viyujyamanah—being separated: ca—and:
asubhih—the life airs: uhyamanah —being carried: sva-aghena—by his
own sinful activities: karma-pakam—the result of his impious ac-
tivities: anusmarantah—remembering: vit—of stool: mitra—urine:


--- Page 459 ---
Text 23] The Hellish Planets 459
piya—pus; Sonita—blood: kesa—hair: nakha—nails: asthi—bones:
medah—marrow; marsa—flesh: vasa—fat: vahinyam—in the river:
upatapyante—are afflicted with pain.
TRANSLATION

A person who is born into a responsible family —such as a
ksatriya, a member of royalty or a government servant—but who
neglects to execute his prescribed duties according to religious
principles, and who thus becomes degraded, falls down at the time
of death into the river of hell known as Vaitarani. This river,
which is a moat surrounding hell, is full of ferocious aquatic
animals. When a sinful man is thrown into the River Vaitarani, the
aquatic animals there immediately begin to eat him, but because of
his extremely sinful life, he does not leave his body. He constantly
remembers his sinful activities and suffers terribly in that river,
which is full of stool, urine, pus, blood, hair, nails, bones, mar-
row, flesh and fat.

TEXT 23
A -
ये fag बे TAWA ARPA: Tg
- - ह

चरन्ति ते चापि त्रेत्य पूथविण्पूत्र्छेष्ममलापूर्णाणंवे निपतन्ति
तदेवातिवीभस्सितमश्नन्ति ॥ २३॥
ye tv tha vai vrsali-patayo nasta-Saucacara-niyamas tyakta-lajjah pasu-
caryari caranti te capi pretya piya-vin-miitra-slesma-mala-parnarmave
nipatanti tad evatibibhatsitam asnanti.

ye—persons who: tu—but: tha—in this life; vai—indeed: vrsali-
patayah—the husbands of the S$iadras; nasta—lost: Sauca-acara-
niyamah—whose cleanliness, good behavior and regulated life: tyakta-
lajjah— without shame; pasu-caryam—the behavior of animals:
caranti—they execute; te—they: ca—also: api—indeed: pretya—
dying: piaya—of pus: wvit—stool: mitra—urine: Slesma—mucus:
mala —saliva: parna—full; arnave—in an ocean: nipatanti—fall: tat—


--- Page 460 ---
460 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
that: eva—only: atibibhatsitam—extremely disgusting: asnanti—they
eat.
TRANSLATION

The shameless husbands of lowborn ৩0003 women live exactly
like animals, and therefore they have no good behavior, cleanli-
ness or regulated life. After death, such persons are thrown into
the hell called Payoda, where they are put into an ocean filled with
pus, stool, urine, mucus, saliva and similar things. Sidras who
could not improve themselves fall into that ocean and are forced to
eat those disgusting things.

PURPORT
Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has sung,
karma-kanda, jiana-kanda, kevala visera banda,
amrta baliya yeba khaya
nana yoni sadd phire, kadarya bhaksana kare,
tara janma adah-pate yaya

He says that persons following the paths of karma-kanda and 17670 -
kanda (fruitive activities and speculative thinking) are missing the op-
portunities for human birth and gliding down into the cycle of birth and
death. Thus there is always the chance that he may be put into the
[07003 Naraka, the hell named 07008, where one is forced to eat stool.
urine, pus, mucus, saliva and other abominable things. It is significant
that this verse is spoken especially about $adras. If one is born a $adra,
he must continually return to the ocean of Piyoda to eat horrible things.
Thus even a born Sidra is expected to become a brahmana; that is the
meaning of human life. Everyone should improve himself. Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (4.13), catur-varnyam maya srstam guna-karma-
vibhagasah: “According to the three modes of material nature and the
work ascribed to them, four divisions of human society were created by
Me.” Even if one is by qualification a $izdra, he must try to improve his
position and become a brahmana. No one should try to check a person,
no matter what his present position is, from coming to the platform of a


--- Page 461 ---
Text 24] The Hellish Planets 461
brahmana or a Vaisnava. Actually, one must come to the platform of a
Vaisnava. Then he automatically becomes a brahmana. This can be done
only if the Krsna consciousness movement is spread, for we are trying to
elevate everyone to the platform of Vaisnava. As Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (18.66), sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekari saranari
vraja: “Abandon all other duties and simply surrender unto Me.” One
must give up the occupational duties of a Sidra, ksatriya or vaisya and
adopt the occupational duties of a Vaisnava, which include the activities
of a brahmana. Krsna explains this in Bhagavad-gita (9.32):
mam hi partha vyapdsritya
ye ए syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaiSyas tatha sudras
te ’pi yanti param gatim
“0 son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me. though they be of lower
birth—women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as siadras [workers] —can
approach the supreme destination.” Human life is specifically meant for
going back home, back to Godhead. That facility should be given to
everyone, whether one be a Sidra, a vaiSya, a woman or a ksatriya. This
is the purpose of the Krsna consciousness movement. However, if one is
satisfied to remain a Sidra, he must suffer as described in this verse: tad
evatibibhatsitam asnanti.
TEXT 24
a ও - - ~ -

ये. सिह ৭ अगदं मपतयो ब्राह्मणादयो खगयाविहारा अतीर्थे च
खगान्निन्नन्ति तानपि सम्परेतह्छक्ष्यभूतान्‌ य मपुरूषा इषुभिर्िंभ्यन्ति।। २४॥
ye tv iha vai $va-gardabha-patayo brahmanadayo mrgaya vihara
atirthe ca mrgan nighnanti tan api samparetal laksya-bhiitan yama-
purusa isubhir vidhyanti.

ye—those who: tu—but; iha—in this life: vai—or: sva—of dogs:
gardabha—and asses: patayah—maintainers: brahmana-adayah—
brahmanas, ksatriyas and vaiSyas; mrgaya viharah—taking pleasure in


--- Page 462 ---
462 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
hunting animals in the forest; atirthe—other than prescribed; ca—also:
mrgan—animals: nighnanti—kill: tan—them: api—indeed: sam-
paretan—having died: laksya-bhitan—becoming the targets: yama-
purusah—the assistants of Yamaraja; isubhih—by arrows: vidhyanti—
pierce.
TRANSLATION

If in this life a man of the higher classes [brahmana, ksatriya and
vai$ya] is very fond of taking his pet dogs, mules or asses into the
forest to hunt and kill animals unnecessarily, he is placed after
death into the hell known as Pranarodha. There the assistants of
Yamaraja make him their targets and pierce him with arrows.

PURPORT

In the Western countries especially, aristocrats keep dogs and horses to
hunt animals in the forest. Whether in the West or the East, aristocratic
men in the Kali-yuga adopt the fashion of going to the forest and un-
necessarily killing animals. Men of the higher classes (the brahmanas,
ksatriyas and vaiSyas) should cultivate knowledge of Brahman. and they
should also give the $00705 a chance to come to that platform. If instead
they indulge in hunting, they are punished as described in this verse.
Not only are they pierced with arrows by the agents of Yamaraja, but
they are also put into the ocean of pus. urine and stool described in the
previous verse.

TEXT 25
K/ - [OI
ये লিহণ दाम्भिका दम्भयज्ञेषु मश्‌ विशसन्ति तानशष्मिहटोके वेशसे

नरके पतितान्निरयपतयो यातयित्वा विशसन्ति | २५ ॥

ye tv tha vai dambhika dambha-yajiiesu pasun visasanti tan amusmil
loke vaisase narake patitan niraya-patayo ydatayitva visasanti.

ye—persons who: tu—but: iha—in this life: vai—indeed:
dambhikah—very proud of wealth and a prestigious position: dambha-
yajiiesu—in a sacrifice performed to increase prestige: pasin—animals:
visasanti—kill: tan—them: amusmin loke—in the next world:
vaisase—Vaisasa or Visasana: narake—into the hell: patitan—fallen:


--- Page 463 ---
Text 26] The Hellish Planets 463
niraya-patayah—assistants of Yamaraja: yatayitva—causing sufficient
pain; visasanti—kill.
TRANSLATION

A person who in this life is proud of his eminent position, and
who heedlessly sacrifices animals simply for material prestige, is
put into the hell called Visasana after death. There the assistants of
Yamaraja kill him after giving him unlimited pain.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (6.41) Krsna says, sucinar srimatam gehe yoga-
bhrasto ’bhijayate: “Because of his previous connection with bhakti-
yoga, a man is born into a prestigious family of brahmanas or
aristocrats.” Having taken such a birth, one should utilize it to perfect
bhakti-yoga. However, due to bad association one often forgets that his
prestigious position has been given to him by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and he misuses it by performing various kinds of so-called
yajnas like kali-pija or durga-piyja, in which poor animals are sacrificed.
How such a person is punished is described herein. The word dambha-
yajiiesu in this verse is significant. If one violates the Vedic instructions
while performing yajiia and simply makes a show of sacrifice for the
purpose of killing animals, he is punishable after death. In Calcutta there
are many slaughterhouses where animal flesh is sold that has supposedly
been offered in sacrifice before the goddess Kali. The sastras enjoin that
one can sacrifice a small goat before the goddess Kali once a month.
Nowhere is it said that one can maintain a slaughterhouse in the name of
temple worship and daily kill animals unnecessarily. Those who do so
receive the punishments described herein.

TEXT 26

यस्त्विह वै सवर्णां भार्या द्विजो रेतः पाययति काममोहितस्तं पाप-
FING रेतःङल्यायां पातयित्वा रेतः सम्पाययन्ति ॥ २६॥
yas tv tha vai savarnari bharyarm dvijo retah payayati kama-mohitas
tari papa-krtam amutra retah-kulyayam patayitva retah sampayayanti.


--- Page 464 ---
464 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26

yah—any person who: tu—but: itha—in this life; vai—indeed: sa-
varndm—of the same caste: bharyam—his wife: dvijah—a person of a
higher caste (such as a brahmana, ksatriya or vaisya): retah —the
semen: payayati—causes to drink: kama-mohitah—being deluded by
lusty desires: tam—him: papa-krtam—performing sin; amutra—in the
next life: retah-kulyayam—in a river of semen: patayitva—throwing:
retah—semen: sampayayanti—force to drink.

TRANSLATION

If a foolish member of the twice-born classes [brahmana,
ksatriya and vai$ya] forces his wife to drink his semen out of a
lusty desire to keep her under control, he is put after death into
the hell known as Lalabhaksa. There he is thrown into a flowing
river of semen, which he is forced to drink.

PURPORT

The practice of forcing one’s wife to drink one’s own semen is a black
art practiced by extremely lusty persons. Those who practice this very
abominable activity say that if a wife is forced to drink her husband’s
semen, she remains very faithful to him. Generally only low-class men
engage in this black art, but if a man born in a higher class does so. after
death he is put into the hell known as Lalabhaksa. There he is immersed
in the river known as Sukra-nadi and forced to drink semen.

TEXT 27

os a “উজান ~
ये fag वै दस्यवोऽग्निदा गरदा ग्रामान्‌ सार्थान्‌ वा विलुम्पन्ति
राजानो राजभटा वा तांश्वापि दि परेत्य यमदूता वज्दश्राः खानः
सप्तशतानि विंशतिश्च सरभसं खादन्ति ॥ २७॥
ye tv iha vai dasyavo ‘gnida garada graman sarthan va vilumpanti
rajano raja-bhata va tams capi hi paretya yamadiita vajra-darstrah
Svanah sapta-satani vimsatis ca sarabhasarm khadanti.

ye—persons who: tu—but; tha—in this life: vai—indeed:
dasyavah—thieves and plunderers: agni-dah—who set fire: gara-


--- Page 465 ---
Text 28] The Hellish Planets 465
dah—who administer poison; graman—villages: sarthan—the mercan-
tile class of men; va—or: vilumpanti—plunder; rajanah—Xkings: raja-
bhatah—government officials; धद -- ग; tan—them; ca—also: api—in-
deed: hi—certainly: paretya—having died: yamaditah—the assistants
of Yamarija: wvajra-damstrah—having mighty teeth; svanah—dogs:
sapta-satini—seven hundred; vimsatih—twenty: ca—and: sara-
bhasam —voraciously: khadanti—devour.
TRANSLATION

In this world, some persons are professional plunderers who set
fire to others’ houses or administer poison to them. Also, members
of the royalty or government officials sometimes plunder mercan-
tile men by forcing them to pay income tax and by other methods.
After death such demons are put into the hell known as
Sarameyadana. On that planet there are 720 dogs with teeth as
strong as thunderbolts. Under the orders of the agents of
Yamaraja, these dogs voraciously devour such sinful people.

PURPORT

In the Twelfth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, it is said that in this age
of Kali everyone will be extremely disturbed by three kinds of tribula-
tions: scarcity of rain, famine, and heavy taxation by the government.
Because human beings are becoming more and more sinful. there will be
a scarcity of rain, and naturally no food grains will be produced. On the
plea of relieving the suffering caused by the ensuing famine. the govern-
ment will impose heavy taxes, especially on the wealthy mercantile com-
munity. In this verse. the members of such a government are described
as dasyu, thieves. Their main activity will be to plunder the wealth of the
people. Whether a highway robber or a government thief, such a man
will be punished in his next life by being thrown into the hell known as
Sarameyadana, where he will suffer greatly from the bites of ferocious
dogs.

TEXT 28

यस्त्विह वा अतं वदति साक्ष्ये द्रव्यविनिमये হাল वा said
वै प्रेत्य नरके ऽवीचिमत्यधःशिरा निरवकारो योजनशतोच्छरायाद्‌ Riga:


--- Page 466 ---
466 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
सम्पात्यते यत्र॒ जलमिव स्थरमडमपृष्ठमवभासते तदवीचिमत्तिलशो विशीयं
माणशरीरो न म्रियमाणः पुनरारोपितो निपतति ॥ २८ ॥
yas tv tha va anrtam vadati saksye dravya-vinimaye dane va kathancit
sa vai pretya narake "vicimaty adhah-sira niravakase yojana-
Satocchrayad giri-mitrdhnah sampatyate yatra jalam iva sthalam asma-
prstham avabhasate tad avicimat tilaso visiryamana-sariro na
mriyamdnah punar aropito nipatati.

yah—anyone who: tu—but: tha—in this life: va—or: anrtam—a lie:
vadati—speaks: saksye—giving witness: dravya-vinimaye—in ex-
change for goods: dane—in giving charity: va—or: kathasicit—some-
how: sah—that person: vai—indeed: pretya—after dying: narake—in
the hell; avicimati—named Avicimat (having no water) : adhah-sirah—
with his head downward: niravakase—without support: yojana-sata —of
eight hundred miles: ucchrayat—having a height: giri—of a mountain:
mitrdhnah—from the top: sampdatyate—is thrown: yatra—where:
jalam iva—like water: sthalam—land: asma-prstham—having a sur-
face of stone: avabhasate—appears: tat—that: avicimat—having no
water or waves: tilasah—in pieces as small as seeds: viSiryamana—
being broken: Sarirah—the body: na mriyamanah—not dying:
punah—again: aropitah—raised to the top: nipatati—falls down.

TRANSLATION

A person who in this life bears false witness or lies while trans-
acting business or giving charity is severely punished after death
by the agents of Yamaraja. Such a sinful man is taken to the top of a
mountain eight hundred miles high and thrown headfirst into the
hell known as Avicimat. This hell has no shelter and is made of
strong stone resembling the waves of water. There is no water
there, however, and thus it is called Avicimat [waterless].
Although the sinful man is repeatedly thrown from the mountain
and his body broken to tiny pieces, he still does not die but con-
tinuously suffers chastisement.


--- Page 467 ---
Text 29] The Hellish Planets 467
TEXT 29
= - রা. °

यस्त्विह वै विप्रो राजन्यो वैश्यो वा सोमपीयस्तत्करत्रं वा
सुरां व्रतस्थोऽपि वा पिबति प्रमादतस्तेषां निरयं লাবালাদ্ধলে
पदाऽऽक्रम्यास्ये वद्धिना द्रवमाणं कार््णायसं निषिश्चन्ति ॥ २९ ॥

yas tv iha vai vipro rajanyo vaisyo va soma-pithas tat-kalatram va
suram vrata-stho ’pi vd pibati pramadatas tesarn nirayar nitanam urasi
padakramydasye vahnina dravamanam karsnayasarm nisificanti.

yah—anyone who: tu—but: iha—in this Ife: vai—indeed: viprah—a
learned brahmana; rajanyah—a ksatriya; vaiSyah—a vaiSya; va—or:
soma-pithah—drink soma-rasa; tat—his: kalatram—wife: va—or:
suram—liquor: vrata-sthah—being: situated in a vow: api—certainly:
va—or: pibati—drinks: pramadatah—out of illusion: tesam—of all of
them: nirayam—to hell: nitanam —being brought: urasi—on the chest:
pada—with the foot: akramya—stepping: asye—in the mouth:
vahnina—by fire: dravamanam —melted: karsnayasam—iron:
nisiiicanti—they pour into.

TRANSLATION

Any brahmana or brahmana’s wife who drinks liquor is taken by
the agents of Yamaraja to the hell known as Ayahpana. This hell
also awaits any ksatriya, vaiSya, or person under a vow who in illu-
sion drinks soma-rasa. In Ayahpana the agents of Yamaraja stand
on their chests and pour hot melted iron into their mouths.

PURPORT

One should not be a brahmana in name only and engage in all kinds of
sinful activities, especially drinking liquor. Brahmanas, ksatriyas and
vaisyas must behave according to the principles of their order. If they
fall down to the level of sitdras, who are accustomed to drink liquor. they
will be punished as described herein.


--- Page 468 ---
468 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
TEXT 30
- -
अथ च यस्त्विह वा आत्मसम्भावनेन खयमथमो जन्मतपोविद्याचार-
N 9
वर्णा्रमवतो वरीयसो न वहु मन्येत स मृतक एव मृत्वा क्षारकर्दमे
-

निरयेऽवाक्‌ fim निपातितो दुरन्ता यातना ह्यश्नुते ॥२३०॥
atha ca yas tv tha va aima-sambhavanena svayam adhamo janma-tapo-
vidyacara-varnasramavato vartyaso na bahu manyeta sa mrtaka eva
mrtva ksarakardame niraye *vak-sira nipatito duranta yatana hy asnute.

atha—furthermore: ca—also: yah—anyone who: tu—but: iha—in
this life: va—or: atma-sambhavanena—by false prestige: svayam—
himself: adhamah—very degraded: janma—good birth: tapah—
austerities: vidya —knowledge: acara—good behavior: varna-asrama-
vatah—in terms of strictly following the principles of varnasrama;
variyasah—of one who is more honorable: na—not: bahu—much:
manyeta—respects: sah—he: mrtakah—a dead body: eva—only:
mrtva—after dying: ksarakardame—named Ksarakardama: niraye—in
the hell: avak-sira—with his head downward: nipatitah—thrown:
durantah yatanah—severe painful conditions: hi—indeed: asnute—
suffers.

TRANSLATION

A lowborn and abominable person who in this life becomes
falsely proud, thinking "व्‌ am great,” and who thus fails to show
proper respect to one more elevated than he by birth, austerity,
education, behavior, caste or spiritual order, is like a dead man
even in this lifetime, and after death he is thrown headfirst into
the hell known as Ksarakardama. There he must great suffer great
tribulation at the hands of the agents of Yamaraja.

PURPORT

One should not become falsely proud. One must be respectful toward
a person more elevated than he by birth, education, behavior, caste
or spiritual order. If one does not show respect to such highly elevated


--- Page 469 ---
Text 31] The Hellish Planets 469
persons but indulges in false pride. he receives punishment in
Ksarakardama.
TEXT 31
পে - ক

ये त्विह वे पुरुषाः पुरुषमेधेन यजन्ते याश्च Rl ব্বদ্যাল্আহল্লিলাগন
पशव इव निहता यमसदने यातयन्तो रक्षोगणा; सौनिका হন खधितिनाव-
दायासुक्‌ पिबन्ति gears च गायन्ति च हृष्यमाणा यथेह पुरुषादाः
॥ २१ ॥

‘ye tv tha vai purusah purusa-medhena yajante yas ca striyo nr-pasian
khadanti tars ca te pasava iva nihata yama-sadane yatayanto rakso-
ganah saunika iva svadhitinavadayasrk pibanti nrtyanti ca gayanti ca
hrsyamana yatheha purusadah.

ye—persons who: tu—but; iha—in this life; vai—indeed: purusah—
men: purusa-medhena—by sacrifice of a man: yajante—worship (the
goddess Kali or Bhadra Kali); yah—those who; ca—and: striyah—
women; nr-pasin—the men used as sacrifice: khadanti—eat: tan—
them; ca—and; te—they: pasavah iva—like the animals: nihatah—
being slain; yama-sadane—in the abode of Yamaraja: yatayantah—
punishing; raksah-ganah—being Raksasas: saunikah—the killers:
iva—like; svadhitina—by a sword; avadd@ya —cutting to pieces: asrk—
the blood: pibanti—drink: nrtyanti—dance: ca—and: gayanti—sing:
ca—also; hrsyamanah—being delighted: yatha—just like: tha—in this
world; purusa-addh—the man-eaters.

TRANSLATION

There are men and women in this world who sacrifice human
beings to Bhairava or Bhadra Kali and then eat their victims’ flesh.
Those who perform such sacrifices are taken after death to the
abode of Yamaraja, where their victims, having taken the form of
Raksasas, cut them to pieces with sharpened swords. Just as in this
world the man-eaters drank their victims’ blood, dancing and


--- Page 470 ---
470 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
singing in jubilation, their victims now enjoy drinking the blood
of the sacrificers and celebrating in the same way.
TEXT 32
(९ a
ये fag वा अनागसोऽरण्ये সাম वा वैश्रम्भद्ेरुपसृतानुपविभ्म्भय्य
जिजीविषृन्‌ शलघत्रादिषुपप्रोतान्‌ ऋीडनकतया यातयन्ति तेऽपि च
Tq यमयातनासु शखादिषु प्रोतात्मानः ধ্যবূতং্যা चामिहताः कङ्-
EN ৬

वटादिभिश्वेतस्ततस्िग्मतुण्डेराहन्यमाना আংমহামন্ত सरन्ति ॥ ३२॥
ye tv iha va anagaso ‘ranye grame va vaisrambhakair upasrtan
upavisrambhayya jijivisin sila-sutradisupaprotan kridanakataya
yatayanti te ‘pi ca pretya yama-yatanasu Suladisu protatmanah ksut-
trdbhyam cabhihatah karka-vatadibhis cetas tatas tigma-tundair
ahanyamana atma-samalam smaranti.

ye—persons who: tu—but: iha—in this life: va—or: anagasah—
who are faultless: aranye—in the forest: grame—in the village: va—or:
vaisrambhakaih—by means of good faith: upasrtan—brought near:
upavisrambhayya —inspiring with confidence; jijivisin —who want to be
protected; Sila-sitra-adisu—on a lance, thread, and so on; upaprotan—
fixed; kridanakataya—like a plaything; yatayanti—cause pain; te—
those persons: api—certainly; ca—and; pretya—after dying; yama-
yatanasu—the persecutions of Yamaraja: Sila-adisu—on lances and so
on: prota-atmanah—whose bodies are fixed: ksut-trdbhyam—by
hunger and thirst: ca—also: abhihatah—overwhelmed: karnka-vata-
adibhih—by birds such as herons and vultures: ca—and: itah tatah—
here and there: tigma-tundaih—having pointed beaks:
ahanyamanah—being tortured: atma-samalam—own sinful activities:
smaranti—they remember.

TRANSLATION

In this life some people give shelter to animals and birds that
come to them for protection in the village or forest, and after mak-
ing them believe that they will be protected, such people pierce
them with lances or threads and play with them like toys, giving


--- Page 471 ---
Text 33] The Hellish Planets 471
them great pain. After death such people are brought by the assis-
tants of Yamaraja to the hell known as Sualaprota, where their
bodies are pierced with sharp, needlelike lances. They suffer from
hunger and thirst, and sharp-beaked birds such as vultures and
herons come at them from all sides to tear at their bodies. Tor-
tured and suffering, they can then remember the sinful activities
they committed in the past.
TEXT 33
সী J =.
ये fir वै भुतान्युद्रेजयन्ति नरा उल्वणखभावा यथा

दन्दशूकास्तेऽपि प्रेत्य नरके AREY निपतन्ति यत्र॒ qq
दन्द शकाः पञ्चमुखाः सप्तमुखा ITT ग्रसन्ति यथा चिलेशयान्‌ ।॥ ३३ ॥

ye tv tha vai bhitany udvejayanti nara ulbana-svabhava yatha
dandasukas te ‘pi pretya narake dandasikakhye nipatanti yatra nrpa
dandasikah parica-mukhah sapta-mukha upasrtya grasanti yatha
bilesayan.

ye—persons who: tu—but: tha—in this life: vai—indeed: bhiatani—
to living entities; udvejayanti—cause unnecessary pain: narGh—men:
ulbana-svabhavah—angry by nature: yatha—just like: dandasikah—
snakes: te—they: api—also: pretya—after dying: narake—in the hell:
dandasika-akhye—named Danda$ika: nipatanti—{fall down: yatra—
where: nrpa—O King: dandasikah—serpents: paiica-mukhah—hav-
ing five hoods: sapta-mukhah—having seven hoods: upasrtya—reach-
ing up: grasanti—eat: yatha—just like: bilesayan—mice.

TRANSLATION

Those who in this life are like envious serpents, always angry
and giving pain to other living entities, fall after death into the
hell known as Dandasiika. My dear King, in this hell there are ser-
pents with five or seven hoods. These serpents eat such sinful per-
sons just as snakes eat mice.


--- Page 472 ---
472 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
TEXT 34

ये न्विह वा अन्धावटङकघ्रलगुहादिषु भूतानि निरुन्धन्ति तथात्र
तेष्वेवोपवेश्य सगरेण fg धूमेन निरुन्धन्ति । ३४॥
ye tv tha va andhavata-kusiila-guhdadisu bhitani nirundhanti
tathamutra tesv evopaveSya sagarena vahnina dhiimena nirundhanti.

ye—persons who; tu—but; tha—in this life; va—or: andha-avata—
a blind well; kusiila—granaries: guha-adisu—and in caves: bhitani—
the living entities: nirundhanti—confine: tatha —similarly: amutra—in
the next life; tesu—in those same places: eva—certainly: upavesya—
causing to enter: sagarena—with poisonous fumes: vahnind—with fire;
dhiamena—with smoke: nirundhanti—confine.

TRANSLATION

Those who in this life confine other living entities in dark wells,
granaries or mountain caves are put after death into the hell
known as Avata-nirodhana. There they themselves are pushed into
dark wells, where poisonous fumes and smoke suffocate them and
they suffer very severely.

TEXT 35

यस्त्विह वा अतिथीनभ्यागतान्‌ वा गृहपतिरसृदुपगतमन्युर्दिधक्षुरिव पापेन
चक्षुषा निरीक्षते तस्य॒ चापि निरये पापदृष्टेरक्षिणी वजतण्डा गृधाः
कङ्क (कवटाद यः प्रसहयोरुबरादुत्पाटयन्ति ।।२५॥
yas tv tha va atithin abhydgatan va grha-patir asakrd upagata-manyur
didhaksur iva papena caksusa niriksate tasya capi niraye papa-drster
aksini vajra-tunda grdhrah kanka-kaka-vatadayah prasahyoru-balad
ulpatayanti.

yah—a person who: tu—but; tha—in this life: va—or: atithin—
guests; abhyagatan—visitors; va—or: grha-patih—a householder:
asakrt—many times; upagata—obtaining; manyuh—anger: didhak-
suh—one desiring to burn: iwa—Ilike: papena—sinful: caksusa—with


--- Page 473 ---
Text 36] The Hellish Planets 473
eyes; nirtksate—looks at; tasya—of him; ca—and; api—certainly;
niraye—in hell: papa-drsteh—of he whose vision has become sinful:
aksini—the eyes: vajra-tundaih—those who have powerful beaks;
grdhrah—vultures; karika—herons; kdka—crows: vata-adayah—and
other birds; prasahya—violently; uru-balat—with great force: ut-
patayanti—pluck out.
TRANSLATION
A householder who receives guests or visitors with cruel
glances, as if to burn them to ashes, is put into the hell called
Paryavartana, where he is gazed at by hard-eyed vultures, herons,
crows and similar birds, which suddenly swoop down and pluck
out his eyes with great force.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic etiquette, even an enemy who comes to a
householder’s home should be received in such a gentle way that he
forgets that he has come to the home of an enemy. A guest who comes to
one’s home should be received very politely. If he is unwanted. the
householder should not stare at him with blinking eyes, for one who does
so will be put into the hell known as Paryavartana after death. and there
many ferocious birds like vultures, crows, and coknis will suddenly come
upon him and pluck out his eyes.
TEXT 36
o = < ४ 2
यस्त्विह वा आद्याभिमतिरहङकुतिलियकरे्षणः মণলী5মিবিহাক্কী
अर्थन्ययनाशचिन्तया परिदयप्यमाणहदयवदनो निन्ेतिमनवगतो ग्रह
इवार्थमभिरक्षति स चापि प्रेर्य तदुत्पादनोतकषणसंरक्षणशषमलग्रहः चीख
+ + [3
नरके निपतति, यत्र ह वित्तग्रहं पापपुरुषं धमेराजपुरूषा বায়কা इव
सवेतोऽङ्ेषु ad: परिवयन्ति ॥ ३६ ॥
yas tv 2/2 va adhyabhimatir aharikrtis tiryak-preksanah sarvato
’bhivisariki artha-vyaya-nasa-cintaya parisusyamana-hrdaya-vadano
nirvrtim anavagato graha ivartham abhiraksati sa capi pretya tad-
utpadanotkarsana-samraksana-samala-grahah sicimukhe narake


--- Page 474 ---
474 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
nipatati yatra ha vitta-graham papa-purusam dharmardaja-purusa
vayaka iva sarvato ’ngesu sitraih parivayanti.

yah—any person who: tu—but: iha—in this world: va—or: adhya-
abhimatih—proud because of wealth: aharnkrtih —egotistic: tiryak-prek-
sanah—whose vision is crooked: sarvatah abhivisariki—always fearful
of being cheated by others, even by superiors: artha-vyaya-nasa-cin-
taya—by the thought of expenditure and loss: pariSusyamana—dried
up: hrdaya-vadanah—his heart and face: nirvrtim—happiness:
anavagatah—not obtaining: grahah—a ghost; iva—like: artham—
wealth: abhiraksati—protects;: sah—he: ca—also: api—indeed:
pretya—after dying: tat—of those riches: utpadana—of the earning:
utkarsana—increasing: samraksana—protecting:; Samala-grahah—ac-
cepting the sinful activities: siicimukhe —named Stcimukha: narake—
in the hell; nipatati—falls down: yatra—where: ha—indeed: vitta-
graham —as a money-grabbing ghost: papa-purusam—very sinful man:
dharmaradja-purusah—the commanding men of Yamaraja: vayakah
iva—like expert weavers: sarvatah—all over; arngesu—on the limbs of
the body: siitraih—by threads: parivayanti—stitch.

TRANSLATION

One who in this world or this life is very proud of his wealth al-
ways thinks, “I am so rich. Who can equal me?” His vision is
twisted, and he is always afraid that someone will take his wealth.
Indeed, he even suspects his superiors. His face and heart dry up at
the thought of losing his wealth, and therefore he always looks
like a wretched fiend. He is not in any way able to obtain actual
happiness, and he does not know what it is to be free from anxiety.
Because of the sinful things he does to earn money, augment his
wealth and protect it, he is put into the hell called Sticimukha,
where the officials of Yamaraja punish him by stitching thread
through his entire body like weavers manufacturing cloth.

PURPORT

When one possesses more wealth than necessary, he certainly becomes

very proud. This is the situation of men in modern civilization. Accord-


--- Page 475 ---
Text 37] The Hellish Planets 475
ing to the Vedic culture, brahmanas do not possess anything, whereas
ksatriyas possess riches, but only for performing sacrifices and other
noble activities as prescribed in the Vedic injunctions. A vai§ya also
earns money honestly through agriculture, cow protection and some
trade. If a Sidra gets money. however, he will spend it lavishly, without
discrimination, or simply accumulate it for no purpose. Because in this
age there are no qualified brahmanas, ksatriyas or vaisyas, almost every-
one is a Sidra (kalau $adra-sambhavah). Therefore the Sidra mentality
is causing great harm to modern civilization. A Sidra does not know how
to use money to render transcendental loving service to the Lord. Money
is also called laksmi, and Laksmi is always engaged in the service of
Narayana. Wherever there is money. it must be engaged in the service of
Lord Narayana. Everyone should use his money to spread the great
transcendental movement of Krsna consciousness. If one does not spend
money for this purpose but accumulates more than necessary. he will
certainly become proud of the money he illegally possesses. The money
actually belongs to Krsna, who says in Bhagavad-gita (5.29). bhoktaram
yajia-tapasarm sarva-loka-mahesvaram: `" am the true enjoyer of
sacrifices and penances, and I am the owner of all the planets.”
Therefore nothing belongs to anyone but Krsna. One who possesses more
money than he needs should spend it for Krsna. Unless one does so. he
will become puffed up because of his false possessions. and therefore he
will be punished in the next life, as described herein.
TEXT 37
एवंविधा नरका यमालये सन्ति যালহাঃ सदखशस्तेषु सर्वेषु च অল

एवाधर्मवर्तिनो ये केचिदिहोदिता अनुदिताश्वावनिपते पर्यायेण विशन्ति
तथैव धर्मानुवर्तिन इतरत्र इद तु पुनर्भवे त॒ उभयशेषाभ्यां निविश्चन्ति
॥ २७ ॥

evarn-vidha naraka yamalaye santi satasah sahasrasas tesu sarvesu ca
sarva evadharma-vartino ye kecid ihodita anuditas cavani-pate
paryayena visanti tathaiva dharmanuvartina itaratra iha tu punar-
bhave ta ubhaya-sesabhyam nivisanti.


--- Page 476 ---
476 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26

evam-vidhah—of this sort: narakah—the many hells: yama-alaye—
in the province of Yamaraja: santi—are: Satasah—hundreds:
sahasrasah—thousands; tesu—in those hellish planets: sarvesu—all:
ca—also: sarve—all: eva—indeed; adharma-vartinah—persons not
following the Vedic principles or regulative principles: ye kecit—
whosoever: itha—here: uditdh—mentioned: anuditah—not mentioned:
ca—and: avani-pate—O King: paryayena—according to the degree of
different kinds of sinful activity: viSanti—they enter: tatha eva—
similarly: dharma-anuvartinah—those who are pious and act according
to the regulative principles or Vedic injunctions: itaratra—elsewhere:
iha—on this planet: tu—but: punah-bhave —into another birth: te—all
of them: ubhaya-sesabhyam—by the remainder of the results of piety or
vice: nivisanti—they enter.

TRANSLATION

My dear King Pariksit, in the province of Yamaraja there are
hundreds and thousands of hellish planets. The impious people I
have mentioned —and also those I have not mentioned —must all
enter these various planets according to the degree of their im-
piety. Those who are pious, however, enter other planetary
systems, namely the planets of the demigods. Nevertheless, both
the pious and impious are again brought to earth after the results
of their pious or impious acts are exhausted.

PURPORT

This corresponds to the beginning of Lord Krsna’s instructions in
Bhagavad-gita. Tatha dehantara-praptih: within this material world.
one is simply meant to change from one body to another in different
planetary systems. Urdhvari gacchanti satva-stha: those in the mode of
goodness are elevated to the heavenly planets. Adho gacchanti tamasah:
similarly, those too engrossed in ignorance enter the hellish planetary
systems. Both of them, however, are subjected to the repetition of birth
and death. In Bhagavad-gita it is stated that even one who is very pious
returns to earth after his enjoyment in the higher planetary systems is
over (ksine punye martya-lokari visanti). Therefore, going from one
planet to another does not solve the problems of life. The problems of life


--- Page 477 ---
Text 38] The Hellish Planets 477
will only be solved when we no longer have to accept a material body.
This can be possible if one simply becomes Krsna conscious. As Krsna
says in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):

Janma karma ca me divyam

evari yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this
material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.” This is the per-
fection of life and the real solution to life’s problems. We should not be
eager to go to the higher, heavenly planetary systems, nor should we act
in such a way that we have to go to the hellish planets. The complete pur-
pose of this material world will be fulfilled when we resume our spiritual
identities and go back home, back to Godhead. The very simple method
for doing this is prescribed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekarn $aranari vraja. One should be
neither pious nor impious. One should be a devotee and surrender to the
lotus feet of Krsna. This surrendering process is also very easy. Even a
child can perform it. Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam
namaskuru. One must always simply think of Krsna by chanting Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama. Hare Rama.
Rama Rama, Hare Hare. One should become Krsna’s devotee. worship
Him and offer obeisances to Him. Thus one should engage all the ac-
tivities of his life in the service of Lord Krsna.
TEXT 38
६ -
निहत्तिरक्षणमागं _ आदावेव व्याख्यातः ॥ एतावानेवाण्डकोशो
-
यश्चतुदंज्ञधा पुराणेषु विकस्पित उपगीयते यत्तद्भगवतो ARETE
साक्षान्महापुरुषसखय स्थविष्ठं रूपमात्ममायागुणमयमुवणितमारतः पठति
- -

श्रृणोति श्रावयति स उपगेयं भगवतः परमार्मनोऽग्राद्यमपि
श्रद्धामक्तिविद्यद्धबुद्िरवेद ।। २८ ॥


--- Page 478 ---
478 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26

nivrtti-laksana-marga adav eva vyakhyatah. etavan evanda-koso yas
caturdasadha puranesu vikalpita upagiyate yat tad bhagavato
narayanasya saksan maha-purusasya sthavisthari ripam atmamaya-
gunamayam anuvarnitam adrtah pathati Srnoti Sravayati sa upageyar
bhagavatah paramatmano ‘grahyam api sraddha-bhakti-visuddha-
buddhir veda.

nivrtti-laksana-margah—the path symptomized by renunciation, or
the path of liberation: ddau—in the beginning (the Second and Third
Cantos): eva—indeed: vydkhyatah—described: etavan—this much:
eva—certainly: anda-kosah—the universe. which resembles a big egg:
yah—which: caturdasa-dha—in fourteen parts: puranesu—in the
Puranas; vikalpitah—divided: upagiyate—is described: yat—which:
tat—that: bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead:
narayanasya—of Lord Narayana: saksat—directly: maha-purusasya—
of the Supreme Person: sthavistham—the gross: ripam—form: atma-
maya—of His own energy: guna—of the qualities: mayam —consisting:
anuvarnitam —described: adrtah—venerating: pathati—one reads:
Srnoti—or hears: Sravayati—or explains: sah—that person:
upageyam—song: bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead: paramatmanah—of the Supersoul: agrahyam—difficult to
understand: api—although: sraddha—by faith: bhakti—and devotion:
visSuddha— purified: buddhih—whose intelligence: veda —understands.

TRANSLATION

In the beginning [the Second and Third Cantos of Srimad-
Bhagavatam] I have already described how one can progress on the
path of liberation. In the Puranas the vast universal existence,
which is like an egg divided into fourteen parts, is described. This
vast form is considered the external body of the Lord, created by
His energy and qualities. It is generally called the virata-rapa. If
one reads the description of this external form of the Lord with
great faith, or if one hears about it or explains it to others to
propagate bhagavata-dharma, or Krsna consciousness, his faith
and devotion in spiritual consciousness, Krsna consciousness, will
gradually increase. Although developing this consciousness is very


--- Page 479 ---
Text 39] The Hellish Planets 479
difficult, by this process one can purify himself and gradually
come to an awareness of the Supreme Absolute Truth.
PURPORT

The Krsna consciousness movement is pushing forward the pub-
lication of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as explained especially for the
understanding of the modern civilized man, to awaken him to his origi-
nal consciousness. Without this consciousness, one melts into complete
darkness. Whether one goes to the upper planetary systems or the hellish
planetary systems, he simply wastes his time. Therefore one should hear
of the universal position of the virata form of the Lord as described in
Srimad-Bhagavatam. That will help one save himself from material con-
ditional life and gradually elevate him to the path of liberation so that he
can go back home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 39
शरुत्वा स्थूलं तथा 85H रूपं भगवतो यतिः |
स्थूले निर्भितमात्मानं खनेः as धिया नयेदिति।३९।
Srutva 5117८72 tatha siksmam
ripari bhagavato yatih
sthile nirjitam atmanam
Sanaih siksmam dhiya nayed iti

Srutva—after hearing of (from the disciplic succession): sthii-
lam —gross: tatha—as well as: siksmam—subtle: ripam—form:
bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: yatih—a san-
nyasi or devotee: sthile—the gross form: nirjitam—conquered: at-
manam—the mind: Sanaih—gradually: saksmam—the subtle. spiritual
form of the Lord: dhiya—Dby intelligence: nayet—one should lead it to:
iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

One who is interested in liberation, who accepts the path of

liberation and is not attracted to the path of conditional life, is


--- Page 480 ---
480 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 5, Ch. 26
called yati, or a devotee. Such a person should first control his
mind by thinking of the virata-rupa, the gigantic universal form
of the Lord, and then gradually think of the spiritual form of
Krsna [sac-cid-ananda-vigraha] after hearing of both forms. Thus
one’s mind is fixed in samadhi. By devotional service one can then
realize the spiritual form of the Lord, which is the destination of
devotees. Thus his life becomes successful.
PURPORT

It is said, mahat-sevamn dvaram ahur vimukteh: if one wants to
progress on the path of liberation, he should associate with mahatmas, or
liberated devotees, because in such association there is a full chance for
hearing, describing and chanting about the name, form, qualities and
paraphernalia of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all of which are
described in Srimad-Bhagavatam. On the path of bondage, one eternally
undergoes the repetition of birth and death. One who desires liberation
from such bondage should join the International Society for Krishna
Consciousness and thus take advantage of the opportunity to hear
Srimad-Bhagavatam from devotees and also explain it to propagate
Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 40
५५ o 5
भूद्रीपवषेसरिदद्रिनभःसयद्र
पातार्दिङ्नरकमभागगलोकसंस्था |
गीता मया तव॒ तरपाद्धुतमीश्वरस्य
स्थूलं वपुः सकरजीवनिकायधाम Boll
bha-dvipa-varsa-sarid-adri-nabhah-samudra-
patala-din-naraka-bhagana-loka-sarstha
gita maya tava nrpadbhutam iSvarasya
sthilam vapuh sakala-jiva-nikaya-dhama

bhi —of this planet earth: dvipa—and other different planetary
systems; varsa—of tracts of land: sarit—rivers: adri—mountains:
nabhah—the sky: samudra—oceans: patala—lower planets: dik—


--- Page 481 ---
Text 40] The Hellish Planets 481
directions: naraka—the hellish planets: bhagana-loka—the luminaries
and higher planets: sarstha—the situation: gita—described: maya —by
me: tava—for you: nrpa—O King: adbhutam —wonderful: iSvarasya—
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sthiilam—gross: vapuh —body:
sakala-jiva-nikaya—of all the masses of living entities; dhama—which
is the place of repose.
TRANSLATION

My dear King, I have now described for you this planet earth,
other planetary systems, and their lands [varsas], rivers and moun-
tains. I have also described the sky, the oceans, the lower planetary
systems, the directions, the hellish planetary systems and the stars.
These constitute the virata-riapa, the gigantic material form of the
Lord, on which all living entities repose. Thus I have explained the
wonderful expanse of the external body of the Lord.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-sixth
Chapter, of Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled (44 Description of the Hellish
Planets.”

— Completed in the Honolulu temple of the Pafica-tattva, June 5. 1975

There is a supplementary note written by His Divine Grace Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja Prabhupada in his Gaudiya-
bhasya. Its translation is as follows. Learned scholars who have full
knowledge of all the Vedic scriptures agree that the incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead are innumerable. These incarnations
are classified into two divisions. called prabhava and vaibhava. Accord-
ing to the scriptures, prabhava incarnations are also classified in two
divisions —those which are called eternal and those which are not vividly
described. In this Fifth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, in Chapters Three
through Six, there is a description of Rsabhadeva. but there is not an ex-
panded description of His spiritual activities. Therefore He is considered
to belong to the second group of prabhava incarnations. In Srimad-
Bhagavatam, First Canto. Chapter Three, verse 13. it is said:


--- Page 482 ---
482 Srimad-Bhagavatam
astame merudevyam tu
nabher jata urukramah
darsayan vartma dhiranam
sarvasrama-namaskrtam
“Lord Visnu appeared in the eighth incarnation as the son of Maharaja
Nabhi [the son of Agnidhra] and his wife Merudevi. He showed the path
of perfection, the paramaharisa stage of life, which is worshiped by all
the followers of varpasrama-dharma.” Rsabhadeva is the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and His body is spiritual (sac-cid-ananda-vigraha).
Therefore one might ask how it might be possible that he passed stool
and urine. The Gaudiya vedanta ৫০৫7৫ Baladeva Vidyabhusana has
replied to this question in his book known as Siddhanta-ratna (First Por-
tion, texts 65-68). Imperfect men call attention to Rsabhadeva’s passing
stool and urine as a subject matter for the study of nondevotees. who do
not understand the spiritual position of a transcendental body. In this
Fifth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.6.11) the illusioned and
bewildered state of the materialists of this age is fully described.
Elsewhere in Fifth Canto (5.5.19) Rsabhadeva stated, 70077 Sariram
mama durvibhavyam: “This body of Mine is inconceivable for
materialists.” This is also confirmed by Lord Krsna in Bhagavad-gita
(9.11):
avajananti mar midha
manusirn tanum asritam
param bhavam ajananto
mama bhita-mahesvaram
“Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know
My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.”
The human form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is extremely
difficult to understand, and, in fact, for a common man it is inconceiv-
able. Therefore Rsabhadeva has directly explained that His own body
belongs to the spiritual platform. This being so. Rsabhadeva did not ac-
tually pass stool and urine. Even though He superficially seemed to pass
stool and urine, that was also transcendental and cannot be imitated by


--- Page 483 ---
Supplementary Note 483
any common man. It is also stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam that the stool
and urine of Rsabhadeva were full of transcendental fragrance. One may
imitate Rsabhadeva, but he cannot imitate Him by passing stool that is
fragrant.

The activities of Rsabhadeva, therefore, do not support the claims of a
certain class of men known as arhat, who sometimes advertise that they
are followers of Rsabhadeva. How can they be followers of Rsabhadeva
while they act against the Vedic principles? Sukadeva Gosvami has re-
lated that after hearing about the characteristics of Lord Rsabhadeva. the
King of Konka, Venka and Kutaka initiated a system of religious princi-
ples known as arhat. These principles were not in accord with Vedic
principles. and therefore they are called pasanda-dharma. The members
of the arhat community considered Rsabhadeva’s activities material.
However, Rsabhadeva is an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore He is on the transcendental platform, and no one
can compare to Him.

Rsabhadeva personally exhibited the activities of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.6.8).
davanalas tad vanam alelihanah saha tena dadaha: at the conclusion of
Rsabhadeva’s pastimes. an entire forest and the Lord's body were burned
10 ashes in a great forest fire. In the same way, Rsabhadeva burned peo-
ple’s ignorance to ashes. He exhibited the characteristics of a
paramaharisa in His instructions to His sons. The principles of the arhat
community, however, do not correspond to the teachings of Rsabhadeva.
_ Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana remarks that in the Eighth Canto of
Srimad-Bhagavatam there is another description of Rsabhadeva. but
that Rsabhadeva is different from the one described in this canto.

END OF THE FIFTH CANTO


--- Page 484 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master.
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent devotional scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic Institutes). liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting. in 1922. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila
Prabhupada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, assisted the
Gaudiya Matha in its work and. in 1944. without assistance. started an
English fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and
checked the galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies
freely and struggled to maintain the publication. Once begun. the maga-
zine never stopped: it is now being continued by his disciples in the
West. |

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion.
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
“Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950. at the age of fifty-four. Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life. and four years later he adopted the
vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his studies and writ-
ing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana. where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several vears in deep study and
writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At
Radha-Damodara. Srila Prabhupada began work on his life’s master-
piece: a multivolume translation and commentary on the eighteen thou-
sand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote
Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States. in 1965. to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time. His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes
of authoritative translations. commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

485


--- Page 485 ---
486 Srimad-Bhagavatam

In 1965. when he first arrived by freighter in New York City. Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
grown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of almost one
hundred asramas, schools. temples. institutes and farm communities.

In 1968. Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana. an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana. now a thriving farm community of more than one thou-
sand acres. his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972. His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. The school began with 3 children in 1972. and by the
beginning of 1975 the enrollment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large interna-
tional center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal. India, which is also
the site for a planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the
magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guest House in
Vrndavana. India. These are centers where Westerners can live to gain
firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution. however. is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their
authoritativeness. depth and clarity. they are used as standard textbooks
in numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into
eleven languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. established in 1972
exclusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace. has thus become
the world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and
philosophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most
recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —com-
pleted by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. ॥

In the past ten years. in spite of his advanced age. Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule. Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion. literature and culture.


--- Page 486 ---
References
The statements of Srimad-Bhagavatam are all confirmed by standard
Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are quoted in this
book on the pages listed.
Bhagavad-gita, 14, 16, 35, 53, 60, 64, 68, 79, 84, 126, 133, 152-
153, 176-177, 185, 189, 191, 208, 243, 252-253, 263, 267, 278,
281, 360, 368, 439, 453, 463, 476, 484
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Rapa Gosvami), 66
Brahmanda Purana, 99-100, 181, 353
Brahma-samhita, 96, 165, 205, 206, 227, 228, 302, 322, 360, 361
Caitanya-bhagavata (Vrndavana dasa Thakura), 231, 234, 259-
260, 421-424
Caitanya-caritamrta (Krsnadasa Kaviraja), 19-20, 56, 59, 124, 148.
177, 213, 218, 219, 254, 266, 394-395
Chandogya Upanisad, 228
Katha Upanisad, 280
Karma Purana, 269
Laghu-bhagavatamrta (Rapa Gosvami), 140-141, 224
Mundaka Upanisad, 60
Padma Purana, 134, 141, 224
487


--- Page 487 ---
488 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 19, 23, 28-29, 48, 49, 51, 58, 60-61, 64, 66,
68, 93-94, 109, 134, 167,169,171, 174. 191-192, 195-196, 230,
263, 265, 411, 444, 455, 484, 485

Svetasvatara Upanisad, 215, 280

Taittirtya Upanisad, 214-215, 253, 281

Vayu Purana, 97, 332

Vedanta-sarigraha (Ramanujacarya), 250

Vedanta-sitra, 415

Visnu-dharmottara, 224

Visnu Purana, 251, 332


--- Page 488 ---
Glossary
A
Acarya —a bona fide spiritual master who teaches by his personal example.
Acintya-Sakti—the inconceivable energy of the Supreme Lord.
Adhibhautika—miseries inflicted by other living entities.
Adhidaivika—miseries caused by natural disturbances such as floods and ex-
cessive heat or cold.
Adhyatmika—miseries arising from own’s own body and mind.
Adi-purusa—Krsna, the original person.
Aharikara—the principle of ego.
Akama-bhakta—one who serves the Lord without any motives.
Akarma—Krsna conscious activity for which one suffers no reaction.
Akificana-gocara— Krsna, who is easily approached by those who are
materially exhausted.
47150 -- 9९९; Visnu-tattva.
47077722 --111€ mystic perfection of becoming so small that one can enter into a
stone.
Antariksa —outer space.
Arcana —the devotional process of worshiping the Lord in the temple.
Arca-vigraha—the Deity form of the Lord.
Asuras—demons.
Atma-nivedana—the devotional process of surrendering everything to the
Lord.
B
Bhagavata-dharma—the science of devotional service to the Lord.
Bhaktas —devotees.
Bhukti—material enjoyment.
Bila-svarga—the subterranean heavens.
Brahma-bhiita—the joyful state of being freed from material contamination.
Brahmajyoti—the personal effulgence emanating from the body of Krsna.
Brahmanas—the intelligent class of men.
Brahmanda bhramana—wandering up and down throughout the universe.
Brahma-saukhya—spiritual happiness which is unobstructed and eternal.
489


--- Page 489 ---
490 Srimad-Bhagavatam
C
Channavatara—a concealed incarnation.
D
Daihika—the bodily necessities of life.
Daivi maya—the external or illusory energy of the Lord who governs the
material world.
Dasya—the devotional process of rendering service to the Lord.
Dhira—one who remains unagitated even when there is cause for agitation.
G
Gramya-karma—mundane activities.
Grhastha-asrama—the householder stage of spiritual life.
Guru—a bona fide spiritual master.

H
Hari—Krsna, who removes all inauspicious things from the heart.
Hari-cakra—Krsna’s Sudarsana weapon, the wheel of time.
Hrta-jaana—bereft of intelligence.

J
Jagad-iséa—the Supreme Lord who is the proprietor of all the universes.
Jivatma—the spirit soul.
Jaana —knowledge.

K
Kaivalya—the illusion of becoming one with the Supreme.
Karma —fruitive activities and their subsequent reactions.
Karma-kanda—the division of the Vedas which deals with fruitive ac-

tivities.

Karmis—fruitive workers.


--- Page 490 ---
Glossary 491
Koti—ten million.
Krpana—a miserly man who wastes his life by not striving for spiritual
realization.
Krsna-prasada—See: Prasada.
Ksatriya—the class of administrators and fighters.
L
Laghima —the mystic perfection of entering into the sun planet by using the
rays of the sunshine.
Lilavatara—an incarnation to display pastimes.
M
Maha-bhagavatas—the topmost devotees of the Lord.
Mahatma—a great soul, or devotee of Krsna.
Maya—the energy of Krsna which deludes the living entity who desires to
forget the Lord.
Maya-sukha—illusory happiness.
Moha —illusion.
Midha —See: Vimiidhas.
Muhiirta—a period of forty-eight minutes.
Mukta-purusas—Iliberated persons.
Mukti—liberation from material bondage.
N
Naksatras—the stars.
Nama-aparadha—offenses in the chanting of the holy name.
Nara-deva—the king, who is an earthly god.
Naradhama—the lowest of mankind.
Nasta-buddhi—bereft of all good sense.
Nirvisesa-vadis —impersonalists who accept an Absolute, but deny that He
has any qualities of His own.
Niskama—{free from material desires.


--- Page 491 ---
492 Srimad-Bhagavatam
ट
Paiicaratrika-vidhi—the authorized process of Deity worship.
Paramahamsa—a first-class devotee of the Lord.
Parampara—the disciplic succession through which spiritual knowledge is
received.
Para prakrti—the superior energy of the Lord.
Pasandis —atheists; those who think God and the demigods to be on the same
level.
Prakrti—{female, to be enjoyed by the purusa.
Pramada—the beauty of the opposite sex.
Prasada—sanctified remnants of food offered to the Lord.
Prasanta—undisturbed by the modes of nature.
Priyatama—dearmost.
Punya-s§loka—verses that increase one’s piety; one who is glorifed by such
verses.
Purusa—male, the enjoyer.
R
Rajo-guna —the material mode of passion.
Raksasas—man-eating demons.
9
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the eternal form of the Supreme Lord which is
full of bliss and knowledge.
Sad-bhija-miirti—the six-armed form of Lord Caitanya.
Sadhu —a holy man.
Sakama-bhakta—a devotee with material desires.
Sakhya—the devotional process of making friends with the Lord.
Sarmadhi—trance, absorption in God consciousness.
Sannyasa—the renounced order of life.
Sastras—revealed scriptures.
Sattva-guna—the material mode of goodness.
Smarana—the devotional process of remembering the Lord.
Smrti—scriptures compiled by living entities under trancendental direction.


--- Page 492 ---
Glossary 493
Soma-rasa—an intoxicant taken on the heavenly planets.
Sravanari kirtanam visnoh—hearing and chanting about Visnu.
Suddha-sattva—the platform of pure goodness.
Sitdra —the laborer class of men who serve the three higher classes.
Suras—demigods, devotees.
9४67152 -- 9९९; Visnu-tattva.
Svarga-loka—the heavenly planetary system.
T
Tarno-guna—the material mode of ignorance.
Tattva-darsi—one who has seen the truth.
Trivikrama—Lord Vamana, the incarnation who performed three heroic
deeds.
U
Udara—magnanimous.
Upasya—worshipable.
Uttamasloka— Krsna, who is worshiped by select poetry.
Vv
Vaikuntha—the spiritual sky, where there is no anxiety.
Vaisya—the class of men involved in business and farming.
Vanaprastha—retired life in which one travels to holy places in preparation
for the renounced order of life.
Vandana —the devotional process of offering prayers to the Lord.
Vanik—the mercantile community.
Varnasrama-dharma—the scientific system of four social and four spiritual
orders in human society.
Vikarma—sinful work performed against the injunctions of revealed scrip-
tures.
Vimiidhas —foolish rascals.
Viraha—transcendental bliss in separation from the Lord.
Virata-ripa—the universal form of the Lord.
Vira-vrata—fully determined.


--- Page 493 ---
494 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Visnu-tattva—the plenary expansions of Krsna, each of whom is also God.
Vivaha-yajiia—the sacrifice of marriage.
Y
Yajiia —sacrifice.
Yamad tas —messengers of Yamaraja, the lord of death.
Yoga —linking the consciousness of the living entity with the Supreme Lord.
Yogamaya—the internal potency of the Lord.
Yojana—eight miles.


--- Page 494 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide
Vowels
अ आः इ; ই: Iu Fa ऋ, ऋः
-
dg! ष e Qai Ao সী au
< rm (anusvara) १ h (visarga)
Consonants

Gutturals: &h ka Id kha IT ga घरक na
Palatals: ca 5) cha ज): FH jha A fia
Cerebrals: ठ ta & tha ड da @ dha ण na
Pentals: d ta ¥] tha द्‌ ५३ दयक wna
Labials: q pa pha ba म्‌ bha H ma
Semivowels: H ya Ira la J va
Sibilants: a Sa sa H sa
Aspirate: ह ha Ss. =” (avagraha) - the apostrophe
The vowels above should be pronounced as follows:
a - like the a in organ or the u in but.
৪ —'like the a in far but held twice as long as a.
1 — like the i in pin.
1 - like the i in pique but held twice as long as i.
u — like the « in push.
घ — like the & in rule but held twice as long as u.

495


--- Page 495 ---
496 Srimad-Bhagavatam
r — like the ri in Rita (but more like French ru).
I — same as 77 but held twice as long.
1 - like lree (lruu).
€ — like thee in they.
ai — like the ai in aisle.
o - like the ० in go.
au— like the ow in how.
m (anusvara) — 8 resonant nasal like the n in the French word bon.
h (visarga) — a final h-sound: ah is pronounced like aha; ih like ihi.
The consonants are pronounced as follows:
k — asin kite kh— as in Eckhart
g — asin give gh- asin dig-hard
n — asinsing ८ — asinchair
ला as in staunch-heart j — asin joy
jh — as in hedgehog 7 — asin canyon
t — asin tub th — as in light-heart
n — as 1718 (prepare to say dha- as in red-hot
the r and say na). d - asindove
Cerebrals are pronounced with tongue to roof of mouth, but the following
dentals are pronounced with tongue against teeth:
t — asin tub but with tongue against teeth.
th — as in light-heart but tongue against teeth.
d - asin dove but tongue against teeth.
dh— as in red-hot but with tongue against teeth.
n = asin nut but with tongue in between teeth.
p — asin pine 011 as in up-hill (not f)
b - asin bird bh— as in rub-hard
m — as in mother y — asinyes
r — asinrun 1 - asinlight
५ ~ asin vine. ও — asinsun
& (palatal) — as in the s in the German word sprechen
§ (cerebral) — as the sh in shine
h - asin home
There is no strong accentuation of syllables in Sanskrit, only a flowing
of short and long (twice as long as the short) syllables.


--- Page 496 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each of the
Sanskrit poetry verses and the first line of each Sanskrit prose verse of this volume of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, arranged in English alphabetical order. In the first column the
Sanskrit transliteration is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the
chapter-verse references and page number for each verse are to be found.
A atha kadacin nivasa-paniya 148 15
atha sa esa atma lokanam 22.5 342
\ athasuryar tat-tanayo 153 73
adhastat savitur yojanayute 24.1 372 athatale maya-putro 51০ balo 24.16 386
adhvany amusminn ima upasargas 14.27 38
111 1111111 19.21 253 atha tasmat 0070105 trayodasa-laksa 23.1 356
aho vicitrarh bhagavad-vicestitari 183 159 athedanim pratisiddha-laksana 26.3 435
akalpam evar vesarh gata esa 20.41 312 ativa sulalita-gati-vildsa-vilasita 18.16 181
akarod aty-alam kirtyd 15.16 88
amo madhuruho meghaprsthah 20.21 293 B
amrtasya ca mrtyos ca 20.5 278
anantyad animita-vikramasya 25.12 426
anda-madhya-gatah siiryo 20.43 313 bhadra cottarato maru-siraso 17.8. 139
bhagavato gunamaye sthila-ripa 163 92
antah-pravisya bhiitani 20.28 299 bhaje bhajanyarana-pada-parikajari 17.18 144
antarala eva tri-jogatyds tu 26.5 437 bhajeta ramari manujakrti hari 19.8 235
antar bahis cakhila-loka-palakair 18.26 200 bhaktesvalar bhavita-bhiita- 17.18 144
antaryamisvarah saksat 20.28 299
anviksayangatisayatma-buddhibhir 18.37 215 bharatasyatmajah sumatir 15.1 72
bharate ‘pi varse bhagavan 19.9 236
anye ca nada nadyas ca varse 17.10 138 bharate ‘py asmin varse 19.16 247
apah purusa-viryah stha 20.23 295 bhavani-nathaih stri-ganarbuda 17.16 142
arsabhasyeha rajarser 14.42 61 bhavan yugantarnava armi-malini 18.28 203
arstisenena saha gandharvair 19.2 223
asad-drio yah pratibhati mayaya 17.20 146 bhindyama yenasu vaya sudurbhidarn = 19.15 245
bhii-dvipa-varsa-sarid-adri 26.40 480
asminn eva varse purusair 19.19 249 bhimna rsikulyayam udgithas tatah 156 76
atah param plaksédinari pramana- 20.1 1272 bibharsi mam laksma varenya mayaya 18.23 194
ata irdhvam arigarako pi yojana 22.14 350
atha caparyamanabhis ca kalabhir 29 346
atha ca tasmad ubhayathapi hi 14.23 33 C
atha ca yas tv tha va atma- 26.30 468
atha ca yatra kautumbika 14.3 9 candravasa tamraparni avatoda 19.18 248
atha ca yavan nabho-mandalam 22.7 344 catursv etesu ciita-jambii-kadamba 16.12 103
atha ca yavatardhena nabho-vithyam = 22.6 343 chandarsy akamasya ca yasya kaman 15.11 83
497


--- Page 497 ---
498
D evam-prabhavo bhagavan ananto 25.13 426
evar purustat ksirodat parita 20.24 296
evar surodad babhis tad-dvi-gunah 20.13 286
devanar purusanganari 20.17 290 evar tato varunin saumyam 21.11 328
deva-tiryen-manusyandm 20.46 316 evar tava bharatottama jambidvipa 19.31 269
devodyanani ca bhavanti catvari 16.14 103  evarn-vidha naraka yamalaye 26.37 475
dhydyamanah surasurorago-siddha 157 416 evar vitta-vyatisanga-vivrddha 14.37 33
dhyayann asad yarhi vikarma seviturn ~~ 18.3 159 G
drastur na drg yasya gunair vidiisyate 19.12 241
dravya-kriya-hetv-ayanesa-kartrbhir 18.37 215
dyauh khar ksitih saila-sarit-samudra- 18.32 208  gayad gayantyam citrarathah 15.14 86
gaya nrpah kah pratiyati karmabhir 15.9 80
चा 8৫ maya tava nrpadbhutam 26.40 480
E graharksa-taramayam ddhidaivikara ~~ 23.9 369
ekadasat-prasarngan nikrta-matir 14.13 22 H
ekah prthan-namabhir 2111440 muda 19.26 262
ekantam advayarh $৫701071 20.33 304
esa madhye ilavrtari 16.7 98 hanty ahah sapadi nrnam asesam 25.11 425
est pursing Gyula; purus Ayr 17.12 135 haraty ajo 01৫0 Srutibhir gato ‘igajara = 18.11 173
1107৫ abhaktasya kuto mahad-guna 18.12 176
etad u haiva bhagavato visnoh 23.8 368 harir hi saksad bhagavan Saririnam 18.13 178
etd hy eveha nrbhir upagantavya 25.14 427 hari-varse cape bhagavan nara 18.7 164
etasam apo bharatyah 19.17 248
etasmin sarhsaradhvani nana 14.38 54 hiranmaye ‘pi bhagvavan nivasati 18.29 205
etaval loka-vinyaso mana-laksana 20.38 308 hitva grham sarsrti-cakravalari 18.14 179
hitva maharns tar yadi sajjate grhe 18.13 178
etdvan eva bhi-valayasya 21.1 320 hradds catvarah payo-madhv 16.13 103
etavatir hi rajan purasah pravrtti 25.15 428
etena hi divo mandala-manarn 21.2 321
etesdr varsa-marydda-girayo nadyas 20.26 298 I
etesu hi bila-svargesu svargad apy 248 378
ete vaya yasya vase mahatmanah 17.23 149 1007 hi yogesvara yoga-naipunar 19.13 242
evam adhvany avarundhano 14.33 49  ilavrte tu bhagavan bhava eka 17.15 141
evar 0071070771৫ arka-gabhastibhya 22.8 345 iSe yatha no ’jita-manya-rarhasdri 17.19 145
evar daksinenelavrtam nisadho 169 100
evam eva dadhi-mandodat 20.29 300 1
evam eva mahdrauravo yatra 26.12 446
evam evandhatamisre yas tu 269 442
evari jambii-phalanam atyucca 16.19 107 = jahau yuvaiva malavad 14.43 63
evar kumuda-niradho yah 16.24 112 Jambidvipasya ca rajann upadvipdn 19.29 268
evar malyavac-chikharan nispatanti ~~ 17.87 129 jambudvipo yam yavat-pramana 20.2 273
evar muhiirtena catus-trirsal 21.12 329 = jarayujam svedajarh andajodbhidarn 18.32 208
evar nava kotaya eka-paiicasal 21.7 325  jathara-devakitau merum 16.27 116


--- Page 498 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 499
K mahan ahar vaikrta-tamasendriyah 17.23 149
maharsa etad vaicitryar lokasya 16.1 433
manas ca bhadrari bhajatad adhoksaje = 18.9 168
kadacid bhagna-mana-daristro 14.21 31 mandaro merumandarah suparsvah 16.11 102
kadacid Svarasya bhagavato visnos 14.29 41 mandarotsanga ekadasa-sata 16.16 105
kadacin manorathopagata-pitr 14.17 27
kalpayusar sthana-jayat punar-bhavat 19.23 257 manikiito vajrakita indraseno 204 275
karhi sma cit kama-madhu-lavin 14.22 32 martydvartaras tv tha martya-Siksanarn 19.53 229
mat-praptaye ‘jeSa-surasuradayas 18.22 192
karma-vallim avalambya tata 14.41 59 maya sahoru kramate 0 ojasa 18.28 203
karoti visva-sthiti-sariyamodayari 1838 217 maya yathdayo bhramate tad-asrayamn == 18.38 217
kartasya sargadisu yo na badhyate 19.12 241 meror miirdhani bhagavata 16.28 117
kecanaitaj [yotir-anikar 23.4 363
ketumale ‘pi bhagavan kamadeva 18.15 180 mithnanti mathna manasa didrksavo 18.36 214
mrte "nda esa etasmin yad abhiit 20.44 314
kirh duskarair nah kratubhis tapo-vratair 19.22 255 mubktas tato yadi bandhad devadatta 14.24 34
kimpuruse varse bhagavantam 191 222 mille rasayah sthita atma-tantro 25.13 427
krtvagra-darstre niragad udanvatah 18.39 219 mirdhany arpitam anuvat sehasra 25.12 426
ksanena martyena 7073 manasvinah == 19.23 257 miirtim nah puru-krpaya babhdra 25.10 424
kurarga-kurara-kusumbha-vaikarka 16.26 115
kuto 'nyatha syad ramatah sva agtmanah 19.5 229 N
kvacic ca duhsahena kayabhyantara 14.19 29
kvacic casesa-dosa-nisadanar 14.7 14
kvacic ca ita-vatady-anekadhidaivika = 14.25 36 na hi 16507 kalyandanari prabhavati 24.14 384
kvacic ca vatyaupamyayd 14.9 16 naicchan nypas tad-ucitari 14.44 65
kvacic chita-vatady-aneka- 14.34 50 na janma nitnari mahato na saubhagarn 19.7 233
namasyatah smarato va tri-kalarm 23.9 369
kvacid asadya grham davavat 14.15 25 ng naga-vadhvo 'rhana isire hriya 17.20 146
kvacid drumvad aihikarthesu grhesu 14.32 48
kvacid grhasrama-karma-codanati 14.18 28 nanuvartmarhati nrpo 14.42 61
kvacid ulitka-jhilli-svanavad 14.11 20  naraka nama bhagavan kira 26.4 436
kvacin mitho vyavaharan yat 14.26 37  narayandya haraye nama ity 14.45 67
nastri-krtar kasmalam asnuvita 19.6 231
kvacin mitho vyavaharan yat 14.35 51 na vd etesu ५050107! divyausadhi-rasa 24.13 383
kvacit kala-visa-mita-raja-kula 14.16 26
kvacit ksina-dhanah sayyasanasanady = 14.36 ৩2 na vai bhagavan niinam 24.22 396
kvacit sakrd avagata-visaya 14.10 18 na vai maharaja bhagavato 164 94
kvapi deva-mayaya striya bhuja 14.28 40 na vaisa atmatmavatar suhrttamah 19.6 231
na vai yaterann apunar-bhavaya te 19.25 260
L navasv api varsesu bhagavan 17.14 139
laksanottaram sardha-nava-koti 21.18 335 na veda nistarana-yogam anjasa 17.24 150
lokaloka iti samakhya yad 20.36 306 na veda siddhartham iva kvacit sthitam = 17.21 147
na yasya maya-guna-citta-vrttibhir 17.19 145
M na yatra narayana-pada-parikaja- 19.22 255
na yatra vaikuntha-katha-sudhapaga 19.24 258
magara-daratmaja-vitta-band husu 18.10 171 na yatra yajriesa-makha mahotsavah 19.24 258


--- Page 499 ---
500 Srimad-Bhagavatam
nivrtti-laksana-marga adav eva 26.38 478 S
no evaitat saksatkaro bhiimi-danasya 24.19 391
ninari batayarh bhagavan arthesu 24.24 398
sa eka evetaratha mitho bhayari 18.20 188
sa esa bhagavan adi-purusa eva 22.3 340
0 sa esa dehatma-maninam 14.1 3
sa eva bhagavan ananto 'nanta 25.6 415
ori hrarn hrim hrm or namo 18.18 183 sa eva punar nidrajagara-grhito 14.20 30
ori namo bhagavate akipdraya 18.30 206
or namo bhagavate dharmayatma- 18.2 157 sa hi sarvesar jyotir-gananar 23.2 357
sa BSvaras (৮৫073 ya 10073 vase ‘nayan 18.26 200
03 namo bhagavate maha-purusaya 17.17 143 sa loka-traydnte parita iSvarena 20.37 307
ori namo bhagavate mantra-tattva- 18.35 212 samagata-$rih sadasas-patih satarn 15.9 81
ori namo bhagavate mukhyatamaya 18.25 198 Sariketa vidvan kukalevaratyayad 19.14 244
ori namo bhagavate narasirahaya 188 166 sankhya na yasyasty ayathopalambhanat 18.31 207
ori namo bhagavate upasama- 19.11 240 sarikhya yaya tattva-drsapaniyate 18.33 210
ori namo bhagavate uttamaslokaya 193 225 sarva-jiva-nikayanar 20.46 316
sa tvarih mamapy acyuta ওয়াল vanditarn = 18.23 194
P satyarn disaty arthitam arthito 70077 19.27 264
sa vai patih syad akutobhayah svayarn = 18.20 188
parasya brahmanah saksaj 20.17 290 sa vai sva-dharmena praja-palana- 15.7 77
(00110771 na Sekur dvi-padas catus-padah = 18.27 202 sa yada dugdha-parva-sukrtas 14.12 21
plaksadisu paricasu purusinam 20.6 281 sitd tu brahma-sadanat kesaracaladi 176 128
plaksah sva-samaneneksu 207 282  Sivara yavasar subhadrarh santa 203 275
praiyavratari varsam imari 15.16 88
Sraddha-visuddhacala-bhakti-yoga- 15.12 84
prajandri sarvasar raja 20.12 285 $rutva sthularh tatha saksmarn 26.39 479
pramathya daityarh prativranari mrdhe 18.39 219 sthiile nirjitam Gtmanari 26.39 479
prapta nr-jatim tv iha ye ca jantavo 19.25 260 striyo vratais tva hrsikesvarara svato 18.19 186
pratihat suvarcaldyam pratihartradayas 15.5 == 75 == suro 570 vapy atha vanaro narah 19.8 235
pratnasya visno ripam yat 20.5 278
saryanda-golayor madhye 20.43 313
pratyadade vai kavaye 8/17/৫০৫/6 186 163 saryena hi vibhajyante 20.45 315
pratvak prasantar sudhiyopalambhanar 19.4 226 sva-gobhih pitr-devebhyo 20.12 285
pratyaricitd yudhi dharmena vipra 15.11 83
priyetasadyah sa ha visva-jivah 15.13 85 svargapavargau naraka 20.45 315
punarvasu-pusyau daksina-vamayoh 236 366 svasty astu visvasya khalah prasidotara 18.9 168
purastdt savitur arunah pascdc 21.16 332 svayarn vidhatte bhajatam anicchatam 19.27 264
R T
ramyake ca bhagavatah priyatamari 18.24 198 tad bhagavato mayamayar ripari 18.17 182
ratha-nidas tu sat-trimsal-laksa 21.15 331 tad bhaktanam atmavatar sarvesam 24.21 395
rte bhavat-pada-parayanan na mari 18.22 192 tad-dvipadhipatih priyavratatmajo 209 283


--- Page 500 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 501
tad-dvipa-madhye manasottara 20.30 301 tato ‘dhastad 70504012 daiteya 24.30 405
tad-dvipa-patih praiyavrato rajen 20.14 287 tato 'dhastad vitale haro bhagavan 24.17 387
tad-dvipasydpy adhipatih praiyavrato = 20.31 303 tato 'dhastad yaksa-raksah-pisica 245 376
tad eva rasipsitam ipsito 70100 18.21 190
tad-uparistac catasrsv asasvitma 20.39 310 tato 'dhastan mahatale kadraveyanarn = 24.29 404
tato 10005001 patdle naga-loka 24.31 406
tad-varsa-purusa bhagavantarn 20.32 303 tato 'dhastat siddha-carana 244 376
tad-varsa-purusih srutadhara- 20.11 285
tad-varsa-purusd rtavrata- 20.27 299 tato 'dhastat sutale udarasravah 24.18 389
tad yatha svarnaprasthas 19.30 268  tato ‘dhastdt taldtale mayo nama 24.28 403
tair yad visrstan api no vanaukasas 19.7 233 tato 'neka-sahasra-koti-vimananika 174 126
tam anuparito loka-palanam 16.29 117 tatra bhagavatah saksad yajra-lingasya 17.1 120
tari bhagavan narado 19.10 238 tatra ca kvacid atapodaka-nibhan 146 13
tam etam iha purusds trayyd 22.4 341 tatra caturdha bhidyamana 175 127
ta nah punitamiva-ghnih 20.23 295
tan nah prabho (৮৫73 kukalevararpitar = 19.15 245 tatra gato darsa-masaka- 145 12
tatrapi bharatam eva varsan karma 17.11 132
tan nisamyobhayatrapi bhagavata 243 374 tathapi muhyanti tavija mayaya 184 160
(3507 na te vai paripanty apatyari 18.19 186 tatra haike narakan eka-vimsatir 267 440
tasmad rajo-raga-visdda-manyu- 1814 179
tasminn akse krtamilo dvitiyo 21.14 330  tatrapi niravarodhah svairena viharann 14.31 46
tasminn api praiyavrato ghrtaprstho 20.20 292 tatrapi priyavrata-ratha-carana 162 91
tatratyandrn divasa-madhyargata 21.8 326
tasya mahanubhdvasydnupatham 24.26 401 tatra yas tu para-vittdpatya- 268 441
tasya mitla-dese trimsad-yojana 25.1 410
tasyanucaritam uparistad vistarisyate = 24.27 402 tavad ubhayor api rodhasor ya 16.20 108
tasyapi praiyavrata evadhipatir 20.25 297 tendjanabhe smrtimaj janma nah syad 19.28 266
tasyemarn gatharh pandaveya 158 80 (6507 sva-vibhitinan loka-palanar 20.40 311
(65071 varsesu simd-girayo nadyas 20.15 288
tatah parastal lokaloka-namacalo 20.34 305
tatah sapta rsayas tat prabhavabhijia 173 124 19507 visiryamandnam ati-madhura 16.17 106
tata uparistad dvi-laksa-yojandntara 22.15 351 tesu varsadrayo nadyas ca 20.10 284
tata uparistad dvi-laksa-yojanato 22.11 348 tri-gunatvdt kartuh sraddhaya 262 434
tata uparistad usana dvi-laksa 22.12 348
tata uparistad yojana-laksa- 22.16 351 U
tata utkalayarh maricir 15.15 86
tata uttarasmad rsaya ekadasa-laksa 22.17 352 udyanani catitaram mana 24.10 381
tatha ca bhadrasrava nama 18.1 156  uktastvaya bhi-mandalayama 16.1 90
tatha ghrtodad bahih krauiicadvipo 20.18 291 upavarnitari bhiimer yatha 24.7 378
usanasa budho vyakhyatas tata 22.13 349
tathaivalakananda daksinena brahma 17.9 130
tathaivelavrtam aparena piirvena 16.10 101 utpatti-sthiti-laya-hetavo ‘sya kalpah 259 420
tathanye ca rsayo gandharvapsaraso 21.18 333  wtard-hanau agastir adhara-hanau 237 367
tatha valakhilya rsayo 'igustha 21.17" 333 uttaresu ca kurusu bhagavan 18.34 212
tato 144512८ chata-yojandntara 246 377 uttarottarenelavrtar nilah svetah 168 99


--- Page 501 ---
502 Srimad-Bhagavatam
॥ yasam ambhah pavitram amalam 20.22 294
yasari payobhih kusadvipaukasah 20.16 289
vadanti visvari kavayah sma nasvararm 18.4 160 yasminn asarikhyeya-visesa-ndma- 18.33 210
vedan yugante tamasa tiraskptan 186 163 yasmin nava varsani nava-yojana- 16.6 ण
visvodbhava-sthana-nirodha-karmate = 18.5 162
yasmin praviste ‘sura-vadhiinam 24.15 385
yas tu maha-kadambah supdrsva 1622 111
Y yas tv tha brahma-dhruk sa 26.14 447
yas tv tha va adhyabhimatir 26.36 473
ya atma-vidyam akhyaya svayam 154 74
yada caindryah puryah pracalate 21.10 327 yas tv tha va agamyarh striyam 26.20 456
20৫0৫ adas taraner mandala 242 373 yas tv iha ৮৫ anrtarh vadati saksye 26.28 466
yada mesa-tulayor vartate 214 323 yas tv tha va asariwibhajyasnati 26.18 453
210৫0 anta-kale tvayi nirgune mano 19.13 242 yas tv tha va atithin abhyagatan 26.35 472
yas tv tha ৮৫ etad aham iti 26.10 443
yada pakhandibhir atma-vaiicitais 14.30 44
27৫৫ api dig-ibha-jayino yajvino 14.40 57 yas tv tha vai bhizanam 26.17 451
yada tu para-badhayandha atmane 14.14 24 yas tv iha vai nija-veda-pathad 26.15 448
yada vricikadisu 0९०5 vartate 21.5 324 705 tviha vai raja rajapuruso 26.26 450
2০৫৫ etad bhagavata adityasya 22.1 338 yas tv iha vai savarnar bharyar 26.26 463
yas tv iha vai sarvabhigamas 26.21 457
yad idan yoganusasanar na va 14.39 56
ववृषे dhruvam 007 yad 25.9 420 yas tv iha vai steyena balad 26.19 455
yad-riipam etan nija-mdyayarpitam 18.31 207 yas tv iha vai vipro rajanyo vaisyo 26.29 467
yad u ha vava vibudhadayah 16.21 108 yas tv iha va ugrah pasin 26.13 446
yad-upajosanad bhavanya anucarinarn = 16.18 106 yasyadhvare bhagavan adhvaritma 15.12 84
yady atra nah svarga-sukhavasesitarn 19.28 266 yasyadya asid guna-vigraho mahan 17.22 149
ya esa evam anusruto 4/19/2)/07710710 25.8 418 yasya ha va idarh kalenopasanjihirsato = 25.3 412
ya esa sodasa-kalah puruso 22.10 347 yasya ha ৮৫০৫ ksuta-patana 24.20 393
yah prana-vrttya paritusta atmavan 18.10 171
ya hy upayuiijananari mukha 16.23 111 yasyaikam cakrar dvadasaram 21.13 330
yasyaiva hi naga-raja-kumarya 255 414
ya idarh bhagavata-sabhdjitdvadata 14.46 68 yasyam ४ ha va ete sad 14.2 7
yaih §raddhaya barhisi bhagaso havir == 19.26 262
yair janma labdhari nrsu bharatajire 19.21 253 yasyanghri-kamala-yugalaruna 254 413
yajiaya dharma-pataye vidhi-naipunaya 14.45 = 67 yasyanudiasyam evasmat-pitamahah 24.25 400
yal-lilarh mrga-patir adade ‘navadyam = 25.10 424 yasya prajanari duduhe dhardsiso 1510 81
yasya pucchagre ‘vaksirasah 235 364
yam abhyasifican paraya muda satih 15.10 81
yam ahur asya sthiti-janma-sarivyamara = 17.21 = 147 == yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akifcana 18.12 175
2071 loka-palah kila matsara-jvara 18.27 202  yasya svaripari kavayo vipascito 18.36 214
’yan-madhya-gato bhagavirhs 21.3 321 = yasyedar ksiti-mandalari bhagavato = 252 411
yan-nama Srutam anukirtayed akasmad 25.11 425 ya tasya te pada-saroruharhanari 1821 190
yan-nirmitara karhy api karma 17.24 150 110 hy anuvatsarar krsyamanam 14.4 11
yan upajusananari na kadacid 16.25 114 yathaihikamusmika-kama-lampatah 19.14 244


--- Page 502 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 503
yatha kulala-cakrena bhramata 222 339 2650 amara-parivrdhah saha 16.15 104
yatha medhistambha akramana 23.3 358 ye tv iha va anagaso ‘ranye grame 26.32 470
yat-prinanad barhisi deva-tiryari- 15.13 85 ye tv iha va andhavata-kusila 26.34 472
১0470 ha deva-patayah svaih 17.18 137 ye tv iha vai bhitany udvejayanti 26.33 471
yatra ha vai 52172017 plaksayama 20.8 283 ye tv tha vai dambhika dambha 26.25 462
yatra ha vava bhagavan pitr-rajo 266 438 ye tv iha vai dasyavo gnida garada 26.27 464
Yatra ha vava na bhayamaho 24.11 382 ye tv iha vai purusah purusa 26.31 469
yatra ha vava vira-vrata auttanapadih == 17.2 123 ye tv iha vai rdjanya raja-purusa- 26.22 458
yatra hi mahahi-pravara-siro- 24.12 383 ye tv iha vai $va-gardabha-patayo 26.24 461
yatrodeti tasya ha samana 219 326 ye tv iha vai vrsali-patayo 26.23 459
yat-sambhavo "har tri-vrtd sva-tejasa 17.22 149 ye tv tha yathaivamuna vihirsita 26.11 445
yat-sariga-labdhari nija-virya-vaibhavarn18.11 173 yo dustyajan dara-sutan 1443 63
yat tad bhagavatdnadhigatanyopayena = 24.23 397 yo dustyajan ksiti-suta-svajandrtha 14.44 65
yat tad visuddhanubhava-matram ekarn = 19.4 226 yo 'ntar-vistara etena hy aloka 20.42 313
at tat karmamayar lingari 20.33 304 yo 'sau bhagavati sarva-bhiuatmany 19.20 251
2৫৮০৫ daksindyanam ahani 21.6 324 yo sau guha-praharanonmathita 20.19 291
2৫007 manasottara-mervor antaram 20.35 305 yo vayari dvipah kuvalaya-kamala 16.5 96
yesu maharaja mayena mayavina 249 380 yuktarh na citrari tvayi karya-karane 185 162


--- Page 503 ---
General Index
Numerals in boldface type indicate references to translations of the verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
Aja
A as son of Pratiharta, 75
Akamah sarva-kamo va
Abhijit verses quoted, 191, 265
as head of the stars, 348 Akati
Abortions as wife of Prthusena, 76-77
follow unwanted pregnancies in Kali- Alakananda River
yuga, 18 as branch of Ganges River. 128
Activities course of described, 131
auspicious and inauspicious controlled by Aloka-varsa
Visnu, 279 located outside of Lokaloka Mountain,
conditioned soul attains material facilities 313
due to pious, 21 Ama
material as only engagement of condi- _asson of Ghrtaprstha, 294
tioned soul, 16 Ami—vijia, ei mirkhe ‘visaya’
should be used for mission of Lord, 34 quoted, 19
those in mode of ignorance engage in im- Anadhikarino devah
pious, 436 verses quoted, 269
Adityas Anadi karama-phale
came from Narayana, 277 verses quoted, 428
Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta- Ananta
verse quoted, 96, 205 as expansion of Visnu, 410
Agni beauty of described. 413-415, 417-
circumambulates Dhruva Maharaja, 418
356-357 becomes angry at time of devastation.
Agnisvatta 412
as head of Pitrloka, 437 main mission of, 416
Aharir hi sarva-yajiianar no end to glorious qualities of, 427
quoted, 277 Anantadeva
Aham (४07४ sarva-papebhyo See: Ananta
quoted, 189. 258 Ananyas cintayanto mari
Aharikdare matta hana verses quoted. 191
quoted, 13 Andhak ipa
Air as hellish planet, 452
planets and stars float by manipulation of, Andhatamisra
361 as hellish planet. 441, 443
Aisvaryasya samagrasya viryasya Animals
quoted, 64 cooked alive by cruel persons. 447
505


--- Page 504 ---
506 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Animals Asi-patravana
don’t commit sins to maintain their as hellish planet, 441, 449
bodies, 444 Association of devotees
not subjected to punishment, 452-453 frees one from misery, 56
Aniruddha not obtained by unfortunate, 57
abode of, 141 one may become convinced of material
Annad bhavanti bhiitani futility by, 19
verse quoted, 113 Astame merudevyam tu
Annamaya verses quoted, 484
as name of moon-god, 347 Astanga-yoga
Antariksa _ purpose of, 68
places of enjoyment for Yaksas, etc., in, Asuri
377 as wife of Devatajit, 74
Antavat tu phalari tesam tad Asurim yonim dpanna
quoted, 194 verses quoted, 18
Ante narayana-smrtih Ataeva krsna miila-jagat-karana
quoted, 68 verses quoted, 219
Anyabhildsita-sanyam jiiana- Atah pumbhir dvija-srestha
pure devotional service as, 134. 167, 190, verses quoted, 58-59
235, 261 Atala
Apareyam itas tv anyam prakrtim demon named Bala in, 386-387
quoted, 201 Atheism
Api cet sudurdcaro results of impious activity due to, 436
verses quoted, 243 Atheists
Apyayana Buddha preached among, 73
_ asson of Yajiiabahu, 284 Ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
Aryans verse quoted, 66
strictly follow Vedic principles, 72-73 Avaisnavo gurur na syat
Arcye visnau sila-dhir gurusu quoted, 134
quoted, 139 Avajananti mam mudha
Arjuna verses quoted, 484
taken by Krsna through Aloka-varsa, Avarodhana
6 313 as son of Gaya, 87
Arstisena Avata-nirodhana
as the chief person in Kimpurusa-varsa, as hellish planet, 441, 472
223-224 Avicimat
Arunadeva as hellish planet, 441, 466
harnesses the sun-god's horses, 331 Ayahpana
looks backward while driving the sun- as hellish planet, 441, 467
god's chariot, 332 Ayi nanda-tanuja kirkaram
Arunoda verse quoted, 110, 170, 428
as river in Ilavrta, 106 Ayodhya
Aryama as residence of Lord Rama, 224
as chief resident of Hiranmaya-varsa, devotees of brought back to Godhead by
205 Rama, 236


--- Page 505 ---
General Index 507
B Bhagavad-gita
quoted on attaining brahma-bhiita plat-
Badarikasrama form, 252-253
as residence of Nara-Narayana, 237-238 quoted on bhakti-yoga as highest. 126
Bahindri janmandm ante quoted on changes of bodies within
quoted. 34, 152. 215 material world, 476
Bahuriipa quoted on conditioned souls struggling
as son of Medhatithi, 298 with six senses and mind, 176-177
Bala quoted on conditioned soul thinking him-
three kinds of women created by. self to be doer of activities, 16
386-387 quoted on cruel nature, 53
Baladeva Vidyabhasana quoted on demigods returning to earth,
cited on Lord Brahma, 224 267
Bali Maharaja quoted on demigod worship. 192.
fought with Indra, 399-400 276-277, 281
offered everything to the Lord, 390-392 quoted on devotee always considered
resides on Sutala, 390 saintly. 243
the Lord became doorkeeper of, 396 quoted on devotees as magnanimous
Vamanadeva appeared in arena of, souls. 191
121-122 quoted on devotional service as perma-
Bankim Candra nent asset, 64
cited on attraction of lover for beloved. quoted on distinction between 1910 and
41 the demigods, 278
Bhadra Kali quoted on fallen yogi taking birth in good
human beings sacrificed to, 469 family. 463
Bhadra River quoted on falling from heavenly planets.
as branch of Ganges River. 128 133
course of described, 130 quoted on fools deriding Krsna’s human
Bhadrasrava form, 484
as ruler of Bhadrasva-varsa, 157 quoted on four divisions of human society
Bhadrasva-varsa created by Krsna, 453. 460
as division of Jambadvipa. 101 quoted on four kinds of impious men who
Ganges River Hows through, 129 don’t surrender, 39
ruled by Bhadrasrava. 157 quoted on four kinds of pious men who
Bhagavad-gita render devotional service. 191
as authorized scripture, 43 quoted on good rebirth of devotee. 68
cited on material world as full of mis- quoted on great souls under protection of
eries, 14 divine nature, 263
contains information on taking birth in quoted on great soul who surrenders to
Bharata-varsa, 250 Krsna, 152-153
Krsna demands complete surrender in. quoted on importance of constant chant-
34 ing. 185
living entities described in. 187 quoted on intricacies of action, 439
quoted on approaching spiritual master. quoted on Krsna accepting offerings of
60, 84 devotee, 172


--- Page 506 ---
508 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bhagavad-gita Bhagavad-gita
quoted on Krsna's appearance, 79, 312 quoted on purifying material desire by
quoted on Krsna as enjoyer of sacrifices, devotional service, 265
474 quoted on purpose of Lord's appearance,
quoted on Krsna as only enjoyer of 230
ritualistic ceremonies, 277 quoted on rarity of devotional service, 62
quoted on Krsna as source of quoted on real purpose of Vedas, 73
remembrance, knowledge and forget- quoted on remembrance, knowledge and
fulness, 207, 411 forgetfulness coming from Krsna, 216
quoted on Krsna as taste of water, 185 quoted on result of different kinds of
quoted on Krsna delivering surrendered worship, 47
soul from all sinful reaction, 189 quoted on returning to lower planetary
quoted on Krsna instructing Gita to sun- systems, 256
god, 317 quoted on separated material energies,
quoted on liberation as mercy of Krsna, 295
368 quoted on sex for begetting children, 17
quoted on living entity as never created, quoted on stars, 91
151 quoted on struggle of living entities, 152
quoted on living entity as never indepen- quoted on Supreme Lord's control of
dent, 201 material nature, 323
quoted on Lord as supreme proprietor, 35 quoted on surrender as salvation, 43
quoted on Lord seated in everyone's quoted on the moon as a luminary, 328
heart, 200, 207 quoted on thinking of Lord's lotus feet,
quoted on Lord taking personal care of 171
surrendered soul, 191 quoted on total surrender to Krsna, 461
quoted on material body as machine, 360 quoted on understanding nature of
quoted on material creation resting on Krsna's appearance and activities,
Krsna's energy, 208 477
quoted on material nature working under quoted on unintelligent desiring tempor-
Krsna’s direction, 204, 211, 217. 219, ary happiness, 194
360 quoted on unmanifested form of Krsna
quoted on miidhas, 158 pervading entire universe, 208
quoted on offering everything to Krsna, quoted on women, vaisyas, etc. approach-
22, 34 ing supreme destination, 461
quoted on offering food for sacrifice, 454 quoted on worshipers attaining destina-
quoted on one in knowledge surrendering tion of worshipable object. 256
to Krsna, 215 Bhagirathi
quoted on one who has seen the truth, 75 as name of Ganges River, 121-122
quoted on one who is dhira, 147 Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
quoted on overcoming influence of quoted on real liberation, 66
material energy, 161 Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura
quoted on overcoming modes of nature, quoted on engaging everything in the
151 service of the Lord, 93
quoted on perfect yoga system, 246 Bhaktivinoda Thakura
quoted on performance of sacrifice, cited on Navadvipa as best place within
113 this universe, 259


--- Page 507 ---
General Index 509
Bhaktivinoda Thakura Bindumati
quoted on getting out of ocean of nes- as wife of Marici, 87
cience, 428 Birth
Bhakti-yoga as accepting another body, 7
as real path of liberation, 252 Boar incarnation
process of broadcast by Caitanya, 126 lives in northern part of Jambadvipa,
Bhaktya mam abhijanati 212
quoted, 234 Body, material
Bharata all sensations originally exist in, 415
as brother of Lord Rama, 224 made of three elements, 228
Bharata-bhiimite haila manusya must be maintained for executing devo-
verse quoted, 239, 254, 257, 267 tional service, 172
Bharata Maharaja Brahma
gave up everything to serve Uttamasloka, as great leader of universe. 202
63 as spiritual master of Narada, 419
had to suffer two more births, 161 as the form of ritualistic ceremonies.
in body of a deer did not forget supreme 304-305
Lord, 67 Bhavani
Sumati as son of, 72 Siva engages in sex with, 388-389
wonderful activities of, 65 wives of Yaksas assist, 107
Bharata-varsa Bhisasmad vatah parate
as field of fruitive activities, 133 verses quoted. 281
Ganges River inundates, 131 Bhoja
mountains and rivers in, 247 as wife of Viravrata. 87
varnasrama-dharma easily adopted in. as trustworthy representative of Lord.
251 164
Bhauvana body of made from total material energy,
as son of Manthu, 87 149-150
Bhava came from Narayana, 277
See: Siva doesn’t understand even this universe.
Bhoktaram yajia-tapasari 96
verse quoted, 35, 474 explanation of yogic process spoken by.
Bhrajistha 243
as son of Ghrtaprstha, 294 in each universe there is one. 329
Bhama Lord sometimes takes position of, 141
as son of Pratiharta, 75 sits on lotus flower on Puskaradvipa. 301
Bhiai-mandala township of on summit of Mount Meru.
divided into seven oceans, 92 117-118
radius of, 90-91 two kinds of Brahmas. 315
Bhamir apo 11010 vayuh Brahma-bhiitah prasannatma
verses quoted, 295 verses quoted, 252
Bilvamangala Thakura Brahmacari
quoted on liberation as maidservant of one should try to remain, 29
devotee, 393 Brahmaloka
Bindu one must return to repeated birth and
as son of Marici. 87 death from, 257


--- Page 508 ---
510 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Brahmana Buddha
devotee who falls away takes birth in atheists accepted Sumati as, 72-73
family of. 68 preached among atheists, 73
doesn’t possess anything, 475
gives his pious activities to those who ध
honor him, 84 C
Jupiter favorable 10. 351
Kalasitra as hell for killer of, 448 Caitanya-bhagavata
none qualified in Kali-yuga, 79 quoted on glories of Ananta, 421-424
perfect compared to swan, 70 quoted on happiness of Vaisnavas, 231
৩৪110811159 as hell for one who robs, quoted on having opportunity to remem-
455-456 ber Krsna, 259-260
six auspicious qualifications of, 134 quoted on the fortune of the devotee
$udras being elevated to platform of, 47 Kholaveca, 234
Sitkaramukha as hell for one who inflicts Caitaya-caritamrta
corporal punishment upon, 451 cited on Sesa, 148
who drinks liquor goes to Ayahpina, 467 description of qualities of devotees in.
Brahmanda bhramite kona 177
verse quoted, 59 pastimes of Caitanya narrated in, 124
Brahmanda Purana quoted on Caitanya as channdvatdra, 213
quoted on Kamadeva as Pradyumna, 181 quoted on creation of material world, 218
quoted on planet Rahu, 99-100 quoted on duty of one born in India, 254
quoted on Visnu as Sisumara, 353 quoted on effect of chanting holy name,
Brahmapuri 394-395
Alakananda flows from southern side of, quoted on Lord instructing devotee to
131 surrender, 19-20
Brahmaputra quoted on materialistic devotee receiving
as main river in Bharata-varsa, 249 shelter at Lord's lotus feet, 266
Brahma sambhus tathaivarkas quoted on prakrti not cause of material
verses quoted, 277 world, 219
Brahma-samhita quoted on shelter of pure devotee. 59
quoted on Govinda tending cows, etc., quoted on unhappiness of materialistic
165 life. 56
quoted on incarnations of Krsna. 227 Caitanya Mahaprabhu
quoted on Krsna's unlimited forms, 205 advises acceptance of spiritual master, 61
quoted on Lord always remaining in an incarnation in age of Kali. 213, 238
Goloka, 206 appeared in land of Bharata-varsa.
quoted on movement of sun, 302 259-260
quoted on planets in fixed orbits, 360 broadcast process of bhakti-yoga, 126
quoted on prakrti, 361 controlled only by pure devotion.
quoted on purified vision of devotees, 228 234-235
quoted on sun as controlled by Govinda, gave practical example of transcendental
322 ecstasy. 124
quoted on unlimited expansions of the introduced congregational chanting of
Lord. 96 Hare Krsna mantra, 175


--- Page 509 ---
General Index 511
Caitanya Mahaprabhu Cintamani-prakara-sadmasu
Krsna consciousness movement as mis- versesquoted, 165
sion of, 47 Cities
prayers of, 169-170 compared to forest, 6
quoted on accepting guru, 6 Citraratha
quoted on being saved from materialistic as son of Gaya, 87
life, 428 Citrarepha
quoted on detachment from gold and as son of Medhatithi, 298
women, 109-110 Conditioned souls
quoted on duty of one born in Bharata- absorbed in activities for bodily mainte-
varsa, 239, 257, 267 nance, 15-16
quoted on mercy of Krsna and guru, 57 attracted by wife as illusion personified,
quoted on shelter of pure devotee, 59-60 40
quoted on wanderings of living entities in attracted to little happiness derived from
universe, 133 sense gratification, 32
represented in six-armed form, 236 bitten by envious enemies, 31
Caksu River burned by fire of lamentation, 25
as branch of Ganges River, 128 chastised by enemies and government
course of described, 129 servants, 20
Canakya Pandita enter material world for some material
two kinds of envious living entities ac- profit, 5
cording to, 170 exchange of money causes enmity among,
Caiicala 51
goddess of fortune as, 35 experience nothing but misery, 38-39
Candra exploit relatives, 24.
came from the mind of Narayana, 277 fear of compared to mountain cave, 50
Candraloka four defects of, 37
Ganges River carried to, 127 government men turn against, 26
Candrama manaso jatas caksoh jump from one body to another, 49
verses quoted, 277 live lives of lamentation. 36
Caranaloka must accept one body after another. 167
as planet below Rahu, 376 obliged to gratify their senses. 8
Catur-varnyarh maya srstar receive cheap blessings from atheists. 22
quoted, 453. 460 repeatedly strive for material enjoyment.
Catur-vidha bhajante mar 19
verses quoted, 191 steal money and escape punishment. 35
Ceto-darpana-marjanam take pleasure in mental concoctions. 27
quoted, 171,175, 238 take shelter of man-made gods. 42
Chandogya Upanisad treat family members unkindly. 29
quoted on Paramatma. 228 Conjugal love
Chanting Krsna attracts everyone's heart by mellow
about Bharata Maharaja. 69 of. 197
Children Cows
compared to tigers, jackals and foxes. those in goodness had last animal birth
10 as. 45


--- Page 510 ---
512 Srimad-Bhagavatam
D Demigods
miseries caused by mental calamity at
Daivi hy esa gunamayi mama hands of, 36
quoted, 18,53, 151 own their possessions within the limits of
Daksa time, 399-400
daughters of, 82 position of like phantasmagoria, 110
Dandasiika reside on Manasottara Mountain, 302
as hellish planet, 441, 471 satisfied by satisfying the Lord, 86
Dandya-jane raja yena see to affairs of material world, 311
quoted. 55-56 unfit to reside in Bharata-varsa, 269
Darwin witness activities of illicit sex, 17
as modern anthropologist, 45 worship Deity form of the Lord, 139-141
Davanalas tad vanam alelihanah saha worshiped by many Indians, 263
quoted, 485 worshiped by those with lusty desires,
Daya 281
bathed Gaya in sanctified water, 82 Devadhani
Death location of, 326
as giving up the body, 7 Devadyumna
as representative of Krsna, 36 as son of Devatajit, 74
compared to elephant, 50 Devakulya
conditioned soul fears approach of, 42 as wife of Udgitha, 76
materialist thinks of wife and children at Devatajit
time of, 245 as son of Sumati, 73
not heeded by materialists, 159 Deva-varsa
sinful men brought to Yamaraja upon as son of Yajiiabahu, 284
their, 438 Devotees
Visnu Supreme Lord of, 279 approach lord with material motives,
Deha-smrti nahi yara, samsara 264-266
quoted, 245 aspire to be delivered from material
Deity world, 110
money should be spent for decorating, 9 as servants of servants of servants of God,
worshiped by the demigods. 139-141 400-401
Demigods association of develops Krsna conscious-
are inclined toward sex, 45 ness, 58
as great leaders of universe, 202 automatically attain liberation. 393-395
as living entities, 362 compare color of gold to golden stool. 109
aspire to achieve human births in discuss and praise activities of Bharata
Bharata-varsa, 254 Maharaja, 69
as servants of the Supreme Lord, 290 do not care if they are reborn or not. 66
become manifest in body of pure devotee, fall down due to illicit sex, 33
176 Krsna takes away everything from, 19
conditioned souls sometimes take shelter live opulently when serving Laksmi-
of, 43 Narayana. 36 ,
destination of worshipers of, 256 more dear to Krsna than Brahma, Siva,
envied opulence of Bharata Maharaja, 65 etc., 195


--- Page 511 ---
General Index 513
Devotees Dhruva Maharaja
released from all kinds of sins, 454 became akama-bhakta, 265
see Lord's actions behind material nature, ecstatic symptoms of 123
204 Dhiimranika
should eat as simply as possible, 173 as son of Medhatithi, 298
Devotional service Din ka dakini rat ka baghini palak
attachment to body can only be given up quoted, 10
by. 246 Disciplic succession
inattention retards, 64 no purification by knowledge not received
India has many facilities for executing, in, 419
254 Divorce
liberation and opulence as obstacles to, material marriages separated by, 54
400-401 presently everyone gives up family life
living entities think of each other's by, 30
welfare by accepting, 168 Drdharuci
original quality of Krsna consciousness as son of Hiranyareta, 288
revived by engaging in. 177 Druti
path of is difficult, 62 as wife of Nakta, 77
spiritual form of Lord realized by, 480 Durga
those in mode of goodness can engage in, as bestower of material opulence, 193
47 as wife of Siva, 142
Dhanar dehi ripari dehi material nature known as, 362
quoted, 193 material world under superintendence 0
Dharma 232
circumambulates Dhruva Maharaja, Disana
356-357 as wife of Bhauvana, 87
Dharma tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam Dvapara-yuga
as only religious principle, 449 material miseries began in, 136
Dharmaraja
as father of Bhadrasrava, 157
Dharmaviruddho bhiitesu kamo ‘smi E
quoted, 17
Dhenumati
as wife of Devadyumna, 74 Earth
Dhiras tatra na muhyanti lifted from Garbhodaka Ocean by boar in-
quoted, 147 carnation, 220
Dhruvaloka planets below. 378
Ganges River descended on, 121-122 protected by Lord, 204
second axle of sun-god’s chariot attached upper limits of, 377
to, 331 Eclipse
seven sages circumambulate, 352-353 caused by Rahu, 375
Dhruva Maharaja Ei ripe brahmanda bhramite
achieved extraordinary material verse quoted, 133
opulences, 193-194 Ekale vara krsna, ara saba bhrtya
as life source of all living entities, 356 verse quoted. 188. 278


--- Page 512 ---
514 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Eko bahanan yo vidadhati kaman Gandharvas
quoted, 203. 276, 454 chants glories of Rama, 223
Eko devah sarva-bhiitesu gidhah constantly offer prayers to Lord, 417
quoted, 215 Ganges River
Eko ha vai narayana asit as river of piety, 259
quoted, 201 carried to moon in celestial airplanes, 127
Energy, external divides into four on top of Mount Meru,
under control of Visnu creates material 128
atmosphere, 5 flows in the sky as the Milky Way, 365
Envy infectious diseases cured by bathing in,
cleansed from mind by devotional ser- 174
vice, 169 one who bathes in is purified, 122
gold as sourceof, 14-15 qualities of, 121-122
Esa hy evanandayati water of on heads of seven great sages.
quoted, 253 125
Etas tisro devata anena jivena Garbhodaka Ocean
quoted, 228 at bottom of universe, 438
hell situated between three worlds and.
437
F Garuda
path of Jada Bharata compared to path of.
Family life 61
as concession for sex, 230 residence of, 283
as festival of momentary sex pleasure, 49 snakes in Mahatala disturbed by fear of,
See also: Household life 404-405
Fear Gaudiya-bhasya
none on subterranean planets, 383 supplementary note on incarnations in,
Food 481
given to us by Lord, 454 Gaya
Fruitive activities as saintly king, 78-79
conditioned soul influenced by, 27 as son of Nakta, 77
executed by the illusory energy, 152 bathed in sanctified water by daughters of
household life as field of, 11 Daksa, 82
may temporarily elevate one to higher kept all his citizens satisfied, 83-84
planets, 59 verses glorifying, 80-86
Narayana as sun-god worshiped by. 342 Gayanti
transcendentalists condemn path of, 33 as wife of Gaya, 87
Gayatri ca brhaty usnig
verses quoted, 332
G Gayatri mantra
quoted, 90-91
Gambling sun-god worshiped by chanting, 317
found where there is gold, 15 Ghrtaprstha
Gandhamadana Mountain as son of Priyavrata Maharaja. 293
as mountain of Jambadvipa, 101 Godavari River
Ganges falls to peak of, 129 land of India glorious because of, 122


--- Page 513 ---
General Index 515
Gold Happiness
as yellow stool, 14-15 does not exist in material world, 55
color of compared to golden stool, 109 material as cause of many miseries.
encompasses four principles of sin, 15 229-231
making body comfortable requires huge material as facility for eating, sleeping,
amounts of, 168 | etc, 159
produced from secretions of Siva and not found in family life, 25
Bharani, 388-389 of family life compared to drop of water
produced on banks of Jambi-nadi River, in desert, 30
108-109 Hare Krsna mantra
Goodness, mode of Caitanya introduced congregational
devotional service performed by those in. chanting of. 175
47 one should hear vibration of. 9
Gopi-bhartuh pada-kamalayor purifies one of baser modes, 48
quoted, 401 Harer nama harer nama
Gopis verses quoted, 62
Lord's mercy upon, 196 Haridasa Thakura
understood Krsna to be only real hus- his confirmation of effects of chanting
band, 187 holy name, 394-395
Gosvamis of Vrndavana Hari-sevaya yaha haya anukila
practically didn’t sleep at all, 31 verse quoted, 93
Government Hari-varsa
may arrest conditioned soul who steals, Nrsirmhadeva resides 17. 164
32 Hayagriva
men like carnivorous demons, 26 returned Vedas to Brahma, 163
present levies taxes unfairly, 80 Hayasirsa
Grhastha worshiped by Bhadraérava and intimate
duties of, 28 servants, 157
Guru Hearing
mercy of, 57 recommended by great saints in devo-
qualifications of, 134 tional line, 175
See also: Spiritual master Heavenly planets
Guru-krsna-prasade paya attained by hearing about Bharata
quoted, 6, 57, 61 Maharaja. 69
three groups of. 133
H Heavens, subterranean
description of. 379-385
Ha ha prabhu nanda-suta Hellish planets (hell)
song quoted, 110 animals don't go to. 444
Hanuman by acting impiously one achieves
serves Rama in Kimpurusa-varsa. 223 different positions in. 435-436
Happiness number of, 441
achieved by seeking a spiritual master, 60 situation of . 437
as brahma-saukhya, 158 Hemakiita Mountain
attained by engaging possessions in ser- Alakananda River falls down upon peaks
vice of Lord, 21-22 of. 131


--- Page 514 ---
516 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Hiranmaya-varsa Idhmajihva
as division of Jambadvipa, 99 as son of Maharaja Priyavrata, 274
Visnu lives as tortoise in, 205 Ignorance, mode of
Hiranyagarbha Ananta as predominating Deity of, 410
as Brahma, 243 monkey as last animal birth in, 45
sun-god known as, 315 result of action in due to madness, 436
Hiranyakasipu Tha yasya harer dasye
as personification of material desire, verses quoted, 66
167-168 llavrta-varsa
Hiranyaksa as division of Jambidvipa, 98
killed by boar incarnation, 220 Siva as only male in, 142
Hiranyareta Illusion
as son of Maharaja Priyavrata, 288 acts both on conditioned and liberated
Hitvatma-patarn grham andha-kiiparn souls, 161
quoted, 29 Imam vivasvate yoga proktavan
Holy name quoted, 317
chanted jokingly or by chance, 425 Impersonalists
compared to sun, 394-395 do not accept spiritual varieties of life,
Haridasa Thakura's confirmation of 125
effects of chanting, 394-395 Incarnations
three stages of chanting, 395 considered as ordinary material creatures
Household life by nondevotees, 205
as field of fruitive activity, 11 Lord appears in different, 424
compared to blazing fire in forest, 25 Matsyavatara appears first among all,
compared to dark well, 29 199
consists of home, wife, children, etc. 172 of Lord like waves of river, 165
entanglement in as root cause of material two divisions of, 481
attachment, 180 India
execution of yajias in, 28 father must get children married in. 28
no one can be happy in, 30 Ganges River purifies residents of, 122
See also: Family life has many facilities for executing devo-
Hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani tional service, 254
quoted, 175 many worshipers of demigods in, 263
Hrsikesa Indra
as controller of senses, 184. Ananta appears as white as, 417
Human life Bali Maharaja fought with, 399-400
purification as aim of, 158 became intoxicated on soma-rasa, 84
Human society circumambulates Dhruva Maharaja.
two classes of men in, 230-231 356-357
Hyderabad fight between serpentine demons and,
Ayodhya exists in, 224 406
possesses Devadhani, 326
1 resides on 31135011313 Mountain, 302
Intelligence
Idar hi ৮5007 bhagavan ivetarah lost in association of atheists, 22-23
quoted, 93 meant for Krsna consciousness, 69


--- Page 515 ---
General Index 517
International Society for Krishna Conscious- Jiva Gosvami
ness cited on transcendental identity of the
See: Krsna consciousness movement Lord, 228
Intoxication quoted on rurus, 445
excites the senses, 32 translation of text 10 given by, 424-425
found where there is gold, 15 JAananandatmano visnuh
quoted on Lord providing everyone with verses quoted, 353
quota, 187 JAanis
Istapiirtarh bahudha jayamanam can’t stop waves of sense gratification,
quoted, 276 167
Fsvarah sarva-bhitanam hrd-dese Jupiter
quoted, 207, 361 movement and characteristics of, 351
Jyotir Veda
technical terms in difficult to translate,
J 309
Jada Bharata K
did not spoil his energy, 64
path of compared to path of Garuda, 61
Jagannatha Puri Kaivalyarn narakayate tri-dasa-pir
Caitanya lived at, 124 verses quoted, 125
Jagat-karana nahe prakrti jada-ripa Kalau $adra-sambhavah
verses quoted, 219 quoted, 475
Jahnavi Kali-yuga
as name of Ganges River, 121-122 Caitanya appears in, 238
Jains (81181188 path of devotional service easy
as false acaryas who don’t follow Vedic in, 62
principles, 72-73 cheating by pseudo yogis prominent in,
Jambadvipa 23
issurrounded by ocean of salt water, 274. community known as drya-samdja
nine divisions of land in, 97 springs up in, 72-73
Jambi-nadi Lord appeared as concealed incarnation
as river in Ilavrta, 107-108 in, 213
Janasya moho yam ahari mameti modern civilization mainly situated in
quoted. 411 cities in, 6
Janmady asya yatah monarchy abolished in, 79
quoted, 415 qualities of people in, 109
Janma karma ca me divyam relatives will kill each other in. 24
verses quoted, 362, 477 stringent material miseries began in. 136
Jayadeva Gosvami unwanted pregnancies in. 18
Krsna's name appears in prayers of, 165 Kali-yuge lilavatara na kare
quoted on Matsya incarnation, 199 verse quoted. 213
Jiva Kamadeva
as name of moon-god, 346-347 lives in Ketumala-varsa, 181
Jiva Gosvami Kamais tais tair hrta-jaanah
cited on meaning of maya-mayam, 183 quoted. 281


--- Page 516 ---
518 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Kapiladeva Krsna
analyzed cosmic manifestation as contain- addressed as akificana-gocara, 234
ing twenty-four elements, 210-211 appears in various incarnations, 227
Karma-kanda, jrana-kanda as attractive, 65
verses quoted, 460 as only real husband of all women. 187
Karmano hy api boddhavyam as owner of all property, riches and
verses quoted. 439 wealth, 35
Karmis authorized scriptures left by, 43
suffer in this life and the next, 33 cleanses the heart as Paramatma, 48
Karttikeya death as representative of, 36
vegetables attacked by weapons of, 292 hari-cakra weapon of, 42
Kasyapa Mahapurusa as name of, 77
circumambulates Dhruva Maharaja, mercy of, 57
356-357 only advanced devotee can understand
Katha Upanisad lusty feelings between Radha and,
quoted on expansions of Visnu as Super- 415
soul, 280 original form of, 165
Kaveri River purpose of His appearance, 79
land of India glorious because of, 122 reputation of is always expanding, 64
Kesaracala Mountains specific characteristic of, 197
Sita River runs down peaks of, 128-129 takes away everything from favored
Kesava devotee, 19
Jayadeva Gosvami's prayers contain name took birth in Yadu dynasty. 88
of, 165 Krsna consciousness movement
Ketumala-varsa as opportunity for all misled members of
as division of Jambadvipa, 101 human society, 7
as residence of Kamadeva, 181 chief engagement of, 175
Ganges River flows through, 129 dealings in are never material, 94
Khala disciples in must follow regulative princi-
as envious living entity, 170 ples, 52
Kholaveca Sridhara established center in Mayapur, 259
as great devotee of Caitanya, 234-235 forbids illicit sex, 458
Ki brahma, ki Siva, ki sanakadi gives everyone the chance to engage in
verses quoted, 421 service, 64
Kimpurusa-varsa goal of, 43
Hanuman serves Rama in, 223 is giving everyone the association of
King saintly people, 56
as representative of the Supreme Lord, 79 is opening Caitanya’s path, 62
Knowledge is opening centers all over the world. 268
Hayagriva always protects Vedic. 163-164 is trying to elevate $80705, 47
Krauiicadvipa propagated to reestablish varnasrama-
is surrounded by ocean of milk, 291 dharma, 251
Kravyadas spreads chanting of Hare Krsna maha-
torment sinful men in Maharaurava. 446 mantra, 57
Krmibhojana teaches people to control mind and
as hellish planet, 441, 454. senses, 9


--- Page 517 ---
General Index 519
Krsna River Laksmi (Laksmidevi, Laksmiji)
land of India glorious because of, 122 as devotee of Kimadeva, 181
Krsna-saktye prakrti haya gauna as source of riches, 35
verses quoted, 219 material opulence not bestowed by, 193
Krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam worships Lord during Sarnvatsara, 183
verses quoted, 259 Laksmi-Narayana
Ksarakardama money should be utilized in service of. 36
as hellish planet. 441, 468 Lalabhaksa
Ksatriya as hellish planet, 441, 464
possesses riches to use for noble ac- Lamentation
tivities, 475 conditioned soul burned by fire of. 25
Vaitarani as hell for degraded, 459 conditioned soul lives life of, 36
Ksine punye martya-lokam Liberated souls
quoted, 133, 256, 267 become captivated by illusory energy.
Kumaras 161
transcendental bliss derived by, 396 Liberation
Kumbhipaka as obstacle to devotional service, 400-401
as hellish planet, 441, 447 attained by hearing about Bharata
Kumuda Mountain Maharaja, 69
as mountain of Jambiadvipa, 102 automatically attained by devotee.
Bhadra River falls onto peaks of, 130 393-395
101 bhakti-yoga as real path of. 252
quoted on Krsna's appearance in this considered insignificant. 65
world, 200 devotees on platform of, 243
(ध्यात Purana obtained by pious acts temporary. 59
quoted on demigods desiring to descend people denied opportunity for. 251
to Bharata-varsa, 269 saintly persons easily attain. 57
Kuru Living entities
as division of Jambadvipa, 99 are never created. 152
Bhadra River flows through province of, as prakrti, 201
130 born from wombs. eggs and perspiration.
Kusadvipa 209
inhabitants of worship fire-god. 290 depend on heat and light from sun. 316
surrounded by ocean of liquid ghee. exhibit greatness in spiritual world.
286-287 178-179
influenced by different modes of nature.
434-435
L Lord controls all. 200
meant to be enjoyed by Krsna. 187
Laghu-bhagavatamrta Supersoul as director of. 216
quoted on expansions of the Lord. two kinds of. 362-363
140-141 Lohitarna
quoted on Lord Rama, 224 as son of Ghrtaprstha. 294
lLaksmana Lokaloka Mountain
as brother of Rama. 223, 224 controls rays of the sun. 307-308
as manifestation of Sankarsana. 232 four elephants on. 310


--- Page 518 ---
520 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Lokaloka Mountain Mahapurusa
land of gold extending to, 306 as name of Krsna, 77
surrounds ocean of sweet nectar, 305 Maharaurava
Lord Rama as hellish planet, 441, 446
See: Ramacandra Mahatala
Lotus feet of Krsna as abode of many-hooded snakes.
one becomes dhira by surrender to, 147 404-405
pure devotees compared to bumblebees Mahatmanas tu mam partha
engaged in serving, 6 verses quoted, 263
the Ganges River directly touches, Mahat-sevar dvaram ahur vimukteh
121-122 quoted, 480
Lust Maitri
comparison of material and spiritual, 415 bathed Gaya in sanctified water, 82
mental situation for material enjoyment Malyavan Mountain
due to, 16 as mountain of Jambidvipa, 101
one disobeys rules of sex life when Caksu River falls on summit of, 129
blinded by, 17 Mamaivariso jiva-loke
verses quoted, 176-177
Mama janmani janmanisvare
M quoted, 170
Mam eva ye prapadyante
quoted, 43, 161
Mari hi partha vyapdsritya
Madhu verses quoted, 461
as son of Bindu, 87 Manah sasthanindriyani
Madhuruha quoted, 152
as son of Ghrtaprstha, 294 Manas ca bhadram bhajatad
Madhvacarya quoted, 169
cited on planet Rahu, 99-100 Manasottara Mountain
cited on purpose of astdriga-yoga, 68 axle of wheel of sun-god's chariot rests
quoted on Kamadeva as Pradyumna, on, 330
181 residential quarters of demigods on, 302
quoted on liberation from material world, sun travels in a circle over sides of.
243 325-326
quoted on Lord Trivikrama, 122 Mandah sumanda-matayo
quoted on worship of Supreme Lord by quoted, 109
different names, 279 Mandara
quotes Brahmanda Purana on Visnu as as mountain of Jambuadvipa, 102
SiSumara, 353 Man-mana bhava mad-bhaktah
Mahakadamba quoted, 171, 246, 258
as tree on Suparéva Mountain, 111 Manojava
Maha-mantra as son of Medhatithi, 298
chanting of inaugurated in Navadvipa, Manomaya
259 as name of moon-god, 347
spread by Krsna consciousness move- Manovati
ment, 57 as township of Brahma, 118


--- Page 519 ---
General Index 521
Manthu Maya-pracuranatmiya-sarikalpena
as son of Viravrata, 87 quoted, 183
Manusyanam sahasresu Mayapur
verses quoted, 62 Krsna consciousness center established at.
Marici 259
as son of Samrat, 87 Maya-sukhdaya bharam udvahato
Marriage quoted, 158, 193, 379
does not last in material world, 54 Maya tatam idarn sarvam jagad
Mars quoted, 208
movement and characteristics of, Mayavadis
350-351 attracted to merging into the Lord's exis-
Mirtanda tence. 66
sun-god known as, 315 consider sarikirtana-yajiia as pious ac-
Material existence tivity, 260
all constituents of described in Chapter regard Krsna's body as material. 181
Fourteen. 70 think universal form to be real. 208
conditioned soul perpetually runs around Meat-eating
forest of, 15-16 excites the senses, 32
living entity suffers miserable conditions found where there is gold, 15
of, 5 Medhatithi
uncontrolled senses like plunderers in divided Sakadvipa into seven sections.
forest of. 8 297-298
way of explained, 40-41 Meghaprstha
Materialists as son of Ghrtaprstha, 294.
as midhas, 158 Mental speculation
desire comfort for the body, 168 material bodily conditions acquired due
don’t heed danger of impending death, 10.5
159 Mercury
Mat-sthani sarva-bhitani na movement and characteristics of. 350
quoted, 208 Merumandara
Matsya as mountain of Jambadvipa. 102
always protects Vedic knowledge. Milky Way
163-164 as Ganges River. 365
appeared in Ramyaka-varsa. 198 Mind
appears first among all incarnations, 199 material existence caused by dirty things
Mattah smrtir jianam apohanari ca within, 175
quoted, 160 moon-god is deity of everyones. 347
Matter Miseries
moves when Lord glances over total conditioned soul unable to protect himself
material energy, 218 from material. 36
Maya Danava path of fruitive activities as original
as great demon architect. 381 source of. 33
Talatala ruled by, 403-404 Monarchy
Mayadhyaksena prakrtih abolished in Kali-yuga. 79
verses quoted, 204, 211. 217. 219. 323. Money
360 conditioned souls exchange. 51


--- Page 520 ---
522 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Money Nagaloka
conditioned soul steals. 35 demoniac serpents on, 407
enemies created from transactions with, Na jayate mriyate va kadacin
37 quoted, 152
known as laksmi, 475 Naksatranam aha ast
merchants always interested in earning, 5 quoted, 91, 328-329
of conditioned soul spent for sense gra- Nakta
tification. 8 as son of Prthusena, 76
required to keep women, 32 Na mam duskrtino miadhah
taken away by family members. 10 verses quoted, 39, 158
Monkeys Nanda Maharaja
transplants of sex glands 0, 45 as resident of Vrndavana, 197
Moon Narada Muni
influences growth of food grains, 346 always glorifies Ananta in his father’s as-
is deity of everyone's mind, 347 sembly, 419
is similar to other stars, 329 as spiritual master of Vyasadeva, 419
is twice as large as sun, 374 instructed Savarni Manu, 239
Mercury is the son of the, 350 worships Nara-Narayana, 241
reflects sunshine, 91 Narada [00700070170
travels faster than the sun, 345 tenets of instructed to Savarni Manu, 239
Moon-god Nara-Narayana
considered chief of all living entities, as best of all saintly persons, 240
346-347 resides at Badarikasrama, 237-238
possesses Vibhavari, 326 Narayana
Mount Meru as beautifully decorated with different
Ganges River divides into four on top of, weapons, 312
128 as supreme controller of everyone, 201
See also: Sumeru Mountain as ultimate goal, 68
Mrtyuh sarva-haras caham descended in the form of the sun, 341
quoted, 279 goddess of fortune as property of, 35
Muktih svayarm mukulitanjalih money must be engaged in service of, 475
quoted, 393 quadruple expansions of, 139-141
Mukunda supremacy of demigods dependent on
activities of as very potent, 173 mercy of, 278
Mundaka Upanisad Narmada River
quoted on acceptance of spiritual master, land of Indiaglorious because of, 122
60 Narottama dasa Thakura
quoted on following paths of karma-
(2700 and jrana-kanda, 460
N quoted on freedom from conditional bon-
dage, 245
Nabhigupta quoted on material disease, 13
as son of Hiranyareta, 288 quoted on taking shelter of Krsna, 110
Na dhanarh na janam na sundarim Nasta-prayesv abhadresu
quoted, 109 verses quoted, 174


--- Page 521 ---
General Index 523
Na tatha me priyatama Opulence
verses quoted, 195 as obstacle to devotional service, 400-401
Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi gold as source of material. 14-15
quoted, 189 obtained by offering prayers to Durga.
Nature, material 194
as external energy, Durga, 362 two kinds of, 397
modes of nature become manifest when utilized for benefit in this life and next.
Lord glances over, 421 22
not cause of material world, 219 Outer space
working under Krsna's direction, 204. defined. 321
211, 217, 323, 361 sun is in middle of. 322
Navadvipa
as best place within this universe, 259
Nayar $riyo nga u nitanta-rateh P
verses quoted, 196
Nema virifico na bhavo
verses quoted, 195 Padma Purana
Nidrahara-viharakadi-vijitau cited on expansions of the Lord. 141
quoted, 31 cited on Rama and His brothers. 224
Nija-srsti-sakti prabhu saficare quoted on one who cannot be guru, 134
verses quoted, 218 Pandita Haridasa
Nila Mountain qualities 01, 177
as mountain of Jambadvipa, 99 Paramatma
Bhadra River falls onto peaks of. 130 has no material connections. 228
Nimlocani Param brahma param dhama
Varuna possesses, 326 verses quoted. 187
Nityananda Paramesthi
one becomes puffed up due to forgetting as son of Devadyumna. 74
lotus feet of, 13 Parasya Saktir vividhaiva sriyate
Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam quoted. 185
quoted, 362-363 Paribhadra
Nrsimhadeva as son of Yajiiabahu. 284
resides in Hari-varsa. 164 Paritranaya sadhinam vinasiya
quoted. 79. 230
Paryavartana
0 as hellish planet. 441, 473
Pasandis
foolish people follow. 43
Offenses pseudo svamis, yogis and incarnations as.
against Deity and spiritual master must 44
be avoided, 140 Passion. mode of
Ori bhur bhuvah svah gold attracts those in. 14
quoted, 90, 317 lions as last animal birth in. 45
Oriv namo bhagavate narasimhaya one is implicated in suffering by associ-
chanted by Prahlada Maharaja. 170 ation with. 18


--- Page 522 ---
524. Srimad-Bhéagavatam
Passion. mode of Prahlada Maharaja
those in desire promotion to heavenly quoted on materialistic rascals, 158, 193
planets. 47 Prajapati
Pastimes of Krsna circumambulates Dhruva Maharaja,
described in Tenth Canto, 66 356-357
Patala Prakrteh kriyamanani
See: Nagaloka verses quoted, 16
Patra puspar phalari toyar Pralayo payodhi-jale dhrtavan asi
verses quoted, 172 verse quoted, 199
Pavamana Pramanthu
as son of Medhatithi, 298 as son of Viravrata, 87
Peace Pranarodha
means of attaining, 48 as hellish planet, 441, 462
Pisacas Prapancikataya buddhya hari-
places of enjoyment for in antariksa, 377 verse quoted, 93
Pitrloka Prasada
as residence of Yamaraja, 438 distributed in Mayapur, 259
location of. 437 Prastava
Plaksadvipa as son of Udgitha, 76
description of, 274. Prastota
inhabitants of described, 276, 282 as son of Pratiha, 75
is surrounded by ocean of sugarcane Pratiha
juice, 282 as son of Paramesthi, 74
Planets as the paragon of bona fide preachers,
enabled to float by manipulation of air, 74-75
361 sons of, 75
fixed in their orbits, 359 Pratiharta
Pleasure as son of Pratiha, 75
doesn’t exist in material world, 14 Prayers
Polestar offered by residents of Jambudvipa,
as pivot for all stars and planets, 357 157-220
Prabodhananda Sarasvati of Siva to Sankarsana. 144-151
cited on position of demigods, 110 Pregnancy
quoted on achieving pure devotional ser- takes place in lower-grade life, 136
vice, 125 Premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-
Pradyumna verse quoted, 228
abode of, 141 Priyavrata
Kamadeva appears as, 181 divided Bhd-mandala with his chariot
Prahlada Maharaja wheels, 92
as grandfather of Bali Maharaja, 400 Virajaas jewel of dynasty of, 88
as perfect example of dhira, 147 Prthu Maharaja
as typical Vaisnava, 169 present leaders should take lessons from,
caused Lord to assume form of 80
Nrsirmhhadeva, 165 Prthusena
quoted on family life as dark well, 28-29 as son of Vibhu, 76


--- Page 523 ---
General Index 525
Purisah striya mithuni-bhavam etarn Ramanaka
verses quoted, 51 as son of Yajfiabahu. 281
Puranas Ramayana
two opinions concerning Rama in, 224 cited on friendship of Rama and
vast universal existence described in, 478 Bibhisana. 79
Pure devotees Ramyaka-varsa
can give up everything on Krsna's behalf, as division 01 Jambudvipa. 99
63 Matsya appeared in. 198
compared to bumblebees, 5-6 Rasatala
Purification as abode of sons of Diti and Danu. 406
as aim of human life, 158 Raso ham apsu kaunteya
Purojava quoted. 185
as son of Medhatithi, 298 Rati
Puskaradvipa as wife of Vibhu. 76
description of, 301-302 Raurava
Piyoda as hellish planet. 441, 444
as hellish planet, 441, 460 Ravana
attempted to kidnap Sitadevi. 227-228
kicked by Bali Maharaja. 402-403
R killed by Lord Rama. 229-230
Laksmi carried away by. 35
Regulative principles
Radharani devotional service should be executed by
all money belongs to Krsna and. 35 rigidly following. 161
only advanced devotee can understand Krsna consciousness movement ham-
lusty feelings of Krsna and. 415 pered if disciples don’t follow. 52
Rahu neophyte devotee ordered to worship
as planet below the sun. 373 Lord according to. 190
is twice as large as moon. 374 purify one of baser modes. 18
Rahu-soma-ravinam Rsabhadeva
quoted. 374 body of belongs to spiritual platform.
Raksasas 484-185
places of enjoyment for in antariksa, 377 instructs sons on accepting austerity. 158
Rama Rsikulya
as goddess of fortune. 185 as wife of Bhima. 76
Ramacandra Rta pibantau sukrtasya loke
as Supersoul. 232 verses quoted. 280
brought devotees of Ayodhya back to Rudra
Godhead. 236 appears from between evebrows of
goddess of fortune belongs to. 35 Ananta. 412
mission of. 229-231 See also: Siva
served by Hanuman in Kimpurusa-varsa. Rapa Gosvami
223 cited on price for achieving God's favor.
Ramadi-mirtisu kala-niyanema 234
verse quoted. 227 describes pure devotional service. 190


--- Page 524 ---
526 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Rapa Gosvami Sankarsana
quoted on engaging everything in service as predominating Deity of false concep-
of Lord. 93 tion of thinking onself as supreme en-
quoted on pure devotional service. 134. , Jjoyer. 411
107 Siva meditates on. 143
Ruru Sankhya philosophy
as more envious than snake. 445 different truths enumerated by. 211
Sarkirtana-yajia
recommended in this age. 259
9 Sannyasa
) shouldn't be taken out of sentiment. 11
Sabde pare ca nisnatam Santa
quoted. 23 as one of seven islands. 276
‘Sadhu-sanga’, ‘sadhu-sariga’ Santa-kumara
verse quoted. 50 quoted on serving toes of Lord's lotus
Sagara Maharaja feet. 107
earth dug up by sons of. 269 Saptasva-ripa-cchandarisi
Sakadvipa verses quoted. 332
, anisland outside ocean of milk. 296 Sarama
Sakuntala as female messenger of Indra. 406
, = Menaka gave birth to. 120 Sarameyadana
Salmalidvipa as hellish planet. 441, 465
mantra of inhabitants of. 286 Sarva-dharman parityajya mam
surrounded by ocean of liquor. 282 quoted. 461. 477
Sambhavamy atma-mayaya Sarvar khalv 10073 brahma
quoted. 312 quoted, 210
Samrat Sarvasya cahar hrdi sannivistp
as son of Citraratha. 87 Sarva-byapi sarva-bhitantar-atma
Sarisara-davanala-lidha-loka- quoted. 215
verses quoted. 23. 25 Sastras
Sarnvatsara advise one to associate with devotees.
as devotee of Kamadeva. 181 50
as wheel of the chariot of the sun-god. Satatarn kirtayanto mar
330 verses quoted. 185
Sarhyamani Satavalsa
Yamaraja possesses. 326 , 88 (7९८ on Kumuda Mountain. 112
Sanatana Gosvami Satijit
quoted on turning low-class men into , asson of Viraja. 87
brahmanas, 389 Satrughna
৩৪110311158 as brother of Lord Rama. 224
as hellish planet. 441, 456 Saturn
Sankaracarva movement and characteristics of. 352
composed prayers in praise of Ganges Satya
River. 122 as wife of Manthu, 87
Sankarsana Satyarh jaiagnam anantarn brahma
ahode of. 141 quoted. 215


--- Page 525 ---
General Index 527
Satya-yuga Sex
everyone practiced mystic yoga in, 130 family life as concession for. 230
Saumanasya found where there is gold. 15
as son of Yajnabahu, 284 husband discharges blood while enjoying.
Sa vai manah krsna-padiravindayoh 10
quoted, 171 material happiness centered around.
Savarni Manu 229-23]
instructed by Narada Muni, 239 none in spiritual world. 136
Sa visvakrd visvavid atmayonih products of, 41
verses quoted, 280 relations allowed only with one’s wife.
Scientists 456
as cheaters, 37-38 Taptasirmi as hell for one who engages
as rascals, 39 in illicitly. 456
demoniac attempt of to go to moon, 375 those enlivened by as descendants of
have no control over God's law, 363 monkeys. 45
interruption of speculative research work Siddhaloka
of, 211 constantly offer prayers to Lord. 417
think material nature is working without _ residents of have mystic powers. 370
supervision, 218 Siksastaka
try to explain cosmic situation. 95 quoted on praying for benecition. 170
try to find cause of life, 151 Simhika
try to manufacture living entities in son of as presiding deity of Rahu. 373
laboratories, 202 Sin
want to avoid Supreme Lord's rule, 300 devotees released from all kinds of. 154
Sense gratification illicit sex as most prominent. 18
conditioned soul accepts miserable condi- in pursuit of bodily maintenance not
tions to enjoy. 39 | committed by animals. +41
conditioned soul attracted to little happi- SiSumara
ness derived from. 32 description of. 365
conditioned soul's money plundered machine of stars and planets resembles.
through. 8 364
JjAanis and yogis can’t stop waves of. 107 should be considered as external form of
materialists attached to. 47 Visnu. 368
superior enjoyed in heavenly planets. 138 Sitadevi
wealth shouldnt be misused for. 21 as wife of Rama. 223
Senses belongs to the spiritual world. 232
compared to plunderers. 8 kidnapped by Ravana. 35. 227-228
of bhakta compared to fangless snake. Sita River
126 as branch of Ganges. 128
purified are spiritual. 93 course of described. 128-129
Sesa Siva
holds universes on His hoods. 148 as one of seven islands. 276
Sex as only male in llavrta-varsa. 142
allowed only for begetting children. 17 creates demigods. elements and senses.
as most prominent sin. 18 149-150
conditioned soul captivated by. 49 engages in sex with Bhavani. 388-389


--- Page 526 ---
528 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Siva Srimad-Bhagavatam
lives with his associates in Vitala. quoted on false conception of thinking
388-389 oneself as supreme enjoyer. 411
meditates on ৩3178138103. 143 quoted on family life as dark well, 28-29
set fire to kingdoms of Maya. 403-404 quoted on how possessions increase illu-
worships Ananta. 410 sion. 00
Sleep quoted on ignorant man as no better than
compared to python. 30 ass or cow. 144
Soma quoted on increasing attachments. 51
worshiped by inhabitants of quoted on intelligent person worshiping
Salmalidvipa. 285 supreme whole, 191-192
Sona quoted on Krsna's devotees as very dear
as main river in Bharata-varsa. 249 to Him. 195
Soul quoted on Krsna taking away everything
becomes conditioned by material at- from devotee. 19
mosphere. 5 quoted on Lord's mercy upon gopis,
Spiritual master 195-196
engaging possessions in devotional ser- quoted on one with material desires
vice under guidance of. 21 engaging in devotional service. 205
not to be considered ordinary man. 140) quoted on perfection of life. 68
one must approach a. 60 quoted on performing duties for satisfac-
only business of conditioned soul to ac- tion of Visnu, 455
॥ cept. 0 quoted on qualities of people in Kali-
Sraddha yuga. 109
bathed Gaya in sanctified water. 82 quoted on real purpose of life. 58
Sridhara Svami quoted on remembering Lord's lotus feet.
cited on rurus, 145 171
quoted on achieving pure devotional ser- quoted on searching out a guru, 134
| vice. 125 quoted on serving toes of Lord's lotus
Srimad-Bhagavatam feet. 167
as authorized scripture. 43 quoted on staunch devotional service
compiled about five thousand years ago. elevating one to transcendental posi-
20 tion. 263
meant for nonenvious. 169 quoted on tribulations of family life.
quoted on acceptance of spiritual master. 230
60-61 quoted on universe as the Lord. 93-94
quoted on approaching bona fide guru, 23 quoted on Vispu's eighth incarnation.
quoted on bodily necessities. 49 | 484
quoted on burning of forest and Srigavan
Rsabhadeva’s body. 485 as mountain of Jambadvipa. 99
quoted on cleansing heart by hearing Bhadra River falls onto peaks of moun-
Bhagavatam, 174 . tain. 130
quoted on cleansing of heart by Srnvatari sva-kathah krsnah
Paramatma. 48 verses quoted. 48. 174
quoted on devotional service as perma- Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-
nent asset. 04 quoted. 194. 232, 361


--- Page 527 ---
General Index 529
Stars Sun
enabled to float by manipulation of air. described as bhagavan, 323
361 holy name compared to. 394-395
fixed to wheel of time. 348 inhabitants of Plaksadvipa attain the.
reflect sunshine. 91 276
Stuti is in middle of outer space. 322
as wife of Pratiharta. 75 is worshipable. 91
Stutyavrata moon is twice as large as. 374
as son of Hiranyareta. 288 Narayana as the. 341
Stuvanti munayah siryarn orbit of. 323-328
verses quoted, 334 planet and sun-god divide directions of
Subhadra universe, 316
as one of seven islands, 276 situated in middle of universe. 314
Siacimukha Sun-god
_ ashellish planet, 441, 474 as Narayana or Visnu. 343
Sucinarh 57101071 gehe yoga-bhrasto as reflection of Visnu. 279
quoted, 68. 403 can’t deviate from his orbit. 323
Sudarsana cakra chariot of worshiped by Gayatri mantra,
causes wives of demons to have miscar- 329-330
riages, 385 has three speeds. 344
demons of Rasatala defeated by. 406 Yamaraja as powerful son of. 438
protected sun and moon from Rahu. 375 Suparéva
Sudhama as mountain of Jambidvipa. 102
, asson of Ghrtaprstha. 294 Supersoul
Sidra as director of living beings. 216
falls into ocean of pus. stool, etc.. 460 Rama as, 232
Krsna consciousness movement is trying Supreme Lord
to elevate. 47 as original cause of all natural events.
must try to become brahmana, 100 216
spends money lavishly. 475 Surocana
Sugati as son of Yajfiabahu. 284.
as son of Gaya. 87 Surya
Sukaramukha as life and soul of this universe. 317
, = १5 hellish planct. 441, 451 Sirya atma atmatvenopasyah
Sualaprota quoted. 316
as hellish planet. 441, 471 Siirya Narayana
Sumana as sun deity incarnation of Supreme Lord.
as wife of Madhu. 87 362
Sumati Siirya-somagni-varisa-
as son of Bharata, 72 verses quoted. 279
Sumeru Mountain Sutala
axle of wheel of sun-god's chariot rests as residence of Bali Maharaja. 390
on, 330 Suvarcala
is surrounded by Jambadvipa. 274 as wife of Paramesthi. 74
is within [lavrta. 98 Svadharma-nisthah sata-
township of Brahma on summit of. 117 quoted. 304


--- Page 528 ---
530 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Svalpam apy asya dharmasya Time

quoted. 64 impossible to check wheel of. 42
Svargaloka Tivrena bhakti-yogena yajeta
sons outlive their fathers on. 160 quoted. 203
Sveta Transcendentalists

as mountain of Jambadvipa. 99 two groups of, 125

Bhadra River falls onto peaks of moun- Transmigration
i tain. 130 the secret of. 152
Svetasvatara Upanisad Treta-yuga

quoted on Supersoul. 280 people enjoyed without tribulations in.

quoted on word gidha, 215 136

Tri-dasa-pir akasa-puspayate
जन quoted. 110
T Tripurari |
See: Siva

Tad viddhi pranipitena pariprasnena Trivikrama

quoted. 60. 84 Madhvacarya quoted on, 122
Tad-jranartham sa gurum Tri-yuga

quoted. 6. 60. 134 Lord known as, 213
Taittiriya Upanisad Tumburu

quoted on fear of Supreme Brahman. 281 as stringed instrument of Narada. 419

quoted on living entity becoming estab- Tvasta

lished in spiritual. blissful life. 253 as son of Bhauvana, 87

quoted on word vipasicitah, 214-215 Tyaktva dehar punar janma naiti
Talatala quoted. 258

ruled by demon Maya. 403-404 Tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujari harer
Tamisra verses quoted. 64

as hellish planet. 441, 442
Tapo divyar putraka yena

quoted. 158 U
Taptasarmi

as hellish planet. 441, 456
Tasmad gururn prapadyeta Udgata

quoted, 23. 60. 134 as son of Pratiha, 75
Tatala saikate, vari-bindu-sama Udgitha

quoted. 30 as son of Bhama. 76
Tatha dehantara-praptih Universal form

quoted. 470 devotee should first think of. 480
Tatra brahma tu vijieyah is material, 93

quoted. 141 meditation on brings one to pure good-
Time ness. 92

as insurmountable. 394 not real form. 208

causes luminaries to revolve around Universe

polestar, 357 appears like mustard seed. 411-412
divided by moon-god. 286 diameter of, 314
fear produced by. 383 heated by sun, 322


--- Page 529 ---
General Index 531
Universe Vamadeva
is like a great fort. 8. 362 as son of Hiranyareta. 288
resting like an atom on one of lord's Vamanadeva
hoods. 426 =, Bali Maharaja offered everything to.
rests on hood of Sesa. 148 390-392
three divisions of. 307 Visnu's appearance as. 121-122
whatever we see is within this one. 329 Vaiicha-kalpa-tarubhyas ca
Upadeksyanti te jianam jraninas verses quoted. 169
quoted. 75 Varahe vama-padam tu
Urna verses quoted. 122
as wife of Citraratha. 87 Varnasramacaravata
Utkala verses quoted. 251
as wife of Samrat. 87 Varnasrama-dharma
Uttarakuru-varsa better position in material world attained
boar incarnation worshiped in. 212 by following principles of. 8-9
Uttamasloka easily adopted in Bharata-varsa. 251
Bharata Maharaja was fond of serving. 63 human being can’t violate principles of.
Uttanapada 453
Dhruva Maharaja as famous son of. 123 Varuna
inhabitants of Krauficadvipa worship.
294-295
ष possesses Nimlocani. 8, 326
protects Mount Kraufica. 292
Vasu
as son of Hiranyareta. 288
Vaikunthaloka Vasudana
no anxiety or repeated birth in. 257 as son of Hiranyareta. 288
Vairaja Vasudeva
sun-god known as. 315 abode of. 141
Vaisnavas understood from platform of pure good-
always in transcendental bliss. 231 ness. 92
avoid company of Jains. 72-73 Vasus
compared to desire tree, 169 came from Narayana. 277
first business of. 172 Vayu
twenty-six good qualities of . 177 inhabitants of Sakadvipa worship. 300
Vaisya Vayu Purana
earns money honestly through quoted on mountains of Jambadvipa. 97
agriculture. etc.. 475 quoted on sun-god’s horses. 332
Vaitarani Vedais ca sarvair aham eva
as hellish planet. 441, 459 quoted. 2.4. 74
Vaivasvata Manu Vedanta-sarigraha
rules in Ramyaka-varsa. 198 quoted on taking birth in Bharata-varsa.
Vajrakantaka-$almali 250
as hellish planet. 441, 457 Vedanta-stitra
Valikhilyas quoted on Lord as source of everything.
offer glorification to sun-god. 333 415


--- Page 530 ---
532 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Vedas Visnu Purana
Asi-patravana as hell for deviates from quoted on demigods and others worship-
path of. 449 ing sun-god. 332
Krsna incarnated as gigantic fish to pro- quoted on satisfying Lord by executing
tect. 199 prescribed duties. 251
meant for understanding karma, jidana quoted on sun-god’s horses. 332
and yoga, 08 1500
quoted on accepting bona fide guru, 0 as wife of Viraja. 87
Venus Visvadhara
motion and characteristics of. 349 as son of Medhatithi. 298
Vibhu Visvaksena
as son of Prastava. 76 as assistant of Lord. 311-312
Vidhyadhara-loka Viévamitra Muni
as planet below Rahu. 376 was captivated by Menaka. 120
Vidyadharas Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura
constantly offer prayers to Lord. 417 cited on Deity worship by demigods.
Vidyapati Thakura 139-141
quoted on unhappiness of family life. cited on location of hellish planets. 434
29-30 cited on location of Lokaloka Mountain.
Vijayadhvaja 309
cited on size of Rahu. 374 cited on meditation on virata-ripa,
Viraja 369-370
as son of Tvasta. 87 cited on mountains of Jambudvipa. 97
verse glorifying. 88 cited on personal identity of the Lord.
Viraraghava Acarya 228-229
explains verse of Bhagavatam, 279-280 cited on praying for benediction. 169
quoted on affection in intimate relation- cited on sakama-bhakta, 191
ships. 183 cited on separation of Rama from Sita.
Virata-ripa 231
as external body of Lord. 478 cited on sons outliving their fathers. 160
Viravrata cited on word adi, 415
as son of Madhu. 87 describes real guru, 23
Virocana gives opinion on sins leading to Raurava
as wife of Tvasta. 87 hell. 444
Visasana quoted on guru as representative of
as hellish planet. 441, 463 Supreme Lord. 290
Visayah khalu sarvatah quoted on material world as blazing forest
quoted. 49 fire. 25
Visnu quoted on method of worship of Varuna.
expands as demigods. 270 294
Sisumara as external form of. 368 quoted on mild flames of kusa grass.
sun-god as reflection of. 279 287
Visnu-dharmottara quoted on spiritual master’s mercy. 01
cited on Lord Rama. 224 quoted on sun as life and soul of all living
Visnupadi entities. 310
as name of Ganges River. 121-122 quoted on township of Brahma. 118


--- Page 531 ---
General Index 533
Vitala World, material
Siva lives with his associates in, 388-389 entered by conditioned soul for some
Vitihotra material profit. 5
as ruler of Puskardvipa, 303 enviousness in, 54
Vivikta everyone works in wrong direction in.
as son of Hiranyareta, 288 252-253
Vrddhasena following principles of varnasrama-
as wife of Sumati, 73 dharma to attain better position in.
Vrndavana 8-9
Krsna treated as beloved son or lover by full of envious persons. 169
residents of, 197 miseries of. 55
Vyasadeva not created just to inflict suffering on liv-
wrote Bhagavatam as commentary on ing entities. 218
Vedanta-sutra, 419 purpose of creation of. 416
Vyeikata Bhatta scientists, philosophers. etc. as cheaters
questioned by Caitanya about Laksmi. in, 37-38
196-197 seen as perishable by Vedic scholars. logi-
cians. etc.. 160-161
seen as permanent by conditioned soul.
w 12
three kinds of activities in. 434
Wife under superintendence of Durgadevi. 232
as illusion personified. 40
compared to witch and tigress, 10 Y
material happiness centered around
one’s, 229-231 Yac caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam
sex relations should be restricted to one’s. verses quoted. 322. 360
456 Yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama
Women quoted. 256
and men, attraction between as cause of Yadu dynasty
bondage, 41 Krsna took birth in. 88
compared to dolls. 201 Yadyapi sarikhya mane ‘pradhana’
conditioned soul falls victim to, 32 verses quoted. 218
Krsna as only real husband of all. 187 Yajiiabahu |
Krsna fulfills desires of. 190 as master of Salmalidvipa. 284
three kinds of created by demon Bala. Yajrarthat karmano 'nyatra
386-387 verses quoted. 455
World. material Yajna-sistasinah santo
as one fourth of Lord's creation. 95 verses quoted. 454
as transformation of material qualities. Yaksas
95 places for enjoyment for in antariksa.
compared to forest. 5-0 377
compared to mirage in desert. 13-14 wives of assist Bhavani. 107
correction of miserable conditions in. 11:4 Yamaditas
demigods see to affairs in. 311 bring sinful men to Yamaraja upon their
different types of enemies within. 20 death. 438


--- Page 532 ---
534 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Yamaraja Yatha kancanatam yati

as King of pitas, 438 verse quoted. 389

possesses Sarnyamani. 326 Yat karosi yad asnasi
Yam evaisa vrnute tena labhyah verses quoted, 22, 34

quoted. 228 Yat-pada-parikaja-palasa-vilasa
Yam labdhva caparam (00107 verses quoted. 167

quoted. 205 Ye 1) anya-devata-bhakta
Yamuna River verses quoted. 276-277

land of India glorious because of. 122 Yogamaya
Yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukhar as Lords personal potency. 312

quoted. 33. 230 Yoginam api sarvesam
Yanti deva-vrata devan verses quoted. 126

verses quoted. 47. 256. 278 Yogis
Yanti mad-yajino 01 mam are fallen and cheated. 44

quoted. 47 can’t stop waves of sense gratification.
Yasmad brahma-saukhyam tv 167

quoted. 158 can’t succeed without devotional service.
Yasoda 126

as resident of Vrndavana. 197 control bodily airs. 300
Yasyaham anugrhnami harisye Yudhisthira Maharaja

quoted. 19 present leaders should take lessons from.
Yasyajaaya bhrahmati sambhrta- 80

quoted. 302
Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah VA

quoted. 61. 200
Yasya samyag bhagavati Zodiac

verses quoted. 243 motion of sun and planets in explained.
Yasyatma-buddhih kunape 340

verses quoted. 444 sun assumes twelve names according to
Yata dekha vaisnavera vyavahara signs of. 343

verse quoted. 231 sun passes through signs of. 322

