
--- Page 1 ---
Preface

We must know the present need of human society. And what is that
need? Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to par-
ticular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the
Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one human
society. The ideals of spiritual communism, according to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human
society, nay. on the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by
great thinkers to make this a successful ideology. Srimad-Bhagavatam
will fill this need in human society. It begins, therefore. with the aphor-
ism of Vedanta philosophy (janmady asya yatah) to establish the ideal of
a common cause.

Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of obli-
vion. It has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts, educa-
tion and economic development throughout the entire world. But there is
a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large. and therefore there are
large-scale quarrels, even over less important issues. There is need of a
clue as to how humanity can become one in peace. friendship and
prosperity with a common cause. Srimad-Bhagavatam will fill this need.
for it is a cultural presentation for the re-spiritualization of the entire
human society.

Srimad-Bhagavatam should be introduced also in the schools and col-
leges, for it is recommended by the great student devotee Prahlada
Maharaja in order to change the demonic face of society.

kaumara acaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabharin manusari janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)

Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One, from whom everything
emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything is

ix


--- Page 2 ---
ॐ Srimad-Bhagavatam

merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of
creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ultimate
source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained rationally
and authoritatively in the beautiful Bhagavatam or Srimad-
Bhagavatam.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the transcendental science not only for know-
ing the ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation
with Him and our duty towards perfection of the human society on the
basis of this perfect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the
Sanskrit language, and it is now rendered into English elaborately so that
simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well, so much so
that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend himself from the
onslaught of atheists. Over and above this, the reader will be able to con-
vert others to accept God as a concrete principle.

Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Vedanta-sittra by the same author,
Srila Vyasadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the
highest state of God realization. The only qualification one needs to study
this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step
cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly as with an ordinary
book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter, one after another.
The reading matter is so arranged with its original Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration, synonyms, translation and purports so that one is
sure to become a God realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine
cantos.

The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos, because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto
without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in
twelve cantos, each independent, but it is good for all to read them in
small installments one after another.

I must admit my frailties in presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam, but still
I am hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society
on the strength of the following statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

tad vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin pratislokam abaddhavaty api


--- Page 3 ---
Preface (८1
namany anantasya yaso nkitani yac
chrnvanti gayanti grnanti sadhavah
(Bhag. 1.5.11)
“On the other hand, that literature which is full with descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, form and pastimes of the
unlimited Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant to bring
about a revolution in the impious life of a misdirected civilization. Such
transcendental literatures, even though irregularly composed, are heard,
sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.”
Ori tat sat
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


--- Page 4 ---
Introduction

“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to His own abode, accompanied by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the
dense darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this
Purana.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43)

The timeless wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human knowledge. Originally
preserved through oral tradition, the Vedas were first put into writing
five thousand years ago by Srila Vyasadeva, the “literary incarnation of
God.” After compiling the Vedas, Vyasadeva set forth their essence in
the aphorisms known as Vedanta-sitras. Srimad-Bhagavatam is
Vyasadeva’s commentary on his own Vedanta-sitras. It was written in
the maturity of his spiritual life under the direction of Narada Muni, his
spiritual master. Referred to as “the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic
literature,” Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and authoritative
exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After compiling the Bhagavatam, Vyasa impressed the synopsis of it
upon his son, the sage Sukadeva Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami subse-
quently recited the entire Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assem-
bly of learned saints on the bank of the Ganges at Hastinapura (now
Delhi). Maharaja Pariksit was the emperor of the world and was a great
rajarsi (saintly king). Having received a warning that he would die
within a week, he renounced his entire kingdom and retired to the bank
of the Ganges to fast until death and receive spiritual enlightenment.
The Bhagavatam begins with Emperor Pariksit’s sober inquiry to
Sukadeva Gosvami:

“You are the spiritual master of great saints and
devotees. I am therefore begging you to show the
way of perfection for all persons, and especially for
one who is about to die. Please let me know what a
man should hear, chant, remember and worship,
and also what he should not do. Please explain all
this to me.”

11


--- Page 5 ---
xiv Srimad-Bhagavatam

Sukadeva Gosvami’s answer to this question, and numerous other
questions posed by Maharaja Pariksit, concerning everything from the
nature of the self to the origin of the universe, held the assembled sages
in rapt attention continuously for the seven days leading to the King's
death. The sage Sata Gosvami, who was present on the bank of the
Ganges when Sukadeva Gosvami first recited Srimad-Bhagavatam, later
repeated the Bhagavatam before a gathering of sages in the forest of
Naimisaranya. Those sages, concerned about the spiritual welfare of the
people in general, had gathered to perform a long, continuous chain of
sacrifices to counteract the degrading influence of the incipient age of
Kali. In response to the sages’ request that he speak the essence of Vedic
wisdom, Sita Gosvami repeated from memory the entire eighteen thou-
sand verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit.

The reader of Srimad-Bhagavatam hears Sita Gosvami relate the
questions of Maharaja Pariksit and the answers of Sukadeva Gosvami.
Also, Sita Gosvami sometimes responds directly to questions put by
Saunaka Rsi, the spokesman for the sages gathered at Naimisaranya. One
therefore simultaneously hears two dialogues: one between Maharaja
Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami on the bank of the Ganges, and another
at Naimisaranya between Sita Gosvami and the sages at Naimisaranya
Forest, headed by Saunaka Rsi. Furthermore, while instructing King
Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami often relates historical episodes and gives
accounts of lengthy philosophical discussions between such great souls as
the saint Maitreya and his disciple Vidura. With this understanding of
the history of the Bhagavatam, the reader will easily be able to follow its
intermingling of dialogues and events from various sources. Since
philosophical wisdom, not chronological order, is most important in the
text, one need only be attentive to the subject matter of Srimad-
Bhagavatam to appreciate fully its profound message.

It should also be noted that the volumes of the Bhagavatam need not
be read consecutively, starting with the first and proceeding to the last.
The translator of this edition compares the Bhagavatam to sugar
candy —wherever you taste it. you will find it equally sweet and
relishable.

This edition of the Bhagavatam is the first complete English transla-
tion of this important text with an elaborate commentary, and it is the


--- Page 6 ---
Introduction xv
first widely available to the English-speaking public. It is the product of
the scholarly and devotional effort of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His consummate Sanskrit
scholarship and intimate familiarity with Vedic culture and thought as
well as the modern way of life combine to reveal to the West a magnifi-
cent exposition of this important classic.

Readers will find this work of value for many reasons. For those in-
terested in the classical roots of Indian civilization, it serves as a vast
reservoir of detailed information on virtually every one of its aspects.
For students of comparative philosophy and religion, the Bhagavatam
offers a penetrating view into the meaning of India’s profound spiritual
heritage. To sociologists and anthropologists, the Bhagavatam reveals the
practical workings of a peaceful and scientifically organized Vedic
culture, whose institutions were integrated on the basis of a highly
developed spiritual world view. Students of literature will discover the
Bhagavatam to be a masterpiece of majestic poetry. For students of psy-
chology, the text provides important perspectives on the nature of con-
sciousness, human behavior and the philosophical study of identity.
Finally, to those seeking spiritual insight, the Bhagavatam offers simple
and practical guidance for attainment of the highest self-knowledge and
realization of the Absolute Truth. The entire multivolume text, pre-
sented by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant
place in the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern man for a
long time to come.

—The Publishers


--- Page 7 ---
CHAPTER ONE
The History of the Life of Ajamila

Throughout Srimad-Bhagavatam there are descriptions of ten subject
matters, including creation, subsequent creation and the planetary
systems. Sukadeva Gosvami, the speaker of Srimad-Bhagavatam, has
already described creation, subsequent creation and the planetary
systems in the Third, Fourth and Fifth Cantos. Now, in this Sixth Canto,
which consists of nineteen chapters, he will describe posana, or
protection by the Lord.

The first chapter relates the history of Ajamila, who was considered a
greatly sinful man, but was liberated when four order carriers of Visnu
came to rescue him from the hands of the order carriers of Yamaraja. A
full description of how he was liberated, having been relieved of the
reactions of his sinful life, is given in this chapter. Sinful activities are
painful both in this life and in the next. We should know for certain that
the cause of all painful life is sinful action. On the path of fruitive work
one certainly commits sinful activities, and therefore according to the
considerations of karma-kanda, different types of atonement are recom-
mended. Such methods of atonement, however, do not free one from ig-
norance, which is the root of sinful life. Consequently one is prone to
commit sinful activities even after atonement, which is therefore very
inadequate for purification. On the path of speculative knowledge one
becomes free from sinful life by understanding things as they are.
Therefore the acquirement of speculative knowledge is also considered a
method of atonement. While performing fruitive activities one can be-
come free from the actions of sinful life through austerity, penance,
celibacy, control of the mind and senses, truthfulness and the practice of
mystic yoga. By awakening knowledge one may also neutralize sinful
reactions. Neither of these methods, however, can free one from the ten-
dency to commit sinful activities.

By bhakti-yoga one can completely avoid the tendency for sinful life;
other methods are not very feasible. Therefore the Vedic literature con-
cludes that devotional service is more important than the methods of

1


--- Page 8 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch.1
karma-kanda and jiana-kanda. Only the path of devotional service is
auspicious for everyone. Fruitive activities and speculative knowledge
cannot independently liberate anyone, but devotional service, indepen-
dent of karma and jiiana, is so potent that one who has fixed his mind at
the lotus feet of Krsna is guaranteed not to meet the Yamaditas, the
order carriers of Yamaraja, even in dreams. |
To prove the strength of devotional service, Sukadeva Gosvami de-
scribed the history of Ajamila. Ajamila was a resident of Kanyakubja
(the modern Kanauj). He was trained by his parents to become a perfect
brahmana by studying the Vedas and following the regulative principles,
but because of his past, this youthful brahmanra was somehow attracted
by a prostitute, and because of her association he became most fallen and
abandoned all regulative principles. Ajamila begot in the womb of the
prostitute ten sons, the last of whom was called Narayana. At the time of
Ajamila’s death, when the order carriers of Yamaraja came to take him,
he loudly called the name Narayana in fear because he was attached to
his youngest son. Thus he remembered the original Narayana, Lord
Visnu. Although he did not chant the holy name of Narayana completely
offenselessly, it acted nevertheless. As soon as he chanted the holy name
of Narayana, the order carriers of Lord Visnu immediately appeared on
the scene. A discussion ensued between the order carriers of Lord Visnu
and those of Yamarija, and by hearing that discussion Ajamila was liber-
ated. He could then understand the bad effect of fruitive activities and
could also understand how exalted is the process of devotional service.
TEXT 1
श्रीपरीक्षिदुवाच
निडत्तिमा्गः कथित आदौ भगवता यथा |
क्रमयोगोपरन्धेन ब्रह्मणा यदसंसृतिः ॥ १॥
sri-pariksid uvaca
nivrtti-margah kathita
ddau bhagavata yatha
krama-yogopalabdhena
brahmana yad asarisrtih


--- Page 9 ---
Text 1] The History of the Life of Ajamila 3
sri-pariksit uwvaca—Maharaja Pariksit said; nivrtti-margah—the path
of liberation; kathitah—described; dadau—in the beginning;
bhagavata—by Your Holiness; yatha—duly; krama—gradually; yoga-
upalabdhena—obtained by the yoga process; brahmana—along with
Lord Brahma (after reaching Brahmaloka); yat—by which way;
asarhsrtih—cessation of the repetition of birth and death.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit said: O my lord, O Sukadeva Gosvami, you
have already described [in the Second Canto] the path of liberation
[nivrtti-marga]. By following that path, one is certainly elevated
gradually to the highest planetary system, Brahmaloka, from
which one is promoted to the spiritual world along with Lord
Brahma. Thus one’s repetition of birth and death in the material
world ceases.
PURPORT
Since Maharaja Pariksit was a Vaisnava, when he heard the descrip-
tion, at the end of the Fifth Canto, of the different hellish conditions of
life, he was very much concerned with how to liberate the conditioned
souls from the clutches of maya and take them back home, back to God-
head. Therefore he reminded his spiritual master, Sukadeva Gosvami,
about the nivrtti-marga, or path of liberation, which he had described in
the Second Canto. Maharaja Pariksit, who at the time of death was fortu-
nate to have met Sukadeva Gosvami, inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami
about the path of liberation at that crucial time. Sukadeva Gosvami very
much appreciated his question and congratulated him by saying:
variyan esa te prasnah
krto loka-hitarh nrpa
atmavit-sammatah purisam
Srotavyadisu yah parah
“My dear King, your question is glorious because it is very beneficial for
all kinds of people. The answer to this question is the prime subject mat-
ter for hearing, and it is approved by all transcendentalists.”
(Bhag. 2.1.1)


--- Page 10 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1

Pariksit Maharidja was astonished that the living entities in the condi-
tional stage do not accept the path of liberation, devotional service, in-
stead of suffering in so many hellish conditions. This is the symptom of a
Vaisnava. Vaiicha-kalpa-tarubhyas ca krpa-sindhubhya eva ca: a
Vaisnava is an ocean of mercy. Para-duhkha-duhkhi: he is unhappy be-
cause of the unhappiness of others. Therefore Pariksit Maharaja, being
compassionate toward the conditioned souls suffering in hellish life, sug-
gested that Sukadeva Gosvami continue describing the path of liberation,
which he had explained in the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam. The
word ৫৩077517188 is very important in this connection. Sarsrti refers to con-
tinuing on the path of birth and death. Asamsrti, on the contrary, refers
to nivrtti-marga, or the path of liberation, by which one’s birth and death
cease and one gradually progresses to Brahmaloka, unless one is a pure
devotee who does not care about going to the higher planetary systems, in
which case one immediately returns home, back to Godhead, by execut-
ing devotional service (tyaktva deham punar janma naiti). Pariksit
Maharaja, therefore, was very eager to hear from Sukadeva Gosvami
about the path of liberation for the conditioned soul.

According to the opinion of the dcaryas, the word krama-
yogopalabdhena indicates that by first performing karma-yoga and then
Jiana-yoga and finally coming to the platform of bhakti-yoga, one can
be liberated. Bhakti-yoga, however, is so powerful that it does not
depend on karma-yoga or jiiana-yoga. Bhakti-yoga itself is so powerful
that even an impious man with no assets in karma-yoga or an illiterate
with no assets in jAiana-yoga can undoubtedly be elevated to the spiritual
world if he simply adheres to bhakti-yoga. Mam evaisyasy asamsayah.
Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (8.7) that by the process of bhakti-yoga one
undoubtedly goes back to Godhead, back home to the spiritual world.
Yogis, however, instead of going directly to the spiritual world, some-
times want to see other planetary systems, and therefore they ascend to
the planetary system where Lord Brahma lives, as indicated here by the
word brahmana. At the time of dissolution, Lord Brahma, along with all
the inhabitants of Brahmaloka, goes directly to the spiritual world. This
is confirmed in the Vedas as follows:

brahmana saha te sarve
samprapte pratisaiicare


--- Page 11 ---
Text 2] The History of the Life of Ajamila 5
parasyante krtatmanah
pravisanti pararh padam
“Because of their exalted position, those who are on Brahmaloka at the
time of dissolution go directly back home, back to Godhead, along with
Lord Brahma.”
TEXT 2
परषृ्तिलक्षणश्नैव त्रैगुण्यविषयो ने ।
५५
योऽसावलीनप्रकृते्श॑णसगंः पुनः पुनः ॥ २॥
pravrtti-laksanas caiva
traigunya-visayo mune
yo ’sav alina-prakrter
guna-sargah punah punah
pravrtti—by inclination; laksanah—symptomized; ca—also; eva—
indeed; trai-gunya—the three modes of nature; visayah—possessing as
objectives; mune—O great sage; yah—which; asau—that; alina-
prakrteh—of one who is not freed from the clutches of maya; guna-
sargah—in which there is a creation of material bodies; punah punah—
again and again.
TRANSLATION
0 great sage Sukadeva Gosvami, unless the living entity is freed
from the infection of the material modes of nature, he receives
different types of bodies in which to enjoy or suffer, and according
to the body, he is understood to have various inclinations. By
following these inclinations he traverses the path called pravrtti-
marga, by which one may be elevated to the heavenly planets, as
you have already described [in the Third Canto].
PURPORT
As Lord Krsna explains in Bhagavad-gita (9.25):
yanti deva-vrata devan
pitFn yanti pitr-vratah


--- Page 12 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
bhatani yanti bhitejya
yanti mad-yajino ’pi mam
“Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods;
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings;
those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship
Me will live with Me.” Because of the influence of the various modes of
nature, the living entities have various tendencies or propensities, and
therefore they are qualified to achieve various destinations. As long as
one is materially attached, he wants to be elevated to the heavenly
planets because of his attraction to the material world. The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead declares, however, “Those who worship Me come to
Me.” If one has no information about the Supreme Lord and His abode,
one tries to be elevated only to a higher material position, but when one
concludes that in this material world there is nothing but repeated birth
and death, he tries to return home, back to Godhead. If one attains that
destination, he need never return to this material world (yad gatva na
nivartante tad dhama [00707710171 mama). As Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
says in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 19.151):
brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija

“According to their karma, all living entities are wandering throughout
the entire universe. Some of them are being elevated to the upper plan-
etary systems, and some are going down into the lower planetary
systems. Out of many millions of wandering living entities, one who is
very fortunate gets an opportunity to associate with a bona fide spiritual
master by the grace of Krsna. By the mercy of both Krsna and the
spiritual master, such a person receives the seed of the creeper of devo-
tional service.” All living entities are rotating throughout the universe,
going sometimes up to the higher planetary systems and sometimes down
to the lower planets. This is the material disease, which is known as
pravrtti-marga. When one becomes intelligent he takes to nivrtti-marga,
the path of liberation, and thus instead of rotating within this material
world, he returns home, back to Godhead. This is necessary.


--- Page 13 ---
Text 5] The History of the Life of Ajamila 7
TEXT 3
&
अधमलक्षणा नाना नरकाध्ानुवर्णिताः |
मन्वन्तरशथ न्याख्यात आद्यः खायम्थुवो qa: ३॥
adharma-laksana nana
71070105 canuvarnitah
manvantaras$ ca vydkhyata
adyah svayambhuvo yatah
adharma-loksanah—symptomized by impious activities; nana—
+ various; narakah—hells; ca—also; anuvarnitah—have been described;
manu-antarah—the change of Manus [in one day of Brahma there are
fourteen Manus]; ca—also; vyakhyatah—has been described; adyah—
the original; svayambhuvah—directly the son of Lord Brahma; yatah—
wherein.
TRANSLATION
You have also described [at the end of the Fifth Canto] the
varieties of hellish life that result from impious activities, and you
have described [in the Fourth Canto] the first manvantara, which
was presided over by Svayambhuva Manu, the son of Lord Brahma.
TEXTS 4-5
प्रयत्रतोत्तानपदो्॑शस्तचरितानि च ।
AERIAL TATA ॥ ४॥
धरामण्डलसंस्थानं भागलक्षणमानतः |
ज्योतिषां विवराणां च यथेदमसजदिः ॥ ५ ॥
priyavratottanapador
vamsas tac-caritani ca
dvipa-varsa-samudradri-
nady-udyana-vanaspatin


--- Page 14 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
dhara-mandala-samsthanarn
bhaga-laksana-manatah

Jjyotisari vivaranan ca
yathedam asrjad vibhuh

priyavrata—of Priyavrata; uttanapadoh—and of Uttanapada; vari-
Sah—the dynasty; tat-caritani—their characteristics; ca—also; dvipa—
different planets; varsa—lands; samudra—oceans and seas; adri—
mountains; nadi—rivers; udyana—gardens; vanaspatin—and trees;
dhara-mandala—of the planet earth; sarmsthanam—situation; bhaga—
according to divisions; laksana—different symptoms; manatah—and
measurements; jyotisam—of the sun and other luminaries;
vivaranam—of the lower planetary systems; ca—and; yatha—as;
idam—this; asrjat—created; vibhuh—the Supreme Personality of God-
head.

TRANSLATION

My dear lord, you have described the dynasties and charac-
teristics of King Priyavrata and King Uttanapada. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead created this material world with various
universes, planetary systems, planets and stars, with varied lands,
seas, oceans, mountains, rivers, gardens and trees, all with dif-
ferent characteristics. These are divided among this planet earth,
the luminaries in the sky and the lower planetary systems. You
have very clearly described these planets and the living entities
who live on them.

PURPORT

Here the words yathedam asrjad vibhuh clearly indicate that the
Supreme, the great, almighty Personality of Godhead, created this entire
material world with its different varieties of planets, stars and so forth.
Atheists try to conceal the hand of God, which is present in every cre-
ation, but they cannot explain how all these creations could come into ex-
istence without a competent intelligence and almighty power behind
them. Simply to imagine or speculate is a waste of time. In Bhagavad-
gita (10.8), the Lord says, aham sarvasya prabhavo: “I am the origin of


--- Page 15 ---
Text 6] The History of the Life of Ajamila 9
everything.” Mattah sarvam pravartate: “Whatever exists in the cre-
ation emanates from Me.” Iti matva bhajante mari budha bhava-saman-
vitah: “When one fully understands that I create everything by My
omnipotence, one becomes firmly situated in devotional service and fully
surrenders at My lotus feet.” Unfortunately, the unintelligent cannot im-
mediately understand Krsna’s supremacy. Nonetheless, if they associate
with devotees and read authorized books, they may gradually come to the
proper understanding, although this may take many, many births. As
Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.19):
bahinam janmanam ante
JAdnavan mar prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah
‘After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surren-
ders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is.
Such a great soul is very rare.” Vasudeva, Krsna, is the creator of every-
thing, and His energy is displayed in various ways. As explained in
Bhagavad-gita (7.4-5), a combination of the material energy (bhamir
apo 78010 vayuh) and the spiritual energy, the living entity, exists in
every creation. Therefore the same principle, the combination of the
supreme spirit and the material elements, is the cause of the cosmic
manifestation.
TEXT 6
अधुनेह মহালান यथैव नरकानरः |
नानोग्रयातनाननेयात्न्मे व्याख्यातम्हसि || ६ ॥
adhuneha maha-bhaga
yathaiva narakan narah
nanogra-yatanan neyat
tan me vyakhyatum arhasi
adhuna —right now; iha—in this material world; maha-bhaga—0
greatly opulent and fortunate Sukadeva Gosvami; yathd—so that; eva—


--- Page 16 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
indeed; narakan—all the hellish conditions into which the impious are
put; narah—human beings; nand—varieties of; ugra—terrible;
yatanan—conditions of suffering; na iyat—may not undergo; tat—
that; me—to me; vyakhyatum arhasi—please describe.
TRANSLATION

O greatly fortunate and opulent Sukadeva Gosvami, now kindly
tell me how human beings may be saved from having to enter
hellish conditions in which they suffer terrible pains.

PURPORT

In the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Fifth Canto, Sukadeva Gosvami
has explained that people who commit sinful acts are forced to enter
hellish planets and suffer. Now Maharaja Pariksit, being a devotee, is
concerned with how this can be stopped. A Vaisnava is para-duhkha-
duhkhi; in other words, he has no personal troubles, but he is very
unhappy to see others in trouble. Prahlada Maharaja said, ‘““My Lord, I
have no personal problems, for I have learned how to glorify Your tran-
scendental qualities and thus enter a trance of ecstasy. I do have a
problem, however, for I am simply thinking of these rascals and fools
who are busy with maya-sukha, temporary happiness, without knowl-
edge of devotional service unto You.” This is the problem faced by a
Vaisnava. Because a Vaisnava fully takes shelter of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, he personally has no problems, but because he is
compassionate toward the fallen, conditioned souls, he is always thinking
of plans to save them from their hellish life in this body and the next.
Pariksit Maharaja, therefore, anxiously wanted to know from Sukadeva
Gosvami how humanity can be saved from gliding down to hell.
Sukadeva Gosvami had already explained how people enter hellish life,
and he could also explain how they could be saved from it. Intelligent
men must take advantage of these instructions. Unfortunately, however,
the entire world is lacking Krsna consciousness, and therefore people are
suffering from the grossest ignorance and do not even believe in a life
after this one. To convince them of their next life is very difficult be-
cause they have become almost mad in their pursuit of material enjoy-
ment. Nevertheless, our duty, the duty of all sane men, is to save them.
Maharaja Pariksit is the representative of one who can save them.


--- Page 17 ---
Text 7] The History of the Life of Ajamila 11
TEXT 7
fia उवाच
न॒ चेदिहैवापचितिं यथांहसः
हृतस्य ङुयोन्पनरउक्तपाणिभिः |
gd स ¥ प्रेत्य नरकानुपैति
ये fda मे मवतस्तिममयातनाः ॥ ७॥
sri-suka wvaca
na ced thaivapacitirh yatharmhasah
krtasya kuryan mana-ukta-panibhih
dhruvar sa vai pretya narakan upaiti
ye kirtita me bhavatas tigma-yatanah
sri-Sukah uvaca—Srila Sukadeva Gosvami said; na—not; cet—if;
tha—within this life; eva—certainly; apacitim —counteraction, atone-
ment; yatha—duly; arhasah krtasya—when one has performed sinful
activities; kuryat—performs; manah—with the mind; ukta—words;
panibhih—and with the senses; dhruvam —undoubtedly; sah —that per-
son; vai—indeed; pretya—after death; narakan—different varieties of
hellish conditions; upaiti—attains; ye —which: kirtitah—were already
described; me —by me; bhavatah—unto you; tigma-yatanah—in which
there is very terrible suffering.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami replied: My dear King, if before one’s next
death whatever impious acts one has performed in this life with his
mind, words and body are not counteracted through proper atone-
ment according to the description of the Manu-sarhhita and other
dharma-§astras, one will certainly enter the hellish planets after
death and undergo terrible suffering, as I have previously
described to you.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura mentions that although
Maharaja Pariksit was a pure devotee, Sukadeva Gosvami did not


--- Page 18 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
immediately speak to him about the strength of devotional service. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):
mari ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhityaya kalpate
Devotional service is so strong that if one fully surrenders to Krsna and
takes fully to His devotional service, the reactions of his sinful life
immediately stop.

Elsewhere in the Gita (18.66), Lord Krsna urges that one give up all
other duties and surrender to Him, and He promises, ahari tvam sarva-
papebhyo moksayisyami: ‘I shall free you from all sinful reactions and
give you liberation.” Therefore in response to the inquiries of Pariksit
Maharaja, Sukadeva Gosvami, his guru, could have immediately ex-
plained the principle of bhakti, but to test Pariksit Maharaja’s intelli-
gence, he first prescribed atonement according to karma-kanda, the path
of fruitive activities. For karma-kanda there are eighty authorized scrip-
tures, such as Manu-samhita, which are known as dharma-sastras. In
these scriptures one is advised to counteract his sinful acts by performing
other types of fruitive action. This was the path first recommended by
Sukadeva Gosvami to Maharaja Pariksit, and actually it is a fact that one

) 94
who does not take to devotional service must follow the decision of these
scriptures by performing pious acts to counteract his impious acts. This is
known as atonement.
TEXT 8
EY
तखात्पुरं बाशिह॒  पापनिष्ढतौ
यतेत॒ FERRERS |
दोषस्य TM गुरुलाघवं यथा
भिषक्‌ चिकित्सत रुजां निदानवित्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
tasmat puraivasv iha papa-niskrtau
yateta mrtyor avipadyatatmana


--- Page 19 ---
Text 8] The History of the Life of Ajamila 13
dosasya drstva guru-laghavar yatha
bhisak cikitseta rujar nidanavit

tasmat—therefore; pura—before; eva—indeed; asu—very quickly;
tha—in this life; papa-niskrtau—to become free from the reaction of
sinful activities; yateta—one should endeavor; mrtyoh—death;
avipadyata—not troubled by disease and old age; atmand—with a body;
dosasya—of the sinful activities; drstvda—estimating; guru-laghavam—
the heaviness or lightness; yatha—just like; bhisak—a physician; cikit-
seta—would treat; rujam—of disease; nidana-vit—one who is expert in
diagnosis.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, before one’s next death comes, as long as one’s body
is strong enough, one should quickly adopt the process of atone-
ment according to $astra; otherwise one’s time will be lost, and the
reactions of his sins will increase. As as expert physician diagnoses
and treats a disease according to its gravity, one should undergo
atonement according to the severity of one’s sins.

PURPORT

The dharma-sastras like the Manu-sarhhitd prescribe that a man who
has committed murder should be hanged and his own life sacrificed in
atonement. Previously this system was followed all over the world, but
since people are becoming atheists, they are stopping capital punishment.
This is not wise. Herein it is said that a physician who knows how to diag-
nose a disease prescribes medicine accordingly. If the disease is very
serious, the medicine must be strong. The weight of a murderer’s sin is
very great, and therefore according to Manu-sarihita a murderer must
be killed. By killing a murderer the government shows mercy to him be-
cause if a murderer is not killed in this life, he will be killed and forced
to suffer many times in future lives. Since people do not know about the
next life and the intricate workings of nature, they manufacture their
own laws, but they should properly consult the established injunctions of
the $astras and act accordingly. In India even today the Hindu com-
munity often takes advice from expert scholars regarding how to


--- Page 20 ---
14 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
counteract sinful activities. In Christianity also there is a process of con-
fession and atonement. Therefore atonement is required, and atonement
must be undergone according to the gravity of one’s sinful acts.
TEXT 9
श्री राजोवाच
खष्टश्वुताभ्यां यत्पापं जानन्नप्यात्मनोऽदितम्‌ |
करोति भूयो विवशः matin कथम्‌ । ९ ॥
Sri-rajovdca
drsta-srutabhyam yat [00700 77
Jjanann apy atmano ’hitam
karoti bhiiyo vivasah
prayascittam atho katham
$ri-rgja uvaca—Pariksit Maharaja replied; drsta—by seeing; Sru-
tabhyam—also by hearing (from the scriptures or lawbooks); yat—
since; papam—sinful, criminal action; janan—knowing; api—al-
though; atmanah—of his self; ahitam—injurious; karoti—he acts;
bhizyah—again and again; vivasah—unable to control himself;
prayascittam —atonement; atho—therefore; katham—what is the value
of.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit said: One may know that sinful activity is in-
jurious for him because he actually sees that a criminal is punished
by the government and rebuked by people in general and because
he hears from scriptures and learned scholars that one is thrown
into hellish conditions in the next life for committing sinful acts.
Nevertheless, in spite of such knowledge, one is forced to commit
sins again and again, even after performing acts of atonement.
Therefore, what is the value of such atonement?
PURPORT
In some religious sects a sinful man goes to a priest to confess his sin-
ful acts and pay a fine, but then he again commits the same sins and


--- Page 21 ---
Text 10] The History of the Life of Ajamila 15
returns to confess them again. This is the practice of a professional sin-
ner. Pariksit Maharaja’s observations indicate that even five thousand
years ago it was the practice of criminals to atone for their crimes but
then commit the same crimes again, as if forced to do so. Therefore,
owing to his practical experience, Pariksit Maharaja saw that the process
of repeatedly sinning and atoning is pointless. Regardless of how many
times he is punished, one who is attached to sense enjoyment will commit
sinful acts again and again until he is trained to refrain from enjoying his
senses. The word vivasa is used herein, indicating that even one who
does not want to commit sinful acts will be forced to do so by habit.
Pariksit Maharaja therefore considered the process of atonement to have
little value for saving one from sinful acts. In the following verse he
further explains his rejection of this process.
TEXT 10
क्षविभियततेऽभद्रात्कचिखरति qm: ।
-
प्रायित्तमथो ऽपार्थं॑मन्ये FREE ॥१०॥
kvacin nivartate "bhadrat
kvacic carati tat punah
prayascittam atho ’parthariu
manye kuijara-saucavat
kvacit—sometimes; nivartate—ceases; abhadrat—from sinful ac-
tivity; kvacit—sometimes; carati—commits; tat—that (sinful activity);
punah—again; prayascittam—the process of atonement; atho—
therefore; apartham—useless; manye—I consider; kufAjara-sauca-
vat—exactly like the bathing of an elephant.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes one who is very alert so as not to commit sinful acts is

victimized by sinful life again. I therefore consider this process of
repeated sinning and atoning to be useless. It is like the bathing of
an elephant, for an elephant cleanses itself by taking a full bath,
but then throws dust over its head and body as soon as it returns to
the land.


--- Page 22 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
PURPORT

When Pariksit Maharaja inquired how a human being could free him-
self from sinful activities so as not to be forced to go to hellish planetary
systems after death, Sukadeva Gosvami answered that the process of
counteracting sinful life is atonement. In this way Sukadeva Gosvami
tested the intelligence of Maharaja Pariksit, who passed the examination
by refusing to accept this process as genuine. Now Pariksit Maharaja is
expecting another answer from his spiritual master, Sukadeva Gosvami.

TEXT 11
श्रीवादरायणिरुवास
कर्मणा कर्मनिहीरो न द्यात्यन्तिक इष्यते |
अविद्रदधिकारित्वात्ममायधित्तं॑विमर्शनम्‌ ne
sri-badarayanir ८४९८०
karmana karma-nirharo
na hy atyantika isyate
avidvad-adhikaritat
prayascittari vimarsanam

sri-badarayanih uvdca—Sukadeva Gosvami, the son of Vyasadeva,
replied; karmand—Dby fruitive activities; karma-nirharah—counterac-
tion of fruitive activities; na—not; hi—indeed; atyantikah—final;
isyate—becomes possible; avidvat-adhikaritvat—from being without
knowledge; prayascittam—real atonement; vimarsanam—full knowl-
edge of Vedanta.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami, the son of Vedavyasa, answered: My dear
King, since acts meant to neutralize impious actions are also
fruitive, they will not release one from the tendency to act
fruitively. Persons who subject themselves to the rules and regula-
tions of atonement are not at all intelligent. Indeed, they are in the
mode of darkness. Unless one is freed from the mode of ig-
norance, trying to counteract one action through another is use-
less because this will not uproot one’s desires. Thus even though


--- Page 23 ---
Text 11] The History of the Life of Ajamila 17
one may superficially seem pious, he will undoubtedly be prone to
act impiously. Therefore real atonement is enlightenment in per-
fect knowledge, Vedanta, by which one understands the Supreme
Absolute Truth.
PURPORT

The guru, Sukadeva Gosvami, has examined Pariksit Maharaja, and it
appears that the King has passed one phase of the examination by reject-
ing the process of atonement because it involves fruitive activities. Now
Sukadeva Gosvami is suggesting the platform of speculative knowledge.
Progressing from karma-kanda to jAana-kanda, he is proposing,
prayascittarn vimarsanam: ‘Real atonement is full knowledge.” Vimar-
Sana refers to the cultivation of speculative knowledge. In Bhagavad-
gita, karmis, who are lacking in knowledge, are compared to asses. Krsna
says in Bhagavad-gita (7.15):

na mam duskrtino midhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jiana
asurarin bhavam asritah

“Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind,
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic
nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.” Thus karmis who engage
in sinful acts and who do not know the true objective of life are called
mudhas, asses. Vimarsana, however, is also explained in Bhagavad-gita
(15.15), where Krsna says, vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah: the pur-
pose of Vedic study is to understand the Supreme Personality of God-
head. If one studies Vedanta but merely advances somewhat in specula-
tive knowledge and does not understand the Supreme Lord, one remains
the same midha. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.19), one attains real
knowledge when he understands Krsna and surrenders unto Him
(bahinarh janmanam ante jignavan mar prapadyate). To become
learned and free from material contamination, therefore, one should try
to understand Krsna, for thus one is immediately liberated from all pious
and impious activities and their reactions.


--- Page 24 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
TEXT 12
नारनतः पथ्यमेवान्नं व्याधयोऽभिभवन्ति दि।
एवं नियमदद्रानन्‌ शनैः क्षेमाय कल्यते 1220
nasnatah pathyam evannam
vyadhayo ’bhibhavanti hi
evari niyamakrd rajan
Sanaih ksemaya kalpate

na—not; asnatah—those who eat: pathyam—suitable; eva—indeed;
annam—food; vyadhayah—different types of disease; abhibhavanti—
overcome; hi—indeed; evam—similarly; niyama-krt—one following
regulative principles; rajan—O King; Sanaih—gradually; ksemaya—
for well-being; kalpate —becomes fit.

TRANSLATION

My dear King, if a diseased person eats the pure, uncontami-
nated food prescribed by a physician, he is gradually cured, and
the infection of disease can no longer touch him. Similarly, if one
follows the regulative principles of knowledge, he gradually
progresses toward liberation from material contamination.

PURPORT

One is gradually purified if one cultivates knowledge, even through
mental speculation, and strictly follows the regulative principles enjoined
in the $astras and explained in the next verse. Therefore the platform of
Jaana, speculative knowledge, is better than the platform of karma,
fruitive action. There is every chance of falling from the platform of
karma to hellish conditions, but on the platform of jiana one is saved
from hellish life, although one is still not completely free from infection.
The difficulty is that on the platform of [दद one thinks that he has
been liberated and has become Narayana, or Bhagavan. This is another
phase of ignorance.

ye ‘nye ’ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah


--- Page 25 ---
Text 14] The History of the Life of Ajamila 19
aruhya krcchrena [00707 padam tatah
patanty adho ’nadrta-yusmad-arighrayah
(Bhag. 10.2.32)
Because of ignorance, one speculatively thinks himself liberated from
material contamination although actually he is not. Therefore even if one
rises to brahma-jaana, understanding of Brahman, one nevertheless
falls down because of not taking shelter of the lotus feet of Krsna. None-
theless, janis at least know what is sinful and what is pious, and they
very cautiously act according to the injunctions of the Sastras.
TEXTS 13-14
तपसा ब्रह्मचर्येण शमेन च दमेन च।
त्यागेन सत्यशो चाभ्यां यमेन नियमेन वा ॥१२॥
देष्वाग्बुद्धिजं धीरा धर्मज्ञा श्रद्धयान्विताः |
क्षिषन्त्यधं महदपि वेणुगुरममिवानलः ॥ १४॥
tapasa brahmacaryena
Samena ca damena ca
tyagena satya-Saucabhyarm
yamena niyamena va
deha-vag-buddhijarn dhira
dharmajiah sraddhayanvitah
ksipanty agharh mahad api
venu-gulmam ivanalah
tapasa—by austerity or voluntary rejection of material enjoyment;
brahmacaryena—by celibacy (the first austerity); samena —by controll
ing the mind; ca—and; damena—by fully controlling the senses; ca—
also; tyagena—by voluntarily giving charity to good causes; satya —by
truthfulness; Saucabhyam—and by following regulative principles to
keep oneself internally and externally clean; yamena—by avoiding
cursing and violence; niyamena—by regularly chanting the holy name
of the Lord; va—and; deha-vak-buddhi-jam—performed by the body,


--- Page 26 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
words and intelligence; dhirah—those who are sober; dharma-jiiah—
fully imbued with knowledge of religious principles; sraddhaya an-
vitah—endowed with faith; ksipanti—destroy; agham—all kinds of sin-
ful activities; mahat api—although very great and abominable; venu-
gulmam—the dried creepers beneath a bamboo tree; iva—like;
analah—fire.
TRANSLATION

To concentrate the mind, one must observe a life of celibacy and
not fall down. One must undergo the austerity of voluntarily giv-
ing up sense enjoyment. One must then control the mind and
senses, give charity, be truthful, clean and nonviolent, follow the
regulative principles and regularly chant the holy name of the
Lord. Thus a sober and faithful person who knows the religious
principles is temporarily purified of all sins performed with his
body, words and mind. These sins are like the dried leaves of
creepers beneath a bamboo tree, which may be burned by fire al-
though their roots remain to grow again at the first opportunity.

PURPORT

Tapah is explained in the smrti-Sastra as follows: manasas
cendriyanam ca aikagryari paramarm tapah. “Complete control of the
mind and senses and their complete concentration on one kind of activity
is called tapah.”” Our Krsna consciousness movement is teaching people
how to concentrate the mind on devotional service. This is first-class
tapah. Brahmacarya, the life of celibacy, has eight aspects: one should
not think of women, speak about sex life, dally with women, look
lustfully at women, talk intimately with women or decide to engage in
sexual intercourse, nor should one endeavor for sex life or engage in sex
life. One should not even think of women or look at them, to say nothing
of talking with them. This is called first-class brahmacarya. If a
brahmacari or sannyasi talks with a woman in a secluded place,
naturally there will be a possibility of sex life without anyone’s knowl-
edge. Therefore a complete brahmacari practices just the opposite. If one
is a perfect brahmacari, he can very easily control the mind and senses,
give charity, speak truthfully and so forth. To begin, however, one must
control the tongue and the process of eating.


--- Page 27 ---
Text 14] The History of the Life of Ajamila 21
In the bhakti-marga, the path of devotional service, one must strictly
follow the regulative principles by first controlling the tongue (sevon-
mukhe hi jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah). The tongue (jikva) can
be controlled if one chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, does not speak
of any subjects other than those concerning Krsna and does not taste any-
thing not offered to Krsna. If one can control the tongue in this way,
brahmacarya and other purifying processes will automatically follow. It
will be explained in the next verse that the path of devotional service is
completely perfect and is therefore superior to the path of fruitive ac-
tivities and the path of knowledge. Quoting from the Vedas, Srila
Viraraghava Acarya explains that austerity involves observing fasts as
fully as possible (tapasandsakena). Srila Rapa Gosvami has also advised
that atyahara, too much eating, is an impediment to advancement in
spiritual life. Also, in Bhagavad-gita (6.17) Krsna says:
yuktahara-viharasya
yukta-cestasya karmasu
yukta-svapnavabodhasya
208০ bhavati duhkha-ha
“He who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working and
recreation can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga system.”
In text 14 the word dhirah, meaning “those who are undisturbed
under all circumstances,” is very significant. Krsna tells Arjuna in
Bhagavad-gita (2.14):
matra-sparsas tu kaunteya
sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah
agamapayino 711৫5
tams titiksasva bharata
““O son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and dis-
tress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and
disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense per-
ception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without
being disturbed.” In material life there are many disturbances (adhyat-
mika, adhidaivika and adhibhautika). One who has learned to tolerate
these disturbances under all circumstances is called dhira.


--- Page 28 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
TEXT 15
केचित्केवलया भक्त्या वापुदेवपरायणाः |
अघं धुन्वन्ति कार्स्न्येन नीहारमिव मास्करः॥ १५॥
kecit kevalaya bhaktya
vasudeva-parayanah
aghari dhunvanti kartsnyena
nitharam iva bhaskarah
kecit—some people; kevalaya bhaktya—by executing unalloyed devo-
tional service; vasudeva—to Lord Krsna, the all-pervading Supreme
Personality of Godhead; parayanah—completely attached (only to such
service, without dependence on austerity, penance, cultivation of knowl-
edge or pious activities); agham—all kinds of sinful reactions; dhun-
vanti—destroy; kartsnyena—completely (with no possibility that sinful
desires will revive); ntharam—fog; iva—like; bhaskarah—the sun.
TRANSLATION
Only a rare person who has adopted complete, unalloyed devo-
tional service to Krsna can uproot the weeds of sinful actions with
no possibility that they will revive. He can do this simply by dis-
charging devotional service, just as the sun can immediately
dissipate fog by its rays.
PURPORT
In the previous verse Sukadeva Gosvami gave the example that the
dried leaves of creepers beneath a bamboo tree may be completely burnt
to ashes by a fire, although the creepers may sprout again because the
root is still in the ground. Similarly, because the root of sinful desire is
not destroyed in the heart of a person who is cultivating knowledge but
who has no taste for devotional service, there is a possibility that his sin-
ful desires will reappear. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.4):
Sreyah-srtirn bhaktim udasya te vibho
klisyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye


--- Page 29 ---
Text 15] The History of the Life of Ajamila 23
Speculators who undergo great labor to gain a meticulous understanding
of the material world by distinguishing between sinful and pious ac-
tivities, but who are not situated in devotional service are prone to ma-
terial activities. They may fall down and become implicated in fruitive
activities. If one becomes attached to devotional service, however, his
desires for material enjoyment are automatically vanquished without
separate endeavor. Bhaktih paresanubhavo viraktir anyatra ca: if one
is advanced in Krsna consciousness, material activities, both sinful and
pious, automatically become distasteful to him. That is the test of Krsna
consciousness. Both pious and impious activities are actually due to ig-
norance because a living entity, as an eternal servant of Krsna, has no
need to act for his personal sense gratification. Therefore as soon as one
is reclaimed to the platform of devotional service, he relinquishes his at-
tachment for pious and impious activities and is interested only in what
will satisfy Krsna. This process of bhakti, devotional service to Krsna
(vasudeva-parayana), relieves one from the reactions of all activities.
_ Since Maharaja Pariksit was a great devotee, the answers of his guru,
Sukadeva Gosvami, concerning karma-kanda and jiiana-kanda could
not satisfy him. Therefore Sukadeva Gosvami, knowing very well the
heart of his disciple, explained the transcendental bliss of devotional ser-
vice. The word kecit, which is used in this verse, means, “a few people
but not all.” Not everyone can become Krsna conscious. As Krsna
explains in Bhagavad-gita (7.3):

manusyanar sahasresu

kascid yatati siddhaye
yatatam api siddhanarn
kascin mam vetti tattvatah

“Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection,
and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in
truth.” Practically no one understands Krsna as He is, for Krsna cannot
be understood through pious activities or attainment of the most elevated
speculative knowledge. Actually the highest knowledge consists of
understanding Krsna. Unintelligent men who do not understand Krsna
are grossly puffed up, thinking that they are liberated or have them-
selves become Krsna or Narayana. This is ignorance.


--- Page 30 ---
24 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1

To indicate the purity of bhakti, devotional service, Srila Rupa
Gosvami says in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11):

anyabhilasita-sanyarn
Jjiana-karmady-anavrtam
anukilyena krsnanu-
Silanari bhaktir uttama
“One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devo-
tional service.” Srila Rapa Gosvami further explains that bhakti is klesa-
ghni subhada, which means if one takes to devotional service, all kinds
of unnecessary labor and material distress cease entirely and one
achieves all good fortune. Bhakti is so powerful that it is also said to be
moksa-laghutakrt; in other words, it minimizes the importance of
liberation.

Nondevotees must undergo material hardships because they are prone
to commit sinful fruitive activities. The desire to commit sinful actions
continues in their hearts due to ignorance. These sinful actions are
divided into three categories— pataka, maha-pataka and atipataka—
and also into two divisions: prarabdha and aprarabdha. Prarabdha
refers to sinful reactions from which one is suffering at the present, and
aprarabdha refers to sources of potential suffering. When the seeds
(bija) of sinful reactions have not yet fructified, the reactions are called
aprarabdha. These seeds of sinful action are unseen, but they are un-
limited, and no one can trace when they were first planted. Because of
prarabdha, sinful reactions that have already fructified, one is seen to
have taken birth in a low family or to be suffering from other miseries.

When one takes to devotional service, however, all phases of sinful
life, including prarabdha, aprarabdha and bija, are vanquished. In
Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.14.19) Lord Krsna tells Uddhava:

yathagnih susamrddharcih
karoty edharsi bhasmasat

tatha mad-visaya bhaktir
uddhavainarisi krtsnasah


--- Page 31 ---
Text 15] The History of the Life of Ajamila 25
“My dear Uddhava, devotional service in relationship with Me is like a
blazing fire that can burn to ashes all the fuel of sinful activities supplied
to it.” How devotional service vanquishes the reactions of sinful life is
explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.6) in a verse spoken during
Lord Kapiladeva’s instructions to His mother, Devahiti. Devahuti said:
yan-namadheya-sravananukirtanad
yat-prahvanad yat-smaranad api kvacit
$vado ‘pi sadyah savanaya kalpate
kutah punas te bhagavan nu darsanat
“My dear Lord, if even a person born in a family of dog-eaters hears and
repeats the chanting of Your glories, offers respects to You and remem-
bers You, he is immediately greater than a brahmana and is therefore
eligible to perform sacrifices. Therefore, what is to be said of one who
has seen You directly?”

In the Padma Purana there is a statement that persons whose hearts
are always attached to the devotional service of Lord Visnu are im-
mediately released from all the reactions of sinful life. These reactions
generally exist in four phases. Some of them are ready to produce results
immediately, some are in the form of seeds, some are unmanifested, and
some are current. All such reactions are immediately nullified by devo-
tional service. When devotional service is present in one’s heart, desires
to perform sinful activities have no place there. Sinful life is due to ig-
norance, which means forgetfulness of one’s constitutional position as an
eternal servant of God, but when one is fully Krsna conscious he realizes
that he is God’s eternal servant.

In this regard, Srila Jiva Gosvami comments that bhakti may be
divided into two divisions: (1) santata, devotional service that continues
incessantly with faith and love, and (2) kadacitki, devotional service
that does not continue incessantly but is sometimes awakened. Inces-
santly flowing devotional service (santatd) may also be divided into two
categories: (1) service performed with slight attachment and
(2) spontaneous devotional service. Intermittent devotional service
(kadacitki) may be divided into three categories: (1) ragabhasamayi,
devotional service in which one is almost attached, (2) ragabhasa-
sunya-svarupa-bhiita, devotional service in which there is no spon-
taneous love but one likes the constitutional position of serving, and


--- Page 32 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
(3) abhasa-ripa, a slight glimpse of devotional service. As for atone-
ment, if one has caught even a slight glimpse of devotional service, all
needs to undergo prayascitta, atonement, are superseded. Therefore
atonement is certainly unnecessary when one has achieved spontaneous
love and, above that, attachment with love, which are signs of increasing
advancement in kadacitki. Even in the stage of abhdsa-ripa bhakti, all
the reactions of sinful life are uprooted and vanquished. Srila Jiva
Gosvami expresses the opinion that the word kdrtsnyena means that even
if one has a desire to commit sinful actions, the roots of that desire are
vanquished merely by abhasa-ripa bhakti. The example of bhaskara,
the sun, is most appropriate. The abhasa feature of bhakti 15 compared to
twilight, and the accumulation of one’s sinful activities is compared to
fog. Since fog does not spread throughout the sky, the sun need do no
more than merely manifest its first rays, and the fog immediately disap-
pears. Similarly, if one has even a slight relationship with devotional ser-
vice, all the fog of his sinful life is immediately vanquished.
TEXT 16
न तथा IW राजन्‌ पूयेत तपआदिभिः |
यथा दछृष्णार्पितप्राणस्तत्पुरुषनिषेवया ॥१६॥
na tatha hy aghavan rajan
puyeta tapa-adibhih
yatha krsnarpita-pranas
tat-purusa-nisevayda
na—not; tatha—so much; hi—certainly; agha-van—a man full of
sinful activities; rajan—O King; piiyeta—can become purified; tapah-
adibhih—by executing the principles of austerity, penance,
brahmacarya and other purifying processes; yatha—as much as; krsna-
arpita-pranah—the devotee whose life is fully Krsna conscious; tat-
purusa-nisevaya—by engaging his life in the service of Krsna’s repre-
sentative.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, if a sinful person engages in the service of a bona
fide devotee of the Lord and thus learns how to dedicate his life


--- Page 33 ---
Text 16] The History of the Life of Ajamila 27
unto the lotus feet of Krsna, he can be completely purified. One
cannot be purified merely by undergoing austerity, penance,
brahmacarya and the other methods of atonement I have
previously described.
PURPORT

Tat-purusa refers to a preacher of Krsna consciousness, such as the
spiritual master. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has said, chadiya
vaisnava-sevd nistara pdayeche 1০০03: “Without serving a bona fide
spiritual master, an ideal Vaisnava, who can be delivered from the
clutches of maya?” This idea is also expressed in many other places.
Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.2) says, mahat-sevam dvaram ahur vimukteh:
if one desires liberation from the clutches of mayd, one must associate
with a pure devotee mahatma. A mahatma is one who engages twenty-
four hours daily in the loving service of the Lord. As Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (9.13):

mahdatmanas tu mar partha
daivirh prakrtim asritah
bhajanty ananya-manaso
70/02 bhiatadim avyayam

“0 son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under
the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional
service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
original and inexhaustible.” Thus the symptom of a mahatma is that he
has no engagement other than service to Krsna. One must render service
to a Vaisnava in order to get freed from sinful reactions, revive one’s
original Krsna consciousness and be trained in how to love Krsna. This is
the result of mahatma-seva. Of course, if one engages in the service of a
pure devotee, the reactions of one’s sinful life are vanquished auto-
matically. Devotional service is necessary not to drive away an insignifi-
cant stock of sins, but to awaken our dormant love for Krsna. As fog is
vanquished at the first glimpse of sunlight, one’s sinful reactions are
automatically vanquished as soon as one begins serving a pure devotee;
no separate endeavor is required.


--- Page 34 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
The word krsnarpita-pranah refers to a devotee who dedicates his life
to serving Krsna, not to being saved from the path to hellish life. A devo-
tee is narayana-parayana, or vasudeva-parayana, which means that the
path of Vasudeva, or the devotional path, is his life and soul. Narayana-
parah sarve na kutascana bibhyati (Bhag. 6.17.28): such a devotee is
not afraid of going anywhere. There is a path toward liberation in the
higher planetary systems and a path toward the hellish planets, but a
narayana-para devotee is unafraid wherever he is sent; he simply wants
to remember Krsna, wherever he may be. Such a devotee is unconcerned
with hell and heaven; he is simply attached to rendering service to
Krsna. When a devotee is put into hellish conditions, he accepts them as
Krsna’s mercy: tat te ‘nukampari susamiksamanah (Bhag. 10.14.8). He
does not protest, “Oh, I am such a great devotee of Krsna. Why have I
been put into this misery?” Instead he thinks, “This 15 Krsna’s mercy.”
Such an attitude is possible for a devotee who engages in the service of
Krsna’s representative. This is the secret of success.
TEXT 17
= ह्ययं रोके पन्थाः क्षेमोऽकुतोभयः |
सुशीलाः साधवो यत्र नारायणपरायणाः ॥ १७।।
sadhricino hy ayarn loke
panthah ksemo ’kuto-bhayah
susilah sadhavo yatra
narayana-parayanah
sadhricinah—just appropriate; hi—certainly; ayam—this; loke—in
the world; panthah—path; ksemah—auspicious; akutah-bhayah—
without fear; su-stlah—well-behaved; sadhavah—-saintly persons;
yatra—wherein; narayana-parayanah—those who have taken the path
of Narayana, devotional service, as their life and soul.
TRANSLATION
The path followed by pure devotees, who are well-behaved and
fully endowed with the best qualifications, is certainly the most
auspicious path in this material world. It is free from fear, and it is
authorized by the $astras.


--- Page 35 ---
Text 18] The History of the Life of Ajamila 29
PURPORT

One should not think that the person who takes to bhakti is one who
cannot perform the ritualistic ceremonies recommended in the karma-
kanda section of the Vedas or is not sufficiently educated to speculate on
spiritual subjects. Mayavadis generally allege that the bhakti path is for
women and illiterates. This is a groundless accusation. The bhakti path is
followed by the most learned scholars, such as the Gosvamis, Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Ramainujacarya. These are the actual
followers of the bhakti path. Regardless of whether or not one is educated
or aristocratic, one must follow in their footsteps. Mahdjano yena gatah
sa panthah: one must follow the path of the mahajanas. The mahajanas
are those who have taken to the path of devotional service (susilah
sadhavo yatra narayana-parayanah), for these great personalities are
the perfect persons. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.18.12):

yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surah
“One who has unflinching devotion to the Personality of Godhead has all
the good qualities of the demigods.”” The less intelligent, however, mis-
understand the bhakti path and therefore allege that it is for one who
cannot execute ritualistic ceremonies or speculate. As confirmed here by
the word sadhricinah, bhakti is the path that is appropriate, not the paths
of karma-kanda and jiana-kanda. Mayavadis may be susilah sadhavah
(well-behaved saintly persons), but there is nevertheless some doubt
about whether they are actually making progress, for they have not ac-
cepted the path of bhakti. On the other hand, those who follow the path
of the acaryas are susilah and sadhavah, but furthermore their path is
akuto-bhaya, which means free from fear. One should fearlessly follow
the twelve mahdjanas and their line of disciplic succession and thus be
liberated from the clutches of maya.
TEXT 18
प्रायथित्तानि चीर्णानि नारायणपराङयुखम्‌ |
न निष्पुनन्ति राजेन्दर सुराङ्कम्भमिवापगाः ॥ १८॥


--- Page 36 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
prayascittani cirnani
narayana-paranmukham
na nispunanti rajendra
sura-kumbham ivapagah
prayascittani—processes of atonement; cirnani—very nicely per-
formed; narayana-paranmukham—a nondevotee; na nispunanti—can-
not purify; rajendra—O King; sura-kumbham—a pot containing liquor;
iva—like; apa-gah—the waters of the rivers.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, as a pot containing liquor cannot be purified even
if washed in the waters of many rivers, nondevotees cannot be
purified by processes of atonement even if they perform them very
well.
PURPORT
To take advantage of the methods of atonement, one must be at least
somewhat devoted; otherwise there is no chance of one’s being purified.
It is clear from this verse that even those who take advantage of karma-
kanda and jiiana-kanda, but are not at least slightly devoted cannot be
purified simply by following these other paths. The word prayascittani is
plural in number to indicate both karma-kanda and jiana-kanda.
Narottama dasa Thakura therefore says, karma-kanda, jiana-kanda,
kevala visera bhanda. Thus Narottama dasa Thakura compares the paths
of karma-kanda and jiana-kanda to pots of poison. Liquor and poison
are in the same category. According to this verse from Srimad-
Bhagavatam, a person who has heard a good deal about the path of devo-
tional service, but who is not attached to it, who is not Krsna conscious, is
like a pot of liquor. Such a person cannot be purified without at least a
slight touch of devotional service.
TEXT 19
(९
सछृन्मनः दृष्णपद्‌रविन्द्यो-
निवेशितं तद्गुणरागि यैरिह ।


--- Page 37 ---
Text 19] The History of the Life of Ajamila 31
न ते यमं पाश्ञभृतश्च तद्धटान्‌
0
was पश्यन्ति हि Tofranil
sakrn manah krsna-padaravindayor
nivesitarh tad-guna-ragi yair tha
na te yamarn pasa-bhrtas ca tad-bhatan
svapne ‘pi pasyanti hi cirna-niskrtah
.
sakrt—once only; manah—the mind; krsna-pade-aravindayoh—
unto the two lotus feet of Lord Krsna; nivesitam—completely surren-
dered; tat—of Krsna; guna-ragi—which is somewhat attached to the
qualities, name, fame and paraphernalia; yaih—by whom; iha—in this
world; na—not; te—such persons; yamam— Yamarija, the superinten-
dent of death; pasa-bhrtah —those who carry ropes (to catch sinful per-
sons); ca—and; tat—his; bhatan—order carriers; svapne api—even in
dreams; pasSyanti—see; hi—indeed; cirna-niskrtah—who have per-
formed the right type of atonement.
TRANSLATION
Although not having fully realized Krsna, persons who have
even once surrendered completely unto His lotus feet and who
have become attracted to His name, form, qualities and pastimes
are completely freed of all sinful reactions, for they have thus ac-
cepted the true method of atonement. Even in dreams, such sur-
rendered souls do not see Yamaraja or his order carriers, who are
equipped with ropes to bind the sinful.
PURPORT
Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (18.66):
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam Saranarm vraja
aham 1৮৫71) sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma Sucah


--- Page 38 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.” This same principle is
described here (sakrn manah krsna-padaravindayoh). If by studying
Bhagavad-gita one decides to surrender to Krsna, he is immediately
freed from all sinful reactions. It is also significant that Sukadeva
Gosvami, having several times repeated the words vasudeva-parayana
and ndarayana-parayana, finally says krsna-padaravindayoh. Thus he
indicates that Krsna is the origin of both Narayana and Vasudeva. Even
though Narayana and Vasudeva are not different from Krsna, simply by
surrendering to Krsna one fully surrenders to all His expansions, such as
Narayana, Vasudeva and Govinda. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita
(7.7), mattah [00270107071 nanyat: “There is no truth superior to Me.”
There are many names and forms of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, but Krsna is the supreme form (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam).
Therefore Krsna recommends to neophyte devotees that one should sur-
render unto Him only (mam ekam). Because neophyte devotees cannot
understand what the forms of Narayana, Vasudeva and Govinda are,
Krsna directly says, mam ekam. Herein, this is also supported by the
word krsna-padaravindayoh. Narayana does not speak personally, but
Krsna or Vasudeva does, as in Bhagavad-gita for example. Therefore, to
follow the direction of Bhagavad-gita means to surrender unto Krsna,
and to surrender in this way is the highest perfection of bhakti-yoga.

Pariksit Maharaja had inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami how one can
be saved from falling into the various conditions of hellish life. In this
verse Sukadeva Gosvami answers that a soul who has surrendered to
Krsna certainly cannot go to naraka, hellish existence. To say nothing of
going there, even in his dreams he does not see Yamaraja or his order
carriers, who are able to take one there. In other words, if one wants to
save himself from falling into naraka, hellish life, he should fully sur-
render to Krsna. The word sakrt is significant because it indicates that if
one sincerely surrenders to Krsna once, he is saved even if by chance he
falls down by committing sinful activities. Therefore Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (9.30):

api cet sudurdacaro
bhajate mam ananya-bhak


--- Page 39 ---
Text 19] The History of the Life of Ajamila 33
sadhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah
“Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated.” If one never for a moment forgets Krsna, he is safe even if by
chance he falls down by committing sinful acts.
In the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gita (2.40) the Lord also says:
nehabhikrama-naso ’sti
pratyavayo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya
trayate mahato bhayat
“In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement
on this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear.”
Elsewhere in the Gita (6.40) the Lord says, na hi kalyana-krt kascid
durgatim tata gacchati: “One who performs auspicious activity is never
overcome by evil.” The highest kalyana (auspicious) activity is to sur-
render to Krsna. That is the only path by which to save oneself from fall-
ing down into hellish life. Srila Prabodhananda Sarasvati has confirmed
this as follows:
kaivalyarn narakayate tri-dasa-pir akasa-puspayate
durdantendriya-kala-sarpa-patali protkhata-darstrayate
৮1$1 778 purna-sukhayate vidhi-mahendradis ca kitayate
vat-karunya-kataksa-vaibhavavatam 1077 gauram eva stumah
The sinful actions of one who has surrendered unto Krsna are compared
to a snake with its poison fangs removed (protkhata-damstrayate). Such
a snake is no longer to be feared. Of course, one should not commit sinful
activities on the strength of having surrendered to Krsna. However, even
if one who has surrendered to Krsna happens to do something sinful be-
cause of his former habits, such sinful actions no longer have a destruc-
tive effect. Therefore one should adhere to the lotus feet of Krsna very


--- Page 40 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
tightly and serve Him under the direction of the spiritual master. Thus
in all conditions one will be akuto-bhaya, free from fear.
TEXT 20
अत्र॒ चोदाहरन्तीममितिदासं पुरातनम्‌ |
৬ re 9. (4 निबो मे
दूतानां विष्णुयमयोः संबादस्तं निबोध मे ॥२०॥
atra codaharantimam
itihasari puratanam
ditanam vispu-yamayoh
sariwadas tari nibodha me

atra—in this connection; ca—also; udaharanti—they give as an ex-
ample; imam —this; itihasam—the history (of Ajamila); puratanam—
which is very old; ditdnam—of the order carriers; visnu—of Lord
Visnu; yamayoh—and of Yamaraja; samvadah—the discussion; tam—
that; nibodha—try to understand; me—from me.

TRANSLATION

In this regard, learned scholars and saintly persons describe a
very old historical incident involving a discussion between the
order carriers of Lord Visnu and those of Yamaraja. Please hear of
this from me.

PURPORT

The Puranas, or old histories, are sometimes neglected by unin-
telligent men who consider their descriptions mythological. Actually, the
descriptions of the Puranas, or the old histories of the universe, are fac-
tual, although not chronological. The Puranas record the chief incidents
that have occurred over many millions of years, not only on this planet
but also on other planets within the universe. Therefore all learned and
realized Vedic scholars speak with references to the incidents in the
Puranas. Srila Ripa Gosvami accepts the Puranas to be as important as
the Vedas themselves. Therefore in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu he quotes
the following verse from the Brahma-yamala:


--- Page 41 ---
Text 21] The History of the Life of Ajamila 35
Sruti-smrti-puranadi-
paiicaratra-vidhim vind
aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva kalpate
“Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic
literatures like the Upanisads, Puranas and Narada-parficaratra is
simply an unnecessary disturbance in society.” A devotee of Krsna must
refer not only to the Vedas, but also to the Puranas. One should not
foolishly consider the Puranas mythological. If they were mythological,
Sukadeva Gosvami would not have taken the trouble to recite the old
historical incidents concerning the life of Ajamila. Now the history
begins as follows.
TEXT 21
AFA हिजः कथिदासीपतिरजामिलः |
AA नष्टसदाचारो दास्याः संसगद्षितः ॥२१॥
kanyakubje dvijah kascid
dasi-patir ajamilah
namna nasta-saddcaro
dasyah samsarga-disitah
kanya-kubje—in the city of Kanyakubja (Kanauj, a town near Kan-
pur); dvijah—brahmana; kascit—some; dasi-patih—the husband of a
low-class woman or prostitute; ajamilah—Ajamila; namna—by name;
nasta-sat-acarah—who lost all brahminical qualities; dasyah—of the
prostitute or maidservant; sarisarga-disitah —contaminated by the asso-
ciation.
TRANSLATION
In the city known as Kanyakubja there was a brahmana named
Ajamila who married a prostitute maidservant and lost all his
brahminical qualities because of the association of that low-class
woman.


--- Page 42 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
PURPORT
The fault of illicit connection with women is that it makes one lose all
brahminical qualities. In India there is still a class of servants, called
Sidras, whose maidservant wives are called sidranis. Sometimes people
who are very lusty establish relationships with such maidservants and
sweeping women, since in the higher statuses of society they cannot in-
dulge in the habit of woman hunting, which is strictly prohibited by
social convention. Ajamila, a qualified brahmana youth, lost all his
brahminical qualities because of his association with a prostitute, but he
was ultimately saved because he had begun the process of bhakti-yoga.
Therefore in the previous verse, Sukadeva Gosvami spoke of the person
who has only once surrendered himself at the lotus feet of the Lord
(manah krsna-padaravindayoh) or has just begun the bhakti-yoga pro-
cess. Bhakti-yoga begins with Sravanam kirtanari visnoh, hearing and
chanting of Lord Visnu’s names, as in the maha-mantra—Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare. Chanting is the beginning of bhakti-yoga. Therefore
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu declares:
harer nama harer nama

harer namaiva kevalam

kalau nasty eva nasty eva

nasty eva gatir anyatha
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way.” The process of chanting the holy
name of the Lord is always superbly effective, but it is especially effec-
tive in this age of Kali. Its practical effectiveness will now be explained
by Sukadeva Gosvami through the history of Ajamila, who was freed
from the hands of the Yamaditas simply because of chanting the holy
name of Narayana. Pariksit Maharaja’s original question was how to be
freed from falling down into hell or into the hands of the Yamaditas. In
reply, Sukadeva Gosvami is citing this old historical example to convince
Pariksit Maharaja of the potency of bhakti-yoga, which begins simply


--- Page 43 ---
Text 22] The History of the Life of Ajamila 37
with the chanting of the Lord’s name. All the great authorities of bhakti-
yoga recommend the devotional process beginning with the chanting of
the holy name of Krsna (tan-nama-grahanadibhih).
TEXT 22
a RA Ax One ৩
बन्दक्षेः कैतवैोर्येगेर्ितां इत्तिमास्ितः ।
बिश्रतडटम्बमञ्चियातयामास देहिनः ॥२२॥
bandy-aksaih kaitavais cauryair
garhitarn vrttim asthitah
bibhrat kutumbam asucir
yatayam asa dehinah

bandi-aksaih—by unnecessarily arresting someone; kaitavaih—by
cheating in gambling or throwing dice; cauryaih—by committing theft;
garhitam—condemned; vrttim—professions; asthitah—who has under-
taken (because of association with a prostitute); bibhrat—maintaining;
kutumbam —his dependent wife and children; asucih—being most sin-
ful; yatayam asa—he gave trouble; dehinah—to other living entities.

TRANSLATION

This fallen brahmana, Ajamila, gave trouble to others by arrest-
ing them, by cheating them in gambling, or by directly plundering
them. This was the way he earned his livelihood and maintained
his wife and children.

PURPORT

This verse indicates how degraded one becomes simply by indulging in
illicit sex with a prostitute. Illicit sex is not possible with a chaste or
aristocratic woman, but only with unchaste Siidras. The more society
allows prostitution and illicit sex, the more impetus it gives to cheaters,
thieves, plunderers, drunkards and gamblers. Therefore we first advise
all the disciples in our Krsna consciousness movement to avoid illicit sex,
which is the beginning of all abominable life and which is followed by
meat-eating, gambling and intoxication, one after another. Of course,


--- Page 44 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
restraint is very difficult, but it is quite possible if one fully surrenders to
Krsna, since all these abominable habits gradually become distasteful for
a Krsna conscious person. If illicit sex is allowed to increase in a society,
however, the entire society will be condemned, for it will be full of
rogues, thieves, cheaters and so forth.
TEXT 23
एवं निवसतस्तस्य लालयानस्य तत्सुतान्‌ |
कारोऽत्यगान्महान्‌ राजन्नष्टाशीत्यायुषः समाः| २३॥
evar nivasatas tasya
lalayanasya tat-sutan
kalo ’tyagan mahan rajann
astasityayusah samah
evam—in this way; nivasatah—living; tasya—of him (Ajamila);
lalayanasya—maintaining; tat—of her (the sudrani); sutan—sons;
kalah—time; atyagat—passed away; mahan—a great amount; rajan—
O King; astasitya—eighty-eight; ayusah—of the duration of life;
samah —years.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, while he thus spent his time in abominable, sinful
activities to maintain his family of many sons, eighty-eight years of
his life passed by.
TEXT 24
तस्य प्रवयसः पत्रा হা तेषां तु योऽवमः |
-
बालो नारायणो नाम्ना पित्रो दयितो ggg uke
tasya pravayasah putra
dasa tesa tu yo "vamah
balo narayano namna
pitros ca dayito bhrsam


--- Page 45 ---
Text 25] The History of the Life of Ajamila 39

tasya—of him (Ajamila); pravayasah—who was very old; putrah—
sons; daSa-—ten; tesam—of all of them; tu—but; yah—the one who;
avamah—the youngest;  balah—child;  narayanah—Narayana;
namna—by name; pitroh—of the father and mother; ca—and;
dayitah—dear; bhrsam—very.

TRANSLATION

That old man Ajamila had ten sons, of whom the youngest was a
baby named Narayana. Since Narayana was the youngest of all the
sons, he was naturally very dear to both his father and his mother.

PURPORT

The word pravayasah indicates Ajamila’s sinfulness because although
he was eighty-eight years old, he had a very young child. According to
Vedic culture, one should leave home as soon as he has reached fifty
years of age; one should not live at home and go on producing children.
Sex life is allowed for twenty-five years, between the ages of twenty-five
and forty-five or, at the most, fifty. After that one should give up the
habit of sex life and leave home as a vanaprastha and then properly take
sannydsa. Ajamila, however, because of his association with a prostitute,
lost all brahminical culture and became most sinful, even in his so-called
household life.

TEXT 25
6
स॒ बद्धहृदयस्तसिन्नभेके कलमापिणि |
निरीक्षमाणस्तह्टीखां शरदे जरटो भृशम्‌ ।२५॥
sa baddha-hrdayas tasminn
arbhake kala-bhasini
nirtksamanas tal-lilam
mumude jaratho bhrsam

sah—he; baddha-hrdayah—being very attached; tasmin—to that;
arbhake—small child; kala-bhasini—who could not talk clearly but
talked in broken language; nirtksamanah—seeing; tat—his; lilam—


--- Page 46 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
pastimes (such as walking and talking to his father); mumude —enjoyed;
jarathah—the old man; bhrsam—very much.
TRANSLATION

Because of the child’s broken language and awkward move-
ments, old Ajamila was very much attached to him. He always took
care of the child and enjoyed the child’s activities.

PURPORT

Here it is clearly mentioned that the child Narayana was so young that
he could not even speak or walk properly. Since the old man was very at-
tached to the child, he enjoyed the child’s activities, and because the
child’s name was Narayana, the old man always chanted the holy name of
Narayana. Although he was referring to the small child and not to the
original Narayana, the name of Narayana is so powerful that even by
chanting his son’s name he was becoming purified (harer nama harer
nama harer namaiva kevalam). Srila Rapa Gosvami has therefore
declared that if one’s mind is somehow or other attracted by the holy
name of Krsna (tasmat kenapy upayena manah krsne nivesayet), one is
on the path of liberation. It is customary in Hindu society for parents to
give their children names like Krsnadasa, Govinda dasa, Narayana dasa
and Vrndavana dasa. Thus they chant the names Krsna, Govinda,
Narayana and Vrndavana and get the chance to be purified.

TEXT 26
शज्ञानः प्रपिबन्‌ खादन्‌ बालकंस्नेहयन्त्रितः।
मोजयन्‌ पाययन्मूढो न वेदागतमन्तकम्‌ ॥२६॥
bhunjanah prapiban khadan
balakari sneha-yantritah
bhojayan payayan 77170000
na vedagatam antakam

bhuiijanah—while eating; prapiban—while drinking; khadan—
while chewing; balakam—unto the child; sneha-yantritah—being at-
tached by affection; bhojayan—feeding; payayan—giving something to


--- Page 47 ---
Text 27] The History of the Life of Ajamila 41
drink; midhah—the foolish man; na—not; veda—understood;
agatam—had arrived; antakam—death.
TRANSLATION
When Ajamila chewed food and ate it, he called the child to chew
and eat, and when he drank he called the child to drink also. Al-
ways engaged in taking care of the child and calling his name,
Narayana, Ajamila could not understand that his own time was now
exhausted and that death was upon him.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is kind to the conditioned soul.
Although this man completely forgot Narayana, he was calling his child,
saying, ‘Narayana, please come eat this food. Narayana, please come
drink this milk.” Somehow or other, therefore, he was attached to the
name Narayana. This is called ajiiata-sukrti. Although calling for his son,
he was unknowingly chanting the name of Narayana, and the holy name
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is so transcendentally powerful
that his chanting was being counted and recorded.
TEXT 27
स एवं वर्तमानोऽज्ञो TIS उपस्थिते |
मतिं चकार तनये बाले नारायणाह्धये । २७॥
sa evar vartamano 176
mrtyu-kala upasthite
matin cakara tanaye
bale narayanahvaye
sah—that Ajamila; evam—thus; wvartamanah—living; ajiah—
foolish; mrtyu-kale—when the time of death; upasthite—arrived;
matim cakara—concentrated his mind; tanaye—on his son; bale—the
child; ndrayana-ahvaye—whose name was Narayana.


--- Page 48 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION

When the time of death arrived for the foolish Ajamila, he

began thinking exclusively of his son Narayana.
PURPORT
In the Second Canto of the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.1.6) Sukadeva
Gosvami says:
etavan sankhya-yogabhyar
svadharma-parinisthaya
Janma-labhah parah purisam
ante narayana-smritih
“The highest perfection of human life, achieved either by complete
knowledge of matter and spirit, by acquirement of mystic powers, or by
perfect discharge of one’s occupational duty, is to remember the Per-
sonality of Godhead at the end of life.” Somehow or other, Ajamila con-
sciously or unconsciously chanted the name of Narayana at the time of
death (ante narayana-smrtih), and therefore he became all-perfect
simply by concentrating his mind on the name of Narayana.

It may also be concluded that Ajamila, who was the son of a
brahmana, was accustomed to worshiping Narayana in his youth because
in every brahmana’s house there is worship of the narayana-sila. This
system 15 still present in India; in a rigid brahmana’s house, there is
narayana-sevd, worship of Narayana. Therefore, although the contami-
nated Ajamila was calling for his son, by concentrating his mind on the
holy name of Narayana he remembered the Narayana he had very
faithfully worshiped in his youth.

In this regard Srila Sridhara Svami expressed his verdict as follows:
etac ca tad-upaldlonadi-Sri-narayana-namoccarana-mahatmyena tad-
bhaktir evabhid iti siddhantopayogitvenGpi drastavyam. “According to
the bhakti-siddhanta, it is to be analyzed that because Ajamila constantly
chanted his son’s name, Narayana, he was elevated to the platform of
bhakti, although he did not know it.” Similarly, Srila Viraraghava
Acarya gives this opinion: evar vartamanah sa dvijah mrtyu-kale
upasthite satyajiio narayanakhye putra eva matin cakara matim asak-


--- Page 49 ---
Text 29] The History of the Life of Ajamila 43
tam akarod ity arthah. “Although at the time of death he was chanting
the name of his son, he nevertheless concentrated his mind upon the holy
name of Narayana.” Srila Vijayadhvaja Tirtha gives a similar opinion:
mrtyu-kale deha-viyoga-laksana-kdle mrtyoh sarva-dosa-papa-
harasya harer anugrahat kale datta-jiana-laksane upasthite hrdi pra-
kasite tanaye purna-jiidne bale pafica-varsa-kalpe pradesa-matre
narayanahvaye miirti-visese matirn smarana-samartham cittamm cakdra
bhaktyasmarad ity arthah.
Directly or indirectly, Ajamila factually remembered Narayana at the
time of death (ante narayana-smrtih).
TEXTS 28-29
स पाशहस्तां खीन्दष्टरा पुरुषानतिदारुणान्‌ |
€ ६
वक्रतुण्डानूष्वेरोम्ण आत्मानं नेतमागतान्‌ ॥२८॥
द्रे कीडनकासक्तं पुत्रं नारायणाह्ययम्‌ |
छ्ावितेन RETIREES FER: ॥२९॥
sa pasa-hastaris trin drstva
purusan ati-darunan
vakra-tundan ardhva-romna
atmanam netum agatan
dire kridanakasaktam
putram narayanahvayam
plavitena svarenoccair
ajuhavakulendriyah
sah—that person (Ajamila); pasa-hastan—having ropes in their
hands; trin—three; drstva—seeing; purusan—persons; ati-darunan—
very fearful in their features; vakra-tundan—with twisted faces;
ardhva-romnah—with hair standing on the body; dtmanam—the self;
netum—to take away; dgatan—arrived; diire—a short distance away;


--- Page 50 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
kridanaka-asaktam—engaged in his play; putram—his child;
narayana-ahvayam —named Narayana; plavitena—with tearful eyes;
svarena —with his voice; uccaih—very loudly; ajuhava—called; akula-
indriyah—being full of anxiety.
TRANSLATION
Ajamila then saw three awkward persons with deformed bodily
features, fierce, twisted faces, and hair standing erect on their
bodies. With ropes in their hands, they had come to take him away
to the abode of Yamaraja. When he saw them he was extremely
bewildered, and because of attachment to his child, who was play-
ing a short distance away, Ajamila began to call him loudly by his
name. Thus with tears in his eyes he somehow or other chanted the
holy name of Narayana.
PURPORT
A person who performs sinful activities performs them with his body,
mind and words. Therefore three order carriers from Yamaraja came to
take Ajamila to Yamaraja’s abode. Fortunately, even though he was
referring to his son, Ajamila chanted the four syllables of the hari-nama
Narayana, and therefore the order carriers of Narayana, the Visnuditas,
also immediately arrived there. Because Ajamila was extremely afraid of
the ropes of Yamaraja, he chanted the Lord’s name with tearful eyes. Ac-
tually, however, he never meant to chant the holy name of Narayana; he
meant to call his son.
TEXT 30
निशम्य fama अुखतो हरिकीर्तनम्‌ |
मतुर्नीम महाराज पार्षदाः सहसापतन्‌ ell
niSamya mriyamanasya
mukhato hari-kirtanam
bhartur nama maharaja
parsadah sahasapatan
nisamya—hearing; mriyamanasya—of the dying man; mukhatah—
from the mouth; hari-kirtanam—chanting of the holy name of the


--- Page 51 ---
Text 31] The History of the Life of Ajamila 45
Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhartuh nama—the holy name of
their master; maha-raja—O King; parsadah—the order carriers of
Visnu; sahasd—immediately; dpatan—arrived.
TRANSLATION

My dear King, the order carriers of Visnu, the Visnudiitas, im-
mediately arrived when they heard the holy name of their master
from the mouth of the dying Ajamila, who had certainly chanted
without offense because he had chanted in complete anxiety.

PURPORT

Srila Viévaniatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks, hari-kirtanam
niSamyapatan, katham-bhitasya bhartur nama bruvatah: the order car-
riers of Lord Visnu came because Ajamila had chanted the holy name of
Narayana. They did not consider why he was chanting. While chanting
the name of Narayana, Ajamila was actually thinking of his son, but
simply because they heard Ajamila chanting the Lord’s name, the order
carriers of Lord Visnu, the Visnuditas, immediately came for Ajamila’s
protection. Hari-kirtana is actually meant to glorify the holy name, form,
pastimes and qualities of the Lord. Ajamila, however, did not glorify the
form, qualities or paraphernalia of the Lord; he simply chanted the holy
name. Nevertheless, that chanting was sufficient to cleanse him of all sin-
ful activities. As soon as the Visnuditas heard their master’s name being
chanted, they immediately came. In this regard Srila Vijayadhvaja Tirtha
remarks: anena putra-sneham antarena pracinadrsta-balad udbhitaya
bhaktya bhagavan-nama-sankirtanari krtam iti jadyate. ‘‘Ajamila
chanted the name of Narayana because of his excessive attachment to his
son. Nevertheless, because of his past good fortune in having rendered
devotional service to Narayana, he apparently chanted the holy name in
full devotional service and without offenses.”

TEXT 31
6. ©.
विकषतोऽन्तहेदयादासीपतिमजामिलम्‌ |
यमप्रेष्याच्‌ विष्णुदता वारयामासुरोजसा 132101
vikarsato ‘ntar hrdayad
dasi-patim ajamilam


--- Page 52 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
yama-presyan visnudiita
varayam 2507 ojasa

vikarsatah—snatching; antah hrdayat—from within the heart; dasi-
patim—the husband of the prostitute; ajamilam—Ajamila; yama-pre-
syan—the messengers of Yamaraja; visnu-dittah—the order carriers of
Lord Visnu; varayam asuh—forbade; ojasa —with resounding voices.

TRANSLATION

The order carriers of Yamaraja were snatching the soul from the
core of the heart of Ajamila, the husband of the prostitute, but
with resounding voices the messengers of Lord Visnu, the
Visnudiitas, forbade them to do so.

PURPORT

A Vaisnava, one who has surrendered to the lotus feet of Lord Visnu,
is always protected by Lord Visnu’s order carriers. Because Ajamila had
chanted the holy name of Narayana, the Visnuditas not only im-
mediately arrived on the spot but also at once ordered the Yamadutas not
to touch him. By speaking with resounding voices, the Visnuditas
threatened to punish the Yamaditas if they continued trying to snatch
Ajamila’s soul from his heart. The order carriers of Yamaraja have
jurisdiction over all sinful living entities, but the messengers of Lord
Visnu, the ৬1510000085, are capable of punishing anyone, including
Yamaraja, if he wrongs a Vaisnava.

Materialistic scientists do not know where to find the soul within the
body with their material instruments, but this verse clearly explains that
the soul is within the core of the heart (hrdaya); it is from the heart that
the Yamadiitas were extracting the soul of Ajamila. Similarly, we learn
that the Supersoul, Lord Visnu, is also situated within the heart (isvarah
sarva-bhitanam hrd-dese गुद tisthati). In the Upanisads it is said that
the Supersoul and the individual soul are living in the same tree of the
body as two friendly birds. The Supersoul is said to be friendly because
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is so kind to the original soul that
when the original soul transmigrates from one body to another, the Lord
goes with him. Furthermore, according to the desire and karma of the in-


--- Page 53 ---
Text 32] The History of the Life of Ajamila 47
dividual soul, the Lord, through the agency of maya, creates another
body for him.
The heart of the body is a mechanical arrangement. As the Lord says
in Bhagavad-gita (18.61):
Svarah sarva-bhutanarm
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhutani
yantraradhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.” Yantra means a machine, such
as an automobile. The driver of the machine of the body is the individual
soul, who is also its director or proprietor, but the supreme proprietor is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One’s body is created through the
agency of maya (karmana daiva-netrena), and according to one’s ac-
tivities in this life, another vehicle is created, again under the supervi-
sion of daivi maya (daivi hy esa gunamayi mama maya duratyaya). At
the appropriate time, one’s next body is immediately chosen, and both
the individual soul and the Supersoul transfer to that particular bodily
machine. This is the process of transmigration. During transmigration
from one body to the next, the soul is taken away by the order carriers of
Yamaraja and put into a particular type of hellish life (naraka) in order
to become accustomed to the condition in which he will live in his next
body.
TEXT 32
ऊचुरनिषेधितास्तांस्ते वैवखतपुरःसराः |
के यूयं प्रतिषेद्धारो धर्मराजस्य शासनम्‌ ।३२॥
ticur nisedhitas tams te
vaivasvata-purahsarah
ke ywyarh pratiseddharo
dharma-rajasya $asanam


--- Page 54 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
ucuh—replied; nisedhitah—being forbidden; tan—to the order car-
riers of Lord Visnu; te—they; vaivasvata —of Yamaraja; purah-sarah—
the assistants or messengers; ke—who; yidyam—all of you; pratised-
dharah—who are opposing; dharma-rajasya—of the king of religious
principles, Yamaraja; S@sanam—the ruling jurisdiction.
TRANSLATION
When the order carriers of Yamaraja, the son of the sun-god,
were thus forbidden, they replied: Who are you, sirs, that have the
audacity to challenge the jurisdiction of Yamaraja?
PURPORT
According to the sinful activities of Ajamila, he was within the
jurisdiction of Yamarija, the supreme judge appointed to consider the
sins of the living entities. When forbidden to touch Ajamila, the order
carriers of Yamariaja were surprised because they had never been hin-
dered in the execution of their duty by anyone within the three worlds.
TEXT 33
कस्य वा इत आयाताः कसादस्य निषेधथ |
किं देवा उपदेवा या युयं किं सिद्धसत्तमाः NR
kasya va kuta ayatah
kasmad asya nisedhatha
kim deva upadeva ya
yityarh kin siddha-sattamah
kasya—whose servants; va—or; kutah—from where; ayatah—have
you come; kasmat—what is the reason; asya— (the taking away) of this
Ajamila; nisedhatha—are you forbidding; kim—whether; devah—
demigods; upadevah—sub-demigods; yah—who; yizyam—all of you;
kim—whether; siddha-sat-tamah—the best of the perfect beings, the
pure devotees.
TRANSLATION
Dear sirs, whose servants are you, where have you come from,
and why are you forbidding us to touch the body of Ajamila? Are


--- Page 55 ---
Text 36] The History of the Life of Ajamila 49
you demigods from the heavenly planets, are you sub-demigods,
or are you the best of devotees?

PURPORT

The most significant word used in this verse is siddha-sattamah,
which means “the best of the perfect.” In Bhagavad-gita (7.3) it is said,
manusyanam sahasresu kascid yatati siddhaye: out of millions of per-
sons, one may try to become siddha, perfect—or, in other words, self-
realized. A self-realized person knows that he is not the body but a
spiritual soul (aha brahmasmi). At the present moment practically
everyone is unaware of this fact, but one who understands this has at-
tained perfection and is therefore called siddha. When one understands
that the soul is part and parcel of the supreme soul and one thus engages
in the devotional service of the supreme soul, one becomes siddha-sat-
tama. One is then eligible to live in the Vaikuntha planets or Krsnaloka.
The word siddha-sattama, therefore, refers to a liberated, pure devotee.

Since the Yamadiitas are servants of Yamaraja, who is also one of the
siddha-sattamas, they knew that a siddha-sattama is above the demigods
and sub-demigods and, indeed, above all the living entities within this
material world. The Yamaditas therefore inquired why the Visnuditas
were present where a sinful man was going to die.

It should also be noted that Ajamila was not yet dead, for the
Yamaditas were trying to snatch the soul from his heart. They could not
take the soul, however, and therefore Ajamila was not yet dead. This will
be revealed in later verses. Ajamila was simply in an unconscious state
when the argument was in progress between the Yamadutas and the
Visnudatas. The conclusion of the argument was to be a decision regard-
ing who would claim the soul of Ajamila.

TEXTS 34-36
सर्वे पद्मपलाशाक्षाः पीतकोशोयनाससः |
किरीटिनः कुण्डकिनो लसत्पुष्करमालिनः ॥३४॥
6
सर्वे च नूलवयसः स्वे चारुचतुशुनाः |
खलनुविपङ्जासिगताङ्कककनम्युजभ्रियः ॥ ২৭


--- Page 56 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
6.
Rant वितिमिरालोकाः वन्तः स्वेन तेज सा |
किमथ धर्मपालस्य किङ्करान्नो निषेधय ॥२६॥
sarve padma-palasaksah
pita-kauseya-vasasah
kiritinah kundalino
lasat-puskara-malinah
sarve ca niitna-vayasah
sarve caru-caturbhujah
dhanur-nisangasi-gada-
Sankha-cakrambuja-sriyah
diso vitimiralokah
kurvantah svena tejasa
kim artham dharma-palasya
kinkaran no nisedhatha
sarve —all of you; padma-paldsa-aksah—with eyes like the petals of a
lotus flower; pita —yellow; kauSeya—silk; vasasah—wearing garments;
kiritinah—with helmets; kundalinah—with earrings; lasat—glittering;
puskara-malinah—with a garland of lotus flowers; sarve—all of you;
ca—also; nitna-vayasah—very youthful; sarve—all of you; caru—
very beautiful; catuh-bhujah—with four arms; dhanuh—bow;
nisariga—dquiver of arrows; asi—sword; gada—club; $arkha—conch-
shell; cakra—disc; ambuja—lotus flower; S$riyah—decorated with;
disah—all directions; vitimira—without darkness; alokah—extraordi-
nary illumination; kurvantah—exhibiting; svena—by your own; te-
Jasa—effulgence; kim artham—what is the purpose; dharma-palasya—
of Yamaraja, the maintainer of religious principles; kirtkaran—servants;
nah—us; nisedhatha—you are forbidding.
TRANSLATION
The order carriers of Yamaraja said: Your eyes are just like the
petals of lotus flowers. Dressed in yellow silken garments, deco-


--- Page 57 ---
Text 36] The History of the Life of Ajamila 51
rated with garlands of lotuses, and wearing very attractive helmets
on your heads and earrings on your ears, you all appear fresh and
youthful. Your four long arms are decorated with bows and
quivers of arrows and with swords, clubs, conchshells, discs and
lotus flowers. Your effulgence has dissipated the darkness of this
place with extraordinary illumination. Now, sirs, why are you
obstructing us?
PURPORT

Before even being introduced to a foreigner, one becomes acquainted
with him through his dress, bodily features and behavior and can thus
understand his position. Therefore when the Yamadatas saw the
Visnudaitas for the first time, they were surprised. They said, “By your
bodily features you appear to be very exalted gentlemen, and you have
such celestial power that you have dissipated the darkness of this ma-
terial world with your own effulgences. Why then should you endeavor
to stop us from executing our duty?” It will be explained that the
Yamaddtas, the order carriers of Yamaraja, mistakenly considered
Ajamila sinful. They did not know that although he was sinful
throughout his entire life, he was purified by constantly chanting the
holy name of Narayana. In other words, unless one is a Vaisnava, one
cannot understand the activities of a Vaispava.

The dress and bodily features of the residents of Vaikunthaloka are
properly described in these verses. The residents of Vaikuntha, who are
decorated with garlands and yellow silken garments, have four arms
holding various weapons. Thus they conspicuously resemble Lord Visnu.
They have the same bodily features as Narayana because they have at-
tained the liberation of sarapya, but they nevertheless act as servants.
All the residents of Vaikunthaloka know perfectly well that their master
is Narayana, or Krsna, and that they are all His servants. They are all
self-realized souls who are nitya-mukta, everlastingly liberated. Al-
though they could conceivably declare themselves Narayana or Visnu,
they never do so; they always remain Krsna conscious and serve the Lord
faithfully. Such is the atmosphere of Vaikunthaloka. Similarly, one who
learns the faithful service of Lord Krsna through the Krsna conscious-
ness movement will always remain in Vaikunthaloka and have nothing to
do with the material world.


--- Page 58 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
TEXT 37
श्रीक उवाच
इत्युक्तं TREATS: |
तान्‌ प्रत्यूचुः प्रहस्येदं ঈঘনিহাহ্যা गिरा ॥२७॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
ity ukte yamadiitais te
vasudevokta-karinah
tan pratyiicuh prahasyedarm
megha-nirhradaya gira

$ri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti —thus; ukte—being
addressed; yamadiitaih—by the messengers of Yamaraja; te—they;
vasudeva-ukta-karinah—who are always ready to execute the orders of
Lord Vasudeva (being personal associates of Lord Visnu who have ob-
tained the liberation of salokya); tan—unto them; pratyiicuh—replied;
prahasya—smiling; idam—this; megha-nirhradaya—resounding like a
rumbling cloud; gira—with voices.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Being thus addressed by the
messengers of Yamaraja, the servants of Vasudeva smiled and
spoke the following words in voices as deep as the sound of rum-
bling clouds.

PURPORT

The Yamaditas were surprised to see that the Visnuditas, although
polite, were hindering the rule of Yamaraja. Similarly, the Visnuditas
were also surprised that the Yamaditas, although claiming to be servants
of Yamaraja, the supreme judge of religious principles, were unaware of
the principles of religious action. Thus the Visnuditas smiled, thinking,
“What is this nonsense they are speaking? If they are actually servants
of Yamaraja they should know that Ajamila is not a suitable candidate for
them to carry off.”


--- Page 59 ---
Text 38] The History of the Life of Ajamila 53
TEXT 38
Aga जुः
+ A ~
यूयं वै धर्मराजस्य यदि निर्देशकारिणः ।
ब्रूत धर्मस्य नस्तत्त्वं TAH लक्षणम्‌ ।३८॥
Sri-visnudiitd 8018]
১89৫7) vai dharma-rajasya
yadi nirdesa-karinah
brita dharmasya nas tattvarin
yac cadharmasya laksanam
Sri-visnudittah ८८८१ --1116€ blessed messengers of Lord Visnu spoke;
yiyam—all of you; vai—indeed; dharma-rajasya—of King Yamaraja,
who knows the religious principles; yadi—if; nirdesa-karinah—order
carriers; brita—just speak; dharmasya—of religious principles; nah—
unto us; tattvarm—the truth; yat—that which; ca—also; adharmasya—
of impious activities; laksanam—symptoms.
TRANSLATION
The blessed messengers of Lord Visnu, the Visnudiitas, said: If
you are actually servants of Yamaraja, you must explain to us the
meaning of religious principles and the symptoms of irreligion.
PURPORT
This inquiry by the Visnuditas to the Yamaditas is most important. A
servant must know the instructions of his master. The servants of
Yamariaja claimed to be carrying out his orders, and therefore the
Visnudatas very intelligently asked them to explain the symptoms of
religious and irreligious principles. A Vaisnava knows these principles
perfectly well because he is well acquainted with the instructions of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord says, sarva-dhar-
man parityajya mam 6160 77 Saranam vraja: “Give up all other varieties
of religion and just surrender unto Me.” Therefore surrender unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the actual principle of religion. Those
who have surrendered to the principles of material nature instead of to


--- Page 60 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
Krsna are all impious, regardless of their material position. Unaware of
the principles of religion, they do not surrender to Krsna, and therefore
they are considered sinful rascals, the lowest of men, and fools bereft of
all knowledge. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.15):
na mam duskrtino midhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jaana
asurar bhavam asritah
“Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind,
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic
nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.”” One who has not surren-
dered to Krsna does not know the true principle of religion; otherwise he
would have surrendered.

The question posed by the Visnuditas was very suitable. One who
represents someone else must fully know that person’s mission. The
devotees in the Krsna consciousness movement must therefore be fully
aware of the mission of Krsna and Lord Caitanya; otherwise they will be
considered foolish. All devotees, especially preachers, must know the
philosophy of Krsna consciousness so as not to be embarrassed and in-
sulted when they preach.

TEXT 39
कथंखिद्‌ धियते दण्डः কি वास्य स्थानमीच्सितम्‌ |
दण्ड्याः किं कारिणः सर्वे आदोखित्कतिचिन्द्रणाम्‌२९
katharisvid dhriyate dandah
kirh vasya sthanam ipsitam
dandyah kim karinah sarve
ahosvit katicin nrnam

katharhsvit—by which means; dhriyate—is imposed; dandah—
punishment; kim—what; va—or; asye—of this; sthanam—the place;
ipsitam —desirable; dandyah—punishable; kim —whether; karinah—
fruitive actors; sarve—all; ahosvit—or whether; katicit—some;
nrnam—of the human beings.


--- Page 61 ---
Text 40] The History of the Life of Ajamila 55
TRANSLATION
What is the process of punishing others? Who are the actual
candidates for punishment? Are all karmis engaged in fruitive ac-
tivities punishable, or only some of them?
PURPORT
One who has the power to punish others should not punish everyone.
There are innumerable living entities, the majority of whom are in the
spiritual world and are nitya-mukta, everlastingly liberated. There is no
question of judging these liberated living beings. Only a small fraction of
the living entities, perhaps one fourth, are in the material world. And the
major portion of the living entities in the material world—8,000,000 of
the 8,400,000 forms of life—are lower than human beings. They are not
punishable, for under the laws of material nature they are automatically
evolving. Human beings, who are advanced in consciousness, are respon-
sible, but not all of them are punishable. Those engaged in advanced
pious activities are beyond punishment. Only those who engage in sinful
activities are punishable. Therefore the Visnuditas particularly inquired
about who is punishable and why Yamaraja has been designated to dis-
criminate between who is punishable and who is not. How is one to be
judged? What is the basic principle of authority? These are the questions
raised by the Visnuditas.
TEXT 40
यमदूता ऊचुः
वेद्रणिदितो धर्मो atid ।
वेदो नारायणः साक्षात्सखयम्भूरिति TW ॥४०॥
yamadiita tcuh
veda-pranihito dharmo
hy adharmas tad-viparyayah
vedo narayanah saksat
svayambhar iti Susruma
yamadiitah icuh—the order carriers of Yamaraja said; veda—by the
four Vedas (Sama, Yajur, Rg and Atharva); pranihitah—prescribed;


--- Page 62 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
dharmah—religious principles; hi—indeed; adharmah—irreligious
principles; tat-viparyayah—the opposite of that (that which is not sup-
ported by Vedic injunctions); vedah—the Vedas, books of knowledge;
narayanah saksat—directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead (being
the words of Narayana); svayam-bhiith—self-born, self-sufficient (ap-
pearing only from the breath of Narayana and not being learned from
anyone else); iti—thus; susruma—we have heard.
TRANSLATION

The Yamadiitas replied: That which is prescribed in the Vedas
constitutes dharma, the religious principles, and the opposite of
that is irreligion. The Vedas are directly the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Narayana, and are self-born. This we have heard from
Yamaraja.

PURPORT

The servants of Yamaraja replied quite properly. They did not
manufacture principles of religion or irreligion. Instead, they explained
what they had heard from the authority Yamaraja. Mahdjano yena gatah
sa panthah: one should follow the mahdjana, the authorized person.
Yamaraja is one of twelve authorities. Therefore the servants of
Yamaraja, the Yamadiitas, replied with perfect clarity when they said
susruma (“we have heard”). The members of modern civilization
manufacture defective religious principles through speculative concoc-
tion. This is not dharma. They do not know what is dharma and what is
adharma. Therefore, as stated in the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
dharmah projjhita-kaitavo ‘tra: dharma not supported by the Vedas is
rejected from srimad-bhagavata-dharma. Bhagavata-dharma comprises
only that which is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Bhagavata-dharma is sarva-dharman parityajya mam 6107 Saranari
vraja: one must accept the authority of the Supreme Personality of God-
head and surrender to Him and whatever He says. That is dharma. Ar-
juna, for example, thinking that violence was adharma, was declining to
fight, but Krsna urged him to fight. Arjuna abided by the orders of
Krsna, and therefore he is actually a dharmi because the order of Krsna
is dharma. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (15.15), vedais ca sarvair
aham eva vedyah: “The real purpose of veda, knowledge, is to know


--- Page 63 ---
Text 40] The History of the Life of Ajamila 57
Me.” One who knows Krsna perfectly is liberated. As Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
Jjanma karma ca me divyam
evarn yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehari punar janma
naiti mam eti so ’rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this
material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.” One who
understands Krsna and abides by His order is a candidate for returning
home, back to Godhead. It may be concluded that dharma, religion,
refers to that which is ordered in the Vedas, and adharma, irreligion,
refers to that which is not supported in the Vedas.

Dharma is not actually manufactured by Narayana. As stated in the
Vedas, asya mahato bhitasya nisvasitam etad yad rg-vedah iti: the in-
junctions of dharma emanate from the breathing of Narayana, the
supreme living entity. Narayana exists eternally and breathes eternally,
and therefore dharma, the injunctions of Narayana, also exist eternally.
Srila Madhvacarya, the original dcarya for those who belong to the
Madhva-Gaudiya-sampradaya, says:

vedandam prathamo vakta
harir eva yato vibhuh
ato visnv-atmaka veda
ity ahur veda-vadinah
The transcendental words of the Vedas emanated from the mouth of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Vedic principles should
be understood to be Vaisnava principles because Visnu is the origin of
the Vedas. The Vedas contain nothing besides the instructions of Visnu,
and one who follows the Vedic principles is a Vaisnava. The Vaisnava is
not a member of a manufactured community of this material world. A
Vaisnava is a real knower of the Vedas, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah).


--- Page 64 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
TEXT 41
येन खधाम्न्यमी भावा ETA |
णुणनामकियास्पेर्विभान्यन्ते यथातथम्‌ । ४१
yena svadhamny ami bhava
rajah-sattva-tamomayah
guna-nama-kriya-ripair
vibhavyante yatha-tatham
yena—by whom (Narayana); sva-dhamni—although in His own
place, the spiritual world; ami—all these; bhavah—manifestations; ra-
jah-sattva-tamah-mayah—created by the three modes of material
nature (passion, goodness and ignorance); guna —qualities; nama—
names; kriyd—activities; rapaih—and with forms; vibhavyante—are
variously manifested; yatha-tatham—exactly to the right point.
TRANSLATION
The supreme cause of all causes, Narayana, is situated in His own
abode in the spiritual world, but nevertheless He controls the en-
tire cosmic manifestation according to the three modes of material
nature —sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna. In this way all liv-
ing entities are awarded different qualities, different names [such
as brahmana, ksatriya and vaiSya], different duties according to the
varnasrama institution, and different forms. Thus Narayana is the
cause of the entire cosmic manifestation.
PURPORT
The Vedas inform us:
na tasya karyarm karanam ca vidyate
na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate
parasya Saktir vividhaiva Sriiyate
svabhaviki jiana-bala-kriya ca
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8)
Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is almighty, omnipotent.
He has multifarious energies, and therefore He is able to remain in His


--- Page 65 ---
Text 42] The History of the Life of Ajamila 59
own abode and without endeavor supervise and manipulate the entire
cosmic manifestation through the interaction of the three modes of
material nature —sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna. These interac-
tions create different forms, bodies, activities and changes, which all oc-
cur perfectly. Because the Lord is perfect, everything works as if He
were directly supervising and taking part in it. Atheistic men, however,
being covered by the three modes of material nature, cannot see
Narayana to be the supreme cause behind all activities. As Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (7.13):
tribhir gunamayair bhavair
ebhih sarvam 10077 jagat
mohitari nabhijanati
mam ebhyah param avyayam
“Deluded by the three modes, the whole world does not know Me, who
am above the modes and inexhaustible.” Because unintelligent agnostics
are mohita, illusioned by the three modes of material nature, they cannot
understand that Narayana, Krsna, is the supreme cause of all activities.
As stated in Brahma-sarihita (5.1):
ष्का व paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
“Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other
origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes.”
TEXT 42
. =
खर्योऽभ्निः खं मरु देवः सोमः सन्घ्याहनी বহিঃ |
क § स्वयं धम इति द्यते Jam साक्षिणः nw
siryo 7120 kha marud devah
somah sandhyahani disah


--- Page 66 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
kari kuh svayari dharma iti
hy ete daihyasya saksinah

siuryah—the sun-god; agnih—the fire; kham—the sky; marut—the
air; devah—the demigods; somah—the moon; sandhya—evening;
ahani—the day and night; diSah—the directions; kam—the water;
kuh—the land; svayam —personally; dharmah— Yamaraja or the Super-
soul; iti—thus; hi—indeed; ete—all of these; daihyasya—of a living
entity embodied in the material elements; saksinah—witnesses.

TRANSLATION

The sun, fire, sky, air, demigods, moon, evening, day, night,
directions, water, land and Supersoul Himself all witness the ac-
tivities of the living entity.

PURPORT

The members of some religious sects, especially Christians, do not
believe in the reactions of karma. We once had a discussion with a
learned Christian professor who argued that although people are
generally punished after the witnesses of their misdeeds are examined,
where are the witnesses responsible for one’s suffering the reactions of
past karma? To such a person the answer by the Yamaditas is given
here. A conditioned soul thinks that he is working stealthily and that no
one can see his sinful activities, but we can understand from the sastras
that there are many witnesses, including the sun, fire, sky, air, moon,
demigods, evening, day, night, directions, water, land and the Supersoul
Himself, who sits with the individual soul within his heart. Where is the
dearth of witnesses? The witnesses and the Supreme Lord both exist, and
therefore so many living entities are elevated to higher planetary systems
or degraded to lower planetary systems, including the hellish planets.
There are no discrepancies, for everything is arranged perfectly by the
management of the Supreme God (svabhaviki jaana-bala-kriya ca). The
witnesses mentioned in this verse are also mentioned in other Vedic
literatures:

aditya-candrav anilo ’nalas ca
dyaur bhiimir apo hrdayam yamas ca


--- Page 67 ---
Text 44] The History of the Life of Ajamila 61
ahas ca ratris ca ubhe ca sandhye
dharmo pi janati narasya vrttam
TEXT 43
एतैरधर्मो विज्ञातः स्थानं दण्डस्य सन्यते ।
सर्वे कर्मानुरोधेन दण्डमर्हन्ति कारिणः ॥४२॥
etair adharmo vynatah
sthanam dandasya yujyate
sarve karmanurodhena
dandam arhanti karinah
etaih—by all these (witnesses, beginning from the sun-god); adhar-
mah—deviation from the regulative principles; vijidtah—is known;
sthanam—the proper place; dandasya—of punishment; yujyate—is ac-
cepted as; sarve—all; karma-anurodhena—with consideration of the ac-
tivities performed; dandam—punishment; arhanti—deserve; kari-
nah—the performers of sinful activities.
TRANSLATION
The candidates for punishment are those who are confirmed by
these many witnesses to have deviated from their prescribed
regulative duties. Everyone engaged in fruitive activities is suit-
able to be subjected to punishment according to his sinful acts.
TEXT 44
सम्मषन्ति हि भद्राणि विपरीतानि चानघाः ।
कारिणां गुणसङ्गोऽस्ति देहवान्‌ न gw ।।४५४॥
sambhavanti hi bhadrani
viparitani canaghah
karina guna-sango ’sti
dehavan na hy akarmakrt
sambhavanti—there are; hi—indeed; bhadrani—auspicious, pious
activities; viparitani—just the opposite (inauspicious, sinful activities);


--- Page 68 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
ca—also; anaghah—O sinless inhabitants of Vaikuntha; karinam—of
the fruitive workers; guna-sanigah—contamination of the three modes
of nature; asti—there is; deha-van—anyone who has accepted this ma-
terial body; na—not; hi—indeed; akarma-krt—without performing
action.
TRANSLATION
O inhabitants of Vaikuntha, you are sinless, but those within
this material world are all karmis, whether acting piously or im-
piously. Both kinds of action are possible for them because they
are contaminated by the three modes of nature and must act ac-
cordingly. One who has accepted a material body cannot be inac-
tive, and sinful action is inevitable for one acting under the modes
of material nature. Therefore all the living entities within this ma-
terial world are punishable.
PURPORT
The difference between human beings and non-human beings is that a
human is supposed to act according to the direction of the Vedas. Unfor-
tunately, men manufacture their own ways of acting, without reference
to the Vedas. Therefore all of them commit sinful actions and are
punishable.
TEXT 45
মল যাবাল্ব্‌ यथाधर्मो धर्मो वेह समीहितः ।
स एव तत्फलं স্তত্কী तथा TREE वै 11৪4
yena yavan yathadharmo
dharmo veha samihitah
sa eva tat-phalam bhunkte
tatha tavad amutra vai
yena—by which person; yavan—to which extent; yatha —in which
manner; adharmah—irreligious activities; dharmah—religious ac-
tivities; va—or; itha—in this life; samihitah—performed; sah—that
person; eva—indeed; tat-phalam—the particular result of that;


--- Page 69 ---
Text 46] The History of the Life of Ajamila 63
bhurikte—enjoys or suffers; tatha—in that way; tavat—to that extent;
amutra—in the next life; vai —indeed.
TRANSLATION
In proportion to the extent of one’s religious or irreligious ac-
tions in this life, one must enjoy or suffer the corresponding re-
actions of his karma in the next.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (14.18):
iardhvam gacchanti sattva-stha
madhye tisthanti rajasah
jaghanya-guna-vrtti-stha
adho gacchanti tamasah
Those who act in the mode of goodness are promoted to higher planetary
systems to become demigods, those who act in an ordinary way and do
not commit excessively sinful acts remain within this middle planetary
system, and those who perform abominable sinful actions must go down
to hellish life.
TEXT 46
यथेद देवणवसस्तरविन्यञुपलय्यते |
भूतेषु गुणदेकित्रयात्तथान्यत्राुमीयते ॥४६।।
yatheha deva-pravards
trai-vidhyam upalabhyate
bhatesu guna-vaicitryat
tathanyatranumiyate
yatha—just as; tha—in this life; deva-pravarah—O best of the
demigods; trai-vidhyam—three kinds of attributes; upalabhyate—are
achieved; bhiitesu—among all living entities; guna-vaicitryat—because
of the diversity of the contamination by the three modes of nature;
tatha—similarly; anyatra—in other places; anumiyate—it is inferred.


--- Page 70 ---
64 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION

O best of the demigods, we can see three different varieties of
life, which are due to the contamination of the three modes of
nature. The living entities are thus known as peaceful, restless and
foolish; as happy, unhappy or in-between; or as religious, ir-
religious and semireligious. We can deduce that in the next life
these three kinds of material nature will similarly act.

PURPORT

The actions and reactions of the three modes of material nature are
visible in this life. For example, some people are very happy, some are
very distressed, and some are in mixed happiness and distress. This is
the result of past association with the modes of material nature —good-
ness, passion and ignorance. Since these varieties are visible in this life,
we may assume that the living entities, according to their association
with the different modes of material nature, will be happy, distressed or
between the two in their next lives also. Therefore the best policy is to
disassociate oneself from the three modes of material nature and be al-
ways transcendental to their contamination. This is possible only when
one fully engages in the devotional service of the Lord. As Krsna con-
firms in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):

mar ca yo ‘vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiayaya kalpate
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down
under any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature
and thus comes to the spiritual platform.” Unless one is fully absorbed in
the service of the Lord, one is subject to the contamination of the three
modes of material nature and must therefore suffer from distress or
mixed happiness and distress.
TEXT 47
बतंमानोऽन्ययोः कालो गुणाभिज्ञापको ao |
.
od जन्मान्ययोरेतद्धमीधमं निदशेनम्‌ ।४५७।।


--- Page 71 ---
Text 48] The History of the Life of Ajamila 65
vartamano ‘nyayoh kalo
gunabhiynapako yatha
evar janmanyayor etad
dharmadharma-nidarsanam
vartamanah—the present; anyayoh—of the past and future; kalah—
time; guna-abhijiapakah—making known the qualities; yatha—just
as; evam—thus; janma—birth; anyayoh—of the past and future
births; etat—this; dharma—religious principles; adharma—irreligious
principles; nidarsanam—indicating.
TRANSLATION
Just as springtime in the present indicates the nature of
springtimes in the past and future, so this life of happiness, dis-
tress or a mixture of both gives evidence concerning the religious
and irreligious activities of one’s past and future lives.
PURPORT
Our past and future are not very difficult to understand, for time is
under the contamination of the three modes of material nature. As soon
as spring arrives, the usual exhibition of various types of fruits and
flowers automatically becomes manifest, and therefore we may conclude
that spring in the past was adorned with similar fruits and flowers and
will be so adorned in the future also. Our repetition of birth and death is
taking place within time, and according to the influence of the modes of
nature, we are receiving various types of bodies and being subjected to
various conditions.
TEXT 48
6
मनसैव ॒ धुरे देवः पूर्वरूपं विपञ्यति ।
अदुमीमांसतेऽपूवं मनसा भगवानजः ।।४८॥।
manasaiva pure devah
purva-ripam vipaSyati
anumimdrisate ‘purvarm
manasa bhagavan ajah


--- Page 72 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
manasa—by the mind; eva—indeed; pure—in his abode, or within
everyone's heart like the Supersoul; devah—the demigod Yamaraja
(divyatiti devah, one who is always brilliant and illuminated is called
deva); purva-ripam—the past religious or irreligious condition;
vipasSyati—completely observes; anumimarisate—he considers; apiir-
vam —the future condition; manasa —with his mind; bhagavan—who is
omnipotent; ajah—as good as Lord Brahma.
TRANSLATION
The omnipotent Yamaraja is as good as Lord Brahma, for while
situated in his own abode or in everyone’s heart like the
Paramatma, he mentally observes the past activities of a living en-
tity and thus understands how the living entity will act in future
lives.
PURPORT
One should not consider Yamaraja an ordinary living being. He is as
good as Lord Brahma. He has the complete cooperation of the Supreme
Lord, who is situated in everyone’s heart, and therefore, by the grace of
the Supersoul, he can see the past, present and future of a living being
from within. The word anumimarisate means that he can decide in con-
sultation with the Supersoul. Anu means “following.” The actual deci-
sions concerning the next lives of the living entities are made by the
Supersoul, and they are carried out by Yamaraja.
TEXT 49
यथाज्ञस्तमसा युक्त उपास्ते व्यक्तमेव हि |
न वेद पूर्वमपरं नष्टजन्मस्पृतिस्तथा ।।४९॥।
yathajiias tamasa yukta
upaste vyaktam eva hi
na veda pirvam aparam
nasta-janma-smrtis tatha
yatha—just as; ajiiah—an ignorant living being; tamasa—in sleep;
yuktah—engaged; updste—acts according to; wvyaktam—a body


--- Page 73 ---
Text 49] The History of the Life of Ajamila 67

manifested in a dream; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; na veda—does not

know; pirvam—the past body; aparam—the next body; nasta—lost;

janma-smrtih—the remembrance of birth; tatha—similarly.
TRANSLATION

As a sleeping person acts according to the body manifested in his
dreams and accepts it to be himself, so one identifies with his pres-
ent body, which he acquired because of his past religious or ir-
religious actions, and is unable to know his past or future lives.

PURPORT

A man engages in sinful activities because he does not know what he
did in his past life to get his present materially conditioned body, which
is subjected to the threefold miseries. As stated by Rsabhadeva in
Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.4), nina pramattah kurute vikarma: a
human being who is mad after sense gratification does not hesitate to act
sinfully. Yad indriya-pritaya aprnoti: he performs sinful actions simply
for sense gratification. Na sadhu manye: this is not good. Yata atmano
yam asann api klesada asa dehah: because of such sinful actions, one
receives another body in which to suffer as he is suffering in his present
body because of his past sinful activities.

It should be understood that a person who does not have Vedic knowl-
edge always acts in ignorance of what he has done in the past, what he is
doing at the present and how he will suffer in the future. He is com-
pletely in darkness. Therefore the Vedic injunction is, tamasi ma:
“Don’t remain in darkness.” Jyotir gama: “Try to go to the light.” The
light or illumination is Vedic knowledge, which one can understand
when he is elevated to the mode of goodness or when he transcends the
mode of goodness by engaging in devotional service to the spiritual
master and the Supreme Lord. This is described in the Svetasvatara
Upanisad (6.23):

yasya deve para bhaktir
yatha deve tatha gurau

tasyaite kathita hy arthah
prakasante mahdatmanah


--- Page 74 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
“Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically
revealed.” The Vedas enjoin, tad-vijianartharh sa gurum evabhigac-
chet: one must approach a spiritual master who has full knowledge of the
Vedas and be faithfully directed by him in order to become a devotee of
the Lord. Then the knowledge of the Vedas will be revealed. When the
Vedic knowledge is revealed, one need no longer remain in the darkness
of material nature.

According to his association with the material modes of nature—good-
ness, passion and ignorance—a living entity gets a particular type of
body. The example of one who associates with the mode of goodness is a
qualified brahmana. Such a brahmana knows past, present and future
because he consults the Vedic literature and sees through the eyes of
sastra (sastra-caksuh). He can understand what his past life was, why he
isin the present body, and how he can obtain liberation from the clutches
of maya and not accept another material body. This is all possible when
one is situated in the mode of goodness. Generally, however, the living
entities are engrossed in the modes of passion and ignorance.

In any case, one receives an inferior or superior body at the discretion
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramatma. As stated in the
previous verse:

manasaiva pure devah
piirva-ripam vipasyati
anumimarisate ‘parva
manasa bhagavan ajah
Everything depends on bhagavan, or ajah, the unborn. Why doesn’t one
please Bhagavan to receive a better body? The answer is gjiias tamasa:
because of gross ignorance. One who is in complete darkness cannot
know what his past life was or what his next life will be; he is simply in-
terested in his present body. Even though he has a human body, a person
in the mode of ignorance and interested only in his present body is like
an animal, for an animal, being covered by ignorance, thinks that the
ultimate goal of life and happiness is to eat as much as possible. A human
being must be educated to understand his past life and how he can en-
deavor for a better life in the future. There is even a book, called Bhrgu-


--- Page 75 ---
Text 50] The History of the Life of Ajamila 69
sarhita, which reveals information about one’s past, present and future
lives according to astrological calculations. Somehow or other one must
be enlightened about his past, present and future. One who is interested
only in his present body and who tries to enjoy his senses to the fullest
extent is understood to be engrossed in the mode of ignorance. His future
is very, very dark. Indeed, the future is always dark for one who is
grossly covered by ignorance. Especially in this age, human society is
covered by the mode of ignorance, and therefore everyone thinks his
present body to be everything, without consideration of the past or
future.
TEXT 50
पञ्चमिः ङुरुते खा्यान्‌ पञ्च वेदाथ पश्चभिः |
एकस्तु ণীতহীল त्रीन्‌ स्वयं सप्तदशोऽश्नुते ॥५०॥
८८८60221, kurute svarthan
८८८ vedatha paiicabhih
ekas tu sodasena trin
svayam saptadaso ‘Snute

paiicabhih—with the five working senses (voice, arms, legs, anus and
genitals);  kurute—performs; sva-arthan—his desired interests;
parica—the five objects of the senses (sound, form, touch, aroma and
taste); veda—knows; atha—thus; paricabhih—Dby the five senses of per-
ception (hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting and feeling); ekah—the one;
tu—Dbut; sodasena—Dby these fifteen items and the mind; trin—the three
categories of experience (happiness, distress and a mixture of both);
svayam—he, the living entity himself; saptadasah—the seventeenth
item; asnute—enjoys.

TRANSLATION

Above the five senses of perception, the five working senses and
the five objects of the senses is the mind, which is the sixteenth
element. Above the mind is the seventeenth element, the soul, the
living being himself, who, in cooperation with the other sixteen,
enjoys the material world alone. The living being enjoys three
kinds of situations, namely happy, distressful and mixed.


--- Page 76 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
PURPORT

Everyone engages in work with his hands, legs and other senses just to
achieve a certain goal according to his concocted ideas. One tries to enjoy
the five sense objects, namely form, sound, taste, aroma and touch, not
knowing the actual goal of life, which is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. Be-
cause of disobeying the Supreme Lord, one is put into material condi-
tions, and he then tries to improve his situation in a concocted way, not
desiring to follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Nevertheless, the Supreme Lord is so kind that He comes Himself
to instruct the bewildered living entity how to act obediently and then
gradually return home, back to Godhead, where he can attain an eternal,
peaceful life of bliss and knowledge. The living entity has a body, which
is a very complicated combination of the material elements, and with this
body he struggles alone, as indicated in this verse by the words ekas tu.
For example, if one is struggling in the ocean, he must swim through it
alone. Although many other men and aquatics are swimming in the
ocean, he must take care of himself because no one else will help him.
Therefore this verse indicates that the seventeenth item, the soul, must
work alone. Although he tries to create society, friendship and love, no
one will be able to help him but Krsna, the Supreme Lord. Therefore his
only concern should be how to satisfy Krsna. That is also what Krsna
wants (sarva-dharman parityajya mam 61077 Saranam vraja). People
bewildered by material conditions try to be united, but although they
strive for unity among men and nations, all their attempts are futile.
Everyone must struggle alone for existence with the many elements of
nature. Therefore one’s only hope, as Krsna advises, is to surrender to
Him, for He can help one become free from the ocean of nescience. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore prayed:

ayi nanda-tanuja kirkaram
patitarn mar visame bhavambudhau
krpaya tava pada-parikaja-
sthita-dhitli-sadrsarn vicintaya

“0 Krsna, beloved son of Nanda Maharaja, I am Your eternal servant,
but somehow or other I have fallen into this ocean of nescience, and al-
though I am struggling very hard, there is no way I can save myself. If


--- Page 77 ---
Text 51] The History of the Life of Ajamila 71
You kindly pick me up and fix me as one of the particles of dust at Your
lotus feet, that will save me.”
In a similar way, Bhaktivinoda Thakura sang:
anadi karama-phale, padi’ bhavarnava-jale,
taribare na dekhi upaya
“My dear Lord, I cannot remember when I somehow or other fell into
this ocean of nescience, and now I can find no way to rescue myself.” We
should remember that everyone is responsible for his own life. If an in-
dividual becomes a pure devotee of Krsna, he is then delivered from the
ocean of nescience.
TEXT 51
तदेतत्‌ षोडशकं RF शक्तित्रयं महत्‌ |
धत्तेऽनुसंसृतिं पुंसि दर्पशोकमयातिदपम्‌ ।५१॥।
tad etat sodasa-kalam
lingam sakti-trayam mahat
dhatte ’nusarnsrtim purisi
harsa-soka-bhayartidam
tat—therefore; etat—this; sodasa-kalam—made of sixteen parts
(namely the ten senses, the mind and the five sense objects); lingam —
the subtle body; Sakti-trayam —the effect of the three modes of material
nature; mahat—insurmountable; dhatte—gives; anusamsrtim—almost
perpetual rotation and transmigration in different types of bodies;
purmsi—unto the living entity; harsa—jubilation; Soka—lamentation;
bhaya—fear; arti—misery; dam—which gives.
TRANSLATION
The subtle body is endowed with sixteen parts—the five knowl-
edge-acquiring senses, the five working senses, the five objects of
sense gratification, and the mind. This subtle body is an effect of
the three modes of material nature. It is composed of insur-
mountably strong desires, and therefore it causes the living entity


--- Page 78 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
to transmigrate from one body to another in human life, animal
life and life as a demigod. When the living entity gets the body of a
demigod, he is certainly very jubilant, when he gets a human body
he is always in lamentation, and when he gets the body of an
animal, he is always afraid. In all conditions, however, he is ac-
tually miserable. His miserable condition is called sarnsrti, or
transmigration in material life.
PURPORT

The sum and substance of material conditional life is explained in this
verse. The living entity, the seventeenth element, is struggling alone,
life after life. This struggle is called sarsrti, or material conditional life.
In Bhagavad-gita it is said that the force of material nature is insur-
mountably strong (daivi hy esa gunamayi mama maya duratyaya).
Material nature harasses the living entity in different bodies, but if the
living entity surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he be-
comes free from this entanglement, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(mam eva ye prapadyante mayam 6৫7 taranti te). Thus his life be-
comes successful.

TEXT 52
देदयङ्ञोऽजितष्डवर्गो नेच्छन्‌ कर्माणि कार्यते |
कोशकार इवात्मानं कर्मणाच्छाद्य স্তহালি NSU
dehy ajiio ’jita-sad-vargo
necchan karmani karyate
kosakara iwatmanarin
karmanacchadya muhyati

dehi—the embodied soul; ajiah—without perfect knowledge; ajita-
sat-vargah—who has not controlled the senses of perception and the
mind; na icchan—without desiring; karmani—activities for material
benefit; karyate—is caused to perform; kosakarah—the silkworm;
iva—like; atmanam—himself; karmana—by fruitive activities; dc-
chadya—covering; muhyati—becomes bewildered.


--- Page 79 ---
Text 53] The History of the Life of Ajamila 73
TRANSLATION

The foolish embodied living entity, inept at controlling his
senses and mind, is forced to act according to the influence of the
modes of material nature, against his desires. He is like a silkworm
that uses its own saliva to create a cocoon and then becomes
trapped in it, with no possibility of getting out. The living entity
traps himself in a network of his own fruitive activities and then
can find no way to release himself. Thus he is always bewildered,
and repeatedly he dies.

PURPORT

As already explained, the influence of the modes of nature is very
strong. The living entity entangled in different types of fruitive activity
is like a silkworm trapped in a cocoon. Getting free is very difficult un-
less he is helped by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 53
न हि wim जातु fgets |
कार्यते द्यवशः क्म गुणैः खामाविकैर्बलात्‌ ।।५३॥
na hi kascit ksanam api
jatu tisthaty akarmakrt
karyate hy avasah karma
gunaih svabhavikair balat

na—not; hi—indeed; kascit—anyone; ksanam api—even for a
moment; jatu—at any time; tisthati—remains; akarma-krt— without
doing anything; karyate—he is caused to perform; hi—indeed;
avasah—automatically; karma—fruitive activities; gunaih—by the
three modes of nature; svabhavikaih—which are produced by his own
tendencies in previous lives; balat—by force.

TRANSLATION

Not a single living entity can remain unengaged even for a

moment. One must act by his natural tendency according to the


--- Page 80 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch.1
three modes of material nature because this natural tendency forc-
ibly makes him work in a particular way.
PURPORT
The svabhavika, or one’s natural tendency, is the most important fac-
tor in action. One’s natural tendency is to serve because a living entity is
an eternal servant of God. The living entity wants to serve, but because
of his forgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Lord, he serves
under the modes of material nature and manufactures various modes of
service, such as socialism, humanitarianism and altruism. However, one
should be enlightened in the tenets of Bhagavad-gita and accept the in-
struction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that one give up all
natural tendencies for material service under different names and take to
the service of the Lord. One’s original natural tendency is to act in Krsna
consciousness because one’s real nature is spiritual. The duty of a human
being is to understand that since he is essentially spirit, he must abide by
the spiritual tendency and not be carried away by material tendencies.
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has therefore sung:
(miche) mayara vase, yaccha bhese’,

khaccha habudubu, bhai
“My dear brothers, you are being carried away by the waves of material
energy and are suffering in many miserable conditions. Sometimes you
are drowning in the waves of material nature, and sometimes you are
tossed like a swimmer struggling in the ocean.” As confirmed by Bhakti-
vinoda Thakura, this tendency to be battered by the waves of maya can
be changed to one’s original, natural tendency, which is spiritual, when
the living entity comes to understand that he is eternally krsna-dasa, a
servant of God, Krsna.

(iva) krsna-dasa, ei visvasa,

karle ta’ ara duhkha nai
If instead of serving maya under different names, one turns his service
attitude toward the Supreme Lord, he is then safe, and there is no more
difficulty. If one returns to his original, natural tendency in the human


--- Page 81 ---
Text 54] The History of the Life of Ajamila 75
form of life by understanding the perfect knowledge given by Krsna
Himself in the Vedic literature, one’s life is successful.
TEXT 54
रन्ध्वा निमित्तमव्यक्तं व्यक्ताव्यक्तं मवत्युत।
यथायोनि यथाबीजं सखभावेन वरीयसा ।५४॥
labdhva nimittam avyaktamn
vyaktavyaktar bhavaty uta
yatha-yoni yatha-bijarm
svabhavena baliyasa
labdhva—having gotten; nimittam —the cause; avyaktam —unseen or
unknown to the person; vyakta-avyaktam—manifested and un-
manifested, or the gross body and the subtle body; bhavati—come into
being; uta—certainly; yatha-yoni—exactly like the mother; yatha-
bijam —exactly like the father; sva-bhavena—by the natural tendency;
baltyasa—which is very powerful.
TRANSLATION
The fruitive activities a living being performs, whether pious or
impious, are the unseen cause for the fulfillment of his desires.
This unseen cause is the root for the living entity’s different
bodies. Because of his intense desire, the living entity takes birth
in a particular family and receives a body which is either like that
of his mother or like that of his father. The gross and subtle
bodies are created according to his desire.
PURPORT
The gross body is a product of the subtle body. As stated in Bhagavad-
gita (8.6):
yar yarn vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tar tam evaiti kaunteya
sada tad-bhava-bhavitah


--- Page 82 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
“Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that
state he will attain without fail.” The atmosphere of the subtle body at
the time of death is created by the activities of the gross body. Thus the
gross body acts during one’s lifetime, and the subtle body acts at the time
of death. The subtle body, which is called liriga, the body of desire, is the
background for the development of a particular type of gross body,
which is either like that of one’s mother or like that of one’s father. Ac-
cording to the Rg Veda, if at the time of sex the secretions of the mother
are more profuse than those of the father, the child will receive a female
body, and if the secretions of the father are more profuse than those of
the mother, the child will receive a male body. These are the subtle laws
of nature, which act according to the desire of the living entity. If a
human being is taught to change his subtle body by developing a con-
sciousness of Krsna, at the time of death the subtle body will create a
gross body in which he will be a devotee of Krsna, or if he is still more
perfect, he will not take another material body but will immediately get a
spiritual body and thus return home, back to Godhead. This is the pro-
cess of the transmigration of the soul. Therefore instead of trying to
unite human society through pacts for sense gratification that can never
be achieved, it is clearly desirable to teach people how to become Krsna
conscious and return home, back to Godhead. This is true now and, in-
deed, at any time.
TEXT 55
एष॒ प्रक़ृतिसद्धेन पुरुषस्य विपर्ययः |
आसीत्‌ स एव नचिरादीशसङ्काद्विरीयते ।।५५॥
esa prakrti-sarigena
purusasya viparyayah
asit sa eva na cirad
Sa-sangad viltyate

esah —this; prakrti-sarigena—because of association with the material
nature; purusasya—of the living entity; viparyayah—a situation of
forgetfulness or an awkward position; dsit—came to be; sah —that posi-
tion; eva—indeed; na—not; cirat—taking a long time; ia-sangat—
from the association of the Supreme Lord; viliyate—is vanquished.


--- Page 83 ---
Text 57] The History of the Life of Ajamila 77
TRANSLATION
Since the living entity is associated with material nature, he is in
an awkward position, but if in the human form of life he is taught
how to associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His
devotee, this position can be overcome.
PURPORT
The word prakrti means material nature, and purusa may also refer to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one wants to continue his asso-
ciation with prakrti, the female energy of Krsna, and be separated from
Krsna by the illusion that he is able to enjoy prakrti, he must continue in
his conditional life. If he changes his consciousness, however, and asso-
ciates with the supreme, original person (purusarn $asvatam), or with
His associates, he can get out of the entanglement of material nature. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9), janma karma ca me divyam evam yo
vetti tattvatah: one must simply understand the Supreme Person, Krsna,
in terms of His form, name, activities and pastimes. This will keep one
always in the association of Krsna. Tyaktva dehari punar janma naiti
mam eti so 'rjuna: thus after giving up his gross material body, one ac-
cepts not another gross body but a spiritual body in which to return
home, back to Godhead. Thus one ends the tribulation caused by his
association with the material energy. In summary, the living entity is an
eternal servant of God, but he comes to the material world and is bound
by material conditions because of his desire to lord it over matter.
Liberation means giving up this false consciousness and reviving one’s
original service to the Lord. This return to one’s original life is called
mubkti, as confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (muktir hitvanyatha ripari
svariipena vyavasthitih).
TEXTS 56-57

अयं हि श्वुतसम्पनः शीलक्तगुणाठयः ।

धृतवतो FERIA: सत्यबाङकन्त्रविच्छुचिः REI

गुग्न्यतिथिव्रद्ानां ge: |

©.
सवेभूतसुहस्साधुमितवागनखयकः well


--- Page 84 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
ayar hi sruta-sampannah
Stla-vrtta-gunalayah
dhrta-vrato mrdur dantah
satya-van mantravic chucih
gurv-agny-atithi-vrddhanari
Susriasur anaharikrtah
sarva-bhita-suhrt sadhur
mita-vag anasiyakah
ayam—this person (known as Ajamila); hi—indeed; sruta-sampan-
nah—well educated in Vedic knowledge; sitla—of good character;
vrtta—good conduct; guna—and good qualities; alayah—the reservoir;
dhrta-vratah—fixed in the execution of the Vedic injunctions; mrduh—
very mild; dantah—completely controlling the mind and senses; satya-
vak—always truthful; mantra-vit—knowing how to chant the Vedic
hymns; Sucih—always very neat and clean; guru—the spiritual master;
agni—the fire-god; atithi—guests; vrddhanam—and of the old house-
hold members; susrizsuh—very respectfully engaged in the service;
anaharkrtah—without pride or false prestige; sarva-bhita-suhrt—
friendly to all living entities; sadhuh—well behaved (no one could find
any fault in his character); mita-vak—talking with great care not to
speak nonsense; anasityakah—not envious.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning this brahmana named Ajamila studied all the
Vedic literatures. He was a reservoir of good character, good con-
duct and good qualities. Firmly established in executing all the
Vedic injunctions, he was very mild and gentle, and he kept his
mind and senses under control. Furthermore, he was always
truthful, he knew how to chant the Vedic mantras, and he was also
very pure. Ajamila was very respectful to his spiritual master, the
fire-god, guests, and the elderly members of his household. In-
deed, he was free from false prestige. He was upright, benevolent
to all living entities, and well behaved. He would never speak non-
sense or envy anyone.


--- Page 85 ---
Text 60] The History of the Life of Ajamila 79
PURPORT
The order carriers of Yamaraja, the Yamadatas, are explaining the fac-
tual position of piety and impiety and how a living entity is entangled in
this material world. Describing the history of Ajamila’s life, the
Yamaditas relate that in the beginning he was a learned scholar of the
Vedic literature. He was well behaved, neat and clean, and very kind to
everyone. In fact, he had all good qualities. In other words, he was like a
perfect brahmana. A brahmana is expected to be perfectly pious, to
follow all the regulative principles and to have all good qualities. The
symptoms of piety are explained in these verses. Srila Viraraghava
Acarya comments that dhrta-vrata means dhrtari vrata stri-sanga-
rahityatmaka-brahmacarya-ripam. In other words, Ajamila followed
the rules and regulations of celibacy as a perfect brahmacari and was
very softhearted, truthful, clean and pure. How he fell down in spite of
all these qualities and thus came to be threatened with punishment by
Yamarija will be described in the following verses.
TEXTS 58-60
एकदासौ वनं यातः पिवरसन्देशकरद्‌ दिजः ।
आदाय तत आव्त्तः फलपुष्पसमित्छरशान्‌ ।५८॥
ददश कामिनं कञिच्छद्रं सह भुजिष्यया |
पीत्वा च मधु मैरेयं मदाघूणितनेत्रया ॥५९॥
मत्तया वि छथन्नीन्या व्यपेतं निरपत्रपम्‌ |
क्रीडन्तमनु गायन्तं हसन्तमनयान्तिके ॥६०॥
ekadasau ৮7077 yatah
pitr-sande$akrd dvijah
adaya tata avrttah
phala-puspa-samit-kusan
dadarsa kaminarh kancic
chiadram saha bhujisyaya


--- Page 86 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
pitva ca madhu maireyari
madaghiirnita-netraya
mattaya vislathan-nivya
vyapetari nirapatrapam
kridantam anugayantarn
hasantam anayantike
ekada—once upon a time; asau—this Ajamila; vanam yatah—went
to the forest; pitr—of his father; sandesa—the order; krt—carrying out;
dvijah—the brahmana; adaya—collecting; tatah—from the forest;
avrttah—returning; phala-puspa—fruits and flowers; samit-kusan—
two kinds of grass, known as samit and kuSa; dadarsa—saw;
kaminam—very lusty; kaficit—someone; Sitdram —a fourth-class man,
a Sidra; saha—along with; bhujisyaya—an ordinary maidservant or
prostitute;  pitva—after drinking; ca—also; madhu —nectar;
maireyam—made of the soma flower; mada—by intoxication; aghiir-
nita—moving; netraya—her eyes; mattaya—intoxicated; vislathat-
nivy@G—whose dress was slackened; vyapetam—fallen from proper
behavior; nirapatrapam—without fear of public opinion; kridantam —
engaged in enjoyment; anugdyantam—singing; hasantam—smiling;
anaya—with her; antike —close by.
TRANSLATION
Once this brahmana Ajamila, following the order of his father,
went to the forest to collect fruit, flowers and two kinds of grass,
called samit and kusa. On the way home, he came upon a §iidra, a
very lusty, fourth-class man, who was shamelessly embracing and
kissing a prostitute. The §iidra was smiling, singing and enjoying
as if this were proper behavior. Both the §idra and the prostitute
were drunk. The prostitute’s eyes were rolling in intoxication, and
her dress had become loose. Such was the condition in which
Ajamila saw them.
PURPORT
While traveling along the public way, Ajamila came upon a fourth-
class man and a prostitute, who are vividly described here. Drunkenness


--- Page 87 ---
Text 61] The History of the Life of Ajamila 81
was sometimes manifest even in bygone ages, although not very fre-
quently. In this age of Kali, however, such sin is to be seen everywhere,
for people all over the world have become shameless. Long ago, when he
saw the scene of the drunken Sidra and the prostitute, Ajamila, who was
a perfect brahmacari, was affected. Nowadays such sin is visible in so
many places, and we must consider the position of a brahmacari student
who sees such behavior. For such a brahmacari to remain steady is very
difficult unless he is extremely strong in following the regulative prin-
ciples. Nevertheless, if one takes to Krsna consciousness very seriously,
he can withstand the provocation created by sin. In our Krsna conscious-
ness movement we prohibit illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and
gambling. In Kali-yuga, a drunk, half-naked woman embracing a drunk
man is a very common sight, especially in the Western countries, and
restraining oneself after seeing such things is very difficult. Neverthe-
less, if by the grace of Krsna one adheres to the regulative principles and
chants the Hare Krsna mantra, Krsna will certainly protect him. Indeed,
Krsna says that His devotee is never vanquished (kaunteya pratijanthi
na me bhaktah pranasyati). Therefore all the disciples practicing Krsna
consciousness should obediently follow the regulative principles and
remain fixed in chanting the holy name of the Lord. Then there need be
no fear. Otherwise one’s position is very dangerous, especially in this
Kali-yuga.
TEXT 61
TY तां कामरिपतेन बाहुना परिरम्भिताम्‌ |
जगाम हच्छयवक्षं सहसैव विमोहितः ।६१॥
drstva (काः kama-liptena
bahuna parirambhitam
Jjagama hrc-chaya-vasarm
sahasaiva vimohitah

drstva—by seeing; tam—her (the prostitute); kama-liptena—deco-
rated with turmeric to incite lusty desires; bahuna—with the arm;
parirambhitam—embraced; jagama—went; hrt-Saya—of lusty desires
within the heart; vasam—under the control; sahasa—suddenly; eva—
indeed; vimohitah—being illusioned.


--- Page 88 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
TRANSLATION
The Sidra, his arm decorated with turmeric powder, was
embracing the prostitute. When Ajamila saw her, the dormant
lusty desires in his heart awakened, and in illusion he fell under
their control.
PURPORT
It is said that if one’s body is smeared with turmeric, it attracts the
lusty desires of the opposite sex. The word kama-liptena indicates that
the Sizdra was decorated with turmeric smeared on his body.
TEXT 62
स्तम्भय न्नात्मनात्मानं यावत्सत्त्वं यथाश्चुतम्‌ |
न TIE समाधातं मनो मदनवेपितम्‌ ।।६२॥
stambhayann atmanatmanam
yavat sattvarm yatha-srutam
na $asaka samadhaturi
mano madana-vepitam
stambhayan—trying to control; atmana—by the intelligence; at-
manam—the mind; ydvat sattvam—as far as possible for him; yatha-
§rutam —by remembering the instruction (of celibacy, brahmacarya, not
even to see a woman); na—not; 5०51८ -- ५85 able; samadhatum—to
restrain; manah—the mind; madana-vepitam—agitated by Cupid or
lusty desire.
TRANSLATION
As far as possible he patiently tried to remember the instruc-
tions of the $astras not even to see a woman. With the help of this
knowledge and his intellect, he tried to control his lusty desires,
but because of the force of Cupid within his heart, he failed to
control his mind.
PURPORT
Unless one is very strong in knowledge, patience and proper bodily,
mental and intellectual bahavior, controlling one’s lusty desires is ex-


--- Page 89 ---
Text 63] The History of the Life of Ajamila 83
tremely difficult. Thus after seeing a man embracing a young woman and
practically doing everything required for sex life, even a fully qualified
brahmana, as described above, could not control his lusty desires and
restrain himself from pursuing them. Because of the force of ma-
terialistic life, to maintain self-control is extremely difficult unless one is
specifically under the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through devotional service.
TEXT 63
तन्निमित्तसरल्याजग्रह्रस्तो विचेतनः ।
तामेव मनसा ध्यायन्‌ SIE ह ॥६२॥
tan-nimitta-smara-vyaja-
graha-grasto vicetanah
tam eva manasa dhydayan
sva-dharmad virarama ha
tat-nimitta—caused by the sight of her; smara-vyaja—taking advan-
tage of his thinking of her always; graha-grastah—being caught by an
eclipse; vicetanah—having completely forgotten his real position; tam—
her; eva—certainly; manasa—by the mind; dhydyan—meditating
upon; sva-dharmat—from the regulative principles executed by a
brahmana; virarama ha—he completely ceased.
TRANSLATION
In the same way that the sun and moon are eclipsed by a low
planet, the brahmana lost all his good sense. Taking advantage of
this situation, he always thought of the prostitute, and within a
short time he took her as a servant in his house and abandoned all
the regulative principles of a brahmana.
PURPORT
By speaking this verse, Sukadeva Gosvami wants to impress upon the
mind of the reader that Ajamila’s exalted position as a brahmana was
vanquished by his association with the prostitute, so much so that he
forgot all his brahminical activities. Nevertheless, at the end of his life,


--- Page 90 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
by chanting the four syllables of the name Narayana, he was saved from
the gravest danger of falling down. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya tray-
ate mahato bhayat: even a little devotional service can save one from the
greatest danger. Devotional service, which begins with chanting of the
holy name of the Lord, is so powerful that even if one falls down from
the exalted position of a brahmana through sexual indulgence, he can be
saved from all calamities if he somehow or other chants the the holy
name of the Lord. This is the extraordinary power of the Lord’s holy
name. Therefore in Bhagavad-gita it is advised that one not forget the
chanting of the holy name even for a moment (satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratah). There are so many dangers in this material
world that one may fall down from an exalted position at any time. Yet if
one keeps himself always pure and steady by chanting the Hare Krsna
maha-mantra, he will be safe without a doubt.
TEXT 64
तामेव तोषयामास ॒पित्रयेणार्थेन यावता ।
Q
ग्राम्यमनोरमेः कामैः प्रसीदेत यथा तथा ॥६७॥
tam eva tosayam asa
pitryendrthena yavata
gramyair manoramaih kamaih
prasideta yatha tatha

tam—her (the prostitute); eva—indeed; tosayam asa—he tried to
please; pitryena—he got from his father’s hard labor; arthena—by the
money; ydvatd—as long as possible; gramyaih—material; manah-
ramaih—pleasing to her mind; kamaih—by presentations for sense en-
joyment; prasideta—she would be satisfied; yathda—so that; tatha —in
that way.

TRANSLATION

Thus Ajamila began spending whatever money he had inherited
from his father to satisfy the prostitute with various material pre-
sentations so that she would remain pleased with him. He gave up
all his brahminical activities to satisfy the prostitute.


--- Page 91 ---
Text 65] The History of the Life of Ajamila 85
PURPORT
There are many instances throughout the world in which even a
purified person, being attracted by a prostitute, spends all the money he
has inherited. Prostitute hunting is so abominable that the desire for sex
with a prostitute can ruin one’s character, destroy one’s exalted position
and plunder all one’s money. Therefore illicit sex is strictly prohibited.
One should be satisfied with his married wife, for even a slight deviation
will create havoc. A Krsna conscious grhastha should always remember
this. He should always be satisfied with one wife and be peaceful simply
by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. Otherwise at any moment he may
fall down from his good position, as exemplified in the case of Ajamila.
TEXT 65
fast खमार्यामप्रौढां के महति लम्भिताम्‌ |
ॐ,
विससर्जाविरात्पापः स्वैरिण्यापाङ्गविद्धधीः ॥६५॥
vipram sva-bharyam apraudharm
kule mahati lambhitam
visasarjacirat papah
svairinyapanga-viddha-dhih
vipram—the daughter of a brahmana; sva-bharyam—his wife;
apraudham—not very old (youthful); kule—from a family; mahati—
very respectable; lambhitam—married; visasarja—he gave up; acirat—
very soon; papah—being sinful; svairinya—of the prostitute; aparnga-
viddha-dhih—his intelligence pierced by the lustful glance.
TRANSLATION
Because his intelligence was pierced by the lustful glance of the
prostitute, the victimized brahmana Ajamila engaged in sinful acts
in her association. He even gave up the company of his very
beautiful young wife, who came from a very respectable brahmana
family.
PURPORT
Customarily everyone is eligible to inherit his father’s property, and
Ajamila also inherited the money of his father. But what did he do with


--- Page 92 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
the money? Instead of engaging the money in the service of Krsna, he
engaged it in the service of a prostitute. Therefore he was condemned
and was punishable by Yamaraja. How did this happen? He was vic-
timized by the dangerous lustful glance of a prostitute.
TEXT 66
यतस्ततश्चोपनिन्ये न्यायतोऽन्यायतो धनम्‌ |
बभारास्याः FAN: FTF मन्द्‌ धीरयम्‌।।६६॥
yatas ८८125 copaninye
nyayato ‘nyayato dhanam
babharasyah kutumbinyah
kutumbarih manda-dhir ayam
yatah tatah—wherever possible, however possible; ca—and; upa-
ninye—he got;  nyadyatah—properly;  anyayatah—improperly;
dhanam —money; babhdara—he maintained; asyah—of her; kutum-
binyah—possessing many sons and daughters; kutumbam—the family;
manda-dhih—Dbereft of all intelligence; ayam—this person (Ajamila).:
TRANSLATION
Although born of a brahmana family, this rascal, bereft of intel-
ligence because of the prostitute’s association, earned money
somehow or other, regardless of whether properly or improperly,
and used it to maintain the prostitute’s sons and daughters.
TEXT 67
=
यदसौ शाखलक्षथ स्वैरचार्यतिगर्हितः |
अवर्तत चिरं काठमषायुरञ्चि्मलात्‌ Sell
yad asau sastram ullanghya
svaira-cary ati-garhitah
avartata 087072 kalam
aghayur asucir malat


--- Page 93 ---
Text 68] The History of the Life of Ajamila 87
yat—because; asau—this brahmana; sastram ullarighya—trans-
gressing the laws of $astra; svaira-cari—acting irresponsibly; ati-
garhitah—very much condemned; avartata—passed; ciram kalam—a
long time; agha-ayuh—whose life was full of sinful activities; aSucih—
unclean; malat—because of impurity.
TRANSLATION
This brahmana irresponsibly spent his long lifetime transgress-
ing all the rules and regulations of the holy scripture, living ex-
travagantly and eating food prepared by a prostitute. Therefore he
is full of sins. He is unclean and is addicted to forbidden activities.
PURPORT
Food prepared by an unclean, sinful man or woman, especially a
prostitute, is extremely infectious. Ajamila ate such food, and therefore
he was subject to be punished by Yamaraja.
TEXT 68
तत एनं दण्डपाणेः सकाशं कृतकिरिविषम्‌ |
Ne
ने्यामोऽकृतनिवेशं यत्र दण्डेन IIA ॥६८॥
tata शका? danda-paneh
sakasam krta-kilbisam
nesyamo ’krta-nirvesam
yatra dandena suddhyati
tatah—therefore; enam—him; danda-paneh—of Yamaraja, who is
authorized to punish; sakasam—in the presence; krta-kilbisam—who
has regularly committed all sinful activities; nesyamah—we shall take;
akrta-nirvesam—who has not undergone atonement; yatra—where;
dandena—by punishment; Suddhyati—he will be purified.
` TRANSLATION
This man Ajamila did not undergo atonement. Therefore be-
cause of his sinful life, we must take him into the presence of


--- Page 94 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 1
Yamaraja for punishment. There, according to the extent of his
sinful acts, he will be punished and thus purified.
PURPORT

The Visnuditas had forbidden the Yamaditas to take Ajamila to
Yamaraja, and therefore the Yamaditas explained that taking such a man
to Yamaraja was appropriate. Since Ajamila had not undergone atone-
ment for his sinful acts, he was to be taken to Yamaraja to be purified.
When a man commits murder he becomes sinful, and therefore he also
must be killed; otherwise after death he must suffer many sinful re-
actions. Similarly, punishment by Yamaraja is a process of purification
for the most abominable sinful persons. Therefore the Yamadiitas re-
quested the Visnudiitas not to obstruct their taking Ajamila to Yamaraja.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, First Chapter
of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The History of the Life of Ajamila.”


--- Page 95 ---
CHAPTER TWO
Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas

In this chapter the messengers from Vaikuntha explain to the Yamadutas
the glories of chanting the holy name of the Lord. The 19100001085 said,
“Now impious acts are being performed even in an assembly of devotees,
for a person who is not punishable is going to be punished in the assem-
bly of Yamaraja. The mass of people are helpless and must depend upon
the government for their safety and security, but if the government
takes advantage of this to harm the citizens, where will they go? We see
perfectly that Ajamila should not be punished, although you are attempt-
ing to take him to Yamaraja for punishment.”

It was due to Ajamila’s glorifying the holy name of the Supreme Lord
that he was not punishable. The Visnuditas explained this as follows:
“Simply by once chanting the holy name of Narayana, this brahmana
has become free from the reactions of sinful life. Indeed, he has been
freed not only from the sins of this life, but from the sins of many, many
thousands of other lives. He has already undergone true atonement for
all his sinful actions. If one atones according to the directions of the
Sastras, one does not actually become free from sinful reactions, but if
one chants the holy name of the Lord, even a glimpse of such chanting
can immediately free one from all sins. Chanting the glories of the Lord’s
holy name awakens all good fortune. Therefore there is no doubt that
Ajamila, being completely free from all sinful reactions, should not be
punished by Yamaraja.”

As they were saying this, the ৬1510000095 released Ajamila from the
ropes of the Yamadatas and left for their own abode. The brahmana
Ajamila, however, offered his respectful obeisances to the ৬1910001035.
He could understand how fortunate he was to have chanted the holy
name of Narayana at the end of his life. Indeed, he could realize the full
significance of this good fortune. Having thoroughly understood the dis-
cussion between the Yamadatas and the ৬1911001085, he became a pure
devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He lamented very much
for how very sinful he had been, and he condemned himself again and
again.

89


--- Page 96 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2

Finally, because of his association with the ৬1910000035, Ajamila, his
original consciousness aroused, gave up everything and went to Hard-
war, where he engaged in devotional service without deviation, always
thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus the ৬1510000195
went there, seated him on a golden throne and took him away to
Vaikunthaloka.

In summary, although the sinful Ajamila meant to call his son, the
holy name of Lord Narayana, even though chanted in the preliminary
stage, namabhdsa, was able to give him liberation. Therefore one who
chants the holy name of the Lord with faith and devotion is certainly ex-
alted. He is protected even in his material, conditional life.

TEXT 1
श्रीकादरायणिरुका्‌
एवं A मगवदूता यमदूताभिभाषितम्‌ |
उपधार्याथ तान्‌ राजन्‌ प्रत्याहुनंयकोबिदाः ॥ १ ॥
Sri-badarayanir uvaca
evar te bhagavad-dita
yamaditabhibhasitam
upadharyatha tan rajan
pratyahur naya-kovidah

sri-badarayanih uvica—Sukadeva Gosvami, the son of Vyasadeva,
said; evam—thus; te—they; bhagavat-ditah—the servants of Lord
Visnu; yamadita—by the servants of Yamaraja; abhibhasitam —what
was spoken; upadhdarya—hearing; atha—then; tan—unto them; ra-
jan—O0 King; pratyahuh—replied properly; naya-kovidah—being con-
versant in good arguments or good logic.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, the servants of Lord
Visnu are always very expert in logic and arguments. After hearing
the statements of the Yamadiitas, they replied as follows.


--- Page 97 ---
Text 2] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudiitas 91
TEXT 2
श्री विष्णुदूता ऊचुः
©,
अहो कष्टं धर्मदशामधमेः स्पशते सभाम्‌ |
खत्रादण्ठ्येष्वपापे दण्डो IEA इया ॥ २॥
$ri-visnudita ८८८
aho kastarn dharma-drsam
adharmah spriate sabham
yatradandyesv apapesu
dando yair dhriyate vrtha
sri-visnudutah dcuh—the Visnuditas said; aho—alas; kastam —how
painful it is; dharma-driam—of persons interested in maintaining
religion; adharmah—irreligion; sprsate—is affecting; sabham—the
assembly; yatra—wherein; adandyesu—upon persons not to be
punished; apapesu—who are sinless; dandah—punishment; yaih—by
whom; dhriyate—is being allotted; vrtha@—unnecessarily.
TRANSLATION
The Visnuditas said: Alas, how painful it is that irreligion is
being introduced into an assembly where religion should be main-
tained. Indeed, those in charge of maintaining the religious prin-
ciples are needlessly punishing a sinless, unpunishable person.
PURPORT
The Visnudiitas accused the Yamadiitas of violating the religious prin-
ciples by attempting to drag Ajamila to Yamaraja for punishment.
Yamaraja is the officer appointed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to judge religious and irreligious principles and to punish people who are
irreligious. However, if completely sinless people are punished, the en-
tire assembly of Yamaraja is contaminated. This principle applies not
only in the assembly of Yamaraja, but throughout human society also.
In human society, properly maintaining religious principles is the duty
of the king’s court or the government. Unfortunately, in this yuga, Kali-
yuga, the religious principles are tampered with, and the government


--- Page 98 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
cannot properly judge who is to be punished and who is not. It is said that
in the Kali-yuga if one cannot spend money in court, one cannot get
justice. Indeed, in courts of justice it is often found that magistrates are
bribed for favorable judgments. Sometimes religious men who preach
the Krsna consciousness movement for the benefit of the entire populace
are arrested and harassed by the police and courts. The Visnuditas, who
are Vaisnavas, lamented for these very regrettable facts. Because of their
spiritual compassion for all the fallen souls, Vaisnavas go out to preach
according to the standard method of all religious principles, but unfor-
tunately, because of the influence of Kali-yuga, Vaisnavas who have
dedicated their lives to preaching the glories of the Lord are sometimes
harassed and punished by courts on false charges of disturbing the peace.
TEXT 3
sot पितरो ये च शास्तारः साधवः समाः ।
>, ५ .
यदि स्यात्तेषु बेषम्यं क यान्ति शरणं प्रजाः ॥ २ ॥
prajanan pitaro ye ca
57510704. sadhavah samah
yadi syat tesu vaisamyari
kari yanti Saranam prajah

prajanam—of the citizens; pitarah—protectors, guardians (kings or
government servants); ye—they who; ca—and; sastarakh—give instruc-
tions concerning law and order; sadhavah—endowed with all good
qualities; samah—equal to everyone; yadi—if; syat—there is; tesu—
among them; vaisamyam—partiality; kam—what; yanti—will go to;
Saranam—shelter; prajah—the citizens.

TRANSLATION

A king or governmental official should be so well qualified that
he acts as a father, maintainer and protector of the citizens because
of affection and love. He should give the citizens good advice and
instructions according to the standard scriptures and should be
equal to everyone. Yamaraja does this, for he is the supreme
master of justice, and so do those who follow in his footsteps.


--- Page 99 ---
Text 4] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudutas 93
However, if such persons become polluted and exhibit partiality
by punishing an innocent, blameless person, where will the
citizens go to take shelter for their maintenance and security?
PURPORT

The king, or in modern times the government, should act as the guar-
dian of the citizens by teaching them the proper goal of life. The human
form of life is especially meant for realization of one’s self and one’s
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead because this can-
not be realized in animal life. The duty of the government, therefore, is
to take charge of training all the citizens in such a way that by a gradual
process they will be elevated to the spiritual platform and will realize the
self and his relationship with God. This principle was followed by kings
like Maharaja Yudhisthira, Maharaja Pariksit, Lord Ramacandra,
Maharaja Ambarisa and Prahlada Maharaja. The leaders of the govern-
ment must be very honest and religious because otherwise all the affairs
of the state will suffer. Unfortunately, in the name of democracy, rogues
and thieves are electing other rogues and thieves to the most important
posts in the government. Recently this has been proven in America,
where the president had to be condemned and dragged down from his
post by the citizens. This is only one case, but there are many others. Be-
cause of the importance of the Krsna consciousness movement, people
should be Krsna conscious and should not vote for anyone who is not
Krsna conscious. Then there will be actual peace and prosperity in the
state. When a Vaisnava sees mismanagement in the government, he feels
great compassion in his heart and tries his best to purify the situation by
spreading the Hare Krsna movement.

TEXT 4
यद्यदाचरति श्रेयानितरस्त्तदीहते |
स॒ यत्प्रमाणं रुते लोकस्तद जुवतैते || ४॥
yad yad dacarati sreyan
itaras tat tad thate
sa yat pramanam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate


--- Page 100 ---
94. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
yat yat—whatever; dcarati—executes; sreyan—a first-class man with
full knowledge of religious principles; itarah—the subordinate man; tat
tat—that; thate—performs; sah—he (the great man); yat—whatever;
pramanam—as evidence or as the right thing; kurute—accepts; lokah—
the general public; tat—that; anuvartate —follows.
TRANSLATION
The mass of people follow the example of a leader in society and
imitate his behavior. They accept as evidence whatever the leader
accepts.
PURPORT
Although Ajamila was not punishable, the Yamaditas were insisting
on taking him away to Yamaraja for punishment. This was adharma,
contrary to religious principles. The Visnuditas feared that if such ir-
religious acts were allowed, the management of human society would be
spoiled. In modern times, the Krsna consciousness movement is trying to
introduce the right principles of management for human society, but un-
fortunately the governments of Kali-yuga do not properly support the
Hare Krsna movement because they do not appreciate its valuable ser-
vice. The Hare Krsna movement is the right movement for ameliorating
the fallen condition of human society, and therefore governments and
public leaders in every part of the world should support this movement
to completely rectify humanity’s sinful condition.
TEXTS 5-6
यस्याङ्के शिर आधाय लोकः स्वपिति fda: |
ad धर्ममधर्मं वा न हि वेद्‌ यथा पञ्चः ॥ ५॥
स॒ कथं न्यर्पितात्मानं छृतमत्रमचेतनम्‌ |
विख्म्मणीयो भूतानां सधृणो दोग्धुमहेति ।॥ ६ ॥
yasyarnke Sira adhaya
lokah svapiti nirvrtah
svayam dharmam adharmam va
na hi veda yatha pasuh


--- Page 101 ---
Text 6] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudutas 95
sa kathari nyarpitatmanar
krta-maitram acetanam
visrambhaniyo bhitanarn
saghrno dogdhum arhati
yasya—of whom; arike—on the lap; Sirah —the head; adhaya—plac-
ing; lokah—the general mass of people; svapiti—sleep; nirvrtah—in
peace; svayam —personally; dharmam—religious principles or the goal
of life; adharmam—irreligious principles; va—or; na—not; hi—in-
deed; veda—know; yatha —exactly like; pasuh—an animal; sah —such
a person; katham—how; nyarpita-atmanam—unto the living entity
who has fully surrendered; krta-maitram —endowed with good faith and
friendship; acetanam —with undeveloped consciousness, foolish;
visrambhaniyah —deserving to be the object of faith; bhiitanam—of the
living entities; sa-ghrnah—who has a soft heart for the good of all
people; dogdhum —to give pain; arhati—is able.
TRANSLATION
People in general are not very advanced in knowledge by which
to discriminate between religion and irreligion. The innocent,
unenlightened citizen is like an ignorant animal sleeping in peace
with its head on the lap of its master, faithfully believing in the
master’s protection. If a leader is actually kindhearted and
deserves to be the object of a living entity’s faith, how can he
punish or kill a foolish person who has fully surrendered in good
faith and friendship?
PURPORT
The Sanskrit word viSvasta-ghata refers to one who breaks faith or
causes a breach of trust. The mass of people should always feel security
because of the government’s protection. Therefore, how regrettable it is
for the government itself to cause a breach of trust and put the citizens in
difficulty for political reasons. We actually saw during the partition days
in India that although Hindus and Muslims were living together
peacefully, manipulation by politicians suddenly aroused feelings of
hatred between them, and thus the Hindus and Muslims killed one
another over politics. This is a sign of Kali-yuga. In this age, animals are


--- Page 102 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
kept nicely sheltered, completely confident that their masters will protect
them, but unfortunately as soon as the animals are fat, they are im-
mediately sent for slaughter. Such cruelty is condemned by ४9514८३5
like the Visnuditas. Indeed, the hellish conditions already described
await the sinful men responsible for such suffering. One who betrays the
confidence of a living entity who takes shelter of him in good faith,
whether that living entity be a human being or an animal, is extremely
sinful. Because such betrayals now go unpunished by the government,
all of human society is terribly contaminated. The people of this age are
therefore described as mandah sumanda-matayo manda-bhagya hy
upadrutah. As a consequence of such sinfulness, men are condemned
(mandah), their intelligence is unclear (sumanda-matayah), they are
unfortunate (manda-bhagyah), and therefore they are always disturbed
by many problems (upadrutah). This is their situation in this life, and
after death they are punished in hellish conditions.
TEXT 7
ও -
अयं हि कृतनिर्वेशो जन्मकोवव्यंहसामपि |
यद्‌ व्याजहार विवशो नाम खस्त्ययनं हरेः ॥ ७ ॥
aya hi krta-nirveso
Jjanma-koty-amhasam api
yad vyajahara vivaso
nama svasty-ayanari hareh
ayam—this person (Ajamila); hi—indeed; krta-nirvesah—has un-
dergone all kinds of atonement; janma—of births; koti—of millions;
armmhasam—for the sinful activities; api—even; yat—because; vya-
jahara—he has chanted; vivasah—in a helpless condition; nama—the
holy name; svasti-ayanam—the means of liberation; hareh—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Ajamila has already atoned for all his sinful actions. Indeed, he
has atoned not only for sins performed in one life but for those
performed in millions of lives, for in a helpless condition he


--- Page 103 ---
Text 7] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 97
chanted the holy name of Narayana. Even though he did not chant
purely, he chanted without offense, and therefore he is now pure
and eligible for liberation.
PURPORT
The Yamadiitas had considered only the external situation of Ajamila.
Since he was extremely sinful throughout his life, they thought he
should be taken to Yamaraja and did not know that he had become free
from the reactions of all his sins. The Visnudiitas therefore instructed
that because he had chanted the four syllables of the name Narayana at
the time of his death, he was freed from all sinful reactions. In this
regard Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura quotes the following verses
from the smrti-sastra:
namno hi yavati Saktih
papa-nirharane hareh
tavat karturn na Saknoti
patakarh pataki narah
“Simply by chanting one holy name of Hari, a sinful man can counteract
the reactions to more sins than he is able to commit.” (Brhad-visnu
Purana)
avasenapi yan-namni
kirtite sarva-patakaih
puman vimucyate sadyah
sirha-trastair mrgair iva
“If one chants the holy name of the Lord, even in a helpless condition or
without desiring to do so, all the reactions of his sinful life depart, just as
when a lion roars, all the small animals flee in fear.” (Garuda Purana)
sakrd uccaritarn yena
harir ity aksara-dvayam
baddha-parikaras tena
moksaya gamanarh prati


--- Page 104 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
“By once chanting the holy name of the Lord, which consists of the two
syllables ha-ri, one guarantees his path to liberation.” (Skanda Purana)
These are some of the reasons why the Visnuditas objected to the
Yamadiitas’ taking Ajamila to the court of Yamaraja.
TEXT 8
एतेनैव ANNE कृतं WRATH |
यदा नारायणायेति जगाद चतुरक्षरम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
etenaiva hy aghono ’sya
(वः syad agha-niskrtam
yada narayandyeti
Jjagada catur-aksaram
etena—by this (chanting); eva—indeed; hi—certainly; aghonah—
who possesses sinful reactions; asya—of this (Ajamila); krtam—per-
formed; syat—is; agha—of sins; niskrtam—complete atonement;
yada—when; narayana—O Narayana (the name of his son); aya—
please come; iti—thus; jagada—he chanted; catuh-aksaram—the four
syllables (na-ra-ya-na). ;
TRANSLATION
The Visnudiitas continued: Even previously, while eating and at
other times, this Ajamila would call his son, saying, “My dear
Narayana, please come here.”” Although calling the name of his
son, he nevertheless uttered the four syllables na-ra-ya-na. Simply
by chanting the name of Narayana in this way, he sufficiently
atoned for the sinful reactions of millions of lives.
PURPORT
Previously, when engaged in sinful activities to maintain his family,
Ajamila chanted the name of Narayana without offenses. To chant the
holy name of the Lord just to counteract one’s sinful activities, or to com-
mit sinful activities on the strength of chanting the holy name, is offen-
sive (namno balad yasya hi papa-buddhih). But although Ajamila
engaged in sinful activities, he never chanted the holy name of Narayana


--- Page 105 ---
Text 10] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 99
to counteract them; he simply chanted the name Narayana to call his son.
Therefore his chanting was effective. Because of chanting the holy name
of Narayana in this way, he had already vanquished the accumulated sin-
ful reactions of many, many lives. In the beginning he was pure, but al-
though he later committed many sinful acts, he was offenseless because
he did not chant the holy name of Narayana to counteract them. One who
always chants the holy name of the Lord without offenses is always pure.
As confirmed in this verse Ajamila was already sinless, and because he
chanted the name of Narayana he remained sinless. It did not matter that
he was calling his son; the name itself was effective.
TEXTS 9-10
स्तेनः सुरापो मित्रधग्‌ नहमहा गुरुतल्पगः |
स्लीराजपि्गोहन्ता ये च पातकिनोऽपरे ॥ ९ ॥
सर्वेषामप्यषवतापिदमेव सुनिष्कृतम्‌ |
नामन्याहरणं विष्णो्यतस्तद्विषथा मतिः ।॥१०॥
stenah sura-po mitra-dhrug
brahma-ha guru-talpa-gah
stri-raja-pitr-go-hanta
ye ca patakino ‘pare
sarvesam apy aghavatam
idam eva suniskrtam
nama-vyaharanam visnor
yatas tad-visaya matih
stenah—one who steals; sura-pah—a drunkard; mitra-dhruk—one
who turns against a friend or relative; brahma-ha—one who kills a
brahmana; guru-talpa-gah—one who indulges in sex with the wife of
his teacher or guru; stri—women; raja—king; pitr—father; go—of
cows; hanta—the killer; ye—those who; ca—also; patakinah—commit-
ted sinful activities; apare—many others; sarvesam—of all of them;
api—although; agha-vatam—persons who have committed many sins;
idam—this; eva—certainly; su-niskrtam—perfect atonement; nama-


--- Page 106 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
vyaharanam—chanting of the holy name; visnoh—of Lord Vispu;
yatah—because of which; tat-visaya—on the person who chants the
holy name; matih—His attention.
TRANSLATION

The chanting of the holy name of Lord Visnu is the best process
of atonement for a thief of gold or other valuables, for a
drunkard, for one who betrays a friend or relative, for one who
kills a brahmana, or for one who indulges in sex with the wife of
his guru or another superior. It is also the best method of atone-
ment for one who murders women, the king or his father, for one
who slaughters cows, and for all other sinful men. Simply by
chanting the holy name of Lord Visnu, such sinful persons may at-
tract the attention of the Supreme Lord, who therefore considers,
“Because this man has chanted My holy name, My duty is to give
him protection.”

TEXT 11
न निष्ठतेरुदितेबेकषयादिमि-
स्तथा gga वतादिभिः |
यथा RARER
स्तदु्मश्छोकगुणोपलम्भकम्‌ 112211
na niskrtair uditair brahma-vadibhis
tatha visuddhyaty aghavan vratadibhih
yatha harer nama-padair udahrtais
tad uttamasloka-gunopalambhakam

na—not; niskrtath—by the processes of atonement; uditaih—
prescribed; brahma-vadibhih—by learned scholars such as Manu;
tatha—to that extent; viSuddhyati—becomes purified; agha-van—a sin-
ful man; vrata-adibhih—by observing the vows and regulative prin-
ciples; yatha—as; hareh—of Lord Hari; nama-padaih—Dby the syllables
of the holy name; udahrtaih—chanted; tat—that; uttamasloka—of the


--- Page 107 ---
Text 11] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 101
Supreme Personality of Godhead; guna —of the transcendental qualities;
upalambhakam —reminding one.
TRANSLATION

By following the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies or undergoing
atonement, sinful men do not become as purified as by chanting
once the holy name of Lord Hari. Although ritualistic atonement
may free one from sinful reactions, it does not awaken devotional
service, unlike the chanting of the Lord’s names, which reminds
one of the Lord’s fame, qualities, attributes, pastimes and
paraphernalia.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that the chanting of
the holy name of the Lord has special significance that distinguishes it
from the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies of atonement for severe, more
severe or most severe sinful actions. There are twenty types of religious
scriptures called dharma-sastras, beginning with the Manu-sarihita and
Parasara-sarhita, but herein it is stressed that although one may be-
come free from the reactions of the most sinful activities by following the
religious principles of these scriptures, this cannot promote a sinful man
to the stage of loving service to the Lord. On the other hand, chanting the
holy name of the Lord even once not only frees one immediately from
the reactions of the greatest sins, but also raises one to the platform of
rendering loving service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
described as uttamasloka because He is famous for His glorious activities.
Thus one serves the Lord by remembering His form, His attributes and
pastimes. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura explains that this is all
possible simply by chanting the Lord’s holy name because of the Lord’s
omnipotence. What cannot be achieved through the performance of
Vedic rituals can be easily achieved through the chanting of the Lord’s
holy name. To chant the holy name and dance in ecstasy is so easy and
sublime that one can achieve all the benefits of spiritual life simply by
following this process. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu declares,
param vijayate Sri-krsna-sankirtanam: “All glories to Sri Krsna
sarikirtana!” The sarnkirtana movement we have started offers the best


--- Page 108 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
process for becoming purified of all sinful reactions and coming im-
mediately to the platform of spiritual life.
TEXT 12
.
नैकान्तिकं तद्धि कृतेऽपि निष्कृते
मनः पुनर्धादति ge |
तत्कयेनिदीरमभीप्सतां हरे-
ga: सक्छ सत्वभावनः ॥ १२)
naikantikar tad dhi krte ‘pi niskrte
manah punar dhavati ced asat-pathe
tat karma-nirharam abhipsatam harer
gunanuvadah khalu sattva-bhavanah
na—not; aikantikam—absolutely cleansed; tat—the heart; hi—
because; krte—very nicely performed; api—although; niskrte—
atonement; manah—the mind; punah—again; dhavati—runs; cet—if;
asat-pathe —on the path of material activities; tat—therefore; karma-
nirharam—cessation of the fruitive reactions of material activities;
abhipsatam —for those who seriously want; hareh—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; guna-anuvadah—constant chanting of the glories;
khalu—indeed; sattva-bhavanah—actually purifying one’s existence.
TRANSLATION
The ritualistic ceremonies of atonement recommended in the
religious scriptures are insufficient to cleanse the heart absolutely
because after atonement one’s mind again runs toward material ac-
tivities. Consequently, for one who wants liberation from the
fruitive reactions of material activities, the chanting of the Hare
Krsna mantra, or glorification of the name, fame and pastimes of
the Lord, is recommended as the most perfect process of atone-
ment because such chanting eradicates the dirt from one’s heart
completely.


--- Page 109 ---
Text 13] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudutas 103
PURPORT
, The statements in this verse have been confirmed previously in
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.17):
Srnvatarh sva-kathah krsnah
punya-sravana-kirtanah
hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani
vidhunott suhrt satam

“Sri Krsna, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramitma
[Supersoul] in everyone’s heart and the benefactor of the truthful devo-
tee, cleanses desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee
who relishes His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when prop-
erly heard and chanted.” It is the special mercy of the Supreme Lord that
as soon as He knows that one is glorifying His name, fame and attributes,
He personally helps cleanse the dirt from one’s heart. Therefore simply
by such glorification one not only becomes purified, but also achieves the
results of pious activities (punya-sravana-kirtana). Punya-sravana-
kirtana refers to the process of devotional service. Even if one does not
understand the meaning of the Lord’s name, pastimes or attributes, one
is purified simply by hearing or chanting of them. Such purification is
called sattva-bhavana.

One’s main purpose in human life should be to purify his existence
and achieve liberation. As long as one has a material body, one is under-
stood to be impure. In such an impure, material condition, one cannot
enjoy a truly blissful life, although everyone seeks it. Therefore Srimad-
Bhagavatam (5.5.1) says, tapo divyam putraka yena sattvari suddhyet:
one must perform tapasya, austerity, to purify his existence in order to
come to the spiritual platform. The tapasya of chanting and glorifying
the name, fame and attributes of the Lord is a very easy purifying pro-
cess by which everyone can be happy. Therefore everyone who desires
the ultimate cleansing of his heart must adopt this process. Other pro-
cesses, such as karma, jana and yoga, cannot cleanse the heart
absolutely.

TEXT 13
अथैनं मापनयत छतारोषाघनिष्कृतम्‌ |
यदसौ भगवस्ाम भ्रियमाणः समग्रहीत्‌ 1230


--- Page 110 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
athainarm mapanayata
krtasesagha-niskrtam
yad asau bhagavan-nama
mriyamanah samagrahit
atha—therefore; enam—him (Ajamila); ma—do not; apanayata—
try to take; krta—already done; asesa—unlimited; agha-niskrtam—
atonement for his sinful actions; yat—because; asau—he; bhagavat-
nama—the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
mriyamanah—while dying; samagrahit—perfectly chanted.
TRANSLATION
At the time of death, this Ajamila helplessly and very loudly
chanted the holy name of the Lord, Narayana. That chanting alone
has already freed him from the reactions of all sinful life.
Therefore, O servants of Yamaraja, do not try to take him to your
master for punishment in hellish conditions.
PURPORT
The ৬1510000185, who are superior authorities, gave orders to the
Yamadaiitas, who did not know that Ajamila was no longer subject to tri-
bulation in hellish life for his past sins. Although he had chanted the
holy name Narayana to indicate his son, the holy name is so transcenden-
tally powerful that he was automatically freed because he had chanted
the holy name while dying (ante narayana-smrtih). As Krsna confirms
in Bhagavad-gita (7.28):
Jyesam tv anta-gatam [00700 778
Jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah
“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose
sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the
duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determina-
tion.” Unless one is freed from all sinful reactions, one cannot be pro-
moted to the platform of devotional service. Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita
(8.5) it is stated:


--- Page 111 ---
Text 15] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 105
anta-kdle ca mam eva
smaran muktva kalevaram
yah prayati sa mad-bhavarn
yati nasty atra sarmsayah
If one remembers Krsna, Narayana, at the time of death, one is certainly
eligible to return immediately home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 14
साङ्केत्यं पारिदास्यं वा स्तोभं ইত্তনমীন वा ।
बैङ्ण्ठनामग्रहणमशेषाषहरं विदुः ।॥१४॥
sariketyarn parihasyariv va
stobhari helanam eva va
vaikuntha-nama-grahanam
asesagha-harari viduh
sanketyam—as an assignation; parihdsyam—jokingly; vd—or;
stobham—as musical entertainment; helanam—neglectfully; eva—cer-
tainly; v@a—or; vaikuntha—of the Lord; nama-grahanam—chanting
the holy name; asesa—unlimited; agha-haram—neutralizing the effect
of sinful life; viduh—advanced transcendentalists know.
TRANSLATION
One who chants the holy name of the Lord is immediately freed
from the reactions of unlimited sins, even if he chants indirectly
[to indicate something else], jokingly, for musical entertainment,
or even neglectfully. This is accepted by all the learned scholars of
the scriptures.
TEXT 15
पतितः स्खलितो भग्नः सन्दष्टस्तप्त आहतः |
हरिरित्यवशेनाह पुमान्नादति यातना; ||
patitah skhalito bhagnah
sandastas tapta ahatah


--- Page 112 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
harir ity avasenaha
puman narhati yatanah
patitah—fallen down; skhalitah—slipped; bhagnah—having broken
his bones; sandastah—bitten; taptah—severely attacked by fever or
similar painful conditions; ahatah—injured; harih—Lord Krsna; iti—
thus; avasena—accidently; aha—chants; puman—a person; na—not;
arhati—deserves; yatanah—hellish conditions.
TRANSLATION
If one chants the holy name of Hari and then dies because of an
accidental misfortune, such as falling from the top of a house, slip-
ping and suffering broken bones while traveling on the road,
being bitten by a serpent, being afflicted with pain and high fever,
or being injured by a weapon, one is immediately absolved from
having to enter hellish life, even though he is sinful.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (8.6):
yam yarih vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tari tam evaiti kaunteya
sada tad-bhava-bhavitah
“Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that
state he will attain without fail.” If one practices chanting the Hare
Krsna mantra, he is naturally expected to chant Hare Krsna when he
meets with some accident. Even without such practice, however, if one
somehow or other chants the holy name of the Lord (Hare Krsna) when
he meets with an accident and dies, he will be saved from hellish life
after death.
TEXT 16
गुरूणां च FIAT च गुरूणि च SAF |
प्रायधित्तानि पापानां ज्ञात्वोक्तानि महर्षिभिः।।१६॥


--- Page 113 ---
Text 16] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 107
gurianam ca laghanar ca
guruni ca laghuani ca
prayascittani papanarm
JAatvoktani maharsibhih

gurinam—heavy; ca—and; laghinam—light; ca—also; guriani—
heavy; ca—and; laghini—light; ca—also; prayascittani—the processes
of atonement; papanam—of sinful activities; jiatva—knowing per-
fectly well; uktani—have been prescribed; maha-rsibhih—by great
sages.

TRANSLATION

Authorities who are learned scholars and sages have carefully
ascertained that one should atone for the heaviest sins by undergo-
ing a heavy process of atonement and one should atone for lighter
sins by undergoing lighter atonement. Chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra, however, vanquishes all the effects of sinful activities,
regardless of whether heavy or light.

PURPORT

In this regard, Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura describes an inci-
dent that took place when Samba was rescued from the punishment of
the Kauravas. Samba fell in love with the daughter of Duryodhana, and
since according to ksatriya custom one is not offered a ksatriya’s
daughter unless he displays his chivalrous valor, Simba abducted her.
Consequently Samba was arrested by the Kauravas. Later, when Lord
Balarama came to rescue him, there was an argument about Samba’s
release. Since the argument was not settled, Balarama showed His power
in such a way that all of Hastinapura trembled and would have been van-
quished as if by a great earthquake. Then the matter was settled, and
Samba married Duryodhana’s daughter. The purport is that one should
take shelter of Krsna-Balarama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
whose protective power is so great that it cannot be equaled in the ma-
terial world. However powerful the reactions of one’s sins, they will im-
mediately be vanquished if one chants the name of Hari, Krsna,
Balarama or Narayana.


--- Page 114 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
TEXT 17
तैस्तान्यघानि पूयन्ते तपोदानवतादिभिः |
As ববুত্বহ্য तदपीक्ञाङ्प्रिसेवया ॥१७॥
tais tany aghani piyante
tapo-dana-vratadibhih
nadharmajam tad-dhrdayam
tad apisanghri-sevaya
taih—by those; tani—all those; aghani—sinful activities and their
results; piiyante—become vanquished; tapah—austerity; dana—
charity; vrata-adibhih—by vows and other such activities; na—not;
adharma-jam—produced from irreligious actions; tat—of that;
hrdayam—the heart; tat—that; api—also; ia-arighri—of the lotus feet
of the Lord; sevaya—by service.
TRANSLATION
Although one may neutralize the reactions of sinful life through
austerity, charity, vows and other such methods, these pious ac-
tivities cannot uproot the material desires in one’s heart. However,
if one serves the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, he is im-
mediately freed from all such contaminations.
PURPORT
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.42), bhaktih paresanubhavo
viraktir anyatra ca: devotional service is so powerful that one who per-
forms devotional service is immediately freed from all sinful desires. All
desires within this material world are sinful because material desire
means sense gratification, which always involves action that is more or
less sinful. Pure bhakti, however, is anyabhilasita-sinya; in other
words, it is free from material desires, which result from karma and
Jaana. One who is situated in devotional service no longer has material
desires, and therefore he is beyond sinful life. Material desires should be
completely stopped. Otherwise, although one’s austerities, penances and
charity may free one from sin for the time being, one’s desires will reap-
pear because his heart is impure. Thus he will act sinfully and suffer.


--- Page 115 ---
Text 19] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 109
TEXT 18
अज्ञानादथवा ज्ञानादुत्तमश्छोकनाम यत्‌ |
सङ्कीर्तितमघं पुंसो दहेदेधो यथानः ।॥॥१८॥
ajaanad athava jianad
uttamasloka-nama yat
sankirtitam agham puriso
dahed edho yathanalah
ajiianat—out of ignorance; athava—or; jianat—with knowledge; ut-
tamasloka—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nama—the holy
name; yat—that which; sarnkirtitam—chanted; agham—sin; purisah—
of a person; dahet—burns to ashes; edhah—dry grass; yatha—just as;
analah—fire.
TRANSLATION
As a fire burns dry grass to ashes, so the holy name of the Lord,
whether chanted knowingly or unknowingly, burns to ashes, with-
out fail, all the reactions of one’s sinful activities.
PURPORT
Fire will act, regardless of whether handled by an innocent child or by
someone well aware of its power. For example, if a field of straw or dry
grass is set afire, either by an elderly man who knows the power of fire or
by a child who does not, the grass will be burned to ashes. Similarly, one
may or may not know the power of chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, but
if one chants the holy name he will become free from all sinful reactions.
TEXT 19
यथागदं वीर्तमधरुपयुक्तं यदृच्छया |
| =
अजानतोऽप्यात्मगुणं ङर्यान्मन्त्रोऽप्युदाहृतः। १९।
yathagadam viryatamam
upayuktari yadrcchaya
ajanato ‘py atma-gunarn
kuryan mantro ‘py udahrtah


--- Page 116 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2

yatha—just like; agadam —medicine; virya-tamam—very powerful;
upayuktam—properly taken; yadrcchayd—somehow or other;
ajanatah—by a person without knowledge; api—even; atma-gunam—
its own potency; kuryat—manifests; mantrah—the Hare Krsna mantra;
api—also; udahrtah—chanted.

TRANSLATION

If a person unaware of the effective potency of a certain
medicine takes that medicine or is forced to take it, it will act even
without his knowledge because its potency does not depend on the
patient’s understanding. Similarly, even though one does not
know the value of chanting the holy name of the Lord, if one
chants knowingly or unknowingly, the chanting will be very
effective.

PURPORT

In the Western countries, where the Hare Krsna movement is spread-
ing, learned scholars and other thoughtful men are realizing its effec-
tiveness. For example, Dr. J. Stillson Judah, a learned scholar, has been
very much attracted to this movement because he has actually seen that it
is turning hippies addicted to drugs into pure Vaisnavas who voluntarily
become servants of Krsna and humanity. Even a few years ago, such hip-
pies did not know the Hare Krsna mantra, but now they are chanting it
and becoming pure Vaisnavas. Thus they are becoming free from all sin-
ful activities, such as illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling.
This is practical proof of the effectiveness of the Hare Krsna movement,
which is supported in this verse. One may or may not know the value of
chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, but if one somehow or other chants it,
he will immediately be purified, just as one who takes a potent medicine
will feel its effects, regardless of whether he takes it knowingly or
unknowingly.

TEXT 20
Stow उवाच
त of सुविनिर्णीय धर्म weed नृप ।
तं याम्यपाशानियच्य বিস मृत्योरमूमुचन्‌ ॥।२०॥


--- Page 117 ---
Text 21] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 111
Sri-Suka uvaca
ta evar suvinirniya
dharmarn bhagavatarn nrpa
tam yamya-pdsan nirmucya
viprarh mrtyor amimucan
sri-sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; te—they (the order
carriers of Lord Visnu); evam —thus; su-vinirntya—perfectly ascertain-
ing; dharmam—real religion; bhdgavatam—in terms of devotional ser-
vice; nrpa—O King; tam—him (Ajamila); yamya-pasat—from the
bondage of the order carriers of Yamaraja; nirmucya—releasing;
vipram—the brahmana; mrtyoh—from death; amimucan—rescued.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, having thus
perfectly judged the principles of devotional service with reason-
ing and arguments, the order carriers of Lord Visnu released the
brahmana Ajamila from the bondage of the Yamadiitas and saved
him from imminent death.
TEXT 21
इति प्रत्युदिता याम्या दृता यात्वा यमान्तिकम्‌ ।
यमराज्ञे यथा सर्वमाचनश्षुररिन्दम ।२१॥
iti pratyudita yamya
dita yatva yamantikam
yama-rajie yatha sarvam
acacaksur arindama
iti—thus; pratyuditih—having been replied to (by the order carriers
of Visnu); yamyah—the servants of Yamaraja; diitah—the messengers;
yatva—going; yama-antikam—to the abode of Lord Yamaraja; yama-
rajie—unto King Yamaraja; yatha—duly; sarvam—everything;
acacaksuh—informed in full detail; arindama—O subduer of the
enemies.


--- Page 118 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
TRANSLATION
My dear Maharaja Pariksit, O subduer of all enemies, after the
servants of Yamaraja had been answered by the order carriers of
Lord Visnu, they went to Yamaraja and explained to him every-
thing that had happened.
PURPORT
In this verse the word pratyuditah is very significant. The servants of
Yamaraja are so powerful that they can never be hindered anywhere, but
this time they were baffled and disappointed in their attempt to take
away a man they considered sinful. Therefore they immediately returned
to Yamaraja and described to him everything that had happened.
TEXT 22
द्विजः पाञादिनिर्क्तो गतमी; प्रतिं गतः।
6.
ववन्दे शिरसा विष्णो : किङ्करान्‌ दशेनोत्सवः॥ २२
dvijah pasad vinirmukto
gata-bhih prakrtim gatah
vavande 57050 visnoh
kinkaran darsanotsavah
dvijah—the brahmana (Ajamila); pasat—from the noose; vinirmuk-
tah—being released; gata-bhih—freed from fear; prakrtim gatah—
came to his senses; vavande—offered his respectful obeisances; Sirasa —
by bowing his head; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; kirikaran—unto the ser-
vants; darSana-utsavah—very pleased by seeing them.
TRANSLATION
Having been released from the nooses of Yamaraja’s servants,
the brahmana Ajamila, now free from fear, came to his senses and
immediately offered obeisances to the Visnudiitas by bowing his
head at their lotus feet. He was extremely pleased by their pres-
ence, for he had seen them save his life from the hands of the
servants of Yamaraja.


--- Page 119 ---
Text 23] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 113
PURPORT
Vaisnavas are also Visnudiitas because they carry out the orders of
Krsna. Lord Krsna is very eager for all the conditioned souls rotting in
this material world to surrender to Him and be saved from material
pangs in this life and punishment in hellish conditions after death. A
Vaisnava therefore tries to bring conditioned souls to their senses. Those
who are fortunate like Ajamila are saved by the Vispudatas, or
Vaisnavas, and thus they return back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 23
त॑ विवश्षुमभिप्ेत्य महापुरुषकिङ्कराः |
सहसा पश्यतस्तस्य तत्रान्तद धिरेऽनघ ।।२३॥
1077 vivaksum abhipretya
mahapurusa-kirkarah
sahasa pasyatas tasya
tatrantardadhire ‘nagha
tam —him (Ajamila); vivaksum—desiring to speak; abhipretya—
understanding; mahapurusa-kirikarah—the order carriers of Lord
Visnu; sahasa—suddenly; pasyatah tasya—while he looked on; tatra—
there; antardadhire—disappeared; anagha—O sinless Maharaja
Pariksit.
TRANSLATION
O sinless Maharaja Pariksit, the order carriers of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Visnudiitas, saw that Ajamila was at-
tempting to say something, and thus they suddenly disappeared
from his presence.
PURPORT
The sastras say:
papistha ye duracara
deva-brahmana-nindakah
apathya-bhojands tesam
akale 77127000777 dhruvam


--- Page 120 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
“For persons who are papistha, very sinful, and duracara, misbehaved
or very unclean in their habits, who are against the existence of God,
who disrespect Vaisnavas and brahmanas, and who eat anything and
everything, untimely death is sure.” It is said that in Kali-yuga one has a
maximum lifetime of one hundred years, but as people become
degraded, the duration of their lives decreases (prayenalpayusah). Be-
cause Ajamila was now free from all sinful reactions, his lifetime was ex-
tended, even though he was to have died immediately. When the
Visnudiitas saw Ajamila trying to say something to them, they disap-
peared to give him a chance to glorify the Supreme Lord. Since all his
sinful reactions had been vanquished, he was now prepared to glorify the
Lord. Indeed, one cannot glorify the Lord unless one is completely free
from all sinful activities. This is confirmed by Krsna Himself in
Bhagavad-gita (7.28):
yesarh tv anta-gatarn papari
jananari punya-karmanam
te dvanda-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mari drdha-vratah
“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose
sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the
duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determina-
tion.” The Visnudiitas made Ajamila aware of devotional service so that
He might immediately become fit to return home, back to Godhead. To
increase his eagerness to glorify the Lord, they disappeared so that he
would feel separation in their absence. In the mode of separation,
glorification of the Lord is very intense.
TEXTS 24-25
€ ५ LN

अजामिलोऽप्यथाकण्यं दूतानां यमकृष्णयोः |

धर्मं भागवतं ZF 339 च गुणाश्रयम्‌ ॥ २४॥

भक्तिमान्‌ WITTY माहात्म्यश्रवणाद्धरः |

अनुतापो महानासीत्सरतोऽद्यभमात्मनः । २५॥


--- Page 121 ---
Text 25] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 115
ajamilo py athakarnya
ditanarm yama-krsnayoh
dharmar bhagavatam suddharm
trai-vedyari ca gundsrayam
bhaktiman bhagavaty asu
mahatmya-sravanad dhareh
anutapo mahan asit
smarato ’subham atmanah
ajamilah—Ajamila; api—also; atha—thereafter; akarnya—hearing;
duatanam—of the order carriers; yama-krsnayoh—of Yamaraja and
Lord Krsna; dharmam—actual religious principles; bhagavatam—as
described in Srimad-Bhagavatam, or concerning the relationship be-
tween the living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sud-
dham—pure; trai-vedyam—mentioned in three Vedas; ca—also; guna-
asrayam—material religion, under the modes of material nature;
bhakti-man—a pure devotee (cleansed of the modes of material nature);
bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; asu—im-
mediately; mahatmya—glorification of the name, fame, etc.; sravanat—
because of hearing; hareh—of Lord Hari; anutapah—regret; mahan—
very great; dsit—there was; smaratah—remembering; asubham —all
the inglorious activities; atmanah—done by himself.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the discourses between the Yamaditas and the
Visnuditas, Ajamila could understand the religious principles that
act under the three modes of material nature. These principles are
mentioned in the three Vedas. He could also understand the tran-
scendental religious principles, which are above the modes of
material nature and which concern the relationship between the
living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Furthermore, Ajamila heard glorification of the name, fame,
qualities and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He
thus became a perfectly pure devotee. He could then remember his
past sinful activities, which he greatly regretted having performed.


--- Page 122 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (2.45) Lord Krsna told Arjuna:
traigunya-visaya veda
nistraigunyo bhavarjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-ksema atmavan
“The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material
nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of
them. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and
safety, and be established in the Self.” The Vedic principles certainly
prescribe a gradual process for rising to the spiritual platform, but if one
remains attached to the Vedic principles, there is no chance of his being
elevated to spiritual life. Krsna therefore advised Arjuna to perform
devotional service, which is the process of transcendental religion. The
transcendental position of devotional service is also confirmed in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.2.6). Sa vai purmsarn [0070 dharmo yato bhaktir adho-
ksaje. Bhakti, devotional service, is paro dharmah, transcendental
dharma; it is not material dharma. People generally think that religion
should be pursued for material profit. This may be suitable for persons
interested in material life, but one who is interested in spiritual life
should be attached to paro dharmah, the religious principles by which
one becomes a devotee of the Supreme Lord (yato bhaktir adhoksaje).
The bhagavata religion teaches that the Lord and the living entity are
eternally related and that the duty of the living entity is to surrender to
the Lord. When one is situated on the platform of devotional service, one
is freed from impediments and completely satisfied (ahaituky apratihata
yayatma suprasidati). Having been elevated to that platform, Ajamila
began to lament for his past materialistic activities and glorify the name,
fame, form and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 26
अहो मे परमं कष्टममूद्‌ विजितात्मनः |
येन বিস্তাবিণ ब्रह्म बृषल्यां जायतात्मना ।। २६॥


--- Page 123 ---
Text 27] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudiitas 117
aho me [00707710771 kastam
abhud avyitatmanah
yena viplavitarh brahma
vrsalyar jayatatmana

aho—alas; me—my; paramam—extreme; kastam —miserable condi-
tion; abhiit—became; avijita-atmanah—because my senses were un-
controlled; yena—by which; viplavitam—destroyed; brahma—all my
brahminical qualifications; wvrsalyam—through a $udrani, a maidser-
vant; ja@yatd—being born; atmana—by me.

TRANSLATION

Ajamila said: Alas, being a servant of my senses, how degraded I
became! I fell down from my position as a duly qualified brahmana
and begot children in the womb of a prostitute.

PURPORT

The men of the higher classes—the brahmanas, ksatriyas and
vaisyas—do not beget children in the wombs of lower-class women.
Therefore the custom in Vedic society is to examine the horoscopes of a
girl and boy being considered for marriage to see whether their combina-
tion is suitable. Vedic astrology reveals whether one has been born in the
vipra-varna, ksatriya-varna, vaisSya-varna or Sidra-varna, according to
the three qualities of material nature. This must be examined because a
marriage between a boy of the vipra-varna and a girl of the sidra-varna
is incompatible; married life would be miserable for both husband and
wife. Consequently a boy should marry a girl of the same category. Of
course, this is trai-gunya, a material calculation according to the Vedas,
but if the boy and girl are devotees there need be no such considerations.
A devotee is transcendental, and therefore in a marriage between devo-
tees, the boy and girl form a very happy combination.

TEXT 27
ক জা
fami विगर्हितं सद्भि दुष्कृतं कलकजलम्‌ ।
हित्वा बालां सतीं योऽहं सुरापीभसतीमगाम्‌ ॥२७॥


--- Page 124 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
dhinn mam vigarhitari sadbhir
duskrtarmn kula-kajjalam
hitva 0৫৫77 satirh yo "ham
sur@-pim asatim agam
dhik mam—all condemnation upon me; wvigarhitam —condemned;
sadbhih—by honest men; duskrtam —who has committed sinful acts;
kula-kajjalam —who has defamed the family tradition; hitva—giving
up; balam—a young wife; satim—chaste; yah—who; aham—1I; sura-
pim—with a woman accustomed to drinking wine; asatim—unchaste;
agam—I had sexual intercourse.
TRANSLATION
Alas, all condemnation upon me! I acted so sinfully that I
degraded my family tradition. Indeed, I gave up my chaste and
beautiful young wife to have sexual intercourse with a fallen
prostitute accustomed to drinking wine. All condemnation upon
me!
PURPORT
This is the mentality of one who is becoming a pure devotee. When
one is elevated to the platform of devotional service by the grace of the
Lord and the spiritual master, one first regrets his past sinful activities.
This helps one advance in spiritual life. The Visnuditas had given
Ajamila the chance to become a pure devotee, and the duty of a pure
devotee is to regret his past sinful activities in illicit sex, intoxication,
meat-eating and gambling. Not only should one give up his past bad
habits, but he must always regret his past sinful acts. This is the standard
of pure devotion.
TEXT 28
बरद्धावनाथो पितरौ नान्यबन्धू तपखिनौ |
अहो मयाधुना त्यक्तावकृतज्ञेन नीचवत्‌ ॥२८॥
vrddhav anathau pitarau
nanya-bandhi tapasvinau
aho mayadhuna tyaktav
akrtajiiena nicavat


--- Page 125 ---
Text 29] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudiitas 119

vrddhau—old; anathau—who had no other person to look after their
comforts; pitarau—my father and mother; na anya-bandhii—who had
no other friend; tapasvinau—who underwent great difficulties; aho—
alas; maya—by me; adhuna—at that moment; tyaktau—were given
up; akrta-jiiena —ungrateful; nica-vat—like the most abominable low-
class person.

TRANSLATION

My father and mother were old and had no other son or friend
to look after them. Because I did not take care of them, they lived
with great difficulty. Alas, like an abominable lower-class man, I
ungratefully left them in that condition.

PURPORT

According to Vedic civilization, everyone has the responsibility for
taking care of brahmanas, old men, women, children and cows. This is
the duty of everyone, especially an upper-class person. Because of his
association with a prostitute, Ajamila abandoned all his duties. Regret-
ting this, Ajamila now considered himself quite fallen.

TEXT 29
dist व्यक्तं पतिष्यामि नरके gage |
¢. =
HAT: कामिनो यत्र विन्दन्ति यमयातनाः ॥२९॥
so "har vyaktarh patisyami
narake bhrsa-darune
dharma-ghnah kamino yatra
vindanti yama-yatanah

sah—such a person; aham —I; vyaktam—it is now clear; patisyami—
will fall down; narake—in hell; bhrsa-darune—most miserable;
dharma-ghnah—they who break the principles of religion; kaminah—
who are too lusty; yatra—where; vindanti—undergo; yama-yatanah—
the miserable conditions imposed by Yamaraja.


--- Page 126 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
TRANSLATION
It is now clear that as a consequence of such activities, a sinful
person like me must be thrown into hellish conditions meant for
those who have broken religious principles and must there suffer
extreme miseries.
i TEXT 30
किमिदं aw आहोखित्‌ साक्षाद्‌ दृष्टमिदाद्रुतम्‌ |
क्त याता अद्य तेये मां व्यकर्षन्‌ पाश्चपाणयः॥२३०॥
kim 80278 svapna ahosvit
saksad drstam thadbhutam
kva yata adya te ye mam
vyakarsan pasa-panayah
kim—whether; idam—this; svapne—in a dream; ahosvit—or; sak-
sat—directly; drstam—seen; itha—here; adbhutam—wonderful; kva—
where; yatah—have gone; adya—now; te—all of them; ye—who;
mam—me; vyakarsan—were dragging; pasa-panayah—with ropes in
their hands.
TRANSLATION
Was this a dream I saw, or was it reality? I saw fearsome men
with ropes in their hands coming to arrest me and drag me away.
Where have they gone?
TEXT 31
४५५
अथ ते क्र गताः सिद्धाचचत्वारशारुदशंनाः |
টে A =
व्याभोचयनीयमानं बद्ध्वा TE शवः ।।२१॥
atha te kva gatah siddhas
catvaras caru-darsanah
vyamocayan niyamanam
baddhva pasair adho bhuvah


--- Page 127 ---
Text 32] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 121
atha—thereafter; te—those persons; kva—where; gatah—went; sid-
dhah—liberated; catvarah—four personalities; caru-darsanah—ex-
tremely beautiful to see; vyamocayan—they released; niyamanam—
me, who was being carried away; baddhva—being arrested; pasaih—by
ropes; adhah bhuvah—downward to the hellish region.
TRANSLATION
And where have those four liberated and very beautiful persons
gone who released me from arrest and saved me from being drag-
ged down to the hellish regions?
PURPORT
As we have learned from the descriptions in the Fifth Canto, the
hellish planets are situated in the lower portions of this universe.
Therefore they are called adho bhuvah. Ajamila could understand that
the Yamadutas had come from that region.
TEXT 32
अथापि मे दुर्भगस्य विुघोत्तमदशेने |
भवितन्यं मङ्गलेन येनात्मा मे प्रसीदति ।।३२॥
athapi me durbhagasya
vibudhottama-darsane
bhavitavyarn mangalena
yenatma me prasidati
atha—therefore; api—although; me—of me; durbhagasya—so un-
fortunate; vibudha-uttama—exalted devotees; darsane—because of
seeing; bhavitavyam—there must be; marngalena—auspicious ac-
tivities; yena—by which; atma—self; me—my; prasidati —actually be-
comes happy.
TRANSLATION
I am certainly most abominable and unfortunate to have merged
in an ocean of sinful activities, but nevertheless, because of my


--- Page 128 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
previous spiritual activities, I could see those four exalted per-
sonalities who came to rescue me. Now I feel exceedingly happy
because of their visit.
PURPORT
As stated in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.54):
‘sadhu-sanga’, ‘sadhu-sanga’——sarva-sastre kaya
lava-matra sadhu-sarige sarva-siddhi haya

“Association with devotees is recommended by all the Sastras because by
even a moment of such association one can receive the seed for all per-
fection.” In the beginning of his life Ajamila was certainly very pure,
and he associated with devotees and brahmanas; because of that pious
activity, even though he was fallen, he was inspired to name his son
Narayana. Certainly this was due to good counsel given from within by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita
(15.15), sarvasya ০৫/07) hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtir jiagnam
apohanam ca: “l am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come
remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness.” The Lord, who is situated
in everyone’s heart, is so kind that if one has ever rendered service to
Him, the Lord never forgets him. Thus the Lord, from within, gave
Ajamila the opportunity to name his youngest son Narayana so that in
affection he would constantly call “Narayana! Narayana!’ and thus be
saved from the most fearful and dangerous condition at the time of his
death. Such is the mercy of Krsna. Guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-
lata-bija: by the mercy of the guru and Krsna, one receives the seed of
bhakti. This association saves a devotee from the greatest fear. In our
Krsna consciousness movement we therefore change a devotee’s name to
a form that reminds him of Visnu. If at the time of death the devotee can
remember his own name, such as Krsnadasa or Govinda dasa, he can be
saved from the greatest danger. Therefore the change of names at the
time of initiation is essential. The Krsna consciousness movement is so
meticulous that it gives one a good opportunity to remember Krsna
somehow or other.


--- Page 129 ---
Text 34] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 123
TEXT 33
अन्यथा সিযমাদাহ্য नाडवेदषलीपतेः |
वैङ्टनामग्रदणं fam वक्तुमिहारति 1230
anyatha mriyamanasya
nasucer vrsali-pateh
vaikuntha-nama-grahanarm
Jjihva vaktum iharhati
anyatha —otherwise; mriyamanasya—of a person who is just ready
for death; na—not; asuceh—most unclean; vrsali-pateh—the keeper of
a prostitute; vaikuntha—of the Lord of Vaikuntha; nama-grahanam—
the chanting of the holy name; jihva—the tongue; vaktum—to speak;
tha—in this situation; arhati—is able.
TRANSLATION
Were it not for my past devotional service, how could I, a most
unclean keeper of a prostitute, have gotten an opportunity to
chant the holy name of Vaikunthapati when I was just ready to die?
Certainly it could not have been possible.
PURPORT
The name Vaikunthapati, which means “the master of the spiritual
world,” is not different from the name Vaikuntha. Ajamila, who was
now a realized soul, could understand that because of his past spiritual
activities in devotional service, he had gotten this opportunity to chant
the holy name of Vaikunthapati in his horrible condition at the time of
death.
TEXT 34
क्र चाहं कितवः पापो ब्रह्मघ्नो निरपत्रपः ।
क्र च नारायणेत्येतद्धगवननाम मङ्गलम्‌ 113811
। kva caharh kitavah papo
brahma-ghno nirapatrapah


--- Page 130 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
kva ca narayanety etad
bhagavan-nama marigalam
kva—where; ca—also; aham—1I; kitavah—a cheater; papah—all
sins personified; brahma-ghnah—the killer of my brahminical culture;
nirapatrapah—shameless; kva—where; ca—also; narayana—
Narayana; iti—thus; etat—this; bhagavat-nama—the holy name of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; margalam—all-auspicious.
TRANSLATION
Ajamila continued: I am a shameless cheater who has killed his
brahminical culture. Indeed, I am sin personified. Where am I in
comparison to the all-auspicious chanting of the holy name of
Lord Narayana?
PURPORT
Those engaged in broadcasting the holy name of Narayana, Krsna,
through the Krsna consciousness movement should always consider what
our position was before we came and what it is now. We had fallen into
abominable lives as meat-eaters, drunkards and woman hunters who
performed all kinds of sinful activities, but now we have been given the
opportunity to chant the Hare Krsna mantra. Therefore we should al-
ways appreciate this opportunity. By the grace of the Lord we are open-
ing many branches, and we should use this good fortune to chant the
holy name of the Lord and serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead
directly. We must be conscious of the difference between our present and
past conditions and should always be very careful not to fall from the
most exalted life.
TEXT 35
सोऽहं तथा यतिष्यामि यतचित्तेन्द्रियानिलः।
यथा न भूय आत्मानमन्धे तमसि मजये 11340
so ’harh tatha yatisyami
yata-cittendriyanilah
yatha na bhiaya atmanam
andhe tamasi majjaye


--- Page 131 ---
Text 37] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudatas 125
sah—such a person; aham—I; tatha —in that way; yatisyami—I shall
endeavor; yata-citta-indriya—controlling the mind and senses;
anilah—and the internal airs; yath@a—so that; na—not; bhiyah—
again; atmanam—my soul; andhe—in darkness; tamasi—in ignorance;
majjaye—I1 drown.
TRANSLATION
I am such a sinful person, but since I have now gotten this op-
portunity, I must completely control my mind, life and senses and
always engage in devotional service so that I may not fall again into
the deep darkness and ignorance of material life.
PURPORT
Everyone one of us should have this determination. We have been ele-
vated to an exalted position by the mercy of Krsna and the spiritual
master, and if we remember that this is a great opportunity and pray to
Krsna that we will not fall again, our lives will be successful.
TEXT 36-37
. ©
विभ्युच्य तमिमं बन्धमविदाकामकमेजम्‌ |
EN
सर्व॑भूतसुहच्छान्तो मंत्र; करुण आत्मवान्‌ ।२६॥
मोचये ग्रस्तमात्मानं योषिन्मय्यात्ममायया |
~ _ =
विक्रीडितो ययंवाहं क्रीडागृग इवाधमः ॥२३५७॥
vimucya tam imam bandham
avidya-kama-karmajam
sarva-bhiita-suhrc chanto
maitrah karuna atmavan
mocaye grastam atmanarm
yosin-mayydatma-mayaya
vikridito yayaivaharh
krida-mrga ivadhamah


--- Page 132 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2

vimucya—having become free from; tam—that; imam -- 11115;
bandham—bondage; avidya—due to ignorance; kama—due to lusty
desire; karma-jam —caused by activities; sarva-bhiita—of all living en-
tities; suhrt—friend; Santah—very peaceful; maitrah—{friendly;
karunah—merciful; atma-van—self-realized; mocaye—I shall disen-
tangle; grastam—encaged; atmanam—my soul; yosit-mayya—in the
form of woman; atma-mayaya—by the illusory energy of the Lord;
vikriditah—played with; yaya—by which; eva—certainly; aham—I;
krida-mrgah—a controlled animal; iva—like; adhamah—so fallen.

TRANSLATION

Because of identifying oneself with the body, one is subjected to
desires for sense gratification, and thus one engages in many dif-
ferent types of pious and impious action. This is what constitutes
material bondage. Now I shall disentangle myself from my material
bondage, which has been caused by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead’s illusory energy in the form of a woman. Being a most
fallen soul, I was victimized by the illusory energy and have be-
come like a dancing dog led around by a woman’s hand. Now I
shall give up all lusty desires and free myself from this illusion. I
shall become a merciful, well-wishing friend to all living entities
and always absorb myself in Krsna consciousness.

PURPORT

This should be the standard of determination for all Krsna conscious
persons. A Krsna conscious person should free himself from the clutches
of maya, and he should also be compassionate to all others suffering in
those clutches. The activities of the Krsna consciousness movement are
meant not only for oneself but for others also. This is the perfection of
Krsna consciousness. One who is interested in his own salvation is not as
advanced in Krsna consciousness as one who feels compassion for others
and who therefore propagates the Krsna consciousness movement. Such
an advanced devotee will never fall down, for Krsna will give him special
protection. That is the sum and substance of the Krsna consciousness
movement. Everyone is like a play toy in the hands of the illusory energy
and is acting as she moves him. One should come to Krsna consciousness
to release oneself and also to release others.


--- Page 133 ---
Text 38] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 127
TEXT 38
५५: ©
ममाहमिति वेदादौ दित्वामिप्याथधीर्मतिम्‌ |
= . ©
धास्ये मनो मगवरति gg तत्कोतेनादिभिः ॥३८॥
mamaham iti dehadau
hitvamithyartha-dhir matim
dhasye mano bhagavati
Suddhari tat-kirtanadibhih
mama—my; aham—I; iti—thus; deha-adau—in the body and things
related to the body; hitva—giving up; amithya—not false; artha—on
values; dhih—with my consciousness; matim—the attitude; dhasye—I
shall engage; manah—my mind; bhagavati—on the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; Suddham—pure; tat—His name; kirtana-
adibhih—by chanting, hearing and so on.
TRANSLATION
Simply because I chanted the holy name of the Lord in the asso-
ciation of devotees, my heart is now becoming purified. Therefore
I shall not fall victim again to the false lures of material sense gra-
tification. Now that I have become fixed in the Absolute Truth,
henceforward I shall not identify myself with the body. I shall give
up false conceptions of ‘I’ and ‘““mine’’ and fix my mind on the
lotus feet of Krsna.
PURPORT
How a living entity becomes a victim of the material condition is
lucidly explained in this verse. The beginning is to misidentify the body
as one’s self. Therefore Bhagavad-gita begins with the spiritual instruc-
tion that one is not the body, but is within the body. This consciousness
can be possible only if one chants the holy name of Krsna, the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra, and always keeps oneself in the association of
devotees. This is the secret of success. Therefore we stress that one
should chant the holy name of the Lord and keep oneself free from the
contaminations of this material world, especially the contaminations of
lusty desires for illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. With


--- Page 134 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
determination, one should vow to follow these principles and thus be
saved from the miserable condition of material existence. The first
necessity is to become freed from the bodily concept of life.
TEXT 39
=
इति जातसुनिर्वेदः क्षणसङ्गेन साधुषु ।
TREE gHEETETA: 113201
iti jata-sunirvedah
ksana-sangena sadhusu
ganga-dvaram upeyaya
mukta-sarvanubandhanah

iti—thus; jata-sunirvedah—(Ajamila) who had become detached from
the material conception of life; ksana-sarigena—by a moment’s asso-
ciation; sadhusu—with devotees; garniga-dvaram —to Hardwar (hari-
dvara), the doorway to Hari (because the Ganges begins there, Hardwar
is also called ganga-dvara); upeyaya—went; mukta—being freed from;
sarva-anubandhanah—all kinds of material bondage.

TRANSLATION

Because of a moment’s association with devotees [the
Visnudiitas], Ajamila detached himself from the material concep-
tion of life with determination. Thus freed from all material at-
traction, he immediately started for Hardwar.

PURPORT

The word mukta-sarvanubandhanah indicates that after this incident,
Ajamila, not caring for his wife and children, went straight to Hardwar
for further advancement in his spiritual life. Our Krsna consciousness
movement now has centers in Vrndavana and Navadvipa so that those
who want to live a retired life, whether they be devotees or not, can go
there and with determination give up the bodily concept of life. One is
welcome to live in those holy places for the rest of his life in order to


--- Page 135 ---
Text 40] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudutas 129
achieve the highest success by the very simple method of chanting the
holy name of the Lord and taking prasada. Thus one may return home,
back to Godhead. We do not have a center in Hardwar, but Vrndavana
and Sridhama Mayapur are better for devotees than any other places.
The Caitanya Candrodaya temple offers one a good opportunity to asso-
ciate with devotees. Let us all take advantage of this opportunity.
TEXT 40
स तिन्‌ देवसदन आसीनो योगमास्थितः |
प्रत्याहतेन्द्रियग्रामो युयोज मन आत्मनि ॥४०॥
sa tasmin deva-sadana
৫5870 yogam asthitah
pratyahrtendriya-gramo
ywyoja mana atmani
sah—he (Ajamila); tasmin—at that place (Hard war); deva-sadane—
in one Visnu temple; asinah—being situated; yogam dasthitah—per-
formed bhakti-yoga; pratyahrta—withdrawn from all activities of sense
gratification; indriya-gramah—his senses; ywyoja—he fixed; manah—
the mind; @tmani—on the self or the Supersoul, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
In Hardwar, Ajamila took shelter at a Visnu temple, where he
executed the process of bhakti-yoga. He controlled his senses and
fully applied his mind in the service of the Lord.
PURPORT
The devotees who have joined the Krsna consciousness movement may
live comfortably in our many temples and engage in the devotional ser-
vice of the Lord. Thus they can control the mind and senses and achieve
the highest success in life. This is the process descending from time im-
memorial. Learning from the life of Ajamila, we should vow with deter-
mination to do what is necessary to follow this path.


--- Page 136 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
TEXT 41
ततो गुणेभ्य आत्मानं वियुज्यात्मसमाधिना |
युधुजे भगवद्धाक्नि ब्रह्मण्यजुमवात्मनि 112211
1010 gunebhya atmanam
viyujyatma-samadhina
yuyuje bhagavad-dhamni
brahmany anubhavatmani

tatah—thereafter; gunebhyah—from the modes of material nature;
atmanam—the mind; viyujya—detaching; @trma-samadhina—by being
fully engaged in devotional service; yuyuje—engaged; bhagavat-
dhamni—in the form of the lord; brahmani—which is Parabrahman
(not idol worship); anubhava-atmani—which is always thought of
(beginning from the lotus feet and gradually progressing upward).

TRANSLATION

Ajamila fully engaged in devotional service. Thus he detached
his mind from the process of sense gratification and became fully
absorbed in thinking of the form of the Lord.

PURPORT

If one worships the Deity in the temple, one’s mind will naturally be
absorbed in thought of the Lord and His form. There is no distinction be-
tween the form of the Lord and the Lord Himself. Therefore bhakti-yoga
is the most easy system of yoga. Yogis try to concentrate their minds
upon the form of the Supersoul, Visnu, within the heart, but this same
objective is easily achieved when one’s mind is absorbed in the Deity
worshiped in the temple. In every temple there is a transcendental form
of the Lord, and one may easily think of this form. By seeing the Lord
during arati, by offering bhoga and by constantly thinking of the form of
the Deity, one becomes a first-class yogi. This is the best process of yoga,
as confirmed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Bhagavad-gita
(6.47):


--- Page 137 ---
Text 42] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudiitas 131
yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantaratmanda
Sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah
“Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping
Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in
yoga and is the highest of all.” The first-class yogi is he who controls his
senses and detaches himself from material activities by always thinking
of the form of the Lord.
TEXT 42
©
यद्यु पारतधीस्तसिन्नद्रा्षीरपुरुषान्‌ परः |
उपलम्योपलन्धान्‌ प्राग्‌ ववन्दे शिरसा द्विजः ।।४२॥
yarhy uparata-dhis tasminn
adraksit purusan purah
upalabhyopalabdhan prag
vavande Sirasa dvijah
yarhi—when; uparata-dhth—his mind and intelligence were fixed;
tasmin—at that time; adraksit—had seen; purusan—the persons (the
order carriers of Lord Visnu); purah—before him; upalabhya—get-
ting; upalabdhan—who were gotten; prak—previously; vavande—
offered obeisances; Sirasa—by the head; dvijah—the brahmana.
TRANSLATION
‘When his intelligence and mind were fixed upon the form of the
Lord, the brahmana Ajamila once again saw before him four
celestial persons. He could understand that they were those he had
seen previously, and thus he offered them his obeisances by
bowing down before them.
PURPORT
The Visnudatas who had rescued Ajamila came before him again
when his mind was firmly fixed upon the form of the Lord. The


--- Page 138 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
Visnudiitas had gone away for some time to give Ajamila a chance to be-
come firmly fixed in meditation upon the Lord. Now that his devotion
had matured, they returned to take him. Understanding that the same
Visnudatas had returned, Ajamila offered them his obeisances by bowing
down before them.
TEXT 43
. (५
हित्वा कलेवरं तीथे गङ्गायां दशनाद |
सद्यः खरूपं जगृहे भगवत्पाश्ववर्तिनाम्‌ ॥४२॥
hitva kalevaram tirthe
gangayam darsanad anu
sadyah svaripam jagrhe
bhagavat-parsva-vartinam
hitva—giving up; kalevaram —the material body; tirthe—in the holy
place; garigayam—on the bank of the Ganges; darsanat anu—after
seeing; sadyah—immediately; sva-riipam—his original spiritual form;
jagrhe—he assumed; bhagavat-parsva-vartinam—which is fit for an
associate of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the Visnudiitas, Ajamila gave up his material body
at Hardwar on the bank of the Ganges. He regained his original
spiritual body, which was a body appropriate for an associate of the
Lord.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
Jjanma karma ca me divyam
evari yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehariv punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this ma-
terial world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.”


--- Page 139 ---
Text 44] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 133
The result of perfection in Krsna consciousness is that after giving up
one’s material body, one is immediately transferred to the spiritual world
in one’s original spiritual body to become an associate of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Some devotees go to Vaikunthaloka, and others
go to Goloka Vrndavana to become associates of Krsna.
TEXT 44
९ EY
साकं विहायसा विप्रो महापुरुषकिङ्करे; |
न, $
हैमं विमानमारुद्य ययौ यत्र भियः पतिः nes
sakari vihayasa vipro
mahapurusa-kirikaraih
haimarh vimanam aruhya
yayau yatra Sriyah patih
sakam—along; vihayasa—by the path in the sky, or the airways;
viprah—the brahmana (Ajamila); mahdapurusa-kinkaraih—with the
order carriers of Lord Visnu; haimam—made of gold; vimanam—an
airplane; aruhya—boarding; yayau—went; yatra—where; Sriyah
patih—Lord Visnu, the husband of the goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
Accompanied by the order carriers of Lord Visnu, Ajamila
boarded an airplane made of gold. Passing through the airways, he
went directly to the abode of Lord Visnu, the husband of the
goddess of fortune.
PURPORT
For many years, material scientists have tried to go to the moon, but
they are still unable to go there. However, the spiritual airplanes from
the spiritual planets can take one back home, back to Godhead, in a sec-
ond. The speed of such a spiritual plane can only be imagined. Spirit is
finer than the mind, and everyone has experience of how swiftly the
mind travels from one place to another. Therefore one can imagine the
swiftness of the spiritual form by comparing it to the speed of the mind.


--- Page 140 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
In less than even a moment, a perfect devotee can return home, back to
Godhead, immediately after giving up his material body.
TEXT 45
+ ९
एनं स॒ নিশ্তানিবমণণমা
- (3)
दास्याः पति; पतितो गद्यंकमणा।
निपात्यमानो निरये हतव्रतः
सो विश्ुक्तो भगवनाम 26 ।७५॥
evam sa viplavita-sarva-dharma
dasyah patih patito garhya-karmana
nipdtyamdno niraye hata-vratah
sadyo vimukto bhagavan-nama grhnan
evam—in this way; sah—he (Ajamila); viplavita-sarva-dharmah—
who gave up all religious principles; dasyah patih—the husband of a
prostitute; patitah—fallen; garhya-karmana—by being engaged in
abominable activities; nipatyamanah—falling; niraye—in hellish life;
hata-vratah—who broke all his vows; sadyah—immediately; vimuk-
tah—liberated; bhagavat-nama—the holy name of the Lord; grhnan—
chanting.
TRANSLATION
Ajamila was a brahmana who because of bad association had
given up all brahminical culture and religious principles. Becom-
ing most fallen, he stole, drank and performed other abominable
acts. He even kept a prostitute. Thus he was destined to be carried
away to hell by the order carriers of Yamaraja, but he was im-
mediately rescued simply by a glimpse of the chanting of the holy
name Narayana.
TEXT 46
नातः परं कमैनिबन्धकृन्तनं
+ S
gual ती्थपदालुकीर्तनात्‌ |


--- Page 141 ---
Text 46] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 135
न यत्पुनः कर्मसु सज्ञते मनो
रजस्तमोभ्यां किरं ततोऽन्यथा ॥४६॥
natah param karma-nibandha-krntanari
mumuksatam tirtha-padanukirtanat
na yat punah karmasu sajjate mano
rajas-tamobhyan kalilar tato ‘nyatha
na—not; atah—therefore; param—better means; karma-niban-
dha—the obligation to suffer or undergo tribulations as a result of
fruitive activities; krntanam—that which can completely cut off;
mumuksatam—of persons desiring to get out of the clutches of material
bondage; tirtha-pada—about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, at
whose feet all the holy places stand; anukirtanat—than constantly
chanting under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master; na—not;
yat—because; punah—again; karrmasu—in fruitive activities; sajjate —
becomes attached; manah—the mind; rajah-tamobhyam—by the modes
of passion and ignorance; kalilam—contaminated; tatah—thereafter;
anyatha—by any other means.
TRANSLATION
Therefore one who desires freedom from material bondage
should adopt the process of chanting and glorifying the name,
fame, form and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
at whose feet all the holy places stand. One cannot derive the
proper benefit from other methods, such as pious atonement,
speculative knowledge and meditation in mystic yoga, because
even after following such methods one takes to fruitive activities
again, unable to control his mind, which is contaminated by the
base qualities of nature, namely passion and ignorance.
PURPORT
It has actually been seen that even after achieving so-called perfection,
many karmis, तकण and yogis become attached to material activities
again. Many so-called svamis and yogis give up material activities as false
(jagan mithya), but after some time they nevertheless resume material


--- Page 142 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
activities by opening hospitals and schools or performing other activities
for the benefit of the public. Sometimes they participate in politics, al-
though still falsely declaring themselves sannyasis, members of the
renounced order. The perfect conclusion, however, is that if one actually
desires to get out of the material world, he must take to devotional ser-
vice, which begins with Sravanari kirtanar visnoh; chanting and hear-
ing the glories of the Lord. The Krsna consciousness movement has
actually proved this. In the Western countries, many young boys who
were addicted to drugs and who had many other bad habits, which they
could not give up, abandoned all those propensities and very seriously
engaged in chanting the glories of the Lord as soon as they joined the
Krsna consciousness movement. In other words, this process is the
perfect method of atonement for actions performed in rajah and tamah
(passion and ignorance). As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.19):
tada rajas-tamo-bhavah
kama-lobhadayas ca ye
ceta etair anaviddham
sthitarn sattve prasidati
As a result of rajah and tamah, one becomes increasingly lusty and
greedy, but when one takes to the process of chanting and hearing, one
comes to the platform of goodness and becomes happy. As he advances in
devotional service, all his doubts are completely eradicated (bhidyate
hrdaya-granthis chidyante sarva-samsayah). Thus the knot of his desire
for fruitive activities is cut to pieces.
TEXT 47-48
य॒ एतं परमं गुद्यमितिहासमघापहम्‌ |
श्णुयाच्क्द्ध या युक्तो यश्च AFAGHAA ॥४७॥
= ५ A
नवे स नरकं याति नेक्षितो यमकिङ्करेः।
यचप्यभङ्गलो मर्त्यो विष्णुलोके महीयते ell
ya 61077 paramarih guhyam
itihasam aghapaham


--- Page 143 ---
Text 49] Ajamila Delivered by the Visnuditas 137
Srnwyac chraddhaya yukto
yas ca bhaktyanukirtayet
na vai sa narakam yati
neksito yama-kirikaraih
yadyapy amangalo martyo
visnu-loke mahiyate
yah—anyone who; etam—this; paramam—very; guhyam—confi-
dential; itihasam —historical narration; agha-apaham —which frees one
from all reactions to sins; Srnwyat—hears; sraddhaya —with faith; yuk-
tah—endowed; yah—one who; ca—also; bhaktya—with great devo-
tion; anukirtayet—repeats; na—not; vai—indeed; sah—such a person;
narakam—to hell; yati—goes; na—not; iksitah—is observed; yama-
kirkaraih—by the order carriers of Yamaraja; yadyapi—although;
amarigalah—inauspicious; martyah—a living entity with a material
body; visnu-loke—in the spiritual world; mahiyate—is welcomed and
respectfully received.
TRANSLATION
Because this very confidential historical narration has the
potency to vanquish all sinful reactions, one who hears or de-
scribes it with faith and devotion is no longer doomed to hellish
life, regardless of his having a material body and regardless of how
sinful he may have been. Indeed, the Yamadiitas, who carry out the
orders of Yamaraja, do not approach him even to see him. After
giving up his body, he returns home, back to Godhead, where he is
very respectfully received and worshiped.
TEXT 49
त्रियमाणो हरेर्नाम गृणन्‌ पुत्रोपचारितम्‌ |
अजामिलो ऽप्यगाद्धाम FFT श्रद्धया गृणन्‌।।४९॥
mriyamano harer nama
grnan putropacaritam
ajamilo py agad dhama
kim uta $raddhaya grnan


--- Page 144 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
mriyamanah—at the time of death; hareh nama—the holy name of
Hari; grnan—chanting; putra-upacaritam —indicating 15 ৪0103
ajamilah—Ajamila; api—even; agat—went; dhama—to the spiritual
world; kim uta—what to speak of; Sraddhaya—with faith and love;
grnan—chanting.
TRANSLATION

While suffering at the time of death, Ajamila chanted the holy
name of the Lord, and although the chanting was directed toward
his son, he nevertheless returned home, back to Godhead.
Therefore if one faithfully and inoffensively chants the holy name
of the Lord, where is the doubt that he will return to Godhead?

PURPORT

At the time of death one is certainly bewildered because his bodily
functions are in disorder. At that time, even one who throughout his life
has practiced chanting the holy name of the Lord may not be able to
chant the Hare Krsna mantra very distinctly. Nevertheless, such a per-
son receives all the benefits of chanting the holy name. While the body is
fit, therefore, why should we not chant the holy name of the Lord loudly
and distinctly? If one does so, it is quite possible that even at the time of
death he will be properly able to chant the holy name of the Lord with
love and faith. In conclusion, one who chants the holy name of the Lord
constantly is guaranteed to return home, back to Godhead, without a
doubt.

Supplementary note to this chapter.

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura’s commentary to texts nine and
ten of this chapter form a dialogue concerning how one can become free
from all sinful reactions simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord.

Someone may say, “It may be accepted that by chanting the holy name
of the Lord one becomes freed from all the reactions of sinful life.
However, if one commits sinful acts in full consciousness, not only once
but many, many times, he is unable to free himself from the reactions of
such sins even after atoning for them for twelve years or more. How is


--- Page 145 ---
Ajamila Delivered by the Visnudiatas 139
it possible, then, that simply by once chanting the holy name of the Lord
one immediately becomes freed from the reactions of such sins?”

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura replies by quoting verses nine
and ten of this chapter: “The chanting of the holy name of Lord Visnu is
the best process of atonement for a thief of gold or other valuables, for a
drunkard, for one who betrays a friend or relative, for one who kills a
brahmana, or for one who indulges in sex with the wife of his guru or
another superior. It is also the best method of atonement for one who
murders women, the king or his father, for one who slaughters cows, and
for all other sinful men. Simply by chanting the holy name of Lord
Visnu, such sinful persons may attract the attention of the Supreme
Lord, who therefore considers, ‘Because this man has chanted My holy
name, My duty is to give him protection.” ”

One may atone for sinful life and vanquish all sinful reactions by
chanting the holy name, although this is not called atonement. Ordinary
atonement may temporarily protect a sinful person, but it does not com-
pletely cleanse his heart of the deep-rooted desire to commit sinful acts.
Therefore atonement is not as powerful as the chanting of the holy name
of the Lord. In the 3astras it is said that if a person only once chants the
holy name and completely surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Lord, the
Lord immediately considers him His ward and is always inclined to give
him protection. This is confirmed by Sridhara Svami. Thus when Ajamila
was in great danger of being carried off by the order carriers of
Yamaraja, the Lord immediately sent His personal order carriers to pro-
tect him, and because Ajamila was freed from all sinful reactions, the
Visnudiitas spoke on his behalf.

Ajamila had named his son Narayana, and because he loved the boy
very much, he would call him again and again. Although he was calling
for his son, the name itself was powerful because the name Narayana is
not different from the Supreme Lord Narayana. When Ajamila named
his son Narayana, all the reactions of his sinful life were neutralized, and
as he continued calling his son and thus chanting the holy name of
Narayana thousands of times, he was actually unconsciously advancing in
Krsna consciousness.

One may argue, “Since he was constantly chanting the name of
Narayana, how was it possible for him to be associating with a prostitute
and thinking of wine? By his sinful actions he was bringing suffering


--- Page 146 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 2
upon himself again and again, and therefore one may say that his ulti-
mate chanting of Narayana was the cause of his being freed. However,
his chanting would then have been a nama-aparadha. Namno balad
yasya hi papa-buddhih: one who continues to act sinfully and tries to
neutralize his sins by chanting the holy name of the Lord is a ndma-
aparadhi, an offender to the holy name. In response it may be said that
Ajamila’s chanting was inoffensive because he did not chant the name of
Narayana with the purpose of counteracting his sins. He did not know
that he was addicted to sinful actions, nor did he know that his chanting
of the name of Narayana was neutralizing them. Thus he did not commit
a nama-aparddha, and his repeated chanting of the holy name of
Narayana while calling his son may be called pure chanting. Because of
this pure chanting, Ajamila unconsciously accumulated the results of
bhakti. Indeed, even his first utterance of the holy name was sufficient to
nullify all the sinful reactions of his life. To cite a logical example, a fig
tree does not immediately yield fruits, but in time the fruits are avail-
able. Similarly, Ajamila’s devotional service grew little by little, and
therefore although he committed very sinful acts, the reactions did not
affect him. In the $astras it is said that if one chants the holy name of the
Lord even once, the reactions of past, present or future sinful life do not
affect him. To give another example, if one extracts the poison fangs of a
serpent, this saves the serpent’s future victims from poisonous effects,
even if the serpent bites repeatedly. Similarly, if a devotee chants the
holy name even once inoffensively, this protects him eternally. He need
only wait for the results of the chanting to mature in due course of time.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Second
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Ajamila Delivered by the
Visnudiitas.”


--- Page 147 ---
CHAPTER THREE
Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers
As related in this chapter, the Yamaditas approached Yamaraja, who
very exhaustively explained bhagavata-dharma, the religious principle
of devotional service. Yamaraja thus satisfied the Yamadatas, who had
been very disappointed. Yamaraja said, “Although Ajamila was calling
for his son, he chanted the holy name of the Lord, Narayana, and simply
by a glimpse of the chanting of the holy name, he immediately achieved
the association of Lord Visnu’s order carriers, who saved him from your
attempt to arrest him. This is quite all right. It is a fact that even a
chronically sinful person who chants the holy name of the Lord, although
not completely without offenses, does not take another material birth.”

By chanting the holy name of the Lord, Ajamila had met four order
carriers of Lord Visnu. They were very beautiful and had quickly come
to rescue him. Yamaraja now described them. “The Visnudiitas are all
pure devotees of the Lord, the Supreme Person in regard to the creation,
maintenance and annihilation of this cosmic manifestation. Neither King
Indra, Varuna, Siva, Brahma, the seven rsis nor I myself can understand
the transcendental activities of the Supreme Lord, who is self-sufficient
and beyond the reach of the material senses. With material senses, no
one can attain enlightenment about Him. The Lord, the master of the il-
lusory energy, possesses transcendental qualities for the good fortune of
everyone, and His devotees are also qualified in that way. The devotees,
concerned only with rescuing the fallen souls from this material world,
apparently take birth in different places in the material world just to save
the conditioned souls. If one is somewhat interested in spiritual life, the
devotees of the Lord protect him in many ways.”

Yamaraja continued, “The essence of sandtana-dharma, or eternal
religion, is extremely confidential. No one but the Lord Himself can
deliver that confidential religious system to human society. It is by the
mercy of the Lord that the transcendental system of religion can be
understood by His pure devotees, and specifically by the twelve maha-
janas—Lord Brahma, Narada Muni, Lord Siva, the Kumaras, Kapila,

141


--- Page 148 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
Manu, Prahlada, Janaka, Bhisma, Bali, Sukadeva Gosvami and me. Other
learned scholars, headed by Jaimini, are almost always covered by the il-
lusory energy, and therefore they are more or less attracted by the flow-
ery language of the three Vedas, namely Rg, Yajur and Sama, which are
called trayi. Instead of becoming pure devotees, people captivated by the
flowery words of these three Vedas are interested in the Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies. They cannot understand the glories of chanting the holy
name of the Lord. Intelligent persons, however, take to the devotional
service of the Lord. When they chant the holy name of the Lord without
offenses, they are no longer subject to my rulings. If by chance they com-
mit some sinful act, they are protected by the holy name of the Lord be-
cause that is where their interest lies. The four weapons of the Lord,
especially the club and the Sudarsana cakra, always protect the devotees.
One who chants, hears or remembers the holy name of the Lord without
duplicity, or who prays or offers obeisances to the Lord, becomes perfect,
whereas even a learned person may be called to hell if he is bereft of
devotional service.”

After Yamarija thus described the glories of the Lord and His devo-
tees, Sukadeva Gosvami further explained the potency of chanting the
holy name and the futility of performing Vedic ritualistic ceremonies and
pious activities for atonement.

TEXT 1
श्रीराजोवाच
নিহাম্ম देवः खमभटोपवणितं
प्रत्याह किं तानपि धर्मराजः ।
9 -
एवं हताज्ञो बिहतान्छुरारे-
~ => 0
नैदेशिकैर्यस्य वशो जनोऽयम्‌ ॥ १॥
Sri-rajovaca
nisamya devah sva-bhatopavarnitam
pratyaha kim tan api dharmarajah
evam hatajiio vihatan murarer
naidesikair yasya vase jano yam


--- Page 149 ---
Text 2] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 143
§ri-raja uvaca —the King said; nisamya —after hearing; devah—Lord
Yamarija; sva-bhata—of his own servants; upavarnitam—the state-
ments; pratyaha—replied; kim—what; tan—unto them; api—also;
dharma-rajah—Yamarija, the superintendent of death and the judge of
religious and irreligious activities; evam—thus; hata-ajiiah—whose
order was foiled; vihatdn —who were defeated; murareh naidesikaih—
by the order carriers of Murari, Krsna; yasya—of whom; vase—under
the subjugation; janah ayam—all the people of the world.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit said: O my lord, O Sukadeva Gosvami, Yamaraja is
the controller of all living entities in terms of their religious and
irreligious activities, but his order had been foiled. When his ser-
vants, the Yamadiitas, informed him of their defeat by the
Visnudiitas, who had stopped them from arresting Ajamila, what
did he reply?
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that although the state-
ments of the Yamadiitas were fully upheld by Vedic principles, the state-
ments of the ৬1910000089 were triumphant. This was confirmed by
Yamaraja himself.
TEXT 2
यमसय देवस्य न दण्डभङ्गः
6.
कुतश्चन PAE आसीत्‌ |
एतन्छुने वृश्चति लोकसंशयं
नहि त्वदन्य इतिमे विनिश्चितम्‌ un
yamasya devasya na danda-bhangah
kutascanarse Sruta-purva dasit
etan mune vrscati loka-sarmsayam
na hi tvad-anya iti me viniscitam
yamasya—of Yamaraja; devasya—the demigod in charge of judg-
ment; na—not; danda-bharigah—the breaking of the order;


--- Page 150 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
kutascana—from anywhere; rse—QO great sage; Sruta-pirvah—heard
before; asit—was; etat—this: mune—O great sage; vrscati—can eradi-
cate; loka-samsayam—the doubt of people; na—not; hi—indeed; tvat-
anyah—anyone other than you; iti—thus; me—by me; viniscitam—
concluded.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, never before has it been heard anywhere that an
order from Yamaraja has been baffled. Therefore I think that
people will have doubts about this that no one but you can eradi-
cate. Since that is my firm conviction, kindly explain the reasons
for these events.
TEXT 3
HgH उवाच
EN
AYES राजन्‌ याम्याः प्रतिहतोद्यमाः |
9$ +
पतिं विज्ञापयामाखयंमं संयमनीपतिम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥
sri-Suka ८०९८०
bhagavat-purusai rajan
yamyah pratihatodyamah
patim vyidpayam asur
yamarn sariyamani-patim
$ri-Sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; bhagavat-purusaih—by
the order carriers of the Lord, the Vispudatas; rgjan—O King;
yamyah—the order carriers of Yamaraja; pratihata-udyamah—whose
efforts were defeated; patim—their master; vijiiapayam dasuh—in-
formed; yamam—Yamaraja; sarmiyamani-patim—the master of the city
Sarnyamani.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami replied: My dear King, when the order
carriers of Yamaraja were baffled and defeated by the order car-
riers of Visnu, they approached their master, the controller of
Sarnyamani-puri and master of sinful persons, to tell him of this
incident.


--- Page 151 ---
Text 4] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 145
TEXT 4
यमदूता Fg:
= = a LN
कति सन्तीह शास्तारो जीवलोकस्य वै प्रमो ।
a —
त्रैविध्यं कुर्वतः कमं फलामिन्यक्तिहेतवः ॥ ४ ॥
yamadiita icuh
kati santtha $astaro
Jiva-lokasya vai prabho
trai-vidhyarn kurvatah karma
phalabhivyakti-hetavah
yamaditah icuh—the order carriers of Yamaraja said; kati—how
many; santi—are there; tha—in this world; $astarah—controllers or
rulers; jiva-lokasya—of this material world; vai—indeed; prabho—O
master; trai-vidhyam—under the three modes of material nature; kur-
vatah—performing;  karma—activity; phala—of the results;
abhivyakti—of the manifestation; hetavah—causes.
TRANSLATION
The Yamadiitas said: Our dear lord, how many controllers or
rulers are there in this material world? How many causes are re-
sponsible for manifesting the various results of activities per-
formed under the three modes of material nature [sattva-guna,
rajo-guna and tamo-guna]?
PURPORT
Srila Viévanitha Cakravarti Thakura says that the Yamaditas, the
order carriers of Yamaraja, were so disappointed that they asked their
master, almost in great anger, whether there were many masters other
than him. Furthermore, because the Yamadiitas had been defeated and
their master could not protect them, they were inclined to say that there
was no need to serve such a master. If a servant cannot carry out the or-
ders of his master without being defeated, what is the use of serving such
a powerless master?


--- Page 152 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
TEXT 5
© ~ =
यदि ফ্যুবহবা लोके शास्तारो दण्डधारिणः |
कस्य स्यातां न वा कख मृत्युश्चामृतमेव वा ॥ ५॥
yadi syur bahavo loke
sastaro danda-dharinah
kasya syatar na va kasya
mrtyus camrtam eva va
yadi—if; syuh—there are; bahavah—many; loke—in this world;
Sastarah—rulers or controllers; danda-dharinah—who punish the sin-
ful men; kasya—of whom; syatam—there may be; na—not; va—or;
kasya—of whom; mrtyuh—distress or unhappiness; ca—and;
amrtam—happiness; eva—certainly; va—or.
TRANSLATION
If in this universe there are many rulers and justices who dis-
agree about punishment and reward, their contradictory actions
will neutralize each other, and no one will be punished or
rewarded. Otherwise, if their contradictory acts fail to neutralize
each other, everyone will have to be both punished and rewarded.
PURPORT
Because the Yamaditas had been unsuccessful in carrying out the
order of Yamaraja, they doubted whether Yamaraja actually had the
power to punish the sinful. Although they had gone to arrest Ajamila,
following Yamaraja’s order, they found themselves unsuccessful because
of the order of some higher authority. Therefore they were unsure of
whether there were many authorities or only one. If there were many au-
thorities who gave different judgments, which could be contradictory, a
person might be wrongly punished or wrongly rewarded, or he might be
neither punished nor rewarded. According to our experience in the ma-
terial world, a person punished in one court may appeal to another. Thus
the same man may be either punished or rewarded according to different
judgments. However, in the law of nature or the court of the Supreme


--- Page 153 ---
Text 6] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 147
Personality of Godhead there cannot be such contradictory judgments.
The judges and their judgments must be perfect and free from contradic-
tions. Actually the position of Yamarija was very awkward in the case of
Ajamila because the Yamaditas were right in attempting to arrest
Ajamila, but the Visnudatas had baffled them. Although Yamaraja,
under these circumstances, was accused by both the Visnuditas and the
Yamadittas, he is perfect in administering justice because he is em-
powered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore he will ex-
plain what his real position is and how everyone is controlled by the
supreme controller, the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 6
हिन्त ज्ञास्ववहुस्वे AFgATHE कर्मिणाम्‌ |
शास्वत्वय्ुपचारो हि यथा मण्डलवर्तिनाम्‌ ॥ & II
kintu $astr-bahutve syad
bahanam iha karminam
Sastrtvam upacaro hi
yatha mandala-vartinam
kintu—but; sastr—of governors or judges; bahutve —in the plurality;
syat—there may be; bahinam—of many; iha—in this world; kar-
minam—persons performing actions; Sastrtvam —departmental manage-
ment; upacarah—administration; hi—indeed; yatha—just like; man-
dala-vartinam—of the departmental heads.
TRANSLATION
The Yamadiitas continued: Since there are many different
karmis, or workers, there may be different judges or rulers to give
them justice, but just as one central emperor controls different
departmental rulers, there must be one supreme controller to
guide all the judges.
PURPORT
In governmental management there may be departmental officials to
give justice to different persons, but the law must be one, and that


--- Page 154 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
central law must control everyone. The 03111300039 could not imagine
that two judges would give two different verdicts in the same case, and
therefore they wanted to know who the central judge is. The Yamaditas
were certain that Ajamila was a most sinful man, but although Yamaraja
wanted to punish him, the 15100000359 excused him. This was a puzzling
situation that the Yamadatas wanted Yamarija to clarify.
TEXT 7
अतस्त्वमेको भूतानां सेश्वराणामधीश्वरः |
शास्ता दण्डधरो नृणां FATIH: ॥ ७ ॥
atas tvam eko bhitanam
sesvaranam adhisvarah
sasta danda-dharo ninam
Subhasubha-vivecanah
atah—as such; tvam—you; ekah—one; bhutanam—of all living
beings; sa-iSvaranam—including all the demigods; adhisvarah—the
supreme master; $astd—the supreme ruler; danda-dharah—the
supreme administrator of punishment; nfndm—of human society;
Subha-asubha-vivecanah—who discriminates between what is
auspicious and inauspicious.
TRANSLATION
The supreme judge must be one, not many. It was our under-
standing that you are that supreme judge and that you have
jurisdiction even over the demigods. Our impression was that you
are the master of all living entities, the supreme authority who dis-
criminates between the pious and impious activities of all human
beings.
TEXT 8
= = ९
तस्य ते विहितो दण्डो न लोके IIASA |
A
चतर्भिरदतैः सिद्धैराज्ञा ते Ream ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 155 ---
Text 9] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 149
tasya te vihito dando
na loke vartate 41/70
caturbhir adbhutaih siddhair
ajia te vipralambhita

tasya—of the influence; te—of you; vihitah—ordained; dandah—
punishment; na—not; loke—within this world; vartate—exists;
adhunda—now; caturbhih—by four; adbhutaih—very wonderful; sid-
dhaih—perfected persons; djiid—the order; te —your; vipralambhita—
surpassed.

TRANSLATION

But now we see that the punishment ordained under your au-
thority is no longer effective, since your order has been
transgressed by four wonderful and perfect persons.

PURPORT

The Yamadiitas had been under the impression that Yamaraja was the
only person in charge of administering justice. They were fully confident
that no one could counteract his judgments, but now, to their surprise,
his order had been violated by the four wonderful persons from Sid-
dhaloka.

TEXT 9
नीयमानं तवादेशादस्पाभि्यातन्ागृषटान्‌ ।
व्यामोचयन्‌ पातकिनं छिना पाशान्‌ प्रसद्य ते ॥ ९ ॥
niyamanar tavadesad
asmabhir yatana-grhan
vyamocayan patakinam
chittva pasan prasahya te

niyamanam—being brought; tava dadesat—by your order;
asmabhih—by us; ydatana-grhan—to the torture chambers, the hellish
planets; vyamocayan—released; patakinam—the sinful Ajamila; chit-
tva —cutting; pasan—the ropes; prasahya—by force; te—they.


--- Page 156 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch.3
TRANSLATION
We were bringing the most sinful Ajamila toward the hellish
planets, following your order, when those beautiful persons from
Siddhaloka forcibly cut the knots of the ropes with which we were
arresting him.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks that the ১8108800185
wanted to bring the ৬1510000185 before Yamaraja. If Yamaraja could then
have punished the Visnuditas, the Yamaditas would have been satisfied.
TEXT 10
तांस्ते वेदितुमिच्छामो यदि না मन्यसे क्षमम्‌।
= (5
नारायणेत्यभिहिते मा भैरित्याययुद्धंतम्‌ ॥१०॥
1775 te veditum icchamo
yadi no manyase ksamam
narayanety abhihite
ma bhair ity ayayur drutam
tan—about them; te—from you; veditum—to know; icchamah—we
wish; yadi—if; nah—for us; manyase—you think; ksamam—suitable;
narayana—Narayana; iti—thus; abhihite—being uttered; ma—do not;
bhaih—fear; iti—thus; ayayuh—they arrived; drutam—very soon.
TRANSLATION
As soon as the sinful Ajamila uttered the name Narayana, these
four beautiful men immediately arrived and reassured him, say-
ing, “Do not fear. Do not fear.”” We wish to know about them
from Your Lordship. If you think we are able to understand them,
kindly describe who they are.
PURPORT
The order carriers of Yamaraja, being very much aggrieved because of
their defeat by the four Visnuditas, wanted to bring them before


--- Page 157 ---
Text 11] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 151
Yamaraja and, if possible, punish them. Otherwise they desired to com-
mit suicide. Before pursuing either course, however, they wanted to
know about the Visnuditas from Yamaraja, who is also omniscient.
TEXT 11
श्रीबादरायणिरूवाचर
इति देवः स We: प्रजासंयमनो यमः ।
प्रीतः SFA प्रत्याह खरन्‌ पादाम्बुजं हरेः 12 21)
sri-badarayanir uvaca
iti devah sa aprstah
praja-sariyamano yamah
pritah sva-dutan pratyaha
smaran padambujam hareh

sri-badarayanih uvdca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; devah—
the demigod; sah—he; aprstah—being questioned; praja-samyamanah
yamah—Lord Yamaraja, who controls the living entities; pritah—being
pleased; sva-ditan—to his own servants; pratyaha—replied; smaran—
remembering; pada-ambujam—the lotus feet; hareh—of Hari, the Per-
sonality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Thus having been questioned, Lord
Yamaraja, the supreme controller of the living entities, was very
pleased with his order carriers because of hearing from them the
holy name of Narayana. He remembered the lotus feet of the Lord
and began to reply.

PURPORT

Srila Yamaraja, the supreme controller of the living entities in terms
of their pious and impious activities, was very pleased with his servants
because they had chanted the holy name of Narayana in his dominion.
Yamaraja has to deal with men who are all sinful and who can hardly
understand Narayana. Consequently when his order carriers uttered the
name of Narayana, he was extremely pleased, for he also is a Vaisnava.


--- Page 158 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
TEXT 12
यम उवाच
परो मदन्यो जगतस्तस्थुषश्च
ओतं प्रोतं पटत्रयत्र विश्वम्‌ |
यदंशतोऽस्य सितिजन्मनाशा
TET यस्य वशे च लोकः ॥१२॥
yama uvaca
paro mad-anyo jagatas tasthusas ca
০0107 protarn patavad yatra visvam
yad-arisato ’sya sthiti-janma-nasa

nasy otavad yasya vase ca lokah
yamah uvaca—Yamarija replied; parah—superior; mat—than me;
anyah—another; jagatah—of all moving things; tasthusah—of non-
moving things; ca—and; otam—crosswise; protam—lengthwise; pata-
vat—like a woven cloth; yatra—in whom; wvisvam—the cosmic
manifestation; yat—of whom; amsatah—from the partial expansions;
asya—of this universe; sthiti—the maintenance; janma—the creation;
nasah—the annihilation; nasi—in the nose; ota-vat—like the rope;
yasya—of whom; vase—under the control; ca—and; lokah—the whole

creation.
TRANSLATION
Yamaraja said: My dear servants, you have accepted me as the
Supreme, but factually I am not. Above me, and above all the other
demigods, including Indra and Candra, is the one supreme master
and controller. The partial manifestations of His personality are
Brahma, Visnu and Siva, who are in charge of the creation, mainte-
nance and annihilation of this universe. He is like the two threads
that form the length and breadth of a woven cloth. The entire
world is controlled by Him just as a bull is controlled by a rope in
its nose.
PURPORT

The order carriers of Yamarija suspected that there was a ruler even
above Yamaraja. To eradicate their doubts, Yamarija immediately


--- Page 159 ---
Text 13] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 153
replied, “Yes, there is one supreme controller above everything.”
Yamaraja is in charge of some of the moving living entities, namely the
human beings, but the animals, who also move, are not under his control.
Only human beings have consciousness of right and wrong, and among
them only those who perform sinful activities come under the control of
Yamaraja. Therefore although Yamaraja is a controller, he is only a
departmental controller of a few living entities. There are other
demigods who control many other departments, but above them all is one
supreme controller, Krsna. Isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-
vigrahah: the supreme controller is Krsna. Others, who control their own
departments in the affairs of the universe, are insignificant in com-
parison to Krsna, the supreme controller. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita
(7.7), mattah [00701070717 nanyat kiicid asti dhanaijaya: “My dear
Dhanaiijaya [Arjuna], no one is superior to Me.” Therefore Yamarija
immediately cleared away the doubts of his assistants, the Yamaditas, by
confirming that there is a supreme controller above all others.

Srila Madhvacarya explains that the words 01৫7 protam refer to the
cause of all causes. The Supreme Lord is both vertical and horizontal to
the cosmic manifestation. This is confirmed by the following verse from
the Skanda Purana:

yatha kantha-patah 50870
otah protas ca sa sthitah
evam visnav idam visvam
০0107 protarn ca sarsthitam
Like the two threads, horizontal and vertical, of which a quilt is
manufactured, Lord Visnu is situated as the vertical and horizontal cause
of the cosmic manifestation.
TEXT 13
- 0 . a
यो नामभिवांचि जनं निजायां
बभ्राति तन्त्यामिव दामभिर्गाः |
यस्मै बलिं त इमे नामकर्म-
निजन्धकद्धा्किता वहन्ति ॥१३॥


--- Page 160 ---
154 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
yo namabhir vaci [कष्या nijayam
badhnati tantryam iva damabhir gah
yasmai balim ta ime nama-karma-
nibandha-baddhas cakita vahanti

yah—He who; namabhih—by different names; vaci—to the Vedic
language; janam —all people; nijayam—which has emanated from Him-
self; badhnati—binds; tantryam—to a rope; iva—like; damabhih—by
cords; gah—bulls; yasmai—unto whom; balim—a small presentation of
taxes; te—all of them; ime—these; nama-karma—of names and dif-
ferent activities; nibandha—by the obligations; baddhah—bound;
cakitah—Dbeing fearful; vahanti—carry.

TRANSLATION

Just as the driver of a bullock cart ties ropes through the
nostrils of his bulls to control them, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead binds all men through the ropes of His words in the
Vedas, which set forth the names and activities of the distinct or-
ders of human society [brahmana, ksatriya, vaiya and $adra). In
fear, the members of these orders all worship the Supreme Lord
by offering Him presentations according to their respective
activities.

PURPORT

In this material world, everyone is conditioned, regardless of who he
is. One may be a human being, a demigod or an animal, tree or plant, but
everything is controlled by the laws of nature, and behind this natural
control is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed by
Bhagavad-gita (9.10), wherein Krsna says, mayadhyaksena prakrtih
sityate sa-caracaram: “The material nature is working under My direc-
tion and producing all moving and nonmoving beings.” Thus Krsna is
behind the natural machine, which works under His control.

Apart from other living entities, the living being in the human form
of body is systematically controlled by the Vedic injunctions in terms of
the divisions of varna and asrama. A human being is expected to follow
the rules and regulations of varna and asrama; otherwise he cannot


--- Page 161 ---
Text 13] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 155
escape punishment by Yamaraja. The point is that every human being is
expected to elevate himself to the position of a brahmana, the most intel-
ligent man, and then one must transcend that position to become a
Vaisnava. This is the perfection of life. The brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya
and Sidra can elevate themselves by worshiping the Lord according to
their activities (sve sve karmany abhiratah samsiddhim labhate narah).
The divisions of varna and dsrama are necessary to insure the proper
execution of duties and peaceful existence for everyone, but everyone is
directed to worship the Supreme Lord, who is all-pervading (yena sar-
vam idam tatam). The Supreme Lord exists vertically and horizontally
(01277 protam), and therefore if one follows the Vedic injunctions by
worshiping the Supreme Lord according to one’s ability, his life will be
perfect. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.13):
atah pumbhir dvija-srestha
varnasrama-vibhagasah
svanusthitasya dharmasya
samsiddhir hari-tosanam

““O best among the twiceborn, it is therefore concluded that the highest
perfection one can achieve, by discharging his prescribed duties
|dharma) according to caste divisions and orders of life, is to please the
Lord Hari.” The ৮০702707780 institution offers the perfect process for
making one eligible to return home, back to Godhead, because the aim of
every varna and dsrama is to please the Supreme Lord. One can please
the Lord under the direction of a bona fide spiritual master, and if one
does so his life is perfect. The Supreme Lord is worshipable, and every-
one worships Him directly or indirectly. Those who worship Him directly
get the results of liberation quickly, whereas the liberation of those who
serve Him indirectly is delayed.

The words namabhir vaci are very important. In the varnasrama in-
stitution, there are different names —brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, Sidra,
brahmacari, grhastha, vanaprastha and sannyasi. The vak, or Vedic in-
junctions, give directions for all these divisions. Everyone is expected to
offer obeisances to the Supreme Lord and perform duties as indicated in
the Vedas.


--- Page 162 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
TEXTS 14-15
अहं महेन्द्रो निच्छतिः प्रचेताः
सोमोऽग्निरीशः पवनो विरिञ्चिः ।
ALAA वसवोऽथ साध्या
मरुद्रणा रुद्रगणाः ससिद्धाः ॥१४॥
अन्ये च ये विश्वसृजोऽमरेशा
भृग्बादयोऽस्पृष्टरजस्तमस्काः |
यस्येहितं न विदुः स्पृष्टमायाः
geal अपि किं ततोऽन्ये ॥१५॥
aharin mahendro nirrtih pracetah
somo ‘gnir sah pavano virincih
aditya-visve vasavo 170 sadhya
marud-gand rudra-ganah sasiddhah
anye ca ye visva-srjo ‘maresa
bhrgv-adayo ’sprsta-rajas-tamaskah
yasyehitari na viduh sprsta-mayah
sattva-pradhana api 167 tato ‘nye
aham—I, Yamaraja; mahendrah—Indra, the King of heaven; nir-
rtih—Nirrti; pracetah—Varuna, the controller of water; somah—the
moon; agnih—fire; iSah—Lord Siva; pavanah—the demigod of the air;
viriicth—Lord Brahma; aditya—the sun; visve—Visvasu; vasavah—
the eight Vasus; atha—also; sadhyah—the demigods; marut-ganah—
masters of the wind; rudra-ganah—the expansions of Lord Siva; sa-sid-
dhah—with the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; anye—others; ca—and;
ye—who; visva-srjah—Marici and the other creators of the universal
affairs; amara-isah—the demigods like Brhaspati; bhrgu-adayah—the
great sages headed by Bhrgu; asprsta—who have not been contaminated;
rajah-tamaskah—by the lower modes of material nature (rajo-guna and
tamo-guna); yasya—of whom; thitam—the activity; na viduh—do not
know; sprsta-mayah—who are illusioned by the illusory energy; sattva-


--- Page 163 ---
Text 15] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 157
pradhanah—chiefly in the mode of goodness; api—although; kim—
what to speak of; tatah—than them; anye—others.
TRANSLATION
I, Yamaraja; Indra, the King of heaven; Nirrti; Varuna; Candra,
the moon-god; Agni; Lord Siva; Pavana; Lord Brahma; Siirya, the
sun-god; Visvasu; the eight Vasus; the Sadhyas; the Maruts; the
Rudras; the Siddhas; and Marici and the other great rsis engaged
in maintaining the departmental affairs of the universe, as well as
the best of the demigods headed by Brhaspati, and the great sages
headed by Bhrgu are all certainly freed from the influence of the
two base material modes of nature, namely passion and ignorance.
Nevertheless, although we are in the mode of goodness, we cannot
understand the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
What, then, is to be said of others, who, under illusion, merely
speculate to know God?
PURPORT
The men and other living entities within this cosmic manifestation are
controlled by the three modes of nature. For the living entities controlled
by the base qualities of nature, passion and ignorance, there is no
possibility of understanding God. Even those in the mode of goodness,
like the many demigods and great rsis described in these verses, cannot
understand the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita, one who is situated in the devotional service of
the Lord is transcendental to all the material qualities. Therefore the
Lord personally says that no one can understand Him but the bhaktas,
who are transcendental to all material qualities (bhaktya mam abhi-
janati). As stated by Bhismadeva to Maharaja Yudhisthira in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.9.16):
na hy asya karhicid rajan
puman veda vidhitsitam
yad vijjiasaya yukta
muhyanti kavayo pi hi
“O King, no one can know the plan of the Lord [Sri Krsna). Even though
great philosophers inquire exhaustively, they are bewildered.” No one,


--- Page 164 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
therefore, can understand God by speculative knowledge. Indeed, by
speculation one will be bewildered (muhyanti). This is also confirmed by
the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (7.3):
manusyanam sahasresu
kascid yatati siddhaye
yatatam api siddhanarm
kascin mam vetti tattvatah
Among many thousands of men, one may endeavor for perfection, and
even among the siddhas, those who have already become perfect, only
one who adopts the process of bhakti, devotional service, can understand
Krsna.
TEXT 16
+ ২২
यं वै न गोमिर्मनसासुभिर्वा
हृदा गिरा वासुभृतो fee ।
आत्मानमन्तहदि सन्तमात्मनां
oR
चक्षुयंथवाकरृतयस्ततः परम्‌ ॥१६॥
yam vai na gobhir manasasubhir va
hrda gira vasu-bhrto vicaksate
atmanam antar-hrdi santam atmanari
caksur yathaivakrtayas tatah param
yam—whom; wvai—indeed; na—not; gobhih—by the senses;
manasa—by the mind; asubhih—by the life breath; va—or; hrda—by
thoughts; gira—by words; va—or; asu-bhrtah—the living entities;
vicaksate—see or know; atmanam—the Supersoul; antah-hrdi—within
the core of the heart; santam—existing; atmanam—of the living en-
tities; caksuh—the eyes; yatha —just like; eva—indeed; akrtayah—the
different parts or limbs of the body; tatah—than them; param—
higher.
TRANSLATION
As the different limbs of the body cannot see the eyes, the living
entities cannot see the Supreme Lord, who is situated as the Super-


--- Page 165 ---
Text 17] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 159
soul in everyone’s heart. Not by the senses, by the mind, by the life
air, by thoughts within the heart, or by the vibration of words can
the living entities ascertain the real situation of the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Although the different parts of the body do not have the power to see
the eyes, the eyes direct the movements of the body’s different parts. The
legs move forward because the eyes see what is in front of them, and the
hand touches because the eyes see touchable entities. Similarly, every
living being acts according to the direction of the Supersoul, who is situ-
ated within the heart. As the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gita
(15.15), sarvasya caharir hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtir jianam
apohanan ca: “I am sitting in everyone's heart and giving directions for
remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness.” Elsewhere in Bhagavad-
gita it is stated, iSvarah sarva-bhittanam hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati: “The
Supreme Lord, as the Supersoul, is situated within the heart.” The living
entity cannot do anything without the sanction of the Supersoul. The
Supersoul is acting at every moment, but the living entity cannot under-
stand the form and activities of the Supersoul by manipulating his
senses. The example of the eyes and the bodily limbs is very appropriate.
If the limbs could see, they could walk forward without the help of the
eyes, but that is impossible. Although one cannot see the Supersoul in
one’s heart through sensual activities, His direction is necessary.
TEXT 17
SIE IAC EL
WE मायाधिपतेमंहात्मनः |
a
प्रायेण दूता इह লী मनोहरा-
अरन्ति तदरूपगुणस्वभावाः ॥ १७॥
tasyatma-tantrasya harer adhisituh
parasya mayadhipater mahatmanah
prayena dita iha vai manoharas
caranti tad-rapa-guna-svabhavah


--- Page 166 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch.3

tasya—of Him; atma-tantrasya—being self-sufficient, not dependent
on any other person; hareh—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
adhisituh—who is the master of everything; parasya—the Transcen-
dence; maya-adhipateh—the master of the illusory energy; maha-at-
manah—of the Supreme Soul; prayena—almost; diitah—the order car-
riers; tha—in this world; vai—indeed; manoharah—pleasing in their
dealings and bodily features; caranti—they move; tat—of Him; ripa—
possessing the bodily features; guna—the transcendental qualities; sva-
bhavah—and nature.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is self-sufficient and fully
independent. He is the master of everyone and everything, includ-
ing the illusory energy. He has His form, qualities and features;
and similarly His order carriers, the Vaisnavas, who are very
beautiful, possess bodily features, transcendental qualities and a
transcendental nature almost like His. They always wander within
this world with full independence.

PURPORT

Yamaraja was describing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
supreme controller, but the order carriers of Yamaraja were very eager to
know about the Visnuditas, who had defeated them in their encounter
with Ajamila. Yamaraja therefore stated that the Visnudiitas resemble
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in their bodily features, transcen-
dental qualities and nature. In other words, the Visnudatas, or
Vaisnavas, are almost as qualified as the Supreme Lord. Yamaraja in-
formed the Yamaditas that the Visnudiitas are no less powerful than
Lord Visnu. Since Visnu is above Yamaraja, the Visnuditas are above the
Yamadaitas. Persons protected by the Visnuditas, therefore, cannot be
touched by the Yamadtas.

TEXT 18
भूतानि विष्णोः gear
दुरद॑श्चलिङ्गानि महाद्तानि |


--- Page 167 ---
Text 18] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 161
रक्षन्ति तद्भक्तिमतः परेभ्यो
मत्तश्च मर्त्यानथ सर्वतश्च ॥१८॥
bhuatani visnoh sura-pujitani
durdarsa-lingani mahadbhutani
raksanti tad-bhaktimatah parebhyo
matta$ ca martyan atha sarvatas ca
bhatani—living entities or servants; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; sura-pi-
jitani—who are worshiped by the demigods; durdarsa-lirigani—possess-
ing forms not easily seen; maha-adbhutani—greatly wonderful; rak-
santi—they protect; tat-bhakti-matah—the devotees of the Lord;
parebhyah—from others who are inimical; mattah—from me
(Yamaraja) and my order carriers; ca—and; martyan—the human
beings; atha—thus; sarvatah—from everything; ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The order carriers of Lord Visnu, who are worshiped even by
the demigods, possess wonderful bodily features exactly like those
of Visnu and are very rarely seen. The 15700100189 protect the
devotees of the Lord from the hands of enemies, from envious
persons and even from my jurisdiction, as well as from natural
disturbances.
PURPORT
Yamaraja has specifically described the qualities of the Visnudiitas to
convince his own servants not to be envious of them. Yamaraja warned
the Yamadatas that the ৬1910000185 are worshiped with respectful obei-
sances by the demigods and are always very alert to protect the devotees
of the Lord from the hands of enemies, from natural disturbances and
from all dangerous conditions in this material world. Sometimes the
members of the Krsna Consciousness Society are afraid of the impending
danger of world war and ask what would happen to them if a war should
occur. In all kinds of danger, they should be confident of their protection
by the Visnudiitas or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed


--- Page 168 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
in Bhagavad-gita (kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati). Ma-
terial danger is not meant for devotees. This is also confirmed in Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Pada [00007 yad vipadam na tesam: in this material
world there are dangers at every step, but they are not meant for devo-
tees who have fully surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord. The pure
devotees of Lord Visnu may rest assured of the Lord’s protection, and as
long as they are in this material world they should fully engage in devo-
tional service by preaching the cult of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and
Lord Krsna, namely the Hare Krsna movement of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 19
धमे तु साक्षाद्धगवरप्रणीतं
EN =
न 3 विदुक्छैषयो नापि देवाः।
न faggen असुरा मनुष्याः
कुतो जु विद्याधरचारणादयः ॥१९॥
14.11.19... 1111
na vai vidur rsayo napi devah
na siddha-mukhya asura manusyah
kuto nu vidyadhara-caranadayah
dharmam—real religious principles, or bona fide laws of religion;
tu—but; saksat—directly; bhagavat—by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; pranitam—enacted; na—not; wvai—indeed; wviduh—they
know; rsayah—the great rsis such as Bhrgu; na—not; api—also;
devah—the demigods; na—nor; siddha-mukhyah—the chief leaders of
Siddhaloka; asurah—the demons; manusyah—the inhabitants of
Bhirloka, the human beings; kutah—where; nu—indeed;
vidyadhara—the lesser demigods known as Vidyadharas; carana-
the residents of the planets where people are by nature great musicians
and singers; adayah—and so on.
TRANSLATION
Real religious principles are enacted by the Supreme Personality

of Godhead. Although fully situated in the mode of goodness,


--- Page 169 ---
Text 19] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 163
even the great rsis who occupy the topmost planets cannot ascer-
tain the real religious principles, nor can the demigods or the
leaders of Siddhaloka, to say nothing of the asuras, ordinary
human beings, Vidyadharas and Caranas.

PURPORT

When challenged by the Visnudiitas to describe the principles of
religion, the Yamadiutas said, veda-pranihito dharmah: the religious
principles are the principles enacted in the Vedic literature. They did not
know, however, that the Vedic literature contains ritualistic ceremonies
that are not transcendental, but are meant to keep peace and order
among materialistic persons in the material world. Real religious prin-
ciples are nistraigunya, above the three modes of material nature, or
transcendental. The Yamadiutas did not know these transcendental
religious principles, and therefore when prevented from arresting
Ajamila they were surprised. Materialistic persons who attach all their
faith to the Vedic rituals are described in Bhagavad-gita (2.42), wherein
Krsna says, veda-vada-ratah partha nanyad astiti vadinah: the sup-
posed followers of the Vedas say that there is nothing beyond the Vedic
ceremonies. Indeed, there is a group of men in India who are very fond
of the Vedic rituals, not understanding the meaning of these rituals,
which are intended to elevate one gradually to the transcendental plat-
form of knowing Krsna (vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah). Those who
do not know this principle but who simply attach their faith to the Vedic
rituals are called veda-vada-ratah.

Herein it is stated that the real religious principle is that which is
given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That principle is stated in
Bhagavad-gita. Sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam Saranari vraja:
one should give up all other duties and surrender unto the lotus feet of
Krsna. That is the real religious principle everyone should follow. Even
though one follows Vedic scriptures, one may not know this transcenden-
tal principle, for it is not known to everyone. To say nothing of human
beings, even the demigods in the upper planetary systems are unaware of
it. This transcendental religious principle must be understood from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead directly or from His special representa-
tive, as stated in the next verses.


--- Page 170 ---
164. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
TEXTS 20-21
म्वयम्भूनारदः TH: कुमारः कपिलो मयुः ।
- - Qe Ly
THEY जनको भीष्मो बलिवयासकिवेयम्‌ ।।২০।॥।
EF विजानीमो धमं भागवतं मटाः ।
गुद्यं॒विद्युदधं दुर्बोधं यं ज्ञात्वाश्रतमहलुते ॥२१॥
11.11.111. 1/1
kumarah kapilo manuh
prahlado janako bhismo
balir vaiyasakir vayam
dvadasaite vijanimo
dharmari bhagavatari bhatah
guhyar visuddhari durbodhari
yam jidtvamrtam asnute
svayambhih—Lord Brahma; naradah—the great saint Narada;
sambhuh—Lord Siva; kumarah—the four Kumaras; kapilah—Lord
Kapila; manuh—Svayambhuva Manu; prahladah—Prahlada Maharaja;
janakah—Janaka Maharaja; bhismah—Grandfather Bhisma; balih—
Bali Maharaja; vaiyasakih—Sukadeva, the son of Vyasadeva; vayam—
we; dvadasa—twelve; ete—these; vjanimah—know; dharmam—real
religious principles; bhagavatam—which teach a person how to love the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhatah—O my dear servants;
guhyam—very confidential; visuddham—transcendental, not contami-
nated by the material modes of nature; durbodham —not easily under-
stood; yam—which; jiatva—understanding; amrtam—eternal life;
asnute—he enjoys.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, Bhagavan Narada, Lord Siva, the four Kumaras,
Lord Kapila [the son of Devahiiti], Svayambhuva Manu, Prahlada
Maharaja, Janaka Maharaja, Grandfather Bhisma, Bali Maharaja,
Sukadeva Gosvami and I myself know the real religious principle.
My dear servants, this transcendental religious principle, which is
known as bhagavata-dharma, or surrender unto the Supreme Lord


--- Page 171 ---
Text 21] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 165
and love for Him, is uncontaminated by the material modes of
nature. It is very confidential and difficult for ordinary human
beings to understand, but if by chance one fortunately under-
stands it, he is immediately liberated, and thus he returns home,
back to Godhead.
PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna refers to bhagavata-dharma as the most
confidential religious principle (sarva-guhyatamam, guhyad guhya-
taram). Krsna says to Arjuna, “Because you are My very dear friend, I
am explaining to you the most confidential religion.” Sarva-dharman
parityajya mam ekari Saranari vraja: “Give up all other duties and sur-
render unto Me.”” One may ask, “If this principle is very rarely under-
stood, what is the use of 11277 In answer, Yamaraja states herein that this
religious principle is understandable if one follows the parampara
system of Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, the four Kumaras and the other stan-
dard authorities. There are four lines of disciplic succession: one from
Lord Brahma, one from Lord Siva, one from Laksmi, the goddess of for-
tune, and one from the Kumaras. The disciplic succession from Lord
Brahmi is called the Brahma-sampradaya, the succession from Lord Siva
(Sambhu) is called the Rudra-sampradaya, the one from the goddess of
fortune, Laksmiji, is called the Sri-sampradaya, and the one from the
Kumaras is called the Kumara-sampradaya. One must take shelter of one
of these four sampradayas in order to understand the most confidential
religious system. In the Padma Purana it is said, sampradaya-vihing ye
mantras te nisphala matah: If one does not follow the four recognized
disciplic successions, his mantra or initiation is useless. In the present
day there are many apasampradayas, or sampradayas which are not
bona fide, which have no link to authorities like Lord Brahma, Lord Siva,
the Kumaras or Laksmi. People are misguided by such sampradayas.
The 3astras say that being initiated in such a sampraddya is a useless
waste of time, for it will never enable one to understand the real
religious principles.

TEXT 22
TRAY लोकेऽसिन्‌ पुंसां घमे; परः स्मृतः।
भक्तियोगो मगवति तननामग्रहणादिभिः ॥२२।।


--- Page 172 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
etavan eva loke ’smin
ष्का dharmah parah smrtah
bhakti-yogo bhagavati
tan-nama-grahanadibhih

etavan—this much; eva—indeed; loke asmin —in this material world;
purisam—of the living entities; dharmah—the religious principles;
parah—transcendental; smrtah—recognized; bhakti-yogah— bhakti-
yoga, or devotional service; bhagavati—to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (not to the demigods); tat—His; nama—of the holy name;
grahana-adibhih—beginning with chanting.

TRANSLATION

Devotional service, beginning with the chanting of the holy
name of the Lord, is the ultimate religious principle for the living
entity in human society.

PURPORT

As stated in the previous verse, dharmari bhagavatam, real religious
principles, are bhagavata-dharma, the principles described in Srimad-
Bhagavatam itself or in Bhagavad-gita, the preliminary study of the
Bhagavatam. What are these principles? The Bhdgavatam says, dhar-
mah projjhita-kaitavo ‘tra: in Srimad-Bhagavatam there are no cheating
religious systems. Everything in the Bhagavatam is directly connected
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Bhagavatam further
says, sa vai purisari paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhoksaje: the supreme
religion is that which teaches its followers how to love the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is beyond the reach of experimental knowl-
edge. Such a religious system begins with tan-nama-grahana, chanting
of the holy name of the Lord (Sravanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam
pada-sevanam). After chanting the holy name of the Lord and dancing
in ecstasy, one gradually sees the form of the Lord, the pastimes of the
Lord and the transcendental qualities of the Lord. This way one fully
understands the situation of the Personality of Godhead. One can come to
this understanding of the Lord, how He descends into the material world,
how He takes His births and what activities He performs, but one can
know this only by executing devotional service. As stated in Bhagavad-


--- Page 173 ---
Text 23] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 167
gita, bhaktya mam abhijanati: simply by devotional service one can
understand everything about the Supreme Lord. If one fortunately
understands the Supreme Lord in this way, the result is tyaktva deham
punar janma naiti: after giving up his material body, he no longer has to
take birth in this material world. Instead, he returns home, back to God-
head. That is the ultimate perfection. Therefore Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (8.15):
mam upetya punar janma
duhkhalayam asasvatam
napnuvanti mahatmanah
sarisiddhirn paraman gatah
“After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion, never
return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they
have attained the highest perfection.”
TEXT 23
नामोच्चारणमाहात्म्यं हरेः দহ্মল पुत्रकाः |
अजामिलोऽपि येनैव मृत्युपाशाद च्यत 1:30
namoccarana-mahatmyar
hareh pasyata putrakah
ajamilo pi yenaiva
mrtyu-pasad amucyata
nama—of the holy name; uccarana—of the pronouncing; mahat-
myam—the exalted position; hareh—of the Supreme Lord; pasyata—
just see; putrakah—O my dear servants, who are like my sons; ajamilah
api—even Ajamila (who was considered greatly sinful); yena—by the
chanting of which; eva—certainly; mrtyu-pasat—from the ropes of
death; amucyata—was delivered.
TRANSLATION
My dear servants, who are as good as my sons, just see how
glorious is the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. The greatly


--- Page 174 ---
168 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
sinful Ajamila chanted only to call his son, not knowing that he
was chanting the Lord’s holy name. Nevertheless, by chanting the
holy name of the Lord, he remembered Narayana, and thus he was
immediately saved from the ropes of death.
PURPORT
There is no need to conduct research into the significance of the chant-
ing of the Hare Krsna mantra. The history of Ajamila is sufficient proof
of the power of the Lord’s holy name and the exalted position of a person
who chants the holy name incessantly. Therefore Sri Caitanya
Mahiaprabhu advised:
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha
In this age of Kali, no one can perform all the ritualistic ceremonies for
becoming liberated; that is extremely difficult. Therefore all the sastras
and all the acaryas have recommended that in this age one chant the holy
name.
TEXT 24
SG PRY
एतावतालमघनिदेरणाय gat
০১ ~
सङ्ीतेनं भगवतो गुणकमनास्नाम्‌ |
विक्रुश्य पुत्रमघवान्‌ यदजामिलोऽपि
नारायणेति प्रियमाण इयाय gi ।।२४॥
etavatalam agha-nirharandya purisari
sankirtanarn bhagavato guna-karma-namnam
vikruSya putram aghavan yad ajamilo 07
narayaneti mriyamana yaya muktim
etavata—with this much; alam —sufficient; agha-nirharanaya—for
taking away the reactions of sinful activities; purisam—of human
beings; sarikirtanam—the congregational chanting; bhagavatah—of the


--- Page 175 ---
Text 24] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 169
Supreme Personality of Godhead; guna—of the transcendental qualities;
karma-namnam—and of His names according to His activities and
pastimes; vikru§ya—crying to without offense; putram —his son; agha-
van—the sinful; yat—since; ajamilah api—even Ajamila; ndrayana—
the Lord’s name, Narayana; iti—thus; mriyamanah—dying; iyaya—
achieved; muktim —liberation.
TRANSLATION

Therefore it should be understood that one is easily relieved
from all sinful reactions by chanting the holy name of the Lord
and chanting of His qualities and activities. This is the only process
recommended for relief from sinful reactions. Even if one chants
the holy name of the Lord with improper pronunciation, he will
achieve relief from material bondage if he chants without offenses.
Ajamila, for example, was extremely sinful, but while dying he
merely chanted the holy name, and although calling his son, he
achieved complete liberation because he remembered the name of
Narayana.

PURPORT

In the assembly of Raghunatha dasa Gosvami’s father, Haridasa
Thakura confirmed that simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord
one is liberated, even if he does not chant completely inoffensively.
Smadrta-brahmanas and Mayavadis do not believe that one can achieve
liberation in this way, but the truth of Haridasa Thakura’s statement is
supported by many quotations from Srimad-Bhdagavatam.

In his commentary on this verse, for example, Sridhara Svami gives
the following quotation:

sayarn pratar grnan bhaktya
duhkha-gramad vimucyate

“If one always chants the holy name of the Lord with great devotion in
the evening and in the morning, one can become free from all material
miseries.” Another quotation confirms that one can achieve liberation if
one hears the holy name of the Lord constantly, every day with great
respect (anudinam idam ddarena Srnvan). Another quotation says:


--- Page 176 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
Sravanam kirtanarm dhyanarm
harer adbhuta-karmanah
Janma-karma-gunanam ca
tad-arthe ’khila-cestitam
“One should always chant and hear about the extraordinarily wonderful
activities of the Lord, one should meditate upon these activities, and one
should endeavor to please the Lord.” (Bhag. 78.20)

‘Sridhara Svami also quotes from the Puranas, papa-ksayas ca bhavati
smaratam tam ahar-nisam: “One can become free from all sinful reac-
tions simply by remembering the lotus feet of the Lord day and night
[ahar-nisam].” Furthermore, he quotes from Bhagavatam (6.3.31):

tasmat sarikirtanam visnor
Jagan-marngalam arihasam

mahatam api kauravya
viddhy aikantika-niskrtam

All these quotations prove that one who constantly engages in chanting
and hearing of the holy activities, name, fame and form of the Lord is
liberated. As stated wonderfully in this verse, etavatalam agha-
nirharandya purisam: simply by uttering the name of the Lord, one is
freed from all sinful reactions.

The word alam, which is used in this verse, indicates that simply
uttering the holy name of the Lord is sufficient. This word is used with
different imports. As stated in the Amara-kosa, the most authorized dic-
tionary in the Sanskrit language, alarm bhisana-paryapti-sakti-varana-
vacakam: the word alam is used to mean “ornament,” ‘‘sufficiency,”
“power” and “restraint.” Here the word alam is used to indicate that
there is no need of any other process, for the chanting of the holy name
of the Lord is sufficient. Even if one chants imperfectly, one becomes
free from all sinful reactions by chanting.

This power of chanting the holy name was proved by the liberation of
Ajamila. When Ajamila chanted the holy name of Narayana, he did not
precisely remember the Supreme Lord; instead, he remembered his own
son. At the time of death, Ajamila certainly was not very clean; indeed,


--- Page 177 ---
Text 24] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 171
he was famous as a great sinner. Furthermore, one’s physiological condi-
tion is completely disturbed at the time of death, and in such an awkward
condition it would certainly have been very difficult for Ajamila to have
chanted clearly. Nevertheless, Ajamila achieved liberation simply by
chanting the holy name of the Lord. Therefore, what is to be said of those
who are not sinful as Ajamila? It is to be concluded that with a strong
vow one should chant the holy name of the Lord —Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rima, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare—for thus one will certainly be delivered from the clutches of
maya by the grace of Krsna.

The chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra is recommended even for per-
sons who commit offenses, because if they continue chanting they will
gradually chant offenselessly. By chanting the Hare Krsna mantra with-
out offenses, one increases his love for Krsna. As stated by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, prema pum-artho mahan: one’s main concern should be to
increase one’s attachment to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and to
increase one’s love for Him.

In this regard Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura quotes the
following verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.19.24):

evari dharmair manusyanam
uddhavitmani vedinam
mayi saijayate bhaktih
ko ‘nyo ’rtho ’syavasisyate
“My dear Uddhava, the supreme religious system for human society is
that by which one can awaken his dormant love for Me.”” Commenting on
this verse, Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura describes the word
bhakti by saying premaivoktah. Ko anyah arthah asya: in the presence
of bhakti, what is the necessity of liberation?

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura also quotes this verse from the

Padma Purana:
namaparadha-yuktanam
namany eva haranty agham
avisranti-prayuktani
tany evdrtha-karani ca


--- Page 178 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch.3
Even if in the beginning one chants the Hare Krsna mantra with
offenses, one will become free from such offenses by chanting again and
again. Papa-ksaya$ ca bhavati smaratam tam ahar-nisam: one becomes
free from all sinful reactions if one chants day and night, following the
recommendation of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. It was Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu who quoted the following verse:
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
ndsty eva gatir anyatha
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way.” If the members of the Krsna con-
sciousness movement strictly follow this recommendation of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, their position will always be secure.
TEXT 25
प्रायेण वेद तदिदं न महाजनोऽयं
- (९
देव्या विमोदितमतिबेत माययालम्‌ |
त्रय्यां जडीकृतमतिमेधुपुष्पितायां
वैतानिके महति कमणि युउ्यमानः Ru)
,prayena veda tad कवक na mahdjano ‘yarn
devya vimohita-matir bata mayayalam
trayyarm jadi-krta-matir madhu-puspitayarm
vaitanike mahati karmani yujyamanah
prayena—almost always; veda—know; tat—that; idam —this; na—
not; mahdjanah—great personalities besides Svayambhi, Sambhu and
the other ten; ayam—this; devya—by the energy of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; vimohita-matih—whose intelligence is bewildered;
bata—indeed; mayaya—by the illusory energy; alam—greatly;
trayyam—in the three Vedas; jadi-krta-matih—whose intelligence has


--- Page 179 ---
Text 25] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 173
been dulled; madhu-puspitayam—in the flowery Vedic language
describing the results of ritualistic performances; wvaitanike—in the
performances mentioned in the Vedas; mahati—very great; karmani—
fruitive activities; yujyamanah—being engaged.
TRANSLATION

Because they are bewildered by the illusory energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yajfiavalkya, Jaimini and other
compilers of the religious scriptures cannot know the secret, con-
fidential religious system of the twelve mahajanas. They cannot
understand the transcendental value of performing devotional ser-
vice or chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. Because their minds are
attracted to the ritualistic ceremonies mentioned in the Vedas—
especially the Yajur Veda, Sama Veda and Rg Veda—their intelli-
gence has become dull. Thus they are busy collecting the
ingredients for ritualistic ceremonies that yield only temporary
benefits, such as elevation to Svargaloka for material happiness.
They are not attracted to the sankirtana movement; instead, they
are interested in dharma, artha, kama and moksa.

PURPORT

Since one may easily achieve the highest success by chanting the holy
name of the Lord, one may ask why there are so many Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies and why people are attracted to them. This verse answers
that question. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (15.15), vedais ca sarvair
aham eva vedyah: the real purpose of studying the Vedas is to approach
the lotus feet of Lord Krsna. Unfortunately, unintelligent people
bewildered by the grandeur of Vedic yajiias want to see gorgeous
sacrifices performed. They want Vedic mantras chanted and huge
amounts of money spent for such ceremonies. Sometimes we have to ob-
serve the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies to please such unintelligent men.
Recently, when we established a large Krsna-Balarama temple in
Vrndavana, we were obliged to have Vedic ceremonies enacted by
brahmanas because the inhabitants of Vrndavana, especially the smarta-
brahmanas, would not accept Europeans and Americans as bona fide
brahmanas. Thus we had to engage brahmanas to perform costly yajnas.


--- Page 180 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
In spite of these yajiias, the members of our Society performed
sarikirtana loudly with mrdarigas, and I considered the sarikirtana more
important than the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. Both the ceremonies and
the sankirtana were going on simultaneously. The ceremonies were
meant for persons interested in Vedic rituals for elevation to heavenly
planets (jadi-krta-matir madhu-puspitayam), whereas the sankirtana
was meant for pure devotees interested in pleasing the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. We would simply have performed sartkirtana, but
then the inhabitants of Vrndavana would not have taken the installation
ceremony seriously. As explained here, the Vedic performances are
meant for those whose intelligence has been dulled by the flowery
language of the Vedas, which describe fruitive activities intended to
elevate one to the higher planets.

Especially in this age of Kali, sarnikirtana alone is sufficient. If the
members of our temples in the different parts of the world simply con-
tinue sarikirtana before the Deity, especially before Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, they will remain perfect. There is no need of any other
performances. Nevertheless, to keep oneself clean in habits and mind,
Deity worship and other regulative principles are required. Srila Jiva
Gosvami says that although sarikirtana is sufficient for the perfection of
life, the arcana, or worship of the Deity in the temple, must continue in
order that the devotees may stay clean and pure. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura therefore recommended that one follow both pro-
cesses simultaneously. We strictly follow his principle of performing
Deity worship and sarnkirtana along parallel lines. This we should
continue.

TEXT 26
एवं বিদ্বহম सुधियो भगवत्यनन्ते
सर्वात्मना विदधते खल भावयोगम्‌ |
ते मे न दण्डमहन्त्यथ यद्यमीषां
स्यात्‌ पातक तद पि हन्त्युरुगायवादः || २६॥
evari vimrSya sudhiyo bhagavaty 0710714९
sarvatmana vidadhate khalu bhava-yogam


--- Page 181 ---
Text 26] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 175
te me na dandam arhanty atha yady amisam
syat patakar tad api hanty urugaya-vadah

evam—thus; vimr§ya—considering; su-dhiyah—those whose intelli-
gence is sharp; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
anante—the unlimited; sarva-atmana—with all their heart and soul;
vidadhate —take to; khalu—indeed; bhava-yogam—the process of
devotional service; te—such persons; me—my; na—not; dandam—
punishment; arhanti—deserve; atha—therefore; yadi—if; amisam—
of them; syat—there is; patakam—some sinful activity; tat—that;
api—also; hanti—destroys; urugaya-vadah—the chanting of the holy
name of the Supreme Lord.

TRANSLATION

Considering all these points, therefore, intelligent men decide
to solve all problems by adopting the devotional service of chant-
ing the holy name of the Lord, who is situated in everyone’s heart
and who is a mine of all auspicious qualities. Such persons are not
within my jurisdiction for punishment. Generally they never
commit sinful activities, but even if by mistake or because of
bewilderment or illusion they sometimes commit sinful acts, they
are protected from sinful reactions because they always chant the
Hare Krsna mantra.

PURPORT

In this regard Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura quotes the follow-

ing verse from the prayers of Lord Brahma (Bhag. 10.14.29):
athapi te deva padambuja-dvaya-
prasada-lesanugrhita eva hi
janati tattvarmm bhagavan-mahimno
na canya eko 08 ciram vicinvan

The purport is that even though one is a very learned scholar of the
Vedic $Sastras, he may be completely unaware of the existence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and His name, fame, qualities and so


--- Page 182 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch.3
forth, whereas one who is not a great scholar can understand the position
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he somehow or other becomes
a pure devotee of the Lord by engaging in devotional service. Therefore
this verse spoken by Yamaraja says, evar vimrSya sudhiyo bhagavati:
those who engage in the loving service of the Lord become sudhiyah, in-
telligent, but this is not so of a Vedic scholar who does not understand
Krsna’s name, fame and qualities. A pure devotee is one whose intelli-
gence is clear; he is truly thoughtful because he engages in the service of
the Lord —not as a matter of show, but with love, with his mind, words
and body. Nondevotees may make a show of religion, but it is not very
effective because although they ostentatiously attend a temple or church,
they are thinking of something else. Such persons are neglecting their
religious duty and are punishable by Yamaraja. But a devotee who com-
mits sinful acts, which he may do unwillingly or accidentally because of
his former habits, is excused. That is the value of the sankirtana
movement.
TEXT 27
ते देवसिद्धपरिगीतपवित्रगाथा
ये साधवः समदशो भगवत्प्रपन्नाः |
तान्‌ नोपसीदत हरेगंदयाभिगुपान्‌
Ao 9
मेषां वयं न च वयः प्रमवाम दण्डे ।॥२५७॥
te deva-siddha-parigita-pavitra-gatha
ye sadhavah samadrso bhagavat-prapannah
tan nopasidata harer gadayabhiguptan
naisam vayam na ca vayah prabhavama dande
te—they; deva—by the demigods; siddha—and the inhabitants of

Siddhaloka; parigita—sung; pavitra-gathah—whose pure narrations;
ye—who; sadhavah—devotees; samadrsah—who see everyone equally;
bhagavat-prapannah—being surrendered to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tan—them; na—not; upasidata—should go near; hareh—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gadaya—by the club; abhigup-
tan—being fully protected; na—not; esam—of these; vayam—we; na


--- Page 183 ---
Text 28] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 177
ca—and also not; vayah—unlimited time; prabhavama —are compe-
tent; dande—in punishing.
TRANSLATION

My dear servants, please do not approach such devotees, for they
have fully surrendered to the lotus feet of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. They are equal to everyone, and their narra-
tions are sung by the demigods and the inhabitants of Siddhaloka.
Please do not even go near them. They are always protected by the
club of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore Lord
Brahma and I and even the time factor are not competent to
chastise them.

PURPORT

In effect, Yamaraja warned his servants, “My dear servants, despite
what you may have done previously to disturb the devotees, hencefor-
ward you should stop. The actions of devotees who have surrendered
unto the lotus feet of the Lord and who constantly chant the holy name of
the Lord are praised by the demigods and the residents of Siddhaloka.
Those devotees are so respectable and exalted that Lord Visnu personally
protects them with the club in His hand. Therefore, regardless of what
you have done this time, henceforward you should not approach such
devotees; otherwise you will be killed by the club of Lord Visnu. This is
my warning. Lord Visnu has a club and cakra to punish nondevotees. Do
not risk punishment by attempting to disturb the devotees. Not to speak
of you, if even Lord Brahma or I were to punish them, Lord Visnu would
punish us. Therefore do not disturb the devotees any further.”

TEXT 28
तानानयध्व्रमसतो विश्रुखान्‌ GT -
पादारविन्दमकरन्दरसादजखम्‌ ।
PER
निष्किश्वनैः परमदंसङ्ठरसद्गै -
Jo गृहे निरयवस्म॑नि बद्धप्णान्‌।।२८॥


--- Page 184 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
tan anayadhvam asato vimukhan mukunda-
padaravinda-makaranda-rasad ajasram
niskiicanaih paramaharnsa-kulair asangair

Justad grhe niraya-vartmani baddha-trsnan

tan—them; anayadhvam—bring before me; asatah —nondevotees
(those who have not taken to Krsna consciousness); vimukhan—who
have turned against; mukunda—of Mukunda, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; pada-aravinda—of the lotus feet; makaranda—of the
honey; rasat—the taste; ajasram—continuously; niskificanaih—by per-
sons completely free from material attachment; paramaharisa-kulaih—
by the paramaharisas, the most exalted personalities; asarigaih—who
have no material attachment; just@t—which is enjoyed; grhe—to house-
hold life; niraya-vartmani—the path leading to hell; baddha-trsnan—
whose desires are bound.

TRANSLATION

Paramaharnsas are exalted persons who have no taste for ma-
terial enjoyment and who drink the honey of the Lord’s lotus feet.
My dear servants, bring to me for punishment only persons who
are averse to the taste of that honey, who do not associate with
paramaharnsas and who are attached to family life and worldly en-
joyment, which form the path to hell.

PURPORT

After warning the Yamaditas not to approach the devotees, Yamaraja
now indicates who is to be brought before him. He specifically advises the
Yamadaitas to bring him the materialistic persons who are attached to
household life merely for sex. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, yan
maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukharin hi tuccham: people are attached to
household life for sex only. They are always harassed in many ways by
their material engagements, and their only happiness is that after work-
ing very hard all day, at night they sleep and indulge in sex. Nidraya
hriyate naktarih vyavayena ca va vayah: at night, materialistic house-
holders sleep or indulge in sex life. Diva carthehaya rajan kutumba-
bharanena va: during the day they are busy trying to find out where


--- Page 185 ---
Text 29] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 179
money is, and if they get money they spend it to maintain their families.
Yamaraja specifically advises his servants to bring these persons to him
for punishment and not to bring the devotees, who always lick the honey
at the lotus feet of the Lord, who are equal to everyone, and who try to
preach Krsna consciousness because of sympathy for all living entities.
Devotees are not liable to punishment by Yamarija, but persons who
have no information of Krsna consciousness cannot be protected by their
material life of so-called family enjoyment. Srimad-Bhdgavatam says
(2.1.4):
dehapatya-kalatradisv
atma-sainyesv asatsv apt
tesari pramatio nidhanar
pasyann api na paSyati
Such persons complacently believe that their nations, communities or
families can protect them, unaware that all such fallible soldiers will be
destroyed in due course of time. In conclusion, one should try to associate
with persons who engage in devotional service twenty-four hours a day.
TEXT 29
जिह्वा न वक्ति भगवद्गुणनामधेयं
चेतश्च न सरति तच्चरणारविन्दम्‌ |
कृष्णाय नो नमति यच्छिर एकदापि
तानानयधष्वमसतोऽकृतविष्णुकृत्यान्‌।। २९॥
Jihva na vakti bhagavad-guna-namadheyam
ceta$ ca na smarati tac-caranaravindam
krsnaya no namati yac-chira ekadapi
tan anayadhvam asato ’krta-visnu-krtyan
jihva—the tongue; na—not; vakti—chants; bhagavat—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; guna—transcendental qualities;
nama—and the holy name; dheyam—imparting; cetah—the heart;
ca—also; na—not; smarati—remembers; tat—His; carana-aravin-


--- Page 186 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
dam —Ilotus feet; krsnaya—unto Lord Krsna through His Deity in the
temple; no—not; namati—bows; yat—whose; Sirah—head; ekada
api—even once; tan—them; anayadhvam —bring before me; asatah—
the nondevotees; akrta—not performing; visnu-krtyan —duties toward
Lord Visnu.
TRANSLATION

My dear servants, please bring to me only those sinful persons
who do not use their tongues to chant the holy name and qualities
of Krsna, whose hearts do not remember the lotus feet of Krsna
even once, and whose heads do not bow down even once before
Lord Krsna. Send me those who do not perform their duties
toward Visnu, which are the only duties in human life. Please
bring me all such fools and rascals.

PURPORT

The word wvisnu-krtyan is very important in this verse because the
purpose of human life is to please Lord Visnu. Varnasrama-dharma is
also meant for that purpose. As stated in the Visnu Purana (3.8.9):

varnasramacaravata
purusena parah puman
visnur aradhyate pantha
nanyat tat-tosa-karanam

Human society is meant to follow strictly the varnasrama-dharma,
which divides society into four social divisions (brahmana, ksatriya,
vaiSya and $idra) and four spiritual divisions (brahmacarya, grhastha,
vanaprastha and sannyasa). Varnasrama-dharma easily brings one
nearer to Lord Visnu, who is the only true objective in human society.
Na te viduh svartha-gatiri hi vispum: unfortunately, however, people do
not know that their self-interest is to return home, back to Godhead, or
to approach Lord Visnu. Durasaya ye bahir-artha-maninah: instead,
they are simply bewildered. Every human being is expected to perform
duties meant for approaching Lord Visnu. Therefore Yamaraja advises
the Yamadutas to bring him those persons who have forgotten their


--- Page 187 ---
Text 30] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 181
duties toward Visnu (akrta-vispu-krtyan). One who does not chant the
holy name of Visnu (Krsna), who does not bow down to the Deity of
Visnu, and who does not remember the lotus feet of Visnu is punishable
by Yamarija. In summary, all avaisnavas, persons unconcerned with
Lord Visnu, are punishable by Yamaraja.
TEXT 30
तत्‌ क्षम्यतां स मगवान्‌ पुरषः पुराणो
ॐ +
नारायणः स्वपुरुषयदसत्कृतं नः |
खानामहो न विदुषां रचिताञ्नलीनां
क्षान्तिगंरीयसि नमः पुरुषाय भूम्ने ॥२०॥
tat ksamyatar sa bhagavan purusah purano
narayanah sva-purusair yad asat krtari nah
svanam aho na vidusarh racitanjalinarm
ksantir gariyasi namah purusaya bhimne
tat—that; ksamyatam—Ilet it be excused; sah—He; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; purusah—the Supreme Person;
puranah—the oldest; narayanah—Lord Narayana; sva-purusaih—by
my own servants; yat—which; asat—impudence; krtam—performed;
nah—of us; svanam—of my own men; aho—alas; na vidusam—not
knowing; racita-adjalinam—folding our hands together to beg Your
pardon; ksantih—forgiveness; gariyasi—in the glorious; namah—re-
spectful obeisances; purusdya—unto the person; bhiimne—supreme
and all-pervading.
TRANSLATION
[Then Yamaraja, considering himself and his servants to be

offenders, spoke as follows, begging pardon from the Lord.] O my
Lord, my servants have surely committed a great offense by arrest-
ing a Vaignava such as Ajamila. O Narayana, O supreme and oldest
person, please forgive us. Because of our ignorance, we failed to
recognize Ajamila as a servant of Your Lordship, and thus we have
certainly committed a great offense. Therefore with folded hands


--- Page 188 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
we beg Your pardon. My Lord, since You are supremely merciful
and are always full of good qualities, please pardon us. We offer
our respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT

Lord Yamaraja took upon himself the responsibility for the offense
committed by his servants. If the servant of an establishment makes a
mistake, the establishment takes responsibility for it. Although Yamaraja
is above offenses, his servants, practically with his permission, went to
arrest Ajamila, which was a great offense. The nyaya-iastra confirms,
bhrtyaparadhe svamino dandah: if a servant makes a mistake, the
master is punishable because he is responsible for the offense. Taking
this seriously, Yamaraja, along with his servants, prayed with folded
hands to be excused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana.

TEXT 31
तनं 0 ५
तसात्‌ सङ्खीतेनं विष्णोजेगन्मङ्गलमंहसाम्‌ |
महतामपि कौरव्य विद्धयैकान्तिकनिष्ठृतम्‌ 1220
tasmat sankirtanar visnor
Jagan-marngalam arhhasam
mahatam api kauravya
viddhy aikantika-niskrtam

tasmat—therefore; sarnkirtanam—the congregational chanting of the
holy name; vispoh—of Lord Visnu; jagat-marigalam—the most
auspicious performance within this material world; armhasam —for sin-
ful activities; mahatam api—even though very great; kauravya—O de-
scendant of the Kuru family; viddhi—understand; aikantika—the ulti-
mate; niskrtam—atonement.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, the chanting of the
holy name of the Lord is able to uproot even the reactions of the
greatest sins. Therefore the chanting of the sankirtana movement


--- Page 189 ---
Text 32] Yamarija Instructs His Messengers 183
is the most auspicious activity in the entire universe. Please try to
understand this so that others will take it seriously.
PURPORT

We should note that although Ajamila chanted the name of Narayana
imperfectly, he was delivered from all sinful reactions. The chanting of
the holy name is so auspicious that it can free everyone from the reac-
tions of sinful activities. One should not conclude that one may continue
to sin with the intention of chanting Hare Krsna to neutralize the reac-
tions. Rather, one should be very careful to be free from all sins and
never think of counteracting sinful activities by chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra, for this is another offense. If by chance a devotee accidentally
performs some sinful activity, the Lord will excuse him, but one should
not intentionally perform sinful acts.

TEXT 32
शृण्वतां गृणतां वीयोण्युदामानि 38s: |
oy
यथा सुजातया मक्त्या YG AATHT चतादिभिः TERY]
Srnvatdarn grnatarn viryany
uddamani harer muhuh
yatha sujataya bhaktya
Suddhyen natma vratadibhih

Srnvatam—of those hearing; grnatam—and chanting; viryani—the
wonderful activities; uddamani—able to counteract sin; hareh—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; muhuh—always; yatha—as;
su-jataya—easily brought forth; bhaktya—by devotional service; sud-
dhyet—may be purified; na—not; atma—the heart and soul; vrata-
adibhih—Dby performing ritualistic ceremonies.

TRANSLATION

One who constantly hears and chants the holy name of the Lord
and hears and chants about His activities can very easily attain the
platform of pure devotional service, which can cleanse the dirt


--- Page 190 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 3
from one’s heart. One cannot achieve such purification merely by
observing vows and performing Vedic ritualistic ceremonies.
PURPORT
One may very easily practice chanting and hearing the holy name of
the Lord and thus become ecstatic in spiritual life. Padma Purana states:
namaparadha-yuktanam
namdany eva haranty agham
avisranti-prayuktani
tany evartha-karani ca
Even if one chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra offensively, one can
avoid offenses by continuously chanting without deviation. One who
becomes accustomed to this practice will always remain in a pure tran-
scendental position, untouchable by sinful reactions. Sukadeva Gosvami
especially requested King Pariksit to note this fact very carefully. There
is no profit, however, in executing the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. By
performing such activities one may go to the higher planetary systems,
but as stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.21), ksine punye martya-lokam
visanti: when the period of one’s enjoyment in the heavenly planets is
terminated because of the limited extent of the results of one’s pious ac-
tivities, one must return to earth. Thus there is no use in endeavoring to
travel up and down in the universe. It is better to chant the holy name of
the Lord so that one may become fully purified and eligible to return
home, back to Godhead. That is the aim of life, and that is the perfection
of life.
TEXT 33
कृष्णाङ्धिपयमघुलिण्‌ न पुनर्विंख॒ष्ट-
मायागुणेषु रमते इृजिनावहेषु |
अन्यस्तु कामहत आत्मरजः प्रमाष्टु-
मीहेत कमं यत एव रजः पुनः स्यात्‌॥३३॥
krsnanghri-padma-madhu-lin na punar visrsta-
maya-gunesu ramate vrjinavahesu


--- Page 191 ---
Text 33] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 185
anyas tu kdma-hata atma-rajah pramarstum
theta karma yata eva rajah punah syat

krsna-anghri-padma—of the lotus feet of Lord Krsna; madhu—the
honey; lit—one who licks; na—not; punah—again; visrsta—already
renounced; maya-gunesu—in the material modes of nature; ramate—
desires to enjoy; wvrjina-avahesu—which brings distress; anyah—
another; tu—however; kdma-hatah—being enchanted by lust; atma-
rajah—the sinful infection of the heart; pramarstum—to cleanse;
theta—may perform; karma—activities; yatah—after which; eva—in-
deed; rajah—the sinful activity; punah—again; syat—appears.

TRANSLATION

Devotees who always lick the honey from the lotus feet of Lord
Krsna do not care at all for material activities, which are per-
formed under the three modes of material nature and which bring
only misery. Indeed, devotees never give up the lotus feet of Krsna
to return to material activities. Others, however, who are addicted
to Vedic rituals because they have neglected the service of the
Lord’s lotus feet and are enchanted by lusty desires, sometimes
perform acts of atonement. Nevertheless, being incompletely
purified, they return to sinful activities again and again.

PURPORT

A devotee’s duty is to chant the Hare Krsna mantra. One may some-
times chant with offenses and sometimes without offenses, but if one
seriously adopts this process, he will achieve perfection, which cannot be
achieved through Vedic ritualistic ceremonies of atonement. Persons who
are attached to the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies, but do not believe in
devotional service, who advise atonement, but do not appreciate the
chanting of the Lord’s holy name, fail to achieve the highest perfection.
Devotees, therefore, being completely detached from material enjoy-
ment, never give up Krsna consciousness for Vedic ritualistic
ceremonies. Those who are attached to Vedic ritualistic ceremonies be-
cause of lusty desires are subjected to the tribulations of material exis-
tence again and again. Maharaja Pariksit has compared their activities to
kunijara-sauca, the bathing of an elephant.


--- Page 192 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch.3
TEXT 34
इत्थं Ed भगवन्महित्वं
dere विसितधियो यमकिङ्करास्ते |
Ey त
न॒वायच्युतान्यजन प्रतिशङ्कमाना
द्रष्टु च विभ्यति ततः प्रभृति स राजन्‌ ॥ ३४॥
वक svabhartr-gaditarn bhagavan-mahitvarn
sarismrtya vismita-dhiyo yama-kirkaras te
naivacyutdsraya-janam pratisarikamana
drasturi ca bibhyati tatah prabhrti sma rajan
ittham—of such power; sva-bhartr-gaditam—explained by their
master (Yamarija); bhagavat-mahitvam —the extraordinary glory of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and His name, fame, form and at-
tributes; sarismrtya—remembering; vismita-dhiyah—whose minds
were struck with wonder; yama-kirikarah—all the servants of
Yamaraja; te—they; na—not; eva—indeed; acyuta-asraya-janam—a
person sheltered by the lotus feet of Acyuta, Lord Krsna; pra-
tisarikamanah—always fearing; drastum—to see; ca—and; bibhyati—
they are afraid; tatah prabhrti—beginning from then; sma —indeed; ra-
jan—O King.
TRANSLATION
After hearing from the mouth of their master about the extraor-
dinary glories of the Lord and His name, fame and attributes, the
Yamadiitas were struck with wonder. Since then, as soon as they
see a devotee, they fear him and dare not look at him again.
PURPORT
Since this incident, the Yamadiatas have given up the dangerous
behavior of approaching devotees. For the Yamaditas, a devotee is
dangerous.
TEXT 35
इतिहासमिमं gd भगवान्‌ कुम्भसम्भवः |
= 5
कथयामास मख्य आसीनो हरिमचयन्‌ ॥२५॥


--- Page 193 ---
Text 35] Yamaraja Instructs His Messengers 187
itihasam imam guhyam
bhagavan kumbha-sambhavah
kathayam asa malaya
asino harim arcayan
ittihasam—history; = imam—this;  guhyam—very confidential;
bhagavan—the most powerful; kumbha-sambhavah—Agastya Muni,
the son of Kumbha; kathayam asa —explained; malaye—in the Malaya
Hills; asinah—residing; harim arcayan—worshiping the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
When the great sage Agastya, the son of Kumbha, was residing
in the Malaya Hills and worshiping the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, 1 approached him, and he explained to me this
confidential history.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Third
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Yamaraja Instructs His
Messengers.”


--- Page 194 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
The Harhsa-guhya Prayers
Offered to the Lord by Prajapati Daksa

After Maharaja Pariksit appealed to Sukadeva Gosvami to describe in
further detail the creation of the living entities within this universe,
Sukadeva Gosvami informed him that when the Pracetas, the ten sons of
Pracinabarhi, entered the sea to execute austerities, the planet earth was
neglected because of the absence of a king. Naturally many weeds and
unnecessary trees grew, and no food grains were produced. Indeed, all
the land became like a forest. When the ten Pracetas came out of the sea
and saw the entire world full of trees, they were very angry with the
trees and decided to destroy them all to rectify the situation. Thus the
Pracetas created wind and fire to burn the trees to ashes. Soma, however,
the king of the moon and the king of all vegetation, forbade the Pracetas
to destroy the trees, since the trees are the source of fruit and flowers for
all living beings. Just to satisfy the Pracetas, Soma gave them a beautiful
girl born of Pramloca Apsara. By the semina of all the Pracetas, Daksa
was born of that girl.

In the beginning, Daksa created all the demigods, demons and human
beings, but when he found the population not increasing properly, he
took sannyasa and went to Vindhya Mountain, where he underwent
severe austerities and offered Lord Visnu a particular prayer known as
Harsa-guhya, by which Lord Visnu became very pleased with him. The
contents of the prayer were as follows.

“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, Lord Hari, is
the controller of both the living entities and the material nature. He is
self-sufficient and self-effulgent. As the subject matter of perception is
not the cause of our perceiving senses, so the living entity, although
within his body, does not cause his eternal friend the Supersoul, who is
the cause of creation of all the senses. Because of the living entity’s ig-
norance, his senses are engaged with material objects. Since the living
entity is alive, he can understand the creation of this material world to

189


--- Page 195 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
some extent, but he cannot understand the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is beyond the conception of the body, mind and intelligence.
Nevertheless, great sages who are always in meditation can see the per-
sonal form of the Lord within their hearts.

“Since an ordinary living being is materially contaminated, his words
and intelligence are also material. Therefore he cannot ascertain the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by manipulating his material senses.
The conception of God derived through the material senses is inaccurate
because the Supreme Lord is beyond the material senses, but when one
engages his senses in devotional service, the eternal Supreme Personality
of Godhead is revealed on the platform of the soul. When that Supreme
Godhead becomes the aim of one’s life, one is said to have attained
spiritual knowledge.

“The Supreme Brahman is the cause of all causes because He
originally existed before the creation. He is the original cause of every-
thing, both material and spiritual, and His existence is independent.
However, the Lord has a potency called avidya, the illusory energy,
which induces the false arguer to think himself perfect and which in-
duces the illusory energy to bewilder the conditioned soul. That Supreme
Brahman, the Supersoul, is very affectionate to His devotees. To bestow
mercy upon them, He discloses His form, name, attributes and qualities
to be worshiped within this material world.

“Unfortunately, however, those who are materially absorbed worship
various demigods. As the air passes over a lotus flower and carries the
scent of the flower with it, or as the air sometimes carries dust and
therefore assumes colors, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears as
the various demigods according to the desires of His various foolish
worshipers, but actually He is the supreme truth, Lord Visnu. To fulfill
the desires of His devotees, He appears in various incarnations, and
therefore there is no need to worship the demigods.”

Being very satisfied by the prayers of Daksa, Lord Visnu appeared
before Daksa with eight arms. The Lord was dressed in yellow garments
and had a blackish complexion. Understanding that Daksa was very
eager to follow the path of enjoyment, the Lord awarded him the potency
to enjoy the illusory energy. The Lord offered him the daughter of
Paiicajana named Asikni, who was suitable for Maharaja Daksa to enjoy
in sex. Indeed, Daksa received his name because he was very expert in
sex life. After awarding this benediction, Lord Visnu disappeared.


--- Page 196 ---
Text 2] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 191
TEXTS 1-2
श्रीराजोवाच
AGE सर्गो नागानां खगपक्षिणाम्‌ |
सामासिकस्त्वया प्रोक्तो यस्तु खायम्थवेऽन्तरे॥ १॥
a 0
वस्येव व्यासमिच्छामि ज्ञातुं ते भगवन्‌ यथा |
(9
अनुसगं यया शक्त्या ससजं भगवान्‌ परः ॥ २ ॥
sri-rajovaca
devasura-nrnam sargo
naganar mrga-paksinam
samasikas tvaya prokto
yas tu svayambhuve ’ntare
tasyaiva vydasam icchami
17214772 te bhagavan yatha
anusargam yaya Saktya
sasarja bhagavan parah
sri-raja uvaca--the King said; deva-asura-nrnam—of the demigods,
the demons and the human beings; sargah—the creation; naganam—of
the Nagas (serpentine living entities); mrga-paksinam—of the beasts
and birds; samasikah—briefly; tvaya—by you; proktah—described;
yah—which; tu—however; svayambhuve—of Svayambhuva Manu; an-
tare—within the period; tasya—of this; eva—indeed; vyasam—the
detailed account; icchami—I wish; jAatum—to know; te—from you;
bhagavan—O my lord; yatha—as well as; anusargam —the subsequent
creation; yaya—by which; Saktya—potency; sasarja—created;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parah—transcenden-
tal.
TRANSLATION
The blessed King said to Sukadeva Gosvami: My dear lord, the
demigods, demons, human beings, Nagas, beasts and birds were
created during the reign of Svayambhuva Manu. You have spoken
about this creation briefly [in the Third Canto]. Now I wish to
know about it elaborately. I also wish to know about the potency of


--- Page 197 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by which He brought about
the secondary creation.
TEXT 3
श्रीसूत sar
(५ ~
इति सम्प्रभ्माकण्य राजपेर्बादरायणिः |
भ्रतिनन्य महायोगी जगाद अनिसत्तमाः ॥ २ ॥
$ri-siita uvaca
iti samprasnam akarnya
rajarser badarayanih
pratinandya maha-yogi
Jagada muni-sattamah
Sri-sitah uvaca—Suta Gosvami said; iti—thus; samprasnam —the in-
quiry; akarnya—hearing; rajarseh—of King Pariksit; badarayanih—
Sukadeva Gosvami; pratinandya—praising; maha-yogi—the great
yogi; jagada—replied; muni-sattamah—O best of the sages.
TRANSLATION
Siita Gosvami said: O great sages [assembled at Naimisaranya],
after the great yogi Sukadeva Gosvami heard King Pariksit’s in-
quiry, he praised it and thus replied.
TEXT 4
श्रीक उवाच
यदा प्रचेतसः पत्रा दश प्राचीनवर्हिषः |
अन्तःसखुद्रादुन्मम्रा GIA दमेकेताम्‌ | ४॥
sri-Suka ८४९८८
yada pracetasah putra
dasa pracinabarhisah
antah-samudrad unmagna
dadrsur gam drumair vrtam


--- Page 198 ---
Text 5] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 193

$ri-sukah uvdca—Sukadeva Gosvami said; yada—when: pra-

cetasah—the Pracetas; putrah—the sons; dasa—ten; pracina-

barhisah—of King Pracinabarhi; antah-samudrat—from within the

ocean; unmagnah—emerged; dadrsuh—they saw; gam—the entire
planet; drumaih vrtam—covered with trees.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: When the ten sons of Pracinabarhi
emerged from the waters, in which they were performing
austerities, they saw that the entire surface of the world was
covered by trees.

PURPORT

When King Pracinabarhi was performing Vedic rituals in which the
killing of animals was recommended, Narada Muni, out of compassion,
advised him to stop. Pracinabarhi understood Narada properly and then
left the kingdom to perform austerities in the forest. His ten sons,
however, were performing austerities within the water, and therefore
there was no king to see to the management of the world. When the ten
sons, the Pracetas, came out of the water, they saw that the earth was
overrun with trees.

When the government neglects agriculture, which is necessary for the
production of food, the land becomes covered with unnecessary trees. Of
course, many trees are useful because they produce fruits and flowers,
but many other trees are unnecessary. They could be used as fuel and the
land cleared and used for agriculture. When the government is
negligent, less grain is produced. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.44),
krsi-goraksya-vanijyari  vaiS§ya-karma svabhava-jam: the proper
engagements for vai§yas, according to their nature, are to farm and to
protect cows. The duty of the government and the ksatriyas is to see that
the members of the third class, the vai§yas, who are neither brahmanas
nor ksatriyas, are thus properly engaged. Ksatriyas are meant to protect
human beings, whereas vaiSyas are meant to protect useful animals.
especially cows.

TEXT 5
दमेभ्यः FARA तपोदीपितमन्यवः |
मखतो वायुमप्रिं च ससजुस्तदिधक्षया ॥ ५ ॥


--- Page 199 ---
194. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
drumebhyah krudhyamanas te
tapo-dipita-manyavah
mukhato vayum agnim ca
sasrjus tad-didhaksaya
drumebhyah—unto the trees; krudhyamanah—being very angry:
te—they (the ten sons of Pracinabarhi): tapah-dipita-manyavah—
whose anger was inflamed because of long austerities: mukhatah—from
the mouth: vayum —wind; agnim—fire; ca—and: sasrjuh—they cre-
ated: tat—those forests: didhaksaya—with the desire to burn.
TRANSLATION
Because of having undergone long austerities in the water, the
Pracetas were very angry at the trees. Desiring to burn them to
ashes, they generated wind and fire from their mouths.
PURPORT
Here the word tapo-dipita-manyavah indicates that persons who have
undergone severe austerity (tapasya) are endowed with great mystic
power, as evinced by the Pracetas, who created fire and wind from their
mouths. Although devotees undergo severe tapasya, however, they are
vimanyavah, sadhavah, which means that they are never angry. They
are always decorated with good qualities. Bhagavatam (3.25.21) states:
tittksavah karunikah
suhrdah sarva-dehinam
ajata-Satravah santah
sadhavah sadhu-bhisanah
A sadhu, a devotee, is never angry. Actually the real feature of devotees
who undergo tapasya, austerity. is forgiveness. Although a Vaisnava has
sufficient power in tapasya, he does not become angry when put into dif-
ficulty. If one undergoes tapasya but does not become a Vaisnava,
however. one does not develop good qualities. For example,


--- Page 200 ---
Text 6] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 195
Hiranyakasipu and Ravana also performed great austerities, but they did
so to demonstrate their demoniac tendencies. Vaisnavas must meet many
opponents while preaching the glories of the Lord, but Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu recommends that they not become angry while preaching.
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu has given this formula: trnad api sunicena
taror api sahisnuna/ amanina manadena kirtaniyah sada harih. “One
should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, think-
ing oneself lower than the straw in the street: one should be more
tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and should be
ready to offer all respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant
the holy name of the Lord constantly.” Those engaged in preaching the
glories of the Lord should be humbler than grass and more tolerant than
a tree: then they can preach the glories of the Lord without difficulty.
TEXT 6
ताभ्यां निर्दश्चमानांस्तानुपठम्य ङरूद्वह |
राजोवाच महान्‌ सोमो मन्युं प्रशमयन्निव ॥ ६ ॥
tabhyarm nirdahyamanams tan
upalabhya kuradvaha
rajovaca mahan somo
manyuri prasSamayann iva

tabhyam—by the wind and fire; nirdahyamanan—being burned;
tan—them (the trees); upalabhya—seeing; kuriidvaha—O Maharaja
Pariksit; raja—the king of the forest: uvaca—said; mahan—the great:
somah—predominating deity of the moon, Somadeva; manyum—the
anger; prasamayan—pacifying; iva—like.

TRANSLATION

My dear King Pariksit, when Soma, the king of the trees and
predominating deity of the moon, saw the fire and wind burning
all the trees to ashes, he felt great sympathy because he is the


--- Page 201 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
maintainer of all herbs and trees. To appease the anger of the Pra-
cetas, Soma spoke as follows.
PURPORT
It is understood from this verse that the predominating deity of the
moon is the maintainer of all the trees and plants throughout the uni-
verse. It is due to the moonshine that trees and plants grow very lux-
uriantly. Therefore how can we accept the so-called scientists whose
moon expeditions have informed us that there are no trees or vegetation
on the moon? Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says, somo
vrksadhisthata sa eva vrksanam raja: Soma, the predominating deity of
the moon, is the king of all vegetation. How can we believe that the
maintainer of vegetation has no vegetation on his own planet?
TEXT 7
©
न ZHAN महाभागा दीनेम्यो द्रोग्धुमहेथ ।
विवर्भयिषवो यूयं प्रजानां पतयः स्मृताः || ७॥
na drumebhyo maha-bhaga
dinebhyo drogdhum arhatha
vivardhayisavo 702 07
[070] 07127) patayah smrtah ,
na—not; drumebhyah—the trees; maha-bhagah—O greatly fortu-
nate ones; dinebhyah—who are very poor; drogdhum—to burn to ashes;
arhatha—you deserve; vivardhayisavah—desiring to bring about an in-
crease; yiwyam—you; prajanam—of all living entities who have taken
shelter of you; patayah—the masters or protectors; smrtah—known as.
TRANSLATION
O greatly fortunate ones, you should not kill these poor trees by
burning them to ashes. Your duty is to wish the citizens [prajas] all
prosperity and to act as their protectors.


--- Page 202 ---
Text 8] The Harhsa-guhya Prayers 197
PURPORT
It is indicated herein that the government or king has the duty of pro-
tecting not only the human beings, but all other living entities, including
animals, trees and plants. No living entity should be killed unnecessarily.
TEXT 8
- ¢
अहो प्रजापतिपतिभेगवान्‌ हरिरन्ययः ।
© .
वनस्पतीनोषधीश्च ससर्जोजमिषं बिथ: ॥ ८ ॥
aho prajapati-patir
bhagavan harir avyayah
vanaspatin osadhi$ ca
sasarjorjam isarn vibhuh
aho—alas; prajapati-patih—the Lord of all the lords of created
beings; bhagavan harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari;
avyayah—indestructible; vanaspatin—the trees and plants; osadhth—
the herbs; ca—and; sasarja—created; drjam—invigorating; isam—
food; vibhuh—the Supreme Being.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Hari, is the master of
all living entities, including all the prajapatis, such as Lord
Brahma. Because He is the all-pervading and indestructible
master, He has created all these trees and vegetables as eatables for
other living entities.
PURPORT
Soma, the predominating deity of the moon, reminded the Pracetas
that this vegetation had been created by the Lord of lords to provide food
for everyone. If the Pracetas tried to kill them off, their own subjects
would also suffer, for trees are also required for food.


--- Page 203 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
TEXT 9
अन्नं चराणामचरा ह्यपदः पाद चारिणाम्‌ |
अहस्ता हस्तयुक्तानां द्विपदां च चतुष्पद: । ९ ॥
annam caranam acara
hy apadah pada-carinam
ahasta hasta-yuktanam
dvi-padam ca catus-padah
annam—food; caranam—of those that move on wings; acarah—the
nonmoving (fruits and flowers); hi—indeed; apadah—the living en-
tities without legs, like the grass; pada-carinam—of the animals who
move on legs, like the cows and buffalo; ahastah—animals without
hands; hasta-yuktanam—of the animals with hands, like the tigers: dvi-
padam—of human beings, who have two legs; ca—and; catuh-padah—
the four-legged animals like the deer.
TRANSLATION
By nature’s arrangement, fruits and flowers are considered the
food of insects and birds; grass and other legless living entities are
meant to be the food of four-legged animals like cows and buffalo;
animals that cannot use their front legs as hands are meant to be
the food of animals like tigers, which have claws; and four-legged
animals like deer and goats, as well as food grains, are meant to be
the food of human beings.
PURPORT
By nature’s law, or the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one kind of living entity is eatable by other living entities. As
mentioned herein, dvi-padam ca catus-padah: the four-legged animals
(catus-padah), as well as food grains, are eatables for human beings
(dvi-padam). These four-legged animals are those such as deer and
goats, not cows, which are meant to be protected. Generally the men of
the higher classes of society —the brahmanas, ksatriyas and vaiSyas—do
not eat meat. Sometimes ksatriyas go to the forest to kill animals like
deer because they have to learn the art of killing. and sometimes they eat


--- Page 204 ---
Text 10] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 199
the animals also. Sudras, too, eat animals such as goats. Cows, however,
are never meant to be killed or eaten by human beings. In every sastra,
cow killing is vehemently condemned. Indeed, one who kills a cow must
suffer for as many years as there are hairs on the body of a cow. Manu-
samhita says, pravrttir esa bhutanam nivrttis tu maha-phala: we have
many tendencies in this material world, but in human life one is meant to
learn how to curb those tendencies. Those who desire to eat meat may
satisfy the demands of their tongues by eating lower animals, but they
should never kill cows, who are actually accepted as the mothers of
human society because they supply milk. The astra especially recom-
mends, krsi-goraksya: the vaiSya section of humanity should arrange for
the food of the entire society through agricultural activities and should
give full protection to the cows, which are the most useful animals be-
cause they supply milk to human society.
TEXT 10
युयं च पित्रान्वादिष्टा TIT चानघाः |
प्रजासर्गाय हि कथं वकषान्‌ निरदग्धुमहेथ ॥१०।
॥ (7.1... 1111
deva-devena canaghah
praja-sargaya hi katharn
vrksan nirdagdhum arhatha

yityam —you; ca—also; pitra—by your father; anvadistah—ordered;
deva-devena —by the Personality of Godhead, the master of the masters;
ca—also; anaghah—O sinless ones; praja-sargaya—for generating the
population; hi—indeed; katham—how; vrksan—the trees; nir-
dagdhum—to burn to ashes; arhatha—are able.

TRANSLATION

O pure-hearted ones, your father, Pracinabarhi, and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead have ordered you to generate
population. Therefore how can you burn to ashes these trees and
herbs, which are needed for the maintenance of your subjects and
descendants?


--- Page 205 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
TEXT 11
श : द्‌ °
आतिष्ठत सतां मागं कोपं यच्छत दीपितम्‌ |
o>. ৬
पित्रा पितामहेनापि जष्टं वः प्रपितामरैः neon
1111, 1.2.11 1.11
kopari yacchata dipitam
pitra pitamahenapi
Justarh vah prapitamahaih
atisthata—just follow; satam margam—the path of the great saintly
personalities; kopam—the anger; yacchata—subdue: dipitam—which
is now awakened; pitra—by the father; pitamahena api—and by the
grandfather; justam—executed; vah—your; prapitamahaih—by the
great-grandfathers.
TRANSLATION
The path of goodness traversed by your father, grandfather and
great-grandfathers is that of maintaining the subjects [prajas], in-
cluding the men, animals and trees. That is the path you should
follow. Unnecessary anger is contrary to your duty. Therefore I
request you to control your anger.
PURPORT
Here the words pitra pitamahenapi justarn vah prapitamahaih depict
an honest royal family, consisting of the kings, their father, their grand-
father and their great-grandfathers. Such a royal family has a prestigious
position because it maintains the citizens, or prajas. The word praja
refers to one who has taken birth within the jurisdiction of the govern-
ment. The exalted royal families were conscious that all living beings,
whether human, animal or lower than animal, should be given protec-
tion. The modern democratic system cannot be exalted in this way be-
cause the leaders elected strive only for power and have no sense of re-
sponsibility. In a monarchy, a king with a prestigious position follows the
great deeds of his forefathers. Thus Soma, the king of the moon, here
reminds the Pracetas about the glories of their father, grandfather and
great-grandfathers.


--- Page 206 ---
Text 12] The Harhsa-guhya Prayers 201
TEXT 12
तोकानां पितरौ बन्धू रः पक्ष्म জিযাঃ पतिः
पतिः प्रजानां भिक्षूणां गृह्यज्ञानां बुधः सुहृत्‌ ॥१२॥
tokanar pitarau bandhi
01801, paksma striyah patih
patih prajanam bhiksinam
grhy qjianarn budhah suhrt

tokanam—of children; pitarau—the two parents; bandhi—the
friends; drsah—of the eye; paksma—the eyelid; striyah—of the
woman; patih—the husband; patih—the protector; prajanam—of
the subjects; bhiksunam—of the beggars; grhi—the householder;
agjianam—of the ignorant; budhah—the learned; su-hrt—the friend.

TRANSLATION

As the father and mother are the friends and maintainers of
their children, as the eyelid is the protector of the eye, as the hus-
band is the maintainer and protector of a woman, as the house-
holder is the maintainer and protector of beggars, and as the
learned is the friend of the ignorant, so the king is the protector
and giver of life to all his subjects. The trees are also subjects of
the king. Therefore they should be given protection.

PURPORT

By the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead, there are various
protectors and maintainers for helpless living entities. The trees are also
considered prajds, subjects of the king, and therefore the duty of the
monarch is to protect even the trees, not to speak of others. The king is
duty-bound to protect the living entities in his kingdom. Thus although
the parents are directly responsible for the protection and maintenance
of their children, the duty of the king is to see that all parents do their
duty properly. Similarly, the king is also responsible for overseeing the
other protectors mentioned in this verse. It may also be noted that the
beggars who should be maintained by the householders are not


--- Page 207 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
professional beggars, but sannyasis and brahmanas, to whom the house-
holders should supply food and clothing.
TEXT 13
अन्तदे हेषु भूतानामात्मास्ते हरिरीश्वरः |
° -
स्वं तद्धिष्ण्यमीक्षष्वमेवं वस्तोषितो gat 1930
antar dehesu bhitanam
atmaste harir iSvarah
sarvam tad-dhispyam tksadhvam
evarn vas tosito hy asau

antah dehesu—within the bodies (in the cores of the hearts);
bhitanam—of all living entities; dtma—the Supersoul; aste—resides;
harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; #varah—the Lord or
director; sarvam—all; tat-dhisnyam—His place of residence;
iksadhvam—try to see; evam—in this way; vah—with you; tositah—
satisfied; hi—indeed; asau—that Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated as the Super-
soul within the cores of the hearts of all living entities, whether
moving or nonmoving, including men, birds, animals, trees and,
indeed, all living entities. Therefore you should consider every
body a residence or temple of the Lord. By such vision you will
satisfy the Lord. You should not angrily kill these living entities in
the forms of trees.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita and confirmed by all the Vedic scriptures,
isvarah sarva-bhitanar hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati: the Supersoul is situ-
ated within everyone’s heart. Therefore, since everyone’s body is the
residence of the Supreme Lord, one should not destroy the body because
of unnecessary envy. That will dissatisfy the Supersoul. Soma told the
Pracetas that because they had tried to satisfy the Supersoul, now they
should not displease Him.


--- Page 208 ---
Text 14] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 203
TEXT 14
यः ggeqfad देह ARH |
¢
आत्मजिज्ञासया यच्छेत्‌ स गुणानतिषतेते ॥ १४॥
yah samutpatitarh deha
akasan manyum ulbanam
atma-jyndsaya yacchet
sa gunan ativartate
yah—anyone who; samutpatitam—suddenly awakened; dehe—in the
body; a@kasat—from the sky; manyum—anger; ulbanam—powerful;
atma-jjiiasaya—by inquiry into spiritual realization or self-realization;
yacchet—subdues; sah—that person; gunan—the modes of material
nature; ativartate—transcends.
TRANSLATION
One who inquires into self-realization and thus subdues his
powerful anger —which awakens suddenly in the body as if falling
from the sky —transcends the influence of the modes of material
nature.
PURPORT
When one becomes angry, he forgets himself and his situation, but if
one is able to consider his situation by knowledge, one transcends the in-
fluence of the modes of material nature. One is always a servant of lusty
desires, anger, greed, illusion, envy and so forth, but if one obtains suffi-
cient strength in spiritual advancement, one can control them. One who
obtains such control will always be transcendentally situated, untouched
by the modes of material nature. This is only possible when one fully
engages in the service of the Lord. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita
(14.26):
mar ca yo vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiyaya kalpate


--- Page 209 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the spiritual platform.” By engaging one in devotional ser-
vice, the Krsna consciousness movement keeps one always transcenden-
tal to anger, greed, lust, envy and so forth. One must perform devotional
service because otherwise one will become victimized by the modes of
material nature.
TEXT 15
५ ac .
अलं FEAL: खिलानां शिवमस्तु वः ।
वार्षी ধীঘা वरा कन्या पललीत्वे प्रतिगृद्यताम्‌ ॥ १५॥
alari dagdhair drumair dinaih
khilanarn sivam astu vah
varkst hy esa vara kanya
patnitve pratigrhyatam
alam—enough; dagdhaih—with burning; drumaih—the trees;
dinath—poor; khilanam—of the remainder of the trees; Sivam—all
good fortune; astu—let there be; vah—of you; varksi—raised by the
trees; hi—indeed; esa—this; wvara—choice; kanya—daughter;
patnitve—into wifehood; pratigrhyatam—let her be accepted.
TRANSLATION
There is no need to burn these poor trees any longer. Let what-
ever trees still remain be happy. Indeed, you should also be happy.
Now, here is a beautiful, well-qualified girl named Marisa, who was
raised by the trees as their daughter. You may accept this beautiful
girl as your wife.
TEXT 16
इत्यामन्त्य वरारोहां कन्यामाप्सरसीं चप |
सोमो राजा ययो दत्वा ते धर्मेणोपयेमिरे 1280
ity amantrya ৮৫70701৫277
kanyam 07050705877 nrpa


--- Page 210 ---
Text 17] The Harhsa-guhya Prayers 205
somo raja yayau dattva
te dharmenopayemire
iti—thus; amantrya—addressing; vara-aroham—possessing high,
beautiful hips; kanyam—the girl; dpsarasim—born of an Apsara;
nrpa—O King; somah—Soma, the predominating deity of the moon;
raja—the king; yayau—returned; dattva—delivering; te—they; dhar-
mena —according to religious principles; upayemire—married.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, after thus pacify-
ing the Pracetas, Soma, the king of the moon, gave them the
beautiful girl born of Pramloca Apsara. The Pracetas all received
Pramloca’s daughter, who had high, very beautiful hips, and mar-
ried her according to the religious system.
TEXT 17
तेभ्यस्तस्यां समभवद्‌ दक्षः प्राचेतसः किल ।
~~ =
यस्य प्रजाविसर्गेण लोका आप्रिताल्रयः ॥१७॥
tebhyas tasyam samabhavad
daksah pracetasah kila
‘yasya praja-visargena
loka apuritas trayah
tebhyah—from all the Pracetas; tasyam—in her; samabhavat—was
generated; daksah—Daksa, the expert in begetting children; pra-
cetasah—the son of the Pracetas; kila—indeed; yasya—of whom;
praja-visargena—by the generation of living entities; lokah—the
worlds; apuaritah—filled; trayah—three.
TRANSLATION
In the womb of that girl the Pracetas all begot a son named
Daksa, who filled the three worlds with living entities.


--- Page 211 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
PURPORT
Daksa was first born during the reign of Svayambhuva Manu, but be-
cause of offending Lord Siva he was punished by having the head of a
goat substituted for his own head. Thus insulted, he had to give up that
body, and in the sixth manvantara, called the Caksusa manvantara, he
was born of the womb of Marisa as Daksa. In this connection Srila
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura quotes this verse:
caksuse tv antare prapte
prak-sarge kala-vidrute
yah sasarja praja istah
sa dakso daiva-coditah
“His previous body had been destroyed, but he, the same Daksa, inspired
by the supreme will, created all the desired living entities in the Caksusa
manvantara.” (Bhag. 4.30.49) Thus Daksa regained his previous opu-
lence and again begot thousands and millions of children to fill the three
worlds.
TEXT 18
< ;
यथा ससजे भूतानि दक्षो दुहितृवत्सलः |
a
रेतसा मनसा च्व तन्ममावहितः श्रृणु ॥१८॥
yatha sasarja bhitani
dakso duhitr-vatsalah
retasd manasa caiva
tan mamavahitah srnu
yatha—as; sasarja—created; bhitani—the living entities; daksah—
Daksa; duhitr-vatsalah—who is very affectionate to his daughters;
retasa—by semina; manasa—by the mind; ca—also; eva—indeed;
tat—that; mama—from me; avahitah—being attentive; Srnu—please
hear.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Please hear from me with great
attention how Prajapati Daksa, who was very affectionate to his


--- Page 212 ---
Text 20] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 207
daughters, created different types of living entities through his
semina and through his mind.
PURPORT
The word duhitr-vatsalah indicates that all the prajas were born from
Daksa’s daughters. Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that
apparently Daksa had no son.
TEXT 19
a
मनसेवाखजस्पूवं॒प्रजापतिरिमाः प्रजाः |
देवासुरमयष्यादीननमःस्यलजलोकसः ॥१९॥
manasaivasrjat purvam
prajapatir imah prajah
devasura-manusyadin
nabhah-sthala-jalaukasah
manasa—by the mind; eva—indeed; asrjat—created; pirvam—in
the beginning; prajapatih—the prajapati (Daksa); imah—these; pra-
jah—living entities; deva—the demigods; asura—the demons;
manusya-adin—and other living entities, headed by the human beings;
nabhah—in the skies; sthala—on the land; jala—or within the water;
okasah—who have their abodes.
TRANSLATION
With his mind, Prajapati Daksa first created all kinds of
demigods, demons, human beings, birds, beasts, aquatics and so
on.
TEXT 20
तमचरंहितमालोक्य sew प्रजापतिः |
विन्घ्यपादाुपत्रज्य सोऽचरद्‌ दुष्करं तपः ।२०॥
tam abrrhitam alokya
praja-sargam prajapatih


--- Page 213 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
vindhya-padan upavrajya
so 00700 duskarari tapah
tam—that; abrrhitam—not increasing; dalokya—seeing; praja-
sargam—the creation of the living entities; prajapatih—Daksa, the
generator of living entities; vindhya-padan—the mountains near the
Vindhya mountain range; upavrajya—going to; sah—he; acarat—exe-
cuted; duskaram—very difficult; tapah—austerities.
TRANSLATION
But when Prajapati Daksa saw that he was not properly generat-
ing all kinds of living entities, he approached a mountain near the
Vindhya mountain range, and there he executed very difficult
austerities.
TEXT 21
तत्राघमर्षणं नाम तीथं पापहरं परम्‌ |
उपस्पृश्यानुसवनं तपसातोषयद्धरिम्‌ ॥२१॥
tatraghamarsanam nama
tirtharn papa-harari param
upasprsyanusavanari
tapasatosayad dharim
tatra—there; aghamarsanam —Aghamarsana; nama—named;
tirtham —the holy place; papa-haram—suitable for destroying all sinful
reactions; param —best; upaspr§ya—performing acamana and bathing;
anusavanam—regularly; tapasai—by austerity; atosayat—caused
pleasure; harim—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Near that mountain was a very holy place named Aghamarsana.
There Prajapati Daksa executed ritualistic ceremonies and satisfied
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, by engaging in great
austerities to please Him.


--- Page 214 ---
Text 23] The Harisa-guhya Prayers 209
TEXT 22
अस्तोषीद्धंसगुद्यन भगवन्तमधोक्षजम्‌ |
तुभ्यं तदभिधास्यामि कस्यातुष्यद्‌ यथा हरिः॥२२॥
astausid dharmsa-guhyena
bhagavantam adhoksajam
tubhyar tad abhidhasyami
kasyatusyad yatha harih
astausit—satisfied; harsa-guhyena—by the celebrated prayers
known as Hariisa-guhya; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; adhoksajam—who is beyond the reach of the senses;
tubhyam—unto you; tat—that; abhidhasyami—I shall explain;
kasya—with Daksa, the prajapati; atusyat—was satisfied; yatha—how;
harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, I shall fully explain to you the Harmisa-guhya
prayers, which were offered to the Supreme Personality of God-
head by Daksa, and I shall explain how the Lord was pleased with
him for those prayers.
PURPORT
It is to be understood that the Hariisa-guhya prayers were not com-
posed by Daksa, but were existing in the Vedic literature.
TEXT 23
श्री प्रजापतिरुवाच
नमः परायावितथानुभूतये
गुणत्रयामासनिमित्तवन्धवे।
अटष्टधाम्ने गुणतच्वुद्धिभि-
निंडत्तमानाय द घे स्वयम्भुवे 1:3


--- Page 215 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
Sri-prajapatir uvaca
namah parayavitathanubhitaye
guna-trayabhdsa-nimitta-bandhave
adrsta-dhamne guna-tattva-buddhibhir
nivrtta-manaya dadhe svayambhuve

Sri-prajapatih uvaca—the prajapati Daksa said; namah—all respect-
ful obeisances; par@ya—unto the Transcendence; avitatha—correct;
anubhiitaye —unto Him whose spiritual potency brings about realization
of Him; guna-traya—of the three material modes of nature; abhasa —of
the living entities who have the appearance; nimitta—and of the ma-
terial energy; bandhave—unto the controller; adrsta-dhamne—who is
not perceived in His abode; guna-tattva-buddhibhih—by the condi-
tioned souls whose poor intelligence dictates that real truth is found in
the manifestations of the three modes of material nature; nivrtta-
mandaya—who has surpassed all material measurements and calcula-
tions; dadhe—I offer; svayambhuve—unto the Supreme Lord, who is
manifest with no cause.

TRANSLATION

Prajapati Daksa said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is
transcendental to the illusory energy and the physical categories it
produces. He possesses the potency for unfailing knowledge and
supreme will power, and He is the controller of the living entities
and the illusory energy. The conditioned souls who have accepted
this material manifestation as everything cannot see Him, for He is
above the evidence of experimental knowledge. Self-evident and
self-sufficient, He is not caused by any superior cause. Let me offer
my respectful obeisances unto Him.

PURPORT

The transcendental position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
explained herewith. He is not perceivable by the conditioned souls, who
are accustomed to material vision and cannot understand that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead exists in His abode, which is beyond
that vision. Even if a materialistic person could count all the atoms in the


--- Page 216 ---
Text 24] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 211
universe, he would still be unable to understand the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. As confirmed in Brahma-samhita (5.34):
panthas tu koti-sata-vatsara-sampragamyo
vayor athapi manaso muni-pungavanam
so ‘py asti yat-prapada-simny avicintya-tattve
govindam adi-purusam tam aha bhajami
The conditioned souls may try to understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead for many billions of years through their mental speculative pro-
cesses, traveling at the speed of the mind or the wind, but still the Ab-
solute Truth will remain inconceivable to them because a materialistic
person cannot measure the length and breadth of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead’s unlimited existence. If the Absolute Truth is
beyond measurement, one may ask, how can one realize Him? The
answer is given here by the word svayambhuve: one may understand
Him or not, but nevertheless He is existing in His own spiritual potency.
TEXT 24
+ a
न यस्य सख्यं पुरुषोऽवेति सख्युः
सखा वसन्‌ संबसतः पुरेऽसिन्‌ |
-
गुणो यथा गुणिनो व्यक्तच्ष्टे-
हे -
WER महेशाय नमस्करोमि 11231)
na yasya sakhyam puruso ‘vaiti sakhyuh
sakha vasan 50770050102 pure ’smin
guno yatha gunino vyakta-drstes
tasmai mahesaya namaskaromi
na—not; yasya—whose; sakhyam—{fraternity; purusah—the living
entity; avaiti—knows; sakhyuh—of the supreme friend; sakha—the
friend; vasan—living; sarmvasatah—of the one living with; pure—in
the body; asmin—this; gunah—the object of sense perception; yatha—
just like; guninah—of its respective sense organ; vyakta-drsteh—who


--- Page 217 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
oversees the material manifestation; tasmai—unto Him; maha-isaya—
unto the supreme controller; namaskaromi—I offer my obeisances.
TRANSLATION
As the sense objects [form, taste, touch, smell and sound] cannot
understand how the senses perceive them, so the conditioned soul,
although residing in his body along with the Supersoul, cannot
understand how the supreme spiritual person, the master of the
material creation, directs his senses. Let me offer my respectful
obeisances unto that Supreme Person, who is the supreme
controller.
PURPORT
The individual soul and the Supreme Soul live together within the
body. This is confirmed in the Upanisads by the analogy that two
friendly birds live in one tree—one bird eating the fruit of the tree and
the other simply witnessing and directing. Although the individual living
being, who is compared to the bird that is eating, is sitting with his friend
the Supreme Soul, the individual living being cannot see Him. Actually
the Supersoul is directing the workings of his senses in the enjoyment of
sense objects, but as these sense objects cannot see the senses, the condi-
tioned soul cannot see the directing soul. The conditioned soul has
desires, and the Supreme Soul fulfills them, but the conditioned soul is
unable to see the Supreme Soul. Thus Prajapati Daksa offers his obei-
sances to the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul, even though unable to see
Him. Another example given is that although ordinary citizens work
under the direction of the government, they cannot understand how they
are being governed or what the government is. In this regard,
Madhvacarya quotes the following verse from the Skanda Purana:
yatha rajiah priyatvarm tu
bhrtya vedena catmanah
tatha jivo na yat-sakhyar
vetti tasmai namo stu te
“As the various servants in the different departments of big establish-
ments cannot see the supreme managing director under whom they are


--- Page 218 ---
Text 25] The Harisa-guhya Prayers 213
working, the conditioned souls cannot see the supreme friend sitting
within their bodies. Let us therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto
the Supreme, who is invisible to our material eyes.”
TEXT 25
देहोऽसवोऽक्षा मनवो भूतमात्रा
मात्मानमन्यं च विदुः परं यत्‌।
सव॑॑पुमान्‌ वेद गुणांश्च तज्ज्ञो
न वेद॒ सवरज्ञमनन्तमीडे ॥२५॥
deho ’savo ’ksa manavo bhita-matram
atmanam anyam ca viduh param yat
ऽका ण्ठाः puman veda gundams ca taj-jiio
na veda sarva-jiiam anantam ide
dehah—this body; asavah—the life airs; aksah—the different
senses; manavah—the mind, understanding, intellect and ego; bhita-
matram —the five gross material elements and the sense objects (form,
taste, sound and so on); atmanam—themselves; anyam—any other:
ca—and; viduh—know; param—beyond; yat—that which; sarvam—
everything; puman—the living being; veda—knows; gunan—the
qualities of the material nature; ca—and; tat-jiah—knowing those
things; na—not; veda—knows; sarva-jiam—unto the omniscient:
anantam—the unlimited; ide—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Because they are only matter, the body, the life airs, the external
and internal senses, the five gross elements and the subtle sense
objects [form, taste, smell, sound and touch] cannot know their
own nature, the nature of the other senses or the nature of their
controllers. But the living being, because of his spiritual nature,
can know his body, the life airs, the senses, the elements and the
sense objects, and he can also know the three qualities that form
their roots. Nevertheless, although the living being is completely
aware of them, he is unable to see the Supreme Being, who is


--- Page 219 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
omniscient and unlimited. I therefore offer my respectful
obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
Material scientists can make an analytical study of the physical ele-
ments, the body, the senses, the sense objects and even the air that con-
trols the vital force, but still they cannot understand that above all these
is the real spirit soul. In other words, the living entity, because of his
being a spirit soul, can understand all the material objects, or, when self-
realized, he can understand the Paramatma, upon whom yogis meditate.
Nevertheless, the living being, even if advanced, cannot understand the
Supreme Being, the Personality of Godhead, for He is ananta, unlimited,
in all six opulences.
TEXT 26
यदोपरामो मनसो ARE
रूपस्य TREE |
य॒ ईयते केवलया स्वसंस्थया
हंसाय तस्मै छचिसमने नमः ॥२६॥।
yadoparamo 71071050 nama-ripa-
rupasya drsta-smrti-sampramosat
ya tyate kevalaya sva-samsthaya
harmsaya tasmai Suci-sadmane namah
yadd—when in trance; uparamah—complete cessation; manasah—
of the mind; nama-ripa—material names and forms; riapasya —of that
by which they appear; drsta—of material vision; smrti—and of
remembrance; sampramosat—due to the destruction; yah—who (the
Supreme Personality of Godhead); iyate—is perceived; kevalaya—with
spiritual; sva-sarmsthaya—His own original form; hamsaya—unto the
supreme pure; tasmai—unto Him; Suci-sadmane—who is realized only
in the pure state of spiritual existence; namah—I offer my respectful
obeisances.
TRANSLATION
When one’s consciousness is completely purified of the con-
tamination of material existence, gross and subtle, without being


--- Page 220 ---
Text 26] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 215
agitated as in the working and dreaming states, and when the mind
is not dissolved as in susupti, deep sleep, one comes to the plat-
form of trance. Then one’s material vision and the memories of
the mind, which manifests names and forms, are vanquished. Only
in such a trance is the Supreme Personality of Godhead revealed.
Thus let us offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is seen in that uncontaminated,
transcendental state.
PURPORT

There are two stages of God realization. One is called sujieyam, or
very easily understood (generally by mental speculation), and the other
is called durjiieyam, understood only with difficulty. Paramatma realiza-
tion and Brahman realization are considered sujiieyam, but realization of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is durjiieyam. As described here,
one attains the ultimate realization of the Personality of Godhead when
one gives up the activities of the mind —thinking, feeling and willing—
or, in other words, when mental speculation stops. This transcendental
realization is above susupti, deep sleep. In our gross conditional stage we
perceive things through material experience and remembrance, and in
the subtle stage we perceive the world in dreams. The process of vision
also involves remembrance and also exists in a subtle form. Above gross
experience and dreams is susupti, deep sleep, and when one comes to the
completely spiritual platform, transcending deep sleep, he attains trance,
viSuddha-sattva, or vasudeva-sattva, in which the Personality of
Godhead is revealed.

Atah sri-krsna-namadi na bhaved grahyam indriyaih: as long as one
is situated in duality, on the sensual platform, gross or subtle, realization
of the original Personality of Godhead is impossible. Sevonmukhe hi
Jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah: but when one engages his senses in
the service of the Lord —specifically, when one engages the tongue in
chanting the Hare Krsna mantra and tasting only Krsna prasada with a
spirit of service—the Supreme Personality of Godhead is revealed. This
is indicated in this verse by the word Suci-sadmane. Suci means purified.
By the spirit of rendering service with one’s senses, one’s entire exis-
tence becomes Suci-sadma, the platform of uncontaminated purity.
Daksa therefore offers his respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is revealed on the platform of Suci-sadma. In


--- Page 221 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
this regard Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura quotes the following
prayer by Lord Brahma from the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.6): tathapi
bhiaman mahimagunasya te viboddhum arhaty amalantar-atmabhih.
“One whose heart has become completely purified, my Lord, can under-
stand the transcendental qualities of Your Lordship and can understand
the greatness of Your activities.”
TEXTS 27-28
५ . व
मनीषिणोऽन्तदहेदि संनिवेशितं
सखशक्तिभिनवभिश्च त्रव्द्धिः।
वहं यथा दारुणि বাধ্বহহ্ম
मनीषया निष्कर्षन्ति गूढम्‌ 19
स॒ ৭ ममाशेषविोषमाया-
निषेधनिर्वाणसुखालुभूतिः ।
स॒ सर्वनामा অ च विश्वरूपः
प्रसीदतामनिरुक्तात्मशक्तिः ।।२८॥
manisino ’'ntar-hrdi sannivesitam
sva-saktibhir navabhis ca trivrdbhih
vahnim yatha daruni pancadasyam
manisaya niskarsanti gidham
sa vai mamasesa-visesa-maya-
nisedha-nirvana-sukhanubhiitih
sa sarva-nama sa ca visva-rapah
prasidatam aniruktatma-saktih
manisinah—great learned brahmanas performing ritualistic
ceremonies and sacrifices; antah-hrdi—within the core of the heart;
sannivesitam —being situated; sva-Saktibhih—with His own spiritual
potencies; navabhih—also with the nine different material potencies
(the material nature, the total material energy, the ego, the mind and the
five objects of the senses); ca—and (the five gross material elements and


--- Page 222 ---
Text 28] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 217
the ten acting and knowledge-gathering senses); trivrdbhih—by the
three material modes of nature; wvahnim—fire; yatha—just like;
daruni—within wood; paiicadasyam—rproduced by chanting the fifteen
hymns known as Samidheni mantras; manisaya—by purified intelli-
gence; niskarsanti—extract; gudham—although not manifesting; sah—
that Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai—indeed; mama —toward me;
asesa—all; visesa—varieties; maya —of the illusory energy; nisedha—
by the process of negation; nirvana—of liberation; sukha-anubhitih—
who is realized by transcendental bliss; sah—that Supreme Personality
of Godhead; sarva-nama—who is the source of all names; sah —that
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—also; visva-ripah—the gigantic
form of the universe; prasidatam—may He be merciful; anirukta—in-
conceivable; atma-saktih—the reservoir of all spiritual potencies.
TRANSLATION

Just as great learned brahmanas who are expert in performing
ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices can extract the fire dormant
within wooden fuel by chanting the fifteen Samidheni mantras,
thus proving the efficacy of the Vedic mantras, so those who are ac-
tually advanced in consciousness—in other words, those who are
Krsna conscious—can find the Supersoul, who by His own
spiritual potency is situated within the heart. The heart is covered
by the three modes of material nature and the nine material ele-
ments [material nature, the total material energy, the ego, the
mind and the five objects of sense gratification], and also by the
five material elements and the ten senses. These twenty-seven ele-
ments constitute the external energy of the Lord. Great yogis
meditate upon the Lord, who is situated as the Supersoul,
Paramatma, within the core of the heart. May that Supersoul be
pleased with me. The Supersoul is realized when one is eager for
liberation from the unlimited varieties of material life. One ac-
tually attains such liberation when he engages in the transcenden-
tal loving service of the Lord and realizes the Lord because of his
attitude of service. The Lord may be addressed by various spiritual
names, which are inconceivable to the material senses. When will
that Supreme Personality of Godhead be pleased with me?


--- Page 223 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
PURPORT

In his commentary to this verse, Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura
uses the word durvijieyam, which means very difficult to realize. The
pure stage of existence is described in Bhagavad-gita (7.28), wherein
Krsna says:

yesam tv anta-gatam papam
Jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah
“Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose
sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the
duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determina-
tion.”
Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita (9.14) the Lord says:
satatarn kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratah
namasyantas ca mam bhaktya
nitya-yukta upasate
“Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination.
bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with
devotion.”

One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead after tran-
scending all material impediments. Therefore Lord Krsna also says in the
Gita (7.3):

manusyandam sahasresu
kascid yatati siddhaye
yatatam api siddhanam
kascin mam vetti tattvatah
“Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection,
and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in
truth.”


--- Page 224 ---
Text 28] The Harmsa-guhya Prayers 219
To understand Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one must
undergo severe penances and austerities, but since the path of devotional
service is perfect, by following this process one can very easily come to
the spiritual platform and understand the Lord. This, too, is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (18.55), wherein Krsna says:
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato 17616
visate tad-anantaram
“One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is only
by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the
Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.”
Thus although the subject matter is durvijieyam, extremely difficult
to understand, it becomes easy if one follows the prescribed method.
Coming in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead is possible
through pure devotional service, which begins with sravanam kirtanam
visnoh. In this regard, Srila Vi§vanatha Cakravarti Thakura quotes a
verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.8.5): pravistah karna-randhrena
svanam bhava-saroruham. The process of hearing and chanting enters
the core of the heart, and in this way one becomes a pure devotee. By
continuing this process, one comes to the stage of transcendental love,
and then he appreciates the transcendental name, form, qualities and
pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, a pure
devotee, by devotional service, is able to see the Supreme Personality of
Godhead despite many material impediments, which are all various en-
ergies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Easily making his way
through these impediments, a devotee comes directly in contact with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. After all, the material impediments
described in these verses are but various energies of the Lord. When a
devotee is eager to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he prays to
the Lord:
ayi nanda-tanuja kinkararm
patitarn mam visame bhavambudhau
krpaya tava pada-parikaja-
sthita-dhili-sadrsam vicintaya


--- Page 225 ---
220 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
*“O son of Maharaja Nanda [Krsnal, I am Your eternal servitor, yet some-
how or other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick
me up from this ocean of death and place me as one of the atoms at Your
lotus feet.” Being pleased with the devotee, the Lord turns all his ma-
terial impediments into spiritual service. In this connection Srila
Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura quotes a verse from the Visnu Purana:
hladini sandhini samvit
tvayy eka sarva-sarsthitau
hlada-tapa-kari misra
tvayi no guna-varjite

In the material world, the spiritual energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is manifested as tapa-kari, which means ‘causing miseries.”
Everyone hankers for happiness, but although happiness originally
comes from the pleasure potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
in the material world, because of material activities, the pleasure potency
of the Lord becomes a source of miseries (hlada-tapa-kari). False happi-
ness in the material world is the source of distress, but when one’s en-
deavors for happiness are redirected toward the satisfaction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, this tapa-kart element of misery is
vanquished. An example given in this connection is that extracting fire
from wood is certainly difficult, but when the fire comes out it burns the
wood to ashes. In other words, experiencing the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is extremely difficult for those devoid of devotional service, but
everything becomes easier for a devotee, and thus he can very easily
meet the Supreme Lord.

Here the prayers say that the form of the Lord is beyond the jurisdic-
tion of material form and is therefore inconceivable. A devotee prays,
however, “My dear Lord, be pleased with me so that I may very easily
see Your transcendental form and potency.” Nondevotees try to under-
stand the Supreme Brahman by discussions of neti neti. Nisedha-nir-
vana-sukhanubhiutih: a devotee, however, simply by chanting the holy
name of the Lord, avoids such laborious speculations and realizes the ex-
istence of the Lord very easily.


--- Page 226 ---
Text 29] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 221
TEXT 29
यद्यन्निरुक्तं वचसा निरूपितं
धियाक्षभिवां मनसोत यस्य |
मा भूत्‌ खरूपं गुणरूपं हि तत्तत्‌
a
स वै गुणापायविसर्गलक्षणः ।।२९॥
yad yan niruktari vacasa 78070101271
dhiyaksabhir va manasota yasya
ma bhit ৩৮৫70100718 guna-ripam hi tat tat
sa vai gunapaya-visarga-laksanah

yat yat—whatever; niruktam—expressed; vacasi—by words;
niripitam—ascertained; dhiyd—by so-called meditation or intelligence;
aksabhih—by the senses; va—or; manasa—by the mind; uta—cer-
tainly; yasya—of whom; ma bhiit—may not be; sva-riipam—the actual
form of the Lord; guna-riipam—consisting of the three qualities; hi—
indeed; tat tat—that; sah—that Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai—
indeed; guna-apaya—the cause of the annihilation of everything made
of the material modes of nature; visarga—and the creation; laksanah—
appearing as.

TRANSLATION

Anything expressed by material vibrations, anything ascertained
by material intelligence and anything experienced by the material
senses or concocted within the material mind is but an effect of the
modes of material nature and therefore has nothing to do with the
real nature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme
Lord is beyond the creation of this material world, for He is the
source of the material qualities and creation. As the cause of all
causes, He exists before the creation and after the creation. I wish
to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.

PURPORT

One who manufactures names, forms, qualities or paraphernalia per-

taining to the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot understand Him,


--- Page 227 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
since He is beyond creation. The Supreme Lord is the creator of every-
thing, and this means that He existed when there was no creation. In
other words, His name, form and qualities are not materially created en-
tities; they are transcendental always. Therefore by our material concoc-
tions, vibrations and thoughts we cannot ascertain the Supreme Lord.
This is explained in the verse atah Sri-krsna-namadi na bhaved
grahyam indriyaih.

Pracetasa, Daksa, herein offers prayers unto the Transcendence, not to
anyone within the material creation. Only fools and rascals think God a
material creation. This is confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-
gita (9.11):

avajananti mar madha
manusim tanum asritam
parari bhavam ajananto
mama bhiita-mahesvaram
“Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know
My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.”
Therefore, one must receive knowledge from a person to whom the Lord
has revealed Himself; there is no value in creating an imaginary name or
form for the Lord. Sripada Sankaracarya was an impersonalist, but
nevertheless he said, narayanah paro ’vyaktat: Narayana, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is not a person of the material world. We cannot
assign Narayana a material designation, as the foolish attempt to do when
they speak of daridra-narayana (poor Narayana). Narayana is always
transcendental, beyond this material creation. How can He become
daridra-narayana? Poverty is found within this material world, but in
the spiritual world, there is no such thing as poverty. Therefore the idea
of daridra-narayana is merely a concoction.

Daksa very carefully points out that material designations cannot be
names of the worshipable Lord: yad yan niruktarh vacasa niripitam.
Nirukta refers to the Vedic dictionary. One cannot properly understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead merely by picking up expressions
from a dictionary. In praying to the Lord, Daksa does not wish material
names and forms to be the objects of his worship; rather, he wants to
worship the Lord, who existed before the creation of material diction-


--- Page 228 ---
Text 30] The Hammsa-guhya Prayers 223
aries and names. As confirmed in the Vedas, yato vaco nivartante/
aprapya manasa saha: the name, form, attributes and paraphernalia of
the Lord cannot be ascertained through a material dictionary. However,
if one reaches the transcendental platform of understanding the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes well acquainted with
everything, material and spiritual. This is confirmed in another Vedic
mantra: tam eva viditvatimrtyum eti. If one can somehow or other, by
the grace of the Lord, understand the transcendental position of the
Lord, one becomes eternal. This is further confirmed by the Lord Him-
self in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam
evari yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehari punar janma
naiti mam eti so rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and
activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this ma-
terial world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.” Simply by under-
standing the Supreme Lord, one goes beyond birth, death, old age and
disease. Srila Sukadeva Gosvami therefore advised Maharaja Pariksit in
Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.1.5):
tasmad bharata sarvatma
bhagavan iSvaro harih
Srotavyah kirtitavyas ca
smartavyas cecchatabhayam
“0 descendant of King Bharata, one who desires to be free from all mis-
eries must hear, glorify and also remember the Personality of Godhead.
who is the Supersoul, the controller and the savior from all miseries.”
TEXT 30
a
यसिन्‌ यतो येन च यस यस
९
यदू यो यथा FHA कायते च |


--- Page 229 ---
224 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
: (3 os | |
परावरेषां परमं प्राक प्रसिद्ध
तद्‌ ब्रह्म तद्धेतुरनन्यदेकम्‌ 13011
yasmin yato yena ca yasya yasmai
yad yo yatha kurute karyate ca
[00700076507 paramari prak prasiddhari
tad brahma tad-dhetur ananyad ekam
yasmin—in whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the
supreme place of repose); yatah—from whom (everything emanates);
yena—by whom (everything is enacted); ca—also; yasya—to whom
everything belongs; yasmai—to whom (everything is offered); yat—
which; yah—who; yatha—as; kurute—executes; karyate—is per-
formed; ca—also; para-avaresam—of both, in the material and spiritual
existence; paramam—the supreme; prak—the origin; prasiddham—
well known to everyone; tat—that; brahma—the Supreme Brahman:
tat-hetuh—the cause of all causes; ananyat—having no other cause;
ekam —one without a second.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Brahman, Krsna, is the ultimate resting place and
source of everything. Everything is done by Him, everything
belongs to Him, and everything is offered to Him. He is the ulti-
mate objective, and whether acting or causing others to act, He is
the ultimate doer. There are many causes, high and low, but since
He is the cause of all causes, He is well known as the Supreme
Brahman who existed before all activities. He is one without a sec-
ond and has no other cause. I therefore offer my respects unto
Him.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the original cause, as
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (ahari sarvasya prabhavah). Even this ma-
terial world, which is conducted under the modes of material nature, is
caused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who therefore also has
an intimate relationship with the material world. If the material world


--- Page 230 ---
Text 31] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 225
were not a part of His body, the Supreme Lord, the supreme cause,
would be incomplete. Therefore we hear, vasudevah sarvam iti sa
mahatma sudurlabhah: if one knows that Vasudeva is the original cause
of all causes, he becomes a perfect mahatma.
The Brahma-sarnhita (5.1) declares:
tSvarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
“Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other
origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes.” The Supreme Brahman
(tad brahma) is the cause of all causes, but He has no cause. 4nadir adir
govindah sarva-karana-karanam: Govinda, Krsna, is the original cause
of all causes, but He has no cause for His appearance as Govinda.
Govinda expands in multifarious forms, but nevertheless they are one.
As confirmed by Madhvacarya, ananyah sadrsiabhavad eko rupady-
abhedatah: Krsna has no cause nor any equal, and He is one because His
various forms, as svarm$a and vibhinndars$a, are nondifferent from
Himself.
TEXT 31
(९ 5 ध
यच्छक्तयो वदतां वादिनां वै
विवादसंवादभुवो भवन्ति |
= = +
कुर्वन्ति चैषां महुरात्ममोहं
तसै नमोऽनन्तगुणाय भूम्ने 11321)
yac-chaktayo vadatarn 2৫017৫7 vai
vivada-sarhvada-bhuvo bhavanti
kurvanti caisarn muhur atma-moham
tasmai namo ’‘nanta-gundya bhimne
yat-Saktayah—whose multifarious potencies; wvadat@m—speaking
different philosophies; vadinam—of the speakers: wvai—indeed:


--- Page 231 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
vivada—of argument; sarmvada—and agreement; bhuvah—the causes;
bhavanti—are; kurvanti—create; ca—and; esam—of them (the
theorists); muhuh—continuously; atma-moham—bewilderment re-
garding the existence of the soul; tasmai—unto Him; namah—my re-
spectful obeisances; ananta—unlimited; gundya—possessing transcen-
dental attributes; bhimne—the all-pervading Godhead.
TRANSLATION

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-pervading
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who possesses unlimited tran-
scendental qualities. Acting from within the cores of the hearts of
all philosophers, who propagate various views, He causes them to
forget their own souls while sometimes agreeing and sometimes
disagreeing among themselves. Thus He creates within this ma-
terial world a situation in which they are unable to come to a con-
clusion. I offer my obeisances unto Him.

PURPORT

Since time immemorial or since the creation of the cosmic manifesta-
tion, the conditioned souls have formed various parties of philosophical
speculation, but this is not true of the devotees. Nondevotees have dif-
ferent ideas of creation, maintenance and annihilation, and therefore
they are called vadis and prativadis—proponents and counterproponents.
It is understood from the statement of Mahabharata that there are many
munis, or speculators:

tarko ‘pratisthah Srutayo vibhinna
nasav rsir yasya matam na bhinnam
All speculators must disagree with other speculators; otherwise, why
should there be so many opposing parties concerned with ascertaining
the supreme cause?

Philosophy means finding the ultimate cause. As Vedanta-sitra very
reasonably says, athato brahma-jijiasa: human life is meant for under-
standing the ultimate cause. Devotees accept that the ultimate cause is
Krsna because this conclusion is supported by all Vedic literature and


--- Page 232 ---
Text 31] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 227
also by Krsna Himself, who says, aham sarvasya prabhavah: "नृ am the
source of everything.” Devotees have no problem understanding the
ultimate cause of everything, but nondevotees must face many opposing
elements because everyone who wants to be a prominent philosopher in-
vents his own way. In India there are many parties of philosophers, such
as the dvaita-vadis, advaita-vadis, vaisesikas, mimarsakas, Mayavadis
and svabhava-vadis, and each of them opposes the others. Similarly, in
the Western countries there are also many philosophers with different
views of creation, life, maintenance and annihilation. Thus it is un-
doubtedly a fact that there are countless philosophers throughout the
world, each of them contradicting the others.

Now, one might ask why there are so many philosophers if the ulti-
mate goal of philosophy is one. Undoubtedly the ultimate cause is one —
the Supreme Brahman. As Arjuna told Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (10.12):

parari brahma param dhama
pavitram [00707710778 bhavan
purusam $asvatarn divyam
adi-devam ajar vibhum
“You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and
purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the
primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-
pervading beauty.” Nondevotee speculators, however, do not accept an
ultimate cause (sarva-karana-karanam). Because they are ignorant and
bewildered concerning the soul and its activities, even though some of
them have a vague idea of the soul, many controversies arise, and the
philosophical speculators can never reach a conclusion. All of these
speculators are envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as
Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (16.19-20):
tan aham dvisatah kriran
samsaresu naradhaman
ksipamy ajasram asubhan
asurisv eva yonisu


--- Page 233 ---
228 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4.
asurim yonim apannd
miidha janmani janmani
mam aprapyaiva kaunteya
tato yanty adhamar gatim
“Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among
men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various
demoniac species of life. Attaining repeated birth among the species of
demoniac life, such persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink
down to the most abominable type of existence.’” Because of their envy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nondevotees are born in demoniac
families life after life. They are great offenders, and because of their
offenses the Supreme Lord keeps them always bewildered. Kurvanti
caisari muhur atma-moham: the Lord, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, purposely keeps them in darkness (atma-moham).
The great authority Parasara, the father of Vyasadeva, explains the
Supreme Personality of Godhead thus:
JjAana-sakti-balaisvarya-
virya-tejarsy asesatah
bhagavac-chabda-vacyani
vina heyair gunadibhih
The demoniac speculators cannot understand the transcendental
qualities, form, pastimes, strength, knowledge and opulence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, which are all free from material con-
tamination (vina heyair gunadibhih). These speculators are envious of
the existence of the Lord. Jagad ahur anisvaram: their conclusion is that
the entire cosmic manifestation has no controller, but is just working
naturally. Thus they are kept in constant darkness, birth after birth, and
cannot understand the real cause of all causes. This is the reason why
there are so many schools of philosophical speculation.
TEXT 32
अस्तीति नास्तीति च बस्तुनिष्टयो-
रेकस्ययोर्भि्नविरुद्रधमेणोः ।


--- Page 234 ---
Text 32] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 229
अवेक्षितं किञ्चन योगसांख्ययोः
समं परं द्यनुङ्कलं बृहत्तत्‌ ॥२२॥
astiti nastiti ca vastu-nisthayor
eka-sthayor bhinna-viruddha-dharmanoh
aveksitarn kificana yoga-sarikhyayoh
samam param hy anukilam brhat tat

asti—there is; iti—thus; na—not; asti—there is; iti—thus; ca—and;
vastu-nisthayoh—professing knowledge of the ultimate cause; eka-
sthayoh—with one and the same subject matter, establishing Brahman;
bhinna —demonstrating different; viruddha-dharmanoh—and opposing
characteristics; aveksitam —perceived; kificana—that something which;
yoga-sankhyayoh—of mystic yoga and the Sankhya philosophy (analysis
of the ways of nature); samam—the same; param —transcendental ;
hi—indeed; anukiilam —dwelling place; brhat tat—that ultimate cause.

TRANSLATION

There are two parties —namely, the theists and the atheists. The
theist, who accepts the Supersoul, finds the spiritual cause
through mystic yoga. The Sankhyite, however, who merely
analyzes the material elements, comes to a conclusion of imper-
sonalism and does not accept a supreme cause— whether Bhagavan,
Paramatma or even Brahman. Instead, he is preoccupied with the
superfluous, external activities of material nature. Ultimately,
however, both parties demonstrate the Absolute Truth because al-
though they offer opposing statements, their object is the same
ultimate cause. They are both approaching the same Supreme
Brahman, to whom I offer my respectful obeisances.

PURPORT

Actually there are two sides to this argument. Some say that the Ab-
solute has no form (nira@kara), and others say that the Absolute has a
form (sakara). Therefore the word “form” is the common factor, al-
though some accept it (asti or astika) whereas others try to negate it


--- Page 235 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
(nasti or nastika). Since the devotee considers the word “form” (akara)
the common factor for both, he offers his respectful obeisances to the
form, although others may go on arguing about whether the Absolute has
a form or not.

In this verse the word yoga-sankhyayoh is very important. Yoga
means bhakti-yoga because yogis also accept the existence of the all-
pervading Supreme Soul and try to see that Supreme Soul within their
hearts. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.13.1), dhyanavasthita-tad-
gatena manasa pasyanti yam yoginah. The devotee tries to come directly
in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas the yogi
tries to find the Supersoul within the heart by meditation. Thus, both
directly and indirectly, yoga means bhakti-yoga. Sankhya, however,
means physical study of the cosmic situation through speculative knowl-
edge. This is generally known as jiana-sastra. The Sankhyites are at-
tached to the impersonal Brahman, but the Absolute Truth is known in
three ways. Brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti sabdyate: the Absolute
Truth is one, but some accept Him as impersonal Brahman, some as the
Supersoul existing everywhere, and some as Bhagavan, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The central point is the Absolute Truth.

Although the impersonalists and personalists fight with one another,
they focus upon the same Parabrahman, the same Absolute Truth. In the
‘yoga-$astras, Krsna is described as follows: krsnam pisarigambaram am-
bujeksanari catur-bhujarn sarikha-gadady-udayudham. Thus the pleas-
ing appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s bodily features,
His limbs and His dress are described. The sarikhya-sastra, however,
denies the existence of the Lord’s transcendental form. The sarnkhya-
Sastra says that the Supreme Absolute Truth has no hands, no legs and no
name: hy anama-ripe-guna-pani-padam acaksur asrotram ekam ad-
vittyam api nama-ripddikarn nasti. The Vedic mantras say, apani-pado
Javano grahita: the Supreme Lord has no legs and hands, but He can ac-
cept whatever is offered to Him. Actually such statements accept that the
Supreme has hands and legs, but deny that He has material hands and
legs. This is why the Absolute is called aprakrta. Krsna. the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, has a sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, a form of eter-
nity, knowledge and bliss, not a material form. The Sankhyites, or
Jadnis, deny the material form, and the devotees also know very well that
the Absolute Truth, Bhagavan, has no material form.


--- Page 236 ---
Text 32] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 231
Svarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
“Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other
origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes.” The conception of the
Absolute without hands and legs and the conception of the Absolute with
hands and legs are apparently contradictory, but they both coincide with
the same truth about the Supreme Absolute Person. Therefore the word
vastu-nisthayoh, which is used herein, indicates that both the yogis and
Sankhyites have faith in the reality, but are arguing about it from the
different viewpoints of material and spiritual identities. Parabrahman,
or brhat, is the common point. The Sankhyites and yogis are both situ-
ated in that same Brahman, but they differ because of different angles of
vision.

The directions given by the bhakti-Sastra point one in the perfect
direction because the Supreme Personality of Godhead says in
Bhagavad-gita, bhaktya mam abhijanati: “Only by devotional service
am I to be known.” The bhaktas know that the Supreme Person has no
material form, whereas the janis simply deny the material form. One
should therefore take shelter of the bhakti-marga, the path of devotion;
then everything will be clear. Jiianis concentrate on the virata-ripa, the
gigantic universal form of the Lord. This is a good system in the begin-
ning for those who are extremely materialistic, but there is no need to
think continuously of the virdta-riipa. When Arjuna was shown the
virata-ripa of Krsna, he saw it, but he did not want to see it perpetually.
He therefore requested the Lord to return to His original form as two-
armed Krsna. In conclusion, learned scholars find no contradictions in
the devotees’ concentration upon the spiritual form of the Lord (&varah
paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah). In this regard, Srila
Madhvacarya says that less intelligent nondevotees think that their con-
clusion is the ultimate, but because devotees are completely learned, they
can understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate
goal.


--- Page 237 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
TEXT 33
योऽनुग्रहाथं भजतां पादमूल-
मनामरूपो भगवाननन्तः ।
©
नामानि रूपाणि च जन्मकमेभि-
मजे स मद्यं परमः प्रसीदतु 1330
yo ‘nugrahartharm bhajatam pada-milam
anama-ripo bhagavan anantah
namani rapani ca janma-karmabhir
bheje sa mahyam paramah prasidatu
yah—who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); anugraha-
artham—to show His causeless mercy; bhajatam—to the devotees who
always render devotional service; pada-mitlam—to His transcendental
lotus feet; anama—with no material name; ripah—or material form;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: anantah—unlimited,
all-pervading and eternally existing; ndamdni—transcendental holy
names; rapani—His transcendental forms; ca—also; janma-kar-
mabhih—with His transcendental birth and activities; bheje—
manifests; sah—He; mahyam—unto me; paramah—the Supreme;
prasidatu—may He be merciful.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is inconceivably
opulent, who is devoid of all material names, forms and pastimes,
and who is all-pervading, is especially merciful to the devotees
who worship His lotus feet. Thus He exhibits transcendental forms
and names with His different pastimes. May that Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, whose form is eternal and full of knowledge
and bliss, be merciful to me.
PURPORT
In regard to the significant word anama-riapah, Sri Sridhara Svami
says, prakrta-nama-ripa-rahito ‘pi. The word andma, which means
“having no name,” indicates that the Supreme Personality of Godhead


--- Page 238 ---
Text 33] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 233
has no material name. Simply by chanting the name of Narayana to call
his son, Ajamila attained salvation. This means that Narayana is not an
ordinary mundane name; it is nonmaterial. The word anama, therefore,
indicates that the names of the Supreme Lord do not belong to this ma-
terial world. The vibration of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra is not a ma-
terial sound, and similarly the form of the Lord and His appearance and
activities are all nonmaterial. To show His causeless mercy to the devo-
tees, as well as to the nondevotees, Krsna, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, appears in this material world with names, forms and pastimes,
all of which are transcendental. Unintelligent men who cannot under-
stand this think that these names, forms and pastimes are material, and
therefore they deny that He has a name or a form.

Considered with scrutiny, the conclusion of nondevotees, who say that
God has no name, and that of devotees, who know that His name is not
material, are practically the same. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
has no material name, form, birth, appearance or disappearance, but
nevertheless, He takes His birth (janma). As stated in Bhagavad-gita
(4.6):

ajo ‘pi sann avyayatma
bhatanam [90070 pi san
prakrtimn svam adhisthaya
sambhavamy atma-mayaya
Although the Lord is unborn (aja) and His body never undergoes ma-
terial changes, He nevertheless appears as an incarnation, maintaining
Himself always in the transcendental stage (suddha-sattva). Thus He ex-
hibits His transcendental forms, names and activities. That is His special
mercy toward His devotees. Others may continue merely arguing about
whether the Absolute Truth has form or not, but when a devotee. by the
grace of the Lord, sees the Lord personally, he becomes spiritually
ecstatic.

Unintelligent persons say that the Lord does nothing. Actually He has
nothing to do, but nevertheless He has to do everything, because without
His sanction no one can do anything. The unintelligent, however, cannot
see how He is working and how the entire material nature is working
under His direction. His different potencies work perfectly.


--- Page 239 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
na tasya karyam karanarm ca vidyate
na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate
parasya Saktir vividhaiva Sriyate
svabhaviki jaana-bala-kriya ca
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8)
He has nothing to do personally, for since His potencies are perfect,
everything is immediately done by His will. Persons to whom the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is not revealed cannot see how He is
working, and therefore they think that even if there is God, He has
nothing to do or has no particular name.

Actually the Lord’s name already exists because of His transcendental
activities. The Lord is sometimes called guna-karma-nama because He is
named according to His transcendental activities. For example, Krsna
means “‘all-attractive.”” This is the Lord’s name because His transcenden-
tal qualities make Him very attractive. As a small boy He lifted
Govardhana Hill and in His childhood He killed many demons. Such ac-
tivities are very attractive, and therefore He is sometimes called
Giridhari, Madhustidana, Agha-nisidana and so on. Because He acted as
the son of Nanda Maharaja, He is called Nanda-tanuja. These names
already exist, but since nondevotees cannot understand the names of the
Lord, He is sometimes called anama, or nameless. This means that he
has no material names. All His activities are spiritual, and therefore He
has spiritual names.

Generally, less intelligent men are under the impression that the Lord
has no form. Therefore He appears in His original form as Krsna, sac-
cid-ananda-vigraha, to carry out His mission of participating in the Bat-
tle of Kuruksetra and pastimes to protect the devotees and vanquish the
demons (paritranaya sadhinarm vinasaya ca duskrtam). This is His
mercy. For those who think that He has no form and no work to do,
Krsna comes to show that indeed He works. He works so gloriously that
no one else can perform such uncommon acts. Although He appeared as a
human being, He married 16,108 wives, which is impossible for a
human being to do. The Lord performs such activities to show people
how great He is, how affectionate He is and how merciful He is. Although
His original name is Krsna (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam), He acts in un-
limited ways, and therefore according to His work He has many, many
thousands of names.


--- Page 240 ---
Text 34] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 235
TEXT 34
2 A +
यः TEATS
यथाशयं देहगतो विभाति ।
यथानिलः पाथिवमाध्रितो गुणं
स ईश्वरो FHA मनोरथम्‌ ।।২৩।।
yah prakrtair jigna-pathair [वाक्ते
yathasayarm deha-gato vibhati
yathanilah parthivam asrito gunam
sa [50070 me kurutari manoratham
yah—who; prakrtaih—lower grade; jiana-pathaih—by the paths of
worship; jananam—of all living entities; yatha-asayam—according to
the desire; deha-gatah—situated within the core of the heart; vibhati—
manifests; yatha—just as; anilah—the air; parthivam—earthly;
asritah—receiving; gunam—the quality (like flavor and color); sah—
He; isvarah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; me—my;
kurutam —may He fulfill; manoratham —desire (for devotional service).
TRANSLATION
As the air carries various characteristics of the physical ele-
ments, like the aroma of a flower or colors resulting from a mix-
ture of dust in the air, the Lord appears through lower systems of
worship according to one’s desires, although He appears as the
demigods and not in His original form. What is the use of these
other forms? May the original Supreme Personality of Godhead
please fulfill my desires.
PURPORT

The impersonalists imagine the various demigods to be forms of
the Lord. For example, the Mayavadis worship five demigods
(parnicopasana). They do not actually believe in the form of the Lord, but
for the sake of worship they imagine some form to be God. Generally
they imagine a form of Visnu, a form of Siva, and forms of Ganesa, the


--- Page 241 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
sun-god and Durga. This is called paficopasana. Daksa, however, wanted
to worship not an imaginary form, but the supreme form of Lord Krsna.

In this regard, Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura describes the dif-
ference between the Supreme Personality of Godhead and an ordinary
living being. As pointed out in a previous verse, sarvam puman veda
gunams ca taj-jiio na veda sarva-jiam anantam ide: the omnipotent
Supreme Lord knows everything, but the living being does not actually
know the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-
gita, “I know everything, but no one knows Me.” This is the difference
between the Supreme Lord and an ordinary living being. In a prayer in
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Queen Kunti says, “My dear Lord, You exist inside
and outside, yet no one can see You.”

The conditioned soul cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by speculative knowledge or by imagination. One must
therefore know the Supreme Personality of Godhead by the grace of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He reveals Himself, but He cannot be
understood by speculation. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.29):

athapi te deva padambuja-dvaya-
prasada-lesanugrhita eva hi
janati tattvar bhagavan-mahimno
na canya eko ’pi 08707 vicinvan
“My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your
lotus feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those
who speculate to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
unable to know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for
many years.”

This is the verdict of the sastra. An ordinary man may be a great phi-
losopher and may speculate upon what the Absolute Truth is, what His
form is and where He is existing, but he cannot understand these truths.
Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah: one can under-
stand the Supreme Personality of Godhead only through devotional ser-
vice. This is also explained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Him-
self in Bhagavad-gita (18.55). Bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas
casmi tattvatah: “One can understand the Supreme Personality of God-
head as He is only by devotional service.” Unintelligent persons want to


--- Page 242 ---
Text 34] The Harhsa-guhya Prayers 237
imagine or concoct a form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but
devotees want to worship the actual Personality of Godhead. Therefore
Daksa prays, “One may think of You as personal, impersonal or imagi-
nary, but I wish to pray to Your Lordship that You fulfill my desires to
see You as You actually are.”

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that this verse is es-
pecially meant for the impersonalist, who thinks that he himself is the
Supreme because there is no difference between the living being and
God. The Mayavadi philosopher thinks that there is only one Supreme
Truth and that he is also that Supreme Truth. Actually this is not knowl-
edge but foolishness, and this verse is especially meant for such fools,
whose knowledge has been stolen by illusion (mayayapahrta-jianah).
Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that such persons, jiani-maninah,
think themselves very advanced, but actually they are unintelligent.

In regard to this verse, Srila Madhvacarya says:

svadeha-sthari hari prahur
adhama jivam eva tu
madhyamas capy anirnitari
18৮৫0 bhinnarm janardanam
There are three classes of men —the lowest (adhama), those in the mid-
dle (madhyama), and the best (uttama). The lowest (adhama) think that
there is no difference between God and the living entity except that the
living entity is under designations whereas the Absolute Truth has no
designations. In their opinion, as soon as the designations of the material
body are dissolved, the jiva, the living entity, will mix with the Supreme.
They give the argument of ghatakasa-patakasa, in which the body is
compared to a pot with the sky within and the sky without. When the pot
breaks, the sky inside becomes one with the sky outside, and so the im-
personalists say that the living being becomes one with the Supreme.
This is their argument, but Srila Madhvacarya says that such an argu-
ment is put forward by the lowest class of men. Another class of men
cannot ascertain what the actual form of the Supreme is, but they agree
that there is a Supreme who controls the activities of the ordinary living
being. Such philosophers are accepted as mediocre. The best, however,
are those who understand the Supreme Lord (sac-cid-ananda-vigraha).


--- Page 243 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
Parnanandadi-gunakar sarva-jiva-vilaksanam: His form is completely
spiritual, full of bliss, and completely distinct from that of the condi-
tioned soul or any other living entity. Uttamas tu harim prahus tarata-
myena tesu ca: such philosophers are the best because they know that
the Supreme Personality of Godhead reveals Himself differently to
worshipers in various modes of material nature. They know that there
are thirty-three million demigods just to convince the conditioned soul
that there is a supreme power and to induce him to agree to worship one
of these demigods so that by the association of devotees he may be able to
understand that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As Lord
Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita, mattah 70070107077 nanyat kificid asti
dhananjaya: “There is no truth superior to Me.” Aham adir hi
devanam: “I am the origin of all the demigods.” Aham sarvasya
prabhavah: “I am superior to everyone, even Lord Brahma, Lord Siva
and the other demigods.”” These are the conclusions of the astra, and
one who accepts these conclusions should be considered a first-class phi-
losopher. Such a philosopher knows that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the Lord of the demigods (deva-devesvarari siitram anan-
dam prana-vedinah).
TEXTS 35-39
श्रीञ्युक उवाच

इति स्तुतः संस्तुवतः स॒ gree |

प्रादुरासीत्‌ करुशरेष्ठ भगवान्‌ भक्तवत्सलः ॥३५॥

कृतपादः सुपर्णांसे श्रलम्बाष्टमहाय्जः |

्
चक्रशङ्खासिचर्मेषुधनुःपाञ्चगदाधरः TEE]
पीतवासा घनहयामः प्रसन्नवदनेक्षणः |
- EN

वनमाखानिवीताङ्गो टसच्द्रीवरसकोस्तुमः 11391

महाकिरीटकटकः स्पुरन्मकरङ्ण्डलः |

काञच्यङ्कुलीयवलयन्‌ पुराङ्गद भूषितः ॥३८॥

= ~ ~ „ ~

त्रैलोक्यमोहनं सूपं बिभ्रत्‌ त्रियुवनेश्वरः ।

- EN রড
TA नारदनन्दाद्यैः TEL: सुरयुथैः ।
= ooo © oa
स्तूयमाना ऽुगायाद्धः सिद्ध गन्धवंचारणः ॥२९॥


--- Page 244 ---
Text 39] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 239
sri-Suka uvaca
iti stutah samstuvatah
sa tasminn aghamarsane
pradurasit kuru-srestha
bhagavan bhakta-vatsalah
krta-padah suparnarse
pralambasta-mahabhujah
cakra-sarikhasi-carmesu-
dhanuh-pasa-gada-dharah
pita-vasa ghana-Syamah
prasanna-vadaneksanah
vana-mala-nivitango
lasac-chrivatsa-kaustubhah
maha-kirita-katakah
sphuran-makara-kundalah
karncy-anguliya-valaya-
nipurangada-bhisitah
trailokya-mohanam ripam
bibhrat tribhuvanesvarah
vrto narada-nandadyaih
parsadaih sura-yithapaih
stityamano ’nugayadbhih
siddha-gandharva-caranaih
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; stutah—
being praised; samstuvatah—of Daksa, who was offering prayers; sah—
that Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasmin—in that; aghamarsane —
holy place celebrated as Aghamarsana; pradurasit—appeared; kuru-
srestha—O best of the Kuru dynasty; bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; bhakta-vatsalah—who is very kind to His devotees;
krta-padah—whose lotus feet were placed; suparna-amse—on the
shoulders of His carrier, Garuda; pralamba—very long; asta-maha-
bhujah—possessing eight mighty arms; cakra—disc; Sarkha—


--- Page 245 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
conchshell; asi—sword; carma—shield; isu—arrow; dhanuh—bow;
pdsa—rope; gada—club; dharah—holding; pita-vasah—with yellow
garments; ghana-§yamah—whose bodily hue was intense blue-black;
prasanna—very cheerful; vadana—whose face; thksanah—and glance;
vana-mala—by a garland of forest flowers; nivita-arigah—whose body
was adorned from the neck down to the feet; lasat—shining; Srivatsa-
kaustubhah—the jewel known as Kaustubha and the mark of Srivatsa:
maha-kirita—of a very large and gorgeous helmet; katakah—a circle;
sphurat—glittering; makara-kundalah—earrings resembling sharks;
kanci—with a belt; anguliya—finger rings; wvalaya—bracelets;
niapura—ankle bells; arngada—upper-arm bracelets; bhitsitah—deco-
rated; trai-lokya-mohanam—captivating the three worlds; ripam—His
bodily features; bibhrat—shining; tri-bhuvana—of the three worlds;
iSvarah—the Supreme Lord; vrtah—surrounded; narada—by exalted
devotees, headed by Narada; nanda-adyaih—and others, like Nanda;
parsadaih—who are all eternal associates; sura-yiuthapaih—as well as
by the heads of the demigods; stiyamanah—being glorified;
anugayadbhih—singing after Him; siddha-gandharva-caranaih—by
the Siddhas, Gandharvas and Caranas.
TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: The Supreme Personality of God-
head, Hari, who is extremely affectionate to His devotees, was very
pleased by the prayers offered by Daksa, and thus He appeared at
that holy place known as Aghamarsana. O Maharaja Pariksit, best
of the Kuru dynasty, the Lord’s lotus feet rested on the shoulders
of His carrier, Garuda, and He appeared with eight long, mighty,
very beautiful arms. In His hands He held a disc, conchshell,
sword, shield, arrow, bow, rope and club—in each hand a different
weapon, all brilliantly shining. His garments were yellow and His
bodily hue deep bluish. His eyes and face were very cheerful, and
from His neck to His feet hung a long garland of flowers. His chest
was decorated with the Kaustubha jewel and the mark of Srivatsa.
On His head was a gorgeous round helmet, and His ears were deco-
rated with earrings resembling sharks. All these ornaments were
uncommonly beautiful. The Lord wore a golden belt on His waist,
bracelets on His arms, rings on His fingers, and ankle bells on His


--- Page 246 ---
Text 41] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 241
feet. Thus decorated by various ornaments, Lord Hari, who is at-
tractive to all the living entities of the three worlds, is known as
Purusottama, the best personality. He was accompanied by great
devotees like Narada, Nanda and all the principal demigods, led by
the heavenly king, Indra, and the residents of various upper
planetary systems such as Siddhaloka, Gandharvaloka and
Caranaloka. Situated on both sides of the Lord and behind Him as
well, these devotees offered Him prayers continuously.
TEXT 40
रूपं तन्महदाश्रयं विचक्ष्यागतसाध्वसः ।
ननाम दण्डवद्‌ भूमौ प्रहृष्टात्मा प्रजापतिः ।।४०॥
rapa tan mahad-ascaryam
vicaksyagata-sadhvasah
nanama dandavad bhiaimau
prahrstatma prajapatih
ripam —transcendental form; tat—that; mahat-ascaryam —greatly
wonderful; vicaksya—seeing; agata-sadhvasah—in the beginning be-
coming afraid; nanama—offered obeisances; danda-vat—like a stick;
bhitmau—on the ground; prahrsta-atma—being pleased in his body,
mind and soul; prajapatih—the prajapati known as Daksa.
TRANSLATION
Seeing that wonderful and effulgent form of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Prajapati Daksa was first somewhat afraid,
but then he was very pleased to see the Lord, and he fell to the
ground like a stick [dandavat] to offer his respects to the Lord.
TEXT 41
न किञश्चनोदीरयितमश्चकत्‌ লীলা gan |
= ९ >
आपूरितमने दारहदिन्य হল निरे; nen
na kincanodirayitum
asakat tivraya muda


--- Page 247 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
apirita-manodvarair
hradinya iva nirjharaih
na—not; kificana—anything; udirayitum—to speak; asakat—he was
able; tivraya—by very great; muda—happiness; apirita—filled;
manah-dvaraih—by the senses; hradinyah—the rivers; iva—like; nir-
jharaih—Dby torrents from the mountain.
TRANSLATION
As rivers are filled by water flowing from a mountain, all of
Daksa’s senses were filled with pleasure. Because of his highly ele-
vated happiness, Daksa could not say anything, but simply
remained flat on the ground.
PURPORT
When one actually realizes or sees the Supreme Personality of God-
head, he is filled with complete happiness. For example, when Dhruva
Maharaja saw the Lord in his presence, he said, svamin krtartho smi
vara na yace: “My dear Lord, I have nothing to ask from You. Now I
am completely satisfied.” Similarly, when Prajapati Daksa saw the
Supreme Lord in his presence, he simply fell flat, unable to speak or ask
Him for anything.
TEXT 42
तं तथावनतं मक्तं प्रजाकामं प्रजापतिम्‌ |
~ <
चित्तज्ञः सर्वभूतानामिदमाह जनार्दनः ॥४२॥
tam tathavanatari bhaktam
praja-kamar prajapatim
citta-jiiah sarva-bhitanam
idam aha janardanah
tam —him (Prajapati Daksa); tatha—in that way; avanatam—pros-
trated before Him; bhaktam —a great devotee; praja-kamam—desiring
to increase the population; prajapatim—unto the prajapati (Daksa);


--- Page 248 ---
Text 43] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 243
citta-jiiah —who can understand the hearts; sarva-bhitanam—of all liv-
ing entities; idam—this; aha—said; janardanah—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who can appease everyone’s desires.
TRANSLATION
Although Prajapati Daksa could not say anything, when the
Lord, who knows everyone’s heart, saw His devotee prostrate in
that manner and desiring to increase the population, He addressed
him as follows.
TEXT 43
श्रीभगवानुवाच
प्राचेतस महाभाग संसिद्धस्तपसा भवान्‌ |
यच्छ्रद्धया मत्परया मयि भावं परं गतः ॥ও২॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca
pracetasa maha-bhaga
samsiddhas tapasa bhavan
yac chraddhaya mat-paraya
mayi bhava param gatah
Sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pra-
cetasa—O My dear Pracetasa; maha-bhaga—O you who are so fortu-
nate; samsiddhah—perfected; tapasa—by your austerities; bhavan—
your good self: yat—because; sraddhaya —by great faith, mat-paraya—
whose object is Me: mayi—in Me: bhavam—ecstasy: param —supreme:
gatah— attained.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O most fortunate
Pracetasa, because of your great faith in Me, you have attained the
supreme devotional ecstasy. Indeed, because of your austerities,
combined with exalted devotion, your life is now successful. You
have achieved complete perfection.


--- Page 249 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
PURPORT
As the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gita (8.15), one reaches
the highest perfection when he attains the fortune of realizing the
Supreme Personality of Godhead:
mam upetya punar janma
duhkhalayam asasvatam
napnuvanti mahatmanah
sarisiddhir paramar gatah
“After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion, never
return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they
have attained the highest perfection.” Therefore the Krsna conscious-
ness movement teaches one to follow the path toward the topmost perfec-
tion simply by performing devotional service.
TEXT 44
प्रीतोऽहं ते प्रजानाथ यत्तेऽस्योदुब्ंहणं तपः |
EY - ৬
ममंष कामा भूतानां यद्‌ भूयासुर्विभूतयः ॥४४॥
prito "harm te praja-natha
yat te ’syodbrmhanari tapah
mamaisa kamo bhiatanarm
yad bhwyasur vibhiatayah
pritah—very much pleased; aham—1I; te—with you; praja-natha—0O
King of population; yat—because; te—your; asya—of this material
world; udbrmhanam —causing increase; tapah—austerity; mama—My;
esah—this; kamah—desire; bhiatanam—of the living entities; yat—
which; bhiyasuh —may there be; vibhitayah—advancement in all
respects.
TRANSLATION
My dear Prajapati Daksa, you have performed extreme
austerities for the welfare and growth of the world. My desire also
is that everyone within this world be happy. I am therefore very


--- Page 250 ---
Text 44] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 245
pleased with you because you are endeavoring to fulfill My desire
for the welfare of the entire world.
PURPORT
After every dissolution of the material cosmos, all the living entities
take shelter in the body of Karanodaka$ayi Visnu, and when creation
takes place again, they come forth from His body in their various species
to resume their activities. Why does the creation take place in such a way
that the living entities are put into conditioned life to suffer the threefold
miseries imposed upon them by the material nature? Here the Lord says
to Daksa, “You desire to benefit all living entities, and that is also My
desire.” The living entities who come in contact with the material world
are meant to be corrected. All the living entities within this material
world have revolted against the service of the Lord, and therefore they
remain within this material world as ever-conditioned, nitya-baddha,
taking birth again and again. There is a chance, of course, of their being
liberated, but nevertheless the conditioned souls, not taking advantage of
this opportunity, continue in a life of sense enjoyment, and thus they are
punished by birth and death again and again. This is the law of nature.
As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (7.14):
daivi hy esa gunamayi
mama maya duratyayd
mam eva ye prapadyante
mayam etam taranti te
“This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me
can easily cross beyond it.”” Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita (15.7) the Lord
says:
mamaivarso jiva-loke
Jjiva-bhitah sandatanah
manah sasthanindriyani
prakrti-sthani karsati
“The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six


--- Page 251 ---
246 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
senses, which include the mind.” The living entity's struggle for exis-
tence within the material world is due to his rebellious nature. Unless a
living entity surrenders to Krsna, he must continue this life of struggle.
The Krsna consciousness movement is not a fad. It is a bona fide
movement intended to promote the welfare of all conditioned souls by
trying to elevate everyone to the platform of Krsna consciousness. If one
does not come to this platform, he must continue in material existence
perpetually, sometimes in the upper planets and sometimes in the lower
planets. As confirmed in Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 20.118), kabhu
svarge uthaya, kabhu narake dubaya: the conditioned soul sometimes
descends into nescience and sometimes gets some relief by being
relatively freed from it. This is the life of the conditioned soul.
Prajapati Daksa is trying to benefit the conditioned souls by begetting
them to give them a life with a chance for liberation. Liberation means
surrender to Krsna. If one begets children with the purpose of training
them to surrender to Krsna, fatherhood is very good. Similarly, when the
spiritual master trains the conditioned souls to become Krsna conscious,
his position is successful. If one gives the conditioned souls a chance to
become Krsna conscious, all his activities are approved by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is extremely pleased, as stated here (prito
’ham). Following the examples of the previous dcaryas, all the members
of the Krsna consciousness movement should try to benefit the condi-
tioned souls by inducing them to become Krsna conscious and giving
them all facilities to do so. Such activities constitute real welfare work.
By such activities, a preacher or anyone who endeavors to spread Krsna
consciousness is recognized by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gita (18.68-69):
ya 077 paramarh guhyarm
mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyati
bhaktirh mayi param krtva
mam evaisyaty asamsayah
na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamah
bhavita na ca me tasmad
anyah priyataro bhuvi


--- Page 252 ---
Text 45] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 247
“For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional
service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me. There is no
servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one
more dear.”
TEXT 45
रह्मा भवो मवन्तश्च मनवो QT ।
विभूतयो मम ধীনা भूतानां भूतिहेतवः neu)
brahma bhavo bhavantas ca
manavo vibudhesvarah
vibhatayo mama hy eta
bhitanar bhiiti-hetavah

brahma—Lord Brahmi; bhavah—Lord Siva; bhavantah—all of you
prajapatis; ca—and; manavah—the Manus; vibudha-isvarah—all the
different demigods (such as the sun, the moon, Venus, Mars and Jupiter,
who are all in charge of various activities for the welfare of the world) ;
vibhiitayah—expansions of energy; mama—My; hi—indeed; etah—all
these; bhatanam—of all the living entities; bhiti—of welfare;
hetavah—causes.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, the Manus, all the other demigods in
the higher planetary systems, and you prajapatis, who are increas-
ing the population, are working for the benefit of all living
entities. Thus you expansions of My marginal energy are
incarnations of My various qualities.

PURPORT

There are various types of incarnations or expansions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The expansions of His personal self, or wvisnu-
tattva, are called svarmsa expansions, whereas the living entities, who are
not visnu-tattva but jiva-tattva, are called vibhinnamsa, separated ex-
pansions. Although Prajapati Daksa is not on the same level as Lord
Brahma and Lord Siva, he is compared to them because he engages in the


--- Page 253 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
service of the Lord. In the service of the Personality of Godhead, it is not
that Lord Brahma is considered very great while an ordinary human
being trying to preach the glories of the Lord is considered very low.
There are no such distinctions. Regardless of whether materially high or
materially low, anyone engaged in the service of the Lord is spiritually
very dear to Him. In this regard, Srila Madhvacarya gives this quotation
from the Tantra-nirnaya:
viesa-vyakti-patratvad
brahmadyas tu vibhitayah
tad-antaryaminas ০০১৮৫
matsyadya vibhavah smrtah
From Lord Brahma down, all the living entities engaged in the service of
the Lord are extraordinary and are called vibhiti. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gita (10.41):
yad yad vibhatimat sattvarm
srimad urjitam eva va
tat tad evavagaccha tvam
mama tejo- th$a-sambhavam
“Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but
a spark of My splendor.” A living entity especially empowered to act on
behalf of the Lord is called vibhiiti, whereas the visnu-tattva incarnations
of the Lord, such as the Matsya avatara (kesava dhrta-mina-sarira jaya
Jagad-isa hare). are called vibhava.
TEXT 46
तपो मे हृदयं ब्रह्मस्तनुर्विद्या Grave: |
- Q
अङ्गानि ক্ষবনা जाता धमे आत्मासवः सुराः ।४६।।
tapo me hrdayari brahmaris
tanur vidya kriyakrtih
arigani kratavo jata
dharma atmasavah surah


--- Page 254 ---
Text 46] The Haritsa-guhya Prayers 249

tapah—austerities like mental control, mystic yoga and meditation;
me—My; hrdayam—heart; brahman—O brahmana; tanuh—the body;
vidya—the knowledge derived from Vedic scripture; kriyd—spiritual
activities; akrtih—form; arigani—the limbs of the body; kratavah—the
ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices mentioned in the Vedic literature;
Jjatah—completed; dharmah—the religious principles for executing the
ritualistic ceremonies; atma—My soul; asavah—life airs; surah—the
demigods who execute My orders in different departments of the ma-
terial world.

TRANSLATION

My dear brahmana, austerity in the form of meditation is My
heart, Vedic knowledge in the form of hymns and mantras con-
stitute My body, and spiritual activities and ecstatic emotions are
My actual form. The ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices, when
properly conducted, are the various limbs of My body, the unseen
good fortune proceeding from pious or spiritual activities con-
stitutes My mind, and the demigods who execute My orders in
various departments are My life and soul.

PURPORT

Sometimes atheists argue that since God is invisible to their eyes, they
do not believe in God. For them the Supreme Lord is describing a method
by which one can see God in His impersonal form. Intelligent persons can
see God in His personal form, as stated in the $astras, but if one is very
eager to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead immediately, face to
face, he can see the Supreme Lord through this description, which
portrays the various internal and external parts of His body.

To engage in tapasya, or denial of material activities, is the first prin-
ciple of spiritual life. Then there are spiritual activities, such as the per-
formance of Vedic ritualistic sacrifices, study of the Vedic knowledge,
meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and chanting of
the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. One should also respect the demigods and
understand how they are situated, how they act and how they manage the
activities of the various departments of this material world. In this way
one can see how God is existing and how everything is managed perfectly


--- Page 255 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
because of the presence of the Supreme Lord. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gita (9.10):
mayadhyaksena prakrtih
sivyate sa-caracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
Jagad viparivartate
“This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti,
and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this
manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.” If one is un-
able to see the Supreme Lord although He is present as Krsna in His
various incarnations, one may see the Supreme Lord’s impersonal
feature, according to the direction of the Vedas, by seeing the activities
of material nature.
Anything done under the direction of the Vedic injunctions is called
dharma, as described by the order carriers of Yamaraja (Bhag. 6.1.40):
veda-pranihito dharmo
hy adharmas tad-viparyayah
vedo narayanah saksat
svayambhitr iti Susruma
“That which is prescribed in the Vedas constitutes dharma, the religious
principles, and the opposite of that is irreligion. The Vedas are directly
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana, and are self-born. This
we have heard from Yamaraja.”
In this connection, Srila Madhvacarya comments:
tapo ’bhimani rudras tu
visnor hrdayam asritah
vidya rapa tathaivoma
৮৮505 tanum updasrita
srangarady-akrti-gatah
kriyatma paka-sasanah


--- Page 256 ---
Text 47] The Harmsa-guhya Prayers 251
angesu kratavah sarve
madhya-dehe ca dharma-rat
prano vayus citta-gato
brahmadyah svesu devatah
The various demigods are all acting under the protection of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and according to their various actions the
demigods are differently named.
TEXT 47
[स = ५ _
अहमेवासमेवाग्रे नान्यत्‌ किचान्तरं बहिः |
संज्ञानमात्रमव्यक्तं॑ प्रसुप्तमिव विश्वतः ॥४७॥
aham evasam evagre
nanyat kificantarari bahih
sarynana-matram avyaktam
prasuptam va visvatah
aham—1, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva—only; asam—
was; eva—certainly; agre—in the beginning, before the creation; na—
not; anyat—other; kifica—anything; antaram—besides Me; bahih—
external (since the cosmic manifestation is external to the spiritual
world, the spiritual world existed when there was no material world);
sariyiidna-matram—only the consciousness of the living entities; avyak-
tam —unmanifested; prasuptam—sleeping; wa—like; visvatah—all
over.
TRANSLATION
Before the creation of this cosmic manifestation, I alone existed
with My specific spiritual potencies. Consciousness was then un-
manifested, just as one’s consciousness is unmanifested during the
time of sleep.
PURPORT
The word aham indicates a person. As explained in the Vedas, nityo
nityanam cetanas cetananam: the Lord is the supreme eternal among


--- Page 257 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
innumerable eternals and the supreme living being among the innumer-
able living beings. The Lord is a person who also has impersonal
features. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11):
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvam yaj jidnam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti Sabdyate

“Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this non-
dual substance Brahman, Paramatma or Bhagavan.” Consideration of
the Paramatma and impersonal Brahman arose after the creation; before
the creation, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead existed. As firmly
declared in Bhagavad-gita (18.55), the Lord can be understood only by
bhakti-yoga. The ultimate cause, the supreme cause of creation, is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can be understood only by bhakti-
yoga. He cannot be understood by speculative philosophical research or
by meditation, since all such processes came into existence after the ma-
terial creation. The impersonal and localized conceptions of the Supreme
Lord are more or less materially contaminated. The real spiritual process,
therefore, is bhakti-yoga. As the Lord says, bhaktya mam abhijanati:
“Only by devotional service can I be understood.” Before the creation,
the Lord existed as a person, as indicated here by the word aham. When
Prajapati Daksa saw Him as a person, who was beautifully dressed and
ornamented, he actually experienced the meaning of this word aham
through devotional service.

Each person is eternal. Because the Lord says that He existed as a per-
son before the creation (agre) and will also exist after the annihilation,
the Lord is a person eternally. Srila Vi$vanatha Cakravarti Thakura
therefore quotes these verses from Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.9.13-14):

na cantar na bahir yasya
na purvam napi caparam

purvaparam bahis cantar
Jjagato yo jagac ca yah


--- Page 258 ---
Text 47] The Harirsa-guhya Prayers 253
tar matvatmajam avyaktam
martya-lingam adhoksajam
gopikolikhale damna
babandha prakrtam yatha
The Personality of Godhead appeared in Vrndavana as the son of mother
Yasoda, who bound the Lord with rope just as an ordinary mother binds
a material child. There are actually no divisions of external and internal
for the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (sac-cid-ananda-
vigraha), but when He appears in His own form the unintelligent think
Him an ordinary person. Avajananti mam midha manusim tanum
asritam: although He comes in His own body, which never changes,
midhas, the unintelligent, think that the impersonal Brahman has
assumed a material body to come in the form of a person. Ordinary living
beings assume material bodies, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead
does not. Since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme con-
sciousness, it is stated herein that sanyfiana-matram, the original con-
sciousness, Krsna consciousness, was unmanifested before the creation,
although the consciousness of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
origin of everything. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (2.12), “Never
was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings; nor in
the future shall any of us cease to be.” Thus the Lord’s person is the Ab-
solute Truth in the past, present and future.
In this regard, Madhvacarya quotes two verses from the Matsya
Purana:
nana-varno haris tv eko
bahu-sirsa-bhujo rapat
asil laye tad-anyat tu
suksma-ripam Sriyam vina
asuptah supta iva ca
militakso ’bhavad dharih
anyatranadarad visnau
अऽ ca lineva kathyate


--- Page 259 ---
254 Srimad -Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
saksmatvena harau sthanal
linam anyad apisyate
After the annihilation of everything, the Supreme Lord, because of His
sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, remains in His original form, but since the
other living entities have material bodies, the matter merges into matter,
and the subtle form of the spirit soul remains within the body of the
Lord. The Lord does not sleep, but the ordinary living entities remain
asleep until the next creation. An unintelligent person thinks that the
opulence of the Supreme Lord is nonexistent after the annihilation. but
that is not a fact. The opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
remains as it is in the spiritual world; only in the material world is
everything dissolved. Brahma-lina, merging into the Supreme Brahman,
is not actual lina, or annihilation, for the subtle form remaining in the
Brahman effulgence will return to the material world after the material
creation and again assume a material form. This is described as bhiatva
bhatva praliyate. When the material body is annihilated, the spirit soul
remains in a subtle form, which later assumes another material body.
This is true for the conditioned souls, but the Supreme Personality of
Godhead remains eternally in His original consciousness and spiritual
body.
TEXT 48
मस्यनन्तगुणेऽनन्ते गुणतो गुणविग्रहः ।
यदासीत्‌ तत एवाद्यः खयम्भूः FRIES: RC
mayy ananta-gune ‘nante
gunato guna-vigrahah
yadasit tata evadyah
svayambhih samabhid ajah
mayi—in Me; ananta-gune —possessing unlimited potency; anante—
unlimited; gunatah—from My potency known as mayd; guna-
vigrahah—the universe, which is a result of the modes of nature;
yadd—when; dasit—it came into existence; tatah—therein; eva—in-
deed; adyah—the first living being; svayambhih—Lord Brahma;
samabhit—was born; ajah—although not from a material mother.


--- Page 260 ---
Text 50] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 255
TRANSLATION
I am the reservoir of unlimited potency, and therefore I am
known as unlimited or all-pervading. From My material energy the
cosmic manifestation appeared within Me, and in this universal
manifestation appeared the chief being, Lord Brahma, who is your
source and is not born of a material mother.
PURPORT
This is a description of the history of the universal creation. The first
cause is the Lord Himself, the Supreme Person. From Him, Brahma is
created, and Brahma takes charge of the affairs of the universe. The uni-
versal affairs of the material creation depend upon the material energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is therefore the cause of the
material creation. The entire cosmic manifestation is described herein as
guna-vigrahah, the form of the Lord’s qualities. From the cosmic uni-
versal form, the first creation is Lord Brahma, who is the cause of all liv-
ing entities. In this regard, Srila Madhvacarya describes the unlimited
attributes of the Lord:
praty-ekaso gundnar tu
nihsimatvam udiryate
tadanantyam tu gunatas
te cananta hi sankhyaya
ato 'nanta-guno visnur
gunato ’nanta eva ca
Parasya saktir vividhaiva srizyate: the Lord has innumerable potencies,
all of which are unlimited. Therefore the Lord Himself and all His
qualities, forms, pastimes and paraphernalia are also unlimited. Because
Lord Visnu has unlimited attributes, He is known as Ananta.
TEXTS 49-50
a o
स वै यदा महादेवो मम वीर्योपवंहितः ।
EN ८५
मेने खिलभिवात्मानघरुयतः Seiwa gel


--- Page 261 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
अथ मेऽभिहितो देवस्तपोऽतप्यत दारुणम्‌ |
नव age युष्मान्‌ येनादावसुजद्‌ विः ।५०॥
sa vai yada mahadevo
mama viryopabrrhitah
mene khilam ivatmanam
udyatah svarga-karmani
atha me ’bhihito devas
tapo ’tapyata darunam
nava visva-srjo yusman
yenadav asrjad vibhuh
sah—that Lord Brahma; vai—indeed; yadda—when; maha-devah—
the chief of all the demigods; mama —My; virya-upabrrithitah—being
increased by the potency; mene —thought; khilam—incapable; iva—as
if; atmanam—himself; udyatah—attempting; svarga-karmani—in the
creation of the universal affairs; atha—at that time; me—by Me;
abhihitah—advised; devah—that Lord Brahma; tapah—austerity;
atapyata—performed; darunam—extremely difficult; nava—nine;
visva-srjah—important personalities to create the universe; yusman—all
of you; yena—by whom; ddau—in the beginning; asrjat—created;
vibhuh—the great.
TRANSLATION
When the chief lord of the universe, Lord Brahma
[Svayambhii], having been inspired by My energy, was attempting
to create, he thought himself incapable. Therefore I gave him ad-
vice, and in accordance with my instructions he underwent ex-
tremely difficult austerities. Because of these austerities, the great
Lord Brahma was able to create nine personalities, including you,
to help him in the functions of creation.
PURPORT
Nothing is possible without tapasya. Lord Brahma, however, was em-
powered to create this entire universe because of his austerities. The


--- Page 262 ---
Text 52] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 257
more we engage in austerities, the more we become powerful by the
grace of the Lord. Therefore Rsabhadeva advised His sons, tapo divyam
putraka yena sattvarn Suddhyed: “One should engage in penance and
austerity to attain the divine position of devotional service. By such ac-
tivity, one’s heart is purified.” (Bhdg. 5.5.1) In our material existence
we are impure, and therefore we cannot do anything wonderful, but if
we purify our existence by tapasya, we can do wonderful things by the
grace of the Lord. Therefore tapasya is very important, as stressed in
this verse.
TEXT 51
|
एषा पञ्चजनस्याङ्ग दुहिता वे प्रजापतेः |
असिक्री नाम पलीत्वे प्रजेश प्रतिगृह्यताम्‌ ॥५१॥
esa pancajanasyanga
duhita vai prajapateh
asikni nama patnitve
prajesa pratigrhyatam
esa—this; painicajanasya—of Paficajana; ariga—O My dear son;
duhita—the daughter; vai—indeed; prajapateh—another prajapati;
asikni nama —of the name Asikni; patnitve—as your wife; prajesa—O
prajapati; pratigrhyatam—Ilet her be accepted.
TRANSLATION
O My dear son Daksa, Prajapati Paficajana has a daughter named
Asikni, whom I offer to you so that you may accept her as your
wife.
TEXT 52
_ 9 ९८ +
मिथुनव्यवायधमंस्त्वं प्रजासगंमिमं पुनः |
मिथुनव्यवायधर्भिण्यां मूरिशो भावयिष्यसि ।।५२॥
mithuna-vyavaya-dharmas tvam
praja-sargam imam punah
mithuna-vyavaya-dharminyam
bhiiriso bhavayisyasi


--- Page 263 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4

mithuna—of man and woman; vyav@ya—sexual activities; dhar-
mah—who accepts by religious performance; tvam—you; praja-
sargam—creation of living entities; imam—this; punah—again;
mithuna—of man and woman united; vyavaya-dharminyam—in her
according to the religious performance of sexual intercourse; bhitrisah—
manifold; bhavayisyasi—you will cause to be.

TRANSLATION

Now unite in sexual life as man and woman, and in this way, by
sexual intercourse, you will be able to beget hundreds of children
in the womb of this girl to increase the population.

PURPORT

The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (7.11), dharmaviruddho bhitesu
kamo ‘smi: “I am sex that is not contrary to religious principles.” Sexual
intercourse ordained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is dharma,
a religious principle, but it is not intended for sense enjoyment. In-
dulgence in sense enjoyment through sexual intercourse is not allowed
by the Vedic principles. One may follow the natural tendency for sex life
only to beget children. Therefore the Lord told Daksa in this verse,
“This girl is offered to you only for sex life to beget children, not for any
other purpose. She is very fertile, and therefore you will be able to have
as many children as you can beget.”

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks in this connection that
Daksa was given the facility for unlimited sexual intercourse. In Daksa’s
previous life he was also known as Daksa, but in the course of perform-
ing sacrifices he offended Lord Siva, and thus his head was replaced with
that of a goat. Then Daksa gave up his life because of his degraded condi-
tion, but because he maintained the same unlimited sexual desires, he
underwent austerities by which he satisfied the Supreme Lord, who then
gave him unlimited potency for sexual intercourse.

It should be noted that although such a facility for sexual intercourse
is achieved by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this
facility is not offered to advanced devotees, who are free from material
desires (anyabhilasita-siinyam). In this connection it may be noted that


--- Page 264 ---
Text 53] The Harnsa-guhya Prayers 259
if the American boys and girls engaged in the Krsna consciousness move-
ment want to advance in Krsna consciousness to achieve the supreme
benefit of loving service to the Lord, they should refrain from indulging
in this facility for sex life. Therefore we advise that one should at least
refrain from illicit sex. Even if there are opportunities for sex life, one
should voluntarily accept the limitation of having sex only for progeny,
not for any other purpose. Kardama Muni was also given the facility for
sex life, but he had only a slight desire for it. Therefore after begetting
children in the womb of Devahati, Kardama Muni became completely
renounced. The purport is that if one wants to return home, back to God-
head, one should voluntarily refrain from sex life. Sex should be ac-
cepted only as much as needed, not unlimitedly.

One should not think that Daksa received the favor of the Lord by
receiving the facilities for unlimited sex. Later verses will reveal that
Daksa again committed an offense, this time at the lotus feet of Narada.
Therefore although sex life is the topmost enjoyment in the material
world and although one may have an opportunity for sexual enjoyment
by the grace of God, this entails a risk of committing offenses. Daksa was
open to such offenses, and therefore, strictly speaking, he was not ac-
tually favored by the Supreme Lord. One should not seek the favor of the
Lord for unlimited potency in sex life.

TEXT 53
त्वत्तोऽधस्तात्‌ प्रजाः सर्वा मिथुनीभूय मायया।
मदीयया भविष्यन्ति हरिष्यन्ति च मे बलिम्‌ ॥५३॥
tvatto {41145101 prajah sarva
mithuni-bhilya mayaya
madiyaya bhavisyanti
harisyanti ca me balim

tvattah—you; adhastat—after; prajah—the living entities; sarvah—
all; mithuni-bhitya —having sex life; mayaya—because of the influence
or facilities given by the illusory energy; madiyaya—My: bhavisyanti—
they will become; harisyanti—they will offer; ca—also; me —unto Me:
balim —presentations.


--- Page 265 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 4
TRANSLATION

After you give birth to many hundreds and thousands of
children, they will also be captivated by My illusory energy and
will engage, like You, in sexual intercourse. But because of My
mercy to you and them, they will also be able to give Me
presentations in devotion.

TEXT 54
গাঁহ্যক उवाच
इत्युक्त्वा मिषतस्तस्य भगवान्‌ विश्वमावनः |
ड a ९
खभोपरन्धार्थ इव ॒तत्रैवान्तदंघे हरिः ॥५४॥
sri-Suka uvaca
ity uktva misatas tasya
bhagavan visva-bhavanah
svapnopalabdhartha iva
tatraivantardadhe harih

sri-Sukah uvaca—Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak; iti—thus;
uktva—saying; misatah tasya—while he (Daksa) was personally looking
on; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead: visva-bhavanah—
who creates the universal affairs: svapna-upalabdha-arthah—an object
obtained in dreaming: iva—like; tatra—there: eva—certainly: antar-
dadhe—disappeared; harih—the Lord, the Supreme Personality of God-
head.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After the creator of the entire
universe, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, had spoken
in this way in the presence of Prajapati Daksa, He immediately dis-
appeared as if He were an object experienced in a dream.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fourth
Chapter of Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Harmsa-guhya Prayers
Offered to the Lord by Prajapati Daksa.”


--- Page 266 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
Narada Muni
Cursed by Prajapati Daksa
This chapter relates how all the sons of Daksa were delivered from the
clutches of the material energy by following the advice of Narada, who
was therefore cursed by Daksa.

Influenced by the external energy of Lord Visnu, Prajapati Daksa
begot ten thousand sons in the womb of his wife, Pafcajani. These sons,
who were all of the same character and mentality, were known as the
Haryasvas. Ordered by their father to create more and more population,
the Haryaévas went west to the place where the River Sindhu (now the
Indus) meets the Arabian Sea. In those days this was the site of a holy
lake named Narayana-saras, where there were many saintly persons. The
Haryas$vas began practicing austerities, penances and meditation, which
are the engagements of the highly exalted renounced order of life.
However, when Srila Narada Muni saw these boys engaged in such
commendable austerities simply for material creation, he thought it
better to release them from this tendency. Narada Muni described to the
boys their ultimate goal of life and advised them not to become ordinary
karmis to beget children. Thus all the sons of Daksa became enlightened
and left, never to return.

Prajapati Daksa, who was very sad at the loss of his sons, begot one
thousand more sons in the womb of his wife, Paficajani, and ordered
them to increase progeny. These sons, who were named the Savalasvas,
also engaged in worshiping Lord Visnu to beget children, but Narada
Muni convinced them to become mendicants and not beget children.
Foiled twice in his attempts to increase population, Prajapati Daksa
became most angry at Narada Muni and cursed him, saying that in the
future he would not be able to stay anywhere. Since Narada Muni, being
fully qualified, was fixed in tolerance, he accepted Daksa’s curse.

261


--- Page 267 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
TEXT 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
+ EN -~
तस्यां ख पाञ्चजन्यां ৭ विष्णुमायोपचंहितः |
९, . IN
हयश्चसज्ञानयुत पुत्रानजनयद्‌ विशु: ॥ १॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
tasyam sa pancajanyam vai
visnu-mayopabrmhitah
haryasva-sarjian ayutari
putran ajanayad vibhuh
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; tasyam—in her; sah—
Prajapati Daksa; paincajanyam—his wife named Paficajani; vai—
indeed; visnu-madya-upabrrnhitah—being made capable by the illusory
energy of Lord Visnu; haryasva-samjian—named the Haryasvas;
ayutam—ten thousand; putran—sons; ajanayat—begot; vibhuh—
being powerful.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Impelled by the illusory
energy of Lord Visnu, Prajapati Daksa begot ten thousand sons in
the womb of Paicajani [Asikni]. My dear King, these sons were
called the Haryasvas.
TEXT 2
(9
अष्थग्धमंशीलास्ते सवं दाक्षायणा वृष |
पित्रा प्रोक्ताः प्रजासे प्रतीचीं भ्रययुदिंशम्‌ ॥ २ ॥
aprthag-dharma-silas te
sarve daksayana nrpa
pitra proktah praja-sarge
praticith prayayur disam
aprthak—alike in; dharma-silah—good character and behavior; te—
they: sarve—all; daksayanah—the sons of Daksa; nrpa—O King;


--- Page 268 ---
Text 5] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 263
pitra—by their father; proktah—ordered; praja-sarge—to increase the
population; praticim—western; prayayuh—they went to; diSam—the
direction.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, all the sons of Prajapati Daksa were alike in being
very gentle and obedient to the orders of their father. When their
father ordered them to beget children, they all went in the western
direction.
TEXT 3
तत्र॒ नारायणसरस्तीथं सिन्धुसमुद्रयोः |
सङ्गमो यत्र॒ सुमहन्छुनिसिद्धनिषेवितम्‌ ॥ ३ ॥
tatra narayana-saras
tirthar sindhu-samudrayoh
sarnigamo yatra sumahan
muni-siddha-nisevitam
tatra—in that direction; narayana-sarah—the lake named Narayana-
saras; tirtham—very holy place; sindhu-samudrayoh—of the River
Sindhu and the sea: sangamah—confluence; yatra—where: su-
mahat—very great: muni—by sages: siddha—and perfected human
beings; nisevitam —{frequented.
TRANSLATION
In the west, where the River Sindhu meets the sea, there is a
great place of pilgrimage known as Narayana-saras. Many sages and
others advanced in spiritual consciousness live there.
TEXTS 4-5
(५
तदुपस्पशं नादेव विनिर्धूतमलाशयाः |
धर्मे पारमहंस्ये च प्रोत्पन्नमतयोऽप्युत ॥ ४ ॥
तेपिरे तप হায় पित्रादेशेन यन्त्रिताः |
TATE यत्तान्‌ देवर्षिस्तान्‌ दद्शे ह ॥ ५॥


--- Page 269 ---
264. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
tad-upasparsanad eva
vinirdhita-malasayah
dharme paramaharisye ca
protpanna-matayo ‘py uta
tepire tapa evogram
pitradesena yantritah
praja-vivrddhaye yattan
devarsis tan dadarsa ha
tat—of that holy place; upasparsanat—from bathing in that water or
touching it; eva—only; vinirdhiita—completely washed away; mala-
asayah—whose impure desires; dharme—to the practices;
paramaharisye —executed by the topmost class of sannydsis; ca—also;
protpanna—highly inclined: matayah—whose minds: api uta—
although; tepire—they executed; tapah—penances; eva—certainly;
ugram—severe; pitr-adesena—by the order of their father; yantritah—
engaged; praja-vivrddhaye—for the purpose of increasing the
population; yattan—ready; devarsih—the great sage Narada; tan—
them; dadarsa—visited; ha —indeed.
TRANSLATION
In that holy place, the Haryasvas began regularly touching the
lake’s waters and bathing in them. Gradually becoming very much
purified, they became inclined toward the activities of
paramaharnsas. Nevertheless, because their father had ordered
them to increase the population, they performed severe austerities
to fulfill his desires. One day, when the great sage Narada saw
those boys performing such fine austerities to increase the
population, Narada approached them.
TEXTS 6-8
+ =
उवाच चाथ ह्यश्वाः कथ सक्ष्यथ वे प्रजाः ।
অহুদ্বাল্ল शवो यूयं बालिशा बत पालकाः ॥ ৪ ॥


--- Page 270 ---
Text 8] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 265
तथैकपुरुषं Ug बिलं चाद्टनिगैमम्‌ ।
बहुरूपां लियं चापि पुमांसं पुं्चलीपतिम्‌ । ७ ॥
नदीश्चभयतोवाहां पञ्चपञ्चाद्भुतं गृहम्‌ |
क्रचिद्ध॑सं चित्रकथं क्षौरपव्यं खयं भ्रमि nen
uvdca catha haryasvah
katham sraksyatha vai prajah
adrstvantari bhuvo yiayari
balisa bata palakah
tathaika-purusam rastram
81127 cadrsta-nirgamam
bahu-raparn striyamn capi
pumarisarin purscali-patim
nadim ubhayato vaharm
panca-pancadbhutar grham
kvacid dhamsari citra-kathari
ksaura-pavyam svayarm bhrami
uvaca—he said; ca—also; atha—thus; haryasvah—O Haryasvas,
sons of Prajapati Daksa; katham—why; sraksyatha—you will beget;
vai—indeed; prajah—progeny; adrstva—having not seen; antam—the
end; bhuvah—of this earth; yayam—all of you; balisah—
inexperienced; bata—alas; palakah—although ruling princes; tatha—
so also: eka—one: purusam—man; rastram—kingdom: bilam—the
hole; ca—also: adrsta-nirgamam—{from which there is no coming out;
bahu-rapam—taking many forms; striyam—the woman; ca—and;
api—even; pumarisam—the man; puriscali-patim—the husband of a
prostitute; nadim—a river; ubhayatah—in both ways; vaham—which
flows; panca-parica—of five multiplied by five (twenty-five):
adbhutam—a wonder; grham—the house; kvacit—somewhere:
harhisam —a swan; citra-katham—whose story is wonderful; ksaura-
pavyam—made of sharp razors and thunderbolts; svayam—itself;
bhrami—revolving.


--- Page 271 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION

The great sage Narada said: My dear HaryaSvas, you have not
seen the extremities of the earth. There is a kingdom where only
one man lives and where there is a hole from which, having
entered, no one emerges. A woman there who is extremely
unchaste adorns herself with various attractive dresses, and the
man who lives there is her husband. In that kingdom, there is a
river flowing in both directions, a wonderful home made of
twenty-five materials, a swan that vibrates various sounds, and an
automatically revolving object made of sharp razors and
thunderbolts. You have not seen all this, and therefore you are
inexperienced boys without advanced knowledge. How, then, will
you create progeny?

PURPORT

Narada Muni saw that the boys known as the Harya$vas were already
purified because of living in that holy place and were practically ready
for liberation. Why then should they be encouraged to become entangled
in family life, which is so dark that once having entered it one cannot
leave it? Through this analogy, Narada Muni asked them to consider why
they should follow their father’s order to be entangled in family life.
Indirectly, he asked them to find within the cores of their hearts the
situation of the Supersoul, Lord Visnu, for then they would truly be
experienced. In other words, one who is too involved in his material
environment and does not look within the core of his heart is
increasingly entangled in the illusory energy. Narada Muni’s purpose
was to get the sons of Prajapati Daksa to divert their attention toward
spiritual realization instead of involving themselves in the ordinary but
complicated affairs of propagation. The same advice was given by
Prahlada Maharaja to his father (Bhag. 7.5.5):

tat sadhu manye ’sura-varya dehinam
sada samudvigna-dhiyam asad-grahat
hitvatma-patarn grham andha-kapam
vanarn gato yad dharim asrayeta

In the dark well of family life, one is always full of anxiety because of
having accepted a temporary body. If one wants to free himself from this


--- Page 272 ---
Text 10] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 267
anxiety, one should immediately leave family life and take shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in Vrndavana. Narada Muni advised
the Haryasvas not to enter household life. Since they were already
advanced in spiritual knowledge, why should they be entangled in that
way?
TEXT 9
कथं खपितुरादेशमविद्वांसो fafa: |
अनुरूपमविज्ञाय अहो सर्गं करिष्यथ ॥ ९ ॥
katham sva-pitur adesam
avidvarso vipascitah
anuripam avijiaya
aho sargam karisyatha
katham—how; sva-pituh—of your own father; adeSam—the order;
avidvamsah—ignorant; vipascitah—who knows everything: anu-
ripam—suitable for you; avijidya—without knowing; aho—alas;
sargam—the creation; karisyatha—you will perform.
TRANSLATION
Alas, your father is omniscient, but you do not know his actual
order. Without knowing the actual purpose of your father, how
will you create progeny?
TEXT 10
श्रीद्युक उवाच
तजिशम्याय हयश्वा ओरपत्तिकमनीषया ।
EE तु देवर्षेः खयं Rete ॥१०॥
sri-suka uvaca
tan nisamyatha haryasva
autpattika-manisaya
vacah kata tu devarseh
svayam vimamrsur dhiya


--- Page 273 ---
268 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5

sri-Sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; tat—that; niSamya—
hearing; atha—thereafter; haryasvah—all the sons of Prajapati Daksa;
autpattika— naturally awakened; manisaya—by possessing the power to
consider; wvacah—of the speech; kiatam—the enigma; tu—but;
devarseh—of Narada Muni; svayam—themselves; vimamrsuh—
reflected upon; dhiya—with full intelligence.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Hearing these enigmatic words of
Narada Muni, the Harya$vas considered them with their natural
intelligence, without help from others.

TEXT 11
भूः कषेत्रं जीवसंज्ञं यदनादि निजबन्धनम्‌ ।
अदृष्टा तख निर्वाणं किमसत्कर्ममिर्भवेत्‌ 1220
bhih ksetram jiva-sarjiam yad
anadi nija-bandhanam
adrstva tasya nirvanam
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

bhiih—the earth; ksetram—the field of activities; jiva-sarmjiiam —the
designation of the spiritual living being who is bound by different results
of activity; yat—which; anadi—existing since time immemorial; nija-
bandhanam —causing his own bondage; adrstva—without seeing;
tasya—of this; nirvanam—the cessation; kim—what benefit: asat-
karmabhih—with temporary fruitive activities; bhavet—there can be.

TRANSLATION

[The Harya$vas understood the meaning of Narada’s words as
follows.] The word “bhith> [नल earth] refers to the field of
activities. The material body, which is a result of the living being’s
actions, is his field of activities, and it gives him false designations.
Since time immemorial, he has received various types of material
bodies, which are the roots of bondage to the material world. If


--- Page 274 ---
Text 11] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 269
one foolishly engages in temporary fruitive activities and does not
look toward the cessation of this bondage, what will be the benefit
of his actions?

PURPORT

Narada Muni spoke to the Haryasvas, the sons of Prajapati Daksa,
about ten allegorical subjects—the king, the kingdom, the river, the
house, the physical elements and so forth. After considering these by
themselves, the Harya$vas could understand that the living entity
encaged in his body seeks happiness, but takes no interest in how to
become free from his encagement. This is a very important verse, since
all the living entities in the material world are very active, having
obtained their particular types of bodies. A man works all day and night
for sense gratification, and animals like hogs and dogs also work for
sense gratification all day and night. Birds, beasts and all other
conditioned living entities engage in various activities without
knowledge of the soul encaged within the body. Especially in the human
form of body, one’s duty is to act in such a way that he can release
himself from his encagement, but without the instructions of Narada or
his representative in the disciplic succession, people blindly engage in
bodily activities to enjoy maya-sukha—flickering, temporary happiness.
They do not know how to become free from their material encagement.
Rsabhadeva therefore said that such activity is not at all good, since it
encages the soul again and again in a body subjected to the threefold
miseries of the material condition.

The Haryasvas, the sons of Prajapati Daksa, could immediately
understand the purport of Narada’s instructions. Our Krsna
consciousness movement is especially meant for such enlightenment. We
are trying to enlighten humanity so that people may come to the
understanding that they should work hard in tapasya for self-realization
and freedom from the continuous bondage of birth, death, old age and
disease in one body after another. Maya, however, is very strong; she is
expert in putting impediments in the way of this understanding.
Therefore sometimes one comes to the Krsna consciousness movement
but again falls into the clutches of maya, not understanding the
importance of this movement.


--- Page 275 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
TEXT 12
एक एवेश्वरस्तुर्यो मगवान्‌ खाश्रयः परः ।
] 1 ९
तमदृष्टाभवं पुंसः किमसत्कम॑मिर्भवेत्‌ ॥ १२॥
eka evesvaras turyo
bhagavan svasrayah parah
tam adrstvabhavar purisah
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

ekah—one; eva—indeed; iSvarah—supreme controller; turyah—the
fourth transcendental category; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sva-asrayah—independent, being His own shelter; parah—
beyond this material creation; tam—Him:; adrstvd—not seeing;
abhavam—who is not born or created; purisah—of a man; kim —what
benefit; asat-karmabhih—with temporary fruitive activities; bhavet—
there can be.

TRANSLATION

[Narada Muni had said that there is a kingdom where there is
only one male. The Harya$vas realized the purport of this
statement.] The only enjoyer is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who observes everything, everywhere. He is full of six
opulences and fully independent of everyone else. He is never
subject to the three modes of material nature, for He is always
transcendental to this material creation. If the members of human
society do not understand Him, the Supreme, through their
advancement in knowledge and activities, but simply work very
hard like cats and dogs all day and night for temporary happiness,
what will be the benefit of their activities?

PURPORT

Narada Muni had mentioned a kingdom where there is only one king
with no competitor. The complete spiritual world, and specifically the
cosmic manifestation, has only one proprietor or enjoyer —the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is beyond this material manifestation. The
Lord has therefore been described as turya, existing on the fourth


--- Page 276 ---
Text 13] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 271
platform. He has also been described as abhava. The word bhava, which
means “takes birth,” comes from the word bhi, “to be.” As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (8.19), bhitva bhitva praliyate: the living entities in the
material world must be repeatedly born and destroyed. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, however, is neither bhiitva nor praliyate; He is
eternal. In other words, He is not obliged to take birth like human beings
or animals, which repeatedly take birth and die because of ignorance of
the soul. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is not subjected to
such changes of body, and one who thinks otherwise is considered a fool
(avajananti mam miidhd manusirn tanum asritam). Narada Muni
advises that human beings not waste their time simply jumping like cats
and monkeys, without real benefit. The duty of the human being is to

understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 13
पुमान्‌ नैवैति यद्‌ गत्वा बिलखगं गतो यया।
प्रत्यग्धामाविद इह किमसत्क्ममिभवेत्‌ 123
puman navaiti yad gatva
bila-svargari gato yatha
pratyag-dhamavida iha
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
puman—a human being; na—not; eva—indeed; eti—comes back;
yat—to which; gatva—having gone; bila-svargam—to the region of the
lower planetary system known as Patala; gatah—gone: yatha—like;
pratyak-dhama—the effulgent spiritual world; avidah—of the unin-
telligent man; iha—in this material world; kim—what benefit; asat-
karmabhih—with temporary fruitive activities; bhavet—there can be.
TRANSLATION

[Narada Muni had described that there is a bila, or hole, from
which, having entered, one does not return. The Harya$vas
understood the meaning of this allegory.] Hardly once has a
person who has entered the lower planetary system called Patala


--- Page 277 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
been seen to return. Similarly, if one enters the Vaikuntha-dhama
[pratyag-dhama], he does not return to this material world. If
there is such a place, from which, having gone, one does not
return to the miserable material condition of life, what is the use
of jumping like monkeys in the temporary material world and not
seeing or understanding that place? What will be the profit?
PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (15.6), yad gatva na nivartante tad
dhama paramam mama: there is a region from which, having gone, one
does not return to the material world. This region has been repeatedly
described. Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita (4.9), Krsna says:

Jjanma karma ca me divyam
evar yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehari punar janma
naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and
activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this
material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.”

If one can properly understand Krsna, who has already been described
as the Supreme King, he does not return here after giving up his
material body. This fact has been described in this verse of Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Puman naivaiti yad gatva: he does not return to this
material world, but returns home, back to Godhead, to live an eternally
blissful life of knowledge. Why do people not care about this? What will
be the benefit of taking birth again in this material world, sometimes as a
human being, sometimes a demigod, and sometimes a cat or dog? What is
the benefit of wasting time in this way? Krsna has very definitely
asserted in Bhagavad-gita (8.15):

mam upetya punar janma
duhkhalayam asasvatam

napnuvanti mahatmanah
sariisiddhim paramarn gatah


--- Page 278 ---
Text 14] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 273
“After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion, never
return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they
have attained the highest perfection.” One’s real concern should be to
free himself from the repetition of birth and death and attain the
topmost perfection of life by living with the Supreme King in the
spiritual world. In these verses the sons of Daksa repeatedly say, kim
asat-karmabhir bhavet: “What is the use of impermanent fruitive
activities?”
TEXT 14
नानारूपात्मनो बुद्धिः स्वैरिणीव गुणान्विता ।
तज्नष्ठामगतस्येह किमसत्कमेमिर्भवेत्‌ ॥१४॥
nana-ripatmano buddhih
svainniva gunanvita
tan-nistham agatasyeha
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

nana —various; ripa—who has forms or dresses; atmanah—of the
living entity; buddhih—the intelligence; svairini—a prostitute who
freely decorates herself with different types of cloths and ornaments;
iva —like; guna-anvita—endowed with the mode of passion, and so on;
tat-nistham—the cessation of that; agatasya—of one who has not
obtained; itha—in this material world; kim asat-karmabhih bhavet—
what is the use of performing temporary fruitive activities.

TRANSLATION

[Narada Muni had described a woman who is a professional
prostitute. The Haryaévas understood the identity of this woman.]
Mixed with the mode of passion, the unsteady intelligence of every
living entity is like a prostitute who changes dresses just to attract
one’s attention. If one fully engages in temporary fruitive
activities, not understanding how this is taking place, what does he
actually gain?


--- Page 279 ---
274 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
PURPORT

A woman who has no husband declares herself independent, which
means that she becomes a prostitute. A prostitute generally dresses
herself in various fashions intended to attract a man’s attention to the
lower part of her body. Today it has become a much advertised fashion
for a woman to go almost naked, covering the lower part of her body only
slightly, in order to draw the attention of a man to her private parts for
sexual enjoyment. The intelligence engaged to attract a man to the lower
part of the body is the intelligence of a professional prostitute. Similarly,
the intelligence of a living entity who does not turn his attention toward
Krsna or the Krsna consciousness movement simply changes dresses like
a prostitute. What is the benefit of such foolish intelligence? One should
be intelligently conscious in such a way that he need no longer change
from one body to another.

Karmis change their professions at any moment, but a Krsna conscious
person does not change his profession, for his only profession is to attract
the attention of Krsna by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra and living a
very simple life, without following daily changes of fashion. In our
Krsna consciousness movement, fashionable persons are taught to adopt
one fashion —the dress of a Vaisnava with a shaved head and tilaka.
They are taught to be always clean in mind, dress and eating in order to
be fixed in Krsna consciousness. What is the use of changing one’s dress,
sometimes wearing long hair and a long beard and sometimes dressing
otherwise? This is not good. One should not waste his time in such
frivolous activities. One should always be fixed in Krsna consciousness
and take the cure of devotional service with firm determination.

TEXT 15
तत्सज्गभ्रंितेशवयं संसरन्तं gam ।
तद्वतीरबुधस्येह किमसत्कमेभिमेवेत्‌ neu
tat-sanga-bhramsitaisvaryar
sarisarantarn kubharyavat
tad-gatir abudhasyeha
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet


--- Page 280 ---
Text 15] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 275

tat-sariga—by association with the prostitute of intelligence;
bhramsita—taken away; aiSvaryam—the opulence of independence;
sarisarantam —undergoing the material way of life; ku-bharya-vat—
exactly like a person who has a polluted wife; tat-gatih—the movements
of the polluted intelligence; abudhasya—of one who does not know;
tha—in this world; kim asat-karmabhih bhavet—what can be the
benefit of performing temporary fruitive activities.

TRANSLATION

[Narada Muni had also spoken of a man who is the husband of
the prostitute. The Harya$vas understood this as follows.] If one
becomes the husband of a prostitute, he loses all independence.
Similarly, if a living entity has polluted intelligence, he prolongs
his materialistic life. Frustrated by material nature, he must follow
the movements of the intelligence, which brings various
conditions of happiness and distress. If one performs fruitive
activities under such conditions, what will be the benefit?

PURPORT

Polluted intelligence has been compared to a prostitute. One who has
not purified his intelligence is said to be controlled by that prostitute. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.41), vyavasayatmika buddhir ekeha kuru-
nandana: those who are actually serious are conducted by one kind of
intelligence, namely, intelligence in Krsna consciousness. Bahu-sakha
hy 47107405 ca buddhayo vyavasayinam: one who is not fixed in proper
intelligence discovers many modes of life. Thus involved in material
activities, he is exposed to the different modes of material nature and
subjected to varieties of so-called happiness and distress. If a man
becomes the husband of a prostitute, he cannot be happy, and similarly
one who follows the dictations of material intelligence and material
consciousness will never be happy.

One must judiciously understand the activities of material nature. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.27):

prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah


--- Page 281 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
aharnkara-vimiadhatma
kartaham iti manyate
“The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are in
actuality carried out by nature.” Although one follows the dictations of
material nature, he happily thinks himself the master or husband of
material nature. Scientists, for example, try to be the masters of material
nature, life after life, not caring to understand the Supreme Person,
under whose direction everything within this material world is moving.
Trying to be the masters of material nature, they are imitation gods who
declare to the public that scientific advancement will one day be able to
avoid the so-called control of God. In fact, however, the living being,
unable to control the rulings of God, is forced to associate with the
prostitute of polluted intelligence and accept various material bodies. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (13.22):
purusah prakrti-stho hi
bhunkte prakrti-jan gunan
karanam guna-sango sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
“The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life,
enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with
that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various
species.” If one fully engages in temporary fruitive activities and does
not solve this real problem, what profit will he gain?
TEXT 16
सृष्टयप्ययकरीं मायां वेलाङूलान्तवेगिताम्‌ |
९
मत्तस्य तामविज्ञस्य किमसत्कममिर्भेवेत्‌ ॥१६॥
srsty-apyaya-karirn mayam
vela-kiilanta-vegitam
mattasya tam aviynasya
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet


--- Page 282 ---
Text 16] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 277

srsti—creation; apyaya—dissolution; karim—one who causes;
mayam—the illusory energy; weld-kila-anta—near the banks;
vegitam—being very rapid; mattasya—of one who is mad; tam—that
material nature; avijiasya—who does not know; kim asat-karmabhih
bhavet—what benefit can there be by performing temporary fruitive
activities.

TRANSLATION

[Narada Muni had said that there is a river flowing in both
directions. The HaryaSvas understood the purport of this
statement.] Material nature functions in two ways —by creation and
dissolution. Thus the river of material nature flows both ways. A
living entity who unknowingly falls in this river is submerged in
its waves, and since the current is swifter near the banks of the
river, he is unable to get out. What will be the benefit of
performing fruitive activities in that river of maya?

PURPORT

One may be submerged in the waves of the river of maya, but one
may also get free from the waves by coming to the banks of knowledge
and austerity. Near these banks, however, the waves are very strong. If
one does not understand how he is being tossed by the waves, but simply
engages in temporary fruitive activities, what benefit will he derive?

In the Brahma-sarihita (5.44) there is this statement:

srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani vibharti durga

The maya-sakti, Durga, is in charge of srsti-sthiti-pralaya, creation and
dissolution, and she acts under the direction of the Supreme Lord
(mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sa-caracaram). When one falls in the
river of nescience, he is always tossed here and there by the waves. but
the same maya can also save him when he surrenders to Krsna, or
becomes Krsna conscious. Krsna consciousness is knowledge and
austerity. A Krsna conscious person takes knowledge from the Vedic
literature, and at the same time he must practice austerities.


--- Page 283 ---
278 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5

To attain freedom from material life, one must take to Krsna
consciousness. Otherwise, if one very busily engages in the so-called ad-
vancement of science, what benefit will he derive? If one 15 carried away
by the waves of nature, what is the meaning of being a great scientist or
philosopher? Mundane science and philosophy are also material
creations. One must understand how maya works and how one can be
released from the tossing waves of the river of nescience. That is one’s
first duty.

TEXT 17
<
पञ्चविंशतितच्वानां "व ।
अध्यात्ममबुधस्येह त्कमेमिर्भवेत्‌ ॥१७॥
paiica-vimsati-tattvanarm
puruso ‘dbhuta-darpanah
adhyatmam abudhasyeha
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

panca-virisati—twenty-five; tattvanam—of the elements: purusah
—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adbhuta-darpanah—the
wonderful manifester; adhyatmam—the overseer of all causes and
effects; abudhasya—of one who does not know; iha—in this world; kim
asat-karmabhih bhavet—what can be the benefit of engaging in
temporary fruitive activities.

TRANSLATION

[Narada Muni had said that there is a house made of twenty-five
elements. The Harya$vas understood this analogy.] The Supreme
Lord is the reservoir of the twenty-five elements, and as the
Supreme Being, the conductor of cause and effect, He causes their
manifestation. If one engages in temporary fruitive activities, not
knowing that Supreme Person, what benefit will he derive?

PURPORT

Philosophers and scientists conduct scholarly research to find the

original cause, but they should do so scientifically, not whimsically or


--- Page 284 ---
Text 17] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 279
through fantastic theories. The science of the original cause is explained
in various Vedic literatures. Athdto brahma-jijiiasa/janmady asya
vatah. The Vedanta-sitra explains that one should inquire about the
Supreme Soul. Such inquiry about the Supreme is called brahma-jijaasa.
The Absolute Truth, tattva, is explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.2.11):
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvam yaj jianam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti

bhagavan iti sabdyate
“Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this
nondual substance Brahman, Paramatma or Bhagavan.” The Absolute
Truth appears to neophytes as impersonal Brahman and to advanced
mystic yogis as Paramatma, the Supersoul, but devotees, who are further
advanced, understand the Absolute Truth as the Supreme Lord, Visnu.

This material cosmic manifestation is an expansion of the energy of

Lord Krsna, or Lord Visnu.

eka-desa-sthitasyagner

Jyotsna vistarini yatha
parasya brahmanah Saktis
tathedam akhilam jagat
“Whatever we see in this world is but an expansion of various energies
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is like a fire that spreads
illumination for a long distance although it is situated in one place.”
(Visnu Purana) The entire cosmic manifestation is an expansion of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore if one does not conduct research to find the
supreme cause, but instead falsely engages in frivolous, temporary
activities, what is the use of demanding recognition as an important
scientist or philosopher? If one does not know the ultimate cause, what is
the use of his scientific and philosophical research?
The purusa, the original person—Bhagavan, Visnu—can be

understood only by devotional service. Bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan
yas casmi tattvatah: only by devotional service can one understand the


--- Page 285 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
Supreme Person, who is behind everything. One must try to understand
that the material elements are the separated, inferior energy of the Lord
and that the living entity is the Lord’s spiritual energy. Whatever we
experience, including matter and the spirit soul, the living force, is but a
combination of two energies of Lord Visnu—the inferior energy and the
superior energy. One should seriously study the facts concerning crea-
tion, maintenance and devastation, as well as the permanent place from
which one never need return (yad gatva na nivartante). Human society
should study this, but instead of culturing such knowledge, people are
attracted to temporary happiness and sense gratification, culminating in
bottomless, topless passion. There is no profit in such activities; one must
engage himself in the Krsna consciousness movement.
TEXT 18
° ¢
gi IEEE बन्धमोक्षालुद श्य्‌ |
©
विविक्तपदमज्ञाय किमसत्करम॑भिर्मवेत्‌ ॥१८॥
111... 21.111
bandha-moksanudarsanam
vivikta-padam ajiaya
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet
aisvaram—bringing understanding of God, or Krsna consciousness;
sastram—the Vedic literature; utsrjya—giving up; bandha—of
bondage; moksa—and of liberation; anudarsanam—informing about
the ways; vivikta-padam—distinguishing spirit from matter; ajiaya—
not knowing; kim asat-karmabhih bhavet—what can be the use of
temporary fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
[Narada Muni had spoken of a swan. That swan is explained in
this verse.] The Vedic literatures [$astras] vividly describe how to
understand the Supreme Lord, the source of all material and
spiritual energy. Indeed, they elaborately explain these two
energies. The swan [11870058] is one who discriminates between
matter and spirit, who accepts the essence of everything, and who


--- Page 286 ---
Text 19] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 281
explains the means of bondage and the means of liberation. The
words of scriptures consist of variegated vibrations. If a foolish
rascal leaves aside the study of these §astras to engage in temporary
activities, what will be the result?

PURPORT

The Krsna consciousness movement is very eager to present Vedic
literature in modern languages, especially Western languages such as
English, French and German. The leaders of the Western world, the
Americans and Europeans, have become the idols of modern civilization
because the Western people are very sophisticated in temporary activities
for the advancement of material civilization. A sane man, however, can
see that all such grand activities, although perhaps very important for
temporary life, have nothing to do with eternal life. The entire world is
imitating the materialistic civilization of the West, and therefore the
Krsna consciousness movement is very much interested in giving the
Western people knowledge by translating the original Sanskrit Vedic
literatures into Western languages.

The word vivikta-padam refers to the path of logical discourses
concerning the aim of life. If one does not discuss that which is important
in life, one is put into darkness and must struggle for existence. What,
then, is the benefit of his advancement in knowledge? The people of the
West are seeing their students becoming hippies, despite gorgeous
arrangements for university education. The Krsna consciousness
movement, however, is trying to convert misguided, drug-addicted
students to the service of Krsna and engage them in the best welfare
activities for human society.

TEXT 19
कालचक्रं भरमि तीक्ष्णं ad निष्कषयज्गत्‌ |
खवतन्त्रमबुधस्येह किमसत्करमभिर्भवेत्‌ ।१९॥
kala-cakrari bhrami tiksnam
sarvam niskarsayaj jagat
svatantram abudhasyeha
kim asat-karmabhir bhavet


--- Page 287 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5

kala-cakram—the wheel of eternal time; bhrami—revolving
automatically; tiksnam—very sharp; sarvam—all; niskarsayat—
driving; jagat—the world; sva-tantram—independent, not caring for
the so-called scientists and philosophers; abudhasya—of one who does
not know (this principle of time); tha—in this material world; kim asat-
karmabhih bhavet—what is the use of engaging in temporary fruitive
activities.

TRANSLATION

[Narada Muni had spoken of a physical object made of sharp
blades and thunderbolts. The Harya$vas understood this allegory
as follows.] Eternal time moves very sharply, as if made of razors
and thunderbolts. Uninterrupted and fully independent, it drives
the activities of the entire world. If one does not try to study the
eternal element of time, what benefit can he derive from
performing temporary material activities?

PURPORT

This verse explains the words ksaura-pavyari svayarin bhrami, which
especially refer to the orbit of eternal time. It is said that time and tide
wait for no man. According to the moral instructions of the great
politician Canakya Pandita:

ayusah ksana eko ‘pi
na labhya svarna-kotibhih
na cen nirarthakari nitih
ka ca hanis tato 'dhika

Even a moment of one’s lifetime could not be returned in exchange for
millions of dollars. Therefore one should consider how much loss one
suffers if he wastes even a moment of his life for nothing. Living like an
animal, not understanding the goal of life, one foolishly thinks that there
is no eternity and that his life span of fifty, sixty, or, at the most, one
hundred years, is everything. This is the greatest foolishness. Time is
eternal, and in the material world one passes through different phases of
his eternal life. Time is compared herein to a sharp razor. A razor is


--- Page 288 ---
Text 20] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 283
meant to shave the hair from one’s face, but if not carefully handled, the
razor will cause disaster. One is advised not to create a disaster by
misusing his lifetime. One should be extremely careful to utilize the span
of his life for spiritual realization, or Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 20
५ <
Free पितुरादेशं यो न वैद ॒निवतेकम्‌ |
ক বে
कथं तदनुरूपाय য়নয্যানিস্তফ্যযুদন্চমীন্‌ IR
Sastrasya pitur adesam
yo na veda nivartakam
katharm tad-anuripaya
guna-visrambhy upakramet
Sastrasya—of the scriptures; pituh—of the father; adesam—the
instruction; yah—one who; na—not; veda—understands;
nivartakam—which brings about the cessation of the material way of
life; katham—how; tat-anuripaya—to follow the instruction of the
Sastras; guna-visrambhi—a person entangled in the three modes of
material nature; upakramet—can engage in the creation of progeny.
TRANSLATION
[Narada Muni had asked how one could ignorantly defy one’s
own father. The Haryasvas understood the meaning of this
question.] One must accept the original instructions of the astra.
According to Vedic civilization, one is offered a sacred thread as a
sign of second birth. One takes his second birth by dint of having
received instructions in the $astra from a bona fide spiritual
master. Therefore, $astra, scripture, is the real father. All the
Sastras instruct that one should end his material way of life. If one
does not know the purpose of the father’s orders, the $astras, he is
ignorant. The words of a material father who endeavors to engage
his son in material activities are not the real instructions of the
father.


--- Page 289 ---
॥

284. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
PURPORT

Bhagavad-gita (16.7) says, pravrttim ca nivrttim ca jana na vidur
asurah: demons, who are less than human beings but are not called
animals, do not know the meaning of pravrtti and nivrtti, work to be done
and work not to be done. In the material world, every living entity has a
desire to lord it over the material world as much as possible. This is
called pravrtti-marga. All the sastras, however, advise nivrtti-marga, or
release from the materialistic way of life. Apart from the $astras of the
Vedic civilization, which is the oldest of the world, other $astras agree on
this point. For example, in the Buddhist sastras Lord Buddha advises that
one achieve nirvana by giving up the materialistic way of life. In the
Bible, which is also $astra, one will find the same advice: one should
cease materialistic life and return to the kingdom of God. In any s$astra
one may examine, especially the Vedic sastra, the same advice is given:
one should give up his materialistic life and return to his original,
spiritual life. Sankaracarya also propounds the same conclusion. Brahma
satya jagan mithya: this material world or materialistic life is simply
illusion, and therefore one should stop his illusory activities and come to
the platform of Brahman.

The word $astra refers to the scriptures, particularly the Vedic books
of knowledge. The Vedas—Sama, Yajur, Rg and Atharva—and any
other books deriving knowledge from these Vedas are considered Vedic
literatures. Bhagavad-gita is the essence of all Vedic knowledge, and
therefore it is the scripture whose instructions should be especially
accepted. In this essence of all sastras, Krsna personally advises that one
give up all other duties and surrender unto Him (sarva-dharman
parityajya mam ekarih Saranarn vraja).

One should be initiated into following the principles of $astra. In
offering initiation, our Krsna consciousness movement asks one to come
to the conclusion of Sastra by taking the advice of the supreme speaker of
the sastra, Krsna, forgetting the principles of the materialistic way of
life. Therefore the principles we advise are no illicit sex, no intoxication,
no gambling and no meat-eating. These four types of engagement will
enable an intelligent person to get free from the materialistic life and
return home, back to Godhead.

In regard to the instructions of the father and mother, it may be said
that every living entity, including even the insignificant cats, dogs and


--- Page 290 ---
Text 20] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 285
serpents, takes birth of a father and mother. Therefore, getting a
material father and mother is not a problem. In every form of life, birth
after birth, the living entity gets a father and mother. In human society,
however, if one is satisfied with his material father and mother and their
instructions and does not make further progress by accepting a spiritual
master and being educated in the $astras, he certainly remains in
darkness. The material father and mother are important only if they are
interested in educating their son to become free from the clutches of
death. As instructed by Rsabhadeva (Bhag. 5.5.18): pita na sa syaj
Jjanani na sa syat/ na mocayed yah samupeta-mrtyum. One should not
strive to become a mother or father if one cannot save one’s dependent
son from the impending danger of death. A parent who does not know
how to save his son has no value because such fathers and mothers may
be had in any form of life, even among the cats, dogs and so on. Only a
father and mother who can elevate their son to the spiritual platform are
bona fide parents. Therefore according to the Vedic system it is said,
Jjanmana jayate $007018: one is born of a material father and mother as a
Sidra. The purpose of life, however, is to become a brahmana, a first-
class man.

A first-class intelligent man is called a brahmana because he knows
the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Truth. According to the Vedic
instructions, tad-vijianartharm sa gurum evabhigacchet: to know this
science, one must approach a bona fide guru, a spiritual master who will
initiate the disciple with the sacred thread so that he may understand the
Vedic knowledge. Janmana jayate Siidrah sarmskarad dhi bhaved dvijah.
Becoming a brahmana through the endeavor of a bona fide spiritual
master is called sariskara. After initiation, one is engaged in study of the
Sastra, which teaches the student how to gain release from materialistic
life and return home, back to Godhead.

The Krsna consciousness movement is teaching this higher knowledge
of retiring from materialistic life to return to Godhead, but
unfortunately many parents are not very satisfied with this movement.
Aside from the parents of our students, many businessmen are also
dissatisfied because we teach our students to abandon intoxication, meat-
eating, illicit sex and gambling. If the Krsna consciousness movement
spreads, the so-called businessmen will have to close their
slaughterhouses, breweries and cigarette factories. Therefore they are


--- Page 291 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
also very much afraid. However, we have no alternative than to teach our
disciples to free themselves from materialistic life. We must instruct
them in the opposite of material life to save them from the repetition of
birth and death.

Narada Muni, therefore, advised the Haryasvas, the sons of Prajapati
Daksa, that instead of begetting progeny, it would be better to leave and
achieve the perfection of spiritual understanding according to the
instructions of the $astras. The importance of the sastras is mentioned in
Bhagavad-gita (16.23):

yah $astra-vidhim utsrjya
vartate kama-karatah
na sa siddhim avapnoti
na sukham na param gatim
“One who disregards the injunctions of the Sastras and acts whimsically,
as he likes, never achieves the perfection of life, not to speak of
happiness. Nor does he return home to the spiritual world.”
TEXT 21
इति व्यवसिता राजन्‌ हर्यश्वा एकचेतसः ।
५ (५
प्रययुस्तं परिक्रम्य पन्थानमनिवतेनम्‌ ॥।२१॥
iti vyavasita rajan
haryasva eka-cetasah
prayayus tam parikramya
panthanam anivartanam

iti—thus; vyavasitah—being fully convinced by the instructions of
Narada Muni; rajan—O King; haryasvah—the sons of Prajapati Daksa;
eka-cetasah—all being of the same opinion; prayayuh—Ileft; tam—
Narada Muni; parikramya—circumambulating; panthanam—on the
path; anivartanam—which does not bring one back again to this
material world.


--- Page 292 ---
Text 21] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 287
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, after hearing the
instructions of Narada, the HaryasSvas, the sons of Prajapati Daksa,
were firmly convinced. They all believed in his instructions and
reached the same conclusion. Having accepted him as their
spiritual master, they circumambulated that great sage and
followed the path by which one never returns to this world.

PURPORT

From this verse we can understand the meaning of initiation and the
duties of a disciple and spiritual master. The spiritual master never
instructs his disciple, “Take a mantra from me, pay me some money, and
by practicing this yoga system you will become very expert in
materialistic life.” This is not the duty of a spiritual master. Rather, the
spiritual master teaches the disciple how to give up materialistic life, and
the disciple’s duty is to assimilate his instructions and ultimately follow
the path back home, back to Godhead, from whence no one returns to
this material world.

After hearing the instructions of Narada Muni, the Haryasvas, the
sons of Prajapati Daksa, decided not to be entangled in materialistic life
by begetting hundreds of children and having to take care of them. This
would have been unnecessarily entangling. The Harya$vas did not
consider pious and impious activities. Their materialistic father had
instructed them to increase the population, but because of the words of
Narada Muni, they could not heed that instruction. Narada Muni, as their
spiritual master, gave them the $astric instructions that they should give
up this material world, and as bona fide disciples they followed his
instructions. One should not endeavor to wander to different planetary
systems within this universe, for even if one goes to the topmost plan-
etary system, Brahmaloka, one must return again (ksine punye martya-
lokari visanti). The endeavors of karmis are a useless waste of time. One
should endeavor to return home, back to Godhead. This is the perfection
of life. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (8.16):

abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
punar avartino ’‘rjuna


--- Page 293 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
mam upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate
“From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all
are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But one
who attains to My abode, O son of Kunti, never takes birth again.”
TEXT 22
Ste निमातदृषीकेशपदाम्बुजे ।
अखण्डं चित्तमावेश्य लोकाननुचरन्युनिः RRA
svara-brahmani nirbhata-
hrstkesa-padambuje
akhandari cittam avesya
lokan anucaran munih
svara-brahmani—in spiritual sound; nirbhata—placing clearly
before the mind; hrstkeSa—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna, the master of the senses; padambuje—the lotus feet;
akhandam —unbroken;  cittam—consciousness; = aveSya—engaging;
lokan—all the planetary systems; anucarat—traveled around; munih—
the great sage Narada Muni.
TRANSLATION
The seven musical notes —sa, ए, ga, ma, pa, dha and ni —are used
in musical instruments, but originally they come from the Sama
Veda. The great sage Narada vibrates sounds describing the
pastimes of the Supreme Lord. By such transcendental vibrations,
such as Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, he fixes his mind at
the lotus feet of the Lord. Thus he directly perceives Hrsikesa, the
master of the senses. After delivering the Harya$vas, Narada Muni
continued traveling throughout the planetary systems, his mind
always fixed at the lotus feet of the Lord.


--- Page 294 ---
Text 22] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 289
PURPORT
The goodness of the great sage Narada Muni is described herewith. He
always chants about the pastimes of the Lord and delivers the fallen souls
back to Godhead. In this regard, Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has sung:
narada-muni, bajaya vind,
‘radhika-ramana’-name
nama amani, udita haya,
bhakata-gita-same
amiya-dhara, varise ghana,
Sravana-yugale giya
bhakata-jana, saghane nace,
bhariya apana hiya
madhuri-pira, asaba pasi’,
mataya jagata-jane
keha va kande, keha va nace,
keha mate mane mane
pafica-vadana, narade dhari’,
premera saghana rola
kamalasana, naciya bale,
‘bola bola hari bola’
sahasranana, parama-sukhe,
‘hari hari’ bali’ gaya
nama-prabhave, matila visva,
nama-rasa sabe paya
sri-krsna-nama, rasane sphuri’,
pura’la amara asa
Sri-riipa-pade, yacaye iha,
bhakativinoda dasa
The purport of this song is that Narada Muni, the great soul, plays a
stringed instrument called a vind, vibrating the sound radhika-ramana,


--- Page 295 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
which is another name for Krsna. As soon as he strokes the strings, all
the devotees begin responding, making a very beautiful vibration.
Accompanied by the stringed instrument, the singing seems like a
shower of nectar, and all the devotees dance in ecstasy to the fullest
extent of their satisfaction. While dancing, they appear madly
intoxicated with ecstasy, as if drinking the beverage called madhuri-
piira. Some of them cry, some of them dance, and some of them,
although unable to dance publicly, dance within their hearts. Lord Siva
embraces Narada Muni and begins talking in an ecstatic voice, and seeing
Lord Siva dancing with Narada, Lord Brahma also joins, saying, “All of
you kindly chant ‘Hari bol! Hari bol!” ”* The King of heaven, Indra, also
gradually joins with great satisfaction and begins dancing and chanting
“Hari bol! Hari bol!” In this way, by the influence of the transcendental
vibration of the holy name of God, the whole universe becomes ecstatic.
Bhaktivinoda Thakura says, “When the universe becomes ecstatic, my
desire 15 satisfied. I therefore pray unto the lotus feet of Ripa Gosvami
that this chanting of harer n@ama may go on nicely like this.”

Lord Brahma is the guru of Narada Muni, who is the guru of
Vyasadeva, and Vyasadeva is the guru of Madhvacarya. Thus the
Gaudiya-Madhva-sampradaya is in the disciplic succession from Narada
Muni. The members of this disciplic succession—in other words, the
members of the Krsna consciousness movement—should follow in the
footsteps of Narada Muni by chanting the transcendental vibration Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare. They should go everywhere to deliver the fallen
souls by vibrating the Hare Krsna mantra, and the instructions of
Bhagavad-gita, Srimad-Bhagavatam and Caitanya-caritamrta. That
will please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can spiritually
advance if one actually follows the instructions of Narada Muni. If one
pleases Narada Muni, then the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hrsikesa, is also pleased (yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah). The
immediate spiritual master is the representative of Narada Muni; there is
no difference between the instructions of Narada Muni and those of the
present spiritual master. Both Narada Muni and the present spiritual
erp peak the same teachings of Krsna, who says in Bhagavad-gita

18.65-66):


--- Page 296 ---
Text 23] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 291
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mar namaskuru
mam evaisyasi satyari te
pratijane priyo ’si me
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekarn Saranam vraja
aham tvarm sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma Sucah
“Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer
your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise
you this because you are My very dear friend. Abandon all varieties of
religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful
reaction. Do not fear.”
TEXT 23
नाशं निशम्य mn নাংহাক্ীকযাত্তিনাঘৃ।
अन्वतप्यत कः शोचन्‌ सुप्रजस्त्वं IT TH 113
70507 nisamya putranam
naradac chila-salinam
anvatapyata kah Socan
suprajastvari 5२८८677 padam
nasam—the loss; nisamya—hearing of; putranam—of his sons;
naradat—from Narada; S$ila-Salinam—who were the best of well-
behaved persons; anvatapyata—suffered; kah—Prajapati Daksa;
Socan—lamenting; su-prajastvam —having ten thousand well-behaved
sons; Sucam—of lamentation; padam—position.
TRANSLATION
The Harya$vas, the sons of Prajapati Daksa, were very well-
behaved, cultured sons, but unfortunately, because of the
instructions of Narada Muni, they deviated from the order of their


--- Page 297 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
father. When Daksa heard this news, which was brought to him by
Narada Muni, he began to lament. Although he was the father of
such good sons, he had lost them all. Certainly this was lamentable.
PURPORT

The Haryasvas, the sons of Prajapati Daksa, were certainly well-
behaved, learned and advanced, and in accordance with the order of
their father they went to perform austerities to beget good sons for their
family. But Narada Muni took advantage of their good behavior and
culture to properly direct them not to be involved with this material
world, but to use their culture and knowledge to end their material
affairs. The Haryasvas abided by the order of Narada Muni, but when
news of this was brought to Prajapati Daksa, the prajapati, instead of
being happy with the actions of Narada Muni, was extremely sorrowful.
Similarly, we are trying to bring as many young men as possible to the
Krsna consciousness movement for their ultimate benefit, but the
parents of the young men joining this movement, being very sorry, are
lamenting and making counterpropaganda. Of course, Prajapati Daksa
did not make propaganda against Narada Muni, but later, as we shall see,
Daksa cursed Narada Muni for his benevolent activities. This is the way
of materialistic life. A materialistic father and mother want to engage
their sons in begetting children, striving for improved economic
conditions, and rotting in materialistic life. They are not unhappy when
their children become spoiled, useless citizens, but they lament when
they join the Krsna consciousness movement to achieve the ultimate goal
of life. This animosity between parents and the Krsna consciousness
movement has existed since time immemorial. Even Narada Muni was
condemned, not to speak of others. Nevertheless, Narada Muni never
gives up his mission. To deliver as many fallen souls as possible, he
continues playing his musical instrument and vibrating the
transcendental sound Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rima, Rima Rama, Hare Hare.

TEXT 24
स भूयः पाश्चजन्यायामजेन परिसान्त्वितः |
पुत्रानजनयद्‌ दश्च सवलाश्वान्‌ सहसिणः ॥२४॥


--- Page 298 ---
Text 25] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 293
sa bhityah pancajanyayam
ajena parisantvitah
putran ajanayad daksah
savalasvan sahasrinah
sah—Prajapati Daksa; bhiyah—again; pancajanyayam—in the
womb of his wife Asikni, or Paficajani; ajena—by Lord Brahma;
parisantvitah—being pacified;  putran—sons;  ajanayat—begot;
daksah—Prajapati Daksa; savaldsvan—named the Savalaévas;
sahasrinah—numbering one thousand.
TRANSLATION
When Prajapati Daksa was lamenting for his lost children, Lord
Brahma pacified him with instructions, and thereafter Daksa begot
one thousand more children in the womb of his wife, Paficajani.
This time his sons were known as the Savalasvas.
PURPORT
Prajapati Daksa was so named because he was very expert in begetting
children. (The word daksa means “‘expert.”) First he begot ten thousand
children in the womb of his wife, and when the children were lost—
when they returned home, back to Godhead —he begot another set of
children, known as the Savalasvas. Prajapati Daksa is very expert in
begetting children, and Narada Muni is very expert in delivering all the
conditioned souls back home, back to Godhead. Therefore the
materialistic experts do not agree with the spiritual expert Narada Muni,
but this does not mean that Narada Muni will give up his engagement of
chanting the Hare Krsna mantra.
TEXT 25
ते च पित्रा समादिष्टाः प्रजासर्गे व्रताः |
Q
नारायणसरो EAA सिद्धाः स्वपूर्वजाः ॥२५॥
te ca pitra samadistah
praja-sarge dhrta-vratah


--- Page 299 ---
294 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
narayana-saro jagmur
yatra siddhah sva-pirvajah

te—these sons (the Savalaévas); ca—and; pitra—by their father;
samadistah—being ordered; praja-sarge—in increasing progeny or
population; dhrta-vratah—accepted vows; narayana-sarah—the holy
lake named Narayana-saras; jagmuh—went to; yatra—where;
siddhah—perfected; sva-piirva-jah—their older brothers, who had
previously gone there.

TRANSLATION

In accordance with their father’s order to beget children, the
second group of sons also went to Narayana-saras, the same place
where their brothers had previously attained perfection by
following the instructions of Narada. Undertaking great vows of
austerity, the Savala§vas remained at that holy place.

PURPORT

Prajapati Daksa sent his second group of sons to the same place where
his previous sons had attained perfection. He did not hesitate to send his
second group of sons to the same place, although they too might become
victims of Narada’s instructions. According to the Vedic culture, one
should be trained in spiritual understanding as a brahmacari before
entering household life to beget children. This is the Vedic system. Thus
Prajapati Daksa sent his second group of sons for cultural improvement,
despite the risk that because of the instructions of Narada they might
become as intelligent as their older brothers. As a dutiful father, he did
not hesitate to allow his sons to receive cultural instructions concerning
the perfection of life; he depended upon them to choose whether to
return home, back to Godhead, or to rot in this material world in various
species of life. In all circumstances, the duty of the father is to give
cultural education to his sons, who must later decide which way to go.
Responsible fathers should not hinder their sons who are making
cultural advancement in association with the Krsna consciousness move-
ment. This is not a father’s duty. The duty of a father is to give his son
complete freedom to make his choice after becoming spiritually advanced
by following the instructions of the spiritual master.


--- Page 300 ---
Text 26] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 295
TEXT 26
तदुपस्पक्ष॑नादेव दिविभूतमठाशयाः ।
जपन्तो ब्रह्म परमं तेपुस्तत्र महत्‌ तपः ॥२६॥
tad-upasparsanad eva
vinirdhiita-malasayah
Japanto brahma paramari
tepus tatra mahat tapah

tat—of that holy place; upasparsanat—by bathing regularly in the
water; eva—indeed; vinirdhitta—completely purified; mala-asayah—
of all the dirt within the heart; japantah—chanting or murmuring;
brahma— mantras beginning with om (such as orn tad 15001 paramam
padam sada pasyanti sirayah); paramam—the ultimate goal; tepuh—
performed; tatra—there; mahat—great; tapah—penances.

TRANSLATION

At Narayana-saras, the second group of sons performed
penances in the same way as the first. They bathed in the holy
water, and by its touch all the dirty material desires in their hearts
were cleansed away. They murmured mantras beginning with
ormkara and underwent a severe course of austerities.

PURPORT

Every Vedic mantra is called brahma because each mantra is preceded
by the brahmaksara, aum or 07270. For example, 07 namo bhagavate
vasudevaya. Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (7.8), pranavah sarva-
vedesu: “In all the Vedic mantras, I am represented by pranava, or
omkara.” Thus chanting of the Vedic mantras beginning with omkara is
directly chanting of Krsna’s name. There is no difference. Whether one
chants oritkdra or addresses the Lord as Krsna, the meaning is the same,
but Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has recommended that in this age one
chant the Hare Krsna mantra (harer nama eva kevalam). Although
there is no difference between Hare Krsna and the Vedic mantras
beginning with omkara, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the leader of the


--- Page 301 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
spiritual movement for this age, has recommended that one chant Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
TEXTS 27-28
अम्भक्षाः कतिचिन्मासान्‌ कतिचिद्‌ নান্তুমীজনাঃ।
आराधयन्‌ मन्त्रमिममम्यस्यन्त इडस्पतिम्‌ Rell
ॐ नमो नारायणाय पुरुषाय महात्मने |
विद्द्वसत्तधिष्ण्याय महाहंसाय धीमहि ॥२८॥
ab-bhaksah katicin masan
katicid vayu-bhojanah
aradhayan mantram imam
abhyasyanta idaspatim
or namo narayanaya
purusaya mahatmane
visuddha-sattva-dhisnyaya
maha-hamsaya dhimahi
ap-bhaksah—drinking only water; katicit masan—for some months;
katicit—for some; wvayu-bhojandh—merely breathing, or eating air;
aradhayan—worshiped; mantram imam—this mantra, which 15
nondifferent from Narayana; abhyasyantah—practicing; idah-patim—
the master of all mantras, Lord Visnu; orm —O Lord; namah—respectful
obeisances; narayandya—unto Lord Narayana; purusdya—the
Supreme Person; mahad-atmane—the exalted Supersoul; visuddha-
sattva-dhisnyaya—who is always situated in the transcendental abode;
maha-harsaya—the great swanlike Personality of Godhead; dhimahi—
we always offer.
TRANSLATION
For a few months the sons of Prajapati Daksa drank only water
and ate only air. Thus undergoing great austerities, they recited
this mantra: ‘Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto


--- Page 302 ---
Text 29] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 297
Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is always
situated in His transcendental abode. Since He is the Supreme
Person [paramaharnsa], let us offer our respectful obeisances unto
Him.”
PURPORT

From these verses it is apparent that the chanting of the maha-mantra
or the Vedic mantras must be accompanied by severe austerities. In Kali-
yuga, people cannot undergo severe austerities like those mentioned
herein —drinking only water and eating only air for many months. One
cannot imitate such a process. But at least one must undergo some
austerity by giving up four unwanted principles, namely illicit sex, meat-
eating, intoxication and gambling. Anyone can easily practice this
tapasya, and then the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra will be
effective without delay. One should not give up the process of austerity.
If possible, one should bathe in the waters of the Ganges or Yamuna, or
in the absence of the Ganges and Yamuna one may bathe in the water of
the sea. This is an item of austerity. Our Krsna consciousness movement
has therefore established two very large centers, one in Vrndavana and
another in Mayapur, Navadvipa. There one may bathe in the Ganges or
Yamuna, chant the Hare Krsna mantra and thus become perfect and
return home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 29
-
इति तानपि राजेनद्र प्रजासगेधियो सनिः |
उपेत्य नारदः সাহু वाचःङटानि पूववत्‌ ॥२९॥
iti tan api rajendra
praja-sarga-dhiyo munih
upetya naradah praha
vacah katani pirvavat

iti—thus; tan—them (the sons of Prajapati Daksa known as the
Savalaévas); api—also; rajendra—O King Pariksit; praja-sarga-
dhiyah—who were under the impression that begetting children was the
most important duty; munih—the great sage; upetya—approaching;


--- Page 303 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
naradah—Narada; praha—said; vacah—words; kiitani—enigmatic;
purva-vat—as he had done previously.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, Narada Muni approached these sons of
Prajapati Daksa, who were engaged in tapasya to beget children,
and spoke enigmatic words to them just as he had spoken to their
elder brothers.
TEXT 30
दाक्षायणाः HE गदतो निगमं मम ।
अन्विच्छतानुपदवीं भ्रातृणां जआदवत्सलाः ॥२०॥
daksayanah 50771610080
gadato nigamari mama
anvicchatanupadavirn
bhratrnar bhratr-vatsalah
daksayanah—O sons of Prajapati Daksa; samsrnuta—please hear
with attention; gadatah—who am speaking; nigamam—instruction;
mama —my; anvicchata—follow; anupadavim—the path; bhratfnam—
of your brothers; bhratr-vatsalah—O you who are very much
affectionate to your brothers.
TRANSLATION
O sons of Daksa, please hear my words of instruction attentively.
You are all very affectionate to your elder brothers, the Haryasvas.
Therefore you should follow their path.
PURPORT
Narada Muni encouraged Prajapati Daksa’s second group of sons by
awakening their natural affinity for their brothers. He urged them to
follow their older brothers if they were at all affectionate toward them.
Family affection is very strong, and therefore Narada Muni followed this
tactic of reminding them of their family relationship with the Haryasvas.


--- Page 304 ---
Text 31] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 299
Generally the word nigama refers to the Vedas, but here nigama refers
to the instructions contained in the Vedas. Srimad-Bhagavatam says,
nigama-kalpa-taror galitarh phalam: the Vedic instructions are like a
tree, of which Srimad-Bhagavatam is the ripened fruit. Narada Muni is
engaged in distributing this fruit, and therefore he instructed Vyasadeva
to write this Maha-purana, Srimad-Bhagavatam, for the benefit of
ignorant human society.
anarthopasamar saksad
bhakti-yogam adhoksaje
lokasyajanato vidvarns
cakre satvata-sarithitam
“The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to
him, can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional
service. But the mass of people do not know this, and therefore the
learned Vyasadeva compiled this Vedic literature, which is in relation to
the Supreme Truth.” (Bhag. 1.7.6) People are suffering because of
ignorance and are following a wrong path for happiness. This is called
anartha. These material activities will never make them happy, and
therefore Narada instructed Vyasadeva to record the instructions of
Srimad-Bhagavatam. Vyasadeva actually followed Narada and did this.
Srimad-Bhagavatam is the supreme instruction of the Vedas. Galitari
phalam: the ripened fruit of the Vedas is Srimad-Bhagavatam.
TEXT 31
आतृणां प्रायणं भ्राता योऽुतिष्ठति wif ।
स पुण्यबन्धुः पुरुषो मरुद्धिः सह मोदते UR
bhratrnam prayanar bhrata
yo ’nutisthati dharmavit
sa punya-bandhuh puruso
marudbhih saha modate
bhratrnam—of elder brothers; prayanam—the path; bhrata—a
faithful brother; yah—one who; anutisthati—follows; dharma-vit—


--- Page 305 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
knowing the religious principles; sah—that; punya-bandhuh—highly
pious; purusah—person; marudbhih—the demigods of the winds;
saha—with; modate—enjoys life.
TRANSLATION
A brother aware of the principles of religion follows in the
footsteps of his elder brothers. Because of being highly elevated,
such a pious brother gets the opportunity to associate and enjoy
with demigods like the Maruts, who are all affectionate to their
brothers.
PURPORT
According to their belief in various material relationships, people are
promoted to various planets. Here it is said that one who is very faithful
to his brothers should follow a path similar to theirs and get the oppor-
tunity for promotion to Marudloka. Narada Muni advised Prajapati
Daksa’s second group of sons to follow their elder brothers and be pro-
moted to the spiritual world.
TEXT 32
(५
एतावदुक्त्वा प्रययो नारदोऽमोषद श्नः |
तेऽपि चान्वगमन्‌ मागं ज्ातृणामेव मारिष ॥३२॥
etavad uktva prayayau
narado ’mogha-darsanah
te ’pi canvagaman margam
bhratrnam eva marisa
etavat—this much; uktvd —speaking; prayayau—departed from that
place; naradah—the great sage Narada; amogha-darsanah—whose
glance is all-auspicious; te—they; api—also; ca—and; anvagaman—
followed; margam—the path; bhratfnam—of their previous brothers;
eva—indeed; marisa—O great Aryan king.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: 0 best of the advanced Aryans,
after saying this much to the sons of Prajapati Daksa, Narada


--- Page 306 ---
Text 34] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 301
Muni, whose merciful glance never goes in vain, left as he had
planned. The sons of Daksa followed their elder brothers. Not
attempting to produce children, they engaged themselves in Krsna
consciousness.
TEXT 33
सध्रीचीनं प्रतीचीनं परस्यानुपथं गताः ।
নাল্রাদি ते निवर्तन्ते पिमा यामिनीरिव ॥२२॥
sadhricinam praticinari
parasyanupathari gatah
. nadyapi te nivartante
pascima yaminir iva
sadhricinam —completely correct;  praticinam —obtainable by
adopting a mode of life aimed at the highest goal, devotional service;
parasya—of the Supreme Lord; anupatham—the pathway; gatah—
taking to; na—not; adya api—even until today; te—they (the sons of
Prajapati Daksa); nivartante—have come back: pascimah—western
(those that have past); yaminih—nights; va—like.
TRANSLATION
The Savalasvas took to the correct path, which is obtainable by a
mode of life meant to achieve devotional service, or the mercy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Like nights that have gone
to the west, they have not returned even until now.
TEXT 34
एतसिन्‌ काल उत्पातान्‌ बहून्‌ पश्यन्‌ प्रनापतिः।
पूर्ववारदकृतं पुजनाञ्पुपापरणोत्‌ IEE
etasmin kala utpatan
bahian pasyan prajapatih
pirvavan narada-krtar
putra-nasam upasrnot


--- Page 307 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5

etasmin—at this; kale—time; utpatan—disturbances; bahian—
many; pa$yan—seeing; prajapatih—Prajapati Daksa; parva-vat—like
before; narada—by the great sage Narada Muni; krtam—done; putra-
nasam—the loss of his children; upasrnot—he heard of.

TRANSLATION

At this time, Prajapati Daksa observed many inauspicious signs,
and he heard from various sources that his second group of sons,
the Savalasvas, had followed the path of their elder brothers in
accordance with the instructions of Narada.

TEXT 35
TAN नारदायासौ पुत्र शोरूबिमून्कितः |
वेवर्षि्पलम्याह  रोषाद्िस्फरिताधरः ॥३५॥
cukrodha naradayasau
putra-Soka-vimiircchitah
devarsim upalabhyaha
rosad visphuritadharah

cukrodha—became very angry; ndradaya—at the great sage Narada
Muni; asau—that one (Daksa); putra-Soka—due to lamentation for the
loss of his children; vimircchitah—almost fainting; devarsim—the great
sage Devarsi Narada; upalabhya—seeing; aha—he said; rosat—out of
great anger; visphurita—trembling; adharah—whose lips.

TRANSLATION

When he heard that the SavalaSvas had also left this world to
engage in devotional service, Daksa was angry at Narada, and he
almost fainted due to lamentation. When Daksa met Narada,
Daksa’s lips began trembling in anger, and he spoke as follows.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that Narada Muni had

delivered the entire family of Svayambhuva Manu, beginning with


--- Page 308 ---
Text 36] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 303
Priyavrata and Uttanapada. He had delivered Uttanapada’s son Dhruva
and had even delivered Pracinabarhi, who was engaged in fruitive
activities. Nevertheless, he could not deliver Prajapati Daksa. Prajapati
Daksa saw Narada before him because Narada had personally come to
deliver him. Narada Muni took the opportunity to approach Prajapati
Daksa in his bereavement because the time of bereavement is a suitable
time for appreciating bhakti-yoga. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.16),
four kinds of men—arta (one who is distressed), artharthi (one in need
of money), jijiasu (one who is inquisitive) and jiani (a person in
knowledge) —try to understand devotional service. Prajapati Daksa was
in great distress because of the loss of his sons, and therefore Narada
took the opportunity to instruct him regarding liberation from material
bondage.
TEXT 36
श्रीदक्ष उवाच
अहो असाधो साधूनां साधु लिङ्गेन नस्त्वया ।
असाष्वकायभेकाणां fra: प्द्चितः 1280
$ri-daksa uvdca
aho asadho sadhana
sadhu-lingena nas tvaya
asadhv akary arbhakanam
bhiksor margah pradarsitah

sri-daksah uvaca—Prajapati Daksa said; aho asadho—O greatly
dishonest nondevotee; sadhiinam—of the society of devotees and great
sages; sadhu-lingena—wearing the dress of a saintly person; nah—unto
us; twayd—by you; asadhu—a dishonesty; akari—has been done;
arbhakanam—of poor boys who were very inexperienced; bhiksoh
margah —the path of a beggar or mendicant sannydasi; pradarsitah—
shown.

TRANSLATION

Prajapati Daksa said: Alas, Narada Muni, you wear the dress of a

saintly person, but you are not actually a saint. Indeed, although I


--- Page 309 ---
304 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
am now in grhastha life, I am a saintly person. By showing my sons
the path of renunciation, you have done me an abominable
injustice.

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, sannydsira alpa chidra sarva-loke
gaya (Cc. Madhya 12.51). In society one will find many sannyasts,
vanaprasthas, grhasthas and brahmacaris, but if all of them properly
live in accordance with their duties, they are understood to be sadhus.
Prajapati Daksa was certainly a sadhu because he had executed such
great austerities that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu,
had appeared before him. Nevertheless, he had a fault-finding mentality.
He improperly thought Narada Muni to be asadhu, or nonsaintly,
because Narada had foiled his intentions. Desiring to train his sons to
become grhasthas fully equipped with knowledge, Daksa had sent them
to execute austerities by Narayana-saras. Narada Muni, however, taking
advantage of their highly elevated position in austerity, instructed them
to become Vaisnavas in the renounced order. This is the duty of Narada
Muni and his followers. They must show everyone the path of
renouncing this material world and returning home, back to Godhead.
Prajapati Daksa, however, could not see the exaltedness of the duties
Narada Muni performed in relation to his sons. Unable to appreciate
Narada Muni’s behavior, Daksa accused Narada of being asadhu.

The words bhiksor marga, “the path of the renounced order,” are
very significant in this regard. A sannyast is called tridandi-bhiksu
because his duty is to beg alms from the homes of grhasthas and to give
the grhasthas spiritual instructions. A sannyasi is allowed to beg from
door to door, but a grhastha cannot do so. Grhasthas may earn their
living according to the four divisions of spiritual life. A brahmana
grhastha may earn his livelihood by becoming a learned scholar and
teaching people in general how to worship the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He may also assume the duty of worship himself. Therefore it
is said that only brahmanas may engage in Deity worship, and they may
accept as prasada whatever people offer the Deity. Although a brahmana
may sometimes accept charity, it is not for his personal maintenance but
for the worship of the Deity. Thus a brahmana does not stock anything


--- Page 310 ---
Text 36] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 305
for his future use. Similarly, ksatriyas may collect taxes from the
citizens, and they must also protect the citizens, enforce rules and
regulations, and maintain law and order. VaiSyas should earn their
livelihood through agriculture and cow protection, and $80705 should
maintain their livelihood by serving the three higher classes. Unless one
becomes a brahmana, one cannot take sannyasa. Sannyasis and
brahmacaris may beg alms door to door, but a grhastha cannot.

Prajapati Daksa condemned Narada Muni because Narada, a
brahmacari who could beg from door to door, had made sannydsis of
Daksa’s sons, who were being trained to be grhasthas. Daksa was
extremely angry at Narada because he thought that Narada had done him
a great injustice. According to Daksa’s opinion, Narada Muni had misled
Daksa’s inexperienced sons (asadhv akary arbhakanam). Daksa
regarded his sons as innocent boys who had been misled when Narada
showed them the renounced order of life. Because of all these
considerations, Prajapati Daksa charged that Narada Muni was asadhu
and should not have adopted the dress of a sadhu.

Sometimes a saintly person is misunderstood by grhasthas, especially
when he instructs their young sons to accept Krsna consciousness.
Generally a grhastha thinks that unless one enters grhastha life he
cannot properly enter the renounced order. If a young man immediately
adopts the path of the renounced order in accordance with the
instructions of Narada or a member of his disciplic succession, his
parents become very angry. This same phenomenon is occurring in our
Krsna consciousness movement because we are instructing all the young
boys in the Western countries to follow the path of renunciation. We
allow grhastha life, but a grhastha also follows the path of renunciation.
Even a grhastha has to give up so many bad habits that his parents think
his life has been practically destroyed. We allow no meat-eating, no illicit
sex, no gambling and no intoxication, and consequently the parents
wonder how, if there are so many no’s, one’s life can be positive. In the
Western countries especially, these four prohibited activities practically
constitute the life and soul of the modern population. Therefore parents
sometimes dislike our movement, just as Prajapati Daksa disliked the
activities of Narada and accused Narada of dishonesty. Nevertheless,
although parents may be angry at us, we must perform our duty without


--- Page 311 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
hesitation because we are in the disciplic succession from Narada Muni.

People addicted to householder life wonder how one can give up the
enjoyment of grhastha life, which is a concession for sex enjoyment,
simply to become a mendicant in Krsna consciousness. They do not know
that the householder’s concession for sex life cannot be regulated unless
one accepts the life of a mendicant. The Vedic civilization therefore
enjoins that at the end of one’s fiftieth year one must give up household
life. This is compulsory. However, because modern civilization is misled,
householders want to remain in family life until death, and therefore
they are suffering. In such cases, the disciples of Narada Muni advise all
the members of the younger generation to join the Krsna consciousness
movement immediately. There is nothing wrong in this.

TEXT 37
ऋणैखिधिरघ॒क्तानामयीपांपितररमणाम्‌ |
विघातः श्रेयसः पाप लोकयोरुमयोः Fa: ।।২৩।।
rnais tribhir amuktanam
amimarmsita-karmanam
vighatah sreyasah papa
lokayor ubhayoh krtah

rnaih—from the debts; tribhih—three; amuktanam—of persons not
freed; amimarsita—not considering; karmanam—the path of duty;
vighatah—ruin; sreyasah—of the path of good fortune; papa—O most
sinful (Narada Muni); lokayoh—of the worlds; ubhayoh—both;
krtah—done.

TRANSLATION

Prajapati Daksa said: My sons were not at all freed from their
three debts. Indeed, they did not properly consider their
obligations. O Narada Muni, O personality of sinful action, you
have obstructed their progress toward good fortune in this world
and the next because they are still indebted to the saintly persons,
the demigods and their father.


--- Page 312 ---
Text 37] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 307
PURPORT

As soon as a brahmana takes birth, he assumes three kinds of debts —
debts to great saints, debts to the demigods and debts to his father. The
son of a brahmana must undergo celibacy (brahmacarya) to clear his
debts to the saintly persons, he must perform ritualistic ceremonies to
clear his debts to the demigods, and he must beget children to become
free from his debts to his father. Prajapati Daksa argued that although
the renounced order is recommended for liberation, one cannot attain
liberation unless one fulfills his obligations to the demigods, the saints
and his father. Since Daksa’s sons had not liberated themselves from
these three debts, how could Narada Muni have led them to the
renounced order of life? Apparently, Prajapati Daksa did not know the
final decision of the $astras. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.41):

devarsi-bhitapta-nrnar pitinam
na kirkaro nayam rni ca rajan
sarvatmand yah Saranam Sarapyam
gato mukundari parihrtya kartam

Everyone is indebted to the demigods, to living entities in general, to his
family, to the pitas and so on, but if one fully surrenders to Krsna,
Mukunda, who can give one liberation, even if one performs no yajrias,
one is freed from all debts. Even if one does not repay his debts, he is
freed from all debts if he renounces the material world for the sake of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose lotus feet are the shelter of
everyone. This is the verdict of the Sastra. Therefore Narada Muni was
completely right in instructing the sons of Prajapati Daksa to renounce
this material world immediately and take shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unfortunately, Prajapati Daksa, the father of
the Haryaévas and Savalaévas, did not understand the great service
rendered by Narada Muni. Daksa therefore addressed him as papa (the
personality of sinful activities) and asadhu (a nonsaintly person). Since
Narada Muni was a great saint and Vaisnava, he tolerated all such
accusations from Prajapati Daksa. He merely performed his duty as a
Vaisnava by delivering all the sons of Prajapati Daksa, enabling them to
return home, back to Godhead.


--- Page 313 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
TEXT 38
एवं त्वं निरनुक्रोशो बालानां मतिभिद्धरेः |
पाषदमष्ये चरसि यशोहा निरपत्रपः ॥२८॥
evari (चा niranukroso
balanarm mati-bhid dhareh
parsada-madhye carasi
yaSo-ha nirapatrapah
evam —thus; tvam—you (Narada); niranukrosah—without
compassion; balanam—of innocent, inexperienced boys; mati-bhit—
contaminating the consciousness; hareh—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; parsada-madhye—among the personal associates; carasi—
travel; yasah-ha—defaming the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
nirapatrapah— (although you do not know what you are doing, you are
executing sinful activities) without shame.
TRANSLATION
Prajapati Daksa continued: Thus committing violence against
other living entities and yet claiming to be an associate of Lord
Visnu, you are defaming the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
You needlessly created a mentality of renunciation in innocent
boys, and therefore you are shameless and devoid of compassion.
How could you travel with the personal associates of the Supreme
Lord?
PURPORT
This mentality of Prajapati Daksa still continues even today. When
young boys join the Krsna consciousness movement, their fathers and
so-called guardians are very angry at the propounder of the Krsna
consciousness movement because they think that their sons have been
unnecessarily induced to deprive themselves of the material enjoyments
of eating, drinking and merrymaking. Karmis, fruitive workers, think
that one should fully enjoy his present life in this material world and also
perform some pious activities to be promoted to higher planetary systems
for further enjoyment in the next life. A yogi, however, especially a
bhakti-yogi, is callous to the opinions of this material world. He is not


--- Page 314 ---
Text 39] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 309
interested in traveling to the higher planetary systems of the demigods to
enjoy a long life in an advanced materialistic civilization. As stated by
Prabodhananda Sarasvati, kaivalyarn narakayate tridasa-pir akasa-
puspayate: for a devotee, merging into the Brahman existence is hellish,
and life in the higher planetary systems of the demigods is a will-o’-the-
wisp, a phantasmagoria with no real existence at all. A pure devotee is
not interested in yogic perfection, travel to higher planetary systems, or
oneness with Brahman. He is interested only in rendering service to the
Personality of Godhead. Since Prajapati Daksa was a karmi, he could not
appreciate the great service Narada Muni had rendered his eleven
thousand sons. Instead, he accused Narada Muni of being sinful and
charged that because Narada Muni was associated with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Lord would also be defamed. Thus Daksa
criticized that Narada Muni was an offender to the Lord although he was
known as an associate of the Lord.
TEXT 39
Ad मागवता नित्यं भूतायुग्रहकातराः |
+ A EY
छते त्वां deg वै वैरङ्करमवैरिणाम्‌ ।।২৭।॥
nanu bhagavata nityari
bhitanugraha-katarah
rte tvarh sauhrda-ghnarm vai
vairankaram avairinam

nanu—now; bhagavatah—devotees of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; nityam—eternally; bhita-anugraha-katarah—very much
anxious to bestow benedictions upon the fallen conditioned souls; rte—
except; tvam—yourself; sauhrda-ghnam—a breaker of friendship
(therefore not countable among the bhagavatas, or devotees of the
Lord); vai—indeed; vairam-karam—you create enmity; avairinam—
toward persons who are not enemies.

TRANSLATION 4

All the devotees of the Lord but you are very kind to the

conditioned souls and are eager to benefit others. Although you


--- Page 315 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
wear the dress of a devotee, you create enmity with people who are
not your enemies, or you break friendship and create enmity
between friends. Are you not ashamed of posing as a devotee while
performing these abominable actions?
PURPORT
Such are the criticisms that must be borne by the servants of Narada
Muni in the disciplic succession. Through the Krsna consciousness
movement, we are trying to train young people to become devotees and
return home, back to Godhead, by following rigid regulative principles,
but our service is appreciated neither in India nor abroad in the Western
countries where we are endeavoring to spread this Krsna consciousness
movement. In India the caste brahmanas have become enemies of the
Krsna consciousness movement because we elevate foreigners, who are
supposed to be mlecchas and yavanas, to the position of brahmanas. We
train them in austerities and penances and recognize them as brahmanas
by awarding them sacred threads. Thus the caste brahmanas of India are
very displeased by our activities in the Western world. In the West also,
the parents of the young people who join this movement have also
become enemies. We have no business creating enemies, but the process
is such that nondevotees will always be inimical toward us. Nevertheless,
as stated in the $dstras, a devotee should be both tolerant and merciful.
Devotees engaged in preaching should be prepared to be accused by
ignorant persons, and yet they must be very merciful to the fallen
conditioned souls. If one can execute his duty in the disciplic succession
of Narada Muni, his service will surely be recognized. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gita (18.68-69):
ya idari paramam guhyariu
mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyati
bhakti mayi param krtva
mam evaisyaty asarmsayah
na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamah
bhavita na ca me tasmad
+ anyah priyataro bhuvi


--- Page 316 ---
Text 40] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 311
“For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional
service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me. There is no
servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one
more dear.” Let us continue preaching the message of Lord Krsna and
not be afraid of enemies. Our only duty is to satisfy the Lord by this
preaching, which will be accepted as service by Lord Caitanya and Lord
Krsna. We must sincerely serve the Lord and not be deterred by so-called
enemies.

In this verse the word sauhrda-ghnam (“a breaker of friendship”) is
used. Because Narada Muni and the members of his disciplic succession
disrupt friendships and family life, they are sometimes accused of being
sauhrda-ghnam, creators of enmity between relatives. Actually such
devotees are friends of every living entity (suhrdam sarva-bhatanam),
but they are misunderstood to be enemies. Preaching can be a difficult,
thankless task, but a preacher must follow the orders of the Supreme
Lord and be unafraid of materialistic persons.

TEXT 40
नेत्थं dat विरागः स्यात्‌ त्वया केवलिना मृषा |
मन्यसे ययुपशमं स्नेहपाशनिकन्तनम्‌ ॥४०॥
netthari purisam viragah syat
tvaya kevalina mrsa
manyase yady upasamari
sneha-pasa-nikrntanam

na—not; ittham—in this way; purisam—of persons; viragah—
renunciation; syat—is possible; tvaya—by you; kevalina mrsa—
possessing knowledge falsely; manyase—you think; yadi—if;
upasamam —renunciation of material enjoyment; sneha-pasa—the
bonds of affection; nikrntanam—cutting.

TRANSLATION

Prajapati Daksa continued: If you think that simply awakening
the sense of renunciation will detach one from the material world,
I must say that unless full knowledge is awakened, simply


--- Page 317 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
changing dresses as you have done cannot possibly bring
detachment.
PURPORT

Prajapati Daksa was correct in stating that changing one’s dress cannot
detach one from this material world. The sannyasis of Kali-yuga who
change their robes from white to saffron and then think they can do
whatever they like are more abominable than materialistic grhasthas.
This is not recommended anywhere. Prajapati Daksa was right in
pointing out this defect, but he did not know that Narada Muni had
aroused the spirit of renunciation in the Haryasvas and Savalasvas
through full knowledge. Such enlightened renunciation is desirable. One
should enter the renounced order with full knowledge (jaana-vairagya),
for the perfection of life is possible for one who renounces this material
world in that way. This elevated stage can be reached very easily, as
supported by the statements of Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.7):

vasudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogah prayojitah
Janayaty asu vairagyariu
JjAanar ca yad ahaitukam
“By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Sri
Krsna, one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment
from the world.”” If one seriously engages in devotional service to Lord
Vasudeva, jiana and vairagya are automatically manifest in one’s
person. There is no doubt of this. Prajapati Daksa’s accusation that
Narada had not actually elevated his sons to the platform of knowledge
was not factual. All the sons of Prajapati Daksa had first been raised to
the platform of jiigna and had then automatically renounced this world.
In summary, unless one’s knowledge is awakened, renunciation cannot
take place, for without elevated knowledge one cannot give up
attachment for material enjoyment.
TEXT 41
ATI न जानाति पुमान्‌ विषयतीस्णताम्‌ |
निर्विते खयं तसान्न तथा भिन्नधीः परैः ॥४१॥


--- Page 318 ---
Text 41] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 313
nanubhiya na janati
puman visaya-tiksnatam
nirvidyate svayari tasman
na tatha bhinna-dhih paraih

na—not; anubhiya —experiencing; na—not;  jandti—knows;
pumdn—a person; visaya-tikspatam—the sharpness of material
enjoyment; nirvidyate—becomes aloof; svayam—himself; tasmat—
from that; na tatha—not like that; bhinna-dhih—whose intelligence is
changed; paraih—by others.

TRANSLATION

Material enjoyment is indeed the cause of all unhappiness, but
one cannot give it up unless one has personally experienced how
much suffering it is. Therefore one should be allowed to remain in
so-called material enjoyment while simultaneously advancing in
knowledge to experience the misery of this false material
happiness. Then, without help from others, one will find material
enjoyment detestful. Those whose minds are changed by others do
not become as renounced as those who have personal experience.

PURPORT

It is said that unless a woman becomes pregnant, she cannot under-
stand the trouble of giving birth to a child. Bandhya ki bujhibe prasava-
vedana. The word bandhya means a sterile woman. Such a woman can-
not give birth to a child. How, then, can she perceive the pain of deliv-
ery? According to the philosophy of Prajapati Daksa, a woman should
first become pregnant and then experience the pain of childbirth. Then.
if she is intelligent, she will not want to be pregnant again. Actually.
however, this is not a fact. Sex enjoyment is so strong that a woman be-
comes pregnant and suffers at the time of childbirth, but she becomes
pregnant again, despite her experience. According to Daksa’s philosophy.
one should become implicated in material enjoyment so that after ex-
periencing the distress of such enjoyment, one will automatically
renounce. Material nature, however, is so strong that although a man
suffers at every step, he will not cease his attempts to enjoy (trpyanti


--- Page 319 ---
314 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
neha krpana bahu-duhkha-bhajah). Under the circumstances, unless
one gets the association of a devotee like Narada Muni or his servant in
the disciplic succession, one’s dormant spirit of renunciation cannot be
awakened. It is not a fact that because material enjoyment involves so
many painful conditions one will automatically become detached. One
needs the blessings of a devotee like Narada Muni. Then one can
renounce his attachment for the material world. The young boys and
girls of the Krsna consciousness movement have given up the spirit of
material enjoyment not because of practice but by the mercy of Lord Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and His servants.
TEXT 42
৬ ५१
यन्नस्त्वं कमंसन्धानां साधूनां गृदमेषिनाम्‌ |
$ 6.
कृतवानसि दुमषै विप्रियं तव मर्षितम्‌ ॥४२॥
yan nas ৮৫7) karma-sandhanam
sadhanam grhamedhinam
krtavan asi durmarsam
vipriyar tava marsitam
yat—which; nah—unto us; tvam—you; karma-sandhanam—who
strictly follow the fruitive ritualistic ceremonies according to Vedic
injunctions; sadhiinam—who are honest (because we honestly seek
elevated social standards and bodily comfort); grha-medhinam—
although situated with a wife and children; krtavan asi—have created;
durmarsam —unbearable; vipriyam—wrong; tava—your; marsitam—
forgiven.
TRANSLATION
Although I live in household life with my wife and children, I

honestly follow the Vedic injunctions by engaging in fruitive
activities to enjoy life without sinful reactions. I have performed
all kinds of yajiias, including the deva-yajfa, rsi-yajiia, pitr-yajia
and nr-yajiia. Because these yajiias are called vratas [vows], I am


--- Page 320 ---
Text 43] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 315
known as a grhavrata. Unfortunately, you have given me great
displeasure by misguiding my sons, for no reason, to the path of
renunciation. This can be tolerated once.
PURPORT

Prajapati Daksa wanted to prove that he had been most tolerant in not
having said anything when Narada Muni, for no reason, induced his ten
thousand innocent sons to adopt the path of renunciation. Sometimes
householders are accused of being grhamedhis, for grhamedhis are
satisfied with family life without spiritual advancement. Grhasthas,
however, are different because although grhasthas live in householder
life with their wives and children, they are eager for spiritual
advancement. Wanting to prove that he had been magnanimous to
Narada Muni, Prajapati Daksa stressed that when Narada had misled his
first sons, Daksa had taken no action; he had been kind and tolerant. He
was aggrieved, however, because Narada Muni had misled his sons for a
second time. Therefore he wanted to prove that Narada Muni, although
dressed like a sadhu, was not actually a sadhu; he himself, although a
householder, was a greater sadhu than Narada Muni.

TEXT 43
तन्तुदृन्तन यनस्त्वमसभद्रमचरः पुनः |
तसा्टोकेषु ते मूढ न भवेद्धमतः पदम्‌ ॥४३॥
tantu-krntana yan nas tvam
abhadram acarah punah
tasmal lokesu te midha
na bhaved bhramatah padam

tantu-krntana—O mischief-monger who has mercilessly separated
my sons from me; yat—which; nah —unto us; tvam—you; abhadram—
an inauspicious thing; acarah—have done; punah—again; tasmat—
therefore; lokesu—in all the planetary systems within the universe; te—
of you; miidha—O rascal not knowing how to act; na—not; bhavet—
there may be; bhramatah—who are wandering; padam—an abode.


--- Page 321 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
TRANSLATION

You have made me lose my sons once, and now you have again
done the same inauspicious thing. Therefore you are a rascal who
does not know how to behave toward others. You may travel all
over the universe, but I curse you to have no residence anywhere.

PURPORT

Because Prajapati Daksa was a grhamedhi who wanted to remain in
household life, he thought that if Narada Muni could not remain in one
place, but had to travel all over the world, that would be a great
punishment for him. Actually, however, such a punishment is a boon for
a preacher. A preacher is known as parivrajakacarya—an dacarya, or
teacher, who always travels for the benefit of human society. Prajapati
Daksa cursed Narada Muni by saying that although he had the facility to
travel all over the universe, he would never be able to stay in one place.
In the parampara system from Narada Muni, I have also been cursed.
Although I have many centers that would be suitable places of residence,
I cannot stay anywhere, for I have been cursed by the parents of my
young disciples. Since the Krsna consciousness movement was started, I
have traveled all over the world two or three times a year, and although I
am provided comfortable places to stay wherever I go, I cannot stay
anywhere for more than three days or a week. I do not mind this curse by
the parents of my disciples, but now it is necessary that I stay in one
place to finish another task —this translation of Srimad-Bhagavatam. If
my young disciples, especially those who have taken sannydsa, take
charge of traveling all over the world, it may be possible for me to
transfer the curse of the parents to these young preachers. Then I may sit
down conveniently in one place for the work of translation.

TEXT 44
HAF उवाच
प्रतिजग्राह ag নার नारदः साधुसम्मतः |
एतावान्‌ साधुवादो हि तितिक्षेतेश्वरः खयम्‌ ॥४४॥


--- Page 322 ---
Text 44] Narada Muni Cursed by Prajapati Daksa 317
$ri-Suka uvaca
pratijagraha tad badhar
naradah sadhu-sammatah
etavan sadhu-vado hi
titiksetesvarah svayam
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; pratijagraha—
accepted; tat—that; badham —so be it; naradah—Narada Muni; sadhu-
sammatah—who is an approved sadhu; etavan—this much; sadhu-
vadah—appropriate for a saintly person; hi—indeed; titikseta—he may
tolerate; iSvarah—although able to curse Prajapati Daksa; svayam—
himself.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, since Narada
Muni is an approved saintly person, when cursed by Prajapati
Daksa he replied, tad badham: ‘Yes, what you have said is good. I
accept this curse.” He could have cursed Prajapati Daksa in return,
but because he is a tolerant and merciful sadhu, he took no action.
PURPORT
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.25.21):
titiksavah karunikah
suhrdah sarva-dehinam
ajata-satravah santah
sadhavah sadhu-bhiusanah
“The symptoms of a sadhu are that he is tolerant, merciful and friendly
to all living entities. He has no enemies, he is peaceful, he abides by the
scriptures, and all his characteristics are sublime.” Because Narada Muni
is the most elevated of sadhus, devotees, to deliver Prajapati Daksa he
silently tolerated the curse. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has taught this
principle to all His devotees:
trnad api sunicena
taror api sahisnuna


--- Page 323 ---
318 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 5
amaning manadena
kirtaniyah sada harih

“One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more
tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and should be
ready to offer all respects to others. In such a state of mind one can chant
the holy name of the Lord constantly.” Following the orders of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, one who preaches the glories of the Lord all over
the world or all over the universe should be humbler than grass and
more tolerant than a tree because a preacher cannot live an easygoing
life. Indeed, a preacher must face many impediments. Not only is he
sometimes cursed, but sometimes he must also suffer personal injury.
For example, when Nityananda Prabhu went to preach Krsna
consciousness to the two roguish brothers Jagai and Madhai, they injured
Him and made His head bleed, but nevertheless, He tolerantly delivered
the two rogues, who became perfect Vaisnavas. This is the duty of a
preacher. Lord Jesus Christ even tolerated crucifixion. Therefore the
curse against Narada was not very astonishing, and he tolerated it.

Now, it may be asked why Narada Muni stayed in the presence of
Prajapati Daksa and tolerated all his accusations and curses. Was that for
Daksa’s deliverance? The answer is yes. Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti
Thakura says that after being insulted by Prajapati Daksa, Narada Muni
should have left immediately, but he purposely stayed to hear all Daksa’s
strong words so that Daksa might be relieved of his anger. Prajapati
Daksa was not an ordinary man; he had accumulated the results of many
pious activities. Therefore Narada Muni expected that after delivering
his curse, Daksa, satisfied and freed from anger, would repent his
misbehavior and thus get a chance to become a Vaisnava and be
delivered. When Jagai and Madhai offended Lord Nityananda, Lord
Nityananda stood tolerantly, and therefore both brothers fell at His lotus
feet and repented. Consequently they later became perfect Vaisnavas.

Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fifth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam entitled “Narada Muni Cursed by
Prajapati Daksa.”


--- Page 324 ---
Appendixes


--- Page 325 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent devotional scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutes), liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila
Prabhupada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, assisted the
Gaudiya Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance, started an
English fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and
checked the galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies
freely and struggled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the maga-
zine never stopped; it is now being continued by his disciples in the
West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion,
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
“Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life, and four years later he adopted the
vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his studies and writ-
ing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana, where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and
writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At
Radha-Damodara, Srila Prabhupada began work on his life’s master-
piece: a multivolume translation and commentary on the eighteen thou-
sand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote
Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time, His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes
of authoritative translations, commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

321


--- Page 326 ---
322 Srimad-Bhagavatam

In 1965. when he first arrived by freighter in New York City. Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
grown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of almost one
hundred asramas, schools. temples, institutes and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana. an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana, now a thriving farm community of more than one thou-
sand acres. his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. The school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the
beginning of 1975 the enrollment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large interna-
tional center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India. which is also
the site for a planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the
magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guest House in
Vrndavana, India. These are centers where Westerners can live to gain
firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution. however. is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their
authoritativeness. depth and clarity. they are used as standard textbooks
in numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into
eleven languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, established in 1972
exclusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus become
the world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and
philosophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most
recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —com-
pleted by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. ,

In the past ten years. in spite of his advanced age. Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule. Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature and culture.


--- Page 327 ---
References
The purports of Srimad-Bhagavatam are all confirmed by standard

Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are specifically

cited in this volume.

Amara-kosa dictionary, 170

Bhagavad-gita, 4, 5, 8, 9, 12, 17, 21, 23, 27, 31, 32, 33, 47, 49, 54, 56,
57,59, 63, 64, 72, 75, 77, 84, 104, 106, 114, 116, 122, 130, 132,
153, 154, 158, 159, 163, 167, 173, 184, 193, 202, 203, 218, 219
222, 223, 224, 227, 231, 233, 236, 238, 244, 245, 246, 248, 250,
253, 258, 271, 272, 275, 276, 284, 286, 287, 291, 295, 303, 310

Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (Rapa Gosvami), 24, 34

Brahma-samhita, 59, 211, 225, 231, 277

Brahma-yamala, 34

Brhad-visnu Purana, 97

Caitanya-caritamrta (Krsnadasa Kaviraja), 6, 122, 246, 304

Garuda Purana, 97

Mahabharata, 226

Matsya Purana, 253

Padma Purana, 171, 184

Skanda Purana, 98, 153, 212

323


--- Page 328 ---
324 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 3, 10, 19, 24-25, 27, 28, 29, 42, 67, 77, 103, 108,
116, 136, 155, 162, 165, 166, 170, 171, 175, 178, 179, 206, 216,
219, 223, 230, 236, 250, 252, 257, 266, 279, 285, 299, 307, 312,
317

Svetasvatara Upanisad, 58, 67

Tantra-nirnaya, 248

Vedanta-sitra, 226

Vedas, 4-5, 57, 60, 68, 223, 251, 285

Visnu Purana, 180, 220, 279


--- Page 329 ---
Glossary
A
Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by example.
Adharma—irreligion.
Adhibhautika— material suffering caused by other living entities.
Adhidaivika— material suffering caused by natural occurrences.
Adhyatmika—material suffering caused by one’s own body and mind.
Advaita-vadis—atheistic philosophers who say that any distinction must be
material.
AjAata-sukrti—pious deeds performed accidentally, without knowledge of
their effect.
Arati—a ceremony for greeting the Lord with offerings of food, lamps, fans,
flowers and incense.
Arcana—the devotional process of regulated Deity worship.
Asrama—an order of spiritual life.
B
Balarama, Lord —Krsna’s first expansion and elder brother.
Bhagavad-gita—the basic directions for spiritual life spoken by the Lord
Himself.
Bhagavata-dharma—the eternal religion or occupational duty of service to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Bhakta—a devotee.
Bhakti-yoga—devotional service.
Bhoga—sense gratification; food not offered to the Lord.
Brahmacarya—celibate student life; the first order of Vedic spiritual life.
Brahmaloka —the abode of Lord Brahma; the highest planetary system.
Brahman —the Absolute Truth; especially, the impersonal aspect of the
Absolute.
Brahmana—a person in the mode of goodness; first Vedic social order.
0
Caitanya-caritamrta—Srila Krsnadasa Kaviraja’s authorized biography of
325


--- Page 330 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, presenting the Lord’s pastimes and
teachings.
Cakra—the Lord’s personal disc weapon.
D
Daivi maya—the Lord’s divine deluding potency, the material energy.
Daridra-narayana—(lit., poor Narayana), the false conception that the
Supreme Lord can fall to the status of an ordinary conditioned soul.
Dharma —one’s innate eternal activity.
Dharma-sastras—religious scriptures that prescribe regulations of social
organization and religion.
Dharmi—one who abides by Vedic law.
Dhira—one who is undisturbed in all circumstances.
G
Gaudiya-Madhva-sampradaya—the authorized disciplic succession from
Madhvacarya through Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Goloka Vrndavana—the highest spiritual planet, the personal abode of Lord
Krsna.
Grhamedhi—a person who is envious because of too much attachment to
family life.
Grhastha—one who follows regulated householder life according to Vedic
principles.
Guru —a spiritual master.
H
Hari—the Supreme Lord, Visnu.
J
Jiva-tattva—the living entities, who are small parts of the Lord.
Jiana —speculative knowledge.


--- Page 331 ---
Glossary 327

Jiiana-yoga—the process of approaching the Supreme by the cultivation of
knowledge.

K

Kali-yuga—the present age of quarrel, which began 5,000 years ago.

Karma —fruitive work, for which there is always reaction, good or bad.

Karma-kanda—the parts of the Vedas that describe fruitive activities for
improving one’s material standard of life.

Karma-yoga—the process of linking with the Supreme by offering all the
fruits of one’s work.

Karmi—one who is satisfied with working hard for material results.

Krsnaloka— See: Goloka Vrndavana.

Ksatriya—a warrior or administrator; the second Vedic social order.

L
Liniga—the subtle body: mind, intelligence and false ego.
M

Mahajanas—great souls who have established the science of devotional
service.

Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rima, Hare Rima, Rima Rama,
Hare Hare.

Mahatma —a great liberated personality.

Mantra—a sound vibration for liberating the mind.

Manu-samhita—the original lawbook written by Svayambhuva Manu for
humanity.

Manvantara—the duration of the life of each Manu (progenitor of man-
kind); standard unit of measurement for universal time.

Marudloka—the planet of the Maruts, associates of King Indra.

Maya —the external, illusory energy of the Lord, comprising this material
world.

Maya-sukha—illusory, temporary happiness.


--- Page 332 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Mayavadis —impersonal philosophers who say that the Lord cannot have a
transcendental body.
Mimarisakas —atheistic philosophers who say that even if God exists, He is
obliged to reward us the fruits of our work.
Miecchas—meat-eaters, who are outside Vedic society.
Mrdarnga—a clay drum used for congregational chanting.
Mukti —liberation.
N
Nama-aparadha—offense against the holy name of the Lord.
Narayana—the Supreme Lord in His majestic four-armed form, an expan-
sion of Krsna.
Nitya-muktas— eternally liberated souls.
Nivrtti-marga—the path of liberation.
Nyaya-sastras— Vedic textbooks of logic.
0
Omkara—the sound incarnation of Krsna.
P
Paricopasana—worship by impersonalists of five deities (Visnu, Durga,
Brahma, Gane$a and Vivasvan) that is motivated by the desire to
ultimately abandon all conceptions of a personal Absolute.
Parabrahman —Krsna, who is the Supreme Absolute Truth.
Paramatma —the Supersoul, Lord Visnu, in the heart of all living entities.
Parampara—the chain of spiritual masters in disciplic succession.
Prajapatis—the progenitors of the universal population.
Prajas—citizens (including all species of life).
Prakrti—nature, the Lord’s energy.
Prasada—food spiritualized by being offered to the Lord.
Pravrtti-marga—the path of material enjoyment.
Prayascitta—atonement to counteract sinful acts.
Puranas—Vedic histories of the universe.
Purusa—the supreme enjoyer; the Lord of the universe.


--- Page 333 ---
Glossary 329
R
Rajo-guna—the material mode of passion.
Rsis—great sages.
ও
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the Lord’s transcendental form, which is eternal,
full of knowledge and bliss.
Sadhu—a saintly person.
Sampradaya—a disciplic succession.
Samsrti—the cycle of repeated birth and death.
Sanatana-dharma—eternal religion.
Sarnkhya—analytical study of the material world.
Sarikirtana—public chanting of the names of God, the approved yoga pro-
cess for this age.
Sannyasa—the renounced order of spiritual life.
Sastra—revealed scripture.
Sattva-guna—the material mode of goodness.
Siddha—a perfected living being.
Siddhaloka—the heavenly planet whose inhabitants possess all mystic
powers.
Smarta-brahmanas—nondevotees who strictly follow the Vedas for material
benefit.
Smrti-$astra— Vedic scriptures other than the original Vedas, Upanisads and
# Vedanta-siitra.
Sravanam kirtanam visnoh—hearing and chanting about Lord Visnu.
Suddha-sattva—See: Visuddha-sattva.
Sudra—a laborer; the fourth of the Vedic social orders.
Susupti—deep sleep, one of the levels of material consciousness.
Svarmsa—Godhead in one of His personal expansions.
Svargaloka—the heavenly planets of the material world.
T
Tamo-guna—the material mode of ignorance.
Tapasya—austerity; accepting some voluntary inconvenience for a higher
purpose.


--- Page 334 ---
330 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Tilaka —auspicious clay marks that sanctify a devotee’s body as a temple of
the Lord.
Trayi—one who follows the three Vedas (Rg, Sama and Yajur), which ex-
plain fruitive activities for material benefits.
[৪1
Upanisads—the most significant philosophical sections of the Vedas.
Vv
Vaikuntha—the planets of the spiritual sky, where there is no anxiety.
Vairagya—renunciation of material pleasure.
Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Visnu, or Krsna.
Vaisyas—farmers and merchants; the third Vedic social order.
Vanaprastha—one who has retired from family life; the third order of Vedic
spiritual life.
Varnasrama—the Vedic social system of four social and four spiritual
orders.
Vasudeva-parayana—one whose desire is fixed on the Supreme Lord.
Vedinta—the philosophy that describes the end of all knowledge, pure devo-
tional service to the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna.
Vedas—the original revealed scriptures, first spoken by the Lord Himself.
Vibhinnamsa—the separated expansions of the Lord, the minute living
entities.
Vibhiiti—the Lord’s glory and opulence.
Vipra—See: Brahmana.
Virata-ripa—Lord Visnu’s universal form.
Visnudiitas —the order carriers of Lord Visnu.
Visuddha-sattva—the spiritual platform of pure goodness.
Y
Yajiia —sacrifice; work done for the satisfaction of Visnu.
Yamadiitas —the messengers of Yamaraja, the lord of death.
Yavanas—those outside the Vedic social system.
Yogi—a transcendentalist who is striving to reestablish his link with the
Supreme.


--- Page 335 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide
Vowels
अनजा इ; दैः उप Fa Wr Wr
gg 1 We पे ai a ০ সী au
=< पा (anusvara) th (visarga)
Consonants
Gutturals: क्क ka I kha IT ga স্‌ gha ङः na
Palatals: च ca & cha ज) H jha A fa
Cerebrals: eta ठ tha ड da @ dha ण na
Dentals: त J tha द्‌ da ef dha na
Labials: q pa ER pha qd ba ¥H bha মল ma
Semivowels: H ya Ira la J va
Sibilants: I sa q sa स sa
Aspirate: ह्‌ ha S ” (avagraha) ~ the apostrophe
The vowels above should be pronounced as follows:
a — like the ain organ or the win but.
a — like the ain far but held twice as long as short a.
1 — like the iin pin.
i — like the i in pique but held twice as long as short i.
u — like the uw in push.
@ — like the win rule but held twice as long as short wu.
331


--- Page 336 ---
332 Srimad-Bhagavatam
r — like the riin rim.
ह — like ree in reed.
] — like !followed by r (Ir).
€ — like the ein they.
ai — like the ai in aisle.
০ — like the oin go.
au — like the ow in how.
m (anusvara) — a resonant nasal like the nin the French word bon.
h (visarga) — a final h-sound: ahis pronounced like aha; ih like ihi.
The consonants are pronounced as follows:
k — asin kite jh — as in hedgehog
kh— as in Eckhart 7 — asin canyon
g — asingive t — asin tub
gh— asin dig-hard th — as in light-heart
7 — asin sing d — asin dove
০ — asin chair dha- as in red-hot
ch — as in staunch-heart n — asrna (prepare to say
j — asin joy the rand say na).
Cerebrals are pronounced with tongue to roof of mouth, but the
following dentals are pronounced with tongue against teeth:
t — asin tub but with tongue against teeth.
th — as in light-heart but with tongue against teeth.
d — asin dove but with tongue against teeth.
dh— asin red-hot but with tongue against teeth.
n — asin nut but with tongue between teeth.
ए — asin pine 1 — asin light
ph— as in uphill (not f) v — asin vine
b — asin bird 5 (palatal) — as in the sin the German
bh— as in rub-hard word sprechen
m — asin mother s (cerebral) — as the sh in shine
y — asin yes 8 — asin sun
r — asin run h — asin home
There is no strong accentuation of syllables in Sanskrit, only a flow-
ing of short and long (twice as long as the short) syllables.


--- Page 337 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each of the
Sanskirt poetry verses and the first line of each Sanskrit prose verse of this volume of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, arranged in English alphabetical order. In the first column the
Sanskrit transliteration is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the
chapter-verse references and page number for each verse are to be found.
A antah-samudrad unmagna 44 192
antar dehesu 0104071৫771 4.13 202
anumimdrisate ‘pirvari 1.50 69
ab-bhaksah katicin masan 5.27 296 anuriipam avijidya 5.9 267
adaya tata ৫710 1.60 80 anusargarh yaya saktyd 4.2 191
adharma-laksana nana 1.3 a
adhuneha maha-bhaga 1.6 9 anwtdpo mahan asit 225 115
adhyatmam abudhasyeha 5.17 278 anvatapyata kah Socan 523 291
anvicchatanupadavir 5.30 298
aditya-visve vasavo tha sadhya 3.14 156 anyas tu kama-hata atma-rajah 3.33 184
adrsta-dhamne guna-tattva-buddhibhir 4.23 210  anyatha mriyamdnasya 233 123
adrstvantarn bhuvo - 5.6 265
adrstva tasya nirvana 511 268  anyeca ye visva-sijo ‘maria 3.15 156
वमे dhunvanti kartsnyena 1.15 22 aprthag-dharma-silas te 52 262
aptirita-manodvarair 4.41 242
aham evdsam evagre 4.47 251 aradhayan mantram imam 5.27 296
ahari mahendro nirrtih pracetah 3.14 156 asadhv akary arbhakanar 5.36 303
ahastd hasta-yuktanarm 49 198
aho asadho sadhana 5.36 303  asikni nama patnitve 4.51 257
oho নান দল এ 22 9 कजत ००7० नोक 1.57 78
astausid dhariisa-guhyena 4.22 209
aho mayadhuna tyaktav 228 118 astiti ndstiti ca vastu-nisthayor 4.32 229
aho me [0070771077১ kastam 226 117 atas tvam eko bhudnam 37 148
aho prajapati-patir 4.8 197
aisvaram $astram utsrjya 5.18 280 athainar mapanayata 2.13 104
ajamilo 101 yenaiva 3.23 167 atha me 81100 devas 4.50 256
athapi me durbhagasya 2.32 121
ajamilo 'py agad dhama 2.49 137 atha te kva gatah siddhas 2.31 180
ajamilo ‘py athakarmya 224 115 atisthata sata margam 4.11 200
ajanato ‘py Gtma-gunari 2.19 109
ajaandd athava 1727104 2.18 109 atma-jijidsaya yacchet 4.14 203
datmanam antar-hrdi santam atmanarm = 3.16 18
akhandarh cittam dvesya 5.22 288 atra codaharantimam 1.20 34
alah dagdhair drumair dinaih 4.15 204 avartata ০1707 kalam 1.67 86
angani kratavo jata 4.46 248 aveksitam kificana yoga-sarkhyayoh 4.32 229
anna caranam acard 49 198 avidvad-adhikaritvat ঢা 16
333


--- Page 338 ---
334 Srimad-Bhagavatam
ayarn hi krta-nirveso গা 96 dhara-mandala-samsthanam 1.8 8
aya hi Sruta-sampannah 1.58 79 dharma-ghnah kamino yatra 229 119
dharmari bhagavatari suddhari 2.24 115
B dharman tu saksad bhagavat-pranitarn 3.19 162
dharme paramaharisye ca 54 264
babharasyah kutumbinyah 1.66 86 dhasye mano bhagavati 2.38 127
badhnati tantryam iva daémabhir gah 913 153 dhatte 'nusarisrtim purisi 183. ~73
bahu-rapdr 501) 071 capi 5.7 265 वात man vigarhitari sadbhir 927 110
balo narayano namna 1.24 38 dhrta-vrato mrdur dantah 1.58 79
bandy-aksaih kaitavais cauryair 1.22 37 (11111 1.1.11. । 11
bhagavat-purusai rajan 3.3 144 diso vitimiralokah 1.36 50
bhaktiman bhagavaty su 2.25 115 dosasya drstvd guru-laghavar 1.8 13
bhakti-yogo bhagavati 3.22 165 1 1... 10 14
bhartur nama maharaja 1.30 44 drstva tam kama-liptena 163 83
bhavitavyarh margalena 2.32 121 drumebhyah krudhyamanas te 4.5 194
bhojayan payayan madho 1.26 40 diire kridanakasaktar 1.29 43
1... 1111. 11.1.11... 1 5.31 299 ditanarh visnu-yamayoh 1.20 34
8788 दपा) jiva-samjiam 5.11 268 dvddasaite vijanimo 3.21 164
bhuiijanah prapiban khadan 1.26 40 dvijah 06584 vinirmukto 222 112
bhitdni visnoh sura-pijitani 3.18 160 dvipa-varsa-samudradri- 14 7
bhitesu guna-vaicitrydt 1.48 65 E
bibhrat kutumbam asucir 1.22 37!
brahma bhavo bhavantas ca 4.45 247
87010 dharmasya nas tattvar 138 = 153 ekadasau vanar yatah 1.60 80
eka evesvaras turyo 5.12 270
C ekas tu sodasena trin 1.52 72
esd pafcajanasydnga 4.51 257
cakra-$ankhasi-carmesu- 4.36 239 esa prakrti-sangena 1.57 78
caturbhir adbhutaih siddhair 3.8 148
citta-jiiah sarva-bhitdnam 4.42 242 etair adharmo ४१76101 1.45 62
cukrodha naraddydsau 5.35 302 etan mune vrscati loka- 32 144
etasmin kala utpatan 5.34 301
D etdvad uktvd prayayau 5.32 300
etdvan eva loke 'smin 3.22 165
dadaria kéminam kaficic 1.61 81
daksayanéh 50771610140 5.30 298 etavan sadhu-vado hi 54 317
dandyah kirh kérinah sarve 1.39 54 etavatalam agha-nirharandya 324 168
deha-vag-buddhijarh dhira 1.14 19 etenaiva hy aghono sya 28 98
deho 'savo 'ksa manavo bhita-matrd 425 213 evan hatdjiio vihatGn murdrer 31 142
evar janmanyayor etad 1.49 66
dehy ajiio jita-sad-vargo 1.54 75
devarsim upalabhydha 5.35 302 8৮07 nivasatas tasya 1.23 38
devdsura-manusyadin 4.19 207 evari niyamakrd rajan 1412 18
devdsura-nmam sargo 4.1 191 evar sa viplavita-sarva-dharma 245 134
dhanur-nisangasi-gada- 1.35 50 ৩৮৫7 te bhagavad-diua 21 90


--- Page 339 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 335
evant tvarh niranukroso 5.38 308 K
evar vimrSya sudhiyo bhagavaty 3.26 174
kala-cakrar bhrami tiksnam 5.19 281
G kalo 'tyagan mahan rajann 1.23 38
kari kuh ৩৮৫) ৫78 dharmo. iti 1.42 60
kanyakubje dvijah kascid 1.21 35
garga-dvaram upeydya 239 128 kacy-anguliya-valaya- 4.38 239
gramyair manoramaih kamaih 1.64 84
11/11/1111 111. 3.21 164 kdrinam guna-sargo sti 1.46 63
guna-ndma-kriya-riapair 1.41 58 karmana karma-nirharo 1.11 16
karoti bhityo vivasah 1.9 14
guna-nama-kriya-rapair 143 61 karyate hy avasah karma 155 76
guno yatha gurino vyakta-drstes 4.24 211 kasya syatar na va kasya 3.5 146
1/1 11.11 ca 2.16 107
gurv-agny-atithi-vrdd hana 1.59 79 kasya va kuta ayatah 1.33 48
kathari sva-pitur adesam 59 267
H katharasvid dhriyate dandah 1.39 54
10107 tad-anuripaya 5.20 283
kathayam asa malaya 3.35 186
(यतद, vimanam aruhya 2.44 133
harir ity 405९1000 2.15 106 kati santiha $astaro 34 145
haryasva-samjidn ayutam 5.1 262 kecit kevalaya bhaktya 1.1 22
hitva bala satim yo "ham 227 118 ke yityarn pratiseddharo 1.32 47
110৫ 68018007073 10706 2.43 132 kim arthari dharma-palasya 1.36 50
kim ৫০৮৫ upadevd ya 1.33 48
I kim 1007 svapna ahosvit 2.30 120
kintu $astr-bahutve syad 3.6 147
iti devah sa aprsah 3.11 151 kiritinah kundalino 1.34 50
itihasam imam guhyam 3.35 186 koSakara ivatmanari 1.54 75
iti jata-sunirvedah 2.39 128 krama-yogopalabdhena 0.1 2
iti pratyudita yamya 22 11
kridantam anugayantarn 1.62 82
iti samprasnam dkarnya 4.3 192 krsnang hri-padma-madhu-lin na 3.33 184
71111111 4.35 239 krsndya no namati yac-chira ekadapi 329 179
iti tn api rajendra 529 297 krta-padah suparnarise 4.36 239
iti yyavasita rajan 521 286 krtavan asi durmarsam 5.42 314
ksipanty गु! mahad api 1.14 19
10073 svabhartr-gaditarh bhagavan- 3.34 186
ity amantrya vardrohari 4.16 204 kurvanti वकाः muhur atma-moharn 4.3] 225
ity ukte yamadatais te 137 52 kva cahari kitavah papo 2.34 123
ity uktva misatas tasya 4.54 260 kva ca narayanety etad 2.34 124
1111 1 58 265
J kvacin nivartate 'bhadrat 1.10 15
kva yata adya te ye mari 2.30 120
jagama hre-chaya-vasam 1.63 83
Jjapanto brahma paramari 5.26 295 L
jihvé na vakti bhagavad-guna- 3.29 179
Jyotisar vivarandm ca 1.5 8 labdhva nimittam avyaktari 1.56 78


--- Page 340 ---
336 Srimad-Bhagavatam
M nana-ripdtmano buddhih 514 273
na niskrtair uditair bra hma-vadibhis 2.11 100
ma bhit 5৩০৫7070711 guna-riparn hitat = 4.29 221 na nispunanti rajendra 1.18 30
madiyaya bhavisyanti 4.53 259 nanogra-yatanan neyat 1.6 9
maha-kirita-katakah 4.38 239 nanu bhagavata nityari 5.39 309
mahapurusa-kirikaraih 2.44 133
mahatam api kauravya 3.31 182 7071012 na janati 541 313
nardyana-saro jagmur 5.25 294
mamaham iti dehadau 2.38 127 narayanety abhihite 3.10 150
mamaisa kdmo bhitanarn 4.44 244 ॥. 1, 11. 0273 5.23 291
manasaiva pure devah 1.50 69 na siddha-mukhya asura manusyah 3.19 162
manasaivdsrjat parva 4.19 207
manisino पथमा) sannivesitam 4.27 216 ॥. 1.1... 1.1... 1.12 18
natah param karma-nibandha-krntanarm 2.46 135
manvantaras ca vyakhyata 1.3 7 na tatha hy aghavan rajan 1.16 26
manyase yady upasamari 5.40 311 na te yamar pasa-bhrtas ca 1.19 31
matiri cakdra tanaye 1.27 41 na vai sa narakar yati 2.48 137
mattasya tam avijiasya 5.16 276
mattaya vislathan-nivya 1.62 82 nava visva-sijo yusman 4.50 256
na veda piirvam aparari 1.51 71
mayy ananta-gune 'nante 4.48 254 na yasya sakhyara puruso 'vaiti 424 211
mene khilam ivatmanam 449 256 na yat punah karmasu sajjate mano 2.46 135
mithuna-vyavaya-dharmas (0078 4.52 257 nesyamo 'krta-nirvesarit 1.68 87
mithuna-vyavaya-dharninydam 4.52 257
nettharh purhsam viragah sydt 5.40 311
mocaye grastam dtmdnam 2.37 125 nipdtyamano niraye hata-vratah 2.45 134
mriyamano harer néma 249 137 nirtksamanas tal-lilarm 1.25 39
mukhato vayum agnin ca 4.5 194 nirvidyate svayari tasman 5.41 313
nisamya devah svabhatopavarnitarit 3.1 143
N niSamya mriyamdnasya 1.30 44
niskificanaih paramaharsa-kulair 3.28 177
na ced ihaivapacitim yatharmhasah 11 11 nivrtti-margah kathita 1.1 2)
nadharmajari: tad-dhrdayari 2.17 108 niyamanarh tavadesad 3.9 149
nadim ubhayato vaharm 58 265
na drumebhyo maha-bhaga 47 196 0
nadyapi te nivartante 5.33 301
na hi kacit ksanam api 1.55 76 or namo ndrdyandya 5.28 296
naikantikar tad dhi krte ‘pi 2.12 102
naivicyutdsraya-janar pratisankamana 3.34 46 P
na kificanodirayitum 441 241
namah pardyavitathanubhitaye 4.23 210
1.1.111... 1.52 72
namani ripani ca janma-karmabhir 4.33 232 Ppaiica-virhsati tattvandri 5.17 278
॥ visnor 2.10 99 = [007৫0076507 00170770711 prak prasiddhar 4.30 224
namna nasta-saddciro 1.21 35 paro mad anyo jagatas tasthusas ca 812 = 152
namoccarana-mahatmyan 3.23 167 parsada-madhye carasi 5.38 308
nanama dandavad bhamau 4.40 241 patih prajanam bhiksandri 4.12 201


--- Page 341 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 337
pati vijidpaydm ৫57 33 144 sadhricinarh praticinar 5.33 301
patitah skhalito bhagnah 215 105 sadhricino hy ayam loke 1.17 28
pita-vasa ghana-§yamah 4.37 239 sadyah svarapari jagrhe 2.43 132
pitra pitamahendpi 4.11 200 sa evar vartamano ’jiio 127 41
pitra proktah praja-sarge 5.2 262 sa eva tat-phalar bhurkte 1.47 65
pitva ca madhu maireyari 1.61 81 sahasa pasyatas tasya 223 113
plavitena svarenoccair 1.29 43 sa kathari nyarpitatmanari 2.6 95
précetasa mahd-bhaga 4.43 243 sakm manah krsna-padaravindayor 1.19 31
pradurdsit kuru-srestha 4.35 239 samdsikas tvaya prokto 4.1 191
prahlado janako bhismo 3.20 164 sambhavanti hi bhadrani 146 63
prajanar pitaro ye ca 2:3 92 samjAdna-matram avyaktarn 4.47 251
11.9.11... 1 4.10 199 saiigamo yatra sumahan 5.3 263
praja-vivrddhaye yattan 55 264 sarketyarn parihdsyarm va 2.14 105
1. 1. 1.1. 1... 5.44 317 sarikirtitam aghari 10780 2.18 109
pratinandya maha-yogi 43 192 sa pasa-hastarns trin drstvd 1.28 43
pratyag-dhamavida iha 5.13 27 sa punya-bandhuh puruso 5.31 299
pratyahrtendriya-grimo 240 129 sarva-bhita-suhre chanto 2.36 125
pravrtti-laksanas caiva 152 5 sarva-bhita-suhrt sadhur 1.59 80
11.1.17 1.10 15 sarvari puman veda gundris ca 4.25 213
prayascittdni cirnani 1.18 30 sarvarh tad-dhisityam thsadhvam 4.13 202
11.1.11... 2.16 107 sarve ca niitna-vayasah 1.35 50
prayayus tar parikramya 5.21 286 sarve karmdnurodhena 1.45 62
prayenadiita iha vai manoharas 3.17 19 sarve padma-palasaksah 1.34 50
préyena veda tad (कठा na mahajano 325; 32 sarvesdm apy aghavatam 2.10 99
pritah sva-ditan pratyaha 3.11 151 sa sarva-nama sa ca visva-ripah 4.28 216
prito "har te praja-natha 4.44 244 $asta danda-dharo 3:7 148
priyavratottanapador 14 7 Sastrasya pitur adesar 5.20 283
puman naivaiti yad gatva 5.13 271 Sastrtvam upacaro hi 3.6 147
pirvavan narada-krtarn 5.3¢ 301 sa tasmin deva-sadana 2.40 129
putrén ajanayad daksah 524 293 ৩৫ vai mamasesa-visesa- 428 216
R sa vai yada mahadevo 4.49 256
sa yat pramanari kurute 24 93
rajovdaca mahdn somo 4.6 195 so 'harn tatha yatisyami 235 124
raksanti tad-bhaktimatah parebhyo 3.18 160 so "hari vyaktarh patisyami 229 119
retasa manasa caiva 4.18 206 11.2.71. 1 4.16 205
mais tribhir amuktanam 5.37 306
rte tam sauhrda-ghnar vai 5.39 309 $muydcchraddhaya yukto 2.47 137
rapari tan ma had-ascaryari 4.40 241 $mvatdrh grata viryany 332 183
srsty-apyaya-karim maydr 5.16 276
S stenah surd-po mitra-dhrug 2.9 99
stri-raja-pitr-go-hanta 29 9
sa baddha-hrdayas tasminn 1.25 39 11.81.11 4.39 239
sa bhiyah paicajanydydm 5.24 293 saryo ‘gnih kharh marud devah 1.42 59


--- Page 342 ---
338 Srimad-Bhagavatam
susilah sadhavo yatra 19111 > 128 tathaika-purusari rastrar 90 265
svandm aho na णकाक 3.30 181 tat karma-nirharam abhipsatari 2.12 102
svapnopalabdhartha iva 454 260  tatksamyatarh sa bhagavan purusah 3.30 181
svara-brahmani nirbhata- 5.22 288  tatogunebhya atmanar 2.41 130
svatantram abudhasyeha 5.19 281 tatraghamarsanarh nama 421 208
svayambhir ndradah sambhuh 3.20 164
svayarn dharmam adharmari va 25 94 tatra ndrayana-saras 9.3 263
tat-sarga-bhramsitaisvaryam 5.15 274
॥॥ tebhyas tasyar samabhavad 4.17 205
te ca [0107 samadistah 5:25 = 293
te deva-siddha-parigita-pavitra- 3.27 176
tabhyarh nirdahyamandrhs tan 46 195
tad etat sodasa-kalarn 153 73 te me na dandam arhanty atha yady 326 174
tad-gatir abudhasyeha 5.15 274 te ’pi canvagaman margarn 5.32 300
tad-upasparsanad eva 54 264  tepire tapa evogram 55 264
tad-upaspariandd eva 5.26 295 tokdndrh pitarau bandha 4.12 201
070100/0/৫-471007107% 70007 4.39 239
ta 6৮07 suvinirniya 220 111
1015 tany aghani piiyante 2.17 108  trai-vidhyar kurvatah karma 3.4 145
tam abrrihitam alokya 420 207  trayyam jadi-krta-matir madhu- 325 172
tam adrstvabhavarh purisah 512 270 tubhyarn tad abhidhasyami 4.22 209
tam eva tosaydm dsa 1.64 84 tvatto ‘dhastat prajah sarva 4.53 259
tydgena satya-saucabhyarn 1.13 19
(काऽ te veditum icchamo 3.10 150
tarh tathavanatari bhaktarn 4.42 242 U
tar tu krntana yan nas tam 543 315
tari vivaksum abhipretya 223 113
tarh yamya-pasan nirmucya 220 111 80187 nisedhitds (कां te 1.32 47
upadharyatha tan rajan 2.1 90
tan anayadhvam 05000 vimukhan 3.28 177  upalabhyopalabdhan prag 2.42 131
tan nisamyatha haryasva 5.10 267 upaspréydnusavanarn 4.21 208
tan-nistham agatasyeha 5.14 273 upetya naradah praha 5.29 297
tan nopasidata harer 3:27. 176 uvdca catha haryasvah 56 265
tan pratyicuh prahasyedari 1237 = 1.32
(00056 brahmacaryena 1.13 19 ॥।
tapo me hrdayarh brahmaras 4.46 248
tasmal lokesu te madha 5.43 315
tasmdt puraivdsv iha papa-niskrtau 18 12) vacah kata tu devarseh 510 267
tasmat sarikirtanam visnor 331 182 vahnir yatha daruni paiicadasyarn 4.27 216
vaikuntha-néma-grahanam 2.14 105
tasyaiva vyasam icchami 4.2 191 vaikuntha-nama-grahanari 233 123
tasyar sa paicajanydri vai 5.1 262
tasya pravayasah pura 1.24 38 vakra-tundan ardhva-romna 1.28 43
tasya te vihito dando 3.8 148 vana-mala-nivitango 4.37 239
tasyatma-tantrasya harer adhisituh 3.17 159 vanaspatin osadhis ca 4.8 197
tata 67107 danda-paneh 1.68 87 varksi hy esa vard kanya 4.15 204


--- Page 343 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 339
vartamano ‘nyayoh kalo 149 66 ’yadyapy amangalo martyo 248 137
vavande Sirasa visnoh 2.22 112 ya etarih paramari guhyam 2.47 136
veda-pranihito dharmo 1.40 55 yah prakrtair jidna-pathair 4.34 235
vedo ndrdyanah saksat 1.40 55
vibhitayo mama hy eta 4.45 247 yah samutpatitarh deha 4.14 203
ya iyate kevalaya sva-saristhayd 4.26 214
vighatah sreyasah papa 5.37 306 ’yama-presyan visnudisa 1.31 46
vikarsato 'ntar hrdayad 1.31 45 ‘yama-rdjiie yatha sarvam 221 111
vikridito yayaivaharh 2.37 125 yamasya devasya na danda- 312 143
vikru§ya putram aghavdn yad ajamilo = 3.24 167
vimucya tam imari bandham 236 125 yari vai na gobhir manasasubhir va 3.16 158
yan nas tvarh karma-sandhanam 542 314
vindhya-padan upavrajya 4.20 208 yarhy uparata-dhis tasminn 2.42 131
viprdri sva-bharyam 070701007৫7) 1.65 85 yasmai balirh ta ime nama-karma- 313 153
visasarjdcirat papah 165 85 yasmin yato yena ca yasya yasmai 4.30 224
visrambhaniyo 0101৫17৫773 2.6 95
visuddha-sattva-dhisnydya 5.28 296 yasyarike ॐ adhdya 29 94
2०300 praja-visargena 4.17 205
vivardhayisavo yityar 47 196  yasyehitarh na viduh sprsta-mayah 3.15 156
vivikta-padam ajiidya 5.18 280 yatas 10/05 copaninye 1.66 86
vrddhav andthau pitarau 2.28 118 2017৫800073 viryatamam 2.19 109
vrto nérada-nandadyaih 439 239
vydmocayan niyaménar 2.31 120 2010৫ harer néma-padair udahrtais 2.11 100
vydmocayan patakinar 3.9 149 20111725 tamasa yukta Is) ॥
’ 2৫118 krsnarpita-pranas 116 26
Y 20103 na bhaya atmanam 2.35 124
yathanilah pdrthivam asrito 4.34 235
24116 sasarja bhatani 4.18 206
०८-८124010)/0 vadatdri ৫৫7৫7 vai 431 225
yac-chraddhayd mat-parayd 4.43 243 yathasujatayd bhaktya 332 183
yad-ammsato ‘sya sthiti-janma-nasa 3197 152 ‘yathé-yoni yathabijarn 1.56 78
‘yada nérdyandyeti 2.8 98 yatheha deva-pravaras 1.48 65
yada pracetasah 01070 44 192 = yatradandyesv apdpesu 2.2 91
3670 svadhamny ami bhava 1.41 58
2৫0 asau bhagavan-néma 2.13 104
2৫0 asau $astram ullanghya 1.67 86 yena svadhdmny ami bhava 1.43 61
40571 tata evidyah 4.48 254 ‘yena viptavitam brahma 2.26 117
2৫0; syat tesu vaisamyar 23 92 yena ydvan yathadharmo 1.47 65
2001 syur bahavo loke 3.5 146 yo 'nugraharthar bhajatar pada- 4.33 232
‘yadopardmo manaso néma-ripa- 426 214 yo 5৫৮ alina-prakrter 12 5
2০৫ vydjahara vivaso 27 96 ylyari ca pitranvadista 4.10 199
70৫0 yad dcarati Sreydn 24 93 yityar vai dharma-rdjasya 1.38 53
2৫0 yan niruktari १०८०८ 70070011079 4.29 221 yuyuje bhagavad-dhamni 2.41 130


--- Page 344 ---
General Index
Numerals in boldface type indicate references to translations of the verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
A Ahas ca ratris ca ubhe ca sandhye,
quoted, 61
a Aikantiki harer bhaktir,
Abrahma-bhuvanal lokah, verse quoted, 35
verse quoted, 287 Air, analogy of, with Lord's appearance.
Absolute Truth 235
aspects of, 279 Airplane, spiritual, 133
atonement by understanding, 17 Ajamila
as seen by personalists and impersonalists, attached to his son, 40-45
229-234 brahminical life abandoned by, 83-84
Supreme Lord as, 253-254 chanting of “Narayana” by, 40-45,
See also: Supreme Lord 97-99, 140
Acarya. See: Spiritual master contemplates deliverance, 120-122
Activities degraded life of, 35-39
Narayana as cause of, 59 determined in devotional service.
witnesses of. 60 125-127
Yamarija observes, 66 former goodness of, 78, 122-123
See also: Fruitive activities; Karma goes to Lord Visnu, 133
Activities of Krsna. See: Pastimes of Krsna inspired to name hisson, 122
Aditya-candrav anilo ’nalas ca, laments sinful past, 117-120, 124
हि quoted, 60 obeisances of. to Visnudiitas, 112
Agamapayino ’nityas, offenseless chanting of, 97-99. 140
verse quoted, 21 perfects bhakti-yoga in Hardwar.
Agastya, 187 129-132
Age of Kali. See: Kali-yuga progress in bhakti of, 140
Agriculture, 193 prostitute and ৪8070 met by. 80-82
Ahaituky apratihata, as pure devotee, 115
quoted, 116 regains spiritual body, 132
Aham adir hi devanam, Visnuditas defend, 91-110
quoted, 238 Visnudiitas release, 111
Ahari sarvasya prabhavo, Yamadiitas describe release of, 150
quoted, 224, 238 Ajata-satravah santah,
verse quoted, 8-9 verse quoted, 194. 317
Ahan tari sarva-papebhyo, Ajo [01 sann avyayatma,
quoted, 12 verse quoted, 233
verse quoted, 31,291 Alam, defined, 170
Ahankara-vimadhatma, Amanind manadena,
verse quoted, 276 verse quoted. 195. 318
341


--- Page 345 ---
342 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Anadi karama-phale, padi bhavarnava-jale, Arcana, prescribed with sarikirtana, 174
verse quoted, 71 Arjuna, as dharmi, 56
Anadir adir govindah, Aruhya krechrena param pada tatah,
verse quoted, 59, 225. 231 verse quoted, 19
Ananyah sadrsabhavad, Asikni, 257-258
quoted, 225 491 laye tad-anyat tu,
Anarthopasaman saksad, _ verse quoted, 253
verse quoted, 299 Asrama. See: Society, human: Varndsrama
Anena putra-sneham antarena, Association
quoted, 45 with devotees, 122. 127-129
Anger with modes of nature, 64, 68
controlled by devotional service, 203-204 with prostitute causes falldown, 83. 85. 86
devotees devoid of, 194-195 with Supreme Lord, 77
Animals Astrology in Vedic marriages, 117
citizens compared to, 95 Asuptah supta iva ca,
fear in, 72 verse quoted, 253
ignorant compared to, 68, 95 Asuras. See: Atheists; Nondevotees
Animal slaughter Asurim yonim apanna,
chanting counteracts reactions of, 100 verse quoted, 228
cows excluded from, 198-199 Asya mahato bhitasya nisvasitam,
effects 01, 96 quoted, 57
Précinabarhi advised against, 193 Atah pumbhir dvija-srestha,
Annihilation of the universe verse quoted, 155
Brahma's destination at, 4-5 Atah sri-krsna-namadi,
Supreme Lord and living entity at, 254 quoted, 215, 222
Anta-kale ca mam eva, Athapi te deva padambuja-dvaya,
verse quoted, 105 verse quoted, 175, 236
Anudinam idam adarena srnvan, Athato brahma-jijiasa,
quoted, 169 verse quoted, 279
Anukalyena krsnanu-, Atheists
verse quoted, 24 capital punishment stopped by. 13
Anumimarsate "षाणि, creation unexplained by, 8
verse quoted, 68 how they can see God, 249
Anyabhilasita-sinyam, the Lord invisible to, 59
verse quoted, 24 See also: Nondevotees
Anyatranadarad visnau, Atmavit-sammatah 1/1
verse quoted, 253 verse quoted, 3
Apani-pado javano grahita, Ato ’nanta-guno visnur,
quoted, 230 verse quoted, 255
Apathya-bhojanas tesam, Atonement
verse quoted, 113 Ajamila neglected, 87
Api cet suduracaro, chanting as best process of. 100-103. 107,
verse quoted, 32 138-139
Appearance of Krsna (*birth™) compared to cure for disease, 13
not material, 232-233 compared to elephant’s bath, 15. 185
purpose and glories of. 234 defined. 17


--- Page 346 ---
General Index 343
Atonement Bhagavac-chabda-vacyani,
devotional service supersedes, 26 verse quoted, 228
insufficient for purification, 27 Bhagavad-gita
necessity of, 11-16 cited on energies in creation. 9
rejected by Pariksit, 15-16, 17 cited on knowing Krsna, 236
rituals 01, contrasted to chanting, 185 enlightenment by, 74
useless without bhakti, 30, 135-136 as essence of Vedas, 284
Ato visnv-atmaka veda, See also: Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
verse quoted, 57 Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
Austerity on chanting, 84
chanting and 11637111186 85, 103 on demons not knowing what to do, 284
of Daksa, 208 on destinations at death. 75-76. 106
of devotees and demons, 194 on destinations by activity, 63
fasting as, 21 on devotee as rare, 23, 158, 218
of the Haryasvas, 264 on devotee’s saintliness, 32-33
for Kali-yuga, 297 on १६५०९९७ worship of Krsna, 218
in Krsna consciousness, 20, 21, 310 on devotional service as necessity. 157.
material desires unchanged by. 108 219, 231, 236, 252, 279
necessity of, 256-257 on devotional service's strength. 12
of the Pracetas, 193-194 on enviers of Krsna, 227-228
of the Savalasvas, 294-297 on eternality of all beings. 253
Authority, Yamaditas’ questions on. on fool's mistaking Krsna, 222
146-149 on freedom by surrender to Krsna. 72. 245
Avaisnavas. See: Atheists: Nondevotees on highest yogi, 131
Avajananti mar midha on intelligence, 275
quoted, 253. 271 on Krsna as highest truth, 32
verse quoted. 222, 253 on Krsna as sex according to religion. 258
Avasenapi yan-namni, on Krsna as source, 8-9
verse quoted, 97 on Krsna as the ultimate, 227
Avisranti-prayuktani, on Krsna’s incarnation. 233
verse quoted, 171, 184 on Krsna’s protecting devotee. 162
Ayi nanda-tanuja kirkaram, on Krsna’s splendor. 248
| verse quoted, 70, 219 on Krsna’s supremacy. 153. 238
Ayusah ksana eko pi, on Krsna’s transcendence. 59
quoted. 282 on liberation by knowing Krsna. 77. 132.
223,272
B on living entity in nature. 276
on Lord’s directing living entities. 47. 202
Baddha-parikaras tena, on mahatmasin devotional service. 27
verse quoted, 97 on material nature's strength. 72
18010870711 janmanam ante on miscreants, four kinds of. 17. 54
quoted, 17 on mitigating material pains. 21
verse quoted, 9 on nature under Krsna. 154. 250
Bahu-sakha hy anantas ca, on not returning from Krsna’s abode. 167.
quoted, 275 244. 272. 273
Being, living. See: Living entity on ornkara, 295


--- Page 347 ---
344 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bhagavad-gita, quotations from (continued) Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu,
on perfection. rareness 01, 49 on unauthorized devotional service, 35
on pious men. four kinds of, 303 Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura,
on pious men in Krsna's service, 104. 114, sarikirtana and arcana prescribed by.
218 174
on planets as miserable, 287-288 Bhaktivinoda Thikura, quotations from
on remembering Krsna at death. 105 on maya’s waves, 74
on preachers as dear to Krsna, 246-247, on Narada, 289-290
310-311 on rescue from nescience, 71
on repeated births and deaths. 271 Bhakti-yoga. See: Devotional service to the
on return from heaven. 174 Lord
on returning to Godhead, 4 Bhaktya mam abhijanati
on sastras, those who disregard, 286 quoted, 157, 167. 219. 231. 236. 252. 279
on soul conceived as doer, 275-276 verse quoted, 219
on struggle of living entity. 245-246 Bhavita na ca me tasmad,
on Supersoul in heart, 122, 159 verse quoted, 246. 310
on surrender to Krsna, 31-32. 163. 165 Bhidyate hrdaya-granthis,
on tolerance, 21 verse quoted, 136
on transcendence in devotional service, 64. Bhismadeva, quoted on Lord's mysteriousness.
203-204 157
on unconditionally accepting Krsna. 291 Bhramayan sarva-bhitani,
on vai§ya’sduty, 193 quoted, 47
on Vedas’ false followers. 163 Bhrgu-sarnhita, 68-69
on Vedas’real knower, 57 Bhrtyaparadhe svamino dandah,
on Vedas’ real purpose. 17. 56-57, 173 quoted, 182
on worship. 5-6 Bhimir apo 70010 vayuh,
Bhagavan quoted. 9
impersonal and personal views of. Bhitani yanti bhitejya,
229-231 verse quoted. 6
See also: Absolute Truth: Krsna: Supreme 11/00 bhatva praliyate,
Lord quoted. 271
Bhagavata-dharma (ultimate religion). Birds in tree, example of, 212
164-165. 166-167 Birth
Bhagavatam. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam repeated. freedom from. 3-4. 77. 132.
Bhajanty ananya-manaso, 223,272
verse quoted. 27 worship determines. 6
Bhaktas See also: Transmigration of the soul
as only knowers of God, 157-158 Birth of Krsna. See: Appearance of Krsna
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord Body, material
Bhaktih paresanubhavo viraktir, activity necessary in, 62
quoted, 23. 108 desire as cause of . 75-76
Bhaktirn mayi param krtva freedom from illusion of, 127-128
quoted. 246. 310 the Haryasévas’ understanding 0,
verse quoted, 246. 310 268-269
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, quotations from Krsna conscious centers for freedom from.
on pure devotional service, 24 128-129


--- Page 348 ---
General Index 345

Body. material Brahma-yamala, quoted on unauthorized
the Lord not subject to, 271 devotional service. 35
as Lord's residence, 202 Brahmeti paramatmeti
modes of nature award, 68 quoted, 230
work in. 268-269 verse quoted, 252, 279

Body. subtle. See: Subtle body Brahmins. See: Brahmana (8)

Brahma. Lord Brhad-visnu Purana, quoted on chanting. 97
austerities 01 256 Brothers, religious principles for. 298, 300
disciplic succession from, 165
as first created person, 255 ८
quoted on devotees’ superiority, 175-176

Brahmacari
Ajamila as, 79. 81 Caitanya-caritamrta, quotations from
aspects of life of, eight listed, 20 on association of devotees, 122
debt cleared by, 307 on conditioned soul's plight. 246
father’s duty toallow son to be, 294 on sadhus of all asramas, 304
tongue controlled by. 20-21 on wanderings of living entities. 6

Brahmaloka (planet of Brahma). elevation to Caitanya Mahaprabhu on Hare Krsna mantra,

spiritual world from. 3-5 295-296

Brahman (impersonal Absolute) Caitanya Mahaprabhu. quotations from
devotees avoid merging with. 309 on chanting. 36, 148. 172
merging with. at annihilation, 254 prayer to Krsna, 70-71
as misconceived by unintelligent, 253 on preaching. 195. 317-318
as one phase of Absolute. 279 on sadhus of all asramas, 304
perspectives on, 229-231 on sarikirtana movement. 101

Brahmana(s) (intellectuals) on wanderings of living entities. 6
Ajamila as, 79 Cabksuse tv antare prapte,
chanting can deliver, 84 verse quoted, 206
duty of, 304-305 Canakya Pandita, quoted on value of time.
guru trains one as. 285 282
Krsna consciousness creates, 310 Capital punishment
perspective of, 68 atheists stop, 13
supported by householders, 201-202 necessity of, 88
in varndsrama system. 14-15 Caste system. See: Varnasrama-dharma
worship by, 42 Cause, ultimate

Brahmana saha te sarve, as cause of all causes, 221-223. 224-225

verse quoted. 4-5 as goal of philosophy. 226-227

Brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan, the Haryasvas’ understanding of. 278

quoted. 6 as impersonalist’s and personalist’s

Brahma-sarihita, quotations from objective. 229-231
on Durga, 277 science of, 278-280
on Krsna as supreme controller, 59, Celibacy. See: Brahmacari

225 Ceta etair anaviddham,
on materialist’s not knowing God. 211 verse quoted. 136
Brahma satyari jagan mithya, Chadiya vaisnpava-seva nistara,
quoted. 284 quoted. 27


--- Page 349 ---
346 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Chanting of the Lord’s holy name Conditioned souls. See: Souls, conditioned
Ajamila’s. of “Narayana,” 40-45, 96-99, Cosmic manifestation. See: Creation, the;
134,138, 139 Material world
Ajamila purified by. 45, 51 Cow protection, 193, 198-199
as beginning of devotional service, 36-37, Creation, the
84.136, 166, 219 atheist’signorance of, 8
Brhad-visnu Purana quoted on, 97 history 01, described by Lord, 255
compared to fire, 109 the Lord before and after, 251-254
compared to medicine, 110 the Lord’s existence beyond, 221-222
effects of. shown today. 110.136 Pariksit inquires on, 191-192
as freedom from bondage, 135-136 purpose of, 245-246
Garuda Purana quoted on, 97 See also: Material world
for grhastha, 85 Creator, Supreme Lord as, 221-223, 224-225
as insurance at death, 106, 138 Curse
liberation by, 97-98, 102-103, 135-136, of author by disciples’ parents, 316
169-170 Daksa’s, of Narada, 316
Lord Caitanya on, 195, 317-318
Nirada’s, with devotees, 290 D
of Narada’s successors, 290
offenses clear in, 171-172. 184. 185
offenses in, and Ajamila’s offenselessness, Daivi hy esa gunamayi
98-99, 140, 183 quoted, 47
as opportunity, 124 verse quoted, 72, 245
power of, 40-43, 45, 84 Daksa
protects devotees, 81, 140 accuses Narada of defaming Krsna, 308
in retirement, 128-129 austerities of, 208
Skanda Purana quoted on, 97-98 begets and orders the Haryasvas. 262-263
for spiritual vision, 127 claims to be sadhu, 303-304
Sukadeva Gosvami on superiority of, congratulated by the Lord, 243-245
182-183 curses Narada, 316
tongue controlled by, 21 on debts of a son, 306
as ultimate religion. 166 as grhavrata, 314-315
unconditional nature of, 105, 109, 110, informed about the Savalasvas. 302
168-171 laments for the Haryasvas. 292-293
unintelligent misunderstand, 173-174 Narada accused by, 303-316
Vedic rituals surpassed by. 185 offenses of, 258, 259
Visnudiitas explain superexcellence of , ordered to procreate, 258
96-110 Pracetas beget, 205
Yamaraja praises value of, 166-175 previous life of, 206-207, 258
Charity to brahmanas, 304 receives the Supreme Lord, 241-243
Christians, 60 on renunciation, 311-313
Civilization, human. See: Society, human the Savalasvas begotten by. 293
Compassion sends the Savalasvas 10 Narayana-saras,
of Hare Krsna movement, 126 294.
of Pariksit, 3-4 sons of. See: Haryaévas, the:
of Vaisnava, 10, 92-93 Savaladvas. the


--- Page 350 ---
General Index 347
Daksa Deva-devesvarari siitram,
wanted to prove his tolerance, 315 quoted, 238
a wife is presented to, 257 Devotees of the Supreme Lord
Death association 01, for detachment, 314
of Ajamila, 42-43 austerity and, 194
cessation of. 3-5 chanting as duty of, 185
chanting’s value at, 106, 122. 138 compared to Visnudatas. 113
defined, 49 compassion of, 3-4. 10
parent’s duty regarding, 285 harassed, 92
remembering Krsna at, 105 knowledge necessary for. 54
subtle body at, 76 Krsna’s mercy on, 232-233
surpassing, by knowing Krsna. 223 Narada inspires, to dance. 290
untimely, in this age, 114 as only knowers of God. 157-158
Debts parents 01, criticize Krsna consciousness.
of brahmanas, 307 292, 305. 308, 310
of sons. 306-307 parents of, curse by, 316
Dehapatya-kalatradisv, planets of demigods do not attract.
verse quoted. 179 308-309
Deity worship preaching as duty of, 124. 126. 162. 318
as brahmanas’ duty, 304 protected by Krsna, 81. 161-162. 234
with sarikirtana, 174 Puranas necessary for, 35
yoga as meditation in, 130-131 scholars inferior to, 175-176
Demigods service to, is necessary. 26-27
attaining status of, 6. 63. 72 sex life restricted for. 258-259
debt to, 306-307 Supreme Lord attained by. 219-220
devotee has qualities of, 29 as tolerant and fearless. 310-311
imagined as forms of God, 235-236 ` unconcerned with hell and heaven. 28
the Lord represented by. 249-250 Vedas known by. 57
planets of, disdained by devotees. 308-309 Visnudatas protect, 46. 141, 161-162
purpose of. 238 Yamaraja describes position of. 177-178
religion misunderstood by, 163 See also: Pure devotees of Krsna:
subordinate to Krsna. 152-154, 238 Vaisnavas
Supreme Lord a inystery to. 157 Devotional service to the Lord
Visnudiitas mistaken for. 49 of Ajamila, 36, 42. 129-132
as witnesses. 60 Ajamila’s determination for. 125-127
Desires. material atonement superseded by. 26
atonement does not affect. 16-17 auspicious and fearless. 28-29
bodies according to, 46-47. 75-76 chanting awakens. 36.101, 136. 166. 219
control of, difficult, 82-83 compared to sun, 22, 26
destroyed by devotional service. 22-26, distress helps one appreciate. 303
108, 136. 139 divisions of, seven listed. 25-26
subtle body composed by. 71-72 easiest and best. 130-131
Determination equality in. 248
of Ajamila for Krsna's service. 125 as freedom from bondage. 136. 203-204
of devotees, 125-129. 311 as highest path, 28-29
Devas. See: Demigods as highest perfection. 243-241


--- Page 351 ---
348 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Devotional service to the Lord (continued) Disciplic succession(s)
knowledge and detachment in, 312 from Narada Muni, 290
learned following of, 29 necessity of, 29, 165
love of God as purpose of, 27 true and false, 165
material desires vanquished by, 108 Disease
power of. 4, 24 atonement compared to cure for, 13
protection through, 83, 84 knowledge compared to cure for, 18
purification impossible without, 30 Distress. See: Suffering
purifies one to understand God, 215-216 Diva carthehaya rajan,
purity of, 24 quoted, 178
seed of, how received, 6 Dreams
sex life restricted in, 259 as example of misidentity, 67
sinful reactions vanquished by, 25 transcended in God realization, 215
as sole means of knowing the Lord, Durasaya ye bahir-artha-maninah,
157-158, 166-167, 252, 279-280 quoted, 180
strength of, 12 Duty
as supreme religion. 116 of disciple and spiritual master, 287
surpasses all impediments, 219-220 of government in spiritual life, 93
transcends material modes, 64 of government to protect life, 196-197,
as ultimate religion, 116, 166-167 200-201
unauthorized, as disturbance, 35 of Lord toward one who chants His name,
See also: names of devotional processes 100
Dharma of parents toward child, 285
bhaktias transcendental, 116 pleasing the Lord by, 155
eternal nature of, 57 special, of human being, 269, 270-271
See also: Devotional service, as ultimate in Vedic society toward old men, cows, etc.,
religion: Religion: Varndsrama- 119
dharma 5
Dharmah praojjhita-kaitavo ‘tra, E
quoted. 56, 166
Dharma-sastras Earth planet, the body compared to, 266,
on atonement, 11 268-269
surpassed by chanting, 101 Education
Dharmaviruddho bhittesu kamo ‘smi, as father’s duty, 294
quoted, 258 material, fruitless, 281
Dhrtari vratam stri-sanga-, Eka-desa-sthitasyagner jyotsnd vistarini,
quoted. 79 quoted, 279
Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena, Elements, material
quoted, 230 the Haryaévas’ understanding of, 278
Disciple ultimate cause of, 278-280
duty of, 287 See also: Creation; Material world
See also: Brahmacari; Devotees of the Energies
Supreme Lord combined in creation, 9
Disciplic succession (6) Narayana's control through, 58-59
(Parampara or Sampradaya) need of understanding, 280
the four authorized, 145 Energy, external, body as machine of. 47


--- Page 352 ---
General Index 349
Enjoyment, material Form of the Supreme Lord
strength of, 313-314 imagined by impersonalists, 235-237
See also: Sense gratification impersonal and personal viewson,
Entity, individual. See: Living entity 229-234
Envy of Krsna, 228 known by best philosophers, 237-238
Etac ca tad-upalilanadi, nonmaterial, 230-234
quoted, 42 spiritual in any condition, 253
Etavan sarkhya-yogabhyar, unintelligent disbelieve in, 233-234
verse quoted, 42 See also: Deity worship
Evan dharmair manusyanam, Freedom. See: Liberation
verse quoted, 171 Fruitive activities
Evan vartamanah sa dvijah, as atonement, 12, 16, 17
quoted, 42-43 blindly performed, 268-269
Evan visnav idam visvam, bodies caused by, 46-47, 75
verse quoted, 153 devotee finds, distasteful, 23
Expansions of the Supreme Lord, 247 devotional service superior to, 21
liberation from, 102-103
punishment for performers of, 61
F trap living entity, 73
Fruitive workers. See: Karma; Karmis
Faith
government's betrayal of, 95-96 G
in Lord and spiritual master, 68
Family Life
entangling nature of, 266-267 Ganges River, 297
See also: Grhastha Garuda, 240
Fashion, mundane and transcendental, 274 Garuda Purana, quoted on chanting, 97
Fasting, 21 God. See: Supreme Lord
Father God realization
duty of, 294 attained only by bhakti-yoga, 157-158.
of the Haryaévas, their understanding 01, 166-167, 219, 252, 279-280
283 difficulty of, for conditioned souls, 211
scriptures compared to, 267, 283-286 disciplic succession as access to, 165
son’s debt to, 307 happiness the result of, 242
value of, 285 stages of, two defined, 215
See also: Parents by understanding material world. 249-250
Fear See also: Bhakti-yoga; Devotional service:
in animals, 72 Krsna consciousness
bhakti free from, 28-29, 33, 34 Goodness, mode of
Fire brahmana symptomizes. 68
Lord's name compared to, 109 insufficient for knowing the Lord. 157
Supersoul compared to. 217 result of acts in, 63
as witness, 60 Gopikolikhale damna,
Food verse quoted, 253
for living entities, 198-199 Government
unclean, eaten by Ajamila, 87 agriculture the concern of. 193


--- Page 353 ---
350 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Government (continued) Harer nama harer nama
as citizen's enemy in Kali-yuga. 95-96 quoted, 40
duty neglected by, 93 verse quoted, 36, 168, 172
duty of. to protect life. 196-197 Hare Krsna movement. See:
religion corrupted in, 91-93 Krsna consciousness movement
solving the problems of. 93-94 Haridasa Thakura, on chanting, 169
Supersoul compared to, 212 Hari-kirtanarm nisamyapatan,
Grace of God. See: Mercy of the Lord quoted, 45
Grhasthas Haryaévas, the
duty of, 304-305 approached by Narada, 264-267
grhamedhis contrasted with, 315 austerities accepted by, 264
may misconceive renunciation, 305-306 begotten and ordered by Daksa, 262-263
peace and safety for, 85 delivered by Narada, 287, 292
Guna-karma-nama, Narada'’s allegory considered by, 268-283
quoted, 234 Hearing of Krsna
Guru. See: Spiritual master as beginning of devotional service, 36, 136.
Guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija 166, 219
quoted, 122 prime subject matter for, 3-4
verse quoted, 6 purificatory effects of, 136, 219
Heart, the
H cleansing of, 102-103
coverings of, 217
sinful desiresin, 22. 24, 25
Harnsa-guhya prayers of Daksa quoted, soul in, 46
210-238 Supersoul in, 60, 158-159
Happiness Heavenly planets, 5-6, 173, 184
blindly sought, 269 Hell (hellish planets)
false in material world, 220 Ajamila’s deliverance from. 120-121,
God realization produces, 242 150
in modes of nature, 64 devotee callous to, 28
religious activities evidenced by, 65 Jani 15 saved from, 18
tolerance 01, 21 safety from, 32
Hardwar, Ajamila visits, 128-129 sinful enter, 10-11, 47, 63
Hare Krsna mantra Hetunanena kaunteya,
as beginning of bhakti-yoga, 36-37. 84, verse quoted, 250
136, 166, 219 Hindus victimized by politicans, 95
benefit of, 106, 138 Hitvatma-patari grham andha-kipar,
compared to fire, 109 verse quoted. 266
devotee’s duty to chant, 171, 185 Hlada-tapa-kart misra,
Nirada'’s successors should chant, 290 verse quoted, 220
as nonmaterial sound, 232-234 Hladinisandhini samvit,
recommended for this age. 36, 168, 172, verse quoted, 220
295-297 Hole, spiritual world compared to, 266,
for spiritual safety, 84 271-273
tongue controlled by, 21 Holy name. See: Chanting of the Lord's holy
See also: Chanting of the Lord's holy name name; Krsna, name of


--- Page 354 ---
General Index 351
House, the Lord compared to, 266, 278-280 International Society for Krishna
Householders Consciousness. See: Krsna
punishable in material life, 178-181 consciousness movement
See also: Grhasthas Intoxication, 37, 81
Hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani, Irreligion, Yamadiitas accused ০ 91
verse quoted, 103 Isvarah paramah krsnah
Human being(s) quoted, 153, 231
defined, 62 verse quoted, 59, 225, 231
duty of, 74, 180-181, 269, 270-271 Fvarah sarva-bhitanan
perfect life for, 154-155 quoted, 46, 159, 202
tongue should be controlled by, 199 verse quoted, 47
transcendental life for, 215-216, 218-220,
223 J
ultimate religion for, 166-167
Human society. See: Society, human Jadi-krta-matir madhu-puspitayam,
Humility, Lord Caitanya on, 195, 317-318 quoted, 174
Husband, a bewildered man compared to, 266, Jaghanya-guna-vrtti-stha
275-276 verse quoted, 63
Hy anama-ripa-guna-pani-padam acaksur, Jaimini, 173
quoted, 230 Janati tattvarh bhagavan-mahimno,
verse quoted, 175, 236
1 Janayaty asu vairagyan,
verse quoted, 312
Ignorance Janmady asya yatah,
atonement an aspect of, 16 verse quoted, 279
counteracted by chanting, 136 Janma karma ca me divyam,
17210 25, 18-19 verse quoted, 57, 77, 132, 223, 272
piety and impiety as, 23 Janma-karma-gunanan ca,
sin due to, 25 verse quoted, 170
symptoms of, 68-69 Janma-labhah parah purisam,
Illusion verse quoted, 42
of impersonalists, 237 Jiva. See: Living entity; Soul, conditioned:
See also: Maya Soul, the
Impersonalists. See: Mayavadis Jiva Gosvami
Incarnations of Krsna, transcendental, cited on divisions of bhakti, 25-26
232-234 sarkirtanaand arcana prescribed by, 174
India, worship of Narayana in, 42 (Jiva) krsna-dasa, ei ४16४९5०,
Initiation, spiritual verse quoted, 74
of brahmanas by guru, 285 Jiana. See: Knowledge
meaning of, 287 Jiana-kanda, compared to poison. 30
principles for, 284 Jiana-sakti-balaisvarya,
Intelligence. devotional service gives, 176 verse quoted, 228
Intelligence, material Jrana-yoga, 4
compared to a prostitute, 273-275 Janis
frustrating and unhappy, 275-276 ignorance of, 18-19
the Haryaévas’ consideration 01, 273-275 negative views 0. 230-231


--- Page 355 ---
352 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Janis (continued) King
as $astras adherents, 19 qualifications and duty of, 92-93,
Judah. Dr. J. 51111501. 110 200-201
Judge. supreme, 146-148 See also: Government; Ksatriya(s)
Justice. 55, 60-63, 87-88, 91-94, 146-150 Kirtana. See: Chanting of the Lord's holy
name
K Knowledge
limitations of, for living being, 213-214.
Kabhu svarge uthaya, kabhu narake dubaya, of the Lord, 157-158
quoted, 246 in Lord and living beings contrasted, 236
Kaivalyar narakayate tridasa-pir material contrasted with eternal, 280-281
quoted, 309 purification through, 17, 18
verse quoted, 33 purpose of, 56-57
Kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva, renunciation requires, 312
quoted, 36. 168, 172 revealed to faithful, 68
Kali-yuga surrender in, 9
austerity and chanting in, 297 of ultimate cause, 278-280
chanting recommended for, 36, 40, 168, useless without bhakti, 135-136
172 Vedic, illuminates, 67
death untimely in, 114 Krishna. See: Krsna
religion corrupted in, 91-93 Krpaya tava pada-parikaja,
sinful atmosphere of, 81 verse quoted, 70, 219
symptoms 0 described, 95-96 Krsi-goraksya-vanijyarn,
Kanyakubja. 35 quoted, 193
Karanam guna-sarigo ‘sya, Krsna
verse quoted, 276 as creator, cause and controller, 221-
Kardama Muni, as renunciant, 259 228
Karma devotees must know mission 0 54
disbelievers in, 60 expansions of, classified, 247
JAana superior to, 18 Janis meditate on universal form of, 231
religious or irreligious acts create, 63 liberation by understanding. 17. 132, 223,
wandering of living entities by, 6 272
See also: Fruitive activities as origin of Narayana, etc.. 32
Karma-kanda as supreme controller, 153-154
compared to poison, 30 surrender to, 70, 163-165
See also: Fruitive activities; Karma See also: Appearance of Krsna: Deity
Karma-yoga, bhakti-yoga independent of, 4 worship: Form of the Supreme Lord:
Karmis (fruitive workers) God realization: Pastimes of Krsna:
compared to asses, 17 Surrender to Krsna: Supreme Lord:
Daksa shows mentality 0, 308-309 Worship
Karma-kanda, jrana-kanda, Krsna, name of
quoted, 30 means “‘all-attractive.” 234
Kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah, Rapa Gosvami on attraction for. 40
quoted, 81, 162 See also: Chanting of the Lord's holy name
Kesava dhrta-mina-sarira, Krsna-Balarama temple, 173
quoted, 248 Krsna consciousness
as freedom from matter, 277-278


--- Page 356 ---
General Index 353
Krsna consciousness Ksine punye martya-lokari visanti,
governmental problems solved by, 93-94 quoted, 184, 287
as knowledge and austerity, 277 Ksipamy ajasram asubhan,
lack of, 10 quoted, 227
as natural tendency, 74 Kumiras, disciplic succession from, 165
as necessity for conditioned souls, 246 Kurvanti caisam muhur atma-moham,
preachers of. See: Preachers, Krsna quoted, 228
conscious
proper attitude in, 124, 126, 317-318 L
result of, 133
stability in, 274 Laksmi, disciplic succession from, 145
as strength against sin, 81 Lamentation, 72
the test of, 23 Lava-matra sadhu-sarige sarva-siddhi haya,
Krsna consciousness movement verse quoted, 122
arcana and sankirtana in, 174 Liberation
caste brahmanas criticize, 310 bhaktirenders, insignificant, 24
centers of, for everyone, 128-129 chanting as best means of, 97-98,
chanting proved by, 136 102-103, 135-136, 169-170
curse on founder of, 316 defined, 77, 246
determination in, 124-125 in devotional service, 217
elevating function of, 246, 269 direct and indirect, 155
fashion in, 274 as duty ignored, 269
a father’s duty concerning. 294 by holy name’s attraction, 40
governmental problems solved by, 93-94 by knowledge, 18
obstructed by modern authorities, 92 Krsna consciousness movement teaches.
Krsna remembered in, 122 126, 285-286
literature presented by, 281 Pariksit discusses, 3-4
Lord Caitanya’s mercy in, 314 for rare intelligent persons, 6
Narada as predecessor of, 290 real and ineffective means of, contrasted.
parents critical of, 285-286, 292, 305, 308, 135-136
310 by understanding Krsna, 17. 57. 223. 272
preaching as duty in, 162 Life
principles of, 284 human, purpose of, 103
sarikirtana and arcand in, 174 value and utility of, 282-283
sex life restricted in, 259 Life, forms of, 55
transcendence through, 204 Living entities
value of, demonstrated, 110 at annihilation, 245, 250
৬1511000135 and Lord protect, 161-162 bodies of, by desire, 75
Krsnam pisarigambaram ambujeksanam, bodies 01, in modes of nature. 68
quoted, 230 compared to silkworm, 73
Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam, as false material actor, 275-276
quoted, 32, 234 food types for, 198
Ksatriya(s) happiness blindly sought by. 269
duty of, 193, 305 King’s duty to protect, 196-197. 200
success in life for, 154-155 know Lord by His grace. 236
See also: King Lord differs in body from. 253


--- Page 357 ---
354 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Living entities (continued) Mahatmanas tu mar partha,
the Lord's guidance of, 47, 159 verse quoted, 27
in material and spiritual worlds, 55 Mahat-sevam dvaram ahur vimukteh,
material world’s purpose regarding, quoted, 27
245-246 Mamaivarso jiva-loke,
matter as false association for, 77 verse quoted, 245
prostituted intelligence of, 275-276 Mam aprapyaiva kaunteya,
as punishable in this world, 62 verse quoted, 228
service nature of, 73-74 Mari ca yo "vyabhicarena,
struggle of, 72 verse quoted, 12, 64, 203
varieties of , three explained, 64. Mam evaisyasi satya te,
wander the universe, 5-6 verse quoted, 291
witnesses of, 60, 66 Mam evaisyasy asarsayah,
Lokasyajanato vidvars, quoted, 4
verse quoted, 299 Mam eva ye prapadyante,
Lord, the. See: Supreme Lord verse quoted, 72, 245
Love of God Mam upetya punar janma,
atonement unnecessary in, 26 verse quoted, 167, 244, 272
beginning of, 219 Mam upetya tu kaunteya,
chanting develops, 71, 101 verse quoted, 288
as purpose of devotional service, 27 Man. See: Government: Human being:
as supreme religion, 166-167 Society, human: Soul, conditioned
See also: Devotional service Man, the one, the Lord compared to, 266,
270-271
M Manah sasthanindriyani,
verse quoted, 245
Madhvacarya Manasaiva pure devah,
on demigods as subordinate to Krsna, verse quoted, 68
250-251 Manasas cendriyanan ca,
on different theistic views, 237 quoted, 20
on Krsna as cause, 153 Mandah sumanda-matayo,
quoted on Lord's unlimited potencies, 255 quoted, 96
quoted on soul and Supersoul, 212-213 Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto,
quoted on Vedas, 57 verse quoted, 291
Mahabharata, quoted on munis, 226 Mantras, Vedic
Mahajanas orkara in, as Krsna, 295
following, 29, 56 See also: Chanting the Lord's holy name:
supreme religion known by, 164-165, Hare Krsna mantra
173 Manu-samhita, on atonement, 11-13, 101
Mahajano yena gatah sa panthih, Manusyanam sahasresu
quoted, 29, 56 quoted, 49
Maha-mantra. See: Chanting the Lord's holy verse quoted, 23, 158, 218
name: Hare Krsna mantra Marisa, 204-205
Mahatam api kauravya, Marriage, 117
verse quoted, 170 Material energy, body as machine 01, 47
Mahatmas, association with, 27 Material nature. See: Nature, material


--- Page 358 ---
General Index 355
Material world, May: saiijayate bhaktih,
annihilation of, 254 verse quoted, 171
controlled by Krsna, 153-154 Meat-eating. See: Animal slaughter
as creation of the Lord, 8-9 Meditation
false happiness in, 220 highest form of, 130-131
freedom from, 135-136 useless for knowing the Lord, 252
living entities in, 6, 55 useless without bhakti, 135-136
living entity’s struggle in, 245-246 Mental speculation. See: Speculative
the Lord creates but transcends, 221-222 knowledge
the Lord understood through, 249-250 Mercy of the Lord
purpose of, 245-246 in appearing as He is, 232-234
renunciation of, advised by scriptures, 284 and guru, 6, 122, 125
transcendental cause of, 221-225 as sole means of knowing God, 236
Materialism Mercy of ४३९११५३, 4, 6, 122, 125
freedom from, 284 (Miche) mayara vase, 2८110 bhese’,
rejection of, taught by guru, 287 verse quoted, 74
Sastrasagainst, 284 Mind
Western influence of, 281 controlling, by austerity, 20
Materialists as element, sixteenth, 69
oppose Krsna consciousness, 285-286 purified in God realization, 214-215
See also: Atheists: Karmis; Nondevotees See also: Subtle body
Matra-sparsas tu kaunteya, Misery. See: Suffering
verse quoted, 21 Modes of nature
Mattah parataram nanyat, bodies according to, 68
quoted, 32, 153, 238 control cosmic manifestation. 58,
Maya 59
baffles true understanding, 269 inclinations due to, 5-6
bodies created by, 47 sin inevitable in, 62
compared to ocean, 74 strength of, 73
compared to river, 277 subtle body as effect of, 71-72
liberation from, by association of and time, 65
mahatmas, 27 transcending, 203-204
understanding of , is necessary, 277-278 varieties of life due to, 64
See also: Material world: Nature. material work in, 73-74
Mayadhyaksena prakrtih Mokhitam nabhianati,
quoted, 154. 277 verse quoted, 59
verse quoted, 250 Money, 84-86
Mayapur, Krsna conscious center in, 129 Monism
Mayavadis faulty idea and argument of, 237
Absolute Truth, views on, 229-231 See also: Mayavadis
bhakti misunderstood by, 29 Moon
chanting discounted by, 169 vegetation grows by light of. 196
faulty ideas and arguments of, 237 as witness. 60
form of God imagined by, 235-236 Mukti. See: Liberation
Mayayapahrta-jiiana, Muktir hitvanyatha riapam,
quoted, 17, 54 quoted, 77


--- Page 359 ---
356 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Muslims victimized by politicians, 95 Narada Muni
Mystic power, 194 the Savalasvasaddressed by, 298
speaks allegory to the Haryasvas, 266-267
N Vyasadeva instructed by, 299
Narada muni, bajaya vina,
Na cantar na bahir yasya, song quoted, 289-290
verse quoted, 252 Narayana
Na ca tasman manusyesu, Ajamila’s chanting the name of, 40-45,
verse quoted, 246, 310 51, 98-99, 139-140, 150
Na hi kalyana-krt kascid, dharma from breathing of, 57
quoted, 33 Krsna asorigin of, 32
Na hy asya karhicid rajan, the Savalasvas’ 00615811065 unto, 296-297
verse quoted, 157 as supreme cause, 58-59
Nama-aparadha. See: Chanting the Lord’s as transcendental, 222
holy name, offenses in in Vaikuntha, 51
Na mari duskrtino madhah, Vedas identical with, 56
verse quoted, 17, 54 Yamaraja asks pardon from, 181-182
Namaparadha-yuktanan, See also: Supreme Lord
verse quoted, 171, 184 Narayana (Ajamila’s son), 39-45. 122
Namasyantas ca mar bhaktya, Narayana-parah sarve,
verse quoted, 218 quoted, 28
Name change at initiation, 122 Narayanah paro "vyaktat,
Names of the Lord quoted, 222
according to His transcendental deeds, 234 Narayana-saras
all-spiritual, 232-234 the Haryaévas’ austerities at, 263-264
See: Chanting the Lord’s holy name the Savalasvas’ austerities at, 294-295
Namno balad yasya hi papa-buddhih Narottama dasa Thakura, quotations from
quoted, 98, 140 on karma-kanda and jiiana-kanda, 30
Namno hi yavati Saktih papa-nirharane, on serving Vaisnava, 27
verse quoted, 97 Na sadhu manye yata atmano yam,
Nana-varno haris tv eko, verse quoted, 67
verse quoted, 253 Na sa siddhim avapnoti,
Napnuvanti mahatmanah, verse quoted, 286
verse quoted, 167, 244, 272 Na tasya karyar karanam ca vidyate,
Narada Muni verse quoted, 58, 234
cursed by Daksa, 316-318 Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum,
Daksa accuses and criticizes, 303-316 quoted, 180
Daksa met by, 302-303 Nature, material
description of, 288-290 association with, 77
determination of, 292, 293 controlled by Krsna, 153-154, 233-234
devotees inspired to dance by, 290 the Haryaévas' understanding of, 277
disciplic succession from, 290 insurmountable, 72
the Haryasvas approached by, 264. the Lord seen through. 249-250
the Haryasvas delivered by, 287. 292 mdyd in charge of, 277
informs Daksa of the Haryasvas, 292 strength of, 313-314
Pracinabarhi advised by, 193 understanding of, necessary, 275-276


--- Page 360 ---
General Index 357
Nature, material Papa-ksayas ca bhavati,
See also: Creation; Material world quoted, 170, 172
Navadvipa, Krsna conscious center in, 128 Papistha ye duracara,
Nehabhikrama-naso ’sti pratyavayo, verse quoted, 113
verse quoted, 33 Parabrahman, impersonal and personal views
Nidraya hriyate naktar, ^ on, 229-231
quoted, 178 Paramitma. See: Supersoul
Nigama-kalpa-taror galitari phalam, Parariv bhavam ajananto,
quoted, 299 verse quoted, 222
Nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho, Param brahma para dhama,
verse quoted, 116 quoted, 227
Nisedha-nirvana-sukhanubhitih, Parampara. See: Disciplic succession
quoted, 220 Parari vijayate sri-krsna-sarnkirtanam,
Nityananda Prabhu, as tolerant, 318 quoted, 101
Nityo nityanan cetanas cetananam, Parasara, on nondevotees, 228
quoted, 251 Parasya brahmanah saktis tathedam,
Nondevotees quoted, 279
devotional service required for, 30 Parasyante krtatmanah,
philosophical confusion among, 226-228 verse quoted, 5
punishable by Yamaraja, 180-181 Parasya Saktir vividhaiva srizyate
religion falsely shown by, 176 quoted, 255
suffering of, due tosin, 24 verse quoted, 58, 234
See also: Atheists; Karmis; Materialists Parents
Nana pramattah kurute vikarma, critical of Krsna consciousness, 292. 305.
verse quoted, 67 308, 310
Nyaya-sastra, quoted on responsibility, 182 curse of, on author, 316
the duty of, 285, 294
0 Pariksit Maharaja
compassion of, 3-4, 10
Offenses in chanting tested by Sukadeva, 12, 16
Ajamila free of, 98-99, 140 Yamadittas’ defeat questioned by, 3-4
clear gradually, 171-172, 184, 185 Paritranaya sadhinari,
defined, 140 quoted, 234
Oneness Passion, chanting counteracts, 136
faulty idea of. 237 Pastimes of Krsna
See also: Mayavadi not material but merciful, 232-234
Ornkara, 295 purpose and glory of, 234
Penance. See: Atonement
P Perfection
by chanting, 185
Pada pada yad vipadam na tesam, by devotional service, 312
quoted, 162 the highest, 42, 147, 243-244
Padma Purana, on devotional service, 25 for human society, 154-155
Paficajani, 262, 293 rarest kind of, 23, 49. 158
Panthas tu koti-sata-vatsara-sarmpragamyo, asreturning to Godhead. 287-
verse quoted, 211 288


--- Page 361 ---
358 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Philosophers Preachers, Krsna conscious
classes of. three described. 237-238 Krsna satisfied by, 310-311
deluded types of. 226-228 Lord Caitanya's formula for, 195, 317-
Philosophies 318
types and goal of, 226-227 opposition to, 92
why many exist, 226-228 protected by Krsna, 126
See also: Speculative knowledge recognized by Supreme Lord, 246-247
Pita na sa syaj janani na sa syat, tolerance recommended for, 317-318
quoted, 285 tolerant and fearless, 310-311
Politics. See: Government: King: Ksatriya(s) Pregnant woman, the example of, 313
Pot. a, analogy of, 237 Prema pum-artho mahan,
Prabodhananda Sarasvati. quotations from quoted, 171
on devotee’s sinlessness, 33 Principles of holy life. See: Regulative
on liberation and devotees. 309 principles
Pracetas, the Prostitute, intelligence compared (0, 266,
emerge from water, 193 273-275
Soma advises, 196-204 Protection
Pracinabarhi advised by Narada, 193 of cows, 198-199
Prahlada Maharaja of life by governments, 197, 200-201
compassion of, 10 Puman naivaiti yad gatva,
quoted on family life, 266 quoted, 272
Prajas, 200-201 Puman vimucyate sadyah,
Prakrteh kriyamanani, verse quoted, 97
verse quoted, 275 Punishment
Prakrti. See: Nature, material sinners subject to, 55, 62
Prakrtir svam adhisthaya, sinning with knowledge of, 14-15
verse quoted, 233 persons who receive. 178-181
Pramloca Apsara, daughter of, 205 Yamadatas' questions on. 146-150
Pranavah sarva-vedesu, Puranas, importance of, 34-35
quoted, 295 Pure devotees of Krsna
Prano vayus citta-gato, intelligence of, 176
verse quoted, 251 Lord understood solely by, 175-176
Praty-ekaso gunanam tu, regret past life, 118
verse quoted. 255 See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
Pravistah karna-randhrena, Purification
quoted. 219 by chanting, 40, 51
Pravrttir ca nivrttim ca, by devotional service, 215
quoted, 284 impossible for nondevotees, 30
Pravrttir esa bhiitanan, by knowledge, 18
quoted, 199 punishment as, 88
Prayers of Daksa, 210-238 by serving devotees, 26-27
Preachers, Krsna conscious See also: Atonement
attitude of, 124, 126, 195. 317-318 Purusah prakrti-stho hi,
curse on author may be accepted by. 316 verse quoted, 276
devotees duty to be, 162 Purusam sasvatarn divyam adi-devam,
knowledge required for, 54 quoted, 227


--- Page 362 ---
General Index 359
Parvaparari bahis cantar, Riipa Gosvami
verse quoted, 252 quoted on holy name as giving liberation,
40
R quoted on pure bhakti, 24
Rajah (mode of passion), chanting ও
counteracts, 136
Razors and thunderbolts, time compared to, Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha pirnanandadi,
266, 282-283 quoted, 237-238
Regulative principles, the Sacrifices. See: Ritualistic ceremonies
in Krsna consciousness movement, 20, 21, Sadhu, 317
81, 284, 297 Sadhur eva sa mantavyah,
parents’ dislike of, 305, 308 verse quoted, 33
Regulative principles of knowledge, 18 ‘Sadhu-sariga’, ‘sadhu-sanga’ 507৮0 sastre,
Reincarnation of the soul. See: Birth, repeated, verse quoted, 122
freedom from; Transmigration of the Sa gunan samatityaitan,
soul verse quoted, 12, 64, 203
Religion Sakrd uccaritarm yena,
eternal nature of, 57 verse quoted, 97
a government's duty regarding, 91-95 Samba, 107
nondevotee’s show 01, 176 Sampradayas. See: Disciplic succession (s)
real, a mystery, 162-163 Sampradaya-vihina ye
supreme form of, 116, 166-167 quoted, 165
surrender to Krsna as, 32, 53, 54 Saikhya, defined, 230
Vedas as source of, 56-57 ৩৪110011165, 229-231
Renounced order. See: Sannyasis Sarikirtana
Renunciation importance of, in this age, 174
१९५०1९९७ blessings needed for, 314 as opportunity for spiritual life, 101-102
knowledge required for, 312 Sukadeva Gosvami on, 182-183
false and true, 313-314 Sannyasira alpa chidra sarva-loke gaya,
Rg Veda, on conception, 76 quoted, 304
Ritualistic ceremonies Sannyasis
chanting surpasses, 101-103 duty of, 304
not real religion, 163 householders provide for. 201-202
profitless, 184-185 knowledge necessary for, 312
unintelligent prefer to chanting, 173— Sarva-dharman parityajya
174 quoted, 53, 70, 163, 165. 284
River, material nature compared to, 266, verse quoted, 31, 291
277-278 Sarvasya cahar hrdi sannivisto,
Rsabhadeva, quotations from quoted, 122, 159
on austerities, 257 Sarvatmana yah saranam saranyar gato,
on becoming mother or father, 285 | verse quoted, 307
on sinful acts, 67 Sastras (scriptures)
Ripa Gosvami as basis for government. 92
on overeating, 21 defined, 284
Puranas accepted by, 34 as father, 283


--- Page 363 ---
360 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Sastras (scriptures) (continued) Sex life
importance of. 286 period of life for. 39
materialism rejected by. 284 restricted for spiritual life, 258-259
Satatar kirtayanto mam Siddhaloka as Visnuditas' origin, 149-150
quoted. 84. 218 Sin
verse quoted. 218 atonement for, 13-14
Sa vai purmsarn paro dharmo, compared todried leaves, 20
verse quoted, 116. 166 counteracted by chanting, 96-110,
Savalasvas. the 138-139
begotten by Daksa. 293 deliberate, 14-15
debts dissolved by. 306-307 devotional service destroys. 12. 25
devotional service adopted by. 301 food as. 87
Narada addresses. 298 hell result of, 10, 63
Saya pratar grnan bhaktya, ignorance as cause of. 25
verse quoted, 169 in Kali-yuga. 81
Science. authentic. 278-280 pure devotees regret, 118
Scientists. material rituals cannot prevent, 185
imitate and ignore God. 276 for sense gratification. 67
moon theories of, in doubt. 196 _ stages of reaction to, 24
unscientific claims of. 278-279 Siva, Lord, disciplic succession from, 165
Scriptures. See: Sdstras; Vedas; Vedic Skanda Purana, quotations from
literature: names of scriptures on chanting, 97-98
Self-realization on souls and Supersoul, 212-213
defined, 49 on Visnu as cause. 153
government's duty to teach, 92-93 Sky
neglected, 269 living being compared to. 237
Sense gratification as witness, 60
blindly sought, 269 Sleep, transcended. 215
sin from attachment for. 15 Smrti-sastra, quoted on austerity. 20
unnecessary for devotee. 23 Society, human
Senses betrayal of life in, 95-96
purified in devotional service, 215-216 correcting religion in, 93-94
as subtle body's component, 71 marriage in Vedic system of. 117
Supersoul compared to, 212 meat-eating in. 198-199
Service to the Supreme Lord. See: Devotional misguided condition 0. 281
service perfect system of. 154-155. 180
Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau, platform of unity for. 76
quoted. 21, 215, 236 proper study for, 280
Sex (gender), determined at conception, 76 religion corrupt in. 91-93
Sex life sadhus in, 304
brahmacari avoids, 20 Visnu the goal of, 180-181
Daksa’s facility for, 258-259 Soma
illicit, degrades, 37-38 appeases the Pracetas regarding trees,
illicit, prohibited, 85 196-204
as materialist’s sole happiness, 178-179 as deity of moon. 195-196


--- Page 364 ---
General Index 361
Soma Spiritual master
presents Marisa to the Pracetas, 204-205 as Narada’s representative. 290
So ’py asti yat-prapada-simny avicintya-tattve, = Spiritual world
verse quoted, 211 from Brahmaloka to. 3-5
Soul, conditioned destination of devotees, 132-134
devotee’s efforts concerning, 113 the Haryadvas’ understanding 01,
God not perceived by. 210-211 271-272
plight of. 245-246 living entities in, 55
Supersoul not understood by, 212-213 returning to. 57, 223, 272-273
See also: Living entity , yogispath to, 4
Soul, the Sraddhavan bhajate yo mam,
as element, seventeenth. 69, 70 | verse quoted, 131
ignored by materialists. 269 Sravanar kirtanam dhyana,
perfection in knowing, 49 | verse quoted, 170
philosophers ignorant of, 227 Sravanar kirtanarvisnoh
situation 0. 46 as beginning of devotional service. 36. 136.
Supersoul with. 60 166. 219
transmigration of. See: Transmigration of See also: Chanting the Lord's holy name:
the soul र, Hearing of Krsna
understanding of. 213-214 Sreyah-srtirn bhaktim udasya te vibho,
See also: Living entity: Soul, conditioned i verse quoted, 22
Speculative knowledge Sridhara Svami, quotations from
Absolute Truth viewed by. 229-231 on Ajamila’s bhakti, 42
as ignorance. 18, 158 _ on liberation by chanting, 169. 170
Krsna is beyond, 23 Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from
purifying effects of, 18-19 on Absolute Truth in three phases. 252.
as Sukadeva proposed. 17 279
useless for knowing Supreme Lord, on austerities, 257
157-158. 163. 215, 236. 252 on bhagavata-dharma, 166
Speculators. See: Philosophers on bhakti’s power, 24-25, 108
Speculators. See: Philosophers on chanting, 136
Spirit. See: Soul, the: Soul, conditioned: on debts and surrendering to Krsna. 307
Spiritual world: Supreme Lord on devotee’saccepting Krsna's mercy. 28
Spiritual body. 76 on devotee’s good qualities, 29
Spiritual life on devotional service as supreme. 116
direct process of. 116 on dharmaand adharma, 56. 250
easiest process for. 101. 103 on false liberation, 18-19
See also: Devotional service to the Lord: on hearing as purifying. 103. 219
Krsna consciousness on knowledge
Spiritual master on liberation, 77
association with, 6 on knowledge and detachment. 312
brahmanas initiated by. 285 on liberation, 77
duty of. 287 on the Lord’s mysteriousness. 157
faith in, 68 on the Lord’s protecting devotees. 162
Lord pleased through, 290 on mahatma’sassociation. 27


--- Page 365 ---
362 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from (cont) Sun
on materialistic householders, 178-179 Ajamila’s falldown compared to eclipse of ,
on Pariksit’s question, glory of, 3 83
on perfection, 42 devotional service compared to, 22, 26
on pleasing the Lord by duty, 155 as witness, 60
on purity for knowing Krsna, 216 Sun-god, Yamaraja as son of, 48
on renouncing family life, 266-267 Supersoul (Paramatma)
on sadhus, 317 compared to the eye, 158-159
on sin for sense gratification, 67 not perceived by individual soul, 158-159,
on speculator’s lack of bhakti, 22-23 212-213
on tapasya, 103 as one phase of Absolute, 279
, on Vedic literature’s purpose, 299 the Pracetas advised about, 202
Srrigaradyakrti-gatah, realization of, 217
p verse quoted, 250 situation 01, 46-47, 158-159, 212-213
Srnvatar sva-kathah krsnah, as witness, 60
j verse quoted, 103 Yamaraja’s orders from, 66
Srotavyah kirtitavyas ca, Supreme Brahman
verse quoted, 223 Krsna as, 224-225, 227
Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka, See also: Supreme Lord
॥ quoted, 277 Supreme Lord
Sruti-smrti-puranadi, as Absolute and supreme spirit, 253-254
verse quoted, 35 appears before Daksa, 240-241
Subtle body association with, 77
gross body as product of, 75-76 bodies received from, 68
parts of, sixteen described, 71 chanting obliges, 100, 139
_ See also: Mind as conceived by three types of men,
Sidras 237-238
duty of, 305 as controller above all, 152-154, 238, 250
success in life for, 154-155 as creator and cause, 8-9, 153, 255,
Suffering 278-280
chanting frees from, 169 Daksa addressed by, 247-255
devotional service appreciated in, 303 Daksa congratulated by, 243-245
devotional serviceends, 24, 299 Daksa instructed by, 258-260
irreligion evidenced by, 65 demigods subordinate to, 152-154, 238
modes responsible for, 64 described by Daksa, 210, 221, 224, 226,
origin of, 220 232, 235
reason for, 245-246 directs living entities, 47, 159, 212-213
renunciation not attained by, 313-314 distinguished from living beings, 236,
sin as cause of, 10-11, 67 253-254
from sinful reactions, 24 the Haryasvas’ understanding of, 270
, tolerance of, 21 impersonal and personal views on,
Sukadeva 229-234, 252, 279
as Pariksit’s spiritual master, 3, 17, 23 impersonal form 0, described, 249
tested Pariksit’s intelligence, 12, 16 impersonalists imagine, 235-236
Siksmatvena harau sthanal, {7015 meditate on universal form of, 231
verse quoted, 254 kindness of, 41, 70


--- Page 366 ---
General Index 363
Supreme Lord Svanusthitasya dharmasya,
known only by bhakti, 157-158, 166-167, verse quoted, 155
252, 279-280 Svayambhuva Manu
material world as evidence of, 249-250 creation during reign of, 191
not understood by conditioned souls, Narada delivered family of. 302-303
210-211 as manvantara, first, 7
pleased through guru, 290 Sve sve karmany abhiratah,
potencies of, 255,279-280 | quoted, 155
protects the devotees, 81, 83, 161-162, Svetasvatara Upanisad, quotations from
177,234 on revelation, 67
pure devotees alone understand, 175-176 on Supreme Lord as controller, 58
on remembering, 42 Swan, transcendentalist compared to, 266,
transcends the creation, 221-223, 280-281
270-271
understanding of, as duty, 270-271 T
Vedas’ purpose to aid understanding of, 17,
163,173 Tadanantyarn tu gunatas te,
Yamaraja explains position of, 152- 160 verse quoted, 255
See also: Appearance of Krsna: Deity Tad-antaryaminas caiva matsyadya,
worship; Form of the Supreme verse quoted, 248
Lord: God realization; Names of the Tada rajas-tamo-bhavah,
Supreme Lord: Narayana: Pastimes verse quoted, 136
of Krsna: Supersoul: Surrender to Tad-vijiiandrthar sa gurum evabhigacchet,
Krsna: Visnu, Lord; Worship quoted, 68, 285
Suras. See: Demigods Tamabh. See: Ignorance.
Surrender to the Supreme Lord Tamah-guna. See: Ignorance, mode of
auspiciousness of, 33 Tamasi ma jyotir gama,
Bhagavad-gita quoted on, 72 quoted, 67
as bhakti-yoga’s perfection, 32 Tam eva viditvatimrtyum eti,
debts removed by, 307 quoted, 223
in knowledge, 9 Tar matvatmajam avyaktarn,
as only hope of human being, 70 verse quoted, 253
as religion's essence, 53, 54, 164-167 Tari tam evaiti kaunteya,
sinful reactions vanquished by, 32 verse quoted, 75. 106
types who do not, four described, 54 Tan aham dvisatah kriiran sarmsaresu,
Susilah sadhavo yatra, quoted, 227
quoted, 29 Tantra-nirnaya, quoted on devotees, 248
Svabhaviki jiana-bala-kriya ca, Tapah. See: Austerities; Tapasya
quoted, 60 Tapasya
Svadeha-sthari harim prahur, as beginning of spiritual life, 249
টন verse quoted, 237 chanting and hearing as. 103
Svado ‘pi sadyah savanaya kalpate, of devotees and demons. 194
verse quoted, 25 of the Pracetas. 194
Svalpam apy asya dharmasya See also: Austerity
quoted, 84 Tapo ’bhimani rudras tu,
verse quoted, 33 verse quoted. 250


--- Page 367 ---
364 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Tapo divyar putraka yena sattvar, Tongue
quoted, 103, 257 spiritual use of, 21
Tarko 'pratisthah Srutayo vibhinna, Traigunya-visayd veda,
quoted, 226 verse quoted, 116
Tasmat kenapy upayena manah krsne, Trance, 215
quoted, 40 Transcendence, the Lord’s position in,
Tasmat sarikirtanam visnor, 221-223, 270-271
verse quoted, 170 Transmigration of the soul
Tasmat sarvatmana rajan, conditions attending, 65
verse quoted, 223 by desire, 46-47, 75-76
Tasyaite kathita hy arthah, freedom from, through Krsna, 3-4, 57,
verse quoted, 67 147, 272-273
Tatha jivo na yat-sakhyari, process of, 47, 71-72, 75-76
verse quoted, 212 Trees
Tatha mad-visaya bhaktir, as Lord’s creation, 197
verse quoted, 24 world once covered by, 193
Tathapibhiman mahimagunasya te, Tribhir gunamayair bhavair,
quoted, 216 verse quoted, 59
Tato mar tattvato 72/४0, Trnad api sunicena,
verse quoted, 219 verse quoted, 195, 317
Tat sadhu manye ’sura-varya dehindrn, Truth, See: Absolute Truth
verse quoted, 266 Tyaktva dehari punar janma
Tat tad evavagaccha (को, quoted, 4, 167
verse quoted, 248 verse quoted, 57, 77, 132, 223, 272
Tat te 'nukampan susamiksamanah,
quoted, 28 U
Tavat kartur na saknoti,
Te ek ca CA ay form of Krsna, meditation on, 231
niverse. See: Creation, the: Material world
verse quoted, 104, 114, 218 Dien cardio 1
Tesarn pramatto nidhanar, 1 টপ h त ९
rdhvar gacchanti sattva-stha,
verse quoted, 179 3
Thunderbolts, razors and, time compared to, ol ^
266, 282-283
Time Vv
the Haryasvas’ understanding of, 282
modes of nature and, 65 Vadanti tat tattva-vidas,
value of, 282-283 quoted, 252, 279
Titiksavah karunikah, Vaikuntha
verse quoted, 194, 317 as destination of devotees, 133
Tolerance residents of, described, 51
in dhiras, 21 Vaikunthapati, 123
Narada’s, of Daksa, 317-318 Vaisnavas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
in preaching and chanting, 195, 317-318 Vaisyas
Tongue cow protection as duty of, 193, 199, 305
control of, 20-21 perfection for, 155


--- Page 368 ---
General Index 365
Vancha-kalpa-tarubhyas ca, Vedic rituals
quoted, 4 perfection not attained by, 185
Vartyan esa te prasnah, profitless, 184
verse quoted, 3 Vedo narayanah saksat,
Varndsramacaravata purusena parah puman, verse quoted, 250
quoted, 180 Vijayadhvaja Tirtha, quotations from
Varnasrama-dharma on Ajamila chanting, 45
goal of, 180 on Ajamila remembering Narayana, 43
as perfect society, 154-155 Viraraghava Acirya
See also: Brahmacari; Brahmanas; cited on fasting, 21
Grhastha; Sannyasis; Sudras; quoted on Ajamila as brahmacari, 79
Vaisyas quoted on Ajamila remembering Narayana,
Vasudeva. See: Krsna 42-43
Vasudevah sarvam iti Virata-ripa (universal form of God),
quoted, 225 meditation on, 231
verse quoted. 9 Visesa-vyakti-pdtratvad,
Vasudeve bhagavati, verse quoted, 248
verse quoted, 312 Visnu, Lord
Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah, Ajamila attains abode of, 133
quoted, 17, 56, 57, 163, 173 goal of human life, 180-181
Vedanari prathamo vakta, protects devotees personally, 177
verse quoted, 57 as Supersoul, 46
Vedanta, atonement as knowledge in, 17 Vedas originate from, 57
Vedas See also: Narayana; Supersoul; Supreme
purpose of, 163, 173 Lord
quoted on Brahma and Brahmaloka, 4-5 Visnuditas
quoted on dharma, 57 again seen by Ajamila, 131-132
quoted on spiritual master as necessity, 68 arrive at Ajamila’s deathbed, 44-45
quoted on the Lord as controller, 58 chanting’s superexcellence explained by,
religion comes from, 56-57 96-110
rituals of, bewilder unintelligent, 33-34 condemn Yamadiitas, 91-95
as sastra, 284 contest Yamadittas about Ajamila, 46-110
as standard for human being. 62 described, 50-51
transcended by bhakti, 116 devotees protected by, 161
on varndsrama system, 154-155 disappear, 113
Veda-vada-ratah, defined, 163 on king's principles of conduct. 92-95
Veda-vada-ratah partha, Pariksit’s question on, 143-144
quoted, 163 release Ajamila, 111
Vedic literature Yamaditas desired to punish, 150-151
purpose of, 299 Yamaditas® question about, 150
translation 01, for the West, 281 Yamaditas threatened by, 46
the real religion of, 163 Yamarija describes, 160-161
See also: Vedas Visnu Purana, quotations from
Vedic rituals on everything as Krsna’s energy. 279
chanting surpasses, 101 on material misery. 220
nature and purpose of, 163 on varnasrama-dharma, 180


--- Page 369 ---
366 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Visnur aradhyate pantha, Yad vijijaasaya yukta,
quoted, 180 verse quoted, 157
Visvarn pitrna-sukhayate vidhi-, Yad yad vibhatimat sattvar,
verse quoted. 33 verse quoted, 248
Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura Yah prayati sa mad-bhavarn,
on chanting contrasted to ritual, 101 verse quoted, 105
on chanting’s power, 107 Yah sasarja praja istah,
on Narada’s preaching, 302-303 verse quoted, 206
on Narada’s tolerance, 318 Yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya,
on Sukadeva and Pariksit, 11-12 verse quoted, 286
on Yamaditas, 143, 145, 150 Ya वक्वा paramari 81409 071,
Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, quotations verse quoted, 246, 310
from Yajiia. See: Ritualistic ceremonies
on Ajamila’s chanting, 45 Yajiavalkya, 173
on bhakti’s supremacy, 171 Yamaditas
on chanting, counteracting sins by, 97 Ajamila described by, 78-88
on chanting’s purifying effect, 138-139 Ajamila saved from, 36
on Daksa. 206 devotees avoided by, 186
on devotee’s superiority, 175-176 frustration of, 145, 150-151
on hearing and chanting, 219 instructedconcerning devotees, 177-178
on Krsna’s pastimes, 252-253 Pariksit’s question on, 143-144
on miseries, 220 punishment by, for whom meant,
on offenses in chanting being cleared, 172 178-181
on purity for knowing the Lord, 216 question Yamaraja, 145-151
on Soma, 196 real religion not known by, 163
Vrndavana, Krsna conscious center in, 128 return to Yamaraja, 112
Vyasadeva, 299 upheld by Vedic principles, 143
Vyavasayatmika buddhir, Visnuditas criticize, 91-110
quoted, 275 Visnudiitas threaten, 46
Visnuditas vie for Ajamila with, 46-110
w wanted Visnudatas punished, 150-151
Yamaraja thought supreme by. 148-149
Water as witness, 60 Yamaraja
Western world and Krsna consciousness, 281 Ajamila punishable by. 87-88
Women, brahmacari’s restrictions concerning, chanting glorified by, 166-175
20 considered supreme by Yamaditas.
World, material. See: Material world 148-149
Worship devotees never see. 31, 32
birth according to, 6 on devotees of the Lord. 177-178
by duties of caste, 154-155 Pariksit’s question on, 143-144
See also: Deity worship perfection of, 147
pleased to hear “Narayana,” 151
Y position of, 152-153
prays for forgiveness, 181-182
Yad gatva na nivartante, punishable persons described by, 178, 180
quoted, 6, 272, 280 on real religion, 162-166


--- Page 370 ---
General Index 367
Yamarija Yatha rajiah priyatvarn,
as son of sun-god, 48 verse quoted, 212
Supreme Lord explained by, 152-160 Yato vaco nivartante,
Visnuditas described by, 160-161 quoted, 223
14718 08135 question, 145-150 Yena sarvam idam tatam,
Yamuna River, 297 quoted, 155
Yarn yam vapi smaran bhavam, Ye nye 'ravindaksa vimukta-maninas,
verse quoted, 75, 106 verse quoted, 18-19
Yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukham hi, Yesarn tv anta-gatar papa,
quoted, 178 verse quoted, 104, 114, 218
Yan-namadheya-sravananukirtanad, Yoga
verse quoted, 25 best process of, 130-131
Yanti deva-vrata devan, useless without bhakti, 135-136
verse quoted, 5-6 Yoginam api sarvesam,
Yasya deve para bhaktir, verse quoted, 131
verse quoted, 67 Yogis
Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah, in Brahmaloka, 4
quoted, 290 the highest, 130-131
Yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana, material activities resumed by, 135-136
quoted, 29 perfection of, 167, 244, 272-273
Yatatam api 51000101710 7, Supersoul the goal of, 230
verse quoted, 23, 158, 218 Yuktahara-viharasya,
Yathagnih susamrddharcih, verse quoted, 21
verse quoted, 24 Yukta-svapnavabodhasya yogo bhavati,
Yatha kantha-patah sitra, verse quoted, 21
verse quoted, 153

