
--- Page 1 ---
Preface

We must know the present need of human society. And what is that
need? Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to par-
ticular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the
Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one human
society. The ideals of spiritual communism, according to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human
society, nay, on the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by
great thinkers to make this a successful ideology. Srirmad-Bhagavatam
will fill this need in human society. It begins, therefore, with the aphor-
ism of Vedanta philosophy (janmady asya yatah) to establish the ideal of
a common cause.

Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of obli-
vion. It has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts, educa-
tion and economic development throughout the entire world. But there is
a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore there are
large-scale quarrels, even over less important issues. There is need of a
clue as to how humanity can become one in peace. friendship and
prosperity with a common cause. Srimad-Bhagavatam will fill this need,
for it is a cultural presentation for the re-spiritualization of the entire
human society.

Srimad-Bhagavatam should be introduced also in the schools and col-
leges, for it is recommended by the great student devotee Prahlada
Maharaja in order to change the demonic face of society.

kaumara acaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan iha
08287100180 772 manusari janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)

Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One, from whom everything
emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything is

ix


--- Page 2 ---
x Srimad-Bhagavatam

merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of
creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ultimate
source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained rationally
and authoritatively in the beautiful Bhagavatam or Srimad-
Bhagavatam.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the transcendental science not only for know-
ing the ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation
with Him and our duty towards perfection of the human society on the
basis of this perfect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the
Sanskrit language, and it is now rendered into English elaborately so that
simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well, so much so
that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend himself from the
onslaught of atheists. Over and above this, the reader will be able to con-
vert others to accept God as a concrete principle.

Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Vedanta-siitra by the same author.
Srila Vyasadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the
highest state of God realization. The only qualification one needs to study
this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step
cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly as with an ordinary
book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter, one after another.
The reading matter is so arranged with its original Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration, synonyms, translation and purports so that one is
sure to become a God realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine
cantos.

The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos. because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto
without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in
twelve cantos, each independent, but it is good for all to read them in
small installments one after another. 4

I must admit my frailties in presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam, but still
I am hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society
on the strength of the following statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin pratislokam abaddhavaty api


--- Page 3 ---
Preface xi
namany anantasya yaso ‘nkitani yac
chrnvanti gayanti grnanti sadhavah
(Bhag. 1.5.11)
“On the other hand, that literature which is full with descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, form and pastimes of the
unlimited Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant to bring
about a revolution in the impious life of a misdirected civilization. Such
transcendental literatures, even though irregularly composed, are heard.
sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.”
Ori tat sat
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


--- Page 4 ---
Introduction

“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun. and it has arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to His own abode. accompanied by
religion. knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the
dense darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this
Purana.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43)

The timeless wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human knowledge. Originally
preserved through oral tradition. the Vedas were first put into writing
five thousand years ago by Srila Vyasadeva. the ‘literary incarnation of
God.” After compiling the Vedas, Vyasadeva set forth their essence in
the aphorisms known as Vedanta-sitras. Srimad-Bhagavatam is
Vyasadeva’s commentary on his own Vedanta-sitras. It was written in
the maturity of his spiritual life under the direction of Narada Muni. his
spiritual master. Referred to as “the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic
literature,” Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and authoritative
exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After compiling the Bhagavatam, Vyasa impressed the synopsis of it
upon his son, the sage Sukadeva Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami subse-
quently recited the entire Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assem-
bly of learned saints on the bank of the Ganges at Hastinapura (now
Delhi). Maharaja Pariksit was the emperor of the world and was a great
rajarsi (saintly king). Having received a warning that he would die
within a week, he renounced his entire kingdom and retired to the bank
of the Ganges to fast until death and receive spiritual enlightenment.
The Bhagavatam begins with Emperor Pariksit’s sober inquiry to
Sukadeva Gosvami:

“You are the spiritual master of great saints and
devotees. | am therefore begging you to show the
way of perfection for all persons. and especially for
one who is about to die. Please let me know what a
man should hear, chant. remember and worship.
and also what he should not do. Please explain all
this to me.” J

xiii


--- Page 5 ---
xiv Srimad-Bhagavatam

Sukadeva Gosvami's answer to this question, and numerous other
questions posed by Maharaja Pariksit, concerning everything from the
nature of the self to the origin of the universe, held the assembled sages
in rapt attention continuously for the seven days leading to the King’s
death. The sage Sita Gosvami, who was present on the bank of the
Ganges when Sukadeva Gosvami first recited Srimad-Bhagavatam, later
repeated the Bhagavatam before a gathering of sages in the forest of
Naimisaranya. Those sages, concerned about the spiritual welfare of the
people in general, had gathered to perform a long, continuous chain of
sacrifices to counteract the degrading influence of the incipient age of
Kali. In response to the sages’ request that he speak the essence of Vedic
wisdom, Sata Gosvami repeated from memory the entire eighteen thou-
sand verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit.

The reader of Srimad-Bhagavatam hears Sita Gosvami relate the
questions of Maharaja Pariksit and the answers of Sukadeva Gosvami.
Also, Sita Gosvami sometimes responds directly to questions put by
Saunaka Rsi, the spokesman for the sages gathered at Naimisaranya. One
therefore simultaneously hears two dialogues: one between Maharaja
Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami on the bank of the Ganges, and another
at Naimisaranya between ৩008 Gosvami and the sages at Naimisaranya
Forest, headed by Saunaka Resi. Furthermore, while instructing King
Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami often relates historical episodes and gives
accounts of lengthy philosophical discussions between such great souls as
the saint Maitreya and his disciple Vidura. With this understanding of
the history of the Bhagavatam, the reader will easily be able to follow its
intermingling of dialogues and events from various sources. Since
philosophical wisdom, not chronological order, is most important in the
text, one need only be attentive to the subject matter of Srimad-
Bhagavatam to appreciate fully its profound message.

It should also be noted that the volumes of the Bhagavatam need not
be read consecutively, starting with the first and proceeding to the last.
The translator of this edition compares the Bhagavatam to sugar
candy —wherever you taste it, you will find it equally sweet and
relishable.

This edition of the Bhagavatam is the first complete English transla-
tion of this important text with an elaborate commentary, and it is the


--- Page 6 ---
Introduction xv
first widely available to the English-speaking public. It is the product of
the scholarly and devotional effort of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His consummate Sanskrit
scholarship and intimate familiarity with Vedic culture and thought as
well as the modern way of life combine to reveal to the West a magnifi-
cent exposition of this important classic.

Readers will find this work of value for many reasons. For those in-
terested in the classical roots of Indian civilization. it serves as a vast
reservoir of detailed information on virtually every one of its aspects.
For students of comparative philosophy and religion. the Bhagavatam
offers a penetrating view into the meaning of India’s profound spiritual
heritage. To sociologists and anthropologists, the Bhagavatam reveals the
practical workings of a peaceful and scientifically organized Vedic
culture, whose institutions were integrated on the basis of a highly
developed spiritual world view. Students of literature will discover the
Bhagavatam to be a masterpiece of majestic poetry. For students of psy-
chology. the text provides important perspectives on the nature of con-
sciousness, human behavior and the philosophical study of identity.
Finally, to those seeking spiritual insight, the Bhagavatam offers simple
and practical guidance for attainment of the highest self-knowledge and
realization of the Absolute Truth. The entire multivolume text. pre-
sented by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant
place in the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern man for a
long time to come.

—The Publishers


--- Page 7 ---
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
King Citraketu’s Lamentation
In this Fourteenth Chapter, Pariksit Maharaja asks his spiritual master,
Sukadeva Gosvami, how such a demon as Vrtrasura could become an ex-
alted devotee. In this connection the previous life of Vrtrasura is dis-
cussed. This involves the story of Citraketu and how he was victimized
by lamentation because of the death of his son.

Among many millions of living entities, the number of human beings
is extremely small, and among human beings who are actually religious,
only some are eager to be liberated from material existence. Among
many thousands of people who desire relief from material existence, one
is freed from the association of unwanted persons or is relieved of
material contamination. And among many millions of such liberated per-
sons, one may become a devotee of Lord Narayana. Therefore such devo-
tees are extremely rare. Since bhakti, devotional service, is not ordinary,
Pariksit Maharaja was astonished that an asura could rise to the exalted
position of a devotee. Being doubtful, Pariksit Maharaja inquired from
Sukadeva Gosvami, who then described Vrtrasura with reference to his
previous birth as Citraketu, the King of Sarasena.

Citraketu, who had no sons, got an opportunity to meet the great sage
Angira. When Angira inquired from the King about his welfare, the
King expressed his moroseness, and therefore by the grace of the great
sage, the King’s first wife, Krtadyuti, gave birth to a son, who was the
cause of both happiness and lamentation. Upon the birth of this son, the
King and all the residents of the palace were very happy. The co-wives of
Krtadyuti, however, were envious, and later they administered poison to
the child. Citraketu was overwhelmed by shock at his son’s death. Then
Narada Muni and Angira went to see him.

TEXT 1
श्रीपरीश्िद्िवाक
रजस्तमःस्वभावस्य द्यच्‌ TH पाप्मनः ।
नारायणे भगवति कथमासीद्‌ दढा मतिः ॥ १ ॥
1


--- Page 8 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
sri-pariksid uvdca
rajas-tamah-svabhavasya
brahman vrtrasya papmanah
narayane bhagavati
katham asid drdha matih
sri-partksit uvdca—King Pariksit inquired; rajah—of the mode of
passion; tamah—and of the mode of ignorance; sva-bhavasya—having a
nature; brahman—O learned brahmana; vrtrasya—of Vrtrasura; pap-
manah—who was supposedly sinful; narayane—in Lord Narayana;
bhagavati—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; katham —how; dsit—
was there; drdha—very strong; matih—consciousness.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami: 0 learned
brahmana, demons are generally sinful, being obsessed with the
modes of passion and ignorance. How, then, could Vrtrasura have
attained such exalted love for the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Narayana?
PURPORT
In this material world, everyone is obsessed with the modes of passion
and ignorance. However, unless one conquers these modes and comes to
the platform of goodness, there is no chance of one’s becoming a pure
devotee. This is confirmed by Lord Krsna Himself in Bhagavad-gita
(7.28):
Jyesari tv anta-gatari paparit
jananari punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mari drdha-vratah
‘Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose
sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the
duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determina-
tion.” Since Vrtrasura was among the demons, Maharaja Pariksit won-


--- Page 9 ---
Text 3] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 3
dered how it was possible for him to have become such an exalted
devotee.
TEXT 2
देवानां शद्धसत्वानारषीणां THETA |
मक्तिङन्दचरणे न॒ प्रायेणोपजायते ।। २ ॥
devanam suddha-sattvanam
rstndarm camalatmanam
bhaktir mukunda-carane
na prayenopajayate
devanam—of the demigods; Suddha-sattvanam—whose minds are
purified; rsinam—of great saintly persons; ca—and; amala-at-
manam—who have purified their existence; bhaktih—devotional ser-
vice; mukunda-carane —to the lotus feet of Mukunda, the Lord, who can
give liberation; na—not; prayena—almost always; upajayate—
develops.
TRANSLATION
Demigods situated in the mode of goodness and great saints
cleansed of the dirt of material enjoyment hardly ever render pure
devotional service at the lotus feet of Mukunda. [Therefore how
could Vrtrasura have become such a great devotee?)
TEXT 3
+ a
रजोभिः समसंख्याताः पार्थिवैरिह जन्तवः |
तेषां ये केचनेहन्ते श्रेयो वै मजुनादयः ॥ ३ ॥
rajobhih sama-sarikhyatah
parthivair iha jantavah
195৫ 77 ye kecanehante
Sreyo vai manujadayah
rajobhih—with the atoms; sama-sarikhyatah—having the same
numerical strength; parthivaih—of the earth; iha—in this world; jan-
tavah—the living entities; tesim—of them; ye—those who: kecana—


--- Page 10 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
some: thante—act: sreyah—for religious principles; wvai—indeed;
manuja-ddayah—the human beings and so on.
TRANSLATION
In this material world there are as many living entities as atoms.
Among these living entities, a very few are human beings, and
among them, few are interested in following religious principles.
TEXT 4
प्रायो सुधुक्षवस्तेषां केचनेव fem ।
अक्षणा सहस्रेषु wigs सिध्यति ।॥ ४॥
prayo mumuksavas tesam
kecanaiva dvijottama
mumuksiindarn sahasresu
kascin mucyeta sidhyati
prayah—almost always; mumuksavah—persons interested in libera-
tion: tesam—of them; kecana—some; eva—indeed; dvija-uttama—O
best of the brahmanas; mumuksinam —of those who desire to be liber-
ated; sahasresu—in many thousands; kascit—someone; mucyeta—may
be actually liberated; sidhyati—someone is perfect.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brahmanas, Sukadeva Gosvami, out of many per-
sons who follow religious principles, only a few desire liberation
from the material world. Among many thousands who desire
liberation, one may actually achieve liberation, giving up material
attachment to society, friendship, love, country, home, wife and
children. And among many thousands of such liberated persons,
one who can understand the true meaning of liberation is very
rare.
PURPORT
There are four classes of men, namely karmis, jiianis, yogis and bhak-
tas. This statement pertains especially 10 karmis and jaanis. A karmi tries
to be happy within this material world by changing from one body to


--- Page 11 ---
Text 5] King Citraketu’s Lamentation S
another. His objective is bodily comfort, either in this planet or in
another. When such a person becomes a jiiani, however, he aspires for
liberation from material bondage. Among many such persons who aspire
for liberation, one may actually be liberated during his life. Such a per-
son gives up his attachment for society, friendship, love, country, family,
wife and children. Among many such persons, who are in the
vanaprastha stage, one may understand the value of becoming a san-
nyasi, completely accepting the renounced order of life.
TEXT ০
शक्तानामपि सिद्धानां नारायणपरायणः ।
TION: प्रशान्तात्मा कोटिष्वपि মহান ५ ॥
muktanam api siddhanari
narayana-parayanah
sudurlabhah prasantatma
kotisv api maha-mune

muktanam—of those who are liberated during this life (who are unat-
tached to the bodily comforts of society, friendship and love); api—
even; siddhanam —who are perfect (because they understand the insig-
nificance of bodily comforts); narayana-parayanah—a person who has
concluded that Narayana is the Supreme; su-durlabhah—very rarely
found; prasanta—fully pacified; atma—whose mind; kotisu—out of
millions and trillions; * api —even; maha-mune—O great sage.

TRANSLATION

O great sage, among many millions who are liberated and per-
fect in knowledge of liberation, one may be a devotee of Lord
Narayana, or Krsna. Such devotees, who are fully peaceful, are ex-
tremely rare.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura gives the following purport to
this verse. Simply desiring mukti, or liberation, is insufficient; one must
*The word koti means ten million. Its plural means millions and trillions.


--- Page 12 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
become factually liberated. When one understands the futility of the ma-
terialistic way of life, one becomes advanced in knowledge, and therefore
he situates himself in the vanaprastha order, unattached to family, wife
and children. One should then further progress to the platform of san-
nyasa, the actual renounced order, never to fall again and be afflicted by
materialistic life. Even though one desires to be liberated, this does not
mean he is liberated. Only rarely is someone liberated. Indeed, although
many men take sannydsa to become liberated, because of their imperfec-
tions they again become attached to women, material activities, social
welfare work and so on.

Jranis, yogis and karmis devoid of devotional service are called of-
fenders. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says, mayavadi krsne aparadhi: one
who thinks that everything is maya instead of thinking that everything
is Krsna is called an aparadhi, or offender. Although the Mayavadis, im-
personalists, are offenders at the lotus feet of Krsna, they may nonethe-
less be counted among the siddhas, those who have realized the self.
They may be considered nearer to spiritual perfection because at least
they have realized what spiritual life is. If such a person becomes
narayana-parayana, a devotee of Lord Narayana, he is better than
a jivan-mukta, one who is liberated or perfect. This requires higher
intelligence.

There are two kinds of jiiganis. One is inclined to devotional service and
the other to impersonal realization. Impersonalists generally undergo
great endeavor for no tangible benefit, and therefore it is said that they
are husking paddy that has no grain (sthizla-tusavaghatinah). The other
class of jianis, whose jiiana is mixed with bhakti, are also of two kinds—
those who are devoted to the so-called false form of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and those who understand the Supreme Personality
of Godhead as sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, the actual spiritual form. The
Mayavadi devotees worship Narayana or Visnu with the idea that Visnu
has accepted a form of maya and that the ultimate truth is actually im-
personal. The pure devotee, however, never thinks that Visnu has ac-
cepted a body of maya; instead, he knows perfectly well that the original
Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person. Such a devotee is actually situ-
ated in knowledge. He never merges in the Brahman effulgence. As
stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.2.32):


--- Page 13 ---
Text 5] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 7
ye ‘nye ‘ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah
aruhya krcchrena param padari tatah
patanty adho ’nadrta-yusmad-arighrayah
“0 Lord, the intelligence of those who think themselves liberated but
who have no devotion is impure. Even though they rise to the highest
point of liberation by dint of severe penances and austerities, they are
sure to fall down again into material existence, for they do not take
shelter at Your lotus feet.” Evidence of this same point is also given in
Bhagavad-gita (9.11), wherein the Lord says:
avajananti mar muadha
manusim tanum asritam
[00707 bhavam ajananto
mama bhiita-mahesvaram
“Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know
My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.”
When rascals (midhas) see that Krsna acts exactly like a human being,
they deride the transcendental form of the Lord because they do not
know the parari bhavam, His transcendental form and activities. Such
persons are further described in Bhagavad-gita (9.12) as follows:
moghasa mogha-karmano
mogha-jiidna vicetasah
raksasim asurim caiva
prakrtirn mohinir Sritah
“Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demoniac and atheistic
views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their fruitive
activities and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.” Such persons
do not know that Krsna’s body is not material. There is no distinction be-
tween Krsna’s body and His soul, but because less intelligent men see
Krsna as a human being, they deride Him. They cannot imagine how a
person like Krsna could be the origin of everything (govindam adi-


--- Page 14 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
purusari tam aha bhajami). Such persons are described as moghasah,
baffled in their hopes. Whatever they desire for the future will be
baffled. Even if they apparently engage in devotional service, they are
described as moghasah because they ultimately desire to merge into the
Brahman effulgence.

Those who aspire to be elevated to the heavenly planets by devo-
tional service will also be frustrated, because this is not the result of de-
votional service. However, they are also given a chance to engage in
devotional service and be purified. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.2.17):

Srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
punya-sravana-kirtanah
hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani
vidhunoti suhrt satam
“Sri Krsna, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramatma
[Supersoul] in everyone’s heart and the benefactor of the truthful devo-
tee, cleanses desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee
who relishes His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when prop-
erly heard and chanted.”

Unless the dirt within the core of one’s heart is cleansed away, one
cannot become a pure devotee. Therefore the word sudurlabhah (“very
rarely found”) is used in this verse. Not only among hundreds and thou-
sands, but among millions of perfectly liberated souls, a pure devotee is
hardly ever found. Therefore the words kotisv api are used herein. Srila
Madhvacarya gives the following quotations from the Tantra Bhagavata:

nava-kotyas tu devanam
rsayah sapta-kotayah
narayandyandh sarve
ye kecit tat-parayanah
“There are ninety million demigods and seventy million sages, who are
all called narayandayana, devotees of Lord Narayana. Among them, only
a few are called narayana-parayana.”


--- Page 15 ---
Text 6] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 9
narayanayanda deva
rsy-adyds tat-parayanah
brahmadyah kecanaiva syuh
siddho yogya-sukharin labhan
The difference between the siddhas and narayana-parayanas is that
direct devotees are called narayana-parayanas whereas those who per-
form various types of mystic yoga are called siddhas.
TEXT 6
TEA कथं पापः सवलोकोपतापनः |
इत्थं दृटमतिः कृष्ण आसीत्‌ संग्राम उल्वणे ॥ ६ ॥
vrtras tu sa (00, papah
sarva-lokopatapanah
ittham drdha-matih krsna
asit sarigrama ulbane
vrtrah—Vrtrasura; tu—but; sah—he; katham—how; papah—al-
though sinful (getting the body of a demon); sarva-loka—of all the three
worlds; upatapanah—the cause of suffering; ittham—such; drdha-
matih—firmly fixed intelligence; krsne—in Krsna; dsit—there was;
sangrame ulbane—in the great blazing fire of battle.
TRANSLATION
Vrtrasura was situated in the blazing fire of battle and was an in-
famous, sinful demon, always engaged in giving troubles and
anxieties to others. How could such a demon become so greatly
Krsna conscious?
PURPORT
It has been described that a narayana-parayana, a pure devotee, is
rarely found even among millions and millions of persons. Therefore
Pariksit Maharija was surprised that Vrtrasura, whose purpose was to
give trouble and anxiety to others, was one of these devotees, even on a
battlefield. What was the reason for Vrtrasura’s advancement?


--- Page 16 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
TEXT 7
अत्र नः संशयो भूयाञ्छ्रोतुं कोतूहलं प्रमो |
यः पौरुषेण समरे सहस्राक्षमतोषयत्‌ ।। ७॥
atra nah sarmsayo bhityan
chroturi kautihalari prabho
yah paurusena samare
sahasraksam atosayat
atra—in this connection; nah—our; samsayah—doubt; bhiyan—
great; srotum—to hear; kautihalam—eagerness; prabho—O my lord;
yah—he who; paurusena—by bravery and strength; samare—in battle;
sahasra-aksam—Lord Indra, who has one thousand eyes; atosayat—
pleased.
TRANSLATION
My dear lord, Sukadeva Gosvami, although Vrtrasura was a sin-
ful demon, he showed the prowess of a most exalted ksatriya and
satisfied Lord Indra in battle. How could such a demon be a great
devotee of Lord Krsna? These contradictions have caused me great
doubt, and they have made me eager to hear of this from you.
TEXT 8
श्रीसूत उवाच
परीक्षितोऽथ संप्रस्नं भगवान्‌ बादरायणिः |
निज्ञम्य ्रदधानस्य प्रतिनन्य वचोऽ्रवीत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
Sri-siita uvaca
pariksito tha samprasnam
bhagavan badarayanih
nisamya sraddadhanasya
pratinandya vaco ’bravit
sri-stitah uvaca—Sri Sata Gosvami said; pariksitah—of Maharaja
Pariksit; atha—thus; samprasnam—the perfect question; bhagavan—


--- Page 17 ---
Text 10] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 11
the most powerful; badarayanih—Sukadeva Gosvami, the son of
Vyasadeva; nisamya—hearing; sraddadhanasya—of his disciple, who
was so faithful in understanding the truth; pratinandya—congratulat-
ing; vacah—words; abravit—spoke.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sita Gosvami said: After hearing Maharaja Pariksit’s very in-
telligent question, Sukadeva Gosvami, the most powerful sage,
began answering his disciple with great affection.
TEXT 9
asm उवाच
शृणुष्वावहितो राजन्नितिहासमिमं यथा ।
श्रुतं दैपायनञ्चता्रारदादेवलादपि ।। ९॥
sri-Suka uvaca
Srnusvavahito rajann
itihasam imarh yatha
Srutari dvaipayana-mukhan
naradad devaldad api
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; Srnusva—please hear;
avahitah—with great attention; rajan—O King; itihasam— history;
imam—this; yatha—just as; Srutam—heard; dvaipayana—of Vyasa-
deva; mukhat—from the mouth; naraddat—from Narada; devalat—
from Devala Rsi; api—also.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, I shall speak to you the
same history I have heard from the mouths of Vyasadeva, Narada
and Devala. Please listen with attention.
TEXT 10
Ly a
आसीद्राजा सावंभौमः शरसेनेषु वै 9
चित्रकेतुरिति ख्यातो यस्यासीत्‌ कामधुपही Heo


--- Page 18 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
asid raja sarvabhaumah
Sirasenesu vai nrpa
citraketur iti khyato
yasyasit kamadhur mahi
asit—there was; raja—one king; sarva-bhaumah—an emperor of the
entire surface of the globe; sirasenesu—in the country known as
Surrasena; vai—indeed; nrpa—O King; citraketuh —Citraketu; iti—
thus; khyatah—celebrated; yasya—of whom; asit—was; kama-dhuk—
supplying all the necessities; mahi—the earth.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, in the province of Siirasena there was a king
named Citraketu, who ruled the entire earth. During his reign, the
earth produced all the necessities for life.
PURPORT
Here the most significant statement is that the earth completely pro-
duced all the necessities of life during the time of King Citraketu. As
stated in the ISopanisad (Mantra 1):
savasyam idari sarvariu
yat kifica jagatyarm jagat
tena tyaktena bhunijitha
ma grdhah kasya svid dhanam
“Everything animate or inanimate that is within the universe is con-
trolled and owned by the Lord. One should therefore accept only those
things necessary for himself, which are set aside as his quota, and one
should not accept other things, knowing well to whom they belong.”
Krsna, the supreme controller, has created the material world, which is
completely perfect and free from scarcity. The Lord supplies the
necessities of all living entities. These necessities come from the earth,
and thus the earth is the source of supply. When there is a good ruler,
that source produces the necessities of life abundantly. However, when
there is not such a good ruler, there will be scarcity. This is the signifi-
cance of the word kamadhuk. Elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam


--- Page 19 ---
Text 11] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 13
(1.10.4) it is said, kamari vavarsa parjanyah sarva-kama-dugha mahi:
“During the reign of Maharaja Yudhisthira, the clouds showered all the
water that people needed, and the earth produced all the necessities of
men in profusion.” We have experience that in some seasons the rains
produce abundance and in other seasons there is scarcity. We have no
control over the earth’s productiveness, for it is naturally under the full
control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By His order, the Lord
can make the earth produce sufficiently or insufficiently. If a pious king
rules the earth according to the §astric injunctions, there will naturally
be regular rainfall and sufficient produce to provide for all men. There
will be no question of exploitation, for everyone will have enough.
Black-marketeering and other corrupt dealings will then automatically
stop. Simply ruling the land cannot solve man’s problems unless the
leader has spiritual capabilities. He must be like Maharaja Yudhisthira,
Pariksit Maharaja or Ramacandra. Then all the inhabitants of the land
will be extremely happy.
TEXT 11
तस्य भार्यासदखाणां सहखाणि दशाभवन्‌ |
सान्तानिकथापि चपो नेमे तासु सन्ततिम्‌।।११॥
tasya bharya-sahasranam
sahasrani dasabhavan
santanikas capi nrpo
na lebhe tasu santatim

tasya—of him (King Citraketu) ; bharya—of wives; sahasranam—of
thousands; sahasrani—thousands; dasa—ten; abhavan—there were:
santanikah —quite capable of begetting sons; ca—and; api—although:
nrpah—the King; na—not; lebhe—obtained; tasu—in them; san-
tatim—a son.

TRANSLATION

This Citraketu had ten million wives, but although he was capa-
ble of producing children, he did not receive a child from any of
them. By chance, all the wives were barren.


--- Page 20 ---
14 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
TEXT 12
रूपोदार्यवयोजन्मविदैश्व्॑भ्नियादिमिः ।
सम्पनस्य गुणैः SET बन्ध्यापतेरभूत्‌ ॥ १२॥
ripauddrya-vayo-janma-
vidyaisvarya-sriyadibhih
sampannasya gunaih sarvais
cinta bandhya-pater abhi

ripa—with beauty; audarya —magnanimity; wvayah—youth; jan-
ma —aristocratic birth; vidy@—education; aiSvarya—opulence; Sriya-
adibhih—wealth and so on; sampannasya—endowed; gunaih—with
good qualities; sarvaih—all; cinta —anxiety; bandhya-pateh—of
Citraketu, the husband of so many sterile wives; abhiit—there was.

TRANSLATION

Citraketu, the husband of these millions of wives, was endowed
with a beautiful form, magnanimity and youth. He was born in a
high family, he had a complete education, and he was wealthy and
opulent. Nevertheless, in spite of being endowed with all these
assets, he was full of anxiety because he did not have a son.

PURPORT

It appears that the King first married one wife, but she could not bear
a child. Then he married a second, a third, a fourth and so on, but none
of the wives could bear children. In spite of the material assets of jan-
maisvarya-sruta-sri—birth in an aristocratic family with full opulence,
wealth, education and beauty —he was very much aggrieved because in
spite of having so many wives, he had no son. Certainly his grief was
natural. Grhastha life does not mean having a wife and no children.
Canakya Pandita says, putra-hinari grhari Sinyam: if a family man has
no son, his home is no better than a desert. The King was certainly most
unhappy that he could not get a son, and this is why he had married so
many times. Ksatriyas especially are allowed to marry more than one
wife, and this King did so. Nonetheless, he had no issue.


--- Page 21 ---
Text 14] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 15
TEXT 13
ক -
~ न तस्य संपदः सर्वा महिष्यो वामलोचनाः |
साव॑मौमस्य भूशेयममवन्‌ प्रीतिहेतवः 1230
na tasya sampadah sarva
mahisyo vama-locanah
sarvabhaumasya bhis ceyam
abhavan priti-hetavah
na—not; tasya—of him (Citraketu); sampadah—the great opu-
lences; sarvah—all; mahisyah—the queens; vama-locanah—having
very attractive eyes; sarva-bhaumasya—of the emperor; bhizth—land;
ca—also; iyam—this; abhavan—were; priti-hetavah—sources of
pleasure.
TRANSLATION
His queens all had beautiful faces and attractive eyes, yet neither
his opulences, his hundreds and thousands of queens, nor the
lands of which he was the supreme proprietor were sources of hap-
piness for him.
TEXT 14
तस्यैकदा तु भवनमङ्गिरा WER ।
लोकानजुचरमेताठषागच्छयटचन्छया ॥ ৪
tasyaikada tu bhavanam
angira bhagavan rsih
lokan anucarann etan
upagacchad yadrcchaya
tasya—of him; ekadd—once upon a time; tu—but; bhavanam—to
the palace; arngirah—Angira; bhagavan—very powerful; rsih—sage;
lokan—planets; anucaran—traveling around; etan—these; upagac-
chat —came; yadrcchaya—suddenly.


--- Page 22 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
TRANSLATION
Once upon a time, when the powerful sage named Angira was
traveling all over the universe without engagement, by his sweet
will he came to the palace of King Citraketu.
TEXT 15
तं पूजयित्वा विधिवत्म्त्युत्यानार्दणादिभिः |
छृतातिय्यमुपासीदस्सुरासीनं समाहितः ॥१५॥
tam pujayitva vidhivat
pratyutthanarhanadibhih
krtatithyam upasidat
sukhastnarn samahitah
tam —him; pijayitva —after worshiping; vidhi-vat—according to the
rules and regulations for receiving exalted guests; pratyutthana—by
standing from the throne; arhana-adibhih—offering worship and so on;
krta-atithyam —who was given hospitality; updsidat—sat down near;
sukha-dasinam —who was seated very comfortably; samahitah—control-
ling his mind and senses.
TRANSLATION
Citraketu immediately stood up from his throne and offered
him worship. He offered drinking water and eatables and in this
way performed his duty as a host to a great guest. When the rsi was
seated very comfortably, the King, restraining his mind and
senses, sat on the ground at the side of the rsi’s feet.
TEXT 16
wEffeguEe प्रश्रयावनतं शितो ।
प्रतिपूज्य महाराज समायाष्येद मबयीत्‌ ।॥१६॥
maharsis tam updsinam
prasrayavanatari ksitau


--- Page 23 ---
Text 17] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 17
pratipijya maharaja
samabhasyedam abravit
maha-rsih—the great sage; tam —unto him (the King); upasinam—
sitting near; prasraya-avanatam—bowing in humility; ksitau—on the
ground; pratipijya—congratulating; mahdraja—O King Pariksit;
samabhdsya—addressing; idam—this; abravit—said.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, when Citraketu, bent low in humility, was
seated at the lotus feet of the great sage, the sage congratulated
him for his humility and hospitality. The sage addressed him in
the following words.
TEXT 17
IFT उवाच
अपि तेऽनामयं खलति प्रकृतीनां तथात्मनः ।
यथा SHARIF: पुमान्‌ राजा च सप्तभिः ॥१७॥
angira uvaca
api te ‘namayari svasti
prakrtinan tathatmanah
yatha prakrtibhir guptah
puman raja ca saptabhih
angirah uvdca—the great sage Angira said; api—whether; te—of
you; anamayam—health; svasti—auspiciousness; prakrtinam—of your
royal elements (associates and paraphernalia); tatha—as well as; at-
manah—of your own body, mind and soul; yatha —like; prakrtibhih—
by the elements of material nature; guptah—protected; puman—the
living being; raja—the king; ca—also; saptabhih—by seven.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Angira said: My dear King, I hope that your body
and mind and your royal associates and paraphernalia are well.


--- Page 24 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
When the seven properties of material nature [the total material
energy, the ego and the five objects of sense gratification] are in
proper order, the living entity within the material elements is
happy. Without these seven elements one cannot exist. Similarly, a
king is always protected by seven elements— his instructor (svami
or guru), his ministers, his kingdom, his fort, his treasury, his
royal order and his friends.
PURPORT
As it is quoted by Sridhara Svami in his Bhagavatam commentary:
svamy-amatyau janapada
durga-dravina-saiicayah
dando mitram ca tasyaitah
sapta-prakrtayo matah
A king is not alone. He first has his spiritual master, the supreme guide.
Then come his ministers, his kingdom, his fortifications, his treasury, his
system of law and order, and his friends or allies. If these seven are
properly maintained, the king is happy. Similarly, as explained in
Bhagavad-gita (dehino ’smin yatha dehe), the living entity, the soul, is
within the material covering of the mahat-tattva, ego and pasca-tan-
matra, the five objects of sense gratification. When these seven are in
proper order, the living entity is in a mood of pleasure. Generally when
the associates of the king are quiet and obedient, the king can be happy.
Therefore the great sage Angira Rsi inquired about the King’s personal
health and the good fortune of his seven associates. When we inquire
from a friend whether everything is well, we are concerned not only with
his personal self but also with his family, his source of income, and his
assistants or servants. All of them must be well, and then a person can be
happy.
TEXT 18
आत्मानं प्रकृतिष्वद्धा निधाय श्रेय आप्लुयात्‌।
राज्ञा तथा भ्ररृतयो नरदेवाहिताधयः ॥१८॥


--- Page 25 ---
Text 19] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 19
atmanarh prakrtisv addha
nidhaya Sreya apnuyat
rajna tatha prakrtayo
naradevahitadhayah
atmanam—himself; prakrtisu —under these seven royal elements;
addha—directly; nidhaya—placing; Sreyah—ultimate happiness; ap-
nuyat—may obtain; rajaa—by the king; tatha—so also; prakrtayah—
the dependent royal elements; nara-deva—O King; ahita-adhayah—
offering wealth and other items.
TRANSLATION
O King, O lord of humanity, when a king directly depends upon
his associates and follows their instructions, he is happy. Similarly,
when his associates offer their gifts and activities to the king and
follow his orders, they are also happy.
PURPORT
The actual happiness of a king and his dependents is described in this
verse. A king should not simply give orders to his dependents because he
is supreme; sometimes he must follow their instructions. Similarly, the
dependents should depend on the king. This mutual dependence will
make everyone happy.
TEXT 19
अपि दाराः प्रजामात्या भृत्याः श्रेण्योऽथ मन्त्रिणः |
पौरा जानपदा भूपा आत्मजा वशवर्तिनः ॥१९॥
api darah prajamatya
bhrtyah srenyo ’tha mantrinah
paurd janapada bhiipa
atmaja vasa-vartinah
api—whether; darah—wives; praja—citizens; amatyah—and secre-
taries; bhrtyah—servants; Srenyah—merchants; atha—as well as:


--- Page 26 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
mantrinah—ministers; paurah—inmates of the palace; janapadah—the
provincial governors; bhipah—landholders; atma-jah—sons; vasa-var-
tinah—under your full control.
TRANSLATION
O King, are your wives, citizens, secretaries and servants and the
merchants who sell spices and oil under your control? Are you
also in full control of ministers, the inhabitants of your palace,
your provincial governors, your sons and your other dependents?
PURPORT
The master or king and his subordinates should be interdependent.
Through cooperation, both of them can be happy.
TEXT 20
-
यस्यात्मानुवशशेस्स्यात्स्वे নন্তহামা इमे |
लोकाः सपाला यच्छन्ति सर्वे बलिमतन्द्रिताः ॥२०॥
yasyatmanuvasas cet syat
sarve tad-vasaga ime
lokah sapala yacchanti
sarve balim atandritah
yasya—of whom; atma—mind; anuvasah—under control; cet—if;
syat—may be; sarve—all; tat-vasa-gah—under the control of him;
ime —these; lokah—the worlds; sa-palah—with their governors; yac-
chanti—offer; sarve—all; balim—contribution; atandritah—becoming
free from laziness.
TRANSLATION
If the king’s mind is fully controlled, all his family members
and governmental officers are subordinate to him. His provincial
governors present taxes on time, without resistance, and what to
speak of lesser servants?


--- Page 27 ---
Text 22] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 21
PURPORT
Angira Rsi asked the King whether his mind was also under control.
This is most essential for happiness.
TEXT 21
आत्मनः प्रीयते नात्मा परतः खत एव वा |
लक्षयेऽरन्धकामं त्वां चिन्तया शबलं श्रखम्‌ ।। २१॥
atmanah priyate natma
paratah svata eva va
laksaye ’labdha-kamari tvarn
cintaya $000 (077) mukham
atmanah—of you; priyate—is pleased; na—not; atma—the mind:
paratah—due to other causes; svatah—due to yourself; eva—indeed;
va—or; laksaye—] can see; alabdha-kamam—not achieving your
desired goals; tvam—you; cintaya—by anxiety; Sabalam—pale:
mukham —face.
TRANSLATION
O King Citraketu, I can observe that your mind is not pleased.
You seem not to have achieved your desired goal. Is this because of
you yourself, or has it been caused by others? Your pale face
reflects your deep anxiety.
TEXT 22
एवं विकर्षतो राजन्‌ विदुषा স্তুলিনাদি a: ।
प्रभ्रयावनतोऽभ्याह प्रजाकामस्ततो gg ॥२२॥
[9.1.111
vidusa muninapi sah
prasrayavanato ‘bhyaha
praja-kamas tato munim


--- Page 28 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
evam—thus; wvikalpitah—questioned; r@jan—O King Pariksit;
vidusa—greatly learned; munina—by the philosopher; api—although;
sah—he (King Citraketu); prasraya-avanatah—being bent low due to
humility; abhyaha—replied; praja-kamah—desiring offspring; tatah—
thereafter; munim—to the great sage.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: 0 King Pariksit, although the great
sage Angira knew everything, he inquired from the King in this
way. Thus King Citraketu, desiring a son, bent low in great
humility and spoke to the great sage as follows.
PURPORT
Since the face is the index to the mind, a saintly person can study the
condition of one’s mind by seeing his face. When Angira Rsi remarked
about the King’s discolored face, King Citraketu explained the cause of
his anxiety as follows.
TEXT 23
Ragen
भगवन्‌ किं न विदितं तपोज्ञानसमाधिमिः |
योगिनां ष्वस्तपापानां बहिरन्तः शरीरिषु ॥२२॥
citraketur uviaca
bhagavan kirh na viditarn
tapo-jiana-samadhibhih
yoginari dhvasta-papanar
bahir antah saririsu
citraketuh uvaca—King Citraketu replied; bhagavan —O most power-
ful sage; kim—what; na—not; viditam—is understood; tapah—by
austerity; jiiana—knowledge; samadhibhih—and by samadhi (trance,
transcendental meditation); yoginam—by the great yogis or devotees;
dhvasta-papanam—who are fully freed from all sinful reactions;
bahih—externally; antah—internally; Saririsu—in conditioned souls,
who have material bodies.


--- Page 29 ---
Text 25] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 23
TRANSLATION
King Citraketu said: O great lord Angira, because of austerity,
knowledge and transcendental samadhi, you are freed from all the
reactions of sinful life. Therefore, as a perfect yogi, you can
understand everything external and internal regarding embodied,
conditioned souls like us.
TEXT 24
तथापि पृच्छतो बरूयां ब्रह्मात्मनि স্বিল্বিবমৃ।
भवतो विदुषश्ापि चोदितस्त्वदलुज्ञया uke
tathapi 7८८८० bricyam
brahmann atmani cintitam
bhavato vidusas capi
coditas tvad-anujhiaya
tathapi—still; prcchatah—asking; briizyam—let me speak; brah-
man—O great brahmana; atmani—in the mind; cintitam—anxiety;
bhavatah—to you; vidusah—who know everything; ca—and; api—al-
though; coditah—being inspired; tvat—your; anujiaya—by the order.
TRANSLATION
O great soul, you are aware of everything, yet you are asking me
why I am full of anxiety. Therefore, in response to your order, let
me disclose the cause.
TEXT 25
४५
लोकपारेरपि प्राया; साग्राज्यैस्वर्यसम्पद्ः |
न नन्दयन्त्यप्रजं मां कतुट्काममिवापरे ৰ २५॥
loka-palair api prarthyah
samrajyaisvarya-sampadah
na nandayanty aprajar mam
ksut-trt-kamam ivapare


--- Page 30 ---
24. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
loka-palaih—by great demigods; api—even; prarthyah—desirable;
samrdjya—a great empire; aiSvarya—material opulence; sampadah—
possessions; na nandayanti—do not give pleasure; aprajam—because of
having no son; mam—unto me; ksut—hunger; trt—thirst; kamam—
desiring to satisfy; iva—like; apare—other enjoyable sense objects.
TRANSLATION
As a person aggrieved by hunger and thirst is not pleased by the
external gratification of flower garlands or sandalwood pulp, I am
not pleased with my empire, opulence or possessions, which are
desirable even for great demigods, because I have no son.
TEXT 26
ततः पादि महामाग पूर्वैः सह गतं aw: |
यथा तरेम दुष्पारं प्रजया तद्‌ विधेहि नः ॥२६॥
tatah pahi maha-bhaga
pirvaih saha 80077 tamah
yatha tarema dusparam
prajaya tad vidhehi nah
tatah—therefore, because of this; pahi—kindly save; maha-bhaga—
0 great sage; pirvaih saha—along with my forefathers; gatam—gone;
tamah—to darkness; yathd—so that; tarema—we can cross;
dusparam—very difficult to cross; prajaya—by getting a son; tat—that;
vidhehi—kindly do; nah—for us.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O great sage, please save me and my forefathers, who
are descending to the darkness of hell because I have no progeny.
Kindly do something so that I may have a son to deliver us from
hellish conditions.
PURPORT
According to Vedic civilization, one gets married simply to have a son,
who is needed to offer oblations to his forefathers. King Citraketu re-


--- Page 31 ---
Text 28] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 25
sponsibly desired to beget a child so that he and his forefathers might be
delivered from the darkest regions. He was concerned with how to get
pinda, oblations, in the next life, not only for himself but also for his
forefathers. Therefore he requested Angira Rsi to favor him by doing
something that could help him get a son.
TEXT 27
श्रीद्युक उवाच
c
इत्यर्थितः स भगवाच्‌ कृपादुब्रेद्यणः सतः |
श्रपयित्वा चरं त्वां त्व्टारमयजद्‌ विथः ॥२७॥
$ri-Suka uvdca
ity arthitah sa bhagavan
krpalur brahmanah sutah
Srapayitva carum tvastram
tvastaram ayajad vibhuh
Sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; arthitah—
being requested; sah—he (Angira Rsi); bhagavan—the most powerful;
krpaluh—being very merciful; brahmanah—of Lord Brahma; sutah—a
son (born of Lord Brahma’s mind); srapayitva—after causing to cook;
carum—a specific oblation of sweetrice; tvastram—meant for the
demigod known as Tvasta; tvastaram—Tvasta; ayajat—he worshiped;
vibhuh—the great sage.
TRANSLATION
In response to the request of Maharaja Citraketu, Angira Rsi,
who was born of Lord Brahma’s mind, was very merciful toward
him. Because the sage was a greatly powerful personality, he per-
formed a sacrifice by offering oblations of sweetrice to Tvasta.
TEXT 28
ज्येष्ठा श्रेष्ठा च या राज्ञो मदिषीणां च मारत |
a
AA ृतदयुतिस्तस्ये यज्ञोच्लिष्टमदाद्‌ द्विजः ॥२८॥


--- Page 32 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
Jyestha srestha ca ya rajio
mahisinar ca bharata
namna krtadyutis tasyai
yajiocchistam adad dvijah
Jyestha—the senior; Srestha—the most perfect; ca—and; ya—she
who; rajiiah—of the King; mahisinam—among all the queens; ca—
also; bharata—O Maharaja Pariksit, the best of the Bharatas; namna—
by name; krtadyutih—Krtadyuti; tasyai—unto her; yajia—of the
sacrifice; ucchistam—the remnants of food; adat—delivered; dvijah—
the great sage (Angira).
TRANSLATION
O Pariksit Maharaja, best of the Bharatas, the remnants of the
food offered in the yajiia were given by the great sage Angira to
the first and most perfect among Citraketu’s millions of queens,
whose name was Krtadyuti.
TEXT 29
अथाह TN राजन्‌ भवितेकल्तवात्मजः |
(प
हषंशोकप्रदस्तुम्यमिति ह्मसुतो ययो ॥ २९॥
athaha nrpatiri rajan
bhavitaikas tavatmajah
harsa-$oka-pradas tubhyam
iti brahma-suto yayau
atha—thereafter; aha—said; nrpatim—unto the King; rajan—O
King Citraketu; bhavita—there will be; ekah—one; tava —your; atma-
jah—son; harsa-s5oka—jubilation and lamentation; pradeah—who will
give; tubhyam—unto you; iti—thus; brahma-sutah—Angira Rsi, the
son of Lord Brahma; yayau —left.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the great sage told the King, (0 great King, now
you will have a son who will be the cause of both jubilation and


--- Page 33 ---
Text 30] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 27
lamentation.” The sage then left, without waiting for Citraketu’s
response.
PURPORT
The word harsa means “‘jubilation,” and Soka means ‘‘lamentation.”
The King was overwhelmed with joy when he understood that he would
have a son. Because of his great jubilation, he could not actually under-
stand the statement of the sage Angira. He accepted it to mean that there
would certainly be jubilation because of the birth of his future son, but
that he would be the King’s only son and, being very proud of his great
wealth and empire, would not be very obedient to his father. Thus the
King was satisfied, thinking, ‘Let there be a son. It does not matter if he
is not very obedient.” In Bengal there is a proverb that instead of having
no maternal uncle, it is better to have a maternal uncle who is blind. The
King accepted this philosophy, thinking that a disobedient son would be
better than no son at all. The great sage Canakya Pandita says:
ko ’rthah putrena jatena
yo na vidvan na dharmikah
kanena caksusa kim va

caksuh pidaiva kevalam
“What is the use of a son who is neither a learned scholar nor a devotee?
Such a son is like a blind, diseased eye, which always causes suffering.”
Nevertheless, the material world is so polluted that one wants to have a
son even though he is useless. This attitude was represented in the
history of King Citraketu.

TEXT 30
सापि तत्प्राशनादेव च्िकेतोरारयत्‌ ।
স্ব
गभं कृतद्युतिर्देवी ক্কাবিকামীব্ৰাংমঅমৃূ 11301)
sapi tat-prasanad eva
citraketor adharayat
garbhari krtadyutir devi
krttikagner ivatmajam


--- Page 34 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
sa—she; api—even; tat-prasanat—by eating the remnants of food
from the great sacrifice; eva —indeed; citraketoh—{from King Citraketu;
adharayat—bore; garbham—pregnancy; krtadyutih—Queen Krta-
dyuti: devi—the goddess; krttika—Krttika; agneh—from Agni; iva—
as: atma-jam—a son.
TRANSLATION
As Krttikadevi, after receiving the semen of Lord Siva from
Agni, conceived a child named Skanda [Karttikeya], Krtadyuti,
having received semen from Citraketu, became pregnant after eat-
ing remnants of food from the कषु 78 performed by Angira.
TEXT 31
Al
तस्या अनुदिनं गभः gE इवोड्पः ।
ac
TIN शरसेनेशतेजसा शनकेनरेप ।।२१॥
tasya anudinari garbhah
Sukla-paksa ivodupah
vavrdhe Sirasenesa-
tejasa Sanakair nrpa
tasyah—her; anudinam—day after day; garbhah—embryo; sukla-
pakse—during the fortnight of the waxing moon; iva—like; udupah—
the moon; vavrdhe —gradually developed; sirasena-ia—of the King of
Surasena; tejasa—by the semen; Sanakaih—little by little; nrpa—O
King Pariksit.
TRANSLATION
_ After receiving semen from Maharaja Citraketu, the King of
Siirasena, Queen Krtadyuti gradually developed in her pregnancy,
O King Pariksit, just as the moon develops during the bright
fortnight.
TEXT 32
अथ काल उपावृत्ते TAC समजायत |
जनयन्‌ शचरसेनानां शृण्वतां परमां GI ।३२॥


--- Page 35 ---
Text 33] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 29
atha kala upavrtte
kumarah samajayata
Janayan Siirasenanarin
Srnvatarh paramarn mudam
atha—thereafter; kale upavrtte—in due course of time; kumarah—
the son; samajayata—took birth; janayan—creating; sirasenanam—of
the inhabitants of ৩8013561183; §rmvatam—hearing; paramam—the high-
est; mudam—delight.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in due course of time, a son was born to the King.
Hearing news of this, all the inhabitants of the state of Suirasena
were extremely pleased.
TEXT 33
हृष्टो राजा RY स्नातः IEEE ।
[+ =
वाचयित्वाशिषो विप्रैः कारयामास जातकम्‌ 11330
hrsto raja kumarasya
snatah sucir alanikrtah
vdcayitvasiso vipraih
karayam asa jatakam
hrstah—very happy; raja—the King; kumarasya—of his newly born
son; snatah—having bathed; Sucih—being purified; alarikrtah—being
decorated with ornaments; vdcayitva—having caused to be spoken:
asisah—words 01 benediction; vipraih—by learned brahmanas;
karayam asa—caused to be performed; jatakam—the birth ceremony.
TRANSLATION
King Citraketu was especially pleased. After purifying himself
by bathing and by decorating himself with ornaments, he engaged
learned brahmanas in offering benedictions to the child and per-
forming the birth ceremony.


--- Page 36 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
TEXT 34
Ft दिरण्वं रजतं वासांस्यामरणानि च॒ ।
[3
ग्रामान्‌ दयान्‌ गजान्‌ प्रादाद्‌ धेनलामवुंदानि षट्‌ |।২৩।
tebhyo hiranyar rajatari
vasarsy abharanani ca
graman hayan gajan pradad
dheniinam arbudani sat
tebhyah—unto them (the learned brahmanas); hiranyam —gold; ra-
Jatam —silver; vasamsi—garments; abharanani—ornaments; ca —also;
graman—villages; hayan—horses; gajain —elephants; pradat—gave in
charity; dheninam—of cows; arbudani—groups of one hundred
million; sat—six.
TRANSLATION
Unto the braihmanas who took part in the ritualistic ceremony
the King gave charity of gold, silver, garments, ornaments,
villages, horses and elephants, as well as sixty crores of cows [six
hundred million cows].
TEXT 35
S| +
ননদ कामानन्येषां पजन्य इव॒देदिनाम्‌ ।
धन्यं यज्ञस्यमायुष्यं मारस्य महामनाः ॥३५॥
vavarsa kaman anyesar
parjanya iva dehinam
dhanyari yasasyam ayusyar
kumarasya maha-manah
vavarsa—showered, gave in charity; k@man—all desirable things;
anyesam—of others; parjanyah—a cloud; iva—like; dehinam—of all
living entities; dhanyam —with the desire for an increase of opulence;
yasasyam—an increase of reputation; ayusyam—and an increase of the
duration of life; kumarasya—of the newly born child; maha-manah—
the beneficent King Citraketu.


--- Page 37 ---
Text 37] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 31
TRANSLATION
As a cloud indiscriminately pours water on the earth, the benefi-
cent King Citraketu, to increase the reputation, opulence and
longevity of his son, distributed like rainfall all desirable things to
everyone.
TEXT 36
ृच्छलन्धेऽथ राजर्षेस्तनयेऽलुदिनं पितुः |
९
यथा निःसखस्य FEW धने অহী ऽन्ववधेत ।३६।
krcchra-labdhe tha rajarses
tanaye ‘nudinari pituh
yatha nihsvasya krcchrapte
dhane sneho ’nvavardhata
krcchra—with great difficulty; labdhe—gained; atha—thereafter;
raja-rseh—of the pious King Citraketu; tanaye—for the son;
anudinam—day after day; pituh—of the father; yathd—exactly as;
nihsvasya—of a poor man; krcchra-apte—gained after great difficulty;
dhane—for riches; snehah—affection; anvavardhata—increased.
TRANSLATION
When a poor man gets some money after great difficulty, his
affection for the money increases daily. Similarly, when King
Citraketu, after great difficulty, received a son, his affection for
the son increased day after day.
TEXT 37
मातुस्त्वतितरां पुत्रे অহা मोदसखुद्धवः |
कृतद्युतेः सपलीनां प्रजाकामन्वरोऽमवत्‌ 11901
madtus tv atitaram putre
sneho moha-samudbhavah
krtadyuteh sapatninar
praja-kama-jvaro ’bhavat


--- Page 38 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
matuh—of the mother; tu—also; atitaram —excessively; putre—for
the son: snehah—affection; moha—out of ignorance; samudbhavah—
produced: krtadyuteh—of Krtadyuti; sapatninam—of the co-wives;
praja-kama—of a desire to have sons; jvarah—a fever; abhavat—
there was.
TRANSLATION
The mother’s attraction and attention to the son, like that of the
child’s father, excessively increased. The other wives, seeing
Krtadyuti’s son, were very much agitated, as if by high fevers, with
a desire to have sons.
TEXT 38
= ly
चित्रकेतोरतिप्रीतियेथा दारे प्रजावति ।
न तथान्येषु GF बार जाखयतोऽन्वहम्‌ ।।২৫।।
citraketor atipritir
yatha dare prajavati
na tathanyesu sanjajiie
balarh lalayato ‘nvaham
citraketoh—of King Citraketu; atipritih—excessive attraction;
yatha—just as; dare—unto the wife; praja-vati—who begot a son; na—
not; tatha—like that; anyesu—unto the others; sanjajiie—arose;
balam—the son; lalayatah—taking care of; anvaham—constantly.
TRANSLATION
As King Citraketu fostered his son very carefully, his affection
for Queen Krtadyuti increased, but gradually he lost affection for
the other wives, who had no sons.
TEXT 39
৬ ©. =
ताः TARA गरंयन्त्योऽम्यस्रयया |
आनपत्येन दुःखेन राज्ञश्चानादरेण च ॥३९॥


--- Page 39 ---
Text 40] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 33
tah paryatapyann atmanari
garhayantyo ’bhyasityaya
anapatyena duhkhena
rajias canadarena ca
tah—they (the queens who did not have sons); paryatapyan—
lamented; atmanam —themselves; garhayantyah—condemning;
abhyasiiyaya—out of envy; anapatyena—due to being without sons;
duhkhena—by unhappiness; rajiah—of the King; ca—also;
anadarena—due to negligence; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
The other queens were extremely unhappy due to their being
sonless. Because of the King’s negligence toward them, they con-
demned themselves in envy and lamented.
TEXT 40
पिगप्रजां fd पापां पत्युधागृहसम्मताम्‌ |
सुप्रजाभिः सपलीमिरदसीमिव तिरस्कृताम्‌ ॥४०॥
dhig aprajam striyariv papam
patyus cagrha-sammatam
suprajabhih sapatnibhir
dasim iva tiraskrtam
dhik—all condemnation; aprajam—without a son; striyam—upon a
woman; papam—full of sinful activities; patyuh—by the husband;
ca—also; a-grha-sammatam—who is not honored at home; su-pra-
jabhih—who have sons; sapatnibhih—by co-wives; dasim —a maidser-
vant; iwa—exactly like; tiraskrtam—dishonored.
TRANSLATION
A wife who has no sons is neglected at home by her husband and
dishonored by her co-wives exactly like a maidservant. Certainly
such a woman is condemned in every respect because of her sinful
life.


--- Page 40 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
PURPORT
As stated by Canakya Pandita:
mata yasya grhe nasti
bharya capriya-vadini
aranyarm tena gantavyam
yatharanyar tatha grham
“A person who has no mother at home and whose wife does not speak
sweetly should go to the forest. For such a person, living at home and liv-
ing in the forest are equal.” Similarly, for a woman who has no son, who
is not cared for by her husband and whose co-wives neglect her, treating
her like a maidservant, to go to the forest is better than to remain at
home.
TEXT 41
৬ = ©.
दासीनां को नु सन्तापः खामिनः परिचयंया |
ক . ¢
Te] STREET दासा दासीव दुभेगाः।॥४१॥
dasinari ko nu santapah
sv@minah [0078001707৫
abhiksnam labdha-mananari
dasya dasiva durbhagah
dasinam—of the maidservants; kah—what; nu—indeed; santapah—
lamentation; svdminah—unto the husband; paricaryaya—by rendering
service; abhiksnam—constantly; labdha-mananam—honored; dasyah
—of the maidservant; dasi iva—like a maidservant; durbhagah—most
unfortunate.
TRANSLATION
Even maidservants who are constantly engaged in rendering ser-
vice to the husband are honored by the husband, and thus they
have nothing for which to lament. Qur position, however, is that


--- Page 41 ---
Text 43] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 35
we are maidservants of the maidservant. Therefore we are most
unfortunate.
TEXT 42
एवं सन्दद्यमानानां AIT पुत्रसम्पदा ।
राज्ञोऽ सम्मतच्ृत्तीनां विद्धेषो बलवानभूत्‌ ॥४२॥
evar sandahyamananarn
sapatnyah putra-sampada
rajio ’sammata-vrttinam
vidveso balavan abhit
evam—thus; sandahyamananam—of the queens, who were con-
stantly burning in lamentation; sapatnyah—of the co-wife Krtadyuti;
putra-sampadda—due to the opulence of a son; rajiah—by the King;
asammata-vrttindm —not being very much favored; vidvesah—envy;
balavan—very strong; abhiit—became.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Being neglected by their hus-
band and seeing Krtadyuti’s opulence in possessing a son,
Krtadyuti’s co-wives always burned in envy, which became
extremely strong.
TEXT 43
fees: জিমী दारुणचेतसः |
गरं ददुः माराय दुर्मर्षा नृपतिं प्रति ॥४२॥
vidvesa-nasta-matayah
striyo daruna-cetasah
garari daduh kumaraya
durmarsa nrpatirn prati
vidvesa-nasta-matayah—whose intelligence was lost in envy;
striyah—the women; daruna-cetasah—being very hardhearted;


--- Page 42 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
garam —poison: daduh—administered; kumardya—unto the boy; dur-
marsah—being intolerant; nrpatim—the King; prati—upon.
TRANSLATION
As their envy increased, they lost their intelligence. Being ex-
tremely hardhearted and unable to tolerate the King’s neglect,
they finally administered poison to the son.
TEXT 44
कृतद्युतिरजानन्ती सपलीनामघं महत्‌ ।
सस एवेति afr निरीक्ष्य व्यचरद्‌ गृहे nee
krtadyutir ajanantt
sapatninam aghari mahat
supta eveti sancintya
nirtksya vyacarad grhe
krtadyutih—Queen  Krtadyuti; ajananti—being unaware of;
sapatninam—of her co-wives; agham—sinful act; mahat—very great;
suptah—sleeping; eva—indeed; iti—thus; saficintya—thinking;
nirthsya—Ilooking at; vyacarat—was walking; grhe—at home.
TRANSLATION
Unaware of the poison administered by her co-wives, Queen
Krtadyuti walked within the house, thinking that her son was
sleeping deeply. She did not understand that he was dead.
TEXT 45
+ + Sl
शयानं खचिरं rege मनीषिणी |
पुत्रमानय मे मद्रे इति धात्रीमचोदयत्‌ ea
Sayanarn sucirari balam
upadharya manisini
putram anaya me bhadre
iti dhatrim acodayat


--- Page 43 ---
Text 47] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 37
Sayanam—lying down; su-ciram—for a long time; balam—the son;
upadharya—thinking; manisini—very intelligent; putram—the son;
anaya—bring; me—unto me; bhadre—O gentle friend; iti—thus;
dhatrim—unto the nurse; acodayat—gave the order.
TRANSLATION
Thinking that her child had been sleeping for a long time,
Queen Krtadyuti, who was certainly very intelligent, ordered the
nurse, ‘‘My dear friend, please bring my son here.”
TEXT 46
सा शयानुपव्रज्य TY चोत्तारलोचनम्‌ |
भ्राणेन्द्रियार्मभिस्त्यक्तं हताखीत्यपतद्धुवि ॥४६॥
sa $ayanam upavrajya
drstva cottara-locanam
pranendriyatmabhis tyaktari
hatasmity apatad bhuvi
sa—she (the maidservant); Sayanam—lying down; upavrajya—
going to; drstva—seeing; ca—also; uttara-locanam—his eyes turned
upward (as are those of a dead body); prana-indriya-atmabhih—by the
life force, senses and mind; tyaktam —abandoned; hata asmi—now I am
doomed; iti—thus; apatat—fell down; bhuvi—on the ground.
TRANSLATION
When the maidservant approached the child, who was lying
down, she saw that his eyes were turned upward. There were no
signs of life, all his senses having stopped, and she could under-
stand that the child was dead. Seeing this, she immediately cried,
“Now I am doomed,” and fell to the ground.
TEXT 47
९ + .
तस्यास्तदाक्ण्य JAE सवर
a
घ्नन्त्याः कराभ्यामुर उचकेरपि ।


--- Page 44 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
प्रविश्य राज्ञी AAAS
९ . .
gd बालं सदसा मृतं सुतम्‌ ॥४७॥
tasydas tadakarnya bhrsaturam svaram
ghnantyah karabhyam ura uccakair api
pravisya rajiii tvarayatmajantikarn
dadarsa balarh sahasa mrtam sutam
tasyah—of her (the maidservant); tada—at that time; akarnya—
hearing; bhrsa-aturam—highly regretful and agitated; svaram—voice;
ghnantyah—striking; karabhyam—with the hands; urah—the chest;
uccakath—loudly; api—also; praviSya—entering; rajii—the Queen;
tvaraya—hastily; atmaja-antikam—near her son; dadarsa—she saw;
balam —the child; sahasd —suddenly; mrtam —dead; sutam—son.
TRANSLATION
In great agitation, the maidservant struck her breast with both
hands and cried loudly in regretful words. Hearing her loud voice,
the Queen immediately came, and when she approached her son,
she saw that he was suddenly dead.
TEXT 48
पपात भूमो पखद्रया शुचा
समोह विग्रष्टशिरोरुदाम्बरा ॥४८॥
papata bhimau parivrddhaya suca
mumoha vibhrasta-siroruhambara
papata—fell down; bhimau—on the ground; parivrddhaya—highly
increased; Sucd—out of lamentation; mumoha—she became un-
conscious; vibhrasta—scattered; Siroruha—hair; ambara@—and dress.
TRANSLATION
In great lamentation, her hair and dress in disarray, the Queen
fell to the ground unconscious.


--- Page 45 ---
Text 51] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 39
TEXT 49
ततो चृपान्तःपुरवर्तिनो जना
y
नराश्च নাম নিহজ্ম रोदनम्‌ |
आगत्य तुल्यव्यसनाः सुदुःखिता-
स्ता व्यरीकं रुरुदुः कृतागसः ॥४९॥
tato nrpantahpura-vartino jana
nards ca naryas ca nisamya rodanam
agatya tulya-vyasanah suduhkhitas
tas ca vyaltkam ruruduh krtagasah
tatah—thereafter; nrpa—O King; antahpura-vartinah—the inhabi-
tants of the palace; janah—all the people; narah—the men; ca—and;
naryah—the women; ca—also; niSamya—hearing; rodanam—loud
crying; dgatya—coming; tulya-vyasanah —being equally aggrieved; su-
duhkhitah—very greatly lamenting; tah—they; ca—and; vyaltham—
pretentiously; ruruduh—cried; krta-dgasah—who had committed the
offense (by giving the poison).
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, hearing the loud crying, all the inhabitants of
the palace came, both men and women. Being equally aggrieved,
they also began to cry. The queens who had administered the
poison also cried pretentiously, knowing full well their offense.
TEXTS 50-51
PA सृतं पुत्रमलक्षितान्तकं
विनष्टदृष्टिः प्रपतन्‌ स्वलन्‌ पथि |
. he) ক
स्नेदायुबन्धेधितय। शचा भृशं
6. ¢
विमूच्छितोऽनुप्रकृतिदिजैंतः ॥५०॥
पपात बाल्य स पादमूले
gre विसखस्तरिरोरुहाम्बरः |


--- Page 46 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
दीर्घं सन्‌ बाप्पकलोपरोधतो
निरुद्धकण्टो न शाक भाषितुम्‌ ue
Srutva mrtari putram alaksitantakarn
vinasta-drstih prapatan skhalan pathi
snehanubandhaidhitaya suca bhrsam
vimircchito ‘nuprakrtir dvijair vrtah
papata balasya sa pada-miile
mrtasya visrasta-Siroruhambarah
dirghari Svasan baspa-kaloparodhato
niruddha-kantho na sasaka bhasitum
Srutva—hearing; mrtam—dead; putram—the son; alaksita-an-
taka —the cause of death being unknown; vinasta-drstih—unable to
see properly; prapatan—constantly falling down; skhalan—slipping;
pathi—on the road; sneha-anubandha—because of affection;
edhitayd—increasing; Suca—by lamentation; bhrsam —greatly; vimirc-
chitah—becoming unconscious; anuprakrtih—followed by ministers
and other officers; dvijaih—by learned brahmanas; vrtah—surrounded;
papata—fell down; balasya—of the boy; sah—he (the King); pada-
miile—at the feet; mrtasya—of the dead body; visrasta—scattered;
Siroruha—hair; ambarah—and dress; dirgham—long; Svasan—
breathing; baspa-kala-uparodhatah—due to crying with tearful eyes;
niruddha-kanthah—having a choked voice; na—not; sasaka—was able;
bhasitum —to speak.
TRANSLATION
When King Citraketu heard of his son’s death from unknown
causes, he became almost blind. Because of his great affection for
his son, his lamentation grew like a blazing fire, and as he went to
see the dead child, he kept slipping and falling on the ground.
Surrounded by his ministers and other officers and the learned
brahmanas present, the King approached and fell unconscious at
the child’s feet, his hair and dress scattered. When the King,
breathing heavily, regained consciousness, his eyes were tearful,
and he could not speak.


--- Page 47 ---
Text 53] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 41
TEXT 52
पतिं निरीक्ष्योरुश्चचापितं तदा
मरतं च बालं सुतमेकसन्ततिम्‌ |
जनस्य राज्ञी प्रकृते TFS
सती दधाना विललाप चित्रधा ॥५२॥
patim nirtksyoru-Sucarpitari tadd
mrtar ca balam sutam eka-santatim
Janasya rajiii prakrtes ca hrd-rujari
sati dadhana vilalapa citradha
patim—the husband; niriksya—by seeing; uru—greatly; suca—with
lamentation; arpitarm —pained; tada—at that time; mrtam —dead; ca—
and; balam—the child; sutam—the son; eka-santatim—the only son in
the family; janasya—of all the other people gathered there; rajit—the
Queen; prakrteh ca—as well as of the officers and ministers; hrt-ru-
jam —the pains within the core of the heart; sati dadhana—increasing;
vilalapa—lamented; citradhd—in varieties of ways.
TRANSLATION
When the Queen saw her husband, King Citraketu, merged in
great lamentation and saw the dead child, who was the only son in
the family, she lamented in various ways. This increased the pain
in the cores of the hearts of all the inhabitants of the palace, the
ministers and all the brahmanas.
TEXT 53
स्तनद्वयं कुद्कमपड्क मण्डितं
निषिश्चती साज्जनबाप्पविन्दुभिः |
विकीर्य केशान्‌ fee: सुतं
शुशोच चित्रं कुररीव सुखरम्‌ ॥५३॥
stana-dvayam kurikuma-parika-manditarn
nisificati safjana-baspa-bindubhih


--- Page 48 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
vikirya kesan vigalat-srajah sutarn
SuSoca citram kurariva susvaram
stana-dvayam—her two breasts; kurikuma—with kurikuma powder
(which is generally sprayed on the breasts of women); parika—oint-
ment; manditam—decorated; nisifiicati—moistening; sa-afjana—mixed
with the eye ointment; baspa—of tears; bindubhih—by drops;
vikirya—scattering; kesan—hair; vigalat—was falling down; srajah—
on which the flower garland; sutam—for her son; Susoca—lamented;
citram—variegated; kurari iva—like a kurari bird; su-svaram—in a
very sweet voice.
TRANSLATION
The garland of flowers decorating the Queen’s head fell, and her
hair scattered. Falling tears melted the collyrium on her eyes and
moistened her breasts, which were covered with kunkuma
powder. As she lamented the loss of her son, her loud crying
resembled the sweet sound of a kurari bird.
TEXT 54
अहो विधातस्त्वमतीव बालिशो
यस्त्वात्मसृष्टयप्रतिरूपमीहसे ।
परे जु जीवत्यपरस्य या ম্বলি-
@ >
विंपयेयश्वेमसि भुवः परः ॥५४॥
aho vidhatas tvam ativa baliso
yas tv atma-srsty-apratiripam thase
pare nu jivaty aparasya ya mrtir
viparyayas cet tvam asi dhruvah parah
aho—alas (in great lamentation); vidhatah—O Providence; tvam—
You; ativa—very much; balisah—inexperienced; yah—who; tu—in-
deed; atma-srsti—of Your own creation; apratiripam—just the op-
posite; thase—You are performing and desiring; pare—while the father
or the elder; nu—indeed; jivati—is living; aparasya—of one who was


--- Page 49 ---
Text 55] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 43
born later; yd—which; mrtih—death; viparyayah—contradictory;
cet—if; tvam—You; asi—are; dhruvah—indeed; parah—an enemy.
TRANSLATION
Alas, O Providence, O Creator, You are certainly inexperienced
in creation, for during the lifetime of a father You have caused the
death of his son, thus acting in opposition to Your creative laws. If
You are determined to contradict these laws, You are certainly the
enemy of living entities and are never merciful.
PURPORT
This is the way a conditioned soul condemns the supreme creator when
he meets reverses. Sometimes he accuses the Supreme Personality of
Godhead of being crooked because some people are happy and some are
not. Here the Queen blames supreme providence for her son’s death.
Following the creative laws, a father should die first and then his son. If
the creative laws are changed according to the whims of providence, then
providence certainly should not be considered merciful, but must be con-
sidered inimical to the created being. Actually it is not the creator, but
the conditioned soul who is inexperienced. He does not know how the
subtle laws of fruitive activity work, and without knowledge of these
laws of nature, he ignorantly criticizes the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 55
न हि क्रमश्चेदिह म॒र्युजन्मनोः
ও
शरीरिणामस्तु तदारमकर्मभिः ।
यः स्नेहपाशो निजसगंबद्धये
सयं कृतस्ते तमिमं Ref isan
na hi kramas ced iha mrtyu-janmanoh
Saririnam astu tad atma-karmabhih
yah sneha-pdso nija-sarga-vrddhaye
svayari krtas te tam imam vivrscasi


--- Page 50 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14

na—not: hi—indeed; kramah—chronological order; cet—if; iha—in
this material world; mrtyu—of death; janmanoh—and of birth;
saririnam—of the conditioned souls, who have accepted material bodies;
astu—let it be; tat—that; atma-karmabhih—Dby the results of one’s
karma (fruitive activities); yah—that which; sneha-pasah—bondage of
affection; nija-sarga—Your own creation; vrddhaye—to increase;
svayam—personally; krtah—made; te—by You; tam —that; imam—
this; vivrscasi—you are cutting.

TRANSLATION

My Lord, You may say that there is no law that a father must die
in the lifetime of his son and that a son must be born in the
lifetime of his father, since everyone lives and dies according to
his own fruitive activity. However, if fruitive activity is so strong
that birth and death depend upon it, there is no need of a con-
troller, or God. Again, if You say that a controller is needed be-
cause the material energy does not have the power to act, one may
answer that if the bonds of affection You have created are dis-
turbed by fruitive action, no one will raise children with affection;
instead, everyone will cruelly neglect his children. Since You have
cut the bonds of affection that compel a parent to raise his child,
You appear inexperienced and unintelligent.

PURPORT

As stated in the Brahma-samhita, karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-
bhajam: one who has taken to Krsna consciousness, devotional service, is
not affected by the results of karma. In this verse, karma has been
stressed on the basis of karma-mimarsa philosophy, which says that one
must act according to his karma and that a supreme controller must give
the results of karma. The subtle laws of karma, which are controlled by
the Supreme, cannot be understood by ordinary conditioned souls.
Therefore Krsna says that one who can understand Him and how He is
acting, controlling everything by subtle laws, immediately becomes freed
by His grace. That is the statement of Brahma-samhita (karmani nir-
dahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam). One should take to devotional service
without reservations and surrender everything to the supreme will of the
Lord. That will make one happy in this life and the next.


--- Page 51 ---
Text 56] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 45
TEXT 56
+ <. +
त्वं तात ARR च मां कृपणामनाथां
त्यक्तं वि चक्ष्व पितरं तव लोकततम्‌ |
अज्ञस्तरेम भवताप्रजदुस्तरं यद्‌
ध्वान्तं न याद्यकरुणेन यमेन TE NUE
tvar tata narhasi ca mar krpanam anatharm
tyakturi vicaksva pitaram tava Soka-taptam
afijas tarema bhavatapraja-dustaram yad
dhvantari na yahy akarunena yamena diram
tvam—you; tata—my dear son; na—not; arhasi—ought; ca—and;
mam —me; krpanam—very poor; anatham—without a protector; tyak-
tum—to give up; vicaksva—look; pitaram—at the father; tava—your;
Soka-taptam—affected by so much lamentation; ajiiah—easily;
tarema—we can cross; bhavata—by you; apraja-dustaram—very dif-
ficult to cross for one without a son; yat—which; dhvantam—the
kingdom of darkness; na yahi—do not go away; akarunena—merciless;
yamena—with Yamaraja; diram—any further.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, I am helpless and very much aggrieved. You should
not give up my company. Just look at your lamenting father. We
are helpless because without a son we shall have to suffer the dis-
tress of going to the darkest hellish regions. You are the only hope
by which we can get out of these dark regions. Therefore I request
you not to go any further with the merciless Yama.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic injunctions, one must accept a wife just to
beget a son who can deliver one from the clutches of Yamaraja. Unless
one has a son to offer oblations to the pitas, or forefathers, one must
suffer in Yamaraja’s kingdom. King Citraketu was very much aggrieved.
thinking that because his son was going away with Yamaraja. he himself


--- Page 52 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
would again suffer. The subtle laws exist for the karmis; if one becomes
a devotee, he has no more obligations to the laws of karma.
TEXT 57
उत्तिष्ठ तात त इमे शिशवो वयसखा-
स्त्वामाह्वयन्ति नृपनन्दन संविहतंम्‌ |
सुसधिरं ह्यशनया च मवान्‌ परीतो
शङ्कव स्तनं দিন शुचो हर नः खकानाम्‌ ॥ ५७॥
uttistha tata ta ime 57500 vayasyas
tvam ahvayanti nrpa-nandana sarvihartum
suptas 08707 hy asanaya ca bhavan parito
bhunksva stanari piba 5८८0 hara nah svakanam
uttistha—kindly get up; tdta—my dear son; te—they; ime—all these;
SiSavah —children; vayasyah—playmates; tvam—you; ahvayanti—are
calling; nrpa-nandana—O son of the King; sariwihartum—to play with;
suptah—you have slept; ciram—for a long time; hi—indeed;
asanaya—by hunger; ca—also; bhavan—you; paritah—overcome;
bhuriksva—please eat; stanam—at the breast (of your mother); piba—
drink; Sucah—lamentation; hara—just dissipate; nah—of us;
svakanam—your relatives.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, you have slept a long time. Now please get up. Your
playmates are calling you to play. Since you must be very hungry,
please get up and suck my breast and dissipate our lamentation.
TEXT 58
नाहं तनूज FEY हतमङ्गला ते
यग्धस्मितं मदितवीक्षणमाननान्जम्‌ |
किं না गतोऽस्यपुनरन्वयमन्यलोकं
नीतोऽघृणेन न श्रृणोमि कडा गिरस्ते ॥५८॥


--- Page 53 ---
Text 59] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 47
naharh tanija dadrse hata-marigala te
mugdha-smitari mudita-viksanam ananabjam
kirh va gato ’sy apunar-anvayam anya-lokari
nito ‘ghrnena na srnomi kala giras te
na—not; aham—I; tani-ja—my dear son (born of my body);
dadrse—saw; hata-marigala—because of my being the most unfortu-
nate; te—your; mugdha-smitam—with charming smiling; mudita-
viksanam —with closed eyes; dnana-abjam—lotus face; kin va—
whether; gatah—gone away; asi—you are; a-punah-anvayam—from
which one does not return; anya-lokam—to another planet, or the planet
of Yamaraja; nitah—having been taken away; aghrnena—by the cruel
Yamarija; na—not; Srnomi—1I can hear; kalah—very pleasing; girah—
utterances; te—your.
TRANSLATION
My dear son, I am certainly most unfortunate, for I can no
longer see your mild smiling. You have closed your eyes forever. I
therefore conclude that you have been taken from this planet to
another, from which you will not return. My dear son, I can no
longer hear your pleasing voice.
TEXT 59
श्रीञ्ुक उवाच
+ 2
विलपन्त्या मृतं पुत्रमिति चित्रविलापनैः ।
(4 at
चितरकेत्थैशं বমী शक्तकण्ठो रुरोद ह ॥५९॥
sri-Suka uvdaca
vilapantyd mrtariv putram
iti citra-vilapanaih
citraketur bhrsari tapto
mukta-kantho ruroda ha
$ri-sukah uwvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; vilapantya—with the
woman who was lamenting; mrtam —dead; putram—for the son; iti—
thus; citra-vilapanaih—with various lamentations; citraketuh—King


--- Page 54 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 14
Citraketu; bhrsam—very much; taptah—aggrieved; mukta-kanthah—
loudly; ruroda—cried; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Accompanied by his wife, who
was thus lamenting for her dead son, King Citraketu began crying
loudly with an open mouth, being greatly aggrieved.
TEXT 60
-~
तयोर्विलपतोः सर्वे < दम्पत्योस्तदनुवताः |
रुरुदुः ख नरा नार्यः सर्वमासीदचेतनम्‌ ॥६०॥
tayor vilapatoh sarve
dampatyos tad-anuvratah
ruruduh sma nara naryah
sarvam asid acetanam
tayoh—while the two of them; vilapatoh—were lamenting; sarve—
all; dam-patyoh—the King, along with his wife; tat-anuvratah—their
followers; ruruduh—cried loudly; sma—indeed; narah—the male
members; naryah—the female members; sarvam—the whole kingdom;
asit—became; acetanam—almost unconscious.
TRANSLATION
As the King and Queen lamented, all their male and female
followers joined them in crying. Because of the sudden accident,
all the citizens of the kingdom were almost unconscious.
TEXT 61
एवं करमलमापननं नष्टसंज्ञमनायकम्‌ |
ज्ञात्वाङ्गिरा नाम ऋषिराजगाम सनारदः ॥६१॥
evam kasmalam apannari
nasta-saryiiam anayakam


--- Page 55 ---
Text 61] King Citraketu’s Lamentation 49
JRatvangira nama rsir
ajagama sanaradah
evam—thus; kasmalam —misery; apannam—having gotten; nasta—
lost; sariyfiam —consciousness; andyakam—without help; 17212 --
knowing; angirah—Angira; ndma—named; rsih—the saintly person;
ajagama—came; sa-naradah—with Narada Muni.
TRANSLATION
When the great sage Angira understood that the King was
almost dead in an ocean of lamentation, he went there with Narada
Rsi.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fourteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “King Citraketu’s
Lamentation.”


--- Page 56 ---
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The Saints Narada and Angira
Instruct King Citraketu
In this chapter, Angira Rsi, along with Narada, consoles Citraketu as far
as possible. Angira and Narada Rsi came to relieve the King from ex-
cessive lamentation by instructing him about the spiritual significance of
life.

The great saints Angira and Narada explained that the relationship be-
tween father and son is not factual; it is simply a representation of the il-
lusory energy. The relationship did not exist before, nor will it stay in
the future. By the arrangement of time, the relationship exists only in
the present. One should not lament for temporary relationships. The en-
tire cosmic manifestation is temporary; although not unreal, it is not fac-
tual. By the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, everything
created in the material world is transient. By a temporary arrangement, a
father begets a child, or a living entity becomes the child of a so-called
father. This temporary arrangement is made by the Supreme Lord.
Neither the father nor the son exists independently.

As the King listened to the great sages, he was relieved from his false
lamentation, and then he inquired about their identity. The great sages
presented who they were and instructed that all sufferings are due to the
bodily conception of life. When one understands his spiritual identity
and surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme
spiritual person, one becomes actually happy. When one searches for
happiness in matter, one must certainly lament for bodily relationships.
Self-realization means spiritual realization of one’s relationship with
Krsna. Such realization ends one’s miserable material life.

TEXT 1
Haw उवाच
[अ .
ऊचतुख़ेतकोपान्ते पतितं सतकोपमम्‌ |
. বসে
शोकामिभूतं राजानं बोधयन्तो सदुक्तिभिः ng
51


--- Page 57 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
$ri-suka uvdaca
dcatur mrtakopante
patitarh mrtakopamam
Sokabhibhiitarn rajanarn
bodhayantau sad-uktibhih
sri-sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvimi said; zcatuh—they spoke;
mrtaka—the dead body; updante—near; patitam—fallen; mrtaka-
upamam —exactly like another dead body; soka-abhibhitam—very
much aggrieved by lamentation; rajanam—to the King; bodhayantau—
giving instruction; sat-uktibhih—Dby instructions that are factual, not
temporary.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: While King Citraketu, overcome by
lamentation, lay like a dead body at the side of the dead body of his
son, the two great sages Narada and Angira instructed him about
spiritual consciousness as follows.
TEXT 2
कोऽयं स्यात्‌ तव राजेन्द्र मवान्‌ यमजुशो चति ।
त्वं चास्य कतमः सृष्टौ पुरेदानीमतः परम्‌ ॥ २॥
ko ’yarh syat tava rdjendra
bhavan yam anusocati i
tvarh casya katamah srstau
puredanim atah param
kah—who; ayam —this; syat—is; tava—to you; rdja-indra—O best
of kings; bhavan—Your Lordship; yam —whom; anusocati—laments
over; tvam—you; ca—and; asya—to him (the dead boy); katamah—
who; srstau—in the birth; pur@—previously; idanim—at this time, at
the present; atah param—and hereafter, in the future.
TRANSLATION
O King, what relationship does the dead body for which you
lament have with you, and what relationship do you have with


--- Page 58 ---
Text 3] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 53
him? You may say that you are now related as father and son, but
do you think this relationship existed before? Does it truly exist
now? Will it continue in the future?
PURPORT
The instructions given by Narada and Angira Muni are the true
spiritual instructions for the illusioned conditioned soul. This world is
temporary, but because of our previous karma we come here and accept
bodies, creating temporary relationships in terms of society, friendship,
love, nationality and community, which are all finished at death. These
temporary relationships did not exist in the past, nor will they exist in
the future. Therefore at the present moment the so-called relationships
are illusions.
TEXT 3
यथा प्रयान्ति संयान्ति खोतोवेभेन बालुकाः |
संयुज्यन्ते वियुज्यन्ते तथा कालेन देहिनः ॥ ২ ॥
yatha prayanti sarmyanti
sroto-vegena balukah
saryujyante viyujyante
tatha kalena dehinah
yatha—just as; prayanti—move apart; sarydnti—come together:
srotah-vegena—by the force of waves; balukdh—the small particles of
sand; samyujyante—they are united; viyujyante—they are separated:
tatha—similarly; kalena—by time; dehinah—the living entities who
have accepted material bodies.
TRANSLATION
O King, as small particles of sand sometimes come together and
are sometimes separated due to the force of the waves, the living
entities who have accepted material bodies sometimes come
together and are sometimes separated by the force of time.


--- Page 59 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
PURPORT
The misunderstanding of the conditioned soul is the bodily conception
of life. The body is material, but within the body is the soul. This is
spiritual understanding. Unfortunately, one who is in ignorance, under
the spell of material illusion, accepts the body to be the self. He cannot
understand that the body is matter. Like small particles of sand, bodies
come together and are separated by the force of time, and people falsely
lament for unification and separation. Unless one knows this, there is no
question of happiness. Therefore in Bhagavad-gita (2.13) this is the first
instruction given by the Lord:
dehino 1577771 yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanarm jara
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati
‘As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.” We are not the
body; we are spiritual beings trapped in the body. Our real interest lies
in understanding this simple fact. Then we can make further spiritual
progress. Otherwise, if we remain in the bodily conception of life, our
miserable material existence will continue forever. Political adjustments,
social welfare work, medical assistance and the other programs we have
manufactured for peace and happiness will never endure. We shall have
to undergo the sufferings of material life one after another. Therefore
material life is said to be duhkhalayam asasvatam; it is a reservoir of
miserable conditions.
TEXT 4
bY o
यथा धानासु वे धाना भवन्ति न भवन्ति च ।
৬ -
एवं भूतानि भूतेषु चोदितानीशमायया ॥ ४ ॥
yatha dhanasu vai dhana
bhavanti na bhavanti ca
evar bhiitani bhiitesu
coditanisa-mayaya


--- Page 60 ---
Text 4] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 55
yatha—just as; dhandsu—through seeds of paddy; wvai—indeed;
dhanah—grains; bhavanti—are generated; na—not; bhavanti—are
generated; ca—also; evam—in this way; bhitani—the living entities;
bhatesu—in other living entities; coditani—impelled; iSa-mayaya—by
the potency or power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION

When seeds are sown in the ground, they sometimes grow into
plants and sometimes do not. Sometimes the ground is not fertile,
and the sowing of seeds is unproductive. Similarly, sometimes a
prospective father, being impelled by the potency of the Supreme
Lord, can beget a child, but sometimes conception does not take
place. Therefore one should not lament over the artificial relation-
ship of parenthood, which is ultimately controlled by the Supreme
Lord.

PURPORT

Maharaja Citraketu was actually not destined to get a son. Therefore
although he married hundreds and thousands of wives, all of them
proved barren, and he could not beget even one child. When Angira Rsi
came to see the King, the King requested the great sage to enable him to
have at least one son. Because of the blessing of Angira Rsi, a child was
sent by the grace of maya, but the child was not to live for long.
Therefore in the beginning Angira Rsi told the King that he would beget
a child who would cause jubilation and lamentation.

King Citraketu was not destined to get a child by providence, or the
will of the Supreme. Just as sterile grain cannot produce more grain, a
sterile person, by the will of the Supreme Lord, cannot beget a child.
Sometimes a child is born even to an impotent father and sterile mother,
and sometimes a potent father and fertile mother are childless. Indeed,
sometimes a child is born despite contraceptive methods, and therefore
the parents kill the child in the womb. In the present age, killing
children in the womb has become a common practice. Why? When con-
traceptive methods are taken, why don’t they act? Why is a child some-
times produced so that the father and mother have tokill it in the womb?
We must conclude that our arrangement of so-called scientific knowledge
cannot determine what will take place; what is enacted actually depends


--- Page 61 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
on the supreme will. It is by the supreme will that we are situated in cer-
tain conditions in terms of family, community and personality. These are
all arrangements of the Supreme Lord according to our desires under the
spell of maya, illusion. In devotional life, therefore, one should not
desire anything, since everything depends on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. As stated in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11):
anyabhilasita-sanyarm
Jjhana-karmady-andvrtam
anukilyena krsnanu-
silanarin bhaktir uttama
“‘One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devo-
tional service.” One should act only to develop Krsna consciousness. For
everything else, one should fully depend upon the Supreme Person. We
should not create plans that will ultimately make us frustrated.
TEXT 5
Tad च ये चेमे TEATS: |
A ~
ATCT TG प्राडनेवमधुनापि भोः॥ ५ ॥
10707 ca tvam ca ye ceme
tulya-kalas caracarah
Jjanma-mrtyor yatha pascat
pran naivam adhunapi bhoh
vayam—we (the great sages and the ministers and adherents of the
King): ca—and; tvam—you; ca—also; ye—who; ca —also; ime —these:
tulya-kalah—assembled at the same time; cara-acarah—moving and
not moving; janma—birth; mrtyoh—and death; yatha—just as;
pascat—after; prak—before; na—not; evam—thus; adhuna—at pres-
ent; api—although; bhoh—O King.


--- Page 62 ---
Text 6] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 57
TRANSLATION
O King, both you and us—your advisers, wives and ministers—
as well as everything moving and not moving throughout the en-
tire cosmos at this time, are in a temporary situation. Before our
birth this situation did not exist, and after our death it will exist no
longer. Therefore our situation now is temporary, although it is
not false.
PURPORT
The Mayavadi philosophers say, brahma satya jagan mithya: Brah-
man, the living being, is factual, but his present bodily situation is false.
According to the Vaisnava philosophy, however, the present situation is
not false but temporary. It is like a dream. A dream does not exist before
one falls asleep, nor does it continue after one awakens. The period for
dreaming exists only between these two, and therefore it is false in the
sense that it is impermanent. Similarly, the entire material creation, in-
cluding our own creation and those of others, is impermanent. We do not
lament for the situation in a dream before the dream takes place or after
it is over, and so during the dream, or during a dreamlike situation, one
should not accept it as factual and lament about it. This is real
knowledge.
TEXT 6
a =
agar भूतेशः सृजत्यवति हन्ति च ।
A
आत्मसृष्टैरखतन्त्रैरनपेश्चोऽपि बालवत्‌ ॥ £ ॥
bhiitair bhiitani bhiitesah
srjaty avati hanti ca
atma-srstair asvatantrair
anapekso ‘pi balavat
bhiataih—by some living beings; bhiitani—other living entities;
bhita-iSah —the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of every-
thing; srjati—creates; avati—maintains; hanti—Xkills; ca—also; atma-
srstaith—who are created by Him; asvatantraih—not independent;


--- Page 63 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
anapeksah—not interested (in creation); api—although; bala-vat—like
a boy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master and proprie-
tor of everything, is certainly not interested in the temporary cos-
mic manifestation. Nonetheless, just as a boy at the beach creates
something in which he is not interested, the Lord, keeping every-
thing under His control, causes creation, maintenance and annihi-
lation. He creates by engaging a father to beget a son, He maintains
by engaging a government or king to see to the public’s welfare,
and He annihilates through agents for killing, such as snakes. The
agents for creation, maintenance and annihilation have no inde-
pendent potency, but because of the spell of the illusory energy,
one thinks himself the creator, maintainer and annihilator.
PURPORT
No one can independently create, maintain or annihilate. Bhagavad-
gita (3.27) therefore says:
prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah
aharikdara-vimiadhatma
kartaham iti manyate
“The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself the doer of activities that are in actuality
carried out by nature.” Prakrti, material nature, as directed by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, induces all living entities to create,
maintain or annihilate according to the modes of nature. But the living
entity, without knowledge of the Supreme Person and His agent the ma-
terial energy, thinks that he is the doer. In fact, he is not at all the doer.
As an agent of the supreme doer, the Supreme Lord, one should abide by
the Lord’s orders. The present chaotic conditions of the world are due to
the ignorance of leaders who forget that they have been appointed to act
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because they have been ap-
pointed by the Lord, their duty is to consult the Lord and act accordingly.


--- Page 64 ---
Text 7] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 39
The book for consultation is Bhagavad-gita, in which the Supreme Lord
gives directions. Therefore those who are engaged in creation, mainte-
nance and annihilation should consult the Supreme Person, who has ap-
pointed them, and should act accordingly. Then everyone will be
satisfied, and there will be no disturbances.
TEXT 7
देहेन देदिनो राजन्‌ देहादेदोऽभिजायते ।
बीजादेव यथा बीजं देद्यथं इव शाश्वतः | ও।॥
dehena dehino rajan
dehad deho ’bhijayate
bijad eva yatha 00277
dehy artha iva $asvatah

dehena—by the body; dehinah—of the father possessing a material
body; rajan—O King; dehat—from the body (of the mother); dehah—
another body; abhijayate—takes birth; bijat—from one seed; eva—in-
deed; yatha—just as; bijam—another seed; dehi—a person who has ac-
cepted a material body; arthah—the material elements; iva—like;
$asvatah —eternal.

TRANSLATION

As from one seed another seed is generated, O King, so from
one body [the body of the father], through another body [the body
of the mother], a third body is generated [the body of a son]. As
the elements of the material body are eternal, the living entity who
appears through these material elements is also eternal.

PURPORT

From Bhagavad-gita we understand that there are two energies,
namely the superior energy and inferior energy. Inferior energy consists
of the five gross and three subtle material elements. The living entity,
who represents the superior energy, appears in different types of bodies
through these elements by the manipulation or supervision of the ma-
terial energy. Actually both the material and spiritual energies —matter


--- Page 65 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
and spirit—exist eternally as potencies of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The potent entity is the Supreme Person. Since the spiritual
energy, the living being, who is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord,
desires to enjoy this material world, the Lord gives him a chance to ac-
cept different types of material bodies and enjoy or suffer in different
material conditions. Factually, the spiritual energy, the living entity who
desires to enjoy material things, is manipulated by the Supreme Lord.
The so-called father and mother have nothing to do with the living en-
tity. As a result of his own choice and karma, the living being takes dif-
ferent bodies through the agency of so-called fathers and mothers.
TEXT 8
देददेदिविभागोऽयमविवेककृतः पुरा ।
जातिव्यक्तिविभागोऽयं यथा वस्तुनि कल्पितः ॥८॥
deha-dehi-vibhago yam
aviveka-krtah pura
Jjati-vyakti-vibhago ‘yarn
yatha vastuni kalpitah
deha—of this body; dehi—and the proprietor of the body;
vibhagah—the division; ayam—this; aviveka—from ignorance;
krtah—made; pura—from time immemorial; jati—of the class or caste;
vyakti—and the individual; vibhagah—division; ayam—this; yatha—
just as; vastuni—in the original object; kalpitah—imagined.
TRANSLATION
Divisions of generalization and specification, such as nationality
and individuality, are the imaginations of persons who are not ad-
vanced in knowledge.
PURPORT
Actually there are two energies —material and spiritual. Both of them
are ever-existing because they are emanations from the eternal truth, the
Supreme Lord. Because the individual soul, the individual living entity,
has desired to act in forgetfulness of his original identity since time im-


--- Page 66 ---
Text 10] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 61
memorial, he is accepting different positions in material bodies and being
designated according to many divisions of nationality, community,
society, species and so on.
TEXT 9
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवमाश्वासितो राजा चित्रकेतुर्िजोक्तिमिः ।
विमृज्य पाणिना वक्त्रमाधिम्लानममाषत ॥ ९॥
sri-Suka uvaca
evam asvasito raja
citraketur dvijoktibhih
vimrjya paninda vaktram
adhi-mlanam abhasata
sri-sukah uvdca—Sri  Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—thus;
asvasitah—being enlightened or given hope; raja—the King;
citraketuh—Citraketu; dvija-uktibhih—by the instructions of the great
brahmanas (Narada and Angira Rsi); vimrjya—wiping off; panina—by
the hand; vaktram —his face; adhi-mlanam—shriveled due to lamenta-
tion; abhasata—spoke intelligently.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thus enlightened by the in-
structions of Narada and Angira, King Citraketu became hopeful
with knowledge. Wiping his shriveled face with his hand, the
King began to speak.
TEXT 10
श्रीराजोवाच
कौ युवां ज्ञानसम्पनौ महिष्ठौ च महीयसाम्‌ |
अवधूतेन वेषेण गूढाविह समागतो ॥१०॥
sri-rajovaca
kau yuvar jiagna-sampannau
mahisthau ca mahiyasam


--- Page 67 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
avadhiitena vesena
gudhav iha samagatau
sri-rgja uvaca—King Citraketu said; keu—who; yuvam—you two;
jiana-sampannau—fully developed in knowledge; mahisthau—the
greatest; ca—also; mahiyasam—among other great personalities;
avadhittena—of the liberated wandering mendicants; vesena—by the
dress; gudhau—disguised; itha—in this place; samagatau—arrived.
TRANSLATION
King Citraketu said: You have both come here dressed like
avadhiitas, liberated persons, just to cover your identities, but I see
that of all men, you are the most elevated in awareness. You know
everything as it is. Therefore you are the greatest of all great
personalities.
TEXT 11
चरन्ति gat कामं ब्राह्मणा भगवत्प्रियाः |
मादृशां ग्राम्यबुद्धीनां बोधायोन्मत्तरिङ्गिनः॥११॥
caranti hy avanau kamarn
brahmana bhagavat-priyah
madrsam gramya-buddhinarm
bodhayonmatta-linginah
caranti—wander; hi—indeed; avanau—on the surface of the world;
kamam—according to desire; brahmanah—the brahmanas; bhagavat-
priyah—who are also Vaisnavas, very dear to the Personality of God-
head; ma-driam—of those like me; gramya-buddhinam—who are ob-
sessed with temporary material consciousness; bodhdya—for the
awakening; unmatta-linginah—who dress as if madmen.
TRANSLATION
Brahmanas who are exalted to the position of Vaisnavas, the
most dear servants of Krsna, sometimes dress like madmen. Just to


--- Page 68 ---
Text 15] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 63
benefit materialists like us, who are always attached to sense gra-
tification, and just to dissipate our ignorance, these Vaisnavas
wander on the surface of the globe according to their desire.
TEXTS 12-15
FW नारद ऋभुरङ्गिरा TSR: |
g
अपान्तरतमा व्यासो माकरण्डेयोऽथ गौतमः ॥१२॥
वसिष्ठो भगवान्‌ रामः कपिलो बादरायणिः |
दुर्वासा याज्ञवल्क्य जातुकर्णस्तथारुणिः ॥।१३॥
रोमशर्च्यवनो दत्त आसुरिः सपतञ्जलिः |
ऋषिर्वेदशिरा धोम्यो gf: पञ्चशिखस्तथा ॥१४॥
2
हिरण्यनाभः कांशल्यः श्ुतदेव HIF: |
एते परे च सिद्धेशाश्रन्ति ज्ञानहेतवः ।१५॥
kumaro narada rbhur
arngira devalo ’sitah
apantaratama vyaso
markandeyo ‘tha gautamah
vasistho bhagavan ramah
kapilo badarayanih
durvasa yajravallyas$ ca
jatukarnas tatharunih
70710505 cyavano datta
asurih sapatanjalih
rsir veda-$ira dhaumyo
munih paricasikhas tatha
hiranyanabhah kausalyah
Srutadeva rtadhvajah
ete pare ca siddhesas
caranti jiana-hetavah


--- Page 69 ---
64 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15

kumarah—Sanat-kumara; naradah—Narada Muni; rbhuh—Rbhu;
angirah—Angira; devalah—Devala; asitah— Asita; apantaratamah—
Vyasa’s previous name, Apantaratama; vydsah—Vyasa; markan-
deyah—Markandeya; atha—and; gautamah—Gautama; vasisthah—
Vasistha; bhagavan ramah—Lord ParaSurama; kapilah—Kapila;
badarayanih—Sukadeva  Gosvami;  durvasah—Durvasa;  yajia-
valkyah— Yajhavalkya; ca—also; jatukarnah—Jatukarna; tatha—as
well as; arunih— Aruni; romasah—Romasa; cyavanah—
Cyavana; dattah—Dattatreya; asurih—Asuri; sa-pataiijalih—with
Pataiijali Rsi; rsih—the sage; veda-Sirah—the head of the Vedas;
dhaumyah—Dhaumya; munih—the sage; parncasikhah—Paficasikha;
tatha—so also; hiranyanabhah—Hiranyanabha; kausalyah—Kausalya;
Srutadevah—Srutadeva; rtadhvajah—Rtadhvaja; ete—all of these;
pare—others; ca—and; siddha-isah—the masters of mystic power;
caranti—wander; jiana-hetavah—very learned persons who preach all
over the world.

TRANSLATION

O great souls, I have heard that among the great and perfect per-
sons wandering the surface of the earth to instruct knowledge to
people covered by ignorance are Sanat-kumara, Narada, Rbhu,
Angira, Devala, Asita, Apantaratama [Vyasadeva], Markandeya,
Gautama, Vasistha, Bhagavan ParaSurama, Kapila, Sukadeva, Dur-
vasa, Yajhavalkya, Jatukarna and Aruni. Others are Romasa,
Cyavana, Dattatreya, Asuri, Pataiijali, the great sage Dhaumya who
is like the head of the Vedas, the sage Paiicasikha, Hiranyanabha,
Kausalya, Srutadeva and Rtadhvaja. You must certainly be among
them.

PURPORT

The word jiana-hetavah is very significant because great personalities
like those listed in these verses wander on the surface of the globe not to
mislead the populace, but to distribute real knowledge. Without this
knowledge, human life is wasted. The human form of life is meant for
realization of one’s relationship with Krsna, or God. One who lacks this
knowledge is categorized among the animals. The Lord Himself says in
Bhagavad-gita (7.15):


--- Page 70 ---
Text 16] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 65
na mam duskrtino miadhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mdyayapahrta-jidana
asuram bhavam asritah
“Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind,
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic
nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.”

Ignorance is the bodily conception of life (yasyatma-buddhih kunape
tri-dhatuke. . . sa eva go-kharah). Practically everyone throughout the
universe, especially on this planet, Bhirloka, thinks that there is no
separate existence of the body and soul and therefore no need of self-
realization. But that is not a fact. Therefore all the brahmanas listed
here, being devotees, travel all over the world to awaken Krsna con-
sciousness in the hearts of such foolish materialists.

The dcaryas mentioned in these verses are described in the
Mahabharata. The word paicasikha is also important. One who 15 liber-
ated from the conceptions of annamaya, pranamaya, manomaya,
vijiidnamaya and anandamaya and who is perfectly aware of the subtle
coverings of the soul is called paficasikha. According to the statements of
the Mahabharata (Santi-parva, Chapters 218-219), an ৫০৫7৫ named
Paiicasikha took birth in the family of Maharaja Janaka, the ruler of
Mithila. The Sankhya philosophers accept Paficasikhacarya as one of
them. Real knowledge pertains to the living entity dwelling within the
body. Unfortunately, because of ignorance, the living entity identifies
himself with the body and therefore feels pleasure and pain.

TEXT 16
तसखरा्युवां ग्राम्यपश्चोमंम मूढधियः प्रम्‌ ।
अन्धे तमसि मग्नस्य ज्ञानदीप उदीयेताम्‌ ॥१६॥
tasmad yuvarh gramya-pasor
mama miidha-dhiyah prabhi
andhe tamasi magnasya
JjRana-dipa udiryatam


--- Page 71 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
tasmat—therefore: yuvam—both of you: gramya-pasoh—of an
animal like a hog. pig or dog; mama—me: miidha-dhiyah—who am
very foolish (due to having no spiritual knowledge); prabhi—O my two
lords: andhe—in blind; tamasi—darkness; magnasya—of one who is
absorbed: jiana-dipah—the torchlight of knowledge: udiryatam—let it
be ignited.
TRANSLATION
Because you are great personalities, you can give me real knowl-
edge. I am as foolish as a village animal like a pig or dog because I
am merged in the darkness of ignorance. Therefore, please ignite
the torch of knowledge to save me.
PURPORT
This is the way to receive knowledge. One must submit oneself at the
lotus feet of great personalities who can actually deliver transcendental
knowledge. It is therefore said, tasmad gurum prapadyeta jijiasuh sreya
uttamam: “One who is inquisitive to understand the highest goal and
benefit of life must approach a bona fide spiritual master and surrender
unto him.” Only one who is actually eager to receive knowledge to eradi-
cate the darkness of ignorance is eligible to approach a guru, or spiritual
master. The guru should not be approached for material benefits. One
should not approach a guru just to cure some disease or receive some
miraculous benefit. This is not the way to approach the guru. Tad-
vijaanartham: one should approach the guru to understand the transcen-
dental science of spiritual life. Unfortunately, in this age of Kali there
are many bogus gurus who display magic to their disciples, and many
foolish disciples want to see such magic for material benefits. These dis-
ciples are not interested in pursuing spiritual life to save themselves
from the darkness of ignorance. It is said:
om ajiana-timirandhasya
Jjrananjana-salakaya
caksur unmilitar yena
tasmai Sri-gurave namah


--- Page 72 ---
Text 19] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 67
“I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my
eyes with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto
him.” This gives the definition of the guru. Everyone is in the darkness
of ignorance. Therefore everyone needs to be enlightened with transcen-
dental knowledge. One who enlightens his disciple and saves him from
rotting in the darkness of ignorance in this material world is a true guru.
TEXT 17
MAF उवाच
अहं ते पुत्रकामस्य पुत्रदोऽस्म्यङ्धिरा 39 ।
एष ब्रह्मसुतः साक्षान्नारदो WEF: ॥१७॥
Sri-angira uvaca
aha te putra-kamasya
putrado ’smy angira nrpa
esa brahma-sutah saksan
narado bhagavan rsih
Sri-angirah uvaca—the great sage Angira said; aham—I; te—of you;
putra-kamasya—desiring to have a son; putra-dah—the giver of the
son; asmi—am; angirah—Angira Rsi; nrpa—O King; esah—this;
brahma-sutah—the son of Lord Brahma; saksat—directly; naradah—
Narada Muni; bhagavan—the most powerful; rsih—sage.
TRANSLATION
Angira said: My dear King, when you desired to have a son, I ap-
proached you. Indeed, I am the same Angira Rsi who gave you this
son. As for this rsi, he is the great sage Narada, the direct son of
Lord Brahma.
TEXTS 18-19
इत्थं त्वां पुत्रशोकेन मग्रं तमसि दुस्तरे ।
अतददैमनुस्यरत्य महापुरुषगोचरम्‌ ॥१८॥
-
अनुग्रहाय भवतः प्राप्तावात्रामिह प्रभो ।
- = -
ब्रह्मण्यो भगवद्धक्तो नाप्रासादितुमहसि ।१९॥


--- Page 73 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
ittharn tvarh putra-$okena
magnari tamasi dustare
atad-arham anusmrtya
mahapurusa-gocaram
anugrahaya bhavatah
praptav avam iha prabho
brahmanyo bhagavad-bhakto
navasaditurm arhasi
ittham—in this way; tvdm—you; putra-Sokena—because of grief at
the death of your son; magnam—merged; tamasi—in darkness;
dustare—insurmountable; a-tat-arham—unsuitable for a person like
you; anusmrtya—remembering; maha-purusa—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; gocaram—who are advanced in understanding;
anugrahaya—just to show favor; bhavatah—toward you; praptau—ar-
rived; avam—we two; tha—in this place; prabho—O King;
brahmanyah—one who is situated in the Supreme Absolute Truth;
bhagavat-bhaktah—an advanced devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; na—not; avasaditum—to lament; arhasi—you deserve.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, you are an advanced devotee of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. To be absorbed in lamentation for the loss of
something material is unsuitable for a person like you. Therefore
we have both come to relieve you from this false lamentation,
which is due to your being merged in the darkness of ignorance.
For those who are advanced in spiritual knowledge to be affected
by material loss and gain is not at all desirable.
PURPORT
Several words in this verse are very important. The word maha-
purusa refers to advanced devotees and also to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Maha means “‘the supreme,” and purusa means “person.”
One who always engages in the service of the Supreme Lord is called
maha-paurusika. Sukadeva Gosvami and Maharaja Pariksit are some-


--- Page 74 ---
Text 20] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 69
times addressed as maha-paurusika. A devotee should always aspire to
engage in the service of advanced devotees. As Srila Narottama dasa
Thakura has sung:

tandera carana sevi bhakta-sane vasa

Jjaname janame haya, ei abhilasa
A devotee should always aspire to live in the association of advanced
devotees and engage in the service of the Lord through the parampara
system. One should serve the mission of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
through the instructions of the great Gosvamis of Vrndavana. This is
called tarndera carana sevi. While serving the lotus feet of the Gosvamis,
one should live in the association of devotees (bhakta-sane vasa). This is
the business of a devotee. A devotee should not aspire for material profit
or lament for material loss. When Angira Rsi and Narada saw that
Maharaja Citraketu, an advanced devotee, had fallen in the darkness of
ignorance and was lamenting for the material body of his son, by their
causeless mercy they came to advise him so that he could be saved from
this ignorance.

Another significant word is brahmanya. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is sometimes addressed by the prayer namo brahmanya-
devaya, which offers obeisances unto the Lord because He is served by
the devotees. Therefore this verse states, brahmamnyo bhagavad-bhakto
navasaditum arhasi. This is the symptom of an advanced devotee.
Brahma-bhitah prasannatma. For a devotee—an advanced, self-
realized soul —there is no cause for material jubilation or lamentation.
He is always transcendental to conditional life.

TEXT 20
EY + .
तदव ते परं ज्ञानं ददामि गृहमागतः |
ज्ञात्वान्यामिनिवेश्ं ते पुत्रमेव ददाम्यहम्‌ ॥२०॥
tadaiva te parari jiianarn
dadami grham agatah
JjAatvanyabhinivesarn te
putram eva dadamy aham


--- Page 75 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
tada—then: eva—indeed: te—unto you: param —transcendental;
Jjaanam—knowledge: dadami—I would have delivered: grham—to
your home: dgatah—came: jiatva—knowing: anya-abhinivesam—ab-
sorption in something else (in material things): te—your; putram—a
son: eva—only: dadami—gave: aham—I.
TRANSLATION
When 1 first came to your home, I could have given you the
supreme transcendental knowledge, but when I saw that your
mind was absorbed in material things, I gave you only a son, who
caused you jubilation and lamentation.
TEXTS 21-23
a - Q
अधुना gh तापो मवतेवानुमूयते ।
. = 6
एवं दारा गृहा रायो विविधेस्वय सम्पद्‌ ॥२१॥
शब्दादयश्च विषयाश्चला राज्यविभूतयः |
रा | 9 ० = ्
मही राज्यं बं कोषो भ्रत्यामात्यसुहजनाः ॥२२॥
सवेऽपि शरसेनेमे शोकमोहमयार्तिदाः |
गन्धवेनगरप्रस्याः खममायामनोरथाः ॥२३॥
८0710 putrinarm tapo
bhavataivanubhityate
evar dara grha rayo
vividhaisvarya-sampadah
Sabdadayas ca visayas
cala rajya-vibhitayah
mahi rajyari bala koso
bhrtyamatya-suhrj-janah
sarve ‘pi Siraseneme
Soka-moha-bhayartidah
gandharva-nagara-prakhyah
svapna-maya-manorathah


--- Page 76 ---
Text 23] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 71

adhunda—at the present moment; putrinam—of persons who have
children; tapah—the tribulation; bhavata—by you; eva—indeed;
anubhiiyate—is experienced; evam—in this way; darah—good wife;
grhah—residence; rayah—riches; vividha—various; aisvarya—opu-
lences; sampadah—prosperities; $abda-adayah—sound and so on; ca—
and; visayah—the objects of sense gratification; caldh—temporary; ra-
Jya—of the kingdom: vibhiitayah—opulences; mahi—land; rajyam—
kingdom; balam—strength; kosah—treasury:  bhrtya—servants:
amatya—ministers;  suhrt-janah—allies; sarve—all: api —indeed:
surasena—O King of Surasena; ime—these; Soka—of lamentation:
moha—of illusion; bhaya—of fear; arti—and distress; dah—givers;
gandharva-nagara-prakhyah—headed by the illusory sight of a
gandharva-nagara, a big palace within the forest; svapna—dreams:
maya —illusions; manorathah—and concoctions of the mind.

TRANSLATION

My dear King, now you are actually experiencing the misery of a
person who has sons and daughters. O King, owner of the state of
Siirasena, one’s wife, his house, the opulence of his kingdom, and
his various other opulences and objects of sense perception are all
the same in that they are temporary. One’s kingdom, military
power, treasury, servants, ministers, friends and relatives are all
causes of fear, illusion, lamentation and distress. They are like a
gandharva-nagara, a nonexistent palace that one imagines to exist
in the forest. Because they are impermanent, they are no better
than illusions, dreams and mental concoctions.

PURPORT

This verse describes the entanglement of material existence. In ma-
terial existence, the living entity possesses many things —the material
body. children, wife and so on (dehapatya-kalatradisu). One may think
that these will give him protection, but that is impossible. In spite of all
these possessions, the spirit soul has to give up his present situation and
accept another. The next situation may be unfavorable, but even if it is
favorable, one must give it up and again accept another body. In this
way, one’s tribulation in material existence continues. A sane man


--- Page 77 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
should be perfectly aware that these things will never be able to give him
happiness. One must be situated in his spiritual identity and eternally
serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead as a devotee. Angira Rsi and
Narada Muni gave this instruction to Maharaja Citraketu.
TEXT 24
=
TAF विनार्थेन न TH मनोभवाः ।
© - = |
ESE (BG नानाकर्षाणि मनसाऽमवन्‌ |।২৩।।
dr$yamana vinarthena
na driyante manobhavah
karmabhir dhyayato nana-
karmani manaso ’bhavan
drsyamanah—being perceived; vina—without; arthena—substance
or reality; na—not; driyante—are seen; manobhavah—creations of
mental concoction; karmabhih—by fruitive activities; dhyayatah—
meditating upon; ndnd—various; karmani—fruitive activities;
manasah—from the mind; abhavan—appear.
TRANSLATION
These visible objects like wife, children and property are like
dreams and mental concoctions. Actually what we see has no per-
manent existence. It is sometimes seen and sometimes not. Only
because of our past actions do we create such mental concoctions,
and because of these concoctions, we perform further activities.
PURPORT
Everything material is a mental concoction because it is sometimes
visible and sometimes not. At night when we dream of tigers and snakes,
they are not actually present, but we are afraid because we are affected
by what we envision in our dreams. Everything material is like a dream
because it actually has no permanent existence.
Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura writes as follows in his commen-
tary: arthena vyaghra-sarpadina vinaiva drSyamanah svapnadi-bharige
sati na drSyante tad evam daradayo ’vastava-vastu-bhitah svapnadayo


--- Page 78 ---
Text 25] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 73
‘vastu-bhitas ca sarve manobhavah mano-vasana janyatvan
manobhavah. At night one dreams of tigers and snakes, and while
dreaming he actually sees them, but as soon as the dream is broken they
no longer exist. Similarly, the material world is a creation of our mental
concoctions. We have come to this material world to enjoy material
resources, and by mental concoction we discover many, many objects of
enjoyment because our minds are absorbed in material things. This is
why we receive various bodies. According to our mental concoctions we
work in various ways, desiring various achievements, and by nature and
the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (karmana daiva-
netrena) we get the advantages we desire. Thus we become more and
more involved with material concoctions. This is the reason for our
suffering in the material world. By one kind of activity we create
another, and they are all products of our mental concoctions.
TEXT 25
ह oN =, न ~ ul
अयं हि देहिनो देहो द्र्यज्ञानक्रियात्मकः |
देहिनो विविधङ्कशसन्तापङृदुदाहतः nul
ayari hi dehino deho
dravya-jiana-kriyatmakah
dehino vividha-klesa-
santapa-krd udahrtah

ayam—this; hi—certainly; dehinah—of the living entity; dehah—
body; dravya-jiana-kriya-atmakah—consisting of the material ele-
ments, the senses for acquiring knowledge, and the acting senses;
dehinah—of the living entity; vividha—various; klesa—sufferings;
santapa—and of pains; krt—the cause; udahrtah—is declared.

TRANSLATION

The living entity in the bodily conception of life is absorbed in
the body, which is a combination of the physical elements, the five
senses for gathering knowledge, and the five senses of action,
along with the mind. Through the mind the living entity suffers


--- Page 79 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15

three kinds of tribulations—adhibhautika, adhidaivika and

adhyatmika. Therefore this body is a source of all miseries.
PURPORT

In the Fifth Canto (5.5.4), while instructing his sons, Rsabhadeva said,
asann api klesada asa dehah: the body, although temporary, is the cause
of all the miseries of material existence. As already discussed in the pre-
vious verse. the entire material creation is based on mental concoction.
The mind sometimes induces us to think that if we purchase an
automobile we can enjoy the physical elements, such as earth, water, air
and fire, combined in forms of iron, plastic, petrol and so on. Working
with the five material elements (parica-bhiitas), as well as with our five
knowledge-gathering senses like the eyes, ears and tongue and our five
active senses like the hands and legs, we become involved in the material
condition. Thus we are subjected to the tribulations known as adhyat-
mika, adhidaivika and adhibhautika. The mind is the center because the
mind creates all these things. As soon as the material object is struck,
however, the mind is affected, and we suffer. For example, with the ma-
terial elements, the working senses and the knowledge-gathering senses
we create a very nice car, and when the car is accidentally smashed in a
collision, the mind suffers, and through the mind the living entity
suffers.

The fact is that the living entity, while concocting with the mind, cre-
ates the material condition. Because matter is destructible, through the
material condition the living entity suffers. Otherwise, the living entity
is detached from all material conditions. When one comes to the Brah-
man platform, the platform of spiritual life, fully understanding that he
is a spiritual soul (aham brahmasmi), he is no longer affected by lamen-
tation or hankering. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (18.54):

brahma-bhitah prasanndtma
na Socati na kariksati
“One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have
anything.”” Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita (15.7) the Lord says:


--- Page 80 ---
Text 26] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 75
mamaivariso jiva-loke
Jjiva-bhiitah sanatanah
manah-sasthanindriyani
prakrti-sthani karsati
“The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six
senses, which include the mind.” The living entity is actually part and
parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is unaffected by ma-
terial conditions, but because the mind (manah) is affected, the senses
are affected, and the living entity struggles for existence within this
material world.
TEXT 26
तसमात्‌ खस्थेन मनसा विमृश्य गतिमात्मनः |
2 N =
ইল धुवाथविश्म्भं त्यजोपशममाविश ॥२६॥
tasmat svasthena manasa
vimrsya gatim atmanah
dvaite dhruvartha-visrambham
tyajopasamam avisa
tasmmat—therefore; svasthena—with a careful; manasa —mind;
vimr§ya—considering; gatim—real position; atmanah—of yourself;
dvaite—in the duality; dhruva—as permanent; artha—object;
visrambham —belief; tyaja—give up; upasamam—a peaceful condi-
tion; avisa—take to.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O King Citraketu, carefully consider the position of
the atma. In other words, try to understand who you are —whether
body, mind or soul. Consider where you have come from, where
you are going after giving up this body, and why you are under the
control of material lamentation. Try to understand your real posi-
tion in this way, and then you will be able to give up your un-
necessary attachment. You will also be able to give up the belief


--- Page 81 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 15
that this material world, or anything not directly in touch with ser-
vice to Krsna, is eternal. Thus you will obtain peace.
PURPORT

The Krsna consciousness movement is factually endeavoring to bring
human society to a sober condition. Because of a misdirected civilization,
people are jumping in materialistic life like cats and dogs, performing all
sorts of abominable, sinful actions and becoming increasingly entangled.
The Krsna consciousness movement includes self-realization because one
is first directed by Lord Krsna to understand that one is not the body but
the owner of the body. When one understands this simple fact, he can
direct himself toward the goal of life. Because people are not educated in
terms of the goal of life, they are working like madmen and becoming
more and more attached to the material atmosphere. The misguided man
accepts the material condition as everlasting. One must give up his faith
in material things and give up attachment for them. Then one will be
sober and peaceful.

TEXT 27
श्रीनारद उवाच
एतां मन्त्रोपनिषदं प्रतीच्छ प्रयतो মদ |
০
यां धारयन्‌ सप्तरात्राद्‌ द्रष्टा सङ्कषणं विधुम्‌ ॥२७॥
§ri-narada uvdca
etarh mantropanisadari
praticcha prayato mama
yarn dhdrayan sapta-ratrad
drasta sankarsanar vibhum

§ri-naradah uvaca—Sri Narada Muni said; etam—this; mantra-
upanisadam— Upanisad in the form of a mantra by which one can
achieve the highest goal of life; praticcha—accept; prayatah—with
great attention (after finishing the funeral ceremony of your dead son);
mama —from me; yam—which; dharayan—accepting; sapta-ratrat—
after seven nights; drasta—you will see; sarikarsanam—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sankarsana; vibhum—the Lord.


--- Page 82 ---
Text 28] Narada and Angira Instruct King Citraketu 77
TRANSLATION
The great sage Narada continued: My dear King, attentively
receive from me a mantra, which is most auspicious. After accept-
ing it from me, in seven nights you will be able to see the Lord face
to face.
TEXT 28
यत्पादमूलघरुपख॒त्य नरेन्द्र पूर्वे
शर्वादयो भ्रममिमं द्वितयं विज्य |
सयस्तदीयमतुठानधिकं महित्वं
< . [>
प्रापुर्भवानपि परं नचिरादुपैति ॥२८॥
yat-pada-milam upasrtya narendra [00706
Sarvadayo bhramam imarh dvitayar visrjya
sadyas tadiyam atulanadhikarih mahitvarn
prapur bhavdn api parari na cirad upaiti
yat-pada-mizlam—the lotus feet of whom (Lord Sankarsana);
upasrtya—obtaining shelter at; nara-indra—O King; pirve—formerly;
sarva-adayah—great demigods like Lord Mahadeva; bhramam—illu-
sion; imam —this; dvitayam—consisting of duality; visrjya—giving up;
sadyah—immediately; tadtyam—His; atula—unequaled; anadhi-
kam —unsurpassed; mahitvam—glories; prapuh—achieved; bhavan—
yourself; api—also; param —the supreme abode; na—not; cirat—after
a long time; upaiti—will obtain.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, in former days Lord Siva and other demigods
took shelter of the lotus feet of Sankarsana. Thus they im-
mediately got free from the illusion of duality and achieved un-
equaled and unsurpassed glories in spiritual life. You will very
soon attain that very same position.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fifteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Saints Narada and
Argira Instruct King Citraketu.”


--- Page 83 ---
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
King Citraketu Meets the Supreme Lord

As related in this chapter, Citraketu was able to talk with his dead son
and hear from him the truth of life. When Citraketu was appeased, the
great sage Narada gave him a mantra, and by chanting this mantra
Citraketu found shelter at the lotus feet of Sankarsana.

The living entity is eternal. Thus he has neither birth nor death (ra
hanyate hanyamane Sarire). According to the reactions of one’s fruitive
activities, one takes birth in various species of life among the birds.
beasts, trees, human beings, demigods and so on, thus rotating through
various bodies. For a certain period of time, one receives a particular
type of body as a son or father in a false relationship. All our relation-
ships in this material world with friends, relatives or enemies consist of
duality, in which one feels happy and distressed on the basis of illusion.
The living entity is actually a spiritual soul who is part and parcel of God
and has nothing to do with relationships in the world of duality.
Therefore Narada Muni advised Citraketu not to lament for his so-
called dead son.

After hearing instructions from their dead child, Citraketu and his
wife could understand that all relationships in this material world are
causes of misery. The queens who had administered poison to the son of
Krtadyuti were very much ashamed. They atoned for the sinful act of
killing a child and gave up their aspiration to have sons. Thereafter.
Narada Muni chanted prayers to Narayana, who exists as catur-vyitha,
and instructed Citraketu about the Supreme Lord, who creates, main-
tains and annihilates everything and who is the master of the material
nature. After instructing King Citraketu in this way, he returned to
Brahmaloka. These instructions about the Absolute Truth are called the
maha-vidya. After being initiated by Narada Muni, King Citraketu
chanted the maha-vidya, and after one week he attained the presence of
Lord Sankarsana, who was surrounded by the four Kumairas. The Lord

79


--- Page 84 ---
80 = Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
was nicely dressed in bluish garments, with a helmet and ornaments of
gold. His face appeared very happy. In the presence of Lord Sankarsana,
Citraketu offered his obeisances and began to offer prayers.

In his prayers, Citraketu said that millions of universes rest in the
pores of Sankarsana, who is limitless, having no beginning and end. The
Lord is well known to the devotees for His eternity. The difference be-
tween worshiping the Lord and worshiping the demigods is that the
worshiper of the Lord also becomes eternal, whereas whatever benedic-
tions one can get from the demigods are impermanent. Unless one be-
comes a devotee, one cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

After Citraketu finished his prayers, the unlimited Supreme Lord ex-
plained knowledge of Himself to Citraketu.

TEXT 1
श्रीकादरायणिरुगाक
अथ॒ देवऋषी राजन्‌ सम्परेतं TI |
ZARA होवाच ज्ञातीनामनुज्लोचताम्‌ ।। १ ।।
sri-badarayanir uvaca
atha deva-rst rajan
samparetam nrpatmajam
darsayitveti hovaca
Jjiiatinam anusocatam

sri-badarayanik uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; atha—thus;
deva-rsih—the great sage Narada; rajan—O King; samparetam —dead;
nrpa-atmajam—the son of the King; darsayitva—making visible; iti—
thus; ha—indeed; uvdca—explained; jiatindm—to all the relatives;
anusocatam—who were lamenting.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King Pariksit, by his mystic
power the great sage Narada brought the dead son into the vision
of all the lamenting relatives and then spoke as follows.


--- Page 85 ---
Text 3] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 81
TEXT 2
श्रीनारद उवार
जीवात्मन्‌ पश्य भद्रं ते मातरं पितरं च ते ।
सुदो बान्धवास्तप्ताः चा त्वत्कृतया श्रञ्चम्‌ NR
sri-narada uvaca
jvatman pasya bhadrar te
matarari pitaram ca te
suhrdo bandhavas taptah
Suca tvat-krtaya bhrsam
§ri-naradah uvaca—Sri Narada Muni said; Jjiva-atman—O living en-
tity; paSya—just see; bhadram—good fortune; te—unto you;
mataram—the mother; pitaram—the father; ca—and; te—of you;
suhrdah—friends; bandhavah—relatives; taptah—aggrieved; Suca—
by lamentation; tvat-krtaya—because of you; bhriam—very greatly.
TRANSLATION
Sri Narada Muni said: O living entity, all good fortune unto you.
Just see your father and mother. All your friends and relatives are
overwhelmed with grief because of your passing away.
TEXT 3
FOR অমাবিহয शेषमायुः FEE: |
FET मोगान्‌ पिदप्रतानधितिष् gama ॥ ২ ॥
kalevaram svam avisya
Sesam ayuh suhrd-vrtah
bhuriksva bhogan pitr-prattan
adhitistha nrpasanam
kalevaram —body; svam—your own; avi§ya—entering; Sesam—the
balance; ayuh—duration of life; suhrt-vrtah—surrounded by your
friends and relatives; bhuriksva—just enjoy; bhogan—all enjoyable opu-
lences; pitr—by your father; prattan—awarded; adhitistha—accept;
nrpa-asanam—the throne of the king.


--- Page 86 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Because you died untimely, the balance of your lifetime still
remains. Therefore you may reenter your body and enjoy the
remainder of your life, surrounded by your friends and relatives.
Accept the royal throne and all the opulences given by your father.
TEXT 4
जीव उवाच
कसिज्ञन्मन्यमी मद्यं पितरो मातरोऽभवन्‌ |
कम॑मिर्राम्यमाणख देवति्॑डनुयोनिषु ॥ ४॥
Jiva uvaca
kasmin janmany ami mahyam
pitaro mataro ’bhavan
karmabhir bhramyamanasya
deva-tiryan-nr-yonisu
Jjivah uvaca—the living entity said; kasmin—in which; janmani—
birth; ami—all those; mahyam—to me; pitarah—fathers; matarah—
mothers; abhavan—were; karmabhih—by the results of fruitive action;
bhramyamanasya—who am wandering; deva-tiryak—of the demigods
and the lower animals; nr—and of the human species; yonisu—in the
wombs.
TRANSLATION
By the mystic power of Narada Muni, the living entity reentered
his dead body for a short time and spoke in reply to Narada Muni’s
request. He said: According to the results of my fruitive activities,
I, the living being, transmigrate from one body to another, some-
times going to the species of the demigods, sometimes to the
species of lower animals, sometimes among the vegetables, and
sometimes to the human species. Therefore, in which birth were
these my mother and father? No one is actually my mother and
father. How can I accept these two people as my parents?


--- Page 87 ---
Text 5] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 83
PURPORT

Here it is made clear that the living being enters a material body that
is like a machine created by the five gross elements of material nature
(earth, water, fire, air and sky) and the three subtle elements (mind, in-
telligence and ego). As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, there are two sepa-
rate identities, called the inferior and superior natures, which both
belong to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. According to the results
of a living entity’s fruitive actions, he is forced to enter the material ele-
ments in different types of bodies.

This time the living entity was supposed to have been the son of
Maharaja Citraketu and Queen Krtadyuti because according to the laws
of nature he had entered a body made by the King and Queen. Actually,
however, he was not their son. The living entity is the son of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and because he wants to enjoy this ma-
terial world, the Supreme Lord gives him a chance to enter various
bodies. The living entity has no true relationship with the material body
he gets from his material father and mother. He is part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord, but he is allowed to go through different bodies. The
body created by the so-called father and mother actually has nothing to
do with its so-called creators. Therefore the living entity flatly denied
that Maharaja Citraketu and his wife were his father and mother.

TEXT 5
बन्धुज्ञात्यरिमध्यस्थमित्रोदासीनविद्धिषः ।
स्व एव हि सर्वेषां भवन्ति कमशो मिथः ॥ ५॥
bandhu-jraty-ari-madhyastha-
mitrodasina-vidvisah
sarva eva hi sarvesarm
bhavanti kramaso mithah

bandhu—friends; jiati—family members; ari—enemies; madhya-
stha—neutrals; mitra—well-wishers; udasina—indifferent; vidvisah—
or envious persons; sarve—all; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; sarvesam—
of all; bhavanti—become; kramasah—gradually; mithah—of one
another.


--- Page 88 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16

TRANSLATION

In this material world, which advances like a river that carries
away the living entity, all people become friends, relatives and
enemies in due course of time. They also act neutrally, they medi-
ate, they despise one another, and they act in many other relation-
ships. Nonetheless, despite these various transactions, no one is
permanently related.
PURPORT
It is our practical experience in this material world that the same per-
son who is one’s friend today becomes one’s enemy tomorrow. Our rela-
tionships as friends or enemies, family men or outsiders, are actually the
results of our different dealings. Citraketu Maharaja was lamenting for
his son, who was now dead, but he could have considered the situation
otherwise. “This living entity,” he could have thought, “was my enemy
in my last life, and now, having appeared as my son, he is prematurely
leaving just to give me pain and agony.” Why should he not consider his
dead son his former enemy and instead of lamenting be jubilant because
of an enemy’s death? As stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.27), prakrteh
kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah: factually everything is happen-
ing because of our association with the modes of material nature.
Therefore one who is my friend today in association with the mode of
goodness may be my enemy tomorrow in association with the modes of
passion and ignorance. As the modes of material nature work, in illusion
we accept others as friends, enemies, sons or fathers in terms of the reac-
tions of different dealings under different conditions.
TEXT 6
यथा वस्तूनि पण्यानि हेमादीनि ततस्ततः ।
© +
पर्यटन्ति नरेष्वेवं जीवो योनिषु कठंषु ॥ ६॥
वद vastini panyani
hemadini tatas tatah
paryatanti naresv evar
Jivo yonisu kartrsu


--- Page 89 ---
Text 6] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 85
yatha—just as; vastiini—commodities; panyani—meant for trading;
hema-adini—such as gold; tatah tatah—from here to there; parya-
tanti—move about; neresu—among men; evam—in this way; jivah—
the living entity; yonisu—in different species of life; kartrsu—in dif-
ferent material fathers.
TRANSLATION

Just as gold and other commodities are continually transferred
from one place to another in due course of purchase and sale, so
the living entity, as a result of his fruitive activities, wanders
throughout the entire universe, being injected into various bodies
in different species of life by one kind of father after another.

PURPORT

It has already been explained that Citraketu’s son was his enemy in a
past life and had now appeared as his son just to give him more severe
pain. Indeed, the untimely death of the son caused severe lamentation
for the father. One may put forward the argument, “If the King’s son
was his enemy, how could the King have so much affection for him?” In
answer, the example is given that when someone’s wealth falls into the
hands of his enemy, the money becomes the enemy’s friend. Then the
enemy can use it for his own purposes. Indeed, he can even use it to
harm its previous owner. Therefore the money belongs neither to the one
party nor to the other. The money is always money, but in different
situations it can be used as an enemy or a friend.

As explained in Bhagavad-gita, it is not by any father or mother that
the living entity is given his birth. The living entity is a completely
separate identity from the so-called father and mother. By the laws of
nature, the living entity is forced to enter the semen of a father and be
injected into the womb of the mother. He is not in control of selecting
what kind of father he will accept. Prakrteh kriyamanani: the laws of
nature force him to go to different fathers and mothers, just like a con-
sumer commodity that is purchased and sold. Therefore the so-called
relationship of father and son is an arrangement of prakrti, or nature. It
has no meaning, and therefore it is called illusion.


--- Page 90 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
The same living entity sometimes takes shelter of an animal father and
mother and sometimes a human father and mother. Sometimes he ac-
cepts a father and mother among the birds, and sometimes he accepts a
demigod father and mother. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore says:
brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
Harassed life after life by the laws of nature, the living entity wanders
throughout the entire universe in different planets and different species
of life. Somehow or other, if he is fortunate enough, he comes in touch
with a devotee who reforms his entire life. Then the living entity goes
back home, back to Godhead. Therefore it is said:
Janame janame sabe pita mata paya
krsna guru nahi mile baja hari ei
In the transmigration of the soul through different bodies, everyone, in
every form of life—be it human, animal, tree or demigod —gets a father
and mother. This is not very difficult. The difficulty is to obtain a bona
fide spiritual master and Krsna. Therefore the duty of a human being is
to capture the opportunity to come in touch with Krsna’s representative,
the bona fide spiritual master. Under the guidance of the spiritual
master, the spiritual father, one can return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 7
LN
नित्यस्यार्थस्य सम्बन्धो दयनित्यो दश्यते सुषु ।
= | 4
यावद्यस्य हि सम्बन्धो ममत्वं तावदेव हि ॥ ७॥
nityasyarthasya sambandho
hy anityo drsyate nrsu
yavad yasya hi sambandho
mamatvarn tavad eva hi
nityasya—of the eternal; arthasya—thing; sambandhah—relation-
ship; hi—indeed; anityah—temporary; drSyate—is seen; nrsu—in


--- Page 91 ---
Text 8] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 87
human society; yavat—as long as; yasya—of whom; hi—indeed; sam-
bandhah —relationship; mamatvam—ownership; tavat—that long;
eva—indeed; hi—certainly.
TRANSLATION

A few living entities are born in the human species, and others
are born as animals. Although both are living entities, their rela-
tionships are impermanent. An animal may remain in the custody
of a human being for some time, and then the same animal may be
transferred to the possession of other human beings. As soon as
the animal goes away, the former proprietor no longer has a sense
of ownership. As long as the animal is in his possession he cer-
tainly has an affinity for it, but as soon as the animal is sold, the
affinity is lost.

PURPORT

Aside from the fact that the soul transmigrates from one body to
another, even in this life the relationships between living entities are im-
permanent, as exemplified in this verse. The son of Citraketu was named
Harsaoka. or “jubilation and lamentation.” The living entity is certainly
eternal, but because he is covered by a temporary dress, the body, his
eternity is not observed. Dehino ’smin yatha dehe kaumararm yauvanarm
Jara: “The embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood
to youth to old age.” Thus the bodily dress is impermanent. The living
entity, however, is permanent. As an animal is transferred from one
owner to another, the living entity who was the son of Citraketu lived as
his son for some time, but as soon as he was transferred to another body.
the affectionate relationship was broken. As stated in the example given
in the previous verse, when one has a commodity in his hands he con-
siders it his, but as soon as it is transferred it becomes someone else’s
commodity. Then one no longer has a relationship with it; he has no
affection for it, nor does he lament for it.

TEXT 8
gd योनिगतो जीवः स॒ fen fag
यावत्रोपलम्येत तावत्खत्वं हि तस तत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 92 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
evari yoni-gato jivah
sa nityo niraharkrtah
yavad yatropalabhyeta
tavat svatvari hi tasya tat

evam—thus; yoni-gatah—being within a specific species of life;
jivah—the living entity; sah—he; nityah—eternal; nirahankrtah—
without identification with the body; yavat—as long as; yatra—where;
upalabhyeta—he may be found; t@vat—that long; svatvam—the con-
cept of self; hi—indeed; tasya—of him; tat—that.

TRANSLATION

Even though one living entity becomes connected with another
because of a relationship based on bodies that are perishable, the
living entity is eternal. Actually it is the body that is born or lost,
not the living entity. One should not accept that the living entity
takes birth or dies. The living being actually has no relationship
with so-called fathers and mothers. As long as he appears as the
son of a certain father and mother as a result of his past fruitive ac-
tivities, he has a connection with the body given by that father and
mother. Thus he falsely accepts himself as their son and acts affec-
tionately. After he dies, however, the relationship is finished.
Under these circumstances, one should not be falsely involved
with jubilation and lamentation.

PURPORT

When the living entity lives within the material body, he falsely
thinks that he is the body, although actually he is not. His relationship
with his body and his so-called father and mother are false, illusory con-
ceptions. These illusions continue as long as one is not enlightened about
the situation of the living entity.

TEXT 9
एष नित्योऽन्ययः घ्म एष सर्वाश्रयः खक्‌
आत्ममायागुणेवि मात्मानं सृजते प्रथः ॥ ९ ॥


--- Page 93 ---
Text 9] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 89
esa nityo 'vyayah sitksma
esa sarvasrayah svadrk
atmamaya-gunair visvam
atmanarm srjate prabhuh
esah—this living entity; nityah—eternal; avyayah—imperishable;
sitksmah—very, very fine (not seen by the material eyes); esah—this
living entity; sarva-asrayah—the cause of different types of bodies; sva-
drk—self-effulgent; atma-maya-gunaih—by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead’s modes of material nature; visvam—this material world; at-
manam—himself; srjate—appears; prabhuh—the master.
TRANSLATION
The living entity is eternal and imperishable because he actually
has no beginning and no end. He never takes birth or dies. He is
the basic principle of all types of bodies, yet he does not belong to
the bodily category. The living being is so sublime that he is equal
in quality to the Supreme Lord. Nonetheless, because he is ex-
tremely small, he is prone to be illusioned by the external energy,
and thus he creates various bodies for himself according to his
different desires.
PURPORT
In this verse the philosophy of acintya-bhedabheda—simultaneous
oneness and difference —is described. The living entity is eternal (nitya)
like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the difference is that the
Supreme Lord is the greatest, no one being equal to or greater than Him,
whereas the living entity is siksma, or extremely small. The sastra de-
scribes that the magnitude of the living entity is one ten-thousandth the
size of the tip of a hair. The Supreme Lord is all-pervading (andantara-
stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham). Relatively, if the living entity is ac-
cepted as the smallest, there should naturally be inquiry about the
greatest. The greatest is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the
smallest is the living entity.
Another peculiar characteristic of the jiva is that he becomes covered
by maya. Atmamaya-gunaih: he is prone to being covered by the
Supreme Lord’s illusory energy. The living entity is responsible for his


--- Page 94 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
conditional life in the material world, and therefore he is described as
prabhu (“the master’’). If he likes he can come to this material world,
and if he likes he can return home, back to Godhead. Because he wanted
to enjoy this material world, the Supreme Personality of Godhead gave
him a material body through the agency of the material energy. As the
Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gita (18.61):
iSvarah sarva-bhitanarn
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhitani
yantraridhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.” The Supreme Lord gives the liv-
ing entity a chance to enjoy in this material world as he desires, but He
openly expresses His own desire that the living entity give up all material
aspirations, fully surrender unto Him and return home, back to
Godhead.

The living entity is the smallest (siksma). Jiva Gosvami says in this
connection that the living entity within the body is extremely difficult for
materialistic scientists to find, although we understand from authorities
that the living entity is within the body. The body is different from the
living entity.

TEXT 10
न हछयस्यासितिप्रियः कथिन्नाप्रियः खः परोऽपिवा।
~ ৫৬
एकः सर्वधियां ge कतु णां गुणदोषयोः ॥१०॥
na hy asyasti priyah kascin
napriyah svah paro ‘pi va
ekah sarva-dhiyam drasta
kartinam guna-dosayoh

na—not; hi—indeed; asya—to the living entity; asti—there is;
priyah—dear; kascit—someone; na—not; apriyah—not dear; svah—
own; parah—other; api—also; wv@—or; ekah—the one; sarva-


--- Page 95 ---
Text 10] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 91
dhiyam—of the varieties of intelligence; drasta—the seer; kartfnam—
of the performers; guna-dosayoh—of right and wrong activities.
TRANSLATION
For this living entity, no one is dear, nor is anyone unfavorable.
He makes no distinction between that which is his own and that
which belongs to anyone else. He is one without a second; in other
words, he is not affected by friends and enemies, well-wishers or
mischief-mongers. He is only an observer, a witness, of the
different qualities of men.
PURPORT
As explained in the previous verse, the living entity has the same
qualities as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but he has them in
minute quantities because he is a small particle (sizksma) whereas the
Supreme Lord is all-pervading and great. For the Supreme Lord there
are no friends, enemies or relatives, for He is completely free from all
the disqualifications of ignorance that characterize the conditioned souls.
On the other hand, He is extremely kind and favorable to His devotees,
and He is not at all satisfied with persons who are envious of His devo-
tees. As the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gita (9.29):
samo ham sarva-bhiitesu
na me dvesyo sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu mari bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham
“I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a
friend to him.” The Supreme Lord has no enemy or friend, but He is in-
clined toward a devotee who always engages in His devotional service.
Similarly, elsewhere in the Gita (16.19) the Lord says:
tan aham dvisatah kriran
sarisaresu naradhaman
ksipamy ajasram asubhan
asurisv eva yonisu


--- Page 96 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
“Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among
men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various
demoniac species of life.”” The Lord is extremely antagonistic toward
those who are envious of His devotees. To protect His devotees, the Lord
sometimes has to kill their enemies. For example, to protect Prahlada
Maharaja, the Lord had to kill his enemy Hiranyakasipu, although
Hiranyakasipu attained salvation because of being killed by the Lord.
Since the Lord is the witness of everyone’s activities, He witnesses the ac-
tions of the enemies of His devotees, and He is inclined to punish them.
In other cases, however, He simply witnesses what the living entities do
and gives the results of one’s sinful or pious actions.
TEXT 11
ARE आत्मा हि गुणं न id न क्रियाफलम्‌ |
उदासीनवदासीनः परादरटगीश्वरः 12201
nadatta atma hi gunar
na dosarmh na kriya-phalam
udasinavad dasinah
paravara-drg iSvarah

na—not; adatte—accepts; atma—the Supreme Lord; hi—indeed;
gunam—happiness; na—not; dosam—unhappiness; na—nor; kriya-
phalam—the result of any fruitive activity; udasina-vat—exactly like a
neutral man; asinah—sitting (in the core of the heart); para-avara-
drk—seeing the cause and effect; varah—the Supreme Lord.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord [ब्व], the creator of cause and effect, does
not accept the happiness and distress that result from fruitive ac-
tions. He is completely independent of having to accept a material
body, and because He has no material body, He is always neutral.
The living entities, being part and parcel of the Lord, possess His
qualities in a minute quantity. Therefore one should not be
affected by lamentation.


--- Page 97 ---
Text 12] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 93
PURPORT

The conditioned soul has friends and enemies. He is affected by the
good qualities and the faults of his position. The Supreme Lord,
however, is always transcendental. Because He is the ष्ठ, the supreme
controller, He is not affected by duality. It may therefore be said that He
sits in the core of everyone’s heart as the neutral witness of the causes
and effects of one’s activities, good and bad. We should also understand
that uddsina, neutral, does not mean that He takes no action. Rather, it
means that He is not personally affected. For example, a court judge is
neutral when two opposing parties appear before him, but he still takes
action as the case warrants. To become completely neutral, indifferent, to
material activities, we should simply seek shelter at the lotus feet of the
supreme neutral person.

Maharaja Citraketu was advised that remaining neutral in such trying
circumstances as the death of one’s son is impossible. Nevertheless, since
the Lord knows how to adjust everything, the best course is to depend
upon Him and do one’s duty in devotional service to the Lord. In all
circumstances, one should be undisturbed by duality. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (2.47):

karmany evadhikaras te
ma phalesu kadacana
ma karma-phala-hetur bhir
ma te sango stv akarmani
“You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not en-
titled to the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be the cause of
the results of your activities, and never be attached to not doing your
duty.” One should execute one’s devotional duty, and for the results of
one’s actions one should depend upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 12
श्रीबादरायणिर्वाचर
इतयुदीयं गतो जीवो ज्ञातयस्तस्य ते तदा ।
fafa gag: शोकं छिन््वारमसेदगङ्खलाम्‌ ।।१२॥


--- Page 98 ---
94 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
sri-badarayanir uvaca
ity udirya gato jivo
JAdtayas tasya te tada
vismita mumucuh Soka
chittvatma-sneha-srrikhalam
sri-badarayanih uviaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—in this way
udirya—speaking; gatah—went; jivah—the living entity (who had ap-
peared as the son of Maharaja Citraketu); jiiatayah—the relatives and
family members; tasya—of him; te—they; tada—at that time;
vismitah —being astonished; mumucuh—gave up; sokam —lamentation;
chittva—cutting off; atma-sneha—of affection due to a relationship;
Srrikhalam —the iron shackles.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: When the conditioned soul
[jiva] in the form of Maharaja Citraketu’s son had spoken in this
way and then left, Citraketu and the other relatives of the dead son
were all astonished. Thus they cut off the shackles of their affec-
tion, which was due to their relationship with him, and gave up
their lamentation.
TEXT 13
निहत्य ज्ञातयो ज्ञेरं कृत्वोचिताः क्रियाः ।
तत्यजुदुस्त्यजं स्नेहं शोकमोहमयार्तिदम्‌ 12310
nirhrtya jiiatayo jiater
dehari krtvocitah kriyah
tatyajur dustyajar snehari
soka-moha-bhayartidam
nirhrtya—removing; jidtayah—XKing Citraketu and all the other
relatives; jiateh—of the son; deham—the body; krtva—performing;
ucitah—suitable; kriyah—activities; tatyajuh—gave up; dustyajam—
very difficult to give up; sneham—affection; Soka —lamentation;
moha—illusion; bhaya—fear; arti—and distress; dam—giving.


--- Page 99 ---
Text 14] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 95
TRANSLATION
After the relatives had discharged their duties by performing
the proper funeral ceremonies and burning the dead child’s body,
they gave up the affection that leads to illusion, lamentation, fear
and pain. Such affection is undoubtedly difficult to give up, but
they gave it up very easily.
TEXT 14
TR fear बारहत्याहतप्रमाः |
ও Q
बालहत्याव्रतं चेसुनाह्मणेय॑न्निरूपितम्‌ |
TART महाराज खरन्त्यो दिजमाषितिम्‌ ॥१४॥
bala-ghnyo vriditas tatra
bala-hatya-hata-prabhah
bala-hatya-vratari cerur
brahmanair yan niripitam
yamunayarn maharaja
smarantyo dvija-bhasitam
bala-ghnyah—the killers of the child; vriditah—being very much
ashamed; tatra—there; bala-hatya—because of killing the child;
hata—having lost; prabhah—all bodily luster; bala-hatya-vratam—the
atonement for killing the child; ceruh—executed; brahmanaih—by the
priests; yat—which; nirapitam —described; yamunayam—at the River
Yamuna; maha-raja—0O King Pariksit; smarantyah—remembering;
dvija-bhasitam—the statement given by the brahmana.
TRANSLATION
Queen Krtyadyuti’s co-wives, who had poisoned the child, were
very much ashamed, and they lost all their bodily luster. While
lamenting, O King, they remembered the instructions of Angira
and gave up their ambition to bear children. Following the direc-
tions of the brahmanas, they went to the bank of the Yamuna,
where they bathed and atoned for their sinful activities.


--- Page 100 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
PURPORT

In this verse the word bala-hatya-hata-prabhah is to be particularly
noted. The practice of killing children has existed in human society for a
long time —since time immemorial —but in the days of yore it was very
rarely performed. At the present moment, however, in this age of Kali,
abortion —killing of the child within the womb —has become very com-
mon, and sometimes a child is even killed after birth. If a woman per-
forms such an abominable act, she gradually loses all her bodily luster
(bala-hatya-hata-prabhakh). It is also to be noted that the ladies who had
committed the sinful act of administering poison to the child were very
much ashamed, and according to the directions of the brahmanas, they
had to undergo atonement for killing the child. Any woman who has ever
performed such an infamously sinful act must atone for it, but no one
now is doing that. Under the circumstances, the women responsible must
suffer in this life and the next. Those who are sincere souls, after hearing
this incident, should refrain from such child-killing and should atone for
their sinful activities by taking to Krsna consciousness very seriously. If
one chants the Hare Krsna maha-mantra without offenses, all of one’s
sinful actions are surely atoned for immediately, but one should not com-
mit such deeds again, for that is an offense.

TEXT 15
स इत्थं प्रतिबुद्धात्मा चित्रकेतुदविंजोक्तिभिः |
गृदान्धद्ूपाच्िष्कान्तः सरःपङ्कादिव fa: nun
sa itthari pratibuddhatma
citraketur dvijoktibhih
grhandha-kipan niskrantah
sarah-pankad iva dvipah

sah—he; ittham—in this way; pratibuddha-atma—being fully aware
of spiritual knowledge; citraketuh—King Citraketu; dvija-uktibhih—by
the instructions of the perfect brahmanas (Angira and Narada Muni);
grha-andha-kipat—from the dark well of family life; niskrantah—
came out; sarah—of a lake or reservoir of water; pankat—from the
mud; iva—like; dvipah—an elephant.


--- Page 101 ---
Text 17] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 97
TRANSLATION
Thus enlightened by the instructions of the brahmanas Angira
and Narada, King Citraketu became fully aware of spiritual knowl-
edge. As an elephant becomes free from a muddy reservoir of
water, King Citraketu came out of the dark well of family life.
TEXT 16
कारिन्यां विधिवत्‌ खात्वा कृतपुण्यजलकरियः।
-
মীলীন संयतप्राणो ब्रह्मपुत्राववन्दत ॥१६।
kalindyar vidhivat snatva
krta-punya-jala-kriyah
maunena sarivyata-prano
brahma-putrav avandata
kalindyam—in the River Yamuna; vidhi-vat—according to prescribed
regulations; snatva—bathing; krta—performing; punpya—pious; jala-
kriyah—oblations by offering water; maunena —with gravity; saryata-
pranah—controlling the mind and senses; brahma-putrau—unto the
two sons of Lord Brahma (Angira and Narada); avandata—offered his
prayers and obeisances.
TRANSLATION
The King bathed in the water of the Yamuna, and according to
prescribed duties, he offered oblations of water to the forefathers
and demigods. Very gravely controlling his senses and mind, he
then offered his respects and obeisances to the sons of Lord
Brahma [Angira and Narada].
TEXT 17
अथ तस्मै प्रपन्नाय भक्ताय प्रयतात्मने |
भगवान्नारदः प्रीतो विद्यामेताशचवाच ह ॥ १७॥
atha 14577107 prapanndaya
bhaktaya prayatatmane


--- Page 102 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
bhagavan naradah prito
vidyam etam uvaca ha
atha—thereafter; tasmai—unto him; prapanndya—who was surren-
dered; bhaktaya—being a devotee; prayata-atmane—who was self-
controlled; bhagavan—the most powerful; naradah—Narada; pritah—
being very pleased; vidyam—transcendental knowledge; etam—this;
uvaca—spoke; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, being very much pleased with Citraketu, who was a
self-controlled devotee and surrendered soul, Narada, the
most powerful sage, spoke to him the following transcendental
instructions.
TEXTS 18-19
ॐ नमस्तुभ्यं मगवते वासुदेवाय धीमहि |
সম্তুগাযাপিহত্রায नमः ag च ॥१८॥
नमो विज्ञानमात्राय परमानन्दमूर्तये |
आत्मारामाय शान्ताय निशृत्तदेतर््टये 12a
ori namas tubhyarih bhagavate
vasudevaya dhimahi
pradyumnayaniruddhaya
namah sarikarsanaya ca
namo vyjiidana-matraya
paramananda-mirtaye
atmaramaya santaya
nivrtta-dvaita-drstaye
orn—0 my Lord; namah—obeisances; tubhyam—unto You; bhaga-
vate—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vdsudevaya—Krsna, the
son of Vasudeva; dhimahi—let me meditate upon; pradyumndaya—unto
Pradyumna; aniruddhaya—unto Aniruddha; namah—respectful obei-


--- Page 103 ---
Text 19] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 99
sances; sartkarsandya—unto Lord Sankarsana; ca—also; namah—all
obeisances; vijiana-matraya—unto the form full of knowledge;
parama-ananda-mirtaye—full of transcendental bliss; atma-
aramaya—unto the Lord, who is self-sufficient; $antaya—and free
from disturbances; nivrtta-dvaita-drstaye—whose vision turns away
from duality, or who is one without a second.
TRANSLATION

[Narada gave Citraketu the following mantra.] O Lord, O
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who are addressed by the
omkara [pranava), I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. 0
Lord Vasudeva, I meditate upon You. O Lord Pradyumna, Lord
Aniruddha and Lord Sankarsana, I offer You my respectful obei-
sances. O reservoir of spiritual potency, O supreme bliss, I offer
my respectful obeisances unto You, who are self-sufficient and
most peaceful. O ultimate truth, one without a second, You are
realized as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan and are therefore
the reservoir of all knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances
unto You.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita Krsna says that He is pranavah sarva-vedesu, the
syllable ori in the Vedic mantras. In transcendental knowledge, the Lord
is addressed as pranava, ornkdra, which is a symbolic representation of
the Lord in sound. Ori» namo bhagavate vasudevaya. Vasudeva, who is
an expansion of Narayana, expands Himself as Pradyumna, Aniruddha
and Sankarsana. From Sankarsana comes a second Narayana expansion,
and from this Narayana come further expansions of Vasudeva, Pra-
dyumna, Sankarsana and Aniruddha. The Sankarsana in this group is
the original cause of the three purusas, namely Karanodakasayi Visnu,
Garbhodakasayi Visnu and Ksirodakasay1 Visnu. Ksirodakasayi Visnu is
situated in every universe in a special planet called Svetadvipa. This is
confirmed in the Brahma-sarihita: andantara-stha. The word anda
means this universe. Within this universe is a planet called Svetadvipa,
where Ksirodakasiyi Visnu is situated. From Him come all the incarna-
tions within this universe.


--- Page 104 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16

As confirmed in the Brahma-sarihita, all these forms of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are advaita, nondifferent, and they are also
acyuta, infallible; they do not fall down like the conditioned souls. The
ordinary living entity is prone to falling into the clutches of maya, but
the Supreme Lord in His different incarnations and forms is acyuta, in-
fallible. Therefore His body is different from the material body possessed
by the conditioned soul.

The word matra is explained in the Medini dictionary as follows:
matra karna-vibhisayar vitte mane paricchade. The word matra, in its
different imports, is used to indicate the decoration of the ear, posses-
sion, respect, and the possession of a covering. As stated in Bhagavad-
gita (2.14):

matra-sparsas tu kaunteya
sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah
agamapayino ’‘nitydas
tars titiksasva bharata

“0 son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and dis-
tress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and
disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense per-
ception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without
being disturbed.” In the conditioned state of life, the body is used as our
dress, and as one needs different dresses during the summer and winter,
we conditioned souls are changing bodies according to our desires.
However, because the body of the Supreme Lord is full of knowledge, it
needs no covering. The idea that Krsna’s body is like ours—in other
words, that His body and soul are different—is a misunderstanding.
There are no such differences for Krsna, because His body is full of
knowledge. Here we receive material bodies because of a lack of knowl-
edge, but because Krsna, Vasudeva, is full of knowledge, there is no dif-
ference between His body and His soul. Krsna remembers what He said
forty million years ago to the sun-god, but an ordinary being cannot
remember what he said the day before yesterday. This is the difference
between Krsna’s body and our body. Therefore the Lord is addressed as
vijiiana-matraya paramananda-miirtaye.


--- Page 105 ---
Text 20] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 101

Because the Lord’s body is full of knowledge, He always enjoys tran-
scendental bliss. Indeed, His very form is paramananda. This is con-
firmed in the Vedanta-sitra: anandamayo ’bhyasat. By nature the Lord
is anandamaya. Whenever we see Krsna, He is always full of ananda in
all circumstances. No one can make Him morose. Atmaraimaya: He does
not need to search for external enjoyment, because He is self-sufficient.
Santaya: He has no anxiety. One who has to seek pleasure from other
sources is always full of anxiety. Karmis, jiianis and yogis are full of
anxiety because they want something, but a devotee does not want any-
thing; he is simply satisfied in the service of the Lord, who is fully
blissful.

Nivrtta-dvaita-drstaye: in our conditioned life our bodies have dif-
ferent parts, but although Krsna apparently has different bodily parts,
no part of His body is different from any other part. Krsna can see with
His eyes, and Krsna can see without His eyes. Therefore in the
Svetasvatara Upanisad it is said, paSyaty acaksuh. He can see with His
hands and legs. He does not need a particular bodily part to perform a
particular action. Angani yasya sakalendriya-vrttimanti: He can do any-
thing He desires with any part of His body, and therefore He is called
almighty.

TEXT 20
आत्मानन्दाुभूत्यैव न्यस्तशषक्त्य्मये नमः |
हृषीकेशाय महते नमस्तेऽनन्तमूर्तये ॥२०॥

atmanandanubhiityaiva
nyasta-Sakty-irmaye namah
hrsikesaya mahate
namas te ‘nanta-mirtaye

atma-ananda—of Your personal bliss; anubhiitya—by perception;
eva—certainly; nyasta—given up; Sakti-irmaye—the waves of material
nature; namah—respectful obeisances; hrsikeSdya—unto the supreme
controller of the senses; mahate—unto the Supreme; namah—respect-
ful obeisances; te—unto You; ananta—unlimited; miirtaye—whose ex-
pansions.


--- Page 106 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Perceiving Your personal bliss, You are always transcendental to
the waves of material nature. Therefore, my Lord, I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You. You are the supreme controller of
the senses, and Your expansions of form are unlimited. You are the
greatest, and therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT

This verse analytically differentiates the living entity from the
Supreme Lord. The form of the Lord and the form of the conditioned
soul are different because the Lord is always blissful whereas the condi-
tioned soul is always under the threefold miseries of the material world.
The Supreme Lord is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. He derives ananda, bliss,
from His own self. The Lord’s body is transcendental, spiritual, but be-
cause the conditioned soul has a material body, he has many bodily and
mental troubles. The conditioned soul is always perturbed by attachment
and detachment, whereas the Supreme Lord is always free from such
dualities. The Lord is the supreme master of all the senses, whereas the
conditioned soul is controlled by the senses. The Lord is the greatest,
whereas the living entity is the smallest. The living entity is conditioned
by the waves of material nature, but the Supreme Lord is transcendental
to all actions and reactions. The expansions of the Supreme Lord’s body
are innumerable (advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam), but the
conditioned soul is limited to only one form. From history we learn that a
conditioned soul, by mystic power, can sometimes expand into eight
forms, but the Lord’s bodily expansions are unlimited. This means that
the bodies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no beginning and

no end, unlike the bodies of the living entities.

TEXT 21
वचस्युपरतेऽराप्य य॒ एको मनसा सह |
अनामरूपिन्मात्रः सोऽव्यान्नः सदसत्परः 1121
vacasy uparate ‘prapya
ya eko manasa saha


--- Page 107 ---
Text 22] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 103
andama-rapas cin-matrah
so 'vyan nah sad-asat-parah
vacasi—when the words; uparate—cease; aprapya—not achieving
the goal; yah—He who; ekah—one without a second; manasa—the
mind; saha—with; andma—with no material name; riigpah—or material
form; cit-matrah—totally spiritual; sah—He; avyat—may kindly pro-
tect; nah—us; sat-asat-parah—who is the cause of all causes (the
supreme cause).
TRANSLATION
The words and mind of the conditioned soul cannot approach
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for material names and
forms are not applicable to the Lord, who is entirely spiritual,
beyond the conception of gross and subtle forms. The impersonal
Brahman is another of His forms. May He, by His pleasure, protect
us.
PURPORT
The impersonal Brahman, which is the effulgence of the Lord, is
described in this verse.
TEXT 22
यखिभ्िदं यतशरेदं॑तिष्ठत्यप्येति जायते ।
मृण्मयेष्विव मूजातिस्तस ते ब्रह्मणे नमः ॥२२॥
yasminn दकठफः yatas ০০৫77
tisthaty apyeti jayate
mronmayesv ia mrj-jatis
tasmai te brahmane namah
yasmin—in whom; idam—this (cosmic manifestation); yatah—from
whom; ca—also; idam—this (cosmic manifestation); tisthati—stands;
apyeti—dissolves; jayate—is born; mrt-mayesu—in things made of
earth; iva—like; mrt-jatih—birth from earth; tasmai—unto Him; te—
You; brahmane—the supreme cause; namah—respectful obeisances.


--- Page 108 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
As pots made completely of earth are situated on earth after
being created and are transformed into earth again when broken,
this cosmic manifestation is caused by the Supreme Brahman, situ-
ated in the Supreme Brahman, and annihilated in the same
Supreme Brahman. Therefore, since the Supreme Lord is the
cause of Brahman, let us offer Him our respectful obeisances.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is the cause of the cosmic manifestation, He main-
tains it after creation, and after annihilation the Lord is the reservoir of
everything.
TEXT 23
यन्न स्पृशन्ति न विदुर्मनोबुद्धीन्दरियासवः |
अन्तर्बहिश्च विततं व्योमव्स्नतोऽस्म्यहम्‌ 130
yan na अण्व्या na vidur
mano-buddhindriyasavah
antar bahis ca vitatarn
vyomavat tan nato ’smy aham
yat—whom; na—not; sprsanti—can touch; na—nor; viduh—can
know; manah—the mind; buddhi—the intelligence; indriya—the
senses; asavah—the life airs; antah—within; bahih—outside; ca—
also; vitatam—expanded; vyoma-vat—like the sky; tat—unto Him;
natah—bowed; asmi—am; aham—I.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Brahman emanates from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and expands like the sky. Although untouched by any-
thing material, it exists within and without. Nonetheless, the
mind, intelligence, senses and living force can neither touch Him
nor know Him. I offer unto Him my respectful obeisances.


--- Page 109 ---
Text 24] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 105
TEXT 24
देहेन्द्रियप्राणमनोधियोऽमी
यदंशविद्धाः प्रचरन्ति कर्म॑सु |
नैवान्यदा Sefer
स्थानेषु तद्‌ द्ष्पदेशमेति ||
dehendriya-prana-mano-dhiyo ‘mit
yad-armsa-viddhah pracaranti karmasu
naivanyadd lauham ivaprataptarn
sthanesu tad drastrapadesam eti
deha—the body; indriya—senses; prana—life airs; manah—mind;
dhiyah—and intelligence; ami—all those; yat-amsa-viddhah—being
influenced by rays of Brahman, or the Supreme Lord; pracaranti—they
move; karmasu—in various activities; na—not; eva—indeed; an-
yada—at other times; lauham—iron; iva—like; aprataptam—not
heated (by fire); sthanesu—in those circumstances; tat—that; drastr-
apadesam—the name of a subject matter; eti—achieves.
TRANSLATION
As iron has the power to burn when made red-hot in the
association of fire, so the body, senses, living force, mind and in-
telligence, although merely lumps of matter, can function in their
activities when infused with a particle of consciousness by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As iron cannot burn unless
heated by fire, the bodily senses cannot act unless favored by the
Supreme Brahman.
PURPORT
Red-hot iron can burn, but it cannot burn the original fire. Therefore
the consciousness of the small particle of Brahman is fully dependent on
the power of the Supreme Brahman. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says,
mattah smrtir jiagnam apohanar ca: “From Me the conditioned soul
receives memory, knowledge and forgetfulness.” The power for ac-


--- Page 110 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
tivities comes from the Supreme Lord, and when the Lord withdraws this
power, the conditioned soul no longer has energy with which to act
through his various senses. The body includes five knowledge-acquiring
senses, five active senses and the mind, but actually these are merely
lumps of matter. For example, the brain is nothing but matter, but when
electrified by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
brain can act, just as iron can burn when made red-hot by the influence
of fire. The brain can act while we are awake or even while we are
dreaming, but when we are fast asleep or unconscious the brain is inac-
tive. Since the brain is a lump of matter, it does not have independent
power with which to act. It can act only when favored by the influence of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is Brahman or Parabrahman.
This is the way to understand how the Supreme Brahman, Krsna, is pres-
ent everywhere, just as the sunshine is present because of the sun-god in
the sun globe. The Supreme Lord is called Hrsike$a; He is the only con-
ductor of the senses. Unless empowered by His energy, our senses cannot
act. In other words, He is the only seer, the only worker, the only
listener, and the only active principle or supreme controller.
TEXT 25

ॐ नमो भगवते महापुरुषाय मदाचुभावाय मदाबिभूतिपतये सकल-
सात्वतपरिबरटनिकरकर कमरकडमलोपलाकितचरणारविन्दयुगल TARRY
नमस्ते ॥ २५॥

072 namo bhagavate maha-purusaya mahanubhavaya maha-vibhiti-
pataye sakala-satvata-parivrdha-nikara-kara-kamala-kudmalopalalita-
carandravinda-yugala parama-paramesthin namas te.

orh—O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namah—respectful obei-
sances; bhagavate—unto You, the Lord, who are full in six opulences;
maha-purusiya—the supreme enjoyer; mahd-anubhavaya—the most
perfect realized soul, or the Supersoul; maha-vibhiti-pataye—the
master of all mystic power; sakala-satvata-parivrdha—of all the best
devotees; nikara—of the multitude; kara-kamala—of the lotus hands;
kudmala—by the buds; upalalita—served; carana-aravinda-yugala—


--- Page 111 ---
Text 26] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 107
whose two lotus feet; parama—topmost; parame-sthin—who are situ-
ated in the spiritual planet; namah te—respectful obeisances unto You.
TRANSLATION

O transcendental Lord, who are situated in the topmost planet of
the spiritual world, Your two lotus feet are always massaged by a
multitude of the best devotees with their lotus-bud hands. You are
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, complete in six opulences.
You are the supreme person mentioned in the Purusa-siikta
prayers. You are the most perfect, self-realized master of all mystic
power. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT

It is said that the Absolute Truth is one, but is manifested in different
features as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. The previous verses de-
scribed the Brahman and Paramatma features of the Absolute Truth.
Now this prayer is offered in bhakti-yoga to the Absolute Supreme Per-
son. The words used in this regard are sakala-satvata-parivrdha. The
word sdtvata means ‘‘devotees,”” and sakala means “all together.” The
devotees, who also have lotus feet, serve the lotus feet of the Lord with
their lotus hands. The devotees may sometimes not be competent to serve
the lotus feet of the Lord, and therefore the Lord is addressed as
parama-paramesthin. He is the Supreme Person, yet He is very kind to
the devotees. No one is competent to serve the Lord, but even if a devotee
is not competent, the merciful Lord accepts the humble attempt of the
devotee.

TEXT 26
MH उवाच
भक्तायेतां प्रपन्नाय विद्यामादिश्य नारदः ।
ययावङ्गिरसा साकं धाम खायम्धुवं प्रमो ।२६॥
Sri-Suka uvdca
bhaktayaitarh prapannaya
vidyam adisya naradah


--- Page 112 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
yayav angirasa sakariz
dhama svayambhuvari prabho
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvimi said; bhaktdya—unto the
devotee; etam—this; prapannaya—unto one who fully surrendered;
vidyam—transcendental knowledge; dadiSya—instructing; naradah—
the great sage Narada; yayau—Ileft; arngirasa —the great saint Angira;
sakam—with; dhama—for the topmost planet; svayambhuvam —
belonging to Lord Brahma; prabho—O King.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Narada, having become the
spiritual master of Citraketu, instructed him fully in this prayer
because Citraketu was fully surrendered. O King Pariksit, Narada
then left with the great sage Angira for the topmost planet, known
as Brahmaloka.
PURPORT
When Angira had first come to visit King Citraketu, he did not bring
Narada with him. However, after the death of Citraketu’s son, Angira
brought Narada to instruct King Citraketu about bhakti-yoga. The dif-
ference was that in the beginning Citraketu was not in a temperament of
renunciation, but after the death of his son, when he was overwhelmed
by his great plight, he was awakened to the platform of renunciation by
instructions regarding the falsity of this material world and material
possessions. It is only at this stage that bhakti-yoga can be instructed. As
long as one is attached to material enjoyment, bhakti-yoga cannot be
understood. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (2.44):
bhogaisvarya-prasaktanar
tayapahrta-cetasam
vyavasayatmika buddhih
samadhau na vidhiyate
“In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and ma-
terial opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute
determination of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take


--- Page 113 ---
Text 27] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 109
place.” As long as one is very much attached to material enjoyment, one
cannot concentrate his mind on the subject matter of devotional service.

The Krsna consciousness movement is progressing successfully in the
Western countries at the present moment because the youth in the West
have reached the stage of vairdgya, or renunciation. They are practically
disgusted with material pleasure from material sources, and this has
resulted in a population of hippies throughout the Western countries.
Now if these young people are instructed about bhakti-yoga, Krsna con-
sciousness, the instructions will certainly be effective.

As soon as Citraketu understood the philosophy of vairagya-vidya, the
knowledge of renunciation, he could understand the process of bhakti-
yoga. In this regard Srila Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya has said, vairagya-
vidya-nija-bhakti-yoga. Vairigya-vidya and bhakti-yoga are parallel
lines. One is essential for understanding the other. It is also said, bhaktih
paresanubhavo viraktir anyatra ca (Bhag. 11.2.42). Advancement in
devotional service, or Krsna consciousness, is characterized by increasing
renunciation of material enjoyment. Narada Muni is the father of devo-
tional service, and therefore, just to bestow causeless mercy upon King
Citraketu, Angira brought Narada Muni to instruct the King. These in-
structions were extremely effective. Anyone who follows in the footsteps
of Narada Muni is certainly a pure devotee.

TEXT 27
चित्रकेतुस्तु तां Rai यथा नारदभाषिताम्‌ |
धारयामास स्नाहमन्मक्षः सुसमाहितः ॥२७।।
citraketus tu ৫7 ৮৮09৫
yatha narada-bhasitam
dharayam 050 saptaham
ab-bhaksah susamahitah

citraketuh—King Citraketu; tu—indeed; tam—that; vidyam—tran-
scendental knowledge; yatha—just as; narada-bhasitam—instructed by
the great sage Narada; dharayam dsa—chanted; sapta-aham—con-
tinuously for one week; ap-bhaksah—only drinking water; su-
samahitah—with great attention and care.


--- Page 114 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION

Fasting and drinking only water, Citraketu for one week con-
tinuously chanted with great care and attention the mantra given
by Narada Muni.

TEXT 28
ततः स सक्षरा्रान्ते Ram धायंमाणया |
विद्याधराधिपत्यं च लेभेऽप्रतिहतं Iw ॥२८॥
tatah sa sapta-ratrante
vidyaya dharyamanaya
vidyadharadhipatyari ca
lebhe ’pratihatarih nrpa

tatah—from this; sah—he; sapta-ratra-ante—at the end of seven
nights; vidyaya—by the prayers; dharyamanaya—being carefully
practiced; vidyadhara-adhipatyam —mastership of the Vidyadharas (as
an intermediate result); ca—also; lebhe—achieved; apratihatam —un-
deviated from the instructions of the spiritual master; nrpa—O King
Pariksit.

TRANSLATION

O King Pariksit, after only one week of repeatedly practicing
the mantra received from the spiritual master, Citraketu achieved
the rule of the planet of the Vidyadharas as an intermediate prod-
uct of his spiritual advancement in knowledge.

PURPORT

If a devotee, after being initiated, adheres rigidly to the instructions of
the spiritual master, he is naturally endowed with the material opulences
of vidyadhara-adhipatyam and similar posts as by-products. A devotee
need not practice yoga, karma or jiiana to achieve a successful result.
Devotional service alone is competent to award a devotee all material
power. A pure devotee, however, is never attached to material power, al-
though he gets it very easily without personal endeavor. Citraketu


--- Page 115 ---
Text 29] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 111
received this side benefit of his devotional service, which he rigidly per-
formed in accordance with the instructions of Narada.
TEXT 29
ततः कृतिपयादोभिग्दिशेद्मनोंगतिः |
जगाम देवदेवस्य शेषस्य चरणान्तिकम्‌ ॥ २९॥
tatah katipayahobhir
vidyayeddha-mano-gatih
Jjagama deva-devasya
Sesasya caranantikam
tatah—thereafter; katipaya-ahobhih—within a few days; vidyaya—
by the spiritual mantra; iddha-manah-gatih—the course of his mind
being enlightened; jagama—went; deva-devasya—of the master of all
other lords or demigods; Sesasya—Lord Sesa; carana-antikam—to the
shelter of the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, within a very few days, by the influence of the
mantra that Citraketu had practiced, his mind became increasingly
enlightened in spiritual progress, and he attained shelter at the
lotus feet of Anantadeva.
PURPORT
A devotee’s ultimate achievement is to take shelter of the lotus feet of
the Lord in any one of the planets in the spiritual sky. As a result of rigid
execution of devotional service, a devotee receives all material opulences
if these are required; otherwise, the devotee is not interested in material
opulences, nor does the Supreme Lord award them. When a devotee is
actually engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, his apparently
material opulences are not material; they are all spiritual. For example,
if a devotee spends money to construct a beautiful and costly temple, the
construction is not material but spiritual (nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
৩1607 vairagyam ucyate). A devotee’s mind is never diverted to the


--- Page 116 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
material side of the temple. The bricks, stone and wood used in the con-
struction of the temple are spiritual, just as the Deity, although made of
stone, is not stone but the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. The
more one advances in spiritual consciousness, the more he can under-
stand the elements of devotional service. Nothing in devotional service is
material; everything is spiritual. Consequently a devotee is awarded so-
called material opulence for spiritual advancement. This opulence is an
aid to help the devotee advance toward the spiritual kingdom. Thus
Maharaja Citraketu remained in material opulence as a vidyadhara-pati,
master of the Vidyadharas, and by executing devotional service he be-
came perfect within a very few days and returned home, back to God-
head, taking shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Sesa, Ananta.
A karmi’s material opulence and a devotee’s material opulence are not
on the same level. Srila Madhvacarya comments in this way:
anyantaryaminarm visnum
updsyanya-samipagah
bhaved yogyataya tasya
padari va prapnuwyan narah
By worshiping Lord Visnu one can get whatever he desires, but a pure
devotee never asks Lord Visnu for any material profit. Instead he serves
Lord Visnu without material desires and is therefore ultimately trans-
ferred to the spiritual kingdom. In this regard, Srila Viraraghava Acarya
comments, yathesta-gatir ity arthah: by worshiping Visnu, a devotee can
get whatever he likes. Maharaja Citraketu wanted only to return home,
back to Godhead, and therefore he achieved success in that way.
TEXT 30
५4 [ক
quent शितिवाससं स्फुरत्‌-
किरीटकेयूरकरित्रकङ्कणम्‌ ।
प्रसन्नवक्तरारुणलोचनं इतं
५
ददक्षं सिद्धेश्वरमण्डलैः प्रम्‌ ।॥३०॥
mrnala-gauram Siti-vasasam sphurat-
kirita-keyira-katitra-kankanam


--- Page 117 ---
Text 31] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 113
prasanna-vaktraruna-locanari vrtari
dadarsa siddhesvara-mandalaih prabhum
mrnala-gauram—white like the fibers of a lotus; Siti-vasasam —wear-
ing garments of blue silk; sphurat—glittering; kirita—helmet;
keyiira—armlets; katitra—belt; kankanam—whose bangles; prasanna-
vaktra—smiling face; aruna-locanam—having reddish eyes; vrtam—
surrounded; dadarsa—he saw; siddha-iSvara-mandalaih—by the most
perfect devotees; prabhum—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Upon reaching the shelter of Lord Sesa, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Citraketu saw that He was as white as the
white fibers of a lotus flower. He was dressed in bluish garments
and adorned with a brilliantly glittering helmet, armlets, belt and
bangles. His face was smiling, and His eyes were reddish. He was
surrounded by such exalted liberated persons as Sanat-kumara.
TEXT 31
০
तदसंचप्वस्तसयस्तफिस्विषः
खस्थामसान्तः TONS FAG: |
प्रबद्धमक्त्या प्रणयाश्वुलाचनः
TETHER YET ॥२१॥
tad-darsana-dhvasta-samasta-kilbisah
svasthamalantahkarano ’bhyayan munih
pravrddha-bhaktyd pranayasru-locanah
prahrsta-romanamad adi-purusam
tat-darsana—by the sight of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
dhvasta—destroyed; samasta-kilbisah—having all sins; svastha—
healthy; amala—and pure; antahkaranah—the core of whose heart;
abhyayat —approached face to face; munih—the King, who was silent
due to full mental satisfaction; pravrddha-bhaktya—with an attitude of
increased devotional service; pranaya-asru-locanah—with tears in his
eyes because of love; prahrsta-roma—his hairs standing on end due to


--- Page 118 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
jubilation; anamat—offered respectful obeisances; ddi-purusam—unto
the expansion of the original personality.
TRANSLATION
As soon as Maharaja Citraketu saw the Supreme Lord, he was
cleansed of all material contamination and situated in his original
Krsna consciousness, being completely purified. He became silent
and grave, and because of love for the Lord, tears fell from his
eyes, and his hairs stood on end. With great devotion and love, he
offered his respectful obeisances unto the original Personality of
Godhead.
PURPORT
The word tad-darsana-dhvasta-samasta-kilbisah is very important in
this verse. If one regularly sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
the temple, one will gradually be disinfected of all material desires
simply by visiting the temple and seeing the Deity. When one is freed
from all the results of sinful activities, one will be purified, and with a
healthy mind, completely cleansed, he will increasingly make progress in
Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 32
a  उत्तमश्ोकपदान्जविष्टरं
= A
्रमा्लेसेरुपमेदयन्युहः |
रमो परुद्धारिक्ठवणनिर्गयो
नैवाशकत्तं प्रसमीडितं चिरम्‌ nz
sa uttamasloka-padabja-vistararin
premasru-lesair upamehayan muhuh
premoparuddhakhila-varna-nirgamo
naivasakat tam prasamidituri ciram
sah—he; uttamasloka— of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
pada-abja—of the lotus feet; wvistaram—the resting place; prema-
asru—of tears of pure love; lesaih—by drops; upamehayan—moisten-


--- Page 119 ---
Text 33] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 115
ing; muhuh—again and again; prema-uparuddha—choked with love;
akhila—all; varna—of the letters; nirgamah—the coming out; na—
not; eva—indeed; asakat—was able; tam —unto Him; prasamiditum—
to offer prayers; ciram—for a long time.
f TRANSLATION
With tears of love and affection, Citraketu repeatedly moistened
the resting place of the Supreme Lord’s lotus feet. Because his
voice was choked in ecstasy, for a considerable time he was unable
to utter any of the letters of the alphabet to offer the Lord suitable
prayers.
PURPORT
All the letters of the alphabet and the words constructed by those let-
ters are meant for offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Maharaja Citraketu had the opportunity to offer prayers to the
Lord by composing nice verses from the letters of the alphabet, but be-
cause of his ecstasy, for a considerable time he could not join those letters
to offer prayers to the Lord. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.22):
idari hi purisas tapasah Srutasya va
svistasya siktasya ca buddhi-dattayoh
avicyuto ’rthah kavibhir 71170179110
yad uttamasloka-gunanuvarnanam
If one has scientific, philosophical, political, economic or any other
abilities and wants perfection in his knowledge, he should offer prayers
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead by composing first-class poetry or
engaging his talents in the service of the Lord. Citraketu wanted to do
this, but he was unable because of loving ecstasy. Therefore he had to
wait for a considerable time before he could offer prayers.
TEXT 33
ततः समाधाय मनो मनीषया
बभाष एतत्प्रतिलन्धवागसौ |


--- Page 120 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
€,
नियम्य सर्वेन्द्रियबाह्यवतेनं
जगद्गुरुं सात्वतश्ाखेविग्रहम्‌ 1330
tatah samadhdya mano manisaya
babhasa etat pratilabdha-vag asau
niyamya sarvendriya-bahya-vartanari
Jjagad-gurum satvata-sastra-vigraham
tatah—thereafter; samadhdaya—controlling; manah—the mind;
manisaya—by his intelligence; babhasa—spoke; etat—this; pra-
tilabdha —recovering; vak—speech; asau—that one (King Citraketu);
niyamya—controlling; sarva-indriya—of all the senses; bahya—exter-
nal; vartanam—the wandering; jagat-gurum—who is the spiritual
master of everyone; satvata—of devotional service; Sastra—of the holy
scriptures; vigraham —the personified form.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, by controlling his mind with his intelligence and
thus restricting his senses from external engagements, he
recovered suitable words with which to express his feelings. Thus
he began offering prayers to the Lord, who is the personification
of the holy scriptures [the satvata-sarhhitas like the Brahma-
98111121113 and the Narada-paficaratra] and who is the spiritual master
of all. He offered his prayers as follows.
PURPORT
One cannot offer prayers to the Lord with mundane words. One must
become spiritually advanced by controlling the mind and senses. Then he
can find suitable words to offer in prayers to the Lord. Quoting the
following verse from the Padma Purana, Srila Sanatana Gosvami forbids
us to sing any song not sung by authorized devotees.
avaisnava-mukhodgirnam
चक hari-kathamrtam
Sravanari naiva kartavyam
sarpocchistarn yatha payah


--- Page 121 ---
Text 34] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 117
The words or songs of a person not fixed in Vaisnava behavior, not
strictly following the rules and regulations and chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra should not be accepted by pure devotees. The words satvata-
Sastra-vigraham indicate that the sac-cid-ananda body of the Lord can
never be accepted to be made of maya. Devotees do not offer prayers to
the Lord in an imaginary form. The existence of the Lord’s form is sup-
ported by all Vedic literature.

TEXT 34
वित्रक्रतुरुवाच
अजित जितः सममतिभिः
[५
साघुमिर्भवान्‌ जितात्मभिर्भवता |
विजितास्तेऽपि च॒ भजता-
मकामात्मनां य आत्मदोऽतिकरुणः 11391)
citraketur uvaca
ajita jitah sama-matibhih
sadhubhir bhavan jitatmabhir bhavata
vijitds te "ट ca bhajatam
akamatmanam ya atmado ’ti-karunah
citraketuh uvaca—King Citraketu said; ajita—O my unconquerable

Lord; jitah—conquered; sama-matibhih—by persons who have con-
quered the mind; sadhubhih—the devotees; bhavan—Your Lordship;
Jita-atmabhih —who have completely controlled the senses; bhavata—by
You; vijitah—conquered; te—they; api—also; ca—and; bhajatam—to
those who always engage in Your service; akama-atmanam—with no
motives for material profit; yah—who; atma-dah—giving Yourself; ati-
karunah—extremely merciful.

TRANSLATION
Citraketu said: O unconquerable Lord, although You cannot be
conquered by anyone, You are certainly conquered by devotees
who have control of the mind and senses. They can keep You


--- Page 122 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
under their control because You are causelessly merciful to devo-
tees who desire no material profit from You. Indeed, You give
Yourself to them, and because of this You also have full control
over Your devotees.

PURPORT

The Lord and the devotees both conquer. The Lord is conquered by
the devotees, and the devotees are conquered by the Lord. Because of
being conquered by one another, they both derive transcendental bliss
from their relationship. The highest perfection of this mutual conquer-
ing is exhibited by Krsna and the gopis. The gopis conquered Krsna, and
Krsna conquered the gopis. Thus whenever Krsna played His flute, He
conquered the minds of the gopis, and without seeing the gopis Krsna
could not be happy. Other transcendentalists, such as janis and yogis,
cannot conquer the Supreme Personality of Godhead; only pure devotees
can conquer Him.

Pure devotees are described as sama-mati, which means that they
never deviate from devotional service under any circumstances. It is not
that devotees worship the Supreme Lord only when happy; they worship
Him even when in distress. Happiness and distress do not hamper the
process of devotional service. Therefore Srimad-Bhagavatam says that
devotional service is ahaituky apratihata, unmotivated and uninter-
rupted. When a devotee offers devotional service to the Lord without any
motive (anyabhilasita-sinyam), his service cannot be hampered by any
material condition (apratihata). Thus a devotee who offers service in all
conditions of life can conquer the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

A special distinction between devotees and the other transcenden-
talists, namely the janis and yogis, is that janis and yogis artificially try
to become one with the Supreme, whereas devotees never aspire for such
an impossible accomplishment. Devotees know that their position is to be
eternally servants of the Supreme Lord and never to be one with Him.
Therefore they are called sama-mati or jitatma. They detest oneness with
the Supreme. They have no lusty desires for oneness; instead, their
desire is to be freed from all material hankering. Therefore they are
called niskama, desireless. A living entity cannot exist without desires,
but desires that can never be fulfilled are called kama, lusty desires.


--- Page 123 ---
Text 35] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 119
Kamais tais tair hrta-jianah: because of lusty desires, nondevotees are
deprived of their intelligence. Thus they are unable to conquer the
Supreme Lord, whereas devotees, being freed from such unreasonable
desires, can conquer the Lord. Such devotees are also conquered by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because they are pure, being free from
"all material desires, they fully surrender to the Supreme Lord, and
therefore the Lord conquers them. Such devotees never aspire for libera-
tion. They simply desire to serve the lotus feet of the Lord. Because they
serve the Lord without desires for remuneration, they can conquer the
mercy of the Lord. The Lord is by nature very merciful, and when He
sees that His servant is working without desires for material profit,
naturally He is conquered.
Devotees are always engaged in service.
sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacarisi vatkuntha-gunanuvarnane
All the activities of their senses are engaged in the service of the Lord.
Because of such devotion, the Lord gives Himself to His devotees as if
they could use Him for any purpose they might desire. Of course, devo-
tees have no purpose other than to serve. When a devotee fully surren-
ders and has no aspiration for material profit, the Lord certainly gives
him all opportunities for service. This is the position of the Lord when
conquered by His devotees.
TEXT 35
तव॒विमवबः खलु भगवन्‌
जगदुदयसितिलयादीनि |
विश्वसृजस्तेऽशांशा-
सतत्र मषा स्पर्धन्ति एयगमिमत्या 13%
tava vibhavah khalu bhagavan
Jjagad-udaya-sthiti-layadini
viSva-srjas te "75077505
tatra mrsa spardhanti prthag abhimatya


--- Page 124 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16

tava—Your; wvibhavah—opulences; khalu—indeed; bhagavan—O
Supreme Personality of Godhead; jagat—of the cosmic manifestation;
udaya—the creation; sthiti—maintenance; laya-adini—dissolution and
so on; viSva-srjah—the creators of the manifested world; te—they;
arnsa-arnsah—parts of Your plenary portion; tatra—in that; mrsa —in
vain; spardhanti—rival one another; prthak—of separateness;
abhimatya—by a false conception.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, this cosmic manifestation and its creation, main-
tenance and annihilation are all but Your opulences. Since Lord
Brahma and the other creators are nothing but small portions of a
portion of You, their partial power to create does not make them
God [5४४४]. Their consciousness of themselves as separate Lords
is therefore merely false prestige. It is not valid.

PURPORT

A devotee who has fully surrendered to the lotus feet of the Lord
knows very well that the creative energy of the living entities, from Lord
Brahmi down to the small ant, exists because the living entities are part
and parcel of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gita (15.7) the Lord says,
mamaivarnso jiva-loke jiva-bhiitah sanatanah: “The living entities in
this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts.” The living en-
tities are nothing but very small portions of the supreme spirit, like
sparks of a fire. Because they are part of the Supreme, they have a cre-
ative quality in a very minute quantity.

The so-called scientists of the modern materialistic world are proud
because they have created modern facilities like great airplanes, but the
credit for creating the airplanes should go to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, not to the scientists who have invented or created the so-called
wonderful products. The first consideration is the intelligence of the
scientist; one must be elevated by the dictation of the Supreme Lord,
who says in Bhagavad-gita (15.15), mattah smrtir jianam apohanar
ca: “From Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness.” Be-
cause the Supreme Lord, as Supersoul, sits within the core of every living
entity’s heart, the dictation by which one advances in scientific knowl-


--- Page 125 ---
Text 36] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 121
edge or creative faculties comes from Him. Furthermore, the ingredients
to manufacture wonderful machines like airplanes are also supplied by
the Lord, not by the scientists. Before the airplane was created, its ingre-
dients already existed, having been caused by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but when the manifested creation of the airplane is ruined, the
‘remaining debris is a problem for the so-called creators. Another exam-
ple is that the West is creating many automobiles. The ingredients for
these cars are supplied, of course, by the Supreme Lord, and the intelli-
gence for the so-called creation is also supplied by the Lord. Ultimately,
when the cars are demolished, the so-called creators are faced with the
problem of what to do with their ingredients. The actual creator, the
original creator, is the Personality of Godhead. Only in the interim does
someone create something with intelligence supplied by the Lord, and
later the creation again becomes a problem. Therefore the so-called
creator is not to be credited with the act of creation; the only credit goes
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is rightly stated herein that
the credit for all the opulences of creation, maintenance and annihilation
belongs to the Supreme Lord, not to the living entities.
TEXT 36
परमाणुपरममहतो-
स्त्वमादन्तान्तरवतीं त्रयविधुरः |
आदावन्तेऽपि च মন্লালা
यद्‌ धुवं तदेवान्तराङेऽपि ॥২৪।।
paramanu-parama-mahatos
tvam ady-antantara-varti traya-vidhurah
adav ante ’pi ca sattvanarin
yad dhruvari tad evantarale 07
parama-anu—of the atomic particle; parama-mahatoh—and of the
biggest (the result of the combination of atoms); tvam— You; adi-anta—
in both the beginning and the end; antara—and in the middle; varti—
existing; traya-vidhurah—although without beginning, end or middle;
ddau—in the beginning; ante—at the end; api—also; ca—and; sat-


--- Page 126 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
tvanam—of all existences; yat—which; dhruvam—permanent; tat—
that; eva—certainly; antarale—in the middle; api—also.
TRANSLATION

You exist in the beginning, middle and end of everything, from
the most minute particle of the cosmic manifestation —the atom —
to the gigantic universes and total material energy. Nonetheless,
You are eternal, having no beginning, end or middle. You are per-
ceived to exist in these three phases, and thus You are permanent.
When the cosmic manifestation does not exist, You exist as the
original potency.

PURPORT
The Brahma-samhita (5.33) says:
advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam
adyari purdana-purusarm nava-yauvanari ca
vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau
govindam adi-purusami tr.m 01077 bhajami

“I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who
is the original person —absolute, infallible, without beginning, although
expanded into unlimited forms, still the same original, the oldest, and
the person always appearing as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful, all-
knowing forms of the Lord cannot be understood even by the best Vedic
scholars, but they are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees.” The
Supreme Personality of Godhead has no cause, for He is the cause of
everything. The Lord is beyond the workings of cause and effect. He is
eternally existing. In another verse the Brahma-sarihita says, andan-
tara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham: the Lord exists within the gigan-
tic universe and within the atom. The descent of the Lord into the atom
and the universe indicates that without His presence, nothing could fac-
tually exist. Scientists say that water is a combination of hydrogen and
oxygen, but when they see a vast ocean they are puzzled about where
such a quantity of hydrogen and oxygen could have come from. They
think that everything evolved from chemicals, but where did the chemi-
cals come from? That they do not know. Since the Supreme Personality


--- Page 127 ---
Text 37] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 123
of Godhead is the cause of all causes, He can produce immense quantities
of chemicals to create a situation for chemical evolution. We actually see
that chemicals are produced from living entities. For example, a lemon
tree produces many tons of citric acid. The citric acid is not the cause of
the tree; rather, the tree is the cause of the acid. Similarly, the Supreme

# Personality of Godhead is the cause of everything. He is the cause of the
tree that produces the citric acid (bijar mam sarva-bhitanam). Devo-
tees can see that the original potencies causing the cosmic manifestation
are not in chemicals but in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He
is the cause of the chemicals.

Everything is caused or manifested by the energy of the Supreme
Lord, and when everything is annihilated or dissolved, the original
potency enters the body of the Supreme Lord. Therefore this verse says,
adav ante ‘pi ca sattvanar yad dhruvam tad evantarale pi. The word
dhruvam means “permanent.” The permanent reality is Krsna, not this
cosmic manifestation. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, aham adir hi
devanam and mattah sarvari pravartate: Krsna is the original cause of
everything. Arjuna recognized Lord Sri Krsna as the original person
(purusari sasvatar divyam adi-devam ajari vibhum), and the Brahma-
sarithita describes Him as the original person (govindam adi-purusam).
He is the cause of all causes, whether at the beginning, at the end or in
the middle.

TEXT 37
कित्यादिभिरेष  किलादृतः
सप्तभिर्दंशगुणोत्तरेरण्डकोश्चः |
यत्र पतत्यणुकल्पः
सदहाण्डकोरिकोटिमिस्तदनन्तः ॥২৩।।
ksity-adibhir esa kilavrtah
saptabhir dasa-gunottarair anda-kosah
yatra pataty anu-kalpah
sahanda-koti-kotibhis tad anantah
ksiti-adibhih—by the ingredients of the material world, headed by
earth: esah—this; kila—indeed; avrtah—covered; saptabhih—seven;


--- Page 128 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
dasa-guna-uttaraih—each ten times more than the previous one; anda-
koSah—egg-shaped universe; yatra—in whom; patati—falls; anu-
kalpah—like a minute atom; saha—with; anda-koti-kotibhih—millions
of such universes; tat—therefore; anantah—(You are called) unlimited.
TRANSLATION

Every universe is covered by seven layers—earth, water, fire,
air, sky, the total energy and false ego—each ten times greater
than the previous one. There are innumerable universes besides
this one, and although they are unlimitedly large, they move about
like atoms in You. Therefore You are called unlimited [ananta].

PURPORT
The Brahma-samhita (5.48) says:
yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya
Jjivanti loma-vilaja jagad-anda-nathah
visnur mahan sa tha yasya kala-viseso
govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami

The origin of the material creation is Maha-Visnu, who lies in the Causal
Ocean. While He sleeps in that ocean, millions of universes are generated
as He exhales, and they are all annihilated when He inhales. This Maha-
Visnu is a plenary portion of a portion of Visnu, Govinda (yasya kala-
visesah). The word kala refers to a plenary portion of a plenary portion.
From Krsna, or Govinda, comes Balarama; from Balarama comes
Sankarsana; from Sankarsana, Narayana; from Narayana, the second
Sankarsana; from the second Sankarsana, Maha-Visnu; from Maha-
Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnu; and from Garbhodakasayi Visnu,
Ksirodakaéayi Visnu. Ksirodakasayl Visnu controls every universe. This
gives an idea of the meaning of ananta, unlimited. What is to be said of
the unlimited potency and existence of the Lord? This verse describes
the coverings of the universe (saptabhir dasa-gunottarair anda-kosah).
The first covering is earth, the second is water, the third is fire, the
fourth is air, the fifth is sky, the sixth is the total material energy, and
the seventh is the false ego. Beginning with the covering of earth, each
covering is ten times greater than the previous one. Thus we can only


--- Page 129 ---
Text 38] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 125
imagine how great each universe is, and there are many millions of uni-
verses. As confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (10.42):
athava bahunaitena
kirh [दला tavarjuna
¢ vistabhyaham (007 krtsnam
ekamsena sthito jagat
“But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.”
The entire material world manifests only one fourth of the Supreme
Lord’s energy. Therefore He is called ananta.
TEXT 38
विषयठ्षो नरपशवो
य उपासते विभूतीनं परं त्वाम्‌ ।
तेषामाशिष ईश
तदजु विनश्यन्ति यथा राजङलम्‌॥।३८॥
visaya-trso nara-pasavo
ya updsate vibhitir na param tvam
tesam asisa isa
tad anu vinaSyanti yatha raja-kulam
visaya-trsah—eager to enjoy sense gratification; nara-pasavah—
manlike animals; ye—who; updsate—worship very gorgeously;
vibhitth—small particles of the Supreme Lord (the demigods); na—not;
param—the Supreme; tvam—You; tesam—of them; asisah—the
benedictions; ©a—O supreme controller; tat—them (the demigods);
anu—after; vinaSyanti—will be vanquished; yatha—just as; raja-
kulam —those who are supported by the government (when the govern-
ment is finished).
TRANSLATION
O Lord, O Supreme, unintelligent persons who thirst for sense
enjoyment and who worship various demigods are no better than


--- Page 130 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
animals in the human form of life. Because of their animalistic
propensities, they fail to worship Your Lordship, and instead they
worship the insignificant demigods, who are but small sparks of
Your glory. With the destruction of the entire universe, including
the demigods, the benedictions received from the demigods also
vanish, just like the nobility when a king is no longer in power.
PURPORT

Bhagavad-gita (7.20) says, kamais tais tair hrta-jianah prapadyante
‘nya-devatah: “Those whose minds are distorted by material desires sur-
render unto the demigods.” Similarly, this verse condemns worship of
the demigods. We may show our respect to the demigods, but the
demigods are not worshipable. The intelligence of those who worship the
demigods is lost (hrta-jianah) because these worshipers do not know
that when the entire material cosmic manifestation is annihilated, the
demigods, who are the departmental heads of that manifestation, will be
vanquished. When the demigods are vanquished, the benedictions given
by the demigods to unintelligent men will also be vanquished. Therefore
a devotee should not hanker to obtain material opulence by worshiping
the demigods, but should engage in the service of the Lord, who will
satisfy all his desires. .

akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
Yajeta purusari param

“Whether full of all material desires, free from material desires or desir-
ing liberation, a person who has broader intelligence must by all means
worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead.”
(Bhag. 2.3.10) This is the duty of a perfect human being. One who has
the shape of a human being but whose actions are nothing but those of an
animal is called nara-pasu or dvipada-pasu, a two-legged animal. A
human being who is not interested in Krsna consciousness is condemned
herewith as a nara-pasu.


--- Page 131 ---
Text 39] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 127
TEXT 39
कामधियस्त्वयि रचिता
न परम रोहन्ति यथा करम्भबीजानि |
ज्ानात्मन्यगुणयये
८ गुणगणतोऽस्य दन््जालानि ॥३९॥
kama-dhiyas tvayi racita
na parama rohanti yatha karambha-bijani
JAanatmany agunamaye
guna-ganato sya dvandva-jalani
kama-dhiyah—desires for sense gratification; tvayi—in You;
racitah—performed; na—not; parama—O Supreme Personality of
Godhead; rohanti—do grow (produce other bodies); yatha—just as;
karambha-bijani—sterilized or fried seeds; jiana-atmani—in You,
whose existence is in full knowledge; aguna-maye—who is not affected
by the material qualities; guna-ganatah—from the material qualities;
asya—of a person; dvandva-jalani—the networks of duality. -
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, if persons obsessed with material desires for
sense gratification through material opulence worship You, who
are the source of all knowledge and are transcendental to material
qualities, they are not subject to material rebirth, just as sterilized
or fried seeds do not produce plants. Living entities are subjected
to the repetition of birth and death because they are conditioned
by material nature, but since You are transcendental, one who
is inclined to associate with You in transcendence escapes the
conditions of material nature.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9), wherein the Lord says:
Jjanma karma ca me divyam
evar yo vetti tattvatah


--- Page 132 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16

tyaktva deharh punar janma

naiti mam eti so ‘rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this ma-
terial world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.” If one simply
engages in Krsna consciousness to understand Krsna, he surely becomes
immune to the process of repeated birth and death. As clearly stated in
Bhagavad-gita, tyaktva dehari punar janma naiti: such a person, simply
by engaging in Krsna consciousness or understanding the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Krsna, becomes quite fit to return home, back to
Godhead. Even those who are obsessed with material desires may also
come to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead so steadily that
they go back to Godhead. The fact is that if one comes to Krsna con-
sciousness, although he may have many material desires, he becomes in-
creasingly attracted to the lotus feet of Krsna through associating with
the Supreme Lord by chanting His holy name. The Supreme Lord and
His holy name are identical. Thus he becomes uninterested in attachment
to material enjoyment. The perfection of life is to be uninterested in ma-
terial enjoyment and interested in Krsna. If one comes to Krsna con-
sciousness somehow or other, even for material gain, the result is that he
will be liberated. Kamad dvesad bhayat snehat. Whether for the
satisfaction of material desires, because of the influence of envy, because
of fear, because of affection or because of any other reason, if one comes
to Krsna, his life is successful.
TEXT 40
जितमजित तदा मवता
यदाह भागवतं धर्ममनवयम्‌ |
निष्किञ्चना ये gw
आत्मारामा ययुपासतेऽपचगौख ।।४०।।
jitam ajita tada bhavata
yadaha bhagavatarih dharmam anavadyam
niskificand ye munaya
atmarama yam updsate ‘pavargaya


--- Page 133 ---
Text 40] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 129
jitam—conquered; ajita—O unconquerable one; tadd—then;
bhavata—by Your Lordship; yada—when; aha—spoke; bhagavatam—
which helps the devotee approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
dharmam—the religious process; anavadyam—faultless (free from
contamination); niskiicanah—who have no desire to be happy with ma-
terial opulences; ye —those who; munayah—great philosophers and ex-
alted sages; atma-aramah—who are self-satisfied (being completely
aware of their constitutional position as eternal servants of the Lord);
yam —whom; updsate—worship; apavargaya—for achieving liberation
from material bondage.
TRANSLATION
O unconquerable one, when You spoke about bhagavata-
dharma, which is the uncontaminated religious system for achiev-
ing the shelter of Your lotus feet, that was Your victory. Persons
who have no material desires, like the Kumiaras, who are self-
satisfied sages, worship You to be liberated from material
contamination. In other words, they accept the process of
bhagavata-dharma to achieve shelter at Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
As stated by Srila Rapa Gosvami in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu:
anyabhilasita-sinyarn
Jjiana-karmady-andavrtam
anukilyena krsnanu-
Silanari bhaktir uttama
“One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme
Lord Krsna favorably and without desires for material profit or gain
through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called
pure devotional service.”
The Narada-paiicardtra also says:
sarvopadhi-vinirmuktarii
tat-paratvena nirmalam


--- Page 134 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16

hrsikena hrsikesa-

sevanarn bhaktir ucyate
“One should be free from all material designations and cleansed of all
material contamination. He should be restored to his pure identity, in
which he engages his senses in the service of the proprietor of the senses.
That is called devotional service.” This is also called bhagavata-dharma.
Without material aspirations, one should simply serve Krsna, as advised
in Bhagavad-gita, Narada-pasicaratra and Srimad-Bhagavatam.
Bhagavata-dharma is the process of religion enunciated by pure devo-
tees, direct representatives of the Supreme Personality of Godhead like
Narada, Sukadeva Gosvami and their humble servants in the disciplic
succession. By understanding bhagavata-dharma, one immediately be-
comes free from material contamination. Living entities, who are part
and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are loitering in this
material world suffering. When they are instructed by the Lord Himself
about bhagavata-dharma and they adopt it, that is victory for the Lord,
for He then reclaims these fallen souls. A devotee following the prin-
ciples of bhagavata-dharma feels very much obligated to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He can understand the difference between life
without bhagavata-dharma and life with bhagavata-dharma and thus
he ever remains obliged to the Lord. Taking to Krsna consciousness and
bringing fallen souls to Krsna consciousness is victory for Lord Krsna.
sa vai puriisam paro dharmo
ato bhaktir adhoksaje
ahaituky apratihata

Yyaydtma suprasidati
“The supreme occupation [dharma] for all humanity is that by which
men can attain to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord.
Such devotional service must be unmotivated and uninterrupted in order
to completely satisfy the self.” (Bhag. 1.2.6) Therefore Srimad-
Bhagavatam is the pure transcendental process of religion.


--- Page 135 ---
Text 41] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 131
TEXT 41
विषममतिनं যঙ্গ qui
त्वमहमिति मम तवेति च यदन्यत्र |
-
विषमधिया रचितो यः
7
स figs: शयिष्णुरधरमबहुलः net)
visama-matir na yatra nrnarit
tvam aham iti mama taveti ca yad anyatra
visama-dhiya racito yah
sa hy avisuddhah ksayisnur adharma-bahulah
visama—unequal (your religion, my religion; your belief, my belief);
matih—consciousness; na—not; yatra—in which; nrmam—of human
society; tvam—you; aham—1I; iti—thus; mama —my; tava—your; iti—
thus; ca—also; yat—which; anyatra—elsewhere (in religious systems
other than bhagavata-dharma); visama-dhiya—by this unequal intelli-
gence; racitah—made; yah—that which; sah—that system of religion;
hi—indeed; avisuddhah—not pure; ksayisnuh—temporary; adharma-
bahulah—full of irreligion.
TRANSLATION
Being full of contradictions, all forms of religion but bhagavata-
dharma work under conceptions of fruitive results and distinc-
tions of “you and I'’ and “yours and mine.” The followers of
Srimad-Bhagavatam have no such consciousness. They are all
Krsna conscious, thinking that they are Krsna’s and Krsna is
theirs. There are other, low-class religious systems, which are con-
templated for the killing of enemies or the gain of mystic power,
but such religious systems, being full of passion and envy, are im-
pure and temporary. Because they are full of envy, they are full of
irreligion.
PURPORT
Bhagavata-dharma has no contradictions. Conceptions of “your
religion” and “my religion” are completely absent from bhagavata-


--- Page 136 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
dharma. Bhagavata-dharma means following the orders given by the
Supreme Lord, Bhagavan, as stated in Bhagavad-gita: sarva-dharman
parityajya mam ekari $aranar vraja. God is one, and God is for every-
one. Therefore everyone must surrender to God. That is the pure concep-
tion of religion. Whatever God orders constitutes religion (dharman tu
saksad bhagavat-pranitam). In bhagavata-dharma there is no question
of “what you believe and “what I believe.” Everyone must believe in
the Supreme Lord and carry out His orders. Anukilyena
krsnanusilanam: whatever Krsna says —whatever God says—should be
directly carried out. That is dharma, religion.

If one is actually Krsna conscious, he cannot have any enemies. Since
his only engagement is to induce others to surrender to Krsna, or God,
how can he have enemies? If one advocates the Hindu religion, the
Muslim religion, the Christian religion, this religion or that religion,
there will be conflicts. History shows that the followers of religious
systems without a clear conception of God have fought with one another.
There are many instances of this in human history, but systems of
religion that do not concentrate upon service to the Supreme are tempor-
ary and cannot last for long because they are full of envy. There are
many activities directed against such religious systems, and therefore one
must give up the idea of “my belief” and “your belief.” Everyone
should believe in God and surrender unto Him. That is bhagavata-
dharma.

Bhagavata-dharma is not a concocted sectarian belief, for it entails
research to find how everything is connected with Krsna (&avasyam
idarin sarvam). According to the Vedic injunctions, sarvari khalv 10277
brahma: Brahman, the Supreme, is present in everything. Bhagavata-
dharma captures this presence of the Supreme. Bhagavata-dharma does
not consider everything in the world to be false. Because everything
emanates from the Supreme, nothing can be false; everything has some
use in the service of the Supreme. For example, we are now dictating
into a microphone and recording on a dictating machine, and thus we are
finding how the machine can be connected to the Supreme Brahman.
Since we are using this machine in the service of the Lord, it is Brahman.
This is the meaning of sarvari khalv ida brahma. Everything 15 Brah-
man because everything can be used for the service of the Supreme Lord.
Nothing is mithya, false; everything is factual.


--- Page 137 ---
Text 42] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 133
Bhagavata-dharma is called sarvotkrsta, the best of all religious
systems, because those who follow bhagavata-dharma are not envious of
anyone. Pure bhagavatas, pure devotees, invite everyone, without envy,
to join the Krsna consciousness movement. A devotee is therefore exactly
like the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Suhrdam sarva-bhiatanam: he
# is the friend of all living entities. Therefore this is the best of all
religious systems. Whereas so-called religions are meant for a particular
type of person who believes in a particular way, such discrimination has
no place in Krsna consciousness, or bhagavata-dharma. If we scrutinize
the religious systems meant for worship of demigods or anyone else but
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we will find that they are full of
envy and therefore impure.
TEXT 42
कः क्षेमो निजपरयोः
कियान्‌ and: खपरदरहया धर्मेण ।
खदरोहात्तव कोपः
परसम्पीडया च तथाधर्मः ।।४२॥
kah ksemo nija-parayoh
kiyan varthah sva-para-druha dharmena
sva-drohat tava kopah
para-sampidaya ca tathadharmah
kah—what; ksemah—benefit; nija—to oneself; parayoh—and to
others; kiyan—how much; vd—or; arthah—purpose; sva-para-
druha—which is envious of the performer and of others; dharmena—
with the religious system; sva-drohat—from being envious of one’s own
self; tava—of You; kopah—anger; para-sampidaya—by giving pain to
others; ca—also; tatha—as well as; adharmah—irreligion.
TRANSLATION
How can a religious system that produces envy of one’s self and
of others be beneficial for oneself and for them? What is
auspicious about following such a system? What is actually to be


--- Page 138 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
gained? By causing pain to one’s own self due to self-envy and by
causing pain to others, one arouses Your anger and practices
irreligion.

PURPORT

Any religious system but the process of bhagavata-dharma—service
as an eternal servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead —is a
system of envy of one’s own self and of others. For example, there are
many systems of religion in which animal sacrifices are recommended.
Such animal sacrifices are inauspicious both for the performer and for
the animal. Although one is sometimes permitted to sacrifice an animal
before the goddess Kali and eat it instead of purchasing meat from a
slaughterhouse, permission to eat meat after a sacrifice in the presence of
the goddess Kali is not the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
It is simply a concession for the miserable person who will not give up
eating meat. It is meant to restrict his desire for unrestricted meat-
eating. Such a religious system is condemned. Therefore Krsna says,
sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekari Saranari vraja: “Give up all other
duties and surrender unto Me.” That is the last word in religion.

One may argue that the sacrifice of animals is recommended in the
Vedas. This recommendation, however, is a restriction. Without Vedic
restrictions on the purchase of meat, people will purchase meat from the
market, which will be overflooded with meat shops, and slaughterhouses
will increase. To restrict this, sometimes the Vedas say that one may eat
meat after sacrificing an insignificant animal like a goat before the god-
dess Kali. In any case, a system of religion in which animal sacrifices are
recommended is inauspicious for those who perform the sacrifices and
for the animals. Envious persons who perform ostentatious animal
sacrifices are condemned in Bhagavad-gita (16.17) as follows:

atma-sambhavitah stabdha
dhana-mana-madanvitah
yajante nama-yajiiais te
dambhenavidhi-parvakam
“Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false
prestige, they sometimes perform sacrifices in name only without follow-


--- Page 139 ---
Text 42] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 135
ing any rules or regulations.” Sometimes animal sacrifices are performed
very gorgeously with grand arrangements for worshiping the goddess
Kali, but such festivals, although performed in the name of yajiia, are
not actually 7070, for yajfia means to satisfy the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore it is recommended that in this age specifically,
# yajiiaih sarikirtana-prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah: those who have good
intelligence satisfy the yajia-purusa, Visnu, by chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra. Envious persons, however, are condemned by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead as follows:
ahankarar 02127 darpar
kamariv krodham ca samsritah
mam atma-para-dehesu
pradvisanto ’bhyasizyakah
tan aha dvisatah kriran
samsaresu naradhaman
ksipamy ajasram asubhan
asurisv eva yonisu
“Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demon be-
comes envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in
his own body and in the bodies of others, and blasphemes against the real
religion. Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest
among men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into
various demoniac species of life.” (Bg. 16.18-19) These persons are
condemned by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as indicated by the
words tava kopah. A person who commits murder is envious of himself
and also the person he has killed, for the result of committing murder is
that he will be arrested and hanged. If one transgresses the laws of a
man-made government, he may escape being killed by the state, but one
cannot escape the laws of God. A killer of any animal must be killed in
his next life by the same animal. This is the law of nature. One must
follow the instructions of the Supreme Lord: sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekari Saranari vraja. If one follows any other system of religion, he
is subject to punishment by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in many
different ways. Therefore if one follows a concocted system of religion,


--- Page 140 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
he is envious not only of others but also of himself. Consequently his
system of religion is useless.
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.8) says:
dharmah svanusthitah purisarm
visvaksena-kathasu yah
notpadayed yadi ratirn
srama eva hi kevalam
“Duties [dharma] executed by men, regardless of occupation, are only so
much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of
the Supreme Lord.” Following a system of religion that does not awaken
one’s Krsna consciousness, or God consciousness, is merely a waste of
time and labor.
TEXT 43
a व्यभिचरति तवेक्षा ॥
यया द्यमिहितो मागवतो घमः |
स्थिरचरसच्वकदम्बे-
प्वपृथग्वियो यञरुपासते amt: gal
na vyabhicarati taveksa
yaya hy abhihito bhagavato dharmah
sthira-cara-sattva-kadambesv
aprthag-dhiyo yam upasate tv aryah
na—not; vyabhicarati—{fails; tava— Your; iksa—outlook; yaya —by
which; hi—indeed; abhihitah—declared; bhagavatah—in relationship
with Your instructions and activities; dharmah—religious principle;
sthira—nonmoving; cara—moving; sattva-kadambesu —among the
living entities; aprthak-dhiyah—who do not consider distinctions;
yam —which; updsate—follow; tu—certainly; aryah—those who are
advanced in civilization.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, one’s occupational duty is instructed in Srimad-
Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita according to Your point of view,


--- Page 141 ---
Text 43] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 137
which never deviates from the highest goal of life. Those who
follow their occupational duties under Your supervision, being
equal to all living entities, moving and nonmoving, and not con-
sidering high and low, are called Aryans. Such Aryans worship
You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

#

॥ PURPORT

Bhagavata-dharma and krsna-katha are identical. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu wanted everyone to become a guru and preach the instruc-
tions of Krsna everywhere from Bhagavad-gita, Srimad-Bhagavatam,
the Puranas, Vedanta-sitra and similar Vedic literatures. Aryans, who
are advanced in civilization, follow bhagavata-dharma. Prahlada
Maharaja, although merely a child of five years, recommended:

kaumdra acaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabharh 77107185077 janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)
Prahlada Maharaja preached bhagavata-dharma among his classmates as
soon as an opportunity was afforded by the absence of his teachers from
the classroom. He said that from the very beginning of life, from the age
of five, children should be instructed about bhagavata-dharma because
the human form of life, which is very rarely obtained, is meant for
understanding this subject.

Bhagavata-dharma means living according to the instructions of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita we find that the
Supreme Lord has arranged human society in four social divisions,
namely brahmana, ksatriya, vaiSya and $0070. Again, the Puranas and
other Vedic literatures set forth four asramas, which are the divisions of
spiritual life. Therefore bhagavata-dharma means the varnasrama-
dharma of the four social and four spiritual divisions.

The members of human society who strictly follow the principles of
bhagavata-dharma and live according to the instructions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are called Aryans or arya. A civilization of
Aryans who strictly follow the instructions of the Lord and never deviate
from those instructions is perfect. Such civilized men do not discriminate


--- Page 142 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
between trees, animals, human beings and other living entities. Panditah
sama-darsinah: because they are completely educated in Krsna con-
sciousness, they see all living beings equally. Aryans do not kill even a
small plant unnecessarily, not to speak of cutting trees for sense gra-
tification. At the present moment, throughout the world, killing is
prominent. Men are killing trees, they are killing animals, and they are
killing other human beings also, all for sense gratification. This is not an
Aryan civilization. As stated here, sthira-cara-sattva-kadambesv
aprthag-dhiyah. The word aprthag-dhiyah indicates that Aryans do not
distinguish between lower and higher grades of life. All life should be
protected. All living beings have a right to live, even the trees and plants.
This is the basic principle of an Aryan civilization. Apart from the lower
living entities, those who have come to the platform of human civiliza-
tion should be divided into a society of brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaiSyas
and S$idras. The brahmanas should follow the instructions of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as stated in Bhagavad-gita and other
Vedic literatures. The criterion must be guna and karma. In other
words, one should acquire the qualities of a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya
or Sidra and act accordingly. This is the civilization accepted by the
Aryans. Why do they accept it? They accept it because they are very
much eager to satisfy Krsna. This is perfect civilization.

Aryans do not deviate from the instructions of Krsna, nor do they
have doubts about Krsna, but non-Aryans and other demoniac people fail
to follow the instructions of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam.
This is because they have been trained in sense gratification at the cost of
all other living entities. Nina pramattah kurute vikarma: their only
business is to indulge in all kinds of forbidden activities for sense gra-
tification. Yad indriya-pritaya aprnoti: they deviate in this way because
they want to gratify their senses. They have no other occupation or ambi-
tion. Their method of civilization is condemned in the previous verse.
Kah ksemo nija-parayoh kiyan varthah sva-para-druha dharmena:
“What is the meaning of a civilization that kills oneself and others?”

This verse, therefore, advises that everyone become a member of the
Aryan civilization and accept the instructions of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. One should conduct his social, political and religious affairs
according to His instructions. We are spreading the Krsna consciousness
movement to try to establish a society the way that Krsna wants it. This is


--- Page 143 ---
Text 44] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 139
the meaning of Krsna consciousness. We are therefore presenting
Bhagavad-gita as it is and kicking out all kinds of mental concoction.
Fools and rascals interpret Bhagavad-gita in their own way. When Krsna
says, man-mand bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru—
“Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your
» homage unto Me” —they comment that it is not Krsna to whom we must
surrender. Thus they derive imaginary meanings from Bhagavad-gita.
The Krsna consciousness movement, however, strictly follows
bhagavata-dharma, the instructions of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-
Bhagavatam for the complete welfare of human society. One who misin-
terprets Bhagavad-gita, twisting out some meaning for his sense gra-
tification, is a non-Aryan. Therefore commentaries on Bhagavad-gita by
such persons should be immediately rejected. One should try to follow
Bhagavad-gita as it is. In Bhagavad-gita (12.6-7) Lord Sri Krsna says:
ye tu sarvani karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parah
ananyenaiva yogena
mari dhydyanta updsate
tesam aharh samuddharta
mrtyu-samsara-sagarat
bhavami na cirat partha
mayy aveSita-cetasam
“For one who worships Me, giving up all his activities unto Me and being
devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service and al-
ways meditating upon Me, who has fixed his mind upon Me, O son of
Prtha, for him I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth and
death.”
TEXT 44
न हि भगवम्नषटितमिदं
स्वदशेनान्कृणापरिक्ठि पापक्षयः |
यन्नामसङच्छरवणात्‌
पुक्कशोऽपि विगुच्यते संसारात्‌ ॥४४॥


--- Page 144 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
between trees, animals, human beings and other living entities. Panditah
sama-darsinah: because they are completely educated in Krsna con-
sciousness, they see all living beings equally. Aryans do not kill even a
small plant unnecessarily, not to speak of cutting trees for sense gra-
tification. At the present moment, throughout the world, killing is
prominent. Men are killing trees, they are killing animals, and they are
killing other human beings also, all for sense gratification. This is not an
Aryan civilization. As stated here, sthira-cara-sattva-kadambesv
aprthag-dhiyah. The word aprthag-dhiyah indicates that Aryans do not
distinguish between lower and higher grades of life. All life should be
protected. All living beings have a right to live, even the trees and plants.
This is the basic principle of an Aryan civilization. Apart from the lower
living entities, those who have come to the platform of human civiliza-
tion should be divided into a society of brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaiSyas
and S$idras. The brahmanas should follow the instructions of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as stated in Bhagavad-gita and other
Vedic literatures. The criterion must be guna and karma. In other
words, one should acquire the qualities of a brahmana, ksatriya, vaiSya
or Sidra and act accordingly. This is the civilization accepted by the
Aryans. Why do they accept it? They accept it because they are very
much eager to satisfy Krsna. This is perfect civilization.

Aryans do not deviate from the instructions of Krsna, nor do they
have doubts about Krsna, but non-Aryans and other demoniac people fail
to follow the instructions of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam.
This is because they have been trained in sense gratification at the cost of
all other living entities. Nina pramattah kurute vikarma: their only
business is to indulge in all kinds of forbidden activities for sense gra-
tification. Yad indriya-pritaya aprnoti: they deviate in this way because
they want to gratify their senses. They have no other occupation or ambi-
tion. Their method of civilization is condemned in the previous verse.
Kah ksemo nija-parayoh kiyan varthah sva-para-druha dharmena:
“What is the meaning of a civilization that kills oneself and others?”

This verse, therefore, advises that everyone become a member of the
Aryan civilization and accept the instructions of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. One should conduct his social, political and religious affairs
according to His instructions. We are spreading the Krsna consciousness
movement to try to establish a society the way that Krsna wants it. This is


--- Page 145 ---
Text 44] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 139
the meaning of Krsna consciousness. We are therefore presenting
Bhagavad-gita as it is and kicking out all kinds of mental concoction.
Fools and rascals interpret Bhagavad-gita in their own way. When Krsna
says, man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mar namaskuru—
“Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your
» homage unto Me”” —they comment that it is not Krsna to whom we must
surrender. Thus they derive imaginary meanings from Bhagavad-gita.
The Krsna consciousness movement, however, strictly follows
bhagavata-dharma, the instructions of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-
Bhagavatam for the complete welfare of human society. One who misin-
terprets Bhagavad-gita, twisting out some meaning for his sense gra-
tification, is a non-Aryan. Therefore commentaries on Bhagavad-gita by
such persons should be immediately rejected. One should try to follow
Bhagavad-gita as it is. In Bhagavad-gita (12.6-7) Lord Sri Krsna says:
ye tu sarvani karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parah
ananyenaiva yogena
mari dhydyanta updsate
tesam aha samuddharta
mriyu-sarnsara-sagarat
bhavami na cirat partha
mayy avesita-cetasam
“For one who worships Me, giving up all his activities unto Me and being
devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service and al-
ways meditating upon Me, who has fixed his mind upon Me, O son of
Prtha, for him I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth and
death.”
TEXT 44
न हि भगवश्नषटितमिदं
व्वदर्छनान्तरणामखिल पापक्षयः |
FARHAN
पुक्कशोऽपि विमुच्यते संसारात्‌ ngs


--- Page 146 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
na hi bhagavann aghatitam 10277
tvad-darsanan nrnam akhila-papa-ksayah
yan-nama sakrc chravanat
pukkaso 101 vimucyate sarisarat
na—not; hi—indeed; bhagavan—O my Lord; aghatitam—not oc-
curred; idam —this; tvat—of You; darsanat—by seeing; nrnam—of all
human beings; akhila—all; papa—of sins; ksayah—annihilation; yat-
nama —whose name; sakrt—only once; Sravanat—by hearing; puk-
kasah—the lowest class, the candala; api—also; vimucyate—is
delivered; saris@rat—from the entanglement of material existence.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, it is not impossible for one to be immediately freed
from all material contamination by seeing You. Not to speak of
seeing You personally, merely by hearing the holy name of Your
Lordship only once, even candalas, men of the lowest class, are
freed from all material contamination. Under the circumstances,
who will not be freed from material contamination simply by
seeing You?
PURPORT
As stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.5.16), yan-nama-sruti-
matrena puman bhavati nirmalah: simply by hearing the holy name of
the Lord, one is immediately purified. Therefore, in this age of Kali,
when all people are very contaminated, the chanting of the holy name of
the Lord is recommended as the only means of improvement.
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
ndsty eva gatir anyatha
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There
is no other way. There is no other way.” (Brhan-naradiya Purana) Sri


--- Page 147 ---
Text 45] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 141
Caitanya Mahaprabhu introduced this chanting of the holy name five
hundred years ago, and now through the Krsna consciousness movement,
the Hare Krsna movement, we are actually seeing that men who are con-
sidered to belong to the lowest class are being delivered from all sinful
activities simply by hearing the holy name of the Lord. Sarisdra, ma-

» terial existence, is a result of sinful actions. Everyone in this material
world is condemned, yet as there are different grades of prisoners, there
are different grades of men. All of them, in all statuses of life, are suffer-
ing. To stop the suffering of material existence, one must take to the
Hare Krsna movement of sarikirtana or Krsna conscious life.

Herein it is said, yan-nama sakrc chravandt: the holy name of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is so powerful that if once heard with-
out offenses, it can purify the lowest of men (kirata-hanandhra-
pulinda-pulkasah). Such men, who are called candalas, are less than
sizdras, but they also can be purified simply by hearing the holy name of
the Lord, not to speak of personally seeing the Lord. From our present
position, the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be personally seen as
the Deity in the temple. The Deity of the Lord is not different from the
Supreme Lord. Because we cannot see the Supreme Lord with our pres-
ent blunt eyes, the Lord has kindly consented to come before us in a form
we can see. Therefore the Deity in the temple should not be considered
material. By offering food to the Deity and by decorating and serving the
Deity, one gets the same result that one derives from serving the Lord
personally in Vaikuntha.

TEXT 45
अथ WE वयमधुना
त्वदवलोकपरिगृष्टाश्चयमलाः |
सुरऋषिणा यत्‌ कथितं
तावकेन कथमन्यथा मवति ॥४५॥
atha bhagavan vayam adhuna
tvad-avaloka-parimrstasaya-malah
sura-rsina yat kathitam
tavakena katham anyatha bhavati


--- Page 148 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
atha—therefore; bhagavan—O Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vayam—we; adhund—at the present moment; tvat-avaloka—by seeing
You; parimrsta—wiped away; dSaya-maladh—contaminated desires in
the heart: sura-rsina—by the great sage of the demigods (Narada);
yat—which; kathitam —spoken; tavakena—who is Your devotee;
katham —how; anyatha— otherwise; bhavati—can it be.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear Lord, simply seeing You has now wiped
away all the contamination of sinful activities and their results of
material attachment and lusty desires, which always filled my mind
and the core of my heart. Whatever is predicted by the great sage
Narada Muni cannot be otherwise. In other words, I have obtained
Your audience as a result of being trained by Narada Muni.
PURPORT
This is the process of the perfect way. One must take lessons from au-
thorities like Narada, Vyasa and Asita, and follow their principles. Then
one will be able to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead even with
one’s own eyes. One only needs training. Atah $ri-krsna-namadi na
bhaved grahyam indriyaih. With our blunt eyes and other senses we
cannot perceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but if we engage
our senses in the service of the Lord according to the instructions of the
authorities, it will be possible to see Him. As soon as one sees the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, all the sinful reactions in the core of
one’s heart are certainly vanquished.
TEXT 46
fifa समस्तं
ES
तव जगदात्मनो जनेरिदाचरितम्‌ |
विज्ञाप्यं परमगुरोः
कियदिव सवितुरिव অআনীঃ ivan
viditam ananta samastari
tava jagad-atmano janair ihacaritam


--- Page 149 ---
Text 47] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 143
vijiapyari parama-guroh
kiyad iva savitur iva khadyotaih
viditam—well known; ananta—O unlimited; samastam—every-
thing; tava —to You; jagat-atmanah—who are the Supersoul of all living
# entities; janaih—Dby the mass of people, or all living entities; itha—
within this material world; acaritam —performed; vijigpyam—to be in-
formed; parama-guroh—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
supreme master; kiyat—how much; iva—certainly; savituh—to the
sun; wva—like; khadyotaih—by the fireflies.
TRANSLATION
O unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, whatever a living
entity does in this material world is well known to You because You
are the Supersoul. In the presence of the sun there is nothing to be
revealed by the light of a glowworm. Similarly, because You know
everything, in Your presence there is nothing for me to make
known.
TEXT 47
नमस्तुम्यं मगवते
सकरजगत्स्यितिलयोदयेखाय ।
दुरवसितात्मगतये
योगिनां मिदा परमहंसाय gall
namas tubhyam bhagavate
sakala-jagat-sthiti-layodayesaya
duravasitatma-gataye
kuyoginam bhida paramaharmsaya
namah—all obeisances; tubhyam —unto You; bhagavate —Your Lord-
ship; sakala—all; jagat—of the cosmic manifestation; sthiti—of the
maintenance; laya —dissolution; udaya—and creation; #@ya—unto the
Supreme Lord; duravasita—impossible to understand; atma-gataye—
whose own position; ku-yoginam—of those who are attached to the ob-
jects of the senses; bhida—by the false understanding of separateness;
parama-hamsaya—unto the supreme pure.


--- Page 150 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You are the creator, maintainer and annihilator of
this cosmic manifestation, but persons who are too materialistic
and who always see separateness do not have eyes with which to see
You. They cannot understand Your real position, and therefore
they conclude that the cosmic manifestation is independent of
Your opulence. My Lord, You are the supreme pure, and You
are full in all six opulences. Therefore I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
Atheistic men think that the cosmic manifestation has come about by
chance, by a combination of matter, without reference to God. Ma-
terialistic so-called chemists and atheistic philosophers always try to
avoid even the name of God in relation to the cosmic manifestation. For
them God’s creation is impossible to understand because they are too ma-
terialistic. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is paramaharisa, or the
supreme pure, whereas those who are sinful, being very much attached
to material sense enjoyment and therefore engaging in material activities
like asses, are the lowest of men. All their so-called scientific knowledge
is null and void because of their atheistic temperament. Thus they cannot
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 48
यं वै श्वसन्तमनु विश्वसृजः maf
य॑ चेकितानमनु चित्तय उचकन्ति |
भूमण्डलं सर्षपायति यस्य मूर्धनि
तस्मै नमो मगवतेऽस्तु सदसखमूर्ने ॥४८॥
yar vai Svasantam anu visva-srjah Svasanti
yarn cekitanam anu cittaya uccakanti
bhii-mandalar sarsapayati yasya miirdhni
tasmai namo bhagavate stu sahasra-miirdhne


--- Page 151 ---
Text 49] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 145
yam —whom; vai—indeed; Svasantam—endeavoring; anu—after;
viSva-srjah—the directors of the cosmic creation; Svasanti—also en-
deavor; yam—whom; cekitdnam—perceiving; anu—after; cittayah—
all the knowledge-gathering senses; uccakanti—perceive; bhii-man-
dalam —the huge universe; sarsapayati—become like seeds of mustard;
# yasya—of whom; miirdhni—on the head; tasmai—unto Him; namah—
obeisances; bhagavate—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full with
six opulences; astu—may there be; sahasra-mirdhne—who has thou-
sands of hoods.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, it is after You endeavor that Lord Brahma, Indra
and the other directors of the cosmic manifestation become oc-
cupied with their activities. It is after You perceive the material en-
ergy, My Lord, that the senses begin to perceive. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead holds all the universes on His heads like
seeds of mustard. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, that
Supreme Personality, who has thousands of hoods.
TEXT 49
HF उवाच
संस्तुतो भगवानेदमनन्तस्तमभाषत |
विद्याधरपतिं प्रीतधित्रकेतं इरूढह ।॥४९॥
sri-Suka uvaca
saristuto bhagavan evam
anantas tam abhasata
vidyadhara-patirh pritas
citraketumn kuridvaha
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvimi said; sariistutah —being
worshiped; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; evam—in
this way; anantah—Lord Ananta; tam—unto him; abhdsata—replied;
vidyadhara-patim—the King of the Vidyadharas; pritah—being very
pleased; citraketum —King Citraketu; kuru-udvaha—O best of the Kuru
dynasty, Maharaja Pariksit.


--- Page 152 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: The Lord, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Anantadeva, being very much pleased with
the prayers offered by Citraketu, the King of the Vidyadharas,
replied to him as follows, O best of the Kuru dynasty, Maharaja
Pariksit.
TEXT 50
श्रीभगवालवाच
यन्नारदा्गिरोम्यां ते व्याहृतं मेऽलुश्ासनम्‌ |
©.
संसिद्धोऽसि तया राजन्‌ विद्यया दशेनाच मे ite
sri-bhagavan ८४९८०
yan naradarngirobhyar te
vyahrtari me ‘nusasanam
samsiddho si taya rajan
vidyaya darsanac ca me
sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sankar-
sana, replied; yat—which; narado-argirobhyam—by the great sages
Narada and Angira; te—unto you; vyahrtam—spoken; me—of Me;
anu$asanam—the worship; samsiddhah—completely perfected; asi—
you are; taya—by that; rajan—O King; vidyaya—mantra; darsanat—
from the direct sight; ca—as well as; me—of Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Anantadeva, replied as
follows: O King, as a result of your having accepted the instruc-
tions spoken about Me by the great sages Narada and Angira, you
have become completely aware of transcendental knowledge. Be-
cause you are now educated in the spiritual science, you have seen
Me face to face. Therefore you are now completely perfect.
PURPORT
The perfection of life is to be spiritually educated and to understand
the existence of the Lord and how He creates, maintains and annihilates


--- Page 153 ---
Text 50] King Citrakeiu Meets the Lord 147
the cosmic manifestation. When one is perfect in knowledge, he can
develop his love of Godhead through the association of such perfect per-
sons as Narada and Angira and the members of their disciplic succession.
Then one is able to see the unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead
face to face. Although the Lord is unlimited, by His causeless mercy He
becomes visible to the devotee, who is then able to see Him. In our pres-
ent position of conditioned life we cannot see or understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah
“No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form,
quality and pastimes of Sri Krsna through his materially contaminated
senses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental
service to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality and
pastimes of the Lord revealed to him.” (Bhakti-rasamrta-
sindhu 1.2.234) If one takes to spiritual life under the direction of
Narada Muni or his representative and thus engages himself in the ser-
vice of the Lord, he qualifies himself to see the Lord face to face. The
Brahma-samhita (5.38) states:
premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yarn Syamasundaram acintya-guna-svaripari
govindam adi-purusari tam ahari bhajami
“I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devo-
tee whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eter-
nal form of Syamasundara situated within the heart of the devotee.” One
must follow the instructions of the spiritual master. Thus one becomes
qualified and later sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as evinced
by Maharaja Citraketu.


--- Page 154 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
TEXT 51
: A
अहं वै सर्वभूतानि भूतात्मा भूतभावनः |
TRAM परं ब्रह्म ममोभे शाश्वती तन्‌ ॥५१॥
1 1/8... 1.11
bhatatma bhita-bhavanah
Sabda-brahma [00707 brahma
mamobhe $asvati tani

aham—1I; vai—indeed; sarva-bhiitani—expanded in different forms
of living entities; bhita-atma—the Supersoul of all living entities (the
supreme director and enjoyer of them); bhiita-bhavanah—the cause for
the manifestation of all living entities; Sabda-brahma—the transcenden-
tal sound vibration (the Hare Krsna mantra); param brahma—the
Supreme Absolute Truth; mama—My; ubhe—both (namely, the form
of sound and the form of spiritual identity); $asvati —eternal; tani —two
bodies.

TRANSLATION

All living entities, moving and nonmoving, are My expansions
and are separate from Me. I am the Supersoul of all living beings,
who exist because I manifest them. I am the form of the transcen-
dental vibrations like 01111871073 and Hare Krsna Hare Rama, and I am
the Supreme Absolute Truth. These two forms of Mine —namely,
the transcendental sound and the eternally blissful spiritual form
of the Deity, are My eternal forms; they are not material.

PURPORT

The science of devotional service has been instructed by Narada and
Angira to Citraketu. Now, because of Citraketu’s devotional service, he
has seen the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By performing devotional
service, one advances step by step, and when one is on the platform of
love of Godhead (prema pumartho mahan) he sees the Supreme Lord at
every moment. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, when one engages in devo-
tional service twenty-four hours a day (tesa satata-yuktanarn bhajatarn
priti-pirvakam) in accordance with the instructions of the spiritual


--- Page 155 ---
Text 51] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 149
master, his devotional service becomes more and more pleasing. Then
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is within the core of every-
one’s heart, speaks to the devotee (dadami buddhi-yogar tari yena
mam upayanti te). Citraketu Maharaja was first instructed by his gurus,
Angira and Narada, and now, having followed their instructions, he has

» come to the stage of seeing the Supreme Lord face to face. Therefore the
Lord is now instructing him in the essence of knowledge.

The essence of knowledge is that there are two kinds of vastu, or sub-
stances, One is real, and the other, being illusory or temporary, is some-
times called nonfactual. One must consider these two kinds of existence.
The real tattva, or truth, consists of Brahman, Paramatma, and
Bhagavin. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11):

vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvarn yaj jianam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate
‘Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this non-
dual substance Brahman, Paramitma or Bhagavan.” The Absolute Truth
exists eternally in three features. Therefore, Brahman, Paramatma and
Bhagavan combined are the substance.

The categories of emanations from the nonsubstance are two—ac-
tivities and forbidden activities (karma and vikarma). Karma refers to
the pious life or material activities performed during the day and the
mental activities of dreams at night. These are more or less desired ac-
tivities. Vikarma, however, refers to illusory activities, which are some-
thing like the will-o’-the-wisp. These are activities that have no mean-
ing. For example, modern scientists imagine that life can be produced
from chemical combinations, and they are very busy trying to prove this
in laboratories throughout the world, although no one in history has been
able to produce the substance of life from material combinations. Such
activities are called vikarma.

All material activities are actually illusory, and progress in illusion is
simply a waste of time. These illusory activities are called akarya, and
one must learn of them from the instructions of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.17):


--- Page 156 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
karmano hy api boddhavyar
boddhavyari ca vikarmanah
akarmanas ca boddhavyamn
gahana karmano gatih
“The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one
should know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and what
inaction 15.”” One must learn of these directly from the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who, as Anantadeva, is instructing King Citraketu
because of the advanced stage of devotional service he achieved by
following the instructions of Narada and Angira.

Herein it is said, aham vai sarva-bhitani: the Lord is everything
(sarva-bhitani), including the living entities and the material or physi-
cal elements. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (7.4-5):

bhamir apo १2८० vayuh
khari mano buddhir eva ca
aharkara itiyarh me
bhinna prakrtir astadha
apareyam itas tv anyam
prakrtirh viddhi me param
Jjiva-bhitarn maha-baho
yayedam dhdryate jagat
“Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all
together these eight comprise My separated material energies. Besides
this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy
of Mine, which consists of the living entities, who are struggling with
material nature and are sustaining the universe.” The living entity tries
to lord it over the material or physical elements, but both the physical
elements and the spiritual spark are energies emanating from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord says, ahari vai
sarva-bhitani: “I am everything.” Just as heat and light emanate from
fire, these two energies—the physical elements and the living entities—


--- Page 157 ---
Text 51] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 151
emanate from the Supreme Lord. Therefore the Lord says, aham vai
sarva-bhitani: “I expand the physical and spiritual categories.”

Again, the Lord, as the Supersoul, guides the living entities who are
conditioned by the physical atmosphere. Therefore he is called bhiatatma
bhiita-bhavanah. He gives the living entity the intelligence with which

to improve his position so that he may return home, back to Godhead, or

"if he does not want to go back to Godhead, the Lord gives him the intelli-
gence with which to improve his material position. This is confirmed by
the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (15.15). Sarvasya caharir hrdi san-
nivisto mattah smrtir jagnam apohanari ca: “‘I am seated in everyone's
heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness.”
From within, the Lord gives the living being the intelligence with which
to work. Therefore the previous verse said that after the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead endeavors, our endeavors begin. We cannot inde-
pendently endeavor or act upon anything. Therefore the Lord is bhiita-
bhavanah.

Another specific feature of the knowledge given in this verse is that
sabda-brahma is also a form of the Supreme Lord. In His eternal,
blissful form, Lord Krsna is accepted by Arjuna as param brahma. A liv-
ing entity in the conditioned stage accepts something illusory as substan-
tial. This is called maya or avidya—ignorance. Therefore according to
the Vedic knowledge, one must become a devotee, and one must then dis-
tinguish between avidya and vidya, which are elaborately explained in
the [opanisad. When one is actually on the platform of vidya, he can
personally understand the Personality of Godhead in His forms like those
of Lord Rama, Lord Krsna and Sankarsana. The Vedic knowledge is de-
scribed as the breathing of the Supreme Lord, and activities begin on the
basis of Vedic knowledge. Therefore the Lord says that when He en-
deavors or breathes, the material universes come into existence, and
various activities gradually develop. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita,
pranavah sarva-vedesu: “I am the syllable ori in all the Vedic mantras.”
Vedic knowledge begins with the vibration of the transcendental sound
pranava, ormkara. The same transcendental sound is Hare Krsna. Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama.
Hare Hare. Abhinnatvan nama-naminoh: there is no difference be-
tween the holy name of the Lord and the Lord Himself.


--- Page 158 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
TEXT 52
लोके विततमात्मानं लोकं चारमनि सन्ततम्‌ |
. . EY .
उभयं च मय। व्याप्तं मयि SE कृतम्‌ ॥५२॥
loke vitatam atmanariu
lokam catmani santatam
ubhayam ca maya vyaptar
mayi caivobhayar krtam
loke —in this material world; vitatam —expanded (in the spirit of ma-
terial enjoyment); atmanam—the living entity; lokam —the material
world; ca—also; atmani—in the living entity; santatam—spread;
ubhayam —both (the material world of material elements and the living
entity); ca—and; maya—by Me; vyaptam—pervaded; mayi—in Me;
ca—also; eva—indeed; ubhayam—both of them; krtam—created.
TRANSLATION
In this world of matter, which the conditioned soul accepts as
consisting of enjoyable resources, the conditioned soul expands,
thinking that he is the enjoyer of the material world. Similarly, the
material world expands in the living entity as a source of enjoy-
ment. In this way they both expand, but because they are My en-
ergies, they are both pervaded by Me. As the Supreme Lord, I am
the cause of these effects, and one should know that both of them
rest in Me.
PURPORT
The Mayavada philosophy sees everything as being equal in quality
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or the Supreme Brahman, and
therefore sees everything as worshipable. This dangerous theory of the
Mayivada school has turned people in general toward atheism. On the
strength of this theory, one thinks that he is God, but this is not a fact. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (maya tatam idam 57077 jagad avyakta-miir-
tina), the fact is that the entire cosmic manifestation is an expansion of
the Supreme Lord’s energies, which are manifested in the physical ele-
ments and the living entities. The living entities wrongly consider the


--- Page 159 ---
Text 54] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 153
physical elements to be resources meant for their enjoyment, and they
think themselves to be the enjoyers. However, neither of them is inde-
pendent; they are both energies of the Lord. The original cause for the
material energy and spiritual energy is the Supreme Personality of God-
head. However, although the expansion of the Lord’s energies is the
# original cause, one should not think that the Lord Himself has expanded
in different ways. To condemn the theories of the Mayavadis, the Lord
clearly says in Bhagavad-gita, mat-sthani sarva-bhitani na caharm tesv
avasthitah: “All beings are in Me, but I am not in them.” Everything
rests upon Him, and everything is but an expansion of His energies, but
this does not mean that everything is as worshipable as the Lord Himself.
The material expansion is temporary, but the Lord is not temporary. The
living entities are parts of the Lord, but they are not the Lord Himself.
The living entities in this material world are not inconceivable, but the
Lord is. The theory that the Lord’s energies, being expansions of the
Lord, are as good as the Lord is mistaken.
TEXTS 53-54
यथा सुषुप्ः पुरुषो বিহন ঘহ্যানি चात्मनि ।
आत्मानमेकदेशस्थं मन्यते खम उत्थितः nui
एवं जागरणादीनि जीवस्थानानि चात्मनः ।
मायामात्राणि विज्ञाय तदुद्रषटारं परं खरेत्‌ kel
yatha susuptah puruso
viSvarn paSyati catmani
atmanam eka-desa-stharh
manyate svapna utthitah
evan jagaranddini
Jiva-sthanani catmanah
maya-matrani vijigya
tad-drastarar param smaret
yatha—just as; susuptah—sleeping; purusah—a person; visvam—
the whole universe; pasyati—perceives; ca—also; atmani—in himself;


--- Page 160 ---
154 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
atmanam—himself; eka-desa-stham—lying down in one place; man-
yate—he considers; svapne —in the dreaming condition; utthitah—wak-
ing up; evam—in this way; jagarana-adini—the states of wakefulness
and so on; jiva-sthandni—the living entity’s different conditions of exis-
tence; ca—also; atmanah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
madya-matrani— the exhibitions of the illusory potency; vijidya—know-
ing; tat—of them; drastaram—the creator or seer of all such conditions;
param —the Supreme; smaret—one should always remember.
TRANSLATION

When a person is in deep sleep, he dreams and sees in himself
many other objects, such as great mountains and rivers or perhaps
even the entire universe, although they are far away. Sometimes
when one awakens from a dream he sees that he is in a human
form, lying in his bed in one place. Then he sees himself, in terms
of various conditions, as belonging to a particular nationality,
family and so on. All the conditions of deep sleep, dreaming and
wakefulness are but energies of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. One should always remember the original creator of these
conditions, the Supreme Lord, who is unaffected by them.

PURPORT

None of these conditions of the living entities—namely, deep sleep,
dreaming and wakefulness —is substantial. They are simply displays of
various phases of conditional life. There may be many mountains, rivers,
trees, bees, tigers and snakes that are situated far away, but in a dream
one may imagine them to be nearby. Similarly, as one has subtle dreams
at night, when the living entity is awake he lives in gross dreams of
nation, community, society, possessions, skyscrapers, bank balance,
position and honor. Under the circumstances, one should know that his
position is due to his contact with the material world. One is situated in
different positions in various forms of life that are all but creations of the
illusory energy, which works under the direction of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Therefore the Supreme Lord is the ultimate actor,
and the conditioned living entity should simply remember this original
actor, Sri Krsna. As living entities, we are being carried away by the
waves of prakrti, or nature, which works under the Lord’s direction


--- Page 161 ---
Text 55] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 155
(mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sa-caracaram). Bhaktivinoda Thakura
sings, (miche) mayara vase, yaccha bhese’, khaccha habudubu, bhai:
“Why are you being carried away by the waves of the illusory energy in
various phases of dreaming and wakefulness? These are all creations of
maya.” Our only duty is to remember the supreme director of this il-
slusory energy —Krsna. For us to do this, the sastra advises us, harer
nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam: one should constantly chant
the holy name of the Lord —Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. The Supreme
Lord is realized in three different phases, as Brahman, Paramatma and
Bhagavan, but Bhagavan is the ultimate realization. One who realizes
Bhagavan —the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna—is the most
perfect mahatma (vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma sudurlabhah). In
the human form of life, one should understand the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, for then one will understand everything else. Yasmin vijiiate
sarvam evar vjnatarn bhavati. According to this Vedic injunction,
simply by understanding Krsna one understands Brahman, Paramatma,
prakrti, the illusory energy, the spiritual energy and everything else.
Everything will be revealed. Prakrti, the material nature, is- working
under the direction of the Supreme Lord, and we living entities are being
carried away by various phases of prakrti. For self-realization, one
should always remember Krsna. As stated in Padma Purana, smar-
tavyah satatarn visnuh: we should always remember Lord Visnu.
Vismartavyo na jatucit: we should never forget the Lord. This is the
perfection of life.
7 TEXT 55
येन प्रसुप्तः पुरुः स्वापं बेदात्मनस्तद्‌] ।
सुखं च निगणं बह्म तमात्मानमवेहि माम्‌ ॥५५॥
yena prasuptah purusah
svapari vedatmanas tada
sukharh ca nirgunar brahma
tam atmanam avehi mam
yena—by whom (the Supreme Brahman); prasuptah—sleeping;
purusah—a man; svdpam—the subject of a dream; veda—knows; at-


--- Page 162 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
manah—of himself; tadd—at that time; sukham —happiness; ca—also;
nirgunam —without contact with the material environment; brahma—
the supreme spirit; tam —Him; atmanam—the pervader; avehi—just
know; mam —Me.
TRANSLATION

Know Me to be the Supreme Brahman, the all-pervading Super-
soul through whom the sleeping living entity can understand his
dreaming condition and his happiness beyond the activities of the
material senses. That is to say, I am the cause of the activities of the
sleeping living being.

PURPORT

When the living entity becomes free from false ego, he understands
his superior position as a spirit soul, part and parcel of the pleasure
potency of the Lord. Thus, due to Brahman, even while sleeping the liv-
ing entity can enjoy. The Lord says, “That Brahman, that Paramatma
and that Bhagavan are I Myself.”” This is noted by Srila Jiva Gosvami in
his Krama-sandarbha.

TEXT 56
उभयं WE: पुंसः प्रखापग्रतिबोधयोः |
अन्वेति व्यतिरिच्येत तज्ज्ञानं ब्रह्म तत्‌ परम्‌ ।।५६।।
1/1 .1/ 18/18. 1 11
prasvapa-pratibodhayoh
anveti vyatiricyeta
taj jianarn brahma tat param

ubhayam—both types of consciousness (sleep and wakefulness);
smaratah—remembering; purisah—of the person; prasvapa—of con-
sciousness during sleep; pratibodhayoh—and of consciousness while
awake; anveti—extends through; vyatiricyeta—may reach beyond;
tat—that; jaanam—knowledge; brahma—the Supreme Brahman; tat—
that; param —transcendental.


--- Page 163 ---
Text 57] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 157
TRANSLATION

If one’s dreams during sleep are merely subject matters wit-
nessed by the Supersoul, how can the living entity, who is dif-
ferent from the Supersoul, remember the activities of dreams?
The experiences of one person cannot be understood by another.

#Therefore the knower of the facts, the living entity who inquires
into the incidents manifested in dreams and wakefulness, is dif-
ferent from the circumstantial activities. That knowing factor is
Brahman. In other words, the quality of knowing belongs to the
living entities and to the Supreme Soul. Thus the living entity can
also experience the activities of dreams and wakefulness. In both
stages the knower is unchanged, but is qualitatively one with the
Supreme Brahman.
PURPORT

In knowledge the living entity is qualitatively one with the Supreme
Brahman, but the quantity of the Supreme Brahman is not the same as
that of the living entity, who is part of Brahman. Because the living en-
tity is Brahman in quality, he can remember the past activities of dreams
and also know the present activities of wakefulness.

TEXT 57
यदेतवदिस्तं पुंसो मद्भावं भिलमात्मनः |
ततः संसार एतस्य देदादेहो TWA: mel)
yad etad vismrtarh puriiso
mad-bhavam bhinnam atmanah
tatah sarhsdara etasya
dehad deho mrter mrtih

yat—which; etat—this; vismrtam—forgotten; purisah—of the living
entity; mat-bhavam—My spiritual position; bhinnam—separation; at-
manah—from the Supreme Soul; tatah—from that; saris@rah—ma-
terial, conditional life; etasya—of the living entity; dehat—from one
body; dehah—another body; mrteh—from one death; mrtih—another
death.


--- Page 164 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION

When a living entity, thinking himself different from Me,
forgets his spiritual identity of qualitative oneness with Me in eter-
nity, knowledge and bliss, his material, conditional life begins. In
other words, instead of identifying his interest with Mine, he be-
comes interested in his bodily expansions like his wife, children
and material possessions. In this way, by the influence of his ac-
tions, one body comes from another, and after one death, another
death takes place.

PURPORT

Generally the Mayavadi philosophers or persons influenced by
Mayavadi philosophers think themselves as good as the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. This is the cause of their conditional life. As stated
by the Vaisnava poet Jagadananda Pandita in his Prema-vivarta:

krsna-bahirmukha hana bhoga vancha kare
nikata-stha maya tare japatiya dhare

As soon as a living entity forgets his constitutional position and en-
deavors to become one with the Supreme, his conditional life begins. The
conception that the Supreme Brahman and the living entity are equal not
only in quality but also in quantity is the cause of conditional life. If one
forgets the difference between the Supreme Lord and the living entity,
his conditional life begins. Conditional life means giving up one body to
accept another and undergoing death to accept death again. The
Mayavadi philosopher teaches the philosophy of tat tvam asi, saying,
“You are the same as God.” He forgets that tat tvam asi applies in terms
of the marginal position of the living entity, who is like sunshine. There
is heat and light in the sun, and there is heat and light in the sunshine,
and thus they are qualitatively one. But one should not forget that the
sunshine rests on the sun. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita, brahmano
hi pratisthaham: “I am the original source of Brahman.” The sunshine
is important because of the presence of the sun globe. It is not that the
sun globe is important because of the all-pervasiveness of the sunshine.
Forgetfulness and misunderstanding of this fact is called maya. Because


--- Page 165 ---
Text 58] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 159
of forgetfulness of one’s constitutional position and that of the Supreme
Lord, one comes into maya, or sarisara—conditional life. In this regard,
Madhvicarya says:
sarva-bhinnari paratmanarn
vismaran samsared iha
4 abhinnari 57357710707) yati
tamo nasty atra sarh$ayah
When one thinks that the living entity is nondifferent in all respects
from the Supreme Lord, there is no doubt that he is in ignorance
(tamah).
TEXT 58
Foe मालुषीं योनिं ज्ञानविष्टारसम्थराय्‌ ।
9 च
आत्मानं यो न बुद्धथेत न कचित्‌ क्षेममाप्लुयात्‌ ।॥।५८॥
labdhveha manusir ১0772
JjhAana-vijiiana-sambhavam
atmanari yo na buddhyeta
na kvacit ksemam apnuyat
labdhva—achieving; iha—in this material world (especially in this
pious land of Bharata-varsa, India); manusim—the human; yonim—
species; jiiana—of knowledge through Vedic scriptures; vijiana—and
practical application of that knowledge in life; sambhavam—wherein
there is a possibility; atmanam—one’s real identity; yah—anyone who;
na—not; buddhyeta —understands; na—never; kvacit—at any time;
19567770771 —success in life; apnuyat—can obtain.
TRANSLATION
A human being can attain perfection in life by self-realization
through the Vedic literature and its practical application. This is
possible especially for a human being born in India, the land of
piety. A man who obtains birth in such a convenient position but
does not understand his self is unable to achieve the highest per-
fection, even if he is exalted to life in the higher planetary
systems.


--- Page 166 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
PURPORT

This statement is confirmed in Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 9.41). Lord

Caitanya said:
bharata-bhamite haila manusya-janma yara
janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara
Everyone born in India, especially as a human being, can achieve the
supreme success through the Vedic literature and its practical application
in life. When one is perfect, he can render a service for the self-
realization of the entire human society. This is the best way to perform
humanitarian work.
TEXT 59
TATE WRB ततः FORAY |
अमयं বায্যনীহাযা सङ्कत्यादिरमेत्करिः ॥५९॥
smrtvehayari pariklesar
tatah phala-viparyayam
abhayar capy anthayar
sarikalpad viramet kavih

smrtva—remembering; thayam—in the field of activities with fru-
itive results; parikleSam —the waste of energy and the miserable condi-
tions; tatah—from that; phala-viparyayam—the opposite of the desired
result; abhayam—fearlessness; ca—also; api—indeed; anithayam—
when there is no desire for fruitive results; sarikalpat—from material
desire; viramet—should cease; kavih—one who is advanced in knowl-
edge.

TRANSLATION

Remembering the great trouble found in the field of activities
performed for fruitive results, and remembering how one receives
the reverse of the results one desires—whether from material ac-
tions or from the fruitive activities recommended in the Vedic
literatures—an intelligent man should cease from the desire for


--- Page 167 ---
Text 62] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 161
fruitive actions, for by such endeavors one cannot achieve the ulti-
mate goal of life. On the other hand, if one acts without desires for
fruitive results—in other words, if one engages in devotional ac-
tivities — he can achieve the highest goal of life with freedom from
miserable conditions. Considering this, one should cease from
/material desires.
TEXT 60
सखाय दुःखमोक्षाय FQ दग्पती क्रियाः |
ऽ
ततोऽनिषृत्तिरपरा्िदु खस्य च सुखस्य च ॥६०॥
sukhaya duhkha-moksaya
kurvate dampati kriyah
tato ’nivrttir apraptir
duhkhasya ca sukhasya ca
sukhaya—for happiness; duhkha-moksaya—for release from the
unhappy state; kurvate—perform; dam-pati—the wife and husband;
kriyah—activities; tatah—from that; anivrttih—no cessation; aprap-
tih—no achievement; duhkhasya—of distress; ca—also; sukhasya—of
happiness; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
As husband and wife, a man and woman plan together to attain
happiness and decrease unhappiness, working jointly in many
ways, but because their activities are full of desires, these activities
are never a source of happiness, and they never diminish distress.
On the contrary, they are a cause of great unhappiness.
TEXTS 61-62
[| Ce
ad बिषयेयं बुद्ध्वा Jo विज्ञाभिमानिनाम्‌ |
आत्मनश्च गतिं मां स्थान्यिलष्णाय्‌ ॥६१॥
[9
रटशरुताभिा्ामिनि्क्तः स्वेन तेजसा |
ज्ञानविज्ञानसन्तुपो मद्भक्तः पुरुषो भवेत्‌ ॥६२॥


--- Page 168 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
evar viparyayari buddhva
nrnam vijiabhimaninam
atmanas ca gatirm siiksmarn
sthana-traya-vilaksanam
drsta-srutabhir matrabhir
nirmuktah svena tejasa
JAdna-vijiiana-santrpto
mad-bhaktah puruso bhavet
evam—in this way; viparyayam—reversal; buddhvd—realizing;
nrpam—of men; vijia-abhimaninam —who think of themselves as full
of scientific knowledge; atmanah—of the self; ca—also; gatim—the
progress; sithsmam—extremely difficult to understand; sthana-traya—
the three conditions of life (deep sleep, dreaming and wakefulness);
vilaksanam—apart from; drsta—directly perceived; srutabhih—or
understood by information from authorities; matrabhih—from objects;
nirmuktah—being freed; svena—by one’s own; tejasa—strength of con-
sideration; jiana-vijiana—with knowledge and practical application of
the knowledge; santrptah—being fully satisfied; mat-bhaktah—My
devotee; purusah—a person; bhavet—should become.
TRANSLATION
One should understand that the activities of persons who are
proud of their material experience bring only results contradic-
tory to those such persons conceive while awake, sleeping and
deeply sleeping. One should further understand that the spirit
soul, although very difficult for the materialist to perceive, is
above all these conditions, and by the strength of one’s discrimina-
tion, one should give up the desire for fruitive results in the
present life and in the next. Thus becoming experienced in tran-
scendental knowledge, one should become My devotee.
TEXT 63
एतावानेव मनुजैर्योगनैपुण्यवुद्धिभिः ।
साथः सर्वात्मना जेयो यर ।६२॥


--- Page 169 ---
Text 64] King Citraketu Meets the Lord 163
etavan eva manujair
yoga-naipunya-buddhibhih
svarthah sarvatmana jiieyo
yat paratmaika-darsanam
,# etavan—this much; eva—indeed; manujaih—by human beings;
yoga—by the process of linking with the Supreme by bhakti-yoga;
naipunya—endowed with expertise; buddhibhih—who have intelli-
gence; sva-arthah—the ultimate goal of life; sarva-atmana—by all
means; jiieyah —to be known; yat—which; para—of the transcendental
Lord; atma—and of the soul; eka—of the oneness; darsanam—under-
standing.
TRANSLATION

Persons who try to reach the ultimate goal of life must expertly
observe the Supreme Absolute Person and the living entity, who
are one in quality in their relationship as part and whole. This is
the ultimate understanding of life. There is no better truth than
this.

TEXT 64
त्वमेतच्छ्रद्धया राजन्ञप्रमत्तो वचो मम ।
-
ज्ञानरिह्ञावसम्पभो ধাযেল্সাহ্যু fst ngs
tvam etac chraddhaya rajann
apramatto vaco mama
JARdna-vijidna-sampanno
dharayann asu sidhyasi

tvam—you; etat—this; Sraddhaya—with great faith and allegiance;
rajan—O King; apramattah—without being mad or deviated to any
other conclusion; vacah—instruction; mama—of Me; jRana-vijiana-
sampannah—being fully aware of knowledge and its practical applica-
tion in life; dharayan—accepting; asu—very soon; sidhyasi—you will
become the most perfect.

TRANSLATION

O King, if you accept this conclusion of Mine, being unattached

to material enjoyment, adhering to Me with great faith and thus


--- Page 170 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 16
becoming proficient and fully aware of knowledge and its practical
application in life, you will achieve the highest perfection by
attaining Me.
TEXT 65
श्रीशुक उवाच
आश्वास्य मगवानित्थं चित्रकेतुं gE: |
पश्यतस्तस्य विश्वात्मा ततशान्तदंधे हरिः ॥६५॥
Sri-Suka 20৫০৫
asvasya bhagavan itthari
citraketurh jagad-guruh
pasyatas tasya viSvatma
tatas cantardadhe harih
sri-Sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; asvdsya—assuring;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ittham—thus;
citraketum—King Citraketu; jagat-guruh—the supreme spiritual
master; paSyatah—while looking on; tasya—he; viSva-atma—the
Supersoul of the whole universe; tatah—from there; ca—also; antar-
dadhe—disappeared; harih—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After thus instructing
Citraketu and assuring him of perfection in this way, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme spiritual master, the
supreme soul, Sankarsana, disappeared from that place as
Citraketu looked on.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Sixteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “King Citraketu Meets the
Supreme Lord.”


--- Page 171 ---
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu
Fd
The Seventeenth Chapter is summarized as follows. This chapter de-
scribes Citraketu’s receiving the body of an asura, or demon, because of
joking with Lord Siva.

After personally talking with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
King Citraketu enjoyed life in his airplane with the women of the
Vidyadhara planet. Engaging in the congregational chanting of the glo-
ries of the Lord, he began flying his plane and traveling in outer space.
One day while traveling like this, he wandered into the bowers of
Sumeru Mountain, where he came upon Lord Siva embracing Parvati,
surrounded by an assembly of Siddhas, Caranas and great sages. Seeing
Lord Siva in that situation, Citraketu laughed very loudly, but Parvati
became very angry at him and cursed him. Because of this curse,
Citraketu later appeared as the demon Vrtrasura.

Citraketu, however, was not at all afraid of Parvati’s curse, and thus
he spoke as follows: “Everyone in human society enjoys happiness and
distress according to his past deeds and in this way travels in the material
world. Therefore no one is responsible for his happiness and distress.
One is controlled by the influence of material nature in the material
world, yet one thinks himself the doer of everything. In this material
world, which is made of the external energy of the Supreme Lord, one is
sometimes cursed and sometimes favored, and thus he sometimes enjoys
in the upper planetary systems and sometimes suffers in the lower
planets, but all these situations are the same because they are within this
material world. None of these positions has any factual existence, for all
of them are temporary. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ulti-
mate controller because the material world is created, maintained and
annihilated under His control while He nonetheless remains neutral to
these different transformations of the material world in time and space.
The material, external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
in charge of this material world. The Lord helps the world by creating
situations for the living entities within it.”

165


--- Page 172 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
When Citraketu spoke in this way, all the members in the great assem-
bly in which Lord Siva and Parvati were present were astonished. Then
Lord Siva began speaking about the devotees of the Lord. A devotee is
neutral in all conditions of life, whether in the heavenly planets or
hellish planets, whether liberated from the material world or conditioned
by it, and whether blessed with happiness or subjected to distress. These
are all merely dualities created by the external energy. Being influenced
by the external energy, the living entity accepts a gross and subtle ma-
terial body, and in this illusory position he apparently suffers miseries,
although everyone is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. The so-called
demigods consider themselves independent lords, and in this way they
are misled from understanding that all living entities are part of the
Supreme. This chapter concludes by glorifying the devotee and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 1
श्री्युक उवाच
Ls a
यतश्ान्तर्दितोऽनन्तस्तस्ये Fen হিহী नमः।
बिदयाधरशित्रकेतुश्चचार गगनेचरः ॥ १ ॥
sri-suka uvaca
yatas cantarhito 'nantas
tasyai krtva dise namah
vidyadharas citraketus$
cacdra gagane carah
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; yatah—in which
(direction); ca—and; antarhitah—disappeared; anantah—the un-
limited Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasyai—unto that; krtva—
after offering; dise—direction; namah—obeisances; vidyadharah—the
King of the Vidyadhara planet; citraketuh—Citraketu; cacara—tra-
veled; gagane—in outer space; carah—moving.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami said: After offering obeisances to the
direction from which Ananta, the Supreme Personality of God-


--- Page 173 ---
Text 3] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 167
head, had disappeared, Citraketu began traveling in outer space as
the head of the Vidyadharas.
TEXTS 2-3
p स लक्षं वषैलक्षाणामन्याहतवलेन्द्रियः  ।
स्तूयमानो महायोगी धनिभिः सिद्धचारणैः || २ ॥
FERNY  नानासङ्कल्पसिद्धिषु |
रेमे रि्ाधरखीपिर्गापयन्‌ हरिमीश्वरम्‌ ॥ २ ॥
sa laksari varsa-laksanam
avyahata-balendriyah
stizyamano maha-yogi
munibhih siddha-caranaih
kulacalendra-dronisu
nand-sarnkalpa-siddhisu
reme vidyadhara-stribhir
gapayan harim iSvaram
sah—he (Citraketu); laksam—one hundred thousand; varsa—of
years; laksanam—one hundred thousand; avyahata—without
hindrance; bala-indriyah—whose strength and power of the senses;
stiiyamanah—being praised; maha-yogi—the great mystic yogi;
munibhih—by saintly persons; siddha-caranaih—by the Siddhas and
Caranas; kulacalendra-dronisu—within the valleys of the great moun-
tain known as Kulacalendra, or Sumeru; nana-sarnkalpa-siddhisu—
where one becomes perfect in all kinds of mystic power; reme—enjoyed;
vidyadhara-stribhih—with the women of the Vidyadhara planet;
gapayan—causing to praise; harim —the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Hari; iSvaram—the controller.
TRANSLATION
Being praised by great sages and saints and by the inhabitants of
Siddhaloka and Caranaloka, Citraketu, the most powerful mystic
yogi, wandered about enjoying life for millions of years. With
bodily strength and senses free from deterioration, he traveled


--- Page 174 ---
168 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
within the valleys of Sumeru Mountain, which is the place of per-
fection for various kinds of mystic power. In those valleys he en-
joyed life with the women of Vidyadhara-loka by chanting the
glories of the Supreme Lord, Hari.
PURPORT
It is to be understood that Maharaja Citraketu, although surrounded
by beautiful women from Vidyadhara-loka, did not forget to glorify the
Lord by chanting the holy name of the Lord. It has been proved in many
places that one who is not contaminated by any material condition, who is
a pure devotee engaged in chanting the glories of the Lord, should be
understood to be perfect.
TEXTS 4-5
एकदा स विमानेन विष्णुदत्तेन माख्वता |
गिरिशं ददृशे गच्छन्‌ परीतं सिद्धचारणेः ॥ ४॥
आरिङ्गयाङ्कीकृतां देवीं बाहुना ्निसंसदि ।
(स
उवाच देव्याः TIFT जहासो्ेस्तद न्तिके ॥ এ ॥
ekada sa vimanena
visnu-dattena bhasvata
girisari dadrse gacchan
paritarn siddha-caranaih
alingyankikrtar devirn
bahuna muni-sarmsadi
uvdca devyah Srnvantya
21805000015 tad-antike
ekada—one time; sah—he (King Citraketu); vimdnena—with his
airplane; visnu-dattena—given to him by Lord Visnu; bhasvata—shin-
ing brilliantly; girisam—Lord Siva; dadrse—he saw; gacchan—going;
paritam—surrounded; siddha—by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka;
caranaih—and the inhabitants of Caranaloka; alingya—embracing;
arikikrtam —sitting on his lap; devim —his wife, Parvati; bahuna—with
his arm; muni-samsadi—in the presence of great saintly persons;


--- Page 175 ---
Text 6] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 169

uvaca—he said; devyah—while the goddess Parvati; srnvantyah—was

hearing; jahasa—he laughed; uccaih—very loudly; tad-antike—in the

vicinity.

TRANSLATION
One time while King Citraketu was traveling in outer space on a

রা brilliantly effulgent airplane given to him by Lord Visnu, he saw

Lord Siva, surrounded by Siddhas and Caranas. Lord Siva was sit-

ting in an assembly of great saintly persons and embracing Parvati

on his lap with his arm. Citraketu laughed loudly and spoke,

within the hearing of Parvati.

PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura says in this connection,
bhaktirn bhatiri harir dattva
sva-vicchedanubhitaye
devyah sapena vrtratvarn
nitva tari svantike ‘nayat

The purport is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead wanted to bring

Citraketu to Vaikunthaloka as soon as possible. The Lord’s plan was that

Citraketu be cursed by Parvati to become Vrtrasura so that in his next

life he could quickly return home, back to Godhead. There have been

many instances in which a devotee acting as a demon has been brought to

the kingdom of God by the mercy of the Lord. For Parvati to be

embraced by Lord Siva was natural in a relationship between husband

and wife; this was nothing extraordinary for Citraketu to see. Nonethe-

less, Citraketu laughed loudly to see Lord Siva in that situation, even

though he should not have done so. Thus he was eventually cursed, and

this curse was the cause of his returning home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 6
चित्रकेतुरुवाच
९
एष लोकगुरुः AEH वक्ता शरीरिणाम्‌ |
आस्ते श्यः समायां वै मिथुनीभूय मार्यया ॥ ६ ॥


--- Page 176 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
citraketur uvaca
esa loka-guruh saksad
dharmarn vakta saririnam
aste mukhyah sabhayam vai
mithuni-bhitya bharyaya
citraketuh uvaca—XKing Citraketu said; esah—this; loka-guruh—the
spiritual master of the people who follow Vedic instructions; saksat—
directly; dharmam —of religion; vakta—the speaker; Saririndm —for all
living entities who have accepted material bodies; aste—sits;
mukhyah—the chief; sabhayam—in an assembly; wvai—indeed;
mithuni-bhiitya—embracing; bharyaya—with his wife.
TRANSLATION
Citraketu said: Lord Siva, the spiritual master of the general
populace, is the best of all living entities who have accepted ma-
terial bodies. He enunciates the system of religion. Yet how won-
derful it is that he is embracing his wife, Parvati, in the midst of an
assembly of great saintly persons.
TEXT 7
जटाधरस्तीत्रतपा जरह्मवादिसमापतिः |
अङ्कीकृत्य खयं चास्ते गतहीः प्राकृतो यथा ।। ७॥
Jjata-dharas tivra-tapa
brahmavadi-sabha-patih
arikikrtya striyam caste J
gata-hrih prakrto yatha
Jjata-dharah—keeping matted locks of hair; tivra-tapah—highly ele-
vated due to undergoing fierce austerities and penances; brahma-vadi—
of strict followers of the Vedic principles; sabha-patih—the president of
an assembly; ankikrtya—embracing; striyam—a woman; ca—and;
aste—sits; gata-hrth—without shame; prakrtah—a person conditioned
by material nature; yatha—just as.


--- Page 177 ---
Text 8] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 171
‘TRANSLATION
Lord Siva, whose hair is matted on his head, has certainly under-
gone great austerities and penances. Indeed, he is the president in
the assembly of strict followers of Vedic principles. Nonetheless,
he is seated with his wife on his lap in the midst of saintly persons
7 and is embracing her as if he were a shameless, ordinary human
being.
PURPORT
Citraketu appreciated the exalted position of Lord Siva, and therefore
he remarked at how wonderful it was that Lord Siva was acting like an
ordinary human being. He appreciated Lord Siva’s position, but when he
saw Lord Siva sitting in the midst of saintly persons and acting like a
shameless, ordinary man, he was astonished. Srila Viévanitha Cakravarti
Thakura remarks that although Citraketu criticized Lord Siva, he did not
offend Lord Siva like Daksa. Daksa considered Lord Siva insignificant,
but Citraketu expressed his wonder at Lord Siva’s being situated in that
way.
TEXT 8
प्रायश्चः प्राकृताश्चापि खयं रहति बिभ्रति ।
अयं महाव्रतधरो विभति सदसि स्ियम्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
prayasah prakrtas capi
striyam rahasi bibhrati
aya maha-vrata-dharo
bibharti sadasi striyam
prayasah—generally; prakrtah—conditioned souls; ca—also; api—
although; striyam—a woman; rahasi—in a solitary place; bibhrati—
embrace; ayam—this (Lord Siva); maha-vrata-dharah—the master of
great vows and austerities; bibharti—enjoys; sadasi—in an assembly of
great saintly persons; striyam—his wife.
TRANSLATION
Ordinary conditioned persons generally embrace their wives
and enjoy their company in solitary places. How wonderful it is


--- Page 178 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
that Lord Mahadeva, although a great master of austerity, is
embracing his wife openly in the midst of an assembly of great
saints.
PURPORT
The word maha-vrata-dharah indicates a brahmacari who has never
fallen down. Lord Siva is counted among the best of yogis, yet he
embraced his wife in the midst of great saintly persons. Citraketu ap-
preciated how great Lord Siva was to be unaffected even in that situation.
Therefore Citraketu was not an offender; he merely expressed his
wonder.
TEXT 9
श्रीञ्ुक उवाच
€
मगबानपि ॐ 5. प्रहस्यागाधधीनरेष |
तृष्णीं बभूव सदसि FAT तदनुव्रताः ॥ ९॥
sri-Suka uvaca
bhagavan api tac chrutva
prahasyagadha-dhir nrpa
tiasnirn babhiiva sadasi
sabhyas ca tad-anuvratah
Sri-Sukah uvdaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; bhagavan—Lord Siva;
api—also; tat—that; Srutva—hearing; prahasya—smiling; agadha-
dhih—whose intelligence is unfathomed; nrpa—O King; tisnim—
silent; babhiiva—remained; sadasi—in the assembly; sabhyah —every-
one assembled there; ca—and; tat-anuvratah—followed Lord Siva (re-
mained silent).
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, after hearing
Citraketu’s statement, Lord Siva, the most powerful personality,
whose knowledge is fathomless, simply smiled and remained
silent, and all the members of the assembly followed the lord by
not saying anything.
PURPORT
Citraketu’s purpose in criticizing Lord Siva is somewhat mysterious
and cannot be understood by a common man. Srila ViSvanatha


--- Page 179 ---
Text 10] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 173
Cakravarti Thakura, however, has made the following observations.
Lord Siva, being the most exalted Vaisnava and one of the most powerful
demigods, is able to do anything he desires. Although he was externally
exhibiting the behavior of a common man and not following etiquette,
such actions cannot diminish his exalted position. The difficulty is that a
^ common man, seeing Lord Siva’s behavior, might follow his example. As
stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.21):
yad yad dacarati sresthas
tat tad evetaro janah
sa yat pramanam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
“Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow. And
whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues.” A
common man might also criticize Lord Siva, like Daksa, who suffered the
consequences for his criticism. King Citraketu desired that Lord Siva
cease this external behavior so that others might be saved from criticiz-
ing him and thus becoming offenders. If one thinks that Visnu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the only perfect personality whereas
the demigods, even such demigods as Lord Siva, are inclined to improper
social affairs, he is an offender. Considering all this, King Citraketu was
somewhat harsh in his behavior with Lord Siva.

Lord Siva, who is always deep in knowledge, could understand
Citraketu’s purpose, and therefore he was not at all angry; rather, he
simply smiled and remained silent. The members of the assembly sur-
rounding Lord Siva could also understand Citraketu’s purpose. Conse-
quently, following the behavior of Lord Siva, they did not protest; in-
stead, following their master, they remained silent. If the members of
the assembly thought that Citraketu had blasphemed Lord Siva, they
would certainly have left at once, blocking their ears with their hands.

TEXT 10
इत्यतद्वीय॑विदुषि इवाणे बहश्चोमनम्‌ |
रुषाह देवी धृष्टाय निर्जितात्माभिमानिने ॥१०॥


--- Page 180 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
ity atad-virya-vidusi
bruvane bahv-asobhanam
rusaha devi dhrstaya
nirjitatmabhimanine
iti—thus; a-tat-virya-vidusi—when Citraketu, who did not know the
prowess of Lord Siva; bruvane —spoke; bahu-asobhanam—that which is
not up to the standard of etiquette (the criticism of the exalted Lord
Siva); rusa—with anger; aha—said; devi—the goddess Parvati;
dhrstaya—unto Citraketu, who was quite shameless; nirjita-atma—as
one who has controlled his senses; abhimanine—thinking of himself.
TRANSLATION
Not knowing the prowess of Lord Siva and Parvati, Citraketu
strongly criticized them. His statements were not at all pleasing,
and therefore the goddess Parvati, being very angry, spoke as
follows to Citraketu, who thought himself better than Lord Siva in
controlling the senses.
PURPORT
Although Citraketu never meant to insult Lord Siva, he should not
have criticized the lord, even though the lord was transgressing social
customs. It is said, tejiyasam na dosaya: one who is very powerful should
be understood to be faultless. For example, one should not find faults
with the sun, although it evaporates urine from the street. The most
powerful cannot be criticized by an ordinary man, or even by a great per-
sonality. Citraketu should have known that Lord Siva, although sitting in
that way, was not to be criticized. The difficulty was that Citraketu, hav-
ing become a great devotee of Lord Visnu, Sankarsana, was somewhat
proud at having achieved Lord Saiikarsana’s favor and therefore thought
that he could now criticize anyone, even Lord Siva. This kind of pride in
a devotee is never tolerated. A Vaisnava should always remain very
humble and meek and offer respect to others.
trnad api sunicena
taror api sahisnuna


--- Page 181 ---
Text 11] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 175
amanina manadena
kirtaniyah sada harih
“One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more
¢ tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and ready to
offer all respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy
name of the Lord constantly.” A Vaisnava should not try to minimize
anyone else’s position. It is better to remain humble and meek and chant
the Hare Krsna mantra. The word nirjitatmabhimanine indicates that
Citraketu thought himself a better controller of the senses than Lord
Siva, although actually he was not. Because of all these considerations,
mother Parvati was somewhat angry at Citraketu.
TEXT 11
श्रीपार्वत्युवाच
अयं किमधुना सोके যাত্রা दण्डधरः प्रः |
৬ (ॐ ক
अखद्विधानां दुष्टानां নি্তলানা च विप्रकृत्‌ 1221
Sri-parvaty २1260
ayarn kim adhuna loke
56516 danda-dharah prabhuh
asmad-vidhanar dustanari
nirlajjanari ca viprakrt
Sri-parvati uvdca—the goddess Parvati said; ayam—this; kim—
whether; adhuna—now; loke—in the world; 55516 —the supreme con-
troller; danda-dharah—the carrier of the rod of punishment;
prabhuh—the master; asmat-vidhanam—of persons like us;
dustanam—criminals; nirlajjanédm—who have no shame; ca—and;
viprakrt—the restrainer.
TRANSLATION
The goddess Parvati said: Alas, has this upstart now received a
post from which to punish shameless persons like us? Has he been


--- Page 182 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
appointed ruler, carrier of the rod of punishment? Is he now the
only master of everything?
TEXT 12
न वेद ud किल पद्मयोनि-
न॑ब्रह्मपत्रा भृगुनारदाद्याः |
aA -
न वे guw कपिलो मनु
ये नो निषेधन्त्यतिवतिनं हरम्‌ ।।१२॥
na veda dharma kila padmayonir
na brahma-putra bhrgu-naradadyah
na vai kumarah kapilo manus ca
ye no nisedhanty ati-vartinamn haram
na—not; veda—knows; dharmam—the religious principles; kila—
indeed; padma-yonih—Lord Brahma; na—nor; brahma-putrah—the
sons of Lord Brahma; bhrgu —Bhrgu; narada—Narada; adyah—and so
on; na—nor; vai—indeed; kumarah—the four Kumairas (Sanaka,
Sanat-kumara, Sananda and Sanatana); kapilah—Lord Kapila;
manuh—Manu himself; ca—and; ye—who; no—not; nisedhanti—
order to stop; ati-vartinam—who is beyond laws and orders; haram—
Lord Siva.
TRANSLATION
Alas, Lord Brahma, who has taken his birth from the lotus
flower, does not know the principles of religion, nor do the great
saints like Bhrgu and Narada, nor the four Kumaras, headed by
Sanat-kumara. Manu and Kapila have also forgotten the religious
principles. I suppose it to be because of this that they have not
tried to stop Lord Siva from behaving improperly.
TEXT 13
एषामनुष्येयपदाच्जयुरमं
जगद्गुरुं मङ्गलमङ्करं खयम्‌ |


--- Page 183 ---
Text 14] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 177
यः शषत्रजन्धुः परिभूय खरीन्‌
সহাালি धरष्टस्तद्यं हि दण्ड्यः ॥१२॥
esam anudhyeya-padabja-yugmariu
| Jjagad-gurum mangala-margalari svayam
yah ksatra-bandhuh paribhiiya sirin
prasasti dhrstas tad ayam hi dandyah
esam—of all these (exalted personalities); anudhyeya—to be con-
stantly meditated upon; pada-abja-yugmam—whose two lotus feet;
jagat-gurum—the spiritual master of the whole world; mangala-
marngalam— personification of the topmost religious principle;
svayam—himself; yah—he who; ksatra-bandhuh—the lowest of the
ksatriyas; paribhiya—overriding; sarin—the demigods (like Brahma
and the others); prasasti—chastises; dhrstah—impudent; tat—
therefore; ayam—this person; hi—indeed; dandyah—to be punished.
TRANSLATION
This Citraketu is the lowest of ksatriyas, for he has impudently
overridden Brahma and the other demigods by insulting Lord
Siva, upon whose lotus feet they always meditate. Lord Siva is per-
sonified religion and the spiritual master of the entire world, and
therefore Citraketu must be punished.
PURPORT
All the members of the assembly were exalted brahmanas and self-
realized souls, but they did not say anything about the conduct of Lord
Siva, who was embracing the goddess Parvati on his lap. Citraketu none-
theless criticized Lord Siva, and therefore the opinion of Parvati was that
he should be punished.
TEXT 14
a
नायमर्हति वैङ्ण्ठपादमूलोपसरप॑णम्‌ |
सम्भावितमतिः स्तन्धः साधुभिः पयुंपासितम्‌ ।।१४।।


--- Page 184 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
nayam arhati vaikuntha-
pada-miilopasarpanam
sambhavita-matih stabdhah
sadhubhih paryupasitam
na—not; ayam—this person; arhati—deserves; vaikuntha-pada-
mitla-upasarpanam —the approaching of the shelter of Lord Visnu’s
lotus feet; sambhavita-matih— considering himself highly esteemed;
stabdhah—impudent; = sadhubhih—by great saintly persons;
paryupasitam—worshiped.
TRANSLATION
This person is puffed up because of his achievements, thinking,
“I am the best.” He does not deserve to approach the shelter of
Lord Visnu’s lotus feet, which are worshiped by all saintly per-
sons, for he is impudent, thinking himself greatly important.
PURPORT
If a devotee thinks that he is very much advanced in devotional ser-
vice, he is considered puffed up and unfit to sit beneath the shelter of the
Lord’s lotus feet. Again, this instruction by Lord Caitanya is applicable:
trnad api sunicena
taror api sahisnuna
amaninad manadena
kirtaniyah sada harih
“One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more
tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and ready to
offer all respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy
name of the Lord constantly.” Unless one is humble and meek, one can-
not qualify to sit at the lotus feet of the Lord.
TEXT 15
c.
अतः पापीयसीं योनिमासुरीं याहि gad ।
यथेह भूयो महतां न कर्ता पुत्र किस्विषम्‌ ॥१५॥


--- Page 185 ---
Text 15] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 179
atah papiyasim yonim
asurim yahi durmate
yatheha bhityo mahatar
na karta putra kilbisam
¢ atah—therefore; papiyasim—most sinful; yonim—to the species of
life; asurim —demoniac; yahi—go; durmate—O impudent one; yatha—
so that; itha—in this world; bhiyah—again; mahatam—to great per-
sonalities; nra—not; karta—will commit; putra—my dear son;
kilbisam—any offense.
TRANSLATION

O impudent one, my dear son, now take birth in a low, sinful
family of demons so that you will not commit such an offense again
toward exalted, saintly persons in this world.

PURPORT

One should be very careful not to commit offenses at the lotus feet of
Vaisnavas, of whom Lord Siva is the best. While instructing Srila Rupa
Gosvami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu described an offense at the lotus feet
of a Vaisnava as hati mata, a mad elephant. When a mad elephant enters
a nice garden, it spoils the entire garden. Similarly, if one becomes like a
mad elephant and commits offenses at the lotus feet of a Vaisnava, his
entire spiritual career is halted. One should therefore be very careful not
to commit offenses at the lotus feet of a Vaisnava.

Mother Parvati was justified in punishing Citraketu, for Citraketu im-
pudently criticized the supreme father, Mahadeva, who is the father of
the living entities conditioned within this material world. The goddess
Durga is called mother, and Lord Siva is called father. A pure Vaisnava
should be very careful to engage in his specific duty without criticizing
others. This is the safest position. Otherwise, if one tends to criticize
others, he may commit the great offense of criticizing a Vaisnava.

Because Citraketu was undoubtedly a Vaispava, he might have been
surprised that Parvati had cursed him. Therefore the goddess Parvati ad-
dressed him as putra, or son. Everyone is the son of mother Durga, but
she is not an ordinary mother. As soon as there is a small discrepancy in a
demon’s behavior, mother Durga immediately punishes the demon so


--- Page 186 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
that he may come to his senses. This is explained by Lord Krsna in
Bhagavad-gita (7.14):
daivi hy esa gunamayi
mama maya duratyaya
mam eva ye prapadyante
mayam etarn taranti te
“This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me
can easily cross beyond 11." To surrender to Krsna means to surrender to
His devotees also, for no one can be a proper servant of Krsna unless he
is a proper servant of a devotee. Chadiya vaisnava-sevd nistara payeche
keba: without serving a servant of Krsna, one cannot be elevated to being
a servant of Krsna Himself. Therefore mother Parvati spoke to Citraketu
exactly like a mother who says to her naughty child, “My dear child, I am
punishing you so that you won't do anything like this again.” This ten-
dency of a mother to punish her child is found even in mother Yasoda,
who became the mother of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mother
Yasoda punished Krsna by binding Him and showing Him a stick. Thus it
is the duty of a mother to chastise her beloved son, even in the case of the
Supreme Lord. It is to be understood that mother Durga was justified in
punishing Citraketu. This punishment was a boon to Citraketu because
after taking birth as the demon Vrtrasura, he was promoted directly to
Vaikuntha.
TEXT 16
श्री्युक उवाच
एवं शप्तचित्रकेतुर्दिमानादवरुद्य सः ।
प्रसादयामास सतीं मूधा नम्रेण भारत ॥१६॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
evarh Saptas citraketur
vimanad avaruhya sah
prasadayam dasa satin
mirdhna namrena bharata


--- Page 187 ---
Text 17] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 181
$ri-sukah uvaca —Sri Sukadeva Gosvimi said; evam—thus; Saptah—
cursed; citraketuh—XKing Citraketu; wvimanat—from his airplane;
avaruhya—coming down; sah—he; prasadayam dsa—completely
pleased; satim —Parvati; mirdhna—by his head; namrena—bent low;
bharata—O King Pariksit.
রা
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King Pariksit, when
Citraketu was cursed by Parvati, he descended from his airplane,
bowed before her with great humility and pleased her completely.
TEXT 17
चित्रकेतुरुवाच
्तिगरहामि ते शापमात्मनोऽज्ञलिनाभ्बिके |
EY ५ .
देवैमे्त्याय यत्प्रोक्तं पूषदिष्टं हि तस्थ तत्‌ ॥१५७॥
citraketur uvaca
pratigrhnami te sapam
atmano ‘ijalinambike
devair martyaya yat proktari
piirva-distarn hi tasya tat
citraketuh uvaca—King Citraketu said; pratigrhnami—I accept; te—
your; Sapam —curse; atmanah—my own; anjalind—with folded hands;
ambike --0 mother; devaih—by the demigods; marty@éya—unto a mor-
tal; yat—which; proktam—prescribed; piirva-distam —fixed previously
according to one’s past deeds; hi—indeed; tasya—of him; tat—that. .
TRANSLATION
Citraketu said: My dear mother, with my own hands folded
together I accept the curse upon me. I do not mind the curse, for
happiness and distress are given by the demigods as a result of
one’s past deeds.


--- Page 188 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
PURPORT

Since Citraketu was a devotee of the Lord, he was not at all disturbed
by the curse of mother Parvati. He knew very well that one suffers or en-
joys the results of one’s past deeds as ordained by daiva-netra—superior
authority, or the agents of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He knew
that he had not committed any offense at the lotus feet of Lord Siva or
the goddess Parvati, yet he had been punished, and this means that the
punishment had been ordained. Thus the King did not mind it. A devo-
tee is naturally so humble and meek that he accepts any condition of life
as a blessing from the Lord. Tat te ’nukamparm susamiksamanah
(Bhag. 10.14.8). A devotee always accepts punishment from anyone as
the mercy of the Lord. If one lives in this conception of life, he sees
whatever reverses occur to be due to his past misdeeds, and therefore he
never accuses anyone. On the contrary, he becomes increasingly attached
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead because of his being purified by
his suffering. Suffering, therefore, is also a process of purification.

Srila ৬৮153113103 Cakravarti Thakura says in this connection that one
who has developed Krsna consciousness and who exists in love with
Krsna is no longer subject to suffering and happiness under the laws of
karma. Indeed, he is beyond karma. The Brahma-samhita says, karmani
nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam: a devotee is free from the reactions of
his karma because he has taken to devotional service. This same prin-
ciple is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (14.26). Sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhizydya kalpate: one who is engaged in devotional service has
already been freed from the reactions of his material karma, and thus he
immediately becomes brahma-bhiita, or transcendental. This is also ex-
pressed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.21). Ksiyante casya karmani:
before attaining the stage of love, one becomes free from all the results
of karma.

The Lord is very kind and affectionate toward His devotees, and
therefore a devotee, in any condition, is not subjected to the results of
karma. A devotee never aspires for the heavenly planets. The heavenly
planets, liberation and hell are nondifferent for a devotee, for he does
not discriminate between different positions in the material world. A
devotee is always eager to return home, back to Godhead, and remain
there as the Lord’s associate. This ambition becomes increasingly fervent
in his heart, and therefore he does not care about material changes in his


--- Page 189 ---
Text 18] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 183
life. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that Maharaja
Citraketu’s being cursed by Parvati should be considered the mercy of
the Lord. The Lord wanted Citraketu to return to Godhead as soon as
possible, and therefore he terminated all the reactions of his past deeds.
Acting through the heart of Parvati, the Lord, who is situated in every-
// one’s heart, cursed Citraketu in order to end all his material reactions.
Thus Citraketu became Vrtrasura in his next life and returned home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 18
9. ৮.৬
संसारचक  एतसिञ्जन्त्रज्ञानमोहितः |
५ 3 [y
भ्राम्यन्‌ सुखं च दुःखं च 92 सर्वत्र सर्वदा 112410
saris@ra-cakra etasmin
Jantur ajiana-mohitah
bhramyan sukhariv ca duhkhari ca
bhurikte sarvatra sarvada
samsara-cakre—in the wheel of material existence; etasmin—this;
Jantuh—the living entity; ajiana-mohitah—being bewildered by ig-
norance; bhramyan—wandering; sukham—happiness; ca—and;
duhkham—distress; ca—also; bhurnkte—he undergoes; sarvatra—
everywhere; sarvada—always.
TRANSLATION
Deluded by ignorance, the living entity wanders in the forest of
this material world, enjoying the happiness and distress resulting
from his past deeds, everywhere and at all times. [Therefore, my
dear mother, neither you nor I am to be blamed for this incident.)
PURPORT
As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (3.27):
prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah
ahankara-vimiadhatma
kartaham iti manyate


--- Page 190 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
“The bewildered soul, under the influence of the three modes of material
nature, thinks himself the doer of activities that are in actuality carried
out by nature.” Actually a conditioned soul is completely under the con-
trol of material nature. Wandering here and there —always and every-
where —he is subjected to the results of his past deeds. This is carried out
by the laws of nature, but one foolishly thinks himself the doer, which in
fact he is not. To get free from the karma-cakra, the wheel of the results
of one’s karma, one should take to bhakti-marga—devotional service, or
Krsna consciousness. That is the only remedy. Sarva-dharman paritya-
Jya mam eka Saranam vraja.
TEXT 19
नैवात्मा न परश्रापि कर्ता स्यात्‌ gag: |
s .
कर्तारं मन्यतेऽत्राज्ञ आत्मानं परमेव च ॥१९॥
naivatma na paras capi
karta syat sukha-duhkhayoh
kartararh manyate ‘trajia
atmanarh param eva ca
na—not; eva—indeed; atma—the spirit soul; na—nor; parah—
another (friend or enemy); ca—also; api—indeed; karta—the doer;
syat—can be; sukha-duhkhayoh—of happiness and distress; kar-
taram—the doer; manyate—considers; atra—in this connection;
ajiah—a person not aware of the real fact; atmanam—himself;
param —another; eva—indeed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, neither the living entity himself nor
others [friends and enemies] are the cause of material happiness
and distress. But because of gross ignorance, the living entity
thinks that he and others are the cause.
PURPORT
In this verse the word व्यद is very significant. In the material world,
all living entities are ajiia, ignorant, in different degrees. This ignorance


--- Page 191 ---
Text 20] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 185
continues very strongly in the mode of ignorance presented by material
nature. One must therefore promote himself to the stage of goodness
through his character and behavior and then gradually come to the tran-
scendental platform, or adhoksaja platform, in which he realizes both his
position and the position of others. Everything is done under the
¢ superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The process by
which the results of action are ordained is called niyatam, always
working.
TEXT 20
गुणप्रवाह एतसिन्‌ कः शापः को न्वनुग्रहः |
कः खर्गो नरकः को वा किं सुखं दुःखमेव वा ॥२०॥
guna-pravaha etasmin
kah sapah ko nv anugrahah
kah svargo narakah ko va
kirh sukharh duhkham eva va

guna-pravahe—in the current of the modes of material nature;
etasmin—this; kah—what; sapah—a curse; kah—what; nu—indeed;
anugrahah—a favor; kah—what; svargah—elevation to heavenly
planets; narakah—hell; kah—what; va—or; kim—what; sukham—
happiness; duhkham—distress; eva—indeed; vd —or.

TRANSLATION

This material world resembles the waves of a constantly flowing
river. Therefore, what is a curse and what is a favor? What are the
heavenly planets, and what are the hellish planets? What is actually
happiness, and what is actually distress? Because the waves flow
constantly, none of them has an eternal effect.

PURPORT

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura sings, (miche) mdyara vase, yaccha
bhese’, khaccha habudubu, bhai: “My dear living entities within this
material world, why are you being carried away by the waves of the
modes of material nature?” (Jiva) krsna-dasa, ei visvasa, karle ta’ ara


--- Page 192 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
duhkha nai: “If the living entity tries to understand that he is an eternal
servant of Krsna, there will no longer be misery for him.” Krsna wants
us to give up all other engagements and surrender unto Him. If we do so,
where will the cause and effect of this material world be? There is
nothing like cause and effect for the surrendered soul. Srila Visvanatha
Cakravarti Thakura says in this regard that being put into this material
world is like being thrown into a mine of salt. If one falls into a mine of
salt, he tastes only salt wherever he goes. Similarly, this material world is
full of miseries. The so-called temporary happiness of the world is also
misery, but in ignorance we cannot understand this. That is the actual
position. When one comes to his senses—when he becomes Krsna con-
scious—he is no longer concerned with the various conditions of this ma-
terial world. He is not concerned with happiness or distress, curses or
favors, or heavenly or hellish planets. He sees no distinction between
them.
TEXT 21
एकः सृजति भूतानि भगवानात्ममायया |
एषां बन्धं च मोक्षं च सुखं दुःखं च निष्कलः ॥२९॥
ekah srjati bhutani
bhagavan atma-mayaya
esam bandhari ca moksam ca
sukharih duhkhari ca niskalah

ekah—one; srjati—creates; bhitani—different varieties of living en-
tities; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; datma-
mayayd—by His personal potencies; esam —of all the conditioned souls;
bandham —the conditional life; ca—and; moksam —the liberated life;
ca—also;  sukham—happiness;  duhkham—distresses; ca—and;
niskalah—not affected by the material qualities.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one. Unaffected by the
conditions of the material world, He creates all the conditioned
souls by His own personal potency. Because of being contaminated
by the material energy, the living entity is put into ignorance and


--- Page 193 ---
Text 22] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 187
thus into different conditions of bondage. Sometimes, by knowl-
edge, the living entity is given liberation. In sattva-guna and rajo-
guna, he is subjected to happiness and distress.
PURPORT
¢ The question may be raised why the living entities are situated in dif-
ferent conditions and who has arranged this. The answer is that it has
been done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without anyone’s
help. The Lord has His own energies (pardsya Saktir vividhaiva srivyate),
and one of them, namely the external energy, creates the material world
and the varieties of happiness and distress for the conditioned souls
under the supervision of the Lord. The material world consists of three
modes of material nature — sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna. By
sattva-guna the Lord maintains the material world, by rajo-guna He cre-
ates it, and by tamo-guna He annihilates it. After the varieties of living
entities are created, they are subject to happiness and distress according
to their association. When they are in sattva-guna, the mode of goodness,
they feel happiness, when in rajo-guna they are distressed, and when in
tamo-guna they have no sense of what to do or what is right and-wrong.
TEXT 22
न বন্ধ hehe प्रतीपो
6 =
न ज्ञातिवन्धुनं परो न च खः।
¢
समस्य মলঙগ্গ निरञ्जनस्य
सुखे न रागः कत एव रोषः ॥२२॥
na tasya kascid dayitah pratipo
na jiati-bandhur na paro na ca svah
samasya sarvatra niraijanasya
sukhe na ragah kuta eva rosah
na—not; tasya—of Him (the Supreme Lord); kascit—anyone:
dayitah—dear; pratipah—not dear; na—nor; jAdati—kinsman:
bandhuh—friend; na—nor; parah—other; na—nor; ca—also; svah—
own; samasya—who is equal: sarvatra—everywhere; nirafijanasya—


--- Page 194 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
without being affected by material nature; sukhe—in happiness; na—
not; ragah—attachment; kutah—from where; eva—indeed; rosah—
anger.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is equally disposed toward
all living entities. Therefore no one is very dear to Him, and no
one is a great enemy for Him; no one is His friend, and no one is
His relative. Being unattached to the material world, He has no
affection for so-called happiness or hatred for so-called distress.
The two terms happiness and distress are relative. Since the Lord is
always happy, for Him there is no question of distress.
TEXT 23
तथापि तच्छक्तिविसर्गं॒॑एषां
सुखाय दुःखाय हिताहिताय ।
बन्धाय मोक्षाय च मृत्युजन्मनोः
श्चरीरिणां संखतयेऽवकल्पते ॥२२॥
tathapi tac-chakti-visarga ০5৫77
sukhaya duhkhaya hitahitaya
bandhaya moksaya ca mrtyu-janmanoh
Saririnari sarmsrtaye ’vakalpate
tathapi—still; tat-Sakti—of the Lord’s energy; visargah—the cre-
ation; esam —of these (conditioned souls); sukhaya—for the happiness;
duhkhaya—for the distress; hita-ahitaya—for the profit and loss;
bandhaya—for the bondage; moksaya—for the liberation; ca—also;
mrtyu—of death; janmanoh—and birth; Saririnam—of all those who
accept material bodies; samsrtaye—for the repetition; avakalpate—acts.
TRANSLATION
Although the Supreme Lord is unattached to our happiness and
distress according to karma, and although no one is His enemy or
favorite, He creates pious and impious activities through the


--- Page 195 ---
Text 24] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 189
agency of His material potency. Thus for the continuation of the
materialistic way of life He creates happiness and distress, good
fortune and bad, bondage and liberation, birth and death.
PURPORT
¢ Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate doer of
everything, in His original transcendental existence He is not responsible
for the happiness and distress, or bondage and liberation, of the condi-
tioned souls. These are due to the results of the fruitive activities of the
living entities within this material world. By the order of a judge, one
person is released from jail, and another is imprisoned, but the judge is
not responsible, for the distress and happiness of these different people is
due to their own activities. Although the government is ultimately the
supreme authority, the justice is administered by the departments of the
government, and the government is not responsible for the individual
judgments. Therefore the government is equal to all the citizens.
Similarly, the Supreme Lord is neutral to everyone, but for the mainte-
nance of law and order His supreme government has various depart-
ments, which control the activities of the living entities. Another
example given in this regard is that lilies open or close because of the
sunshine, and thus the bumblebees enjoy or suffer, but the sunshine and
the sun globe are not responsible for the happiness and distress of the
bumblebees.
TEXT 24
+ [3
अथ प्रसादये न त्वां शापमोक्षाय मामिनि |
यन्मन्यसे ह्यसाधूक्तं मम तत्छम्यतां सति ॥२४॥
atha prasadaye na tvam
sapa-moksaya bhamini
yan manyase hy asadhithtarn
mama tat ksamyatarm sati
atha—therefore; prasadaye—I am trying to please; na—not; tvam—
you; $apa-moksaya—for being released from your curse: bhamini—O
most angry one; yat—which; manyase—you consider; hi—indeed:


--- Page 196 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
asadhu-uktam—improper speech; mama—my; tat—that; ksamya-
tam—Ilet it be excused; sati—O most chaste one.
TRANSLATION
O mother, you are now unnecessarily angry, but since all my
happiness and distress are destined by my past activities, I do not
plead to be excused or relieved from your curse. Although what I
have said is not wrong, please let whatever you think is wrong be
pardoned.
PURPORT
Being fully aware of how the results of one’s karma accrue by the laws
of nature, Citraketu did not want to be released from Parvati’s curse.
Nonetheless, he wanted to satisfy her because although his verdict was
natural, she was displeased with him. As a matter of course, Maharaja
Citraketu begged pardon from Parvati.
TEXT 25
figs उवाच
इति प्रसा गिरिशौ चित्रकेतुररिन्दम |
जगाम सखविमानेन पर्यतोः सयतोस्तयोः ॥२५॥
$ri-suka uvaca
iti prasadya girisau
citraketur arindama
jagama sva-vimdanena
pasyatoh smayatos tayoh
sri-sukah wvica—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; prasadya—
after satisfying; giriSau—Lord Siva and his wife, Parvati; citraketuh—
King Citraketu; arim-dama—O King Pariksit, who are always able to
subdue the enemy; jagama—went away; sva-vimanena—by his own
airplane; pasyatoh—were watching; smayatoh—were smiling; tayoh—
while Lord Siva and Parvati.


--- Page 197 ---
Text 27] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 191
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: O King Pariksit, subduer of
the enemy, after Citraketu satisfied Lord Siva and his wife, Parvati,
he boarded his airplane and left as they looked on. When Lord Siva
and Parvati saw that Citraketu, although informed of the curse,
५७ unafraid, they smiled, being fully astonished by his behavior.
TEXT 26
ततस्तु भगवान्‌ रुद्रो रुद्राणीमिद मनर्‌ |
देवर्षिदेत्यसिद्धानां पार्षदानां च शृण्वताम्‌ ।२६॥
tatas tu bhagavan rudro
rudranim idam abravit
devarsi-daitya-siddhanari
parsadandm ca Srnvatam
tatah—thereafter; tu—then; bhagavan—the most powerful;
rudrah—Lord Siva; rudranim—unto his wife, Parvati; idam—this;
abravit—said; devarsi—while the great sage Narada; daitya—the
demons; siddhanam—and the inhabitants of Siddhaloka, who are expert
in yogic power; pdrsadanam—his personal associates; ca—also;
Srnvatam—were listening.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in the presence of the great sage Narada, the
= demons, the inhabitants of Siddhaloka, and his personal associates,
Lord Siva, who is most powerful, spoke to his wife, Parvati, while
they all listened.
TEXT 27
श्रीरुद्र उवाच
waft सुश्रोणि दरेरदुतकर्मणः |
माहात्म्यं भृत्यभृत्यानां निःस्पृहाणां महात्मनाम्‌ || २७॥


--- Page 198 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
sri-rudra uvaca
drstavaty asi susroni
harer adbhuta-karmanah
mahatmyar bhrtya-bhrtyanam
nihsprhanar mahatmanam

sri-rudrah uvaca—Lord Siva said; drstavati asi—have you seen; su-
$roni—O beautiful Parvati; hareh—of the Supreme Personality of God-
head; adbhuta-karmanah—whose acts are wonderful; mahatmyam—
the greatness; bhrtya-bhrtyanam—of the servants of the servants;
nihsprhanam—who are without ambitions for sense gratification;
mahatmanam —great souls.

TRANSLATION

Lord Siva said: My dear beautiful Parvati, have you seen the
greatness of the Vaisnavas? Being servants of the servants of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, they are great souls and
are not interested in any kind of material happiness.

PURPORT

Lord Siva, the husband of Parvati, told his wife, “My dear Parvati,
you are very beautiful in your bodily features. Certainly you are
glorious. But I do not think that you can compete with the beauty and
glory of devotees who have become servants of the servants of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.” Of course, Lord Siva smiled when he
joked with his wife in that way, for others cannot speak like that. “The
Supreme Lord,” Siva continued, “is always exalted in His activities, and
here is another example of His wonderful influence upon King
Citraketu, His devotee. Just see, although you cursed the King, he was
not at all afraid or sorry. Rather, he offered respect to you, called you
mother and accepted your curse, thinking himself faulty. He did not say
anything in retaliation. This is the excellence of a devotee. By mildly
tolerating your curse, he has certainly excelled the glory of your beauty
and your power to curse him. I can impartially judge that this devotee,
Citraketu, has defeated you and your excellence simply by becoming a
pure devotee of the Lord.” As stated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, taror


--- Page 199 ---
Text 28] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 193
api sahisnuna. Just like a tree, a devotee can tolerate all kinds of curses
and reversals in life. This is the excellence of a devotee. Indirectly, Lord
Siva forbade Parvati to commit the mistake of cursing a devotee like
Citraketu. He indicated that although she was powerful, the King, with-
out showing any power, had excelled her power by his tolerance.
¢
TEXT 28
স্ব
नारायणपराः स्वे न FAFA बिम्यति।
खर्गापवनरकेष्वपि तुर्यार्थदरिनः Ike
narayana-parah sarve
na kutascana bibhyati
svargapavarga-narakesv
api tulyartha-darsinah

narayana-parah—pure devotees, who are interested only in the ser-
vice of Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarve—all: na—
not; kutascana—anywhere; bibhyati—are afraid; svarga—in the higher
planetary systems; apavarga—in liberation; narakesu—and in hell:
api—even; tulya—equal; artha—value; darsinah—who see.

TRANSLATION

Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana, never fear any condi-
tion of life. For them the heavenly planets, liberation and the
hellish planets are all the same, for such devotees are interested

only in the service of the Lord.
PURPORT

Parvati might naturally have inquired how devotees become so ex-
alted. Therefore this verse explains that they are narayana-para, simply
dependent on Narayana. They do not mind reverses in life because in the
service of Narayana they have learned to tolerate whatever hardships
there may be. They do not care whether they are in heaven or in hell:
they simply engage in the service of the Lord. This is their excellence.
Anukiilyena krsnanusilanam: they are liberally engaged in the service of


--- Page 200 ---
194 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
the Lord, and therefore they are excellent. By using the word bhrtya-
bhrtyanam, Lord Siva pointed out that although Citraketu provided one
example of tolerance and excellence, all the devotees who have taken
shelter of the Lord as eternal servants are glorious. They have no eager-
ness to be happy by being placed in the heavenly planets, becoming
liberated or becoming one with Brahman, the supreme effulgence. These
benefits do not appeal to their minds. They are simply interested in giv-
ing direct service to the Lord.
TEXT 29
RAT देहसंयोगाद्‌ इन्द्रानीश्वरलीरया |
सुखं दुःखं खतिर्जन्म शापोऽनुग्रह एव च ॥२९॥
dehinam deha-sariyogad
dvandvanisvara-lilaya
sukhari 00801601077 mrtir janma
Sapo ’nugraha eva ca

dehinam—of all those who have accepted material bodies; deha-
sarivyogat—because of contact with the material body; dvandvani—
dualities; @Svara-lilaya—by the supreme will of the Lord; sukham—
happiness; duhkham—distress; mrtih—death; janma—birth; sapah—
curse; anugrahah—favor; eva—certainly; ca—and.

TRANSLATION

Because of the actions of the Supreme Lord’s external energy,
the living entities are conditioned in contact with material bodies.
The dualities of happiness and distress, birth and death, curses
and favors, are natural by-products of this contact in the material
world.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita we find, mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sa-
caracaram: the material world works under the direction of the goddess
Durga, the material energy of the Lord, but she acts under the direction
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also confirmed in the
Brahma-samhita (5.44):


--- Page 201 ---
Text 30] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 195
srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga
Durga —the goddess Parvati, the wife of Lord Siva—is extremely power-
ful. She can create, maintain and annihilate any number of universes by
# her sweet will, but she acts under the direction of the Supreme Per-
"sonality of Godhead, Krsna, not independently. Krsna is impartial, but
because this is the material world of duality, such relative terms as hap-
piness and distress, curses and favors, are created by the will of the
Supreme. Those who are not narayana-para, pure devotees, must be dis-
turbed by this duality of the material world, whereas devotees who are
simply attached to the service of the Lord are not at all disturbed by it.
For example, Haridasa Thakura was beaten with cane in twenty-two
bazaars, but he was never disturbed; instead, he smilingly tolerated the
beating. Despite the disturbing dualities of the material world, devotees
are not disturbed at all. Because they fix their minds on the lotus feet of
the Lord and concentrate on the holy name of the Lord, they do not feel
the so-called pains and pleasures caused by the dualities of this material
world.
TEXT 30
अविवेककृतः पुंसो दर्थभेद इवात्मनि ।
TRNAS भिदेव स्रजिवत्कृतः ॥३०॥
aviveka-krtah puriso
hy artha-bheda ivatmani
guna-dosa-vikalpas ca
bhid eva srajivat krtah
aviveka-krtah—done in ignorance, without mature consideration;
purisah—of the living entity; hi—indeed; artha-bhedah—differentia-
tion of value; iva—like; @tmani—in himself; guna-dosa—of quality
and fault; vikalpah—imagination; ca—and; bhit—difference; eva—
certainly; sraji—in a garland; vat—like; krtah—made.
TRANSLATION
As one mistakenly considers a flower garland to be a snake or
experiences happiness and distress in a dream, so, in the material


--- Page 202 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17

world, by a lack of careful consideration, we differentiate between

happiness and distress, considering one good and the other bad.
PURPORT

The happiness and distress of the material world of duality are both

mistaken ideas. In the Caitanya-caritamrta (Antya 4.176) it is said:
“dvaite’ bhadrabhadra-jiana, saba— “manodharma’
“ei bhala, ei manda”, —ei saba ‘“‘bhrama’
The distinctions between happiness and distress in the material world of
duality are simply mental concoctions, for the so-called happiness and
distress are actually one and the same. They are like the happiness and
distress in dreams. A sleeping man creates his happiness and distress by
dreaming, although actually they have no existence.

The other example given in this verse is that a flower garland is
originally very nice, but by mistake, for want of mature knowledge, one
may consider it a snake. In this connection there is a statement by Pra-
bodhananda Sarasvati: visvam pama-sukhayate. Everyone in this ma-
terial world is distressed by miserable conditions, but Srila Prabodha-
nanda Sarasvati says that this world is full of happiness. How is this
possible? He answers, yat-kdrunya-kataksa-vaibhavavatarn tar
gauram eva stumah. A devotee accepts the distress of this material world
as happiness only due to the causeless mercy of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. By His personal behavior, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
showed that He was never distressed but always happy in chanting the
Hare Krsna maha-mantra. One should follow in the footsteps of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu and engage constantly in chanting the maha-
mantra—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Then he will never feel the
distresses of the world of duality. In any condition of life one will be
happy if he chants the holy name of the Lord.

In dreams we sometimes enjoy eating sweet rice and sometimes suffer
as if one of our beloved family members had died. Because the same
mind and body exist in the same material world of duality when we are
awake, the so-called happiness and distress of this world are no better
than the false, superficial happiness of dreams. The mind is the via


--- Page 203 ---
Text 31] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 197
medium in both dreams and wakefulness, and everything created by the
mind in terms of sarnkalpa and vikalpa, acceptance and rejection, is
called manodharma, or mental concoction.
TEXT 31
4 वासुदेवे मगवति भक्ति्ुद्हतां वृणाम्‌ ।
ry
्ञानवैराग्यवीयाणा न हि कथिद्‌ व्यपाश्रयः 120
vasudeve bhagavati
bhaktim udvahatam nrnam
JjAana-vairagya-viryanarm
na hi kascid vyapasrayah
vasudeve—to Lord Vasudeva, Krsna; bhagavati—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; bhaktim—love and faith in devotional service; ud-
vahatam —for those who are carrying; nrnam—men; jiana-vairagya—
of real knowledge and detachment; viryanam —possessing the powerful
strength; na—not; hi—indeed; kascit—anything; vyapasrayah—as in-
terest or shelter.
TRANSLATION
Persons engaged in devotional service to Lord Vasudeva, Krsna,
have naturally perfect knowledge and detachment from this ma-
terial world. Therefore such devotees are not interested in the so-
called happiness or so-called distress of this world.
PURPORT
Here is the distinction between a devotee and a philosopher who
speculates on the subject matter of transcendence. A devotee does not
need to cultivate knowledge to understand the falsity or temporary exis-
tence of this material world. Because of his unalloyed devotion to
Vasudeva, this knowledge and detachment are automatically manifested
in his person. As confirmed elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.7):
vasudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogah prayojitah


--- Page 204 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
Jjanayaty asu vairagyam
jnanam ca yad ahaitukam
One who engages in unalloyed devotional service te Vasudeva, Krsna,
automatically becomes aware of this material world, and therefore he is
naturally detached. This detachment is possible because of his high stan-
dard of knowledge. The speculative philosopher tries to understand that
this material world is false by cultivating knowledge, but this under-
standing is automatically manifested in the person of a devotee, without
separate endeavor. The Mayavadi philosophers may be very proud of
their so-called knowledge, but because they do not understand Vasudeva
(vasudevah sarvam iti), they do not understand the world of duality,
which is a manifestation of Vasudeva’s external energy. Therefore, un-
less the so-called janis take shelter of Vasudeva, their speculative
knowledge is imperfect. Ye ‘nye ’ravindaksa vimukta-maninah. They
simply think of becoming free from the contamination of the material
world, but because they do not take shelter at the lotus feet of Vasudeva,
their knowledge is impure. When they actually become pure, they sur-
render to the lotus feet of Vasudeva. Therefore, the Absolute Truth is
easier to understand for a devotee than for janis who simply speculate
to understand Vasudeva. Lord Siva confirms this statement in the follow-
ing verse.
TEXT 32
नाहं Rat ন ङमारनारदौ
म॒ AEE सनयः सुरेशाः |
विदाम यस्येदितयंशकांशका
न तत्खरूपं पृथगीशमानिनः ॥३२॥
71/20 धए ८० na kumara-naradau
na brahma-putra munayah suresah
vidama yasyehitam armsakamsaka
na tat-svariapam prthag-isa-maninah
na—not; aham—I (Lord Siva); virticah—Lord Brahma; na—nor;
kumara—the Asvini-kumaras; naradau—the great saint Narada; na—


--- Page 205 ---
Text 32] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 199
nor; brahma-putrah—the sons of Lord Brahma; munayah—great
saintly persons; sura-iSah—all the great demigods; vidama—know:
yasya—of whom; thitam—activity; amsaka-armsakah—those who are
parts of the parts; na—not; tat—His; sva-ripam—real personality;
prthak—separate; isa —rulers; maninah—who consider ourselves to be.
বণ
TRANSLATION

Neither I [Lord Siva], nor Brahma, nor the Aévini-kumaras, nor
Narada or the other great sages who are Brahma’s sons, nor even
the demigods can understand the pastimes and personality of the
Supreme Lord. Although we are part of the Supreme Lord, we
consider ourselves independent, separate controllers, and thus we
cannot understand His identity.

PURPORT
Brahma-sarivhita (5.33) states:
advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-riapam
adyarh purana-purusari nava-yauvanam ca
vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau
govindam adi-purusarh tam 2107 bhajami

“I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is the
original person. He is absolute, infallible and beginningless, and al-
though expanded into unlimited forms, He is still the same original per-
son, the oldest person, who always appears as a fresh youth. The eternal.
blissful, all-knowing forms of the Lord can not be understood even by
the best Vedic scholars, but they are always manifest to pure, unalloyed
devotees.” Lord Siva places himself as one of the nondevotees, who can-
not understand the identity of the Supreme Lord. The Lord, being
ananta, has an unlimited number of forms. Therefore, how is it possible
for an ordinary, common man to understand Him? Lord Siva, of course.
is above the ordinary human beings, yet he is unable to understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Siva is not among the ordinary
living entities, nor is he in the category of Lord Visnu. He is between
Lord Visnu and the common living entity.


--- Page 206 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
TEXT 33
Arent प्रियः fara: खः परोऽपि वा ।
आत्पत्वात्सर्बभूतानां सर्वभूतप्रियो हरिः ॥३३॥
na hy asyasti priyah kascin
napriyah svah paro pi va
atmatvat sarva-bhitanam
sarva-bhiita-priyo harih
na—not; hi—indeed; asya—of the Lord; asti—there is; priyah—
very dear; kascit—anyone; na—nor; apriyah—not dear; svah—own;
parah—other; api—even; va—or; atmatvat—due to being the soul of
the soul; sarva-bhitanam—of all living entities; sarva-bhiita—to all liv-
ing entities; priyah—very, very dear; harih—Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
He holds no one as very dear and no one as inimical. He has no
one for His own relative, and no one is alien to Him. He is actually
the soul of the soul of all living entities. Thus He is the auspicious
friend of all living beings and is very near and dear to all of them.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His second feature, is the
Supersoul of all living entities. As one’s self is extremely dear, the
Superself of the self is still more dear. No one can be the enemy of the
friendly Superself, who is equal to everyone. Relationships of dearness or
enmity between the Supreme Lord and the living beings are due to the
intervention of the illusory energy. Because the three modes of material
nature intervene between the Lord and the living beings, these different
relationships appear. Actually, the living entity in his pure
condition is always very near and dear to the Lord, and the Lord is dear
to him. There is no question of partiality or enmity.
TEXTS 34-35
तस्य चायं महामागचित्रकेतुः Ses: |
सवत्र QUE शान्तो হাই चंवाच्युतग्रियः ॥२४॥


--- Page 207 ---
Text 35] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 201
৫
तसान्न विखयः कायः पुरुषेषु महात्मसु |
महापुरुषभक्तेषु शान्तेषु समदरदिषु ।२५॥
tasya cayarn maha-bhagas
citraketuh priyo ‘nugah
^ sarvatra sama-drk Santo
hy ahari caivacyuta-priyah
tasman na vismayah karyah
purusesu mahdtmasu
mahapurusa-bhaktesu
Santesu sama-darsisu
tasya—of Him (the Lord); ca—and; ayam—this; maha-bhagah—
the most fortunate; citraketuh—King Citraketu; priyah—beloved;
anugah—most obedient servant; sarvatra—everywhere; sama-drk—
sees equally; santah—very peaceful; hi—indeed; aham—I; ca—also;
eva—certainly; acyuta-priyah—very dear to Lord Krsna, who never
fails; tasmat—therefore; na—no; vismayah—wonder; karyah—to be
done; purusesu—among persons; maha-atmasu—who are exalted souls;
maha-purusa-bhaktesu —devotees of Lord Visnu; santesu—peaceful;
sama-dars$isu—equal to everyone.
TRANSLATION
This magnanimous Citraketu is a dear devotee of the Lord. He is
equal to all living entities and is free from attachment and hatred.
Similarly, I am also very dear to Lord Narayana. Therefore, no one
should be astonished to see the activities of the most exalted devo-
tees of Narayana, for they are free from attachment and envy. They
are always peaceful, and they are equal to everyone.
PURPORT
It is said, vaisnavera kriya, mudra vijieha na bujhaya: one should not
be astonished to see the activities of exalted, liberated Vaisnavas. As one
should not be misled by the activities of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, one should also not be misled by the activities of His devotees. Both


--- Page 208 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
the Lord and His devotees are liberated. They are on the same platform,
the only difference being that the Lord is the master and the devotees are
servants. Qualitatively, they are one and the same. In Bhagavad-gita
(9.29) the Lord says:
samo ’ham sarva-bhiitesu
na me dvesyo sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu mar bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham

“I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a
friend to him.” From this statement by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, it is clear that the devotees of the Lord are always extremely dear
to Him. In effect, Lord Siva told Parvati, “Both Citraketu and I are al-
ways very dear to the Supreme Lord. In other words, both he and I are on
the same level as servants of the Lord. We are always friends, and some-
times we enjoy joking words between us. When Citraketu loudly laughed
at my behavior, he did so on friendly terms, and therefore there was no
reason to curse him.” Thus Lord Siva tried to convince his wife, Parvati,
that her cursing of Citraketu was not very sensible.

Here is a difference between male and female that exists even in the
higher statuses of life—in fact, even between Lord Siva and his wife.
Lord Siva could understand Citraketu very nicely, but Parvati could not.
Thus even in the higher statuses of life there is a difference between the
understanding of a male and that of a female. It may be clearly said that
the understanding of a woman is always inferior to the understanding of
a man. In the Western countries there is now agitation to the effect that
man and woman should be considered equal, but from this verse it ap-
pears that woman is always less intelligent than man.

It is clear that Citraketu wanted to criticize the behavior of his friend
Lord Siva because Lord Siva was sitting with his wife on his lap. Then,
100, Lord Siva wanted to criticize Citraketu for externally posing as a
great devotee but being interested in enjoying with the Vidyadhari
women. These were all friendly jokes; there was nothing serious for
which Citraketu should have been cursed by Parvati. Upon hearing the


--- Page 209 ---
Text 36] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 203
instructions of Lord Siva, Parvati must have been very much ashamed
for cursing Citraketu to become a demon. Mother Parvati could not ap-
preciate Citraketu’s position, and therefore she cursed him, but when
she understood the instructions of Lord Siva she was ashamed.
TEX
7 EXT 36
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
इति शरुत्वा भगवतः शिवस्योमाभिमाषितम्‌ |
बभूव शान्तधी राजन्‌ देवी विगतविखया ।३६॥
sri-Suka uvaca
iti 71४0 bhagavatah
Sivasyomabhibhasitam
babhiva santa-dhi rajan
devi vigata-vismaya
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: iti—thus; Srutvd—
hearing; bhagavatah—of the most powerful demigod; $ivasya—of Lord
Siva; uma—Parvati; abhibhdsitam—instruction; babhiiva—became;
santa-dhih—very peaceful; rajan—O King Pariksit; devi—the goddess;
vigata-vismayd—released from astonishment.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, after hearing this speech by
her husband, the demigoddess [Uma, the wife of Lord Siva] gave
up her astonishment at the behavior of King Citraketu and became
steady in intelligence.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks that the word $anta-
dhih means sviya-pirva-svabhava-smrtya. When Parvati remembered
her former behavior in cursing Citraketu, she became very much
ashamed and covered her face with the skirt of her sari, admitting that
she was wrong in cursing Citraketu.


--- Page 210 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
TEXT 37
इति भागवतो देव्याः प्रतिशप्रुमलन्तमः ।
मूभा स॒ जगृहे शापमेतादत्साधुलक्षणम्‌ ॥ ३७
iti bhagavato devyah
pratisaptum alantamah
mirdhna sa jogrhe sapam
etavat sadhu-laksanam
iti—thus; bhdgavatah—the most exalted devotee; devyah—of Par-
vati; pratiSaptum—to make a counter-curse; alantamah—able in all
respects; miirdhna—with his head; sah—he (Citraketu); jagrhe—ac-
cepted; Sapam —the curse; etdvat—this much; sadhu-laksanam—the
symptom of a devotee.
TRANSLATION
The great devotee Citraketu was so powerful that he was quite
competent to curse mother Parvati in retaliation, but instead of
doing so he very humbly accepted the curse and bowed his head
before Lord Siva and his wife. This is very much to be appreciated
as the standard behavior of a Vaisnava.
PURPORT
Upon being informed by Lord Siva, mother Parvati could understand
that she was wrong in cursing Citraketu. King Citraketu was so exalted
in his character that in spite of being wrongly cursed by Parvati, he im-
mediately descended from his airplane and bowed his head before the
mother, accepting her curse. This has already been explained:
narayana-parah sarve na kutascana bibhyati. Citraketu very sportingly
felt that since the mother wanted to curse him, he could accept this curse
just to please her. This is called sadhu-laksanam, the characteristic of a
sadhu, or a devotee. As explained by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, trnad api
sunicena taror api sahisnund. A devotee should always be very humble
and meek and should offer all respect to others, especially to superiors.
Being protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a devotee is al-


--- Page 211 ---
Text 38] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 205
ways powerful, but a devotee does not wish to show his power unneces-
sarily. However, when a less intelligent person has some power, he wants
to use it for sense gratification. This is not the behavior of a devotee.
TEXT 38
^ जज्ञ FERRE दानवीं योनिमाभितः |
[+ h... 4 9,
चत्र इत्यमिविख्यातो ज्ञानविज्ञानसंयुतः 13
[नुन tvastur daksinagnau
danavim yonim asritah
vrtra ity abhivikhyato
JRdna-vijiana-sariyutah
Jajie—was born; tvastuh—of the brahmana known 85 Tvasta; dak-
sina-agnau—in the fire sacrifice known as daksinagni; danavim—
demoniac; yonim—species of life; asritah—taking shelter of: vrtrah—
Vrtra;  iti—thus;  abhivikhyatah—celebrated;  jidana-vinana-
sarivyutah—fully equipped with transcendental knowledge and practical
application of that knowledge in life.
TRANSLATION
Being cursed by mother Durga [Bhavani, the wife of Lord Siva,
that same Citraketu accepted birth in a demoniac species of life.
Although still fully equipped with transcendental knowledge and
practical application of that knowledge in life, he appeared as a
demon at the fire sacrifice performed by Tvasta, and thus he be-
came famous as Vrtrasura.
PURPORT
The word yoni is generally understood to mean jati—family, group or
species. Although Vrtrasura appeared in a family of demons. it is clearly
said that his knowledge of spiritual life still existed. JAana-vijiana-
sarivyutah: his spiritual knowledge and the practical application of that
knowledge in life were not lost. Therefore it is said that even if a devotee
falls down for some reason, he is still not lost.


--- Page 212 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
yatra kva vabhadram abhad amusya kim
ko vartha apto ’bhajatari sva-dharmatah
(Bhag. 1.5.17)
Once one is advanced in devotional service, his spiritual assets are never
lost under any circumstances. Whatever spiritual advancement he has
achieved continues. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita. Even if a
bhakti-yogi falls, he takes birth in a rich family or family of brah-
manas, in which he again starts devotional activities from the point
where he left off. Although Vrtrasura was known as an asura, or demon,
he did not lose his consciousness of Krsna or devotional service.
TEXT 39
९ spi= ২৪
एतत्ते सवेमाख्यातं यन्मां त्वं परिपृच्छसि ।
बत्रस्यासुरजातेश्च कारणं भगवन्मतेः NR
etat te sarvam akhyatar
yan mar tvar pariprcchasi
vrtrasyasura-jates ca
karanam bhagavan-mateh
etat—this; te—unto you; sarvam—all; akhyatam —explained; yat—
which; mam—me; tvam—you; pariprcchasi—asked; vrtrasya—of
Vrtrasura; asura-jateh—whose birth was in a species of asuras; ca—
and; karanam—the cause; bhagavat-mateh—of exalted intelligence in
Krsna consciousness.
TRANSLATION
My dear King Pariksit, you inquired from me how Vrtrasura, a
great devotee, took birth in a demoniac family. Thus I have tried to
explain to you everything about this.
TEXT 40
. ৬ ¢
इतिहासमिमं पुण्यं चित्रकेतोमंहात्मनः |
माहात्म्यं दिष्णुभक्तानां शरुत्वा बन्धाद्विसुध्यते।।७०॥


--- Page 213 ---
Text 40] Mother Parvati Curses Citraketu 207
itihasam imam punyarm
citraketor mahatmanah
mahatmyam visnu-bhaktanarm
Srutva bandhad vimucyate
^ itihasam— history; imam 1115; punyam—very pious; citraketoh—
“of Citraketu; maha-atmanah—the exalted devotee; mahatmyam—con-
taining glory; visnu-bhaktanam—from the devotees of Visnu; srutva—
hearing; bandhat—from bondage or conditional, material life; vimucy-
ate—is freed.
TRANSLATION
Citraketu was a great devotee [mahatma]. If one hears this
history of Citraketu from a pure devotee, the listener also is freed
from the conditional life of material existence.
PURPORT
The historical incidents in the Puranas, such as the history of
Citraketu explained in the Bhagavata Purana, are sometimes mis-
understood by outsiders, or nondevotees. Therefore Sukadeva Gosvami
advised that the history of Citraketu be heard from a devotee. Anything
about devotional service or the characteristics of the Lord and His devo-
tees must be heard from a devotee, not from a professional reciter. This
is advised herein. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s secretary also advised that
one learn the history of Srimad-Bhagavatam from a devotee: 27৫10,
bhagavata pada vaisnavera sthane. One should not hear the statements
of Srimad-Bhagavatam from professional reciters, or else they will not
be effective. Quoting from Padma Purana, Sri Sanatana Gosvami has
strictly forbidden us to hear about the activities of the Lord and His
devotees from the mouths of nondevotees:
avaisnava-mukhodgirnar
putari hari-kathamrtam
Sravanam naiva kartavyar
sarpocchistari yatha payah
“One should not hear anything about Krsna from a non-Vaispava. Milk
touched by the lips of a serpent has poisonous effects: similarly, talks


--- Page 214 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 17
about Krsna given by a non-Vaisnava are also poisonous.” One must be a
bona fide devotee, and then he can preach and impress devotional service
upon his listeners.
TEXT 41
य एतत्प्ातरुत्याय AEA वाग्यतः पठेत्‌ |
इतिहासं हरिं स्मृत्वा स याति परमां गतिम्‌ ॥४१॥
ya etat pratar utthaya
Sraddhaya vag-yatah pathet
itthasam hari smrtvd
sa ydati paramarm gatim

yah—any person who; etat—this; pratah—early in the morning; ut-
thaya—rising; Sraddhaya—with faith; vak-yatah—controlling the
mind and words; pathet—may read; itihasam—history; harim—the
Supreme Lord; smrtva—remembering; sah—that person; yati—goes;
paramam gatim—Dback home, back to Godhead.

TRANSLATION

One who rises from bed early in the morning and recites this
history of Citraketu, controlling his words and mind and remem-
bering the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will return home,
back to Godhead, without difficulty.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Seventeenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam entitled, “Mother Parvati Curses
Citraketu.”


--- Page 215 ---
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Diti Vows to Kill King Indra
This chapter gives the history of Diti, the wife of Kasyapa, and how she
followed a vow to have a son who would kill Indra. It also describes how
Indra attempted to foil her plan by cutting to pieces the son within her
womb.

In relation to Tvasta and his descendants, there is a description of the
dynasty of the Adityas (sons of Aditi) and other demigods. Préni, the
wife of Aditi’s fifth son named Savita, had three daughters—Savitri,
Vyahrti and Trayi—and very exalted sons named Agnihotra, Pasu,
Soma, Caturmasya and the five Mahayajfas. Siddhi, the wife of Bhaga,
had three sons, named Mahima, Vibhu and Prabhu, and she also had one
daughter, whose name was A$. Dhata had four wives—Kuha, Sinivali,
Raka and Anumati—who had four sons, named Sayam, Darsa, Pratah
and Parnamasa respectively. Kriya, the wife of Vidhata, gave birth to the
five Purisyas, who are representatives of five kinds of fire-gods. Bhrgu,
the mind-born son of Brahma, took his birth again from Carsani, the
wife of Varuna, and the great sage Valmiki appeared from Varuna’s
semen. Agastya and Vasistha were two sons of Varuna and Mitra. Upon
seeing the beauty of Urvasi, Mitra and Varuna discharged semen, which
they kept in an earthen pot. From that pot, Agastya and Vasistha ap-
peared. Mitra had a wife named Revati, who gave birth to three sons—
Utsarga, Arista and Pippala. Aditi had twelve sons, of whom Indra was
the eleventh. Indra’s wife was named Paulomi (Sacidevi). She gave birth
to three sons—Jayanta, Rsabha and Midhusa. By His own powers, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as Vamanadeva. From His
wife, whose name was Kirti, appeared a son named Brhatéloka.
Brhatsloka’s first son was known as Saubhaga. This is a description of the
sons of Aditi. A description of Aditya Urukrama, who is an incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will be offered in the Eighth
Canto.

The demons born of Diti are also described in this chapter. In the
dynasty of Diti appeared the great saintly devotee Prahlada and also Bali,

209


--- Page 216 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
Prahlada’s grandson. Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa were the first sons
of Diti. Hiranyakasipu and his wife, whose name was Kayadhu, had four
sons—Sarnhlada, Anuhlada, Hlada and Prahlada. They also had one
daughter, whose name was Simhika. In association with the demon
Vipracit, Sithhika bore a son named Rahu, whose head was severed by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krti, the wife of Sarnhlada, bore a
son named Paficajana. Hlada’s wife, whose name was Dhamani, gave
birth to two sons— Vatapi and Ilvala. Ilvala put Vatapi into the form of a
ram and gave him to Agastya to eat. Anuhlada, in the womb of his wife,
Surya, begot two sons, named Baskala and Mahisa. Prahlada’s son was
known as Virocana, and his grandson was known as Bali Maharaja. Bali
Maharaja had one hundred sons, of whom Bana was the eldest.

_ After describing the dynasty of the Adityas and the other demigods,
Sukadeva Gosvami describes Diti’s sons known as the Maruts and how
they were elevated to the position of demigods. Just to help Indra, Lord
Visnu had killed Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu. Because of this, Diti
was very envious, and she was eager to have a son who could kill Indra.
By her service, she enchanted Kasyapa Muni in order to beg from him a
greater son to do this. In corroboration of the Vedic injunction vidvar-
sam api karsati, Kasyapa Muni was attracted to his beautiful wife and
promised to grant her any request. When, however, she requested a son
who would kill Indra, he condemned himself, and he advised his wife
Diti to follow the Vaisnava ritualistic ceremonies to purify herself. When
Diti, following the instructions of Kasyapa, engaged in devotional ser-
vice, Indra could understand her purpose, and he began observing all
her activities. One day, Indra had the opportunity to see her deviating
from devotional service. Thus he entered her womb and cut her son into
forty-nine parts. In this way the forty-nine kinds of air known as the
Maruts appeared, but because Diti had performed the Vaisnava
ritualistic ceremonies, all the sons became Vaisnavas.

TEXT 1
श्रीञ्ुक उवाच
पृ्निस्तु पली सवितुः सावित्रीं न्याहृतिं त्रयीम्‌ ।
अग्निहोत्रं पशं सोमं चातुर्मास्यं महामखान्‌ ॥ १॥


--- Page 217 ---
Text 2] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 211
Sri-Suka uvaca
prsnis tu patni savituh
savitrim vyahrtinm trayim
agnihotrari pasurin somari
caturmasyarm maha-makhan
f sri-sukah uwvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; prsnih—Préni; tu—
then; patni—wife; savituh—of Savita; savitrim—Savitri; vyahrtim—
Vyahrti; trayim—Trayi; agnihotram—Agnihotra; pasum—Pasu;
somam—Soma; caturmasyam—Caturmasya; mahd-makhan—the five
Mahayajiias.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Préni, who was the wife of Savita,
the fifth of the twelve sons of Aditi, gave birth to three
daughters —Savitri, Vyahrti and Trayi—and the sons named Ag-
nihotra, Pasu, Soma, Caturmaisya and the five Mahayajiias.
TEXT 2
[७ .
afer भार्याङ्ग महिमानं fd प्रथम्‌ ।
afd च वरारोदां कन्यां प्रात सुव्रताम्‌ ॥ २ ॥
siddhir bhagasya bharyanga
mahimanari vibhuri prabhum
asisarm ca vararoharin
kanya prasita suvratam
siddhih—Siddhi; bhagasya—of Bhaga; bharya—the wife; ariga—my
dear King; mahimanam—Mahima; vibhum—Vibhu; prabhum—
Prabhu; asisam—AS$&1; ca—and; vararoham—very beautiful;
kanyam —daughter; prasita—bore; su-vrat@m—virtuous.
TRANSLATION
O King, Siddhi, whe was the wife of Bhaga, the sixth son of
Aditi, bore three sons, named Mahima, Vibhu and Prabhu, and
one extremely beautiful daughter, whose name was Asi.


--- Page 218 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
TEXTS 3-4
धातुः इदुः বিনীবান্তী राक] चानुमतिस्तथा |
सायं दद्ोमथ प्रातः पूर्णमासमनुक्रमात्‌ ।। २ ॥
अग्नीन्‌ पुरीष्यानाधत क्रियायां समनन्तरः |
चर्षणी वरुणस्यासीयसयां जातो भृगुः पुनः ॥ ४ ॥
dhatuh kuhih sinivali
raka canumatis tatha
sayarih darSam atha pratah
piarnamdsam anukramat
agnin purisyan adhatta
kriyayarih samanantarah
carsani varunasyasid
yasyari jato bhrguh punah
dhatuh —of Dhata; kuhih—Kuhi; sinivali—Sinivali; raka —Raka:
ca—and; anumatih—Anumati; 10170 —also; sdyam—Sayam; darsam—
09769; atha—also; pratah—Pratah; parnamasam—Purnamasa;
anukramat—respectively; agnin—fire-gods; purisyan—called the
Purisyas; adhatta—begot; kriyayam—in Kriya; samanantarah—the
next son, Vidhata; carsani—Carsani; varunasya—of Varuna; dasit—
was; yasydm—in whom; jatah—took birth; bhrguh—Bhrgu; punah—
again.
TRANSLATION
Dhata, the seventh son of Aditi, had four wives, named Kuha,
Sinivali, Raka and Anumati. These wives begot four sons, named
Sayam, Dar$a, Pratah and Puarnamasa respectively. The wife of
Vidhata, the eighth son of Aditi, was named Kriya. In her Vidhata
begot the five fire-gods named the Purisyas. The wife of Varuna,
the ninth son of Aditi, was named Carsani. Bhrgu, the son of
Brahma, took birth again in her womb.


--- Page 219 ---
Text 6] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 213
TEXT 5
वारमीकिंश्च महायोगी वल्मीकादभवत्किल |
[3
अगस्त्यश्च वसिष्ठश्च मित्रावरुणयोऋषी || ५ ॥
^ valmikis ca maha-yogi
valmikad abhavat kila
agastyas ca vasisthas ca
mitra-varunayor rst
valmikih—Valmiki; ca—and; maha-yogi—the great mystic;
valmikat—from an anthill; abhavat—took birth; kila—indeed;
agastyah—Agastya; ca—and; vasisthah—Vasistha; ca—also; mitra-
varunayoh—of Mitra and Varuna; rsi—the two sages.
TRANSLATION
By the semen of Varuna, the great mystic Valmiki took birth
from an anthill. Bhrgu and Valmiki were specific sons of Varuna,
whereas Agastya and Vasistha Rsis were the common sons of
Varuna and Mitra, the tenth son of Aditi.
TEXT 6
~ ©.
रेतः सिषिचतुः TH उर्वश्याः सन्निधौ हुतम्‌ |
रेषत्यां मित्र उत्सगमरिषटं पिप्पलं न्यधात्‌ ॥ ६ ॥
retah sisicatuh kumbhe
urvas$yah sannidhau drutam
revatyar mitra utsargam
aristari pippalarh vyadhat
retah—semen; sisicatuh—discharged; kumbhe—in an earthen pot;
urva§yah—of Urva$i; sannidhau—in the presence; drutam—flown;
revatyam—in Revati; mitrah—Mitra; utsargam—Utsarga; aristam—
Arista; pippalam—Pippala; vyadhat—begot.


--- Page 220 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing Urvasi, the celestial society girl, both Mitra and
Varuna discharged semen, which they preserved in an earthen pot.
The two sons Agastya and Vasistha later appeared from that pot,
and they are therefore the common sons of Mitra and Varuna.
Mitra begot three sons in the womb of his wife, whose name was
Revati. Their names were Utsarga, Arista and Pippala.
PURPORT
Modern science is trying to generate living entities in test tubes by
processing semen, but even long, long ago it was possible for semen kept
in a pot to develop into a child.
TEXT 7
पौलोम्यामिन्द्र आधत्त त्रीन्‌ पुत्रानिति नः श्चुतम्‌ |
जयन्तमृषभं तात वतीयं Wg प्रयः ॥७॥
paulomyam indra adhatta
trin putran iti nah srutam
Jayantam rsabhari tata
trttyarn midhusarh prabhuh
paulomyam—in Paulomi (Sacidevi); indrah—Indra; adhatta—
begot; trin—three; putran—sons; iti—thus; nah—by us; Srutam—
heard; jayantam—Jayanta; rsabham—Rsabha; tata—my dear King;
trttyam—third; midhusam —Midhusa; prabhuh—the lord.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, Indra, the King of the heavenly planets and
eleventh son of Aditi, begot three sons, named Jayanta, Rsabha
and Midhusa, in the womb of his wife, Paulomi. Thus we have
heard.
TEXT 8
SEARS देवस्य मायावामनरूपिणः ।
Fil Tl बहच्छलोकस्तस्यासन्‌ सौमगादयः ॥८।।


--- Page 221 ---
Text 8] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 215
urukramasya devasya
maya-vamana-ripinah
kirtau patnyari brhacchlokas
tasyasan saubhagadayah
#  urukramasya—of Urukrama; devasya—the Lord; maya—by His in-
ternal potency; vamana-riipinah—having the form of a dwarf; kirtau—
in Kirti; patnyam—His wife; brhacchlokah—Brhatsloka; tasya—of
him; asan—were; saubhaga-adayah—sons beginning with Saubhaga.
TRANSLATION
By His own potency, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
has multifarious potencies, appeared in the form of a dwarf as
Urukrama, the twelfth son of Aditi. In the womb of His wife,
whose name was Kirti, He begot one son, named Brhat§loka, who
had many sons, headed by Saubhaga.
PURPORT
As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.6):
ajo ए sann avyayatma
bhiatanam (50070 ‘pi san
prakrtimm svam adhisthaya
sambhavamy atma-mayaya
‘Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates,
and although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every
millennium in My original transcendental form.” When the Supreme
Personality of Godhead incarnates, He does not need any help from the
external energy, for He appears as He is by His own potency. The
spiritual potency is also called maya. It is said, ato mayamayari vispuri
pravadanti manisinah: the body accepted by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is called mayamaya. This does not mean that He is formed of
the external energy; this maya refers to His internal potency.


--- Page 222 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
TEXT 9
[9
तत्कर्मगुणवीर्याणि काश्यपस्य महात्मनः |
पादरत्यामहेऽदित्यां यथैवावततार ह॒ ॥ ९॥
tat-karma-guna-viryani
kasyapasya mahatmanah
pascad vaksyamahe ‘dityar
yathaivavatatara ha
tat—His; karma—activities; guna—qualities; viryani—and power;
kasyapasya—of the son of KaSyapa; mahad-atmanah—the great soul;
pascat—later; vaksyamahe—I shall describe; adityam—in Aditi;
yatha—how; eva—certainly; avatatira—descended; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Later [in the Eighth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam] I shall de-
scribe how Urukrama, Lord Vamanadeva, appeared as the son of
the great sage KaSyapa and how He covered the three worlds with
three steps. I shall describe the uncommon activities He per-
formed, His qualities, His power and how He took birth from the
womb of Aditi.
TEXT 10
अथ कदयपदायादान्‌ दैतेयान्‌ कीतंयामि ते |
यत्र भागवतः श्रीमान्‌ प्रहादो बलिरेव च ॥१०॥
atha kasyapa-dayadan
daiteyan kirtayami te
yatra bhagavatah sriman
prahrado balir eva ca
atha—now; kaSyapa-dayadan—the sons of Kasyapa; daiteyan—born
of Diti; kirtayami—I shall describe; te—to you; yatra—where;
bhagavatah—the great devotee; S$ri-man—glorious; prahradah—
Prahlada; balih—Bali; eva —certainly; ca—also.


--- Page 223 ---
Text 13] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 217
TRANSLATION
Now let me describe the sons of Diti, who were begotten by
KasSyapa but who became demons. In this demoniac family the
great devotee Prahlada Maharaja appeared, and Bali Maharaja also
appeared in that family. The demons are technically known as
^ Daityas because they proceeded from the womb of Diti.
TEXT 11
a
fi दायादौ दैत्यदानववन्दितौ |
दिरण्यकशिपूर्नाम दिरण्याक्षश्च कीर्तितो 1220
diter dvav eva dayadau
daitya-danava-vanditau
hiranyakasSipur nama
hiranyaksas ca kirtitau
diteh—of Diti; dvau—two; eva—certainly; dayddau—sons; daitya-
danava—by the Daityas and Danavas; wvanditau—worshiped;
hiranyakasipuh—HiranyakaSipu; nadma—named;  hiranyaksah—
Hiranyaksa; ca—also; kirtitau—known.
TRANSLATION
First the two sons named Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa took
birth from Diti’s womb. Both of them were very powerful and
were worshiped by the Daityas and Danavas.
TEXTS 12-13
दिरण्यकशिपोमयं कयाधुर्नाम दानवी |
जम्भस्य तनया सा तु सुषुवे चतुरः GAR ।॥॥१२॥
संहादं प्रागनुहादं हदं प्रहादमेव च |
तत्खसा सिंहिका नाम राहुं विप्रचितोऽग्रदीत्‌॥। १२॥
hiranyakasipor bharya
kayadhur nama danavi


--- Page 224 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
jambhasya tanaya sa tu
susuve caturah sutan
sarmhradarin prag anuhradam
hradam prahradam eva ca
tat-svasa sirmhika nama
rahurh vipracito ‘grahit
hiranyakasipoh—of Hiranyakasipu; bharya—the wife; kayadhuh—
Kayadhu; nama—named; danavi—descendant of Danu; jambhasya—
of Jambha; tanaya—daughter; sa—she; tu—indeed; susuve—gave
birth to; caturah—four; sutan—sons; sarmhradam—Samhlada; prak—
first; anuhradam — Anuhlada; hradam —Hlada; prahradam —Prahlida;
eva—also; ca—and; tat-svasa—his sister; simhika—Simhika; nama—
named; rahum—Rahu; vipracitah—from Vipracit; agrahit—received.
TRANSLATION
The wife of Hiranyakasipu was known as Kayadhu. She was the
daughter of Jambha and a descendant of Danu. She gave birth to
four consecutive sons, known as Sarhlada, Anuhlada, Hlada and
Prahlada. The sister of these four sons was known as Sirhhika. She
married the demon named Vipracit and gave birth to another
demon, named Rahu.
TEXT 14
a
श्िरोऽहरयस्य हरिश्चक्रेण पिवतोऽम्रृतम्‌ |
संहादस्य ক্কলিমাযাঁদ্রল पञ्चजनं ततः ॥१४॥
Siro ’harad yasya hari
cakrena pibato ‘'mrtam
sanihradasya krtir bharya-
siita paficajanari tatah
Sirah—the head; aharat—cut off; yasya—of whom; harih—Hari;
cakrena—with the disc; pibatah—drinking; amrtam—nectar;


--- Page 225 ---
Text 16] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 219
samhradasya—of Samhlada; krtih—Krti; bharya—the wife; asita—
gave birth to; paficajanam —Paficajana; tatah—from him.
TRANSLATION
While Rahu, in disguise, was drinking nectar among the
/ demigods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead severed his head.
The wife of Sarmhlada was named Krti. By union with Sarnhlada,
Krti gave birth to a son named Paiicajana.
TEXT 15
हादस्य ঘমনিমাযান্তুন वातापिमिल्वलम्‌ |
योऽगस्त्याय त्वतिथये पेचे वातापिमिल्वलः १५
hradasya dhamanir bharya-
siita vatapim ilvalam
yo ‘gastyaya tv atithaye
pece vatapim ilvalah
hradasya—of Hlada; dhamanih—Dhamani; bharya—the wife;
asita—gave birth to; vatapim—Vatapi; ilvalam—Illvala; yah—he who;
agastydya—to Agastya; tu—but; atithaye—his guest; pece—cooked;
vatapim—Vatapi; ilvalah—Ilvala.
TRANSLATION
The wife of Hlada was named Dhamani. She gave birth to two
sons, named Vatapi and Ilvala. When Agastya Muni became Ilvala’s
guest, Ilvala served him a feast by cooking Vatapi, who was in the
shape of a ram.
TEXT 16
अनुहादस्य घर्यायां AHS ARTE |
~
विरोचनस्तु प्राहादिदेंन्यां तस्याभवद्वलिः 1281
anuhradasya siaryayar
baskalo mahisas tatha


--- Page 226 ---
220 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
virocanas tu prahradir
devyarm tasyabhavad balih
anuhradasya—of Anuhlada; siryayam—through Sirya; baskalah—
Baskala; mahisah—Mabhisa; tatha—also; virocanah—Virocana; tu—in-
deed; prahradih—the son of Prahlada; devyam—through his wife;
tasya—of him; abhavat—was; balih—Bali.
TRANSLATION
The wife of Anuhlada was named Siirya. She gave birth to two
sons, named Baskala and Mahisa. Prahlada had one son, Virocana,
whose wife gave birth to Bali Maharaja.
TEXT 17
बाणज्येष्टं॑पुत्रहातमज्षनायां ततोऽभवत्‌ |
9 = >
तस्यादुभावं सुश्छोक्यं पञ्चादेवाभिधास्यते 112011
bana-jyestharm putra-satam
asanayam tato ’bhavat
tasyanubhavar suslokyarn
pascad evabhidhasyate
bana-jyestham—having Bana as the eldest; putra-satam—one
hundred sons; asSanayam—through Asana; tatah—from him;
abhavat—there were; tasya—his; anubhavam—character; su-
Slokyam—laudable; pascat—later; eva—certainly; abhidhasyate—will
be described.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Bali Maharaja begot one hundred sons in the womb
of Asana. Of these one hundred sons, King Bana was the eldest.
The activities of Bali Maharaja, which are very laudable, will be de-
scribed later [in the Eighth Canto].


--- Page 227 ---
Text 19] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 221
TEXT 18
बाण आराध्य गिरिशं ठेमे तद्वणयुख्यताम्‌ |
FH भगवानास्ते ह्यद्यापि पुरपालकः ।१८॥
pd bana aradhya girisarn
lebhe tad-gana-mukhyatam
yat-parsve bhagavan aste
hy adyapi pura-palakah
banah—Bina; aradhya—having worshiped; girisam—Lord Siva;
lebhe —obtained; tat—of him (Lord Siva); gana-mukhyatam—the plat-
form of being one of the chief associates; yat-parsve—beside whom;
bhagavan—Lord Siva; dste—remains; hi—because of which; adya—
now; api—even; pura-palakah—the protector of the capital.
TRANSLATION
Since King Bana was a great worshiper of Lord Siva, he became
one of Lord Siva’s most celebrated associates. Even now, Lord Siva
protects King Bana’s capital and always stands beside him.
TEXT 19
मरुतश्च दितेः पूत्राश्रतवारिंशनवाधिकाः |
- -
त आसन्नप्रजाः सर्वे नीता इन्द्रेण सात्मताम्‌ ।। १९॥
marutas ca diteh putras
catvarimsan navadhikah
ta asann aprajah sarve
nita indrena satmatam
marutah—the Maruts; ca—and; diteh—of Diti; putrah—sons;
catvarimsat—forty; nava-adhikdh—plus nine; te—they; dsan—were;
aprajah—without sons; sarve—all; nitah—were brought; indrena—by
Indra; sa-atmatam—to the position of demigods.


--- Page 228 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
The forty-nine Marut demigods were also born from the womb
of Diti. None of them had sons. Although they were born of Diti,
King Indra gave them a position as demigods.
, PURPORT
Apparently even demons can be elevated to positions as demigods
when their atheistic character is reformed. There are two kinds of men
throughout the universe. Those who are devotees of Lord Visnu are
called demigods, and those who are just the opposite are called demons.
Even the demons can be transformed into demigods, as the statement of
this verse proves.
TEXT 20
श्रीराजोवाच
कथं त॒ आसुरं भावमपोद्यौत्पत्तिकं गुरो ।
. cn A
इन्द्रेण प्रापिताः सात्म्यं किः तत्साधु छृतं दि तैः ॥२०॥
$ri-rajovaca
katham ta asuram bhavam
apohyautpattikarn guro
indrena prapitah satmyar
kim tat sadhu krtar hi taih
sri-rgja uvaca—King Pariksit said; katham—why; te—they;
asuram—demoniac; bhavam —mentality; apohya—giving up;
autpattikam—due to birth; guro—my dear lord; indrena—by Indra;
prapitah—were converted; sa-atmyam—to demigods; kim —whether;
tat—therefore; sadhu—pious activities; krtam—performed; hi—in-
deed; taih—by them.
TRANSLATION
King Pariksit inquired: My dear lord, due to their birth, the
forty-nine Maruts must have been obsessed with a demoniac men-
tality. Why did Indra, the King of heaven, convert them into
demigods? Did they perform any rituals or pious activities?


--- Page 229 ---
Text 22] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 223
TEXT 21
हमे श्रदधते ब्रह्मनुषयो हि मया .सह ।
परिज्ञानाय भगवंस्तत्नो व्याख्यातुमहंसि ॥२१॥
ime $raddadhate brahmann
V4
^ rsayo hi maya saha
parijianaya bhagavars
tan no vyakhyatum arhasi
ime—these; Sraddadhate—are eager; brahman—O brahmana;
rsayah—sages; hi—indeed; maya saha—with me; parijianaya—to
know; bhagavan—O great soul; tat—therefore: nah—to us;
vyakhyatum arhasi—please explain.
TRANSLATION
My dear brahmana, I and all the sages present with me are eager
to know about this. Therefore, O great soul, kindly explain to us
the reason.
TEXT 22
श्रीसूत उवाच
तद्विष्णुरातख स॒ बाद्रायणि- ,
वचो निश्म्याटतमल्पमथयत्‌ |
समाजयन्‌ संनिभतेन चेतसा
का)
जगाद सत्रायण सवेदञ्चनः॥२२॥
577-5 ८ 40৫০৫
tad visnuratasya sa badarayanir
vaco nisamyadrtam alpam arthavat
sabhajayan san nibhrtena cetasa
Jagada satrayana sarva-darsanah
sri-stitah uvdca—Sri Sita Gosvami said; tat —those; visnuratasya —of
Maharaja Pariksit; sah—he; badarayanih—Sukadeva Gosvami:
vacah—words; nisamya—hearing; adrtam—respectful: alpam—brief:


--- Page 230 ---
224 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
artha-vat—meaningful; sabhajayan san—praising; nibhrtena cetasa—
with great pleasure; jagada—replied; satrayana—O Saunaka; sarva-
darsanah—who is aware of everything.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sita Gosvami said: 0 great sage Saunaka, after hearing
Maharaja Pariksit speak respectfully and briefly on topics essential
to hear, Sukadeva Gosvami, who was well aware of everything,
praised his endeavor with great pleasure and replied.
PURPORT
Maharaja Pariksit’s question was very much appreciated by Sukadeva
Gosvami because although it was composed of a small number of words,
it contained meaningful inquiries about how the sons of Diti, although
born as demons, became demigods. Srila Vi§vanatha Cakravarti Thakura
stresses that even though Diti was very envious, her heart was purified
because of a devotional attitude. Another significant topic is that al-
though KaSyapa Muni was a learned scholar and was advanced in
spiritual consciousness, he nonetheless fell a victim to the inducement of
his beautiful wife. All these questions were posed in a small number of
words, and therefore Sukadeva Gosvami very much appreciated
Maharaja Pariksit’s inquiry.
TEXT 23
HPF उवाच
हतपुत्रा दविः शक्रपाष्णगरादेण विष्णुना ।
6
मन्युना शोकदीप्तेन ज्वलन्ती पर्यचिन्तयत्‌ IRR
sri-Suka uvaca
hata-putra ditih sakra-
parsni-grahena visnunda
manyund Soka-diptena
Jvalanti paryacintayat
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; hata-putra—whose
sons were killed; ditih—Diti; sakra-parsni-grahena —who was helping


--- Page 231 ---
Text 25] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 225
Lord Indra; visnuna—by Lord Visnu; manyund—with anger; Soka-
diptena—kindled by lamentation; jvalanti—burning; paryacintayat—
thought.
TRANSLATION
# Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Just to help Indra, Lord Visnu
killed the two brothers Hiranyaksa and HiranyakaSipu. Because of
their being killed, their mother, Diti, overwhelmed with lamenta-
tion and anger, contemplated as follows.
TEXT 24
कदा J WEAR RAG] |
FEAL पापं घातयित्वा शये सुखम्‌ ॥२४॥
kada nu bhratr-hantaram
indriyaramam ulbanam
aklinna-hrdayari papar
ghatayitva saye sukham
kada—when; nu—indeed; bhratr-hantaram—the killer of the
brothers; indriya-aramam—very fond of sense gratification;
ulbanam—cruel;  aklinna-hrdayam —hardhearted; papam—sinful;
ghatayitva—having caused to be killed; Saye—shall I rest; sukham—
happily.
TRANSLATION
Lord Indra, who is very much fond of sense gratification, has
killed the two brothers Hiranyaksa and HiranyakaSipu by means of
Lord Visnu. Therefore Indra is cruel, hardhearted and sinful.
‘When will I, having killed him, rest with a pacified mind ?
TEXT 25
छमिविडमससंज्ञासी्यस्येशामिदितस्य च |
JAI तत्कृते खाथं कं वेद निरयो यतः na
krmi-vid-bhasma-saryiasid
yasyesabhihitasya ca


--- Page 232 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
bhita-dhruk tat-krte svartham
1077 veda nirayo yatah
krmi—worms; vit—stool; bhasma—ashes; sariyiia—name; dsit—be-
comes; yasya—of which (body) ; Sa-abhihitasya—although designated
as king; ca—also; bhiita-dhruk—he who harms others; tat-krte—for the
sake of that; sva-artham—his self-interest; kim veda—does he know;
nirayah—punishment in hell; yatah—from which.
TRANSLATION
When dead, the bodies of all the rulers known as kings and
great leaders will be transformed into worms, stool or ashes. If one
enviously kills others for the protection of such a body, does he
actually know the true interest of life? Certainly he does not, for if
one is envious of other entities, he surely goes to hell.
PURPORT
The material body, even if possessed by a great king, is ultimately
transformed into stool, worms or ashes. When one is too attached to the
bodily conception of life, he is certainly not very intelligent.
TEXT 26
आशासानस्य तस्येदं धरवश्चनद्धचेतसः |
AZINE FRE भूयायेन सुतो दि ম।।২৪।।
asasanasya tasyedariu
dhruvam unnaddha-cetasah
mada-Sosaka indrasya
bhiyad yena suto hi me
asasanasya—thinking; tasya—of him; idam—this (body);
dhruvam—eternal; unnaddha-cetasah—whose mind is unrestrained;
mada-Sosakah—who can remove the madness; indrasya—of Indra;
bhiyat—may there be; yena—by which; sutah—a son; hi—certainly;
me—of me.


--- Page 233 ---
Text 28] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 227
TRANSLATION
Diti thought: Indra considers his body eternal, and thus he has
become unrestrained. I therefore wish to have a son who can
remove Indra’s madness. Let me adopt some means to help me in
this.
I'd PURPORT
One whois in the bodily conception of life is compared in the Sastras to
animals like cows and asses. Diti wanted to punish Indra, who had
become like a lower animal.
TEXTS 27-28
९
इति मावेन सा भमतुराच्वारासृत्पियम्‌ |
TEE प्रश्रयेण दमेन च ॥२७॥
a 0
भक्त्या परमया राजन्‌ मनोज्ञवल्णुमापितैः |
मनो जग्राह भावज्ञा सखितापाद्गदीकषणेः ।।२८॥।
iti bhavena sa bhartur
dacacarasakrt priyam
SuSriisayanuragena
prasrayena damena ca
bhaktya paramayd rajan
manojiiair valgu-bhasitaih
mano jagraha bhava-jia
sasmitapariga-viksanaih
iti—thus; bhavena—with the intention; sa—she; bhartuh—of the
husband; d@cac@ra—performed; asakrt—constantly; priyam—pleasing
activities; ~~ SuSrusaya—with service;  anuragena—with love:
prasrayena—with humility; damena—with self-control; ca—also;
bhaktya—with devotion;  paramayd—great; ragjan—O King;
manojiiaih—charming; valgu-bhasitaih—with sweet words; manah—
his mind; jagraha—brought under her control; bhava-jiia—knowing
his nature; sa-smita—with smiling; aparga-viksanaih—by glancing.


--- Page 234 ---
228 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
Thinking in this way [with a desire for a son to kill Indra], Diti
began constantly acting to satisfy KaSyapa by her pleasing
behavior. 0 King, Diti always carried out KaSyapa’s orders very
faithfully, as he desired. With service, love, humility and control,
with words spoken very sweetly to satisfy her husband, and with
smiles and glances at him, Diti attracted his mind and brought it
under her control.
PURPORT
When a woman wants to endear herself to her husband and make him
very faithful, she must try to please him in all respects. When the hus-
band is pleased with his wife, the wife can receive all necessities, orna-
ments and full satisfaction for her senses. Herein this is indicated by the
behavior of Diti.
TEXT 29
एवं सिया जडीभूतो विद्ानपि मनोज्ञया ।
बाढमित्याह विवशो न तचत्रं हि योषिति ॥२९॥
evam striya jadibhiito
vidvan api manojiiaya
badham ity aha vivaso
na tac citrari hi yositi
evam—thus; striya—by the woman; jadibhitah—enchanted;
vidvan—very learned; api—although; manojiaya—very expert;
badham —yes; iti—thus; aha —said; vivasah—under her control; na—
not; tat—that; citram—astonishing; hi—indeed; yositi—in the matter
of women.
TRANSLATION
Although KaSyapa Muni was a learned scholar, he was captivated
by Diti’s artificial behavior, which brought him under her con-
trol. Therefore he assured his wife that he would fulfill her
desires. Such a promise by a husband is not at all astonishing.


--- Page 235 ---
Text 30] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 229
TEXT 30
कितोक्येछान्तभूतानि भूतान्यादौ प्रजापतिः। `
fot चक्रे wend यया पुंसां Afgan ॥३०॥
Fd vilokyaikanta-bhitani
bhitany adau prajapatih
striyarin cakre sva-dehardhari
yaya [0187715৫773 matir hrta
vilokya—seeing; ekanta-bhitani—detached; bhitani—the living en-
tities; ddau—in the beginning; prajapatih—Lord Brahma; striyam—
the woman; cakre—created; sva-deha—of his body; ardham—half;
yaya—by whom; pumsam—of men; matih—the mind; hrta—carried
away.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of creation, Lord Brahma, the father of the liv-
ing entities of the universe, saw that all the living entities were
unattached. To increase population, he then created woman from
the better half of man’s body, for woman’s behavior carries away a
man’s mind.
PURPORT
This entire universe is going on under the spell of sexual attachment,
which was created by Lord Brahma to increase the population of the en-
tire universe, not only in human society but also in other species. As
stated by Rsabhadeva in the Fifth Canto, pumsah striya mithuni-bhavam
etam: the entire world is going on under the spell of sexual attraction
and desire between man and woman. When man and woman unite, the
hard knot of this attraction becomes increasingly tight, and thus a man is
implicated in the materialistic way of life. This is the illusion of the ma-
terial world. This illusion acted upon Kasyapa Muni, although he was
very learned and advanced in spiritual knowledge. As stated in the
Manu-sarihita (2.215) and Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.19.17):
matra svasrda duhitra va
naviviktasano bhavet


--- Page 236 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
balavan indriya-gramo
vidvamsam api karsati
““‘A man should not associate with a woman in a solitary place, not even
with his mother, sister or daughter, for the senses are so strong that they
lead astray even a person advanced in knowledge.” When a man remains
in a solitary place with a woman, his sexual desires undoubtedly increase.
Therefore the words ekanta-bhiitani, which are used here, indicate that
to avoid sexual desires one should avoid the company of women as far as
possible. Sexual desire is so powerful that one is saturated with it if he
stays in a solitary place with any woman, even his mother, sister or
daughter.
TEXT 31
एवं चश्रूषितस्तात मगवान्‌ कर्यपः জিয়া ।
अहस्य परमप्रीतो दितिमादामिनन्य च ॥२१॥
evar Susrusitas tata
bhagavan kasyapah striya
prahasya parama-prito
ditim ahabhinandya ca
evam—thus;  Susrisitah—being served; tata—O dear one;
bhagavan—the powerful; kasyapah—Kasyapa; striya—by the woman;
prahasya—smiling; parama-pritah—being very pleased; ditim—to
Diti; aha—said; abhinandya—approving; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
O my dear one, the most powerful sage KaSyapa, being ex-
tremely pleased by the mild behavior of his wife Diti, smiled and
spoke to her as follows.
TEXT 32
श्रीकरयप उवाच
वरंवरय वामोरु प्रीतस्तेऽदमनिन्दिते |
স্তিযা मतैरि सुप्रीते कः काम इह चागमः 130


--- Page 237 ---
Text 34] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 231
sri-kaSyapa uvaca
vararh varaya vamoru
pritas te ham anindite
striya bhartari suprite
^ kah kama iha cagamah
Sri-kasyapah uvaca—Kasyapa Muni said; varam—benediction;
varaya—ask; vamoru—O beautiful woman; pritah—pleased; te—with
you; aham—I; anindite—O irreproachable lady; striyah—for the
woman; bhartari—when the husband; su-prite—pleased; kah—what;
kamah—desire; tha—here; ca—and; agamah—difficult to obtain.
TRANSLATION
KaSyapa Muni said: O beautiful woman, O irreproachable lady,
since I am very much pleased by your behavior, you may ask me
for any benediction you want. If a husband is pleased, what desires
are difficult for his wife to obtain, either in this world or in the
next?
TEXTS 33-34
पतिरेव हि नारीणां दैवतं परमं स्मृतम्‌ ।
मानसः सर्वभूतानां वासुदेवः भियः पतिः 1330
a
स॒ एव देवतालिद्ै्नामरूपविकस्पतैः |
इज्यते मगवा्‌ पुम्मिः सीमि afer ze
patir eva hi narinarm
daivatari paramar smrtam
manasah sarva-bhiitanarm
vasudevah $riyah patih
sa eva devata-lingair
nama-ripa-vikalpitaih
ijyate bhagavan pumbhih
stribhis ca pati-ripa-dhrk
patih—the husband; eva—indeed; hi—certainly; narinam—of
women; daivatam—demigod; paramam—supreme; smrtam—is


--- Page 238 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
considered; manasah—situated in the heart; sarva-bhittanam—of all
living entities; vasudevah—Vasudeva; Sriyah—of the goddess of for-
tune; patih—the husband; sah—He; eva—certainly; devata-lingaih—
by the forms of the demigods; nama—names; ripa—forms;
vikalpitaih—conceived; ijyate —is worshiped; bhagavan—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; pumbhih—by men; stribhih—by women; ca—
also; pati-ripa-dhrk—in the form of the husband.
TRANSLATION

A husband is the supreme demigod for a woman. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Vasudeva, the husband of the god-
dess of fortune, is situated in everyone’s heart and is worshiped
through the various names and forms of the demigods by fruitive
workers. Similarly, a husband represents the Lord as the object of
worship for a woman.

PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.23):
ye ‘py anya-devata-bhakta
yajante sraddhayanvitah
te ‘pi mam eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-pirvakam

“Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunti, is really
meant for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding.”” The
demigods are various assistants who act like the hands and legs of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who is not in direct touch with the
Supreme Lord and cannot conceive of the exalted position of the Lord is
sometimes advised to worship the demigods as various parts of the Lord.
If women, who are usually very much attached to their husbands, wor-
ship their husbands as representatives of Vasudeva, the women benefit,
just as Ajamila benefited by calling for Narayana, his son. Ajamila was
concerned with his son, but because of his attachment to the name of
Narayana, he attained salvation simply by chanting that name. In India a
husband is still called pati-guru, the husband spiritual master. If hus-


--- Page 239 ---
Text 36] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 233
band and wife are attached to one another for advancement in Krsna
consciousness, their relationship of cooperation is very effective for such
advancement. Although the names of Indra and Agni are sometimes ut-
tered in the Vedic mantras (indraya svaha, agnaye svaha), the Vedic
sacrifices are actually performed for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu. As
A long as one is very much attached to material sense gratification, the wor-
ship of the demigods or the worship of one’s husband is recommended.
TEXT 35
-
तसात्पतितव्रता नायः श्रेयस्कामाः सुमध्यमे |
यजन्तेऽनन्यभावेन पतिमात्मानमोश्वरम्‌ । २५॥
tasmat pati-vratd naryah
Sreyas-kamah sumadhyame
yajante ‘nanya-bhavena
patim atmanam (চো চো?
tasmat—therefore; pati-vratah—devoted to the husband; naryah—
women; Sreyah-kdmah—conscientious; su-madhyame—O thin-waisted
woman; yajante—worship; ananya-bhavena—with devotion; patim—
the husband; atmanam—the Supersoul; iSvaram —representative of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
My dear wife, whose body is so beautiful, your waist being thin,
a conscientious wife should be chaste and should abide by the or-
ders of her husband. She should very devoutly worship her hus-
band as a representative of Vasudeva.
TEXT 36
सोऽहं त्वयार्चितो मद्र ईदग्भावेन मक्तितः।
ते ते सम्पादये काममसतीनां सुदुलंमम्‌ 113811
so "har tvayarcito bhadre
idrg-bhavena bhaktitah


--- Page 240 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
tar te sampadaye kamam
asatinam sudurlabham
sah—such a person; aham—I; tvaya—by you; arcitah—worshiped;
bhadre—O gentle woman; idrk-bhavena—in such a way; bhaktitah—
with devotion; tam—that; te—your; sampadaye—shall fulfill;
kamam —desire; asatinam—for unchaste women; su-durlabham—not
obtainable.
TRANSLATION
My dear gentle wife, because you have worshiped me with great
devotion, considering me a representative of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, I shall reward you by fulfilling your desires,
which are unobtainable for an unchaste wife.
TEXT 37
दितिरुवाच
वरदो यदि मे ब्रह्मन्‌ पुत्रमिन्द्रहणं वृणे |
word IARI मे घातितौ सुतौ ॥२७॥
ditir uvaca
varado yadi me brahman
putram indra-hanar vrne
amrtyum mrta-putraham
yena me ghatitau sutau
ditih uvaca—Diti said; vara-dah—the giver of benedictions; yadi—
if; me—to me; brahman—O great soul; putram—a son; indra-
hanam—who can kill Indra; vrre—I am asking for; amrtyum —immor-
tal; mrta-putra—whose sons are dead; aham—I; yena—by whom:
me—my; ghatitau—were caused to be killed; sutau—two sons.
TRANSLATION
Diti replied: O my husband, O great soul, I have now lost my
sons. If you want to give me a benediction, I ask you for an immor-


--- Page 241 ---
Text 38] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 235
tal son who can kill Indra. I pray for this because Indra, with the
help of Visnu, has killed my two sons Hiranyaksa and
HiranyakaSipu.
PURPORT
^ The word indra-hanam means “one who can kill Indra,” but it also
“means “one who follows Indra.” The word amrtyum refers to the
demigods, who do not die like ordinary human beings because they have
extremely long durations of life. For example, the duration of Lord
Brahma’s life is stated in Bhagavad-gita: sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar
yad brahmano viduh. Even the duration of one day, or twelve hours, of
Brahma is 4,300,000 years multiplied by one thousand. Thus the dura-
tion of his life is inconceivable for an ordinary human being. The
demigods are therefore sometimes called amara, which means “one who
has no death.” In this material world, however, everyone has to die.
Therefore the word amrtyum indicates that Diti wanted a son who would
be equal in status to the demigods.
TEXT 38
©.
निशम्य ag विप्रो विमना; पयंतप्यत ।
अहो अधेः सुमहान agra Nel
nisamya tad-vaco vipro
vimanah paryatapyata
aho adharmah sumahan
adya me samupasthitah
niSamya—hearing; tat-vacah—her words; viprah—the brahmana;
vimanah—aggrieved; paryatapyata—lamented; aho—alas; adhar-
mah—impiety; su-mahan—very great; adya—today; me—upon me;
samupasthitah—has come.
TRANSLATION
Upon hearing Diti’s request, KaSyapa Muni was very much ag-
grieved. ‘‘Alas,” he lamented, “now I face the danger of the
impious act of killing Indra.”


--- Page 242 ---
234. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
tar te sampadaye kamam
asatinarn sudurlabham
sah—such a person; aham—I; tvaya—by you; arcitah—worshiped;
bhadre—O gentle woman; idrk-bhavena—in such a way; bhaktitah—
with devotion; tam—that; te—your; sampadaye—shall fulfill;
kamam—desire; asatinam—for unchaste women; su-durlabham—not
obtainable.
TRANSLATION
My dear gentle wife, because you have worshiped me with great
devotion, considering me a representative of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, I shall reward you by fulfilling your desires,
which are unobtainable for an unchaste wife.
TEXT 37
दितिरुकाक
वरदो यदि मे ब्रह्मन्‌ पुत्रमिन्द्रहणं बणे ।
wg WEE येन मे घातितौ सुतो ॥२७॥
1118111
varado yadi me brahman
putram indra-hanam vrne
amrtyuri mrta-putrahar
yena me ghatitau sutau
ditih uvaca—Diti said; vara-dah—the giver of benedictions; yadi—
if; me—to me; brahman—O great soul; putram—a son; indra-
hanam —who can kill Indra; vrine—I am asking for; amrtyum—immor-
tal; mrta-putra—whose sons are dead; aham—I; yena—by whom:
me—my; ghatitau—were caused to be killed; sutau—two sons.
TRANSLATION
Diti replied: O my husband, O great soul, I have now lost my
sons. If you want to give me a benediction, I ask you for an immor-


--- Page 243 ---
Text 38] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 235
tal son who can kill Indra. I pray for this because Indra, with the
help of Visnu, has killed my two sons Hiranyaksa and
Hiranyakasipu.
PURPORT

The word indra-hanam means “one who can kill Indra,” but it also
means ‘“‘one who follows Indra.” The word amrtyum refers to the
demigods, who do not die like ordinary human beings because they have
extremely long durations of life. For example, the duration of Lord
Brahma’s life is stated in Bhagavad-gita: sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar
yad brahmano viduh. Even the duration of one day, or twelve hours, of
Brahma is 4,300,000 years multiplied by one thousand. Thus the dura-
tion of his life is inconceivable for an ordinary human being. The
demigods are therefore sometimes called amara, which means “one who
has no death.” In this material world, however, everyone has to die.
Therefore the word amrtyum indicates that Diti wanted a son who would
be equal in status to the demigods.

TEXT 38
নিহ্যম্য aah নিসী विमनाः पयेतप्यत ।
अहो अधेः सुमहानद्य मे समुपसितः ॥३८॥
nisamya tad-vaco vipro
vimanah paryatapyata
aho adharmah sumahan
adya me samupasthitah

niSamya—hearing; tat-vacah—her words; viprah—the brahmana;
vimanah—aggrieved; paryatapyata—lamented; aho—alas; adhar-
mah—impiety; su-mahdan—very great; adya—today; me—upon me;
samupasthitah—has come.

TRANSLATION

Upon hearing Diti’s request, KaSyapa Muni was very much ag-
grieved. “Alas,” he lamented, “now I face the danger of the
impious act of killing Indra.”


--- Page 244 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
PURPORT
Although Kaéyapa Muni was eager to fulfill the desire of his wife Diti,
when he heard that she wanted a son to kill Indra his jubilation was im-
mediately reduced to nothing because he was averse to the idea.
TEXT 39
अहो अर्थेन्द्रियारामो योषिन्मय्येह मायया |
गृदीवचेताः कृपणः पतिष्ये नरके धुवम्‌ NRA
aho arthendriyaramo
yosin-mayyeha mayaya
grhita-cetah krpanah
patisye narake dhruvam
aho—alas; artha-indriya-aramah—too attached to material enjoy-
ment; yosit-mayyd—in the form of a woman; iha—here; mayaya—by
the illusory energy; grhita-cetah—my mind being captivated;
krpanah—wretched; patisye—I shall fall; narake—to hell; dhruvam—
surely.
TRANSLATION
Kasyapa Muni thought: Alas, I have now become too attached to
material enjoyment. Taking advantage of this, my mind has been
attracted by the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in the form of a woman [my wife]. Therefore I am surely
awretched person who will glide down toward hell.
TEXT 40
कोऽतिक्रमोऽलुवतन्त्याः सखमावमिह योषितः |
धिङ्‌ मां बताबुधं खार्थे यदहं त्वजितेन्द्रियः ॥४०॥
10018800770 ’nuvartantyah
svabhavam iha yositah
0807 mari batabudhari svarthe
yad ahari tv ajitendriyah


--- Page 245 ---
Text 40] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 237

kah—what; atikramah —offense; anuvartantyah—following; sva-
bhavam —her nature; itha—here; yositah—of the woman; dhik—con-
demnation; mdm —unto me; bata—alas; abudham—not conversant;
sva-arthe—in what is good for me; yat—because; aham—I; tu—in-
deed; ajita-indriyah—unable to control my senses.

TRANSLATION

This woman, my wife, has adopted a means that follows her
nature, and therefore she is not to be blamed. But I am a man.
Therefore, all condemnation upon me! I am not at all conversant
with what is good for me, since I could not control my senses.

PURPORT

The natural instinct of a woman is to enjoy the material world. She in-
duces her husband to enjoy this world by satisfying his tongue, belly and
genitals, which are called jihva, udara and upastha. A woman is expert
in cooking palatable dishes so that she can easily satisfy her husband in
eating. When one eats nicely, his belly is satisfied, and as soon as the
belly is satisfied the genitals become strong. Especially when a man is ac-
customed to eating meat and drinking wine and similar passionate
things, he certainly becomes sexually inclined. It should be understood
that sexual inclinations are meant not for spiritual progress but for glid-
ing down to hell. Thus Kasyapa Muni considered his situation and
lamented. In other words, to be a householder is very risky unless one is
trained and the wife is a follower of her husband. A husband should be
trained at the very beginning of his life. Kaumdra dacaret prajio
dharman bhagavatan iha (Bhag. 7.6.1). During the time of
brahmacarya, or student life, a brahmacari should be taught to be ex-
pert in bhagavata-dharma, devotional service. Then when he marries, if
his wife is faithful to her husband and follows him in such life, the rela-
tionship between husband and wife is very desirable. However, a rela-
tionship between husband and wife without spiritual consciousness but
strictly for sense gratification is not at all good. It is said in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (12.2.3) that especially in this age, Kali-yuga, dam-patye
’bhirucir hetuh: the relationship between husband and wife will be based
on sexual power. Therefore householder life in this Kali-yuga is


--- Page 246 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
extremely dangerous unless both the wife and husband take to Krsna
consciousness.
TEXT 41
a द्मो 4 ৪
IEWET वक्त्र বন্য সবঘাম্ববদূ।
৬ . + =
हृदयं gd staf को वेद वेष्टितम्‌ ॥४१॥
Sarat-padmotsavari vaktrari
vacas ca Sravanamrtam
hrdayariv ksura-dharabham
strinam ko veda cestitam
Sarat—in the autumn; padma—a lotus flower; utsavam —blossoming;
vaktram —face; vacah—words; ca—and; S$ravana—to the ear;
amrtam—giving pleasure; hrdayam—heart; ksura-dhara—the blade of
a razor; abham—like; strinam—of women; kah—who; veda—knows;
cestitam—the dealings.
TRANSLATION
A woman’s face is as attractive and beautiful as a blossoming
lotus flower during autumn. Her words are very sweet, and they
give pleasure to the ear, but if we study a woman’s heart, we can
understand it to be extremely sharp, like the blade of a razor. In
these circumstances, who could understand the dealings of a
woman?
PURPORT
Woman is now depicted very well from the materialistic point of view
by Kasyapa Muni. Women are generally known as the fair sex, and es-
pecially in youth, at the age of sixteen or seventeen, women are very at-
tractive to men. Therefore a woman’s face is compared to a blooming
lotus flower in autumn. Just as a lotus is extremely beautiful in autumn,
a woman at the threshold of youthful beauty is extremely attractive. In
Sanskrit a woman’s voice is called nari-svara because women generally
sing and their singing is very attractive. At the present moment, cinema


--- Page 247 ---
Text 41] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 239
artists, especially female singers, are especially welcome. Some of them
earn fabulous amounts of money simply by singing. Therefore, as taught
by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, a woman’s singing is dangerous because it
can make a sannyasi fall a victim to the woman. Sannyasa means giving
up the company of women, but if a sannyast hears the voice of a woman
and sees her beautiful face, he certainly becomes attracted and is sure to
fall down. There have been many examples. Even the great sage
Viévamitra fell a victim to Menaka. Therefore a person desiring to ad-
vance in spiritual consciousness must be especially careful not to see a
woman’s face or hear a woman’s voice. To see a woman’s face and ap-
preciate its beauty or to hear a woman’s voice and appreciate her singing
as very nice is a subtle falldown for a brahmacari or sannyasi. Thus the
description of a woman’s features by KaSyapa Muni is very instructive.

When a woman’s bodily features are attractive, when her face is
beautiful and when her voice is sweet, she is naturally a trap for a man.
The $astras advise that when such a woman comes to serve a man, she
should be considered to be like a dark well covered by grass. In the fields
there are many such wells, and a man who does not know about them
drops through the grass and falls down. Thus there are many such in-
structions. Since the attraction of the material world is based on attrac-
tion for women, Kaéyapa Muni thought, “Under the circumstances, who
can understand the heart of a woman?”’ Canakya Pandita has also ad-
vised, visvdso naiva kartavyah strisu raja-kulesu ca: “There are two per-
sons one should not trust—a politician and a woman.” These, of course.
are authoritative §astric injunctions, and we should therefore be very
careful in our dealings with women.

Sometimes our Krsna consciousness movement is criticized for min-
gling men and women, but Krsna consciousness is meant for anyone.
Whether one is a man or woman does not matter. Lord Krsna personally
says, striyo vaiSyds tatha sudras te [08 yanti param gatim: whether one is
a woman, $§idra or vaiSya, not to speak of being a brahmana or ksatriya,
everyone is fit to return home, back to Godhead, if he strictly follows the
instructions of the spiritual master and दऽ. We therefore request all
the members of the Krsna consciousness movement—both men and
women —not to be attracted by bodily features but only to be attracted by
Krsna. Then everything will be all right. Otherwise there will be danger.


--- Page 248 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
TEXT 42
न हि wafer: dumsa खाश्षिषात्मनाम्‌।
9 ৬ -
पतिं gf भ्रातरं না ्नन्त्यथे घातयन्ति च ॥४२॥
na hi kascit priyah strinam
anjasa svdsisatmanam
patirh putrari bhrataram va
ghnanty arthe ghatayanti ca
na—not; hi—certainly; kascit—anyone; priyah—dear; strinam—to
women; anjasa—actually; sva-asisa—for their own interests; at-
manam—most dear; patim—husband; putram—son; bhrataram—
brother; va—or; ghnanti—they kill; arthe—for their own interests;
ghatayanti—cause to be killed; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
To satisfy their own interests, women deal with men as if the
men were most dear to them, but no one is actually dear to them.
‘Women are supposed to be very saintly, but for their own interests
they can kill even their husbands, sons or brothers, or cause them
to be killed by others.
PURPORT
A woman’s nature has been particularly well studied by Kasyapa
Muni. Women are self-interested by nature, and therefore they should
be protected by all means so that their natural inclination to be too self-
interested will not be manifested. Women need to be protected by men. A
woman should be cared for by her father in her childhood, by her hus-
band in her youth and by her grown sons in her old age. This is the
injunction of Manu, who says that a woman should not be given indepen-
dence at any stage. Women must be cared for so that they will not be free
to manifest their natural tendency for gross selfishness. There have been
many cases, even in the present day, in which women have killed their
husbands to take advantage of their insurance policies. This is not a criti-
cism of women but a practical study of their nature. Such natural in-
stincts of a woman or a man are manifested only in the bodily conception


--- Page 249 ---
Text 43] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 241
of life. When either a man or a woman is advanced in spiritual conscious-
ness, the bodily conception of life practically vanishes. We should see all
women as spiritual units (0807 brahmasmi), whose only duty is to
satisfy Krsna. Then the influences of the different modes of material
nature, which result from one’s possessing a material body, will not act.

The Krsna consciousness movement is so beneficial that it can very
easily counteract the contamination of material nature, which results
from one’s possessing a material body. Bhagavad-gita therefore teaches,
in the very beginning, that whether one is a man or a woman, one must
know that he or she is not the body but a spiritual soul. Everyone should
be interested in the activities of the spirit soul, not the body. As long as
one is activated by the bodily conception of life, there is always the
danger of being misled, whether one is a man or a woman. The soul is
sometimes described as purusa because whether one is dressed as a man
or a woman, one is inclined to enjoy this material world. One who has
this spirit of enjoyment is described as purusa. Whether one is a man or a
woman, he is not interested in serving others; everyone is interested in
satisfying his or her own senses. Krsna consciousness, however, provides
first-class training for a man or a woman. A man should be trained to be
a first-class devotee of Lord Krsna, and a woman should be trained to be
a very chaste follower of her husband. That will make the lives of both of
them happy.

TEXT 43
प्रतिश्वुतं ददामीति वचस्तन्न मृषा भवेत्‌ ।
वधं नार्दति चेन्द्रोऽपि तत्रेदभुपकल्पते ।४३॥
pratisrutarin dadamiti
vacas tan na mrsa bhavet
vadhari narhati cendro pi
tatredam upakalpate

pratisrutam —promised; dadami—I shall give; iti—thus: vacah—
statement; tat—that; na—not; mrsa—false; bhavet—can be; vadham—
killing; na—not; arhati—is suitable; ca—and; indrah—Indra; api—
also; tatra—in that connection; idam—this; upakalpate—is suitable.


--- Page 250 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION

I promised to give her a benediction, and this promise cannot be
violated, but Indra does not deserve to be killed. In these circum-
stances, the solution I have is quite suitable.

PURPORT

Kasyapa Muni concluded, “Diti is eager to have a son who can kill In-
dra, since she is a woman, after all, and is not very intelligent. I shall
train her in such a way that instead of always thinking of how to kill In-
dra, she will become a Vaisnava, a devotee of Krsna. If she agrees to
follow the rules and regulations of the Vaisnava principles, the unclean
core of her heart will certainly be cleansed.” Ceto-darpana-marjanam.
This is the process of devotional service. Anyone can be purified by
following the principles of devotional service in Krsna consciousness, for
Krsna consciousness is so powerful that it can purify even the dirtiest
class of men and transform them into the topmost Vaisnavas. Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s movement aims at this purpose. Narottama dasa
Thakura says:

vrajendra-nandana yet, Saci-suta haila sei,
balarama ha-ila nitai
dina-hina yata chila, hari-name uddharila,
ta’ra saksi jagai-madhai

The appearance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in this Kali-yuga is
especially meant to deliver the fallen souls, who are always planning
something for material enjoyment. He gave the people of this age the ad-
vantage of being able to chant the Hare Krsna mantra and thus become
fully pure, free from all material contamination. Once one becomes a
pure Vaisnava, he transcends all material conceptions of life. Thus
Kasyapa Muni tried to transform his wife into a Vaisnavi so that she
might give up the idea of killing Indra. He wanted both her and her sons
to be purified so that they would be fit to become pure Vaisnavas. Of
course, sometimes a practitioner deviates from the Vaisnava principles,
and there is a chance that he may fall down, but Kasyapa Muni thought
that even if one falls while practicing the Vaisnava principles, he is still
not a loser. Even a fallen Vaisnava is eligible for better results, as con-


--- Page 251 ---
Text 45] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 243
firmed in Bhagavad-gita. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato
bhayat: even practicing the Vaisnava principles to a small extent can
save one from the greatest danger of material existence. Thus Kasyapa
Muni planned to instruct his wife Diti to become a Vaisnava because he
wanted to save the life of Indra.
TEXT 44
इति संचिन्त्य भगवान्मारीचः Teas |
+ 6
उवाच किञ्चित्‌ कुपित आत्मानं च बिगदंयन्‌ use
iti sanicintya bhagavan
maricah kurunandana
uvaca kiricit kupita
atmanarn ca vigarhayan
iti—thus; saficintya—thinking; bhagavan —the powerful;
maricah—Kasyapa Muni; kuru-nandana—O descendant of Kuru;
uvaca—spoke; kificit—somewhat; kupitah—angry; atmanam—him-
self; ca—and; vigarhayan —condemning.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: KaSyapa Muni, thinking in this way,
became somewhat angry. Condemning himself, O Maharaja
Pariksit, descendant of Kuru, he spoke to Diti as follows.
TEXT 45
श्रीकर्यप उवाच
पुत्रस्ते भविता भद्रे इन्द्रहादेवबान्धवः |
संवत्सरं तमिदं Fast धारयिष्यसि ॥४५॥
sri-kasyapa uvdca
putras te bhavita bhadre
indra-hadeva-bandhavah
sarhwvatsarariv vratam idari
yady anjo dharayisyasi


--- Page 252 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
sri-kasyapah uvdaca—Kasyapa Muni said; putrah—son; te—your;
bhavita—will be: bhadre—O gentle woman; indra-ha—killer of Indra,
or follower of Indra; adeva-bandhavah—friend of the demons (or deva-
bandhavah—friend of the demigods); sarwatsaram—for a year;
vratam—vow: idam—this; yadi—if; aijah—properly; dharayisyasi—
you will execute.
TRANSLATION
Kasyapa Muni said: My dear gentle wife, if you follow my in-
structions regarding this vow for at least one year, you will surely
get a son who will be able to kill Indra. However, if you deviate
from this vow of following the Vaisnava principles, you will get a
son who will be favorable to Indra.
PURPORT
The word indra-ha refers to an asura who is always eager to kill In-
dra. An enemy of Indra is naturally a friend to the asuras, but the word
indra-ha also refers to one who follows Indra or who is obedient to him.
When one becomes a devotee of Indra, he is certainly a friend to the
demigods. Thus the words indra-hadeva-bandhavah are equivocal, for
they say. “Your son will kill Indra, but he will be very friendly to the
demigods.” If a person actually became a friend of the demigods, he cer-
tainly would not be able to kill Indra.
TEXT 46
दितिरुवाच
धारयिष्ये व्रतं डान्नूहि कार्याणि यानि मे ।
यानि चेह निषिद्धानि न व्रतं पनन्त यान्युत ॥४६॥
ditir uvaca
dharayisye vratarih brahman
brihi karyani yani me
yani ceha nisiddhani
na vrata ghnanti yany uta


--- Page 253 ---
Text 47] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 245
ditih uvaca—Diti said; dharayisye—I shall accept; vratam—vow;
brahman—my dear brahmana; brihi—please state; karyani—must be
done; yani—what; me—to me; yani—what; ca—and; iha—here;
nisiddhani—is forbidden; na—not; vratam—the vow; ghnanti—break;
yani—what; uta—also.
TRANSLATION
Diti replied: My dear brahmana, I must accept your advice and
follow the vow. Now let me understand what I have to do, what is
forbidden and what will not break the vow. Please clearly state all
this to me.
PURPORT
As stated above, a woman is generally inclined to serve her own pur-
poses. KaSyapa Muni proposed to train Diti to fulfill her desires within
one year, and since she was eager to kill Indra, she immediately agreed,
saying, “Please let me know what the vow is and how I have to follow it.
I promise that I shall do the needful and not break the vow.” This is
another side of a woman’s psychology. Even though a woman is very
fond of fulfilling her own plans, when someone instructs her, especially
her husband, she innocently follows, and thus she can be trained for bet-
ter purposes. By nature a woman wants to be a follower of a man;
therefore if the man is good the woman can be trained for a good
purpose.
TEXT 47
श्रीकरयप তবাব্ব
न दस्याद्ूतजातानि न शपेन्नारृतं वदेत्‌ |
नचछिन्यान्नखरोमाणि न स्प्रदो्यदमङ्गलम्‌ ॥४७॥
sri-kasSyapa uvaca
na himsyad bhita-jatani
na $apen nanrtari vadet
na chindyan nakha-romani
na sprsed yad amangalam


--- Page 254 ---
24.6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18

sri-kasyapah uvaca—Kasyapa Muni said; na hirisyat—must not
harm; bhita-jatani—the living entities; na sapet—must not curse; na—
not: anrtam—a lie; vadet—must speak; na chindyat—must not cut;
nakha-romani—the nails and hair; na sprset—must not touch; yat—
that which; amarngalam—impure.

TRANSLATION

Kasyapa Muni said: My dear wife, to follow this vow, do not be
violent or cause harm to anyone. Do not curse anyone, and do not
speak lies. Do not cut your nails and hair, and do not touch impure
things like skulls and bones.

PURPORT

Kasyapa Muni’s first instruction to his wife was not to be envious. The
general tendency of anyone within this material world is to be envious,
and therefore, to become a Krsna conscious person, one must curb this
tendency, as stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (paramo nirmatsaranam). A
Krsna conscious person is always nonenvious, whereas others are always
envious. Thus KaSyapa Muni’s instruction that his wife not be envious
indicates that this is the first stage of advancement in Krsna conscious-
ness. KaS§yapa Muni desired to train his wife to be a Krsna conscious per-
son, for this would suffice to protect both her and Indra.

TEXT 48
€.
नाप्सु FRNA TAT न सम्भाषेत दुजनैः |
= is s
न वसीताधोतवासः स्रजं च विधरतां कचित्‌ ॥४८॥
710 [25८ snayan na kupyeta
na sambhaseta durjanaih
na vasitadhauta-vasah
srajamn ca vidhrtar kvacit

na—not; apsu—in water; snayat—must bathe; na kupyeta—must
not become angry; na sambhaseta—must not speak; durjanaih—with
wicked persons; na vasita—must not wear; adhauta-vasah—unwashed
clothes; srajam—flower garland; ca—and; vidhrtam—which was
already worn; kvacit—ever.


--- Page 255 ---
Text 49] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 247
TRANSLATION

Kasyapa Muni continued: My dear gentle wife, never enter the
water while bathing, never be angry, and do not even speak or
associate with wicked people. Never wear clothes that have not
been properly washed, and do not put on a garland that has already
been worn.

TEXT 49
नोच्छिष्टं चण्डिकान्नं च सामिषं बषलाहतम्‌।
भञ्ञोतोदक्यया दष्टं पिवेन्नाज्ञटिना त्वपः ॥४९॥
nocchistarin candikannan ca
samisarn vrsalahrtam
bhunjitodakyaya drstarin
piben nanjalina tv apah

na—not; ucchistam—leftover food; candika-annam—food offered to
the goddess Kali; ca—and; sa-amisam—mixed with flesh; vrsala-
ahrtam—brought by a Sidra; bhunjita—must eat; udakyaya—by a
woman in her menstrual period; drstam—seen; pibet na—must not
drink; afjalina—by joining and cupping the two palms; tu—also;
apah—water.

TRANSLATION

Never eat leftover food, never eat prasada offered to the goddess
Kali [Durga], and do not eat anything contaminated by flesh or
fish. Do not eat anything brought or touched by a $tdra nor any-
thing seen by a woman in her menstrual period. Do not drink
water by joining your palms.

PURPORT

Generally the goddess Kali is offered food containing meat and fish,
and therefore KaSyapa Muni strictly forbade his wife to take the rem-
nants of such food. Actually a Vaisnava is not allowed to take any food
offered to the demigods. A Vaisnava is always fixed in accepting prasada
offered to Lord Visnu. Through all these instructions, Kasyapa Muni. in
a negative way, instructed his wife Diti how to become a Vaisnavi.


--- Page 256 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
TEXT 50
नोच्छिष्टास्पृष्टसकिला सन्ध्यायां मुक्तमूर्धजा |
अनचितासंयतवाक्‌ नासंबीता बहिश्चरेत्‌ ॥५०॥
nocchistasprsta-salila
sandhyayam mukta-miirdhaja
anarcitasarivyata-vak
nasarwita bahi$ caret
na—not; ucchista—after eating; asprsta-salila—without washing;
sandhyayam—in the evening; muhkta-mirdhaja—with the hair loose;
anarcita—without ornaments; asamyata-vak—without being grave;
na—not; asarmvitd—without being covered; bahih—outside; caret—
should go.
TRANSLATION
After eating, you should not go out to the street without having
washed your mouth, hands and feet. You should not go out in the
evening or with your hair loose, nor should you go out unless you
are properly decorated with ornaments. You should not leave the
house unless you are very grave and are sufficiently covered.
PURPORT
Kasyapa Muni advised his wife not to go out onto the street unless she
was well decorated and well dressed. He did not encourage the mini-
skirts that have now become fashionable. In Oriental civilization, when a
woman goes out onto the street, she must be fully covered so that no man
will recognize who she is. All these methods are to be accepted for
purification. If one takes to Krsna consciousness, one is fully purified,
and thus one remains always transcendental to the contamination of the
material world.
TEXT 51
নাযীবঘাহামযবা ARIE उद्क्िराः |
aC -
शयीत नापराडनान्यने नम्रा न च सन्ध्ययोः ॥५१॥


--- Page 257 ---
Text 52] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 249
nadhauta-padaprayata
nardra-pada udak-sirah
Sayita naparan nanyair
na nagna na ca sandhyayoh
na—not; adhauta-pada—without washing the feet; aprayata —with-
out being purified; na—not; ardra-pada —with wet feet; udak-sirah—
with the head toward the north; sSayita—should lie down; na—not;
aparak—with the head pointed west; na—not; anyaih—with other
women; na—not; nagna—naked; na—not; ca—and; sandhyayoh—at
sunrise and sunset.
TRANSLATION
You should not lie down without having washed both of your
feet or without being purified, nor with wet feet or with your head
pointed west or north. You should not lie naked, or with other
women, or during the sunrise or sunset.
TEXT 52
=, ४ +
धोतवासा शछचिर्नित्य॑ सर्वमङ्गलसंयुता |
पूजयेतप्रातराञ्चात्पराग्गोविग्राञ्‌ भियमच्युतम्‌ ॥५२॥
dhauta-vasa Sucir nityariu
sarva-mangala-sarivyuta
pijayet pratarasat prag
go-vipran Sriyam acyutam
dhauta-vasa—wearing washed cloth; Sucih—being purified;
nityam —always; sarva-marigala—with all auspicious items; sarivyuta—
adorned; pijayet—one should worship; pratah-asat prak—before
breakfast; go-vipran—the cows and brahmanas; sriyam—the goddess of
fortune; acyutam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Putting on washed clothing, being always pure and being
adorned with turmeric, sandalwood pulp and other auspicious


--- Page 258 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
items, before breakfast one should worship the cows, the
brahmanas, the goddess of fortune and the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
PURPORT

If one is trained to honor and worship the cows and brahmanas, he is
actually civilized. The worship of the Supreme Lord is recommended.
and the Lord is very fond of the cows and brahmanas (namo
brahmanya-devaya go-brahmana-hitaya ca). In other words, a civiliza-
tion in which there is no respect for the cows and brahmanas is con-
demned. One cannot become spiritually advanced without acquiring the
brahminical qualifications and giving protection to cows. Cow protection
insures sufficient food prepared with milk, which is needed for an ad-
vanced civilization. One should not pollute civilization by eating the flesh
of cows. A civilization must do something progressive, and then it is an
Aryan civilization. Instead of killing the cow to eat flesh, civilized men
must prepare various milk products that will enhance the condition of
society. If one follows the brahminical culture, he will become competent
in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 53
a
felt बीरवतीभार्चेत्खग्गन्धबलिमण्डनेः |
पतिं चार्च्योपतिष्ठेत ध्यायेरकोष्ठगतं च तम्‌ 11430
striyo viravatis carcet
srag-gandha-bali-mandanaih
[0007 carcyopatistheta
dhyayet kostha-gatariz ca tam

striyah—women; vira-vatth—possessing husbands and sons; ca—
and; arcet—she should worship; srak—with garlands; gandha —sandal-
wood; bali—presentations; mandanath—and with ornaments; patim—
the husband; ca—and; arcya—worshiping; upatistheta —should offer
prayers; dhyayet—should meditate; kostha-gatam —situated in the
womb; ca—also; tam —upon him.


--- Page 259 ---
Text 55] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 251
TRANSLATION
With flower garlands, sandalwood pulp, ornaments and other
paraphernalia, a woman following this vow should worship women
who have sons and whose husbands are living. The pregnant wife
should worship her husband and offer him prayers. She should
meditate upon him, thinking that he is situated in her womb.
PURPORT
The child in the womb is a part of the husband’s body. Therefore the
husband, through his representative, indirectly remains within the
womb of his pregnant wife.
TEXT 54
सांबत्सरं पुंसवनं व्रतमेतदविप्ठतम्‌ |
धारयिष्यसि चेत्तुभ्यं शक्रहा मवितः सुतः ॥५४॥
samvatsararm purisavanam
vratam etad aviplutam
dharayisyasi cet tubhyarn
sakra-ha bhavita sutah
sarwatsaram —for one year; purisavanam—called [01875000705
vratam—vow; etat—this; aviplutam—without violation; dharayis-
yasi—you will perform; cet—if; tubhyam—for you; Sakra-ha—the
killer of Indra; bhavita—will be; sutah—a son.
TRANSLATION
KaSyapa Muni continued: If you perform this ceremony called
purisavana, adhering to the vow with faith for at least one year,
you will give birth to a son destined to kill Indra. But if there is
any discrepancy in the discharge of this vow, the son will be a
friend to Indra.
TEXT 55
बाटमित्यभ्युपेत्याथ दिती राजन्‌ महामनाः |
(३ .
FANE गभमाधत्त व्रत ars दधार सा ॥५५५॥


--- Page 260 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
badham ity abhyupetyatha
diti rajan maha-manah
kasyapad garbham adhatta
vratari canjo dadhara sa
badham—yes; iti—thus; abhyupetya—accepting; atha—then;
ditih—Diti; rajan—O King; maha-manah—jubilant; kasyapat—from
Kasyapa; garbham—semen; adhatta—obtained; vratam—the vow;
ca—and; afjah—properly; dadhara—discharged; sa—she.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, Diti, the wife of KaSyapa, agreed to undergo
the purificatory process known as purisavana. ‘‘Yes,” she said, “I
shall do everything according to your instructions.” With great
jubilation she became pregnant, having taken semen from
KaSyapa, and faithfully began discharging the vow.
TEXT 56
मावृष्वसुरमिप्रायमिन्द्र॒ आज्ञाय मानद्‌ ।
৬ €
छश्रूषणेनाश्रमयां दितिं पयंचरत्कविः ।५६॥
matr-svasur abhiprayam
indra ajaaya manada
Susriisanendsrama-stham
ditirh paryacarat kavih
matr-svasuh—of his mother’s sister; abhiprayam—the intention;
indrah—Indra; a@jiaya—understanding; mana-da—O King Pariksit,
who give respect to everyone; sSusriusanena—with service; asrama-
stham—residing in an dasrama; ditim—Diti; paryacarat—attended
upon; kavih—seeing his own interest.
TRANSLATION
O King, who are respectful to everyone, Indra understood Diti’s
purpose, and thus he contrived to fulfill his own interests. Follow-
ing the logic that self-preservation is the first law of nature, he


--- Page 261 ---
Text 58] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 253
wanted to break Diti’s promise. Thus he engaged himself in the
service of Diti, his aunt, who was residing in an arama.
TEXT 57
नित्यं वनात्छुमनसः फलमूरसमिर्डश्ान्‌ |
पत्राङ्करमृदोऽपश्च FS कार उपाहरत्‌ ॥॥*५७॥
7/८ vandat sumanasah
phala-mila-samit-kusan
patrarikura-mrdo pas ca
kale kala upaharat
nityam—daily; vanat—from the forest; sumanasah—flowers;
phala—{fruits; mitla—roots; samit—wood for the sacrificial fire;
kusan—and kusa grass; patra—leaves; ankura—sprouts; mrdah—and
earth; apah—water; ca—also; kale kale—at the proper time;
upaharat—brought.
TRANSLATION
Indra served his aunt daily by bringing flowers, fruits, roots and
wood for yajfias from the forest. He also brought kusa grass,
leaves, sprouts, earth and water exactly at the proper time.
TEXT 58
+ . <
एवं तस्या व्रतस्थाया व्रतच्छिद्रं BREW |
a
gg: पयंचरजिह्मो मृगहेव nei ॥५८॥
০৮৫77 tasyd vrata-sthaya
vrata-cchidrari harir nrpa
prepsuh paryacaraj jihmo
mrga-heva mrgakrtih
evam—thus; tasyah—of her; vrata-sthayah—who was faithfully dis-
charging her vow; vrata-chidram—a fault in the execution of the vow;
harih—Indra; nrpa—O King; prepsuh—desiring to find; paryacarat—


--- Page 262 ---
254 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
served; jihmah—deceitful; mrga-ha—a hunter; iva—like; mrga-
akrtih—in the form of a deer.
TRANSLATION

O King Pariksit, as the hunter of a deer becomes like a deer by
covering his body with deerskin and serving the deer, so Indra, al-
though at heart the enemy of the sons of Diti, became outwardly
friendly and served Diti in a faithful way. Indra’s purpose was to
cheat Diti as soon as he could find some fault in the way she dis-
charged the vows of the ritualistic ceremony. However, he wanted
to be undetected, and therefore he served her very carefuily.

TEXT 59
नाध्यगच्छद्रतच्छिद्रं तत्परोऽथ महीपते |
चिन्तां तीव्रां गतः सक्र केन मे स्याच्छिवं सिह ।॥५९॥
nadhyagacchad vrata-cchidram
tai-paro ‘tha mahi-pate
cintarn tivrarm gatah sakrah
kena me syac chivam tv iha

na—not; adhyagacchat—could find; vrata-chidram—a fault in the
execution of the vow; tat-parah—intent upon that; atha—thereupon;
mahi-pate—O master of the world; cintdm—anxiety; tivram —intense;
gatah—obtained; Sakrah—Indra; kena—how; me—my; syat—can
there be; $ivam —well-being; tu—then; iha—here.

TRANSLATION

O master of the entire world, when Indra could find no faults,
he thought, ‘““How will there be good fortune for me?’ Thus he
was full of deep anxiety.

TEXT 60
एकदा सा तु सन्ध्यायाघ्रुच्छिष्टा बतकरिता ।
९
अस्पृष्टवायंधीताद्धिः सुष्वाप विधिमोहिता ॥६०॥


--- Page 263 ---
Text 61] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 255
ekada sa tu sandhyayam
ucchista vrata-karsita
asprsta-vary-adhautarnghrih
susvdapa vidhi-mohita
ekada—once; sa—she: tu—but; sandhyayam—during the evening
twilight; ucchista—just after eating; vrata—from the vow; karsita—
weak and thin; asprsta—not touched; vari—water; adhauta—not
washed; arighrih—her feet; susvdpa—went to sleep; vidhi—by fate;
mohita—bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Having grown weak and thin because of strictly following the
principles of the vow, Diti once unfortunately neglected to wash
her mouth, hands and feet after eating and went to sleep during
the evening twilight.
TEXT 61
लन्ध्वा तदन्तरं शक्रो निद्रापटतचेतसः |
[3 9 = -
दितेः प्रविष्ट उदरं योगेशो योगमायया ॥६१॥
labdhva tad-antaram sakro
nidrapahrta-cetasah
diteh pravista udaram
yogeso yoga-mayaya
labdhva —finding; tat-antaram—after that; sakrah—Indra; nidra—
by sleep; apahrta-cetasah—unconscious; diteh—of Diti; pravistah—en-
tered; udaram—the womb; yoga-iSah—the master of yoga; yoga—of
yogic perfections; mayaya—by the power.
TRANSLATION
Finding this fault, Indra, who has all the mystic powers [the
yoga-siddhis such as anima and laghima], entered Diti’s womb
while she was unconscious, being fast asleep.


--- Page 264 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
PURPORT
A perfectly successful yogi is expert in eight kinds of perfection. By
one of them, called anima-siddhi, he can become smaller than an atom,
and in that state he can enter anywhere. With this yogic power, Indra en-
tered the womb of Diti while she was pregnant.
TEXT 62
<
चकतं सप्तधा गभे वज्रेण कनकप्रमम्‌ |
+ 3 ५ त
रुदन्तं सप्तधेकंकं मा रोदीरिति तान्‌ पुनः ॥६२॥
cakarta saptadha garbhari
vajrena kanaka-prabham
rudantari saptadhaikaikari
ma rodir iti tan punah
cakarta—he cut; sapta-dha—into seven pieces; garbham—the
embryo; vajrena—by his thunderbolt; kanaka—of gold; prabham—
which had the appearance; rudantam—crying; sapta-dha—into seven
pieces; eka-ekam—each one; ma rodih—do not cry; iti—thus; tan—
them; punah—again.
TRANSLATION
After entering Diti’s womb, Indra, with the help of his thunder-
bolt, cut into seven pieces her embryo, which appeared like
glowing gold. In seven places, seven different living beings began
crying. Indra told them, “Do not cry,” and then he cut each of
them into seven pieces again.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks that Indra, by his yogic
power, first expanded the body of the one Marut into seven, and then
when he cut each of the seven parts of the original body into pieces, there
were forty-nine. When each body was cut into seven, other living entities
entered the new bodies, and thus they were like plants, which become
separate entities when cut into various parts and planted on a hill. The


--- Page 265 ---
Text 64] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 257
first body was one, and when it was cut into many pieces, many other liv-
ing entities entered the new bodies.
TEXT 63
-
तमूचुः पास्वमानास्ते सर्वे प्राञ्जलयो 39 |
किंन इन्द्र जिघांससि भ्रातरो मरुतस्तव ॥६३॥
tam ८८४५१. patyamanas te
sarve praijalayo nrpa
प्रः na indra jighamsasi
bhrataro marutas tava
tam—to him; iicuh—said; patyamanah—being aggrieved; te—they:
sarve—all; praijalayah—with folded hands; nrpa—O King; kim—
why; nah—us; indra—O Indra; jighamsasi—do you want to kill:
bhratarah—brothers; marutah—Maruts; tava—your.
TRANSLATION
O King, being very much aggrieved, they pleaded to Indra with
folded hands, saying, ‘Dear Indra, we are the Maruts, your
brothers. Why are you trying to kill us?”
TEXT 64
मा भैष्ट भ्रातरो मह्यं यूथमित्याह कौशिकः |
©
FATHER] पाषदानात्मनो मरुतां गणान्‌ ।।৪৬।।
ma bhaista bhrataro mahyari
yityam ity aha kauSikah
ananya-bhavan parsadan
atmano 77107101072 ganan
ma bhaista—do not fear; bhratarah—brothers; mahyam—my:
yilyam—you; iti—thus; aha—said; kauSikah—Indra; ananya-
bhavan—devoted; parsadan—followers; atmanah—his; marutam
ganan—the Maruts.


--- Page 266 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
When Indra saw that actually they were his devoted followers,
he said to them: If you are all my brothers, you have nothing more
to fear from me.
TEXT 65
(५
न ममार ami: श्रीनिवासानुकम्पया |
बहुधा लिशष्षण्णो TFN यथा मवान्‌ ॥६५॥
na mamara diter garbhah
Srinivasanukampaya
bahudha kulisa-ksunno
drauny-astrena yatha bhavan
na—not; mamara—died; diteh—of Diti; garbhah—the embryo; $ri-
nivasa—of Lord Visnu, the resting place of the goddess of fortune;
anukampaya—by the mercy; bahu-dha—into many pieces; kuliSa—by
the thunderbolt; ksunnah—cut; drauni—of Asvatthama; astrena—by
the weapon; yathda—just as; bhavan—you.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King Pariksit, you were
burned by the brahmastra of ASvatthama, but when Lord Krsna
entered the womb of your mother, you were saved. Similarly, al-
though the one embryo was cut into forty-nine pieces by the thun-
derbolt of Indra, they were all saved by the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXTS 66-67
सङृदिष्टादि पुरुषं पुरुषो याति साम्यताम्‌ |
संवत्सरं किञ्चिदूनं दित्या यद्धरिरर्चितः ।६६॥
सजूरिन्द्रेण पश्वाशदेवास्ते मरुतोऽमवन्‌ |
व्यपोह्य मातदोषं ते हरिणा सोमपाः कृताः gel


--- Page 267 ---
Text 68] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 259
sakrd istvadi-purusar
puruso yati samyatam
sarhwatsaram kificid ianarm
ditya yad dharir arcitah
sajir indrena parncasad
devas te maruto ‘bhavan
vyapohya matr-dosari te
harina soma-pah krtah
sakrt—once; istva—worshiping; adi-purusam—the original person;
purusah—a person; ydti—goes to; samyatdm—possessing the same
bodily feature as the Lord; sarwatsaram—a year; kificit inam—a little
less than; ditya—by Diti; yat—because; harih—Lord Hari; arcitah—
was worshiped; sajih—with; indrena—Indra; parnicasat—ffty;
devah—demigods; te—they; marutah—the Maruts; abhavan—became;
vyapohya—removing; matr-dosam—the fault of their mother; te—
they; harina—by Lord Hari; soma-pah—drinkers of soma-rasa;
krtah—were made.
TRANSLATION
If one worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
original person, even once, he receives the benefit of being pro-
moted to the spiritual world and possessing the same bodily
features as Visnu. Diti worshiped Lord Visnu for almost one year,
adhering to a great vow. Because of such strength in spiritual life,
the forty-nine Maruts were born. How, then, is it wonderful that
the Maruts, although born from the womb of Diti, became equal to
the demigods by the mercy of the Supreme Lord?
TEXT 68
दितिरुत्थाय दददे इमाराननलग्रभान्‌ |
इन्द्रेण सहितान्‌ देवी पयतुष्यद निन्दिता ॥&<॥
ditir utthaya dadrse
kumaran anala-prabhan


--- Page 268 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
indrena sahitan devi
paryatusyad anindita
ditth—Diti; utthaya—getting up; dadrse—saw; kumaran—children;
anala-prabhan—as brilliant as fire; indrena sahitan—with Indra;
devi—the goddess; paryatusyat—was pleased; anindita—being
purified.
TRANSLATION
Because of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Diti was completely purified. When she got up from bed, she saw
her forty-nine sons along with Indra. These forty-nine sons were
all as brilliant as fire and were in friendship with Indra, and
therefore she was very pleased.
TEXT 69
अथेन्द्रमाह ताताहमादित्यानां AIREY |
अपत्यमिच्छन्त्यचरं वतमेतत्सदुष्करम्‌ ॥६९॥
athendram aha tataham
adityanam bhayavaham
apatyam icchanty acaram
vratam etat suduskaram
atha—thereafter; indram—to Indra; aha—spoke; tata—dear one;
aham—1I1; adityanam—to the Adityas; bhaya-avaham—fearful;
apatyam—a son; icchanti—desiring; acaram—executed; vratam—
vow; etat—this; su-duskaram—very difficult to perform.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Diti said to Indra: My dear son, I adhered to this
difficult vow just to get a son to kill you twelve Adityas.
TEXT 70
एकः सङ्कल्पितः पुत्रः सप्र सप्ामवन्‌ कथम्‌ |
यदि ते विदितं पुत्र सत्यं कथय मा সদ্বদা ॥७०॥


--- Page 269 ---
Text 71] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 261
ekah sarikalpitah putrah
sapta saptabhavan katham
yadi te viditarh putra
satya kathaya ma mrsa
ekah—one; sarikalpitah—was prayed for; putrah—son; sapta
sapta—forty-nine; abhavan—came to be; katham—how; yadi—if;
te—by you; viditam—known; putra—my dear son; satyam—the truth;
kathaya—speak; ma—do not (speak); mrsa—lies.
TRANSLATION
I prayed for only one son, but now I see that there are forty-
nine. How has this happened? My dear son Indra, if you know,
please tell me the truth. Do not try to speak lies.
TEXT 71
इन्द्र उवाच
अम्ब तेऽहं SAREE TIES Ty
- ক ©
कन्धान्तरोऽच्छिदं गर्भमथबुद्धिनं धर्मटक्‌ ell
indra uvaca
amba te "hari vyavasitam
upadharyagato ’‘ntikam
labdhantaro ’cchidari garbham
artha-buddhir na dharma-drk
indrah uvaca—Indra said; amba—O mother; te—your; aham—I;
vyavasitam—vow; upadharya—understanding; agatah—came;
antikam—nearby; labdha—having found; antarah—a fault; ac-
chidam—1 cut; garbham—the embryo; artha-buddhih—being self-
interested; na—not; dharma-drk—possessing vision of religion.
TRANSLATION
Indra replied: My dear mother, because I was grossly blinded by
selfish interests, I lost sight of religion. When I understood that
you were observing a great vow in spiritual life, I wanted to find


--- Page 270 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
some fault in you. When I found such a fault, I entered your womb
and cut the embryo to pieces.
PURPORT
When Diti, Indra’s aunt, explained to Indra without reservations what
she had wanted to do, Indra explained his intentions to her. Thus both of
them, instead of being enemies, freely spoke the truth. This is the
qualification that results from contact with Visnu. As stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (5.18.12):
yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akincana
sarvair gunais tatra samdsate surah
If one develops a devotional attitude and becomes purified by worshiping
the Supreme Lord, all the good qualities are certainly manifested in his
body. Because of being touched by worship of Visnu, both Diti and Indra
were purified.
TEXT 72
- €
कृत्तो मे सप्तधा गभं आसन्‌ सप्त मारकाः |
EY)
तेऽपि चैकैकशो ¶ृक्णाः सप्तधा नापि মস্সিং ॥॥७२॥
krtto me saptadha garbha
asan sapta kumarakah
te 7 caikaikaso vrknah
saptadha napi mamrire
krttah—cut; me—by me; sapta-dhd—into seven; garbhah—the
embryo; dsan—there came to be; sapta—seven; kumarakah—babies;
te—they; api—although; ca—also; eka-ekasah—each one; vrknah—
cut; sapta-dha—into seven; na—not; api—still; mamrire—died.
TRANSLATION
First I cut the child in the womb into seven pieces, which be-
came seven children. Then I cut each of the children into seven


--- Page 271 ---
Text 73] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 263
pieces again. By the grace of the Supreme Lord, however, none of
them died.
TEXT 73
ततस्तत्परमाश्वयं वीक्ष्य व्यवसितं मया ।
मदापुरुषष्जायाः सिद्धिः काप्यानुषङ्गिणी ।।७२॥
tatas tat paramascaryarit
viksya vyavasitarh maya
mahapurusa-pijayah
siddhih kapy anusangini
tatah—then; tat—that; parama-ascaryam —great wonder; viksya—
seeing; vyavasitam—it was decided; maya—by me; mahad-purusa—of
Lord Visnu; piajayah—of worship; siddhih—result; kapi—some;
anusangini—secondary.
TRANSLATION
My dear mother, when I saw that all forty-nine sons were alive, 1
was certainly struck with wonder. I decided that this was a second-
ary result of your having regularly executed devotional service in
worship of Lord Visnu.
PURPORT
For one who engages in worshiping Lord Visnu, nothing is very won-
derful. This is a fact. In Bhagavad-gita (18.78) it is said:
yatra yogesvarah krsno
yatra partho dhanur-dharah
tatra $rir vijayo bhitir
dhruva nitir matir mama
“Wherever there is Krsna, the master of all mystics, and wherever there
is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, vic-
tory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.” Yogesvara
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all mystic yoga,


--- Page 272 ---
264 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
who can do anything and everything He likes. This is the omnipotence of
the Supreme Lord. For one who pleases the Supreme Lord, no achieve-
ment is wonderful. Everything is possible for him.
TEXT 74
आराधनं भगवत ईहमाना ffi: ।
ये तुनेच्छन्त्यपि परं ते खायंङुरताः स्मृताः lew)
aradhanari bhagavata
thamana nirasisah
ye tu necchanty api param
te svartha-kusalah smrtah
aradhanam—the worship; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; thamanah—being interested in; nirasisah—without ma-
terial desires; ye—those who; tu—indeed; na icchanti—do not desire:
api—even; param—liberation; te—they; sva-artha—in their own in-
terest; kusalah —expert; smrtah—are considered.
TRANSLATION
Although those who are interested only in worshiping the
Supreme Personality of Godhead do not desire anything material
from the Lord and do not even want liberation, Lord Krsna fulfills
all their desires.
PURPORT
When Dhruva Maharija saw Lord Visnu, he declined to take any
benedictions from Him, for he was fully satisfied by seeing the Lord.
Nonetheless, the Lord is so kind that because Dhruva Maharaja, in the
beginning, had desired a kingdom greater than his father’s, he was pro-
moted to Dhruvaloka, the best planet in the universe. Therefore in the
Sastra it is said:
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih


--- Page 273 ---
Text 75] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 265
tivrena bhakti-yogena
20610 purusarh param
“A person who has broader intelligence, whether he is full of material
desires, free from material desires, or desiring liberation, must by all
means worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead.” (Bhag.
2.3.10) One should engage in full devotional service. Then, even though
he has no desires, whatever desires he previously had can all be fulfilled
simply by his worship of the Lord. The actual devotee does not desire
even liberation (anyabhildsita-sinyam). The Lord, however, fulfills the
desire of the devotee by awarding him opulence that will never be
destroyed. A karmi’s opulence is destroyed, but the opulence of a devotee
is never destroyed. A devotee becomes more and more opulent as he in-
creases his devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 75
आराघ्यात्मप्रदं देवं खात्मानं जगदीश्वरम्‌ |
४.4
को वृणीत गुणस्पशच बुधः AERIS यत्‌ 11941)
aradhyatma-pradari devamn
svatmanarn jagad-isvaram
ko vrnita guna-sparsam
budhah syan narake pi yat
aradhya—after worshiping; atma-pradam—who gives Himself:
devam—the Lord; sva-atmanam—the most dear; jagat-isvaram—the
Lord of the universe; kah—what; wvrnita—would choose: guna-spar-
Sam—material happiness; budhah—intelligent person; syat—is:
narake—in hell; api—even; yat—which.
TRANSLATION
The ultimate goal of all ambitions is to become a servant of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If an intelligent man serves the
most dear Lord, who gives Himself to His devotees, how can he
desire material happiness, which is available even in hell?


--- Page 274 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18
PURPORT
An intelligent man will never aspire to become a devotee to achieve
material happiness. That is the test of a devotee. As Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu teaches:
na dhanam na janari na sundariri
kavitarh va jagad-isa kamaye
mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi
“0 almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desire
beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want
Your causeless devotional service birth after birth.” A pure devotee
never begs the Lord for material happiness in the shape of riches,
followers, a good wife or even mukti. The Lord promises, however, yoga-
16567710771 vahamy aham: ^ voluntarily bring everything necessary for
My service.”
TEXT 76
N ९ +
तदिदं मम दौजन्यं बाठिशस्य महीयसि ।
6 +
FRI मातस्त्वं दिष्टया गर्भो ृतोस्थितः।।७६।
tad ववदः mama daurjanyam
balisasya mahiyasi
ksantum arhasi matas tvam
distya garbho mrtotthitah
tat—that; idam—this; mama—of me; daurjanyam—evil deed;
balisasya—a fool; mahiyasi—O best of women; ksantum arhasi—please
excuse; matah—O mother; tvam —you; distya—by fortune; garbhah—
the child within the womb; mrta—Xkilled; utthitah—became alive.
TRANSLATION
O my mother, O best of all women, I am a fool. Kindly excuse
me for whatever offenses I have committed. Your forty-nine sons
have been born unhurt because of your devotional service. As an


--- Page 275 ---
Text 78] Diti Vows to Kill King Indra 267
enemy, I cut them to pieces, but because of your great devotional
service they did not die.
TEXT 77
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
इन्द्रस्तयाम्यनुज्ञातः शद्धमावेन तुष्टया |
मरुद्धिः सह तां नत्वा जगाम त्रिदिवं प्रथुः॥॥७७॥
sri-Suka uvdaca
indras tayabhyanujiatah
Suddha-bhavena tustaya
marudbhih saha tar natva
jagama tri-divarih prabhuh
sri-Sukah uvaca —Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; indrah—Indra; taya—
by her; abhyanujiatah—being permitted; Suddha-bhavena—by the
good behavior; tustaya—satisfied; marudbhih saha—with the Maruts;
tam —to her; natva—having offered obeisances; jagama—he went; tri-
divam—1o the heavenly planets; prabhuh—the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvimi continued: Diti was extremely satisfied by
Indra’s good behavior. Then Indra offered his respects to his aunt
with profuse obeisances, and with her permission he went away to
the heavenly planets with his brothers the Maruts.
TEXT 78
एवं ते सर्वमाख्यातं यन्मां त्वं परिष्च्छसि |
मङ्गरं मरुतां जन्म किं भूयः कथयामि ते ॥७८॥
evari te sarvam akhyatarm
yan mar tvarh pariprcchasi
77101080107) marutarm janma
kim bhityah kathayami te


--- Page 276 ---
268 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 18

evam—thus; te—to you; sarvam—all; d@khyatam—narrated; yat—
which; mam—me; tvam—you; pariprcchasi—asked; marigalam—
auspicious; marutam—of the Maruts; janma—the birth; kim —what;
bhityah—further; kathayami—shall 1 speak; te—to you.

TRANSLATION

My dear King Pariksit, I have replied as far as possible to the
questions you have asked me, especially in regard to this pure,
auspicious narration about the Maruts. Now you may inquire
further, and I shall explain more.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Eighteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Diti Vows to Kill King
Indra.”


--- Page 277 ---
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Performing the
Pumsavana Ritualistic Ceremony

This chapter explains how Diti, KaSyapa Muni’s wife, executed KaSyapa
Muni’s instructions on devotional service. During the first day of the
bright fortnight of the moon in the month of Agrahayana (November—
December), every woman, following in the footsteps of Diti and
following the instructions of her own husband, should begin this puri-
savana-vrata. In the morning, after washing her teeth, bathing and thus
becoming purified, she should hear about the birth mystery of the
Maruts. Then, covering her body with a white dress and being properly
ornamented, before breakfast she should worship Lord Visnu and
mother Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, Lord Visnu’s wife, by glorifying
Lord Visnu for His mercy, patience, prowess, ability, greatness and other
glories and for how He can bestow all mystic benedictions. While offer-
ing the Lord all paraphernalia for worship, such as ornaments, a sacred
thread, scents, nice flowers, incense and water for bathing and washing
His feet, hands and mouth, one should invite the Lord with this mantra:
orm namo bhagavate maha-purusaya mahanubhavaya mahavibhiti-
pataye saha maha-vibhitibhir balim upaharami. Then one should offer
twelve oblations in the fire while chanting this mantra: om namo
bhagavate maha-purusaya mahavibhiti-pataye svaha. One should offer
obeisances while chanting this mantra ten times. Then one should chant
the Laksmi-Narayana mantra.

If either a pregnant woman or her husband regularly discharges this
devotional service, both of them will receive the result. After continuing
this process for one full year, the chaste wife should fast on the pirnima,
the full-moon day, of Karttika. On the following day, the husband should
worship the Lord as before and then observe a festival by cooking nice
food and distributing prasada to the brahmanas. Then, with the permis-
sion of the brahmanas, the husband and wife should take prasada. This
chapter ends by glorifying the results of the purmsavana function.

269


--- Page 278 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
TEXT 1
श्रीराजोवाच
व्रतं पुंसवनं ब्रह्मन्‌ मवता यदुदीरितम्‌ |
तस्य वेदितुमिच्छामि येन विष्णुः प्रसीदति ॥ १॥
Sri-rajovaca
vratari purisavanarih brahman
bhavata yad udiritam
tasya veditum icchami
yena visnuh prasidati
Sri-rgja uvaca—Maharaja  Pariksit said; vratam—the vow;
purisavanam —called purisavana; brahman—O brahmana; bhavata—
by you; yat—which; udiritam—was spoken of; tasya—of that;
veditum—to know; icchami—I want; yena—by which; visnuh—Lord
Visnu; prasidati—is pleased.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit said: My dear lord, you have already spoken
about the purmsavana vow. Now I want to hear about it in detail, for
I understand that by observing this vow one can please the
Supreme Lord, Visnu.
TEXTS 2-3
श्रीञ्युक IIT
- € - €
शङ्के मागंशिरे पक्षे योषिद्धतुरनुज्ञया ।
आरभेत व्रतमिदं सार्वकामिकमादितः ॥ २॥।
निश्ञम्य मरुतां जन्म ब्राह्मणानचुमन्त्य च |
खात्वा TERA शङ्के वसीतालङ्कुताम्बरे |
पूजयेत्प्रातराश्चासप्रागमगवन्तं श्रिया सह ॥ ३ ॥


--- Page 279 ---
Text 3] The Purisavana Ritualistic Ceremony 271
sri-Suka uvaca
Sukle margasire pakse
yosid bhartur anujiiaya
arabheta vratam idam
sarva-kamikam aditah
nisamya marutam janma
brahmanan anumantrya ca
snatva sukla-dati sukle
vasitalankrtambare
pijayet pratarasat prag
bhagavantarh sriya saha
sri-sukah uvaca —Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; Sukle—bright;
margasire—during the month of November—December; pakse—during
the fortnight; yosit—a woman; bhartuh—of the husband; anujiiaya—
with the permission; arabheta—should begin; vratam —vow; idam—
this; sarva-kamikam—which fulfills all desires; aditah —from the first
day; niSamya—hearing; marutam—of the Maruts; janma—the birth;
brahmanan—the brahmanas; anumantrya—taking instruction from;
ca—and; snatva—bathing; Sukla-dati—having cleaned the teeth;
Sukle—white; vasita—should put on; alarnkrtda—wearing ornaments;
ambare—garments; pijayet—should worship; pratah-asat prak—
before breakfast; bhagavantam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
Sriya saha—with the goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: On the first day of the bright fortnight
of the month of Agrahayana [November—December], following
the instructions of her husband, a woman should begin this
regulative devotional service with a vow of penance, for it can
fulfill all one’s desires. Before beginning the worship of Lord
Visnu, the woman should hear the story of how the Maruts were
born. Under the instructions of qualified brahmanas, in the morn-
ing she should wash her teeth, bathe, and dress herself with white


--- Page 280 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
cloth and ornaments, and before taking breakfast she should
worship Lord Visnu and Laksmi.
TEXT 4
+ €
अलं ते निरपेश्चाय पणंकाम नमोऽस्तु ते।
महाविभूतिपतये नमः सकलसिद्धये ॥ ও ॥
alam te nirapeksaya
purna-kama namo stu te
mahavibhiti-pataye
namah sakala-siddhaye
alam —enough; te—to You; nirapeksaya—indifferent; pirna-
kama—O Lord, whose desire is always fulfilled; namah—obeisances;
astu—may there be; te—unto You; maha-vibhiti—of Laksmi; pataye —
unto the husband; namah—obeisances; sakala-siddhaye—unto the
master of all mystic perfections.
TRANSLATION
[She should then pray to the Lord as follows] My dear Lord, You
are full in all opulences, but I do not beg You for opulence. I
simply offer my respectful obeisances unto You. You are the hus-
band and master of Laksmidevi, the goddess of fortune, who has
all opulences. Therefore You are the master of all mystic yoga. I
simply offer my obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
A devotee knows how to appreciate the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
orn piurnam adah puarnam ida
purnat pirnam udacyate
purnasya piurnam ৫0৫১৫
purnam evavasisyate
“The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete, and because He is
completely perfect, all emanations from Him, such as this phenomenal


--- Page 281 ---
Text 5] The Purhsavana Ritualistic Ceremony 273
world, are perfectly equipped as complete wholes. Whatever is produced
of the complete whole is also complete in itself. Because He is the com-
plete whole, even though so many complete units emanate from Him, He
remains the complete balance.” Therefore, to take shelter of the
Supreme Lord is required. Whatever a devotee needs will be supplied by
the complete Supreme Personality of Godhead (tesam nityabhiyuktanari
yoga-ksemamn vahamy aham). Therefore a pure devotee will not ask
anything from the Lord. He simply offers the Lord his respectful obei-
sances, and the Lord is prepared to accept whatever the devotee can
secure to worship Him, even patra puspari phalarih toyam—a leaf,
flower, fruit or water. There is no need to artificially exert oneself. It is
better to be plain and simple and with respectful obeisances offer to the
Lord whatever one can secure. The Lord is completely able to bless the
devotee with all opulences.
TEXT 5
यथा त्वं FIAT भूत्या तेजसा महिमौजसा |
ge ईश गुणैः सर्वैस्ततोऽसि भगवान्‌ प्रयः | ५॥
yatha tvam krpaya bhitya
tejasa mahimaujasa
Justa 6 gunaih sarvais
tato si bhagavan prabhuh

yatha—as; tvam—You; krpaya—with mercy; bhitya—with opu-
lences; tejasa—with prowess; mahima-ojasa—with glory and strength;
justah—endowed; #a—O my Lord; gunaih—with transcendental
qualities; sarvaih—all; tatah—therefore; asi—You are; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; prabhuh—the master.

TRANSLATION

O my Lord, because You are endowed with causeless mercy, all
opulences, all prowess and all glories, strength and transcendental
qualities, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master
of everyone.


--- Page 282 ---
274 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
PURPORT

In this verse the words tato ’si bhagavan prabhuh mean “Therefore
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of everyone.”
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is endowed with all six opulences
in full, and moreover He is extremely kind to His devotee. Although He
is full in Himself, He nonetheless wants all the living entities to sur-
render unto Him so that they may engage in His service. Thus He be-
comes satisfied. Although He is full in Himself, He nonetheless becomes
pleased when His devotee offers Him patram puspam [010 0778 toyam—a
leaf, flower, fruit or water—in devotion. Sometimes the Lord, as the
child of mother Yasoda, requests His devotee for some food, as if He were
very hungry. Sometimes He tells His devotee in a dream that His temple
and His garden are now very old and that He cannot enjoy them very
nicely. Thus He requests the devotee to repair them. Sometimes He is
buried in the earth, and as if unable to come out Himself, He requests
His devotee to rescue Him. Sometimes He requests His devotee to preach
His glories all over the world, although He alone is quite competent to
perform this task. Even though the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
endowed with all possessions and is self-sufficient, He depends on His
devotees. Therefore the relationship of the Lord with His devotees is ex-
tremely confidential. Only the devotee can perceive how the Lord, al-
though full in Himself, depends on His devotee for some particular
work. This is explained in Bhagavad-gita (11.33), where the Lord tells
Arjuna, nimitta-matram bhava savyasacin: ““O Arjuna, merely be an in-
strument in the fight.” Lord Krsna had the competence to win the Battle
of Kuruksetra, but nonetheless He induced His devotee Arjuna to fight
and become the cause of victory. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was quite
competent enough to spread His name and mission all over the world, but
still He depended upon His devotee to do this work. Considering all these
points, the most important aspect of the Supreme Lord’s self-sufficiency
is that He depends on His devotees. This is called His causeless mercy.
The devotee who has perceived this causeless mercy of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead by realization can understand the master and the
servant.

TEXT 6
विष्णुपत्ि महामाये मदापुरुषरक्षणे |
प्रीयेथा मे महामागे लोकमातनमोऽस्तु ते ॥ ६ ॥


--- Page 283 ---
Text 7] The Puriisavana Ritualistic Ceremony 275
visnu-patni maha-maye
mahapurusa-laksane
priyetha me maha-bhage
loka-matar namo ‘stu te
visnu-patni—O wife of Lord Visnu; maha-maye—O energy of Lord
Visnu; maha-purusa-laksane—possessing the qualities and opulences of
Lord Visnu; priyethah—kindly be pleased; me—upon me; maha-
bhage—O goddess of fortune; loka-matah—O mother of the world;
namah—obeisances; astu—may there be; te—unto you.
TRANSLATION
[After profusely offering obeisances unto Lord Visnu, the devo-
tee should offer respectful obeisances unto mother Laksmi, the
goddess of fortune, and pray as follows.] O wife of Lord Visnu, O
internal energy of Lord Visnu, you are as good as Lord Visnu Him-
self, for you have all of His qualities and opulences. O goddess of
fortune, please be kind to me. O mother of the entire world, I
offer my respectful obeisances unto you.
PURPORT
The Lord has multifarious potencies (parasya sSaktir vividhaiva
Sriyate). Since mother Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, is the Lord’s very
precious potency, she is addressed here as maha-maye. The word maya
means Sakti. Lord Visnu, the Supreme, cannot exhibit His power every-
where without His principal energy. It is said, Sakti Saktiman abheda:
the power and the powerful are identical. Therefore mother Laksmi, the
goddess of fortune, is the constant companion of Lord Visnu; they
remain together constantly. One cannot keep Laksmi in one’s home with-
out Lord Visnu. To think that one can do so is very dangerous. To keep
Laksmi, or the riches of the Lord, without the service of the Lord is al-
ways dangerous, for then Laksmi becomes the illusory energy. With Lord
Visnu, however, Laksmi is the spiritual energy.
TEXT 7
ॐ नमो मगवते महापुरुषाय महाचुमावाय मदाविभूतिपतये सह
[3 [JE
महाविभूतिभिवेलिुपहरामीति । अनेनाहरहमन्त्रेण विष्णोरावाहनाघ्य-


--- Page 284 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
पायोपस्पशंनखरानवासउपवीतविभूषणगन्धपुष्यधूप {TRE TTR
खुसमादितोपादरेत्‌ ॥ ७ ॥

ori namo bhagavate maha-purusaya mahanubhavaya mahavibhiti-
pataye saha maha-vibhitibhir balim upaharamiti. anenahar-ahar
mantrena visnor avahanarghya-padyopasparsana-snana-vasa-upavita-
vibhiasana-gandha-puspa-dhiipa-dipopaharady-upacaran susama-
hitopaharet.

07 -0 my Lord; namah—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, full with six opulences; maha-purusaya—the
best of enjoyers; maha-anubhavaya—the most powerful; maha-
vibhiiti—of the goddess of fortune; pataye—the husband; saha —with;
maha-vibhiatibhih —associates; balim—presentations; upaharami—I
am offering; iti—thus; anema—by this; ahah-ahah—every day;
mantrena—mantra; visnoh—of Lord Vispu; ava@hana—invocations;
arghya-padya-upaspariana—water for washing the hands, feet and
mouth; snana—water for bathing; vdsa—garments; upavita—a sacred
thread; vibhitsana—ornaments; gandha—scents; puspa—flowers;
dhiapa—incense; dipa—lamps; upahdra—gifts; adi—and so on;
upacaran —presentations; su-samahita—with great attention;
upaharet —she must offer.

TRANSLATION

“My Lord Visnu, full in six opulences, You are the best of all en-
joyers and the most powerful. O husband of mother Laksmi, I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are accompanied by
many associates, such as ViSvaksena. I offer all the paraphernalia
for worshiping You.”” One should chant this mantra every day with
great attention while worshiping Lord Visnu with all parapher-
nalia, such as water for washing His feet, hands and mouth and
water for His bath. One must offer Him various presentations for
His worship, such as garments, a sacred thread, ornaments, scents,
flowers, incense and lamps.


--- Page 285 ---
Text 9] The Purhsavana Ritualistic Ceremony 277
PURPORT

This mantra is very important. Anyone engaged in Deity worship
should chant this mantra, as quoted above, beginning with om namo
bhagavate maha-purusaya.

TEXT 8
দ্থনিঃহাণ च जुहुयादनले द्वादज्ञाहूतीः |
ॐ नमो मगवते महापुरुषाय महाविभूतिपतये खाहेति ॥ ८ ॥
114.0700-5९5८7) ca juhwyad
anale dvadasahutih

or namo bhagavate maha-purusaya mahavibhiti-pataye svaheti

havih-sesam—remnants of the offering; ca—and; juhuyat—one
should offer; anale—in the fire; dvadasa—twelve; ahutih—oblations;
om—0 my Lord; namah—obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; maha-purusaya—the supreme enjoyer; maha-
vibhiiti—of the goddess of fortune; pataye—the husband; svaha —hail;
iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After worshiping the Lord with
all the paraphernalia mentioned above, one should chant the
following mantra while offering twelve oblations of ghee on the
sacred fire: orm namo bhagavate maha-purusaya mahavibhati-
pataye svaha.

TEXT 9
fort विष्णं च Tm प्रभवावुभौ ।
भक्त्या FERIA यदीच्छेत्सवंसम्पदः ॥ ९ ॥
Sriyarn visnurh ca varadav
asisarn prabhavav ubhau
bhaktya sampajayen nityarn
yadicchet sarva-sampadah


--- Page 286 ---
278 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19

sriyam —the goddess of fortune; visnum—Lord Visnu; ca—and;
vara-dau—the bestowers of benedictions; dsisam—of blessings;
prabhavau—the sources; ubhau—both; bhaktya—with devotion;
sampijayet—should worship; nityam—daily; yadi—if; icchet—
desires; sarva—all; sampadah—opulences.

TRANSLATION

If one desires all opulences, his duty is to daily worship Lord
Visnu with His wife, Laksmi. With great devotion one should wor-
ship Him according to the above-mentioned process. Lord Visnu
and the goddess of fortune are an immensely powerful combina-
tion. They are the bestowers of all benedictions and the sources of
all good fortune. Therefore the duty of everyone is to worship
Laksmi-Narayana.

PURPORT

Laksmi-Narayana—Lord Visnu and mother Laksmi—are always situ-
ated in everyones heart = (कष्या sarva-bhiitanari hrd-dese ’rjuna
tisthati). However, because nondevotees do not realize that Lord Visnu
stays with His eternal consort, Laksmi, within the hearts of all living en-
tities, they are not endowed with the opulence of Lord Visnu.
Unscrupulous men sometimes address a poor man as daridra-narayana,
or “poor Narayana.” This is most unscientific. Lord Visnu and Laksmi
are always situated in everyone’s heart, but this does not mean that
everyone is Narayana, especially not those in poverty. This is a most
abominable term to use in connection with Narayana. Narayana never
becomes poor, and therefore He can never be called daridra-narayana.
Narayana is certainly situated in everyone’s heart, but He is neither poor
nor rich. Only unscrupulous persons who do not know the opulence of
Narayana try to afflict Him with poverty.

TEXT 10
प्रणमेदण्डबद्भमो भक्तिप्रह्वेण चेतसा |
FEAR जपेन्मन्त्रं ततः स्तोत्रदीरयेत्‌ ॥२०॥


--- Page 287 ---
Text 11] The Purisavana Ritualistic Ceremony 279
pranamed dandavad bhimau
bhakti-prahvena cetasa
dasa-vdrari japen mantra
tatah stotram udirayet
pranamet—should offer obeisances: danda-vat—like a stick;
bhizmau—on the ground; bhakti—through devotion; prahvena—hum-
ble; cetasa—with a mind; dasa-varam—ten times; japet—should utter;
mantram—the mantra; tatah—then; stotram—prayer; udirayet—
should chant.
TRANSLATION
One should offer obeisances unto the Lord with a mind humbled
through devotion. While offering dandavats by falling on the
ground like a rod, one should chant the above mantra ten times.
Then one should chant the following prayer.
TEXT 11
युवां तु विश्वस्य विभू जगतः कारणं परम्‌ |
इयं दि प्रकृतिः wr मायाक्षक्तिदुरत्यया 12201
yuvarm tu visvasya vibhi
jagatah karanarn param
yar hi prakrtih siksma
maya-saktir duratyaya
yuvam—both of you; tu—indeed; visvasya—of the universe;
vibhii—the proprietors; jagatah—of the universe; karanam—the cause;
param—supreme; iyam—this;  hi—certainly;  prakrtih—energy;
siaksma—difficult to understand; maya-saktih—the internal energy;
duratyaya—difficult to overcome.
TRANSLATION
My Lord Visnu and mother Laksmi, goddess of fortune, you are
the proprietors of the entire creation. Indeed, you are the cause of


--- Page 288 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
the creation. Mother Laksmi is extremely difficult to understand
because she is so powerful that the jurisdiction of her power is dif-
ficult to overcome. Mother Laksmi is represented in the material
world as the external energy, but actually she is always the internal
energy of the Lord.
TEXT 12
तस्या अधीश्वरः साक्षात्वमेव पुरुषः परः |
त्वं सर्वयज्ञ इज्येयं क्रियेयं फलथग्भवान्‌ ॥१२॥
tasya adhisvarah saksat
tvam eva purusah parah
एव्म sarva-yajia ijyeyarm
kriyeyarn phala-bhug bhavan
tasyah—of her; adhiSvarah—the master; saksat—directly; tvam—
You; eva—certainly; purusah—the person; parah—supreme; tvam—
You; sarva-yajiiah—personified sacrifice; iya—worship; iyam—this
(Laksmi); kriya—activities; iyam—this; phala-bhuk—the enjoyer of
the fruits; bhavan— You.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the master of energy, and therefore You are
the Supreme Person. You are sacrifice [yajfia] personified. Laksmi,
the embodiment of spiritual activities, is the original form of wor-
ship offered unto You, whereas You are the enjoyer of all
sacrifices.
TEXT 13
गुणज्यक्तिरियं देवी व्यज्ञको गुणथ्रुगमवान्‌ |
ন্‌ ¢
त्वं हि सर्वशरीर्यात्मा श्रीः शरीरेन्द्रियाशयाः।
नामरूपे भगवती प्रत्ययस्त्वमपाश्रयः nz
guna-vyaktir iyam devi
vyanjako guna-bhug bhavan
tvari hi sarva-Sariry atma
$rih Sarirendriyasayah


--- Page 289 ---
Text 13] The Purhsavana Ritualistic Ceremony 281
nama-ripe bhagavati
pratyayas tvam apdsrayah

guna-vyaktih—the reservoir of qualities; iyam—this; devi—goddess;
vyaijakah—manifester; guna-bhuk—the enjoyer of the qualities;
bhavan—You; tvam—You; hi—indeed; sarva-sariri atma—the Super-
soul of all living entities; $rth—the goddess of fortune; Sarira—the
body; indriya—senses; dsayah—and the mind; nama—name; ripe—
and form; bhagavati—Laksmi; pratyayah—the cause of manifestation;
tvam —You; apasrayah—the support.

TRANSLATION

Mother Laksmi, who is here, is the reservoir of all spiritual
qualities, whereas You manifest and enjoy all these qualities. In-
deed, You are actually the enjoyer of everything. You live as the
Supersoul of all living entities, and the goddess of fortune is the
form of their bodies, senses and minds. She also has a holy name
and form, whereas You are the support of all such names and
forms and the cause for their manifestation.

PURPORT

Madhvacarya, the acarya of the Tattvavadis, has described this verse
in the following way: “Visnu is described as yajiia personified, and
mother Laksmi is described as spiritual activities and the original form of
worship. In fact, they represent spiritual activities and the Supersoul of
all yajiia. Lord Visnu is the Supersoul even of Laksmidevi, but no one
can be the Supersoul of Lord Visnu, for Lord Visnu Himself is the
spiritual Supersoul of everyone.”

According to Madhvacarya, there are two tattvas, or factors. One is in-
dependent, and the other is dependent. The first tattva is the Supreme
Lord, Visnu, and the second is the jiva-tattva. Laksmidevi, being depen-
dent on Lord Visnu, is sometimes counted among the jivas. The Gaudiya
Vaisnavas, however, describe Laksmidevi in accordance with the follow-
ing two verses from the Prameya-ratnavali of Baladeva Vidyabhusana.
The first verse is a quotation from the Visnu Purana.

nityaiva sa jagan-mata
visnoh $rir anapayinit


--- Page 290 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
yatha sarva-gato visnus
tathaiveyarn dvijottama
visnoh syuh Saktayas tisras
tasu ya kirtita para
saiva $ris tad-abhinneti
praha Sisyan prabhur mahan
^“ "0 best of the brahmanas, Laksmiji is the constant companion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, and therefore she is called
anapayini. She is the mother of all creation. As Lord Visnu is all-
pervading, His spiritual potency, mother Laksmi, is also all-pervading.’
Lord Vispu has three principal potencies—internal, external and
marginal. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has accepted para-sakti, the spiritual
energy of the Lord, as being identical with the Lord. Thus she is also in-
cluded in the independent visnu-tattva.”

In the Kanti-mala commentary on the Prameya-ratnavali there 15 this
statement: nanu kvacit nitya-mukta-jivatvarn laksmyah svikrtarn,
tatraha, —praheti. nityaiveti padye sarva-vyapti-kathanena kala-
kasthety adi-padya-dvaye, suddho ‘pity ukta ca mahaprabhuna sva-
Sisyan prati laksmya bhagavad-advaitam upadistam. kvacid yat tasyas
tu dvaitam uktarh, tat tu tad-avista-nitya-mukta-jivam adaya
sangatamas tu. “Although some authoritative Vaisnava disciplic succes-
sions count the goddess of fortune among the ever-liberated living en-
tities (jivas) in Vaikuntha, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in accordance with
the statement in the Visnu Purana, has described Laksmi as being iden-
tical with the visnu-tattva. The correct conclusion is that the descriptions
of Laksmi as being different from Visnu are stated when an eternally
liberated living entity is imbued with the quality of Laksmi; they do not
pertain to mother Laksmi, the eternal consort of Lord Vispu.”

TEXT 14
यथा युवां त्रिलोकस्य वरदौ WEE |
तथा म उनत्तमश्छोक सन्तु सत्या महा हिषः ॥ १४॥
yatha yuvam tri-lokasya
varadau paramesthinau


--- Page 291 ---
Text 15] The Purhsavana Ritualistic Ceremony 283
tatha ma uttamasloka
santu satya mahasisah
yatha—since; yuvam—both of you; tri-lokasya—of the three worlds;
vara-dau—givers of benedictions; parame-sthinau—the supreme
rulers; tatha—therefore; me—my; uttama-sloka—O Lord, who are
praised with excellent verses; santu—may become; satyah—fulfilled;
maha-asisah —great ambitions.
TRANSLATION
You are both the supreme rulers and benedictors of the three
worlds. Therefore, my Lord, Uttamasloka, may my ambitions be
fulfilled by Your grace.
TEXT 15
इत्यभिष्टूय वरदं श्रीनिवासं Bm सह ।
९
तन्निःसार्योपहरणं दत्वाचमनमचयेत्‌ ।॥ १५॥
ity abhistiiya varadam
Srinivasarn Sriya saha
tan nihsaryopaharanarn
dattvacamanam arcayet
iti—thus; abhistiizya—offering prayers; wvara-dam—who bestows
benedictions; $ri-nivasam —unto Lord Visnu, the abode of the goddess of
fortune; s$riya saha—with Laksmi; tat—then; nihsarya—removing;
upaharanam—the paraphernalia for worship; dattva—after offering:
dcamanam—water for washing the hands and mouth; arcayet—one
should worship.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thus one should worship
Lord Visnu, who is known as Srinivasa, along with mother Laksmi,
the goddess of fortune, by offering prayers according to the pro-
cess mentioned above. After removing all the paraphernalia of
worship, one should offer them water to wash their hands and
mouths, and then one should worship them again.


--- Page 292 ---
284 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
TEXT 16
ततः स्तुवीत स्तोत्रेण मक्तिग्रहेण चेतसा |
~ 6 _ ~
यज्ञोरिछष्टमवधघ्राय  पुनरमभ्यचंयेद्धरिम्‌ ॥१६॥
tatah stuvita stotrena
bhakti-prahvena cetasa
yajitocchistam avaghraya
punar abhyarcayed dharim
tatah—then; stuvita—one should praise; stotrena—with prayers;
bhakti—with devotion; prahvena—humble; cetasa—with a mind;
yajaa-ucchistam—the remnants of sacrifice; avaghraya—smelling;
punah—again; abhyarcayet—one should worship; harim—Lord Visnu.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, with devotion and humility, one should offer
prayers to the Lord and mother Laksmi. Then one should smell the
remnants of the food offered and then again worship the Lord and
Laksmiji.
TEXT 17
पतिं च परया WRT महापुरुषचेतसा |
XA a = +
्रियस्तेस्तेरुपनमेत्‌ प्रमश्षीलः खयं पतिः |
6
बिभरयात्‌ स्वकर्माणि पल्य SIRTF IL oll
[00287 ca paraya bhaktya
mahdpurusa-cetasa
priyais tais tair upanamet
prema-silah 5৮09 077 patih
bibhryat sarva-karmani
patnya uccavacani ca
patim—the husband; ca—and; paraya—supreme; bhaktya—with
devotion; maha-purusa-cetasa—accepting as the Supreme Person;
priyaih—dear; taih taih—Dby those (offerings); upanamet—should wor-


--- Page 293 ---
Text 18] The Purhsavana Ritualistic Ceremony 285
ship; prema-Silah—being affectionate; svayam—himself; patih—the
husband; bibhryat—should execute; sarva-karmani—all activities;
patnyah—of the wife; ucca-avacani—high and low; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
Accepting her husband as the representative of the Supreme
Person, a wife should worship him with unalloyed devotion by
offering him prasada. The husband, being very pleased with his
wife, should engage himself in the affairs of his family.
PURPORT
The family relationship of husband and wife should be established
spiritually according to the process mentioned above.
TEXT 18
FIAT _  दम्पत्योरुमयोरपि |
qa ङुर्यादनर्हायां पतिरेतत्‌ समाहितः ॥१८॥
krtam ekatarenapi
dam-patyor ubhayor api
patnyar kuryad anarhayar
patir etat samahitah
krtam—executed; ekatarena—by one; api—even; dam-patyoh—of
the wife and husband; ubhayoh—of both; api—still; patnyam —when
the wife; kuryat—he should execute; anarhayam—is unable; patih—
the husband; etat—this; samahitah—with attention.
TRANSLATION
Between the husband and wife, one person is sufficient to exe-
cute this devotional service. Because of their good relationship,
both of them will enjoy the result. Therefore if the wife is unable
to execute this process, the husband should carefully do so, and
the faithful wife will share the result.


--- Page 294 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
PURPORT
The relationship between husband and wife is firmly established when
the wife is faithful and the husband sincere. Then even if the wife, being
weaker, is unable to execute devotional service with her husband, if she
is chaste and sincere she shares half of her husband’s activities.
TEXTS 19-20
९ ५
विष्णोव्रेतमिदं बिभ्रन्न विहन्यात्‌ कथञ्चन |
क ~ LY
विप्रान्‌ खियो बीरतीः सग्गन्धबलिमण्डनेः ।
= ४ >)
अर्चद हरहभक्त्या ইন नियममास्थिता ॥१९॥
उद्वास देवं खे খালি तन्निवेदितमग्रतः |
~ (3
अद्यादात्मविशचदुष्यथं सर्वकामसमृद्धये ॥२०।
visnor vratam idar bibhran
na vihanyat (८110 ८0710
vipran striyo viravatih
srag-gandha-bali-mandanaih
arced ahar-ahar bhaktya
devarih niyamam asthita
udvasya 06৮07 sve dhamni
tan-niveditam agratah
adyad atma-visuddhy-artham
sarva-kama-samrddhaye
visnoh—of Lord Visnu; vratam—vow; idam—this; bibhrat—execut-
ing; na—not; vihanyat—should break; katharicana—for any reason;
vipran—the brahmanas; striyah—women; vira-vatih—who have their
husband and sons; srak—with garlands; gandha—sandalwood; bali—
offerings of food; mandanaih—and with ornaments; arcet—one should
worship; ahah-ahah —daily; bhaktya—with devotion; devam—Lord
Visnu; niyamam—the regulative principles; asthita—following;
udvasya—placing; devam—the Lord; sve—in His own; dhamni—rest-
ing place; tat—to Him; niveditam —what was offered; agratah—after


--- Page 295 ---
Text 21] The Purnsavana Ritualistic Ceremony 287
dividing first among the others; adyat—one should eat; atma-visuddhi-
artham—for self-purification; sarva-kama—all desires; samrddhaye—
for fulfilling.
TRANSLATION
One should accept this visnu-vrata, which is a vow in devotional
service, and should not deviate from its execution to engage in
anything else. By offering the remnants of prasada, flower gar-
lands, sandalwood pulp and ornaments, one should daily worship
the brahmanas and worship women who peacefully live with their
husbands and children. Every day the wife must continue follow-
ing the regulative principles to worship Lord Visnu with great
devotion. Thereafter, Lord Visnu should be laid in His bed, and
then one should take prasada. In this way, husband and wife will
be purified and will have all their desires fulfilled.
TEXT 21
एतेन पूजाविधिना मासान्‌ द्वादश्च हायनम्‌ |
ঢল [৫৭
नीत्वाथोपरमेत्साध्वी कार्तिके चरमेऽहनि 1201
etena puja-vidhina
masan dvadasa hayanam
nitvathoparamet sadhvi
kartike carame ’hani
etena—with this;  pija-vidhina—regulated worship;  masan
dvadasa—twelve months; hdyanam—a year; nitvd—after passing:
atha—then; uparamet—should fast; sadhvi—the chaste wife; kartike—
in Karttika; carame ahani—on the final day.
TRANSLATION
The chaste wife must perform such devotional service con-
tinuously for one year. After one year passes, she should fast on
the full-moon day in the month of Karttika [October-November].


--- Page 296 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
TEXT 22
श्वोभूतेऽप उपस्पृस्य कृष्णमभ्यर्च्य पूर्ववत्‌ |
पयःशृतेन FEATS सह सर्पिषा |
A
पाकयज्ञविधानेन दवादशेवाहुतीः पतिः ॥२२॥
Svo-bhiite ‘pa upasprsya
krsnam abhyarcya pirvavat
payah-srtena juhuydc
carund saha sarpisa
paka-yajiia-vidhanena
dvadasaivahutih patih
Svah-bhiite—on the following morning; apah—water; upasprsya—
contacting; krsnam —Lord Krsna; abhyarcya —worshiping; piarva-vat—
as previously; payah-srtena—with boiled milk; juhuyat—one should
offer; caruna—with an offering of sweet rice; saha—with; sarpisa—
ghee; paka-yajiia-vidhanena—according to the injunctions of the
Grhya-sitras; dvadasa—twelve; eva—indeed; ahutth—oblations;
patih—the husband.
TRANSLATION
On the morning of the next day, one should wash oneself, and
after worshiping Lord Krsna as before, one should cook as one
cooks for festivals as stated in the Grhya-siitras. Sweet rice should
be cooked with ghee, and with this preparation the husband
should offer oblations to the fire twelve times.
TEXT 23
a
আশি: शिरसादाय द्विजैः प्रीतैः समीरिताः |
प्रणम्य शिरसा भक्त्या স্তুলীল तदनुज्ञया ॥২২॥
৫$8508 sirasadaya
dvijaih pritaih samiritah
pranamya sirasa bhaktya
bhusnjita tad-anujiaya


--- Page 297 ---
Text 24] The Purnsavana Ritualistic Ceremony 289
asisah—blessings; Sirasa —with the head; adaya—accepting; dvi-
jaih—by the brahmanas; pritaih—who are pleased; samiritah—spoken;
pranamya—after offering obeisances; $irasa—with the head;
bhaktya—with devotion; bhufijita—he should eat; tat-anujiiaya—with
their permission.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, he should satisfy the brahmanas. When the satisfied
brahmanas bestow their blessings, he should devotedly offer them
respectful obeisances with his head, and with their permission he
‘should take prasada.
TEXT 24
6
आचायंमग्रतः कृत्वा वाग्यतः सह बन्धुभिः ।
LY - 1 9
दद्यात्फ्त्न्य चराः शेषं सुप्रजास्त्वं खसौमगम्‌ Hel
acaryam agratah krtva
vag-yatah saha bandhubhih
dadyat patnyai caroh Sesarn
suprajastvari susaubhagam
acaryam—the acarya; agratah—first of all; krtva—receiving prop-
erly; wvak-yatah—controlling speech; saha—with; bandhubhih—
friends and relatives; dadyat—he should give; patnyai—to the wife;
caroh—of the oblation of sweet rice; Sesam—the remnant; su-
prajastvam—which insures good progeny; su-saubhagam—which in-
sures good fortune.
TRANSLATION
Before taking his meal, the husband must first seat the acarya
comfortably, and, along with his relatives and friends, should con-
trol his speech and offer prasada to the guru. Then the wife should
eat the remnants of the oblation of sweet rice cooked with ghee.
Eating the remnants insures a learned, devoted son and all good
fortune.


--- Page 298 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19
TEXT 25
एतच्चरित्वा विधिवद्रतं विभो
रमीप्सिताथं रमते पुमानिह |
खरी चैतदास्याय लभेत सौभगं
धियं प्रजां जीवपतिं यज्ञो गृहम्‌ ॥२५॥
etac caritva vidhivad vratari vibhor
abhipsitartham labhate puman iha
stri caitad asthaya labheta saubhagarm
Sriyar prajam jiva-patirn yaso grham
etat—this; caritva—performing; vidhi-vat—according to the injunc-
tions of $astra; vratam—vow; vibhoh—from the Lord; abhipsita—
desired; artham—object; labhate —gets; pumdn—a man; tha—in this
life; stri—a woman; ca—and; etat—this; asthaya—performing;
labheta—can get; saubhagam—good fortune; Sriyam—opulence;
prajam—progeny; jiva-patim—a husband with a long duration of life;
yasah—good reputation; grham—home.
TRANSLATION
If this vow or ritualistic ceremony is observed according to the
description of $astra, even in this life a man will be able to achieve
all the benedictions he desires from the Lord. A wife who per-
forms this ritualistic ceremony will surely receive good fortune,
opulence, sons, a long-living husband, a good reputation and a
good home.
PURPORT
In Bengal even today if a woman lives for a long time with her hus-
band, she is considered very fortunate. A woman generally desires a good
husband, good children, a good home, prosperity, opulence and so on. As
recommended in this verse, a woman will receive all these desirable
benedictions, and a man will also be able to receive all benedictions, from
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus by performing this particular
type of vrata, a man and a woman in Krsna consciousness will be happy


--- Page 299 ---
Text 28] The Purnsavana Ritualistic Ceremony 291
in this material world, and because of being Krsna conscious they will be
promoted to the spiritual world.
TEXTS 26-28
कन्या च विन्देत समग्रलक्षणं
पतिं त्ववीरा हतकिल्बिषां गतिम्‌ |
ম্ববর্সলা जीवसुता धनेश्वरी
सुदुर्भगा gam रूपमश्यम्‌ ॥२६॥
विन्देद्‌ विरूपा विरुजा विघुन्यते
य आमयाबीन्द्रियकल्यदेदम्‌ ।
एतत्पटननम्युदये च कर्म
ण्यनन्तदसिः पिवदेवतानाम्‌ ॥२५७॥
go: प्रयच्छन्ति समस्तकामान्‌
होमावसाने हतथक्‌ श्रीहरि |
राजन्‌ महन्मर्तां जन्म पुण्यं
दिते््रैतं॑चामिदितं महत्ते ॥२८॥
kanya ca vindeta samagra-laksanari
patiri tv avira hata-kilbisarh gatim
mrta-praja jiva-suta dhanesvart
sudurbhaga subhaga ripam agryam
vinded viripa viruja vimucyate
ya amayavindriya-kalya-deham
etat pathann abhyudaye ca karmany
ananta-trptih pitr-devatanam
tustah prayacchanti samasta-kaman
homavasane huta-bhuk sri-haris ca
rajan mahan marutarh janma punyari
diter ৮7007 cabhihitarh mahat te


--- Page 300 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 6, Ch. 19

kanya—an unmarried girl; ca—and; vindeta—can get; samagra-
laksanam —possessing all good qualities; patim—a husband; tu—and;
avira—a woman without a husband or son; hata-kilbisam—free from
fault; gatim—the destination; mrta-praja—a woman whose children are
dead; jiva-suta—a woman whose child has a long duration of life;
dhana-isvari—possessing wealth;  su-durbhaga—unfortunate; = ऽप
bhaga—fortunate; ripam—beauty; agryam—excellent; vindet—can
get; viripda—an ugly woman; viruja—from the disease; vimucyate—is
freed; yah—he who; amaya-vi—a diseased man; indriya-kalya-
deham—an able body; etat—this; pathan—reciting; abhyudaye ca
karmani—and in a sacrificial ceremony in which oblations are offered to
the forefathers and demigods; ananta—unlimited; trptih—satisfaction;
pitr-devatanam—of the forefathers and demigods; tustah—being
pleased; prayacchanti—they bestow; samasta—all; kaman—desires;
homa-avasane—on the completion of the ceremony; huta-bhuk—the
enjoyer of the sacrifice; $ri-harih—Lord Visnu; ca—also; rajan—O
King; mahat—great; marutam—of the Maruts; janma—birth;
punyam—pious; diteth—of Diti; vratam—the vow; ca—also;
abhihitam—explained; mahat—great; te—to you.

TRANSLATION

If an unmarried girl observes this vrata, she will be able to get a
very good husband. If a woman who is avira—who has no husband
or son— executes this ritualistic ceremony, she can be promoted to
the spiritual world. A woman whose children have died after birth
can get a child with a long duration of life and also become very
fortunate in possessing wealth. If a woman is unfortunate she will
become fortunate, and if ugly she will become beautiful. By ob-
serving this vrata, a diseased man can gain relief from his disease
and have an able body with which to work. If one recites this
narration while offering oblations to the pitas and demigods, es-
pecially during the $raddha ceremony, the demigods and inhabi-
tants of Pitrloka will be extremely pleased with him and bestow
upon him the fulfillment of all desires. After one performs this
ritualistic ceremony, Lord Visnu and His wife, mother Laksmi, the
goddess of fortune, are very pleased with him. O King Pariksit,


--- Page 301 ---
Text 28] The Purhsavana Ritualistic Ceremony 293
now I have completely described how Diti performed this
ceremony and had good children —the Maruts—and a happy life. I
have tried to explain this to you as elaborately as possible.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Nine-
teenth Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Performing the
Purisavana Ritualistic Ceremony.”

END OF THE SIXTH CANTO


--- Page 302 ---
Appendixes


--- Page 303 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent devotional scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutes), liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila Prabhu-
pada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, assisted the Gaudiya
Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance, started an English
fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and checked the
galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and strug-
gled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never
stopped; it is now being continued by his disciples in the West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion,
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
“Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life, and four years later he adopted the
vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his studies and writ-
ing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana, where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and
writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At
Radha-Dameodara, Srila Prabhupada began work on his life's master-
piece: a multivolume translation and commentary on the eighteen thou-
sand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote
Easy Journey to Other Planets. 2

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time, His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes
of authoritative translations, commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

297


--- Page 304 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
grown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of almost one
hundred asramas, schools, temples, institutes and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana, an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana, now a thriving farm community of more than one thou-
sand acres, his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. The school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the
beginning of 1975 the enrollment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large inter-
national center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India, which is also
the site for a planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the
magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guest House in
Vrndavana, India. These are centers where Westerners can live to gain
firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their authori-
tativeness, depth and clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in
numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into eleven
languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, established in 1972 ex-
clusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus become the
world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and phi-
losophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most
recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —com-
pleted by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature and culture.


--- Page 305 ---
References
The purports of Srimad-Bhagavatam are all confirmed by standard

Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are specifically

cited in this volume.

Bhagavad-gita, 2, 7, 18, 54, 58, 65, 84, 87, 90, 91, 93, 99, 100, 105,
108, 119, 120, 125, 126, 127, 128, 134, 135, 139, 148, 150, 151,
152, 153, 155, 158, 173, 180, 182, 183-185, 194, 200, 215, 232,
235, 239, 243, 263, 273, 274, 275, 278.

Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, 56, 102, 129, 147, 191

Brahma-sarihita, 44, 100, 122, 123, 124, 147, 182, 195, 199

Brhan-naradiya Purana, 140

Caitanya-caritamrta, 86, 160, 196, 207

Canakya-sloka, 14, 27, 34, 239

15079078520, 12, 132, 272-273

Narada-paricaratra, 129-130

Padma Purana, 116, 149, 207

Prameya-ratnavali, 281-282

Prema-vivarta, 158

Siksastaka, 174-175, 178, 192-193, 204, 266

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 7, 8,13, 67,109, 115, 119, 126. 130, 132, 136.
137, 138, 149, 182, 197-198, 206, 229-230, 237, 246, 262,
264-265

299


--- Page 306 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Svetasvatara Upanisad, 101

Tantra Bhagavata, 8

Vedanta-sitra, 132

Visnu-Purana, 281-282


--- Page 307 ---
Glossary
A
Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by example.
Adhibhautika—misery inflicted by other living beings.
Adhidaivika—miseries of nature inflicted by demigods.
Adhyatmika—misery caused by the body or mind.
Anandamaya—(lit., full of bliss), spiritual realization; Krsna consciousness.
Anima —the mystic power to become as small as an atom.
Annamaya— (111. consisting of food), consciousness absorbed only in eating.
Arati—a ceremony for greeting the Lord with offerings of food, lamps, fans,
flowers and incense.
Arcana—the devotional practice of Deity worship.
Asrama—a spiritual order of life.
Asura—atheistic demons.
Avatara—a descent of the Supreme Lord.
B
Bhagavad-gita—the basic directions for spiritual life spoken by the Lord
Himself.
Bhagavan —the Supreme Lord, who possesses six opulences: wealth,
strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation.
Bhakta—a devotee.
Bhakti-yoga—linking with the Supreme Lord in ecstatic devotional service.
Brahmacarya—celibate student life; the first order of Vedic spiritual life.
Brahman —the Absolute Truth; especially, the impersonal aspect of the
Absolute.
Brahmana—a person in the mode of goodness; first Vedic social order.
C
Caranaloka—the heavenly planet of the Carana demigods.
D
Dharma—eternal occupational duty; religious principles.
301


--- Page 308 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam
E
Ekadasi—a special fast day for increased remembrance of Krsna, which
comes on the eleventh day of both the waxing and waning moon.
G
Goloka (Krsnaloka) —the highest spiritual planet, containing Krsna’s per-
sonal abodes, Dvaraka, Mathura and Vrndavana.
Gopis—Krsna’s cowherd girl friends who are His most confidential servitors.
Grhastha—regulated householder life; the second order of Vedic spiritual
life.
Guru—a spiritual master or superior person.
H
Hare Krsna mantra—See: Maha-mantra
J
Jiwva-tattva—the living entities, who are small parts of the Lord.
JAani—one who cultivates knowledge by empirical speculation.
K
Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) —the present age, which is characterized by quarrel.
It is last in the cycle of four, and began five thousand years ago.
Karatalas—hand cymbals used in kirtana.
Karma—fruitive action, for which there is always reaction, good or bad.
Karmi—one who is satisfied with working hard for flickering sense
gratification.
Kirtana—chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord.
Krsnaloka— See: Goloka
Ksatriyas—a warrior or administrator; the second Vedic social order.
L
Laghima —the mystic power to become as light as a feather.


--- Page 309 ---
Glossary 303
M

Mahabharata—the history of greater India compiled by Srila Vyasadeva. It
includes Bhagavad-gita.

Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Raima Rama, Hare
Hare.

Mahat-tattva—the total material energy before the manifestation of diverse
elements.

Manomaya—(lit., consisting of mind), consciousness absorbed in mental
activity.

Mantra—a sound vibration that can deliver the mind from illusion.

Mathura—Lord Krsna’s abode, surrounding Vrndavana, where He took
birth and later returned to after performing His Vrndavana pastimes.

Maya—(ma—not; ya—this), illusion; forgetfulness of one’s relationship
with Krsna.

Mayavadis—impersonalist philosophers who say that the Lord cannot have a
transcendental body.

Mrdanga—a clay drum used for congregational chanting.

P

Paramatma—Lord Visnu expanded into everyone’s heart.

Parampara—the chain of spiritual masters in disciplic succession.

Pranamaya— (lit. consisting of life), consciousness absorbed in maintaining
one’s bodily existence.

Prasada—food spiritualized by being offered to the Lord.

Puranas— Vedic supplements in the form of histories.

R

Rsi—sage or mystic.

S

Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the Lord’s transcendental form, which is eternal,
full of knowledge and bliss.

Samadhi—fixed mind for understanding the self; trance; absorption in the
Supreme.


--- Page 310 ---
304 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Sarikirtana—public chanting of the names of God. the approved yoga pro-
cess for this age.

Sannydsa—renounced life: the fourth order of Vedic spiritual life.

Sdstras —revealed scriptures.

Siddhaloka—heavenly planet where residents have all eight mystic powers.

Sravanam kirtanam visnoh—the devotional processes of hearing and chant-

_ ing about Lord Visnu.

Siidra—a laborer: the fourth of the Vedic social orders.

Svami—one who controls his mind and senses; title of one in the renounced
order of life.

T

Tapasya—austerity; accepting some voluntary inconvenience for a higher
purpose.

Tilaka—auspicious clay marks that sanctify a devotee’s body as a temple of
the Lord.

॥ 1

Vaikuntha—the spiritual world, where there is no anxiety.

Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Visnu, or Krsna.

Vaisyas—farmers and merchants: the third Vedic social order.

Vanaprastha—one who has retired from family life; the third order of Vedic
spiritual life.

Varnasrama—the Vedic social system of four social and four spiritual
orders.

Vedas —the original revealed scriptures, first spoken by the Lord Himself.

Vidyadharas—a race of celestial beings.

Vijianamaya — (lit. full of knowledge), consciousness of the self as dif-
ferent from matter.

Visnu, Lord —Krsna’s first expansion for the creation and maintenance of
the material universes.

Vrndavana—Krsna’s personal abode, where He fully manifests His quality
of sweetness.

Vyasadeva—Krsna’s incarnation, at the end of Dvapara-yuga, for compiling
the Vedas.


--- Page 311 ---
Glossary 305
Y
Yajiia—sacrifice, work done for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu.
Yogi—a transcendentalist who, in one way or another, is striving for union
with the Supreme.
Yugas—ages in the life of a universe, occuring in a repeated cycle of four.


--- Page 312 ---
GENEALOGICAL TABLE
The Descendants of Kasyapa Mund
Timi —— aquatics
Vinati —— Garuda, Aniiru (Arun) This chart shows the descendants of Kasyapa Muni, whose father, Maric, was
Kadri ——serpents born from the mind of Lord Brahmi, the first created being in the universe.
पिट ——birds Kasyapa's wives helped to populate the universe with different species of fife. Two
Yimini ——locusls of his wives, Dit and Adit, are especially important: Dit was the mother of many
Kisthi ———»single-hooved animals great demons. and Aditi, many reat demigods. An incarnation of he Supreme Per-
Arist —— Gandharvas sonality of Godhead, Urukrama, also appeared from Adit’s womb.
Surasi —— Riksasas
115 ————pcreepers & rees
Muni জে
Surabhi —— cow, buffalo, etc.
Timed —— large birds of prey
Krodhavasi —» mosquioe, serpents dandasika & others)
Sarami —— ferocious animals
Sarnhlida + Krti—— Paicajana

Hiranyiksa + Upadinavi Anuhlida 4 Siryd —— Biskala, Mahisa
Diti ——{ Hiranyakasipu + Kayadhu—— { Hlida + Dhamani —— Vitipi, Ivala Bi

Maruts Prahlida + 7 Virocana 4% —— Bali + Adand ¬| 44

Sia +

Arisa, Anutdpana, |

Dvimirdha, Sambara, Vipracitt + Simhiki ——— Rahu & the one hundred Ketus

Dhimrakesa, Aruna,

Vibhivasu, Ayomukha,

Svarbhin 4 NS mmm Supra + Namuci
| লট $s ————> ১

Saikusrd, Kapila,

Durjaya, Pulom, | Upatinai

(rm 6-স যা)!

।, [रा (demon), Pulomi | ति | the Palomas & the Kalakeyas,
Kasyapa + Btn 16 =4 (ति bot — headed by Nivatakavaca


--- Page 313 ---
Bhaga + Siddhi মম Mahi, Vibhu, Prabhu & प
ডাটা | Agnihotra, Pau, Soma, Citurmisya,

| the § Mahayajias, & Savitri, Vyahnti, Trayi .

+ indicates marriage tes
Vidhitd Kr 1171, 1/1 | ¬+ indicates offspring
5 not specified
११ an anthill) = Valmiki
Varuna + Cargani ————» Bhrgu (1 second birth)
- mother) — Agastya, Vasistha (common sons of Varuna & Mitra)
Mitra/+ Revati ——— Utsarga, Arisa, Pippala
Aditi —

Urokrama + Kirti ———— Brhatsloka + 5s ——— Saubhaga & many others

Koha ——— Siyam
+ Sia —_— [9४४

Riki ——— Prish

Anumati =— Pirnamisa
Tvagtd + Racand ————— Sannivesa, Visvaripa
Aryami + Mitrki ———— scholars & human beings

AIG | 1 + ~¬ Sanaicars, Savarni Manu, Tapati + Sarivarana
Vivasvin +{ +) . ,
Sarnjii ——— Yama, Sriddhadeva & R. Yamund (Yami) ——— Asvini-kumiras

Indra + Paulomi চট Jayanta, Rsabha, Midhusa
1


--- Page 314 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide
Vowels
अआ इ; ई! उण Fo সহ: Kr
-
J 1 ण € q ai ओ ০ সী au
=~ प (anusvdra) * h (visarga)
Consonants
Gutturals: &h ka kha IM ga घ ङः na
Palatals: q ca cha ja FH jha A na
Cerebrals: eta & tha S$ da @ dha Ql na
Dentals: dta tha Q da द्य dha | na
Labials: q pa FR pha q ba H bha H ma
Semivowels: य+ I ra ola qd va
Sibilants: शा sa q sa H sa
Aspirate: ह्‌ ha SS, = (avagraha) — the apostrophe
The vowels above should be pronounced as follows:
a — like the ain organ or the win but.
a — like the ain far but held twice as long as short a.
1 — like the iin pin.
i — like the iin pique but held twice as long as short i.
u — like the win push.
i — like the ८८17 rule but held twice as long as short wu.
309


--- Page 315 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam
r — like the riin rim.
tT — like ree in reed.
| — like I followed by r (Ir).
€ — like the ein they.
ai — like the aiin aisle.
o — liketheoin go.
au— like the ow in how.
m (anusvara) — a resonant nasal like the nin the French word bon.
h (visarga) — a final h-sound: ah 15 pronounced like aha; ik like ihi.
The consonants are pronounced as follows:
k — asin kite jh — asin hedgehog
kh— asin Eckhart 7 — asin canyon
g — asin give t — asin tub
gh— asin dig-hard th — asin light-heart
१ - asin sing d — asin dove
€ — asin chair dha- as in red-hot
ch — as in staunch-heart n — as rna (prepare to say
J — asin joy the rand say na).
Cerebrals are pronounced with tongue to roof of mouth, but the
following dentals are pronounced with tongue against teeth:
t — asin tub but with tongue against teeth.
th — asin light-heart but with tongue against teeth.
१ — asin dove but with tongue against teeth.
dh— asin red-hot but with tongue against teeth.
n - asin nut but with tongue between teeth.
p — asin pine ] _ asin light
ph— asin uphill (not |) v — asin vine
b — asin bird 5 (palatal) — asin the sin the German
bh — asin rub-hard word sprechen
m — as in mother s (cerebral) — as the shin shine
y — asin yes 5 — asin sun
r — asin run h — asin home
There is no strong accentuation of syllables in Sanskrit, only a flow-
ing of short and long (twice as long as the short) syllables.


--- Page 316 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each of the Sanskrit
poetry verses and the first line of each Sanskrit prose verse of this volume of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, arranged in English alphabetical order. In the first column the Sanskrit trans-
literation is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the chapter-verse
reference and page number for each verse are to be found.
A anugrahaya bhavatah 15.19 67
anveti vyatiricyeta 16.56 156
apantaratama vydso 15.12 63
abhayari capy anihayar 16.59 160 apatyam icchanty acarari 18.69 260
नि labdha-mananam 1441 34 api darah projamatya 14.19 19
acaryam agratah krtva 19.24 289
adav ante 7 ca sattvanar 16.36 121 api te 'namayarh svasti 14.17 17
adhuna putrindri tipo 1521 70 arabheta vratam idarn 19.2 271
aradhanarh bhagavata 18.74 264
adyad atma-visuddhy-artham 19.20 286 aradhydtma-pradarh devarn 18.75 265
agastyas ca ४०७११25 ca 185 213 arced ahar-ahar bhaktya 19.19 286
agatya tulya-vyasanah suduhkhitas 14.49 39
agnihotrarh pasuri somari 18.1 211 asasanasya tasyedari 18.26 226
agnin purisyan adhatta 184 212 ৫588 raja sarvabhaumah 14.10 12
asisah sirasadaya 19.23 288
ahah te putra-kamasya 15.17 67 asisarh ca vararohar 182, , 211
ahari vai sarva-bhitani 16.51 148 asmad-vidhanarh dustanar 17.11 175
aho adharmah sumahan 18.38 235
aho arthendriyaramo 18.39 236 asprsta-vary-adhautanghrih 18.60 255
aho vidhatas tvam ativa baliso 14.54 42 aste mukhyah sabhayar vai 176 170
asvasya bhagavan itthari 16.65 164
ajita jitah sama-matibhih 16.34 117 atad-arham anusmrtya 15.18 67
(८. (1. 18.24 225 atah papiyasiri yonim 17.15 179
alar te nirapeksaya 194 272
alingyarikikrtarn devir 17.5 468 atha bhagavan vayam adhuna 16.45 141
amba te har vyavasitam 18.71 261 atha deva-rsirajan 16.1 80
athaha nrpatim rajan 14.29 26
amrtyurh mrta-putrahari 18.37 234  atha kala upavrite 14.32 29
andma-ripas cin-matrah 16.21 103 = atha kasyapa-dayadan 18.10 216
ananya-bhavan parsadan 18.64 257
anapatyena duhkhena 1439 33 atha prasadaye na ৮৫771 17.24 189
anarcitdsaryata-vak 18.50 248 atha tasmai prapannaya 16.17 97
athendram aha tataham 18.69 260
anuhradasya siryayam 18.16 219 atmamdya-gunair visvam 169 89
andhe tamasi magnasya 15.16 65
anjastarema bhavatapraja-dustaram 14.56 45 atmanah priyate natma 14.21 21
(0.1 11. 17.7 = 170 = atmanam eka-desa-stharn 16.53 153
antar bahis ca vitatar 16.23 104 atmanarh prakrtisv addha 14.18 19
311


--- Page 317 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam
atmanari yo na buddhyeta 16.58 159 C
atmanandanubhiityaive 16.20 101
atmanas ca gatir siksmar 16.61 162 cakarta saptadha garbharn 18.62 256
atmaramaya santaya 16.19 98 caranti hy avanau kama 15.11 62
atma-srstair asvatantrair 15.6 57 carsani varunasydsid 184 212
atmatvat sarva-bhitanam 17.33 200 cintam tivram gatah sakrah 18.59 254
atra nah sammsayo bhiyan 14.7 10 citraketor atipritir 14.38 32
avadhiitena vesena 15.10 61 citraketur bhriam tapto 14.59 47
aviveka-krtah puriso 17.30 195 citraketur iti khydto 14.10 12
ayari hi dehino deho 15.25 73 citraketus tu tar vidyam 16.27 109
ayarn kim adhuna loke 17.11 175
ayam maha-vrata-dharo 178 171
D
B ; ८

dadyat patnyai caroh Sesari. 19.24 289
babhiiva santa-dhi rajan 17.36 203 darsayitveti hovaca 16.1 80
badham ity abhyupetyatha 18.55 252  dasa-vdrarh japen mantrar 19.10 279
badham ity aha vivaso 18.29 228 dasinar ko nu santapah 14.41 34
bahudha kulisa-ksunno 18.65 258  deha-dehi-vibhago 'yam 158 60
bala-ghnyo vriditds tatra 16.14 95

dehena dehino rajan 19:0 = 2)
bala-hatya-vratarh cerur 16.14 95 dehendriya-prana-mano-dhiyo ‘mi 16.24 105
bana aradhya girisam 18.18 221  dehinarh deha-saryogad 17.29 194
bana-jyesthar putra-satam 18.17 220  dehino vividha-klesa 1925 73
bandhaya moksaya ca mrtyu- 17.23 188 devair martyaya yat proktari 17.17 181
bandhu-jaaty-ari-madhyastha- 165 83

devanam suddha-sattvanam 14.2 3
bhagavan api tac chrutva 17.9 172. devarsi-daitya-siddhanam 17.26 191
bhagavan kim na viditam 14.23 22 = dhanyarm yasasyam dyusyam 14.35 30
bhagavan naradah prito 16.17 98  dharayam dsa saptaham 16.27 109
bhaktayaitar prapannaya 16.26 107  dharayisyasi cet tubhyar 18.54 251
bhaktir mukunda-carane 14.2 3

dharayisye vrata brahman 18.46 244
bhaktya paramaya rajan 18.28 227  dhatuhkuhah sinivali 183 212
bhaktya sampitjayen nityarn 19.9 277  dhauta-vasa इष्टा nityarn 18.52 249
bhavato vidusas capi 14.24 23 dhig aprajam striyam papanm 14.40 33
bhramyan sukham ca duhkhari ca 17.18 183 dhir. mar batabudharh svdrthe 18.40 236
bhamandalar sarsapayati yasya 16.48 144 dirgharh vasan baspa-kaloparodhato ~~ 14.51 40
bhunjitodakyaya drstarit 18.49 247 diteh pravista udarariu 18.61 255
bhuriksva bhogan pitr-prattan 16.3 81 diter ৫0৫৮ eva dayadau 18.11 217
bhita-dhruk tat-krte svarthar 18.25 226 ditir utthaya dodrse 18.68 259
bhatair bhatani bhitesah 156 57 drsta-srutabhir matrabhir 16.62 162
bibhryat sarva-karmani 19.17 284 drstavaty asi susroni 17:27" 9192,
bijad eva yatha 0007: 1577" ৩9 drSyamana vinarthena 15.24 72
brahmanyo bhagavad-bhakto 15.19 67 duravasititma-gataye 16.47 143


--- Page 318 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 313
durvasa yajiiavalkyas ca 15.13 63 graman hayan gajan pradad 14.34 30
dvaite dhruvartha-visrambham 15.26 75 grhandha-kipan niskrantah 16.15 96
grhita-cetah krpanah 18.39 236
E guna-dosa-vikalpas ca 17.30 195
ekada sa tu sandhyayam 18.60 255 guna-praviha etasmin 17.20 185
ekada sa vimdnena 17.4 168 guna-vyaktiriyari devi 19.13 280
ekah sarikalpitah putrah 18.70 261
ekah sarva-dhiyarh drasta 16.10 90 H
ekah srjati bhatani 17.21 186
esa brahma-sutah saksan 15.17 67 harsa-soka-pradas tubhyam 14.29 26
esa loka-guruh saksad 176 170 hata-putra ditih sakra- 18.23 224
esam anudhyeya-padabja-yugmari 17.13 176 havih-Sesari ca juhuyad 19.8 277
esam bandhari ca moksar ca 17.21 186 hiranyakasipor bharya 18.12 217
esa nityo ‘vyayah siksma 169 89 hiranyakasipur nama 18.11 217
etac caritva vidhivad vratam vibhor 19.25 290 hiranyanabhah kausalyah 15.15.03
eta mantropanisadari 15.27 76 hradasya dhamanir bharya- 18.15 219
etat pathann abhyudaye ca karmany 19.27 291 hrdayari ksura-dharabhari 18.41 238
etat te sarvam akhyatarn 17.39 206 hrsikesaya mahate 16.20 101
etdvdn eve manujair 16.63 163 hrsto raja kumarasya 14.33 29
etena piyja-vidhind 19.21 287 1
ete pare ca siddhesas 15.15 63
evam dsvdsito raja 159 61
evarn bhiutani bhiitesu 154 54 ijyate bhagavan pumbhih 18.34 231
evar dara grha riayo 15.21 70 ime $raddadhate brahmann 18.21 223
indras tayabhyanujiatah 18.77 267
evan jagaranddini 16.54 153 indrena prapitah satmyari 18.20 222
evar kasmalam apannam 14.61 48 indrena sahitan devi 18.68 260
evar sandahyamananar 14.42 35
evari Saptas citraketur 17.16 180 iti bhagavato devyah 17.37 204
evar striyd jodibhito 18.29 228 iti bhavena sa bhartur 18.27 227
itihasam hariri smrtva 17.41 208
evar Susrisitas tata 18.31 230 itihasam imari punyari 17.40 207
evar tasya vrala-sthaya 18.58 253 iti prasadya girisau 17.25 190
evar te sarvam akhyatarm 18.78 267
evari vikalpito rajan 14.22 21 iti saficintya bhagavan 18.44 243
evar viparyayari buddhva 16.61 162 iti Srutvd bhagavatah 17.36 203
evar yoni-gato jivah 16.8 88 10073 drdha-matih krsna 14.6 9
ittharh tvar putra-sokena 15.18 67
G ity abhistizya varadam 19.15 283
gandharva-nagara-prakhyih 15.23 70 ity arthitah sa bhagavan 14.27 25
80707100018 kumaraya 14.43 35 ity atad-virya-vidusi 17.10 174
garbhari krtadyutir devi 14.30 27 ity udirya gatojivo 16.12 94
girisarh dadrse gacchan 17.4 168 iyari hi prakrtih saksma 19.11 279


--- Page 319 ---
314 Srimad-Bhagavatam
J ko vrnita guna-sparsam 18.75 265
ko yar syat tava rajendra 152 52
(का deva-devasya 16.29 111 = kyechra-labdhe ‘tha rajarses 14.36 31
Jagdma sva-vimanena 17.25 190 krmi-vid-bhasma-sarnjidsid 18.25 225
Jajne tvastur daksinagnau 17.38 205 krtadyuteh sapatninar 14.37 31
Jambhasya tanaya sa tu 18.12 218
Janasya rajiii prakrtes ca hrd-rujar 14.52 41 krtadyutir ajananti 14.44 36
krtam ekatarenapi 19.18 285
Janayan $urasenanarm 14.32 29 krtatithyam upasidat 14.15 16
Janma-mrtyor yatha pascat 155 56 krtto me saptadha garbha 18.72 262
Jjata-dharas tivra-tapa 17.7 170
Jati-vyakti-vibhago "yam 158 60 ksantumarhasi mdtas tvara 18.76 266
Jayantam rsabham tata 18.7 214 ksity-adibhir esa kilavrtah 16.37 123
kuldcalendra-dronisu 17.3 167
Jitam ajita tada bhavata 16.40 128 kumaro narada rbhur 15.12 63
Jivatman pasya bhadrar te 162 79
jAdndtmany agunemaye 16.39 127 L
Jidna-vairagya-viryanam 17.31 197
JAdna-vijadna-sampanno 16.64 163 labdhantaro ‘cchidarh garbham 18.71 261
labdhva tad-antaram sakro 18.61 255
JAdna-vijidna-santrpto 16.62 162 labdhveha manusir yonira 16.58 159
Jhdtvangira nama rsir 14.61 49 laksaye "labdha-kamar (৮৫73 14.21 21
1.111.111} 15.20 69
Justa 55a gunaih sarvais 195 273 lokah sapala yacchanti 14.20 20
Jyestha srestha ca ya rajito 14.28 26 lokan anucarann 6107 14.14 15
loka-palair api prarthyah 1425 23
K loke vitatam atmanam 16.52 152
kada nu bhratr-hantaram 18.24 225 M
kah ksemo nija-parayoh 16.42 133
kah svargo narakah ko va 17.20 185 ma bhaista bhrataro mahyar 18.64 257
kalevarari svam avisya 163 79 mada-sosaka indrasya 18.26 226
kalindyarn vidhivat snatva 16.16 97 madrid gramya-buddhinarn 15.11 62
mahdpurusa-bhaktesu 17.35 201
kama-dhiyas tvayi racita 16.39 127  mahdpurusa-pijaydh 18.73 263
kanya ca vindeta samagra-laksanar 19.26 291
karmabhir bhramyamanasya 164 82  maharsis tam updsinari 14.16 17
karmabhir dhydyato nana- 15.24 72 mahatmyarn bhrtya-bhrtyanarn 17.27 192
kartararh manyate (कतय 17.19 184 mahatmyarn vispu-bhaktanar 17.40 207
mahavibhati-pataye 194 272
kasmin janmany ami mahyar 164 82 mahirajyari 00107 koso 15.22 70
kasyapad garbham adhatta 18.55 252 manasah sarva-bhitanam 18.33 231
kathara ta asurara bhavam 18.20 222
kau yuvar jAana-sampannau 15.10 61 mangalar marutam janma 18.78 267
kirh na indra jigharsasi 18.63 257 mano jograha bhava-jia 18.88 227
manyuna soka-diptena 18.23 224
kirh va gato 5) apunar-anvayam anya- 14.58 কা marudbhih saha tar natva 18.77 267
kirtau patnyarm brhacchlokas 18.8 215 marutas ca diteh putras 18.19 221
ko 'tikramo 'nuvartantyah 18.40 236 matr-svasur abhiprayam 18.56 252


--- Page 320 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 315
matus tva atitarar putre 14.37 31 nirhrtya jRatayo ॥ 16.13 94
maunena saryata-prano 16.16 97 niSemya marutdn janma 193 271
madya-matrani vijidya 16.54 153 nisamya $roddadhdnasya 14.8 10
mrnala-gaurar Siti-vdsasam sphurat- 16.30 112 nisamya tad-vaco vipro 18.38 235
mramayesv iva myj-jatis 16.22 103 niskincana ye munaya 16.40 128
mpta-praja jiva-sutd dhanesvari 19.26 291 nitvathoparamet sadhvi 19.21 287
muktanam api siddhanam 14.5 5 nityam vanat sumanasah 18.57 253
॥ ॥ sahasresu 14.4 4 nityasyarthasya sambandho 16.7 86
mirdhna sa jagrhe Sapam 17.37 204 niyamya sarvendriya-bahya-vartanarn 16.33 116
nocchistar candikannam ca 18.49 247
N necchistaspryta-salila 18.50 248
na chindyan nakha-romani 18.47 245 0
nddatta atma hi gunam 16.11 92
nadhauta-padaprayata 18.51 249 গো namas tubhyarh bhegavate 16.18 ५8
nadhyagacchad vrata-cchidram 18.59 254 om namo bhagavate maha-purusaya 16.25 106
nahar tanija dadrie hata-mangalate = 14.58 47 om namo bhagavate maha-purusaya 19.7 হা
ort namo bhagavate maha-purusaya 198 277
naharh viriico na kumara-naradau 17.32 198
na hi bhagavann aghatitam idari 16.44 140 P
na hi kascit priyah strinam 18.42 240
na hi kramas ced tha mrtyu- 1455 43 paka-yajiia-vidhanena 19.22 288
na himsydd bhata-jatani 18.47 245 papata balasya sa pada-mile 14.51 40
papata 60010" parivrddhaya Suca 1448 38
na hy asyasti priyah kascin 16.10 9 paramadnu-parama-mahatos 16.36 121
na hy asyasti priyah kascin 17.33 200 pare nu jivaty aparasya ya নাঃ 14.54 42
na mamara diter garbhah 18.65 258
naivanyada lauham ivaprataptam 16.24 105 parijianaya bhagavars 18.21 223
naivatma na paras capi 17.19 184 pariksito ‘tha samprasnari 14.8 10
paryatanti naresv evam 16.6 84
nama rape bhagavati 19.13 281 pascad vaksyamahe "वका 189 216
namas tubhyar bhagavate 16.47 143 pasyatas tasya visvatma 16.65 164
namna krtadyutis tasyai 14.28 26
namo vijadna-matraya 16.19 98 pati ca parayd bhaktya 19.17 284
na nandayanty aprajari ma 14.25 23 patim carcyopatistheta 18.53 250
pati niriksyoru-Sucarpiteri 14.52 41
napsusndayan na kupyeta 18.48 246 pati putrar bhratararm va 18.42 240
narayana-parah sarve 17.28 193 patir eva hi narinam 18.33 231
narayane bhagavati 14.1 2
na tasya kascid dayitah pratipo 17.22 187 patnydrn kuryad anarhayam 19.18 285
na tasya sampadah sarva 14.13 19 patrarikura-mrdo ‘pas ca 18.57 253
paulomyam indra adhatta 18.7 214
na tathanyesu safijajiie 14.38 32 00५70 janapadi bhipa 14.19 19
na vai kumarah kapilo manus ca 17.12 176 payah-srtena juhuydc 19.22 288
na vasitadhauta-vasah 18.48 246
na veda dharma kila padmayonir 17.12 176 pradyumnayaniruddhdya 16.18 98
na vyabhicarati taveksa 16.43 136 prahasya parama-prito 18.31 230
nayam arhati vaikuntha- 17.14 178 pranamed dandavad bhamau 19.10 279


--- Page 321 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam
pranamya Sirasa bhaktyd 19.23 288 sabda-brahma parari brahma 16.51 148
pranendriyatmabhis tyaktar 14.46 37 sabdadayas ca visyas 15.22 70
prasadayam 250 satin 17.16 178 sabhajayan san nibhrtena cetasa 18.22 223
prasanna-vaktraruna-locanar 10071 16.30 111 sadyas tadiyam atulanadhikari 15.28 77
prasrayavanato "bhydha 14.22 21

sakrd istvadi-purusari 18.66 259
pratigrhnami te Sapam 17.17 181 sa laksarh varsa-laksanam 17.2 167
pratipiijya maharaja 1416 17 samasya sarvatra nirafijanasya 17.22 187
pratisrutari dadamiti 18.43 241 sambhavita-matih stabdhah 17.14 178
praviSya rajii tvarayatmajantikam 14.47 38 1.1.11. 18.13 218
pravrddha-bhaktya pranayasru- 16.31 113

sanhradasya krtir bharya- 18.14 218
prayasah prakrtas capi 17.8 171 sampannasya gunaih sarvai§ 14.12 14
11/11 1 14.4 4 sarsara-cakra etasmin. 17.18 183
premoparuddhakhila-varna-nirgamo 16.32 114 ऽकाो54व00 ’si taya rajan 16.50 146
prepsuh paryacaraj jikmo 18.58 253 saristuto bhagavan evam 16.49 145
priya tais tair upanamet 19.17 284

sanwatsararh kificid fina 18.66 259 .
priyetha me maha-bhage 19.6 275 sdrivatsarar purhsavanari 18.54 251
prinis tu patni savituh 181 211 sariwatsarari vratam 10077 18.45 243
Ppiljayet pratarasat prag 18.52 249 sarivyujyante viyujyante 153 53
Ppiljayet pratarasat prag 193 271 santanikas capi nrpo 14.11 13
putram anaya me bhadre 14.45 36
putras te bhavita bhadre 18.45 243 sapi tat-prasanad eva 14.30 ঠা

Sarat-padmotsavari vaktram 18.41 238

R sarvabhaumasya bhis ceyam 14.13 15

sarva eva hi sarvesari 16.5 83
rajanmahan marutari janma punyarn 19.28 291 sarvatra sama-drk Santo 17.34 201
rajas-tamah-svabhavasya 14.1 2
raja tatha prakrtayo 14.18 19 sarve 01 Siiraseneme 15.23 70
rdjiio 'sammata-vrttindri 14.42 35 sa Sayanam upavrajya 14.46 37
rajobhih sama-sarikhyatah 14.3 3 sa uttamasloka-padabja-vistarar 16.32 114

sayari darsam atha pratah 183 212
reme vidyadhara-stribhir 17.3 167 Saydnari suciram balam 14.45 36
retahsisicatuh kumbhe 18.6 213
revatyar mitra utsargam 18.6 213 Sayita napardn nanyair 18.51 249
romasas cyavano datta 15.14 63 siddhir bhagasya bharyanga 182 211
rsir veda-§ird dhaumyo 15.14 63 siro 0700 yasya haris 18.14 218

smrtvehayarn pariklesam 16.59 160
rudantari saptadhaikaikam 18.62 256 snatva Sukla-dati sukle 19.3 271
riipauddrya-vayo-janma- 14.12 14
ruruduh sma nara naryah 14.60 48 snehanubandhaidhitaya Suca bhriam 14.50 40
rusaha devi dhrstaya 17.10 174 so "har tvayarcito bhadre 18.36 233

Sokabhibhitarh rajanam 15.1 51

ও Srapayitva 00813 tvastrari 14.27 25

sa eva devata-lingair 18.34 231 Sriyam visnuri ca varaddv 199 277
sa ittharn pratibuddhatma 16.15 96 Smusvavahito rajann 14.9 11
sajar indrena paiicasad 18.67 259 अप्व dvaipayana-mukhan 149 11


--- Page 322 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 317

Srutva mrtarh putram alaksitantakari 14.50 40 tasya bharya-sahasranam 14.11 13
stana-dvayarn kurikuma-parika- 14.53 41 tasya ০৫) যোঃ maha-bhagas 17.34 201
sthira-cara-sattva-kadambesv 16.43 136 tasyaikada tu bhavanam 14.14 15
stricaitad asthaya labheta saubhagarn = 19.25 290 tasyanubhavarn suslokyarn 18.17 220
striya bhartari suprite 18.32 231 tasyas tadakarnya bhriaturam svararm 14.47 38
striyarn cakre sva-dehardhari 18.30 229 tasya veditum icchami 19.1 270
striyo viravatis carcet 18.53 250 tatah katipayahobhir 16.29 111
stityamano maha-yogi 17.2. 167 tatah pahi maha-bhaga 14.26 24
sudurlabhah prasantatma 14.5 5 tatah samadhaya mano manisaya 16.33 116
suhrdo bandhavas taptah 16.2 81 tatah samsara etasya 16.57 157
sukharn ca nirgunari brahma 16.55 155 tatah sa sapta-ratrante 16.28 110
sukhari duhkharh mrtir janma 17.29 194 tatah stuvita stotrena 19.16 284
sukhaya duhkha-moksaya 16.60 161 tatas tat paramascaryari 18.73 263
sukle margasire pakse 192 271 tatas tu bhagavin rudro 17.26 190
suprajabhih sapatnibhir 14.40 33 tatha ma uttamasloka 19.14 283
supta eveti saicintya 14.44 36 tathapiprechato brayam 14.24 23
suptas cirar hy asanaya ca bhavin 14.57 46 tathapi tac-chakti-visarga 65৫7 17.23 188
sura-rsind yat kathitari 16.45 141 tat-karma-guna-viryani 189 216
Susrisanenasrama-stham 18.56 252 tato ’nivrttir apraptir 16.60 161
SuSrusayanuragena 18.27 227 tato nypantahpura-vartino jana 14.49 39
sva-drohat tava kopah 16.42 133 tat-svasa sirnhika nama 18.13 218
svargapavarga-narakesv 17.28 191 tatyajur dustyajar snehari 16.13 94
svdrthah sarvatmana jiieyo 16.63 163 tava vibhavah khalu bhagavan 16.35 119
$vo-bhate 100 upasprsya 19.22 288 tayor vilapatoh sarve 14.60 48

tebhyo hiranyarh rajatar 14.34 30

T

te pi caikaikaso vrknah 18.72 262
ta dsann aprajah sarve 18.19 221 tesam asisa isa 16.38 125
tadaiva te [0৫707 jiidnam 15.20 69 tesa ye kecanehante 14.3 3
tad-darsana-dhvasta-samasta-kilbisah = 16.31 113 tasnir babhiiva sadasi 179 172
tad 10077 mama daurjanyar 18.76 266 tustah prayacchanti samasta-kaman 19.28 291
tad visnuratasya sa badarayanir 18.22 223

1৮৫7 casya katamah srstau 15:2 52
tah paryatapyann atmanar 14.39 33 tvam etac chraddhaya rajann 16.64 163
tar pijayitva vidhivat 14.15 16 1007 hi sarva-sariry atma 19.13 280
tam te sampadaye kamam 18.36 234 tvarh sarva-yajiia ijyeyar 19.12 280
tam 80140 patyamanas te 18.63 257 tvarh tata narhasi ca mar krpanam 14.56 45
tan nihsaryopaharanam 19.15 283
tasmad yuvar gramya-pasor 15.16 65 |+
tasman na vismayah karyah 17.35 201 ubhayari ca maya vyaptarn 16.52 152
tasmat pati-vratd naryah 18.35 233 ubhayari smaratah pumsah 16.56 156
tasmat svasthena manasa 1526 75 icatur mrtakopante 15.1 51
tasya adhisvarah saksat 19.12 280 udasinavad asinah 16.11 92
tasyd anudinam garbhah 14.31 28 udvasya devarn sve dhamni 19.20 286


--- Page 323 ---
318 Srimad-Bhagavatam
urukramasya devasya 18.8 215 vrtras tu sa katharh papah 14.6 9
uttistha tata ta ime $isavo vayasyds 14.57 46 vrtrasydsura-jdtes ca 17.39 206
uvdca devyah srnvantya 17.5 168 vyapohya matr-dosarn te 18.67 259
01.3.13. 18.44 243
ष Y

vacasy uparate prapya 16.21 102 yad etad vismrtarh puraso 16.57 157
vdcayitvdsiso vipraih 14.33 29 2001 te viditarh putra 18.70 261
vadhari narhati cendro ’pi 18.43 241 ya etat pratar utthaya 17.41 208
valmikis ca maha-yogi 185 213 yah ksatra-bandhuh paribhitya sarin 17.13 177
varado yadi me brahman 18.37 234 yah paurusena samare 14.7 10
vara varaya vamoru 18.32 231 yah sneha-paso nija-sarga-vrddhaye 14.55 43
vasistho bhagavdn ramah 15.13 63 पम 'nanya-bhavena 18.35 233
vasudeve bhagavati 17.31 197 yajiocchistam avaghraya 19.16 284
vavarsa kdman anyesdm 1435 30  yamundyarh maharaja 16.14 95
vavrdhe Sirasenesa- 14.31 28 yarn dharayan sapta-ratrad 15.27 176
vayarh ca tvam ca ye ceme 15.5 56 yarh vai Svasantam anu visva-srjah 16.48 144
viddma yasyehitam arsakamsaka 17.32 198 yani ceha nisiddhani 18.46 246
viditam ananta samastari 16.46 142 yan manyase hy asadhitktari 17.24 189
vidvesa-nasta-matayah 14.43 35 yan-nama sake chravanat 16.44 140
vidyadharadhipatyari ca 16.28 110 yan naradangirobhyarh te 16.50 146
vidyadhara-patinh pritas 16.49 145

yan na sprianti na vidur 16.23 104
vidyadharas citraketus 17.1 166 yasminn ida yatas cedari 16.22 103
vijitds te pi ca bhajatam 16.34 117 yasyatmanuvasas cet sydt 14.20 20
vijiapyari parama-guroh 16.46 143 yatas cantarhito 7071005 17.1 166
vikirya kesan vigalat-srajah sutarn 14.53 42 yatha dhandsu vai dhana 154 54
vilapantya mrtari putram 14.59 47

20112 nihsvasya krechrapte 14.36 31
vilokyaikanta-bhitani 18.30 229 2017৫ prakrtibhir guptah 14.17 17
vimjya panind vaktram 159 61 yatha prayanti sarayanti 153 53
vinded णठ virya vimucyate 19.27 291 yatha susuptah puruso 16.53 153
vipran striyo viravatih 19.19 286 2010৫ tarema dusparam 14.26 24
virocanas tu prahradir 18.16 220

yatha tvarh krpaya bhitya 19.5 273
visama-dhiya racito yah 16.41 131 20183 vastini 0৫0) ৫78 16.6 84
visama-matir na yatra nari 16.41 131 20173 yuva tri-lokasya 19.14 282
visaya-rso nara-pasavo 16.38 125 yatheha bhityo mahatam 17.15 179
vismita mumucuh ऽणो, 16.12 94 yat-pada-milam upasrtya narendra 15.28 77
visnor vratam प्म, bibhran 19.19 286

yat-parsve bhagavdn dste 18.18 221
visnu-patni maha-maye 19.6 275 yatra bhagavatah sriman 18.10 216
visva-srjas te (काततः 16.35 119 yatra pataty anu-kalpah 16.37 123
vratarh purasavanarh brahman 19.1 270 2৫৮০৫ yasya hi sambandho 16.7 86
ण ity abhivikhyato 17.38 205 yavad yatropalabhyeta 168 88


--- Page 324 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 319
yayav angirasa sakam 16.26 108 yo ‘gastyaya tv atithaye 18.15 219
‘yena prasuptah purusah 16.55 155 ‘yoginarh dhvasta-papandri 14.23 22
ye tu necchanty api parari 18.74 264 ‘yuvam tu visvasya vibhi 19.11 279


--- Page 325 ---
General Index
Numerals in boldface type indicate references to translations of the verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
A Aharikara itiyarih me
verse quoted, 150
Aharikarari bala darpari
Abhinnatvarh nama-naminoh verse quoted, 135
quoted, 151 Ahankara-vimidhatma
Abortion verse quoted, 58, 183
atonement for, 96 Air. See: Elements, material
at contraceptive’s failure, 55 Airplane as example of false creation,
Absolute Truth 120-121
devotee’s vs. jiiani’s approach to, 197-198 Ajamila, attachment of, compared to a
features of, three defined, 97, 107, 149 woman’s attachment to husband,
See also: Supreme Lord 232
Actrya. See: Spiritual master Ajo 'pi sann avyayatma
Activities verse quoted, 215
caused by the Lord, 151 Akamah sarva-kamo va
illusion of soul concerning, 58 verse quoted, 126, 264-265
material, as mental concoction, 72-74 Akarmanas ca boddhavyarn
pious and forbidden, 149 verse quoted, 150
understanding, from the Lord, 150 Alphabet, true purpose of, 115
See also: Karma Amanina manadena
Acyuta, Krsna’s forms as, 100 verse quoted, 175, 178
Aditi, descendants of, 210-216 Ananda, in Krsna, 101-102
Advaita, Krsna’s forms as, 100 Anandamayo *bhyasat
Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam quoted, 101
quoted, 102 Ananta, Krsna as, 124-125
_ verse quoted, 120, 197 Anantadeva
Agamapayino ‘nityas See also: Anantadeva, quotations from
verse quoted, 100 Citraketu instructed by, 146-164
Agastya Muni, 213, 214 described, 113
Vatapi served to, 219 disappears, 164, 166-167
Agents of the Lord, father, king, etc., as, 58 universes held by, 145
Age of Kali. See: Kali-yuga Anantadeva, quotations from
Agnihotra, 211 on cause of material and spiritual energies.
Ahaituky apratihata, 118 Himself as, 152
verse quoted, 130 on Deity form of Himself, 148
Aham adir hi devanam on fruitive activities, 160-161, 162
quoted, 123 on Indians in spiritual life, 159
Aham vai sarva-bhitani on knowledge in living entities. 157
quoted, 150-151 on living entity’s forgetfulness. 158
321


--- Page 326 ---
322 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Anantadeva. quotations from (continued) Anumati, 212
on living entity’s relation with the Lord, Anxiety, cause of, 101
163 Anyabhilasita-sinyarn
on Narada's and Angira’s favoring verse quoted, 56, 129
Citraketu, 146 Anyantaryaminam visnum
on perfection. 163-164 verse quoted, 112
on sleep. dreams. etc.. 154, 156, 157 Apantaratama, 64
on sound form of Himself, 148 Aparadhi, Mayavadi as, 6
Ananyenaiva yogena Apareyam itas tv anya
verse quoted, 139 verse quoted, 150
Andantara-stha, 99 Arista, 214
Andantarastha-paramanu-cayantara-stham Aruhya krcchrena param padari tatah
quoted. 89. 122 verse quoted, 7
Argan: yasya sakalendriya-vrttimanti Aruni, 64
quoted. 101 Aryan society, 137-138, 250
Angira Asana, 220
Anantadeva credits, 146 Adi, 211
Citraketu questioned by, 20-21 Asita, 64, 142
Citraketu received son from, 55, 70 ASramas in varnasrama-dharma, 138-140
Citraketu revisited by, 49 Asuras, reformation of , 222
Citraketu'’s reception of, 16-17 Asuri (a sage), 64
departs for Brahmaloka, 108 Aévatthama, Krsna’s saving Pariksit from, the
discloses his identity, 67 Lord’s saving Maruts compared to, 258
instructs Citraketu, 2-10, 18-27 Atah $ri-krsna-namadi
on king's happiness, 17-19 quoted, 142
as preacher. 64 verse quoted, 147
prediction of, 26-27 Athava bahunaitena
sacrifice by, for Citraketu, 25-27 verse quoted, 125
Animal killing Atheists
civilized men refrain from, 138 Bhagavad-gita on, 65
condemned, 134-136 blind and ignorant, 144
reaction for. 135 Mayavadamonism creates, 152
as sacrifice in primitive religions, 134-135 Atma-sambhavitah stabdha
Animals verse quoted, 134
demigod worshipers likened to, 125-126 Ato mayamayarh visnum
human beings likened to, 64 quoted, 215
Animals, ownership of, transmigration com- Atoms, the Lord's existence in, 122
pared to, 87 Atonement of Citraketu’s wives, 95-96
Aniruddha, Lord Avaisnava-mukhodgirnam
in Narada’s mantra, 99 verse quoted, 116, 207
in quadruple expansions, 99 Avajananti mari midha
Anuhlada. 218, 220 verse quoted, 7
Anukilyena krsnanusilanam Avicyuto 71000 kavibhir nirapito
quoted. 193 verse quoted, 115
verse quoted, 56, 129 Avidya, must be understood, 151


--- Page 327 ---
General Index 323
B Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
on duality and tolerance. 100
Baladeva Vidyabhisana, quoted on Laksmi as on duties and their results, 93
visnu-tattva, 281-282 on envious men condemned, 91-92. 135
Balarama, expansions from, 124 on fools deriding Krsna, 7
Balavan indriya-gramo on great men, 173
verse quoted, 229-230 on Krsna as 07, 99, 151
Bali Maharaja. father and sons of, 220 on Krsna as original cause, 123
Bana, King, 220-221 on Krsna’s appearances, 215
Baskala, 220 on Krsna's control of nature, 155, 194
Being, living. See: Living entities; Soul, on Krsna’s delivering devotees, 139
conditioned on Krsna’s directing devotee, 149
Bhaga, 211 on Krsna’s energies, inferior and superior.
Bhagavad-gita 150
See also: Bhagavad-gita, quotations from on Krsna's energy as everything, 152
Aryans follow. 137-139 on Krsna's energy supporting creation, 125
duties are instructed in, 136-137 on Krsna's equal disposition, 91, 202
for leaders of the world, 59 on Krsna's victorious presence. 263
for perfect society, 137-139 on liberation through Krsna, 127-128
as presented today, 139 on living entities as Krsna’s parts, 120
societal divisions in, 137 on the Lord in the heart, 132, 151
Bhagavad-gita, quotations from on mahatmas, 155
on action, understanding of, 150 on materialist’s inability to accept Krsna.
on action as done by nature, 84, 85 65, 108-109
on action as misconceived by the soul, 58, on memory, etc., coming from Krsna, 105.
183-184 120
on actions and their results, 93 on miscreants, 65
on actions of great men, 173 on nature under Krsna, 155, 194
“All beings are in Me, but I am not in on orm as Krsna, 99, 151
them.” 153 on overcoming material modes, 180
animal sacrifices condemned, 134 on soul in matter. 18
on Arjuna 85 Krsna’s instrument, 274 on soul’s illusion as doer, 58. 183-184
on brahma-bhita situation, 69, 74 on struggling of living entities, 75
on Brahman’s source as Krsna, 158 on surrender to Krsna, 132, 134. 135.
on Brahma’s life span, 235 180
on demigod worship, 232 on transmigration of the soul. 54. 87
on demigod worshipers, 119. 126 on women, $iidras, etc.. in bhakti-yoga,
on demon’s defeat, 7 239
on devotees as mahdatmas, 155 on worshiping, etc.. Krsna. 139
on devotee’s freedom and joy, 69, 74 Bhagavan
on devotee’s overcoming nature, 180 as aspect of Supreme Lord, 99, 107. 149.
on devotee’s pious background, 2 156
on devotional services benefit, 243 as highest realization. 155
on devotional service steadily done, Bhagavata-dharma
148-149 as devotional service. 129-130


--- Page 328 ---
324 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bhagavata-dharma (continued) Body, material
Krsna consciousness movement follows, as dress, 87
139 as miserable, 74
as perfect religion, 131-133 parents produce, 59-60
for perfect society, 137-138 relationships based on, 82-88
Prahlada Maharaja preached, 137 soul different from, 54
Bhagavatam. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam temporary relationships of, 52-61, 71-76
Bhaktas varieties of, in transmigration, 82
as class of human being, 4 Body of the Supreme Lord. See: Supreme
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord Lord, body of
Bhakti Boy at the beach, Krsna creating the world
See: Devotional service to the Supreme compared to, 58
Lord; Krsna consciousness Brahma, Lord
Bhaktih paresanubhavo viraktir anyatra ca Aigira born from mind of, 25
quoted, 109 life span of, 235
Bhakti bhitirn harir dattva Parvati criticizes, 176 १
verse quoted, 4 as secondary actor, 145
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, quotations from women created by, 229
on pure devotional service, 56 Brahma-bhatah prasannatma
on seeing Krsna by devotion, 142, 147 quoted, 69, 74
Bhaktivinoda Thakura, quoted on waves of Brahmacari
maya, 155 danger of women for, 239
Bhakti-yoga. See: Devotional service to the husband trained as, 237
Supreme Lord; Krsna consciousness Brahmajyoti. See: Monism
Bharata-bhiumite haila manusya-janma yara Brahmaloka, 108
verse quoted, 160 Brahman (impersonal Absolute)
Bhavami na cirat partha as aspect of the Lord, 99, 103, 107, 149,
verse quoted, 139 155, 156
Bhogaisvarya-prasaktanari enjoyment caused by, 156
verse quoted, 108 oneness in quality with, 157
Bhramayan sarva-bhitani source of, 158
verse quoted, 90 suffering absent in understanding, 74
Bhamir apo 70010 vayuh Brahman, Supreme
verse quoted, 150 connecting everything with, 132
Bhita-bhavanah, Supreme Lord as, 151 Krsna as, 106
Bijar mari sarva-bhitanam soul’s dependency on, 105-106
quoted, 123 universe in, 104
Blasphemy, Citraketu did not commit, 173 See also: Supreme Lord
Bliss in Krsna, 101-102 Brahman effulgence
Body, material “devotional service” for attaining, 8
absorption in, 71-74 See also: Monism
beginning of life in, 155-159 Brahmanas (intellectuals)
composition of, 73-74 Citraketu’s charity to, 30-31
contrasted to Krsna’s body, 102 part of perfect society, 137-138
dead condition of, 226 in pumsavana-vrata, 287, 289
desire causes, 60-61, 73, 89-90 worship of, 250


--- Page 329 ---
General Index 325
Brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva Caitanya Mahaprabhu, quotations from
verse quoted, 86 on humility while chanting, 174-175, 178.
Brahmano hi pratisthaham 192-193, 204
quoted, 158 on India’s special aptitude, 160
Brahma-samhita on living entity finding mercy, 86
See also: Brahma-sarithita, quotations on Mayavadis as offenders, 6
from on offenses to devotees, 179
on forms of Godhead, 100 on unconditional devotion, 266
the Lord personifies, 116 Caksur unmilitar yena
Brahma-samhita, quotations from verse quoted, 66
on devotional service without karma, 44 Canakya Pandita, quotations from
on Durga controlled by Krsna, 195 on sons, necessity of, 14°
on expansions of Krsna, 102, 122 on who should leave home, 34
on Krsna as original person, 123 on women, 239
on Krsna in atoms and universes, 89, 122 on worthless sons, 27
on Krsna’s body, 101 Candalas, purification of, 140-141
on Krsna seen by love, 147 Caranas with Siva, 167
on Krsna’s greatness known to devotees, Carsani, 212
122,199 Caturmasya, 211
on Maha-Visnu’s source as Krsna, 124 Caturvyitha, 99
on Visnu in Svetadvipa, 99 Causal Ocean, universes in, 124
Brahma satyari jagan mithyd, 57 Cause of everything, Supreme Lord as. 104,
Brahmeti paramatmeti 122-125, 144-145, 150-151.
verse quoted, 149 152-153
Brahmins. See: Brahmanas Chadiyavaisnava-seva nistara payeche keba
Brain as material, 106 quoted, 180
Brghu, 212, 213 Chanting the Lord's holy names
Brhan-naradiya Purana, quoted on chanting, for all men, 141
140, 155 by Citraketu, 168
Brhat$loka, 215 desires decrease by, 128
happiness in, 196
C humility in, 174-175,178
recommended for this age, 135. 140-141
for remembering Krsna, 155
Caitanya-caritémrta, quotations from sins purified by, 96
on happiness and distress, 196 Charity of Citraketu, 30-31
on India’s duty, 160 Chastity of women, 248
Caitanya Mahaprabhu Chemicals’ cause, 122-123
See also: Caitanya Mahaprabhu, quotations Child-killing, atonement for, 95-96
from Citraketu, King
chanting introduced by, 141 See also: Citraketu, quotations from
delivers fallen souls, 242 abundance during reign of. 12
depends on devotees, 274 Anantadeva attained by, 111-115
devotees should serve, 69 Anantadeva purifies, 114
Laksmi as visnu-tattva accepted by, 282 Anantadeva seen by. in ecstasy. 114-115
preaching desired by, 137 Angira asked by, for a son. 23-25


--- Page 330 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Citraketu, King (continued) Citraketu, quotations from
Angira instructs, 52-60, 67-76 on desires and worshiping the Lord,
Angira misunderstood by. 27 127
Angira received by. 16-17 on the Lord's all-inclusiveness. 122
chanting of mantra by. 110-111 on the Lord’s connection with universes,
charity of. on son’s birth, 30-31 144
childless destiny of. 55 on the Lord's directing everything, 145
curse as mercy for. 182-183 on the Lord’s purifying effect. 140, 142
cursed by Parvati, 179 on religions, 131, 133-134
curse tolerated by, 181-182. 192-193, on Supersoul. 143

204 on universes as atoms in the Lord, 124

cursing of. See: Cursing of King Citraketu Citraketu’s son
departs in airplane, 191 born. 29
described. 14 Citraketu’s affection for. 31-32
devotees praised by, 62-63 dies, 36-37
enlightenment of. 61, 94-95, 97 as enemy of his father, 4-85
fault of, in criticizing Siva, 174 as Harsasoka. 87
frustration of. with wives, 13-15 instructions of, on reincarnation, 82-92
hearing about. 207 Citric acid, tree producing, the Lord's creating
karma accepted by, 190 compared to. 123
knowledge requested by. 66 Civilization. human
laments for his son, 40-41, 45-46. 48 criterion of. 250
Narada credited by. 142 See also: Society. human
Narada instructs, 52-60, 77 Conditioned soul. See: Soul, conditioned
Narada teaches prayer to, 99-107 Contraception. life unaffected by. 55-56
Parvati criticizes, 175-178 Cosmic manifestation. See: Universe
Parvati’s forgiveness asked by. 190 Cows
reciting history of, 208 for advancing society. 250
renunciation in, 108-109 as charity of Citraketu. 30
Siva appreciated by. 171 Creation, the
Siva criticized by, 170-173 compared to a dream. 57
Siva praises. 192-194, 201-202 See also: Material world; Universe
as Siva’s friend. 202 Creator
son of. See: Citraketu’s son scientists not, 120-121
transcendental success of, 108-109, 146 See also: Supreme Lord, as cause of every-
travels in space, 167-168 thing: Supreme Lord, as indepen-
as Vrtrasura. 205-206 dent creator
wives of. 14-15, 32-36 Curse on King Citraketu
wives of, atonement of. 95 justification of. 179, 180

Citraketu. quotations from as the Lord's plan, 169. 182
on Aryans. or dutiful men, 136-137 as mercy for him, 180
on bhagavata-dharma, 129, 131 by Parvati. 179
on conquering the Lord. 117-118 Parvati’s reasons for. 175-177
on demigods, 120 Parvatiregrets. 202. 203
on demigod worshipers. 125-126 Cyavana. 64


--- Page 331 ---
General Index 327
D Detachment. See: Renunciation
Devala, 64
Dadami buddhi-yogarm tam Sukadeva heard of Vrtrasura from, 11
quoted, 149 Devotees of the Supreme Lord
Daityas defined, 217 accept everything as mercy. 182
Daiva-netra, 182 appreciate the Lord, 272
Daivi hy esa gunamayi behavior of, 201, 204
verse quoted, 180 Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s happiness as. 196
Daksa, Citraketu unlike, 171 dear to the Lord, 201
Dam-patye ’bhirucir hetuh demigods respected by. 126
quoted, 237 depend on the Lord, 272-273
Dandavats to Laksmi-Narayana, 279 desire nothing material, 264-266
Dando mitra ca tasyaitah desires of, the Lord fulfills, 263-264
verse quoted, 18 duty and activities of, 69
“Daridra-ndrayana,” 278 enemies of, punished by the Lord, 91-92
Darsa, 212 envy avoided by, 246
Dattatreya, 64 food not eaten by, 247
Death in material relationships, 52-53 goal of, 111, 182
Dehino 'smin yatha dehe hearing from, necessity of, 207
quoted, 18. 54, 87 humility of, 174-175, 178. 204
Deity of the Supreme Lord, 148 incapability in, 107
Deity worship of the Supreme Lord, 116, 141, Janis inferior to, 6, 118
143, 276-277 karma transcended by, 182
Demigods knowledge in, 151, 188-189. 197, 198
criticizing, an offense, 173 the Lord conquered by, 117-119
defined, 222 the Lord depends on, 274
long lives of 235 the Lord favors, 91-92
ninety million, 8 the Lord seen by, 142. 146-149
as parts of the Lord, 232 the Lord's lotus feet served by. 107
reciting purisavana-vrata pleases, 292 as maha-paurusiya, 68-69
as secondary actors, 145 material conditions do not affect. 68-69.
worship 01, condemned, 125-126 74
See also: Indra; Maruts; other names of in- Mayavadis inferior to, 6. 118
dividual demigods meeting, as fortune. 86
Demons, reformation of, 222 obligated feeling of, to the Lord. 130
Desires opulence of, 111-112
of devotees, yogisand janis, 118-119 pride disqualifies. 174
of devotees to go to'the Lord, 182 pure. See: Pure devotees of the Supreme
devotional service fulfills, 112, 263-264 Lord
material, absent in devotional service, 56 purpose of, 62-65
material, body given by, 60-61 rarity of, 3-4, 8-9
material, unhappiness from, 160-162 renunciation in. 182. 186. 192, 195
material, worship of the Lord with, security of, in difficulty. 205-206
126-128 service of, accepted. 109
Destiny in getting children, 55 Siva glorifies. 192-194, 197, 201


--- Page 332 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Devotees of the Supreme Lord (continued) Distress. See: Suffering
surrender to. 180 Diti
test of. 266 descendants of, 217-222
tolerance in, 182, 192-193, 194, 195 Indra questioned by, 261
universal appeal of, 132-133 Indra’s explanations to, 261-267
yogisdiffer from, 118 Indra’s death planned by, 227-228
Devotional service to the Supreme Lord Kasyapa captivated by, 228
Anantadeva recommends, 161 Kaéyapa instructs, on vow, 246-251
attachment to be abandoned in, 93 Kasyapa requested by, for instructions,
bhagavata-dharma as, 129, 139 245
defined, 130 Maruts born to, 259-260
Diti and Indra purified by, 262 neglect of, in executing vow, 255
goodness preliminary for, 2 pregnancy achieved by, 252
honesty a result of, 262 purity of, 224
husband trained in, 237 Dreams
imperishable, 206, 242-243 as illusory phase, 154-155
karma transcended by, 44, 182, 184 the Lord causes understanding of,
knowledge through, 197-198 156-157
material attachment obstructs, 108-109 material life like, 57, 71-74, 195-197
material power a by-product of, 110-112 Duality, material
necessary for knowing the Lord, 147, devotees above, 118, 195-196
148-149 compared to thinking flower garland a
Prahlada Maharaja preached, 137 snake, 195-196
pumsavana vow in. See: Purisavana-vrata Supreme Lord free from, 100, 102
pure stage of, 56, 129-130 Duhkhalayam asasvatam, 4
purifies anyone, 242 Durga
renunciation in, 108-109 Kasyapa’s instructions concerning, 247
as sarvotkrsta, or best religion, 133 See also: Parvati
spiritualizes everything, 111-112 Durlabhari manusar janma
unconditional, 118, 130 verse quoted, 137
utility in, 111-112, 132 Durvasa, 64
wife shares husband’s, 285-286 Duty
wonderful nature of, 263-264 highest success in, 136-137
See also: individual devotional processes proper mentality in, 93
Dhamani, 219 “Duaite” bhadrabhadra-jiiana, saba
Dharma (occupation), supreme form of, 130 “manodharma”
Dharma (religion). See: Religion verse quoted, 196
Dharmakh svanusthitah purisam
verse quoted, 136 E
Dharmarn tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam
quoted, 132 Earth (element). See: Elements, material
Dhata, 212 Earth planet productive under pious kings,
Dhaumya, 64 12-13
Dhruva Maharaja satisfied, 264 Education, real, lacking, 76
Disciples. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord Ego, false. See: Elements, material
Disciplic succession, the Lord known through, “Ei bhala, ei manda,” eisaba “bhrama”
147 verse quoted, 196


--- Page 333 ---
General Index 329
Elements, material Gautama, 64
body composed of, 83 Glowworm in the sun, Citraketu compares
emanate from the Lord, 150 himself to, 143
soul covered by, 18 Goal of life. See: Perfection
universe covered by, 124-125 God. See: Supreme Lord
Elephant, mad, offense to devotees compared God consciousness. See: Krsna consciousness
to, 179 Goddess of fortune. See: Laksmi -
Elephant emerging from muddy water, “Gods.” See: Demigods
Citraketu’s enlightenment compared to, Gold, transaction in, transmigration compared
97 to, 85
Energy Goodness. mode of
of life from Krsna, 105-106 necessity of attaining, 2, 185
the Lord’s, different from Him, 152-153 symptom and function of, 186-187
material and spiritual, 59-60, 150-151 Gopis’relationship with Krsna, 118
Enjoyment, material Government rule, Krsna’s equal disposition
wife induces, 237 compared to, 189
See also: Happiness, material Govindam adi-purusam
Envy quoted, 7-8, 123
of devotees, Lord intolerant of , 91-92 Grhasthas, son needed for, 14
devotees avoid, 246 Guru. See: Spiritual master
in religions, 131-136 Guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
Ether. See: Elements, material verse quoted, 86
H
F
Happiness
Face as index of mind, 22 attaining, in this world, 58-59, 196
Family life, son needed in, 14 devotees undeviated by, 118
Fatherhood. See: Parenthood of kings, 18-20
Fear, causes of, 71, 74 Lord Caitanya sets example of, 196
Fire. See: Elements, material See also: Pleasure; Pleasure, material
Flower garland mistaken for a snake, material Hare Krsna mantra
illusion compared to, 195 Lord Caitanya delivered, 242
Foodstuffs offered to the Lord. See: Prasada the Lord is identical with, 148, 151
Fruitive activities See also: Chanting the Lord's holy names
birth determined by, 82-83 Hare Krsna movement. See: Krsna conscious-
ceasing of, 160-161, 162 ness movement
contradictory results of, 160-162 Harer nama harer nama
See also: Karma; Vikarma quoted, 155
verse quoted, 140
G Harsasoka, 87
Haridasa Thakura, tolerance exemplified by.
195
Gandharva-nagara defined, 71 Hearing about the Supreme Lord from devo-
Garbhodakasayi Visnu tees only, 207
expansion of Maha-Visnu, 124 Heavenly planets
expansion of Sankarsana, 99 devotees disdain, 182, 186. 193, 194


--- Page 334 ---
330 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Heavenly planets (continued) Illusion

devotional service not for attaining, 8 activity in, 149
Hellish planets, devotees indifferent to, 182, of bodily identification, 65

186. 193, 194 in bodily relationships, 52-54, 82-88

Hiranyakasipu, 217, 218 causes of, 71-74

Diti recalls killing of. 225, 235 of happiness in material world, 186
Hiranyaksa, 217 phases of, three described, 154-155

Diti recalls killing of, 225, 235 of soul as doer, 58, 184
Hiranyanabha, 64 Ilvala, 219
Hlada. 218, 219 Impersonalists. See: Mayavadis
Householders. See: Grhasthas; Marriage Incarnations of God
Hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani appear by His own potency, 215

verse quoted, 8 Ksirodakasayi Visnu the source of, 99
Hrsikena hrsikesa- See also: names of individual incarnations

verse quoted, 130 India, special position of, 159-160
Hrsikesa, the Lord’s function as, 105-106 Indra
Human beings bodily conception of, 227

classes of , four given, 5 Diti plans to kill, 225-227, 234-235

classified as demigods or demons, 222 Diti questions, 261

criterion for, 64 Diti receives apology from, 266-267

as false creators, 120-121 Diti receives explanation from, 261-267

perfect, described, 137-138 Diti served by, 252-254

rarity of, as species, 4 Diti’s womb entered by, 255-256

See also: Soul, conditioned family of, 214
Human society. See: Society, human Kasyapa’s son 9 friend or enemy of, 244
Humility of devotees, 174,175, 178,181, Maruts cut by, 256

182, 204 Maruts elevated by, 222
Husband. See: Marriage Maruts reassured by, 258
as secondary actor, 145
Intelligence
I demigod worshipers lack, 126
devotional service a matter of, 256-266

Ignorance the Lord as source of, 120-121. 151

in atheists, 144 See also: Elements, material

in criticizing God, 43 Iron with power to burn, body, etc., with con-

defined, 65 i sciousness compared to, 105

devotees understand, 151 Eavasyam idari sarvam

in material nature, 184-185 quoted, 132

in modern men, 76 _ verse quoted, 12

monism as, 158-159 15070078500, quotations from

removing, 66-67 on the Lord's completeness, 272-273

See also: Illusion on the Lord's proprietorship, 12
Ignorance, mode of Fvarah sarva-bhiitanarn

conquering, as necessity, 2 quoted, 278

symptom and function of, 187 verse quoted, 90


--- Page 335 ---
General Index 331
J Kali-yuga (Age of Kali)
false gurusin, 66
Jagadananda Pandita, quoted on beginning of marriage in, 237-238
conditioned life. 158 Kamad dvesad bhayat snehat
Jambha, 218 quoted. 128
Janame janame sabe pita mata paya Kamais tais tair hrta-jaanah
quoted. 86 quoted. 119. 126
Janayaty asu vairagyam Kamar vavarsa parjanyah
verse quoted. 198 quoted. 12
Janma karma ca me divyam Kapila. 64
verse quoted. 127-128 Karanodakasayi Visnu as expansion of Sankar-
Janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara sana, 9
verse quoted, 160 Karma
Jatukarna. 64 bodies caused by. 60
Jayanta, 214 Citraketu accepts results of. 190
Jiva. See: Living entity: Soul: Soul. condi- controlled by the Lord. 44
tioned defined. 149
Jiva-bhitar maha-baho freedom from. 182
verse quoted. 150 living conditions caused by. 53. 189
Jiva Gosvami See also: Fruitive activities
noted the Lord's statement on His aspects. Karma-mimarasa philosophy. Krtadyuti’s
156 stress on, 44
on smallness of living entity. 90 Karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam
(Jiva) krsna-ddsa, ei visvisa, karle ta’ ara quoted. 44. 182
duhkha nai Karmano hy api boddhavyarn
verse quoted, 185-186 verse quoted. 150
Jadnis Karmany evadhikaras te
anxiety in, 101 verse quoted. 93
classes of, two main and two subordinate. 6 Karmis
as class of human being, 4 anxiety in, 101
deficiency in, 198 desire comforts, 4-5
devotees distinguished from, 118 as offenders. 6
Judge. impartial. Krsna compared to. 93. 189 Karttikeya (Skanda). conception of. compared
to that of Krtadyuti’s son. 28
K Kasyapa Muni
Diti captivates, 228
Diti instructed by, 244, 246-251
Kalau nasty eva nasty eva Diti promised reward by. 234
verse quoted, 140 Diti’s purification planned by. 242
Kali. goddess Diti’s request regretted by. 236-237
animal sacrifice to, 134-135 as victim of his wife. 224
Kasyapa's instructions concerning, 247 Kaumara caret prajao
Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) quoted. 237
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s mission in, 242 verse quoted. 137
chanting recommended for. 140-141 Kausalya. 64


--- Page 336 ---
332 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Kayadhu. 218 Krsna consciousness
Killing motives for, vary, but result is same, 128
perfect men refrain from, 138 preaching of, 64, 65, 137, 274
See also: Animal killing purification in, 114, 127-128, 242
King Citraketu. See: Citraketu, King as religion, pure, 132-133
Kings renunciation for, 108-109
happiness for. 18-20 women and men in, 241
seven protectors of, 18 See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
See also: Ksatriyas Lord; individual devotional pro-
King’s nobility vanishing, demigod's favors cesses
vanishing compared to, 126 Krsna consciousness movement
Kirata-hanandhra-pulinda-pulkasah for benefit of everyone, 139, 141
quoted, 141 mission of, 26
Kirti, 215 success of, 109
Knowledge women in, 239, 241
atheism voids, 144 Krsna-katha as bhagavata-dharma, 137
Brahman as cause of, 156-157 Krtadyuti
complete, 155 lamentation of, 38, 41-48
devotees have naturally. 197 pregnant, 28
dreams as subject of, 156-157 sacrificial remnants received by, 26
of God, attainment of, 146-147, 148- son of, dies, 36-37
149 Krti, 218
as human being’s qualification, 64 Krttikadevi, pregnancy of, compared to
of illusion and reality, 57, 149 Krtadyuti’s, 28
Krsna’s body full of, 100-101 Ksatriyas
Krsna understood in, 151 in perfect society, 137-138
perfect and imperfect, 57, 197-198 See also: Kings
perfection in, 115 Ksirodakasayi Visnu
reception of, 66 as expansion of Garbhodakasay1 "15100, 124
sages distribute, 62-65 as source of incarnations, 99
spiritual, imperishable, 205-206 Ksipamy ajasram asubhan
Vedic, as basis of activity, 151 verse quoted, 91, 135
Ko ’rthah putrena jatena Ksiyante casya karmani
verse quoted, 27 quoted, 182
Krishna. See: Supreme Lord Kuha, 212
Krishna consciousness. See: Krsna conscious- Kumaras, the, cited as worshiping for libera-
ness tion, 129
Kriya, 212
Krsna. See: Supreme Lord L
Krsna-bahirmukha 1074 bhoga vaiicha kare
verse quoted, 158 Laksmi
Krsna consciousness “different” from Visnu, 281-282
brahminical culture for, 250 exalted status of, 279-280, 281
chastity in, 248 the Lord's energy, 275, 280
envy avoided in, 246 prayers to, in purisavana-vrata, 272, 275,
marriage in, 233, 237-238 279-280, 283-284


--- Page 337 ---
General Index 333
Laksmi Living entities
as visnu-tattva, 282 as part of the Lord, 120, 163
Laksmi-Narayana worship, 278 relationships of, in illusion, 82-88
Lamentation responsible for themselves, 189
causes of, 71-74 in sleep, 154-157
devotees transcend, 68-69, 74 smallness of, 89-90
unnecessary in this world, 52-53, 55, 57 source of, 148
Laws of God inescapable, 135 in spiritual or material worlds, 90
Leaders of government neglect duty, 58-59 in transmigration of soul, 82-90,
Liberation 158-159
devotees shun, 118-119, 182,186, See also: Soul, conditioned
193-194, 264, 266 Lotus feet of the Supreme Lord served by de-
rarity of , 4 votees, 107
Life Lotus flower, woman's face compared to, 238,
material ideas 01, 149 239
respected by perfect men, 140 Love of God beyond karma, 182
Life, material Love
entanglement in, 71-75 of God as natural, 200
forgetfulness causes, 158-159 the Lord’s, for devotees, 274
monism the beginning of, 158 the Lord seen by, 147, 148-149
suffering in, 54, 71 See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
Lilies and bees, effect of sun on, Krsna's equal Lord
क disposition compared to, 189 Lust in nondevotees, 118-119
Living entities
accept this world falsely, 152-153 M
Brahman in quality, 157
dear to the Lord, 200
devotees as fortune for, 86 Madhvacarya, quotations from
different from the Lord, 88, 90, 92, 102 on monism, 159
directed by the Lord, 90, 151 on pure worship of Visnu, 112
in dreams, 156-157 on rarity of pure devotees, 8
duality experienced by, 195 on Visnu and Laksmi, 281
as false creators, 120-121 Mahamantra. See: Chanting the Lord's holy
happiness of, 18 names; Hare Krsna mantra
illusion of, 184 Maha-paurusiya defined, 68-69
illusion of, as doers, 58 Maharaja Pariksit. See: Pariksit Maharaja
life for, right of, 138 Mahatma defined, 155
material life’s beginning for, 60-61, Maha-Visnu as expansion of Sankarsana.
158-159 124
in material life, 71-75 Mahayajiias. the five, 211
in material or spiritual world, 90 Mahima (son of Bhaga), 211
neutrality in, 93 Mahisa, 220
as numerous as atoms, 4 Ma karma-phala-hetur bhar
as one with but different from the Lord, verse quoted. 93
89, 91, 92, 120, 158-159, 163 Mamaivamso jiva-loke
parentless, 85 quoted, 75, 120


--- Page 338 ---
334 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Mama janmani janmanisvare Materialists
verse quoted. 266 blind to God, 144, 147
Mam atma-para-dehesu enlightened by devotees, 62-65
verse quoted, 135 words and songs of. 116-117
Mam eva ye prapadyante See also: Atheists, Karmis
verse quoted. 180 Material life. See: Life, material: Material
Manah sasthanindriyani world
quoted. 75 Material nature. See: Nature. material
Man-mana bhava mad-bhakto Material world
quoted. 139 compared to river, 84
Mantra devotees indifferent in. 182. 186
of Narada given to Citraketu. 99-107 as dream, 57, 71-72
Vedic. Krsna as om in, 99 duality in, 184-187. 194-197
Manu-sarhita, quoted on association with illusion in, 57. 71-75,154-155
women, 229-230 Lord’sdisinterestin, 58
Markandeya. 64 as Lord’s energy. 152-153
Marriage as mental concoction. 71-75
danger in, 237-238 modern attachment for. 76
husband’s position in. 228, 232-233 modes of nature in. 187
husband worshiped in, 232-233 relativity in, 184-187, 194-197
materialistic. 161 suffering in. See: Suffering
spiritual benefit in, 233 Matra-sparias tu kaunteya
spiritual relationship in, 285-286 verse quoted, 100
successful, 237 Matra svasra duhitra va
Vedic. 24-25. 45-46 verse quoted, 229-230
wife's material influence in, 237 Mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
wife's satisfaction in, 238 quoted, 153
Maruts, 222 Mattah 50707 pravartate
birth of, 259-260 quoted, 123
as demigods, 222, 259 Mattah smrtir jAi@nam apohanari ca
Diti’s questions concerning, 261 quoted, 105,110
hearing about, 271 Maya
Indra cuts, 256 beginning of. 158-159
Pariksit’s questions on. 222-223 devotee understands, 151
plead with Indra. 257 illusions of, 154-155
saved by the Lord’s mercy. 258 material life arranged by, 56
Mata yasya grhe nasti as spiritual potency, 215
verse quoted, 34 See also: Illusion: Material world
Material body. See: Body, material Mayadhyaksena prakrtih
Materialism quoted, 155,194
devotees never involved in, 111-112 Maya tatam 1007 sarvam
as dream, 154 quoted. 152
modern disgust with, 109 Mayavadis (impersonalists)
wife induces. 229, 237 offensive but elevated, 6
women as basis of, 239 philosophy of, 158-159, 198
See also: Material world refuted. 152-153


--- Page 339 ---
General Index 335
Mayavadis (impersonalists) Motherhood. See: Parenthood
worship by, 6, 8 Mukti. See: Liberation
Mayavadi krsne aparadhi Murderer, God's laws punish, 135
quoted, 6 Mystic power
Mayayapahrta-jigna Indra’s use of, 256
versequoted, 65 limited, of living entity. 102
Meat eating
civilized men avoid, 250 N
Kagyapa’s instructions against, 247
restricted by sacrifice, 134
See also: Animal killing Na dhanari na janam na sundarim
Men, demigod and demon classes of , 222 verse quoted, 266
Mercy of the Lord Na mam duskrtino madhah
on Citraketu, 169, 183 verse quoted, 65
devotees accept, 182-183 Names of God. See: Chanting the Lord's holy
Merging with God. See: Liberation; names; Supreme Lord. name of. effect
Mayavadis: Monism of; Supreme Lord. name 01. identical
(Miche) mayara vase, yaccha bhese’, khaccha with Him
habudubu bhai Namo brahmanya devaya
verse quoted, 155, 185 quoted, 250
Midhusa, 214 Narada Muni
Milk, need of, 250 Anantadeva credits, 146
Milk touched by serpent’s lips, hearing from Angira accompanied by. 49
nondevotees compared to, 207-208 Citraketu instructed by. 52-60, 68-77
Mind Citraketu promised vision of Lord by. 77
control of, for happiness, 20 Citraketu receives mantra from, 99-107
face as index of, 22 Citraketu’s son returned by. 80-82
materially absorbed, 72-75 departs, 108
suffering through, 73-75 as father of devotional service. 109
as via media, 196-197 following, a necessity. 142
See also: Elements, material a preacher of God consciousness. 64
Misery. See: Suffering Sukadeva heard of Vrtrasura from. 11
Mitra, 214 Narada-paiicaratra, 130
Modes of material nature the Lord personifies. 116
relationships in, 84 quoted on one in devotional service.
intervene between Lord and living entity, 129-130
200 Narayana, Lord
Moghasa mogha-karmano as expansion of Sankarsana. 99. 124
verse quoted, 7 quadruple expansion from. 99
Money, transferral of, Citraketu's enemy be- Narayana-para, 193
coming his son compared to, 85, 87 Narayana-parah sarve
Monism verse quoted. 204
as cause of material life, 158 Narayana-parayana. See: Devotees of the
devotees avoid, 6 Supreme Lord
refuted, 152-153 Narayanayand deva
Monists. See: Mayavadis verse quoted, 9


--- Page 340 ---
336 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Narayanayanah sarve Ori, Krsna as, 148, 151
verse quoted, 8 Ori ajiiana-timirandhasya
Narottama dasa Thakura, quotations from verse quoted, 66
on devotee’s mode of life, 69 Ori namo bhagavate maha-purusaya,
on Lord Caitanya, 242 276-277
Nature, material Ori namo bhagavate vasudevaya
in destiny of conditioned souls, 184 quoted, 99
as energy, eternal, of the Lord, 59-60 Ori purnam adah pirnam idari
illusion by, 154-155 verse quoted, 273-274
intervenes between Lord and living entity, Oneness. See: Liberation; Mayavadis; Monism
200 Oneness and difference of the Lord and the
Krsna controls, 194-195 living entities, 89, 91, 92, 120,
living entities directed by, 58 158-159, 163
parent-offspring relation in, 83-85 Opulence of devotees, 111-112 273
productive under pious kings, 12-13
soul covered by, 18 P
Nava-kotyas tu devanam
verse quoted, 8
Necessities abundant under pious kings, Padma Purana, quotations from
12-13 on hearing from nondevotees, 207-208
Nimitta-matram bhava savyasacin on remembering Visnu, 155
quoted, 274 Paiicajana, 218
Nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe Paiicasikha (the sage) accepted by Sankhyites,
quoted, 111 64, 65
Nityaiva sa jogan-mata Paiicasikha as knowledge, 65
verse quoted, 281-282 Paramatma. See: Supersoul
Niyatam, 185 Paramaharnsa, Supreme Lord as, 144
Nobility, vanishing of, vanishing of demigod’s Param bhavam ajananto
favor compared to, 126 verse quoted, 7
Nondevotees Paramo nirmatsaranam
civilization of, condemned, 133-134, 138 quoted, 246
effect of hearing, 116-117, 207-208 Parasurama, 64.
Notpadyed yadi rati Parasya saktir vividhaiva $707016
verse quoted, 136 quoted, 187, 275
Nunari pramattah kurute vikarma Parenthood
quoted, 138 illusory nature of, 82-83
0 material nature arranges, 83-85
Supreme Lord controls, 55-56, 58, 60
living entity separate from, 85
Obeisances to Laksmi-Narayana, 279 Parents, material, as commonplace, 86
Ocean as Lord's creation, 122-123 Pariksit, Krsna’s saving of , the Lord’s saving
Offenders at Krsna’s lotus feet, 6 Maruts compared to, 258
Offenses Pariksit Maharaja
to demigods, 173 on Maruts, 222-223
to devotees, 179 Sukadeva appreciates questions of, 224


--- Page 341 ---
General Index 337
Parvati (Durga) Pleasure, material
Citraketu as object of anger of, 174-179 impossible, 71-72
Citraketu astonishes, 191 as misery, 186
Citraketu criticized by, 175-178 spiritual life stopped by, 108-109
Citraketu, curse on regretted by, 203 wife induces, 237
Citraketu excelled, 192-193 Poetry, perfection of, 115
as material energy, 195 Poison given Citraketu’s son, 36
as mother, 179-180 “Poor Narayana,” 278
Siva defended by, 169 Pots made of earth, the universe's relation
Siva embraces, 169 with Supreme Brahman compared to,
Siva’s instructions to, 192-203 104
Passion, mode of Power, material, from devotional service,
conquering, a necessity, 2 110-112 |
symptom and function of, 187 Prabodhananda Sarasvati, quoted on happiness
२०६०, 211 for devotees, 196
Pasyaty acaksuh Prabhu (son of Bhaga), 211
quoted, 101 Pradyumna, Lord
Pataiijali, 64 addressed in Narada's mantra, 99
Pati-guru, 232 in quadruple expansions, 99
Patram puspam phalari toyam Prahlada Maharaja, 217, 218, 220
quoted, 273, 274 preached perfect religion, 137
Paulomi, 214 Prakrteh kriyamanani
Penance. See: Purmsavana-vrata quoted, 84, 85
Perfection verse quoted, 183
Anantadeva on, 161, 163-164 Prakrti
in prayers to the Lord, 115 directs living entities, 58
as spiritual understanding, 146-147 See also: Nature, material
Persons. See: Living entities; Souls, condi- Prakrtim svam adhisthaya
tioned verse quoted, 215
Philosophers Prameya-ratnavali, quoted on Laksmias
atheistic, blindness of, 144 visnu-tattva, 281-282
deficiency in, 197-198 Pranavah sarva-vedesu
See also: Jianis; Mayavadis quoted, 99, 151
Pinda, 24-25 Prasada
Pippala, 214 as offered by devotees, 247
Pitas pleased by pumsavana-vrata, 293 in purisavana-vrata, 284, 285, 287, 289
Plants, cutting and replanting of, Maruts Pratah, 212
dividing compared to, 256-257 Prayers to Laksmi in purisavana-vrata, 275,
Plants, respecting life of, 138 278, 279-280, 281, 283
Pleasure Prayers to the Supreme Lord
in God and living entities, 101 Citraketu receives, from Narada, 99-
See also: Happiness; Pleasure, material 107
Pleasure, material of Citraketu to Anantadeva, 117-145
devotees shun, 264-266 mundaners incapable of, 116
illusory nature of, 183-185, 194-195 as perfection of words, etc., 115


--- Page 342 ---
338 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Prayers to the Supreme Lord (continued) Purusas. See: Garbhodakasayi Visnu;
in pumsavana-vrata, 272, 276-277, Ksirodakasayi Visnu; Maha-Visnu
279-280, 283-284 Purusa-sitkta prayers, 107
Preaching of Krsna consciousness
Lord Caitanya depends on devotees for, 274 Q
from Vedic literatures, 137
ash ij i ४ 4 ० Quadruple expansions of Godhead, 99
Prema-vivarta, quoted on beginning of condi-
tioned life, 158 R
Pride
in Citraketu. 174-175
disqualifies devotee, 174-178 Rahu (demon), 218, 219
Préni, 211 Rajo-guna. See: Passion, mode of
Purisah striya mithuni-bhavam etam Raka, 212
quoted. 17 Raksasim asurim caiva
Purisavana-vrata verse quoted, 7
benefits from, 289-293 Razor blade, woman's heart compared to, 238
described, 271-289 Rbhu (a sage), 64
fasting after. 287 Reincarnation. See: Transmigration of the soul
by husband for wife’s benefit, 285-286 Relationships
Kasyapa instructs Diti in, 246-251 as based on material bodies, 82-88
for one year. 287 by modes of nature, 84
Pariksit's inquiry about, 270 See also: Body, material
procedures following, 287-289 Religion
Punishment under God's law, 135 animal sacrifice in, 134-135
Puranas, divisions of spiritual life in, 137 bhagavata-dharma as supreme, 129-139
Pure devotees of the Supreme Lord deficient kinds of 131-139
desires nothing but service, 273 defined, 132
detached from materialism, 110, 112 envyin, 131-136
envy absent in, 133 false varieties of, 131-136
goodness preliminary for, 2 See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
invite everyone for Krsna, 133 Lord
steady service 01, 118 Remembrance, Brahman as cause of,
Purification 156-157
in devotional practices, 242. 246-250 Renunciation
by holy name of the Lord, 140-141 in devotees, 194.
by seeing the Lord, 140-142 Krsna consciousness in, 108
Purisyas, 212 of Western youth, 109
Parnamasa (Aditi’s grandson), 212 Revati (wife of Mitra), 214
Pirnasya piirnam 00290 River, material world compared to, 185
verse quoted, 272-273 Romasa, 64
Purusa, conditioned soul as, 241 Rsabha (son of Indra), 214
Purusarisasvatarn divyam Rsabhadeva, King, quotations from
quoted, 123 on misery of the body, 74


--- Page 343 ---
General Index 339
Rsabhadeva, King, quotations from Sarva-bhinnari paratmanari
on sexual attraction, 229 verse quoted, 159
Rtadhvaja, 64 Sarva-dharman parityajya
Riipa Gosvami, quoted on pure devotional ser- quoted, 132. 134,135. 184
vice, 129 Sarvari khalv ida brahma
quoted, 132
9 Sarvasya cahari hrdi sannivisto
quoted, 151
Sabda-brahma form of the Lord, 148, 151 Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktar
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, Krsna's body as, 102 verse quoted, 129
Sacrifice Sarvotkrsta, 133
of animals, 134 Sattva-guna. See: Goodness, mode of
for this age, 135 Saubhaga, 215
ultimate purpose of, 232-133 Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
Visnu personifies, 280-281 quoted, 119
See also: Purhsavana-vrata Sa vai purisari paro dharmo
Sadhu. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord verse quoted, 130
Sa gunan samatityaitan Savitri, 211
quoted, 182 Sayam, 212
Sahasra-yuga-paryantam Sa yat pramanarh kurute
quoted, 235 verse quoted, 173
Salt mine, material world compared to, 186 Science
Sama-mati, 118 false control by, 55-56
Sarhhlada, 218, 219 outstripped by ancients, 214
Samo "ham sarva-bhitesu voided by atheism, 144
verse quoted, 91, 202 Scientists
Sanatana Gosvami, quoted on hearing from absurdity in, 149
nondevotees, 116, 207 false status of, 120-121
Sanat-kumara, 64 Seed planting, attempt to procreate compared
with Anantadeva, 113 10, 55, 59
Sand, living entities compared to, 53 Seeds, sterilized or fried, purified persons
Sankarsana, Lord compared to, 127
as expansion of Balarama, 124 Self. See: Soul; Soul, conditioned
as expansion of Narayana, 124 Self-realization
expansions from, 99 India’s aptitude for, 159-160
Narada’s mantra addressed to, 99 in Krsna consciousness. 76, 130. 155
shelter of, promised to, 77 transmigration known in, 54
Sankhya philosophers, Paiicasikha accepted Semen, artificial development of. 214
by, 65 Sense gratification
Sannyasa of modern materialists, 138
danger of women for one in, 239 wife induces, 237
failures in, 6 worship by one desiring. 233
value of, not understood, 5 See also: Body. material: Life. material
Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, quoted on renun- Senses
ciation in bhakti-yoga, 109 depend on the Lord, 105-106


--- Page 344 ---
340 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Senses (continued) Son of King Citraketu. See: Citraketu, son of
, as part of material body. 73-74 Sons
Sesa. Lord. See: Anantadeva Canakya Pandita quoted on, 14, 27
Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau function of, in Vedic life, 24-25, 45
verse quoted, 147 pursavana-vrata for getting, 289
Sex Soul
attractive force of , 229-230 body different from, 54
in modern marriage, 237-238 illusion of, as doer, 58
wife promotes, 237 Supersoul of, 96, 107, 143, 149, 151, 155,
Siddha defined. 6.9 156, 200, 281
Siddhas. 167, 169 Souls, conditioned
Siddhi (wife of Bhaga), 211 bodily concept of, 54
Simhika, 218 Caitanya Mahaprabhu delivers, 242
Sinful activity, child-killing as, 95-96 coverings of, 18
Sinivali, 212 entangled in material life, 54, 71-75
Siva, Lord illusion of, as doer, 184
Bana favored by, 221 karma not understood by, 4
Citraketu appreciated by, 175 the Lord criticized by, 43
as Citraketu’s friend, 202 mystic power of, 102
Citraketu surprises, 191 as purusa, “‘enjoyer,” 241
Citraketu understood by, 172-173 reclaiming, 130
devotees’ greatness praised by, 192, 194, Sound, transcendental
197-198,201-203 as form of the Lord, 148, 151
father of everyone, 179 See also: Chanting the Lord’s holy names
prerogative, 173 Speculative philosophers. See: Jaanis;
Sankarsana the shelter of, 77 Mayavadis
special status of, 199 Spirit. See: Brahman; Soul: Soul, conditioned;
wife of. See: Parvati Supreme Lord
Skanda (Karttikeya), conception of, compared Spiritual life. See: Devotional service to the
to that of Krtadyuti’s son, 28 Supreme Lord; Krsna consciousness
Sky. See: Elements, material Spiritual master
Sleep approaching a, 66
the Lord causes understanding 01, Caitanya Mahaprabhu orders us to be, 137
156-157 defined, 66-67
as phase of illusion, 154-155 devotional service directed by, 148-149
Smartavyah satatar visnuh husband as, 232
quoted. 155 _ necessity of, 86
Society, human Sravanar naiva kartavyam
cow protection in, 250 _ verse quoted, 116, 207
false creations in, 120-121 Srimad-Bhagavatam
happiness in, 58-59 Aryans follow, 137-139
modern madness of, 76 duties instructed in, 136-137
perfect system of, 137-139 hearing, 207
Vedic (varnasrama-dharma), 137-138 for perfect society, 137-139
Soma, 211 See also: Srimad-Bhdgavatam, quotations
Songs. criterion for, 116-117 from


--- Page 345 ---
General Index 341
Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from Sumeru Mountain, Citraketu visits. 16 7-168
on abundance during Yudhisthira’s reign, Sun and sunshine, the Lord and living entity
13 compared to, 158
on aspects of the Absolute, 149 Supersoul PP aramama), 99, 107, 149, 155,
on chanting’s purifying all men, 141 156, 200, 281
on childhood training in Krsna conscious- as guide, 151
ness, 137, 237 omniscience of, 143
on detachment in Krsna consciousness, Supreme Brahman
109, 198 living entity different from, 158-159
on devotee’s accepting Lord's mercy, 182 See also: Supreme Lord
on devotee’s security, 206 Supreme Lord
on dharma’s real value, 136 activities caused by, 156
on false liberation, 7 appears by His own potency, 215
on hearing of Krsna, 8 atheists blind to, 144
on holy name’s purifying effect, 140 in atoms and universes, 122
on love of God as freedom, 182 behavior of, with devotees, 274
on marriage in Kali-yuga, 237 body of, misunderstood, 7
on praying to the Lord, 115 body of, omnipotent, 101
on sacrifice in this age (sasikirtana), 135 body of, spiritual truth of, 100, 102, 117,
on sexual attraction, 229-230 122,213
on supreme religion, 130 Brahman as one form of, 103, 104
on womanly association, 229-230 as cause of everything, 104, 122-125,
_ on worship of Krsna by all, 126, 264-265 144-145, 150-151, 152-153
Srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah Citraketu instructed by, 146-164
verse quoted, 8 Citraketu’s deliverance planned by. 169
Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka child-bearing controlled by. 55-56
, verse quoted, 195 as controller, 58, 135, 154
Srutadeva, 64 cows dear to, 250
Striyo vaiSyas tatha ऽका क as creator, but independent. 134-136.
_ quoted, 239 186-187, 188-189
Sidras as part of perfect society, 137-138 criticized by ignorant souls, 43
Suffering Deity form of , eternal, 148
causes of, 54, 71, 73-74 Deity worship of, 114,139, 141. 274-275
by desires, 160-162 demigods parts of, 232
devotees benefit by, 182 devotees of. See: Devotees of the Supreme
devotees undeviated by, 118 Lord
freedom from, 141, 186 Dhruva Maharaja satisfied by, 264
illusory, 184, 185, 188, 194-197 directs living entities, 90, 120-121. 151
the Lord free from, 188 energies of, in creation, two given. 59 -60
types of, three listed, 74 and envious persons, 135
Suhrdari sarva-bhitanam equally disposed. 91-93, 188-189. 200
, quoted, 133 eternal existence of. 122-123
Sukadeva Gosvami exalted status ০1. 100
invites Pariksit's inquiries, 268 form of. 100. 102. 117. 122
praises Pariksit Maharaja, 224 forms 01, as sound and Deity. 148
as preacher of God-consciousness, 64 forms 01, devotees understand. 151


--- Page 346 ---
342 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Supreme Lord (continued) Supreme Lord
freedom by knowing. 127-128 See also: Anantadeva: Vasudeva. Lord
gopis relationship with. 118 Suras. See: Demigods
greatness of. 199. 272 Surasena, state of. as Citraketu's province. 12,
husband as representative of. 233 71
illusion controlled by. 154 Sarya, 220
incarnates by His own potency, 215 Svalpam apy asya dharmasya
incarnates from Ksirodakasayi Visnu. 99 quoted. 243
incarnations of. See: names of individual Svamy-amatyau janapada
incarnations , verse quoted. 18
intelligence given by. 120-121 Svetadvipa, 99
Laksmi's relation with. 280, 281-282 Svetasvatara Upanisad, quoted on Krsna's
laws of. inescapable. 135 omnipotent body. 101
living entity different from. 93. 100. 102
living entity one with and different from,
89, 91.92, 120, 158-159, 163 T
Maruts saved by. 256, 260-261
material approach to, impossible, 103, 104
Mavyavadis’ idea of. 6-7 Tamo-guna. See: Ignorance, mode of
mercy of. 169, 182-183, 183 Tan aha dvisatah kraran
name of, effect of. 140 verse quoted, 91
name of. identical with Him. 151 Taridera carana sevi bhakta-sane visa
omniscience of. 143 verse quoted. 69
prayers to. in purasavana-vrata, 272, 273, Tantra Bhagavatam, quoted on narayana-
276, 279-280, 281, 283 parayanas, 8
purisavana-vrata for pleasing, 271-292 Taror api sahisnuna
purifying effect of. 140-142 quoted, 192-193, 204
remembering the. 155 Tasmad gururh prapadyeta
seeing the. 142, 144, 146-149 quoted, 66
self-satisfied. 101. 272 =" 1010৫ dehantara-praptir
separate from creation, 152-153 quoted, 54
as source of life's power, 105-106 Tatra srir vijayo bhitir
as Supreme Brahman. See: Supreme Brah- verse quoted, 263
man Tat te ‘nukampari susumiksamanah
surrender to, 188 quoted, 182
understanding. is difficult, 199 Tattva (truth). aspects of, three given, 149
understanding caused by, 156 Tat tvam asi, 158 ৷
understanding the. 146-147, 148-149 Te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
universes in, 124-125 verse quoted. 2
as unlimited. 124-125 Tejiyasant na dosaya
as Urukrama (Vamanadeva), 215 quoted. 174
as witness. 91-93 Tena tyaktena bhuijitha
worship of. See: Devotional service to the verse) quoted, 12
Supreme Lord: Worship. appropri- Te ‘pi mam eva kaunteya
ate entries verse quoted, 232


--- Page 347 ---
General Index 343
Tesam aham samuddharta Urukrama (Lord Vamanadeva), family and
verse quoted, 139 brief history of, 215, 216
Tesarn nityabhiyuktanar Urvaéi, 214
quoted, 273 Utsarga, 214
Tesarn satata-yuktanari
quoted, 148 Vv
Time, bodily relations under, 53-54
Tivrena bhakti-yogena
verse quoted, 126, 264-265 Vadanti tat tattva-vidas
Tolerance in devotees, 182, 192, 195 verse quoted, 149
Transmigration of the soul Vairagya. See: Renunciation
beginning of, 158-159 Vairagya-vidya-nija-bhakti-yoga
compared to animal's changing owners, quoted, 109
87 Vaisnava. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
escape from, 127-128 Vaisyas as part of perfect society, 137-138
illusory nature of, 82 Vilmiki, 213
Krsna quoted on, 54 Vanaprastha, when one should adopt, 6
as tribulation, 71 Varnasrama-dharma as bhagavata-dharma,
Trayi (granddaughter of Aditi), 211 137-138
Trees, respecting life of, 138 Varuna, 212, 213, 214
Trees, tolerance 01, devotee’s tolerance com- Vasistha Rsi, 213
pared to, 193 birth of, 214
Trnad api sunicena Vastu, kinds of, two given, 149
quoted, 204 Vasudeva, Lord
verse quoted, 174-175, 178 addressed in Narada's mantra, 99
Truth. See: Absolute Truth; Knowledge; Tat- husband as representative of, 233
tva in quadruple expansions, 99
Tvasta, Vrtrasura created by, 205 Vasudeve bhagavati
Tyaktva dehari punar janma verse quoted, 197
verse quoted, 127-128 Vasudevah sarvam iti
quoted, 155
Vatapi, 219
Vedanta-sitra
U Lord Caitanya instructs to preach from.
137
Unhappiness. See: Suffering quoted on blissfulness of God, 101
Universe Vedas, animal sacrifice in, 134
Anantadeva holds, 145 Vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau
complete unit, 272-273 verse quoted, 122,199
covering layers of, 124-125 Vedic knowledge as basis of activity, 151
as creation of the Lord, 120-121 Vibhu, 211
creation and control of, 124-125 Vidhata, 212
as different from the Lord, 153 Vidya, the Lord understood through, 151
the Lord’s breathing produces, 151 Vidyadharas, Citraketu rules, 110, 112.
sexual attachment predominates, 229-230 166-167


--- Page 348 ---
344 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Vikarma, 149 ४ Vyasadeva
Vipracit, 218 known as Apantaratama, 64
Viraraghava Acarya, quoted on devotee’s necessity of following, 142
satisfaction, 112 Vrtrasura’s history spoken by, to
Virocana, 220 Sukadeva, 11
Vismartavyo na jatucit Vyavasayatmika buddhih
quoted, 155 verse quoted, 108
Visnoh syuh Saktayas tisras
verse quoted, 282 Ww
Visnu, Lord. See: Supreme Lord
Visnu Purana, quoted on Laksmi, 281-282
Visnur mahan sa iha yasya kala-viseso Water
verse quoted, 124 Lord’s creation of, 122-123
Visnu-tattva, Laksmi as, 282 See also: Elements, material
Visnu-vrata. See: Purhsavana-vrata Waves of a river, material world compared to,
Vistabhyaham 00778 krtsnam 185
verse quoted, 125 Wife. See: Marriage; Women
Viévaksena, 276 Wealth, transferral of, Citraketu’s enemy be-
Viévamitra, falldown of, 239 coming his son compared to, 85
Visvam piarna-sukhayate Wealth of devotees, 111-112, 273
quoted, 196 Well covered by grass, women compared to,
Vi$vanatha Cakravarti Thakura 239
Citraketu’s criticism explained by, Women
172-173 association with, 229-230
compares material world to salt mine, 186 attractive materially, 237-239
on Daksa’s and Citraketu’s difference, 171 chastity in, 248
on Diti’s purity, 224 danger from, 238-239
on Indra’s cutting of the Maruts, 256 husband endeared by, 228
on karma, freedom from, 182 intelligence in, 202
on liberation, 5-6 Kasyapa describes, 237, 240
on Parvati’s curse, 169, 183 in marriage, 228, 231-233, 237
on Parvati’s embarrassment, 203 material inclination of, 237
Visvéaso naiva kartavyah nature of, 238-240, 245
quoted, 237 perfection for, 240-241
Vow of purisavana-vrata. See: Purhsavana- pregnant, husband as part of, 251
vrata protection of, 240
Vrajendra-nandana yei, Saci-suta haila sei, purisavana vow for, 271-293
balarama ha-ila nitai singing of , 238-239
quoted, 242 sonless, 33-34
Vrtrasura submissive nature of, 245
Citraketu as, 205-206 Words
Citraketu cursed to become, 169, 179-183 purpose of, 115
history of narration of, 11 in prayers, 116-117
questions on, 2-3, 9-10 World, material. See: Material world; Uni-
Vyahrti, 211 verse


--- Page 349 ---
General Index 345
Worship Yasoda as chastising mother, 180
for all men, 264-265 Yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya
by Aryans of the Lord, 137-128 verse quoted, 124
of Deity form of the Lord, 116, 141, 143, Yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akificand
276-277 quoted, 262
of demigods condemned, 125-126 Yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
by devotees, spirit of, 274 quoted, 65
of husband by wife, 232-233 Yat-karunya-kataksa-vaibhavavatam tam
of the Lord as duty of intelligent, 126 gauram eva stumah
of the Lord, benefit in, 259 quoted, 196
of the Lord, paraphernalia for, 276 Yatra kva vabhadram abhid amusya kim
of the Lord through demigods, 232, 233 quoted, 206
Yatra yogesvarah krsno
Y verse quoted, 263
Ye bhajanti tu marn bhaktya
verse quoted, 202
Yad indriya-pritaya aprnoti Ye nye 'ravindaksa vimukta-maninah
quoted, 138 quoted, 198
Yad yad acarati sresthas verse quoted, 7
verse quoted, 173 Ye tu sarvani karmani
Yaha bhagavata pada vaisnavera sthane verse quoted, 139
quoted, 207 Yesam tv anta-gatari papa
Yajante nama-yajiiais te verse quoted, 2
verse quoted, 134 Ye ‘py anya-devati-bhakta
Yajiia verse quoted, 232
true and false, 135 Yoga. See: Krsna consciousness, Yogis
Visnu personifies, 280-281 Yoga ksemarih vahamy aham
Yajraih sarnkirtana-prayair quoted, 266
quoted, 135 Yogeévara, 263-264
Yajravalkya, 64 Yogis
Yamaraja, sons deliver one from, 45-46 anxiety of, 101
Yar Syamasundaram acintya-guna-svaripam as class of human beings, 4
verse quoted, 147 and devotees, difference between. 118
Yamuna River, Citraketu and wives bathe in, the Lord as master of, 263-264
95, 97 mystic power of, 256
Yan-nama-sruti-matrena as offenders, 6
quoted, 140 perception in, 23
Yasmin vijiiate sarvam evar vijiiatari bhavati Yudhisthira Maharaja, abundance during
quoted, 155 reign of, 12-13


--- Page 350 ---
| - দম
১০১ ॥ 1 " ` `
pi ৮৮. Ee iii su a
1 চার SRIM AD চা
i : 4
"का~ 1 | ch Canto BHAGAVAT AM
Ei a ag img fhe Ei Part Three । `
५ iA iy ৷ ५५ bE Sixth Canto-Part Three ~~ 48
ऋ পে | pi ` bh
3 | $ \ ১ । 0১100 nN ॥ 4
a | ॥ + | 7.১) Lt i १
oll | ANE ১6০৬ 3
` कर्व A |); 0. 4 |
श 4 ॥ क i ৯১ 1 |
। 4.4 i ८1 9.1 च
va iC, CTE CARREY 1 + igs ह.
= be 4. Fil Bi bt 11. :
A 7 (क ' {१५4 (^, , 4 A
s श क } ॥ ॥। | Swami व. „^“ कि 7) 3
ww" plc (णद्ध এ, (ad
মা { | \ i "^: आ १५ क। Jit + RN ध
4 । \4 / > | LY न... || A\ ह, i र
४), ८ HR Ll of [৬২ ५५५ १ क
© (~ AV BOE |
| i HE | ष 1 } DAR ,
| ॥ ॥ পি , (4 \ V | i od) १
| # ` \ ~ 3 ॐ ~ च| --- {8 ~
১৩১. ১৩ pe 4, (9॥॥1(1
| व PE 6 | 18. J = - Eo
IN 4 ; 4. ক সে ।
WY N | Hdl ॥ ह ~
|) N (द.  -. (| NAS ee | ৷
| 8 ১২ ig धि ॥ 7} | | | ८ 1 +.
0 | “1 (भेव, । 6 कः ^^ =
6 |. 0 0. ৯০৪৮৬ =
a ol A os @ ह ह
১৬১১১. 8 His Divine Grace + |
8 0 ॥ ১২ ও মস য় ६ र न |
CT ET ` क ৬ AC. Blukivedanta Swami Prabhupadg ==="


--- Page 351 ---
| ४)
SRIMAD What the reviewers say about the ima
BHAG AVAT, AM Bhagovatam, by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakt-
vedanta Swami तपुः
Srinad-Bhagountam, an epic philosophical and “It hs been my grat pleasure reenly to have
literary classe, holds a prominent 7001 in read the Srimad-Bhdgavatam 1 the superb edition
Indi's voluminous writen wisdom, The timeless authorized by A.C. Bhaktivedania Swami Prabhu-
wisdom of India is expres in the Vedas, ancient pda. am sure this monumental work will o for to
Sanskrit texts that touch upon ll 000 of human bring the sublime message of the Bhdgovatam to
knowledge. Originally preserved through ral 000” | numerous Westerners who otherwise would mis this
tion, the Vedas were frst put into writing by Sela opportunity.”
18888 the “lterary incaraton of God.” After Dr. Alex Wayman
compling te Vedas, Sila Vyisadera was inspired Profesor of Sanskrit
by his spiritual master to present thei profound | Columbia University
essence i the form of rimad-Bhigosatam, Known त
asthe ripened frit of the ee of Vedi erature” "भाक is  vahabl soure ma-
Srimad-Bhagovatam 8 the mast complete and au- terial for several categories of readers, Wih fs ex-
thoriative exposition of Vedic knowledge. haustiv plan of providing the origina Sanskrit text,
After wring the Bhagouaiam, 1) taught to its Roman tranlteraion, English synonyms,
his son, Sukadeva (रा who later spake the English translation and elaborate commentary by a
Bhagavatam to Nahiria Pariksit in an assembly of scholar and practitioner of philosophy, it cannot but
sages on the bak of the sured Ganges River. Al- be attractive to serous student and scholars of
though Mabiria Parkst was a reat rors (nly religion and philosophy. | recommend this serie to
king) and the emperor of the world, when he anyone san important and useful reference work.”
reoeived noice his death seven days advance, he
renounced his entire kindgom and retired o the Professor C.P, Agrawal
ak ofthe Ganges 0 sek कपा enlightenment. Chairman
The questions of King Pariksit and Sukadeva Department of Humanities
গোয়া! illuminating answers, concerning every- University of Michigan
thin from the nature of the sl to the origi of the
universe, are the bsis of Srimad-Bhigouatam, “The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust editions of
This edition of Bhagonaam is the ony complete famous religious cassis of India with new transl-
English translation vith an elaborate and sehlaly tions and commentaries are an important addition to
commentary, and ii the first 000 widely aval our expanding knowledge of situa India. The new
abl to the English-reading public. This work is the ediion of the Srinad-Bhdgavatam is particulary
product of the scholarly and devotional effrt of His দ্যা
Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktvedants Swami Prabhu Dr. John L. Mish
18, the world's mst distinguished teacher of Chie, Oriental Divison
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His New York Public Libary
Sanskrit scholarship and intimate familiarity with
Vedic culture combine to reveal to the West a mag-
101 00001 of tis important css i ॥ १६१६१
| With ts comprehensive system of providing the §
orginal Sanskrit text, Roman transliteration, prise
word-for-word equivalents, a eid English transla
tion and a comprehensive commentary it wll appeal
10 scholars, students and laymen alike. The entre |) |
mulivolume tex, presented by the Bhaktvedanta
Book Tras, promises to ooupy a significant lace in
the intellectual, cultural and spiral feof modern
man fora long time to come,

