
--- Page 1 ---
Preface

We must know the present need of human society. And what is that
need? Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to par-
ticular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the
Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one human
society. The ideals of spiritual communism, according to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human
society, nay, on the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by
great thinkers to make this a successful ideology. Srimad-Bhagavatam
will fill this need in human society. It begins, therefore, with the aphor-
ism of Vedanta philosophy (janmady asya yatah) to establish the ideal of
a common cause.

Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of obli-
vion. It has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts, educa-
tion and economic development throughout the entire world. But there is
a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore there are
large-scale quarrels, even over less important issues. There is need of a
clue as to how humanity can become one in peace, friendship and
prosperity with a common cause. Srimad-Bhagavatam will fill this need,
for it is a cultural presentation for the re-spiritualization of the entire
human society.

Srimad-Bhagavatam should be introduced also in the schools and col-
leges, for it is recommended by the great student devotee Prahlada
Maharaja in order to change the demonic face of society.

kaumara acaret prajio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabharih manusar janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)

Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One, from whom everything
emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything is

ix


--- Page 2 ---
x Srimad-Bhagavatam

merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of
creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ultimate
source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained rationally
and authoritatively in the beautiful Bhagavatam or Srimad-
Bhagavatam.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the transcendental science not only for know-
ing the ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation
with Him and our duty towards perfection of the human society on the
basis of this perfect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the
Sanskrit language, and it is now rendered into English elaborately so that
simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well, so much so
that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend himself from the
onslaught of atheists. Over and above this, the reader will be able to con-
vert others to accept God as a concrete principle.

Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Vedanta-sitra by the same author,
Srila Vyasadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the
highest state of God realization. The only qualification one needs to study
this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step
cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly as with an ordinary
book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter, one after another.
The reading matter is so arranged with its original Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration, synonyms, translation and purports so that one is
sure to become a God realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine
cantos.

The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos, because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto
without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in
twelve cantos, each independent, but it is good for all to read them in
small installments one after another.

I must admit my frailties in presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam, but still
I am hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society
on the strength of the following statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin pratislokam abaddhavaty api


--- Page 3 ---
Preface xi
namany anantasya yaso ’nkitani yac
chrnvanti gayanti gmanti sadhavah
(Bhag. 1.5.11)
“On the other hand, that literature which is full with descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, form and pastimes of the
unlimited Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant to bring
about a revolution in the impious life of a misdirected civilization. Such
transcendental literatures, even though irregularly composed, are heard,
sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.”
Ori tat sat
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


--- Page 4 ---
Introduction

“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to His own abode, accompanied by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the
dense darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this
Purana.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43)

The timeless wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human knowledge. Originally
preserved through oral tradition, the Vedas were first put into writing
five thousand years ago by Srila Vyasadeva, the “literary incarnation of
God.” After compiling the Vedas, Vyasadeva set forth their essence in
the aphorisms known as Vedanta-siatras. Srimad-Bhagavatam is
Vyasadeva’s commentary on his own Vedanta-siitras. It was written in
the maturity of his spiritual life under the direction of Narada Muni, his
spiritual master. Referred to as ‘“‘the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic
literature,” Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and authoritative
exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After compiling the Bhagavatam, Vyasa impressed the synopsis of it
upon his son, the sage Sukadeva Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami subse-
quently recited the entire Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assem-
bly of learned saints on the bank of the Ganges at Hastinapura (now
Delhi). Maharaja Pariksit was the emperor of the world and was a great
rajarsi (saintly king). Having received a warning that he would die
within a week, he renounced his entire kingdom and retired to the bank
of the Ganges to fast until death and receive spiritual enlightenment.
The Bhagavatam begins with Emperor Pariksit’s sober inquiry to
Sukadeva Gosvami:

“You are the spiritual master of great saints and
devotees. I am therefore begging you to show the
way of perfection for all persons, and especially for
one who is about to die. Please let me know what a
man should hear, chant, remember and worship,
and also what he should not do. Please explain all
this to me.”

xiii


--- Page 5 ---
xiv Srimad-Bhagavatam

Sukadeva Gosvami’s answer to this question, and numerous other
questions posed by Maharaja Pariksit, concerning everything from the
nature of the self to the origin of the universe, held the assembled sages
in rapt attention continuously for the seven days leading to the King’s
death. The sage Stata Gosvami, who was present on the bank of the
Ganges when Sukadeva Gosvami first recited Srimad-Bhagavatam, later
repeated the Bhagavatam before a gathering of sages in the forest of
Naimisaranya. Those sages, concerned about the spiritual welfare of the
people in general, had gathered to perform a long, continuous chain of
sacrifices to counteract the degrading influence of the incipient age of
Kali. In response to the sages’ request that he speak the essence of Vedic
wisdom, Sita Gosvami repeated from memory the entire eighteen thou-
sand verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit.

The reader of Srimad-Bhagavatam hears Sita Gosvami relate the
questions of Maharaja Pariksit and the answers of Sukadeva Gosvami.
Also, Sata Gosvimi sometimes responds directly to questions put by
Saunaka Rsi, the spokesman for the sages gathered at Naimisaranya. One
therefore simultaneously hears two dialogues: one between Maharaja
Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami on the bank of the Ganges, and another
at Naimisaranya between Sata Gosvami and the sages at Naimigaranya
Forest, headed by Saunaka Rsi. Furthermore, while instructing King.
Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami often relates historical episodes and gives
accounts of lengthy philosophical discussions between such great souls as
the saint Maitreya and his disciple Vidura. With this understanding of
the history of the Bhagavatam, the reader will easily be able to follow its
intermingling of dialogues and events from various sources. Since philo-
sophical wisdom, not chronological order, is most important in the text,
one need only be attentive to the subject matter of Srimad-Bhagavatam
to appreciate fully its profound message.

The translator of this edition compares the Bhagavatam to sugar
candy —wherever you taste it, you will find it equally sweet and
relishable. Therefore, to taste the sweetness of the Bhagavatam, one may
begin by reading any of its volumes. After such an introductory taste,
however, the serious reader is best advised to go back to Volume One of
the First Canto and then proceed through the Bhagavatam, volume after
volume, in its natural order.


--- Page 6 ---
Introduction xv

This edition of the Bhagavatam is the first complete English transla-
tion of this important text with an elaborate commentary, and it is the
first widely available to the English-speaking public. It is the product of
the scholarly and devotional effort of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His consummate Sanskrit
scholarship and intimate familiarity with Vedic culture and thought as
well as the modern way of life combine to reveal to the West a magnifi-
cent exposition of this important classic.

Readers will find this work of value for many reasons. For those in-
terested in the classical roots of Indian civilization, it serves as a vast
reservoir of detailed information on virtually every one of its aspects.
For students of comparative philosophy and religion, the Bhagavatam
offers a penetrating view into the meaning of India’s profound spiritual
heritage. To sociologists and anthropologists, the Bhagavatam reveals the
practical workings of a peaceful and scientifically organized Vedic
culture, whose institutions were integrated on the basis of a highly
developed spiritual world view. Students of literature will discover the
Bhagavatam to be a masterpiece of majestic poetry. For students of psy-
chology, the text provides important perspectives on the nature of con-
sciousness, human behavior and the philosophical study of identity.
Finally, to those seeking spiritual insight, the Bhagavatam offers simple
and practical guidance for attainment of the highest self-knowledge and
realization of the Absolute Truth. The entire multivolume text, pre-
sented by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant
place in the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern man for a
long time to come.

—The Publishers


--- Page 7 ---
CHAPTER SIX
Prahlada Instructs
His Demoniac Schoolmates

This chapter describes Prahlada Maharaja’s instructions to his class
friends. In speaking to his friends, who were all sons of demons,
Prahlada Maharaja stressed that every living entity, especially in human
society, must be interested in spiritual realization from the very begin-
ning of life. When human beings are children, they should be taught that
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the worshipable Deity for every-
one. One should not be very much interested in material enjoyment; in-
stead, one should be satisfied with whatever material profits are easily
obtainable, and because the duration of one’s life is very short, one
should utilize every moment for spiritual advancement. One may
wrongly think, “In the beginning of our lives let us enjoy material
facilities, and in old age we may become Krsna conscious.” Such ma-
terialistic thoughts are always useless because in old age one cannot be
trained in the spiritual way of life. Therefore, from the very beginning
of life, one should engage in devotional service (Sravanari kirtanarm
visnoh). This is the duty of all living entities. Material education is in-
fected by the three modes of nature, but spiritual education, for which
there is a great need in human society, is transcendental. Prahlada
Maharaja disclosed the secret of how he had received instructions from
Narada Muni. By accepting the lotus feet of Prahlada Maharaja, who is in
the parampara succession, one will be able to understand the mode of
spiritual life. In accepting this mode of activity, there is no need for ma-
terial qualifications.

After Prahlada Maharaja’s class friends had listened to Prahlada
Maharaja, they inquired how he had become so learned and advanced. In
this way the chapter ends.

TEXT 1
भ्रीप्रहाद INT
FAR आचरेत्प्राज्ञो धर्मान्‌ भागवतानिह |
[9 + ¢
dd मानुषं जन्म तदप्यधुवमथंदम्‌ ॥ १॥
1


--- Page 8 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
Sri-prahrada uvaca
kaumdra acaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabharih manusari janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam

Sri-prahradah uvaca—Prahlada Maharaja said; kaumdrah—in the
tender age of childhood; d@caret—should practice; prajiah—one who is
intelligent; dharman—occupational duties; bhagavatan—which are
devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iha—in this
life; durlabham—very rarely obtained; manusam—human; janma—
birth; tat—that; api—even; adhruvam—impermanent, temporary;
artha-dam—full of meaning.

TRANSLATION

Prahlada Maharaja said: One who is sufficiently intelligent
should use the human form of body from the very beginning of
life—in other words, from the tender age of childhood —to prac-
tice the activities of devotional service, giving up all other engage-
ments. The human body is most rarely achieved, and although
temporary like other bodies, it is meaningful because in human
life one can perform devotional service. Even a slight amount of
sincere devotional service can give one complete perfection.

PURPORT

The whole purpose of Vedic civilization and of reading the Vedas is to
attain the perfect stage of devotional service in the human form of life.
According to the Vedic system, therefore, from the very beginning of life
the brahmacarya system is introduced so that from one’s very child-
hood —from the age of five years—one can practice modifying one’s
human activities so as to engage perfectly in devotional service. As con-
firmed in Bhagavad-gita (2.40), svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate
mahato bhayat: “Even a little advancement on this path can protect one
from the most dangerous type of fear.”” Modern civilization, not refer-
ring to the verdicts of Vedic literature, is so cruel to the members of
human society that instead of teaching children to become brahmacaris,


--- Page 9 ---
Text 2] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 3
it teaches mothers to kill their children even in the womb, on the plea of
curbing the increase of population. And if by chance a child is saved, he
is educated only for sense gratification. Gradually, throughout the entire
world, human society is losing interest in the perfection of life. Indeed,
men are living like cats and dogs, spoiling the duration of their human
lives by actually preparing to transmigrate again to the degraded species
among the 8,400,000 forms of life. The Krsna consciousness movement
is anxious to serve human society by teaching people to perform devo-
tional service, which can save a human being from being degraded again
to animal life. As already stated by Prahlada Maharaja, bhagavata-
dharma consists of Sravanarh kirtanarmn visnoh smaranarm pada-
sevanam/ arcanarh vandanari 025) 0718 sakhyam atma-nivedanam. In all
the schools, colleges and universities, and at home, all children and
youths should be taught to hear about the Supreme Personality of God-
head. In other words, they should be taught to hear the instructions of
Bhagavad-gita, to put them into practice in their lives, and thus to be-
come strong in devotional service, free from fear of being degraded to
animal life. Following bhagavata-dharma has been made extremely easy
in this age of Kali. The $astra says:
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
ndsty eva gatir anyatha
One need only chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Everyone engaged in
the practice of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra will be completely
cleansed, from the core of his heart, and be saved from the cycle of birth
and death.
TEXT 2
यथा दि पुरुषस्येह विष्णोः पादोपसपणम्‌ |
ক ৯০
यदेष स्वेभूतानां प्रिय आत्मेश्वरः স্তহন্‌ ॥ २ ॥
yatha hi purusasyeha
visnoh padopasarpanam


--- Page 10 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
yad esa sarva-bhitanam
priya atmesvarah suhrt
yatha—in order that; hi—indeed; purusasya—of a living entity;
tha —here; visnoh—of Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of God-
head; pdda-upasarpanam—approaching the lotus feet; yat—because;
esah—this; sarva-bhiitanam—of all living entities; priyah—the dear
one; atma-ivarah—the master of the soul, the Supersoul; suhrt—the
best well-wisher and friend.
TRANSLATION
The human form of life affords one a chance to return home,
back to Godhead. Therefore every living entity, especially in the
human form of life, must engage in devotional service to the lotus
feet of Lord Visnu. This devotional service is natural because Lord
Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the most beloved,
the master of the soul, and the well-wisher of all other living
beings.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (5.29):
bhoktarar yajna-tapasari
sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdarh sarva-bhiitanam
JjAdtva mam santim rcchati
“The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the
benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from the
pangs of material miseries.” Simply by understanding these three
facts —that the Supreme Lord, Visnu, is the proprietor of the entire cre-
ation, that He is the best well-wishing friend of all living entities, and
that He is the supreme enjoyer of everything— one becomes peaceful and
happy. For this transcendental happiness, the living entity has wandered
throughout the universe in different forms of life and different plan-
etary systems, but because he has forgotten his intimate relationship


--- Page 11 ---
Text 3] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 5
with Visnu, he has merely suffered, life after life. Therefore, the educa-
tional system in the human form of life should be so perfect that one will
understand his intimate relationship with God, or Visnu. Every living
entity has an intimate relationship with God. One should therefore
glorify the Lord in the adoration of santa-rasa or revive his eternal rela-
tionship with Visnu as a servant in dasya-rasa, a friend in sakhya-rasa,
a parent in vdtsalya-rasa or a conjugal lover in madhurya-rasa. All these
relationships are on the platform of love. Visnu is the center of love for
everyone, and therefore the duty of everyone is to engage in the loving
service of the Lord. As stated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead
(Bhag. 3.25.38), yesam ahari priya atma sutas ca sakha guruh suhrdo
daivam istam. In any form of life, we are related with Visnu, who is the
most beloved, the Supersoul, son, friend and guru. Our eternal relation-
ship with God can be revived in the human form of life, and that should
be the goal of education. Indeed, that is the perfection of life and the per-
fection of education.
TEXT 3
सुखभेन्द्रियङं दैत्या देदयोगेन देहिनाम्‌ |
सर्वत्र॒ रम्यते दैवायथा दुःखमयलतः ॥ २॥
sukham aindriyakar daitya
deha-yogena dehinam
sarvatra labhyate daivad
yatha duhkham ayatnatah

sukham —happiness; aindriyakam —with reference to the material
senses; daitydh—O my dear friends born in demoniac families; deha-
yogena—because of possessing a particular type of material body;
dehinam —of all embodied living entities; sarvatra—everywhere (in any
form of life); labhyate—is obtainable; daivat—by a superior arrange-
ment; yathd—just as; duhkham—unhappiness; ayatnatah— without
endeavor.

TRANSLATION

Prahlada Maharaja continued: My dear friends born of

demoniac families, the happiness perceived with reference to the


--- Page 12 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
sense objects by contact with the body can be obtained in any form
of life, according to one’s past fruitive activities. Such happiness is
automatically obtained without endeavor, just as we obtain
distress.
PURPORT

In the material world, in any form of life, there is some so-called hap-
piness and so-called distress. No one invites distress in order to suffer,
but still it comes. Similarly, even if we do not endeavor to obtain the ad-
vantages of material happiness, we shall obtain them automatically. This
happiness and distress are obtainable in any form of life, without en-
deavor. Thus there is no need to waste time and energy fighting against
distress or working very hard for happiness. Our only business in the
human form of life should be to revive our relationship with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus become qualified to return
home, back to Godhead. Material happiness and distress come as soon as
we accept a material body, regardless of what form. We cannot avoid
such happiness and distress under any circumstances. The best use of
human life, therefore, lies in reviving our relationship with the Supreme
Lord, Visnu.

TEXT 4
तत्प्रयासो न FAST यत आयुर्व्ययः परम्‌ |
न तथा विन्दते क्षेमं युङगन्द चरणाम्बुजम्‌ ।। ४ ॥
tat-prayaso na kartavyo
yata ayur-vyayah param
na tatha vindate ksemarm
mukunda-caranambujam

tat—for that (sense gratification and economic development);
prayasah—endeavor; na—not; kartavyah—to be done; yatah—from
which; ayuh-vyayah—waste of the duration of life; param—only or
ultimately; na—nor; tatha—in that way; vindate—enjoys; ksemam—
the ultimate goal of life; mukunda—of the Supreme Personality of God-


--- Page 13 ---
Text 5] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 7
head, who can deliver one from the material clutches; carana-ambu-
jam —the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION

Endeavors merely for sense gratification or material happiness
through economic development are not to be performed, for they
result only in a loss of time and energy, with no actual profit. If
one’s endeavors are directed toward Krsna consciousness, one can
surely attain the spiritual platform of self-realization. There is no
such benefit from engaging oneself in economic development.

PURPORT

We see materialistic persons busily engaged in economic development
all day and all night, trying to increase their material opulence, but even
if we suppose that they get some benefit from such endeavors, that does
not solve the real problem of their lives. Nor do they know what the real
problem of life is. This is due to a lack of spiritual education. Especially
in the present age, every man is in darkness, in the bodily conception of
life, not knowing anything of the spirit soul and its needs. Misguided by
the blind leaders of society, people consider the body to be everything,
and they are engaged in trying to keep the body materially comfortable.
Such a civilization is condemned because it does not lead humanity
toward knowing the real goal of life. People are simply wasting time and
the valuable gift of the human form because a human being who does not
cultivate spiritual life but dies like the cats and dogs is degraded in his
next life. From human life, such a person is put into the cycle of con-
tinuous birth and death. Thus one loses the true benefit of human life,
which is to become Krsna conscious and solve life’s problems.

TEXT 5
ततो AIT JIS: क्षेमाय भवमाश्रितः |
ও ৬ -
शरीरं पौरुषं यावन विपद्येत पुष्कलम्‌ || ৭ ॥
tato yateta kusalah
ksemaya bhavam asritah


--- Page 14 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
Sariram paurusam yavan
na vipadyeta puskalam

tatah—therefore; yateta—should endeavor; kusalah—an intelligent
man interested in the ultimate goal of life; ksemaya—for the real benefit
of life, or for liberation from material bondage; bhavam asritah—who is
in material existence; Sariram—the body; paurusem —human; yavat—
as long as; na—not; vipadyeta—fails; puskalam—stout and strong.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, while in material existence [bhavam asritah], a per-
son fully competent to distinguish wrong from right must en-
deavor to achieve the highest goal of life as long as the body is
stout and strong and is not embarrassed by dwindling.

PURPORT

As stated by Prahlada Maharaja at the beginning of this chapter,
kaumara acaret prajiiah. The word prajia refers to one who 15 ex-
perienced and who can distinguish right from wrong. Such a person
should not waste his energy and valuable human lifetime simply working
like a cat or dog to develop his economic condition.

For one word in this verse there are two readings —bhavam asritah
and bhayam asritah—but accepting the meaning of either of them will
bring one to the same conclusion. Bhayam asritah indicates that the ma-
terialistic way of life is always fearful because at every step there is
danger. Materialistic life is full of anxieties and fear (bhayam).
Similarly, accepting the reading bhavam asritah, the word bhavam
refers to unnecessary trouble and problems. For want of Krsna con-
sciousness, one is put into bhavam, being perpetually embarrassed by
birth, death, old age and disease. Thus one is surely full of anxieties.

Human society should be divided into a social system of brahmanas,
ksatriyas, vaiSyas and Sadras, but everyone can engage in devotional ser-
vice. If one wants to live without devotional service, his status as a
brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya or Sidra certainly has no meaning. It is said,
sthanad bhrastah patanty adhah: whether one is in a higher or lower
division, one certainly falls down for want of Krsna consciousness. A


--- Page 15 ---
Text 6] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 9
sane man, therefore, is always fearful of falling from his position. This is
a regulative principle. One should not fall from his exalted position. The
highest goal of life can be achieved as long as one’s body is stout and
strong. We should therefore live in such a way that we keep ourselves al-
ways healthy and strong in mind and intelligence so that we can dis-
tinguish the goal of life from a life full of problems. A thoughtful man
must act in this way, learning to distinguish right from wrong, and thus
attain the goal of life.
TEXT 6
. ©
पुंसो वषशतं द्यायुस्तदथं चाजितात्मनः |
निष्फलं यदसौ रात्यां शेतेऽन्धं प्रापितस्तमः ॥ £ ॥
puriiso varsa-Satari hy ayus
tad-ardhari cajitatmanah
nisphalam yad asau ratryarm
Sete 'ndhar prapitas tamah

purisah—of every human being; varsa-satam—one hundred years;
hi—indeed; ayuh—duration of life; tat—of that; ardham—half; ca—
and; ajita-atmanah—of a person who is a servant of his senses;
nisphalam—without profit, without meaning; yat—because; asau—that
person; ratryam—at night; Sete—sleeps; andham —ignorance (forget-
ting his body and soul); prapitah—being completely possessed of;
tamah—darkness.

TRANSLATION

Every human being has a maximum duration of life of one
hundred years, but for one who cannot control his senses, half of
those years are completely lost because at night he sleeps twelve
hours, being covered by ignorance. Therefore such a person has a
lifetime of only fifty years.

PURPORT

Lord Brahma, a human being and an ant all live for one hundred

years, but their lifetimes of one hundred years are different from one


--- Page 16 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
another. This world is a relative world, and its relative moments of time
are different. Thus the one hundred years of Brahma are not the same as
the one hundred years of a human being. From Bhagavad-gita we
understand that Brahma’s daytime of twelve hours equals 4,300,000
times 1,000 years (sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmano
viduh). Thus the varsa-satam, or one hundred years, are relatively dif-
ferent according to time, person and circumstances. As far as human
beings are concerned, the calculation given here is right for the general
public. Although one has a maximum of one hundred years of life, by
sleeping one loses fifty years. Eating, sleeping, sex life and fear are the
four bodily necessities, but to utilize the full duration of life a person
desiring to advance in spiritual consciousness must reduce these ac-
tivities. That will give him an opportunity to fully use his lifetime.
TEXT 7
मुग्धस्य बार्ये कै शलोरे AEA याति विंशतिः |
जरया ग्रस्तदेहस्य यात्यकल्पस्य Fgh ॥ ७॥
mugdhasya balye kaisore
kridato yati virnsatih
Jaraya grasta-dehasya
yaty akalpasya "77150414

mugdhasya—of a person bewildered or not in perfect knowledge;
balye—in childhood; kaisore—in boyhood; kridatah—playing; yati—
passes; virisatih—twenty years; jaraya—by invalidity; grasta-
dehasya—of a person overcome; yati—passes; akalpasya—without
determination, being unable to execute even material activities;
virn$atih—another twenty years.

TRANSLATION

In the tender age of childhood, when everyone is bewildered,
one passes ten years. Similarly, in boyhood, engaged in sporting
and playing, one passes another ten years. In this way, twenty years
are wasted. Similarly, in old age, when one is an invalid, unable to


--- Page 17 ---
Text 8] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 11
perform even material activities, one passes another twenty years
wastefully.
PURPORT

Without Krsna consciousness, one wastes twenty years in childhood
and boyhood and another twenty years in old age, when one cannot per-
form any material activities and is full of anxiety about what is to be
done by his sons and grandsons and how one’s estate should be protected.
Half of these years are spent in sleep. Furthermore, one wastes another
thirty years sleeping at night during the rest of his life. Thus seventy out
of one hundred years are wasted by a person who does not know the aim
of life and how to utilize this human form.

TEXT 8
TR कामेन मोदेन च बलीयसा ।
शेषं गृहेषु सक्तस्य प्रमत्तस्यापयाति टि ॥ ८ ॥
durapirena kamena
mohena ca baltyasa
Sesarh grhesu saktasya
pramattasyapayati hi

durapiirena—which is never fulfilled; kdmena—by a strong aspira-
tion to enjoy the material world; mohena —by bewilderment; ca —also;
baltyasa—which is strong and formidable; Sesam —the remaining years
of life; grhesu—to family life; saktasya—of one who is too attached;
pramattasya—mad; apayati—wastefully pass; hi—indeed.

TRANSLATION

One whose mind and senses are uncontrolled becomes in-
creasingly attached to family life because of insatiable lusty desires
and very strong illusion. In such a madman’s life, the remaining
years are also wasted because even during those years he cannot
engage himself in devotional service.


--- Page 18 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
PURPORT

This is the account of one hundred years of life. Although in this age a
lifetime of one hundred years is generally not possible, even if one has
one hundred years, the calculation is that fifty years are wasted in sleep-
ing, twenty years in childhood and boyhood, and twenty years in in-
validity (jara-vyadhi). This leaves only a few more years, but because of
too much attachment to household life, those years are also spent with no
purpose, without God consciousness. Therefore, one should be trained to
be a perfect brahmacari in the beginning of life and then to be perfect in
sense control, following the regulative principles, if one becomes a
householder. From household life one is ordered to accept vanaprastha
life and go to the forest and then accept sannyasa. That is the perfection
of life. From the very beginning of life, those who are gjitendriya, who
cannot control their senses, are educated only for sense gratification, as
we have seen in the Western countries. Thus the entire duration of a life
of even one hundred years is wasted and misused, and at the time of
death one transmigrates to another body, which may not be human. At
the end of one hundred years, one who has not acted as a human being in
a life of tapasya (austerity and penance) must certainly be embodied
again in a body like those of cats, dogs and hogs. Therefore this life of

lusty desires and sense gratification is extremely risky.

TEXT 9
को PRY पुमान्सक्तमात्मानमजितेन्द्रियः |
खेदपारटदेबद्धयुत्सदेत ff ॥ ९ ॥
ko grhesu puman saktam
atmanam ajitendriyah
sneha-pasair drdhair baddham
utsaheta vimocitum

. kah—what; grhesu—to household life; puman—man; saktam—very
much attached; atmanam —his own self, the soul; gjita-indriyah—who
has not conquered the senses; sneha-pasaih—by the ropes of affection;
drdhaih—very strong; baddham—bound hand and foot; utsaheta—is

able; vimocitum—to liberate from material bondage.


--- Page 19 ---
Text 9] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 13
TRANSLATION

What person too attached to household life due to being unable
to control his senses can liberate himself? An attached house-
holder is bound very strongly by ropes of affection for his family
[wife, children and other relatives].

PURPORT

Prahlada Maharaja’s first proposal was kaumdra dcaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan tha: “One who is sufficiently intelligent should
use the human form of body from the very beginning of life—in other
words, from the tender age of childhood —to practice the activities of
devotional service, giving up all other engagements.” Dharman
bhagavatan means the religious principle of reviving our relationship
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For this purpose Krsna per-
sonally advises, sarva-dharman parityajya mam दद्वः Saranam vraja:
“Give up all other duties and surrender unto Me.” While in the material
world we manufacture so many duties in the name of so many isms, but
our actual duty is to free ourselves from the cycle of birth, death, old age
and disease. For this purpose, one must first be liberated from material
bondage, and especially from household life. Household life is actually a
kind of license for a materially attached person by which to enjoy sense
gratification under regulative principles. Otherwise there is no need of
entering household life.

Before entering household life, one should be trained as a brahmacari,
living under the care of the guru, whose place is known as the guru-kula.
Brahmacari guru-kule vasan danto guror hitam (Bhag. 7.12.1). From
the very beginning, a brahmacari is trained to sacrifice everything for
the benefit of the guru. A brahmacariis advised to go begging alms door
to door, addressing all women as mother, and whatever he collects goes to
the benefit of the guru. In this way he learns how to control his senses ~
and sacrifice everything for the guru. When he is fully trained, if he
likes he is allowed to marry. Thus he is not an ordinary grhastha who has
learned only how to satisfy his senses. A trained grhastha can gradually
give up household life and go to the forest to become increasingly en-
lightened in spiritual life and at last take sannyasa. Prahlada Maharaja
explained to his father that to be freed from all material anxieties one


--- Page 20 ---
14 Srimad-Bhigavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
should go to the forest. Hitvatma-patarn grham andha-kipam. One
should give up his household, which is a place for going further and
further down into the darkest regions of material existence. The first ad-
vice, therefore, is that one must give up household life (grham andha-
कव्याः). However, if one prefers to remain in the dark well of household
life because of uncontrolled senses, he becomes increasingly entangled
by ropes of affection for his wife, children, servants, house, money and
so on. Such a person cannot attain liberation from material bondage.
Therefore children should be taught from the very beginning of life to
be first-class brahmacaris. Then it will be possible for them to give up
household life in the future.

To return home, back to Godhead, one must be completely free from
material attachment. Therefore, bhakti-yoga means vairagya-vidya, the
art that can help one develop a distaste for material enjoyment.

vasudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogah prayojitah
janayaty asu vairagyam
JjAdnar ca yad ahaitukam
“By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Sri
Krsna, one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment
from the world.” (Bhag. 1.2.7) If one engages in devotional service
from the beginning of life, he easily attains vairagya-vidya, or asakti,
detachment, and becomes jitendriya, the controller of his senses. One
who perfectly engages in devotional service is therefore called gosvami or
svami, master of the senses. Unless one is master of the senses, he should
not accept the renounced order of life, sannydsa. A strong inclination for
sense enjoyment is the cause of the material body. Without full knowl-
edge one cannot be unattached to material enjoyment, but as long as one
is not in that position one is not fit to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 10
को न्वर्थवष्णां विसृजेत्‌ प्राणेभ्योऽपि य ईप्सितः ।
यं क्रीणात्यसुभिः ग्रषठसतस्करः सेवको बणिक्‌ ॥१०॥


--- Page 21 ---
Text 10] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 15
ko nv artha-trsnanm visrjet
pranebhyo pi ya ipsitah
yarn krinaty asubhih presthais
taskarah sevako vanik

kah—who; nu—indeed; artha-trsnam—a strong desire to acquire
money; visjjet—can give up; pranebhyah—than life; api—indeed;
yah—which; ipsitah—more desired; yam —which; krinati—tries to ac-
quire; asubhih—with his own life; presthaih—very dear; taskarah—a
thief; sevakah—a professional servant; vanik—a merchant.

TRANSLATION

Money is so dear that one conceives of money as being sweeter
than honey. Therefore, who can give up the desire to accumulate
money, especially in household life? Thieves, professional ser-
vants [soldiers] and merchants try to acquire money even by risk-
ing their very dear lives.

PURPORT

How money can be dearer than life is indicated in this verse. Thieves
may enter the house of a rich man to steal money at the risk of their
lives. Because of trespassing, they may be killed by guns or attacked by
watchdogs, but still they try to commit burglary. Why do they risk their
lives? Only to get some money. Similarly, a professional soldier is
recruited into the army, and he accepts such service, with the risk of
dying on the battlefield, only for the sake of money. In the same way,
merchants go from one country to another on boats at the risk of their
lives, or they dive into the water of the sea to collect pearls and valuable
gems. Thus it is practically proved —and everyone will admit—that
money is sweeter than honey. One may risk everything to acquire
money, and this is especially true of rich men who are too attached to
household life. Formerly, of course, the members of the higher castes—
the brahmanas, ksatriyas and vaisyas (everyone but the sidras) —were
trained in the guru-kula to adhere to a life of renunciation and sense
control by practicing brahmacarya and mystic yoga. Then they were
allowed to enter household life. There have consequently been many


--- Page 22 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
instances in which great kings and emperors have given up household
life. Although they were extremely opulent and were the masters of
kingdoms, they could give up all their possessions because they were
trained early as brahmacaris. Prahlada Maharaja’s advice is therefore
very appropriate:
kaumara dcaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabharih manusari janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
“One who is sufficiently intelligent should use the human form of body
from the very beginning of life—in other words, from the tender age of
childhood —to practice the activities of devotional service, giving up all
other engagements. The human body is most rarely achieved, and al-
though temporary like other bodies, it is meaningful because in human
life one can perform devotional service. Even a slight amount of sincere
devotional service can give one complete perfection.” Human society
should take advantage of this instruction.
TEXTS 11-13
कथं प्रियाया अलुकम्पितायाः
सङ्गं रस्यं रुचिरां च मन्त्रान्‌ |
- a
सुहृत्सु तरसेहसितः शिशनां
कराश्षराणापतुरक्तचित्तः ॥११॥
पुत्रान्सरंस्ता दुहितृरदय्या
भ्रातृन्‌ खसु पिर च दीनौ |
गृहान्‌ मनोज्ञोरुपरिच्छदां च
THY স্তব্মাঃ पुभृत्यवर्गान्‌ ।।१२॥
त्यजेत कोशस्कृदिवेहमानः
कर्माणि लोभादविदस्तकामः |
=
ओपरथ्यजेहं बहु मन्यमानः
कथं विरज्येत दुरन्तमोहः ॥१२॥


--- Page 23 ---
Text 13] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 17
kathar priyaya anukampitayah
sarigarh rahasyarn rucirams ca mantran
suhrtsu tat-sneha-sitah Sisanarn
kalaksaranam anurakta-cittah
putran smararis ta duhitfr hrdayya
bhratrn svasrr va pitarau ca dinau
grhan manojiioru-paricchadams ca
vrttis ca kulyah pasu-bhrtya-vargan
tyajeta kosas-krd ivehamanah
karmani lobhad avitrpta-kamah
aupasthya-jaihvarin bahu-manyamanah
kathari virajyeta duranta-mohah
katham —how; priyayah—of the dearmost wife; anukampitayah—
always affectionate and compassionate; sarigam—the association;
rahasyam —solitary; ruciran—very pleasing and acceptable; ca—and;
mantran—instructions; suhrtsu—to the wife and children; tat-sneha-
sitah—being bound by their affection; $iSitn@m—to the small children;
kala-aksaranam —speaking in broken language; anurakta-cittah—a
person whose mind is attracted; putran—the sons; smaran—thinking
of; tah—them; duhitrh—the daughters (married and staying at the
homes of their husbands); hrdayyah—always situated in the core of the
heart; bhratrn—the brothers; 5005700 va —or the sisters; pitarau—father
and mother; ca—and; dinau—who in old age are mostly invalids;
grhan—household affairs; manojia—very attractive; uru—much;
paricchadan—furniture; ca—and; vrttih—big sources of income (in-
dustry, business); ca—and; kulyah—connected with the family; pasu—
of animals (cows, elephants and other household animals); bhrtya—ser-
vants and maidservants; vargan—groups; tyajeta—can give up; kosah-
krt—the silkworm; iva—like; thamanah—performing; karmani—dif-
ferent activities; lobhat—because of insatiable desires; avitrpta-
kamah—whose increasing desires are not satisfied; aupasthya—
pleasure from the genitals; jathvam—and the tongue; bahu-
manyamanah—considering as very important; katham—how;
virajyeta—is able to give up; duranta-mohah—Dbeing in great illusion.


--- Page 24 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION

How can a person who is most affectionate to his family, the core
of his heart being always filled with their pictures, give up their
association? Specifically, a wife is always very kind and sym-
pathetic and always pleases her husband in a solitary place. Who
could give up the association of such a dear and affectionate wife?
Small children talk in broken language, very pleasing to hear, and
their affectionate father always thinks of their sweet words. How
could he give up their association? One’s elderly parents and one’s
sons and daughters are also very dear. A daughter is especially dear
to her father, and while living at her husband’s house she is always
in his mind. Who could give up that association? Aside from this,
in household affairs there are many decorated items of household
furniture, and there are also animals and servants. Who could give
up such comforts? The attached householder is like a silkworm,
which weaves a cocoon in which it becomes imprisoned, unable to
get out. Simply for the satisfaction of two important senses—the
genitals and the tongue —one is bound by material conditions.
How can one escape?

PURPORT

In household affairs the first attraction is the beautiful and pleasing
wife, who increases household attraction more and more. One enjoys his
wife with two prominent sense organs, namely the tongue and the
genitals. The wife speaks very sweetly. This is certainly an attraction.
Then she prepares very palatable foods to satisfy the tongue, and when
the tongue is satisfied one gains strength in the other sense organs, es-
pecially the genitals. Thus the wife gives pleasure in sexual intercourse.
Household life means sex life (yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukhari hi
tuccham). This is encouraged by the tongue. Then there are children. A
baby gives pleasure by speaking sweet words in broken language, and
when the sons and daughters are grown up one becomes involved in their
education and marriage. Then there are one’s own father and mother to
be taken care of, and one also becomes concerned with the social at-
mosphere and with pleasing his brothers and sisters. A man becomes in-
creasingly entangled in household affairs, so much so that leaving them


--- Page 25 ---
Text 14] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 19
becomes almost impossible. Thus the household becomes grham andha-
kapam, a dark well into which the man has fallen. For such a man to get
out is extremely difficult unless he is helped by a strong person, the
spiritual master, who helps the fallen person with the strong rope of
spiritual instructions. A fallen person should take advantage of this rope,
and then the spiritual master, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna, will take him out of the dark well.
TEXT 14
FR वियन्‌ निजायु-
नै बुष्यतेऽथं fied प्रमत्तः ।
<
सवत्र तापत्रयदुःखितात्मा
निर्वियते ন खङ्टम्बरामः ॥१४॥
kutumba-posaya viyan nijayur
na budhyate ’rtham vihatarh pramattah
sarvatra tapa-traya-duhkhitatma
nirvidyate na sva-kutumba-ramah
kutumba —of family members; [05090 -- 101 the maintenance; viyat—
declining; nija-ayuh—his lifetime; na—not; budhyate—understands;
artham —the interest or purpose of life; vihatam —spoiled; pramattah—
being mad in material conditions; sarvatra—everywhere; tapa-traya—
by the threefold miserable conditions (adhyatmika, adhidaivika and
adhibautika); duhkhita—being distressed; atma—himself; nirvidyate-
—becomes remorseful; na—not; sva-kutumba-ramah —enjoying simply
by maintaining the members of the family.
TRANSLATION
One who is too attached cannot understand that he is wasting his

valuable life for the maintenance of his family. He also fails to
understand that the purpose of human life, a life suitable for
realization of the Absolute Truth, is being imperceptibly spoiled.
However, he is very cleverly attentive to seeing that not a single


--- Page 26 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
farthing is lost by mismanagement. Thus although an attached
person in material existence always suffers from threefold mis-
eries, he does not develop a distaste for the way of material exis-
tence.
PURPORT

A foolish man does not understand the values of human life, nor does
he understand how he is wasting his valuable life simply for the mainte-
nance of his family members. He is expert in calculating the loss of
pounds, shillings and pence, but he is so foolish that he does not know
how much money he is losing, even according to material considerations.
Canakya Pandita gives the example that a moment of life cannot be
purchased in exchange for millions of dollars. A foolish person, however,
wastes such a valuable life without knowing how much he is losing, even
according to monetary calculations. Although a materialistic person is ex-
pert in calculating costs and doing business, he does not realize that he is
misusing his costly life for want of knowledge. Even though such a ma-
terialistic person is always suffering threefold miseries, he is not intelli-
gent enough to cease his materialistic way of life.

TEXT 15
N
वित्तेषु नित्याभिनिविष्टचेता
. . ९
विद्वांश्च दोषं परवित्तहतंः |
रतये बाथाप्यजितेन्द्रियस्त-
दञशान्तकामो हरते FTE ॥१५॥
vittesu nityabhinivista-ceta
vidvarn$ ca dosam para-vitta-hartuh
pretyeha vathapy ajitendriyas tad
asanta-kamo harate kutumbi

vittesu —in material wealth; nitya-abhinivista-cetah—whose mind is
always absorbed; vidvan—having learned; ca —also; dosam —the fault;
para-vitta-hartuh—of one who steals the money of others by cheating or
by transactions on the black market; pretya—after dying; iha—in this


--- Page 27 ---
Text 16] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 21
material world; va—or; athapi—still; ajita-indriyah —because of being
unable to control the senses; tat—that; asanta-kamah—whose desires
are unsatiated; harate —steals; kutumbi—too fond of his family.
TRANSLATION
If a person too attached to the duties of family maintenance is
unable to control his senses, the core of his heart is immersed in
how to accumulate money. Although he knows that one who takes
the wealth of others will be punished by the law of the govern-
ment, and by the laws of Yamaraja after death, he continues cheat-
ing others to acquire money.
PURPORT
Especially in these days, people do not believe in a next life or in the
court of Yamaraja and the various punishments of the sinful. But at least
one should know that one who cheats others to acquire money will be
punished by the laws of the government. Nonetheless, people do not care
about the laws of this life or those governing the next. Despite whatever
knowledge one has, one cannot stop his sinful activities if he is unable to
control his senses.
TEXT 16
विद्वानपीत्थं दनुजाः ङटम्बं
- a
पुष्णन्खलोकाय न कर्पते वें |
यः खीयपारक्यविमिनमाव-
स्तमः प्रपद्येत यथा विमूढः 1280
vidvan apittharn danwjah 10818710077
pusnan sva-lokdya na kalpate vai
yah sviya-parakya-vibhinna-bhavas
tamah prapadyeta yatha vimiadhah
vidvan —knowing (the inconvenience of material existence, especially
in household life); api—although; ittham—thus; danu-jah—O sons of
demons; kutumbam—the family members or extended family members


--- Page 28 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
(like one’s community, society, nation or union of nations); pusnan —
providing with all the necessities of life; sva-lokdya—in understanding
himself; na—not; kalpate—capable; wvai—indeed; yah—he who;
sviya—my own; pdrakya—belonging to others; vibhinna—separate;
bhavah—having a conception of life; tamah—nothing but darkness;
prapadyeta—enters; yatha—just as; vimidhah—a person without
education, or one who is like an animal.
TRANSLATION

O my friends, sons of demons! In this material world, even
those who are apparently advanced in education have the propen-
sity to consider, “This is mine, and that is for others.” Thus they
are always engaged in providing the necessities of life to their
families in a limited conception of family life, just like uneducated
cats and dogs. They are unable to take to spiritual knowledge; in-
stead, they are bewildered and overcome by ignorance.

PURPORT

In human society there are attempts to educate the human being, but
for animal society there is no such system, nor are animals able to be
educated. Therefore animals and unintelligent men are called vimadha,
or ignorant, bewildered, whereas an educated person is called vidvan.
The real vidvan is one who tries to understand his own position within
this material world. For example, when Sanatana Gosvami submitted to
the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, his first question was ‘%e
ami’, ‘kene amaya jare tapa-traya’. In other words, he wanted to know
his constitutional position and why he was suffering from the threefold
miseries of material existence. This is the process of education. If one
does not ask, “Who am I? What is the goal of my life?” but instead
follows the same animal propensities as cats and dogs, what is the use of
his education? As discussed in the previous verse, a living being is en-
trapped by his fruitive activities, exactly like a silkworm trapped in its
own cocoon. Foolish persons are generally encaged by their fruitive ac-
tions (karma) because of a strong desire to enjoy this material world.
Such attracted persons become involved in society, community and
nation and waste their time, not having profited from having obtained
human forms. Especially in this age, Kali-yuga, great leaders, politicians,


--- Page 29 ---
Text 18] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 23
philosophers and scientists are all engaged in foolish activities, thinking,
“This is mine, and this is yours.” The scientists invent nuclear weapons
and collaborate with the big leaders to protect the interests of their own
nation or society. In this verse, however, it is clearly stated that despite
their so-called advanced knowledge, they actually have the same men-
tality as cats and dogs. As cats, dogs and other animals, not knowing their
true interest in life, become increasingly involved in ignorance, the so-
called educated person who does not know his own self-interest or the
true goal of life becomes increasingly involved in materialism. Therefore
Prahlada Maharaja advises everyone to follow the principles of var-
nasrama-dharma. Specifically, at a certain point one must give up family
life and take to the renounced order of life to cultivate spiritual knowl-
edge and thus become liberated. This is further discussed in the follow-
ing verses.
TEXTS 17-18
यतो न कचित्‌ क्र च FANG वा
दीनः खमात्मानमखं समथः |
bY ৬ oN
विमोचितुं कामदशां विहार्‌-
3
क्रीडाखरगो यन्निगडो विसगेः ॥ १५७
a
ततो वबिद्रात्‌ परिहत्य den
दैत्येषु सङ्गं विषयात्मकेषु |
उपेत नारायणमादिदेवं
An -
स॒ुक्तसङ्खरिषितोऽपवगः 12410
yato na kascit kva ca kutracid va
dinah svam atmanam alam samarthah
vimociturn kama-drsam vihara-
krida-mrgo yan-nigado visargah
tato vidurat parihrtya daitya
daityesu sarigari visayatmakesu
upeta narayanam dadi-devari
sa mukta-sangair isito ‘pavargah


--- Page 30 ---
24 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6

yatah—because; na—never; kascit—anyone; kva—in any place;
ca—also; kutracit—at any time; va—or; dinah—having a poor fund of
knowledge; svam—own; atmanam—self; alam —exceedingly;
samarthah—able; vimocitum—to liberate; kama-drsam—of lusty
women; vihdra—in the sexual enjoyment; krida-mrgah—a playboy;
yat—in whom; nigadah—which is the shackle of material bondage;
visargah—the expansions of family relationships; tatah—in such
circumstances; vidarat—from far away; parihrtya—giving up;
daityah—O my friends, sons of the demons; daityesu—among the
demons; sarigam —association; visaya-atma-kesu—who are too addicted
to sense enjoyment; upeta—one should approach; narayanam—Lord
Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adi-devam—the origin
of all the demigods; sah—He; mukta-sarigaih—by the association of
liberated persons; isitah—desired; apavargah—the path of liberation.

TRANSLATION

My dear friends, O sons of the demons, it is certain that no one
bereft of knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead has
been able to liberate himself from material bondage at any time or
in any country. Rather, those bereft of knowledge of the Lord are
bound by the material laws. They are factually addicted to sense
gratification, and their target is woman. Indeed, they are actually
playthings in the hands of attractive women. Victimized by such a
conception of life, they become surrounded by children, grand-
children and great-grandchildren, and thus they are shackled to
material bondage. Those who are very much addicted to this con-
ception of life are called demons. Therefore, although you are
sons of demons, keep aloof from such persons and take shelter of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana, the origin of all
the demigods, because the ultimate goal for the devotees of
Narayana is liberation from the bondage of material existence.

PURPORT

Prahlada Maharaja has maintained the philosophical point of view that
one should give up the dark well of family life and go to the forest to take
shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
(hitvatma-patarn  grham andha-kiparin vanam gato yad dharim


--- Page 31 ---
Text 19] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 25
asrayeta). In this verse also, he stresses the same point. In the history of
human society, no one, at any time or any place, has been liberated be-
cause of too much affection and attachment for his family. Even in those
who are apparently very educated, the same family attachment is there.
They cannot give up the association of their families, even in old age or
invalidity, for they are attached to sense enjoyment. As we have several
times discussed, yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukhar hi tuccham: so-
called householders are simply attracted by sexual enjoyment. Thus they
keep themselves shackled in family life, and furthermore they want
their children to be shackled in the same way. Playing the parts of play-
boys in the hands of women, they glide down to the darkest regions of
material existence. Adanta-gobhir visatarh tamisrarih punah punas
carvita-carvananam. Because they are unable to control their senses,
they continue a life of chewing the chewed and therefore descend to the
darkest material regions. One should give up the association of such
demons and adhere to the association of devotees. Thus one will be able
to be liberated from material bondage.
TEXT 19
न ह्यच्युतं प्रीणयतो बह्मायासाऽसुरात्मजाः ।
आत्मत्वात्‌ सरवंभूतानां सिद्धत्वादिह ada: nga
na hy acyutarn prinayato
bahv-ayaso ’suratmajah
atmatvat sarva-bhitanar
siddhatvad iha sarvatah
na—not; hi—indeed; acyutam—the infallible Supreme Personality
of Godhead; prinayatah—satisfying; bahu—much; ayasah—endeavor;
asura-atma-jah—O sons of demons; atmatvat—because of being in-
timately related as the Supersoul; sarva-bhitanam—of all living en-
tities; siddhatvat—because of being established; iha—in this world;
sarvatah—in all directions, in all times and from all angles of vision.
TRANSLATION
My dear sons of demons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Narayana, is the original Supersoul, the father of all living entities.


--- Page 32 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
Consequently there are no impediments to pleasing Him or
worshiping Him under any conditions, whether one be a child or
an old man. The relationship between the living entities and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is always a fact, and therefore
there is no difficulty in pleasing the Lord.
PURPORT

One may ask, “One 15 certainly very attached to family life, but if one
gives up family life to be attached to the service of the Lord, one must
undergo the same endeavor and trouble. Therefore, what is the benefit of
taking the trouble to engage in the service of the Lord?” This is not a
valid objection. The Lord asserts in Bhagavad-gita (14.4):

sarva-yonisu kaunteya
mitrtayah sambhavanti yah
tasarn brahma mahad yonir
aha bija-pradah pita

“It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunti, are made
possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving
father.” The Supreme Lord, Narayana, is the seed-giving father of all
living entities because the living entities are parts and parcels of the
Supreme Lord (mamaivarso . . . jiva-bhitah). As there is no difficulty in
establishing the intimate relationship between a father and son, there is
no difficulty in reestablishing the natural, intimate relationship between
Narayana and the living entities. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate
mahato bhayat: if one performs even very slight devotional service,
Narayana is always ready to save one from the greatest danger. The
definite example is Ajamila. Ajamila separated himself from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by performing many sinful activities
and was condemned by Yamaraja to be very severely punished, but be-
cause at the time of death he chanted the name of Narayana, although he
was calling not for the Supreme Lord Narayana but for his son named
Narayana, he was saved from the hands of Yamaraja. Therefore, pleasing
Narayana does not require as much endeavor as pleasing one’s family,
community and nation. We have seen important political leaders killed
for a slight discrepancy in their behavior. Therefore pleasing one’s


--- Page 33 ---
Text 23] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 27
society, family, community and nation is extremely difficult. Pleasing
Narayana, however, is not at all difficult; it is very easy.

One’s duty is to revive one’s relationship with Narayana. A slight en-
deavor in this direction will make the attempt successful, whereas one
will never be successful in pleasing his so-called family, society and
nation, even if one endeavors to sacrifice his life. The simple endeavor
involved in the devotional service of sravanari kirtanari visnoh, hearing
and chanting the holy name of the Lord, can make one successful in
pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
has therefore bestowed His blessings by saying, param vijayate $ri-
krsna-sarnkirtanam: ‘“All glories to Sri Krsna 50780710720” If one wants
to derive the actual benefit from this human form, he must take to the
chanting of the holy name of the Lord.

TEXTS 20-23
परावरेषु भूतेषु ब्रद्मान्तस्थावरादिषु ।
भौतिकेषु विकारेषु भूतेष्वथ महत्सु च ॥२०॥
गुणेषु गुणसाम्ये च गुणव्यतिकरे तथा ।
एक एव परो ह्यात्मा भगवानीश्वरोऽव्ययः ॥२१॥
TERESI दृश्यरूपेण च खयम्‌ |
व्याप्यव्यापकनिर्देश्यो Af श्योऽविकल्पितः।।२२॥
केवलाचुमवानन्दखरूपः परमेश्वरः |
हितैश्वयं ई i
माययान्ताहतश्च यते गुणसगंया ॥२३॥
paravaresu bhiitesu
brahmanta-sthavaradisu
bhautikesu vikaresu
bhitesv atha mahatsu ca
gunesu guna-simye ca
guna-vyatikare tatha


--- Page 34 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
eka eva paro hy atma
bhagavan ৮৫7০ vyayah
pratyag-atma-svarupena
drSya-ripena ca svayam
vyapya-vyapaka-nirdesyo
hy anirdesyo vikalpitah
kevalanubhavananda-
svaripah paramesvarah
mayayantarhitaisvarya
tyate guna-sargaya
para-avaresu—in exalted or hellish conditions of life; bhitesu—in
the living beings; brahma-anta—ending with Lord Brahma; sthavara-
adisu—beginning with the nonmoving forms of life, the trees and
plants; bhautikesu—of the material elements; vikaresu—in the transfor-
mations; bhitesu—in the five gross elements of material nature; atha—
moreover; mahatsu—in the mahat-tattva, the total material energy;
ca—also; gunesu—in the modes of material nature; guna-samye—in an
equilibrium of material qualities; ca—and; guna-vyatikare—in the
uneven manifestation of the modes of material nature; tatha—as well;
ekah—one; eva—only; parah—transcendental; hi—indeed; @tma—the
original source; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
Svarah—the controller; avyayah—without deteriorating; pratyak—in-
ner; atma-svaripena—by His original constitutional position as the
Supersoul; drsya-ripena—by His visible forms; ca—also; svayam—
personally; vyapya—pervaded; vyapaka—all-pervading; nirdesyah—
to be described; hi—certainly; anirdesyah—not to be described (because
of fine, subtle existence); avikalpitah—without differentiation;
kevala—only; anubhava-ananda-svaripah—whose form is blissful and
full of knowledge; parama-ivarah—the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the supreme ruler; mdyaya—by maya, the illusory energy;
antarhita—covered; aiSvaryah—whose unlimited opulence; tyate—is
mistaken as; guna-sargayd—the interaction of the material modes of
nature.


--- Page 35 ---
Text 23] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 29
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller,
who is infallible and indefatigable, is present in different forms of
life, from the inert living beings [sthavara], such as the plants, to
Brahma, the foremost created living being. He is also present in
the varieties of material creations and in the material elements, the
total material energy and the modes of material nature [sattva-
guna, rajo-guna and tamo-gunal, as well as the unmanifested ma-
terial nature and the false ego. Although He is one, He is present
everywhere, and He is also the transcendental Supersoul, the cause
of all causes, who is present as the observer in the cores of the
hearts of all living entities. He is indicated as that which is per-
vaded and as the all-pervading Supersoul, but actually He cannot
be indicated. He is changeless and undivided. He is simply per-
ceived as the supreme sac-cid-ananda [eternity, knowledge and
bliss]. Being covered by the curtain of the external energy, to the
atheist He appears nonexistent.

PURPORT

Not only is the Supreme Personality of Godhead present as the Super-
soul of all living entities; at the same time, He pervades everything in
the entire creation. He exists in all circumstances and at all times. He ex-
ists in the heart of Lord Brahma and also in the cores of the hearts of the
hogs, dogs, trees, plants and so on. He is present everywhere. He is
present not only in the heart of the living entity, but also in material
things, even in the atoms, protons and electrons being explored by ma-
terial scientists.

The Lord is present in three features—as Brahman, Paramatma and
Bhagavan. Because He is present everywhere, He is described as sarvarm
khaly idarh brahma. Visnu exists beyond Brahman. Bhagavad-gita con-
firms that Krsna, by His Brahman feature, is all-pervading (maya tatam
idan sarvam), but Brahman depends upon Krsna (brahmano hi
pratisthaham). Without Krsna, there could be no existence of Brahman
or Paramiatma. Therefore, Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, is the ultimate realization of the Absolute Truth. Although He is


--- Page 36 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
present as the Paramatma in the core of everyone’s heart, He is nonethe-
less one, either as an individual or as the all-pervading Brahman.

The supreme cause is Krsna, and devotees who have surrendered to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead can realize Him and His presence
within the universe and within the atom (andantara-stha-paramanu-
cayantara-stham). This realization is possible only for devotees who
have fully surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord; for others it is not
possible. This is confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (7.14):

daivi hy esa gunamayi
mama maya duratyaya
mam eva ye prapadyante
mayam 6127 taranti te
The process of surrender in a devotional attitude is accepted by a fortu-
nate living being. After wandering through many varieties of life on
many planetary systems, when one comes to the real understanding of
the Absolute Truth by the grace of a devotee, one surrenders to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(bahanarh janmanam ante jiianavan mari prapadyate).

Prahlada Maharaja’s class friends, who were born of Daitya families,
thought that realizing the Absolute was extremely difficult. Indeed, we
have experience that many, many people say this very thing. Actually,
however, this is not so. The Absolute, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, is most intimately related to all living entities. Therefore if one
understands the Vaisnava philosophy, which explains how He is present
everywhere and how He acts everywhere, to worship the Supreme Lord
or to realize Him is not at all difficult. Realization of the Lord, however,
is possible only in the association of devotees. Therefore Sri Caitanya
Mahiprabhu, in His teachings to Rapa Gosvami said (00.
Madhya 19.151):

brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
The living entity in the material condition wanders through many
varieties of life and many varieties of circumstances, but if he comes in


--- Page 37 ---
Text 24] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 31
contact with a pure devotee and is intelligent enough to take instructions
from the pure devotee regarding the process of devotional service, he can
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin of Brahman
and Paramatma, without difficulty. In this regard, Srila Madhvacarya
says:
antaryamt pratyag-atma
vyaptah kalo harih smrtah
prakrtya tamasavrtatvat
harer aiSvaryar na jRayate
The Lord is present as antaryami in everyone’s heart and is visible in the
individual soul covered by a body. Indeed, He is everywhere at every
time and every condition, but because He is covered by the curtain of
material energy, to an ordinary person there appears to be no God.
TEXT 24
= + सौ
तसात्‌ सर्वेषु भूतेषु दयां THT सोहदम्‌ |
भावमासुर यन्य॒च्य यया तुष्यत्यधाक्षजः Re
tasmat sarvesu bhitesu
dayam kuruta sauhrdam
bhavam asuram unmucya
yaya tusyaty adhoksajah
tasmat—therefore; sarvesu—to all;  bhiatesu—living entities;
dayam—mercy; kuruta—show; sauhrdam —friendliness; bhavam—the
attitude; asuram —of the demons (who separate friends and enemies);
unmucya—giving up; yayd—by which; tusyati—is satisfied;
adhoksajah—the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the perception of the
senses.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear young friends born of demons, please act in
such a way that the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the conception
of material knowledge, will be satisfied. Give up your demoniac


--- Page 38 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
nature and act without enmity or duality. Show mercy to all living
entities by enlightening them in devotional service, thus becoming
their well-wishers.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagaiwad-gita (18.55), bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah: “One can understand the Supreme Per-
sonality as He is only by devotional service.” Prahlada Maharaja
ultimately instructed his clas friends, the sons of the demons, to accept
the process of devotional service by preaching the science of Krsna con-
sciousness to everyone. Preaching is the best service to the Lord. The
Lord will immediately be extremely satisfied with one who engages in
this service of preaching Krsna consciousness. This is confirmed by the
Lord Himself in Bhagavaa-gita (18.69). Na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamah: “There is no servant in this world more dear
to Me than he, nor will there ever be one more dear.” If one sincerely
tries his best to spread Krsm consciousness by preaching the glories of
the Lord and His supremacy, even if he is imperfectly educated, he be-
comes the dearmost servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
is bhakti. As one performs this service for humanity, without discrimina-
tion between friends and enemies, the Lord becomes satisfied, and the
mission of one’s life is fulfiled. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore ad-
vised everyone to become a guru-devotee and preach Krsna conscious-
ness (yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa). That is the easiest way to
realize the Supreme Persorality of Godhead. By such preaching, the
preacher becomes satisfied, and those to whom he preaches are also
satisfied. This 15 the process of bringing peace and tranquility to the en-
tire world.
bhoktirarh yajria-tapasarn
sara-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdarh sarva-bhitanarn
JAdava mam santim rcchati
One is expected to understand these three formulas of knowledge con-
cerning the Supreme Lord —that He is the supreme enjoyer, that He is
the proprietor of everything, and that He is the best well-wisher and


--- Page 39 ---
Text 25] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 33
friend of everyone. A preacher should personally understand these
truths and preach them to everyone. Then there will be peace and tran-
quility all over the world.

The word sauhrdam (“friendliness”) is very significant in this verse.
People are generally ignorant of Krsna consciousness, and therefore to
become their best well-wisher one should teach them about Krsna con-
sciousness without discrimination. Since the Supreme Lord, Visnu, is
situated in the core of everyone’s heart, every body is a temple of Visnu.
One should not misuse this understanding as an excuse for such words as
daridra-narayana. If Narayana lives in the house of a daridra, a poor
man, this does not mean that Narayana becomes poor. He lives every-
where—in the houses of the poor and those of the rich—but in all
circumstances He remains Narayana; to think that He becomes either
poor or rich is a material calculation. He is always sad-aiSvarya-purna,
full in six opulences, in all circumstances.

TEXT 25
तष्टे च तत्र किंमलम्यमनन्त आये
किं तैगणव्यतिकरादिह ये खसिद्धाः।
धर्मादयः किमगुणेन च waa
सारंजषां चरणयोरुपगायतां नः ॥२५॥
tuste ca tatra kim alabhyam ananta adye
क्रः tair guna-vyatikarad iha ye sva-siddhah
dharmadayah kim agunena ca kanksitena
sara jusam caranayor upagdayatam nah

tuste—when satisfied; ca—also; tatra—that; kim —what; ala-
bhyam —unobtainable; anante—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
adye—the original source of everything, the cause of all causes; kim —
what need; taih —with them; guna-vyatikarat—due to the actions of the
modes of material nature; tha—in this world; ye—which; sva-sid-
dhah—automatically achieved; dharma-ddayah—the three principles
of material advancement, namely religion, economic development and
sense gratification; kim —what need; agunena—with liberation into the
Supreme; ca—and; kariksitena—desired; saram—essence; jusam—


--- Page 40 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
relishing; caranayoh—of the two lotus feet of the Lord; upagayatam—
who glorify the qualities of the Lord; nah—of us.

TRANSLATION

Nothing is unobtainable for devotees who have satisfied the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the cause of all causes,
the original source of everything. The Lord is the reservoir of un-
limited spiritual qualities. For devotees, therefore, who are tran-
scendental to the modes of material nature, what is the use of
following the principles of religion, economic development, sense
gratification and liberation, which are all automatically obtainable
under the influence of the modes of nature? We devotees always
glorify the lotus feet of the Lord, and therefore we need not ask
for anything in terms of dharma, kama, artha and moksa.

PURPORT

In an advanced civilization, people are eager to be religious, to be
economically well situated, to satisfy their senses to the fullest extent,
and at last to attain liberation. However, these are not to be magnified as
desirable. Indeed, for a devotee these are all very easily available.
Bilvamangala Thakura said, muktih svayam mukulitanjali sevate sman
dharmartha-kama-gatayah samaya-pratiksah. Liberation always stands
at the door of a devotee, ready to carry out his orders. Material advance-
ment in religion, economic development, sense gratification and libera-
tion simply wait to serve a devotee at the first opportunity. A devotee is
already in a transcendental position; he does not need further qualifica-
tions to be liberated. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (14.26), sa gunan
samatityaitan brahma-bhiiyaya kalpate: a devotee is transcendental to
the actions and reactions of the three modes of material nature because
he is situated on the Brahman platform.

Prahlada Maharaja said, agunena ca kariksitena: if one is engaged in
the transcendental loving service of the lotus feet of the Lord, he does
not need anything in terms of dharma, artha, kama or moksa. In
Srimad-Bhagavatam, therefore, in the beginning of the transcendental
literature, it is said, dharmah projjhita-kaitavo ‘tra. Dharma, artha,
kama and moksa are kaitava—{false and unnecessary. Nirmatsaranam,


--- Page 41 ---
Text 26] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 35
persons who are completely transcendental to the material activities of
separateness, who make no distinction between “mine” and “yours,” but
who simply engage in the devotional service of the Lord, are actually fit
to accept bhagavata-dharma (dharman bhagavatan iha). Because they
are nirmatsara, not jealous of anyone, they want to make others devo-
tees, even their enemies. In this regard, Srila Madhvacarya remarks,
kariksate moksa-gam api sukhar nakarksato yatha. Devotees are not
desirous of any material happiness, including the happiness derived
from liberation. This is called anyabhilasita-sinyam jrana-karmady-
anavrtam. Karmis desire material happiness, and jiianis desire libera-
tion, but a devotee does not desire anything; he is simply satisfied by
rendering transcendental loving service at the lotus feet of the Lord and
glorifying Him everywhere by preaching, which is his life and soul.
TEXT 26
५
धमारथकाम इति योऽभिदितस्िवगं
EN
ईशा त्रयी नयदमौ विविधा च নাবাঁ।
मन्ये तदेतदखिलं निगमस्य सतयं
WRAY] खसुहदः परमस्य पुंसः ॥२६॥
dharmartha-kama iti yo ’bhihitas tri-varga
thsa tray naya-damau vividha ca varta
manye tad etad 0171077, nigamasya satya
svatmarpanarm sva-suhrdah paramasya purisah
dharma —religion; artha—economic development; kdamah—regu-
lated sense gratification; iti—thus; yah—which; abhihitah—
prescribed; tri-vargah—the group of three; iksa—self-realization;
trayi—the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; naya—logic; damau—and the
science of law and order; vividha—varieties of; ca—also; varta—oc-
cupational duties, or one’s livelihood; manye—I consider; tat—them;
etat—these; akhilam—all; nigamasya—of the Vedas; satyam—truth;
sva-atma-arpanam—the full surrendering of one’s self; sva-suhrdah—
unto the supreme friend; paramasya—the ultimate; purisah—per-
sonality.


--- Page 42 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
TRANSLATION

Religion, economic development and sense gratification —these
are described in the Vedas as tri-varga, or three ways to salvation.
Within these three categories are education and self-realization;
ritualistic ceremonies performed according to Vedic injunction;
logic; the science of law and order; and the various means of earn-
ing one’s livelihood. These are the external subject matters of
study in the Vedas, and therefore I consider them material.
However, I consider surrender to the lotus feet of Lord Visnu to
be transcendental.

PURPORT

These instructions of Prahlada Maharaja stress the transcendental

position of devotional service. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):
mar ca yo vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiryaya kalpate

“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” One who fully engages in the devo-
tional service of the Lord is immediately raised to the transcendental
position, which is the brahma-bhiita stage. Any education or activity not
on the brahma-bhiita platform, the platform of self-realization, is con-
sidered to be material, and Prahlada Maharaja says that anything ma-
terial cannot be the Absolute Truth, for the Absolute Truth is on the
spiritual platform. This is also confirmed by Lord Krsna in Bhagavad-
gita (2.45), where He says, traigunya-visaya veda nistraigunyo
bhavarjuna: “The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes
of material nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental
to all of them.” To act on the material platform, even if one’s activities
are sanctioned by the Vedas, is not the ultimate goal of life. The ultimate
goal of life is to stay on the spiritual platform, fully surrendered to the
parama-purusa, the supreme person. This is the object of the human
mission. In summary, the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies and injunctions


--- Page 43 ---
Text 27] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 37
are not to be discounted; they are means of being promoted to the spiri-
tual platform. But if one does not come to the spiritual platform, the
Vedic ceremonies are simply a waste of time. This is confirmed in
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.8):
dharmah svanusthitah 1
visvaksena-kathasu yah
notpadayed yadi ratiri
Srama eva hi kevalam
“Duties [dharma] executed by men, regardless of occupation, are only so
much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of
the Supreme Lord.” If one very strictly performs the various duties of
religion but does not ultimately come to the platform of surrendering to
the Supreme Lord, his methods of attaining salvation or elevation are
simply a waste of time and energy.
TEXT 27
ज्ञानं तदेतदमलं दुरवापमाह
नारायणो नरसखः किल नारदाय ।
एकान्तिनां भगवतस्तद किश्चनानां
पाद्‌।रविन्द रजसाप्छतदेदिनां स्यात्‌ ।॥२७॥
Jjianarn tad etad amalarm duravapam aha
narayano nara-sakhah kila naradaya
ekantinar bhagavatas tad akificananarn
padaravinda-rajasapluta-dehinarn syat
jaanam—knowledge; tat—that; etat—this; amalam —without ma-
terial contamination; duravapam—very difficult to understand (without
the mercy of a devotee); adha—explained; narayanah—Lord Narayana,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-sakhah—the friend of all
living entities (especially human beings); kila—certainly; naradaya—
unto the great sage Narada; ekantinam—of those who have surrendered
exclusively to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhagavatah—
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat—that (knowledge);


--- Page 44 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6
akificananam—who do not claim any material possessions; pada-
aravinda—of the lotus feet of the Lord; rajasa—by the dust; apluta—
bathed; dehinam—whose bodies; syat—is possible.
TRANSLATION

Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the well-wisher
and friend of all living entities, formerly explained this transcen-
dental knowledge to the great saint Narada. Such knowledge is ex-
tremely difficult to understand without the mercy of a saintly
person like Narada, but everyone who has taken shelter of
Narada’s disciplic succession can understand this confidential
knowledge.

PURPORT

It is stated here that this confidential knowledge is extremely difficult
to understand, yet it is very easy to understand if one takes shelter of a
pure devotee. This confidential knowledge is also mentioned at the end of
Bhagavad-gita, where the Lord says, sarva-dharman parityajya mam
ekarh Saranar vraja: “Abandon all varieties of religion and just sur-
render unto Me.” This knowledge is an extremely confidential secret, but
it can be understood if one approaches the Supreme Personality of God-
head through the bona fide agent, the spiritual master in the disciplic
succession from Narada. Prahlada Maharaja wanted to impress upon the
sons of the demons that although such knowledge can be understood only
by a saintly person like Narada, they should not be disappointed, for if
one takes shelter of Narada instead of material teachers, this knowledge
is possible to understand. Understanding does not depend upon high
parentage. The living entity is certainly pure on the spiritual platform,
and therefore anyone who attains the spiritual platform by the grace of
the spiritual master can also understand this confidential knowledge.

TEXT 28
शुतमेतन्मया पूवं ज्ञानं विज्ञानसंयुतम्‌ |
धमं भागवतं gE नारदाद्‌ ITA ॥२८॥
Srutam etan maya purvan
JRidnam viiidna-sarivyutam


--- Page 45 ---
Text 30] Prahlada Instructs His Demoniac Schoolmates 39
dharmari bhagavatarn suddhari
naradad deva-darsanat
srutam —heard; etat—this; maya—by me; piarvam—formerly;
jiaanam—confidential knowledge; vijidna-sariyutam—combined with
its practical application;  dharmam—transcendental religion;
bhagavatam —in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
Suddham—having nothing to do with material activities; naradat—from
the great saint Narada; deva—the Supreme Lord; darsanat—who always
sees.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja continued: I received this knowledge from
the great saint Narada Muni, who is always engaged in devotional
service. This knowledge, which is called bhagavata-dharma, is
fully scientific. It is based on logic and philosophy and is free from
all material contamination.
TEXTS 29-30
श्रीदैत्यपुत्रा उचः
प्रहराद्‌ त्वं वयं चापि नर्तेऽन्यं विग्रहे गुरुम्‌ |
एताभ्यां गुरुपुत्रास्यां बाङानामपि ad ॥२९॥
बालस्यान्तः पुरस्यस्य महत्सङ्गो दुरन्वयः ।
9. 3 -
छिन्धि नः संशयं सौम्य स्याचेदि सम्मकारणम्‌।।३०॥
sri-daitya-putra icuh
prahrada tvarh vayar capi
narte 'nyarh vidmahe gurum
etabhyarn guru-putrabhyarn
balanam api hisvarau
balasyantahpura-sthasya
mahat-sarigo duranvayah
chindhi nah ৩0770800712 saumya
syac ced visrambha-karanam


--- Page 46 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 6

Sri-daitya-putrah dcuh—the sons of the demons said; prahrada—O
dear friend Prahlada; tvam—you; vayam—we; ca—and; api—also;
na—not; rte—except; anyam—any other; vidmahe—know; gurum—
spiritual master; etabhyam —these two; guru-putrabhyam—the sons of
Sukracarya; balanam—of little children; api—although; hi—indeed;
Svarau—the two controllers; balasya—of a child; antahpura-sthasya—
remaining inside the house or palace; mahat-sarigah—the association of
a great person like Narada; duranvayah—very difficult; chindhi—
please dispel; nah—our; sarisayam—doubt; saumya—O gentle one;
syat—there may be; cet—if; visrambha-karanam—cause of faith (in
your words).

TRANSLATION

The sons of the demons replied: Dear Prahlada, neither you nor
we know any teacher or spiritual master other than Sanda and
Amarka, the sons of Sukracarya. After all, we are children and
they our controllers. For you especially, who always remain within
the palace, it is very difficult to associate with a great personality.
Dear friend, most gentle one, would you kindly explain how it was
possible for you to hear Narada? Kindly dispel our doubts in this
regard.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Sixth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, “Prahlada Instructs His
Demoniac Schoolmates.”


--- Page 47 ---
CHAPTER SEVEN
What Prahlada Learned in the Womb
In this chapter, to dissipate the doubts of his class friends, the sons of the
demons, Prahlada Maharaja states how, within the womb of his mother,
he had heard from the mouth of Narada Muni, who had instructed him
in bhagavata-dharma.

When Hiranyakasipu left his kingdom and went to the mountain
known as Mandaracala to execute severe austerities, all the demons scat-
tered. Hiranyakasipu’s wife, Kayadhu, was pregnant at that time, and
the demigods, mistakenly thinking that she carried another demon in her
womb, arrested her. Their plan was that as soon as the child took birth
they would kill him. While they were taking Kayadhu to the heavenly
planets, they met Narada Muni, who stopped them from taking her away
and took her to his dasrama until Hiranyakasipu’s return. In Narada
Muni’s asrama, Kayadhu prayed for the protection of the baby in her
womb, and Narada Muni reassured her and gave her instructions on
spiritual knowledge. Taking advantage of those instructions, Prahlada
Maharaja, although a small baby within the womb, listened very
carefully. The spirit soul is always apart from the material body. There is
no change in the spiritual form of the living entity. Any person above the
bodily conception of life is pure and can receive transcendental knowl-
edge. This transcendental knowledge is devotional service, and Prahlada
Maharaja, while living in the womb of his mother, received instructions
in devotional service from Narada Muni. Any person engaged in the ser-
vice of the Lord through the instructions of a bona fide spiritual master is
immediately liberated, and being free from the clutches of maya, he is
relieved of all ignorance and material desires. The duty of everyone is to
take shelter of the Supreme Lord and thus become free from all material
desires. Regardless of the material condition in which one is situated, one
can achieve this perfection. Devotional service is not dependent on the
material activities of austerity, penance, mystic yoga or piety. Even with-
out such assets, one can achieve devotional service through the mercy of
a pure devotee.

41


--- Page 48 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
TEXT 1
श्रीनारद उवाच
+ =>, a
एवं देत्यसुतेः দ্বহী महाभागवतोऽसुरः |
उवाच तान्सयमानः सरन्‌ मद नुमापषितम्‌ ॥ १ ॥
sri-narada uvaca
91077 daitya-sutaih prsto
maha-bhagavato ’surah
uvdca tan smayamanah
smaran mad-anubhasitam

sri-naradah uvaca—the great saint Narada Muni said; evam—thus;
daitya-sutaih—by the sons of the demons; prstah—being questioned;
maha-bhagavatah—the exalted devotee of the Lord; asurah—born in a
family of demons; uvdca—spoke; tdn—unto them (the sons of the
demons); smayamdnah—smiling; smaran—remembering; mat-
anubhasitam—what was spoken by me.

TRANSLATION

Narada Muni said: Although Prahlada Maharaja was born in a
family of asuras, he was the greatest of all devotees. Having thus
been questioned by his class friends, the sons of the asuras, he
remembered the words spoken to him by me and replied to his
friends as follows.

PURPORT

When he was in the womb of his mother, Prahlada Maharaja listened
to the words of Narada Muni. One cannot imagine how the baby in
embryo could hear Narada, but this is spiritual life; progress in spiritual
life cannot be obstructed by any material condition. This is called
ahaituky apratihata. Reception of spiritual knowledge is never checked
by any material condition. Thus Prahlada Maharaja, from his very child-
hood, spoke spiritual knowledge to his class friends, and certainly it was
effective, although all of them were children.


--- Page 49 ---
Text 3] ‘What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 43
TEXT 2
श्रीप्रहाद उवाच
पितरि प्रस्थितेऽखाकं तपसे मन्दराचलम्‌ |
युद्धोद्यमं परं agli दानवान्प्रति ॥ २॥
sri-prahrada uvdaca
pitari prasthite ’smakarn
tapase mandaracalam
yuddhodyamari param cakrur
vibudha danavan prati
sri-prahradah uvaca—Prahlada Maharaja said; pitari—when the
demon father, Hiranyakasipu; prasthite—left for; asmakam—our;
tapase—to execute austerities; mandara-acalam—the hill known as
Mandaracala; yuddha-udyamam—exertion of warfare; param—very
great; cakruh—executed; vibudhah—the demigods, headed by King
Indra; danavan—the demons; prati—toward.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja said: When our father, HiranyakasSipu, went
to Mandaracala Mountain to execute severe austerities, in his ab-
sence the demigods, headed by King Indra, made a severe attempt
to subdue all the demons in warfare.
TEXT 3
पिपीलिकैरहिरिव दिष्टया रोकोपतापनः।
पापेन पापोऽभक्षीति वदन्तो वासवादयः । २॥
pipilikair ahir iva
distya lokopatapanah
papena papo ’bhaksiti
vadanto vasavadayah


--- Page 50 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
pipilikaith—Dby small ants; ahih—a serpent; iva—like; distya—thank
heaven; loka-upatapanah—always oppressing everyone; papena—by
his own sinful activities; papah—the sinful Hiranyakasipu; abhaksi—
has now been eaten; iti—thus; vadantah—saying; vasava-adayah—the
demigods, headed by King Indra.
TRANSLATION
“Alas, as a serpent is eaten by small ants, so the troublesome
Hiranyakasipu, who always inflicted miseries upon all types of
people, has now been defeated by the reactions of his own sinful
activities.” Saying this, the demigods, headed by King Indra, ar-
ranged to fight the demons.
TEXTS 4-5
तेषामतिबलोयोगं निशम्यासुरयुथपाः ।
২, C=
वध्यमानाः सुरेमीता दु दबः Jaa ॥ ४॥
कत्र पत्रवित्तापरान्गृहान्प्यपरिच्छदान्‌ ।
=
नावेश्चमाणास्त्वरिताः सरवे प्राणपरीप्सवः ॥ ५।।
tesam atibalodyogari
nisamydasura-yithapah
vadhyamanah surair bhita
dudruvuh sarvato disam
kalatra-putra-vittaptan
grhan pasu-paricchadan
naveksyamanads tvaritah
sarve prana-paripsavah
tesam —of the demigods, headed by King Indra; atibala-udyogam—
the great exertion and strength; niSamya—hearing of; asura-
yithapah—the great leaders of the demons; vadhyamanah—being


--- Page 51 ---
Text 6] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 45
killed one after another; suraih—by the demigods; bhitah—afraid;
dudruvuh—ran away; sarvatah—in all; disam—directions; kalatra—
wives; putra-vitta—children and wealth; aptan—relatives; grhan—
homes; pasu-paricchadan—animals and paraphernalia of household
life; na—not; aveksyamanah—seeing to; tvaritah—very hasty; sarve—
all of them; prana-paripsavah—very much desiring to live.
TRANSLATION

When the great leaders of the demons, who were being killed
one after another, saw the unprecedented exertion of the
demigods in fighting, they began to flee, scattering themselves in
all directions. Simply to protect their lives, they hastily fled from
their homes, wives, children, animals and household parapher-
nalia. Paying no heed to all these, the demons simply fled.

TEXT 6
ज्यटुम्पन्‌ राजशिबिरममरा TITHE: |
इन्द्रस्तु TENET मातरं मम चाग्रहीत्‌ ॥ & ॥
vyalumpan raja-sibiram
amara jaya-karksinah
indras tu raja-mahisim
madtararh mama cagrahit

vyalumpan—plundered; raja-sibiram—the palace of my father,
Hiranyakasipu; amarah—the demigods; jaya-karnksinah—eager to be
victorious; indrah—the head of the demigods, King Indra; tu—but;
raja-mahisim—the Queen; mdtaram—mother; mama—my; ca—also;
agrahit —captured.

TRANSLATION

The victorious demigods plundered the palace of
Hiranyakas$ipu, the King of the demons, and destroyed everything
within it. Then Indra, King of heaven, arrested my mother, the
Queen.


--- Page 52 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
TEXT 7
नीयमानां भयोद्िं रुदतीं ररीमिव ।
¢
यदच्छयागतस्तत्र॒ देवर्षिदेद्छो पथि ॥ ७॥
niyamanari bhayodvignar
rudatim kurarim iva
yadrcchayagatas tatra
devarsir dadrse pathi

niyamanam—being taken away; bhaya-udvignam—disturbed and
full of fear; rudatim—crying; kurarim iva—like a kurari (osprey);
yadrcchaya—by chance; dgatah—arrived; tatra—on the spot; deva-
rsih—the great saint Narada; dadrse—he saw; pathi—on the road.

TRANSLATION

As she was being led away, crying in fear like a kurari captured
by a vulture, the great sage Narada, who at that time had no
engagement, appeared on the scene and saw her in that condition.

TEXT 8
प्राह चैनां सुरपते नेतमर्स्यनागसम्‌ ।
यञ्च शरञ्च महाभाग सतीं परपरिग्रदम्‌ ।॥ ८ ॥
praha nainar sura-pate
netum arhasy andagasam
munca muinica mahd-bhaga
satim para-parigraham

praha—he said; na—not; enam—this; sura-pate—O King of the
demigods; netum—to drag away; arhasi—you deserve; anagasam—not
at all sinful; munca mufica—release, release; maha-bhaga—O greatly
fortunate one; satim—chaste; para-parigraham—the wife of another
person.


--- Page 53 ---
Text 9] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 47
TRANSLATION
Narada Muni said: O Indra, King of the demigods, this woman is
certainly sinless. You should not drag her off in this merciless way.
O greatly fortunate one, this chaste woman is the wife of another.
You must immediately release her.
TEXT 9
श्रीइन्द्र उवाच
आस्तेऽस्या जटरे बीयेमविषद्य॑ सुरद्विषः |
आस्यतां यावत्प्रसवं AAI गतः ॥ ९॥
Sri-indra uvdaca
aste ’sya jathare viryam
avisahyari sura-dvisah
asyatam yavat prasavam
moksye ’rtha-padavir gatah
Sri-indrah uvaca—King Indra said; aste—there is; asyah—of her;
Jathare—within the abdomen; viryam—the seed; avisahyam —intolera-
ble; sura-dvisah—of the enemy of the demigods; asyatam—let her
remain (in our prison); ydvat—until; prasavam—the delivery of the
child; moksye—I shall release; artha-padavim—the path of my object;
gatah—obtained.
TRANSLATION
King Indra said: In the womb of this woman, the wife of the
demon Hiranyakasipn, is the seed of that great demon. Therefore,
let her remain in our custody until her child is delivered, and then
we shall release her.
PURPORT
Indra, the King of heaven, decided to arrest Prahlada Maharaja’s
mother because he thought that another demon, another Hiranyakasipu,
was within her womb. The best course, he thought, was to kill the child
when the child was born, and then the woman could be released.


--- Page 54 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
TEXT 10
श्रीनारद उवाच
अयं निष्किर्विषः साकषान्महामागवतो महान्‌ |
त्वया न प्राप्यते संस्ामनन्ताुचरो बली ॥१०॥
Sri-narada uvaca
aya niskilbisah saksan
maha-bhagavato mahan
tvaya na prapsyate sarnstham
anantanucaro bali
sri-naradah uvdca—the great saint Narada Muni said; ayam—this
(child within the womb); niskilbisah—completely sinless; saksat—
directly; maha-bhagavatah—a saintly devotee; mahdn—very great;
tvaya—by you; na—not; prapsyate—will obtain; saristham—his
death; ananta—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anucarah—a
servant; bali—extremely powerful.
TRANSLATION
Narada Muni replied: The child within this woman’s womb is
faultless and sinless. Indeed, he is a great devotee, a powerful ser-
vant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore you will
not be able to kill him.
PURPORT
There have been many instances in which demons or nondevotees
have attempted to kill a devotee, but they have never been able to
destroy a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord
promises in Bhagavad-gita (9.31), kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah
pranasyati. This is a declaration by the Supreme Personality of Godhead
that His devotee cannot be killed by demons. Prahlada Maharaja is the
vivid example of the truth of this promise. Narada Muni told the King of
heaven, “] would be impossible for you to kill the child, even though
you are demigods, and certainly it would be impossible for others.”


--- Page 55 ---
Text 11] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 49
TEXT 11
इस्युक्तस्तां विहायेन्द्रो Reda: |
= = ५
अनन्तप्रियभक्त्येनां परिक्रम्य दिवं ययो ॥११॥
ity uktas (कः vihayendro
devarser manayan vacah
ananta-priya-bhaktyainarm
parikramya diva yayau

iti—thus; uktah—addressed; tam—her; uvihdya—releasing;
indrah—the King of heaven; deva-rseh—of the saint Narada Muni;
manayan—honoring; vacah—the words; ananta-priya—for one who is
very dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktya—by devo-
tion; enam—this (woman); parikramya—circamambulating; divam —
to the heavenly planets; yayau—returned.

TRANSLATION

‘When the great saint Narada Muni had thus spoken, King Indra,
being respectful to Narada’s words, immediately released my
mother. Because of my being a devotee of the Lord, all the
demigods circumambulated her. Then they returned to their
celestial kingdom.

PURPORT

Although King Indra and the other demigods are exalted personalities,
they were so obedient to Narada Muni that King Indra immediately ac-
cepted Narada Muni’s words concerning Prahlada Maharaja. This is
called understanding by the parampara system. Indra and the demigods
did not know that a great devotee was in the womb of Kayadhu, the wife
of Hiranyakasipu, but they accepted the authoritative statements of
Narada Muni and immediately offered their respects to the devotee by
circumambulating the woman in whose womb he was living. To under-
stand God and the devotee by the parampara system is the process of
knowledge. There is no need to speculate about God and His devotee. One
should accept the statements of a bona fide devotee and thus try to
understand.


--- Page 56 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
TEXT 12
ৰৈ
ततो मे मातरण्षिः FAT निजाश्रमे ।
৬ 6.
आश्वास्येदोष्यतां वत्से यावत्‌ ते मतुरागमः 12:
tato me mataram rsih
samaniya niyjasrame
asvasyehosyatarin vatse
yavat te bhartur agamah
tatah—thereafter; me —my; mataram —mother; rsih—the great saint
Narada Rsi; samaniya—bringing; nija-asrame—to his own dasrama;
asvasya—giving her assurance; iha—here; usyatam—stay; vatse—my
dear child; yavat—until; te—your; bhartuh—of the husband;
agamah —the coming.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja continued: The great saint Narada Muni
brought my mother to his aSrama and assured her of all protec-
tion, saying, “My dear child, please remain at my aSrama until the
arrival of your husband.”
TEXT 13
तथेत्यवात्सीद्‌ देवर्षेरन्तिके साङतोमया |
PN ५
यावद्‌ RATT तपसो न FEE ॥१३॥
tathety avatsid devarser
antike sakuto-bhaya
১৫৮৫৫ daitya-patir ghorat
tapaso na nyavartata
tatha—so be it; iti—thus; avatsit—lived; deva-rseh—Devarsi
Narada; antike—near; si—she (my mother); akuto-bhaya—without
fear from any direction; yavat—as long as; daitya-patih—my father,
Hiranyaka$ipu, the lord of the demons; ghorat—from very severe;
tapasah—austerities; na—not; nyavartata—ceased.


--- Page 57 ---
Text 14] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 51
TRANSLATION
After accepting the instructions of Devarsi Narada, my mother
stayed in his care, without fear from any direction, as long as my
father, the King of the Daityas, had not become free from his
severe austerities.
TEXT 14
[9
ऋषिं पयं चरत्‌ तत्र भक्त्या परमया सती ।
(७
अन्तव॑ज्ली खगस्य ॒क्षेमायेच्छाप्र्लये ।१४॥
sim paryacarat tatra
bhaktya paramaya sati
antarvatni sva-garbhasya
ksemayeccha-prasitaye
rsim—unto Narada Muni; paryacarat—rendered service; tatra—
there (in the asrama of Narada Muni); bhaktya—with devotion and
faith; paramaya—great; sati—the faithful woman; antarvatni—preg-
nant; sva-garbhasya—of her embryo; ksemaya—for the welfare;
icchd—according to desire; prasitaye—for deliverance of the child.
TRANSLATION
My mother, being pregnant, desired the safety of her embryo
and desired to give birth after her husband’s arrival. Thus she
stayed at Narada Muni’s aSrama, where she rendered service unto
Narada Muni with great devotion.
PURPORT
It is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.19.17)
matra svasra duhitra va
naviviktasano bhavet
balavan indriya-gramo
vidvarisam api karsati


--- Page 58 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
One should not remain in a secluded place with a woman, even one’s
mother, sister, or daughter. Nonetheless, although one is strictly
prohibited from staying with a woman in a secluded place, Narada Muni
gave shelter to Prahlada Maharaja’s young mother, who rendered service
to him with great devotion and faith. Does this mean that Narada Muni
transgressed the Vedic injunctions? Certainly he did not. Such injunc-
tions are intended for mundane creatures, but Narada Muni is transcen-
dental to mundane categories. Narada Muni is a great saint and is tran-
scendentally situated. Therefore, although he was a young man, he could
give shelter to a young woman and accept her service. Haridasa Thakura
also spoke with a young woman, a prostitute, in the dead of night, but the
woman could not deviate his mind. Instead, she became a Vaisnavi, a
pure devotee, by the benediction of Haridasa Thakura. Ordinary persons,
however, should not imitate such highly elevated devotees. Ordinary
persons must strictly observe the rules and regulations by staying aloof
from the association of women. No one should imitate Narada Muni or
Haridasa Thakura. It is said, vaisnavera kriya-mudra vijiie na bujhaya.
Even if a man is very advanced in learning, he cannot understand the
behavior of a Vaisnava. Anyone can take shelter of a pure Vaisnava,
without fear. Therefore in the previous verse it has been distinctly said,
devarser antike sakuto-bhaya: Kayadhu, the mother of Prahlada
Maharaja, stayed under the protection of Narada Muni without fear from
any direction. Similarly, Narada Muni, in his transcendental position,
stayed with the young woman without fear of deviation. Narada Muni,
Haridasa Thakura and similar acaryas especially empowered to broad-
cast the glories of the Lord cannot be brought down to the material plat-
form. Therefore one is strictly forbidden to think that the dcarya is an
ordinary human being (gurusu nara-matih).
TEXT 15
ऋषिः कारुणिकस्तस्याः प्रादादुमयमीश्वरः।
धर्मस्य a ज्ञानं च मामप्युदिश्य निर्मलम्‌ ॥१५॥
rsih karunikas tasyah
pradad ubhayam iSvarah


--- Page 59 ---
Text 15] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 53
dharmasya tattvam 70710772 ca
mam apy uddisya nirmalam

rsih—the great sage Narada Muni; karunikah—naturally very affec-
tionate or merciful to the fallen souls; tasyah—to her; pradat—gave in-
structions; ubhayam—both; iSvarah—a powerful controller who can do
whatever he likes (Narada Muni); dharmasya—of religion; tattvam—
the truth; jignam—knowledge; ca—and; mam—me; api—especially;
uddisya—indicating; nirmalam—without material contamination.

TRANSLATION

Narada Muni delivered his instructions both to me, who was
within the womb, and to my mother, who was engaged in render-
ing him service. Because he is naturally extremely kind to the
fallen souls, being in a transcendental position, he gave instruc-
tions on religion and transcendental knowledge. These instruc-
tions were free from all material contamination.

PURPORT

Here it is said, dharmasya tattvam jianari ca... nirmalam. The
word nirmalam refers to spotless dharma, spotless religion —or, in other
words, bhagavata-dharma. Ordinary ritualistic activities constitute con-
taminated religion, by which one benefits by developing material wealth
and prosperity, but uncontaminated, pure religion consists of under-
standing one’s relationship with God and acting accordingly, thus fulfill-
ing the highest mission of life and returning home, back to Godhead.
Prahlada Maharaja advised that one elevate oneself to the standard of
bhagavata-dharma from the very beginning of life (kaumadra acaret
prajiio dharman bhagavatan iha). The Lord Himself also speaks of pure,
uncontaminated religion when He says, sarva-darman parityajya mam
ekarn Saranam vraja: “Abandon all varieties of religion and just sur-
render unto Me.” (Bg. 18.66) One must understand one’s relationship
with God and then act accordingly. This is bhagavata-dharma.
Bhagavata-dharma means bhakti-yoga.


--- Page 60 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
vasudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogah prayojitah
Janayaty asu vairagyari
Jjhadnari ca yad ahaitukam
“By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Sri
Krsna, one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment
from the world.” (Bhag. 1.2.7) To be situated on the platform of pure
religion, one should perform bhakti-yoga in relationship with Krsna,
Vasudeva.
TEXT 16
तत्तु कारस्य दीर्ष॑त्वात्‌ SAFARI |
ऋषिणानुगृहीतं मां नाघुनाप्यजदात्‌ स्मृतिः ॥१६॥
tat tu kalasya dirghatvat
stritvan matus tirodadhe
rsindnugrhitarn marn
nadhunapy ajahat smrtih
tat—that (instruction on religion and knowledge); tu—indeed;
kalasya—of time; dirghatvat—because of the longness; stritvat—be-
cause of being a woman; matuh—of my mother; tirodadhe—disap-
peared; rsina—by the sage; anugrhitam—being blessed; mam —me;
na—not; adhuna—today; api—even; ajahat—left; smrtih—the
memory (of Narada Muni’s instructions).
TRANSLATION
Because of the long duration of time that has passed and because
of her being a woman and therefore less intelligent, my mother
has forgotten all those instructions; but the great sage Narada
blessed me, and therefore I could not forget them.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (9.32) the Lord says:


--- Page 61 ---
Text 17] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 55
mari hi partha vyapasritya
ye "ए syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaiSyas tatha sadras
te "7 yanti parari gatim
“0 son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me—though they be lowborn,
women, vai§yas [merchants] or Siidras [workers] —can approach the
supreme destination.” The word papa-yoni refers to those who are less
than $00705, but even though a woman may not be papa-yoni, because of
being less intelligent she sometimes forgets devotional instructions. For
those who are strong enough, however, there is no question of forgetting.
Women are generally attached to material enjoyment, and because of this
tendency they sometimes forget devotional instructions. But if even a
woman practices devotional service strictly, according to the rules and
regulations, the statement by the Lord Himself that she can return to
Godhead (te ‘pi yanti param gatim) is not at all astonishing. One must
take shelter of the Lord and rigidly follow the rules and regulations.
Then, regardless of what one is, one will return home, back to Godhead.
Prahlada Maharija’s mother was more concerned with protecting the
child in the womb and was very anxious to see her husband return.
Therefore she could not consider very seriously the sublime instructions
of Narada Muni.
TEXT 17
मवतामपि भूयान्मे यदि भ्रदधते वचः ।
वैशारदी धीः श्रद्धातः सीवालानां च मे यथा ॥१७॥।
bhavatam api bhityan me
yadi sraddadhate vacah
vaisaradi dhih sraddhatah
stri-balanari ca me yatha
bhavatam—of yourselves; api—also; bhityat—it may be; me—of
me; yadi—if; Sraddadhate—you believe in; wvacah—the words;
vaisaradi—of the most expert, or in relation with the Supreme Lord;


--- Page 62 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
dhih—intelligence; sraddhatah—because of firm faith; stri—of women;
balanam—of small boys; ca—also; me—of me; yatha—just as.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja continued: My dear friends, if you can place
your faith in my words, simply by that faith you can also under-
stand transcendental knowledge, just like me, although you are
small children. Similarly, a woman can also understand transcen-
dental knowledge and know what is spirit and what is matter.
PURPORT
These words of Prahlada Maharaja are very important in regard to

knowledge descending by the disciplic succession. Even when Prahlada
Maharaja was a baby within the womb of his mother, he became fully
convinced of the existence of the supreme power because of hearing the
powerful instructions of Narada and understood how to attain perfection
in life by bhakti-yoga. These are the most important understandings in
spiritual knowledge.

yasya deve para bhaktir

yatha deve tatha gurau
tasyaite kathita hy arthah
prakasante mahatmanah
“Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically
revealed.” (Svetdsvatara Upanisad 6.23)
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau

svayam eva sphuraty adah
“No one can understand Krsna as He is by the blunt material senses. But
He reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for their
transcendental loving service unto Him.” (Bhakti-rasamrta-
sindhu 1.2.234.)


--- Page 63 ---
Text 17] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 57
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato jiatva
visate tad-anantaram
“One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devo-
tional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme
Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.”
(Bg. 18.55)

These are Vedic instructions. One must have full faith in the words of
the spiritual master and similar faith in the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Then the real knowledge of atma and Paramatma and the distinc-
tion between matter and spirit will be automatically revealed. This
atma-tattva, or spiritual knowledge, will be revealed within the core of a
devotee’s heart because of his having taken shelter of the lotus feet of a
mahdjana such as Prahlada Maharaja.

In this verse the word bhizyat may be understood to mean “let there
be.” Prahlada Maharaja offers his blessings to his class friends, saying,
“Also become faithful like me. Become bona fide Vaisnavas.” A devotee
of the Lord desires for everyone to take to Krsna consciousness. Unfor-
tunately, however, people sometimes do not have staunch faith in the
words of the spiritual master who comes by the disciplic succession, and
therefore they are unable to understand transcendental knowledge. The
spiritual master must be in the line of authorized disciplic succession,
like Prahlada Maharaja, who received the knowledge from Narada. If the
class friends of Prahlada Maharaja, the sons of demons, were to accept
the truth through Prahlada, they would certainly also become fully
aware of transcendental knowledge.

The words vaisaradi dhih refer to intelligence concerning the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is extremely expert. The Lord has
created wonderful universes by His expert knowledge. Unless one is ex-
tremely expert, he cannot understand the expert management of the
supreme expert. One can understand, however, if one is fortunate
enough to meet a bona fide spiritual master coming in the disciplic suc-
cession from Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Mother Laksmi or the Kumaras.
These four sampradayas, or disciplic successions of knowledge and tran-
scendence, are called the Brahma-sampradaya, Rudra-sampradaya,


--- Page 64 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
Sri-sampradaya, and Kumaira-sampradaya. Sampradaya-vihing ye
mantras te nisphald matah. The knowledge of the Supreme received
from such a sampradaya, or disciplic succession, can give one enlighten-
ment. If one does not take to the path of disciplic succession, it is not
possible for one to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If
one understands the Supreme Lord through devotional service with faith
in the disciplic succession and then advances further, he awakens his
natural love for God, and then his success in life is assured.
TEXT 18
जन्माद्याः খতিম मावा दष्टा देहस्य नात्मनः |
फलानामिव वृषस्य कालेनेश्वरमूर्तिना ॥ १८॥
janmadyah sad ime bhava
drsta dehasya natmanah
phalanam iva vrksasya
kalenesvara-miirtina
janma-adyah—beginning with birth; sat—the six (birth, existence,
growth, transformation, dwindling and at last death); ime—all these;
bhavah—different conditions of the body; drstah—seen; dehasya—of
the body; na—not; atmanah—of the soul; phalanam—of the fruits;
wa—like; vrksasya—of a tree; kalena—in due course of time; ण्व्य -
miirtinda—whose form 15 the ability to transform or control the bodily ac-
tivities.
TRANSLATION
Just as the fruits and flowers of a tree in due course of time un-
dergo six changes—birth, existence, growth, transformation,
dwindling and then death—the material body, which is obtained
by the spirit soul under different circumstances, undergoes simi-
lar changes. However, there are no such changes for the spirit
soul.
PURPORT
This is a very important verse in understanding the difference be-
tween the spiritual soul and the material body. The soul is eternal, as
stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.20):


--- Page 65 ---
Text 18] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 59
na jayate mriyate va kadacin
nayarn bhitva bhavita va na bhityah
ajo nityah sasvato ’yari purano
na hanyate hanyamane sarire

“For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been, does
he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying and
primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.” The spirit soul is eter-
nal, being freed from waste and change, which take place because of the
material body. The example of a tree and its fruits and flowers is very
simple and clear. A tree stands for many, many years, but with the
seasonal changes its fruits and flowers undergo six transformations. The
foolish theory of modern chemists that life can be produced by chemical
interactions cannot be accepted as truth. The birth of a human being’s
material body takes place due to a mixture of the ovum and semen, but
the history of birth is that although the ovum and semen mix together
after sex, there is not always pregnancy. Unless the soul enters the mix-
ture, there is no possibility of pregnancy, but when the soul takes shelter
of the mixture the body takes birth, exists, grows, transforms and dwin-
dles, and ultimately it is vanquished. The fruits and flowers of a tree
seasonally come and go, but the tree continues to stand. Similarly, the
transmigrating soul accepts various bodies, which undergo six transfor-
mations, but the soul remains permanently the same (ajo nityah sasvato
’yariv purano na hanyate hanyamane sarire). The soul is eternal and
ever existing, but the bodies accepted by the soul are changing.

There are two kinds of soul —the Supreme Soul (the Personality of
Godhead) and the individual soul (the living entity). As various bodily
changes take place in the individual soul, different millenniums of cre-
ation take place in the Supreme Soul. In this regard, Madhvacarya says:

sad vikarah sarirasya
na visnos tad-gatasya ca
tad-adhinar Sariramh ca
1722८02 tan mamatam tyajet
Since the body is the external feature of the soul, the soul is not depen-
dent on the body; rather, the body is dependent on the soul. One who


--- Page 66 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
understands this truth should not be very much anxious about the main-
tenance of his body. There is no possibility of maintaining the body per-
manently or eternally. Antavanta ime deha nityasyoktah saririnah. This
is the statement of Bhagavad-gita (2.18). The material body is antavat
(perishable), but the soul within the body is eternal (nityasyoktah
Saririnah). Lord Visnu and the individual souls, who are part and parcel
of Him, are both eternal. Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam. Lord
Visnu is the chief living being, whereas the individual living entities are
parts of Lord Visnu. All the various grades of bodies —from the gigantic
universal body to the small body of an ant—are perishable, but the
Supersoul and the soul, being equal in quality, both exist eternally. This
is further explained in the next verses.
TEXTS 19-20
आत्मा नित्योऽव्ययः ZF TH: FTF AAT: |
अविक्रियः खरग हेतुरन्यापकोऽसङ्गथनाइ़ृतः ।॥।१९॥
LY
फएतैददशभिविदवानार्मनो रक्षणैः परैः |
अहं ममेत्यसद्भावं देदादौ मोहजं त्यजेत्‌ Rell
atma nityo vyayah suddha
ekah ksetra-jiia asrayah
avikriyah sva-drg hetur
vyapako ’sangy anavrtah
etair dvadasabhir vidvan
atmano laksanaih paraih
aha mamety asad-bhavam
dehadau mohajam tyajet
atma—the spirit soul, the part of the Supreme Personality of God-
head; nityah—without birth or death; avyayah—with no possibility of
dwindling; suddhah—without the material contamination of attachment
and detachment; ekah—individual; ksetra-jiah—who knows and 15


--- Page 67 ---
Text 20] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 61
therefore different from the material body; asrayah—the original foun-
dation; ! avikriyah—not undergoing changes like the body;2 sva-drk—
self-illuminated;3 hetuh—the cause of all causes; vyapakah —spreading
throughout the body in the form of consciousness; asarigi—not depend-
ing on the body (free to transmigrate from one body to another);
anavrtah—not covered by material contamination; etaith—by all these;
dvadasabhih—twelve; vidvan—a person who is not foolish but fully
aware of things as they are; atmanah—of the spirit soul; laksanaih—
symptoms; paraih—transcendental; aham—I (“I am this body”);
mama—mine (“everything in relationship with this body is mine”);
iti—thus; asat-bhavam —a false conception of life; deha-adau—iden-
tifying oneself with the material body and then with one’s wife, children,
family, community, nation and so on; moha-jam—produced from il-
lusory knowledge; tyajet—must give up.
TRANSLATION

““Atma”’ refers to the Supreme Lord or the living entities. Both
of them are spiritual, free from birth and death, free from
deterioration and free from material contamination. They are in-
dividual, they are the knowers of the external body, and they are
the foundation or shelter of everything. They are free from ma-
terial change, they are self-illuminated, they are the cause of all
causes, and they are all-pervading. They have nothing to do with
the material body, and therefore they are always uncovered. With
these transcendental qualities, one who is actually learned must
give up the illusory conception of life, in which one thinks, ‘I am
this material body, and everything in relationship with this body is
mine.”
1 Without the shelter of the spirit soul, the material body cannot exist.
2 As already explained, the fruits and flowers of a tree take birth, exist, grow,
transform, dwindle and die according to seasonal changes, but the tree, through
all these changes, remains the same. Similarly, the atm is free from all changes.
3 One does not need to make the soul prominent; it is automatically prominent.
One can very easily understand that in the living body there is a spiritual soul.


--- Page 68 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (15.7) Lord Krsna clearly says, mamaivamso jiva-
loke jiva-bhutah: “All the living entities are part of Me.” Therefore the
living entities are qualitatively the same as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is the leader, the Supreme among all the living entities. In
the Vedas it is said, nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam: the Lord is the
chief individual living entity, the leader of the subordinate living en-
tities. Because the living entities are parts or samples of God, their
qualities are not different from those of the Supreme Lord. The living
entities have the same qualities as the Lord, just as a drop of sea water is
composed of the same chemicals as the great sea itself. Thus there is one-
ness in quality but a difference in quantity. One can understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by understanding the sample, the living
entity, because all the qualities of God exist in a minute quantity in the
living entities. There is oneness, but God is great whereas the living en-
tities are extremely small. Anor aniyan mahato mahiyan (Katha
Upanisad 1.2.20). The living entities are smaller than the atom, but God
is greater than the greatest. Our conception of greatness may be repre-
sented by the sky because we think of the sky as being unlimitedly big,
but God is bigger than the sky. Similarly, we have knowledge that the
living entities are smaller than atoms, being one ten-thousandth the size
of the tip of a hair, yet the quality of being the supreme cause of all
causes exists in the living entity as well as in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Indeed, it is due to the presence of the living entity that the
body exists and bodily changes take place. Similarly, it is because the
Supreme Lord is within this universe that the changes dictated by the
material laws occur.

The word ekah, meaning “individual,” is significant. As explained in
Bhagavad-gita (9.4), mat-sthani sarva-bhitani na cahar tesv
avasthitah. Everything, material and spiritual, including earth, water,
air, fire, sky and the living entities, exists on the platform of spirit soul.
Although everything is an emanation from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one should not think that the Supreme Lord is dependent upon
anything else.

Both God and the living entity are fully conscious. As living entities,
we are conscious of our bodily existence. Similarly, the Lord is conscious


--- Page 69 ---
Text 21] ‘What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 63
of the gigantic cosmic manifestation. This is confirmed in the Vedas.
Yasmin dyauh prthivi cantariksam. Vijaataram adhikena vijantyat.
Ekam evadvitiyam. Atma-jyotih samrad ihovaca. Sa iman lokan asrjata.
Satyam jianam anantam. Asarigo hy aya purusah. Pirnasya parnam
adaya piarnam evavasisyate. All these Vedic injunctions prove that both
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the minute soul are individual.
One is great, and the other is small, but both of them are the cause of all
causes —the corporally limited and the universally unlimited.

We should always remember that although we are equal to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in quality, we are never equal to Him in
quantity. Persons with a small fund of intelligence, finding themselves
equal in quality with God, foolishly think that they are equal in quantity
also. Their intelligence is called avisuddha-buddhayah—unpolished or
contaminated intelligence. When such persons, after endeavoring hard
for many, many lives to understand the supreme cause, are finally in ac-
tual knowledge of Krsna, Vasudeva, they surrender unto Him
(vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma sudurlabhah). Thus they become
great mahatmas, perfect souls. If one is fortunate enough to understand
his relationship with God, knowing that God is great (vibhu) whereas the
living entity is small (anu), he is perfect in knowledge. The individual
exists in darkness when he thinks that he is the material body and that
everything in relationship with the material body belongs to him. This is
called aharih mama (janasya moho yam aharir mameti). This is illusion.
One must give up his illusory conception and thus become fully aware of
everything.

TEXT 21
स्वणं यथा ग्रावसु हेमकारः
AY योगैस्तदभिज्ञ आप्नुयात्‌ |
P|WI देषु  तथात्मयोगे-
रघ्यात्मविद्‌ बह्मगतिं लभेत ॥२१॥
svarnarm yatha gravasu hema-karah
ksetresu yogais tad-abhijiia apnuyat
ksetresu dehesu tathatma-yogair
adhyatma-vid brahma-gatirn labheta


--- Page 70 ---
64 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7

svarnam—gold; yatha—just as; gravasu—in the stones of gold ore;
hema-karah—the expert who knows about gold; ksetresu—in the gold
mines; yogaih—by various processes; tat-abhijiah—an expert who can
understand where gold is; apnuydt—very easily obtains; ksetresu—
within the material fields; dehesu—the human bodies and all the rest of
the 8,400,000 different bodily forms; (0146 —similarly; atma-yogaih—
by spiritual processes; adhyatma-vit—one who is expert in understand-
ing the distinction between spirit and matter; brahma-gatim—perfec-
tion in spiritual life; labheta—may obtain.

TRANSLATION

An expert geologist can understand where there is gold and by
various processes can extract it from the gold ore. Similarly, a
spiritually advanced person can understand how the spiritual par-
ticle exists within the body, and thus by cultivating spiritual
knowledge he can attain perfection in spiritual life. However, as
one who is not expert cannot understand where there is gold, a
foolish person who has not cultivated spiritual knowledge cannot
understand how the spirit exists within the body.

PURPORT

Here is a very good example concerning spiritual understanding.
Foolish rascals, including so-called jiianis, philosophers and scientists,
cannot understand the existence of the soul within the body because they
are lacking in spiritual knowledge. The Vedas enjoin, tad-vijianartham
sa gurum evabhigacchet: to understand spiritual knowledge, one must
approach a bona fide spiritual master. Unless one has been trained in
geology, one cannot detect gold in stone. Similarly, unless one has been
trained by a spiritual master, he cannot understand what is spirit and
what is matter. Here it is said, yogais tad-abhijiah. This indicates that
one who has connected himself with spiritual knowledge can understand
that there is a spiritual soul within the body. However, one who is in an
animalistic conception of life and has no spiritual culture cannot under-
stand. As an expert minerologist or geologist can understand where there
is gold and can then invest his money to dig there and chemically sepa-
rate the gold from the ore, an expert spiritualist can understand where


--- Page 71 ---
Text 22] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 65
the soul is within matter. One who has not been trained cannot dis-
tinguish between gold and stone. Similarly, fools and rascals who have
not learned from an expert spiritual master what is soul and what is mat-
ter cannot understand the existence of the soul within the body. To
understand such knowledge, one must be trained in the mystic yoga
system, or, finally, in the bhakti-yoga system. As stated in Bhagavad-
gita (18.55), bhaktya mam abhijanati. Unless one takes shelter of the
bhakti-yoga process, one cannot understand the existence of the soul
within the body. Therefore Bhagavad-gita begins by teaching:
dehino ‘smin yatha dehe
kaumararm yauvanam jara
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati
‘As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self -realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.” (Bg. 2.13) Thus
the first instruction is that one should understand that the soul is within
the body and is transmigrating from one body to another. This is the
beginning of spiritual knowledge. Any person who is not expert in
understanding this science or is unwilling to understand it remains in the
bodily conception of life, or the animalistic conception of life, as con-
firmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-
dhatuke . . . sa eva go-kharah). Every member of human society should
clearly understand the instructions of Bhagavad-gita, for only in this
way can one be spiritually elevated and automatically give up the false,
illusory knowledge by which one thinks, “I am this body, and everything
belonging to this body is mine [aha mameti].” This doggish conception
should be rejected immediately. One should be prepared to understand
the spirit soul and the supreme spirit, God, who are eternally related.
Thus one may return home, back to Godhead, having solved all the
problems of life.
TEXT 22
अष्टौ प्रकृतयः সীক্ধান্তম एव हि तद्गुणाः |
विकाराः Stearn: पुमानेकः समन्वयात्‌ ॥२२॥


--- Page 72 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
astau prakrtayah proktas
traya eva hi tad-gunah
vikarah sodasacaryaih
puman ekah samanvayat

astau—eight; prakrtayah—material energies; proktah—it is said;
trayah—three; eva—certainly; hi—indeed; tat-gunah—the modes of
material energy; vikarah —transformations; sodosa—sixteen;
acaryaih—Dby the authorities; puman—the living entity; ekah—one;
samanvayat—f{rom conjunction.

TRANSLATION

The Lord’s eight separated material energies, the three modes of
material nature and the sixteen transformations [the eleven senses
and the five gross material elements like earth and water] —within
all these, the one spiritual soul exists as the observer. Therefore all
the great acaryas have concluded that the individual soul is condi-
tioned by these material elements.

PURPORT

As explained in the previous verse, ksetresu dehesu tathatma-yogair
adhyatma-vid brahma-gatirn labheta: “A spiritually advanced person
can understand how the spiritual particle exists within the body, and
thus by cultivating spiritual knowledge he can attain perfection in spiri-
tual life.” The intelligent person who is expert in finding the self within
the body must understand the eight external energies, which are listed in
Bhagavad-gita (7.4):

bhamir apo ’nalo vayuh
kha mano buddhir eva ca
ahaiikara ittyar me
bhinna prakrtir astadha

“Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all
together these eight comprise My separated material energies.”” Bhami,
earth, includes all the objects of sense perception— rizpa (form), rasa


--- Page 73 ---
Text 22] ‘What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 67
(taste), gandha (smell), sabda (sound) and sparsa (touch). Within the
earth are the fragrance of roses, the taste of sweet fruit, and whatever
else we want. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.10.4), sarva-kama-
dugha mahi: the earth (mahi) contains all our requirements. Thus the
objects of sense perception are all present in bhimi, or the earth. The
gross material elements and subtle material elements (mind, intelligence
and ahankara, false ego) constitute the total material energy.

Within the total material energy are the three material modes or
qualities. These qualities— sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna—
belong not to the soul but to the material energy. It is because of the in-
teraction of these three material modes of nature that the five
knowledge-gathering senses, the five working senses and their con-
troller, the mind, are manifested. Then, according to these modes, the
living entity gets the opportunity to perform different types of karma
with different types of knowledge, thinking, feeling and willing. Thus
the bodily machine begins to work.

This has all been properly analyzed in sarikhya-yoga by the great
acaryas, especially by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, in
His incarnation as Devahiiti-putra Kapila. This is indicated here by the
word acaryaih. We need not follow anyone who is not an authorized
acarya. Acaryavan puruso veda: one can understand the truth fully
when he has taken shelter of an expert acarya.

The living entity is individual, but the body is a composition of many
material elements. This is proved by the fact that as soon as the living
entity quits this combination of material elements, it becomes a mere
conglomeration of matter. The matter is qualitatively one, and the spiri-
tual soul is qualitatively one with the Supreme. The Supreme is one, and
the individual soul is one, but the individual soul is understood to be the
master of the individual combination of material energy, whereas the
Supreme Lord is the controller of the total material energy. The living
entity is the master of his particular body, and according to his activities
he is subjected to different types of pains and pleasures. However, al-
though the Supreme Person, the Paramatma, is also one, He is present as
an individual in all the different bodies.

The material energy is in fact divided into twenty-four elements. The
individual soul, the owner of the individual body, is a twenty-fifth sub-
ject, and above everything is Lord Visnu as Paramatma, the supreme


--- Page 74 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
controller, who is the twenty-sixth subject. When one understands all of
these twenty-six subjects, he becomes adhyatma-vit, an expert in under-
standing the distinction between matter and spirit. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (13.3), ksetra-ksetrajiiayor jianam: understanding of the
ksetra (the constitution of the body) and of the individual soul and the
Supersoul constitutes real jiana, or knowledge. Unless one ultimately
understands that the Supreme Lord is eternally related with the in-
dividual soul, one’s knowledge is imperfect. This is confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita (7.19):
bahinar janmanam ante
JAanavan mari prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah
‘After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surren-
ders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is.
Such a great soul is very rare.” Everything, material and spiritual, con-
sists of various energies of Vasudeva, to whom the individual soul, the
spiritual part of the Supreme Lord, is subordinate. Upon understanding
this perfect knowledge, one surrenders to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead (vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma sudurlabhakh).
TEXT 23
देदस्तु सर्वसंघातो जगत्‌ तस्थुरिति दिधा ।
अत्रैव TT: पुरुषो नेति नेतीरयतत्‌ त्यजन्‌ ॥२३॥
dehas tu sarva-sanghato
Jagat tasthur iti dvidha
atraiva mrgyah puruso
neti netity atat tyajan
dehah—the body; tu—but; sarva-sarighatah—the combination of all
the twenty-four elements; jagat—seen to be moving; tasthuh—and
standing in one place; iti—thus; dvidha—two kinds; atra eva—in this
matter; mrgyah—to be searched for; purusah—the living entity, the


--- Page 75 ---
Text 23] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 69
soul; na—not; iti—thus; na—not; iti—thus; iti—in this way; atat—
what is not spirit; tyajan—giving up.

TRANSLATION

There are two kinds of bodies for every individual soul —a gross
body made of five gross elements and a subtle body made of three
subtle elements. Within these bodies, however, is the spirit soul.
One must find the soul by analysis, saying, “This is not it. This is
not it.” Thus one must separate spirit from matter.
PURPORT
As previously stated, svarnam yatha gravasu hema-karah ksetresu
yogais tad-abhijia apnuyat. An expert in the study of soil can find out
where gold is and then dig there. He can then analyze the stone and test
the gold with nitric acid. Similarly, one must analyze the whole body to
find within the body the spirit soul. In studying one’s own body, one
must ask himself whether his head is his soul, his fingers are his soul, his
hand is his soul, and so on. In this way, one must gradually reject all the
material elements and the combinations of material elements in the body.
Then, if one is expert and follows the dcarya, he can understand that he
is the spiritual soul living within the body. The greatest acarya, Krsna,
begins His teachings in Bhagavad-gita by saying:
dehino ’smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanar jara
tatha dehantara-praptir

dhiras tatra na muhyati
‘As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.” (Bg. 2.13) The
spirit soul possesses the body and is within the body. This is the real
analysis. The soul never mixes with the bodily elements. Although the
soul is within the body, it is separate and always pure. One must analyze
and understand his self. This is self-realization. Neti neti is the analytical
process of rejecting matter. By expertly conducting such an analysis, one


--- Page 76 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
can understand where the soul is. One who is not expert, however, can-
not distinguish gold from earth, nor the soul from the body.
TEXT 24
अन्वयन्यतिरेकेण विवेकेनोशतास्मना ।
सखर्गख्यानसमाभ्नायैरविशरशद्भिरसत्वरेः ॥ ২৬
anvaya-vyatirekena
vivekenosatatmana
svarga-sthana-samamnayair
vimrsadbhir asatvaraih

anvaya—directly; wyatirekena—and indirectly;  vivekena—by
mature discrimination; uSat@d—purified; atmana—with the mind;
svarga—creation; sthana—maintenance; samdmnayaih—and with
destruction; vimrsadbhih—by those making a serious analysis; asat-
varaih—very sober.

TRANSLATION

Sober and expert persons should search for the spirit soul with
minds purified through analytical study in terms of the soul’s con-
nection with and distinction from all things that undergo creation,
maintenance and destruction.

PURPORT

A sober person can study himself and distinguish the soul from the
body by analytical study. For example, when one considers his body —his
head, his hands and so on—one can certainly understand the difference
between the spirit soul and the body. No one says, “I head.” Everyone
says, “My head.” Thus there are two entities—the head and “1.” They
are not identical, although they appear to be one conglomeration.

One may argue, “When we analyze the body we find a head, hands,
legs, a belly, blood, bones, urine, stool and so on, but after everything is
considered, where is the existence of the soul?’’ A sober man, however,
avails himself of this Vedic instruction:


--- Page 77 ---
Text 24] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 71
yato va imani bhitani jayante. yena jatani jivanti. yat prayanty
abhisarwisanti. tad  vijijiasasva. tad  brahmeti. (Taittiriya
Upanisad 3.1.1)
Thus he can understand that the head, hands, legs and indeed the entire
body have grown on the basis of the soul. If the soul is within, the body,
head, hands and legs grow, but otherwise they do not. A dead child does
not grow up, for the soul is not present. If by a careful analysis of the
body one still cannot find the existence of the soul, this is due to his ig-
norance. How can a gross man fully engaged in materialistic activities
understand the soul, which is a small particle of spirit one ten-
thousandth the size of the tip of a hair? Such a person foolishly thinks
that the material body has grown from a combination of chemicals, al-
though he cannot find them. The Vedas inform us, however, that chemi-
cal combinations do not constitute the living force; the living force is the
atmd and Paramatma, and the body grows on the basis of that living
force. The fruit of a tree grows and undergoes six kinds of change be-
cause of the presence of the tree. If there were no tree, there could be no
question of the growth and maturity of fruit. Therefore, beyond the exis-
tence of the body are the Paramatma and atma within the body. This is
the first understanding of spiritual knowledge explained in Bhagavad-
gita. Dehino 1571771. yatha dehe. The body exists because of the presence
of the Supreme Lord and the jiva, which is part of the Lord. This is
further explained by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (9.4):
maya tatam 1027 sarvariv
Jagad avyakta-mirtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
na caham tesv avasthitah
“By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.” The Supreme Soul exists every-
where. The Vedas enjoin, sarvari khalv idarh brahma: everything is
Brahman or an expansion of Brahman’s energies. Siitre mani-gana iva:
everything rests on the Lord, just like pearls strung together on a thread.
The thread is the principal Brahman. He is the supreme cause, the


--- Page 78 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
Supreme Lord upon whom everything rests (mattah parataram nanyat).
Thus we must study the atma and Paramatma —the individual soul and
the Supersoul—upon whom the entire material cosmic manifestation
rests. This is explained by the Vedic statement yato va imani bhitani
Jayante. yena jatani jivanti.
TEXT 25
बदधेजागरणं सखः सुषुिरिति वृत्तयः ।
ता येनैवाठुभूयन्ते सोऽध्यक्षः पुरुषः परः ।२५॥
buddher jagaranam svapnah
susuptir iti vrttayah
ta yenaivanubhityante
so ’dhyaksah purusah parah
buddheh—of the intelligence; jagaranam—the waking or active state
of the gross senses; svapnah—dreaming (the activity of the senses with-
out the gross body); susuptih—deep sleep or cessation of all activities
(although the living entity is the seer); iti—thus; vrttayah—the various
transactions; tah—they; yena—by whom; eva—indeed; anu-
bhityante —are perceived; sah—that; adhyaksah—overseer (who is dif-
ferent from the activities); purusah—the enjoyer; parah—
transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Intelligence can be perceived in three states of activity —
wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep. The person who perceives
these three is to be considered the original master, the ruler, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
Without intelligence one cannot understand the direct activities of the
senses, nor can he understand dreaming or the cessation of all gross and
subtle activities. The seer and controller is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the Supreme Soul, by whose direction the individual soul can
understand when he is awake, when he is sleeping, and when he is com-


--- Page 79 ---
Text 26] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 73
pletely in trance. In Bhagavad-gita (15.15) the Lord says, sarvasya
caham hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtirjaanam apohanari ca: “I am seated
in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and
forgetfulness.” The living entities are completely absorbed in the three
states of wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep through their intelli-
gence. This intelligence is supplied by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who accompanies the individual soul as a friend. Srila
Madhvacarya says that the living entity is sometimes described as sattva-
buddhi when his intelligence acts directly to perceive pains and pleasures
above activities. There is a dreaming state in which understanding comes
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead (mattah smrtir jianam
apohanari ca). The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, is
the supreme controller, and under His direction the living entities are
subcontrollers. One must understand the Supreme Personality of God-
head with one’s intelligence.
TEXT 26
€ a EY
एभिचिवर्णेः पर्यस्तेवुद्धिमेदैः क्रियोद्भवैः |
खरूपमात्मनो बुध्येद्‌ TAG RETF ॥२६॥
ebhis tri-varnaih paryastair
buddhi-bhedaih kriyodbhavaih
svariapam atmano budhyed
gandhair vayum ivanvayat

ebhih—by these; tri-varnaih—composed of the three modes of
nature; paryastaih—completely rejected (due to not touching the living
force); buddhi—of intelligence; bhedaih—the differentiations; kriya-
udbhavaih—produced from different activities; svarapam—the con-
stitutional position; atmanah—of the self; budhyet—one should under-
stand; gandhaih—by the aromas; vayum—the air; iva—exactly like;
anvayat—from close connection.

TRANSLATION

As one can understand the presence of the air by the aromas it

carries, so, under the guidance of the Supreme Personality of


--- Page 80 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
Godhead, one can understand the living soul by these three divi-
sions of intelligence. These three divisions, however, are not the
soul; they are constituted of the three modes and are born of ac-
tivities.
PURPORT

As already explained, there are three states to our existence, namely
wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep. In all three states, we have dif-
ferent experiences. Thus the soul is the observer of these three states.
Actually, the activities of the body are not the activities of the soul. The
soul is different from the body. Just as aromas are distinct from the ma-
terial vehicle in which they are carried, the soul is unattached to material
activities. This analysis can be considered by a person who is fully under
the shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. This is confirmed by
the Vedic injunction yasmin vijiiate sarvam evar vijiatarn bhavati. If
one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can auto-
matically understand everything else. Because of not taking shelter of
the Lord’s lotus feet, even great scholars, scientists, philosophers and
religionists are always bewildered. This is confirmed in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (10.2.32):

ye ‘nye ’‘ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah
Even though one may artificially think himself liberated from material
contamination, if he has not taken shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet his in-
telligence is polluted. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (3.42):
indriyani parany ahur
indriyebhyah pararh manah
manasas tu para buddhir
yo buddheh paratas tu sah

Above the senses is the mind, above the mind is the intelligence, and
above the intelligence is the soul. Ultimately, when one’s intelligence be-
comes clear through devotional service, one is situated in buddhi-yoga.
This also is explained in Bhagavad-gita (dadami buddhi-yogar tar


--- Page 81 ---
Text 27] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 75
yena mam upayanti te). When devotional service develops and one’s in-
telligence becomes clear, one can use his intelligence to return home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 27
एतदुद्रारो हि संसारो गुणकर्मनिबन्धनः |
॥ . [3
अन्ञानमूलोऽपार्थोऽपि पुंसः खम्र वाप्यते ।।२७॥
etad dvdro hi sarsaro
guna-karma-nibandhanah
agjiiana-milo ‘partho 08
purisah svapna ivarpyate
etat—this; dvarah—whose door; hi—indeed; sarsarah—material
existence, in which one suffers threefold miseries; guna-karma-
nibandhanah—captivation by the three modes of material nature;
aqjiiana-millah—whose root is ignorance; apdrthah—without factual
meaning; api—even; purisah—of the living entity; svapnah —a dream;
iva—like; arpyate—is placed.
TRANSLATION
Through polluted intelligence one is subjected to the modes of
nature, and thus one is conditioned by material existence. Like a
dreaming state in which one falsely suffers, material existence,
which is due to ignorance, must be considered unwanted and tem-
porary.
[ PURPORT
The unwanted condition of temporary life is called ignorance. One can
very easily understand that the material body is temporary, for it is
generated at a certain date and ends at a certain date, after undergoing
the six kinds of change, namely birth, death, growth, maintenance,
transformation and dwindling. This condition of the eternal soul is due to
his ignorance, and although it is temporary, it is unwanted. Because of
ignorance one is put into temporary bodies one after another. The spirit
soul, however, does not need to enter such temporary bodies. He does so


--- Page 82 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
only due to his ignorance or his forgetfulness of Krsna. Therefore in the
human form of life, when one’s intelligence is developed, one should
change his consciousness by trying to understand Krsna. Then one can be
liberated. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9), where the Lord
says:
janma karma ca me divyam
evar yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva dehari punar janma
naiti mam eti so ’rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this ma-
terial world, but attains My eternal abode, 0 Arjuna.” Unless one under-
stands Krsna and comes to Krsna consciousness, one must continue in
material bondage. To end this conditional life, one must surrender to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Indeed, that is demanded by the
Supreme Lord. Sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekari $aranarn vraja.
As advised by Maharaja Rsabhadeva, na sadhu manye yata atmano
yam asann api klesada asa dehah. One must be intelligent enough to
understand that although one’s body is temporary and will not endure
for long, as long as one has a body he must undergo the pangs of material
existence. Therefore, if by good association, by the instructions of a bona
fide spiritual master, one takes to Krsna consciousness, his conditional
life of material existence is vanquished, and his original consciousness,
known as Krsna consciousness, is revived. When one is Krsna conscious,
he can realize that material existence, whether one is awake or dreaming,
is nothing but a dream and has no factual value. This realization is possi-
ble by the grace of the Supreme Lord. This grace is also present in the
form of the instructions of Bhagavad-gita. Therefore Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s mission is for everyone to engage in welfare activities to
awaken the foolish living entity, especially in human society, so that he
may come to the platform of Krsna consciousness and benefit by libera-
tion from conditional life.
In this connection, Srila Madhvacarya cites the following verses:
duhkha-ripo [08 samsaro
buddhi-piarvam avapyate


--- Page 83 ---
Text 28] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 77
yatha svapne siras chedari
svayar krtvatmano vasah
tato duhkham avapyeta
tatha jagarito pi tu
janann apy atmano duhkham
avasas tu pravartate
One must realize that the material condition of life is full of distresses.
One can realize this with purified intelligence. When one’s intelligence is
purified, he can understand that unwanted, temporary, material life is
just like a dream. Just as one suffers pain when his head is cut off in a
dream, in ignorance one suffers not only while dreaming but also while
awake. Without the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one
continues in ignorance and is thus subjected to material distresses in
various ways.
TEXT 28
: hie nui
तसाद्धवद्धिः कतंन्यं FA त्रिगुणात्मनाम्‌ |
बीजनिहेरणं योगः अ्रवाहोपरमो धियः ire
tasmad bhavadbhih kartavyari
karmanar tri-gunatmanam
bija-nirharanari yogah
pravahoparamo dhiyah
tasmat—therefore; bhavadbhih—by your good selves; kartavyam—
to be done; karmanam—of all material activities; tri-guna-atmanam—
conditioned by the three modes of material nature; byja-nirharanam—
burning of the seed; yogah—the process by which one can be linked
with the Supreme; pravaha—of the continuous current in the form of
wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep; uparamah—the cessation;
dhiyah—of the intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, my dear friends, O sons of the demons, your duty is
to take to Krsna consciousness, which can burn the seed of fruitive


--- Page 84 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
activities artificially created by the modes of material nature and
stop the flow of the intelligence in wakefulness, dreaming and
deep sleep. In other words, when one takes to Krsna conscious-
ness, his ignorance is immediately dissipated.
PURPORT
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):
mar ca yo ‘vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhityaya kalpate
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” By the practice of bhakti-yoga, one
immediately comes to the spiritual platform, transcendental to the ac-
tions and reactions of the three modes of material nature. The root of ig-
norance is material consciousness, which must be killed by spiritual con-
sciousness, or Krsna consciousness. The word bija-nirharanam refers to
burning the root cause of material life to ashes. In the Medini dictionary,
yoga is explained by its result: yoge ’pirvartha-sampraptau sangati-
dhyana-yuktisu. When one is put into an awkward position because of
ignorance, the process by which one can be freed from this entanglement
is called yoga. This is also called liberation. Muktir hitvanyatha-riparn
svaripena vyavasthitih. Mukti means giving up one’s position in ig-
norance or illusion, by which one thinks in a way contrary to his con-
stitutional position. Returning to one’s constitutional position is called
mukti, and the process by which one does this is called yoga. Thus yoga
is above karma, jiiana and sarikhya. Indeed, yoga is the ultimate goal of
life. Krsna therefore advised Arjuna to become a yogi (tasmad yogi
bhavarjuna). Lord Krsna further advised in Bhagavad-gita that the
first-class yogi 15 he who has come to the platform of devotional service.
yoginam api sarvesarit
mad-gatenantaratmana


--- Page 85 ---
Text 29] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 79
sraddhavan bhajate yo mari
sa me yuktatamo matah
“Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping
Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in
yoga and is the highest of all.” (Bg. 6.47) Thus one who always thinks
of Krsna within the core of his heart is the best yagi. By practicing this
best of all yoga systems, one is liberated from the material condition.
TEXT 29
तत्रोपायसहस्राणामयं भगवतोदितः |
aN
यदीश्वरे भगवति यथा येरज्ञसा रतिः ॥२९॥
tatropaya-sahasranam
ayari bhagavatoditah
yad iSvare bhagavati
yatha yair anjasa ratih

tatra—in that connection (getting out of the entanglement of material
conditioning); upaya—of processes; sahasranam—of many thousands;
ayam—this; bhagavata uditah—given by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yat—which; Zvare—to the Lord; bhagavati—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; yatha—as much as; yaih—by which; চো] 05৫ --
quickly; ratih—attachment with love and affection.

TRANSLATION

Of the different processes recommended for disentanglement
from material life, the one personally explained and accepted by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead should be considered all-
perfect. That process is the performance of duties by which love
for the Supreme Lord develops.

PURPORT

Among the linking processes that elevate one from bondage to ma-

terial contamination, the one recommended by the Supreme Personality


--- Page 86 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
of Godhead should be accepted as the best. That process is clearly ex-
plained in Bhagavad-gita, where the Lord says, sarva-dharman
parityajya mam ekari Saranari vraja: “Abandon all varieties of religion
and just surrender unto Me.” This process is the best because the Lord
assures, aha tvam sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami ma sucah: “I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.”” There is no need to be
worried, for the Lord Himself assures that He will care for His devotee
and save him from the reactions of sinful activities. Material bondage is a
result of sinful activity. Therefore, since the Lord assures that He will
dissipate the results of fruitive material activities, there is no need to be
worried. This process of understanding one’s position as a spirit soul and
then engaging oneself in devotional service is therefore the best. The en-
tire Vedic program is based on this principle, and one can understand it
as recommended in the Vedas:
yasya deve para bhaktir
yatha deve tatha gurau
tasyaite kathita hy arthah
prakasante mahatmanah

“Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the
spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically
revealed.” (Svetdsvatara Upanisad 6.23) One must accept the pure de-
votee, the representative of God, as one’s guru and then offer him all the
respects one would offer the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the
secret of success. For one who adopts this method, the perfect process is
revealed. In this verse, the words yair afijasa ratih indicate that by offer-
ing service and surrendering to the spiritual master, one is elevated to
devotional service, and by performing devotional service one gradually
becomes attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because of this
attachment to the Lord, one can understand the Lord. In other words,
one can understand what the Lord’s position is, what our position is and
what our relationship is. All this can be understood very easily by the
simple method of bhakti-yoga. As soon as one is situated on the platform
of bhakti-yoga, the root cause of one’s suffering and material bondage is
destroyed. This is clearly explained in the next verse, which gives the
secret of success.


--- Page 87 ---
Text 31] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 81
TEXTS 30-31
५
TENT भक्त्या सर्वलब्धार्पणेन च |
सङ्गेन साधुमक्तानामीश्वराराधनेन च 130)
. . Sa ¢
TET तत्कथायां च कीतनेगुंणकमणाम्‌ |
-
तत्पादाम्बुरुहध्यानात्‌ तचचिद्गेक्षादणादिमिः।।२१॥
guru-susrisaya bhaktya
sarva-labdharpanena ca
sarigena sadhu-bhaktanam
isvararadhanena ca
sraddhaya tat-kathayarn ca
kirtanair guna-karmanam
tat-padamburuha-dhyanat
tal-lingeksarhanadibhih
guru-susrisaya—by rendering service to the bona fide spiritual
master; bhaktya—with faith and devotion; sarva—all; labdha —of ma-
terial gains; arpanena—by offering (to the guru, or to Krsna through
the spiritual master); ca—and; sangena—by the association; sadhu-
bhaktanam —of devotees and saintly persons; #Svara—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; aradhanena—by the worship; ca—and;
sraddhaya—with great faith; tat-kathayam—in discourses about the
Lord; ca—and; kirtanaith—by glorifications; guna-karmanam—of the
transcendental qualities and activities of the Lord; tat—His; pada-
amburuha—on the lotus feet; dhyanat—by meditation; tat—His;
linga—forms (Deities); tksa—observing; arhana-adibhih—and by
worshiping.
TRANSLATION
One must accept the bona fide spiritual master and render ser-
vice unto him with great devotion and faith. Whatever one has in
one’s possession should be offered to the spiritual master, and in
the association of saintly persons and devotees one should worship
the Lord, hear the glories of the Lord with faith, glorify the


--- Page 88 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
transcendental qualities and activities of the Lord, always meditate
on the Lord’s lotus feet, and worship the Deity of the Lord strictly
according to the injunctions of the $astra and guru.

PURPORT

In the previous verse it has been said that the process which im-
mediately increases one’s love and affection for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is the best of the many thousands of ways to become free
from the entanglement of material existence. It is also said, dharmasya
tattvari nihitarn guhayam: actually the truth of religious principles is
extremely confidential. Nonetheless, it can be understood very easily if
one actually adopts the principles of religion. As it is said, dharmam tu
saksad bhagavat-pranitam: the process of religion is enunciated by the
Supreme Lord because He is the supreme authority. This is also indicated
in the previous verse by the word bhagawvatoditah. The injunctions or
directions of the Lord are infallible, and their benefits are fully assured.
According to His directions, which are explained in this verse, the per-
fect form of religion is bhakti-yoga.

To practice bhakti-yoga, one must first accept a bona fide spiritual
master. Srila Ripa Gosvami, in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.74-75),
advises:

guru-padasrayas tasmat
krsna-diksadi-siksanam
visrambhena guroh seva
sadhu-vartmanuvartanam
sad-dharma-prccha bhogadi-
tyagah krsnasya hetave
One’s first duty is to accept a bona fide spiritual master. The student or
disciple should be very inquisitive; he should be eager to know the com-
plete truth about eternal religion (sandtana-dharma). The words guru-
Susrisaya mean that one should personally serve the spiritual master by
giving him bodily comforts, helping him in bathing, dressing, sleeping,
eating and so on. This is called guru-susnisanam. A disciple should serve
the spiritual master as a menial servant, and whatever he has in his


--- Page 89 ---
Text 32] ‘What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 83
possession should be dedicated to the spiritual master. Pranair arthair
dhiya vaca. Everyone has his life, his wealth, his intelligence and his
words, and all of them should be offered to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead through the via medium of the spiritual master. Everything
should be offered to the spiritual master as a matter of duty, but the
offering should be made to the spiritual master with heart and soul, not
artificially to gain material prestige. This offering is called arpana.
Moreover, one should live among devotees, saintly persons, to learn the
etiquette and proper behavior of devotional service. Srila Visvanitha
Cakravarti Thikura remarks in this connection that whatever is offered
to the spiritual master should be offered with love and affection, not for
material adoration. Similarly, it is recommended that one associate with
devotees, but there must be some discrimination. Actually, a sadhu, a
saintly person, must be saintly in his behavior (sadhavah sad-acarah).
Unless one adheres to the standard behavior, one’s position as a sadhu, a
saintly person, is not complete. Therefore a Vaisnava, a sadhu, must
completely adhere to the standard of behavior. Srila Vi$vanatha
Cakravarti Thakura says that a Vaispava, a person initiated into the
Vaisnava cult, should be offered the respect befitting a Vaisnava, which
means that he should be offered service and prayers. However, one
should not associate with him if he is not a fit person with whom to asso-
ciate.
TEXT 32
हरिः सर्वेषु॒भूतेषु , भगवानास्त ईश्वरः |
इति भूतानि मनसा कामैस्तैः साधु मानयेत्‌ ।॥३२॥
harih sarvesu bhiitesu
bhagavan asta ४८१८१
iti bhiitani manasa
kamais taih sadhu manayet

harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarvesu—in all;
bhittesu —living entities; bhagavan—the supreme personality; aste—is
situated; &Svarah—the supreme controller; iti—thus; bhitani—all liv-
ing entities; 7770178052৫ —by such understanding; kamaih—by desires;
taih—those; sadhu manayet—one should highly esteem.


--- Page 90 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
TRANSLATION

One should always remember the Supreme Personality of God-
head in His localized representation as the Paramatma, who is situ-
ated in the core of every living entity’s heart. Thus one should
offer respect to every living entity according to that living entity’s
position or manifestation.

PURPORT

Harih sarvesu bhiitesu. This statement is sometimes misunderstood by
unscrupulous persons who wrongly conclude that because Hari, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is situated in every living entity, every
living entity is therefore Hari. Such foolish persons do not distinguish
between the atma and the Paramatma, who are situated in every body.
The atma is the living entity, and the Paramatma is the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The individual living entity, however, is different
from the Paramiatma, the Supreme Lord. Therefore harih sarvesu
bhiitesu means that Hari is situated as Paramatma, not as atma, although
atma is a part of Paramatma. Offering respect to every living entity
means offering respect to the Paramatma situated in every living entity.
One should not misunderstand every living entity to be the Paramatma.
Sometimes unscrupulous persons designate a living entity as daridra-
narayana, svami-narayana, this Narayana or that Narayana. One should
clearly understand that although Narayana is situated in the core of the
heart of every living entity, the living entity never becomes Narayana.

TEXT 33
एवं faffaeesd: क्रियते भक्तिरीश्वरे ।
वासुदेवे भगवति यया संलभ्यते रतिः ॥३३॥
evar nirjita-sad-vargaih
kriyate bhaktir Svare
vasudeve bhagavati
yaya sarilabhyate ratih

evam—thus; nirjita—subdued; sat-vargaih—by the six symptoms of

the senses (lusty desires, anger, greed, illusion, madness and jealousy);


--- Page 91 ---
Text 34] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 85
kriyate—is rendered; bhaktih—devotional service; iSvare—unto the
supreme controller; vdsudeve—to Lord Vasudeva; bhagavati—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaya—by which; samlabhyate—is
obtained; ratih—attachment.
TRANSLATION

By these activities [as mentioned above] one is able to cut down
the influence of the enemies, namely lust, anger, greed, illusion,
madness and jealousy, and when thus situated, one can render ser-
vice to the Lord. In this way one surely attains the platform of lov-
ing service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

As mentioned in verses thirty and thirty-one, one’s first duty is to ap-
proach the spiritual master, the representative of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, to begin rendering service to him. Prahlada
Maharaja proposed that from the very beginning of life (kaumara acaret
prajiiah) a small child should be trained to serve the spiritual master
while living at the guru-kula. Brahmacart guru-kule vasan danto guror
hitam (Bhag. 7.12.1). This is the beginning of spiritual life. Guru-
padasrayah, sadhu-vartmanuvartanam, sad-dharma-precha. By follow-
ing the instructions of the guru and the Sastras, the disciple attains the
stage of devotional service and becomes unattached to possessions. What-
ever he possesses he offers to the spiritual master, the guru, who engages
him in $ravanam kirtanari visnoh. The disciple follows strictly and in
this way learns how to control his senses. Then, by using his pure intelli-
gence, he gradually becomes a lover of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, as confirmed by Srila Ripa Gosvami (adau sraddha tatah sadhu-
sangah). In this way one’s life becomes perfect, and his attachment for
Krsna becomes positively manifested. In that stage, he is situated in
ecstasy, experiencing bhava and anubhdva, as explained in the following
verse.

TEXT 34
निश्चम्य कर्माणि गुणानतुल्यान्‌
वीर्याणि रीकातजुभिः कृतानि |


--- Page 92 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
यदातिदर्षोत्पुलकाश्रगद्भदं
Stews उद्वायति रोति रृत्यति nen
nisamya karmani gunan atulyan
viryani lila-tanubhih krtani
yadatiharsotpulakasru-gadgadarm
protkantha udgayati rauti nrtyati
nisamya—hearing; karmani—transcendental activities; gunan—
spiritual qualities; atulydn—uncommon (not generally visible in an
ordinary person); viryani—very powerful; lila-tanubhih—by different
pastime forms; krtani—performed; yada —when; atiharsa—because of
great jubilation; utpulaka—horripilation; asru—tears in the eyes;
gadgadam—faltering voice; protkanthah—with an open voice;
udgayati—chants very loudly; rauti—cries; nrtyati—dances.
TRANSLATION
One who is situated in devotional service is certainly the con-
troller of his senses, and thus he is a liberated person. When such a
liberated person, the pure devotee, hears of the transcendental
qualities and activities of the Lord’s incarnations for the perfor-
mance of various pastimes, his hair stands on end on his body,
tears fall from his eyes, and in his spiritual realization his voice
falters. Sometimes he very openly dances, sometimes he sings
loudly, and sometimes he cries. Thus he expresses his transcen-
dental jubilation.
PURPORT
The Lord’s activities are uncommon. For example, when He appeared
as Lord Ramacandra, He performed uncommon activities like bridging
the ocean. Similarly, when Lord Krsna appeared He raised the
Govardhana Hill when He was only seven years of age. These are uncom-
mon activities. Fools and rascals, who are not in the transcendental posi-
tion, consider these uncommon activities of the Lord to be mythological,
but when the pure devotee, the liberated person, hears about these un-
common activities of the Lord, he immediately becomes ecstatic and ex-
hibits the symptoms of chanting, dancing, and crying very loudly and
jubilantly. This is the difference between a devotee and a nondevotee.


--- Page 93 ---
Text 35] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 87
TEXT 35
यदा ग्रहग्रस्त হল छचिद्धस-
त्याक्रन्द ते घ्यायति वन्दते जनम्‌ |
यहुः श्वसन्वक्ति হই „ जगत्यते
नारायणेत्यात्ममतिगंतत्रपः 13
yada graha-grasta iva kvacid dhasaty
akrandate dhyayati vandate janam
muhuh Svasan vakti hare jagat-pate
narayanety atma-matir gata-trapah
yadd—when; graha-grastah—haunted by a ghost; iva—like;
kvacit—sometimes; hasati—laughs; akrandate—cries loudly (remem-
bering the transcendental qualities of the Lord); dhydyati—meditates;
vandate—offers respects; janam—to all living entities (thinking all of
them to be engaged in the service of the Lord); muhuh—constantly;
Svasan—breathing heavily; vakti—he speaks; hare—O my Lord; jagat-
pate—O master of the whole world; narayana—O Lord Narayana; iti—
thus; atma-matih—fully absorbed in thoughts of the Supreme Lord;
gata-trapah—without shame.
TRANSLATION
When a devotee becomes like a person haunted by a ghost, he
laughs and very loudly chants about the qualities of the Lord.
Sometimes he sits to perform meditation, and he offers respects to
every living entity, considering him a devotee of the Lord. Con-
stantly breathing very heavily, he becomes careless of social eti-
quette and loudly chants like a madman, “Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna! O my Lord, O master of the universe!”
PURPORT
When one chants the holy name of the Lord in ecstasy, not caring for
outward social conventions, it is to be understood that he is atma-mati.
In other words, his consciousness is turned toward the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.


--- Page 94 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
TEXT 36
तदा युमान्मुक्तसमस्तबन्धन-
स्तद्धावभावानुकृताश्चयाकृतिः ।
frie महीयसा
मक्तिप्रयोभेण समेत्यधोक्षजम्‌ 1381
tada puman mukta-samasta-bandhanas
tad-bhava-bhavanukrtasayakrtih
nirdagdha-bijjanusayo mahiyasa
bhakti-prayogena samety adhoksajam
tadi—at that time; puman—the living entity; mukta—liberated;
samasta-bandhanah—from all material obstacles on the path of devo-
tional service; tat-bhdva—of the situation of the Supreme Lord’s ac-
tivities; bhava—by thinking; anukrta—made similar; asaya-akrtih—
whose mind and body; nirdagdha—completely burned up; bija—the
seed or original cause of material existence; anusayah—desire;
mahiyasa—very powerful; bhakti—of devotional service; prayogena—
by the application; sameti—achieves; adhoksajam —the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is beyond the reach of the material mind and
knowledge.
TRANSLATION
The devotee is then freed from all material contamination be-
cause he constantly thinks of the Lord’s pastimes and because his
mind and body have been converted to spiritual qualities. Because
of his intense devotional service, his ignorance, material con-
sciousness and all kinds of material desires are completely burnt to
ashes. This is the stage at which one can achieve the shelter of the
Lord’s lotus feet.
PURPORT
When a devotee is completely purified, he becomes anyabhilasita-
Sanya. In other words, all of his material desires become zero, being
burrit to ashes, and he exists either as the Lord’s servant, friend, father,


--- Page 95 ---
Text 37] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 89
mother or conjugal lover. Because one thinks constantly in this way,
one’s present material body and mind are fully spiritualized, and the
needs of one’s material body completely vanish from one’s existence. An
iron rod put into a fire becomes warmer and warmer, and when it is red
hot it is no longer an iron rod but fire. Similarly, when a devotee con-
stantly engages in devotional service and thinks of the Lord in his
original Krsna consciousness, he no longer has any material activities, for
his body is spiritualized. Advancement in Krsna consciousness is very
powerful, and therefore even during this life such a devotee has
achieved the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. This transcendental
ecstatic existence of a devotee was completely exhibited by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. In this regard, Srila Madhvacarya writes as follows:
tad-bhava-bhavah tad yatha ऽएव चत bhaktih
kecid bhakta vinrtyanti gayanti ca yathepsitam
kecit tusnirn japanty eva kecit sobhaya-karinah
The ecstatic condition of devotional service was completely exhibited by
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who sometimes danced, sometimes cried,
sometimes sang, sometimes remained silent, and sometimes chanted the
holy name of the Lord. That is perfect spiritual existence.
TEXT 37
अधोक्षजाठम्ममिहाञ्ुमात्मनः
शरीरिणः संसृतिचकशातनम्‌ |
] &
तद्‌ ब्रह्मनिर्वाणसुखं विदबुधा-
स्ततो मजष्वं हृदये हृदीश्वरम्‌ ॥२७॥
adhoksajalambham ihasubhatmanah
Saririnah samsrti-cakra-satanam
tad brahma-nirvana-sukhari vidur budhas
tato bhajadhvari hrdaye hrd-isvaram
adhoksaja—with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond
the reach of the materialistic mind or experimental knowledge;


--- Page 96 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
alambham —being constantly in contact; tha—in this material world;
asubha-atmanah —whose mind is materially contaminated; saririnah—
of a living entity who has accepted a material body; sarisrti—of material
existence; cakra—the cycle; satanam—completely stopping; tat—that;
brahma-nirvana—connected with the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute
Truth; sukham—transcendental happiness;  viduh—understand;
budhah—those who are spiritually advanced; tatah—therefore;
bhajadhvam—engage in devotional service; hrdaye—within the core of
the heart; hrt-iSvaram —to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Supersoul within the heart.
TRANSLATION

The real problem of life is the repetition of birth and death,
which is like a wheel rolling repeatedly up and down. This wheel,
however, completely stops when one is in touch with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In other words, by the transcendental
bliss realized from constant engagement in devotional service, one
is completely liberated from material existence. All learned men
know this. Therefore, my dear friends, O sons of the asuras, im-
mediately begin meditating upon and worshiping the Supersoul
within everyone’s heart.

PURPORT

Generally it is understood that by merging into the existence of Brah-
man, the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth, one becomes com-
pletely happy. The words brahma-nirvana refer to connecting with the
Absolute Truth, who is realized in three features: brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate. One feels brahma-sukha, spiritual happiness, by
merging into the impersonal Brahman because the brahmajyoti is the
effulgence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yasya prabha
prabhavato jagad-anda-koti. Yasya prabha, the impersonal Brahman,
consists of the rays of Krsna’s transcendental body. Therefore whatever
transcendental bliss one feels from merging in Brahman is due to contact
with Krsna. Contact with Krsna is perfect brahma-sukha. When the
mind is in touch with the impersonal Brahman one becomes satisfied, but
one must advance further to render service to the Supreme Personality


--- Page 97 ---
Text 37] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 91
of Godhead, for one’s remaining merged in the Brahman effulgence is
not always assured. As it is said, aruhya krcchrena param pada tatah
patanty adho ’nadrta-yusmad-arighrayah: one may merge in the
Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth, but there is a chance that one
may fall because of not being acquainted with Adhoksaja, or Vasudeva.
Of course, such brahma-sukha undoubtedly eliminates material happi-
ness, but when one advances through impersonal Brahman and localized
Paramatma to approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead in relation-
ship with Him as a servant, friend, parent or conjugal lover, one’s happi-
ness becomes all-pervading. Then one automatically feels transcendental
bliss, just as one becomes happy seeing the shining of the moon. One ac-
quires natural happiness upon seeing the moon, but when one can see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, one’s transcendental happiness in-
creases hundreds and thousands of times. As soon as one is very in-
timately connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one surely
becomes free from all material contamination. Ya nirvrtis tanu-bhrtam.
This cessation of all material happiness is called nirvrti or nirvana. Srila
Rapa Gosvami says in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.38):
brahmanando bhaved esa
cet parardha-gunikrtah
naiti bhakti-sukhambhodheh
paramanu-tulam api
“If brahmananda, the bliss of merging in the Brahman effulgence, were
multiplied one hundred trillion times, it would still not equal even an
atomic fragment of the ocean of transcendental bliss felt in devotional
service.”
brahma-bhitah prasannatma
na Socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhiitesu
mad-bhaktirh labhate param
“One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have


--- Page 98 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
anything; he is equally disposed toward all living entities. In that state he
attains pure devotional service unto the Lord.” (Bg. 18.54) If one ad-
vances further from the brahma-nirvana platform, one enters the stage
of devotional service (mad-bhaktirn labhate param). The word
adhoksajalambham refers to keeping the mind always engaged in the
Absolute Truth, who is beyond the mind and material speculation. Sa vai
manah krsna-padaravindayoh. This is the result of Deity worship. By
constantly engaging in the service of the Lord and thinking of His lotus
feet, one is automatically freed from all material contamination. Thus the
word brahma-nirvana-sukham indicates that when one is in touch with
the Absolute Truth, material sense gratification is completely nullified.
TEXT 38
कोऽतिप्रयासोऽखुरवालका हरे-
TEA स्वे हदि छिद्रवत्‌ सतः |
खस्थात्मनः सख्युरशेषदेहिनां
सामान्यतः किं विषयोपपादनैः ॥२८॥
ko ’ti-prayaso ’sura-balaka harer
upasane sve hrdi chidravat satah
svasyatmanah sakhyur asesa-dehinarm
samanyatah kim visayopapadanaih
kah—what; ati-prayasah—difficult endeavor; asura-balakah—O
sons of demons; hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
upasane—in discharging the devotional service; sve—in one’s own;
hrdi—core of the heart; chidra-vat—just like the space; satah—who al-
ways exists; svasya—of one’s self or of the living entity; atmanah—of
the Supersoul; sakhyuh—of the well-wishing friend; asesa —unlimited;
dehinam —of the embodied souls; samanyatah—generally; kim—what
is the need; visaya-upapadanaih—with activities delivering the objects
of the senses for sense enjoyment.
TRANSLATION
O my friends, sons of the asuras, the Supreme Personality of

Godhead in His Supersoul feature always exists within the cores of


--- Page 99 ---
Text 38] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 93
the hearts of all living entities. Indeed, He is the well-wisher and
friend of all living entities, and there is no difficulty in worshiping
the Lord. Why, then, should people not engage in His devotional
service? Why are they so addicted to unnecessarily producing ar-
tificial paraphernalia for sense gratification?
PURPORT
Because the Personality of Godhead is supreme, no one is equal to
Him, and no one is greater than Him. Nonetheless, if one is a devotee of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord is easily obtainable. The
Lord is compared to the sky because the sky is vast yet within the reach
of all, not only of human beings but even of the animals. The Supreme
Lord, in His Paramatma feature, exists as the best well-wisher and
friend. As confirmed in the Vedas, sayujau sakhayau. The Lord, in His
Supersoul feature, always stays in the heart along with the living entity.
The Lord is so friendly to the living entity that He remains within the
heart so that one can always contact Him without difficulty. One can do
this simply by devotional service (Sravanari kirtanar visnoh smaranari
pada-sevanam). As soon as one hears of the Supreme Personality of God-
head (krsna-kirtana), one immediately comes in touch with the Lord. A
devotee immediately comes in touch with the Lord by any or all of the
items of devotional service:
Sravanari kirtanari visnoh
smaranarh pada-sevanam
arcanari vandanari dasyar
sakhyam atma-nivedanam
Therefore there is no difficulty in coming in contact with the Supreme
Lord (ko ‘ti-prayasah). On the other hand, going to hell requires great
endeavor. If one wants to go to hell by illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling
and intoxication, he must acquire so many things. For illicit sex he must
arrange for money for brothels, for meat-eating he must arrange for
many slaughterhouses, for gambling he must arrange for casinos and
hotels, and for intoxication he must open many breweries. Clearly,
therefore, if one wants to go to hell he must endeavor very much, but if
he wants to return home, back to Godhead, there is no difficult endeavor.


--- Page 100 ---
94 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
To go back to Godhead, one may live alone anywhere, in any condition,
and simply sit down, meditate upon the Supersoul and chant and hear
about the Lord. Thus there is no difficulty in approaching the Lord.
Adanta-gobhir visatarh tamisram. Because of inability to control the
senses, one must go through great endeavor to go to hell, but if one is
sensible he can very easily obtain the favor of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead because the Lord is always with him. By the simple method of
Sravanari kirtanari visnoh, the Lord is satisfied. Indeed, the Lord says:
patra puspari phalari toyari
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad ahah bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah
“If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I
will accept it.” (Bg. 9.26) One can meditate upon the Lord anywhere
and everywhere. Thus Prahlada Maharaja advised his friends, the sons
of the demons, to take this path back home, back to Godhead, without
difficulty.
TEXT 39
रायः কত पशवः सुतादयो
गृहा मही इच्रकोशभूतयः |
सर्वेऽथकामाः क्षणभङ्गुरायुषः
©. ड
र्वन्ति म्यस्य कियत्‌ प्रियं चलाः ॥। २९॥
rayah 10010487071 pasavah sutadayo
grha mahi kunjara-kosa-bhitayah
sarve ’rtha-kamah ksana-bhangurayusah
kurvanti martyasya kiyat priya calah
rayah—wealth; kalatram—one’s wife and feminine friends;
pasavah—domestic animals like cows, horses, asses, cats and dogs; suta-
adayah—children and so on; grhah—big buildings and residences;
mahi—land; kunjara—elephants; kosa—treasury house; bhiitayah—
and other luxuries for sense gratification and material enjoyment;


--- Page 101 ---
Text 39] ‘What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 95
sarve—all; artha—economic development; kamah—and sense gratifica-
tion; ksana-bharngura —perishable in a moment; ayusah—of one whose
duration of life; kurvanti—effect or bring; martyasya—of one who is
destined to die; kiyat—how much; priyam —pleasure; calah—flickering
and temporary.
TRANSLATION

One’s riches, beautiful wife and female friends, one’s sons and
daughters, one’s residence, one’s domestic animals like cows,
elephants and horses, one’s treasury, economic development and
sense gratification —indeed, even the lifetime in which one can en-
joy all these material opulences—are certainly temporary and
flickering. Since the opportunity of human life is temporary, what
benefit can these material opulences give to a sensible man who has
understood himself to be eternal?

PURPORT

This verse describes how the advocates of economic development are
frustrated by the laws of nature. As the previous verse asks, kim
visayopapadanaih: what is the actual benefit of so-called economic
development? The history of the world has factually proved that at-
tempts to increase economic development for bodily comfort through the
advancement of material civilization have done nothing to remedy the
inevitability of birth, death, old age and disease. Everyone has knowl-
edge of huge empires throughout the history of the world —the Roman
Empire, the Moghul Empire, the British Empire and so on—but all the
societies engaged in such economic development (sarve ’rtha-kamah)
have been frustrated by the laws of nature through periodic wars,
pestilence, famine and so on. Thus all their attempts have been flickering
and temporary. In this verse, therefore, it is said, kurvanti martyasya
kiyat priyari 00108: one may be very proud of possessing a vast empire,
but such empires are impermanent; after one hundred or two hundred
years, everything is finished. All such positions of economic develop-
ment, although created with great endeavor and hardship, are van-
quished very soon. Therefore they have been described as calah. An in-
telligent man should conclude that material economic development is not
at all pleasing. The entire world is described in Bhagavad-gita as


--- Page 102 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
duhkhalayam asasvatam— miserable and temporary. Economic develop-
ment may be pleasing for some time, but it cannot endure. Thus many
big businessmen are now very morose because they are being harassed
by various plundering governments. In conclusion, why should one
waste his time for so-called economic development, which is neither per-
manent nor pleasing to the soul?

On the other hand, our relationship with Krsna, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, is eternal. Nitya-siddha krsna-prema. The pure
souls are eternally in love with Krsna, and this permanent love, either as
a servant, a friend, a parent or a conjugal lover, is not at all difficult to
revive. Especially in this age, the concession is that simply by chanting
the Hare Krsna mantra (harer nama harer nama harer namaiva
kevalam) one revives his original relationship with God and thus be-
comes so happy that he does not want anything material. As enunciated
by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, na dhanam na janam na sundarim
kavitarh va jagad-isa kamaye. A very advanced devotee in Krsna con-
sciousness does not want riches, followers or possessions. Rayah
16001047078 pasavah sutadayo grha mahi kunjara-kosa-bhitayah. The
satisfaction of possessing material opulences, although perhaps of a dif-
ferent standard, is available even in the lives of dogs and hogs, who can-
not revive their eternal relationship with Krsna. In human life, however,
our eternal, dormant relationship with Krsna is possible to revive.
Therefore Prahlada Maharaja has described this life as arthadam. Conse-
quently, instead of wasting our time for economic development, which
cannot give us any happiness, if we simply try to revive our eternal rela-
tionship with Krsna, we will properly utilize our lives.

TEXT 40
एवं हि रोकाः कतुमिः इता अमी
क्षयिष्णवः सातिशया न निर्मलाः |
तसाद दृष्टश्चुतद्षणं परं
भक्त्योक्तयेशं भजतात्मलब्धये ।४०॥
evar hi lokah kratubhih krta ami
ksayisnavah satisaya na nirmaldh


--- Page 103 ---
Text 40] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 97
tasmad adrsta-sruta-ditsanari pararn
bhaktyoktayesari bhajatatma-labdhaye

evam—similarly (as earthly wealth and possessions are imperma-
nent); hi—indeed; lokah —higher planetary systems like heaven, the
moon, the sun and Brahmaloka; kAratubhih—by performing great
sacrifices; krtah—achieved; ami—all those; ksayisnavah—perishable,
impermanent; satiSayah—although more comfortable and pleasing;
na—not; nirmaldh —pure (free from disturbances); tasmat—therefore;
adrsta-Sruta—never seen or heard; dizsanam —whose fault; param —the
Supreme; bhaktya—with great devotional love; uktaya—as described in
the Vedic literature (not mixed with jana or karma); iSam—the
Supreme Lord; bhajata—worship; atma-labdhaye —for self-realization.

TRANSLATION

It is learned from Vedic literature that by performing great
sacrifices one may elevate himself to the heavenly planets.
However, although life on the heavenly planets is hundreds and
thousands of times more comfortable than life on earth, the
heavenly planets are not pure [nirmalam], or free from the taint of
material existence. The heavenly planets are also temporary, and
therefore they are not the goal of life. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, however, has never been seen or heard to possess in-
ebriety. Consequently, for your own benefit and self-realization,
you must worship the Lord with great devotion, as described in the
revealed scriptures.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita, ksine punye martya-lokar visanti. Even
if one is promoted to the higher planetary systems by performing great
sacrifices, which are accompanied by the sinful act of sacrificing animals,
the standard of happiness in Svargaloka is also not free of disturbances.
There is a similar struggle for existence even for the King of heaven,
Indra. Thus there is no practical benefit in promoting oneself to the
heavenly planets. Indeed, from the heavenly planets one must return to
this earth after one has exhausted the results of his pious activities. In
the Vedas it is said, tad yatheha karma-jito lokah kstyate evam evamutra


--- Page 104 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
punya-jito lokah kstyata. As the material positions we acquire here by
hard work are vanquished in due course of time, one’s residence in the
heavenly planets is also eventually vanquished. According to one’s ac-
tivities of piety in different degrees, one obtains different standards of
life, but none of them are permanent, and therefore they are all impure.
Consequently, one should not endeavor to be promoted to the higher
planetary systems, only to return to this earth or descend still lower to
the hellish planets. To stop this cycle of going up and coming down, one
must take to Krsna consciousness. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore
said:

brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva

guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
(Ce. Madhya 19.151)
The living entity is rotating in the cycle of birth and death, going some-
times to the higher planets and sometimes to the lower planets, but that
is not the solution to the problems of life. But if by the grace of Krsna
one is fortunate enough to meet a guru, a representative of Krsna, one
gets the clue to returning home, back to Godhead, having achieved self-
realization. This is what is actually desirable. Bhajatatma-labdhaye: one
must take to Krsna consciousness for self-realization.
TEXT 41
০
Td इह ` कर्माणि विद्धन्मान्यसङृनरः |
करोत्यतो Roatan विन्दते फलम्‌ 19201
yad-artha iha karmani
vidvan-many asakrn narah
karoty ato viparyasam
amoghari vindate phalam
yat—of which; arthe—for the purpose; tha—in this material world;

karmani—many activities (in factories, industries, speculation and so
on); vidvat—advanced in knowledge; mani—thinking himself to be;
asakrt—again and again; narah—a person; karoti—performs; atah—


--- Page 105 ---
Text 42] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 99
from this; viparyasam—the opposite; amogham—unfailingly; wvin-
date —achieves; phalam —result.
TRANSLATION

A materialistic person, thinking himself very advanced in intel-
ligence, continually acts for economic development. But again and
again, as enunciated in the Vedas, he is frustrated by material ac-
tivities, either in this life or in the next. Indeed, the results one
obtains are inevitably the opposite of those one desires.

PURPORT

No one has ever achieved the results he desired from material ac-
tivities. On the contrary, everyone has been frustrated again and again.
Therefore one must not waste his time in such material activities for sen-
sual pleasure, either in this life or in the next. So many nationalists,
economists and other ambitious persons have tried for happiness, in-
dividually or collectively, but history proves that they have all been frus-
trated. In recent history we have seen many political leaders work hard
for individual and collective economic development, but they have all
failed. This is the law of nature, as clearly explained in the next verse.

TEXT 42
सुखाय दुःखमोक्षाय सङ्कट इह कर्मिणः |
सदाभओोतीहया दुःखमनीहायाः স্তুলান্বনঃ ।४२॥
sukhaya duhkha-moksaya
sarnkalpa iha karminah
sadapnotihaya duhkham
anihayah sukhavrtah

sukhaya—for achieving happiness by a so-called higher standard of
life; duhkha-moksaya—for becoming free from misery; sarikalpah—
the determination; iha—in this world; karminah—of the living entity
trying for economic development; sad@—always; dpnoti—achieves;
thaya—by activity or ambition; duhkham—only unhappiness;


--- Page 106 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
anthayah—and from not desiring economic development; sukha—by
happiness; avrtah—covered.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, every materialist desires to achieve happi-
ness and diminish his distress, and therefore he acts accordingly.
Actually, however, one is happy as long as one does not endeavor
for happiness; as soon as one begins his activities for happiness,
his conditions of distress begin.
PURPORT
Every conditioned soul is bound by the laws of material nature, as de-
scribed in Bhagavad-gita (prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani
sarvasah). Everyone has achieved a certain type of body given by ma-
terial nature according to the instructions of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
Svarah sarva-bhitanam
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhiatani
yantraridhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.” (Bg. 18.61) The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the Supersoul, is present in everyone’s heart, and as
the living entity desires, the Lord gives him facilities with which to work
according to his ambitions in different grades of bodies. The body is just
like an instrument by which the living entity moves according to false
desires for happiness and thus suffers the pangs of birth, death, old age
and disease in different standards of life. Everyone begins his activities
with some plan and ambition, but actually, from the beginning of one’s
plan to the end, one does not derive any happiness. On the contrary, as
soon as one begins acting according to his plan, his life of distress im-
mediately begins. Therefore, one should not be ambitious to dissipate the
unhappy conditions of life, for one cannot do anything about them.
Aharikara-vimidhatma kartaham iti manyate. Although one is acting


--- Page 107 ---
Text 43] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 101
according to false ambitions, he thinks he can improve his material con-
ditions by his activities. The Vedas enjoin that one should not try to in-
crease happiness or decrease distress, for this is futile. Tasyaiva hetoh
prayateta kovidah. One should work for self-realization, not for
economic development, which is impossible to improve. Without en-
deavor, one can get the amount of happiness and distress for which he is
destined, and one cannot change this. Therefore, it is better to use one’s
time for advancement in the spiritual life of Krsna consciousness. One
should not waste his valuable life as a human being. It is better to utilize
this life for developing Krsna consciousness, without ambitions for so-
called happiness.
TEXT 43
९
कामान्कामयते काम्यै्यदथमिद TE |
স্চ त
स वैँ देदस्तु पारक्यो AFA यास्युपेति च ।४३॥
kaman kamayate kamyair
yad-artham iha parusah
sa vai dehas tu parakyo
bhanguro yaty upaiti ca
kaman—things for sense gratification; kamayate—one desires;
kamyaih—by different desirable actions; yat—of which; artham—for
the purpose; iha—in this material world; pirusah—the living entity;
sah—that; vai—indeed; dehah—body; tu—but; parakyah—belongs to
others (the dogs, vultures, etc.); bharigurah—perishable; yati—goes
away; upaiti—embraces the spirit soul; ca —and.
TRANSLATION
A living entity desires comfort for his body and makes many
plans for this purpose, but actually the body is the property of
others. Indeed, the perishable body embraces the living entity and
then leaves him aside.
PURPORT
Everyone desires comfort for his body and tries to make a suitable
situation for this purpose, forgetting that the body is meant to be eaten


--- Page 108 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
by dogs, jackals or moths and thus turned into useless stool, ashes or
earth. The living entity wastes his time in a futile attempt to gain ma-
terial possessions for the comfort of one body after another.
TEXT 44
fg व्यवहितापत्यदारागारषनादयः ।
राज्य कोशलगजामात्यभ्रत्यापा ममतास्पदाः; ॥८४॥
kim u vyavahitapatya-
daragara-dhanadayah
rajya-kosa-gajamatya-
bhrtyapta mamataspadah
kim u—what to speak of; vyavahita—separated; apatya—children;
dara—wives; agara—residences; dhana—wealth; adayah—and so on;
rajya—kingdoms; kosa—treasuries; gaja—big elephants and horses;
amatya—ministers; bhrtya—servants; aptah—relatives; mamata-
aspadah—false seats or abodes of intimate relationship (““mineness™).
TRANSLATION
Since the body itself is ultimately meant to become stool or
earth, what is the meaning of the paraphernalia related to the
body, such as wives, residences, wealth, children, relatives, ser-
vants, friends, kingdoms, treasuries, animals and ministers? They
are also temporary. What more can be said about this?
TEXT 45
a EN
किमेतैरात्मनस्तुच्छेः सह देहेन नश्वरैः ।
अनर्थेरथसंकालनित्यानन्दरसोदधेः ॥४५॥
kim etair atmanas tucchaih
saha dehena nasvaraih
anarthair artha-sankasair
nityananda-rasodadheh


--- Page 109 ---
Text 46] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 103
kim —what is the use; etaih—with all these; atmanah—for the real
self; tucchaih—which are most insignificant; saha—with; dehena—
the body; nasvaraih—perishable; anarthaih—unwanted; artha-
sankasaih—appearing as if needed; nitya-ananda—of eternal happi-
ness; rasa—of the nectar; udadheh—for the ocean.
TRANSLATION
All this paraphernalia is very near and dear as long as the body
exists, but as soon as the body is destroyed, all things related to the
body are also finished. Therefore, actually one has nothing to do
with them, but because of ignorance one accepts them as valuable.
Compared to the ocean of eternal happiness, they are most insig-
nificant. What is the use of such insignificant relationships for the
eternal living being?
PURPORT
Krsna consciousness, devotional service to Krsna, is the ocean of eter-
nal bliss. In comparison to this eternal bliss, the so-called happiness of
society, friendship and love is simply useless and insignificant. One
should therefore not be attached to temporary things. One should take to
Krsna consciousness and become eternally happy.
TEXT 46
€
निरूप्यतामिह खाथः कियान्देहभेतोऽसुराः |
निपेकादिष्ववस्यासु স্তিহ্যদানজ্ম कर्मभिः 198)
nirdpyatam iha svarthah
kiyan deha-bhrto ‘surah
nisekadisv avasthasu
klisyamanasya karmabhih
niripyatam—Ilet it be ascertained; iha—in this world; sva-arthah—
personal benefit; kiyan—how much; deha-bhrtah—of a living entity
who has a material body; asurah—O sons of demons; niseka-adisu—
beginning from the happiness derived from sex life; avasthasu—in


--- Page 110 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
temporary conditions; kli§yamanasya—of one who is suffering in severe
hardships; karmabhih—by his previous material activities.
TRANSLATION

My dear friends, O sons of the asuras, the living entity receives
different types of bodies according to his previous fruitive ac-
tivities. Thus he is seen to suffer with reference to his particular
body in all conditions of life, beginning with his infusion into the
womb. Please tell me, therefore, after full consideration, what is
the living entity’s actual interest in fruitive activities, which result
in hardship and misery?

PURPORT

Karmana daiva-netrena jantur dehopapattaye. The living entity
receives a particular type of body according to his karma, or fruitive ac-
tivities. The material pleasure derived in the material world from one’s
particular body is based on sexual pleasure: yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-
sukhari hi tuccham. The entire world is working so hard only for sexual
pleasure. To enjoy sexual pleasure and maintain the status quo of ma-
terial life, one must work very hard, and because of such activities, one
prepares himself another material body. Prahlada Maharaja places this
matter to his friends, the asuras, for their consideration. Asuras
generally cannot understand that the objects of sexual pleasure, the so-
called pleasure of materialistic life, depend on extremely hard labor.

TEXT 47
कमौण्यारमते देदी देहेनातमानुवर्तिना |
९ .
कमेभिस्तनुते ইহ্্মম त्वविवेकतः Rell
karmany arabhate deht
dehenatmanuvartina
karmabhis tanute deham
ubhayarih tv avivekatah

karmani—material fruitive activities; arabhate—begins; dehi—a liv-

ing entity who has accepted a particular type of body; dehena—with that


--- Page 111 ---
Text 47] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 105
body; atma-anuvartina—which is received according to his desire and
past activities; karmabhih—by such material activities; tanute—he ex-
pands; deham—another body; ubhayam—both of them; tu—indeed;
avivekatah—due to ignorance.
TRANSLATION

The living entity, who has received his present body because of
his past fruitive activity, may end the results of his actions in this
life, but this does not mean that he is liberated from bondage to
material bodies. The living entity receives one type of body, and by
performing actions with that body he creates another. Thus he
transmigrates from one body to another, through repeated birth
and death, because of his gross ignorance.

PURPORT

The living entity’s evolution through different types of bodies is con-
ducted automatically by the laws of nature in bodies other than those of
human beings. In other words, by the laws of nature (prakrteh
kriyamanani) the living entity evolves from lower grades of life to the
human form. Because of his developed consciousness, however, the
human being must understand the constitutional position of the living
entity and understand why he must accept a material body. This chance
is given to him by nature, but if he nonetheless acts like an animal, what
is the benefit of his human life? In this life one must select the goal of
life and act accordingly. Having received instructions from the spiritual
master and the $astra, one must be sufficiently intelligent. In the human
form of life, one should not remain foolish and ignorant, but must in-
quire about his constitutional position. This is called athato brahma-
Jynasa. The human psychology gives rise to many questions, which
various philosophers have considered and answered with various types of
philosophy based upon mental concoction. This is not the way of libera-
tion. The Vedic instructions say, tad-vijidanartharn sa gurum
evabhigacchet: to solve the problems of life, one must accept a spiritual
master. Tasmad gururi prapadyeta jyniasuh Sreya uttamame: if one is ac-
tually serious in inquiring about the solution to material existence, one
must approach a bona fide guru.


--- Page 112 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
tad viddhi pranipdtena
pariprasnena sevayd
upadeksyanti te jianari
JAaninas tattva-darsinah
“Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized
soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.”
(Bg. 4.34) One must approach a bona fide spiritual master by surrender-
ing himself (pranipatena) and rendering service. An intelligent person
must inquire from the spiritual master about the goal of life. A bona fide
spiritual master can answer all such questions because he has seen the
real truth. Even in ordinary activities, we first consider gain and loss,
and then we act. Similarly, an intelligent person must consider the entire
process of material existence and then act intelligently, following the
directions of the bona fide spiritual master.
TEXT 48
तसादर्थाथच कामाश्च TA यदपाश्रयाः |
भजतानीदयात्मानमनीहं हरिमीश्वरम्‌ gel
tasmad arthas ca kamas ca
dharmas ca yad-apdsrayah
bhajatanthayatmanam
anthari harim Svaram
tasmat —therefore; arthah—ambitions for economic development;
ca—and; kdmah—ambitions for satisfaction of the senses; ca—also;
dharmah—dauties of religion; ca—and; yat—upon whom; apdsrayah—
dependent; bhajata—worship; anihaya—without desire for them;
atmanam—the Supersoul; antham—indifferent; harim—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; #Svaram —the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The four principles of advancement in spiritual life —dharma,
artha, kama and moksa—all depend on the disposition of the


--- Page 113 ---
Text 49] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 107
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, my dear friends,
follow in the footsteps of devotees. Without desire, fully depend
upon the disposition of the Supreme Lord, worship Him, the
Supersoul, in devotional service.
PURPORT

These are words of intelligence. Everyone should know that in every
stage of life we are dependent upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore the dharma, religion, which we accept should be that which is
recommended by Prahlada Maharaja— bhagavata-dharma. This is the
instruction of Krsna: sarva-dharman parityajya mam 61607 Saranarm
vraja. To take shelter of the lotus feet of Krsna means to act according to
the rules and regulations of bhagavata-dharma, devotional service. As
far as economic development is concerned, we should discharge our oc-
cupational duties but fully depend on the lotus feet of the Lord for the
results. Karmany evadhikaras te ma phalesu kadacana: “You have a
right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to the
fruits of action.” According to one’s position, one should perform his
duties, but for the results one should fully depend upon Krsna.
Narottama dasa Thakura sings that our only desire should be to perform
the duties of Krsna consciousness. We should not be misled by the
karma-mimarisa philosophy, which concludes that if we work seriously
the results will come automatically. This is not a fact. The ultimate result
depends upon the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In devo-
tional service, therefore, the devotee completely depends upon the Lord
and honestly performs his occupational duties. Therefore Prahlada
Maharaja advised his friends to depend completely on Krsna and worship
Him in devotional service.

TEXT 49
सर्वेषामपि भूतानां हरिरात्मेश्वरः प्रियः ।
भूतैमेदद्धिः खतः कृतानां जीवसंज्ञितः 18’
sarvesam api bhitanarm
harir atmesvarah priyah
bhitair mahadbhih sva-krtaih
krtanarn jiva-sarjiiitah


--- Page 114 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
sarvesam—of all; api—certainly; bhiitanam—living entities; harih—
the Lord, who mitigates all the miseries of the living entity; atma—the
original source of life; Hvarah—the complete controller; priyah—the
dear; bhitaih—by the separated energies, the five material elements;
mahadbhih—emanating from the total material energy, the mahat-
tattva; sva-krtaih—which are manifested by Himself; krtanam—cre-
ated; jiva-sariyiiitah—who is also known as the living entity, since the
living entities are expansions of His marginal energy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is the soul and the
Supersoul of all living entities. Every living entity is a manifesta-
tion of His energy in terms of the living soul and the material
body. Therefore the Lord is the most dear, and He is the supreme
controller.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is manifested by His different
energies —the material energy, the spiritual energy and the marginal en-
ergy. He is the original source of all living entities in the material world,
and He is situated in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. Although the liv-
ing entity is the cause of his various types of bodies, the body is given by
material nature according to the order of the Lord.
varah sarva-bhitanari
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhiitani
yantraridhani mayaya
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.” (Bg. 18.61) The body is just
like a machine, a car, in which the living entity is given a chance to sit
and move according to his desire. The Lord is the original cause of the
material body and the soul, which is expanded by His marginal energy.
The Supreme Lord is the dearmost object of all living entities. Prahlada
Maharaja therefore advised his class friends, the sons of the demons, to
take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead again.


--- Page 115 ---
Text 52] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 109
TEXT 50
देवोऽसुरो ATA वा यक्षो TR एव वा ।
भजन्‌ FFF चरणं SEH स्याद्‌ यथा वयम्‌।।५०॥
devo ’suro manusyo va
yakso gandharva eva va
bhajan mukunda-caranari
svastiman syad yatha vayam
devah—a demigod; asurah—a demon; manusyah—a human being;
vi—or; yaksah—a Yaksa (a member of a demoniac poe
gandharvah—a Gandharva; eva—indeed; va—or; bhajan—rendering
service; mukunda-caranam—to the lotus feet of Mukunda, Lord Krsna,
who can give liberation; svasti-man—full of all auspiciousness; syat—
becomes; yatha—just as; vayam—we (Prahlada Maharaja).
TRANSLATION
If a demigod, demon, human being, Yaksa, Gandharva or any-
one within this universe renders service to the lotus feet of
Mukunda, who can deliver liberation, he is actually situated in the
most auspicious condition of life, exactly like us [the mahajanas,
headed by Prahlada Maharaja].
PURPORT
Prahlada Maharaja, by his living example, requested his friends to
engage in devotional service. Whether in demigod society, asura society,
human society or Gandharva society, every living entity should take
shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda and thus become perfect in good
fortune.
TEXTS 51-52
नारं द्विजत्वं देवत्वद्षित्वं वासुरात्मजाः |
UAE शरङखन्दस्य न Id न बहुज्ञता ॥५१।
न दानं न तपो नेज्या न शौचं न बतानि च |
प्रीयत्तेऽमर्या भक्त्या हरिरन्यद्‌ विडम्बनम्‌ 1142


--- Page 116 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
nalar dvijatvarin devatvam
rsitvarin vasuratmajah
prinandaya mukundasya
na vrttarn na bahu-jiiata
na danam na tapo nejya
na Saucari na vratani ca
priyate ‘'malaya bhaktya
harir anyad vidambanam
na—not; alam—sufficient; dvijatvam—being a perfect, highly
qualified brahmana; devatvam—being a demigod; rsitvam—Dbeing a
saintly person; vda—or; asura-atma-jah—O descendants of asuras;
prinanaya—for pleasing; mukundasya—of Mukunda, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; na vrttam—not good conduct; na—not; bahu-
Jjiata—vast learning; na—neither; danam—charity; na tapah—no
austerity; na—nor; ifyd—worship; na—nor; Saucam—cleanliness; na
vratani—nor execution of great vows; ca—also; priyate—is satisfied;
amalaya—by spotless; bhaktya—devotional service; harih—the
Supreme Lord; anyat—other things; vidambanam—only show.
TRANSLATION
My dear friends, O sons of the demons, you cannot please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by becoming perfect brahmanas,
demigods or great saints or by becoming perfectly good in eti-
quette or vast learning. None of these qualifications can awaken
the pleasure of the Lord. Nor by charity, austerity, sacrifice,
cleanliness or vows can one satisfy the Lord. The Lord is pleased
only if one has unflinching, unalloyed devotion to Him. Without
sincere devotional service, everything is simply a show.
PURPORT
Prahlada Maharaja concludes that one can become perfect by serving
the Supreme Lord sincerely by all means. Material elevation to life as a
brahmana, demigod, rsi and so on are not causes for developing love of
Godhead, but if one sincerely engages in the service of the Lord, his


--- Page 117 ---
Text 53] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 111
Krsna consciousness is complete. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita
(9.30):
api cet suduracaro
bhajate mam ananya-bhak
sadhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah
“Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly
situated.” To develop unalloyed love for Krsna is the perfection of life.
Other processes may be helpful, but if one does not develop his love for
Krsna, these other processes are simply a waste of time.
dharmah svanusthitah purisarn
visvaksena-kathasu yah
notpadayed yadi ratirn
Srama eva hi kevalam
“Duties [dharma] executed by men, regardless of occupation, are only so
much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of
the Supreme Lord.” (Bhag. 1.2.8) The test of perfection is one’s
unalloyed devotion to the Lord.
TEXT 53
ततो हरौ भगवति मक्तिं कुरुत दानवाः |
€ <
आत्मौपम्येन सर्वत्र स्वभू वात्मनी्वरे ॥५२॥
tato harau bhagavati
bhaktirn kuruta danaviah
atmaupamyena sarvatra
sarva-bhitatmanisvare
tatah—therefore; harau—unto Lord Hari; bhagavati—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; bhaktim —devotional service; kuruta—execute;
danavah—O my dear friends, 0 sons of demons; atma-aupamyena—
just as one’s own self; sarvatra—everywhere; sarve-bhita-atmani—
who is situated as the soul and Supersoul of all living entities; iSvare—
unto the Supreme Lord, the controller.


--- Page 118 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
TRANSLATION
My dear friends, O sons of the demons, in the same favorable
way that one sees himself and takes care of himself, take to devo-
tional service to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is present everywhere as the Supersoul of all living entities.
PURPORT
The word atmaupamyena refers to thinking others to be like oneself.

One can very intelligently conclude that without devotional service,
without becoming Krsna conscious, one cannot be happy. Therefore the
duty of all devotees is to preach Krsna consciousness everywhere all over
the world, because all living entities without Krsna consciousness are
suffering the pangs of material existence. To preach Krsna consciousness
is the best welfare activity. Indeed, it is described by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu as para-upakara, work for the true benefit of others. The
activities of para-upakara have been especially entrusted to those who
have taken birth in India as human beings.

bharata-bhamite haila manusya-janma yara

Jjanma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara

(Ce. Adi 9.41)
The entire world is suffering for want of Krsna consciousness. Therefore
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu advised all human beings born in India to
make their lives perfect by Krsna consciousness and then preach the
gospel of Krsna consciousness all over the world so that others may be-
come happy by executing the principles of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 54

EN ॐ

दैतेया यक्षरक्षांसि शियः शद्रा वजौकसः |

खगा मृगाः पापजीवाः सन्ति ह्यच्युततां wis

daiteya yaksa-raksarsi
striyah Sidra vrajaukasah
khaga mrgah papa-jivah
santi hy acyutatarm gatah


--- Page 119 ---
Text 54] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 113

daiteyah—O demons; yaksa-raksarsi—the living entities known as
the Yaksas and Raksasas; striyah—women; sidrah—the laborer class;
vraja-okasah—village cowherd men; khagah—birds; mrgah—animals;
papa-jiwah—sinful living entities; santi—can become; hi—certainly;
acyutatam—the qualities of Acyuta, the Supreme Lord; gatah—ob-
tained.

TRANSLATION

O my friends, O sons of demons, everyone, including you (the
Yaksas and Raksasas), the unintelligent women, $iadras and
cowherd men, the birds, the lower animals and the sinful living
entities, can revive his original, eternal spiritual life and exist
forever simply by accepting the principles of bhakti-yoga.

PURPORT

The devotees are referred to as acyuta-gotra, or the dynasty of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is called Acyuta, as indicated
in Bhagavad-gita (senayor ubhayor madhye rathari sthapaya me
‘cyuta). The Lord is infallible in the material world because He is the
supreme spiritual person. Similarly, the jivas, who are part and parcel of
the Lord, can also become infallible. Although Prahlada’s mother was in
the conditional state and was the wife of a demon, even Yaksas, Raksasas,
women, Sidras and even birds and other lower living entities can be ele-
vated to the acyuta-gotra, the family of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. That is the highest perfection. As Krsna never falls, when we
revive our spiritual consciousness, Krsna consciousness, we never fall
again to material existence. One should understand the position of the
supreme Acyuta, Krsna, who says in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):

janma karma ca me divyam
evar yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so rjuna

“One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and ac-
tivities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this ma-
terial world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.” One should under-
stand Acyuta, the supreme infallible, and how we are related with Him,


--- Page 120 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
and one should take to the service of the Lord. This is the perfection of
life. Srila Madhvacarya says, acyutatarm cyuti-varjanam. The word
acyutatam refers to one who never falls to this material world but always
remains in the Vaikuntha world, fully engaged in the service of the
Lord.
TEXT 55
एतावानेव लोकेऽसिन्पुंखः खार्थः परः wa: |
एकान्तमक्तिर्गोविन्दे यत्‌ सर्वत्र तदीक्षणम्‌ ॥५५॥
etavan eva loke 709
puriisah svarthah parah smrtah
ekanta-bhaktir govinde
yat sarvatra tad-itksanam
etavan—this much; eva—certainly; loke asmin—in this material
world; purisah—of the living entity; sva-arthah—the real self-interest;
parah—transcendental; smrtah—regarded; ekanta-bhaktih—unalloyed
devotional service; govinde —to Govinda; yat—which; sarvatra—every-
where; tat-tksanam—seeing the relationship with Govinda, Krsna.
TRANSLATION
In this material world, to render service to the lotus feet of
Govinda, the cause of all causes, and to see Him everywhere, is the
only goal of life. This much alone is the ultimate goal of human
life, as explained by all the revealed scriptures.
PURPORT
In this verse the words sarvatra tad-iksanam describe the highest per-
fection of devotional service, in which one sees everything with
reference to Govinda’s activities. The highly elevated devotee never sees
anything unrelated to Govinda.
sthavara-jarigama dekhe, na dekhe tara miirti
sarvatra haya nija ista-deva-sphiirti


--- Page 121 ---
Text 55] What Prahlada Learned in the Womb 115
“The maha-bhagavata, the advanced devotee, certainly sees everything
mobile and immobile, but he does not exactly see their forms. Rather,
everywhere he immediately sees manifest the form of the Supreme
Lord.” (Cc. Madhya 8.274) Even in this material world, a devotee does
not see materially manifested things; instead he sees Govinda in every-
thing. When he sees a tree or a human being, a devotee sees them in rela-
tion to Govinda. Govindam adi-purusam: Govinda is the original source
of everything.
Svarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
“Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other
origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes.” (Brahma-samhita 5.1)
The test of a perfect devotee is that he sees Govinda everywhere in this
universe, even in every atomic particle (andantara-stha-paramanu-
cayantara-stham). This is the perfect vision of a devotee. It is therefore
said:
narayanam ayam dhirah
pasyanti paramarthinah
10800. dhanamayari lubdhah
kamukah kaminimayam
A devotee sees everyone and everything in relationship with Narayana
(narayanam ayam). Everything is an expansion of Narayana’s energy.
Just as those who are greedy see everything as a source of money-making
and those who are lusty see everything as being conducive to sex, the
most perfect devotee, Prahlada Maharaja, saw Narayana even within a
stone column. This does not mean, however, that we must accept the
words daridra-narayana, which have been manufactured by some
unscrupulous person. One who actually envisions Narayana everywhere
makes no distinction between the poor and the rich. To single out the
daridra-narayanas, or poor Narayana, and reject the dhani-narayana,


--- Page 122 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 7
or rich Narayana, is not the vision of a devotee. Rather, that is the imper-
fect vision of materialistic persons.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Seventh
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “What Prahlada Learned
in the Womb.”


--- Page 123 ---
CHAPTER EIGHT
Lord Nrsirhhadeva
Slays the King of the Demons
As described in this chapter, Hiranyakasipu was ready to kill his own son
Prahlada Maharaja, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared in
front of the demon as Sri Nrkesari, half lion and half man, and killed
him.

Following the instructions of Prahlada Maharaja, all the sons of the
demons became attached to Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of God-
head. When this attachment became pronounced, their teachers, Sanda
and Amarka, were very much afraid that the boys would become more
and more devoted to the Lord. In a helpless condition, they approached
Hiranyakasipu and described in detail the effect of Prahlada’s preaching.
After hearing of this, Hiranyakasipu decided to kill his son Prahlada.
Hiranyakasipu was so angry that Prahlada Maharaja fell down at his feet
and said many things just to pacify him, but he was unsuccessful in
satisfying his demoniac father. Hiranyakasipu, as a typical demon, began
to advertise himself as being greater than the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but Prahlada Maharaja challenged him, saying that
Hiranyakasipu was not God, and began to glorify the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, declaring that the Lord is all-pervading, that every-
thing is under Him, and that no one is equal to or greater than Him.
Thus he requested his father to be submissive to the omnipotent
Supreme Lord.

The more Prahlada Maharaja glorified the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the more angry and agitated the demon became. Hiranyakasipu
asked his Vaisnava son whether his God existed within the columns of
the palace, and Prahlada Maharaja immediately accepted that since the
Lord is present everywhere, He was also present within the columns.
When Hiranyakasipu heard this philosophy from his young son, he
derided the boy’s statement as just the talk of a child and forcefully
struck the pillar with his fist.

117


--- Page 124 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8

As soon as HiranyakaSipu struck the column, there issued forth a
tumultuous sound. At first Hiranyakasipu, the King of the demons, could
not see anything but the pillar, but to substantiate Prahlada’s statements,
the Lord came out of the pillar in His wonderful incarnation as
Narasirnha, half lion and half man. Hiranyakasipu could immediately
understand that the extraordinarily wonderful form of the Lord was
surely meant for his death, and thus he prepared to fight with the form
of half lion and half man. The Lord performed His pastimes by fighting
with the demon for some time, and in the evening, on the border be-
tween day and night, the Lord captured the demon, threw him on His
lap, and killed him by piercing his abdomen with His nails. The Lord not
only killed Hiranyakasipu, the King of the demons, but also killed many
of his followers. When there was no one else to fight, the Lord, roaring
with anger, sat down on Hiranyakasipu’s throne.

The entire universe was thus relieved of the rule of Hiranyakasipu,
and everyone was jubilant in transcendental bliss. Then all the demigods,
headed by Lord Brahma, approached the Lord. These included the great
saintly persons, the Pitas, the Siddhas, the Vidyadharas, the Nagas, the
Manus, the prajapatis, the Gandharvas, the Caranas, the Yaksas, the
Kimpurusas, the Vaitalikas, the Kinnaras and also many other varieties
of beings in human form. All of them stood not far from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and began offering their prayers unto the Lord,
whose spiritual effulgence was brilliant as He sat on the throne.

TEXT 1
श्रीनारद उवाच
अथ दैत्युताः सर्वे श्रुत्वा तदलुवर्णितम्‌ |
जगहुर्निरवद्यत्वान्नैव गुर्वनुशिक्षितम्‌ ॥ १॥
sri-narada uvaca
atha daitya-sutah sarve
Srutva tad-anuvarnitam
Jagrhur niravadyatvan
naiva gurv-anusiksitam

sri-naradah uvdca —Sri Narada Muni said; atha—thereupon; daitya-

sutah—the sons of the demons (the class friends of Prahlada Maharaja);


--- Page 125 ---
Text 2] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 119
sarve—all; srutva—hearing; tat—by him (Prahlada); anuvarnitam—
the statements about devotional life;  jagrhuh—accepted;
niravadyatvdt—due to the supreme utility of that instruction; na—not;
eva—indeed; guru-anusiksitam —that which was taught by their
teachers.
TRANSLATION
Narada Muni continued: All the sons of the demons appreciated
the transcendental instructions of Prahlada Maharaja and took
them very seriously. They rejected the materialistic instructions
given by their teachers, Sanda and Amarka.
PURPORT
This is the effect of the preaching of a pure devotee like Prahlada

Maharaja. If a devotee is qualified, sincere and serious about Krsna con-
sciousness and if he follows the instructions of a bona fide spiritual
master, as Prahlada Maharaja did when preaching the instructions he
had received from Narada Muni, his preaching is effective. As it is said
in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.25.25):

sata prasarngan mama virya-sarvido

bhavanti hrt-karna-rasayanah kathah
If one tries to understand the discourses given by the sat, or pure devo-
tees, those instructions will be very pleasing to the ear and appealing to
the heart. Thus if one is inspired to take to Krsna consciousness and if
one practices the process in his life, he is surely successful in returning
home, back to Godhead. By the grace of Prahlada Maharaja, all his class
friends, the sons of the demons, became Vaisnavas. They did not like
hearing from their so-called teachers Sanda and Amarka, who were in-
terested only in teaching them about diplomacy, politics, economic
development and similar topics meant exclusively for sense gratification.
TEXT 2
Qf ५
अथाचायेसुतस्तेषां बुद्धिमेकान्तसं स्थिताम्‌ |
-
आलक्ष्य भीतस्त्वरितो राज्ञ आवेदयद्‌ IAN २ ॥


--- Page 126 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
athacarya-sutas tesam
buddhim ekanta-samsthitam
alaksya bhitas tvarito
rajiia avedayad yatha
atha—thereupon; acarya-sutah—the son of Sukracarya; tesam—of
them (the sons of the demons); buddhim—the intelligence; ekanta-
samsthitam —fixed in one subject matter, devotional service; alaksya—
realizing or seeing practically; bhitah—being afraid; tvaritah—as soon
as possible; rajiie—unto the King (Hiranyakasipu); avedayat—submit-
ted; yatha—fittingly.
TRANSLATION
When Sanda and Amarka, the sons of Sukracarya, observed that
all the students, the sons of the demons, were becoming advanced
in Krsna consciousness because of the association of Prahlada
Maharaja, they were afraid. They approached the King of the
demons and described the situation as it was.
PURPORT
The words buddhim ekanta-saristhitam indicate that as an effect of
Prahlada Maharaja’s preaching, the students who listened to him became
fixed in the conclusion that Krsna consciousness is the only object of
human life. The fact is that anyone who associates with a pure devotee
and follows his instructions becomes fixed in Krsna consciousness and is
not disturbed by materialistic consciousness. The teachers particularly
observed this in their students, and therefore they were afraid because
the whole community of students was gradually becoming Krsna con-
scious.
TEXTS 3-4
FRAT चलद्वात्रः पुत्रं हन्तं मनो दधे |
&
क्षिप्त्वा परुषया वाचा प्रहादमतददणम्‌ ॥ ২ ॥
आहेक्षमाणः पापेन तिरश्चीनेन चक्षुषा |
ग्रभ्रयाबनतं दान्तं बद्धाञ्जकिमवस्थितम्‌ |
€
सपः पदाहत হল सन्प्रृतिदारुषः ॥। ४ ॥


--- Page 127 ---
Text 4] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 121
kopavesa-calad-gatrah
putram hanturh mano dadhe
ksiptva parusaya vaca
prahradam atad-arhanam
aheksamanah papena
tirascinena caksusa
prasrayavanatar dantarn
baddhanjalim avasthitam
sarpah padahata iva
Svasan prakrti-darunah
kopa-avesa—by a very angry mood; calat—trembling; gatrah—the
whole body; putram—his son; hantum—to kill; manah—mind;
dadhe—fixed; ksiptva—rebuking; parusaya—with very harsh; vaca—
words; prahradam—Prahlada Maharaja; a-tat-arhanam—not fit to be
chastised (due to his noble character and tender age); aha —said;
thsamanah—looking at him in anger; papena—because of his sinful ac-
tivities;  tiraScinena—crooked; caksusa—with eyes; prasraya-
avanatam—very gentle and mild; dantam—very restrained; baddha-
afjalim—having folded hands; avasthitam —situated; sarpah—a snake;
pada-ahatah—being trampled by the foot; iva—like; svasan—hissing;
prakrti—by nature; darunah—very evil.
TRANSLATION
When Hiranyaka$ipu understood the entire situation, he was ex-
tremely angry, so much so that his body trembled. Thus he finally
decided to kill his son Prahlada. Hiranyakasipu was by nature very
cruel, and feeling insulted, he began hissing like a snake trampled
upon by someone’s foot. His son Prahlada was peaceful, mild and
gentle, his senses were under control, and he stood before
HiranyakaSipu with folded hands. According to Prahlada’s age and
behavior, he was not to be chastised. Yet with staring, crooked
eyes, Hiranyaka$ipu rebuked him with the following harsh words.
PURPORT
When one is impudent toward a highly authorized devotee, one is
punished by the laws of nature. The duration of his life is diminished,


--- Page 128 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
and he loses the blessings of superior persons and the results of pious ac-
tivities. Hiranyakasipu, for example, had achieved such great power in
the material world that he could subdue practically all the planetary
systems in the universe, including the heavenly planets (Svargaloka).
Yet now, because of his mistreatment of such a Vaisnava as Prahlada
Maharaja, all the results of his tapasya diminished. As stated in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (10.4.46):
ayuh sriyari yaso dharmariu
lokan asisa eva ca
hanti $767 07058 sarvani
240715० mahad-atikramah
“When one mistreats great souls, his life span, opulence, reputation,
religion, possessions and good fortune are all destroyed.”
TEXT 5
श्रीहिरण्यकिपुरुवाच
हे दुर्विनीत मन्दार्मन्ुलमेदकराधम ।
स्तन्धं मच्छासनोदुढ़क्तं नेष्ये त्वाद्य यमक्षयम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥
(11/11. 19
he durvinita mandatman
kula-bheda-karadhama
stabdham mac-chasanodvrttarin
nesye tvadya yama-ksayam
Sri-hiranyakasipuh uvdaca—the blessed Hiranyakasipu said; he—O;
durvinita—most impudent; manda-atman—O stupid fool; kula-bheda-
kara—who are bringing about a disruption in the family; adhama—O
lowest of mankind; stabdham —most obstinate; mat-sasana—from my
ruling; udvrttam—going astray; nesye—I shall bring; tva—you;
adya—today; yama-ksayam—to the place of Yamaraja, the superinten-
dent of death.
TRANSLATION
HiranyakasSipu said: O most impudent, most unintelligent dis-
ruptor of the family, O lowest of mankind, you have violated my


--- Page 129 ---
Text 5] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 123
power to rule you, and therefore you are an obstinate fool. Today I
shall send you to the place of Yamaraja.
PURPORT

Hiranyakasipu condemned his Vaisnava son Prahlada for being
durvinita—ungentle, uncivilized, or impudent. Srila ViSvanatha
Cakravarti Thakura, however, has derived a meaning from this word
durvinita by the mercy of the goddess of learning, Sarasvati. He says that
duh refers to this material world. This is confirmed by Lord Krsna in His
instruction in Bhagavad-gita that this material world is dukkhalayam,
full of material conditions. Vi means visesa, ‘‘specifically,”” and nita
means “brought in.” By the mercy of the Supreme Lord, Prahlada
Maharaja was especially brought to this material world to teach people
how to get out of the material condition. Lord Krsna says, yada yada hi
dharmasya glanir bhavati bharata. When the entire population, or part
of it, becomes forgetful of its own duty, Krsna comes. When Krsna is not
present the devotee is present, but the mission is the same: to free the
poor conditioned souls from the clutches of the maya that chastises them.

Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura further explains that the word
mandatman means manda —very bad or very slow in spiritual realiza-
tion. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.1.10), mandah sumanda-
matayo manda-bhagya. Prahlada Maharaja is the guide of all the
mandas, or bad living entities who are under the influence of maya. He
is the benefactor even of the slow and bad living entities in this material
world. Kula-bheda-karadhama: by his actions, Prahlada Maharaja made
great personalities who established big, big families seem insignificant.
Everyone is interested in his own family and in making his dynasty
famous, but Prahlada Maharaja was so liberal that he made no distinction
between one living entity and another. Therefore he was greater than the
great prajapatis who established their dynasties. The word stabdham
means obstinate. A devotee does not care for the instructions of the
asuras. When they give instructions, he remains silent. A devotee cares
about the instructions of Krsna, not those of demons or nondevotees. He
does not give any respect to a demon, even though the demon be his
father. Mac-chasanodvrttam: Prahlada Maharaja was disobedient to the
orders of his demoniac father. Yama-ksayam: every conditioned soul is
under the control of Yamaraja, but Hiranyakasipu said that he considered


--- Page 130 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
Prahlada Maharaja his deliverer, for Prahlada would stop
HiranyakaSipu’s repetition of birth and death. Because Prahlada
Maharaja, being a great devotee, was better than any yogi,
Hiranyakasipu was to be brought among the society of bhakti-yogis.
Thus Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura has explained these words in
a very interesting way as they can be interpreted from the side of
Sarasvati, the mother of learning.
TEXT 6
FEW यस कम्पन्ते त्रयो खोकाः सहेश्वराः ।
तस्य मेऽभीतवन्मूढ शासनं किं बलोऽस्यगाः।। § ॥
kruddhasya yasya kampante
trayo lokah sahesvarah
tasya me ’bhitavan midha
sasanarm kim balo tyagah

kruddhasya—when angered; yasya—he who; kampante—tremble;
trayah lokah—the three worlds; saha-iSvarah—with their leaders;
tasya—of that; me—of me (Hiranyakasipu); abhita-vat—without fear;
midha—rascal; sasanam —ruling order; kim—what; balah—strength;
atyagah—have overstepped.

TRANSLATION

My son Prahlada, you rascal, you know that when I am angry all
the planets of the three worlds tremble, along with their chief
rulers. By whose power has a rascal like you become so impudent
that you appear fearless and overstep my power to rule you?

PURPORT

The relationship between a pure devotee and the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is extremely relishable. A devotee never claims to be very
powerful himself; instead, he fully surrenders to the lotus feet of Krsna,
being confident that in all dangerous conditions Krsna will protect His
devotee. Krsna Himself says in Bhagavad-gita (9.31), kaunteya prati-
janihi na me bhaktah pranasyati: “O son of Kunti, declare boldly that


--- Page 131 ---
Text 7] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 125
My devotee never perishes.” The Lord requested Arjuna to declare this
instead of declaring it Himself because sometimes Krsna changes His
view and therefore people might not believe Him. Thus Krsna asked Ar-
juna to declare that a devotee of the Lord is never vanquished.

Hiranyakas$ipu was perplexed about how his five-year-old boy could be
so fearless that he did not care for the order of his very great and power-
ful father. A devotee cannot execute the order of anyone except the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the position of a devotee.
Hiranyaka$ipu could understand that this boy must have been very
powerful, since the boy did not heed his orders. Hiranyakasipu asked his
son, (77? balah: “How have you overcome my order? By whose strength
have you done this?”

TEXT 7
ser उवाच
५ न,
न केवल मे भवतश्च राजन्‌
सवं बलं विनां चापरेषाम्‌ |
परेऽवरेऽमी स्थिरजङ्गमा ये
NEE येन॒ बयं प्रणीताः ॥ ७॥
$78৮-0070187000 uvaca
na kevalarih me bhavatas ca rajan
sa vai bala balinarm caparesam
pare वाट ‘mi sthira-jangama ye
brahmadayo yena vasari pranitah

sri-prahradah  wvaca—Prahlada Maharaja replied; na—not;
kevalam—only; me—of me; bhavatah—of yourself; ca —and; rajan—
O great King; sah—he; vai—indeed; balam—strength; balinam—of
the strong; ca—and; aparesam—of others; pare —exalted; avare—
subordinate; ami—those; sthira-jarigamah—moving or nonmoving liv-
ing entities; ye —who; brahma-adayah —beginning from Lord Brahma;
yena—by whom; vasam—under control; pranitah —brought.

TRANSLATION

Prahlada Maharaja said: My dear King, the source of my

strength, of which you are asking, is also the source of yours.


--- Page 132 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
Indeed, the original source of all kinds of strength is one. He is
not only your strength or mine, but the only strength for every-
one. Without Him, no one can get any strength. Whether moving
or not moving, superior or inferior, everyone, including Lord
Brahma, is controlled by the strength of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. .
PURPORT
Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (10.41):
yad yad vibhitimat sattvarn
Srimad arjitam eva va
tat tad evavagaccha tvam
mama tejo-rmsa-sambhavam

“Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but
a spark of My splendor.” This is confirmed by Prahlada Maharaja. If one
sees extraordinary strength or power anywhere, it is derived from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. To give an example, there are different
grades of fire, but all of them derive heat and light from the sun.
Similarly, all living entities, big or small, are dependent on the mercy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One’s only duty is to surrender, for
one is a servant and cannot independently attain the position of master.
One can attain the position of master only by the mercy of the master,
not independently. Unless one understands this philosophy, he is still a
miidha; in other words, he is not very intelligent. The miidhas, the asses
who do not have this intelligence, cannot surrender unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

Understanding the subordinate position of the living entity takes
millions of births, but when one is actually wise he surrenders unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita
(7.19):

bahinarm janmanam ante
JAdnavan mar prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah


--- Page 133 ---
Text 8] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 127
“After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surren-
ders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is.
Such a great soul is very rare.” Prahlada Maharaja was a great soul, a
mahatma, and therefore he completely surrendered unto the lotus feet of
the Lord. He was confident that Krsna would give him protection under
all circumstances.
TEXT 8
स॒ ईश्वरः काल उरुकमोऽसा-
बोजःसहःसत्वबलेन्द्रियात्मा |
स॒ एव fist परमः खरशाक्तिभिः
IATA गुणत्रयेशः ॥ ८ ॥
sa (00708 kala urukramo ’sav
ojah sahah sattva-balendriyatma
sa eva visvarh paramah sva-Saktibhih
srjaty avaty atti guna-trayesah
sah—He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); isvarah—the
supreme controller; kalah—the time factor; urukramah—the Lord,
whose every action is uncommon; asau—that one; ojah—the strength of
the senses; sahah—the strength of the mind; sattva—steadiness; bala—
bodily strength; indriya—and of the senses themselves; atma—the very
self; sah—He; eva—indeed; visvam—the whole universe; paramah—
the supreme; sva-Saktibhih—by His multifarious transcendental poten-
cies; srjati—creates; avati—maintains; atti—winds up; guna-
traya-isah—the master of the material modes.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme con-

troller and time factor, is the power of the senses, the power of the
mind, the power of the body, and the vital force of the senses. His
influence is unlimited. He is the best of all living entities, the con-
troller of the three modes of material nature. By His own power,
He creates this cosmic manifestation, maintains it and annihilates
it also.


--- Page 134 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
PURPORT
Since the material world is being moved by the three material modes
and since the Lord is their master, the Lord can create, maintain and
destroy the material world.
TEXT 9
जद्यासुरं भावमिमं त्वमात्मनः
समं मनो घत्ख न सन्ति विद्विषः ।
ऋतेऽजितादात्मन उत्पथे सितात्‌
तद्धि ह्यनन्तस्य महत्‌ समहेणम्‌ ॥ ९ ॥
jahy asurarn bhavam imam tvam atmanah
samarin mano dhatsva na santi vidvisah
rte jitad atmana utpathe sthitat
tad dhi hy anantasya mahat samarhanam
Jahi—just give up; asuram—demoniac; bhavam—tendency; imam —
this; tvam—you (my dear father); atmanah—of yourself; samam—
equal; manah—the mind; dhatsva—make; na—not; santi—are;
vidvisah—enemies; rte—except; ajitat—uncontrolled; atmanah—the
mind; utpathe—on the mistaken path of undesirable tendencies;
sthitat—being situated; tat hi—that (mentality); hi—indeed;
anantasya—of the unlimited Lord; mahat—the best; samarhanam—
method of worship.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja continued: My dear father, please give up
your demoniac mentality. Do not discriminate in your heart be-
tween enemies and friends; make your mind equipoised toward
everyone. Except for the uncontrolled and misguided mind, there
is no enemy within this world. When one sees everyone on the
platform of equality, one then comes to the position of worshiping
the Lord perfectly.
PURPORT
Unless one is able to fix the mind at the lotus feet of the Lord, the
mind is impossible to control. As Arjuna says in Bhagavad-gita (6.34):


--- Page 135 ---
Text 10] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 129
८7८०८7४ hi manah krsna
pramathi balavad drdham
tasyahari nigraharh manye
vayor iva suduskaram
“For the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Krsna,
and to subdue it, it seems to me, is more difficult than controlling the
wind.” The only bona fide process for controlling the mind is to fix the
mind by service to the Lord. We create enemies and friends according to
the dictation of the mind, but actually there are no enemies and friends.
Panditah sama-darsinah. Samah sarvesu bhiitesu mad-bhaktirh labhate
param. To understand this is the preliminary condition for entering into
the kingdom of devotional service.
TEXT 10
दस्यून्पुरा षण्‌ न विजित्य छम्पतो
मन्यन्त एके खजिता दिशो दश्च ।
जितारमनो ज्ञस्य समस्य देहिनां
साधोः জদীহমমনবাঃ ङतः परे kell
dasyin pura san na vijitya lumpato
manyanta eke sva-jita diso dasa
Jitatmano jiiasya samasya dehinarn
sadhoh sva-moha-prabhavah kutah pare
dasyin—plunderers; pura—in the beginning; sat—six; na—not;
vijitya—conquering; lumpatah—stealing all one’s possessions;
manyante—consider; eke—some; sva-jitdh—conquered; disah dasa—
the ten directions; jita-atmanah—one who has conquered the senses;
Jaasya—learned; samasya—equipoised; dehinam—to all living entities;
sadhoh—of such a saintly person; sva-moha-prabhavah—created by
one’s own illusion; kutah—where; pare —enemies or opposing elements.
TRANSLATION
In former times there were many fools like you who did not
conquer the six enemies that steal away the wealth of the body.


--- Page 136 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
These fools were very proud, thinking, ‘I have conquered all
enemies in all the ten directions.” But if a person is victorious
over the six enemies and is equipoised toward all living entities,
for him there are no enemies. Enemies are merely imagined by one
in ignorance.
PURPORT
In this material world, everyone thinks that he has conquered his
enemies, not understanding that his enemies are his uncontrolled mind
and five senses (manah sasthanindriyani prakrti-sthani karsati). In this
material world, everyone has become a servant of the senses. Originally
everyone is a servant of Krsna, but in ignorance one forgets this, and
thus one is engaged in the service of maya through lusty desires, anger,
greed, illusion, madness and jealousy. Everyone is actually dependent on
the reactions of material laws, but still one thinks himself independent
and thinks that he has conquered all directions. In conclusion, one who
thinks that he has many enemies is an ignorant man, whereas one who is
in Krsna consciousness knows that there are no enemies but those within
oneself — the uncontrolled mind and senses.
TEXT 11
श्रीहिरण्यकनि दुरुवाच
o_o +
न्यक्तं तवं मतुकामोऽसि योऽतिमात्रं विकत्थसे |
©
gw हि मन्दात्मन्‌ Ag | fig गिरः ॥११॥
Sri-hiranyakasipur uvaca
vyaktari (धवा martu-kamo ’si
yo ’timatrari vikatthase
mumirsanam hi mandatman
nanu syur viklava girah
Sri-hiranyaka$ipuh ~~ uvaca—the blessed Hiranyakasipu said;
vyaktam—evidently; tvam—you; martu-kamah—desirous of death;
asi—are; yah —one who; atimatram—without limit; vikatthase—are
boasting (as if you had conquered your senses whereas your father could
not do so); mumirsiinam—of persons who are about to meet immediate


--- Page 137 ---
Text 12] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 131
death; hi—indeed; manda-atman—O unintelligent rascal; nanu—cer-
tainly; syuh—become; viklavah—confused; girah—the words.
TRANSLATION

Hiranyakasipu replied: You rascal, you are trying to minimize
my value, as if you were better than me at controlling the senses.
This is over-intelligent. I can therefore understand that you desire
to die at my hands, for this kind of nonsensical talk is indulged in
by those about to die.

PURPORT

It is said in Hitopadesa, upadeso hi mirkhanarm prokopaya na
santaye. If good instructions are given to a foolish person, he does not
take advantage of them, but becomes more and more angry. Prahlada
Maharaja’s authorized instructions to his father were not accepted by
Hiranyaka$ipu as truth; instead HiranyakaSipu became increasingly
angry at his great son, who was a pure devotee. This kind of difficulty al-
ways exists when a devotee preaches Krsna consciousness to persons like
Hiranyakaéipu, who are interested in money and women. (The word
hiranya means “gold,” and kasipu refers to cushions or good bedding.)
Moreover, a father does not like to be instructed by his son, especially if
the father is a demon. Prahlada Maharaja’s Vaisnava preaching to his
demoniac father was indirectly effective, for because of Hiranyakasipu’s
excessive jealousy of Krsna and His devotee, he was inviting
Nrsirnhadeva to kill him very quickly. Thus he was expediting his being
killed by the Lord Himself. Although Hiranyakasipu was a demon, he is
described here by the added word sri. Why? The answer is that for-
tunately he had such a great devotee son as Prahlada Maharaja. Thus al-
though he was a demon, he would attain salvation and return home, back
to Godhead.

TEXT 12
यस्त्वया मन्दभाग्योक्तो मदन्यो जगदीश्वरः |
क्वासो यदि स सर्वत्र कसमात्‌ स्तम्भे न रस्यते ॥१२॥
yas tvaya manda-bhagyokto
mad-anyo jagad-wvarah


--- Page 138 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
kvasau yadi sa sarvatra
kasmat stambhe na drsyate

yah—the one who; tvaya—by you; manda-bhagya—O unfortunate
one; uktah—described; mat-anyah—besides me; jagat-isvarah—the
supreme controller of the universe; kva—where; asau—that one;
yadi—if; sah—He; sarvatra—everywhere (all-pervading); kasmat—
why; stambhe—in the pillar before me; na dr§yate—not seen.

TRANSLATION

O most unfortunate Prahlada, you have always described a
supreme being other than me, a supreme being who is above
everything, who is the controller of everyone, and who is all-
pervading. But where is He? If He is everywhere, then why is He
not present before me in this pillar?

PURPORT

Demons sometimes declare to a devotee that they cannot accept the ex-
istence of God because they cannot see Him. But what the demon does
not know is stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (7.25): naham
prakasah sarvasya yogamaya-samavrtah. “1 am never manifest to the
foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered by yogamaya.”” The
Lord is open to being seen by devotees, but nondevotees cannot see Him.
The qualification for seeing God is stated in Brahma-sarhita (5.38):
premaijana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vi-
lokayanti. A devotee who has developed a genuine love for Krsna can al-
ways see Him everywhere, whereas a demon, not having a clear under-
standing of the Supreme Lord, cannot see Him. When Hiranyakasipu was
threatening to kill Prahlada Maharaja, Prahlada certainly saw the col-
umn standing before him and his father, and he saw that the Lord was
present in the pillar to encourage him not to fear his demoniac father’s
words. The Lord was present to protect him. Hiranyakasipu marked
Prahlada’s observation and asked him, “Where is your God?’ Prahlada
Maharaja replied, ‘‘He is everywhere.” Then Hiranyakasipu asked,
“Why is He not in this pillar before me?”” Thus in all circumstances the
devotee can always see the Supreme Lord, whereas the nondevotee can-
not.


--- Page 139 ---
Text 13] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 133
Prahlada Maharaja has here been addressed by his father as ““the most
unfortunate.” Hiranyakasipu thought himself extremely fortunate be-
cause he possessed the property of the universe. Prahlada Maharaja, his
legitimate son, was to have inherited this vast property, but because of
his impudence, he was going to die at his father’s hands. Therefore the
demoniac father considered Prahlada the most unfortunate because
Prahlada would not be able to inherit his property. HiranyakaSipu did
not know that Prahladd Maharaja was the most fortunate person within
the three worlds because Prahlada was protected by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Such are the misunderstandings of demons. They do
not know that a devotee is protected by the Lord in all circumstances
(kaunteya pratijanthi na me bhaktah pranasyati).
TEXT 13
सोऽहं विकत्थमानस्य शिरः कायाद्धरामि ते ।
गोपायेत हरिस्त्वाद्य यस्ते शरणमीप्सितम्‌ 1230
so hari vikatthamanasya
sirah kayad dharami te
gopayeta haris tvadya
yas te saranam ipsitam
sah—he; aham—1; vikatthamanasya—who are speaking such non-
sense; Sirah—the head; kayat—from the body; harami—I shall take
away; te—of you; gopayeta—Ilet Him protect; harih—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; tva—you; adya—now; yah—He who; te—your;
Saranam—protector; ipsitam—desired.
TRANSLATION
Because you are speaking so much nonsense, I shall now sever
your head from your body. Now let me see your most worshipable
God come to protect you. | want to see it.
PURPORT
Demons always think that the God of the devotees is fictitious. They
think that there is no God and that the so-called religious feeling of


--- Page 140 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
devotion to God is but an opiate, a kind of illusion, like the illusions
derived from LSD and opium. HiranyakaSipu did not believe Prahlada
Maharaja when Prahlada asserted that his Lord is present everywhere.
Because Hiranyakasipu, as a typical demon, was convinced that there is
no God and that no one could protect Prahlada, he felt encouraged to kill
his son. He challenged the idea that the devotee is always protected by
the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 14
ॐ C
एवं दुरुक्तदरदंयन्रुषा
gd महाभागवतं महासुरः |
खङ्गं्॑रगरद्योत्पतितो वरासनात्‌
स्तम्भं तताडातिबलः खयुष्टिना ॥१४॥
০৮৫7 duruktair muhur ardayan rusa
sutarh maha-bhagavatarn mahasurah
khadgarih pragrhyotpatito varasanat
stambhari tatadatibalah sva-mustina
evam—thus; duruktath—by harsh words; muhuh—constantly;
ardayan —chastising; rusa—with unnecessary anger; sutam—his son;
maha-bhagavatam—who was a most exalted devotee; maha-asurah—
Hiranyakasipu, the great demon; khadgam —sword; pragrhya—taking
up; utpatitah—having gotten up; vara-asandat—from his exalted
throne; stambham—the column; tatdda—struck; ati-balah—very
strong; sva-mustina—by his fist.
TRANSLATION
Being obsessed with anger, Hiranyakasipu, who was very great
in bodily strength, thus chastised his exalted devotee-son Prahlada
with harsh words. Cursing him again and again, Hiranyakasipu
took up his sword, got up from his royal throne, and with great
anger struck his fist against the column.
TEXT 15
ES
तदेव faq निनदोऽतिमीषणो
बभूव येन्राण्डकटाटमर्फुटत्‌ |


--- Page 141 ---
Text 16] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 135
य॑ 3 खधिष्म्योपगतं त्वजादयः
त्वा खधामात्ययमङ्ग मेनिरे ॥१५५॥
tadaiva tasmin ninado ’tibhisano
babhawva yenanda-kataham asphutat
yam vai sva-dhisnyopagatam tv ajadayah
Srutva sva-dhamatyayam anga menire
tada—at that time; eva—just; tasmin—within (the pillar);
ninadah—a sound; ati-bhisanah—very fearful; babhava—there was;
yena—by which; anda-kataham—the covering of the universe;
asphutat—appeared to crack; yam —which; vai—indeed; sva-dhisnya-
upagatam—reaching their respective abodes; tu—but; aja-adayah—
the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma; srutva—hearing; sva-dhama-
atyayam—the destruction of their abodes; ariga—my dear Yudhisthira;
menire—thought.
TRANSLATION
Then from within the pillar came a fearful sound, which ap-
peared to crack the covering of the universe. O my dear
Yudhisthira, this sound reached even the abodes of the demigods
like Lord Brahma, and when the demigods heard it, they thought,
“Oh, now our planets are being destroyed!”
PURPORT
As we sometimes become very much afraid at the sound of a thunder-
bolt, perhaps thinking that our houses will be destroyed, the great
demigods like Lord Brahma feared the thundering sound that came from
the pillar in front of Hiranyakasipu.
TEXT 16
स विक्रमन्‌ पुत्रवधेप्सुरोजसा
©.
निशम्य निहदमपूमद्धतम्‌ |
अन्तःसभायां न ददश्षं॑तत्पदं
वितत्रसुर्येन सुरारियूथपाः ॥१६॥


--- Page 142 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
sa vikraman putra-vadhepsur ojasa
niSamya nirhradam apiirvam adbhutam
antah-sabhayam na dadarsa tat-padam
vitatrasur yena surari-yatha-pah
sah—he (Hiranyakasipu); vikraman —exhibiting his prowess; putra-
vadha-ipsuh—desirous of killing his own son; ojasa—with great
strength; niSamya—hearing; nirhradam —the fierce sound; apirvam—
never heard before; adbhutam—very wonderful; antah-sabhayam—
within the jurisdiction of the great assembly; na—not; dadarsa—saw;
tat-padam—the source of that tumultuous sound; vitatrasuh—became
afraid; yena—by which sound; sura-ari-yitha-pah—the other leaders
of the demons (not only Hiranyakasipu).
TRANSLATION
While showing his extraordinary prowess, Hiranyakasipu, who
desired to kill his own son, heard that wonderful, tumultuous
sound, which had never before been heard. Upon hearing the
sound, the other leaders of the demons were afraid. None of them
could find the origin of that sound in the assembly.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (7.8), Krsna explains Himself by saying:
raso "ham apsu kaunteya
prabhasmi 5057 siryayoh
pranavah sarva-vedesu
Sabdah khe paurusam nrsu
“0 son of Kunti [^ पप], I am the taste of water, the light of the sun
and the moon, the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound in
ether and ability in man.” Here the Lord exhibited His presence every-
where by the tumultuous sound in the sky (Sabdah khe). The tumultuous
thundering sound was proof of the Lord’s presence. The demons like
Hiranyakasipu could now realize the supreme ruling power of the Lord,
and thus Hiranyakasipu became afraid. However powerful a man may
be, he always fears the sound of a thunderbolt. Similarly, Hiranyakasipu


--- Page 143 ---
Text 17] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 137
and all the demons who were his associates were extremely afraid be-
cause of the presence of the Supreme Lord in the form of sound, al-
though they could not trace out the source of the sound.
TEXT 17
सत्यं विधातुं निजभृत्यभाषितं
হ্যারি च भूतेष्व चिलेषु चात्मनः |
अद स्यतात्यद्धुतरूपयुददन्‌
स्तम्भे सभायां न मृगं न मायुषम्‌ ॥१७॥
satyarin 74071770 nija-bhrtya-bhasitari
vyaptirn ca bhitesv akhilesu catmanah
adrsyatatyadbhuta-rapam udvahan
stambhe sabhayar na mrgarh na manusam

satyam—true; vidhatum—to prove; nija-bhrtya-bhasitam—the
words of His own servant (Prahlada Maharaja, who had said that his
Lord is present everywhere); vydptim—the pervasion; ca—and;
bhiitesu—among the living entities and elements; akhilesu—all; ca—
also; atmanah—of Himself; adrsyata—was seen; ati—very; adbhuta—
wonderful; ripam—form; udvahan—taking; stambhe—in the pillar;
sabhayam—within the assembly; na—not; mrgam—an animal; na—
nor; manusam—a human being.

TRANSLATION

To prove that the statement of His servant Prahlada Maharaja
was substantial —in other words, to prove that the Supreme Lord is
present everywhere, even within the pillar of an assembly hall —
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, exhibited a wonderful
form never before seen. The form was neither that of a man nor
that of a lion. Thus the Lord appeared in His wonderful form in
the assembly hall.

PURPORT

When Hiranyakasipu asked Prahlada Maharaja, “Where is your Lord?

Is He present in this pillar?”” Prahlada Maharaja fearlessly replied, “Yes,


--- Page 144 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
my Lord is present everywhere.” Therefore, to convince Hiranyakasipu
that the statement of Prahlada Maharaja was unmistakably true, the Lord
appeared from the pillar. The Lord appeared as half lion and half man so
that HiranyakaSipu could not understand whether the great giant was a
lion or a human being. To substantiate Prahlada’s statement, the Lord
proved that His devotee, as declared in Bhagavad-gitda, is never van-
quished (kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati). Prahlada
Maharaja’s demoniac father had repeatedly threatened to kill Prahlada,
but Prahlada was confident that he could not be killed, since he was pro-
tected by the Supreme Lord. By appearing from the pillar, the Lord en-
couraged His devotee, saying in effect, “Don’t worry. I am present
here.”” By manifesting His form as Nrsimnhadeva, the Lord also preserved
the truth of Lord Brahma’s promise that Hiranyakasipu was not to be
killed by any animal or any man. The Lord appeared in a form that could
not be said to be fully a man or a lion.
TEXT 18
स॒ सत्वमेनं परितो विपदयन्‌
स्तम्भस्य मध्याद चुनिर्जिंदानम्‌ |
नायं मृगो नापि नरो विचित्र-
महो किमेतनुमगे््ररूपम्‌ ॥१८॥
sa sattvam enam parito vipasyan
stambhasya madhyad anunirjihanam
ndayarmn mrgo napi naro vicitram
aho kim etan nr-mrgendra-ripam

sah—he (Hiranyakasipu, the King of the Daityas); sattvam—living
being; enam—that; paritah—all around; vipaSyan—looking;
stambhasya—of the pillar; madhyat—from the midst;
anunirjihdnam—having come out; na—not; ayam—this; mrgah—
animal; na—not; api—indeed; narah—human being; vicitram—very
wonderful; aho—alas; kim—what; etat—this; nr-mrga-indra-riipam—
the form of both a man and the king of the beasts, the lion.


--- Page 145 ---
Text 22] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 139
TRANSLATION

‘While Hiranyakasipu looked all around to find the source of the
sound, that wonderful form of the Lord, which could not be ascer-
tained to be either a man or a lion, emerged from the pillar. In
amazement, HiranyakaSipu wondered, “What is this creature that
is half man and half lion?”

PURPORT

A demon cannot calculate the unlimited potency of the Supreme Lord.
As stated in the Vedas, parasya Saktir vividhaiva $riyate svabhaviki
jAaana-bala-kriya ca: the different potencies of the Lord are always
working as an automatic exhibition of His knowledge. For a demon it is
certainly wonderful that the form of a lion and the form of a man can be
united, since a demon has no experience of the inconceivable power for
which the Supreme Lord is called “‘all-powerful.”” Demons cannot under-
stand the omnipotence of the Lord. They simply compare the Lord to one
of them (avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam). Midhas,
rascals, think that Krsna is an ordinary human being who appears for the
benefit of other human beings. Param bhavam ajanantah: fools, rascals
and demons cannot realize the supreme potency of the Lord, but He can
do anything and everything; indeed, He can do whatever He likes. When
Hiranyakasipu received benedictions from Lord Brahma, he thought that
he was safe, since he received the benediction that he would not be killed
either by an animal or by a human being. He never thought that an
animal and human being would be combined so that demons like him
would be puzzled by such a form. This is the meaning of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead’s omnipotence.

TEXTS 19-22
= - -
मीमांसमानस्य सञुत्थितोऽग्रतो ।
नरसिदरूपस्तदलं भयानकम्‌ 1124
प्रतप्तचामीकरचण्डरोचनं
स्फुरःंसटाकेशरलुम्मिताननम्‌ |


--- Page 146 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
करारदंष FAAS
ক -
्षरान्तजिहं॑शरुङरीश्चखोल्बणम्‌ ।॥२०॥
स्तन्धोध्वेकणं गिरिकन्दराद्त-
व्यात्तास्यनासं हनुभेदभीषणम्‌ |
০
दिविस्फृशत्कायमदीधेपीवर-
ग्रीवोखवक्ष;स्थलमल्पमध्यमम्‌ ॥२१॥
2 AR +
चनदरा्चगोरेश्छरितं तनरुै-
विष्वग्धजानीकशतं नखायुधम्‌ |
दुरासदं सर्वनिजेतरायुध-
भ्वेकविद्रावितदेत्यदानवम्‌  ॥२२॥
mimadrisamanasya samutthito ‘grato
nrsimha-ripas tad alain bhayanakam
pratapta-camikara-canda-locanam
sphurat sata-kesara-jrmbhitananam
karala-damstram karavala-caficala-
ksuranta-jihvarn bhrukuti-mukholbanam
stabdhordhva-karnar giri-kandaradbhuta-
vyattasya-nasam hanu-bheda-bhisanam
divi-sprsat kayam adirgha-pivara-
grivoru-vaksah-sthalam alpa-madhyamam
candrarisu-gaurais churitam taniruhair
visvag bhujanika-satar nakhayudham
durasadari sarva-nijetarayudha-
praveka-vidravita-daitya-danavam
mimarsamanasya—of Hiranyakasipu, who was contemplating the
wonderful form of the Lord; samutthitah—appeared; agratah—in
front; nrsirmha-ripah—the form of Nrsimmhadeva (half lion and half
man); tat—that; alam—extraordinarily; bhayanakam—very fearful;


--- Page 147 ---
Text 22] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 141
pratapta—Ilike molten; camikara—gold; canda-locanam—having fierce
eyes; sphurat—flashing; sata-kesara—by His mane; jrmbhita-
ananam—whose face was expanded; karala—deadly; darmstram —with
a set of teeth; karavala-caficala—waving like a sharp sword; ksura-
anta—and as sharp as a razor; jihvam—whose tongue; bhrukuti-
mukha—due to His frowning face; ulbanam—dreadful; stabdha—
motionless; irdhva—extending upward; karnam—whose ears; giri-
kandara—like the caves of a mountain; adbhuta—very wonderful;
vyattasya—with a widely opened mouth; nasam—and nostrils; hanu-
bheda-bhisanam —causing fear due to the separation of the jaws; divi-
sprsat—touching the sky; kayam—whose body; adirgha—short;
pivara—fat; griva—neck; uru—broad; vaksah-sthalam—chest; alpa—
small; madhyamam—middle portion of the body; candra-armsu—like
the rays of the moon; gauraih—whitish; churitam—covered;
tanaruhaih—with hairs; visvak—in all directions; bhuja—of arms;
antka-satam—with a hundred rows; nakha—having nails; ayudham—
as fatal weapons; durasadam—very difficult to conquer; sarva—all;
nija—personal; itara—and other; ayudha—of weapons; praveka—by
use of the best; vidravita—caused to run; daitya—by whom the
demons; danavam—and the rogues (atheists).
TRANSLATION

HiranyakaSipu studied the form of the Lord, trying to decide
who the form of Nrsithhadeva standing before him was. The
Lord’s form was extremely fearsome because of His angry eyes,
which resembled molten gold; His shining mane, which expanded
the dimensions of His fearful face; His deadly teeth; and His
razor-sharp tongue, which moved about like a dueling sword. His
ears were erect and motionless, and His nostrils and gaping mouth
appeared like caves of a mountain. His jaws parted fearfully, and
His entire body touched the sky. His neck was very short and
thick, His chest broad, His waist thin, and the hairs on His body as
white as the rays of the moon. His arms, which resembled flanks of
soldiers, spread in all directions as He killed the demons, rogues
and atheists with His conchshell, disc, club, lotus and other natural
weapons.


--- Page 148 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
TEXT 23
भ्रायेण मेऽयं इरिणोरूपायिना
वधः स्मृतोऽनेन सष्ठयतेन किम्‌ ।
WERE _ गदायुधो
नदन्‌ বৃত্ধিই प्रति दं त्यङ्ञ्जरः ।॥२३॥
prayena me वा! harinorumayina
vadhah smrto ‘nena samudyatena kim
evar bruvaris tv abhyapatad gadayudho
nadan nrsimharm prati daitya-kurjarah
prayena—probably; me—of me; ayam—this; harina—by the
Supreme Lord; uru-mayina—who possesses the great mystic power;
vadhah—the death; smrtah —planned; anena—with this;
samudyatena—endeavor; kim—what use; evam—in this way;
bruvan—murmuring; tu—indeed; abhyapatat—attacked; gada-
ayudhah —armed with his weapon, the club; nadan—Iloudly roaring;
nr-simham—the Lord, appearing in the form of half lion and half man;
prati—toward; daitya-kunijarah—Hiranyakasipu, who was like an
elephant.
TRANSLATION
Hiranyakasipu murmured to himself, “Lord Visnu, who
possesses great mystic power, has made this plan to kill me, but
what is the use of such an attempt? Who can fight with me?”
Thinking like this and taking up his club, Hiranyakasipu attacked
the Lord like an elephant.
PURPORT
In the jungle there are sometimes fights between lions and elephants.
Here the Lord appeared like a lion, and Hiranyaka$ipu, unafraid of the
Lord, attacked Him like an elephant. Generally the elephant is defeated
by the lion, and therefore the comparison in this verse is appropriate.
TEXT 24
अलक्षितोऽग्नौ पतितः पतङ्गमो
अथा चसिंहौजसि सोऽसुरस्तदा |


--- Page 149 ---
Text 24] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 143
न तद्‌ विचित्रं खलु aww
स्वतेजसा यो g पुरापिबत्‌ तमः ॥२४॥
alaksito 87808 patitah patarigamo
yatha nrsimhaujasi so ’suras tada
na tad 01018070712 khalu sattva-dhamani
sva-tejasa yo nu purapibat tamah
alaksitah—invisible;  agnau—in the fire;  patitah—fallen;
patarigamah—an insect; yatha—just as; nrsimha—of Lord
Nrsithhadeva; ojasi—in the effulgence; sah—he; asurah—
Hiranyakasipu; tadd—at that time; na —not; tat—that; vicitram —won-
derful; khalu—indeed; sattva-dhamani—in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is situated in pure goodness; sva-tejasa—by His own
effulgence; yah—He who (the Lord); nu—indeed; pura—formerly;
apibat—swallowed up; tamah—the darkness within the material cre-
ation.
TRANSLATION
Just as a small insect falls forcefully into a fire and the insignifi-
cant creature becomes invisible, when Hiranyaka$ipu attacked the
Lord, who was full of effulgence, Hiranyakasipu became invisible.
This is not at all astonishing, for the Lord is always situated in pure
goodness. Formerly, during creation, He entered the dark uni-
verse and illuminated it by His spiritual effulgence.
PURPORT
The Lord is situated transcendentally, in pure goodness. The material
world is generally controlled by tamo-guna, the quality of ignorance, but
the spiritual world, because of the presence of the Lord and His
effulgence, is free from all contamination by darkness, passion or con-
taminated goodness. Although there is a tinge of goodness in this
material world in terms of the brahminical qualifications, such qualifica-
tions sometimes become invisible because of the strong prevalence of the
modes of passion and ignorance. But because the Lord is always transcen-
dentally situated, the material modes of passion and ignorance cannot


--- Page 150 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
touch Him. Whenever the Lord is present, there cannot be any darkness
from the mode of ignorance. It is stated in Caitanya-caritamrta
(Madhya 22.31):
krsna——sitrya-sama, maya haya andhakara
yahar krsna, tahan nahi mayara adhikara
“Godhead is light. Nescience is darkness. Where there is Godhead there
is no nescience.” This material world is full of darkness and ignorance of
spiritual life, but by bhakti-yoga this ignorance is dissipated. The Lord
appeared because of the bhakti-yoga exhibited by Prahlada Maharaja,
and as soon as the Lord appeared, the influence of Hiranyakasipu’s pas-
sion and ignorance was vanquished as the Lord’s quality of pure good-
ness, or the Brahman effulgence, became prominent. In that prominent
effulgence, Hiranyakasipu became invisible, or his influence became in-
significant. An example illustrating how the darkness of the material
world is vanquished is given in the astra. When Brahma was created
from the lotus stem growing from the abdomen of Garbhodakasayi
Visnu, Lord Brahma saw everything to be dark, but when he received
knowledge from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, everything be-
came clear, as everything becomes clear when one comes from night to
sunshine. The important point is that as long as we are in the material
modes of nature, we are always in darkness. This darkness cannot be dis-
sipated without the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
which is invoked by the practice of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga creates a
transcendental situation with no tinges of material contamination.
TEXT 25
ततोऽधिपद्याम्यदनन्महासुरो
रुषा नृसिं गदयोरुवेगया ।
त॑ विक्रमन्तं सगदं गदाषरो
महोरगं বাংস্তুবী यथाग्रहीत्‌ ।॥२५॥
{2/० ’bhipadyabhyahanan mahasuro
rusa nrsintham gadayoruvegaya


--- Page 151 ---
Text 26] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 145
tari vikramantarn sagadari gadadharo
mahoragari tarksya-suto yathagrahit
tatah—thereafter;  abhipadya—attacking; abhyahanat—struck;
mahd-asurah—the great demon (Hiranyakasipu); rusa—with anger;
nrsimham—Lord Nrsimhadeva; gadaya—by his club; uru-vegaya—
moving with great force; tam—him (Hiranyakasipu); vikramantam—
showing his prowess; sa-gadam—with his club; gada-dharah—Lord
Nrsimmhadeva, who also holds a club in His hand; maha-uragam —a great
snake; tarksya-sutah—Garuda, the son of Tarksya; yathda—just as;
agrahit —captured.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, the great demon Hiranyakasipu, who was extremely
angry, swiftly attacked Nrsithhadeva with his club and began to
beat Him. Lord Nrsithhadeva, however, captured the great demon,
along with his club, just as Garuda might capture a great snake.
TEXT 26
स॒ तस्य दस्तोत्कसितिस्तदासुसे
विक्रीडतो यद्वदिगरुत्मतः |
असाष्वमन्यन्त॒हतोकसोऽमरा
घनच्छदा भारत सर्वधिष्ण्यपाः ॥২৪॥
sa tasya hastotkalitas tadasuro
vikridato yadvad ahir garutmatah
asadhv amanyanta hrtaukaso ‘mara
ghana-cchada bharata sarva-dhisnya-pah
sah—he (Hiranyakasipu); tasya—of Him (Lord Nrsimhadeva);
hasta—from the hands; utkalitah—slipped; tada—at that time;
asurah—the King of the demons, Hiranyakasipu; vikridatah—playing:
yadvat—exactly like; ahih—a snake; garutmatah—of Garuda;
asadhu—not very good; amanyanta—considered; hrta-okasah—whose
abodes were taken by Hiranyakasipu; amarah—the demigods;


--- Page 152 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
ghana-cchadah—situated behind a cover of clouds; bharata—O great
son of Bharata; sarva-dhisnya-pah—the rulers of the heavenly planets.
TRANSLATION
O Yudhisthira, O great son of Bharata, when Lord Nrsirnhadeva
gave Hiranyaka$ipu a chance to slip from His hand, just as Garuda
sometimes plays with a snake and lets it slip from his mouth, the
demigods, who had lost their abodes and who were hiding behind
the clouds for fear of the demon, did not consider that incident
very good. Indeed, they were perturbed.
PURPORT
When Hiranyakasipu was in the process of being killed by Lord
Nrsimhadeva, the Lord gave the demon a chance to slip from His
clutches. This incident was not very much appreciated by the demigods,
for they were greatly afraid of Hiranyakasipu. They knew that if some-
how or other Hiranyakasipu escaped from Nrsimhadeva’s hands and saw
that the demigods were looking forward to his death with great pleasure,
he would take great revenge upon them. Therefore they were very much
afraid.
TEXT 27
+ [9
त॑ मन्यमानो নিজবীযহান্কিবি
Tegel चरं मदासुरः |
पुनस्तमासजतव  खङ्गचर्मणी
प्रगृह्य वेगेन TEE দম ২৩
tarh manyamano nija-virya-sankitarm
yad dhasta-mukto nrharimm mahasurah
punas tam asajjata khadga-carmani
pragrhya vegena gata-sramo mrdhe
tam—Him (Lord Nrsimhadeva); manyamanah—thinking; nija-
virya-sarikitam —afraid of his prowess; yat—because; hasta-muktah—
freed from the clutches of the Lord; nr-harim—Lord Nrsimhadeva;


--- Page 153 ---
Text 28] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 147
maha-asurah—the great demon; punah—again; tam —Him; asajjata—
attacked; khadga-carmani—his sword and shield; pragrhya—taking
up; vegena—with great force; gata-sramah—his fatigue having gone;
mrdhe—in the battle.
TRANSLATION
When Hiranyakasipu was freed from the hands of Nrsirnhadeva,
he falsely thought that the Lord was afraid of his prowess.
Therefore, after taking a little rest from the fight, he took up his
sword and shield and again attacked the Lord with great force.
PURPORT
When a sinful man enjoys material facilities, foolish people sometimes
think, “How is it that this sinful man is enjoying whereas a pious man is
suffering ?”’ By the will of the Supreme, a sinful man is sometimes given
the chance to enjoy the material world as if he were not under the
clutches of material nature, just so that he may be fooled. A sinful man
who acts against the laws of nature must be punished, but sometimes he
is given a chance to play, exactly like Hiranyakasipu when he was
released from the hands of Nrsirnhadeva. Hiranyakasipu was destined to
be ultimately killed by Nrsimhadeva, but just to see the fun, the Lord
gave him a chance to slip from His hands.
TEXT 28
IY Q
d JW छतचन्द्रवत्मंभि-
अरन्तमच्छद्रयुपर्यधो दरिः ।
FARE खरमुत्खनोख्चणं
निमीकिताक्षं जगृहे महाजवः ॥२८॥
tar Syena-vegarn Sata-candra-vartmabhis
carantam acchidram upary-adho harih
krtvatta-hasarm kharam utsvanolbanari
nimilitaksarn jagrhe maha-javah
tam—him (Hiranyakadipu); Syena-vegam —possessing the speed of a
hawk; Sata-candra-vartmabhih—by the maneuvers of his sword and his


--- Page 154 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
shield, which was marked with a hundred moonlike spots; carantam—
moving; acchidram—without any weak spot; upari-adhah—up and
down; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; krtva—making;
atta-hasam—loud laughter; kharam—extremely shrill; utsvana-
ulbanam —very fearful due to its great sound; nimilita—closed; ak-
sam —eyes; jagrhe—captured; maha-javah—the greatly powerful Lord.
TRANSLATION
Making a loud, shrill sound of laughter, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Narayana, who is extremely strong and
powerful, captured Hiranyakasipu, who was protecting himself
with his sword and shield, leaving no gaps open. With the speed of
a hawk, Hiranyakasipu moved sometimes in the sky and sometimes
on the earth, his eyes closed because of fear of Nrsirhhadeva’s
laughter.
TEXT 29
विष्वक्‌ स्फुरन्तं wena हरि-
.वर्यालो यथाखुं ङलिशाक्षतत्व |
द्ायुंरुमापत्य ददार लीलया
ac
नखेयंथा्हिं गरुडो महाविषम्‌ ॥२९॥
visvak 57/८7/0707 grahandaturam harir
vyalo yathakhum kulisaksata-tvacam
dvary arum apatya daddra lilaya
nakhair yathahim garudo maha-visam
visvak—all around; sphurantam—moving his limbs; grahana-
aturam—afflicted because of being captured; harih—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Gedhead, Nrsimhhadeva; vyalah—a snake; yatha—just as;
akhum—a mouse; kulisa-aksata—not cut even by the thunderbolt
thrown by Indra; tvacam—whose skin; dvdari—on the threshold of the
door; darum—on His thigh; apatya—placing; dadara—pierced; lilaya—
very easily; nakhaih—with the nails; yatha—just as; ahim—a snake;
garudah—Garuda, the carrier of Lord Visnu; maha-visam—very
venomous.


--- Page 155 ---
Text 30] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 149
TRANSLATION
As a snake captures a mouse or Garuda captures a very
venomous snake, Lord Nrsitnhadeva captured Hiranyakasipu, who
could not be pierced even by the thunderbolt of King Indra. As
Hiranyakasipu moved his limbs here, there and all around, very
much afflicted at being captured, Lord Nrsirnhadeva placed the
demon on His lap, supporting him with His thighs, and in the
doorway of the assembly hall the Lord very easily tore the demon
to pieces with the nails of His hand.
PURPORT
Hiranyakasipu had received from Lord Brahma the benediction that
he would not die on the land or in the sky. Therefore, to keep the prom-
ise of Lord Brahma intact, Nrsithhadeva placed Hiranyakasipu’s body on
His lap, which was neither land nor sky. Hiranyakasipu had received the
benediction that he would not die either during the day or at night.
Therefore, to keep this promise of Brahma, the Lord killed
Hiranyakasipu in the evening, which is the end of day and the beginning
of night but is neither day nor night. Hiranyakasipu had taken a
benediction from Lord Brahma that he would not die from any weapon
or be killed by any person, dead or alive. Therefore, just to keep the
word of Lord Brahma, Lord Nrsirhhadeva pierced Hiranyakasipu’s body
with His nails, which were not weapons and were neither living nor
dead. Indeed, the nails can be called dead, but at the same time they can
be said to be alive. To keep intact all of Lord Brahma’s benedictions,
Lord Nrsirmhadeva paradoxically but very easily killed the great demon
Hiranyakasipu.
TEXT 30
संरम्मदुष्पर्ष्यक्राठलोचनो
व्यात्ताननान्तं निलिदन्खजिदह्वया |
असग्लवाक्तारुणङेशराननो
यथान्त्रमाली द्िषहत्यया हरिः ॥२०॥
samrambha-duspreksya-karala-locano
vydttananantarh vilihan sva-jihvaya


--- Page 156 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
asrg-lavaktaruna-kesaranano
yathantra-mali dvipa-hatyaya harih
sararambha—because of great anger; duspreksya—very difficult to
look at; karala—very fearful; locanah—eyes; wvydtta—expanded;
anana-antam—the edge of the mouth; vilihan—licking; sva-jihvaya—
with His tongue; asrk-lava—with spots of blood; akta—smeared;
aruna—reddish; kesara—mane; ananah—and face; yatha—just as;
antra-mali—decorated with a garland of intestines; dvipa-hatyaya—by
the killing of an elephant; harih—the lion.
TRANSLATION
Lord Nrsirnhadeva’s mouth and mane were sprinkled with drops
of blood, and His fierce eyes, full of anger, were impossible to look
at. Licking the edge of His mouth with His tongue, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Nrsirhhadeva, decorated with a garland of
intestines taken from HiranyakaSipu’s abdomen, resembled a lion
that has just killed an elephant.
PURPORT
The hair on Lord Nrsirmhadeva’s face, being sprinkled with drops of
blood, was reddish and looked very beautiful. Lord Nrsirnhadeva pierced
Hiranyakasipu’s abdomen with His nails, pulled out the demon’s in-
testines and wore them as a garland, which enhanced His beauty. Thus
the Lord became very fearsome, like a lion engaged in fighting an
elephant.
TEXT 31
== क्न 4
नखाङ्करोत्पाटितदृरसरोरुहं
विखज्य तस्याचुचरानुदायुधान्‌ |
अदन्‌ समस्ता्रशस्पणिभि-
©
- रदोदण्डयूथोऽलुपथान्‌ सदसः ॥३२१॥
nakharnkurotpatita-hrt-saroruhari
visrjya tasyanucaran udayudhan
ahan samastan nakha-sastra-panibhir
dordanda-yitho ’nupathan sahasrasah


--- Page 157 ---
Text 31] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 151

nakha-ankura—by the pointed nails; utpatita—torn out; hrt-
saroruham—whose heart, which was like a lotus flower; visrjya—leav-
ing aside; tasya—of him; anucaran—the followers (soldiers and
bodyguards); uddayudhan—having raised weapons; ahan—He killed;
samastan—all; nakha-Sastra-panibhih—with His nails and other
weapons in His hands; dordanda-yiithah—having unlimited arms;
anupathan—the attendants of Hiranyakasipu; sahasrasah—by thou-
sands.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had many, many
arms, first uprooted Hiranyaka$ipu’s heart and then threw him
aside and turned toward the demon’s soldiers. These soldiers had
come in thousands to fight with Him with raised weapons and were
very faithful followers of Hiranyakasipu, but Lord Nrsimhadeva
killed all of them merely with the ends of His nails.

PURPORT

Since the creation of the material world, there have been two kinds of
men —the devas and the asuras. The devas are always faithful to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas the asuras are always atheists
who defy the supremacy of the Lord. At the present moment, throughout
the entire world, the atheists are extremely numerous. They are trying to
prove that there is no God and that everything takes place due to com-
binations and permutations of material elements. Thus the material
world is becoming more and more godless, and consequently everything
is in a disturbed condition. If this continues, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead will certainly take action, as He did in the case of
Hiranyakasipu. Within a second, Hiranyakasipu and his followers were
destroyed, and similarly if this godless civilization continues, it will be
destroyed in a second, simply by the movement of one finger of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The demons should therefore be
careful and curtail their godless civilization. They should take advantage
of the Krsna consciousness movement and become faithful to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; otherwise they are doomed. As
Hiranyakasipu was killed in a second, the godless civilization can be
destroyed at any moment.


--- Page 158 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
TEXT 32
सटावधूता जलदाः परापतन्‌
ग्रहाश्च तद्दष्टिविग््टरोचिषः |
अम्भोधयः श्वासहता विचुक्षु्ु-
নিহাহ্‌দীবা दिगिभा विचुक्रद्यः ॥३२॥
satavadhiita jaladah parapatan
grahas ca tad-drsti-vimusta-rocisah
ambhodhayah svasa-hata vicuksubhur
nirhrada-bhita digibha vicukrusuh
sata—by the hair on Lord Nrsimhadeva’s head; avadhiitah —shaken;
jaladah—the clouds; parapatan—scattered; grahah—the luminous
planets; ca—and; tat-drsti—by His glaring glance; vimusta—taken
away; rocisah—whose effulgence; ambhodhayah—the water of the
oceans and seas; Svdsa-hatah—being struck by Lord Nrsimhadeva’s
breathing;  vicuksubhuh—became turbulent; nirhrada-bhitah—
frightened by Nrsimhadeva’s roaring; digibhah—all the elephants
guarding the quarters; vicukrusuh—cried out.
TRANSLATION
The hair on Nrsirhhadeva’s head shook the clouds and scattered
them here and there, His glaring eyes stole the effulgence of the
luminaries in the sky, and His breathing agitated the seas and
oceans. Because of His roaring, all the elephants in the world
began to cry in fear.
PURPORT
As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (10.41):
yad yad vibhitimat sattvarn
Srimad urjitam eva vd
tat tad evavagaccha tvari
mama tejo-sa-sambhavam
“Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but
a spark of My splendor.” The illumination of the planets and stars in the


--- Page 159 ---
Text 33] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 153
sky is but a partial manifestation of the Lord’s effulgence. There are
many wonderful qualities of different living entities, but whatever ex-
traordinary things exist are but part of the Lord’s tejas, His illumination
or brilliance. The deep waves of the seas and oceans and the many other
wonders within the creation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead all
become insignificant when the Lord, in His special feature, incarnates
within this material world. Everything is insignificant in comparison to
His personal, all-defeating transcendental qualities.
TEXT 33
ोस्ततसटोरिकषप्तविमानसङ्कला
-
प्रोत्सर्पत क्ष्मा च पदाभिपीडिता |
शैलाः सत्पेतुरमुष्य रंहसा
तत्तेजसा खं ककुमो न रेजिरे ॥३३॥
dyaus tat-satotksipta-vimana-sarnkula
protsarpata ksma ca padabhipidita
Sailah samutpetur amusya rarhasa
tat-tejasa khari kakubho na rejire
dyauh—outer space; tat-sata—by His hair; ‘utksipta—thrown up;
vimana-sankula—filled with airplanes; protsarpata—slipped out of
place; ksma—the planet earth; ca—also; pada-abhipidita—distressed
due to the heavy weight of the lotus feet of the Lord; sailah—the hills
and mountains; samutpetuh—sprang up; amusya—of that one (the
Lord); ramhasa—due to the intolerable force; tat-tejasa—by His
effulgence; kham—the sky; kakubhah—the ten directions; na rejire—
did not shine.
TRANSLATION
Airplanes were thrown into outer space and the upper planetary
system by the hair on Nrsimhadeva’s head. Because of the pressure
of the Lord’s lotus feet, the earth appeared to slip from its posi-
tion, and all the hills and mountains sprang up due to His intolera-
ble force. Because of the Lord’s bodily effulgence, both the sky
and all directions diminished in their natural illumination.


--- Page 160 ---
154 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
PURPORT
That there were airplanes flying in the sky long, long ago can be
understood from this verse. Srimad-Bhagavatam was spoken five thou-
sand years ago, and the statements of this verse prove that the symptoms
of a very advanced civilization then existed, even in the upper planetary
systems, as well as in the lower planetary systems. Modern scientists and
philosophers foolishly explain that there was no civilization prior to three
thousand years ago, but the statement of this verse nullifies such whimsi-
cal judgments. The Vedic civilization existed millions and millions of
years ago. It existed since the creation of this universe, and it included
arrangements all over the universe with all the modern amenities and
even more.
TEXT 34
ततः समायागुपविषटघुत्तमे
नृपासने संभृततेजसं विभुम्‌ ।
अरक्षितद्वैरथमत्यमषणं
AUSF न बभाज कश्चन ।॥३४॥
† tatah sabhayam upavistam uttame
nrpasane sarnbhrta-tejasarin vibhum
alaksita-dvairatham atyamarsanarin
pracanda-vaktrarin na babhdja kascana
tatah —thereafter; sabhayam—in the assembly house; upavistarm—
seated; uttame—on the best; nrpa-asane—throne (upon which King
Hiranyakasipu used to sit); sambhrta-tejasam—in full effulgence;
vibhum —the Supreme Lord; alaksita-dvairatham —whose challenger or
enemy was not seen; ati—very much; amarsanam—fearsome (due to
His anger); pracanda—terrible; vaktram—face; na—not; babhdja—
worshiped; kaScana—anyone.
TRANSLATION
Manifesting a full effulgence and a fearsome countenance, Lord
Nrsirnha, being very angry and finding no contestant to face His
power and opulence, then sat down in the assembly hall on the ex-


--- Page 161 ---
Text 35] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 155
cellent throne of the king. Because of fear and obedience, no one
could come forward to serve the Lord directly.
PURPORT
When the Lord sat on the throne of HiranyakaSipu, there was no one
to protest; no enemy came forward on behalf of HiranyakasSipu to fight
with the Lord. This means that His supremacy was immediately accepted
by the demons. Another point is that although Hiranyakasipu treated the
Lord as his bitterest enemy, he was the Lord’s faithful servant in
Vaikuntha, and therefore the Lord had no hesitation in sitting on the
throne that Hiranyakasipu had so laboriously created. Srila Visvanatha
Cakravarti Thakura remarks in this connection that sometimes, with
great care and attention, great saintly persons and rsis offer the Lord
valuable seats dedicated with Vedic mantras and tantras, but still the
Lord does not sit upon those thrones. Hiranyakasipu, however, had for-
merly been Jaya, the doorkeeper at the Vaikuntha gate, and although he
had fallen because of the curse of the brahmanas and had gotten the
nature of a demon, and although he had never offered anything to the
Lord as HiranyakaSipu, the Lord 15 so affectionate to His devotee and ser-
vant that He nonetheless took pleasure in sitting on the throne that
HiranyakasSipu had created. In this regard it is to be understood that a de-
votee is fortunate in any condition of his life.
TEXT 35
निज्ञाम्य  लोकत्रयमस्तकज्वरं
तमादिदैत्यं हरिणा হল ad)
४४
प्रहषवेगोत्करितानना षुः
=.
भदनवर्ेवशषुः SCREEN
nisamya loka-traya-mastaka-jvararn
tam adi-daityarn harina hatarh mrdhe
praharsa-vegotkalitanana muhuh
prasiina-varsair vavrsuh sura-striyah
nisSamya—hearing; loka-traya—of the three worlds; mastaka-

jvaram—the headache; tam—him; adi—the original; daityam—


--- Page 162 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
demon; harina—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hatam—
killed; mrdhe—in battle; praharsa-vega—by an outburst of ecstasy;
utkalita-ananah—whose faces blossomed; muhuh—again and again;
prastina-varsaih—with showers of flowers; vavrsuh—rained; sura-
striyah—the wives of the demigods.
TRANSLATION
HiranyakaSipu had been exactly like a fever of meningitis in the
head of the three worlds. Thus when the wives of the demigods in
the heavenly planets saw that the great demon had been killed by
the personal hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, their
faces blossomed in great joy. The wives of the demigods again and
again showered flowers from heaven upon Lord Nrsirnhadeva like
rain.
TEXT 36
Ly ny
तदा विमानावङिभिनेमस्तलं
दिदृक्षतां सङ्कुलमास नाकिनाम्‌ |
सुरानका दुन्दुभयोऽथ afi
r= $ ज . *
गन्धवघुरुया ननृत॒जंगुः fam ॥२६॥
tada vimanavalibhir nabhastalam
didrksatam sankulam asa nakinam
suranaka dundubhayo ’tha jaghnire
gandharva-mukhya nanrtur jaguh striyah
tada—at that time; vimana-avalibhih—with different types of
airplanes; nabhastalam—the sky; didrksatam—desirous of seeing;
sartkulam —crowded; asa—became; nakinam—of the demigods; sura-
anakah—the drums of the demigods; dundubhayah—the kettledrums;
atha—as well; jaghnire—were sounded; gandharva-mukhyah—the
chiefs of Gandharvaloka; nanrtuh—began to dance; jaguh—sang;
striyah—heavenly society women.
TRANSLATION
At that time, the airplanes of the demigods, who desired to see
the activities of the Supreme Lord, Narayana, crowded the sky.


--- Page 163 ---
Text 39] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 157
The demigods began beating drums and kettledrums, and upon
hearing them the angelic women began to dance, while the chiefs
of the Gandharvas sang sweetly.
TEXTS 37-39
तश्नोपव्रज्य विबुधा ब्रहनद्रगिरिशादयः ।
ऋषयः पितरः सिद्धा विधाधरमहोरगाः nen
मनवः प्रजानां पतयो गन्धर्वाप्सरचारणाः |
यक्षाः किम्पुरुषास्तात वेतालाः सह किनराः॥। २८॥
-~
ते विष्णुपाषदाः सवे सुनन्दङ्घुदादयः |
मरि बद्धाञ्जलिपुटा आसीनं तीव्रतेजसम्‌ |
ईडिरे नरशादुंलं नातिदूरचराः प्रथक्‌ ॥३९॥
tatropavrajya vibudha
brahmendra-girisadayah
rsayah pitarah siddha
vidyadhara-mahoragah
manavah prajanari patayo
gandharvapsara-caranah
yaksah kimpurusas tata
vetalah saha-kinnarah
te visnu-parsadah sarve
sunanda-kumudadayah
mirdhni baddhanjali-puta
asinari tivra-tejasam
idire nara-sardularn
natidiracarah prthak
tatra—there (in the sky); upavrajya—coming (in their respective
airplanes); vibudhah—all the different demigods; brahma-indra-girisa-
adayah—headed by Lord Brahma, King Indra and Lord Siva; rsayah—
the great saintly sages; pitarah—the inhabitants of Pitrloka; siddhah—


--- Page 164 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
the residents of Siddhaloka; vidyadhara—the residents of Vidyadhara-
loka; maha-uragah—the residents of the planets where great serpents
reside; manavah—the Manus; prajanam—of the living entities (on dif-
ferent planets); patayah—the chiefs; gandharva—the residents of
Gandharvaloka; apsara—the residents of the angelic planet; caranah—
the residents of Caranaloka; yaksah—the Yaksas; kimpurusah—the
Kimpurusas; tata—O dear one; vetalah—the Vetalas; saha-kinnarah—
along with the Kinnaras; te—they; visnu-pdrsadah—the personal asso-
ciates of Lord Visnu (in the Vaikunthalokas); sarve—all; sunanda-
kumuda-adayah—headed by Sunanda and Kumuda; mirdhni—on their
heads; baddha-anjali-putah—with folded hands; asinam —who was sit-
ting on the throne; tivra-tejasam—exposing His great spiritual
effulgence; idire —offered respectful worship; nara-sardulam —unto the
Lord, who had appeared as half man and half lion; na ati-ditracarah—
coming near; prthak—individually.
TRANSLATION

My dear King Yudhisthira, the demigods then approached the
Lord. They were headed by Lord Brahma, King Indra and Lord
Siva and included great saintly persons and the residents of
Pitrloka, Siddhaloka, Vidyadhara-loka and the planet of the
snakes. The Manus approached, and so did the chiefs of various
other planets. The angelic dancers approached, as did the
Gandharvas, the Caranas, the Yaksas, the inhabitants of Kin-
naraloka, the Vetalas, the inhabitants of Kimpurusa-loka, and the
personal servants of Visnu like Sunanda and Kumuda. All of them
came near the Lord, who glowed with intense light. They in-
dividually offered their obeisances and prayers, their hands folded
at their heads.

TEXT 40
श्रीबद्मोवाच
नतोऽस्म्यनन्ताय दुरन्तशक्तये
विचित्रवीर्याय पवित्रकर्मणे ।
विश्वस्य सगं स्थितिसं यमान्‌ गुणैः
खलीख्या सन्दधतेऽन्ययातमने ॥४०॥


--- Page 165 ---
Text 40] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 159
Sri-brahmovaca
nato ’smy anantaya duranta-saktaye
vicitra-viryaya pavitra-karmarne
viSvasya sarga-sthiti-sariyaman gunaih
sva-lilaya sandadhate ‘vyayatmane

sri-brahma uvaca—Lord Brahma said; natah—bowed down; asmi—I
am; anantaya—unto the unlimited Lord; duranta—very difficult to find
an end to; Saktaye— who possesses different potencies; vicitra-viryaya—
having varieties of prowess; pavitra-karmane—whose actions have no
reaction (even though doing contrary things, He remains without con-
tamination by the material modes); visvasya—of the universe; sarga—
creation; sthiti—maintenance; sariyaman —and annihilation; gunaih—
by the material qualities; sva-lilaya—very easily; sandadhate—per-
forms; avyaya-atmane—whose personality never deteriorates.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma prayed: My Lord, You are unlimited, and You
possess unending potencies. No one can estimate or calculate Your
prowess and wonderful influence, for Your actions are never
polluted by the material energy. Through the material qualities,
You very easily create the universe, maintain it and again annihi-
late it, yet You remain the same, without deterioration. I therefore
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

PURPORT

The activities of the Lord are always wonderful. His personal servants
Jaya and Vijaya were confidential friends, yet they were cursed, and they
accepted bodies of demons. Again, in the family of one such demon,
Prahlada Maharaja was caused to take birth to exhibit the behavior of an
exalted devotee, and then the Lord accepted the body of Nrsimhadeva to
kill that same demon, who by the Lord’s own will had taken birth in a
demoniac family. Therefore, who can understand the Lord’s transcen-
dental activities? Not to speak of understanding the transcendental ac-
tivities of the Lord, no one can understand even the activities of His
servants. In Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 23.39) it is said, tanra
vakya, kriya, mudra vijieha na bhujhaya: no one can understand the


--- Page 166 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
activities of the Lord’s servants. Therefore, what to speak of the ac-
tivities of the Lord? Who can understand how Krsna is benefiting the en-
tire world? The Lord is addressed as duranta-sakti because no one can
understand His potencies and how He acts.
TEXT 41
HEE उवाच
AIFS! युगान्तस्ते हतोऽयमसुरोऽव्पकः |
JET TIE भक्तं॑ते भक्तवत्सर 11820
sri-rudra uvaca
kopa-kalo yugantas te
hato yam asuro ’lpakah
tat-sutarn pahy upasrtarn
bhaktar te bhakta-vatsala
sri-rudrah uvica—Lord Siva offered his prayer; kopa-kalah—the
right time for Your anger (for the purpose of annihilating the universe);
yuga-antah—the end of the millennium; te—by You; hatah—killed;
ayam—this; asurah—great demon; alpakah—very insignificant; tat-
sutam—his son (Prahlada Maharaja); pahi—just protect; upasrtam—
who is surrendered and standing nearby; bhaktam—devotee; te—of
Your Lordship; bhakta-vatsala—O my Lord, who are so affectionate to
Your devotee.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva said: The end of the millennium is the time for Your
anger. Now that this insignificant demon Hiranyakasipu has been
killed, O my Lord, who are naturally affectionate to Your devotee,
kindly protect his son Prahlada Maharaja, who is standing nearby
as Your fully surrendered devotee.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the creator of the material
world. There are three processes in creation —namely creation, mainte-
nance and finally annihilation. During the period of annihilation, at the


--- Page 167 ---
Text 42] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 161
end of each millennium, the Lord becomes angry, and the part of anger
is played by Lord Siva, who is therefore called Rudra. When the Lord ap-
peared in great anger to kill Hiranyakasipu, everyone was extremely
afraid of the Lord’s attitude, but Lord Siva, knowing very well that the
Lord’s anger is also His lila, was not afraid. Lord Siva knew that he
would have to play the part of anger for the Lord. Kala means Lord Siva
(Bhairava), and kopa refers to the Lord’s anger. These words, combined
together as kopa-kala, refer to the end of each millennium. Actually the
Lord is always affectionate toward His devotees, even though He may ap-
pear very angry. Because He is avyayatma—because He never falls
down —even when angry the Lord is affectionate toward His devotees.
Therefore Lord Siva reminded the Lord to act like an affectionate father
toward Prahlada Mahardja, who was standing by the Lord’s side as an ex-
alted, fully surrendered devotee.
TEXT 42
সাইন उवाच
FEAT: परम मवता त्रायता नः खमागा
दैस्याक्रान्तं हृदयकमलं तद्‌ गृहं प्रत्यबोधि |
कालग्रस्तं कियदिदमहो नाथ शुश्रूषतां ते
क्तिस्तेषां न हि बहुमता নাংশ্রিহাদইঃ किम्‌ ॥४२॥
sri-indra uvaca
pratyanitah parama bhavata trayata nah sva-bhaga
daityakrantam hrdaya-kamalarm tad-grham pratyabodhi
kala-grastari kiyad idam aho natha Susrisatam te
muktis tesarn na hi bahumata narasimhaparaih kim

sri-indrah uvica—Indra, the King of heaven, said; pratyanitah—
recovered; parama—O Supreme; bhavata—by Your Lordship;
trayata—who are protecting; nah—us; sva-bhagah—shares in the
sacrifices; daitya-akrantam—afflicced by the demon; hrdaya-
kamalam—the lotuslike cores of our hearts; tat-grham —which is ac-
tually Your residence; pratyabodhi—it has been illuminated; kala-


--- Page 168 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
grastam—devoured by time; kiyat—insignificant; idam —this (world);
aho—alas; natha—O Lord; susrusatam—for those who are always
engaged in the service; te—of You; muktih—liberation from material
bondage; tesam—of them (the pure devotees); na—not; hi—indeed;
bahumata—thought very important; nara-simha—0 Lord
Nrsimmhadeva, half lion and half human being; aparaih kim —then what
is the use of other possessions.
TRANSLATION

King Indra said: O Supreme Lord, You are our deliverer and
protector. Our shares of sacrifices, which are actually Yours, have
been recovered from the demon by You. Because the demoniac
king Hiranyakasipu was most fearsome, our hearts, which are
Your permanent abode, were all overtaken by him. Now, by Your
presence, the gloom and darkness in our hearts have been dissi-
pated. O Lord, for those who always engage in Your service, which
is more exalted than liberation, all material opulence is insignifi-
cant. They do not even care for liberation, not to speak of the
benefits of kama, artha and dharma.

PURPORT

In this material world there are two kinds of people—the devatas
(demigods) and the asuras (demons). Although the demigods are at-
tached to material enjoyment, they are devotees of the Lord who act ac-
cording to the rules and regulations of the Vedic injunctions. During the
reign of Hiranyakasipu, everyone was disturbed in the routine duties of
Vedic civilization. When Hiranyakasipu was killed, all the demigods,
who had always been disturbed by Hiranyakasipu, felt relief in their
general way of life.

Because the government in Kali-yuga is full of demons, the living con-
ditions of devotees are always disturbed. Devotees cannot perform yajiia,
and thus they cannot partake of the remnants of food offered in yajiia
for the worship of Lord Visnu. The hearts of the demigods are always
filled with fear of the demons, and therefore they cannot think of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The engagement of the demigods is to
think of the Lord always within the cores of their hearts. The Lord says
in Bhagavad-gita (6.47):


--- Page 169 ---
Text 43] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 163
yoginam api sarvesari
mad gatenantaratmana
sraddhavan bhajate yo marn
sa me yuktatamo matah
““And of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worship-
ing Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with
Me in yoga and is the highest of all.”” The demigods fully absorb them-
selves in meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead to become
perfect yogis, but because of the presence of demons, their hearts are
filled with the activities of the demons. Thus their hearts, which are
meant to be the abode of the Supreme Lord, are practically occupied by
the demons. All the demigods felt relieved when Hiranyakasipu was
dead, for they could easily think of the Lord. They could then receive the
results of sacrifices and become happy even though in the material
world.
TEXT 43
श्रीक्रषय ऊचुः
स्वं नस्तपः परममात्थ यदात्मतेजो
a [1 ६५
येनेदमादि पुरूषात्मगतं ससक्थं |
तद्‌ বিসত্তমমন্ত্ননায্য शरण्यपाल
रक्षागृहीतवपुषा पनरन्वमंस्थाः ॥४२॥
sri-rsaya कल
(षय, nas tapah paramam ৫880 yad atma-tejo
yenedam adi-purusatma-gatar sasarktha
tad vipraluptam amunadya Saranya-pala
raksa-grhita-vapusa punar anvamaristhah
sri-rsayah icuh—the great sages said; tvam—You; nah—our;
tapah—austerity; paramam—topmost; dttha—instructed; yat—which;
atma-tejah— Your spiritual power; yena—by which; idam—this
(material world); adi-purusa—O supreme original Personality of God-
head; atma-gatam —merged within Yourself; sasarktha— (You) created;
tat—that process of austerity and penance; wvipraluptam—stolen;
amuna—by that demon (Hiranyakaéipu); adya—now; saranya-pala—


--- Page 170 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
O supreme maintainer of those who need to be sheltered; raksa-grhita-
vapusdi—by Your body, which You accept to give protection; punah—
again; anvamaristhah—You have approved.
TRANSLATION
All the saintly persons present offered their prayers in this way:

O Lord, O supreme maintainer of those sheltered at Your lotus
feet, O original Personality of Godhead, the process of austerity
and penance, in which You instructed us before, is the spiritual
power of Your very self. It is by austerity that You create the ma-
terial world, which lies dormant within You. This austerity was
almost stopped by the activities of this demon, but now, by Your-
self appearing in the form of Nrsirmhhadeva, which is meant just to
give us protection, and by killing this demon, You have again ap-
proved the process of austerity.

PURPORT

The living entities wandering within the jurisdiction of the 8,400,000

species of life get the opportunity for self-realization in the human form
and gradually in such other elevated forms as those of the demigods,
Kinnaras and Caranas, as will be described below. In the higher statuses
of life, beginning from human life, the main duty is tapasya, or
austerity. As Rsabhadeva advised His sons, tapo divyari putraka yena
sattvari suddhyet. To rectify our material existence, austerity (tapasya)
is absolutely necessary. However, when people in general come under the
control of a demon or a demoniac ruling power, they forget this process
of tapasya and gradually also become demoniac. All the saintly persons,
who were generally engaged in austerity, felt relieved when
Hiranyakasipu was killed by the Lord in the form of Nrsimhhadeva. They
realized that the original instruction concerning human life —that it is
meant for tapasya for self-realization—was reaffirmed by the Lord when
He killed Hiranyakasipu.

TEXT 44

श्रीपितर उचः

श्राद्धानि नोऽधिबुजे प्रभं तनजै-
दंतानि तीयसमयेऽप्यपिबत्‌ तिकाम्बु |


--- Page 171 ---
Text 44] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 165
तस्योदराखविदी्णवपाद्‌ य आर्छत्‌
तस्मै नमो नृहरयेऽखकघर्मगोप््रे ॥४४॥
Sri-pitara ८1८1
sraddhani no ‘dhibubhuje prasabham tanijair
dattani tirtha-samaye py apibat tilambu
tasyodaran nakha-vidirna-vapad ya arcchat
tasmai namo nrharaye ’khila-dharma-goptre
Sri-pitarah icuh—the inhabitants of Pitrloka said; sraddhani—the
performances of the sraddha ceremony (offering of food grains to dead
forefathers by a particular process); nah—our; adhibubhuje —enjoyed;
prasabham —Dby force; tanijaih—by our sons and grandsons; dattani—
offered; firtha-samaye—at the time of bathing in the holy places; api—
even; apibat—drank; tila-ambu—offerings of water with sesame seeds;
tasya—of the demon; udarat—from the abdomen; nakha-vidirna—
pierced by the nails of the hand; vapat—the skin of the intestines of
which; yah—He who (the Personality of Godhead); arcchat—obtained;
tasmai—unto Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); namah—re-
spectful obeisances; nr-haraye—who has appeared as half lion and half
man (Nrhari); akhila—universal; dharma —religious principles;
goptre—who maintains.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Pitrloka prayed: Let us offer our respectful
obeisances unto Lord Nrsirnhadeva, the maintainer of the religious
principles of the universe. He has killed Hiranyakasipu, the
demon who by force enjoyed all the offerings of the sraddha
ceremonies performed by our sons and grandsons on the anniver-
saries of our death and who drank the water with sesame seeds
offered in holy places of pilgrimage. By killing this demon, O
Lord, You have taken back all this stolen property from his abdo-
men by piercing it with Your nails. We therefore wish to offer our
respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
It is the duty of all householders to offer food grains to all their
departed forefathers, but during the time of Hiranyakasipu this process


--- Page 172 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
was stopped; no one would offer sraddha oblations of food grains to the
forefathers with great respect. Thus when there is a demoniac rule,
everything concerning the Vedic principles is turned upside down, all the
religious ceremonies of yajiia are stopped, the resources meant to be
spent for yajiia are taken away by the demoniac government, everything
becomes chaotic, and consequently the entire world becomes hell itself.
When the demons are killed by the presence of Nrsirmhadeva, everyone
feels comfortable, irrespective of the planet upon which he lives.
TEXT 45
श्रीतिया जच
यो नो गतिं योगसिद्धामसाधु-
wily योगतपोबलेन |
नानादपं तं नसैविंददार
तस्मै तुभ्यं प्रणताः सो RE ॥४५॥
sri-siddha dacuh
yo no gati yoga-siddham asadhur
aharsid yoga-tapo-balena
nana darparm tari nakhair vidadara
tasmai tubhyari pranatah smo nrsimmha
sri-siddhah icuh—the inhabitants of Siddhaloka said; yah—the per-
son who; nah—our; gatim—perfection; yoga-siddham—achieved by
mystic yoga; asadhuh—most uncivilized and dishonest; aharsit—stole
away; yoga—of mysticism; tapah—and austerities; balena—by the
power; nana darpam—proud due to wealth, opulence and strength;
tam —him; nakhaih—by the nails; vidadara—pierced; tasmai—unto
him; tubhyam—unto You; pranatah—bowed down; smah—we are;
nrsimmha—O Lord Nrsimhadeva.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Siddhaloka prayed: O Lord Nrsirnhadeva, be-
cause we belong to Siddhaloka, we automatically achieve perfec-
tion in all eight kinds of mystic power. Yet Hiranyakasipu was so


--- Page 173 ---
Text 46] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 167
dishonest that by the strength of his power and austerity, he took
away our powers. Thus he became very proud of his mystic
strength. Now, because this rogue has been killed by Your nails,
we offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
On earth there are many yogis who can exhibit some feeble mystic
power by manufacturing pieces of gold like magic, but the inhabitants of
the planet Siddhaloka are actually extremely powerful in mysticism.
They can fly from one planet to another without airplanes. This is called
laghima-siddhi. They can actually become very light and fly in the sky.
By a severe type of austerity, however, HiranyakasSipu excelled all the in-
habitants of Siddhaloka and created disturbances for them. The residents
of Siddhaloka were also beaten by the powers of Hiranyakasipu. Now
that Hiranyakasipu had been killed by the Lord, the inhabitants of Sid-
dhaloka also felt relieved.
TEXT 46
श्रीकियाधरा ऊचुः
विद्यां फ्थग्धारणयायुरादां
©
न्यषेधदज्ञो TEA: |
स येन॒ संख्ये oe
मायानृसिंहं प्रणताः ख नित्यम्‌ ॥४६॥
Sri-vidyadhara ०८२४४
01.11... 11111111
nyasedhad gjito bala-virya-drptah
sa yena sarikhye pasuvad dhatas tari
maya-nrsirmham pranatah sma nityam
sri-vidyadharah icuh—the inhabitants of Vidyadhara-loka prayed;
vidyam —mystic formulas (by which one can appear and disappear);
prthak—separately; dharanaya—by various meditations within the
mind; anuraddham —attained; nyasedhat—stopped; ajiiah—this fool;
bala-virya-drptah—puffed up by bodily strength and his ability to


--- Page 174 ---
168 Srimnad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
conquer anyone; sah—he (Hiranyakadipu); yena—by whom;
sarikhye—in battle; pasu-vat—exactly like an animal; hatah—killed;
tam —unto Him; maya-nrsimham—appearing as Lord Nrsimmhadeva by
the influence of His own energy; pranatah—fallen; sma—certainly;
nityam—eternally.
TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of Vidyadhara-loka prayed: Our acquired power
to appear and disappear in various ways according to varieties of
meditation was banned by that foolish HiranyakaSipu because of
his pride in his superior bodily strength and his ability to conquer
others. Now the Supreme Personality of Godhead has killed him
just as if the demon were an animal. Unto that supreme pastime
form of Lord Nrsirnhadeva, we eternally offer our respectful obei-
sances.

TEXT 47
श्रीनागा ऊचुः
येन पापेन रलानि स्ीरलानि हतानि नः ।
तद्वश्ःपाटनेनासां द ्ानन्द नमोऽस्तु ते ॥४७॥
sri-naga ucuh
yena pdapena ratnani
stri-ratnani hrtani nah
tad-vaksah-patanendasarn
dattananda namo ’stu te

sri-nagah icuh—the inhabitants of Nagaloka, who look like serpents,
said; yena—by which person; papena—the most sinful
(Hiranyakasipu); ratnani—the jewels on our heads; stri-ratndni—
beautiful wives; hrtani—taken away; nah—our; tat—his; vaksah-
patanena—by the piercing of the chest; asam—of all the women (who
were kidnapped); datta-ananda—O Lord, You are the source of the
pleasure; namah—our respectful obeisances; astu—let there be; te—
unto You.


--- Page 175 ---
Text 48] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 169
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Nagaloka said: The most sinful
Hiranyakasipu took away all the jewels on our hoods and all our
beautiful wives. Now, since his chest has been pierced by Your
nails, You are the source of all pleasure to our wives. Thus we
together offer our respectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
No one is peaceful if his wealth and wife are forcibly taken away. All
the inhabitants of Nagaloka, which is situated below the earthly plan-
etary system, were in great anxiety because their wealth had been stolen
and their wives kidnapped by Hiranyakasipu. Now, Hiranyakasipu hav-
ing been killed, their wealth and wives were returned, and their wives
felt satisfied. The inhabitants of various lokas, or planets, offered their
respectful obeisances unto the Lord because they were relieved by the
death of Hiranyakasipu. Disturbances similar to those created by
Hiranyakasipu are now taking place all over the world because of
demoniac governments. As stated in the Twelfth Canto of Srimad-
Bhagavatam, the men of the governments of Kali-yuga will be no better
than rogues and plunderers. Thus the populace will be harassed on one
side by scarcity of food and on another by heavy taxation by the govern-
ment. In other words, the people in most parts of the world in this age
are harassed by the ruling principles of Hiranyakasipu.
TEXT 48
श्रीमनक्र ऊचुः
मनबो वयं तव निदेश्चकारिणो
दितिजेन देव परिभूतसेतवः |
भवता खलः स॒ उपसंहृतः प्रमो
करवाम ते किंमनुखाषि किङ्करान्‌ ven
sri-manava 80111
manavo vaya tava nidesa-karino
ditijena deva paribhiita-setavah


--- Page 176 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
bhavata khalah sa upasarmhrtah prabho
karavama te kim anusadhi kirkaran

sri-manavah icuh—all the Manus offered their respectful obeisances
by saying; manavah—the leaders of the universal affairs (especially in
connection with giving knowledge to humanity about how to live law-
fully under the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead);
vayam—we; tava—of Your Lordship; nidesa-karinah—the carriers of
the orders; diti-jena—by Hiranyakasipu, the son of Diti; deva—O Lord;
paribhita—disregarded; setavah—whose laws of morality concerning
the varndsrama system in human society; bhavata—by Your Lordship;
khalah—the most envious rascal; sah—he; upasamhrtah—killed;
prabho—O Lord; karavama—shall we do; te— Your; kim —what;
anusadhi—please direct; kirikaran— Your eternal servants.

TRANSLATION

All the Manus offered their prayers as follows: As Your order
carriers, O Lord, we, the Manus, are the law-givers for human
society, but because of the temporary supremacy of this great
demon, HiranyakasSipu, our laws for maintaining varnasrama-
dharma were destroyed. O Lord, now that You have killed this
great demon, we are in our normal condition. Kindly order us,
Your eternal servants, what to do now.

PURPORT

In many places in Bhagavad-gita, the Supreme Lord, Krsna, refers to
the varnasrama-dharma of four varnas and four asramas. He teaches
people about this varnasrama-dharma so that all of human society can
live peacefully by observing the principles for the four social divisions
and four spiritual divisions (varna and asrama) and thus make ad-
vancement in spiritual knowledge. The Manus compiled the Manu-
sarihita. The word sarmhita means Vedic knowledge, and manu indicates
that this knowledge is given by Manu. The Manus are sometimes incar-
nations of the Supreme Lord and sometimes empowered living entities.
Formerly, many long years ago, Lord Krsna instructed the sun-god. The
Manus are generally sons of the sun-god. Therefore, while speaking to
Arjuna about the importance of Bhagavad-gita, Krsna said, ima vivas-


--- Page 177 ---
Text 49] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 171
vate yogar proktavan aham avyayam vivasvan manave praha: “This
instruction was given to Vivasvan, the sun-god, who in turn instructed
his son Manu.” Manu gave the law known as Manu-samhita, which is
full of directions based on varna and asrama concerning how to live as a
human being. These are very scientific ways of life, but under the rule of
demons like Hiranyakadipu, human society breaks all these systems of
law and order and gradually becomes lower and lower. Thus there is no
peace in the world. The conclusion is that if we want real peace and order
in the human society, we must follow the principles laid down by the
Manu-sarihita and confirmed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna.
TEXT 49
श्रीप्रजापतय जच
प्रजेशा चयं ते परेशाभिसृष्टा
EN
न येन प्रजा वै gam निषिद्धाः |
स एष त्वया मिन्नयक्षा § शेते
जगन्मङ्गरं सत्वमूर्तेऽवतारः ॥४९॥
Sri-prajapataya 00০08
prajesa ৮০৫০7 te paresabhisrsta
na yena praja vai sjamo nisiddhah
sa esa tvaya bhinna-vaksa nu Sete
Jagan-mangalari sattva-mirte ‘vatarah
sri-prajapatayah iicuh—the great personalities who created the

various living beings offered their prayers by saying; praja-isah—the
prajapatis created by Lord Brahma, who have created generations of
living entities; vayam—we; te—of You; para-i5a—O Supreme
Lord; abhisrstah—born; na—not; yena—by whom (Hiranyakasipu);
prajah—living entities; vai—indeed; srjamah—we create; nisiddhah—
being forbidden; sah—he (Hiranyakasipu); esah—this; tvaya—by You;
bhinna-vaksah—whose chest has been split; nu—indeed; sete—lies
down; jagat-marngalam—for the auspiciousness of the whole world;
sattva-miirte—in this transcendental form of pure goodness; avatarah—
this incarnation.


--- Page 178 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
TRANSLATION

The prajapatis offered their prayers as follows: O Supreme
Lord, Lord of even Brahma and Siva, we, the prajapatis, were cre-
ated by You to execute Your orders, but we were forbidden by
HiranyakaSipu to create any more good progeny. Now the demon
is lying dead before us, his chest pierced by You. Let us therefore
offer our respectful obeisances unto You, whose incarnation in
this form of pure goodness is meant for the welfare of the entire
universe.

TEXT 50
श्रीगन्धर्वा ऊचु?
वयं विभो ते नरनाय्यगायका
येनार्मसाद्‌ वीय॑बलौजसा कृताः |
स एष नीतो भवता दज्ञाभिमां
सिुत्पथसथः इशलाय कर्पते kell
(1/1...
৮৫৫77? vibho te nata-natya-gayaka
yenatmasad virya-balaujasa krtah
sa esa nito bhavata dasam imarn
kim utpathasthah kusalaya kalpate

sri-gandharvah icuh—the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka (who are
usually engaged as musicians of the heavenly planets) said; vayam—we;
vibho—O Lord; te— Your; nata-natya-gayakah—dancers and singers in
dramatic performances; yena—by whom; atmasat—under subjection;
virya—of his valor; bala—and bodily strength; ojasa—by the influence;
krtah —made (brought); sah—he (Hiranyakasipu); esah—this; nitah—
brought; bhavata—by Your Lordship; dasam imam —to this condition;
kim —whether; utpathasthah—anyone who is an upstart; kusalaya—for
auspiciousness; kalpate—is capable.

TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka prayed: Your Lordship, we

ever engage in Your service by dancing and singing in dramatic


--- Page 179 ---
Text 51] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 173
performances, but this Hiranyakasipu, by the influence of his
bodily strength and valor, brought us under his subjugation. Now
he has been brought to this low condition by Your Lordship. What
benefit can result from the activities of such an upstart as
Hiranyakasipu?
PURPORT
By being a very obedient servant of the Supreme Lord, one becomes
extremely powerful in bodily strength, influence and effulgence,
whereas the fate of demoniac upstarts is ultimately to fall down like
Hiranyakasipu. Hiranyakasipu and persons like him may be very power-
ful for some time, but the obedient servants of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead like the demigods remain powerful always. They are vic-
torious over the influence of Hiranyakasipu by the grace of the Supreme
Lord.
TEXT 51
श्रीचारणा ऊचुः
৬ ©.
हरे तवाङ्प्रिपङ्कजं भवापवगमाध्चिताः |
यदेष साधुट्च्छयस्त्वयासुरः समापितः 11210)
Sri-carana iicuh
hare tavanghri-parnkajar
bhavapavargam asritah
yad esa sadhu-hrc-chayas
tvayasurah samapitah
Sri-caranah iicuh —the inhabitants of the Carana planet said; hare—O
Lord; tava— Your; anghri-pankajam —lotus feet; bhava-apavargam—
the only shelter for becoming free from the contamination of material
existence; asritah—sheltered at; yat—because; esah—this; sadhu-hrt-
Sayah—stake in the hearts of all honest persons; tvaya—by Your Lord-
ship; asurah—the demon (Hiranyakaéipu); samapitah —finished.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of the Carana planet said: O Lord, because You
have destroyed the demon HiranyakasSipu, who was always a stake


--- Page 180 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
in the hearts of all honest men, we are now relieved, and we eter-
nally take shelter of Your lotus feet, which award the conditioned
soul liberation from materialistic contamination.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental form of
Narahari, Nrsimhhadeva, is always ready to kill the demons, who always
create disturbances in the minds of honest devotees. To spread the Krsna
consciousness movement, devotees have to face many dangers and im-
pediments all over the world, but a faithful servant who preaches with
great devotion to the Lord must know that Lord Nrsirhhadeva is always
his protector.
TEXT 52
se ऊचु
=
बययनुचरर्याः कर्ममिस्ते মনাবী-
स्त gg दितिसुतेन प्रापिता वाहकत्वम्‌ |
स त॒ जनपरितापं तत्कृतं जानता ते
नरदर उपनीतः पञ्चतां परविश ॥५२॥
sri-yaksa ucuh
vayam anucara-mukhyah karmabhis te mano-jiiais
ta 2/८ diti-sutena prapita vahakatvam
sa tu jana-paritapam tat-krtam janata te
narahara upanitah paficatarm pafnica-virsa
sri-yaksah dicuh—the inhabitants of the Yaksa planet prayed;
vayam—we; anucara-mukhyah—the chief among Your many servants;
karmabhih—by services; te—unto You; mano-jiaih—very pleasing;
te—they; iha—at the present moment; diti-sutena—by Hiranyakasipu,
the son of Diti; prapitah—forced to engage as; vahakatvam —the palan-
quin carriers; sah—he; tu—but; jana-paritapam —the miserable condi-
tion of everyone; tat-krtam —caused by him; janata—knowing; te—by
You; nara-hara—O Lord in the form of Nrsitmha; upanitah—is put to;


--- Page 181 ---
Text 53] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 175
paiicatam—death; paiica-vimsa—O twenty-fifth principle (the con-
troller of the other twenty-four elements).
TRANSLATION

The inhabitants of Yaksaloka prayed: O controller of the
twenty-four elements, we are considered the best servants of Your
Lordship because of rendering services pleasing to You, yet we
engaged as palanquin carriers by the order of HiranyakaSipu, the
son of Diti. 0 Lord in the form of Nrsimhadeva, You know how
this demon gave trouble to everyone, but now You have killed
him, and his body is mixing with the five material elements.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord is the controller of the ten senses, the five material
elements, the five sense objects, the mind, the intelligence, the false ego
and the soul. Therefore He is addressed as pasica-virisa, the twenty-fifth
element. The inhabitants of the Yaksa planet are supposed to be the best
of all servants, but HiranyakasSipu engaged them as palanquin carriers.
The entire universe was in trouble because of Hiranyakasipu, but now
that Hiranyakasipu’s body was mixing with the five material elements—
earth, water, fire, air and sky—everyone felt relief. Upon
Hiranyaka$ipu’s death, the Yaksas were reinstated in their original ser-
vice to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus they felt obliged to the
Lord and offered their prayers.

TEXT 53
श्रीकिम्पुरुषा ऊचुः
बयं किम्पुरुषास्त्वं @ महापुरुष ईश्वरः |
[| ©.
अयं पुरुषो नष्टो धिक्कृतः साधुभियदा ॥५३॥
sri-kimpurusa ८८८८
vaya kimpurusas tvam tu
maha-purusa Svarah
ayari kupuruso nasto
dhik-krtah sadhubhir yada


--- Page 182 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
sri-kimpurusah @cuh—the inhabitants of Kimpurusa-loka said;
vayam—we; kimpurusah—the inhabitants of Kimpurusa-loka, or
insignificant living entities; tvam—Your Lordship; tu—however;
mahd-purusah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; i#Svarah—the
supreme controller; ayam—this; ku-purusah—most sinful person,
Hiranyakasipu; nastah—slain; dhik-krtah—being condemned;
sadhubhih—by the saintly persons; yada—when.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Kimpurusa-loka said: We are insignificant
living entities, and You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the supreme controller. Therefore how can we offer suitable
prayers unto You? When this demon was condemned by devotees
because they were disgusted with him, he was then killed by You.
PURPORT
The cause of the Supreme Lord’s appearance upon this earth is stated
in Bhagavad-gita (4.7-8) by the Lord Himself:
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanari srjamy aham
paritranaya sadhinarm
vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-saristhapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge
“Whenever and wherever there is a decrease in religious principles and a
predominant rise in irreligion, at that time I descend Myself. To deliver
the pious and annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the prin-
ciples of religion, I advent Myself, millennium after millennium.” The
Lord appears in order to execute two kinds of activities—to kill the
demons and to protect the devotees. When the devotees are too disturbed
by the demons, the Lord certainly appears in different incarnations to
give the devotees protection. The devotees following in the footsteps of


--- Page 183 ---
Text 54] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 177
Prahlada Maharaja should not be disturbed by the demoniac activities of
the nondevotees. Rather, they should stick to their principles as sincere
servants of the Lord and rest assured that the demoniac activities
directed against them will not be able to stop their devotional service.
TEXT 54
श्रीवैतालिका FI:
= .
सभासु सत्रेषु तवामलं यशो
गीत्वा सपयां महतीं लभामहे |
~ <
यस्तामनेषीद्‌ वमेष दुजंनो
दवि्टया हतस्ते भगवन्यथामयः ॥ 4৪
1 11111
sabhasu satresu ८८९८1८7 yaso
gitva saparyarm mahatim labhamahe
yas tam anaisid vasam esa durjano
dvistya hatas te bhagavan yathamayah
sri-vaitalikah  iicuh—the inhabitants of Vaitalika-loka said;
sabhasu—in great assemblies; satresu —in the arenas of sacrifice; tava—
Your; amalam —without any spot of material contamination; yasah—
reputation; gitva—singing; saparyam—respectful position; mahatim—
great; labhamahe—we achieved; yah—he who; tam—that (respectful
position); anaisit—brought under; vasam—his control; esah—this;
durjanah—crooked person; dvistya—by great fortune; hatah—killed;
te—by You; bhagavan—O Lord; yatha—exactly like; amayah—a dis-
ease.
TRANSLATION
The inhabitants of Vaitalika-loka said: Dear Lord, because of
chanting Your spotless glories in great assemblies and arenas of
sacrifice, we were accustomed to great respect from everyone. This
demon, however, usurped that position. Now, to our great for-
tune, You have killed this great demon, exactly as one cures a
chronic disease.


--- Page 184 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
TEXT 55
श्रीकिचरा ऊचुः
নযমীহা किन्नरगणास्तवानुगा
दिविजेन विष्टिमञुनाजुकारिताः ।
भवता हरे स इजिनोऽवसादितो
नरसिंह नाथ विभवाय नो भव ॥।५५॥
sri-kinnara 008]
vayam ia kinnara-gands tavanuga
ditijena vistim amunanukaritah
bhavata hare sa vrjino "vasadito
narasirmha natha vibhavaya no bhava
sri-kinnarah dicuh—the inhabitants of the Kinnara planet said;
vayam—we; 2560-0 Lord; kinnara-ganah—the inhabitants of the
Kinnara planet; tava— Your; anugah—faithful servants; diti-jena—by
the son of Diti; vistim—service without remuneration; amuna—by that;
anukaritah—caused to perform; bhavata—by You; hare—O Lord;
sah—he; vrjinah—most sinful; avasaditah —destroyed; narasirnha—O
Lord Nrsimhhadeva; natha—O master; vibhavaya—for the happiness
and opulence; nah—of us; bhava— You please be.
TRANSLATION
The Kinnaras said: O supreme controller, we are ever-existing
servants of Your Lordship, but instead of rendering service to You,
we were engaged by this demon in his service, constantly and with-
out remuneration. This sinful man has now been killed by You.
Therefore, O Lord Nrsirnhadeva, our master, we offer our respect-
ful obeisances unto You. Please continue to be our patron.
TEXT 56
श्रीकिष्णुपार्षदा ऊचुः
अदैतद्धरिनरसूपमद्धतं ते
° © म ©
ष्टं नः JOUR सवंखाकशम्‌ |


--- Page 185 ---
Text 56] The Lord Slays the King of the Demons 179
सोऽयं ते विधिकर ईश विप्रशस-
स्तस्येदं निषनमनुग्रराय विद्मः ise
Sri-visnu-parsada icuh
adyaitad dhari-nara-ripam adbhutari te
drstarih nah $aranada sarva-loka-sarma
so ‘yam te vidhikara Sa vipra-saptas
tasyedarin nidhanam anugrahaya vidmah
Sri-visnu-parsaddh icuh—the associates of Lord Visnu in
Vaikunthaloka said; adya—today; etat—this; hari-nara—of half lion
and half human being; ripam—form; adbhutam—very wonderful;
te—Your; drstam—seen; nah—of us; Sarana-da—the everlasting
bestower of shelter; sarva-loka-sarma—which brings good fortune to all
the various planets; sah—he; ayam—this; te—of Your Lordship;
vidhikarah —order carrier (servant); i§a—O Lord; vipra-saptah—being
cursed by the brahmanas; tasya—of him; idam —this; nidhanam—kill-
ing; anugrahaya—for the special favor; vidmah—we understand.
TRANSLATION
The associates of Lord Visnu in Vaikuntha offered this prayer:
O Lord, our supreme giver of shelter, today we have seen Your
wonderful form as Lord Nrsihhadeva, meant for the good fortune
of all the world. O Lord, we can understand that HiranyakaSipu
was the same Jaya who engaged in Your service but was cursed by
brahmanas and who thus received the body of a demon. We under-
stand that his having now been killed is Your special mercy upon
him.
PURPORT
Hiranyakasipu’s coming to this earth and acting as the Lord’s enemy
was prearranged. Jaya and Vijaya were cursed by the brahmanas Sanaka,
Sanat-kumara, Sanandana and Sanatana because Jaya and Vijaya checked
these four Kumaras. The Lord accepted this cursing of His servants and
agreed that they would have to go to the material world and would then
return to Vaikuntha after serving the term of the curse. Jaya and Vijaya
were very much perturbed, but the Lord advised them to act as enemies,


--- Page 186 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 8
for then they would return after three births; otherwise, ordinarily, they
would have to take seven births. With this authority, Jaya and Vijaya
acted as the Lord’s enemies, and now that these two were dead, all the
Visnuditas understood that the Lord’s killing of Hiranyakasipu was
special mercy bestowed upon them.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Eighth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Lord Nrsirihadeva Slays
the King of the Demons.”


--- Page 187 ---
CHAPTER NINE
Prahlada Pacifies Lord
Nrsirnhadeva with Prayers
As related in this chapter, Prahlada Maharaja, following the order of
Lord Brahma, pacified the Lord when the Lord was extremely angry
after having killed Hiranyakasipu.

After Hiranyakasipu was killed, the Lord continued to be very angry,
and the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma, could not pacify Him. Even
mother Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, the constant companion of
Narayana, could not dare come before Lord Nrsimnhadeva. Then Lord
Brahma asked Prahlada Maharaja to go forward and pacify the Lord’s
anger. Prahlada Maharaja, being confident of the affection of his master,
Lord Nrsimmhadeva, was not afraid at all. He very gravely appeared
before the Lord’s lotus feet and offered Him respectful obeisances. Lord
Nrsimhadeva, being very much affectionate toward Prahlada Maharaja,
put His hand on Prahlada’s head, and because of being personally
touched by the Lord, Prahlada Maharaja immediately achieved brahma-
jana, spiritual knowledge. Thus he offered his prayers to the Lord in
full spiritual knowledge and full devotional ecstasy. The instructions
given by Prahlada Maharaja in the form of his prayers are as follows.

Prahlada said, ““I am not proud of being able to offer prayers to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. I simply take shelter of the mercy of
the Lord, for without devotion one cannot appease Him. One cannot
please the Supreme Personality of Godhead simply by dint of high paren-
tage or great opulence, learning, austerity, penance or mystic power. In-
deed, these are never pleasing to the Supreme Lord, for nothing can
please Him but pure devotional service. Even if a nondevotee is a
brahmana qualified with the twelve brahminical symptoms, he cannot be
very dear to the Lord, whereas if a person born in a family of dog-eaters
is a devotee, the Lord can accept his prayers. The Lord does not need
anyone’s prayers, but if a devotee offers his prayers to the Lord, the de-
votee benefits greatly. Ignorant persons born in low families, therefore,

181


--- Page 188 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
can sincerely offer heartfelt prayers to the Lord, and the Lord will accept
them. As soon as one offers his prayers to the Lord, he is immediately
situated on the Brahman platform.

Lord Nrsimmhadeva appeared for the benefit of all human society, not
only for Prahlada’s personal benefit. The fierce form of Lord
Nrsimnhadeva may appear most awful to a nondevotee, but to the devotee
the Lord is always affectionate as He is in other forms. Conditioned life
in the material world is actually extremely fearful; indeed, a devotee is
not afraid of anything else. Fear of material existence is due to false ego.
Therefore the ultimate goal of life for every living entity is to attain the
position of being servant of the servant of the Lord. The miserable condi-
tion of the living entities in the material world can be remedied only by
the mercy of the Lord. Although there are so-called material protectors
like Lord Brahma and the other demigods, or even one’s own father, they
are unable to do anything if one is neglected by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. However, one who has fully taken shelter of the Lord’s lotus
feet can be saved from the onslaught of material nature. Therefore every
living entity should be unattracted by material so-called happiness and
should take shelter of the Lord by all means. That is the mission of
human life. To be attracted by sense gratification is simply foolish.
Whether one is a devotee of the Lord or is a nondevotee does not depend
upon one’s birth in a high or low family. Even Lord Brahma and the god-
dess of fortune cannot achieve the full favor of the Lord, whereas a devo-
tee can very easily attain such devotional service. The Lord’s mercy is
bestowed equally upon everyone, regardless of whether one is high or
low. Because Prahlada Maharaja was blessed by Narada Muni, Prahlada
became a great devotee. The Lord always saves the devotee from imper-
sonalists and voidists. The Lord is present in everyone’s heart as the
Supersoul to give the living being protection and all benefits. Thus the
Lord acts sometimes as the killer and sometimes as the protector. One
should not accuse the Lord for any discrepancies. It is His plan that we
see varieties of life within this material world. All of them are ultimately
His mercy.

Although the entire cosmic manifestation is nondifferent, the material
world is nonetheless different from the spiritual world. Only by the
mercy of the Supreme Lord can one understand how the wonderful ma-
terial nature acts. For example, although Lord Brahma appeared from


--- Page 189 ---
Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 183
the lotus seat that had grown from the abdomen of Garbhodakasayi
Visnu, he could not understand what to do after his appearance. He was
attacked by two demons, Madhu and Kaitabha, who took away Vedic
knowledge, but the Lord killed them and entrusted to Lord Brahma the
Vedic knowledge. Thus the Lord appears in every millennium in the
societies of demigods, human beings, animals, saints and aquatics. All
such incarnations are meant to protect the devotees and kill the demons,
but this killing and protecting does not reflect any sense of partiality on
the part of the Supreme Lord. The conditioned soul is always attracted by
the external energy. Therefore he is subjected to lust and greed, and he
suffers under the conditions of material nature. The Lord’s causeless
mercy toward His devotee is the only means by which to get out of ma-
terial existence. Anyone engaged in glorifying the Lord’s activities is al-
ways unafraid of this material world, whereas one who cannot glorify the
Lord in that way is subjected to all lamentation.

Those interested in silently worshiping the Lord in solitary places may
be eligible for liberation themselves, but a pure devotee is always ag-
grieved to see others suffering. Therefore, not caring for his own libera-
tion, he always engages in preaching by glorifying the Lord. Prahlada
Maharaja, therefore, had tried to deliver his class friends by preaching
and had never remained silent. Although being silent, observing
austerities and penances, learning the Vedic literature, undergoing
ritualistic ceremonies, living in a solitary place and performing japa and
transcendental meditation are approved means of liberation, they are
meant for nondevotees or for cheaters who want to live at the expense of
others. A pure devotee, however, being freed from all such deceptive ac-
tivities, is able to see the Lord face to face.

The atomic theory of the composition of the cosmic manifestation is
not factual. The Lord is the cause of everything, and therefore He is the
cause of this creation. One should therefore always engage in devotional
service by offering respectful obeisances to the Lord, offering prayers,
working for the Lord, worshiping the Lord in the temple, always remem-
bering the Lord and always hearing about His transcendental activities.
Without these six kinds of activity, one cannot attain to devotional ser-
vice.

Prahlada Maharaja thus offered his prayers to the Supreme Lord, beg-
ging His mercy at every step. Lord Nrsimhadeva was pacified by


--- Page 190 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
Prahlada Maharaja’s prayers and wanted to give him benedictions by
which Prahlada could procure all kinds of material facilities. Prahlada
Maharaja, however, was not misled by material facilities. Rather, he
wanted to remain always a servant of the servant of the Lord.
TEXT 1
श्रीनारद्‌ उवाच
~~
एवं सुरादयः स्वे नहरुद्रपुरःसराः |
नोपैतमशकन्मन्युसंरम्भं सुदुरासदम्‌ ॥ १ ॥
sri-narada uvaca
evar suradayah sarve
brahma-rudra-purah sarah
nopaitum asakan manyu-
sarmrambham sudurasadam
sri-naradah uvaca—the great saintly sage Narada Muni said; evam —
thus; sura-ddayah—the groups of demigods; sarve—all; brahma-
rudra-purah sarah —represented by Lord Brahma and Lord Siva; na—
not; upaitum—to go before the Lord; aSakan—able; manyu-
samrambham—in a completely angry mood; su-durasadam—very dif-
ficult to approach (Lord Nrsirnhadeva).
TRANSLATION
The great saint Narada Muni continued: The demigods, headed
by Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and other great demigods, dared not
come forward before the Lord, who at that time was extremely
angry.
PURPORT
Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has sung in his Prema-bhakti-candrika,
‘krodha’ bhakta-dvesi-jane: anger should be used to punish a demon who
is envious of devotees. Kama, krodha, lobha, moha, mada and
matsarya—lust, anger, greed, illusion, pride and envy—all have their
proper use for the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotee. A


--- Page 191 ---
Text 2] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 185
devotee of the Lord cannot tolerate blasphemy of the Lord or His other
devotees, and the Lord also cannot tolerate blasphemy of a devotee. Thus
Lord Nrsirmhadeva was so very angry that the great demigods like Lord
Brahma and Lord Siva and even the goddess of fortune, who is the Lord’s
constant companion, could not pacify Him, even after offering prayers of
glorification and praise. No one was able to pacify the Lord in His anger,
but because the Lord was willing to exhibit His affection for Prahlada
Maharaja, all the demigods and the others present before the Lord
pushed Prahlada Maharaja forward to pacify Him.
TEXT 2
a 2D 9
साक्षात्‌ श्रीः प्रेषिता 33g1 तं महदद्भुतम्‌ ।
अटष्टाश्ुतपू्त्वात्‌ स। नोपेयाय शङ्किता ॥ २॥
saksat srih presita devair
drstva [0772 mahad adbhutam
adrstasruta-pirvatvat
sa nopeyaya Sarikita
saksat —directly; Srth—the goddess of fortune; presita—being re-
quested to go forward before the Lord; devaih—by all the demigods
(headed by Lord Brahma and Lord Siva); drstva—after seeing; tam —
Him (Lord Nrsirahadeva); mahat—very big; adbhutam—wonderful;
adrsta—never seen; asruta—never heard of; parvatvat—due to being
previously; sa—the goddess of fortune, Laksmi; na—not; upeyaya—
went before the Lord; sarkita—being very much afraid.
TRANSLATION
The goddess of fortune, Laksmiji, was requested to go before
the Lord by all the demigods present, who because of fear could
not do so. But even she had never seen such a wonderful and ex-
traordinary form of the Lord, and thus she could not approach
Him.
PURPORT
The Lord has unlimited forms and bodily features (advaitam acyutam
anadim ananta-rapam). These are all situated in Vaikuntha, yet


--- Page 192 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
Laksmidevi, the goddess of fortune, being inspired by lila-sakti, could
not appreciate this unprecedented form of the Lord. In this regard, Srila
Madhvicirya recites the following verses from the Brahmanda Purana:
adrstasruta-purvatvad
anyaih sadharanair janaih
nrsimmham sankiteva srir
loka-mohayano yayau
॥ prahrade caiva vatsalya-
darsanaya harer api
172८४ manas tatha brahma
[07018700077 presayat tada
ekatraikasya vatsalyarm
viSesad darsayed dharih
avarasyapi mohaya
kramenaivapi vatsalah
In other words, for the common men the form of the Lord as
Nrsimhadeva is certainly unseen and wonderful, but for a devotee like
Prahlada Maharaja such a fearsome form of the Lord is not at all extraor-
dinary. By the grace of the Lord, a devotee can very easily understand
how the Lord can appear in any form He likes. Therefore the devotee is
never afraid of such a form. Because of special favor bestowed upon
Prahlada Maharaja, he remained silent and unafraid, even though all the
demigods, including even Laksmidevi, were afraid of Lord
Nrsimhadeva. Narayana-parah sarve na kutascana  bibhyati
(Bhag. 6.17.28). Not only is a pure devotee of Narayana like Prahlada
Maharaja unafraid of any dangerous condition of material life, but also if
the Lord appears to mitigate the fear of a devotee, the devotee maintains
his status of fearlessness in all circumstances.
TEXT 3
WR प्रेषयामास ब्ह्मावस्थितमन्तिके |
तात प्रञ्वमयोपेहि खपित्रे पितं sag ॥ ३ ॥


--- Page 193 ---
Text 4] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 187
prahradam presayam asa
brahmavasthitam antike
tata prasamayopehi
sva-pitre kupitarih prabhum

prahradam —Prahlada Maharaja; presayam  dsa—requested;
brahma—Lord Brahma; avasthitam—being situated; antike—very
near; tata—my dear son; prasamaya—just try to appease; upehi—go
near; sva-pitre—because of your father’s demoniac activities;
kupitam—greatly angered; prabhum—the Lord.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter Lord Brahma requested Prahlada Maharaja, who was
standing very near him: My dear son, Lord Nrsimmhadeva is ex-
tremely angry at your demoniac father. Please go forward and ap-
pease the Lord.

TEXT 4
तथेति नके राजन्महामागवतोऽर्भकः |
उपेत्य স্তুবি कायेन ननाम ॒विष्ताज्किः ॥ ४ ॥
tatheti Sanakai rajan
maha-bhagavato ‘rbhakah
upetya bhuvi kayena
nanama vidhrtanjalih

tatha—so be it; iti—thus accepting the words of Lord Brahma;
$anakaih—very slowly; rajan—O King (Yudhisthira); maha-
bhagavatah—the great, exalted devotee (Prahlada Maharaja);
arbhakah—although only a small boy; upetya—gradually going near;
bhuvi—on the ground; kayena—by his body; nandma—offered re-
spectful obeisances; vidhrta-aijalih—folding his hands.

TRANSLATION

Narada Muni continued: O King, although the exalted devotee

Prahlada Maharaja was only a little boy, he accepted Lord Brahma’s


--- Page 194 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
words. He gradually proceeded toward Lord Nrsirhhadeva and fell
down to offer his respectful obeisances with folded hands.
TEXT 5
. ©^
खपादमूले पतितं तमभकं
विलोक्य देवः कृपया परिप्ठतः |
उत्थाप्य तच्छीष्ण्येदधात्‌ कराम्बुजं
wae वित्रस्तभियां Fame ॥ ५॥ |
sva-pada-mile patitari tam arbhakam
vilokya devah krpaya pariplutah
utthapya tac-chirsny adadhat karambujarn
kalahi-vitrasta-dhiyarm krtabhayam
sva-pada-mile—at His lotus feet; patitam—fallen; tam—him
(Prahlada Maharaja); arbhakam—only a little boy; vilokya—seeing;
devah—Lord Nrsimhadeva; krpaya—out of His causeless mercy;
pariplutah—very much afflicted (in ecstasy); utthapya—raising; tat-
Strsni—on his head; adadhat—placed; kara-ambujam—His lotus hand;
kala-ahi—of the deadly snake of time, (which can cause immediate
death); vitrasta—afraid; dhiyam—to all of those whose minds; krta-
abhayam—which causes fearlessness.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Nrsirnhadeva saw the small boy Prahlada Maharaja
prostrated at the soles of His lotus feet, He became most ecstatic in
affection toward His devotee. Raising Prahlada, the Lord placed
His lotus hand upon the boy’s head because His hand is always
ready to create fearlessness in all of His devotees.
PURPORT
The necessities of the material world are four —ahdra, nidra, bhaya
and maithuna (eating, sleeping, defending and mating). In this material
world, everyone is in fearful consciousness (sada samudvigna-dhiyam),
and the only means to make everyone fearless is Krsna consciousness.


--- Page 195 ---
Text 6] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 189
When Lord Nrsimmhadeva appeared, all the devotees became fearless. The
devotee’s hope of becoming fearless is to chant the holy name of Lord
Nrsimhadeva. Yato yato yami tato nrsirmhah: wherever we go, we must
always think of Lord Nrsirnhadeva. Thus there will be no fear for the de-
votee of the Lord.
TEXT 6
९
स॒ तत्करस्पशेधुताखिठाग्मः
सपद्यभिल्यक्तपरात्मददेनः |
sawed ₹হি निवतो दधौ
Tg: छिनहदशवुलोचनः ॥ ६ ॥
sa tat-kara-sparsa-dhutakhilasubhah
sapady abhivyakta-paratma-darsanah
tat-pada-padmari hrdi nirvrto dadhau
hrsyat-tanuh klinna-hrd-asru-locanah

sah—he (Prahlada Maharaja); tat-kara-sparsa—because of being
touched on the head by the lotus hand of Nrsimmhadeva; dhuta—being
cleansed; akhila—all; asubhah—inauspiciousness or material desires;
sapadi—immediately; abhivyakta —manifested; para-atma-darsanah —
realization of the Supreme Soul (spiritual knowledge); tat-pada-
padmam—Lord Nrsimhhadeva’s lotus feet; hrdi—within the core of the
heart; nirvrtah—full of transcendental bliss; dadhau—captured;
hrsyat-tanuh—having transcendental ecstatic bliss manifested in the
body; klinna-hrt—whose heart was softened due to transcendental
ecstasy; asru-locanah—with tears in his eyes.

TRANSLATION

By the touch of Lord Nrsithhadeva’s hand on Prahlada
Maharaja’s head, Prahlada was completely freed of all material con-
taminations and desires, as if he had been thoroughly cleansed.
Therefore he at once became transcendentally situated, and all the
symptoms of ecstasy became manifest in his body. His heart filled
with love, and his eyes with tears, and thus he was able to


--- Page 196 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
completely capture the lotus feet of the Lord within the core of his
heart.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):
mar ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gundan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiyaya kalpate
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita (9.32)
the Lord says:
mar hi partha vyapasritya
ye pi syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaisyas tatha sudras
te ’pi yanti param gatim
“O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as sidras [workers] —can
approach the supreme destination.”

On the strength of these verses from Bhagavad-gita, it is evident that
although Prahlada Maharaja was born in a demoniac family and although
virtually demoniac blood flowed within his body, he was cleansed of all
material bodily contamination because of his exalted position as a devo-
tee. In other words, such impediments on the spiritual path could not
stop him from progressing, for he was directly in touch with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who are physically and mentally
contaminated by atheism cannot be situated on the transcendental plat-
form, but as soon as one is freed from material contamination he is im-
mediately fit to be situated in devotional service.

TEXT 7
अस्तीषीद्धरिमेकाग्रमनसा सुसमाहितः |
=
TEST वाचा वन्न्यस्तदृद येक्षणः ॥ ७ ॥


--- Page 197 ---
Text 8] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 191
astausid dharim ekagra-
manasa susamahitah
prema-gadgadaya vaca
tan-nyasta-hrdayeksanah
astausit—he began to offer prayers; harim—unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; ekagra-manasa—the mind being completely fixed
upon the lotus feet of the Lord; su-samahitah—very attentive (without
diversion to any other subject); prema-gadgadaya—faltering because of
feeling transcendental bliss; vaca —with a voice; tat-nyasta—being fully
dedicated to Him (Lord Nrsirnhadeva); hrdaya-iksanah—with heart and
sight.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja fixed his mind and sight upon Lord
Nrsirmhadeva with full attention in complete trance. With a fixed
mind, he began to offer prayers in love with a faltering voice.
PURPORT
The word susamahitah means “very attentive’ or “fully fixed.” The
ability to fix the mind in this way is a result of yoga-siddhi, mys-
tic perfection. As it is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.13.1),
dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa pasyanti yarn yoginah. One attains
yogic perfection when he is freed from all material diversions and his
mind is fixed upon the lotus feet of the Lord. This is called samadhi or
trance. Prahlada Maharaja attained that stage beyond the senses. Because
he was engaged in service, he felt transcendentally situated, and
naturally his mind and attention became saturated in transcendence. In
that condition, he began to offer his prayers as follows.
TEXT 8
श्रीग्रहाद उवाच
ब्रह्मादयः सुरगणा यनयोऽथ सिद्धाः
सच्ैकतानगतयो वचसां प्रवाहैः |
৩ R
नाराधितुं पुरुगुणेरथुनापि पिः
किं तोष्डुमहति स मे हरिरग्रजातेः ॥ < ॥


--- Page 198 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
Sri-prahrada uvaca
brahmadayah sura-gana munayo ’tha siddhah
sattvaikatana-gatayo vacasarir pravahaih
naradhiturn puru-gunair adhunapi pipruh
kirh tostum arhati sa me harir ugra-jateh
Sri-prahradah uvaca—Prahlada Maharaja prayed; brahma-adayah—
headed by Lord Brahma; sura-ganah—the inhabitants of the upper
planetary systems; munayah—the great saintly persons; atha—as well
(like the four Kumaras and others); siddhah—who have attained perfec-
tion or full knowledge; sattva—to spiritual existence; ekatana-
gatayah—who have taken without diversion to any material activities;
vacasam—of descriptions or words; pravahaih—by streams; na—not;
aradhitum—to satisfy;  puru-gunaih—although fully qualified;
adhuna—until now; api—even; pipruh—were able; kim—whether;
tostum—to become pleased; arhati—is able; sah—He (the Lord); me—
my; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ugra-jateh—who am
born in an asuric family.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja prayed: How is it possible for me, who have
been born in a family of asuras, to offer suitable prayers to satisfy
the Supreme Personality of Godhead? Even until now, all the
demigods, headed by Lord Brahma, and all the saintly persons,
could not satisfy the Lord by streams of excellent words, although
such persons are very qualified, being in the mode of goodness.
Then what is to be said of me? I am not at all qualified.
PURPORT
A Vaisnava who is fully qualified to serve the Lord still thinks himself
extremely low while offering prayers to the Lord. For example,
Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, the author of Caitanya-caritamrta, says:
10822 madhai haite mui se papistha
purisera kita haite mui se laghistha
(Ce. Adi 5.205)


--- Page 199 ---
Text 9] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 193
Thus he considers himself unqualified, lower than the worms in stool,
and more sinful than Jagai and Madhai. A pure Vaisnava actually thinks
of himself in this way. Similarly, although Prahlada Maharaja was a
pure, exalted Vaisnava, he thought himself most unqualified to offer
prayers to the Supreme Lord. Mahajano yena gatah sa panthah. Every
pure Vaisnava should think like this. One should not be falsely proud of
his Vaisnava qualifications. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has therefore in-
structed us:
trnad api sunicena
taror iva sahisnuna
amanina manadena
kirtantyah sada harih
“One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more
tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and should be
ready to offer all respect to others. Ia such a state of mind one can chant
the holy name of the Lord constantly.” Unless one is meek and humble,
to make progress in spiritual life is very difficult.
TEXT 9
मन्ये धनाभिजनरूपतपःशरुतज-
स्तेजःग्रभाववलपोरुषुद्धियोगाः |
नाराधनाय हि भवन्ति परख पुंसो
मक्त्या तुतोष मगवान्गजयुथपाय । ९ ॥
manye dhanabhijana-ripa-tapah-srutaujas-
tejah-prabhava-bala-paurusa-buddhi-yogah
naradhanaya hi bhavanti parasya pumso
bhaktya tutosa bhagavan gaja-yiitha-paya

manye—I consider; dhana—riches; abhijana—aristocratic family:
riipa—personal beauty; tapah—austerity; sruta—knowledge from
studying the Vedas; ojah—sensory prowess; tejah—bodily effulgence:


--- Page 200 ---
194 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
prabhava—influence; bala—bodily strength; paurusa—diligence;
buddhi—intelligence; yogah—mystic power; na—not; aradhanaya—
for satisfying; hi—indeed; bhavanti—are; parasya—of the transcen-
dent; purnsah—Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktya—simply by
devotional service; tutosa—was satisfied; bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; gaja-yiitha-padya—unto the King of elephants
(Gajendra).
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja continued: One may possess wealth, an
aristocratic family, beauty, austerity, education, sensory expertise,
luster, influence, physical strength, diligence, intelligence and
mystic yogic power, but I think that even by all these qualifications
one cannot satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. However,
one can satisfy the Lord simply by devotional service. Gajendra did
this, and thus the Lord was satisfied with him.
PURPORT
No kind of material qualification is the means for satisfying the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, only by
devotional service can the Lord be known (bhaktya mam abhijanati).
Unless the Lord is pleased by the service of a devotee, the Lord does not
reveal Himself (naham prakasah sarvasya yoga-maya-samavrtah). This
is the verdict of all sastras. Neither by speculation nor by material
qualifications can one understand or approach the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
TEXT 10
विप्राद्‌ द्विषडगुणयुतादरविन्दनाम-
पादारविन्दविचखात्‌ पच वरम्‌ |
मन्ये तद्पितयरोदचनेदिताथं-
प्राणं पुनाति सङ्खं न त॒ मूरिमानः ॥१०॥
viprad dvi-sad-guna-yutad aravinda-nabha-
padaravinda-vimukhat svapacarm varistham
manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitartha-
pranari punati sa kularm na tu bhirimanah


--- Page 201 ---
Text 10] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 195

viprat—than a brahmana; dvi-sat-guna-yutat—qualified with twelve
brahminical qualities; * aravinda-nabha—Lord Visnu, who has a lotus
growing from His navel; pada-aravinda—to the lotus feet of the Lord;
vimukhat—not interested in devotional service; sva-pacam—one born
in a low family, or a dog-eater; varistham—more glorious; manye—I
consider; tat-arpita—surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord;
manah—his mind; vacana—words; thita—every endeavor; artha—
wealth; pranam—and life; punati—purifies; sah—he (the devotee);
kulam—his family; na—not; tu—but; bhitrimanah—one who falsely
thinks himself to be in a prestigious position.

TRANSLATION

If a brahmana has all twelve of the brahminical qualifications [as
they are stated in the book called Sanat-sujata] but is not a devotee
and is averse to the lotus feet of the Lord, he is certainly lower
than a devotee who is a dog-eater but who has dedicated every-
thing—mind, words, activities, wealth and life—to the Supreme
Lord. Such a devotee is better than such a brahmana because the
devotee can purify his whole family, whereas the so-called
brahmana in a position of false prestige cannot purify even him-
self.

PURPORT

Here is a statement by Prahlada Maharaja, one of the twelve authori-
ties, regarding the distinction between a devotee and a brahmana expert
in karma-kanda, or Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. There are four varnas
and four asramas, which divide human society, but the central principle
is to become a first-class pure devotee. It is said in the Hari-bhakti-
sudhodaya:

bhagavad-bhakti-hinasya
jatih sastram japas tapah

*These are the twelve qualities of a perfect brahmana: following religious prin-
ciples, speaking truthfully, controlling the senses by undergoing austerities and
penances, being free from jealousy, being intelligent, being tolerant, creating no
enemies, performing yajiia, giving charity, being steady, being well versed in
Vedic study, and observing vows.


--- Page 202 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
apranasyaiva dehasya
mandanarn loka-raijanam
“If one is born in a high family like that of a brahmana, ksatriya or
vaiSya but is not a devotee of the Lord, all his good qualifications as a
brahmana, ksatriya or vaisya are null and void. Indeed, they are con-
sidered decorations of a dead body.”

In this verse Prahlada Maharaja speaks of the wvipras, the learned
brahmanas. The learned brahmana is considered best among the divi-
sions of brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya and Sidra, but a devotee born in a
low candala family is better than such brahmanas, not to speak of the
ksatriyas, vaiSyas and others. A devotee is better than anyone, for he is
in the transcendental position on the Brahman platform.

mari ca yo vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhiyaya kalpate
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” (Bg. 14.26) The twelve qualities of
a first-class brahmana, as stated in the book called Sanat-sujata, are as
follows:
0707107 ca satyarn ca damah 57.८07 ca
hy amatsaryari hris titiksanasitya
yajiias ca danari ca dhrtih samas ca
maha-vrata dvadasa brahmanasya
The European and American devotees in the Krsna consciousness move-
ment are sometimes accepted as brahmanas, but the so-called caste
brahmanas are very much envious of them. In answer to such envy,
Prahlada Maharaja says that one who has been born in a brahmana
family but is falsely proud of his prestigious position cannot even purify
himself, not to speak of his family, whereas if a candala, a lowborn per-
son, is a devotee and has fully surrendered unto the lotus feet of the
Lord, he can purify his entire family. We have had actual experience of


--- Page 203 ---
Text 11] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 197
how Americans and Europeans, because of their full Krsna conscious-
ness, have purified their whole families, so much so that a mother of a
devotee, at the time of her death, inquired about Krsna with her last
breath. Therefore it is theoretically true and has been practically proven
that a devotee can give the best service to his family, his community, his
society and his nation. The foolish accuse a devotee of following the prin-
ciple of escapism, but actually the fact is that a devotee is the right per-
son to elevate his family. A devotee engages everything in the service of
the Lord, and therefore he is always exalted.
TEXT 11
a .
नैवात्मनः प्र्चरयं निजलाभपूर्णो
मानं FART: करुणो णीते ।
यद्‌ AF भगवते विदधीत मानं
বস্বাংমল प्रतिमुखस्य Tages: 1221
naiwatmanah prabhur ayarn nija-labha-pirno
manam janad avidusah karuno vrnite
yad yaj jano bhagavate vidadhita manam
tac catmane prati-mukhasya yatha mukha-srih
na—nor; eva—certainly; atmanah—for His personal benefit;
prabhuh—Lord; ayam—this; nija-labha-pirnah—is always satisfied in
Himself (He does not need to be satisfied by the service of others);
manam—respect; janat—from a person; avidusah—who does not know
that the aim of life is to please the Supreme Lord; karunah—(the
Supreme Personality of Godhead), who is so kind to this foolish, ignorant
person; vrnite—accepts; yat yat—whatever; janah—a person;
bhagavate—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vidadhita—may
offer; manam—worship; tat—that; ca—indeed; atmane—for his own
benefit; prati-mukhasya—of the reflection of the face in the mirror;
yatha—just as; mukha-srih—the decoration of the face.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is al-

ways fully satisfied in Himself. Therefore when something is


--- Page 204 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
offered to Him, the offering, by the Lord’s mercy, is for the
benefit of the devotee, for the Lord does not need service from
anyone. To give an example, if one’s face is decorated, the reflec-
tion of one’s face in a mirror is also seen to be decorated.
PURPORT

In bhakti-yoga it is recommended that a devotee follow nine prin-
ciples: sravanam kirtanar visnoh smaranarm pada-sevanam/ arcanari
vandanari dasyar sakhyam atma-nivedanam. This service of glorify-
ing the Lord by hearing, chanting and so on is not, of course, meant for
the benefit of the Lord; this devotional service is recommended for the
benefit of the devotee. The Lord is always glorious, whether the devotee
glorifies Him or not, but if the devotee engages in glorifying the Lord,
the devotee himself automatically becomes glorious. Ceto-darpana-
madrjanari bhava-maha-davagni-nirvapanam. By glorifying the Lord
constantly, the living entity becomes purified in the core of his heart, and
thus he can understand that he does not belong to the material world but
is a spirit soul whose actual activity is to advance in Krsna consciousness
so that he may become free from the material clutches. Thus the blazing
fire of material existence is immediately extinguished (bhava-maha-
davagni-nirvapanam). A foolish person is amazed that Krsna orders,
sarva-dharman parityajya mam 61607 saranam vraja: ‘““‘Abandon all
varieties of religious activities and just surrender unto Me.” Some foolish
scholars even say that this is too much to demand. But this demand is not
for the benefit of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rather, it is for
the benefit of human society. If human beings individually and collec-
tively surrender everything to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
full Krsna consciousness, all of human society will benefit. One who does
not dedicate everything to the Supreme Lord is described in this verse as
avidusa, a rascal. In Bhagavad-gita (7.15), the Lord Himself speaks in
the same way:

na mari duskrtino miadhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jiana
asuram bhavam asritah

“Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind,
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic


--- Page 205 ---
Text 12] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 199
nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.”” Because of ignorance and
misfortune, the atheists and the naradhamas, the lowest of men, do not
surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore although
the Supreme Lord, Krsna, is full in Himself, He appears in different
yugas to demand the surrender of the conditioned souls so that they will
benefit by becoming free from the material clutches. In conclusion, the
more we engage in Krsna consciousness and render service unto the
Lord, the more we benefit. Krsna does not need service from any of us.
TEXT 12
` तसमाददं विगतवि्कव fa
सर्वात्मना महि गृणामि यथामनीषम्‌ |
(स
नीचोऽजया गुणविसगंमनुप्रविष्टः
पूयेत येन हि पुमाननुवर्णितेन ॥१२॥
tasmad aham vigata-viklava Svarasya
sarvatmand mahi grnami yatha manisam
nico jaya guna-visargam anupravistah
piyeta yena hi puman anuvarnitena
tasmat —therefore; aham—I; vigata-viklavah—having given up con-
templation of being unfit; ©varasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sarva-atmana—in full surrender; mahi—glory; grnami—I
shall chant or describe; yatha manisam—according to my intelligence;
nicah—although lowborn (my father being a great demon, devoid of all
good qualities); ajay@—because of ignorance; guna-visargam —the ma-
terial world (wherein the living entity takes birth according to the con-
tamination of the modes of nature); anupravistah—entered into:
pityeta—may be purified; yena—by which (the glory of the Lord); hi—
indeed; puman—a person; anuvarnitena—being chanted or recited.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, although I was born in a demoniac family, I may
without a doubt offer prayers to the Lord with full endeavor, as far
as my intelligence allows. Anyone who has been forced by


--- Page 206 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
ignorance to enter the material world may be purified of material
life if he offers prayers to the Lord and hears the Lord’s glories.
PURPORT
It is clearly understood that a devotee does not need to be born in a
very high family, to be rich, to be aristocratic or to be very beautiful.
None of these qualifications will engage one in devotional service. With
devotion one should feel, “God is great, and I am very small. Therefore
my duty is to offer my prayers to the Lord.” Only on this basis can one
understand and render service to the Lord. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gita (18.55):
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato 172८४
visate tad-anantaram
“One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devo-
tional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme
Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.” Thus
Prahlada Maharaja decided to offer his best prayers to the Lord, without
consideration of his material position.
TEXT 13
सरवे ह्यमी বিশিক্কযাৰ as
ब्रह्मादयो वयमिवेश न चोद्विजन्तः।
क्षेमाय भूतय उतात्मसुखाय चाख
विक्रीडितं मगवतो रुचिरावतारः॥१२॥
sarve hy ami vidhi-karas tava sattva-dhamno
brahmadayo vayam ivesa na codvijantah
ksemaya bhiitaya utatma-sukhaya casya
vikriditarn bhagavato ruciravataraih
sarve—all; hi—certainly; ami—these; vidhi-karah —executors of or-
ders; tava—Your; sattva-dhamnah—being always situated in the tran-


--- Page 207 ---
Text 14] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 201
scendental world; brahma-adayah—the demigods, headed by Lord
Brahma; vayam—we; iva—like; a—O my Lord; na—nct; ca—and;
udvijantah—who are afraid (of Your fearful appearance); ksemaya—for
the protection; bhitaye—for the increase; uta—it is said; atma-
sukhaya—for personal satisfaction by such pastimes; ca—also; asya—
of this (material world); vikriditam —manifested; bhagavatah—of Your
Lordship; rucira—very pleasing; avatarath—by Your incarnations.
TRANSLATION

O my Lord, all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma, are sin-
cere servants of Your Lordship, who are situated in a transcenden-
tal position. Therefore they are not like us [Prahlada and his
father, the demon Hiranyaka$Sipu]. Your appearance in this fear-
some form is Your pastime for Your own pleasure. Such an incar-
nation is always meant for the protection and improvement of the
universe.

PURPORT

Prahlada Maharaja wanted to assert that his father and the other mem-
bers of his family were all unfortunate because they were demoniac,
whereas the devotees of the Lord are always fortunate because they are
always ready to follow the orders of the Lord. When the Supreme Lord
appears in this material world in His various incarnations, He performs
two functions—saving the devotee and vanquishing the demon
(paritranaya 5৫018070778 vinasaya ca duskrtam). Lord Nrsimmhadeva, for
example, appeared for the protection of His devotee. Such pastimes as
those of Nrsimhadeva are certainly not meant to create a fearful situation
for the devotees, but nonetheless the devotees, being very simple and
faithful, were afraid of the fierce incarnation of the Lord. Therefore
Prahlada Maharaja, in the following prayer, requests the Lord to give up
His anger.

TEXT 14
तद्‌ यच्छ मन्युमसुरश्च दतस्त्वयाद्य
मोदेत साधुरपि बृशिकसपेहत्या |
लोकाश्च निढ़ेतिमिताः प्रतियन्ति सर्वे
रूपं चसह विभयाय जनाः सरन्ति ॥१४॥


--- Page 208 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
tad yaccha manyum asuras ca hatas tvayadya
modeta sadhur api vrscika-sarpa-hatya
lokas ca nirvrtim itah pratiyanti sarve
rapa nrsimha vibhaydya janah smaranti

tat—therefore; yaccha—kindly give up; manyum—Your anger;
asurah—my father, Hiranyakasipu, the great demon; ca—also; hatah—
killed; tvaya—by You; adya—today; modeta—take pleasure; sadhuh
api—even a saintly person; vrscika-sarpa-hatya—by killing a snake or a
scorpion; lokah—all the planets; ca—indeed; nirvrtim—pleasure;
itah—have achieved; pratiyanti—are waiting (for pacification of Your
anger); sarve—all of them; ripam—this form; nrsimha—O Lord
Nrsimmhadeva; vibhaydya—for mitigating their fear; janah—all the
people of the universe; smaranti—will remember.

TRANSLATION

My Lord Nrsirnhadeva, please, therefore, cease Your anger now
that my father, the great demon Hiranyakasipu, has been killed.
Since even saintly persons take pleasure in the killing of a scor-
pion or a snake, all the worlds have achieved great satisfaction be-
cause of the death of this demon. Now they are confident of their
happiness, and they will always remember Your auspicious incar-
nation in order to be free from fear.

PURPORT

The most important point in this verse is that although saintly persons
never desire the killing of any living entity, they take pleasure in the
killing of envious living entities like snakes and scorpions.
Hiranyakasipu was killed because he was worse than a snake or a scor-
pion, and therefore everyone was happy. Now there was no need for the
Lord to be angry. The devotees can always remember the form of
Nrsirhhadeva when they are in danger, and therefore the appearance of
Nrsimhadeva was not at all inauspicious. The Lord’s appearance is al-
ways worshipable and auspicious for all sane persons and devotees.


--- Page 209 ---
Text 15] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 203
TEXT 15
नाहं बिभेम्यजित तेऽतिमयानकास्य-
IEEE EEE TAG RIE coi (I
आन्त्रसजः श्षतजकेशरशङ्ककर्णा-
निर्हादभीतदि गिमाद्रिमिनखाग्रात्‌ ॥ १५॥
naham bibhemy ajita te ’tibhayanakasya-
Jihvarka-netra-bhrukuti-rabhasogra-damstrat
antra-srajah-ksataja-kesara-sariku-karnan
nirhrada-bhita-digibhad ari-bhin-nakhagrat
na—not; aham—I; bibhemi—am afraid; ajita—O supreme victorious
person, who are never conquered by anyone; te— Your; ati—very much;
bhayanaka—{fearful; asya—mouth; jihva—tongue; arka-netra—eyes
shining like the sun; bhrukuti—frowning brows; rabhasa—strong;
ugra-daristrat—ferocious teeth; antra-srajah—garlanded by intestines;
ksataja—bloody; kesara—manes; Sariku-karnat—wedgelike ০৪153
nirhrada—by a roaring sound (caused by You); bhita —frightened;
digibhat—from which even the great elephants; ari-bhit— piercing the
enemy; nakha-agrat—the tips of whose nails.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, who are never conquered by anyone, I am certainly not
afraid of Your ferocious mouth and tongue, Your eyes bright like
the sun or Your frowning eyebrows. I do not fear Your sharp,
pinching teeth, Your garland of intestines, Your mane soaked with
blood, or Your high, wedgelike ears. Nor do I fear Your
tumultuous roaring, which makes elephants flee to distant places,
or Your nails, which are meant to kill Your enemies.
PURPORT
Lord Nrsirmhadeva’s fierce appearance was certainly most dangerous
for the nondevotees, but for Prahlada Maharaja such a fearful ap-
pearance was not at all disturbing. The lion is very fearsome for other


--- Page 210 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
animals, but its cubs are not at all afraid of the lion. The water of the sea
is certainly dreadful for all living entities on the land, but within the sea
even the small fish is unafraid. Why? Because the small fish has taken
shelter of the big ocean. It is said that although great elephants are taken
away by the flooding waters of the river, the small fish swim opposite the
current. Therefore although the Lord sometimes assumes a fierce ap-
pearance to kill the duskrtis, the devotees worship Him. Kesava dhrta-
nara-hari-ripa jaya jagadiia hare. The devotee always takes pleasure in
worshiping the Lord and glorifying the Lord in any form, either pleasing
or fierce.
TEXT 16
त्रस्तोऽस्म्यहं कृपणवत्सल दुःसदोग्र-
संसारचककद नाद्‌ ग्रसतां प्रणीतः |
बद्धः FIAT तेऽङ्घ्रिमूलं
भ्रीतोऽपवगंशरणं हयसे कदा जु ॥१६॥
trasto ’smy aham krpana-vatsala duhsahogra-
sarisara-cakra-kadanad grasatar pranitah
baddhah sva-karmabhir usattama te ’righri-mulam
prito ’pavarga-Saranam hvayase kada nu
trastah—frightened; asmi—am; aham—I; krpana-vatsala—O my
Lord, who are so kind to the fallen souls (who have no spiritual knowl-
edge); duhsaha—intolerable; ugra—ferocious; sarisara-cakra—of the
cycle of birth and death; kadanat—from such a miserable condition;
grasatam—among other conditioned souls, who devour one another;
pranitah—being thrown; baddhah—bound; sva-karmabhih—the
course by the reactions of my own activities; usattama—O great insur-
mountable; te—Your; anghri-mialam—to the soles of the lotus feet;
pritah—being pleased (with me); apavarga-saranam—which are the
shelter meant for liberation from this horrible condition of material exis-
tence; hvayase— You will call (me); kadda—when; nu—indeed.
TRANSLATION
O most powerful, insurmountable Lord, who are kind to the
fallen souls, I have been put into the association of demons as a


--- Page 211 ---
Text 17] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 205
result of my activities, and therefore I am very much afraid of my
condition of life within this material world. When will that
moment come when You will call me to the shelter of Your lotus
feet, which are the ultimate goal for liberation from conditional
life?
PURPORT
Being in the material world is certainly miserable, but certainly when
one is put into the association of asuras, or atheistic men, it is intolerably
so. One may ask why the living entity is put into the material world. In-
deed, sometimes foolish people deride the Lord for having put them
here. Actually, everyone is put into conditional life according to his
karma. Therefore Prahlada Maharaja, representing all the other condi-
tioned souls, admits that he was put into life among the asuras because of
the results of his karma. The Lord is known as krpana-vatsala because
He is extremely kind to the conditioned souls. As stated in Bhagavad-
gita, therefore, the Lord appears whenever there are discrepancies in the
execution of religious principles (yada yada hi dharmasya glanir
bhavati bharata . . . tadatmanam srjamy aham). The Lord is extremely
anxious to deliver the conditioned souls, and therefore He instructs all of
us to return home, back to Godhead (sarva-dharman parityajya mam
eka saranam vraja). Thus Prahlada Maharaja expected that the Lord,
by His kindness, would call him again to the shelter of His lotus feet. In
other words, everyone should be eager to return home, back to Godhead,
taking shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord and thus being fully trained in
Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 17
यसमात्‌ प्रियाप्रियवियोगसंयोगजन्म-
शोकाग्निना सकलयोनिषु दह्यमानः |
दुःखौषधं तदपि दुःखमतद्धियाहं
भूमन्भ्रमामि वद मे तव दास्ययोगम्‌ 11 ell
yasmat priyapriya-viyoga-sarmyoga-janma-
Sokagnina sakala-yonisu dahyamanah
duhkhausadhari tad api duhkham atad-dhiyaharm
bhitman bhramami vada me tava dasya-yogam


--- Page 212 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9

yasmat—because of which (because of existing in the material world);
priya—pleasing; apriya—not pleasing; viyoga—by separation;
saryoga—and combination; janma—whose birth; Soka-agnina—by the
fire of lamentation; sakala-yonisu—in any type of body;
dahyamanah—being burned; duhkha-ausadham—remedial measures
for miserable life; tat—that; api—also; duhkham—suffering; a-tat-
dhiya—by accepting the body as the self; aham—I; bhiman—O great
one; bhramami—am wandering (within the cycle of birth and death);
vada —kindly instruct; me—unto me; tava— Your; dasya-yogam—ac-
tivities of service.

TRANSLATION

O great one, O Supreme Lord, because of combination with
pleasing and displeasing circumstances and because of separation
from them, one is placed in a most regrettable position, within
heavenly or hellish planets, as if burning in a fire of lamentation.
Although there are many remedies by which to get out of misera-
ble life, any such remedies in the material world are more misera-
ble than the miseries themselves. Therefore I think that the only
remedy is to engage in Your service. Kindly instruct me in such
service.

PURPORT

Prahlada Maharaja aspired to engage in the service of the lotus feet of
the Lord. After the death of his father, who was materially very opulent,
Prahlada would have inherited his father’s property, which extended
throughout the world, but Prahlada Maharaja was not inclined to accept
such material opulence, for whether one is in the heavenly or hellish
planets or is a rich or a poor man’s son, material conditions are every-
where. Therefore no condition of life is at all pleasing. If one wants the
uncontaminated pleasure of blissful life, he must engage himself in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. Material opulence may be
somewhat pleasing for the time being, but to come to that temporary
pleasing condition one must work extremely hard. When a poor man is
rich he may be better situated, but to come to that position he had to ac-
cept many miseries. The fact is that in material life, whether one is
miserable or happy, both conditions are miserable. If one actually wants


--- Page 213 ---
Text 18] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 207
happy, blissful life, one must become Krsna conscious and constantly
engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. That is the real
remedy. The entire world is under the illusion that people will be happy
by advancing in materialistic measures to counteract the miseries of con-
ditional life, but this attempt will never be successful. Humanity must be
trained to engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. That is
the purpose of the Krsna consciousness movement. There can be no hap-
piness in changing one’s material conditions, for everywhere there is
trouble and misery.
TEXT 18
सोऽदं प्रियस्य ggg: परदेवताया
रीलाकथास्तव नृसिंह विरि्चगीताः |
त
अञ्जस्तितम्यलुगणन्गुणविप्रसुक्तो
दुर्गाणि ते प्दयुगाटयदंससङ्गः ॥१८॥
so 07४ priyasya suhrdah paradevataya
lila-kathas tava nrsimha viriica-gitah
anjas titarmy anugrnan guna-vipramukto
durgani te pada-yugalaya-hamsa-sangah
sah—that; aham—I (Prahlada Maharaja); priyasya—of the dear-
most; suhrdah—well-wisher; paradevatayah—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; lila-kathah—narrations of the pastimes; tava—
Your; nrsimha—O my Lord Nrsimmhadeva; virifica-gitah—given by Lord
Brahma by the disciplic succession; anjah—easily; titarmi—I shall
cross; anugrnan —constantly describing; guna —by the modes of ma-
terial nature; vipramuktah—specifically being uncontaminated;
durgani—all miserable conditions of life; te—of You; pada-yuga-
alaya—fully absorbed in meditation on the lotus feet; harmsa-sarigah—
having the association of the hamsas, or liberated persons (who have no
connection with material activities).
TRANSLATION
O my Lord Nrsirhhadeva, by engaging in Your transcendental
loving service in the association of devotees who are liberated


--- Page 214 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
souls [harhsas], I shall become completely uncontaminated by the
association of the three modes of material nature and be able to
chant the glories of Your Lordship, who are so dear to me. I shall
chant Your glories, following exactly in the footsteps of Lord
Brahma and his disciplic succession. In this way I shall un-
doubtedly be able to cross the ocean of nescience.
PURPORT

A devotee’s life and duty are very well explained herein. As soon as a
devotee can chant the holy name and glories of the Supreme Lord, he
certainly comes to the liberated position. Attachment for glorifying the
Lord by hearing and chanting the holy name and activities of the Lord
(Sravanam kirtanam visnoh) certainly brings one to the position where
material contamination is absent. One should chant the bona fide songs
received from the disciplic succession. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that
the chanting is powerful when one follows the disciplic succession (evari
parampara-praptam imam rajarsayo viduh). Manufacturing many ways
of chanting will never be effective. However, chanting the song or the
narration left by the previous dcaryas (mahdjano yena gatah sa
panthah) is extremely effective, and this process is very easy. Therefore
in this verse Prahlada Maharaja uses the word वन्य (“easily”). Accept-
ing the thoughts of exalted authorities through disciplic succession is cer-
tainly much easier than the method of mental speculation, by which one
tries to invent some means to understand the Absolute Truth. The best
process is to accept the instructions of the previous acaryas and follow
them. Then God realization and self-realization become extremely easy.
By following this easy method, one is liberated from the contamination of
the material modes of nature, and thus one can certainly cross the ocean
of nescience, in which there are many miserable conditions. By following
in the footsteps of the great acaryas, one associates with the harisas or
paramaharisas, those who are completely freed from material con-
tamination. Indeed, by following the instructions of the a@caryas one is al-
ways freed from all material contamination, and thus one’s life becomes
successful, for one reaches the goal of life. This material world is misera-
ble, regardless of one’s standard of life. Of this there is no doubt. At-
tempts to mitigate the miseries of material existence by material methods
will never be successful. One must take to Krsna consciousness to become


--- Page 215 ---
Text 19] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 209
really happy; otherwise happiness is impossible. One might say that be-
coming advanced in spiritual life also involves tapasya, voluntary accep-
tance of some inconvenience. However, such inconvenience is not as
dangerous as material attempts to mitigate all miseries.
TEXT 19
बालस्य नेह शरणं पितरौ fiw
नातंस्य IRR मजतोनौः |
९
तसस्य ततपरतिविधियं इदाज्ञसे्ट-
स्तावद्‌ विभो agai त्वदुपेक्षितानाम्‌ ।। १९॥
balasya neha saranarm pitarau nrsirmha
nartasya cagadam udanvati majjato nauh
taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihanjasestas
tavad vibho tanu-bhrtam tvad-upeksitanam
balasya—of a little child; na—not; iha—in this world; Saranam—
shelter (protection); pitarau—the father and mother; nrsimha—O my
Lord Nrsimhadeva; na—neither; artasya—of a person suffering from
some disease; ca—also; agadam—medicine; udanvati—in the water of
the ocean; majjatah—of a person who is drowning; nauh—the boat;
taptasya—of a person suffering from a condition of material misery; tat-
pratividhih—the counteraction (invented for stopping the suffering of
material existence); yah—that which; iha—in this material world;
anjasa—very easily; istah—accepted (as a remedy); tavat—similarly;
vibho—O my Lord, O Supreme; tanu-bhrtam—of the living entities who
have accepted material bodies; tvat-upeksitanam—who are neglected by
You and not accepted by You.
TRANSLATION
My Lord Nrsithhadeva, O Supreme, because of a bodily concep-

tion of life, embodied souls neglected and not cared for by You
cannot do anything for their betterment. Whatever remedies they
accept, although perhaps temporarily beneficial, are certainly im-
permanent. For example, a father and mother cannot protect their


--- Page 216 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
child, a physician and medicine cannot relieve a suffering patient,
and a boat on the ocean cannot protect a drowning man.
PURPORT

Through parental care, through remedies for different kinds of dis-
ease, and through means of protection on the water, in the air and on
land, there is always an endeavor for relief from various kinds of suffer-
ing in the material world, but none of them are guaranteed measures for
protection. They may be beneficial temporarily, but they afford no per-
manent benefit. Despite the presence of a father and mother, a child can-
not be protected from accidental death, disease and various other
miseries. No one can help, including the parents. Ultimately the shelter
is the Lord, and one who takes shelter of the Lord is protected. This is
guaranteed. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.31), kaunteya
pratijanthi na me bhaktah pranasyati: “‘O son of Kunti, declare it boldly
that My devotee never perishes.” Therefore, unless one is protected by
the mercy of the Lord, no remedial measure can act effectively. One
should consequently depend fully on the causeless mercy of the Lord. Al-
though as a matter of routine duty one must of course accept other
remedial measures, no one can protect one who is neglected by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this material world, everyone is try-
ing to counteract the onslaught of material nature, but everyone is
ultimately fully controlled by material nature. Therefore even though
so-called philosophers and scientists try to surmount the onslaught of
material nature, they have not been able to do so. Krsna says in
Bhagavad-gita (13.9) that the real sufferings of the material world are
four —janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi (birth, death, old age and disease). In
the history of the world, no one has been successful in conquering these
miseries imposed by material nature. Prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih kar-
mani sarvasah. Nature (prakrti) is so strong that no one can overcome
her stringent laws. So-called scientists, philosophers, religionists and
politicians should therefore conclude that they cannot offer facilities to
the people in general. They should make vigorous propaganda to awaken
the populace and raise them to the platform of Krsna consciousness. Our
humble attempt to propagate the Krsna consciousness movement all over
the world is the only remedy that can bring about a peaceful and happy
life. We can never be happy without the mercy of the Supreme Lord


--- Page 217 ---
Text 20] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 211
(tvad-upeksitanam). If we keep displeasing our supreme father, we shall
never be happy within this material world, in either the upper or lower
planetary systems.
TEXT 20
यखिन्यतो aff येन च यस्य यसखाद्‌
यसै यथा यदुत यस्त्वपरः परोवा |
मावः करोति विकरोति rE:
- 9
सओजोदितस्तद खिलं भवतः खरूपम्‌ Rel)
yasmin yato yarhi yena ca yasya yasmad
yasmai yatha yad uta yas tv aparah paro va
bhavah karoti vikaroti prthak svabhavah
sanicoditas tad akhilarn bhavatah svaripam

yasmin—in any condition of life; yatah—because of anything;
yarhi—at any time (past, present or future); yena—by something; ca—
also; yasya—in relationship with anyone; yasmat—from any causal
representative; yasmai—unto anyone (without discrimination in regard
to place, person or time); yatha—in any manner; yat—whatever it may
be; uta—certainly; yah—anyone who; tu—but; aparah—the other;
parah—the supreme; va—or; bhavah—being; karoti—does; vikaroti—
changes; prthak—separate; svabhavah—nature (under the influence of
different modes of material nature); sanicoditah—being influenced;
tat—that; akhilam—all; bhavatah—of Your Lordship; svaripam—
emanated from Your different energies.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, everyone in this material world is under the
modes of material nature, being influenced by goodness, passion
and ignorance. Everyone —from the greatest personality, Lord
Brahma, down to the small ant—works under the influence of
these modes. Therefore everyone in this material world is in-
fluenced by Your energy. The cause for which they work, the place
where they work, the time when they work, the matter due to
which they work, the goal of life they have considered final, and


--- Page 218 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
the process for obtaining this goal —all are nothing but manifesta-
tions of Your energy. Indeed, since the energy and energetic are
identical, all of them are but manifestations of You.

PURPORT

Whether one thinks himself protected by his parents, by the govern-
ment, by some place or by some other cause, everything is due to the
various potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everything
that is done, whether in the higher, middle or lower planetary systems, is
due to the supervision or control of the Supreme Lord. It is therefore
said, karmana daiva-netrena jantur dehopapattaye. The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the Supersoul within the core of everyone’s heart,
gives inspirations for action according to one’s mentality. All of these
mentalities are merely facilities given by Krsna to the person acting.
Bhagavad-gita therefore says, mattah smrtir jianam apohanam ca:
everyone works according to the inspiration given by the Supersoul. Be-
cause everyone has a different goal of life, everyone acts differently, as
guided by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The words yasmin yato yarhi yena ca yasya yasmat indicate that all
activities, whatever they may be, are but different features of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. All of them are created by the living
entity and fulfilled by the mercy of the Lord. Although all such activities
are nondifferent from the Lord, the Lord nonetheless directs, sarva-
dharman parityajya mam eka Saranam vraja: “Give up all other
duties and surrender unto ১16.” When we accept this direction from the
Lord, we can actually become happy. As long as we work according to our
material senses we are in material life, but as soon as we act according to
the real, transcendental direction of the Lord, our position is spiritual.
The activities of bhakti, devotional service, are directly under the control
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Narada-paicaratra states:

sarvopadhi-vinirmuktar
tat-paratvena nirmalam

hrstkena hrsikesa-
sevanari bhaktir ucyate


--- Page 219 ---
Text 21] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 213
When one gives up materially designated positions and works directly
under the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one’s spiritual life is
revived. This is described as svaripena avasthiti, being situated in one’s
original constitutional position. This is the real description of mukti, or
liberation from material bondage.
TEXT 21
माया मनः স্তুননি कर्ममयं बलीयः
FRA चोदितगुणानुमतेन पुंसः |
छन्दोमयं यदजयापिंतषोडशारं
संसारचक्रमज कोऽतितरेव्‌ त्वदन्यः ॥२१॥
maya manah srjati karmamayar baliyah
kalena codita-gunanumatena purisah
chandomayar yad ajayarpita-sodasarar
sarmsara-cakram aja ko ‘titaret tvad-anyah
maya —the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
manah—the mind;* srjati—creates;  karma-mayam—producing
hundreds and thousands of desires and acting accordingly; baliyah—ex-
tremely powerful, insurmountable; kdlena—by time; codita-guna—
whose three modes of material nature are agitated; anumatena—permit-
ted by the mercy of the glance (time); pumsah—of the plenary portion,
Lord Visnu, the expansion of Lord Krsna; chandah-mayam—chiefly in-
fluenced by the directions in the Vedas; yat—which; ajaya—because of
dark ignorance; arpita—offered; sodasa—sixteen; aram—the spokes;
sarisara-cakram —the wheel of repeated birth and death in different
species of life; aja—O unborn Lord; kah—who (is there); atitaret—able
to get out; tvat-anyah—without taking shelter at Your lotus feet.
*The mind is always planning how to remain in the material world and struggle
for existence. It is the chief part of the subtle body, which consists of the mind,
intelligence and false ego.


--- Page 220 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
TRANSLATION

O Lord, O supreme eternal, by expanding Your plenary portion
You have created the subtle bodies of the living entities through
the agency of Your external energy, which is agitated by time.
Thus the mind entraps the living entity in unlimited varieties of
desires to be fulfilled by the Vedic directions of karma-kanda
[fruitive activity] and the sixteen elements. Who can get free from
this entanglement unless he takes shelter at Your lotus feet?

PURPORT

If the hand of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is present in
everything, where is the question of being liberated from material en-
cagement to spiritual, blissful life? Indeed, it is a fact that Krsna is the
source of everything, as we understand from Krsna Himself in
Bhagavad-gita (aha sarvasya prabhavah). All the activities in both the
spiritual and material world are certainly conducted by the orders of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead through the agency of either the ma-
terial or spiritual nature. As further confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.10),
mayadhyaksena prakrtih siwyate sacaracaram: without the direction of
the Supreme Lord, material nature cannot do anything; it cannot act in-
dependently. Therefore, in the beginning the living entity wanted to en-
joy the material energy, and to give the living entity all facility, Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, created this material world and
gave the living entity the facility to concoct different ideas and plans
through the mind. These facilities offered by the Lord to the living entity
constitute the sixteen kinds of perverted support in terms of the
knowledge-gathering senses, the working senses, the mind and the five
material elements. The wheel of repeated birth and death is created by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but to direct the bewildered living
entity in progress toward liberation according to varied stages of ad-
vancement, different directions are given in the Vedas (chandomayam).
If one wants to be elevated to the higher planetary systems, he may
follow the Vedic directions. As the Lord states in Bhagavad-gita (9.25):

yanti deva-vrata devan
pitfn yanti pitr-vratah


--- Page 221 ---
Text 22] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 215
bhutani yanti bhitejya
yanti mad-yajino ‘pi mam

“Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods;
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings;
those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship
Me will live with Me.”” The real purpose of the Vedas is to direct one back
home, back to Godhead, but the living entity, not knowing the real goal
of his life, wants to go sometimes here and sometimes there and do some-
times this and sometimes that. In this way he wanders throughout the
entire universe, imprisoned in various species and thus engaging in
various activities for which he must suffer the reactions. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu therefore says:

brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan ja

guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija

(Ce. Madhya 19.151)
The fallen, conditioned living entity, trapped by the external energy,
loiters in the material world, but if by good fortune he meets a bona fide
representative of the Lord who gives him the seed of devotional service,
and if he takes advantage of such a guru, or representative of God, he
receives the bhakti-lata-bija, the seed of devotional service. If he prop-
erly cultivates Krsna consciousness, he is then gradually elevated to the
spiritual world. The ultimate conclusion is that one must surrender to the
principles of bhakti-yoga, for then one will gradually attain liberation.
No other method of liberation from the material struggle is at all possi-
ble.
TEXT 22
स त्वं हि नित्यविजितात्मगुणः खधाभ्ना
कारो वशीङृतिसृज्यविसर्गशक्तिः।
चक्र विसृष्टमजयेश्वर षोडशारे
=
मिष्पोख्यमानयुपकप॑ विमो प्रपन्नम्‌ ॥२२॥
sa (एवः hi nitya-vijitatma-gunah sva-dhamna
kalo vasi-krta-visrjya-visarga-saktih


--- Page 222 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
cakre visrstam ajayesvara sodasare
nispidyamanam upakarsa vibho prapannam

sah—that one (the supreme independent person who, through His ex-
ternal energy, has created the material mind, which is the cause of all
suffering in this material world); tvam— You (are); hi—indeed; nitya—
eternally; vijita-atma—conquered; gunah—whose property of the intel-
ligence; sva-dhamna—by Your personal spiritual energy; kalah—the
time element (which creates and annihilates); vasi-krta—brought under
Your control; visrjya—by which all effects; visarga—and causes;
Saktih—the energy; cakre—in the wheel of time (the repetition of birth
and death); visrstam —being thrown; ajayd—by Your external energy,
the mode of ignorance; #Svara—O supreme controller; sodasa-are—with
sixteen spokes (the five material elements, the ten senses, and the leader
of the senses, namely the mind); nispidyamanam—being crushed
(under that wheel); upakarsa—kindly take me (to the shelter of Your
lotus feet); vibho—O supreme great; prapannam—who am fully sur-
rendered unto You.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, O supreme great, You have created this material
world of sixteen constituents, but You are transcendental to their
material qualities. In other words, these material qualities are
under Your full control, and You are never conquered by them.
Therefore the time element is Your representation. My Lord, O
Supreme, no one can conquer You. As for me, however, I am being
crushed by the wheel of time, and therefore I surrender fully unto
You. Now kindly take me under the protection of Your lotus feet.

PURPORT

The wheel of material miseries is also a creation of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, but He is not under the control of the material en-
ergy. Rather, He is the controller of the material energy, whereas we, the
living entities, are under its control. When we give up our constitutional
position (jivera ‘svarapa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’), the Supreme
Personality of Godhead creates this material energy and her influence


--- Page 223 ---
Text 22] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 217
over the conditioned soul. Therefore He is the Supreme, and only He can
deliver the conditioned soul from the onslaught of material nature (mam
eva ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te). Maya, the external energy,
continuously imposes upon the conditioned souls the suffering of the
threefold miseries of this material world. Therefore, in the previous
verse, Prahlada Maharaja prayed to the Lord, “But for Your Lordship, no
one can save me.” Prahlada Maharaja has also explained that a child’s
protectors, his parents, cannot save the child from the onslaught of birth
and death, nor can medicine and a physician save one from death, nor
can a boat or similar means of protection save a person drowning in the
water, for everything is controlled by the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Therefore suffering humanity must surrender to Krsna, as Krsna
Himself demands in the last instruction of Bhagavad-gita (18.66):
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam 61607 Saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma Sucah

“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.” All of human society
must take advantage of this offer and thus be saved by Krsna from the
danger of being crushed by the wheel of time, the wheel of past, present
and future.

The word nispidyamanam (“being crushed”) is very significant.
Every living entity in the material condition is actually being crushed
again and again, and to be saved from this position one must take shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then one will be happy. The
word prapannam is also very significant, for unless one fully surrenders
to the Supreme Lord one cannot be saved from being crushed. A criminal
is put in prison and punished by the government, but the same govern-
ment, if it likes, can release the criminal from imprisoned life. Similarly,
we must know conclusively that our material condition of suffering has
been allotted to us by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and if we
want to be saved from this suffering, we must appeal to the same con-
troller. Thus one can be saved from this material condition.


--- Page 224 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam ~ [Canto 7, Ch.9
TEXT 23
ष्टा मया दिवि विमोऽखिलयिष्ण्यपाना-
मायुः श्रियो विभव इच्छति याञ्जनोऽयम्‌।
येऽखत्पितुः कपितदहासविजुम्भितभ्र-
दिस्फूर्ितेन र्तिः स तु ते निरस्तः ॥२२॥
drsta maya divi vibho ’khila-dhisnya-panam
ayuh Sriyo vibhava icchati yan jano ‘yam
ye ’smat pituh kupita-hasa-vijrmbhita-bhrii-
visphurjitena lulitah sa tu te nirastah
drstah—have been seen practically; maya—by me; divi—in the
higher planetary systems; vibho—O my Lord; akhila—all; dhisnya-
panam—of the chiefs of different states or planets; ayuh—the duration
of life; sriyah—the opulences; vibhavah—glories, influence; icchati—
desire; yan—all of which; janah ayam—these people in general; ye—
all of which (duration of life, opulence, etc.); asmat pituh—of our
father, Hiranyakasipu; kupita-hasa—by his critical laughing when
angry; virmbhita—being expanded; bhri—of the eyebrows;
visphiirjitena—simply by the feature; lulitah—pulled down or finished;
sah—he (my father); tu—but; te—by You; nirastah —completely van-
quished.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, people in general want to be elevated to the
higher planetary systems for a long duration of life, opulence and
enjoyment, but I have seen all of these through the activities of my
father. When my father was angry and he laughed sarcastically at
the demigods, they were immediately vanquished simply by seeing
the movements of his eyebrows. Yet my father, who was so power-
ful, has now been vanquished by You within a moment.
PURPORT
Within this material world, one should understand by practical ex-
perience the value of material opulence, longevity and influence. We


--- Page 225 ---
Text 24] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 219
have actual experience that even on this planet there have been many
great politicians and military commanders like Napolean, Hitler,
Shubhash Chandra Bose and Gandhi, but as soon as their lives were
finished, their popularity, influence and everything else were finished
also. Prahlada Maharaja formerly gathered the same experience by
seeing the activities of HiranyakaSipu, his great father. Therefore
Prahlada Maharaja did not give any importance to anything in this ma-
terial world. No one can maintain his body or material achievements
forever. A Vaisnava can understand that nothing within this material
world, not even that which is powerful, opulent or influential, can en-
dure. At any time such things may be vanquished. And who can van-
quish them? The Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore one should
conclusively understand that no one is greater than the Supreme Great.
Since the Supreme Great demands, sarva-dharman parityajya mam
दष्क Saranari vraja, every intelligent man must agree to this proposal.
One must surrender unto the Lord to be saved from the wheel of
repeated birth, death, old age and disease.
TEXT 24
तखादमूस्तनुभृतामहमाश्िषोऽज्ञ
आयुः भियं विभवमन्द्रियमाविरि्यात्‌ |
नेच्छामि ते विलुकितानुरुविक्रमेण
कालात्मनोपनय मां निजभृत्यपार्धम्‌ ॥२४॥
tasmad amiis tanu-bhrtam aham asiso गतय
ayuh sriyari vibhavam aindriyam avirincyat
necchami te vilulitan uruvikramena
kalatmanopanaya mari nija-bhrtya-parsvam
tasmat —therefore; amith—all those (opulences); tanu-bhrtam —with

reference to living entities possessing material bodies; aham—I; asisah
agjiah—knowing well the results of such benedictions; ayuh—a long
duration of life; sriyam —material opulences; vibhavam —influence and
glories; aindriyam—all meant for sense gratification; avirificyat—
beginning from Lord Brahma (down to the small ant); na—not;


--- Page 226 ---
220 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9

icchami—I want; te—by You; vilulitan —subject to be finished; uru-

vikramena—who are extremely powerful; kdla-atmand—as the master

of the time factor; upanaya—kindly take to; mam —me; nija-bhrtya-

parsvam—the association of Your faithful servant, Your devotee.
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, now I have complete experience concerning the
worldly opulence, mystic power, longevity and other material
pleasures enjoyed by all living entities, from Lord Brahma down to
the ant. As powerful time, You destroy them all. Therefore, be-
cause of my experience, I do not wish to possess them. My dear
Lord, I request You to place me in touch with Your pure devotee
and let me serve him as a sincere servant.

PURPORT

By studying Srimad-Bhagavatam, every intelligent man can get ex-
perience like that of Prahlada Maharaja through the historical incidents
mentioned in this great literature of spiritual knowledge. By following in
the footsteps of Prahlada Maharaja, one should gain thorough experience
that all material opulence is perishable at every moment. Even this body,
for which we try to acquire so many sensual pleasures, may perish at any
time. The soul, however, is eternal. Na hanyate hanyamdne sarire:
the soul is never vanquished, even when the body is destroyed. An intel-
ligent man, therefore, should care for the happiness of the spirit soul,
not of the body. Even if one receives a body with a long duration of life,
like those of Lord Brahma and the other great demigods, it will also be
destroyed, and therefore an intelligent man should be concerned with the
imperishable spirit soul.

To save oneself, one must take shelter of a pure devotee. Narottama
dasa Thakura therefore says, chadiya vaisnava-seva nistara payeche
keba. If one wants to save himself from material nature’s onslaughts,
which arise because of the material body, one must become Krsna con-
scious and try to fully understand Krsna. As stated in Bhagavad-gita
(4.9), janma karma ca me divyam evar yo vetti tattvatah. One should
understand Krsna in truth, and this one can do only by serving a pure
devotee. Thus Prahlada Maharaja prays that Lord Nrsirbhadeva place


--- Page 227 ---
Text 25] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 221
him in touch with a pure devotee and servant instead of awarding him
material opulence. Every intelligent man within this material world must
follow Prahlada Maharaja. Mahdjano yena gatah sa panthah. Prahlada
Maharaja did not want to enjoy the estate left by his father; rather, he
wanted to become a servant of the servant of the Lord. The illusory
human civilization that perpetually endeavors for happiness through ma-
terial advancement is rejected by Prahlada Maharaja and those who
strictly follow in his footsteps.

There are different types of material opulence, known technically as
bhukti, mukti and siddhi. Bhukti refers to being situated in a very good
position, like a position with the demigods in the higher planetary
systems, where one can enjoy material sense gratification to the greatest
extent. Mukti refers to being disgusted with material advancement and
thus desiring to become one with the Supreme. Siddhi refers to executing
a severe type of meditation, like that of the yogis, to attain eight kinds of
perfection (anima, laghima, mahima, etc.). All who desire some ma-
terial advancement through bhukti, mukti or siddhi are punishable in
due course of time, and they return to material activities. Prahlada
Maharaja rejected them all; he simply wanted to engage as an apprentice
under the guidance of a pure devotee.

TEXT 25
FY: श्रतिसुखा खृगद्ष्णिरूपाः
h J 9
केदं कलेवरमशेषरुजां विरोहः ।
निर्विद्यते न तु जनो यदपीति विद्धान्‌
£ EN EY
FEES AIA: शमयन्दुरापः IRA
kutrasisah sruti-sukha mrgatrsni-riipah
kvedar kalevaram asesa-rujar virohah
nirvidyate na tu jano yad apiti vidvan
kamanalam madhu-lavaih samayan durapaih
kutra—where; asisah—benedictions; Sruti-sukhah—simply pleasing
to hear 013 mrgatrsni-ripah—exactly like a mirage in the desert; kva—
where; idam—this; kalevaram—body; aSesa—unlimited; rujam—of


--- Page 228 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
diseases; virohah—the place for generating; nirvidyate—become sati-
ated; na—not; tu—but; janah—people in general; yat api—although;
iti—thus; vidvan —so-called learned philosophers, scientists and politi-
cians; kama-analam—the blazing fire of lusty desires; madhu-lavaih—
with drops of honey (happiness); samayan—controlling; durapaih—
very difficult to obtain.
TRANSLATION

In this material world, every living entity desires some future
happiness, which is exactly like a mirage in the desert. Where is
water in the desert, or, in other words, where is happiness in this
material world? As for this body, what is its value? It is merely a
source of various diseases. The so-called philosophers, scientists
and politicians know this very well, but nonetheless they aspire for
temporary happiness. Happiness is very difficult to obtain, but be-
cause they are unable to control their senses, they run after the so-
called happiness of the material world and never come to the right
conclusion.

PURPORT

There is a song in the Bengali language which states, “I constructed
this home for happiness, but unfortunately there was a fire, and every-
thing has now been burnt to ashes.” This illustrates the nature of ma-
terial happiness. Everyone knows it, but nonetheless one plans to hear or
think something very pleasing. Unfortunately, all of one’s plans are an-
nihilated in due course of time. There were many politicians who plan-
ned empires, supremacy and control of the world, but in due time all
their plans and empires—and even the politicians themselves —were
vanquished. Everyone should take lessons from Prahlada Maharaja about
how we are engaged in so-called temporary happiness through bodily ex-
ercises for sense enjoyment. All of us repeatedly make plans, which are
all repeatedly frustrated. Therefore one should stop such planmaking.

As one cannot stop a blazing fire by constantly pouring ghee upon it,
one cannot satisfy oneself by increasing plans for sense enjoyment. The
blazing fire is bhava-maha-davagni, the forest fire of material existence.
This forest fire occurs automatically, without endeavor. We want to be


--- Page 229 ---
Text 26] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 223
happy in the material world, but this will never be possible; we shall
simply increase the blazing fire of desires. Our desires cannot be satisfied
by illusory thoughts and plans; rather, we have to follow the instructions
of Lord Krsna: sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekari saranarm vraja.
Then we shall be happy. Otherwise, in the name of happiness, we shall
continue to suffer miserable conditions.
TEXT 26
TE रजः प्रमव ईश तमोऽधिकेऽसिन्‌
जातः GIFS क तवानुकम्पा ।
a
न जह्मणो न तु मवस्य न बे रमाया
यन्मेऽर्पितः श्चिरसि पद्मकरः प्रसादः॥२६॥
kvahari rajah-prabhava isa tamo ‘dhike ’smin
Jjatah suretara-kule kva tavanukampa
na brahmano na tu bhavasya na vai ramaya
yan me ’rpitah Sirasi padma-karah prasadah

kva—where; aham—1 (am); rajah-prabhavah—being born in a body
full of passion; ©$a—O my Lord; tamah—the mode of ignorance;
adhike —surpassing in; asmin—in this; jatah—born; sura-itara-kule—
in a family of atheists or demons (who are subordinate to the devotees);
kva—where; tava—Your; anukampd—causeless mercy; na—not;
brahmanah—of Lord Brahma; na—not; tu—but; bhavasya—of Lord
Siva; na—nor; vai—even; ramaydh—of the goddess of fortune; yat—
which; me—of me; arpitah—offered; sirasi—on the head; padma-
karah—Ilotus hand; prasddah—the symbol of mercy.

TRANSLATION

O my Lord, O Supreme, because I was born in a family full of
the hellish material qualities of passion and ignorance, what is my
position? And what is to be said of Your causeless mercy, which
was never offered even to Lord Brahma, Lord Siva or the goddess
of fortune, Laksmi? You never put Your lotus hand upon their
heads, but You have put it upon mine.


--- Page 230 ---
224. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
PURPORT

Prahlada Maharaja was surprised at the causeless mercy of the
Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, for although Prahlada was
born in a demoniac family and although the Lord had never before
placed His lotus hand on the head of Brahma, Siva or the goddess of for-
tune, His constant companion, Lord Nrsirhhadeva kindly placed His hand
on the head of Prahlada. This is the meaning of causeless mercy. The
causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead may be bestowed
upon anyone, regardless of his position in this material world. Everyone
is eligible to worship the Supreme Lord, irrespective of his material posi-
tion. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):

mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhayaya kalpate
“One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.” Anyone who engages in continuous
devotional service to the Lord is situated in the spiritual world and has
nothing to do with the material qualities (sattva-guna, rajo-guna and
tamo-guna).

Because Prahlada Maharaja was situated on the spiritual platform, he
had nothing to do with his body, which had been born of the modes of
passion and ignorance. The symptoms of passion and ignorance are de-
scribed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.19) as lust and hankering (tada
rajas tamo-bhavah kama-lobhadayas ca ye). Prahlada Maharaja, being a
great devotee, thought the body born of his father to be born of passion
and ignorance, but because Prahlada was fully engaged in the service of
the Lord, his body did not belong to the material world. The pure
Vaisnava’s body is spiritualized even in this life. For example, when iron
is put into a fire it becomes red-hot and is no longer iron but fire.
Similarly, the so-called material bodies of devotees who fully engage in
the devotional service of the Lord, being constantly in the fire of spiritual
life, have nothing to do with matter, but are spiritualized.


--- Page 231 ---
Text 27] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 225
Srila Madhvacarya remarks that the goddess of fortune, the mother of
the universe, could not get mercy similar to that which was offered to
Prahlada Maharaja, for although the goddess of fortune is always a con-
stant companion of the Supreme Lord, the Lord is more inclined to His
devotees. In other words, devotional service is so great that when it is
offered even by those born in low families, the Lord accepts it as being
more valuable than the service offered by the goddess of fortune. Lord
Brahma, King Indra and the other demigods living in the upper plan-
etary systems are situated in a different spirit of consciousness, and
therefore they are sometimes troubled by demons, but a devotee, even if
situated in the lower planets, enjoys life in Krsna consciousness under
any circumstances. Paratah svatah karmatah: as he acts himself, as he is
instructed by others or as he performs his material activities, he enjoys
life in every respect. In this regard, Madhvacarya quotes the following
verses, which are mentioned in the Brahma-tarka:
§ri-brahma-brahmivindradi-
tri-katat stri-puru-stutah
tad anye ca kramadeva
sada muktau smrtav api
hari-bhaktau ca taj-jiiane
sukhe ca niyamena tu
paratah svatah karmato va
na kathaiicit tad anyatha
TEXT 27
९
नैषा परावरमतिभेवतो नलु an
जन्तोर्यथात्मसुहदो जगतस्तथापि |
संसेवया सुरतरोरिव ते प्रसाद्‌;
सेवाचुरूपयुदयो न परावरत्वम्‌ ॥२५७॥
naisa paravara-matir bhavato nanu syaj
Jantor yathatma-suhrdo jagatas tathapi


--- Page 232 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
sarisevayd surataror wa te prasadah
sevanuriipam udayo na paravaratvam

na—not; esa—this; para-avara—of higher or lower; matih—such
discrimination; bhavatah—of Your Lordship; nanu—indeed; syat—
there can be; jantoh—of ordinary living entities; yatha—as; atma-
suhrdah—of one who is the friend; jagatah—of the whole material
world; tathapi—but still (there is such a demonstration of intimacy or
difference); sarmsevaya—according to the degree of service rendered by
the devotee; surataroh iva—like that of the desire tree in Vaikunthaloka
(which offers fruits according to the desire of the devotee); te— Your;
prasadah —benediction or blessing; seva-anuripam—according to the
category of service one renders to the Lord; udayah—manifestation;
na—not; para-avaratvam—discrimination due to higher or lower levels.

TRANSLATION

Unlike an ordinary living entity, my Lord, You do not discrimi-
nate between friends and enemies, the favorable and the unfavora-
ble, because for You there is no conception of higher and lower.
Nonetheless, You offer Your benedictions according to the level of
one’s service, exactly as a desire tree delivers fruits according to
one’s desires and makes no distinction between the lower and the
higher.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (4.11) the Lord clearly says, ye yatha mam
prapadyante tars tathaiva bhajamy aham: “As one surrenders to Me, I
reward him accordingly.” As stated by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, jivera
‘svaripa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’: every living being is an eternal
servant of Krsna. According to the service the living entity renders, he
automatically receives benedictions from Krsna, who does not make dis-
tinctions, thinking, “Here is a person in an intimate relationship with
Me, and here is a person I dislike.” Krsna advises everyone to surrender
to Him (sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja). One’s
relationship with the Supreme Lord is in proportion to that surrender
and the service one renders unto the Lord. Thus throughout the entire
world the higher or lower positions of the living entities are selected by
the living entities themselves. If one is inclined to dictate that the Lord


--- Page 233 ---
Text 28] _ Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 227
grant something, one receives benedictions according to his desires. If
one wants to be elevated to the higher planetary systems, the heavenly
planets, he can be promoted to the place he desires, and if one wants to
remain a hog or a pig on earth, the Lord fulfills that desire also.
Therefore, one’s position is determined by one’s desires; the Lord is not
responsible for the higher or lower grades of our existence. This is
further explained quite definitely in Bhagavad-gita (9.25) by the Lord
Himself :
yanti deva-vrata devan
pitfn yanti pitr-vratah
bhiitani yanti bhittejya
yanti mad-yajino ‘pi mam
Some people want to be promoted to the heavenly planets, some want to
be promoted to Pitrloka, and some want to remain on earth, but if one is
interested in returning home, back to Godhead, he can be promoted
there also. According to the demands of a particular devotee, he receives
a result by the grace of the Lord. The Lord does not discriminate, think-
ing, “Here is a person favorable to Me, and here is a person who is not
favorable.” Rather, He fulfills the desires of everyone. Therefore the
sastras enjoin:
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama uddra-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
yajeta purusam param
“Whether one is without desire [the condition of the devotees], or is
desirous of all fruitive results, or is after liberation, one should with all
efforts try to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead for complete
perfection, culminating in Krsna consciousness.” (Bhag. 2.3.10) Ac-
cording to one’s position, whether as a devotee, a karmi or a jiani, what-
ever one wants one can get if one fully engages in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 28
एवं जनं निपतितं sal
कामाभिकाममनु यः प्रपतन्प्रसङ्गात्‌।


--- Page 234 ---
228 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
FARHAN सुरर्षिणा भगवन्‌ गृहीतः
Ast कथं जु REA तव भृत्यसेवाम्‌ ॥ २८॥
evar janari nipatitarn prabhavahi-kape
kamabhikamam anu yah prapatan prasarigat
krtvatmasat surarsina bhagavan grhitah
so "hari katharh nu visrje tava bhrtya-sevam
evam—thus; janam—people in general; nipatitam—fallen;
prabhava—of material existence; ahi-kipe—in a blind well full of
snakes; kama-abhikamam—desiring the sense objects; anu—following;
yah—the person who; prapatan—falling down (in this condition);
prasangat—because of bad association or increased association with ma-
terial desires; krtva atmasat—causing me (to acquire spiritual qualities
like himself, Sri Narada); sura-rsina—by the great saintly person
(Narada); bhagavan—O my Lord; grhitah—accepted; sah—that per-
son; aham—I; katham—how; nu—indeed; visrje—can give up; tava—
Your; bhrtya-sevam —the service of Your pure devotee.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, because of
my association with material desires, one after another, I was
gradually falling into a blind well full of snakes, following the
general populace. But Your servant Narada Muni kindly accepted
me as his disciple and instructed me how to achieve this transcen-
dental position. Therefore, my first duty is to serve him. How
could I leave his service?
PURPORT
As will be seen in later verses, even though Prahlada Maharaja was
directly offered all the benedictions he might have desired, he refused to
accept such offerings from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. On the
contrary, he asked the Lord to engage him in the service of His servant
Narada Muni. This is the symptom of a pure devotee. One should serve
the spiritual master first. It is not that one should bypass the spiritual
master and desire to serve the Supreme Lord. This is not the principle
for a Vaisnava. Narottama dasa Thakura says:


--- Page 235 ---
Text 29] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 229
tandera carana sevi bhakta-sane vasa
Janame janame haya, ei abhilasa
One should not be anxious to offer direct service to the Lord. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu advised that one become a servant of the servant of the ser-
vant of the Lord (gopi-bhartuh pada-kamalayor dasa-dasanudasah).
This is the process for approaching the Supreme Lord. The first service
should be rendered to the spiritual master so that by his mercy one can
approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead to render service. While
teaching Rupa Gosvami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, guru-krsna-
prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija: one can achieve the seed of devotional
service by the mercy of the guru, the spiritual master, and then by the
mercy of Krsna. This is the secret of success. First one should try to
please the spiritual master, and then one should attempt to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura also
says, yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasido. One should not attempt to
please the Supreme Personality of Godhead by concoction. One must first
be prepared to serve the spiritual master, and when one is qualified he is
automatically offered the platform of direct service to the Lord.
Therefore Prahlada Maharaja proposed that he engage in the service of
Narada Muni. He never proposed that he engage directly in the service of
the Lord. This is the right conclusion. Therefore he said, so "ham kathar
nu visyje tava bhrtya-sevam: “How can I give up the service of my spiri-
tual master, who has favored me in such a way that I am now able to see
You face to face?”” Prahlada Maharaja prayed to the Lord that he might
continue to engage in the service of his spiritual master, Narada Muni.
TEXT 29
मतप्राणरक्षणमनन्त॒ पितुर्वधथ
मन्ये Wea ETE विधातुम्‌ |
WR ATE यददोचदसद्विधित्े
स्त्वामीश्वरो मदपरोऽवतु कं हरामि ॥२९॥
mat-prana-raksanam ananta pitur vadhas ca
manye sva-bhrtya-rsi-vakyam 10077 vidhatum


--- Page 236 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
khadgar pragrhya yad avocad asad-vidhitsus
tvam Svaro mad-aparo “vatu kari harami
mat-prana-raksanam—saving my life; ananta—O unlimited one,
reservoir of unlimited transcendental qualities; pituh—of my father;
vadhah ca—and killing; manye—I consider; sva-bhrtya—of Your
unalloyed servants; rsi-vakyam—and the words of the great saint
Narada; rtam—true; vidhatum—to prove; khadgam—sword;
pragrhya—taking in hand; yat—since; avocat—my father said; asat-
vidhitsuh—desiring to act very impiously; tvam— You; Svarah—any
supreme controller; mat-aparah—other than me; avatu—let him save;
kam —your head; harami—I shall now separate.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, O unlimited reservoir of transcendental qualities, You
have killed my father, HiranyakaSipu, and saved me from his
sword. He had said very angrily, “If there is any supreme con-
troller other than me, let Him save you. I shall now sever your
head from your body.” Therefore I think that both in saving me
and in killing him, You have acted just to prove true the words of
Your devotee. There is no other cause.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (9.29) the Lord says:
samo ’ham sarva-bhatesu
na me dvesyo ’sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu mar bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is undoubtedly equal to everyone.
He has no friend and no enemy, but as one desires benefits from the
Lord, the Lord is very pleased to award them. The lower and higher posi-
tions of different living entities are due to their desires, for the Lord,
being equal to all, fulfills everyone's desires. The killing of
Hiranyakasipu and saving of Prahlada Maharaja also strictly followed
this law of the supreme controller’s activities. When Prahlada’s mother,


--- Page 237 ---
Text 30] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 231
Hiranyakasipu’s wife, Kayadhu, was under the protection of Narada, she
prayed for the protection of her son from the enemy, and Narada Muni
gave assurance that Prahlada Maharaja would always be saved from the
enemy’s hands. Thus when Hiranyakadipu was going to kill Prahlada
Maharaja, the Lord saved Prahlada to fulfill His promise in Bhagavad-
gita (kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati) and to prove true
the words of Narada. The Lord can fulfill many purposes through one ac-
tion. Thus the killing of Hiranyakasipu and the saving of Prahlada were
enacted simultaneously to prove the truthfulness of the Lord’s devotee
and the fidelity of the Lord Himself to His own purpose. The Lord acts
only to satisfy the desires of His devotees; otherwise He has nothing to
do. As confirmed in the Vedic language, na tasya karyam karanam ca
vidyate: the Lord has nothing to do personally, for everything is done
through His different potencies (parasya saktir vividhaiva $riyate). The
Lord has multifarious energies, through which everything is done. Thus
when He personally does something, it is only to satisfy His devotee. The
Lord is known as bhakta-vatsala because He very much favors His devo-
ted servant.
TEXT 30
एकस्त्वमेव जगदेतमयुष्य यत्‌ त्व-
मादन्तयोः ए्रथगवस्यसि म॒घ्यतश्च |
सृष्टा गुणन्यतिकरं निजमाययेदं
नानेव तेरवसितस्तदुप्रविष्टः ।।२०॥
ekas tvam eva Jagad etam amusya yat tvam
ady-antayoh prthag avasyasi madhyatas ca
srstva guna-vyatikaram nija-mayayedarn
naneva tair avasitas tad anupravistah

ekah—one; tvam—You; eva—only; jagat—the cosmic manifestation;
etam—this; amusya—of that (the whole universe); yat—since; tvam—
You; adi—in the beginning; antayoh—at the end; prthak—separately;
avasyasi—exist (as the cause); madhyatah ca—also in the middle (the
duration between the beginning and end); srstva—creating; guna-
vyatikaram—the transformation of the three modes of material nature;


--- Page 238 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
nija-mayayd—by Your own external energy; idam—this; nana iva—
like many varieties; taih—by them (the modes); avasitah—ex-
perienced; tat—that; anupravistah—entering into.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, You alone manifest Yourself as the entire cosmic
manifestation, for You existed before the creation, You exist after
the annihilation, and You are the maintainer between the begin-
ning and the end. All this is done by Your external energy through
actions and reactions of the three modes of material nature.
Therefore whatever exists—externally and internally—is You
alone.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.35):
eko ‘py asau racayitum jagad-anda-kotirn
yac-chaktir asti jagad-anda-caya yad-antah
andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-sthari
govindam adi-purusarin tam aha bhajami
“I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who, by one of His
plenary portions, enters the existence of every universe and every atomic
particle and thus unlimitedly manifests His infinite energy all over the
material creation.” To create this cosmic manifestation, Govinda, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, expands His external energy and thus
enters everything in the universe, including the atomic particles. In this
way He exists in the entire cosmic manifestation. Therefore the activities
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in maintaining His devotees are
transcendental, not material. He exists in everything as the cause and
effect, yet He is separate, existing beyond this cosmic manifestation. This
is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.4):
maya tatam idari sarvar
Jjagad avyakta-miirtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
na cahari tesv avasthitah


--- Page 239 ---
Text 31] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 233
The entire cosmic manifestation is but an expansion of the Lord’s en-
ergy; everything rests in Him, yet He exists separately, beyond creation,
maintenance and annihilation. The varieties of creation are performed
by His external energy. Because the energy and energetic are one, every-
thing is one (sarvari khalv 10277 brahma). Therefore without Krsna, the
Parabrahman, nothing can exist. The difference between the material
and spiritual worlds is that His external energy is manifested in the ma-
terial world whereas His spiritual energy exists in the spiritual world.
Both energies, however, belong to the Supreme Lord, and therefore in a
higher sense there is no exhibition of material energy because everything
is spiritual energy. The energy in which the Lord’s all-pervasiveness is
not realized is called material. Otherwise, everything is spiritual.
Therefore Prahlada prays, ekas tvam eva jagad etam: “You are every-
thing.”
TEXT 31
त्वं बा इदं सदसदीश भवांस्ततोऽन्यो
माया यदात्मपरबुद्धिरियं aur |
यद्‌ यस्य जन्म निधनं सितिरीक्षणं च
तद्‌ IT वसुकालवद्टितर्वोः।। ३१
tvarh va 10277 sadasad $a bhavarms tato ‘nyo
maya yad atma-para-buddhir iyarn hy apartha
yad yasya janma nidhanari sthitir tksanarm ca
tad vaitad eva vasukalavad asti-tarvoh
tvam—You; va—either; idam—the whole universe; sat-asat—con-

sisting of cause and effect (You are the cause, and Your energy is the
effect); ©a—O my Lord, the supreme controller; bhavan— Yourself;
tatah—from the universe; anyah—separately situated (the creation is
made by the Lord, yet He remains separate from the creation); maya —
the energy that appears as a separate creation; yat—of which; atma-
para-buddhih —the conception of one’s own and another’s; iyam—this;
hi—indeed; apartha—has no meaning (everything is Your Lordship,
and therefore there is no hope for understanding “my” and *‘your™);
yat—the substance from which; yasya—of which; janma—creation;


--- Page 240 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
nidhanam—annihilation; sthitih—maintenance; tksanam—manifesta-
tion; ca—and; tat—that; va—or; etat—this; eva—certainly; vasukala-
vat—like the quality of being the earth and, beyond that, the subtle ele-
ment of the earth (smell); asti-tarvoh—the seed (the cause) and the tree
(the effect of the cause).
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, the entire
cosmic creation is caused by You, and the cosmic manifestation is
an effect of Your energy. Although the entire cosmos is but You
alone, You keep Yourself aloof from it. The conception of ‘““mine
and yours,” is certainly a type of illusion [maya] because every-
thing is an emanation from You and is therefore not different
from You. Indeed, the cosmic manifestation is nondifferent from
You, and the annihilation is also caused by You. This relationship
between Your Lordship and the cosmos is illustrated by the exam-
ple of the seed and the tree, or the subtle cause and the gross
manifestation.

PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (7.10) the Lord says:
bijarh mari sarva-bhiitanar
viddhi partha sanatanam

“‘O son of Prtha, know that I am the original seed of all existences.” In
the Vedic literature it is said, Ha@vasyam 1073 sarvam, yato va imani
bhiitani jayante and sarvam khalv 1027 brahma. All this Vedic informa-
tion indicates that there is only one God and that there is nothing else but
Him. The Mayavadi philosophers explain this in their own way, but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead asserts the truth that He is everything
and yet is separate from everything. This is the philosophy of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, which is called acintya-bhedabheda-tattva.
Everything is one, the Supreme Lord, yet everything is separate from the
Lord. This is the understanding of oneness and difference.

The example given in this regard — vasukalavad asti-tarvoh—is very
easy to understand. Everything exists in time, yet there are different


--- Page 241 ---
Text 31] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 235
phases of the time factor — present, past and future. Present, past and
future are one. Every day we can experience the time factor as morning,
noon and evening, and although morning is different from noon, which
is different from evening, all of them taken together are one. The time
factor is the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the Lord
is separate from the time factor. Everything is created, maintained and
annihilated by time, but the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead,
has no beginning and no end. He is nityah sasvatah— eternal, perma-
nent. Everything passes through time’s phases of present, past and
future, yet the Lord is always the same. Thus there is undoubtedly a dif-
ference between the Lord and the cosmic manifestation, but actually they
are not different. Accepting them to be different is called avidya, ig-
norance.

True oneness, however, is not equivalent to the conception of the
Mayavadis. The true understanding is that the differences are manifested
by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The seed is
manifested as a tree, which displays varieties in its trunk, branches,
leaves, flowers and fruits. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has therefore
sung, keSava tuya jagata vicitra: “My dear Lord, Your creation is full of
varieties.” The varieties are one and at the same time different. This is
the philosophy of acintya-bhedabheda-tattva. The conclusion given in
Brahma-sarnhita is this:

tSvarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
“Krsna, known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal,
blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for
He is the prime cause of all causes.” Because the Lord is the supreme
cause, everything is one with Him, but when we consider varieties, we
find that one thing is different from another.

We may conclude, therefore, that there is no difference between one
thing and another, yet in varieties there are differences. In this regard,
Madhvacirya gives an example concerning a tree and a tree in fire. Both
trees are the same, but they look different because of the time factor. The


--- Page 242 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
time factor is under the control of the Supreme Lord, and therefore the
Supreme Lord is different from time. An advanced devotee consequently
does not distinguish between happiness and distress. As stated in
Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.8):
tat te ‘nukampam susamiksamano
bhunjana evatma-krtari vipakam
When a devotee is in a condition of so-called distress, he considers it a
gift or blessing from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When a devo-
tee is always thus situated in Krsna consciousness in any condition of life,
he is described as mukti-pade sa daya-bhak, a perfect candidate for
returning home, back to Godhead. The word daya-bhak means
“inheritance.” A son inherits the property of his father. Similarly, when
the devotee is fully Krsna conscious, undisturbed by dualities, he is sure
that he will return home, back to Godhead, just as one inherits his
father’s property.
TEXT 32
न्यस्येदमात्मनि जगद्‌ विरयाम्बुमध्ये
शेषेत्मना निजसुखानुभवो निरीहः।
योगेन मीरितदगात्मनिपीतनिद्र-
স্ব
स्तु्े सितो न तु तमो न गुणां ध TERRA
nyasyedam atmani jagad vilayambu-madhye
Sesetmana nija-sukhanubhavo nirthah
‘yogena milita-drg-atma-nipita-nidras
turye sthito na tu tamo na gunams ca yurkse
nyasya—throwing; idam—this; atmani—in Your own self; jagat—

cosmic manifestation created by You; vilaya-ambu-madhye—in the
Causal Ocean, in which everything is preserved in a state of reserved en-
ergy; Sese—You act as if sleeping; atmana—by Yourself; nija—Your
own personal; sukha-anubhavah—experiencing the state of spiritual
bliss; nirthah—appearing to be doing nothing; yogena—by the mystic


--- Page 243 ---
Text 32] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 237
power; milita-drk—the eyes appearing closed; atma—by a manifestation
of Yourself; nipita—prevented; nidrah—whose sleeping; turye—in the
transcendental stage; sthitah—keeping (Yourself); na—not; tu—but;
tamah—the material condition of sleeping; na—nor; gunan—the ma-
terial modes; ca—and; yurnkse—do You engage Yourself in.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, after the an-
nihilation the creative energy is kept in You, who appear to sleep
with half-closed eyes. Actually, however, You do not sleep like an
ordinary human being, for You are always in a transcendental
stage, beyond the creation of the material world, and You always
feel transcendental bliss. As Karanodakasayi Visnu, You thus
remain in Your transcendental status, not touching material ob-
jects. Although You appear to sleep, this sleeping is distinct from
sleeping in ignorance.
PURPORT
As explained very clearly in the Brahma-samhita (5.47):
yah karanarnava-jale bhajati sma yoga-
nidram ananta-jagad-anda-sa-roma-kipah
adhara-$aktim avalambya param sva-mirtir
govindam adi-purusam tam ahari bhajami
“I worship the primeval Lord Govinda, who lies down in the Causal
Ocean in His plenary portion as Maha-Visnu, with all the universes
generating from the pores of hair on His transcendental body, and who
accepts the mystic slumber of eternity.” The adi-purusa, the original
Supreme Personality of Godhead — Krsna, Govinda— expands Himself as
Maha-Visnu. After the annihilation of this cosmic manifestation, He
keeps Himself in transcendental bliss. The word yoga-nidram is used in
reference to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One should under-
stand that this nidra, or sleep, is not like our nidra in the mode of ig-
norance. The Lord is always situated in transcendence. He is sac-cid-


--- Page 244 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
ananda—eternally in bliss—and thus He is not disturbed by sleep like
ordinary human beings. It should be understood that the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is in transcendental bliss in all stages. Srila
Madhvacarya concisely states that the Lord is turya-sthitah, always situ-
ated in transcendence. In transcendence there is no such thing as
Jjagarana-nidra-susupti— wakefulness, sleep and deep sleep.

The practice of yoga is similar to the yoga-nidra of Maha-Visnu. Yogis
are advised to keep their eyes half closed, but this state is not at all one of
sleep, although imitation yogis, especially in the modern age, manifest
their so-called yoga by sleeping. In the astra, yoga is described as
dhyanavasthita, a state of full meditation, but this is meditation upon the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa:
the mind should always be situated at the lotus feet of the Lord. Yoga
practice does not mean sleeping. The mind should always be actively
fixed at the lotus feet of the Lord. Then one’s practice of yoga will be
successful.

TEXT 33
तस्यैव ते वपुरिदं निजकाठशक्त्या
सञोदितप्रङृतिधमेण आत्मगूढम्‌ |
अम्भस्यनन्तश्चयनाद्‌ विरमत्समाधे-
नाभिरभूत्‌ खकणिकावटवन्महान्जम्‌।॥। २३॥
tasyaiva te vapur 80271 nija-kala-saktya
sanicodita-prakrti-dharmana atma-gidham
ambhasy ananta-$ayanad viramat-samadher
nabher abhiit sva-kanika-vatavan-mahabjam

tasya—of that Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva —certainly; te —
of You; vapuh—the cosmic body; idam—this (universe); nija-kala-
Saktya—by the potent time factor; saricodita—agitated; prakrti-
dharmanah—of Him, by whom the three gunas, or qualities of material
nature; atma-gidham—dormant in Yourself; ambhasi—in the water
known as the Causal Ocean; ananta-Sayanat—from the bed known as
Ananta (another feature of Yourself); viramat-samadheh—having


--- Page 245 ---
Text 33] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 239
awakened from the samadhi (yogic trance); nabheh—from the navel;
abhuat—appeared; sva-kanika—from the seed; vata-vat—like the great
banyan tree; maha-abjam —the great lotus of the worlds (has similarly
grown).
TRANSLATION

This cosmic manifestation, the material world, is also Your body.
This total lump of matter is agitated by Your potent energy known
as kala-Sakti, and thus the three modes of material nature are
manifested. You awaken from the bed of Sesa, Ananta, and from
Your navel a small transcendental seed is generated. It is from this
seed that the lotus flower of the gigantic universe is manifested,
exactly as a banyan tree grows from a small seed.

PURPORT

The three different forms of Maha-Visnu—namely Karanodakasayi
Visnu, Garbhodakasayl Visnu and Ksirodakasayi Visnu, who are the
origin of creation and maintenance—are gradually being described.
From Maha-Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnu is generated, and from
Garbhodakasayi Visnu, Ksirodakasayl Visnu gradually expands. Thus
Maha-Visnu is the original cause of Garbhodakasayi Visnu, and from
Garbhodakasayi Visnu comes the lotus flower from which Lord Brahma
is manifested. Thus the original cause of everything is Visnu, and conse-
quently the cosmic manifestation is not different from Visnu. This is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (10.8), wherein Krsna says, ahar sarvasya
prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate: “I am the source of all spiritual and
material worlds. Everything emanates from Me.” Garbhodakasayi Visnu
is an expansion of Karanodakasayi Visnu, who is an expansion of
Sanikarsana. In this way, Krsna is ultimately the cause of all causes
(sarva-karana-karanam). The conclusion is that both the material world
and spiritual world are considered to be the body of the Supreme Lord.
We can understand that the material body is caused by the spiritual body
and is therefore an expansion of the spiritual body. Thus when one takes
up spiritual activities, one’s entire material body is spiritualized.
Similarly, in this material world, when the Krsna consciousness move-
ment expands, the entire material world becomes spiritualized. As long


--- Page 246 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
as we do not realize this, we live in the material world, but when we are
fully Krsna conscious we live not in the material world but in the spiri-
tual world.
TEXT 34
तत्सम्भवः कबिरतोऽन्यदपश्यमान-
स्त्वां बीजमात्मनि ततं स बहिर्विचिन्त्य |
नाविन्ददश्दशतमप्छु निमजमानो
जातेऽङ्कुरे कथयुदोपलभेत बीजम्‌ ॥३४॥
tat-sambhavah kavir ato ‘nyad apasyamanas
tvarm bijam atmani tata sa bahir vicintya
navindad abda-satam apsu nimajjamano
jate (धट katham uhopalabheta bijam
tat-sambhavah—who was generated from that lotus flower; kavih—
he who can understand the subtle cause of creation (Lord Brahma);
atah—from that (lotus); anyat—anything else; apasyamanah—not
able to see; tvam—Your Lordship; bijam—the cause of the lotus;
atmani—in himself; tatam—expanded; sah—he (Lord Brahma); bahih
vicintya—considering to be external; na—not; avindat—understood
(You); abda-satam—for a hundred years according to the demigods;*
apsu—in the water; nimajjamanah—diving; jate arikure—when the
seed fructifies and is manifested as a creeper; katham—how; uha—O
my Lord; upalabheta—one can perceive; bijam—the seed that has
already fructified. i
TRANSLATION
From that great lotus flower, Brahma was generated, but
Brahma certainly could see nothing but the lotus. Therefore,
thinking You to be outside, Lord Brahma dove into the water and
attempted to find the source of the lotus for one hundred years. He
could find no trace of You, however, for when a seed fructifies, the
original seed cannot be seen.
*One day for the demigods equals six of our months.


--- Page 247 ---
Text 35] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 241
PURPORT

This is the description of the cosmic manifestation. The development
of the cosmic manifestation is like the fructification of a seed. When cot-
ton is transformed into thread, the cotton is no longer visible, and when
the thread is woven into cloth, the thread is no longer visible. Similarly,
it is perfectly correct that when the seed that had generated from the
navel of Garbhodakasayi Visnu became manifested as the cosmic cre-
ation, one could no longer understand where the cause of the cosmic
manifestation is. Modern scientists have tried to explain the origin of
creation by a chunk theory, but no one can explain how such a chunk
might have burst. The Vedic literature, however, explains clearly that
the total material energy was agitated by the three modes of material
nature because of the glance of the Supreme Lord. In other words, in
terms of the chunk theory, the bursting of the chunk was caused by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus one must accept the supreme
cause, Lord Visnu, as the cause of all causes.

TEXT 35
= ]
स त्वात्मयोनिरतिविसित आश्रितोऽन्जं
FIA ती बतपसा परिज्यद्धमाः |
त्वामात्मनीञ স্তুণি गन्धमिवातिकमं
भूतेन्दियाश्चयमये विततं ददशं ।३५॥
sa tv atma-yonir ativismita asrito "णृ
kalena tivra-tapasa parisuddha-bhavah
tvam atmanisa bhuvi gandham ivatisiksmari
bhiitendriyasayamaye vitatam dadarsa

sah—he (Lord Brahma); tu—but; atma-yonih—who is born without
a mother (directly begotten by the father, Lord Visnu); ati-vismitah—
very much surprised (not finding the source of his birth); asritah—situ-
ated on; abjam—the lotus; kdlena—in due course of time; tivra-
tapasi—by severe austerities; parisuddha-bhavah—being completely
purified; tvam—You; atmani—in his body and existence; $a—O my
Lord; bhuvi —within the earth; gandham—aroma; iva—like; ati-


--- Page 248 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
sitksmam—very subtle; bhita-indriya—composed of elements and
senses; asaya-maye—and that filled with desires (the mind); vitatam —
spread out; dadarsa—found.
TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma, who is celebrated as atma-yoni, having been born
without a mother, was struck with wonder. Thus he took shelter of
the lotus flower, and when he had been purified after undergoing
severe austerities for many hundreds of years, he could see that
the cause of all causes, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was
spread throughout his own body and senses, just as aroma, al-
though very subtle, is perceived in the earth.

PURPORT

Here the statement of self-realization ahari brahmasmi, which is in-
terpreted by the Mayavada philosophy to mean “I am the Supreme
Lord,” is explained. The Supreme Lord is the original seed of everything
(janmady asya yatah. aharir sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvarin
pravartate). Thus the Supreme Lord extends everywhere, even
throughout our bodies, because our bodies are made of material energy,
which is the Lord’s separated energy. One should realize that since the
Supreme Lord spreads throughout one’s body and since the individual
soul is a part of the Supreme Lord, everything is Brahman (sarvari khalv
idari brahma). This realization was achieved by Lord Brahma after he
was purified, and it is possible for everyone. When one is completely in
knowledge of aharir brahmasmi, he thinks, “I am part of the Supreme
Lord, my body is made of His material energy, and therefore I have no
separate existence. Yet although the Supreme Lord is spread everywhere,
He is different from me.” This is the philosophy of acintya-bhedabheda-
tattva. An example given in this regard is that of the aroma within the
earth. In the earth there are aromas and colors, but one cannot see them.
Actually we find that when flowers grow from the earth, they appear
with different colors and aromas, which they have certainly gathered
from the earth, although in the earth we cannot see them. Similarly, the
Supreme Lord, by His different energies, spreads throughout one’s body
and soul, although we cannot see Him. An intelligent man, however, can
see the Supreme Lord existing everywhere. Andantara-stha-paramanu-


--- Page 249 ---
Text 36] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 243
cayantara-stham: the Lord is within the universe and within the atom by
His different energies. This is the real vision of the Supreme Lord for the
intelligent man. Brahma, the first created being, became the most intelli-
gent person by his tapasya, austerity, and thus he came to this realiza-
tion. We must therefore take all knowledge from Brahma, who became
perfect by his tapasya.
TEXT 36
एवं सहस्रवदनाङ्धिशिरःकरोरु-
नासाद्यकणनयनामरणायुधाठ्यम्‌ |
मायामयं सदुपरक्षितसनिवेशं
Tg! महापुरुषमाप 3% fafa: nian
evar sahasra-vadanarghri-sirah-karoru-
nasadya-karna-nayanabharanayudhadhyam
mayamayam sad-upalaksita-sannivesari
drstva maha-purusam apa mudar virificah

evam—in this way; sahasra—thousands and thousands; vadana—
faces; arighri—feet; Sirah—heads; kara—hands; uru—thighs; nasa-
adya—noses, etc.; karna—ears; nayana—eyes; abharana—varieties of
ornaments; a@yudha—varieties of weapons; adhyam—endowed with;
maya-mayam—all demonstrated by unlimited potency; sat-
upalaksita—appearing in different symptoms; sannivesam —combined
together; drstva —seeing; maha-purusam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; apa—achieved; mudam—transcendental bliss; virificah—
Lord Brahma.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma could then see You possessing thousands and
thousands of faces, feet, heads, hands, thighs, noses, ears and eyes.
You were very nicely dressed, being decorated and bedecked with
varieties of ornaments and weapons. Seeing You in the form of
Lord Visnu, Your symptoms and form being transcendental, Your
legs extending from the lower planets, Lord Brahma achieved
transcendental bliss.


--- Page 250 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
PURPORT

Lord Brahma, being completely pure, could see the original form of
the Lord as Visnu, having many thousands of faces and forms. This pro-
cess is called self-realization. Genuine self-realization consists not of per-
ceiving the impersonal effulgence of the Lord, but seeing face to face the
transcendental form of the Lord. As distinctly mentioned here, Lord
Brahma saw the Supreme Lord as maha-purusa, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Arjuna also saw Krsna in this same way. Therefore
he told the Lord, [00707 brahma param dhama pavitram paramari
bhavan purusarm $asvatari divyam: “You are the Supreme Brahman, the
ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the
eternal divine person.” The Lord is parama-purusa, the supreme form.
Purusari sasvatam: He 15 everlastingly the supreme enjoyer. It is not that
the impersonal Brahman assumes a form; on the contrary, the imper-
sonal Brahman effulgence is an emanation from the supreme form of the
Lord. Upon being purified, Brahma could see the supreme form of the
Lord. The impersonal Brahman cannot have heads, noses, ears, hands
and legs. This is not possible, for these are attributes of the Lord’s form.

The word mayamayam means “spiritual knowledge.” This is ex-
plained by Madhvacirya. Mayamayar jiRdana-svaripam. The word
mayamayam, describing the Lord’s form, should not be taken to mean
illusion. Rather, the Lord’s form is factual, and seeing this form is the
result of perfect knowledge. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita:
bahinam janmanam ante jianavan mari prapadyate. The word
JjAadanavan refers to one who is perfectly in knowledge. Such a person can
see the Personality of Godhead, and therefore he surrenders unto the
Lord. The Lord’s being symptomized by a face, nose, ears and so on is
eternal. Without such a form, no one can be blissful. The Lord, however,
is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, as stated in the $astra (isvarah paramah
krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah). When one is in perfect transcenden-
tal bliss, he can see the Lord’s supreme form (vigraha). In this regard,
Srila Madhvacarya says:

gandhakhya devata yadvat
prthivir vyapya tisthati
evar vyaptar jagad visnuri
brahmatma-stham dadarsa ha


--- Page 251 ---
Text 37] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 245
Lord Brahma saw that as aromas and colors spread throughout the earth,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead pervades the cosmic manifestation
in a subtle form.
TEXT 37
a +
तस्म भवान्हयशिरस्तनुवं हि बिभ्रद्‌
जे
वेददधुहाचतिबरलौ मधुकंटमाख्यौ |
हत्वानयच्छरूतिगणांश्च रजस्तम
सत्त्वं तव प्रियतमां तनुमामनन्ति el
tasmai bhavan haya-siras tanuvari hi bibhrad
veda-druhav atibalau madhu-kaitabhakhyau
hatvanayac chruti-ganams ca rajas tamas ca
sattvari tava priyatamadrin tanum amananti

tasmai—unto Lord Brahma; bhavan—Your Lordship; haya-Sirah—
having the head and neck of a horse; tanuvam —the incarnation; hi—in-
deed; bibhrat—accepting; veda-druhau—two demons who were against
the Vedic principles; ati-balau—extremely powerful; madhu-kaitabha-
akhyau—known as Madhu and Kaitabha; hatva—killing; anayat—
delivered; sruti-ganan—all the different Vedas (Sama, Yajur, Rg and
Atharva); ca—and; rajah tamah ca—by representing the modes of pas-
sion and ignorance; sattvam—pure transcendental goodness; tava—
Your; priya-tamam—most dear; tanum—form (as Hayagriva); ama-
nanti—they honor.

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, when You appeared as Hayagriva, with the head of
a horse, You killed two demons known as Madhu and Kaitabha,
who were full of the modes of passion and ignorance. Then You
delivered the Vedic knowledge to Lord Brahma. For this reason,
all the great saints accept Your forms as transcendental, untinged
by material qualities.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental form is al-

ways ready to give protection to His devotees. As mentioned herein, the


--- Page 252 ---
246 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
Lord in the form of Hayagriva killed two demons named Madhu and
Kaitabha when they attacked Lord Brahma. Modern demons think that
there was no life in the beginning of creation, but from Srimad-
Bhagavatam we understand that the first living creature created by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead was Lord Brahma, who is full of Vedic
understanding. Unfortunately, those entrusted with distributing Vedic
knowledge, such as the devotees engaged in spreading Krsna conscious-
ness, may sometimes be attacked by demons, but they must rest assured
that demoniac attacks will not be able to harm them, for the Lord is al-
ways prepared to give them protection. The Vedas provide the knowl-
edge by which we can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead
(vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah). The devotees of the Lord are al-
ways ready to spread knowledge by which one may understand the Lord
through Krsna consciousness, but the demons, being unable to under-
stand the Supreme Lord, are full of ignorance and passion. Thus the
Lord, whose form is transcendental, is always ready to kill the demons.
By culturing the mode of goodness, one can understand the position of
the transcendental Lord and how the Lord is always prepared to remove

all obstacles on the path of understanding Him.
In summary, whenever the Lord incarnates, He appears in His original

transcendental form. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanarn srjamy aham

“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendent of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
descend Myself.” It is simply foolish to think of the Lord as being
originally impersonal but accepting a material body when He appears as a
personal incarnation. Whenever the Lord appears, He appears in His
original transcendental form, which is spiritual and blissful. But unin-
telligent men, such as the Mayavadis, cannot understand the transcen-
dental form of the Lord, and therefore the Lord chastises them by
saying, avajananti marin miadha manusim tanum asritam: “Fools deride


--- Page 253 ---
Text 38] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 247
Me when I descend in the human form.” Whenever the Lord appears,
whether as a fish, a tortoise, a hog or any other form, one should under-
stand that He maintains His transcendental position and that His only
business, as stated here, is hatva—to kill the demons. The Lord appears
in order to protect the devotees and kill the demons (paritrandaya
sadhinam vinasaya ca duskrtam). Since the demons are always ready to
oppose Vedic civilization, they are sure to be killed by the transcendental
form of the Lord.
TEXT 38
५ €
इत्थं सनृतियंगषिदेवञ्ञषावतारं-
ote विभावयसि हंसि जगत्प्रतीपान्‌ |
धर्म॑ महापुरुष पासि युगानुवृत्तं
छनः करौ यदमवख्ियुगोऽय स त्वम्‌ ।३८॥
itthamm nr-tiryag-rsi-deva-jhasavatarair
lokan vibhavayasi hamsi jagat pratipan
dharmarm maha-purusa pasi yuganuvrttam
channah kalau yad abhavas tri-yugo tha sa tvam
ittham —in this way; nr—like a human being (such as Lord Krsna and
Lord Ramacandra); tiryak—like animals (such as the boar); rsi—as a
great saint (Parasurima); deva—as demigods; jhasa—as an aquatic
(such as the fish and tortoise); avataraih—by such different incarna-
tions; lokan—all the different planetary systems; vibhavayasi— You
protect; harisi—You (sometimes) kill; jagat pratipan—persons who
have simply created trouble in this world; dharmam—the principles of
religion; maha-purusa—O great personality; pdsi— You protect; yuga-
anuvrttam—according to the different millenniums; channah—
covered; kalau—in the age of Kali; yat—since; abhavah—have been
(and will be in the future); tri-yugah—named Triyuga; atha—
therefore; sah—the same personality; tvam — You.
TRANSLATION
In this way, my Lord, You appear in various incarnations as a

human being, an animal, a great saint, a demigod, a fish or a


--- Page 254 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
tortoise, thus maintaining the entire creation in different plan-
etary systems and killing the demoniac principles. According to
the age, O my Lord, You protect the principles of religion. In the
age of Kali, however, You do not assert Yourself as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and therefore You are known as Triyuga,
or the Lord who appears in three yugas.
PURPORT

As the Lord appeared just to maintain Lord Brahma from the attack of
Madhu and Kaitabha, He also appeared to protect the great devotee
Prahlada Maharaja. Similarly, Lord Caitanya appeared in order to protect
the fallen souls of Kali-yuga. There are four yugas, or millenniums—
Satya, Treta, Dvapara and Kali. In all the yugas but Kali-yuga, the Lord
appears in various incarnations and asserts Himself as the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, but although Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
appears in Kali-yuga, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He never
asserted Himself as such. On the contrary, whenever Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was addressed as being as good as Krsna, He blocked His
ears with His hands, denying His identity with Krsna, because He was
playing the part of a devotee. Lord Caitanya knew that in Kali-yuga there
would be many bogus incarnations pretending to be God, and therefore
He avoided asserting Himself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is accepted as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, however, in many Vedic literatures, especially in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (11.5.32):

krsna-varnam tvisakrsnarn
sarigopangastra-parsadam
yajiaih sarikirtana-prayair
yajanti hi sumedhasah

In Kali-yuga, intelligent men worship the Supreme Personality of God-
head in the form of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is always accom-
panied by His associates such as Nityananda, Advaita, Gadadhara and
Srivasa. The entire Krsna consciousness movement is based on the prin-
ciples of the sankirtana movement inaugurated by Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Therefore one who tries to understand the Supreme Per-


--- Page 255 ---
Text 39] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 249
sonality of Godhead through the medium of the sarikirtana movement
knows everything perfectly. He is sumedhas, a person with substantial
intelligence.
TEXT 39
नैतन्मनस्तव कथासु विङ्कण्ठनाथ
सम्प्रीयते दुरितदुष्टमसाधु तीव्रम्‌ |
५ € a
कामातुरं हषेज्लोकभयेषणातं
तसिन्कथं तव गतिं REC aI RAC HIERN]
naitan manas tava kathasu vikuntha-natha
sampriyate durita-dustam asadhu tivram
kamaturarm harsa-Soka-bhayaisanartarn
tasmin katharn tava gatim vimrsami dinah
na—certainly not; etat—this; manah—mind; tava—Your;
kathasu—in transcendental topics; vikuntha-natha—O Lord of
Vaikuntha, where there is no anxiety; sampriyate —is pacified or in-
terested in; durita—by sinful activities; dustam—polluted; asadhu—
dishonest; ttvram—very difficult to control; kama-aturam—always full
of different desires and lusty propensities; harsa-Soka—sometimes by
jubilation and sometimes by distress; bhaya—and sometimes by fear;
esana—and by desiring; artam—distressed; tasmin—in that mental
status; katham—how; tava—Your; gatim—transcendental activities;
vimrsami—I shall consider and try to understand; dinah—who am most
fallen and poor.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord of the Vaikuntha planets, where there is no

anxiety, my mind is extremely sinful and lusty, being sometimes
so-called happy and sometimes so-called distressed. My mind is
full of lamentation and fear, and it always seeks more and more
money. Thus it has become most polluted and is never satisfied in
topics concerning You. I am therefore most fallen and poor. In
such a status of life, how shall I be able to discuss Your activities?


--- Page 256 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
PURPORT
Here Prahlada Maharaja represents himself as a common man, al-
though he actually has nothing to do with this material world. Prahlada is
always situated in the Vaikuntha planets of the spiritual world, but on
behalf of the fallen souls he asks how, when his mind is always disturbed
by material things, he can discuss the transcendental position of the
Lord. The mind becomes sinful because we are always engaged in sinful
activities. Anything not connected with Krsna consciousness should be
understood to be sinful. Indeed, Krsna demands in Bhagavad-gita
(18.66):
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekari Saranari vraja
ahar tvar sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma Sucah
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.” As soon as one surren-
ders unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, Krsna im-
mediately relieves one of the reactions of sinful activities. Therefore one
who is not surrendered to the lotus feet of the Lord should be understood
to be sinful, foolish, degraded among men and bereft of all real knowl-
edge because of atheistic propensities. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita (7.15):
na mam duskrtino midhah
pradyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jiana
asurarn bhavam asritah
Therefore, especially in this age of Kali, the mind must be cleansed, and
this is possible only by the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
Ceto-darpana-marjanam. In this age, the process of chanting the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra is the only method by which to cleanse the sinful
mind. When the mind is completely cleansed of all sinful reactions, one
can then understand his duty in the human form of life. The Krsna con-
sciousness movement is meant to educate sinful men so that they may be-
come pious simply by chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.


--- Page 257 ---
Text 40] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 251
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
ndsty eva gatir anyatha
To cleanse the heart so that one may become sober and wise in this age of
Kali, there is no value to any method other than the chanting of the Hare
Krsna maha-mantra. Prahlada Maharaja has confirmed this process in
previous verses. Tvad-virya-gayana-mahamrta-magna-cittah. Prahlada
further confirms that if one’s mind is always absorbed in thought of
Krsna, that very qualification will purify one and keep one purified al-
ways. To understand the Lord and His activities, one must free his mind
from all contamination of the material world, and this one can achieve by
simply chanting the Lord’s holy name. Thus one becomes free from all
material bondage.
TEXT 40
A= ¢
जिह्वंकतोऽच्युत दिकपति mfg
शिश्नोऽन्यतस्त्वगुदरं श्रवण Farag 1
চ
घ्राणोऽन्यतथपलदक्‌ क च कमशक्ति-
Ay
TE सपटन्य इव गेहपतिं लनन्ति well
Jjihvaikato ’cyuta vikarsati mavitrpta
sisno ’nyatas tvag-udaram Sravanar kutascit
ghrano ’nyatas capala-drk kva ca karma-saktir
bahvyah sapatnya iva geha-patir lunanti
Jjihva—the tongue; ekatah—to one side; acyuta—O my infallible
Lord; wvikarsati—attracts; ma—me; avitrptd—not being satisfied;
Sisnah—the genitals; anyatah—to another side; tvak—the skin (for
touching a soft thing); udaram—the belly (for various types of food);
sravanam—the ear (for hearing some sweet music); kutascit—to some
other side; ghranah—the nose (for smelling); anyatah—to still another
side; capala-drk—the restless eyesight; kva ca—somewhere; karma-
Saktih—the active senses; bahvyah—many; sa-patnyah—co-wives;
iva—like; geha-patim—a householder; lunanti—annihilate.


--- Page 258 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, O infallible one, my position is like that of a per-
son who has many wives, all trying to attract him in their own way.
For example, the tongue is attracted to palatable dishes, the
genitals to sex with an attractive woman, and the sense of touch to
contact with soft things. The belly, although filled, still wants to
eat more, and the ear, not attempting to hear about You, is
generally attracted to cinema songs. The sense of smell is attracted
to yet another side, the restless eyes are attracted to scenes of sense
gratification, and the active senses are attracted elsewhere. In this
way I am certainly embarrassed.

PURPORT

The human form of life is meant for God realization, but this process,
which begins with Sravanam kirtanam visnoh—hearing and chanting of
the holy name of the Lord —is disturbed as long as our senses are ma-
terially attracted. Therefore devotional service means purifying the
senses. In the conditioned state our senses are covered by material sense
gratification, and as long as one is not trained in purifying the senses, one
cannot become a devotee. In our Krsna consciousness movement,
therefore, we advise from the very beginning that one restrict the ac-
tivities of the senses, especially the tongue, which is described by Srila
Bhaktivinoda Thakura as most greedy and unconquerable. To stop this
attraction of the tongue, one is authoritatively advised not to accept meat
or similar uneatable things nor to allow the tongue to hanker to drink or
smoke. Even the drinking of tea and coffee is not permitted. Similarly,
the genitals must be restricted from illicit sex. Without such restraint of
the senses, one cannot make advancement in Krsna consciousness. The
only method of controlling the senses is to chant and hear the holy name
of the Lord; otherwise, one will always be disturbed, as a householder
with more than one wife would be disturbed by them for sense gratifica-
tion.

TEXT 41
of सखकर्मपतितं भववेतरण्या-
मन्योन्यजन्ममरणाशनमीत मीतम्‌ ।


--- Page 259 ---
Text 41] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 253
. = = +
पश्यञ्जनं खपरविग्रहवेरमेत्रं
हन्तेति पारचर पहि मूढमद्य iL
6007 sva-karma-patitarn bhava-vaitaranyam
anyonya-janma-maranasana-bhita-bhitam
pasyan janam sva-para-vigraha-vaira-maitram
hanteti paracara piprhi midham adya

evam—in this way; sva-karma-patitam—fallen because of the reac-
tions of one’s own material activities; bhava—compared to the world of
nescience (birth, death, old age and disease); vaitarayam—in the river
known as Vaitarani (which lies in front of the doorway of Yamarija, the
superintendant of death); anyah anya—one after another; janma—
birth; marana—death; asana—different types of eating; bhita-
bhitam —being exceedingly afraid; pasyan—seeing; janam—the living
entity; sva—one’s own; para—of others; vigraha—in the body; vaira-
maitram—considering friendship and enmity; hanta—alas; iti—in this
way; paracara—O You, who are on the other side of the river of death;
piprhi—kindly save us all (from this dangerous condition); midham —
we are all foolish, bereft of spiritual knowledge; adya—today (because
You are personally present here).

TRANSLATION

My dear Lord, You are always transcendentally situated on the
other side of the river of death, but because of the reactions of our
own activities, we are suffering on this side. Indeed, we have fallen
into this river and are repeatedly suffering the pains of birth and
death and eating horrible things. Now kindly look upon us—not
only upon me but also upon all others who are suffering—and by
Your causeless mercy and compassion, deliver us and maintain us.

PURPORT

Prahlada Maharaja, a pure Vaisnava, prays to the Lord not only for
himself but for all other suffering living entities. There are two classes of
Vaisnavas—the bhajandnandis and gosthy-anandis. The bhajananandis
worship the Lord only for their own personal benefit, but the


--- Page 260 ---
254 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
gosthy-anandis try to elevate all others to Krsna consciousness so that
they may be saved. Fools who cannot perceive repeated birth and death
and the other miseries of materialistic life cannot be sure of what will
happen to them in their next birth. Indeed, these foolish, materially con-
taminated rascals have manufactured an irresponsible way of life that
does not consider the next life. They do not know that according to one’s
own activities, one receives a body selected from 8,400,000 species.
These rascals have been described in Bhagavad-gita as duskrtino
midhah. Nondevotees, those who are not Krsna conscious, must engage
in sinful activities, and therefore they are miidhas—fools and rascals.
They are such fools that they do not know what will happen to them in
their next life. Although they see varieties of living creatures eating
abominable things — pigs eating stool, crocodiles eating all kinds of flesh,
and so on—they do not realize that they themselves, because of their
practice of eating all kinds of nonsense in this life, will be destined to eat
the most abominable things in their next life. A Vaisnava is always afraid
of such an abominable life, and to free himself from such horrible condi-
tions, he engages himself in the devotional service of the Lord. The Lord
is compassionate to them, and therefore He appears for their benefit.
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanam srjamy aham

“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I
descend Myself.” (Bg. 4.7) The Lord is always ready to help the fallen
souls, but because they are fools and rascals, they do not take to Krsna
consciousness and abide by the instructions of Krsna. Therefore although
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is personally the Supreme Lord, Krsna, He
comes as a devotee to preach the Krsna consciousness movement. Yare
dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa. One must therefore become a sincere
servant of Krsna. Amara ajiaya guru haa tara’ ei desa (Ce.
Madhya 7.128). One should become a guru and spread Krsna conscious-
ness all over the world, simply by preaching the teachings of Bhagavad-
gita.


--- Page 261 ---
Text 42] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 255
TEXT 42
को न्वत्र तेऽखिरगुरो भगवन्प्रयास
^~ ° -
उत्तारणेऽस्य भवसम्भवलोपहेतोः |
मूढेषु ৭ महदनुग्रह आतंबन्धो
किं तेन ते प्रियजनाननुसेवतां नः॥४२॥
ko nv atra te ’khila-guro bhagavan prayasa
uttarane ’sya bhava-sambhava-lopa-hetoh
77800016588 vai mahad-anugraha arta-bandho
kirh tena te priya-janan anusevatari nah
kah—what is that; nu—indeed; atra—in this matter; te—of Your
Lordship; akhila-guro—O supreme spiritual master of the entire cre-
ation; bhagavan—O Supreme Lord, O Personality of Godhead;
prayasah—endeavor; uttarane—for the deliverance of these fallen
souls; asya—of this; bhava-sambhava—of creation and maintenance;
lopa—and of annihilation; hetoh—of the cause; midhesu—unto the
foolish persons rotting in this material world; vai—indeed; mahat-
anugrahah—compassion by the Supreme; arta-bandho—O friend of the
suffering living entities; kim —what is the difficulty; tena—with that;
te—of Your Lordship; priya-janan—the dear persons (devotees);
anusevatam—of those always engaged in serving; nah—like us (who are
so engaged).
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, original spiri-
tual master of the entire world, what is the difficulty for You, who
manage the affairs of the universe, in delivering the fallen souls
engaged in Your devotional service? You are the friend of all
suffering humanity, and for great personalities it is necessary to
show mercy to the foolish. Therefore I think that You will show
Your causeless mercy to persons like us, who engage in Your ser-
vice.
PURPORT
Here the words priya-janan anusevatamn nah indicate that the
Supreme Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is very favorable to


--- Page 262 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
devotees who act according to the instructions of His own pure devotee.
In other words, one must become the servant of the servant of the ser-
vant of the Lord. If one wants to become the servant of the Lord directly,
this is not as fruitful as engaging in the service of the Lord’s servant.
This is the direction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who shows us the way
to become gopi-bhartuh pada-kamalayor dasa-dasanudasah. One should
not be proud of becoming directly the servant of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Rather, one must seek a pure devotee, a servant of
the Lord, and engage oneself in the service of such a servant. The more
one becomes the servant of the servant, the more one becomes perfect in
devotional service. This is also the injunction of Bhagavad-gita: 60৫77
parampara-praptam ima rajarsayo viduh. One can understand the
science of the Supreme Personality of Godhead simply by the parampara
system. In this regard, Srila Narottama dasa Thakura says, tandera
carana sevi bhakta-sane vasa: ‘‘Let me serve the lotus feet of the devo-
tees of the Lord, and let me live with devotees.” Janame janame haya, ei
abhilasa. Following Narottama dasa Thakura, one should aspire to be a
servant of the Lord’s servant, life after life. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura
also sings, tumi ta’ thakura, tomara kukura, baliya janaha more: “0 my
Lord, O Vaisnava, please consider me your dog.” One must become the
dog of a Vaisnava, a pure devotee, for a pure devotee can deliver Krsna
without difficulty. Krsna se tomara, krsna dite para. Krsna is the prop-
erty of His pure devotee, and if we take shelter of a pure devotee, he can
deliver Krsna very easily. Prahlada wants to engage in the service of a
devotee, and therefore he prays to Krsna, “My dear Lord, kindly give me
the shelter of Your very dear devotee so that I may engage in his service
and You may then be pleased.” Mad-bhakta-pijabhyadhika
(Bhag. 11.19.21). The Lord says, “Engaging in the service of My devo-
tee is better than trying to engage in My devotional service.”

Another significant point in this verse is that by devotional service
Prahlada Maharaja does not want to benefit alone. Rather, he prays to the
Lord that all of us fallen souls in this material world may, by the grace of
the Lord, engage in the service of His servant and thus be delivered. The
grace of the Lord is not at all difficult for the Lord to bestow, and thus
Prahlada Maharaja wants to save the whole world by spreading Krsna
consciousness.


--- Page 263 ---
Text 43] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 257
TEXT 43
a
नैवोद्विजे पर दुरत्ययवेतरण्या-
स्त्वद्ी्गायनमहाखतमभ्चित्तः |
=
शोचे ततो विश्चखचेतस इन्द्रियाथ-
मायासुखाय भरघुद्हतो विमूढान्‌ ॥४३॥
naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaranyds
tvad-virya-gayana-mahamrta-magna-cittah
Soce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyartha-
maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimadhan
na—not; eva—certainly; udvije—I am disturbed or afraid; para—O
Supreme; duratyaya—insurmountable or very difficult to cross;
vaitaranyah—of the Vaitarani, the river of the material world; tvat-
virya—of Your Lordship’s glories and activities; gayana—from chant-
ing or distributing; mahd-amrta—in the great ocean of nectarean spiri-
tual bliss; magna-cittah—whose consciousness is absorbed; Soce—I am
simply lamenting; tatah—from that; vimukha-cetasah—the fools and
rascals who are bereft of Krsna consciousness; indriya-artha—in sense
gratification; maya-sukhaya—for temporary, illusory happiness;
bharam—the false burden or responsibility (of maintaining one’s
family, society and nation and elaborate arrangements for that purpose);
udvahatah—who are lifting (by making grand plans for this arrange-
ment); vimiidhan—although all of them are nothing but fools and ras-
cals (I am thinking of them also).
TRANSLATION
O best of the great personalities, I am not at all afraid of material
existence, for wherever I stay I am fully absorbed in thoughts of
Your glories and activities. My concern is only for the fools and
rascals who are making elaborate plans for material happiness and
maintaining their families, societies and countries. I am simply
concerned with love for them.


--- Page 264 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
PURPORT

Throughout the entire world, everyone is making big, big plans to ad-
just the miseries of the material world, and this is true at present, in the
past and in the future. Nonetheless, although they make elaborate politi-
cal, social and cultural plans, they have all been described herein as
vimitdha—fools. The material world has been described in Bhagavad-
gita as duhkhalayam asasvatam —temporary and miserable —but these
fools are trying to turn the material world into sukhalayam, a place of
happiness, not knowing how everything acts by the arrangement of ma-
terial nature, which works in her own way.

prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah
aharikara-vimadhatma
kartaham iti manyate
“The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities that are in ac-
tuality carried out by nature.” (Bg. 3.27)

There is a plan for material nature, personally known as Durga, to
punish the demons. Although the asuras, the godless demons, struggle
for existence, they are directly attacked by the goddess Durga, who is
well equipped with ten hands with different types of weapons to punish
them. She is carried by her lion carrier, or the modes of passion and ig-
norance. Everyone struggles very hard to fight through the modes of pas-
sion and ignorance and conquer material nature, but at the end everyone
is vanquished by nature’s laws.

There is a river known as Vaitarani between the material and spiritual
worlds, and one must cross this river to reach the other side, or the spiri-
tual world. This is an extremely difficult task. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gita (7.14), daivi hy esa gunamayi mama maya duratyaya:
“This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome.” The same word duratyaya, meaning
“very difficult,” is used here. Therefore one cannot surpass the stringent
laws of material nature except by the mercy of the Supreme Lord. None-
theless, although all materialists are baffled in their plans, they try again
and again to become happy in this material world. Therefore they have


--- Page 265 ---
Text 44] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 259
been described as vimidha —first-class fools. As for Prahlada Maharaja,
he was not at all unhappy, for although he was in the material world, he
was full of Krsna consciousness. Those who are Krsna conscious, trying
to serve the Lord, are not unhappy, whereas one who has no assets in
Krsna consciousness and is struggling for existence is not only foolish
but extremely unhappy also. Prahlada Maharaja was happy and unhappy
simultaneously. He felt happiness and transcendental bliss because of his
being Krsna conscious, yet he felt great unhappiness for the fools and
rascals who make elaborate plans to be happy in this material world.
TEXT 44
भरायेण दे ञ्ुनयः অন্িন্তুক্চিকাদা
मौनं चरन्ति विजने न पराथनिष्ठाः |
नैतान्विहाय कृपणान्वि्््च एको
नान्यं त्वदस्य शरणं AAAI ।।४४॥
prayena deva munayah sva-vimukti-kama
maunarir caranti vijane na parartha-nisthah
naitan vihaya krpanan vimumuksa eko
nanyari tvad asya Saranar bhramato ’nupasye

prayena—generally, in almost all cases; deva—O my Lord;
munayah—the great saintly persons; sva—personal, own; vimukti-
kamah — ambitious for liberation from this material world; maunam—
silently; caranti—they wander (in places like the Himalayan forests,
where they have no touch with the activities of the materialists);
vijane—in solitary places; na—not; para-artha-nisthah—interested in
working for others by giving them the benefit of the Krsna consciousness
movement, by enlightening them with Krsna consciousness; na—not;
etan—these; vihaya—leaving aside; krpanan—fools and rascals
(engaged in materialistic activity who do not know the benefit of the
human form of life); vimumukse—I desire to be liberated and to return
home, back to Godhead; ekah—alone; na—not; anyam—other; tvat—
but for You; asya—of this; Saranam—shelter; bhramatah—of the liv-
ing entity rotating and wandering throughout the material universes;
anupasye—do I see.


--- Page 266 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
TRANSLATION

My dear Lord Nrsirnhadeva, I see that there are many saintly per-
sons indeed, but they are interested only in their own deliverance.
Not caring for the big cities and towns, they go to the Himalayas or
the forest to meditate with vows of silence [mauna-vrata]. They are
not interested in delivering others. As for me, however, I do not
wish to be liberated alone, leaving aside all these poor fools and
rascals. I know that without Krsna consciousness, without taking
shelter of Your lotus feet, one cannot be happy. Therefore I wish
to bring them back to shelter at Your lotus feet.

PURPORT

This is the decision of the Vaisnava, the pure devotee of the Lord. For
himself he has no problems, even if he has to stay in this material world,
because his only business is to remain in Krsna consciousness. The Krsna
conscious person can go even to hell and still be happy. Therefore
Prahlada Maharaja said, naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaranyah: “O
best of the great personalities, I am not at all afraid of material exis-
tence.” The pure devotee is never unhappy in any condition of life. This
is confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (6.17.28):

narayana-parah sarve
na kutascana bibhyati
svargapavarga-narakesv
api tulyartha-darsinah

“Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Narayana, never fear any condition of life. For
them the heavenly planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the
same, for such devotees are interested only in the service of the Lord.”

For a devotee, being situated in the heavenly planets and being in the
hellish planets are equal, for a devotee lives neither in heaven nor in hell
but with Krsna in the spiritual world. The secret of success for the devo-
tee is not understood by the karmis and janis. Karmis therefore try to
be happy by material adjustment, and jiianis want to be happy by becom-
ing one with the Supreme. The devotee has no such interest. He is not in-
terested in so-called meditation in the Himalayas or the forest. Rather,


--- Page 267 ---
Text 45] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 261
his interest is in the busiest part of the world, where he teaches people
Krsna consciousness. The Krsna consciousness movement was started for
this purpose. We do not teach one to meditate in a secluded place just so
that one may show that he has become very much advanced and may be
proud of his so-called transcendental meditation, although he engages in
all sorts of foolish materialistic activity. A Vaispava like Prahlada
Maharaja is not interested in such a bluff of spiritual advancement.
Rather, he is interested in enlightening people in Krsna consciousness
because that is the only way for them to become happy. Prahlada
Maharija says clearly, nanyam tvad asya saranarih bhramato 'nupasye:
“I know that without Krsna consciousness, without taking shelter of
Your lotus feet, one cannot be happy.” One wanders within the universe,
life after life, but by the grace of a devotee, a servant of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, one can get the clue to Krsna consciousness and then not
only become happy in this world but also return home, back to Godhead.
That is the real target in life. The members of the Krsna consciousness
movement are not at all interested in so-called meditation in the
Himalayas or the forest, where one will only make a show of meditation,
nor are they interested in opening many schools for yoga and meditation
in the cities. Rather, every member of the Krsna consciousness move-
ment is interested in going door to door to try to convince people about
the teachings of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, the teachings of Lord Caitanya.
That is the purpose of the Hare Krsna movement. The members of the
Krsna consciousness movement must be fully convinced that without
Krsna one cannot be happy. Thus the Krsna conscious person avoids all
kinds of pseudo spiritualists, transcendentalists, meditators, monists,
philosophers and philanthropists.
TEXT 45
यन्मेथुनादि गृहमेधिखुखं दि तुच्छं
कण्डूयनेन करयोरिव दुःखदुःखम्‌ ।
द्यन्ति नेह छपणा बहदु ःखमाजः
कण्डूतिवन्मनसिजं विषहेत धीरः eu
yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukhari hi /1800/077
kandayanena karayor iva duhkha-duhkham


--- Page 268 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
trpyanti neha krpana bahu-duhkha-bhajah
kanditivan manasijari visaheta dhirah

yat—that which (is meant for material sense gratification); maithuna-
adi—represented by talking of sex, reading sexual literature or enjoying
sex life (at home or outside, as in a club); grhamedhi-sukham —all types
of material happiness based on attachment to family, society, friendship,
etc.; hi—indeed; tuccham—insignificant; kandiyanena—with the itch-
ing; karayoh—of the two hands (to relieve the itching); iva—like;
duhkha-duhkham —different types of unhappiness (into which one is
put after such itching sense gratification); trpyanti—become satisfied;
na—never; tha—in material sense gratification; krpanah—the foolish
persons; bahu-duhkha-bhajah—subjected to various types of material
unhappiness; kandiiti-vat—if one can learn from such itching; manasi-
jam —which is simply a mental concoction (actually there is no happi-
ness); visaheta—and tolerates (such itching); dhirah— (he can become)
a most perfect, sober person.

TRANSLATION

Sex life is compared to the rubbing of two hands to relieve an
itch. Grhamedhis, so-called grhasthas who have no spiritual
knowledge, think that this itching is the greatest platform of hap-
piness, although actually it is a source of distress. The krpanas, the
fools who are just the opposite of brahmanas, are not satisfied by
repeated sensuous enjoyment. Those who are dhira, however, who
are sober and who tolerate this itching, are not subjected to the
sufferings of fools and rascals.

PURPORT

Materialists think that sexual indulgence is the greatest happiness in
this material world, and therefore they make elaborate plans to satisfy
their senses, especially the genitals. This is generally found everywhere,
and specifically found in the Western world, where there are regular ar-
rangements to satisfy sex life in different ways. Actually, however, this
has not made anyone happy. Even the hippies, who have given up all the
materialistic comforts of their fathers and grandfathers, cannot give up
the sensational happiness of sex life. Such persons are described here as


--- Page 269 ---
Text 46] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 263
krpanas, misers. The human form of life is a great asset, for in this life
one can fulfill the goal of existence. Unfortunately, however, because of
a lack of education and culture, people are victimized by the false happi-
ness of sex life. Prahlada Maharaja therefore advises one not to be misled
by this civilization of sense gratification, and especially not by sex life.
Rather, one should be sober, avoid sense gratification and be Krsna con-
scious. The lusty person, who is compared to a foolish miser, never gets
happiness by sense gratification. The influence of material nature is very
difficult to surpass, but as stated by Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (7.14), mam
eva ye prapadyante, mayam eta taranti te: if one voluntarily submits
to the lotus feet of Krsna, he can be saved very easily.
In reference to the low-grade happiness of sex life, Yamunacarya says
in this connection:
yadavadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhamanudyata rantum ৫58
tadavadhi bata nari-sarigame smaryamane
bhavati mukha-vikarah sustu nisthivanam ca
“Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of
Krsna, realizing ever-new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sex
pleasure, I spit at the thought, and my lips curl with distaste.”
Yamuniacarya had formerly been a great king who enjoyed sexual happi-
ness in various ways, but since he later engaged himself in the service of
the Lord, he enjoyed spiritual bliss and hated to think of sex life. If sex-
ual thoughts came to him, he would spit with disgust.
TEXT 46
[J
मौरेवतश्वुततपोऽष्ययनसखधरम-
व्यारन्यारदोजपसमाधय आप्याः |
সাযঃ bil Jb Sil
भवन्त्युत न বাস तु दाम्मिकानाम्‌।।७६।।
mauna-vrata-ruta-tapo- dhyayana-sva-dharma-
vyakhya-raho-japa-samadhaya apavargyah
prayah param purusa te tv agjitendriyanam
varta bhavanty uta na vdatra tu dambhikanam


--- Page 270 ---
264 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9

mauna—silence; vrata—vows; sruta— Vedic knowledge; tapah—
austerity; adhyayana—study of scripture; sva-dharma—executing
varndsrama-dharma; vyakhya—explaining the Sastras; rahah—living
in a solitary place; japa—chanting or reciting mantras; samadhayah—
remaining in trance; dpavargyah—these are ten types of activities for
advancing on the path of liberation; prayah—generally; param—the
only means; purusa—O my Lord; te—all of them; tu—but; gjita-
indriyanam—of persons who cannot control the senses; vartah—means
of living; bhavanti—are; uta—so it is said; na—not; va—or; atra—in
this connection; tu—but; dambhikanam—of persons who are falsely
proud.

TRANSLATION

O Supreme Personality of Godhead, there are ten prescribed
methods on the path to liberation —to remain silent, not to speak
to anyone, to observe vows, to amass all kinds of Vedic knowledge,
to undergo austerities, to study the Vedas and other Vedic
literatures, to execute the duties of varnasrama-dharma, to explain
the 5251785, to stay in a solitary place, to chant mantras silently, and
to be absorbed in trance. These different methods for liberation
are generally only a professional practice and means of livelihood
for those who have not conquered their senses. Because such per-
sons are falsely proud, these procedures may not be successful.

PURPORT
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (6.1.15):
kecit kevalaya bhaktya
vasudeva-parayanah
aghari dhunvanti kartsnyena
niharam iva bhaskarah

“Only a rare person who has adopted complete, unalloyed devotional ser-
vice to Krsna can uproot the weeds of sinful actions with no possibility
that they will revive. He can do this simply by discharging devotional
service, just as the sun can immediately dissipate fog by its rays.” The


--- Page 271 ---
Text 46] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 265
real purpose of human life is to attain liberation from material entangle-
ment. Such liberation may be achieved by many methods (tapasa
brahmacaryena $amena ca damena ca), but all of them more or less
depend on tapasya, austerity, which begins with celibacy. Sukadeva
Gosvami says that those who are vasudeva-parayana, who have fully
surrendered to the lotus feet of Lord Vasudeva, Krsna, automatically
achieve the results of mauna (silence), vrata (vows) and other such
methods simply by discharging devotional service. In other words, these
methods are not so powerful. If one takes to devotional serivce, all of
them are very easily performed.

Mauna, for example, does not mean that one should just stop speak-
ing. The tongue is meant for speaking, although sometimes, to make a
big show, a person remains silent. There are many who observe silence
some day in a week. Vaisnavas, however, do not observe such silence.
Silence means not speaking foolishly. Speakers at assemblies, con-
ferences and meetings generally speak foolishly like toads. This is de-
scribed by Srila Ripa Gosvami as vdco vegam. One who wants to say
something can show himself to be a big orator, but rather than go on
speaking nonsense, better to remain silent. This method of silence,
therefore, is recommended for persons very attached to speaking non-
sense. One who is not a devotee must speak nonsensically because he does
not have the power to speak about the glories of Krsna. Thus whatever
he says is influenced by the illusory energy and is compared to the croak-
ing of a frog. One who speaks about the glories of the Lord, however, has
no need to be silent. Caitanya Mahaprabhu recommends, kirtaniyah sada
harih: one should go on chanting the glories of the Lord twenty-four
hours a day. There is no question of becoming mauna, or silent.

The ten processes for liberation or improvement on the path of libera-
tion are not meant for the devotees. Kevalaya bhaktya: if one simply
engages in devotional service to the Lord, all ten methods of liberation
are automatically observed. Prahlada Maharaja's proposal is that such
processes may be recommended for the ajitendriya, those who cannot
conquer their senses. Devotees, however, have already conquered their
senses. Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktarn tat-paratvena nirmalam: a devotee is
already freed from material contamination. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura therefore said:


--- Page 272 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
dusta mana! tumi kisera vaisnava? pratisthara tare, nirjanera ghare,
tava harinama kevala kaitava
There are many who like to chant the Hare Krsna mantra in a silent,
solitary place, but if one is not interested in preaching, talking constantly
to the nondevotees, the influence of the modes of nature is very difficult
to surpass. Therefore unless one is extremely advanced in Krsna con-
sciousness, one should not imitate Haridasa Thakura, who had no other
business than chanting the holy name always, twenty-four hours a day.
Prahlada Maharaja does not condemn such a process; he accepts it, but
without active service to the Lord, simply by such methods one generally
cannot attain liberation. One cannot attain liberation simply by false

pride.
TEXT 47
रूपे इमे सदसती तव वेदसृष्टे
बीजाङ्कुराविव न चान्यदरूपकस्य |
युक्ताः समष्ष्ठमयत्र विचश्वन्ते লা
योगेन বদ্ছিমিব दारुषु नान्यतः स्यात्‌ ॥४७॥
riipe ime sad-asati tava veda-srste
bijarikurav iva na canyad aripakasya
yuktah samaksam ubhayatra vicaksante tvari
yogena vahnim va darusu nanyatah syat
riipe—in the forms; ime—these two; sat-asati—the cause and the
effect; tava— Your; veda-srste—explained in the Vedas; bija-arikurau—
the seed and the sprout; iva—like; na—never; ca—also; anyat—any
other; arapakasya—of You, who possess no material form; yuhktah—
those engaged in Your devotional service; samaksam —before the very
eyes; ubhayatra—in both ways (spiritually and materially);
vicaksante—can actually see; twam—You; yogena—simply by the
method of devotional service; vahnim—fire; iwa—like; darusu—in
wood; na—not; anyatah—from any other means; syat—it is possible.


--- Page 273 ---
Text 48] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 267
TRANSLATION

By authorized Vedic knowledge one can see that the forms of
cause and effect in the cosmic manifestation belong to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, for the cosmic manifestation is
His energy. Both cause and effect are nothing but energies of the
Lord. Therefore, O my Lord, just as a wise man, by considering
cause and effect, can see how fire pervades wood, those engaged in
devotional service understand how You are both the cause and
effect.

PURPORT

As described in previous verses, many so-called students of spiritual
understanding follow the ten different methods known as mauna-vrata-
Sruta-tapo- ’dhyayana-sva-dharma-vyakhya-raho-japa-samadhayah.
These may be very attractive, but by following such methods, one cannot
actually understand the real cause and effect and the original cause of
everything (janmady asya yatah). The original source of everything is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself (sarva-karana-karanam).
This original source of everything is Krsna, the supreme ruler. Isvarah
paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah. He has His eternal spiritual
form. Indeed, He is the root of everything (छनः mari sarva-
bhiitanam). Whatever manifestations exist, their cause is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This cannot be understood by so-called silence
or by any other hodgepodge method. The supreme cause can be under-
stood only by devotional service, as stated in Bhagavad-gita (bhaktya
mam abhijanati). Elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.14.21), the
Supreme Godhead personally says, bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah: one can
understand the original cause of all causes, the Supreme Person, only by
devotional service, not by show-bottle exhibitionism.

TEXT 48
त्वं बायुरथिरदनि्िंयदम्बुपा्ः
प्राणेन्द्रियाणि हृदयं चिदुग्रदश्च ।
सवं त्वमेव सगुणो विगुणश्च भूमन्‌
नान्यत्‌ त्वदस्त्यपि मनोवचसा निरुक्तम्‌ ।(४८॥


--- Page 274 ---
268 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
1৮৫2 vayur agnir avanir viyad ambu matrah
pranendriyani hrdayam cid anugrahas ca

sarvarm tvam eva saguno vigunas ca bhiman
nanyat tvad asty api mano-vacasa niruktam
tvam—You (are); vayuh—air; agnih—fire; avanih—earth; viyat—
sky; ambu—water; matrah—the sense objects; prana—the life airs;
indriyani—the senses; hrdayam—the mind; cit—consciousness;
anugrahah ca—and false ego or the demigods; sarvam—everything;
tvam—You; eva—only; sa-gunah—material nature with its three
modes; vigunah—the spiritual spark and Supersoul, which are beyond
material nature; ca—and; bhiaman—O my great Lord; na—not;
anyat—other; tvat—than You; asti—is; api—although; manah-
vacasa—by mind and words; niruktam —everything manifested.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, You are actually the air, the earth, fire, sky and
water. You are the objects of sense perception, the life airs, the five
senses, the mind, consciousness and false ego. Indeed, You are
everything, subtle and gross. The material elements and anything
expressed, either by the words or by the mind, are nothing but
You.
PURPORT
This is the all-pervasive conception of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, which explains how He spreads everywhere and anywhere.
Sarvarn khalv 80277 brahma: everything is Brahman—the Supreme
Brahman, Krsna. Nothing exists without Him. As the Lord says in
Bhagavad-gita (9.4):
maya tatam ida sarvari
jagad avyakta-mirtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
na cahari tesv avasthitah
“I exist everywhere, and everything exists in Me, yet I am not visible
everywhere.” The Lord can be visible only through devotional service.


--- Page 275 ---
Text 49] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 269
Tatra tisthami narada yatra gayanti mad-bhaktah: the Supreme Lord
stays only where His devotees chant His glories.
TEXT 49
नेते गुणा न गुणिनो महदादयो ये
~
स्वे मनःप्रभृतयः सहदेवम्याः |
आद्यन्तवन्त उरुगाय विदन्ति हि त्वा-
मेवं विग्य सुधियो विरमन्ति शब्दात्‌॥॥४९॥
naite guna na gunino mahad-adayo ye
sarve manah prabhrtayah sahadeva-martyah
ady-antavanta urugaya vidanti hi tvam
9০৮৫7? vimrSya sudhiyo viramanti sabdat
na—neither; ete—all these; gundh—three qualities of material
nature; na—nor; guninah—the predominating deities of the three
modes of material nature (namely Lord Brahma, the predominating deity
of passion, and Lord Siva, the predominating deity of ignorance);
mahat-adayah—the five elements, the senses and the sense objects;
ye—those which; sarve—all; manah—the mind; prabhrtayah—and so
on; saha-deva-martyah—with the demigods and the mortal human
beings; adi-anta-vantah—who all have a beginning and end; urugaya—
O Supreme Lord, who are glorified by all saintly persons; vidanti—
understand; hi—indeed; tvam—Your Lordship; evam—thus;
vimrsya—considering; sudhiyah—all wise men; viramanti—cease;
sabdat—from studying or understanding the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
Neither the three modes of material nature [sattva-guna, rajo-
guna and tamo-gunal, nor the predominating deities controlling
these three modes, nor the five gross elements, nor the mind, nor
the demigods nor the human beings can understand Your Lord-
ship, for they are all subjected to birth and annihilation. Consider-
ing this, the spiritually advanced have taken to devotional service.
Such wise men hardly bother with Vedic study. Instead, they
engage themselves in practical devotional service.


--- Page 276 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
PURPORT
As stated in several places, bhaktya mam abhijanati: only by devo-
tional service can the Supreme Lord be understood. The intelligent per-
son, the devotee, does not bother much about the practices mentioned in
text 46 (mauna-vrata-sruta-tapo-’dhyayana-sva-dharma). After under-
standing the Supreme Lord through devotional service, such devotees are
no longer interested in studies of the Vedas. Indeed, this is confirmed in
the Vedas also. The Vedas say, kim artha vayam adhyesyamahe kim
artha vayam vaksyamahe. What is the use of studying so many Vedic
literatures? What is the use of explaining them in different ways?
Vayam vaksyamahe. No one needs to study any more Vedic literatures,
nor does anyone need to describe them by philosophical speculation.
Bhagavad-gita (2.52) also says:
yada te moha-kalilarn
buddhir vyatitarisyati
tada gantasi nirvedar
srotavyasya Srutasya ca
When one understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead by execut-
ing devotional service, one ceases the practice of studying the Vedic
literature. Elsewhere it is said, aradhito yadi haris tapasa tatah kim. If
one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engage in
His service, there is no more need of severe austerities, penances and so
on. However, if after performing severe austerities and penances one
does not understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, such practices
are useless.
TEXT 50
तत्‌ तेऽत्तम नमःस्तुतिकमेपूजाः
कम स्म्रतिश्वरणयोः श्रवणं कथायाम्‌ |
संसेवया त्वयि विनेति षडङ्गया किं
क्ति जनः परमहंसगतौ लमेत ॥५०॥
tat te †711011व710 namah stuti-karma-pijah
karma smrtis caranayoh sravanari kathayam


--- Page 277 ---
Text 50] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 271
sarisevaya tvayi vineti sad-arigaya kim
bhakti janah paramahamsa-gatau labheta

tat—therefore; te—unto You; arhat-tama—O supreme of all
worshipable persons; namah—respectful obeisances; stuti-karma-
pijah—worshiping Your Lordship by offering prayers and other devo-
tional activities; karma —activities being dedicated to You; smrtih—con-
stant remembrance; caranayoh—of Your lotus feet; Sravanam —always
hearing; kathayam—in topics (about You); sarsevaya—such devotional
service; tvayi—unto You; vinda— without; iti—thus; sat-arigaya—hav-
ing six different parts; kim—how; bhaktim—devotional service;
janah—a person;  paramaharisa-gatau—obtainable by 006
paramaharisa; labheta—may attain.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, the best of all
persons to whom prayers are offered, I offer my respectful obei-
sances unto You because without rendering six kinds of devotional
service unto You— offering prayers, dedicating all the results of
activities, worshiping You, working on Your behalf, always
remembering Your lotus feet and hearing about Your glories—
who can achieve that which is meant for the paramaharnsas?

PURPORT

The Vedas enjoin: nayam atma pravacanena labhyo na medhaya na
bahuna srutena. One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead simply by studying the Vedas and offering prayers. Only by the
grace of the Supreme Lord can one understand Him. The process of
understanding the Lord, therefore, is bhakti. Without bhakti, simply
following the Vedic injunctions to understand the Absolute Truth will
not be helpful at all. The process of bhakti is understood by the
paramaharisa, one who has accepted the essence of everything. The
results of bhakti are reserved for such a paramaharisa, and this stage
cannot be obtained by any Vedic process other than devotional service.
Other processes, such as jigna and yoga, can be successful only when
mixed with bhakti. When we speak of jiana-yoga, karma-yoga and


--- Page 278 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
dhyana-yoga the word yoga indicates bhakti. Bhakti-yoga, or buddhi-
yoga, executed with intelligence and full knowledge, is the only suc-
cessful method for going back home, back to Godhead. If one wants to be
liberated from the pangs of material existence, he should take to devo-
tional service for quick attainment of this goal.
TEXT 51
श्रीनारद उवाच
- [न
रताबद्र्णितगुणो भक्तया मक्तन निगुणः |
प्रहादं प्रणतं प्रीतो यतमन्युरभाषत ॥५१॥
sri-narada uvaca
etavad varnita-guno
bhaktya bhaktena nirgunah
prahradari pranatari prito
yata-manyur abhasata
Sri-naradah uvdca—Sri Narada Muni said; etavat—up to this;
varnita—described; gunah—transcendental qualities; bhaktya—with
devotion; bhaktena—by the devotee (Prahlada Maharaja); nirgunah—
the transcendental Lord; prahradam—unto Prahlada Maharaja;
pranatam —who was surrendered at the lotus feet of the Lord; pritah—
being pleased; yata-manyuh—controlling the anger; abhasata —began
to speak (as follows).
TRANSLATION
The great saint Narada said: Thus Lord Nrsimhadeva was
pacified by the devotee Prahlada Maharaja with prayers offered
from the transcendental platform. The Lord gave up His anger,
and being very kind to Prahlada, who was offering prostrated
obeisances, He spoke as follows.
PURPORT
The word nirguna is important. The Mayavadi philosophers accept the
Absolute Truth as nirguna or nirakara. The word nirguna refers to one
who possesses no material qualities. The Lord, being full of spiritual
qualities, gave up all His anger and spoke to Prahlada.


--- Page 279 ---
Text 52] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 273
TEXT 52
HRI
সহাহ भद्र मद्रं ते MASE तेऽसुरोत्तम |
वरं बणीष्वाभिमतं कामपूरोऽस्म्यहं चृणाम्‌ ॥॥५२॥
$ri-bhagavan uvaca
prahrada bhadra bhadrar te
prito "hari te ’surottama
varam vrnisvabhimatari
kama-piiro ’smy aha nrnam
Sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
prahrada—O My dear Prahlada; bhadra—you are so gentle; bhadram —
all good fortune; te—unto you; pritah—pleased; aham—I (am); te—
unto You; asura-uttama—O best devotee in the family of asuras
(atheists); wvaram—benediction; vrpisva—just 891 (from Me);
abhimatam —desired; kama-purah—who fulfills everyone’s desire;
asmi—am; aham—I; nrnam—of all men.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahlada,
most gentle one, best of the family of the asuras, all good fortune
unto you. I am very much pleased with you. It is My pastime to
fulfill the desires of all living beings, and therefore you may ask
from Me any benediction that you desire to be fulfilled.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as bhakta-vatsala, the
Supreme Personality who is very much affectionate to His devotees. It is
not very extraordinary that the Lord offered His devotee all benedictions.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said in effect, “I fulfill the desires
of everyone. Since you are My devotee, whatever you want for yourself
will naturally be given, but if you pray for anyone else, that prayer also
will be fulfilled.” Thus if we approach the Supreme Lord or His devotee,
or if we are blessed by a devotee, naturally we will automatically achieve
the benedictions of the Supreme Lord. Yasya prasadad bhagavat-


--- Page 280 ---
274 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
prasadah. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that if one pleases
the Vaisnava spiritual master, all of one’s desires will be fulfilled.
TEXT 53
Ce ©. ५
मामप्रीणत आयुष्मन्दश॑नं TH दि. मे।
TH मां न पुनजन्तुरारमानं तप्तुमहेति ॥५२॥
mam aprinata ayusman
darsanam durlabhari hi me
drstva mam na punar Jjantur
atmanarii taptum arhati
mam—Me; aprinatah—not pleasing; ayusman—O long-living
Prahlada; darSanam—seeing; durlabham—very rare; hi—indeed;
me—of Me; drstva—after seeing; mam —Me; na—not; punah—again;
Jantuh—the living entity; atmanam—for himself; tapturmn—to lament;
arhati—deserves.
TRANSLATION
My dear Prahlada, may you live a long time. One cannot appreci-
ate or understand Me without pleasing Me, but one who has seen
or pleased Me has nothing more for which to lament for his own
satisfaction.
PURPORT
One cannot be happy under any circumstances unless one pleases the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but one who has learned how to please
the Supreme Lord need no longer lament for his material condition.
TEXT 54
(a
प्रीणन्ति হায मां धीराः सवेमावेन साधवः |
अयस्कामा महाभाग सर्वासामाशिषां पतिम्‌ ls
prinanti hy atha mar dhirah
sarva-bhavena sadhavah


--- Page 281 ---
Text 54] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 275
Sreyas-kama maha-bhaga
sarvasam asisam patim
prinanti—try to please; hi—indeed; atha—because of this; mam —
Me; dhirah—those who are sober and most intelligent; sarva-bhavena—
in all respects, in different modes of devotional service; sadhavah —per-
sons who are very well behaved (perfect in all respects); Sreyas-
kamah —desiring the best benefit in life; maha-bhaga—O you who are
so fortunate; sarvasam—of all; asisam —kinds of benedictions; patim—
the master (Me).
TRANSLATION
My dear Prahlada, you are very fortunate. Please know from Me
that those who are very wise and highly elevated try to please Me in
all different modes of mellows, for I am the only person who can
fulfill all the desires of everyone.
PURPORT
The words dhirah sarva-bhavena do not mean “in whichever way you
like.” Bhava is the preliminary condition of love of Godhead.
athasaktis tato bhavas
tatah premabhyudadicati
sadhakanam aya premnah
pradurbhave bhavet kramah
(Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.4.16)
The bhava stage is the final division before one reaches love of Godhead.
The word sarva-bhava means that one can love the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in different transcendental modes of mellows, beginning
with dasya, sakhya, vatsalya and madhurya. In the $anta stage, one is
on the border of loving service to the Lord. Pure love of Godhead begins
from dasya and develops to sakhya, vatsalya and then madhurya. Still,
in any of these five mellows one can render loving service to the Supreme
Lord. Since our main business is to love the Supreme Personality of God-
head, one can render service from any of the above-mentioned platforms
of love.


--- Page 282 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 9
TEXT 35
श्रीनारद उवाच
एवं प्रलोभ्यमानोऽपि , बरैर्लोकप्रलोमनेः |
=~
एकान्तित्वाद्‌ मगवति नैच्छत्‌ तानसुरोत्तमः॥।५५॥
Sri-narada uvaca
evar pralobhyamano ‘pi
varair loka-pralobhanaih
ekantitvad bhagavati
naicchat tan asurottamah
Sri-naradah uvaca—the great saint Narada said; evam—thus;
pralobhyamanah —being allured or induced; api—although; varaih—
by benedictions; loka —of the world; pralobhanaih—by different kinds
of allurements; ekantitvat—because of being solely surrendered;
bhagavati —unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na aicchat—did
not want; tan—those benedictions; asura-uttamah—Prahlada Maharaja,
the best of the family of asuras.
TRANSLATION
Narada Muni said: Prahlada Maharaja was the best person in the
family of asuras, who always aspire for material happiness. None-
theless, although allured by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who offered him all benedictions for material happiness, because
of his unalloyed Krsna consciousness he did not want to take any
material benefit for sense gratification.
PURPORT
Pure devotees like Prahlada Maharaja and Dhruva Maharaja do not
aspire for any material benefit at any stage of devotional service. When
the Lord was present before Dhruva Maharaja, Dhruva did not want to
take any material benefit from the Lord: svamin krtartho smi vara na
ydce. As a pure devotee, he could not ask the Lord for any material
benefit. In this regard, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu instructed us:


--- Page 283 ---
Text 55] Prahlada Pacifies the Lord with Prayers 277
na dhanam na janam na sundariri
kavitam va jagad-isa kamaye
mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi
“O my Lord, Jagadida, I do not pray for benedictions by which to achieve
material wealth, popularity or beauty. My only desire is to serve You.
Kindly engage me in the service of the servant of Your servant.”
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Ninth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘Prahlada Pacifies Lord
Nrsirmhadeva with Prayers.”


--- Page 284 ---
CHAPTER TEN
Prahlada, the Best
Among Exalted Devotees
This chapter describes how the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Nrsirnhadeva disappeared, after pleasing Prahlada Maharaja. It also de-
scribes a benediction given by Lord Siva.

Lord Nrsimhadeva wanted to bestow benedictions upon Prahlada
Maharaja, one after another, but Prahlada Maharaja, thinking them im-
pediments on the path of spiritual progress, did not accept any of them.
Instead, he fully surrendered at the Lord’s lotus feet. He said: ““If anyone
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord prays for personal sense
gratification, he cannot be called a pure devotee or even a devotee. He
may be called only a merchant engaged in the business of give and take.
Similarly, a master who wants to please his servant after taking service
from him is also not a real master.” Prahlada Mahar3ja, therefore, did
not ask anything from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Rather, he
said that if the Lord wanted to give him a benediction, he wanted the
Lord to assure him that he would never be induced to take any benedic-
tions for the sake of material desires. Exchanges of devotional service for
lusty desires are always very prominent. As soon as lusty desires awaken,
one’s senses, mind, life, soul, religious principles, patience, intelligence,
shyness, beauty, strength, memory and truthfulness are all vanquished.
One can render unalloyed devotional service only when there are no ma-
terial desires in one’s mind.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead was greatly pleased with
Prahlada Maharaja for his unalloyed devotion, yet the Lord provided him
one material benediction —that he would be perfectly happy in this world
and live his next life in Vaikuntha. The Lord gave him the benediction
that he would be the king of this material world until the end of the
manvantara millennium and that although in this material world, he
would have the facility to hear the glories of the Lord and depend fully
on the Lord, performing service to Him in uncontaminated bhakti-yoga.

279


--- Page 285 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
The Lord advised Prahlada to perform sacrifices through bhakti-yoga,
for this is the duty of a king.

Prahlada Maharaja accepted whatever the Lord had offered him, and
he prayed for the Lord to deliver his father. In response to this prayer,
the Lord assured him that in the family of such a pure devotee as he, not
only the devotee’s father but his forefathers for twenty-one generations
are liberated. The Lord also asked Prahlada to perform the ritualistic
ceremonies appropriate after his father’s death.

Then Lord Brahma, who was also present, offered many prayers to the
Lord, expressing his obligation to the Lord for having offered benedic-
tions to Prahlada Maharaja. The Lord advised Lord Brahma not to offer
benedictions to asuras as he had to Hiranyakasipu, for such benedictions
indulge them. Then Lord Nrsithhadeva disappeared. On that day,
Prahlada Maharaja was installed on the throne of the world by Lord
Brahma and Sukracarya.

Thus Narada Muni described the character of Prahlada Maharaja for
Yudhisthira Maharaja, and he further described the killing of Ravana by
Lord Ramacandra and the killing of Sisupala and Dantavakra in
Dvapara-yuga. SiSupala, of course, had merged into the existence of the
Lord and thus achieved sayujya-mukti. Narada Muni praised
Yudhisthira Maharaja because the Supreme Lord, Krsna, was the greatest
well-wisher and friend of the Pandavas and almost always stayed in their
house. Thus the fortune of the Pandavas was greater than that of
Prahlada Maharaja.

Later, Narada Muni described how the demon Maya Danava con-
structed Tripura for the demons, who became very powerful and de-
feated the demigods. Because of this defeat, Lord Rudra, Siva, dis-
mantled Tripura; thus he became famous as Tripurari. For this, Rudra is
very much appreciated and worshiped by the demigods. This narration
occurs at the end of the chapter.

TEXT 1
श्रीनारद उवाच .
भक्तियोगस्य तत्‌ स्वेमन्तरायतयाभकः |
मन्यमानो हषीकेशचं खयमान उवाच ह ॥ १॥


--- Page 286 ---
Text 1] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 281
Sri-narada uvaca
bhakti-yogasya tat sarvam
antarayatayarbhakah
manyamano hrsikesar
smayamana uvdca ha

Sri-naradah uvaca—Narada Muni said; bhakti-yogasya—of the prin-
ciples of devotional service; tat—those (blessings or benedictions offered
by Lord Nrsirmhadeva); sarvam—each and every one of them;
antarayataya—because of being impediments (on the path of bhakti-
yoga); arbhakah—Prahlida Mahirija, although only a boy;
manyamanah—considering;  hrsikeSam—unto Lord Nrsimhadeva;
smayamanah—smiling; uvdca—said; ha—in the past.

TRANSLATION

The saint Narada Muni continued: Although Prahlada Maharaja
was only a boy, when he heard the benedictions offered by Lord
Nrsirhhadeva he considered them impediments on the path of
devotional service. Thus he smiled very mildly and spoke as
follows.

PURPORT

Material achievements are not the ultimate goal of devotional service.
The ultimate goal of devotional service is love of Godhead. Therefore al-
though Prahlada Maharaja, Dhruva Maharaja, Ambarisa Maharaja,
Yudhisthira Maharaja and many devotee kings were materially very opu-
lent, they accepted their material opulence in the service of the Lord, not
for their personal sense gratification. Of course, possessing material opu-
lence is always fearful because under the influence of material opulence
one may be misdirected from devotional service. Nonetheless, a pure de-
votee (anyabhildsita-sanyam) is never misdirected by material opu-
lence. On the contrary, whatever he possesses he engages one hundred
percent in the service of the Lord. When one is allured by material
possessions, they are considered to be given by maya, but when one uses
material possessions fully for service, they are considered God’s gifts, or
facilities offered by Krsna for enhancing one’s devotional service.


--- Page 287 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
TEXT 2
HEIR उवाच
: et 9 ৮1
मा मां प्रजोमयोत्पत्या सक्तं कामेषु বনই:।
तत्सङ्गमीतो निर्विण्णो शयश्षुस्त्वामुपाभितः ॥ २॥
Sri-prahrada wvaca
ma mam pralobhayotpattya
saktarn kamesu tair varaih f
tat-sariga-bhito nirvinno
mumuksus tvam upasritah

sri-prahradah uvica—Prahlada Maharaja said (to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead); ma—please do not; mam—me; pralobhaya—
allure; utpattya—because of my birth (in a demoniac family); saktam —
(I am already) attached; kamesu—to material enjoyment; taih—by all
those; varaih—benedictions of material possessions; tat-sariga-bhitah—
being afraid of such material association; nirvinnah—completely
detached from material desires; mumuksuh—desiring to be liberated
from material conditions of life; tvam—unto Your lotus feet;
upasritah—I1 have taken shelter.

TRANSLATION

Prahlada Maharaja said: My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality
of Godhead, because I was born in an atheistic family I am
naturally attached to material enjoyment. Therefore, kindly do not
tempt me with these illusions. I am very much afraid of material
conditions, and I desire to be liberated from materialistic life. It is
for this reason that I have taken shelter of Your lotus feet.

PURPORT

Materialistic life means attachment to the body and everything in rela-
tionship to the body. This attachment is based on lusty desires for sense
gratification, specifically sexual enjoyment. Kamais tais tair hrta-
JAanah: when one is too attached to material enjoyment, he is bereft of
all knowledge (hrta-jaanah). As stated in Bhagavad-gita, those who are
attached to material enjoyment are mostly inclined to worship the


--- Page 288 ---
Text 3] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 283
demigods to procure various material opulences. They are especially at-
tached to worship of the goddess Durga and Lord Siva because this tran-
scendental couple can offer their devotees all material opulence.
Prahlada Maharaja, however, was detached from all material enjoyment.
He therefore took shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Nrsirtnhadeva, and not
the feet of any demigod. It is to be understood that if one really wants
release from this material world, from the threefold miseries and from
janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi (birth, death, old age and disease), one must
take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for without the
Supreme Personality of Godhead one cannot get release from ma-
terialistic life. Atheistic men are very much attached to material enjoy-
ment. Therefore if they get some opportunity to achieve more and more
material enjoyment, they take it. Prahlada Maharaja, however, was very
careful in this regard. Although born of a materialistic father, because he
was a devotee he had no material desires (anyabhilasita-sanyam).
TEXT 3
পা ४९
भृत्यलक्षण जिज्ञासुम॑क्तं कामेप्वचोदयत्‌ |
भवान्‌ संसारबीजेषु हृदयग्रन्थिषु प्रमो ॥ ३॥
bhrtya-laksana-jijiasur
bhaktarn kamesv acodayat
bhavan sarsara-bijesu
hrdaya-granthisu prabho
bhrtya-laksana-jijiasuh —desiring to exhibit the symptoms of a pure

devotee; bhaktam —the devotee; kamesu —in the material world, where
lusty desires predominate; acodayat—has sent; bhavan—Your Lord-
ship; sariisara-bijesu—the root cause of being present in this material
world; hrdaya-granthisu—which (desire for material enjoyment) is in
the cores of the hearts of all conditioned souls; prabho—O my worshipa-
ble Lord.

TRANSLATION

O my worshipable Lord, because the seed of lusty desires, which

is the root cause of material existence, is within the core of


--- Page 289 ---
284 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
everyone’s heart, You have sent me to this material world to ex-
hibit the symptoms of a pure devotee.
PURPORT

Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu has given considerable discussion about
nitya-siddha and sadhana-siddha devotees. Nitya-siddha devotees come
from Vaikuntha to this material world to teach, by their personal exam-
ple, how to become a devotee. The living entities in this material world
can take lessons from such nitya-siddha devotees and thus become in-
clined to return home, back to Godhead. A nitya-siddha devotee comes
from Vaikuntha upon the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and shows by his example how to become a pure devotee (anyabhilasita-
sunyam). In spite of coming to this material world, the nitya-siddha de-
votee is never attracted by the allurements of material enjoyment. A
perfect example is Prahlada Maharaja, who was a nitya-siddha, a
maha-bhagavata devotee. Although Prahlada was born in the family of
Hiranyakasipu, an atheist, he was never attached to any kind of
materialistic enjoyment. Desiring to exhibit the symptoms of a pure de-
votee, the Lord tried to induce Prahlada Maharaja to take material
benedictions, but Prahlada Maharaja did not accept them. On the con-
trary, by his personal example he showed the symptoms of a pure
devotee. In other words, the Lord Himself has no desire to send His pure
devotee to this material world, nor does a devotee have any material
purpose in coming. When the Lord Himself appears as an incarnation
within this material world, He is not allured by the material atmosphere,
and He has nothing to do with material activity, yet by His example He
teaches the common man how to become a devotee. Similarly, a devotee
who comes here in accordance with the order of the Supreme Lord shows
by his personal behavior how to become a pure devotee. A pure devotee,
therefore, is a practical example for all living entities, including Lord
Brahma.

TEXT 4
नान्यथा तेऽखिलगुरो घटेत करुणात्मनः |
यस्त आशिष आशास्ते न स भत्यः स वै बणिक्‌ ।।४॥


--- Page 290 ---
Text 4] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 285
nanyatha te ’khila-guro
ghateta karunatmanah
yas ta 05250 asaste
na sa bhrtyah sa vai vanik

na—not; anyatha—otherwise; te—of You; akhila-guro—O supreme
instructor of the entire creation; ghateta—such a thing can happen;
karuna-atmanah—the Supreme Person, who is extremely kind to His
devotees; yah—any person who; te—from You; dasisah—material
benefits; asaste—desires (in exchange for serving You); na—not; sah—
such a person; bhrtyah—a servitor; sah—such a person; vai—indeed;
vanik—a merchant (who wants to get material profit from his business).

TRANSLATION

Otherwise, O my Lord, O supreme instructor of the entire
world, You are so kind to Your devotee that You could not induce
him to do something unbeneficial for him. On the other hand, one
who desires some material benefit in exchange for devotional ser-
vice cannot be Your pure devotee. Indeed, he is no better than a
merchant who wants profit in exchange for service.

PURPORT

It is sometimes found that one comes to a devotee or a temple of the
Lord just to get some material benefit. Such a person is described here as
a mercantile man. Bhagavad-gita speaks of arto jijiasur artharthi. The
word arta refers to one who is physically distressed, and artharthi refers
to one in need of money. Such persons are forced to approach the
Supreme Personality of Godhead for mitigation of their distress or to get
some money by the benediction of the Lord. They have been described as
sukrti, pious, because in their distress or need for money they have ap-
proached the Supreme Lord. Unless one is pious, one cannot approach
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. However, although a pious man
may receive some material benefit, one who is concerned with material
benefits cannot be a pure devotee. When a pure devotee receives material
opulences, this is not because of his pious activity but for the service of
the Lord. When one engages in devotional service, one is automatically


--- Page 291 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
pious. Therefore, a pure devotee is anyabhilasita-siinyam. He has no
desire for material profit, nor does the Lord induce him to try to profit
materially. When a devotee needs something, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead supplies it (yoga-ksemari vahamy aham).

Sometimes materialists go to a temple to offer flowers and fruit to the
Lord because they have learned from Bhagavad-gita that if a devotee
offers some flowers and fruits, the Lord accepts them. In Bhagavad-gita
(9.26) the Lord says:

patra puspariv phalari toyarn
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad aharii bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah
“If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I
will accept it.” Thus a man with a mercantile mentality thinks that if he
can get some material benefit, like a large amount of money, simply by
offering a little fruit and flower, this is good business. Such persons are
not accepted as pure devotees. Because their desires are not purified,
they are still mercantile men, even though they go to temples to make a
show of being devotees. Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktari tat-paratvena nir-
malam: only when one is fully freed from material desires can one be
purified, and only in that purified state can one serve the Lord. Hrstkena
hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktir ucyate. This is the pure devotional platform.
TEXT 5
N
आजश्ञासानो न वै भृत्यः खामिन्याक्िष आत्मनः |
न खामी भृत्यतः खाम्यमिच्छन्‌ यो राति चारिषः॥ ५॥
asasano na vai bhrtyah
svaminy asisa atmanah
na svami bhrtyatah svamyam
icchan yo rati casisah

asasanah—a person who desires (in exchange for service); na—not;

vai—indeed; bhrtyah—a qualified servant or pure devotee of the Lord;


--- Page 292 ---
Text 5] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 287
svamini—from the master; asisah—material benefit; atmanah—for
personal sense gratification; na—nor; svami—the master; bhrtyatah—
from the servant; svamyam—the prestigious position of being the
master; icchan—desiring; yah—any such master who; rati—bestows;
ca—also; asisah—material profit.
TRANSLATION

A servant who desires material profits from his master is cer-
tainly not a qualified servant or pure devotee. Similarly, a master
who bestows benedictions upon his servant because of a desire to
maintain a prestigious position as master is also not a pure master.

PURPORT

As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.20), kamais tais tair hrta-jaanah
prapadyante ’nya-devatah. “Those whose minds are distorted by ma-
terial desires surrender unto demigods.” A demigod cannot become
master, for the real master is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
demigods, to keep their prestigious positions, bestow upon their
worshipers whatever benedictions the worshipers want. For example,
once it was found that an asura took a benediction from Lord Siva by
which the asura would be able to kill someone simply by placing his
hands on that person’s head. Such benedictions are possible to receive
from the demigods. If one worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
however, the Lord will never offer him such condemned benedictions.
On the contrary, it is said in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.88.8),
yasyaham anugrhnami harisye tad-dhanarm sanaih. If one is too ma-
terialistic but at the same time wants to be a servant of the Supreme
Lord, the Lord, because of His supreme compassion for the devotee,
takes away all his material opulences and obliges him to be a pure devo-
tee of the Lord. Prahlada Maharaja distinguishes between the pure devo-
tee and the pure master. The Lord is the pure master, the supreme
master, whereas an unalloyed devotee with no material motives is the
pure servant. One who has materialistic motivations cannot become a
servant, and one who unnecessarily bestows benedictions upon his ser-
vant to keep his own prestigious position is not a real master.


--- Page 293 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
TEXT 6
+ .
HE तवकामस्त्बद्धक्तस्तव च खाम्यनपान्रयः।
=
नान्यथेदावयोरर्थो राजसेवकयोरिव ॥ & ॥
aha ८४ akamas tvad-bhaktas
tvari ca svamy anapasrayah
nanyathehavayor artho
raja-sevakayor iva

aham—as far as | am concerned; tu —indeed; akamah —without ma-
terial desire; tvat-bhaktah—fully attached to You without motivation;
tvam ca—Your Lordship also; svami—the real master; anapasrayah—
without motivation (You do not become the master with motivation);
na—not; anyatha—without being in such a relationship as master and
servant; iha—here; avayoh—our; arthah—any motivation (the Lord is
the pure master, and Prahlada Maharaja is the pure devotee with no ma-
terialistic motivation); raja—of a king; sevakayoh—and the servitor;
iva—like (just as a king exacts taxes for the benefit of the servant or the
citizens pay taxes for the benefit of the king).

TRANSLATION

O my Lord, I am Your unmotivated servant, and You are my
eternal master. There is no need of our being anything other than
master and servant. You are naturally my master, and I am
naturally Your servant. We have no other relationship.

PURPORT

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu said, jivera ‘svaripa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-
dasa’: every living being is eternally a servant of the Supreme Lord,
Krsna. Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (5.29), bhoktaram yajna-
tapasari sarva-loka-mahesvaram: “I am the proprietor of all planets,
and I am the supreme enjoyer.” This is the natural position of the Lord,
and the natural position of the living being is to surrender unto Him
(sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekari saranarin vraja). If this relation-
ship continues, then real happiness exists eternally between the master
and servant. Unfortunately, when this eternal relationship is disturbed,


--- Page 294 ---
Text 7] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 289
the living entity wants to become separately happy and thinks that the
master is his order supplier. In this way there cannot be happiness. Nor
should the master cater to the desires of the servant. If he does, he is not
the real master. The real master cornmands, ‘You must do this,” and the
real servant immediately obeys the order. Unless this relationship be-
tween the Supreme Lord and the subordinate living entity is established,
there can be no real happiness. The living entity is dsraya, always subor-
dinate, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is visaya, the supreme
objective, the goal of life. Unfortunate persons trapped in this material
world do not know this. Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum: illusioned
by the material energy, everyone in this material world is unaware that
the only aim of life is to approach Lord Visnu.
aradhananar sarvesarm
visnor aradhanarh param
tasmat parataram devi
tadtyanarh samarcanam
In the Padma Purana Lord Siva explains to his wife, Parvati, the goddess
Durga, that the highest goal of life is to satisfy Lord Visnu, who can be
satisfied only when His servant is satisfied. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
therefore teaches, gopi-bhartuh pada-kamalayor dasa-dasanudasah.
One must become a servant of the servant. Prahlada Maharaja also
prayed to Lord Nrsimhadeva that he might be engaged as the servant of
the Lord’s servant. This is the prescribed method of devotional service.
As soon as a devotee wants the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be his
order supplier, the Lord immediately refuses to become the master of
such a motivated devotee. In Bhagavad-gita (4.11) the Lord says, ye
yatha mar prapadyante tars tathaiva bhajamy aham. “As one surren-
ders unto Me, I reward him accordingly.” Materialistic persons are
generally inclined to material profits. As long as one continues in such an
adulterated position, he does not receive the benefit of returning home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 7
यदि दास्यसि मे कामान्‌ बरांस्त्वं वरदर्षभ |
कामानां हृ्यसंरोहं मवतस्तु बृणे वरम्‌ ॥ ७॥


--- Page 295 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
yadi dasyasi me kaman
vararms tvam varadarsabha
kamanar hrdy 05070870107
bhavatas tu vrne varam
yadi—if; dasyasi—want to give; me—me; kaman—anything
desirable; varan —as Your benediction; tvam — You; varada-rsabha—0O
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can give any benediction;
kamanam—of all desires for material happiness; hrdi—within the core
of my heart; asariroham—no growth; bhavatah—from You; tu—then;
vrne—I pray for; varam—such a benediction.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, best of the givers of benediction, if You at all want to
bestow a desirable benediction upon me, then I pray from Your
Lordship that within the core of my heart there be no material
desires.
PURPORT
Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught us how to pray for benedictions
from the Lord. He said:
na dhanarm na jana na sundariri
kavitarh va jagad-isa kamaye
mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi
“O my Lord, I do not want from You any amount of wealth, nor many
followers, nor a beautiful wife, for these are all materialistic desires. But
if I have to ask You for any benediction, I pray that in whatever forms of
life I may take my birth, under any circumstances, I will not be bereft of
Your transcendental devotional service.” Devotees are always on the
positive platform, in contrast to the Mayavadis, who want to make every-
thing impersonal or void. One cannot remain void (sanyavadi); rather,
one must possess something. Therefore, the devotee, on the positive side,
wants to possess something, and this possession is very nicely described
by Prahlada Maharaja, who says, “If I must take some benediction from


--- Page 296 ---
Text 8] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 291
You, I pray that within the core of my heart there may be no material
desires.” The desire to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not
at all material.
TEXT 8
इन्द्रियाणि मनः प्राण आत्मा ঘদা एतिम॑तिः ।
हीः श्रीस्तेजः स्पतिः सत्यं यस्य नर्यन्ति जन्मना॥ ८ ॥
indriyani manah prana
atma dharmo dhrtir matih
hrih ॐ tejah smrtih satyam
yasya naSyanti janmana

indriyani—the senses; manah—the mind; pranah—the life air;
atma—the body; dharmah—religion; dhrtih—patience; matih—intelli-
gence; hrih—shyness; Srih—opulence; tejah—strength; smrtih—
memory; satyam—truthfulness; yasya—of which lusty desires;
nasyanti—are vanquished; janmana—from the very beginning of birth.

TRANSLATION

O my Lord, because of lusty desires from the very beginning of
one’s birth, the functions of one’s senses, mind, life, body,
religion, patience, intelligence, shyness, opulence, strength,
memory and truthfulness are vanquished.

PURPORT

As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam, kamar hrd-rogam. Materialistic
life means that one is afflicted by a formidable disease called lusty desire.
Liberation means freedom from lusty desires because it is only due to
such desires that one must accept repeated birth and death. As long as
one’s lusty desires are unfulfilled, one must take birth after birth to
fulfill them. Because of material desires, therefore, one performs various
types of activities and receives various types of bodies with which to try
to fulfill desires that are never satisfied. The only remedy is to take to
devotional service, which begins when one is free from all material
desires. Anyabhilasita-sinyam. Anya-abhildsita means ‘‘material


--- Page 297 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
desire,” and siinyam means “free from.” The spiritual soul has spiritual
activities and spiritual desires, as described by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu:
mama janmani janmanisvare bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi.
Unalloyed devotion to the service of the Lord is the only spiritual desire.
To fulfill this spiritual desire, however, one must be free from all ma-
terial desires. Desirelessness means freedom from material desires. This
is described by Srila Rapa Gosvami as anyabhilasita-sinyam. As soon as
one has material desires, one loses his spiritual identity. Then all the
paraphernalia of one’s life, including one’s senses, body, religion,
patience and intelligence, are deviated from one’s original Krsna con-
sciousness. As soon as one has material desires, one cannot properly use
his senses, intelligence, mind and so on for the satisfaction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mayavadi philosophers want to become
impersonal, senseless and mindless, but that is not possible. The living
entity must be living, always existing with desires, ambitions and so on.
These should be purified, however, so that one can desire spiritually and
be spiritually ambitious, without material contamination. In every living
entity these propensities exist because he is a living entity. When ma-
terially contaminated, however, one is put into the hands of material
misery (janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi). If one wants to stop repeated birth
and death, one must take to the devotional service of the Lord.
sarvopadhi-vinirmuktarin
tat-paratvena nirmalam
hrsikena hrsikesa-
sevanam bhaktir ucyate
“Bhakti, or devotional service, means engaging all our senses in the ser-
vice of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all
the senses. When the spirit soul renders service unto the Supreme, there
are two side effects. One is freed from all material designations, and,
simply by being employed in the service of the Lord, one’s senses are
purified.”
TEXT 9
fafa यदा कामान्मानवो मनसि fear ।
तर्येव पुण्डरीकाक्ष WEEE कल्पते ॥ ९ ॥


--- Page 298 ---
Text 10] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 293
vimunicati yada kaman
manavo manasi sthitan
tarhy eva pundarikaksa
bhagavattvaya kalpate
vimuficati—gives up; yadd—whenever; kaman—all material desires;
manavah—human society; manasi—within the mind; sthitan—situ-
ated; tarhi—at that time only; eva—indeed; pundarika-aksa—O lotus-
eyed Lord; bhagavattvaya—to be equally as opulent as the Lord;
kalpate—becomes eligible.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, when a human being is able to give up all the ma-
terial desires in his mind, he becomes eligible to possess wealth
and opulence like Yours.
PURPORT
Atheistic men sometimes criticize a devotee by saying, “If you do not
want to take any benediction from the Lord and if the servant of the Lord
is as opulent as the Lord Himself, why do you ask for the benediction of
being engaged as the Lord’s servant?”” Sridhara Svami comments,
bhagavattvaya bhagavat-samdn aisvaryaya. Bhagavattva, becoming
as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, does not mean becoming
one with Him or equal to Him, although in the spiritual world the ser-
vant is equally as opulent as the master. The servant of the Lord is
engaged in the service of the Lord as a servant, friend, father, mother or
conjugal lover, all of whom are equally as opulent as the Lord. This is
acintya-bhedabheda-tattva. The master and servant are different yet
equal in opulence. This is the meaning of simultaneous difference from
the Supreme Lord and oneness with Him.
TEXT 10
ॐ नमो मगवते तुस्यं पुरुषाय महात्मने |
हरयेऽ्द्ुतरसिंहाय बरह्मणे wna ॥१०॥
orm namo bhagavate tubhyarin
purusaya mahatmane


--- Page 299 ---
294. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
haraye ‘dbhuta-simhaya
brahmane paramatmane
07--0 my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namah—I offer
my respectful obeisances; bhagavate—unto the Supreme Person;
tubhyam —unto You; purusaya—unto the Supreme Person; maha-
atmane—unto the Supreme Soul, or the Supersoul; haraye—unto the
Lord, who vanquishes all the miseries of devotees; adbhuta-simhaya—
unto Your wonderful lionlike form as Nrsimhadeva; brahmane —unto
the Supreme Brahman; parama-atmane—unto the Supreme Soul.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, full of six opulences, O Supreme Person! O
Supreme Soul, killer of all miseries! O Supreme Person in the
form of a wonderful lion and man, let me offer my respectful obei-
sances unto You.
PURPORT
In the previous verse Prahlada Maharaja has explained that a devotee
can achieve the platform of bhagavattva, being as good as the Supreme
Person, but this does not mean that the devotee loses his position as a ser-
vant. A pure servant of the Lord, although as opulent as the Lord, is still
meant to offer respectful obeisances to the Lord in service. Prahlada
Maharaja was engaged in pacifying the Lord, and therefore he did not
consider himself equal to the Lord. He defined his position as a servant
and offered respectful obeisances unto the Lord.
TEXT 11
श्रीमगावाठुवाच
=
नैकान्तिनो मे मयि जात्विहाशिष
आशासतेऽुत्र च ये मवद्धिधाः |
तथापि मन्वन्तरमेतदत्र
दत्येस्वराणामजुशचङक्व भोगान्‌ ॥११॥।


--- Page 300 ---
Text 11] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 295
sri-bhagavan uvaca
naikantino me mayi jatv ihasisa
asasate ‘mutra ca ye bhavad-vidhah
tathapi manvantaram etad atra
daityesvaranam anubhuriksva bhogan

sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; na—
not; ekantinah—unalloyed, without desires except for the one desire for
devotional service; me—from Me; mayi—unto Me; jatu—any time;
tha—within this material world; asisah—benedictions; dsasate—intent
desire; amutra—in the next life; ca—and; ye—all such devotees who;
bhavat-vidhah—like you; tathapi—still; manvantaram—the duration
of time until the end of the life of one Manu; etat—this; atra—within
this material world; daitya-svaranam—of the opulences of materialistic
persons; anubhuriksva—you can enjoy; bhogan—all material opulences.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahlada, a
devotee like you never desires any kind of material opulences,
either in this life or in the next. Nonetheless, I order you to enjoy
the opulences of the demons in this material world, acting as their
king until the end of the duration of time occupied by Manu.

PURPORT

One Manu lives for a duration of time calculated to be an aggregate of
seventy-one yuga cycles, each of which equals 4,300,000 years. Al-
though atheistic men like to enjoy material opulences and they endeavor
with great energy to build big residences, roads, cities and factories, un-
fortunately they cannot live more than eighty, ninety or at the utmost
one hundred years. Although the materialist exerts so much energy to
create a kingdom of hallucinations, he is unable to enjoy it for more than
a few years. However, because Prahlada Maharaja was a devotee, the
Lord allowed him to enjoy material opulence as the king of the ma-
terialists. Prahlada Maharaja had taken birth in the family of
Hiranyakasipu, who was the topmost materialist, and since Prahlada was
the bona fide heir of his father, the Supreme Lord allowed him to enjoy


--- Page 301 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
the kingdom created by his father for so many years that no materialist
could calculate them. A devotee does not have to desire material opu-
lence, but if he is a pure devotee, there is ample opportunity for him to
enjoy material happiness also, without personal endeavor. Therefore,
everyone is advised to take to devotional service under all circumstances.
If one desires material opulence, he can also become a pure devotee, and
his desires will be fulfilled. It is stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.3.10):
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
yajeta purusari param
“Whether one desires everything or nothing, or whether he desires to
merge into the existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships
Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering tran-
scendental loving service.”
TEXT 12
कथा मदीया जुषमाणः प्रियास्त्व-
मावेऽ्य मामात्मनि सन्तमेकम्‌ |
सर्वेषु भूतेष्वधियज्ञमीशं
यजख योगेन च कम॑ हिन्वन्‌ ॥१२॥
katha madiya jusamanah priyas tvam
aveSya mam atmani santam ekam
sarvesu bhitesv adhiyajiam Sari
yajasva yogena ca karma hinvan
kathah—messages or instructions; madiyah—given by Me;
Jjusamanah—always hearing or contemplating; priyah—extremely
pleasing; tvam —yourself; avesya—being fully absorbed in; mam —Me;
atmani—within the core of your heart; santam—existing; ekam—one
(the same Supreme Soul); sarvesu—in all; bhiitesu—living entities;
adhiyajiam —the enjoyer of all ritualistic ceremonies; iSam—the


--- Page 302 ---
Text 13] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 297
Supreme Lord; yajasva—worship; yogena—by bhakti-yoga, devotional
service; ca—also; karma —fruitive activities; hinvan—giving up.
TRANSLATION

It does not matter that you are in the material world. You should
always, continuously, hear the instructions and messages given by
Me and always be absorbed in thought of Me, for I am the Super-
soul existing in the core of everyone’s heart. Therefore, give up
fruitive activities and worship Me.

PURPORT

When a devotee becomes materially very opulent, one should not
think that he is enjoying the results of his fruitive activities. A devotee in
this material world uses all material opulences for the service of the Lord
because he is planning how to serve the Lord with these opulences, as ad-
vised by the Lord Himself. Whatever material opulence is within his
possession he engages to expand the glories and service of the Lord. A
devotee never performs any fruitive or ritualistic ceremony to enjoy the
results of such karma. Rather, a devotee knows that karma-kanda is
meant for the less intelligent man. Narottama dasa Thakura says in his
Prema-bhakti-candrika, karma-kanda, jRana-kanda, kevala visera
bhanda: both karma-kanda and jiana-kanda—fruitive activities and
speculation about the Supreme Lord —are like pots of poison. One who is
attracted to karma-kanda and jiana-kanda spoils his existence as a
human being. Therefore a devotee is never interested in karma-kanda or
Jjnana-kanda, but is simply interested in favorable service to the Lord
(@nukilyena krsnanusilanam), or cultivation of spiritual activities in
devotional service.

TEXT 13
मोगेन पुण्यं ङशलेन पापं
कलेवरं कालजवेन दहित्वा ।
कीतिं विश्द्धां सुरलोकगीतां
विताय मामेष्यसि सुक्तबन्धः ॥१३॥


--- Page 303 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
bhogena punyarn kusalena paparn
kalevaram kala-javena hitva
kirtirh visSuddharn sura-loka-gitarn
vitdya mam esyasi mukta-bandhah

bhogena—by feelings of material happiness; punyam—pious ac-
tivities or their results; kusalena—by acting piously (devotional service
is the best of all pious activities); papam—all kinds of reactions to im-
pious activities; kalevaram—the material body; kala-javena—by the
most powerful time factor; hitva—giving up; kirtim—reputation;
viSuddham—transcendental or fully purified; sura-loka-gitam —praised
even in the heavenly planets; vitdya—spreading all through the uni-
verse; mam —unto Me; esyasi—you will come back; mukta-bandhah—
being liberated from all bondage.

TRANSLATION

My dear Prahlada, while you are in this material world you will
exhaust all the reactions of pious activity by feeling happiness, and
by acting piously you will neutralize impious activity. Because of
the powerful time factor, you will give up your body, but the
glories of your activities will be sung in the upper planetary
systems, and being fully freed from all bondage, you will return
home, back to Godhead.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura says: evar prahladasyamsena
sadhana-siddhatvari nitya-siddhatvari ca naradadivaj jieyam. There
are two classes of devotees—the sadhana-siddha and the nitya-siddha.
Prahlada Maharaja is a mixed siddha; that is, he is perfect partly because
of executing devotional service and partly because of eternal perfection.
Thus he is compared to such devotees as Narada. Formerly, Narada Muni
was the son of a maidservant, and therefore in his next birth he attained
perfection (sadhana-siddhi) because of having executed devotional ser-
vice. Yet he is also a nitya-siddha because he never forgets the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

The word kusalena is very important. One should live in the material
world very expertly. The material world is known as the world of duality


--- Page 304 ---
Text 14] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 299
because one sometimes has to act impiously and sometimes has to act
piously. Although one does not want to act impiously, the world is so
fashioned that there is always danger (padam padam yad vipadam).
Thus even when performing devotional service a devotee has to create
many enemies. Prahlada Mahardja himself had experience of this, for
even his father became his enemy. A devotee should expertly manage to
think always of the Supreme Lord so that the reactions of suffering can-
not touch him. This is the expert management of papa-punya—pious
and impious activities. An exalted devotee like Prahlada Maharaja is
Jivan-mukta; he is liberated even in this very life in the material body.
TEXT 14
य एतत्‌ कीतयेन्भद्यं तवया गीतमिदं नरः |
त्वां च मां च स्मरन्काले कर्मबन्धात्‌ प्रयुच्यते।।१४॥
ya etat kirtayen mahyarin
tvaya gitam 1077 narah
tvarn ca mam ca smaran kale
karma-bandhat pramucyate

yah—anyone who; etat—this activity; kirtayet—chants; mahyam—
unto Me; tvaya —by you; gitam—prayers offered; idam—this; narah—
human being; tvam—you; ca—as well as; mam ca—Me also; smaran—
remembering; kale—in due course of time; karma-bandhat—from the
bondage of material activities; pramucyate—becomes free.

TRANSLATION

One who always remembers your activities and My activities also,
and who chants the prayers you have offered, becomes free, in due
course of time, from the reactions of material activities.

PURPORT

Here it is stated that anyone who chants and hears about the activities
of Prahlada Maharaja and, in relationship with Prahlada’s activities, the
activities of Nrsirnhadeva, gradually becomes free from all the bondage
of fruitive activities. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.15, 2.56):


--- Page 305 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
yarir hi na vyathayanty ete
purusari purusarsabha
sama-duhkha-sukhari dhiram
so ‘mrtatvaya kalpate
“0 best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happi-
ness and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation.”
duhkhesv anudvigna-manah
sukhesu vigata-sprhah
vita-raga-bhaya-krodhah
sthita-dhir munir ucyate
“One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not
elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear
and anger, is called a sage of steady mind.” A devotee should not be ag-
grieved in an awkward position, nor should he feel extraordinarily happy
in material opulence. This is the way of expert management of material
life. Because a devotee knows how to manage expertly, he is called jivan-
mukta. As Rapa Gosvami explains in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu:
tha yasya harer dasye
karmana manasa gira
nikhilasv apy avasthasu
jiwan-muktah sa ucyate
““A person acting in Krsna consciousness (or, in other words, in the ser-
vice of Krsna) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a liberated
person even within this material world, although he may be engaged in
many so-called material activities.” Because of constantly engaging in
devotional service, in any condition of life, a devotee is free from all ma-
terial bondage.
bhaktih punati man-nistha
Sva-pakan api sambhavat
“Even one born in a family of meat-eaters is purified if he engages in
devotional service.” (Bhag. 11.14.21) Srila Jiva Gosvami cites this verse


--- Page 306 ---
Text 17] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 301
in logically supporting that anyone who chants about the pure life and
activities of Prahlada Mahar3ja is freed from the reactions of material ac-
tivities.
TEXTS 15-17
श्रीप्हाद उवाच
बरं वरय एतत्‌ ते वरदेशान्महेस्वर ।
यदनिन्दत्‌ पिता मे त्वामविद्वंस्तेज ेशवरम्‌ ॥ १५॥
६५ .
विद्धामर्षाशयः aE सर्वलोकगुरं प्रथम्‌ |
भ्रातेति FEET मयि चाषवान्‌ ॥ १६॥
तसात्‌ पितामे पूयेत TAR दुस्तराद्‌ धात्‌ |
पृतस्तेऽपाङ्गसं TTR FIRES 11291)
Sri-prahrada uvaca
varam varaya etat te
varadesan mahesvara
yad anindat pita me
tvam avidvars teja aisvaram
viddhamarsasayah saksat
sarva-loka-gurum prabhum
bhratr-heti mrsa-drstis
tvad-bhakte mayi caghavan
tasmat pita me piyela
durantad dustarad aghat
piitas te ‘pariga-sarndrstas
tada krpana-vatsala
sri-prahradah uvaca—Prahlada Maharaja said; varam —benediction;
varaye—I pray; etat—this; te—from You; varada-isat—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who offers benedictions even to such exalted
demigods as Brahma and Siva; maha-tsvara—O my Supreme Lord;
yat—that; anindat—vilified; pita—father; me—my; tvam—You; avid-
van—without knowledge of; tejah—strength; aiSvaram—supremacy;


--- Page 307 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
viddha—being polluted; amarsa—with anger; dSayah—within the
heart; saksat—directly; sarva-loka-gurum—unto the supreme spiritual
master of all living beings; prabhum —unto the supreme master; bhratr-
ha—the killer of his brother; iti—thus; mrsa-drstih—falsely envious
because of a false conception; tvat-bhakte—unto Your devotee; mayi—
unto me; ca—and; agha-van —who committed heavily sinful activities;
tasmat—from that; pita—father; me—my; pilyeta—may be purified;
durantat—very great; dustarat—difficult to pass over; aghat—from all
sinful activities; pitah — (although he was) purified; te—of You;
apariga—Dby the glance over him; sarndrstah—being looked at; tada—at
that time; krpana-vatsala—O You who are merciful to the materialistic.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja said: O Supreme Lord, because You are so

merciful to the fallen souls, I ask You for only one benediction. I
know that my father, at the time of his death, had already been
purified by Your glance upon him, but because of his ignorance of
Your beautiful power and supremacy, he was unnecessarily angry
at You, falsely thinking that You were the killer of his brother.
Thus he directly blasphemed Your Lordship, the spiritual master
of all living beings, and committed heavily sinful activities
directed against me, Your devotee. I wish that he be excused for
these sinful activities.

PURPORT

Although HiranyakaSipu was purified as soon as he came in contact

with the Lord’s lap and the Lord saw him, Prahlada Maharaja still
wanted to hear from the Lord’s own mouth that his father had been
purified by the Lord’s causeless mercy. Prahlada Maharaja offered this
prayer to the Lord for the sake of his father. As a Vaisnava son, despite
all the inconveniences imposed upon him by his father, he could not
forget his father’s affection.

TEXT 18

श्रीभगवातुवाच

त्रिःसप्तभिः पिता पूतः पिठभिः सह तेऽनघ |
यत्‌ साधोऽस्य TS जातो मवान्वै FINE: ॥ १८॥


--- Page 308 ---
Text 19] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 303
$ri-bhagavan uvaca
trih-saptabhih pita pitah
pitrbhih saha te ’nagha
yat sadho ’sya kule jato
bhavan vai kula-pavanah
sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; trih-
saptabhih —seven multiplied by three (that is to say, twenty-one);
pita—father; patah—purified; pitrbhih—with your forefathers; saha —
all together; te—your; anagha—O most sinless personality (Prahlada
Maharaja); yat—because; sadho—O great saintly person; asya—of this
person; kule—in the dynasty; jatah—took birth; bhavan—you; vai—
indeed; kula-pavanah—the purifier of the whole dynasty.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahlada, O
most pure, O great saintly person, your father has been purified,
along with twenty-one forefathers in your family. Because you
were born in this family, the entire dynasty has been purified.
PURPORT
The word trih-saptabhih means seven multiplied by three. In one’s
family one can count back four or five generations—to one’s great-
grandfather or even one’s great-grandfather’s father —but since the
Lord mentions twenty-one forefathers, this indicates that the benediction
expands to other families also. Before the present family in which one
has taken birth, one must have been born in other families. Thus when a
Vaisnava takes birth in a family, by the grace of the Lord he purifies not
only that family but also the families of his previous births.
TEXT 19
यत्र यत्र च मद्भक्ताः प्रशान्ताः समदरििनः ।
साधवः समुदाचारास्ते पूयन्तेऽपि कीकटाः ॥१९॥
yatra yatra ca mad-bhaktah
prasantah sama-darsinah


--- Page 309 ---
304 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
sadhavah samudacaras
te piyante (ण kikatah
yatra yatra—wherever and whenever; ca—also; mat-bhaktah—My
devotees; prasantah—extremely peaceful; sama-darsinah—equipoised;
sadhavah—decorated with all good qualities; samudacarah—equally
magnanimous; te—all of them; piiyante—are purified; api—even;
kikatah—a degraded country or the inhabitants of such a place.
TRANSLATION
Whenever and wherever there are peaceful, equipoised devotees
who are well behaved and decorated with all good qualities, that
place and the dynasties there, even if condemned, are purified.
PURPORT
Wherever exalted devotees stay, not only they and their dynasties but
the entire country is purified.
TEXT 20
सर्वात्मना न हिंसन्ति भूतग्रामेषु किञ्चन ।
EN
उच्चावचेषु FAR मद्धावविगतस्प्ाः ॥२०॥
sarvatmand na hirmsanti
bhiita-gramesu kincana
uccavacesu daityendra
mad-bhava-vigata-sprhah
sarva-atmand—in all respects, even in the modes of anger and
jealousy; na—never; hirisanti—they are envious; bhiita-gramesu—
among all species of life; kificana—toward any one of them; ucca-
avacesu—the lower and higher living entities; daitya-indra—0O my dear
Prahlada, King of the Daityas; mat-bhava—because of devotional ser-
vice unto Me; vigata—given up; sprhah—all material modes of anger
and greed.


--- Page 310 ---
Text 21] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 305
TRANSLATION
My dear Prahlada, King of the Daityas, because of being attached
to devotional service to Me, My devotee does not distinguish be-
tween lower and higher living entities. In all respects, he is never
jealous of anyone.
TEXT 21
-
मवन्ति पुरुषा रोके मद्धक्तास्त्वामनुव्रताः |
+ স্ব
भवान्मे खलु भक्तानां सर्वेषां प्रतिरूपधरक्‌ 1:20
bhavanti purusa loke
mad-bhaktas tvam anuvratah
bhavan me khalu bhaktanar
sarvesarn pratiripa-dhrk
bhavanti—become; purusadh—persons; loke—in this world; mat-
bhaktah—My pure devotees; tvam —you; anuvratah—following in your
footsteps; bhavan—you; me—My; khalu—indeed; bhaktanam—of all
devotees; sarvesam—in different mellows; pratiripa-dhrk—tangible
example.
TRANSLATION
Those who follow your example will naturally become My pure
devotees. You are the best example of My devotee, and others
should follow in your footsteps.
PURPORT
In this connection, Srila Madhvacirya quotes a verse from the Skanda
Purana:
rte tu tattvikan devan
naradadirns tathaiva ca
prahradad uttamah ko nu
visnu-bhaktau jagat-traye


--- Page 311 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
There are many, many devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and they have been enumerated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (6.3.20) as
follows:
svayambhiir naradah sambhuh
kumarah kapilo manuh
prahlado janako bhismo
balir vaiyasakir vayam
Of the twelve authorized devotees— Lord Brahma, Narada, Lord Siva,
Kapila, Manu and so on — Prahlada Maharaja is understood to be the best
example.
TEXT 22
+ ५५
रु त्वं प्ेतछृत्यानि पितुः पूतस्य सवशः |
मदङ्गस्पश्नेनाङ्ग लोकान्यास्यति सुप्रजाः ॥२२॥
kuru tvarh preta-krtyani
pituh patasya sarvasah
mad-anga-sparsanenanga
lokan yasyati suprajah
kuru—perform; tvam—you; preta-krtyani—the ritualistic ceremony
performed after death; pituh—of your father; pitasya—already
purified; sarvasah—in all respects; mat-ariga—My body; sparsanena—
by touching; ariga—My dear child; lokar—to planets; yasyati—he will
be elevated; su-prajah—to become a devotee-citizen.
TRANSLATION
My dear child, your father has already been purified just by the
touch of My body at the time of his death. Nonetheless, the duty of
a son is to perform the $raddha ritualistic ceremony after his
father’s death so that his father may be promoted to a planetary
system where he may become a good citizen and devotee.
PURPORT
In this regard, Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that although
Hiranyakaéipu was already purified, he had to take birth on a higher


--- Page 312 ---
Text 23] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 307
planetary system to become a devotee again. Prahlada Maharaja was ad-
vised to perform the ritualistic ceremony as a matter of etiquette, for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead under no circumstances wants to stop
the regulative principles. Madhva Muni also instructs:
madhu-kaitabhau bhakty-abhava
dirau bhagavato mrtau
tama eva kramad aptau
bhaktya ced yo 10778 yayau
When the demons Madhu and Kaitabha were killed by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, their kinsmen also observed the ritualistic
ceremonies so that these demons could return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 23
fied च स्थानमातिष्ठ यथोक्तं ब्रह्मवादिभिः |
मय्यावेश्य मनस्तात कुरु कर्माणि मत्परः ॥२२॥
pitryar ca sthanam atistha
yathoktari brahmavadibhih
mayy avesSya manas tata
kuru karmani mat-parah

pitryam—paternal; ca—also; sthanam—place, throne; atistha—sit
upon; yatha-uktam—as described; brahmavadibhih—by the followers
of Vedic civilization; mayi—unto Me; aveSya—being fully absorbed;
manah—the mind; tata—My dear boy; kuru—just execute; karmani—
the regulative duties; mat-parah—just for the sake of My work.

TRANSLATION

After performing the ritualistic ceremonies, take charge of your
father’s kingdom. Sit upon the throne and do not be disturbed by
materialistic activities. Please keep your mind fixed upon Me.
Without transgressing the injunctions of the Vedas, as a matter of
formality you may perform your particular duties.


--- Page 313 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
PURPORT

When one becomes a devotee, he no longer has any duty to the Vedic
regulative principles. One has many duties to perform, but if one be-
comes fully devoted to the Lord, he no longer has any such obligations.
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.41):

devarsi-bhiitapta-nrnam pitFnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajan
sarvatmanad yah Saranari Saranyam
gato mukundarm parihrtya kartam
One who has fully surrendered to the lotus feet of the Lord is no longer a
debtor to his forefathers, the great sages, human society, the common
man or any living entity.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead nonetheless advised Prahlada
Maharaja to follow the regulative principles, for since he was going to be
the king, others would follow his example. Thus Lord Nrsimmhadeva ad-
vised Prahlada Maharaja to engage in his political duties so that people
would become the Lord’s devotees.

yad yad acarati Sresthas
tat tad evetaro janah
sa yat pramanari kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
“Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow. And
whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues.”
(Bg. 3.21) One should not be attached to any materialistic activities, but
a devotee may perform such activities as an example to show the common
man that one should not deviate from the Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 24
श्रीनारद उवाच
- ©
प्रहादोऽपि तथा चक्रे पितुयेत्साम्परायिकमर्‌ |
यथाह मगवान्‌ राजनमिपिक्तो द्विजातिभिः ॥२४॥


--- Page 314 ---
Text 25] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 309
sri-narada uvaca
prahrado ‘pi tatha cakre
pitur yat samparayikam
yathaha bhagavan rajann
abhisikto dvijatibhih
Sri-naradah uvaca—Narada Muni said; prahradah—Prahlada
Maharaja; api—also; tatha—in that way; cakre—executed; pituh—of
his father; yat— whatever; samparayikam—ritualistic ceremonies per-
formed after death; yatha—even as; aha—order; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; rajan—O King Yudhisthira;
abhisiktah—he was enthroned in the kingdom; dvi-jatibhih—by the
brahmanas present.
TRANSLATION
Sri Narada Muni continued: Thus, as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead ordered, Prahlada Maharaja performed the ritualistic
ceremonies for his father. O King Yudhisthira, he was then en-
throned in the kingdom of HiranyakaSipu, as directed by the
brahmanas.
PURPORT
It is essential that society be divided into four groups of men—
brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaiSyas and Sidras. Here we see that although
Prahlada was perfect in every respect, he nonetheless followed the in-
structions of the brahmanas who performed the Vedic rituals. Therefore
in society there must be a very intelligent class of leaders who are well
versed in the Vedic knowledge so that they can guide the entire populace
to follow the Vedic principles and thus gradually become most perfect
and eligible to return home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 25
श्रसादसुमुखं TH ब्रह्मा नरहरिं हरिम्‌ |
५
स्तुत्वा वाग्भिः पवित्राभिः प्राह देवादिभिब्रेतः॥ २५
prasada-sumukham drstva
brahma naraharim harim


--- Page 315 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
stutva vagbhih pavitrabhih
praha devadibhir vrtah
prasada-sumukham —whose face was bright because the Supreme
Lord was pleased; drstvd—seeing this situation; brahma—Lord Brahma
nara-harim —unto Lord Nrsimhadeva; harim —the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; stutva—offering prayers; wvagbhih—by transcendental
words; pavitrabhih —without any material contamination; praha—ad-
dressed (the Lord); deva-adibhih—by other demigods; vrtah—sur-
rounded.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, surrounded by the other demigods, was bright-
faced because the Lord was pleased. Thus he offered prayers to the
Lord with transcendental words.
TEXT 26
श्रीबह्मोवाच
¢
देबदेवाखिलाच्यक्ष भूतमावन पूज |
-
दिष्टया ते निहतः पापो लोकसन्तापनोऽसुरः REN
sri-brahmovaca
deva-devakhiladhyaksa
bhita-bhavana piurvaja
distya te nihatah papo
loka-santapano ‘surah
sri-brahma uvaca—Lord Brahma said; deva-deva—O my Lord, Lord
of all the demigods; akhila-adhyaksa—owner of the whole universe;
bhiita-bhavana—O cause of all living entities; pirva-ja—O original
Personality of Godhead; distya—by Your example or because of our good
fortune; te—by You; nihatah—killed; papah—most sinful; loka-
santapanah—giving trouble to the entire universe; asurah—the demon
Hiranyaka$ipu.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: O Supreme Lord of all lords, proprietor of
the entire universe, O benedictor of all living entities, O original


--- Page 316 ---
Text 28] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 311
person [adi-purusa], because of our good fortune You have now
killed this sinful demon, who was giving trouble to the entire uni-
verse.
PURPORT
The word pirvaja is described in Bhagavad-gita (10.8): aha sar-
vasya prabhavo mattah sarvarii pravartate. All the demigods, including
Lord Brahma, are manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore the original person, the cause of all causes, is Govinda, the
adi-purusam.
TEXT 27
योऽसौ लन्धवरो मत्तो न वण्यो मम greta: |
तपोयोगबलोन्नद्धः समस्तनिगमानहन्‌ ।२५७॥
yo ‘sau labdha-varo matto
na vadhyo mama srstibhih
tapo-yoga-balonnaddhah
samasta-nigaman ahan
yah—the person who; asau—he (Hiranyakasipu); labdha-varah—
being given the extraordinary benediction; mattah—from me; na
vadhyah—not to be killed; mama srstibhih —by any living being created
by me; tapah-yoga-bala—by austerity, mystic power and strength;
unnaddhah—thus being very proud; samasta—all; nigaman— Vedic in-
junctions; ahan—disregarded, transgressed.
TRANSLATION
This demon, Hiranyaka$ipu, received from me the benediction
that he would not be killed by any living being within my creation.
With this assurance and with strength derived from austerities and
mystic power, he became excessively proud and transgressed all
the Vedic injunctions.
TEXT 28
Rem तत्तनयः साधुर्महामागवतोऽर्भकः ।
त्वया श्रिमोचितो गृत्योर्दिं्टया त्वां समितोऽधुना ॥२८॥


--- Page 317 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
distya tat-tanayah sadhur
maha-bhagavato 'rbhakah
tvayd vimocito mrtyor
distya tvari samito 'dhuna
distya—by fortune; tat-tanayah—his son; sadhuh—who is a great
saintly person; maha-bhagavatah—a great and exalted devotee;
arbhakah—although a child; tvaya—by Your Lordship; vimocitah—
released; mrtyoh—from the clutches of death; distya—also by great for-
tune; tvam samitah—perfectly under Your shelter; adhuna —now.
TRANSLATION
By great fortune, HiranyakaSipu’s son Prahlada Maharaja has
now been released from death, for although he is a child, he is an
exalted devotee. Now he is fully under the protection of Your lotus
feet.
TEXT 29
एतद्‌ वपुस्ते मगवन्ध्यायतः परमात्मनः |
सवतो गोपत संत्रासान्परर्योरपि जिघांसतः ॥२९॥
etad vapus te bhagavan
dhyayatah paramatmanah
sarvato goptr santrasan
mrtyor api jighamsatah
etat—this; vapuh—body; te—Your; bhagavan—O Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; dhyayatah—those who meditate upon; parama-
atmanah—of the Supreme Person; sarvatah—from everywhere;
goptr—the protector; santrasat—from all kinds of fear; mrtyoh api—
even from fear of death; jighamsatah —if one is envied by an enemy.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are the
Supreme Soul. If one meditates upon Your transcendental body,


--- Page 318 ---
Text 30] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 313
You naturally protect him from all sources of fear, even the immi-
nent danger of death.
PURPORT
Everyone is sure to die, for no one is excused from the hands of death,
which is but a feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (mrtyuh
sarva-haras caham). When one becomes a devotee, however, he is not
destined to die according to a limited duration of life. Everyone has a
limited duration of life, but a devotee’s lifetime can be extended by the
mercy of the Supreme Lord, who is able to nullify the results of one’s
karma. Karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajarn. This is the statement
of Brahma-samhita (5.54). A devotee is not under the laws of karma.
Therefore even a devotee’s scheduled death can be avoided by the cause-
less mercy of the Supreme Lord. God protects the devotee even from the
extreme danger of death.
TEXT 30
LICE (GC
मैवं विभोऽसुराणां ते प्रदेयः पद्मसम्मव ।
वरः क्रूरनिसर्गाणामहीनामग्तं यथा ॥३०॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca
maivam vibho ’suranam te
pradeyah padma-sambhava
varah krira-nisarganam
ahinam amrtam yatha
$ri-bhagavan uvica—the Supreme Personality of Godhead replied (to
Brahma); ma—do not; evam—thus; vibho—O great person;
asurandm—unto the demons; te—by you; pradeyah —bestow benedic-
tions; padma-sambhava—O Lord Brahma, born from the lotus flower;
varah—benediction; krira-nisarganam—persons who are by nature
very cruel and jealous; ahinam—to snakes; amrtam—nectar or milk;
yatha—just as.


--- Page 319 ---
314 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead replied: My dear Lord Brahma, O
great lord born from the lotus flower, just as it is dangerous to
feed milk to a snake, so it is dangerous to give benedictions to
demons, who are by nature ferocious and jealous. I warn you not
to give such benedictions to any demon again.
TEXT 31
श्रीनारद उवाच
न =
इत्युक्त्वा भगवान्राजंस्ततश्वान्तदधे हरिः |
©. ও
FTA: WEAR पूजितः परमेष्ठिना ॥३१॥
sri-narada uvaca
ity uktva bhagavan rajars
tatas cantardadhe harih
adrsyah sarva-bhitanarm
pujitah paramesthina
Sri-naradah uvaca—Narada Muni said; iti uktva—saying this;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rajan—O King
Yudhisthira; tatah—from that place; ca—also; antardadhe—disap-
peared; harih—the Lord; adrSyah—without being visible; sarva-
bhatanam—by all kinds of living entities; pujitah—being worshiped;
paramesthina—by Lord Brahma.
TRANSLATION
Narada Muni continued: O King Yudhisthira, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is not visible to an ordinary human
being, spoke in this way, instructing Lord Brahma. Then, being
worshiped by Brahma, the Lord disappeared from that place.
TEXT 32
ततः सम्पूज्य शिरसा JAR परमेष्ठिनम्‌ |
| मवं प्रजापतीन्देवान्प्रहादो मगवत्कलाः ॥२२॥


--- Page 320 ---
Text 33] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 315
tatah sampijya Sirasa
vavande paramesthinam
bhavarn prajapatin devan
prahrado bhagavat-kalah
tatah—thereafter; sampiijya—worshiping; Sirasa—by bowing the
head; vavande —offered prayers; paramesthinam—to Lord Brahma;
bhavam—to Lord Siva; prajapatin—to the great demigods entrusted
with increasing the population; devan—to all the great demigods;
prahradah—Prahlada Maharaja; bhagavat-kalah—influential parts of
the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja then worshiped and offered prayers to all the
demigods, such as Brahma, Siva and the prajapatis, who are all
parts of the Lord.
TEXT 33
ङ
ततः काव्यादिभिः साधे मुनिभिः কমন্তান্তনঃ।
दैत्यानां दानवानां च प्रहादमकरोत्‌ पतिम्‌॥३३॥
tatah kavyadibhih sardhar
munibhih kamalasanah
daityanar danavanar ca
prahradam akarot patim
tatah—thereafter; kavya-adibhih—with Sukracarya and others;
sardham—and with; munibhih—great saintly persons; kamala-
asanah—Lord Brahma; daityanam—of all the demons; danavanam—
of all the giants; ca—and; prahradam—Prahlada Maharaja; akarot—
created; patim—the master or king.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, along with Sukracarya and other great saints, Lord
Brahma, whose seat is on the lotus flower, made Prahlada the king
of all the demons and giants in the universe.


--- Page 321 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
PURPORT
By the grace of Lord Nrsimmhadeva, Prahlada Maharaja became a
greater king than his father, Hiranyaka$ipu. Prahlada’s inauguration
was performed by Lord Brahma in the presence of other saintly persons
and demigods.
TEXT 34
भ्रतिनन्य ततो देवाः प्रयुज्य परमाश्चिषः ।
खधामानि ययु राजन््ह्मायाः प्रतिपूजिताः 13210
pratinandya tato devih
prayujya paramasisah
sva-dhamani yayu rajan
brahmadyah pratipujitah
pratinandya—congratulating; tatah—thereafter; devah—all the
demigods; prayujya—having offered; parama-asisah—exalted benedic-
tions; sva-dhamani—to their respective abodes; yayuh—returned;
rajan—O King Yudhisthira; brahma-adyah—all the demigods, headed
by Lord Brahma; pratipgjitah—being thoroughly worshiped (by
Prahlada Maharaja).
TRANSLATION
O King Yudhisthira, after all the demigods, headed by Lord
Brahma, were properly worshiped by Prahlada Maharaja, they
offered Prahlada their utmost benedictions and then returned to
their respective abodes.
TEXT 35
एवं च पार्षदौ विष्णोः पुत्रत्वं प्रापितौ दितेः |
ky
हृदि स्थितेन हरिणा वैरभावेन तौ हतौ ।२३५॥
evar ca parsadau visnoh
putratvar prapitau diteh
hrdi sthitena harina
vaira-bhavena tau hatau


--- Page 322 ---
Text 36] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 317

evam—in this way; ca—also; parsadau—the two personal associates;
visnoh—of Lord Visnu; putratvam—becoming the sons; prapitau—hav-
ing gotten; diteh—of Diti; hArdi—within the core of the heart; sthitena—
being situated; harina —by the Supreme Lord; vaira-bhavena—by con-
ceiving as an enemy; tau—both of them; hatau—were killed.

TRANSLATION

Thus the two associates of Lord Visnu who had become
Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu, the sons of Diti, were both killed.
By illusion they had thought that the Supreme Lord, who is situ-
ated in everyone’s heart, was their enemy.

PURPORT

The discourse concerning Lord Nrsimhhadeva and Prahlada Maharaja
began when Maharaja Yudhisthira asked Narada how Siéupala had
merged into the body of Krsna. SiSupila and Dantavakra were the same
Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu. Here Narada Muni is relating how in
three different births the associates of Lord Visnu were killed by Lord
Visnu Himself. First they were the demons Hiranyaksa and
Hiranyakasipu.

TEXT 36
पुनश्च विप्रशापेन राक्षसौ तौ बभूवतुः ।
EY
इम्मकर्णदशग्रीवौ हतौ तौ रामविक्रमैः ॥३६॥
punas ca vipra-sapena
raksasau tau babhiivatuh
kumbhakarna-dasa-grivau
hatau tau rama-vikramaih

punah—again; ca—also; vipra-Sapena—being cursed by the
brahmanas; raksasau—the two Riksasas; tau—both of them;
babhitvatuh—incarnated as; kumbhakarna-dasa-grivau—known 35
Kumbhakarna and the ten-headed Ravana (in their next birth); hatau—
they also were killed; tau—both of them; rama-vikramaih—by the ex-
traordinary strength of Lord Ramacandra.


--- Page 323 ---
318 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
TRANSLATION
Being cursed by the brahmanas, the same two associates took
birth again as Kumbhakarna and the ten-headed Ravana. These
two Raksasas were killed by Lord Ramacandra’s extraordinary
power.
TEXT 37
EN
श्षयानौ युधि निर्भिनददयौ रामशायकैः |
fat जहतुदेह यथा प्राक्तनजन्मनि ।२७॥
Sayanau yudhi nirbhinna-
hrdayau rama-sayakaih
tac-cittau jahatur dehar
yatha praktana-janmani
Sayanau—being laid down; yudhi—on the battlefield; nirbhinna—
being pierced; hrdayau—in the core of the heart; rama-sayakaih—by
the arrows of Lord Rimacandra; tat-cittau—thinking or being conscious
of Lord Ramacandra; jahatuh—gave up; deham—body; yatha—even
as; praktana-janmani—in their previous births.
TRANSLATION
Pierced by the arrows of Lord Ramacandra, both Kumbhakarna
and Ravana lay on the ground and left their bodies, fully absorbed
in thought of the Lord, just as they had in their previous births as
Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu.
TEXT 38
ताविहाथ पुनर्जातौ शिश्युपारकरूषजौ |
हरौ वैरायुबन्धेन पर्यतस्ते समीयतुः 13a
tav ihatha punar jatau
Sisupdala-karisa-jau
harau vairanubandhena
pasyatas te samiyatuh


--- Page 324 ---
Text 39] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 319
tau—both of them; iha—in this human society; atha—in this way;
punah—again; jatau—took their births; Sisupala—SiSupila; kanisa-
jau—Dantavakra; harau—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
vaira-anubandhena —by the bondage of considering the Lord an enemy;
posyatah—were looking on; te—while you; samiyatuh—merged or
went into the lotus feet of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
They both took birth again in human society as Sisupala and
Dantavakra and continued in the same enmity toward the Lord. It
is they who merged into the body of the Lord in your presence.
PURPORT
Vairanubandhena. Acting like the Lord’s enemy is also beneficial for
the living entity. Kamad dvesad bhayat snehad. Whether in lusty desire,
anger, fear or envy of the Lord, somehow or other, as recommended by
Srila Ripa Gosvami (tasmat kenapy upayena), one should become at-
tached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and ultimately achieve the
goal of returning home, back to Godhead. What, then, is to be said of one
who is related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead as a servant,
friend, father, mother or conjugal lover?
TEXT 39
९ LY
एनः IEF यत्‌ तद्‌ राजानः कृष्णवैरिणः |
जहृस्तेऽन्ते तदात्मानः कीटः पेशस्कृतो यथा ॥२९॥
enah [च्व - (काः yat tad
rajanah krsna-vairinah
Jahus te ’nte tad-atmanah
kitah pesaskrto yatha
enah—this sinful activity (of blaspheming the Supreme Lord); piarva-
krtam —executed in previous births; yat—which; tat—that; rajanah—
kings; krsna-vairinah—always acting as enemies of Krsna; jahuh—gave
up; te—all of them; ante—at the time of death; tat-atmanah—attaining


--- Page 325 ---
320 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
the same spiritual body and form; kitah—a worm; pesaskrtah—(cap-
tured by) a black drone; yatha—just like.
TRANSLATION

Not only Sisupala and Dantavakra but also many, many other
kings who acted as enemies of Krsna attained salvation at the time
of death. Because they thought of the Lord, they received spiritual
bodies and forms the same as His, just as worms captured by a
black drone obtain the same type of body as the drone.

PURPORT

The mystery of yogic meditation is explained here. Real yogis always
meditate on the form of Visnu within their hearts. Consequently, at the
time of death they give up their bodies while thinking of the form of
Visnu and thus attain Visnuloka, Vaikunthaloka, where they receive
bodily features the same as those of the Lord. From the Sixth Canto we
have already learned that when the Visnudiitas came from Vaikuntha to
deliver Ajamila, they looked exactly like Visnu, with four hands and the
same features as Visnu. Therefore, we may conclude that if one practices
thinking of Visnu and is fully absorbed in thinking of Him at the time of
death, one returns home, back to Godhead. Even enemies of Krsna who
thought of Krsna in fear (bhaya), such as King 49158, received bodies
in a spiritual identity similar to that of the Lord.

TEXT 40
यथा यथा AEA AFD परमयाभिदा |
INANE: साम्यं दरेस्तचिन्तया ययुः ॥४०॥
yatha yatha bhagavato
bhaktya paramayabhida
nrpas caidyadayah satmyari
hares tac-cintaya yayuh

yatha yatha—just as; bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; bhaktya—by devotional service; paramaya—supreme;
abhida—incessantly thinking of such activities; nrpah—kings; caidya-


--- Page 326 ---
Text 40] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 321
adayah—Sisupala, Dantavakra and others; satmyam—the same form;
hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-cintaya—by con-
stantly thinking of Him; yayuh—returned home, back to Godhead.
TRANSLATION

By devotional service, pure devotees who incessantly think of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead receive bodies similar to His.
This is known as sarapya-mukti. Although Sisupala, Dantavakra
and other kings thought of Krsna as an enemy, they also achieved
the same result.

PURPORT

In Caitarnya-caritamrta, in connection with Lord Caitanya’s instruc-
tions to ৩৪113103118 Gosvamli, it is explained that a devotee should exter-
nally execute his routine devotional service in a regular way but should
always inwardly think of the particular mellow in which he is attracted to
the service of the Lord. This constant thought of the Lord makes the de-
votee eligible to return home, back to Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-
gita (4.9), tyaktva dehari punar janma naiti mam eti: after giving up his
body, a devotee does not again receive a material body, but goes back to
Godhead and receives a spiritual body resembling those of the Lord’s
eternal associates whose activities he followed. However the devotee likes
to serve the Lord, he may constantly think of the Lord’s associates—the
cowherd boys, the gopis, the Lord’s father and mother, His servants and
the trees, land, animals, plants and water in the Lord’s abode. Because of
constantly thinking of these features, one acquires a transcendental posi-
tion. Kings like Sisupala, Dantavakra, Karsa, Paundraka, Narakasura
and Salva were all similarly delivered. This is confirmed by
Madhvacarya:

paundrake narake caiva
salve karise ca rukmini
avistas tu harer bhaktas
tad-bhaktya harim apire

Paundraka, Narakasura, Silva and Karnsa were all inimical toward the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but because all these kings constantly
thought of Him, they achieved the same liberation — saripya-mukti. The


--- Page 327 ---
322 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
jAana-bhakta, the devotee who follows the path of jaana, also attains the
same destination. If even the enemies of the Lord achieve salvation by
constantly thinking about the Lord, what is to be said of pure devotees
who always engage in the Lord’s service and who think of nothing but
the Lord in every activity ?
TEXT 41
০ ₹ +_ +
आरूयातं स्॑मेतत ते यन्मां त्वं परिपृष्टवान्‌ |
द्मपोषसुतादी्यां हरेः सात्म्यमपि द्विषाम्‌ ।॥७१।।
20/10/2८८7 sarvam etat te
yan mam (00778 pariprstavan
damaghosa-sutadinari
hareh satmyam api dvisam
akhyatam—described; sarvam—everything; etat—this; te—unto
you; yat—whatever; mam—unto me; tvam—you; pariprstavan—in-
quired; damaghosa-suta-adinam—of the son of Damaghosa (Si$upala)
and others; hareh—of the Lord; satmyam—equal bodily features; api —
even; dvisdm—although they were inimical.
TRANSLATION
Everything you asked me about how Siupila and others at-
tained salvation although they were inimical has now been ex-
plained to you by me.
TEXT 42
एषा ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्य कृष्णस्य च महात्मनः |
2
अवतारकथा पुण्या वथो यत्रादिदैत्ययोः ॥४२॥
esa brahmanya-devasya
krsnasya ca mahatmanah
avatara-katha punya
vadho yatradi-daityayoh
esa—all this; brahmanya-devasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is worshiped by all brahmanas; krsnasya—of Krsna, the


--- Page 328 ---
Text 42] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 323
original Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca—also; maha-atmanah—
the Supersoul; awvatdra-katha—narrations about His incarnations;
punya—pious, purifying; vadhah—Xkilling; yatra—wherein; adi—in
the beginning of the millennium; daityayoh—of the demons
(Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu).
TRANSLATION

In this narration about Krsna, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, various expansions or incarnations of the Lord have been
described, and the killing of the two demons Hiranyaksa and
Hiranyakasipu has also been described.

PURPORT

Avataras, or incarnations, are expansions of the Supreme Personality

of Godhead —Krsna, Govinda.
advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam
৫0907 purana-purusarit nava-yauvanarit ca
vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau
govindam adi-purusari tam aharin bhajami

“I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is the
original person—nondual, infallible, and without beginning. Although
He expands into unlimited forms, He is still the original, and although
He is the oldest person, He always appears as a fresh youth. Such eternal,
blissful and all-knowing forms of the Lord cannot be understood by the
academic wisdom of the Vedas, but they are always manifest to pure,
unalloyed devotees.” (Brahma-samhita 5.33) The Brahma-sambhita de-
scribes the avataras. Indeed, all the avataras are described in the
authentic scriptures. No one can become an avatdra, or incarnation, al-
though this has become fashionable in the age of Kali. The avataras are
described in the authentic scriptures (s@stras), and therefore before one
risks accepting a pretender as an avatara, one should refer to the sastras.
The $astras say everywhere that Krsna is the original Personality of God-
head and that He has innumerable avatdras, or incarnations. Elsewhere
in the Brahma-samhita it is said, ramadi-mirtisu kala-niyamena


--- Page 329 ---
324 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
tisthan: Rama, Nrsimha, Varaha and many others are consecutive expan-
sions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After Krsna comes
Balarama, after Balarama 15 Sainkarsana, then Aniruddha, Pradyumna,
Narayana and then the purusa-avataras—Maha-Visnu, Garbhodakasayi
Visnu and Ksirodakasayi Visnu. All of them are avataras.

One must hear about the avataras. Narrations about such avataras are
called avatara-katha, the narrations of Krsna’s expansions. Hearing and
chanting these narrations is completely pious. Srnvatam sva-kathah
krsnah punya-sravana-kirtanah. One who hears and chants can become
punya, purified of material contamination.

Whenever there are references to the avataras, religious principles are
established, and demons who are against Krsna are killed. The Krsna
consciousness movement is spreading all over the world with two aims—
to establish Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and to kill all
the pretenders who falsely present themselves as avataras. The
preachers of the Krsna consciousness movement must carry this convic-
tion very carefully within their hearts and kill the demons who in many
tactful ways vilify the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. If we
take shelter of Nrsirnhadeva and Prahlada Maharaja, it will be easier to
kill the demons who are against Krsna and to thus reestablish Krsna’s
supremacy. Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam: Krsna is the Supreme Lord, the
original Lord. Prahlada Maharaja is our guru, and Krsna is our worshipa-
ble God. As advised by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, guru-krsna-prasade
paya bhakti-lata-bija. If we can be successful in getting the mercy of
Prahlada Maharaja and also that of Nrsimhadeva, then our Krsna con-
sciousness movement will be extremely successful.

The demon Hiranyakasipu had so many ways to try to become God
himself, but although Prahlada Maharaja was chastised and threatened
in many ways, he rigidly refused to accept his powerful demoniac father
as God. Following in the footsteps of Prahlada Maharaja, we should reject
all the rascals who pretend to be God. We must accept Krsna and His in-
carnations, and no one else.

TEXTS 43-44
प्रहादस्यालु चरितं महामागवतस्य, च |
मक्तिर्ानं विरक्तिश्च याथाथ्यं चास्य वै हरेः ॥४२॥


--- Page 330 ---
Text 44] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 325
€ ©
सगंस्थिस्यप्ययेशचसख  गुणकर्मायुबणनम्‌ |
परावरेषां स्थानानां FSA व्यत्ययो महान्‌ ।॥४४॥
prahradasyanucaritarn
maha-bhagavatasya ca
bhaktir jaanarh viraktis ca
yatharthyam casya vai hareh
sarga-sthity-apyayesasya
guna-karmanuvarnanam
paravaresarm sthananarn
kalena vyatyayo mahan
prahradasya—of Prahlada Maharaja; anucaritam —characteristics
(understood by reading or describing his activities); maha-
bhagavatasya—of the great and exalted devotee; ca—also; bhaktih—
devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jaganam—
complete knowledge of the Transcendence (Brahman, Paramatma and
Bhagavin); viraktih—renunciation of material existence; ca—also;
yatharthyam—just to understand each of them perfectly; ca—and;
asya—of this; vai—indeed; hareh —always in reference to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; sarga—of creation; sthiti—maintenance;
apyaya—and annihilation; iSasya—of the master (the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead); guna—of the transcendental qualities and opu-
lences; karma —and activities; anuvarnanam—description within the
disciplic succession;* para-avaresam—of different types of living en-
tities known as demigods and demons; sthananam—of the various
planets or places to live; kdlena—in due course of time; vyatyayah—the
annihilation of everything; mahan—although very great.
TRANSLATION
This narration describes the characteristics of the great and ex-
alted devotee Prahlada Maharaja, his staunch devotional service,
*The word anu means ‘‘after.” Authorized persons do not create anything:
rather, they follow the previous acaryas.


--- Page 331 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
his perfect knowledge, and his perfect detachment from material
contamination. It also describes the Supreme Personality of God-
head as the cause of creation, maintenance and annihilation.
Prahlada Maharaja, in his prayers, has described the transcenden-
tal qualities of the Lord and has also described how the various
abodes of the demigods and demons, regardless of how materially
opulent, are destroyed by the mere direction of the Lord.
PURPORT

Srimad-Bhagavatam is filled with descriptions of the characteristics of
various devotees, with reference to the service of the Lord. This Vedic
literature is called Bhagavatam because it deals with the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and His devotee. By studying Srimad-Bhagavatam
under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master, one can perfectly
understand the science of Krsna, the nature of the material and spiritual
worlds, and the aim of life. Srimad-Bhagavatam amalar puranam.
Srimad-Bhagavatam is the spotless Vedic literature, as we have dis-
cussed in the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Therefore, simply by
understanding Srimad-Bhagavatam, one can understand the science of
the activities of the devotees, the activities of the demons, the permanent
abode and the temporary abode. Through Srimad-Bhagavatam, every-
thing is perfectly known.

TEXT 45
धर्मों भागवतानां च भगवान्येन गम्यते ।
आखूयानेऽसिन्समान्नातमाघ्यात्मिकमरोषतः।।४५।।
dharmo bhagavatanam ca
bhagavan yena gamyate
akhyane ’smin samamndtam
adhyatmikam asesatah

dharmah—religious principles; bhagavatanam—of the devotees;
ca—and; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yena—by
which; gamyate—one can understand; akhyane—in the narration;


--- Page 332 ---
Text 46] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 327
asmin—this; samamnatam—is perfectly described; adhyatmikam—
transcendence; asesatah —without reservations.
TRANSLATION
The principles of religion by which one can actually understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead are called bhagavata-dharma.
In this narration, therefore, which deals with these principles, ac-
tual transcendence is properly described.
PURPORT
Through the principles of religion, one can understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Brahman (the impersonal feature of the
Supreme Lord) and Paramatma (the localized aspect of the Lord). When
one is well conversant with all these principles, he becomes a devotee and
performs bhagavata-dharma. Prahlada Maharaja, the spiritual master in
the line of disciplic succession, advised that this bhagavata-dharma be
instructed to students from the very beginning of their education
(kaumara dacaret prajiio dharman bhagavatan tha). To understand the
science of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the real purpose of
education. Sravanar kirtanar visnoh. One must simply hear about and
describe Lord Visnu and His various incarnations. This narration con-
cerning Prahlada Maharaja and Lord Nrsirnhadeva, therefore, has prop-
erly described spiritual, transcendental subjects.
TEXT 46
य एतत्‌ पुण्यमाख्यानं विष्णोर्वर्योपकृंहितम्‌ |
कीतयेच्रद्धया श्रुत्वा FRAG ४६
> ya etat punyam akhyanarm
visnor viryopabrrhitam
kirtayec chraddhaya srutva
karma-pasair vimucyate
yah—anyone who; etat—this; punyam—pious; akhyanam—narra-
tion; wvisnoh—of Lord Visnu; virya—the supreme power;


--- Page 333 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 7, Ch. 10
upabrmhitam —in which is described; kirtayet—chants or repeats;
sraddhaya—with great faith; srutva—after properly hearing (from the
right source); karma-pasaih—from the bondage of fruitive activities;
vimucyate —becomes liberated.
TRANSLATION
One who hears and chants this narration about the omnipotence
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, is certainly liber-
ated from material bondage without fail.
TEXT 47
एतद्‌ य आदिपुरुषस्य मगेन्द्रलीखां
„ देत्येन्द्रयूयपवधं प्रयतः पटेत ।
दत्यात्मजस्य च सतां प्रदरस्य पुण्यं
शुत्वाजुभावमकुतोमयमेति लोकम्‌ 11291)
etad ya adi-purusasya mrgendra-lilarm
daityendra-yitha-pa-vadharh prayatah patheta
daityatmajasya ca 50৫77 pravarasya [01807 077
Srutvanubhavam akuto-bhayam eti lokam
etat—this narration; yah—anyone who; adi-purusasya—of the
original Personality of Godhead; mrga-indra-lilam —pastimes as a lion
and human being combined; daitya-indra—of the King of the demons;
yiuitha-pa—as strong as an elephant; vadham —the killing; prayatah—
with great attention; patheta—reads; daitya-atma-jasya—of Prahlada
Maharaja, the son of the demon; ca—also; satam—among elevated de-
votees; pravarasya—the best; punyam—pious; S$rutva—hearing;
anubhavam—the activities; akutah-bhayam —where there is no fear
anywhere or at any time; eti—reaches; lokam —the spiritual world.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja was the best among exalted devotees. Anyone
who with great attention hears this narration concerning the ac-
tivities of Prahlada Maharaja, the killing of Hiranyakasipu, and the


--- Page 334 ---
Text 47] Prahlada, the Best Among Exalted Devotees 329
activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nrsirnhadeva,
surely reaches the spiritual world, where there is no anxiety.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Seventh Canto, Tenth
Chapter, First Part, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Prahlada, the
Best Among Exalted Devotees.”
CONTINUED IN THE NEXT VOLUME


--- Page 335 ---
Appendixes


--- Page 336 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent devotional scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutes), liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila Prabhu-
pada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, assisted the Gaudiya
Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance, started an English
fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and checked the
galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and strug-
gled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never
stopped; it is now being continued by his disciples in the West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion,
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
“‘Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life, and four years later he adopted the
vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his studies and writ-
ing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana, where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and
writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At
Radha-Dameodara, Srila Prabhupada began work on his life’s master-
piece: a multivolume translation and commentary on the eighteen thou-
sand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote
Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time, His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes
of authoritative translations, commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

333


--- Page 337 ---
334 Srimad-Bhagavatam

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
grown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of almost one
hundred asramas, schools, temples, institutes and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana, an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana, now a thriving farm community of more than one thou-
sand acres, his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. The school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the
beginning of 1975 the enrollment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupida has also inspired the construction of a large inter-
national center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India, which is also
the site for a planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the
magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guest House in
Vrndavana, India. These are centers where Westerners can live to gain
firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their authori-
tativeness, depth and clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in
numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into eleven
languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, established in 1972 ex-
clusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus become the
world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and phi-
losophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most
recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —com-
pleted by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature and culture.


--- Page 338 ---
References
The purports of Srimad-Bhagavatam are all confirmed by standard

Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are specifically

cited in this volume.

Bhagavad-gita, 2, 4, 10, 26, 29, 30, 32, 34, 36, 38, 48, 53, 54-55, 57,
58-59, 60, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 71, 73, 74, 74-75, 76, 78, 78-79, 80,
91-92, 94, 95-96, 97, 100, 106, 108, 111, 113, 124-125, 126,
126-127, 128-129, 132, 136, 138, 152, 162-163, 170-171, 176, 190,
194, 196, 198-199, 200, 205, 208, 210, 212, 214, 214-215, 217, 220,
224, 226, 227, 230, 231, 232, 234, 239, 244, 246, 250, 254, 256, 258,
263, 267, 268, 270, 282-283, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 299-300, 300,
308, 311, 321

Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, 56, 82, 91, 275, 284, 300

Brahmanda Purana, 186

Brahma-sarnhita, 115, 132, 232, 235, 237, 313, 323, 323-324

Brahma-tarka, 225

Caitanya-caritamrta, 30, 98, 112, 114-115, 144, 159-160, 192, 215, 254,
288, 321

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya, 195-196

Hitopadesa, 131

Katha Upanisad, 62

Manu-sambhita, 170

335


--- Page 339 ---
336 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Narada-parficardtra, 212

Padma Purana, 289

Skanda Purana, 305

Srimad-Bhagavatam, 5, 13, 14, 34-35, 37, 51, 54, 65, 67, 74, 85, 111, 119,
122, 123, 169, 186, 191, 224, 227, 236, 246, 248, 256, 260, 264, 267,
287, 291, 296, 300, 306, 308

Svetasvatara Upanisad, 56, 80

Taitiriya Upanisad, 71


--- Page 340 ---
Glossary
A
Aciarya—a spiritual master who teaches by example.
Anubhava—the bodily symptoms of ecstatic love for Krsna.
Arati—a ceremony for greeting the Lord with offerings of food, lamps, fans,
flowers and incense.
Arcana—the devotional practice of Deity worship.
Artha—economic development.
ASrama—a spiritual order of life.
Asuras —atheistic demons.
Atma—the self (the body, the mind, or the soul).
Avatira—a descent of the Supreme Lord.
B
Bhagavad-gita—the basic directions for spiritual life spoken by the Lord
Himself.
Bhagavata-dharma—religious principles enunciated by the Supreme Lord.
Bhakta—a devotee.
Bhakti — pure devotional service to Lord Krsna.
Bhakti-yoga—linking with the Supreme Lord in ecstatic devotional service.
Bhava—the preliminary stage of ecstatic love of God.
Brahmacarya—celibate student life; the first order of Vedic spiritual life.
Brahman —the Absolute Truth; especially the impersonal aspect of the
Absolute.
Brahmana—a person in the mode of goodness; first Vedic social order.
D ५
ष्णा eternal occupational duty; religious principles.
E
Ekadasi—a special fast day for increased remembrance of Krsna, which
comes on the eleventh day of both the waxing and waning moon.
337


--- Page 341 ---
338 Srima d-Bhagavatam
G
Goloka (Krsnaloka) —the highest spiritual planet, containing Krsna’s per-
sonal abodes, Dvaraka, Mathura and Vrndavana.
Gopis—Krsna’s cowherd girl friends who are His most confidential
servitors.
Grhamedhis— materialistic householders.
Grhastha—regulated householder life; the second order of Vedic spiritual
life.
Guru—a spiritual master or superior person.
H
Hare Krsna mantra— See: Maha-mantra
J
Jiva-tattva—the living entities, who are small parts of the Lord.
Jiiana—theoretical knowledge.
Jiiani—one who cultivates knowledge by empirical speculation.
K
Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) —the present age, which is characterized by quar-
rel. It is last in the cycle of four, and began five thousand years ago.
Kama — lust.
Karatalas—hand cymbals used in kirtana.
Karma—fruitive action, for which there is always reaction, good or bad.
Karma-kanda—a section of the Vedas concerning elevation to the heavenly
planets.
Karmi—one who is satisfied with working hard for flickering sense
gratification.
Kirtana— chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord.
Krsnaloka— See: Goloka ५
Ksatriyas—a warrior or administrator; the second Vedic social order.
L
Lila — pastimes.
Lila-8akti —the energy of Krsna which helps to enact His pastimes.


--- Page 342 ---
Glossary 339
M
Maha-bhagavata—a pure devotee of the Lord.
Mahiajana—the Lord’s authorized devotee who by his teachings and behavior
establishes the true purpose of religious principles.
Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rima, Hare
Rama, Rima Rima, Hare Hare.
Mantra—a sound vibration that can deliver the mind from illusion.
Mathura—Lord Krsna’s abode, surrounding Vrndavana, where He took
birth and later returned to after performing His Vrndavana pastimes.
Maya— (mi—not; ya—this), illusion; forgetfulness of one’s relationship
with Krsna.
Mayavadis — impersonal philosophers who say that the Lord cannot have a
transcendental body.
Mrdanga—a clay drum used for congregational chanting.
P
Paramaharnsa—the topmost class of devotees.
Paramiatmia — the Supersoul, an expansion of the Supreme Lord situated in
every living entity’s heart and in every atom.
Parampara—the chain of spiritual masters in disciplic succession.
Prasada—food spiritualized by being offered to the Lord.
R
Riaksasas— man-eating demons.
Rsi—a great sage.
ও
Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the Lord’s transcendental form, which is eternal,
full of knowledge and bliss.
Sankhya—the analytical study of matter and spirit.
Sankirtana— public chanting of the names of God, the approved yoga pro-
cess for this age.
Sannyasa— renounced life; the fourth order of Vedic spiritual life.
Sastras—revealed scriptures.


--- Page 343 ---
340 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Sraddha— ritualistic ceremony of offering oblations 10 one’s deceased ances-

_ tors to free them from possible hellish conditions in their next lives.

Sravanam kirtanarh visnoh—the devotional processes of hearing and

IK chanting about Lord Vispu.

Siidra—a laborer; the fourth of the Vedic social orders.

Svami—one who controls his mind and senses; title of one in the renounced
order of life.

T

Tantras— Vedic literatures consisting mostly of dialogues between Lord Siva
and Durga.

Tapasya—austerity; accepting some voluntary inconvenience for a higher
purpose.

Tilaka— auspicious clay marks that sanctify a devotee’s body as a temple of
the Lord.

\4

Vaikuntha—the spiritual world, where there is no anxiety.

Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Visnu, or Krsna.

VaiSyas—farmers and merchants; the third Vedic social order.

Vinaprastha—one who has retired from family life; the third order of Vedic
spiritual life.

Varnas—the four occupational divisions of society: the intellectual class, the
administrative class, the mercantile and agricultural class, and the
laborer class.

Varpasrama—the Vedic social system of four social and four spiritual
orders.

Vedas—the original revealed scriptures, first spoken by the Lord Himself.

Visnu, Lord —Krsna’s first expansion for the creation and maintenance of
the material universes.

Visnudiitas— the messengers of Lord Visnu who come to take perfected de-
votees back to the spiritual world at the time of death.

Vrndavana—Krsna’s personal abode, where He fully manifests His quality
of sweetness.

Vyasadeva—Krsna’s incarnation, at the end of Dvapara-yuga, for compiling
the Vedas.


--- Page 344 ---
Glossary 341
Y
Yajiia—sacrifice, work done for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu.
Yamaraja—the demigod in charge of punishing sinful human beings after
death.
Yoga-nidra—the mystic slumber of Lord Visnu.
Yogi —a transcendentalist who, in one way or another, is striving for union
with the Supreme.
Yugas—ages in the life of a universe, occurring in a repeated cycle of four.


--- Page 345 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide
Vowels
Aa Aa इ; ই उप Ha Wr ऋ;
लृ! Te Ta 3ATo ओ
= 7 (anusvdara) th (visarga)
Consonants
Gutturals: ল্ 13 { kha Mea घ gha ङः na
Palatals: q ca & cha I<; BE &H jha A da
Cerebrals: eta क tha ड da @ dha Of na
Dentals: त ¥ tha द्‌ da 3 dha न्‌ na
Labials: q pa | pha ba H bha H{ ma
Semivowels: H ya Ira la J va
Sibilants: श॒ 5 ॥ sa H sa
Aspirate: ह ha इ? (avagraha) — the apostrophe
The vowels above should be pronounced as follows:
a - like the ain organ or the u in but.
a — like the ain far but held twice as long as short a.
i — like the iin pin.
i — like the i in pique but held twice as long as short i.
u — like the u in push.
प — like the uin rule but held twice as long as short u.
343


--- Page 346 ---
344 Srimad-Bhagavatam
r — like the riin rim.
ह — like ree in reed.
1 _ like I followed by r (Ir).
€ — like the ein they.
al — like the aiin aisle.
০ — like the oin go.
au — like the owin how.
m (anusvdra) — a resonant nasal like the nin the French word bon.
h (visarga) — a final h-sound: ah is pronounced like aha; ih like ihi.
The consonants are pronounced as follows:
k — asin kite jh — as in hedgehog
kh— asin Eckhart 7 — asin canyon
g — asin give t — asin tub
gh— asin dig-hard th — as in light-heart
7 — asin sing d — asin dove
८ — asin chair dha- as in red-hot
ch — as in staunch-heart n — as rna (prepare to say
] — asin joy the rand say na).
Cerebrals are pronounced with tongue to roof of mouth, but the
following dentals are pronounced with tongue against teeth:
t - asin tub but with tongue against teeth.
th — asin light-heart but with tongue against teeth.
१ — asin dove but with tongue against teeth.
dh— asin red-hot but with tongue against teeth.
1 — asin nut but with tongue between teeth.
7 — asin pine 1 — asin light
ph— asin uphill (not f) ४ — asin vine
b — asin bird § (palatal) — as in the 5 in the German
bh— asin rub-hard word sprechen
m — asin mother s (cerebral) — as the sh in shine
y — asin yes ও — asinsun
r — asin run h — asin home
There is no strong accentuation of syllables in Sanskrit, only a flow-
ing of short and long (twice as long as the short) syllables.


--- Page 347 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each of the
Sanskirt poetry verses and the first line of each Sanskrit prose verse of this volume of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, arranged in English alphabetical order. In the first column the
Sanskrit transliteration is given, and in the second and third columns respectively the
chapter-verse references and page number for each verse are to be found.
A astau prakrtayah proktas 7.2 66
astausid dharim ekagra- 9.7 191
adhoksajalambham ihasubhatmanah 0-307 8৪9 aste syd jathare viryam 79 47
adrstasruta-pirvatvat 92 185 dasvasyehosyatarn vatse 7.12 ` 60
adrsyah sarva-bhatanarn 10.31 314 dsyatam ydvat prasavar 79 47
adriyatatyadbhuta-ripam udvahan 8.17 137
adyaitad dhari-nara-ripam adbhutarin te 8.56 179 athdacarya-sutas 165৫7: 82 120
atha daitya-sutah sarve 8.1 118
ady-antavanta urugdya vidanti hi 9.49 269 atma nityo 'vyayah suddha 7.19 60
aharh mamety asad-bhavari 7.20 60  atmatvat sarva-bhitanar 6.19 25
ahari tv akamas tvad-bhaktas 10.6 288 dtmaupamyena sarvatra 7.53 111
ahan samastan nakha-sastra-panibhir 8.31 150
aheksamanah papena 84 121 atraiva mrgyah puruso 7.23 68
aupasthya-jaihvari bahu-manyaman 018." 917
ajaana-milo ‘partho "pi 1.20. 15 avatdra-katha punya 10.42 322
akhyane 51170 samamnétam 10.45 326 avikriyah sva-drg hetur 7.19 60
akhyatarh sarvam etat te 10.41 322 ayari kupuruso nasto 8.53 175
alaksita-dvairatham atyamarsanari 8.34 154 ayarh niskilbisah saksan 7.10 48
alaksito ‘gnau patitah patargamo 8.24 143
alaksya bhitas tvarito 82 120 B
ambhasy ananta-sayanad viramat- 9.33 238
ambhodhayah svisa- hata vicuksubhur 8.32 152 baddhah sva-karmabhir usattama 9.16 204
ananta-priya-bhaktyainari 7.11 49  baddhaajalim avasthitam 84 121
anarthair artha-sarkasair 7.45 102 balasya neha saranarh pitarau 9.19 209
balasyantahpura-sthasya 6.30 39
anjas titarmy anugrnan guna-vipram 9.18 207 bhajan mukunda-caranari 7.50 109
antah-sabhdyari na dadarsa tat- 8.16 136 bhajatanihayatmanam 7.48 106
antarvatni sva-garbhasya 7.14 51 ॥
antra-srajah-ksataja-kesara-sarku- 9.15 203 bhaktir jagnarh viraktis ca 10.43 325
bhakti-yogasya tat sarvam 10.1 281
anvaya-vyatirekena 7.24 70 bhautikesu vikaresu 6.20 27
asadhv amanyanta hrtaukaso ‘mara 8.26 145 bhavah karoti vikaroti prthak 9.20 211
asasano na vai bhrtyah 10.5 286 bhavam asuram unmucya 6.24 31
asrg-lavaktaruna-hesaranano 8.30 150  bhavant prajapatin devin 10.32 315
345


--- Page 348 ---
346 Srimad-Bhagavatam
bhavin me khalu bhaktanari 10.21 305 = कष्ठ mam na punar jantur 9.53 274
bhavan sarmsara-bijesu 10.3 283  duhkhausadhan tad api duhkham 9.17 205
bhavanti purusa loke 10.21 305  durapirena kamena 68 11
bhavata hare sa vrjino ‘vasadito 8.55 178  durdsadam sarva-nijetara-yudha 8.22 140
bhavata khalah sa upasarivhriah prabho = 8.48 170
durlabharis manusar janma 6.12 16
bhavatam api bhiiyan me 7.17 55  dvary drum apatya dadara lilayd 8.29 148
bhogena punyari kusalena papa 10.13 298  dyaus tat-satotksipta-vimana-sankula 8.33 153
bhratr-heti mrsa-drstis 10.16 301
11/11... 10.3 283 E
bhatair mahadbhih sva-krtaih 7.49 107
bija-nirharanam yogah 7.28 77 = ebbhis tri-varnaih paryastair 726 73
brahmadayah sura-gand munayo tha 9.8 192  ekaevaparo hy atma 6.21 28
buddher jagaranam svapnah 725 72 ekanta-bhaktir govinde 7.55 114
ekantinari bhagavatas tad 6.27 37
८ ekantitvad bhagavati 9.55 276
ekas tvam eva jagad etam amusya 9.30 231
cakre visrstam ajayesvara sodasare 9.22 216  enah parve-krtarh yat tad 10.39 319
candrarsu-gaurais churitari 822 140 esa brahmanya-devasya 10.42 322
chandomayar yad ajayarpita- 9.21 213  etabhyarhguru-putrabhydri 6.29 39
chindhi nah ৩0777592773 saumya 6.30 39 6100৫08৮370 hi sarsaro 7.27 75
etad vapus te bhagavan 10.29 312
D etad ya adi-purusasya mygendra- 10.47 328
etair dvadasabhir vidvan 7.20 60
daiteya yaksa-raksamsi 7.54 112 etavad varnita-guno 9.51 272
daityanam danavanam ca 10.33 315  etavan eva loke 'smin 7.55 114
daityamajasya ca satdm pravarasya 10.47 328
damaghosa-sutadingr 10.41 322 evar bruvaris tv abhyapatad 8.23 142
dasyiin purd san na vijitya lumpato 8.10 129 evar ca pdrsadau visnoh 10.35 316
evan daitya-sutaih prsto 7.1 42
dehas tu sarva-asanighato 7.23 68 evarh duruktair muhurardayan rusa 8.14 134
deva-devakhiladhyaksa 10.26 310 evan hi lokah kratubhih krta ami 740 96
devo 5180 manusyo णठ 7.50 109
dharmadayah kim agunena ca 6.25 33 evar janam nipatitari 9.28 228
dharmarh bhagavatar suddhar 6.28 39 evar nirjita-sad-vargaih 7.33 84
evari pralobhyamano ‘pi 9.55 276
dharma maha-purusa pasi yugan 9.38 247 evar sahasra-vadananghri-sirah- 9.36 243
dharmasya tattvam jiénam ca 7.15 53  evam suradayah sarve 9.1 184
dharmartha-kama iti yo ‘bhihitas 6.26 35  evam sva-karma-patitari bhava- 9.41 253
dharmo bhagavatanan ca 10.45 326
distya tat-tanayah sadhur 10.28 312 G
distya te nihatah papo 10.26 310
divi-sprsat kdyam adirgha-pivara- 8.21 140  ghrano 'nyatas capala-drk kva ca 9.40 251
drsta maya divi vibho ’khila- 9.23 218  gopdyeta haris tvadya 8.13 133


--- Page 349 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 347
grhan manojioru-paricchadams ca 6.12 17 karala-damstrarih karavala-cancala- 8.20 140
gunesu guna-samye ca 6.21 27 karmabhis tanute deham 7.47 104
guru-Susrisaya bhaktya 7.30 81 karmany arabhate dehi 747 104
karoty ato viparyasam 7.41 98
katha madiya jusamanah priyds tvam 10.12 296
H kathari priyaya anukampitayah 6.11 17
harau vairanubandhena 10.38 318  kaumara 2८0९1 prajiio 6.1 2
haraye ‘dbhuta-simhaya 10.10 294  hevalanubhavananda- 6.23 28
hare tavanghri-parikajani 851 173 = khadgarh pragrhya yad avocad asad- 9.29 230
harih sarvesu bhitesu 732 83 khadgari pragrhyotpatito varasandt 8.14 134
khaga mrgah papa-jivah 7.54 112
hatvanayac chruti-ganams ca rajas 9.37 245 kim etair atmanas tucchaih 7.45 102
he durvinita mandatman 85 122
hrdi sthitena harina 10.35 316 kim u vyavahitapatya- 7.44 102
hrih sris tejah smrtih satya 10.8 291 kirtayec chraddhaya srutva 10.46 327
kirtira visuddharh sura-loka-gitam 10.13 298
ko grhesu puman saktam 6.9 12
I ko nv artha-trsnarh णमु 610 15
ko nv atra te ’khila-guro bhagavan 9.42 255
indras tu raja-mahisir 76 45
indriyani manah prana 10.8 291 kopa-kalo yugantas te 8.41 160
iti bhatani manasa 7.32 83 kopavesa-calad-gatrah 83 121
itthari nr-tiryag-rsi-deva- 9.38 247 ko ’ti-praydso ’sura-balaka harer 7.38 92
ity uktas tar vihayendro 7.11 49 krtvatmasat 51870175103 bhagavan 9.28 228
ity uktva bhagavan rajars 10.31 314 krtvatta-hasari kharam utsvanolbanarn 8.28 147
kruddhasya yasya kampante 86 124
J ksemdya bhitaya utatma-sukhaya 9.13 200
ksetresu dehesu tathatma-yogair 7.21 63
Jagrhur niravadyatvan 81 118 ksiptva parusaya vaca 83 121
Jahus te ५९ tad-atmanah 10.39 319 kumbhakarna-dasa-grivau 10.36 317
Jahy asuram bhavam imarh tvam 8.9 128 kuru (पो preta-krtyani 10.22 306
Jjanmadyah sad ime bhava 7.18 58
kutrasisah Sruti-sukha mrgatrsni- 9.25 221
Jaraya grasta-dehasya 6.7 ]0 jyumba-posaya viyan nijayur 6.14 19
Jjihvaikato ‘cyuta vikarsati mavitrpta 9.40 251 kvaharh rajah-prabhava ia tamo 9.26 223
jitatmano jfiasya samasya dehingrm 8.10 129 kvdsau yadi sa sarvatra 8.12 132
Jadnarh tad etad amalari duravapam 6.27 37 L
K lokas ca nirvrtim itah pratiyanti 9.14 202
kala-grastar kiyad idam aho natha 8.42 161
Kalatra-putra-vitiaptan 75 44 M
kamanari hrdy asariroham 10.7 290
kaman kamayate kamyair 7.43 101 mad-anga-sparsanendanga 10.22 306
kamaturari harsa-soka- 9.39 249  maivam vibho ‘suranam te 10.30 313


--- Page 350 ---
348 Srimad-Bhagavatam
ma mari pralobhayotpattya 10.2 282  naradhandya hi bhavanti parasya 9.9 193
mam aprinata Gyusman 9.53 274 naradhituri puru-gunair adhunapi 9.8 192
manavah prajanam patayo 8.38 157 7৫ svami bhrtyatah svamyam 10.5 286
manavo vaya tava nidesa-kdrino 8.48 169 na tad vicitrar khalu sattva-dhaman 824 143
manyamano hrsikesari 10.1 281 na tatha vindate ksemariu 6.4 6
manye dhanabhijana-ripa-tapah- 9.9 193 17040 smy anantaya duranta-saktaye 8.40 159
manye tad-arpita-mano- 9.10 194  naveksyamanas tvaritah 7.5 44
manye tad etad akhilar nigamasya 6.26 35  navindad abda-Satam apsu nimajja 9.34 240
mat-prana-raksanam ananta pitur 9.29 229  nayari mygo napi naro vicitram 8.18 138
mauna-vrata-sruta-tapo-'dhyayana- 9.46 263  necchami te vilulitan uruvikramena 9.24 219
maya manah srjati karmamayari 9.21 213 nico ’jayd guna-visargam 9.12 199
mayamayan sad-upalaksita- 9.36 243  nirdagdha-bijanusayo mahivasa 7.36 88
mayayantarhitaisvarya 6.23 28  nirapyatam iha svarthah 7.46 103
mayy aveSya manas (2/0. 10.23 307  nirvidyate na tu jano yad apiti 9.25 221
mimadrrsamanasya samutthito ‘grato 819 140 nisamya karmani gunan atulydn 7.34 86
midhesu vai mahad-anugraha arta 9.42 255 nisamya loka-traya-mastaka-jvaram 8.35 155
mugdhasya balye kaisore 6.7 10 nysimha-ripas tad alam 8.19 140
muhuh Svasan vakti hare jogat-pate 7.35 87  nisekadisv avasthasu 7.46 103
mumirsinam hi mandétman 8.11 130 nisphalarh yad asau rtryam 6.6 9
muiica mufica maha-bhaga 78 46
mirdhni baddharjali-puta 8.39 157 niyamanari bhayodvignam 71 46
nopaitum asakan manyu- 9.1 184
nypas caidyadayah satmyarn 10.40 320
N nyasyedam atmani jagad vilayambu- 9.32 236
na brahmano na tu bhavasya na vai 9.26 223
na 00707) na tapo nejyd 7.52 110 0
॥ 1.1. 1.1. 9.15 203
na hy acyutarh prinayato 6.19 25 om namo bhagavate tubhyar 10.10 293
naikantino me mayi jatv ihasisa 10.11 295
naisa paravara-matir bhavato nanu 9.27 225 P
naitan manas tava kathasu vikuntha- 9.39 249
naitan vihaya krpanan vimumuksa 9.44 259  papena papo bhaksiti 7.3 43
naite guna na gunino mahad-adayo 9.49 269  paravaresan sthananam 10.44 325
naivatmanah prabhur ayari nija- 9.11 197 paravaresu bhatesu 6.20 27
pare ৮০৫৩ पाम sthira-jarigama ye 87 125
naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitarany 9.43 257 pasyai janarh sva-para-vigraha- 9.41 253
na kevalari me bhavatas ca rajan 87 125
nakhaikurotpatita-hrt-saroruhari 8.31 150 phalanam iva vrksasya 7.18 58
nalari dvijatvari devasvam 7.51 110  pipilikair ahir iva 73 43
pitari prasthite 'smakari 72 43
nana darpam tari nakhair vidadara 8.45 166  pitryan ca sthanam atistha 10.23 307
nényatha te 'khila-guro 10.4 285  praha ष्ठे sura-pate 78 46
nanyathehdvayor artho 10.6 288 praharsa-vegotkalitdnana muhuh 8.35 155


--- Page 351 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 349
prahrada bhadra bhadrari te 9.52 273  sadhavah samudacaras 10.19 304
prahradari pranatan prito 9.51 272  saesa nito bhavata dasam imam 8.50 172
prahradari presaydm ৫5৫ 9.3 187  saesa tvayd bhinna-vaksa nu sete 8.49 171
prahradasyanucaritari 10.43 325 sa eva visvam paramah sva-saktibhih 8.8 127
prahrada tvar vayan capi 6.29 39 sailah samutpetur amusya ramhasa 8.33 153
prahrado ‘pi tatha cakre 10.24 309 sa ष्य kala urukramo 5৫৮ 88 127
prajesa vayar te paresabhisrsta 8.49 171  saksat srih presitd devair 9.2 185
prasada-sumukhari 01510. 10.25 309  sammrambha-duspreksya-karala-locano 8.30 149
pratapta-camikara-canda-locanari 8.20 140  samsevayd surataror iva te prasadah 9.27 226
pratinandya tato devih 10.34 316  sarsevayd tvayi vineti sad-argaya 9.50 271
Ppratyag-atma-svariipena 6.22 28  sarigena sadhu-bhaktanam 7.30 81
pratyanitahparama bhavata trayata 8.42 161  sarga-sthity-apyayesasya 10.44 325
prayah parari purusa te 9.46 263  Sariram paurusan yavan 6.5 8
prdyena deva munayah sva- 9.44 259  sarvam tvam eva saguno vigunas ca 9.48 268
prayena me "yar harinorumayina 8.23 142  sarvdtmang na himsanti 10.20 304
prema-gadgadaya ४९८० 9.7 191  sarvaeto goptr santrasan 10.29 312
pretyeha vathapy ajitendriyas tad 6.15 20  sarvatra labhyate daivad 6.3 5
prinandya mukundasya 7.51 110  sarvatratapa-traya-duhkhitatma 6.14 19
prinanti hy atha mam dhirah 9.54 274 sarve hy ami vidhi-kards tava sattva- 9.13 200 `
priyate 7०12 bhaktya 7.52 110 507৮6 'rtha-kamah ksana- 7.39 94
05० varsa-Satari hy 29/४5 6.6 9 sarvesam api bhatanam 7.49 107
punas ca vipra-sapena 10.36 317  sarvesu bhatesv adhiyajiam Sam 10.12 296
punas tam dsajjata khadga-carmani 8.27 146 sa sattvam 67107 parito vipasyan 8.18 138
pitas te ‘parga-samdrstas 10.17 301 sa tasya hastotkalitas taddsuro 8.26 145
putran smararis ta duhitir hrdayya 6.12 17 sa tat-kara-sparsa-dhutakhilasubhah 9.6 189
satavadhiitd jaladah pardpatan 8.32 152
R sa tu jana-paritaparh tat-kriam janata 8.52 174
sa tari hi nitya-vijitatma-gunah sva- 9.22 215
rdjya-koa-gajamatya- 7.44 102 sat dtma-yonir ativismita dsrito 9.35 241
rayah 60400470778 pasavah sutadayo 7.39 94  satyam vidhaturh nija-bhrtya- 8.17 137
rsayah pitarah siddha 8.37 157
rsih karunikas tasyah 7.15 52. savaidehas tu parakyo 7.43 101
sa vikraman putra-vadhepsur 0105৫ 8.16 136
rin paryacarat tatra 7.14 51 sayanauyudhinirbhinna- 10.37 318
rsinanugrhitar mam 7.16 54 sa yena sankhye pasuvad dhatas tar 8.46 167
rte jitad dtmana utpathe sthitat 89 128  sesam grhesu saktasya 68 11
riipe ime sad-asati tava veda-srste 9.47 266
sneha-pasair drdhair baddham 6.9 12.
$006 tato vimukha-cetasa indriyartha 9.43 257
S ॐ "hori priyasya suhrdah paradevat 9.18 207
so "harn vikatthamanasya 8.13 133
sabhasu satresu tavamalar yaso 8.54 177 ৩০ yam te vidhikara ia vipra-aptas 8.56 179
sadapnotihayd duhkham 7.42 99  sraddhani no ‘dhibubhuje prasabhari 8.44 165


--- Page 352 ---
350 Srimad-Bhagavatam
sraddhaya tat-kathayari ca 7.31 81  tasyaiva te vapur idan nija-kala- 9.33 238
$reyas-kama maha-bhaga 9.54 275  tasya me ‘bhitavan midha 86 124
sr3tvd guna-vyatikaram nija- 9.30 231  tasyodaran nakha-vidirna-vapid ya 8.44 165
Srutam etan maya piirveri 6.28 38 10108 kavyadibhih sardhar 10.33 315
stabdham mac-chasanodvrttari 8.5 122. (८८० sabhayam upavistam uttame 8.34 154
stabdhordhva-karnari giri- 8.21 140 tatah sampiljya Sirasa 10.32 315
stutva vagbhih pavitrabhih 10.25 310 tata prasamayopehi 9.3 187
suhrtsu tat-sneha-sitah sisinam 6.11 17 tathapi manvantaram etad atra 10.11 295
sukham aindriyakarh daitya 6.3 5 tatheti sanakai rajan 94 187
sukhaya duhkha-mohsdya 7.42 99 tathety ०४९।७य्द्‌ devarser 7.13: 50
suranaka dundubhayo tha jaghnire 8.36 156
tato "bhipadyabhyahanan mahdsuro 8.25 144
sva-dhamani yayi rajan 10.34 316 tato harau bhagavati 7.53 111
sva-pdda-miile patitar tam arbhakari 9.5 188 tato me mataram rsih 7.12 50
svarga-sthana-samamnayair 7.24 70 tato vidardt parihrtya daityd 6.18 23
svarnarh yatha grivasu hema-kirah 7.21 63 tato yateta kusalah 6.5 7]
svaripam dtmano budhyed 7.26 73
svasydtmanah sakhyur asesa-dehinam 7.38 92 tat-padamburuha-dhydnat 731 81
tat-pada-padman hrdi nirvrto dadhau 96 189
= tat-praydso na kartavyo 6.4 6
T tatropavrajya vibudha 8.37 157
tatropdya-sahasranam 229. 79
tac-cittau jahatur deham 10.37 318
tadaiva tasmin ninado 'ti-bhisano 8.15 135 tat-sambhavah kavir ato 'nyad 9.34 240
tada puman mukta-samasta-bandhan 7.36 88 tat-sanga-bhito nirvinno 10.2 282
1003 vimanavalibhir nabhastalarn 8.36 156 tat-sutarn pahy upasrtari 8.41 160
tad brahma-nirvana-sukham vidur 737 89 tat te 'rhattama namah stuti-karma- 9.50 270
tat tu kalasya dirghatvat 7.16 54
tad-vaksah-pdtanenasam 8.47 168
tad vipraluptam amunddya Saranya 8.43 163 2४ hatha punar jatau 10.38 318
tad yaccha manyum asuras ca hatas 9.14 202 ta yenaivanubhiiyante 125 72
1.11 111 1 8.27 146  tesam atibalodyogar 7.4 44
tam Syena-vegarm sata-candra-vartma 8.28 147 te visnu-parsadah sarve 8.39 157
trasto smy aha krpana-vatsala 9.16 204
tari vikramantari sagadam 8.25 145
tapo-yoga-balonnaddhah 10.27 311 trih-saptabhih pita pitah 10.18 303
taptasya tat-pratividhir ya 9.19 209 trpyanti neha krpana bahu-duhkha- 9.45 262
tarhy eva pundarikaksa 10.9 293 tuste ca tatra kim alabhyam ananta 6.25 33
tasmad adrsta-Sruta-disanam param 740 97 tvam atmanisa bhuvi gandham 9.35 241
tasmad aha vigata-viklava Svarasya 9.12 199 tam ca mar ca smaran kale 10.14 299
tasmad amis tanu-bhrtam aham asiso 9.24 219  tvam nas tapah paramam attha yad 8.43 163
tasmad arthas ca kamas ca 7.48 106  tvam ৮৫ ida sadasad isa bhavaris 9.31 233
tasmad bhavadbhih kartavyar 7.28 77 vam vayur agnir avanir viyad ambu 9.48 268
tasmai bhavan haya-Siras tanuvarm 9.37 245 tvayd na prapsyate saristham 710 48
057715८ pita me piiyeta 10.17 301 tvaya vimocito mrtyor 10.28 312
tasmat sarvesu bhiitesu 6.24 31 tyajeta kosas-krd ivehamanah 6.13 17


--- Page 353 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 351

U yad-artha iha karmani 7.41 98

yadatiharsotpulakasru-gadgadar 7.34 86

uccavacesu daityendra 10.20 304 7৫৫ esa sadhu-hrc-chayas 8.51 173

upeta nardyanam adi-devar 6.18 23 7৫0 esa sarva-bhitanam 6.2 4

upetya bhuvi kayena 9.4 187 2001 ddsyasi me kaman 10.7 290

utthapya tac-chirsny adadhat karam 9.5 188 yad 85076 bhagavati 7.29 79
२४९00 tan smayamanah Tl 42

Vv yadrechayagatas tatra 7.7 46

20৫ yaj jano bhagavate vidadhita 9.11 197

vadhyamanah surair bhita 7.4 44 yad yasya janma nidhanar sthitir 9.31 233

vaisaradi dhih sraddhatah 010 59 20৫ 6101 00710) 67 71010) 273 10.14 299

varah krira-nisarganam 10.30 313 ya etat punyam akhyanari 10.46 327

vara varaya etat te 10.15 301 yah sviya-parakya-vibhinna-bhavas 6.16 21
varam vnisvabhimatarn 9.52 273

yaksah kimpurusds tata 8.38 157

vasudeve bhagavati 7.33 84 yarn krindty asubhih presthais 6.10 15

vayam anucara-mukhyah karmabhis 8.52 174 yar vai sva-dhisnyopagatam 8.15 135
vayam iSa kinnara-gands tavanuga 8.55 178

vayarn kimpurusds tvan tu 8.53 175 ‘yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukharm 9.45 261

vaya vibho te nata-natya-gayaka 8.50 172 yasmat priydpriya-viyoga-saniyoga- 9.17 205

‘yasmin yato yarhi yena ca yasya 9.20 211

viddhamarsasayah saksat 10.16 301 yas ta asisa asaste 10.4 285

vidvan apittharh danujah kutumbari 6.16 21 yas tam anaisid vasam esa durjano 8.54 177
৮10) 0 prthag dharanayanuraddhar 8.46 167

vikarah sodasacaryaih 7.22 66 yas tvaya manda-bhagyokto 8.12 131

vimociturh kama-drsar vihdra- 6.17 23 yathaha bhagavan rajann 10.24 3097

yatha hi purusasyeha 6.2 3

vimuiicati yada kaman 10.9 293 201৫ yatha bhagavato 10.40 320

viprad dvi-sad-guna-yutad aravinda- 9.10 194 yato na kascit kva ca kutracid va 6.17 23
visvak sphurantarh grahandturari harir 8.29 148

visvasya sarga-sthiti-sariyaman 8.40 159 yatra yatra ca mad-bhaktah 10.19 303

vittesu nityabhinivista-ceta 6.15 20 yat sadho sya kule jato 10.18 303

2৫৮০৫ daitya-patir ghorit 7.13 50

vyaktarh tvarh martu-kamo si 811 130  yena pipena ratndni 8.47 168

vyalumpan raja-sibiram 76 45 ye ’smat pituh kupita-hdsa- 9.23 218
vydpya-vyapaka-nirdesyo 6.22 28

yogena milita-drg-atma-nipita-nidras 9.32 236

Y yo no 80171 yoga-siddham asadhur 8.45 166

yo 15011 labdha-varo matto 10.27 311

yada graha-grasta iva kvacid dhasaty 7.35 87 yuddhodyamarh parari cakrur 7.2 43

200 anindat pita me 10.15 301 yuktah samaksam ubhayatra 9.47 266


--- Page 354 ---
General Index
Numerals in boldface type indicate references to translations of the verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
A Activity (Activities)
yoga as topmost, 78
Abhyutthanam adharmasya Activities, material
verse quoted, 176, 246, 254 futility of, 99-100, 101
Absolute Truth as punishable, 220
disciplic successionreveals, 208 spiritual activities vs., 36-37
features of, three listed, 29-30, 90, 327 See also: Karma
Krsna as, 29-30 Acyuta-gotra
materialists neglect, 19-20 defined, 113
Mayavadis misunderstand, 235, 272 See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
as one and different, 234-235 Actyutatari cyuti-varjanam
purifying power of, 92 quoted, 114
realization of, 29-31 Adanta-gobhir visatari tamisrari
religious principles reveal, 327 verse quoted, 25
via spiritual master, 67, 106 Adhara-saktim avalambya [007 078 sva-martir
as transcendental activity, 36-37 verse quoted, 237
Acarya. See: Spiritual master, all entries Adhyatma-vit
Acaryavan puruso veda defined, 68
quoted, 67 See also: Transcendentalists
Acintya-bhedabheda-tattva Adrstasruta-pirvatvad
defined, 234, 242 verse quoted, 186
Lord and living beings as, 293 Advaita, Lord, with Lord Caitanya, 248
Activity (Activities) Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam
of civilization, four listed, 34 verse quoted, 323
desires determine, 291 Age of Kali. See: Kali-yuga
of devotees inconceivable, 159 Ahaituky apratihata
fruitive. See: Fruitive activities quoted, 42
of Krsna. See: Pastimes of Krsna Ahari sarvasya prabhavo
Lord controls, 211-212, 214 quoted, 214, 239, 242, 311
material. See: Activities, material Ahari (0৫7 sarve-papebhyo
of Nrsirmhadeva as liberating, 299, quoted, 80
300-301, 328 verse quoted, 217
pious and impious, 299 Aharikara itiyarh me
pious vs. Krsna conscious, 97-98 verse quoted, 66
of Prahlada as liberating, 299, 300-301, Ahankara-vimadhatma
328 quoted, 100
sinful, as punishable, 21 verse quoted, 258
states of, three listed, 72-74, 78 Ahara defined, 188
353


--- Page 355 ---
354 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Airplanes 5,000 years ago, 154 Annihilation of the universe
Ajamila by Lord’s anger, 161
chanting Narayana’s name saved, 26 by Siva, 161
Visnudiitas saved, 320 Anor aniyan mahato mahiyan
Ajo nityah sasvato ’yari purano quoted, 62
quoted, 59 Antaryami pratyag-atma
Akamah sarva-kamo va verse quoted, 31
verse quoted, 227, 296 Antavanta ime deha
Amanina manadena quoted, 60
verse quoted, 193 Anukilyena krsnanu-
Amara ajiidya guru hana tara’ ei desa quoted, 297
verse quoted, 254 Anxiety
Ambarisa Maharaja in material life, 8
opulence used by, 281 in old age, 11
sense gratification rejected by, 281 Anyabhilasita-sanyam
Americans quoted, 35, 88, 281, 283, 384, 286, 291,
as brahmanas, 196-197 292
as devotees, 196-197 „ Api cet suduracaro
Anadir adir govindah verse quoted, 111
verse quoted, 115, 235 Appearance of Krsna (Descent)
Ananta as Lord’s bed, 239 liberation by understanding, 76
Ancestors, worship of, 215 as Nrsirhhadeva, 137, 138, 139
Andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham purpose of, 123, 176, 199, 201, 205, 245,
quoted, 30, 115, 242, 243 246-247, 254 र
verse quoted, 232 Apranasyaiva dehasya
Anger verse quoted, 196
cure for, 85 Aradhananarh sarvesan
by demons toward devotees, 137 verse quoted, 289
Hiranyaka$ipu in, 134 Arcana vandanan 005) 077
as ignorance, 130 verse quoted, 3, 93, 198
of Lord as transcendental, 161 Arjuna
of Nrsimhadeva, 184, 185 God realization by, 244
Siva as, 161 quoted on Krsna’s identity, 244
spiritual, 184, 185 Arpana
universe annihilated by Lord’s, 161 defined, 83
Animals See also: Spiritual master, service to
attachment to, 18 Artha
devotional service for, 113 Lord sanctions, 106-107
happiness of, 96 See also: Economic development
human beings vs., 96, 105 Arto jijiasur artharthi
materialists compared to, 22-23 quoted, 285
people becoming, 3, 7, 12 111 111
sacrifice 01, 97 quoted, 91
See also: names of individual animals Asango hy ayam purusah
Aniruddha, Lord, as Krsna’s expansion, 324 quoted, 63
Annihilation of the universe Association of devotees. See: Devotees of the
Lord controls, 8, 159, 160-161 Supreme Lord, association of


--- Page 356 ---
General Index 355
Asuras Austerity
defined, 151, 162, 205, 258 for self -realization, 164
See also: Atheists; Demons, all entries spiritual life requires, 209
Atah $ri-krsna-namadi Authority (Authorities)
verse quoted, 56 Absolute Truth understood via, 208
Athasahtis tato bhavas on devotional service, 306
verse quoted, 275 in disciplic succession, 325n
Athato brahma-jijrdsa Lord as supreme, 82
quoted, 105 Prahlada as, 195
Atheists Avajananti mam midha
devotees criticized by, 293 quoted, 139, 246
God's laws ignored by, 21 Avarasyapi mohaya
Lord concealed from, 29, 31 verse quoted, 186
material pleasure pursued by, 283, 295 Avataras
as polluted, 190 bona fide vs. bogus, 323, 324
suffering increased by, 205 defined, 323
theory by, 151 hearing about, 324
world overrun by, 151 purusa-, 324
See also: Demons religious principles upheld by, 324
Atma. See: Soul See also: Incarnations of the Supreme Lord
Atma-[yotih samrad ihovdca Avidya
_ quoted, 63 defined, 235
Atma-tattva See also: Ignorance
defined, 57 Avistas tu harer bhaktas
See also: Knowledge, transcendental _ verse quoted, 321
Atoms Ayuh sriyam yaso dharmam
Lord pervades, 29 verse quoted, 122
soul smaller than, 62
Attachment, material B
to body, 282
by demigods, 162 Bahiinar janmanam ante
to family life, 11-12, 13-14, 18-22, 23, quoted, 30, 244
24-25 verse quoted, 68, 126
to genitals, 18 Balarama, Lord, as Krsna’s expansion,
to money, 15, 19-20 324
to tongue, 18 Balavan indriya-gramo
See also: Desire, material verse quoted, 51
Austerity Being, living. See: Living entities
Brahma purified by, 242-243 Bengali song, quoted on material happiness,
demons destroy, 164 222
devotional service surpasses, 270 Bhagavad-bhakti-hinasya
by Hiranyakasipu,43, 51, 311 verse quoted, 195
human life for, 164 Bhagavad-gita +
liberation requires, 264-265 See also: Bhagavad-gita, cited; Bhagavad-
as Lord’s power, 164 gita, quotations from
need for, 164 in education, 3
offenses spoil, 122 value of knowing, 65


--- Page 357 ---
356 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bhagavad-gita, cited Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
on demigod worshipers, 282-283 on Lord known by devotional service, 32,
on material world, 95-96, 123 56-57, 194, 200
on varnasrama-dharma, 170 on Lord protecting devotees, 48, 124, 138,
Bhagavad-gita, quotations from 210, 231
on Brahman’s basis, 29 on Lord rewarding surrender, 226, 289
on Brahma's day, 10 on Lord’s descent, purpose of, 176, 205,
on conditioned souls, 100, 258 246, 254
on demigod worshipers, 287 on Lord’s material energies, 66
on destiny by desire, 227 on Lord’s parts and parcels, 62
on devotees as transcendental, 34, 36, 190, on Lord’s power, 126, 152
196, 224 on Lord vs. creation, 62
on devotees going back to Godhead, 321 on Manus in disciplic succession, 171
on devotional service, value of, 2, 111 on materialists worshiping Krsna, 285
on devotional service as topmost yoga, on material world as suffering, 210, 258
78-79 on mind as uncontrollable, 129
on devotional service surpassing Vedic on miscreants, four types of, 198-199
knowledge, 270 on modes of nature, 258
on disciplic succession, 208, 256 on nature under Krsna, 214
on equanimity in devotees, 300 on offerings Lord accepts, 94, 286
on fools shunning surrender, 250 on preachers, Krsna conscious, 32
on Godhead accessible to everyone, 55, 190 on salvation by surrender, 263
on happiness, transcendental, 91-92 on self-realization by bhakti-yoga, 65
on heavenly planets, falling from, 97 on soul's nature, 58-59
on intelligence, mind and senses, 74 on soul vs. body, 58-59, 69, 71
on knowing Krsna, 220 on spiritual master, 106
on Krsna as enjoyer, proprietor, friend, 4, on Supersoul, 212
32 on surrender to Krsna, 30, 38, 53, 68, 80,
on Krsna as master, 288 126-127, 217, 244, 250
on Krsna consciousness as transcendental on teaching by example, 308
activity, 78 on transcendental knowledge, 68
on liberation, eligibility for, 299-300 on transcending Vedic rituals, 36
on liberation by knowing Krsna, 76, 113 on transmigration of the soul, 65
on Lord as all-pervading, 29, 268, 136 on worship, types of, 214-215
on Lord as equally disposed, 230 on yagi, topmost, 78-79, 163
on Lord as father, 26 Bhagavan. See: Supreme Lord
on Lord as infallible, 113 Bhagavata-dharma
on Lord as invisible to atheists, 132 defined, 53, 107, 327
on Lord as original seed, 234 processes of, 3
on Lord as source of everything, 214, 239, as transcendental knowledge, 39
311 See also: Education, Krsna consciousness in
on Lord as Supersoul, 73 Bhagavatam. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam
on Lord as sustainer, 71 Bhajananandis defined, 253
on Lord as within and without, 232, 233 Bhaktas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord,
on Lord directing living entity, 100, 108 all entries


--- Page 358 ---
General Index 357
Bhakti. See: Devotional service; Krsna con- Bijari mari sarva-bhitanarm
sciousness quoted, 234, 267
Bhaktih punati man-nistha Bilvamangala Thakura, quoted on devotees as
quoted, 300 transcendental, 34
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, cited on pure devo- Birds in devotional service, 113
tees, 284 Birth
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, quotations from freedom from, 98
on bliss, devotional vs. impersonal, 91 as nature’s law, 95
on devotees as liberated souls, 300 repetition of, 3, 7, 13, 90, 105
on Lord revealed to devotees, 56 soul causes, 59
on love of God, 275 Birth and death, repeated. See: Transmigra-
on spiritual master, service to, 82 tion of the soul
Bhaktivinoda Thakura, cited on tongue, Blasphemy as intolerable, 184-185
252 Bliss
Bhaktivinoda Thikura, quotations from Brahma in, 243
on creation’s variety, 235 devotional service as, 91, 103, 206-207
on serving pure devotees, 256 devotional vs. impersonal, 91
Bhakti-yoga. See: Devotional service to the Krsna consciousness as, 103, 207
Supreme Lord; Krsna consciousness Lord in, 237, 238
Bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah Lord’s form as, 244, 246
quoted, 267 Prahlada in, 259
Bhaktya mam abhijanati See also: Happiness
quoted, 32, 65, 194, 267, 270 Bodily concept of life
verse quoted, 57, 200 as doom, 209-210
Bharata, descendant of, 146 as ignorance, 7, 65
Bharata-bhimite haila manusya-janma yara as illusion, 61, 63, 65
verse quoted, 112 psychology of, 61, 63
Bhava See also: Duality, material; Materialism
defined, 275 Body material
See also: Love of God attachment to, 282
Bhaya as bad bargain, 101-103
defined, 188 cause 01, 14
See also: Fear changes of, six listed, 58-59, 75
Bhoktaram yajna-tapasari demands of, four listed, 10
quoted, 288 by desire, 291
verse quoted, 4, 32 as desire machine, 100, 108
Bhramayan sarva-bhitani devotees freed from, 321
verse quoted, 100, 108 devotional service spiritualizes, 89, 224,
Bhukti 239
defined, 221 as disease, 222
See also: Sense gratification distress according to, 6
Bhimir apo 71010 vayuh enemies within, 130
verse quoted, 66 fate of, 101-102
Bhutani yanti bhitejya by fruitive activity, 105
verse quoted, 215, 227 as God's temple, 33


--- Page 359 ---
358 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Body material (continued) Brahma, Lord
gross and subtle, 69 Prahlada’s good fortune excelled, 223, 224
happiness according to, 5-6 prayed to Nrsirahadeva, 159, 310-313
human, as special, 2 quoted on Nrsirhhadeva and Prahlada, 187
by karma, 67, 104 self-realization by, 243, 244
living entity causes, 62-63 Visnu seen by, 243, 244, 245
Lord pervades, 242, 243 Brahma-bhitah prasanndatma
Lord powers, 127 verse quoted, 91-92
Lord sanctions, 108 Brahmacari guru-kule
via nature, 108 quoted, 13, 85
soul vs., 58, 59-60, 61, 62-63, 64-65, Brahmacaris
66, 67-68, 69-70, 71, 74, 220 kings trained as, 15-16
subtle, 214 training for, 13-14
tree’s fruits compared to, 58-59, 71 Brahmacarya
Body of the Supreme Lord for children, 2-3, 12-13
Brahma-sarihita quoted on, 115 for higher castes, 15-16
as everything, 239 Brahmajyoti. See: Brahman effulgence
as limitless, 185 Brahman (Impersonal Absolute)
rays of, 90 defined, 90
as transcendental, 312 happiness in, 90-91
universe as, 62-63 Lord as basis of, 29, 90-91
Bose, Shubhash Chandra, death defeated, 291 as Lord’s energy, 71
Brahma, Lord religious principles reveal, 327
austerity purified, 242, 243 See also: Brahman effulgence; Liberation
as authority, 306 Brahman, Supreme
in bliss, 243 Lord as, 71-72, 233, 268
at creation’s dawn, 240, 242, 243 See also: Supreme Lord
day of, calculated, 10 Brahmanando bhaved esa
as demigod, 135 verse quoted, 91
as devotee, 201 Brahmana(s) (Intellectuals)
devotee’s status vs., 225 caste, 195, 196-197
in disciplic succession, 57, 207-208 devotees vs. caste, 195, 196
as first created being, 246 disqualification for, 8
following, recommended, 242-243 guru-kula for, 15
from Garbhodakagayi Visnu, 144, 239-240 Jaya and Vijaya cursed by, 179
Hiranyakasipu blessed by, 149, 311 as material qualification, 110
Krsna above, 172, 311 Prahlada followed, 309
lifespan of, vs. human life span, 10 qualities of, twelve listed, 195n
Lord enlightened, 144 social status of, 196
lotus flower bore, 314-315 society guided by, 309
under modes of nature, 211 Westerners as, 196-197
Nrsimhadeva frightened, 184, 185 Brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva
Nrsirmhadeva preserved promise by, 138, verse quoted, 30, 98, 215
139, 149 Brahmanda Purana, quoted on Nrsimhadeva
Prahlada enthroned by, 315, 316 and Prahlada, 186


--- Page 360 ---
General Index 359
Brahman effulgence Caitanya Mahaprabhu
danger in, 91 associates of, 248
happiness in, 91 Bhagavatam predicted, 248
Lord emanates, 244 in devotee role, 248, 254
of Nrsimhadeva, Hiranyakasipu over- ecstasy of, 89
whelmed by, 143 Krsna consciousness via, 261
as transcendental, 144 mission of, 76
See also: Brahman (Impersonal Absolute); philosophy of, 234
Liberation as preacher, 254
Brahmano hi pratisthaham Riipa Gosvami instructed by, 30
quoted, 29 Sanatana Gosvami instructed by, 321
Brahma-sarihitd, quotations from Sanatana Gosvami questioned, 22
on devotees as transcendental, 313 sarnkirtana started by, 248-249
on Krsna as original person, 323 as Supreme Lord, 254
on Krsna's expansions, 323-324 wise men worship, 249
on Lord as all-pervading, 232 Caitanya Mahaprabhu, quotations from
on Lord as creator and controller, 115, 235 on chanting in humility, 193
on Lord as Maha- Visnu, 237 on chanting Lord’s holy names, 27
on seeing God, qualification for, 132 on devotional service via guru and Krsna,
Brahma-sampradaya, 57 98, 215
Brahma-tarka, quoted on devotee’s good for- on glorifying Krsna, 265
tune, 225 on living entities as Lord's servants, 226,
Brahmeti paramatmeti 288
quoted, 90 on mercy of Krsna and guru, 324
Brahmins. See: Brahmanas on preaching Krsna consciousness, 32, 112
British Empire, nature’s laws foiled, 95 on pure devotee’s association, 30-31
Buddhi-yoga on pure devotional service, 276-277, 290,
defined, 271-272 292
See also: Devotional service to the Supreme on renouncing material happiness, 96
Lord, all entries on serving Lord’s servants, 256, 289
Canakya Pandita, cited on human life’s value,
C 20
Caiicalari hi manah krsna
Caitanya-caritamrta, cited on devotee’s rela- verse quoted, 129
tionship with Krsna, 321 Candala defined, 196
Caitanya-caritamrta, quotations from Caranas prayed to Nrsithhadeva, 173
on devotee’s activities as inconceivable, Caste system. See: Varnasrama-dharma
159-160 Celibacy. See: Brahmacari
on devotional service via spiritual master, Ceto-darpana-marjanam bhava-maha-
215 davagni-nirvapanam
on Godhead dispelling darkness, 144 quoted, 198
on Krsnadasa Kaviraja, 192 Chadiya vaisnava-seva nistara prayeche keba
on preaching Krsna consciousness, quoted, 220
254 Chanting the Lord’s holy names
on pure devotee’s vision, 114-115 Ajamila saved by, 26


--- Page 361 ---
360 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Chanting the Lord’s holy names (continued) Creation, the
with तिम recommended, 265 oneness and variety in, 234, 235, 236
via disciplic succession, 208 processes in, three listed, 160
ecstatic symptoms in, 87
fear dispelled by, 189 D
happiness by, 96
by Haridasa Thakura, 266
in humility, 192, 193 Dadami buddhi-yogam tari
for Kali-yuga, 3 quoted, 74-75
liberation by, 208 Daityas
purifying power of, 3, 250-251 king of, 305
sense gratification disturbs, 252 Prahlada’s classmates as, 30
senses controlled by, 252 See also: Demons, king of
spiritual world via, 94 Daivi hy esa gunamayi
success by, 27 quoted, 258
Cheating for money, 21 verse quoted, 30
Childhood Dantavakra
material life wastes, 10-11 Hiranyakasipu as, 317
spiritual life in, 85 liberation of, 319-321
Children Daridra-narayana as misconception, 33, 84,
attachment to, 18 115-116
brahmacarya for, 2, 12-14 Dark well, materialistic household life as, 14,
devotional serivee for, 2-3 19
spiritual education for, 327 Death
Chunk theory of creation, refuted and revised, Ajamilasaved at, 26
241 conditioned souls subject to, 253, 254
Civilization, human devotees protected from, 312-313
activities of, four listed, 34 freedom from repeated, 98
5,000 years ago, 154 Lord above, 253
in ignorance, 7 Lord as, 313
nature foils material, 95 as nature’s law, 95
sense gratification in, 262-263 Prahlada protected from, 312
warning for godless, 151 repetition of, 3, 7, 13, 90, 105
See also: Society, human saints relish demon’s, 202
Consciousness yogistranscend, 320
states of , three listed, 72-73, 74, 78, 238 Dehino ’smin yatha dehe
See also: Krsna consciousness quoted, 71
Cosmic manifestation. See: Creation, the; Ma- verse quoted, 65, 69
terial world, Universe Deity worship of the Supreme Lord
Creation, the purification by, 92
for austerity, 164 recommended, 82
Brahma at dawn of, 240, 242, 243 Demigod (s)
Lord beyond, 237 demons vs., 42-45, 48
Lord creates and controls, 127, 160-161, as devotees, 201
232, 241 devotee’s status vs., 223, 224, 225
Lord pervades, 29, 30-31, 71-72 devotional service for, 109


--- Page 362 ---
General Index 361
Demigod (s) Demons
in goodness, 192 peace destroyed by, 171
Hiranyakasipu conquered, 218 pillar sound scared, 136
Hiranyakasipu feared by, 146 Prahlada born among, 159, 190, 191,199,
king of, 47 223, 224, 282, 283
Krsna above, 287, 311, 326 Prahlada converted sons of, 119, 120
Lord inconceivable to, 269 Prahlada ruled, 315
as materially attached, 162 preaching to, 131
as material qualification, 110 religion scorned by, 133-134
Nrsirmhadeva frightened, 184,185 sacrifices disturbed by, 162, 164
Nrsirhhadeva honored by, 156 sex life enslaves, 104
Nrsirhhadeva honored wives of, 157 surrendered to Nrsirhhadeva, 155
pillar sound terrorized, 135 surrender shunned by, 198-199, 250
Prahlada prayed to, 315 types 01, four listed, 198-199
Prahlada’s mother circumambulated by, 49 warning for, 151
quoted on Hiranyakasipu, 44 world ruined by, 166
self-realization for, 164 worship disturbed by, 162
as topmost yogis, 163 See also: Atheists
worshipers of, 282-283, 187 Desire(s), material
worship of, 215 activities according to, 291
See also: names of individual demigods - body according to, 14, 291
Demons body driven by, 100

austerity destroyed by, 164 as bondage, 11-12, 22, 214
Bhagavatam refutes, 246 devotees free of, 35, 88, 89, 283
demigods vs., 43-45, 48 devotional service purifies, 291-292,
devotees disdain, 123 206
devotees misunderstood by, 133 as false, 100-101
devotees vs., 131, 157, 162, 174, 176, 246, freedom from, 222-223

247, 324 as ignorance, 130
in devotional service, 109, 113 life ruined by, 291, 292
devotional service unstoppable by, 177 living entities designated by, 230
as doomed, 254 Lord Caitanya rejected, 290
Durga punishes, 258 Lord fulfills, 226, 227, 231, 273, 275,
envy in, 314 296
God denied by, 132, 133-134 Prahlada free of, 283
government run by, 162 pure devotees free of, 286
king of, 45, 51 renunciation of, 293
Krsna conscious preachers vanquish, 324 sex as basis of, 282
Lord fools, 147 soul’s transmigration due to, 291
Lord invisible to, 132 spiritual desire vs., 292
Lord kills, 176, 201, 245, 246, 247, 326 See also: Lust
Lord misunderstood by, 139 Detachment. See: Renunciation
materialists as, 24-25 Devarsi-bhiitapta-nrnari-pitinan
nature punishes, 258 verse quoted, 308
Nrsirhhadeva kills, 174 Devas
in passion and ignorance, 245 defined, 151


--- Page 363 ---
362 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Devazas (continued) Devotee (s) of the Supreme Lord
See also: Demigods; Devotees of the Lord fulfills desires of, 226, 227, 230,
Supreme Lord 231,273
Devazas Lord protects, 48, 80, 124-125, 174,176,
defined, 162 201, 210, 230, 231, 246, 247,
See also: Demigods 312-313
Devotees) of the Supreme Lord Lord purifies, 287
activities of, as inconceivable, 159 Lord realized by, 30-31, 56
association of. See: Devotees of the Lord seen by, 132
Supreme Lord, association of Lord’s forms understood by, 186, 203, 204
atheists criticize, 293 materialistic, 289
blasphemers punished by, 184, 185 material life shunned by, 254
Brahma as, 201 material world disinterests, 219
caste brahmanas vs., 195, 196 Mayavadis vs., 290-291
classes of, two listed, 253-254, 298 nondevotees vs., 86, 265
demigods as, 201 Nrsimhadeva dispels fear by, 188, 189,
demigods’status surpassed by, 224, 225 202
demons disdained by, 123 Nrsirmhadeva frightened, 201
demons misunderstand, 133 Nrsirmhadeva protects, 133
demons vs., 131, 151, 162, 174, 176, 245, opulence used by, 297
246, 247, 324 as opulent as Krsna, 293, 294
depend on Krsna, 107 parampara reveals, 49
as desireless, 227, 283 Prahlada’s classmates became, 199
desire service, 35, 290-291, 305 preaching duty of, 122
devotional service benefits, 198, 199 purification of, 88-89
envy absent in, 305 purifying power of, 195, 196-197, 304
equanimity in, 300 qualification for, 289
as expert managers, 289-299 rituals shunned by, 297
family purified by, 303, 304 rituals surpassed by, 308
as fearless, 186 as sense controlled, 85-86, 265
fools criticize, 197 as servants par excellence, 197
fruitive activities shunned by, 297 serve spiritual master, 82-83, 85
good fortune of, 225 “spiritualists” avoided by, 260, 261
humility vital for, 200 spiritual residence of, 224, 260, 261
Janis misunderstand, 260 as teachers, 260-261, 308
karmis misunderstand, 260 as topmost yogis, 78-79
knowledge revealed to, 56-57 as transcendental, 34, 35-36, 190, 196,
knowledge spread by, 246 207-208, 313
Krsna's associates followed by, 321 Vedas surpassed by, 269, 270
as liberated souls, 207, 300 Westerners as, 196-197
liberation surpassed by, 265 See also: Pure devotees of the Supreme
Lord attained by, 93 Lord; names of individual devotees
Lord Caitanya played part of, 248, 254 Devotees of the Supreine Lord, association of
Lord favors, 155, 161, 173, 231, 255-256, chanting Hare Krsnaadvised in, 266
268-269, 273, 286 discrimination advised in, 83


--- Page 364 ---
General Index 363
Devotees of the Supreme Lord, association of Devotional service to the Supreme Lord
God realization by, 30-31 materialists in, 285, 286
liberation by, 25 materialists neglect, 11-12
purifying power of, 207-208 mind controlled by, 128, 129
recommended, 83 as natural, 4
success by, 208 opulence used in, 281
Devotional service to the Supreme Lord perfection of, 114-115
(Bhakti) Prahlada chose, 206, 220, 221
as all-auspicious, 109 preaching as best, 32
austerity surpassed by, 270 prerequisite for, 129, 190
authorities on, 306 processes of . See: Devotional service to the
benefit 01, 292 Supreme Lord, processes of
as bliss, 91,103, 206-207 pure, 286
body spiritualized by, 224 as pure devotee’s solace, 260-261
for children, 2, 3 purifying power of , 88-89, 198, 208, 252,
defined, 292 264, 300
demons cannot stop, 177 as saving grace, 111
desire purified by, 291-292, 296 self-realization by, 64-65, 80
detachment by, 13-14, 54 sense gratification vs., 93-94
for devotee’s benefit, 197-198, 199 senses purified by, 292
devotees desire, 35, 290-291, 305 society needs, 112, 206-207
as duty, 4, 82-83 via spiritual master, 82-83, 215, 228, 229
as easy, 93-94 success in, 80
as essential, 8 suffering cured by, 206, 207
for everyone, 113 superexcellence of, 162
family life vs., 26-27 as transcendental, 34-35, 78-79, 144, 291
goal of, 281 transmigration ended by, 90
happiness as, 112, 288-289 value of, 2-3, 14, 26-27, 224, 225
for human beings, 2-3, 4-5, 13, 16 Vedas surpassed by, 269, 270
humility vital for, 200, 255 as welfare work, 32-33
ignorance dispelled by, 143 wise men practice, 269, 270
intelligence purified by, 74-75 women eligible for, 55
kinds 01, six listed, 271 yoga culminates in, 271, 272
knowledge by, 54 See also: Krsna consciousness
via Krsna and guru, 98 Devotional service to the Supreme Lord, pro-
liberation by, 90, 212-213, 214, 215, 272, cesses of
321, 322 for devotee’s benefit, 197-198, 199
liberation surpassed by, 162, 264-265 Lord’s association via, 93
Lord controls, 212 Dhani-narayana defined, 115-116
Lord satisfied by, 110, 194 Dharma
Lord understood by, 32, 56-57, 80, 93-94, Lord sanctions, 106-107
194, 200, 267, 268-269, 270 See also: Religion; Religious principles;
love of God by, 110-111 Varnasrama-dharma
material conditions cannot stop, 190 Dharma-saristhapanarthaya
material happiness vs., 103 verse quoted, 176


--- Page 365 ---
364 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Dharmah svanusthitah [01477150778 Duhkhalayam asasvatam
verse quoted, 37, 111 quoted, 96, 258
Dharmasya tattvari nihitarh guhayam Duhkha-ripo pi sarasaro
quoted, 82 verse quoted, 76-77
Dhruva Maharaja Duhkhesv anudvigna-manah
opulence used by, 281 verse quoted, 300
as pure devotee, 276 Durga, Goddess
sense gratification rejected by, 281 demons punished by, 258
Dhyandvasthita-tad-gatena manasa pasyanti materialists worship, 283
yarn yoginah Parvati as, 289
quoted, 191 visage of, 258
Dhyana-yoga, bhakti-yoga completes, Durlabhari» manusari janma
271-272 verse quoted, 16
Disciples. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord Duskrtis
Disciplic succession (s) defined, 204
Absolute Truth via, 208 See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
Brahma in, 57 Dusta mana! tumi kisera vaisnava?
chanting according to, 208 verse quoted, 265-266
devotees understood via, 49 Duty
four listed, 57-58 devotional service as, 4, 82-83
God realization via, 49, 208, 257 of householders to forefathers, 165
knowledge by, 38, 49, 57-58 for human beings and up, 164
Kumaras in, 57-58 of humanlife, 13, 27, 164
Laksmi in, 57-58 in Krsna consciousness, 107
as misunderstood, 57 perfection of, 111
Narada in, 38 preaching as, 112
Prahlada in, 57, 327 of son for dead father, 306
self -realization via, 208 to spiritual master, 85
Siva in, 57 surrender to Krsna as, 126
spiritual master in, 57 ultimate, 36-37
Disease
body as, 222 E
life wasted by, 12
as nature’s law, 13, 95 Earth (Element), sense perceptions included
Distress. See: Suffering in, 66-67
Dreaming Earth planet
activities in, 73 heavenly planets vs., 97-98
material life as, 75, 76-77 Nrsimmhadeva convulsed, 153
Duality, material yogis of , vs. Siddhas, 167
as ignorance, 235, 236 Economic development
as illusion, 234 as dead end, 95-96
Lord above, 226 devotees surpass, 34
mind creates, 128,130 devotional service transcends, 36
pure devotees above, 236 Lord sanctions, 106-107
world as, 298-299 nature’s laws foil, 95, 99
See also: Bodily concept of life self-realization vs., 101


--- Page 366 ---
General Index 365
Economic development Energy (Energies) of the Supreme Lord
as time waster, 7-8 Lord’s work done by, 231, 232, 233
Education material vs. spiritual, 233
devotional service crowns, 36 types of, three listed, 108
as hearing about Krsna, 3 variety caused by, 235
for human beings, 3, 5, 16 world controlled by, 211-212
Krsna consciousness in, 327 Energy, material
material, as sense gratification, 3, 12 body as Lord’s, 242
material vs, spiritual, 2-3, 22-23 living entities exploit, 214
need for spiritual, 7 living entities under, 216
purpose of, 5 Lord controls, 214, 216
in Western countries, 12 as Lord’s veil, 29, 31
Ego, false, Lord controls, 175 types of, eight listed, 66
Ekatraikasya vatsalyamn Enjoyment, material
verse quoted, 186 atheists pursue, 283
Eko py asau racayituri jagad-anda- kotirn demigods attached to, 162
verse quoted, 232 demigod worshipers want, 282-283
Electrons, Lord pervades, 29 for demons treacherous, 147
Elements, material by fallen souls perverted, 214
in atheists theory, 151 as ignorance, 282
five listed, 175 Prahlada shunned, 282, 283
gross and subtle, 67, 69 women attached to, 55
living entities exploit, 214 See also: Happiness, material
Lord controls, 175 Envy
Lord within, 29 in caste brahmanas, 196
number of , 67 cure for, 85
See also: Energy, material; Nature, ma- in demons, 314
terial devotees free of, 305
Elephants in Hiranyakasipu, 131, 202
lions defeat, 142, 150 as ignorance, 130
Nrsimhadeva terrified, 152, 203 toward Krsna consciousness movement,
Elephant vs. lion, Hiranyakasipu vs. 196
Nrsimhadeva compared to, 142, 150 Europeans
Enemy (Enemies) as brahmanas, 196-197
Jaya and Vijaya played Lord’s, 179 as devotees, 196-197
of Krsna as liberated, 319-322 Evariparampara-praptam
mind as, 128, 130 quoted, 208, 256
mind concocts, 129, 130 Evari vyaptar jagad visnuri
senses as, 130 verse quoted, 244
Energy, sense gratification wastes, 6-7 Evolution, animal vs. human, 105
Energy (Energies) of the Supreme Lord Expansions of the Supreme Lord. See:
as all-pervading, 242-243 Supreme Lord, expansions 01, listed
for creation, 214, 232 5
external, as Lord’s veil, 29, 31 F
external, eight listed, 66 Faith
as limitless, 232, 233 knowledge by, 56, 57-58


--- Page 367 ---
366 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Faith (continued) Fruitive activities
in Krsna, 56 devotees shun, 297
in spiritual master, 56-57, 80 fortune according to, 5-6
Family, devotee purifies, 195, 196-197, 303, freedom from, 77-78, 80, 299, 300-301
304 for material desires, 214
Family life as suffering, 104
attachment to, 11-12, 13-14, 18-22, 23, See also: Activities, material; Karma
24-25
as dark well, 14, 19 G
detachment from, 13-14, 24-25
devotional service vs., 26-27 Gadadhara with Lord Caitanya, 248
sense control for, 11-12 Gambling, hell by, 93
as sense gratification, 13, 24-25 Gandha defined, 67
as sex life, 18, 24-25 Gandhakhya devata yadvat
See also: Grhasthas; Householders; House- verse quoted, 244
holders, materialistic Gandharvas
Famine as nature’s law, 95 in devotional service, 109
Fear Nrsirhhadeva honored by, 157
by demigods toward demons, 162 prayed to Nrsirhhadeva, 172-173
by demigods toward Nrsimhadeva, 184, Gandhi, death defeated, 219
185 Garbhodakasayi Visnu
devotees free of, 186 as avatara, 324
devotees protected from, 312-313 Brahma from, 144, 239, 240, 241, 242
by devotees toward Nrsimhadeva, 201 cosmos from, 241
Krsna consciousness dispels, 2, 3, 188, 189 Garuda vs. snake, Nrsimhadeva vs.
Lord’s incarnations dispel, 202 Hiranyakasipu compared to, 145, 146,
in material life, 8-9 149
Nrsimmhadeva dispels devotee’s, 188 Genitals
Prahlada free of, 186, 203 family life indulges, 18
Fish incarnation as transcendental, 246-247 materialists indulge, 262, 263
Flower shower for Nrsirahadeva, 156 Geologist, transcendentalist compared to, 64,
Foodstuffs offered to the Lord. See: Prasada 69
Form of the Supreme Lord Ghosts, worship of , 251
as absolute and transcendental, 246, 247 God. See: Supreme Lord
as blissful, 243, 244 Goddess of fortune
Brahman effulgence from, 244 Nrsirmhadeva frightened, 185, 186
Brahma saw, 243, 244 Prahlada luckier than, 223, 224
devotees understand, 186, 203, 204 See also: Laksmi, Goddess
as eternal, 244 Goddess of learning. See: Sarasvati, Goddess
as limitless, 185 Godhead. See: Spiritual world; Supreme Lord
Mayivadis misunderstand, 246 God realization
as Nrsimmhadeva, 137, 139 by Arjuna, 244
in sound, 136-137 by devotional service, 56-58, 80
Fruitive activities via disciplic succession, 208, 256
body according to, 104-105 goodness promotes, 246
bondage to, 22, 46-47 heavenly elevation vs., 97-98


--- Page 368 ---
General Index 367
God realization Guru
human life for, 252 defined, 215
liberation surpassed by, 267 Lord as, 5
by Lord’s grace, 271 See also: Spiritual master, all entries
via parampara, 49 Guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
by pleasing Krsna, 274 quoted, 98, 229, 324
by preaching Krsna consciousness, 32 verse quoted, 30, 215
via pure devotee’s association, 30-31 Guru-kula
viareligious principles, 327 defined, 13
via sarikirtana, 248 for higher castes, 15
sense gratification disturbs, 252 Guru-padasrayah sadhu-
in sound, 136 quoted, 85
by surrender, 30 Guru-padasrayas tasmat
via Vedas, 246 verse quoted, 82
See also: Devotional service, Lord under-
stood by; Krsna consciousness H
Goodness, mode of
demigods in, 192 Hanti sreyamsi sarvani
God realization promoted by, 246 verse quoted, 122
ignorance and passion overwhelm, 143 Happiness
Goodness, pure vs. impure, 143 Brahman realization, 90-91
Gopi-bhartuh pada-kamalayor dasa- by chanting Hare Krsna, 96
dasanudasah as devotional service, 91, 112, 288-289
quoted, 229, 256, 289 formula for, 4
Gopis, devotees follow, 321 in heavenly planets, 97
Gosthy-anandis of janis, 260
defined, 253-254 of karmis, 260
See also: Preachers, Krsna conscious as Krsna consciousness, 112, 206, 207,
Gosvami defined, 14 208, 209, 210-211, 259, 260, 261
Govardhana Hill, Krsna raised, 86 by Lord’s mercy, 210-211
Government material. See: Happiness, material
in Kali-yuga demoniac, 162, 169 materialists lack, 100-101, 258
punishes swindlers, 21 material vs. spiritual, 96, 103
sacrifices stopped by demoniac, 166 paradox of, 100
Greed by pleasing Krsna, 274
cure for, 85 sex as false, 262
as ignorance, 130 by surrender to Krsna 212, 217
Grhamedhis, sex life adored by, 262 transcendental, 90-91
Grhastha-asrama world lacks, 222, 258, 259
preparation for, 13-16 See also: Bliss
See also: Family life, all entries; House- Happiness, material
holders animals enjoy, 96
Grhasthas as destined, 5-6, 101
material vs. spiritual, 13-16 devotees reject, 35
See also: Family life; Householders, all en- devotional service vs., 103
tries Dhruva rejected, 276


--- Page 369 ---
368 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Happiness, material (continued) Heavenly planets
as distress, 100 earth vs., 97-98
futility of, 222 elevation to, 214-215, 218-219
as illusory, 99-100, 101, 206, 207, 222, falling from, 97-98
223 forefathers promoted to, 306-307
Krsna consciousness vs., 103 happiness in, 97
Prahlada rejected, 276 Hiranyakasipu promoted to, 306-307
pure devotees reject, 96 Hiranyakasipu terrorized, 122
pure devotees utilize, 296 as impure, 97
sex as basis 01, 104 king of , 45
spiritual happiness vs., 96, 103 life as temporary in, 97-98
as temporary, 222, 223 Prahlada glorified in, 298
as time waster, 6-7 via sacrifice, 97
See also: Enjoyment, material; Pleasure, Hell
material by sense indulgence, 94
Hare Krsna mantra by sinful activity, 93
happiness via, 96 Himalayan Mountains, meditators retreat to,
for Kali-yuga, 250-251 260
love of God via, 96 Hippies, renunciation incomplete by, 262
for purification, 250 Hiranya defined, 131
See also: Chanting the Lord’s holy names Hiranyakasipu
Hare Krsna movement. See: Krsna conscious- in anger, 134
ness movement austerities by, 43, 51, 311
Harer nama harer nama Brahma blessed, 149, 311
quoted, 96 character of, 121, 122, 166
verse quoted, 3, 251 Dantavakra as, 317
Hari-bhaktau ca taj-jiiane demigods conquered by, 218
verse quoted, 225 demigods feared, 146
Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya, quoted on good as demon No. 1, 45, 51
qualifications, material vs. spiritual, envy in, 131, 202
195-196 false confidence of, 147
Haridasa Thakura feared Nrsimhadeva, 148
imitating, forbidden, 52, 266 as Jaya, 155,179
as transcendental, 52 Lord’s effulgence overwhelmed, 143
Hayagriva, Lord, demons killed by, 245, 246 Lord’s mercy on, 179
Health, value of good, 8-9 Manus overruled by, 170
Hearing about the Supreme Lord as materialist No. 1, 295
ecstasy 0, 86 meningitis compared to, 156
education for, 3 mother of, 317
as life’s purpose, 327 mystic power of, 167, 311
Lord’s association by, 93 Nagaloka plundered by, 169
from pure devotees, 119 name of, meaning of , 131
recommended, 81 Nrsimhadeva dethroned, 155
sense gratification disturbs, 252 Nrsimhadeva killed, 149, 150, 151, 230,
spiritual world via, 94 231


--- Page 370 ---
General Index 369
Hiranyakasipu Householders, materialistic
Nrsirmhadeva killed soldiers of, 151 fate of, 24-25
Nrsirahadeva mystified, 141 liberation inaccessible to, 13-14, 24-25
Nrsirnhadeva purified, 302, 306 Lord saves, 19
Nrsimhadeva toyed with, 146, 147 as money-grubbers, 15, 21
pillar sound scared, 136 sense control lacking in, 13-14, 21, 25
power of, 122, 124, 149,167, 168, 218, silkworms compared to, 18
219, 311 spiritual mastersaves, 19
Prahlada condemned by, 122-123 Hrsikena hrsikesa-
Prahlada mistreated by, 122 verse quoted, 212, 292
Prahlada misunderstood by, 133 Human beings
Prahlada’s advice rejected by, 131 animal life awaits degraded, 3, 7, 12
Prahlada saved, 124, 131, 303 animals, vs., 96, 105
Prahlada’s power perplexed, 125 austerity for, 164
prajapatis’ service hampered by, 172 devotional service for, 2-3, 4-5, 13-14,
Ravana as, 318 16,109
saints relished death of, 202 duty of, 13, 27
salvation for, 131 education for, 3, 5, 22-23
Siddhas conquered by, 167 freedom for, 293
universe plagued by, 156 God realization for, 252
Vedic culture disturbed by, 162, 171 karma and jana ruin, 297
Vidyadharas conquered by, 168 Krsna consciousness for, 101
wife of, 49, 230-231 life span of, 9-10
Yaksas’ service degraded by, 175 life span of , vs. Brahma’s life span, 9-10
Hiranyakasipu, quotations from Lord inconceivable to, 269
on God’s whereabouts, 132,133 Lord vs., 237-238
on Prahlada as rascal, 122,124, 131 morality applies to, 8-9
Hiranyaksa self-realization for, 164 +
Kumbhakarna as, 318 spiritual master for, 105-106
mother of, 317 See also: Souls, conditioned
Sisupala as, 317 Husband. See: Marriage
Hitler, death defeated, 219
Hitopadesa, quoted on fools angered by good 1
advice, 131
Hitvatma-pdtara grham andha- kipam Ignorance
quoted, 14, 24-25 bodily concept of life as, 7
Hog incarnation as transcendental, 246-247 civilization in, 7
Holy name of the Lord. See: Chanting the conditioned souls in, 63, 75-77
Lord’s holy names; Supreme Lord, ap- devotional service dispels, 88, 144
propriate entries duality as, 235
Householders enemies imagined by, 130
duty to forefathers for, 165 Krsna consciousness dispels, 78
See also: Family life; Grhasthas, all entries leaders in, 7
Householders, materialistic Lord dispels, 76-77, 143
animals compared to, 22-23 materialists in, 22-23, 254


--- Page 371 ---
370 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Ignorance (continued) Incarnations of the Supreme Lord
material life as, 75, 76-77 See also: Avataras; names of individual in-
material relationships as, 103 carnations
maya as, 130 Indra, King, 149
mode of. See: Ignorance, mode of as demigods’ king, 47
modes of nature as, 144 demons vs., 43-44
sense gratification as, 282 devotee’s status vs., 225
sleep as, 9-10 as heaven's king, 45
soul’s transmigration as, 75-76, 105 life as struggle for, 97
surrender forbidden by, 199 Narada obeyed by, 49
See also: Illusion Prahlada’s mother arrested by, 45-47
Ignorance, mode of prayed to Nrsimhadeva, 162
demons in, 245-146 quoted on Prahlada’s mother with child, 47
sleepin, 237 Indriyani parany ahur
as struggle, 258 verse quoted, 74
symptoms of, 224 Insanity
_ world controlled by 143 cure for, 85
Iha yasya harer dasye as ignorance, 130
verse quoted, 300 Intelligence
Illusion activity states of, three listed, 72
bodily concept of life as, 61, 63, 65 Krsna consciousness revives, 78
demons condemn religion as, 133-134 Lord controls, 175
devotional service dispels, 85 Lord understood by, 73
duality as, 234 materialists lack, 20
as ignorance, 130 mind and senses vs., 74
material happiness as, 207, 222, 223 of monists small, 63
materialists in, 11, 289, 295 polluted, 74-75
world in, 207 purification of, 74-75
See also: Maya purpose of human, 2
Imam vivasvate yoga soul perceived by, 74
quoted, 170-171 worshiping Krsna as, 296
Incarnations of the Supreme Lord International Society for Krishna Conscious-
as absolute and transcendental, 245, ness.
246-147 See: Krsna consciousness movement
devotees protected by, 176 Intoxication
fear dispelled by, 202 hell by, 93
as Hayagriva, 245-246 Krsna consciousness movement forbids, 252
hearing about, 86, 327 Iron rod in fire
in Kali-yuga, 248 body in devotional service compared to,
as Kapila, 67 224
Manus as, 170 devotee in devotional service compared to,
power of, 153 89
purpose of, 201 Irreligion, Lord vanquishes, 176
teach by example, 284 Isavasyam idari sarvam
universe maintained by, 247-248 quoted, 234


--- Page 372 ---
General Index 371
ISKCON. See: Krsna consciousness movement Jaana
Isvarah paramah krsnah defined, 68
quoted, 244, 267 ‘yoga above, 78
verse quoted, 115, 235 See also: Knowledge; Knowledge, tran-
Fsvarah sarva-bhitanam scendental
verse quoted, 100, 108 Jrana-bhakta
J defined, 322
liberation for, 322
Jagad dhanamayam lubdhah Jrana-kanda
verse quoted, 115 devotees shun, 297
Jagai and Madhai, Krsnadasa Kaviraja com- life spoiled by, 297
pares himself to, 192-193 Jianar ca satyam ca damah $rutam ca
Jagai madhai haite mudi se papistha verse quoted, 196
verse quoted, 192 Jiana-yoga, bhakti-yoga completes, 271-272
Janame janame haya, ei abhilasa Jranis
verse quoted, 228-229, 256 desire of , 35
Janann apy atmano duhkham happiness ०, 260
verse quoted, 77 soul misunderstood by, 64
Janasya moho yam aha mameti See also: Mayavadis (Impersonalists); Phi-
quoted, 63 losophers, speculative
Janayaty asu vairagyari Jiatva manas tatha brahma
verse quoted, 14, 54 verse quoted, 186
Janmady asya yatah
verse quoted, 242, 267 K
Janma karma ca me divyam
quoted, 220 Kaitabha demon
verse quoted, 76, 113 Hayagriva killed, 245-246
Janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi purification 01, 307
quoted, 210, 283, 292 Kalau nasty eva nasty eva
Janma sarthaka kari’ kara para-upakara verse quoted, 3, 251
verse quoted, 112 Kali-yuga (Age of Kali)
Jaya, Hiranyakasipu as, 155,179 bogus avatdrasin, 323, 324
Jaya and Vijaya government demoniac in, 162, 169
in Krsna’s pastimes, 159, 179 ignorancein, 7
Kumaras cursed, 179 Lord's incarnation in, 247-248
Lord counseled, 179-180 panacea for, 3, 250, 251
Jealousy. See: Envy people oppressed in, 169
Jiva Gosvami, cited on chanting Prahlada’s Kama
pastimes, 300-301 defined, 184
Jivas Lord sanctions, 106-107
perfection for, 113 See also: Lust; Sense gratification
See also: Living entities; Soul; Souls,con- = Kamad dvesad bhayat snehad
ditioned quoted, 319
Jivera ‘svaripa’ haya— krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’ Kamais tais tair hrta-jianah
quoted, 216, 226, 228 quoted, 282, 287


--- Page 373 ---
372 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Karmsa, King Kaumara acaret prajio
feared Krsna, 320 verse quoted, 16
liberation of, 320, 321-322 Kaunteya pratijanthi
Kariksate moksa-gam api quoted, 48, 124, 133, 138, 210, 231
quoted, 35 Kayadhu
Kapila, Lord, as authority, 306 husband of, 49
Karanodakasayi Visnu Narada protected, 230-231
Lord as, 237 son of , 52
from Sankarsana, 239 See also: Prahlada’s mother, all entries
“sleep” 01, 237 ‘Ke ami’, ‘kene amaya jare tapa-traya’
See also: Maha-Visnu quoted, 22
Karma Kecid bhakta vinrtyanti
body according to, 67, 104 verse quoted, 89
bondage to, 22 Kecit tusnim japanty eva
life as, 205 verse quoted, 89
Lord dissolves, 313 Kesava dhrta-nara-hari-ripa jaya jagadisa
nondevotees ignorant of, 254 hare
yoga above, 78 quoted, 204
See also: Activities, material; Fruitive ac- Kimpurusas prayed 10 Nrsirhhadeva, 176
tivities King (s)
Karma-kanda brahmacarya training for, 15-16
defined, 195, 214. detachment by, 15-16
devotees shun, 297 Prahlada as, 295-296, 305, 309, 315,
life spoiled by, 297 316
See also: Fruitive activities; Ritualistic See also: Ksatriyas
ceremonies King of heaven. See: Indra, King, all entries
Karma-kanda, jiana- kinda, kevala visera Kinnaras prayed to Nrsirhhadeva, 178
bhanda Knowledge
quoted, 297 via Bhagavatam, 326
Karma-mimarasa philosophy as misconcep- by devotional service, 14, 54
tion, 107 via disciplic succession, 57-58
Karmana daiva-netrena from Krsna, 73
quoted, 104, 212 materialists lack, 19-20, 22-23
Karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam via parampara, 49
quoted, 313 renunciation by, 14
Karmany evadhikaras te speculative, as futile, 208
quoted, 107 as surrender to Krsna, 68, 126-127
Karma-yoga, bhakti-yoga completes, Knowledge, transcendental
271-272 via Bhagavatam, 220, 326
Karmis (Fruitive workers) by bhakti-yoga, 65
desire 01, 35 for devotees, 56-57
happiness of, 260 devotees spread, 246
See also: Materialists; Nondevotees by disciplic succession, 38
Kasipu defined, 131 by faith, 56-57
Kaumara acaret prajio material conditions cannot stop, 42
quoted, 13, 53, 85, 327 as misunderstood, 57


--- Page 374 ---
General Index 373
Knowledge, transcendental Krsna consciousness
via pure devotees, 38 need for, 7, 76, 97-98, 112, 220-221, 263
soul understood by, 64 of pure devotees, 114-115
via spiritual master, 38 purifying power of, 88-89, 251
subjects of, twenty-six listed, 66-67 self-realization by, 97-98
as surrender to Krsna, 244. sense gratification vs., 96
varnasrama-dharma facilitates, 170 senses controlled in, 252
for women, 56 sin dispelled by, 250
Krishna. See: Krsna, Lord: Supreme Lord society benefited by, 198
Krishna consciousness. See: Krsna conscious- soul freed by, 199
ness via spiritual master, 76, 326
Krodha spiritual world by. 215, 239-240
defined, 184 as transcendental, 78, 144
See also: Anger as yoga’s perfection, 79
Krsna, Lord yoga vs., 260, 261
as Absolute Truth, 29-31 See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
activities of. See: Pastimes of Krsna Lord
devotees follow associates of, 321 Krsna consciousness movement
as original cause, 239 caste brahmanasenvy, 196
as original person, 323, 324 as mankind's hope, 151. 210
quoted on surrender to Him, 13 Nrsirhhadeva protects, 174
See also: Appearance of Krsna (Descent); preachers in. See: Preachers, Krsna con-
Pastimes of Krsna; Supreme Lord, scious
all entries as preaching movement, 260-261
Krsna consciousness purpose of, 207, 250, 260-261, 324
benefit of, 119, 120 sankirtana as basis 01, 248-249
via Bhagavatam, 326 spiritual power of, 239
as bliss, 103, 206-207 success formula for, 324
duty in, 107 value of, 3
ecstatic symptoms of, 86-87 Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami, quoted on him-
in education, 327 self, 192-193
as eternal, 113 Krsna-kirtana
fallen souls ignore, 254 defined, 93
fear absent in, 188-189 See also: Chanting the Lord's holy names:
freedom by, 76 Hearing about the Supreme Lord
happiness as, 112, 206-207, 208-209, 210 Krsna se tomara, krsna dite para
heavenly elevation vs. 97-98 quoted, 256
ignorance dispelled by, 78, 144 Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam
intelligence revived by, 78 quoted, 324
introspection in, 130 Krsna—sirya-sama, maya haya andhakara
liberation by, 76 verse quoted, 144
as life’s purpose, 101 Krsna-varnam tvisakrsnarn
via Lord Caitanya, 261 verse quoted, 248
lust spoils, 292 Ksatriyas
material happiness vs., 103 disqualification for, 8
meditation vs., 260-261 guru-kula for, 15


--- Page 375 ---
374 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Ksatriyas (continued) Liberation
social status of, 196 for conditioned souls, 174, 215
Ksetra-ksetrajiayor jignam of Dantavakra, 319-321
quoted, 68 defined, 291
Ksetresu dehesu tathatma-yogair by devotee’s association, 25
quoted, 66 devotees surpass, 34-35, 265
Ksine punye martya- lokam visanti by devotional service, 90-91, 213, 215,
quoted, 97 272,321, 322
Ksirodakasayi Visnu as 0001270, 324 devotional service surpasses, 36, 162, 265
Kumiras eligibility for, 300
in disciplic succession, 57 from fruitive activities, 299, 300-301
Jaya and Vijaya cursed by, 179 for Hiranyakasipu, 131
names of, 179 human life for, 265
Kumara-sampradaya, 58 for jiana-bhakta, 322
Kumbhakarna of Karnsa, 320, 321-322
as Hiranyaksa, 318 by Krsna consciousness, 76, 113
Rama killed, 318 Lord’s enemies attained, 319-322
Kumuda, 158 Lord’s lotus feet as, 174, 205, 214.
Kurari captured by vulture, Prahlada’s mother love of God as, 82
compared to, 46 materialists cannot attain, 14, 24-25
from material world, 283
L meditators seek, 260
methods for, ten listed, 264
Laghima-siddhi, Siddhas possess, 167 of Narakasura, 321-322
Laksmi, Goddess via Nrsirhadeva-katha, 299, 328
in disciplic succession, 57 of Paundraka, 321-322
Prahlada luckier than, 223-224 via Prahlada-katha, 299, 300-301, 328
See also: Goddess of Fortune, all entries of Salva, 321-322
Laugther of Nrsimhadeva, 148 for sensualists, 264
Law(s) of nature of Sisupala, 317, 319-322
conditioned souls bonds by, 100, 130 via spiritual master, 106
demons punished by, 147, 258 by surrender to Krsna, 217
economic development foiled by, 95, 99 Vedas for, 215
empires foiled by, 95 yogaas, 78
famine as, 95 Life
four hard-and-fast, 95, 100, 210 animal vs. human, 105
Lord’s mercy suspends, 258 duty in, 13-14, 27, 164
punish offenders to pure devotees, 121 goal of, 78, 105-106, 113-114, 120, 289
war as, 95 for God realization, 252
See also: Nature, material health’s value for, 8-9
Laws of the Supreme Lord, atheists ignore, 21 invalidity wastes, 12
Leaders, government, in ignorance, 7 karma and [7072 ruin, 297
Liberation liberation for human, 264-265
austerity needed for, 264 lust ruins, 291, 292
bogus, 74 material. See: Life, material
by chanting Lords holy names, 208 materialist’s span of, 295


--- Page 376 ---
General Index 375
Life Living entities
materialists waste, 7, 10-11, 12, 19-20, devotional service frees, 98
22) devotional service purifies, 198
money dearer to materialist than, 15, 21 embodied, 101, 104
morality for human, 8-9 evolution of, 105
oversleeping wastes, 9, 10-11 identity of, 198
perfection of, 12,32, 85,109, 110-111, Lord above, 127
113-114 Lord directs, 211-212
purpose of, 2-3, 4, 5-6, 13-16, 19-20, Lord fulfills desires of, 100
36-37, 53, 76, 96 Lord’s energy exploited by, 214
soul causes, 59, 62, 71 as Lords parts and parcels, 25-26, 108
spans 01, relative, 9-10 as Lord’s servants, 227, 288-289
species 01. See: Species of life Lord vs., 59-63, 67-68, 73
success in, 56 Lord within, 25, 29, 30-31, 93, 100, 108
value of human, 19-20, 263 Manus as empowered, 170
Life, material mind entraps, 214
as body consciousness 282 Narayana vs., 84
as dead end, 95 nature’s laws control, 130
devotees shun, 254 Paramatma vs., 67-68, 73, 84
as dream, 75-76 pure vs. polluted, 292
duality of, 6 respect for all, 84, 87
as fearful, 8-9 size 01, 62
as foolishness, 19-20 species 01, number of, 164
freedom from, 76, 79-80, 105, 205, subtle body of, 214
206-207, 283 suffering of, 4-5, 100
futility of, 218-219 as transcendental, 61, 62-63
in heavenly planets, 97 universe entraps, 215
as ignorance, 75, 77 See also: Soul; Souls, conditioned
as illusion, 11 Lobha
as karma, 204-205 defined, 184
as lust, 283, 291 See also: Greed
opulences in, three listed, 221 Logic, devotional service transcends, 36
Prahlada rejected, 220, 282, 283 Lokas
problems of, 8-9, 90 defined, 169
sex as basis of, 104, 282 See also: Universe
as sinful, 80 Lord Caitanya. See: Caitanya Mahaprabhu
spiritual life vs., 212 Lotus feet of the Supreme Lord
as suffering, 75, 77, 100, 206-207, as all-auspicious, 109
216-217, 222-223, 253-254 dependence on, 107
as waste, 10-11, 12 as liberation, 174, 205, 214
Lions, elephants defeated by, 142,150 meditation on, 82, 238
Living entities mind pacified at, 128-129
bodies sustained by, 62 Prahlada at, 127,189-190
consciousness states 01, 72-73 pure devotees at, 124
as dependent, 126 purifying power of, 92
desires designate, 230 self-realization via, 74


--- Page 377 ---
376 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Lotus feet of the Supreme Lord (continued) Madhvicarya, quotations from
shelter at, 88, 216 on liberation of Krsna’s enemies, 321-322
trance via, 191 on Lord as all-pervading, 244
Lotus flower, Brahma on, 239, 240, 242, 314, on Lord Caitanya’s ecstasy, 89
315 on material life, 76-77
Love of God on Nrsimhhadeva and Prahlada, 186
bhava precedes, 275 on Supersoul, 31
by chanting Hare Krsna, 96 Mahajana, Prahlada as, 57, 109
by devotional service, 110-11, 281 Mahajano yena gatah sa panthah
as liberation, 82 quoted, 193, 208, 221
as life’s perfection, 111 Maha-mantra. See: Chanting the Lord’s holy
relationships in, 5 names; Hare Krsna mantra
types of, four listed, 96 Maharaja Yudhisthira. See: Yudhisthira
See also: Rasas (Relationships with Krsna) Maharaja
LSD illusion, demons liken religious ecstasy Mahatmal(s)
to, 134 defined, 63, 127
Lust Prahlada as, 127
danger of, 11-12 surrender to Krsna, 63
in heart, 283-284 Maha-Visnu
Krsna consciousness ruined by, 292 as avatara, 324
life ruined by, 291, 292 forms 01, three listed, 239
material life due to, 283, 291 See also: Karanodakasayi Visnu
See also: Desire, material; Sex life Maithuna
defined, 188
M See also: Sex life
Mamaivamso jiva-loke
quoted, 62
Mada Mama janmani janmanisvare
defined, 184 quoted, 292
See also: Pride verse quoted, 277, 290
Mad-bhakta-pijabhyadhika Mar ca yo 'vyabhicarena
quoted, 256 verse quoted, 36, 78, 190, 196, 224
Madhu demon Mam eva ye prapadyante
Hayagriva killed, 245-246 quoted, 217, 263
purification of, 307 verse quoted, 30
Madhu-kaitabhau bhakty-abdva Mari hi partha vyapasritya
verse quoted, 307 verse quoted, 55, 190
Madhvacarya, cited Man. See: Human beings
on creation’s oneness and variety, 235-236 == Manah sasthanindriyani
on living entity, 73 quoted, 130
on Lord as transcendental, 238 Manasas tu para buddhir
on Prahlada’s good fortune, 225 verse quoted, 74
Madhvacarya, quotations from Mandah sumanda-matayo
on devotees as transcendental, 35 quoted, 123
on devotee’s good fortune, 225 Mandaracala Mountain, Hiranyakasipu at,
on liberated souls, 114 43


--- Page 378 ---
General Index 377
Manu(s) Material nature. See: Nature, material
as authority, 306 Material nature, modes of. See: Modes of ma-
in disciplic succession, 171 terial nature
father 01, 170 Material world
Hiranyakasipu overruled, 170 atheists overrunning, 151
identified, 170 for austerity, 164
life span of, 295 bondage to, 22
prayed to Nrsirihadeva, 170 as dangerous, 299
as society’s law-givers, 170 demons ruin, 160
Manu-sambhita devotees callous to, 219
identified, 170 duality in, 6, 289-299
varnasrama-dharma in, 170 as fearful, 188
Marriage as foreign, 198
training for, 13-14 freedom from, 283
wife's charm in, 18 happiness absent in, 100, 222, 258, 259
Materialism in ignorance, 144
as body consciousness, 282 in illusion, 207
Prahlada rejected, 220, 221 for living entity’s exploitation, 214
sex as basis of, 282 Lord beyond, 237-238
See also: Life, material; Material world Lord creates and controls, 127, 159, 160,
Materialists 211-212,216
Absolute Truth neglected by, 19-20 Lord illuminates, 143
as demons, 25 under modes of nature, 143, 211-212
in devotional service, 285, 286 necessities of, four listed, 188
as failures, 99 people in, two kinds of, 151, 162
as fools, 257, 258 Prahlada callous to, 219, 260, 261
happiness eludes, 100, 258-259 protection lacking in, 209-210, 217
in ignorance, 22-23, 254 as relative, 10
in illusion, 289, 295 river border of, 258
intelligence absent in, 20 senses rule, 130
knowledge absent in, 20, 22-23 sex life as basis of , 104
life span of, 295 spiritual world vs., 143, 233, 239-240,
life wasted by, 7, 10-11, 12, 19-20, 258, 259
22-23 as suffering, 95-96, 205, 206, 208, 210,
money blinds, 19-20 217, 258, 259, 283
sense gratification baffles, 222-223 Matra svasra duhitra va
sex life adored by, 262 verse quoted, 51
silkworms compared to, 22 Matsarya
spiritual world beyond, 289 defined, 184
suffering of, 20 See also: Envy
temple worship by, 285, 286 Mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
women control, 24-25 verse quoted, 71, 232, 268
worship demigods, 282-283, 287 Mattah parataram nanyat
See also: Karmis (Fruitive workers); Non- quoted, 72, 212
devotees Mattah smrtir jianam apohanam ca
Material life. See: Life, material quoted, 73, 212


--- Page 379 ---
378 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Matter. See: Energy, material; Nature, ma- Mercy of the Supreme Lord
terial on conditioned souls, 123, 205
Mauna, defined, 265 for everyone, 224
Maya God realization by, 271
defined, 217 happiness by, 210
as ignorance, 130 on Hiranyakasipu, 179
material opulence as, 281 ignorance dispelled by, 76, 77
as punisher, 123 Krsna consciousness movement's success
as suffering, 217 by, 324
See also: Illusion; Material world; Nature, living entities dependent on, 126
material nature’s laws suspended by, 258
Mayadhyaksena prakrtih Merging with the Supreme. See: Janis;
quoted, 214 Liberation; Mayavadis
Maya tatam idem sarvam Mind
quoted, 29 bondage to, 214
verse quoted, 71, 232, 268 devotional service controls, 129
Mayavadis (Impersonalists) duality created by, 129, 130
Absolute Truth misunderstood by, 235, as enemy, 128, 130
272, intelligence and senses vs., 74
devotees vs., 290-291 Lord controls, 175
Lord’s form misunderstood by, 246 Lord powers, 127
negation by, 292 meditation for, 238
self-realization misunderstood by, 242 purification of, 251
See also: Jiianis sin pollutes, 249
Mayayapahrta-jaana in trance, 191
verse quoted, 198 Misery. See: Suffering
Meat-eating Moda
hell by, 93 defined, 184
Krsna consciousness movement forbids, See also: Tllusion
252 Modes of material nature
Medini dictionary, quoted on yoga, 78 Brahman effulgence above, 144
Meditation Brahma under, 211
demons disturb demigods’, 162 conditioned souls under, 258
Krsna consciousness vs., 2607-261 as darkness, 144
on Lord’s lotus feet, 82, 238 devotees surpass, 34, 190, 196, 208, 224
for mind, 238 divisions 01, 67
for mystic powers, 221 freedom from, 78
on Supersoul, 90, 94 Lord above, 127, 143-144, 216
on Visnu, 320 Lord manifests, 239
by yogis, 320 Lord pervades, 29
Meningitis, Hiranyakasipu compared to, 156 senses according to, 67
Mental speculation, See: Knowledge, specula- world under, 143, 211-212, 232
tive, as futile See also: Nature, material; individual
Merchants modes (goodness, passion, ig-
money dearer than life to, 15 norance)
See also: Vaisyas Moghul Empire, nature’s laws foiled, 95


--- Page 380 ---
General Index 379
Moksa Nagas prayed to Nrsimmhadeva, 169
Lord sanctions, 106 Nahar prakasah sarvasya
See also: Liberation quoted, 132, 194
Money Na hanyate hanyamane sarire
attachment to, 15, 19-21 quoted, 220
cheating for, 21 Naiti bhakti-sukhambhodheh
life risked for, 15, 21 verse quoted, 91
materialists blinded by, 19-20 Na mam duskrtino mudhah
See also: Opulence, material verse quoted, 198, 250
Monists Names of God. See: Chanting the Lord’s holy
intelligence of, 63 names
See also: Janis; Mayavadis (Imper- Napoleon, death defeated, 218, 219
sonalists) Narada Muni
Mrtyuh sarva-haras caham as authority, 306
quoted, 313 imitating, forbidden, 52
Mudhas Indra submitted to, 49
defined, 126 Lord kept promise of, 230-231
Lord misunderstood by, 139 Prahlada compared to, 298
Mukti Prahlada instructed by, 39, 42,53, 54, 56,
defined, 78, 213, 221 119, 228
See also: Liberation, all entries with Prahlada’s mother, 49-51, 52, 53,
Muktih 5৮০) ৫773 mukulitaijali sevate sman 230-231
quoted, 34 as spiritual master, 38
Muktir hitvanyatha-rapam as transcendental, 52, 53
quoted, 78 Narada Muni, quotations from
Mysticism. See: Krsna consciousness; Medita- on demigods fearing Nrsirnhadeva,
tion; Yogis 184-185
Mystic power on Hiranyakasipu and Prahlada, 121
of Hiranyakasipu, 167,311 on Madhu and Kaitabha demons, 307
laghima-siddhi as, 167 on Nrsirmhhadeva and Prahlada, 187, 188,
of Siddhas, 166, 167 189,190,191
trance as, 191 on Prahlada, 42, 48, 276, 281, 309
types 01, number of, 221 on Prahlada’s classmates’ conversion, 119
of Vidyadharas, 168 on Prahlada’s mother, 47
Mystic yoga. See: Mystic power; Yoga on Sanda and Amarka’s anxiety, 120
Narada-paricaratra, quoted on spiritual life,
N revival of, 212-213
Naradhamas
Na ca tasman manusyesu defined, 199
quoted, 32 See also: Atheists; Demons; Materialists
Na dhanam na jana na sundarim Narakasura, liberation of, 321-322
quoted, 96 Narayana, Lord
verse quoted, 277, 290 as absolute and transcendental. 33
Nagaloka as Ajamila’s savior, 26
Hiranyakasipu plundered, 169 daridra vs. dhani
location 01, 169 as father of all, 25-26


--- Page 381 ---
380 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Narayanam ayam dhirah (continued) Nityasyoktah sariranah
as Krsna's expansion, 324 quoted, 60
as living entity vs., 84 Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam
relationship with, 26 quoted, 60, 62
as well-wisher, 38 Nondevotees
See also: Supreme Lord devotees vs., 86, 123, 176, 265
Narayanam ayam dhirah karmaignored by, 254
verse quoted, 115 See also: Materialists
Narayana-parah sarve Notpadayed yadi ratim
quoted, 186 verse quoted, 37, 111
verse quoted, 260 Nrsirmhadeva, Lord, 131
Narottama dasa Thakura, cited on Krsna con- as absolute and transcendental,
sciousness, 107 143
Narottama dasa Thakura, quotations from anger of, 184
on anger, spiritual, 184 appearance of, cause of, 144
on karma-kanda and jiana-kanda, 297 Brahma prayed to, 159, 310-313
on Krsna consciousness, need for, 220 Brahma's promise preserved by, 138, 139,
on serving Lord's servants, 229, 256 149
Na sadhu manye yata atmano yam Caranas prayed to, 173-174
quoted, 76 demigods feared, 184-185
Na tasya karyam karanan ca vidyate demigods honored, 157
quoted, 231 demons surrendered to, 155
Na te viduh svartha-gatim hivisnum devotees frightened by, 201
quoted, 289 as devotee’s shelter, 164, 174, 188, 202,
Nature, material 324
body via, 108 Earth convulsed by, 153
conditioned souls under, 66, 210, 217 elephants terrified by, 152
demons punished by, 258 emergence 01, from pillar,137, 139
Durgaas, 258 flower shower for, 156
Krsna above, 214 Gandharvas honored, 157
as mother, 26 Gandharvas prayed to, 172-173
See also: Body, material; Laws of nature; Hare Krsna movement protected by,
Modes of material nature 174
Nayam dtma pravacanena labhyo Hiranyakasipu dethroned by, 155
quoted, 271 Hiranyakasipu feared, 148
Nidra Hiranyakasipu fooled by, 146, 147
defined, 188 Hiranyakasipu mystified by, 141
See also: Sleep Hiranyakasipu overwhelmed by effulgence
Nikhilasv apy avasthasu of, 143
verse quoted, 300 Hiranyakasipu purified by, 302, 306
Nityananda, Lord, with Lord Caitanya, 248 Hiranyakasipu vs., 142, 143, 145-151
Nitya-siddhas Indra prayed to, 162
defined, 284, 298 killed Hiranyakasipu, 149, 150, 151,
sadhana-siddhas vs., 284 230-231
See also: Pure devotees of the Supreme killed Hiranyakasipu’s soldiers, 151
Lord; Souls, liberated kills demons, 151


--- Page 382 ---
General Index 381
Nrsimhadeva, Lord, 131 Opium illusion, demons liken religious ecstasy
Kimpurusas prayed to, 176 to, 134
Kinnaras prayed to, 178 Opulence, material
as Krsna’s expansion, 324 Ambarisa used, 281
laughter of, 148 atheists indulge, 295
liberation by glorifying, 299, 328 danger of, 281
Manus prayed to, 170 demigod worshipers want, 282-283
mission of, 201 devotees use, 297
Nagas prayed to, 169 devotional service uses, 281
Pitas prayed to, 165 Dhruva used, 281
power of, 152, 154-155, 159 as God's gift, 281
Prahlada favored by, 188, 223-224 Lord Caitanya rejected, 290
Prahlada pacified, 272 Prahlada used, 281, 295-296
Prahlada prayed to, 192, 271, 290, 302 pure devotees use, 281, 285
Prahlada purified by, 189-190 Yudhisthira used, 281
Prahlada unafraid of, 203 See also: Money
Prajapatis prayed to, 172 Opulence, spiritual, renunciation for, 293
protects preachers, 174
quoted on Prahlada’s good fortune, 273, P
275
religious principles recovered by, 165
sacrifices rescued by, 162, 165 Padma Purana, quoted on life’s goal,
saints prayed to, 164 289
Siddhas prayed to, 166-167 Pain. See: Suffering
Siva prayed to, 160 Panditah sama-darsinah
Vaitalikas prayed to, 177 quoted, 129
Vidyadharas prayed to, 168 Parabrahman. See: Brahman, Supreme
visage of, 141, 150, 152, 154, 203 Paramatma. See: Supersoul
Visnu’s associates prayed to, 179 Parari bhavam ajanantah
Yaksas prayed to, 175 quoted, 139
Nrsimhari san kiteva $rir Para brahma parari dhama
verse quoted, 186 quoted, 244
Parampara. See: Disciplic succession, all en-
0 tries
Param vijayate sri krsna-sankirtanam
Offenses quoted, 27
bad effects of, 122 Parasya $aktirvividhaiva Sriayate
by Hiranyakasipu to Prahlada, 121 quoted, 139, 231
to pure devotees, 121-122 Paratah svatah karmato va
Offerings to Krsna; 94 verse quoted, 225
Old age Paritranaya sadhana
anxiety in, 11 quoted, 201, 247
material life wastes, 10-11, 12 verse quoted, 176
as nature's law, 13, 95 Parvati
Oneness. See: Jiianis; Liberation; Mayavadis; as Durga, 289
Monists husband of, 289


--- Page 383 ---
382 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Passion, mode of Politicians
demons in, 245 failure of modern, 99
as struggle, 258 sense gratification baffles, 222
symptoms of, 224 See also: Leaders, government, in ig-
Pastimes of Krsna norance
in anger, 161 Politics. See: Government
fools misunderstand, 86 Power
at Govardhana Hill, 86 of Hiranyakasipu, 122, 124, 149, 167,
hearing ०, 86 168, 218, 311
as inconceivable, 159 of Nrsirhhadeva, 152-155, 159
Jaya and Vijaya in, 159, 179 of Prahlada over Hiranyakasipu, 125
liberation by understanding, 76, 113 of Supreme Lord, 126, 127, 148, 152,
purifying power of, 88 159, 218, 219
as transcendental, 86, 159 See also: Mystic power
Patra puspar phalam toyam Pradyumna, Lord, as Krsna’s expansion, 324
verse quoted, 94, 286 Prahlada Maharaja
Paundraka, liberation of, 321-322 as authority, 195, 306
Paundrake narake caiva in bliss, 259
verse quoted, 321 body of, 224
Peace born among demons, 42, 159, 190, 191,
demons destroy, 171 199, 223, 224, 282, 283, 295
disturbances to domestic, 169 character of, 121
formula for, 4, 32-33 classmates converted by, 119, 120
varnasrama-dharma provides, 170 classmates instructed by, 31-32, 42,
Penance. See: Austerity 56-115
People compassion of, 253, 255, 257, 260-261,
in Kali-yuga oppressed, 169 302
See also: Human beings as conditioned soul’s savior, 123
Philosophers, speculative as desireless, 283
as bewildered, 74 as devotee’s shelter, 324
mind misleads, 105 devotional service chosen by, 206, 220,
nature controls, 210 221, 256
sense gratification baffles, 222 in disciplic succession, 57
soul misunderstood by, 64-65 ecstatic symptoms in, 189-190
See also: Janis; Mayavadis; Monists as equally disposed, 123
Philosophy of Lord Caitanya, 234 as fearless, 186, 203
Pillar following, recommended, 221, 222, 324
fearful sound from, 135, 136, 137 good fortune of, 223, 224, 225
Hiranyakasipu struck, 134 as happy and unhappy, 259
Nrsithhadeva emerged from, 139 heavenly planets glorify, 298
Pitas prayed to Nrsirhhadeva, 165 Hiranyakasipu condemned, 122-123
Planets. See: Universe Hiranyakasipu mistreated, 121, 122
Pleasure. See: Bliss; Happiness Hiranyakasipu misunderstood, 133
Pleasure, material Hiranyakasipu perplexed by power of, 125
as temporary, 220 Hiranyakasipu rejected advice of, 131
See also: Happiness, material as Hiranyakasipu'’s savior, 124, 131, 303


--- Page 384 ---
General Index 383
Prahlada Maharaja Prahlada Maharaja, quotations from
humility of, 192, 201, 249, 250 on Brahma’s vision of Visnu, 243
as king, 295-296, 305, 309, 315, 316 on childhood, spiritual life in, 85
as liberated soul, 299 on demigods vs. demons, 45
liberation by glorifying, 299, 300-301, on devotees as transcendental, 34
328 on devotee’s purification, 88
Lord blessed, 295-296, 298, 307 on devotional service, 79, 90, 109-110,
Lord protected, 48, 127, 132, 133, 138, 112-114
230-231, 312 on equanimity, 128, 130
at Lord’s lotus feet, 127 on fruitive activities, 104
Lord’s mission for, 284 on Hayagriva incarnation, 245
as mahajana, 57, 109 on heavenly elevation vs. God realization,
as mahatma, 127 97
materialism rejected by, 220, 221, 276, on Hiranyakasipu, 43
281, 282, 283 on householders, materialistic, 13, 18-22
material world disinterested, 219, 260 on household life, detachment from, 13,
mission 01, 123 24
as mixed siddha, 298 on human life for devotional service, 2,
mother of. See: Kayadhu; Prahlada’s 13,15
mother on intelligence, 72, 74, 75
Narada compared to, 298 on knowledge by faith, 56
Narada instructed, 42, 53, 54, 56, 119, on knowledge via spiritual master, 38-39
228, 229 on Krsna, dependence on, 106-107
Nrsimhadeva favored, 188, 223 on Krsna and guru, 81
Nrsirmhadeva pacified by, 272 on Krsna consciousness, 77
Nrsithhadeva purified, 189 on liberation, 264
Nrsirhhadeva’s appearance caused by, 144 on life as duty, 4, 8
opulence used by, 281, 295-296 on life wasted, 10-11
prayed to demigods, 315 on Lord as creator and controller, 232,
prayed to Nrsimhadeva, 192, 271, 290, 234, 239, 267
302 on Lord as desire fulfiller, 226
preaching potency of, 119, 120, 131 on Lord as power source, 125-126, 127
as pure devotee, 42, 48, 131, 160, 276, on Lord as Self-satisfied, 197-198
284, 288, 289, 305, 306, 325-326 on Lord satisfied by devotional service, 194
pure devotees sought by, 220-221, 256 on Lord’s energy, 211
rituals performed by, 309 on Lord’s incarnations, 247
in samadhi (trance), 191 on Lord’s sleeping, 237
Sanda and Amarka feared, 120 on material body, 101
as spiritual master, 324, 327 on material happiness, 2-7, 95, 100
teaches by example, 305, 306, 308, 324 on materialists, 99
as transcendental, 189, 190, 191, 250, on material relationships, 102-103
325-326 on money, 15
in womb, 48, 49, 53, 55, 56 on Narada, 38-39, 228
yogis excelled by, 124 on Nrsirhhadeva’s visage, 203
Prahlada Maharaja, quotations from on praying to God, 199-200
on brahmanas vs. devotees, 195 on pure devotee’s ecstasy, 86-87


--- Page 385 ---
384 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Prahlada Maharaja, quotations from (continued) = Prayers
on religion, transcendental, 36 by Pitas for Nrsirmhadeva, 165
on senses’ demands, 252 by prajapatis for Nrsimhadeva, 172
on sex life, 262 by Prahlada for Nrsimhadeva, 192, 271
on soul vs. body, 58, 61, 64, 66, 69, 70 by Prahlada to Nrsirhhadeva, 290, 302
on Supersoul (Paramatma), 25, 29, 84, purifying power of, 199-200
108 by saints for Nrsirnhadeva, 164
on transmigration of the soul, 105 by Siddhas for Nrsirnhadeva, 166-167
Prahlado janako bhismo by Siva for Nrsimhadeva, 160
verse quoted, 306 by Vaitalikas for Nrsirhhadeva, 177
Prahlada’s mother by Vidyadharas for Nrsimhadeva, 168
as conditioned soul, 113 by Visnu's associates for Nrsimmhadeva,
demigods circumambulated, 49 179
Indra arrested, 45-47 by Yaksas for Nrsirmhadeva, 175
with Narada, 49-51, 52, 53 Preacher(s), Krsna conscious
Prahlada protected by, 55 as dearmost to Krsna, 32
Prahradad uttamah ko nu demons vanquished by, 324
verse quoted, 49 Lord Caitanya as, 254
Prahrade caiva vatsalya- Nrsirhhadeva protects, 174
verse quoted, 186 Prahlada as, 119, 120
Prajapatis pure devotees as, 219
Hiranyakasipu forbid progeny by, 172 See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord:
Prahlada excelled, 123 Pure devotees of the Supreme Lord
Prahlada prayed to, 315 Preaching of Krsna consciousness
prayed to Nrsirhhadeva, 172 to demons, 131
Prakrteh kriyamanani as devotee’s duty, 112
quoted, 100, 105, 210 God realization by, 32
verse quoted, 258 Lord Caitanya quoted on, 112
Prakrti.See: Nature, material by Prahlada, 119, 120, 131
Prakrtya tamasavrtatvat by pure devotee, 119, 120
verse quoted, 31 as supreme service, 32
Pranair arthair dhiya vaca as topmost welfare work, 112
quoted, 83 Pregnancy, soul causes, 59
Pranavah sarva-vedesu Prema-bhakti-candrika, quoted on anger,
verse quoted, 136 spiritual, 184
Prasada, demons deprive devotees of, 162 Premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
Prayers quoted, 132
by Brahma for Nrsirnhadeva, 159, Pride, devotional service spoiled by, 256
310-313 Protection
by Caranas for Nrsirhhadeva, 173-174 of Kayadhu by Narada, 230-231
by Gandharvas for Nrsimhadeva, 172 by Krsna. See: Protection by the Supreme
by Indra for Nrsimhadeva, 162 Lord
by Kimpurusas for Nrsirmhadeva, 176 for Prahlada by his mother, 55
by Kinnaras for Nrsimhadeva, 178 world cannot provide, 209-210, 217
by Manus for Nrsirmhadeva, 170 Protection by the Supreme Lord
by Nagas for Nrsirmhadeva, 169 demons challenge, 134


--- Page 386 ---
General Index 385
Protection by the Supreme Lord Pure devotee(s) of the Supreme Lord
for devotees, 48, 80, 124, 174, 176-177, Prahlada sought, 220-221, 256
201, 210, 230, 231, 247, 312-313 preaching potency of, 119, 120
as Nrsithhadeva, 164 salvation via, 220-221
for Prahlada, 48, 127, 132, 133, 138, sarapya-mukti attained by, 321, 322
230-231, 312 serve spiritual master, 229
for preachers, 174 service as solace for, 260
for religious principles, 176, 248 service to, 256
as sole shelter, 210, 216-217 as spiritual master, 80
surrender assures, 217 teach by example, 284
Protons, Lord pervades, 29 varnasrama-dharma surpassed by,
Punishment 195-197
for blasphemers, 184-185 Purification
of demons by Durga, 258 of Brahma, 242
by government, 21 by bogus brahmanas, 195
by maya, 123 by chanting Hare Krsna, 3, 251
by nature’s laws, 258 by Deity worship, 92
for offenders to pure devotees, 121-122 of desire, 291-292
for sinners, 147 of devotees, 8, 89, 287
by Yamaraja, 21 via devotees, 210, 304
Pure devotee(s) of the Supreme Lord by devotional service, 89, 198, 207-208,
body of, 224 252, 264-265
as desireless, 286, 287 of family by devotee, 195, 196-197, 303,
Dhruva as, 276 304
disqualification for, 285, 286, 287 by hearing about avataras, 324
above duality, 236 of Hiranyakasipu, 302, 303, 306-307
ecstatic symptoms in, 86-87, 89 of intelligence, 74
as happy anywhere, 260 for Kali-yuga, 250
hearing from, 119 120 Krsna consciousness as, 250
humility of, 192-193 via Lord's pastimes, 88
imitating, forbidden, 52 of mind, 250
knowledge via, 38 of Prahlada by Nrsirhhadeva, 189-190
Krsna conscious vision by, 114-115 by prayer, 199-200
as liberated souls, 86 of senses, 292
Lord fulfills desires of, 296 Purisera kita haite mui se laghistha
Lord known via, 220-221 verse quoted, 192
Lord protects, 48, 124-125 Parnasya parnam adaya
at Lord’s lotus feet, 124 quoted, 63
Lord’s mission for, 284 Purusa-avataras, three Visnus listed, 324
as Lord’s servants, 294 Purusarm sasvatarh divyam
material happiness rejected by, 96 quoted, 244
nitya-siddha vs. sadhana-siddha, 284
offenses to, 121-122 R
opulence used by, 281, 285
Prahlada as, 42, 48, 131, 160, 276, 284, Rajo-guna. See: Passion, mode of
288, 289, 305, 306, 325-326 Riksasas in devotional service, 113


--- Page 387 ---
386 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Rama, Lord Religious principles
activity of, 86 Lord protects, 176, 248
as Krsna's expansion, 324 Lord revealed by, 327
Kumbhakarpa and Ravana killed by, 318 Nrsimhadeva recovered, 165
Ramadi-mirtisu kala-niyamena tisthan Paramatma revealed by, 327
quoted, 323-324 See also: Ritualistic ceremonies
Rasa defined, 66-67 Renounced order. See: Sannyasa
Rasa(s) (Relationships) with Krsna) Renunciation
Caitanya-caritamrta cited on, 321 by devotional service, 14, 54
dasya-, 5 by kings, 15-16
as enemy, 319, 320 by knowledge, 14
in fear, 320 of material desire, 293
happiness in, 91 of sex life, 263
madhurya-, 5 for spiritual opulence, 293
sakhya-, 5 training for, 15-16
santa-, 5 by Yamunacarya, 263
by surrender, 226 See also: Sannyasa; Sense control
types of, five listed, 5, 88-89, 275 Ritualistic ceremonies
vatsalya-, 5 demigods perform, 162
Raso "ham apsu kaunteya devotees shun, 297
verse quoted, 136 devotees surpass, 308
Ravana devotional service transcends, 36-37
as Hiranyakasipu, 318 Lord upholds, 307, 308
Rama killed, 318 Prahlada performed, 309
Rayah kalatram pasavah sutadayo sraddha, 165, 166, 306-307
quoted, 96 Roman Empire, nature’s laws foiled, 95
Regulative principles. See: Religious prin- Rsabhadeva Maharaja, quotations from
ciples; Ritualistic ceremonies on austerity, 164
Reincarnation. See: Transmigration of the soul on material life as misery, 75, 76
Relationships Resi as material qualification, 110. .
with Krsna. See: Rasas Rte tu tattvikan devan
material, as ignorance, 103 verse quoted, 305
material vs. spiritual, 96,103 Rudra, Siva as, 161
Religion Rudra-sampradaya, 57
demons scorn, 133-134 Rules and regulations. See: Religious prin-
devotional service transcends, 36 ciples; Ritualistic ceremonies
Lord dictates, 82 Ripa defined, 66
perfection of, 82 Rupa Gosvami, Lord Caitanya instructed, 30,
pure vs. impure. 53 229
Religious principles Riipa Gosvami, quotations from
avatdras uphold, 324 on attraction to Krsna, 319
benefit of, 55 on bliss, devotional vs. impersonal, 91
Brahman revealed by, 327 on devotees as liberated souls, 300
brahmanas uphold, 309 on love of God, 85
devotees transcend, 34-35 on pure desire, 292
Lord dictates, 82 on spiritual master, service to, 82


--- Page 388 ---
General Index 387
Ripa Gosvami, quotations from Saints
on talking nonsense, 265 , See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
Silva, liberation of, 321-322
S Salvation. See: Liberation
: Samadhi (Trance)
Sabda defined, 67 via Lord’s lotus feet, 191
Sac-cid-ananda defined, 29 mind in, 191
Sacrifice(s) as mystic perfection, 191
by brakmacari, 13 Prahlada in, 191
demons disturb, 162, 166 Sama-duhkha-sukhari dhiram
for forefathers, 165 verse quoted, 300
for heavenly planets, 97 Samah sarvesu bhitesu
Nrsirithadeva rescued, 162, 165 quoted, 129
See also: Ritualistic ceremonies verse quoted, 91
Sad-aisvarya-piirna, Narayana as, 33 Sarihita defined, 170
Sada samudvigna-dhiyam Samo "ham sarva-bhiitesu
quoted, 188 verse quoted, 230
Sad-dharma-prccha bhogadi- Sampradaya
verse quoted, 82 defined, 57
Sadhakanam 27071 premnah See also: Disciplic succession, all entries
verse quoted, 275 Sampradaya-vihing ye
Sadhana-siddhas quoted, 58
defined, 284, 298 Samsara. See: Transmigration of the soul
nitya-siddhas vs., 284 Sanitana Gosvami
See also: Pure devotees of the Supreme Lord Caitanya instructed, 321
Lord; Souls, liberated quoted on self-realization, 22
Sadhavah sad-acarah Sanat-sujita, quoted on brahmana’s qualities,
quoted, 83 195
Sadhu Sanda and Amarka
defined, 83 father 01, 40, 120
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord, all Prahlada feared by, 120
entries Prahlada’s classmates rejected, 119
Sadhur eva sa mantavyah as Prahlada’s teachers, 40
verse quoted, 111 topics taught by, 119
Sad vikarah sarirasya Sankarsana, Lord
verse quoted, 59 Karanodakasayi Visnu from, 239
Sa gunan samatityaitan as Krsna expansions, 324
verse quoted, 36, 78, 190, 196, 224 Sarikhya, yoga above, 78
Sahasra- yuga-paryantam Sarikhya-yoga
quoted, 10 Lord propounded, 67
Sa iman lokan asrjata subject matter of, 66-67
quoted, 63 Sarikirtana
Saints God realization via, 248-249
Hiranyakasipu’s death relished by, 202 Krsna consciousness movement based on,
prayed to Nrsirhhadeva, 164 248
salvation sought by, 260 Lord Caitanya started, 248


--- Page 389 ---
388 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Sarikirtana (continued) Scientists, material
See also: Chanting the Lord’s holy names life as chemicals to, 59
Sannyasa (Renounced life) nature controls, 210
as life’s culmination, 12-13 sense gratification baffles, 222
prerequisite for, 14 soul misunderstood by, 64
Sarasvati, Goddess, Visvanatha inspired by, Self. See: Soul; Souls, conditioned
123 Self-realization
Sarapya-mukti austerity for, 164
defined, 321 by bhakti-yoga, 65
pure devotees attain, 321 by Brahma, 244
Sarva-dharman parityajya by devotional service, 36, 80
quoted, 13, 38,53, 76, 80, 107, 198, 205, via disciplic succession, 208
212, 219, 223, 226, 288 economic development vs., 101
verse quoted, 217, 250 for human beings and up, 164
Sarva-kama-dugha mahi impersonal vs. personal, 244
quoted, 67 by Krsna consciousness, 7, 97
Sarva-karana-karanam via Lord’s lotus feet, 74
quoted, 239, 267 Mayavadis misunderstand, 242
Sarvam khalv idam brahma process of, 69-70, 71
quoted 29, 71, 233, 234, 242 via spiritual master, 69, 98
Sarvasya cahari hrdi sannivisto See also: God realization: Krsna conscious-
quoted, 73 ness
Sarvatmana yah saranam saranyam Senayor ubhayor madhye
verse quoted, 308 quoted, 113
Sarvatra haya nija ista-deva-sphiurti Sense control
verse quoted, 114 by brahmacari, 13-14
Sarva-yonisu kaunteya by devotional service, 13-14
verse quoted, 26 for family life, 11-12
Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktari materialists lack, 13-14, 21, 24-25
quoted, 286 sense gratification vs., 12
verse quoted, 212, 292 training for, 15
Sastras. See: Vedas; names of individual See also: Renunciation
scriptures Sense(s)
Satarh prasarngan mama virya-sarwido demands of, 252
quoted, 119 devotees control, 85, 86, 265
Sattva-guna. See: Goodness, mode of devotional service purifies, 252, 292
Satyam jiidnam anantam asenemies, 130
quoted, 63 hell by uncontrolled, 94
Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh intelligence and mind vs., 74
quoted, 92 Krsna consciousness controls, 252
Sa yat pramanari kurute for living entity’s exploitation, 214
verse quoted, 308 Lord controls, 175
Scientists, material Lord powers, 127
as bewildered, 74 materialists indulge, 262, 263
Bhagavatam refutes, 154 modes of nature conirol, 67
chunk theory of, 241 tongue as wildest, 242


--- Page 390 ---
General Index 389
Sense(s) Siddhas
world ruled by, 130 mystic powers of, 167
See also: Body, material prayed to Nrsimhadeva, 166-167
Sense gratification Siddhi
Ambarisa rejected, 281 defined, 221
civilization pervaded by, 262-263 See also: Mystic power
cure for, 92 Silkworm weaving cocoon, materialists com-
as dead end, 95-96 pared to, 18, 22
devotees surpass, 34 Sin
devotional service transcends, 36 animal sacrifice as, 97
Dhruva rejected, 281 devotional service uproots, 264
in education, 3, 12 Krsna consciousness dispels, 250
God realization disturbed by, 252 Lord punishes, 147
household life as, 13-14, 25 mind polluted by, 249, 250
Krsna consciousness vs., 96 perpetuation of, 21
materialism as, 282 त surrender absolves, 80, 250
materialists baffled by, 222 SiSupila
Prahlada rejected, 281 Hiranyaksa as, 317
sense control vs., 12 , liberation of, 317, 319-322
as time waster, 6-7 Siva, Lord
as troublesome, 93, 262 as annihilation’s anger, 161
Yudhisthira rejected, 281 as authority, 306
See also: Body, material; Desire, material; in disciplic succession, 57
Fruitive activites; Happiness, ma- Krsna above, 172
terial; Life, material materialists worship, 283, 287
Servants of God. See: Devotees of the Supreme Nrsimhadeva frightened, 184
Lord Prahlada luckier than, 223, 224
Service to God. See: Devotional service to the prayed to Nrsirhhadeva, 160
Supreme Lord quoted on life’s goal, 289
Sesa, Lord as, 239 as Rudra, 161
Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau wife of, 289
verse quoted, 56 Sky, Lord compared to, 62, 93
Sex life Sleep
bondgae to, 104 activities in, 72
demons slave for, 104 divine vs. human, 237
family life as, 18, 24-25 life wasted in, 9, 10-11
hell by illicit, 93 yoga degrading to, 238
Krsna consciousness movement forbids il- Snake capturing mouse, Nrsithhadeva captur-
licit, 252 ing Hiranyakasipu compared to, 149
materialism based on, 282 Snakes and scorpions, Hiranyakasipu com-
materialists adore, 262 pared to, 202
as suffering, 262 Society, human
world revolves around, 104 brahmanas guide, 309
See also: Desire, material; Lust degradation in, 2-3
Siddhas devotional service need in, 209
Hiranyakasipu conqured, 167 education for, 22-23


--- Page 391 ---
390 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Society, human (continued) Soul(s). conditioned
Krsna consciousness benefits, 3, 198 time controls, 216
law-givers for, 170 under Yamaraja, 123
Lord Caitanya’s mission in, 76 Soul(s), liberated
peace formula for, 171 classes 01, two listed, 298
varnasrama-dharma organizes, 8, 170, devotees as, 208, 300
195, 309 as infallible, 113
See also: Civilization, human nitya-siddha vs. sidhana-siddha, 284
Soldiers, money dearer than life to, 15 Prahlada as, 299
Song, Bengali, quoted on material happiness, pure devotees as, 86
222 Sound
Soul Lord's presence realized in, 136-137
as active, 292 pillar, as fearful, 135, 136-137
birth caused by, 59 Sound, transcendental. See: Chanting the
body vs., 58, 59, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, Lord’s holy names; Hare Krsna mantra
69, 70, 71,74, 220 Sparsa defined, 67
conditioned. See: Souls, conditioned Species of life
as desirous, 292 evolution through, 3, 7, 105
fools misunderstand, 64 father of all, 26
intelligence perceives, 74 living entities trapped among, 215
Krsna consciousness frees, 198 Lord within, 29
liberated. See: Souls, liberated number of, 3, 164, 254
life caused by, 59, 62, 71 Spirit. See: Soul; Spiritual world; Supreme
Lord as source of, 108 Lord
Lord controls, 175 Spiritual knowledge. See: Knowledge, tran-
materialists neglect, 7 scendental
pregnancy caused by, 59 Spiritual life
pure vs. polluted, 292 advancement in, 10, 106
size of, 62, 71 austerity required in, 209
Supreme Soul vs. 59, 67-68, 71, 73 bogus vs. bona fide, 261
transcendentalists understand, 64, 66 in childhood, 85
transmigration of. See: Transmigration of humility vital for, 193
the soul material conditions cannot stop, 42
See also: Living entities material life vs., 212
Soul(s), conditioned need for, 7
as bewildered, 100 perfection of, 89
death awaits, 253, 254 revival of, 213
devotional service frees, 98, 215 world ignorant of, 144
as helpless, 210 See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
ignorance by, 63,75 1,013; Krsna consciousness
Krsna consciousness ignored by, 254 Spiritual master (Guru)
Lord delivers, 123, 174, 205, 217 brahmacariserves, 13
nature controls, 66, 100, 216-217, 258 devotees serve, 81, 82, 85
Prahlada kind to, 123, 253 devotional service via, 83, 215, 228-229
Prahlada’s mother as, 113 in disciplic succession, 57
surrender frees, 198, 215 disqualification for, 287, 289


--- Page 392 ---
General Index 391
Spiritual master (Guru) Srimad-Bhagavatam
faith in, 56, 80 name of, meaning of, 326
householders saved by, 19 materialists refuted by, 154
Krsna consciousness via, 76, 326 _ as transcendental, 326
as Krsna's representative, 98 Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from
liberation via, 105 on authorities on devotional service, 306
Lord as, 255, 287, 302 on bodily concept of life, 65
as misunderstood, 57 on brahmacari serving guru, 13
Narada as, 38-39 on conditioned suls, 123
need for, 64, 105-106 on devotees as fearless, 186
Prahlada as, 324, 327 on devotees as transcendental, 34-35, 236
pure devotee as, 80 on devotees surpassing Vedic rituals, 308
qualification for, 289 on devotional service, purifying power of,
residence 01, 13 264, 300
self-realization via, 69, 98 on duty, perfection of, 37, 111
service to, 81, 82, 85, 106, 229, 273-274 on earth (element), 67
as transcendental, 52 on God realization by devotional service,
truth via, 67, 106 267
Spiritual world on hearing from pure devotees, 119
devotees live in, 224, 260 on liberation, bogus, 74
by hearing about Nrsimhadeva, 328 on Lord blessing devotee, 287
by hearing about Prahlada, 328 on lust, 291
by Krsna consciousness, 215, 240 on knowledge and detachment by devo-
materialists cannot attain, 289 tional service, 14, 54
vs. material world, 144, 233, 239, 258 on Lord as supreme person, 5
oneness and difference in, 293 on Lord Caitanya’s incarnation, 248
as transcendental, 143 on Lord fulfilling desires, 227
returning to, 14, 65, 95, 98, 119, 321 on offending great souls, 122
yogis attain, 320 on passion and ignorance, 224
Sraddhavan bhajate yo mar on pure devotees as equally disposed, 260
verse quoted, 79, 163 on serving devotees, 256
Sravanar kirtanari visnoh on women, restricted association with,
quoted, 27, 85, 93, 208, 252, 327 51-52
_ verse quoted, 3, 93, 198 on worshiping Krsna, 296
Sri-brahma-bhrahmivindradi , on yogic trance, 191
_ verse quoted, 225 Sri-sampradaya, 57-58
Sridhara Svami, quoted on equal opulence Srivasa with Lord Caitanya, 248
| with Krsna, 293 Srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
Srimad-Bhigavatam quoted, 324
See also: Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations Sthanad bhrastah patanty adhah
from quoted, 8
cited on first created being, 246 Sthavara-jaiigama dekhe, na dekhe tara mirti
cited on government in Kali-yuga, 169 verse quoted, 114
dated, 154 Strength. See: Power
knowledge via, 220, 326 Striyo vaisyas tatha sadras
Krsna consciousness via, 326 verse quoted, 55, 190


--- Page 393 ---
392 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Subtle body. See: Intelligence; Mind Supersoul (Paramatma)
Sidras soul vs., 71, 72
in devotional service, 113 as well-wisher, 93
disqualification for, 8 worship 01, 90
Godhead accessible to, 190 Supreme Brahman. See: Brahman, Supreme
guru-kulaexcluded, 15 Supreme Lord
as lowborn, 55 as absolute and transcendental, 61, 143,
social status 01, 196 153, 159, 237
Suffering activities controlled by, 212, 214
atheists increase, 205 as Acyuta, 113
as destined, 6, 100-101 as Adhoksaja, 91
devotional service cures, 80, 206 as all-pervading, 232, 242, 243, 245, 267
fruitive activities as, 104. as Ananta, 239
by living entities, 4-5, 100 appearance of. See: Appearance of Krsna
Lord creates, 216, 217 (Descent)
material happiness as, 100 as authority, 82
materiallife as, 75, 100, 206, 217,222, as bhakta-vatsala, 231, 273
253, 254, 258 blasphemers punished by, 185
mayaas, 217 in bliss, 237, 238
sense gratification as, 262 body of. See: Body of the Supreme Lord
sex life as, 262 body sanctioned by, 108
soul’s transmigration as, 217 Brahma enlightened by, 144
types of, four listed, 210 as Brahman’s basis, 29-31, 90
world as, 95-96, 205, 206, 208, 210, Brahma saw, 243
216-217, 258, 283 Brahma under, 172, 311
Suhrdam sarva-bhitanam Caitanya Mahaprabhu as, 254
, verse quoted, 4, 32 as cause of all causes, 29-30, 34, 71-72,
Sukracarya 114, 115, 214, 234, 235, 239, 241,
Prahlada enthroned by, 315 242,267, 311
sons of, 40, 120 conditioned souls delivered by, 217
Sumedhas as creator and controller, 57, 71, 72, 73,
defined, 249 100, 108, 115,126, 127, 159,
See also: Wise man 160-161, 175, 211-212, 216,
Sun, Lord compared to, 126 232,239, 326
Sun-god, Lord instructed, 170-171 darkness dispelled by, 143, 144
Sunanda, 158 as dearmost friend, 108
Supersoul (Paramatma) as death, 313
as all-pervading, 29, 30-31 as deathless, 253
in heart of all, 90, 92-93, 100, 212, 297 demigods under, 287, 311, 326
knowledge 0, 57 demons cannot see, 29, 132
living entity vs., 67, 68, 73, 84 demons deny, 132, 133-134
as living force, 71 demons fooled by, 147, 173
Lord as, 5, 25, 29, 30-31, 73, 84, 92, demons killed by, 176, 201, 245, 246, 326
100,107,108, 112, 212, 297 demons misunderstand, 139
meditation on, 91, 94 dependence on, 106-107
religious principles reveal, 327 desires fulfilled by, 227, 230, 273, 275, 296


--- Page 394 ---
General Index 393
Supreme Lord Supreme Lord
as detached, 230, 231 living entities as servants of, 226, 227,
devotees as opulent as, 293, 294 288-289
devotee’s desires fulfilled by, 226, 231, living entities directed by, 212
273 vs. living entities, 59-60, 62, 67, 73
devotees favored by, 155,160, 173, 231, living entity’s desires fulfilled by, 100
256, 269, 273, 286 lotus feet 01. See: Lotus feet of the
devotees purified by, 287 Supreme Lord
devotees realize, 30-1, 56, 93, 132 love for. See: Love of God
devotional service controlled by, 212 as Maha-purusa, 244
devotional service reveals, 31-32, 93, 194, as Maha-Visnu, 237, 238
200, 267, 268, 269, 270 materialists worship, 285, 286
devotional service satisfies, 110, 194 mercy of. See: Mercy of the Supreme Lord
effulgence of. See: Brahman effulgence: as Mukunda, 109
Supreme Lord, power of Narada’s promise kept by, 230-231
energies of. See: Energies of the Supreme as Narayana, 148, 156
Lord nature under, 214,216
as enjoyer, 4, 32 offerings acceptable to, 286
as equally disposed, 226-227, 230-231 as omnipotent, 139
expansions of, listed, 324 as omnipresent, 136, 137-138
faith in, 56, 57 as one and different, 232, 234, 235, 242
as father of all, 25-26 as Parabrahman, 233
fools deride, 205 parampara reveals, 49
form of. See: Form of the Supreme Lord pastimes of. See: Pastimes of Krsna
as Govinda, 115, 235, 311, 323 pleasing, 32, 100
guru represents, 98 power of, 126, 127, 148, 152, 159, 218
hearing about. See: Hearing about the Prahlada blessed by, 295-296, 298, 307
Supreme Lord as proprietor, 4, 32
in heart of all, 33, 73, 84, 93, 100, 212, protection by. See: Protection by the
297 Supreme Lord
householders saved by, 19 punishes sinners, 147
human beings vs, 237 pure devotees reveal, 220
incarnations of. See: Avataras; Incarna- pure devotional service satisfies, 289
tions of the Supreme Lord purifying power of, 91
as inconceivable, 269 relationships with. See: Rasas
as infallible, 161 religion dictated by, 82
intelligence reveals, 73 rewards surrender, 226, 289
irreligion vanquished by, 176 rituals upheld by, 307, 308
Jaya and Vijaya counseled by, 179 as sac-cid-ananda, 29
Jaya and Vijaya played enemies 0 as sanctioner, 106-107
180 as Self -satisfied, 197-198, 199
as Karanodakasayi Visnu, 237 serving servants of , 228-229, 255-256
karma dissolved by, 313 as Sesa, 239
laws of . See: Laws of the Supreme Lord above Siva, 172
liberation by understanding, 76, 113 sky compared to, 62, 93
as limitless, 185 “sleep” of 237


--- Page 395 ---
394 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Supreme Lord (continued) Surrender to the Supreme Lord
as ৪0015 source, 108 fools donot, 126, 198-199
sound reveals, 136 as freedom, 76, 80, 199
within species, 29 God realization by, 30
as spiritual master, 255, 287, 302 happiness by, 212, 217
suffering created by, 216 ignorance forbids, 199
sun compared to, 126 as knowledge, 38, 68, 127, 244
sun-god instructed by, 170 Krsna quoted on, 13
as Supersoul, 5, 25, 29, 30-31, 72, 84, as life’s goal, 36-37
92-93, 100,107,108, 112, 212, as living being’s function, 288
297 Lord rewards, 226, 289
as supreme being, 4, 5, 93, 127, 219, 288, by mahatmas, 63
289, 294, 312, 323, 324 need for, 217, 219
surrender to. See: Surrender to the protection assured by, 217
Supreme Lord rarity of, 127
teaches by example, 284 asreal religion, 53
above time, 234-235 salvation by, 217, 250, 263
as time, 127, 216, 220 as transcendental, 36
transmigration supervised by, 214 Siitre mani-gana iva
as Triyuga, 248 quoted, 71
as twenty-fifth element, 175 Svalpam apy asya dharmasya
as Vasudeva, 68 quoted, 2, 26
as Visnu, 4-5 Svami defined, 14
as well-wisher, 4, 32, 38, 93 Svami-ndrayana as misconception, 84
as within and without, 232, 234, 242-243 Svargaloka. See: Heavenly planets, all entries
worship of. See: Deity worship of the Svargapavarga-narakesv
Supreme Lord; Worship, of Lord verse quoted, 260
See also: Krsna, Lord; Narayana, Lord; Svarnam yatha gravasu hema-karah
Supersoul (Paramiatma); names of quoted, 69
individual forms and incarnations Svayambhar naradah sambhuh
Supreme Lord, quotations from _ verse quoted, 306
on demons as envious, 314 Svetasvatara Upanisad, quoted on knowledge
on dharma, 107 by faith, 56, 80
on foolish impersonalists, 246-247
on mission of His appearance, 123 T
on Prahlada, 295, 298
on surrender to Him, 76, 198, 199, 212, Tad-adhinam sariram ca
213, 226 verse quoted, 59
on yogi, 78-79 Tada gantasi nirvedam
Supreme Personality of Godhead. See: verse quoted, 270
Supreme Lord Tad 04073 bhakty-upahrtam
Suras. See: Demigods verse quoted, 94, 286
Surrender to the Supreme Lord Tad anye ca kramadeva
benefit of, 197-198, 199 verse quoted, 225
debts dissolved by, 308 Tada rajas tamo-bhavah
as duty, 36-37, 126 quoted, 224


--- Page 396 ---
General Index 395
Tadavadhi bata nari-sarigame smaryamane Tat tad evavagaccha tvar
verse quoted, 263 verse quoted, 126, 152
Tad-bhava-bhavah tad yatha-svarapan Tat te 'nukampan susamiksamano
bhaktih quoted, 236
quoted, 89 Tava harinama kevala kaitava
Tad viddhi pranipatena verse quoted, 265-266
verse quoted, 106 Teacher, spiritual. See: Brahmanas; Spiritual
Tad-vijianartham sa gurum evabhigacchet master
quoted, 64, 105 Te ’pi yanti param gatim
Taittiriya Upanisad, quoted on soul vs. body, quoted, 55
71 Thieves, money dearer than life to, 15
Tama eva kramad aptau Time
verse quoted, 307 conditioned souls under, 216
Tamo-guna. See: Ignorance, mode of demigod vs. Earth, 240n
Taridera carana sevi bhakta-sane vasa Lord above, 235
verse quoted, 229, 256 Lord as, 127, 216, 220
Tarra vakya, kriya, mudra vijieha na piety exhausted by, 98
bhujhaya sense gratification wastes, 6-7, 99
quoted, 159 Tivrena bhakti-yogena
Tapasa brahmacaryena verse quoted, 227, 296
quoted, 265 Tongue
Tapasya family life indulges, 18
defined, 12, 164, 209, 243, 265 Krsna consciousness tames,
See also: Austerity 252
Tapo divyam putraka yena sattvari Tortoise incarnation as transcendental,
quoted, 164 246-247
Tasarm brahma mahad yonir Traigunya-visaya veda
verse quoted, 26 quoted, 36
Tasmad guru prapadyeta Trance. See: Samadhi
quoted, 105 Transcendentalist
Tasmat kenapy upayena geologist compared to, 64, 69
quoted, 319 soul understood by, 66
Tasmat paratarari devi See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord:
verse quoted, 289 Janis; Mayavadis (Imper-
Tasyahar nigraharm manye sonalists); Yogis
verse quoted, 129 Transmigration of the soul
Tasyaite kathita hy arthah into animal species, 3, 7, 12
verse quoted, 56, 80 changes by, 59
Tatha dehdntara-praptir freedom from, 3, 13, 90, 98
verse quoted, 65, 69 by ignorance, 75-76, 105
Tato dubkham avapyeta Lord supervises, 214
verse quoted, 77 by lust, 291
Tato man tattvato jiidtva need to understand, 65
verse quoted, 57, 200 as suffering, 217
Tatra tisthami ndrada Tree’s fruits and flowers, body compared to.
quoted, 269 58, 71


--- Page 397 ---
396 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Trnad api sunicena Varnasrama-dharma
verse quoted, 193 goal of, 195-196
Truth. See: Absolute Truth Hiranyakasipu disrupted, 170
Tumi ta” thakura, tomara kukura, knowledge in, 170
quoted, 256 in Manu-sarmhita, 170
Tyaktva dehan punar janma peace provided by, 170, 171
verse quoted, 76, 113, 321 society organized by, 170, 195-196
See also: Brahmacaris; Brahmanas;
চা Grhasthas; Ksatriyas; Sannyasa;
Sidras; Vaisyas; Vanaprastha;
Unhappiness. See: Suffering Vedic culture
Universe Vasudevah sarvam iti
annihilation of. See: Annihilation of the quoted, 63, 68, 126
universe verse quoted, 68
civilization pervades, 154 Vasudeve bhagavati
creator and controller of, 57, 71-72, 216, verse quoted, 14, 54
239,247-248 Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah
Hiranyakasipu plagued, 156 quoted, 246
living entities trapped in, 214 Vedas
Lord illuminates, 143 avatdras verified by, 323
as Lord’s body, 62 devotees surpass, 269
See also: Creation, the; Material world devotional service surpasses, 270
Upadeksyanti te jagnam God realization via, 246
verse quoted, 106 for liberation, 214-215
Upadeso hi miarkhanam purpose of, 2, 214
quoted, 131 subjects in, material. 36
Vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau
v verse quoted, 323
Vedic culture
Vaikuntha. See: Spiritual world Hiranyakasipu disturbed, 162,170
Vairagya-vidya purpose of, 2
defined, 14 as timeless, 154
See also: Renunciation See also: Varnasrama-dharma
Vaisnavas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord Vedic injunctions. See: Ritualistic ceremonies;
Vaisnavera kriya—mudra Vedas
quoted, 52 Vedic rituals. See: Ritualistic ceremonies
Vaisyas Vidya. See: Knowledge; Knowledge, transcen-
disqualification for, 8 dental
Godhead accessible to, 190 Vidyadharas
guru-kula for, 15 Hiranyakasipu conquered, 168
as lowborn, 55 mystic power of, 168
social status of , 196 prayed to Nrsimhadeva, 168
Vaitalikas prayed to Nrsitnhadeva, 177 Vijrataram adhikena vijaniyat
Vaitarani River, location of, 258 quoted, 63
Vanaprastha (Retired life), residence for, 12 Vipras
Varaha, Lord, as Krsna’s expansion, 324 defined, 196


--- Page 398 ---
General Index 397
Vipras Wise man
See also: Brahmanas defined, 22, 127
Vishnu, Lord. See: Supreme Lord in devotional service, 269
Vision, material vs. spiritual, 115 sees Lord everywhere, 243
Visnu, Lord. See: Garbhodakasayi Visnu; worships Krsna, 296
Ksirodakasayi Visnu; Karanodakasayi worships Lord Caitanya, 248
Visnu; Maha-Visnu; Supersoul ‘Women
(Paramatma); Supreme Lord association with, restricted, 52
Visnudiitas in devotional service, 55,113
Ajamila saved by, 320 Godhead accessible to, 190
bodily features of, 320 in knowledge, 56
Visnu's associate (s) as less intelligent, 54, 55,113
Dantavakra as, 319 as lowborn, 55
as Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu, in marriage, 18
317 materialists controlled by, 24-25
as Kumbhakarna and Ravana, 318 Work. See: Fruitive activities; Karma
prayed to Nrsihhadeva, 179 Workers. See: Fruitive workers; Sidras
Sisupalaas, 319 World, material. See: Material world; Uni-
Visrambhena guroh seva verse
verse quoted, 82 Worship
Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, cited of ancestors, 215
on Lord favoring devotees, 155 of demigods, 215, 282-283, 287
on Prahlada, 123 demons disturb, 162
on serving spiritual master, 83 of ghosts, 215
Vi$vanatha Cakravarti Thakura, quotations of Lord by devotees, 204
from of Lord in perfection, 128
on Hiranyakasipu, 306-307 of Lord recommended, 82, 83,93, 97,
on Krsna via guru, 228-229 107, 215, 224, 227, 296
on Prahlada, 298 by materialists, 285, 286
on serving spiritual master, 274 as Supersoul, 90
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, Sarasvati in- See also: Deity worship of the Supreme
spired, 123 Lord
Vita-raga-bhaya-krodhah Y
verse quoted, 300
Vivasvian, Lord instructed, 170-171
Vivasvan manave praha Yada te moha-kalilar
quoted, 171 verse quoted, 270
w Yadavadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
verse quoted, 263
Yada yada hi dharmasya
War as nature's law, 95 quoted, 123, 205
Wealth. See: Money: Opulence, material verse quoted, 176, 246, 254
Western countries Yad yad acarati Sresthas
miseducation in, 12 verse quoted, 308
sex life gluts, 262 Yad yad vibhatimat sattvamn
Wife. See: Marriage; Women verse quoted, 126, 152


--- Page 399 ---
398 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Yahan krsna, tahan nahi mayara adhikara Yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
verse quoted, 144 quoted, 65
Yah karanarnava-jale bhajati sma yoga Yatha svapne Siras chedar
verse quoted, 237 verse quoted, 77
Yaksas Yato va imani bhutan jayante
in devotional service, 109, 113 quoted, 71, 234
Hiranyakasipu degraded service of, 175 Yat prayanty abhisariwisanti
prayed to Nrsirnhadeva, 175 quoted, 71
पनथ. See: Ritualistic ceremonies Ye bhajanti tu mari bhaktya
Yajraih sarikirtana-prayair verse quoted, 230
verse quoted, 248 Yena jatani jivanti
Yajias ca danari ca dhrtih samas ca quoted, 72
verse quoted, 196 Ye 'nye ’ravindaksa vimukta-maninas
Yamaraja quoted, 74
Ajamila saved from, 26 Yesam ahari priya atma sutas ca
conditioned souls under, 123 quoted, 5
Hiranyakasipu threatened Prahlada with, Ye yatha mar prapadyante
123 quoted, 226, 289
punishes swindlers, 21 Yoga
Yam hi na vyathayanty ete as bhakti, 272
verse quoted, 300 bogus vs. bona fide, 238
Yamunacarya knowledge by, 65
quoted on sex life, 263 Krsna consciousness vs., 261
renounced sex life, 263 as liberation, 78
Ya nirvrtis tanu-bhrtam as 11106 5 goal, 78
quoted, 91 mystic, for higher castes, 15
Yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukhari hi topmost system of, 79
tuccham See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
quoted, 18, 25, 104 Lord; Krsna consciousness; Yogis
Yanti deva-vrata devan Yoga-ksemarm vahamy aham
verse quoted, 214-215, 227 quoted, 286
Yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa Yoga-nidra, Maha- Visnu in, 237
quoted, 32 Yoga-siddhi
verse quoted, 254 defined, 191
Yasmin dyauh prthivi cantartksam See also: Mystic power
quoted, 63 Yoge ‘pirvartha-sampraptau
Yasmin vijiiate sarvam evam vijiiatari bhavati quoted, 78
quoted, 74 Yogi(s)
Yasya deve para bhaktir bogus vs. bona fide, 238
verse quoted, 56, 80 death transcended by, 320 2
Yasyaham anugrhnami demigods as topmost, 163
quoted, 287 devotees as topmost, 79
Yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti of Earth vs. Siddhaloka, 167
quoted, 90 meditate on Visnu, 320
Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasado mystic meditation of, 221
quoted, 229, 273-274 Prahlada as topmost, 124


--- Page 400 ---
General Index 399
Yoginam api sarvesam Yudhisthira Maharaja
verse quoted 78-79, 163 sense gratification rejected by, 281
Yudhisthira Maharaja Yugas
forefather of, 146 names of, 248
Narada addressed, 135, 158, 309 cycle of, duration of, 295
opulence used by, 281


--- Page 401 ---
क ১ ১৯৪ ध 1५ i

a Ee. চর BHAGAVA :

fo . —— (3 11 त 4

- ध | Pm Seventh Canto-Part Two

4 | i ¥ # IM gy চু as ay 8.“ (1 4 4

| । ARG ২৭1 = Ny N |

9 (A 1 ॥ 6६ : ১ ॥ ४ | ४. L ) | র্‌

ए. \७ ৮২১ ৪ A ॥ His 4 ॥ ১1 Py 1
EIN /" "শা 5 Diner (| {Abe 4

i ५ 1 ny | i 1 | gt) 3

৷ রগ / | ॥| AC 1% ॐ, |
4 f A প্‌ { | Bhaktivedan . 3
২) - ARNE `

J A | ॥ | ॥ | / //ম 00100 RL | Va
Pasa Ue “৬ ণ ১৬১ ॥ » I
|“ 1/1 ইং - AYN | 1
॥| vgn ¶ i ॥ ९\/0
4 ) ) || \ ॥ ক (6 ॥.॥ | | १ = ॥ |
 . ১ fe i | "Qe of mE 4 | 104 11

24 (8 \ +|} ` A pA oer ^ ,||
Fx 5.0 সমস
< pd গম aE যয ९ धि 4 ১ | 2 ५५ 1 ~ i
1... नि be 3 ॥ ४. ५ छ <u £ A. ঢ ।
¢ owt fo .\ Py His Divine Grace ए |
(4 व 0 MEE न ॥ ida
९ a ` अ ১ A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabh pd
॥ ।


--- Page 402 ---
ह
BHAGAVATAM

Srimad-Bhagavatam, an epic philosophical and
literary classic, holds a prominent position in
India’s voluminous written wisdom. The timeless
wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human
knowledge. Originally preserved through oral tradi-
tion, the Vedas were first put into writing by Srila
Vyasadeva, the “literary incarnation of God.” After
compiling the Vedas, Srila Vyasadeva was inspired .
by his spiritual master to present their profound
essence in the form of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Known
as “the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic literature,”
Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and au-
thoritative exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After writing the Bhagavatam, Vyasa taught it to

his son, Sukadeva Gosvami, who later spoke the
Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assembly of
sages on the bank of the sacred Ganges River. Al-
though Maharaja Pariksit was a great rajarsi (saintly
king) and the emperor of the world, when he
received notice of his death seven days in advance, he
renounced his entire kindgom and retired to the |
bank of the Ganges to seek spiritual enlightenment.
The questions of King Pariksit and Sukadeva
Gosvami’s illuminating answers, concerning every-
thing from the nature of the self to the origin of the
universe, are the basis of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

This edition of Bhagavatam is the only complete |
English translation with an elaborate and scholarly
commentary, and it is the first edition widely avail-
able to the English-reading public. This work is the
product of the scholarly and devotional effort of His
Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhu-
pada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His
Sanskrit scholarship and intimate familiarity with
Vedic culture combine to reveal to the West a mag-
nificent exposition of this important classic.

With its comprehensive system of providing the
original Sanskrit text, Roman transliteration, precise |
word-for-word equivalents, a lucid English transla-
tion and a comprehensive commentary, it will appeal

"to scholars, students and laymen alike. The entire
multivolume text, presented by the Bhaktivedanta |
Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant place in
the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern |
man for a long time to come. |


--- Page 403 ---
|
| श ।

What the reviewers say about the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada:

“It has been my great pleasure recently to have
read the Srimad-Bhagavatam in the superb edition
authorized by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhu-
pada. I am sure this monumental work will go far to
bring the sublime message of the Bhagavatam to
numerous Westerners who otherwise would miss this
opportunity.”

Dr. Alex Wayman
Professor of Sanskrit
Columbia University

“Srimad-Bhagavatam is a valuable source ma-
terial for several categories of readers. With its ex-
haustive plan of providing the original Sanskrit text.
15 Roman transliteration, English synonyms,
English translation and elaborate commentary by a
scholar and practitioner of philosophy, it cannot but
be attractive to serious students and scholars of
religion and philosophy. I recommend this series to
anyone as an important and useful reference work.”

Professor C. P. Agrawal
Chairman

Department of Humanities
University of Michigan

“The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust editions of
famous religious classics of India with new transla-
tions and commentaries are an important addition to
our expanding knowledge of spiritual India. The new
edition of the Srimad-Bhagavatam is particularly
welcome.”

Dr. John L. Mish
Chief, Oriental Division
New York Public Library
1 ও
४ y

