
--- Page 1 ---
Preface

We must know the present need of human society. And what is that
need? Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to par-
ticular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the
Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one human
society. The ideals of spiritual communism, according to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human
society, nay, of the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by
great thinkers to make this a successful ideology. Srimad-Bhagavatam
will fill this need in human society. It begins, therefore, with the aphor-
ism of Vedanta philosophy janmady asya yatah to establish the ideal of a
common cause.

Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of obli-
vion. It has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts, educa-
tion and economic development throughout the entire world. But there is
a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore there are
large-scale quarrels, even over less important issues. There is need of a
clue as to how humanity can become one in peace, friendship and
prosperity with a common cause. Srimad-Bhagavatam will fill this need,
for it is a cultural presentation for the re-spiritualization of the entire
human society.

Srimad-Bhagavatam should be introduced also in the schools and col-
leges, for it is recommended by the great student-devotee Prahlada
Maharaja in order to change the demoniac face of society.

kaumara acaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabharih manusari janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)

Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One, from whom everything
emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything is

ix


--- Page 2 ---
x Srimad-Bhagavatam

merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of
creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ultimate
source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained rationally
and authoritatively in the beautiful Bhagavatam or Srimad-
Bhagavatam.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the transcendental science not only for know-
ing the ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation
with Him and our duty towards perfection of the human society on the
basis of this perfect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the
Sanskrit language, and it is now rendered into English elaborately so that
simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well, so much so
that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend himself from the
onslaught of atheists. Over and above this, the reader will be able to con-
vert others to accepting God as a concrete principle.

Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Vedanta-sitra by the same author,
Srila Vyasadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the
highest state of God realization. The only qualification one needs to study
this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step
cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly like with an ordinary
book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter, one after another.
The reading matter is so arranged with its original Sanskrit text, its
English transliteration, synonyms, translation and purports so that one is
sure to become a God-realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine
cantos.

The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto
without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in
twelve cantos, each independent, but it is good for all to read them in
small installments one after another.

I must admit my frailties in presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam, but still
I am hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society
on the strength of the following statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam
(1.5.11):

tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin prati-slokam abaddhavaty api


--- Page 3 ---
Preface xi
namdany anantasya yao 'rkitani yac
chrnvanti gayanti grnanti sadhavah

“On the other hand, that literature which is full with descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame, form and pastimes of the un-
limited Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant to bring about a
revolution in the impious life of a misdirected civilization. Such tran-
scendental literatures, even though irregularly composed, are heard,

sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.”
Om tat sat
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


--- Page 4 ---
Introduction

“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to His own abode, accompanied by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the
dense darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this
Purana.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43)

The timeless wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human knowledge. Originally
preserved through oral tradition, the Vedas were first put into writing
five thousand years ago by Srila Vyasadeva, the “literary incarnation of
God.” After compiling the Vedas, Vyasadeva set forth their essence in
the aphorisms known as Vedanta-sitras. Srimad-Bhagavatam 15
Vyasadeva’s commentary on his own Vedanta-sitras. It was written in
the maturity of his spiritual life under the direction of Narada Muni, his
spiritual master. Referred to as “the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic
literature,” Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and authoritative
exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After compiling the Bhagavatam, Vyasa impressed the synopsis of it
upon his son, the sage Sukadeva Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami subse-
quently recited the entire Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assem-
bly of learned saints on the bank of the Ganges at Hastinapura (now
Delhi). Maharaja Pariksit was the emperor of the world and was a great
rajarsi (saintly king). Having received a warning that he would die
within a week, he renounced his entire kingdom and retired to the bank
of the Ganges to fast until death and receive spiritual enlightenment.
The Bhagavatam begins with Emperor Pariksit’s sober inquiry to
Sukadeva Gosvami: ‘“You are the spiritual master of great saints and de-
votees. I am therefore begging you to show the way of perfection for all
persons, and especially for one who is about to die. Please let me know
what a man should hear, chant, remember and worship, and also what he
should not do. Please explain all this to me.”

Sukadeva Gosvami’s answer to this question, and numerous other
questions posed by Maharaja Pariksit, concerning everything from the
nature of the self to the origin of the universe, held the assembled sages

xiii


--- Page 5 ---
xiv Srimad-Bhagavatam

in rapt attention continuously for the seven days leading to the King’s
death. The sage Sita Gosvami, who was present on the bank of the
Ganges when Sukadeva Gosvami first recited Srimad-Bhagavatam, later
repeated the Bhagavatam before a gathering of sages in the forest of
Naimisaranya. Those sages, concerned about the spiritual welfare of the
people in general, had gathered to perform a long, continuous chain of
sacrifices to counteract the degrading influence of the incipient age of
Kali. In response to the sages’ request that he speak the essence of Vedic
wisdom, Siita Gosvami repeated from memory the entire eighteen thou-
sand verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit.

The reader of Srimad-Bhagavatam hears Sita Gosvami relate the
questions of Maharaja Pariksit and the answers of Sukadeva Gosvami.
Also, Siita Gosvami sometimes responds directly to questions put by
Saunaka Rsi, the spokesman for the sages gathered at Naimisaranya. One
therefore simultaneously hears two dialogues: one between Maharaja
Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami on the bank of the Ganges, and another
at Naimisaranya between Sita Gosvami and the sages at Naimisaranya
Forest, headed by Saunaka Rsi. Furthermore, while instructing King
Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami often relates historical episodes and gives
accounts of lengthy philosophical discussions between such great souls as
the saint Maitreya and his disciple Vidura. With this understanding of
the history of the Bhagavatam, the reader will easily be able to follow its
intermingling of dialogues and events from various sources. Since philo-
sophical wisdom, not chronological order, is most important in the text,
one need only be attentive to the subject matter of Srimad-Bhagavatam
to appreciate fully its profound message.

The translator of this edition compares the Bhagavatam to sugar
candy —wherever you taste it, you will find it equally sweet and
relishable. Therefore, to taste the sweetness of the Bhagavatam, one may
begin by reading any of its volumes. After such an introductory taste,
however, the serious reader is best advised to go back to Volume One of
the First Canto and then proceed through the Bhagavatam, volume after
volume, in its natural order.

This edition of the Bhagavatam is the first complete English transla-
tion of this important text with an elaborate commentary, and it is the
first widely available to the English-speaking public. It is the product of


--- Page 6 ---
Introduction 2৮
the scholarly and devotional effort of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His consummate Sanskrit
scholarship and intimate familiarity with Vedic culture and thought as
well as the modern way of life combine to reveal to the West a magnifi-
cent exposition of this important classic.

Readers will find this work of value for many reasons. For those in-
terested in the classical roots of Indian civilization, it serves as a vast
reservoir of detailed information on virtually every one of its aspects.
For students of comparative philosophy and religion, the Bhagavatam
offers a penetrating view into the meaning of India’s profound spiritual
heritage. To sociologists and anthropologists, the Bhagavatam reveals the
practical workings of a peaceful and scientifically organized Vedic
culture, whose institutions were integrated on the basis of a highly
developed spiritual world view. Students of literature will discover the
Bhagavatam to be a masterpiece of majestic poetry. For students of psy-
chology, the text provides important perspectives on the nature of con-
sciousness, human behavior and the philosophical study of identity.
Finally, to those seeking spiritual insight, the Bhagavatam offers simple
and practical guidance for attainment of the highest self-knowledge and
realization of the Absolute Truth. The entire multivolume text, pre-
sented by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant
place in the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern man for a
long time to come.

—The Publishers


--- Page 7 ---
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
The Supreme Lord
Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son
As explained in this chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, being
very pleased by the payo-vrata ceremony performed by Aditi, appeared
before her in full opulence. At her request, the Lord agreed to become
her son.

After Aditi performed the payo-vrata ceremony for twelve continuous
days, the Lord, who was certainly very pleased with her, appeared before
her with four hands and dressed in yellow garments. As soon as Aditi
saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead present before her, she im-
mediately got up, and with great ecstatic love for the Lord she fell to the
ground to offer respectful obeisances. Aditi’s throat was choked because
of ecstatic feelings, and her entire body trembled with devotion. Al-
though she wanted to offer suitable prayers to the Lord, she could not do
anything, and thus she remained silent for some time. Then, feeling
solace, observing the beauty of the Lord, she offered her prayers. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul of all living entities, was
very pleased with her, and He agreed to become her son by incarnating
as a plenary expansion. He was already pleased by Kasyapa Muni’s
austerities, and thus He agreed to become their son and maintain the
demigods. After giving His word of honor to this effect, the Lord disap-
peared. Following the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Aditi engaged in the service of Kasyapa Muni, who could see by samadhi
that the Lord was within him and who thus placed his semen in the
womb of Aditi. Lord Brahma, who is known as Hiranyagarbha, under-
stood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead had entered Aditi’s
womb. Thus he offered prayers to the Lord.

TEXT 1
श्री्चुक उवाच
श्त्युक्ता सादिती राजन्खभत्रा कर्यपेन वै |
अन्वतिष्ठद्‌ নবমিহ दादजाहमतन्द्रिता ॥ १ ॥
1


--- Page 8 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
sri-Suka uvaca
ity ukta saditi rajan
sva-bhartra kaSyapena vai
anv atisthad vratam idam
dvadasaham atandrita
$ri-Sukah wvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; ukta—being
advised; sa —that lady; aditih — Aditi; rajan—O King; sva-bhartra—by
her husband; kasyapena —Kagyapa Muni; vai —indeed; anu —similarly;
atisthat—executed; vratam idam—this payo-vrata ritualistic ceremony;
dvadasa-aham —for twelve days; atandrita—without any laziness.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, after Aditi was thus advised by
her husband, Kasyapa Muni, she strictly followed his instructions
without laziness and in this way performed the payo-vrata
ritualistic ceremony.
PURPORT
For advancement in anything, especially in spiritual life, one must
strictly follow the bona fide instructions of the teacher. Aditi did this.
She strictly followed the instructions of her husband and guru. As con-
firmed in the Vedic injunctions, yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve
tatha gurau. One should have complete faith in the guru, who helps the
disciple make progress in spiritual life. As soon as the disciple thinks in-
dependently, not caring for the instructions of the spiritual master, he is
a failure (yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto pi). Aditi very strictly followed
the instructions of her husband and spiritual master, and thus she was
successful.
TEXTS 2-3
विन्तयन्स्येकया बुद्धया महापुरुषमीश्वरम्‌ |
परगृयन्द्रियदुष्टा्चान्मनसा बुद्धिसारथिः ॥ २॥
मनशैकाग्रया TEN भगवत्यखिलारमनि |
वासुदेवे समाधाय चचार ह पयोव्रतम्‌ ॥ २॥


--- Page 9 ---
Text 3] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 3
cintayanty ekaya buddhya
maha-purusam Bvaram
pragrhyendriya-dustasvan
manasa buddhi-sarathih
manas caikagraya buddhya
bhagavaty akhilatmani
vasudeve samadhaya
cacara ha payo-vratam
cintayanti—constantly thinking; ekaya—with one attention;
buddhya—and intelligence; maha-purusam—upon the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; #Svaram—the supreme controller, Lord Visnu;
pragrhya—completely controlling; indriya—the senses; dusta—for-
midable, powerful; asvdn—horses; manasa—by the mind; buddhi-
sarathih—with the help of intelligence, the chariot driver; manah—the
mind; ca—also; eka-agraya—with full attention; buddhya—with the
intelligence; bhagavati—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
akhila-atmani—the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul of all living entities;
vasudeve—unto Lord Vasudeva; samadhaya—keeping full attention;
cacara—executed; ha—thus; payah-vratam—the ritualistic ceremony
known as payo-vrata.
TRANSLATION
With full, undiverted attention, Aditi thought of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and in this way brought under full control
her mind and senses, which resembled forceful horses. She con-
centrated her mind upon the Supreme Lord, Vasudeva. Thus she
performed the ritualistic ceremony known as payo-vrata.
PURPORT
This is the process of bhakti-yoga.
anyabhilasita-sianyam
Jjaana-karmady-andavrtam
anukitlyena krsnanu-
silanarn bhaktir uttama


--- Page 10 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
“One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devo-
tional service.” One simply has to concentrate upon the lotus feet of
Vasudeva, Krsna (sa vai manah krsiia-padaravindayoh). Then the mind
and senses will be controlled, and one can engage himself fully in the
devotional service of the Lord. The devotee does not need to practice the
hatha-yoga system to control the mind and senses; his mind and senses
are automatically controlled because of unalloyed devotional service to
the Lord.
TEXT 4
तस्याः प्रादुरभूत्तात भगवानादिपुरुषः |
पीतवासाशचतुर्बाहूः शङ्खचक्रगदाधरः ॥ ४ ॥
tasyah pradurabhit tata
bhagavan adi-purusah
pita-vasas catur-bahuh
Sankha-cakra-gada-dharah
tasyah—before her; pradurabhiit—appeared; tata—my dear King;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adi-purusah—the
original person; pita-vasah—dressed in yellow garments; catuh-
bahuh—with four arms; Sarkha-cakra-gada-dharah—bearing the
conchshell, disc, club and lotus flower.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead,
dressed in yellow garments and bearing a conchshell, disc, club
and lotus in His four hands, then appeared before Aditi.
TEXT 5
तं नेत्रगोचरं वीक्ष्य सहसोत्थाय सादरम्‌ |
ननाम अवि कायेन दण्डवत्‌प्रीतिविद्वला || ५॥


--- Page 11 ---
Text 6] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 5
tar netra-gocarar viksya
sahasotthaya sadaram
nanama bhuvi kayena
dandavat-priti-vihvala
tam—Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); netra-gocaram—
visible by her eyes; viksya—after seeing; sahasa—all of a sudden;
utthaya—getting up; sa-addaram—with great respect; nanama—offered
respectful obeisances; bhuvi—on the ground; kayena—by the whole
body; danda-vat—{alling like a rod; priti-vihvala—almost puzzled be-
cause of transcendental bliss.
TRANSLATION
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead became visible to
Aditi’s eyes, Aditi was so overwhelmed by transcendental bliss that
she at once stood up and then fell to the ground like a rod to offer
the Lord her respectful obeisances.
TEXT 6
सोत्थाय बद्धाञ्ञलिरीडितुं सिता
नोत्सेह आनन्दजलाङ्लेक्षणा |
बभूव तुष्णीं पुलकाङ्कलाङृति- ,
९
स्तदशेनात्युर्सवगात्रवेपथुः ॥ ६ ॥
sotthaya baddhanjalir iditurn sthita
notseha ananda-jalakuleksana
babhiva tasnim pulakakulakrtis
tad-darsanatyutsava-gatra-vepathuh
sa—she; utthaya—standing up; baddha-anjalih—with folded hands;
iditum —to worship the Lord; sthita—situated; na utsehe—could not en-
deavor; ananda—from transcendental bliss; jala—with water;
akula-tksand—her eyes were filled; babhiiva—remained; tiasnim—
silent; pulaka—with standing of the hairs of the body; @kula—over-
whelmed; akrtih—her form; tat-darsana—by seeing the Lord;


--- Page 12 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
ati-utsava —with great pleasure; gatra—her body; vepathuh—began to
tremble.
TRANSLATION
Aditi stood silently with folded hands, unable to offer prayers to
the Lord. Because of transcendental bliss, tears filled her eyes, and
the hairs on her body stood on end. Because she could see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face, she felt ecstasy, and
her body trembled.
TEXT 7
©.
प्रीत्या FARA गिरा हरिं
gem सा देन्यदितिः gw |
उद्वीक्षती सा पिबतीव चक्षुषा
रभापर्तिं यज्ञपतिं जगत्पतिम्‌ ॥ ७॥
prityd Sanair gadgadaya gira haririh
tustava sa devy aditih kuridvaha
udviksati sa pibativa caksusa
rama-patin yajnia-patimn jagat-patim
pritya—because of love; Sanaih—again and again; gadgadaya—
faltering; gira —with a voice; harim—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tustava—pleased; sa—she; devi—the demigoddess; aditih—
Aditi; kuru-udvaha—O Maharaja Pariksit; udviksati—while staring;
sa—she; pibati iva—appeared as if she were drinking; caksusa—
through the eyes; rama-patim —unto the Lord, the husband of the god-
dess of fortune; yajia-patim—unto the Lord, the enjoyer of all
sacrificial ceremonies; jagat-patim—the master and Lord of the entire
universe.
TRANSLATION
O Maharaja Pariksit, the demigoddess Aditi then began offering
her prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in a faltering
voice and with great love. She appeared as though drinking


--- Page 13 ---
Text 8] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 7
through her eyes the Supreme Lord, who is the husband of the
goddess of fortune, the enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies, and
the master and Lord of the entire universe.
PURPORT

After observing the payo-vrata, Aditi was certain that the Lord had
appeared before her as Rama-pati, the husband of all good fortune, just
to offer her sons all opulences. She had performed the yajiia of payo-
vrata under the direction of her husband, Kasyapa, and therefore she
thought of the Lord as Yajiia-pati. She was completely satisfied to see the
master and Lord of the entire universe come before her to fulfill her
desire.

TEXT 8
भ्रीजदितिरुवाच
_ ७
यज्ञेश यज्ञपुरुषाच्युत तीथेपाद्‌
तीथेश्रवः अ्रवणमद्गटनामथेय |
आपजनलोकवृजिनोपशमोद यादय
शं नः कृधीश मगवनति दीननाथः।। < ॥
Sri-aditir uvdaca
yajiiesa yajia-purusacyuta tirtha-pada
tirtha-sravah Sravana-mangala-namadheya
apanna-loka-vrjinopasamodayadya
Sam nah krdhisa bhagavann asi dina-nathah

$ri-aditih uvaca—the demigoddess Aditi said; yajiia-isa—O controller
of all sacrificial ceremonies; yajia-purusa—the person who enjoys the
benefits of all sacrifices; acyuta—infallible; tirtha-pada —at whose lotus
feet stand all the holy places of pilgrimage; tirtha-Sravah —celebrated as
the ultimate shelter of all saintly persons; $ravana—hearing about
whom; marigala—is auspicious; namadheya—to chant His name is also
auspicious; apanna—surrendered; loka—of people; vrjina—dangerous
material position; upasama—diminishing; udaya—who has appeared;
adya—the original Personality of Godhead; Sam —auspiciousness;


--- Page 14 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
nah—our; krdhi—kindly bestow upon us; a—O supreme controller;
bhagavan—O Lord; asi—You are; dina-nathah—the only shelter of the
downtrodden.
TRANSLATION

The goddess Aditi said: O master and enjoyer of all sacrificial
ceremonies, O infallible and most famous person, whose name,
when chanted, spreads all good fortune! O original Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, supreme controller, shelter of all holy places,
You are the shelter of all poor, suffering living entities, and You
have appeared to diminish their suffering. Please be kind to us and
spread our good fortune.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of those who ob-
serve vows and austerities, and it is He who bestows benedictions upon
them. He is worshipable for the devotee throughout the devotee’s life,
for He never breaks His promises. As He says in Bhagavad-gita (9.31),
kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati: “0 son of Kunti,
declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.” The Lord is addressed
here as acyuta, the infallible, because He takes care of His devotees.
Anyone inimical to the devotees is certainly vanquished by the mercy of
the Lord. The Lord is the source of the Ganges water, and therefore He is
addressed here as tirtha-pada, indicating that all the holy places are at
His lotus feet, or that whatever He touches with His foot becomes a holy
place. Bhagavad-gita, for example, begins with the words dharma-ksetre
kuru-ksetre. Because the Lord was present on the Battlefield of Kuru-
ksetra, it became a dharma-ksetra, a place of pilgrimage. Therefore the
Pandavas, who were extremely religious, were assured of victory. Any
place where the Supreme Personality of Godhead displays His pastimes,
such as Vrndavana or Dvaraka, becomes a holy place. The chanting of
the holy name of the Lord —Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare—is pleasing to
the ear, and it expands good fortune to the audience who hears it
chanted. Owing to the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Aditi was fully assured that the troublesome condition created for her by
the demons would now be ended.


--- Page 15 ---
Text 9] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 9
TEXT 9
विश्वाय विश्वमवनयिितिसंयमाय
>,
स्वैरं ५ भूम्ने |
অন্যায় शश्वदुपठरंहितपूणंबोध-
व्यापादितात्मतमसे हरये नमस्ते ॥ ९॥
visvaya visSva-bhavana-sthiti-sarnyamaya
svairari grhita-puru-sakti-gunaya bhiimne
sva-sthaya $asvad-upabrrihita-pirna-bodha-
vyapaditatma-tamase haraye namas te
viSvaya—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is actually
the entire universe; visva—of the universe; bhavana—creation; sthiti—
maintenance; sariyamdaya—and annihilation; svairam—fully indepen-
dent; grhita—taking in hand; puru—completely; Sakti-gundaya—con-
trolling the three modes of material nature; bhizmne—the supreme
great; sva-sthaya—who is always situated in His original form; Sasvat—
eternally; upabrrihita—achieved; piirna—complete; bodha—knowl-
edge; vyapddita—completely vanquished; atma-tamase—the illusory
energy of Your Lordship; haraye—unto the Supreme Lord; namah te—I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the all-pervading universal form, the fully in-
dependent creator, maintainer and destroyer of this universe. Al-
though You engage Your energy in matter, You are always situated
in Your original form and never fall from that position, for Your
knowledge is infallible and always suitable to any situation. You
are never bewildered by illusion. 0 my Lord, let me offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You.
PURPORT
In the Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 2.117) it is said:


--- Page 16 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
siddhanta baliya citte na kara alasa
tha ha-ite krsne lage sudrdha manasa
Anyone trying to become fully Krsna conscious must know the Lord’s
glories as far as they are possible to understand. Here Aditi hints at these
glories. The universe is nothing but the external potency of the Lord.
This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.4): maya tatam 1007 sarvam.
Whatever we see in this universe is but an expansion of the potency of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as the sunshine and heat all
over the universe are expansions of the sun. When one surrenders unto
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he surpasses the influence of the il-
lusory energy, for the Supreme Lord, being fully wise and being situated
in the heart of everyone, especially in the heart of the devotee, gives one
intelligence by which one is sure never to fall into illusion.
TEXT 10
आयुः परं वपुरभीष्टमतुस्यलक्ष्मी-
योभूरसाः सकख्योगगुणाचिवर्गः |
ज्ञानं च केवरुमनन्त मवन्ति तुष्टात्‌
त्वत्तो नृणां किरु सपललजयादिराश्शीः।। १०॥
ayuh param vapur abhistam atulya-laksmir
dyo-bhii-rasah sakala-yoga-gunas tri-vargah
jranarm ca kevalam ananta bhavanti tustat
tvatto nrnarn kim u sapatna-jayadir asih
ayuh—duration of life; param—as long as that of Lord Brahma;
vapuh—a particular type of body; abhistam—the goal of life; atulya-
laksmih—unparalleled opulence in material existence; dyo—the upper
planetary system; bhi—Bhiloka; rasah—the lower planetary system;
sakala—all kinds of; yoga-gunah—the eight mystic perfections; tri-
vargah—the principles of religiosity, economic development and sense
gratification; jignam —transcendental knowledge; ca—and; kevalam—
complete; ananta—O unlimited one; bhavanti—all become possible;
tustat—by Your satisfaction; tvattah—from You; nrnam—of all living


--- Page 17 ---
Text 11] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 11
entities; kim u—what to speak of; sapatna—enemies; jaya—
conquering; adih—and others; asth—such benedictions.
TRANSLATION
O unlimited one, if Your Lordship is satisfied, one can very
easily obtain a lifetime as long as that of Lord Brahma, a body
either in the upper, lower or middle planetary systems, unlimited
material opulence, religion, economic development and satisfac-
tion of the senses, full transcendental knowledge, and the eight
yogic perfections, what to speak of such petty achievements as con-
quering one’s rivals.
TEXT 11
HAF INT
अदित्यैवं स्तुतो राजन्मगवान्पुष्करेकषणः |
४५
्ेत्रज्ञः स्वेभूतानामिति होवाच मारत ॥११॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
adityaivam stuto rajan
bhagavan puskareksanah
ksetra-jiiah sarva-bhitanam
iti hovaca bharata
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; aditya—by Aditi;
evam—thus; stutah—being worshiped; rgjan—O King (Maharaja
Pariksit); bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
puskara-iksanah—whose eyes are like lotus flowers; ksetra-jiah—the
Supersoul; sarva-bhiatanam—of all living entities; iti—thus; ha—in-
deed; uvaca—replied; bharata—O best of the Bharata dynasty.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King Pariksit, best of the Bharata
dynasty, when the lotus-eyed Lord, the Supersoul of all living en-
tities, was thus worshiped by Aditi, He replied as follows.


--- Page 18 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
TEXT 12
्रीमगवादुवाक
देवमातर्भवत्या मे विज्ञातं Fria |
यत्‌ सपतनैदतश्रीणां च्यावितानां खधामतः ॥१२॥
Sri-bhagavan uvaca
deva-matar bhavatya me
viyrdtarn cira-karksitam
yat sapatnair hrta-Srinam
cyavitanar sva-dhamatah
_ $ri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; deva-
matar—O mother of the demigods; bhavatyah—of you; me—by Me;
vijiiatam—understood; cira-kariksitam—what You have desired for a
long time; yat—because; sapatnaih—by the rivals; hrta-srinam—
of your sons, who are bereft of all opulences; cyavitanam— vanquished;
sva-dhamatah —from their own residential quarters.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O mother of the
demigods, I have already understood your long-cherished desires
for the welfare of your sons, who have been deprived of all opu-
lences and driven from their residence by their enemies.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being situated in everyone’s
heart, and especially in the hearts of His devotees, is always ready
to help devotees in adversity. Since He knows everything, He knows how
things are to be adjusted, and He does the needful to relieve the suffering
of His devotee.
TEXT 13
¢
तान्विनिर्जित्य समरे . दुमेदानसुरषभान्‌ |
प्रतिलन्धजयश्रीमिः पूत्ररिच्छस्युपासितुम्‌ ॥१३॥


--- Page 19 ---
Text 14] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 13
tan vinirjitya samare
durmadan asurarsabhan
pratilabdha-jaya-sribhih
putrair icchasy upasitum
tan —them; vinirjitya—defeating; samare—in the fight; durmadan—
puffed up by strength; asura-rsabhan—the leaders of the demons;
pratilabdha —getting back; jaya—victory; Sribhih—as well as the opu-
lence; putraih—with your sons; icchasi—you are desiring; updsitum—
to come together and worship Me.
TRANSLATION
O Devi, O goddess, I can understand that you want to regain
your sons and be together with them to worship Me, after defeat-
ing the enemies in battle and retrieving your abode and opulences.
TEXT 14
इन्द्रज्यद्ैः खतनयैरैतानां युधि बिद्धिषाम्‌ |
सियो रुदन्तीरासाय द्रष्टुमिच्छसि दुःखिताः ॥१४॥
indra-jyesthaih sva-tanayair
hatanam yudhi vidvisam
striyo rudantir asadya
drastum icchasi duhkhitah
indra-jyesthaih—persons of whom King Indra is the eldest; sva-
tanayaih—by your own sons; hatanam—who are killed; yudhi—in the
fight; vidvisam—of the enemies; striyah—the wives; rudantth—
lamenting; a@sddya—coming near the dead bodies of their husbands;
drastum icchasi—you want to see; duhkhitah—very much aggrieved.
TRANSLATION
You want to see the wives of the demons lamenting for the death
of their husbands when those demons, the enemies of your sons,
are killed in battle by the demigods, of whom Indra is the chief.


--- Page 20 ---
14 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
TEXT 15
ARAA-GEIGI A प्रत्याहृतयश्ञःश्चियः |
नाकपृष्ठमधिष्ठाय क्रीडतो द्रष्टुमिच्छसि ॥ १५॥
atmajan susamrddharms tvari
pratyahrta-yasah-sriyah
naka-prstham adhisthaya
kridato drastum icchasi
atma-jan—your own sons; su-samrddhan—completely opulent;
tvam—you; pratydhrta—having received back; yasah—reputation;
Sriyah—opulence;  naka-prstham—in the heavenly kingdom;
adhisthaya —situated; kridatah—enjoying their life; drastum—to see;
icchasi—you are desiring.
TRANSLATION
You want your sons to regain their lost reputation and opulence
and live again on their heavenly planet as usual.
TEXT 16
प्रायोऽधुना तेऽसुरयुथनाथा
अपारणीया इति देवि मे मतिः ।
यत्तेऽनुक्ूलेश्वरविप्रगुप्ता
a विक्रमस्तत्र सुखं ददाति ॥१६॥
prayo 21076 te ’sura-yiutha-natha
aparaniya iti devi me matih
yat te ‘nukileSvara-vipra-gupta
na vikramas tatra sukhari dadati
prayah—almost; adhuna—at the present moment; te—all of them;
asura-yitha-nathah—the chiefs of the demons; aparaniyah—uncon-
querable; iti —thus; devi—O mother Aditi; me—My; matih—opinion;


--- Page 21 ---
Text 17] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 15
yat—because; te—all the demons; anukila-i$vara-vipra-guptah—pro-
tected by brahmanas, by whose favor the supreme controller is always
present; na—not; vikramah—the use of power; tatra—there;
sukham—happiness; dadati—can give.
TRANSLATION

O mother of the demigods, in My opinion almost all the chiefs of
the demons are now unconquerable, for they are being protected
by brahmanas, whom the Supreme Lord always favors. Thus the
use of power against them now will not at all be a source of
happiness.

PURPORT

When a person is favored by brahmanas and Vaisnavas, no one can
defeat him. Even the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not interfere
when one is protected by a brahmana. It is said, go-brahmana-hitaya ca.
The Lord’s first inclination is to give all benedictions to the cows and
brahmanas. Therefore if brahmanas favor someone, the Lord does not
interfere, nor can anyone interfere with the happiness of such a person.

TEXT 17
अथाप्युपायो मम देवि चिन्त्यः
सन्तोषितस्य व्रतचर्यया ते |
Ce <
ममाचेनं नाहति गन्तुमन्यथा
श्द्धाचुरूपं फलहेतकत्वात्‌ ॥१७॥
athapy upayo mama devi cintyah
santositasya vrata-caryaya te
mamadrcanari narhati gantum anyatha
$700000 70187010071 phala-hetukatvat

atha—therefore; api—in spite of this situation; upayah—some
means; mama—by Me; devi—O goddess; cintyah—must be considered;
santositasya—very pleased; vrata-caryaya—observing the vow; te—by
you; mama arcanam—worshiping Me; na—never; arhati—deserves;


--- Page 22 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
gantum anyathd—to become otherwise; sraddha-anuriipam—according
to one’s faith and devotion; phala—of the result; hetukatvat—from
being the cause.
TRANSLATION

Yet because I have been satisfied by the activities of your vow, O
goddess Aditi, I must find some means to favor you, for worship of
Me never goes in vain but certainly gives the desired result accord-
ing to what one deserves.

TEXT 18
त्वयाचितश्वाहमपत्यगुक्षये
पयोत्रतेनावुगुणं समीडितः ।
खां शेन JAPA ते सुतान्‌
गोप्तासि मारीचतपस्यधिष्ठितः ॥१८॥
tvayarcita$ caham apatya-guptaye
payo-vratenanugunari samiditah
svarsena putratvam upetya te sutan
goptasmi marica-tapasy adhisthitah

tvaya—by you; arcitah—being worshiped; ca—also; aham—I;
apatya-guptaye—giving protection to your sons; payah-vratena—by
the payo-vrata vow; anugunam—as far as possible; samiditah—prop-
erly worshiped; sva-arisena—by My plenary portion; putratvam—be-
coming your son; upetya—taking this opportunity; te sutdn—to your
other sons; gopta asmi—I shall give protection; marica—of Kasyapa
Muni; tapasi—in the austerity; adhisthitah—situated. =.

TRANSLATION

You have prayed to Me and properly worshiped Me by perform-
ing the great payo-vrata ceremony for the sake of protecting your
sons. Because of Kasyapa Muni’s austerities, I shall agree to be-
come your son and thus protect your other sons.


--- Page 23 ---
Text 20] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 17
TEXT 19
उपधाव पतिं मद्रे प्रजापतिमकटमषम्‌ |
मां च भावयती प्यावेवंरूपमवस्थितम्‌ ॥१९॥
(1. ॥ 11... 1.1.
prajapatim akalmasam
marn ca bhavayati patyav
evar ripam avasthitam
upadhava—just go worship; patim—your husband; bhadre—O gen-
tle woman; prajapatim—who is a Prajapati; akalmasam—very much
purified because of his austerity; mam—Me; ca—as well as;
bhavayati—thinking of; patyau—within your husband; evam—thus;
ripam—form; avasthitam—situated there.
TRANSLATION
Always thinking of Me as being situated within the body of your
husband, Kasyapa, go worship your husband, who has been
purified by his austerity.
TEXT 20
नैतत्‌ wen आख्येयं पृष्टयापि कथंचन |
९ . ক
सवं सम्पद्यते देवि देवगु्यं॑सुसंृतम्‌ Rell
naitat parasma akhyeyarn
prstayapi kathafcana
sarvarh sampadyate devi
deva-guhyarn susarhwrtam
na—not; etat—this; parasmai—to outsiders; akhyeyam—is to be
disclosed; prstaya api—even though questioned; kathaiicana—by any-
one; sarvam—everything; sampadyate —becomes successful; devi—O
lady; deva-guhyam—very confidential even to the demigods; su-
sarwrtam—very carefully kept confidential.


--- Page 24 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION
O lady, even if someone inquires, you should not disclose this
fact to anyone. That which is very confidential is successful if kept
secret.
TEXT 21
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
एतावदुक्त्वा भगवासतत्ैवान्तरधीयत |
अदितिदुंभं Fo हरेजन्मात्मनि प्रभोः |
उपाधावत्‌ पतिं भक्त्या परया कृतकृत्यवत्‌ ॥२१॥
sri-Suka uvaca
etavad uktvd bhagavaris
tatraivantaradhiyata
aditir durlabhari labdhva
harer janmatmani prabhoh
upadhavat patiri bhaktya
paraya krta-krtyavat
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sr1 Sukadeva Gosvami said; etavat—in this way;
uktva—saying (to her); bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; tatra eva—in that very spot; antah-adhiyata—disappeared;
aditih—Aditi; durlabham—a very rare achievement; labdhva—getting;
hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; janma—birth; atmani-
—in herself; prabhoh—of the Lord; upadhavat—immediately went;
patim—unto her husband; bhaktya—with devotion; paraya—great;
krta-krtya-vat—thinking herself very successful.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: After speaking in this way, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead disappeared from that very spot. Aditi,
having received the extremely valuable benediction that the Lord
would appear as her son, considered herself very successful, and
with great devotion she approached her husband.


--- Page 25 ---
Text 23] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 19
TEXT 22
स॒वै समाधियोगेन कस्यपस्तद्‌बुष्यत ।
प्रविष्टमात्मनि हरेरंशं दछयवितथे्षणः।२२॥
sa vai samadhi-yogena
kasyapas tad abudhyata
pravistam atmani harer
aman hy avitatheksanah
sah—Kasyapa Muni; vai—indeed; samadhi-yogena—by mystic
meditation; kasyapah—Kasyapa Muni; tat—then; abudhyata—could
understand; pravistam —entered; dtmani—within himself; hareh—of
the Supreme Lord; amSam—a plenary portion; hi—indeed;
avitatha-tksanah—whose vision is never mistaken.
TRANSLATION
Being situated in a meditational trance, KaSyapa Muni, whose
vision is never mistaken, could see that a plenary portion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead had entered within him.
TEXT 23
©
सोऽदित्यां वीयमाधत्त तपसा विरसंभेतम्‌ |
समादितमना राजन्दारुण्यत्नि यथानिलः ॥२३॥
so ’dityam viryam adhatta
tapasa cira-sambhrtam
samdhita-mana rajan
daruny कव्य yathanilah
sah—KasSyapa; adityam—unto Aditi; viryam—semen; adhatta—
placed; tapasa—by austerity; cira-sambhrtam—restrained for long,
long years; samahita-manah—being fully in trance upon the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; rajan—O King; daruni—as in firewood;
agnim—fire; yatha—as; anilah—wind.


--- Page 26 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
TRANSLATION

O King, as the wind promotes friction between two pieces of
wood and thus gives rise to fire, Kasyapa Muni, whose transcen-
dental position was fully absorbed in the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, transferred his potency into the womb of Aditi.

PURPORT

A forest fire begins when two pieces of wood rub against one another,
being agitated by the wind. Actually, however, fire belongs neither to the
wood nor to the wind; it is always different from both. Similarly, here it
is to be understood that the union of Kasyapa Muni and Aditi was not like
the sexual intercourse of ordinary human beings. The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead has nothing to do with the human secretions of sex-
ual intercourse. He is always completely aloof from such material
combinations.

The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.29), samo "hari sarva-bhiitesu: "न्‌
am equal toward all living entities.” Nonetheless, to protect the devotees
and kill the demons, who were a disturbing element, the Lord entered
the womb of Aditi. Therefore this is a transcendental pastime of the
Lord. This should not be misunderstood. One should not think that the
Lord became the son of Aditi the way an ordinary child is born because
of sexual intercourse between man and woman.

Here it may also be appropriate to explain, in these days of con-
troversy, the origin of life. The life force of the living entity —the soul —
is different from the ovum and semen of the human being. Although the
conditioned soul has nothing to do with the reproductive cells of man and
woman, he is placed into the proper situation because of his work
(karmana daiva-netrena). Life is not, however, a product of two secre-
tions, but is independent of all material elements. As fully described in
Bhagavad-gita, the living entity is not subject to any material reactions.
He can neither be burnt by fire, cut by sharp weapons, moistened by
water, nor dried by the air. He is completely different from the physical
elements, but by a superior arrangement he is put into these material
elements. He is always aloof from material contact (asarigo hy aya
purusah) but because he is placed in a material condition, he suffers the
reactions of the material modes of nature.


--- Page 27 ---
Text 24] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 21
purusah prakrti-stho hi
bhurikte prakrtijan gunan
karanari guna-sango sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
“The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoy-
ing the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that ma-
terial nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various
species.” (Bg. 13.22) Although the living entity is aloof from the ma-
terial elements, he is put into material conditions, and thus he must
suffer the reactions of material activities.
TEXT 24
अदितेर्धिष्ठितं गर्भं भगवन्तं सनातनम्‌ |
हिरण्यगरमो विज्ञाय समीडे गुद्यनामभिः ॥२४॥
aditer dhisthitari garbhari
bhagavantari sandatanam
hiranyagarbho vijidya
samide guhya-namabhih
aditeh—into the womb of Aditi; dhisthitam—being established;
garbham —pregnancy; bhagavantam—unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sanatanam—who is eternal; hiranyagarbhah—Lord Brahma;
vijidya—knowing this; samide—offered prayers; guhya-namabhih—
with transcendental names.
TRANSLATION
When Lord Brahma understood that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead was now within the womb of Aditi, he began to offer
prayers to the Lord by reciting transcendental names.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead exists everywhere (andantara-
stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham). Therefore when one chants His tran-
scendental names— Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/


--- Page 28 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
Hare Rima, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is automatically pleased by such sarikirtana. It is not
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is absent; He is present there.
And when a devotee utters the transcendental name, it is not a material
sound. Therefore, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is naturally
pleased. A devotee knows that the Lord is present everywhere and that
one can please Him simply by chanting His holy name.
TEXT 25
श्रीबह्मीवाच
जयोरुगाय भगवन्नुरुक्रम नमोऽस्तु ते |
नमो ब्रह्मण्यदेवाय त्रिगुणाय नमो नमः ॥२५॥
Sri-brahmovaca
Jayorugdya bhagavann
urukrama namo ’stu te
namo brahmanya-devaya
tri-gundya namo namah

§ri-brahma uvaca—Lord Brahma offered prayers; jaya—all glories;
urugaya—unto the Lord, who is constantly glorified; bhagavan—O my
Lord; urukrama—whose activities are very glorious; namah astu te—I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You; namah—my respectful obei-
sances; brahmanya-devaya—unto the Lord of the transcendentalists;
tri-gundya—the controller of the three modes of nature; namah
namah—1 offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and again.

TRANSLATION

Lord Brahma said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, all glo-
ries unto You, who are glorified by all and whose activities are all
uncommon. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, O Lord of
the transcendentalists, controller of the three modes of nature. I
offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and again.


--- Page 29 ---
Text 27] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 23
TEXT 26
नमस्ते पृरक्षिगर्माय वेदगमाय वेधसे ।
त्रिनाभाय frog शिपिविष्टाय विष्णवे na
71017205 te prsni-garbhaya
veda-garbhaya vedhase
tri-nabhaya tri-prsthaya
Sipi-vistaya visnave
namah te—] offer my respectful obeisances unto You; prsni-
garbhaya—who formerly lived within the womb of Préni (Aditi in her
previous birth); veda-garbhaya—who always remain within Vedic
knowledge; vedhase—who are full of knowledge; tri-nabhaya—within
the stem growing from whose navel live all the three worlds; tri-
prsthaya—who are transcendental to the three worlds; Sipi-vistaya—
who are within the cores of the hearts of all living entities; visnave—
unto the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the all-pervading
Lord Visnu, who have entered the cores of the hearts of all living
entities. All the three worlds reside within Your navel, yet You are
above the three worlds. Formerly You appeared as the son of
Préni. To You, the supreme creator, who are understood only
through Vedic knowledge, I offer my respectful obeisances.
TEXT 27
त्वमादिरन्तो স্তুলনন্য मध्य
मनन्तञ्चक्तिं पुरुषं यमाहुः ।
कालो भवानाक्षिपतीश विश्वं
स्रोतो यथान्तःपतितं गभीरम्‌ Rel
tvam adir anto bhuvanasya madhyam
ananta-Saktim [01871050778 yam ahuh


--- Page 30 ---
24 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 17
kalo bhavan aksipatisa 025४0772
stroto yathantah patitarn gabhiram
tvam —Your Lordship; adih—the original cause; antah —the cause of
dissolution; bhuvanasya—of the universe; madhyam —maintenance of
the present manifestation; ananta-saktim—the reservoir of unlimited
potencies; purusam—the Supreme Person; yam —whom; ahuh—they
say; kalah—the principle of eternal time; bhavan— Your Lordship; ak-
sipati—attracting; a—the Supreme Lord; visvam—the whole uni-
verse; strotah—waves; yathda—as; antah patitam—fallen within the
water; gabhiram—very deep.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, You are the beginning, the manifestation and the
ultimate dissolution of the three worlds, and You are celebrated in
the Vedas as the reservoir of unlimited potencies, the Supreme
Person. O my Lord, as waves attract branches and leaves that have
fallen into deep water, You, the supreme eternal time factor, at-
tract everything in this universe.
PURPORT
The time factor is sometimes described as kala-strota, waves of time.
Everything in this material world is within the time factor and is being
carried away by waves of attraction, which represent the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.
TEXT 28
५ A .
त्व॑व प्रजानां स्थिरजङ्गमानां
भ्रजापतीनामसि सम्भविष्णुः |
दिवौकसां देव॒ दिवश्च्युतानां
परायणं नौरिव ` मजतोऽप्सु॥॥२८॥
tvari vai prajandam sthira-jarigamandri
prajapatinam asi sambhavispuh


--- Page 31 ---
Text 28] The Lord Agrees to Become Aditi’s Son 25
divaukasarn deva divas cyutanarm
parayanar naur iva majjato ‘psu

tvam—Your Lordship; vai—indeed; prajanam—of all living entities;
sthira-jarigamanam—either stationary or moving; prajapatinam—of all
the Prajapatis; asi—You are; sambhavisnuh—the generator of every-
one; diva-okasam—of the inhabitants of the upper planetary system;
deva —O Supreme Lord; divah cyutanam—of the demigods, who have
now fallen from their residential quarters; parayanam—the supreme
shelter; nauh—boat; iva—like; majjatah—of one drowning; apsu—in
the water.

TRANSLATION

My Lord, You are the original generator of all living entities,
stationary or moving, and You are also the generator of the
Prajapatis. O my Lord, as a boat is the only hope for a person
drowning in the water, You are the only shelter for the demigods,
who are now bereft of their heavenly position.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Seventeenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Supreme Lord Agrees
to Become Aditi’s Son.”


--- Page 32 ---
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Lord Vamanadeva,
the Dwarf Incarnation
This chapter describes how Lord Vamanadeva appeared and how He
went to the sacrificial arena of Maharaja Bali, who received Him well and
fulfilled His desire by offering Him benedictions.

Lord Vamanadeva appeared in this world from the womb of Aditi
completely equipped with conchshell, disc, club and lotus. His bodily hue
was blackish, and He was dressed in yellow garments. Lord Visnu ap-
peared at an auspicious moment on Sravana-dvadasi when the Abhijit
star had arisen. At that time, in all the three worlds (including the higher
planetary system, outer space and this earth), all the demigods, the cows,
the brahmanas and even the seasons were happy because of God’s ap-
pearance. Therefore this auspicious day is called Vijaya. When the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has a sac-cid-ananda body, ap-
peared as the son of KaSyapa and Aditi, both of His parents were very
astonished. After His appearance, the Lord assumed the form of a dwarf
(Vamana). All the great sages expressed their jubilation, and with
Kasyapa Muni before them they performed the birthday ceremony of
Lord Vamana. At the time of Lord Vamanadeva’s sacred thread
ceremony, He was honored by the sun-god, Brhaspati, the goddess
presiding over the planet earth, the deity of the heavenly planets, His
mother, Lord Brahmi, Kuvera, the seven rsis and others. Lord
Vamanadeva then visited the sacrificial arena on the northern side of the
Narmada River, at the field known as Bhrgukaccha, where brahmanas of
the Bhrgu dynasty were performing yajias. Wearing a belt made of
mufija straw, an upper garment of deerskin and a sacred thread and
carrying in His hands a danda, an umbrella and a waterpot
(kamandalu), Lord Vamanadeva appeared in the sacrificial arena of
Maharaja Bali. Because of His transcendentally effulgent presence, all
the priests were diminished in their prowess, and thus they all stood
from their seats and offered prayers to Lord Vamanadeva. Even Lord
Siva accepts on his head the Ganges water generated from the toe of Lord

27


--- Page 33 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
Vamanadeva. Therefore, after washing the Lord’s feet, Bali Maharaja
immediately accepted the water from the Lord’s feet on his head and felt
that he and his predecessors had certainly been glorified. Then Bali
Maharaja inquired of Lord Vamanadeva’s welfare and requested the
Lord to ask him for money, jewels or anything He might desire.
TEXT 1
sft उवाच
. ©
इत्थं विरिजस्तुतकर्मवीर्यः
्रादुबभूवागरृतभूरदित्याम्‌ |
Sect शहगदान्जचक्रः
पिशङ्गवासा = नङिनायतेक्षणः ।। १ ॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
ittham virifica-stuta-karma-viryah
pradurbabhivamrta-bhir adityam
catur-bhujah $arikha-gadabja-cakrah
pisanga-vdsa nalinayateksanah
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; ittham—in this way;
viriiica-stuta-karma-viryah—the Personality of Godhead, whose ac-
tivities and prowess are always praised by Lord Brahma;
pradurbabhiiva—became manifested; amrta-bhith—whose appearance
is always deathless; adityam —from the womb of Aditi; catuh-bhujah—
having four arms; sankha-gada-abja-cakrah—decorated with conch-
shell, club, lotus and disc; piSanga-vasah—dressed in yellow garments;
nalina-ayata-tksanah—having blooming eyes like the petals of a lotus.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: After Lord Brahma had thus spoken,
glorifying the Supreme Lord’s activities and prowess, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is never subject to death like an or-
dinary living being, appeared from the womb of Aditi. His four


--- Page 34 ---
Text 2] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 29
hands were decorated with a conchshell, club, lotus and disc, He
was dressed in yellow garments, and His eyes appeared like the
petals of a blooming lotus.
PURPORT
The word amrta-bhiih is significant in this verse. The Lord sometimes
appears like an ordinary child taking birth, but this does not mean that
He is subject to birth, death or old age. One must be very intelligent to
understand the appearance and activities of the Supreme Lord in His in-
carnations. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9): janma karma ca
me divyam evar yo vetti tattvatah. One should try to understand that the
Lord’s appearance and disappearance and His activities are all divyam, or
transcendental. The Lord has nothing to do with material activities. One
who understands the appearance, disappearance and activities of the
Lord is immediately liberated. After giving up his body, he never again
has to accept a material body, but is transferred to the spiritual world
(tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti so 'rjuna).
TEXT 2
श्यामावदातो श्षपराजङ्ण्डल-
तिषोह्छसच्ट्रीवद नाम्बुजः पुमान्‌ |
श्रीवत्सवक्षा बलयाङ्गवोलस-
क्किरीटकाश्चीगुणवासुनूपुरः ॥ २ ॥
Syamavadato jhasa-raja-kundala-
tvisollasac-chri-vadanambujah puman
Srivatsa-vaksa balayargadollasat-
kirita-kanci-guna-caru-niipurah
$§yama-avaddtah—whose body is blackish and free from inebriety;

Jhasa-raja-kundala—of the two earrings, made in the shape of sharks;
tvisa—by the luster; ullasat—dazzling; $ri-vadana-ambujah—having a
beautiful lotus face; puman—the Supreme Person; srivatsa-vaksah—
with the mark of Srivatsa on His bosom; balaya—bracelets; arigada—


--- Page 35 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
arm bands; ullosat—dazzling; kirita—helmet; kanci—belt; guna—
sacred thread; caru—beautiful; nizpurah—ankle bells.
TRANSLATION

The body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, blackish in
complexion, was free from all inebrieties. His lotus face, decorated
with earrings resembling sharks, appeared very beautiful, and on
His bosom was the mark of Srivatsa. He wore bangles on His
wrists, armlets on His arms, a helmet on His head, a belt on His
waist, a sacred thread across His chest, and ankle bells decorating
His lotus feet.

TEXT 3
मधु वतव्रातविचुष्टया खया
विराजितः श्रीवनमाख्या हरिः ।
प्रनापतेरवेश्मतमः खरोचिषा
भिनाश्चयन्‌ कण्ठनिविष्टकोस्तुमः ॥ २ ॥
madhu-vrata-vrata-vighustaya svaya
virgjitah sSri-vanamadlaya harih
prajapater vesma-tamah svarocisa
vinasayan kantha-nivista-kaustubhah

madhu-vrata—of bees always hankering for honey; vrata—with a
bunch; vighustayd—resounding; svayd—uncommon; virdjitah—situ-
ated; Sri—beautiful; vana-malaya—with a flower garland; harih—the
Supreme Lord; prajapateh—of KaSyapa Muni, the Prajapati; vesma-
tamah—the darkness of the house; sva-rocisa—by His own effulgence;
vinaSayan—vanquishing; kantha—on the neck; nivista—worn;
kaustubhah—the Kaustubha gem.

TRANSLATION

An uncommonly beautiful garland of flowers decorated His
bosom, and because the flowers were extremely fragrant, a large
group of bees, making their natural humming sounds, invaded


--- Page 36 ---
Text 5] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 31
them for honey. When the Lord appeared, wearing the Kaustubha
gem on His neck, His effulgence vanquished the darkness in the
home of the Prajapati KaSyapa.
TEXT 4
fa: प्रसेदुः सलिलाशयास्तदा
प्रजाः प्रहृष्टा ऋतवो गुणान्विताः |
dead fff
गावो Ben संजहषुनंगाश्च ।। ४॥
disah praseduh salilasayas tada
prajah prahrsta rtavo gunanvitah
dyaur antariksari ksitir agni-jihva
gavo dvijah sarjahrsur nagas ca
disah—all directions; praseduh—became happy; salila—of water;
asayah—the reservoirs; tadd—at that time; prajah—all living entities;
prahrstah—very happy; rtavah—the seasons; guna-anvitah—full of
their respective qualities; dyauh—the upper planetary system; an-
tariksam—outer space; ksitih—the surface of the earth; agni-jihvah—
the demigods; gavah—the cows; dvijah —the brahmanas; sarijahrsuh—
all became happy; nagah ca—and the mountains.
TRANSLATION
At that time, there was happiness in all directions, in the reser-
voirs of water like the rivers and oceans, and in the core of every-
one’s heart. The various seasons displayed their respective
qualities, and all living entities in the upper planetary system, in
outer space and on the surface of the earth were jubilant. The
demigods, the cows, the brahmanas and the hills and mountains
were all filled with joy.
TEXT 5
श्रोणायां SEK মৃত্তর্ন5মিজিলি प्रयः |
सर्वे नशत्रतारायाशक्कस्तजन्म दक्षिणम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥


--- Page 37 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
Srondyam Sravana-dvadaSyarin
muhirte ’bhijiti prabhuh
sarve naksatra-taradyas
cakrus taj-janma daksinam
Sronagyam—when the moon was situated in the Sravana lunar man-
sion; $ravana-dvadaSsyam—on the twelfth lunar day of the bright
fortnight in the month of Bhadra, the day famous as the Sravana-
dvadasi; muhitrte—in the auspicious moment; abhijiti—in the first por-
tion of the Sravana lunar mansion known as the Abhijit-naksatra and in
the Abhijit-muharta (occurring at midday); prabhuh—the Lord;
sarve—all; naksatra—stars; tara —planets; adyah—beginning with the
sun and followed by the other planets; cakruh—made; tat-janma—the
birthday of the Lord; daksinam—very munificent.
TRANSLATION
On the day of Sravana-dvadasi [the twelfth day of the bright
fortnight in the month of Bhadra], when the moon came into the
lunar mansion Sravana, at the auspicious moment of Abhijit, the
Lord appeared in this universe. Considering the Lord’s appearance
very auspicious, all the stars and planets, from the sun to Saturn,
were munificently charitable.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, an expert astrologer, explains
the word naksatra-taradyah. The word naksatra means ‘“‘the stars,” the
word tara in this context refers to the planets, and adyah means “the
first one specifically mentioned.” Among the planets, the first is Sarya,
the sun, not the moon. Therefore, according to the Vedic version, the
modern astronomer’s proposition that the moon is nearest to the earth
should not be accepted. The chronological order in which people all over
the world refer to the days of the week—Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday —corresponds to the Vedic
order of the planets and thus circumstantiates the Vedic version. Apart
from this, when the Lord appeared the planets and stars became situated
very auspiciously, according to astrological calculations, to celebrate the
birth of the Lord.


--- Page 38 ---
Text 7) Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 33
TEXT 6
द्वादश्यां सवितातिष्ठन्पष्यंदिनगतो 99 |
विजया नाम सा प्रोक्ता यस्यां जन्म Ret CTE]
dvadasyarh savitatisthan
madhyandina-gato nrpa
vijaya-nama sa prokta
yasyarn janma vidur hareh
dvadaSyam—on the twelfth day of the moon; savita—the sun;
atisthat—was staying; madhyam-dina-gatah—on the meridian; nrpa—
O King; vijayd-nama—by the name Vijaya; sa—that day; prokta—is
called; yasyam—on which; janma—the appearance; viduh—they
know; hareh—of Lord Hari.
TRANSLATION
0 King, when the Lord appeared —on dvadasi, the twelfth day of
the moon—the sun was at the meridian, as every learned scholar
knows. This dvadasi is called Vijaya.
TEXT 7
(५
शङ्खदुन्दुभयो नेदुम्ेदङ्गपणवानकाः |
चित्रवादित्रतूर्याणां निर्षोषस्तुमलोऽभवत्‌ ।। ७ ॥
Sankha-dundubhayo nedur
mrdarga-panavanakah
citra-vaditra-tiiryanarm
nirghosas tumulo ’bhavat
Sankha—conchshells;  dundubhayah—kettledrums;  neduh—vi-
brated; mrdanga—drums; panava-anakah—drums named panavas
and anakas; citra—various; vaditra—of these vibrations of musical
sound; tiryanam—and of other instruments; nirghosah—the loud
sound; tumulah —tumultuous; abhavat—became.


--- Page 39 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
TRANSLATION
Conchshells, kettledrums, drums, panavas and anakas vibrated
in concert. The sound of these and various other instruments was
tumultuous.
TEXT 8
प्रीताश्ाप्सरसोऽनरत्यन्गन्धर्वप्रवरा जगुः |
TTI देवा मनवः पितरोऽग्नयः ।॥ ८ ॥
pritds capsaraso ‘nrtyan
gandharva-pravara jaguh
tustuvur munayo deva
manavah pitaro ‘gnayah
pritah—being very pleased; ca—also; apsarasah—the celestial danc-
ing girls; anrtyan—danced; gandharva-pravarah—the best of the
Gandharvas; jaguh—sang; tustuvuh—satisfied the Lord by offering
prayers; munayah—the great sages; devah—the demigods; manavah—
the Manus; pitarah—the inhabitants of Pitrloka; agnayah—the
fire-gods.
TRANSLATION
Being very pleased, the celestial dancing girls [Apsaras] danced
in jubilation, the best of the Gandharvas sang songs, and the great
sages, demigods, Manus, Pitas and fire-gods offered prayers to
satisfy the Lord.
TEXTS 9-10
सिद्धविदयाधरगणाः सर्किपुरुषकिनराः |
चारणा यक्षरक्षांसि सुपर्णा भुजगोत्तमाः ।। ९ ॥
गायन्तोऽतिप्रजञंसन्तो चत्यन्तो RTE: |
अदित्या आश्रमपदं कुसुमैः समवाकिरन्‌ ॥१०॥
siddha-vidyadhara-ganah
sakimpurusa-kinnarah


--- Page 40 ---
Text 11] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 35
caranda yaksa-raksarisi
suparna bhujagottamah
gayanto ’tiprasarhsanto
nrtyanto vibudhanugah
aditya asrama-padariu
kusumaih samavakiran
siddha —the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; vidyadhara-ganah—the in-
habitants of Vidyadhara-loka; sa—with; kimpurusa—the inhabitants of
Kimpurusa-loka; kinnarah —the inhabitants of Kinnaraloka; caranah—
the inhabitants of Caranaloka; yaksa—the Yaksas; raksarisi—the
Raksasas; suparnah—the Suparnas; bhujaga-uttamah—the best of the
inhabitants of the serpent loka; gayantah—glorifying the Lord; ati-
prasarisantah—praising the Lord; nrtyantah—dancing; vibudha-
anugah—the followers of the demigods; adityah—of Aditi; asrama-
padam—the place of residence; kusumaih—by flowers; samavakiran—
covered.
TRANSLATION
The Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Kimpurusas, Kinnaras, Caranas,
Yaksas, Raksasas, Suparnas, the best of serpents, and the followers
of the demigods all showered flowers on Aditi’s residence, cover-
ing the entire house, while glorifying and praising the Lord and
dancing.
TEXT 11
दृष्टादितिस्तं निजगर्मसम्भवं
परं पुमांसं घदमाप विखिता।
गृहीतदेहं निजयोगमायया
प्रजापतिश्वाह जयेति बिसितः॥११॥
drstvaditis tar nija-garbha-sambhavari
[00707 pumarasarn mudam apa vismita
grhita-dehar nija-yoga-mayaya
prajapatis caha jayeti vismitah


--- Page 41 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
drstva—seeing; aditih—mother Aditi; tam —Him (the Supreme
Personality of Godhead); nija-garbha-sambhavam—born of her own
womb; param —the Supreme; pumarisam—the Personality of Godhead;
mudam—great happiness; apa—conceived; vismita—being very much
astonished; grhita—accepted; deham—body, or transcendental form;
nija-yoga-mayaya—by His own spiritual potency; prajapatih—Kasyapa
Muni; ca—also; @ha—said; jaya—all glories; iti—thus; vismitah—
being astonished.
TRANSLATION
When Aditi saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had
appeared from her own womb, having accepted a transcendental
body by His own spiritual potency, she was struck with wonder
and was very happy. Upon seeing the child, Prajapati Kasyapa ex-
claimed, ‘“Jaya! Jaya!” in great happiness and wonder.
TEXT 12
EN
यत्‌ तद्‌ वपुमाति विभूषणायुधै-
रल्यक्तचिदुव्यक्तमधारयद्धरिः |
चभूव तेनैव A वामनो IF
- ¢
सम्पश्यतोर्दि्यगतिर्थथा नटः ॥१२॥
yat tad vapur bhati vibhasanayudhair
avyakta-cid-vyaktam adharayad dharih
babhiva tenaiva sa vamano vatuh
sampasyator divya-gatir yatha natah
yat—which; tat—that; vapuh—transcendental body; bhati—
manifests; vibhisana—with regular ornaments; ayudhaih—and with
weapons; avyakta—unmanifested; cit-vyaktam—spiritually mani-
fested; adharayat—assumed; harih—the Lord; babhiiva —immediately
became; tena—with that; eva—certainly; sah—He (the Lord);
vamanah—dwarf; vatuh—a brahmana brahmacari; sampasSyatoh—
while both His father and mother were seeing; divya-gatih—whose
movements are wonderful; yatha—as; natah—a theatrical actor.


--- Page 42 ---
Text 13] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 37
TRANSLATION

The Lord appeared in His original form, with ornaments and
weapons in His hands. Although this ever-existing form is not visi-
ble in the material world, He nonetheless appeared in this form.
Then, in the presence of His father and mother, He assumed the
form of Vamana, a brahmana-dwarf, a brahmacari, just like a
theatrical actor.

PURPORT

The word natah is significant. An actor changes dress to play different
parts, but is always the same man. Similarly, as described in the
Brahma-sarihita (5.33, 39), the Lord assumes many thousands and
millions of forms (adwaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam adyari
purana-purusam). He is always present with innumerable incarnations
(ramadi-murtisu ~~ kala-niyamena  tisthan  ndndvataram akarod
bhuvanesu kintu). Nonetheless, although He appears in various incarna-
tions, they are not different from one another. He is the same person,
with the same potency, the same eternity and the same spiritual exis-
tence, but He can simultaneously assume various forms. When
Vamanadeva appeared from the womb of His mother, He appeared in the
form of Narayana, with four hands equipped with the necessary symbolic
weapons, and then immediately transformed Himself into a brahmacari
(vatu). This means that His body is not material. One who thinks that the
Supreme Lord assumes a material body is not intelligent. He has to learn
more about the Lord’s position. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9),
Jjanma karma ca me divyam evar yo vetti tattvatah. One has to under-
stand the transcendental appearance of the Lord in His original transcen-
dental body (sac-cid-ananda-vigraha).

TEXT 13
तं নও वामनं TE मोदमाना महर्षयः |
कर्माणि कारयामासुः पुरस्कृत्य प्रजापतिम्‌ IRE
tar vaturn vamanam drstva
modamadna maharsayah


--- Page 43 ---
38 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
karmani karayam asuh
puraskrtya prajapatim
tam ~ प्रा; vatum—the brahmacari; vamanam—dwarf; drstva—
seeing; modamanah—in a happy mood; maha-rsayah—the great saintly
persons; karmdni—ritualistic ceremonies; karayam asuh—performed;
puraskrtya—keeping in front; prajapatim—Kasyapa Muni, the
Prajapati.
TRANSLATION
When the great sages saw the Lord as the brahmacari-dwarf
Vamana, they were certainly very pleased. Thus they placed before
them KaSyapa Muni, the Prajapati, and performed all the ritualistic
ceremonies, such as the birthday ceremony.
PURPORT
According to Vedic civilization, when a child is born in the family of a
brahmana, the birthday ceremony, known as jata-karma, is first per-
formed, and then other ceremonies are also gradually performed. But
when this vamana-ripa appeared in the form of a vatu, or brahmacart,
His sacred thread ceremony was also performed immediately.
TEXT 14
तस्योपनीयमानसख सावित्रीं सवितात्रवीत्‌ ৷
बृहस्पतित्रह्मखत्रं मेखलां कश्यपोऽददात्‌ ॥ १४॥
tasyopaniyamanasya
savitrim savitabravit
brhaspatir brahma-sttrarm
mekhalam kaSyapo 0000
tasya—of Lord Viamanadeva; upaniyamdnasya—at the time of His
being offered the sacred thread ceremony; savitrim—the
Gayatri mantra; savita—the sun-god; abravit—chanted; brhaspatih—
Brhaspati, the guru of the demigods; brahma-sitram—the sacred


--- Page 44 ---
Text 16] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 39
thread; mekhalam—the belt of straw; kaSyapah—Ka$yapa Muni;
adadat—offered.
TRANSLATION
At the sacred thread ceremony of Vamanadeva, the sun-god per-
sonally uttered the Gayatri mantra, Brhaspati offered the sacred
thread, and KaS§yapa Muni offered a straw belt.
TEXT 15
ददौ कृष्णाजिनं भूमिर्दण्डं सोमो वनस्पतिः |
कोपीनाच्छादनं माता यश्छत्रं जगतः पतेः 11241
dadau krsnajinari bhimir
dandarin somo vanaspatih
kaupinacchadanarm mata
dyaus chatram jagatah pateh
dadau—gave, offered; krsna-ajinam—the skin of a deer; bhamih—
mother earth; dandam—a brahmacari’s rod; somah—the moon-god;
vanah-patih—the king of the forest; kaupina—the underwear;
dacchadanam—covering the body; mata—His mother, Aditi; dyauh—
the heavenly kingdom; chatram—an umbrella; jagatah—of the whole
universe; pateh—of the master.
TRANSLATION
Mother earth gave Him a deerskin, and the demigod of the
moon, who is the king of the forest, gave Him a brahma-danda [the
rod of a brahmacari]. His mother, Aditi, gave Eim cloth for under-
wear, and the deity presiding over the heavenly kingdom offered
Him an umbrella.
TEXT 16
FARE ITM: इुशान्सपर्षयो ददुः |
अक्षमायां महाराज सरखत्यव्ययात्मनः ॥ १६॥


--- Page 45 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
kamandalum veda-garbhah
kusan saptarsayo daduh
aksa-malarm maharaja
sarasvaty avyayatmanah
kamandalum—a waterpot; veda-garbhah—Lord Brahma; kusan—
kuSa grass; sapta-rsayah—the seven sages; daduh—offered; aksa-
malam —a string of Rudriksa beads; maharaja—O King; sarasvati—the
goddess Sarasvati; avyaya-atmanah—to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
O King, Lord Brahma offered a waterpot to the inexhaustible
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the seven sages offered Him
kusa grass, and mother Sarasvati gave Him a string of Rudraksa
beads.
TEXT 17
तखा इत्युपनीताय यक्षराट्‌ पात्रिकामदात्‌ |
भिक्षां मगवती साक्षादुमाद॥दम्बिका सती ।॥१७॥
tasma ity upanitaya
yaksa-rat patrikam adat
bhiksarn bhagavati saksad
umadad ambika satt
tasmai—unto Him (Lord Vamanadeva); iti—in this way;
upanitdya—who had undergone His sacred thread ceremony; yaksa-
rat—Kuvera, the treasurer of heaven and King of the Yaksas;
patrikam—a pot for begging alms; adat—delivered; bhiksam —alms;
bhagavati—mother Bhavani, the wife of Lord Siva; saksat—directly;
uma —Uma; adat—gave; ambika —the mother of the universe; sati—
the chaste.
TRANSLATION
When Vamanadeva had thus been given the sacred thread,
Kuvera, King of the Yaksas, gave Him a pot for begging alms, and


--- Page 46 ---
Text 19] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 41
mother Bhagavati, the wife of Lord Siva and most chaste mother of
the entire universe, gave Him His first alms.
TEXT 18
स ब्रह्मवच॑सेनैवं सभां संभावितो वटुः ।
ब्रहर्षिंगणसज्रष्टामत्यरोचत मारिषः ॥१८॥
sa (070187780-10070056780710 77
56110771 sambhavito vatuh
brahmarsi-gana-sanjustam
atyarocata marisah
sah—He (Vamanadeva); brahma-varcasena—by His Brahman
effulgence; evam—in this way; sabham —the assembly; sambhavitah—
having been welcomed by everyone; vatuh—the brahmacari; brahma-
rsi-gana-saijustam—*filled with great brahmana sages; ati-arocata—
surpassing, appeared beautiful; marisah—the best of the brahmacaris.
TRANSLATION
Having thus been welcomed by everyone, Lord Vamanadeva, the
best of the brahmacaris, exhibited His Brahman effulgence. Thus
He surpassed in beauty that entire assembly, which was filled with
great saintly brahmanas.
TEXT 19
समिद्धमाहितं वद्धिं Fe परिसमूहनम्‌ ।
९
परिस्तीर्य समभ्यर्च्य समिद्धिरजहोद्‌ दिजः nal
(1/1 11/11. 111
krtva parisamithanam
paristirya samabhyarcya
samidbhir ajuhod dvijah
samiddham —blazing; ahitam—being situated; vahnim—the fire;
krtva—after making; parisamithanam—properly; paristirya—surpass-
ing; samabhyarcya—after offering worship; samidbhih—with


--- Page 47 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
sacrificial offerings; ajuhot—completed the fire sacrifice; dvijah—the
best of the brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
After Lord Sri Vamanadeva set a sacrificial fire, He offered wor-
ship and performed a fire sacrifice on the sacrificial field.
TEXT 20
- =€
श्रुतवाश्वमेधेयंजमानमूर्जितं
वरि भृगूणाघुपकस्पितैस्ततः |
जगाम  तत्राखिटसारसंभरतो
मारेण गां सन्नमयन्पदे पदे ॥२०॥
Srutvasvamedhair yajamanam चा 1210792
balirh bhrginam upakalpitais tatah
jagama tatrakhila-sara-sambhrto
bharena gam sannamayan pade pade
Srutva—after hearing; asvamedhaih—by asvamedha sacrifices;
yajamanam—the performer; arjitam—very glorious; balim—Bali
Maharaja; bhrginam—under the guidance of the brahmanas born in the
Bhrgu dynasty; upakalpitaih—performed; tatah—from that place;
jagama—went; tatra—there; akhila-sara-sambhrtah—the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the essence of all creation; bharena—with the
weight; gam —the earth; sannamayan—depressing; pade pade—at
every step.
TRANSLATION
When the Lord heard that Bali Maharaja was performing
asvamedha sacrifices under the patronage of brahmanas belonging
to the Bhrgu dynasty, the Supreme Lord, who is full in every
respect, proceeded there to show His mercy to Bali Maharaja. By
His weight, He pushed down the earth with every step.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is akhila-sara-sambhrta. In
other words, He is the proprietor of everything essential in this material


--- Page 48 ---
Text 22] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 43
world. Thus although the Lord was going to Bali Maharaja to beg some-
thing, He is always complete and has nothing to beg from anyone. In-
deed, He is so powerful that in His full opulence He pressed down the
surface of the earth at every step.
TEXT 21
+ ও
त॑ नमंदायास्तट उत्तरे बले-
„ यै ऋत्विजस्ते भ्रगुकच्छसंजके |
प्रबतेयन्तो भगवः क्रतूत्तमं
व्यचक्षतारादुदितं यथा रविम्‌ ॥२१॥
1071 narmaddyas tata uttare baler
ya rtvijas te bhrgukaccha-samjiiake
pravartayanto bhrgavah kratittamarn
vyacaksatarad uditar yatha ravim
tam—Him (Viamanadeva); narmadayah—of the River Narmada;
tate—on the bank; uttare —northern; baleh—of Maharaja Bali; ye—
who; rtvijah—the priests engaged in ritualistic ceremonies; te—all of
them; bhrgukaccha-sarjiiake—in the field named Bhrgukaccha;
pravartayantah—performing; bhrgavah—all the descendants of Bhrgu;
kratu-uttamam—the most important sacrifice, named aSvamedha;
vyacaksata—they observed; drat—nearby; uditam—risen; yatha—
like; ravim—the sun.
TRANSLATION
While engaged in performing the sacrifice in the field known as
Bhrgukaccha, on the northern bank of the Narmada River, the
brahminical priests, the descendants of Bhrgu, saw Vamanadeva to
be like the sun rising nearby.
TEXT 22
त ऋरिवजो यजमानः सदस्या
हतत्विषो वामनतेजसा चप ।


--- Page 49 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
९
खयः किखायात्युत वा विमावसुः
सनत्कुमारोऽथ दिदृक्षया क्रतोः ॥२२॥
te 78৮80 yajamanah sadasya
hata-tviso vamana-tejasa nrpa
siryah kilayaty uta va vibhavasuh
sanat-kumaro ’tha didrksaya kratoh
te—all of them; rtvijjah—the priests; yajamanah—as well as Bali
Maharaja, who had engaged them in performing the yajiia; sadasyah—
all the members of the assembly; hata-tvisah—decreased in their bodily
effulgence; vamana-tejasa—by the brilliant effulgence of Lord Vamana;
nrpa—O King; siryah—the sun; kila—whether; ayati—is coming; uta
va—either; vibhavasuh—the fire-god; sanat-kumarah—the Kumara
known as Sanat-kumaira; atha—either; didrksaya —with a desire to ob-
serve; kratoh—the sacrificial ceremony.
TRANSLATION
O King, because of Vamanadeva’s bright effulgence, the priests,
along with Bali Maharaja and all the members of the assembly,
were robbed of their splendor. Thus they began to ask one another
whether the sun-god himself, Sanat-kumara or the fire-god had
personally come to see the sacrificial ceremony.
TEXT 23
इत्थं सशिष्येषु भुगुष्वनेकथा
6
वितक्यमाणो मगवान्स वामनः |
छत्रं सदण्डं স্তন कमण्डलुं
নিনহ विन्रद्धयमेधवारम्‌ ॥२२॥
21111077 sasisyesu bhrgusv anekadha
vitarkyamano bhagavan sa vamanah
chatrari 5000 0007 sajalarn kamandaluri
vivesa bibhrad dhayamedha-vatam


--- Page 50 ---
Text 25] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 45
ittham—in this way; sa-Sisyesu—with their disciples; bhrgusu—
among the Bhrgus; anekadhda—in many ways; vitarkyamanah—being
talked and argued about; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; sah—that; vamanah—Lord Vamana; chatram—umbrella; sa-
dandam—with the rod; sa-jalam—filled with water; kamandalum—
waterpot; viveSa—entered; bibhrat—taking in hand; hayamedha—of
the asvamedha sacrifice; vatam —the arena.
TRANSLATION
‘While the priests of the Bhrgu dynasty and their disciples talked
and argued in various ways, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Vamanadeva, holding in His hands the rod, the umbrella and a
waterpot full of water, entered the arena of the aSvamedha
sacrifice.
TEXTS 24-25
मीञ्ज्या मेखलया Haga |
जटं वामनं विप्रं मायामाणवकं हरिम्‌ ॥२४॥
प्रविष्टं die भगवः सशिष्यास्ते सहाप्भिभिः |
प्रतयगृहणन्समुत्थाय संक्षिप्ास्तस्य तेजसा ।२५॥
maunjya mekhalaya vitam
upavitdjinottaram
Jatilarh vamanarm viprar
maya-manavakari harim
[07008510778 viksya bhrgavah
sasisyds te sahagnibhih
pratyagrhnan samutthaya
sanksiptas tasya tejasa
maunjya—made of munja straw; mekhalaya—with a belt; vitam—
circled; upavita—sacred thread; ajina-uttaram —wearing a deerskin up-
per garment; jatilam—having matted locks of hair; vamanam—Lord
Vamana; vipram—a brahmana; maya-manavakam—the illusory son of


--- Page 51 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
a human being; harim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
pravistam —entered; viksya—seeing; bhrgavah—the priests who were
descendants of Bhrgu; sa-Sisyah —with their disciples; te—all of them;
saha-agnibhih—with the fire sacrifice; pratyagrhnan—properly
welcomed; samutthdya—standing up; sariksiptah—being diminished;
tasya—His; tejasa—Dby brilliance.
TRANSLATION
Appearing as a brahmana boy, wearing a belt of straw, a sacred
thread, an upper garment of deerskin, and matted locks of hair,
Lord Vamanadeva entered the arena of sacrifice. His brilliant
effulgence diminished the brilliance of all the priests and their dis-
ciples, who thus stood from their seats and welcomed the Lord
properly by offering obeisances.
TEXT 26
यजमानः प्र्ुदितो EAE मनोरमम्‌ ।
रूपानुरूपावयवं तसा आसनमाहरत्‌ REN
yajamanah pramudito
darsaniyarn manoramam
rapanuripavayavari
tasma asanam aharat
yajamanah—Bali Maharaja, who had engaged all the priests in per-
forming the sacrifice; pramuditah—being very jubilant; darsaniyam—
pleasing to see; manoramam—so beautiful; ripa—with beauty;
anuriipa—equal to His bodily beauty; avayavam—all the different parts
of the body; tesmai—unto Him; asanam—a sitting place; aharat—
offered.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja, jubilant at seeing Lord Vamanadeva, whose
beautiful limbs contributed equally to the beauty of His entire
body, offered Him a seat with great satisfaction.


--- Page 52 ---
Text 28] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 47
TEXT 27
खागतेनाभिनन्याय पादौ मगवतो बलिः |
अवनिज्याचयामास शुक्तसङ्गमनोरमम्‌ ॥२४७॥
svagatenabhinandyatha
padau bhagavato balih
avanijyarcayam dasa
mukta-sanga-manoramam
su-agatena—by words of welcome; abhinandya—welcoming; atha—
thus; padeu—the two lotus feet; bhagavatah—of the Lord; balih—Bali
Maharaja; avanijya—washing; arcayam dsa—worshiped; mukta-
sanga-manoramam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
beautiful to the liberated souls.
TRANSLATION
Thus offering a proper reception to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is always beautiful to the liberated souls, Bali
Maharaja worshiped Him by washing His lotus feet.
TEXT 28
तत्पादशौचं जनकटमषापहं
९
स धमविन्मू्न्यदधात्‌ सुमङ्गलम्‌ |
यद्‌ देवदेवो . गिरिशथन्द्रमीलि-
दधार মূলী परया च भक्तया ॥२८॥
tat-pada-Saucarn [८720-/60(7720501004007
sa dharma-vin mardhny adadhat sumangalam
yad deva-devo girisas candra-maulir
dadhara mirdhna paraya ca bhaktya
tat-pada-saucam—the water that washed the lotus feet of the Lord;
Jjana-kalmasa-apaham —which washes away all the sinful reactions of


--- Page 53 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
the people in general; sah—he (Bali Maharaja); dharma-vit—com-
pletely aware of religious principles; miirdhni—on the head; adadhat—
carried; su-marigalam —all-auspicious; yat—which; deva-devah—the
best of the demigods; girisah—Lord Siva; candra-maulih—who carries
on his forehead the emblem of the moon; dadhara—carried;
miirdhna—on the head; paraya—supreme; ca—also; bhaktya—with
devotion.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva, the best of demigods, who carries on his forehead the

emblem of the moon, receives on his head with great devotion the
Ganges water emanating from the toe of Visnu. Being aware of
religious principles, Bali Maharaja knew this. Consequently,
following in the footsteps of Lord Siva, he also placed on his head
the water that had washed the Lord’s lotus feet.

PURPORT

Lord Siva is known as Ganga-dhara, or one who carries the water of

the Ganges on his head. On Lord Siva’s forehead is the emblem of the
half-moon, yet to give supreme respect to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Siva placed the water of the Ganges above this emblem.
This example should be followed by everyone, or at least by every devo-
tee, because Lord Siva is one of the mahajanas. Similarly, Maharaja Bali
also later became a mahajana. One mahdajana follows another mahajana,
and by following the parampara system of mahajana activities one can
become advanced in spiritual consciousness. The water of the Ganges is
sanctified because it emanates from the toe of Lord Vispu. Bali Maharaja
washed the lotus feet of Vimanadeva, and the water with which he did so
became equal to the Ganges. Bali Maharaja, who perfectly knew all
religious principles, therefore took that water on his head, following in
the footsteps of Lord Siva.

TEXT 29

श्रीबठिरुवाक

खागतं ते नमस्तुभ्यं সন্তান্কি कराम ते |
©
जह्ार्षीणां तपः साक्षान्मन्ये त्वाय वपुधेरम्‌ ॥२९॥


--- Page 54 ---
Text 30] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 49
sri-balir uvaca
svagatarn te namas tubhyarn
brahman [078 karavama te
brahmarsinam tapah saksan
manye tvarya vapur-dharam
sri-balih uvaca—Bali Maharaja said; su-agatam—all welcome; te—
unto You; namah tubhyam—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You;
brahman—O brahmana; kim—what; karavama—can we do; te—for
You; brahma-rsinam—of the great brahmana sages; tapah—austerity;
saksat—directly; manye—I think; tva—You; arya—O noble one;
vapuh-dharam—personified.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja then said to Lord Vamanadeva: 0 brahmana, I
offer You my hearty welcome and my respectful obeisances. Please
let us know what we may do for You. We think of You as the per-
sonified austerity of the great brahmana-sages.
TEXT 30
अद्य नः पितरस्ठसा अद्य नः पावितं go |
अद्य खिष्टः FE यद्‌ भवानागतो गृहाच ॥२०॥
adya nah pitaras trpta
adya nah pavitari kulam
adya svistah kratur ayam
yad bhavan agato grhan
adya—today; nah—our; pitarah—forefathers; trptah—satisfied;
adya—today; nah—our; pavitam—purified; kulam—the whole family;
adya—today; su-istah—properly executed; kratuh—the sacrifice;
ayam—this; yat—because; bhavan—Your Lordship; agatah—arrived;
grhan—at our residence.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, because You have kindly arrived at our home, all my
forefathers are satisfied, our family and entire dynasty have been


--- Page 55 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 18
sanctified, and the sacrifice we are performing is now complete be-
cause of Your presence.
TEXT 31
अदाग्रयो मे सुहुता यथाविधि
द्विजात्मज स्बच्रणावनेजनैः |
हतांहसो वार्भिरियं च भूरहो
तथा पुनीता तनुभिः पदैस्तव ॥३१॥
adyagnayo me suhuta yatha-vidhi
dvijjatmaja tvac-carandvanejanaih
hatarhaso varbhir iyar ca bhiir aho
tatha punita tanubhih padais tava
adya—today; agnayah—the sacrificial fires; me —executed by me;
su-hutah —properly offered oblations; yatha-vidhi—in terms of the
gastric injunction; dvija-atmaja—O son of a brahmana; tvat-carana-
avanejanaih—which washed Your lotus feet; hata-armhasah—who have
become cleansed of all sinful reactions; varbhih—by the water; iyam—
this; ca—also; bhith—the surface of the globe; aho—oh; tatha—as
well; punitda—sanctified; tanubhih —small; padaih—by the touch of the
lotus feet; tava— Your.
TRANSLATION
O son of a brahmana, today the fire of sacrifice is ablaze accord-
ing to the injunction of the astra, and I have been freed from all
the sinful reactions of my life by the water that has washed Your
lotus feet. O my Lord, by the touch of Your small lotus feet the en-
tire surface of the world has been sanctified.
TEXT 32
यद्‌ यद्‌ वटो वाञ्छसि तत्प्रतीच्छ मे
त्वामधिनं भिग्रसुतादुतकये |


--- Page 56 ---
Text 32] Lord Vamanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation 51
गां काञ्चनं गुणवद्‌ धाम मृष्टं
तथान्नपेयञ्चुत না विप्रकन्याम्‌ ।
ग्रामान्‌ सम॒द्धांस्तुरगाच्‌ गजाच्‌ না
रथांस्तथा्ेततम सम्प्रतीच्छ ॥३२॥
yad yad vato vaiichasi tat praticcha me
tvam arthinam vipra-sutanutarkaye
gam 10276007071) gunavad dhama mrstam
tathanna-peyam uta va vipra-kanyam
graman samrddharis turagan gajan va
ratharis tatharhattama sampraticcha
yat yat—whatever; vato—O brahmacari; vanchasi—You desire;
tat—that; praticcha—You may take; me—from me; tvam—You;
arthinam—desiring something; wvipra-suta—O son of a brahmana;
anutarkaye—I consider; gam—a cow; kaicanam—gold; gunavat
dhama—a furnished residence; mrstam—npalatable; tatha —as well as;
anna—food grains; peyam—drink; uta—indeed; va—either; vipra-
kanyam—the daughter of a brahmana; graman—villages; samrd-
dhan —prosperous; turagan—horses; gajan—elephants; vd —either;
rathan—chariots; tatha—as well as; arhat-tama—O best of those who
are worshipable; sampraticcha— You may take.
TRANSLATION
O son of a brahmana, it appears that You have come here to ask
me for something. Therefore, whatever You want You may take
from me. O best of those who are worshipable. You may take from
me a cow, gold, a furnished house, palatable food and drink, the
daughter of a brahmana for Your wife, prosperous villages,
horses, elephants, chariots or whatever You desire.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Eighteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Lord Vamanadeva, the
Dwarf Incarnation.”


--- Page 57 ---
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Lord Vamanadeva
Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja
This Nineteenth Chapter describes how Lord Vamanadeva asked for
three paces of land in charity, how Bali Maharaja agreed to His proposal,
and how Sukracarya forbade Bali Maharaja to fulfill Lord Vamanadeva’s
request.

When Bali Maharaja, thinking Vamanadeva to be the son of a
brahmana, told Him to ask for anything He liked, Lord Vamanadeva
praised Hiranyaka$ipu and Hiranyaksa for their heroic activities, and
after thus praising the family in which Bali Maharaja had been born, He
begged the King for three paces of land. Bali Maharaja agreed to give this
land in charity, since this was very insignificant, but Sukracarya, who
could understand that Vamanadeva was Visnu, the friend of the
demigods, forbade Bali Maharaja to give this land. Sukracarya advised
Bali Maharaja to withdraw his promise. He explained that in subduing
others, in joking, in responding to danger, in acting for the welfare of
others, and so on, one could refuse to fulfill one’s promise, and there
would be no fault. By this philosophy, Sukracarya tried to dissuade Bali
Maharaja from giving land to Lord Vamanadeva.

TEXT 1
श्रीट्युक उवाच
EN ° °
इति QTE धर्मयुक्तं स॒ gga ।
निशम्य भगवान्प्रीतः प्रतिनन्येद्‌ मन्रवीत्‌ ॥ १ ॥
$ri-Suka uvaca
iti vairocaner vakyar
dharma-yuktarm sanrtam
nisamya bhagavan pritah
pratinandyedam abravit
53


--- Page 58 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
sri-sukah uwvdca—Sri  Sukadeva  Gosvami said;  iti—thus;
vairocaneh—of the son of Virocana; vakyam—the words; dharma-
yuktam—in terms of religious principles; sah—He; si-nrtam—very
pleasing; nisamya—hearing; bhagavin—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; pritah—completely pleased; pratinandya—congratulating
him; idam—the following words; abravit—said.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: When the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Vamanadeva, heard Bali Maharaja speaking in this
pleasing way, He was very satisfied, for Bali Maharaja had spoken
in terms of religious principles. Thus the Lord began to praise
him.
TEXT 2
श्रीमगाकालुवाच
क्वस्तवैतजनदेव ad
कुलोचितं धर्मयुतं यजस्करम्‌ |
यस्य प्रमाणं भगवः सांपराये
पितामहः Togs प्रशान्तः ॥ २॥
Sri-bhagavan uvaca
vacas tavaitaj jana-deva sanrtari
kulocitarih dharma-yutari yasas-karam
yasya pramanari bhrgavah samparaye
pitamahah kula-vrddhah prasantah
sri-bhagavan uvdaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
vacah—words; tava—your; etat—this kind of; jana-deva—O King of
the people; sii-nrtam—very true; kula-ucitam—exactly befitting your
dynasty; dharma-yutam—completely in accord with the principles of
religion; ya$ah-karam—fit for spreading your reputation; yasya—of
whom; pramanam—the evidence; bhrgavah—the brahmanas of the
Bhrgu dynasty; samparaye—in the next world; pitamahah—your
grandfather; kula-vrddhah—the oldest in the family; prasantah—very
peaceful (Prahlada Maharaja).


--- Page 59 ---
Text 3] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 55
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O King, you are in-
deed exalted because your present advisors are the brahmanas who
are descendants of Bhrgu and because your instructor for your
future life is your grandfather, the peaceful and venerable
Prahlada Maharaja. Your statements are very true, and they com-
pletely agree with religious etiquette. They are in keeping with the
behavior of your family, and they enhance your reputation.

PURPORT

Prahlada Maharaja is a vivid example of a pure devotee. Someone
might argue that since Prahlada Maharaja, even though very old, was at-
tached to his family, and specifically to his grandson Bali Maharaja, how
could he be an ideal example? Therefore this verse uses the word
prasantah. A devotee is always sober. He is never disturbed by any con-
ditions. Even if a devotee remains in grhastha life and does not renounce
material possessions, he should still be understood to be prasanta, sober,
because of his pure devotion to the Lord. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
therefore said:

kiba vipra, kiba nyasi, Sidra kene naya

yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei ‘guru’ haya
“Whether one is a brahmana, a sannyasi or a §tidra—regardless of what
he is—he can become a spiritual master if he knows the science of
Krsna.” (Cc. Madhya 8.128) Anyone completely aware of the science of
Krsna, regardless of his status in life, is a guru. Thus Prahlada Maharaja
is a guru in all circumstances.

Here His Lordship Vamanadeva also teaches sannyasis and
brahmacaris that one should not ask more than necessary. He wanted
only three paces of land, although Bali Maharaja wanted to give Him
anything He wanted.

TEXT 3
न द्येतसिन्ुरे कथिनिःसत्वः कृपणः पुमान्‌ |
भ्रत्यारू्याता प्रतिश्ुत्य यो वादाता द्विजातये ॥ ३॥


--- Page 60 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
na hy etasmin kule kascin
nihsattvah krpanah puman
pratyakhyata pratisrutya
yo vadata dvijataye
na—not; hi—indeed; etasmin—in this; kule—in the dynasty or
family; kasScit—anyone; nihsattvah—poor-minded; krpanah—miser;
puman—any person; pratyakhyata—refuses; pratiSrutya—after pro-
mising to give; yah va —either; adata—not being charitable; dvijataye-
—unto the brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
I know that even until now, no one taking birth in your family
has been poor-minded or miserly. No one has refused to give
charity to brahmanas, nor after promising to give charity has any-
one failed to fulfill his promise.
TEXT 4
नसन्ति নী gfy चार्थिनार्थिताः
पराश्छुखा ये त्वमनखिनो 39 ।
युष्मत्कुले यद्यज्ञसामलेन
TBE उद्भाति यथोडपः {NBN
na santi tirthe yudhi carthinarthitah
paranmukha ye tv amanasvino nrpa
yusmat-kule yad yasasamalena
prahrada udbhati yathodupah khe
na—not; santi—there are; tirthe—in holy places (where charity is
given); yudhi—in the battlefield; ca—also; arthina—by a brahmana or
a ksatriya; arthitah—who have been asked; pararimukhah—who
refused their prayers; ye—such persons; tu—indeed; amanasvinah—
such low-minded, low-grade kings; nrpa—O King (Bali Maharaja);
yusmat-kule—in your dynasty; yat—therein; yaSasa amalena—by im-


--- Page 61 ---
Text 5] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 57
peccable reputation; prahradeh—Prahlada Maharaja; udbhati —arises;
yatha—as; udupah—the moon; khe—in the sky.
TRANSLATION

O King Bali, never in your dynasty has the low-minded king
been born who upon being requested has refused charity to
brahmanas in holy places or a fight to ksatriyas on a battlefield.
And your dynasty is even more glorious due to the presence of
Prahlada Maharaja, who is like the beautiful moon in the sky.

PURPORT

The symptoms of a ksatriya are given in Bhagavad-gita. One of the
qualifications is the willingness to give charity (dana). A ksatriya does
not refuse to give charity when requested by a brahmana, nor can he
refuse to fight another ksatriya. A king who does refuse is called low-
minded. In the dynasty of Bali Maharaja there were no such low-minded
kings.

TEXT 5
यतो जातो दिरण्याक्षशरन्नेक इमां महीम्‌ |
प्रतिवीरं दिग्विजये नाविन्दत गदायुधः ॥ ५॥
yato jato hiranyaksa$
carann eka imarh mahim
prativirar dig-vijaye
navindata gadayudhah

yatah—in which dynasty; jatah —was born; hiranyaksah—the king
named Hiranyaksa; caran—wandering; ekah—alone; imam —this;
mahim—surface of the globe; prativiram —a rival hero; dik-vijaye—for
conquering all directions; na avindata—could not get; gada-ayudhah—
bearing his own club.

TRANSLATION

It was in your dynasty that Hiranyaksa was born. Carrying only
his own club, he wandered the globe alone, without assistance, to
conquer all directions, and no hero he met could rival him.


--- Page 62 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
TEXT 6
यं विनिर्जित्य =u विष्णुः ््मोद्धार आगतम्‌ |
+ + €
आप्मानं जयिनं मेने तद्वयं भूयंचखरन्‌ ॥ £ ॥
yarh vinirjitya krcchrena
visnuh ksmoddhara agatam
dtmanam jayinari mene
tad-viryari bhiiry anusmaran
yam—whom; vinirjitya—after conquering; krcchrena—with great
difficulty; visnuh—Lord Visnu in His incarnation as a boar; ksma-
uddhdre —at the time when the earth was delivered; agatam —appeared
before Him; datmanam—personally, Himself; jayinam—victorious;
mene—considered; tat-viryam—the prowess of Hiranyaksa; bhiiri—
constantly, or more and more; anusmaran—thinking about.
TRANSLATION
When delivering the earth from the Garbhodaka Sea, Lord
Visnu, in His incarnation as a boar, killed Hiranyaksa, who had ap-
peared before Him. The fight was severe, and the Lord killed
Hiranyaksa with great difficulty. Later, as the Lord thought about
the uncommon prowess of Hiranyaksa, He felt Himself victorious
indeed.
TEXT 7
निज्ञम्य तद्वधं भ्राता हिरण्यकशिपुः पुरा ।
हन्तुं म्राठहणं Fal जगाम निलयं हरेः ॥ ७॥
niSamya tad-vadharn bhrata
hiranyaka$ipuh pura
hanturih bhratr-hanam kruddho
Jjagama nilayarm hareh
niSamya—after hearing; tat-vadham—the killing of Hiranyaksa;
bhrata—the brother; hiranyakasipuh—Hiranyakasipu; pura—for-
merly; hantum—just to kill; bhratr-hanam—the killer of his brother;


--- Page 63 ---
Text 9] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 59
kruddhah—very angry; jagama—went; nilayam—to the residence;
hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
When Hiranyakasipu heard the news of his brother’s being
killed, with great anger he went to the residence of Visnu, the
killer of his brother, wanting to kill Lord Visnu.
TEXT 8
तमायान्तं समालोक्य शूलपाणिं कृतान्तवत्‌ |
चिन्तयामास कालज्ञो विष्णुर्मायाविनां वरः ॥ < ॥
tam ayantam samalokya
2 sala-panim krtantavat
cintayam asa kala-jiio
visnur mayavinam varah
tam —him (Hiranyakasipu); aydntam—coming forward;
samalokya—observing minutely; $ila-panim—with a trident in his
hand; krtanta-vat—just like death personified; cintayam asa—thought;
kala-jiah—who knows the progress of time; visnuh—Lord Visnu;
mayavinam—of all kinds of mystics; varah—the chief.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Hiranyakasipu coming forward bearing a trident in his
hand like personified death, Lord Visnu, the best of all mystics and
the knower of the progress of time, thought as follows.
TEXT 9
यतो यतोऽहं तत्रासो मृत्युः प्राणभृतामिव |
अतोऽहमस्य हृदयं प्रवेक्ष्यामि पराग्शः ॥ ९ ॥
yato yato 1077 tatrasau
mrtyuh prana-bhrtam iva


--- Page 64 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
ato ham asya hrdayam
praveksyami parag-drsah
yatah yatah—wheresoever; aham—I; tatra—there indeed; asau—
this Hiranyakasipu; mrtyuh—death; prana-bhrtam—of all living en-
tities; iwva—just like; atah—therefore; aham—I; asya—of him;
hrdayam—within the core of the heart; praveksyami—shall enter;
parak-drsah—of a person who has only external vision.
TRANSLATION
Wheresoever 1 go, Hiranyakasipu will follow Me, as death
follows all living entities. Therefore it is better for Me to enter the
core of his heart, for then, because of his power to see only exter-
nally, he will not see Me.
TEXT 10
एवं स॒ निधित्य रिपोः शरीर-
<
माधावतो निर्विंविशेऽसुरेन्द्र |
श्वासानिरान्तर्दितखक््मदेह-
स्तत्प्राणरन्धेण विविश्रचेताः ute
evar sa niscitya ripoh Sariram
adhavato nirvivise ‘surendra
$vasanilantarhita-sitksma-dehas
tat-prana-randhrena vivigna-cetah
evam—in this way; sah—He (Lord Visnu); niscitya—deciding;
ripoh—of the enemy; sariram—the body; adhavatah—who was run-
ning after Him with great force; nirvivise—entered; asura-indra—O
King of the demons (Maharaja Bali); S$vasa-anila—through the
breathing; antarhita—invisible; siksma-dehah—in his finer body; tat-
prana-randhrena—through the hole of the nostril; vivigna-cetah—
being very anxious.
TRANSLATION
Lord Vamanadeva continued: O King of the demons, after Lord
Visnu made this decision, He entered the body of His enemy


--- Page 65 ---
Text 11] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 61
Hiranyakasipu, who was running after Him with great force. In a
subtle body inconceivable to Hiranyakasipu, Lord Visnu, who was
in great anxiety, entered Hiranyakasipu’s nostril along with his
breath.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is already in the core of every-
one’s heart. ISvarah sarva-bhiatanam hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
(Bg. 18.61). Logically, therefore, it was not at all difficult for Lord
Visnu to enter HiranyakaSipu’s body. The word vivigna-cetah, ‘“‘very
anxious,” is significant. It is not that Lord Visnu was afraid of
Hiranyakas$ipu; rather, because of compassion, Lord Visnu was in anxi-
ety about how to act for his welfare.
TEXT 11
a तन्निकेतं परिगश्य शन्य-
मपदयमानः पितो ननाद |
मां af दिशः खं विवरान्सघुदरान्‌
५ [५
विष्णुं विचिन्वन्‌ न হত্যা वीरः ॥११॥
sa tan-niketarn [007177115)0 sanyam
apasyamanah kupito nanada
ksmarh dyarn disah kharh vivaran samudran
visnurn vicinvan na dadarsa virah
sah—that Hiranyaka$ipu; tat-niketarmm —the residence of Lord Visnu;
parimr§ya—searching; Sianyam—vacant; apaSyamanah—not seeing
Lord Visnu; kupitah—being very angry; nanada—cried very loudly;
ksmam—on the surface of the earth; dyam —in outer space; diSah—in
all directions; kham —in the sky; vivaran—in all the caves; samudran —
all the oceans; vispum—Lord Visnu; vicinvan —searching for; na—not;
dadarsa—did see; virah—although he was very powerful.
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing that the residence of Lord Visnu was vacant,
Hiranyakasipu began searching for Lord Visnu everywhere. Angry


--- Page 66 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
at not seeing Him, Hiranyakasipu screamed loudly and searched
the entire universe, including the surface of the earth, the higher
planetary systems, all directions and all the caves and oceans. But
Hiranyakasipu, the greatest hero, did not see Visnu anywhere.
TEXT 12
अपस्यन्निति होवाच मयान्विष्टमिदं जगत्‌ )
भ्रातृहा मे गतो नूनं यतो नावत॑ते पुमान्‌ ॥१२॥
apasyann iti hovaca
mayanvistam 10718 jagat
bhratr-ha me gato nina
yato navartate puman

apasyan—not seeing Him; iti—in this way; ha uvdce—uttered;
mayda—by me; anvistam—has been sought; idam—the whole; jagat—
universe; bhratr-ha—Lord Visnu, who killed the brother; me—mys;
gatah—must have gone; nitnam—indeed; yatah—from where; na—
not; avartate—comes back; puman—a person.

TRANSLATION

Unable to see Him, Hiranyakasipu said, *‘I have searched the en-
tire universe, but I could not find Visnu, who has killed my
brother. Therefore, He must certainly have gone to that place
from which no one returns. [In other words, He must now be
dead.]”

PURPORT

Atheists generally follow the Bauddha philosophical conclusion that at
death everything is finished. Hiranyakasipu, being an atheist, thought
this way. Because Lord Visnu was not visible to him, he thought that the
Lord was dead. Even today, many people follow the philosophy that God
is dead. But God is never dead. Even the living entity, who is part of God,
never dies. Na jayate mriyate va kadacit: “For the soul there is never
birth or death.” This is the statement of Bhagavad-gita (2.20). Even the
ordinary living entity never takes birth or dies. What then is to be said of


--- Page 67 ---
Text 13] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 63
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the chief of all living en-
tities? He certainly never takes birth or dies. Ajo ’pi sann avyayatma
(Bg. 4.6). Both the Lord and the living entity exist as unborn and inex-
haustible personalities. Thus Hiranyakasipu’s conclusion that Visnu was
dead was wrong.

As indicated by the words yato navartate puman, there is certainly a
spiritual kingdom, and if the living entity goes there, he never returns to
this material world. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
tyaktva dehar punar janma naiti mam eti so ’rjuna. Materially speak-
ing, every living entity dies; death is inevitable. But those who are
karmis, janis and yogis return to this material world after death,
whereas bhaktas do not. Of course, if a bhakta is not completely perfect
he takes birth in the material world again, but in a very exalted position,
either in a rich family or a family of the purest brakmanas (Sucinam
Srimatari gehe), just to finish his development in spiritual consciousness.
Those who have completed the course of Krsna consciousness and are
free from material desire return to the abode of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead (व्व gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramarm mama). Here
the same fact is stated: yato navartate puman. Any person who goes back
home, back to Godhead, does not return to this material world.

TEXT 13
JUITY ॒एतावानामरत्योरिद देहिनाम्‌ ।
अज्ञानग्रमवो मन्युरहं मानोपच्ं हितः ।।१३॥
vairanubandha etavan
amrtyor iha dehinam
ajaana-prabhavo manyur
ahari-manopabrmhitah
vaira-anubandhah—enmity; etavan—so great; amrtyoh—up to the
point of death; iha—in this; dehinam—of persons too involved in the
bodily concept of life; ajidgna-prabhavah—because of the great in-
fluence of ignorance; manyuh—anger; aham-mana—by egotism;
upabrmhitah—expanded.


--- Page 68 ---
64 Srimad -Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
Hiranyaka$ipu’s anger against Lord Visnu persisted until his
death. Other people in the bodily concept of life maintain anger
only because of false ego and the great influence of ignorance.
PURPORT
Generally speaking, even though the conditioned soul is angry, his
anger is not perpetual but temporary. It is due to the influence of ig-
norance. Hiranyakasipu, however, maintained his emnity and his anger
against Lord Visnu until the point of death. He never forgot his vengeful
attitude toward Visnu for having killed his brother, Hiranyaksa. Others
in the bodily concept of life are angry at their enemies but not at Lord
Visnu. Hiranyakasipu, however, was everlastingly angry. He was angry
not only because of false prestige but also because of continuous enmity
toward Visnu.
TEXT 14
पिता प्रहादपुत्रस्ते तद्विद्रान्दिनवत्सलः |
= -
खमायुद्विजलिङ्गम्यो देवेभ्योऽदात्‌ स aa: १४॥
pita prahrada-putras te
tad-vidvan dvija-vatsalah
svam ayur dvija-lingebhyo
devebhyo ‘dat sa yacitah
pita—father; prahrada-putrah—the son of Maharaja Prahlada; te—
your; tat-vidvan —although it was known to him; dvija-vatsalah—still,
because of his affinity for brahmanas; svam—his own; ayuh—duration
of life; dvija-lingebhyah—who were dressed like brahmanas;
devebhyah—unto the demigods; adat—delivered; sah—he; yacitah—
being so requested.
TRANSLATION
Your father, Virocana, the son of Maharaja Prahlada, was very
affectionate toward brahmanas. Although he knew very well that it
was the demigods who had come to him in the dress of brahmanas,
at their request he delivered to them the duration of his life.


--- Page 69 ---
Text 16] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 65
PURPORT
Maharaja Virocana, Bali’s father, was so pleased with the brahmana
community that even though he knew that those approaching him for
charity were the demigods in the dress of brahmanas, he nonetheless
agreed to give it.
TEXT 15
भवानाचरितान्धर्मानास्ितो गृहमेधिभिः |
(3 AAD =
ब्राह्मणैः पूर्वजैः शररन्यैथोदामकीर्तिभिः ॥ এ)
bhavan acaritan dharman
asthito grhamedhibhih
brahmanaih pirvajaih siarair
anyais coddama-kirtibhih
bhavan—your good self; acaritan—executed; dharman—religious
principles; asthitah—being situated; grhamedhibhih—by persons in
household life; brahmanaih—by the brahmanas; pirva-jaih—by your
forefathers; sirath—by great heroes; anyaih ca—and others also;
uddama-kirtibhih—very highly elevated and famous.
TRANSLATION
You also have observed the principles followed by great per-
sonalities who are householder brahmanas, by your forefathers
and by great heroes who are extremely famous for their exalted
activities.
TEXT 16
= = se ९
तसात्‌ त्वत्तो महीमीषद्‌ T0SE वरद षमात्‌ |
पदानि त्रीणि दैत्येन्द्र संमितानि पदा मम ॥१६॥
057720८ tvatto mahim isad
vrne ‘ham varadarsabhat
padani trini daityendra
sammitani pada mama


--- Page 70 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
tasmat—from such a person; tvattah—from Your Majesty; mahim—
land; isat—very little vrne—am asking for; aham—I; varada-
rsabhat—from the personality who can give charity munificently;
padani—footsteps; trini—three; daitya-indra—O King of the Daityas;
sammitani—to the measurement of; pada —by a foot; mama—My.
TRANSLATION
O King of the Daityas, from Your Majesty, who come from such
a noble family and who are able to give charity munificently, I ask
only three paces of land, to the measurement of My steps.
PURPORT
Lord Vamanadeva wanted three paces of land according to the
measurement of His footsteps. He did not want more than necessary. But
although He pretended to be an ordinary human child, He actually
wanted the land comprising the upper, middle and lower planetary
systems. This was just to show the prowess of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 17
नान्यत्‌ ते कामये राजन्वद्‌ान्याजगदीश्वरात्‌ ।
EY न्द ©.
नैनः प्रामोति ন विद्धान्यावदथग्रतिग्रहः ।। १७॥
nanyat te kamaye rajan
vadanyaj jagad-isvarat
nainah prapnoti vai vidvan
yavad-artha-pratigrahah
na—not; anyat—anything else; te—from you; kamaye—I beg;
rajan—O King; vadanyat—who are so munificent; jagat-isvarat—who
are the king of the entire universe; na—not; enah—distress; prap-
noti—gets; vai—indeed; vidvan —one who is learned; yavat-artha —as
much as one needs; pratigrahah—taking charity from others.
TRANSLATION
O King, controller of the entire universe, although you are very
munificent and are able to give Me as much land as I want, I do not


--- Page 71 ---
Text 18] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 67
want anything from you that is unnecessary. If a learned brahmana
takes charity from others only according to his needs, he does not
become entangled in sinful activities.
PURPORT
A brahmana or sannyast 15 qualified to ask charity from others, but if
he takes more than necessary he is punishable. No one can use more of
the Supreme Lord’s property than necessary. Lord Vamanadeva in-
directly indicated to Bali Maharaja that he was occupying more land than
he needed. In the material world, all distresses are due to extravagance.
One acquires money extravagantly and also spends it extravagantly. Such
activities are sinful. All property belongs to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and all living beings, who are sons of the Supreme Lord, have
the right to use the Supreme Father’s property, but one cannot take more
than necessary. This principle should especially be followed by
brahmanas and sannyasis who live at the cost of others. Thus
Vamanadeva was an ideal beggar, for He asked only three paces of land.
Of course, there is a difference between His footsteps and those of an or-
dinary human being. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His in-
conceivable prowess, can occupy the entire universe, including the
upper, lower and middle planetary systems, by the unlimited measure-
ment of His footsteps.
TEXT 18
भ्रीवटिरुवाच
अहो ब्राह्मणदायाद वाचस्ते इद्धसंमताः |
त्वं बालो নাক্তিহাদনিঃ खाथं प्रत्यबुधो यथा ।। ₹৫।।
sri-balir uvaca
aho brahmana-dayada
vacas te vrddha-sammatah
tvari balo balisa-matih
svartharn praty abudho yatha
sri-balih uvaca—Bali Maharaja said; aho—alas; brahmana-dayada—
O son of a brahmana; vacah—the words; te—of You; vrddha-


--- Page 72 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
sammatadh—are certainly acceptable to learned and elderly persons;
tvam— You; balah—a boy; balisa-matih—without sufficient knowledge;
sva-artham —self-interest; prati—toward; abudhah—not knowing
sufficiently; yatha—as it should have been.
TRANSLATION

Bali Maharaja said: O son of a brahmana, Your instructions are
as good as those of learned and elderly persons. Nonetheless, You
are a boy, and Your intelligence is insufficient. Thus You are not
very prudent in regard to Your self-interest.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being full in Himself, actually
has nothing to want for His self-interest. Lord Vamanadeva, therefore,
had not gone to Bali Maharaja for His own self-interest. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita (5.29), bhoktararn  yajiia-tapasarn = sarva-loka-
mahesvaram. The Lord is the proprietor of all planets, in both the ma-
terial and spiritual worlds. Why should He be in want of land? Bali
Maharaja rightly said that Lord Vamanadeva was not at all prudent in
regard to His own personal interests. Lord Vamanadeva had approached
Bali not for His personal welfare but for the welfare of His devotees. De-
votees sacrifice all personal interests to satisfy the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and similarly the Supreme Lord, although having no per-
sonal interests, can do anything for the interests of His devotees. One
who is full in himself has no personal interests.

TEXT 19
मां वचोभिः समाराध्य रोकानामेकमीश्वरम्‌ |
पदत्रयं FUN योऽबुद्धिमान्‌ द्वीपदाञ्चषम्‌ ॥१९॥।
mari vacobhih samaradhya
lokanam ekam (07072
pada-trayari vrnite yo
*buddhiman dvipa-dasusam


--- Page 73 ---
Text 20] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 69

mam—me; vacobhih—by sweet words; samaradhya—after suffi-
ciently pleasing; lokanam—of all the planets in this universe; ekam—
the one and only; iSvaram—master, controller; pada-trayam—three
feet; vrnite—is asking for; yah—He who; abuddhiman —not very intel-
ligent; dvipa-dasusam—because I can give You an entire island.

TRANSLATION

I am able to give You an entire island because I am the proprie-
tor of the three divisions of the universe. You have come to take
something from me and have pleased me by Your sweet words, but
You are asking only three paces of land. Therefore You are not
very intelligent.

PURPORT

According to Vedic understanding, the entire universe is regarded as
an ocean of space. In that ocean there are innumerable planets, and each
planet is called a dvipa, or island. When approached by Lord
Vamanadeva, Bali Maharaja was actually in possession of all the dvipas,
or islands in space. Bali Maharaja was very pleased to see the features of
Vamanadeva and was ready to give Him as much land as He could ask,
but because Lord Vamanadeva asked only three paces of land, Bali
Maharaja considered Him not very intelligent.

TEXT 20
IN ৫
न पुमान्‌ মান্তুমনভ্ম भूयो याचितुमहेति |
तस्माद्‌ वृत्तिकरीं भूमि वटो कामं प्रतीच्छ मे ॥२०॥
na puman mam upavrajya
bhityo yacitum arhati
tasmad vrttikartm bhamirn
vato kamarh praticcha me

na—not; pumdn—any person; mam-—unto me; upavrajya—after
approaching; bhityah—again; ydcitum—to beg; arhati—deserves;
tasmat —therefore;  vrtti-karim —suitable to maintain Yourself;


--- Page 74 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
bhimim —such land; vato—O small brahmacari; kamam—according to
the necessities of life; praticcha —take; me —from me.
TRANSLATION
O small boy, one who approaches me to beg something should
not have to ask anything more, anywhere. Therefore, if You wish,
You may ask from me as much land as will suffice to maintain You
according to Your needs.
TEXT 21
श्रीमगावाठवाच
यावन्तो विषयाः प्रष्ठाख्िलोक्यामजितेन्द्रियम्‌ |
~~ 4
न शक्तुवन्ति ते सवे प्रतिपूरयितुं नृप ॥२१॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca
yavanto visayah presthas
tri-lokyam ajitendriyam
na Saknuvanti te sarve
pratipirayiturin nrpa
sri-bhagavan uvdaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
yavantah—as far as possible; visayah—the objects of sense enjoyment;
presthah—pleasing to anyone; tri-lokyam—within these three worlds;
ajita-indriyam —a person who is not self-controlled; na Saknuvanti—are
unable; re—all those; sarve—taken together; pratiparayitum—to
satisfy; nrpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
The Personality of Godhead said: O my dear King, even the en-
tirety of whatever there may be within the three worlds to satisfy
one’s senses cannot satisfy a person whose senses are uncontrolled.
PURPORT
The material world is an illusory energy to deviate the living entities
from the path of self-realization. Anyone who is in this material world is


--- Page 75 ---
Text 21] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 71
extremely anxious to get more and more things for sense gratification.
Actually, however, the purpose of life is not sense gratification but self-
realization. Therefore, those who are too addicted to sense gratification
are advised to practice the mystic yoga system, or astariga-yoga system,
consisting of yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara and so on.
In this way, one can control the senses. The purpose of controlling the
senses is to stop one’s implication in the cycle of birth and death. As
stated by Rsabhadeva:
nitnari pramattah kurute vikarma
yad indriya-pritaya aprnoti
na sadhu manye yata atmano ’yam
asann api klesada asa dehah

“When a person considers sense gratification the aim of life, he certainly
becomes mad after materialistic living and engages in all kinds of sinful
activity. He does not know that due to his past misdeeds he has already
received a body which, although temporary, is the cause of his misery.
Actually the living entity should not have taken on a material body, but
he has been awarded the material body for sense gratification. Therefore
I think it not befitting an intelligent man to involve himself again in the
activities of sense gratification, by which he perpetually gets material
bodies one after another.” (Bhdag. 5.5.4) Thus according to Rsabhadeva
the human beings in this material world are just like madmen engaged in
activities which they should not perform but which they do perform only
for sense gratification. Such activities are not good because in this way
one creates another body for his next life, as punishment for his
nefarious activities. And as soon as he gets another material body, he is
put into repeated suffering in material existence. Therefore the Vedic
culture or brahminical culture teaches one how to be satisfied with
possessing the minimum necessities in life.

To teach this highest culture, varnasrama-dharma is recommended.
The aim of the varnasrama divisions—brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya,
suadra, brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha and sannyasa—is to train
one to control the senses and be content with the bare necessities. Here
Lord Vamanadeva, as an ideal brahmacari, refuses Bali Maharaja's offer
to give Him anything He might want. He says that without contentment


--- Page 76 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
one could not be happy even if he possessed the property of the entire
world or the entire universe. In human society, therefore, the brahmini-
cal culture, ksatriya culture and vai§ya culture must be maintained, and
people must be taught how to be satisfied with only what they need. In
modern civilization there is no such education; everyone tries to possess
more and more, and everyone is dissatisfied and unhappy. The Krsna
consciousness movement is therefore establishing various farms, es-
pecially in America, to show how to be happy and content with minimum
necessities of life and to save time for self-realization, which one can
very easily achieve by chanting the maha-mantra—Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare.
TEXT 22
+ ९
त्रिभिः कमेरसंतषटो द्वीपेनापि न पूर्यते ।
“ই.
नववषेसमेतेन सदरीपवरेच्छया ॥২২।॥
tribhih kramair asantusto
dvipendpi na puryate
nava-varsa-sametena
sapta-dvipa-varecchaya
tribhih—three; kramaih—by steps; asantustah—one who is dis-
satisfied; dvipena—by a complete island; api—although; na piryate—
cannot be satisfied; nava-varsa-sametena—even by possessing nine
varsas; sapta-dvipa-vara-icchaya—by the desire to take possession of
seven islands.
TRANSLATION
If I were not satisfied with three paces of land, then surely I
would not be satisfied even with possessing one of the seven is-
lands, consisting of nine varsas. Even if I possessed one island, I
would hope to get others.
TEXT 23
EN
सपद्वीपाधिपतयो सुपा बेन्यगयादयः ।
6 ग
अर्थः कामैगंता नान्तं तृष्णाया इति नः FAG NR


--- Page 77 ---
Text 24] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 73
sapta-dvipadhipatayo
nrpa vainya-gayadayah
arthaih kamair gata nantarin
trsnaya iti nah Srutam

sapta-dvipa-adhipatayah—those who are proprietors of the seven is-
lands; nrpah—such kings; wvainya-gaya-adayah—Maharaja Prthu,
Maharaja Gaya and others; arthaih—for fulfillment of ambition;
kamaih—for satisfying one’s desires; gatdh na—could not reach;
antam—the end; trspayah—of their ambitions; iti—thus; nah—by Us;
Srutam —has been heard.

TRANSLATION

We have heard that although powerful kings like Maharaja
Prthu and Maharaja Gaya achieved proprietorship over the seven
dvipas, they could not achieve satisfaction or find the end of their
ambitions.

TEXT 24
यद्च्छयोपपन्नेन, संतुष्टो वतेते , सखम्‌ |
नासंतुष्ट्धिमिर्लकिरजितारमोपसादितैः ॥२४॥
yadrcchayopapannena
santusto vartate sukham
nasantustas tribhir lokair
ajitatmopasaditaih

yadrcchaya—as offered by the supreme authority according to one’s
karma; upapannena—by whatever is obtained; santustah—one should
be satisfied; wvartate—there is; sukham—happiness; na—not;
asantustah—one who is dissatisfied; tribhih lokaih—even by possessing
the three worlds; ajita-Gtma—one who cannot control his senses;
upasaditaih—even though obtained.

TRANSLATION

One should be satisfied with whatever he achieves by his pre-

vious destiny, for discontent can never bring happiness. A person


--- Page 78 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
who is not self-controlled will not be happy even with possessing
the three worlds.
PURPORT i
If happiness is the ultimate goal of life, one must be satisfied with the
position in which he is placed by providence. This instruction is also
given by Prahlada Maharaja:
sukham aindriyakari daitya
deha-yogena dehinam
sarvatra labhyate daivad

yatha duhkham ayatnatah
“My dear friends born of demoniac families, the happiness perceived
with reference to the sense objects by contact with the body can be ob-
tained in any form of life, according to one’s past fruitive activities. Such
happiness is automatically obtained without endeavor, just as we obtain
distress.” (Bhag. 7.6.3) This philosophy is perfect in regard to obtaining
happiness.

Real happiness is described in Bhagavad-gita (6.21):
sukham atyantikam yat tad
buddhi-grahyam atindriyam
vetti yatra na caivayam

sthitas calati tattvatah
“In the spiritually joyous state, one is situated in boundless transcenden-
tal happiness and enjoys himself through transcendental senses.
Established thus, one never departs from the truth.” One has to perceive
happiness by the supersenses. The supersenses are not the senses of the
material elements. Every one of us is a spiritual being (ahari
brahmasmi), and every one of us is an individual person. Our senses are
now covered by material elements, and because of ignorance we consider
the material senses that cover us to be our real senses. The real senses,
however, are within the material covering. Dehino ‘smin yatha dehe:
within the covering of the material elements are the spiritual senses.
Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktari tat-paratvena nirmalam: when the spiritual


--- Page 79 ---
Text 25] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 75
senses are uncovered, by these senses we can be happy. Satisfaction of
the spiritual senses is thus described: hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanarm bhaktir
ucyate. When the senses are engaged in devotional service to Hrsikesa,
then the senses are completely satisfied. Without this superior knowledge
of sense gratification, one may try to satisfy his material senses, but hap-
piness will never be possible. One may increase his ambition for sense
gratification and even achieve what he desires for the gratification of his
senses, but because this is on the material platform, he will never achieve
satisfaction and contentment.

According to brahminical culture, one should be content with what-
ever he obtains without special endeavor and should cultivate spiritual
consciousness. Then he will be happy. The purpose of the Krsna con-
sciousness movement is to spread this understanding. People who do not
have scientific spiritual knowledge mistakenly think that the members of
the Krsna consciousness movement are escapists trying to avoid material
activities. In fact, however, we are engaged in real activities for obtain-
ing the ultimate happiness in life. If one is not trained to satisfy the spiri-
tual senses and continues in material sense gratification, he will never
obtain happiness that is eternal and blissful. Srimad-Bhdgavatam (5.5.1)
therefore recommends:

tapo divyari putraka yena sattvari
Suddhyed yasmad brahma-saukhyar tv anantam
One must practice austerity so that his existential position will be
purified and he will achieve unlimited blissful life.
TEXT 25
पुंसोऽयं संदेहे तरसंतोषोऽर्थकामयोः |
यद्च्छयोपपन्नेन संतोषो खक्तये स्मरतः ।२५॥
puriiso yar sarisrter hetur
asantoso 'rtha-kamayoh
yadrcchayopapannena
santoso muktaye smrtah


--- Page 80 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
purisah—of the living entity; ayam—this; sarisrteh—of the con-
tinuation of material existence; hetuh—the cause; asantosah—dis-
satisfaction with his destined achievement; artha-kamayoh—for the
sake of lusty desires and getting more and more money; yadrcchaya—
with the gift of destiny; upapannena—which has been achieved;
santosah—satisfaction; muktaye—for liberation; smrtah—is considered
fit.
TRANSLATION
Material existence causes discontent in regard to fulfilling one’s
lusty desires and achieving more and more money. This is the
cause for the continuation of material life, which is full of re-
peated birth and death. But one who is satisfied by that which is
obtained by destiny is fit for liberation from this material
existence.
TEXT 26
यद्च्छालामतुष्टस्य तेजो विप्रस्य वर्धते ।
तत्‌ प्रश्ाम्यत्यसंतोषादम्भसेवाञ्चुञक्षणिः ॥२६॥
yadrccha-labha-tustasya
tejo viprasya vardhate
tat prasamyaty asantosad
ambhasevasusuksanih
yadrccha-labha-tustasya—who is satisfied by things obtained by the
grace of God; tejah—the brilliant effulgence; viprasya—of a brahmana;
vardhate—increases; tat—that (effulgence); prasamyati—is  di-
minished; asantosat—because of dissatisfaction; ambhasa—by pouring
of water; iva—as; asusuksanih—a fire.
TRANSLATION
A brahmana who is satisfied with whatever is providentially ob-
tained is increasingly enlightened with spiritual power, but the
spiritual potency of a dissatisfied brahmana decreases, as fire
diminishes in potency when water is sprinkled upon it.


--- Page 81 ---
Text 28] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 77
TEXT 27
= पदान्येव वृणे त्वद्‌ बरद षमात्‌ |
सिद्धोऽहं वित्तं यावत्प्रयोजनम्‌ ॥२७॥
tasmat trini padany eva
vrne tvad varadarsabhat
etavataiva siddho har
vittarh yavat prayojanam
tasmat—because of being satisfied by things easily obtained; trini—
three; padani—steps; eva—indeed; vrne—I ask; tvat—from your good
self; varada-rsabhat—who are a munificent benedictor; etdvata eva—
merely by such an endowment; siddhah aham—1I shall feel full satisfac-
tion; vittam—achievement; yavat—as far as; prayojanam—is needed.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O King, from you, the best of those who give
charity, I ask only three paces of land. By such a gift I shall be very
pleased, for the way of happiness is to be fully satisfied to receive
that which is absolutely needed.
TEXT 28
श्रीद्युक उवाच
इत्युक्तः स दसनाह वाञ्छातः प्रतिगृह्यताम्‌ 1
वामनाय महीं दातुं जग्राह जलमाजनम्‌ ॥२८॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
ity uktah sa hasann aha
vanchatah pratigrhyatam
vamandya mahiri daturiv
Jagraha jala-bhajanam
Sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti uktah—thus being
addressed; sah—he (Bali Maharaja); hasan—smiling; aha—said;
vanchatah—as You have desired; pratigrhyatam—now take from me;


--- Page 82 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
vamandya—unto Lord Vamana; mahim—land; datum—to give;
jagraha—took; jala-bhajanam—the waterpot.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: When the Supreme Personality
of Godhead had thus spoken to Bali Maharaja, Bali smiled and told
Him, ०.11 right. Take whatever You like.”” To confirm his promise
to give Vamanadeva the desired land, he then took up his waterpot.
TEXT 29
विष्णवे क्ष्मां प्रदास्यन्तयुश्चना असुरेश्वरम्‌ |
जानंधिकीर्षितं विष्णोः शिष्यं प्राह विदां azine
visnave ksmarm pradasyantam
uSana asuresvaram
janams cikirsitari visnoh
Sisyarn praha vida varah
visnave—unto Lord Visnu (Vamanadeva); ksmam—the land;
pradasyantam—who was ready to deliver; uSanah—Sukracarya;
asura-iSvaram—unto the King of the demons (Bali Maharaja); janan —
knowing well; cikirsitam —what was the plan; visnoh—of Lord Visnu;
Sisyam—unto his disciple; praha—said; vidam varah—the best of the
knowers of everything.
TRANSLATION
Understanding Lord Visnu’s purpose, Sukracarya, the best of
the learned, immediately spoke as follows to his disciple, who was
about to offer everything to Lord Vamanadeva.
TEXT 30
श्रीञ्चुकर उवाच
एष वैरोचने साक्षाद्‌ मगवान्विष्णुरव्ययः |
कड्यपाददितेर्नातो ATA कार्यसाधकः 113011


--- Page 83 ---
Text 31] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 79
Sri-Sukra ५12८0
esa vairocane saksad
bhagavan visnur avyayah
kasyapad aditer jato
devanarn karya-sadhakah
Sri-Sukrah uvaca—Sukracarya said; esah—this (boy in the form of a
dwarf); vairocane—O son of Virocana; saksat—directly; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; visnuh—Lord Visnu; avyayah—
without deterioration; kasyapat—from His father, KaSyapa; aditeh—in
the womb of His mother, Aditi; jatah—was born; devanam—of the
demigods; karya-sadhakah—working in the interest.
TRANSLATION
Sukracirya said: O son of Virocana, this brahmacari in the form
of a dwarf is directly the imperishable Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Visnu. Accepting KaSyapa Muni as His father and Aditi
as His mother, He has now appeared in order to fulfill the interests
of the demigods.
TEXT 31
৬ ¢
प्रतिशवुतं॑ त्वयैतस्मै यदनथंमजानता |
न साधु मन्ये दत्यानां महानुपगतोऽनयः ॥३१॥
pratiSrutam tvayaitasmai
yad anartham qjanata
na sadhu manye daityanar
mahan upagato 'nayah
pratisrutam—promised; tvaya—by you; etasmai—unto Him; yat
anartham—which is repugnant; gjanata—by you who have no knowl-
edge; na—not; sadhu—very good; manye—I think; daityanam—of the
demons; mahan—great; upagatah—has been achieved; anayah—in-
auspiciousness.


--- Page 84 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION
You do not know what a dangerous position you have accepted
by promising to give Him land. I do not think that this promise is
good for you. It will bring great harm to the demons.
TEXT 32
एष ते खानमैश्वयं धियं तेजो यश्चः श्चुतम्‌ |
दास्यत्याच्छिद्य शक्राय मायामाणवको हरिः 1133
esa te sthanam aisvaryari
Sriyarn tejo yasah srutam
dasyaty dacchidya sakraya
maya-manavako harih
esah—this person falsely appearing as a brahmacari; te—of you;
sthanam—the land in possession; aiSvaryam—the riches; sriyam—the
material beauty; tejah—the material power; yaSah—the reputation;
Srutam—the education; dasyati—will give; acchidya—taking from you;
Sakraya—unto your enemy, Lord Indra; maya—falsely appearing;
manavakah—a brahmacari son of a living being; harih—He is actually
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari.
TRANSLATION
This person falsely appearing as a brahmacari is actually the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who has come in this form
to take away all your land, wealth, beauty, power, fame and educa-
tion. After taking everything from you, He will deliver it to Indra,
your enemy.
PURPORT
Srila Vigvanatha Cakravarti Thakura explains in this regard that the
very word harih means “0116 who takes away.” If one connects himself
with Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord takes away all
his miseries, and in the beginning the Lord also superficially appears to
take away all his material possessions, reputation, education and beauty.
As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.88.8), yasyaham anugrhnami


--- Page 85 ---
Text 33] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 81
harisye tad-dhanari sanaih. The Lord said to Maharaja Yudhisthira,
“The first installment of My mercy toward a devotee is that I take away
all his possessions, especially his material opulence, his money.” This is
the special favor of the Lord toward a sincere devotee. If a sincere devo-
tee wants Krsna above everything but at the same time is attached to ma-
terial possessions, which hinder his advancement in Krsna consciousness,
by tactics the Lord takes away all his possessions. Here Sukracarya says
that this dwarf brahmacari would take away everything. Thus he indi-
cates that the Lord will take away all one’s material possessions and also
one’s mind. If one delivers his mind to the lotus feet of Krsna (sa vai
manah krsna-padaravindayoh), one can naturally sacrifice everything to
satisfy Him. Although Bali Maharija was a devotee, he was attached to
material possessions, and therefore the Lord, being very kind to him,
showed him special favor by appearing as Lord Vamana to take away all
his material possessions, and his mind as well.
TEXT 33
সিসি: क्रमैरिमाह्छोकान्विश्वकायः क्रमिष्यति |
५५
ade विष्णवे दत्वा मूढ वर्तिभ्यसे कथम्‌ 1330
tribhih kramair imal lokan
visva-kayah kramisyati
sarvasvam visnave dattva
midha vartisyase katham

tribhih—three; kramaih—Dby steps; iman—all these; lokan—three
planetary systems; viSva-kdyah—becoming the universal form;
kramisyati—gradually He will expand; sarvasvam—everything;
visnave—unto Lord Visnu; dattva—after giving charity; midha—O you
rascal; vartisyase—you will execute your means of livelihood; katham —
how.

TRANSLATION

You have promised to give Him three steps of land in charity,
but when you give it He will occupy the three worlds. You are a
rascal! You do not know what a great mistake you have made. After


--- Page 86 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
giving everything to Lord Visnu, you will have no means of liveli-
hood. How then shall you live?
PURPORT

Bali Maharija might argue that he had promised only three steps of
land. But Sukricarya, being a very learned brahmana, immediately
understood that this was a plan of Hari, who had falsely appeared there
as a brahmacari. The words midha vartisyase katham reveal that
Sukracirya was a brahmana of the priestly class. Such priestly
brahmanas are mostly interested in receiving remuneration from their
disciples. Therefore when Sukracarya saw that Bali Maharaja had risked
all of his possessions, he understood that this would cause havoc not only
to the King but also to the family of Sukracarya, who was dependent on
Maharaja Bali’s mercy. This is the difference between a Vaisnava and a
smarta-brahmana. A smarta-brahmana is always interested in material
profit, whereas a Vaisnava is interested only in satisfying the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. From the statement of Sukracarya, it appears
that he was in all respects a smarta-brahmana interested only in personal
gain.

TEXT 34
क्रमतो गां पदैकेन द्वितीयेन दिं विमोः |
खं च कायेन महता तातींयस्य इतो गतिः ॥२४॥
kramato gar padaikena
dvitiyena divari vibhoh
khari ca kayena mahata
tartiyasya kuto gatih

kramatah—gradually; gam —the surface of the land; pada ekena—
by one step; dvitiyena—by the second step; divam—the whole of outer
space; vibhoh—of the universal form; kham ca—the sky also; kayena—
by the expansion of His transcendental body; mahata—by the universal
form; tartiyasya—as far as the third step is concerned; kutah—where
is; gatih—to keep His step.


--- Page 87 ---
Text 35] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 83
TRANSLATION
Vamanadeva will first occupy the three worlds with one step,
then He will take His second step and occupy everything in outer
space, and then He will expand His universal body to occupy
everything. Where will you offer Him the third step?
PURPORT
Sukracirya wanted to tell Bali Maharaja how he would be cheated by
Lord Vamana. “You have promised three steps,” he said. “But with only
two steps, all your possessions will be finished. How then will you give
Him a place for His third step?” Sukracarya did not know how the Lord
protects His devotee. The devotee must risk everything in his possession
for the service of the Lord, but he is always protected and never de-
feated. By materialistic calculations, Sukracarya thought that Bali
Maharaja would under no circumstances be able to keep his promise to
the brahmacari, Lord Vamanadeva.
TEXT 35
निष्ठां ते नरके मन्ये ह्यप्रदातुः प्रतिश्वुतम्‌ |
प्रतिश्वुतस्य योऽनीश्चः प्रतिपादयितुं मान्‌ ॥२५॥
nisthar te narake manye
hy apradatuh pratisrutam
pratisrutasya yo ‘niSah
pratipadayiturir bhavan
nistham — perpetual residence; te—of you; narake—in hell; manye—
I think; hi—indeed; apradatuh—of a person who cannot fulfill;
pratisSrutam—what has been promised; pratiSrutasya—of the promise
one has made; yah aniSah—one who is unable; pratipadayitum—to
fulfill properly; bhavan—you are that person.
TRANSLATION
You will certainly be unable to fulfill your promise, and I think
that because of this inability your eternal residence will be in hell.


--- Page 88 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
TEXT 36
न तदानं प्रशंसन्ति येन इतिर्विप्ते ।
दानं यज्ञस्तपः कमं लोके স্বতিমনা यतः ॥३६॥
na tad danam prasarisanti
yena vrttir vipadyate
danam 20605 tapah karma
loke vrttimato yatah
na—not; tat—that; danam—charity; prasamsanti—the saintly per-
sons praise; yena—by which; vrttih—one’s livelihood; vipadyate—be-
comes endangered; danam—charity; yajiiah—sacrifice; tapah—
austerity; karma—fruitive activities; loke—in this world; vrttimatah—
according to one’s means of livelihood; yatah—as it is so.
TRANSLATION
Learned scholars do not praise that charity which endangers
one’s own livelihood. Charity, sacrifice, austerity and fruitive ac-
tivities are possible for one who is competent to earn his livelihood
properly. [They are not possible for one who cannot maintain
himself.]
TEXT 37
धर्माय यशसेऽर्थाय कामाय खजनाय च ।
पञ्चधा विभजन्वि्तमिदा्रत्र॒ च मोदते Hel
dharmaya yasase ’rthaya
kamaya sva-janaya ca
[00078000170 vibhajan vittam
ihamutra ca modate
dharmaya—for religion; yasase—for one’s reputation; arthaya—for
increasing one’s opulence; kamaya—for increasing sense gratification;
sva-jandya ca—and for maintaining one’s family members; [00186000000 —


--- Page 89 ---
Text 38] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 85
for these five different objectives; vibhajan—dividing; vittam—his ac-
cumulated wealth; iha—in this world; amutra—the next world; ca—
and; modate—he enjoys.
TRANSLATION

Therefore one who is in full knowledge should divide his ac-
cumulated wealth in five parts—for religion, for reputation, for
opulence, for sense gratification and for the maintenance of his
family members. Such a person is happy in this world and in the
next.

PURPORT

The sastras enjoin that if one has money one should divide all that he
has accumulated into five divisions—one part for religion, one part for
reputation, one part for opulence, one part for sense gratification and one
part to maintain the members of his family. At the present, however, be-
cause people are bereft of all knowledge, they spend all their money for
the satisfaction of their family. Srila Ripa Gosvami taught us by his own
example by using fifty percent of his accumulated wealth for Krsna,
twenty-five percent for his own self, and twenty-five percent for the
members of his family. One’s main purpose should be to advance in
Krsna consciousness. This will include dharma, artha and kama.
However, because one’s family members expect some profit, one should
also satisfy them by giving them a portion of one’s accumulated wealth.
This is a §astric injunction.

TEXT 38
৭৯০০
अत्रापि TENE श्रणु॒मेऽसुरसतम |
सत्यमोमिति यत्‌ ्रोक्तं यननेत्याहाचृतं हि तत्‌ । ३८॥
atrapi bahvrcair gitar
Srnu me ’sura-sattama
satyam om iti yat proktar
yan nety ahanrtari hi tat

atra api—in this regard also (in deciding what is truth and what is not

truth); bahu-rcaih—by the S$ruti-mantras known as Bahvrca-sruti,


--- Page 90 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
which are evidence from the Vedas; gitam—what has been spoken;
Srnu—just hear; me—from me; asura-sattama—O best of the asuras;
satyam—the truth is; om iti—preceded by the word or; yat—that
which; proktam—has been spoken; yat—that which is; na—not pre-
ceded by ori; iti—thus; aha—it is said; anrtam—untruth; hi—indeed;
tat —that.
TRANSLATION
One might argue that since you have already promised, how can
you refuse? O best of the demons, just take from me the evidence
of the Bahvrca-$ruti, which says that a promise is truthful pre-
ceded by the word orh and untruthful if not.
TEXT 39
सत्यं पुष्पफलं विद्यादात्मबक्चस्य गीयते |
वृक्षेऽजीवति तन्न WRIA मूलमात्मनः ॥३९॥
satya puspa-phalar vidyad
atma-vrksasya giyate
vrkse jivati tan na syad
anrtamm milam atmanah
satyam—the factual truth; puspa-phalam—the Hower and the fruit;
vidyat—one should ‘understand; atma-vrksasya—of the tree of the
body; giyate—as described in the Vedas; vrkse ajivati—if the tree is not
living; tat—that (puspa-phalam); na—not; syat—is possible; anrtam —
untruth; milam—the root; atmanah—of the body.
TRANSLATION
The Vedas enjoin that the factual result of the tree of the body is
the good fruits and flowers derived from it. But if the bodily tree
does not exist, there is no possibility of factual fruits and flowers.
Even if the body is based on untruth, there cannot be factual fruits
and flowers without the help of the bodily tree.


--- Page 91 ---
Text 40] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 87
PURPORT

This sloka explains that in relation to the material body even the fac-
tual truth cannot exist without a touch of untruth. The Mayavadis say,
brahma satyari jagan mithya: “The spirit soul is truth, and the external
energy is untruth.” The Vaisnava philosophers, however, do not agree
with the Mayavada philosophy. Even if for the sake of argument the
material world is accepted as untruth, the living entity entangled in the
illusory energy cannot come out of it without the help of the body. With-
out the help of the body, one cannot follow a system of religion, nor can
one speculate on philosophical perfection. Therefore, the flower and fruit
(puspa-phalam) have to be obtained as a result of the body. Without the
help of the body, that fruit cannot be gained. The Vaisnava philosophy
therefore recommends yukta-vairagya. It is not that all attention should
be diverted for the maintenance of the body, but at the same time one’s
bodily maintenance should not be neglected. As long as the body exists
one can thoroughly study the Vedic instructions, and thus at the end of
life one can achieve perfection. This is explained in Bhagavad-gita (8.6):
yar yar vapi smaran bhavari tyajaty ante kalevaram. Everything is
examined at the time of death. Therefore, although the body is tempor-
ary, not eternal, one can take from it the best service and make one’s life
perfect.

TEXT 40
तद्‌ यथा TY उन्मूलः शप्यत्युदर्तेऽचिरात्‌ |
एवं ATT: सद्य आत्मा FRAN संशयः ॥।४०॥
tad yatha vrksa unmiilah
Susyaty udvartate ’cirat
evar nastanrtah sadya
atma Susyen na sarmsayah

tat—therefore; yatha—as; wvrksah—a tree; unmiilah—being
uprooted; Susyati—dries up; udvartate—falls down; acirat—very soon;
evam—in this way; nasta—lost; anrtah—the temporary body;
sadyah—immediately; atma—the body; Susyet—dries up; na—not;
samSayah—any doubt.


--- Page 92 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
TRANSLATION

When a tree is uprooted it immediately falls down and begins to
dry up. Similarly, if one doesn’t take care of the body, which is
supposed to be untruth—in other words, if the untruth is
uprooted —the body undoubtedly becomes dry.

PURPORT
In this regard, Srila Ripa Gosvami says:
prapadcikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih parityago
vairagyar phalgu kathyate

“One who rejects things without knowledge of their relationship to
Krsna is incomplete in his renunciation.” (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
1.2.266) When the body is engaged in the service of the Lord, one should
not consider the body material. Sometimes the spiritual body of the spiri-
tual master is misunderstood. But Srila Ripa Gosvami instructs,
prapaiicikataya buddhya hari-sambandhi-vastunah. The body fully
engaged in Krsna’s service should not be neglected as material. One who
does neglect it is false in his renunciation. If the body is not properly
maintained, it falls down and dries up like an uprooted tree, from which
flowers and fruit can no longer be obtained. The Vedas therefore enjoin:

om iti satyari nety anrtarn tad etat-puspari phalari vaco yat satyarn
sahesvaro yasasvi kalyana-kirtir bhavita. puspari hi phalari vacah
satya vadaty athaitan-miilar ४2८0 yad 07107 yad yatha vrksa
avirmitlah Susyati, sa udvartata evam evanrtarn vadann avirmitlam
atmanarm karoti, sa Susyati sa udvartate, tasmad anrtari na vaded
dayeta tv etena.
The purport is that activities performed with the help of the body for the
satisfaction of the Absolute Truth (07 tat sat) are never temporary, al-
though performed by the temporary body. Indeed, such activities are
everlasting. Therefore, the body should be properly cared for. Because


--- Page 93 ---
Text 41] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 89
the body is temporary, not permanent, one cannot expose the body to
being devoured by a tiger or killed by an enemy. All precautions should
be taken to protect the body.
TEXT 41
पराग्‌ रिक्तमपूणं वा अक्षरं यत्‌ तदोमिति |
यत्‌ कि्िदोमिति ब्रूयात्‌ तेन रिच्येत वै पुमान्‌ ।
भिक्षवे midges कामेन चात्मने ।॥४१॥
parag riktam apirnam va
aksaramh yat tad om iti
yat kificid om iti 070৫1
tena ricyeta vai puman
bhiksave sarvam ori kurvan
nalari kamena catmane
parak—that which separates; riktam—that which makes one free
from attachment; apiarnam—that which is insufficient; va—either;
aksaram—this syllable; yat—that; tat—which; om —orikara; iti—thus
stated; yat—which; kificit—whatever; om—this word ori; iti—thus;
briayat—if you say; tena—by such an utterance; ricyeta—one becomes
free; vai—indeed; puman—a person; bhiksave—unto a beggar; sar-
vam—everything; ori kurvan—giving charity by uttering the word ori;
na—not; alam—sufficiently; kamena—for sense gratification; ca—
also; atmane —for self-realization.
TRANSLATION
The utterance of the word जा? signifies separation from one’s
monetary assets. In other words, by uttering this word one be-
comes free from attachment to money because his money is taken
away from him. To be without money is not very satisfactory, for
in that position one cannot fulfill one’s desires. In other words, by
using the word “om” one becomes poverty-stricken. Especially
when one gives charity to a poor man or beggar, one remains un-
fulfilled in self-realization and in sense gratification.


--- Page 94 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
PURPORT

Maharaja Bali wanted to give everything to Vamanadeva, who had ap-
peared as a beggar, but Sukracarya, being Maharaja Bali’s familial spiri-
tual master in the line of seminal succession, could not appreciate
Maharaja Bali’s promise. Sukracarya gave Vedic evidence that one should
not give everything to a poor man. Rather, when a poor man comes for
charity one should untruthfully say, “Whatever I have I have given you.
I have no more.” It is not that one should give everything to him. Ac-
tually the word 01 is meant for 07 tat sat, the Absolute Truth. Ormkara
is meant for freedom from all attachment to money because money
should be spent for the purpose of the Supreme. The tendency of modern
civilization is to give money in charity to the poor. Such charity has no
spiritual value because we actually see that although there are so many
hospitals and other foundations and institutions for the poor, according
to the three modes of material nature a class of poor men is always
destined to continue. Even though there are so many charitable institu-
tions, poverty has not been driven from human society. Therefore it is
recommended here, bhiksave sarvam or kurvan 70/07 kamena
catmane. One should not give everything to the beggars among the poor.

The best solution is that of the Krsna consciousness movement. This
movement is always kind to the poor, not only because it feeds them but
also because it gives them enlightenment by teaching them how to
become Krsna conscious. We are therefore opening hundreds and thou-
sands of centers for those who are poor, both in money and in knowl-
edge, to enlighten them in Krsna consciousness and reform their
character by teaching them how to avoid illicit sex, intoxication, meat-
eating and gambling, which are the most sinful activities and which
cause people to suffer, life after life. The best way to use money is to
open such a center, where all may come live and reform their character.
They may live very comfortably, without denial of any of the body’s
necessities, but they live under spiritual control, and thus they live hap-
pily and save time for advancement in Krsna consciousness. If one has
money, it should not be squandered away on nothing. It should be used to
push forward the Krsna consciousness movement so that all of human
society will become happy, prosperous and hopeful of being promoted
back home, back to Godhead. The Vedic mantra in this regard reads as
follows:


--- Page 95 ---
Text 42] The Lord Begs Charity from Bali Maharaja 91
parag va etad riktam aksaram yad etad om iti tad yat kificid om iti
ahatraivasmai tad ricyate. sa yat sarvam orn kuryad ricyad atmanar sa
kamebhyo 7040772 syat.
TEXT 42
यैत © + +
अथेतत्‌ ATH यच्च AAT वचः |
४.4 (3 6 = [3
सवं नेत्यच॒तं ब्रूयात्‌ स दुष्कीतिः FETT: BRA
athaitat piarnam abhyatmar
yac ca nety anrtam vacah
sarvarh nety anrtam brivyat
sa duskirtih Svasan mrtah
atha—therefore; etat—that; pirnam—completely; abhyatmam—
drawing the compassion of others by presenting oneself as always
poverty-stricken; yat—that; ca—also; na—not; iti—thus; anrtam—
false; wvacah—words; sarvam—completely; na—not; iti—thus;
anrtam—falsity; brityat—who should say; sah—such a person;
duskirtih—infamous; $vasan—while breathing or while alive; mrtah—
is dead or should be killed.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, the safe course is to say no. Although it is a false-
hood, it protects one completely, it draws the compassion of others
toward oneself, and it gives one full facility to collect money from
others for oneself. Nonetheless, if one always pleads that he has
nothing, he is condemned, for he is a dead body while living, or
while still breathing he should be killed.
PURPORT
Beggars always present themselves as possessing nothing, and this
may be very good for them because in this way they are assured of not
losing their money and of always drawing the attention and compassion
of others for the sake of collection. But this is also condemned. If one
purposely continues this professional begging, he is supposed to be dead
while breathing, or, according to another interpretation, such a man of


--- Page 96 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 19
falsity should be killed while still breathing. The Vedic injunction in this
regard is as follows: athaitat parnam abhyatmar yan neti sa yat ऽवा ण्वः
neti brityat papikdsya kirtir jayate. sainam tatraiva hanyat. If one con-
tinuously poses himself as possessing nothing and collects money by beg-
ging, he should be killed (sainar tatraiva hanyat).
TEXT 43
3 ~ ५
Hg TEAR च बृच्यथं प्राणसंकटे |
गोब्राह्मणार्थे हिंसायां नातं खाज्जगुप्सितम्‌॥।४२॥
strisu narma-vivahe ca
vrtty-arthe prana-sarikate
go-brahmanadrthe hirsayar
nanrtam sydaj jugupsitam
strisu—to encourage a woman and bring her under control; narma-
vivahe—in joking or in a marriage ceremony; ca—also; vrtti-arthe—for
earning one’s livelihood, as in business; prana-sarikate—or in time of
danger; go-brahmana-arthe—for the sake of cow protection and
brahminical culture; himsayam—for any person who is going to be
killed because of enmity; na—not; anrtam—falsity; syat—becomes;
Jugupsitam —abominable.
TRANSLATION
In flattering a woman to bring her under control, in joking, in
a marriage ceremony, in earning one’s livelihood, when one’s life
is in danger, in protecting cows and brahminical culture, or in
protecting a person from an enemy’s hand, falsity is never
condemned.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Nineteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, “Lord Vamanadeva Begs
Charity from Bali Maharaja.”


--- Page 97 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY
Bali Maharaja
Surrenders the Universe
The summary of this Twentieth Chapter is as follows. Despite his
knowledge that Lord Vamanadeva was cheating him, Bali Maharaja gave
everything to the Lord in charity, and thus the Lord extended His body
and assumed a gigantic form as Lord Visnu. ,

After hearing the instructive advice of Sukracarya, Bali Maharaja
became contemplative. Because it is the duty of a householder to main-
tain the principles of religion, economic development and sense gratifica-
tion, Bali Maharaja thought it improper to withdraw his promise to the
brahmacari. To lie or fail to honor a promise given to a brahmacari is
never proper, for lying is the most sinful activity. Everyone should be
afraid of the sinful reactions to lying, for mother earth cannot even bear
the weight of a sinful liar. The spreading of a kingdom or empire is tem-
porary; if there is no benefit for the general public, such expansion has
no value. Previously, all the great kings and emperors expanded their
kingdoms with a regard for the welfare of the people in general. Indeed,
while engaged in such activities for the benefit of the general public,
eminent men sometimes even sacrificed their lives. It is said that one who
is glorious in his activities is always living and never dies. Therefore,
fame should be the aim of life, and even if one becomes poverty-stricken
for the sake of a good reputation, that is not a loss. Bali Maharaja thought
that even if this brahmacari, Vamanadeva, were Lord Visnu, if the Lord
accepted his charity and then again arrested him, Bali Maharaja would
not envy Him. Considering all these points, Bali Maharaja finally gave in
charity everything he possessed.

Lord Vamanadeva then immediately extended Himself into a univer-
sal body. By the mercy of Lord Vamanadeva, Bali Maharaja could see
that the Lord is all-pervading and that everything rests in His body. Bali
Maharaja could see Lord Vamanadeva as the supreme Visnu, wearing a
helmet, yellow garments, the mark of Srivatsa, the Kaustubha jewel, a

93


--- Page 98 ---
94 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
flower garland, and ornaments decorating His entire body. The Lord gra-
dually covered the entire surface of the world, and by extending His
body He covered the entire sky. With His hands He covered all direc-
tions, and with His second footstep He covered the entire upper plan-
etary system. Therefore there was no vacant place where He could take
His third footstep.
TEXT 1
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
बलिरेवं गृहपतिः ङराचार्येण भाषितः |
तूष्णीं भूत्वा क्षणं राजन्युवाचावहितो गुरुम्‌ ॥ 2 1
$ri-suka uvaca
balir evar grha-patih
kulacaryena bhasitah
tasnim bhitva ksanam rajann
uvdcavahito gurum

sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; balih—Bali Maharaja;
evam—thus; grha-patih —the master of the household affairs, although
guided by the priests; kula-acaryena—by the family acarya or guide;
bhasitah—being thus addressed; tasnim —silent; bhiitva—becoming;
ksanam —for a moment; rajan—O King (Maharaja Pariksit); uvdca—
said; avahitah—after full deliberation; gurum—unto his spiritual
master.

TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King Pariksit, when Bali Maharaja
was thus advised by his spiritual master, Sukracarya, his family
priest, he remained silent for some time, and then, after full
deliberation, he replied to his spiritual master as follows.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks that Bali Maharaja

remained silent at a critical point. How could he disohey the instruction


--- Page 99 ---
Text 1] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 95
of Sukracarya, his spiritual master? It is the duty of such a sober per-
sonality as Bali Maharaja to abide by the orders of his spiritual master
immediately, as his spiritual master had advised. But Bali Maharaja also
considered that Sukricirya was no longer to be accepted as a spiritual
master, for he had deviated from the duty of a spiritual master. Accord-
ing to $astra, the duty of the guru is to take the disciple back home, back
to Godhead. If he is unable to do so and instead hinders the disciple in
going back to Godhead, he should not be a guru. Gurur na sa syat
(Bhag. 5.5.18). One should not become a guru if he cannot enable his
disciple to advance in Krsna consciousness. The goal of life is to become a
devotee of Lord Krsna so that one may be freed from the bondage of
material existence (tyaktva dehari punar janma naiti mam eti so ’rjuna).
The spiritual master helps the disciple attain this stage by developing
Krsna consciousness. Now Sukracarya had advised Bali Maharaja to deny
the promise to Vamanadeva. Under the circumstances, therefore, Bali
Maharaja thought that there would be no fault if he disobeyed the order
of his spiritual master. He deliberated on this point —should he refuse to
accept the advice of his spiritual master, or should he independently do
everything to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead? He took some
time. Therefore it is said, (च्छः bhitva ksanam rajann uvacavahito
gurum. After deliberating on this point, he decided that Lord Visnu
should be pleased in all circumstances, even at the risk of ignoring the
guru’s advice to the contrary.

Anyone who is supposed to be a guru but who goes against the princi-
ple of visnu-bhakti cannot be accepted as a guru. If one has falsely ac-
cepted such a guru, one should reject him. Such a guru is described as
follows (Mahabharata, Udyoga 179.25):

guror apy avaliptasya
kdaryakaryam ajanatah
utpatha-pratipannasya
parityago vidhiyate
Srila Jiva Gosvami has advised that such a useless guru, a family priest
acting as guru, should be given up, and that the proper, bona fide guru
should be accepted.


--- Page 100 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
sat-karma-nipuno vipro
mantra-tantra-visaradah
avaisnavo gurur na syad
vaisnavah Svapaco guruh
““A scholarly brahmana expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge is unfit
to become a spiritual master without being a Vaisnava, but if a person
born in a family of a lower caste is a Vaisnava, he can become a spiritual
master.” (Padma Purana)
TEXT 2
श्रीवटिरुवाच
ডা | == 4 ৬
सत्यं मगवता प्रोक्तं धर्मोऽयं गृहमेधिनाम्‌ |
अथं कामं यश्चो वृत्ति यो न बाधेत करिंचित्‌ ॥ २॥
sri-balir ८९८०
satyam bhagavata proktarn
dharmo ’yari grhamedhinam
arthariv kamarn yaso vrttin
yo na badheta karhicit
Sri-balih  uvaca—Bali Maharaja said; satyam—it is truth;
bhagavata—by Your Greatness; proktam—what has already been
spoken; dharmah—a religious principle; ayam—that is; grha-
medhinam—especially for the householders; artham—economic
development; kamam—sense gratification; yasah vrttim —reputation
and means of livelihood; yah—which religious principle; na—not;
badheta —hinders; karhicit—at any time.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja said: As you have already stated, the principle of
religion that does not hinder one’s economic development, sense
gratification, fame and means of livelihood is the real occupational
duty of the householder. I also think that this religious principle is
correct.


--- Page 101 ---
Text 3] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 97
PURPORT

Bali Maharaja’s grave answer to Sukricarya is meaningful. Sukracarya
stressed that one’s material means of livelihood and one’s material
reputation, sense gratification and economic development must continue
properly. To see to this is the first duty of a man who is a householder,
especially one who is interested in material affairs. If a religious princi-
ple does not affect one’s material condition, it is to be accepted. At the
present time, in this age of Kali, this idea is extremely prominent. No
one is prepared to accept any religious principle if it hampers material
prosperity. Sukracarya, being a person of this material world, did not
know the principles of a devotee. A devotee is determined to serve the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to His full satisfaction. Anything that
hampers such determination should certainly be rejected. This is the
rinciple of bhakti. Anukilyasya sankalpah pratikilyasya varjanam
fee. Madhya 22.100). To perform devotional service, one must accept
only that which is favorable and reject that which is unfavorable. Bali
Maharaja had the opportunity to contribute everything he possessed to
the lotus feet of Lord Vamanadeva, but Sukracarya was putting forward
a material argument to hamper this process of devotional service. Under
the circumstances, Bali Maharija decided that such hindrances should
certainly be avoided. In other words, he decided immediately to reject the
advice of Sukracarya and go on with his duty. Thus he gave all his

possessions 10 Lord Vimanadeva.

TEXT 3
स चाहं वित्तलोभेन प्रत्याचक्षे कथं Gay ।
प्रतिश्वुत्य ददामीति प्राहादिः कितवो यथा nn
sa ८९12077 vitta-lobhena
pratyacakse kathari dvijam
pratisrutya dadamiti
prahradih kitavo yatha

sah—such a person as I am; ca—also; aham—I am; vitta-lobhena —
for being allured by greed for money; pratyacakse—I shall cheat or say
no when I have already said yes; katham—how; dvijam —especially to a


--- Page 102 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
brahmana; pratisrutya—after already having promised; dadami—that I
shall give; iti—thus; prahradih—I who am famous as the grandson of
Maharaja Prahlada; kitavah—an ordinary cheater; yathd—just like.
TRANSLATION

I am the grandson of Maharaja Prahlada. How can I withdraw my
promise because of greed for money when I have already said that
I shall give this land? How can I behave like an ordinary cheater,
especially toward a brahmana?

PURPORT

Bali Maharaja had already been blessed by his grandfather Prahlada
Maharaja. Therefore, he was a pure devotee, although born in a family of
demons. There are two kinds of highly elevated devotees, called
sadhana-siddha and krpa-siddha. Sadhana-siddha refers to one who has
become a devotee by regular execution of the regulative principles men-
tioned in the $astras, as ordered and directed by the spiritual master. If
one regularly executes such devotional service, he will certainly attain
perfection in due course of time. But there are other devotees, who may
not have undergone all the required details of devotional service but
who, by the special mercy of guru and Krsna —the spiritual master and
the Supreme Personality of Godhead —have immediately attained the
perfection of pure devotional service. Examples of such devotees are the
yajia-patnis, Maharaja Bali and Sukadeva Gosvami. The yajia-patnis
were the wives of ordinary brahmanas engaged in fruitive activities.
Although the brahmanas were very learned and advanced in Vedic
knowledge, they could not achieve the mercy of Krsna-Balarama,
whereas their wives achieved complete perfection in devotional service,
despite their being women. Similarly, Vairocani, Bali Maharaja, received
the mercy of Prahlada Maharaja, and by Prahlada Maharaja’s mercy he
also received the mercy of Lord Visnu, who appeared before him as a
brahmacart beggar. Thus Bali Maharaja became ৪ krpa-siddha because
of the special mercy of both guru and Krsna. Caitanya Mahaprabhu con-
firms this favor: guru-krsna- prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija (Cc.
Madhya 19.151). Bali Maharaja, by the grace of Prahlada Maharaja, got
the seed of devotional service, and when that seed developed, he


--- Page 103 ---
Text 4] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 99
achieved the ultimate fruit of that service, namely love of Godhead
(prema pum-artho mahan), immediately upon the appearance of Lord
Vamanadeva. Bali Maharaja regularly maintained devotion for the Lord,
and because he was purified, the Lord appeared before him. Because of
unalloyed love for the Lord, he then immediately decided, “I shall give
this little dwarf brahmana whatever He asks from me.” This is a sign of
love. Thus Bali Maharaja is understood to be one who received the high-
est perfection of devotional service by special mercy.
TEXT 4
ky
न ह्यसत्यात्‌ परोऽधमं इति होवाच भूरियम्‌ |
af सोढुमलं मन्ये ऋतेऽरीकपरं नरम्‌ ॥ ४॥
na hy asatyat paro ‘dharma
iti hovaca 0/ 87 iyam
sarvar sodhum alam manye
rte ’lika-pararh naram

na—not; hi—indeed; asatyat—than compulsion to untruthfulness;
parah—more; adharmah—irreligion; iti—thus; ha uvdca —indeed had
spoken; bhih—mother earth; iyam—this; sarvam—everything;
sodhum—to bear; 01071 -- am able; manye—although I think; rte—ex-
cept; alitka-param—the most heinous liar; naram—a human being.

TRANSLATION

There is nothing more sinful than untruthfulness. Because of
this, mother earth once said, (वृ can bear any heavy thing except a
person who is a liar.”

PURPORT

On the surface of the earth there are many great mountains and oceans
that are very heavy, and mother earth has no difficulty carrying them.
But she feels very much overburdened when she carries even one person
who is a liar. It is said that in Kali-yuga lying is a common affair:
mdyaiva vyavaharike (Bhag. 12.2.3). Even in the most common deal-
ings, people are accustomed to speaking so many lies. No one is free from


--- Page 104 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
the sinful reactions of speaking lies. Under the circumstances, one can
just imagine how this has overburdened the earth, and indeed the entire
universe.
TEXT 5
नाहं बिभेमि निरयानाधन्यादसुखाणेवात्‌ |
न सानच्यवनान्मरत्योयेथा विप्रप्रलम्भनात्‌ ॥ ५॥
naharn bibhemi nirayan
nadhanyad asukharnavat
na sthana-cyavanan mrtyor
yatha vipra-pralambhanat
na—not; aham—1I; bibhemi—am afraid of; nirayat—from a hellish
condition of life; na—nor; adhanyat—from a poverty-stricken condi-
tion; asukha-arnavat—nor from an ocean of distresses; na—nor;
sthana-cyavanat—from falling from a position; mrtyoh—nor from
death; yatha—as; vipra-pralambhandat—from the cheating of a
brahmana.
TRANSLATION
I do not fear hell, poverty, an ocean of distress, falldown from
my position or even death itself as much as I fear cheating a
brahmana.
TEXT 6
यद्‌ यद्धासखति लोकेऽसिन्सं परेतं धनादिकम्‌ ।
तस्य त्यागे निभित्तं कि विप्रस्तुष्येन्न तेन चेत्‌ ॥ ६ ॥
yad yad dhasyati loke ’smin
samparetari dhanadikam
tasya tyage nimittarir kin
vipras tusyen na tena cet
yat yat—whatsoever; hasyati—will leave; loke—in the world;
asmin—in this; samparetam—one who is already dead; dhana-
adikam—his wealth and riches; tasya—of such wealth; tyage—in


--- Page 105 ---
Text 7] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 101
renunciation; nimittam—the purpose; kim—what is; viprah—the
brahmana who is confidentially Lord Visnu; tusyet—must be pleased;
na—is not; tena—by such (riches); cet—if there is a possibility.
TRANSLATION
My lord, you can also see that all the material opulences of this
world are certainly separated from their possessor at death.
Therefore, if the brahmana Vamanadeva is not satisfied by what-
ever gifts one has given, why not please Him with the riches one is
destined to lose at death?
PURPORT
The word vipra means brahmana, and at the same time
‘‘confidential.” Bali Maharaja had confidentially decided to give the gift
to Lord Vamanadeva without discussion, but because such a decision
would hurt the hearts of the asuras and his spiritual master, Sukracarya,
he spoke equivocally. Bali Maharaja, as a pure devotee, had already
decided to give all the land to Lord 19100.
TEXT 7
५ +
श्रेयः Fa fra भूतानां साधो दुस्त्यजासुभिः |
दभ्यङज्ञिबिग्रभृतयः को बिकस्पो धरादिषु ॥ ७॥
Sreyah kurvanti bhatanam
sadhavo dustyajasubhih
dadhyan-$ibi-prabhrtayah
ko vikalpo dharadisu
Sreyah—activities of the utmost importance; kurvanti—execute;
bhiitanam—of the general mass of people; sadhavah—the saintly per-
sons; dustyaja—which are extremely hard to give up; asubhih —by their
lives; dadhyari—Maharaja Dadhici; $ibi—Maharaja Sibi; prabhrtayah—
and similar great personalities; kah—what; vikalpah—consideration;
dhara-adisu—in giving the land to the brahmana.


--- Page 106 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION
Dadhici, Sibi and many other great personalities were willing to
sacrifice even their lives for the benefit of the people in general.
This is the evidence of history. So why not give up this insignifi-
cant land? What is the serious consideration against it?
PURPORT
„ Bali Maharaja was prepared to give everything to Lord Visnu, and
Sukracarya, being a professional priest, might have been anxiously wait-
ing, doubting whether there had been any such instance in history in
which one had given everything in charity. Bali Maharaja, however,
cited the tangible examples of Maharaja Sibi and Maharaja Dadhici, who
had given up their lives for the benefit of the general public. Certainly
one has attachment for everything material, especially one’s land, but
land and other possessions are forcibly taken away at the time of death,
as stated in Bhagavad-gita (mrtyuh sarva-hara$ caham). The Lord per-
sonally appeared to Bali Maharaja to take away everything he had, and
thus he was so fortunate that he could see the Lord face to face. Non-
devotees, however, cannot see the Lord face to face; to such persons the
Lord appears as death and takes away all their possessions by force.
Under the circumstances, why should we not part with our possessions
and deliver them to Lord Visnu for His satisfaction? Sri Canakya Pandita
says in this regard, san-nimitte vara tyago vindSe niyate sati
(Canakya-sloka 36). Since our money and possessions do not last but
will somehow or other be taken away, as long as they are in our posses-
sion it is better to use them for charity to a noble cause. Therefore Bali
Maharaja defied the order of his so-called spiritual master.
TEXT 8
Md DN ब्ह्मन्दत्येनदररनिवर्तिभिः |
तेषां कालोऽग्रषीहलोकान्‌ न यशोऽधिगतं gf ८ ॥
yair iyarn bubhuje brahman
daityendrair anivartibhih
tesarn kalo ‘grasil lokan
na yaso ‘dhigatari bhuvi


--- Page 107 ---
Text 9] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 103

yaith—by whom; iyam—this world; bubhuje—was enjoyed;
brahman—O best of the brahmanas; daitya-indraih—by great heroes
and kings born in demoniac families; anivartibhih—by those who were
determined to fight, either to lay down their lives or to win victory;
tesam—of such persons; kalah—the time factor; agrasit—took away;
lokan—all possessions, all objects of enjoyment; na—not; yaSah—the
reputation; adhigatam—achieved; bhuvi—in this world.

TRANSLATION

O best of the brahmanas, certainly the great demoniac kings
who were never reluctant to fight enjoyed this world, but in due
course of time everything they had was taken away, except their
reputation, by which they continue to exist. In other words, one
should try to achieve a good reputation instead of anything else.

PURPORT

In this regard, Canakya Pandita (Canakya-sloka 34) also says, ayusah
ksana eko pi na labhya svarna-kotibhih. The duration of one’s life is ex-
tremely short, but if in that short lifetime one can do something that
enhances his good reputation, that may continue to exist for many
millions of years. Bali Maharaja therefore decided not to follow his
spiritual master’s instruction that he deny his promise to Vamanadeva;
instead, he decided to give the land according to the promise and be
everlastingly celebrated as one of the twelve mahdajanas (balir vaiyasakir
vayam).

TEXT 9
gem युधि विग्र्षे द्यनिव्रत्तास्तचुत्यजः |
न तथा तीथं आयाति श्रद्धया ये धनत्यजः ॥ ९॥
sulabha yudhi viprarse
hy anivrttas tanu-tyajah
na tatha tirtha ayate
sraddhaya ye dhana-tyajah

su-labhah—very easily obtained; yudhi—in the battlefield; vipra-

rse—O best of the brahmanas; hi—indeed; anivrttah—not being afraid


--- Page 108 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
of fighting; tanu-tyajah—and thus lay down their lives; na—not;
tathd—as; tirthe ayate—on the arrival of a saintly person who creates
holy places; sraddhaya—with faith and devotion; ye—those whos;
dhana-tyajah—can give up their accumulated wealth.
TRANSLATION
O best of the brahmanas, many men have laid down their lives
on the battlefield, being unafraid of fighting, but rarely has one
gotten the chance to give his accumulated wealth faithfully to a
saintly person who creates holy places.
PURPORT
Many ksatriyas have laid down their lives on the battlefield for their
nations, but hardly a person can be found who has given up all his pro-
perty and his accumulated wealth in charity to a person worthy of the
gift. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (17.20):
datavyam iti yad 00707
diyate ’'nupakarine
dese kale ca patre ca
tad danam sattvikari smrtam
“That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to a
worthy person, and without expectation of return is considered to be
charity in the mode of goodness.” Thus charity given in the proper place
is called sattvika. And above this charity in goodness is transcendental
charity, in which everything is sacrificed for the sake of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Vamanadeva, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, had come to Bali Maharaja for alms. How could one get such an
opportunity to give charity? Therefore, Bali Maharaja decided without
hesitation to give the Lord whatever He wanted. One may get various op-
portunities to lay down his life on the battlefield, but such an opportunity
as this is hardly ever obtained.
TEXT 10
मनखिनः कारुणिकस्य छोमनं
यदर्थिकामोपनयेन gfe |


--- Page 109 ---
Text 11] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 105
कृतः पुनन्रैहयविदां भवाद्शां
ततो वटोरस्य ददामि वाञ्छितम्‌ ॥१०॥
manasvinah karunikasya 5०९0८४7४.
yad arthi-kamopanayena durgatih
kutah punar brahma-vidarh bhavadriam
tato vator asya dadami vanchitam
manasvinah—of persons who are greatly munificent; karunikasya—
of persons celebrated as very merciful; Sobhanam—very auspicious;
yat—that; arthi—of persons in need of money; kama-upanayena—by
satisfying;  durgatih—becoming poverty-stricken;  kutah—what;
punah—again (is to be said); brahma-vidam—of persons well versed in
transcendental science (brahma-vidya); bhavadriam—like your good
self; tatah—therefore; vatoh—of the brahmacari; asya—of this
Vamanadeva; dadami—]I shall give; vaschitam —whatever He wants.
TRANSLATION
By giving charity, a benevolent and merciful person undoub-
tedly becomes even more auspicious, especially when he gives
charity to a person like your good self. Under the circumstances, I
must give this little brahmacari whatever charity He wants from
me.
PURPORT
If one accepts a poverty-stricken position because of losing money in
business, gambling, prostitution or intoxication, no one will praise him,
but if one becomes poverty-stricken by giving all of his possessions in
charity, he becomes adored all over the world. Aside from this, if a
benevolent and merciful person exhibits his pride in becoming poverty-
stricken by giving his possessions in charity for good causes, his poverty
is a welcome and auspicious sign of a great personality. Bali Maharaja
decided that even though he would become poverty-stricken by giving
everything to Vamanadeva, this is what he would prefer.
TEXT 11
यजन्ति यज्क्रतुमि्यमादता
मन्त आन्नायविधानकोविदाः |


--- Page 110 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
स एव Rgds वा परो
reneged क्षितिमीप्सितां सुने॥।११॥
yajanti yajian kratubhir yam adrta
bhavanta amnaya-vidhana-kovidah
sa eva vispur varado ’stu va paro
dasyamy amusmai ksitim ipsitari mune
yajanti—worship; yajiam—who is the enjoyer of sacrifice;
kratubhih—Dby the different paraphernalia for sacrifice; yam —unto the
Supreme Person; adrtah—very respectfully; bhavantah—all of you;
amnaya-vidhana-kovidah—great saintly persons fully aware of the
Vedic principles of performing sacrifice; sah—that; eva—indeed;
visnuh—is Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vara-
dah—either He is prepared to give benedictions; astu—He becomes;
va —or; parah—comes as an enemy; dasyami—I shall give; amusmai—
unto Him (unto Lord Visnu, Vimanadeva); ksitim—the tract of land;
ipsitam —whatever He has desired; mune—O great sage.
TRANSLATION
O great sage, great saintly persons like you, being completely
aware of the Vedic principles for performing ritualistic
ceremonies and yajiias, worship Lord Visnu in all circumstances.
Therefore, whether that same Lord Visnu has come here to give
me all benedictions or to punish me as an enemy, I must carry out
His order and give Him the requested tract of land without
hesitation.
PURPORT
As stated by Lord Siva:
aradhananam 50170৮65077
visnor aradhanari param
tasmat parataram devi
tadiyanam samarcanam
(Padma Purana)


--- Page 111 ---
Text 12] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 107
Although in the Vedas there are recommendations for worshiping many
demigods, Lord Visnu is the Supreme Person, and worship of Visnu is
the ultimate goal of life. The Vedic principles of the varnasrama institu-
tion are meant to organize society to prepare everyone to worship Lord
Visnu.
varnasramacaravata
purusena parah puman
visnur aradhyate pantha
nanyat tat-tosa-karanam
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, is worshiped by the
proper execution of prescribed duties in the system of varna and asrama.
There is no other way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”
(Visnu Purana 3.8.9) One must ultimately worship Lord Visnu, and for
that purpose the varndsrama system organizes society into brahmanas,
ksatriyas, vaiSyas, $adras, brahmacaris, grhasthas, vanaprasthas and
sannydsis. Bali Maharaja, having been perfectly educated in devotional
service by his grandfather Prahlada Maharaja, knew how things are to be
done. He was never to be misguided by anyone, even by a person who
happened to be his so-called spiritual master. This is the sign of full sur-
render. Bhaktivinoda Thakura said:
marabi rakhabi—yo iccha tohara
nitya-dasa-prati tuya adhikara
When one surrenders to Lord Visnu, one must be prepared to abide by
His orders in all circumstances, whether He kills one or gives one protec-
tion. Lord Visnu must be worshiped in all circumstances.
TEXT 12
यद्यप्यसावधर्मेण मां बधीयादनागसम्‌ ।
तथाप्येनं न हिसिष्ये मीतं ब्रह्मतनुं रिपुम्‌ ॥१२॥
yadyapy asav adharmena
mari badhniyad anagasam


--- Page 112 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
tathapy enari na hirisisye
bhitam brahma-tanum ripum
yadyapi—although; asau—Lord Visnu; adharmena—crookedly,
without reference to the straight way; mam—me; badhniyat—Xkills;
andgasam—although I am not sinful; tathapi—still; enam—against
Him; na—not; hirisisye—I shall take any retaliation; bhitam—because
He is afraid; brahma-tanum—having assumed the form of a brahmana-
brahmacart; ripum—even though He is my enemy.
TRANSLATION
Although He is Visnu Himself, out of fear He has covered Him-
self in the form of a brahmana to come to me begging. Under the
circumstances, because He has assumed the form of a brahmana,
even if He irreligiously arrests me or even kills me, I shall not
retaliate, although He is my enemy.
PURPORT
If Lord Visnu as He is had come to Bali Maharaja and asked him to do
something, Bali Maharaja certainly would not have refused His request.
But to enjoy a little humor between Himself and His devotee, the Lord
covered Himself as a brahmana-brahmacari and thus came to Bali
Maharaja to beg for only three feet of land.
TEXT 13
एष वा उत्तमश्छोको न fafa यद्‌ यञः ।
हत्वा मैनां हरेद्‌ युद्धे शयीत निहतो मया ॥१३॥
esa va uttamasloko
na jihasati yad yasah
hatva mainari hared yuddhe
Sayita nihato maya
esah—this (brahmacdri); va—either; uttama-slokah—is Lord Visnu,
who is worshiped by Vedic prayers; na—not; jihasati—desires to give
up; yat—because; yasah—perpetual fame; hatva—after killing; ma—


--- Page 113 ---
Text 14] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 109
me; en@dm—all this land; haret—will take away; yuddhe—in the fight;
Sayita—will lie down; nihatah—being killed; maya—by me.
TRANSLATION
If this brahmana really is Lord Visnu, who is worshiped by Vedic
hymns, He would never give up His widespread reputation; either
He would lie down having been killed by me, or He would kill me
in a fight.
PURPORT
Bali Maharaja’s statement that Visnu would lie down having been
killed is not the direct meaning, for Visnu cannot be killed by anyone.
Lord Visnu can kill everyone, but He cannot be killed. Thus the real
meaning of the words “lie down” is that Lord Visnu would reside within
the core of Bali Maharaja’s heart. Lord Visnu is defeated by a devotee
through devotional service; otherwise, no one can defeat Lord Visnu.
TEXT 14
stad उवाच
एवमश्रद्धितं क्षिष्यमनादेश्चकरं गुरुः ।
शशाप दैवप्रहितः सत्यसन्धं मनखिनम्‌ Ls
Sri-Suka uvaca
evam asraddhitari Sisyam
anadesakarariv guruh
Sasapa daiva-prahitah
satya-sandhari manasvinam
Sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—thus;
asraddhitam —who was not very respectful to the instruction of the
spiritual master; Sisyam—unto such a disciple; anadesa-karam—who
was not prepared to carry out the order of his spiritual master; guruh—
the spiritual master (Sukracarya); Sasapa—cursed; daiva-prahitah—
being inspired by the Supreme Lord; satya-sandham—one who was
fixed in his truthfulness; manasvinam—who was of a highly elevated
character.


--- Page 114 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
TRANSLATION

Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thereafter, the spiritual
master, Sukracarya, being inspired by the Supreme Lord, cursed
his exalted disciple Bali Maharaja, who was so magnanimous and
fixed in truthfulness that instead of respecting his spiritual
master’s instructions, he wanted to disobey his order.

PURPORT

The difference between the behavior of Bali Maharaja and that of his
spiritual master, Sukricarya, was that Bali Maharaja had already
developed love of Godhead, whereas Sukracirya, being merely a priest of
routine rituals, had not. Thus Sukracarya was never inspired by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead to develop in devotional service. As
stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (10.10):

tesarn satata-yuktanarn
bhajatar priti-piarvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tari
yena mam upayanti te
“To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.”

Devotees who actually engage in devotional service with faith and love
are inspired by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vaisnavas are
never concerned with ritualistic smarta-brahmanas. Srila Sanatana
Gosvami has therefore compiled Hari-bhakti-vilasa to guide the
Vaisnavas, who never follow the smarta-viddhi. Although the Supreme
Lord is situated in the core of everyone’s heart, unless one is a Vaisnava,
unless one is engaged in devotional service, one does not get sound advice
by which to return home, back to Godhead. Such instructions are meant
only for devotees. Therefore in this verse the word daiva-prahitah,
“being inspired by the Supreme Lord,” is important. Sukracarya should
have encouraged Bali Maharaja to give everything to Lord Visnu. This
would have been a sign of love for the Supreme Lord. But he did not do
so. On the contrary, he wanted to punish his devoted disciple by cursing
him.


--- Page 115 ---
Text 15] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 111
TEXT 15
ददं पण्डितमान्यज्ञः स्तन्धोऽस्यसदुपेश्षया |
मच्छासनातिगो यस्त्वमविराद्त्रऽ्यसे भियः॥ १५॥
drdharh pandita-many ajiiah
stabdho ९१ asmad-upeksaya
mac-chasanatigo yas tvam
acirad bhraSyase Sriyah

drdham—so firmly convinced or fixed in your decision; pandita-
mani—considering yourself very learned; ajiah—at the same time
foolish; stabdhah—impudent; asi—you have become; asmat—of us;
upeksaya—by disregarding;  mat-sasana-atigah —surpassing the
jurisdiction of my administration; yah —such a person (as you); tvam—
yourself; acirat—very soon; bhrasyase—will fall down; $riyah—from
all opulence.

TRANSLATION

Although you have no knowledge, you have become a so-called
learned person, and therefore you dare be so impudent as to dis-
obey my order. Because of disobeying me, you shall very soon be
bereft of all your opulence.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that Bali Maharaja was not
pandita-mani, or one who falsely assumes himself learned; rather, he
was pandita-manya-jiah, one who is so learned that all other learned
persons worship him. And because he was so learned, he could disobey
the order of his so-called spiritual master. He had no fear of any condi-
tion of material existence. Anyone cared for by Lord Visnu does not need
to care about anyone else. Thus Bali Maharaja could never be bereft of all
opulences. The opulences offered by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead are not to be compared to the opulences obtained by karma-
kanda. In other words, if a devotee becomes very opulent, it is to be un-
derstood that his opulence is a gift of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Such opulence will never be vanquished, whereas the opulence
achieved by one’s fruitive activity may be vanquished at any moment.


--- Page 116 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
TEXT 16
एवं TW: WE सत्याम चलितो महान्‌ |
वामनाय ददावेनामचित्ोद कपूरवंकम्‌ ॥१६॥
evar Saptah sva-gurunda
satyan na calito mahan
vamandya 0000 enam
arcitvodaka-pirvakam
evam—in this way; Saptah—being cursed; sva-guruna—by his own
spiritual master; satyat—from truthfulness; na—not; calitah—who
moved; mahan—the great personality; vamandaya—unto Lord
Viamanadeva; dadau—gave in charity; enam—all the land; arcitva—
after worshiping; udaka-pirvakam—preceded by offering of water.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Even after being cursed in this
way by his own spiritual master, Bali Maharaja, being a great per-
sonality, never deviated from his determination. Therefore, ac-
cording to custom, he first offered water to Vamanadeva and then
offered Him the gift of land he had promised.
TEXT 17
विन्ध्यावलिस्तदागत्य पल्ली जालकमालिनी |
आनिन्ये कलशं हैममवनेजन्यपां भरतम्‌ ॥१७॥
vindhyavalis tadagatya
patni jalaka-malini
aninye kalasari haimam
avanejany-apari bhrtam
vindhyavalih—Vindhyavali; tadd—at that time; dgatya—coming
there; patni—the wife of Maharaja Bali; jalaka-malini—decorated with
a necklace of pearls; aninye—caused to be brought; kalasam—a water-
pot; haimam—made of gold; avanejani-apam—with water for the sake
of washing the Lord’s feet; bhrtam —filled.


--- Page 117 ---
Text 19] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 113
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja's wife, known 85 Vindhyavali, who was decorated
with a necklace of pearls, immediately came and had a large golden
waterpot brought there, full of water with which to worship the
Lord by washing His feet.
TEXT 18
यजमानः खयं तस्य श्रीमत्‌ पादयुगं दा |
अवनिज्यावहन्मूर्धिं तदपो विश्वपावनीः 12a
yajamanah svayarh tasya
srimat pada-yugarih mudd
avanijyavahan murdhni
tad apo visva-pavanih
yajamanah—the worshiper (Bali Maharaja); svayam—personally;
tasya—of Lord Vamanadeva; §rimat pada-yugam—the most auspicious
and beautiful pair of lotus feet; muda—with great jubilation; avanijya-
—properly washing; avahat—took; miirdhni—on his head; tat—that;
apah—water; viSva-pavanih—which gives liberation to the whole
universe.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja, the worshiper of Lord Vamanadeva, jubilantly
washed the Lord’s lotus feet and then took the water on his head,
for that water delivers the entire universe.
TEXT 19
वदासुरेनद्रं दिवि awn
गन्पर्वविद्यापरसिद्धनारणाः |
तत्कर्म सर्वेऽपि गृणन्त आर्जवं
সম্ভলনবীবদ্বত্তযূহাল্বিবাঃ ॥१९॥
tadasurendrari divi devata-gana
gandharva-vidyadhara-siddha-caranah


--- Page 118 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
tat karma sarve ’pi grnanta arjavarn
prasiina-varsair vavrsur mudanvitah

tada—at that time; asura-indram—unto the King of the demons, Bali
Maharaja; divi—in the higher planetary system; devatd-ganah—the
residents known as the demigods; gandharva—the Gandharvas;
vidyadhara—the Vidyadharas; siddha—the residents of Siddhaloka;
caranah—the residents of Caranaloka; tat—that; karma —action; sarve
api—all of them; grnantah—declaring; arjavam—plain and simple;
prastina-varsaih—with a shower of flowers; vavrsuh—released; muda-
anvitah—being very pleased with him.

TRANSLATION

At that time, the residents of the higher planetary system,
namely the demigods, the Gandharvas, the Vidyadharas, the
Siddhas and the Caranas, all being very pleased by Bali Maharaja's
simple, nonduplicitous act, praised his qualities and showered
upon him millions of flowers.

PURPORT

Arjavam—simplicity or freedom from duplicity —is a qualification of
a brahmana and a Vaisnava. A Vaisnava automatically acquires all the
qualities of a brahmana.

yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akificana
sarvair gunais tatra samdasate surah
(Bhag. 5.18.12)
A Vaisnava should possess the brahminical qualities such as satya, sama,
dama, titiksa and ৫1720. There cannot be any duplicity in the character
of a Vaisnava. When Bali Maharaja acted with unflinching faith and
devotion unto the lotus feet of Lord Visnu, this was very much appreci-
ated by all the residents of the higher planetary system.
TEXT 20
০
नेदुर्दुन्दुभयः _ सहस्रशो
= षकिनरा जगुः |


--- Page 119 ---
Text 21] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 115
मनखिनानेन छृतं सुदुष्करं
विद्रानदाद्‌ यद्‌ रिपवे जगत्रयम्‌ ॥२०॥
nedur muhur dundubhayah sahasraso
gandharva-kimpurusa-kinnara jaguh
manasvindnena krtari suduskararm
vidvan adad yad ripave jagat-trayam
neduh—began to beat; muhuh—again and again; dundubhayah—
trumpets and kettledrums; sahasrasah—by thousands and thousands;
gandharva—the residents of Gandharvaloka; kimpirusa—the residents
of Kimpurusaloka; kinnardh—and the residents of Kinnaraloka;
Jjaguh—began to sing and declare; manasvina —by the most exalted per-
sonality; anena—by Bali Maharaja; krtam—was done; su-duskaram—
an extremely difficult task; vidvan—because of his being the most
learned person; adat—gave Him a gift; yat—that; ripave—unto the
enemy, Lord Visnu, who was siding with Bali Maharaja’s enemies, the
demigods; jagat-trayam—the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
The Gandharvas, the Kimpurusas and the Kinnaras sounded
thousands and thousands of kettledrums and trumpets again and
again, and they sang in great jubilation, declaring, ‘How exalted a
person is Bali Maharaja, and what a difficult task he has per-
formed! Even though he knew that Lord Visnu was on the side of
his enemies, he nonetheless gave the Lord the entire three worlds
in charity.”
TEXT 21
५ ९ +
तद वामन सूपमवधताद्ुत
हरेरनन्तस्य गुणत्रयार्मकम्‌ |
भूः खं Radia: पयोधय-
स्ति्यङ्चदेवा ऋषयो यदासत ॥२१॥
tad vamanari rapam avardhatadbhutari
harer anantasya guna-trayatmakam


--- Page 120 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
bhiah kham diso dyaur vivarah payodhayas
tiryarn-nr-deva rsayo yad-asata

tat—that; vamanam—incarnation of Lord Vamana; ripam—form;
avardhata—began to increase more and more; adbhutam— certainly
very wonderful; hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
anantasya—of the unlimited; guna-traya-atmakam—whose body is ex-
panded by the material energy, consisting of three modes (goodness, pas-
sion and ignorance); bhih —the land; kham—the sky; disah—all direc-
tions; dyauh—the planetary systems; vivarah —different holes of the
universe; payodhayah—great seas and oceans; tiryak—lower animals,
birds and beasts; nr—human beings; devah—demigods; rsayah—great
saintly persons; yat— wherein; asata—lived.

TRANSLATION

The unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had
assumed the form of Vamana, then began increasing in size, acting
in terms of the material energy, until everything in the universe
was within His body, including the earth, the planetary systems,
the sky, the directions, the various holes in the universe, the seas,
the oceans, the birds, beasts, human beings, the demigods and the
great saintly persons.

PURPORT

Bali Maharaja wanted to give charity to Vamanadeva, but the Lord ex-
panded His body in such a way that He showed Bali Maharaja that every-
thing in the universe is already in His body. Actually, no one can give
anything to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He is full in every-
thing. Sometimes we see a devotee offering Ganges water to the Ganges.
After taking his bath in the Ganges, a devotee takes a palmful of water
and offers it back to the Ganges. Actually, when one takes a palmful of
water from the Ganges, the Ganges does not lose anything, and similarly
if a devotee offers a palmful of water to the Ganges, the Ganges does not
increase in any way. But by such an offering, the devotee becomes
celebrated as a devotee of mother Ganges. Similarly, when we offer any-
thing with devotion and faith, what we offer does not belong to us, nor
does it enrich the opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But


--- Page 121 ---
Text 22] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 117
if one offers whatever he has in his possession, he becomes a recognized
devotee. In this regard, the example is given that when one’s face is
decorated with a garland and sandalwood pulp, the reflection of one’s
face in a mirror automatically becomes beautiful. The original source of
everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is our original
source also. Therefore when the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
decorated, the devotees and all living entities are decorated
automatically.
TEXT 22
काये बलिस्तस्य महाविभूतेः
सहत्विंगाचायंसदस्य एतत्‌ |
gga বিশ্ব त्रिगुणं गुणात्मके
भूतेद्ियार्थाश्चयजीवयुक्तम्‌ ।।२२॥
kaye ९८25 tasya maha-vibhiiteh
sahartvig-acarya-sadasya etat
dadarsa visvarih tri-gunarm gunatmake
bhitendriyarthasaya-jiva-yuktam
kaye—in the body; balih—Maharaja Bali; tasya—of the Personality
of Godhead; maha-vibhiiteh —of that person who is equipped with all
wonderful opulences; saha-rtvik-acarya-sadasyah—with all the priests,
acaryas and members of the holy assembly; etat—this; dadarsa—saw;
visvam—the whole universe; tri-gunam—made of three modes of
material nature; guna-atmake—in that which is the source of all such
qualities; bhiita—with all the gross material elements; indriya—with
the senses; artha—with the sense objects; dsaya—with mind, in-
telligence and false ego; jiva-yuktam—with all the living entities.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja, along with all the priests, acaryas and members of

the assembly, observed the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s
universal body, which was full of six opulences. That body con-
tained everything within the universe, including all the gross


--- Page 122 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
material elements, the senses, the sense objects, the mind, in-
telligence and false ego, the various kinds of living entities, and
the actions and reactions of the three modes of material nature.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita, the Supreme Personality of Godhead says, aham
sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate: Krsna is the origin of
everything. Vasudevah sarvam iti: Krsna is everything. Mat-sthani
sarva-bhitani na cahar tesv avasthitah: everything rests in the body of
the Lord, yet the Lord is not everywhere. Mayavadi philosophers think
that since the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, has
become everything, He has no separate existence. Their philosophy is
called advaita-vada. Actually, however, their philosophy is not correct.
Here, Bali Maharaja was the seer of the Personality of Godhead’s univer-
sal body, and that body was that which was seen. Thus there is dvaita-
vada; there are always two entities —the seer and the seen. The seer is a
part of the whole, but he is not equal to the whole. The part of the whole,
the seer, is also one with the whole, but since he is but a part, he cannot
be the complete whole at any time. This acintya-bhedabheda—
simultaneous oneness and difference—is the perfect philosophy pro-
pounded by Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
TEXT 23
रसामचष्टाङधितलेऽथ पादयो-
A महोधरा्पुरूषस्य Sw: |
पतत्त्रिणो जानुनि विश्वमूर्ते
ভাগ্য मारुतमिन्द्रसेनः 130
rasam acastanighri-tale tha padayor
mahirn mahidhran purusasya jarghayoh
patattrino januni visva-mirter
arvor ganam madrutam indrasenah
rasam—the lower planetary system; acasta—observed; anghri-tale—
beneath the feet, or on the sole; atha—thereafter; padayoh—on the


--- Page 123 ---
Text 24] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 119
feet; mahim—the surface of the land; mahidhran—the mountains;
purusasya—of the giant Personality of Godhead; jarighayoh—on the
calves; patattrinah—the flying living entities; januni—on the knees;
visva-miirteh—of the form of the gigantic Lord; @#rvoh—on the thighs;
ganam marutam—varieties of air; indra-senah—Bali Maharaja, who
had obtained the soldiers of King Indra and who was situated in the post
of Indra.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Bali Maharaja, who was occupying the seat of King
Indra, could see the lower planetary systems, such as Rasatala, on
the soles of the feet of the Lord’s universal form. He saw on the
Lord’s feet the surface of the globe, on the surface of His calves all
the mountains, on His knees the various birds, and on His thighs
the varieties of air.
PURPORT
The universal situation is described herein in regard to the complete
constitution of the Lord’s gigantic universal form. The study of this
universal form begins from the sole. Above the soles are the feet, above
the feet are the calves, above the calves are the knees, and above the
knees are the thighs. Thus the parts of the universal body, one after
another, are described herein. The knees are the place of birds, and
above that are varieties of air. The birds can fly over the mountains, and
above the birds are varieties of air.
TEXT 24
सन्ध्यां विभोर्वाससि ga du
प्रजापतीञ्ञपने  ATAGEA |
नाभ्यां नमः ङश्धिषु सप्तसिन्धू-
TERRA THAT ॥२४॥
sandhyar vibhor vasasi guhya aiksat
prajapatiii jaghane atma-mukhyan


--- Page 124 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
71001100718 nabhah kuksisu sapta-sindhin
urukramasyorasi carksa-malam
sandhyam—the evening twilight; vibhoh—of the Supreme; vasasi—
in the garment; guhye—on the private parts; aiksat—he saw; pra-
Jjapatin—the various Prajapatis, who had given birth to all living en-
tities; jaghane—on the hips; atma-mukhyan—the confidential
ministers of Bali Maharaja; nabhyam—on the navel; nabhah—the
whole sky; kuksisu—on the waist; sapta—seven; sindhiin—oceans;
urukramasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was acting
wonderfully; urasi—on the bosom; ca—also; rksa-malam—the clusters
of stars.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja saw beneath the garments of the Lord, who acts
wonderfully, the evening twilight. In the Lord’s private parts he
saw the Prajapatis, and in the round portion of the waist he saw
himself with his confidential associates. In the Lord’s navel he saw
the sky, on the Lord’s waist he saw the seven oceans, and on the
Lord’s bosom he saw all the clusters of stars.
TEXTS 25-29
EWE धमे wn
ऋतं च qed च मनस्यथेन्दुम्‌ |
श्रियं च spade
कण्ठे च सामानि समस्तरेफान्‌ । २५
इन्द्रपरधानानमरान्धजेषु
तत्कणंयोः ककुभो at मूषिनि |
केशेषु मेषाज्छ्रसनं नासिकाया-
wy यं वदने IF UREN
वाप्यां च छन्दांसि रसे অন্টহা
wf च विधिं च पक्ष्मसु ।


--- Page 125 ---
Text 29] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 121
अश रात्रिं च परस्य पुंसो
मन्युं ललाटेऽधर एव लोभम्‌ ॥२७॥
स्पशे च कामं gv रेतसाम्भः
98 wa क्रमणेषु यज्ञम्‌ |
छायासु रत्यु हसिते च मायां
तन्रुहेष्वोषधिजातयश ॥२८॥
नदीश्च नाडीषु शिला नखेषु
बुद्धावजं देवगणाचु्षीशच ।
प्राणेषु गात्रे स्थिरजद्गमानि
सर्वाणि भूतानि ददौ वीरः ।॥२९॥
hrdy ৫780 dharma stanayor murarer
rtari ca satyari ca manasy athendum
Sriyarn ca vaksasy aravinda-hastar
kanthe ca samani samasta-rephan
indra-pradhanan amaran bhujesu
tat-karnayoh kakubho dyaus ca mirdhni
keSesu meghan chvasanar nasikayam
aksnos ca saryar vadane ca vahnim
vanyam ca chandarmsi rase jaleSari
bhruvor nisedhari ca vidhirh ca paksmasu
ahas ca ratrim ca parasya puriso
manyuri lalate 01070 eva lobham
sparse ca kamari nrpa retasambhah
prsthe tv adharmari kramanesu yajiiam
chaydsu mrtyurn hasite ca mayan
tani-ruhesv osadhi-jatayas ca
nadis ca nadisu 5210 nakhesu
buddhav ajar deva-ganan rsims ca


--- Page 126 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
pranesu gatre sthira-jangamani
sarvani bhiitani dadarsa virah

hrdi—within the heart; ariga—my dear King Pariksit; dharmam—
religion; stanayoh—on the bosom; murareh—of Murari, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; rtam—very pleasing words; ca—also;
satyam—truthfulness; ca—also; manasi—in the mind; atha—
thereafter; indum —the moon; $riyam—the goddess of fotune; ca —also;
vaksasi—on the chest; aravinda-hastam—who always carries a lotus
flower in her hand; kanthe—on the neck; ca—also; samani—all the
Vedas (Sama, Yajur, Rk and Atharva); samasta-rephan—all sound
vibrations; indra-pradhanan—headed by King Indra; amaran—all the
demigods; bhujesu—on the arms; tat-karnayoh—on the ears;
kakubhah—all the directions; dyauh ca—the luminaries; miirdhni—on
the top of the head; keSesu—within the hair; meghan—the clouds;
Svasanam—breathing air; nasikdy@am—on the nostrils; aksnoh ca—in
the eyes; siryam —the sun; vadane—in the mouth; ca—also; vahnim—
fire; vanyam—in His speech; ca—also; chandarisi—the Vedic hymns;
rase—in the tongue; jala-iSam—the demigod of the water; bhruvoh—on
the eyebrows; nisedham—warnings; ca —also; vidhim—regulative prin-
ciples; ca—also; paksmasu—in the eyelids; ahah ca—daytime;
ratrim—night; ca—also; parasya—of the supreme; purisah—of the
person; manyum—anger; laldte—on the forehead; adhare—on the
lips; eva—indeed; lobham—greed; sparse—in His touch; ca—also;
kamam—lusty desires; nrpa—O King; retasa—by semen; ambhah—
water; prsthe—on the back; tu—but; adharmam—irreligion;
kramanesu—in the wonderful activities; yajiam—fire sacrifice;
chayasu—in the shadows; mrtyum—death; hasite—in His smiling;
ca—also; mayam—the illusory energy; tani-ruhesu—in the hair on the
body; osadhi-jatayah—all species of drugs, herbs and plants; ca —and;
nadih—the rivers; ca—also; nadisu—in the veins; Silah—stones;
nakhesu—in the nails; buddhau—in the intelligence; ajam—Lord
Brahma; deva-gandn—the demigods; rsin ca—and the great sages;
pranesu—in the senses; gatre—in the body; sthira-jangamani—moving
and stationary; sarvani—all of them; bhitani—living entities;
dadarsa—saw; virah—Bali Maharaja.


--- Page 127 ---
Text 30] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 123
TRANSLATION
My dear King, on the heart of Lord Murari he saw religion; on
the chest, both pleasing words and truthfulness; in the mind, the
moon; on the bosom, the goddess of fortune, with a lotus flower in
her hand; on the neck, all the Vedas and all sound vibrations; on
the arms, all the demigods, headed by King Indra; in both ears, all
the directions; on the head, the upper planetary systems; on the
hair, the clouds; in the nostrils, the wind; on the eyes, the sun;
and in the mouth, fire. From His words came all the Vedic mantras,
on His tongue was the demigod of water, Varunadeva, on His
eyebrows were the regulative principles, and on His eyelids were
day and night. [When His eyes were open it was daytime, and when
they were closed it was night.] On His forehead was anger, and on
His lips was greed. O King, in His touch were lusty desires, in His
semen were all the waters, on His back was irreligion, and in His
wonderful activities or steps was the fire of sacrifice. On His
shadow was death, in His smile was the illusory energy, and on the
hairs of His body were all the drugs and herbs. In His veins were
all the rivers, on His nails were all the stones, in His intelligence
were Lord Brahma, the demigods and the great saintly persons,
and throughout His entire body and senses were all living entities,
moving and stationary. Bali Maharaja thus saw everything in the
gigantic body of the Lord.
TEXT 30
सर्वात्मनीदं श्चवनं निरीक््य
सर्वेऽसुराः करमरमापुरङ्ग |
6. +
सुदश्चनं चक्रमसष्यतेजो
gd शाञ्जं॑स्तनयिटनुघोषम्‌ ॥३०॥
sarvatmanidari bhuvanam nirtksya
sarve ‘surah kasmalam apur anga
sudarsanarn cakram asahya-tejo
dhanus ca sarrigam stanayitnu-ghosam


--- Page 128 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
sarva-atmani—in the supreme whole, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; idam—this universe; bhuvanam—the three worlds;
nirtksya—by observing; sarve—all; asurah—the demons, the associates
of Bali Maharaja; kasmalam—lamentation; apuh—received; arga—O
King; sudarsanam—named Sudarsana; cakram—the disc; asahya—un-
bearable; tejah—the heat of which; dhanuh ca—and the bow;
Sarrngam—named Sarnga; stanayitnu—the resounding of assembled
clouds; ghosam —sounding like.
TRANSLATION
O King, when all the demons, the followers of Maharaja Bali,
saw the universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who held everything within His body, when they saw in the Lord’s
hand His disc, known as the Sudarsana cakra, which generates in-
tolerable heat, and when they heard the tumultuous sound of His
bow, all of these caused lamentation within their hearts.
TEXT 31
EIN जलजः पाश्चजन्यः
कोमोदकी विष्णुगदा तरस्विनी |
विद्याषरोऽसिः शतचन्द्रयुक्त-
स्तृणोत्तमावक्षयसायको च ॥ ३१॥
parjanya-ghoso jalajah pancajanyah
kaumodaki visnu-gada tarasvini
vidyadharo ’sih Sata-candra-yuktas
tanottamav aksayasayakau ca
parjanya-ghosah—having a sound vibration like that of the clouds;
jalajah—the Lord’s conchshell; pafnicajanyah—which is known as
Paficajanya; kaumodaki—known by the name Kaumodaki; visnu-
gadi—the club of Lord Visnu; tarasvini—with great force;
vidyadharah—named Vidyadhara; asih—the sword; $ata-candra-


--- Page 129 ---
Text 33] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 125
yuktah—with a shield decorated with hundreds of moons; tina-ut-
tamau—the best of quivers; aksayasayakau—named Aksayasayaka;
ca —also.
TRANSLATION
The Lord’s conchshell, named Paficajanya, which made sounds
like that of a cloud; the very forceful club named Kaumodaki; the
sword named Vidyadhara, with a shield decorated with hundreds
of moonlike spots; and also Aksayasayaka, the best of quivers—all
of these appeared together to offer prayers to the Lord.
TEXTS 32-33
FARYT उपतस्थुरीशं
पाषेदयुख्याः सदलोकपाराः |
स्फुरत्किरीटाङ्गदभीनङ्ण्डलः
श्रीवत्सरतो्तममेखलाम्बरेः ॥३२॥
मधुत्रतखरग्बनमालयाठृतो
रराज राजन्भगवाचुरुक्रमः |
धिति पदेकेन बलेर्विचक्रमे
नभः शरीरेण fay बाहुभिः ui
sunanda-mukhya upatasthur Sam
parsada-mukhyah saha-loka-palah
sphurat-kiritarigada-mina-kundalah
$rivatsa-ratnottama-mekhalambaraih
madhuvrata-srag-vanamalayavrto
rardja rajan bhagavan urukramah
ksitirn padaikena baler vicakrame
nabhah sarirena disas ca bahubhih
sunanda-mukhyah—the associates of the Lord headed by Sunanda;
upatasthuh—began to offer prayers; iSam—unto the Supreme


--- Page 130 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
Personality of Godhead; parsada-mukhyah—other chiefs of the asso-
ciates; saha-loka-palah—with the predominant deities of all the planets;
sphurat-kirita—with a brilliant helmet; arigada—bracelets; mina-
kundalah—and earrings in the shape of fish; srivatsa—the hair named
Srivatsa on His bosom; ratna-uttama—the best of jewels (Kaustubha);
mekhald—belt; ambaraih—with yellow garments; madhu-vrata—of
bees; srak—in which there was a garland; vanamaleya—by a flower
garland; avrtah—covered; raraja—predominantly manifested; rajan—
0 King; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; urukramah—
who is prominent by His wonderful activities; ksitim—the whole surface
of the world; pada ekena—by one footstep; baleh—of Bali Maharaja;
vicakrame—covered; nabhah—the sky; Sarirena—by His body; disah
ca—and all directions; bahubhih—by His arms.
TRANSLATION

These associates, headed by Sunanda and other chief associates
and accompanied by all the predominating deities of the various
planets, offered prayers to the Lord, who wore a brilliant helmet,
bracelets, and glittering earrings that resembled fish. On the
Lord’s bosom were the lock of hair called Srivatsa and the tran-
scendental jewel named Kaustubha. He wore a yellow garment,
covered by a belt, and He was decorated by a flower garland, sur-
rounded by bees. Manifesting Himself in this way, O King, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose activities are wonderful,
covered the entire surface of the earth with one footstep, the sky
with His body, and all directions with His arms.

PURPORT

One might argue, “Since Bali Maharaja promised Vamanadeva only
the land occupied by His steps, why did Lord Vamanadeva occupy the
sky also?” In this regard, Srila Jiva Gosvami says that the steps include
everything, downward and upward. When one stands up, he certainly oc-
cupies certain parts of the sky and certain portions of the earth below his
feet. Thus there was nothing uncommon for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead when He occupied the entire sky with His body.


--- Page 131 ---
Text 34] Bali Maharaja Surrenders the Universe 127
TEXT 34
पदं द्वितीयं  wwafafied
न वै तृतीयाय तदीयमण्वपि ।
0
उरुक्रमस्याङ्धिर्पर्युपर्यथो
महजनाम्यां तपसः परं गतः ॥२४॥
[00027 dvitiyarh kramatas trivistapam
na vai trttyaya tadiyam ৫০৮ api
urukramasyanghrir upary upary atho
mahar-janabhyam tapasah param gatah
padam—step; = dvitiyam—second; = kramatah—advancing;  tri-
vistapam—all of the heavenly planets; na—not; vai—indeed;
trttyaya—for the third step; tadiyam—of the Lord; anu api—only a
spot of land remained; urukramasya—of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who performs uncommon activities; arighrih—steps occupying
above and below; upari upari—higher and higher; atho—now; mahah-
janabhyam —than Maharloka and Janaloka; tapasah—that Tapoloka;
param—beyond that; gatah—approached.
TRANSLATION
As the Lord took His second step, He covered the heavenly
planets. And not even a spot remained for the third step, for the
Lord’s foot extended higher and higher, beyond Maharloka,
Janaloka, Tapoloka and even Satyaloka.
PURPORT
When the Lord’s footstep exceeded the height of all the lokas, includ-
ing Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka, His nails certainly
pierced the covering of the universe. The universe is covered by the five
material elements (bhamir apo ’nalo vayuh kham). As stated in the
astra, these elements are in layers, each ten times thicker than the pre-
vious one. Nonetheless, the nails of the Lord pierced through all these
layers and made a hole penetrating into the spiritual world. From this


--- Page 132 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 20
hole, the water of the Ganges infiltrated into this material world, and
therefore it is said, pada-nakha-nira-janita-jana-pavana (Dasavatara-
stotra 5). Because the Lord kicked a hole in the covering of the universe,
the water of the Ganges came into this material world to deliver all the
fallen souls.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twentieth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Bali Maharaja Surrenders
the Universe.”


--- Page 133 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord
This chapter describes how Lord Visnu, desiring to advertise the glories
of Bali Maharaja, arrested him for not fulfilling his promise in regard to
the Lord’s third step.

With the second step the Supreme Personality of Godhead reached the
topmost planet of the universe, Brahmaloka, which He diminished in
beauty by the effulgence of His toenails. Thus Lord Brahma, accom-
panied by great sages like Marici and the predominating deities of all the
higher planets, offered humble prayers and worship to the Lord. They
washed the Lord’s feet and worshiped Him with all paraphernalia.
Rksaraja, Jambavan, played his bugle to vibrate the glories of the Lord.
When Bali Maharaja was deprived of all his possessions, the demons were
very angry. Although Bali Maharaja warned them not to do so, they took
up weapons against Lord Visnu. All of them were defeated, however, by
Lord Visnu’s eternal associates, and, in accordance with Bali Maharaja’s
order, they all entered the lower planets of the universe. Understanding
Lord Visnu’s purpose, Garuda, the carrier of Lord Visnu, immediately
arrested Bali Maharaja with the ropes of Varuna. When Bali Maharaja
was thus reduced to a helpless position, Lord Visnu asked him for the
third step of land. Because Lord Visnu appreciated Bali Maharaja’s deter-
mination and integrity, when Bali Maharaja was unable to fulfill his
promise, Lord Visnu ascertained that the place for him would be the
planet Sutala, which is better than the planets of heaven.

TEXT 1
stars उवाच
सत्यं समीक्ष्याव्जमवो नखेन्दुभि-
ic -
हंतखधामद्युतिराबरृतोऽम्यगात्‌ ।
129


--- Page 134 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
मरीचिमिश्रा ऋषयो Tegan
सनन्दनाद्या नरदेव योगिनः ॥ १ ॥
sri-Suka uvdca
satyarin samiksyabja-bhavo nakhendubhir
hata-svadhama-dyutir avrto *bhyagat
marici-misra rsayo brhad-vratah
sanandanadya nara-deva yoginah
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; satyam—the planet
Satyaloka; samiksya—by observing; abja-bhavah—Lord Brahma, who
appeared on the lotus flower; nakha-indubhih—by the effulgence of the
nails; hata—having been reduced; sva-dhama-dyutih—the illumination
of his own residence; avrtah—being covered; abhyagat— came; marici-
misrah— with sages like Marici; rsayah—great saintly persons; brhat-
vratah—all of them absolutely brahmacari; sanandana-adyah—like
Sanaka, Sanatana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumara; nara-deva—O King;
yoginah—greatly powerful mystics.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: When Lord Brahma, who was
born of a lotus flower, saw that the effulgence of his residence,
Brahmaloka, had been reduced by the glaring effulgence from the
toenails of Lord Vamanadeva, he approached the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Lord Brahma was accompanied by all the
great sages, headed by Marici, and by yogis like Sanandana, but in
the presence of that glaring effulgence, O King, even Lord Brahma
and his associates seemed insignificant.
TEXTS 2-3
वेदोपवेदा] नियमा यमान्विता-
स्तर्केतिहासाङ्गपुराणसंहिताः ।
ये चापरे योगसमीरदीपित
ज्ञानात्निना रन्धितकरमैकटमषाः | २ ॥


--- Page 135 ---
Text 3] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 131
ववन्दिरे यत्सरणानु मावतः
WIE धाम गता अकर्मकम्‌ |
अथाङ्घ्रये प्रोन्नमिताय विष्णो-
रुपाहरत्‌ पश्रमवोऽदहणोदकम्‌ |
समर्च्य भक्त्याभ्यगृणाच्छुचिश्रवा
यन्नामिपङ्केरुदसंमवः खयम्‌ ॥ २ ॥
vedopaveda niyama yamdnvitas
tarketihasanga-purana-sarhitah
ye capare yoga-samira-dipita-
JjAanagnina randhita-karma-kalmasah
vavandire yat-smarananubhavatah
svayambhuvarih dhama gata akarmakam
athanghraye pronnamitaya visnor
upaharat padma-bhavo ‘rhanodakam
samarcya bhaktyabhyagrnac chuci-srava
yan-nabhi-pankeruha-sambhavah svayam
veda—the four Vedas (Sama, Yajur, Rg and Atharva), the original
knowledge given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upavedah—
the complementary and supplementary Vedic knowledge, like Ayur-veda
and Dhanur-veda; niyamah—regulative principles; yama—controlling
processes; anvitdh—fully expert in such matters; tarka—logic;
itihasa—history; ariga—Vedic education; purana—old history recorded
in the stories of the Puranas; sarmhitah— Vedic complementary studies
like the Brahma-sarihita; ye—others; ca—also; apare—other than
Lord Brahma and his associates; yoga-samira-dipita—ignited by the air
of mystic yoga practice; jidna-agnina—by the fire of knowledge;
randhita-karma-kalmasah —those for whom all pollution of fruitive
activities has been stopped; vavandire—offered their prayers;
yat-smarana-anubhdvatah—simply by meditating on whom;
svayambhuvam —of Lord Brahma; dhama—the residence; gatah—had
achieved; akarmakam —which cannot be achieved by fruitive activities;
atha—thereupon; arighraye—unto the lotus feet; pronnamitaya—


--- Page 136 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
offered obeisances; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; upgharat—offered worship;
padma-bhavah—Lord Brahma, who appeared from the lotus flower;
arhana-udakam—oblation by water; samarcya—worshiping; bhaktya
—in devotional service; abhyagrnat—pleased him; Suci-sravah—the
most celebrated Vedic authority; yat-nabhi-pankeruha-sambhavah
svayam—Lord Brahma, who personally appeared from the lotus in the
navel of whom (the Personality of Godhead).
TRANSLATION
Among the great personalities who came to worship the lotus
feet of the Lord were those who had attained perfection in self-
control and regulative principles, as well as experts in logic,
history, general education and the Vedic literature known as kalpa
[dealing with old historical incidents]. Others were experts in the
Vedic corollaries like Brahma-sarnhita, all the other knowledge of
the Vedas [Sama, Yajur, Rg and Atharva], and also the supplemen-
tary Vedic knowledge [Ayur-veda, Dhanur-veda, etc.]. Others were
those who had been freed of the reactions to fruitive activities by
transcendental knowledge awakened by practice of yoga. And still
others were those who had attained residence in Brahmaloka not
by ordinary karma but by advanced Vedic knowledge. After de-
votedly worshiping the upraised lotus feet of the Supreme Lord
with oblations of water, Lord Brahma, who was born of the lotus
emanating from Lord Visnu’s navel, offered prayers to the Lord.
TEXT 4
धातुः कमण्डलजरुं तदुरुक्रमस्य
पादावनेजनपवित्रतया नरेन्द्र |
५
स्वधुन्यभून्मसि सा पतती निमा
लोकत्रयं मगवतो Rag कीर्तिः ne
dhatuh kamandalu-jalari tad urukramasya
padavanejana-pavitratayd narendra
svardhuny abhiin nabhasi sa patati nimarsti
loka-trayari bhagavato visadeva kirtih


--- Page 137 ---
Text 5] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 133

dhatuh—of Lord Brahma; kamandalu-jalam—water from the
kamandalu; tat—that; urukramasya—of Lord Visnu; pdda-avanejana-
pavitrataya—because of washing the lotus feet of Lord Visnu and thus
being transcendentally pure; nara-indra—O King; svardhuni—the
river named Svardhuni of the celestial world; abhiit—so became;
nabhasi—in outer space; sa—that water; patati—flowing down;
nimarsti—purifying; loka-trayam—the three worlds; bhagavatah—of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; visada—so purified; iva—just
like; ktrtih—the fame or the glorious activities.

TRANSLATION

O King, the water from Lord Brahma’s kamandalu washed the
lotus feet of Lord Vamanadeva, who is known as Urukrama, the
wonderful actor. Thus that water became so pure that it was
transformed into the water of the Ganges, which went flowing
down from the sky, purifying the three worlds like the pure fame
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

Here we understand that the Ganges began when the water from Lord
Brahma’s kamandalu washed the lotus feet of Lord Vimanadeva. But in
the Fifth Canto it is stated that the Ganges began when Vamanadeva’s
left foot pierced the covering of the universe so that the transcendental
water of the Causal Ocean leaked through. And elsewhere it is also stated
that Lord Narayana appeared as the water of the Ganges. The water of
the Ganges, therefore, is a combination of three transcendental waters,
and thus the Ganges is able to purify the three worlds. This is the de-
scription given by Srila ViSvanatha Cakravarti Thakura.

TEXT 5
जह्मादयो लोकनाथाः स्वनाथाय समारताः |
सादगा बलिमाजहुः संिप्रातमविभूतये ॥ ५ ॥
brahmadayo loka-nathah
sva-nathaya samadrtah


--- Page 138 ---
134. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
sanuga balim ajahruh
sariksiptatma-vibhitaye
brahma-adayah—great personalities, headed by Lord Brahma; loka-
nathah—the predominating deities of various planets; sva-nathaya—
unto their supreme master; samddrtah—with great respect; sa-
anugah—with their respective followers; balim—different parapher-
nalia of worship; @jahruh—collected; sarnksipta-atma-vibhiitaye —unto
the Lord, who had expanded His personal opulence but had now reduced
His size to the Vamana form.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma and all the predominating deities of the various
planetary systems began to worship Lord Vamanadeva, their
supreme master, who had reduced Himself from His all-pervading
form to His original form. They collected all the ingredients and
paraphernalia for this worship.
PURPORT
Vamanadeva first expanded Himself to the universal form and then
reduced Himself to the original Vamana-riapa. Thus He acted exactly
like Lord Krsna, who, at the request of Arjuna, first showed His univer-
sal form and later resumed His original form as Krsna. The Lord can
assume any form He likes, but His original form is that of Krsna (krsnas
tu bhagavan svayam). According to the capacity of the devotee, the Lord
assumes various forms so that the devotee can handle Him. This is His
causeless mercy. When Lord Vamanadeva resumed His original form,
Lord Brahma and his associates collected various paraphernalia for wor-
ship with which to please Him.
TEXTS 6-7
- ¢
तोयैः समदंणैः सभ्मदिंव्यगन्धानुरेषनेः |
धूपदीपैः सुरमिभिर्छजाक्षतफलाङ्करेः ।। ६ |
= 6 a ९
स्तवनेजयशब्देथ  तद्वीयंमहिमाङ्कतेः ।
= ता EN
सृत्यवादित्रगीतेथ शङ्खदुन्दुभिनिःखनैः ॥ ७॥


--- Page 139 ---
Text 8] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 135
toyaih samarhanaih sragbhir
divya-gandhanulepanaih

dhipair dipaih surabhibhir
lajaksata-phalankuraih
stavanair jaya-Sabdais ca
tad-virya-mahimankitaih
nrtya-vaditra-gitais ca
Sankha-dundubhi-nihsvanaih
toyaih—by water required for washing the lotus feet and bathing;
samarhanaih—by padya, arghya and other such items for worshiping
the Lord; sragbhih—by flower garlands; divya-gandha-anulepanaih—
by many kinds of pulp, like sandalwood and aguru, to smear upon the
body of Lord Vamanadeva; dhitpaih—by incense; dipaih—Dby lamps;
surabhibhih—all of them extremely fragrant; lgja—by fried paddies;
aksata—by unbroken grains; phala—by fruits; ankuraih—by roots and
sprouts; stavanaih—by offering prayers; jaya-Sabdaih—by saying
‘jaya, jaya’; ca—also; tat-virya-mahima-arkitaih—which indicated
the glorious activities of the Lord; nrtya-viditra-gitaih ca—by dancing,
playing various musical instruments, and singing songs; Sarikha—of
vibrating conchshells; dundubhi—of the beating on kettledrums;
nihsvanaih—by the sound vibrations.
TRANSLATION
They worshiped the Lord by offering fragrant flowers, water,
padya and arghya, sandalwood pulp and aguru pulp, incense,
lamps, fused rice, unbroken grains, fruits, roots and sprouts.
While so doing, they offered prayers indicating the glorious ac-
tivities of the Lord and shouted “Jaya! Jaya!” They also danced,
played instruments, sang, sounded conchshells and beat ket-
tledrums, in this way worshiping the Lord.
TEXT 8
जाम्बवाचृक्षराजस्तु भेरीक्न्दैर्मनोजवः।
विजयं दिक्षु सर्वासु महोरसवमघोषयत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 140 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
Jjambavan rksa-rajas tu
bheri-sabdair mano-javah
vijayarn diksu sarvasu
mahotsavam aghosayat
Jjambavan—who was named Jambavan; rksa-rajah tu—the king in the
form of a bear also; bheri-sabdaih—by sounding the bugle; manah-
Jjavah—in mental ecstasy; vijayam—victory; diksu—in all directions;
sarvasu—everywhere; maha-utsavam—festival; aghosayat—declared.
TRANSLATION
Jambavan, king of the bears, also joined in the ceremony.
Sounding his bugle in all directions, he declared a great festival
for Lord Vamanadeva’s victory.
TEXT 9
महीं सर्वा हतां Tg त्रिपदव्याजयाच्जया |
ऊचु; खमतरसुरा दीकषितस्यास्यमषिताः ।। ९ |
mahim sarvar hrtam drstva
tripada-vydja-yaciiaya
808 sva-bhartur asura
diksitasyatyamarsitah
mahim—Iland; sarvam—all; hrtam—Ilost; drstva—after seeing; tri-
pada-vydja-ydaciaya—by simply asking three steps of land; @cuh—
said; sva-bhartuh—of their master; asurah—the demons; diksitasya—
of Bali Maharaja, who was so determined in the sacrifice; ati—very
much; amarsitah—for whom the function was unbearable.
TRANSLATION
When the demoniac followers of Maharaja Bali saw that their
master, who had been determined in performing sacrifice, had lost
all his possessions to Vamanadeva, who had taken them away on
the plea of begging three paces of land, they were very angry and
spoke as follows.


--- Page 141 ---
Text 11] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 137
TEXT 10
न वायं त्रहमबन्धुरविष्णुर्मायाविनां वरः ।
दविजरूप्रतिच्छन्नो [EE चिकीर्षति Ion
na vaya brahma-bandhur
visnur mayavinam varah
dvija-ripa-praticchanno
deva-karyar cikirsati
na—not; va—either; ayam—this; brahma-bandhuh—Vamanadeva,
in the form of a brahmana; visnuh—He is Lord 19100 Himself;
mayavinam—of all cheaters; varah—the greatest; dvija-riipa—by
assuming the form of a brahmana; praticchannah—is disguised for the
purpose of cheating; deva-kdryam—the interest of the demigods;
cikirsati—He is trying for.
TRANSLATION
“This Vamana is certainly not a brahmana but the best of
cheaters, Lord Visnu. Assuming the form of a brahmana, He has
covered His own form, and thus He is working for the interests of
the demigods.
TEXT 11
अनेन याचमानेन _ शक्चणा वड्रूपिणा |
3 . + ९ 9
सवेस्वं नो हतं भतन्यस्तदण्डस्य बर्हिषि 11921
anena yacamanena
Satruna vatu-nipina
sarvasvarn no hrtam bhartur
nyasta-dandasya barhisi
anena—by Him; ydcamanena—who is in the position of a beggar;
Satrund—by the enemy; vatu-ripind—in the form of a brahmacari;
sarvasvarm—everything; nah—our; hrtam—has been taken away;
bhartuh—of our master; nyasta—had been given up; dandasya—of


--- Page 142 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
whom the power of giving punishment; barhisi—because of taking the
vow of a ritualistic ceremony.
TRANSLATION

“Our lord, Bali Maharaja, because of his position in performing
the yajiia, has given up the power to punish. Taking advantage of
this, our eternal enemy, Visnu, dressed in the form of a
brahmacari beggar, has taken away all his possessions.

TEXT 12
सत्यव्रतस्य सततं दीक्षितस्य विशेषतः |
नानृतं भाषितुं शक्यं नहाण्यस्य दयावतः ॥१२॥
satya-vratasya satatarm
diksitasya visesatah
nanrtam bhasiturn Sakyam
brahmanyasya dayavatah

satya-vratasya—of Maharaja Bali, who is fixed in truthfulness;
satatam—always; diksitasya—of he who was initiated into performing
yajita; visesatah—specifically; na—not; anrtam—untruth; bhasitum—
to speak; Sakyam—is able; brahmanyasya—to the brahminical culture,
or to the brahmana; daya-vatah—of he who is always kind.

TRANSLATION

“Our lord, Bali Maharaja, is always fixed in truthfulness, and
this is especially so at present, since he has been initiated into per-
forming a sacrifice. He is always kind and merciful toward the
brahmanas, and he cannot at any time speak lies.

TEXT 13
तसादस्य वधो धर्मो Ag: AR च नः |
इत्यायुधानि जगरहुबेकेरनुचरासुराः ॥१३॥


--- Page 143 ---
Text 14] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 139
tasmad asya vadho dharmo
bhartuh susrisanam ca nah
ity ayudhdni jagrhur
baler anucarasurah
tasmat —therefore; asya—of this brahmacari Vaimana; vadhah—the
killing; dharmah—is our duty; bhartuh—of our master; Susrasanam
ca—and it is the way of serving; nah—our; iti—thus; ayudhani—all
kinds of weapons; jagrhuh—they took up; baleh—of Bali Maharaja;
anucara— followers; asurah—all the demons.
TRANSLATION
“Therefore it is our duty to kill this Vamanadeva, Lord Visnu. It
is our religious principle and the way to serve our master.” After
making this decision, the demoniac followers of Maharaja Bali
took up their various weapons with a view to killing Vamanadeva.
TEXT 14
ते स्वे वामनं हन्तुं शलपट्टिज्ञपाणयः |
अनिच्छन्तो IF राजन्‌ TETRA: ॥१४॥
te sarve vamanarm 11071472
sila-pattisa-panayah
anicchanto bale rajan
pradravai jata-manyavah
te —the demons; sarve—all of them; vdmanam—Lord Vamanadeva;
hantum—to kill; siila—tridents; pattisa—lances; panayah—all taking
in hand; anicchantah—against the will; baleh —of Bali Maharaja; rajan
—O King; pradravan—they pushed forward; jata-manyavah—aggra-
vated by usual anger.
TRANSLATION
O King, the demons, aggravated by their usual anger, took their
lances and tridents in hand, and against the will of Bali Maharaja
they pushed forward to kill Lord Vamanadeva.


--- Page 144 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
TEXT 15
तानभिद्रवतो दष्टा दितिजानीकपाच्‌ चुप ।
भ्रहस्याचु चरा विष्णोः प्रत्यषेधन्नुदायुधाः ॥१५॥
tan abhidravato drstva
ditijanikapan nrpa
prahasyanucara visnoh
pratyasedhann udayudhah
tan—them; abhidravatah—thus going forward; drstvd—seeing;
ditija-anika-pan—the soldiers of the demons; nrpa—O King;
prahasya—smiling; anucarah—the associates; visnoh—of Lord Visnu;
pratyasedhan—forbade; uddyudhah—taking up their weapons.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the associates of Lord Visnu saw the soldiers of
the demons coming forward in violence, they smiled. Taking up
their weapons, they forbade the demons to continue their attempt.
TEXTS 16-17
नन्दः सुनन्दोऽथ जयो विजयः प्रबलो बलः |
कुदः TYEE विष्वक्सेनः पतत्तिराट्‌ ।१६॥
जयन्तः PATA पुष्पदन्तोऽथ सात्वतः |
सर्वे नागायुतप्राणाश्वमूं ते जघ्लुरासुरीम्‌ ॥ १५७॥
nandah sunando ’tha jayo
vijayah prabalo balah
kumudah kumudaksas ca
visvaksenah patattrirat
Jayantah Srutadeva$ ca
puspadanto tha satvatah
sarve nagayuta-pranas
cami te jaghnur dsurim


--- Page 145 ---
Text 18] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 141

nandah sunandah—the associates of Lord Visnu such as Nanda and
Sunanda; atha—in this way; jayah vijayah prabalah balah kumudah
kumudaksah ca visvaksenah—as well as Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, Bala,
Kumada, Kumudaksa and Visvaksena; patattri-rat—Garuda, the king of
the birds; jayantah srutadevah ca puspadantah atha satvatah—Jayanta,
Srutadeva, Puspadanta and Satvata; sarve—all of them; naga-ayuta-
pranah—as powerful as ten thousand elephants; camim—the soldiers
of the demons; te—they; jaghnuh—killed; @surim—demoniac.

TRANSLATION

Nanda, Sunanda, Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, Bala, Kumuda,
Kumudaksa, Visvaksena, Patattrirat [Garuda], Jayanta, Srutadeva,
Puspadanta and Satvata were all associates of Lord Visnu. They
were as powerful as ten thousand elephants, and now they began
killing the soldiers of the demons.

TEXT 18
हन्यमानान्‌ खकान्‌ द्रा EGRET: |
वारयामास संरन्धान्‌ काञ्यजापमलुखखरन्‌ ॥ १८
hanyamanan svakan drstva
purusanucarair balih
varayam asa sarirabdhan
kavya-$apam anusmaran

hanyamanan—being killed; svakan—his own soldiers; drstva—after
seeing; purusa-anucaraih—by the associates of the Supreme Person;
balih—Bali Maharaja; varayam dasa—forbade; sarmrabdhan—even
though they were very angry; kivya-sdpam—the curse given by
Sukracarya; anusmaran—remembering.

TRANSLATION

‘When Bali Maharaja saw that his own soldiers were being killed
by the associates of Lord Visnu, he remembered the curse of
Sukracirya and forbade his soldiers to continue fighting.


--- Page 146 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
TEXT 19
हे विप्रचित्ते हे राहो हे नेमे श्रूयतां aw
টব ol 8
मा युध्यत निवतेष्वं न नः कालोऽयमथंछृत्‌ ॥ १९॥
he vipracitte he 70410
he neme srivyatarh vacah
ma yudhyata nivartadhvar
na nah kalo yam artha-krt
he vipracitte—O Vipracitti; he raho—O Rahu; he neme—O Nemi;
Sriiyatam—kindly hear; vacah—my words; md—do not; yudhyata—
fight; nivartadhvam—stop this fighting; na—not; nah—our; kalah—
favorable time; ayam—this; artha-krt—which can give us success.
TRANSLATION
O Vipracitti, 0 Rahu, 0 Nemi, please hear my words! Don’t
fight. Stop immediately, for the present time is not in our favor.
TEXT 20
यः प्रयः सर्वभूतानां सुखदुःखोपपत्तये |
तं नातिवर्तितुं दैत्याः पौरुपैरीश्वरः पुमान्‌ ॥२०॥
yah prabhuh sarva-bhitanar
sukha-duhkhopapattaye
tari nativartiturih daityah
paurusair isvarah puman
yah prabhuh—that Supreme Person, the master; sarva-bhitanam—
of all living entities; sukha-duhkha-upapattaye—for administering hap-
piness and distress; tam—Him; na—not; ativartitum—to overcome;
daityah—O demons; paurusaih—by human endeavors; #Svarah—the
supreme controller; puman—a person.
TRANSLATION
O Daityas, by human efforts no one can supersede the Supreme
Personality of Gudhead, who can bring happiness and distress to
all living entities.


--- Page 147 ---
Text 22] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 143
TEXT 21
यो नो मवाय গাযামীহমবায दिवौकसाम्‌ |
स॒ एव भगवानद्य वतैते तद्विपर्ययम्‌ ॥२१॥
yo no bhavaya prag asid
abhavaya divaukasam
sa eva bhagavdn adya
vartate tad-viparyayam
yah—the time factor, which represents the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; nah—of us; bhavdya—for the improvement; prak—for-
merly; asit—was situated; abhavaya—for the defeat; diva-okasam—of
the demigods; sah—that time factor; eva—indeed; bhagavdin—the
representative of the Supreme Person; adya—today; vartate—is exist-
ing; tat-viparyayam—just the opposite of our favor.
TRANSLATION
The supreme time factor, which represents the Supreme Per-
son, was previously in our favor and not in favor of the demigods,
but now that same time factor is against us.
TEXT 22
९
बलेन सचिवैवुद्धथा दुरर्मनत्रीषधादिमिः |
सामादिभिरूपायेथ काट नात्येति वै जनः ॥२२॥
balena sacivair buddhya
durgair mantrausadhadibhih
samadibhir upayais ca
kalarh natyeti vai janah
balena—by material power; sacivaih—by the counsel of ministers;
buddhya—by intelligence; durgaih—by fortresses; mantra-ausadha-
adibhih—by mystic chanting or the influence of drugs and herbs; sama-
adibhih —by diplomacy and other such means; upayaih ca—by similar
other attempts; kdlam—the time factor, representing the Supreme Lord;
na—never; atyeti—can overcome; vai—indeed; janah—any person.


--- Page 148 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
TRANSLATION

No one can surpass the time representation of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead by material power, by the counsel of
ministers, by intelligence, by diplomacy, by fortresses, by mystic
mantras, by drugs, by herbs or by any other means.

TEXT 23
भवद्धिनिर्जिता शेते बहुशोऽलुचरा हरेः |
देवेन्द्र एवाद्य युधि जित्वा नदन्ति नः ॥२३॥
bhavadbhir nirjita hy ete
bahuso ‘nucara hareh
daivenarddhais ta evadya
yudhi jitva nadanti nah

bhavadbhih—Dby all of you demons; nirjitah—have been defeated;
hi—indeed; ete—all these soldiers of the demigods; bahusah—in great
number; anucarah—followers; hareh—of Lord Visnu; daivena—by
providence; rddhaih—whose opulence was increased; te—they (the
demigods); eva—indeed; adya—today; yudhi—in the fight; jitva—
defeating; nadanti—are vibrating in jubilation; nah—us.

TRANSLATION

Previously, being empowered by providence, you defeated a
great number of such followers of Lord Visnu. But today those
same followers, having defeated us, are roaring in jubilation like
lions.

PURPORT

Bhagavad-gita mentions five causes of defeat or victory. Of these five,
daiva (providence) is the most powerful (na ca daivat param balam).
Bali Maharaja knew the secret of how he had formerly been victorious
because providence was in his favor. Now, since that same providence
was not in his favor, there was no possibility of his victory. Thus he very
intelligently forbade his associates to fight.


--- Page 149 ---
Text 25] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 145
TEXT 24
एतान्‌ वयं विजेष्यामो यदि दैवं प्रसीदति |
तसात्‌ SETAE यो नोऽथ॑त्वाय कस्पते।।२४॥
etan vayam vijesyamo
yadi daivarh prasidati
tasmat क [711 pratiksadhvari
yo no ’rthatvaya kalpate
etan—all these soldiers of the demigods; vayam—we; vijesyamah—
shall gain victory over them; yadi—if; daivam—providence;
prasidati—is in favor; tasmat—therefore; kalam —that favorable time;
pratiksadhvam —wait until; yah—which; nah—our; arthatvaya
kalpate—should be considered in our favor.
TRANSLATION
Unless providence is in our favor, we shall not be able to gain
victory. Therefore we must wait for that favorable time when our
defeating them will be possible.
TEXT 25
Wigs उवाच
पत्युर्निगदितं श्रुत्वा दैत्यदानवयूथपाः |
रसां নিবিবিহ राजन्‌ विष्णुपार्षद ताडिताः ॥२५॥
sri-Suka uvaca
patyur nigaditari Srutva
daitya-danava-yathapah
rasari nirvivisii rajan
visnu-parsada taditah
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosviami said; patyuh—of their
master (Bali Maharaja); nigaditam —what had been thus described;
Srutva—after hearing; daitya-danava-yiitha-pah—the leaders of the
Daityas and demons; rasam—the lower regions of the universe;


--- Page 150 ---
146 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
nirvivisSuh—entered; rajan—O King; visnu-parsada—by the associates
of Lord Visnu; taditah—driven.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: O King, in accordance with the
order of their master, Bali Maharaja, all the chiefs of the demons
and the Daityas entered the lower regions of the universe, to which
they were driven by the soldiers of Visnu.
TEXT 26
চ ~
अथ ताक्ष्यसुतो ज्ञात्वा विराट्‌ प्रश्चिकीरषितम्‌।
बबन्ध वारुणैः पारौबलिं सुत्येऽहनि क्रतौ ॥२६॥
atha tarksya-suto jaatva
virat prabhu-cikirsitam
babandha varunaih pasair
bali sitye ’hani kratau
atha—thereafter; tarksya-sutah—Garuda; jiatva—knowing; virat—
the king of birds; prabhu-cikirsitam—the desire of Lord Visnu as
Vamanadeva; babandha—arrested; varunaih—belonging to Varuna;
pasaih—by the ropes; balim—Bali; sitye—when soma-rasa is taken;
ahani—on the day; kratau—at the time of sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, on the day of soma-pana, after the sacrifice was
finished, Garuda, king of the birds, understanding the desire of
his master, arrested Bali Maharaja with the ropes of Varuna.
PURPORT
Garuda, the constant companion of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, knows the confidential part of the Lord’s desire. Bali Maharaja’s
tolerance and devotion were undoubtedly superexcellent. Garuda ar-
rested Bali Maharaja to show the entire universe the greatness of the
King’s tolerance.


--- Page 151 ---
Text 28] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 147
TEXT 27
९
हाहाकारो महानासीद्‌ रोदस्योः सवंतोदिश्चम्‌ |
निगृ्माणेऽसुरपतौ विष्णुना प्रमविष्णुन॥।२७॥
hahakaro mahan asid
rodasyoh sarvato disam
nigrhyamane ‘sura-patau
visnund prabhavisnuna
haha-karah—a tumultuous roar of lamentation; mahan—great;
asit—there was; rodasyoh—in both the lower and upper planetary
systems; sarvatah—everywhere; disam—all directions; nigrhyamane —
because of being suppressed; asura-patau—when Bali Maharaja, the
King of the demons; visnuna—by Lord Visnu; prabhavisnund —who is
the most powerful everywhere.
TRANSLATION
When Bali Maharaja was thus arrested by Lord Visnu, who is the
most powerful, there was a great roar of lamentation in all direc-
tions throughout the upper and lower planetary systems of the
universe.
TEXT 28
तं बद्धं Ye: पाजैभेगवानाद वामनः |
नष्त्रियं  स्थिरप्घदारयकासं चप Rall
17 baddham varunaih pasair
bhagavan aha vamanah
nasta-Sriyam sthira-prajiam
uddara-yasasar nrpa
tam —unto him; baddham —who was so arrested; varunaih pasaih—
by the ropes of Varuna; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; aha—said; vamanah—Vamanadeva; nasta-sriyam—unto Bali
Maharaja, who had lost his bodily luster; sthira-prajiam —but was all


--- Page 152 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
the same determined in his decision; uddra-ya$asam—the most mag-
nanimous and celebrated; nrpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vamanadeva,
then spoke to Bali Maharaja, the most liberal and celebrated per-
sonality whom He had arrested with the ropes of Varuna. Bali
Maharaja had lost all bodily luster, but he was nonetheless fixed in
his determination.
PURPORT
When one is bereft of all his possessions, he is certainly reduced in
bodily luster. But although Bali Maharaja had lost everything, he was
fixed in his determination to satisfy Vamanadeva, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita, such a person is called sthita-
prajiia. A pure devotee is never deviated from the service of the Lord,
despite all difficulties and impediments offered by the illusory energy.
Generally men who have wealth and opulence are famous, but Bali
Maharaja became famous for all time by being deprived of all his posses-
sions. This is the special mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
toward His devotees. The Lord says, yasyaham anugrhnami harisye tad-
dhanarih $anaih. As the first installment of His special favor, the Lord
takes away all the possessions of His devotee. A devotee, however, is
never disturbed by such a loss. He continues his service, and the Lord
amply rewards him, beyond the expectations of any common man.
TEXT 29
पदानि त्रीणि दत्तानि भूमेमद्यं त्वयासुर ।
द्वाभ्यां कान्ता मदी सवां वतीयगरुपकल्पय ॥२९॥
padani trini dattani
bhitmer mahyari tvayasura
dvabhyarm kranta mahi sarva
trttyam upakalpaya
padani—footsteps;  trini—three; dattani—have been given;
bhiameh—of land; mahyam —unto Me; tvay@a—by you; asura—O King


--- Page 153 ---
Text 31] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 149
of the demons; dvabhyam—by two steps; kranta—have been occupied;
mahi—all the land; sarv@a—completely; trtiyam —for the third step;
upakalpaya—now find the means.
TRANSLATION
O King of the demons, you have promised to give Me three steps
of land, but I have occupied the entire universe with two steps.
Now think about where I should put My third.
TEXT 30
यावत्‌ तपत्यसौ गोभिर्यावदिन्दुः wh |
यावद्‌ वति पर्जन्यस्तावती भूरियं तव ॥३०॥
22४८ tapaty asau gobhir
yavad induh sahodubhih
yavad varsati parjanyas
tavati bhiir iyam tava
yavat—as far as; tapati—is shining; asau—the sun; gobhih—by the
sunshine; ydvat—as long or as far as; induh—the moon; saha-
udubhih—with the luminaries or stars; yavat—as far as; varsati—are
pouring rain; parjanyah—the clouds; tavati—to that much distance;
bhih—land; iyam—this; tava—in your possession.
TRANSLATION
As far as the sun and moon shine with the stars and as far as the
clouds pour rain, all the land throughout the universe is in your
possession.
TEXT 31
पदैकेन मयाक्रान्तो भूर्लोकः खं दिशस्तनोः |
खर्खोकस्ते द्वितीयेन पश्यतस्ते खमारमना ॥३१॥
padaikena mayakranto
bhiirlokah kham disas tanoh


--- Page 154 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
svarlokas te dvitiyena
pasSyatas te svam atmanda
pada ekena—by one step only; maya—by Me; akrantah—have been
covered; bhiirlokah—the entire planetary system known as Bhirloka;
kham—the sky; diSah—and all directions; tanoh—by My body;
svarlokah—the upper planetary system; te—in your possession;
dvitiyena—by the second step; pasyatah te—while you were seeing;
svam—your own; atmana—by Myself.
TRANSLATION
Of these possessions, with one step I have occupied Bhiirloka,
and with My body I have occupied the entire sky and all directions.
And in your presence, with My second step, I have occupied the
upper planetary system.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic description of the planetary system, all the
planets move from east to west. The sun, the moon and five other plan-
ets, such as Mars and Jupiter, orbit one above another. Vamanadeva,
however, expanding His body and extending His steps, occupied the en-
tire planetary system.
TEXT 32
प्रतिश्ुतमदातुस्ते निरये वास इष्यते ।
fa त्वं निरयं तसाद्‌ गुरुणा चानुमोदितः ॥३२॥
pratiSrutam adatus te
niraye vasa isyate
visa tvam nirayar tasmad
guruna canumoditah
pratisSrutam—what had been promised; adatuh—who could not give;
te—of you; niraye—in hell; vdsah—residence; isyate —prescribed;
viSa—now enter; tvam—yourself; nirayam—the hellish planet;
tasmat—therefore; guruna—by your spiritual master; ca—also;
anumoditah —approved.


--- Page 155 ---
Text 33] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 151
TRANSLATION
Because you have been unable to give charity according to your
promise, the rule is that you should go down to live in the hellish
planets. Therefore, in accordance with the order of Sukracarya,
your spiritual master, now go down and live there.
PURPORT
It is said:
narayana-parah sarve
na kutascana bibhyati
svargapavarga-narakesv
api tulyartha-darsinah
“Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Narayana, never fear any condition of life. For
them the heavenly planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the
same, for such devotees are interested only in the service of the Lord.”
(Bhag. 6.17.28) A devotee engaged in the service of Narayana is always
in equilibrium. A devotee actually lives transcendentally. Although he
may appear to have gone to hell or heaven, he does not live in either
place; rather, he always lives in Vaikuntha (sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhityaya kalpate). Vimanadeva asked Bali Maharaja to go to the
hellish planets, apparently just to show the entire universe how tolerant
he was, and Bali Maharaja did not hesitate to carry out the order. A de-
votee does not live alone. Of course, everyone lives with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but because the devotee is engaged in His ser-
vice, he actually does not live in any material condition. Bhaktivinoda
Thakura says, kita-janma hao yatha tuya dasa. Thus he prays to take
birth as an insignificant insect in the association of devotees. Because de-
votees are engaged in the service of the Lord, anyone who lives with
them also lives in Vaikuntha.
TEXT 33
कृथा मनोरथस्तस्य दूरः खगः पतत्यधः |
স্ববিস্কবন্বাহানীন योऽर्थिनं विगप्ररम्भते।।२३३॥


--- Page 156 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 21
vrtha manorathas tasya
diirah svargah pataty adhah
pratiSrutasyddanena
yo ’rthinari vipralambhate
vrtha — without any good result; manorathah—mental concoction;
tasya—of him; diirah—far away; svargah—elevation to the higher
planetary system; patati—falls down; adhah—to a hellish condition of
life; pratiSrutasya—things promised; adanena—being unable to give;
yah—anyone who; arthinam—a beggar; vipralambhate —cheats.
TRANSLATION
Far from being elevated to the heavenly planets or fulfilling
one’s desire, one who does not properly give a beggar what he has
promised falls down to a hellish condition of life.
TEXT 34
मिप्रलन्धो ददामीति त्वयाहं বান্সমানিনা ।
तद्‌ व्यलीकफलं gor निरयं कतिचित्‌ समा ३४॥
vipralabdho dadamiti
tvayaham cadhya-manina
tad vyalika-phalari bhuriksva
nirayari katicit samah
vipralabdhah—now 1 am cheated; dadami—I promise I shall give
you; iti—thus; tvaya—by you; aham—I am; ca—also; adhya-
manind—by being very proud of your opulence; tat—therefore;
vyalika-phalam—as a result of cheating; bhuriksva—you enjoy;
nirayam—in hellish life; katicit—a few; samah—years.
TRANSLATION
Being falsely proud of your possessions, you promised to give
Me land, but you could not fulfill your promise. Therefore, be-
cause your promise was false, you must live for a few years in
hellish life.


--- Page 157 ---
Text 34] Bali Maharaja Arrested by the Lord 153
PURPORT

The false prestige of thinking “I am very rich, and I possess such vast
property” is another side of material life. Everything belongs to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and no one else possesses anything.
This is the real fact. Isavdsyam 80078 sarvam yat kifica jagatyam jagat.
Bali Maharaja was undoubtedly the most exalted devotee, whereas pre-
viously he had maintained a misunderstanding due to false prestige. By
the supreme will of the Lord, he now had to go to the hellish planets, but
because he went there by the order of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, he lived there more opulently than one could expect to live in the
planets of heaven. A devotee always lives with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, engaging in His service, and therefore he is always transcen-
dental to hellish or heavenly residences.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-first
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Bali Maharaja Arrested
by the Lord.”


--- Page 158 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Bali Maharaja
Surrenders His Life
The summary of this Twenty-second Chapter is as follows. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead was pleased by the behavior of Bali Maharaja.
Thus the Lord placed him on the planet Sutala, and there, after bestow-
ing benedictions upon him, the Lord agreed to become his doorman.

Bali Maharaja was extremely truthful. Being unable to keep his prom-
ise, he was very much afraid, for he knew that one who has deviated
from truthfulness is insignificant in the eyes of society. An exalted per-
son can suffer the consequences of hellish life, but he is very much
afraid of being defamed for deviation from the truth. Bali Maharaja
agreed with great pleasure to accept the punishment awarded him by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bali Maharaja’s dynasty there were
many asuras who because of their enmity toward Visnu had achieved a
destination more exalted than that of many mystic yogis. Bali Maharaja
specifically remembered the determination of Prahlada Maharaja in de-
votional service. Considering all these points, he decided to give his head
in charity as the place for Visnu’s third step. Bali Maharaja also con-
sidered how great personalities give up their family relationships and
material possessions to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In-
deed, they sometimes even sacrifice their lives for the satisfaction of the
Lord, just to become His personal servants. Accordingly, by following in
the footsteps of previous acaryas and devotees, Bali Maharaja perceived
himself successful.

While Bali Maharaja, having been arrested by the ropes of Varuna,
was offering prayers to the Lord, his grandfather Prahlada Maharaja ap-
peared there and described how the Supreme Personality of Godhead had
delivered Bali Maharaja by taking his possessions in a tricky way. While
Prahlada Maharaja was present, Lord Brahma and Bali’s wife,
Vindhyavali, described the supremacy of the Supreme Lord. Since Bali
Maharaja had given everything to the Lord, they prayed for his release.

155


--- Page 159 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
The Lord then described how a nondevotee’s possession of wealth is a
danger whereas a devotee’s opulence is a benediction from the Lord.
Then, being pleased with Bali Maharaja, the Supreme Lord offered His
disc to protect Bali Maharaja and promised to remain with him.
TEXT 1
gH उवाच
एवं विप्रकृतो राजन्‌ बरङिर्भगवतामुरः |
भिधमानोऽप्यमिनात्मा মংযাছাবিস্তুন वचः 11 १॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
evar viprakrto rajan
balir bhagavatasurah
bhidyamano ‘py abhinnatma
pratyahaviklavarh vacah
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—thus, as afore-
mentioned; viprakrtah—having been put into difficulty; rajan—O King;
balih—Maharaja Bali; bhagavata—by the Personality of Godhead
Vamanadeva; asurah—the King of the asuras; bhidyamanah api—al-
though situated in this uncomfortable position; abhinna-atma—without
being disturbed in body or mind; pratyaha—replied; aviklavam—un-
disturbed; vacah—the following words.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, although the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead was superficially seen to have acted
mischievously toward Bali Maharaja, Bali Maharaja was fixed in his
determination. Considering himself not to have fulfilled his prom-
ise, he spoke as follows.
TEXT 2
CIEICI (6
यद्युत्तमश्लोक भवान्‌ ममेरितं
वचो व्यलीकं স্তবেষ मन्यते |


--- Page 160 ---
Text 2] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 157
करोम्यृतं तन्न भवेत्‌ प्रलम्भनं
पदं तृतीयं रु शीष्णिं मे निजम्‌ | २॥
Sri-balir uvaca
yady uttamasloka bhavan mameritari
vaco vyalikari sura-varya manyate
karomy [8071 tan na bhavet pralambhanam
pada trtiyarn kuru Sirsni me nijam
sri-balih uvaca—Bali Maharaja said; yadi—if; uttamasloka—O
Supreme Lord; bhavan—Your good self; mama —my; iritam—prom-
ised; vacah—words; vyalikam —false; sura-varya—O greatest of all
suras (demigods); manyate— You think so; karomi—I shall make it;
rtam—truth; tat—that (promise); na—not; bhavet—will become;
pralambhanam —cheating; padam—step; trtiyam—the third; kuru—
just do it; Sirsni—on the head; me—my; nijam—Your lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja said: O best Personality of Godhead, most
worshipable for all the demigods, if You think that my promise has
become false, I shall certainly rectify matters to make it truthful. |
cannot allow my promise to be false. Please, therefore, place Your
third lotus footstep on my head.
PURPORT
Bali Maharaja could understand the pretense of Lord Vamanadeva,
who had taken the side of the demigods and come before him as a beggar.
Although the Lord’s purpose was to cheat him, Bali Maharaja took
pleasure in understanding how the Lord will cheat His devotee to glorify
the devotee’s position. It is said that God is good, and this is a fact.
Whether He cheats or rewards, He is always good. Bali Maharaja
therefore addressed Him as Uttama$loka. “Your Lordship,” he said,
“You are always praised with the best of selected verses. On behalf of the
demigods, You disguised Yourself to cheat me, saying that You wanted
only three paces of land, but later You expanded Your body to such an


--- Page 161 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
extent that with two footsteps You covered the entire universe. Because
You were working on behalf of Your devotees, You do not regard this as
cheating. Never mind. I cannot be considered a devotee. Nonetheless, be-
cause although You are the husband of the goddess of fortune You have
come to me to beg, I must satisfy You to the best of my ability. So please
do not think that I wanted to cheat You; I must fulfill my promise. I still
have one possession—my body. You have taken my wealth, but still I
have my body. When I place my body for Your satisfaction, please put
Your third step on my head.” Since the Lord had covered the entire uni-
verse with two steps, one might ask how Bali Maharaja’s head could be
sufficient for His third step? Bali Maharaja, however, thought that the
possessor of wealth must be greater than the possession. Therefore al-
though the Lord had taken all his possessions, the head of Bali Maharaja,
the possessor, would provide adequate place for the Lord’s third step.
TEXT 3
9 4 ৯.
बिभेमि नाहं निरयात्‌ पदच्युतो
न पाज्ञबन्धाद्‌ JAR दुरत्ययात्‌ |
©
नेवाथषृच्छराद्‌ भवतो विनिग्रहा-
दसाधुबादाद्‌ যৃহাম্তুপ্তিপ यथा nn
bibhemi 7120107} nirayat pada-cyuto
na pasa-bandhad vyasanad duratyayat
naivartha-krechrad bhavato vinigrahad
asadhu-vadad bhrsam udvije yatha
bibhemi—I do fear; na—not; aham—1I; nirayat—from a position in
hell; pada-cyutah—nor do I fear being deprived of my position; na—
nor; pdsa-bandhat—from being arrested by the ropes of Varuna;
vyasanat—nor from the distress; duratyayat—which was unbearable
for me; na—nor; eva—certainly; artha-krechrat—because of poverty,
or scarcity of money; bhavatah—of Your Lordship; vinigrahat—from
the punishment I am now suffering; asadhu-vadat—from defamation;
bhrsam—very much; udvije—I become anxious; yatha—as.


--- Page 162 ---
Text 4] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 159
TRANSLATION
I do not fear being deprived of all my possessions, living in
hellish life, being arrested for poverty by the ropes of Varuna or
being punished by You as much as I fear defamation.
PURPORT
Although Bali Maharaja fully surrendered to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, he could not tolerate being defamed for cheating a
brahmana-brahmacari. Being quite alert in regard to his reputation, he
thought deeply about how to prevent being defamed. The Lord,
therefore, gave him the good counsel to prevent defamation by offering
his head. A Vaisnava does not fear any punishment. Narayana-parah
sarve na kutascana bibhyati (Bhag. 6.17.28).
TEXT 4
. ০
dai wad मन्ये दण्डमहत्तमा्पितम्‌ ।
यं न माता पिता भ्राता सुहृद दिशन्ति हि ॥ ४॥
purnsam $laghyatamarh manye
dandam arhattamarpitam
yarh na mata pita bhrata
suhrda$ cadisanti hi
purmsam—of men; $laghya-tamam—the most exalted; manye—I
consider; dandam—punishment; arhattama-arpitam—given by You,
the supreme worshipable Lord; yam—which; na—neither; mata—
mother; pita—father; bhrata—brother; suhrdah—friends; ca—also;
adisanti—offer; hi—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Although a father, mother, brother or friend may sometimes
punish one as a well-wisher, they never punish their subordinate
like this. But because You are the most worshipable Lord, I regard
the punishment You have given me as most exalted.


--- Page 163 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
PURPORT
Punishment meted out by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is ac-
cepted by the devotee as the greatest mercy.
tat te ‘nukampar susamiksamano
bhurjana evatma-krtari vipakam
hrd-vag-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
Jiveta yo mukti-pade sa daya-bhak
“One who seeks Your compassion and thus tolerates all kinds of adverse
conditions due to the karma of his past deeds, who engages always in
Your devotional service with his mind, words and body, and who always
offers obeisances to You is certainly a bona fide candidate for liberation.”
(Bhag. 10.14.8) A devotee knows that so-called punishment by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is only His favor to correct His devotee
and bring him to the right path. Therefore the punishment awarded by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be compared to even the
greatest benefit awarded by one’s material father, mother, brother or
friend.
TEXT 5
त्वं ARGU नः पारोक्षः परमो गुरुः ।
यो नोऽनेकमदान्धानां विभ्रंशं चश्चरादिशत्‌॥ ५॥
ष्वः ninam asuranarm nah
paroksah paramo guruh
yo no ’neka-madandhanar
vibhrammsarm caksur adisat
tvam — Your Lordship; ninam—indeed; asuranam—of the demons;
nah—as we are; paroksah—indirect; paramah—the supreme; guruh—
spiritual master; yah—Your Lordship; nah—of us; aneka—many;
mada-andhanam—blinded by material opulences; vibhramsam—
destroying our false prestige; caksuh—the eye of knowledge; adisat—
gave.


--- Page 164 ---
Text 7] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 161
TRANSLATION
Since Your Lordship is indirectly the greatest well-wisher of us
demons, You act for our best welfare by posing as if our enemy.
Because demons like us always aspire for a position of false
prestige, by chastising us You give us the eyes by which to see the
right path.
PURPORT
Bali Maharaja considered the Supreme Personality of Godhead a better
friend to the demons than to the demigods. In the material world, the
more one gets material possessions, the more he becomes blind to spiri-
tual life. The demigods are devotees of the Lord for the sake of material
possessions, but although the demons apparently do not have the
Supreme Personality of Godhead on their side, He always acts as their
well-wisher by depriving them of their positions of false prestige. By
false prestige one is misguided, so the Supreme Lord takes away their
position of false prestige as a special favor.
TEXTS 6-7
यसखिन्‌ TFTA व्यूढेन विबुधेतराः |
बहवो लेभिरे सिद्धि याुरेकान्तयोगिनः ॥ ६॥
तेनाहं निगृहीतोऽसि भवता भूरिकर्मणा |
बद्ध वारुणेः पलरनातित्रीडे न च व्यथे ॥ ७॥
yasmin vairanubandhena
vyidhena vibudhetarah
bahavo lebhire siddhirn
yam u haikanta-yoginah
tenahari nigrhito ‘smi
bhavata bhiri-karmana
baddhas ca varunaih pasair
nativride na ca vyathe


--- Page 165 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22

yasmin—unto You; vaira-anubandhena—by continuously treating as
an enemy; wvyidhena—firmly fixed by such intelligence; vibudha-
itarah—the demons (those other than the demigods); bahavah—many
of them; lebhire—achieved; siddhim —perfection; yam —which; u ha—
it is well known; ekanta-yoginah—equal to the achievements of the
greatly successful mystic yogis; tena—therefore; aham—1I; nigrhitah
asmi—although I am being punished; bhavata—by Your Lordship;
bhiiri-karmana —who can do many wonderful things; baddhah ca—I
am arrested and bound; vdrunaih pasaih—by the ropes of Varuna; na
ati-vride—1 am not at all ashamed of this; na ca vyathe—nor am I
suffering very much.

TRANSLATION

Many demons who were continuously inimical toward You
finally achieved the perfection of great mystic yogis. Your Lord-
ship can perform one work to serve many purposes, and conse-
quently, although You have punished me in many ways, I do not
feel ashamed of having been arrested by the ropes of Varuna, nor
do I feel aggrieved.

PURPORT

Bali Maharaja appreciated the Lord’s mercy not only upon him but
upon many other demons. Because this mercy is liberally distributed, the
Supreme Lord is called all-merciful. Bali Maharaja was indeed a fully
surrendered devotee, but even some demons who were not at all devotees
but merely enemies of the Lord attained the same exalted position
achieved by many mystic yogis. Thus Bali Maharaja could understand
that the Lord had some hidden purpose in punishing him. Consequently
he was neither unhappy nor ashamed because of the awkward position in
which he had been put by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 8
पितामहो मे भमवदीयसंमतः
TE आविष्कृतसाधुवादः |
भवद्विपक्षेण विचित्रवैशसं
संप्रापितस्त्व॑परमः सखपित्रा ॥ ८ ॥


--- Page 166 ---
Text 9] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 163
pitamaho me bhavadiya-sammatah
prahrada aviskrta-sadhu-vadah
bhavad-vipaksena vicitra-vaisasarn
samprapitas tvarm paramah sva-pitra
pitamahah —grandfather; me—my; bhavadiya-sammatah—ap-
proved by the devotees of Your Lordship; prahradah—Prahlada
Maharaja; aviskrta-sadhu-vadah—famous, being celebrated everywhere
as a devotee; bhavat-vipaksena—simply going against You; wicitra-
vaisasam—inventing different kinds of harassments; samprapitah—
suffered; tvam—You; paramah—the supreme shelter; sva-pitra —by
his own father.
TRANSLATION
My grandfather Prahlada Maharaja is famous, being recognized
by all Your devotees. Although harassed in many ways by his
father, Hiranyakasipu, he still remained faithful, taking shelter at
Your lotus feet.
PURPORT
A pure devotee like Prahlada Maharaja, although harassed circum-
stantially in many ways, never gives up the shelter of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead to take shelter of anyone else. A pure devotee never
complains against the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A
vivid example is Prahlada Maharaja. Examining the life of Prahlada
Maharaja, we can see how severely he was harassed by his own father,
Hiranyakasipu, yet he did not divert his attention from the Lord even to
the smallest extent. Bali Maharaja, following in the footsteps of his
grandfather Prahlada Maharaja, remained fixed in his devotion to the
Lord, despite the Lord’s having punished him.
TEXT 9
किमारमनानेन SEI योऽन्ततः
किं रिक्थहारैः खजनाख्यदस्युभिः |
किं जायया संसतिदेतशूतया
© ~ -
मर्त्यस्य गेहैः किमिहायुषो व्ययः ॥ ९॥


--- Page 167 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
kim atmananena jahati yo ‘ntatah
kim riktha-haraih svajanakhya-dasyubhih
kirh jayaya sarasrti-hetu-bhitaya
martyasya gehaih kim ihayuso vyayah

kim —what is the use; atmana anena—of this body; jahati—gives up;
yah—which (body); antatah—at the end of life; kim —what is the use;
riktha-haraih—the plunderers of wealth; svajana-akhya-dasyubhih—
they who are actually plunderers but who pass by the name of relatives;
kim —what is the use; jayaya—of a wife; sarnsrti-hetu-bhiitaya—who is
the source of increasing material conditions; martyasya—of a person
sure to die; gehaith—of houses, family and community; kim —what is
the use; tha—in which house; ayusah—of the duration of life;
vyayah—simply wasting.

TRANSLATION

What is the use of the material body, which automatically leaves
its owner at the end of life? And what is the use of all one’s family
members, who are actually plunderers taking away money that is
useful for the service of the Lord in spiritual opulence? What is
the use of a wife? She is only the source of increasing material
conditions. And what is the use of family, home, country and com-
munity? Attachment for them merely wastes the valuable energy
of one’s lifetime.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, advises, sarva-dharman
parityajya mam 61078 Saranam vraja: “Give up all other varieties of
religion and just surrender unto Me.” The common man does not ap-
preciate such a statement by the Supreme Personality of Godhead be-
cause he thinks that during his lifetime his family, society, country, body
and relatives are everything. Why should one give up any one of them
and take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? But from the
behavior of great personalities like Prahlada Maharaja and Bali Maharaja
we understand that surrendering to the Lord is the right action for an in-
telligent person. Prahlada Maharaja took shelter of Visnu against the will


--- Page 168 ---
Text 9] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 165
of his father. Similarly, Bali Maharija took shelter of Vamanadeva
against the will of his spiritual master, Sukracarya, and all the leading
demons. People may be surprised that devotees like Prahlada Maharaja
and Bali Maharaja could seek shelter of the side of the enemy, giving up
the natural affinity for family, hearth and home. In this connection, Bali
Maharaja explains that the body, which is the center of all material ac-
tivities, is also a foreign element. Even though we want to keep the body
fit and helpful to our activities, the body cannot continue eternally. Al-
though I am the soul, which is eternal, after using the body for some
time I have to accept another body (tatha dehantara-praptih), according
to the laws of nature, unless I render some service with the body for ad-
vancement in devotional service. One should not use the body for any
other purpose. One must know that if he uses the body for any other pur-
pose he is simply wasting time, for as soon as the time is ripe, the soul
will automatically leave the body.

We are very interested in society, friendship and love, but what are
they? Those in the garb of friends and relatives merely plunder the
hard-earned money of the bewildered soul. Everyone is affectionate
toward his wife and is attached to her, but what is this wife? The wife is
called stri, which means, “0116 who expands the material condition.” If a
person lives without a wife, his material conditions are less extensive. As
soon as one marries and is connected with a wife, his material necessities
increase.

purisah striya mithuni-bhavam 61077
tayor mitho hrdaya-granthim ahuh
ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
Janasya moho ’yam ववो! mameti
“The attraction between male and female is the basic principle of ma-
terial existence. On the basis of this misconception, which ties together
the hearts of the male and female, one becomes attracted to his body,
home, property, children, relatives and wealth. In this way one increases
life’s illusions and thinks in terms of ‘I and mine.” ” (Bhag. 5.5.8)
Human life is meant for self-realization, not for increasing unwanted
things. Actually, a wife increases unwanted things. One’s lifetime, one’s
home and everything one has, if not properly used in the service of the


--- Page 169 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
Lord, are all sources of material conditions of perpetual suffering under
the threefold miseries (adhyatmika, adhibhautika and adhidaivika).
Unfortunately, there is no institution in human society for education on
this subject. People are kept in darkness about the goal of life, and thus
there is a continuous struggle for existence. We speak of “survival of the
fittest,” but no one survives, for no one is free under material conditions.
TEXT 10
इत्थं स॒ fafa पितामहो महा-
नगाधबोधो मवतः पादपद्मम्‌ |
धवं प्रपेदे दयङ्तोमयं जनाद्‌
भीतः खपक्षक्षपणस्य सत्तम ॥१०॥
itthar sa niscitya pitamaho mahan
agadha-bodho bhavatah pada-padmam
dhruvari prapede hy akutobhayam janad
bhitah svapaksa-ksapanasya sattama
ittham—because of this (as stated above); sah—he, Prahlada
Maharaja; niscitya—definitely deciding on this point; pitamahah—my
grandfather; mahan—the great devotee; agadha-bodhah—my grand-
father, who received unlimited knowledge because of his devotional ser-
vice; bhavatah—of Your Lordship; pada-padmam—the lotus feet;
dhruvam—the infallible, eternal shelter; prapede—surrendered; hi—
indeed; akutah-bhayam—completely free of fear; janat—from ordinary
common people; bhitah—being afraid; svapaksa-ksapanasya—of Your
Lordship, who kill the demons on our own side; sat-tama—O best of the
best.
TRANSLATION
My grandfather, the best of all men, who achieved unlimited
knowledge and was worshipable for everyone, was afraid of the
common men in this world. Being fully convinced of the substan-
tiality afforded by shelter at Your lotus feet, He took shelter of
Your lotus feet, against the will of his father and demoniac friends,
who were killed by Your own self.


--- Page 170 ---
Text 11] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 167
TEXT 11
अथाहमप्यात्मरिपोस्तवान्तिकं
देवेन नीतः प्रसभं स्याजितश्रीः |
इदं wre , जीवितं
ययाध्रुवं स्तन्धमतिनं बुध्यते || ং।
athaham apy atma-ripos tavantikarn
daivena nitah prasabhari tydajita-srth
0077 krtantantika-varti jivitari
yayadhruvari stabdha-matir na budhyate
atha—therefore; aham—1I; api—also; atma-ripoh—who are the tra-
ditional enemy of the family; tava—of Your good self; antikam—the
shelter; daivena—by providence; nitah—brought in; prasabham—by
force; tyajita—bereft of; §rih—all opulence; idam—this philosophy of
life; krta-anta-antika-varti—always given the facility for death;
jiwitam—the duration of life; yaya—by such material opulence;
adhruvam—as temporary; stabdha-matih—such an unintelligent per-
son; na budhyate—cannot understand.
TRANSLATION
Only by providence have I been forcibly brought under Your
lotus feet and deprived of all my opulence. Because of the illusion
created by temporary opulence, people in general, who live under
material conditions, facing accidental death at every moment, do
not understand that this life is temporary. Only by providence
have I been saved from that condition.
PURPORT
Bali Maharaja appreciated the actions of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, although all the members of the demoniac families except
Prahlada Maharaja and Bali Maharaja considered Visnu their eternal tra-
ditional enemy. As described by Bali Maharaja, Lord Visnu was actually
not the enemy of the family but the best friend of the family. The prin-
ciple of this friendship has already been stated. Yasyaham anugrhnami


--- Page 171 ---
168 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
harisye tad-dhanari Sanaih: the Lord bestows special favor upon His de-
votee by taking away all his material opulences. Bali Maharaja appreci-
ated this behavior by the Lord. Therefore he said, daivena nitah
prasabharn tyajita-srih: “It is to bring me to the right platform of eternal
life that You have put me into these circumstances.”

Actually, everyone should fear the so-called society, friendship and
love for which he works so hard all day and night. As indicated by Bali
Maharaja by the words janad bhitah, every devotee in Krsna conscious-
ness should always be afraid of the common man engaged in pursuing
material prosperity. Such a person is described as pramatta, a madman
chasing the will-o’-the-wisp. Such men do not know that after a hard
struggle for life one must change his body, with no certainty of what
kind of body he will receive next. Those who are completely established
in Krsna conscious philosophy and who therefore understand the aim of
life will never take to the activities of the materialistic dog race. But if a
sincere devotee somehow does fall down, the Lord corrects him and saves
him from gliding down to the darkest region of hellish life.

adanta-gobhir visatarm tamisrari
punah punas carvita-carvananam
(Bhag. 7.5.30)
The materialistic way of life is nothing but the repeated chewing of that
which has already been chewed. Although there is no profit in such a
life, people are enamored of it because of uncontrolled senses. Ninar
pramattah kurute vikarma. Because of uncontrolled senses, people fully
engage in sinful activities by which they get a body full of suffering. Bali
Maharaja appreciated how the Lord had saved him from such a
bewildered life of ignorance. He therefore said that his intelligence had
been stunned. Stabdha-matir na budhyate. He could not understand how
the Supreme Personality of Godhead favors His devotees by forcibly
stopping their materialistic activities.
TEXT 12
श्रीशुक उवाच
तस्येत्थं भाषमाणस्य प्रहादो भगवस्प्रियः |
आजगाम कुरुश्रेष्ठ राकरापतिरिबोत्थितः ॥१२॥


--- Page 172 ---
Text 13] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 169
Sri-Suka uvaca
tasyetthari bhdsamanasya
prahrado bhagavat-priyah
ajagama kuru-srestha
rakd-patir wotthitah
sri-Sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; tasya—Bali Maharaja;
ittham—in this way; bhasamanasya—while describing his fortunate
position; prahradah—Maharaja Prahlada, his grandfather; bhagavat-
priyah—the most favored devotee of the Supreme Personality of God-
head; ajagama—appeared there; kuru-srestha—O best of the Kurus,
Maharaja Pariksit; raka-patih—the moon; iva —like; utthitah—having
risen.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: O best of the Kurus, while Bali
Maharaja was describing his fortunate position in this way, the
most dear devotee of the Lord, Prahlada Maharaja, appeared there,
like the moon rising in the nighttime.
TEXT 13
तमिन्द्रसेनः खपितामहं श्रिया
विराजमानं नलिनायतेक्षणम्‌ |
sid पिशङ्गाम्बरमञ्जनत्विषं
NEE TEARS 1230
tam indra-senah sva-pitamahar Sriya
virajamanari nalinayateksanam
pramsurn pisangambaram aiijana-tvisariu
pralamba-bahum subhagarsabham aiksata
tam —that Prahlada Maharaja; indra-senah—Bali Maharaja, who now
possessed all the military force of Indra; sva-pitamaham—unto his
grandfather; $riya—present with all beautiful features; viragjamanam—
standing there; nalina-ayata-iksanam—with eyes as broad as the petals
of a lotus; pramsum—a very beautiful body; pisarga-ambaram—


--- Page 173 ---
170 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
dressed in yellow garments; afijana-tvisam—with his body resembling
black ointment for the eyes; pralamba-bahum—very long arms;
Subhaga-rsabham —the best of all auspicious persons; aiksata—he saw.
TRANSLATION

Then Bali Maharaja saw his grandfather Prahlada Maharaja, the
most fortunate personality, whose dark body resembled black
ointment for the eyes. His tall, elegant figure was dressed in yellow
garments, he had long arms, and his beautiful eyes were like the
petals of a lotus. He was very dear and pleasing to everyone.

TEXT 14
तस्मै बरिवारुणपाशेयन्त्रितः
समर्हणं नोपजहार पूंवत्‌ |
ननाम मूर्भाशरृविलोरलोचनः
सत्रीडनी चीनघुखो बभूव ह ॥१४॥
1257107 balir varuna-pasa-yantritah
samarhanar nopajahara pirvavat
nanama miurdhnasru-vilola-locanah
sa-vrida-nicina-mukho babhiiva ha

tasmai—unto Prahlada Maharaja; balih—Bali Maharaja; varuna-
pasa-yantritah —being bound by the ropes of Varuna; samarhanam—
befitting respect; na—not; upajahara—offered; purva-vat—like
before; nanama—he offered obeisances; miirdhna—with the head;
asru-vilola-locanah—eyes inundated with tears; sa-vrida—with shy-
ness; nicina—downward; mukhah—face; babhiiva ha—he so became.

TRANSLATION

Being bound by the ropes of Varuna, Bali Maharaja could not
offer befitting respect to Prahlada Maharaja as he had before.
Rather, he simply offered respectful obeisances with his head, his
eyes being inundated with tears and his face lowered in shame.


--- Page 174 ---
Text 15] Bali Maharija Surrenders His Life 171
PURPORT
Since Bali Maharaja had been arrested by Lord Vamanadeva, he was
certainly to be considered an offender. Bali Maharaja seriously felt that
he was an offender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Certainly
Prahlada Maharaja would not like this. Therefore Bali Maharaja was
ashamed and hung his head.
TEXT 15
स तत्र हासीनशरदीक््य सत्पतिं
हरिं सुनन्दाययुगेरुपातितम्‌ ।
उपेत्य भूमो शिरसा महामना
ननाम सूरा पुलकाशरुविज्कवः neu
sa tatra hasinam udiksya sat-patim
harim sunandady-anugair upasitam
upetya bhiumau Sirasé maha-mana
nanama miirdhna pulakdsru-viklavah
sah—Prahlada Maharaja; tatra—there; ha dasinam—seated;
udiksya —after seeing; sat-patim—the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
master of the liberated souls; harim—Lord Hari; sunanda-adi-
anugaih—by His followers, like Sunanda; updsitam—being worshiped;
upetya—reaching nearby; bhiimau—on the ground; Sirasé—with his
head (bowed down); mahd-mandh—the great devotee; nanama—
offered obeisances; mirdhna—with his head; pulaka-asru-viklavah—
agitated by tears of jubilation.
TRANSLATION
When the great personality Prahlada Maharaja saw that the
Supreme Lord was sitting there, surrounded and worshiped by His
intimate associates like Sunanda, he was overwhelmed with tears of
jubilation. Approaching the Lord and falling to the ground, he
offered obeisances to the Lord with his head.


--- Page 175 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam = - [Canto 8, Ch. 22
TEXT 16
MINT उवाच
त्वयैव दत्तं पदमैनदरमूर्जितं
gd am तथैव शोभनम्‌ |
मन्ये মহানজ্ম FA द्यनुग्रहो
विभ्रंशितो यच्छ्रिय आत्ममोहनात्‌ ॥ १६॥
$ri-prahrada 10৫০৫
tvayaiva कवः padam aindram urjitamn
hrtari tad evadya tathaiva Sobhanam
manye mahan asya krto hy anugraho
vibhrarsito yac chriya atma-mohanat
Sri-prahradah uvaca—Prahlada Maharaja said; tvaya—by Your Lord-
ship; eva—indeed; dattam—which had been given; padam—this posi-
tion; aindram—of the King of heaven; arjitam—very, very great;
hrtam—has been taken away; tat—that; eva—indeed; adya—today;
tatha—as; eva—indeed; Sobhanam—beautiful; manye—I consider;
mahan—very great; asya—of him (Bali Maharaja); krtah—has been
done by You; hi—indeed; anugrahah—mercy; vibhramsitah—being
bereft of; yat—because; §riyah—from that opulence; atma-mohanat—
which was covering the process of self-realization.
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja said: My Lord, it is Your Lordship who gave
this Bali the very great opulence of the post of heavenly king, and
now, today, it is You who have taken it all away. I think You have
acted with equal beauty in both ways. Because his exalted position
as King of heaven was putting him in the darkness of ignorance,
You have done him a very merciful favor by taking away all his
opulence.
PURPORT
As it is said, yasyaham anugrhnami harisye tad-dhanam Sanaih
(Bhag. 10.88.8). It is by the mercy of the Lord that one gets all material


--- Page 176 ---
Text 17] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 173
opulence, but if such material opulence causes one to become puffed up
and forget the process of self-realization, the Lord certainly takes all the
opulence away. The Lord bestows mercy upon His devotee by helping
him find out his constitutional position. For that purpose, the Lord is al-
ways ready to help the devotee in every way. But material opulence is
sometimes dangerous because it diverts one’s attention to false prestige
by giving one the impression that he is the owner and master of every-
thing he surveys, although actually this is not the fact. To protect the de-
votee from such a misunderstanding, the Lord, showing special mercy,
sometimes takes away his material possessions. Yasyaham anugrhnami
harisye tad-dhanari Sanaih.
TEXT 17
यया हि विद्वानपि gad यत-
N
स्तत्‌ को विचष्टे गतिमारमनो यथा |
तस्मे नमस्ते जगदीश्वराय वै
नारायणायाखिललोकसाक्षिणे ॥१७॥
yaya hi vidvan api muhyate yatas
tat ko vicaste gatim atmano yatha
tasmai namas te jagad-isvaraya vai
narayandayakhila-loka-saksine
yaya—by which material opulence; hi—indeed; vidvan api—even a
person fortunately advanced in education; muhyate—becomes
bewildered; yatah—self-controlled; tat—that; kah —who; vicaste—can
search for; gatim—the progress; atmanah—of the self; yatha—prop-
erly; tasmai—unto Him; namah—I offer my respectful obeisances; te—
unto You; jagat-tSvaraya—unto the Lord of the universe; vai—indeed;
narayandya—unto His Lordship Narayana; akhila-loka-saksine—who
are the witness of all creation.
TRANSLATION
Material opulence is so bewildering that it makes even a

learned, self-controlled man forget to search for the goal of


--- Page 177 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
self-realization. But the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Narayana, the Lord of the universe, can see everything by His will.
Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.
PURPORT
The words ko vicaste gatim atmano yatha indicate that when one is
puffed up by the false prestige of possessing material opulence, he cer-
tainly neglects the goal of self-realization. This is the position of the
modern world. Because of so-called scientific improvements in material
opulence, people have entirely given up the path of self-realization.
Practically no one is interested in God, one’s relationship with God or
how one should act. Modern men have altogether forgotten such ques-
tions because they are mad for material possessions. If this kind of
civilization continues, the time will soon come when the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead will take away all the material opulences. Then
people will come to their senses.
TEXT 18
श्रीञ्युक उवाच
तस्यानुममृण्वतो राजन्‌ प्रदादस्य कृताञ्जलेः |
दिरण्यगर्मो भगवानुवाच मधुखदनम्‌ ॥ १८॥
Sri-Suka uvdaca
tasyanusrnvato rajan
prahradasya krtanjaleh
hiranyagarbho bhagavan
uvdca madhusiidanam
sri-sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; tasya—of Prahlada
Maharaja; anusrnvatah—so that he could hear; r@jan—O King Pariksit;
prahradasya—of Prahlada Maharaja; krta-anjaleh—who was standing
with folded hands; hiranyagarbhah—Lord Brahma; bhagavan—the
most powerful; uwdca—said; madhusidanam—unto Madhustdana, the
Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 178 ---
Text 20] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 175
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: 0 King Pariksit, Lord Brahma
then began to speak to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
within the hearing of Prahlada Maharaja, who stood nearby with
folded hands.
TEXT 19
बद्धं वीक्ष्य पतिं साध्वी तत्पली भयविह्वला |
प्राज्ञलिः प्रणतोपेन्द्रं वभाषेऽवाच्युखी Fg ॥१९॥
baddhari viksya pati sadhvi
tat-patni bhaya-vihvala
prajalih pranatopendrar
babhase "van-mukhi nrpa
baddham—arrested; viksya—seeing; patim—her husband; sadhvi—
the chaste woman; tat-patni—Bali Maharaja’s wife; bhaya-vihvala—
being very disturbed by fear; pranjalih—with folded hands; pranata—
having offered obeisances; upendram—unto Vamanadeva; babhase—
addressed; avak-mukhi—with face downward; nrpa—O Maharaja
Pariksit.
TRANSLATION
But Bali Maharaja’s chaste wife, afraid and aggrieved at seeing
her husband arrested, immediately offered obeisances to Lord
Vamanadeva [Upendra]. She folded her hands and spoke as
follows.
PURPORT
Although Lord Brahma was speaking, he had to stop for a while be-
cause Bali Maharaja’s wife, Vindhyavali, who was very agitated and
afraid, wanted to say something.
TEXT 20
श्रीविन्ध्यावटिरुवाच
€ ° |
क्रीडायमात्मन इदं त्रिजगत्‌ कृतं ते
खाम्पं तु तत्र कथियोऽपर ইহা कुयुः |


--- Page 179 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
og
कतुः प्रमोस्तव किमस्यत आवहन्ति
ও
त्यक्तदियस्त्वदवरोपितकठ्वादाः ॥२०॥
sri-vindhyavalir uvaca
kridartham atmana 70077 tri-jagat krtam te
svamyarn tu tatra kudhiyo ‘para isa kuryuh
kartuh prabhos tava kim asyata avahanti
tyakta-hriyas tvad-avaropita-kartr-vadah
sri-vindhyavalih uvaca—Vindhyavali, the wife of Bali Maharaja,
said; krida-artham—for the sake of pastimes; atmanah—of Yourself;
idam —this; tri-jagat—the three worlds (this universe); krtam—was
created; te—by You; svamyam—proprietorship; tu—but; tatra—
thereon; kudhiyah—foolish rascals; apare—others; 2602-0 my Lord;
kuryuh—have established; kartuh—for the supreme creator; prabhoh—
for the supreme maintainer; tava—for Your good self; kim—what;
asyatah—for the supreme annihilator; avahanti—they can offer;
tyakta-hriyah—shameless, without intelligence; tvat—by You;
avaropita—falsely imposed because of a poor fund of knowledge; kartr-
vddah —the proprietorship of such foolish agnostics.
TRANSLATION
Srimati Vindhyavali said: O my Lord, You have created the en-
tire universe for the enjoyment of Your personal pastimes, but
foolish, unintelligent men have claimed proprietorship for ma-
terial enjoyment. Certainly they are shameless agnostics. Falsely
claiming proprietorship, they think they can give charity and en-
joy. In such a condition, what good can they do for You, who are
the independent creator, maintainer and annihilator of this
universe?
PURPORT
Bali Maharaja’s wife, who was most intelligent, supported the arrest of
her husband and accused him of having no intelligence because he had
claimed proprietorship of the property of the Lord. Such a claim is a sign
of demoniac life. Although the demigods, who are officials appointed by


--- Page 180 ---
Text 20] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 177
the Lord for management, are attached to materialistic enjoyment, they
never claim to be proprietors of the universe, for they know that the ac-
tual proprietor of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
This is the qualification of the demigods. But the demons, instead of ac-
cepting the exclusive proprietorship of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, claim the property of the universe for themselves through demar-
cations of nationalism. “This part is mine, and that part is yours,” they
say. “This part I can give in charity, and this part I can keep for my en-
joyment.” These are all demoniac conceptions. This is described in
Bhagavad-gita (16.13): idam adya maya labdham म? prapsye
manoratham. “Thus far I have acquired so much money and land. Now I
have to add more and more. In this way I shall be the greatest proprietor
of everything. Who can compete with me?” These are all demoniac
conceptions.

Bali Maharaja’s wife accused Bali Maharaja by saying that although
the Supreme Personality of Godhead had arrested him, showing him ex-
traordinary mercy, and although Bali Maharaja was offering his body to
the Supreme Lord for the Lord’s third step, he was still in the darkness
of ignorance. Actually the body did not belong to him, but because of his
long-standing demoniac mentality he could not understand this. He
thought that since he had been defamed for his inability to fulfill his
promise of charity, and since the body belonged to him, he would free
himself from defamation by offering his body. Actually, however, the
body does not belong to anyone but the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
by whom the body is given. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.61):

tsvarah sarva-bhiitanar
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhitani
yantraridhani mayaya
The Lord is situated in the core of everyone's heart, and, according to the
material desires of the living entity, the Lord offers a particular type of
machine—the body —through the agency of the material energy. The
body actually does not belong to the living entity; it belongs to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Under the circumstances, how could
Bali Maharija claim that the body belonged to him?


--- Page 181 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22

Thus Vindhyavali, Bali Maharaja’s intelligent wife, prayed that her
husband be released, by the Lord’s causeless mercy. Otherwise, Bali
Maharaja was nothing but a shameless demon, specifically described as
tyakta-hriyas tvad-avaropita-kartr-vadah, a foolish person claiming
proprietorship over the property of the Supreme Person. In the present
age, Kali-yuga, the number of such shameless men, who are agnostics
disbelieving in the existence of God, has increased. Trying to defy the
authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, so-called scientists,
philosophers and politicians manufacture plans and schemes for the
destruction of the world. They cannot do anything good for the world,
and unfortunately, because of Kali-yuga, they have plunged the affairs
of the world into mismanagement. Thus there is a great need for the
Krsna consciousness movement for the benefit of innocent people who
are being carried away by propaganda of such demons. If the present
status quo is allowed to continue, people will certainly suffer more and
more under the leadership of these demoniac agnostics.

TEXT 21
श्रीवद्मोवाच
भूतभावन AT देवदेव जगन्मय |
gRd हतसरवैस्वं नायमहेति निग्रहम्‌ ॥२१॥
Sri-brahmovaca
bhita-bhavana bhitesa
deva-deva jaganmaya
muiicainari hrta-sarvasvam
nayam arhati nigraham

§ri-brahma uvaca—Lord Brahma said; bhiita-bhdvana —O Supreme
Being, well-wisher of everyone, who can cause one to flourish;
bhiita-isa—O master of everyone; deva-deva—O worshipable Deity of
the demigods; jagat-maya—O all-pervading one; muAca—please
release; enam—this poor Bali Maharaja; hrta-sarvasvam—now bereft of
everything; na—not; ayam—such a poor man; arhati—deserves;
nigraham — punishment.


--- Page 182 ---
Text 22] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 179
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma said: O well-wisher and master of all living en-
tities, O worshipable Deity of all the demigods, O all-pervading
Personality of Godhead, now this man has been sufficiently
punished, for You have taken everything. Now You can release
him. He does not deserve to be punished more.
PURPORT
When Lord Brahma saw that Prahlada Maharaja and Vindhyavali had
already approached the Lord to ask mercy for Bali Maharaja, he joined
them and recommended Bali Maharaja’s release on the grounds of
worldly calculations.
TEXT 22
HEN तेऽनेन दत्ता भूर्छोकाः FRAY |
~ ९
निवेदितं च सेखमार्माविङ्कवया দিদা ॥২২॥
(1716 te ‘nena datta bhir
lokah karmarjitas ca ye
niveditarn ca sarvasvam
atmaviklavaya dhiya
krtsnah—all; te—unto You; anena—by Bali Maharaja; dattah—have
been given or returned; bhith lokah—all land and all planets; karma-
arjitdh ca—whatever he achieved by his pious activities; ye—all of
which; niveditam ca—have been offered to You; sarvasvam —everything
he possessed; atma—even his body; aviklavaya—without hesitation;
dhiya—by such intelligence.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja had already offered everything to Your Lordship.
Without hesitation, he has offered his land, the planets and what-
ever else he earned by his pious activities, including even his own
body.


--- Page 183 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
TEXT 23
यतपादयोरशरधीः सलिलं प्रदाय
दूर्वाङ्कुरैरपि विधाय सतीं सपर्याम्‌ ।
अप्युत्तमां गतिमसौ मजते त्रिरोकीं
दाश्वानविङ्खवमनाः कथमार्तिमृच्छेत्‌ 11:31
yat-padayor asatha-dhih salilarh pradaya
dirvarikurair api vidhaya satin saparyam
apy uttamar gatim asau bhajate tri-lokirm
dasvan aviklava-manah katham artim [00168
yat-padayoh—at the lotus feet of Your Lordship; asatha-dhih—a
great-minded person who is without duplicity; salilam—water;
pradaya—offering; dirva—with fully grown grass; arkuraih—and
with buds of flowers; api—although; vidhaya—offering; satim—most
exalted; saparyam—with worship; api—although; uttamam —the most
highly elevated; gatim —destination; asau—such a worshiper; bhajate
—deserves; tri-lokim—the three worlds; dasvan—giving to You;
aviklava-manah —without mental duplicity; katham—how; artim —the
distressed condition of being arrested; rcchet—he deserves.
TRANSLATION
By offering even water, newly grown grass, or flower buds at
Your lotus feet, those who maintain no mental duplicity can
achieve the most exalted position within the spiritual world. This
Bali Maharaja, without duplicity, has now offered everything in
the three worlds. How then can he deserve to suffer from arrest?
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (9.26) it is stated:
patrari puspari phalam toyar
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad ahar bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah


--- Page 184 ---
Text 24] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 181
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is so kind that if an unsophisticated
person, with devotion and without duplicity, offers at the lotus feet of the
Lord a little water, a flower, a fruit or a leaf, the Lord accepts it. Then the
devotee is promoted to Vaikuntha, the spiritual world. Brahma drew the
Lord’s attention to this subject and requested that He release Bali
Maharaja, who was suffering, being bound by the ropes of Varuna, and
who had already given everything, including the three worlds and what-
ever he possessed.
TEXT 24
श्रीम गवाडुवाच
जर्मन्‌ यमनुगह्नामि afz विधुनोम्यहम्‌ ।
यन्मदः पुरुषः स्तन्धो लोकं मां चावमन्यते ॥२७॥
ri-bhagavan प्न्य
brahman yam anugrhnami
tad-viso vidhunomy aham
yan-madah purusah stabdho
lokarh mar cavamanyate
Sri-bhagavan uvica—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
brahman—0O Lord Brahma; yam—unto anyone to whom;
anugrhnami—I show My mercy; tat—his; viSah—material opulence or
riches; vidhunomi—take away; aham—I; yat-madah—having false
prestige due to this money; purusah—such a person; stabdhah—being
dull-minded; lokam —the three worlds; mam ca—unto Me also;
avamanyate—derides.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Lord
Brahma, because of material opulence a foolish person becomes
dull-witted and mad. Thus he has no respect for anyone within the
three worlds and defies even My authority. To such a person I
show special favor by first taking away all his possessions.
PURPORT
A civilization that has become godless because of material advance-
ment in opulence is extremely dangerous. Because of great opulence, a


--- Page 185 ---
182 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
materialist becomes so proud that he has no regard for anyone and even
refuses to accept the authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The result of such a mentality is certainly very dangerous. To show
special favor, the Lord sometimes makes an example of someone like Bali
Maharaja, who was now bereft of all his possessions.
TEXT 25
यदा कदाचिजोवारमा संसरन्‌ निजकर्मभिः |
नानायोनिष्वनीशोऽयं पौरुषीं गतिमाव्रजेत्‌ ॥२५॥
yada kaddcij jivatma
samsaran nija-karmabhih
nand-yonisv aniSo ‘yarn
paurusin gatim avrajet

yada—when; kaddcit—sometimes; jiva-atma—the living entity;
sarisaran —rotating in the cycle of birth and death; nija-karmabhih—
because of his own fruitive activities; nana-yonisu—in different species
of life; anisah—not independent (completely under the control of ma-
terial nature); ayam—this living entity; paurusim gatim—the situation
of being human; avrajet—wants to obtain.

TRANSLATION

While rotating in the cycle of birth and death again and again in
different species because of his own fruitive activities, the depen-
dent living entity, by good fortune, may happen to become a
human being. This human birth is very rarely obtained.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is fully independent. Thus it is
not always a fact that a living being’s loss of all opulence is a sign of the
Supreme Lord’s mercy upon him. The Lord can act any way He likes. He
may take away one’s opulence, or He may not. There are varieties of
forms of life, and the Lord treats them according to the circumstances, as
He chooses. Generally it is to be understood that the human form of life
is one of great responsibility.


--- Page 186 ---
Text 26] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 183
purusah prakrti-stho hi
bhurikte prakrtijan gunan
karanar guna-sango sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
“The living entity in material nature follows the ways of life, enjoying
the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that ma-
terial nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various
species.” (Bg. 13.22) After thus rotating through many, many forms of
life in the cycle of birth and death, the living being gets a chance for a
human form. Therefore every human being, especially one belonging to
a civilized nation or culture, must be extremely responsible in his ac-
tivities. He should not risk degradation in the next life. Because the body
will change (tatha dehantara-praptir), we should be extremely careful.
To see to the proper use of life is the purpose of Krsna consciousness.
The foolish living entity declares freedom from all control, but factually
he is not free; he is fully under the control of material nature. He must
therefore be most careful and responsible in the activities of his life.
TEXT 26
जन्पक्मवयोरूपदिसैशधर्यधनादिभिः |
यद्यस्य न भवेत्‌ स्तम्मस्तत्राय मद नुग्रहः REN
Janma-karma-vayo-ripa-
vidyaisvarya-dhanadibhih
yady asya na bhavet stambhas
10870) 0718 mad-anugrahah

Jjanma—by birth in an aristocratic family; [67770 -- 107 wonderful ac-
tivities, pious activities; vayah—by age, especially youth, when one is
capable of doing many things; riipa—by personal beauty, which attracts
everyone; vidyd—by education; aiSvarya—by opulence; dhana—by
wealth; adibhih—by other opulences also; yadi—if; asya—of the
possessor; na—not; bhavet—there is; stambhah—pride; tatra—in such
a condition; ayam—a person; mat-anugrahah—should be considered to
have received My special mercy.


--- Page 187 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
TRANSLATION

If a human being is born in an aristocratic family or a higher
status of life, if he performs wonderful activities, if he is youthful,
if he has personal beauty, a good education and good wealth, and if
he is nonetheless not proud of his opulences, it is to be understood
that he is especially favored by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

PURPORT

When in spite of possessing all these opulences a person is not proud,
this means that he is fully aware that all his opulences are due to the
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He therefore engages all
his possessions in the service of the Lord. A devotee knows very well that
everything, even his body, belongs to the Supreme Lord. If one lives per-
fectly in such Krsna consciousness, it is to be understood that he is es-
pecially favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The conclusion
is that one’s being deprived of his wealth is not to be considered the
special mercy of the Lord. If one continues in his opulent position but
does not become unnecessarily proud, falsely thinking that he is the
proprietor of everything, this is the Lord’s special mercy.

TEXT 27
मानस्तम्मनिमित्तानां जन्मादीनां समन्ततः ।
তং 5 শি
सवेश्रेयःप्रतीपानां हन्त ga मत्परः ।२७॥
mana-stambha-nimittanam
Jjanmadinarh samantatah
sarva-$reyah-pratipanari
hanta muhyen na mat-parah

mana—of false prestige; stambha—because of this impudence;
nimittanam—which are the causes; janma-adindm—such as birth in a
high family; samantatah—taken together; sarva-sreyah—for the
supreme benefit of life; pratipanam —which are impediments; hanta—
also; muhyet—becomes bewildered; na—not; mat-parah—My pure
devotee.


--- Page 188 ---
Text 28] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 185
TRANSLATION

Although aristocratic birth and other such opulences are im-
pediments to advancement in devotional service because they are
causes of false prestige and pride, these opulences never disturb a
pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

Devotees like Dhruva Maharaja, who was given unlimited material
opulence, have the special mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Once Kuvera wanted to give Dhruva Maharaja a benediction, but
although Dhruva Maharaja could have asked him for any amount of ma-
terial opulence, he instead begged Kuvera that he might continue his de-
votional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When a devotee
is fixed in his devotional service, there is no need for the Lord to deprive
him of his material opulences. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
never takes away material opulences achieved because of devotional ser-
vice, although He sometimes takes away opulences achieved by pious ac-
tivities. He does this to make a devotee prideless or put him in a better
position in devotional service. If a special devotee is meant for preaching
but does not give up his family life or material opulences to take to the
service of the Lord, the Lord surely takes away his material opulences
and establishes him in devotional service. Thus the pure devotee be-
comes fully engaged in propagating Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 28
एष॒ दानवदैत्यानामग्रणीः कीर्तिवर्धनः |
अजैषीदजयां मायां सीदन्नपि न श्यति ॥२८॥
esa danava-daityanam
agranih kirti-vardhanah
ajaisid ajaydarh mayan
sidann api na muhyati

esah—this Bali Maharaja; danava-daityanam—among the demons

and unbelievers; agranih —the foremost devotee; kirti-vardhanah—the


--- Page 189 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
most famous; ajaisit—has already surpassed; ajay@m—the insurmoun-
table; mayam—material energy; sidan —being bereft (of all material
opulences); api—although; na—not; muhyati—is bewildered.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja has become the most famous among the demons
and nonbelievers, for in spite of being bereft of all material opu-
lences, he is fixed in his devotional service.
PURPORT
In this verse, the words sidann api na muhyati are very important. A
devotee is sometimes put into adversity while executing devotional ser-
vice. In adversity, everyone laments and becomes aggrieved, but by the
grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a devotee, even in the
worst condition, can understand that he is going through a severe ex-
amination by the Personality of Godhead. Bali Maharaja passed all such
examinations, as explained in the following verses.
TEXTS 29-30
क्षीणरिक्यःल्युतः स्थानात्‌ धिपतो बद्ध afin)
ज्ञातिभिश्च परित्यक्तो यातनामनुयापितः ॥२९॥
गुरुणा भस्सितः शपो जहौ सत्यं न सुतः |
TI! मया धर्मो नायं त्यजति सरयवाक्‌ ।॥२०॥
ksina-rikthas cyutah sthanat
ksipto baddhas ca Satrubhih
Jratibhis ca parityakto
yatanam anwydpitah
gurund bhartsitah sapto
Jjahau satyari na suvratah
chalair ukto maya dharmo
nayam tyajati satya-vak


--- Page 190 ---
Text 30] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 187

ksina-rikthah—although bereft of all riches; cyutah—fallen;
sthanat—from his superior position; ksiptah—forcefully thrown away;
baddhah ca—and forcefully bound; $atrubhih—by his enemies;
jAatibhih ca—and by his family members or relatives; parityaktah—
deserted; yatanam—all kinds of suffering; anuyapitah—unusually
severely suffered; guruna—by his spiritual master; bhartsitah—
rebuked; saptah—and cursed; jahau—gave up; satyam—truthfulness;
na—not; su-vratah—being fixed in his vow; chalaih—pretentiously;
uktah—spoken; maya—by Me; dharmah—the religious principles;
na —not; ayam—this Bali Maharaja; tyajati—does give up; satya-vak—
being true to his word.

TRANSLATION

Although bereft of his riches, fallen from his original position,
defeated and arrested by his enemies, rebuked and deserted by his
relatives and friends, although suffering the pain of being bound
and although rebuked and cursed by his spiritual master, Bali
Maharaja, being fixed in his vow, did not give up his truthfulness.
It was certainly with pretention that I spoke about religious prin-
ciples, but he did not give up religious principles, for he is true to
his word.

PURPORT

Bali Maharaja passed the severe test put before him by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is further proof of the Lord’s mercy toward
His devotee. The Supreme Personality of Godhead sometimes puts a de-
votee to severe tests that are almost unbearable. One could hardly even
live under the conditions forced upon Bali Maharaja. That Bali Maharaja
endured all these severe tests and austerities is the mercy of the Supreme
Lord. The Lord certainly appreciates the devotee’s forbearance, and it is
recorded for the future glorification of the devotee. This was not an ordi-
nary test. As described in this verse, hardly anyone could survive such a
test, but for the future glorification of Bali Maharaja, one of the maha-
Janas, the Supreme Personality of Godhead not only tested him but also
gave him the strength to tolerate such adversity. The Lord is so kind to
His devotee that when severely testing him the Lord gives him the


--- Page 191 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
necessary strength to be tolerant and continue to remain a glorious
devotee.
TEXT 31
एष मे प्रापितः सानं दुष्प्रापममरैरपि ।
साव्णेरन्तरस्यायं मवितेन्द्रो मदाश्रयः ॥३१॥
esa me prapitah sthanari
dusprapam amarair api
savarner antarasyayar
bhavitendro mad-asrayah

esah—Bali Maharaja; me—by Me; prapitah—has achieved;
sthanam—a place; dusprapam—extremely difficult to obtain; amaraih
api—even by the demigods; savarneh antarasya—during the period of
the Manu known as Savarni; ayam—this Bali Maharaja; bhavita—will
become; indrah—the lord of the heavenly planet; mat-asrayah—com-
pletely under My protection.

TRANSLATION

The Lord continued: Because of his great tolerance, I have given
him a place not obtainable even by the demigods. He will become
King of the heavenly planets during the period of the Manu
known as Savarni.

PURPORT

This is the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even if the
Lord takes away a devotee’s material opulences, the Lord immediately
offers him a position of which the demigods cannot even dream. There
are many examples of this in the history of devotional service. One of
them is the opulence of Sudama Vipra. Sudima Vipra suffered severe
material scarcity, but he was not disturbed and did not deviate from de-
votional service. Thus he was ultimately given an exalted position by the
mercy of Lord Krsna. Here the word mad-dsrayah is very significant.
Because the Lord wanted to give Bali Maharaja the exalted position of
Indra, the demigods might naturally have been envious of him and
might have fought to disturb his position. But the Supreme Personality


--- Page 192 ---
Text 32] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 189
of Godhead assured Bali Maharaja that he would always remain under
the Lord’s protection (mad-asrayah).
TEXT 32
तावत्‌ सुतलमध्यास्तां विश्चकपेविनिर्मितम्‌ |
यदाधयो व्याधयश्च THEE परामवः |
नोपसर्गा निवसतां संभवन्ति ममेक्षया ॥३२।।
tavat sutalam adhyastarm
visvakarma-vinirmitam
yad adhayo vyadhayas ca
klamas tandra parabhavah
nopasargda nivasatarn
sambhavanti mameksaya
tavat—as long as you are not in the post of Lord Indra; sutalam—in
the planet known as Sutala; adhydstam—go live there and occupy the
place; viSvakarma-vinirmitam—which is especially created by
Visvakarma; yat—wherein; adhayah—miseries pertaining to the mind;
vyddhayah—miseries pertaining to the body; ca—also; klamah—
fatigue; tandra—dizziness or laziness; parabhavah—becoming de-
feated; na—not; upasargah—symptoms of other disturbances;
nivasatam—of those who live there; sambhavanti—become possible;
mama—of Me; iksayda—by the special vigilance.
TRANSLATION
Until Bali Maharaja achieves the position of King of heaven, he
shall live on the planet Sutala, which was made by Viévakarma ac-
cording to My order. Because it is especially protected by Me, it is
free from mental and bodily miseries, fatigue, dizziness, defeat
and all other disturbances. Bali Maharaja, you may now go live
there peacefully.
PURPORT
Viévakarma is the engineer or architect for the palatial buildings in
the heavenly planets. Therefore, since he was engaged to construct the


--- Page 193 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
residential quarters of Bali Maharaja, the buildings and palaces on the
planet Sutala must at least equal those on the heavenly planets. A further
advantage of this place designed for Bali Maharaja was that he would not
be disturbed by any outward calamity. Moreover, he would not be dis-
turbed by mental or bodily miseries. These are all extraordinary features
of the planet Sutala, where Bali Maharija would live.

In the Vedic literatures we find descriptions of many different planets
where there are many, many palaces, hundreds and thousands of times
better than those of which we have experience on this planet earth.
When we speak of palaces, this naturally includes the idea of great cities
and towns. Unfortunately, when modern scientists try to explore other
planets they see nothing but rocks and sand. Of course, they may go on
their frivolous excursions, but the students of the Vedic literature will
never believe them or give them any credit for exploring other planets.

TEXT 33
इन्द्रसेन महाराज याहि मो भद्रमस्तु ते ।
सुतलं सखिभिः प्रायं ज्ञातिभिः परिवारितः ॥२३॥
indrasena mahardja
yahi bho bhadram astu te
sutalari svargibhih prarthyarn
jRatibhih parivaritah

indrasena—O Maharaja Bali; maharaja—O King; yahi—better go;
bhoh—O King; bhadram—all auspiciousness; astu—Ilet there be: te—
unto you; sutalam—in the planet known as Sutala; svargibhili —by the
demigods; prarthyam—desirable; jiatibhih—by your family members;
parivaritah—surrounded.

TRANSLATION

O Bali Maharaja [Indrasena], now you may go to the planet
Sutala, which is desired even by the demigods. Live there
peacefully, surrounded by your friends and relatives. All good
fortune unto you.


--- Page 194 ---
Text 35] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 191
PURPORT
Bali Maharaja was transferred from the heavenly planet to the planet
Sutala, which is hundreds of times better than heaven, as indicated by
the words svargibhih prarthyam. When the Supreme Personality of God-
head deprives His devotee of material opulences, this does not mean that
the Lord puts him into poverty; rather, the Lord promotes him to a
higher position. The Supreme Personality of Godhead did not ask Bali
Maharaja to separate from his family; instead, the Lord allowed him to
stay with his family members (jatibhih parivaritah).
TEXT 34
न त्वामभिभविप्यन्ति लोकेशाः frgam |
त्वच्छासनातिगान्‌ दैत्यां धकर मे खद्‌ यिष्यति 11381)
na tvam abhibhavisyanti
lokesah kim utapare
tvac-chasanatigan daityams
cakrari me sudayisyati
na—not; tvdm—unto you; abhibhavisyanti—will be able to conquer;
loka-tsah—the predominating deities of the various planets; kim uta
apare—what to speak of ordinary people; tvat-sasana-atigan—who
transgress your rulings; daityan—such demons; cakram—disc; me—
My; sadayisyati—will kill.
TRANSLATION
On the planet Sutala, not even the predominating deities of
other planets, what to speak of ordinary people, will be able to
conquer you. As far as the demons are concerned, if they
transgress your rule, My disc will kill them.
TEXT 35
Ss + _ .
रक्षिष्ये agaist त्वां सानुगं सपरिच्छदम्‌ |
सदा सन्निहितं वीर तत्र मां द्रक्ष्यते मान्‌ ॥२५॥


--- Page 195 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 22
raksisye sarvato "hari tvar
sanugarh saparicchadam
sada sannihitari vira
tatra mar draksyate bhavan
raksisye—shall protect; sarvatah—in all respects; aham—1I; tvam—
you; sa-anugam—with your associates; sa-paricchadam—with your
paraphernalia; sadd—always; sannihitam—situated nearby; vira—O
great hero; tatra—there, in your place; mam —Me; draksyate—will be
able to see; bhavan—you.
TRANSLATION
O great hero, I shall always be with you and give you protection
in all respects along with your associates and paraphernalia.
Moreover, you will always be able to see Me there.
TEXT 36
तत्र दानवदैत्यानां सङ्गात्‌ ते মান आसुरः |
दृष्ट्रा मदनुभावं वै सयः कुण्ठो विनङ्क्ष्यति ॥३६॥।
tatra danava-daityanar
sangat te bhava asurah
drstva mad-anubhavar vai
sadyah kuntho vinanksyati
tatra—in that place; danava-daityanam—of the demons and the
Danavas; sarigat—because of the association; te—your; bhavah—men-
tality; asurah—demoniac; drstva—by observing; mat-anubhavam—My
superexcellent power; vai—indeed; sadyah—immediately; kunthah—
anxiety; vinanksyati—will be destroyed.
TRANSLATION
Because there you will see My supreme prowess, your ma-
terialistic ideas and anxieties that have arisen from your asso-
ciation with the demons and Danavas will immediately be
vanquished.


--- Page 196 ---
Text 36] Bali Maharaja Surrenders His Life 193
PURPORT

The Lord assured Bali Maharaja of all protection, and finally the Lord
assured him of protection from the effects of bad association with the
demons. Bali Maharaja certainly became an exalted devotee, but he was
somewhat anxious because his association was not purely devotional. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead therefore assured him that his
demoniac mentality would be annihilated. In other words, by the asso-
ciation of devotees, the demoniac mentality is vanquished.

satari prasangan mama virya-sariwido
bhavanti hrt-karna-rasayanah kathah
(Bhag. 3.25.25)

When a demon associates with devotees engaged in glorifying the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he gradually becomes a pure devotee.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-
second Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘Bali Maharaja
Surrenders His Life.”


--- Page 197 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
The Demigods
Regain the Heavenly Planets
This chapter describes how Bali Maharaja, along with his grandfather
Prahlada Maharaja, entered the planet Sutala and how the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead allowed Indra to reenter the heavenly planet.

The great soul Bali Maharaja experienced that the highest gain in life
is to attain devotional service under the shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet in
full surrender. Being fixed in this conclusion, his heart full of ecstatic
devotion and his eyes full of tears, he offered obeisances to the Per-
sonality of Godhead and then, with his associates, entered the planet
known as Sutala. Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead satisfied the
desire of Aditi and reinstalled Lord Indra. Prahlada Maharaja, being
aware of Bali’s release from arrest, then described the transcendental
pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this material world.
Prahlada Maharaja praised the Supreme Lord for creating the material
world, for being equal to everyone and for being extremely liberal to the
devotees, just like a desire tree. Indeed, Prahlada Maharaja said that the
Lord is kind not only to His devotees but also to the demons. In this way
he described the unlimited causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Then, with folded hands, he offered his respectful obei-
sances unto the Lord, and after circumambulating the Lord he also en-
tered the planet Sutala in accordance with the Lord’s order. The Lord
then ordered Sukracarya to describe Bali Maharaja’s faults and discre-
pancies in executing the sacrificial ceremony. Sukracarya became free
from fruitive actions by chanting the holy name of the Lord, and he ex-
plained how chanting can diminish all the faults of the conditioned soul.
He then completed Bali Maharaja’s sacrificial ceremony. All the great
saintly persons accepted Lord Vamanadeva as the benefactor of Lord
Indra because He had returned Indra to his heavenly planet. They ac-
cepted the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the maintainer of all the
affairs of the universe. Being very happy, Indra, along with his asso-
ciates, placed Vamanadeva before him and reentered the heavenly planet

195


--- Page 198 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
in their airplane. Having seen the wonderful activities of Lord Visnu in
the sacrificial arena of Bali Maharaja, all the demigods, saintly persons,
Pitas, Bhitas and Siddhas glorified the Lord again and again. The
chapter concludes by saying that the most auspicious function of the con-
ditioned soul is to chant and hear about the glorious activities of Lord
Visnu.
TEXT 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्युक्तवन्तं पुरुषं पुरातनं
महानुभावोऽखिलसाधुसंमतः ।
~
बद्धाञ्नणिबाप्पकलाङलेक्षणो
मक्तयुत्कलो गद्वद या गिरात्रवीत्‌ ॥ १॥
sri-Suka uvdca
ity uktavantar purusari puratanam
mahanubhavo ’khila-sadhu-sammatah
baddharnjalir baspa-kalakuleksano
bhakty-utkalo gadgadaya girabravit
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; uktavantam-
—upon the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; purusam—
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puratanam —the oldest of
everyone; maha-anubhavah—Bali Maharaja, who was a great and ex-
alted soul; akhila-sadhu-sammatah—as approved by all saintly persons;
baddha-afjalih—with folded hands; baspa-kala-akula-iksanah—whose
eyes were filled with tears; bhakti-utkalah—full of ecstatic devotion;
gadgadaya—which were faltering in devotional ecstasy; gira—by such
words; abravit—said.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: When the supreme, ancient, eternal

Personality of Godhead had thus spoken to Bali Maharaja, who is
universally accepted as a pure devotee of the Lord and therefore a


--- Page 199 ---
Text 2] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 197
great soul, Bali Maharaja, his eyes filled with tears, his hands
folded and his voice faltering in devotional ecstasy, responded as
follows.
TEXT 2
श्री वलिरुवाच
अहो प्रणामाय कृतः स्मः
a
भरपन्नमक्ताथविधौ समाहितः |
यष्ठोकपालैस्त्वदनुगरहोऽमरै-
रलन्धपूवोऽपसदेऽसुरेऽपितः ॥ २॥
sri-balir 10৫০৫
aho pranamaya krtah samudyamah
prapanna-bhaktartha-vidhau samahitah
yal loka-palais tvad-anugraho ‘marair
alabdha-pirvo ’pasade ’sure ’rpitah
Sri-balih uvaca—Bali Maharaja said; aho—alas; pranamaya—to offer
my respectful obeisances; krtah—I did; samudyamah—only an en-
deavor; prapanna-bhakta-artha-vidhau—in the regulative principles
observed by pure devotees; samahitah—is capable; yat—that; loka-
palaih —by the leaders of various planets; tvat-anugrahah— Your cause-
less mercy; amaraih —by the demigods; alabdha-piirvah—not achieved
previously; apasade—unto a fallen person like me; asure—belonging to
the asura community; arpitah—endowed.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja said: What a wonderful effect there is in even at-

tempting to offer respectful obeisances to You! I merely en-
deavored to offer You obeisances, but nonetheless the attempt was
as successful as those of pure devotees. The causeless mercy You
have shown to me, a fallen demon, was never achieved even by the
demigods or the leaders of the various planets.


--- Page 200 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
PURPORT

When Vamanadeva appeared before Bali Maharaja, Bali Maharaja im-
mediately wanted to offer Him respectful obeisances, but he was unable
to do so because of the presence of Sukracirya and other demoniac asso-
ciates. The Lord is so merciful, however, that although Bali Maharaja did
not actually offer obeisances but only endeavored to do so within his
mind, the Supreme Personality of Godhead blessed him with more mercy
than even the demigods could ever expect. As confirmed in Bhagavad-
gita (2.40), svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat:
“Even a little advancement on this path can protect one from the most
dangerous type of fear.” The Supreme Personality of Godhead is known
as bhava-grahi jandrdana because He takes only the essence of a de-
votee’s attitude. If a devotee sincerely surrenders, the Lord, as the
Supersoul in everyone’s heart, immediately understands this. Thus even
though, externally, a devotee may not render full service, if he is inter-
nally sincere and serious the Lord welcomes his service nonetheless.
Thus the Lord is known as bhava-grahi janardana because He takes the
essence of one’s devotional mentality.

TEXT 3
श्रीशुक उवाच
LIRA हरिमानत्य बरह्माणं सभवं ततः |
विवेश सुतलं श्रीतो নক্তপ্তুক্ধঃ सहासुरेः ॥ ২ ॥
Sri-Suka ८00८0
ity uktva harim anatya
brahmanam sabhavam tatah
vivesa sutalari prito
balir muktah sahasuraih

$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti uktva —saying this;
harim—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari; anatya—offer-
ing obeisances; brahmanam—unto Lord Brahma; sa-bhavam—with
Lord Siva; tatah—thereafter; viveSa—he entered; sutalam—the planet
Sutala; pritah—being fully satisfied; balih—Bali Maharaja; muktah—
thus released; saha asuraih—with his asura associates.


--- Page 201 ---
Text 5] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 199
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After speaking in this way, Bali
Maharaja offered his obeisances first to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Hari, and then to Lord Brahma and Lord Siva. Thus he
was released from the bondage of the naga-pasa [the ropes of
Varuna], and in full satisfaction he entered the planet known as
Sutala.

TEXT 4
एवमिन्द्राय भगवान्‌ प्रर्यानीय त्रिविष्टपम्‌ |
पूरयित्वादितेः काममज्ञासत्‌ सकलं जगत्‌ ॥ ४॥
evam indraya bhagavan
pratyaniya trivistapam
pirayitvaditeh kamam
asasat sakalam jagat

evam—in this way; indraya—unto King Indra; bhagavan—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratyaniya—giving back; tri-
vistapam —his supremacy in the heavenly planets; pirayitva—fulfill-
ing; aditeh—of Aditi; kamam—the desire; asasat—ruled; sakalam—
complete; jagat—universe.

TRANSLATION

Thus having delivered the proprietorship of the heavenly plan-
ets to Indra and having fulfilled the desire of Aditi, mother of the
demigods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead ruled the affairs
of the universe.

TEXT 5
some निक्तं पौत्रं वंशधरं बलिम्‌ ।
frame मक्तिप्रबणः प्रहाद्‌ इदमत्रवीत्‌ ॥ ५ ॥
labdha-prasadam 77711180007
pautrari varsa-dharam balim


--- Page 202 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
nisamya bhakti-pravanah
prahrada idam abravit
labdha-prasadam —who had achieved the blessings of the Lord;
nirmuktam —who was released from bondage; pautram—his grandson;
var$a-dharam —the descendant; balim—Bali Maharaja; nisamya—
after overhearing; bhakti-pravanah—in fully ecstatic devotion;
prahradah—Prahlada Maharaja; idam —this; abravit—spoke.
TRANSLATION
When Prahlada Maharaja heard how Bali Maharaja, his grandson
and descendant, had been released from bondage and had achieved
the benediction of the Lord, he spoke as follows in a tone of
greatly ecstatic devotion.
TEXT 6
ggg उवाच
WARE ww प्रसादं
न সীল न शवः किमुतापरेऽन्ये |
९
यन्नोऽसुराणामसि दुगंपालो
ने
विश्वाभिवन्येरभि वन्दिताङ्धिः ॥ ६ ॥
Sri-prahrada uvica
nemari virifico labhate prasadam
na $rir na Sarvah kim utapare ‘nye
yan no ’suranam asi durga-palo
visvabhivandyair abhivanditarighrih
$ri-prahradah uvaca—Prahlada Maharaja said; na—not; imam—
this; viriicah—even Lord Brahma; labhate —can achieve; prasadam —
benediction; na—nor; $rih—the goddess of fortune; na—nor; sarvah—
Lord Siva; kim uta—what to speak of ; apare anye—others; yat—which
benediction; nah—of us; asuranam—the demons; asi— You have be-
come; durga-pilah—the maintainer; visva-abhivandyaih—by per-
sonalities like Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, who are worshiped all over
the universe; abhivandita-anghrih—whose lotus feet are worshiped.


--- Page 203 ---
Text 7] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 201
TRANSLATION
Prahlada Maharaja said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead,
You are universally worshiped; even Lord Brahma and Lord Siva
worship Your lotus feet. Yet although You are such a great per-
sonality, You have kindly promised to protect us, the demons. I
think that such kindness has never been achieved even by Lord
Brahma, Lord Siva or the goddess of fortune, Laksmi, what to
speak of other demigods or common people.
PURPORT
The word durga-pala is significant. The word durga means “that
which does not go very easily.” Generally durga refers to a fort, which
one cannot very easily enter. Another meaning of durga is “difficulty.”
Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead promised to protect Bali
Maharaja and his associates from all dangers, He is addressed here as
durga-pala, the Lord who gives protection from all miserable conditions.
TEXT 7
यत्पाद पद्ममकरन्दनिषेवणेन
ब्रह्मादयः शरणदाञ्लुबते विभूतीः |
कसाद्‌ वयं ङसृतयः खरयोनयस्ते
दाकषिण्यदृश्टिपद्वीं मवतः प्रणीताः ॥ ও ॥
yat-pada-padma-makaranda-nisevanena
brahmadayah saranadasnuvate vibhitih
kasmad vayar kusrtayah khala-yonayas te
daksinya-drsti-padavirh bhavatah pranitah
yat—of whom; pdda-padma—of the lotus flower of the feet;
makaranda—of the honey; nisevanena—by tasting the sweetness of
rendering service; brahma-adayah—great personalities like Lord
Brahma; $arana-da—O my Lord, supreme shelter of everyone;
asnuvate—enjoy; vibhitth—benedictions given by You; kasmat—how;
vayam—we; ku-srtayah—all the rogues and thieves; khala-yonayah—
born of an envious dynasty, namely that of the demons; te—those


--- Page 204 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
asuras; daksinya-drsti-padavim —the position bestowed by the merciful
glance; bhavatah—of Your Lordship; pranitah—have achieved.
TRANSLATION
O supreme shelter of everyone, great personalities like Brahma
enjoy their perfection simply by tasting the honey of rendering
service at Your lotus feet. But as for us, who are all rogues and
debauchees born of an envious family of demons, how have we
received Your mercy? It has been possible only because Your
mercy is causeless.
TEXT 8
चित्रं तवेहितमहोऽमितयोगमाया-
लीलाविसुष्शचुबनस्य faa |
सर्वात्मनः समदशोऽबिषमः खमावो
भक्तप्रियो यदसि कल्पतरुखमभावः 1 ८ ॥
citramh tavehitam aho ’mita-yogamaya-
lila-visrsta-bhuvanasya visaradasya
sarvatmanah samadrso "visamah svabhavo
bhakta-priyo yad asi kalpataru-svabhavah
citram —very wonderful; tava thitam —all Your activities; aho—alas;
amita—unlimited; yogamaya—of Your spiritual potency; lila—by the
pastimes; visrsta-bhuvanasya—of Your Lordship, by whom all the uni-
verses have been created; visaradasya—of Your Lordship, who are ex-
pert in all respects; sarva-atmanah—of Your Lordship, who pervade all;
sama-drsah—and who are equal toward all; avisamah—without dif-
ferentiation; svabhavah—that is Your characteristic; bhakta-priyah—
under the circumstances You become favorable to the devotees; yat—be-
cause; asi— You are; kalpataru-svabhavah—having the characteristic of
a desire tree.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, Your pastimes are all wonderfully performed by
Your inconceivable spiritual energy; and by her perverted reflec-
tion, the material energy, You have created all the universes. As


--- Page 205 ---
Text 8] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 203
the Supersoul of all living entities, You are aware of everything,
and therefore You are certainly equal toward everyone. Nonethe-
less, You favor Your devotees. This is not partiality, however, for
Your characteristic is just like that of a desire tree, which yields
everything according to one’s desire.
PURPORT
The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.29):
samo ham sarva-bhitesu
na me dvesyo sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu 7107५ bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham

“I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a
friend to him.” The Supreme Personality of Godhead is certainly equal
toward all living entities, but a devotee who fully surrenders at the lotus
feet of the Lord is different from a nondevotee. In other words, everyone
can take shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord to enjoy equal benedictions
from the Lord, but nondevotees do not do so, and therefore they suffer
the consequences created by the material energy. We can understand this
fact by a simple example. The king or government is equal to all citizens.
Therefore, if a citizen capable of receiving special favors from the
government is offered such favors, this does not mean that the govern-
ment is partial. One who knows how to receive favors from the authority
can receive them, but one who does not neglects these favors and does
not receive them. There are two classes of men—the demons and the
demigods. The demigods are fully aware of the Supreme Lord’s position,
and therefore they are obedient to Him, but even if demons know about
the supremacy of the Lord they purposely defy His authority. Therefore,
the Lord makes distinctions according to the mentality of the living
being, but otherwise He is equal to everyone. Like a desire tree, the Lord
fulfills the desires of one who takes shelter of Him, but one who does not
take such shelter is distinct from the surrendered soul. One who takes
shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord is favored by the Lord, regardless of
whether such a person is a demon or a demigod.


--- Page 206 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
TEXT 9
श्रीमयवायुवाच
त्स प्रहाद्‌ मद्रं ते प्रयाहि सुतलार्यम्‌ |
मोदमानः खपोत्रेण ज्ञातीनां सुखमावह ॥ ९ ॥
sri-bhagavan uvdca
vatsa prahrada bhadram te
prayahi sutalalayam
modamanah sva-pautrena
10.11.18 sukham avaha
Sri-bhagavan uvdaca—the Personality of Godhead said; vatsa—O My
dear son; prahrada—O Prahlada Maharaja; bhadram te —all auspicious-
ness unto you; prayahi—please go; sutala-alayam—to the place known
as Sutala; modamanah—in a spirit of jubilation; sva-pautrena—with
your grandson (Bali Maharaja); jiatinam —of your relatives and friends;
sukham —happiness; dvaha—just enjoy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear son
Prahlada, all good fortune unto you. For the time being, please go
to the place known as Sutala and there enjoy happiness with your
grandson and your other relatives and friends.
TEXT 10
fed mfr मां तत्र गद्ापाणिमवलितम्‌ |
मदशेनमहाहाद्वस्तक्म निबन्धनः ॥१०॥
78807 drastasi mam tatra
gada-panim avasthitam 4
mad-darsana-mahahlada-
dhvasta-karma-nibandhanah
nityam—constantly; drastd —the seer; asi—you shall be; mam —unto
Me; tatra—there (in Sutalaloka); gadd-panim —with a club in My hand;


--- Page 207 ---
Text 12] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 205
avasthitam —situated there; mat-darSana—by seeing Me in that form;
maha-ahlada—by the great transcendental bliss; dhvasta —having been
vanquished; karma-nibandhanah—the bondage of fruitive activities.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead assured Prahlada
Maharaja: You shall be able to see Me there in My usual feature
with conchshell, disc, club and lotus in My hand. Because of your
transcendental bliss due to always personally seeing Me, you will
have no further bondage to fruitive activities.
PURPORT
Karma-bandha, the bondage of fruitive activities, entails the repeti-
tion of birth and death. One performs fruitive activities in such a way
that he creates another body for his next life. As long as one is attached
to fruitive activities, he must accept another material body. This repeated
acceptance of material bodies is called samsara-bandhana. To stop this, a
devotee is advised to see the Supreme Lord constantly. The kanistha-
adhikari, or neophyte devotee, is therefore advised to visit the temple
every day and see the form of the Lord regularly. Thus the neophyte de-
votee can be freed from the bondage of fruitive activities.
TEXTS 11-12
श्रीञ्ुक उवाच
आज्ञां भगवतो राजन्द्रहादो बलिना सह ।
बाटमित्यमलप्रज्ञो Fata कृताञ्जलिः ॥११॥
परिकम्यादिपुरूषं सर्वासुरचमूपतिः |
प्रणतस्तद्‌ चज्ञातः प्रविवेश महाबिलम्‌ ॥ १२॥
sri-Suka uvaca
gjiiari bhagavato rajan
prahrado balina saha
badham ity amala-prajiio
mirdhny adhaya krtanjalih


--- Page 208 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
parikramyadi-purusam
sarvasura-camipatih
pranatas tad-anujiiatah
pravivesa maha-bilam
sri-Sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; @jiam—the order;
bhagavatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rajan—O King
(Maharaja Pariksit); prahradah —Maharaja Prahlada; balina saha—ac-
companied by Bali Maharaja; badham—yes, sir, what You say is all
right; iti—thus; amala-prajiiah—Prahlada Maharaja, who had clear in-
telligence; miirdhni—on his head; adhaya—accepting; krta-anjalih—
with folded hands; parikramya—after circumambulating; व्वा
purusam—the supreme original person, Bhagavan; sarva-asura-
camiipatih —the master of all the chiefs of the demons; pranatah—after
offering obeisances; tat-anujiiatah—being permitted by Him (Lord
Vamana); pravivesa—entered; maha-bilam—the planet known as
Sutala.
TRANSLATION
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami said: Accompanied by Bali Maharaja, my
dear King Pariksit, Prahlada Maharaja, the master of all the chiefs
of the demons, took the Supreme Lord’s order on his head with
folded hands. After saying yes to the Lord, circumambulating Him
and offering Him respectful obeisances, he entered the lower plan-
etary system known as Sutala.
TEXT 13
अथादोशनसं राजन्‌ दरिर्नारायणोऽन्तिके |
आसीनमृत्विजां मध्ये सदसि ब्रह्मवादिनाम्‌ ॥१३॥
athahosanasari rajan
harir narayano ’‘ntike
asinam rtvijarn madhye
sadasi brahma-vadinam
atha—thereafter; aha —said; usanasam—unto Sukracarya; rajan—O
King; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; narayanah—the


--- Page 209 ---
Text 14] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 207
Lord; antike—nearby; dsinam—who was sitting; rtvijam madhye—in
the group of all the priests; sadasi—in the assembly; brahma-
vadinam—of the followers of Vedic principles.
TRANSLATION

Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana, thereafter
addressed Sukracarya, who was sitting nearby in the midst of the
assembly with the priests [brahma, hota, udgata and adhvaryu]. 0
Maharaja Pariksit, these priests were all brahma-vadis, followers of
the Vedic principles for performing sacrifices.

TEXT 14
नहान्‌ dag सिष्यस् कम॑च्छद्रं वितन्वतः ।
यत्‌ तत्‌ कर्मसु वैषम्यं Ame समं भवेत्‌ ॥१४॥
brahman santanu Sisyasya
karma-cchidram vitanvatah
yat tat karmasu vaisamyarm
brahma-drstarih samarin bhavet

brahman—O brahmana; santanu—please describe; Sisyasya—of
your disciple; karma-chidram—the discrepancies in the fruitive ac-
tivities; vitanvatah—of he who was performing sacrifices; yat tat—that
which; karmasu—in the fruitive activities; vaisamyam—discrepancy;
brahma-drstam—when it is judged by the brahmanas: samam—
equipoised; bhavet—it so becomes.

TRANSLATION

O best of the brahmanas, Sukracarya, please describe the fault
or discrepancy in your disciple Bali Maharaja, who engaged in per-
forming sacrifices. This fault will be nullified when judged in the
presence of qualified brahmanas.

PURPORT

When Bali Maharaja and Prahlada Maharaja had departed for the

planet Sutala, Lord Visnu asked Sukracarya what the fault was in Bali


--- Page 210 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
Maharaja for which Sukracarya had cursed him. It might be argued that
since Bali Maharaja had now left the scene, how could his faults be
judged? In reply to this, Lord Visnu informed Sukracarya that there was
no need for Bali Maharaja’s presence, for his faults and discrepancies
could be nullified if judged before the brahmanas. As will be seen in the
next verse, Bali Maharaja had no faults; Sukracarya had unnecessarily
cursed him. Nonetheless, this was better for Bali Maharaja. Being cursed
by Sukracarya, Bali Maharaja was deprived of all his possessions, with
the result that the Supreme Personality of Godhead favored him for his
strong faith in devotional service. Of course, a devotee is not required to
engage in fruitive activities. As stated in the $astra, sarvarhanam
acyutejya (Bhag. 4.31.14). By worshiping Acyuta, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, one satisfies everyone. Because Bali Maharaja had
satisfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there were no discrepan-
cies in his performance of sacrifices.
TEXT 15
श्रीशुक उवाच
तस्तत्करमेवेषम्यं यस्य FHA भवान्‌ |
यज्ञेशो यज्ञपुरुषः सर्वभावेन पूजितः ॥ १५॥
Sri-sukra 1/1
kutas tat-karma-vaisamyarn
yasya karmesvaro bhavan
yajieso yajiia-purusah
sarva-bhavena puajitah

Sri-sukrah wvaca—Sri Sukracarya said; kutah—where is that; tat—of
him (Bali Maharaja); karma-vaisamyam—discrepancy in discharging
fruitive activities; yasya—of whom (Bali Maharaja); karma-isvarah—
the master of all fruitive activities; bhavan— Your Lordship;
yajiia-iSah—You are the enjoyer of all sacrifices; yajiia-purusah—You
are the person for whose pleasure all sacrifices are offered; sarva-
bhavena—in all respects; pajitah—having worshiped.


--- Page 211 ---
Text 15] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 209
TRANSLATION
Sukracarya said: My Lord, You are the enjoyer and lawgiver in
all performances of sacrifice, and You are the yajiia-purusa, the
person to whom all sacrifices are offered. If one has fully satisfied
You, where is the chance of discrepancies or faults in his perfor-
mances of sacrifice?
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (5.29) the Lord says, bhoktaram yajiia-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaram: the Lord, the supreme proprietor, is the actual
person to be satisfied by the performance of yajias. The Visnu Purana
(3.8.9) says:
varnasramadacaravata
purusena parah puman
visnur aradhyate pantha
nanyat tat-tosa-karanam
All the Vedic ritualistic sacrifices are performed for the purpose of
satisfying Lord Visnu, the yagjia-purusa. The divisions of society —
brahmana, ksatriya, vaiSya, Suadra, brahmacarya, grhastha,
vanaprastha and sannydsa—are all meant to satisfy the Supreme Lord,
Visnu. To act according to this principle of the varnasrama institution is
called varndsramacarana. In Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.13), Sita
Gosvami says:
atah pumbhir dvija-srestha
varpdsrama-vibhagasah
svanusthitasya dharmasya
samsiddhir hari-tosanam
“O best among the twiceborn, it is therefore concluded that the highest
perfection one can achieve by discharging his prescribed duties accord-
ing to caste divisions and orders of life is to please the Personality of
Godhead.” Everything is meant to satisfy the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore, since Bali Maharaja had satisfied the Lord, he had
no faults, and Sukracarya admitted that cursing him was not good.


--- Page 212 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
TEXT 16
[| ¢
मन्त्रतस्तन्त्रतश्छिद्रं देश्चङालादवस्तुतः |
स्वं करोति निशठिद्रमनुसंकोतनं तव॒ ॥१६॥
mantratas tantrata$ chidrari
desa-kalarha-vastutah
sarvari karoti nischidram
anusankirtanam tava
mantratah—in pronouncing the Vedic mantras improperly;
tantratah—in insufficient knowledge for following regulative principles;
chidram—discrepancy; deSa—in the matter of country; kala—and
time; arha—and recipient; vastutah—and paraphernalia; sarvam—
all these;  karoti—makes; nischidram —without discrepancy;
anusarikirtanam—constantly chanting the holy name; tava —of Your
Lordship.
TRANSLATION
There may be discrepancies in pronouncing the mantras and ob-
serving the regulative principles, and, moreover, there may be dis-
crepancies in regard to time, place, person and paraphernalia. But
when Your Lordship’s holy name is chanted, everything becomes
faultless.
PURPORT
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has recommended:
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha
“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way.” (Brhan-naradiya Purana 38.126) In
this age of Kali, it is extremely difficult to perform Vedic ritualistic


--- Page 213 ---
Text 17] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 211
ceremonies or sacrifices perfectly. Hardly anyone can chant the Vedic
mantras with perfect pronunciation or accumulate the paraphernalia for
Vedic performances. Therefore the sacrifice recommended in this age is
sarikirtana, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord. प्व
sankirtana-prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah (Bhag. 11.5.29). Instead of
wasting time performing Vedic sacrifices, those who are intelligent, those
who possess good brain substance, should take to the chanting of the
Lord’s holy name and thus perform sacrifice perfectly. I have seen that
many religious leaders are addicted to performing yajiias and spending
hundreds and thousands of rupees for imperfect sacrificial perfor-
mances. This is a lesson for those who unnecessarily execute such imper-
fect sacrifices. We should take the advice of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
0 11.111 sarkirtana-prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah). Although
Sukracarya was a strict brahmana addicted to ritualistic activities, he also
admitted, niSchidram anusarikirtanar tava: “My Lord, constant chant-
ing of the holy name of Your Lordship makes everything perfect.” In
Kali-yuga the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies cannot be performed as per-
fectly as before. Therefore Srila Jiva Gosvami has recommended that al-
though one should take care to follow all the principles in every kind of
spiritual activity, especially in worship of the Deity, there is still a chance
of discrepancies, and one should compensate for this by chanting the
holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In our Krsna con-
sciousness movement we therefore give special stress to the chanting of
the Hare Krsna mantra in all activities.
TEXT 17
तथापि वदतो भूमन्‌ करिष्याम्ययुश्वासनम्‌ |
एतच्छरेयः परं पुंसां यत्‌ तबाज्ञानुपालनम्‌ ॥१७॥
tathapi vadato bhuman
karisyamy anusasanam
etac chreyah param purisari
yat tavajiianupalanam

tathapi—although there was no fault on the part of Bali Maharaja;

vadatah—because of Your order; bhaman—O Supreme; karisyami—I


--- Page 214 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
must execute; anusasanam—because it is Your order; etat—this is;
sreyah—that which is the most auspicious; param —supreme; purisam-
—of all persons; yat—because; tava djid-anupalanam—to obey Your
order.
TRANSLATION
Lord Visnu, I must nonetheless act in obedience to Your order
because obeying Your order is most auspicious and is the first duty
of everyone.
TEXT 18
श्रीञयुक उवाच
प्रतिनन्य॒हरेराज्ञाुशन। भगवानिति ।
यज्ञच्छिद्रं समाधत्त fait: सह ॥१८॥
sri-Suka uvaca
pratinandya harer ajiam
usana bhagavan iti
yajiia-cchidrarih samadhatta
baler viprarsibhih saha
Sri-sukah uwvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; pratinandya—offering
all obeisances; hareh—of the Personality of Godhead; ajiam—the
order; uSanah—Sukracarya; bhagavan—the most powerful; iti—thus;
yajiia-chidram—discrepancies in the performance of sacrifices;
samadhatta—made it a point to fulfill; baleh—of Bali Maharaja; vipra-
rsibhih—the best brahmanas; saha—along with.
TRANSLATION
a Sukadeva Gosvami continued: In this way, the most powerful
Sukracarya accepted the order of the Supreme Personality of God-
head with full respect. Along with the best brahmanas, he began to
compensate for the discrepancies in the sacrifices performed by
Bali Maharaja.
TEXT 19
. ९
एवं बले मंहीं राजन्‌ भिक्षित्वा वामनो हरिः ।
+ =,
ददौ भ्रात्रे महेन्द्राय च्निदिवं यत्‌ aay neal


--- Page 215 ---
Text 21] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 213
evar baler mahi rajan
bhiksitva vamano harih
dadau bhratre mahendraya
tridivari yat parair hrtam
evam—thus; baleh—from Bali Maharaja; mahim—the land; rajan—
0 King Pariksit; bhiksitva—after begging; vamanah—His Lordship
Vamana; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dadau—
delivered; bhratre—unto His brother; maha-indraya—Indra, the King
of heaven; tridivam—the planetary system of the demigods; yat—
which; paraih—by others; hrtam —was taken.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, thus having taken all the land of Bali Maharaja
by begging, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Vamanadeva, delivered to His brother Indra all the land taken
away by Indra’s enemy.
TEXTS 20-21
श्रजापतिषतित्रह्या देवर्षिषिदभूमिपैः |
दक्षभृग्बङ्गिरोुख्यैः मारेण भवेन च ॥।२०॥
a
कस्यपस्यादितेः प्रीत्यै सर्वभूतमवाय च ।
लोकानां लोकपालानामकरोद्‌ বামন पतिम्‌ ॥२१॥
prajapati-patir brahma
devarsi-pitr-bhimipaih
daksa-bhrgv-angiro-mukhyaih
kumarena bhavena ca
kaSyapasyaditeh prityai
sarva-bhita-bhavaya ca
lokanam loka-palanam
akarod vamanarm patim
prajapati-patih—the master of all Prajapatis; brahma—Lord
Brahma; deva—with the demigods; rsi—with the great saintly persons;
pitr—with the inhabitants of Pitrloka; bhimipaih—with the Manus;


--- Page 216 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
daksa—with Daksa; bhrgu—with Bhrgu Muni; angirah—with Angira
Muni; mukhyaih—with all the chiefs of the various planetary systems;
kumarena—with Karttikeya; bhavena—with Lord Siva; ca—also;
kasyapasya—of Kasyapa Muni; aditeh—of Aditi; prityai—for the
pleasure; sarva-bhita-bhavaya—for the auspiciousness of all living en-
tities; ca—also; lokdnam—of all planetary systems; loka-palanam—of
the predominating persons in all planets; akarot—made; vdmanam—
Lord Vamana; patim—the supreme leader.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma [the master of King Daksa and all other Praja-
patis], accompanied by all the demigods, the great saintly persons,
the inhabitants of Pitrloka, the Manus, the munis, and such
leaders as Daksa, Bhrgu and Angira, as well as Karttikeya and Lord
Siva, accepted Lord Vamanadeva as the protector of everyone. He
did this for the pleasure of Kasyapa Muni and his wife Aditi and
for the welfare of all the inhabitants of the universe, including
their various leaders.
TEXTS 22-23
Gv 0 .
वेदानां सवदेवानां धर्मस्य FEE: श्रियः ।
मङ्गलानां নবানা च कल्यं खर्गापवगेयोः ।॥२२॥
उपेन्द्रं कल्पयां चक्रे पतिं सवेविभूतये ।
6 .
तद्‌ सर्वाणि भूतानि gd ggikt दृष ॥२३॥
vedanari sarva-devanarn
dharmasya yasasah sriyah
mangalanari vratanam ca
kalpari svargapavargayoh
upendrari kalpayari cakre
patirh sarva-vibhitaye
tada sarvani bhitani
bhrsarh mumudire nrpa
vedanam —(for the protection) of all the Vedas; sarva-devanam—of
all the demigods; dharmasya—of all principles of religion; yasasah—of


--- Page 217 ---
Text 24] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 215
all fame; $riyah—of all opulences; mangalanam—of all auspiciousness;
vratanam ca—and of all vows; kalpam—the most expert; svarga-
apavargayoh—of elevation to the heavenly planets or liberation from
material bondage; upendram—Lord Vamanadeva; kalpayam cakre—
they made it the plan; patim —the master; sarva-vibhiitaye—for all pur-
poses; tadd—at that time; sarvani—all; bhitani—living entities;
bhrsam—very much; mumudire—became happy; nrpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, Indra was considered the King of all the uni-
verse, but the demigods, headed by Lord Brahma, wanted
Upendra, Lord Vamanadeva, as the protector of the Vedas, the
principles of religion, fame, opulence, auspiciousness, vows,
elevation to the higher planetary system, and liberation. Thus they
accepted Upendra, Lord Vamanadeva, as the supreme master of
everything. This decision made all living entities extremely happy.
TEXT 24
ततस्त्विन्द्रः पुरस्छृस्य देवयानेन वामनम्‌ ।
Are + (8
लोकपालर्दिवं निन्ये बरह्मणा चानुमोदितः ॥२४॥
tatas tv indrah puraskrtya
deva-yanena vamanam
loka-palair divari ninye
brahmana canumoditah
tatah—thereafter; tu—but; indrah—the King of heaven;
puraskrtya—keeping forward; deva-ydnena—by an airplane used by
the demigods; vamanam—Lord Vamana; loka-palaih—with the chiefs
of all other planets; divam—to the heavenly planets; ninye—brought;
brahmana—by Lord Brahma; ca—also; anumoditah—being approved.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, along with all the leaders of the heavenly planets,
Indra, the King of heaven, placed Lord Vamanadeva before him
and, with the approval of Lord Brahma, brought Him to the
heavenly planet in a celestial airplane.


--- Page 218 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
TEXT 25
भ्राप्य সিস্তুনন चेन्द्र उपेन्द्र्जपारितः |
श्रिया परमया जुष्टो gar गतसाध्वसः ॥२५॥
prapya tri-bhuvanar cendra
upendra-bhuja-palitah
riya paramaya justo
mumude gata-sadhvasah
prapya—after obtaining; tri-bhuvanam—the three worlds; ca—also;
indrah—the King of heaven; upendra-bhuja-palitah—being protected
by the arms of Vamanadeva, Upendra; sriya—by opulence; paramaya—
by supreme; justah—thus being served; mumude—enjoyed; gata-
sadhvasah —without fear of the demons.
TRANSLATION
Indra, King of heaven, being protected by the arms of
Vamanadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thus regained
his rule of the three worlds and was reinstated in his own position,
supremely opulent, fearless and fully satisfied.
TEXTS 26-27
त
ब्रह्मा शवः मारश्च भृग्वाद्या अनयो IT |
RISE =
पितरः सवंभूतानि सिद्धा वैमानिकाश्च ये ॥२६॥
६
सुमहत्‌ कमं तद्‌ विष्णोर्गायन्तः परमद्भुतम्‌ |
धिष्ण्यानि खानि ते जग्ुरदितिं च शशंधिरे ॥२७॥
brahma $arvah kumaras ca
bhrgv-adya munayo nrpa
pitarah sarva-bhittani
siddha vaimanikas ca ye
sumahat karma tad visnor
gayantah param adbhutam


--- Page 219 ---
Text 28] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 217
dhisnyani svani te jagmur
aditirh ca Sasamnsire
brahma—Lord Brahma; sarvah—Lord Siva; kumarah ca —also Lord
Karttikeya; bhrgu-adyah—headed by Bhrgu Muni, one of the seven rsis;
munayah—the saintly persons; nrpa—O King; pitarah—the inhabi-
tants of Pitrloka; sarva-bhitdni—other living entities; siddhah—the
residents of Siddhaloka; vaimanikah ca—human beings who can travel
everywhere in outer space by airplane; ye—such persons; sumahat—
highly praiseworthy; karma—activities; tat—all those (activities);
visnoh—done by Lord Visnu; gayantah—glorifying; param
adbhutam—uncommon and wonderful; dhisnyani—to their respective
planets; svdni—own; te—all of them; jagmuh—departed; aditim ca—as
well as Aditi; Sasarnsire—praised all these activities of the Lord.
TRANSLATION
Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Lord Karttikeya, the great sage Bhrgu,
other saintly persons, the inhabitants of Pitrloka and all other liv-
ing entities present, including the inhabitants of Siddhaloka and
living entities who travel in outer space by airplane, all glorified
the uncommon activities of Lord Vamanadeva. O King, while
chanting about and glorifying the Lord, they returned to their
respective heavenly planets. They also praised the position of
Aditi.
TEXT 28
९ 5
सवमेतन्मयाख्यातं भवतः कुलनन्दन |
उरुक्रमस्य चरितं शरोतुणामघमोचनम्‌ ॥२८॥
sarvam etan mayakhyatarn
bhavatah kula-nandana
urukramasya caritarn
srotfnam agha-mocanam
sarvam—all; etat—these incidents; maya—by me; akhyatam—have
been described; bhavatah—of you; kula-nandana—O Maharaja


--- Page 220 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
Pariksit, the pleasure of your dynasty; urukramasya—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; caritam—activities; srotfnam —of the audience;
agha-mocanam—such hearing of the Lord’s activities certainly van-
quishes the results of sinful activities.
TRANSLATION
O Maharaja Pariksit, pleasure of your dynasty, I have now de-
scribed to you everything about the wonderful activities of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Vamanadeva. Those who hear
about this are certainly freed from all the results of sinful
activities.
TEXT 29
पारं महिञ्न उरुविक्रमतो गृणानो
यः पार्थिवानि विममे स रजांसि weds |
a o
कि जायमान उत जात उपेति मत्यं
इत्याह मन्त्रदगृषिः पुरुषस यस्य ॥२९॥
[00707 mahimna uruvikramato grnano
yah pdrthivani vimame sa rajamsi martyah
kim jayamana uta jata upaiti martya
ity aha mantra-drg rsih purusasya yasya
param —the measurement; mahimnah—of the glories;
uruvikramatah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who acts won-
derfully; grnanah—can count; yah—a person who; parthivani—of the
whole planet earth; vimame—can count; sah—he; rajarsi—the atoms;
martyah—a human being who is subject to death; kim—what;
Jjayamanah—one who will take birth in the future; uta —either; jatah—
one who is already born; upaiti—can do; martyah—a person subject to
death; iti—thus; aha—said; mantra-drk—who could foresee the Vedic
mantras; rsih—the great saintly Vasistha Muni; purusasya—of the
supreme person; yasya—of whom.


--- Page 221 ---
Text 30] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 219
TRANSLATION

One who is subject to death cannot measure the glories of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Trivikrama, Lord Visnu, any
more than he can count the number of atoms on the entire planet
earth. No one, whether born already or destined to take birth, is
able to do this. This has been sung by the great sage Vasistha.

PURPORT

Vasistha Muni has given a mantra about Lord Visnu: na te visnor
jayamano na jato mahimnah param anantam apa. No one can estimate
the extent of the uncommonly glorious activities of Lord Visnu. Unfor-
tunately, there are so-called scientists who are subject to death at every
moment but are trying to understand by speculation the wonderful cre-
ation of the cosmos. This is a foolish attempt. Long, long ago, Vasistha
Muni said that no one in the past could measure the glories of the Lord
and that no one can do so in the future. One must simply be satisfied with
seeing the glorious activities of the Supreme Lord’s creation. The Lord
therefore says in Bhagavad-gita (10.42), vistabhyaham 1027 krtsnam
ekamsena sthito jagat: “With a single fragment of Myself, I pervade and
support this entire universe.” The material world consists of innumer-
able universes, each one full of innumerable planets, which are all con-
sidered to be products of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s material
energy. Yet this is only one fourth of God’s creation. The other three
fourths of creation constitute the spiritual world. Among the innumer-
able planets in only one universe, the so-called scientists cannot under-
stand even the moon and Mars, but they try to defy the creation of the
Supreme Lord and His uncommon energy. Such men have been de-
scribed as crazy. Nana pramattah kurute vikarma (Bhag. 5.5.4). Such
crazy men unnecessarily waste time, energy and money in attempting to
defy the glorious activities of Urukrama, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

TEXT 30
य॒ इदं देवदेवसख Rg |
अवतारानुचरितं श्रृण्वन्‌ याति परां गतिम्‌ ॥३०॥


--- Page 222 ---
220 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 23
ya 8007 deva-devasya
harer adbhuta-karmanah
avataranucaritarin
Srnvan ydati [007৫7 gatim
yah—anyone who; idam—this; deva-devasya—of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is worshiped by the demigods; hareh—of Lord
Krsna, Hari; adbhuta-karmanah—whose activities are all wonderful;
avatara-anucaritam—activities performed in His different incarnations;
Svan —if one continues to hear; yati—he goes; param gatim—to the
supreme perfection, back home, back to Godhead.
TRANSLATION
If one hears about the uncommon activities of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead in His various incarnations, he is certainly ele-
vated to the higher planetary system or even brought back home,
back to Godhead.
TEXT 31
3 IS
क्रियमाणे कर्मणीदं दैवे पित्येऽथ मानुषे |
৮১ পা 1 ৬
यत्र यत्रानुकीर्त्येत तत्‌ तेषां सुकृतं विदुः U2
kriyamane karmanidari
daive pitrye ‘tha manuse
yatra yatranukirtyeta
tat tesarn sukrtarin viduh
kriyamane—upon the performance; karmani—of a ritualistic
ceremony; idam—this description of the characteristics of Vamanadeva;
daive—to please the demigods; pitrye—or to please the forefathers, as in
a §raddha ceremony; atha—either; manuse —for the pleasure of human
society, as in marriages; yatra—wherever; yatra—whenever;
anukirtyeta—is described; tat—that; tesam—for them; sukrtam—
auspicious; viduh—everyone should understand.


--- Page 223 ---
Text 31] The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets 221
TRANSLATION

Whenever the activities of Vamanadeva are described in the
course of a ritualistic ceremony, whether the ceremony be per-
formed to please the demigods, to please one’s forefathers in
Pitrloka, or to celebrate a social event like a marriage, that
ceremony should be understood to be extremely auspicious.

PURPORT

There are three kinds of ceremonies—specifically, ceremonies to
please the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the demigods, those per-
formed for social celebrations like marriages and birthdays, and those
meant to please the forefathers, like the sraddha ceremony. In all these
ceremonies, large amounts of money are spent for various activities, but
here it is suggested that if along with this there is recitation of the won-
derful activities of Vamanadeva, certainly the ceremony will be carried
out successfully and will be free of all discrepancies.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-
third Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled ‘The Demigods
Regain the Heavenly Planets.”


--- Page 224 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
Matsya,
the Lord’s Fish Incarnation
This chapter describes the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s incarnation
as a fish, and it also describes the saving of Maharaja Satyavrata from an
inundation.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead expands Himself by svarmsa (His
personal expansions) and vibhinnarisa (His expansions as the living en-
tities). As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.8), paritranaya sadhanam
vinasaya ca duskrtam: the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears on
this planet for the protection of the sadhus, or devotees, and for the
destruction of the miscreants, or nondevotees. He especially descends to
give protection to the cows, the brahmanas, the demigods, the devotees
and the Vedic system of religion. Thus He appears in various forms—
sometimes as a fish, sometimes a boar, sometimes Nrsirhhadeva, some-
times Vamanadeva and so on —but in any form or incarnation, although
He comes within the atmosphere of the material modes of nature, He is
unaffected. This is a sign of His supreme controlling power. Although He
comes within the material atmosphere, 7707৫ cannot touch Him.
Therefore, no material qualities can be attributed to Him in any degree.

Once, at the end of the previous kalpa, a demon named Hayagriva
wanted to take the Vedic knowledge away from Lord Brahma at the time
of annihilation. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead took the
incarnation of a fish at the beginning of the period of Svayambhuva
Manu and saved the Vedas. During the reign of Caksusa Manu there was
a king named Satyavrata, who was a great pious ruler. To save him, the
Lord appeared as the fish incarnation for a second time. King Satyavrata
later became the son of the sun-god and was known as Sraddhadeva. He
was established as Manu by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

To receive the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, King
Satyavrata engaged in the austerity of subsisting only by drinking water.
Once, while performing this austerity on the bank of the Krtamala River

223


--- Page 225 ---
224 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
and offering oblations of water with the palm of his hand, he found a
small fish. The fish appealed to the King for protection, asking the King
to keep Him in a safe place. Although the King did not know that the
small fish was the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, as a king he
gave shelter to the fish and kept Him in a water jug. The fish, being the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, wanted to show His potency to King
Satyavrata, and thus He immediately expanded His body in such a way
that He could no longer be kept in the jug of water. The King then put
the fish in a big well, but the well was also too small. Then the King put
the fish in a lake, but the lake was also unsuitable. Finally the King put
the fish in the sea, but even the sea could not accommodate Him. Thus
the King understood that the fish was no one else but the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and he requested the Lord to describe His incarna-
tion as a fish. The Personality of Godhead, being pleased with the King,
informed him that within a week there would be an inundation
throughout the universe and that the fish incarnation would protect the
King, along with the rsis, herbs, seeds and other living entities, in a boat,
which would be attached to the fish’s horn. After saying this, the Lord
disappeared. King Satyavrata offered respectful obeisances to the
Supreme Lord and continued to meditate upon Him. In due course of
time, annihilation took place, and the King saw a boat coming near. After
getting aboard with learned brahmanas and saintly persons, he offered
prayers to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme
Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, and thus he taught Maharaja
Satyavrata and the saintly persons about Vedic knowledge from the core
of the heart. King Satyavrata took his next birth as Vaivasvata Manu,
who is mentioned in Bhagavad-gita. Vivasvan manave praha: the sun-
god spoke the science of Bhagavad-gita to his son Manu. Because of
being the son of Vivasvan, this Manu is known as Vaivasvata Manu.
TEXT 1
श्रीराजोवाच
भगवञ्करोतुमिच्छामि दरेरद्धतकमेणः |
अक्तारक्थामाचां मायामरस्यविडम्बनम्‌ ॥ १ ॥


--- Page 226 ---
Text 3] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 225
Sri-rajovaca
bhagavaii chrotum icchami
harer adbhuta-karmanah
avatara-katham adyam
maya-matsya-vidambanam
Sri-raja uvaca—King Pariksit said; bhagavan—O most powerful;
§rotum —to hear; icchami—I desire; hareh—of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Hari; adbhuta-karmanah—whose activities are wonderful;
avatara-katham —pastimes of the incarnation; adyam—first; maya-
matsya-vidambanam—which is simply an imitation of a fish.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hari, is eternally situated in His transcendental position, yet He
descends to this material world and manifests Himself in various
incarnations. His first incarnation was that of a great fish. O most
powerful Sukadeva Gosvami, I wish to hear from you the pastimes
of that fish incarnation.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-powerful, yet He accepted
the form of an uncommon fish. This is one of the ten original incarna-
tions of the Lord.
TEXTS 2-3
यदर्थमदथाद्‌ रूपं मारस्यं लोकलुगुष्सितम्‌ |
९
तमःप्रकृति TH कर्मग्रस्त इवेश्वरः | २॥
age भगवन्‌ सवं यथावद्‌ वक्तुमर्हसि |
उत्तमश्छोकचरितं सर्वलोकसुखावहम्‌ ॥ २ ॥
yad-artham adadhad rapari
matsyari loka-jugupsitam
tamah-prakrti-durmarsar
karma-grasta ivesvarah


--- Page 227 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
etan no bhagavan sarvam
yathavad vaktum arhasi
uttamasloka-caritariu
sarva-loka-sukhavaham
yat-artham —for what purpose; adadhat—accepted; rizpam—form;
matsyam—of a fish; loka-jugupsitam—which is certainly not very
favorable in this world; tamah—in the mode of ignorance; prakrti—
such behavior; durmarsam—which is certainly very painful and con-
demned; karma-grastah—one who is under the laws of karma; iva—
like; iSvarah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; etat—all these
facts; nah—unto us; bhagavan—O most powerful sage; sarvam—
everything; yathavat—properly; vaktum arhasi—kindly describe; ut-
tamasloka-caritam —the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of God-
head; sarva-loka-sukha-avaham—by hearing of which everyone be-
comes happy.
TRANSLATION
What was the purpose for which the Supreme Personality of
Godhead accepted the abominable form of a fish, exactly as an or-
dinary living being accepts different forms under the laws of
karma? The form of a fish is certainly condemned and full of ter-
rible pain. O my lord, what was the purpose of this incarnation?
Kindly explain this to us, for hearing about the pastimes of the
Lord is auspicious for everyone.
PURPORT
Pariksit Maharaja's question to Sukadeva Gosvami was based on this
principle stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanarin syjamy aham
“Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O de-
scendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion —at that time I


--- Page 228 ---
Text 5] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 227
descend Myself.” The Lord appears in each incarnation to save the world
from irreligious principles and especially to protect His devotees
(paritranaya sadhinam). Vimanadeva, for example, appeared to save
the devotee Bali Maharaja. Similarly, when the Supreme Personality of
Godhead accepted the abominable form of a fish, He must have done so
to favor some devotee. Pariksit Maharaja was eager to know about the
devotee for whom the Supreme Lord accepted this form.
TEXT 4
श्रीसूत उवाच
इत्युक्तो विष्णुरातेन मगवान्‌ बादरायणिः |
उवाच चरितं दिष्णोम॑त्स्यरूपेण यत्‌ कृतम्‌ ॥ ४ ॥
577-57 द, uvdaca
ity ukto visnu-ratena
bhagavan badarayanih
uvdca caritam visnor
matsya-ripena yat krtam
$ri-siitah uvdca—Sri Sata Gosvami said; iti uktah—thus being ques-
tioned; wvispu-ratena—by Maharija Pariksit, known as Vispurata;
bhagavan—the most powerful; badarayanih—the son of Vyasadeva,
Sukadeva Gosvami; uvaca—said; caritam—the pastimes; vispoh—of
Lord Visnu; matsya-riipena—by Him in the form of a fish; yat—what-
ever; krtam—was done.
TRANSLATION
_ Sita Gosvami said: When Pariksit Maharaja thus inquired from
Sukadeva Gosvami, that most powerful saintly person began de-
scribing the pastimes of the Lord’s incarnation as a fish.
TEXT 5
श्रीदयुक उवाच
गोविप्रसुरसाधूनां छन्दसामपि , चेश्वरः |
रक्षामिच्छंसतनधत्ते धर्मस्यास्य चैव दि ॥ ५॥


--- Page 229 ---
228 Srimad -Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24.
sri-suka uvaca
go-vipra-sura-sadhinanm
chandasam api cesvarah

raksam iccharis taniur dhatte

dharmasyarthasya caiva hi
sri-Sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; go—of the cows;
vipra—of the brahmanas; sura—of the demigods; sadhiinam—and of
the devotees; chandasam api—even of the Vedic literature; ca—and;
isvarah—the supreme controller; raksam—the protection; icchan—
desiring; tanih dhatte —accepts the forms of incarnations; dharmasya-
—of the principles of religion; arthasya—of the principles of the pur-

pose of life; ca—and; eva—indeed; hi—certainly.

TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: 0 King, for the sake of protecting
the cows, brahmanas, demigods, devotees, the Vedic literature,
religious principles, and principles to fulfill the purpose of life,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts the forms of
incarnations.
PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead generally appears in various
types of incarnations to give protection to the cows and brahmanas. The
Lord is described as go-brahmana-hitaya ca; in other words, He is al-
ways eager to benefit the cows and brahmanas. When Lord Krsna ap-
peared, He purposefully became a cowherd boy and showed personally
how to give protection to the cows and calves. Similarly, He showed
respect to Sudama Vipra, a real brahmana. From the Lord’s personal ac-
tivities, human society should learn how to give protection specifically to
the brahmanas and cows. Then the protection of religious principles,
fulfillment of the aim of life and protection of Vedic knowledge can be
achieved. Without protection of cows, brahminical culture cannot be
maintained; and without brahminical culture, the aim of life cannot be
fulfilled. The Lord, therefore, is described as go-brahmana-hitaya be-
cause His incarnation is only for the protection of the cows and


--- Page 230 ---
Text 6] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 229
brahmanas. Unfortunately, because in Kali-yuga there is no protection
of the cows and brahminical culture, everything is in a precarious posi-
tion. If human society wants to be exalted, the leaders of society must
follow the instructions of Bhagavad-gita and give protection to the cows,
the brahmanas and brahminical culture.
TEXT 6
उचावचेषु भूतेषु चरन्‌ वायुरिवेश्वरः |
नोच्चावचत्वं मजते निगणत्वाद्वियो गुणैः ॥ ६ ॥
uccavacesu bhitesu
caran vayur ivesvarah
noccavacatvar bhajate
nirgunatvad dhiyo gunaih
ucca-avacesu—having higher or lower bodily forms; bhitesu—
among the living entities; caran—behaving; vayuh iva —exactly like the
air; Svarah—the Supreme Lord; na—not; ucca-avacatvam—the
quality of higher or lower grades of life; bhajate—accepts; nirgunatvat-
—because of being transcendental, above all material qualities;
dhiyah—generally; gunaih—by the modes of material nature.
TRANSLATION
Like the air passing through different types of atmosphere, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing sometimes
as a human being and sometimes as a lower animal, is always tran-
scendental. Because He is above the material modes of nature, He
is unaffected by higher and lower forms.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of the material
nature (mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sacaracaram). Therefore, being
the supreme controller of the laws of nature, the Lord cannot be under
their influence. An example given in this regard is that although the
wind blows through many places, the air is not affected by the qualities


--- Page 231 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
of these places. Although the air sometimes carries the odor of a filthy
place, the air has nothing to do with such a place. Similarly, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, being all-good and all-auspicious, is never
affected by the material qualities like an ordinary living entity. Purusah
prakrti-stho hi bhunkte prakrtijan gunan (Bg. 13.21). When the living
entity is in the material nature, he is affected by its qualities. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, is not affected. Dis-
respectfully, one who does not know this considers the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead an ordinary living being (avajananti mari mugdhah).
Param bhavam ajanantah: such a conclusion is reached by the unin-
telligent because they are unaware of the transcendental qualities of the
Lord.
TEXT 7
आसीदतीतकल्यान्त গান্ধী नैमित्तिको ख्यः |
- > -
सघुद्रापष्टतास्तत्र SRN भूरादया JT NN 9 ||
asid atita-kalpante
brahmo naimittiko layah
samudropaplutds tatra
loka bhur-adayo nrpa
asit—there was; atita—past; kalpa-ante—at the end of the kalpa;
brahmah—of Lord Brahma’s day; naimittikah—because of that;
layah—inundation; samudra—in the ocean; upaplutah—were inun-
dated; tatra—there; lokah—all the planets; bhith-adayah—Bhih,
Bhuvah and Svah, the three lokas; nrpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, at the end of the past millennium, at the end of
Brahma’s day, because Lord Brahma sleeps during the night, an-
nihilation took place, and the three worlds were covered by the
water of the ocean.
TEXT 8
০
काठेनागतनिद्रस् धातुः হিহাযিঘানপ্তী ।
खतो निःखृतान्‌ वेदान्‌ हयग्रीोऽन्तिकेऽहरत्‌।।८।।


--- Page 232 ---
Text 9] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 231
kalenagata-nidrasya
dhatuh sisayisor bali
mukhato nihsrtan vedan
hayagrivo ’ntike ’harat
11९14 —because of time (the end of Brahma’s day); dgata-
nidrasya—when he felt sleepy; dhatuh—of Brahma; sisayisoh—desir-
ing to lie down to sleep; bali—very powerful; mukhatah—from the
mouth;  nihsrtan—emanating; vedan—the Vedic knowledge;
hayagrivah—the great demon named Hayagriva; antike—nearby;
aharat—stole.
TRANSLATION
At the end of Brahma’s day, when Brahma felt sleepy and
desired to lie down, the Vedas were emanating from his mouth,
and the great demon named Hayagriva stole the Vedic knowledge.
TEXT 9
ज्ञात्वा तद्‌ दानवेन्द्रस्य हयग्रीवस्य चेष्टितम्‌ ।
दधार शफरीरूपं भगवान्‌ हरिरीश्वरः nen
172४2 tad danavendrasya
hayagrivasya cestitam
dadhara Saphari-rapari
bhagavan harir iSvarah
jaatva—after understanding; tat—that; danava-indrasya—of the
great demon; hayagrivasya—of Hayagriva; cestitam—activity;
dadhara—accepted; Saphari-ripam—the form of a fish; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; harih—the Lord; isvarah—the
supreme controller.
TRANSLATION
Understanding the acts of the great demon Hayagriva, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who is full of all opu-
lences, assumed the form of a fish and saved the Vedas by killing
the demon.


--- Page 233 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24.
PURPORT
Because everything was inundated by water, to save the Vedas it was
necessary for the Lord to assume the form of a fish.
TEXT 10
तत्र राजऋषिः FRE सत्यवतो महान्‌ |
नारायणपरोऽतपत्‌ तपः स মত্তিকাহালঃ ॥१०॥
tatra raja-rsih kascin
namna satyavrato mahan
narayana-paro ‘tapat
tapah sa salildsanah
tatra—in that connection; raja-rsth—a king equally qualified as a
great saintly person; kaScit—someone; namna—by the name;
satyavratah—Satyavrata; mahdn—a great personality; narayana-
parah—a great devotee of Lord Narayana, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; atapat—performed austerities; tapah—penances; sah—he;
salila-asanah—only drinking water.
TRANSLATION
During the Caksusa-manvantara there was a great king named
Satyavrata who was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Satyavrata performed austerities by subsisting only on
water.
PURPORT
The Lord assumed one fish incarnation to save the Vedas at the begin-
ning of the Svayambhuva-manvantara, and at the end of the
Caksusa-manvantara the Lord again assumed the form of a fish just to
favor the great king named Satyavrata. As there were two incarnations of
Varaha, there were also two incarnations of fish. The Lord appeared as
one fish incarnation to save the Vedas by killing Hayagriva, and He
assumed the other fish incarnation to show favor to King Satyavrata.


--- Page 234 ---
Text 12] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 233
TEXT 11
योऽसावसिन्‌ महाकष्पे तनयः स विवखतः |
आद्धदेव इति ख्यातो मनुत्वे हरिणार्पितः ॥११॥
yo ’sav asmin maha-kalpe
tanayah sa vivasvatah
Sraddhadeva iti khyato
manutve harinarpitah
yah—one who; asau—He (the Supreme Person); asmin—in this;
maha-kalpe—great millennium; tanayah—son; sah—he; vivasvatah—
of the sun-god; sraddhadevah—by the name Sraddhadeva; iti—thus;
khyatah—celebrated; manutve—in the position of Manu; harina—by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arpitah—was situated.
TRANSLATION
In this [the present] millennium King Satyavrata later became
the son of Vivasvan, the king of the sun planet, and was known as
Sraddhadeva. By the mercy of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, he was given the post of Manu.
TEXT 12
एकदा कृतमालायां र्वतो जलतपेणम्‌ |
तस्याञ्जल्युदके काचिच्लफर्येकाभ्यपद्यत ॥१२॥
ekada krtamalayarm
kurvato jala-tarpanam
tasyanjaly-udake kacic
chaphary ekabhyapadyata
ekada—one day; krtamalayam—on the bank of the Krtamala River;
kurvatah—executing; jala-tarpanam—the offering of oblations of
water; tasya—his; afijali—palmful; udake—in the water; kdcit—some;
Saphari—a small fish; ekd—one; abhyapadyata—was generated.


--- Page 235 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
TRANSLATION
One day while King Satyavrata was performing austerities by
offering water on the bank of the River Krtamala, a small fish ap-
peared in the water in his palms.
TEXT 13
सत्यव्रतोऽञ्रकिगतां सह तोयेन भारत |
- Ne
उत्ससज नदीतोये TRG द्रविडेश्वरः 1230
satyavrato “fijali-gatam
saha toyena bharata
utsasarja nadi-toye
50010777 dravidesvarah
satyavratah—King Satyavrata; anjali-gatam—in the water held in
the palms of the King; saha—with; toyena—water; bharata—O King
Pariksit; utsasarja—threw; nadi-toye—in the water of the river;
Sapharim—that small fish; dravida-isvarah—Satyavrata, the King of
Dravida.
TRANSLATION
Satyavrata, the King of Dravidade$a, threw the fish into the
water of the river along with the water in his palm, O King
Pariksit, descendant of Bharata.
TEXT 14
तमाह सातिकरुणं मदाकारुणिकं नृपम्‌ |
यादोभ्यो ज्ञातिघातिभ्यो दीनां मां दीनवत्सल |
कथं Aged राजन्‌ भीतामसिन्‌ सरिजले ॥१४॥
tam aha satikarunam
maha-karunikarh nrpam
yadobhyo jrati-ghatibhyo
dinam mar dina-vatsala
katharh visrjase rajan
bhitam asmin sarij-jale


--- Page 236 ---
Text 15] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 235
tam—unto him (Satyavrata); Gha—said; s@—that small fish; ati-
karunam—extremely compassionate; maha-karunikam—extremely
merciful; nrpam—unto King Satyavrata; yadobhyah—to the aquatics;
jnati-ghatibhyah—who are always eager to kill the smaller fish;
dinam—very poor; mam—me; dina-vatsala—O protector of the poor;
katham —why; visrjase—you are throwing; rajan—O King; bhitam—
very much afraid; asmin—within this; sarit-jale—in the water of the
river.
TRANSLATION
With an appealing voice, the poor small fish said to King
Satyavrata, who was very merciful: My dear King, protector of the
poor, why are you throwing Me in the water of the river, where
there are other aquatics who can kill Me? I am very much afraid of
them.
PURPORT
In the Matsya Purana it is said:
ananta-$aktir bhagavan
matsya-ripi janardanah
kridarthari yacayam asa
svayam satyavratam nrpam
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead possesses unlimited potency.
Nonetheless, in His pastime in the form of a fish He begged protection
from King Satyavrata.”
TEXT 15
९
तमात्मनोऽयुग्रहा्थं प्रीत्या मरस्यवपुधेरम्‌ |
अजानन्‌ रक्षणार्थाय शफर्याः स मनो दधे ॥१५॥
tam atmano ‘nugrahartham
pritya matsya-vapur-dharam
ajanan raksanarthaya
Sapharyah sa mano dadhe


--- Page 237 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24

tam —unto the fish; atmanah— personal; anugraha-artham—to show
favor; pritya—very much pleased; matsya-vapuh-dharam—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the form of a fish;
ajanan—without knowledge of this; raksana-arthaya—just to give pro-
tection; Sapharyah—of the fish; sah—the King; manah—mind;
dadhe—decided.

TRANSLATION

To please himself, King Satyavrata, not knowing that the fish
was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, decided with great
pleasure to give the fish protection.

PURPORT

Here is an example of giving service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead even without knowledge. Such service is called ajaata-sukrti.
King Satyavrata wanted to show his own mercy, not knowing that the fish
was Lord Vispu. By such unknowing devotional service, one is favored
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Service rendered to the
Supreme Lord, knowingly or unknowingly, never goes in vain.

TEXT 16
तस्या दीनतरं वाक्यमाश्रुत्य स॒ महीपतिः |
कलशाप्सु निधायैनां दयालर्निन्य आश्रमम्‌ 11281
tasya 08780010707 vakyam
asrutya sa mahipatih
kalasapsu nidhayainam
dayalur ninya asramam

tasyah—of the fish; dina-taram—pitiable; wvakyam—words;
asrutya—hearing; sah—that; mahi-patih—the King; kalasa-apsu—in
the water contained in the water jug; nidhaya —taking; enam—the fish;
dayaluh —merciful; ninye —brought; asramam—to his residence.


--- Page 238 ---
Text 18] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 237
TRANSLATION
The merciful King, being moved by the pitiable words of the
fish, placed the fish in a water jug and brought Him to his own
residence.
TEXT 17
सातु तत्रीकरात्रेण वर्धमाना कमण्डलौ |
अल्घ्वात्मावकाञं वा इद माह महीपतिम्‌ १७॥
sa tu tatraika-ratrena
vardhamana kamandalau
alabdhvatmavakasari va
idam aha mahipatim
sa—that fish; tu—but; tatra—therein; eka-ratrena—in one night;
vardhamanda—expanding; kamandalau—in the waterpot; alabdhva—
without attaining; dtma-avakasam—a comfortable position for His
body; vd —either; idam—this; aha —said; mahi-patim—unto the King.
TRANSLATION
But in one night that fish grew so much that He could not move
His body comfortably in the water of the pot. He then spoke to the
King as follows.
TEXT 18
नाहं कमण्डलावसिन्‌ TF पस्तुमिहोत्सहे |
कल्पयौकः सुविपुलं यत्राहं निवसे सुखम्‌ ।॥१८॥
71010777 kamandalav asmin
krcchram vastum ihotsahe
kalpayaukah suvipulari
yatrahari nivase sukham
na—not; aham—I; kamandalau—in this waterpot; asmin—in this;
krechram —with great difficulty; vastum—to live; iha —here; utsahe—


--- Page 239 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
like; kalpaya—just consider; okah—residential place; su-vipulam—
more expanded; yatra—wherein; aham—I; nivase—can live;
sukham—in pleasure.
TRANSLATION
O My dear King, I do not like living in this waterpot with such
great difficulty. Therefore, please find some better reservoir of
water where I can live comfortably.
TEXT 19
स एनां तत॒ आदाय न्यधादौदचचनोदके |
तत्र॒ বিনা ম্তলল दस्त्रयमवधेत ॥१९॥
8.1... 11
nyadhdad audaficanodake
tatra ksipta muhiirtena
hasta-trayam avardhata
sah—the King; enam—unto the fish; tatah—thereafter; adaya—
taking out; nyadhat—placed; audaficana-udake—in a well of water;
tatra—therein; ksipta—being thrown; muhirtena—within a moment;
hasta-trayam—three cubits; avardhata —immediately developed.
TRANSLATION
Then, taking the fish out of the waterpot, the King threw Him in
a large well. But within a moment the fish developed to the length
of three cubits.
TEXT 20
न म एतदलं राजच्‌ सुखं वस्तुश्वद श्नम्‌ |
पृथु देहि पदं मह्यं यत्‌ त्वाहं शरणं गता ॥२०॥
na ma etad alam rajan
sukham vastum udafcanam
prthu dehi [00007 mahyari
yat tvaharh Saranar gata


--- Page 240 ---
Text 22] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 239
na—not; me—unto Me; etat—this; alam—fit; rajan—O King;
sukham—in happiness; vastum—to live; udaficanam—reservoir of
water; prthu—very great; dehi—give; padam—a place; mahyam—
unto Me; yat—which; tvd—unto you; aham—I; Saranam—shelter;
gata—have taken.
TRANSLATION
The fish then said: My dear King, this reservoir of water is not
fit for My happy residence. Please give Me a more extensive pool of
water, for I have taken shelter of you.
TEXT 21
तत आदाय सा राज्ञा धिसा राजन्‌ सरोवरे ।
तदाृयात्मना सोऽयं महामीनोऽन्ववधत ॥२१॥।
tata addya 5৫ rajia
ksipta rajan sarovare
tad avrtyatmana so ’yarin
maha-mino ‘nvavardhata
tatah—from there; ddaya—taking away; sa —the fish; rajia—by the `
King; hsipta—being thrown; rgjan—O King (Maharaja Pariksit);
sarovare—in a lake; tat—that; dvrtya—covering; atmana—by the
body; sah—the fish; ayam—this; maha-minah—gigantic fish;
anvavardhata—immediately developed.
TRANSLATION
O Maharaja Pariksit, the King took the fish from the well and
threw Him in a lake, but the fish then assumed a gigantic form ex-
ceeding the extent of the water.
TEXT 22
नैतन्मे खस्तये राजन्नुदकं AREER: |
निधेहि रक्षायोगेन हृदे मामविदासिनि ॥२२॥


--- Page 241 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
naitan me svastaye rajann
udakam salilaukasah
nidhehi raksa-yogena
hrade mam avidasini
na—not; etat—this; me—unto Me; svastaye —comfortable; rajan—O
King; udakam—water; salila-okasah—because I am a big aquatic;
nidhehi—put; raksa-yogena—by some means; hrade—in a lake;
mam —Me; aviddsini— perpetual.
TRANSLATION
The fish then said: O King, I am a large aquatic, and this water is
not at all suitable for Me. Now kindly find some way to save Me. It
would be better to put Me in the water of a lake that will never
reduce.
TEXT 23
इत्युक्त ¦ सोऽनयन्मरस्यं तत्र तत्राविदासिनि |
जलाशयेऽसंमितं तं age प्राक्षिषज्छषम्‌ ॥२३॥
ity uktah so 'nayan matsyarn
tatra tatravidasini
Jjalasaye ‘sammitari tari
samudre praksipaj jhasam
iti uktah—thus being requested; sah—the King; anayat—brought;
matsyam—the fish; tatra—therein; tatra—therein; avidasini—where
the water never diminishes; jala-aSaye—in the reservoir of water;
asammitam —unlimited; tam —unto the fish; samudre—in the ocean;
praksipat—threw; jhasam—the gigantic fish.
TRANSLATION
When thus requested, King Satyavrata took the fish to the
largest reservoir of water. But when that also proved insufficient,
the King at last threw the gigantic fish into the ocean.


--- Page 242 ---
Text 25] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 241
TEXT 24
किप्यपाणस्तमादेदपिह मां मकरादयः |
अदन्त्यतिबला वीर मां ADEE ॥।२४॥।
ksipyamanas tam ahedam
tha mam makaradayah
adanty atibala vira
mar nehotsrastum arhasi
ksipyamanah—being thrown in the ocean; tam—unto the King;
aha —the fish said; idam—this; iha —in this place; mam —Me; makara-
adayah—dangerous aquatics like sharks; adanti—will eat; ati-balah—
because of being too powerful; vira—O heroic King; mam —Me; na—
not; tha—in this water; utsrastum—to throw; arhasi—you deserve.
TRANSLATION
While being thrown in the ocean, the fish said to King
Satyavrata: O hero, in this water there are very powerful and
dangerous sharks that will eat Me. Therefore you should not throw
Me in this place.
TEXT 25
एवं विमोहितस्तेन gar वल्णुभारतीम्‌ |
तमाह को मवानसान्‌ मत्खरूपेण मोहयन्‌ ।२५॥
91৫77 vimohitas tena
vadata valgu-bharatim
tam aha ko bhavan asman
matsya-riipena mohayan
evam—thus; vimohitah—bewildered; tena—by the fish; vadata—
speaking; valgu-bharatim—sweet words; tam—unto him; aha —said;
kah—who; bhavan—You; asman—us; matsya-ripena—in the form of
a fish; mohayan —bewildering.


--- Page 243 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
TRANSLATION
After hearing these sweet words from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in the form of a fish, the King, being bewildered,
asked Him: Who are You, sir? You simply bewilder us.
TEXT 26
नैवंवीर्यो जलचरो दृ्टोऽखामिः श्रुतोऽपि व ।
यो भवान्‌ योजनशतमद्वाभिन्यानरो सरः ॥२६॥
naivari viryo jalacaro
drsto ‘smabhih Sruto ‘pi va
yo bhavan yojana-satam
ahnabhivyanase sarah
na—not; evam—thus; viryah—powerful; jala-carah—aquatic;
drstah—seen; asmabhih—by us; srutah api—nor heard of; va —either;
yah—who; bhavan—Your Lordship; yojana-satam—hundreds of
miles; ahna—in one day; abhivyanase—expanding; sarah —water.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, in one day You have expanded Yourself for hundreds
of miles, covering the water of the river and the ocean. Before this
I had never seen or heard of such an aquatic animal.
TEXT 27
Ad त्वं मगवान्‌ साश्षादूरि्नारायणोऽन्ययः |
अनुग्रहाय भूतानां धत्से रूपं जलौकसाम्‌ Rl
niinari ८0077 bhagavan saksad
dharir narayano vyayah
anugrahaya bhutanar
dhatse ripam jalaukasam
niinam—certainly; tvam—You (are); bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; saksat—directly; harth—the Lord; narayanah—


--- Page 244 ---
Text 29] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 243
the Personality of Godhead; avyayah—inexhaustible; anugrahaya—to
show mercy; bhiitanam—to all living entities; dhatse—You have
assumed; riipam—a form; jala-okasam—like an aquatic.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are certainly the inexhaustible Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Narayana, Sri Hari. It is to show Your mercy
to the living entities that You have now assumed the form of an
aquatic.
TEXT 28
नमस्ते पुरुषश्रेष्ठ सित्युत्पस्यप्ययेश्वर |
भक्तानां नः प्रपज्ानां ख्यो द्यात्मगतिर्विभो।। २८॥
namas te purusa-srestha
sthity-utpatty-apyayesvara
bhaktanam nah prapannanari
mukhyo hy atma-gatir vibho
namah—I offer my respectful obeisances; te—unto You; purusa-
Srestha—the best of all living entities, the best of all enjoyers; sthiti—of
maintenance; utpatti—creation; apyaya—and destruction; i§vara—the
Supreme Lord; bhaktanam—of Your devotees; nah—like us;
prapannanam—those who are surrendered; mukhyah—the supreme;
hi—indeed; atma-gatih—the supreme destination; vibho—Lord Visnu.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, master of creation, maintenance and annihilation, O
best of enjoyers, Lord Visnu, You are the leader and destination of
surrendered devotees like us. Therefore let me offer my respectful
obeisances unto You.
TEXT 29
सर्वे लीलावतारास्ते भूतानां भूतिरेतवः |
ज्ञातुभिच्छाम्यदो रूपं यद्थं भवता धृतम्‌ ॥२९॥


--- Page 245 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24.
sarve lilavataras te
bhiitanar bhiiti-hetavah
17210772 icchamy ado ripari
yad-arthari bhavata dhrtam
sarve—everything; lild —pastimes; avatardh—incarnations; te—of
Your Lordship; bhiatanam—of all living entities; bhiiti—of a flourishing
condition; hetavah—the causes; jidtum—to know; icchami—I wish;
adah—this; rapam—form; yat-artham—for what purpose; bhavata—
by Your Lordship; dhrtam —assumed.
TRANSLATION
All Your pastimes and incarnations certainly appear for the
welfare of all living entities. Therefore, my Lord, I wish to know
the purpose for which You have assumed this form of a fish.
TEXT 30
न तेऽरविन्दाक्ष पदोपसर्पणं
< -
मषा मवेत्‌ स्ेखुहत्प्रियार्मनः |
यथेतरेषां TOA सता-
wie यद्‌ REA हि नः ॥३०॥
na te 'ravindaksa padopasarpanarn
mrsa bhavet sarva-suhrt-priyatmanah
yathetaresar prthag-atmanar satam
adidrso yad vapur adbhutariv hi nah
na—never; te—of Your Lordship; aravinda-aksa—My Lord, whose
eyes are like the petals of a lotus; pada-upasarpanam—worship of the
lotus feet; mrsa — useless; bhavet—can become; sarva-suhrt—the friend
of everyone; priya—dear to everyone; dtmanah—the Supersoul of
everyone; yathd—as; itaresam—of others (the demigods); prthak-
atmanam—living entities who have material bodies different from the
soul; satam—of those who are spiritually fixed; adidrsah—You have
manifested; yat—that; vapuh—body; adbhutam—wonderful; hi—in-
deed; nah—unto us.


--- Page 246 ---
Text 30] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 245
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, possessing eyes like the petals of a lotus, the worship
of the demigods, who are in the bodily concept of life, is fruitless
in all respects. But because You are the supreme friend and dear-
most Supersoul of everyone, worship of Your lotus feet is never
useless. You have therefore manifested Your form as a fish.
PURPORT
The demigods like Indra, Candra and Sarya are ordinary living en-
tities who are differentiated parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The Lord expands Himself through the living beings (nityo
nityanar cetanas cetananam). His personal visnu-tattva forms, which
are all spiritual, are called svarisa, and the living entities who are dif-
ferentiated parts are called wvibhinnamsa. Some of the vibhinnarmsa
forms are spiritual, and some are a combination of matter and spirit. The
conditioned souls in the material world are different from their external
bodies made of material energy. Thus the demigods living in the upper
planetary systems and the living entities living in the lower planetary
system are of the same nature. Nonetheless, those living as human beings
on this planet are sometimes attracted to worshiping the demigods in the
higher planetary systems. Such worship is temporary. As the human
beings on this planet have to change their bodies (tatha dehantara-
praptih), the living entities known as Indra, Candra, Varuna and so on
will also have to change their bodies in due course of time. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita, antavat tu phalari 86507 tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam:
“Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are
limited and temporary.” Kamais tais tair hrta-jaanah prapadyante
‘nya-devatah: those who do not know the position of the demigods are
inclined to worship the demigods for some material purpose, but the
results of such worship are never permanent. Consequently, here it is
said, yathetaresarin prthag-atmanarh satam, padopasarpanarin mrsa
bhavet. In other words, if one is to worship someone else, he must wor-
ship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then his worship will never
be fruitless. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat: even
a slight attempt to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead is a per-
manent asset. Therefore, as recommended in Srimad-Bhagavatam,
tyaktva sva-dharmar caranambujariv hareh. One should take to the


--- Page 247 ---
246 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
worship of the lotus feet of Hari, even if this means giving up the so-
called occupational duty assigned because of the particular body one has
accepted. Because worship in terms of the body is temporary, it does not
bear any permanent fruit. But worship of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead gives immense benefit.
TEXT 31
সাঁহাক उवाच
इति gael नृपतिं जगत्पतिः
सत्यव्रतं मत्खवपुर्युगक्षये ।
¢
विहतुकामः „ श्रल्याणंवेऽवी-
चिकीषुरेकान्तजनप्रियः प्रियम्‌ nz
sri-Suka uvaca
iti 07000007182 nrpatirh jagat-patih
satyavratarn matsya-vapur yuga-ksaye
vihartu-kamah pralayarnave 07000
cikirsur ekanta-jana-priyah priyam
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; bruvanam—
speaking like that; nrpatim—unto the King; jagat-patih —the master of
the entire universe; satyavratam —unto Satyavrata; matsya-vapuh—the
Lord, who had assumed the form of a fish; yuga-ksaye—at the end of a
yuga; vihartu-kamah—to enjoy His own pastimes; pralaya-arnave—in
the water of inundation; abravit—said; cikirsuh—desiring to do;
ekanta-jana-priyah—most beloved by the devotees; priyam —something
very beneficial.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: When King Satyavrata spoke in this

way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who at the end of the
yuga had assumed the form of a fish to benefit His devotee and en-
joy His pastimes in the water of inundation, responded as follows.


--- Page 248 ---
Text 33] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 247
TEXT 32
fam
सप्मेद्ययतनादुष्व॑महन्येतद रिन्दम ।
-
frag rma तैलोक्यं मू्ैवादिकम्‌ 13211
§ri-bhagavan २८100
saptame hy adyatanad irdhvam
ahany etad arindama
nimariksyaty apyayambhodhau
trailokyari bhir-bhuvadikam
sri-bhagavan uvdca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
saptame—on the seventh; hi—indeed; adyatandt—from today;
ardhvam—forward; ahani—on the day; etat—this creation; arim-
dama—O King who can subdue your enemies; nimariksyati—shall be
inundated; apyaya-ambhodhau—in the ocean of destruction;
trailokyam—the three lokas; bhith-bhuva-adikam—namely 10110110103,
Bhuvarloka and Svarloka.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O King, who can
subdue your enemies, on the seventh day from today the three
worlds —Bhiih, Bhuvah and Svah — will all merge into the water of
inundation.
TEXT 33
+ . a
त्रिलोक्यां लीयमानायां संवर्ताम्भसि वै तदा |
उपस्थास्यति नोः काचिद्‌ विशाखा त्वां मयेरिता ।।২২।॥
tri-lokyar ltyamanayar
sarmvartambhasi vai tada
upasthasyati nauh kacid
visala tvarh mayerita
tri-lokyam —the three lokas; liyamanayam—upon being merged;
sarmvarta-ambhasi—in the water of destruction; vai—indeed; tadd—at


--- Page 249 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
that time; upasthasyati—will appear; nauh—boat; kdacit—one; visala —
very big; tvam—unto you; maya—by Me; irita—sent.
TRANSLATION
When all the three worlds merge into the water, a large boat sent
by Me will appear before you.
TEXTS 34-35
स्वं तावदोषधीः सर्वा बीजान्युच्चावचानि च |
सपर्षिभिः परिवृतः सर्वसच्वोपवंहितः ।२४॥
आरुद्य बृहतीं नावं विचरिष्यस्यविङ्कवः ।
एकाणवे निरालोके ऋषीणामेव वचसा ॥।३५॥
tvarn tavad osadhih sarva
bijany uccavacani ca
saptarsibhih parivrtah
sarva-sattvopabrrithitah
aruhya brhatirh navarm
vicarisyasy aviklavah
ekarnave niraloke
rsinam eva varcasa
tvam—you; tavat—until that time; oseadhih—herbs; sarvah—all
kinds of; bijani—seeds; ucca-avacani—lower and higher; ca—and;
sapta-rsibhih—Dby the seven rsis; parivrtah—surrounded; sarva-sattva-
—all kinds of living entities; upabrmhitah—surrounded by; aruhya—
getting on; brhatim—very large; navam—boat; vicarisyasi—shall
travel; aviklavah—without moroseness; eka-arnave —in the ocean of in-
undation; niraloke—without being illuminated; rsinam—of the great
rsis; eva—indeed; varcasa—by the effulgence.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, O King, you shall collect all types of herbs and seeds
and load them on that great boat. Then, accompanied by the seven


--- Page 250 ---
Text 37] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 249
rsis and surrounded by all kinds of living entities, you shall get
aboard that boat, and without moroseness you shall easily travel
with your companions on the ocean of inundation, the only il-
lumination being the effulgence of the great rsis.
TEXT 36
दोधूयमानां तां नावं समीरेण बलीयसा |
उपस्थितस्य मे श्रृङ्गे निबध्नीहि महाहिना ॥३६॥
dodhiwyamanarn (का? navar
samirena baliyasa
upasthitasya me Srrige
nibadhnihi mahdahina
dodhityamanam—being tossed about; tam—that; navam—boat;
samirena—by the wind; baltyasa —very powerful; upasthitasya—situ-
ated nearby; me—of Me; $rrige—to the horn; nibadhnthi—bind; maha-
ahina—by the large serpent (Vasuki).
TRANSLATION
Then, as the boat is tossed about by the powerful winds, attach
the vessel to My horn by means of the great serpent Vasuki, for I
shall be present by your side.
TEXT 37
अहं त्वाख्षिभिः सार्धं सहनावसुदन्वति |
९
विकषेन्‌ विचरिष्यामि यावद्‌ aw निजा प्रमो ।३७॥
aham tvam rsibhih sardham
saha-navam udanvati
vikarsan vicarisyami
yavad brahmi nisa prabho
aham—I; tvam—unto you; rsibhih—with all the saintly persons;
sardham—all together; saha—with; navam—the boat; udanvati—in


--- Page 251 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
the water of devastation; vikarsan—contacting; vicarisyami—I shall
travel; ydvat—as long as; brahmi—pertaining to Lord Brahma; nisa—
night; prabho—O King.
TRANSLATION
Pulling the boat, with you and all the rsis in it, O King, I shall
travel in the water of devastation until the night of Lord Brahma’s
slumber is over.
PURPORT
This particular devastation actually took place not during the night of
Lord Brahma but during his day, for it was during the time of Caksusa
Manu. Brahma’s night takes place when Brahma goes to sleep, but in the
daytime there are fourteen Manus, one of whom is Caksusa Manu.
Therefore, Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that although
it was daytime for Lord Brahma, Brahma felt sleepy for a short time by
the supreme will of the Lord. This short period is regarded as Lord
Brahma’s night. This has been elaborately discussed by Srila Ripa
Gosvami in his Laghu-bhagavatamrta. The following is a summary of
his analysis. Because Agastya Muni cursed Svayambhuva Manu, during
the time of Svayambhuva Manu a devastation took place. This devasta-
tion is mentioned in the Matsya Purana. During the time of Caksusa
Manu, by the supreme will of the Lord, there was suddenly another
pralaya, or devastation. This is mentioned by Markandeya Rsi in the
Visnu-dharmottara. At the end of Manu’s time there is not necessarily a
devastation, but at the end of the Caksusa-manvantara, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, by His illusory energy, wanted to show
Satyavrata the effects of devastation. Srila Sridhara Svami also agrees
with this opinion. The Laghu-bhagavatamrta says:
madhye manvantarasyaiva
muneh sapan manum prati
pralayo sau babhiveti
purane kvacid iryate
ayam akasmiko jatas
caksusasyantare manoh


--- Page 252 ---
Text 38] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 251
pralayah padmanabhasya
lilayeti ca kutracit
sarva-manvantarasyante
pralayo niscitarn bhavet
visnu-dharmottare tv etat
markandeyena bhasitam
manor ante layo nasti
manave 00151 mayayd
visnuneti bruvanais tu
svamibhir naisa manyate
TEXT 38
मदीयं महिमानं च परं ब्रह्मेति शब्दितम्‌ |
वेत्स्यस्युगृहीतं मे संप्रशनैरविडृतं हदि ॥३८॥
madiyarn mahimanarm ca
param brahmeti sabditam
vetsyasy anugrhitarn me
samprasnair vivrtarmn hrdi
madiyam — pertaining to Me; mahimanam—glories; ca—and; param
brahma—the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Truth; iti—thus;
Sabditam —celebrated; vetsyasi—you shall understand; anugrhitam—
being favored; me—by Me; samprasnaih—by inquiries; vivrtam—
thoroughly explained; hrdi—within the heart.
TRANSLATION
You will be thoroughly advised and favored by Me, and because
of your inquiries, everything about My glories, which are known
as param brahma, will be manifest within your heart. Thus you
will know everything about Me.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (15.15), sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jiagnam apohanam ca: the Supreme Personality of


--- Page 253 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24.
Godhead, Paramatma, is situated in everyone's heart, and from Him
come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness. The Lord reveals
Himself in proportion to one’s surrender to Him. Ye yatha mam prapa-
dyante tars tathaiva bhajamy aham. In responsive cooperation, the
Lord reveals Himself in proportion to one’s surrender. That which is
revealed to one who fully surrenders is different from what is revealed to
one who surrenders partially. Everyone naturally surrenders to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, either directly or indirectly. The con-
ditioned soul surrenders to the laws of nature in material existence, but
when one fully surrenders to the Lord, material nature does not act upon
him. Such a fully surrendered soul is favored by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead directly. Mam eva ye prapadyante mayam सादा
taranti te. One who has fully surrendered to the Lord has no fear of the
modes of material nature, for everything is but an expansion of the
Lord’s glories (sarvar khalv ida brahma), and these glories are gradu-
ally revealed and realized. The Lord is the supreme purifier (param
brahma param dhama pavitram paramam bhavan). The more one is
purified and the more he wants to know about the Supreme, the more the
Lord reveals to him. Full knowledge of Brahman, Paramitma and
Bhagavan is revealed to the pure devotees. The Lord says in Bhagavad-
gita (10.11):
tesam evanukampartham
aham ajranajari tamah
nasayamy atma-bhavastho
JAana-dipena bhasvata
“Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with
the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.”
TEXT 39
হত্মমাহিহম राजानं हरिरन्तरधीयत ।
सोऽन्ववैक्षत तं कालं यं TRF आदित्‌ ।।২৭।।
ittham adisya rajanam
harir antaradhiyata
so ’'nvavaiksata tam kdalam
yar hrsikesa adisat


--- Page 254 ---
Text 41] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 253
ittham —as aforementioned; adiS§ya —instructing; rajanam—the King
(Satyavrata); harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; antar-
adhiyata—disappeared from that place; sah—he (the King);
anvavaiksata—began to wait for; tam kalam—that time; yam —which;
hrsika-isah—Lord HrsikeSa, the master of all the senses; adisat—in-
structed.
TRANSLATION
After thus instructing the King, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead immediately disappeared. Then King Satyavrata began to
wait for that time of which the Lord had instructed.
TEXT 40
€
आस्तीर्य दर्भान्‌ प्राक्कूलान्‌ राजर्षिः प्रागुदच्छुखः |
निषसाद हरेः पादौ चिन्तयन्‌ मत्खरूपिणः ॥४०॥
astirya darbhan prak-kilan
rajarsih prag-udan-mukhah
nisasada hareh padau
cintayan matsya-ripinah
astirya—spreading; darbhan—kusa grass; prak-kiilan—the upper
portion facing east; raja-rsih —Satyavrata, the saintly King; prak-udak-
mukhah —looking toward the northeast (15700) ; nisasada—sat down;
hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; padau—upon the lotus
feet; cintayan—meditating; matsya-ripinah—who had assumed the
form of a fish.
TRANSLATION
After spreading kusa with its tips pointing east, the saintly King,
himself facing the northeast, sat down on the grass and began to
meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, who
had assumed the form of a fish.
TEXT 41
ततः सघुद्र उद्वेलः सर्वतः SEAT महीम्‌ |
४ - Q
वधमानो महामेचेवंषद्धिः समदृश्यत ।४१।


--- Page 255 ---
254 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
tatah samudra udvelah
sarvatah plavayan mahim
vardhamano maha-meghair
varsadbhih samadrsyata
tatah—thereafter; samudrah—the ocean; udvelah—overflowing;
sarvatah—everywhere; plavayan—inundating; mahim—the earth;
vardhamdnah—increasing more and more; mahd-meghaih—by gigan-
tic clouds; varsadbhih—incessantly pouring rain; samadrs§yata—King
Satyavrata saw it.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, gigantic clouds pouring incessant water swelled the
ocean more and more. Thus the ocean began to overflow onto the
land and inundate the entire world.
TEXT 42
ध्यायन्‌ भगवदादेशं ददे नावमागताम्‌ |
तामारुरोह व्त्नदरेरादायौषधिवीरुधः ॥४२॥
dhyayan bhagavad-adesarm
dadrse navam agatam
tam aruroha viprendrair
adayausadhi-virudhah
dhyayan—remembering; bhagavat-adesam—the order of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; dadr§e—he saw; navam—a boat;
agatam—coming near; tam—aboard the boat; aruroha—got up; vipra-
indraih—with the saintly brahmanas; adaya—taking; ausadhi—herbs;
virudhah—and creepers.
TRANSLATION
As Satyavrata remembered the order of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, he saw a boat coming near him. Thus he collected
herbs and creepers, and, accompanied by saintly brahmanas, he
got aboard the boat.


--- Page 256 ---
Text 44] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 255
TEXT 43
तमूचुधैनयः भ्रीता राजन्‌ ध्यायस्व केशवम्‌ |
EY ক +
सवे नः संकटादसादविता হাঁ विधास्यति ॥४३॥
tam iicur munayah prita
rajan dhyayasva kesavam
sa vai nah sankatad asmad
avita sam vidhasyati
tam—unto the King; icuh—said; munayah—all the saintly
brahmanas; pritah—being pleased; rajan—O King; dhyayasva —medi-
tate; kesavam—upon the Supreme Lord, Kesava; sah—His Lordship;
vai—indeed; nah—us; sarnkatat—from the great danger; asmat—as
now visible; avita—will save; Sam—auspiciousness; vidhasyati—He
will arrange.
TRANSLATION
The saintly brahmanas, being pleased with the King, said to
him: O King, please meditate upon the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kesava. He will save us from this impending danger and
arrange for our well-being.
TEXT 44
- - ९
सोऽनुध्यातस्ततो राज्ञा प्रादुरासीन्महाणेवे |
- = = =
एकशङ्गधरो AE हेमो नियुतयोजनः lee
so ’nudhyatas tato rajia
pradurasin maharnave
eka-srnga-dharo matsyo
haimo niyuta-yojanah
sah—the Lord; anudhyatah—being meditated upon; tatah—
thereafter (hearing the words of the saintly brahmanas); rajia—by the
King; pradurasit—appeared (before him); mahd-arnave—in the great
ocean of inundation; eka-$rriga-dharah—with one horn; matsyah—a
big fish; haimah—made of gold; niyuta-yojanah—eight million miles
long.


--- Page 257 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
TRANSLATION
Then, while the King constantly meditated upon the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, a large golden fish appeared in the ocean
of inundation. The fish had one horn and was eight million miles
long.
TEXT 45
निबध्य नावं तच्छृङ्गे यथोक्तो हरिणा पुरा ।
वरत्रेणाहिना वष्टस्त॒ष्टाव मधुखदनम्‌ ।४५॥
nibadhya navam tac-chrrige
yathokto harina pura
varatrenahina tustas
tustava madhusiidanam
nibadhya—anchoring; navam—the boat; tat-$rrige—onto the horn of
the big fish; yatha-uktah—as advised; harina—by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; pura —before; varatrena—used as a rope; ahina—
by the great serpent (of the name Vasuki); tustah—being pleased;
tustava—he satisfied; madhusidanam—the Supreme Lord, the killer of
Madhu.
TRANSLATION
Following the instructions formerly given by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the King anchored the boat to the fish’s horn,
using the serpent Vasuki as a rope. Thus being satisfied, he began
offering prayers to the Lord.
TEXT 46
श्री राजोवाच
अनाद्यविद्योपहतात्मसंविद्‌-
स्तन्मूलसंसारपरिभ्रमातुराः |
यरच्छयोपसृता यमाप्नुयु-
िुक्तिदो नः परमो गुरुभवान्‌ ॥४६॥


--- Page 258 ---
Text 46] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 257
Sri-rajovaca
anady-avidyopahatatma-sariwidas

tan-mitla-samsdara-pariSramaturah
yadrcchayopasrta yam apnuyur
vimuktido nah paramo gurur bhavan

§ri-raja uvaca—the King offered prayers as follows; anadi—from
time immemorial; avidyda—by ignorance; upahata—has been lost;
atma-sariwidah—knowledge about the self; tat—that is; miila—the
root; samsara—material bondage; parisrama—full of miserable condi-
tions and hard work; aturah—suffering; yadrcchaya—by the supreme
will; upasrtah—being favored by the acarya; yam —the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; apnuyuh—can achieve; vimukti-dah—the process
of liberation; nah—our; paramah—the supreme; guruh—spiritual
master; bhavan—Your Lordship.

TRANSLATION

The King said: By the grace of the Lord, those who have lost
their self-knowledge since time immemorial, and who because of
this ignorance are involved in a material, conditional life full of
miseries, obtain the chance to meet the Lord’s devotee. I accept
that Supreme Personality of Godhead as the supreme spiritual
master.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually the supreme spiritual
master. The Supreme Lord knows everything about the suffering of the
conditioned soul, and therefore He appears in this material world, some-
times personally, sometimes by an incarnation and sometimes by
authorizing a living being to act on His behalf. In all cases, however, He
is the original spiritual master who enlightens the conditioned souls who
are suffering in the material world. The Lord is always busy helping the
conditioned souls in many ways. Therefore He is addressed here as
paramo gurur bhavan. The representative of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead who acts to spread Krsna consciousness is also guided by the
Supreme Lord to act properly in executing the Lord’s order. Such a per-
son may appear to be an ordinary human being, but because he acts on


--- Page 259 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme spiritual
master, he is not to be neglected as ordinary. It is therefore said,
dcaryari कण्ठाः vijaniyat: an acarya who acts on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead should be understood to be as good as the
Supreme Lord Himself.
saksad dharitvena samasta-sastrair
uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhih
kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
vande guroh $ri-caranaravindam
Vi$vanatha Cakravarti Thakura has advised that the spiritual master act-
ing on the Supreme Lord’s behalf must be worshiped as being as good as
the Supreme Lord, for he is the Lord’s most confidential servant in
broadcasting the Lord’s message for the benefit of the conditioned souls
involved in the material world.
TEXT 47
- ५ भः
जनोऽबुधोऽयं निजकमेबन्धनः
९
सुखेच्छया कमं समीहतेऽसुखम्‌ ।
or | Ne - -
यत्सेवया तां विधुनोत्यसन्मतिं
ग्रन्थिं स मिन्याद्‌ धृदयं स नो गुरुः ॥४७॥
Jano 0800 ’yamn nija-karma-bandhanah
sukhecchaya karma samihate sukham
yat-sevaya tam vidhunoty asan-matiri
granthirh sa bhindyad dhrdayari sa no guruh
janah—the conditioned soul subjected to birth and death; abudhah —
most foolish because of accepting the body as the self; ayam—he; nija-
karma-bandhanah—accepting different bodily forms as a result of his
sinful activities; sukha-icchaya—desiring to be happy within this ma-
terial world; karma—fruitive activities; samihate—plans; asukham—
but it is for distress only; yat-sevaya—by rendering service unto whom;
tam —the entanglement of karma; vidhunoti—clears up; asat-matim—


--- Page 260 ---
Text 48] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 259
the unclean mentality (accepting the body as the self); granthim —hard
knot; sah—His Lordship the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
bhindyat—being cut off; hrdayam—in the core of the heart; sah—He
(the Lord); nah—our; guruh—the supreme spiritual master.
TRANSLATION
In hopes of becoming happy in this material world, the foolish
conditioned soul performs fruitive activities that result only in
suffering. But by rendering service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, one becomes free from such false desires for happiness.
May my supreme spiritual master cut the knot of false desires from
the core of my heart.
PURPORT
For material happiness, the conditioned soul involves himself in
fruitive activities, which actually put him into material distress. Because
the conditioned soul does not know this, he is said to be in avidya, or ig-
norance. Because of a false hope for happiness, the conditioned soul be-
comes involved in various plans for material activity. Here Maharaja
Satyavrata prays that the Lord sever this hard knot of false happiness
and thus become his supreme spiritual master.
TEXT 48
यत्सेवयात्ेरिव रुद्ररोदनं
पुमान्‌ विजद्यान्मलमात्मनस्तमः |
© ~~ iN -
मजेत वणं निजमेष सोऽव्ययो
- ~, 6
भूयात्‌ स ईशः परमो AE: Rell
yat-sevayagner wa rudra-rodanam
puman vijahyan malam atmanas tamah
bhajeta varnam nijam esa so ৮১০১০
bhizyat sa iSah paramo guror guruh
yat-sevaya—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by serving whom;
agneh—in touch with fire; iva—as it is; rudra-rodanam—a block of


--- Page 261 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
silver or gold becomes purified; puman—a person; vijahyat—can give
up; malam—all the dirty things of material existence; atmanah—of
one’s self; tamah—the mode of ignorance, by which one performs pious
and impious activities; bhajeta—may revive; varnam—his original
identity; nijam—one’s own; esah—such; sah—He; avyayah—inex-
haustible; bhityat—let Him become; sah—He; isah—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; paramah—the supreme; guroh guruh—the spiri-
tual master of all other spiritual masters.
TRANSLATION

One who wants to be free of material entanglement should take
to the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and give up
the contamination of ignorance, involving pious and impious ac-
tivities. Thus one regains his original identity, just as a block of
gold or silver sheds all dirt and becomes purified when treated
with fire. May that inexhaustible Supreme Personality of Godhead
become our spiritual master, for He is the original spiritual master
of all other spiritual masters.

PURPORT

In human life one is meant to undergo austerity to purify one’s exis-
tence. Tapo 08007) putraka yena sattvari Suddhyet. Because of con-
tamination by the modes of material nature, one continues in the cycle of
birth and death (karapari guna-sargo ’sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu).
Therefore the purpose of human life is to purify oneself of this con-
tamination so that one can regain his spiritual form and not undergo this
cycle of birth and death. The recommended process of decontamination
is devotional service to the Lord. There are various processes for self-
realization, such as karma, jiiana and yoga, but none of them is equal to
the process of devotional service. As gold and silver can be freed from all
dirty contamination by being put into a fire but not merely by being
washed, the living entity can be awakened to his own identity by per-
forming devotional service (yat-sevayd), but not by karma, jidna or
yoga. Cultivation of speculative knowledge or practice of yogic gym-
nastics will not be helpful.

The word varnam refers to the luster of one’s original identity. The
original luster of gold or silver is brilliant. Similarly, the original luster


--- Page 262 ---
Text 49] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 261
of the living being, who is part of the sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, is the
luster of Gnanda, or pleasure. Anandamayo 'bhyasat. Every living en-
tity has the right to become anandamaya, joyful, because he is part of
the sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, Krsna. Why should the living being be put
into tribulation because of dirty contamination by the material modes of
nature? The living entity should become purified and regain his
svaripa, his original identity. This he can do only by devotional service.
Therefore, one should adopt the instructions of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who is described here as guror guruh, the spiritual master of
all other spiritual masters.

Even though we may not have the fortune to contact the Supreme Lord
personally, the Lord’s representative is as good as the Lord Himself be-
cause such a representative does not say anything unless it is spoken by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore
gives a definition of guru. Yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa: the
bona fide guru is he who advises his disciples exactly in accordance with
the principles spoken by Krsna. The bona fide guru is he who has ac-
cepted Krsna as guru. This is the guru-parampara system. The original
guru is Vyasadeva because he is the speaker of Bhagavad-gita and
Srimad-Bhagavatam, wherein everything spoken relates to Krsna.
Therefore guru-paja is known as Vyasa-paja. In the final analysis, the
original guru is Krsna, His disciple is Narada, whose disciple is Vyasa,
and in this way we gradually come in touch with the guru-parampara.
One cannot become a guru if he does not know what the Personality of
Godhead Krsna or His incarnation wants. The mission of the guru is the
mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: to spread Krsna con-
sciousness all over the world.

TEXT 49
न यतप्रसादायुतभागलेश-
मन्ये च देवा गुरवो जना; स्वयम्‌ ।
कतु समेताः प्रभवन्ति पुंस-
स्तमीश्वरं त्वां शरणं সবল ॥४९।।
na yat-prasadayuta-bhaga-lesam
anye ca deva guravo janah svayam


--- Page 263 ---
262 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24.
karturih sametah prabhavanti purisas
tam iSvaram tvarh Saranar prapadye

na—not; yat-prasada—of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ayuta-bhaga-lesam— only one ten-thousandth; anye—others;
ca—also; devah—even the demigods; guravah—the so-called gurus;
janah—the total population; svayam—personally; karturm—to execute;
sametah—all together; prabhavanti—can become equally able; purisah-
—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tam —unto Him; iSvaram—
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tvam —unto You; Saranam—
shelter; prapadye—Ilet me surrender.

TRANSLATION

Neither all the demigods, nor the so-called gurus nor all other
people, either independently or together, can offer mercy that
equals even one ten-thousandth of Yours. Therefore I wish to take
shelter of Your lotus feet.

PURPORT

It is said, kamais tais tair hrta-jidnah prapadyante ’nya-devatah:
people in general, being motivated by material desires, worship the
demigods to get fruitive results very quickly. People generally do not be-
come devotees of Lord Visnu, since Lord Visnu never becomes the order-
supplier of His devotee. Lord Visnu does not give a devotee benedictions
that will create a further demand for benedictions. By worshiping the
demigods one may get results, but, as described in Bhagavad-gita,
antavat tu phalari tesarh tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam: whatever great
benedictions one may achieve from the demigods are all temporary. Be-
cause the demigods themselves are temporary, their benedictions are also
temporary and have no permanent value. Those who aspire for such
benedictions have a poor fund of knowledge (tad bhavaty alpa-
medhasam). The benedictions of Lord Visnu are different. By the mercy
of the Lord Visnu, one can be completely freed from material contamina-
tion and go back home, back to Godhead. Therefore the benedictions
offered by the demigods cannot compare to even one ten-thousandth of
the Lord’s benedictions. One should not, therefore, try to obtain benedic-
tions from the demigods or false gurus. One should aspire only for the


--- Page 264 ---
Text 50] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 263
benediction offered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord
says in Bhagavad-gita (18.66):
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekari Saranam vraja
aham tvarm sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.” This is the greatest
benediction.
TEXT 50
अचष्ुरन्धस्य यथाग्रणीः कृत-
स्तथा जनस्याविदुषोऽबुधो गुरुः |
त्वमकंटक्‌ सर्वदृशां समीक्षणो
वृतो TA: खगतिं बुयत्सताम्‌ ।५०॥
acaksur andhasya yathagranth krtas
tatha janasyaviduso ’budho guruh
tvam arka-drk sarva-drsam samiksano
vrto gurur nah sva-gatirn bubhutsatam
acaksuh—one who does not have his power of sight; andhasya—for
such a blind person; yatha—as; agranth—the leader, who goes first;
krtah—accepted; tatha —similarly; janasya—such a person; avidusah—
who has no knowledge of the goal of life; abudhah—a foolish rascal;
guruh—the spiritual master; tvam—Your Lordship; arka-drk—appear
like the sun; sarva-drsam—of all sources of knowledge; samiksanah—
the complete seer; vrtah—accepted; guruh—the spiritual master; nah—
our; sva-gatim—one who knows his real self-interest; bubhutsatam—
such an enlightened person.
TRANSLATION
As a blind man, being unable to see, accepts another blind man
as his leader, people who do not know the goal of life accept


--- Page 265 ---
264. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24.
someone as a guru who is a rascal and a fool. But we are interested
in self-realization. Therefore we accept You, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, as our spiritual master, for You are able to see
in all directions and are omniscient like the sun.
PURPORT

The conditioned soul, being wrapped in ignorance and therefore not
knowing the goal of life, accepts a guru who can juggle words and make
some display of magic that is wonderful to a fool. Sometimes a foolish
person accepts someone as a guru because he can manufacture a small
quantity of gold by mystic yogic power. Because such a disciple has a
poor fund of knowledge, he cannot judge whether the manufacture of
gold is the criterion for a guru. Why should one not accept the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, from whom unlimited numbers of gold
mines come into being? A4ham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam
pravartate. All the gold mines are created by the energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore, why should one accept a magician
who can manufacture only a small portion of gold? Such gurus are ac-
cepted by those who are blind, not knowing the goal of life. Maharaja
Satyavrata, however, knew the goal of life. He knew the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and therefore he accepted the Lord as his guru.
Either the Supreme Lord or His representative can become guru. The
Lord says, mam eva ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te: “One can
get relief from the clutches of maya as soon as he surrenders unto Me.”
Therefore it is the guru’s business to instruct his disciple to surrender to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he wants relief from the material
clutches. This is the symptom of the guru. This same principle was in-
structed by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu: yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-
upadesa. In other words, one is advised not to accept a guru who does not
follow the path of instruction given by Lord Krsna.

TEXT 51
जनो जनस्यादिशतेऽसतीं गतिं
यया श्रपद्येत दुरत्ययं तमः।
त्वं॑त्वव्ययं ज्ञानममोषमञ्जसा
प्रप्ते येन जनो निजं पदम्‌ QIN


--- Page 266 ---
Text 51] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 265
jano janasyadisate ‘satin gatimh
yaya prapadyeta duratyayam tamah
tvari tv avyayam jiagnam amogham anjasa
prapadyate yena jano nijarh padam

janah—a person who is not a bona fide guru (an ordinary person);
Jjanasya—of an ordinary person who does not know the goal of life;
adisate —instructs; asatim—impermanent, material; gatim—the goal of
life; yaya—by such knowledge; prapadyeta—he surrenders;
duratyayam—insurmountable; tamah—to ignorance; tvam—Your
Lordship; tu—but; avyayam—indestructible; jianam—knowledge;
amogham—without material contamination; afjasa—very soon;
prapadyate—achieves; yena—by such knowledge; janah—a person;
nijam—his own; padam—original position.

TRANSLATION

A materialistic so-called guru instructs his materialistic disciples
about economic development and sense gratification, and because
of such instructions the foolish disciples continue in the ma-
terialistic existence of ignorance. But Your Lordship gives knowl-
edge that is eternal, and the intelligent person receiving such
knowledge is quickly situated in his original constitutional
position.

PURPORT

So-called gurus instruct their disciples for the sake of material profit.
Some guru advises that one meditate in such a way that his intelligence
will increase in regard to keeping his body fit for sense gratification.
Another guru advises that sex is the ultimate goal of life and that one
should therefore engage in sex to the best of his ability. These are the in-
structions of foolish gurus. In other words, because of the instructions of
a foolish guru one remains perpetually in material existence and suffers
its tribulations. But if one is intelligent enough to take instructions from
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as enunciated in Bhagavad-gita or
the Sankhya philosophy of Kapiladeva, one can very soon attain libera-
tion and be situated in his original position of spiritual life. The words
nijarh padam are significant. The living entity, being part and parcel of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has the birthright to a position in


--- Page 267 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
Vaikunthaloka, or the spiritual world, where there is no anxiety.
Therefore, one should follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Then, as stated in Bhagavad-gita, tyaktva 06107 punar
janma naiti mam eti so ’rjuna: after giving up one’s body, one will
return home, back to Godhead. The Lord lives in the spiritual world in
His original personality, and a devotee who follows the instructions of
the Lord approaches Him (mam eti). As a spiritual person, such a de-
votee returns to the Personality of Godhead and plays and dances with
Him. That is the ultimate goal of life.
TEXT 52
es © =
सवं सर्वलोकस्य सुहृत्‌ प्रियेश्वरो
ह्यात्मा गुरज्ञानमभीष्टसिद्धिः |
तथापि लोको न भयन्तमन्धधी-
जानाति सन्तं हदि बद्धकामः ॥५२॥
tvari sarva-lokasya suhrt priyesvaro
hy atma gurur jaanam abhista-siddhih
tathapi loko na bhavantam andha-dhir
janati santa hrdi baddha-kamah
tvam— You, my dear Lord; sarva-lokasya—of all planets and their in-
habitants; suhrt—the most well-wishing friend; priya—the most dear;
iSvarah—the supreme controller; hi—also; atma—the supreme soul;
guruh—the supreme teacher; jianam—the supreme knowledge;
abhista-siddhih —the fulfillment of all desires; tatha api—still; lokah—
persons; na—not; bhavantam—unto You; andha-dhih—because of
blind intelligence; janati—can know; santam—situated; hrdi—in his
heart; baddha-kamah—because of being bewildered by material lusty
desires.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the supreme well-wishing friend of everyone,

the dearmost friend, the controller, the Supersoul, the supreme
instructor and the giver of supreme knowledge and the fulfillment


--- Page 268 ---
Text 53] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 267
of all desires. But although You are within the heart, the foolish,
because of lusty desires in the heart, cannot understand You.
PURPORT

Herein the reason for foolishness is described. Because the conditioned
soul in this material world is full of materialistic lusty desires, he cannot
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although the Lord is
situated in everyone's heart (&varah sarva-bhitanam hrd-dese ’rjuna
tisthati). It is because of this foolishness that one cannot take instructions
from the Lord, although the Lord is ready to instruct everyone both ex-
ternally and internally. The Lord says, dadami buddhi-yogam tar yena
mam upayanti te. In other words, the Lord can give instructions on de-
votional service by which one can return home, back to Godhead. Unfor-
tunately, however, people do not take this devotional service. The Lord,
being situated in everyone’s heart, can give one complete instructions on
going back to Godhead, but because of lusty desires one engages himself
in materialistic activities and does not render service to the Lord.
Therefore one is bereft of the value of the Lord’s instructions. By mental
speculation one can understand that one is not the body but a spirit soul,
but unless one engages in devotional service, the real purpose of life is
never fulfilled. The real purpose of life is to go back home, back to God-
head, and live with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, play with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, dance with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and eat with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. These are
different items of @nanda, spiritual happiness in spiritual variegated-
ness. Even though one may come to the platform of brahma-bhiita and
understand his spiritual identity by speculative knowledge, one cannot
enjoy spiritual life without understanding the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is indicated here by the word abhista-siddhih. One can
fulfill the ultimate goal of life only by engaging in devotional service to
the Lord. Then the Lord will give one proper instructions on how to go
back home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 53
त्वं त्वामहं देववरं Tw
प्रप्य ईशं प्रतिबोधनाय ।


--- Page 269 ---
268 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24.
छिन्ध्यथदीपैभंगवन्‌ वचोभि-
अन्थीन्‌ हृदय्यान्‌ FEY खमोकः ॥५३॥।
11.18. व. / 1... 1.111.111
, prapadya क pratibodhanaya
chindhy artha-dipair bhagavan vacobhir
granthin hrdayyan vivrnu svam okah
tvam—how exalted You are; tvam—unto You; aham—myself; deva-
varam—worshiped by the demigods; varenyam—the greatest of all;
prapadye—fully surrendering; iSam—unto the supreme controller;
pratibodhanaya—for understanding the real purpose of life; chindhi—
cut off; artha-dipaih—by the light of purposeful instruction;
bhagavan—O Supreme Lord; vacobhih—by Your words; granthin—
knots; hrdayyan—fixed within the core of the heart; vivrnu—kindly ex-
plain; svam okah—my destination in life.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Lord, for self-realization I surrender unto You, who
are worshiped by the demigods as the supreme controller of every-
thing. By Your instructions, exposing life’s purpose, kindly cut
the knot from the core of my heart and let me know the destina-
tion of my life.
PURPORT
Sometimes it is argued that people do not know who is a spiritual
master and that finding a spiritual master from whom to get enlighten-
ment in regard to the destination of life is very difficult. To answer all
these questions, King Satyavrata shows us the way to accept the Supreme
Personality of Godhead as the real spiritual master. The Supreme Lord
has given full directions in Bhagavad-gita about how to deal with every-
thing in this material world and how to return home, back to Godhead.
Therefore, one should not be misled by so-called gurus who are rascals
and fools. Rather, one should directly see the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as the guru or instructor. It is difficult, however, to understand
Bhagavad-gita without the help of the guru. Therefore the guru appears
in the parampara system. In Bhagavad-gita (4.34) the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead recommends:


--- Page 270 ---
Text 54] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 269
tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya
upadeksyanti te jiianarm
JAaninas tattva-darsinah
“Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized
soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.”
Lord Krsna directly instructed Arjuna. Arjuna is therefore tattva-darsi
or guru. Arjuna accepted the Supreme Personality of Godhead (param
brahma param dhama pavitrari paramari bhavan). Similarly, following
in the footsteps of Sri Arjuna, who is a personal devotee of the Lord, one
should accept the supremacy of Lord Krsna, as supported by Vyasa,
Devala, Asita, Narada and later by the dacaryas Ramanujacarya,
Madhvicarya, Nimbarka and Visnusvami and still later by the greatest
৫০৫7০, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Where, then, is the difficulty in find-
ing a guru? If one is sincere he can find the guru and learn everything.
One should take lessons from the guru and find out the goal of life.
Maharaja Satyavrata, therefore, shows us the way of the mahdjana.
Mahajano yena gatah sa panthah. One should surrender to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (dasavatara) and learn from Him about the
spiritual world and the goal of life.
TEXT 54
श्रीञयुक INT
इत्युक्तवन्तं चृपतिं भगवानादिपूरुषः ।
मर्स्यरूपी महाम्मोधौ विहरंस्तस्वमन्रवीत्‌ ।५५४॥।
Sri-Suka uvdca
ity uktavantarh nrpatim
bhagavan adi-pirusah
matsya-ripi mahambhodhau
vihararms tattvam abravit
sri-Sukah uvaca—>Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; uktavantam-
—Dbeing addressed by Maharaja Satyavrata; nrpatim—unto the King;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adi-piirusah—the


--- Page 271 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
original person; matsya-ripi—who had assumed the form of a fish;
maha-ambhodhau—in that water of inundation; viharan —while mov-
ing; tattvam abravit—explained the Absolute Truth.
TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: When Satyavrata had thus prayed
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the
form of a fish, the Lord, while moving in the water of inundation,
explained to him the Absolute Truth.

TEXT 55
पुराणसंहितां दिव्यां सां ख्ययोगक्रियावतीम्‌ |
सत्यव्रतस्य राजर्षरात्मगुह्यमशेषतः ।।५५॥
purana-sarhitarn divyam
sankhya-yoga-kriyavatim
satyavratasya rajarser
atma-guhyam asesatah

purana—the subject matter explained in the Puranas, the old histo-
ries, especially the Matsya Purana; sarihitam—the Vedic instructions
contained in Brahma-sarhita and other sarihitas; divyam—all tran-
scendental literatures; sarikhya—the philosophical way of sankhya-
yoga; yoga—the science of self-realization or bhakti-yoga; kriyavatim—
practically applied in life; satyavratasya—of King Satyavrata; raja-
rseh—the great king and saint; atma-guhyam—all the mysteries of self-
realization; aSesatah —including all branches.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead thus explained to King
Satyavrata the spiritual science known as sankhya-yoga, the
science by which one distinguishes between matter and spirit [in
other words, bhakti-yoga], along with the instructions contained
in the Puranas [the old histories] and the sarhhitas. The Lord ex-
plained Himself in all these literatures.


--- Page 272 ---
Text 57] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 271
TEXT 56
अश्रौषीटषिमिः साकरमात्मतश्चमसंशयम्‌ |
नाव्यासीनो भगवता प्रोक्तं बह्म सनातनम्‌ ।५६॥
asrausid rsibhih sakam
atma-tattvam asamsayam
navy 57710 bhagavata
proktari brahma sandtanam
asrausit—he heard; rsibhih—the great saintly persons; sakam —with;
dtma-tattvam— the science of self-realization; asarmsayam—without any
doubt (because it was spoken by the Supreme Lord); navi asinah—sit-
ting in the boat; bhagavata—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
proktam—explained; brahma —all transcendental literatures;
sanatanam—eternally existing.
TRANSLATION
While sitting in the boat, King Satyavrata, accompanied by the
great saintly persons, listened to the instructions of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in regard to self-realization. These in-
structions were all from the eternal Vedic literature [brahmal.
Thus the King and sages had no doubt about the Absolute Truth.
TEXT 57
अतीतप्रलयापाय उत्थिताय स वेधसे ।
हत्वासुरं हयग्रीवं वेदान्‌ प्रत्याहरद्धरिः ॥५७॥।
atita-pralayapaya
utthitaya sa vedhase
110৮৫518707 hayagrivar
vedan pratyaharad dharih
atita—passed; pralaya-apaye—at the end of the inundation;
utthitdya—to bring him to his senses after sleeping; sah —the Supreme
Lord; vedhase—unto Lord Brahma; hatva—after killing; asuram—the


--- Page 273 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
demon; hayagrivam—by the name Hayagriva; vedan—all the Vedic
records; pratyaharat—delivered; harih—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION

At the end of the last inundation [during the period of
Svayambhuva Manu] the Supreme Personality of Godhead killed
the demon named Hayagriva and delivered all the Vedic literatures
to Lord Brahma when Lord Brahmi awakened from sleeping.

TEXT 58
सतु सत्यव्रतो राजा ज्ञानविञ्ञानसंयुतः |
a
विष्णोः प्रसादात्‌ कल्पेऽसिन्नासीद्‌ वेवस्वतो ag: ।। ५८॥
sa tu satyavrato raja
Jiana-vijiana-sarivyutah
visnoh prasadat kalpe ‘sminn
asid vaivasvato manuh

sah—he; tu—indeed; satyavratah—Satyavrata; raja—the King;
JjAana-vijiana-sarivyutah—enlightened in full knowledge and its practi-
cal use; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; prasadat—by the mercy; kalpe asmin—
in this period (ruled by Vaivasvata Manu); asit—became; vaivasvatah
manuh—Vaivasvata Manu.

TRANSLATION

King Satyavrata was illuminated with all Vedic knowledge by the
mercy of Lord Visnu, and in this period he has now taken birth as
Vaivasvata Manu, the son of the sun-god.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura gives his verdict that Satyavrata
appeared in the Caksusa-manvantara. When the Caksusa-manvantara
ended, the period of Vaivasvata Manu began. By the grace of Lord Visnu,
Satyavrata received instructions from the second fish incarnation and
was thus enlightened in all spiritual knowledge.


--- Page 274 ---
Text 60] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 273
TEXT 59
सत्यव्रतस्य राजवेमयामत्सयस्य॒शाङ्गिणः ৷
संबादं महदाख्यानं शरुत्वा मुच्येत किर्विषात्‌॥५९॥
satyavratasya rajarser
mdya-matsyasya sarnginah
sarwadari mahad-akhyanari
Srutva mucyeta kilbisat
satyavratasya—of King Satyavrata; rdja-rseh—of the great king;
maya-matsyasya—and the fish incarnation; sarriginah—who had one
horn on His head; sarivadam—the description or dealings; mahat-
akhyanam—the great story; Srutvd—by hearing; mucyeta—is
delivered; kilbisat—from all sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
This story concerning the great King Satyavrata and the fish in-
carnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, is a great
transcendental narration. Anyone who hears it is delivered from
the reactions of sinful life.
TEXT 60
অনলাং gis कीर्तयेदन्वहं नरः |
सङ्करपाप्तस्य सिध्यन्ति स याति परमां गतिम्‌।।६०।।
avataram harer yo ‘yam
kirtayed anvahari narah
sankalpas tasya sidhyanti
sa ydti paramar gatim
avataram—incarnation; hareh—of the Supreme Personality of God-
head; yah—whoever; ayam—he; kirtayet—narrates and chants;
anvaham—daily; narah—such a person; sarikalpah—all ambitions;
tasya—of him; sidhyanti—become successful; sah—such a person;
yati—goes back; paramam gatim—back home to Godhead, the supreme
place.


--- Page 275 ---
274 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 24
TRANSLATION

One who narrates this description of the Matsya incarnation and
King Satyavrata will certainly have all his ambitions fulfilled, and
he will undoubtedly return home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 61
प्रलयपयसि धातुः सुसशक्तर्मुखेभ्यः
्ेतिगणमपनीतं प्रत्युपादत्त हत्वा |
दितिजमरूथयद्‌ यो बह्म सत्यत्रतानां
तमहमखिलहेतुं जिक्षमीनं नतोऽसि।।६१।।
pralaya-payasi dhatuh supta-sakter mukhebhyah
Sruti-ganam apanitarm pratyupadatta hatva
ditijam akathayad yo brahma satyavratanam
tam aham akhila-heturn jihma-minarm nato ‘smi

pralaya-payasi—in the water of inundation; dhatuh—from Lord
Brahma; supta-Sakteh—who was inert because of sleeping;
mukhebhyah—from the mouths; Ssruti-ganam—Vedic records;
apanitam—stolen; pratyupadatta—gave back to him; hatvdi—by kill-
ing; ditijam—the great demon; akathayat—explained; yah—one who;
brahma— Vedic knowledge; satyavratanam—for the enlightenment of
Satyavrata and the great saintly persons; tam—unto Him; aham—I;
akhila-hetum —unto the cause of all causes; jihma-minam—appearing
as and pretending to be a great fish; natah asmi—I offer my respectful
obeisances.

TRANSLATION

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, who pretended to be a gigantic fish, who restored the
Vedic literature to Lord Brahma when Lord Brahma awakened
from sleep, and who explained the essence of Vedic literature to
King Satyavrata and the great saintly persons.


--- Page 276 ---
Text 61] Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarnation 275
PURPORT

Here is a summary of Satyavrata’s meeting with the fish incarnation of
Lord Visnu. Lord Visnu’s purpose was to take back all the Vedic
literatures from the demon Hayagriva and restore them to Lord Brahma.
Incidentally, by His causeless mercy, the Lord spoke with Satyavrata.
The word satyavratanam is significant because it indicates that those on
the level of Satyavrata can take knowledge from the Vedas delivered by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Whatever is spoken by the
Supreme Lord is accepted as Veda. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, vedanta-
krd veda-vit: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the compiler of all
Vedic knowledge, and He knows the purport of the Vedas. Therefore,
anyone who takes knowledge from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna, or from Bhagavad-gita as it is, knows the purpose of the Vedas
(vedai$ ca sarvair aham eva vedyah). One cannot understand Vedic
knowledge from the veda-vada-ratds, who read the Vedas and
misconstrue their subject matter. One has to know the Vedas from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-
fourth Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Matsya, the Lord’s
Fish Incarnation.”

— This commentation has been finished in our New Delhi center today,
the first of September, 1976, the day of Radhastami, by the grace of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the acaryas. Srila Narottama dasa
Thakura says, tandera carana sevi bhakta-sane visa janame janame
haya, ei abhilasa. ¶ am attempting to present Srimad-Bhagavatam in the
English language by the order of my spiritual master, Srimad
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura, and by his grace the work of trans-
lation is gradually progressing, and the European and American devotees
who have joined the Krsna consciousness movement are helping me con-
siderably. Thus we have expectations of finishing the great task before
my passing away. All glories to Sri Guru and Gauranga.

END OF THE EIGHTH CANTO


--- Page 277 ---
Appendixes


--- Page 278 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhianta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhakti-
siddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent devotional scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutes), liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhianta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila Prabhu-
pada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, assisted the Gaudiya
Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance, started an English
fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and checked the
galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and strug-
gled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never
stopped; it is now being continued by his disciples in the West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupada’s philosophical learning and devotion,
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
“Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life, and four years later he adopted the
vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his studies and writ-
ing. Srila Prabhupada traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana, where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and
writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At
Radha-Damodara, Srila Prabhupada began work on his life’s master-
piece: a multivolume translation and commentary on the eighteen thou-
sand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote
Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time, His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes
of authoritative translations, commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

279


--- Page 279 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
grown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of almost one
hundred dsramas, schools, temples, institutes and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana, an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana, now a thriving farm community of more than one thou-
sand acres, his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. The school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the
beginning of 1975 the enrollment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large inter-
national center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India, which is also
the site for a planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the
magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guest House in
Vrndavana, India. These are centers where Westerners can live to gain
firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their authori-
tativeness, depth and clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in
numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into eleven
languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, established in 1972 ex-
clusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus become the
world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and phi-
losophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most
recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —com-
pleted by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta.

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature and culture.


--- Page 280 ---
References

The purports of Srimad-Bhagavatam are all confirmed by standard
Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are specifically
cited in this volume:
Bahvrca-sruti, 86
Bhagavad-gita, 8, 10, 20, 21, 29, 37, 57, 61, 62, 63, 68, 74, 87, 102, 104,
110, 118, 144, 148, 177, 180, 183, 198, 203, 209, 219, 223, 224, 226-227,
230, 245, 251-252, 252, 262, 263, 266, 268-269, 275
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, 88
Brahma-sarhita, 37
Brhan-naradiya Purana, 210
Caitanya-caritamrta, 9-10, 55, 97, 98
Dasavatara-stotra (within Gita-govinda), 128
Laghu-bhagavatamrta, 250
Mahabharata, 95
Matsya Purana, 235
Padma Purana, 96, 106
Srimad-Bhagavatam, 71, 74, 75, 80-81, 95, 99, 114, 151, 159, 160, 165,
168, 172, 193, 208, 209, 211, 219, 245
Visnu-dharmottara, 250
Visnu Purana, 107, 209

281


--- Page 281 ---
Glossary
A
Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by example.
Arati—a ceremony for greeting the Lord with offerings of food, lamps,
fans, flowers and incense.
Arcana—the devotional process of Deity worship.
Arghya—the ceremonious offering of water or of other auspicious items
in a conchshell.
Artha— economic development.
Asrama— the four spiritual orders of life: celibate student, householder,
retired life and renounced life.
Asuras — atheistic demons.
Avatara—a descent of the Supreme Lord.
B
Bhagavad-gita—the basic directions for spiritual life spoken by the
Lord Himself.
Bhakta—a devotee.
Bhakti-yoga—linking with the Supreme Lord by devotional service.
Brahmacarya— celibate student life; the first order of Vedic spiritual
life.
Brahman —the Absolute Truth; especially the impersonal aspect of the
Absolute.
Brahmana—one wise in the Vedas who can guide society; the first Vedic
social order.
D
Daityas—a race of demons descending from Diti.
Dama— control of the senses.
Dharma— eternal occupational duty; religious principles.
E
Ekadasi—a special fast day for increased remembrance of Krsna, which
comes on the eleventh day of both the waxing and waning moon.
283


--- Page 282 ---
284. Srimad-Bhagavatam
G
Goloka (Krsnaloka) —the highest spiritual planet, containing Krsna’s
personal abodes, Dvaraka, Mathura and Vrndavana.
Gopis—Krsna’s cowherd girl friends, His most confidential servitors.
Grhastha—regulated householder life; the second order of Vedic spiri-
tual life.
Guru —a spiritual master.
Guru-piija— worship of the spiritual master.
H
Hare Krsna mantra— See: Maha-mantra
J
Jaya—an exclamation meaning “All victory to you!” or ‘All glories to
you!”
Jiva-tattva— the living entities, atomic parts of the Lord.
Jihiana— theoretical knowledge.
K
Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) — the present age, characterized by quarrel; it
is last in the cycle of four and began five thousand years ago.
Kalpa—daytime of Brahma, 4,320,000,000 years.
Kama — lust.
Kamandalu— water pot carried by sannyasis.
Karatalas —hand cymbals used in kirtana.
Karma —fruitive action, for which there is always reaction, good or bad.
Karma-kanda—a section of the Vedas prescribing fruitive activities for
elevation to a higher material position.
Karmi—a person satisfied with working hard for flickering sense
gratification.
Kirtana— chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord.
Krsnaloka— See: Goloka
Ksatriyas—a warrior or administrator; the second Vedic social order.
Kus$a—auspicious grass used in Vedic rituals.
L
Lokas— planets.


--- Page 283 ---
Glossary 285
M

Mahajana—the Lord’s authorized devotee, who by his teachings and
behavior establishes the path of religion.

Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance:

Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Raima Rama, Hare Hare.

Mantra—a sound vibration that can deliver the mind from illusion.

Manus — fathers of the human species.

Manvantara—the duration of each Manu’s reign; used as a standard
measurement of history.

Mathura— Lord Krsna’s abode, surrounding Vrndavana, where He took
birth and later returned to after performing His Vrndivana
pastimes.

Maya —illusion; forgetfulness of one’s relationship with Krsna.

Mayavadis — impersonal philosophers who say that the Lord cannot have
a transcendental body.

Mrdariga—a clay drum used for congregational chanting.

Munis— sages.

0

Oninkara—the sacred sound vibration from which expand all the Vedas;
chanted as an invocation to all mantras.

रि

Padya— water ceremoniously offered for washing feet.

Parampara— the chain of spiritual masters in disciplic succession.

Prajapatis — the populators of the universe.

Prasada— food spiritualized by being offered to the Lord.

R

Rsis— sages.

S

Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the Lord’s transcendental form, which 25

i eternal, full of knowledge and bliss.

Sama—control of the mind.


--- Page 284 ---
286 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Sarhhitas —supplementary Vedic literatures expressing the conclusions
of particular self-realized authorities.

Sankirtana— public chanting of the names of God, the approved yoga
process for this age.

Sannyasa— renounced life; the fourth order of Vedic spiritual life.

Sastras— revealed scriptures.

Satya-yuga—the first of the cycle of four ages of the universe.

Sloka—a Sanskrit rhymed and metered verse.

Smartas — those who strictly follow Vedic injunctions without realization
of the final conclusion of Vedic knowledge, devotional service to the
Supreme Lord.

Soma—a heavenly elixir available on the moon.

Sravanarh kirtanarh visnoh— the devotional processes of hearing and
chanting about Lord Visnu.

Siidra—a laborer; the fourth of the Vedic social orders.

Svami—one who controls his mind and senses; title of one in the
renounced order of life.

T

Tapasya—austerity; accepting some voluntary inconvenience for a
higher purpose.

Tilaka— auspicious clay marks that sanctify a devotee’s body as a temple
of the Lord.

Titiksa— the godly quality of tolerance.

Vv

Vaikuntha— the spiritual world.

Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Visnu, Krsna.

Vai§yas — farmers and merchants; the third Vedic social order.

Vanaprastha—one who has retired from family life; the third order of
Vedic spiritual life.

Varna— the four occupational divisions of society: the intellectual class,
the administrative class, the mercantile class, and the laborer class.

Varnasrama—the Vedic social system of four social and four spiritual
orders.

Vedas —the original revealed scriptures, first spoken by the Lord Him-
self.


--- Page 285 ---
Glossary 287

Veda-vada-ratas— See: Smartas

Visnu, Lord —Krsna’s expansion for the creation and maintenance of
the material universes.

Visnu-bhakti — devotional service to Lord Visnu.

Visnu-tattva—the original Personality of Godhead’s primary expan-
sions, each of whom is equally God.

Vrndavana—Krsna’s personal abode, where He fully manifests His
quality of sweetness.

Vyasadeva—Krsna’s incarnation, at the end of Dvapara-yuga, for com-
piling the Fedas.

Vyasa-pija— worship of the compiler of the Vedas, Vyasadeva; worship
of the bona fide spiritual master as the representative of Vyasadeva.

Y

Yajiia— sacrifice; work done for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu.

Yogi—a transcendentalist who, in one way or another, is striving for
union with the Supreme.

Yugas—ages in the life of a universe, occurring in a repeated cycle of
four.

Yukta-vairagya—real renunciation by utilizing everything in the ser-
vice of God.


--- Page 286 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide
Vowels
Ha MMs इ; ই: Fu Fo Wr Wr
=
gq! ष ९ qQ ai ओ ০ জী»
০০ 7) (anusvara) th (visarga)
Consonants
Gutturals: व्क ka I kha IT ga ¥] gha ङः na
Palatals: चच ca cha A ja HH jha A ia
Cerebrals: eta छ tha ड da @ dha ण्‌ na
Dentals: dta tha टु da द्य dha na
Labials: q pa FR pha ba H bha H{ ma
Semivowels: H ya I ra त्त 13 व्‌ va
Sibilants: I sa q sa H sa
Aspirate: [स ha ও ” (avagraha) - the apostrophe
The vowels above should be pronounced as follows:
a — like the a in organ or the u in but.
a — like the ain far but held twice as long as short a.
1 ~ like the iin pin.
i - like the iin pique but held twice as long as short i.
u — like the u in push.
प — like the win rule but held twice as long as short u.
289


--- Page 287 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam
r — like the riin rim.
Tf — like ree in reed.
] — like I followed by r (Ir).
€ — like the ein they.
ai — like the aiin aisle.
० — like the ०7 go.
au — like the ow in how.
m (anusvdra) — a resonant nasal like the nin the French word bon.
h (visarga) — a final h-sound: ah is pronounced like aha; ih like ihi.
The consonants are pronounced as follows:
k — asin kite jh — asin hedgehog
kh — asin Eckhart fi — asin canyon
g — asingive t — asintub
gh — asin dig-hard th — as in light-heart
7 — asin sing d — asin dove
০ — asin chair dha- as in red-hot
ch — asin staunch-heart ए — asrna (prepare to say
j — asin joy the rand say na).
Cerebrals are pronounced with tongue to roof of mouth, but the
following dentals are pronounced with tongue against teeth:
॥ - asin tub but with tongue against teeth.
th — asin light- heart but with tongue against teeth.
d — asin dove but with tongue against teeth.
dh— asin red-hot but with tongue against teeth.
1 — asin nut but with tongue between teeth.
p — asin pine 1 — asin light
ph— as in uphill (not f) v ~ asin vine
b — asin bird 5 (palatal) — as in the sin the German
bh— as in rub-hard word sprechen
m — asin mother s (cerebral) — as the shin shine
y — asin yes ও — asinsun
r — asin run h — asin home
There is no strong accentuation of syllables in Sanskrit, only a flow-
ing of short and long (twice as long as the short) syllables.


--- Page 288 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each of the
Sanskrit poetry verses of this volume of Srimad-Bhagavatam, arranged in English
alphabetical order. The first column gives the Sanskrit transliteration, and the second and
third columns, respectively, list the chapter-verse reference and page number for each
verse.
A artharh kdmarh yaso vrttim 20.2 ৪৪
aruhya brhatim navarn 24.35 248
acaksur andhasya yathagranih krtas 24.50 263  dsid atita-kalpante 24.7 230
adanty atibala vira 24.24 241  dsinam [0067 madhye 23.13 206
aditer dhisthitarh garbhari 17.24 21  asrausid rsibhik sakam 24.56 271
aditir durlabhari labdhva 17.21 18
aditya dsrama-padari 18.10 35  dstirya darbhan prak-kilan 24.40 253
atha tarksya-suto [701४6 21.26 146
adityaivarh stuto rajan 17.11 11 athdham apy Gtma-ripos tavantikarn 22.11 167
adya nah pitaras trpta 18.30 49  athdhosanasam rajan 23.13 206
adya svistah kratur ayar 18.30 49  athaitat piirmam abhydtmar 19.42 91
adydgnayo me suhuta yatha-vidhi 18.31 50
ahari tom rsibhik sardharh 24.37 249 = athanghraye pronnamitaya visnor 1.3 131
athapy updyo mama devi cintyah 17.17 15
ahas ca rdtriri ca parasya puriso 20.27 121  atita-pralaydpdya 25.57 271
aho brahmana-dayada 19.18 67  datmajan susampddhdras tvarn 17.15 14
aho prandmadya krtah samudyamah 23.2 197  atmanarm jayinar mene 19.6 58
djagama kuru-srestha 22.12 169
ajaisid ajayar mayan 22.28 185 ato 'ham asya hrdayar 199 60
atrapi bahvreair gitar 19.38 85
ajdnan raksandrthaya 24.15 235  avenijydrcaydm ৫5৫ 18.27 47
ajiiarh bhagavato rdjan 23.11 205  avanijydvahan mirdhni 20.18 113
ajiidna-prabhavo manyur 19.13 63
aksa-maldrh mahardja 18.16 40  avatdra-katham ৫৫১৫, 24.1 225
alabdhvatmavakasar va 24.17 237  avataram harer yo yarn 24.60 273
avatdranucaritarn 23.30 220
anady-avidyopahatdtma-sarividas 24.46 257  ayuh pararh vapurabhistam atulya- 17.10 10
anena ydcamanena 21.11 137
aninye kalasarh haimam 20.17 112 B
annicchato bale rdjan 21.14 139
anugrahdya bhitanari 24.27 242  babandha varunaih pasair 21.26 146
babhiva tenaiva sa vaimano vatuh 18.12 36
anv atisthadvratam ida 17.1 2 babhava (85017 pulakakulakrtis 17.6 5
dpanna-loka-vrjinopasamodayadya 17.8 7 = baddhar viksya patiri sadhvi 22.19 175
apasyann iti hovdca 19.12 62  baddhanjalir baspa-kalakuleksano 23.1 196
apy uttamdri gatim asau bhajate 22.23 180  baddhas ca varunaih pasair 22.7 161
arthaih kamair gata nantarn 19.23 73 badham ity amala-prajiio 23.11 205
291


--- Page 289 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam
bahavo lebhire siddhiri 226 161 = dadhdra saphari-rapari 249 231
balena sacivair buddhya 21.22 143 = dadhyan-sibi-prabhrtayah 207 101
balir evar grha-patih 20.1 94 daivenarddhais ta evadya 21.23 144
bhagavan chrotum icchami 24.1 225 daksa-bhrgv-angiro-mukhyaih 23.20 213
bhajeta varnari nijam esa so ‘vyayo 24.48 259 danarh yajiias tapah karma 19.36 84
bhaktanar nah prapannandrh 24.28 243 = dasyaty dcchidya sakrdya 19.32 80
bhavad-vipaksena vicitra-vaisasari 228 163 deva-matar bhavatya me 1712 12
bhavadbhir nirjita hy ete 21.23 14 dharmaya yasase 'rthaya 19.37 84
bhavan acaritan dharman 19.15 65 dhatuh kamandalu-jalari tad 21.4 132
bhidyamano ‘py abhinnatma 22.1 156 dhisnyani svani te jagmur 23.27 217
bhiksari bhagavati saksad 18.17 40  dhruvarh prapede hy akutobhayari 22.10 166
bhiksave sarvam ori kurvan 19.41 89  dhapair dipaih surabhibhir 21.6 135
bhrétr-ha me gato ninari 19.12 62 dhydyan bhagavad-adesari 24.42 254
bhith kharn 0150 dyaur vivaréh 20.21 116 disah praseduh salilasayas toda 184 31
bhita-bhavana bhiitesa 22.21 178 ditijam akathayad yo brahma 24.61 274
bibhemi nahari nirayat pada-cyuto 223 158  divaukasari deva divas cyutanan 17.28 24
brahma sarvah kumaras ca 23.26 216 dodhilyamanarh tari navari 24.36 249
brakmadayo loka-nathah 21.5 133 drdharh pandita-many 07020 2015 111
brahman santanusisyasya 23.14 207 drstva mad-anubhavari vai 22.36 192
brahman yam anugrhnami 22.24 181 drstvaditis tari nija-garbha- 18.11 35
brahmanaih parvajaih sirair 19.15 65  dvabhyarh kranta mahi sarva 21.29 148
brahmarsi-gana-sarjustdm 18.18 4 dvadasyan savitatisthan 18.6 33
brahmarsinar tapah saksan 18.29 49 dvija-rapa-praticchanno 21.10 137
brhaspatir brahma-sitrari 1814 38  dyaur antariksan ksitir agni-jikvd 184 31
C E

cdrana yaksa-raksarhsi 189 35 eka-smga-dharo matsyo 24.44 255
catur-bhujah sankha-gadabja-cakrah 18.1 28 ekada krtamalayari 24.12 233
chalair ukto maya dharmo 22.30 186 ekdrnave niraloke 24.35 248
chatrari sadandari sajalai 1823 44 esa danava-daityanam 22.28 185
chaydsu mrtyuri hasite ca maya 20.28 121 esa me prapitah sthanari 22.31 188
chindhy artha-dipair bhagavan 24.53 268 esa te sthanam aisvaryarit 19.32 80
cintaydm 35৫ kala-jiio 198 59 esa vd uttamasloko 20.13 108
cintayanty ekaya buddhya 1.2 3 esa vairocane saksad 19.30 79
citra-vaditra-taryanar 18.7 33 etac chreyah parari purhsarit 23.17 211
citrari tavehitam aho 'mita-yogamaya- 23.8 202 etan no bhagavan sarvarit 243 226
D 91৫7 vayarh vijesydmo 21.24 145

etavad uktva bhagavaras 17.21 18

dadarsa visvan tri-gunar gunatmake ~~ 20.22 117 etavataiva siddho yar 19.27 77
dadau bhratre mahendraya 23.19 213 evam asraddhitarh Sisyam 20.14 109
dadau krsndjinarn bhamir 18.15 39 evarn baler तते काः, 23.19 213


--- Page 290 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 293
evam indrdya bhagavan 23.4 199 ity uktah so 'nayan matsyarn 24.23 240
evar nastanrtah sadya 19.40 87 ity uktavantarh nrpatirh 24.54 269
evarh sa niscitya ripoh Sariram 19.10 60 ity uktavantarh purusarh purdtanar 23.1 196
evar Saptah sva-gurund 20.16 112 ity ukto visnu-ratena 244 227
evarh vimohitas tena 24.25 241 ity uktva harim dnatya 23.3 198
evarh viprakrto rajan 22.1 156
i)
G
Jjagdma tatrdkhila-sara-sambhrto 18.20 42
हका kancanarh gunavad dhama 18.32 51  jalasaye ‘sammitari tar 24.23 240
gdyanto 'tiprasarisanto 18.10 35  jambavan rksa-rajas tu 21.8 136
go-brahmanarthe hirsayarm 19.43 92 ৫7076 cikirsitarh visnoh 19.29 78
go-vipra-sura-sadhindm 24.5 228  janma-karma-vayo-ripa- 22.26 183
graman samrddharis turagan gajan 1832 51
grhita-dehari nija-yoga-mayayd 18.11 35  jano budho yarn nija-karma 24.47 258
guruna bhartsitah sapto 22.30 186  jano janasyddisate वकण gatir 24.51 265
Jatilarh vimana viprar 1824 45
H Jjayantah $rutadevas ca 21.17 140
Jayorugaya bhagavann 17.25 22
hahakaro mahan asid 21.27 147
hanturi bhratr-hanari kruddho 19.7 58 Jjianari ca kevalam ananta bhavanti 17.10 10
hanyamanan svakdn drstvd 21.18 141 Jiatibhis ca parityakto 22.29 186
hatarhaso varbhir iyar ca bhiir aho 18.31 50 JAdtum icchamy ado गछ 24.29 244
hatva maindr hared yuddhe 20.13 108  jaatva tad danavendrasya 249 231
hatvasurar hayagrivarn 24.57 271 K
he vipracitte he raho 21.19 142
hiranyagarbho bhagavin 22.18 174  kalasapsu nidhayainam 24.16 236
hiranyagarbho vijiaya 17.24 21 kalenagata-nidrasya 248 231
hrdy ariga dharma stanayor 20.25 121 kalo bhavan aksipatisa visvar 17.27 24
kalpayaukah suvipulari 24.18 237
1 kamandalurh veda-garbhah 18.19 40
idarh krtantantika-varti jivitar 22.11 167 karmani karayam asuh 18.13 38
indra-jyesthaih sva-tanayair 17.14 13 karomy [1071 tan na bhavet 222 157
indra-pradhanan amarén bhujesu 20.26 121 kartuh prabhos tava kim asyata 22.20 176
indrasena mahardja 22.33 190 karturh sametah prabhavanti purisas 24.49 262
iti bruvanar nrpatin: jagat-patih 24.31 246 kasmad vayari kusrtayah khala 23.7 201
iti vairocaner vakyar 19.1 53 kasyapad aditer jato 19.30 79
ittham adisya rajanam 24.39 252 kaSyapasydditeh prityai 23.21 213
ittharh sa niscitya pitamaho mahan 22.10 166 kathar visrjase rdjan 24.14 234
18007 sasisyesu bhrgusv anekadha 18.23 44 kaupindcchadanam mata 18.15 39
ittharh virifica-stuta-karma-viryah 18.1 28 kaye balis tasya maha-vibhiseh 20.22 117
ity dyudhani jagrhur 21.13 139 kesesu meghai chvasanar ndsikdyam = 20.26 121
ity uktd saditi rajan 17.1 2 kharh ca kdyena mahata 19.34 82
ity uktah sa hasann aha 19.28 77 kim dtmandnena jahdti yo ‘ntatah 229 164


--- Page 291 ---
294 Srimad-Bhagavatam
kirh [49071070 uta 1040 upaiti martya 23.29 218 mauiijyd mekhalaya vitam 1824 45
kirh jayaya sarsrti-hetu-bhitaya 229 164 modamanah sva-pautrena 239 204
kramato gar padaikena 19.34 82 mukhato nihsrtan vedan 248 231
kridartham Gtmana idan tri-jagat 22.20 176 muiicainam hrta-sarvasvam 22.21 178
kriyamane karmanidari 23.31 220 N
krtsna te ‘nena datta bhur 22.22 179
ksetra-jiiah sarva-bhitanam 17.10 1॥ na hy 050130८ paro ‘dharma 204 99
ksina-riktha$ cyutah sthanat 22.29 186 na hy etasmin kule kascin 19.3 56
ksipyamanas tam dhedam 24.24 241 na ma etad alah rajan 24.20 238
ksitirh padaikena baler vicakrame 20.33 125 na pumdn mam upavrajya 19.20 69
1.1. 1. 0707) 19.31 79
काष्ठे ৫)৫7 disah पको vivaran 19.11 61
kumudah kumuddksas ca 21.16 140 na saknuvanti te sarve 19.21 70
kutah punar brahma-vidarn 20.10 105 na santi tirthe yudhi carthinarthitah 194 56
kutas tat-karma-vaisamyar 23.15 208 na sthdna-cyavanan mrtyor 20.5 100
na tad dénari prasarisanti 19.36 84
L na tatha tirtha dyate 20.9 103
labdha-prasadari nirmuktari 235 199 7৫ te 'ravindaksa padopasarpanari 24.30 244
loka-palair divarh ninye 23.24 215  natvam abhibhavisyanti 22.34 191
lokanarn loka-péalanam 23.21 213 na vayari brahma-bandhur 21.10 137
na yat-prasaddyuta-bhaga-lesam 24.49 261
M nabhyari nabhah kuksisu sapta 20.24 120
ma yudhyata nivartadhvar 21.19 142 nadis ca nadisu 5116 nakhesu 20.29 121
mac-chdsandtigo yas tvam 20.15 111 nahari bibhemi nirayan 20.5 100
mad-dariana-mahahlido- 23.10 204 70107 kamandalav asmin 24.18 237
madhu-vrata-vrata-vighustaya svaya 183 30  nainahprapnoti vai vidvan 19.17 66
madhuvrata-srag-vanamalayavrto 20.33 125  naitan me svastaye rajann 24.22 240
madiyarh mahimanari ca 24.38 251 naitat parasma akhyeyari 17.20 17
मपा sarvar वा drstva 21.9 136 naivari viryo jalacaro 24.26 242
mani ca bhavayati patydv 17.19 17. naivartha-krechrad bhavato vinigrahad 22.3 158
mar vacobhih samaradhya 19.19 68 naka-prstham adhisthaya 17.15 14
mamarcanari ndrhati gantum anyatha = 17.17 = 15 === namas te prini-garbhaya 17.26 23
madna-stambha-nimittanar 22.27 184 namas te purusa-srestha 24.28 243
manas caikagraya buddhyd 17.3 3 namo brahmanya-devdya 1025 122
manasvinah karunikasya Sobhanarh 20.10 105 ndnd-yonisv aniso 'yari 22.25 182
manasvindnena krtar suduskaram 20.20 115 nanama bhuvi kdyena 17.5 5
mangaldndr vratdnari ca 23.22 214  nanama mardhnasru-vilola-locanah 22.14 170
mantratas tantratas chidram 23.16 210  nandah sunando 'tha jayo 21.16 140
manye mahan asya krto hy anugraho == 22.16 172 nanrtarn bhasituri sakyari 21.12 138
marici-misra rsayo brhad-vratah 21.1 130  nanyat te kimaye rajan 19.17 66
matsya-rippi mahambhodhau 24.54 269  narayana-paro ‘tapyat 24.10 232


--- Page 292 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 295
ndsantustas tribhir lokair 19.24 73 pitarah sarva-bhitani 23.26 216
nasta-$riyarn sthira-prajaiam 21.28 147  pragrhyendriya-dustasvan 17.2 3
nava-varsa-sametena 19.22 72 prahasyanucard visnoh 21.15 140
navy ৫5170 bhagavata 24.56 271 prajdpater vesma-tamah svarocisa 183 30
nedur muhur dundubhayahsahasraso == 20.20 115
prajdpati-patir brahma 23.20 213
nemari viriiico labhate prasadam 23.6 200 pralaya-payasi dhdtuh supta-sakter 24.61 274
nibadhya navarh tac-chrrige 24.45 256  pramsum pisangambaram afijana 22.13 169
nidhehi raksa-yogena 24.22 240 pranatas tad-anujidtah 23.12 206
nigrhyamane ‘sura-patau 21.27 147
nimariksyaty apyayambhodhau 24.32. 247 prinesu gatre sthira-jangamani 20.29 122
pranjalih pranatopendrar 22.19 175
nisamya bhagavan pritah 191 53 pripya tri-bhuvanari cendra 23.25 216
nisamya bhakti-pravanah 23.5 200 pratilabdha-jaya-sribhih 1743 18
nisamya tad-vadhar bhrata 197 ১8
nisasada hareh padau 24.40 253 pratinandya harer ajagm 23.18 212
pratisrutam adatus te 21.32 150
nisthar te narake manye 19.35 83 pratiSrutarh tvayaitasmai 19:31, ५)
nityarh drastasi mari tatra 23.10 204 pratisrutasya yo ‘nisah 19.35 83
niveditari ca sarvasvam 22.22 179
noccavacatvari bhajate 246 229 pratisrutasyadanena 20:33 152
pratisrutya dadamiti 203 97
nopasargd nivasatdri 22.32 189 prativirar dig-vijaye 195 57
nrtya-vaditra-gitais ca 20.7 135 pratyagrhnan samutthaya 1825 45
ninari 007 bhagavan saksad 24.27 242
pratydkhyata pratisrutya 193 56
P pravartayanto bhrgavah 1821 43
pravistam atmani harer 17:22. 19
pada-trayarh vrnite yo 19.19 68  pravistari viksya bhrgavah 18.25 45
padaikena mayakranto 21.31 149
padarh dvitiyari kramatas trivistaparin. 20.34 127 préayo ‘dhuna te 'sura-yatha-natha 17.16 14
padani trini daityendra 19.16 65 pritas capsaraso ‘nrtyan 188 34
padani trini dattani 21.29 148 pritya sanair gadgadayad gird harim 1/4 6
prthu dehi padarh mahyar 24.20 238
panicadha vibhajan vittam 19.37 84
parag riktam apiirnan va 19.41 89 purhsarh slaghyatamarh manye 224 159
param mahimna uruvikremato gmano 23.29 218 puriso "yarn sarisrter hetur 19.25 75
parikramyddi-purusam 23.12 206 purdna-sahitar divyar 24.55 270
pirayitvaditeh kémam 234 199
paristirya samabhyarcya 18.19 41
parjanya-ghoso jalajah paricajanyah 20.31 124 R
patattrino januni visva-mirter 20.23 118
patyur nigaditari srutvd 21.25 145  raksam iccharis tanar dhatte 245 228
raksisye sarvato "hari tari 22.35 192
pita prahrada-putras te 19.14 64 rasam acastanghri-tale ‘tha padayor 20.23 118
pita-vasds catur-bahuh 17.4 4 705৫7 nirvivisii réjan 21.25 145
pitamaho me bhavadiya-sammatah 228 163 10670170600) 0007 18.26 46


--- Page 293 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam
S satya-vratasya satatarn 21.12 138
11.111. 1. 20.2 96
sa brahma-varcasenaivari 18.18 41 satyam om iti yat proktari 19.38 85
sa caharh vitta-lobhena 20.3 97 satyarh puspa-phalari vidyad 19.39 86
sa endri tata addya 24.19 238 satya samiksyabja-bhavo 21.1 130
sa eva bhagavan adya 21.21 143
sa eva visnur varado 504 v3 paro 20.11 106 satyavratasya rajarser 24.55 270
satyavratasya rajarser 24.59 273
sa tan-niketarn parimgSya $iinyam 19.11 61 satyavrato ‘jali-gatam 24.13 234
sa tatra hasinam udiksya sat-patirn 2215 171 savarner antarasydyar 22.31 188
sa tu satyavrato raja 24.58 272 siddha-vidyadhara-ganah 189 34
sd tu tatraika-ratrena 24.17 237
sa vai nah sartkatad asmad 24.43 255 so 'dityarh viryam adhatta 17.23 19
so 'nudhyatas tato गदगद 24.44 255
sa vai samadhi-yogena 17.22 19 = 5० ’nvavaiksata tar kalarn 24.39 252
sada sannihitarh vira 22.35 192 = sotthaya baddhaijalir iditurn sthita 17.6 5
samadibhir updyais ca 21.22 143 sparse ca kdmarh nrpa retasambhah 20.28 121
samahita-mana rajan 17.23 19
samarcya bhaktyabhyagmac chuci 21.3; 131 sphurat-kiritangada-mina-kundalah 20.32 125
sraddhadeva iti khyato 24.11 233
samiddham ৫0107) vahnim 18.19 41 sreyah kurvanti bhatanar 20.7 101
samudropaplutds tatra 247 230 srivatsa-vaksa balayangadollasat- 182 29
sarvadarh mahad-akhyanarn 24.59 273 riya paramaya justo 23.25 216
sandhyarh vibhor vasasi guhya aiksat 20.24 119
sankalpas tasya sidhyanti 24.60 273  Sriyar ca vaksasy aravinda-hastarh 20.25 121
Sronayarn sravana-dvadasyarm 18.5 32
sankha-dundubhayo nedur 18.7 = 33 Ssrutvasvamedhair yajamanam urjitarn 18.20 42
sanuga balim ajahruh 21.5 134  stavanair jaya-sabdais ca 21.7 135
sapta-dvipadhipatayo 19.23 73 strisu narma-vivahe ca 19.43 92
saptame hy adyatanad irdhvam 24.32 247
saptarsibhih parivrtah 24.34 248 striyo rudantir asadya 17.14 13
sudarsanarh cakram asahya-tejo 20.30 123
sarva-sreyah-pratipinam 22.27 184  sulabha yudhi viprarse 20.9 103
sarvam etan mayakhyatarn 23.28 217 sumahat karma tad visnor 23.27 216
sarvar karoti nischidram 23.16 210  sunanda-mukhya upatasthur isarn 20.32 125
sarvarh nety anrtari briydat 19.42 91
sarvarh sampadyate devi 17.20 17 suaryah kilayaty uta va vibhavasuh 18.22 44
sutalarh svargibhih prarthyarn 22.33 190
sarvari soghum alarm manye 204 99 sva-sthaya sasvad-upabrmhita-parna- 17.9 9
sarvasvari no (शष्ठ bhartur 21.11 137 svdgatari te namas tubhyarn 18.29 49
sarvasvarh visnave dattvd 19.33 81  svagatenabhinandyatha 18.27 47
sarvatmanahsamadrso "visamah 23.8 202
sarvatmanidari bhuvanarh niriksya 20.30 123 = svam ayur dvija-lingebhyo 19.14 64
svdmsena putratvam upetya te sutdn 17.18 16
sarve {11404075 te 24.29 244  svardhuny abhin nabhasi 5৫ patati 21.4 132
sarve nagayuta-prands 21.17 140  svarlokas te dvitiyena 21.31 150
sarve naksatra-taradyas 185 32 Svasanilantarhita-saksma-dehas 19.10 60
$asdpa daiva-prahitah 20.14 109  syamavadato jhasa-raja-kundala- 182 29


--- Page 294 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 297
T tata addya sa rajad 24.21 239
tatah samudra udvelah 2441 254
tad avrtydtmana so yarn 24.21 239  tatastvindrah puraskrtya 23.24 215
tad vamanari rapam 20.21 115 = tathapi loko na bhavantam andha-dhir = 24.52 266
tad vyalika-phalari bhutksva 21.34 152  tathapi vadato bhizman 29.10 211
tad yatha vrksa unmiilah 19.40 87
10৫3 sarvani bhitani 23.23 214 tathapy enam na hirmsisye 20.12 108
tatra danava-daityanar 22.36 192
tadasurendrarn divi devata-gand 20.19 113 tatra ksipta muhirtena 24.19 238
tam aha ko bhavdn asman 24.25 241 tatra raja-rsih kascin 24.10 232
tam aha satikarunam 24.14 234 tavat sutalam adhyastamn 22.32 189
tam aruroha viprendrair 24.42 254
tam atmano 'nugrahartharn 24.15 235 te rtvijo yajamanah sadasya 18.22 44
te sarve vamanari hanturi 21.14 139
tam ayantarn samalokya 198 59 tenahari nigrhito smi 22.7 161
tar baddhari varunaih pasair 21.28 147 = (दुका kalo grasil lokdn 20.8 102
tam indra-senah sva-pitamahari sriya = 22.13 169 toyaih samarhanaih sragbhir 21.6 135
tarh narmadayas tata uttare baler 18.21 43
tar nativartitur daityah 21.20 142 tri-lokyar liyamanayam 24.33 247
tri-nabhdya tri-prsthaya 17:26 23
tar netra-gocaram viksya 17.5 5 tribhih kramair asantusto 19.22 72
tam ticur munayah prita 24.43 255  tribhih kramair imal lokan 19.33 81
tari vaturh vamanari drstva 18.13 37 [11.11.111 20.1 94
tamah-prakrti-durmarsari 24.2 225
tan abhidravato drstva 21.15 140 tustuvur munayo devd 18.8 34
tvac-chasanatigan daityams 22.34 191
tan vinirjitya samare 17.13 13 tvam कका anto bhuvanasya madhyam == 17.27 23
tasma ity upanitdya 18.17 40 tvam arka-drk sarva-drsam samiksano 24.50 263
tasmad asya vadho dharmo 21.13 139 tam balo balisa-matih 19.18 67
tasmad vrttikarim bhamirn 19.20 69
tasmai balir varuna-pasa-yantritah 22.14 170 tvari ninam asurandrm nah 22.5 160
tvarh sarva-lokasya suhrt priyesvaro 24.52 266
tasmai namas te jagad-Bvardya vai 22.17 173 ০7: (200 osadhih sarva 24.34 248
tasmat kalarh pratiksadhvari 21.24 145 tari tv avyayar jiidnam amogham 24.5 265
tasmat trini padany eva 1927 77
tasmat tvatto mahim isad 19.16 65 1৮৫77 tvam ahari deva-varar varenyarn 24.53 268
tasya dinatarari vakyam 24.16 236 tvarh vai prajanar sthira-jangamanarn. 17.28 24
tvayaiva dattarh padam aindram 07107 22.16 172
tasya tyage nimittar ki 20.6 100  tvaydrcitascaham apatya-guptaye 17.18 16
tasyah pradurabhiit tata 17.4 4
tasyanjaly-udake kacic 24.12 233 U
tasyanusmoato rajan 22.18 174
tasyetthari bhasamanasya 22.12 169 uccavacesu bhitesu 246 229
iicuh sva-bhartur asura 21.9 136
tasyopaniyamanasya 18.14 38  udviksati sa pibativa caksusa 17.7 6
tat karma sarve ‘pi grmanta arjavari 20.19 114 upadhava [00417 bhadre 17:19 17
tat-pdda-saucari jana-kalmasapaharn == 18.28 47 upadhavat pati bhaktya 17.21 18
tat pras@myaty asantosad 19.26 76 upasthasyati nauh kacid 24.33 247


--- Page 295 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam
upasthitasya me sige 24.36 249 yad-artham adadhad ripari 242 225
upendrari kalpayarh cakre 23.23 214 yaddeva-devogirisas candra-maulir 18.28 47
upetya bhamau Sirasa maha-mana 22.15 171 2০৫ yad dhasyati loke ‘smin 20.6 100
urukramasya caritariu 23.28 217 70৫ yad vato vaiichasi tat praticchame 18.32 51
yada kadacij jivatma 22.25 182
urukramasyanghrir upary upary atho == 20.34 127
utsasarja nadi-toye 24.13 234 = yadobhyo juati-ghatibhyo 24.14 234
uttamasloka-caritari 24.3 226 ‘yadrecha-labha-tustasya 19.26 76
uvdca caritarh visnor 244 227  yadrechayopapannena 19.24 73
200100/0%01001007706700, 19.25 75
A\% yadrcchayopasrta yam apnuyur 24.46 257
vacas tavaitaj jana-deva siinrtarn 192-54 yady asya na bhavet stambhas 22.26 183
vairénubandha etdvan 19.13 63 पव्‌) uttamasloka bhavan mameritarn = 22.2 157
vdmandya dadav 67৫77 20.16 112 yadyapy asav adharmena 20.12 107
vamanaya mahirh 0৫007) 19.28 77 yah prabhuh sarva-bhatanar 21.20 142
vanyam ca chandarhsi rase jalesarn 20.27 121 2017 iyarh bubhuje brahman 20.8 102
varatrenahina tustas 24.45 256  yajamanah pramudito 18.26 46
varayam dsa sarirabdhan 21.18 141 ’yajamanah svayarh tasya 20.18 113
vardhamano maha-meghair 24.41 254 = yajanti yajram kratubhir yam adrta 20.11 106
vasudeve samadhaya 17.3 3 yajra-cchidrarh samadhatta 23.18 212
vatsa prahrada bhadrari te 23.9 204  yajiesa yajia-purusacyuta tirtha-pada 17.8 7
vavandire yat-smarandnubhavatah 21.3 131 भु 7९5० yajia-purusah 23.15 208
vedanarh sarva-devandri 23.22 214  yalloka-palais tvad-anugraho ‘marair = 23.2 197
vedopavedd niyama yamanvitas 21.2 131 207 na mata pita bhrata 224 159
vetsyasy anugrhitarh me 24.38 251 ‘yar vinirjitya krcchrena 19.6 58
vidyadharo ’sih jata-candra-yuktas 20.31 124  yan-madah purusah stabdho 22.24 181
vihartu-kamah pralaydrnave ‘bravic 24.31 246
yan no ’suranam asi durga-palo 23.6 200
vijaya-néma sa proktd 186 33 yasmin vairanubandhena 22.6 161
vijayarh diksu sarvasu 21.8 136 ‘yasya pramdnari bhrgavah samparaye 19.2 54
vikarsan vicarigyami 24.37 249 20८ kificid om iti briryat 19.41 89
vindhyavalis tadagatya 20.17 112 yat-pada-padma-makaranda 23.7 201
vipralabdho dadamiti 21.34 152
visa tvarh nirayari tasmad 21.32 150  yat-padayor asatha-dhih salilar 22.23 180
20८ sapatnair hrta-Srindri 17:02 12:
visnave ksmarh pradasyantam 19.29 78  yat-sevaya tar vidhunoty asan-matim = 24.47 258
visnoh prasadat kalpe "sminn 24.58 272 yat-sevayagner iva rudra-rodanari 24.48 259
visvdya visva-bhavana-sthiti- 17.9 9  yattad vapur bhati 18.12 36
11.11.11 233 198 204 tat karmasu vaisamyari 23.14 207
vrkse Jivati tan na syad 19.39 86
vrtha manorathas tasya 21.33 152 at te ‘nukiilesvara-vipra-gupta 17.16 14
21016/07650৫71 prthag-atmanarh satam 24.30 244
Y 2०८० [2/0 hiranyaksas 19.5 57
(०/० yato hari tatrdsau 199 59
ya idari deva-devasya 23.30 220  yatra yatranukirtyeta 23.31 220
ad adhayo vyadhayas ca 22.32 189  yavad varsati parjanyas 21.30 149


--- Page 296 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 299
ydvanto visaydh presthds 19.21 70 yo no bhavaya prig dsid 21.21 143
ydvat tapaty asau gobhir 21.30 149 2010 'neka-madandhanam 22.5 160
yaya hi vidvan api muhyate yatas 22.17 173 yo 'savasmin mahd-kalpe 24.11 233
ye capare yoga-samira-dipita- 21.2 13] yusmat-kule yad yasasamalena 194 56
yo bhavan yojana-satam 24.26 242


--- Page 297 ---
General Index

Numerals in boldface type indicate references to translations of the verses of Srimad-

Bhagavatam.
A Aditi
Lord fulfilled desire of, 199

Abhyutthanam adharmasya Lord instructed, 17, 18

verse quoted, 226-227 Lord in womb of, 20, 21
Absolute Truth Lord satisfied with, 16

Lord as, 118 motherly desires of, 12-14

See also: Supreme Lord; Truth payo-vrata by, 2, 3, 16
Acarya. See: Spiritual master, all entries prayed to the Lord, 6, 8, 9, 11
Acaryarin mari vijaniyat quoted on the Lord, 8

quoted, 258 residence of, showered with flowers, 35
Acintya-bhedabheda philosophy, Caitanya as Vamana’s mother, 79

propounded, 118 at Vamana’s sacred thread ceremony, 39

Activities Administrators. See: King; Ksatriyas; Leaders

fruitive. See: Fruitive activities Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-ripam

of the Lord. See: Incarnations of the quoted, 37

Supreme Lord; Pastimes of the Advaita-vada vs. dvaita-vada, 118
Supreme Lord Agastya Muni, devastating curse of, 250

of mahdjanas, 48 Age of Kali. See: Kali-yuga

for sense gratification condemned, 71 Agnostics as shameless fools, 178

sinful, four listed, 90 Ahari brahmasmi

spiritual, 88 quoted, 74
Activities, material Aha sarvasya prabhavo

Lord beyond, 29 quoted, 118, 264

lusty desires cause, 267 Ahari tvari sarva-papebhyo

as suffering, 21 verse quoted, 263

See also: Fruitive activities; Karma Air
Actor, Lord compared to, 37 Lord compared to, 229-230
Adanta-gobhir visatam tamisram in Lord’s universal form, 119

quoted, 168 Airplane space travel, 217
Aditi Ajnata-sukrti defined, 236

blissful at Lord’s appearance, 5, 6, 36 Ajo pi sann avyaydtma

concentrated on the Lord, 3 quoted, 63

as demigods’ mothers, 12, 199 Aksayasayaka quiver, 125

Kasyapa instructed, on payo-vrata, 2, 7 America, Krsna conscious farms in, 72

Kasyapa’s union with, 20 Ananda

Lord appeared for, 4-7, 28, 36 defined, 261, 267

Lord blessed, 18 See also: Bliss; Happiness

301


--- Page 298 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Anandamayo *bhyasat Aradhananari sarvesa
quoted, 261 verse quoted, 106
Ananta-Saktir bhagavan Arjavam defined, 114
verse quoted, 235 Arjuna
Andantarastha-paraméanu-cayantara-stham as guru, 269
quoted, 21 Krsna instructed, 269
Anger universal form shown to, 134
in conditioned soul, 64 Asango hy ayam purusah
of demons toward Vimana, 136-139 quoted, 20
of Hiranyakaéipu toward Visnu, 59, Asita, 269
61-62, 64 Association of devotees of the Supreme Lord,
ignorance causes, 64 value of, 151, 193
in Lord’s universal form, 123 Astanga-yoga, processes of, 71
Angira, 214 Astrologer, Viévanatha Cakravarti as, 32
Annihilation of the universe Astronomy, Vedic vs. modern, 32
in Brahma's day, 250 Asuras. See: Atheists; Demons; Nondevotees
in Brahma’s night, 230 Asvamedha sacrifices by Bali, 42
in Caksusa-manvantara, 250 Atah pumbhir dvija-srestha
Lord foretells, 247, 248 verse quoted, 209
at Manu’s finish, 250 Atheist
in Svayambhuva, manvantara, 250 Hiranyakasipu as, 62
by water, 230, 247, 248, 254 See also: Demons
Antavat tu phalari tesam Atma. See: Soul
quoted, 245, 262 Ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
Anukulyasya sanikalpah verse quoted, 165
quoted, 97 Attachment, material
Anukilyena krsnanu- in Bali, 81
verse quoted, 3-4 Bali gave up, 165
Anxiety to body, 164, 165
spiritual world free of, 266 death removes, 102
of Visnu for Hiranyakasipu, 61 to family, 164
See also: Suffering tofruitive activities, 205
Anyabhilasita-sanyam as male-female attraction, 165
verse quoted, 3-4 Prahlada gave up, 165
Appearance of the Supreme Lord (descent) to wife, 165
for Aditi, 4-7, 28, 36 See also: Bodily conception of life; Desires,
constellation at, 32, 33 material
as cowherd boy, 228 Austerity
happiness at, 31, 34 by Kasyapa, 16, 17
in Kadyapa’s home, 31 life for, 260
musical instruments hailed, 34 purification by, 75
prominent personalities honored, 34, 35 by Satyavrata, 232, 234
purpose of, 20, 226-227 Authority
transcendental, 20, 29, 37 of the Lord defied by demons, 181-182,
See also: Incarnations of the Supreme Lord 203
Apsaras, 34 See also: Disciplic succession; Mahdjana


--- Page 299 ---
General Index 303
Avaisnavas. See: Nondevotees Bali Maharaja
Avaisnavo gurur na syad in ignorance, 172, 177
verse quoted, 96 Indra enemy of, 80
Avajananti mar madhah as king of heaven, 172, 188
quoted, 230 as krpa-siddha, 98
Avataras. See: Appearance of the Supreme as learned, 111
Lord (descent); Incarnations of the Lord favored, 208
Supreme Lord Lord praised, 55
Avidya Lord protected, 111, 188-189, 191,
defined, 259 192-193, 201
See also: Ignorance Lord punished, 159, 162, 163
Ayam akasmiko jatas Lord's mercy on, 162, 167, 168, 172, 177,
_ verse quoted, 250-251 182, 187, 197-198
Ayusah ksana eko ‘pi Lord's purpose understood by, 157-158,
quoted, 103 162, 167-168
Lord's universal form seen by, 117-120,
B 123
Lord tested, 187
“Back to Godhead” loved the Lord, 98-99
after body’s demise, 266 as mahdjana, 48, 103, 187
by hearing about the Lord, 220 material attachment shucked by, 165
as life’s goal, 267 as materially attached, 81
by narrating Matsya-Satyavrata pastime, munificent, 66
274. Prahlada beheld by, 170
as ‘“‘no-return” trip, 63 as Prahlada’s grandson, 55, 98, 107, 163,
Bahvrca-ruti, cited on promises, 86 166, 200
Bali Maharaja pride victimized, 152-153
asvamedha sacrifices by, 42 as pure devotee, 98, 101, 153, 193, 196
born among demons, 98 religious, 48, 54, 55,187
brahmanas favored by, 138 sacrifices of, Sukricarya corrected, 212
Brahma pleaded cause of, 179, 180, 181 Siva’s example followed by, 48
charity offered to Vamana by, 51, 70, 78, suffering of, 181, 187
81-82, 157, 158, 177, 179, 180, Sukracarya advised, on charity promises,
181 84, 86, 89, 90, 91, 92
demigods honored, 114, 115 Sukricarya cursed, 110, 111, 207-208,
demons praise, 138 ॥ 209
demons retreated by, 142-146 Sukracérya rejected by, 95, 97, 101-103,
as determined, 148, 156 i 110-112, 165
as devotee, 81 as Sukriacarya’s disciple, 90, 101, 110, 151
family heritage of, Vamana praised, Sukracarya vs., 110
55-57, 64-66 Sukricarya warned, about Vamana, 78-83
famous, 148 as surrendered soul, 107, 159, 162,
faultless, 207-208, 209 164-165
fear in, 100, 159 tolerant, 146, 151, 188
fearless, 111 truthful, 138, 187
Garuda arrested, 146 Vimana arrested, 147, 148, 171


--- Page 300 ---
304 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bali Maharaja (continued) Bhagavad-gita
Vamana assigned, to Sutala, 189-191 society benefits by, 229
Vamana begged land from, 66, 67, 69, 77, speaker of, 261
108, 136, 213 spiritual life via, 265
Vimana “cheated,” 157-158 Vedas revealed in, 275
Vamana criticized by, 68, 69 Bhagavad-gita quotations from
Vamana given land by, 112, 115 on cause of all causes, 144
Vamana outshone, 44 on charity, 104
Vamana praised, 66 on death, 87, 102
Vamana sanctified, 50 on demigod worship, 245
Vamana saved, 227 on determined devotee, 148
Viamana sent, to hell, 151, 152, 153 on freedom from birth and death, 63
Vamana welcomed by, 46-51 on Godhead, returning to, 266
Vamana worshiped by, 113 on happiness, 74
Varuna arrested, 162 on knowing Krsna’s transcendental nature,
Vindhyavali prayed for, 178 29, 37
as Virocana’s son, 64-65 on Krsna as origin of all, 118
wife of, 113,175, 176-178 on Kuruksetra battlefield, 8
Bali Maharaja, quotations from on living entity in species cycle, 183
on 03118 promise to the Lord, 157 on living entity under modes of nature,
on Lord’s mercy, 197 21, 230
on religious principles, 96 on Lord as birthless, 63
on Vamana, 49, 68 on Lord as body’s owner, 177
Balir vaiyasakir vayam on Lord as equally disposed, 20
quoted, 103 on Lord as proprietor, 68
Battlefield of Kuruksetra, 8 on Lord as Vedas’ knower, 275
life sacrificed on, 104 on Lord dispelling ignorance, 252
Bauddha (Buddhist) philosophy, 62 on Lord favoring devotees, 8, 203
Beauty on Lord in heart, 61, 251-252
of the Lord, 29-31 on Lord inspiring devotees, 110
of Prahlada, 170 on Lord of sacrifice, 209
of Vimana, 41, 46 on Lord pervading universe, 219
Beggar on Lord’s incarnation, 226-227
charity denied to, 90 on Lord’s mercy, 198
penalty for false promise to, 152 on Lord’s potency, 10
professional, condemned, 91-92 on offerings to the Lord, 180
Viamana as, 67 on soul, 62
Being, living. See: Living entity; Soul; Soul, on spiritual master, 268-269
conditioned on surrender to the Lord, 263
Bhagaved-gita Bhagavan. See: Krsna, Lord; Supreme Lord
See also: Bhagavad-gita, quotations from Bhagavatam. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam
cited on ksatriya, 57 Bhagavata Purana. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam
cited on living entity, 20 Bhagavati, mother, 40-41
via guru, 268 Bhaktas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
liberation via, 265 Bhakti. See: Devotional service to the Supreme
as Lord’s instructions, 268 Lord; Krsna consciousness


--- Page 301 ---
General Index 305
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, quoted on renuncia- Bodily conception of life
tion, 88 anger in, 64
Bhaktivinoda Thakura worship in, fruitless, 245, 246
quoted on birth amid devotees, 151 See also: Attachment material
quoted on surrender, 107 Body, material
Bhakti-yoga changing, 183
as sarikhya-yoga, 270 conditioned soul vs., 245
See also: Devotional service to the Supreme demigods change, 245
Lord; Krsna consciousness desires cause, 177
Bhava-grahi janardana in devotional service, 88, 165
quoted, 198 as “foreign element,” 165
Bhoktaran yajiia-tapasam freedom from, 29
quoted, 68, 209 fruitive activities cause, 205
Bhramayan sarva-bhitani humans change, 245
verse quoted, 177 life after leaving, 266
Bhrgu as Lord's property, 177
brahmana descendants of, 42, 43, 55 maintenance needed by, 87-89
Vamana honored by, 214, 217 man attached to, 164, 165
Bhamir apo 'nalo vayuh nature prescribes, 165
quoted, 127 as sense gratification’s “reward,” 71
Birds soul vs., 165, 267
king of, 146 as suffering, 71, 168
in Lord’s universal form, 119 temporary, 164, 165
Birth treelike, 86, 87, 88
of bhakta in good family, 63 utility of, 86, 87, 88
in devotee’s association, 151 See also: Bodily conception of life; Senses
human, as rare, 182 Body of the Supreme Lord
of the Lord transcendental, 20, 29 beauty of, 29-31
Birth and death, repeated transcendental, 36, 37
freedom from, 260 universe included in, 116
fruitive activities cause, 182, 205 See also: Form of the Supreme Lord; Uni-
sense control stops, 71 versal form of the Supreme Lord
Blind leading blind, ‘guru’’ leading gullible Brahma, Lord
like, 263-264 annihilation in day of, 250
Bliss annihilation in night of, 230
Aditi in, 5, 6 awakening of, 272, 274
Prahlada in, 205 Bali's cause pleaded by, 179, 180, 181
See also: Happiness birthof, 130, 132
Boar incarnation killed Hiranyaksa, daytime sleep of, 250
58 Hayagriva stole Vedas from, 231
Boat Lord saved Vedas 07, 272, 274, 275
brahmanas boarded, 254 Lord served by, 202
fish incarnation tied to, 256 in Lord’s universal form, 123
in Lord’s instructions to Satyavrata, Lord worshiped by, 201
248-250 Manus in day of , 250
Satyavrata boarded, 254 “night” during day of, 250


--- Page 302 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Brahma, Lord (continued) Brahma 500) 0778 jagan mithya
prayed to the Lord, 21-25 quoted, 87
prayed to Vamana, 132 Brahma-vadis defined, 207
quoted on Bali and the Lord, 179 Brahmin. See: Brahmana
quoted on the Lord, 22 Brahminical culture
Vamana honored by, 214, 215, 217 cow protection maintains, 228
Viamana outshone, 130 Kali-yuga neglects, 229
Vimana’s feet washed by, 133 teaches satisfaction, 72
at Vamana’s sacred thread ceremony, 40 See also: Brahmanas; Varmnmasrama-dhar-
Vamana worshiped by, 132, 134 ma
Vindhyavali interrupted, 175 Brhan-naradiya Purana, quoted on chanting
Brahma-bhiita platform defined, 267 the Lord’s holy names, 210
Brahmacari (celibate student) Brhaspati, 39
charity quota for, 67 C
Vamana as, 37, 38, 39, 41, 71, 79, 80,
83,108, 138
Vamana's teaching to, 55 Caitanya-caritamrta
Brahma-danda quoted on knowing Krsna, 9-10
defined, 39 quoted on mercy of guru and Krsna, 98
See also: Brahmacari Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Brahmajyoti. See: Brahman effulgence Krsna's supremacy accepted by, 269
Brahmaloka philosophy of, 118
elevation to, 132 Caitanya Mahaprabhu, quotations from
Viamana outshone, 130 on chanting the Lord’s holy names, 210,
Brahman (spirit). See: Soul 211
Brahman, Supreme. See: Supreme Lord on guru, 55, 261, 264
न on mercy of guru and Krsna, 98
Bali favors, 138 on sanikirtana-yajia, 211
in Bhrgu dynasty, 42, 43, 55 Caksusa Manu. See: Manu, Ciksusa
boat boarded by, 254 Canakya Pandita
fruitive, Krsna-Balarima displeased by, 98 quoted on possessions, 102
ksatriyas charitable to, 57 quoted on reputation, 103
Lord favors, 15 Canakya-sloka, quoted on possessions, 102
Lord protects, 228-229 Candra, 245
Lord’s appearance gladdened, 31 Caranas
protection by, 15 Bali honored by, 114
qualifications of, 114 Lord’s appearance honored by, 35
satisfied vs. dissatisfied, 76 Caste system. See: Varnasrama-dharma
Vaisnava above, 96 Causal Ocean, Vamana’s kick tapped, 133
Vimana as, 37, 38, 46, 49, 108, 137 Cause, supreme
Virocana favored, 64-65 daiva as, 144
Brahman effulgence of Vamana, 41 Lord as, 117,118
Brahma-samhita Celibate. See: Brahmacari; Sannydst
quoted on Lord's forms, 37 Ceremony, ritualistic. See: Ritualistic
as Vedic corollary, 132 ceremony


--- Page 303 ---
General Index 307
Chanting of the Supreme Lord’s holy names Creation, the
Caitanya quoted on, 210, 211 material vs. spiritual, 219
by intelligent people, 211 scientists vs., 219
Jiva Gosvami cited on, 211 See also: Material world; Universe
for Kali-yuga, 210-211 Curse
Lord pleased by, 21-22 by Agastya on Svayambhuva, 250
perfection by, 210, 211 by Sukrécarya on Bali, 110, 111,
superexcellence of, 8 207-208, 209
transcendental, 21-22 D
See also: Hare Krsna mantra; Sankirtana
Charity
Bali offered, to Vamana, 51, 70, 78, Dadam: buddhi-yogan tari
81-82,115 quoted, 267
brahmacari’s quota of, 67 verse quoted, 110
in goodness, 104 Dadhici Maharaja, 102
of ksatriyas to brahmanas, 57 Daityas. See: Demons, all entries
material vs. spiritual, 90 Daiva defined, 144
money for, 102 Daiva-prahitah defined, 110
penalty for violation of, 151, 152, 153 Daksa, 214
possessions for, 105 Dasavatara-stotra, quoted on Vamana’s kick,
sannydsi’s quota of, 67 128
Sukracarya quoted on, 84, 89 Datavyam iti yad 0৫707
transcendental, 104 verse quoted, 104
value of giving, 105 Days of week, planetary positions correspond
of Virocana to “brahmanas,”’ 65 to, 32
wealth for, 104 Daytime in Lord’s universal form, 123
“Cheating” of Bali by Vamana, 157-158 Death
Civilization, modern Buddhist philosophy on, 62
dissatisfied, 72 as final examination, 87
godless, 174, 181 imminent, 167
warning for, 174 Lord beyond, 28, 29, 62-63
See also: Society, human in Lord’s universal form, 123
Clouds in Lord’s universal form, 123 possession nullified at, 101, 102
Compassion of Visnu for Hiranyakaéipu, 61 Dehino 'smin yatha dehe
Concentration. See: Meditation quoted, 74
Conditioned soul. See: Soul, conditioned Deities, planetary, worshiped Vamana, 134,
Consciousness 135
spiritual, 48, 63, 75 Deity form of the Supreme Lord
See also: Krsna consciousness new devotee should see, 205
Cosmic manifestation. See: Creation, the; Ma- See also: Form of the Supreme Lord
terial world; Universe Demigod (s)
Cows Aditi mother of, 12, 199
Lord favors, 15 Bali honored by, 114
Lord's appearance gladdened, 31 blessings of, vs. Lord’s blessings, 262
protection of, 228, 229 body changed by, 245


--- Page 304 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Demigod (s) (continued) Desires, material
demons vs., 12, 13, 15, 176-177, 203 body according to, 177
heavenly planets reentered by, 217 in conditioned soul, 267
humans compared to, 245 freedom from, 63
humans worship, 245 futility of, 75
Indra chief among, 13,123 material activities caused by, 267
as living entities, 245 material life continued by, 76
Lord favored, 157 See also: Attachment, material
Lord obeyed by, 203 Desire tree, Lord compared to, 203
Lord's appearance gladdened, 31 Destiny
in Lord’s universal form, 123 satisfaction with, 73, 76
Lord vs., 262 See also: Karma
as materialistic devotees, 161, 176-177 Detachment, false, 88
prayed at Lord’s appearance, 34 Devala, 269
qualification of, 176-177 Devas. See: Demigods, all entries
time favors, 143 Devotees) of the Supreme Lord (bhaktas)
Vamana favored, 79, 137 association 01, value of, 151, 193
Vamana honored by, 214, 215, 217 Bali as, 81
of water, 123 birth of, exalted, 63
worship toward, 245, 262 demigods as, 161, 176-177
See also: names of specific demigods as determined, 97, 148

Demons fearless, 151, 159
Bali born among, 98 free of fruitive activities, 208
Bali praised by, 138 Ganges worshiped by, 116
Bali retreated, 142-146 heaven & hell disinterest, 151, 153
demigods vs., 12, 13, 15, 176-177, 203 karma tolerated by, 160
invincible, 15 liberation disinterests, 151
Lord defied by, 203 Lord “cheats,” 157
Lord kills, 20 Lord favors, 12, 110, 148, 160, 167-168,
Lord’s mercy on, 161, 162, 201, 202, 203 184, 191, 198, 203
Lord’s universal form seen by, 124 Lord known by, 22
mentality of, devotee’s association dispels, Lord protects, 8, 20, 83, 168, 227

193 Lord rejoined by, 266

proprietorship pretended by, 176, 177 Lord’s forms for, 134
quoted on Vamana, 137 Lord’s mercy on, 81, 134, 148, 160, 173,
suffering due to, 178 185, 187-188
Vamana angered, 136-139 Lord's relationship with, 68, 83
Visnu associates vs., 140-146 Lord tests, 186, 187-188
world ruined by, 178 materialist as danger for, 168
See also: Atheists; Nondevotees neophyte, advised, 205

Dese kale ca patre ca nondevotees vs., 203
verse quoted, 104 offerings by, 116-117

Desires opulence of, 81, 111
Lord fulfills, 203 qualifications of, 114
of mother Aditi, 12-14 self-satisfied, 68


--- Page 305 ---
General Index 309

Devotee(s) of the Supreme Lord (bhaktas) Disciplic succession (parampara)

Siva’s example recommended to, 48 Narada in, 261

smarta-brahmanas vs., 82 Vyasa in, 261

sober, 55 Disease, Lord free of, 29

as surrendered soul, 198, 203 Distress. See: Suffering

tolerant, 160 Divyam defined, 29

transcendental, 151, 153 Dress

Visnu “defeated” by, 109 of the Lord, 4, 29-31, 126

See also: Pure devotees of the Supreme of Prahlada, 170

Lord; names of specific devotees of Vamana, 46
Devotional service to the Supreme Lord (bhak- Durga defined, 201
ti) Duty

body in, 88, 165 of guru, 95

knowing or unknowing, 236 of householder, 96, 97

life’s goal by, 267 occupational, Hari worship surpasses,

Lord appreciates, 198 245-246

love of God by, 98-99 perfection of, 209

mind controlled by, 4 to Visnu, 212

opulences hinder, 185 Dvédasi

perfection by, 98 defined, 33

principle guiding, 97 Lord appeared on, 32, 33

purifying power of, 260, 261 vijayd, 33

pure, 4,98 Dwaita-vada vs. advaita-vada, 118

by Satyavrata, 236 Dvaraka as holy place, 8

self-realization by, 260-261 ण

sense controlled by, 4 defined, 69

value 01, 236 See also: Planets

See also: Krsna consciousness Dwarf incarnation. See: Vimanadeva, Lord
Dharma. See: Duty; Religious principles; Dynasty of Bali praised by Vamana, 55-57,

Varnasrama-dharma 64-66

Dharma-ksetra

defined, 8 E

See also: Holy places
Dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetre Earth planet

quoted, 8 boar incarnation rescued, 58
Dhruva Maharaja, opulence disinterested, 185 heavenly planets excel, 190
Disciple liars burden, 99-100

bogus vs. bona fide, 2 as mother, 39, 99

foolish, 264, 265 Vamana's footstep covered, 126

guru's duty to, 95, 264 Vamana stepped down on, 42, 43

See also: Brahmacdri; Devotee of the Ecstasy. See: Bliss

Supreme Lord Education, spiritual, modern society lacks, 72,

Disciplic succession (parampara) 166

guru in, 268 Effulgence, Brahman, of Vamana, 41

Krsna in, 261 Ego, false, anger due to, 64


--- Page 306 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Elements, material Fire purifying gold & silver, devotional service
life independent of, 20, 21 purifying living entity like, 260
senses covered by, 74 Fire sacrifice by Vimana, 42
universe covered by, 127 Fish incarnation
See also: names of specific elements boat tied to, 256
Energy of the Supreme Lord body of, 256
external, 10 as firstincarnation, 225
gold by, 264 narration about Satyavrata &, recom-
illusory, 10, 148 mended, 273, 274 J
material, 202, 203, 219 in ocean of inundation, 256, 270
spiritual, 202 purpose of, 227, 275
See also: Maya quoted on wider water residences,
Enjoyment, material 239-241
demigods attached to, 176-177 Satyavrata favored by, 232
See also: Happiness, material Satyavrata instructed by, 272
Entity, individual. See: Living entity Satyavrata let loose, 234
Envy. See: Anger Satyavrata protected, 236, 237
Satyavrata recognized, 243
F in Satyavrata’s palms, 234
Satyavrata’s protection begged by, 235
False ego. See: Ego, false Satyavrata transferred, to wider waters,
Falsity 238-240
Sukracarya quoted, on, 91, 92 Satyavrata unaware of, 236
See also: Liars Variha’s incarnation like, 232
Family Vedas saved by, 231, 232
of Bali praised by Vamana, 55-57, 64-66 waters outgrown by, 237-242
man attached to, 164 Flood, universal. See: Annihilation of the uni-
money share for, 85 verse
preaching more important than, 185 Flowers decorated the Lord, 30, 126
See also: Grhastha; Householder Flower shower
Farms in Hare Krsna movement, 72 on Aditi’s residence, 35
Fear for Bali, 114.
in Bali, 100, 159 at Lord’s appearance, 35
Bali free of, 111 Food offered to the Lord, 181
devotees free of, 151, 159 Form(s) of the Supreme Lord
of materialism advised, 168 for devotee, 134
protection from, 198 numberless, 37
surrender dispels, 252 original, 134
Female-male attraction before Vamana’s appearance, 37
material life as, 165 See also: Body of the Supreme Lord; Deity
See also: Sex life form of the Supreme Lord; Incarna-
Fire in Lord’s universal form, 123 tions of the Supreme Lord; Supreme
Fire from wood, Lord from Kasyapa and Aditi Lord, expansions of; Universal form
like, 20 of the Supreme Lord
Fire-gods prayed at Lord’sappearance, 34 Fortune, goddess of. See: Goddess of fortune


--- Page 307 ---
General Index 311
Freedom Goal of life
from birth-and-death cycle, 260 happiness as, 74
from fruitive activities, 205 ignorance of , 263-264
from material existence, 63, 95 Lord as, 107, 266, 267
in material world absent, 166 Go-brahmana-hitaya ca
from modes of nature, 252 quoted, 15, 228
See also: Liberation God. See: Krsna, Lord; Supreme Lord; Visnu,
Fruitive activities Lord
attachment to, 205 God consciousness. See: Krsna consciousness
birth and death caused by, 182, 205 Goddess of fortune
body caused by, 205 husband of, 7, 158
by conditioned souls, 259 in Lord’s universal form, 123
devotees above, 208 Godhead. See: “890৮ to Godhead”; Spiritual
freedom from, 132, 205 world; Supreme Lord
happiness according to, 74 “God-is-dead” philosophy refuted, 62-63
opulence from, temporary, 111 “Gods.” See: Demigods
Prahlada free of, 205 Gold, false guru's vs. Krsna’s, 264
suffering by, 259 Gold & silver in fire, living entity in devo-
See also: Activities, material; Karma tional service like, 260
Fruitive workers. See: Karmis; Materialists Goodness, mode of, charity in, 104
Government
G as equal to everyone, 203
See also: Civilization, modern; King;
Gambling as sinful, 90 Ksatriyas; Leaders, modern; Politi-
Gandharvas cians; Society, human
Bali honored by, 114, 115 Greed in Lord’s universal form, 123
Lord's appearance honored by, 34 Grhastha (household life)
Ganges water pure devotee in, 55
devotee worships, 116 See also: Family; Householder
Lord as source of, 8 Gunas. See: Modes of material nature
Lord compared to, 116 Guror apy avaliptasya
origins of, three listed, 133 verse quoted, 95
purifying power of, 133 Guror guruh, Lord as, 261
Siva received, 48 Guru. See: Spiritual master
Vimana’s kick tapped, 127-128 Guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija
from Visnu’s toe, 48 quoted, 98
Garbhodaka Sea, Visnu rescued earth from, 58 Guru-parampara
Garuda defined, 261
Bali arrested by, 146 See also: Disciplic succession
as Lord's companion, 146
Gaya Maharaja, 73 H
Goal of life
by devotional service, 95, 267 Happiness
fulfillment of, 228 of Aditi and Kasdyapa on Lord’s appearance,
via guru, 269 36


--- Page 308 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Happiness (continued) Heavenly planets
civilization lacks, 72 Vamana’s footstep covered, 127
from fruitive activities, 74 See also: Planets; Spiritual world; Uni-
by Krsna consciousness, 90 verse
as life’s goal, 74 Hellish planets
at Lord's appearance, 31, 34 devotees indifferent to, 151, 153
material, 259 Vimana sent Bali to, 151, 152, 153
material vs. spiritual, 74-75 Hiranyakasipu
spiritual, 267 as atheist, 62
way to, 77 Lord misunderstood by, 62, 63
See also: Bliss; Satisfaction Prahlada harrassed by, 163
Hare Krsna mantra quoted on Visnu, 62
Hare Krsna movement stresses, 211 Visnu vs., 59-62, 64
self-realization via, 72 Hiranyaksa
See also: Chanting of the Supreme Lord's as conqueror, 57
holy names; Names of the Supreme Visnu killed, 58, 64
Lord; Serikirtana Holy names of the Lord. See: Chanting of the
Hare Krsna movement. See: Krsna conscious- Supreme Lord’s holy names; Names of
ness movement the Supreme Lord; Supreme Lord, ap-
Harer nama harer nama propriate entries
verse quoted, 210 Holy places, Lord’s pastime places as, 8
Hari-bhakti-vilasa as Vaisnava guide, 110 Householder
Harih defined, 80 duty of, 96, 97
Hatha-yoga as needless, 4 See also: Family; Grhastha
Hayagriva Hrd-vag-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te
Lord killed, 231, 232, 272 verse quoted, 160
Lord saved Vedas from, 231, 232, 272, Hrsikena-hrsikesa-
275 quoted, 75
Vedas stolen by, 231 Human being(s)
Hearing about the Supreme Lord austerity for, 260
elevation by, 220 body changed by, 245
sins absolved by, 218 classes 01, two listed, 203
Heaven. See: Heavenly planets; Spiritual demigods compared to, 245
world demigod worship by, 245
Heaven, lord of, 39 intelligent, chant Lord’s holy names, 211
See also: Indra, King, all entries; King of Lord above, 142
heaven, Bali as materialistic, 71, 164
Heavenly planets pride-free, Lord favors, 184
architect of, 189 as rare birth, 182
demigod returned to, 217 responsibility of, 182, 183
devotees indifferent to, 151, 153 surrender ignored by, 164
earth excelled by, 190 Vimana vs., 67
by hearing about the Lord, 220 See also: Living entity; Soul, conditioned
residents of. See: Demigods Human life. See: Human beings; Life
Sutala excels, 190, 191 Human society. See: Society, human


--- Page 309 ---
General Index 313
I International Society for Krsna Consciousness.
See: Krsna consciousness movement
Idam adya maya labdham Intoxication as sinful, 90
quoted, 177 Inundation, universal. See: Annihilation of
Identity the universe
of living entity, 260-261 Irreligion
See also: Self-realization Lord expels, 226-227
Ignorance in Lord's universal form, 123
anger due to, 64 Favasyam 1007 sarvarn
Bali in, 172, 177 quoted, 153
conditioned soul in, 259, 264, 267 ISKCON. See: Krsna consciousness movement
of life’s goal, 263-264 Fsvarah sarva-bhutandm
Lord dispels, 252 quoted, 61, 267
See also: Illusion verse quoted, 177
Tha ha-ite krsne lage sudrdha manasa
verse quoted, 9-10 J
Illusion Jambavin, 136
Lord above, 9 Janaloka, 127
material opulence as, 165, 167 Janma karma ca me divyam
surrender surpasses, 10 quoted, 29, 37
See also: Maya Jata-karma
Impersonalists. See: Mayavadis defined, 38
Incarnation(s) of the Supreme Lord See also: Ritualistic ceremonies
boar, 58 Jiva. See: Living entity; Soul; Soul, condi-
fish. See: Fish incarnation tioned
as the Lord Himself, 37 Jiva Gosvami, cited
numberless, 37 on chanting the holy name of the Lord, 211
purpose of, 227, 228, 244. on guru, 95
transcendental, 29 on Vamana's footsteps, 126
as Vamana. See: Vamanadeva, Lord Jaana
Variha vs. fish, 232 devotional service vs., 260
See also: Appearance of the Supreme Lord See also: Knowledge; Philosophy
Indra, King Jaanis
as 89118 enemy, 80 fate of, 63
as chief demigod, 13, 123 See also: Mayavadis; Philosophers
as living entity, 245 Jupiter, orbit of, 150
Lord reinstated, 199, 213, 216
Viamana excelled, 215 K
as Vamana's brother, 213 Kala-strota
Vamana transported by, to heavenly plan- defined, 24
et, 215 See also: Time
Instruments, Musical. See: Musical instru- Kalau rasty eva nasty eva
ments verse quoted, 210
Intelligence of Vamana criticized by Bali, 68, Kali-yuga (Age of Kali)
69 brahmanas unprotected in, 229


--- Page 310 ---
314 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) (continued) Kiba vipra, kiba nyasi, Sidra kene naya

chanting the Lord’s holy names for, verse quoted, 55

210-211 Kimpurusas

cows unprotected in, 229 Bali honored by, 115

God ignored in, 178 Lord’s appearance honored by, 35

lying common in, 99 King

materialistic, 97 in Bali’s dynasty, 57

precarious, 229 as equally disposed, 203

Vedicrituals impractical in, 210-211 See also: Ksatriyas
Kalpa literature defined, 132 Kingdom of God. See: Spiritual world
Kamais tais tair hrta-jaanah King of heaven

quoted, 245, 262 Bali as, 172, 188
Kanistha-adhikari defined, 205 See also: Heaven, lord 013 Indra, King
Kapiladeva’s philosophy, 265 Kinnaras
Karanarm guna-saiigo ‘sya Bali honored by, 115

quoted, 260 Lord’s appearance honored by, 35

verse quoted, 21, 183 Kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
Karma verse quoted, 258

devotee tolerates, 160 Kirtana. See: Chanting of the Supreme Lord’s

devotional service vs., 260 holy names; Sartkirtana

living being under, 226 Kita-janma ha-u yatha tuya dasa

See also: Activities, material; Destiny; quoted, 151

Fruitive activities Knowledge

Karma-bandha devotional service without, 236

defined, 205 in Krsna consciousness, 10

See also: Fruitive activities Lord gives, 252, 265
Karmana daiva-netrena pure devotees in, 252

quoted, 20 transcendental, 132
Karmis (fruitive workers) Kridarthari yacayam asa

fate of, 63 verse quoted, 235

See also: Materialists; Nondevotees Krishna, Lord. See: Krsna, Lord
Karttikeya, 214, 217 Krishna consciousness. See: Krsna conscious-
Kasyapa ness

Aditi instructed by, on payo-vrata, 2, 7 Krpa-siddha

Aditi’s union with, 20 defined, 98

austerities by, 16, 17 examples of, 98

happy at Lord’s appearance, 36 See also: Mercy of the Supreme Lord

Lord pleased with, 16 Krsna, Lord

meditated on the Lord, 19, 20 dcdryas accept, 269

as Vamana’s father, 79 Arjuna instructed by, 269

at Vamana’s sacred thread ceremony, 39 in disciplicsuccession, 261
Kaumodaki club, 125 as original form of God, 134
Kaunteya pratijanihi universal form shown by, 134

quoted, 8 Vamana compared to, 134
Kaustubha gem adorned the Lord, 31, 126 See also: Supreme Lord


--- Page 311 ---
General Index 315
Krsna-Balarama favored yajiia-patnis, 98 Leaders
Krsna consciousness modern, as demoniac agnostics, 178
completion of, 63 religious, as sacrificial spendthrifts, 211
guru teaches, 55, 95, 261 See also: Kings; Ksatriyas; Politicians
happiness by, 90 Liars
knowledge in, 10 earth burdened by, 99-100
as life’s purpose, 85 in Kali-yuga common, 99
as mission, 261 sinful, 99-100
purpose of, 183 See also: Falsity
See also: Devotional service to the Supreme Liberation
Lord via Bhagavad-gita, 265
Krsna consciousness movement devotees indifferent to, 151
chanting Hare Krsna stressed by, 211 by knowing Krsna, 29
charitable, 90 from material life, 76
farms in, 72 via Sankhya philosophy, 265
materialists misunderstand, 75 by satisfaction with destiny, 76
need for, 178 spiritual life as, 265
purpose of, 75 See also: Freedom
society benefits by, 90 Life
Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa. See: Vyasadeva goal of. See: Goal of life
Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam ksatriyas sacrificed, 104
quoted, 134 origin of, 20
Krtamila River, 234 perfection of, 87
Ksatriyas purpose of, 71
on battlefield, 57, 104 responsibility in, 182, 183
charitable to brahmanas, 57 for self-realization, 165
culture of, 72 short, 103
qualifications of, 57 in species cycle, 21, 182, 183
See also: King Life, material
Kuruksetra battlefield as pilgrimage place, 8 as “chewing the chewed,” 168
Kuvera, 40 false guru perpetuates, 265
freedom from, 76, 95
L illusory, 165
lusty desires cause, 76
Laghu-bhagavatamrta quoted on annihilation as male-female attraction, 165
of universe, 250-251 pride in, 153
Laksmi, goddess. See: Goddess of Fortune sinful, 71
Lamentation as suffering, 166
at Bali's arrest, 147 See also: Birth and death, repeated
of demons, 124 Life force. See: Soul
Land Living entity (Living entities)
Bali gave, to Vamana, 112, 115 deathless, 62
death takes away, 102 demigods as, 245
Vamana begged, from Bali, 66, 67, 69, identity of, 260-261
77, 108, 136, 213 joyful, 261


--- Page 312 ---
316 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Living entity (Living entities) (continued) Maha-mantra. See: Hare Krsna mantra
karma controls, 226 Maharaja Pariksit, quoted on fish incarnation,
Lord as source 01, 25 225
Lord chief among, 62-63 Maharloka, 127
Lord’s appearance gladdened, 31 Male-female attraction
as Lord’s part & parcels, 245, 261, 265 material life as, 165
as Lord’s sons, 67 See also: Sex life
in Lord’s universal form, 123 Mam eva ye prapadyante
Lord vs., 230 quoted, 252, 264
mortal, 63 Mankind. See: human beings; Society, human
nature controls, 183, 230 Manor ante layo nasti
nonmaterial, 20, 21 verse quoted, 251
in species cycle, 21, 182, 183 Mantras
spiritual freedom for, 63 ritualistic, impractical in Kali-yuga,
See also: "Human being; Soul; Soul, condi- 210-211
tioned See also: Hare Krsna mantra
Lord Caitanya. See: Caitanya Mahaprabhu Manu (8)
Lotus feet of the Supreme Lord annihilation at end 01, 250
Bali washed, 47, 113 in Brahma’s day, 250
Brahma washed, 133 (8८5०5, 232, 250, 272
concentration on, 4 prayed at Lord's appearance, 34
holy, 8 Satyavrata as, 233
mind sacrificed to, 81 Savarni, 188
sanctifying power of, 50 Svayambhuva, 232, 250, 272
Love of God Vaivasvata, 272
Aditi expressed, 6-7 Vamana honored by, 214
Bali achieved, 98-99, 110 Manvantara. See: Manu
by devotional service, 98-99 Marabi rakhabi— yo iccha tohara
Lust verse quoted, 107
in Lord’s universal form, 123 Marici, 130
See also: Attachment, material; Desires, Markandeya Resi, cited on annihilation in Cak-
material; Sex life susa manvantara, 250
Marriage
M Vamana’s glorification blesses, 221
wife’s influence in, 164, 165
Madhvacarya, 269 Mars
Madhye manventarasyaiva orbit of, 150
verse quoted, 250 scientists cannot understand, 219
Mahabharata, quoted on guru, 95 Material body. See: Body, material
Mahajana Materialism
activities of, 48 devotees shun, 168
Bali as, 48, 103, 187 in Kali-yuga, 97
Satyavrata follows, 269 See also: Attachment, material; Bodily con-
Siva as, 48 ception of life; Life, material; Ma-
See also: Disciplic succession terial world


--- Page 313 ---
General Index 317
Materialist (8) Mayavadis (impersonalists)
dangerous, 181-182 Lord misunderstood by, 118
frightful, 168 philosophy of, 87
godless, 181-182 quoted on truth and untruth, 87
Hare Krgna movement misunderstood by, See also: Jadnis; Philosophers
09 Meat-eating as sinful, 90
Lord's mercy on, 181 Meditation
as madmen, 71 by Aditi on the Lord, 3
Sukracarya as, 97 foolish, 265
See also: Atheists; Karmis; Nondevotees; by Kasyapa on the Lord, 19, 20
Soul, conditioned by Satyavrata on the Lord, 253, 256
Material life. See: Life, material Men. See: Human beings
Material nature. See: Nature, material Mental speculation. See: Speculation, mental
Material nature, modes of. See: Modes of ma- Mental speculators. See: Janis; Mayavadis;
terial nature Philosophers
Material world Mercy of the Supreme Lord
constitution 01, 219 on Bali, 162, 167, 168, 172, 177, 182,
demons ruin, 178 187, 197-198
freedom absent in, 166 causeless, 202
freedom from, 63 demigods’ blessings vs., 262
illusory, 70 on demons, 161, 162, 201, 202, 203
purpose of, 70 on devotee, 81, 134, 148, 160, 173, 185,
sense gratification rules, 71 187-188
spiritual world vs., 219 on materialist, 181
See also: Creation, the; Universe opulence as, 184
Mat-sthani sarva-bhitani pure devotees accept, 163
quoted, 118 pure devotional service by, 98
Matsya incarnation. See: Fish incarnation on Satyavrata, 233
Matsya Purdna on Suddma Vipra, 188
cited on annihilation of universe, 250 superexcellence of, 262
quoted on fish incarnation & Satyavrata, Mind
235 devotional service controls, 4
Matter. See: Elements, material; Energy of the sacrificed to Krsna, 81
Supreme Lord, material; Nature, ma- Misery. See: Suffering
terial Modes of material nature (gunas)
Maya freedom from, 252
surrender dispels, 264 suffering in, 20-21
See also: Illusion; Material world; Nature, See also: Nature, material
material Moksa. See: Liberation
Mayadhyaksena prakrtih Money
quoted, 229 ceremonies require, 221
Mayaiva vyavaharike for charity, 102
quoted, 99 extravagance with, sinful, 67
Maya tatam ida sarvam family’s share 01, 85
quoted, 10 material vs. spiritual uses of, 90


--- Page 314 ---
318 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Money (continued)
সু divisions of, five listed, 85 See also: Chanting of the Supreme Lord's
ukracarya quoted on, 89 holy names; Supreme Lord, ap-
See also: Opulence, material; Wealth propriate entries
Monists. See: Mayavadis Narada
Month of Bhadra, 32 in disciplic succession, 261
Moon Krsna's supremacy accepted by, 269
in Lord’s universal form, 123 Narayana, Lord
orbit of, 150 as Ganges, 133
position of, at Lord’s appearance, 32, Vamana as, 37
33 See also: Supreme Lord; Vignu, Lord
Prahlada compared to, 57, 169 Narayana-parah sarve
scientists cannot understand, 219 quoted, 159
sun closer to earth than, 32 verse quoted, 151
Moon-god, 39 Narmada River, 43
Mountains Na sadhu manye yata atmano "yam
Lord's appearance gladdened, 31 verse quoted, 71
in Lord's universal form, 119 Nasayamy atma-bhavastho
Mrtyuh sarva- haras caham verse quoted, 252
quoted, 102 Nationalism, as demoniac, 177
Mukti. See: Liberation Nature, material
Mumuksubhih parityago body according to, 165
verse quoted, 88 conditioned soul under, 252
Musical instruments living entity under, 183, 230
Bali honored by, 115 Lord above, 229-230
Lord's appearance hailed by, 34 See also: Body, material; Elements, ma-
Vamana honored by, 135 terial; Modes of material nature
Mysticism Nighttime in Lord’s universal form, 123
of false guru, 264 Nimbarka, 269
Visnu as master of, 59 Nirvana. See: Liberation
yogic, demons achieved, 162 Nitya-dasa-prati 109৫ adhikara
yogic, processes of, 71 verse quoted, 107
See also: Krsna consciousness; Meditation; Nityo 70007071073 cetanas cetandném
Yoga quoted, 245
Mystics. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; Nondevotees
Sages; Yogis devotees vs., 203
Lord destroys, 102
N suffering of, 203
See also: Atheists; Demons; Materialists
Na ca daivat param balam Nunari pramattah kurute vikarma
quoted, 144 quoted, 168, 219
Néga-pasa, defined, 199 verse quoted, 71
Na jayate mriyate va kaddcit ০
quoted, 62
Names of the Supreme Lord Obeisances, benefit of, offered to the Lord,
transcendental, 21-22 197-198


--- Page 315 ---
General Index 319
Ocean (8) Pandita-mani, defined, 111
of inundation. See: Annihilation of the Pandita-manya-jiah, defined, 111
universe, by water Parag va etad riktam aksaram
in Lords universal form, 120 quoted, 91
Offerings to the Supreme Lord Paramatma. See: Supersoul
by devotee, 116-117 Param bhavam ajanantah
spiritual world via, 180-181 quoted, 230
Old age, Lord free of, 29 Param brahma, defined, 251
“Om” Param brahma param dhama
for detachment from money, 89 quoted, 252, 269
in promise-making, 86 Parampara. See: Disciplic succession; Maha-
Orv iti satyari nety anrtari jana, activities of
quoted, 88 Pariksit Maharaja, quoted on fish incarnation,
Ori tat sat 225
defined, 88 Paritranaya sadhinam
See also: Absolute Truth quoted, 227
Opulences Pastimes of the Supreme Lord
of demigods lost to demons, 12-14 places 01, as holy, 8
of the Lord, 43 purpose of, 244
of Lord’s universal form, 117-118 transcendental, 20
material vs. spiritual, 111 wonderful, 202
See also: Goddess of fortune See also: Incarnations of the Supreme Lord
Opulence, material Patra puspar phalam toyarn
in Bali, Lord removed, 172 verse quoted, 180
dangerous, 173,173-174, 181-182 Payo-vrata ceremony by Aditi, 2, 3, 16
death nullifies, 101 Perfection
of devotee, Lord removes, 81, 185, 191 body as vehicle to, 87
devotional service hindered by, 185 by chanting Lord’s holy names, 210, 211
Dhruva indifferent to, 185 by devotional service, 98
illusory, 167 of duty, 209
as Lord's mercy, 184 by satisfying the Lord, 11
pride due to, 185 Persons. See: Human beings; Living entities
pure devotee indifferent to, 185 Philosophers
self-realization hindered by, 173-174 godless, as destructive, 178
types of, six listed, 184 Mayavadi, 118
See also: Gold; Money; Possessions, ma- Philosophy
terial; Wealth acintya-bhedabheda, 118
advaita-vada vs. dvaita-vada, 118
P Bauddha, 62
of Caitanya, 118
Padma Purina “God-is-dead,” refuted, 62-63
on spiritual master, 96 on happiness, 74
quoted on worshiping Visnu, 106-107 Mayavada vs. Vaisnava, 87
Pain. See: Suffering ॥ Sankhya, 265
Paficajanya conchshell, 125 Pilgrimage places, Lord’s pastimes places as,
Pandavas, Lord assured victory 01, 8 8


--- Page 316 ---
320 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Pitas Prahlada Maharaja
prayed at Lord's appearance, 34 as pure devotee, 55, 163
Vamana honored by, 214, 217 surrendered to the Lord, 164-165,
Planets 166
disposition 0, at Lord’s appearance, 32 Prahlada Maharaja, quotations from
as islands, 69 on Bali & the Lord, 172
in Lord’s universal form, 123 on happiness, 74
orbit of , 150 on the Lord, 201
position 01, in solar system, 32 Prajapatis
Rasitala, 119 Lord as source of, 25
scientists’ excursions to, discredited, 190 in Lord’s universal form, 120
See also: Earth planet; Heavenly planets; Prakrti. See: Nature, material
Universe; names of other specific Pralaya
planets defined, 250
Pleasure. See: Bliss; Happiness See also: Annihilation of the universe
Politicians Pralayah padmanabhasya
destructive, 178 verse quoted, 250-251
See also: Leaders, modern Pralayo ’sau babhiiveti
Possessions, material verse quoted, 251
for charity, 102, 105 Pramatta
death takes away, 102 defined, 168
of devotee, Lord removes, 173 See also: Materialist
of materialist, Lord removes, 181 Prapancikataya buddhya
spiritual life hindered by, 161 verse quoted, 88
See also: Opulences, material Prasanta, defined, 55
Poverty Prayer (s)
famous & infamous, 105 by Aditi for the Lord, 8, 9, 11
perpetual, 90 by Bhaktivinoda Thakura, 151
Power by Brahma for the Lord, 22-25
of the Lord, 43 by Lord's associates for the Lord, 125, 126
See also: Mysticism by Satyavrata for the Lord, 257, 259, 260,
Prahlada Maharaja 262-268
Bali beheld, 170 Preaching Krsna consciousness, family life
as Bali's grandfather, 55, 98, 107, 163, secondary to, 185
166, 200 Pride
beauty of, 170 Bali victimized by, 152-153
in bliss, 171, 205 devotees free of, 184.
dress of, 170 material, 152-153
free from fruitive activities, 205 opulences cause, 185
as guru, 55 Priests, Vedic
Hiranyakasipu harassed, 163 types of, four listed, 207
Lord assigned, to Sutala, 204, 206 See also: Brahmanas; Smarta-brahmanas
Lord gladdened, 171 Promise(s)
material attachment shucked by, 165 Bali kept, to Vamana, 157, 158
moonlike, 57, 169 Sukracarya quoted on, 86


--- Page 317 ---
General Index 321
Proprietorship, true and false, 176-177, 178, Purification
184 by austerity, 75
Protection by devotional service, 260, 261
of body, 88-89 by Ganges water, 133
by brahmanas, 15 See also: Self-realization
from fear, 198 Purusah prakrti-stho hi
fish incarnation begged, of Satyavrata, quoted, 230
235 verse quoted, 21, 183
by the Lord. See: Protection by the
Supreme Lord R
of religious principles, 228
Satyavrata gave, to fish incarnation, 236, Raksasas, 35
237 Ramadi-mirtisu kala-niyamena tisthan
of Vedic knowledge, 228 quoted, 37
Protection by the Supreme Lord Riamanujacirya, 269
for Aditi’s sons, 16 Rasatala planets, 119
for Bali, 111, 188-189, 191, 192-193, Regulative principles. See: Religious prin-
201 ciples
for brahmanas, 228-229 Reincarnation. See: Birth and death, repeated
for cows, 228 Religion
for demons, 201 in Lord’s universal form, 123
for devotees, 8, 20, 83, 227 See also: Religious principles
from misery, 201 Religious leaders as sacrificial spendthrifts,
for Sutala, 189 211
Providence. See: Destiny Religious principles
Préni, 23 Bali adhered to, 48, 54, 55, 65
Prthu Maharaja, 73 Lord upholds, 226-227
Puriisah striya mithuni-bhavam दवम, protection of, 228
verse quoted, 165 Sukrécarya’s attitude on, 96-97
Punishment Renunciants. See: Sannydsis
of Bali by the Lord, 159, 162, 163 Renunciation, false, 88
for charity violation, 151, 152 Reputation
of devotees as Lord’s mercy, 160 Bali protected, 159
Vaisnava fearless of, 159 lasting power of, 103
Puranas, defined, 270 Revelation
Pure devotee(s) of the Supreme Lord by surrender to the Lord, 252
Bali as, 98, 101, 153, 193, 196 See also: Self-realization
as determined, 148 Ritualistic ceremony (Ritualistic ceremonies)
in grhastha, 55 for birth, 38
in knowledge, 252 expensive, 221
Lord's mercy accepted by, 163 in Kali-yuga impractical, 210-211
opulences disinterest, 185 payo-vrata, 2, 3, 16
Prahlada as, 55, 163 for sacred thread, 38-41
types of , two listed, 98 sraddha, 221
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord types 01, three listed, 221


--- Page 318 ---
322 Srimad-Bhéagavatam
Ritualistic ceremony (Ritualistic ceremonies) Saksad dharitvena samasta-sastrair
for Vamana, 38-41 verse quoted, 258
Vamana's glorification blesses, 221 Salvation. See: Liberation
See also: Sacrifices Samadhi. See: Meditation
Rivers Samo "hari sarva-bhiitesu
in Lord’s universal form, 123 quoted, 20
See also: names of specific rivers verse quoted, 203
Rsabhadeva, quoted on sense gratification, 71 Samsara-bandhana
Rules and regulations. See: Religious prin- defined, 205
ciples See also: Birth and death, repeated
Ripa Gosvami Sanandana, 130
cited on annihilation of universe, 250 Sanatana Gosvami, Hari-bhakti-vilasa by, 110
quoted on renunciation, 88 Sankhya system
wealth divided by, 85 defined, 270
liberation via, 265
9 Saitkirtana
for Kali-yuga, 211
Sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah Lord pleased by, 21-22
quoted, 37, 261 See also: Chanting of the Supreme Lord’s
Sacrifice(s) holy names; Hare Krsna mantra;
asvamedha, 42 y Preaching Krsna consciousness
of Bali corrected by Sukracarya, 212 San-nimitte varan tyago
Bhrgukaccha, 43 quoted, 102
fire, 42 Sannyasi(s) (renunciants)
for the Lord, 81, 209 charity quota for, 67
See also: Ritualistic ceremonies Vamana's teaching to, 55
Sadhana-siddha Sarasvati, mother, 40
defined, 98 Sarva-dharman parityajya
See also: Pure devotees of the Supreme quoted, 164
Lord verse quoted, 263
Sadhus. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; Sarva-manvantarasyante
Sages; Saints verse quoted, 251
Sages Sarvam khalv 1007 brahma
prayed at Lord’s appearance, 34 quoted, 252
at Vamana's sacred thread ceremony, 40 Sarvasya cham hrdi sannivisto
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; quoted, 251-252
Saints Sarvatra labhyate daivad
Sa gunan samatityaitan verse quoted, 74
quoted, 151 Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktar
Sainar tatraiva hanyat , quoted, 74
quoted, 92 Sastras (Vedic literatures). See: Vedas; names
Saints of specific Vedic literatures
in Lord’s universal form, 123 Satari 07050718072 mama virya-sarvido
worship Visnu, 106 quoted, 193
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; Satisfaction
Sages in brahmana, 76


--- Page 319 ---
General Index 323
Satisfaction Sa vai manah krsna-pedaravindayoh
happiness by, 77 quoted, 4, 81
liberation by, 76 Science of Krsna. See: Krsna consciousness
by sense control, 71, 75 Scientists, material
by spiritual consciousness, 75 astronomical, refuted, 32
Vimana quoted on, 70, 72-74, 76, 77 crazy, 219
Seealso: Happiness destructive, 178
Sat-karma-nipuno vipro extraterrestrial exploration by, discredited,
verse quoted, 96 190
Saturn, disposition of, at Lord's appearance, Lord challenged by, 219
32 Lord’s creation immeasurable by, 219
Satyaloka, 127 Self. See: Identity; Self-realization; Soul
Satyavrata, King Self-realization
austerities by, 232, 234 by chanting Hare Krsna, 72
boat boarded by, 254 by devotional service, 260, 261
in Caksusa-manvantara, 272 as life’s purpose, 71, 165
devotional service by, 236 of living entity, 260-261
fish incarnation begged protection of , material opulence hinders, 173-174
235 See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
fish incarnation favored, 232 Lord; Identity; Krsna conscious-
fish incarnation in palms of, 234 ness; Purification; Spiritual life
fish incarnation instructed, 272 Sense control
fish incarnation let loose by, 234 by devotional service, 4
fish incarnation protected by, 236, 237 purpose of, 71
fish incarnation recognized by, 243 satisfaction by, 71, 75
fish incarnation transferred by, to wider varnasrama-dharma teaches, 71
waters, 238-240 by yoga, 71
fish incarnation unrecognized by, 236 Sense gratification
Lord instructed, on Absolute Truth, 270, body as “reward” for, 71
271,274 false guru preaches, 265
Lord instructed, on surviving water as madness, 71
devastation, 248-250 material vs. spiritual, 74-75
as Lord’s disciple, 264 material world ruled by, 71
Lord’s mercy on, 233 purposeless, 71
as mahajana follower, 269 sin from, 71
as Manu, 233 yoga cures, 71
meditated on the Lord, 253, 256 See also: Attachment, material; Desires,
merciful, 235-237 material; Lust; Sex life
narration about fish incarnation &, recom- Senses
mended, 273, 274 devotional service controls, 4
prayed to the Lord, 257, 259, 260, material vs. spiritual, 74-75
262-268 See also: Body, material
quoted on the Lord, 257, 259, 260, Servants of God. See: Devotees of the Supreme
, 262-268 Lord
as Sraddhadeva, 233 Service to God. See: Devotional service to the
as sun-god’s son, 233, 272 Supreme Lord


--- Page 320 ---
324 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Sex life Society, human
false guru preaches, 265 Bhagavad-gita benefits, 229
illicit, sinful, 90 charity mismanaged by, 90
Kasyapa and Aditi’s union unlike, 20 cow protection needed by, 228-229
life not produced by, 20 divisions of, eight listed, 209
Lord not born by, 20 Hare Krsna movement benefits, 90
See also: Attachment, material; Desires, spiritual education lacking in, 166
material varnasrama-dharma organizes, 107
Shower of flowers. See: Flower shower See also: Civilization, modern; Var-
Sibi Maharaja, 102 nasrama-dharma
Siddhanta baliya citte na kara alasa Soul
verse quoted, 9-10 body vs., 165, 267
Siddhas nonmaterial, 20
Bali honored by, 114 See also: Living entity
Lord’s appearance honored by, 35 Soul, conditioned
Vamana honored by, 217 angry, 64
Silver & gold in fire, living entity in devotional body vs., 245
service like, 260 fruitive activities by, 259
Sin Ganges water frees, 128
activities in, four listed, 90 in ignorance, 259, 264, 267
extravagance as, 67 Lord helps, 257, 258
fish incarpation narration absolves, 273 Lord incomprehensible to, 267
hearing about Lord absolves, 218 material hopes afflict, 259, 267
Lord absolves, 263 nature controls, 252
lying as, 99-100 spiritual master helps, 257, 258
as sense gratification’s result, 71 suffering of, 20-21
i suffering caused by, 90, 168 See also: Human being; Living entity
Siva, Lord Sound, transcendental. See: Chanting of the
Bali followed example of, 48 Supreme Lord’s holy names; Hare
as Bhagavati’s husband, 41 Krsna mantra; Names of the Supreme
devotees should follow example of, 48 Lord
forehead emblem of, 48 Space, universe as ocean 01, 69
as Ganga-dhara, 48 Space exploration, modern, discredited, 190
Ganges received by, 48 Space travel, airplane, 217
Lord worshiped by, 201 Species of life, living entity in cycle of, 21,
as mahdjana, 48 182, 183
quoted on worshiping Visnu, 106-107 Speculation, mental
Vamana honored by, 214, 217 spiritual understanding from, 267
Sky See also: Jana; Mayavadis; Philosophy
in Lord’s universal form, 120 Spirit. See: Energy of the Supreme Lord, spiri-
Vamana's body covered, 126 tual; Soul
Smarta-brahmana Spiritual life
defined, 82 advancement in, 2, 48
Sukrécarya as, 211 via Bhagavad-gita, 265
Vaignava ignores, 110 completion of, 63


--- Page 321 ---
General Index 325
Spiritual life Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations from
enjoying, by knowing the Lord, 267 on association of devotees, 193
as liberation, 265 on austerity, 75
possessions hinder, 161 on devotees, 114, 151, 159, 160
via Sankhya philosophy, 265 on duty’s perfection, 209
spiritual master needed for, 2 on guru, 95
See also: Devotional service to the Supreme on happiness, 74
Lord; Krsna consciousness; Self- on liars in Kali-yuga, 99
realization on Lord’s mercy, 80-81, 172
Spiritual master (guru) on madmen, 219
Arjuna as, 269 on material life, 165, 168
Bhagavad-gita via, 268 on sanikirtana-yajna, 211
body of, 88 on sense gratification, 71
bogus vs. bona fide, 95-96, 263-265, _ णा worshiping the Lord, 208, 245
268-269 Srimad-Bhagavatam, speaker of, 261
conditioned souls helped by, 257, 258 Srivatsa marked the Lord, 30, 126
disqualification for, 261 Sruti-mantras. See: Vedas; names of
duty of, 95 specific Vedic literatures
false, 262, 265, 268 Stars
life’s goal via, 269 disposition of, at Lord’s appearance, 32
Lord as, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 268 in Lord’s universal form, 120
as Lord's representative, 257-258, 261, Stri
264 defined, 165
mercy of, 98 See also: Women
mission of, 261 Subtle body. See: Ego, false; Mind; Intelli-
as necessity, 2 gence
in paramparda, 268 Success. See: Perfection
Prahlada as, 55 Sucinar Srimatar ge he
qualification of, 55, 261 quoted, 63
truth via, 269 Sudama Vipra
Vyasa as, 261 Lord respected, 228
worship toward, 258 Lord’s mercy on, 188
Spiritual world Sudaréana cakra weapon, 124
anxiety-free, 266 Suffering
Ganges water from, 127-128 of Bali, 181, 187
by knowing Krsna, 29 body as, 71, 168
as land of no return, 63 of conditioned soul, 20-21
material world vs., 219 demons cause, 178
, via offerings to the Lord, 180-181 of devotee 98 Lord’s test, 186, 187-188
Sraddhadeva, 233 extravagance causes, 67
Sravana-dvadasi false guru perpetuates, 265
Lord appeared on, 32 by fruitive activities, 259
time of, 32 Lord relieves, 8, 12, 80, 257
Sridhara Svami, cited on annihilation of uni- material life as, 166
verse, 250 in modes of nature, 20-21


--- Page 322 ---
326 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Suffering (continued) Sun
of nondevotees, 203 god of . See: Sun-god
protection from, 201 Lord compared to, 10
sin causes, 90, 168 in Lord’s universal form, 123
Sutala free of, 189, 190 moon farther from earth than, 32
_ types of, three listed, 166 orbit of, 150
Sukadeva Gosvami, quotations from position 01, at Lord’s appearance, 32, 33
on Aditi, 2 Sunanda
on Aditi and the Lord, 18 as Lord’s associate, 171
on Bali, 156, 199 prayed to the Lord, 126
on Bali & demons, 146 Sun-god
on Bali & Sukricarya, 94, 110 as Vaivasvata Manu’s father, 272
on Bali and the Lord, 196-197 at Vamana's sacred thread ceremony, 39
on Bali & Vimana, 54, 78, 112 See also: Vivasvian
on Brahma & Prahlada, 175 Supersoul (Paramatma)
on Brahma & Vamana, 130 in heart of all, 198
on the Lord, 11, 28-29 Lord as, 11, 198, 202-203
on Lord’s incarnation, 228 Supranas, 35
on Prahlada, 169 Supreme Brahman. See: Supreme Lord
on Prahlada, Bali and the Lord, 206 Supreme Lord
on Satyavrata & fish incarnation, 246, 270 See also: Supreme Lord, quotations from
, ण Sukracarya, 212 as Absolute Truth, 118
Sukadeva Gosvami as krpa-siddha, 98 actorlike, 37
Sukham aindriyakar daitya as acyuta, 8
verse quoted, 74 Aditi concentrated on, 3
Sukham atyantikam yat tad Aditi instructed by, 17, 18
verse quoted, 74 Aditi prayed to,6,8,9,11
Sukricarya Aditi’s desire fulfilled by, 16, 18,199
Bali advised by, on charity promises, 84, in Aditi’s womb, 20, 21
86, 89, 90, 91, 92 airlike, 229-230
Bali cursed by, 110, 111, 207-208, 209 all-attractive, 24
Bali rejected, 95, 97, 101-103, 110-112, all-good, 157
165 all-merciful, 162
Bali's sacrifices corrected by, 212 all-pervading, 9, 23
as Bali’s spiritual master, 90,101, 110, as amrta-bhih, 29
151 appearance of. See: Appearance of the
Bali vs., 110 Supreme Lord
Bali warned by, about Vamana, 78-83 Bali favored by, 208
as materialist, 97 Bali praised by, 55
as professional priest, 102, 110 Bali punished by, 159, 162, 163
as smarta-brahmana, 82, 211 Bali surrendered to, 159, 162, 164-165
_ Vamana’s purpose detected by, 78-83 Bali tested by, 187
Sukracarya, quotations from Bali understood purpose of, 157-158, 162,
on chanting the Lord’s holy names, 211 167-168
on the Lord, 209 beauty of, 29-31
on Vimana, 79 as benefactor, 8


--- Page 323 ---
General Index 327
Supreme Lord Supreme Lord
Bhagavad-gita as instructions 01, 268 as equally disposed, 20, 203
as bhava-grahijanardana, 198 as everything, 118
birthless, 20, 29, 63 as everywhere, 21, 22
body of. See: Body of the Supreme Lord expansions of, 19, 245
as body’s owner, 177 form of. See: Form of the Supreme Lord
brahmanas favored by, 15, 228-229 Ganges from, 8
Brahma prayed to, 21-25 Garuda companion of, 146
Brahmi received Vedas from, 272, 274, glories of, 219, 251, 252
275 as go-brahmana-hitaya, 228-229
Brahma serves, 202 as goddess of fortune’s husband, 7, 158
Brahma worships, 201 as guror guruh, 261
chanting Hare Krsna pleases, 21-22 as Hari, 80, 82
as complete, 43, 116 Hayagriva killed by, 231, 232, 272
conchshell of, 125 in heart of all, 10, 23, 61, 110, 177, 198,
conditioned soul cannot understand, 251-252, 267
267 Hiranyakasipu misunderstood, 62, 63
conditioned soul helped by, 257, 258 as Hrsikega, 75
as controller, 8, 22 human beings under, 142
cows favored by, 15 ignorance dispelled by, 252
cows protected by, 228 illusion-free, 9
as creator, 23, 25 incarnations of. See: Incarnations of the
as creator, maintainer, destroyer, 9, 24, Supreme Lord
176 independent, 182
deathless, 28, 29, 62-63 Indra reinstated by, 199, 213, 216
demigods favored by, 157 infallible, 8, 9
demigods obey, 203 as instructor, 265, 266
demigods vs., 262 in Kali-yuga ignored, 178
demons defy, 203 Kaéyapa meditated on, 19, 20
demons killed by, 20 Kasdyapa pleased, 16
desires fulfilled by, 203 knowledge given by, 265
desire tree, compared to, 203 liberation by knowledge of , 29
devotee “defeats,” 109 as life’s goal, 266, 267
devotee returns to, 266 limitless, 11, 24, 116
devotees “cheated” by, 157 living beings as sons of, 67
devotees favored by, 12, 110, 148, 160, living entity compared to, 62-63
167-168, 184, 191, 198, 203 living entity contrasted to, 63, 230
devotees know, 22 Lord’s associates prayed to, 125,
devotee’s opulence removed by, 81 126
devotees protected by, 168, 227 lotus feet of. See: Lotus feet of the
devotee’s relationship with, 68, 83 Supreme Lord
devotees tested by, 186, 187-188 materialist rejects, 181, 182
devotional service appreciated by, 198 Mayavadis misunderstand, 118
dress 01, 4, 29-31, 126 mercy of. See: Mercy of the Supreme Lord
as durga-pala, 201 mission 00, 261
effulgence of, 31 modern civilization ignores, 174


--- Page 324 ---
328 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Supreme Lord (continued) Supreme Lord
names of. See: Chanting of the Supreme sunlike, 10
Lord’s holy names; Names of the as Supersoul, 11, 198, 202-203
Supreme Lord surrender to. See: Surrender to the
nature under, 229-230 Supreme Lord
offerings to. See: Offerings to the Supreme symbols carried by, 4, 28-29, 205
Lord temple of, 205
opulence of, 43 time represents, 24, 143, 144
as origin of all, 117, 118 as tirtha-pada, 8
Pandavas’ victory assured by, 8 transcendental, 229-230
parts & parcels of, 245, 261, 265 universal form of. See: Universal form of
pastimes of. See: Pastimes of the Supreme the Supreme Lord
Lord universe pervaded by, 219
plenary portions of. See: Supreme Lord, as Uttamasloka, 157
expansions of as Vasudeva, 3, 4
power of, 43 Vedasreveal, 23
Prahlada assigned to Sutala by, 204, 206 Vedas revealed by, 275
Prahlada gladdened by, 171 Vedas saved from Hayagriva by, 231, 232,
pride-free people favored by, 184. 272,275
as proprietor, 42-43, 67, 68, 153, as Visnu, 23
176-177, 178, 209 water annihilation foretold by, 247,
protection by. See: Protection by the 248
Supreme Lord weapons 0. See: Weapons of the Supreme
as Rama-pati, 7 Lord
reciprocates one’s surrender, 203, 252 worship of, 201, 208, 245-246, 262
sacrifices for, 209 as Yajiia-pati, 7
Satyavrata instructed by, on Absolute as yajiia-purusa, 209
Truth, 270, 271, 274 See also: Krsna, Lord; Narayana, Lord;
Satyavrata instructed by, on surviving Supersoul; Visnu, Lord
water devastation, 248-250 Supreme Lord, quotations from
Satyavrata meditated on, 253, 256 on Aditi & sons, 12
Satyavrata prayed to, 257, 259, 260, on Bali, 55, 188
262-268 on Lord as equally disposed, 20
as Satyavrata’s guru, 264 on Lord favoring devotee, 8, 148
scientists challenge, 219 on materialist, 181
self-satisfied, 68 on Prahlada, 204, 205
sin absolved by, 263 on senses and satisfaction, 70
Siva worships, 201 on surrender, 164, 264
as sole shelter, 25 on water of devastation, 247
as spiritual master, 257, 258, 259, 260, Suras. See: Demigods; Devotees of the
261, 268 Supreme Lord
spiritual master represents, 257-258, 261, == Surrender to the Supreme Lord
264 by Bali, 107, 159, 162, 164-165
success by satisfying, 11 as benediction, 263
suffering relieved by, 8, 12, 80, 257 condition-free, 107


--- Page 325 ---
General Index 329
Surrender to the Supreme Lord Tapoloka, 127
by devotee, 198, 203 Tasmat paratarari devi
direct & indirect, 252 verse quoted, 106
fearlessness by, 252 Tatha dehantara-praptih
illusion surpassed by, 10 quoted, 165, 183, 245
Krsna advises, 164 Tat te 'nukamparm susamiksamano
man ignores, 164 verse quoted, 160
maya dispelled by, 264 Tattva-darsi, Arjuna as, 269
by Prahlada, 164-165, 166 Teacher, spiritual. See: Brahmana; Spiritual
recommended, 164, 269 master
revelation according to, 252 Temple of the Supreme Lord, new devotee
Siirya, 245 should frequent, 205
Siita Gosvami, quoted on duty’s perfection, Tesam evanukampartham
209 verse quoted, 252
Sutala planet Tesam satata-yuktandri
heavenly planets excelled by, 190, 191 verse quoted, 110
Lord assigned Prahlada to, 204, 206 Three worlds
suffering absent in, 189, 190 names of, 247
Vamana assigned Bali to, 189-191 water annihilation of, 247, 248
Svalpam apy asya dharmasya See also: Annihilation of the Universe;
quoted, 198, 245 Universe
Svamsa, defined, 245 Time
Svanusthitesya dharmasya demigods favored by, 143
verse quoted, 209 invincible, 144
Svargaloka. See: Heavenly planets, all entries Lord represented by, 24, 143, 144
Svargapavarga-narakesv of Lord’s appearance, 32, 33
verse quoted, 151 Trance. See: Meditation
Svariipa Transcendentalists. See: Devotees of the
defined, 261 Supreme Lord; (तकम; Mayavadis;
See also: Identity Yogis
Svayambhuva Manu. See: Manu, Transmigration of the soul. See: Birth and
Svayambhuva death, repeated
Tree, body compared to, 86, 87, 88
T Tree, desire, Lord compared to, 203
Truth
Mayavada vs. Vaignava conceptions of,
Tad 01073 bhakty-upahrtam 87
verse quoted, 180 via spiritual master, 269
Tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam See also: Absolute Truth
quoted, 262 Truthfulness in Lord’s universal form,
Tad viddhi pranipatena 123
verse quoted, 269 Tyaktva dehari punar janma
Tapasya. See: Austerity quoted, 29, 63, 95, 266
Tapo divyari putraka yena sattvari Tyaktva sva-dharmam carenambujeri hareh
quoted, 75, 260 quoted, 245


--- Page 326 ---
330 Srimad-Bhagavatam
U Universal form of the Supreme Lord
waist of, 120
Unhappiness. See: Suffering words of, 123
Universal form of the Supreme Lord Universe(s)
Arjuna saw, 134 annihilation of. See: Annihilation of the
arms of, 123 universe
back of, 123 creator of, 202
Bali saw, 117-120, 123 liars burden, 99-100
bodily hairs of, 123 Lord pervades, 219
bosom of, 120, 123 as Lord’s external potency, 10
calves of, 119 as space ocean, 69
chest of, 123 Vimana encompassed, 116, 149, 150,
demons saw, 124. 157-158
ears of, 123 Vimana’s footstep pierced, 127-128, 133
elements cover, 127 See also: Creation, the; Heavenly planets;
eyebrows of, 123 Material world; Planets
eyelids of, 123 Untruthfulness. See: Falsity; Liars
eyes of, 123 Upadeksyanti te jiidnar
feet of, 119 verse quoted, 269
forehead, 123 Utpatha-pratipannasya
hair of, 123 verse quoted, 95
head of, 123
heart of, 123 ॥ 1
intelligence of, 123
items included in, 117-118 Vaikuntha. See: Spiritual world, all entries
knees of, 119 Vaisnavas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord,
Krsna showed, 134 all entries
lips of, 123 Vaisyas, culture of, 72
mind of, 123 Vimanadeva, Lord
mouth of, 123 Bali & Co. outshone by, 44.
nails of, 123 Bali arrested by, 147, 148, 171
navel of, 120 Bali assigned by, to Sutala, 189-191
neck of, 123 Bali “cheated” by, 157-158
nostrils of, 123 Bali criticized, 68, 69
opulence of, 117-118 Bali gave land to, 112, 115
private parts of, 120 Bali kept promise to, 157, 158
semen of, 123 Bali loved, 98-99
senses of, 123 Bali praised by, 66
shadow 01, 123 Bali sanctified by, 50
smile of, 123 Bali saved by, 227
thighs of, 119 Bali sent to hell by, 151, 152, 153
tongue of, 123 Bali’s family heritage praised by, 55-57,
touch of, 123 64-66
Vamana showed, 134 Bali’s offerings to, 51, 70, 78, 81-82,
veins of, 123 157, 158, 177, 179, 180, 181


--- Page 327 ---
General Index 331
Vimanadeva, Lord Vamanadeva, Lord
Bali welcomed, 46-51 universe encompassed by, 116, 149, 150,
Bali worshiped, 113 157-158
beauty of, 41, 46 as Urukrama, 133
begged land from Bali, 66, 67, 69, 77, as Visnu, 137-139
108, 136,213 Varaha incarnation like fish incarnation, 232
birth ceremony for, 38 Varnam defined, 260
body of, covered sky, 126 Varnasramacaravatd
as brahmacari, 37, 38, 39, 41,71, 79, verse quoted, 107, 209
80, 83, 108, 138 Varnasrama-dharma
brahmacaris advised by, 55 divisions 01, listed, 71, 107
Brahma honored, 214, 215, 217 purpose of, 71, 107, 209
Brahmaloka outshone by, 130 society organized by, 107
as brahmana, 37, 38, 46, 49, 108, 137 See also: Brahmacari; Brahmana;
Brahma outshone by, 130 Grhastha; Ksatriyas; Sannydasi;
Brahma prayed to, 132 Society, human; Vaisyas; Vedic
Brahma washed feet of, 133 culture
Brahma worshiped, 132, 134 Varuna
ceremonies blessed by glorifying, 221 Bali arrested by, 162
demigods favored by, 79, 137 human compared to, 245
demigods honored, 214, 215, 217 in Lord’s universal form, 123
demons angry at, 136-139 Vasistha Muni, quoted on Lord’s glories, 219
dress 01, 46 Vasudevah sarvam iti
as dwarf, 37, 38, 79, 81 quoted, 118
earth stepped on by, 42, 43 Vasuki as anchor rope, 256
effulgence of, 41, 43, 44, 46 Vatu
fire sacrifice by, 42 defined, 37, 38
first footstep of, covered earth, 126 See also: Brahmacari
human being vs., 67 Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah
Indra excelled by, 215 quoted, 275
as Indra’s brother, 213 Vedas
Indra transported, to heavenly planet, 215 astronomy in, 32
Jambavan honored, 136 Bhagavad-gita reveals, 275
Krsnalike, 134 eternal, 271
as Narayana, 37 fish incarnation saved, 231-232
paraphernalia carried by, 45 four listed, 132
parents of, 79 Hayagriva stole, 231
planetary deities worshiped, 134, 135 Lord known via, 23
quoted on Hiranyakasipu and Visnu, Lord reveals, 275
60-61 Lord saved, 231, 232, 272, 274, 275
sacred thread ceremony for, 38, 39, 40 in Lord’s universal form, 123
sannydsis advised by, 55 supplementary, two listed, 132
second step of , pierced universe, 127-128 veda-vada-ratds misconstrue, 275
Sukracarya detected purpose of, 78-83 See also: names of specific Vedic literatures
universal form shown by, 134 Veda-vada-ratas, Vedas misconstrued by, 275


--- Page 328 ---
332 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Vedic culture Visnuneti bruvanais tu
ceremonies for newborn in, 38 verse quoted, 251
teaches satisfaction, 71 Visnu Purana
See also: Varnasrama-dharma quoted on sacrifices for Visnu, 209
Vedic knowledge quoted on Visnu worship via varnasrama-
protection of, 228 dharma, 107
See also: Vedas Visnur aradhyate pantha
Vedic mantras. See: Hare Krsna mantra; verse quoted, 107, 209
Mantras; Vedas Visnu’s associates
Vedic rituals. See: Ritualistic ceremonies; demons vs., 140-146
Sacrifices; Vedic culture fourteen named, 141
Vetti yatra na caivayari Visnusvami, 269
verse quoted, 74 Visnu-tattva vs. living entities, 245
Vibhinnamsa defined, 245 Vistabhyaham idan krtsnam
Vidya. See: Knowledge quoted, 219
Vidyadharas Visvakarma
Bali honored by, 114 as heaven's engineer, 189
Lord's appearance honored by, 35 as Sutala’s maker, 189
Vidyadhara sword, 125 Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura
Vindhyavali as astrologer, 32
as 88115 wife, 113, 175, 176 quoted on spiritual master, 258
Brahma interrupted by, 175 quoted on stars and planets, 32
prayed for Bali, 178 Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, cited
quoted on Lord & fools, 176 on Bali, 111
Vipra defined, 101 on Brahma’s daytime sleep, 250
Virat-ripa. See: Universal form of the on Ganges, 133
Supreme Lord on harih, 80
Virocana on Satyavrata, 272
as Bali’s father, 64-65 Vivasvin
brahmanas favored by, 64 as Satyavrata’s father, 233 +
Visnu, Lord See also: Sun-god
duty to, 212 Vivigna-cetah
Ganges from toeof, 48 defined, 61
Hiranyakasipu vs., 58-62, 64 See also: Anxiety
invincible, 109 Vrndavana as holy place, 8
as mystic master, 59 Vyasadeva
Viamana as, 137-139 in disciplic succession, 261
worship toward, 106-107 as guru No. 1, 261
as yajaa-purusa, 209 Krsna’s supremacy accepted by, 269
See also: Incarnations of the Supreme
Lord; Narayana, Lord; Supreme Ww
Lord Water
Visnu-dharmottara, cited on annihilation in fish incarnation outgrew, 237-242
Caksusa-manvantara, 250 in Lord’s universal form, 123
Visnu-dharmottare tv etat of universal annihilation, 230, 247, 248,
verse quoted, 251 254


--- Page 329 ---
General Index 333
Water-demigod in Lord’s universal form, 123 Yad gatva na nivartante
Wealth quoted, 63
for charity, 104 Yajna. See: Ritualistic ceremony; Sacrifice
Ripa Gosvami divided, 85 Yajiiaih sarikirtana-prayair
See also: Gold; Money; Opulence; Opu- quoted, 211
lence, material Yajiia-patnis as krpa-siddha, 98
Weapons of demons, 139 Yaksas
Weapon (s) of the Supreme Lord Kuvera king of, 40
bow, 124. Lord’s appearance honored by, 35
club, 125 Yarh yarn vapi smaran bhava
disc, 124, 191 quoted, 87
prayed to the Lord, 125 Yare dekha, tare kaha ‘krsna’-upadesa
sword, 125 quoted, 261, 264
Week, days of, planetary positions correspond Yasya deve para bhaktir
to, 32 quoted, 2
Wife. See: Marriage Yasydham anugrhnami
Wind in Lord’s universal form, 123 quoted, 80-81, 148, 167-168, 172,
Wise men chant Lord's holy names, 211 173
Women Yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto ‘pi
celestial, 34 quoted, 2
See also: Female-male attraction; Marriage = Yasydsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiiicana
Wood “producing” fire, Kasyapa and Aditi quoted, 114
“producing” the Lord like, 20 Ye bhajanti tu mar bhaktya
Work. See: Activities; Karma verse quoted, 203
World. See: Creation, the; Earth planet; Ma- Yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei ‘guru’ haya
terial world; Universe verse quoted, 55
Worlds, three. See: Three worlds Ye yatha marh prapadyante
Worship quoted, 252
in bodily conception fruitless, 245, 246 Yoga
towards demigods, 245, 262 astanga, processes of, 71
toward Ganges, 116 devotional service vs., 260
God vs. demigod, 245, 262 hatha, as needless, 4
of the Lord, 16, 201, 208, 245-246, 262 knowledge by, 132
toward spiritual master, 258 mystic, processes of, 71
toward Viamana, 134, 135 sense control by, 71
of Vamana by Bali, 47, 113 sense gratification cured by, 71
of Vamana by Brahma, 132, 134 See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
of "18100, 106-107 Lord; Krsna consciousness
See also: Deity form of the Supreme Lord Yogis
fate of, 63
Y mystic, demons, became, 162
Yada yada hi dharmasya See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
verse quoted, 226-227

