
--- Page 1 ---
Preface

We must know the present need of human society. And what is that
need? Human society is no longer bounded by geographical limits to par-
ticular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in the
Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one human
society. The ideals of spiritual communism, according to Srimad-
Bhagavatam, are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human
society, nay, on the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by
great thinkers to make this a successful ideology. Srimad-Bhagavatam
will fill this need in human society. It begins, therefore, with the aphor-
ism of Vedanta philosophy (janmady asya yatah) to establish the ideal of
a common cause.

Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of obli-
vion. It has made rapid progress in the field of material comforts, educa-
tion and economic development throughout the entire world. But there is
a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore there are
large-scale quarrels, even over less important issues. There is need of a
clue as to how humanity can become one in peace, friendship and
prosperity with a common cause. Srimad-Bhagavatam will fill this need,
for it is a cultural presentation for the re-spiritualization of the entire
human society.

Srimad-Bhagavatam should be introduced also in the schools and col-
leges, for it is recommended by the great student devotee Prahlada
Maharaja in order to change the demonic face of society.

kaumara acaret prajiio
dharman bhagavatan iha
durlabharin manusarm janma
tad apy adhruvam arthadam
(Bhag. 7.6.1)

Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless
civilization. There is God, or the Almighty One, from whom everything
emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom everything is

ix


--- Page 2 ---
x Srimad-Bhagavatam

merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of
creation very insufficiently, but it is a fact that there is one ultimate
source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained rationally
and authoritatively in the beautiful Bhagavatam or Srimad-
Bhagavatam.

Srimad-Bhagavatam is the transcendental science not only for know-
ing the ultimate source of everything but also for knowing our relation
with Him and our duty towards perfection of the human society on the
basis of this perfect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the
Sanskrit language. and it is now rendered into English elaborately so that
simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well. so much so
that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend himself from the
onslaught of atheists. Over and above this, the reader will be able to con-
vert others to accept God as a concrete principle.

Srimad-Bhagavatam begins with the definition of the ultimate source.
It is a bona fide commentary on the Vedanta-siitra by the same author,
Srila Vyasadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to the
highest state of God realization. The only qualification one needs to study
this great book of transcendental knowledge is to proceed step by step
cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly as with an ordinary
book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter. one after another.
The reading matter is so arranged with its original Sanskrit text. its
English transliteration, synonyms. translation and purports so that one is
sure to become a God realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine
cantos.

The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos. because it deals
directly with the transcendental activities of the Personality of Godhead
Sri Krsna. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth Canto
without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in
twelve cantos, each independent, but it is good for all to read them in
small installments one after another.

I must admit my frailties in presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam, but still
I am hopeful of its good reception by the thinkers and leaders of society
on the strength of the following statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

tad-vag-visargo janatagha-viplavo
yasmin pratislokam abaddhavaty api


--- Page 3 ---
Preface xi
namany anantasya yaso ‘nkitani yac
chrnvanti gayanti grnanti sadhavah
(Bhag. 1.5.11)
“On the other hand, that literature which is full with descriptions of the
transcendental glories of the name, fame. form and pastimes of the
unlimited Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant to bring
about a revolution in the impious life of a misdirected civilization. Such
transcendental literatures. even though irregularly composed, are heard,
sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.”
Or tat sat
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami


--- Page 4 ---
Introduction

“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to His own abode, accompanied by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the
dense darkness of ignorance in the age of Kali shall get light from this
Purana.” (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43)

The timeless wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human knowledge. Originally
preserved through oral tradition, the Vedas were first put into writing
five thousand years ago by Srila Vyasadeva, the “literary incarnation of
God.” After compiling the Vedas, Vyiasadeva set forth their essence in
the aphorisms known as Vedanta-sitras. Srimad-Bhagavatam 15
Vyisadeva’s commentary on his own Vedanta-sitras. It was written in
the maturity of his spiritual life under the direction of Narada Muni, his
spiritual master. Referred to as “‘the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic
literature,” Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and authoritative
exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After compiling the Bhagavatam, Vyasa impressed the synopsis of it
upon his son, the sage Sukadeva Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami subse-
quently recited the entire Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assem-
bly of learned saints on the bank of the Ganges at Hastinapura (now
Delhi). Maharaja Pariksit was the emperor of the world and was a great
rajarsi (saintly king). Having received a warning that he would die
within a week, he renounced his entire kingdom and retired to the bank
of the Ganges to fast until death and receive spiritual enlightenment.
The Bhagavatam begins with Emperor Pariksit’s sober inquiry to
Sukadeva Gosvami: ‘“You are the spiritual master of great saints and de-
votees. [ am therefore begging you to show the way of perfection for all
persons, and especially for one who is about to die. Please let me know
what a man should hear, chant, remember and worship, and also what he
should not do. Please explain all this to me.”

Sukadeva Gosvami’s answer to this question, and numerous other
questions posed by Maharaja Pariksit, concerning everything from the
nature of the self to the origin of the universe, held the assembled sages

xiii


--- Page 5 ---
xv Srimad-Bhagavatam

in rapt attention continuously for the seven days leading to the King’s
death. The sage Siita Gosvami, who was present on the bank of the
Ganges when Sukadeva Gosvami first recited Srimad-Bhagavatam, later
repeated the Bhagavatam before a gathering of sages in the forest of
Naimisaranya. Those sages, concerned about the spiritual welfare of the
people in general, had gathered to perform a long, continuous chain of
sacrifices to counteract the degrading influence of the incipient age of
Kali. In response to the sages’ request that he speak the essence of Vedic
wisdom, Sita Gosvami repeated from memory the entire eighteen thou-
sand verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam, as spoken by Sukadeva Gosvami to
Maharaja Pariksit.

The reader of Srimad-Bhagavatam hears Sita Gosvami relate the
questions of Maharija Pariksit and the answers of Sukadeva Gosvami.
Also, Sata Gosvami sometimes responds directly to questions put by
Saunaka Rsi, the spokesman for the sages gathered at Naimisaranya. One
therefore simultaneously hears two dialogues: one between Maharaja
Pariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami on the bank of the Ganges, and another
at Naimisiranya between Sita Gosvami and the sages at Naimisaranya
Forest, headed by Saunaka Rsi. Furthermore, while instructing King
Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami often relates historical episodes and gives
accounts of lengthy philosophical discussions between such great souls as
the saint Maitreya and his disciple Vidura. With this understanding of
the history of the Bhagavatam, the reader will easily be able to follow its
intermingling of dialogues and events from various sources. Since philo-
sophical wisdom, not chronological order, is most important in the text,
one need only be attentive to the subject matter of Srimad-Bhagavatam
to appreciate fully its profound message.

The translator of this edition compares the Bhagavatam to sugar
candy—wherever you taste it, you will find it equally sweet and
relishable. Therefore, to taste the sweetness of the Bhagavatam, one may
begin by reading any of its volumes. After such an introductory taste,
however, the serious reader is best advised to go back to Volume One of
the First Canto and then proceed through the Bhagavatam, volume after
volume, in its natural order.

This edition of the Bhagavatam is the first complete English transla-
tion of this important text with an elaborate commentary, and it is the
first widely available to the English-speaking public. It is the product of


--- Page 6 ---
Introduction xv
the scholarly and devotional effort of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupiada, the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His consummate Sanskrit
scholarship and intimate familiarity with Vedic culture and thought as
well as the modern way of life combine to reveal to the West a magnifi-
cent exposition of this important classic.

Readers will find this work of value for many reasons. For those in-
terested in the classical roots of Indian civilization, it serves as a vast
reservoir of detailed information on virtually every one of its aspects.
For students of comparative philosophy and religion, the Bhagavatam
offers a penetrating view into the meaning of India’s profound spiritual
heritage. To sociologists and anthropologists, the Bhagavatam reveals the
practical workings of a peaceful and scientifically organized Vedic
culture, whose institutions were integrated on the basis of a highly
developed spiritual world view. Students of literature will discover the
Bhagavatam to be a masterpiece of majestic poetry. For students of psy-
chology, the text provides important perspectives on the nature of con-
sciousness, human behavior and the philosophical study of identity.
Finally, to those seeking spiritual insight, the Bhagavatam offers simple
and practical guidance for attainment of the highest self-knowledge and
realization of the Absolute Truth. The entire multivolume text, pre-
sented by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, promises to occupy a significant
place in the intellectual, cultural and spiritual life of modern man for a
long time to come.

—The Publishers


--- Page 7 ---
CHAPTER NINE
The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-marti
This chapter describes how the demons, being enchanted by the beauty
of the Mohini form, agreed to hand over the container of nectar to
Mohinidevi, who tactfully delivered it to the demigods.

When the demons got possession of the container of nectar, an ex-
traordinarily beautiful young woman appeared before them. All the
demons became captivated by the young woman’s beauty and became at-
tached to Her. Now, because the demons were fighting among themselves
to possess the nectar, they selected this beautiful woman as a mediator to
settle their quarrel. Taking advantage of their weakness in this regard,
Mohini, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, got the
demons to promise that whatever decision She might give, they would
not refuse to accept it. When the demons made this promise, the
beautiful woman, Mohini-mirti, had the demigods and demons sit in dif-
ferent lines so that She could distribute the nectar. She knew that the
demons were quite unfit to drink the nectar. Therefore, by cheating
them She distributed all the nectar to the demigods. When the demons
saw this cheating of Mohini-mirti, they remained silent. But one demon,
named Rihu, dressed himself like a demigod and sat down in the line of
the demigods. He sat beside the sun and the moon. When the Supreme
Personality of Godhead understood how Riahu was cheating, He im-
mediately cut off the demon’s head. Rahu, however, had already tasted
the nectar, and therefore although his head was severed, he remained
alive. After the demigods finished drinking the nectar, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead assumed His own form. Sukadeva Gosvami ends this
chapter by describing how powerful is the chanting of the holy names,
pastimes and paraphernalia of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 1
श्रीञ्युक उवाच
तेऽन्योन्यतोऽसुराः पात्र हरन्तस्त्यक्तसोहदाः।
fav दस्युधर्माण आयान्तीं द दश्च: fag १॥
1


--- Page 8 ---
2 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
sri-Suka uvaca
te ‘nyonyato ’surah patram
harantas tyakta-sauhrdah
ksipanto dasyu-dharmana
ayantim dadrsuh striyam

sri-Sukah 8৮৫০৫ —Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; te—the demons;
anyonyatah—among themselves; asurah—the demons; pdtram—the
container of nectar; harantah—snatching from one another; tyakta-
sauhrdah—became inimical toward one another; ksipantah—sometimes
throwing; dasyu-dharmanah—sometimes snatching like robbers;
ayantim—coming forward; dadrsuh—saw; striyam—a very beautiful
and attractive woman.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami said: Thereafter, the demons became inimi-
cal toward one another. Throwing and snatching the container of
nectar, they gave up their friendly relationship. Meanwhile, they
saw a very beautiful young woman coming forward toward them.

TEXT 2
अहो रूपमहो धाम अहो अस्या नवं वयः |
इति ते तामभिदुत्य पएष्रच्छुनातहच्छयाः ॥ २॥
aho ripam aho dhama
aho asya navari vayah
iti te tam abhidrutya
papracchur jata-hrc-chayah

aho—how wonderful; ripam—Her beauty; aho—how wonderful;
dhama—Her bodily luster; aho—how wonderful; asyah—of Her;
navam—new; vayah—beautiful age; iti—in this way; te—those
demons; tam—unto the beautiful woman; abhidrutya—going before
Her hastily; papracchuh—inquired from Her; jata-hrt-Sayah—their
hearts being filled with lust to enjoy Her.


--- Page 9 ---
Text 3] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-mirti 3
TRANSLATION
Upon seeing the beautiful woman, the demons said, ‘Alas, how
wonderful is Her beauty, how wonderful the luster of Her body,
and how wonderful the beauty of Her youthful ৪06০1” Speaking in
this way, they quickly approached Her, full of lusty desires to en-
joy Her, and began to inquire from Her in many ways.
TEXT 3
का तवं FETA ङतो वा दि चिकीषति ।
कस्यासि वद्‌ वामोरु मश्रतीव मनांसि नः ॥ ३॥
ka ८४८४ kanja-palasaksi
kuto va kim cikirsasi
kasyasi vada vamoru
mathnativa manamsi nah
ka—who; tvam—are You; kaiija-palasa-aksi—having eyes like the
petals of a lotus; kutah—from where; va —either; kim cikirsasi—what is
the purpose for which You have come here; kasya—of whom; asi—do
You belong; vada —kindly tell us; vama-iiru—O You whose thighs are
extraordinarily beautiful; mathnati—agitating; iva—like; manamsi—
within our minds; nah—our.
TRANSLATION
O wonderfully beautiful girl, You have such nice eyes, resem-
bling the petals of a lotus flower. Who are You? Where do You
come from? What is Your purpose in coming here, and to whom
do You belong? O You whose thighs are extraordinarily beautiful,
our minds are becoming agitated simply because of seeing You.
PURPORT
The demons inquired from the wonderfully beautiful girl, “To whom
do You belong?” A woman is supposed to belong to her father before her
marriage, to her husband after her marriage, and to her grown sons in


--- Page 10 ---
4 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
her old age. In regard to this inquiry, Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti
Thakura says that the question “To whom do You belong?” means
“Whose daughter are You?’ Since the demons could understand that the
beautiful girl was still unmarried, every one of them desired to marry
Her. Thus they inquired, “Whose daughter are You?”
TEXT 4
9 EY
न वयं त्वामरेदत्यैः सिद्धगन्धर्वचारणेः |
a
ARTE! जानीमो रोकेलेश्च ङतो नृभिः ॥ ४॥
78000 271 [৮৫771017087 00108]
siddha-gandharva-caranaih
nasprsta-pirvarn janimo
lokesais ca kuto nrbhih
na—it is not; vayam—we; tva—unto You; amaraih—by the
demigods; daityaih—by the demons; siddha—by the Siddhas;
gandharva—by the Gandharvas; caranaih—and by the Caranas; na—
not; asprsta-pirvam—never enjoyed or touched by anyone; janimah—
know exactly; loka-#aih—Dby the various directors of the universe; ca—
also; kutah—what to speak of; nrbhih—by human society.
TRANSLATION
What to speak of human beings, even the demigods, demons,
Siddhas, Gandharvas, Caranas and the various directors of the uni-
verse, the Prajapatis, have never touched You before. It is not that
we are unable to understand Your identity.
PURPORT
Even the asuras observed the etiquette that no one should address a
married woman with lust. The great analyst Canakya Pandita says,
matrvat para-daresu: one should consider another’s wife to be one’s
mother. The asuras, the demons, took it for granted that the beautiful
young woman, Mohini-mirti, who had arrived before them, was cer-
tainly not married. Therefore they assumed that no one in the world, in-


--- Page 11 ---
Text 6] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-miirti 5
cluding the demigods, the Gandharvas, the Caranas and the Siddhas, had
ever touched Her. The demons knew that the young girl was unmarried,
and therefore they dared to address Her. They supposed that the young
girl, Mohini-marti, had come there to find a husband among all those
present (the Daityas, the demigods, the Gandharvas and so on).
TEXT 5
नूनं त्वं विधिना gy: प्रेषितासि श्चरीरिणाम्‌ |
৬ -
सर्वेन्द्रियमनःश्रीतिं agua किम्‌ ॥ ५॥
nanam tvam vidhind subhrih
presitasi Saririnam
sarvendriya-manah-pritim
vidhatum saghrnena kim
nianam—indeed; tvam —You; vidhina—by Providence; su-bhrih—O
You with the beautiful eyebrows; presiti—sent; asi—certainly You are
so; Saririnam—of all embodied living entities; sarva—all; indriya—of
the senses; manah—and of the mind; pritim—what is pleasing;
vidhatum—to administer; sa-ghrnena—by Your causeless mercy; kim —
whether.
TRANSLATION
O beautiful girl with beautiful eyebrows, certainly Providence,
by His causeless mercy, has sent You to please the senses and minds
of all of us. Is this not a fact?
TEXT 6
ক
सा त्वं नः स्पधेमानानामेक्वस्तुनि মানিনি।
ज्ञातीनां बद्धवेराणां शं विधत्ख सुमध्यमे ।॥ ६ ॥
sa tvari nah spardhamananam
eka-vastuni manini
jAatinam baddha-vairanam
Sam vidhatsva sumadhyame


--- Page 12 ---
6 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9

sa—as such You are; tvam—Your good self; nah—of all of us
demons; spardhamananam —of those who are becoming increasingly in-
imical; eka-vastuni—in one subject matter (the container of nectar);
manini—0O You who are most beautiful in Your prestigious position;
jaatinam—among our family members; baddha-vairanam—in-
creasingly becoming enemies; Sam —auspiciousness; vidhatsva—must
execute; su-madhyame—O beautiful thin-waisted woman.

TRANSLATION

We are now all engaged in enmity among ourselves because of
this one subject matter —the container of nectar. Although we
have been born in the same family, we are becoming increasingly
inimical. 0 thin-waisted woman, who are so beautiful in Your
prestigious position, we therefore request You to favor us by set-
tling our dispute.

PURPORT

The demons understood that the beautiful woman had attracted the at-
tention of them all. Therefore they unanimously requested Her to be-
come the arbiter to settle their dispute.

TEXT 7
वयं कस्यपदायादा आतरः FAC: |
fre यथान्यायं नैव भेदो यथा मवेत्‌ ॥ ও ॥
vayar kaSyapa-dayada
bhratarah krta-paurusah
vibhajasva yatha-nyayam
naiva bhedo yatha bhavet

vayam—all of us; kasyapa-dayadah—descendants of Kasyapa Muni;
bhratarah—we are all brothers; krta-paurusah—who are all able and
competent; vibhajasva—just divide; yatha-nyayam —according to law;
na—not; eva—certainly; bhedah—partiality; yatha—as; bhavet—
should so become.


--- Page 13 ---
Text 9] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-mirti 7
TRANSLATION
All of us, both demons and demigods, have been born of the
same father, KaSyapa, and thus we are related as brothers. But now
we are exhibiting our personal prowess in dissension. Therefore
we request You to settle our dispute and divide the nectar equally
among us.
TEXT 8
इत्युपामन्त्रितो SARL EE |
प्रहस्य रुचिरापाङ्ग्निरीश्चनिदमनवीत्‌ ॥ ८ ॥
ity upamantrito daityair
maya-yosid-vapur harih
prahasya rucirapangair
niriksann idam abravit
iti—thus; upamantritah—being fervently requested; daityaih—by
the demons; maya-yosit—the illusory woman; vapuh harih —the incar-
nation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prahasya—smiling;
rucira—beautiful; apdrgaih—by exhibiting attractive feminine
features; niriksan—looking at them; idam —these words; abravit—said.
TRANSLATION
Having thus been requested by the demons, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who had assumed the form of a beautiful
woman, began to smile. Looking at them with attractive feminine
gestures, She spoke as follows.
TEXT 9
APTN
कथं ङस्यपदायादाः पुंषल्यां मयि सङ्गताः ।
विश्वासं पण्डितो जातु कामिनीषु न याति हि ॥ ९॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kathariv kasyapa-dayadah
puriscalyarm mayi sangatah


--- Page 14 ---
8 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
visvasar pandito jatu
kaminisu na yati hi

sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the
form of Mohini-marti said; katham—how is it so; kasSyapa-dayadah—
you are all descendants of KaSyapa Muni; pumscalyam—unto a
prostitute who agitates the minds of men; mayi—unto Me; sarigatah—
you come in My association; visvasam—faith; panditah—those who are
learned; jatu—at any time; kaminisu—unto a woman; na—never;
yati—takes place; hi—indeed.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the form of Mohini,
told the demons: O sons of KaSyapa Muni, I am only a prostitute.
How is it that you have so much faith in Me? A learned person
never puts his faith in a woman.

PURPORT

Canakya Pandita, the great politician and moral instructor, said,
visvaso naiva kartavyah strisu raja-kulesu ca: “Never put your faith in a
woman or a politician.” Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
was pretending to be a woman, warned the demons against putting so
much faith in Her, for She had appeared as an attractive woman
ultimately to cheat them. Indirectly disclosing the purpose for which She
had appeared before them, She said to the sons of 13598708, “How is this?
You were all born of a great rsi, yet you are putting your faith in a
woman who is loitering here and there like a prostitute, unprotected by
father or husband. Women in general should not be trusted, and what to
speak of a woman loitering like a prostitute?’” The word kamini is sig-
nificant in this connection. Women, especially beautiful young women,
invoke the dormant lusty desires of a man. Therefore, according to
Manu-samhita, every woman should be protected, either by her hus-
band, by her father or by her grown sons. Without such protection, a
woman will be exploited. Indeed, women like to be exploited by men. As
soon as a woman is exploited by a man, she becomes a common
prostitute. This is explained by Mohini-mirti, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.


--- Page 15 ---
Text 11] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-miirti 9
TEXT 10
. नि a .
सालाृकाणां ख्ीणां च स्वेरिणीनां सुरद्विषः |
सख्यान्याहुरनित्यानि नूत्नं नूत्नं विचिन्वताम्‌ nt on
salavrkanam strinam ca
svairininam sura-dvisah
sakhyany ahur anityani
nittnarih nitnam vicinvatam
salavrkanam —of monkeys, jackals and dogs; strinam ca—and of
women; svairininam—especially women who are independent; sura-
dvisah—O demons; sakhyani—friendship; ahuh—it is said; anityani—
temporary; nitnam—new friends; nitnam —new friends; vicinvatam —
all of whom are thinking.
TRANSLATION
O demons, as monkeys, jackals and dogs are unsteady in their
sexual relationships and want newer and newer friends every day,
women who live independently seek new friends daily. Friendship
with such a woman is never permanent. This is the opinion of
learned scholars.
TEXT 11
श्रीद्युक उवाच
ए
इति ते क्वेलितैस्तस्या आश्वस्तमनसोऽसुराः |
जहसुर्माबगम्भीरं ददुाग्रतमाजनम्‌ 1220
$ri-Suka uvaca
iti te ksvelitais tasya
asvasta-manaso ‘surah
Jahasur bhava-gambhirar
dadus camrta-bhajanam
Sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; te—those
demons; ksvelitaih—by speaking as if jokingly; tasyah—of Mohini-
marti; asvasta—grateful, with faith; manasah—their minds; asurah—
all the demons; jahasuh—laughed; bhava-gambhiram—although


--- Page 16 ---
10 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
Mohini-marti was full of gravity; daduh—delivered; ca—also; amrta-
bhajanam —the container of nectar.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After the demons heard the
words of Mohini-miirti, who had spoken as if jokingly, they were
all very confident. They laughed with gravity, and ultimately they
delivered the container of nectar into Her hands.
PURPORT
The Personality of Godhead in His form of Mohini was certainly not
joking but talking seriously, with gravity. The demons, however, being
captivated by Mohini-miirti’s bodily features, took Her words as a joke
and confidently delivered the container of nectar into Her hands. Thus
Mohini-miirti resembles Lord Buddha, who appeared sammohaya sura-
dvisam —to cheat the asuras. The word sura-dvisam refers to those who
are envious of the demigods or devotees. Sometimes an incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead cheats the atheists. Thus we see here
that although Mohini-mirti was speaking factually to the asuras, the
asuras took Her words to be facetious. Indeed, they were so confident of
Mohini-miirti’s honesty that they immediately delivered the container of
nectar into Her hands, as if they would allow Her to do with the nectar
whatever She liked, whether She distributed it, threw it away or drank it
Herself without giving it to them.
TEXT 12
ततो गदीत्वागरतमाजनं হবি
নমাঘ ईपर्सितशोमया गिरा |
यदभ्युपेतं क्र च साध्वसाधु वा
छतं मया वो विभजे सुधामिमाम्‌ ।१२॥
tato grhitvamrta-bhajanarin harir
babhasa tsat-smita-sobhaya gira
yady abhyupetarih kva ca sadhv asadhu va
krtarih maya vo vibhaje sudham imam


--- Page 17 ---
Text 13] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-miirti 11

tatah—thereafter; grhitva—taking possession of; amrta-bhajanam—
the pot containing the nectar; harih—the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Hari, in the form of Mohini; babhasa—spoke; isat—slightly;
smita-Sobhaya gira—with smiling beauty and by words; yadi—if;
abhyupetam —promised to be accepted; kva ca—whatever it may be;
sadhu asadhu va—whether honest or dishonest; krtam maya—is done
by Me; vah—unto you; vibhaje—I shall give you the proper share;
sudham—nectar; imam—this.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, having taken
possession of the container of nectar, smiled slightly and spoke in
attractive words. She said: My dear demons, if you accept whatever
I may do, whether honest or dishonest, then I can take respon-
sibility for dividing the nectar among you.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot abide by anyone’s dicta-
tion. Whatever He does is absolute. The demons, of course, were deluded
by the illusory potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus
Mohini-mirti got them to promise that whatever She would do they
would accept.

TEXT 13
इत्यभिच्यादतं तस्था आकण्यासुरपुङ्गगः |
अप्रमाणदिदस्तस्यास्तत्‌ तथेत्यन्वमंसत 1231
ity abhivyahrtam tasya
akarnyasura-pungavah
apramana-vidas tasyds
tat tathety anvamarnsata

iti—thus; abhivyahrtam—the words that were spoken; tasyah—Her;
akarnya—after hearing; asura-purigavah—the chiefs of the demons;
apramana-vidah—because they were all foolish; tasyah—of Her; tat—


--- Page 18 ---
12 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
those words; tatha—let it be so; iti—thus; anvamarisata —agreed to ac-
cept.
TRANSLATION
The chiefs of the demons were not very expert in deciding
things. Upon hearing the sweet words of Mohini-miirti, they im-
mediately assented. ““Yes,”’ they answered. “What You have said is
all right.”” Thus the demons agreed to accept Her decision.
TEXTS 14-15
AFIT कृतलाना हत्वा च हविषानलम्‌ |
aN
হুন্লা गोविप्रभूतेभ्यः कृतखस्त्ययना द्विजः ॥१४॥
यथोपजोषं वासांसि परिधायाहतानि ते ।
FTN प्राविशन्सर्वे प्रागगरेष्वभिभूषिताः 12411
athoposya krta-snana
hutva ca havisanalam
dattva go-vipra-bhiitebhyah
krta-svastyayana dvijaih
yathopajosarn vasarmsi
paridhayahatani te
(८८5९57८ pravisan sarve
prag-agresv abhibhusitah
atha—thereafter; uposya—observing a fast; krta-snanah—perform-
ing bathing; hutva—offering oblations; ca—also; havisa—with clarified
butter; analam—into the fire; dattva—giving in charity; go-vipra-
bhatebhyah—unto the cows, brahmanas and living beings in general;
krta-svastyayanah—performing ritualistic ceremonies; dvijaih —as dic-
tated by the brahmanas; yatha-upajosam—according to one’s taste;
vasamsi—garments; paridhaya—putting on: ahatani—first-class and
new; te—all of them; kusesu—on seats made of kusa grass; pravisan—
sitting on them; sarve—all of them; prak-agresu—facing east;
abhibhasitah— properly decorated with ornaments.


--- Page 19 ---
Text 17] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-mirti 13
TRANSLATION
The demigods and demons then observed a fast. After bathing,
they offered clarified butter and oblations into the fire and gave
charity to the cows and to the brahmanas and members of the
other orders of society, namely the ksatriyas, vaiSyas and $idras,
who were all rewarded as they deserved. Thereafter, the demigods
and demons performed ritualistic ceremonies under the directions
of the brahmanas. Then they dressed themselves with new gar-
ments according to their own choice, decorated their bodies with
ornaments, and sat facing east on seats made of kusa grass.
PURPORT
The Vedas enjoin that for every ritualistic ceremony one must first be-
come clean by bathing either in the water of the Ganges or Yamuna or in
the sea. Then one may perform the ritualistic ceremony and offer
clarified butter into the fire. In this verse the words paridhdya ahatani
are especially significant. A sannyasi or a person about to perform a
ritualistic ceremony should not dress himself in clothing sewn with a
needle.
TEXTS 16-17
प्राङछखेषूपविषटेषु सुरेषु दित्जिषु च ।
धूषामोदितशालायां जुष्टायां माखयदीपदैः ॥१६॥
तस्यां नरेन्द्र करमोरुरुशद्‌इल-
ओणीतटाठसगतिर्दविदलाक्षी |
सा कूजती कनकनपुरशिञ्जितेन
EN
FEA करटसपाणिरथादिवेशच 10
pran-mukhesipavistesu
suresu ditijesu ca
dhiapamodita-salayam
Justayam madlya-dipakaih
tasyarn narendra karabhorur usad-dukila-
Sroni-tatalasa-gatir mada-vihvalaksi


--- Page 20 ---
14 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9

sa kijati kanaka-nipura-siiijitena

kumbha-stani kalasa-panir athavivesa
prak-mukhesu—facing east; upavistesu—were sitting on their respec-
tive seats; suresu—all the demigods; diti-jesu —the demons; ca—also;
dhipa-amodita-salayam—in the arena, which was full of the smoke of
incense; justayam—fully decorated; malya-dipakaih—with flower gar-
lands and lamps; tasyam —in that arena; nara-indra—O King; karabha-
aruh —having thighs resembling the trunks of elephants; usat-dukila—
dressed with a very beautiful sari; sroni-tata—because of big hips;
alasa-gatih—stepping very slowly; mada-vihvala-aksi—whose eyes
were restless because of youthful pride; sa—She; kijati—tinkling;
kanaka-nipura—of golden ankle bells; sifijitena—with the sound;
kumbha-stani—a woman whose breasts were like water jugs; kalasa-
panih—holding a waterpot in Her hand; atha—thus; avivesa—entered
the arena.
TRANSLATION
O King, as the demigods and demons sat facing east in an arena
fully decorated with flower garlands and lamps and fragrant with
the smoke of incense, that woman, dressed in a most beautiful sari,
Her ankle bells tinkling, entered the arena, walking very slowly
because of Her big, low hips. Her eyes were restless due to
youthful pride, Her breasts were like water jugs, Her thighs
resembled the trunks of elephants, and She carried a waterpot in
Her hand.
TEXT 18
तां श्रीसखीं रनर्ङ्ण्डजचारुकण-
नासाकपोलवदनां परदेवताख्याम्‌ |
संवीक्ष्य dyads
देवासुरा बिगकिवस्तनपदटिकान्ताम्‌॥। १८॥
tam Sri-sakhim kanaka-kundala-caru-karma-
nasa-kapola-vadanari para-devatakhyam
sarwiksya sammumuhur utsmita-viksanena
devdsura vigalita-stana-pattikantam


--- Page 21 ---
Text 19] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-mirti 15

tam —unto Her; $ri-sakhim —appearing like a personal associate of the
goddess of fortune; kanaka-kundala—with golden earrings; caru—very
beautiful; karma —ears; nasa—nose; kapola —cheeks; vadanam —face;
para-devata-akhyam —the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead,
appearing in that form; sarmviksya—looking at Her; sammumuhuh—all
of them became enchanted; utsmita—slightly smiling; viksanena—
glancing over them; deva-asurah—all the demigods and demons;
vigalita-stana-pattika-antam—the border of the sari on the breasts
moved slightly.

TRANSLATION

Her attractive nose and cheeks and Her ears, adorned with
golden earrings, made Her face very beautiful. As She moved, Her
sari’s border on Her breasts moved slightly aside. When the
demigods and demons saw these beautiful features of Mohini-
miirti, who was glancing at them and slightly smiling, they were all
completely enchanted.

PURPORT

Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks here that Mohini-mirti
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead in a feminine form and that the
goddess of fortune is Her associate. This form assumed by the Per-
sonality of Godhead challenged the goddess of fortune. The goddess of
fortune is beautiful, but if the Lord accepts the form of a woman, He
surpasses the goddess of fortune in beauty. It is not that the goddess of
fortune, being female, is the most beautiful. The Lord is so beautiful that
He can excel any beautiful goddess of fortune by assuming a female
form.

TEXT 19
असुराणां सुधादानं सर्पाणामिव A |
मत्वा जातिदशंसानां न तां व्यभजदच्युतः ॥१९॥
asuranam sudha-danam
sarpanam iva durnayam
matva jati-nrsamsanar
na tar vyabhajad acyutah


--- Page 22 ---
16 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
asuranam—of the demons; sudhd-danam—giving of the nectar;
sarpanam—of snakes; iva—like; durnayam—miscalculation; matva—
thinking like that; jati-nrsarisanam—of those who are by nature very
envious; na—not; tam—the nectar; vyabhajat—delivered the share;
acyutah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who never falls down.
TRANSLATION
Demons are by nature crooked like snakes. Therefore, to dis-
tribute a share of the nectar to them was not at all feasible, since
this would be as dangerous as supplying milk to a snake. Consider-
ing this, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who never falls
down, did not deliver a share of nectar to the demons.
PURPORT
It is said, sarpah krirah khalah krirah sarpat kriratarah khalah:
“शाट snake is very crooked and envious, and so also is a person like a
demon.” Mantrausadhi-vasah sarpah khalah kena nivaryate: “One can
bring a snake under control with mantras, herbs and drugs, but an en-
vious and crooked person cannot be brought under control by any
means.” Considering this logic, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
thought it unwise to distribute nectar to the demons.
TEXT 20
कल्पयित्वा पथक्‌ पङ्ीरुमयेषां जगत्पतिः |
तांओोपवेखयायास स्वेषु स्वेषु च पड्किषु ॥२०॥
kalpayitva prthak parktir
ubhayesari jagat-patih
tars copavesayam asa
svesu svesu ca pariktisu
kalpayitva—after arranging; prthak panktith—different seats;
ubhayesam —of both the demigods and the demons; jagat-patih—the
master of the universe; tan—all of them; ca—and; upavesayam asa—


--- Page 23 ---
Text 21] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-miirti 17
seated; svesu svesu—in their own places; ca—also; pariktisu—all in
order.
TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead as Mohini-miirti, the
master of the universe, arranged separate lines of sitting places
and seated the demigods and demons according to their positions.

TEXT 21
दैत्यान्गृदीतकलसो वखयन्नुपसचरैः |
TE पाययामास JWT सुधाम्‌ ॥२१॥
daityan grhita-kalaso
vaficayann upasafncaraih
diira-sthan payayam asa
jara-mrtyu-haram sudham

daityan—the demons; grhita-kalasah—the Lord, who bore the con-
tainer of nectar; vaiicayan—by cheating; upasaficaraih—with sweet
words; dira-sthan—the demigods, who were sitting at a distant place;
payayam dsa—made them drink; jara-mrtyu-haram—which can coun-
teract invalidity, old age and death; sudham—such nectar.

TRANSLATION

Taking the container of nectar in Her hands, She first ap-
proached the demons, satisfied them with sweet words and thus
cheated them of their share of the nectar. Then She administered
the nectar to the demigods, who were sitting at a distant place, to
make them free from invalidity, old age and death.

PURPORT

Mohini-miirti, the Personality of Godhead, gave the demigods seats at
a distance. Then She approached the demons and spoke with them very
graciously, so that they thought themselves very fortunate to talk with
Her. Since Mohini-miirti had seated the demigods at a distant place, the


--- Page 24 ---
18 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
demons thought that the demigods would get only a little of the nectar
and that Mohini-mirti was so pleased with the demons that She would
give the demons all the nectar. The words varicayann upasaiicaraih in-
dicate that the Lord’s whole policy was to cheat the demons simply by
speaking sweet words. The Lord’s intention was to distribute the nectar
only to the demigods.
TEXT 22
ते पालयन्तः समयमसुराः खकृतं सृप ।
तृष्णीमाखन्कृतस्नेदाः स्ीविवादजगुप्सया HR]
te palayantah samayam
asurah sva-krtarh nrpa
tasnim asan krta-snehah
stri-vivada-jugupsaya
te—the demons; palayantah—keeping in order; samayam—
equilibrium; asurah—the demons; sva-krtam—made by them; nrpa—0
King; tasnim asan—remained silent; krta-snehah—because of having
developed attachment to Mohini-mirti; stri-vivada—disagreeing with a
woman; jugupsayd—because of thinking such an action as abominable.
TRANSLATION
O King, since the demons had promised to accept whatever the
woman did, whether just or unjust, now, to keep this promise, to
show their equilibrium and to save themselves from fighting with
a woman, they remained silent.
TEXT 23
Tat कृतातिप्रणयाः श्रणयापायकातराः |
बहुमानेन चाबद्धा नोचुः किञ्चन विप्रियम्‌ 1:30
tasyarn krtatipranayah
pranayapdya-katarah
bahu-manena cabaddha
nocuh kificana vipriyam


--- Page 25 ---
Text 24] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-miirti 19

tasyam—of Mohini-mirti; krta-ati-pranayah—because of staunch
friendship; pranaya-apaya-katarah—being afraid that their friendship
with Her would be broken; bahu-manena—by great respect and honor;
ca—also; abaddhah—being too attached to Her; na—not; acuh—they
said; kificana—even the slightest thing; vipriyam—by which Mohini-
mirti might be displeased with them.

TRANSLATION

The demons had developed affection for Mohini-miirti and a
kind of faith in Her, and they were afraid of disturbing their rela-
tionship. Therefore they showed respect and honor to Her words
and did not say anything that might disturb their friendship with
Her.

PURPORT

The demons were so captivated by the tricks and friendly words of
Mohini-mirti that although the demigods were served first, the demons
were pacified merely by sweet words. The Lord said to the demons, “The
demigods are very miserly and are excessively anxious to take the nectar
first. So let them have it first. Since you are not like them you can wait a
little longer. You are all heroes and are so pleased with Me. It is better for
you to wait until after the demigods drink.”

TEXT 24
wipes: खमानुर्देवसंसदि |
प्रविष्टः सोममपिवचन््रा्छम्यां च खवचितः 1281
deva-linga-praticchannah
svarbhanur deva-sarisadi
pravistah somam apibac
candrarkabhyam ca sicitah

deva-linga-praticchannah —covering himself with the dress of a
demigod; svarbhanuh—Rihu (who attacks and eclipses the sun and
moon); deva-saritsadi—in the group of the demigods; pravistah—hav-
ing entered; somam—the nectar; apibat—drank; candra-arkabhyam—
by both the moon and the sun; ca —and; sicitah—was pointed out.


--- Page 26 ---
20 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
TRANSLATION

Rahu, the demon who causes eclipses of the sun and moon,
covered himself with the dress of a demigod and thus entered the
assembly of the demigods and drank nectar without being detected
by anyone, even by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
moon and the sun, however, because of permanent animosity
toward Rahu, understood the situation. Thus Rahu was detected.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mohini-mirti, was able to
bewilder all the demons, but Rihu was so clever that he was not
bewildered. Riahu could understand that Mohini-mirti was cheating the
demons, and therefore he changed his dress, disguised himself as a
demigod, and sat down in the assembly of the demigods. Here one may
ask why the Supreme Personality of Godhead could not detect Rahu. The
reason is that the Lord wanted to show the effects of drinking nectar.
This will be revealed in the following verses. The moon and sun,
however, were always alert in regard to Rahu. Thus when Rahu entered
the assembly of the demigods, the moon and sun immediately detected
him, and then the Supreme Personality of Godhead also became aware of
him.

TEXT 25
चक्रेण क्षुरधारेण TER ॒पिवतः शिरः ।
हरिस्तस्य कबन्धस्तु खुधयाावितोऽपतत्‌ ॥२५५॥
cakrena ksura-dharena
Jjahara pibatah sirah
haris tasya kabandhas tu
sudhaydaplavito ’patat

cakrena—Dby the disc; ksura-dharena —which was sharp like a razor;
jahara—cut off; pibatah—while drinking nectar; Sirah—the head;
harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasya—of that Rahu;
kabandhah tu—but the headless body; sudhaya—by the nectar;
aplavitah—without being touched; apatat—immediately fell dead.


--- Page 27 ---
Text 26] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-marti 21
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, using His disc,
which was sharp like a razor, at once cut off Rahu’s head. When
Rahu’s head was severed from his body, the body, being un-
touched by the nectar, could not survive.
PURPORT
When the Personality of Godhead, Mohini-miirti, severed Rahu’s head
from his body, the head remained alive although the body died. Rahu
had been drinking nectar through his mouth, and before the nectar en-
tered his body, his head was cut off. Thus Rahu’s head remained alive
whereas the body died. This wonderful act performed by the Lord was
meant to show that nectar is miraculous ambrosia.
TEXT 26
शिरस्त्वमरतां नीतमजो त्रदमवीक्टपत्‌ |
©,
यस्तु पवंणि चन्दरा्कादमिधावति वैरधीः ।।२६॥
Siras tv amaratar nitam
ajo graham aciklpat
yas tu parvani candrarkav
abhidhavati vaira-dhih
Sirah—the head; tu—of course; amaratam—immortality; nitam—
having obtained; ajah—Lord Brahma; graham —as one of the planets;
aciklpat —recognized; yah—the same Rahu; tu —indeed; parvani—dur-
ing the periods of the full moon and dark moon; candra-arkau—both
the moon and the sun; abhidhavati—chases; vaira-dhih—because of
animosity.
TRANSLATION
Rahu’s head, however, having been touched by the nectar, be-
came immortal. Thus Lord Brahma accepted Rahu’s head as one of
the planets. Since Rahu is an eternal enemy of the moon and the
sun, he always tries to attack them on the nights of the full moon
and the dark moon.


--- Page 28 ---
22 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
PURPORT
Since Rahu had become immortal, Lord Brahma accepted him as one
of the grahas, or planets, like the moon and the sun. Rahu, however,
being an eternal enemy of the moon and sun, attacks them periodically
during the nights of the full moon and the dark moon.
TEXT 27
<
দীবসায়5ম্বন देवैर्भगवान्‌ रोकमावनः |
पञश्यतामसुरेन्दराणां स्वं रूपं जगृहे हरिः ॥२७॥
pita-praye 'mrte devair
bhagavan loka-bhavanah
pasyatam asurendranarn
svari ripari jagrhe harih
pita-praye—when almost finished being drunk; amrte —the nectar;
devaih—by the demigods; bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of God-
head as Mohini-miirti; loka-bhavanah—the maintainer and well-wisher
of the three worlds; pasyatam—in the presence of; asura-indranam—
all the demons, with their chiefs; svam—own; ripam—form; jagrhe—
manifested; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the best friend and
well-wisher of the three worlds. Thus when the demigods had
almost finished drinking the nectar, the Lord, in the presence of
all the demons, disclosed His original form.
TEXT 28
एवं सुरासुरगणाः FARIS
देत्वथंक्ममतयोऽपि फले विकल्पाः |
TAA सरगणाः कटमज्ञसणपु-
TGIF ATI देत्याः ॥२८॥


--- Page 29 ---
Text 28] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-mirti 23
evari surasura-ganah sama-desa-kala-
hetv-artha-karma-matayo ए phale vikalpah
tatramrtarin sura-ganah phalam anjasapur
yat-pada-parikaja-rajah-srayanan na daityah

evam—thus; sura—the demigods; asura-gandh—and the demons;
sama —equal; desa—place; kala—time; hetu—cause; artha—objective;
karma —activities; matayah—ambition; api—although one; phale—in
the result; vikalpah—not equal; tatra—thereupon; amrtam—nectar;
sura-ganah—the demigods; phalam —the result; aijasa—easily, totally
or directly; apuh—achieved; yat—because of; pada-parnkaja—of the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rajah—of the saffron
dust; Srayanat—because of receiving benedictions or taking shelter;
na—not; daityah—the demons.

TRANSLATION

The place, the time, the cause, the purpose, the activity and the
ambition were all the same for both the demigods and the demons,
but the demigods achieved one result and the demons another. Be-
cause the demigods are always under the shelter of the dust of the
Lord’s lotus feet, they could very easily drink the nectar and get its
result. The demons, however, not having sought shelter at the
lotus feet of the Lord, were unable to achieve the result they
desired.

PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (4.11) it is said, ye yatha mam prapadyante tams
tathaiva bhajamy aham: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
supreme judge who rewards or punishes different persons according to
their surrender unto His lotus feet. Therefore it can actually be seen that
although karmis and bhaktas may work in the same place, at the same
time, with the same energy and with the same ambition, they achieve
different results. The karmis transmigrate through different bodies in
the cycle of birth and death, sometimes going upward and sometimes
downward, thus suffering the results of their actions in the karma-
cakra, the cycle of birth and death. The devotees, however, because of
fully surrendering at the lotus feet of the Lord, are never baffled in their
attempts. Although externally they work almost like the karmis, the


--- Page 30 ---
24 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
devotees go back home, back to Godhead, and achieve success in every
effort. The demons or atheists have faith in their own endeavors, but al-
though they work very hard day and night, they cannot get any more
than their destiny. The devotees, however, can surpass the reactions of
karma and achieve wonderful results, even without effort. It is also said,
phalena pariciyate: one’s success or defeat in any activity is understood
by its result. There are many karmis in the dress of devotees, but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead can detect their purpose. The karmis
want to use the property of the Lord for their selfish sense gratification,
but a devotee endeavors to use the Lord’s property for God’s service.
Therefore a devotee is always distinct from the karmis, although the
karmis may dress like devotees. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (3.9),
yajaarthat karmano ’nyatra loko ‘yam karma-bandhanah. One who
works for Lord Visnu is free from this material world, and after giving
up his body he goes back home, back to Godhead. A karmi, however, al-
though externally working like a devotee, is entangled in his nondevo-
tional activity, and thus he suffers the tribulations of material existence.
Thus from the results achieved by the karmis and devotees, one can
understand the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
acts differently for the karmis and jianis than for the devotees. The
author of Sri Caitanya-caritamrta therefore says:
krsna-bhakta——niskama, ataeva ‘Santa’
bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kami—sakali ‘asanta’
The karmis who desire sense gratification, the janis who aspire for the
liberation of merging into the existence of the Supreme, and the yogis
who seek material success in mystic power are all restless, and ultimately
they are baffled. But the devotee, who does not expect any personal
benefit and whose only ambition is to spread the glories of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is blessed with all the auspicious results of
bhakti-yoga, without hard labor.
TEXT 29
यद्‌ युज्यतेऽसुदसुकर्ममनोदचोभि-
देहात्मजादिषु सृमिस्तद सत्‌ पृथ्त्वात्‌।


--- Page 31 ---
Text 29] The Lord Incarnates as Mohini-miirti 25
तैरेव सद्‌ भवति यत्‌ क्रियतेऽप्थक्त्वात्‌
सर्वस्य ag भवति मूलनिषेचनं यत्‌ NR]
yad yujyate ’su-vasu-karma-mano-vacobhir
dehatmajadisu nrbhis tad asat prthaktvat
tair eva sad bhavati yat kriyate ’prthaktvat
sarvasya tad bhavati miila-nisecanam yat
yat—whatever; yujyate—is performed; asu—for the protection of
one’s life; vasu—protection of wealth; karma—activities; manah—by
the acts of the mind; vacobhih—by the acts of words; deha-atma-ja-
adisu—for the sake of one’s personal body or family, etc., with reference
to the body; nrbhih—by the human beings; tat—that; asat—imperma-
nent, transient; prthaktvat—because of separation from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; taih—by the same activities; eva—indeed; sat
bhavati—becomes factual and permanent; yat—which; kriyate—is per-
formed; aprthaktvat—because of nonseparation; sarvasya—for every-
one; tat bhavati—becomes beneficial; mitla-nisecanam —exactly like
pouring water on the root of a tree; yat—which.
TRANSLATION
In human society there are various activities performed for the
protection of one’s wealth and life by one’s words, one’s mind and
one’s actions, but they are all performed for one’s personal or
extended sense gratification with reference to the body. All these
activities are baffled because of being separate from devotional
service. But when the same activities are performed for the
satisfaction of the Lord, the beneficial results are distributed to
everyone, just as water poured on the root of a tree is distributed
throughout the entire tree.
PURPORT
This is the distinction between materialistic activities and activities
performed in Krsna consciousness. The entire world is active, and this
includes the karmis, the janis, the yogis and the bhaktas. However, all
activities except those of the bhaktas, the devotees, end in bafflement and


--- Page 32 ---
26 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 9
a waste of time and energy. Moghdsa mogha-karmano mogha-jiana
vicetasah: if one is not a devotee, his hopes, his activities and his knowl-
edge are all baffled. A nondevotee works for his personal sense gratifica-
tion or for the sense gratification of his family, society, community or
nation, but because all such activities are separate from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, they are considered asat. The word asat means
bad or temporary, and sat means permanent and good. Activities per-
formed for the satisfaction of Krsna are permanent and good, but asat
activity, although sometimes celebrated as philanthropy, altruism,
nationalism, this “ism” or that “ism,” will never produce any perma-
nent result and is therefore all bad. Even a little work done in Krsna con-
sciousness is a permanent asset and is all-good because it is done for
Krsna, the all-good Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is everyone's
friend (50878170077 sarva-bhitanam). The Supreme Personality of God-
head is the only enjoyer and proprietor of everything (bhoktarar yajiia-
tapasarm sarva-loka-mahesvaram). Therefore any activity performed for
the Supreme Lord is permanent. As a result of such activities, the per-
former is immediately recognized. Na ca tasman manusyesu kascin me
priya-krttamah. Such a devotee, because of full knowledge of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is immediately transcendental, al-
though he may superficially appear to be engaged in materialistic ac-
tivities. The only distinction between materialistic activity and spiritual
activity is that material activity is performed only to satisfy one’s own
senses whereas spiritual activity is meant to satisfy the transcendental
senses of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By spiritual activity
everyone factually benefits, whereas by materialistic activity no one
benefits and instead one becomes entangled in the laws of karma.

Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Ninth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Lord Incarnates as
Mohini-mirti.”


--- Page 33 ---
CHAPTER TEN
The Battle Between
the Demigods and the Demons
The summary of Chapter Ten is as follows. Because of envy, the fight be-
tween the demons and the demigods continued. When the demigods were
almost defeated by demoniac maneuvers and became morose, Lord Visnu
appeared among them.

Both the demigods and the demons are expert in activities involving
the material energy, but the demigods are devotees of the Lord, whereas
the demons are just the opposite. The demigods and demons churned the
ocean of milk to get nectar from it, but the demons, not being devotees of
the Lord, could derive no profit. After feeding nectar to the demigods,
Lord Visnu returned to His abode on the back of Garuda, but the
demons, being most aggrieved, again declared war against the demigods.
Bali Maharaja, the son of Virocana, became the commander in chief of
the demons. In the beginning of the battle, the demigods prepared to
defeat the demons. Indra, King of heaven, fought with Bali, and other
demigods, like Vayu, Agni and Varuna, fought against other leaders of
the demons. In this fight the demons were defeated, and to save them-
selves from death they began to manifest many illusions through ma-
terial maneuvers, killing many soldiers on the side of the demigods. The
demigods, finding no other recourse, surrendered again to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Visnu, who then appeared and counteracted all
the illusions presented by the jugglery of the demons. Heroes among the
demons such as Kilanemi, Mali, Sumali and Malyavan fought the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and were all killed by the Lord. The
demigods were thus freed from all dangers.

TEXT 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति दानवदैतेया नाचिन्दमेतं॑चृप ।
युक्ताः कर्मणि यत्ता वासुदेवपराङघुखाः || १ ॥
27


--- Page 34 ---
28 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
Sri-Suka uvaca
iti danava-daiteya
navindann amrtari nrpa
yuktah karmani yattas ca
vasudeva-pararimukhah
sri-Sukah wvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; danava-
daiteyah—the asuras and the demons; na—not; avindan —achieved
(the desired result); amrtam —nectar; nrpa—O King; yuktah—all being
combined; karmani—in the churning; yattah—engaged with full atten-
tion and effort; ca—and; vasudeva—of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Krsna; paranmukhah—because of being nondevotees.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, the demons and Daityas all
engaged with full attention and effort in churning the ocean, but
because they were not devotees of Vasudeva, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Krsna, they were not able to drink the nectar.
TEXT 2
साषयित्वाखतं राजन्पाययित्वा खकान्सुरान्‌ ।
पश्यतां सवभूतानां ययो गरुडवाहनः ॥ २॥
sadhayitvamrtarn rajan
payayitva svakan suran
pasyatarn sarva-bhitanarm
yayau garuda-vahanah
sadhayitva—after executing; amrtam—generation of the nectar;
rajan—O King; payayitva—and feeding; svakan —to His own devotees;
suran—to the demigods; paSyatam—in the presence of; sarva-
bhuatanam —all living entities; yayau—went away; garuda-vahanah—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, carried by Garuda.
TRANSLATION
O King, after the Supreme Personality of Godhead had brought
to completion the affairs of churning the ocean and feeding the


--- Page 35 ---
Text 4] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 29
nectar to the demigods, who are His dear devotees, He left the
presence of them all and was carried by Garuda to His own abode.
TEXT 3
सपलानां ঘবামৃত্তি Te ते दितिनन्दनाः |
=
अमृष्यमाणा उत्पेतुर्देवान्प्रत्यु्यतायुधाः ।। २ ॥
1.1.111 1... 1...
drstva te diti-nandanah
amrsyamana utpetur
devan pratyudyatayudhah

sapatnanam—of their rivals, the demigods; param—the best;
rddhim—opulence; drstva—observing; te—all of them; diti-nan-
danah—the sons of Diti, the Daityas; amrsyamanah—being intolerant;
utpetuh—ran toward (just to create a disturbance); devan—the
demigods; pratyudyata-ayudhah—their weapons raised.

TRANSLATION

Seeing the victory of the demigods, the demons became in-
tolerant of their superior opulence. Thus they began to march
toward the demigods with raised weapons.

TEXT 4
ततः सुरगणाः सर्वे सुधया पीतयैधिताः ।
प्रतिसंयुयुधुः TEAR ॥ ४॥
tatah sura-ganah sarve
sudhaya pitayaidhitah
pratisarnyuyudhuh Sastrair
ndarayana-padasrayah

tatah—thereafter; sura-ganah—the demigods; sarve—all of them;
sudhaya—by the nectar; pitaya—which had been drunk; edhitah—
being enlivened by such drinking; pratisariyuwyudhuh—they


--- Page 36 ---
30 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
counterattacked the demons; Sastraih—by regular weapons; narayana-
pada-asrayah —their real weapon being shelter at the lotus feet of
Narayana.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, being enlivened because of drinking the nectar, the
demigods, who are always at the shelter of the lotus feet of
Narayana, used their various weapons to counterattack the demons
in a fighting spirit.
TEXT 5
|
तत्र देवासुरो নাম रणः परमदारुणः |
रोधस्युदन्वतो राजंस्तुश्चलो रोमहर्षणः ॥ ५॥
tatra daivasuro nama
ranah parama-darunah
rodhasy udanvato rajars
(1772010 roma-harsanah
tatra—there (at the beach of the ocean of milk); daiva—the
demigods; asurah—the demons; nama—as they are celebrated;
ranah—fighting; parama—very much; darunah—fierce; rodhasi—on
the beach of the sea; udanvatah—of the ocean of milk; rajan—O King;
tumulah—tumultuous; roma-harsanah —hair standing on the body.
TRANSLATION
O King, a fierce battle on the beach of the ocean of milk ensued
between the demigods and the demons. The fighting was so terri-
ble that simply hearing about it would make the hair on one’s body
stand on end.
TEXT 6
तत्रान्योन्यं सपलास्ते संरन्धमनसो रणे ।
समासायासिभिर्वाणैनिजय्लुविविधायुयैः . ॥ ६ ॥
tatranyonyarn sapatnas te
samrabdha-manaso rane


--- Page 37 ---
Text 7] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 31
samasadyasibhir banair
nijaghnur vividhayudhaih
tatra—thereupon; anyonyam—one another; sapatnah—all of them
becoming fighters; te—they; samrabdha—very angry; manasah—
within their minds; rane—in that battle; samasadya—getting the op-
portunity to fight between themselves; asibhih—with swords; banaih—
with arrows; nijaghnuh—began to beat one another; vividha-
ayudhaih—with varieties of weapons.
TRANSLATION
Both parties in that fight were extremely angry at heart, and in
enmity they beat one another with swords, arrows and varieties of
other weapons.
PURPORT
There are always two kinds of men in this universe, not only on this
planet but also in higher planetary systems. All the kings dominating
planets like the sun and moon also have enemies like Rahu. It is because
of occasional attacks upon the sun and moon by Rahu that eclipses take
place. The fighting between the demons and demigods is perpetual; it
cannot be stopped unless intelligent persons from both sides take to
Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 7
TEER भेरीडमरिणां মহান ।
दस्त्यश्वरथपत्तीनां नदतां निखनोऽमवत्‌ ৷ ৩॥
Sarikha-tiarya-mrdariganari
bheri-damarinarn mahan
hasty-asva-ratha-pattinarn
nadatarn nisvano ’bhavat
Sankha—of conchshells; tirya—of big bugles; mrdariganam—and of
drums; bheri—of bugles; damarinam—of kettledrums; mahan
—great and tumultuous; hasti—of elephants; asva—of horses;
ratha-pattinam— of fighters on chariots or on the ground; nadatam—all


--- Page 38 ---
32 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
of them making sounds together; nisvanah—a tumultuous sound;
abhavat—so became.
TRANSLATION
The sounds of the conchshells, bugles, drums, bheris and
damaris [kettledrums], as well as the sounds made by the
elephants, horses and soldiers, who were both on chariots and on
foot, were tumultuous.
TEXT 8
रथिनो रथिभिस्तत्र पत्तिभिः सह पत्तयः ।
Fafa: समसजन्त संयुगे ॥ ८ ॥
rathino rathibhis tatra
pattibhih saha pattayah
। haya hayair 20105 cebhaih
samasajjanta sarntyuge
rathinah —fighters on chariots; rathibhih —with the charioteers of the
enemy; tatra—in the battlefield; pattibhih—with the infantry soldiers;
saha—with; pattayah—the infantry of the enemy soldiers; hayah—the
horses; hayaih—with the enemy’s soldiers; ibhah—the soldiers fighting
on the backs of elephants; ca—and; ibhaih—with the enemy’s soldiers
on the backs of elephants; samasajjanta—began to fight together on an
equal level; sarmyuge—on the battlefield.
TRANSLATION
On that battlefield, the charioteers fought with the opposing
charioteers, the infantry soldiers with the opposing infantry, the
soldiers on horseback with the opposing soldiers on horseback,
and the soldiers on the backs of elephants with the enemy soldiers
on elephants. In this way, the fighting took place between equals.
TEXT 9
RY A
a: केचिदिभैः केचिदपरे युयुधुः खरैः ।
©
केचिद्‌ गौरघखे्छरदपिमिरिमिभैटा; ॥ ९ ॥


--- Page 39 ---
Text 12] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 33
ustraih kecid ibhaih kecid
apare yuyudhuh kharaih
kecid gaura-mukhair rksair
dvipibhir haribhir bhatah
ustraih—on the backs of camels; kecit—some persons; ibhaih—on the
backs of elephants; kecit—some persons; 00076 —others; yuyudhuh—
engaged in fighting; kharaih—on the backs of asses; kecit—some per-
sons; gaura-mukhaih—on white-faced monkeys; rksaih—on red-faced
monkeys; dvipibhih—on the backs of tigers; haribhih—on the backs of
lions; bhatah—all the soldiers engaged in this way.
TRANSLATION
Some soldiers fought on the backs of camels, some on the backs
of elephants, some on asses, some on white-faced and red-faced
monkeys, some on tigers and some on lions. In this way, they all
engaged in fighting.
TEXTS 10-12
Tk: कङ्क्कैरन्ये इ्येनमासैसिमिङ्गिलैः |
शरमैम॑हिवैः खडगैरगोडषैगंवयारुणैः 1 oll
शिवाभिराखुभिः posi dea FAL: |
बस्तैरेके FUER च gwd 122
Ey
अन्ये जलस्थलखगैः सन्तैविंकृतविग्रदैः |
सेनयोरुमयो राजन्विवि्यस्तेऽग्रतोऽग्रतः | १२॥
grdhraih karnkair bakair anye
Syena-bhasais timingilaih
Sarabhair mahisaih khadgair
go-vrsair gavayarunaih
siwabhir akhubhih kecit
krkalasaih sasair naraih


--- Page 40 ---
34 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
bastair eke krsna-sarair
hamsair anye ca sikaraih
anye jala-sthala-khagaih
sattvair vikrta-vigrahaih
senayor ubhayo rajan
viviSus te ‘grato ‘gratah
grdhraih—on the backs of vultures; karikaih—on the backs of eagles;
bakaih—on the backs of ducks; anye—others; syena—on the backs of
hawks; bhasaih—on the backs of bhasas; timirgilaih—on the backs of
big fish known as timirngilas; Sarabhaih—on the backs of sarabhas;
mahisaih—on the backs of buffalo; khadgaih—on the backs of
rhinoceroses; go—on the backs of cows; vrsaih—on the backs of bulls;
gavaya-arunaih—on the backs of gavayas and arunas; sivabhih—on
the backs of jackals; akhubhih—on the backs of big rats; kecit—some
persons; krkaldsaih—on the backs of big lizards; sasaih—on the backs
of big rabbits; naraih—on the backs of human beings; bastaih—on the
backs of goats; eke—some; krsna-saraih—on the backs of black deer;
harmsaih—on the backs of swans; anye—others; ca—also; sizkaraih—
on the backs of boars; anye—others; jala-sthala-khogaih —animals
moving on the water, on land and in the sky; sattvaih—Dby creatures
being used as vehicles; vikrta—are deformed; vigrahaih—by such
animals whose bodies; senayoh—of the two parties of soldiers;
ubhayoh—of both; rajan—O King; viviSuh—entered; te —all of them;
agratah agratah—going forward face to face.
TRANSLATION
O King, some soldiers fought on the backs of vultures, eagles,
ducks, hawks and bhasa birds. Some fought on the backs of
timingilas, which can devour huge whales, some on the backs of
sarabhas, and some on buffalo, rhinoceroses, cows, bulls, jungle
cows and arunas. Others fought on the backs of jackals, rats,
lizards, rabbits, human beings, goats, black deer, swans and boars.
In this way, mounted on animals of the water, land and sky, in-
cluding animals with deformed bodies, both armies faced each
other and went forward.


--- Page 41 ---
Text 15] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 35
TEXTS 13-15
fered राजन्नातपत्रैः सितामलैः |
1
महाधनेर्वजदण्डेव्यंजनेर्वादं चामरैः ॥१३॥
a
TGA EE: ।
Taf शदैः शस्त्रैः सुतरां खयरदिमभिः॥१४॥।
देवदानववीराणां ध्वजिन्यौ पाण्डुनन्दन |
रेजतु्ीरमालाभिर्यादसामिव सागरौ ॥१५॥
citra-dhvaja-patai rajann
atapatraih sitamalaih
maha-dhanair vajra-dandair
vyajanair barha-camaraih
vatoddhiitottarosnisair
arcirbhir varma-bhisanaih
sphuradbhir visadaih sastraih
sutarari sarya-rasmibhih
deva-danava-viranari
dhvajinyau pandu-nandana
rejatur vira-malabhir
yadasam iva sagarau
citra-dhvaja-pataih—with very nicely decorated flags and canopies;
rajan—O King; atapatraih—with umbrellas for protection from the
sunshine; sita-amalaih—most of them very clean and white; maha-
dhanaih—by very valuable; vajra-dandaih —with rods made of valuable
jewels and pearls; vyajanaih—with fans; barha-camaraih—with other
fans made of peacock feathers; vata-uddhita—flapping with the breeze;
uttara-usnisaih—with upper and lower garments; arcirbhih—by the
effulgence;  varma-bhasanaih—with ornaments and shields;
sphuradbhih—shining; viSadaih—sharp and clean; Sastraih—with
weapons; sutaram—excessively; siarya-rasmibhih—with the dazzling il-
lumination of the sunshine; deva-danava-viranam—of all the heroes of


--- Page 42 ---
36 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
the parties of both the demons and the demigods; dhvajinyau—the two
parties of soldiers, each one bearing his own flag; pandu-nandana—O
descendant of Maharaja Pandu; rejatuh—distinctly recognized; vira-
malabhih —with garlands used by heroes; yadasam —of aquatics; iva—
just like; sagarau—two oceans.
TRANSLATION
O King, O descendant of Maharaja Pandu, the soldiers of both
the demigods and demons were decorated by canopies, colorful
flags, and umbrellas with handles made of valuable jewels and
pearls. They were further decorated by fans made of peacock
feathers and by other fans also. The soldiers, their upper and
lower garments waving in the breeze, naturally looked very
beautiful, and in the light of the glittering sunshine their shields,
ornaments and sharp, clean weapons appeared dazzling. Thus the
ranks of soldiers seemed like two oceans with bands of aquatics.
TEXTS 16-18
EY
वेरोचनो बलिः संख्ये सोऽसुराणां चमूपतिः |
यानं वैहायसं नाम कामगं मयनिर्मितम्‌ ॥।१६॥
^= + 4 9,
सर्वसाङ्ग्रामिकोपेतं॑सर्वाधयंमयं प्रभो ।
ठे .
अग्रतक््यमनिर्ेश्यं  रञ्यमानमद्‌रं नम्‌ ।१५७॥
आस्थितस्तद्‌ विमानाग्नयं सर्वानोकाधिपैडतः।
वालच्यजनछतराग््यै रेजे चन्द्र॒ इवोदये ।॥१८॥
vairocano balih sarikhye
so ’suranam camii-patih
yanarm vathayasarin nama
kama-gari maya-nirmitam
sarva-sangramikopetari
sarvascaryamayari prabho
apratarkyam anirdesyari
dr§yamanam adarsanam


--- Page 43 ---
Text 24] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 37
asthitas tad vimanagryari
sarvanikadhipair vrtah
bala-vyajana-chatragryai
reje candra ivodaye
vairocanah—the son of Virocana; balih—Maharaja Bali; sarikhye—in
the battle; sah —he, so celebrated; asuranam—of the demons; cami-
patih—commander in chief; yanam—airplane; vaihayasam—called
Vaihayasa; nama—by the name; kama-gam—able to fly anywhere he
desired; maya-nirmitam—made by the demon Maya; sarva—all;
sarigramika-upetam—equipped with all kinds of weapons required for
fighting with all different types of enemies; sarva-ascarya-mayam—
wonderful in every respect; prabho—O King; apratarkyam—
inexplicable; anirdeSyam—indescribable; drsyamanam —sometimes
visible; adarsanam—sometimes not visible; dsthitah—being seated on
such; tat—that; vimana-agryam—excellent airplane; sarva—all;
anika-adhipaih—by the commanders of soldiers; vrtah—surrounded;
bala-vyajana-chatra-agryaih—protected by beautifully decorated
umbrellas and the best of camaras; reje—brilliantly situated; candrah—
the moon; iva—like; udaye—at the time of rising in the evening.
TRANSLATION
For that battle the most celebrated commander in chief,
Maharaja Bali, son of Virocana, was seated on a wonderful airplane
named Vaihayasa. O King, this beautifully decorated airplane had
been manufactured by the demon Maya and was equipped with
weapons for all types of combat. It was inconceivable and in-
describable. Indeed, it was sometimes visible and sometimes not.
Seated in this airplane under a beautiful protective umbrella and
being fanned by the best of camaras, Maharaja Bali, surrounded by
his captains and commanders, appeared just like the moon rising
in the evening, illuminating all directions.
TEXTS 19-24
- ©
तस्यासन्सर्वतो यानैथूथानां पतयोऽसुराः |
नश्चिः शम्बरो बाणो दिग्रित्तिरयोगुखः ॥ १९


--- Page 44 ---
Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
fp कालनाभोऽथ श्रहेतिर्हेतिरिल्वलः |
शङनिभ्रतसंतापो वच्र्दष्ो विरोचनः nen
हयग्रीवः शङ्कुशिराः कपिलो मेषदुन्दुमिः ।
LHRH दक्‌ TEAL निद्यम्मो जम्म उत्कलः ।॥२१।।
अरिष्टोऽरिनेमिश्च मयश्च त्रिपुराधिपः ।
अन्ये पौरोमकाठेया निवातकक्चादयः ॥।२२॥
अङन्धभागाः सोमस्य केवलं TAME: ।
सर्वं एते WER बहुशो निर्जितामराः ॥२३।।
सिंहनादान्विुशन्तः शङ्कान्द ष्यर्भहारयान्‌ |
TH सपलायुत्सिक्तान्क्ठयित्‌ कुपितो IT ॥२४।।

tasyasan sarvato yanair

yuthanam patayo ‘surah

namucih sambaro bano
vipracittir ayomukhah

dvimiardha kalanabho ‘tha
prahetir hetir ilvalah

Sakunir bhitasantapo

vajradaristro virocanah

hayagrivah sarikusirah

kapilo meghadundubhih

tarakas cakradrk sumbho
nisumbho jambha utkalah
aristo ’ristanemis ca

mayas ca tripuradhipah

anye pauloma-kaleya
nivatakavacadayah
alabdha-bhagah somasya

kevalam klesa-bhaginah


--- Page 45 ---
Text 24] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 39
sarva ete rana-mukhe
bahuso nirjitamarah
sirmha-nadan vimufcantah
sarkhan dadhmur maha-ravan
drstva sapatnan utsiktan
balabhit kupito bhrsam
tasya—of him (Maharaja Bali); dsan—situated; sarvatah—
all around; yadnaih—by different vehicles; yithanam—of the sol-
diers; patayah—the न commanders; = 0510727 --पला०ा18; namucih—
Namuci; Sambarah—Sambara; banah—Bana; vipracittih— Vipracitti;
ayomukhah— Ayomukha;  dvimardha—Dvimirdha; kalanabhah—
Kalanabha; atha—also; prahetih—Praheti; hetih—Heti; ilvalah—
Ilvala;  Sakunih—Sakuni;  bhitasantapah—Bhitasantapa;  vajra-
darstrah— Vajradamstra; virocanah—Virocana; hayagrivah—
Hayagriva;  sankusirah—Sankuéira;  kapilah—Kapila;  megha-
dundubhih—Meghadundubhi; tarakah—Taraka; cakradrk—Cakradrk;
Sumbhah—Sumbha;  niSumbhah—NiSumbha;  jambhah—Jambha;
uthalah—Utkala; aristah—Arista; aristanemih—Aristanemi; ca—
and; mayah ca—and Maya; tripuradhipah—Tripuradhipa; anye—
others; pauloma-kaleyah—the sons of Puloma and the Kaleyas;
nivatakavaca-adayah—Nivatakavaca and other demons; alabdha-
bhagah—all unable to take a share; somasya—of the nectar; kevalam—
merely; klesa-bhaginah—the demons took a share of the labor; sarve—
all of them; ete—the demons; rana-mukhe—in the front of the battle;
bahusah—by excessive strength; nirjita-amarah—being very
troublesome to the demigods; sirmha-nadan—vibrations like those of
lions; wvimusicantah—uttering; Sarnkhan—conchshells; dadhmuh—
blew; maha-ravan—making a tumultuous sound; drstva —after seeing;
sapatnan—their rivals; utsiktan—ferocious; balabhit— (Lord Indra)
being afraid of the strength; kupitah—having become angry; bhrsam—
extremely.
TRANSLATION
Surrounding Maharaja Bali on all sides were the commanders
and captains of the demons, sitting on their respective chariots.


--- Page 46 ---
40 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
Among them were the following demons: Namuci, Sambara, Bana,
Vipracitti, Ayomukha, Dvimiirdha, Kalanabha, Praheti, Het,
Ilvala, Sakuni, Bhutasantapa, Vajradamstra, Virocana, Hayagriva,
Sankusira, Kapila, Meghadundubhi, Taraka, Cakradrk, Sumbha,
NiSumbha, Jambha, Utkala, Arista, Aristanemi, Tripuradhipa,
Maya, the sons of Puloma, the Kialeyas and Nivatakavaca. All of
these demons had been deprived of their share of the nectar and
had shared merely in the labor of churning the ocean. Now, they
fought against the demigods, and to encourage their armies, they
made a tumultuous sound like the roaring of lions and blew loudly
on conchshells. Balahhit, Lord Indra, upon seeing this situation of
his ferocious rivals, became extremely angry.
TEXT 25
परावतं दिकरिणमारूढः शशमे ख्राट्‌ ।
यथा सवत्परखवणघ्ुद याद्रिमहपेतिः ॥२५॥
airavatari dik-karinam
aridhah susubhe sva-rat
yatha sravat-prasravanam
udayadrim ahar-patih

airavatarm— Airavata; dik-karinam—the great elephant who could go
everywhere; aridhah—mounted on; susubhe —became very beautiful to
see; sva-rat—Indra; yatha—just as; sravat—flowing; prasravanam—
waves of wine; udaya-adrim—on Udayagiri; ahah-patih—the sun.

TRANSLATION

Sitting on Airavata, an elephant who can go anywhere and who
holds water and wine in reserve for showering, Lord Indra looked
just like the sun rising from Udayagiri, where there are reservoirs
of water.

PURPORT

On the top of the mountain called Udayagiri are large lakes from

which water continuously pours in waterfalls. Similarly, Indra’s carrier,


--- Page 47 ---
Text 27] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 41
Airavata, holds water and wine in reserve and showers it in the direction
of Lord Indra. Thus Indra, King of heaven, sitting on the back of
Airavata, appeared like the brilliant sun rising above Udayagiri.
TEXT 26
¢
तस्थासन्सवेतो देवा, नानावाहध्वजायुधा; |
लोकपालाः सदगणे्ायवभ्निवरुणादयः ॥।२६॥
tasyasan sarvato deva
nana-vaha-dhvajayudhah
lokapalah saha-ganair
vayv-agni-varunadayah
tasya—of Lord Indra; dsan—situated; sarvatah—all around;
devah—all the demigods; nana-vaha—with varieties of carriers;
dhvaja-ayudhah—and with flags and weapons; loka-palah—all the
chiefs of various higher planetary systems; saha —with; ganaih—their
associates; vayu—the demigod controlling air; agni—the demigod con-
trolling fire; varuna—the demigod controlling water; adayah—all of
them surrounding Lord Indra.
TRANSLATION
Surrounding Lord Indra, King of heaven, were the demigods,
seated on various types of vehicles and decorated with flags and
weapons. Present among them were Vayu, Agni, Varuna and other
rulers of various planets, along with their associates.
TEXT 27
तेऽन्योन्यमभिसंछृत्य क्षिपन्तो मम॑मि्मिथः |
आहयन्तो विदचन्तोऽग्रेयुयुधुदंन्दयोधिनः॥२५७॥
te ‘nyonyam abhisamsrtya
ksipanto marmabhir mithah
ahvayanto visanto ‘gre
yuyudhur dvandva-yodhinah


--- Page 48 ---
42 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
te—all of them (the demigods and the demons); anyonyam—one
another; abhisarisrtya—having come forward face to face; ksipantah—
chastising one another; marmabhih mithah—with much pain to the
cores of the hearts of one another; ahvayantah—addressing one
another; viSantah—having entered the battlefield; agre—in front;
yuyudhuh—fought; dvandva-yodhinah—two combatants chose each
other.
TRANSLATION
The demigods and demons came before each other and
reproached one another with words piercing to the heart. Then
they drew near and began fighting face to face in pairs.
TEXT 28
युयोध बलिरिन्द्रेण तारकेण गुहोऽस्यत |
वरुणो हेतिनायुष्यन्मित्रो राजन्प्रहेतिना HR
yuyodha balir indrena
tarakena guho ’syata
varuno hetinayudhyan
mitro rajan prahetina
yuyodha—fought; balih—Maharaja Bali; indrena—with King Indra;
tarakena —with Taraka; guhah—Karttikeya; asyata—engaged in fight-
ing; varunah—the demigod Varuna; hetina—with Heti; ayudhyat—
fought one another; mitrah—the demigod Mitra; rajan—O King;
prahetina—with Praheti.
TRANSLATION
O King, Maharaja Bali fought with Indra, Karttikeya with
Taraka, Varuna with Heti, and Mitra with Praheti.
TEXT 29
a
यमस्तु कालनाभेन विश्वकर्मां मयेन वै |
=
शम्बरो युयुधे त्वष्ट्रा सवित्रा तु {asa ane


--- Page 49 ---
Text 31] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 43
yamas tu kalanabhena
visvakarma mayena vai
Ssambaro yuyudhe tvastra
savitra tu virocanah
yamah—Yamaraja; tu—indeed; kalanabhena—with Kalanabha;
viSvakarma—Visvakarma; mayena—with == Maya; vai—indeed;
Sambarah—Sambara;  yuyudhe—fought; tvastra—with  Tvasta;
savitra—with the sun-god; tu—indeed; virocanah—the demon
Virocana.
TRANSLATION
Yamaraja fought with Kalanabha, Viévakarma with Maya Danava,
Tvasta with Sambara, and the sun-god with Virocana.
TEXTS 30-31
९
अपराजितेन  नचिरश्विनी दृषपवंणा ।
~~ = চ
छर्यो बलिसुतरदेवो बाणज्ये्टः शतेन च ॥२०॥
राहुणा च तथा सोमः पुलोश्ना युयुधेऽनिलः |
निश्युम्मजम्मयोर्देवी मद्रकाटी तरखिनी 13211
aparajitena namucir
asvinau vrsaparvand
siaryo bali-sutair devo
bana-jyesthaih 5०1९710 ca
rahuna ca tatha somah
pulomna yuyudhe ’nilah
nisumbha-sumbhayor devi
bhadrakali tarasvini
apardjitena —with the demigod Aparijita; namucih—the demon
Namuci; asvinau—the Asvini brothers; vrsaparvana—with the demon
Vrsaparva; siryah—the sun-god; bali-sutaih—with the sons of Bali;
devah—the god; bana-jyesthaih—the chief of whom is Bana; 501९712 --
numbering one hundred; ca—and; rahuna—by Rahu; ca—also;


--- Page 50 ---
44 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
tatha—as well as; somah—the moon-god; pulomna—Puloma;
yuyudhe —fought; anilah—the demigod Anila, who controls air;
niSumbha—the demon NiSumbha; sumbhayoh—with Sumbha; devi—
the goddess Durga; bhadrakali—Bhadra Kali; tarasvini—extremely
powerful.
TRANSLATION
The demigod Aparijita fought with Namuci, and the two Asvini-
kumara brothers fought with Vrsaparva. The sun-god fought with
the one hundred sons of Maharaja Bali, headed by Bana, and the
moon-god fought with Rahu. The demigod controlling air fought
with Puloma, and Sumbha and Nisumbha fought the supremely
powerful material energy, Durgadevi, who is called Bhadra Kali.
TEXTS 32-34
[HY जम्भेन मदिषेण विमावसुः |
© =,
इल्दटः सह वातापित्रंह्यपुत्रेररिन्दम TER
९
कामदेवेन TN उत्कलो मातृभिः सह |
= aD
दृदस्पतिशोशनमा नरकेण _ शनेधरः 133
চ ১
मरुतो निवातकवचेः FATE ISAT |
न्द -
विश्वेदेवास्तु पौलोमे रुद्राः करोधवदौः सह ॥२४॥
vrsakapis tu jambhena
mahisena vibhavasuh
ilvalah saha vatapir
brahma-putrair arindama
kamadevena durmarsa
utkalo matrbhih saha
brhaspatis cosanasa
narakena sanaiscarah
maruto nivatakavacaih
kaleyair vasavo 'marah


--- Page 51 ---
Text 35] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 45
visvedevds tu paulomai
rudrah krodhavasaih saha
vrsakapih—Lord Siva; tu—indeed; jambhena—with  Jambha;
mahisena—with Mahisasura; vibhavasuh—the fire-god; ilvalah—the
demon Ilvala; saha vatapih—with his brother, Vatapi; brahma-
putraih—with the sons of Brahma, such as Vasistha; arim-dama—O
Maharaja Pariksit, suppressor of enemies; kamadevena—with
Kamadeva; durmarsah—Durmarsa; utkalah—the demon Utkala;
matrbhih saha—with the demigoddesses known as the Matrkas;
brhaspatih—the demigod Brhaspati; ca—and; usanasa—with
Sukracarya; narakena—with the demon known as Naraka;
Sanaiscarah—the demigod Sani, or Saturn; marutah—the demigods of
air; nivatakavacaih—with the demon Nivatakavaca; kaleyaih—with the
Kalakeyas; vasavah amarah—the Vasus fought; visvedevah—the
Viévedeva demigods; tu—indeed; paulomaih—with the Paulomas;
rudrah—the eleven Rudras; krodhavasaih saha—with the Krodhavasa
demons.
TRANSLATION
_ 0 Maharaja Pariksit, suppressor of enemies [Arindama], Lord
Siva fought with Jambha, and Vibhavasu fought with Mahisasura.
Ilvala, along with his brother Vatapi, fought the sons of Lord
Brahma. Durmarsa fought with Cupid, the demon Utkala with the
Matrka demigoddesses, Brhaspati with Sukracarya, and Sanai$cara
[Saturn] with Narakasura. The Maruts fought Nivatakavaca, the
Vasus fought the Kalakeya demons, the Visvedeva demigods
fought the Pauloma demons, and the Rudras fought the
Krodhavasa demons, who were victims of anger.
TEXT 35
त॒ एवमाजावसुराः सुरेन्द्रा
हन्देन संहत्य च युष्यमानाः।
अन्योन्यमासाद्य निजघ्नुरोजसा
जिगीषवस्तीक््णश्चरासितोमरेः ॥३५॥


--- Page 52 ---
46 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
ta evam ajav asurah surendra
dvandvena sarihatya ca yudhyamanah
anyonyam asadya nijaghnur ojasa
Jigisavas tiksna-sarasi-tomaraih
te—all of them; evam—in this way; ajau—on the battlefield;
asurah—the demons; sura-indrah—and the demigods; dvandvena—
two by two; sarhatya—mixing together; ca—and; yudhyamanah—
engaged in fighting; anyonyam —with one another; asadya—approach-
ing; nijaghnuh—slashed with weapons and killed; ojasa—with great
strength; jigisavah—everyone desiring victory; tiksna—sharp; sara—
with arrows; asi—with swords; tomaraih—with lances.
TRANSLATION
All of these demigods and demons assembled on the battlefield
with a fighting spirit and attacked one another with great strength.
All of them desiring victory, they fought in pairs, hitting one
another severely with sharpened arrows, swords and lances.
TEXT 36
a
अखण्डिभिशक्रगदर्धिपटिशेः स
शक्तयुल्ुकैः TERER |
EY 2
নিষ্ভিহামন্ঃ परिवैः agg
सभिन्दिपारेथ शिरांसि चिच्छिदुः igs
bhusundibhis cakra-gadarsti-pattisaih
Sakty-ulmukaih prasa-parasvadhair api
nistrim$a-bhallaih parighaih samudgaraih
sabhindipalais ca sirarsi cicchiduh
bhusundibhih—with weapons called bhusundi; cakra—with discs;
gada—with clubs; rsti—with the weapons called rsti; pattiSaih —with
the weapons called pattisa; sakti—with the Sakti weapons; ulmukaih—
with the weapons called ulmukas; prasa—with the prasa weapons;
parasvadhaih—with the weapons called parasvadha; api—also;


--- Page 53 ---
Text 37] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 47
nistrimsa —with nistrimsas; bhallaih—with lances; parighaih —with the
weapons named parighas; sa-mudgaraih—with the weapons known as
mudgara; sa-bhindipalaih—with the bhindipala weapons; ca—also;
siramsi—heads; cicchiduh—cut off.
TRANSLATION
They severed one another’s heads, using weapons like
bhusundis, cakras, clubs, rstis, pattisas, Saktis, ulmukas, prasas,
parasvadhas, nistrithéas, lances, parighas, mudgaras and
bhindipalas.
TEXT 37
गजास्तुरङ्खाः सरथाः पदातयः
सारोहवाहा विविधा विखण्डिताः ।
=
निकृत्तबाहूरुशिरोधराङ्घय-
च्छिलध्वजेष्वासतदुत्रभूषणाः ॥२५७॥
gajas turangah sarathah padatayah
saroha-vaha vividha vikhanditah
nikrtta-bahitru-sirodharanghrayas
chinna-dhvajesvasa-tanutra-bhasanah
gajah—elephants; turangah—horses; sa-rathah—with chariots;
padatayah—infantry soldiers; saroha-vahah—carriers with the riders;
vividhah —varieties; vikhanditah—cut to pieces; nikrtta-bahu—cut off
arms; aru—thighs; Sirodhara—necks; arighrayah—legs; chinna—cut
up; dhvaja—Aflags; isvasa—bows; tanutra—armor; bhisanah—orna-
ments.
TRANSLATION
The elephants, horses, chariots, charioteers, infantry soldiers
and various kinds of carriers, along with their riders, were slashed
to pieces. The arms, thighs, necks and legs of the soldiers were
severed, and their flags, bows, armor and ornaments were torn
apart.


--- Page 54 ---
48 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
TEXT 38
तेषां पदाषातरथाङ्गचूणिता-
TANASE उत्थितस्तद्‌॥ |
रेणदिंशः खं दमि च छादयन्‌
न्यवतेतासुकसुतिमिः परिष्ठतात्‌॥॥ २८॥
1९567 padaghata-rathanga-carnitad
ayodhanad ulbana utthitas tada
renur disah kha dyumanim ca chadayan
nyavartatasrk-srutibhih pariplutat

tesam—of all the people engaged on the battlefield; padaghata —be-
cause of beating on the ground by the legs of the demons and demigods;
ratha-ariga—and by the wheels of the chariots; cirnitat—which was
made into pieces of dust; ayodhandt—from the battlefield; ulbanah—
very forceful; utthitah—rising; tada—at that time; renuh—the dust
particles; disSah—all directions; kham—outer space; dyumanim—up to
the sun; ca—also; chadayan—covering all of space up to that;
nyavartata—dropped floating in the air; asrk—of blood; srutibhih—by
particles; pariplutat—because of being widely sprinkled.

TRANSLATION

Because of the impact on the ground of the legs of the demons
and demigods and the wheels of the chariots, particles of dust flew
violently into the sky and made a dust cloud that covered all direc-
tions of outer space, as far as the sun. But when the particles of
dust were followed by drops of blood being sprinkled all over
space, the dust cloud could no longer float in the sky.

PURPORT

The cloud of dust covered the entire horizon, but when drops of blood
sprayed up as far as the sun, the dust cloud could no longer float in the
sky. A point to be observed here is that although the blood is stated to
have reached the sun, it is not said to have reached the moon. Ap-
parently, therefore, as stated elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam, the sun,


--- Page 55 ---
Text 39] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 49
not the moon, is the planet nearest the earth. We have already discussed
this point in many places. The sun is first, then the moon, then Mars,
Jupiter and so on. The sun is supposed to be 93,000,000 miles above the
surface of the earth, and from the Srimad-Bhagavatam we understand
that the moon is 1,600,000 miles above the sun. Therefore the distance
between the earth and the moon would be about 95,000,000 miles. So if a
space capsule were traveling at the speed of 18,000 miles per hour, how
could it reach the moon in four days? At that speed, going to the moon
would take at least seven months. That a space capsule on a moon excur-
sion has reached the moon in four days is therefore impossible.
TEXT 39
EN
frifiregatsdegee: ध
संरम्मटग्मिः परिद्टदच्छदे; |
EY EY
WEG: TA: सहायुधैः
९
सा AEGAN भूः करभोरुभिवंमौ ।२९॥
sirobhir uddhiita-kirita-kundalaih
sarnrambha-drgbhih paridasta-dacchadaih
maha-bhujaih sabharanaih sahayudhaih
sa prastrta bhih karabhorubhir babhau
sirobhih—by the heads; uddhiita—separated, scattered from; kirita—
having their helmets; kundalaih—and earrings; sarnrambha-drgbhih—
eyes staring in anger (although the heads were severed from their
bodies); paridasta—having been bitten by the teeth; dacchadaih —the
lips; maha-bhujaih—with big arms; sa-abharanaih—decorated with or-
naments; saha-ayudhaih—and with weapons in their hands, although
the hands were severed; sa—that battlefield; prastrta—scattered;
bhith —the warfield; karabha-irubhih—and with thighs and legs resem-
bling the trunks of elephants; babhau—it so became.
TRANSLATION
In the course of the battle, the warfield became strewn with the
severed heads of heroes, their eyes still staring and their teeth still


--- Page 56 ---
50 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
pressed against their lips in anger. Helmets and earrings were scat-
tered from these severed heads. Similarly, many arms, decorated
with ornaments and clutching various weapons, were strewn here
and there, as were many legs and thighs, which resembled the
trunks of elephants.
TEXT 40
कबन्धास्तत्र चोत्पेतुः पतितखशिरोऽक्षिभिः।
उद्यतायुषदोरदण्डेराधावन्तो भटान्‌ गधे ॥४०॥
kabandhas tatra cotpetuh
patita-sva-siro-ksibhih
udyatayudha-dordandair
adhavanto bhatan mrdhe
kabandhah—trunks (bodies without heads); tatra—there (on the
battlefield); ca—also; utpetuh—generated; patita—fallen; sva-sirah-
aksibhih—by the eyes in one’s head; udyata—raised; ayudha—
equipped with weapons; dordandaih—the arms of whom; adhavan-
tah—rushing toward; bhatan—the soldiers; mrdhe—on the battlefield.
TRANSLATION ,
Many headless trunks were generated on that battlefield. With
weapons in their arms, those ghostly trunks, which could see with
the eyes in the fallen heads, attacked the enemy soldiers.
PURPORT
It appears that the heroes who died on the battlefield immediately be-
came ghosts, and although their heads had been severed from their
bodies, new trunks were generated, and these new trunks, seeing with
the eyes in the severed heads, began to attack the enemy. In other words,
many ghosts were generated to join the fight, and thus new trunks ap-
peared on the battlefield.
TEXT 41
बरिर्मदेन्द्रं दश्भिचिभिरेरावतं शरेः ।
3
चतुर्भिश्चतुरो गटानेकेनारोटाच्छंयत्‌ 1182


--- Page 57 ---
Text 42] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 51
balir mahendram dasabhis
tribhir airavatam saraih
caturbhis caturo vahan
ekenaroham arcchayat
balih—Maharaja Bali; maha-indram—the King of heaven;
dasabhih—with ten; tribhih —with three; airdvatam—Airavata, carry-
ing Indra; Saraih—Dby arrows; caturbhih—by four arrows; caturah—the
four; vahan—mounted soldiers; ekena—by one; aroham—the driver of
the elephants; arcchayat—attacked.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Bali then attacked Indra with ten arrows and attacked
Airavata, Indra’s carrier elephant, with three arrows. With four ar-
rows he attacked the four horsemen guarding Airavata’s legs, and
with one arrow he attacked the driver of the elephant.
PURPORT
The word vahan refers to the soldiers on horseback who protected the
legs of the carrier elephants. According to the system of military ar-
rangement, the legs of the elephant bearing the commander were also
protected.
TEXT 42
स तानापततः शक्रस्तावद्भिः शीघविकमः।
aC
चिच्छेद निशितेभटैरसम्धासान्दसन्निव 1s)
sa tan apatatah sakras
tavadbhih Sighra-vikramah
ciccheda nisitair bhallair
asampraptan hasann iva
sah—he (Indra); tan—arrows; apatatah—while moving toward
him and falling down; sakrah—Indra; tavadbhih—immediately; sighra-
vikramah—was practiced to oppress very soon; ciccheda—cut to pieces;
nisitaih—very sharp; bhallaih—with another type of arrow;


--- Page 58 ---
52 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
asampraptan—the enemy’s arrows not being received; hasan iva—as if
smiling.
TRANSLATION
Before Bali Maharaja’s arrows could reach him, Indra, King of
heaven, who is expert in dealing with arrows, smiled and coun-
teracted the arrows with arrows of another type, known as bhalla,
which were extremely sharp.
TEXT 43
° ६५
तस्थ कर्मोत्तमं वीक्ष्य दुमषैः शक्तिमाददे ।
तां ज्वलन्तीं মহীক্কামা दस्तस्थामन्ठिनद्धरिः॥४२॥
tasya karmottamam viksya
durmarsah saktim adade
tar jvalantirn maholkabham
hasta-stham acchinad dharih
tasya—of King Indra; karma-uttamam—the very expert service in
military art; viksya—after observing; durmarsah—being in a very
angry mood; Saktim—the Sakti weapon; adade—took up; tam—that
weapon; jvalantim—blazing fire; maha-ulka-abham—appearing like a
great firebrand; hasta-stham —while still in the hand of Bali; acchinat—
cut to pieces; harih—Indra.
TRANSLATION
When Bali Maharaja saw the expert military activities of Indra,
he could not restrain his anger. Thus he took up another weapon,
known as Sakti, which blazed like a great firebrand. But Indra cut
that weapon to pieces while it was still in Bali’s hand.
TEXT 44
ततः शलं॑ततः प्रासं ATER: ।
यद्‌ यच्छस्रं समाद्यात्सवं तदच्छिनद्‌ fag: vs


--- Page 59 ---
Text 45] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 53
tatah Salar tatah prasam
tatas tomaram rstayah
yad yac chastrarm samadadyat
sarvam tad acchinad vibhuh
tatah—thereafter; Sialam—lance; tatah—thereafter; prasam—the
prasa weapon; tatah—thereafter; tomaram—the tomara weapon;
rstayah—the rsti weapons; yat yat—whatever and whichever;
Sastram —weapon; samadadyat—Bali Maharaja tried to use; sarvam—
all of them; tat—those same weapons; acchinat—cut to pieces; vibhuh—
the great Indra.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, one by one, Bali Maharaja used a lance, prasa,
tomara, rstis and other weapons, but whatever weapons he took
up, Indra immediately cut them to pieces.
TEXT 45
ससर्जाथासुरीं मायामन्तर्घानगतोऽसुरः |
a =
ततः प्रादुरभूच्छंलः सुरानीकोपरि प्रभो ॥४५॥
sasarjathasurirn mayam
antardhana-gato surah
tatah pradurabhiic chailah
surantkopari prabho
sasarja—released; atha—now; asurim—demoniac; mayam—illu-
sion; antardhana—out of vision; gatah—having gone; asurah—Bali
Maharaja; tatah—thereafter; pradurabhiit—there appeared; sailah—a
big mountain; sura-anika-upari—above the heads of the soldiers of the
demigods; prabho—O my lord.
TRANSLATION
My dear King, Bali Maharaja then disappeared and resorted to
demoniac illusions. A giant mountain, generated from illusion,
then appeared above the heads of the demigod soldiers.


--- Page 60 ---
54 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
TEXT 46
ततो निपेतुस्तरवो दद्यमाना হনান্নিনা।
शिलाः सटङ्कशिखराऽचूणयन्त्यो द्विषद्रलम्‌।।४६॥
tato nipetus taravo
dahyamana davagnina
Silah satarika-sikharas
curnayantyo dvisad-balam
tatah—from that great mountain; nipetuh—began to fall; taravah—
large trees; dahyamanah—blazing in fire; dava-agnina—by the forest
fire; Silah—and stones; sa-tarika-sikharah—having edges with points as
sharp as stone picks; cirnayantyah—smashing; dvisat-balam—the
strength of the enemies.
TRANSLATION
From that mountain fell trees blazing in a forest fire. Chips of
stone, with sharp edges like picks, also fell and smashed the heads
of the demigod soldiers.
TEXT 47
महोरगाः सथत्पेतुद॑न्द॒श्चकाः ATH |
< =
सिंहव्याघ्रवराहाश्च मदयन्तो महागजाः ॥४७॥
mahoragah samutpetur
dandasitkah savrscikah
simha-vyaghra-varahas ca
mardayanto maha-gajah
maha-uragah—big serpents; samutpetuh—fell upon them;
dandasikah—other poisonous animals and insects; sa-vrScikah—with
scorpions; simha—lions; vydghra—tigers; varahah ca—and forest
boars; mardayantah—smashing; maha-gajah—great elephants.


--- Page 61 ---
Text 49] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 55
TRANSLATION
Scorpions, large snakes and many other poisonous animals, as
well as lions, tigers, boars and great elephants, all began falling
upon the demigod soldiers, crushing everything.
TEXT 48
यातुधान्यश्च शतश्चः Yee विवाससः ।
iN
छिन्धि भिन्धीति वादिन्यस्तथा रक्षोगणाः प्रभो ॥ ve 1;
yatudhanyas ca satasah
sitla-hasta vivasasah
chindhi bhindhiti vadinyas
tatha rakso-ganah prabho
yatudhanyah—carnivorous female demons; ca—and; SataSah—
hundreds upon hundreds; $ila-hastah—every one of them with a tri-
dent in hand; vivasasah—completely naked; chindhi—cut to pieces;
bhindhi—pierce; iti—thus; vadinyah—talking; tatha—in that way;
raksah-ganah—a band of Riksasas (a type of demon); prabho—O my
King.
TRANSLATION
O my King, many hundreds of male and female carnivorous
demons, completely naked and carrying tridents in their hands,
then appeared, crying the slogans ‘“‘Cut them to pieces! Pierce
them!”
TEXT 49
ततो महाघना व्योन्नि गम्भीरपरुषखना; |
IFFT: स्तनयितवः ॥४९॥
tato maha-ghana vyomni
gambhira-parusa-svanah
angaran mumucur vatair
ahatah stanayitnavah


--- Page 62 ---
56 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
tatah—thereafter; maha-ghanah—big clouds; vyomni—in the sky;
gambhira-parusa-svanah— making very deep rumbling sounds;
angaran—embers; mumucuh—released; vataih—by the strong winds;
ahatah—harassed; stanayitnavah—with the sound of thunder.
TRANSLATION
Fierce clouds, harassed by strong winds, then appeared in the
sky. Rumbling very gravely with the sound of thunder, they began
to shower live coals.
TEXT 50
खषटो दैत्येन सुमहान्वष्धिः श्वसनसारथिः |
सांवतैक इवात्युग्रो विवुधष्यजिनीमधाक्‌ kel
srsto daityena sumahan
vahnih $vasana-sarathih
sariwartaka ivatyugro
vibudha-dhvajinim adhak
srstah—created; daityena—by the demon (Bali Maharaja); su-
mahan—very great, devastating; vahnih—a fire; Svasana-sarathih—
being carried by the blasting wind; sarmvartakah—the fire named
Samvartaka, which appears during the time of dissolution; iva—just
like; ati—very much; ugrah—terrible; vibudha—of the demigods;
dhvajinim—the soldiers; adhak—burned to ashes.
TRANSLATION
A great devastating fire created by Bali Maharaja began burning
all the soldiers of the demigods. This fire, accompanied by blasting
winds, seemed as terrible as the Sarmvartaka fire, which appears at
the time of dissolution.
TEXT 51
ततः gx उद्वेलः सर्वतः TACHA |
EY
प्रचण्डवातिरुदूततरङ्गावत॑मीषणः ॥५१॥


--- Page 63 ---
Text 52] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 57
tatah samudra udvelah
sarvatah pratyadrsyata
pracanda-vdtair uddhiita-
tarangavarta-bhisanah
tatah—thereafter; samudrah—the sea; udvelah—being agitated;
sarvatah—everywhere; pratyadrsyata—appeared before everyone's
vision; pracanda—fierce; vataih—by the winds; uddhita—agitated;
tarariga—of the waves; avarta—whirling water; bhisanah—ferocious.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, whirlpools and sea waves, agitated by fierce blasts of
wind, appeared everywhere, before everyone’s vision, in a furious
flood.
TEXT 52
एवं दैत्यैमेहामायैरलक्ष्यगतिमीरणे |
सृज्यमानासु मायासु विषेदुः सुरसैनिकाः ॥५२॥
০৮৫? daityair maha-mayair
alaksya-gatibhi rane
srjyamandsu mayasu
viseduh sura-sainikah
evam—thus; daityaih—by the demons; maha-mayaih—who were
expert in creating illusions; alaksya-gatibhih—but invisible; rane—in
the fight; srjyamanasu mayasu—because of the creation of such an il-
lusory atmosphere; viseduh—became morose; sura-sainikah—the
soldiers of the demigods.
TRANSLATION
While this magical atmosphere in the fight was being created by
the invisible demons, who were expert in such illusions, the
soldiers of the demigods became morose.


--- Page 64 ---
58 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
TEXT 53
a तत्प्रतिविधिं यत्र विदुरिन्द्रादयो तष ।
চ্মাবঃ प्रादुरभूत्‌ तत्र भगवान्विश्वभावनः ।॥५३॥
na tat-pratividhim yatra
vidur indradayo nrpa
dhyatah pradurabhiit tatra
bhagavan visva-bhavanah
na—not; tat-pratividhim—the counteraction of such an illusory at-
mosphere; yatra —wherein; viduh—could understand; indra-adayah—
the demigods, headed by Indra; nrpa—O King; dhyatah—being medi-
tated upon; pradurabhiit—appeared there; tatra—in that place;
bhagavan—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; visva-bhdavanah —the
creator of the universe.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the demigods could find no way to counteract the
activities of the demons, they wholeheartedly meditated upon the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the creator of the universe, who
then immediately appeared.
TEXT 54
ततः GUESS TS:
पिशङ्गवासा नवकञ्ञलोचनः |
अरर्यता्टायुघवाहुरुह्छस-
च्टरीकोस्तुमानघ्ये किरीरकङ्ण्डलः ॥ «৬
tatah suparnarisa-krtarighri-pallavah
pisariga-vasa nava-kanja-locanah
adrsyatastayudha-bahur ullasac-
chri-kaustubhanarghya-kirita-kundalah
tatah—thereafter; suparna-amsa-krta-anghri-pallavah—the  Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, whose lotus feet spread over the two


--- Page 65 ---
Text 55] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 59
shoulders of Garuda; pisariga-vaisah—whose dress is yellow; nava-
kanja-locanah—and whose eyes are just like the petals of a newly
blossomed lotus; adr§yata—became visible (in the presence of the
demigods); asta-dyudha—equipped with eight kinds of weapons;
bahuh—arms; ullasat—brilliantly exhibiting; sri—the goddess of for-
tune; kaustubha—the Kaustubha gem; anarghya—of incalculable
value; kirita—helmet; kundalah —having earrings.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose eyes resemble the
petals of a newly blossomed lotus, sat on the back of Garuda,
spreading His lotus feet over Garuda’s shoulders. Dressed in
yellow, decorated by the Kaustubha gem and the goddess of for-
tune, and wearing an invaluable helmet and earrings, the Supreme
Lord, holding various weapons in His eight hands, became visible
to the demigods.
TEXT 55
तखिन्प्रविषटेऽसुरङ्ूटक्मजा
माया RAT महीयसः |
स्वो यथा हि प्रतिबोध आगते
२ iN
हरिस्यरतिः सवंविपद्िमोक्षणम्‌ ॥५५॥
tasmin praviste ’sura-kita-karmaja
maya vinesur mahina mahiyasah
svapno yatha hi pratibodha agate
hari-smrtih sarva-vipad-vimoksanam
tasmin praviste—upon the entrance of the Supreme Personality of

Godhead; asura—of the demons; kita-karma-ja—because of the il-
lusory, magical activities; maya—the false manifestations; vinesuh—
were immediately curbed; mahina—by the superior power;
mahtyasah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater
than the greatest; svapnah—dreams; yatha—as; hi—indeed;
pratibodhe—when awakening; dgate—has arrived; hari-smrtih—
remembrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-vipat—of


--- Page 66 ---
60 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
all kinds of dangerous situations; vimoksanam—immediately van-
quishes.
TRANSLATION
As the dangers of a dream cease when the dreamer awakens, the
illusions created by the jugglery of the demons were vanquished
by the transcendental prowess of the Supreme Personality of God-
head as soon as He entered the battlefield. Indeed, simply by
remembrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one be-
comes free from all dangers.
TEXT 56
TY AY गरुडवाहमिमारिवाद
आविध्य शूलमहिनोदथ कारनेमिः।
तदीया गरुडमूर्थि पतद्‌ TAT
तेनाहनन्नृप सवाहमरिं sad: ॥५६॥
drstva mrdhe garuda-vaham ibhari-vaha
avidhya salam ahinod atha kalanemih
tal lilaya garuda-mardhni patad grhitva
tenahanan nrpa savaham ari tryadhisah
drstva—seeing; mrdhe—on the battlefield; garuda-vaham—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, carried by Garuda; ibhari-vahah—the
demon, who was carried by a big lion; avidhya—whirling around;
Stilam —trident; ahinot—discharged at him; atha—thus; kalanemih—
the demon Kilanemi; tat—such an attack by the demon against the
Supreme Lord; lilaya—very easily; garuda-mirdhni—on the head of
His carrier, Garuda; patat—while falling down; grhitva —after taking it
immediately, without difficulty; tena—and by the same weapon;
ahanat—killed; nrpa—O King; sa-vaham—with his carrier; arim —the
enemy; tri-adhiSah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the proprie-
tor of the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the demon Kalanemi, who was carried by a lion,
saw that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, carried by Garuda,


--- Page 67 ---
Text 57] The Battle Between the Demigods and Demons 61
was on the battlefield, the demon immediately took his trident,
whirled it and discharged it at Garuda’s head. The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Hari, the master of the three worlds, im-
mediately caught the trident, and with the very same weapon he
killed the enemy Kalanemi, along with his carrier, the lion.
PURPORT
In this regard, Srila Madhvacarya says:
kalanemy-adayah sarve
karina nihata api
Sukrenojjivitah santah
punas tenaiva patitah
“Kalanemi and all the other demons were killed by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Hari, and when Sukracarya, their spiritual master,
brought them back to life, they were again killed by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.”
TEXT 57
ऽ
माली सुमाल्य तिवो युधि पेततुयं-
चक्रेण कृत्तशिरसावथ माल्यवांस्तम्‌ |
आहत्य तिग्भगदयाहनदण्डजेन्द्र
तावच्छिरोऽच्छिनदरेनैदतोऽरिणाद्यः || ५७॥
mali sumaly atibalau yudhi petatur yac-
cakrena krtta-sirasav atha malyavams tam
ahatya tigma-gadayahanad andajendrar
tavac chiro ’‘cchinad arer nadato ’rinadyah
mali sumali—two demons named Mali and Sumali; ati-balau—very
powerful; yudhi—on the battlefield; petatuh—fell down; yat-cakrena—
by whose disc; krtta-sirasau—their heads having been cut off; atha—
thereupon; malyavan—Malyavan; tam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; ahatya—attacking; tigma-gadaya—with a very sharp club;
ahanat—attempted to attack, kill; anda-ja-indram—Garuda, the king


--- Page 68 ---
62 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 10
of all the birds, who are born from eggs; tavat—at that time; sirah—the
head; acchinat—cut off; areh—of the enemy; nadatah—roaring like a
lion; arina—by the disc; adyah—the original Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION

Thereafter, two very powerful demons named Mali and Sumali
were killed by the Supreme Lord, who severed their heads with
His disc. Then Malyavan, another demon, attacked the Lord. With
his sharp club, the demon, who was roaring like a lion, attacked
Garuda, the lord of the birds, who are born from eggs. But the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original person, used His
disc to cut off the head of that enemy also.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Tenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Battle Between the
Demigods and the Demons.”


--- Page 69 ---
CHAPTER ELEVEN
King Indra Annihilates the Demons
As described in this chapter, the great saint Narada Muni, being very
compassionate to the demons who had been killed by the demigods, for-
bade the demigods to continue killing. Then Sukracarya, by his mystic
power, renewed the lives of all the demons.

Having been graced by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
demigods began fighting the demons again, with renewed energy. King
Indra released his thunderbolt against Bali, and when Bali fell, his friend
Jambhasura attacked Indra, who then cut off Jambhasura’s head with his
thunderbolt. When Narada Muni learned that Jambhiasura had been
killed, he informed Jambhasura’s relatives Namuci, Bala and Paka, who
then went to the battlefield and attacked the demigods. Indra, King of
heaven, severed the heads of Bala and Paka and released the weapon
known as kulisa, the thunderbolt, against Namuci’s shoulder. The thun-
derbolt, however, returned unsuccessful, and thus Indra became morose.
At that time, an unseen voice came from the sky. The voice declared, “A
dry or wet weapon cannot kill Namuci.”” Hearing this voice, Indra began
to think of how Namuci could be killed. He then thought of foam, which
is neither moist nor dry. Using a weapon of foam, he was able to kill
Namuci. Thus Indra and the other demigods killed many demons. Then,
at the request of Lord Brahma, Narada went to the demigods and forbade
them to kill the demons any longer. All the demigods then returned to
their abodes. Following the instructions of Narada, whatever demons
remained alive on the battlefield took Bali Maharaja to Asta Mountain.
There, by the touch of Sukracirya’s hand, Bali Maharaja regained his
senses and consciousness, and those demons whose heads and bodies had
not been completely lost were brought back to life by the mystic power of
Sukracarya.

TEXT 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथो सुराः সব্য্ঘকচ্ধলীনমঃ
परस्य पुंसः परयायुकम्पया |
63


--- Page 70 ---
64. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
০১
SEER शक्रसमीरणादय-
सतांस्तान्रणे यैरभिसंहताः पुरा ॥ १ ॥
sri-Suka uvaca
atho surah pratyupalabdha-cetasah
parasya purisah parayanukampaya
Jjaghnur bhrsarm $akra-samiranadayas
tars tan rane yair abhisarmhatah pura
sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosviami said; atho—thereafter;
surah—all the demigods; pratyupalabdha-cetasah—being enlivened
again by revival of their consciousness; parasya—of the Supreme;
purisah—of the Personality of Godhead; parayd—supreme; anukam-
paya—by the mercy; jaghnuh—began to beat; bhrSam—again and
again; Sakra—Indra; samirana— Vayu; ddayah—and others; tan tan—
to those demons; rane —in the fight; yaih—by whom; abhisarmhatah—
they were beaten; pura—before.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: Thereafter, by the supreme grace of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Hari, all the demigods,
headed by Indra and Vayu, were brought back to life. Being en-
livened, the demigods began severely beating the very same
demons who had defeated them before.
TEXT 2
As Sri
वराचनाय सरन्धां भगवान्पाकशासनः |
उदयच्छद्‌ यदा নস प्रजा हा हेति FFT: 11 २॥
vairocanaya sarirabdho
bhagavan paka-sasanah
udayacchad yada vajrarm
praja ha heti cukrusuh
vairocanaya—unto Bali Maharaja (just to kill him); sarirabdhah—
being very angry; bhagavan—the most powerful; paka-sasanah—


--- Page 71 ---
Text 4] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 65
Indra; udayacchat—took in his hand; yada—at which time; vajram—
the thunderbolt; prajah—all the demons; ha ha—alas, alas; iti—thus;
cukrusuh—began to resound.
TRANSLATION
When the most powerful Indra became angry and took his thun-
derbolt in hand to kill Maharaja Bali, the demons began lamenting,
“Alas, alas!”
TEXT 3
वज्रपाणिस्तमाहेदं तिरस्कृत्य पुरःस्थितम्‌ |
Lp SN} 9 : -
मन्नं सुसम्पन्नं विचरन्तं महाग्घे ॥ ३ ॥
vajra-panis tam ahedarin
tiraskrtya purah-sthitam
manasvinam susampannarit
vicarantarh maha-mrdhe
vajra-panih—Indra, who always carries in his hand the thunderbolt;
tam—unto Bali Maharija; aha—addressed; idam—in this way;
tiraskrtya—chastising him; purah-sthitam —standing before him;
manasvinam—very sober and tolerant; su-sampannam—well equipped
with paraphernalia for fighting; vicarantam —moving; maha-mrdhe—
on the great battlefield.
TRANSLATION
Sober and tolerant and well equipped with paraphernalia for
fighting, Bali Maharaja moved before Indra on the great bat-
tlefield. King Indra, who always carries the thunderbolt in his
hand, rebuked Bali Maharaja as follows.
TEXT 4
TIE मायाभिमायेश्ान्‌ नो जिगीषसि ।
जित्वा बालान्‌ निबद्धाक्षान्‌ नटो हरति तद्धनम्‌॥ ४॥


--- Page 72 ---
66 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
natavan miidha mayabhir
mayesan no jigisasi
Jitva balan nibaddhaksan
nato harati tad-dhanam
nata-vat—like a cheater or rogue; midha—you rascal; mayabhih—
by exhibiting illusions; maya-isan —unto the demigods, who can control
all such illusory manifestations; nah—unto us; jigisasi—you are trying
to become victorious; jitva—conquering; balan—small children;
nibaddha-aksan —by binding the eyes; natah—a cheater; harati—takes
away; tat-dhanam—the property in the possession of a child.
TRANSLATION
Indra said: O rascal, as a cheater sometimes binds the eyes of a
child and takes away his possessions, you are trying to defeat us by
displaying some mystic power, although you know that we are the
masters of all such mystic powers.
TEXT 5
आरुरुक्षन्ति मायाभिरुत्सिखप्सन्तिये दिवम्‌ |
तान्दस्ून्विधुनोम्यज्ञनपूवंसाच पदादधः || ५ ॥
aruruksanti mayabhir
utsisrpsanti ye divam
tan 005) 87) vidhunomy ajiian
[01700577100 ca padid adhah
aruruksanti—persons who desire to come to the upper planetary
systems; mayabhih—by so-called mystic power or material advancement
of science; utsisrpsanti—or want to be liberated by such false attempts;
ye—such persons who; divam—the higher planetary system known as
Svargaloka; tan—such rogues and rufhans; dasyiin—such thieves;
vidhunomi—I force to go down; ajiian —rascals; piarvasmat—previous;
ca—also; padat—from the position; adhah—downward.


--- Page 73 ---
Text 6] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 67
TRANSLATION

Those fools and rascals who want to ascend to the upper plan-
etary system by mystic power or mechanical means, or who en-
deavor to cross even the upper planets and achieve the spiritual
world or liberation, I cause to be sent to the lowest region of the
universe.

PURPORT

There are undoubtedly different planetary systems for different per-
sons. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (14.18), ardhvam gacchanti sattva-
sthah: persons in the mode of goodness can go to the upper planets.
Those in the modes of darkness and passion, however, are not allowed to
enter the higher planets. The word divam refers to the higher planetary
system known as Svargaloka. Indra, King of the higher planetary system,
has the power to push down any conditioned soul attempting to go from
the lower to the higher planets without proper qualifications. The
modern attempt to go to the moon is also an attempt by inferior men to go
to Svargaloka by artificial, mechanical means. This attempt cannot be
successful. From this statement of Indra it appears that anyone attempt-
ing to go to the higher planetary systems by mechanical means, which are
here called maya, is condemned to go the the hellish planets in the lower
portion of the universe. To go to the higher planetary system, one needs
sufficient good qualities. A sinful person situated in the mode of ig-
norance and addicted to drinking, meat-eating and illicit sex will never
enter the higher planets by mechanical means.

TEXT 6
सोऽहं दुर्मायिनस्तेऽद्य वजेण शतपवंणा |
शिरो हरिष्ये मन्दात्मन्धटख ज्ञातिभिः सह ॥ ६ ॥
so ৫712 durmayinas te ‘dya
vajrena Sata-parvana
Siro harisye mandatman
ghatasva jaatibhih saha

sah—I am the same powerful person; aham—I; durmayinah—of

you, who can perform so much jugglery with illusions; te—of you;


--- Page 74 ---
68 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
adya—today; vajrena—by the thunderbolt; Sata-parvana—which has
hundreds of sharp edges; Sirah—the head; harisye—I shall separate;
manda-atman—O you with a poor fund of knowledge; ghatasva—just
try to exist on this battlefield; jiiatibhih saha—with your relatives and
assistants.
TRANSLATION
Today, with my thunderbolt, which has hundreds of sharp
edges, I, the same powerful person, shall sever your head from
your body. Although you can produce so much jugglery through
illusion, you are endowed with a poor fund of knowledge. Now,
try to exist on this battlefield with your relatives and friends.
TEXT 7
श्रीनतिर्वाच
® + ~ ~ ९
सङ्ग्रामे वतंमानानां काटठनोदितकमेणाम्‌ |
कीतिंजेयोऽजयो सत्यु सर्वेषां स्युरनुक्रमात्‌ ॥ ও ॥
Sri-balir uvaca
sangrame vartamananam
kala-codita-karmanam
kirtir jayo ‘jayo mrtyuh
sarvesam syur anukramat
sri-balih uvaca—Bali Maharaja said; sarigrame—in the battlefield;
vartamananam—of all persons present here; kala-codita—influenced
by the course of time; karmanam—for persons engaged in fighting or
any other activities; kirtih—reputation; jayah—victory; ajayah—
defeat; mrtyuh—death; sarvesam—of all of them; syuh —must be done;
anukramat —one after another.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja replied: All those present on this battlefield are
certainly under the influence of eternal time, and according to
their prescribed activities, they are destined to receive fame, vic-
tory, defeat and death, one after another.


--- Page 75 ---
Text 8] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 69
PURPORT

If one is victorious on the battlefield, he becomes famous; and if one is
not victorious but is defeated, he may die. Both victory and defeat are
possible, whether on such a battlefield as this or on the battlefield of the
struggle for existence. Everything takes place according to the laws of
nature (prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah). Since every-
one, without exception, is subject to the modes of material nature,
whether one is victorious or defeated he is not independent, but is under
the control of material nature. Bali Maharaja, therefore, was very sensi-
ble. He knew that the fighting was arranged by eternal time and that
under time’s influence one must accept the results of one’s own ac-
tivities. Therefore even though Indra threatened that he would now kill
Bali Maharaja by releasing the thunderbolt, Bali Maharaja was not at all
afraid. This is the spirit of a ksatriya: yuddhe capy apalayanam
(Bg. 18.43). A ksatriya must be tolerant in all circumstances, especially
on the battlefield. Thus Bali Maharaja asserted that he was not at all
afraid of death, although he was threatened by such a great personality
as the King of heaven.

TEXT 8 :
ARE कालरशनं जगत्‌ THT खरयः |
न इष्यन्ति न शोचन्ति तत्र यूयमपण्डिताः । ८ ॥
tad 70278 kala-rasanari
jagat pasyanti sirayah
na hrsyanti na Socanti
tatra yiayam apanditah

tat —therefore; idam—this whole material world; kala-rasanam—is
moving because of time eternal; jagat—moving forward (this whole uni-
verse); paSyanti—observe; sirayah—those who are intelligent by ad-
mission of the truth; na—not; hrsyanti—become jubilant; na —nor;
Socanti—lament; tatra—in such; yidyam—all of you demigods;
apanditah—not very learned (having forgotten that you are working
under eternal time).


--- Page 76 ---
70 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
TRANSLATION

Seeing the movements of time, those who are cognizant of the
real truth neither rejoice nor lament for different circumstances.
Therefore, because you are jubilant due to your victory, you
should be considered not very learned.

PURPORT

Bali Maharaja knew that Indra, King of heaven, was extremely power-
ful, certainly more powerful than he himself. Nonetheless, Bali Maharaja
challenged Indra by saying that Indra was not a very learned person. In
Bhagavad-gita (2.11) Krsna rebuked Arjuna by saying:

asocyan anvasocas tvari
prajada-vadams ca bhasase
gatasin agatdasims ca
nanusocanti panditah

“While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not wor-
thy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the
dead.” Thus as Krsna challenged Arjuna by saying that he was not a
pandita, or a learned person, Bali Maharaja also challenged King Indra
and his associates. In this material world, everything happens under the
influence of time. Consequently, for a learned person who sees how
things are taking place, there is no question of being sorry or happy be-
cause of the waves of material nature. After all, since we are being car-
ried away by these waves, what is the meaning of being jubilant or
morose? One who is fully conversant with the laws of nature is never
jubilant or morose because of nature’s activities. In Bhagavad-gita
(2.14), Krsna advises that one be tolerant: tars titiksasva bharata.
Following this advice of Krsna’s, one should not be morose or unhappy
because of circumstantial changes. This is the symptom of a devotee. A
devotee carries out his duty in Krsna consciousness and is never unhappy
in awkward circumstances. He has full faith that in such circumstances,
Krsna protects His devotee. Therefore a devotee never deviates from his
prescribed duty of devotional service. The material qualities of jubilation
and moroseness are present even in the demigods, who are very highly


--- Page 77 ---
Text 10] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 71
situated in the upper planetary system. Therefore, when one is un-
disturbed by the so-called favorable and unfavorable circumstances of
this material world, he should be understood to be brahma-bhiita, or
self-realized. As stated in Bhagaved-gita (18.54), brahma-bhitah
prasannatma na Socati na kanksati: “One who is transcendentally situ-
ated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful.”
When one is undisturbed by material circumstances, he should be under-
stood to be on the transcendental stage, above the reactions of the three
modes of material nature.
TEXT 9
न वयं मन्यमानानामात्मानं तत्र साधनम्‌ |
गिरो वः साधुशोच्यानां गृह्णीमो मर्मताडनाः ।। ९ ॥
na vayarm manyamananam
atmanari tatra sadhanam
giro vah sadhu-socyanarm
grhnimo marma-tadanah
na—not; vayam—we; manyamananam—who are considering;
atmanam—the self; tatra—in victory or defeat; sadhanam—the cause;
girah—the words; vah—of you; sadhu-$ocyanam—who are to be pitied
by the saintly persons; grhnimah—accept; marma-tadanah—which
afflict the heart.
TRANSLATION
You demigods think that your own selves are the cause of your
attaining fame and victory. Because of your ignorance, saintly per-
sons feel sorry for you. Therefore, although your words afflict the
heart, we do not accept them.
TEXT 10
সাঁহ্যক उवाच
ERA a
इत्याक्षिप्य Ad वीरो नाराचैर्वीरमदं नः |
आकर्णपूरणेरदनदाकेषैराहतं पुनः ॥१०॥


--- Page 78 ---
72 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
$ri-suka uvaca
ity aksipya vibhurm viro
nardcair vira-mardanah
akarna-parnair ahanad
aksepair aha tar punah
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; aksipya—
chastising; vibhum —unto King Indra; virah—the valiant Bali Maharaja;
naracaith—by the arrows named nardcas; vira-mardanah—Bali
Maharaja, who could subdue even great heros; akarna-pirnaih—drawn
up to his ear; ahanat—attacked; aksepaih—by words of chastisement;
aha—said; tam—unto him; punah—again.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: After thus rebuking Indra, King of
heaven, with sharp words, Bali Maharaja, who could subdue any
other hero, drew back to his ear the arrows known as naracas and
attacked Indra with these arrows. Then he again chastised Indra
with strong words.
TEXT 11
- a
एवं নিযান্ধনী देवो वैरिणा तथ्यवादिना |
नाख्ष्यत्‌ तदविकषेपं तोत्राहत इव द्विषः ॥११॥
evam nirakrto devo
vairind tathya-vadina
namrsyat tad-adhiksepari
totrahata iva dvipah
evam—thus; nirdkrtah—being defeated; devah—King Indra;
vairina—by his enemy; tathya-vadina—who was competent to speak
the truth; na—not; amrsyat—lamented; tat—of him (Bali);
adhiksepam —the chastisement; totra—by the scepter or rod; ahatah—
being beaten; iva—just like; dvipah—an elephant.


--- Page 79 ---
Text 13] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 73
TRANSLATION
Since Maharaja Bali’s rebukes were truthful, King Indra did not
at all become sorry, just as an elephant beated by its driver’s rod
does not become agitated.
TEXT 12
प्रादरत्‌ रिशं तसा अमोषं परमर्दनः |
सयानो न्यपतद्‌ भूमौ Red इवाचलः ॥१२॥
praharat kuliSari tasma
amoghari para-mardanah
sayano nyapatad bhiimau
chinna-paksa ivacalah
praharat—inflicted; kuliSam—thunderbolt scepter; tasmai—unto
him (Bali Maharaja); amogham—infallibie; para-mardanah—Indra,
who is expert in defeating the enemy; sa-yanah—with his airplane;
nyapatat—{fell down; bhiamau—on the ground; chinna-paksah—whose
wings have been taken away; iva—like; acaleh—a mountain.
TRANSLATION
When Indra, the defeater of enemies, released his infallible
thunderbolt scepter at Bali Maharaja with a desire to kill him, Bali
Maharaja indeed fell to the ground with his airplane, like a moun-
tain with its wings cut off.
PURPORT
In many descriptions in Vedic literature it is found that mountains also
fly in the sky with wings. When such mountains are dead, they fall to the
ground, where they stay as very large dead bodies.
TEXT 13
सखायं पतितं Tg जम्भो बकिसखः सुहृत्‌ |
अभ्ययात्‌ सौहृदं सख्युहेतस्यापि समाचरन्‌ ॥१३॥


--- Page 80 ---
74 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
sakhdyarih patitarn drstva
jambho bali-sakhah suhrt
abhyayat sauhrdarm sakhyur
hatasyapi samacaran
sakhdyam—his intimate friend; patitam—having fallen; drstva—
after seeing; jambhah—the demon Jambha; bali-sakhah—a very inti-
mate friend of Bali Maharaja; suhrt—and constant well-wisher;
abhyayat—appeared on the scene; sauhrdam—very compassionate
friendship; sakhyuh—of his friend; hatasya—who was injured and
fallen; api—although; samdcaran—just to perform friendly duties.
TRANSLATION
When the demon Jambhasura saw that his friend Bali had fallen,
he appeared before Indra, the enemy, just to serve Bali Maharaja
with friendly behavior.
TEXT 14
स सिंहवाह आसादय गदायुयम्य रंहसा |
जत्राक्ताडयच्छकं गजं च सुमहाबरः ॥१४॥
sa simha-vaha asadya
gadam udyamya rarmhasa
Jatrav atadayac chakrariu
gajarn ca sumaha-balah
sah—Jambhasura; sirtha-vahah—being carried by a lion; dasadya—
coming before King Indra; gadam—his club; udyamya—taking up;
rarmhasa—with great force; jatrau—on the base of the neck; atadayat—
hit; Sakram—Indra; gajam ca—as well as his elephant; su-maha-
balah—the greatly powerful Jambhasura.
TRANSLATION
The greatly powerful Jambhasura, carried by a lion, approached
Indra and forcefully struck him on the shoulder with his club. He
also struck Indra’s elephant.


--- Page 81 ---
Text 16] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 75
TEXT 15
गदाप्रहारव्यथितो भृशं बिहकितो गजः ।
जाचुम्यां धरणीं स्पष्ठा कदमटं परमं ययो ॥१५॥
gada-prahara-vyathito
bhrsarm vihvalito gajah
janubhyam dharanim sprstva
kasmalar paramam yayau
gada-prahara-vyathitah—being aggrieved because of the blow from
Jambhasura’s club; bhrsam—very much; vihvalitah—upset; gajah—
the elephant; janubhyam—with its two knees; dharanim—the earth;
sprstva—touching; kasmalam—unconsciousness; paramam—ultimate;
yayau—entered.
TRANSLATION
Being beaten by Jambhasura’s club, Indra’s elephant was con-
fused and aggrieved. Thus it touched its knees to the ground and
fell unconscious.
TEXT 16
- S
ततो रथो मातङिना हरिभिदंश्चसतैतः |
आनीतो uggs रथमारुरुहे विः ॥ १६॥
tato ratho matalina
haribhir dasa-satair vrtah
anito dvipam utsrjya
ratham aruruhe vibhuh
tatah—thereafter; rathah—chariot; matalina—by his chariot driver
named Matali; haribhih—with horses; dasa-sataih—by ten times one
hundred (one thousand); wvrtah—yoked; anitah—being brought in;
dvipam—the elephant; utsrjya—keeping aside; ratham—the chariot;
aruruhe —got up; vibhuh—the great Indra.


--- Page 82 ---
76 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Matali, Indra’s chariot driver, brought Indra’s
chariot, which was drawn by one thousand horses. Indra then left
his elephant and got onto the chariot.
TEXT 17
तस्य तत्‌ पूजयन्‌ कम॑ यन्तुदानवसत्तमः |
IIA ज्वलता तं तु सयमानोऽहनन्मषे ॥ १७॥
tasya tat pujayan karma
yantur danava-sattamah
salena jvalata tari tu
smayamano ’hanan mrdhe
tasya—of Matali; tat—that service (bringing the chariot before
Indra); pajayan—appreciating; karma—such service to the master;
yantuh—of the chariot driver; danava-sat-tamah—the best of the
demons, namely Jambhasura; silena—by his trident; juvalata —which
was blazing fire; tam—Matali; tu—indeed; smayamanah—smiling;
ahanat—struck; mrdhe —in the battle.
TRANSLATION
Appreciating Matali’s service, Jambhasura, the best of the
demons, smiled. Nonetheless, he struck Matali in the battle with a
trident of blazing fire.
TEXT 18
+ ce
सेहे रुजं স্তহুমণী सतवमालम्न्य मातणिः |
इन्द्रो जम्भ संकद्धो वजेणापाहरच्छिरः ॥ १८॥
sehe rujarin sudurmarsarm
sattvam alambya matalih
indro jambhasya sarikruddho
vajrenapaharac chirah


--- Page 83 ---
Text 20] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 77
sehe—tolerated; rujam—the pain; su-durmarsam—intolerable;
sattvam—patience; alambya—taking shelter of; matalih—the
charioteer Matali; indrah—King Indra; jambhasya —of the great demon
Jambha; sarikruddhah—being very angry at him; vajrena—with his
thunderbolt; apaharat—separated; Sirah —the head.
TRANSLATION
Although the pain was extremely severe, Matali tolerated it with
great patience. Indra, however, became extremely angry at
Jambhasura. He struck Jambhasura with his thunderbolt and thus
severed his head from his body.
TEXT 19
जम्भं श्रुत्वा हतं तस्य ज्ञातयो नारदादषेः ।
Agfa बलः पाकस्तत्रापेतुस्त्वरान्विताः ॥१९॥
Jambham Srutva hatarn tasya
JAdtayo naradad rseh
namucis ca balah pakas
tatrapetus tvaranvitah
jambham —Jambhasura; Srutva—after hearing; hatam—had been
killed; tasya—his; jiatayah—friends and relatives; naradat—from the
source Narada; rseh—from the great saint; namucih—the demon
Namuci; ca—also; balah—the demon Bala; pakah—the demon Pika;
tatra—there; apetuh —immediately arrived; tvara-anvitah—with great
haste.
TRANSLATION
When Narada Rsi informed Jambhasura’s friends and relatives
that Jambhasura had been killed, the three demons named
Namuci, Bala and Paka arrived on the battlefield in great haste.
TEXT 20
LY €
वचोभिः परुषैरिनद्रमदंयन्तोऽस्य मर्मसु |
शरैराकिरन्‌ मेधा धाराभिरिव पर्वतम्‌ ॥२०॥


--- Page 84 ---
78 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
vacobhih parusair indram
ardayanto sya marmasu
Sarair avakiran megha
dharabhir iva parvatam
vacobhih—with harsh words; parusaih—very rough and cruel;
indram—King Indra; ardayantah—chastising, piercing; asya—of In-
dra; marmasu—in the heart, etc.; Saraih—with arrows; avakiran—
covered all around; meghah—clouds; dharabhih—with showers of rain;
iva—just as; parvatam—a mountain.
TRANSLATION
Rebuking Indra with harsh, cruel words that were piercing to
the heart, these demons showered him with arrows, just as torrents
of rain wash a great mountain.
TEXT 21
९ =
हरीन्दशशतान्याजौ हयश्वस्य बलः शरैः ।
ताबद्धिरदंयामास RULER HSI ॥२१॥
harin dasa-satany ajau
haryasvasya balah saraih
tavadbhir ardayam asa
yugapal laghu-hastavan
harin—horses; dasa-satani—ten times one hundred (one thousand);
gjau—on the battlefield; haryasvasya—of King Indra; balah—the
demon Bala; saraih—with arrows; tavadbhih—with so many; ardayam
asa—put into tribulation; yugapat—simultaneously; laghu-hastavan—
with quick handling.
TRANSLATION
Quickly handling the situation on the battlefield, the demon
Bala put all of Indra’s one thousand horses into tribulation by
simultaneously piercing them all with an equal number of arrows.


--- Page 85 ---
Text 23] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 79
TEXT 22
शताम्यां ATS पाको रथं सावयवं पथक्‌ ।
- -
सृत्सन्धानमोक्षेण तदद्भुतमभूद्‌ रणे ॥२२॥
Satabhyarn 771৫1401178 [०0/४0
वकाः savayavarm prthak
sakrt sandhana-moksena
tad adbhutam abhud rane
satabhyam —with two hundred arrows; matalim—unto the chariot
driver Matali; pakah—the demon named Paka; ratham—the chariot;
sa-avayavam—with all paraphernalia; prthak—separately; sakrt—once,
at one time; sandhana—by yoking the arrows to the bow; moksena—
and releasing; tat—such an action; adbhutam—wonderful; abhiit—so
became; rane —on the battlefield.
TRANSLATION
Paka, another demon, attacked both the chariot, with all its
paraphernalia, and the chariot driver, Matali, by fitting two
hundred arrows to his bow and releasing them all simultaneously.
This was indeed a wonderful act on the battlefield.
TEXT 23
नमुचिः पञदज्चमिः सखणंपुदधमेदेषुभिः |
आहत्य व्यनदत्संर्ये सतोय इव तोयद; ॥२३॥
namucih paiica-dasabhih
svarna-purikhair mahesubhih
ahatya vyanadat sarikhye
satoya iva toyadah
namucih—the demon named Namuci; parica-dasabhih—with fifteen;
svarna-purikhaih—with golden feathers attached; maha-isubhih—very
powerful arrows; ahatya—piercing; vyanadat—resounded; sarikhye—


--- Page 86 ---
80 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
on the battlefield; sa-toyah—bearing water; iva—like; toya-dah—a
cloud that delivers rain.
TRANSLATION
Then Namuci, another demon, attacked Indra and injured him
with fifteen very powerful golden-feathered arrows, which roared
like a cloud full of water.
TEXT 24
< ५
स्वेतः WEA शक्रं सरथसारथिम्‌ |
छादयामासुरसुराः प्राबररबखय॑मिवाम्बुदाः ॥२४॥
sarvatah $ara-kitena
Sakram saratha-sarathim
chadayam asur asurah
pravrt-siiryam ivambudah
sarvatah—all around; Sara-kiitena—by a dense shower of arrows;
sakram—Indra; sa-ratha—with his chariot; sarathim—and with his
chariot driver; chadayam asuh—covered; asurah—all the demons;
pravrt—in the rainy season; siryam —the sun; iva—like; ambu-dah—
clouds.
TRANSLATION
Other demons covered Indra, along with his chariot and chariot
driver, with incessant showers of arrows, just as clouds cover the
sun in the rainy season.
TEXT 25
अरक्षयन्तस्तमतीव ব্িদ্কত্তা
=
विचुङ्कुख््दवगणाः মহাত্তমাঃ।
अनायकाः शत्रुबलेन निर्जिता
वणिक्पथा भिन्ननवो यथार्णवे ॥२५॥


--- Page 87 ---
Text 26] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 81
alaksayantas tam ativa vihvala
vicukruSur deva-ganah sahanugah
anayakah jatru-balena nirjita
vanik-patha bhinna-navo yatharnave
alaksayantah—being unable to see; tam—King Indra; ativa—
fiercely; vihvalah—bewildered; vicukrusuh—began to lament; deva-
ganah—all the demigods; saha-anugah—with their followers;
andayakah—without any captain or leader; Satru-balena—by the
superior power of their enemies; nirjitah—oppressed severely; vanik-
pathah—traders; bhinna-navah—whose ship is wrecked; yatha arnave-
—as in the middle of the ocean.
TRANSLATION
The demigods, being severely oppressed by their enemies and
being unable to see Indra on the battlefield, were very anxious.
Having no captain or leader, they began lamenting like traders in a
wrecked vessel in the midst of the ocean.
PURPORT
From this statement it appears that in the upper planetary system
there is shipping and that traders there engage in navigation as their oc-
cupational duty. Sometimes, as on this planet, these traders are ship-
wrecked in the middle of the ocean. It appears that even in the upper
planetary system, such calamities occasionally take place. The upper
planetary system in the creation of the Lord is certainly not vacant or
devoid of living entities. From Srimad-Bhagavatam we understand that
every planet is full of living entities, just as earth is. There is no reason
to accept that on other planetary systems there are no living beings.
TEXT 26
ततस्तुराषाडिषूबद्धप्रराद्‌
विनिगंतः साख्वरथष्वजाग्रणी; |
নমী दिशः खं पृथिवीं च रोचयन्‌
| खतेजसा खयं হন कषपात्यये ॥२६॥


--- Page 88 ---
82 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
tatas turasad isu-baddha-paijarad
vinirgatah sasva-ratha-dhvajagranih
babhau disah 16078 prthivim ca rocayan
sva-tejasa sirya iva ksapatyaye
tatah—thereafter; turasat—another name of Indra; isu-baddha-
paijarat—from the cage of the network of arrows; vinirgatah—being
released; sa—with; asva—horses; ratha—chariot; dhvaja—flag;
agranith—and chariot driver; babhau—became; disah—all directions;
kham—the sky; prthivin—the earth; ca—and; rocayan—pleasing
everywhere; sva-tejasa—by his personal effulgence; siryah—the sun;
iva—like; ksapa-atyaye—at the end of night.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, Indra released himself from the cage of the network
of arrows. Appearing with his chariot, flag, horses and chariot
driver and thus pleasing the sky, the earth and all directions, he
shone effulgently like the sun at the end of night. Indra was bright
and beautiful in the vision of everyone.
TEXT 27
flr एतनां देव; परैरम्यदितां रणे ।
उदयच्छद्‌ रिपुं हन्तं वज्रं वज्रधरो रुषा ॥२५७॥
niriksya prtanari devah
parair abhyarditar rane
udayacchad ripuriv hanturiv
पव्या vajra-dharo rusa
nirtksya—after observing; prtanam—his own soldiers; devah—the
demigod Indra; paraih—by the enemies; abhyarditam—put into great
difficulties or oppressed; rane —in the battlefield; udayacchat—took up;
ripum—the enemies; hantum—to kill; vajram —the thunderbolt; vajra-
dharah—the carrier of the thunderbolt; rusa—in great anger.


--- Page 89 ---
Text 29] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 83
TRANSLATION
When Indra, who is known as Vajra-dhara, the carrier of the
thunderbolt, saw his own soldiers so oppressed by the enemies on
the battlefield, he became very angry. Thus he took up his thun-
derbolt to kill the enemies.
TEXT 28
स तेनैवाष्टधारेण fd बलपाकयोः ।
ज्ञातीनां पर्यतां TITER जनयन्भयम्‌ ॥२८॥
sa tenaivasta-dharena
Sirast bala-pakayoh
JRatinarm pasyatari rajan
jahara janayan bhayam
sah—he (Indra); tena —by that; eva—indeed; asta-dharena—by the
thunderbolt; sirasi—the two heads; bala-pakayoh—of the two demons
known as Bala and Paka; jAatinam pasyatam —while their relatives and
soldiers were watching; rajan—O King; jahara—(Indra) cut off;
janayan—creating; bhayam —fear (among them).
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, King Indra used his thunderbolt to cut off the
heads of both Bala and Pika in the presence of all their relatives
and followers. In this way he created a very fearful atmosphere an
the battlefield.
TEXT 29
ক hy C
नछचिस्तद्वधं दष्टा शोकामषरुषान्वितः |
जिघांसुरिन्द्रं 399 चकार परमोद्यमम्‌ ॥२९॥
namucis tad-vadham drstva
sokamarsa-rusanvitah
jighamsur indram nrpate
cakara paramodyamam


--- Page 90 ---
84 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
namucih—the demon Namuci; tat—of those two demons; vadham —
the massacre; drstva—after seeing; Soka-amarsa—lamentation and
grief; rusa-anvitah—being very angry at this; jigharmisuh—wanted to
kill; indram—King Indra; nr-pate—O Maharaja Pariksit; cakara—
made; parama—a great; udyamam—endeavor.
TRANSLATION
O King, when Namuci, another demon, saw the killing of both
Bala and Paka, he was full of grief and lamentation. Thus he
angrily made a great attempt to kill Indra.
TEXT 30
अश्मसारमयं शूलं षण्टावद्धेमभूषणम्‌ |
= (9
परगृद्याम्यद्रवत्‌ क्रुद्धो हतोऽसीति वितर्जयन्‌ |
प्राहिणोद्‌ देवराजाय निनदन्‌ मृगराडिव ।२०॥
asmasaramayarn Sila
ghantavad dhema-bhiisanam
pragrhyabhyadravat kruddho
hato siti vitarjayan
prahinod deva-rajaya
ninadan mrga-rad iva
asmasara-mayam—made of steel; Silam—a spear; ghanta-vat—
bound with bells; hema-bhitsanam —decorated with ornaments of gold;
pragrhya—taking in his hand; abhyadravat—forcefully went;
kruddhah—in an angry mood; hatah asi iti—now you are killed;
vitarjayan—roaring like that; prahinot—struck; deva-rajaya—unto
King Indra; ninadan—resounding; mrga-rat—a lion; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
Being angry and roaring like a lion, the demon Namuci took up
a steel spear, which was bound with bells and decorated with orna-
ments of gold. He loudly cried, “Now you are killed!’ Thus com-
ing before Indra to kill him, Namuci released his weapon.


--- Page 91 ---
Text 32] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 85
TEXT 31
तदापतद्‌ गगनतले महाजवं
विचिच्छिदे हरिरिषुभिः सहस्रधा |
FEAT Ff कन्धरे
रुषान्वितखिदशपतिः शिरो हरन्‌ ॥२१॥
tadapatad gagana-tale maha-javar
vicicchide harir isubhih sahasradha
tam ahanan nrpa kulisena kandhare
rusanvitas tridasa-patih Siro haran
tadai—at that time; apatat—falling like a meteor; gagana-tale—
beneath the sky or on the ground; maha-javam —extremely powerful;
vicicchide—cut to pieces; harih—Indra; isubhih—by his arrows;
sahasradha—into thousands of pieces; tam—that Namuci; @ahanat—
struck; nrpa—O King; kuliSena—with his thunderbolt; kandhare—on
the shoulder; rusa-anvitah—being very angry; tridasa-patih—Indra,
the King of the demigods; sirah—the head; haran—to separate.
TRANSLATION
O King, when Indra, King of heaven, saw this very powerful
spear falling toward the ground like a blazing meteor, he im-
mediately cut it to pieces with his arrows. Then, being very angry,
he struck Namuci’s shoulder with his thunderbolt to cut off
Namuci’s head.
TEXT 32
न तस्य हि त्वचमपि वज्र ऊर्जितो
बिभेद॒यः सुरपतिनौजसेरितः |
तदद्भुतं परमतिवीयंत्रभित्‌
तिरस्छृेतो नयुचिशिरोधरत्वचा ॥३२॥
na tasya hi tvacam api vajra arjito
bibheda yah sura-patinaujaseritah


--- Page 92 ---
86 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
tad adbhutar param ativirya-vrtra-bhit
tiraskrto namuci-sirodhara-tvaca
na—not; tasya—of him (Namuci); hi—indeed; tvacam api—even
the skin; vajrah—the thunderbolt; irjitah—very powerful; bibheda—
could pierce; yah—the weapon which; sura-patina—by the king of the
demigods; ojasa—very forcefully; iritah—had been released; tat—
therefore; adbhutam param —it was extraordinarily wonderful; ati-
virya-vrtra-bhit—so powerful that it could pierce the body of the very
powerful Vrtrasura; tiraskrtah— (now in the future) which had been
repelled; namuci-sirodhara-tvaca—by the skin of Namuci’s neck.
TRANSLATION
Although King Indra hurled his thunderbolt at Namuci with
great force, it could not even pierce his skin. It is very wonderful
that the famed thunderbolt that had pierced the body of Vrtrasura
could not even slightly injure the skin of Namuci’s neck.
TEXT 33
- Q
तसमादिन्द्रोऽबिभेच्छत्रोेजः प्रतिहतो यतः |
किमिदं दैवयोगेन भूतं लोकविमोहनम्‌ 1330
tasmad indro ’bibhec chatror
vajrah pratihato yatah
kim ida daiva-yogena
bhitam loka-vimohanam
tasmat—therefore; indrah—the King of heaven; abibhet—became
very fearful; satroh—from the enemy (Namuci); vajrah—the thunder-
bolt; pratihatah—was unable to hit and returned; yatah —because; kim
idam—what is this; daiva-yogena—by some superior force; bhiitarm —it
has happened; loka-vimohanam—so wonderful to the people in general.
TRANSLATION
‘When Indra saw the thunderbolt return from the enemy, he was
very much afraid. He began to wonder whether this had happened
because of some miraculous superior power.


--- Page 93 ---
Text 35] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 87
PURPORT
Indra’s thunderbolt is invincible, and therefore when Indra saw that it
had returned without doing any injury to Namuci, he was certainly very
much afraid.
TEXT 34
९
येन मे Eww पक्षच्छेदः प्रजात्यये |
कृतो नि विञ्चतां मारः पतत्त्रैः पततां अवि ng
yena me parvam adrinarn
paksa-cchedah prajatyaye
krto niwisatarn bharaih =
patattraih patatarn bhuvi
yena—by the same thunderbolt; me—by me; parvam—formerly;
adrinam—of the mountains; paksa-cchedah—the cutting of the wings;
praja-atyaye—when there was killing of the people in general; krtah—
was done; nivisatam—of those mountains which entered; bharaih—by
the great weight; patattraih—by wings; patatam—falling; bhuvi—on
the ground.
TRANSLATION
Indra thought: Formerly, when many mountains flying in the
sky with wings would fall to the ground and kill people, I cut their
wings with this same thunderbolt.
TEXT 35
तपःसारमयं त्वां IA येन বিঘাতহিলঃ |
~ A
अन्थे चापि बलोपेताः FIERA: 1340
tapah-saramayari tvastrari
vrtro yena vipatitah
anye capi balopetah
sarvastrair aksata-tvacah
tapah—austerities; sara-mayam—greatly powerful; tvastram—per-
formed by Tvasta; vrtrah—Vrtrasura; yena—by which; vipatitah—was


--- Page 94 ---
88 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
killed; anye—others; ca—also; api—indeed; bala-upetah—very
powerful persons; sarva—all kinds; astraih—by weapons; aksata—
without being injured; tvacah—their skin.
TRANSLATION
Vrtrasura was the essence of the austerities undergone by
Tvasta, yet the thunderbolt killed him. Indeed, not only he but
also many other stalwart heroes, whose very skin could not be in-
jured even by all kinds of weapons, were killed by the same thun-
derbolt.
TEXT 36
सोऽयं प्रतिहतो वज्रो AAGRISGISHHF |
नाहं तदाददे दण्डं ब्रह्मतेजोऽप्यकारणम्‌ ॥३६॥
so ’yam pratihato vajro
maya mukto ’sure ’lpake
naham tad ৫0009 dandam
brahma-tejo py akaranam
sah ayam—therefore, this thunderbolt; pratihatah—repelled;
vajrah—thunderbolt; maya—by me; muktah—released; asure—unto
that demon; alpake—less important; na—not; aham—I; tat—that;
adade—hold; dandam—it is now just like a rod; brahma-tejah—as
powerful as a brahmastra; api—although; akdranam —now it is useless.
TRANSLATION
But now, although the same thunderbolt has been released
against a less important demon, it has been ineffectual. Therefore,
although it was as good as a brahmastra, it has now become useless
like an ordinary rod. I shall therefore hold it no longer.
TEXT 37
इति शक्रं॒विषीदन्तमाह वागञ्चरीरिणी ।
ক - C
नायं EERE AFTRA दानवः 11390


--- Page 95 ---
Text 38] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 89
iti Sakrar visidantam
aha vag asarirint
nayarm Suskair atho nardrair
vadham arhati danavah
iti—in this way; Sakram—unto Indra; visidantam—lamenting;
aha—spoke; vak—a voice; asaririni—without any body, or from the
sky; na—not; ayam—this; Suskaih—by anything dry; atho—also; na—
nor; ardraih—by anything moist; vadham—annihilation; arhati—is
befitting; danavah—this demon (Namuci).
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: While the morose Indra was
lamenting in this way, an ominous, unembodied voice said from
the sky, “This demon Namuci is not to be annihilated by anything
dry or moist.” ठ
TEXT 38
ES = ~
मयास्म यद्‌ वरादत्ता मत्यरनँवाद्रश्॒ष्कयोः |
अतोऽन्यश्चिन्तनीयस्ते उपायो मघवन्‌ रिपोः॥२८॥
maydasmai yad varo datto
mrtyur naivardra-suskayoh
ato ’nyas cintaniyas te
upayo maghavan ripoh
maya—by me; asmai—unto him; yat—because; varah—a benedic-
tion; dattah—has been granted; mrtyuh—death; na—not; eva—in-
deed; ardra—by either a moist; Suskayoh —or by a dry medium; atah—
therefore; anyah—something else, another; cintantyah—has to be
thought of ; te —by you; upayah—means; maghavan—O Indra; ripoh—
of your enemy.
TRANSLATION
The voice also said, ‘‘O Indra, because I have given this demon
the benediction that he will never be killed by any weapon that is
dry or moist, you have to think of another way to kill him.”


--- Page 96 ---
90 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
TEXT 39
+ ९
तां दैवीं गिरमाकण्यं मघवान्सुसमाहितः |
ध्यायन्‌ फेनमथापश्यदुपायञ्चुमयात्मकम्‌ |।২৭।।
tar ववण giram akarnya
maghavan susamahitah
dhyayan phenam athapasyad
upayam ubhayatmakam
tam —that; daivim—ominous; giram—voice; akarnya—after hear-
ing; maghavan—Lord Indra; su-samahitah—becoming very careful;
dhyayan—meditating;  phenam—appearance of foam; atha—
thereafter; apasyat—he saw; upayam —the means; ubhaya-datmakam-
—simultaneously dry and moist.
TRANSLATION
After hearing the ominous voice, Indra, with great attention,
began to meditate on how to kill the demon. He then saw that foam
would be the means, for it is neither moist nor dry.
TEXT 40
TTIW न TE जहार ag: fw ।
तं TTF माल्यैश्वावाकिरन्वि्म्‌ ॥४०॥
na Suskena na cardrena
jahara namuceh Sirah
tari tustuvur muni-gana
madlyais cavakiran vibhum
na—neither; Suskena—by dry means; na—nor; ca—also; ardrena—
by a moist weapon; jahdra—he separated; namuceh—of Namuci;
sirah—the head; tam—him (Indra); tustuvuh—satished; muni-
ganah—all the sages; malyaih—with flower garlands; ca—also;
avakiran—covered; vibhum—that great personality.


--- Page 97 ---
Text 42] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 91
TRANSLATION
Thus Indra, King of heaven, severed Namuci’s head with a
weapon of foam, which was neither dry nor moist. Then all the
sages satisfied Indra, the exalted personality, by showering flowers
and garlands upon him, almost covering him.
PURPORT
In this regard, the Sruti-mantras say, apa phenena namuceh Sira
indro ‘darayat: Indra killed Namuci with watery foam, which is neither
moist nor dry.
TEXT 41
Ly
गन्धर्वमुख्यौ जगतुरविंश्वावसुपरावख ।
(4
देवदुन्दुमयो नेदुर्नर्तक्यो नचृतपंदा ॥४१॥
gandharva-mukhyau jagatur
visSvavasu-paravasi
deva-dundubhayo nedur
nartakyo nanrtur muda
gandharva-mukhyau—the two chiefs of the Gandharvas; jagatuh—
began to sing nice songs; visvdvasu—named Viévavasu; pardvasi—
named Paravasu; deva-dundubhayah—the kettledrums beaten by the
demigods; neduh—made their sound; nartakyah—the dancers known
as Apsards; nanrtuh—began to dance; mudd—in great happiness.
TRANSLATION
Visvavasu and Paravasu, the two chiefs of the Gandharvas, sang
in great happiness. The kettledrums of the demigods sounded, and
the Apsaras danced in jubilation.
TEXT 42
अन्येऽप्येवं प्रतिद्वन्दान्वाय्वभिवरुणादयः |
खद्‌ यामासुरसुरान्‌ गगान्केस रिणो यथा ॥४२॥


--- Page 98 ---
92 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
anye ‘py evar pratidvandvan
vayv-agni-varunadayah

sudayam asur asuran
mrgan kesarino yatha
anye—others; api—also; evam—in this way; pratidvandvan—the
opposing party of belligerants; vayu—the demigod known as Vayu;
agni—the demigod known as Agni; varuna-adayah—the demigod
known as Varuna and others; sidayam asuh—began to kill vigorously;
asuran—all the demons; mrgan—deer; kesarinah—lions; yatha—just
as.
TRANSLATION
Vayu, Agni, Varuna and other demigods began killing the
demons who opposed them, just as lions kill deer in a forest.
TEXT 43
Tam प्रेषिवो देबान्देवर्षिनरदो 39 ।
वारयामास विबुधान्दद्ा दानवसंक्षयम्‌ nel
brahmana presito devan
devarsir narado nrpa
varayam dasa vibudhan
drstva danava-sanksayam
brahmana—by Lord Brahma; presitah—sent; devan—unto the
demigods; deva-rsih—the great sage of the heavenly planets; naradah—
Narada Muni; nrpa—O King; varayam asa—forbade; vibudhan—all
the demigods; drstva —after seeing; danava-sarniksayam—the total an-
nihilation of the demons.
TRANSLATION
O King, when Lord Brahma saw the imminent total annihilation
of the demons, he sent a message with Narada, who went before
the demigods to make them stop fighting.


--- Page 99 ---
Text 45] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 93
TEXT 44
श्रीनारद उवाच
~ ক 4 न
भवाद्धरख्त प्राप्त ARES: |
श्रिया समेधिताः सर्वं उपारमत विग्रहात्‌ uve
$ri-narada uvaca
bhavadbhir amrtarih praptariu
narayana-bhujasrayaih
Sriya samedhitah sarva
updaramata vigrahat
sri-naradah uwvaca—Narada Muni prayed to the demigods;
bhavadbhih—by all of you; amrtam—nectar; praptam—has been ob-
tained; narayana—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhuja-
asrayaih—being protected by the arms; Ssriya—by all fortune;
samedhitah—have flourished; sarve—all of you; uparamata—now
cease; vigrahat—from this fighting.
TRANSLATION
The great sage Narada said: All of you demigods are protected
by the arms of Narayana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and by His grace you have gotten the nectar. By the grace of the
goddess of fortune, you are glorious in every way. Therefore,
please stop this fighting.
TEXT 45
IAF उवाच
संयम्य मन्युसंरम्भं मानयन्तो gees: |
ac
उपगीयमानालुचरेयंयुः सवे त्रिविष्टपम्‌ usu
sri-suka uvaca
sarityamya manyu-sarirambhari
manayanto muner vacah
upagiyamananucarair
yayuh sarve trivistapam


--- Page 100 ---
94. Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; sarivyamya —control-
ling; manyu—of anger; samrambham—the aggravation; manayan-
tah—accepting; muneh vacah—the words of Narada Muni;
upagiyamana—being praised; anucaraih—Dby their followers; yayuh—
returned; sarve—all of the demigods; trivistapam—to the heavenly
planets.
TRANSLATION
Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said: Accepting the words of Narada, the
demigods gave up their anger and stopped fighting. Being praised
by their followers, they returned to their heavenly planets.
TEXT 46
येऽवशिष्टा रणे तसिन्‌ नारदाजुमतेन ते ।
चिं विपन्नमादाय अस्तं गिरिुपागमन्‌ nen
ye ’vasistda rane tasmin
naradanumatena te
balirh vipannam adaya
astarii girim updagaman
ye—some of the demons who; avasistah—remained; rane—in the
fight; tasmin—in that; narada-anumatena—by the order of Narada;
te—all of them; balim—Maharaja Bali; vipannam—in reverses;
adaya—taking; astam—named Asta; girim—to the mountain;
upagaman—went.
TRANSLATION
Following the order of Narada Muni, whatever demons
remained on the battlefield took Bali Maharaja, who was in a pre-
carious condition, to the hill known as Astagiri.
TEXT 47 .
तत्राविनष्टावयवान्‌ विद्यमानश्चिरोधरान्‌ |
IIA जोबयामास संजीवन्या खविद्या ॥४७॥


--- Page 101 ---
Text 48] King Indra Annihilates the Demons 95
tatravinastdvayavan
vidyamana-sirodharan
1८50716 jivayam asa
safijivanya sva-vidyaya
tatra—on that hill; avinasta-avayavin—the demons who had been
killed but whose bodily parts had not been lost; vidyamana-
sirodharan—whose heads were still existing on their bodies; usanah—
Sukracarya; jivayam asa—brought to life; safijivanya—by the Saijivani
mantra; sva-vidyaya—by his own achievement.
TRANSLATION
There, on that hill, Sukracayra brought to life all the dead
demoniac soldiers who had not lost their heads, trunks and limbs.
He achieved this by his own mantra, known as Saiijivani.
TEXT 48
TREAT स्पृष्टः प्रतयापन्नेन्द्रियस्रतिः।
पराजितोऽपि नाखिदयलोकक्त्दविवक्षणः gel
balis 05071050 sprstah
pratyapannendriya-smrtih
pardjito pi nakhidyal
loka-tattva-vicaksanah
balih—Maharaja Bali; ca—also; usanasa—by Sukracarya; sprstah—
being touched; pratyapanna—was brought back; indriya-smrtih—
realization of the actions of the senses and memory; parajitah—he was
defeated; api—although; na akhidyat—he did not lament; loka-tattva-
vicaksanah—because he was very experienced in universal affairs.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja was very experienced in universal affairs. When
he regained his senses and memory by the grace of Sukracarya, he
could understand everything that had happened. Therefore, al-
though he had been defeated, he did not lament.


--- Page 102 ---
96 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 11
PURPORT

It is significant that Bali Maharaja is here said to be very experienced.
Although defeated, he was not at all sorry, for he knew that nothing can
take place without the sanction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Since he was a devotee, he accepted his defeat without lamentation. As
stated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Bhagavad-gita (2.47),
karmany evadhikaras te ma phalesu kaddcana. Everyone in Krsna con-
sciousness should execute his duty, without regard for victory or defeat.
One must execute his duty as ordered by Krsna or His representative, the
spiritual master. Anukalyena krsnanusilanam bhaktir uttama. In first-
class devotional service, one always abides by the orders and will of
Krsna.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Eleventh
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “King Indra Annihilates
the Demons.”


--- Page 103 ---
CHAPTER TWELVE
The Mohini-miirti Incarnation
Bewilders Lord Siva
This chapter describes how Lord Siva was bewildered upon seeing the
beautiful Mohini-miirti incarnation of the Supreme Personality of God-
head and how he later came to his senses. When Lord Siva heard about
the pastimes performed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, in
the form of an attractive woman, he mounted his bull and went to see the
Lord. Accompanied by his wife, Uma, and his servants, the bhita-gana,
or ghosts, he approached the lotus feet of the Lord. Lord Siva offered
obeisances to the Supreme Lord as the all-pervading Lord, the universal
form, the supreme controller of creation, the Supersoul, the resting place
for everyone, and the completely independent cause of all causes. Thus
he offered prayers giving truthful descriptions of the Lord. Then he ex-
pressed his desire. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is very kind to
His devotees. Therefore, to fulfill the desire of His devotee Lord Siva, He
expanded His energy and manifested Himself in the form of a very
beautiful and attractive woman. Upon seeing this form, even Lord Siva
was captivated. Later, by the grace of the Lord, he controlled himself.
This demonstrates that by the power of the Lord’s external energy,
everyone is captivated by the form of woman in this material world.
Again, however, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
one can overcome the influence of maya. This was evinced by Lord Siva,
the topmost devotee of the Lord. First he was captivated, but later, by the
grace of the Lord, he restrained himself. It is declared in this connection
that only a pure devotee can restrain himself from the attractive feature
of maya. Otherwise, once a living entity is trapped by the external
feature of maya, he cannot overcome it. After Lord Siva was graced by
the Supreme Lord, he circumambulated the Lord along with his wife,
Bhavani, and his companions, the ghosts. Then he left for his own abode.
Sukadeva Gosvami concludes this chapter by describing the transcenden-
tal qualities of Uttamasloka, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and by
97


--- Page 104 ---
98 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
declaring that one can glorify the Lord by nine kinds of devotional ser-
vice, beginning with sravanam kirtanam.
TEXTS 1-2
श्रीबादरायणिरूुवाच
इषध्वजो निशम्येदं योषिद्रूपेण दानवान्‌ |
मोहयित्वा सुरगणान्हरिः सोममपाययत्‌ ।॥ १ ॥
a
we गिरिञ्चः ahyma: ।
सह देव्या ययौ द्रष्टुं यत्रास्ते मधुखदनः।। R
sri-badarayanir uvaca
vrsa-dhvajo nisamyedari
yosid-riipena danavan
mohayitva sura-ganan
harih somam apayayat
vrsam aruhya girisah
sarva-bhita-ganair vrtah
saha devya yayau drasturm
yatraste madhusidanah
$ri-badarayanih uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; vrsa-dhvajah—
Lord Siva, who is carried by a bull; niSamya—hearing; idam—this
(news); yosit-ripena—by assuming the form of a woman; danavan—
the demons; mohayitva—enchanting; sura-gandn—unto the demigods;
harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; somam—nectar;
apayayat—caused to drink; wvrsam—the bull; aruhya—mounting;
girisah—Lord Siva; sarva—all; bhiita-ganaih—Dby the ghosts; vrtah—
surrounded; saha devya—with Uma; yayau—went; drastum—to see;
yatra—where; aste—stays; madhusidanah—Lord Visnu.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hari, in the form of a woman, captivated the demons and enabled
the demigods to drink the nectar. After hearing of these pastimes,


--- Page 105 ---
Text 4] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 99
Lord Siva, who is carried by a bull, went to the place where
Madhusiidana, the Lord, resides. Accompanied by his wife, Uma,
and surrounded by his companions, the ghosts, Lord Siva went
there to see the Lord’s form as a woman.
TEXT 3
समाजितो मगवता सादरं सोमया भवः |
আনি उवाचेदं प्रतिपूज्य सखयन्दरिम्‌ ।। २ ॥
sabhajito bhagavata
sadarari somaya bhavah
siipavista uvacedam
pratipijya smayan harim
sabhajitah — well received; bhagavata—by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Visnu; sa-adaram—with great respect (as befitting Lord
Siva); sa-umaya—with Uma; bhavah—Lord Sambhu (Lord Siva); su-
upavistah—being comfortably situated; wuvdca—said; idam—this;
pratipijya—offering respect; smayan—smiling; harim —unto the Lord.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead welcomed Lord Siva and
Uma with great respect, and after being seated comfortably, Lord
Siva duly worshiped the Lord and smilingly spoke as follows.
TEXT 4
श्रीमहादेव उवाच
देवदेव जगद्ल्याफ्ज्ञिगदीश्च जगन्मय |
~
सर्वेषामपि भावानां त्वमात्मा हेतुरीश्वरः ॥ ४॥
sri-mahadeva uvaca
deva-deva jagad-vyapini
Jjagad-isa jagan-maya
sarvesam api bhavanam
tvam atma hetur (0070),


--- Page 106 ---
100 Srimad-Bhagavatamn [Canto 8, Ch. 12

$ri-mahadevah uvaca—Lord Siva (Mahadeva) said; deva-deva—O
best demigod among the demigods; jagat-vyapin—O all-pervading Lord;
jagat-isa—O master of the universe; jagat-maya—O my Lord, who are
transformed by Your energy into this creation; sarvesam api—all kinds
of; bhavanam—situations; tvam—You; atma—the moving force;
hetuh—because of this; Svarah—the Supreme Lord, Paramesvara.

TRANSLATION

Lord Mahadeva said: O chief demigod among the demigods, O
all-pervading Lord, master of the universe, by Your energy You
are transformed into the creation. You are the root and efficient
cause of everything. You are not material. Indeed, You are the
Supersoul or supreme living force of everything. Therefore, You
are Paramesvara, the supreme controller of all controllers.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, resides within the ma-
terial world as the sattva-guna-avatara. Lord Siva is the tamo-guna-
avatara, and Lord Brahma is the rajo-guna-avatara, but although Lord
Visnu is among them, He is not in the same category. Lord Visnu is deva-
deva, the chief of all the demigods. Since Lord Siva is in this material
world, the energy of the Supreme Lord, Visnu, includes Lord Siva. Lord
Visnu is therefore called jagad-vyapi, “the all-pervading Lord.” Lord
Siva is sometimes called Mahesvara, and so people think that Lord Siva is
everything. But here Lord Siva addresses Lord Visnu as Jagad-iSa, “‘the
master of the universe.” Lord Siva is sometimes called Viévesvara, but
here he addresses Lord Visnu as Jagan-maya, indicating that even
Visvesvara is under Lord Visnu’s control. Lord Visnu is the master of the
spiritual world, yet He controls the material world also, as stated in
Bhagavad-gita (mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sacaracaram). Lord
Brahma and Lord Siva are also sometimes called &vara, but the supreme
iSvara is Lord Visnu, Lord Krsna. As stated in Brahma-samhita, isvarah
paramah krsnah: the Supreme Lord is Krsna, Lord Visnu. Everything in
existence works in proper order because of Lord Visnu. Andantara-stha-
paramanu-cayantara-stham. Even paramanu, the small atoms, work
because of Lord Visnu’s presence within them.


--- Page 107 ---
Text 5] Mohini-miarti Bewilders Lord Siva 101
TEXT 5
आदयन्तावस्य TAREE बहिः |
यतोऽव्ययस्य नैतानि तत्‌ स्यं ब्रह्म चिद्‌ मवान्‌ ।५॥
ady-antav asya yan madhyam
idam anyad ahar bahih
yato ’vyayasya naitani
tat satya brahma cid bhavan
adi—the beginning; antau—and the end; asya—of this manifested
cosmos or of anything material or visible; yat—that which; madhyam—
between the beginning and the end, the sustenance; idam—this cosmic
manifestation; anyat—anything other than You; aham—the wrong
mental conception; bahih—outside of You; yatah—because of;
avyayasya—the inexhaustible; na—not; etani—all these differences;
tat—that; satyam—the Absolute Truth; brahma—the Supreme; cit—
spiritual; bhavan—Your Lordship.
TRANSLATION
The manifest, the unmanifest, false ego and the beginning,
maintenance and annihilation of this cosmic manifestation all
come from You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But because
You are the Absolute Truth, the supreme absolute spirit soul, the
Supreme Brahman, such changes as birth, death and sustenance do
not exist in You.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic mantras, yato va imdni bhitani jayante:
everything is an emanation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As
stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (7.4):
bhamir apo 72040 vayuh
kha mano buddhir eva ca
ahankara itiyarn me
bhinna prakrtir astadha
“Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all
together these eight comprise My separated material energies.” In other


--- Page 108 ---
102 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
words, the ingredients of the cosmic manifestation also consist of the en-
ergy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This does not mean,
however, that because the ingredients come from Him, He is no longer
complete. Pirnasya parnam adaya parnam evavasisyate: “Because He
is the complete whole, even though so many complete units emanate
from Him, He remains the complete balance.” Thus the Lord is called
avyaya, inexhaustible. Unless we accept the Absolute Truth as acintya-
bhedabheda, simultaneously one and different, we cannot have a clear
conception of the Absolute Truth. The Lord is the root of everything.
Aham adir hi devanam: He is the original cause of all the devas, or
demigods. Aharih sarvasya prabhavah: everything emanates from Him.
In all cases—nominative, objective, positive, negative and so on—what-
ever we may conceive of in this entire cosmic manifestation is in fact the
Supreme Lord. For Him there are no such distinctions as “this is mine,
and this belongs to someone else,” because He is everything. He is
therefore called avyaya—changeless and inexhaustible. Because the
Supreme Lord is avyaya, He is the Absolute Truth, the fully spiritual
Supreme Brahman.
TEXT 6
तवैव om ঈযক্কামা ffi: ।
विसृज्योमयतः ag भ्ुनयः समुपासते | ६ ॥
tavaiva caranambhojari
Sreyas-kama nirasisah
visrjyobhayatah sargarn
munayah samupdsate
tava— Your; eva—indeed; carana-ambhojam—lotus feet; Sreyah-
kamah — persons desiring the ultimate auspiciousness, the ultimate goal
of life; nirasisah—without material desire; wvisrjya—giving up;
ubhayatah—in this life and the next; sarigam—attachment;
munayah—great sages; samupdsate—worship.
TRANSLATION
Pure devotees or great saintly persons who desire to achieve the
highest goal in life and who are completely free from all material


--- Page 109 ---
Text 7] Mohini-mirti Bewilders Lord Siva 103
desires for sense gratification engage constantly in the transcen-
dental service of Your lotus feet.
PURPORT

One is in the material world when he thinks, “I am this body, and
everything with reference to my body is mine.” Ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-
vittair janasya moho ’yam হেয়? mameti. This is the symptom of ma-
terial life. In the materialistic conception of life, one thinks, “This is my
house, this is my land, this is my family, this is my state,” and so on. But
those who are munayah, saintly persons following in the footsteps of
Narada Muni, simply engage in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord without any personal desire for sense gratification. Anyabhilasita-
ऽद्य, jiana-karmady-anavrtam. Either in this life or in the next, the
only concern of such saintly devotees is to serve the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Thus they are also absolute because they have no other
desires. Being freed from the dualities of material desire, they are called
Sreyas-kamah. In other words, they are not concerned with dharma
(religiosity), artha (economic development), or kama (sense gratifica-
tion). The only concern of such devotees is moksa, liberation. This moksa
does not refer to becoming one with the Supreme like the Mayavadi phi-
losophers. Caitanya Mahaprabhu explained that real moksa means taking
shelter of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead. The Lord clearly
explained this fact while instructing Sarvabhauma Bhattacirya.
Sarvabhauma Bhattacirya wanted to correct the word mukti-pade in
Srimad-Bhagavatam, but Caitanya Mahaprabhu informed him that there
is no need to correct any word in Srimad-Bhagavatam. He explained that
mukti-pade refers to the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Visnu, who offers mukti and is therefore called Mukunda. A pure
devotee is not concerned with material things. He is not concerned with
religiosity, economic development or sense gratification. He is interested
only in serving the lotus feet of the Lord.

TEXT 7
स्वं बह्म पू्णमगरतं विगुणं विश्लोक-
मानन्दमात्रमविकारमनन्यदन्यत्‌ |


--- Page 110 ---
104 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
विश्वस्य रेत्रुदयस्थितिसंयसाना-
मात्मेश्वरश्च तदपेश्चतयानयपेश्चः ।। ७ ॥
tvarih brahma piarnam চো vigunam visokam
ananda-matram avikaram ananyad anyat
visvasya hetur udaya-sthiti-sarnyamanam
atmesvaras ca tad-apeksatayanapeksah
tvam—Your Lordship; brahma—the all-pervading Absolute Truth;
purnam —fully complete; amrtam —never to be vanquished; vigunam—
spiritually situated, free from the material modes of nature; visokam —
without lamentation; ananda-matram—always in transcendental bliss;
avikaram —changeless; ananyat—separated from everything; anyat—
yet You are everything; visvasya —of the cosmic manifestation; hetuh—
the cause; udaya—of the beginning; sthiti—maintenance;
sarityamanam —and of all the directors controlling the various depart-
ments of the cosmic manifestation; atma-iSvarah—the Supersoul giving
direction to everyone; ca—also; tat-apeksatayda—everyone depends
upon You; anapeksah—always fully independent.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, You are the Supreme Brahman, complete in every-
thing. Being completely spiritual, You are eternal, free from the
material modes of nature, and full of transcendental bliss. Indeed,
for You there is no question of lamentation. Since You are the
supreme cause, the cause of all causes, nothing can exist without
You. Yet we are different from You in a relationship of cause and
effect, for in one sense the cause and effect are different. You are
the original cause of creation, manifestation and annihilation, and
You bestow benedictions upon all living entities. Everyone
depends upon You for the results of his activities, but You are al-
ways independent.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead says in Bhagavad-gita (9.4):
maya tatam idam sarvam
jagad avyakta-martina


--- Page 111 ---
Text 8] Mohini-marti Bewilders Lord Siva 105
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
na caharm tesv avasthitah
“By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.” This explains the philosophy of
simultaneous oneness and difference, known as acintya-bhedabheda.
Everything is the Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead, yet the
Supreme Person is differently situated from everything. Indeed, because
the Lord is differently situated from everything material, He is the
Supreme Brahman, the supreme cause, the supreme controller. हिण्मः
paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah. The Lord is the supreme
cause, and His form has nothing to do with the material modes of nature.
The devotee prays: “As Your devotee is completely free from all desires,
Your Lordship is also completely free from desires. You are fully inde-
pendent. Although all living entities engage in Your service, You do not
depend on the service of anyone. Although this material world is created
complete by You, everything depends on Your sanction. As stated in
Bhagavad-gita, mattah smrtir jianam apohanari ca: remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness come from You. Nothing can be done inde-
pendently, yet You act independently of the service rendered by Your
servants. The living entities depend on Your mercy for liberation, but
when You want to give them liberation, You do not depend on anyone
else. Indeed, by Your causeless mercy, You can give liberation to anyone.
Those who receive Your mercy are called krpa-siddha. To reach the plat-
form of perfection takes many, many lives (bahinam janmanam ante
jidnavan mam prapadyate). Nonetheless, even without undergoing
severe austerities, one can attain perfection by Your mercy. Devotional
service should be unmotivated and free from impediments (ahaituky
apratihata yayatma suprasidati). This is the position of nirasisah, or
freedom from expectations for results. A pure devotee continuously
offers transcendental loving service to You, but You may nonetheless
offer mercy to anyone, without depending on his service.”
TEXT 8
एकस्त्वमेव सदसद्‌ TIE च
खणं कृताङृतमिवेह न IRR: |


--- Page 112 ---
106 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
अज्ञानतस्त्ययि जनेविंहितो विकसर्पो
TER गुणव्यतिकरो निरुपाधिकस्य ।। ८ ॥
ekas tvam eva sad asad dvayam advayarm ca
svarnam krtakrtam iveha na vastu-bhedah
ajiidnatas tvayi janair vihito vikalpo
yasmad guna-vyatikaro nirupadhikasya
ekah—the only one; tvam— Your Lordship; eva—indeed; sat—which
is existing, as the effect; asat—which is nonexistent, as the cause;
dvayam—both of them; advayam — without duality; ca—and; svarnam-
—gold; krta—manufactured into different forms; @krtam—the original
source of gold (the gold mine); iva—like; iha —in this world; na—not;
vastu-bhedah—difference in the substance; ajianatah—only because of
ignorance; tvayi—unto You; janaih—by the general mass of people;
vihitah—it should be done; vikalpah—differentiation; yasmat—because
of; guna-vyatikarah—free from the differences created by the material
modes of nature; nirupadhikasya—without any material designation.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord, Your Lordship alone is the cause and the effect.
Therefore, although You appear to be two, You are the absolute
one. As there is no difference between the gold of a golden orna-
ment and the gold in a mine, there is no difference between cause
and effect; both of them are the same. Only because of ignorance
do people concoct differences and dualities. You are free from ma-
terial contamination, and since the entire cosmos is caused by You
and cannot exist without You, it is an effect of Your transcendental
qualities. Thus the conception that Brahman is true and the world
false cannot be maintained.
PURPORT
Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that the living entities are
representations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s marginal
potency whereas the various bodies accepted by the living entities are
products of the material energy. Thus the body is considered material,


--- Page 113 ---
Text 8] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 107
and the soul is considered spiritual. The origin of them both, however, is
the same Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord explains in
Bhagavad-gita (7.4-5):
bhamir apo 7৮010 vayuh
kharih mano buddhir eva ca
aharnkara ittyarn me
bhinna prakrtir astadha
apareyam itas tv anya
prakrtirh viddhi me param
Jiva-bhiitarh maha-baho
yayedar dharyate jagat
“Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all
together these eight comprise My separated material energies. But
besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior
energy of Mine, which consists of all living entities who are struggling
with material nature and are sustaining the universe.” Thus both matter
and the living entities are manifestations of energy of the Supreme Lord.
Since the energy and the energetic are not different and since the ma-
terial and marginal energies are both energies of the supreme energetic,
the Supreme Lord, ultimately the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
everything. In this regard, the example may be given of gold that has not
been molded and gold that has been molded into various ornaments. A
gold earring and the gold in a mine are different only as cause and effect;
otherwise they are the same. The Vedanta-sitra describes that Brahman
is the cause of everything. Janmady asya yatah. Everything is born of
the Supreme Brahman, from which everything emanates as different en-
ergies. None of these energies, therefore, should be considered false. The
Mayavadis’ differentiation between Brahman and maya is only due to ig-
norance.

Srimad Viraraghava Acarya, in his Bhagavata-candra-candrika, de-
scribes the Vaisnava philosophy as follows. The cosmic manifestation is
described as sat and asat, as cit and acit. Matter is acit, and the living
force is cit, but their origin is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in
whom there is no difference between matter and spirit. According to this


--- Page 114 ---
108 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
conception, the cosmic manifestation, consisting of both matter and
spirit, is not different from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. [0277
hi visvarh bhagavan ivetarah: “This cosmic manifestation is also the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, although it appears different from
Him.” In Bhagavad-gita (9.4) the Lord says:
maya tatam 807 sarvarn
10800 avyakta-miirtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhitani
na caham tesv avasthitah

“By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.”” Thus although someone may say
that the Supreme Person is different from the cosmic manifestation, ac-
tually He is not. The Lord says, maya tatam idari sarvam: “In My im-
personal feature I am spread throughout the world.” Therefore, this
world is not different from Him. The difference is a difference in names.
For example, whether we speak of gold earrings, gold bangles or gold
necklaces, ultimately they are all gold. In a similar way, all the different
manifestations of matter and spirit are ultimately one in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Ekam evadvitiyarin brahma. This is the Vedic
version (Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.1). There is oneness because every-
thing emanates from the Supreme Brahman. The example already given
is that there is no difference between a golden earring and the gold mine
as it is. The VaiSesika philosophers, however, because of their Mayavada
conception, create differences. They say, brahma satya jagan mithya:
“The Absolute Truth is real, and the cosmic manifestation is false.” But
why should the jagat be considered mithya? The jagat is an emanation
from Brahman. Therefore the jagat is also truth.

Vaisnavas, therefore, do not consider the jagat to be mithya; rather,
they regard everything as reality in connection with the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.

anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayuiijatah

nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktari vairagyam ucyate


--- Page 115 ---
Text 8] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 109
prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih parityago

vairagyar phalgu kathyate
“Things should be accepted for the Lord’s service and not for one’s per-
sonal sense gratification. If one accepts something without attachment
and accepts it because it is related to Krsna, one’s renunciation is called
yuktari vairagyam. Whatever is favorable for the rendering of service to
the Lord should be accepted and should not be rejected as a material
thing.” (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.255-256) The jagat should not be
rejected as mithya. It is truth, and the truth is realized when everything
is engaged in the service of the Lord. A flower accepted for one’s sense
gratification is material, but when the same flower is offered to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by a devotee, it is spiritual. Food taken
and cooked for oneself is material, but food cooked for the Supreme Lord
is spiritual prasada. This is a question of realization. Actually, every-
thing is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore
everything is spiritual, but those who are not advanced in proper knowl-
edge make distinctions because of the interactions of the three modes of
material nature. In this regard, Srila Jiva Gosvami says that although the
sun is the only light, the sunshine, which is exhibited in seven colors,
and darkness, which is the absence of sunshine, are not different from
the sun, for without the existence of the sun such differentiations cannot
exist. There may be varied nomenclature because of different conditions,
but they are all the sun. The Puranas therefore say:

eka-desa-sthitasyagner

Jyotsna vistarini yatha
parasya brahmanah Saktis
tathedam akhilarh jagat

“Just as the illumination of a fire, which is situated in one place, is
spread all over, the energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Parabrahman, are spread all over this universe.” (50
Purana 1.22.53) Materially, we can directly perceive the sunshine
spreading itself according to different names and activities, but


--- Page 116 ---
110 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
ultimately the sun is one. Similarly, sarvari khalv 80077 brahma: every-
thing is an expansion of the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, the Supreme
Lord is everything, and He is one without differentiation. There is no ex-
istence separate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 9
+ ¢
त्वां ब्रह्म केचिदशयन्त्युत धमभेके
एके परं सदसतोः पुरुषं परेशम्‌ |
अन्येऽवयन्ति नवशक्तियुतं परं त्वां
केचिन्महापुरुषमन्ययमात्मतन्त्रम्‌ ॥ থ।।
1৮৫7) brahma kecid avayanty uta dharmam eke
eke param sad-asatoh purusam paresam
anye ’vayanti nava-sakti-yutari parari tvari
kecin maha-purusam avyayam atma-tantram
tvam — You; brahma—the supreme truth, the Absolute Truth, Brah-
man, kecit—some people, namely the group of Mayavadis known as the
Vedantists; avayanti—consider; uta—certainly; dharmam—religion;
eke—some others; eke—some others; param—transcendental; sat-
asatoh—to both cause and effect; purusam—the Supreme Person;
paresam—the supreme controller; anye—others; avayanti—describe;
nava-s$akti-yutam —endowed with nine potencies; param —transcenden-
tal; tvam—unto You; kecit—some; maha-purusam—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; avyayam—without loss of energy; atma-
tantram—supremely independent.
TRANSLATION
Those who are known as the impersonalist Vedantists regard
You as the impersonal Brahman. Others, known as the Mimarnsaka
philosophers, regard You as religion. The Sankhya philosophers
regard You as the transcendental person who is beyond prakrti and
purusa and who is the controller of even the demigods. The
followers of the codes of devotional service known as the
Paiicaratras regard You as being endowed with nine different


--- Page 117 ---
Text 10] Mohini-marti Bewilders Lord Siva 111
potencies. And the Pataiijala philosophers, the followers of
Patafijali Muni, regard You as the supreme independent Per-
sonality of Godhead, who has no equal or superior.
TEXT 10
नाहं परायुच्छंषयो न मरीषियुख्या
जानन्ति यद्विरचितं wg awe: |
यन्मायया शषितचेतस ইহা ইন্ম-
मत्यादयः Reg Fragma: 12011
nahar para@yur rsayo na marici-mukhya
jananti yad-viracitamm khalu sattva-sargah
yan-mayaya musita-cetasa isa daitya-
martyadayah kim uta sasvad-abhadra-vrttah
na—neither; aham—I; para-ayuh—that personality who lives for
millions and millions of years (Lord Brahma); rsayah—the seven rsis of
the seven planets; na—nor; marici-mukhyah—headed by Marici Rsi;
jananti—know; yat—by whom (the Supreme Lord); viracitam —this
universe, which has been created; khalu—indeed; sattva-sargah—al-
though born in the mode of material goodness; yat-mayaya—by the in-
fluence of whose energy; musita-cetasah —their hearts are bewildered;
5a—0 my Lord; daitya—the demons; martya-adayah—the human
beings and others; kim uta—what to speak of; $asvat—always; abhadra-
vrttah—influenced by the base qualities of material nature.
TRANSLATION
O my Lord, I, who am considered to be the best of the demigods,
and Lord Brahma and the great rsis, headed by Marici, are born of
the mode of goodness. Nonetheless, we are bewildered by Your il-
lusory energy and cannot understand what this creation is. Aside
from us, what is to be said of others, like the demons and human
beings, who are in the base modes of material nature [rajo-guna
and tamo-guna]? How will they know You?


--- Page 118 ---
112 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
PURPORT

Factually speaking, even those who are situated in the material mode
of goodness cannot understand the position of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. What then is to be said of those who are situated in rajo-
guna and tamo-guna, the base qualities of material nature? How can we
even imagine the Supreme Personality of Godhead? There are so many
philosophers trying to understand the Absolute Truth, but since they are
situated in the base qualities of material nature and are addicted to so
many bad habits, like drinking, meat-eating, illicit sex and gambling,
how can they conceive of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? For them
it is impossible. For the present day, the pascaratriki-vidhi as enunciated
by Narada Muni is the only hope. Srila Ripa Gosvami, therefore, has
quoted the following verse from the Brahma-yamala:

Sruti-smrti-puranadi-
paiicaratra-vidhiriv vina
aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva kalpate

“Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic
literatures like the Upanisads, Puranas and Narada-paficaratra is
simply an unnecessary disturbance in society.” (Bhakti-rasamrta-
sindhu 1.2.101) Those who are very advanced in knowledge and are
situated in the mode of goodness follow the Vedic instructions of the sruti
and smrti and other religious scriptures, including the parcaratriki-
vidhi. Without understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
this way, one only creates a disturbance. In this age of Kali, so many
gurus have sprung up, and because they do not refer to the sruti-smrti-
puranadi-pafnicaratrika-vidhi, they are creating a great disturbance in
the world in regard to understanding the Absolute Truth. However,
those who follow the pancaratriki-vidhi under the guidance of a proper
spiritual master can understand the Absolute Truth. It is said,
pancaratrasya krtsnasya vakta tu bhagavan svayam: the pancaratra
system is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just like
Bhagavad-gita. Vasudeva-sarana vidur afjasaiva: the truth can be
understood only by one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of
Vasudeva.


--- Page 119 ---
Text 10] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 113
bahianarh janmanam ante
JAanavan mari prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma sudurlabhah
“After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surren-
ders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is.
Such a great soul is very rare.” (Bg. 7.19) Only those who have surren-
dered to the lotus feet of Vasudeva can understand the Absolute Truth.
vasudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogah prayojitah
Janayaty asu vairagyarn
jAadnari ca yad ahaitukam
“By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Sri
Krsna, one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment
from the world.” (Bhag. 1.2.7) Therefore, Vasudeva, Bhagavan Sri
Krsna, personally teaches in Bhagavad-gita:
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekari Saranar vraja
“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me.”
(Bg. 18.66) Ir) ‡
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
“One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devo-
tional service.” (Bg. 18.55) The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not
properly understood even by Lord Siva or Lord Brahma, what to speak of
others, but He can be understood by the process of bhakti-yoga.
mayy dasakta-manah partha
yogarh yuiijan mad-asrayah
asar$ayar samagrari mar
yatha jaasyasi tac chrnu
(Bg. 7.1)


--- Page 120 ---
114 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
If one practices bhakti-yoga by taking shelter of Vasudeva, Krsna,
simply by hearing Vasudeva speak about Himself, one can understand
everything about Him. Indeed, one can understand Him completely
(samagram).
TEXT 11
स त्वं समीहितमदः स्थितिजन्मनासं
भूतेहितं च जगतो मवबन्धमोक्षौ |
वायुर्यथा विशति खं च चराचराख्यं
स्वं तदात्पङूतयावगयोऽवरुनत्से 1221
sa tvarn samihitam adah sthiti-janma-nasar
bhitehitarh ca jagato bhava-bandha-moksau
vayur yatha visati khar ca caracarakhyari
sarvari tad-atmakatayavagamo ’varuntse

sah—Your Lordship; tvam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
samihitam —which has been created (by You); adah—of this material
cosmic manifestation; sthiti-janma-nasam—creation, maintenance and
annihilation; bhiita—of the living entities; thitam ca—and the different
activities or endeavors; jagatah—of the whole world; bhava-bandha-
moksau—in being implicated and being liberated from material com-
plications; va@yuh—the air; yatha—as; visati—enters; kham—in the
vast sky; ca—and; cara-acara-akhyam—and everything, moving and
nonmoving; sarvam—everything; tat—that; atmakataya—because of
Your presence; avagamah—everything is known to You; avaruntse—
You are all-pervading and therefore know everything.

TRANSLATION

My Lord, You are the supreme knowledge personified. You
know everything about this creation and its beginning, mainte-
nance and annihilation, and You know all the endeavors made by
the living entities, by which they are either implicated in this ma-
terial world or liberated from it. As the air enters the vast sky and
also enters the bodies of all moving and nonmoving entities, You
are present everywhere, and therefore You are the knower of all.


--- Page 121 ---
Text 12] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 115
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-samhita:
eko py asau racayiturih jagad-anda-kotirm
yac-chaktir asti jagad-anda-caya yad-antah
andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-sthari
govindam adi-purusam tam ahari bhajami

“I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who by one of His plen-
ary portions enters the existence of every universe and every atomic par-
ticle and thus manifests His infinite energy unlimitedly throughout the
material creation.” (Bs. 5.35)

ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis

tabhir ya eva nija-ripataya kalabhih
goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhiito
govindam adi-purusari tam ahar bhajami

“I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who resides in His own realm,
Goloka, with Radha, who resembles His own spiritual figure and who
embodies the ecstatic potency [hladini]. Their companions are Her confi-
dantes, who embody extensions of Her bodily form and who are imbued
and permeated with ever-blissful spiritual rasa.” (Bs. 5.37)

Although Govinda is always present in His abode (goloka eva
nivasati), He is simultaneously present everywhere. Nothing is
unknown to Him, and nothing can be hidden from Him. The example
given here compares the Lord to the air, which is within the vast sky and
within every body but still is different from everything.

TEXT 12
EY
अवतारा मया दृष्टा रममाणस्य ते गुणः |
= 4 &.
सोऽहं तद्‌ द्रष्टुमिच्छामि यत्‌ ते योपिद्वपुधेतम्‌।। १२॥
avatara maya drsta
ramamanasya te gunaih


--- Page 122 ---
116 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
so "ham tad drastum icchami
yat te yosid-vapur dhrtam
avatdrah—incarnations; maya—by me; drstah—have been seen;
ramamanasya—while You demonstrate Your various pastimes; te—of
You; gunaih—by the manifestations of transcendental qualities; sah—
Lord Siva; aham—I; tat—that incarnation; drastum icchami—wish to
see; yat—which; te—of You; yosit-vapuh—the body of a woman;
dhrtam —was accepted.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, I have seen all kinds of incarnations You have ex-
hibited by Your transcendental qualities, and now that You have
appeared as a beautiful young woman, I wish to see that form of
Your Lordship.
PURPORT
When Lord Siva approached Lord Visnu, Lord Visnu inquired about
the purpose for Lord Siva’s coming there. Now Lord Siva discloses his
desire. He wanted to see the recent incarnation of Mohini-mirti, which
Lord Visnu had assumed to distribute the nectar generated from the
churning of the ocean of milk.
TEXT 13
a .
येन सम्मोहिता देत्याः पायिताशागरतं सुराः ।
तद्‌ Rew आयाताः परं कोतूहं हि नः ॥१३॥
yena sammohita daityah
payitas camrtarn surah
tad didrksava ayatah
param kautihalarn hi nah
yena—by such an incarnation; sammohitah—were captivated;
daityah—the demons; payitah—were fed; ca—also; amrtam —nectar;
surah—the demigods; tat—that form; didrksavah—desiring to see;
ayatah—we have come here; param —very much; kautihalam—great
eagerness; hi—indeed; nah —of ourselves.


--- Page 123 ---
Text 14] Mohini-mirti Bewilders Lord Siva 117
TRANSLATION
My Lord, we have come here desiring to see that form of Your
Lordship which You showed to the demons to captivate them com-
pletely and in this way enable the demigods to drink nectar. I am
very eager to see that form.
TEXT 14
श्री्युक उवाच
एवमम्यथितो विष्णुमेगवान्‌ अलपाणिना |
प्रहस्य मावगम्मीरं गिरिशं प्रत्यमाषत nee
sri-Suka uvaca
evam abhyarthito visnur
bhagavan sila-panina
prahasya bhava-gambhiram
girisam pratyabhasata
Sri-sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—in this way;
abhyarthitah—being requested; visnuh bhagavan—Lord Visnu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; sila-panina—by Lord Siva, who car-
ries a trident in his hand; prahasya—laughing; bhava-gambhiram—
with serious gravity; giriSam —unto Lord Siva; pratyabhasata—replied.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: When Lord Visnu was thus requested
by Lord Siva, who carries a trident in his hand, He smiled with gra-
vity and replied to Lord Siva as follows.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, is known as Yogesvara.
Yatra yogesvarah krsnah. Mystic yogis want to acquire some power by
practicing the yoga system, but Krsna, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, is known as the Supreme Lord of all mystic power. Lord Siva
wanted to see the Mohini-miirti, which was captivating the entire world,
and Lord Visnu was gravely thinking of how to captivate Lord Siva also.


--- Page 124 ---
118 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
Therefore the word bhava-gambhiram is used here. The illusory, ma-
terial energy is represented by Durgadevi, who is the wife of Girisa, or
Lord Siva. Durgadevi could not captivate Lord Siva’s mind, but now that
Lord Siva wanted to see Lord Visnu’s feminine form, Lord Visnu, by His
mystic power, would assume a form that would captivate even Lord Siva.
Therefore Lord Visnu was grave and at the same time was smiling.
TEXT 15
श्रीमगवादुवाच
कौतूहलाय दैत्यानां योपिदधेषो मया धतः |
पश्यता सुरकार्याणि गते पोयूषमाजने ॥ १५
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kautithalaya daityanarm
yosid-veso maya dhrtah
pasyata sura-karyani
gate piyisa-bhajane
sri-bhagavan uvaca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
kautihalaya—for the bewildering; daityanam—of the demons; yosit-
vesah—the form of a beautiful woman; maya—by Me; dhrtah—
assumed; pasyatd—seeing that it is necessary for Me; sura-kdryani—for
executing the interests of the demigods; gate—having been taken away;
piyusa-bhajane —the jug of nectar.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: When the demons
took away the jug of nectar, I assumed the form of a beautiful
woman to bewilder them by directly cheating them and thus to act
in the interest of the demigods.
PURPORT
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead assumed the form of the
beautiful woman Mohini-mirti, the demons were certainly captivated,
but the demigods present were not. In other words, those who maintain a
demoniac mentality are bewildered by the beauty of a woman, but those


--- Page 125 ---
Text 16] Mohini-murti Bewilders Lord Siva 119
who are advanced in Krsna consciousness, or even those on the platform
of goodness, are not bewildered. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
knew that because Lord Siva is not an ordinary person, he cannot be
bewildered even by the most beautiful woman. Cupid himself tried to in-
voke Lord Siva’s lusty desires in the presence of Parvati, but Lord Siva
was never agitated. Rather, the blazing fire from Lord Siva’s eyes turned
Cupid to ashes. Therefore, Lord Visnu had to think twice about what
kind of beautiful form would bewilder even Lord Siva. Consequently He
was smiling gravely, as stated in the previous verse (prahasya bhava-
gambhiram). A beautiful woman generally cannot induce Lord Siva to be
lusty, but Lord Visnu was considering whether there was any form of
woman who could enchant him.
TEXT 16
तत्तेऽहं दशेयिष्यामि Regi: सुरसत्तम ।
कामिनां बहु मन्तन्यं सङ्कटपप्रमवोदयम्‌ ॥१६॥
tat te "1772 darsayisyami
didrksoh sura-sattama
kaminar bahu mantavyari
sarntkalpa-prabhavodayam

tat—that; te—unto you; aham—I; darsayisyami—shall show;
didrksoh —desirous of seeing; sura-sattama—O best of the demigods;
kaminam—of persons who are very lusty; beahu—very much;
mantavyam—an object of adoration; sarikalpa—lusty desires;
prabhava-udayam—causing to be strongly aroused.

TRANSLATION

O best of the demigods, I shall now show you My form that is
very much appreciated by those who are lusty. Since you want to
see that form, I shall reveal it in your presence.

PURPORT

Lord Siva’s desiring to see Lord Visnu reveal the most attractive and

beautiful form of a woman was certainly a joking affair. Lord Siva knew


--- Page 126 ---
120 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
that he could not be agitated by any so-called beautiful woman. “The
Daityas may have been bewildered,” he thought, “but since even the
demigods could not be agitated, what to speak of me, who am the best of
all the demigods?” However, because Lord Siva wanted to see Lord
Visnu’s form as a woman, Lord Visnu decided to impersonate a woman
and show him a form that would immediately put him in an ocean of
lusty desires. In effect, therefore, Lord Visnu told Lord Siva, “I will
show you My form as a woman, and if you become agitated by lusty
desires, do not blame Me.” The attractive features of a woman are ap-
preciated by those who are affected by lusty desires, but those who are
above such desires, who are on the platform of Krsna consciousness, are
very difficult to bewilder. Nonetheless, by the supreme desire of the Per-
sonality of Godhead, everything can be done. This was to be a test of
whether Lord Siva could remain unagitated.
TEXT 17
+ उवाच
ES
इति FTW भगवांस्तत्रैवान्तरधीयत |
सर्वतश्वारयंअश्वु्भव आस्ते सहोमया ॥१७॥
Sri-Suka uvaca
iti bruvano bhagavars
tatraivantaradhiyata
sarvata$ caryams caksur
bhava aste sahomaya
sri-Sukah uvaca —Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; bruvanah—

while speaking; bhagavan—Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; tatra—there; eva—immediately; antaradhiyata —disap-
peared from the vision of Lord Siva and his associates; sarvatah—every-
where; carayan—moving; caksuh—the eyes; bhavah—Lord Siva;
aste—remained; saha-umaya—with his wife, Uma.

TRANSLATION

Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After speaking in this way, the

Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, immediately disap-


--- Page 127 ---
Text 19] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 121
peared, and Lord Siva remained there with Uma, looking for Him
all around with moving eyes.
TEXT 18
ततो ददञ्लोपवने wed
विचित्रपुष्पारुणपष्टवदुमे |
विक्रीडतीं कन्दुकरीर्या खसद्‌-
दुकरुप्यस्तनितम्बमेखलाम्‌ ॥१८॥
tato dadarsopavane vara-striyari
vicitra-pusparuna-pallava-drume
vikridatimm kanduka-lilaya lasad-
dukitla-paryasta-nitamba-mekhalam
tatah—thereafter; dadarsa— Lord Siva saw; upavane—in a nice
forest; vara-striyam—a very beautiful woman; vicitra—of many
varieties; puspa—flowers; aruna—pink; pallava—leaves; drume—in
the midst of the trees; vikridatim —engaged in playing; kanduka—with
a ball; lilaya—by pastimes of playing; lasat—shining; dukila—by a
sari; paryasta—covered; nitamba—on her hips; mekhalam —dressed
with a belt.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, in a nice forest nearby, full of trees with reddish-
pink leaves and varieties of flowers, Lord Siva saw a beautiful
woman playing with a ball. Her hips were covered with a shining
sari and ornamented with a belt.
TEXT 19
<
आयतेनोदतगङ्पितस्तन-
्रकृषदारोरुमरेः पदे पदे ।
श्रमज्यमानामिव मध्यतर्चरत्‌-
पद्‌श्रवालं नयतीं ततस्ततः ॥ १९॥


--- Page 128 ---
122 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
avartanodvartana-kampita-stana-
prakrsta-haroru-bharaih pade pade
prabhajyamanam iva madhyatas calat-
pada-pravalar nayatim tatas tatah
avartana—by the falling down; udvartana—and springing up;
kampita—trembling; stana—of the two breasts; prakrsta—beautiful;
hara—and of garlands; uru-bharaih—because of the heavy load; pade
pade—at every step; prabhajyamanam iva—as if breaking;
madhyatah—in the middle portion of the body; calat—moving like
that; pada-pravalam —feet reddish like coral; nayatim—moving; tatah
tatah—here and there.
TRANSLATION
Because the ball was falling down and bouncing up, as She
played with it Her breasts trembled, and because of the weight of
those breasts and Her heavy flower garlands, Her waist appeared to
be all but breaking at every step, as Her two soft feet, which were
reddish like coral, moved here and there.
TEXT 20
AC.
fg भ्रमत्कन्दुकचापलभृं
भ्रोदधिम्रतारायतलोरुलोचनाम्‌ ।
सखकणंविभ्राजितङ्कण्डरोष्छसत्‌-
कपोरनोतकलक्यष्डिताग्नाम्‌ ।॥।२०॥
diksu bhramat-kanduka-capalair bhrsam
prodvigna-tarayata-lola-locanam
sva-karna-vibhrajita-kundalollasat-
kapola-nilalaka-manditananam
diksu—in all directions; bhramat—moving; kanduka—of the ball;
capalaih—restlessness; bhrsam—now and then; prodvigna—full of
anxieties; tara —eyes; ayata—broad; lola—restless; locanam—with
such eyes; sva-karna—on Her own two ears; vibhrajita—illuminating;


--- Page 129 ---
Text 21] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 123
kundala—earrings; ullasat—shining; kapola—cheeks; nila—bluish;
alaka —with hair; mandita—was decorated; ananam—face.
TRANSLATION
The woman’s face was decorated by broad, beautiful, restless
eyes, which moved as the ball bounced here and there from Her
hand. The two brilliant earrings on Her ears decorated Her shin-
ing cheeks like bluish reflections, and the hair scattered on Her
face made Her even more beautiful to see.
TEXT 21
यद्‌ दुकूलं कबरीं च विच्युतां
सन्नह्यतीं वामकरेण वल्गुना |
विनिन्रतीमन्यक्रेण कन्दुकं
विमोहयन्तीं जगदात्ममायया ॥२१॥
Slathad dukitlari kabarim ca vicyutam
sannahyatim vama-karena valguna
vinighnatim anya-karena kandukarn
vimohayantim jagad-atma-mayaya
slathat—slipping or slackening; dukilam—the sari; kabarim ca—
and the hair on the head; vicyutam—being slackened and scattered;
sannahyatim—trying to bind; vama-karena—with the left hand;
valguna—very beautifully attractive; vinighnatim—striking; anya-
karena—with the right hand; kandukam—the ball; vimohayantim—in
this way captivating everyone; jagat—the whole world; atma-mayaya—
by the spiritual potency, the internal energy.
TRANSLATION
As She played with the ball, the sari covering Her body became
loose, and Her hair scattered. She tried to bind Her hair with Her
beautiful left hand, and at the same time She played with the ball
by striking it with Her right hand. This was so attractive that the


--- Page 130 ---
124 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
Supreme Lord, by His internal potency, in this way captivated
everyone.
PURPORT

In Bhagavad-gita (7.14) it is said, daivi hy esa guna-mayi mama
maya duratyaya: the external potency of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is extremely strong. Indeed, everyone is fully captivated by her
activities. Lord Sambhu (Siva) was not to be captivated by the external
potency, but because Lord Visnu wanted to captivate Him also, He ex-
hibited His internal potency to act the way that His external potency acts
to captivate ordinary living entities. Lord Visnu can captivate anyone,
even such a strong personality as Lord Sambhu.

TEXT 22
तां वीक््य देव इति कन्दुकरीरख्येषद्‌-
व्रीडास्फुटसितविखृषटकटाक्षघुष्टः |
खरीप्रेश्षणप्रतिसमीक्षणविह्वलात्मा
नात्मानमन्तिक उमां खगणां श्च वेद ।।२२।
tarh viksya deva iti kanduka-lilayesad-
vridasphuta-smita-visrsta-kataksa-mustah
stri-preksana-pratisamiksana-vihvalatma
natmanam antika umar sva-ganams ca veda

tam —Her; viksya—after observing; devah—Lord Sambhu; iti—in
this way; kanduka-lilaya—by playing with the ball; #sat—slight;
vrida—by bashfulness; asphuta—not very distinct; smita—with smil-
ing; visrsta—sent; kataksa-mustah—defeated by the glances; stri-
preksana—Dby glancing at that beautiful woman; pratisamiksana —and
by constantly being watched by Her; vihvala-atma—whose mind was
agitated; na—not; atmanam—himself; antike —(situated) nearby;
umam—his wife, mother Uma; sva-ganan ca—and his associates;
veda—Lord Siva could understand.

TRANSLATION

While Lord Siva observed the beautiful woman playing with the

ball, She sometimes glanced at him and slightly smiled in bashful-


--- Page 131 ---
Text 23] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 125
ness. As he looked at the beautiful woman and She watched him,
he forgot both himself and Uma, his most beautiful wife, as well as
his associates nearby.
PURPORT
The material bondage of this world is that a beautiful woman can cap-
tivate a handsome man and that a handsome man can captivate a
beautiful woman. Such are the affairs that began when Lord Siva ob-
served the beautiful girl playing with the ball. In such activities, the in-
fluence of Cupid is very prominent. As both parties move their eyebrows
and glance at one another, their lusty desires increase more and more.
Such reciprocations of lusty desire took place between Lord Siva and the
beautiful woman, even though Uma and Lord Siva’s associates were by
Lord Siva’s side. Such is the attraction between man and woman in the
material world. Lord Siva was supposed to be above all this attraction,
but he was victimized by the captivating power of Lord Visnu.
Rsabhadeva thus explains the nature of lusty attraction:
purisah striya mithuni-bhavam 68772
tayor mitho hrdaya-granthim ahuh
ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
Janasya moho yam ahah mameti
“The attraction between male and female is the basic principle of ma-
terial existence. On the basis of this misconception, which ties together
the hearts of the male and female, one becomes attracted to his body,
home, property, children, relatives and wealth. In this way one increases
life’s illusions and thinks in terms of ‘I and mine.” ” (Bhag. 5.5.8)
When a man and woman exchange feelings of lust, both of them are vic-
timized, and thus they are bound to this material world in various ways.
TEXT 23
तस्याः कराग्रात्‌ स त॒ कन्दुको यदा
गतो विदूरं तमजुबजत्सखियाः |
वासः सत्रं लघु मारुतोऽदरद्‌
मवस्य देवस्य किलानुपर्यतः ।।২২।।


--- Page 132 ---
126 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
tasyah karagrat sa tu kanduko yada
gato vidirarh tam anuvrajat-striyah
vasah sasitrarn laghu maruto ’harad
bhavasya devasya kilanupasSyatah
tasyah—of the beautiful woman; kara-agrat—from the hand; sah—
that; tu—but; kandukah—the ball; yada—when; gatah—had gone;
vidiram—far off; tam—that ball; anuvrajat—began to follow;
striyah—of that woman; vasah—the covering dress; sa-sitram —with
the belt; laghu—because of being very fine; marutah—the breeze;
aharat—blew away; bhavasya—while Lord Siva; devasya—the chief
demigod; kila—indeed; anupasyatah—was always looking.
TRANSLATION
When the ball leaped from Her hand and fell at a distance, the
woman began to follow it, but as Lord Siva observed these ac-
tivities, a breeze suddenly blew away the fine dress and belt that
covered her.
TEXT 24
एवं तां रुचिरापाङ्गीं दनीयां मनोरमाम्‌ |
হুদা तस्यां मनशक्रे विषजन्त्यां मवः किल ॥२४॥
evar tam rucirapangirin
darsaniyar manoramam
drstva tasyarm manas cakre
visajjantyar bhavah kila
evam—in this way; tam—Her; rucira-aparngim—possessing all at-
tractive features; darSaniyam—pleasing to see; manoramam—
beautifully formed; drstva—seeing; tasyam—upon Her; manah
cakre —thought; visajjantyam—to be attracted by him; bhavah—Lord
Siva; kila—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Thus Lord Siva saw the woman, every part of whose body was
beautifully formed, and the beautiful woman also looked at him.


--- Page 133 ---
Text 26] Mohini-marti Bewilders Lord Siva 127
Therefore, thinking that She was attracted to him, Lord Siva be-
came very much attracted to Her.
PURPORT
Lord Siva was observing every part of the woman’s body, and She was
also glancing at him with restless eyes. Thus Siva thought that She was
also attracted to him, and now he wanted to touch Her.
TEXT 25
क्यापदतरिलानस्तत्कृत्परबिहलः |
भवान्या अपि पश्यन्त्या गतदीस्तरपदं ययो ॥ २५॥
tayapahrta-vijianas
tat-krta-smara-vihvalah
bhavanya api pasyantya
gata-hris tat-padarm yayau
taya—by Her; apahrta—taken away; vijidnah—good sense; tat-
krta—done by Her; smara—by the smiling; vihvalah—having become
mad for Her; bhavanyah—while Bhavani, the wife of Lord Siva; api—
although; pasyantyah—was seeing all these incidents; gata-hrih—
bereft of all shame; tat-padam—to the place where She was situated;
yayau—went.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva, his good sense taken away by the woman because of
lusty desires to enjoy with Her, became so mad for Her that even in
the presence of Bhavani he did not hesitate to approach Her.
TEXT 26
सा तमायान्तमालोक्य Ten শ্রীতিবা যৃহামৃ।
निलीयमाना बषेषु हसन्ती नान्वतिष्ठत ॥२६॥
sa tam ayantam alokya
vivastra vridita bhrsam


--- Page 134 ---
128 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
niltyamana vrksesu
hasanti nanvatisthata
sa—that woman; tam —Lord Siva; ayantam—who was coming near;
alokya—seeing; vivastra—She was naked; wvridita—very bashful;
bhrsam—so much; niltyamana—was hiding; vrksesu —among the trees;
hasanti—smiling; na—not; anvatisthata—stood in one place.
TRANSLATION
_ The beautiful woman was already naked, and when She saw Lord
Siva coming toward Her, She became extremely bashful. Thus She
kept smiling, but She hid Herself among the trees and did not
stand in one place.
TEXT 27
तामन्वगच्छद्‌ भगवान्‌ भवः प्रञ्ुषितेन्द्रियः |
कामस्य च वशं नीतः करेणुमिव यूथपः ॥ २५७
tam anvagacchad bhagavan
bhavah pramusitendriyah
kamasya ca vasa nitah
karenum iva yiathapah
tam —Her; anvagacchat—followed; bhagavan—Lord Siva;
bhavah—known as Bhava; pramusita-indriyah—whose senses were agi-
tated; kamasya—of lusty desires; ca—and; vasam—victimized; nitah—
having become; karenum—a female elephant; iva —just as; yathapah—
a male elephant.
TRANSLATION
His senses being agitated, Lord Siva, victimized by lusty desires,
began to follow Her, just as a lusty elephant follows a she-elephant.
TEXT 28
सोऽनुकज्यातिवेभेन गृहीत्वानिच्छतीं खियम्‌।
केशबन्ध उपानीय बाहुम्यां परिषसजे ॥৭২৫।।


--- Page 135 ---
Text 30] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 129
so ‘nuvrajydtivegena
grhitvanicchatim striyam
kesa-bandha upaniya
bahubhyam parisasvaje
sah—Lord Siva; anuvrajya—following Her; ati-vegena—with great
speed; grhitva—catching; anicchatim —although She was not willing to
be caught; striyam —the woman; kesa-bandhe—on the cluster of hair;
upaniya—dragging Her near; bahubhyam—with his arms;
parisasvaje—embraced Her.
TRANSLATION
After following Her with great speed, Lord Siva caught Her by
the braid of Her hair and dragged Her near him. Although She was
unwilling, he embraced Her with his arms.
TEXTS 29-30
सोपगूढा भगवता करिणा करिणी यथा |
इतस्ततः प्रसरन्ती विभ्रकीर्णशिरोरुहा ||২৭।।
आत्मानं मोचयित्वाङ्ग सुरषभथ॒जान्तरात्‌ |
प्राद्रवत्सा TPN माया देवविनिर्मिता ॥३०॥
sopagidha bhagavata
karina karint yatha
itas tatah prasarpanti
viprakirna-siroruha
atmanam mocayitvanga
surarsabha-bhujantarat
pradravat sa prthu-sroni
maya deva-vinirmita
sa—the woman; 2 upagiidhd—being captured and embraced;
bhagavata—by Lord Siva; karina—by a male elephant; karini—a she-
elephant; yatha—as; itah tatah —here and there; prasarpanti—swirling


--- Page 136 ---
130 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
like a snake; viprakirna—scattered; siroruha—all the hair on Her head;
atmanam —Herself; mocayitva—releasing; aiiga—O0 King; sura-
rsabha —of the best of the demigods (Lord Siva); bhuja-antarat—from
the entanglement in the midst of the arms; pradravat—began to run
very fast; sa—She; prthu-sroni—bearing very large hips; maya —inter-
nal potency; deva-vinirmitda—exhibited by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Being embraced by Lord Siva like a female elephant embraced
by a male, the woman, whose hair was scattered, swirled like a
snake. O King, this woman, who had large, high hips, was a woman
of yogamiya presented by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
She released Herself somehow or other from the fond embrace of
Lord Siva’s arms and ran away.
TEXT 31
<
तस्यासौ पदवीं रुद्रो विष्णोरद्रतकर्म॑णः |
XQ
प्रत्यपयत कामेन वैरिणेव विनिलितः ॥२१॥
tasyasau 00०४ rudro ’
visnor adbhuta-karmanah
pratyapadyata kamena
vairineva vinirjitah
tasya—of He who is the Supreme Lord; asau—Lord Siva; padavim—
the place; rudrah—Lord Siva; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; adbhuta-
karmanah—of He who acts very wonderfully; pratyapadyata—began to
follow; kamena—by lusty desire; vairind iva—as if by an enemy;
vinirjitah —being harassed.
TRANSLATION
_ As if harassed by an enemy in the form of lusty desires, Lord
Siva followed the path of Lord Visnu, who acts very wonderfully
and who had taken the form of Mohini.


--- Page 137 ---
Text 32] Mohini-mirti Bewilders Lord Siva 131
PURPORT
Lord Siva cannot be victimized by maya. Therefore it is to be under-
stood that Lord Siva was being thus harassed by Lord Visnu’s internal
potency. Lord Visnu can perform many wonderful activities through His
various potencies.
parasya Saktir vividhaiva srizyate
svabhaviki jaiana-bala-kriya ca
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8)
The Supreme Lord has various potencies, by which He can act very effi-
ciently. To do anything expertly, He doesn’t even need to contemplate.
Since Lord Siva was being harassed by the woman, it is to be understood
that this was being done not by a woman but by Lord Visnu Himself.
TEXT 32
तस्यालुषायतो रेतञचसकन्दामोषरेतसः |
itn यूथपस्येव वासितामनुधावतः ।।३२॥
tasyanudhavato retas
caskandamogha-retasah
Susmino yithapasyeva
vasitam anudhavatah
tasya—of him (Lord Siva); anudhavatah—who was following;
retah—the semen; caskanda—discharged; amogha-retasah—of that
person whose discharge of semen never goes in vain; Susminah—mad;
yiathapasya—of a male elephant; iva—just like; vasitam—to a female
elephant able to conceive pregnancy; anudhavatah—following.
TRANSLATION
Just as a maddened bull elephant follows a female elephant who
is able to conceive pregnancy, Lord Siva followed the beautiful
woman and discharged semen, even though his discharge of semen
never goes in vain.


--- Page 138 ---
132 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
TEXT 33
यत्र॒ यत्रापतन्मद्यां रेतस्तस्य महात्मनः ।
तानि रूप्यस्य हेम्न कषत्राण्यासन्मदहीपते 11330
yatra yatrapatan mahyari
retas tasya mahdatmanah
tani rapyasya hemnas ca
ksetrary asan mahi-pate
yatra—wherever; yatra—and wherever; apatat—fell; mahyam—on
the surface of the world; retah—the semen; tasya—of him; maha-
atmanah—of the great personality (Lord Siva); tani—all those places;
ripyasya—of silver; hemnah—of gold; ca—and; ksetrani—mines;
asan—became; mahi-pate—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, wheresoever on the surface of the globe fell the semen
of the great personality of Lord Siva, mines of gold and silver later
appeared.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that those who seek
gold and silver can worship Lord Siva for material opulences. Lord Siva
lives under a bael tree and does not even construct a house in which to
dwell, but although he is apparently poverty-stricken, his devotees are
sometimes opulently endowed with large quantities of silver and gold.
Pariksit Maharaja later asks about this, and Sukadeva Gosvami replies.
TEXT 34
सरित्सरसु WY वनेषूपवनेषु च ।
यत्र क्र चासन्करषयस्तत्र॒संनिदितो हरः onze
sarit-sarahsu 502157८
vanesiipavanesu ca
yatra kva casann rsayas
tatra sannihito harah


--- Page 139 ---
Text 35] Mohini-mirti Bewilders Lord Siva 133
sarit—near the shores of the rivers; sarahsu—and near the lakes;
Sailesu—near the mountains; vanesu—in the forests; upavanesu—in
the gardens or small forests; ca—also; yatra—wherever; kva—any-
where; ca—also; asan—were existing; rsayah—great sages; tatra—
there; sannihitah—was present; harah—Lord Siva.
TRANSLATION
Following Mohini, Lord Siva went everywhere—near the shores
of the rivers and lakes, near the mountains, near the forests, near
the gardens, and wherever there lived great sages.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thiakura remarks that Mohini-mirti
dragged Lord Siva to so many places, especially to where the great sages
lived, to instruct the sages that their Lord Siva had become mad for a
beautiful woman. Thus although they were all great sages and saintly
persons, they should not think themselves free, but should remain ex-
tremely cautious about beautiful women. No one should think himself
liberated in the presence of a beautiful woman. The $astras enjoin:
matra svasra duhitra va
naviviktasano bhavet
balavan indriya-gramo
vidvarisam api karsati
“One should not stay in a solitary place with a woman, even if she be his
mother, sister or daughter, for the senses are so uncontrollably powerful
that in the presence of a woman one may become agitated, even if he is
very learned and advanced.” (Bhag. 9.19.17)
TEXT 35
स्कर रेतसि सोऽपश्यदात्मानं देवमायया ।
जडीकृतं नृपश्रेष्ठ संन्यवत॑त कस्मात्‌ ॥।३५॥
skanne retasi so ‘paSyad
atmanari deva-mayaya


--- Page 140 ---
134 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
10011671277 nrpa-srestha
sannyavartata kasmalat

skanne —when fully discharged; retasi—the semen; sah—Lord Siva;
apasyat—saw; atmanam—his own self; deva-mayaya—by the maya of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jadikrtam —had become victimized
as a fool; nrpa-srestha—O best of kings (Maharaja Pariksit);
sannyavartata—restrained himself further; kasmalat—from illusion.

TRANSLATION

O Maharaja Pariksit, best of kings, when Lord Siva had fully dis-
charged semen, he could see how he himself had been victimized
by the illusion created by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus he restrained himself from any further maya.

PURPORT

Once one is agitated by lusty desires upon seeing a woman, those
desires increase more and more, but when semen is discharged in the act
of sex, the lusty desires diminish. The same principle acted upon Lord
Siva. He was allured by the beautiful woman Mohini-miirti, but when his
semen had been fully discharged, he came to his senses and realized how
he had been victimized as soon as he saw the woman in the forest. If one
is trained to protect his semen by observing celibacy, naturally he is not
attracted by the beauty of a woman. If one can remain a brahmacari, he
saves himself so much trouble in material existence. Material existence
means enjoying the pleasure of sexual intercourse (yan maithunadi-
grhamedhi-sukham). If one is educated about sex life and is trained to
protect his semen, he is saved from the danger of material existence.

TEXT 36
अथावगतमादात््य आत्मनो जगदात्मनः |
अपरिजञेयदीयस्य ন मेने तदुदाद्धुतम्‌ ॥३६॥
athavagata-mahatmya
atmano jagad-atmanah


--- Page 141 ---
Text 37] Mohini-mirti Bewilders Lord Siva 135
aparijiieya-viryasya
na mene tad u hadbhutam

atha—thus; avagata—being fully convinced about; mahatmyah—
the greatness; atmanah—of himself; jagat-atmanah—and of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; aparijiieya-viryasya—who has un-
limited potency; na—not; mene—did consider; tat—the miraculous ac-
tivities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in bewildering him;
u ha—certainly; adbhutam—as wonderful.

TRANSLATION

Thus Lord Siva could understand his position and that of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has unlimited potencies.
Having reached this understanding, he was not at all surprised by
the wonderful way Lord Visnu had acted upon him.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as all-powerful be-
cause no one can excel Him in any activity. In Bhagavad-gita (7.7) the
Lord says, mattah parataram nanyat kinicid asti dhananjaya: (0 con-
queror of wealth, there is no truth superior to Me.” No one can equal the
Lord or be greater than Him, for He is the master of everyone. As stated
in Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 5.142), ekale vara krsna, ara saba
bhrtya. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the only master
of everyone, including even Lord Siva, what to speak of others. Lord Siva
was already aware of the supreme power of Lord Visnu, but when he was
actually put into bewilderment, he felt proud to have such an exalted
master.

TEXT 37
বযাবিস্কৰমবীতমাত্তং্য मधुखदनः |
उवाच परमप्रीतो बिभ्रतां पौरुषीं तनुम्‌ ॥२७॥
tam aviklavam avridam
alaksya madhusitdanah


--- Page 142 ---
136 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
uvdca parama-prito
bibhrat svar paurusiri tanum
tam—him (Lord Siva); aviklavam —without being agitated by the in-
cident that had taken place; avridarmn — without being ashamed; alaksya-
—seeing; madhu-siidanah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is known as Madhusiidana, the killer of the demon Madhu; uvdca —said;
parama-pritah—being very pleased; bibhrat—assuming; svam—His
own; paurusim—original; tanum—form.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Lord Siva unagitated and unashamed, Lord Visnu
[Madhusiidana] was very pleased. Thus He resumed His original
form and spoke as follows.
PURPORT
Although Lord Siva was aghast at the potency of Lord Visnu, he did
aot feel ashamed. Rather, he was proud to be defeated by Lord Visnu.
Nothing is hidden from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He is in
everyone's heart. Indeed, the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (15.15),
sarvasya caharn hrdi sannivisto mattah smrtir jianam apohanari ca: “I
am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowl-
edge and forgetfulness.” Whatever happened had taken place under the
direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore there
was no cause to be sorry or ashamed. Although Lord Siva is never de-
feated by anyone, when defeated by Lord Visnu he felt proud that he had
such an exalted and powerful master.
TEXT 38
श्रीभगावाडुवाच
दिष्टया त्वं विबुधश्रेष्ठ at निष्ठामात्मना सितः |
EN
यन्मे खीरूपया स्वैरं मोदितोऽप्यङ्ग मायया ॥३८॥
sri-bhagavan uvaca
distya চেন? vibudha-srestha
svar nistham atmana sthitah


--- Page 143 ---
Text 39] Mohini-marti Bewilders Lord Siva 137
yan me stri-riipaya svairam
mohito ‘py anga mayaya

sri-bhagavan uvdca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
distya—all auspiciousness; tvam—unto you; vibudha-srestha—O best of
all the demigods; svam—in your own; nistham—fixed situation; at-
mana—of your own self; sthitah—you are situated; yat—as; me—
Mine; stri-riipaya—appearance like a woman; svairam—sufficiently;
mohitah—enchanted; api—in spite of; arga—O Lord Siva; mayaya—
by My potency.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best of the
demigods, although you have been amply harassed because of My
potency in assuming the form of a woman, you are established in
your position. Therefore, may all good fortune be upon you.

PURPORT

Since Lord Siva is the best of the demigods, he is the best of all devo-
tees (vaisnavanar yatha Sambhuh). His exemplary character was
therefore praised by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who gave His
benediction by saying, ‘May all good fortune be upon you.” When a de-
votee becomes a little proud, the Supreme Lord sometimes exhibits His
supreme power to dissipate the devotee’s misunderstanding. After being
amply harassed by Lord Visnu’s potency, Lord Siva resumed his normal,
unagitated condition. This is the position of a devotee. A devotee should
not be agitated under any circumstances, even in the worst reverses. As
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (6.22), yasmin sthito na duhkhena
gurunapi vicalyate: because of his full faith in the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, a devotee is never agitated, even in the greatest trials. This
pridelessness is possible only for the first-class devotees, of whom Lord
Sambhu is one.

TEXT 39
को जु मेऽतितरेन्मायां विषक्तस्त्व हते पुमान्‌ ।
तांस्तान्विसृजतीं मावान्दुस्तरामढृतात्ममिः 13210


--- Page 144 ---
138 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
ko nu me ’titaren mayarn
visaktas tvad-rte puman
tarns tan visrjatirn bhavan
dustaram akrtatmabhih
kah—what; nu—indeed; me—My; atitaret—can surpass; mayam—
illusory energy; visaktah—attached to material sense enjoyment; tvat-
rte —except for you; pumdn—person; tan—such conditions; tan—unto
the materially attached persons; visrjatim—in surpassing; bhavan—
reactions of material activities; dustaram—very difficult to surmount;
akrta-atmabhih—by persons unable to control their senses.
TRANSLATION
My dear Lord Sambhu, who within this material world but you
can surpass My illusory energy? People are generally attached to
sense enjoyment and conquered by its influence. Indeed, the in-
fluence of material nature is very difficult for them to surmount.
PURPORT
Of the three chief demigods—Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara—all but
Visnu are under the influence of maya. In Caitanya-caritamrta, they are
described as 77707, which means “under maya’s influence.” But even
though Lord Siva associates with maya, he is not influenced. The living
entities are affected by maya, but although Lord Siva apparently asso-
ciates with maya, he is not affected. In other words, all living entities
within this material world except for Lord Siva are swayed by maya.
Lord Siva is therefore neither visnpu-tattva nor jiva-tattva. He is between
the two.
TEXT 40
सेयं गुणमयी माया न त्वापमिभरिष्यति ।
मया समेता कालेन कालरूपेण AWG: ।४०॥
seyarn guna-mayi maya
na tvam abhibhavisyati


--- Page 145 ---
Text 41] Mohini-miirti Bewilders Lord Siva 139
maya sameta kalena
kala-rapena bhagasah
sa—that insurmountable; iyam—this; guna-mayi—consisting of the
three modes of material nature; maya—illusory energy; na—not;
tvam—you; abhibhavisyati—will be able to bewilder in the future;
maya—with Me; sametda —joined; kalena—eternal time; kala-riipena—
in the form of time; bhagasah—with her different parts.
TRANSLATION
The material, external energy [maya], who cooperates with Me
„ in creation and who is manifested in the three modes of nature,
will not be able to bewilder you any longer.
PURPORT
When Lord Siva was present, his wife, Durga, was also there. Durga
works in cooperation with the Supreme Personality of Godhead-in creat-
ing the cosmic manifestation. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.10),
mayadhyaksena prakrtih siyate sacaracaram: “The material energy
[prakrti] works under My direction, 0 son of Kunti, and is producing all
moving and unmoving beings.” Prakrti is Durga.
srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka
chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibharti durga
The entire cosmos is created by Durgi in cooperation with Lord Visnu in
the form of kala, time. Sa itksata lokan nu srja. Sa imal lokan asrjata.
This is the version of the Vedas (ditareya Upanisad 1.1.1-2). Maya
happens to be the wife of Lord Siva, and thus Lord Siva is in association
with maya, but Lord Visnu here assures Lord Siva that this maya will no
longer be able to captivate him.
TEXT 41
श्रीय्युक उवाच
: -
एवं मगवता राजन्‌ श्रीवत्साङ्केन सत्कृतः ।
आमन्त्य त॑ परिक्रम्य सगणः खालयं ययौ ।॥४१॥


--- Page 146 ---
140 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
sri-Suka uvaca
evar bhagavata rajan
Srivatsankena sat-krtah
amantrya tar parikramya
saganah svalayam yayau
Sri-Sukah uvaca—Sri  Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—thus;
bhagavata—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rajan—O King;
Srivatsa-arikena—who always carries the mark of Srivatsa on His breast;
sat-krtah—being very much applauded; amantrya—taking permission
from; tam —Him; parikramya—circamambulating; sa-ganah— with his
associates; sva-dlayam—to his own abode; yayau—went back.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, having thus been praised by
the Supreme Personality, who bears the mark of Srivatsa on His
chest, Lord Siva circumambulated Him. Then, after taking permis-
sion from Him, Lord Siva returned to his abode, Kailasa, along
with his associates.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks that when Lord Siva
was offering obeisances unto Lord Visnu, Lord Visnu arose and
embraced him. Therefore the word srivatsarikena is used here. The mark
of Srivatsa adorns the chest of Lord Visnu, and therefore when Lord
Visnu embraced Lord Siva while being circumambulated, the Srivatsa
mark touched Lord Siva’s bosom.
TEXT 42
आत्मांशमूतां तां मायां भवानीं भगवान्मवः ।
संमतामषिथरूयानां प्रीत्याचष्टाथ मारत ॥४२॥
atmarmsa-bhatar tar mayam
bhavanirm bhagavan bhavah
sammatam rsi-mukhyanam
prityacastatha bharata


--- Page 147 ---
Text 43] Mohini-marti Bewilders Lord Siva 141
atma-arisa-bhiitam —a potency of the Supreme Soul; t@m—unto her;
mayam —the illusory energy; bhavanim—who is the wife of Lord Siva;
bhagavan—the powerful; bhavah—Lord Siva; sammatam—accepted;
rsi-mukhyanam —by the great sages; pritya—in jubilation; dcasta—
began to address; atha—then; bharata—O Maharaja Pariksit, descen-
dant of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata Maharaja, Lord Siva, in jubilation, then
addressed his wife, Bhavani, who is accepted by all authorities as
the potency of Lord Visnu.
TEXT 43
अयि STEERS मायां
परस्य पुंसः परदेवतायाः |
अहं ङलानाग्रषभोऽपि स॒द्य
ययावशोऽन्ये gare: ॥४२॥
ayi vyapasyas tvam ajasya mayam
parasya purisah para-devatayah
ahari kalanam rsabho 08 muhye
yayavaso ‘nye kim utasvatantrah
ayi—oh; vyapaSyah—have seen; tvam—you; ajasya—of the un-
born; mayam—the illusory energy; parasya purisah—of the Supreme
Person; para-devatayah—the Absolute Truth; aham—myself;
kalanam—of plenary portions; rsabhah—the chief; api—although;
muhye—became bewildered; yaya—by her; avasah—imperceptibly;
anye —others; kim uta—what to speak of; asvatantrah—fully depen-
dent on maya.
TRANSLATION
Lord Siva said: O Goddess, you have now seen the illusory en-
ergy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the unborn
master of everyone. Although I am one of the principal expansions


--- Page 148 ---
142 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
of His Lordship, even I was illusioned by His energy. What then is
to be said of others, who are fully dependent on maya?
TEXT 44
यं qREEEER योगात्‌
a
समासदस्रान्त उपारतं वें |
स॒ एष साक्षात्‌ पुरुषः पुराणो
न यत्र कालो विशते न वेदः les
yar mam aprcchas tvam upetya yogat
sama-sahasranta uparatarm vai
sa esa saksat purusah purano
na yatra kalo visate na vedah
yam—about whom; mam—from me; aprcchah—inquired; tvam—
you; upetya—coming near me; yogat—from performing mystic yoga;
sama —years; sahasra-ante—at the end of one thousand; updratam—
ceasing; vai—indeed; sah—He; esah—here is; saksat—directly;
purusah—the Supreme Person; puranah—the original; na—not;
yatra—where; kalah—eternal time; viSate—can enter; na—nor;
vedah—the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
When 1 finished performing mystic yoga for one thousand
years, you asked me upon whom I was meditating. Now, here is
that Supreme Person to whom time has no entrance and who the
Vedas cannot understand.
PURPORT
Eternal time enters anywhere and everywhere, but it cannot enter the
kingdom of god. Nor can the Vedas understand the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. This is an indication of the Lord’s being omnipotent,
omnipresent and omniscient.


--- Page 149 ---
Text 46] Mohini-marti Bewilders Lord Siva 143
TEXT 45
fs उवाच
¢
इति तेऽभिहितस्तात विक्रमः शाङ्गघन्वनः ।
[3
सिन्धोनिमेथने येन शतः पृष्ठे महाचलः ।४५॥
ॐ7-5८/६८. uvaca
iti te "bhihitas tata
vikramah sarriga-dhanvanah
sindhor nirmathane yena
dhrtah prsthe mahdcalah
$ri-Sukah uvdca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti—thus; te—unto
you; abhihitah—explained; tata—my dear King; vikramah—prowess;
sarnga-dhanvanah—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who car-
ries the उवाह bow; sindhoh—of the ocean of milk; nirmathane—in the
churning; yena—by whom; dhrtah—was held; prsthe—on the back;
maha-acalah—the great mountain.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: My dear King, the person who bore the
great mountain on His back for the churning of the ocean of milk
is the same Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as
Sarngadhanva. I have now described to you His prowess.
TEXT 46
<
Lo COMME 350 (1 as |
न रिष्यते जातु स्ठयमः कचित्‌ ।
यदत्तमश्छोकगुणानुबणेनं
समस्तसंसारपरिश्रमापहम्‌ ॥४६॥
etan muhuh kirtayato ’nusrnvato
na risyate jatu samudyamah kvacit


--- Page 150 ---
144 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 12
yad uttamasloka-gunanuvarnanari
samasta-sarhsara-parisramapaham
etat—this narration; muhuh—constantly; kirtayatah—of one who
chants; anusrnvatah—and also hears; na—not; risyate—annihilated;
jatu—at any time; samudyamah—the endeavor; kvacit—at any time;
yat—Dbecause; uttarnasloka—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
guna-anuvarnanam—describing = the transcendental qualities;
samasta—all; sarhsara—of material existence; pariSrama—misery;
apaham—finishing.
TRANSLATION
The endeavor of one who constantly hears or describes this nar-
ration of the churning of the ocean of milk will never be fruitless.
Indeed, chanting the glories of the Supreme Personality of God-
head is the only means to annihilate all sufferings in this material
world.
TEXT 47
असदविषयमङ्धिं मावगम्यं प्रपन्ना-
-~
नगतममरवर्यानाशयत्‌ सिन्धुमध्यम्‌।
कपटयुवतिवेषो मोहयन्यः सुरारी-
स्तमदघुपसृतानां कामप्रं नतोऽसि ॥४७॥
asad-avisayam anghrir bhava-gamyari prapannan
amrtam amara-varyan asayat sindhu-mathyam
kapata-yuvati-veso mohayan yah surdriris
tam aham upasrtanari kama-piiram nato ‘smi
asat-avisayam—not understood by the atheists; arighrim—unto the
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhava-gamyam—
understood by devotees; prapannan—fully surrendered; amrtam —the
nectar; amara-varyan —only unto the demigods; dsayat—gave to drink;
sindhu-mathyam —produced from the ocean of milk; kapata-yuvati-
vesah —appearing as a false young girl; mohayan—captivating; yah—


--- Page 151 ---
Text 47] Mohini-marti Bewilders Lord Siva 145
He who; sura-arin—the enemies of the demigods; tam—unto Him;
aham—1; upasrtanam —of the devotees; kama-piaram—who fulfills all
desires; natah asmi—I offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION

Assuming the form of a young woman and thus bewildering the
demons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead distributed to His
devotees, the demigods, the nectar produced from the churning of
the ocean of milk. Unto that Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who always fulfills the desires of His devotees, I offer my respect-
ful obeisances.

PURPORT

The instruction of this narration concerning the churning of the milk
ocean is clearly manifested by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Al-
though He is equal to everyone, because of natural affection He favors
His devotees. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.29):

samo ‘har sarva-bhiitesu
na me dvesyo ’sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu mar bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham

“I envy no one, nor ain I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and ] am also a
friend to him.” This partiality of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
natural. A person cares for his children not because of partiality but in a
reciprocation of love. The children depend on the father’s affection, and
the father affectionately maintains the children. Similarly, because devo-
tees do not know anything but the lotus feet of the Lord, the Lord is al-
ways prepared to give protection to His devotees and fulfill their desires.
He therefore says, kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati: **0
son of Kunti, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.”

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twelfth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The Mohini-mirti
Incarnation Bewilders Lord Siva.”


--- Page 152 ---
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Description of Future Manus

Of the fourteen Manus, six Manus have already been described. Now,
this chapter will consecutively describe each Manu from the seventh to
the fourteenth.

| The seventh Manu, who is the son of Vivasvan, is known as
Sraddhadeva. He has ten sons, named lksvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrsta,
Saryati, Narisyanta, Nabhaga, Dista, Tarasa, Prsadhra and Vasuman. In
this manvantara, or reign of Manu, among the demigods are the Adityas,
Vasus, Rudras, Visvedevas, Maruts, Asvini-kumaras and Rbhus. The
king of heaven, Indra, is known as Purandara, and the seven sages are
known as Kasyapa, Atri, Vasistha, Vi§vamitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and
Bharadvaja. During this period of Manu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Visnu appears from the womb of Aditi in His incarnation as the
son of Kasyapa.

In the period of the eighth Manu, the Manu is Savarni. His sons are
headed by Nirmoka, and among the demigods are the Sutapas. Bali, the
son of Virocana, is Indra, and Galava and Parasurama are among the
seven sages. In this age of Manu, the incarnation of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead appears as Sarvabhauma, the son of Devaguhya and
Sarasvati.

In the period of the ninth Manu, the Manu is Daksa-savarni. His sons
are headed by Bhataketu, and among the demigods are the
Maricigarbhas. Adbhuta is Indra, and among the seven sages is
Dyutiman. In this period of Manu, the incarnation Rsabha is born of
Ayusman and Ambudhara.

In the period of the tenth Manu, the Manu is Brahma-savarni. Among
his sons is Bhirisena, and the seven sages are Havisman and others.
Among the demigods are the Suvasanas, and Sambhu is Indra. The incar-
nation in this period of Manu is Visvaksena, who is a friend of Sambhu
and who is born from the womb of Visiici in the house of a brahmana
named Vi$vasrasta.

147


--- Page 153 ---
148 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13

In the period of the eleventh Manu, the Manu is Dharma-savarni, who
has ten sons, headed by Satyadharma. Among the demigods are the
Vihangamas, Indra is known as Vaidhrta, and the seven sages are Aruna
and others. In this manvantara, the incarnation is Dharmasetu, who is
born of Vaidhrti and Aryaka.

In the period of the twelfth Manu, the Manu is Rudra-savarni, whose
sons are headed by Devavan. The demigods are the Haritas and others,
Indra is Rtadhiama, and the seven sages are Tapomiirti and others. The
incarnation in this manvantara is Sudhama, or Svadhama, who is born
from the womb of Sunrta. His father’s name 15 Satyasaha.

In the period of the thirteenth Manu, the Manu is Deva-savarni.
Among his sons is Citrasena, the demigods are the Sukarmas and others,
Indra is Divaspati, and Nirmoka is among the sages. The manvantara-
avatara 15 Yoges$vara, who is born of Devahotra and Brhati.

In the period of the fourteenth Manu, the Manu is Indra-savarni.
Anong his sons are Uru and Gambhira, the demigods are the Pavitras
and others, Indra is Suci, and among the sages are Agni and Bahu. The
incarnation of this manvantara is known as Brhadbhanu. He is born of
Satrayana from the womb of Vitana.

The total duration of the periods ruled by these Manus is calculated to
be one thousand catur-yugas, or 4,300,000 times 1,000 years.

TEXT 1
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
मलुर्विवस्वतः पुत्रः श्राद्धदेव इति धुतः ।
- €
सक्षमो वतमानो यस्तदपत्यानि मे श्रृणु ॥ १॥
$ri-Suka uvaca
manur vivasvatah putrah
sraddhadeva iti srutah
saptamo vartamano yas
tad-apatyani me Srnu

sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvimi said; manuh—Manu;

vivasvatah—of the sun-god; putrah—son; sraddhadevah—as


--- Page 154 ---
Text 3] Description of Future Manus 149
Sraddhadeva; iti—thus; s$rutah—known, celebrated; saptamah—
seventh; vartamanah—at the present moment; yah—he who; tat—his;
apatyani—children; me—from me; srnu—just hear.
TRANSLATION
টন Sukadeva Gosvami said: The present Manu, who is named
Sraddhadeva, is the son of Vivasvan, the predominating deity on
the sun planet. Sraddhadeva is the seventh Manu. Now please hear
from me as I describe his sons.
TEXTS 2-3
शस्वाङ्नमगश्चैव Ye: शयोतिरेव च ।
नरिष्यन्तोऽथ नामागः सप्तमो दिष्ट उच्यते ॥ २ ॥
तरूषश्च षध दशमो वसुमान्स्मृतः |
मनोवैवस्वतस्यैते दशपुत्राः परन्तप ॥ २ ॥
iksvakur nabhagas caiva
dhrstah Saryatir eva ca
narisyanto ‘tha nabhagah
saptamo dista ucyate
tarusas ca prsadhras ca
dasamo vasuman smrtah
manor vaivasvatasyaite
dasa-putrah parantapa
iksvakuh —lIksvaku; nabhagah—Nabhaga; ca—also; eva—indeed;
dhrstah—Dhrsta; = Saryatih—Saryati;  eva—certainly; ca —also;
narisyantah—Narisyanta; atha—as well as; nabhdgah—Nabhaga;
saptamah—the seventh one; distah—Dista; ucyate—is so celebrated;
tarisah ca—and Tarasa; prsadhrah ca—and Prsadhra; dasamah—the
tenth one; vasuman—Vasuman; smrtah—known; manoh—of Manu;
vaivasvatasya—of Vaivasvata; ete—all these; dasa-putrah—ten sons;
parantapa—O King.


--- Page 155 ---
150 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, among the ten sons of Manu are Iksvaku,
Nabhaga, Dhrsta, Saryati, Narisyanta and Nabhaga. The seventh
son is known as Dista. Then come Tariisa and Prsadhra, and the
tenth son is known as Vasuman.
TEXT 4
आदित्या वसवो रुद्रा विञ्वेदेबा मरुद्रणाः ।
অস্বিনান্তমনী राजनिन्द्रस्तेषां पुरन्दरः ॥ ४ ॥
aditya vasavo rudra
visvedeva marud-ganah
asvinav rbhavo rajann
indras (95071 purandarah
adityah—the Adityas; vasavah—the Vasus; rudrah—the Rudras;
visvedevah —the Visvedevas; marut-ganah —and the Maruts; asvinau—
the two AsSvini brothers; rbhavah—the Rbhus; rajan—O King; in-
drah—the king of heaven; tesam —of them; purandarah—Purandara.
TRANSLATION
In this manvantara, O King, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras,
the Visvedevas, the Maruts, the two ASvini-kumara brothers and
the Rbhus are the demigods. Their head king [Indra] is Purandara.
TEXT 5
कस्यपोऽत्रिरवसिष्ठश्च विश्वामित्रोऽथ गौतमः |
जमदग्निभेरद्याज इति सपर्षयः स्मृताः ॥ ५॥
kasyapo 787 vasisthas ca
visvamitro tha gautamah
Jjamadagnir bharadvaja
iti saptarsayah smrtah
kasyapah—Kasyapa; atrih—Atri; vasisthah—Vasistha; ca—and;
viSvamitrah—ViSvamitra; atha—as well as; gautarmmah—Gautama;


--- Page 156 ---
Text 7] Description of Future Manus 151
jamadagnih—Jamadagni; bharadvajah—Bharadvaja; iti—thus; sapta-
rsayah—the seven sages; smrtah—celebrated.
TRANSLATION
Kasyapa, Atri, Vasistha, ViSvamitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and
Bharadvaja are known as the seven sages.
TEXT 6
अत्रापि भगवजन्म कञ्यपाददि तेरभूत्‌ |
आदित्यानामवरजो विष्णुर्वामनरूपक्‌ | ६ ॥
atrapi bhagavaj-janma
kasyapad aditer abhit
adityanam avarajo
vispur vamana-riapa-dhrk
atra—in this Manu’s reign; api—certainly; bhagavat-janma—ap-
pearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kasyapat—by Kasyapa
Muni; aditeh—of mother Aditi; abhit—became possible; adityanam —
of the Adityas; avara-jah—the youngest; visnuh—Lord Visnu Himself;
vamana-ripa-dhrk—appearing as Lord Vamana.
TRANSLATION
In this manvantara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead ap-
peared as the youngest of all the Adityas, known as Vamana, the
dwarf. His father was Kasyapa and His mother Aditi.
TEXT 7
संक्षेपतो मयोक्तानि सप्तमन्वन्तराणि ते ।
मविष्याण्यथ वक्ष्यामि विष्णोः शक्तयान्वितानि च ।॥७॥
sanksepato mayoktani
sapta-manvantarani te
bhavisyany atha vaksyami
visnoh Saktyanvitani ca


--- Page 157 ---
152 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
sariksepatah—in brief; maya—by me; uktani—explained; sapta—
seven; manu-antarani—changes of Manu; te—unto you; bhavisyani—
the future Manus; atha—also; vaksyami—I shall speak; vispoh—of
Lord Visnu; Saktya anvitani—empowered by the energy; ca—also.
TRANSLATION
I have briefly explained to you the position of the seven Manus.
Now I shall describe the future Manus, along with the incarnations
of Lord Visnu.
TEXT 8
विवस्वतश्च दे जाये विश्वकर्मसुते उभे ।
संज्ञा छाया च राजेन्द्र॒ ये प्रागमिदिते तव ॥ ८ ॥
vivasvatas ca dve jaye
visvakarma-sute ubhe
sarjia chaya ca rajendra
ye prag abhihite tava
vivasvatah—of  Vivasvan; ca—also; dve—two; jaye—wives;
visvakarma-sute—the two daughters of ViSvakarma; ubhe—both of
them; saryjiia—Samjiia; chaya—Chaya; ca—and; raja-indra—O King;
ye—both of whom; prak—before; abhihite—described; tava—unto
you.
TRANSLATION
O King, I have previously described [in the Sixth Canto] the two
daughters of Vi§vakarmi, named Sarhjiia and Chaya, who were the
first two wives of Vivasvan.
TEXT 9
ठतीयां वडवामेके तासां संजञासुताख्रयः |
यमो यमी श्राद्वदेवस्छायायाश्च सुताञ्छृणु ।। ९ ॥
trtiyarm vadavam eke
tasam sanynid-sutas trayah


--- Page 158 ---
Text 10] Description of Future Manus 153
yamo yami sraddhadevas
chayayas ca sutai chrnu
trttyam—the third wife; vadavam—Vadava; eke—some people;
tasam—of all three wives; saryiia-sutah trayah—three issues of
Sarnjiia; yamah—one son named Yama; yami—Yami, a daughter;
sraddhadevah —Sraddhadeva, another son; chayayah—of Chaya; ca—
and; sutan—the sons; Srnu—just hear about.
TRANSLATION
It is said that the sun-god had a third wife, named Vadava. Of the
three wives, the wife named Sarmjfia had three children— Yama,
Yami and Sraddhadeva. Now let me describe the children of Chaya.
TEXT 10
TRIE कन्या मार्या संवरणस्य या ।
EY
छने रस्ठतीयोऽभूदश्विनौ वडवात्मजौ ॥१०॥
savarnis tapati kanya
bharya sarmwaranasya ya
Sanaiscaras trtiyo ‘bhid
asvinau vadavatmajau
savarnih—Savarni; tapati—Tapati; kanya—the daughter; bharya—
the wife; sararanasya—of King Samvarana; ya—she who;
Sanaiscarah—Sanaiscara; trttyah—the third issue; abhiit—took birth;
asvinau—the two ASvini-kumiras; vadava-atma-jau—the sons of the
wife known as Vadava.
TRANSLATION
Chaya had a son named Savarni and a daughter named Tapati,
who later became the wife of King 33111818118. Chaya’s third child
is known as Sanaicara [Saturn]. Vadava gave birth to two sons,
namely the ऽजा brothers.


--- Page 159 ---
154 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
TEXT 11
अष्टमेऽन्तर आयाते सावर्णिभविता मनुः |
निमोरूबिरजस्कायाः सावर्णितनया चप ॥११॥
astame ’ntara ayate
savarnir bhavita manuh
nirmoka-virajaskadyah
savarni-tanaya nrpa
astame—the eighth; antare—Manu’s period; aydte—when arrived;
savarnih—Savarni; bhavita—will become; manuh—the eighth Manu;
nirmoka—Nirmoka; virajaska-adyah—Virajaska and others; savarni—
of Savarni; tanayah—the sons; nrpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, when the period of the eighth Manu arrives, Savarni
will become the Manu. Nirmoka and Virajaska will be among his
sons.
PURPORT
The present reign is that of Vaivasvata Manu. According to astronomi-
cal calculations, we are now in the twenth-eighth yuga of Vaivasvata
Manu. Each Manu lives for seventy-one yugas, and fourteen such Manus
rule in one day of Lord Brahma. We are now in the period of Vaivasvata
Manu, the seventh Manu, and the eighth Manu will come into existence
after many millions of years. But Sukadeva Gosvami, having heard from
authorities, foretells that the eighth Manu will be Savarni and that
Nirmoka and Virajaska will be among his sons. Sastra can foretell what
will happen millions and millions of years in the future.
TEXT 12
तत्र देवाः सुतपसो विरजा sere |
LN iN
तेषां विरोचनसुतो बरिरिन््रो भविष्यति ॥१२॥
tatra devah sutapaso
viraja amrtaprabhah


--- Page 160 ---
Text 13] Description of Future Manus 155
tesarn virocana-suto
balir indro bhavisyati
tatra—in that period of Manu; devah—the demigods; sutapasah—the
Sutapas; virajah—the Virajas; amrtaprabhah—the Amrtaprabhas;
tesam—of them; virocana-sutah—the son of Virocana; balih—
Maharaja Bali; indrah—the king of heaven; bhavisyati—will become.
TRANSLATION
In the period of the eighth Manu, among the demigods will be
the Sutapas, the Virajas and the Amrtaprabhas. The king of the
demigods, Indra, will be Bali Maharaja, the son of Virocana.
TEXT 13
FAA याचमानाय विष्णवे यः पदत्रयम्‌ |
राद्धमिन्द्रपदं हित्वा ततः सिद्धिमवाप्स्यति ॥१३॥
dattvemar ydcamandaya
visnave yah pada-trayam
raddham indra-padam hitva
tatah siddhim avapsyati
dattva—giving in charity; imam—this entire universe;
yacamandya—who was begging from him; visnave—unto Lord Visnu;
yah—Bali Maharaja; pada-trayam—three paces of land; raddham—
achieved; indra-padam—the post of Indra; hitva—giving up; tatah—
thereafter; siddhim—perfection; avapsyati—will achieve.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja gave a gift of three paces of land to Lord Visnu,
and because of this charity he lost all the three worlds. Later,
however, when Lord Visnu is pleased because of Bali’s giving
everything to Him, Bali Maharaja will achieve the perfection of
life.


--- Page 161 ---
156 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (7.3) it is stated, manusyanari sahasresu kascid
yatati siddhaye: out of many millions of people, one may attempt to
achieve success in life. This success is explained here. Raddham indra-
padari hitva tatah siddhim avapsyati. Siddhi consists of achieving the
favor of Lord Visnu, not the yoga-siddhis. The yoga-siddhis—anima,
laghima, mahima, prapti, prakamya, Sitva, vasitva and kama-
vasayitd—are temporary. The ultimate siddhi is to achieve the favor of
Lord Visnu.
TEXT 14
योऽसौ मगवता बद्धः प्रीतेन सुतले पुनः ।
निवेशितोऽधिके खरगाद धुनास्ते सखराडिव।। १४
yo sau bhagavata baddhah
pritena sutale punah
nivesito ‘dhike svargad
adhunaste sva-rad iva
yah—Bali Maharaja; asau—he; bhagavata—by the Personality of
Godhead; baddhah—bound; pritena—because of favor; sutale—in the
kingdom of Sutala; punah—again; nivesitah—situated; adhike—more
opulent; svargat—than the heavenly planets; adhund—at the present
moment; dste—is situated; sva-rat iva—equal to the position of Indra.
TRANSLATION
With great affection, the Personality of Godhead bound Bali and
then installed him in the kingdom of Sutala, which is more opu-
lent than the heavenly planets. Maharaja Bali now resides on that
planet and is more comfortably situated than Indra.
TEXTS 15-16
गार्वो दीसिमान्रामो द्रोणपुत्रः कृपस्तथा |
EAR पिताखाकं भगवान्वाद रायणः 124)


--- Page 162 ---
Text 17] Description of Future Manus 157
इमे सप्र्षयस्तत्र भविष्यन्ति age: |
इदानीमासते राजन्‌ स्वे ख आश्रममण्डले LE
galavo diptiman ramo
drona-putrah krpas tatha
rsyasrngah pitasmakari
bhagavan badarayanah
ime saptarsayas tatra
bhavisyanti sva-yogatah
idanim asate rajan
sve sva asrama-mandale
galavah—Galava; diptiman —Diptiman; ramah—ParaSurama;
drona-putrah—the son of Dronacirya, namely Asvatthama; krpeh—
Krpacarya; tatha—as well; rsyasrngah—Rsyasrnga; pita asmakam—
our father; bhagavan—the incarnation of Godhead; badarayanah—
Vyasadeva; ime —all of them; sapta-rsayah—the seven sages; tatra—in
the eighth manvantara; bhavisyanti—will become; sva-yogatah—as a
result of their service to the Lord; idanim—at the present moment;
asate—they are all existing; rajan—O King; sve sve—in their own;
asrama-mandale—different hermitages.
TRANSLATION
O King, during the eighth manvantara, the great personalities
Galava, Diptiman, ParaSurama, Aévatthama, Krpacarya, Rsyasriga
and our father, Vyasadeva, the incarnation of Narayana, will be the
seven sages. For the present, they are all residing in their respec-
tive aSramas.
TEXT 17
देवगुद्यात्सरखत्यां साव॑भोम इति प्रयः ।
खानं पुरन्दराद्धत्वा बरखये दास्यतीश्वरः ॥ १५७॥
€
devaguhyat sarasvatyari
sarvabhauma iti prabhuh


--- Page 163 ---
158 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
sthanarh purandarad dhrtva
balaye dasyatisvarah
devaguhyat—from His father, Devaguhya; sarasvatyam—in the
womb of Sarasvati; sarvabhaumah —Sarvabhauma; iti—thus;
prabhuh—the master; sthanam—place; purandarat—from Lord Indra;
hrtva—taking away by force; balaye—unto Bali Maharaja; dasyati—
will give; Svarah—the master.
TRANSLATION
In the eighth manvantara, the greatly powerful Personality of
Godhead Sarvabhauma will take birth. His father will be
Devaguhya, and His mother will be Sarasvati. He will take the
kingdom away from Purandara [Lord Indra] and give it to Bali
Maharaja.
TEXT 18
९ ९
नवमो दक्षसावरणिम॑नुर्वरुणसम्भवः |
भूतकेतुदीं केतु रित्यादात्तत्सुता चप ॥१८॥
navamo daksa-savarnir
manur varuna-sambhavah
bhuataketur diptaketur
ity adyas tat-suta nrpa
navamah—ninth; daksa-savarnih—Daksa-savarni; manuh—the
Manu; varuna-sambhavah—born as the son of Varuna; bhitaketuh —
Bhataketu; diptaketuh—Diptaketu; iti—thus; adyah—and so on; tat—
his; sutah—sons; nrpa—O King.
TRANSLATION
O King, the ninth Manu will be Daksa-savarni, who is born of
Varuna. Among his sons will be Bhiitaketu, and Diptaketu.


--- Page 164 ---
Text 20] Description of Future Manus 159
TEXT 19
पारापरोचिगर्भाया देवा न्द्रोऽद्भुतः स्मृतः |
द्युति मत्परञ्चखास्तत्र मविप्यन्त्युषयस्ततः ।॥१९॥
para-maricigarbhadya
deva indro ’dbhutah smrtah
dyutimat-pramukhas tatra
bhavisyanty rsayas tatah
para—the Paras; maricigarbha —the Maricigarbhas; adyah—like
that; devah—the demigods; indrah—the king of heaven; adbhutah—
Adbhuta; smrtah—known; dyutimat—Dyutiman; pramukhah—headed
by; tatra—in that ninth period of Manu; bhavisyanti—will become;
rsayah —the seven rsis; tatah—then.
TRANSLATION
In this ninth manvantara, the Paras and Maricigarbhas will be
among the demigods. The king of heaven, Indra, will be named
Adbhuta, and Dyutiman will be among the seven sages.
TEXT 20
आयुष्मतोऽम्बुधारायाग्षमो TT |
भवितायेन संराद्धां त्रिलोकीं मोक््यतेऽद्भूतः ॥२०॥
ayusmato ‘'mbudharayam
rsabho bhagavat-kala
bhavita yena sarraddharn
tri-lokirh bhoksyate ‘dbhutah
ayusmatah—of the father, Ayusmain; ambudhdarayam—in the womb
of the mother, Ambudhara; rsabhah—Rsabha; bhagavat-kald—a partial
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavita—will be;
yena—by whom; samraddham—all-opulent; tri-lokim—the three
worlds; bhoksyate—will enjoy; adbhutah—the Indra of the name
Adbhuta.


--- Page 165 ---
160 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
TRANSLATION
Rsabhadeva, a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, will take birth from his father, Ayusman, and his
mother, Ambudhara. He will enable the Indra named Adbhuta to
enjoy the opulence of the three worlds.
TEXT 21
दञ्चमो ब्रह्मसाबणिरुप्छोकसुतो মন্তঃ |
तत्सुता भूरिषेणाद्या हविष्मत्प्रमुखा द्विजाः ॥ २१॥
dasamo brahma-savarnir
upasloka-suto manuh
tat-suta bhurisenadya
havismat pramukha dvijah
dasamah—the tenth Manu; brahma-savarnih—Brahma-savarni;
upasloka-sutah—born of Upa$loka; manuh—will be Manu; tat-sutah—
his sons; bharisena-adyah—Bhirisena and others; havismat—
Havisman; pramukhah—headed by; dvijah—the seven sages.
TRANSLATION
The son of Upasloka known as Brahma-savarni will be the tenth
Manu. Bhurisena will be among his sons, and the brahmanas
headed by Havisman will be the seven sages.
TEXT 22
हविष्मान्सुकृतः सत्यो जयो मूर्तिस्तदा दिजाः।
सुवासनविरुद्धा्या देवाः TRY: सुरेश्वरः ॥२२॥
havisman sukrtah satyo
Jayo martis tada dvijah
suvasana-viruddhadya
devah sambhuh suresvarah
havisman—Havisman; sukrtah—Sukrta; satyah—Satya; jayah—
Jaya; martih—Murti; tada—at that time; dvijah—the seven sages;


--- Page 166 ---
Text 24] Description of Future Manus 161
suvasana—the Suvisanas; viruddha—the Viruddhas; adyah—and so
on; devah—the demigods; Sambhuh—Sambhu; sura-iSvarah—Indra,
king of the demigods.
TRANSLATION
Havisman, Sukrta, Satya, Jaya, Marti and others will be the
seven sages, the Suvasanas and Viruddhas will be among the
demigods, and Sambhu will be their king, Indra.
TEXT 23
विष्वक्सेनो विषूच्यां तु शम्मोः सख्यं करिष्यति ।
जातः स्वांशेन मगवान्गृे विश्वखजो विचः ॥२३॥
visvakseno ৮1500 ৫77, tu
sambhoh sakhyam karisyati
jatah svarnsena bhagavan
grhe visvasrjo vibhuh
visvaksenah—Visvaksena; visicydm—in the womb of Visaci; tu—
then; sambhoh—of Sambhu; sakhyam —friendship; karisyati—will cre-
ate; jatah—being born; sva-amsena—by a plenary portion; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; grie—in the home; visvasrjah—of
Visvasrasta; vibhuh—the supremely powerful Lord.
TRANSLATION
In the home of Visvasrasta, a plenary portion of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead will appear from the womb of Visici as the
incarnation known as Visvaksena. He will make friends with
Sambhu.
TEXT 24
a Q
मयुर्वे धमेसावणिरेकादश्म आत्मवान्‌ |
अनागतास्तत्सुताश्च सत्यधर्मादयो दञ्च IRI
manur vai dharma-savarnir
ekadasama atmavan


--- Page 167 ---
162 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
andagatds tat-sutds ca
satyadharmadayo dasa
manuh—the Manu; wai—indeed; dharma-savarnih—Dharma-
sdvarni; ekadasamah—eleventh; atmavan—the controller of the
senses; anagatah—will come in the future; tat—his; sutah—sons; ca—
and; satyadharma-adayah—Satyadharma and others; dasa—ten.
TRANSLATION
In the eleventh manvantara, the Manu will be Dharma-savarni,
who will be extremely learned in spiritual knowledge. From him
there will come ten sons, headed by Satyadharma.
TEXT 25
विहङ्गमाः कामगमा निर्वाणरुचयः सुराः |
A
इन्द्र वेतस्तेषागषयशारुणाद यः 11411
viharigamah kamagama
nirvanarucayah surah
indras ca vaidhrtas tesam
rsaya$ carunadayah
vihangamah—the Vihangamas; kamagamah—the Kamagamas;
nirvanarucayah—the Nirvanarucis; surah—the demigods; indrah—the
king of heaven, Indra; ca—also; vaidhrtah—Vaidhrta; tesam —of them;
rsayah—the seven sages; ca—also; aruna-adayah—headed by Aruna.
TRANSLATION
The Vihangamas, Kamagamas, Nirvanarucis and others will be
the demigods. The king of the demigods, Indra, will be Vaidhrta,
and the seven sages will be headed by Aruna.
TEXT 26
(3
आर्यकस्य सुतस्तत्र ॒धमेसेत॒रिति स्मरतः |
a A
FEE हरेर॑शच्िलोकीं धारयिष्यति ॥२६॥


--- Page 168 ---
Text 27] Description of Future Manus 163
aryakasya sutas tatra
dharmasetur iti smrtah
vaidhrtayar harer amsas
tri-lokim dharayisyati
aryakasya —of Aryaka; sutah—the son; tatra—in that period (the
eleventh manvantara); dharmasetuh—Dharmasetu; iti —thus;
smrtah—celebrated; vaidhrtayam—from the mother, Vaidhrta;
hareh—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; armSah—a partial incar-
nation; tri-lokim —the three worlds; dharayisyati—will rule.
TRANSLATION
The son of Aryaka known as Dharmasetu, a partial incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will appear from the
womb of Vaidhrta, the wife of Aryaka, and will rule the three
worlds.
TEXT 27
भविता रुद्रसावर्णी TERRIER मयुः |
देववानुपदेवश्च देवश्रेष्ठादयः सताः IR
bhavita rudra-savarni
rajan dvadasamo manuh
devavan upadevas ca
devasresthadayah sutah
bhavita—will appear; rudra-savarnih—Rudra-sivarni; rajan—O
King; dvadasamah—the twelfth; manuh—Manu; devavan—Devavan;
upadevah—Upadeva; ca—and; devasrestha—Devasrestha; adayah—
such persons; sut@h—sons of the Manu.
TRANSLATION
O King, the twelfth Manu will be named Rudra-savarni.
Devavan, Upadeva and Devasrestha will be among his sons.


--- Page 169 ---
164 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
TEXT 28
ऋतधामा च বঈল্লী देवा्च हरितादयः ।
ऋषयश्च तपोमूर्तिस्तपस्व्याग्रीधकाद यः ॥२८॥
rtadhama ca tatrendro
devas ca haritadayah
rsayas ca tapomiirtis
tapasvy agnidhrakadayah
rtadhama —Rtadhamia; ca—also; tatra—in that period; indrah—the
king of heaven; devah—the demigods; ca—and; harita-adayah—
headed by the Haritas; rsayah ca—and the seven sages; tapomurtih—
Tapomiirti; tapasvi—Tapasvi; agnidhraka—Agnidhraka; adayah—and
so on.
TRANSLATION
In this manvantara, the name of Indra will be Rtadhama, and the
demigods will be headed by the Haritas. Among the sages will be
Tapomaurti, Tapasvi and Agnidhraka.
TEXT 29
खथामार्यो हरेरंशः साधयिष्यति तन्मनोः |
अन्तरं सत्यसहसः सुत्रतायाः सुतो RE: 1200
svadhamakhyo harer ammsah
sadhayisyati tan-manoh
antarari satyasahasah
sunrtayah suto vibhuh
svadhama-akhyah—Svadhama; hareh arsah—a partial incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sadhayisyati—will rule; tat-
manoh—of that Manu; antaram—the manvantara; satyasahasah—of
Satyasaha; sunrtayah—of Sunrta; sutah—the son; vibhuh—most
powerful.


--- Page 170 ---
Text 31] Description of Future Manus 165
TRANSLATION
From the mother named Sunrta and the father named Satyasaha
will come Svadhama, a partial incarnation of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. He will rule that manvantara.
TEXT 30
मनुखयोद शो ARH देवसावणिरात्यान्‌ |
चित्रसेनविवित्राया देवसावणिदेहजाः ॥२०॥
manus trayodaso bhavyo
deva-sa@varnir atmavan
citrasena-vicitradya
deva-savarni-dehajah
manuh—the Manu; trayodasah —thirteenth; bhavyah— will become;
deva-savarnih—Deva-savarni; atmavan—well advanced in spiritual
knowledge; citrasena—Citrasena; vicitra-adyah—and others, like
Vicitra; deva-savarni—of Deva-savarni; deha-jah—sons.
TRANSLATION
The thirteenth Manu will be named Deva-savarni, and he will be
very advanced in spiritual knowledge. Among his sons will be
Citrasena and Vicitra.
TEXT 31
[9
देवाः सुकमंसुत्रामसंज्ञा इन्द्रो दिवस्पतिः ।
निर्मोकतन्वदुर्शाया भविष्यन्त्युषयस्तद्‌ा 13211
devah sukarma-sutrama-
sariyia indro divaspatih
nirmoka-tattvadarsadya
bhavisyanty rsayas tada
devah —the demigods; sukarma—the Sukarmas; sutrama-sarijiiah—
and the Sutramas; indrah—the king of heaven; divaspatih—Divaspati;


--- Page 171 ---
166 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
nirmoka—Nirmoka; tattvadarsa-adyah—and others, like Tattvadarsa;
bhavisyanti—will become; rsayah—the seven sages; tada—at that time.
TRANSLATION
In the thirteenth manvantara, the Sukarmas and Sutramas will
be among the demigods, Divaspati will be the king of heaven, and
Nirmoka and Tattvadarsa will be among the seven sages.
TEXT 32
देवहोत्रस्य तनय ভণহলী दिवस्पतेः |
योगेश्वरो हरेरंशो बृहत्यां सम्भविष्यति ॥३२॥
devahotrasya tanaya
upaharta divaspateh
yogesvaro harer ariso
brhatyarm sambhavisyati
devahotrasya—of Devahotra; tanayah—the son; upaharta—the
benefactor; divaspateh—of Divaspati, the Indra at that time;
yoga-isvarah —Yoge$vara, the master of mystic powers; hareh amsah—
a partial representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
brhatyam—in the womb of his mother, Brhati; sambhavisyati—will ap-
pear.
TRANSLATION
The son of Devahotra known as Yoge$vara will appear as a par-
tial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His
mother’s name will be Brhati. He will perform activities for the
welfare of Divaspati.
TEXT 33
©.
मनु्बा न्द्रसाव्णितर्द शम रएष्यति |
उरुगम्मीरवुदाद्या इन्द्रसावर्णिवी्यजाः 1320)
manur va indra-savarnis
caturdasama esyati


--- Page 172 ---
Text 35] Description of Future Manus 167
uru-gambhira-budhadya
indra-savarni-viryajah
manuh—the Manu; vad—either; indra-savarnih—Indra-savarni;
caturdasamah—fourteenth; esyati—will become; uru—Uru;
gambhira—Gambhira; budha-adyah—and others, such as Budha;
indra-savarni—of Indra-savarni; virya-jah—born of the semen.
TRANSLATION
The name of the fourteenth Manu will be Indra-savarni. He will
have sons like Uru, Gambhira and Budha.
TEXT 34
पवित्राश्चाक्षुषा देवाः शुचिरिन्द्रो मविष्यति ।
अभिर्बाहुः चिः शद्धो मागधायास्तपखिनः 1381
pavitras caksusa devah
Sucir indro bhavisyati
agnir bahuh sucih suddho
magadhadyas tapasvinah
pavitrah—the Pavitras; caksusah—the Ciaksusas; devah—the
demigods; Sucth—Suci; indrah—the king of heaven; bhavisyati—will
become; agnih—Agni; bahuh—Bahu; sucih—Suci; suddhah—Suddha;
magadha—Magadha; adyah—and so on; tapasvinah—the sages.
TRANSLATION
The Pavitras and Caksusas will be among the demigods, and Suci
will be Indra, the king of heaven. Agni, Bahu, Suci, Suddha,
Magadha and others of great austerity will be the seven sages.
TEXT 35
सत्रायणस्य तनयो बृहद्भानुस्तदा हरिः ।
वितानायां महाराज क्रियातन्तून्रितायिता ॥२५॥


--- Page 173 ---
168 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 13
satrayanasya tanayo
brhadbhanus tada harih
vitanayari maharaja
kriya-tantin vitayita
satrayanasya—of Satrdyana; tanayah—the son; brhadbhanuh—
Brhadbhanu; tada—at that time; harih—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; vitanayam—in the womb of Vitana; maha-raja—O King;
kriya-tantin—all spiritual activities; vitayita—will perform.
TRANSLATION
O King Pariksit, in the fourteenth manvantara the Supreme
Personality of Godhead will appear from the womb of Vitana, and
His father’s name will be Satrayana. This incarnation will be
celebrated as Brhadbhanu, and He will administer spiritual ac-
tivities.
TEXT 36
9. 1
राज॑अतुर्दशेतानि त्रिकाजाजुगतानि J ।
- -
्रोक्तान्येभिर्मितः कल्पो युगसादखपर्ययः ॥३६॥
rajams caturdasaitani
tri-kalanugatani te
proktany ebhir mitah kalpo
yuga-sahasra-paryayah
rajan—O King; caturdasa—fourteen; etani—all these; tri-kala—the
three periods of time (past, present and future); anugatani—covering;
te—to you; proktani—described; ebhih—Dby these; mitah—estimated;
kalpah—one day of Brahma; yuga-sahasra—one thousand cycles of
four yugas; paryayah—consisting of.
TRANSLATION
O King, I have now described to you the fourteen Manus appear-
ing in the past, present and future. The total duration of time


--- Page 174 ---
Text 36] Description of Future Manus 169
ruled by these Manus is one thousand yuga cycles. This is called a
kalpa, or one day of Lord Brahma.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Thirteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Description of Future
Manus.”


--- Page 175 ---
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The System of
Universal Management
This chapter describes the duties allotted to Manu by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. All the Manus, as well as their sons, the sages, the
demigods and the Indras, act under the orders of various incarnations of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the end of every catur-yuga,
consisting of Satya-yuga, Dvapara-yuga, Treta-yuga and Kali-yuga, the
sages, acting under the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
distribute the Vedic knowledge and thus reinstate eternal religious prin-
ciples. Manu’s duty is to reestablish the system of religion. Manu’s sons
execute Manu’s orders, and thus the entire universe is maintained by
Manu and his descendants. The Indras are various rulers of the heavenly
planets. Assisted by the demigods, they rule the three worlds. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead also appears as incarnations in different
yugas. He appears as Sanaka, Sanatana, Yajiavalkya, Dattatreya and
others, and thus He gives instructions in spiritual knowledge, prescribed
duties, principles of mystic yoga, and so on. As Marici and others, He
creates progeny; as the king, He punishes the miscreants; and in the
form of time, He annihilates the creation. One may argue, “If the all-
powerful Supreme Personality of Godhead can do anything simply by His
will, why has He arranged for so many personalities to manage?” How
and why He does this cannot be understood by those who are under the
clutches of maya.
TEXT 1
श्रीराजोवाच
मन्वन्तरेषु भगवन्यथा मन्वादयस्त्विमे ।
यसिन्कमणि ये येन नियुक्तास्तद्वदख मे ॥ १॥
sri-rajovaca
manvantaresu bhagavan
yatha manv-adayas tv ime
171


--- Page 176 ---
172 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 14
yasmin karmani ye yena
niyuktas tad vadasva me
अकु uvaca—King Pariksit said; manvantaresu—in the reign of
each Manu; bhagavan—O great sage; yathd—as; manu-adayah—the
Manus and others; tu—but; ime—these; yasmin—in which; karmani—
activities; ye—which persons; yena—by whom; niyuktah—appointed;
tat—that; vadasva—kindly describe; me—to me.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit inquired: O most opulent Sukadeva Gosvami,
please explain to me how Manu and the others in each manvantara
are engaged in their respective duties, and by whose order they are
so engaged.
TEXT 2
भ्रीकरषिर्वाच
मनवो मनुपुत्राश्च अनयश्च मरीपते |
~~
इन्द्राः सुरगणाश्चव सव पुरुषशासनाः ॥ २॥
Sri-rsir uvaca
manavo manu-putras ca
munayas ca mahi-pate
indrah sura-ganas caiva
sarve purusa-sasanah
sri-rsih uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; manavah—all the
Manus; manu-putrah—all the sons of Manu; ca—and; munayah—all
the great sages; ca—and; mahi-pate—O King; indrah—all the Indras;
sura-ganah—the demigods; ca—and; eva—certainly; sarve—all of
them; purusa-sasanah—under the rule of the Supreme Person.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: The Manus, the sons of Manu, the great
sages, the Indras and all the demigods, O King, are appointed by


--- Page 177 ---
Text 4] The System of Universal Management 173
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His various incarnations
such as Yajfia.
TEXT 3
यज्ञादयो याः कथिताः पौरुष्यस्तनवो चप ।
मन्वादयो जगात्रां नयन्त्याभिः प्रचोदिताः॥ २ ॥
yajiadayo yah kathitah
paurusyas tanavo nrpa
manv-adayo jagad-yatram
nayanty abhih pracoditah
yajiia-adayah—the Lord’s incarnation known as Yajia and others;
yah—who; kathitah—already spoken of; paurusyah—of the Supreme
Person; tanavah—incarnations; nrpa—O King; manu-adayah—the
Manus and others; jagat-yatram —universal affairs; nayanti—conduct;
abhih—by the incarnations; pracoditah—being inspired.
TRANSLATION
O King, I have already described to you various incarnations of
the Lord, such as शशु. The Manus and others are chosen by these
incarnations, under whose direction they conduct the universal
affairs.
PURPORT
The Manus execute the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in His various incarnations.
TEXT 4
चतुर्युगान्ते कालेन TEER ।
©
तपसा ऋषयोऽपश्यन्यतो धमः सनातनः ॥ ४ ॥
catur-yugante kalena
grastan chruti-ganan yatha
tapasa rsayo 'pasyan
yato dharmah sandtanah


--- Page 178 ---
174 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 14

catuh-yuga-ante—at the end of every four yugas (Satya, Dvipara,
Treta and Kali); kalena—in due course of time; grastan—Ilost; Sruti-
ganan—the Vedic instruction; yatha—as; tapasa—by austerity;
rsayah—great saintly persons; apaSyan—by seeing misuse; yatah—
wherefrom; dharmah—occupational duties; sanatanah—eternal.

TRANSLATION

At the end of every four yugas, the great saintly persons, upon
seeing that the eternal occupational duties of mankind have been
misused, reestablish the principles of religion.

PURPORT

In this verse, the words dharmah and sandtanah are very important.
Sanatana means “eternal,” and dharma means “occupational duties.”
From Satya-yuga to Kali-yuga, the principles of religion and occupational
duty gradually deteriorate. In Satya-yuga, the religious principles are ob-
served in full, without deviation. In Treta-yuga, however, these prin-
ciples are somewhat neglected, and only three fourths of the religious
duties continue. In Dvapara-yuga only half of the religious principles
continue, and in Kali-yuga only one fourth of the religious principles,
which gradually disappear. At the end of Kali-yuga, the principles of
religion, or the occupational duties of humanity, are almost lost. Indeed,
in this Kali-yuga we have passed through only five thousand years, yet
the decline of sandtana-dharma is very prominent. The duty of saintly
persons, therefore, is to take up seriously the cause of sanatana-dharma
and try to reestablish it for the benefit of the entire human society. The
Krsna consciousness movement has been started according to this prin-
ciple. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.3.51):

kaler dosa-nidhe rajann
asti hy eko mahan gunah
kirtanad eva krsnasya
mukta-sangah param vrajet

The entire Kali-yuga is full of faults. It is like an unlimited ocean of
faults. But the Krsna consciousness movement is very authorized.


--- Page 179 ---
Text 5] The System of Universal Management 175
Therefore, following in the footsteps of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who
five hundred years ago inaugurated the movement of sarikirtana, krsna-
kirtana, we are trying to introduce this movement, according to superior
orders, all over the world. Now, if the inaugurators of this movement
strictly follow the regulative principles and spread this movement for the
benefit of all human society, they will certainly usher in a new way of life
by reestablishing sanatana-dharma, the eternal occupational duties of
humanity. The eternal occupational duty of the human being is to serve
Krsna. Jivera ‘svanipa’ haya—krsnera ‘nitya-dasa.’ This is the purport
of sanatana-dharma. Sanatana means nitya, or “eternal,” and krsna-
dasa means “‘servant of Krsna.” The eternal occupational duty of the
human being is to serve Krsna. This is the sum and substance of the
Krsna consciousness movement.
TEXT 5
[8 [] क -
ततो धमं चतुष्पादं मनवो हरिणोदिताः |
युक्ताः सवारयन्त्यद्धा स्वे स्वे काके मही नृप | ५॥
tato dharmari catuspadariu
manavo harinoditah
yuktah saficarayanty addha
sve sve kale mahi nrpa

tatah—thereafter (at the end of Kali-yuga); dharmam —the religious
principle; catuh-padam—in four parts; manavah—all the Manus;
harina—by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uditah—being in-
structed; yuktah—being engaged; saficarayanti—reestablish; addha—
directly; sve sve—in their own; kale —time; mahim —within this world;
nrpa—O King.

TRANSLATION

Thereafter, O King, the Manus, being fully engaged according
to the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
directly reestablish the principles of occupational duty in its full
four parts.


--- Page 180 ---
176 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 14
PURPORT
Dharma, or occupational duty, can be established in its full four parts
as explained in Bhagavad-gita. In Bhagavad-gita (4.1) the Lord says:
imarh vivasvate yogariu
proktavan aham avyayam
vivasvan manave praha
manur iksvakave ’bravit
“I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvan,
and Vivasvin instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in
turn instructed it to Iksvaku.” This is the process of disciplic succession.
Following the same process, the Krsna consciousness movement is teach-
ing the principles of Bhagavad-gita as it is, without deviation, all over
the world. If the fortunate people of this time accept the instructions of
Lord Krsna, they will certainly be happy in Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s
mission. Caitanya Mahaprabhu wanted everyone, at least in India, to be-
come a preacher of this mission. In other words, one should become a
guru and preach the Lord’s instructions all over the world for the peace
and prosperity of humanity.
TEXT 6
पालयन्ति प्रजापाला TREE विभागशः ।
यज्ञमागश्चजो देवा ये च तत्रान्विताश्च तेः ॥ ६ ॥
palayanti praja-pala
yavad antari vibhagasah
yajiia-bhaga-bhujo deva
ye ca tatranvitdas ca tath
palayanti—execute the order; praja-palah—the rulers of the world,
namely the sons and grandsons of Manu; yavat antam—unto the end of
Manu’s reign; vibhagasah—in divisions; yajia-bhaga-bhujah—the en-
joyers of the result of yajiias; devah—the demigods; ye—others; ca—
also; tatra anvitah—engaged in that business; ca—also; taih—by them.


--- Page 181 ---
Text 7] The System of Universal Management 177
TRANSLATION
To enjoy the results of sacrifices [yajiias], the rulers of the
world, namely the sons and grandsons of Manu, discharge the or-
ders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead until the end of
Manu’s reign. The demigods also share the results of these
sacrifices.
PURPORT
As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.2):
evari parampara-praptam
imam rajarsayo viduh
“This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way.” This param-
para system extends from Manu to Iksvaku and from Iksvaku to his sons
and grandsons. The rulers of the world in the line of hierarchy execute
the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the parampara
system. Anyone interested in peaceful life must participate in this
parampard system and perform yajiias. As Gaudiya Vaisnavas in the
parampara system of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, we must perform
sarkirtana-yajia all over the world (yajiaih sarkirtana-prayair yajanti
hi sumedhasah). Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is the incarnation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in this age of Kali, and He will be easily
satisfied if the sankirtana movement is spread vigorously all over the
world. This will also make people happy without a doubt.
TEXT 7
EN
इन्द्रो भगवता दत्तां त्सोक्यभियमूनिताम्‌ |
hb : (4
I: पाति SHE कामं लोके प्रवषंति । ७ ॥
indro bhagavata dattarm
trailokya-sriyam arjitam
| bhunjanah pati lokaris trin
kama loke pravarsati


--- Page 182 ---
178 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 14
indrah—the King of heaven; bhagavata—by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; dattam—given; trailokya—of the three worlds; Sriyam
arjitam —the great opulences; bhusijanah—enjoying; pati—maintains;
lokan —all the planets; trin—within the three worlds; k@mam —as much
as necessary; loke—within the world; pravarsati—pours rain.
TRANSLATION
Indra, King of heaven, receiving benedictions from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus enjoying highly
developed opulences, maintains the living entities all over the
three worlds by pouring sufficient rain on all the planets.
TEXT 8
ज्ञानं चानुयुगं क दरिः सिद्धखरूपध्क्‌ ।
ऋषिरूपधरः योगं योगेञचरूपध्क्‌ | ८ ॥
11.1.14. 1/1...
वय siddha-svariapa-dhrk
rsi-ripa-dharah karma
‘yogari yogesa-riupa-dhrk
jAanam —transcendental knowledge; ca—and; anuyugam—accord-
ing to the age; briite —explains; harih—the Supreme Personality of God-
head; siddha-svaripa-dhrk—assuming the form of liberated persons
like Sanaka and Sanitana; rsi-ripa-dharah—assuming the form of great
saintly persons like Yajhavalkya; karma —karma; yogam—the mystic
yoga system; yoga-iSa-ripa-dhrk—by assuming the form of a great yogi
like Dattatreya.
TRANSLATION
In every yuga, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari,
assumes the form of Siddhas such as Sanaka to preach transcen-
dental knowledge, He assumes the form of great saintly persons
such as Yajfiavalkya to teach the way of karma, and He assumes the
form of great yogis such as Dattatreya to teach the system of mystic
yoga.


--- Page 183 ---
Text 9] The System of Universal Management 179
PURPORT

For the benefit of all human society, not only does the Lord assume the
form of Manu as an incarnation to rule the universe properly, but He
also assumes the forms of a teacher, yogi, jini and so on, for the benefit
of human society. The duty of human society, therefore, is to accept the
path of action enunciated by the Supreme Lord. In the present age, the
sum and substance of all Vedic knowledge is to be found in Bhagavad-
gita, which is personally taught by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and the same Supreme Godhead, assuming the form of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, expands the teachings of Bhagavad-gita all over the world.
In other words, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is so kind and
merciful to human society that He is always anxious to take the fallen
souls back home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 9
सगं प्रजेशरूपेण दस्यून्दन्यात्‌ खराडवपुः |
कालरूपेण सर्वेषामभावाय पृथग्गुणः | ९॥
sargar prajesa-ripena
dasyin hanyat svarad-vapuh
kala-riapena sarvesam
abhavaya prthag gunah

sargam—creation of progeny; praja-iSa-ripena—in the form of the
Prajapati Marici and others; dasyin—thieves and rogues; hanyat—
kills; sva-rat-vapuh—in the form of the king; kala-ripena—in the
form of time; sarvesam—of everything; abhavaya—for the annihila-
tion; prthak—different; gunah—possessing qualities.

TRANSLATION

In the form of Prajapati Marici, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead creates progeny; becoming the king, He kills the thieves
and rogues; and in the form of time, He annihilates everything.
All the different qualities of material existence should be under-
stood to be qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


--- Page 184 ---
180 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 14
TEXT 10
स्तूयमानो जनैरेभिर्मायया नामरूपया ।
ca
विमोदितात्मभिर्नानादशनैनं च दस्यते ॥१०॥
stityamano janair ebhir
mayaya nama-rupaya
vimohitatmabhir nana-
darsanair na ca drsyate
stityamanah—being sought; janaih—by people in general; ebhih —by
all of them; mayaya—under the influence of maya; nama-ripaya—
possessing different names and forms; vimohita—bewildered;
atmabhih—by illusion; nand—various; darsanaih—Dby philosophical
approaches; na—not; ca—and; drSyate—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead can be found.
TRANSLATION
People in general are bewildered by the illusory energy, and
therefore they try to find the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, through various types of research and philo-
sophical speculation. Nonetheless, they are unable to see the
Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Whatever actions and reactions take place for the creation, mainte-
nance and annihilation of this material world are actually brought about
by the one Supreme Person. There are many varieties of philosophers
trying to search for the ultimate cause under different names and forms,
but they are unable to find the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
who explains in Bhagavad-gita that He is the origin of everything and
the cause of all causes (aham sarvasya prabhavah). This inability is due
to the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord. Devotees, therefore, accept
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is and remain happy simply
by chanting the glories of the Lord.
TEXT 11
एतत्‌ कल्पविकल्पस्य प्रमाणं परिकीर्तितम्‌ |
यत्र॒ मन्वन्तराण्याडुअतु्दंश पुराविदः ॥११॥


--- Page 185 ---
Text 11] The System of Universal Management 181
etat kalpa-vikalpasya
pramanar parikirtitam
yatra manvantarany ahus
caturdasa puravidah
etat—all these; kalpa—in one day of Lord Brahma; vikalpasya—of
the changes in a kalpa, such as the change of Manus; pramdnam
—evidences; parikirtitam —described (by me); yatra—wherein;
manvantarani—periods of Manu; ahuh—said; caturdasa—fourteen;
purd-vidah —learned scholars.
TRANSLATION
In one kalpa, or one day of Brahma, there take place the many
changes called vikalpas. O King, all of these have been previously
described to you by me. Learned scholars who know the past, pres-
ent and future have ascertained that in one day of Brahma there
are fourteen Manus.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fourteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “The System of Universal
Management.”


--- Page 186 ---
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Bali Maharaja Conquers
the Heavenly Planets

This chapter describes how Bali, after performing the Visvajit-yajfa,
received the benediction of a chariot and various kinds of paraphernalia
for war, with which he attacked the King of heaven. All the demigods,
being afraid of him, left the heavenly planets and went away, following
the instructions of their guru.

Maharaja Pariksit wanted to understand how Lord Vamanadeva, on
the plea of taking three paces of land from Bali Maharaja, took every-
thing away from him and arrested him. Sukadeva Gosvami responded to
this inquiry with the following explanation. In the fight between the
demons and the demigods, as described in the Eleventh Chapter of this
canto, Bali was defeated, and he died in the fight, but by the grace of
Sukracarya he regained his life. Thus he engaged himself in the service
of Sukracarya, his spiritual master. The descendants of Bhrgu, being
pleased with him, engaged him in the Visvajit-yajia. When this yajiia
was performed, from the fire of yajiia came a chariot, horses, a flag, a
bow, armor and two quivers of arrows. Maharaja Prahlada, Bali
Maharaja’s grandfather, gave Bali an eternal garland of flowers, and
Sukracarya gave him a conchshell. Bali Maharaja, after offering obei-
sances to Prahlada, the brahmanas and his spiritual master, Sukracarya,
equipped himself to fight with Indra and went to Indrapuri with his
soldiers. Blowing his conchshell, he attacked the outskirts of Indra’s
kingdom. When Indra saw Bali Maharaja’s prowess, he went to his own
spiritual master, Brhaspati, told him about Bali’s strength, and inquired
about his duty. Brhaspati informed the demigods that because Bali had
been endowed with extraordinary power by the brahmanas, the
demigods could not fight with him. Their only hope was to gain the favor
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Indeed, there was no alternative.
Under the circumstances, Brhaspati advised the demigods to leave the
heavenly planets and keep themselves somewhere invisible. The

183


--- Page 187 ---
184 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
demigods followed his orders, and Bali Maharaja, along with his asso-
ciates, gained the entire kingdom of Indra. The descendants of Bhrgu
Muni, being very affectionate to their disciple Bali Maharaja, engaged
him in performing one hundred asvamedha-yajiias. In this way, Bali en-
joyed the opulences of the heavenly planets.
TEXTS 1-2
RTT
बलेः पदत्रयं भूमेः FEE |
भूतवेश्वरः कृषणव्टन्धा्थोऽपि बबन्ध तम्‌ ॥ १ ॥
एतद्‌ वेदितुमिच्छामो महत्‌ कौतूहलं हि नः |
यातेश्वरस्य पूर्णस्य बन्धनं चाप्यनागसः २॥
Sri-rajovaca
baleh pada-trayarih bhimeh
kasmad dharir aydacata
bhitesvarah krpana-val
labdhartho ‘pi babandha tam
etad veditum icchamo
mahat kautihalari hi nah
ydciiesvarasya purnasya
bandhanar capy anagasah
Sri-raja uvaca—the King said; baleh—of Bali Maharaja; pada-
trayam—three steps; bhimeh—of land; kasmat—why; harih—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (in the form of Vimana); ayacata—
begged; bhitva-isvarah—the proprietor of all the universe; krpana-
vat—like a poor man; labdha-arthah—He got the gift; api—although;
babandha—arrested; tam—him (Bali); etat—all this; veditum—to
understand; icchdmah—we desire; mahat—very great; kautihalam—
eagerness; hi—indeed; nah—our; ydcria—begging; Svarasya—of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; pizrnasya—who is full in everything;


--- Page 188 ---
Text 3] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 185
bandhanam—arresting; ca—also; api—although; anagasah—of he
who was faultless.
TRANSLATION
Maharaja Pariksit inquired: The Supreme Personality of God-
head is the proprietor of everything. Why did He beg three paces
of land from Bali Maharaja like a poor man, and when He got the
gift for which He had begged, why did He nonetheless arrest Bali
Maharaja? I am very much anxious to know the mystery of these
contradictions.
TEXT 3
igs उवाच
पराजितश्रीरसुभिश्च हापितो
हीन्द्रेण राजन्भृगुभिः स जीवितः |
सर्वात्मना तानमजद्‌ FACS:
- €
शिष्यो महात्माथंनिवेदनेन ॥ ২ ॥
sri-Suka uvaca
pardjita-srir asubhis ca hapito
hindrena rajan bhrgubhih sa jivitah
sarvatmana tan abhajad bhrgin balih
Sisyo mahatmartha-nivedanena
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sr1 Sukadeva Gosvami said; pardjita—being de-
feated; srih—opulences; asubhih ca—of life also; hapitah—deprived;
hi—indeed; indrena—by King Indra; rajan—O King; bhrgubhih—by
the descendants of Bhrgu Muni; sah—he (Bali Maharaja); jivitah—
brought back to life; sarva-atmand—in full submission; tan—them;
abhajat— worshiped; bhrgiin —the descendants of Bhrgu Muni; balih—
Maharaja Bali; Sisyah—a disciple; mahatma—the great soul; artha-
nivedanena—by giving them everything.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, when Bali Maharaja lost all his
opulence and died in the fight, Sukracarya, a descendant of Bhrgu


--- Page 189 ---
186 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
Muni, brought him back to life. Because of this, the great soul Bali
Maharaja became a disciple of Sukracarya and began to serve him
with great faith, offering everything he had.
TEXT 4
तं ब्राह्मणा भगवः प्रीयमाणा
अयाजयन्विश्वजिता त्रिणाकम्‌ |
जिगीषमाणं विधिनाभिषिच्य
महाभिषेकेण  महाचुमावाः ॥ ४॥
tar brahmana bhrgavah priyamana
aydajayan visvajita tri-nakam
Jigisamanarh vidhinabhisicya
mahabhisekena mahanubhavah
tam—upon him (Bali Maharaja); brahmanah—all the brahmanas;
bhrgavah—the descendants of Bhrgu Muni; priyamanah—being very
pleased; aydjayan—engaged him in performing a sacrifice; visvajita—
known as Viévajit; tri-nakam—the heavenly planets; jigisamanam—
desiring to conquer; wvidhind—according to regulative principles;
abhisicya—after purifying; maha-abhisekena—by bathing him in a
great abhiseka ceremony; maha-anubhavah—the exalted brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana descendants of Bhrgu Muni were very pleased
with Bali Maharaja, who desired to conquer the kingdom of Indra.
Therefore, after purifying him and properly bathing him accord-
ing to regulative principles, they engaged him in performing the
yajiia known as Visvajit.
TEXT 5
ततो रथः FEAR
दया दर्॑श्चतरङ्गवणाः |


--- Page 190 ---
Text 6] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 187
ष्वजथ सिंहेन विराजमानो
हताश्चनादास हविर्भिरिष्टात्‌ ॥ ५॥
tato rathah karcana-patta-naddho
hayas ca haryasva-turariga-varnah
dhvajas ca sirthena viragjamano
hutasanad asa havirbhir istat
tatah—thereafter; rathah—a chariot; kaficana—with gold; patta—
and silk garments; naddhah—wrapped; hayah ca—horses also;
haryasva-turanga-varnah—exactly of the same color as the horses of
Indra (yellow); dhvajah ca—a flag also; simthena—with the mark of a
lion; virajamanah—existing; huta-asanat—from the blazing fire; asa—
there was; havirbhih—by offerings of clarified butter; istat— worshiped.
TRANSLATION
‘When ghee [clarified butter] was offered in the fire of sacrifice,
there appeared from the fire a celestial chariot covered with gold
and silk. There also appeared yellow horses like those of Indra,
and a flag marked with 8 lion.
TEXT 6
ঘন্তষ दिव्यं पुरटोपनद्धं
तूणावरिक्तौ कवचं च दिल्यम्‌ ।
पितामहस्तस्य ददौ च माला-
मम्खानपुष्पां जलजं च शुक्रः NEN
dhanus ca कवः puratopanaddharir
1070৮ ariktau kavacari ca divyam
pitamahas tasya dadau ca malam
amlana-puspan jalajarir ca sukrah
dhanuh—a bow; ca—also;  divyam—uncommon;  purata-
upanaddham —covered with gold; tinau—two quivers; ariktau—in-
fallible; kavacam ca—and armor; divyam—celestial; pitamahah


--- Page 191 ---
188 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
tasya—his grandfather, namely Prahlada Maharaja; dadau—gave; ca—
and; malam—a garland; amlana-puspam—made of flowers that do not
fade away; jalajam—a conchshell (which is born in water); ca—as well
as; Sukrah—Sukracarya.
TRANSLATION
A gilded bow, two quivers of infallible arrows, and celestial ar-
mor also appeared. Bali Maharaja’s grandfather Prahlada Maharaja
offered Bali a garland of flowers that would never fade, and
Sukraciarya gave him a conchshell.
TEXT 7
एवं स বিমাজিবযীষ্লায-
A
स्तैः कल्पितखस्त्ययनोऽथ विप्रान्‌ |
श्रदश्िणीषृत्य FAT:
श्रहादमामन्त्य नमश्चकार ॥ ७॥
evar sa viprarjita-yodhanarthas
taih kalpita-svastyayano tha vipran
pradaksini-krtya krta-pranamah
prahradam amantrya namas-cakara
evam—in this way; sah—he (Bali Maharaja); vipra-arjita—gained by
the grace of the brahmanas; yodhana-arthah— possessing equipment
for fighting; taih—by them (the brahmanas); kalpita—advice;
svastyayanah—ritualistic performance; atha—as; vipran—all the
brahmanas (Sukricarya and others); pradaksini-krtya—circumambulat-
ing; krta-pranamah—offered his respectful obeisances; prahradam—
unto Prahlada Maharaja; amantrya—addressing; namah-cakara—
offered him obeisances.
TRANSLATION
‘When Maharaja Bali had thus performed the special ritualistic
ceremony advised by the brahmanas and had received, by their
grace, the equipment for fighting, he circumambulated the


--- Page 192 ---
Text 9] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 189
brahmanas and offered them obeisances. He also saluted Prahlada
Maharaja and offered obeisances to him.
TEXTS 8-9
अथारुद्य रथं दिन्यं भृगुदत्तं महारथः |
सुखग्धरोऽथ संनद्य धन्वी खड्धी एतेषुधिः ॥ ८ ॥
हेमाङ्गदलसद्रादुः GEES! |
रराज रथमारूढो धिष्ण्यस्य शव॒ हन्यवाट्‌ ॥ ९॥
atharuhya गवव? divyarn
bhrgu-dattarh maharathah
susrag-dharo ‘tha sannahya
dhanvi khadgi dhrtesudhih
hemarigada-lasad-bahuh
sphuran-makara-kundalah
7070]0 ratham aridho
dhisnya-stha iva havyavat
atha—thereupon; aruhya—getting on; ratham—the chariot;
divyam—celestial; bhrgu-dattam—given by Sukracirya; maha-
rathah—Bali Maharaja, the great charioteer; su-srak-dharah—deco-
rated with a nice garland; atha—thus; sannahya—covering his body
with armor; dhanvi—equipped with a bow; khadgi—taking a sword;
dhrta-isudhih—taking a quiver of arrows; hema-arigada-lasat-bahuh—
decorated with golden bangles on his arms; sphurat-makara-kundalah
—decorated with brilliant earrings resembling sapphires; raraja—was
illuminating; ratham aradhah—getting on the chariot; dhisnya-sthah—
situated on the altar of sacrifice; iva—like; havya-vat—worshipable
fire.
TRANSLATION
Then, after getting on the chariot given by Sukricirya, Bali
Maharaja, decorated with a nice garland, put protective armor on
his body, equipped himself with a bow, and took up a sword and a


--- Page 193 ---
190 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
quiver of arrows. When he sat down on the seat of the chariot, his
arms decorated with golden bangles and his ears with sapphire ear-
rings, he shone like a worshipable fire.
TEXTS 10-11
तस्यैशव्यबरम्रीभिः  खयूधैदेत्ययुथपैः ।
पिबद्भिरिव खं दम्मिदंहद्धिः परिधीनिष ॥१०॥
वृतो विकर्षन्‌ महतीमासुरीं ध्वजिनीं विः |
ययाविन्द्रपुरीं ফ্বত্রা कम्पयन्निव रोदसी ॥११॥
tulyaisvarya-bala-sribhih
sva-yithair daitya-yithapaih
pibadbhir iva khari drgbhir
dahadbhih paridhin iva
vrto vikarsan mahatim
৫5:77 dhvajinim vibhuh
yaydav indra-purim svrddharm
kampayann iva rodasi
tulya-aisvarya—equal in opulence; bala—strength; sribhih—and in
beauty; sva-yithaih—by his own men; daitya-yitha-paih—and by the
chiefs of the demons; pibadbhih—drinking; iva—as if; kham —the sky;
drgbhih—with the sight; dahadbhih—burning; paridhin—all direc-
tions; iva—as if; vrtah—surrounded; vikarsan—attracting; mahatim—
very great; dasurim—demoniac; dhvajinim—soldiers; vibhuh—most
powerful; yayau—went; indra-purim—to the capital of King Indra; su-
rddham—very opulent; kampayan—causing to tremble; iva—as if;
rodasi—the complete surface of the world.
TRANSLATION
‘When he assembled with his own soldiers and the demon chiefs,
who were equal to him in strength, opulence and beauty, they ap-
peared as if they would swallow the sky and burn all directions
with their vision. After thus gathering the demoniac soldiers, Bali


--- Page 194 ---
Text 13] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 191
Maharaja departed for the opulent capital of Indra. Indeed, he
seemed to make the entire surface of the world tremble.
TEXT 12
TIER: श्रीषद्िनन्दनादिभिः।
कूजद्विदङ्गमिथुने्गायन्म्मधुवतेः ।
प्रवारफलपुष्पोरुभारछार्गापरवुयेः ng:
ramyam upavanodyanaih
srimadbhir nandanadibhih
kijad-vihariga-mithunair
gayan-matta-madhuvrataih
pravala-phala-pusporu-
bhara-sakhamara-drumaih
ramyam—very pleasing; upavana—with orchards; udyanaih—and
gardens; srimadbhih—very beautiful to see; nandana-adibhih—such as
Nandana; kigjat—chirping; vihanga—birds; mithunaih—with pairs;
gayat—singing; matta—mad; madhu-vrataih—with bees; pravila—of
leaves; phala-puspa—{fruits and flowers; uru—very great; bhara—
bearing the weight; $akha—whose branches; amara-drumaih—with
eternal trees.
TRANSLATION
King Indra’s city was full of pleasing orchards and gardens, such
as the Nandana garden. Because of the weight of the flowers, leaves
and fruit, the branches of the eternally existing trees were bend-
ing down. The gardens were visited by pairs of chirping birds and
singing bees. The entire atmosphere was celestial.
TEXT 13
हंससारसवकादकारण्टवङ्ाङुठाः |
निन्यो यत्र क्रीडन्ति प्रमदाः सुरसेविताः ॥१३।


--- Page 195 ---
192 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
harsa-sarasa-cakrahva-
karandava-kulakulah
nalinyo yatra kridanti
pramadah sura-sevitah
hammsa—of swans; sdrasa—cranes; cakrahva—birds known as
cakravakas; karandava—and water fowl; kula—by groups; akuldh—
congested; nalinyah—lotus flowers; yatra—where; kridanti—enjoyed
sporting; pramadaih—beautiful women; sura-sevitah—protected by the
demigods.
TRANSLATION
Beautiful women protected by the demigods sported in the gar-
dens, which had lotus ponds full of swans, cranes, cakravakas and
ducks.
TEXT 14
आकाशगङ्गया देव्या इतां परिखभूतया |
TERM साड़लेनो्नतेन च ॥१४॥
akdsa-garigaya devya
vrtarn parikha-bhitaya
prakarenagni-varnena
sattalenonnatena ca
akasa-gangaya—by Ganges water known as Akasa-gangi; devya—
the always-worshipable goddess; vrtam—surrounded; parikha-
bhitaya—as a trench; prakarena—by ramparts; agni-varnena—resem-
bling fire; sa-attalena—with places for fighting; unnatena—very high;
ca—and.
TRANSLATION
The city was surrounded by trenches full of Ganges water,
known as Akasa-ganga, and by a high wall, which was the color of
fire. Upon this wall were parapets for fighting.


--- Page 196 ---
Text 16] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 193
TEXT 15
रुक्पपड़रूपाटे दारैः स्फिकगोपुरः ।
जुष्टां विभक्तप्रपथां विश्वकर्मविनिमिंताम्‌ ।१५॥
rukma-patta-kapatais ca
dvdraih sphatika-gopuraih
Justarin vibhakta-prapathari
visvakarma-vinirmitam
rukma-patta—possessing plates made of gold; kapataih —the doors of
which; ca—and; dvaraih—with entrances; sphatika-gopuraih—with
gates made of excellent marble; justam—linked; vibhakta-prapatham—
with many different public roads; viSvakarma-vinirmitam —constructed
by Visvakarma, the heavenly architect.
TRANSLATION
The doors were made of solid gold plates, and the gates were of
excellent marble. These were linked by various public roads. The
entire city had been constructed by Vi§vakarma.
TEXT 16
EEE विमानैन्यंच॑दे युताम्‌ |
शृक्ञाटकेमणिमयेवजविदुमवेदिमिः ॥१६॥
sabha-catvara-rathyadhyari
vimdnair nyarbudair yutam
srigatakair manimayair
vajra-vidruma-vedibhih
sabha—with assembly houses; catvara —courtyards; rathya—and
public roads; agdhyam—opulent; vimanaih—by airplanes; nyarbudaih-
—not less than ten crores (one hundred million); yutam—endowed;
Srnga-atakaih—with crossroads; mani-mayaih—made of pearls; va-
jra—made of diamonds; vidruma—and coral; vedibhih—with places to
sit.


--- Page 197 ---
194 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
The city was full of courtyards, wide roads, assembly houses,
and not less than one hundred million airplanes. The crossroads
were made of pearl, and there were sitting places made of diamond
and coral.
TEXT 17
यत्र नित्यवयोरूपाः स्यामा विरजवाससः ।
श्राजन्ते रूपवस्ना्यों ঘণ্দিমিবি व्ययः ॥१५७॥
yatra nitya-vayo-riipah
Syama viraja-vasasah
bhrajante ripavan-naryo
hy arcirbhir iva vahnayah
yatra—in that city; nitya-vayah-ripah—who were ever beautiful
and young; Syamah— possessing the quality of Syama; viraja-vasasah—
always dressed with clean garments; bhrajante—glitter; rapa-vat—well
decorated; naryah—women; hi—certainly; arcirbhih—with many
flames; iva—like; vahnayah—fires.
TRANSLATION
Everlastingly beautiful and youthful women, who were dressed
with clean garments, glittered in the city like fires with flames.
They all possessed the quality of §yama.
PURPORT
Srila Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura gives a hint of the quality of the
§yama woman.
sita-kale bhaved usna
usma-kale susitalah
stanau sukathinau yasam
tah Ssyamah parikirtitah
A woman whose body is very warm during the winter and cool during
the summer and who generally has very firm breasts is called syama.


--- Page 198 ---
Text 19] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 195
TEXT 18
gE विन्रष्टनयसोगन्धिकस्रजाम्‌ |
यत्रामोदञ्पादाय দান आवाति मारुतः ॥१८॥
sura-stri-kesa-vibhrasta-
nava-saugandhika-srajam
yatramodam updadaya
marga avati marutah
sura-stri—of the women of the demigods; kesa—from the hair;
vibhrasta—{fallen; nava-saugandhika—made of fresh, fragrant flowers;
srajam—of the flower garlands; yatra—wherein; damodam—the
fragrance; upadaya—carrying; marge—on the roads; avati—blows;
marutah—the breeze.
TRANSLATION
The breezes blowing in the streets of the city bore the fragrance
of the flowers falling from the hair of the women of the demigods.
TEXT 19
९
देपनाठा्षरिगच्छदु ेन्तगुरुगन्धिना |
पाण्डरेण प्रतिच्छस्रमारगे यान्ति सुरप्रियाः ।॥१९॥
hema-jalaksa-nirgacchad-
dhiimenaguru-gandhina
pandurena praticchanna-
marge yanti sura-priyah
hema-jala-aksa—from dainty little windows made of networks of
gold;  nirgacchat—emanating;  dhiimena—by smoke; aguru-
gandhina—fragrant due to burning incense known as aguru; pan-
durena—very white; praticchanna—covered; marge—on the street;
yanti—pass; sura-priyah—beautiful public women known as Apsaras,
celestial girls.


--- Page 199 ---
196 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
Apsaras passed on the streets, which were covered with the
white, fragrant smoke of aguru incense emanating from windows
with golden filigree.
TEXT 20
अक्तावितानैर्मणिहेमकेत॒मि-
नानापताकावलमीमिराकृताम्‌ ।
शिखण्डिपारावतभरङ्गनादितां
वैमानिकखीकलगीतमङ्गलाम्‌ ॥२०॥
mukta-vitanair mani-hema-ketubhir
nana-pataka-valabhibhir avrtam
Sikhandi-paravata-bhrriga-naditar
vaimanika-stri-kala-gita-mangalam
mukta-vitanaih—by canopies decorated with pearls; mani-hema-
ketubhih —with flags made with pearls and gold; nana-pataka —possess-
ing various kinds of flags; valabhibhih —with the domes of the palaces;
avrtam—covered; Sikhandi—of birds like peacocks; paravata—
pigeons; bhrriga—bees; naditam—vibrated by the respective sounds;
vaimanika—getting on airplanes; stri—of women; kala-gita—from the
choral singing; mangalam—full of auspiciousness.
TRANSLATION
The city was shaded by canopies decorated with pearls, and the
domes of the palaces had flags of pearl and gold. The city always
resounded with the vibrations of peacocks, pigeons and bees, and
above the city flew airplanes full of beautiful women who con-
stantly chanted auspicious songs that were very pleasing to the ear.
TEXT 21
ELE EER CAT ICE
सताखवीणाघ्ररजेष्ठवेणुभिः |


--- Page 200 ---
Text 22] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 197
TA: FIER
मनोरमां खप्रमया जितप्रमाम्‌ ॥२१॥
mrdanga-sankhanaka-dundubhi-svanaih
satala-vina-murajesta-venubhih
nrtyaih savadyair upadeva-gitakair
manoramam sva-prabhaya jita-prabham
mrdanga—of drums; Sarikha—conchshells; anaka-dundubhi—and
kettledrums; svanaih—by the sounds; sa-tala—in perfect tune; vina—a
stringed instrument; muraja—a kind of drum; ista-venubhih—accom-
panied by the very nice sound of the flute; nrtyaih—with dancing; sa-
vadyaih—with concert instruments; upadeva-gitakaih—with singing by
the secondary demigods like the Gandharvas; manoramam —beautiful
and pleasing; sva-prabhaya—by its own brilliance; jita-prabham —the
personification of beauty was conquered.
TRANSLATION
The city was filled with the sounds of mrdangas, conchshells,
kettledrums, flutes and well-tuned stringed instruments all play-
ing in concert. There was constant dancing and the Gandharvas
sang. The combined beauty of Indrapuri defeated beauty per-
sonified.
व TEXT 22
¢
यां न व्रजन्त्यधमिष्ठाः खला भूतद्रुहः হাঃ |
मानिनः कामिनो gs एभिर्हीना ब्रजन्ति यत्‌ । २२॥
yam na vrajanty adharmisthah
khala bhita-druhah sathah
maninah kamino lubdha
ebhir hina vrajanti yat
yam—in the streets of the city; na—not; vrajanti—pass;
adharmisthah—irreligious persons; khalah—envious persons; bhita-
druhah—persons violent toward other living entities; Sathah—cheaters;


--- Page 201 ---
198 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
maninah—falsely prestigious; kaminah—Ilusty; lubdhah—greedy;
ebhih —these; hinah—completely devoid of; wvrajanti—walk; yat—on
the street.
TRANSLATION
No one who was sinful, envious, violent toward other living en-
tities, cunning, falsely proud, lusty or greedy could enter that city.
The people who lived there were all devoid of these faults.
TEXT 23
at देवधानीं स॒ बरूथिनीपति-
बदिः समन्ताद्‌ रुरुधे पृतन्यया |
आचाय॑दत्तं जलजं महाखनं
दष्मी प्रयुञ्जन्मयमिन्द्रयोषिताम्‌ ॥२२॥
107 4८४८-व/0का77 sa varithini-patir
bahih samantad rurudhe prtanyaya
acarya-dattarn jalajarih maha-svanam
dadhmau prayuiijan bhayam indra-yositam
tam —that; deva-dhanim—place where Indra lived; sah—he (Bali
Maharaja); varithini-patih—the commander of the soldiers; bahih—
outside; samantat—in all directions; rurudhe —attacked; prtanyaya—
by soldiers; acarya-dattam—given by Sukracarya; jala-jam —the conch-
shell; maha-svanam—a loud sound; dadhmau —resounded;
prayufnijan—creating; bhayam—fear; indra-yositam—of all the ladies
protected by Indra.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja, who was the commander of numberless soldiers,
gathered his soldiers outside this abode of Indra and attacked it
from all directions. He sounded the conchshell given him by his
spiritual master, Sukracarya, thus creating a fearful situation for
the women protected by Indra.


--- Page 202 ---
Text 25] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 199
TEXT 24
मधघवांस्तममिप्रेत्य॒ वलेः Tomy |
गो मे
सवैदेवगणोपेतो गुरुमेतदुवाच इ ।२४॥
maghavars tam abhipretya
baleh paramam udyamam
sarva-deva-ganopeto
gurum etad uvaca ha
maghavan—Indra; tam—the situation; abhipretya—understanding;
baleh—of Bali Maharaja; paramam udyamam—great enthusiasm;
sarva-deva-gana—by all the demigods; upetah—accompanied;
gurum—unto the spiritual master; etat—the following words; uvaca—
said; ha—indeed.
TRANSLATION
Seeing Bali Maharaja’s indefatigable endeavor and understand-
ing his motive, King Indra, along with the other demigods, ap-
proached his spiritual master, Brhaspati, and spoke as follows.
TEXT 25
मगवन्नुयमो भूयान्वलेनः पूर्ववैरिणः ।
अविषह्यमिमं मन्ये केनासीक्तेजसोजितः।२५॥।
bhagavann udyamo bhizyan
baler nah pirva-vairinah
avisahyam ima manye
kenasit tejasorjitah
bhagavan—0 my lord; udyamah—enthusiasm; bhiyan—great;
baleh—of Bali Maharaja; nah—our; pirva-vairinah—past enemys;
avisahyam—unbearable; imam —this; manye—I think; kena—by
whom; asit—got; tejasa—prowess; urjitah—achieved.


--- Page 203 ---
200 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
My lord, our old enemy Bali Maharaja now has new enthusiasm,
and he has obtained such astonishing power that we think that
perhaps we cannot resist his prowess.
TEXT 26
नैनं कथित्‌ इतो वापि प्रतिन्योदुमधीश्वरः |
पिबन्निव ॒खेनेदं लिदन्निव्‌ दिशो दश ।
दहन्निव दिको wha: संवताभ्रिरिवोत्थितः॥२६॥
70710772 kascit kuto vapi
prativyodhum adhisvarah
pibann iva mukhenedari
lihann iva diso dasa
dahann iva diso drgbhih
sariwartagnir ivotthitah
na—not; enam—this arrangement; kascit—anyone; kutah—from
anywhere; va api—either; prativyodhum—to counteract; adhisvarah—
capable; piban iva—as if drinking; mukhena—by the mouth; idam—
this (world); lihan iva—as if licking up; disah dasa—all ten directions;
dahan iva—as if burning; diSah—all directions; drgbhih—by his
vision; sarwarta-agnih—the fire known as sarwarta; iva—like;
utthitah—now arisen.
TRANSLATION
No one anywhere can counteract this military arrangement of
Bali’s. It now appears that Bali is trying to drink up the entire uni-
verse with his mouth, lick up the ten directions with his tongue,
and raise fire in every direction with his eyes. Indeed, he has arisen
like the annihilating fire known as sarmvartaka.
TEXT 27
€ -
AR कारणमेतस्य दुरधषत्वस्य मद्रिपोः |
ओजः सहो बलं तेजो यत एतत्समुद्यमः ॥२७॥


--- Page 204 ---
Text 28] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 201
brahi karanam etasya
durdharsatvasya mad-ripoh
ojah saho bala tejo
yata etat samudyamah
brithi—kindly inform us; karanam—the cause; etasya—of all this;
durdharsatvasya—of the formidableness; mat-ripoh—of my enemy;
ojah—prowess; sahah—energy; balam—strength; tejah—influence;
yatah—wherefrom; etat—all this; samudyamah —endeavor.
TRANSLATION
Kindly inform me. What is the cause for Bali Maharaja’s
strength, endeavor, influence and victory? How has he become so
enthusiastic?
TEXT 28
श्रीयुरुरुवाच
जानामि मघर्छत्रोरुचतेरस्य कारणम्‌ |
शिष्यायोपभृतं तेजो भृगुमिनैह्यवादिभिः ॥२८॥
Sri-gurur uvaca
janami maghavani chatror
unnater asya karanam
Sisyayopabhrtari tejo
bhrgubhir brahma-vadibhih
Sri-guruh uvaca—Brhaspati said; janami—I know; maghavan—O
Indra; satroh—of the enemy; unnateh—of the elevation; asya—of him;
karanam—the cause; Sisydya—unto the disciple; upabhrtam—en-
dowed; tejah—power; bhrgubhih—by the descendants of Bhrgu;
brahma-vadibhih—all-powerful brahmanas.
TRANSLATION
Brhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, said: O Indra, I
know the cause for your enemy’s becoming so powerful. The


--- Page 205 ---
202 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
brahmana descendants of Bhrgu Muni, being pleased by Bali
Maharaja, their disciple, endowed him with such extraordinary
power.
PURPORT
Brhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, informed Indra,
“Ordinarily, Bali and his forces could not achieve such strength, but it
appears that the brahmana descendants of Bhrgu Muni, being pleased
with Bali Maharaja, endowed them with this spiritual power.” In other
words, Brhaspati informed Indra that Bali Maharija’s prowess was not
his own but that of his exalted guru, Sukracarya. We sing in our daily
prayers, yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasado yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto
pi. By the pleasure of the spiritual master, one can get extraordinary
power, especially in spiritual advancement. The blessings of the spiritual
master are more powerful than one’s personal endeavor for such ad-
vancement. Narottama dasa Thakura therefore says:
guru-mukha-padma-vakya, cittete kariya aikya,
ara na kariha mane asa
Especially for spiritual advancement, one should carry out the bona fide
order of the spiritual master. By the parampara system, one can thus be
endowed with the original spiritual power coming from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (evar parampara-praptam imam rajarsayo
viduh).
TEXT 29

ओजखिनं बिं জন্তু ন समर्थोऽस्ति कन ।

मवद्धिधो भवान्वापि वर्जयित्वेश्वरं हरिम्‌ ।

विजेष्यति न कोऽप्येनं बह्मतेजःसमेधितम्‌ |

AR शक्तः पुरः स्थातु कृतान्तस्य यथा जनाः ॥ २९॥

ojasvinam balim jeturn
na samartho ’sti kascana
bhavad-vidho bhavan vapi
varjayitvesvaram harim


--- Page 206 ---
Text 30] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 203
vijesyati na ko ‘py enarm
brahma-tejah-samedhitam
nasya Saktah purah sthatum
krtantasya yatha janah
ojasvinam—so powerful; balim—Bali Maharaja; jetum—to conquer;
na—not; samarthah—able; asti—is; kascana—anyone; bhavat-
vidhah—like you; bhavan —you yourself; va api—either; varjayitva—
excepting; iSvaram—the supreme controller; harim —the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; vijesyati—will conquer; na—not; kah api—any-
one; enam—him (Bali Maharaja) ; brahma-tejah-samedhitam —now em-
powered with brahma-tejas, extraordinary spiritual power; na—not;
asya—of him; saktah—is able; purah—in front; sthatum—to stay;
krta-antasya—of Yamaraja; yatha—as; janah—people.
TRANSLATION
Neither you nor your men can conquer the most powerful Bali.
Indeed, no one but the Supreme Personality of Godhead can con-
quer him, for he is now equipped with the supreme spiritual
power [brahma-tejas]. As no one can stand before Yamaraja, no
one can now stand before Bali Maharaja.
TEXT 30
तखान्निरयुत्यृज्य युयं सर्वे त्रिविष्टपम्‌ ।
৩ = 2
यात कालं प्रतीक्षन्तो यतः शत्रोविंपयंयः ॥३०॥
tasman nilayam utsrjya
১8078 sarve tri-vistapam
yata (21072 pratiksanto
yatah Satror viparyayah
tasmat—therefore; nilayam—not visible; utsrjya—giving up;
yyam—you; sarve—all; tri-vistapam —the heavenly kingdom; yata—
go somewhere else; kalam—time; pratiksantah—waiting for; yatah—
whereof; satroh—of your enemy; viparyayah—the reverse condition ar-
rives.


--- Page 207 ---
204 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
TRANSLATION
Therefore, waiting until the situation of your enemies is
reversed, you should all leave this heavenly planet and go
elsewhere, where you will not be seen.
TEXT 31
- ©
एष॒ विप्रबलोदकः सम्प्रत्यूजितविक्रमः |
तेषामेवापमानेन सालुबन्धो विनह्भव्यति ॥२१॥
esa vipra-balodarkah
sampraty urjita-vikramah
tesam evapamanena
sanubandho vinarksyati
esah—this (Bali Maharaja); vipra-bala-udarkah—flourishing because
of the brahminical power invested in him; samprati—at the present
moment; irjita-vikramah—extremely powerful; tesam—of the same
brahmanas; eva—indeed; apamanena—by insult; sa-anubandhah—
with friends and assistants; vinanksyati—will be vanquished.
TRANSLATION
Bali Maharaja has now become extremely powerful because of
the benedictions given him by the brahmanas, but when he later
insults the brahmanas, he will be vanquished, along with his
friends and assistants.
PURPORT
Bali Maharaja and Indra were enemies. Therefore, when Brhaspati,
the spiritual master of the demigods, predicted that Bali Maharaja would
be vanquished when he insulted the brahmanas by whose grace he had
become so powerful, Bali Maharaja’s enemies were naturally anxious to
know when that opportune moment would come. To pacify King Indra,
Brhaspati assured him that the time would certainly come, for Brhaspati
could see that in the future Bali Maharaja would defy the orders of
Sukracarya in order to pacify Lord Visnu, Vamanadeva. Of course, to ad-
vance in Krsna consciousness, one can take all risks. To please


--- Page 208 ---
Text 33] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 205
Vamanadeva, Bali Maharaja risked defying the orders of his spiritual
master, Sukracarya. Because of this, he would lose all his property, yet
because of devotional service to the Lord, he would get more than he ex-
pected, and in the future, in the eighth manvantara, he would occupy
the throne of Indra again.
TEXT 32
एवं सुमन्त्रितार्थास्ते गुरुणा्थाचुद दिना |
हित्वा त्रिविष्टपं जग्धुगीर्वाणाः कामरूपिणः 1220
evam sumantritarthas te
gurunarthanudarsina
hitva tri-vistapari jagmur
girvanah kama-ripinah
evam—thus; su-mantrita—being well advised; arthah—about duties;
te—they (the demigods); guruni—by their spiritual master; artha-
anudarsina—whose instructions were quite befitting; hitva—giving up;
tri-vistapam —the heavenly kingdom; jagmuh—went; girvanah—the
demigods; kama-riupinah—who could assume any form they liked.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: The demigods, being thus ad-
vised by Brhaspati for their benefit, immediately accepted his
words. Assuming forms according to their desire, they left the
heavenly kingdom and scattered, without being observed by the
demons.
PURPORT
The word kama-ripinah indicates that the demigods, the inhabitants
of the heavenly planets, can assume any form they desire. Thus it was
not at all difficult for them to remain incognito before the eyes of the
demons.
TEXT 33
Are
देवेष्वथ निरीनेषु নতিববযান্দনঃ पुरीम्‌ |
देवधानीमधिष्ठाय वश्च নিল্ম जगत्त्रयम्‌ ।३३॥


--- Page 209 ---
206 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
devesv atha nilinesu
balir vairocanah purim
deva-dhanim adhisthaya
vasam ninye jagat-trayam
devesu—all the demigods; atha—in this way; nilinesu—when they
disappeared; balih—Bali Maharaja; vairocanah—the son of Virocana;
purim—the heavenly kingdom; deva-dhanim—the residence of the
demigods; adhisthaya—taking possession of; vasam—under control;
ninye—brought; jagat-trayam—the three worlds.
TRANSLATION
When the demigods had disappeared, Bali Maharaja, the son of
Virocana, entered the heavenly kingdom, and from there he
brought the three worlds under his control.
TEXT 34
त॑ विश्वजयिनं शिष्यं भगवः शिष्यवत्सलाः |
शतेन हयमेधानामनुत्रतमयाजयन्‌ ॥ २४॥
(072 visva-jayinam Sisyam
bhrgavah sisya-vatsalah
Satena hayamedhanam
anuvratam aydajayan
tam —unto him (Bali Maharaja); visva-jayinam—the conqueror of the
entire universe; Sisyam—because of his being a disciple; bhrgavah—the
brahmanas, descendants of Bhrgu like Sukricarya; Sisya-vatsalah—
being very pleased with the disciple; satena—by one hundred; haya-
medhanam—sacrifices known as asvamedha; anuvratam—following
the instruction of the brahmanas; ayajayan—caused to execute.
TRANSLATION
The brahmana descendants of Bhrgu, being very pleased with
their disciple, who had conquered the entire universe, now
engaged him in performing one hundred asvamedha sacrifices.


--- Page 210 ---
Text 36] Bali Maharaja Conquers the Heavenly Planets 207
PURPORT
We have seen in the dispute between Maharaja Prthu and Indra that
when Maharaja Prthu wanted to perform one hundred asvamedha-
yajias, Indra wanted to impede him, for it is because of such great
sacrifices that Indra was made King of heaven. Here the brahmana de-
scendants of Bhrgu decided that although Maharaja Bali was situated on
the throne of Indra, he would not be able to stay there unless he per-
formed such sacrifices. Therefore they advised Maharaja Bali to perform
at least as many asvamedha-yajiias as Indra. The word aygjayan indi-
cates that all the brahmanas induced Bali Maharaja to perform such
sacrifices.
TEXT 35
ततस्तद नुमावेन ेवनत्रयविश्रृताम्‌ |
कीर्तिं दिक्षु वितन्वानः स रेज safes uu
tatas tad-anubhavena
bhuvana-traya-visrutam
kirtim diksu vitanvanah
sa reja udurad wa
tatah—thereafter; tat-anubhavena—because of performing such
great sacrifices; bhuvana-traya—throughout the three worlds;
visrutam—celebrated; kirtim —reputation; diksu—in all directions;
vitanvanah—spreading; sah—he (Bali Maharaja); reje—became
effulgent; udurat—the moon; iva—like.
TRANSLATION
When Bali Maharaja performed these sacrifices, he gained a
great reputation in all directions, throughout the three worlds.
Thus he shone in his position, like the brilliant moon in the sky.
TEXT 36
बुश्चजे च भियं स्बद्धां दविजदेबोपलम्मिताम्‌ |
कृतङृत्यमिवात्मानं मन्यमानो महामनाः ॥३६॥


--- Page 211 ---
208 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 15
bubhuje ca sriyamn svrddharm
dvija-devopalambhitam

krta-krtyam 10077127107
manyamano mahamanah

bubhuje —enjoyed; ca—also; Sriyam—opulence; su-rddham—
prosperity; dvija—of the brahmanas; deva—as good as the demigods;
upalambhitam —achieved because of the favor; kria-krtyam—very
satisfied by his activities; iva—like that; atmanam—himself;
manyamanah—thinking; maha-manah—the great-minded.

TRANSLATION

Because of the favor of the brahmanas, the great soul Bali
Maharaja, thinking himself very satisfied, became very opulent
and prosperous and began to enjoy the kingdom.

PURPORT

The brahmanas are called dvija-deva, and ksatriyas are generally
called nara-deva. The word deva actually refers to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The brahmanas guide human society in becoming
happy by satisfying Lord Visnu, and according to their advice, the
ksatriyas, who are called nara-deva, keep law and order so that other
people, namely the vaiSyas and siadras, may properly follow regulative
principles. In this way, people are gradually elevated to Krsna conscious-
ness.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fifteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Bali Maharaja Conquers
the Heavenly Planets.”


--- Page 212 ---
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Executing the Payo-vrata
Process of Worship
As described in this chapter, because Aditi, the mother of the demigods,
was very afflicted, her husband, Kasyapa Muni, told her how to observe
vows in austerities for the benefit of her sons.

Since the demigods were not visible in the heavenly kingdom, their
mother, Aditi, because of separation from them, was very much ag-
grieved. One day after many, many years, the great sage Kasyapa
emerged from a trance of meditation and returned to his asrama. He saw
that the asrama was no longer beautiful and that his wife was very
morose. Everywhere in the asrama, he saw signs of lamentation. The
great sage therefore inquired from his wife about the well-being of the
asrama and asked her why she looked so morose. After Aditi informed
KasSyapa Muni about the asrama’s well-being, she told him that she was
lamenting for the absence of her sons. She then requested him to tell her
how her sons could return and reoccupy their positions. She wanted all
good fortune for her sons. Moved by Aditi’s request, KaSyapa Muni in-
structed her in the philosophy of self-realization, the difference between
matter and spirit, and how to be unaffected by material loss. But when he
saw that Aditi was not satisfied even after he had given these instruc-
tions, he advised her to worship Vasudeva, Janardana. He assured her
that only Lord Vasudeva could satisfy her and fulfill all her desires.
When Aditi then expressed her desire to worship Lord Vasudeva,
Prajapati Kasyapa told her about a process of worship known as payo-
vrata, which is executed in twelve days. Lord Brahma had instructed him
how to satisfy Lord Krsna by this process, and thus he advised his wife to
observe this vow and its regulative principles.

TEXT 1
श्रीञ्युक उवाच
एवं पुत्रेषु नष्टेषु देवमातादितिस्तदा |
FEY ७9
हृते त्रिविष्टपे I=: पयतप्यदनाथवत्‌ ॥ १ ॥
209


--- Page 213 ---
210 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
$ri-suka uvaca
evar putresu nastesu
deva-mataditis tada
hrte tri-vistape daityaih
paryatapyad anathavat
sri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—in this way;
putresu—when her sons; nastesu—disappearing from their position;
deva-mata—the mother of the demigods; aditth—Aditi; tada—at that
time; hrte—because of being lost; tri-vistape—the kingdom of heaven;
daityath—by the influence of the demons; paryatapyat—began to
lament; anatha-vat—as if she had no protector.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King, when Aditi’s sons, the
demigods, had thus disappeared from heaven and the demons had
occupied their places, Aditi began lamenting, as if she had no pro-
tector.
TEXT 2
एकदा FATE APH WEFT ।
निरुत्सवं निरानन्दं समाधेर्विरतधिरात्‌ ।॥ २॥
ekada kasyapas tasya
asramar bhagavan agat
nirutsavari niranandarn
samadher viratas cirat
ekada—one day; kaSyapah—the great sage Kasyapa Muni; tasyah—
of Aditi; asramam—to the shelter; bhagavan—greatly powerful;
agat—went; nirutsavam—without enthusiasm; niranandam—without
jubilation; samadheh—his trance; viratah—stopping; cirat—after a
long time.
TRANSLATION
After many, many days, the great powerful sage Kasyapa Muni
arose from a trance of meditation and returned home to see the
asrama of Aditi neither jubilant nor festive.


--- Page 214 ---
Text 4] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 211
TEXT 3
a ঘর্তী दीनवदनां कृतासनपरिग्रहः |
सभाजितो यथान्यायमिदमाह इरूद्वह ॥ ३ ॥
sa patnim dina-vadanar
krtasana-parigrahah
sabhajito yatha-nyayam
idam aha kuridvaha
sah—Kasyapa Muni; patnim —unto his wife; dina-vadanam—having
a dry face; krta-asana-parigrahah—after accepting a sitting place;
sabhajitah —being honored by Aditi; yatha-nyayam—according to time
and place; idam aha—spoke as follows; kuru-udvaha—O Maharaja
Pariksit, the best of the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
0 best of the Kurus, when Kasyapa Muni had been properly
received and welcomed, he took his seat and then spoke as follows
to his wife, Aditi, who was very morose.
TEXT 4
अप्यभद्रं ন विप्राणां भद्रे लोकेऽधुनागतम्‌ |
&.
न धममस्य न लोकस मृस्योरछन्दानुवर्तिनः ॥ ४॥
apy abhadram na vipranam
bhadre loke ‘dhunagatam
na dharmasya na lokasya
mrtyos chandanuvartinah
api—whether; abhadram—ill fortune; na—not; vipranam—of the
brahmanas; bhadre—O most gentle Aditi; loke—in this world;
adhund—at the present moment; dagatam—has come; na—not;
dharmasya —of religious principles; na—not; lokasya—of the people in
general; mrtyoh—death; chanda-anuvartinah—who are followers of
the whims of death.


--- Page 215 ---
212 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
O most gentle one, I wonder whether anything inauspicious has
now taken place in regard to religious principles, the brahmanas
or the people in general, who are subject to the whims of death.
PURPORT
There are prescribed duties for all the inhabitants of this material
world, especially for the brahmanas but also for the people in general,
who are subject to the whims of death. Kasyapa Muni wondered whether
the regulative principles, which are meant for the well-being of every-
one, had been disobeyed. He accordingly continued his inquiries for
seven verses.
TEXT 5
० ~~ SN
अपि বান্তহান্ত किञ्चिद्‌ JR गृहमेधिनि ।
धर्मस्यार्थस्य कामस्य यत्र योगो ह्ययोगिनाम्‌ ॥ ५ ॥
api vakusalar kificid
grhesu grha-medhini
dharmasyarthasya kamasya
yatra yogo hy ayoginam
api—] am wondering; va—either; akusalam—inauspiciousness;
kificit—some; grhesu —at home; grha-medhini—O my wife, who are at-
tached to household life; dharmasya—of the principles of religion;
arthasya—of the economic condition; kamasya—of satisfaction of
desires; yatra—at home; yogah—the result of meditation; hi—indeed;
ayoginam—even of those who are not transcendentalists.
TRANSLATION
O my wife, who are very much attached to household life, if the
principles of religion, economic development and satisfaction of
the senses are properly followed in household life, one’s activities
are as good as those of a transcendentalist. I wonder whether there
have been any discrepancies in following these principles.


--- Page 216 ---
Text 6] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 213
PURPORT

In this verse, Aditi has been addressed by her husband, Kasyapa
Muni, as grha-medhini, which means “0116 who is satisfied in household
life for sense gratification.” Generally, those who are in household life
pursue sense gratification in the field of activities performed for material
results. Such grhamedhis have only one aim in life—sense gratification.
Therefore it is said, yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukharn hi tuccham:
the householder’s life is based on sense gratification, and therefore the
happiness derived from it is very meager. Nonetheless, the Vedic process
is so comprehensive that even in householder life one can adjust his ac-
tivities according to the regulative principles of dharma, artha, kama
and moksa. One’s aim should be to achieve liberation, but because one
cannot at once give up sense gratification, in the $astras there are injunc-
tions prescribing how to follow the principles of religion, economic
development and sense gratification. As explained in Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.2.9), dharmasya hy apavargyasya nartho ’rthayo-
pakalpate: “All occupational engagements are certainly meant for ulti-
mate liberation. They should never be performed for material gain.”
Those who are in household life should not think that religion is meant to
improve the process of the householder’s sense gratification. Household
life is also meant for advancement in spiritual understanding, by which
one can ultimately gain liberation from the material clutches. One should
remain in household life with the aim of understanding the ultimate goal
of life (tattva-jijiasa). Then household life is as good as the life of a yogi.
Kasyapa Muni therefore inquired from his wife whether the principles of
religion, economic development and sense gratification were being prop-
erly followed in terms of the $astric injunctions. As soon as one deviates
from the injunctions of the $astra, the purpose of household life is im-
mediately lost in confusion.

TEXT 6
अपि वातिथयोऽभ्येत्य ङटुम्बासक्तया त्वया |
गृहादपूजिता याताः प्रत्युत्थानेन वा कचित्‌ ॥ ६ ॥
api vatithayo ’bhyetya
kutumbasaktaya tvaya


--- Page 217 ---
214 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
grhad apujita yatah
pratyutthanena va kvacit
api—whether; va—either; atithayah—guests who come without an
invitation; abhyetya—coming to the home; kutumba-asaktaya—who
were too attached to the family members; tvaya—by you; grhat—from
the house; apujitah—without being properly welcomed; yatah—went
away; pratyutthanena—by standing up; va—either; kvacit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
I wonder whether because of being too attached to the members
of your family, you failed to properly receive uninvited guests,
who therefore were not welcomed and went away.
PURPORT
It is the duty of a householder to receive guests, even if a guest be an
enemy. When a guest comes to one’s home, one should properly receive
him by standing up and offering him a seat. It is enjoined, grhe satrum
api praptari visvastam akutobhayam: if even an enemy comes to one’s
home, one should receive him in such a way that the guest will forget
that his host is an enemy. According to one’s position, one should prop-
erly receive anyone who comes to one’s home. At least a seat and a glass
of water should be offered, so that the guest will not be displeased.
Kasyapa Muni inquired from Aditi whether disrespect had been shown to
such guests, or atithis. The word atithi refers to one who comes without
an invitation.
TEXT 7
९ a
गृहेषु येष्वतिथयो नानिताः सलिलेरपि ।
यदि निर्यान्ति ते नलं फेरुराजगदोपमाः । ७ ॥
grhesu yesv atithayo
narcitah salilair api
yadi niryanti te ninari
pheruraja-grhopamah


--- Page 218 ---
Text 8] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 215
grhesu—at home; yesu—which; atithayah—uninvited guests; na—
not; arcitah—welcomed; salilaih api—even by offering a glass of water;
yadi—if; niryanti—they go away; te—such household life; nitnam—in-
deed; pheru-raja—of ja-kals; grha—the homes; upamah—like.
TRANSLATION
Homes from which guests go away without having been received
even with an offering of a little water are like those holes in the
field which are the homes of jackals.
PURPORT
In a field there may be holes made by snakes and mice, but when there
are very big holes, it may be supposed that jackals live there. Certainly
no one goes to take shelter in such homes. Thus the homes of human
beings where atithis, uninvited guests, are not properly received are like
the homes of jackals.
TEXT 8
अप्यप्नयस्तु वेलायां न हुता हविषा सति ।
त्वयोद्विप्रधिया भद्र प्रोषिते मयि कर्दिचित्‌ ।। ८ ॥
apy agnayas tu velayarm
na huta havisa sati
tvayodvigna-dhiya bhadre
prosite mayi karhicit
api—whether; agnayah—fires; tu—indeed; velayam—in the fire
sacrifice; na—not; hutah—offered; havisa—by ghee; sati—O chaste
woman; tvaya—by you; udvigna-dhiya—because of some anxiety;
bhadre —O auspicious woman; prosite—was away from home; mayi—
when I; karhicit—sometimes.
TRANSLATION
O chaste and auspicious woman, when I left home for other
places, were you in so much anxiety that you did not offer obla-
tions of ghee into the fire?


--- Page 219 ---
216 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
TEXT 9
यत्पूजया FA लोकान्गृहान्वितः |
<
जाह्मणोऽभ्नि् वे विष्णोः सवदेवात्मनो EE 1 ९ ॥
yat-pujaya kama-dughan
yati lokan grhanvitah
brahmano ‘gnis ca vai visnoh
sarva-devatmano mukham
yat-puajaya—by worshiping the fire and brahmanas; kama-dughan—
which fulfill one’s desires; yati—one goes; lokan—to the destination of
the higher planetary system; grha-anvitah—a person attached to house-
hold life; brahmanah—the brahmanas; agnih ca—and the fire; vai—
indeed; visnoh—of Lord Visnu; sarva-deva-atmanah—the soul of all
the demigods; mukham—the mouth.
TRANSLATION
By worshiping the fire and the brahmanas, a householder can
achieve the desired goal of residing in the higher planets, for the
sacrificial fire and the brahmanas are to be considered the mouth
of Lord Visnu, who is the Supersoul of all the demigods.
PURPORT
According to the Vedic system, a fire sacrifice is held in order to offer
oblations of ghee, grains, fruits, flowers and so on, so that Lord Visnu
may eat and be satisfied. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.26):
[00707 puspariv phalarn toyari
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad ahariv bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah
“If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I
will accept it.” Therefore, all these items may be offered in the sacrificial
fire, and Lord Visnu will be satisfied. Similarly, brahmana-bhojana,
feeding of the brahmanas, is also recommended, for when the


--- Page 220 ---
Text 11] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 217
brahmanas eat sumptuous remnants of food after yajiia, this is another
way that Lord Visnu Himself eats. Therefore the Vedic principles recom-
mend that in every festival or ceremony one offer oblations to the fire
and give sumptuous food for the brahmanas to eat. By such activities, a
householder may be elevated to the heavenly planets and similar places
in the higher planetary systems.
TEXT 10
अपि सर्वे इशकिनस्तव पुत्रा मनखिनि ।
लक्षयेऽखस्थमात्मानं भवत्या FREY ॥१०॥
api sarve kusalinas
tava putra manasvini
laksaye ’svastham atmanarn
bhavatya laksanair aham
api—whether; sarve—all; kusalinah—in full auspiciousness; tava—
your; putrah—sons; manasvini—O great-minded lady; laksaye—I see;
asvastham —not in tranquillity; atmanam—the mind; bhavatyah—of
you; laksanaih—by symptoms; aham—1.
TRANSLATION
O great-minded lady, are all your sons faring well? Seeing your
withered face, I can perceive that your mind is not tranquil. How is
this so?
TEXT 11
श्रीअदितिरुवाच
मद्रं द्विजगवां Teme जनस च ।
সিববাঁ্য परं कत्र যুহমখিল্যুহা इमे ॥११॥
Sri-aditir ८0८८
bhadrar dvija-gavarm brahman
dharmasydsya janasya ca


--- Page 221 ---
218 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
tri-vargasya param ksetrarm
grhamedhin grha ime

sri-aditih uvaca—Srimati Aditi said; bhadram—all auspiciousness;
dvija-gavam —of the brahmanas and the cows; brahman—O brahmana;
dharmasya asya—of the religious principles mentioned in S$astra;
Janasya—of the people in general; ca—and; tri-vargasya—of the three
processes of elevation (dharma, artha and kama); param —the supreme;
ksetram—field; grhamedhin—O my husband, who are attached to
household life; grhah—your home; ime—all these things.

TRANSLATION

Aditi said: O my respected brahmana husband, all is well with
the brahmanas, the cows, religion and the welfare of other people.
O master of the house, the three principles of dharma, artha and
kama flourish in household life, which is consequently full of
good fortune.

PURPORT

In household life one can develop the three principles of religion,
economic development and sense gratification according to the regula-
tions given in the $astras, but to attain liberation one must give up house-
hold life and place himself in the transcendental renounced order.
Kasyapa Muni was not in the renounced order of life. Therefore he is ad-
dressed here once as brahman and another time as grhamedhin. Aditi,
his wife, assured him that as far as household life was concerned, every-
thing was going nicely, and the brahmanas and cows were being honored
and protected. In other words, there were no disturbances; household
life was duly progressing.

TEXT 12
अग्रयोऽतिथयो भृत्या भिक्षवो ये च लिप्सवः |
सवं भगवतो ब्रहमन्नुध्यानान रिप्यति ॥१२॥
agnayo ’tithayo bhrtya
bhiksavo ye ca lipsavah


--- Page 222 ---
Text 13] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 219
sarvarit bhagavato brahmann
anudhyanan na risyati

agnayah—worshiping the fires; atithayah—receiving the guests;
bhrtyah—satisfying the servants; bhiksavah—pleasing the beggars;
ye—all of them who; ca—and; lipsavah—as they desire (are taken care
of); sarvam—all of them; bhagavatah—of you, my lord; brahman—O
brahmana; anudhyanat—from always thinking; na risyati—nothing is
missed (everything is properly done).

TRANSLATION

O beloved husband, the fires, guests, servants and beggars are
all being properly cared for by me. Because I always think of you,
there is no possibility that any of the religious principles will be
neglected.

TEXT 13
x
को लु मे मगवन्कामो न सम्पद्येत मानसः ।
यस्या भवान्प्रजाध्यक्ष एवं AT ॥१२॥
ko nu me bhagavan kamo
na sampadyeta manasah
yasya bhavan prajadhyaksa
evar dharman prabhasate

kah—what; nu—indeed; me—my; bhagavan—O lord; kamah—
desire; na—not; sampadyeta—can be fulfilled; manasah—within my
mind; yasyah—of me; bhavan—your good self; praja-adhyaksah—
Prajapati; evam—thus; dharman—religious principles; prabhasate—
talks.

TRANSLATION

O my lord, since you are a Prajapati and are personally my in-
structor in the principles of religion, where is the possibility that
all my desires will not be fulfilled?


--- Page 223 ---
220 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
TEXT 14
EY
WE मारीच मनःशरीरजाः
प्रजा इमाः सतत्वरजस्तमोजुषः |
समो मर्ांस्ताखसुरादिषु प्रमो
तथापि मक्त मजते महेश्वरः ॥१४॥
tavaiva marica manah-sarirajah
praja imah sattva-rajas-tamo-jusah
samo bhavaris tasv asuradisu prabho
tathapi bhaktarih bhajate mahesvarah
tava—your; eva—indeed; marica—O son of Marici; manah-sarira-
jah—born either of your body or of your mind (all the demons and
demigods); prajah—born of you; imah—all of them; sattva-rajah-
tamah-jusah—infected with sattva-guna, rajo-guna or tamo-guna;
samah—equal; bhavan—your good self; tasu—to every one of them;
asura-adisu—beginning with the asuras; prabho—O my lord; tatha
api—still; bhaktam—unto the devotees; bhajate—takes care of;
maha-isvarah—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme con-
troller.
TRANSLATION
O son of Marici, because you are a great personality you are
equal toward all the demons and demigods, who are born either
from your body or from your mind and who possess one or
another of the three qualities —sattva-guna, rajo-guna or tamo-
guna. But although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
supreme controller, is equal toward all living entities, He is es-
pecially favorable to the devotees.
PURPORT
In Bhagavad-gita (9.29) the Lord says:
samo ‘hari sarva-bhiitesu
na me dvesyo ’sti na priyah


--- Page 224 ---
Text 15] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 221
ye bhajanti tu mari bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal toward everyone,
He is especially inclined toward those who engage in His devotional ser-
vice. The Lord says, kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati:
“My dear son of Kunti, please declare that My devotee will never be van-
quished.” Elsewhere, Krsna also says:
ye yatha mar prapadyante
tars tathaiva bhajamy aham
mama vartmanuvartante
manusyah partha sarvasah
(Bg. 4.11)
Actually, everyone is trying to please the Supreme Personality of God-
head in various ways, but according to their methods of approach, the
Supreme Lord endows them with different benedictions. Thus Aditi ap-
pealed to her husband by saying that since even the supreme controller
favors His devotees and since Indra, KaSyapa’s devoted son, was in dif-
ficulty, Kasyapa should bestow his favor upon Indra.
TEXT 15
तसादीश भजन्त्या मे श्रेयश्चिन्तय सुव्रत ।
हृतश्रियो हतस्थानान्सपत्नैः पाहि नः प्रमो ॥१५॥
tasmad isa bhajantya me
Sreyas cintaya suvrata
hrta-$riyo hrta-sthanan
sapatnaih pahi nah prabho
tasmat —therefore; i5a—O powerful controller; bhajantyah—of your
servitor; me—me; Sreyah—auspiciousness; cintaya—just consider; su-
vrata—O most gentle one; hrta-sriyah—bereft of all opulence; hrta-
sthanan—bereft of a residence; sapatnaih—by the competitors; pahi—
please protect; nah—us; prabho—O my lord.


--- Page 225 ---
222 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
TRANSLATION
Therefore, most gentle lord, kindly favor your maidservant. We
have now been deprived of our opulence and residence by our
competitors, the demons. Kindly give us protection.
PURPORT
Aditi, the mother of the demigods, appealed to Kasyapa Muni to give
the demigods protection. When we speak of the demigods, this also in-
cludes their mother.
TEXT 16
S. .
परेविंवासिता साहं म्रा व्यसनसागरे |
tad श्रीर्यशः सानं हतानि प्रबलैर्मम REN
parair vivasita sahari
magna vyasana-sagare
aisvaryarn $rir yasah sthanari
hrtani prabalair mama
paraith—Dby our enemies; vivasita—taken away from our residential
quarters; sa—the same; aham—I; magna—drowned; wvyasana-
sagare—in an ocean of trouble; aisvaryam—opulence; s$rih—beauty;
yasah—reputation; sthanam—place; hrtani—all taken away; pra-
balaih—very powerful; mama —my. .
TRANSLATION
The demons, our formidably powerful enemies, have taken
away our opulence, our beauty, our fame and even our residence.
Indeed, we have now been exiled, and we are drowning in an ocean
of trouble.
TEXT 17
यथा तानि पुनः साधो प्रषेरन्‌ ममात्मजाः |
तथा विधेदि Fea धिया करयाणङृत्म ॥१७॥
yatha tani punah sadho
prapadyeran mamadtmajah


--- Page 226 ---
Text 18] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 223
tatha vidhehi kalyanam
dhiya kalyana-krttama
yatha—as; tani—all of our lost things; punah—again; sadho—O
great saintly person; prapadyeran—can regain; mama—my; datma-
jah—offspring (sons); tatha—so; vidhehi—kindly do; kalyanam—
auspiciousness; dhiya—by consideration; kalyana-krt-tama—O you
who are the best person to act for our welfare.
TRANSLATION
O best of sages, best of all those who grant auspicious benedic-
tions, please consider our situation and bestow upon my sons the
benedictions by which they can regain what they have lost.
TEXT 18
श्रीञ्चुक उवाच
एवमम्यर्थितोऽदित्या कस्तामाह war |
अदो मायावरं दिष्णोः सेहबद्धमिदं जगत्‌ ॥ १८॥
sri-Suka uvdca
evam abhyarthito 08৫
kas tam aha smayann iva
aho maya-balam visnoh
sneha-baddham 107 jagat
$ri-sukah uvaca—Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam—in this way;
abhyarthitah—being requested; aditya—by Aditi; kah—KasSyapa
Muni; tam—unto her; aha—said; smayan—smiling; iva—just like;
aho—alas; maya-balam—the influence of the illusory energy; visnoh—
of Lord Visnu; sneha-baddham—influenced by this affection; idam—
this; jagat—whole world.
TRANSLATION
Sukadeva Gosvami continued: When Kafyapa Muni was thus re-
quested by Aditi, he slightly smiled. ‘‘Alas,”” he said, ‘how


--- Page 227 ---
224 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
powerful is the illusory energy of Lord Visnu, by which the entire
world is bound by affection for children!”
PURPORT
Kasyapa Muni was surely sympathetic to his wife’s affliction, yet he
was surprised at how the whole world is influenced by affection.
TEXT 19
® देहो मोतिकोऽनात्मा क चामा प्रकृतेः परः |
कस्य के पतिपुत्राया मोद एव दि कारणम्‌ ॥१९॥
kva deho bhautiko 7260716
kva catma prakrteh parah
kasya ke pati-putradya
moha eva hi karanam
kva—where is; dehah—this material body; bhautikah—made of five
elements; anatma—not the spirit soul; kva—where is; ca—also;
atma—the spirit soul; prakrteh—to the material world; parah—tran-
scendental; kasya—of whom; ke—who is; pati—husband; putra-
adyah—or son and so on; mohah—illusion; eva—indeed; hi—cer-
tainly; karanam—cause.
TRANSLATION
Kasyapa Muni continued: What is this material body, made of
five elements? It is different from the spirit soul. Indeed, the spirit
soul is completely different from the material elements from
which the body is made. But because of bodily attachment, one is
regarded as a husband or son. These illusory relationships are
caused by misunderstanding.
PURPORT
The spirit soul (atma or 18৮০) is certainly different from the body,
which is a combination of five material elements. This is a simple fact,
but it is not understood unless one is spiritually educated. Kasyapa Muni


--- Page 228 ---
Text 19] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 225
met his wife, Aditi, in the heavenly planets, but the same misconception
extends throughout the entire universe and is also here on earth. There
are different grades of living entities, but all of them are more or less
under the impression of the bodily conception of life. In other words, all
living entities in this material world are more or less devoid of spiritual
education. The Vedic civilization, however, is based on spiritual educa-
tion, and spiritual education is the special basis on which Bhagavad-gita
was spoken to Arjuna. In the beginning of Bhagavad-gita, Krsna in-
structed Arjuna to understand that the spirit soul is different from the
body.
dehino ’smin yatha dehe
16018772707 yauvanarh jara
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati

‘As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The
self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.” (Bg. 2.13) Unfor-
tunately, this spiritual education is completely absent from modern
human civilization. No one understands his real self-interest, which lies
with the spirit soul, not with the material body. Education means spiri-
tual education. To work hard in the bodily conception of life, without
spiritual education, is to live like an animal. Nayarh deho deha-bhajarn
nr-loke kastan kaman arhate vid-bhujam ye (Bhag. 5.5.1). People are
working so hard simply for bodily comforts, without education regarding
the spirit soul. Thus they are living in a very risky civilization, for itis a
fact that the spirit soul has to transmigrate from one body to another
(tatha dehantara-praptih). Without spiritual education, people are kept
in dark ignorance and do not know what will happen to them after the
annihilation of the present body. They are working blindly, and blind
leaders are directing them. Andha yathandhair upaniyamanas te ’pisa-
tantryam uru-damni baddhah (Bhag. 7.5.31). A foolish person does not
know that he is completely under the bondage of material nature and
that after death material nature will impose upon him a certain type of
body, which he will have to accept. He does not know that although in his
present body he may be a very important man, he may next get the body


--- Page 229 ---
226 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
of an animal or tree because of his ignorant activities in the modes of ma-
terial nature. Therefore the Krsna consciousness movement is trying to
give the true light of spiritual existence to all living entities. This move-
ment is not very difficult to understand, and people must take advantage
of it, for it will save them from the risky life of irresponsibility.
TEXT 20
. ক £.
उपतिष्ठख पुरुषं भगवन्तं जनाद्‌ नम्‌ |
सर्वभूतगुहावासं वासुदेवं जगद्गुरुम्‌ Rell
upatisthasva [01871050773
11/८1 11.111
sarva-bhiita-guha-vasarm
vasudevari jagad-gurum

upatisthasva—just try to worship; purusam—the Supreme Person;
bhagavantam—the Personality of Godhead; janardanam—who can kill
all the enemies; sarva-bhiita-guha-vasam—living within the core of the
heart of everyone; vasudevam—Vasudeva, Krsna, who is all-pervading
and is the son of Vasudeva; jagat-gurum—the spiritual master and
teacher of the whole world.

TRANSLATION

My dear Aditi, engage in devotional service to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is the master of everything, who can
subdue everyone’s enemies, and who sits within everyone’s heart.
Only that Supreme Person—Krsna, or Vasudeva—can bestow all
auspicious benedictions upon everyone, for He is the spiritual
master of the universe.

PURPORT

With these words, Kasyapa Muni tried to pacify his wife. Aditi made
her appeal to her material husband. Of course, that is nice, but actually a
material relative cannot do anything good for anyone. If anything good
can be done, it is done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Vasudeva. Therefore, Kasyapa Muni advised his wife, Aditi, to begin


--- Page 230 ---
Text 20] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 227
worshiping Lord Vasudeva, who is situated in everyone’s heart. He is the
friend of everyone and is known as Janardana because He can kill all
enemies. There are three modes of material nature — goodness, passion
and ignorance —and above material nature, transcendental to material
nature, is another existence, which is called suddha-sattva. In the ma-
terial world, the mode of goodness is considered the best, but because of
material contamination, even the mode of goodness is sometimes over-
powered by the modes of passion and ignorance. But when one tran-
scends the competition between these modes and engages himself in
devotional service, he rises above the three modes of material nature. In
that transcendental position, one is situated in pure consciousness.
Sattvari visuddharm vasudeva-sabditam (Bhag. 4.3.23). Above material
nature is the position called vasudeva, or freedom from material con-
tamination. Only in that position can one perceive the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Vasudeva. Thus the vasudeva condition fulfills a
spiritual necessity. Vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma sudurlabhah.
When one realizes Vasudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he
becomes most exalted.
Paramatma (Vasudeva) is situated in everyone’s heart, as confirmed in
Bhagavad-gita. The Lord says:
tesarn satata-yuktanar
bhajatar priti-piarvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tam
yena mam upayanti te
“To those who are constantly devoted and who worship Me with love, I
give the understanding by which they can come to Me.” (Bg. 10.10)
isvarah sarva-bhitanam
hrd-dese ’rjuna tisthati
“The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna.”
(Bg. 18.61)
bhoktaram yajia-tapasari
sarva-loka-mahesvaram


--- Page 231 ---
228 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
suhrdam sarva-bhitanam
Jiatva mam santim rcchati
“The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the
benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from the
pangs of material miseries.” (Bg. 5.29)

Whenever one is perplexed, let him take shelter of the lotus feet of
Vasudeva, Krsna, who will give the devotee intelligence to help him sur-
pass all difficulties and return home, back to Godhead. Ka§yapa Muni ad-
vised his wife to seek shelter at the lotus feet of Vasudeva, Krsna, so that
all her problems would be very easily solved. Thus Kasyapa Muni was an
ideal spiritual master. He was not so foolish that he would present him-
self as an exalted personality, as good as God. He was actually a bona fide
guru because he advised his wife to seek shelter at the lotus feet of
Vasudeva. One who trains his subordinate or disciple to worship
Vasudeva is the truly bona fide spiritual master. The word jagad-gurum
is very important in this regard. Kasyapa Muni did not falsely declare
himself to be jagad-guru, although he actually was jagad-guru because
he advocated the cause of Vasudeva. Actually, Vasudeva is jagad-guru,
as clearly stated here (vasudevar jagad-gurum). One who teaches the
instructions of Vasudeva, Bhagavad-gita, is as good as vasudevarm jagad-
gurum. But when one who does not teach this instruction —as it is—
declares himself jagad-guru, he simply cheats the public. Krsna is jagad-
guru, and one who teaches the instruction of Krsna as it is, on behalf of
Krsna, may be accepted as jagad-guru. One who manufactures his own
theories cannot be accepted; he becomes jagad-guru falsely.

TEXT 21
स विधास्यति ते कामान्दरिदीनानुकम्पनः |
अमोषा भगवद्धक्तिनेतरेति मतिमेम ॥२१॥
sa vidhasyati te kaman
harir dinanukampanah
amogha bhagavad-bhaktir
netareti matir mama


--- Page 232 ---
Text 21] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 229

sah—he (Vasudeva); vidhasyati—will undoubtedly fulfill; te —your;
kaman—desires; harih—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dina—
unto the poor; anukampanah—very merciful; amogha—infallible;
bhagavat-bhaktih—devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; na—not; itara—anything but bhagavad-bhakti; iti—thus;
matih—opinion; mama—my.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is very merciful to
the poor, will fulfill all of your desires, for devotional service unto
Him is infallible. Any method other than devotional service is use-
less. That is my opinion.

PURPORT

There are three kinds of men, who are called akdama, moksa-kama and
sarva-kama. One who tries to get liberation from this material world is
called moksa-kama, one who wants to enjoy this material world to its
fullest extent is called sarva-kama, and one who has fulfilled all his
desires and has no further material desires is called akama. A bhakta has
no desire. Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam tat-paratvena nirmalam. He is
purified and free from material desires. The moksa-kami wants to
achieve liberation by merging into the existence of the Supreme
Brahman, and because of this desire to merge into the existence of the
Lord, he is not yet pure. And since those who want liberation are impure,
what to speak of the karmis, who have so many desires to fulfill? None-
theless, the sastra says:

akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
Yajeta purusari param

‘“Whether one desires everything or nothing or desires to merge into the
existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving
service.” (Bhag. 2.3.10)

Ka$yapa Muni saw that his wife, Aditi, had some material desires for
the welfare of her sons, but still he advised her to render devotional ser-


--- Page 233 ---
230 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
vice to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, everyone,
regardless of whether he is a karmi, jaani, yogi or bhakta, should in-
variably take shelter of the lotus feet of Vasudeva and render transcen-
dental loving service unto Him so that all his desires will be duly
fulfilled. Krsna is dina-anukampana: He is very merciful to everyone.
Therefore if one wants to fulfill his material desires, Krsna helps him. Of
course, sometimes if a devotee is very sincere, the Lord, as a special favor
to him, refuses to fulfill his material desires and directly blesses him
with pure, unalloyed devotional service. It is said in Caitanya-caritamrta
(Madhya 22.38-39):

krsna kahe, — ‘ama bhaje, mage visaya-sukha

amrta chadi’ visa mage, —ei bada murkha

ami—vijia, ei muarkhe ‘visaya’ kene diba?

sva-caranamrta diya ‘visaya’ bhulaiba
“Krsna says, ‘If one engages in My transcendental loving service but at
the same time wants the opulence of material enjoyment, he is very, very
foolish. Indeed, he is just like a person who gives up ambrosia to drink
poison. Since I am very intelligent, why should I give this fool material
prosperity ? Instead I shall induce him to take the nectar of the shelter of
My lotus feet and make him forget illusory material enjoyment.” If a
devotee maintains some material desire and at the same time very sin-
cerely desires to engage at the lotus feet of Krsna, Krsna may directly
give him unalloyed devotional service and take away all his material
desires and possessions. This is the Lord’s special favor to devotees.
Otherwise, if one takes to Krsna’s devotional service but still has ma-
terial desires to fulfill, he may become free from all material desires, as
Dhruva Maharaja did, but this may take some time. However, if a very
sincere devotee wants only Krsna’s lotus feet, Krsna directly gives him
the position of suddha-bhakti, unalloyed devotional service.

TEXT 22
श्रीअदितिरुवाच
केनाहं विधिना ब्रह्न्ुपस्थास्ये जगत्पतिम्‌ |
यथा मे AEF विदध्यात्‌ स मनोरथम्‌ ।।२२॥


--- Page 234 ---
Text 22] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 231
$ri-aditir uvaca
kenahari vidhina brahmann
upasthasye jagat-patim
yatha me satya-sarkalpo
vidadhyat sa manoratham
$ri-aditih uvaca—Srimati Aditi began to pray; kena—by which;
aham—1I; vidhina—by regulative principles; brahman—O brahmana;
upasthdsye —can please; jagat-patim—the Lord of the universe, Jagan-
natha; yatha—by which; me—my; satya-sarikalpah—desire may ac-
tually be fulfilled; vidadhyat—may fulfill; sah—He (the Supreme
Lord); manoratham —ambitions or desires.
TRANSLATION
Srimati Aditi said: O brahmana, tell me the regulative principles
by which I may worship the supreme master of the world so that
the Lord will be pleased with me and fulfill all my desires.
PURPORT
It is said, “Man proposes, God disposes.” Thus a person may desire
many things, but unless these desires are fulfilled by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, they cannot be fulfilled. Fulfillment of desire is
called satya-sarikalpa. Here the word satya-sankalpa is very important.
Aditi placed herself at the mercy of her husband so that he would give
her directions by which to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead
so that all her desires would be fulfilled. A disciple must first decide that
he should worship the Supreme Lord, and then the spiritual master will
give the disciple correct directions. One cannot dictate to the spiritual
master, just as a patient cannot demand that his physician prescribe a
certain type of medicine. Here is the beginning of worship of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (7.16):
catur-vidha bhajante mar
Janah sukrtino ’rjuna
arto jynasur artharthi
JjAani ca bharatarsabha


--- Page 235 ---
232 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
‘0 best among the Bharatas, four kinds of pious men render devotional
service unto Me —the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive,
and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.” Aditi was arta,
a person in distress. She was very much aggrieved because her sons, the
demigods, were bereft of everything. Thus she wanted to take shelter of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead under the direction of her husband,
Kasyapa Muni.
TEXT 23
आदिश त्वं द्विजश्रेष्ठ विधिं तदुपधावनम्‌ ।
avg तुष्यति मे देषः सीदन्त्याः सह पुत्रकैः 130
adisa (एवः dvija-Srestha
vidhir tad-upadhavanam
asu tusyati me devah
sidantyah saha putrakaih

adisa—just instruct me; tvam—O my husband; dvijja-srestha—O best
of the brahmanas; vidhim—the regulative principles; tat—the Lord;
upadhavanam—the process of worshiping; asu—very soon; tusyati—
becomes satisfied; me—unto me; devah—the Lord; sidantyah—now
lamenting; saha—with; putrakaih—all my sons, the demigods.

TRANSLATION

O best of the brahmanas, kindly instruct me in the perfect
method of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
devotional service, by which the Lord may very soon be pleased
with me and save me, along with my sons, from this most
dangerous condition.

PURPORT

Sometimes less intelligent men ask whether one has to approach a
guru to be instructed in devotional service for spiritual advancement.
The answer is given here—indeed, not only here, but also in Bhagavad-
gita, where Arjuna accepted Krsna as his guru (sisyas te "hari s$adhi mam
tvam prapannam). The Vedas also instruct, tad-vijianarthari sa gurum
evabhigacchet: one must accept a guru for proper direction if one is


--- Page 236 ---
Text 24] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 233
seriously inclined toward advancement in spiritual life. The Lord says
that one must worship the dcarya, who is the representative of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead (acaryam mari vijaniyat). One should
definitely understand this. In Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that the guru
is the manifestation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore,
according to all the evidence given by the sSastra and by the practical
behavior of devotees, one must accept a guru. Aditi accepted her hus-
band as her guru, so that he would direct her how to advance in spiritual
consciousness, devotional service, by worshiping the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 24
श्रीकर्यप उवाच
एतन्मे भगवान्पृष्टः प्रजाकामस्य पद्मजः |
यदाह ते प्रवक्ष्यामि वतं केशवतोषणम्‌ ।। २४॥
sri-kasyapa uvaca
etan me bhagavan prstah
praja-kamasya padmajah
yad aha te pravaksyami
vrata kesava-tosanam

sri-kasyapah uvaca—Kasyapa Muni said; etat—this; me—by me;
bhagavan —the most powerful; prstah—when he was requested; praja-
kamasya —desiring offspring; padma-jah—Lord Brahma, who was born
of a lotus flower; yat—whatever; aha—he said; te—unto you;
pravaksyami—1I shall explain; vratam—in the form of worship; kesava-
tosanam—by which Kesava, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
satisfied.

TRANSLATION

Sri Kasyapa Muni said: When I desired offspring, I placed in-
quiries before Lord Brahma, who is born from a lotus flower. Now
I shall explain to you the same process Lord Brahma instructed
me, by which Kesava, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
satisfied.


--- Page 237 ---
234 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
PURPORT

Here the process of devotional service is further explained. Kasyapa
Muni wanted to instruct Aditi in the same process recommended to him
by Brahma for satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is
valuable. The guru does not manufacture a new process to instruct the
disciple. The disciple receives from the guru an authorized process
received by the guru from his guru. This is called the system of disciplic
succession (evar parampara-praptam imari rajarsayo viduh). This is
the bona fide Vedic system of receiving the process of devotional service,
by which the Supreme Personality of Godhead is pleased. Therefore, to
approach a bona fide guru, or spiritual master, is essential. The bona fide
spiritual master is he who has received the mercy of his guru, who in
turn is bona fide because he has received the mercy of his guru. This is
called the parampara system. Unless one follows this parampara system,
the mantra one receives will be chanted for no purpose. Nowadays there
are so many rascal gurus who manufacture their mantras as a process for
material advancement, not spiritual advancement. Still, the mantra can-
not be successful if it is manufactured. Mantras and the process of devo-
tional service have special power, provided they are received from the
authorized person.

TEXT 25
फाल्गुनस्यामले पक्षे द्वादशाहं पयोवतम्‌ |
FRR ww परमयान्वितः ॥ २५॥
„ phalgunasyamale pakse
dvadasahari payo-vratam
arcayed aravindaksarin
bhaktya paramayanvitah

phalgunasya—of the month of Phalguna (February and March);
amale—during the bright; pakse—fortnight; dvadasa-aham—for
twelve days, ending with Dvadasi, the day after Ekadasi; payah-
vratam —accepting the vow of taking only milk; arcayet—one should
worship; aravinda-aksam—the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of God-
head; bhaktya—with devotion; paramaya—unalloyed; anvitah—
surcharged.


--- Page 238 ---
Text 26] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 235
TRANSLATION
In the bright fortnight of the month of Phalguna [February and
March], for twelve days ending with Dvadasi, one should observe
the vow of subsisting only on milk and should worship the lotus-
eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead with all devotion.
PURPORT
Worshiping the Supreme Lord Visnu with devotion means following
arcana-marga.
Sravanam kirtanarm visnoh
smaranar pada-sevanam
arcana vandanarir dasyariv
sakhyam atma-nivedanam
One should install the Deity of Lord Visnu or Krsna and worship Him
nicely by dressing Him, decorating Him with flower garlands, and offer-
ing Him all kinds of fruits, flowers and cooked food, nicely prepared
with ghee, sugar and grains. One should also offer a flame, incense and
so on, while ringing a bell, as prescribed. This is called worship of the
Lord. Here it is recommended that one observe the vow of subsisting
only by drinking milk. This is called payo-vrata. As we generally per-
form devotional service on Ekadasi by not eating grains, it is generally
recommended that on Dvadasi one not consume anything but milk.
Payo-vrata and arcana devotional service to the Supreme Lord should be
performed with a pure devotional attitude (bhaktya). Without bhakti,
one cannot worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhaktya mam
abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah. If one wants to know the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and be directly connected with Him, knowing
what He wants to eat and how He is satisfied, one must take to the process
of bhakti. As recommended here also, bhaktya paramayanvitah: one
should be surcharged with unalloyed devotional service.
TEXT 26
~ €
सिनीवार्यां मृदारिप्य लायात्‌ क्रोडविदीणंया |
- ৬
यदि लभ्येत वै स्रोतस्येतं मन्त्रथुदीरयेत्‌ ॥২৪।।


--- Page 239 ---
236 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
sinwalyam mrdalipya
snayat kroda-vidirnaya
yadi labhyeta vai srotasy
০1071 mantram udirayet
sinivalyam—on the dark-moon day; mrda—with dirt; alipya—
smearing the body; snayat—one should bathe; kroda-vidirnaya—dug
up by the tusk of a boar; yadi—if; labhyeta—it is available; vai—in-
deed; srotasi—in a flowing river; etam mantram—this mantra;
udirayet—one should chant.
TRANSLATION
If dirt dug up by a boar is available, on the day of the dark moon
one should smear this dirt on his body and then bathe in a flowing
river. While bathing, one should chant the following mantra.
TEXT 27
त्वं देव्यादिवराहेण रसायाः स्थानमिच्छता |
IIA नमस्तुभ्यं पाप्मानं मे प्रणाशय ॥२७॥
८7 devy adi-varahena
rasayah sthanam icchata
uddhrtasi namas tubhyam
papmanari me prandasaya
tvam—you; devi—O mother earth; adi-varahena—by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in the form of a boar; rasay@h —from the bottom
of the universe; sthanam—a place; icchata—desiring; uddhrta asi—you
have been raised; namah tubhyam—I offer my respectful obeisances
unto you; papmanam—all sinful activities and their reactions; me —of
me; pranasaya—please undo.
TRANSLATION
O mother earth, you were raised by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in the form of a boar because of your desiring to have a


--- Page 240 ---
Text 29] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 237
place to stay. I pray that you kindly vanquish all the reactions of
my sinful life. I offer my respectful obeisances unto you.
TEXT 28
९
निवतितार्मनियमो Taq समादितः।
अर्चायां खण्डिले ad जले वद्धो WAN ॥२८॥
nirvartitatma-niyamo
devam arcet samahitah
arcayam sthandile sirye
Jjale vahnau gurav api
nirvartita—finished; atma-niyamah—the daily duties of washing,
chanting other mantras and so on, according to one’s practice; devam—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arcet—one should worship;
samahitah —with full attention; arcayam —unto the Deities; sthandile-
—unto the altar; sirye—unto the sun; jale—unto the water; vahnau—
unto the fire; gurau—unto the spiritual master; api —indeed.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, one should perform his daily spiritual duties and
then, with great attention, offer worship to the Deity of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and also to the altar, the sun,
water, fire and the spiritual master.
TEXT 29
awed मगवते पुरुषाय महीयसे |
सवेभूतनिषासाय वासुदेवाय साक्षिणे ॥२९॥
namas tubhyari bhagavate
purusaya mahiyase
sarva-bhitta-nivasaya
vasudevaya saksine
namah tubhyam—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You;
bhagavate —unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; purusaya—the


--- Page 241 ---
238 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
Supreme Person; mahiyase—the best of all personalities; sarva-bhita-
nivasaiya—the person who lives in everyone's heart; vasudevaya—the
Lord who lives everywhere; saksine—the witness of everything.
TRANSLATION
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, greatest of all, who lives in
everyone’s heart and in whom everyone lives, O witness of every-
thing, O Vasudeva, supreme and all-pervading person, I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 30
नमोऽव्यक्ताय ख्ष्माय प्रधानपुरुषाय च |
चतुर्विशद्गुणज्ञाय गुणसंख्यानटेतवे ॥२०॥
namo ’vyaktaya siaksmaya
pradhana-purusaya ca
catur-virnsad-guna-jiiaya
guna-saiikhyana- hetave
namah—1I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; avyaktaya—who
are never seen by material eyes; siksmaya—transcendental; pradhana-
purusaya—the Supreme Person; ca—also; catuh-virisat—twenty-four;
guna-jiiadya—the knower of the elements; guna-sarikhyana—of the
sarikhya-yoga system; hetave—the original cause.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Person.
Being very subtle, You are never visible to material eyes. You are
the knower of the twenty-four elements, and You are the in-
augurator of the sankhya-yoga system.
PURPORT
Catur-virmsad-guna, the twenty-four elements, are the five gross ele-
ments (earth, water, fire, air and ether), the three subtle elements
(mind, intelligence and false ego), the ten senses (five for working and


--- Page 242 ---
Text 32] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 239
five for acquiring knowledge), the five sense objects, and contaminated
consciousness. These are the subject matter of sarikhya-yoga, which was
inaugurated by Lord Kapiladeva. This sarikhya-yoga was again pro-
pounded by another Kapila, but he was an atheist, and his system is not
accepted as bona fide.
TEXT 31
नमो द्विललीष्णे त्रिषदे चतुःशृङ्गाय तन्तवे |
TEE यज्ञाय त्रयीविद्यात्मने नमः॥२१॥
namo dvi-Sirsne tri-pade
catuh-srigaya tantave
sapta-hastaya yajidya
trayi-vidyatmane namah
namah—1 offer my respectful obeisances unto You; dvi-sirsne—who
have two heads; tri-pade—who have three legs; catuh-$rrigaya—who
have four horns; tantave—who expand; sapta-hastaya—who have
seven hands; yajidya—unto the yajiia-purusa, the supreme enjoyer;
trayi—the three modes of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; vidya-atmane—
the Personality of Godhead, the embodiment of all knowledge; namah—
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who have two heads [prayaniya and
udayaniya), three legs [savana-traya], four horns [the four Vedas]
and seven hands [the seven chandas, such as Gayatri]. I offer my
obeisances unto You, whose heart and soul are the three Vedic
rituals [karma-kanda, jiana-kanda and upasana-kanda] and who
expand these rituals in the form of sacrifice.
TEXT 32
नमुः शिवाय रुद्राय नमः शक्तिषराय च ।
सवेविद्याधिपतये भूतानां पतये नमः ॥२२॥


--- Page 243 ---
240 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
namah Sivaya rudraya
namah sakti-dharaya ca
sarva-vidyadhipataye
bhiatanam pataye namah
namah—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; sivaya—the in-
carnation named Lord Siva; rudraya—the expansion named Rudra;
namah—obeisances; Sakti-dharaya—the reservoir of all potencies; ca —
and; sarva-vidya-adhipataye—the reservoir of all knowledge;
bhitanam—of the living entities; pataye—the supreme master;
namah—1 offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, Lord Siva, or Rudra,
who are the reservoir of all potencies, the reservoir of all knowl-
edge, and the master of everyone.
PURPORT
It is the system for one to offer obeisances unto the expansion or incar-
nation of the Lord. Lord Siva is the incarnation of ignorance, one of the
material modes of nature.
TEXT 33
नमो हिरण्यगमौय प्राणाय जगदात्मने ।
- A -
योगेश्वयंशरीराय नमस्ते Gerad 1330
namo hiranyagarbhaya
prandya jagad-atmane
yogaisvarya-Sariraya
namas te yoga-hetave
namah—1 offer my respectful obeisances unto You;
hiranyagarbhaya—situated as the four-headed Hiranyagarbha,
Brahma; pranaya—the source of everyone’s life; jagat-atmane—the
Supersoul of the entire universe; yoga-aisvarya-sariradya—whose body


--- Page 244 ---
Text 35] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 241
is full of opulences and mystic power; namah te—I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You; yoga-hetave—the original master of all mystic
power.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are situated as
Hiranyagarbha, the source of life, the Supersoul of every living
entity. Your body is the source of the opulence of all mystic power.
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 34
नमस्त आदिदेवाय साक्षिभूताय ते नमः |
नारायणाय षये नराय हरये नमः ॥२४॥
namas ta adi-devaya
saksi-bhutaya te namah
narayanaya rsaye
naraya haraye namah
namah te—I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; adi-devaya—
who are the original Personality of Godhead; saksi-bhiitaya—the witness
of everything within the heart of everyone; te—unto You; namah—I
offer my respectful obeisances; narayanaya—who take the incarnation
of Narayana; rsaye—the sage; naraya—the incarnation of a human
being; haraye—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namah—I
offer my respectful obeisances.
TRANSLATION
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are the original
Personality of Godhead, the witness in everyone’s heart, and the
incarnation of Nara-Narayana Rsi in the form of a human being. O
Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
TEXT 35
नमो WRIA Asay |
केशवाय AGE नमस्ते पीतवाससे ॥२५५॥


--- Page 245 ---
242 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
namo marakata-Syama-
vapuse ‘dhigata-sriye
kesavaya namas tubhyarn
namas te pita-vasase
namah—1I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; marakata-§yama-
vapuse —whose bodily hue is blackish like the marakata gem; adhigata-
sriye—under whose control is mother Laksmi, the goddess of fortune;
kesavaya —Lord {६65० ५३, who killed the Kesi demon; namah tubhyam —
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; namah te—again I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You; pita-vasase —whose garment is yellow.
TRANSLATION
My Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are
dressed in yellow garments, whose bodily hue resembles the
marakata gem, and who have full control over the goddess of for-
tune. O my Lord Kesava, I offer my respectful obeisances unto
You.
TEXT 36
+ ९ qt अ
त्वं सवेवरदः पुंसां वरेण्य वरदषेम |
अतस्ते श्रेयसे धीराः पादरेणुञपासते ॥३६॥
1৮৫? sarva-varadah purisam
varenya varadarsabha
atas te sreyase dhirah
pada-renum updsate
tvam— You; sarva-vara-dah—who can give all kinds of benedictions;
purisam —to all living entities; varenya—O most worshipable; vara-da-
rsabha—O most powerful of all givers of benediction; atah—for this
reason; te— Your; Sreyase—the source of all auspiciousness; dhirah—
the most sober; pada-renum updsate —worship the dust of the lotus feet.
TRANSLATION
O most exalted and worshipable Lord, best of those who bestow
benediction, You can fulfill the desires of everyone, and therefore


--- Page 246 ---
Text 38] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 243
those who are sober, for their own welfare, worship the dust of
Your lotus feet.
TEXT 37
¢. 1 ~ .
अन्ववतेन्त यं देवाः श्रीश्च तत्पादपद्मयोः |
स्पृहयन्त इवामोदं भगवान्मे प्रसीदताम्‌ ॥ ३७॥
anvavartanta yar devah
ॐ ca tat-pada-padmayoh
sprhayanta ivamodarn
bhagavan me prasidatam
anvavartanta—engaged in devotional service; yam —unto whom;
devah—all the demigods; ऊ ca —and the goddess of fortune; tat-pada-
padmayoh—of the lotus feet of His Lordship; sprhayantah—desiring;
iva—exactly; amodam—celestial bliss; bhagavan—the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead; me—upon me; prasidatam—may be pleased.
TRANSLATION
All the demigods, as well as the goddess of fortune, engage in
the service of His lotus feet. Indeed, they respect the fragrance of
those lotus feet. May the Supreme Personality of Godhead be
pleased with me.
TEXT 38
¢
RAT FANE पुरस्कृतम्‌
अर्चयेच्छ्रद्धया युक्तः पादयोपस्पशंनादिमिः ॥३८॥
etair mantrair hrsikesam
avahana-puraskrtam
arcayec chraddhaya yuktah
padyopasparsanadibhih
etaih mantraih—by chanting all these mantras; hrsikeSam—unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all senses; avahana—
calling; puraskrtam—honoring Him in all respects; arcayet—one should


--- Page 247 ---
244 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
worship; sraddhaya—with faith and devotion; yuktah—engaged;
padya-upasparsana-adibhih—with the paraphernalia of worship
(padya, arghya, etc.).
TRANSLATION

KaSyapa Muni continued: By chanting all these mantras,
welcoming the Supreme Personality of Godhead with faith and
devotion, and offering Him items of worship [such as padya and
arghya], one should worship 1६65१५५, Hrsikesa, Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 39
od mace nih
अर्चित्वा गन्धमाल्याद्यैः पयसा सरपयेद्‌ Fa)

- Ca
वस्रोपवीतामरणपादयोपप्वशेनैस्ततः ।
गन्धधूपादिभिशार्चेद द्वादशाक्षरविच्या ॥३९॥

arcitva gandha-malyadyaih
payasa snapayed vibhum
vastropavitabharana-
padyopasparsanais tatah
gandha-dhiapadibhis carced
dvadasaksara-vidyaya
arcitva—worshiping in this way; gandha-malya-adyaih—with in-
cense, flower garlands, etc.; payasa—with milk; snapayet—should
bathe; vibhum—the Lord; vastra—dress; upavita—sacred thread;
abharana—ornaments; padya—water for washing the lotus feet;
upasparsanaih—touching;  tatah—thereafter; gandha—fragrance;
dhipa—incense; dadibhih—with all of these; ca—and; arcet—should
worship; dvadasa-aksara-vidyaya—with the mantra of twelve syllables.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning, the devotee should chant the dvadasaksara-
mantra and offer flower garlands, incense and so on. After
worshiping the Lord in this way, one should bathe the Lord with


--- Page 248 ---
Text 41] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 245
milk and dress Him with proper garments, a sacred thread, and or-
naments. After offering water to wash the Lord’s feet, one should
again worship the Lord with fragrant flowers, incense and other
paraphernalia.
PURPORT
The dvadasaksara-mantra is 07 namo bhagavate vasudevaya. While
worshiping the Deity, one should ring a bell with his left hand and offer
padya, arghya, vastra, gandha, mala, abharana, bhisana and so on. In
this way, one should bathe the Lord with milk, dress Him and again wor-
ship Him with all paraphernalia.
TEXT 40
मतं पयति नैवेद्यं शाल्यन्नं विमवे सति ।
ससर्पिः सगुडं दत्वा जुहुयान्मुलबिदयया ॥४०॥
Srtari payasi naivedyar
Saly-annam vibhave sati
sasarpih sagudam dattva
Juhwyan mila-vidyaya
Srtam—cooked; payasi—in milk; naivedyam —offering to the Deity;
Sali-annam —fine rice; vibhave—if available; sati—in this way; sa-
sarpih—with ghee (clarified butter); sa-gudam—with molasses; dat-
tva—offering Him; juhwyat—should offer oblations in the fire; mila-
vidyaya— with chanting of the same dvadasaksara-mantra.
TRANSLATION
If one can afford to, one should offer the Deity fine rice boiled
in milk with clarified butter and molasses. While chanting the
same original mantra, one should offer all this to the fire.
TEXT 41
निवेदितं तद्‌ भक्ताय द याद्‌ भुज्जीत वा खयम्‌ |
दत्वाचमनमर्चित्वा ताम्बरूटं च निवेदयेत्‌ ॥४१॥


--- Page 249 ---
246 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
niveditarn tad-bhaktaya
dadyad bhunjita va svayam
dattvacamanam arcitva
12771001078 ca nivedayet
niveditam—this offering of prasada; tat-bhaktaya—unto His devo-
tee; dadyat—should be offered; bhunjita—one should take; va —either;
svayam—personally; dattva acamanam—giving water to wash the
hands and mouth; arcitva—in this way worshiping the Deity;
tambiilam —betel nuts with spices; ca—also; nivedayet—one should
offer.
TRANSLATION
One should offer all the prasada to a Vaisnava or offer him some
of the prasiada and then take some oneself. After this, one should
offer the Deity acamana and then betel nut and then again worship
the Lord.
TEXT 42
जपेदष्टोत्तरशतं स्तुवीत स्ततिभिः प्रथम्‌ ।
५ १ =
FAT प्रदक्षिणं भूमौ प्रणमद्‌ दण्डवन्द्रुदा ॥४२॥
Japed astottara-satarin
stuvita stutibhih prabhum
krtva pradaksinarm bhimau
pranamed dandavan muda
Jjapet—should silently murmur; astottara-satam—108 times;
stuvita—should offer prayers; stutibhih—by various prayers of glorifica-
tion; prabhum—unto the Lord; krtva—thereafter doing; pradaksinam-
—circumambulation; bhimau—on the ground; pranamet—should offer
obeisances; dandavat—straight, with the whole body; muda —with great
satisfaction.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, one should silently murmur the mantra 108 times
and offer prayers to the Lord for His glorification. Then one


--- Page 250 ---
Text 45] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 247
should circumambulate the Lord and finally, with great delight
and satisfaction, offer obeisances, falling straight like a rod
[dandavat].
TEXT 43
कृत्वा शिरसि तच्छेषां Jagadq ततः |
- -
द्वयवरान्भोजयेद्‌ विग्रान्पायसेन यथोचितम्‌ 11830
krtva sirasi tac-chesarn
devam udvasayet tatah
dvy-avaran bhojayed vipran
payasena yathocitam
krtva—taking; Sirasi—on the head; tat-Sesam—all the remnants (the
water and flowers offered to the Deity); devam—unto the Deity;
udvasayet—should be thrown into a sacred place; tatah—thereafter;
dvi-avaran—a minimum of two; bhojayet—should feed; vipran—
brahmanas; payasena—with sweet rice; yathd-ucitam—as each
deserves.
TRANSLATION
After touching to one’s head all the flowers and water offered to
the Deity, one should throw them into a sacred place. Then one
should feed at least two brahmanas with sweet rice.
TEXTS 44-45
श्ञीत तेरनुज्ञातः सेष्टः षं समाजितेः।
[१ व -
ब्रह्मचायंथ तद्रात्यां श्वोभूते प्रथमेऽहनि 1881
Slag = ~
स्नातः श्चुचियंथोक्तेन विधिना gaia: |
=
पयसा स्रापयित्बार्चेद्‌ यावद्रतसमापनम्‌ ॥४५॥
bhuiijita tair anujiiatah
sestah Sesari sabhajitaih
brahmacary atha tad-ratryar
Svo bhate prathame ’hani


--- Page 251 ---
248 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
snatah Sucir yathoktena
vidhina susamahitah
payasa snapayitvarced
yavad vrata-samdapanam
bhunjita—should take the prasada; taih—by the brahmanas;
anujiiatah—being permitted; sa-istah—with friends and relatives;
Sesam—the remnants; sabhgjitaih—properly honored; brahmacari—
observance of celibacy; atha—of course; tat-ratryam—at night; Svah
bhite—at the end of the night, when the morning comes; prathame
ahani—on the first day; snatah—bathing; Sucih—becoming purified;
yatha-uktena—as stated before; vidhina—by following the regulative
principles; su-samahitah—with great attention; payasa—with milk;
snapayitva —bathing the Deity; arcet—should offer worship; yavat—as
long as; vrata-samapanam—the period of worship is not over.
TRANSLATION
One should perfectly honor the respectable brahmanas one has
fed, and then, after taking their permission, one should take
prasada with his friends and relatives. For that night, one should
observe strict celibacy, and the next morning, after bathing again,
with purity and attention one should bathe the Deity of Visnu with
milk and worship Him according to the methods formerly stated in
detail.
TEXT 46
= . °
पयोमक्षो व्रतमिदं चरेद्‌ विष्ण्वचनादतः |
पूववज्जुहुयादत्रि ब्राह्मणांश्चापि मोजयेत्‌ ॥४६॥
payo-bhakso vratam पवक
cared visnv-arcanadrtah
purvavaj juhuyad agnim
brahmanams capi bhojayet
payah-bhaksah—one who drinks milk only; vratam idam—this pro-
cess of worshiping with a vow; caret—one should execute; visnu-ar-
cana-adrtah—worshiping Lord Visnu with great faith and devotion;


--- Page 252 ---
Text 48] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 249
puarva-vat—as prescribed previously; juhuydt—one should offer obla-
tions; agnim—into the fire; brahmanan—unto the brahmanas; ca
api—as well as; bhojayet—should feed.
TRANSLATION
Worshiping Lord Visnu with great faith and devotion and living
only by drinking milk, one should follow this vow. One should
also offer oblations to the fire and feed the brahmanas as men-
tioned before.
TEXT 47
णवं त्वहरहः ङ्याद ERAT पयोवतम्‌ |
1 জি 4
हरेराराधनं दोममर्हेणं द्विजतर्पणम्‌ ॥४७॥
evar tv ahar ahah kuryad
dvadasaham payo-vratam
harer aradhanari homam
arhanam dvija-tarpanam
evam—in this way; tu—indeed; ahah ahah—day after day; kuryat—
should execute; dvadasa-aham—until twelve days; payah-vratam—the
observance of the vrata known as payo-vrata; hareh aradhanam—
worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead; homam —by executing
a fire sacrifice; arhanam— worshiping the Deity; dvija-tarpanam—and
satisfying the brahmanas by feeding them.
TRANSLATION
In this way, until twelve days have passed, one should observe
this payo-vrata, worshiping the Lord every day, executing the
routine duties, performing sacrifices and feeding the brahmanas.
TEXT 48
प्रतिपदिनमारम्य यावच्छुङ्खत्रयोदश्ञीम्‌ ।
ब्रह्मचर्यमधः खप्नं सानं त्रिषवणं चरेत्‌ ॥४८॥


--- Page 253 ---
250 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
pratipad-dinam arabhya
yavac chukla-trayodasim
brahmacaryam adhah-svapnarn
snanam tri-savanam caret
pratipat-dinam—on the day of pratipat; arabhya—beginning;
yavat—until; Sukla—of the bright fortnight; trayodasim—the thir-
teenth day of the moon (the second day after Ekadaéi);
brahmacaryam—observing complete celibacy; adhah-svapnam—Ilying
down on the floor; snanam —bathing; tri-savanam —three times (morn-
ing, evening and noon); caret—one should execute.
TRANSLATION
From pratipat until the thirteenth day of the next bright moon
[$ukla-trayodasi], one should observe complete celibacy, sleep on
the floor, bathe three times a day and thus execute the vow.
TEXT 49
< + .
वजंयेदसदालापं মীযান্তম্বানস্বালযা |
९
afte: LEC GIT वासुदेवपरायणः ॥४९॥
varjayed asad-alapam
bhogan uccavacaris tatha
ahimsrah sarva-bhiitanam
vasudeva-parayanah
varjayet—one should give up; asat-alapam—unnecessary talk on ma-
terial subject matters; bhogan—sense gratification; ucca-avacan—
superior or inferior; tatha—as well as; ahirmsrah—without being en-
vious; sarva-bhiatanam—of all living entities; vasudeva-parayanah—
simply being a devotee of Lord Vasudeva.
TRANSLATION
During this period, one should not unnecessarily talk of ma-
terial subjects or topics of sense gratification, one should be com-


--- Page 254 ---
Text 52] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 251
pletely free from envy of all living entities, and one should be a
pure and simple devotee of Lord Vasudeva.
TEXT 50
ও A ~C =
त्रयोदश्यामथो विष्णोः पनं पञ्चकंविमोः |
EN
कारयेच्छाखच्ेन विधिना विधिकरोविदेः ॥५०॥
trayodasyam atho visnoh
snapanarh paicakair vibhoh
karayec chastra-drstena
vidhina vidhi-kovidaih
trayodasyam—on the thirteenth day of the moon; atho—thereafter;
visnoh—of Lord Visnu; snapanam—bathing; pasicakaih—by
parnicamrta, five substances; vibhoh—the Lord; karayet—one should
execute; S$astra-drstena—enjoined in the scripture; vidhind—under
regulative principles; vidhi-kovidaih—assisted by the priests who know
the regulative principles.
TRANSLATION
Thereafter, following the directions of the sastra with help from
brahmanas who know the $astra, on the thirteenth day of the moon
one should bathe Lord Visnu with five substances [milk, yogurt,
ghee, sugar and honey].
TEXTS 51-52
पूजां च महतीं FAR पित्तशचाख्यविवर्जितः |
चरं निरूप्य पयसि शिपिविष्टाय विष्णवे ॥*५१॥
= .
सक्तेन तेन पुरुषं यजेत सुसमाहितः |
3 +
नैवेयं चातिगुणदद्‌ दयारपुरुषतुष्टिदम्‌ ॥५२॥
pajarm ca mahatir kuryad
vitta-sathya-vivarjitah
carum niriipya payasi
Sipivistaya visnave


--- Page 255 ---
252 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
sithtena tena purusari
yajeta susamahitah
naivedyari catigunavad
dadyat purusa-tustidam
pajam—worship; ca—also; mahatim—very gorgeous; kuryat—
should do; vitta-Sathya—miserly mentality (not spending sufficient
money); vivarjitah—giving up; carum—grains offered in the yajia;
nirapya—seeing properly; payasi—with milk; Sipivistaya—unto the
Supersoul, who is situated in the heart of every living entity; visnave—
unto Lord Visnu; saktena—by chanting the Vedic mantra known as
Purusa-sikta; tena—by that; purusam—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; yajeta—one should worship; su-samahitah—with great atten-
tion; naivedyam—food offered to the Deity; ca—and; ati-guna-vat—
prepared very gorgeously with all varieties of taste; dadyat—should
offer; purusa-tusti-dam—everything extremely pleasing to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
Giving up the miserly habit of not spending money, one should
arrange for the gorgeous worship of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Visnu, who is situated in the heart of every living entity.
With great attention, one must prepare an oblation of grains
boiled in ghee and milk and must chant the Purusa-siikta mantra.
The offerings of food should be of varieties of tastes. In this way,
one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 53
आचार्यं ज्ञानसम्पन्नं स्रायरणधेनुभिः |
तोषयेदत्विजभैव तद्विद्ध्याराधनं हरेः isa
dcaryar jiana-sampannari
vastrabharana-dhenubhih
tosayed rtvjas caiva
‘tad viddhy aradhanar hareh


--- Page 256 ---
Text 54] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 253
acaryam—the spiritual master; jiana-sampannam—very advanced
in spiritual knowledge; vastra-abharana-dhenubhih—with clothing, or-
naments and many cows; tosayet—should satisfy; rtvijah—the priests
recommended by the spiritual master; ca eva—as well as; tat viddhi—
try to understand that; aradhanam—worship; hareh—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TRANSLATION
One should satisfy the spiritual master [acarya], who is very
learned in Vedic literature, and should satisfy his assistant priests
[known as hota, udgata, adhvaryu and brahma). One should please
them by offering them clothing, ornaments and cows. This is the
ceremony called visnu-aradhana, or worship of Lord Visnu.
TEXT 54
भोजयेत्‌ तान्‌ गुणत्रता सदेन IEA |
अन्यां श ब्राह्मणाज्छक्त्या ये च तत्र समागताः॥५४॥
bhojayet tan gunavata
sad-annena Suci-smite
anyars ca brahmanan chaktya
ye ca tatra samagatah
bhojayet—should distribute prasada; tan—unto all of them; guna-
vata—by rich foods; sat-annena—with food prepared with ghee and
milk, which is supposed to be very pure; Suci-smite—O most pious lady;
anyan ca—others also; brahmanan—brahmanas; sSaktya—as far as
possible; ye—all of them who; ca—also; tatra—there (at the
ceremonies); samagatah—assembled.
TRANSLATION
O most auspicious lady, one should perform all the ceremonies
under the direction of learned acaryas and should satisfy them and
their priests. By distributing prasada, one should also satisfy the
brahmanas and others who have assembled.


--- Page 257 ---
254 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
TEXT 55
दक्षिणां गुरवे ददयादचिर्म्यश्च यथार्ई॑तः।
अन्नाच्ेनाश्वपाकांश्च प्रीणयेत्समुपागतान्‌ 114411
00018580271 gurave dadyad
rtvigbhyas ca yatharhatah
annadyendsva-pakars ca
prinayet samupagatan
daksinam—some contribution of money or gold; gurave—unto the
spiritual master; dadyat—one should give; rtvigbhyah ca—and to the
priests engaged by the spiritual master; yatha-arhatah—as far as possi-
ble; anna-adyena—Dby distributing prasada; asva-pakan—even to the
candalas, persons habituated to eating the flesh of dogs; ca—also;
prinayet—one should please; samupdgatan—because they have
assembled there for the ceremony.
TRANSLATION
One should satisfy the spiritual master and assistant priests by
giving them cloth, ornaments, cows and also some monetary con-
tribution. And by distributing prasada one should satisfy everyone
assembled, including even the lowest of men, the candalas [eaters
of dog flesh].
PURPORT
In the Vedic system, prasada is distributed, as recommended here,
without discrimination as to who may take the prasada. Regardless of
whether one be a brahmana, sidra, vaiSya, ksatriya, or even the lowest
of men, a candala, he should be welcome to accept prasida. However,
when the candalas, the lower class or poorer class, are taking prasada,
this does not mean that they have become Narayana or Visnu. Narayana
is situated in everyone’s heart, but this does not mean Narayana is a can-
dala or poor man. The Mayavada philosophy of accepting a poor man as
Narayana is the most envious and atheistic movement in Vedic culture.
This mentality should be completely given up. Everyone should be given
the opportunity to take prasada, but this does not mean that everyone
has the right to become Narayana.


--- Page 258 ---
Text 57] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 255
TEXT 56
IFT च सर्वेषु दीनान्धकृपणादिषु |
विष्णोस्ततप्रीणनं विद्रान्शधञ्जीत सह बन्धुभिः nua
bhuktavatsu ca sarvesu
dinandha-krpanadisu
visnos tat prinanam vidvan
bhuiijita saha bandhubhih
bhuktavatsu—after feeding; ca—also; sarvesu—everyone present
there; dina—very poor; andha—blind; krpana—those who are not
brahmanas; adisu—and so on; vispoh—of Lord Visnu, who is situated
in everyone’s heart; tat—that (prasada); prinanam—pleasing; vid-
van—one who understands this philosophy; bhudijita —should take
prasada himself; saha—with; bandhubhih—friends and relatives.
TRANSLATION
One should distribute visnu-prasiada to everyone, including the
poor man, the blind man, the nondevotee and the non-brahmana.
Knowing that Lord Visnu is very pleased when everyone is
sumptuously fed with visnu-prasada, the performer of yajfia
should then take prasada with his friends and relatives.
TEXT 57
EN
नत्यवादित्रगीतै् स्तुतिभिः खस्तिवाचकैः |
कारयेत्तत्कथाभिश्च पूजां भगवतोऽन्वहम्‌ ॥५७।।
nrtya-vaditra-gitais ca
stutibhih svasti-vacakaih
karayet tat-kathabhis ca
pajara bhagavato ‘nvaham
nrtya—by dancing; vaditra—by beating the drum; gitaih—and by
singing; ca—also; stutibhih—by chanting auspicious mantras; svasti-
vacakaih—by offering prayers; karayet—should execute; tat-
kathabhih—by reciting the Bhagavatam, Bhagavad-gita and similar


--- Page 259 ---
256 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
literature; ca—also; pitjam—worship; bhagavatah—of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Visnu; anvaham—every day (from pratipat to
trayodasi).
TRANSLATION
Every day from pratipat to trayodasi, one should continue the
ceremony, to the accompaniment of dancing, singing, the beating
of a drum, the chanting of prayers and all-auspicious mantras, and
recitation of Srimad-Bhagavatam. In this way, one should worship
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 58
एतत्पयोव्रतं नाम पुरुषाराधनं परम्‌ ।
पितामहेनाभिदितं मया ते gE uel
etat payo-vratari nama
purusaradhanarih param
pitamahenabhihitari
maya te samudahrtam
etat—this; payah-vratam—ceremony known as payo-vrata; nama —
by that name; purusa-aradhanam—the process of worshiping the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; param—the best; pitamahena—by
my grandfather, Lord Brahma; abhihitam —stated; maya —by me; te—
unto you; samudahrtam—described in all details.
TRANSLATION
This is the religious ritualistic ceremony known as payo-vrata,
by which one may worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 1
received this information from Brahma, my grandfather, and now
I have described it to you in all details.
TEXT 59
ও ০.
त्वं चानेन मदाभागे सम्यक्चीर्णेन केशवम्‌ |
आत्मना शुद्धभावेन नियतात्मा मजान्ययम्‌ ॥५९॥


--- Page 260 ---
Text 60] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 257
tvari canena maha-bhage
samyak cirnena kesavam
atmana $uddha-bhavena
niyatatma bhajavyayam
tvam ca—you also; anena—by this process; maha-bhage—O greatly
fortunate one; samyak cirnena—executed properly; kesavam—unto
Lord Kesava; atmana—by oneself; suddha-bhavena—in a pure state of
mind; niyata-atma—controlling oneself; bhaja—go on worshiping;
avyayam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
O most fortunate lady, establishing your mind in a good spirit,
execute this process of payo-vrata and thus worship the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Kesava, who is inexhaustible.
TEXT 60
४५५ ¢
अयं ৭ सवंयज्ञाख्यः सव॑वरतमिति स्मृतम्‌ |
3 - -
तपःसारमिदं भद्रे दानं वेश्वरत्प॑णम्‌ 11501
ayari vai sarva-yajiiakhyah
sarva-vratam iti smrtam
tapah-saram 1007 bhadre
danarn cesvara-tarpanam
ayam—this; vai—indeed; sarva-yajiia —all kinds of religious rituals
and sacrifices; akhyah—called; sarva-vratam—all religious ceremonies;
iti—thus; smrtam—understood; tapah-saram—the essence of all
austerities; idam—this; bhadre—O good lady; danam—acts of charity;
ca—and; ©Svara—the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tarpanam—the
process of pleasing.
TRANSLATION
This payo-vrata is also known as sarva-yajiia. In other words, by
performing this sacrifice one can perform all other sacrifices auto-
matically. This is also acknowledged to be the best of all ritualistic


--- Page 261 ---
258 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
ceremonies. O gentle lady, it is the essence of all austerities, and it
is the process of giving charity and pleasing the supreme con-
troller.
PURPORT

Aradhananari sarvesari vispor aradhanar param. This is a state-
ment made by Lord Siva to Parvati. Worshiping Lord Visnu is the
supreme process of worship. And how Lord Visnu is worshiped in this
payo-vrata ceremony has now been fully described. The ultimate goal of
life is to please Lord Visnu by varnasrama-dharma. The Vedic principles
of four varnas and four dsramas are meant for worship of Visnu (visnur
aradhyate purisari nanyat tat-tosa-karanam). The Krsna consciousness
movement is also visnu-aradhanam, or worship of Lord Visnu, accord-
ing to the age. The payo-vrata method of visnu-aradhanam was enunci-
ated long, long ago by Kasyapa Muni to his wife, Aditi, in the heavenly
planets, and the same process is bona fide on earth even now. Especially
for this age of Kali, the process accepted by the Krsna consciousness
movement is to open hundreds and thousands of Visnu temples (temples
of Radha-Krsna, Jagannatha, Balarama, Sita-Rama, Gaura-Nitidi and so
on). Performing prescribed worship in such temples of Visnu and thus
worshiping the Lord is as good as performing the payo-vrata ceremony
recommended here. The payo-vrata ceremony is performed from the
first to the thirteenth day of the bright fortnight of the moon, but in our
Krsna consciousness movement Lord Visnu is worshiped in every temple
according to a schedule of twenty-four hours of engagement in perform-
ing kirtana, chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, offering palatable
food to Lord Visnu and distributing this food to Vaisnavas and others.
These are authorized activities, and if the members of the Krsna con-
sciousness movement stick to these principles, they will achieve the same
result one gains by observing the payo-vrata ceremony. Thus the essence
of all auspicious activities, such as performing yajiia, giving in charity,
observing vratas, and undergoing austerities, is included in the Krsna
consciousness movement. The members of this movement should im-
mediately and sincerely follow the processes already recommended. Of
course, sacrifice is meant to please Lord Visnu. YajAaih sarkirtana-
prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah: in Kali-yuga, those who are intelligent
perform the saskirtana-yajiia. One should follow this process conscien-
tiously.


--- Page 262 ---
Text 61] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 259
TEXT 61
त व नियमाः साक्षात्त एव च यमोत्तमाः ।
तपो दानं व्रतं यज्ञो येन तुष्यत्यधोक्षजः ॥६१॥
ta eva niyamah saksat
ta eva ca yamottamah
tapo danam vratar yajio
yena tusyaty adhoksajah
te—that is; eva—indeed; niyamah—all regulative principles; saksat-
—directly; te—that is; eva—indeed; ca—also; yama-uttamah—the
best process of controlling the senses; tapah—austerities; danam—
charity; vratam—observing vows; yajiah—sacrifice; yena—by which
process; tusyati—is very pleased; adhoksajah—the Supreme Lord, who
is not perceived by material senses.
TRANSLATION
This is the best process for pleasing the transcendental Supreme
Personality of Godhead, known as Adhoksaja. It is the best of all
regulative principles, the best austerity, the best process of giving
charity, and the best process of sacrifice.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (18.66):
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekarn saranari vraja
aham tvarm sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma Sucah
‘Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.”” Unless one pleases the
Supreme Personality of Godhead according to His demand, no good
result will come from any of his actions.
dharmah svanusthitah purisamn
visvaksena-kathasu yah


--- Page 263 ---
260 Srimad-Bhagavatam [Canto 8, Ch. 16
notpadayed yadi 70177
Srama eva hi kevalam
“The occupational activities a man performs according to his own posi-
tion are only so much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for
the message of the Personality of Godhead.” (Bhag. 1.2.8) If one is not
interested in satisfying Lord Visnu, Vasudeva, all his so-called
auspicious activities are fruitless. Moghasa mogha-karmano mogha-
jana vicetasah: because he is bewildered, he is baffled in his hopes,
baffled in his activities, and baffled in his knowledge. In this regard, Srila
Viévanatha Cakravarti remarks, napurisakam anapurmsakenety-
adinaikatvam. One cannot equate the potent and the impotent. Among
modern Mayavadis it has become fashionable to say that whatever one
does or whatever path one follows is all right. But these are all foolish
statements. Here it is forcefully affirmed that this is the only method for
success in life. [svara-tarpanam ving sarvam eva viphalam. Unless Lord
Visnu is satisfied, all of one’s pious activities, ritualistic ceremonies and
yajiias are simply for show and have no value. Unfortunately, foolish
people do not know the secret of success. Va te viduh svartha-gatiri hi
visnum. They do not know that real self-interest ends in pleasing Lord
Visnu.
TEXT 62
৬ -
qERAEd AX प्रयता श्रद्धयाचर |
मगवान्परितुषटस्ते Ig विधास्यति ।६२॥
tasmad etad 70077 bhadre
prayata sraddhayacara
bhagavan paritustas te
varan asu vidhasyati
tasmat —therefore; etat—this; vratam—observance of a vrata

ceremony; bhadre—my dear gentle lady; prayata—by observing rules
and regulations; Sraddhaya—with faith; dcara—execute; bhagavan—
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; paritustah—being very satisfied;
te—unto you; varan—benedictions; @su—very soon; vidhasyati—will
bestow.


--- Page 264 ---
Text 62] The Payo-vrata Process of Worship 261
TRANSLATION

Therefore, my dear gentle lady, follow this ritualistic vow,
strictly observing the regulative principles. By this process, the
Supreme Person will very soon be pleased with you and will satisfy
all your desires.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Sixteenth
Chapter, of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled “Executing the Payo-vrata
Process of Worship.”


--- Page 265 ---
Appendixes


--- Page 266 ---
The Author

His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada appeared in
this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. He first met his spiritual master,
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami, in Calcutta in 1922. Bhakti-
৪1001131113 Sarasvati, a prominent devotional scholar and the founder of
sixty-four Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutes), liked this educated young
man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic knowledge.
Srila Prabhupida became his student, and eleven years later (1933) at
Allahabad he became his formally initiated disciple.

At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowledge
through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila Prabhu-
pada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, assisted the Gaudiya
Matha in its work and, in 1944, without assistance, started an English
fortnightly magazine, edited it, typed the manuscripts and checked the
galley proofs. He even distributed the individual copies freely and strug-
gled to maintain the publication. Once begun, the magazine never
stopped; it is now being continued by his disciples in the West.

Recognizing Srila Prabhupida’s philosophical learning and devotion,
the Gaudiya Vaisnava Society honored him in 1947 with the title
““Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of fifty-four, Srila Prabhupada
retired from married life, and four years later he adopted the
vanaprastha (retired) order to devote more time to his studies and writ-
ing. Srila Prabhupida traveled to the holy city of Vrndavana, where he
lived in very humble circumstances in the historic medieval temple of
Radha-Damodara. There he engaged for several years in deep study and
writing. He accepted the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At
Radha-Damodara, Srila Prabhupida began work on his life’s master-
piece: a multivolume translation and commentary on the eighteen thou-
sand verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana). He also wrote
Easy Journey to Other Planets.

After publishing three volumes of Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada
came to the United States, in 1965, to fulfill the mission of his spiritual
master. Since that time, His Divine Grace has written over forty volumes
of authoritative translations, commentaries and summary studies of the
philosophical and religious classics of India.

265


--- Page 267 ---
266 Srimad-Bhagavatam

In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York City, Srila
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of great
difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna Con-
sciousness in July of 1966. Under his careful guidance, the Society has
grown within a decade to a worldwide confederation of almost one
hundred asramas, schools, temples, institutes and farm communities.

In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrndavana, an experimental
Vedic community in the hills of West Virginia. Inspired by the success of
New Vrndavana, now a thriving farm community of more than one thou-
sand acres, his students have since founded several similar communities
in the United States and abroad.

In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary and
secondary education in the West by founding the Gurukula school in
Dallas, Texas. The school began with 3 children in 1972, and by the
beginning of 1975 the enrollment had grown to 150.

Srila Prabhupada has also inspired the construction of a large inter-
national center at Sridhama Mayapur in West Bengal, India, which is also
the site for a planned Institute of Vedic Studies. A similar project is the
magnificent Krsna-Balarama Temple and International Guest House in
Vrndavana, India. These are centers where Westerners can live to gain
firsthand experience of Vedic culture.

Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, is his
books. Highly respected by the academic community for their authori-
tativeness, depth and clarity, they are used as standard textbooks in
numerous college courses. His writings have been translated into eleven
languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, established in 1972 ex-
clusively to publish the works of His Divine Grace, has thus become the
world’s largest publisher of books in the field of Indian religion and phi-
losophy. Its latest project is the publishing of Srila Prabhupada’s most
recent work: a seventeen-volume translation and commentary —com-
pleted by Srila Prabhupada in only eighteen months—on the Bengali
religious classic Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. ,

In the past ten years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada
has circled the globe twelve times on lecture tours that have taken him to
six continents. In spite of such a vigorous schedule, Srila Prabhupada
continues to write prolifically. His writings constitute a veritable library
of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature and culture.


--- Page 268 ---
References
The purports of Srimad-Bhagavatam are all confirmed by standard
Vedic authorities. The following authentic scriptures are specifically
cited in this volume:
Aitareya Upanisad, 139
Bhagavad-gita, 23, 24, 67, 69, 70, 71, 96, 100, 101, 104-105, 105, 107,
108, 113, 113-114, 124, 135, 136, 137, 139, 145, 156, 176, 177, 180,
216, 220-221, 221, 225, 227, 227-228, 231-232, 232, 259
Bhagavata-candra-candrika, 107
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, 108-109, 112
Brahma-sarihita, 100, 115
Brahma-yamala, 112
Caitanya-caritamrta, 24, 135, 230, 233
Chandogya Upanisad, 108
Manu-samhita, 8
Srimad-Bhagavatam, 48-49, 81, 103, 113, 125, 133, 174, 213, 225, 227,
229, 259-260
Svetasvatara Upanisad, 131
Vedanta-satra, 107
Vispu Purana, 109
267


--- Page 269 ---
Glossary
A

Acamana— purification by sipping water and chanting the names of the
Lord.

Acarya—a spiritual master who teaches by example.

Acit— without life or consciousness.

Arati—a ceremony for greeting the Lord with offerings of food, lamps,
fans, flowers and incense.

Arcana—the devotional process of Deity worship.

Artha— economic development.

Asat—not eternal.

Asrama— (1) the four spiritual orders of life: celibate student, house-
holder, retired life and renounced life. (2) the residence of a saintly
person.

Asuras — atheistic demons.

Avatara—a descent of the Supreme Lord.

B

Bhagavad-gita—the basic directions for spiritual life spoken by the
Lord Himself.

Bhakta—a devotee.

Bhakti-yoga—linking with the Supreme Lord by devotional service.

Brahmacarya— celibate student life; the first order of Vedic spiritual
life.

Brahman —the Absolute Truth; especially the impersonal aspect of the
Absolute.

Brahmana— one wise in the Vedas who can guide society; the first Vedic
social order.

Brahmistra—a nuclear weapon produced by chanting mantras.

0

Chandas—the different meters of Vedic hymns.

Cit—alive and conscious.

269


--- Page 270 ---
270 Srimad-Bhagavatam
D
Dharma— eternal occupational duty; religious principles.
Dvadasi—the twelfth day after the full or new moon.
E
Ekadasi—a special fast day for increased remembrance of Krsna, which
comes on the eleventh day of both the waxing and waning moon.
G
Goloka (Krsnaloka) —the highest spiritual planet, containing Krsna’s
personal abodes, Dvaraka, Mathura and Vrndavana.
Gopis—Krsna’s cowherd girl friends, His most confidential
servitors.
Grhastha—regulated householder life; the second order of Vedic spiri-
tual life.
Guru —a spiritual master.
H
Hare Krsna mantra— See: Maha-mantra
J
Jagat —the material universe.
Jiva-tattva—the living entities, atomic parts of the Lord.
Jiana-kanda—the portion of the Vedas containing knowledge of Brah-
man, spirit.
Jiani—one who cultivates knowledge by empirical speculation.
K
Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) —the present age, characterized by quarrel; it
is last in the cycle of four and began five thousand years ago.
Kama— lust.
Karatalas—hand cymbals used in kirtana.
Karma—fruitive action, for which there is always reaction, good or bad.
Karma-kanda—a section of the Vedas prescribing fruitive activities for
elevation to a higher material position.
Karmi—a person satisfied with working hard for flickering sense
gratification.


--- Page 271 ---
Glossary 271

Kirtana—chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord.

Krsnaloka— See: Goloka

Ksatriyas—a warrior or administrator; the second Vedic social order.

M

Maha-mantra—the great chanting for deliverance:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.

Mantra—a sound vibration that can deliver the mind from illusion.

Manvantara—the duration of each Manu’s reign (306,720,000 years);
used as a standard division of history.

Mathura— Lord Krsna’s abode, surrounding Vrndavana, where He took
birth and later returned to after performing His Vrndavana
pastimes.

Maya —illusion; forgetfulness of one’s relationship with Krsna.

Mayavadis — impersonal philosophers who say that the Lord cannot have
a transcendental body.

Moksa—liberation.

Mrdanga—a clay drum used for congregational chanting.

ए

Parampara— the chain of spiritual masters in disciplic succession.

Prajapatis—the populators of the universe.

Prasada—food spiritualized by being offered to the Lord.

R

Rasa—the nonmaterial taste of a personal relationship with the Supreme
Lord.

Rsi—a sage.

S

Sac-cid-ananda-vigraha—the Lord’s transcendental form, which is
eternal, full of knowledge and bliss.

Sankirtana—public chanting of the names of God, the approved yoga
process for this age.

Sannyasa —renounced life; the fourth order of Vedic spiritual life.

Sastras—revealed scriptures.


--- Page 272 ---
272 Srimad-Bhagavatam

Sat —eternal.

Smrti scriptures —supplementary explanations of the Vedas.

Sravanarn kirtanam visnoh —the devotional processes of hearing and

L chanting about Lord Visnu.

Sruti scriptures —the original Vedic literatures: the four Vedas and the

x Upanisads.

Stidra—a laborer; the fourth of the Vedic social orders.

Svami—one who controls his mind and senses; title of one in the
renounced order of life.

T

Tapasya—austerity; accepting some voluntary inconvenience for a
higher purpose.

Tilaka— auspicious clay marks that sanctify a devotee’s body as a temple
of the Lord.

U

Upasana-kanda—a section of the Vedas prescribing worship of
demigods.

v

Vaikuntha—the spiritual world.

Vaisnava—a devotee of Lord Visnu, Krsna.

VaiSyas — farmers and merchants; the third Vedic social order.

Vanaprastha—one who has retired from family life; the third order of
Vedic spiritual life.

Varna—the four occupational divisions of society: the intellectual class,
the administrative class, the mercantile and agricultural class, and
the laborer class.

Varnasrama—the Vedic system of four social and four spiritual orders.

Vedas —the original revealed scriptures, first spoken by the Lord Him-
self.

Visnu, Lord —Krsna’s first expansion for the creation and maintenance
of the material universes.

Visnu-tattva—the original Personality of Godhead’s primary expan-
sions, each of whom is equally God.


--- Page 273 ---
Glossary 273
Vrndavana—Krsna’s personal abode, where He fully manifests His
quality of sweetness.
Vyasadeva—Krsna’s incarnation, at the end of Dvapara-yuga, for com-
piling the Vedas.
Y
Yajiia—sacrifice; work done for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu.
Yoga-siddhis— mystic powers.
Yogi—a transcendentalist who, in one way or another, is striving for
union with the Supreme.
Yugas—ages in the life of a universe, occurring in a repeated cycle of
four.


--- Page 274 ---
Sanskrit Pronunciation Guide
Vowels
HaAMMas इ; इई; Fu Fa Wr ऋः
[3
J 1 ष e ष ai ओ ০ সী au
= 1m (anusvdra) ‡ ४ (visarga)
Consonants
Gutturals: क्क ka kha Mega স্ব gha $ na
Palatals: Hea cha ज) ख jha A iia
Cerebrals: ट ठक tha ड da @ dha QT na
Dentals: dt Y tha दु da द्य dha na
Labials: q pa QR pha ba ¥ bha H{ ma
Semivowels: ya I ra la q va
Sibilants: शा $a q sa H sa
Aspirate: ह ha S › (avagraha) - the apostrophe
The vowels above should be pronounced as follows:
a — like the ain organ or the u in but.
a — like the ain far but held twice as long as short a.
i — like the iin pin.
i — like the i in pique but held twice as long as short i.
u — like the u in push.
प — like the u in rule but held twice as long as short २८.
275


--- Page 275 ---
276 Srimad-Bhagavatam
r — like the riin rim.
ह — like ree in reed.
1 — like I followed by r (Ir).
€ — like the ein they.
ai — like the ai in aisle.
० — like the oin go.
au— like the ow in how.
m (anusvdra) — a resonant nasal like the nin the French word bon.
h (visarga) — a final h-sound: ah 15 pronounced like aha; ih like ihi.
The consonants are pronounced as follows:
k — asin kite jh — 95 171 hedgehog
kh— asin Eckhart 7 — asin canyon
£ — asin give t — asin tub
gh— asin dig-hard th — as in light-heart
n — asin sing d — asin dove
८ — asin chair dha- as in red-hot
ch — asin staunch-heart n — as rna (prepare to say
] — asin joy the r and say na).
Cerebrals are pronounced with tongue to roof of mouth, but the
following dentals are pronounced with tongue against teeth:
t - asin tub but with tongue against teeth.
th — as in light-heart but with tongue against teeth.
d — asin dove but with tongue against teeth.
dh — as in red-hot but with tongue against teeth.
n — asin nut but with tongue between teeth.
P — asin pine 1 — asin light
ph— as in uphill (not f) ४ — asin vine
b — asin bird § (palatal) — as in the sin the German
bh — as in rub-hard word sprechen
m — asin mother s (cerebral) — as the shin shine
y - 35 77 yes 8 — 8871 ऽपरा
7 — asinrun h — asin home
There is no strong accentuation of syllables in Sanskrit, only a flow-
ing of short and long (twice as long as the short) syllables.


--- Page 276 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses
This index constitutes a complete listing of the first and third lines of each of the
Sanskrit poetry verses of this volume of Srimad-Bhigavatam, arranged in English
alphabetical order. The first column gives the Sanskrit transliteration, and the second and
third columns, respectively, list the chapter-verse reference and page number for each
verse.
A anito dvipam utsrfya 11.16 79
annadyenasva-pakams ca 16.55 254
abhyayat sauhrdar sakhyur 11.13 74  antarar satyasahasah 13.29 164
acarya-dattarh jalajarh mahd-svanar 15.23 198 anvavartanta yari devah 16.37 243
dcdryam jidna-sampannari 16.53 252 anya ca brahmanan chaktya 16.54 253
adisa 1৮07 dvyja-srestha 16.23 232
adityanam avarajo 136 151  anye capi balopetdh 11.35 87
anye jala-sthala-khagaih 10.12 34
aditya vasavo rudra 13.4 150  anye pauloma-kaleyd 10.22 38
adrsyatastayudha-ba hur ullasac- 10.54 58 anye ‘py evarh pratidvandvin 11.42 92
ddy-antav asya yan madhyam 125 101 anye 'vayanti nava-sakti-yutan 129 110
agnayo ’tithayo bhrtya 16.12 218
agnir bahuh sucih suddho 13.34 167 anyonyam dsadya nijaghnur ojasd 10.35 46
apardjitena namucir 10.30 43
ahari kalanam rsabho ‘pi muhye 12.43 141 aparijiieya-viryasya 12.36 135
ahatya tigma-gadayahanad 10.57 61  apisarve kusalinas 16.10 217
ahatya vyanadat sarkhye 11.23 79 api vakusalar kincid 165 212
ahirmsrah sarva-bhatanarn 16.49 250
aho maya-balari visnoh 16.18 223 = apivatithayo bhyetya 166 213
apramana-vidas tasyds 913 11
aho rapam ahodhama 02 2 apratarkyam anirdesyarn 10.17 36
ahvayanto visanto ‘gre 10.27 41 apy abhadrari na vipranar 16.4 211
airavatari dik-karinam 10.25 40 apy agnayas tu ৮6/৫% ৫77 16.8 215
aisvaryam अद्रा yasah sthanarn 16.16 222
ajiidnatas tvayi janair vihito vikalpo 128 106 ৫70৫) ৫71 sthandile sirye 16.28 237
arcayec chraddhaya yuktah 16.38 243
akarna-pirnair ahanad 11.10 72 arcayed aravindaksarm 16.25 234
akasa-gaigaya devyd 1514 192 arcitva gandha-malyadyaik 16.39 244
alabdha-bhagih somasya 10.23 38 aristo ristanemis ca 10.22 38
alaksayantas tam ativa vihvala 11.25 81 aruruksanti mayabhir 1६) 66
amantrya tar parikramya 12.41 140
aryakasya sutas tatra 13.26 163
amoghd bhagavad-bhaktir 16.21 228 asad-avisayam anghrirh bhava- 1247 144
amrsyamana utpetur 10.3 29 asmasdramayar Sila 11.30 84
andgatds tat-sutds ca 13.24 162 astame १४८०८ ৫%৫/০ 13.11 154
anayakah Satru-balena nirjita 11.25 81  asthitas tad vimanagryam 10.18 37
arngaran mumucur vatair 10.49 55 asurdnar sudha-danam 9.19 15
277


--- Page 277 ---
278 Srimad-Bhagavatam
asu tusyati me devah 16.23 232  bhunjita tair anujnatah 16.44 247
asvinav rbhavorajann 134 150 bhusundibhis cakra-gadarsti-pattisaih 10.36 46
atas te sreyase dhirah 16.36 242 bhutaketur diptaketur 13.18 158
atharuhya rathari divyarit 158 189  bhitesvarah krpana-val 15.1 184
athavagata-mahatmya 12.36 134 brahmacaryam adhah-svapnar 16.48 250
athoposya krta-snana 9.14 12 brahmacary atha tad-ratryanm 16.44 247
atho surah pratyupalabdha-cetasah 11.1 64 brahmana presito devan 11.43 92
atmamsa-bhatam tam mayan 12.42 141 brahmano gnis ca vai visnoh 169 216
atmanari mocayitviniga 12.30 129 brhaspatis cosanasa 10.33 44
atmana suddha-bhavena 16.59 257  brahi karanam etasya 15.27 201

bubhuje ca sriyam svrddhari 15.36 208
ato 705 cintaniyas te 11.38 89
atrapi bhagavaj-janma 13.6 151 C
avartanodvartana-kampita-stana- 12.19 122
avatara maya ৫151৫ 12.12 115 cakrena ksura-dharena 925 20

carur nirapya payasi 16.51 251
avisahyam imam manye 15.25 199  caturbhis caturovahan 1041 51
ayari vai sarva-yajidkhyah 16.60 257 catur-virnsad-guna-jidya 16.30 238
ayi vyapasyas tvam ajasya mayan 1243 141 catur-yugante kilena 144 173
ayusmato ‘mbudhardyam 13.20 159

chadayam asur asurah 11.24 80

B chindhi bhindhiti vadinyas 1048 55

ciccheda nisitair bhallair 1042 51
babhau disah kharh prthivira ca 11.26 82 citra-dhvaja-patai rajann 10.13 35
bahu-manena cabaddha 9.23 18  citrasena-vicitradya 13.30 165
bila-vyajana-chatrigryai 10.18 37
baleh pada-trayar bhimeh 151 184 D
balira vipannam ddaya 11.46 94

dahann iva diso drgbhih 15.26 200
balir mahendrarh dasabhis 10.41 51 daityan grhita-kalaso 9.21 17
balis cosanasa sprstah 11.48 95 daksinam gurave dadyad 16.55 254
bastair eke krsna-sarair 10.11 34 dasamo brahma-savarnir 13.21 160
bhadrar dvija-gavan brahman 16.11 217  dattvacamanamarcitva 16.41 246
bhagavann udyamo bhityan 15.25 199

dattvemarh yacamandaya 13.13 155
bhagavan paritustas te 16.62 260  dattva go-vipra-bhitebhyah 9.14 12
bhavadbhir amrtari praptari 11.44 93  deva-danava-virdnam 10.15 35
bhavad-vidho 010४271 vapi 15.29 202  deva-deva jagad-vydpin 124 99
bhavanya api pasyantya 12.25 127  deva-dhanim adhisthaya 15.33 206
bhavisyany atha vaksyami 13.7 151  deva-dundubhayo nedur 11.41 91
bhavita rudra-savarni 13.27 163 devaguhyat sarasvatydri 13.17 157
bhavita yena ৩0770000৫71 13.20 159  devahotrasya tanaya 13.32 166
bhojayet tan gunavata 16.54 253  devah sukarma-sutrima- 13.31 165
bhrajante ripavan-naryo 15.17 194  deva-linga-praticchannah 924 19
bhuktavatsu ca sarvesu 16.56 255 devavan upadevas ca 13.27 163
bhunjanah pati lokdrhs trin 147 177 devesv atha nilinesu 15.33 206


--- Page 278 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 279
dhanus ca divyarh puratopanaddhari 156 187  galavo diptiman ramo 13.15 157
dharmasydrthasya kamasya 16.5 212 gandha-dhapadibhis carced 16.39 244
dhapamodita-salayar 9.16 13  gandharva-mukhyau jagatur 11.41 91
dhvajas ca sirhena virdjamano 15.5 187 giro vah sadhu-Socyanarm 119 71
dhyatah pradurabhiit tatra 10.53 58
grdhraih 40744247 bakair anye 10.10 33
dhyayan phenam athapasyad 11.39 90  grhad apujita yatah 166 214
diksu bhramat-kanduka-capalair 12.20 122 grhesu yesv atithayo 16.7 214
distya (৮৫77 vibudha-srestha 12.38 136
drstva mrdhe garuda-vaham ibhari- 10.56 60 H
drstva sapatnan utsiktan 10.24 39
harisa-sarasa~cakrahva- 15.13 192
drstva tasydri manas cakre 12.24 126  harer aradhanarh homam 16.47 249
ditra-sthan payayam asa 9.21 17  harin dasa-Satdny ajau 11.21 78
dvimitrdha kalanabho "tha 10.20 38 18078 tasya kabandhas tu 9.25 20
dvy-avaran bhojayed vipran 16.43 247  hasty-asva-ratha-pattindri 10.7 31
dyutimat-pramukhds tatra 13.19 159
havisman sukrtah satyo 13.22 160
E hayagrivah sarikusirah 10.21 38
haya hayair ibhas cebhaih 108 32
ekada kasyapas tasya 16.2 210  hema-jalaksa-nirgacchad- 15.19 195
ekas tvam eva sad asad dvayam 12.8 106
esa vipra-balodarkah 15.31 204  hemangada-lasad-bahuh 15.9 189
etad veditum icchdmo 152 184  hitva tri-vistapari jagmur 15.32 205
etair mantrair hrsikesam 16.38 243 hrta-$riyo hrta-sthandan 16.15 221
hrte tri-vistape daityaih 16.1 210
etan me bhagavan prstah 16.24 233
etan muhuh kirtayato 'nusrnvato 12.46 143 I
etat kalpa-vikalpasya 14.11 181  idanim 2501९ rajan 13.16 157
९५५८ payo-vratari néma 16.58 256  iksvakur nabhagas caiva 13.2 149
evam abhyarthito 'ditya 16.18 223  ilvalah saha vatapir 10.32 44
ime saptarsayas tatra 13.16 157
evam abhyarthito visnur 12.14 117 indrah sura-gands caiva 142 172
evar bhagavata rajan 12.41 140 indras ca vaidhrtas tesam 13.25 162
evar daityair maha-mayair 10.52 57
evar nirakrto devo 11.11 72 indro bhagavata ৫00৫7 707 17
evar putresu nastesu 161 210 indro jambhasya sarikruddho 11.18 76
itas tatah prasarpanti 12.29 129
evan sa viprarjita-yodhandrthas 15.7 188 = ८८८ 'bhihitas tata 1245 143
evar sumantritarthas te 15.32 205 iti te ksvelitais tasya 911 9
evar surasura-gandh sama-desa- 928 23 iti te tam abhidrutya 9.2 2
evari tari rucirdpdngim 12.24 126
evar tv ahar ahah kuryad 16.47 249 iri bruvano bhagavars 12.17 120
iti danava-daiteyd 10.1 28
iti sakrarn visidantam 11.37 89
G ity abhivyahrtari tasya 9.13 11
gada-prahara-vyathito 11.15 75 ity aksipya vibhuri viro 11.10 72
gajas turaiigah sarathah padatayah 10.37 47 ity upamantrito daityair 9.8 ॥


--- Page 279 ---
280 Srimad-Bhagavatam
J ko nu me bhagavan kamo 16.13 219

ko nu me ‘titaren mayam 12.39 138

Jadikrtari nypa-srestha 12.35 134  krta-krtyam ivatmanari 15.36 208

Jaghnur bhriarh Sakra-samiranddayas 111 64 पाण nivisatdri bharaih 11.34 87

Jahasur bhava-gambhirari 9 9

Jjamadagnir bharadvaja 13.5 150  krtva pradaksinam bhimau 16.42 246

Jjambhar srutva hatari tasya 11.19 77 (ण्ठ Sirasi tac-chesar 16.43 247
ksipanto dasyu-dharmana 9.1 21

janami maghavaii chatror 15.28 201  kigjad-vihariga-mithunair 15.12 191

Jjanubhyari dharani sprstva 11.15 75 kusesu pravisan sarve 915 12

Jjaped astottara-satari 16.42 246  kva deho bhautiko ‘natma 16.19 224

Jjatah svarsena bhagavan 13.23 161

Jatrdv atédayac chakrem 11.14 74 L

Jigharisur indrari nrpate 11.29 83
laksaye ’svastham atmanarn 16.10 217

jijfisamanar vidhinabhisicya 154 186  lokapalahsaha-ganair 10.26 41

Jitva balan nibaddhaksan 11.4 66

JjAdnari canuyugari brite 148 178 M

1৫007) baddha-vairandrh 96 5

Jhdtindri pasyatarn rajai 11.28 83 maghavaris tam abhipretya 15.24 199

[पका vibhakta-prapathari 15.15 193 maha-bhujaih sabharanaih 10.39 49
maha-dkanair vajra-dangair 10.13 35

K mahoragah samutpetur 10.47 54

kabandhas tatra cotpetuh 1040 50 mali sumaly atibalau yudhi petatur 10.57 61

kéla-ripena sarvesam 149 179

kalpayitva prhak pasiktir 920 16  manasvinarh susampannarit 11.3 65

kdmadevena durmarsa 10.33 44 manavo manu-putrasca 142. A72

kamasya ca ৮০৩৫7 nitah 12.27 128 maninah kdmino lubdha 15.22 197
manor vaivasvatasyaite 133 149

kdmindria bahu mantavyari 12.16 119 manur vai dharma-savarnir 13.24 161

kapata-yuvati-veso mohayan yah 12.47 144

karayec chastra-drstena 16.50 251 manur va indra-savamis 13.33 166

kérayet tat-kathabhis ca 16.57 255 manur vivasvatah putrah 13.1 148

kasya ke pati-putradya 1619 224 manus trayodaso bhavyo 13.30 165
maruto nivatakavacaih 10.34 44

kasyapo চা vasisthas ca 135 150 manv-adayo jagad-yatram 143 173

kasyasi vada vamoru 9.3 3 manvantaresu bhagavan 141 171

katharh kasyapa-dayadah 9.9 7

ka (৮০71 kaja-palaiaksi 9.3 3 matva jati-nrsarsandrm 9.19 15

kauwtihalaya daitydnam 12.15 118 maya sametd kalena 12.40 139

kecid gaura-mukhair rksair 10.9 33 mayasmai yad varo datto 11.38 89
mohayitva sura-gandn 12.1 98

kenaharh vidhina brahmann 16.22 231 mudariga-sanikhanaka-dundubhi- 15.21 197

kesa-bandha upaniya 12.28 129 mukta-vitnair mani-hema-ketubhir 15.20 196

kesavaya namas tubhyari 16.35 242

kim idarh daiva-yogena 11.33 86 N

kirtiry diksu vitanvanah 15.35 207 na dharmasya na lokasya 164 211

kirtir jayo ‘jayo mrtyuh 11.7 68 naharh pardyur rsayo na marici- 12.10 111


--- Page 280 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 281
nahari tad édade dandar 11.36 88 nrtya-vaditra-gitais ca 16.57 255
na hrsyanti na socanti 11.8 69 nilnari (एमे vidhing subhrith 95 5
nainarn kascit kuto vapi 15.26 200
naivedyar ctigunavad 16.52 252 0
nalinyo yatra kridanti 15.13 192 ojah saho balar tejo 15.27 201
ojasvinari bali jeturi 15.29 202
namah sivaya rudriya 16.32 240
namas ta ddi-deviya 16.34 241 P
namas tubhyar bhagavate 16.29 237
namo dvi-Sirsne tri-pade 16.31 239  palayanti praja-pala 146 176
namo hiranyagarbhaya 16.33 240  pandurena praticchanna- 1519 195
parair vivasita 5৫073 16.16 222
namo marakata-Syama- 16.35 242 pardjita-$rir asubhis ca hapito 153 185
namo 'vyaktaya siksmaya 16.30 238 pardjito ‘pi nakhidyal 11.48 95
namrsyat tad-adhikseparit 11.11 72
namucih parica-dasabhih 11.23 79  pdrd-maricigarbhadyd 13.19 159
namucih sambaro bano 10.19 38 paSyatdm asurendrananm 9127+ 422
pasyatan sarva-bhitanam 102 28
namucis ca balah pikas 11.19 77 pasSyata sura-karyani 12.15 118
namucis tad-vadhari drstva 11.29 83 pavitrds caksusa devih 13.34 167
nardyandya rsaye 16.34 241
narisyanto 0 nabhagah 13.2 149 payasa snapayitvarced 16.45 248
nasprsta-piirvarh jénimo 9.4 4 payo-bhakso vratam idari 16.46 248
phalgunasyamale pakse 16.25 234
na Suskena na cardrena 11.40 90 pibadbhiriva kharh drgbhir 15.10 190
nasya Saktah purah sthaturi 15.29 203 pibann iva mukhenedarm 15.26 200
na tasya hi tvacam api vajra irjito 11.32 85
॥ 1.11. 10.53 58 pitdmahas tasya dadau ca malam 156 187
natavan miidha mayabhir 11.4 66 pitamahenabhihitar 16.58 256
pita-praye ‘mrte devair 9.27 22
navamo daksa-savarnir 13.18 158 prabhajyamanam iva madhyatas 12.19 122
na vayari manyamananam 12:90 wr TD pracanda-vatair uddhiita- 1051 57
na vayari tvdmarair daityaih 9.4 4
nayarn Suskair atho nardrair 11.37 89 pradaksini-krtya krta-pranamah 15.7 188
nikrtta-bahiiru-sirodharanghrayas 10.37 47 pradravat sa prthu-sroni 12.30 129
pragrhyabhyadravat kruddho 11.30 84
niliyamana vrksesu 12.26 128 praharat kulisarh tasma 11:12. «73
niriksya prtanarh devah 11.27 82 prahasya bhava-gambhirara 12.14 117
nirmoka-tattvadariadyd 13.31 165
nirmoka-virajaskadyah 13.11 154 prahasya rucirapangair 9.8 7
nirutsavari nirdnandari 16.2 210 prahinod deva-rajaya 11.30 84
prakarendgni-varnena 15.14 192
nirvartitdtma-niyamo 16.28 237 préan-mukhesipavistesu 916 13
nistrirha-bhallaih parighaih 10.36 46 pratipad-dinam Grabhya 16.48 250
nisumbha-sumbhayor devi 10.31 43
niveditarh tad-bhaktaya 16.41 246 pratisarvyuyudhuh sastrair 104 29
nivesito ‘dhike svargad 13.14 156 pratyapedyata kamena 12.31 130
nityaih savadyair upadeva-gitakair 15.21 197 pravala-phala-pusporu- 15.12 191


--- Page 281 ---
282 Srimad-Bhagavatam
pravistah somam apibac १.24 19  sanaiscaras trtiyo 8180 13.10 153
proktany ebhir mitah kalpo 13.36 168  sangrame vartamandnari 11.7 68
[00৫78 ca mahatirh kuryad 16.51 251 Sarkha-tirya-mrdanganarn 10.7 31
parvavaj juhuyad agniri 16.46 248  sanksepato mayoktani 13.7 151
sapatnanari param rddhira 103 29
R sa patnirh dina-vadandri 16.3 211
riddham indra-padari hitva 13.13 155  sapta-hastaya yajiidya 16.31 239
rahuna ca tatha somah 10.31 43 saptamo vartamdno yas 13.1 148
rdjaris caturdasaitani 13.36 168  sarabhair mahisaih khadgair 10.10 33
ramyam upavanodydnaih 15.12 191  sarair avdkiran megha 11.20 78
rardja ratham arigho 159 189
sargarh prajesa-ripena 149 179
rathino rathibhis tatra 10.8 32 sarit-sarahsu ailesu 12.34 132
rejatur vira-malabhir 10.15 35  sarva-bhata-guha-vasam 16.20 226
renur disah kha dyumaniri ca 10.38 48  sarva-bhita-nivisdya 16.29 237
rodhasy udanvato rajarns 10.5 30  sarva-deva-ganopeto 15.24 199
rsayas ca tapomiirtis 13.28 164
sarva ete rana-mukhe 10.23 39
rsi-ripa-dharah karma 14.8 178 sarvarn bhagavato brahmann 16.12 219
rsyasrigah pitasmaka ri 13.15 157  sarva-sangramikopetari 10.17 36
rtadhama ca tatrendro 13.28 164 sarvatah sara-kiitena 11.24 80
rukma-patta-kapatais ca 15.15 193  sarvatas caryams caksur 12.17 120
S sarvatmana tan abhajad bhrgin balih 15.3 185
sarva-vidyadhipataye 16.32 240
sabha-catvara-rathyadhyam 15.16 193  sarvendriya-manah-pritim 9.5 5
sabhajito bhagavata 123 99  sarvesam api bhavanar 124 99
sabhdjito yatha-nydyam 16.3 211  sasarjathdsuriis mayam 1045 53
sadhayitvamrtari rajan 10.2 28
sa esa saksat purusah purdno 12.44 142 = sasarpih sagudar 001৮৫ 16.40 245
sa simha-vaha asadya 11.14 74
saha devyd yayau drasturh 122 98  satabhyar matalirh pako 11.22 79
sakhayari patitari drstva 11.13 74 ৩৫ tam ayantam alokya 12.26 127
sakhydny ahur anityani 9.10 9 satan dpatatahsakras 1042 51
sakrt sandhana-moksena 1022179
sa kijati kanaka-niipura-Sinjitena 9.17 14  satena hayamedhanam 15.34 206
sa tenaivasta-dharena 11.28 83
Sakunir bhitasantdpo 10.20 38  satniyanasya tanayo 13.35 168
salavrkanarh strindm ca 9.10 9 58 tvam nah spardhamandanam 9.6 5
samasadydsibhir banair 10.6 31 sa (৮0773 samihitam adakh sthiti- 12.11 114
sambaro yuyudhe tvastra 10.29 43  sdvarnis tapati kanya 13410 158
sarmjiid ০৪৫%৫ ca rajendra 13.8 152
sa vidhasyati te kaman 16.21 228
sammatam rsi-mukhyandri 12.42 141  saydno nyapatad bhimau 11.12 73
samo bhavaris tasv asuradisu prabho 16.14 220  sehe rujam sudurmarsarm 11.18 76
sarvartaka ivatyugro 10.50 56  senayor ubhayo rajan 10.12 34
अव sammumuhur utsmita- 9.18 14  seyar guna-mayi maya 12.40 138
sarityamya manyu-sarirambhari 11.45 93  sikhandi-paravata-bhriiga-naditar 15.20 196


--- Page 282 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 283
silah satanka-sikharas 10.46 54 T
sirha-nddan vimuiicantah 10.24 39
simtha-vydghra-varahas ca 10.47 54 tad adbhutari param ativirya-vrtra 11.32 86
sindhor nirmathane yena 1245 143 tadapatad gagana-tale maha-javari 11.31 85
11111 16.26 236 100৫ didrksavadyatah 12.13 116
tad idarh kala-rasanarm 11.8 69
Siras tv amaratdar nitam 926 21 ta eva niyamah saksat 16.61 259
Sirobhir uddhiuta-kirita-kundaliah 10.39 49
Siro harisye mandatman 11.6 67 ta evam ৫1৫1) asurah surendra 10.35 46
Sisyayopabhrtari tejo 15.28 201 tair eva sad bhavati yat kriyate 9.29 25
tal lilaya garuda-mardhni patad 10.56 60
Sivabhir akhubhih kecit 10.11 33 tam ahanan nrpa kulisena kandhare 11.31 85
skanne retasi so ‘pasyad 12.35 133 tam anvagacc had bhagavan 12.27 128
$lathad dukalarh kabarirh ca 12.21 123
snatah Sucir yathoktena 16.45 248 tam aviklavam avridam 12.37 135
tari brahmana bhrgavah priyamana 15.4 186
so "har durmayinas te ‘dya 11.6 67 tar daivirh giram akarnya 11.39 90
ॐ "hari tad drastum icchami 12.12 116 tar deva-dhaniih sa varithini-patir 15.23 198
ॐ ‘nuvrajydtivegena 12.28 129 tanh [५0107077 maholkabhar 1043 52
sopagadha bhagavatd 12.29 129
tars copavesayam asa 9.20 16
so ’yari pratihato vajro 11.36 88 (৫7 $ri-sakhim kanaka-kundala- 9.18 14
sphuradbhir visadaih Sastraih 10.14 35 tans tan visrjatirn bhavan 12.39 138
sprhayanta ivamodarh 16.37 243 tari tustuvur muni-gand 11.40 90
siya samedhitdh sarva 11.44 93 (का? viksya deva iti kanduka-lilayesad- 12.22 124
srfyamandsu maydsu 10.52 57 (৫78 visva-jayinam Sisyari 15.34 206
$rngatakair manimayair 15.16 193 tan dasyan vidhunomy ajidn 11.5 66
srsto daityena sumahan 10.50 56 tani ripyasya hemnas ca 12.33 132
Srtarh payasi naivedyari 16.40 245 tapah-saramayari tvastrarn 11.35 87
tapah-saram idari bhadre 16.60 257
sthanarh purandarad dhrtva 13.17 158
stri-preksana-pratisamiksana- 12.22 124 tapasd rsayo ‘pasyan 144 173
stityamano janair ebhir 14.10 180  tapodanarh vratarh yajiio 16.61 259
sudayam ৫5107 asuran 11.42 92 tarakas cakradrk sumbho 10.21 38
tarisas ca prsadhras ca 13.3 149
sitktena tena purusari 16.52 252 tasmad etad vratari bhadre 16.62 260
Sitlena jvalata tar tu 11.17 76
siipavista uvdcedarn 12.3 99 tasmad indro 'bibhec chatror 11.33 86
sura-stri-kesa-vibhrasta- 15.18 195 tasmad isa bhajantyd me 16.15 221
tasman nilayam utsrpya 15.30 203
sitryo bali-sutair devo 10.30 43 tasmin praviste ‘sura-kita-karmaja 10.55 59
Susmino yithapasyeva 12.32 131 tasydh karagrit sa tu kanduko yada 12.23 126
susrag-dharo १1५0 sannahya 158 189
suvasana-viruddhadya 13.22 160 tasya karmottamarh viksya 10.43 52
tasyarn kntatipranaydh 9.23 18
svadhamakhyo harer 07304 13.29 164 tasyari narendra karabhorur 9.17 13
sva-karna-vibhrajita-kundalollasat- 12.20 122 tasyanudhavato retas 12.32 131
svapno yatha hi pratibodha agate 10.55 59 tasydsan sarvato 02৮৫ 10.26 41


--- Page 283 ---
284 Srimad-Bhagavatam
tasydsan sarvato yanair 10.19 38 1 brahma kecid avayanty uta 129 110
tasyasau padavir rudro 12.31 130 tvarit brahma piirnam amram 127 104
tasya tat piyayan karma 11.17 76 1৮৫78 canena maha-bhage 16.59 257
tatah pradurabhiic chailah 1045 53  tvam devyddi-varahena 16.27 236
tatah samudra udvelah 10.51 57 tvain sarva-varadah purmsar 16.36 242

tvayodvigna-dhiya bhadre 168 215
tatah $0 1073 tatah prasari 10.44 53
tatah suparndrisa-krtanghri-pallavah === 10.54 58 U
tatah sura-gandh sarve 10.4 29
tatas tad-anubhavena 15.35 207  udayacchad ripuri hanturh 11.27 82
tatas turdsad isu-baddha-paiijarad 11.26 82 udayacchad yada vajrarn 11.2 64

uddhrtasi namas tubhyarir 16.27 236
tatha vidhehi kalyanari 16.17 223  udyatayudha-dordandair 10.40 50
1010 dedarsopavane vara-striyari 12.18 121 upagiyamananucarair 11.45 93
1010 dharmarn catuspadam 14.5 175
1010 grhitvamrta-bhajanarh harir টা 10 upatisthasva purusari 16.20 226
tato maha-ghana vyomni 10.49 55 uru-gambhira-budhadya 13.33 167

usand jivayam dsa 11.47 95
tato nipetus taravo 10.46 54 ustraih kecid ibhaih kecid 109 33
tato rathah kaiicana-patta-naddho 15.5 187 uvdca parama-prito 12.37 135
tato ratho mataling 1116 75
tatra daivasuro néma 10.5 30 ष
10470 devah sutapaso 13.12 154

vacobhihparusair indram 11.20 78
tatramytarh sura-ganah phalam 928 23 vaidhrtdyarn harer ৫7505 13.26 163
tatranyonyarh sapatnds te 106 30 vairocandya sarirabdho 11.2 64
tatravinastavayavan 11.47 95 vairocano balih sarikhye 10.16 36
tat-suta bhiirisenad hya 13.21 160  vajra-panis tam ahedam 11.3 65
tat te "hari darsayisyami 12.16 119

varaydm ৫5৫ vibudhan 11.43 92
tavadbhir ardayam ৫5৫ 11.21 78  varjayed asad-alapari 16.49 250
tavaiva caranambhojari 126 102 varuno hetinayudhyan 10.28 42
tavaiva marica manah-sarirajih 16.14 220 vasah sasiitrar laghu maruto 00700 12.23 126
taydpahrta-vijaanas 12.25 127 vastropavitabharana- 16.39 244
te ‘nyonyam abhisarsrtya 10.27 41

vatoddhiitottarosnisair 10.14 35
te ‘nyonyato ‘surah patram 9.1 2 vayari kaSyapa-dayada 9.7 6
te palayantah samayam 922 18 vayur yatha visati khari ca 12.11 114
tesam evapamanena 15.31 204  vibhajasva yatha-nydyam 9.7 6
1९560 padaghata-ratharga-citrnitad 10.38 48  vihangamah kamagama 13.25 162
lesan virocana-suto 13.12 155  vijesyati na ko ‘py enari 15.29 203
tosayed rtvijas caiva 16.53 252 vikridatim kanduka-lilaya lasad- 12.18 121
trayodasyam atho visnoh 16.50 251 vimohitatmabhir nana- 14.10 180
tri-vargasya parari ksetrarit 16.11 218 vinighnatim anya-karena kandukari 12.21 123
trtiyar vadavam eke 139 152 visnos tat [01100071077 1.1 16.56 255
tulyaisvarya-bala-sribhih 15.10 190  visgyobhayatah saigam 126 102
tisnim asan krta-snehdh 922 18 visvakseno visiicyan tu 13.23 161


--- Page 284 ---
Index of Sanskrit Verses 285
visvasari pandito jatu 9.9 8 yan me stri-rapaya svairam 12.38 137
viSvasya hetur udaya-sthiti- 12.7 104 yasmin karmani ye yena 14.1 172
visvedevds tu paulomai 10.34 45 yas tu parvani candrirkav 9.26 21
vitanayari mahdrija 13.35 168  yasya bhavan prajadhyaksa 16.13 219
vivasvatas ca dve jaye 13.8 152 27৫1৫ (दे pratiksanto 15.30 203
[111 12.1 98  yathd me satya-sarikalpo 16.22 231
vrsakapis tu jambhena 10.32 44  yatha sravat-prasravanam 10.25 40
vrsam druhya girisah 122 = 98 = yatha tani punah 9৫090 16.17 222
vrto vikarsan mahatim 15.11 190 yathopajosari vasarisi 9.15 12
Yato ‘vyayasya naitani 125 101
Y yat-pijayd kama-dughan 169 216
ydcrieSvarasya pirnasya 152 184 70470 kva cdsann rsayas 12.34 133
20৫0 dha te pravaksyami 16.24 233  yatra manvantarany Ghus 14.11 181
7০01 labhyeta vai srotasy 16.26 236  yatramodam upaddya 15.18 195
yadi niryanti te nina 16.7 214  yatra nitya-vayo-rapah 15.17 194
270৫0 uttamasloka-gunanuvarnanar 12.46 144
yatra yatrapatan mahydri 12.33 132
200) abhyupetari kva ca sadhv 9.12 10  yatudhanyas ca satasah 10.48 55
yad yac ০0/05/7073 samadadyat 10.44 53. yaydv indra-puri surddhari 15.11 190
yad yujyate ’su-vasu-karma-mano- 9.29 25  yena me pirvam adrindri 11.34 87
yajria-bhaga-bhujo deva 146 176  yena sammobhita daityah 12.13 116
yajradayo yah kathitah 143 173 26 'vaSista rane tasmin 11.46 94
‘yamas tu kalanabhena 10.29 43  yogaiSvarya-Saririya 16.33 240
yar mam aprcchas tvam upetya 12.44 142  yogesvaro harer amso 13.32 166
(काणे na vrajanty adharmisthah 15.22 197 = 2० 508 bhagavatd baddhah 13.14 156
20710 yami sraddhadevas 13.9 153  yuktah karmani yattas ca 10.1 28
y@nam vaihayasarm ndma 10.16 36  yuktahsaicarayanty addha 145 175
yan-mdyayd musita-cetasa isa daitya- 12.10 111 yuyodha balir indrena 10.28 42


--- Page 285 ---
General Index
Numerals in boldface type indicate references to translations of the verses of Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
A Aditi
Kasyapa advised, on devotional service,
Absolute Truth 226, 228,229
devotional service reveals, 109 Kasyapa begged by, for instructions, 231,
Lord as, 101, 102, 135 232
as one and different, 102 Kasyapa begged by, for protection, 222,
pancaratriki-vidhi reveals, 112 223
philosophers cannot find, 180 Kasyapa instructed, on payo-vrata,
surrender reveals, 113 235-256
Vaisesika philosophers misunderstand, Kasyapa queried, 212, 214, 215, 217
108 Kasyapa reassured by, about household,
_ Seealso: Supreme Lord 218, 219
Acarya. See: Spiritual master, all entries lamentation of, 210, 211,117, 222
Acaryam man vijaniyat as materially attached, 212, 214
quoted, 233 quoted on household life, 218
Acintya-bhedabheda quoted on worshiping the Lord, 231
Absolute Truth as, 102 as Vamana’s mother, 151
Lord as, 105 Age of Kali. See: Kali-yuga
Activities Agni as demigod warrior, 41, 92
in base modes of nature, 112 Ahaituky apratihata
fruitful vs. futile, 260 quoted, 105
of the Lord. See: Incarnations of the Aham adir hi devanarm
Supreme Lord; Supreme Lord, ap- quoted, 102
propriate entries Aharisarvasya prabhavo
Lord’s pleasure as measure of, 259- quoted, 102, 180
260 Ahari (0৫ 7 sarva-papebhyo
material vs. spiritual, 23-24, 25-26 verse quoted, 259
time controls, 68, 69, 70 Ahaiikara itiyarh me
See also: Karma verse quoted, 101, 107
Adbhuta, 159, 160 Aikantiki harer bhaktir
Aditi verse quoted, 112
as arta, 232 Air, Lord compared to, 114, 115
as demigods’ mother, 210, 222 Airavata
as householder, 212, 213 Bali attacked, 51
287


--- Page 286 ---
288 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Airavata (continued) Apsaris
as Indra’s carrier, 40-41, 51 in Indra’s city, 196
Air demigod, 44 Indra’s triumph gladdened, 91
prem i Aradhananan sarvesar
of Bali, 37 quoted, 258
in Indra’s city, 194, 196 Arcana. See: Deity worship of the Supreme
Aitareya Upanisad, quoted on Durga, Visnu Lord
and kala, 139 Arcana vandanari 005) 0778
Akama defined, 229 verse quoted, 235
Akamah sarva-kamo va Arista, 40
verse quoted, 229 Aristanemi, 40
Akasa-gangi in Indra’s city, 192 Artha defined, 103
Ambudhira, 160 Arto jijaasur artharthi
Ami—vijria, ei miirkhe ‘visaya’ kene diba? _ verse quoted, 231-232
verse quoted, 230 Aryaka, 163
Amrta chadi’ visa mage, —ei bada miirkha Asam$ayari samagraris mari
versequoted, 230 verse quoted, 113
Ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis Asat defined, 26
verse quoted, 115 Asocyan anvasocas tvarit
Anasaktasya visayan verse quoted, 70
verse quoted, 108-109 Asrama of Aditi forlorn, 210
Andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stharm Astagiri Hill, 94, 95
quoted, 100 Asuras. See: Atheists; Demons; Nondevotees
verse quoted, 115 Asvamedha sacrifices
Andha yathandhair upaniyamanas Bali performed, 206
quoted, 225 Indra performed, 206, 207
Animals ASvini-kumaras, 44
bodily conception for, 225 Atheists
in demigod-demon battle, 31-34, 40,47, devotees vs., 24
51,55, 60-62, 74-76 incarnations of God cheat, 10
in Indra’s city, 191, 192, 196 karma binds, 24
as sexually fickle, 9 See also: Demons
wild women compared to, 9 Atithi
See also: names of specific animals defined, 214, 215
Anukalyena krsnanu- See also: Guests, reception of, rejection of
quoted, 96 Atma. See: Soul
Anyabhilasita-sanyarn Ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
quoted, 103 quoted, 103
Apari phenena manuceh verse quoted, 125
quoted, 91 Atoms, Lord within, 100, 115
Aparijita, 44 Attachment, material
Apareyam itas tv anya in Aditi, 211, 214
verse quoted, 107 to body, 224, 225
Appearance of the Supreme Lord. See: Incar- See also: Bodily concept of life; Desires,
nations of the Supreme Lord material


--- Page 287 ---
General Index 289
Authority. See: Disciplic succession Bali Maharaja
Avaisnavas. See: Atheists; Nondevotees Prahlada garlanded, 188
Avataras quoted on time, 68
guna-, three listed, 100 Sukracarya defied by, 204-205
See also: Incarnations of the Supreme Lord Sukracirya gifted, 188, 189, 198
Avidya. See: Ignorance Sukrécirya revived, 95, 185-186
Ayomukha, 40 as Sukracarya’s disciple, 186, 198, 202,
Ayusman, 160 205
B universe conquered by, 206
Vimanadeva pleased by, 204-205
Visvajit-yajiia performed by, 186,
“Back to Godhead,” devotees go, 23-24, 228 188-189
Bahinar janmandam ante weapons of, 189-190
quoted, 105 Bina, 40, 44
verse quoted, 113 Battle between demigods and demons,
Bala, Indravs., 77,78, 83 29-34, 36, 37, 39-58, 64-95
Balavan indriya-gramo animals in, 32-34, 40, 47, 51, 55,
verse quoted, 133 60-62, 74-76
Bali Maharaja Brahma stopped, 92
abode of, 156 cloudsin, 48,56
Airavata attacked by, 51 firein, 56
airplane of, 37 ghostsin, 50
asvamedha sacrifices by, 206, 207 illusion in, 53, 57, 60
in battle array, 36, 39,189-191 at milk ocean, 30
Bhrgu’s descendants favored, 186, 202, mountain in, 53, 54
206 musical instruments in, 32, 40, 91
brahmanas favored, 186, 188-189, 202, mystic power in, 66
204, 206, 208 time in, 68, 69
brahmanas insulted by, 204 weapons in, 31, 46, 47, 51-57, 61, 62,
as commander in chief of demons, 37, 39 65, 68, 72, 73, 77-80, 82-86,
demigods rebuked by, 71 90,91
demons escorted, to Astagiri, 94, 95 See also: specific persons in battle
as devotee, 96, 204-205 Being, living. See: Living entities; Soul
fame 1, 207 Bhadra Kili, 44
father of, 206 Bhagavad-gita
as fearless, 69 See also: Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
grandfather of, 188 Caitanya propagates, 179
as Indra, 155, 205 cited on Lord as controller, 100
Indra vs., 42, 51-53, 65-68, 69, 70-73, Hare Krsna movement teaches, 176
186, 190-191, 198-204 Jjagad-guru teaches, 228
lamentation absent in, 95-96 spiritual education in, 225
Lord blessed, 156 as Vedas’ essence, 179
Lord took charity from, 155, 185 Bhagavad-gita, quotations from
as moonlike, 37,207 on bhakti-yoga, 113
power of, 200-204, 206-208 on devotee’s tolerance, 70, 137


--- Page 288 ---
290 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Bhagavad-gita, quotations from (continued) Bhrgu Muni
on devotional service, 113 descendants of, favored Bali, 186, 202,
on disciplic succession, 176, 177 , 206
on duty, 96 as Sukracarya’s forefather, 185-186
on external energy, 124 Bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kami—sakali ‘asanta’
on guru, 232 verse quoted, 24
on heavenly elevation, 67 Bhamir apo 20० vayuh
on Krsna rebuking Arjuna, 70 verse quoted, 101, 107
on ksatriya, 69 Bhiitasantapa, 40
on Lord as energy source, 101, 107 Birds
on Lord as one and different, 104-105, Garuda as lord of, 62
108 in Indra’s city, 191, 192, 196
on Lord favoring devotees, 145, 220-221 Birthand death, repeated. See: Transmigra-
on Lord in heart, 136, 227 tion of the soul
on Lord rewarding surrender, 23, 221 Bliss. See: Happiness
on Lord's supremacy, 135 Boar, dirt dug up by, used in payo-vrata
on material energy under Lord’s direction, sacrifice, 236
139 Boar, Lord, Earth raised by, 236-237
on offerings to the Lord, 216 Bodily concept of life
on pious candidates for devotional service, asanimallike, 225
231-232 living entities under, 225
on remembrance, knowledge, forgetful- psychology of, 103
ness, 105 See also: Duality, material
on sages taking Krsna's shelter, 227-228 Body, material
on successful person as rare, 156 nature awards, 225-226
on surrender, 113, 259 soul vs., 106-107, 224. 225
on transcendental realization, 71 See also: Bodily concept of life
on transmigration of the soul, 225 Brahma, Lord
on work done for Visnu, 24 birth of, 233
Bhagavan. See: Supreme Lord demon-demigod battle stopped by, 92
Bhagavata-candra-candrika, cited on Kasyapa instructed by, 233, 234, 256
Vaisnava philosophy, 107 Lord above, 100, 111, 113
Bhagavatam. See: Srimad-Bhagavatam Manus in day of, 154, 169, 181
Bhaktas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord in maya, 138
Bhakti. See: Devotional service to the Rahu accepted by, 21-22
Supreme Lord; Krsna consciousness Brahma-bhiita defined, 71
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, quoted on devo- Brahma-bhitah prasannatma
tional service, 108-109, 112 quoted, 71
Bhakti-yaga. See: Devotional service to the Brahmacari as trouble-free, 134
Supreme Lord; Krsna consciousness Brahman, Supreme
Bhaktya mam abhijanati as cause of all causes, 107
quoted, 113, 235 Lord as, 101, 102, 104, 105
Bhavani as Siva’s wife, 141 Mayavadis misunderstand, 107
Bhoktararh yajiia-tapasam moksa-kami aspires to, 229
quoted, 26 transcendentalist realizes, 71
verse quoted, 227-228 See also: Supreme Lord


--- Page 289 ---
General Index 291
Brahmana-bhojana defined, 216-217 Caitanya Mahaprabhu
Brahmanas (intellectuals) parampara from, 177
Bali favored by, 185, 188-189, 202, sarikirtana pleases, 177
104, 206, 208 sarikirtana started by, 175
Bali insulted, 204 Sarvabhauma instructed by, 103
duty for, 212 Cakradrk, 40
as dvija-devas, 208 Canakya Pandita
feeding of, 216-217, 247 quoted on wife of another, 4
function of, 208 quoted on women and politicians, 8
at ritualistic ceremonies, 13 Candalas defined, 254
Visnu eats via, 216-217 Caranas, 4
worship toward, 216 Catur-vidha bhajante mariu
Brahma-sarhita, quotations from verse quoted, 231-232
on Govinda and Radha, 115 Catur-virised-guna
on Krsna as controller, 100 defined, 238
on Lord’s all-pervasiveness, 115 See also: Elements, material
Brahma satyari jagan mithya Celibacy in payo-vrata sacrifice, 248, 250
quoted, 108 Ceremonies. See: Ritualistic ceremonies
Brahma-tejas defined, 203 Chandogya Upanisad, quoted on Supreme
Brahma-yamala, quoted on unauthorized de- Brahman, 108
votional service, 112 Charity at ritualistic ceremonies, 13
Brahmins. See: Brahmanas Chaya, 152,153
Brhadbhanu, Lord, parents of, 168 City of Indra, 191-198
Brhaspati Civilization, human
demigods advised by, 204, 205 spiritual education lacking in, 225
Indra pacified by, 204 See also: Society, human
as Indra’s spiritual master, 199 Cleanliness. See: Purification
quoted on Bali, 201-202 Clouds in demigod-demon battle, 48, 56
Sukracarya vs., 45 Cosmic manifestation. See: Creation, the; Ma-
Brhati, 166 terial world; Universe
Buddha, Lord, Mohini compared to, 10 Creation, the
Bull as Siva’s carrier, 99 demigods bewildered by, 111
Butter, clarified. See: Ghee life pervades, 81
See also: Material world; Universe
(0 Cupid
Durmarsa vs., 45
Caitanya-caritamrta, cited on guru, 233 as lust’s agent, 125
Caitanya-caritamrta, quotations from Sivadefeated, 119
on demigods in maya, 138
on devotees, karmis, jadnis, yogis, 24 D
on Lord purifying devotee’s desire, 230
Caitanya Mahaprabhu Daityas, See: Demons, all entries
Bhagavad-gita propagated by, 179 Dadami buddhi-yogari tar
cited on moksa, 103 verse quoted, 227
as Kali-yuga incarnation, 177 Daivi hy esa guna-mayi
mission of, 176 quoted, 124


--- Page 290 ---
292 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Dattatreya, Lord, as mystic yoga teacher, 178 Demigods
Death Mohini gave nectar to, 17, 18
life after, 225-226 Narada obeyed by, 94
people subject to, 212 nectar drunk by, 22, 23
Dehino ’smin yatha dehe nectar enlivened, 30
verse quoted, 225 Rahu in disguise among, 20
Deity worship of the Supreme Lord (arcana) ritualistic ceremonies by, 13, 14
bathing ingredients for, 244-245, 238, in Rudra-savarni-manvantara, 164
251 sacrifices for, 177
food for, 235, 245, 246, 251, 252 in Savarni-manvantara, 155
instructions for, 235, 244-245 Siva best among, 137
paraphernalia for, 235, 244-245, 248, in Sraddhadeva-manvantara, 150
251 Supersoul of, 216
in payo-vratasacrifice, 237, 244-245, Vayu headed, 64
246-248, 251, 252 Visnu above, 100
Demigod-demon battle. See: Battle between See also: names of specific demigods
demigods and demons Demon-demigod battle. See: Battle between
Demigods demigods and demons
Aditi as mother of, 210, 222 Demons
Bali rebuked, 71 Bali escorted by, to Astagiri, 94, 95
in Brahma-savarni-manvantara, 161 Bali headed, 37, 39
Brhaspati advised, 204, 205 churned milk ocean in vain, 28, 40
creation bewilders, 111 demigods vs., 7, 10, 23, 29-34, 36, 37,
in Daksa-savarni-manvantara, 159 39-58, 64-95, 205, 210, 222
demons vs., 7, 10, 23, 29-34, 36, 37, devotees vs., 10, 24, 28
39-58, 64-95, 205, 210, 222 Kasyapa as father of, 220
in Deva-savarni-manvantara, 166 Lord defeated, 60-62
as devotees, 29 Lord revealed Himself to, 22
in Dharma-sivarni-manvantara, 162 in modes of nature, 220
forms changed by, at will, 205 Mohini cautioned, 8
in goodness, 111 Mohini cheated, 10-12, 16, 07, 18-20,
heavenly planets left by, 205 118
Indra headed, 64 Mohini enchanted, 3-8, 10-12, 15,19,
in Indra-savarni-manvantara, 167 118
Kasyapa as father of, 220 Mohini requested by, to settle nectar dis-
lamentation of, on battlefield, 81 pute, 6, 7
Lord above, 243 nectar denied to, 28, 40
Lord appoints, for manvantaras, 172-173 in passion and ignorance, 111
Lord fed nectar to, 28-29 quarreled over nectar, 2, 6
Lord revived, 64 quoted on beautiful woman, 3
Lord’s shelter sought by, 58 quoted on Mohini, 12
in maya, 138 ritualistic ceremonies by, 13, 14
in modes of nature, 70-71, 220 as snakelike, 16
Mohini did not bewilder, 118, 120 Sukracarya revived, 95
Mohini enchanted, 15 women bewilder, 118


--- Page 291 ---
General Index 293
Demons Devotional service to the Supreme Lord
See also: Atheists; Nondevotees (bhakti)
Desires benefit of, 25-26
devotional service fulfills, 229, 230 as causeless, 105
Lord fulfills, 229, 230, 231, 242 desires dispelled by, 230
Desires, material desires fulfilled by, 229, 230
bhakta free 01, 229 detachment by, 113
of devotee purified by the Lord, 230 via disciplic succession, 234
devotional service dispels, 230 first-class, 96
karmis afflicted by, 229 Kagyapa recommended, to Aditi, 226, 228,
Lord free of, 105 229, 230
pure devotees free of, 103 knowledge by, 113
See also: Attachment, material; Lust Lord known by, 113, 235
Destiny. See: Karma modes of nature surpassed by, 227
Detachment. See: Renunciation pious candidates for, 232
Devaguhya, 158 pure, 230, 235
Devahotra, 166 pure devotees desire, 102-102
Deva(s) renunciation in, 109
defined, 102 as sandtana-dharma, 175
Lord as, 208 truth realized by, 109
See also: Demigods See also: Krsna consciousness
Devotees of the Supreme Lord (bhaktas) Dharma
atheists vs., 24 defined, 103, 174, 176
Bali as, 96 See also: Duty; Religious principles;
demigods as, 19 Sanatana-dharma; Varnasrama-
demons vs., 10, 24, 28 dharma
as desireless, 228 Dharmah svanusthitah 10117750772
happiness 01, 180 verse quoted, 259-260
karma surpassed by, 24 Dharmaraja. See: Yamaraja
karmis vs., 23-24 Dharmasetu, Lord, parents of, 163
Lord accepted by, 180 Dharmasya hy apavargyasya
Lord favors, 145, 220, 221, 230 quoted, 213
Lord fulfills desires of, 145 Dhrsta, 150
Lord protects, 145 Dhruva Maharaja as desire-free, 230
Lord purifies, 137, 230 Disciple
Siva best among, 137 spiritual master directs, 231, 234
spiritual success 01, 23-24 See also: Brahmacari; Devotees of the
as surrendered souls, 23 Supreme Lord
as tolerant, 70, 137 Disciplic succession (parampara)
as transcendental, 26 Bhagavad-gita quoted on, 176, 177
See also: Pure devotees of the Supreme from Caitanya, 177
Lord; names of specific devotees devotional service via, 234
Devotional service to the Supreme Lord Gaudiya Vaisnavas in, 177
(bhakti) Hare Krsna movement in, 176
by Bali, 205 Manu in, 176, 177


--- Page 292 ---
294 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Disciplic succession (parampara) (continued) E
peace by, 177
spiritual power via, 202 Earth planet
Vivasvan in, 176 boar incarnation raised, 236-237
Dissolution of the universe by fire, 56 bodily conception pervades, 225
Dista, 150 sun closer to, than moon, 48-49
Distress. See: Suffering Eclipses, Rahu causes, 20, 31
Divaspati, 166 Education, spiritual
Dreams as illusory, 60 in Bhagaved-gita, 225
Dress modern civilization lacks, 225
in demigod-demon battle, 36 Vedic civilization based on, 225
of the Lord, 59, 242, 245 Ekadasi, grains not eaten on, 235
of Mohini, 121-123, 126 Ekadesa-sthitasyagner
for ritualisticceremony, 13 verse quoted, 109
Drinking intoxicants as ignorance, 67 Ekam evadvitiyam brahma
Duality, material quoted, 108
devotee tolerates, 70 Eko py asau racayituri jagad-anda- kotiri
Lord free of, 102, 106 verse quoted, 115
modes of nature cause, 109 Elements, material
pure devotees free of, 103 body consists of, 224.
See also: Bodily concept of life; Modes of as Lord’s energy, 101-102
material nature; Nature, material types listed, 238-239
Durgadevi See also: Energy, material; names of
as co-creator, 129 specific elements |
Nisumbha vs., 43 Elephant and she-elephant, Siva and Mohini
as Siva’s wife, 118, 139 compared to, 128, 130, 131
See also: Maya Enemy as guest, 214
Durmarsa, 45 Energy (Energies) of the Supreme Lord
Dust clouds in demon-demigod battle, external, 124, 129
48 hladini, 115
Duty illusory, 11, 118,138, 141-142, 180,
for brahmanas, 212 223-214
of householder, 214 internal, 124, 131
of human being, 175 as the Lord Himself, 107, 108
in Krsna consciousness, 96 marginal, 106
Manus reestablish, 175 material, 101-102, 106,107,118,
of saints, 174 139
of society, 179 spiritual, 107, 109
See also: Occupational duty; Sanatana- as wonderful, 131
dharma See also: Maya; Yogamaya
Dvadasaksara-mantra identified, Energy, material
245 as Bhadra Kili, 44
Dvada$i, milk diet for, 235 under Lord’s direction, 139
Dvipara-yuga as half-religious, 174 See also: Elements, material; Energy of
Dwija-deva, brahmanas as, 208 the Supreme Lord, material; Maya;
Dvimirdha, 40 Nature, material


--- Page 293 ---
General Index 295
Entity, individual. See: Living entities Ganges water
Evarir parampara-praptam for purification, 13
quoted, 177, 202, 234 Gardens in Indra’s city, 191, 192
Garuda
F as Lord’s carrier, 29, 49, 60
Mailyavan attacked, 62
Family. See: Householders Gatasin agatasims ca
Fast verse quoted, 70
by demigods and demons, 13 Gaudiya Vaisnavas, sarikirtana for, 177
from grains on Ekadasi, 235 Ghee (clarified butter) for fire sacrifice, 187,
Fear, Bali free 01, 69 216
Festivals, requirements for, 217 Ghosts
Fire in demigod-demon battle, 50
in demigod-demon battle, 56 as Siva’s companions, 99
dissolution of cosmos by, 56 Goal of life, 213, 258
sarwartaka, 46,200 God. See: Krsna, Lord; Supreme Lord; Visnu,
Fire sacrifice Lord
for heavenly elevation, 216, 217 God consciousness. See: Devotional service to
by householder, 216, 217 the Supreme Lord; Krsna consciousness
ingredients for, 216 Goddess of fortune
Visnu satisfied by, 216 Lord above, 242, 243
worship by, 216, 217 Lord decorated by, 59
Flowers Mohini excelled, 15
in Indra’s city, 191, 195 Godhead. See: “Back to Godhead’’; Krsna,
material vs. spiritual, 109 Lord; Supreme Lord; Visnu, Lord
Flower shower for Indra, 91 “Gods.” See: Demigods
Food Gold
for brahmanas, 216-217, 247 in Indra’s city, 193, 196
material vs. spiritual, 109 by Siva’s semen, 132
Foodstuffs offered to the Supreme Lord. See: by Siva worship, 132
Prasada See also: Opulence, material
Fortune, goddess of. See: Goddess of fortune Gold mine to gold ornaments, Lord to Cre-
Freedom by remembering the Lord, 60 ation compared to, 107, 108
Fruitive activities. See: Activities; Karma Goloka as Govinda’s abode, 115
Fruitive workers. See: Karmis; Materialist Goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhiito
Future verse quoted, 115
Manus in, 144, 155, 157-169 Goodness, mode of (sattva-guna)
Sastra foretells, 154 competes with other modes, 227
demigods in, 111
G as heavenly qualification, 67
Lord incomprehensible by, 112
Gandharvas Grahas
chief, 91 defined, 22
in Indra’s city, 197 See also: Earth planet; Heavenly planets;
Ganges water Universe; names of other specific
in Indra’s city, 192 planets


--- Page 294 ---
296 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Grha-medhini Householder (s)
defined, 213 Aditi as, 212, 213
Grhamedhis duty of, 214
pursue sense gratification, 213 heavenly elevation for, 216, 217
See also: Householders liberation for, 213,218
Grhastha. See: Householders religious principles for, 212, 213,218
Grhe $atrum api praptari Sastras guide, 213, 218
quoted, 214 sense gratification pursued by, 213
Guests spiritual goal of, 213
reception of, 214 worship by, 216, 217
rejection of , 214, 215 as yogis, 213
Guna-avataras, types of , three listed, 100 Human beings
Gunas. See: Modes of material nature duty for, 175, 212
Guru. See: Spiritual master as mortal, 212
Guru-mukha-padma-vikya, cittete kariya aikya in passion and ignorance, 111
quoted, 202 types of, three listed, 229
See also: Living entities; Persons
H Human life. See: Human beings; Life
Human society. See: Society, human
Happiness
of devotees, 180 ||
Krsna Caitanya delivers, 176
material, disinterests learned person, Idari hi visvarn bhagavan ivetarah
70-71 quoted, 108
by sarikirtana, 177 Ignorance
Hare Krsna movement. See: Krsna conscious- materialist in, 225-226
ness movement Mayavadis in, 107
Hayagriva, 40 modern civilization in, 225
Heaven, King of. See: Indra, King See also: Illusion
Heavenly planets Ignorance, mode of (tamo-guna)
demigods left, 205 competes with other modes, 227
by fire sacrifice, 216, 217 demons in, 111
householder sacrifices for, 216, 217 higher planets inaccessible by, 67
Indra rules, 67 humans in, 111
life on, 81 symptoms of, 67
persons in, two types listed, 31 Iksvaku
qualifications for, 67 in disciplic succession, 176, 177
See also: Universe as Manu’s son, 150
Hellish planets, mechanical space travelers Illusion
condemned to, 67 in demigod-demon battle, 53, 57, 60
Heti, 40, 42 dream compared to, 60
Hiadini defined, 115 See also: Maya; Mystic power
Holes of jackals, homes of inhospitable hosts Ilvala, 40, 45
compared to, 215 Imari vivasvate yogari
Horses from Viévajit-yajiia, 187 verse quoted, 176


--- Page 295 ---
General Index 297
Immortality Indra, King
nectar awards, 17, 21 Bali vs.,42,51-53, 65-68, 69, TK-73,
for Rahu, 21 186, 190-191, 198-204
Impersonalists. See: Mayavadis in battle array, 41, 82
Incarnation (s) of the Supreme Lord Brhaspati pacified, 204
atheists cheated by, 10 as Brhaspati’s disciple, 099
as Brhadbhanu, 168 city of, 191-198
as Caitanya, 177, 179 demigods headed by, 64
chief demigods appointed by, 172-173 Divaspati as, 166
as Dattitreya, 178 flower shower for, 91
as Dharmasetu, 163 higher planets ruled by, 67
as dwarf, 151 Jambhasura vs., 74-77
in human society, 179, 241 as Kasyapa’s son, 221
in ignorance mode, 240 Lord appoints, 072-173
Indras appointed by, 172-173 Namuci vs., 77, 78, 80, 84-86, 87,
in Indra-savarni-manvantara, 168 89-91
in Kali-yuga, 177 Paka vs., 77-79, 83
as king, 179 Purandara as, 150, 148
Manus appointed by, 172,173 quoted on Bali, 66, 200
Manu’s sons appointed by, 172-173 rain from, 178
as Marici, 179 Rtadhima as, 164
as Mohini. See: Mohini-mrti Sambhu as, 161
as Nara-Narayana Rsi, 241 Suci as, 167
in Rudra-savarni-manvantara, 165 as sunlike, 4K, 41, 82
as Sarvabhauma, 158 thunderbolt of, 65, 68, 69, 73, 77, 83,
in Savarni-manvantara, 158 85-88
seven great sages appointed by, 172- Vaidhrta as, 162
173 as Vajra-dhara, 83
as Siddhas, 178 Vrtrasura killed by, 86, 88
Siva as, 240 International Society for Krishna Conscious-
in Sraddhadeva-manvantara, 141 ness. See: Krsna consciousness move-
as Svadhama, 165 ment
as Vamana, 141 Interplanetary travel. See: Space travel
as Visvaksena, 161 Intoxication as ignorance, 67
as woman, 3-8, 15, 99, 116, 119, 120, ISKCON. See: Krsna consciousness movement
130, 145 Fsvara, Visnu as, 100
as Yajiia, 163 Isvarah paramakh krsnah
as Yajnavalkya, 178 quoted, 100, 105
as Yogesvara, 166 IFsvarah sarva-bhittanan
India, Caitanya’s mission for, 176 quoted, 227
Indra, King
Adbhuta as, 159, 160 J
asvamedha sacrifices by, 206, 207 Jagad-guru
Balavs., 77,77, 83 bogus vs. bona fide, 228
Bali as, 155, 204 See also: Spiritual master


--- Page 296 ---
298 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Jambhasura Kapila demon, 40
Indra vs., 74-77 Kapiladeva, Lord, started sarikhya-yoga,
Matali wounded by, 76, 77 = 239
Siva vs., 45 Karma
Janayaty asu vairagyar atheists under, 24
verse quoted, 113 devotees surpass, 24
Janmady asya yatah See also: Activities
quoted, 107 Karma-cakra
Jiva. See: Living entities; Soul defined, 23
Jiva-bhitarm maha-baho See also: Transmigration of the soul
verse quoted, 107 Karmany evadhikaras te
Jiva Gosvami, cited on sun, 109 quoted, 96
Jivera ‘svarapa’ haya— krsnera ‘nitya-dasa’ Karmis (fruitive workers)
quoted, 175 desires afflict, 229
Jranis devotees vs., 23-24
as failures, 24 transmigration by, 23
See also: Mayavadis; Philosophers See also: Materialist; Nondevotees
Jupiter, position of, in solar system, 49 Karttikeya, 42
Kasyapa Muni
K Aditi advised by, on devotional service,
त 226, 228, 229
Kailasa as Siva’s abode, 140 Aditi begged, for instruction, 231, 231
Kalakeyas, 45 Aditi begged, for protection, 222, 223
Kalanabha, 40, 43 Aditi instructed by, on payo-vrata,
Kalanemi, Lord killed, 60-61 235-256
Kalanemy-adayah sarve Aditi questioned by, 212, 214, 215,
verse quoted, 61 217
Kaler dosa-nidhe rajann Aditi reassured, about household, 218,
verse quoted, 174 219
Kaleyas, 40 Brahma instructed, 233, 234, 256
Kali-yuga (Age of Kali) as brahmana, 218
false gurusin, 112 as demigods’ father, 220
as faulty, 174 as demons’ father, 220
religion disappears in, 174 as equally disposed, 220
sankirtana for, 258 as grhamedhi, 218
Visnu worship in, 258 as Indra’s father, 221
Kalpa defined, 169, 181 as Marici’s son, 220
Kama as Prajapati, 219
defined, 103 returned to Aditi, 210, 201
See also: Lust; Sense gratification as sage, 151
Kama-ripinah, demigods as, 205 sons of, 7
Kamini as spiritual master, 228
defined, 8 Kasyapa Muni, quotations from
See also: Women on Brahma, 233
Kapila, atheist, 239 on illusory energy, 223-214


--- Page 297 ---
General Index 299
Kasyapa Muni, quotations from Krsna kahe, — ‘ama bhaje, mage visaya-
on worshiping the Lord, 244 sukha
Kaunteya pratijanihi verse quoted, 230
quoted, 145 Ksatriyas
Kaustubha gem adorned the Lord, 59 as courageous, 69
King(s) function of, 208
on higher planets, 31 as nara-deva, 208
Lord as, 179 See also: Kings
King of heaven. See: Indra, King
Kirtana. See: Sarkirtana movement L
Kirtanad eva krsnasya
verse quoted, 174 Lamentation
Knowledge by devotional service, 113 of Aditi, 210, 211, 217, 222
Krishna, Lord. See: Krsna, Lord Bali free 01, 95-96
Krishna consciousness. See: Krsna conscious- of demigods on battlefield, 81
ness Leaders, government. See: Kings; Ksatriyas;
Krodhavasas, 45 Politician
Krpa-siddha Learned persons. See: Wise men
defined, 105 Liberation
See also: Mercy of the Supreme Lord for householder, 213, 218
Krsna, Lord impersonal vs. personal, 103
abode of, 115 as impure desire, 229
quoted on purifying devotee’s desire, 230 life meant for, 213
Radha with, 115 by Lord’s mercy, 105
See also: Supreme Lord moksa-kamidesires, 229
Krsna-bhakta— niskama, ataeva ‘Santa’ occupational duty meant for, 213
verse quoted, 24 Life
Krsna consciousness after death, 225-226
duty in, 96 goal of, 213, 258
lust conquered by, 118-119, 120 on higher planets, 81
society geared toward, 208 for liberation, 213
war stopped by, 31 material, as sex life, 134
See also: Devotional service to the success rare in, 156
Supreme Lord Living entities
Krsna consciousness movement in bodily conception, 225
Bhagavad-gita taught by, 176 as dependent, 104, 105
in disciplicsuccession, 176 Lord vs., 105
members 01, advised, 258 as marginal potency, 106
message of, 174, 175 in maya, 138, 142
mission of , 174, 175 See also: Animals; Human beings; Per-
purpose ०, 226 sons; Soul
superexcellence 00, 258 Lord Caitanya. See: Caitanya Mahaprabhu
temple worship in, 258 Lotus feet of the Supreme Lord
value 01, 226 mukti-pade as, 103
See also: Sarkirtana movement as shelter, 228


--- Page 298 ---
300 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Lotus feet of the Supreme Lord (continued) Manu(s)
superexcellence of, 243 Lord appoints, 172, 173
Lust Rudra-savarni, 163-165
of demons for Mohini, 2, 4, 5, 6 Savarni, 154, 155, 157-158
Krsna consciousness conquers, 118-119, Sraddhadeva, 149-150
120 Vaivasvata, 154
of men for women, 8, 120, 125, 134 Manu, sons of
seminal discharge dissipates, 134 in Brahma-savarni-manvantara, 160
of Siva for Mohini, 124-133 in Daksa-savarni-manvantara, 158
world bound by, 125 in Deva-savarni-manvantara, 165
See also: Desires, material; Sex life in Dharma-savarni-manvantara, 162
in Indra-savarni-manvantara, 157
M Lord appoints, 172-173
{ Lord’s will done by, 177
Madhvacarya, quoted on Kalanemi, Sukra- in Rudra-savarni-manvantara, 163
carya & Co. vs. the Lord, 61 in Savarni-manvantara, 154
Maharaja Pariksit. See: Pariksit Maharaja in Sraddhadeva-manvantara, 150
Maharaja Prthu vs. Indra, 207 Manu-sanhita, cited on protecting women,
Mahisasura, 45 L 8
Mali, 62 Manusyandri sahasresu
Malyavan, 62 quoted, 156
Mama vartmanuvartante Manvantara. See: Manu
verse quoted, 221 Marici
Mankind. See: Human beings; Society, as Kasyapa's father, 220
human Lord as, 179
Mantra(s) as rsi, 101
bogus vs. bona fide, 234 Mars, position 01, in solar system, 49
dvadasaksara-, 244, 245 Maruts, 45
for payo-vrata sacrifice, 236-246, 252, Matali
256 Indra helped by, 76, 77
Purusa-sikta, 252 Jambhasura wounded, 76, 77
of Sukracarya, 95 Paka attacked, 79
Mantrausadhi-vasah sarpah Material body. See: Body, material
quoted, 16 Material energy. See: Energy, material
Manu(s) Materialism. See: Bodily concept of life; Ma-
Brahma-savarni, 160, 161 terial world
in Brahma’s day, 154, 169, 181 Materialist
Daksa-savarni, 058-160 in ignorance, 225-226
Deva-savarni, 165, 166 See also: Atheists; Karmis; Nondevotees
Dharma-savarni, 162, 163 Material life as sex life, 134
in disciplic succession, 176, 177 Material nature. See: Nature, material
duty reestablished by, 175 Material nature, modes of. See: Modes of ma-
future, 154, 155, 157-169 terial nature
Indra-savarni, 167, 168 Material qualities. See: Modes of material
life span of , 154 nature


--- Page 299 ---
General Index 301
Material world Mayavadis (impersonalists)
illusory energy controls, 222-224 philosophy ০6 254
lust binds, 125 See also: Janis; Philosophers
modes of nature compete in, 227 Mayy asakta-manah partha
spiritual education lacking in, 225 verse quoted, 113
time controls, 70 Meat eating as ignorance, 67
See also: Creation, the; Universe Meditation
Matra svasra duhitra va Kasyapa returned from, 210
verse quoted, 133 by Siva on the Lord, 142
Matrka, 45 Meghadundubhi, 40
Matrvat para-daresu Men. See: Human beings; Persons; Women,
quoted, 4 men vs.
Mat-sthéni sarva-bhiitani Mental speculators. See: Jiianis; Mayavadis;
verse quoted, 104-105, 108 Philosophers
Mattah paratarar nanyat Mercy of the Supreme Lord
quoted, 135 as causeless, 105
Mattah smrtir jianam apohanam ca liberation by, 105
quoted, 105 on society, 179
Matter. See: Elements, material; Energy of Merging with the Supreme. See: Brahman,
the Supreme Lord, material; Nature, Supreme, moksa-kami aspires to;
material Liberation; Mayavadis
Maya Milk
Brahma in, 138 in Deity worship, 244-245, 248,
as co-creator, 139 251
demigods in, 138 in payo-vrata sacrifice, 235, 249
living entities under, 138, 142 Milk, ocean of
mechanical space travel as, 67 demigod-demon battle at, 30
Siva above, 131, 138 demons churned, in vain, 28, 40
as 91९85 wife, 139 hearing about churning of, recommended,
Visnuabove, 138 144
See also: Illusion; Material world; Nature, Mimarisaka philosophers, 110
material; Yogamaya Misery. See: Suffering
Maya demon Mitra, 42
Bali’s airplane built by, 37 Modes of material nature (gunas)
Yamarija vs., 43 base symptoms of, 112
Mayadhyaksena prakrtih competition among, 227
quoted, 100, 139 as controller, 69
Maya tatam idar sarvam demigods under, 70-71, 220
quoted, 108 demons under, 220
verse quoted, 104-105, 108 devotional service above, 227
Mayavadis (impersonalists) duality caused by, 109
Brahman misunderstood by, 107 Lord free of, 104, 105
as fools, 260 philosophers under, 112
in ignorance, 107 transcendentalist above, 71
liberation for, 103 wise men tolerate, 70


--- Page 300 ---
302 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Modes of material nature (gunas) (continued) Moon-god, 44
See also: Duality, material; Guna- Mountain(s)
avatdras; Nature, material; names in demigod-demon battle, 53, 54.
of specific modes (goodness, passion, flying, 73, 87
ignorance) Mukti. See: Liberation, all entries
Moghasa mogha-karmano “Mukti-pade”
quoted, 26, 260 in Bhattacarya-Caitanya debate, 103
Mohini-murti See also: Lotus feet of the Supreme Lord
as all-attractive, 117, 123-124 Mumuksubhih parityago
beauty of, 3, 5-7,14, 15, 121-126, 128, verse quoted, 109
130 Munayah
as Buddhalike, 10 defined, 103
chastity 01, 4-5 See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord;
demigods enchanted by, 15 Sages; Wise men
demigods not bewildered by, 118, 120 Musical instruments
demigods received nectar from, 17, 18 in demigod-demon battle, 32, 40, 91
demons cautioned by, 8 in Indra’s city, 197
demons cheated by, 10-12, 16, 17, Mysticism. See: Krsna consciousness; Yoga
18-20,118 Mystic power
demons enchanted by, 3-8, 10-12, 15, in demigod-demon battle, 66
09,118 for heavenly elevation condemned, 67
demons requested, to settle nectar dispute, of the Lord, 117,241
6,7 See also: Illusion; Yoga-siddhis
dress of, 121-123, 126 Mystics. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord;
goddess of fortune excelled by, 15 Sages; Transcendentalists; Yogis
quoted on demons and nectar, 11
quoted on woman, 8 N
Rahu beheaded by, 21
sages instructed by, 133 Nabhaga, 150
Siva beheld, 121, 124-127 Na ca tasman manusyesu
Siva captivated by, 124-133 quoted, 26
as yogamaya, 130 Names of the Supreme Lord. See: Supreme
Moksa Lord, specific names
defined, 103 Namuci
See also: Liberation, all entries Aparijita vs., 44
Moksa-kiamadefined, 229 Indra vs., 77, 78, 80, 84-86, 87, 89-91
Monists. See: Jiianis; Mayavadis Nandana garden, 191
Month of Phalguna, 235 Narada Muni
Moon demigods obeyed, 94
Bali compared 10, 37, 207 pancaratriki-vidhi from, 112
in payo-vrata calculation, 235, 250, 258 quoted on demigods, 92
Rahu detected by, 20 Nara-deva, ksatriyas as, 208
Rahu harasses, 21, 22, 31 Narakasura, 45
space travel to, refuted, 49, 67 Narayana, “poor,” condemned, 254
sun closer to earth than, 48-49 Narisyanta, 150


--- Page 301 ---
General Index 303
Narottama dasa Thakura, quoted on spiritual Orin namo bhagavate vasudevaya
master, 202 quoted, 245
Na te viduh svartha-gatir hi visnum Oneness. See: Liberation; Mayavadis
quoted, 260 Opulence, material
Nature, material of Indra’s city, 191-197
body awarded by, 225-226 Siva worship for, 132
as controller, 69 See also: Gold
See also: Body, material; Elements, ma-
terial; Modes of material nature P
Nayari deho deha-bhajarn nr-loke
quoted, 225 Pain. See: Suffering
Nectar Paka, Indra vs., 77-79, 83
demigods drank, 22, 23 Paficaratras
demigods enlivened by, 30 as devotional codes, 110
demons deprived of, 28, 40 as God-given, 112
demons quarreled over, 2, 6 Padcaratrasya krtsnasya
Lord fed, to demigods, 28-29, 145 quoted, 112
as miracle potion, 17, 21 Pancaratriki-vidhi as essential, 112
Mohini cheated demons out of, 10, 11, Pandita
16,17,18-20 defined, 70
Mohini gave, to demigods, 17, 18 See also: Wise men
Rahu immortalized by, 21-22 Parabrahman. See: Brahman, Supreme
Rahu sneaked, 20 Paramanu
Nirasisah defined, 105 defined, 100
Nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe See also: Atoms
verse quoted, 108-109 Paramatma. See: Supersoul
Nirvana. See: Liberation Parampara. See: Disciplic succession
Nisumbha, 40, 44 Parasya brahmanah saktis
Nivatakavaca, 40, 45 verse quoted, 109
Nondevotees Parasya aktir vividhaiva $rizyate
as failures, 26 quoted, 131
See also: Atheists; Demons; Jaanis; Parivasu, 91
Karmis; Materialists; Yogis Pariksit Maharaja
Notpiadayed yadi 70417 as Arindama, 45
verse quoted, 259-260 quoted on Bali and the Lord, 185
quoted on Manu, 172
0 Parvati, 119
Passion, mode of (rajo-guna)
Obeisances, dandavat, 247 competes with other modes, 227
Occupational duty demons in, 111
for liberation, 213 higher planets inaccessible by, 67
for pleasing the Lord, 260 humansin, 111
See also: Dharma; Duty; Religious prin- Pataiijala philosophers, 111
ciples Patrari puspari phalari toyar
Ocean of milk. See: Milk, ocean of verse quoted, 216


--- Page 302 ---
304 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Paulomas, 45 Power
Payo-vrata sacrifice via spiritual master, 202
as bona fide, 258 See also: Mystic power
celibacy in, 248, 250 Prahasya bhava-gambhiram
Deity worship in, 237, 244-245, quoted, 119
246-248, 251, 252 Praheti, 40, 42
duration of, 235, 239, 250, 256, 258 Prahlada Maharaja, Bali garlanded by, 188
instructions to Aditi for, 235-256 Prajapati, Kadyapa as, 209
mantras for, 236-246, 252, 256 Prakrteh kriyamanani
milk sustains, 235, 149 quoted, 69
prasada distribution in, 246, 248, Prakrti
253-255 defined, 139
as sarva-yajia, 257 See also: Elements, material; Energy, ma-
spiritual master honored in, 253, 254 terial; Energy of the Supreme Lord,
superexcellence of, 256-258, 259 material; Maya; Nature, material
time for, 235, 258 Prapancikataya buddhya
Peace verse quoted, 109
by disciplic succession, 177 Prasada (food offered to the Lord)
by preaching, 176 via brahmanas, 216-217
Persons defined, 109
in Indra’s city, 198 in Deity worship, 235, 245, 246, 251,
types of , two listed, 31 252
See also: Human beings; Living entities distribution of , 254
Phalena pariciyate distribution of, in payo-vrata sacrifice,
quoted, 24 236, 247, 253-255
Philosophers types of, 216
Absolute Truth beyond, 180 Prayers by Siva for the Lord, 100-104, 1K6,
Mayavadi. See: Mayavadis (impersonalists) 110-111,114,116,117
Mimariisaka, 110 Preacher(s), Krsna conscious
under modes of nature, 112 Caitanya wants, 176
Pataiijala, 111 as guru, 176
Sankhya, 110 Pride absent in pure devotees, 137
Vaiéesika, 108 Priests. See: Brahmanas; Spiritual master,
Vedantist, 110 assistant priests of
Philosophy Prostitute
Mayavada, 254 Mohini likened Herself to, 8
of oneness and difference, 105 woman degraded to, 8
Planets. See: Earth planet; Heavenly planets; Protection
Universe; names of other specific planets Aditi begged, from Kasyapa for demigods,
Pleasure. See: Happiness 222,223
Politician, Canakya quoted on, 8 of devotees by the Lord, 145
Power of semen by celibacy, 134
of Bali, 200-204, 206-208 of woman, 3-4, 8
Lord as source of, 202 Prsadhra, 150
via parampara, 202 Prthu vs. Indra, 207


--- Page 303 ---
General Index 305
Puloma, 40, 44 Reincarnation. See: Transmigration of the
Purnsah striya mithuni-bhavam etamn soul
verse quoted, 125 Relationships
Purandara as Indra, 150, 158 illusory, 224
Pure devotees of the Supreme Lord with wild women, 9
desire service, 102-103 Religious principles
duality absent in, 103 for householder, 212, 213, 218
as prideless, 137 saints reestablish, 174
sense gratification absent in, 102-103 28৫ cycle decays, 174
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord Remembering the Supreme Lord, freedom by,
Purification 60
of devotee by the Lord, 230 Renunciation in devotional service, 109
Ganges for, 13 Ritualistic ceremonies
for ritualistic ceremony, 13 brahmanas at, 13
Yamuna for, 13 charity at, 13
Pirnasya piirnam adaya by demigods and demons, 13, 14
quoted, 102 dress for, 13
ingredients for, 13
Q payo-vrata. See: Payo-vrata sacrifice
purification for, 13
Qualities, material. See: Modes of material requirements for, 217
nature visnu-aradhana, 253
See also: Sacrifices
R Rsabhadeva
parents of, 160
quoted on lust, 125
Radha with Govinda, 115 Rtadhama as Indra, 164
Rihu Rudras, 45
Brahma accepted, 21-22 Rules and regulations. See: Religious prin-
in demigod disguise, 20 ciples
eclipses caused by, 20, 31 Riipa Gosvami, quoted on unauthorized devo-
Lord beheaded, 21 tional service, 112
moon and sun detected, 20
moon and sun harassed by, 21, 22, 31 S
moon-god fought, 44
nectar immortalized, 21-22
nectar sneaked by, 20 Sacrifice(s)
Rain from Indra, 178 asvamedha. See: Asvamedha sacrifices
Rajo-guna. See: Passion, mode of for demigods, 177
Reality. See: Absolute Truth as essential, 177
Reception, home fire. See: Fire sacrifice
of enemy, 214 payo-vrata. See: Payo-vrata sacrifice
of guests, 214 for Visnu, 258
Regulative principles. See: Religious prin- Visvajit. See: Visvajit sacrifice
ciples See also: Ritualistic ceremonies


--- Page 304 ---
306 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Sadhus. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; Sankhya philosophers, 110
Sages; Saints Sasikhya-yoga
Sages Lord started, 238, 239
Indra honored by, 91 subject of, 238-239
at Lord’s shelter, 228 Sarikirtana movement
Mohini instructed, 133 Caitanya pleased by, 177
Sages, seven great Caitanya started, 175
in Brahma-savarni-manvantara, 160, for Gaudiya Vaisnavas, 177
161 happiness by, 177
in Daksa-savarni-manvantara, 159 for Kali-yuga, 258
in Deva-savarni-manvantara, 166 leaders 01, advised, 175
in Dharma-savarni-manvantara, 162 society benefits by, 175
in Indra-savarni-manvantara, 167 , See also: Krsna consciousness movement
Lord appoints, 162-173 Sankusira, 40
in Rudra-savarni-manvantara, 154 Sannyast, ceremonial dress for, 13
in Savarni-manvantara, 157 Sarasvati, 158
in Sraddhadeva-manvantara, 151 Sarpah kriirah khalah krirah
Sa iksata lokan nu srja quoted, 16
quoted, 139 Sarvabhauma, Lord, parents of, 158
Saints Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Caitanya in-
religious principles reestablished by, structed, 103
174 Sarva-dharman parityajya
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; quoted, 113
+ Sages verse quoted, 259
Sakuni, 40 Sarva-kama defined, 229
Salvation. See: Liberation Sarvam khalv ida brahma
Sambara, 40,43 quoted, 110
Sambhu as Indra, 161 Sarvasyacaham hrdi sannivisto
5१] 78, 152, 153 quoted, 136
Sammohaya sura-dvisam Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktari
quoted, 10 _ quoted, 229
Samo 107 sarva-bhitesu Saryati, 150
verse quoted, 145, 220-221 Sastras (scriptures)
Sampradaya. See: Disciplic succession foretell future, 154
Samsara. See: Transmigration of the soul householders guided by, 213, 218
Saravarana, King, 153 See also: Vedas; names of specific Vedic
Sariivartaka fire, 56, 200 sastras
৩৪113180318, 45, 153 Satrayana, 168
Sanatana defined, 174 Sattva-guna. See: Goodness, mode of
Sanatana-dharma Sattvan visuddham vasudeva-sabditam
defined, 175 quoted, 227
for human society, 174, 175 Saturn, 45, 153
See also: Devotional service to the Satyasaha, 165
Supreme Lord; Varnasrama-dharma Satya-sarikalpa
Saiijivani mantra, 95 defined, 231


--- Page 305 ---
General Index 307
Satya-sarikalpa Siva, Lord
See also: Desires, Lord fulfills as ignorance incarnation, 240
Satya-yuga as religious, 174 Jambha vs., 45
Self. See: Soul Lord above, 113, 135, 136
Semen Lord bewitched, 120, 130-131, 134, 135,
celibates protect, 134 136,141-142
discharge of , diminishes lust, 134 Lord praised, 137, 138
Siva discharged, 131, 132, 134 lowly life style of, 132
Sense gratification as Mahesvara, 100
as futile, 25, 26 maya cannot affect, 131, 138
householders pursue, 213 meditated on the Lord, 142
pure devotee free of, 102-103 Mohini beheld by, 121, 123-127
See also: Attachment, material; Desires Mohini captivated, 124-133
material; Lust; Sex life prayed to the Lord, 100-104, 106,
Servants of God. See: Devotees of the 110-111,114,116,117
Supreme Lord proud of the Lord, 135, 136
Service to God. See: Devotional service to the quoted on the Lord, 100, 141-142
Supreme Lord quoted on worshiping Visnu, 258
Sex life as Sambhu, 124, 137
animalistic, 9 seminal discharge of, 131, 132, 134.
illicit, as ignorance, 67 as unique tattva, 138
material life as, 134 as Visvesvara, 100
seminal discharge in, 134 wife of, 99, 118, 125,139, 141
See also: Lust women cannot agitate, 119, 119-120
Shower of flowers for Indra, 91 worship toward, 132
Siddhas, 4, 168 yoga by, 142
Siddhi, yoga- vs. actual, 156 Sky, voice from, quoted on Namuci demon, 89
Silver A Snakes, demons compared to, 16
by Siva’s semen, 122 Society, human
_ by Siva worship, 132 brahmanas guide, 208
Sisyas te "har sadhi mar tvam prapannam divisions of, four listed, 03
_ quoted, 232 duty of, 179
Sita-kale bhaved usna Krsna conscious organization of, 208
, verse quoted, 194 Lord incarnates for, 179
Siva, Lord Lord merciful to, 179
abode of, 140 sanatana-dharma for, 174,175
bull carries, 99 sarikirtana benefits, 175
Cupid defeated by, 119 See also: Civilization, human
as demigod No. 1,137 Soul
as devotee No. 1, 137 body vs., 106-107, 224, 225
devotees 01, wealthy, 132 See also: Living entities
as extraordinary, 119 Sound, transcendental. See: Mantras
ghosts accompany, 99 Space travel
as Giriéa, 118 mechanical, condemned, 67
greatness of, 240 to moon refuted, 49, 67


--- Page 306 ---
308 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Speculators, mental. See: Jidnis; Mayavadis; Sruti-smrti-puranadi-
Philosophers verse quoted, 112
Spirit. See: Energy of the Supreme Lord, Stanau sukathinau yasar
spiritual; Soul verse quoted, 194
Spiritual life Suci, 167
advancement in, 202 Suddha-bhakti
See also: Devotional service to the defined, 230
Supreme Lord; Krsna consciousness See also: Devotional service to the
Spiritual master (guru) Supreme Lord, pure
assistant priests of, 253 Suddha-sattva defined, 227
bogus vs. bona fide, 228, 234 Sidras, ksatriyas protect, 208
disciple directed by, 231, 234 Suffering
false, in Kali-yuga, 112 chanting Lords glories dispels, 144
Kasyapa as, 228 devotee tolerates, 70
Lord as, 226, 228 Suhrdam sarva-bhitanam
as Lord’s representative, 96, 233 quoted, 26
as necessity, 232-233, 234 , verse quoted, 227-228
in payo-vrata honored, 253, 254 Sukadeva Gosvami, quotations from
as preacher, 176 on Aditi, 210
र spiritual power via, 202 on Bali and Indra, 72
Sravanari kirtanam visnoh on Bali and Sukracarya, 185-186
_ verse quoted, 235 on demigods, 64, 94, 205
Srimad- Bhagavatam on demons, 2, 28
See also: Srimad-Bhagavatam, quotations on demons and Mohini, 10
from on Kasyapa and Aditi, 223-224
Caitanya upheld, 103 on the Lord, 143,
cited on life beyond earth, 81 on the Lord and Siva, 98-99, 117,
cited on sun, moon and earth, 48-49 120-121, 140
_ in payo-vrata recited, 256 on the Lord and the Manus, 172-173
Srimad-Bhagavatain, quotations from , on Sraddhadeva Manu, 149
on blind leading blind, 225 Sukracarya
on bodily concept of life, 225 Bali defied, 204-205
on desires fulfilled by worshiping Krsna, Bali gifted by, 187, 189, 198
229 Bali revived by, 95, 185-186
on devotional service, 113 as Bali's spiritual master, 186, 198, 202,
on Kali-yuga, 174 205
on man and woman together, 125, 133 as Bhrgu’s descendant, 185-186
on occupation’s purpose, 213 Brhaspati vs., 45
„ on vasudeva consciousness, 227 demons revived by, 95
Srivatsa mark adorns the Lord, 140 _ Lord foiled, 61
Srsti-sthiti-pralaya-sadhana-saktir eka Sukrenaojjivitah santah
_ quoted, 139 verse quoted, 61
Sruti mantras. See: Mantras; Vedas; names of Sumali, 62
न specific Vedic literatures Sumbha, 40, 44
Sruti-smrti-puranadi- Sun
quoted, 112 Indra compared to, 40, 41, 82


--- Page 307 ---
General Index 309
Sun Supreme Lord
moon farther from earth than, 48-49 as dina-anukampana, 230
as one and different, 109 dress of, 59, 241, 245
Rahu detected by, 20 duality absent in, 102,106
Rahu harasses, 21, 22, 31 energy of. See: Energy of the Supreme
Sun-god Lord
fought demons, 43, 44 as enjoyer, 26
Vivasvan as, 149 as equally disposed, 220, 221
wives of, 153 as everything, 102, 107, 110
Sunrta, 165 as friend of all, 22, 26
Supersoul (Paramatma) glorifying, dispels suffering, 144
in heart of all, 227 goddess of fortune under, 242, 243
Lord as, 100, 241 as Govinda, 115
Visnu as, 216 as greatest of all, 135
Supreme Brahman. See: Brahman, Supreme gururepresents, 233
Supreme Lord happiness delivered by, 176
See also: Supreme Lord, quotations from in heart of all, 136, 226-227, 238, 241,
as absolute, 11 252
as Absolute Truth, 101, 102, 135 as Hiranyagarbha, 241
dcarya represents, 233 incarnations of. See: Incarnations of the
as all-pervading, 100, 108, 114, 115, 238 Supreme Lord
as avyaya, 102 as incomprehensible by modes of nature,
Bali blessed by, 156 111-112
Bali’s charity to, 155, 085 as independent, 11, 104, 105
beauty of, 15,59 as inexhaustible, 102
bodily color of, 242 as invisible, 238
Brahma पावला, 111, 113 as Janardana, 227
as cause of all causes, 100, 102, 104, 105, Kilanemi killed by, 60-60
106, 180 living entities vs., 105
as changeless, 101, 102 lotus feet of. See: Lotus feet of the
as complete, 102, 104 Supreme Lord
as controller, 100, 105, 220, 231 Mali killed by, 62
as creator, 139 Malyavan killed by, 62
demigods fed nectar by, 27-29 Manu’s sons do will of, 177
demigods revived by, 64 material energy directed by, 139
demigods sought shelter of, 58 mercy of. See: Mercy of the Supreme Lord
demigods under, 243 modes of nature under, 104, 105
demons defeated by, 60-62 as Mukunda, 103
demons saw original form of, 22 as mystic master, 117, 241
as desireless, 105 as omnipotent, 131, 135, 142
desires fulfilled by, 229, 230, 231, 242 as omniscient, 114, 115, 142
devotees accept, 180 as one and different, 104-105
devotee’s desires fulfilled by, 145 as one without second, 106, 110
devotees favored by, 145, 220, 221, 230 pleasing, as measure of action, 259-260
devotees purified by, 137, 230 as power source, 202
devotional service reveals, 113, 235 prasada distribution pleases, 255


--- Page 308 ---
310 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Supreme Lord (continued) Supreme Lord, quotations from
as proprietor, 24, 26, 185 on disciplic succession, 176
protects devotees, 145 on Siva, 137
Rahu beheaded by, 21 on surrender, 259
reciprocates one’s surrender, 23, 24, 221 Sura-dvisam
remembering, as freedom, 60 defined, 10
sages take shelter of, 228 See also: Atheists; Demons
as Sarngadhanva, 143 Suras. See: Demigods; Devotees of the
Siva bewitched by, 120, 130-131, 134, Supreme Lord
0 135, 136.,141-142 Surrender to the Supreme Lord
Siva meditated on, 142 Bhagavad-gita quoted on, 259
Siva praised by, 137, 138 by devotees, 23
Siva prayed to, 100-104, 110-111, Lord rewards, 23
114,116,117 asrare, 113
Siva proud of, 135, 136 truth revealed by, 113
Siva under, 113, 135, 136 Sutala planet, 156
as spiritual master, 226, 228 Sva-caranamrta diya ‘visaya’ bhulaiba
spiritual master represents, 96 verse quoted, 230
Srivatsa adorns, 140 Svargaloka. See: Heavenly planets, all entries
Sukricarya foiled by, 61 Svetasvatara Upanisad, quoted on Lord's po-
Sumali killed by, 62 4 tencies, 131
as Supersoul, 100, 241 Syama woman defined, 194
as Supreme Brahman, 101, 102, 104, 105
surrender to. See: Surrender to the iB
Supreme Lord
as time, 179 Tad 04107 bhakty-upahrtam
time under, 142 verse quoted, 216
as transcendental, 106, 116 Tad-vijigndrthari sa gurum evabhigacchet
universal form of. See: Universal form of quoted, 232-233
the Supreme Lord Tamo-guna. See: Ignorance, mode of
varnasrama-dharma pleases, 258 Tams titiksasva bharata
as Vasudeva, 113, 114, 226-227, 228 quoted, 70
Vedas cannot understand, 142 Taraka, 40, 42
weapons of, 21, 59, 62 Tariisa, 150
as witness, 238, 241 Tatha dehantara-praptih
yoga taught by, 178, 179 quoted, 225
as Yogesvara, 117 verse quoted, 225
yogis vs., 117 Teachers, spiritual. See: Brahmanas; Spiritu-
See also: Absolute Truth; Brahman, al master
Supreme; Krsna, Lord; Supersoul; Temples in Hare Krsna movement, 258
Visnu, Lord; names of specific ex- Tesam satata-yuktanarn
pansions and incarnations verse quoted, 227
Supreme Lord, quotations from Three worlds. See: Universe
on demons and woman incarnation, 118 Time
on devotees never perishing, 145, 221 as controller, 68, 69, 70


--- Page 309 ---
General Index 311
Time Universe
as creation factor, 139 Urdhvam gacchanti sattva-sthah
in demigod-demon battle, 68, 69 quoted, 67
Lord above, 142 Utkala, 40, 44
Lord as, 179
present, calculated, 154, 174 Vv
Tivrena bhakti-yogena
verse quoted, 229 Vadava, 153
Tolerance Vahan defined, 51
in devotee, 70 Vaidhrta, 163
in ksatriya, 69 Vaidhrta as Indra, 162
Trance. See: Meditation Vaihayasa airplane, 37
Transcendentalist Vaisesika philosophy, philosophers, Absolute
above modes of nature, 71 Truth misunderstood by, 108
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; Vaisnavanan yatha sambhuh
Janis; Mayavadis; Yogis quoted, 137
Transmigration of the soul Vaisnavas. See: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
Bhagavad-gita quoted on, 225 Vaisyas, ksatriyas protect, 208
by karmis, 23 Vajradarhstra, 40
Trees in Indra’s city, 191 Vimanadeva, Lord
Treta-yuga as three-fourths religious, 174 Bali pleased, 204-205
Tripuradhipa, 40 parents of, 151
Truth. See: Absolute Truth Varnasrama-dharma
Tvasta, 43, 88 Visnu worshiped by, 258
See also: Sanatana-dharma; Vedic culture
U Varuna as demigod warrior, 41, 42, 92
Vasudevah sarvam iti
Udayagiri Mountain, 40, 41 quoted, 227
Uma as Siva’s wife, 99, 125 verse quoted, 113
Unhappiness. See: Suffering Vasudeva position defined, 227
Universal form of the Supreme Lord Vasudeva-3saranavidur aiijasaiva
as four-horned, 239 quoted, 112
heart and soul 01, 239 Vasudeve bhagavati
as seven-handed, 239 verse quoted, 113
as three-legged, 239 Vasumin, 150
as two-headed, 239 Vasus, 45
Universe Vatapi, 45
Bali conquered, 206 Viyu as demigod warrior, 41, 64, 92
bodily conception pervades, 225 Vedanta-siitra, quoted on Supreme Brahman,
dissolution 01, 56 107
Lord pervades, 108,109,115 Vedantist philosophers
people in, two types listed, 31 as impersonalists, 110
See also: Creation, the; Heavenly planets; See also: Mayavadis
Material world Vedas
Upasloka, 160 Bhagavad-gita as essence 01, 179


--- Page 310 ---
312 Srimad-Bhagavatam
Vedas (continued) Viévakarma
Lord beyond, 142 daughters of, 152
See also: Sastras; names of specific Vedic Indra’s city built by, 193
literatures Maya Danava vs., 43
Vedic culture Visvaksena, Lord, parents of, 161
householders in, 213 Viévanatha Cakravarti Thiakura
prasada distribution in, 254 quoted on potency vs. impotency, 260
as spiritually educated, 225 quoted on $ydma woman, 194
See also: Sandtana-dharma; Varnasrama- Viévanatha Cakravarti Thakura, cited
dharma on demons and beautiful girl, 4
Vedic injunctions. See: Religious principles on living entities, 106
Vedic rituals. See: Ritualistic ceremonies on Mohini, 15 ,
Vibhavasu, 45 on Mohini and Siva, 133
Vikalpasdefined, 181 on Siva and Visnu, 140
Vipracitti, 40 on Siva worship, 132
Viraraghava Acirya, cited on Vaisnava phi- Visvaso naiva kartavyah
losophy, 107 quoted, 8
Virat-riapa. See: Universal form of the Viévasrasta, 161
Supreme Lord ४15५५95४, 91
Virocana Vitana, 168
as Bali’s father, 37, 155, 206 Vivasvan
as demon warrior, 40, 43 in disciplic succession, 176
Visnu, Lord son of, 149
as controller, 100 as sun-god, 149
demigods under, 100 See also: Sun-god
as deva-deva, 100 Vivasvan manave praha
eats via brahmanas, 216-217 verse quoted, 176
fire sacrifice satisfied, 216 Voice from sky quoted on Namuci demon,
as Jagan-maya, 100 89
mdya under, 138 Vow, payo-vrata. See: Payo-vrata sacrifice
sacrifice for, 258 Vrsaparva, 44
as Supersoul, 216 Vrtrasura, Indra killed, 86, 88
See also: Brahman, Supreme; Supreme Vyasadeva in sage role, 157
Lord
Visnu-aradhanam w
defined, 258
See also: Worship, of Visnu War
Visnu Purana, quoted on Lord’s energies, 109 demigod-demon. See: Battle between
Visnur aradhyate purisari demigods and demons
quoted, 258 Krsna consciousness stops, 31
Visiici, 161 Watering a tree’s root, devotional service com-
Viévadevas, 45 pared to, 25
Visvajit sacrifice Wealth. See: Gold; Opulence, material
Bali performed, 186, 188-189 Weapons
military equipment from 187-188 of Bali, 189-190


--- Page 311 ---
General Index 313
Weapons Yajiias
in demigod-demon battle, 31 46, 47, defined, 177
51-57,61, 62, 65, 68,72, 73, See also: Ritualistic ceremonies; Sacrifices;
77-80, 82-86, 90, 91 names of specific sacrifices (yajiias)
of the Lord, 21, 59, 62 Yajiiavalkya, Lord, 178
from Visvajit-yajiia, 188 Yamaraja
Wine, Airavata stockpiles, 41 Bali compared to, 203
Wise men Kalanabha vs., 43
modes of nature tolerated by, 70 Yamuna River for purification, 13
women mistrusted by, 8 Yan maithunadi-grhamedhi-sukhani hi tuc-
See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord; cham
Sages; Saints; Transcendentalists quoted, 213
Woman (Women) Yasmin sthito na duhkhena
animallike, 9 quoted, 137
Canakya quoted on, 4,8 Yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasido
demons bewildered by, 118 quoted, 202
in Indra’s city, 192 Yato va imani bhitani jayante
Lord incarnated as, 3-8, 15, 99, 116, quoted, 101
119, 120, 130, 145 Yatra yogesvarah krsnah
man alone with, condemned, 133 quoted, 117
men vs., 8 Ye bhajanti tu mam bhaktyd
protection of, 3-4,8 verse quoted, 145, 220-221
Siva undisturbed by, 119, 119-120 Ye yatha mari prapadyante
Syama, 194 quoted, 23
Work. See: Activities; Karma verse quoted, 221
World. See: Creation, the; Earth planet; Ma- Yoga
terial world; Universe Lord teaches, 178, 179
Worship sarikhya-, 238, 239
toward acarya, 233 Siva performed, 142
toward brahmanas, 216 See also: Devotional service to the Supreme
by householder, 216, 217 Lord; Krsna consciousness; Yogis
of the Lord, 231, 235 Yogamaya, Mohini as, 130
payo-vrata. See: Payo-vrata sacrifice Yoga-siddhis, types of, eight listed, 156
toward sacrificial fire, 216, 217 Yogis
toward Siva, 132 as failures, 24
by varnasrama-dharma, 258 householders as, 213
toward Visnu, 253, 258 Lord vs., 117
See also: Deity worship of the Supreme See also: Devotees of the Supreme Lord
Lord Yuddhe capy apalayanam
Y quoted, 69
Yugas
Yajraih sarikirtana-prayair in Manu’s life, 154
quoted, 177, 258 religion deterioratesduring, 174
Yajnarthat karmano ‘nyatra
quoted, 24


--- Page 312 ---
४ = ১, 1৬ আতা |
` he ay | BHAGAVATA RIMA 11.
EF 7 1, 1 । a
রা 3 ॥
০১৮১00১১১১১ গা
i 8 Ha HR ८ | Eighth Canto-Part Two. ह
८ 1 ^... pl हि |
। वि TRE Oe BE Ey ह
. | Wm शती Fo EY or |
১২4৮ ॥ 6. | i ॥/
3 ५1. |, "১ fg ১ ১২৮৪... - ৬ (( ॥ ৷ (| 4
0, ,.9, (0 14 1 Dine race “২৬ "|
"114 ॥ ॥//, । ^“ स JE
च 1 «2 I) MEER । + Hy | 4 1 ५ Ek
ध | % bl 1॥|.1 | | gi || (6 i ৷ Bhakivedanta | Kod i 4
CPA) | fir 21; | । Swi गे + YAW /॥ म `
4 ১ | Uh 1 Ral Re ESE
3 ॥ 4 | SS A | by, : PR < ४. ৬
र J 41.“ ॥ १) || ১২ 8 | Pal ;
| hd | भ ১1৬৮৮ A et SNE ॥ 1
ETAT णा! | ग 14
VEAL Pr न PA च.
EY দে ARON, (4
=e Em = Wy XG ২) ¢ | |
च Epa SI AT TEN, ST # वौ. "से
= || পট Ny A 7 | -
। (= “1 গো = ६।/. Ty 4 |
va 5 ) TT J AN 7 ( 4 ह `
^+ চে ৬টি Nor VEDA `
1 ৮ # य ০৮. |
| ^ नि | ` সপ |
। 14... fe । (1 क `
Bra © ও . ८2444 ~ : i ` ~ न २
ऋ ` রর 1 SE


--- Page 313 ---
SRIMAD
BHAGAVATAM

Srimad-Bhagavatam, an epic philosophical and
literary classic. holds a prominent position in
India’s voluminous written wisdom. The timeless
wisdom of India is expressed in the Vedas, ancient
Sanskrit texts that touch upon all fields of human
knowledge. Originally preserved through oral tradi-
tion. the Vedas were first put into writing by Srila
Vyasadeva. the “literary incarnation of God.”” After
compiling the Vedas, Srila Vyasadeva was inspired
by his spiritual master to present their profound
essence in the form of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Known
as ““the ripened fruit of the tree of Vedic literature.”
Srirnad-Bhagavatam is the most complete and au-
thoritative exposition of Vedic knowledge.

After writing the Bhagavatam. Vyasa taught it to
his son. Sukadeva Gosvami. who later spoke the
Bhagavatam to Maharaja Pariksit in an assembly of |
sages on the bank of the sacred Ganges River. Al-
though Maharaja Pariksit was a great rajarsi (saintly
king) and the emperor of the world. when he
received notice of his death seven days in advance. he
renounced his entire kindgom and retired to the
bank of the Ganges to seek spiritual enlightenment.
The questions of King Pariksit and Sukadeva
Gosvami’s illuminating answers. concerning every-
thing from the nature of the self to the origin of the
universe. are the basis of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

This edition of Bhagavatam is the only complete
English translation with an elaborate and scholarly
commentary. and it is the first edition widely avail-
able to the English-reading public. This work is the
product of the scholarly and devotional effort of His
Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhu-
pada. the world’s most distinguished teacher of
Indian religious and philosophical thought. His
Sanskrit scholarship and intimate familiarity with
Vedic culture combine to reveal to the West a mag-
nificent exposition of this important classic.

With its comprehensive system of providing the
original Sanskrit text. Roman transliteration. precise
word-for-word equivalents. a lucid English transla-
tion and a comprehensive commentary. it will appeal
to scholars. students and laymen alike. The entire
multivolume text. presented by the Bhaktivedanta
Book Trust. promises to occupy a significant place in
the intellectual. cultural and spiritual life of modern
man for a long time to come. |


--- Page 314 ---
What the reviewers say about the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhakti-
vedanta Swami Prabhupida:

“It has been my great pleasure recently to have
read the Srimad-Bhagavatam in the superb edition
authorized by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhu-
pda. | am sure this monumental work will go far to
bring the sublime message of the Bhagavatam to
numerous Westerners who otherwise would miss this
opportunity.”

Dr. Alex Wayman
Professor of Sanskrit
Columbia University

Srimad-Bhagavatam is a valuable source ma-
terial for several categories of readers. With its ex-
haustive plan of providing the original Sanskrit text.
॥5 Roman transliteration. English synonyms.
English translation and elaborate commentary by a
scholar and practitioner of philosophy. it cannot but
be attractive to serious students and scholars of
religion and philosophy. | recommend this series to
anyone as an important and useful reference work.”

Professor C. P. Agrawal
Department of Humanities |
University of Michigan

“The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust editions of
famous religious classics of India with new transla-
tions and commentaries are an important addition to
our expanding knowledge of spiritual India. The new
edition of the Srimad-Bhagavatam is particularly
welcome.”

Dr. John L. Mish
Chief. Oriental Division
New York Public Library
৯
Li
ad
| AAR 1

